(!}arncU  Iniucraitg  ffiibrarg 


LIBRARY  OF 


LEWIS  BINGLEY  WYNNE 

A  B.. A.M. .COLUMBIAN  COLLEGE. 'Tl. '73 
WASHINGTON.   D.  C. 


THE    GIFT   OF 

MRS.  MARY  A.  WYNNE 

AND 

JOHN  H.  WYNNE 

CORNELL   "98 


Cornell  University  Library 
arV1552 

Lectures  introductory  to  the  study  of  th 


3  1924  031    183  803 
olin.anx 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  tliis  book  is  in 
tine  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31 924031 1 83803 


LECTUEES    INTEODUCTOET   TO    THE    STUDY    OE 
THE  EPISTLES  OE  PAUL  THE  APOSTLE. 


LECTURES 

INTKODUCTORY   TO    THE 

STUDY  OF  THE  EPISTLES  OF  PAUL 
THE  APOSTLE. 


WILLIAM    KELLY. 


LONDON : 
W.  H.  BEOOM,  PATEENOSTER  EOW. 

1869, 


PEEFACE. 


The  twelve  lectures  which  make  up  the  volume  before 
the  reader  were  delivered  in  London  within  the  month 
of  May,  1868.  As  presenting  a  sketch  of  the  epistles 
of  the  great  apostle  of  the  GentUes,  the  subject  is  one 
of  the  nearest  interest  to  us  of  the  uncircumcision  who 
believe.  But  it  is  also  definite  enough  to  need  no  pre- 
fatory words,  further  than  to  say  that,  though  I  have 
sought  diligently  to  correct  the  faults  made  in  extem- 
poraneous discourse,  or  the  flaws  of  such  as  took  them 
down  in  short-hand,  I  cannot  but  deeply  feel  how  far 
short  the  result  is  from  presenting  an  adequate  summaiy 
of  the  wonderful  compositions  to  which  the  lectures 
refer.  But  I  reckon  on,  as  I  pray  for,  the  grace  of  the 
Lord  to  bless  even  this  r^sumi,  to  such  as  read  His 
word  along  with  it,  to  the  help  of  their  souls. 

Guernsey,  March,  1869. 


CONTENTS. 


I. 

EoMANs.  The  epistle  to  tlie  Romans  more  than  any  other  a  com- 
plete treatise  on  the  fundamentals  of  Christian  docti-ine,  1.  No  fresh 
revelations  from  Grod  can  nullify  those  which  preceded  them,  2.  The 
points  of  truth  that  introduce  the  epistle,  3.  Faith-obedience  its 
character,  4.  The  apostle's  desire  to  communicate  with  those  he  had 
never  seen,  5.  Beware  of  contracted  views  of  salvation,  6.  Conscious 
deliverance  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  should  he  the  result  of  the 
gospel  preached,  7.  The  meaning  of  the  phrase,  "from  faith  to  faith,"  8. 
Not  all  that  is  now  revealed  is  the  gospel,  9.  Holding  the  truth  in 
unrighteousness,  who  do  it  ?  10.  The  moral  history  of  man,  11.  "What 
the  natural  conscience  of  man  can  do,  12.  God's  judgment  of  man  in 
respect  of  conscience  and  of  law,  13.  The  place  of  the  Jew  in  this 
estimate  of  man,  14.  Condemned  by  that  in  which  he  blindly  made 
his  boast,  15.  Righteousness  of  God,  what  is  it  ?  16.  PrEeter-mission  of 
sins,  17.  God  looks  for  the  sinner's  submission,  not  his  victory,  18.  The 
question  is  not  what  man  should  be  for  God,  but  what  God  can  be  and 
is  for  man,  19.  Abraham  the  proof  of  the  value  of  faith  in  justi- 
fication before  God,  20.  Abraham's  circumcision  never  constituted  his 
righteousness,  21.  The  connection  of  the  promise  to  Abraham  with 
resurrection,  22.  "What  gives  peace  with  God?  23.  Creature  standing 
gone  for  ever;  the  glory  of  God  the  only  ground  now,  24.  The 
difference  between  man's  guilt  and  man's  nature,  25.  Justification  of 
life,  26.  Sin  and  death  are  proof  of  one  man's  disobedience  with  or 
without  law,  27.  Life  and  liberty  are  proofs  of  one  man's  obedience, 
28.  Practical  holiness  is  not  fouiided  on  Christ  having  died  for  my 
sins,  but  on  my  being  dead  to  sin,  29.  Baptism  means  not  that  I  must 
die  to  sin,  but  that  I  have  died  to  it,  30.  Remission  of  sins  and  deliver- 
ance from  sin  essentially  different,  31.  Christ  dead  and  risen  is  the 
answer  to  both,  32.  God  has  not  only  pardoned  the  sinner,  but  con- 
demned the  fallen  nature,  33.    Flesh  and  Spirit  contrasted,  34.     The 


vm  CONTENTS. 

Spirit  as  a  power,  a  divine  person  dwelling  in  us,  35.  How  does  the 
gospel  affect  Israel's  distinctive  place  ?  36.  The  blessing  of  being  a 
son  of  Abraham  depends  on  its  descent  through  Isaac,  37.  Israel,  lost 
but  for  mercy,  are  but  on  a  level  with  GentUes,  38.  The  stumbling- 
stone  the  key  to  Israel's  coming  ruin,  39.  "Whosoever,"  40.  Israel 
forced  to  bear  witness  that  the  heathen  should  be  brought  in,  41. 
Israel  past,  present,  and  future,  in  Eomans  is.  x.  si.,  42.  Zion  the 
scene  of  final  triumph,  43.  Our  reception  of  one  another  according  to 
Christ's  reception  of  us,  to  the  glory  of  God,  44.  True  mimstry  gives 
not  merely  truth  but  suited  truth  to  the  saints,  45. 

II. 

PmsT  CoB-mTHiANS.  The  unfolding  of  the  assembly  in  a  practical 
way  is  the  object  of  this  epistle,  46.  The  unbelief  of  Christendom  tries 
to  annul  this  epistle  more  than  any  other,  47.  No  amount  of  gift, 
in  few  or  many,  can  of  itself  produce  holy  spiritual  order,  48. 
Corinth  saw  the  early  rise  of  the  Church  of  God  among  the  Gentiles, 
49.  Christ  crucified  puts  all  man's  glory  in  the  dust,  50.  Jew  and 
Greek — opposite  as  the  poles  —  agree  thoroughly  in  alighting  the 
cross,  51.  The  cross  more  than  redemption  merdy,  52.  Christ 
crucified  the  death-knell  for  all  man's  wisdom,  power,  and  righteous- 
ness, 53.  Man  incapable  of  fathoming  the  depths  of  divine  things, 
54.  The  Holy  Ghost  the  sole  means  of  communicating  blessing  to 
the  saints,  56.  How  little  many  a  young  convert  knows  what  wiU 
best  lead  biTn  on !  56.  What  care  each  servant  needs  to  take  how  and 
what  he  builds!  57.  The  apostle's  lowliness  a  source  of  reproach 
among  men,  58,  his  highest  glory  before  God,  59.  Church  discipliae, 
60.  Who  are  to  exercise  it  ?  61.  The  Holy  Ghost's  estimate  of  sin ; 
what  is  a  railer  P  62.  Brother  going  to  law  with  brother,  63.  Why 
personal  purity  is  essential  to  a  Christian,  64.  Revelation  and  inspira- 
tion, 65.  The  commandment  of  the  Lord,  and  a  spiritual  judgment,  66. 
Marriage.  The  position  of  a  slave,  67.  What  a  wonderful  antithesis 
of  man  is  the  Second  Man !  68.  Without  responsibility  nothing  is 
more  ruinous  than  power  and  liberty,  69.  What  grace  does  in  respect 
to  matters  of  right,  70.  How  to  use  a  gift,  71.  The  danger  of  liberty 
lapsing  into  license,  72.  True  ground  is  no  ground  for  false  conduct, 
73.  The  grace  of  Christ  and  the  authority  of  the  Lord,  74.  People 
generally  fail  in  that  of  which  they  boast  most,  75.  Woman's  place  in 
the  assembly,  76.  What  became  her  if  she  had  the  gift  of  prophecy? 
77.  The  Agape  and  its  influence  on  the  Lord's  Supper,  78.  The 
apostle's  regulation  concerning  it,  79.  Spiritual  powers  and  their 
source,  80.    In  the  spiritual  body  there  are  important  members  not 


CONTENTS.  IX 

seen  at  all,  81.  The  churcli  a  vessel  of  power  for  the  maintenance  of 
God's  glory,  and  responsible  for  this  here  helow,  82.  Gifts  that  sup- 
pose the  exercise  of  spiritual  understanding  have  a  far  higher  place 
than-  others,  83.  The  aim  and  purpose  of  prophesying,  84.  The 
difference  between  the  power  of  the  Spirit  and  the  power  of  a  demon, 
§0.  The  connection  between  Christianity  and  the  resurrection,  86. 
From  what  root  of  evil  clerisy  has  grown,  87.  Man  Hkes  to  under- 
stand before  he  believes — this  is  ruinous  to  faith,  88.  What  is  meant 
by  a  "mystery,"'  89.  We  shall  not  aU  sleep,  but  we  shall  aU  be 
changed,  90.  Do  we  every  one  of  us  give  as  we  are  prospered  by  the 
way?  91.  A  selfish  personal  keeping  to  ourselves  of  what  we  have 
is  even  worse  than  a  too  lavish  expenditure,  92.  Liberty  and  responsi- 
bility of  ministry  in  their  mutual  relations,  93.  It  is  good  to  maintain 
the  speciality  of  ministry  in  the  Lord,  94. 

III. 

Second  CoRmiHiAifs.  Contrast  between  first  and  second  epistles, 
95.  Kesemblance  to  the  epistle  to  the  Philippians,  96.  Contrast  with 
PhUippians,  97.  Mutual  consolation  and  afSiction,  98.  The  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  working  in  the  new  man  lifts  the  believer  com- 
pletely above  the  flesh,  99.  "  Yea  and  nay,"  100.  Satan  has  not  lost 
but  acquired  in  the  dominion  of  the  world  a  higher  place  by  the  cru- 
cifixion of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  101.  The  devotion  of  apostolic  love, 
1 02.  Directions  for  dealing  vdth  the  humbled  delinquent  of  the  first 
epistle,  103.  There  is  nothing  Hke  a  manifestation  of  grace  to  call  out 
grace,  104.  Eighteousness  in  Christ  connected  with  heavenly  glory, 
105.  The  saints  a  letter  of  commendation,  106.  The  Lord  that  Spirit 
that  giveth  life,  107.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  108.  The  ministrations 
of  death,  Hfe,  righteousness,  and  glory,  109.  The  ministration  of  the 
Spirit  over  and  above  hfe,  110,  come  down  from  the  exalted  man  in 
glory.  111.  The  vessel  that  contains  the  heavenly  treasure,  112. 
Liveliness  of  nature  hinders  the  manifestation  of  the  treasure,  but  its 
judgment  leaves  room  for  the  light  to  shine  out,  113.  For  we  which 
live  are  always  delivered  unto  death,  114.  "Clothed"  and  "naked,"  115. 
Clothed  upon,  that  mortality  may  be  swallowed  up  of  life,  116.  Always 
confident,  117.  The  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  118,  and  those  who 
stand  at  it,  119.  The  effect  of  manifestation,  120.  Contrast  of  Mes- 
sianic hopes  with  a  higher  glory,  121.  A  Christian  not  occupied  with 
a  Messiah  come  to  bless  the  world,  122.  In  Christ,  and  what  it  sig- 
nifies, 123.  God  was  in  Christ  (not  is),  124.  A  sinner  awakened  takes 
God's  part  against  himself,  125.  It  is  never  right  to  be  narrow,  and 
always  wrong  to  be  lax,  126.    Eespousibility,  individual  as  well  as 

A  3 


X  CONTENTS. 

corporate,  127.  Inspiration  far  above  -the  mil  of  man,  and  the  fruit 
of  the  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  128.  Contributions  for  saints,  129. 
Trials  of  the  apostle  in  his  labours  of  love,  130.  The  prizes  and 
honours  the  world  gave  him,  131.  A  man  in  Christ  taken  up,  incon- 
trast  -with  Paul  in  a  basket  let  down,  132.  Patience  a  sign  of  apostle- 
ship,  133.     Conclusion,  134. 

IV. 

Galatians.  a  serious  and  grieved  spirit  manifest  in  the  epistle,  135. 
The  fountain  of  grace  touched  by  the  intrusion  of  perverted  law,  136. 
Christianity  knows  nothing  of  sucoessional  arrangements,  137.  The 
facts  of  Christianity,  and  their  value  for  the  mind  and  walk,  138. 
Abruptness  of  the  opening  of  the  Gralatian  letter,  139.  Integrity  of 
the  gospel  as  preached  by  Paul :  any  departure  from  it  for  another 
fatal,  140.  Rome,  seeking  to  derive  her  authority  from  Peter,  pro- 
claims her  identity  with  the  circumcision,  141.  Connection  between  a 
servant  and  his  testimony,  142.  Jealousy  of  man,  when  the  grace  of 
God  works  in  a  new  channel  and  gives  the  go-by  to  antiquity,  143. 
The  apostle  separated  from  man  by  God,  in  order  to  proclaim  more 
strikingly  the  singular  ministry  peculiar  to  him,  144.  Conference  with 
flesh  and  blood  out  of  place  with  a  perfect  revelation,  145.  Eevelation 
of  Hia  Son  iii  Paul  and  to  Peter  and  the  rest,  146.  Man,  craving  an 
appearance  of  unity  and  strength,  sacrifices  heaven  for  earth,  Spirit 
for  flesh,  147.  True  desire  for  unity  knows  how  to  walk  alone  with 
God,  148.  Singularity  of  Paul's  conversion  set  in  the  highest  place  at 
the  outset,  149.  Tenderness  towards  his  nation  does  not  prevent  his 
snapping  every  earthly  link  with  it,  150.  His  testimony  character- 
istically heavenly,  151.  Unity  secured  by  deciding  at  Jerusalem  the 
question  of  circumcision  for  Gentiles,  152.  The  case  of  Titus,  153. 
No  interference  with  the  work  which  others  had  been  given  to  do,  164. 
The  gravity  of  Peter's  easy-going  yieldingness  to  the  Judaising  pajrty, 
155.  Peter's  act  went  to  maintain  a  difference  between  Jew  and 
Gentile,  166.  The  true  way  to  measure  things  is  by  their  effect  on 
Christ's  glory,  157.  The  history  of  the  flesh  is  soon  over,  but  the 
history  that  faith  opens  into  never  closes,  158.  Every  one  who  goes 
back  from  such  a  gospel  frustrates,  aa.far  as  it  goes,  the  grace  of  God, 
159.  The  cross  judges  the  legalism  of.  Galatians,  as  it  judged  the 
worldUness  of  Corinthians,  160.  The  law  holds  out,  but  never  gives, 
blessing,  161.  Gentiles  were  not  under  the  curse  of  the  law,  162.  The 
relation  of  law  to  the  promises,  163.  "  The  seed  "  in  its  plurality,  164. 
"The  seed"  in  its  unity,  166.  Christ  the  true  Heir  of  aU  the  pro- 
mises of  God,  166.   Promise  was  before  the  law,  and  flowed  out  of  the 


CONTENTS.  XI 

grace  of  God,  167.  "God  is  one,"  contrasted  with  the  law  which 
supposed  two  parties,  168.  In  grace  God  in  the  person  of  His  Son 
speaks  and  accomplishes  all,  169.  Had  grace  and  law  been  working 
together,  there  would  have  been  two  antagonistic  roads  to  blessing,  170. 
A  person  is  not  baptised  into  his  own  death,  but  into  the  death  of 
Christ,  171.  Old  and  New  Testament  saints  contrasted,  172.  "Abba," 
the  cry  of  the  saint  and  Christ,  173.  Going  back  to  Judaic  elements 
is  going  back  to  heathenism,  174.  Idolatry  no  less  gross  because  Jesus 
is  the  subject  of  it,  175.  Days  and  months  and  times  and  years,  sensible 
helps  to  idolatry,  176.  "Be  as  I  am;  for  I  am  as  ye  are,"  177.  An 
infirmity  in  the  flesh,  178.  A  stickler  for  law  proves  himself  an 
Ishmaehte,  179.  Jerusalem  and  its  desolate  condition  under  law,  180. 
There  is  no  power  for  walk  resulting  from  mere  forgiveness  of  sins,  181. 
Sense  of  duty  is  not  power,  182.  Liberty  first,  power  and  love  after- 
wards, 183.  Occupation  with  Christ  alone  produces  the  love  the  law 
claimed,  184.  Power  may  be  lost,  responsibility  never,  185.  Eternal 
life  in  a  double  sense :  I  have  it  and  I  seek  it,  186.  If  you  take  up 
the  law  in  one  particular,  you  must  take  it  up  altogether,  187-  Chris- 
tianity brings  everything  to  a  climax,  and  settles  all  questions,  188. 
"The  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  in  contrast  with  ciroumeision,  189. 


Ephesians.  God  from  Himself  and  for  Himself,  as  the  adequate 
motive  and  object  before  Him,  even  His  own  glory,  190.  The  ten- 
dency to  set  aside  what  is  personal  for  what  is  corporate,  191. 
There  is  no  place  good  enough  for  Christ,  the  Son,  but  heaven,  192. 
Our  blessing  independent  of  the  old  creation,  193.  Angels  not  adequate 
judges  of  what  pertains  to  us,  194.  "  Child"  differs  in  dignity  from 
"  Son"  in  its  application  to  the  Lord  or  the  saints,  195.  The  mistakes 
of  human  philosophy  in  its  thoughts  of  the  Godhead  have  arisen 
from  importing  the  question  of  time,  196.  A  divine  nature  given  to 
ua  in  its  qualities  of  hoHness  and  love,  197.  The  terms  wisdom  and 
prudence  applied  to  the  saints,  198,  not  to  be  taken  up  as  names  or 
barren  titles,  199.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate  to  mankind  at  large 
what  God  purposes  to  do,  200.  Nature  and  relationship,  201.  The 
riches  of  the  glory  of  the  inheritance,  202.  The  Christian  is  even  now 
the  object  of  the  very  same  power  that  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead, 
203.  Christ  was  not  raised  up  as  an  insulated  individual,  severed  from 
others,  204.  The  sinner's  place  contrasted  in  Romans  and  Ephesians, 
205.  Jew  and  Gentile  in  their  mutual  relation  as  sinners,  206.  God's 
new  workmanship,  207,  which  workmanship  we  Christians  are,  208. 
A  new  man  in  which  Jew  and  Gentile  lose  their  distinctive  place,  209. 


XU  CONTENTS. 

The  heavenly  and  the  earthly  aspect  of  the  church,  210.  That  which 
was  first  in  counsel  is  last  in  revelation,  211.  The  mystery  revealed  to 
holy  apostles  and  prophets  was  not  revealed  hy  them  all,  212.  The 
mystery  does  not  mean  the  church  merely,  213,  but  Christ,  and  the 
church  as  a  consequence,  214.  What  the  principalities  and  powers 
behold,  216.  The  difference  between  the  prayer  of  the  first  and  that 
of  the  third  chapter,  216.  Eooted  that  ye  may  be  able,  &c.,  217. 
Knowing  Christ's  love,  though  unknowable,  and  Grod's  fulness,  though 
infinite,  218.  The  unity  of  the  Spirit,  219.  Intrinsic  unity,  and  of  pro- 
fession, 220.  Universal  unity,  221.  Diversities,  222.  A  man  seated  on 
the  throne  of  God  has  given  gifts  to  men,  223.  In  vain  to  look  for 
the  church's  prosperity,  if  individual  saints  do  not  grow  up  unto 
Christ,  224.  Our  duties  flow  from  what  we  are  or  are  made,  225. 
God  would  have  us  imitate  His  own  ways,  as  they  have  shone  in 
Christ,  226.  Nor  is  there  fuU  Christian  service,  except  in  proportion 
as  it  is  according  to  this  pattern,  227.  Light  is  a  necessity  of  the  new 
nature,  228.  Christ  is  the  pattern  and  perfection  of  grace  in  every 
relationship,  229.  What  true  Christian  conflict  is,  230,  not  with  flesh 
and  blood,  or  nature,  but  with  Satan,  231.  The  armour  of  God,  231. 
Activity  for  others,  dependence  for  ourselves,  233. 

VI. 

Phiuppians.  Practical  appeal  rather  than  doctrine  the  subject  of 
this  epistle,  234.  Mingling  Christ  with  the  affairs  of  every  day,  235. 
Joy  undimmed  in  the  midst  of  the  trials  and  sorrows  of  ordinary 
life,  236.  There  is  no  theory  that  first  love  must  necessarily  cool  down, 
but  the  contrary,  237.  The  power  of  testimony  destroyed  by  the 
allowance  of  evil  insinuations  against  bim  who  renders  it,  238,  but 
Christian  experience  is  developed  in  abounding  love,  239.  Begin  with 
Christ,  go  on  with  Christ,  until  the  day  of  Christ,  240.  Looking  to 
the  Lord,  241.  Once  right  about  Christ,  you  are  right  about  every- 
thing while  He  is  before  you,  242.  The  moral  harmony  in  the  fact, 
that  he  who  preached  the  gospel  of  the  glory  of  Christ  should  be  a 
prisoner  at  Eome,  243.  "  My  bonds  in  Christ,"  244.  Affliction  added 
to  bonds,  245.  "  This  shall  turn  to  my  salvation,"  246.  "  In  nothing 
I  shall  be  ashamed,"  247.  "  I "  and  "me"  of  Eomans  and  Philippians 
coirtrasted,  248.  Fruit  of  labour;  its  meaning,  249.  Conversation 
becoming  to  the  gospel  of  Christ,  260.  Fear  and  trembling  has  no 
dread  or  doubt  in  it,  251.  Suffering  for  Christ's  sake  is  a  gift  of  His 
love,  262.  Energy  apt  to  give  occasion  for  strife  and  vain-glory,  263. 
Two  chief  stages  of  Christ's  hunuliation  flowing  out  of  His  perfect 
love,  264.    All  error  founded  on  a  misuse  of  a  truth  against  the  truth, 


CONTENTS.  xm 

2ofi.  An  archangel  at  best  but  a  servant,  and  can  never  rise  above  it. 
Jesus  emptied  Himself  to  become  one,  256.  The  difference  between 
reconciliation  and  subjection,  257.  The  apostle's  picture  of  the  saint 
resembles  the  Master,  258.  The  true  source  of  humility  in  service,  259. 
Unselfish  love,  260.  The  third  chapter  parenthetical,  to  bring  in  the 
active  side  of  the  Christian  in  contrast  with  the  passive,  261.  The 
only  allusion  to  flesh  in  this  epistle  is  in  connection  with  its  religious 
form,  262.  What  it  is  to  win  Christ,  263.  To  be  in  Christ  is  better 
than  to  have  the  righteousness  of  the  law,  264.  Eesuirection/rom  the 
dead,  265.  Critical  note  on  ryv  kiavaaraaiv  tuiv  viKpSiv,  265,  con- 
■  tinned,  267.  Forgetting  those  things  that  are  behind  refers  to  the 
progress  that  we  may  make,  268.  "Differently  minded"  is  not  agree- 
ing to  differ,  269.  The  name  of  Christ  is  the  true  centre  of  the  saints, 
270.  The  last  chapter  founded  on  the  active  and  passive  aspects  of 
the  Christian,  271.  A  woman  shines  most  where  she  does  not  appear, 
272.  Labour  or  conflict  in  the  gospel,  273.  Moderation,  274.  Ee- 
quests,  to  whom  to  be  made  known,  276.  Having  committed  what  is 
miserable  to  God,  we  can  go  on  rejoicing  in  His  goodness,  276.  In- 
dependence founded  on  dependence,  277. 

vn. 

CoLosssLUfs  a  counterpart,  but  a  supplement,  to  Ephesians,  278,  ^ 
the  one  presenting  the  Head,  the  other  the  body,  279.  Eesemblance 
to  iPeter's  epistles,  280.  The  essential  place  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
Ephesians,  281.  The  striking  absence  of  allusion  to  Him  in  Colos- 
sians,  282.  This  epistle  a  recall  to  Christ  Himself,  283.  One  may  bow 
to  Christ  as  Lord,  and  yet  be  painfully  insensible  to  the  higher  glories 
of  His  person,  284.  Christianity  is  a  thing  of  gradual  grovrth  in  the 
soul,  285,  and  not  circumscribed  by  known  limits,  like  plulosophy, 
286.  The  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light,  287.  Christianity,  instead 
of  being  helped  by  human  philosophy,  is  only  hindered  and  extinguished 
by  it,  288.  "Why  is  Christ  first-bom  of  all  creation  P  289.  As  Creator 
of  all  things,  290.  How  is  Christ  Head  of  the  body  ?  291.  As  first- 
born from  the  dead,  292.  The  fulness  of  Godhead  dwelt  in  Jesus, 
293,  but  man  would  have  none  of  it,  and  proved  it  above  all  in  the 
cross,  294.  Satan  allowed,  apparently,  to  go  on  as  if  he  had  won 
the  final  victory,  295.  "  If  ye  continue  m  the  faith,"  296.  A  minister 
of  the  gospel  and  of  the  church,  two  different  spheres,  297.  Only 
Paul  treats  of  justification  by  faith,  298.  The  gospel  to  every 
creature  under  heaven;  the  church  a  select  body,  299.  A  gap,  which 
Paul  was  deputed  specially  to  vmte  about,  300,  altogether  in  contrast 
with  ancient  or  miUenmal  glory,  301.    He  who  knows  best  the  faith- 


XIV  CONTENTS. 

ful  love  of  Christ,  is  none  the  less  an  energetic  labourer,  302.  What 
God  is  actually  doing  is  the  truth  that  needs  pressing,  303.  The 
secret  of  true  wisdom  and  blessing  is  in  going  on  to  know  more  of 
Christ  than  is  already  possessed,  304.  BituaKsts  and  rationalists  play 
into  each  other's  hands,  305.  The  cross  of  Christ  is  the  death-knell 
of  the  world,  306.  Atheism  and  Pantheism  are  the  ultimate  results  of 
philosophy,  307.  The  doctrine  of  baptism  here  is  contrasted  with 
Eomans,  308.  One  cannot  be  quickened  with  Christ  without  having 
all  trespasses  forgiven,  309.  In  what  consists  "not  holding  the  head," 
310.  There  was  no  Christianity  before  Christ  rose  from  the  dead,  311. 
The  Ritualistic  system  traitorous  to  Him  who  died  on  the  cross,  312. 
Striving  to  be  dead  to  what  is  wrong  is  but  the  law  in  a  new  and 
impossible  shape,  313.  Baptism,  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  314.  Ought 
I  not  to  share  my  Master's  shame  and  dishonour  here  ?  315.  Corrup- 
tion of  inner  feeHng  in  contrast  with  that  which  goes  on  outside  of 
us,  316.  Put  on  charity,  317.  The  peace  "of  Christ,"  318.  Continuance 
in  prayer,  319.  AVhat  a  spring  of  power  is  the  love  of  Christ!  320. 
Paul  narrowed  himself  to  no  local  ties,  321.  There  are  no  portions  of 
the  sacred  writings  lost,  322. 

VIII. 
Thessalonians.  Any  truth  specially  given  by  God  is  immediately 
the  object  of  Satan's  continual  and  subtle  attacks,  323.  "In  God  the 
Father"  suggests  an  infantine  condition  rather  than  an  advanced 
stage,  324.  How  to  deal  with  the  entrance  of  error  and  the  dangers 
that  threaten  the  children  of  God,  325.  We  should  consider  the 
manner  God  deals  with  saints  in  any  special  place,  326.  Simplicity  is 
the  secret  for  enjoying  the  truth  as  well  as  for  receiving  it,  327.  Do 
not  attempt  to  draw  from  scripture  more  than  it  undertakes  to  convey, 

328.  What  the  first  chapter  teaches  in  respect  to  the  Lord's  coming, 

329.  How  the  apostle  adapted  his  ministrations  to  the  advancing 
requirements  of  the  Thessalonians,  330.  A  sketch  of  that  sufferinn- 
which  faith  entails,  331.  Why  men  oppose  the  truth,  332.  Christianity 
not  dreamy  nor  sentimental,  but  most  real  in  its  power  of  adapting 
itself  to  every  need,  333.  The  two  prayers  in  this  epistle,  334.  Love 
always  precedes  holiness,  335,  which  is  the  fruit  of  the  love  to  which 
the  heart  has  surrendered,  336.  Why  Thessalonians  should  be  warned 
of  even  the  grossest  sins,  337.  The  Aristotles  and  Plates  not  fit  for 
decent  company,  338.  Disadvantages  Thessalonians  laboured  under, 
and  which  do  not  fall  to  our  lot,  339.  They  had  no  fear  of  being  lost, 
but  were  not  clear  what  the  Lord  would  do  with  them,  340.  Newly- 
entered  light  gives  occasion  to  the  perception  of  much  which  we  can- 


CONTENTS.  XV 

not  solve  at  once,  341.  The  character  of  the  "  shout,"  and  hy  whom 
it  ■wiU  he  heard,  342.  The  "  day  of  the  Lord"  never  applied  to  any 
dealing  with  the  Christian  as  on  the  earth,  343.  It  was  too  notorious  a 
period  to  need  fresh  words  about  it,  344.  The  presence  of  the  Lord 
and  the  day  of  Jehovah,  if  confounded,  reveal  a  secret  of  the  heart, 
345.  "Wake  or  sleep," — beware  of  verbal  analogies,  346.  For  some 
to  be  over  others  in  the  Lord  did  not  depend  on  apostoHo  appointment 
only,  347.  Disorderly  folk  are  apt  to  know  nobody  over  them  in  the 
Lord,  348.  The  object  of  the  second  epistle,  349.  The  terrors  of  "that 
day"  used  by  the  enemy  to  unsettle  during  a  period  of  persecution, 
350.  Traceable  to  a  lack  of  that  "patience  of  hope"  which  charac- 
terised an  early  faith,  351.  The  two  classes  on  whom  vengeance  will 
fall  in  "that  day,"  352.  Gentiles  know  not  God,  and  Jews  obey  not 
the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  353.  Both  are  the  guilty  tools 
of  Satan,  and  shall  be  punished  with  everlasting  destruction,  354. 
'EviarriKc  does  not  mean  "  at  hand,"  but  "  actually  come,"  355.  The 
trouble  of  "that  day"  will  befall  the  enemies,  not  the  friends,  of  the 
Lord,  356.  If  one  is  taught  a  truth  by  God,  why  be  troubled  about 
what  comes  from  any  other  quarter  ?  357-  Some  of  the  m.ost  im- 
portant parts  of  Satan's  means  for  bringing  about  the  apostasy  are 
now  actively  at  work,  358.  Jerusalem  and  Eome,  359.  The  restraint 
and  the  restrainer,  360.  Every  Christian  waits  for  Christ  with  more  or 
less  intelligence,  361.  Events  following  the  removal  of  the  restraint, 
362.  "With  startling  rapidity  events  in  our  day  are  leading  on  to  the 
brink  of  the  precipice,  363.  The  idea  that  the  Eomau  empire  is  the 
restraining  power  not  altogether  wide  of  the  mark,  364.  The  patience 
of  Christ  is  a  key-note  maintained  from  first  to  last,  365. 

IX. 

First  and  Second  Timothy.  Confidential  communication  from  the 
apostle  to  some  of  his  feUow-labourers,  366.  A  Saviour  God  is  in  con- 
trast with  His  dealings  under  law  or  government,  367.  Mellowed  tone 
observable  in  the  writings  of  the  apostle  as  he  drew  to  the  close  of  his 
career,  368.  How  the  term  "commandment"  is  sometimes  misused,  369. 
The  negative  use  of  the  law,  370.  The  law  not  enacted  for  the  Christian, 
371.  Sound  doctrine — what  is  comprised  in  it,  372.  Ordinary  duties 
of  life  in  connection  with  the  gospel  of  the  glory,  373.  The  faith  and 
a  good  conscience,  374.  Delivery  to  Satan — its  object,  375.  How  often 
pre-occupation  within  makes  us  forget  those  without,  376.  Exhorta- 
tion pursued  in  respect  of  that  which  would  meet  the  eye  even  of 
an  unconverted  person,  377.  The  way  in  which  a  woman  can  con- 
tribute to  a  right  and  godly  testimony,  378.  "Woman,  and  her  lot  here 


XVI  CONTENTS. 

telow,  379.  The  personal  qualifications  of  an  overseer,  380.  Home 
influence  in  its  relation  to  the  house  of  God,  381.  The  invalidity  of 
present  appointment  to  ofSce,  382.  The  qualifications  of  deacons  and 
their  wives,  383.  We  are  called  to  he  a  manifestation  of  the  truth 
hefore  the  world,  384.  Faith  waits  till  it  gets  a  distinct  word  from 
God,  383.  The  mystery  of  godliness,  386,  and  its  connection  with  the 
minutest  afiairs  of  work-a-day  Ufe,  387.  Every  creature  of  God  is  good, 

388.  Those  who  seek  to  give  out  had  better  take  care  they  take  in, 

389.  The  decorum  that  becomes  everyone,  especially  a  young  man, 
enjoined  upon  Timothy,  390.  There  is  nothing  either  too  great  or  too 
little  for  the  Holy  Spirit,  391.  The  value  of  piety  with  a  contented 
mind,  392. 

The  character  of  the  second  epistle,  393.  A  deep  sense  of  what  can 
be  owned  in  nature  can  only  follow  a  due  apprehension  of  what  God 
is  —  nature  set  aside,  394.  Timothy's  sensitive  nature  finds  full 
sympathy  in  the  apostle's  large  heart,  395,  while  he  accustoms 
his  mind  to  expect  hardship  instead  of  shirking  it,  396.  The  dis- 
order of  the  house  of  God  in  this  epistle,  397.  In  such  a  state  of 
things,  do  the  will  of  God;  let  others  say  what  they  please,  398. 
There  are  very  few  saints  from  whom  we  may  not  derive  some  good, 
though  not  always  in  the  same  way,  399.  A  single  eye  to  Christ  and 
His  grace  made  Paul  consistent,  400.  The  firm  foundation  of  God 
stands,  401.  Why  one  cannot  deal  as  simply  with  people  now  as  in 
apostolic  times,  402.  It  is  not  maintaining  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  to 
couple  with  the  name  of  the  Lord  that  which  is  fleshly  and  sinful,  403. 
Isolation  never  desirable,  though  sometimes  necessary,  404.  "Physical 
Christianity"  a  heathenish  phrase,  but  designating  much  that  finds  its 
place  in  these  last  days,  405.  It  is  a  matter  of  no  little  importance 
who  says  this  or  that,  406.  The  importance  of  preaching  the  word 
when  men  will  not  endure  sound  doctrine,  407.  The  coming  of  the 
Lord  in  no  way  manifests  the  faithfulness  of  the  servant;  the  appear- 
ing win,  408.  A  book  or  a  cloak  not  too  small  a  matter  to  bring  the 
Spirit  of  God  into,  409. 


Titus.  More  prominence  is  given  to  external  order  in  writing  to 
Titus  than  to  Timothy,  410.  To  acknowledge  the  truth  which  is 
after  godliness  is  always  a  duty,  even  after  the  house  of  God  has  been 
grievously  affected,  411.  God's  elect,  412.  The  truth  of  eternal  life  is 
brought  out  far  more  fully  in  the  decay  of  Christian  profession,  413. 
There  was  no  such  thing  as  preaching  known  during  the  most  con- 
siderable part  of  the  world's  history,  414.    The  universality  of  the 


CONTENTS.  XVU 

testimony  of  grace  in  contrast  with  the  narrow  limits  of  law,  415. 
Summary  of  the  world's  history,  to  show  that  eternal  life  in  Christ 
before  the  world  hegan  shines  out  most  brilliantly  at  its  close,  416. 
The  circle  of  Divine  life  may  seem  narrow,  but  nothing  can  rival  it 
in  point  of  large  and  deep  affection,  417.  When  a  ministry  of  death  and 
condemnation  was  in  question,  a  limit  was  good  and  wise;  but  with 
eternal  life  and  remission  of  sins,  how  different!  418.  John  takes  up 
the  very  point  at  which  Paul  leaves  off,  419.  The  present  state  of 
Christendom  renders  it  fitting  that  there  should  be  "things  wanting" 
now,  420,  but  then  that  makes  the  word  of  God  the  more  precious 
to  those  who  feel  the  lack,  421.  No  one  can  appoint,  save  those  who 
have  authority  so  to  do,  422.  A  state  of  ruin  always  tests  the  heart 
more  than  when  things  are  in  primitive  order,  423.  Eldership  is 
likely  to  he  passed  by,  under  the  more  attractive  service  of  the  word 
in  pubHc  work,  424.  If  we  see  men  who  have  the  qualities,  and  do 
the  work  of  elders,  we  should  respect  them  as  such,  423.  Elders  are 
a  local  charge,  426.  National  character  to  be  taken  into  account 
when  dealing  with  souls,  427.  Never  interpose  the  teacher,  nor  the 
mere  letter  of  a  duty,  between  the  soul  and  the  Lord,  428.  Nothing 
more  marks  Christianity  than  its  elaaticity  and  breadth,  429.  The 
power  of  Christ  lends  dignity  to  the  very  smallest  thing  that  occupies 
the  heart  and  mind,  430.  There  is  no  relationship,  not  a  single  thing 
of  the  most  ordinary  kind,  that  does  not  become  a  test,  431.  If  God 
pays  particular  attention  to  any,  it  is  to  those  that  man  as  such 
despised — slaves,  432.  Distinction  between  worldly  and  fleshly  lusts, 
433.  The  falsehood  of  either  ameliorating  human  nature  or  of  im- 
proving the  world  will  soon  end  in  worse  confusion  and  in  sorest 
judgment,  434.  The  antagonist  of  the  Son  of  God  has  prompted  men 
to  abuse  Bis  grace  so  as  to  deny  His  glory,  436.  The  difference 
between  "the  washing  of  regeneration"  and  "  the  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,"  436.  Plain  every-day  need  goes  along  with  the 
deepest  truth,  437.  What  is  a  heretic?  438.  What  to  do  with 
a  heretic,  439.  The  whole  root  of  it  is  self,  440.  Heresies  in  1  Cor. 
xi.  19,  441.  It  is  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  there  may  not  be 
such  a  thing  as  arrangement  in  ministry,  442.  Yet  it  is  not  every- 
body that  possesses  a  competent  judgment  about  such  a  matter,  443. 

Philemon.  This  has  altogether  a  different  character  from  the 
epistles  that  have  lately  been  occupying  us,  444.  Philemon,  Apphia, 
Arohippus,  445.  What  movements  of  heart  about  a  runagate  slave ! 
446.  The  most  excellent  of  men  have  broken  down  occasionally  by 
the  pettiest  things  that  entice  or  provoke  self,  447.  Would  Paul  the 
prisoner  and  the  aged  make  an  ineffectual  claim  on  the  heart  of 


XVIU  CONTENTS. 

Philemon  ?  448.  The  delicacy  of  feeling  and  the  sense  of  propriety 
which  grace  forms  are  truly  exquisite,  449.  It  is  not  always  a  question 
of  doing  a  right  thing,  but  of  doing  it  in  the  right  way,  450.  Chris- 
tianity is  not  a  system  of  earthly  righteousness,  but  the  unfolding  of 
the  grace  of  Christ  and  of  heavenly  hopes,  461.  The  heart  that  could 
stand  out  against  such  appeals  of  grace  was  far  from  Philemon,  452. 

XI.  XII. 

Hebrews.  Reasons  for  supposing  Paul  to  be  the  writer  of  this 
epistle,  463.  His  name  suppressed  because  he  takes  the  place  of  a 
teacher  and  not  of  an  apostle,  454.  The  epistle  is  a  consummate 
treatise  upon  the  bearing  of  Christ  and  Christianity  on  the  law  and  the 
prophets,  455.  Paul  would  show  them  thus  the  infinite  dignity  of  the 
Messiah  whom  they  had  received,  456.  Who  so  suitable  to  introduce 
Jesus,  the  rejected  Messiah,  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  as  Saul  of 
Tarsus  P  467.  A  striking  absence  of  allusion  to  the  one  body,  468. 
But  there  was  One  dearer  to  the  heart  of  Paul  than  the  church  itself, 
459.  Eeduoe  the  glory  of  Christ,  and  you  equally  lower  your  judg- 
ment of  the  state  of  man,  460.  Previous  revelation  to  Israel  partial 
and  piecemeal,  but  in  Christ  the  fulness  of  the  truth  shines  out,  461. 
The  place  angels  held  in  the  Jewish  mind,  462,  used  to  bring  into 
greater  relief  the  astonishing  place  of  man  in  the  person  of  Christ, 

463.  God  never  singled  out  an  angel,  and  said,  "  Thou  art  my  Son ! " 

464.  Butunto  the  Son  He  saith,  "Thy  throne,  O  God,"  465.  Messiah  is 
called  "Jehovah,"  and  that  in  His  deepest  shame,  466.  The  perfection 
of  Messiah's  submission  in  contrast  with  the  permanence  of  Jehovah 
467.     Then  His  exaltation  on  high  as  man  till  the  hour  of  judgment 

on  His  foes,  468.   The  glory  of  Christ  as  Son  of  man,  469.    Man his 

position  in  the  world  to  come,  470.  Christ's  death  the  ground  of 
reconciliation  for  the  universe,  471.  The  doctrine  of  the  epistle,  and  its 
suitability  to  the  wants  of  the  believer  traversing,  the  wilderness  472. 
Common  place  of  the  Sanctifier  with  the  sanctified,  473.  Sin  atoned 
for,  persons  reconciled,  474.  Chapters  i.  and  ii.  introduce  the  basis  of 
the  high-priesthood ;  chapters  iii.  and  iv.  a  digression,  linking  them- 
selves, however,  with  the  first  two,  474.  The  apostle  and  high  priest 
of  our  profession  is  in  contrast  with  that  of  the  Jews,  476.  Difiiculty  at 
first  in  reconciling  the  fact  of  a  Messiah  come,  and  gone  to  glory,  with 
a  people  left  in  shame  and  sorrow,  476 ;  explained  by  the  fact,  that 
the  path  of  the  people  of  God  is  a  path  of  faith  now,  just  as  it  was 
before,  477.  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  rest  of  God?  478.  "We 
which  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest,"— its  bearing,  479.  God  had 
rested //-OCT  His  works,  but  had  never  rested  in  them,  480.   The  rest  is 


CONTENTS.  XIX 

still  beyond,  481.  "There  remaineth  therefore  a  rest,"  482.  Mistake  to 
apply  the  rest  to  rest  of  conscience,  483.  In  chapter  v.  we  enter  on 
the  priesthood,  484.  "For  every  high  priest  taken  from  among  men" 
cannot  apply  to  Christ,  485.  Such  is  not  the  Priest  God  has  given  us, 
486.  At  the  same  time  there  is  no  forgetfuMess  of  the  suffering 
obedience  of  Christ's  place  here  below,  487.  Religious  tradition  and 
philosophy  are  the  main  sources  of  spiritual  dulness,  488.  -Hebrews 
"pressed  as  to  their  excessive  danger  of  abandoning  Christ  for  religious 
traditions,  489.  The  -word  of  the  beginning  of  Christ,  490.  The 
description  of  a  confessor  with  all  the  crowning  evidences  of  the 
gospel,  but  not  a  converted  man,  491.  kolvwvol  and  fikroxoi,  492. 
Eenewal  to  repentance  an  impossibility,  and  why,  493.  The  promise 
to  Abraham,  and  the  hope  set  before  us,  494.  The  weakest  faith  that 
the  New  Testament  acknowledges — fleeing  for  refuge,  495.  Followed 
by  strong  consolation — even  that  which  enters  within  the  veil,  496. 
The  great  theme — Christ  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchise- 
dec — resumed,  497.  The  time  for  the  proper  exercise  of  the  Melobisedec 
priesthood  of  Christ  is  not  yet  arrived,  498.  Meanwhile  the  Spirit  of 
God  directs  attention,  not  to  the  exercise,  but  to  the  order  of  the 
Melchisedec  priest,  499.  The  indisputable  superiority  of  the  Mel- 
chisedeo  priesthood  to  that  of  Aaron,  500.  This  Priest  was  to  be  a 
living,  undying  Priest,  501.  Jehovah's  oath,  602.  A  Priest  always 
in  connection  with  the  people  of  God ;  never  as  such  with  those  out- 
side,'503.  It  became  God  that  Christ  should  go  down  to  the  uttermost 
— us  that  He  should  be  exalted  to  the  highest,  504.  "  On  high  "  and 
"  in  the  heavens,"  505.  The  exercise  of  the  functions  of  Christ  as  a 
Priest,  506,  and  as  a  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  507.  Eemarkable 
how  little  the  Holy  Ghost  appears  in  this  epistle,  608.  Why  the  taber- 
nacle is  always  referred  to,  and  not  the  temple,  509.  Why  allusion 
to  the  sanctuary  is  made,  510.  The  rent  veil,  511.  SiadfjizT]  means 
"  testament "  as  well  as  "  covenant,"  612.  Why  it  should  be  "  testa- 
ment" in  two  places  alone  and  covenant  in  all  others,  613.  6  SiaQinivoQ 
is  rightly  rendered  "the  testator,''  514.  The  contracting  party  had  not 
to  die,  515.  The  death  of  Christ,  both  in  the  sense  of  a  victim  sacri- 
ficed and  of  a  testator,  though  a  double  figure,  is  evident  to  aD,  516. 
There  is  but  one  offering  and  one  suffering  of  Christ  once  for  all,  517. 
He  who  was  without  sin  in  His  person  and  all  His  life,  had  everything 
to  do  with  sin  on  the  cross,  518.  Christianity  comes  in  between  the 
work  of  Christ  and  His  coming  in  glory,  619.  "  Conscience  of  sins  " 
means  a  dread  of  God's  judging  one  because  of  his  sins,  520.  A  book 
which  none  ever  saw  but  God  and  His  Son,  521.  Ei'c  to  dirjVtKse  does 
not  express  for  eternity,  but  "for  continuance,"  522.    The  Jew  never 


XX  CONTENTS. 

understood  his  law  till  the  light  of  Christ  on  the  cross  and  in  glory- 
shone  on  it,  523.  In  chapter  ti.  are  warnings  for  those  who  turn 
from  Christianity;  in  chapter  x.  for  those  who  turn  from  the  one 
sacrifice,  524.  Similarities  in  the  two  chapters,  525.  What  faith 
is,  526.  A  simple  word  of  Scripture  settles  a  thousand  questions,  527. 
Reason  is  ever  drawing  conclusions :  God  is,  and  reveals  what  is,  528. 
Faith  hrings  God  into  everything,  529.  Abraham  and  his  faith,  530. 
Moses  acta  in  faith,  not  policy,  631.  What  is  the  "better  thing" 
provided  for  us?  532.  The  reward  of  the  Hfe  of  faith,  533.  In  this 
epistle  the  old  and  new  natures  are  not  separated,  as  in  the  other 
epistles,  534.  Saints  are  here  dealt  with  as  to  their  walk,  535.  There 
is  nothing  more  serious  than  to  set  grace  against  holiness,  536.  A 
magnificent  picture  of  Christianity  in  contrast  with  Judaism,  537. 
Sinai  and  Zion,  538.  The  special  glories  of  Zion,  539.  The  heavenly 
city  that  Abraham  looked  for,  640.  The  spirits  of  just  men  made 
perfect,  541.  How  the  most  awful  threat  is  turned  into  the  most 
blessed  promise,  542.  Practical  exhortations,  543.  Christendom  takes 
the  middle  ground  of  Judaism,  544.  Access  into  the  holiest  involves 
also  the  place  of  ashes  outside  the  camp,  545.  Are  these  two  things 
true  of  you  ?  646.  All  the  effort  of  Christendom  is  first  to  deny  the 
one,  and  then  to  escape  from  the  other,  547.  God's  final  call,  548. 
Two  kinds  of  sacrifice  to  which  we  are  now  called,  549.  Closing 
remarks,  550.  No  place  of  death  to  sin,  the  law,  or  the  world,  no 
privilege  of  union  with  Christ,  wiU  enable  a  soul  to  dispense  with  the 
truths  contained  ia  this  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  551. 


INTRODUCTOEY   LECTUEES 

ON 

THE  EPISTLES   OF   PAUL. 


I. 

EOMANS. 

The  circumstances  under  -which  the  epistle  to  the 
Eomans  was  written  gave  occasion  to  the  most  thorough 
and  comprehensive  unfolding,  not  of  the  church,  but 
of  Christianity.  Ifo  apostle  had  ever  yet  visited  Eome. 
There  was  somewhat  as  yet  lacking  to  the  saints  there ; 
but  even  this  was  ordered  of  God  to  call  forth  from 
the  Holy  Ghost  an  epistle  which  more  than  any  other 
approaches  a  complete  treatise  on  the  fundamentals  of 
Christian  doctrine,  and  especially  as  to  righteousness. 

Would  we  follow  up  the  heights  of  heavenly  truth, 
would  we  sound  the  depths  of  Christian  experience, 
would  we  survey  the  workings  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in 
the  Church,  would  we  bow  before  the  glories  of  the 
person  of  Christ,  or  learn  His  manifold  offices,  we  must 
look  elsewhere — in  the  writings  of  the  New  Testament 
no  doubt,  but  elsewhere  rather  than  here. 

The  condition  of  the  Eoman  saints  called  for  a 
setting  forth  of  the  gospel  of  God ;  but  this  object,  in 
order  to  be  rightly  understood  and  appreciated,  leads 
the  apostle  into  a  display  of  the  condition  of  man.  We 


Z  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES. 

have  God  and  man  in  presence,  so  to  speak.  Nothing 
can  be  more  simple  and  essential.  Although  there  is 
undoubtedly  that  profoundness  which  must  accompany 
every  revelation  of  God,  and  especially  in  connection 
with  Christ  as  now  manifested,  still  we  have  God 
adapting  Himself  to  the  very  first  wants  of  a  renewed, 
soul — nay,  even  to  the  wretchedness  of  souls  without 
God,  without  any  real  knowledge  either  of  themselves 
or  of  Him.  Not,  of  course,  that  the  Eoman  saints 
were  in  this  condition;  but  that  God,  writing  by  the 
apostle  to  them,  seizes  the  opportunity  to  lay  bare 
man's  state  as  well  as  His  own  grace. 

From  the  very  first  we  have  these  characteristics  of 
the  epistle  disclosing  themselves.  The  apostle  writes 
with  the  full  assertion  of  his  own  apostolic  dignity, 
but  as  a  servant  also.  "Paul,  a  bondman  of  Jesus 
Christ" — an  apostle  "called,"  not  born,  still  less  as 
educated  or  appointed  of  man,  but  an  apostle  "  called," 
as  he  says — "  separated  unto  the  gospel  of  God,  which 
he  had  promised  afore  by  his  prophets."  The  connection 
is  fully  owned  with  that  which  had  been  from  God  of 
old.  No  fresh  revelations  from  God  can  nullify  those 
which  preceded  them ;  but  as  the  prophets  looked 
onward  to  what  was  coming,  so  is  the  gospel  already 
come,  supported  by  the  past.  There  is  mutual  con- 
firmation. Nevertheless,  what  is  is  in  nowise  the  same 
as  what  was  or  what  will  be.  The  past  prepared  the 
way,  as  it  is  said  here,  "  which  God  had  promised  afore 
by  his  prophets  in  the  holy  scriptures,  concerning  his 
Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  [here  we  have  the  great 
central  object  of  God's  gospel,  even  the  person  of  Christ, 
God's  Son,]  which  was  made  of  the  seed  of  David 


ON   TUB   EPISTLE   TO   THE   EOMANS.  3 

according  to  the  flesh"  (ver.  3).  This  last  relation  was 
the  direct  subject  of  the  prophetic  testimony,  and  Jesus 
had  come  accordingly.  He  was  the  promised  Messiah, 
born  King  of  the  Jews. 

But  there  was  far  more  in  Jesus.  He  was  "declared," 
says  the  apostle,  "to  be  the  Soil  of  God  with  power, 
according  to  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resurrection 
from  the  dead"  (c^  dvaaraa-eais  vCKpav,  ver.  4).  It  was 
the  Son  of  God  not  merely  as  dealing  with  the  powers 
of  the  earth,  Jehovah's  King  on  the  holy  hill  of 
Zion,  but  after  a  far  deeper  manner.  For,  essentially 
associated  as  He  is  with  the  glory  of  God  the  Father, 
the  full  deliverance  of  souls  from  the  realm  of  death 
was  His  also.  In  this  too  we  have  the  blessed  connec- 
tion of  the  Spirit  (here  peculiarly  designated,  for  special 
reasons,  "the  Spirit  of  holiness").  That  same  energy  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  which  had  displayed  itself  in  Jesus, 
when  He  walked  in  holiness  here  below,  was  demon- 
strated in  resurrection;  and  not  merely  in  His  own 
rising  from  the  dead,  but  m  raising  such  at  any  time 
no  doubt,  though  most  signally  and  triumphantly  dis- 
played in  His  own  resurrection. 

The  bearing  of  this  on  the  contents  and  main  doc- 
trine of  the  epistle  will  appear  abundantly  by-and-by. 
Let  me  refer  in  passing  to  a  few  points  more  in  the 
introduction,  in  order  to  link  them  together  with  that 
which  the  Spirit  was  furnishing  to  the  Roman  saints, 
as  well  as  to  show  the  admirable  perfectness  of  every 
word  that  inspiration  has  given  us.  I  do  not  mean  by 
this  its  truth  merely,  but  its  exquisite  suitability;  so  that 
the  opening  address  commences  the  theme  in  hand,  and 
insinuates  that  particular  line  of  truth  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  sees  fit  to  pursue  throughout.     To  this  then  the 

E    2 


4  INTRODUCTOEY   LECTURES. 

apostle  comes,  after  having  spoken  of  the  divine  favour 
shown  himself,  both  when  a  sinner,  and  now  in  his  own 
special  place  of  serving  the  Lord  Jesus.  "By  whom 
we  have  received  grace  and  apostleship  for  obedience  to 
the  faith."  This  was  no  question  of  legal  obedience, 
although  the  law  came  from  Jehovah.  Paul's  joy  and 
boast  were  in  the  gospel  of  God.  So  therefore  it 
addressed  itself  to  the  obedience  of  faith;  not  by  this 
meaning  practice,  still  less  according  to  the  measure  of  a 
man's  duty,  but  that  which  is  at  the  root  of  all  practice 
— faith-obedience — obedience  of  heart  and  will,  renewed 
by  divine  grace,  which  accepts  the  truth  of  God.  To 
man  this  is  the  hardest  of  all  obedience;  but  when 
once  secured,  it  leads  peacefully  into  the  obedience  of 
every  day.  If  slurred  over,  as  it  too  often  is  in  souls, 
it  invariably  leaves  practical  obedience  lame,  and  halt, 
and  blind. 

It  was  for  this  then  that  Paul  describes  himself  as 
apostle.  And  as  it  is  for  obedience  of  faith,  it  was  not 
in  anywise  restricted  to  tkp  Jewish  people — "among 
all  nations,  for  his  (Christ's)  tiame:  among  whom  are 
ye  also  the  called  of  Jesus  Christ"  (verses  5,  6).  He 
loved  even  here  at  the  threshold  to  show  the  breadth  of 
God's  grace.  If  he  was  called,  so  were  they — he  an 
apostle,  they  not  apostles  but  saints ;  but  still,  for  them 
as  for  him,  all  flowed  out  of  the  same  mighty  love  of 
God.  "To  aU  that  be  at  Rome,  beloved  of  God,  called 
saints''  (ver.  7).  To  these  then  he  wishes,  as  was  his 
wont,  the  fresh  flow  of  that  source  and  stream  of  divine 
blessing  which  Christ  has  made  to  be  household  bread 
to  us :  "Grace  and  peace  from  God  our  Father,  and  from 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (ver.  7).  Then,  from  ver.  8, 
after  thanking  God  through  Jesus  for  their  faith  spoken 


ON   THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   EOMANS.  5 

of  everywhere,  and  telling  them  of  his  prayers  for  them, 
he  briefly  discloses  the  desire  of  his  heart  about  them — 
his  long-cherished  hope  according  to  the  grace  of  the 
gospel  to  reach  Eome — his  confidence  in  the  love  of 
God  that  through  him  some  spiritual  gift  would  be 
imparted  to  them,  that  they  might  be  established,  and, 
according  to  the  spirit  of  grace  which  filled  his  own 
heart,  that  he  too  might  be  comforted  together  with 
them  "by  the  mutual  faith  both  of  you  and  me" 
(w.  11,  12).  There  is  nothing  like  the  grace  of  God  for 
producing  the  truest  humility,  the  humility  that  not 
only  descends  to  the  lowest  level  of  sinners  to  do 
them  good,  but  which  is  itself  the  fruit  of  deliverance 
from  that  self-love  which  puffs  itself  or  lowers  others. 
Witness  the  common  joy  that  grace  gives  an  apostle 
with  saints  he  had  never  seen,  so  that  even  he  should 
be  comforted  as  well  as  they  by  their  mutual  faith.  He 
would  not  therefore  have  them  ignorant  how  they  had 
lain  on  Ms  heart  for  a  visit  (ver.  13).  He  was  debtor 
both  to  the  Greeks  and  the  barbarians,  both  to  the  wise 
and  to  the  unwise ;  he  was  ready,  as  far  as  he  was  con- 
cerned, to  preach  the  gospel  to  those  that  were  at  Eome 
also  (ver.  14,  15).  Even  the  saints  there  woiild  have 
been  all  the  better  for  the  gospel.  It  was  not  merely 
"to  those  at  Eome,"  but  "to  you  that  be  at  Eome." 
Thus  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  saints  may  not  be 
benefited  by  a  better  understanding  of  the  gospel,  at 
least  as  Paul  preached  it.  Accordingly  he  teUs  them 
now  what  reason  he  had  to  speak  thus  strongly,  not  of 
the  more  advanced  truths,  but  of  the  good  news.  "  For 
I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel :  for  it  is  the  power  of 
God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth ;  to  the 
Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Greek"  (ver.  16). 


6  INTEODUCTOEY   LECTUEES. 

Observe,  the  gospel  is  not  simply  remission  of  sins, 
nor  is  it  only  peace  with  God,  but  "  the  power  of  God 
unto  salvation."  Now  I  take  this  opportunity  of  press- 
ing on  all  that  are  here  to  beware  of  contracted  views 
of  "salvation."  Beware  that  you  do  not  confound  it 
with  souls  being  quickened,  or  even  brought  into  joy. 
Salvation  supposes  not  this  only,  but  a  great  deal 
more.  There  is  hardly  any  phraseology  that  tends  to 
more  injury  of  souls  in  these  matters  than  a  loose  way 
of  talking  of  salvation.  "At  any  rate  he  is  a  saved 
soul,"  we  hear.  "The  man  has  not  got  anything  like 
settled  peace  with  God ;  perhaps  he  hardly  knows  his 
sins  forgiven ;  but  at  least  he  is  a  saved  soul."  Here  is 
an  instance  of  what  is  so  reprehensible.  This  is  precisely 
what  salvation  does  not  mean ;  and  I  would  strongly, 
press  it  on  all  that  hear  me,  more  particularly  on  those 
that  have  to  do  with  the  work  of  the  Lord,  and  of 
cour.se  ardently  desire  to  labour  intelligently;  and  this 
not  alone  for  the  conversion,  but  for  the  establishment 
and  deliverance  of  souls.  Nothing  less,  I  am  persuaded,, 
than  this  full  blessing  is  the  line  that  God  has  given  to 
those  who  have  followed  Christ  without  the  camp,  and 
who,  having  been  set  free  from  the  contracted  ways  of 
men,  desire  to  enter  into  the  largeness  and  at  the  same 
time  the  profound  wisdom  of  every  word  of  God.  Let 
us  not  stumble  at  the  starting-point,  but  leave  room 
for  the  due  extent  and  depth  of  "salvation"  in  the 
gospel. 

There  is  no  need  of  dwelling  now  on  "  salvation  "  as 
employed  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  in  some  parts  of 
the  New,  as  the  gospels  and  Revelation  particularly, 
where  it  is  used  for  deliverance  in  power  or  even  pro- 
vidence and  present  things.     I  confine  myself  to  its 


ON   THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   ROMANS.  7 

doctrinal  import,  and  the  full  Christian  sense  of  the 
word ;  and  I  maintain  that  salvation  signifies  that 
deliverance  for  the  believer  which  is  the  full  con- 
sequence of  the  mighty  work  of  Christ,  apprehended 
not,  of  course,  necessarily  according  to  all  its  depth  in 
God's  eyes,  but  at  any  rate  applied  to  the  soul  in  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  not  the  awakening  of 
conscience,  however  real ;  neither  is  it  the  attraction  of 
heart  by  the  grace  of  Christ,  however  blessed  this  may 
be.  We  ought  therefore  to  bear  in  mind,  that  if  a  soul 
be  not  brought  into  conscious  deliverance  as  the  fruit 
of  divine  teaching,  and  founded  on  the  work  of  Christ, 
we  are  very  far  from  presenting  the  gospel  as  the 
apostle  Paul  glories  in  it,  and  delights  that  it  should  go 
forth.     "  I  am  not  ashamed,"  &c. 

And  he  gives  his  reason :  "  For  therein  is  the  right- 
eousness of  God  revealed  from  faith  to  faith;  as  it  is 
written,  The  just  shall  live  by  faith."  That  is,  it  is  the 
power  of  God  imto  salvation,  not  because  it  is  victory 
(which  at  the  beginning  of  the  soul's  career  would 
only  give  importance  to  man  even  if  possible,  which  it 
is  not),  but  because  it  is  "  the  righteousness  of  God." 
It  is  not  God  seeking,  or  man  bringing  righteousness. 
In  the  gospel  there  is  revealed  God's  righteousness. 
Thus  the  introduction  opened  with  Christ's  person, 
and  closes  with  God's  righteousness.  The  law  demanded, 
but  could  never  receive  righteousness  from  man.  Christ 
is  come,  and  has  changed  all.  God  is  revealing  a  right- 
eousness of  His  own  in  the  gospel.  It  is  God  who 
now  makes  known  a  righteousness  to  man,  instead  of 
looking  for  any  from  man.  Undoubtedly  there  are 
fruits  of  righteousness,  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ,  and 
God  values  them — I  will  not  say  from  man,  but  from 


8  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

His  saints;  but  here  it  is  what,  according  to  the 
apostle,  God  has  for  man.  It  is  for  the  saints  to  learn, 
of  course;  but  it  is  that  which  goes  out  in  its  own 
force  and  necessary  aim  to  the  need  of  man — a  divine 
righteousness,  which  justifies  instead  of  condemning 
him  who  believes.  It  is  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salva- 
tion." It  is  for  the  lost,  therefore ;  for  they  it  is  who 
need  salvation ;  and  it  is  to  save — not  merely  to  quicken, 
but  to  save ;  and  this  because  in  the  gospel  the  right- 
eousness of  God  is  revealed. 

Hence  it  is,  as  he  says,  herein  revealed  "  from  faith," 
or  by  faith.  It  is  the  same  form  of  expression  exactly 
as  in  the  beginning  of  Eomans  v. — "  being  justified  ly 
faith"  {Ik  irCareios).  But  besides  this  he  adds  "to  faith." 
The  first  of  these  phrases,  "from  faith,"  excludes  the 
law ;  the  second,  "  to  faith,"  inchides  every  one  that  has 
faith  within  the  scope  of  God's  righteousness.  Justifi- 
cation is  not  from  works  of  law.  The  righteousness  of 
God  is  revealed  from  faith;  and  consequently,  if  there 
be  faith  in  any  soul,  to  this  it  is  revealed,  to  faith 
wherever  it  may  be.  Hence^  therefore,  it  was  in  no 
way  limited  to  any  particular  nation,  such  as  those  that 
had  already  been  under  the  law  and  government  of 
God.  It  was  a  message  that  went  out  from  God  to 
sinners  as  such.  Let  man  be  what  he  might,  or  where 
he  might,  God's  good  news  was  for  man.  And  to  this 
agreed  the  testimony  of  the  prophet :  "  The  just  shall 
live  by  faith"  (not  by  law).  Even  where  the  law  was, 
not  by  it  but  by  faith  the  just  lived.  Did  Gentiles 
believe?  They  too  should  live.  Without  faith  there 
is  neither  justice  nor  life  that  God  owns ;  where  faith 
is,  the  rest  will  surely  follow. 

This  accordingly  leads  the  apostle  into  the  earlier 


ON   THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   ROMANS.  9 

portion  of  his  great  argument,  and  first  of  all  in  a 
preparatory  way.  Here  we  pass  out  of  the  introduction 
of  the  epistle.  "For  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed 
from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteous- 
ness of  men,  who  hold  the  truth  in  unrighteousness" 
(ver.  18).  This  is  what  made  the  gospel  to  be  so  sweet 
and  precious,  and,  what  is  more,  absolutely  necessary, 
if  he  would  escape  certain  and  eternal  ruin.  There  is 
no  hope  for  man  otherwise;  for  the  gospel  is  not  all 
that  is  now  made  known.  Not  only  is  God's  righteous- 
ness revealed,  but  also  His  wrath.  It  is  not  said  to 
be  revealed  in  the  gospel.  The  gospel  means  His 
glad  tidings  for  man.  The  wrath  of  God  could  not 
possibly  be  glad  tidings.  It  is  true,  it  is  needful  for 
man  to  learn ;  but  in  nowise  is  it  good  news.  There  is 
then  the  solemn  truth  also  of  divine  wrath.  It  is  not 
yet  executed.  It  is  "revealed,"  and  this  too  "from 
heaven."  There  is  no  question  of  a  people  on  earth, 
and  of  God's  wrath  breaking  out  in  one  form  or  another 
against  human  evil  in  this  life.  The  earth,  or,  at  least, 
the  Jewish  nation,  had  been  familiar  with  such  dealings 
of  God  in  times  past.  But  now  it  is  "the  wrath  of 
God  from  heaven ;"  and  consequently  it  is  in  view  of 
eternal  things,  and  not  of  those  that  touch  present  life 
on  the  earth. 

Hence,  as  God's  wrath  is  revealed  from  heaven, 
it  is  against  every  form  of  impiety — "  against  all 
ungodliness."  Besides  this,  which  seems  to  be  a  most 
comprehensive  expression  for  embracing  every  sort  and 
degree  of  human  iniquity,  we  have  one  very  specifically 
named.  It  is  against  the  "unrighteousness  of  men,  who 
hold  the  truth  in  unrighteousness."  To  hold  the  truth 
in  unrighteousness  would  be  no  security.     Alas !   we 


10  INTRODUCTOKY  LECTURES. 

know  how  this  was  in  Israel,  how  it  might  be,  and  has 
been,  in  Christendom.  God  pronounces  against  the  un- 
righteousness of  such ;  for  if  the  knowledge,  however 
exact,  of  God's  revealed  mind  was  accompanied  by  no 
renewal  of  the  heart,  if  it  was  without  life  towards 
God,  all  must  be  vain.  Man  is  only  so  much  the  worse 
for  knowing  the  truth,  if  he  holds  it  ever  so  fast  with 
unrighteousness.  There  are  some  that  find  a  difficulty 
here,  because  the  expression  "to  hold"  means  holding 
firmly.  But  it  is  quite  possible  for  the  unconverted  to 
be  tenacious  of  the  truth,  yet  unrighteous  in  their 
ways ;  and  so  much  the  worse  for  them.  Not  thus 
does  God  deal  with  souls.  If  His  grace  attract.  His 
truth  humbles,  and  leaves  no  room  for  vain  boasting 
and  self-confidence.  What  He  does  is  to  pierce  and 
penetrate  the  man's  conscience.  If  one  may  so  say. 
He  thus  holds  the  man,  instead  of  letting  the  man 
presume  that  he  is  holding  fast  the  truth.  The  inner 
man  is  dealt  with,  and  searched  through  and  through. 

Nothing  of  this  is  intended  in  the  class  that  is  here 
brought  before  us.  They  are  merely  persons  who  plume 
themselves  on  their  orthodoxy,  but  in  a  whoU}'^  unre- 
newed condition.  Such  men  have  never  been  wanting 
since  the  truth  has  shone  on  this  world ;  still  less  are 
they  now.  But  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from 
heaven  against  them  pre-eminently.  The  judgments  of 
God  wUl  fall  on  man  as  man,  but  the  heaviest  blows 
are  reserved  for  Christendom.  There  the  truth  is  held, 
and  apparently  with  firmness  too.  This,  however,  will 
be  put  to  the  test  by-and-by.  But  for  the  time  it  is 
held  fast,  though  in  unrighteousness.  Thus  the  wrath 
of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against  (not  only  the 
open  ungodliness  of  men, .but)  the  orthodox  unright- 


ON   THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   ROMANS.  11 

eousness   of   those  that  hold  the  truth  in   unright- 
eousness. 

And  this  leads  the  apostle  into  the  moral  history  of 
man— the  proof  both  of  his  inexcusable  guilt,  and  of 
his  extreme  need  of  redemption.  He  begins  with  the 
great  epoch  of  the  dispensations  of  God  (that  is,  the 
ages  since  the  flood).  We  cannot  speak  of  the  state  of 
things  before  the  flood  as  a  dispensation.  There  was  a 
most  important  trial  of  man  in  the  person  of  Adam  ; 
but  after  this,  what  dispensation  was  there  ?  What 
were  the  principles  of  it?  No  man  can  tell.  The 
truth  is,  those  are  altogether  mistaken  who  call  it  so. 
But  after  the  flood  man  as  such  was  put  under  certain 
conditions — the  whole  race.  Man  became  the  object, 
first,  of  general  dealings  of  G-od  under  Noah ;  next,  of 
His  special  ways  in  the  calling  of  Abraham  and  of  his 
family.  And  wliat  led  to  the  call  of  Abraham,  of 
whom  we  hear  much  in  the  epistle  to  the  Eomans  as 
elsewhere,  was  the  departure  of  man  into  idolatry.  Man 
despised  at  first  the  outward  testimony  of  God,  His 
eternal  power  and  Godhead,  in  the  creation  above  and 
around  hira  (verses  19,  20).  Moreover,  He  gave  up 
the  knowledge  of  God  that  had  been  handed  down 
from  father  to  son  (ver.  21).  The  downfall  of  man, 
when  he  thus  abandoned  God,  was  most  rapid  and 
profound;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  traces  this  soletrmly 
to  the  end  of  chapter  i.  with  no  needless  words,  in  a 
few  energetic  strokes  summing  up  that  which  is  abun- 
dantly confirmed  (but  in  how  different  a  manner ')  by 
all  that  remains  of  the  ancient  world.  ''Professing 
themselves  to  be  wise,  they  became  fools,  and  changed 
the  glory  of  the  uncorruptible  God  into  an  image  made 
like  to  corruptible  man,"  &c.    (verses  22-32.)     Thus 


12  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

corruption  not  only  overspread  morals,  but  became  an 
integral  part  of  the  religion  of  men,  and  had  thus  a 
quasi-divine  sanction.  Hence  the  depravity  of  the  hea- 
then found  little  or  no  check  from  conscience,  because 
it  was  bound  up  with  aU  that  took  the  shape  of  God 
before  their  mind.  There  was  no  part  of  heathenism, 
practically  viewed  now,  so  corrupting  as  that  wliich 
had  to  do  with  the  objects  of  its  worship.  Thus,  the 
true  God  being  lost,  all  was  lost,  and  man's  downward 
career  becomes  the  most  painful  and  humiliating  object, 
unless  it  be,  indeed,  that  which  we  have  to  feel  where 
men,  without  renewal  of  heart,  espouse  in  pride  of 
mind  the  truth  with  nothing  but  unrighteousness. 

In  the  beginning  of  chapter  ii.  we  have  man  pre- 
tending to  righteousness.  Still,  it  is  "man" — not  yet 
exactly  the  Jew,  but  man — who  had  profited,  it  might 
be,  by  whatever  the  Jew  had;  at  the  least,  by  the 
workings  of  natural  conscience.  But  natural  conscience, 
although  it  may  detect  evil,  never  leads  one  into  the 
inward  possession  and  enjoyment  of  good — never  brings 
the  soul  to  God.  Accordingly,  in  chapter  ii.  the  Holy 
Spirit  shows  us  man  satisfying  himself  with  pro- 
nouncing on  what  is  right  and  wrong — moralizing,  for 
others,  but  nothing  more.  Now  God  must  have  reality 
in  the  man  himself.  The  gospel,  instead  of  treating 
this  as  a  light  matter,  alone  vindicates  God  in  these 
eternal  ways  of  His,  in  that  which  must  be  in  him 
who  stands  in  relationship  with  God.  Hence  there- 
fore, the  apostle,  with  divine  wisdom,  opens  this  to  us 
before  the  blessed  relief  and  deliverance  which  the 
gospel  reveals  to  us.  In  the  most  solemu  way  he 
appeals  to  man  with  the  demand,  whether  he  thinks 


ON   THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   EOMANS.  13 

that  God  will  look  complacently  on  that  which  barely 
judges  another,  but  which  allows  the  practice  of  evil 
iu  the  man  himself  (ii.  1-3).  Such  moral  judgments 
will,  no  doubt,  be  used  to  leave  man  without  excuse; 
they  can  never  suit  or  satisfy  God. 

Then  the  apostle  introduces  the  ground,  certainty, 
and  character  of  God's  judgment  (verses  4^16).  He 
"will  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds:  to 
them  who  by  patient  continuance  in  well  doing  seek 
for  glory  and  honour  and  immortality,  eternal  life :  to 
them  that  are  contentious,  and  do  not  obey  the  truth, 
but  obey  unrighteousness,  indignation  and  wrath,  tribu- 
lation and  anguish,  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  doeth 
evil,  of  the  Jew  first  and  also  of  the  Gentile." 

It  is  not  here  a  question  of  how  a  man  is  to  be  saved, 
but  of  God's  indispensable  moral  judgment,  which  the 
gospel,  instead  of  weakening,  asserts  according  to  the 
holiness  and  truth  of  God.  It  will  be  observed  there- 
fore, that  in  this  connection  the  apostle  shows  the  place 
both  of  conscience  and  of  the  law, — that  God  in 
judging  will  take  into  full  consideration  the  circum- 
stances and  condition  of  every  soul  of  man.  At  the 
same  time  he  connects,  in  a  singularly  interesting 
manner,  this  disclosure  of  the  principles  of  the  eternal 
judgment  of  God  with  what  he  calls  "my  gospel." 
This  also  is  a  most  important  truth,  my  brethren,  to 
bear  in  mind.  The  gospel  at  its  height  in  uo  wise 
weakens  but  maintains  the  moral  manifestation  of 
what  God  is.  The  legal  institutions  were  associated 
with  temporal  judgment.  The  gospel,  as  now  revealed 
in  the  New  Testament,  has  linked  with  it,  though  not 
contained  in  it,  the  revelation  of  divine  wrath  from 
heaven,  and  this,  you  will  observe,  according  to  Paul's 


14  INTEODUCTOET   LECTURES. 

gospel.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  dispensational 
position  will  not  suffice  for  God,  who  holds  to  His  own 
unchangeable  estimate  of  good  and  evU,  and  who 
judges  the  more  stringently  according  to  the  measure 
of  advantage  possessed. 

But  thus  the  way  is  now  clear  for  bringing  the  Jew 
into  the  discussion.  "  But  if  [for  so  it  should  be  read] 
thou  art  named  a  Jew,"  &c.  (ver.  17.)  It  was  not 
merely  that  he  had  better  light.  He  had  this,  of  course, 
in  a  revelation  that  was  from  God;  he  had  law;  he 
had  prophets ;  he  had  divine  institutions.  It  was  not 
merely  better  light  in  the  conscience,  which  might  be 
elsewhere,  as  is  supposed  in  the  early  verses  of  our 
chapter;  but  the  Jew's  position  was  directly  and  un- 
questionably one  of  divine  tests  applied  to  man's  estate. 
Alas !  the  Jew  was  none  the  better  for  this,  unless 
there  were  the  submission  of  his  conscience  to  God. 
Increase  of  privileges  can  never  avail  without  the  soul's 
self-judgment  before  the  mercy  of  God.  Eather  does 
it  add  to  his  guilt :  such  is  man's  evil  state  and  will. 
Accordingly,  in  the  end  of  the  chapter,  he  shows  that 
this  is  most  true  as  applied  to  the  moral  judgment  of 
the  Jew ;  that  none  so  much  dishonoured  God  as  wicked 
Jews,  their  own  Scripture  attesting  it;  that  position 
went  for  nothing  in  such,  while  the  lack  of  it  would 
not  annul  the  Gentile's  righteousness,  which  would 
indeed  condemn  the  more  unfaithful  Israel;  in  short, 
that  one  must  be  a  Jew  inwardly  to  avail,  and  circum- 
cision be  of  the  heart,  in  spirit,  not  in  letter,  whose 
praise  is  of  God,  and  not  of  men. 

The  question  then  is  raised  in  the  beginning  of  chap- 
ter iii.,  If  this  be  so,  what  is  the  superiority  of  the 


ON   THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   ROMANS.  15 

Jew  ?  Where  lies  the  value  of  belonging  to  the  circum- 
cised people  of  God  ?  The  apostle  allows  this  privilege 
to  be  great,  specially  in  having  the  Scriptures,  but 
turns  the  argument  against  the  boasters.  We  need 
not  here  enter  into  the  details ;  but  on  the  surface  we 
see  how  the  apostle  brings  all  down  to  that  which  is  of 
the  deepest  interest  to  every  soul.  He  deals  with  the 
Jew  from  his  own  Scripture  (verses  9-19).  Did  the 
Jews  take  the  ground  of  exclusively  having  that  word 
of  God — the  law  ?  Granted  that  it  is  so,  at  once  and 
fully.  To  whom,  then,  did  the  law  address  itself?  To 
those  that  were  under  it,  to  be  sure.  It  pronounced  on 
the  Jew  then.  It  was  the  boast  of  the  Jews  that  the 
law  spoke  about  them;  that  the  Gentiles  had  no  right 
to  it,  and  were  but  presuming  on  what  belonged  to 
God's  chosen  people.  The  apostle  applies  this  accord- 
ing to  divine  wisdom.  Then  your  principle  is  your 
condemnation.  What  the  law  says,  it  speaks  to  those 
under  it.  What,  then,  is  its  voice  ?  That  there  is  none 
righteous,  none  that  doeth  good,  none  that  under- 
standeth.  Of  whom  does  it  declare  all  this  ?  Of  the 
Jew  by  his  own  confession.  Every  mouth  was  stopped  ; 
the  Jew  by  his  own  oracles,  as  the  Gentile  by  their 
evident  abominations,  shown  already.  All  the  world 
was  guilty  before  God. 

Thus,  having  shown  the  Gentile  in  chapter  i.  mani- 
festly wrong,  and  hopelessly  degraded  to  the  last 
degree — having  laid  bare  the  moral  dilettantism  of  the 
philosophers,  not  one  whit  better  in  the  sight  of  God, 
but  rather  the  reverse — having  shown  the  Jew  over- 
whelmed by  the  condemnation  of  the  divine  oracles  in 
which  he  chiefly  boasted,  without  real  righteousness, 
and  so  much  the  more  guilty  for  his  special  privileges, 


16  INTROUUCTOEY   LECTUEES. 

all  now  lies  clear  for  bringing  in  the  proper  Christian 
message,  the  gospel  of  God.  "  Therefore  by  the  deeds 
of  the  law  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  sight : 
for  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  But  now  the 
righteousness  of  God  without  the  law  is  manifested, 
being  witnessed  by  the  law  and  the  prophets "  (verses 
20,  21). 

Here,  again,  the  apostle  takes  up  what  he  had  but 
announced  in  chapter  i. — the  righteousness  of  God. 
Let  me  call  your  attention  again  to  its  force.  It  is  not 
the  mercy  of  God.  Many  have  contended  that  so  it  is, 
and  to  their  own  great  loss,  as  well  as  to  the  weakening 
of  the  word  of  God.  "  Eighteousness"  never  means 
mercy,  not  even  the  "righteousness  of  God."  The  mean- 
ing is  not  what  was  executed  on  Christ,  but  what  is  in 
virtue  of  it.  Undoubtedly  divine  judgment  fell  on 
Him ;  but  this  is  not  "  tlie  righteousness  of  God,"  as 
the  apostle  employs  it  in  any  part  of  his  writings  any 
more  than  here,  though  we  know  there  could  be  no 
such  thing  as  God's  righteousness  justifying  the  believer, 
if  Christ  had  not  borne  the  judgment  of  God.  The 
expression  means  that  righteousness  which  God  can 
afford  to  display  because  of  Christ's  atonement.  In 
short,  it  is  what  the  words  say — "  the  righteousness  of 
God"  and  this  "by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ." 

Hence  it  is  wholly  apart  from  the  law,  whilst  witnessed 
to  by  the  law  and  prophets ;  for  the  law  with  its  types 
had  looked  onward  to  this  new  kind  of  righteousness ; 
and  the  prophets  had  borne  their  testimony  that  it  was 
at  hand,  but  not  then  come.  Now  it  was  manifested 
and  not  promised  or  predicted  merely.  Jesus  had  come 
and  died;  Jesus  had  been  a  propitiatory  sacrifice- 
Jesus  had  borne  the  judgment  of  God  because  of  the 


ON  THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   ROMANS.  17 

sins  He  bore.  The  righteousness  of  God,  then,  could 
now  go  forth  in  virtue  of  His  blood.  God  was  not 
satisfied  alone.  There  is  satisfaction ;  but  the  work  of 
Christ  goes  a  great  deal  farther.  Therein  God  is  both 
vindicated  and  glorified.  By  the  cross  God  has  a  deeper 
moral  glory  than  ever — a  glory  that  He  thus  acquired, 
if  I  may  so  say.  He  is,  of  course,  the  same  absolutely 
perfect  and  unchangeable  God  of  goodness;  but  His 
perfection  has  displayed  itself  in  new  and  more  glorious 
ways  in  Christ's  death,  in  Him  who  humbled  Himself, 
and  was  obedient  even  to  the  death  of  the  cross. 

God,  therefore,  having  not  the  least  hindrance  to  the 
manifestation  of  what  He  can  be  and  is  in  merciful 
intervention  on  behalf  of  the  worst  of  sinners,  manifests 
it  as  His  righteousness  "  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  unto 
all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe"  (ver.  22).  The 
former  is  the  direction,  and  the  latter  the  application. 
The  direction  is  "unto  all;"  the  application  is,  of 
course,  only  to  "them  that  believe;"  but  it  is  to  all 
them  that  believe.  As  far  as  persons  are  concerned, 
there  is  no  hindrance ;  Jew  or  Gentile  makes  no  differ- 
ence, as  is  expressly  said,  "For  aU.  have  sinned,  and 
come  short  of  the  glory  of  God;  being  justified  freely 
by  his  grace  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus :  whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation 
through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness 
for  the  [passing  over  or  prEeter-mission,  not]  remission 
of  sins  that  are  past,  through  the  forbearance  of  God ; 
to  declare,  I  say,  at  this  time  his  righteousness :  that  he 
might  be  just,  and  the  justifier  of  him  that  believeth  in 
Jesus  "  (verses  23-26).  There  is  no  simple  mind  that 
can  evade  the  plain  force  of  this  last  expression.  The 
righteousness  of  God  means  that  God  is  just,  whUe  at 

c 


18  INTEODUCTOEY   LECTUBES. 

the  same  time  He  justifies  the  believer  in  Christ  Jesus. 
It  is  His  righteousness,  or,  in  other  words.  His  perfect 
consistency  with  Himself,  which  is  always  involved 
in  the  notion  of  righteousness.  He  is  consistent  with 
Himself  when  He  is  justifying  sinners,  or,  more  strictly, 
all  those  who  believe  in  Jesus.  He  can  meet  the  sinner, 
but  He  justifies  the  believer ;  and  in  this,  instead  of 
trenching  on  His  glory,  there  is  a  deeper  revelation  and 
maintenance  of  it  than  if  there  never  had  been  sin  or 
a  sinner. 

Horribly  offensive  as  sin  is  to  God,  and  inexcusable 
in  the  creature,  it  is  sin  which  has  given  occasion 
to  the  astonishing  display  of  divine  righteouness  in 
justifying  believers.  It  is  not  a  question  of  His  mercy 
merely;  for  this  weakens  the  truth  immensely,  and 
perverts  its  character  wholly.  The  righteousness  of 
God  flows  from  His  mercy,  of  course ;  but  its  character 
and  basis  is  righteousness.  Christ's  work  of  redemption 
deserves  that  God  should  act  as  He  does  in  the  gospel. 
Observe  again,  it  is  not  victory  here ;  for  that  would 
give  place  to  human  pride.  It  is  not  a  soul's  over- 
coming its  difficulties,  but  a  sinner's  submission  to  the 
righteousness  of  God.  It  is  God  Himself  who,  infi- 
nitely glorified  in  the  Lord  that  expiated  our  sins  by 
His  one  sacrifice,  remits  them  now,  not  looking  for 
our  victory,  nor  as  yet  even  in  leading  us  on  to  victory, 
but  by  faith  in  Jesus  and  His  blood.  God  is  proved 
thus  divinely  consistent  with  Himself  in  Christ  Jesus, 
whom  He  has  set  forth  a  mercy-seat  through  faith  in 
His  blood. 

Accordingly  the  apostle  says  that  boast  and  works 
are  completely  set  aside  by  this  principle  which  affirms 
faith,  apart  from  deeds  of  law,  to  be  the  means  of 


ON  THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE    EOMANS.  19 

relationship  with  God  (verses  27,  28).  Consaquently 
the  door  is  as  open  to  the  Gentile  as  to  the  Jew. 
The  ground  taken  by  a  Jew  for  supposing  God  ex- 
clusively for  Israel  was,  that  they  had  the  law,  which 
was  the  measure  of  what  God  claimed  from  man ;  and 
this  the  Gentile  had  not.  But  such  thoughts  altogether 
vanish  now,  because,  as  the  Gentile  was  unquestionably 
wicked  and  abominable,  so  from  the  law's  express  de- 
nunciation the  Jew  was  universally  guilty  before  God. 
Consequently  all  turned,  not  on  what  man  should  be 
for  God,  but  what  God  can  be  and  is,  as  revealed  in  the 
gospel,  to  man.  This  maintains  both  the  glory  and  the 
moral  universality  of  Him  who  will  justify  the  circum- 
cision by  faith,  not  law,  and  the  uncircumcision  through 
their  faith,  if  they  believe  the  gospel.  Nor  does  this  in 
the  slightest  degree  weaken  the  principle  of  law.  On  the 
contrary,  the  doctrine  of  faith  establishes  law  as  nothing 
else  can ;  and  for  this  simple  reason,  that  if  one  who  is 
guilty  hopes  to  be  saved  spite  of  the  broken  law,  it 
must  be  at  the  expense  of  the  law  that  condemns  his 
guilt ;  whereas  the  gospel  shows  no  sparing  of  sin,  but 
the  most  complete  condemnation  of  it  all,  as  charged 
on  Him  who  shed  His  blood  in  atonement.  The  doc- 
trine of  faith  therefore,  which  reposes  on  the  cross, 
establishes  law,  instead  of  making  it  void,  as  every 
other  principle  must  (verses  27-31). 

But  this  is  not  the  full  extent  of  salvation.  Accord- 
ingly we  do  not  hear  of  salvation  as  such  in  chapter  iii. 
There  is  laid  down  the  most  essential  of  all  truths  as  a 
groundwork  of  salvation ;  namely,  expiation.  There  is 
the  vindication  of  God  in  His  ways  with  the  Old 
Testament  believers.     Their  sins  had  been  passed  by. 

c  2 


20  INTEODtrCTORY  LECTURES. 

He  could  not  have  remitted  heretofore.  This  would  not 
have  been  just.  And  the  hlessedness  of  the  gospel  is, 
that  it  is  (not  merely  an  exercise  of  mercy,  but  also) 
divinely  just.  It  would  not  have  been  righteous  in  any 
sense  to  have  remitted  the  sins,  until  they,  were  actually 
borne  by  One  who  could  and  did  suffer  for  them.  But 
now  they  were ;  and  thus  God  vindicated  Himself  per- 
fectly as  to  the  past.  But  this  great  work  of  Christ 
was  not  and  could  not  be  a  mere  vindication  of  God; 
and  we  may  find  it  otherwise  developed  in  various 
parts  of  Scripture,  which  I  here  mention  by  the  way  to 
show  the  point  at  which  we  are  arrived.  God's  right- 
eousness was  now  manifested  as  to  the  past  sins  He  had 
not  brought  into  judgment  through  His  forbearance, 
and  yet  more  conspicuously  in  the  present  time,  when 
He  displayed  His  justice  in  justifying  the  believer. 

But  this  is  not  aU;  and  the  objection  of  the  Jew 
gives  occasion  for  the  apostle  to  bring  out  a  fuller  dis- 
play of  what  God  is.  Did  they  fall  back  on  Abraham  ? 
"  What  shall  we  then  say  that  Abraham  our  father,  as 
pertaining  to  the  flesh,  hath  found  ?  For  if  Abraham 
were  justified  by  works,  he  hath  whereof  to  glory;  but 
not  before  God."  Did  the  Jew  fancy  that  the  gospel 
makes  very  light  of  Abraham,  and  of  the  then  dealings 
of  Godi  Not  so,  says  the  apostle.  Abraham  is  the 
proof  of  the  value  of  faith  in  justification  before  God. 
Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was  counted  to  him  for 
righteousness.  There  was  no  law  there  or  then;  for 
Abraham  died  long  before  God  spoke  from  Sinai.  He 
believed  God  and  His  word,  with  special  approval  on 
God's  part ;  and  his  faith  was  counted  as  righteousness 
(ver.  3).  And  this  was  powerfully  corroborated  by  the 
testimony  of  another  great  name  in  Israel  (David),  in 


ON  THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   EOMANS.  21 

Psalm  xxxii.  "  For  day  and  night  thy  hand  was  heavy 
upon  me:  my  moisture  is  turned  into  the  drought  of 
summer.  I  acknowledged  my  sin  unto  thee,  and  mine 
iniquity  have  I  not  hid.  I  said,  I  wiU  confess  my 
transgressions  unto  the  Lord;  and  thou  forgavest  the 
iniquity  of  my  sin.  For  this  ^kU  every  one  that  is 
godly  pray  unto  thee  in  a  time  when  thou  mayest  be 
found:  surely  in  the  floods  of  great  waters  they  shall 
not  come  nigh  unto  him.  Thou  art  my  hiding-place ; 
thou  shalt  preserve  me  from  trouble;  thou  shalt  com- 
pass me  about  with  songs  of  deliverance.  I  will 
instruct  thee  and  teach  thee  in  the  way  which  thou 
shalt  go :  I  wiU.  guide  thee  with  mine  eye." 

In  the  same  way  the  apostle  disposes  of  all  pretence 
on  the  score  of  ordinances,  especially  circumcision.  Not 
only  was  Abraham  justified  without  law,  but  apart  from 
that  great  sign  of  mortification  of  the  flesh.  Although 
circumcision  began  with  Abraham,  manifestly  it  had 
nothing  to  do  with  his  righteousness,  and  at  best  was 
but  the  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith  which  he  had 
in  an  uncircumcised  state.  It  could  not  therefore  be 
the  source  or  means  of  his  righteousness.  All  then 
that  believe,  though  uncircumcised,  might  claim  him  as 
father,  assured  that  righteousness  wUl  be  reckoned  to 
them  too.  And  he  is  father  of  circumcision  in  the  best 
sense,  not  to  Jews,  but  to  believing  Gentiles.  Thus 
the  discussion  of  Abraham  strengthens  the  case  in 
behalf  of  the  uncircumcised  who  believe,  to  the  over- 
throw of  the  greatest  boast  of  the  Jew.  The  appeal  to 
their  own  inspired  account  of  Abraham  turned  into 
a  proof  of  the  consistency  of  God's  ways  in  justifying 
by  faith,  and  hence  in  justifying  the  uncircumcised  no 
less  than  the  circumcision. 


22  INTRODUCTOEY   LECTURES. 

But  there  is  more  than  this  in  chapter  iv.  He  takes 
up  a  third  feature  of  Abraham's  case ;  that  is,  the  con- 
nection of  the  promise  with  resurrection.  Here  it  is 
not  merely  the  negation  of  law  and  of  circumcision, 
but  we  have  the  positive  side.  Law  works  wrath 
because  it  provokes  H'ansgression ;  grace  makes  the 
promise  sure  to  all  the  seed,  not  only  because  faith  is 
open  to  the  Gentile  and  Jew  alike,  but  because  God  is 
looked  to  as  a  quickener  of  the  dead.  What  gives  glory 
to  God  like  this  ?  Abraham  believed  God  when, 
according  to  nature,  it  was  impossible  for  him  or  for 
Sarah  to  have  a  child.  The  quickening  power  of  God 
therefore  was  here  set  forth,  of  course  historically  in  a 
way  connected  with  this  life  and  a  posterity  on  earth, 
but  nevertheless  a  very  just  and  true  sign  of  God's 
power  for  the  believer — the  quickening  energy  of  God 
after  a  still  more  blessed  sort.  And  this  leads  us  to  see 
not  only  where  there  was  an  analogy  with  those  who 
believe  in  a  promised  Saviour,  but  also  to  a  weighty 
difference.  Aud  this  lies  in  the  fact  that  Abraham 
believed  God  before  he  had  the  son,  being  fully  per- 
suaded that  what  He  had  promised  He  was  able  to 
perform;  and  therefore  it  was  imputed  to  him  for 
righteousness.  But  we  believe  on  Him  that  raised  up 
Jesus  our  Lord  from  the  dead.  It  is  done  already.  It 
is  not  here  believing  on  Jesus,  but  on  God  who  has 
proved  what  He  is  to  us  in  raising  from  among  the 
dead  Him  who  was  delivered  for  our  offences,  and 
raised  again  for  our  justification  (verses  13-25). 

This  brings  out  a  most  emphatic  truth  and  special 
side  of  Christianity.  Christianity  is  not  a  system  of 
promise,  but  rather  of  promise  accomplished  in  Christ. 
Hence  it  is  essentially  founded  on  the  gift  not  only  of 


ON   THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   ROMANS.  23 

a  Saviour  who  would  interpose,  in  the  mercy  of  God, 
to  bear  our  sins,  but  of  One  who  is  already  revealed,  and 
the  work  done  and  accepted,  and  this  known  in  the 
fact  that  God  Himself  has  interposed  to  raise  Him 
from  among  the  dead — a  bright  and  momentous  thing 
to  press  on  souls,  as  indeed  we  find  the  apostles  insist- 
ing on  it  throughout  the  Acts.  Were  it  merely  Eomans 
iii.  there  could  not  be  full  peace  with  God  as  there  is. 
One  might  know  a  most  real  clinging  to  Jesus ;  but  this 
would  not  set  the  heart  at  ease  with  God.  The  soul 
may  feel  the  blood  of  Jesus  to  be  a  yet  deeper  want ; 
but  this  alone  does  not  give  peace  with  God.  In  such 
a  condition  what  has  been  found  in  Jesus  is  too  often 
misused  to  make  a  kind  of  difference,  so  to  speak, 
between  the  Saviour  on  the  one  hand,  and  God  on  the 
other — ruinous  always  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  fuU 
blessing  of  the  gospel.  Now  there  is  no  way  in  which 
God  could  lay  a  basis  for  peace  with  Himself  more 
blessed  than  as  He  has  done  it.  No  longer  does  the 
question  exist  of  requiring  an  expiation.  That  is  the 
first  necessity  for  the  sinner  with  God.  But  we  have 
had  it  fully  in  Eomans  iii.  Now  it  is  the  positive 
power  of  God  in  raising  up  from  the  dead  Him  that 
was  delivered  for  our  offences,  and  raised  again  for  our 
justifying.     The  whole  work  is  done. 

The  soul  therefore  now  is  represented  for  the  first  time 
as  already  justified  and  in  possession  of  peace  with  God. 
This  is  a  state  of  mind,  and  not  the  necessary  or 
immediate  fruit  of  Eomans  iii.,  but  is  based  on  the 
truth  of  Eomans  iv.  as  well  as  iii.  There  never  can  be 
solid  peace  with  God  without  both.  A  soul  may  as 
truly,  no  doubt,  be  put  into  relationship  with  God — be 


24  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

made  very  happy,  it  may  be ;  but  it  is  not  what  Scrip- 
ture calls  "peace  with  God."  Therefore  it  is  here  for 
the  first  time  that  we  find  salvation  spoken  of  in  the 
grand  results  that  are  now  brought  before  us  in  chapter 
V.  1-11.  "Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with 
God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  There  is  entrance 
into  favour,  and  nothing  but  favour.  The  believer  is 
not  put  under  law,  you  will  observe,  but  under  grace, 
which  is  the  precise  reverse  of  law.  The  soul  is  brought 
into  peace  with  God,  as  it  finds  its  standing  in  the 
grace  of  God,  and,  more  than  that,  rejoices  in  hope  of 
the  glory  of  God.  Such  is  the  doctrine  and  the  fact. 
It  is  not  merely  a  call  then;  but  as  we  have  by  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  our  access  into  the  favour  wherein 
we  stand,  so  there  is  positive  boasting  in  the  hope  of 
the  glory  of  God.  Por  it  may  have  been  noticed  from 
chapter  iii.  to  chapter  v.,  that  nothing  but  fitness  for 
the  glory  of  God  will  do  now.  It  is  not  a  question  of 
creature-standing.  This  passed  away  with  man  when 
he  sinned.  Now  that  God  has  revealed  Himself  in  the 
gospel,  it  is  not  what  will  suit  man  on  earth,  but  what 
is  worthy  of  the  presence  of  the  glory  of  God.  Never- 
theless the  apostle  does  not  expressly  mention  heaven 
here.  This  was  not  suitable  to  the  character  of  the 
epistle ;  but  the  glory  of  God  he  does.  We  all  know 
where  it  is  and  must  be  for  the  Christian. 

The  consequences  are  thus  pursued;  first,  the  general 
place  of  the  believer  now,  in  all  respects,  in  relation  to 
the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future.  His  pathway 
follows;  and  he  shows  that  the  very  troubles  of  the 
road  become  a  distinct  matter  of  boast.  This  was  not 
a  direct  and  intrinsic  effect,  of  course,  but  the  result  of 
spiritual  dealing  for  :the  soul.    It  was  the  Lord  giving 


ON  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EOMANS.  25 

US  the  profit  of  sorrow,  and  ourselves  bowing  to  the 
way  and  end  of  God  in  it,  so  that  the  result  of  tribu- 
lation should  be  rich  and  fruitful  experience. 

Then  there  is  another  and  crowning  part  of  the 
blessing :  "  And  not  only  so,  but  also  boasting  in  God 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  we  have  now 
received  the  reconciliation."  It  is  not  only  a  blessing 
in  its  own  direct  character,  or  in  indirect  though  real 
effects,  but  the  Giver  Himself  is  our  joy,  and  boast,  and 
glory.  The  consequences  spiritually  are  blessed  to  the 
soul;  how  much  more  is  it  to  reach  the  source  from 
which  all  flows !  This,  accordingly,  is  the  essential 
spring  of  worship.  The  fruits  of  it  are  not  expanded 
here ;  but,  in  point  of  fact,  to  joy  in  God  is  necessarily 
that  which  makes  praise  and  adoration  to  be  the  simple 
and  spontaneous  exercise  of  the  heart.  In  heaven  it 
will  fill  us  perfectly ;  but  there  is  no  more  perfect  joy 
there,  nor  anything  higher,  if  so  high,  in  this  epistle. 


At  this  point  we  enter  upon  a  most  important  part 
of  the  epistle,  on  which  we  must  dwell  for  a  little.  It 
is  no  longer  a  question  of  man's  guilt,  but  of  his 
nature.  Hence  the  apostle  does  not,  as  in  the  early 
chapters  of  this  epistle,  take  up  our  sins,  except  as 
proofs  and  symptoms  of  sin.  Accordingly,  for  the  first 
time,  the  Spirit  of  God  from  chapter  v.  12  traces  the 
nature  of  man  to  the  head  of  the  race.  This  brings  in 
the  contrast  with  the  other  Head,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  whom  we  have  here  not  as  One  bearing  our 
sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree,  but  as  the  spring  and 
chief  of  a  new  family.  Hence,  as  is  shown  later  in 
the  chapter,  Adam  is  a  head  characterized  by  dis- 


26  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

obedience,  who  brought  in  death,  the  just  penalty  of 
sin;  as  on  the  other  hand  we  have  Him  of  whom  he 
was  the  type,  Christ,  the  obedient  man,  who  has  brought 
in  righteousness,  and  this  after  a  singularly  blessed  sort 
and  style — "justification  of  life."  Of  it  nothing  has 
been  heard  tOl  now.  We  have  had  justification,  both 
by  blood  and  also  in  virtue  of  Christ's  resurrection. 
But  "justification  of  life"  goes  farther,  though  ia- 
volved  in  the  latter,  than  the  end  of  Eomans  iv.;  for 
now  we  learn  that  in  the  gospel  there  is  not  only  a 
dealing  with  the  guilt  of  those  that  are  addressed  in  it ; 
there  is  also  a  mighty  work  of  God  in  the  presenting 
the  man  in  a  new  place  before  God,  and  in  fact,  too,  for 
his  faith,  clearing  him  from  all  the  consequences  in 
which  he  finds  himself  as  a  man  in  the  flesh  here 
below. 

It  is  here  that  you  will  find  a  great  failure  of  Chris- 
tendom as  to  this.  Not  that  any  part  of  the  truth  has 
escaped :  it  is  the  fatal  brand  of  that  "  great  house " 
that  even  the  most  elementary  truth  suffers  the  deepest 
injury;  but  as  to  this  truth,  it  seems  unknown  alto- 
gether. I  hope  that  brethren  in  Christ  will  bear  with 
me  if  I  press  on  them  the  importance  of  taking  good 
heed  to  it  that  their  souls  are  thoroughly  grounded  in 
this,  the  proper  place  of  the  Christian  by  Christ's  death 
and  resurrection.  It  must  not  be  assumed  too  readily. 
There  is  a  disposition  continually  to  'imagine  that  what 
is  frequently  spoken  of  must  be  understood ;  but  expe- 
rience will  soon  show  that  this  is  not  the  case.  Even 
those  that  seek  a  place  of  separation  to  the  Lord  outside 
that  which  is  now  hurrying  on  souls  to  destruction  are, 
nevertheless,  deeply  affected  by  the  condition  of  that 
Christendom  in  which  we  find  ourselves. 


ON  THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE  EOMANS.  27 

Here,  then,  it  is  not  a  question  at  all  of  pardon  or 
remission.  First  of  all  the  apostle  points  out  that 
death  has  eome  in,  and  that  this  was  no  consequence  of 
law,  but  before  it.  Sin  was  in  the  world  between 
Adam  and  Moses,  when  the  law  was  not.  This  clearly 
takes  in  man,  it  will  be  observed ;  and  this  is  his  grand 
point  now.  The  contrast  of  Christ  with  Adam  takes 
in  man  universally  as  well  as  the  Christian ;  and  man 
in  sin,  alas !  M'as  true,  accordingly,  before  the  law,  right 
through  the  law,  and  ever  since  the  law.  The  apostle 
is  therefore  plainly  in  presence  of  the  broadest  possible 
grounds  of  comparison,  though  we  shall  find  more  too. 

But  the  Jew  might  argue  that  it  was  an  unjust  thing 
in  principle — this  gospel,  these  tidings  of  which  the 
apostle  was  so  full;  for  why  should  one  man  affect 
many,  yea,  all?  "N"ot  so,"  replies  the  apostle.  Why 
should  tliis  be  so  strange  and  incredible  to  you?  for 
on  your  own  showing,  according  to  that  word  to  which 
we  all  bow,  you  must  admit  that  one  man's  sin  brought 
in  universal  moral  ruin  and  death.  Proud  as  you  may 
be  of  that  which  distinguishes  you,  it  is  hard  to  make 
sin  and  death  peculiar  to  you,  nor  can  you  connect 
them  even  with  the  law  particularly :  the  race  of  man 
is  in  question,  and  not  Israel  alone.  There  is  nothing 
that  proves  this  so  convincingly  as  the  book  of  Genesis; 
and  the  apostle,  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  calmly  but 
triumphantly  summons  the  Jewish  Scriptures  to  de- 
monstrate that  which  the  Jews  were  so  strenuously 
denying.  Their  own  Scriptures  maintained,  as  nothing 
else  could,  that  all  the  wretchedness  which  is  now 
found  in  the  world,  and  the  condemnation  which  hangs 
over  the  race,  is  the  fruit  of  one  man,  and  indeed  of 
one  act. 


28  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEE3. 

Now,  if  it  was  righteous  in  God  (and  who  will  gain- 
say it  ?)  to  deal  with  the  whole  posterity  of  Adam  as 
involved  in  death  because  of  one,  their  common  father, 
who  could  deny  the  consistency  of  one  man's  saving  1 
who  would  defraud  God  of  that  which  He  delights  in — 
the  hlessedness  of  bringing  in  deliverance  by  that  One 
man,  of  whom  Adam  was  the  image?  Accordingly, 
then,  he  confronts  the  unquestionable  truth,  admitted 
by  every  Israelite,  of  the  universal  havoc  by  one  man 
everywhere  with  the  One  man  who  has  brought  in  {rwt 
pardon  only,  but,  as  we  shall  find)  eternal  life  and 
liberty — ^liberty  now  in  the  free  gift  of  life,  but  a  liberty 
that  will  never  cease  for  the  soul's  enjoyment  until  it 
has  embraced  the  very  body  that  stiU  groans,  and  this 
because  of  the  Holy  Ghost  who  dwells  in  it. 

Here,  then,  it  is  a  comparison  of  the  two  great  heads — 
Adam  and  Christ,  and  the  immeasurable  superiority  of  the 
second  man  is  shown.  That  is,  it  is  not  merely  pardon 
of  past  sins,  but  deliverance  from  sin,  and  in  due  time 
from  all  its  consequences.  The  apostle  has  come  now 
to  the  nature.  This  is  the  essential  point.  It  is  the 
thing  which  troubles  a  renewed  conscientious  soul  above 
all,  because  of  his  surprise  at  finding  the  deep  evil  of 
the  flesh  and  its  mind  after  having  proved  the  great 
grace  of  God  in  the  gift  of  Christ.  If  I  am  thus  pitied 
of  God,  if  so  truly  and  completely  a  justified  man,  if 
I  am  really  an  object  of  God's  eternal  favour,  how  can 
I  have  such  a  sense  of  continual  evil  ?  why  am  I  still 
under  bondage  and  misery  from  the  constant  evil  of 
my  nature,  over  which  I  seem  to  have  no  power  what- 
ever? Has  God  then  no  delivering  power  from  this? 
The  answer  is  found  in  this  portion  of  our  epistle  (that 
is,  from  the  middle  of  chapter  v). 


ON  THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   ROMANS.  29 

Having  shown  first,  tlien,  tlie  sources  and  the  cha- 
racter of  the  blessing  in  general  as  far  as  regards 
deliverance,  the  apostle  sums  up  the  result  in  the  end 
of  the  chapter:  "That  as  sin  hath  reigned  in  death, 
even  so  might  grace  reign  through  righteousness  unto 
eternal  life,"  the  point  being  justification  of  life  now 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

This  is  applied  in  the  two  chapters  that  follow. 
There  are  two  things  that  might  make  insuperable 
difficulty :  the  one  is  the  obstacle  of  sin  in  the  nature 
to  practical  holiness ;  the  other  is  the  provocation  and 
condemnation  of  the  law.  Wow  the  doctrine  which  we 
saw  asserted  in  the  latter  part  of  chapter  v.  is  applied 
to  both.  First,  as  to  practical  holiness,  it  is  not  merely 
that  Christ  has  died  for  my  sins,  but  that  even  in  the 
initiatory  act  of  baptism  the  truth  set  forth  there  is 
that  I  am  dead.  It  is  not,  as  in  Ephesians  ii.,  dead  in 
sins,  which  would  be  nothing  to  the  purpose.  This  is  all 
perfectly  true — true  of  a  Jew  as  of  a  pagan — true  of  any 
unrenewed  man  that  never  heard  of  a  Saviour.  But 
what  is  testified  by  Christian  baptism  is  Christ's  death. 
"Know  ye  not,  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptized 
unto  Jesus  Christ  were  baptized  unto  his  death  ? " 
Thereby  is  identification  with  His  death.  "Therefore 
we  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  into  death;  that 
like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory 
of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness 
of  life."  The  man  who,  being  baptized  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  or  Christian  baptism,  would 
assert  any  license  to  sin  because  it  is  in  his  nature,  as 
if  it  were  therefore  an  inevitable  necessity,  denies  the 
real  and  evident  meaning  of  his  baptism.     That  act 


30  INTEODUCTOEY   LECTUEES. 

denoted  not  even  the  wasting  away  of  our  sins  by  the 
blood  of  Jesus,  which  would  not  apply  to  the  case,  nor 
in  any  adequate  way  meet  the  question  of  nature. 
What  baptism  sets  forth  is  more  than  that,  and  is  justly 
found,  not  in  Romans  iii.,  but  in  chapter  vi.  There  is 
no  inconsistency  in  Ananias's  word  to  the  apostle  Paul 
— "  wash  away  thy  sins,  caUing  upon  the  name  of  the 
Lord."  There  is  water  as  well  as  blood,  and  to  that, 
not  to  this,  the  washing  here  refers.  But  there  is  more, 
which  Paul  afterwards  insisted  on.  That  was  said  to 
Paul,  rather  than  what  was  taught  hy  Paul.  What  the 
apostle  had  given  him  in  fulness  was  the  great  truth, 
however  fundamental  it  may  be,  that  I  am  entitled,  and 
even  called  on  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  know 
that  I  am  dead  to  sin ;  not  that  I  must  die,  but  that  I 
am  dead — that  my  baptism  means  nothing  less  than 
this,  and  is  shorn  of  its  most  emphatic  point  if  limited 
merely  to  Christ's  dying  for  my  sins.  It  is  not  so  alone ; 
but  in  His  death,  unto  which  I  am  baptized,  I  am  dmd 
to  sin.  And  "  how  shall  we  that  are  dead  to  sin  live 
any  longer  therein?"  Hence,  then,  we  find  that  the 
whole  chapter  is  founded  on  this  truth.  "Shall  we 
sin,"  says  he,  proceeding  yet  farther  (ver.  15),  "  because 
we  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace?"  This 
were  indeed  to  deny  the  value  of  His  death,  and  of 
that  newness  of  life  we  have  in  Him  risen,  and  a  return 
to  bondage  of  the  worst  description. 

In  chapter  vii.  we  have  the  subject  of  the  law  dis- 
cussed for  practice  as  well  as  in  principle,  and  there 
again  meet  with  the  same  weapon  of  tried  and  unfailing 
temper.  It  is  no  longer  blood,  but  death— Christ's 
death  and  resurrection.     The  figure  of  the  relationship 


ON   THE  EPISTLE    TO   THE   ROMANS.  31 

of  husband  and  wife  is  introduced  in  order  to  make 
the  matter  plain.  Death,  and  nothing  short  of  it, 
rightly  dissolves  the  bond.  We  accordingly  are  dead, 
says  he,  to  the  law ;  not  (as  no  doubt  almost  all  of  us 
know)  that  the  law  dies,  but  that  we  are  dead  to  the 
law  in  the  death  of  Christ.  Compare  verse  6  (where 
the  margin,  not  the  text,  is  substantially  correct)  with 
verse  4.  Such  is  the  principle.  The  rest  of  the  chap- 
ter (7-25)  is  an  instructive  episode,  in  which  the 
impotence  and  the  misery  of  the  renewed  mind  which 
attempts  practice  under  law  are  fully  argued  out,  tOl 
deliverance  (not  pardon)  is  found  in  Christ. 

Thus  the  latter  portion  of  the  chapter  is  not  doctrine 
exactly,  but  the  proof  of  the  difficulties  of  a  soul  who 
has  not  realised  death  to  the  law  by  the  body  of 
Christ.  Did  this  seem  to  treat  the  law  that  condemned 
as  an  evil  thing  ?  Not  so,  says  the  apostle ;  it  is  because 
of  the  evil  of  the  nature,  not  of  the  law.  The  law 
never  delivers ;  it  condemns  and  kills  us.  It  was 
meant  to  make  sin  exceeding  sinful.  Hence,  what  he 
is  here  discussing  is  not  remission  of  sins,  but  deliver- 
ance from  sin.  No  wonder,  if  souls  confound  the  two 
things  together,  that  they  never  know  deliverance  in 
practice.  Conscious  deliverance,  to  be  solid  according 
to  God,  must  be  in  the  line  of  His  truth.  In  vain  wiU 
you  preach  Komans  iii.,  or  even  iv.  alone,  for  souls  to 
know  themselves  consciously  and  holily  set  free. 

From  verse  14  there  is  an  advance.  There  we  find 
Christian  knowledge  as  to  the  matter  introduced ;  but 
still  it  is  the  knowledge  of  one  who  is  not  in  this  state 
pronouncing  on  one  who  is.  You  must  carefully  guard 
against  the  notion  of  its  being  a  question  of  Paul's 
own  experience,  because  he  says,  "/  had  not  known," 


32  INTEODTTCTOEY  LECTURES. 

"  I  was  alive,"  &c.  There  is  no  good  reason  for  such 
an  assumption,  but  much  against  it.  It  might  be  more 
or  less  any  man's,  lot  to  learn.  It  is  not  meant  that 
Paul  knew  nothing  of  this;  but  that  the  ground  of 
inference,  and  the  general  theory  built  up,  are  alike 
mistaken.  We  have  Paul  informing  us  that  he  transfers 
sometimes  in  a  figure  to  himself  that  which  was  in  no 
wise  necessarily  his  own  experience,  and  perhaps  had 
not  been  so  at  any  time.  But  this  may  be  compara- 
tively a  light  question.  The  great  point  is  to  note  the 
true  picture  given  us  of  a  soul  quickened,  but  labour- 
ing and  miserable  under  law,  not  at  all  consciously 
delivered.  The  last  verses  of  the  chapter,  however, 
bring  in  the  deliverance — not  yet  the  fulness  of  it, 
but  the  hinge,  so  to  speak.  The  discovery  is  made  that 
the  source  of  the  internal  misery  was  that  the  mind 
though  renewed,  was  occupied  with  the  law  as  a  means 
of  dealing  with  flesh.  Hence  the  very  fact  of  being 
renewed  makes  one  sensible  of  a  far  more  intense 
misery  than  ever,  while  there  is  no  power  until  the  soul 
looks  right  outside  self  to  Him  who  is  dead  and  risen, 
who  has  anticipated  the  difficulty,  and  alone  gives  the 
full  answer  to  all  wants. 

Chapter  viii.  displays  this  comforting  truth  in  its 
fulness.  From  the  first  verse  we  have  the  application 
of  the  dead  and  risen  Christ  to  the  soul,  till  in  verse  11 
we  see  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  brings  the 
soul  into  this  liberty  now,  applied  by-and-by  to  the 
body,  when  there  wiU  be  the  complete  deliverance. 
"There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them 
which  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  For  the  law  of  the  Spirit 
of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me  free  from  the  law 
of  sin  and  death.     For  what  the  law  could  not  do  in 


ON  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EOMANS.  33 

that  it  was  weak  through,  the  flesh,  God  sending  his 
own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin, 
condemned  sin  in  the  flesh."  A  wondrous  way,  but 
most  blessed!  And  there  (for  such  was  the  point)  it 
was  the  complete  condemnation  of  this  evil  thing,  the 
nature  in  its  present  state,  so  as,  nevertheless,  to  set  the 
believer  as  before  God's  judgment  free  from  itself  as 
well  as  its  consequences.  This  God  has  wrought  in 
Christ.  It  is  not  in  any  degree  settled  as  to  itself  by 
His  blood.  The  shedding  of  His  blood  was  absolutely 
necessary :  without  that  precious  expiation  all  else  had 
been  vain  and  impossible.  But  there  is  much  more  in 
Christ  than  that  to  which  too  many  souls  restrict  them- 
selves, not  less  to  their  own  loss  than  to  His  dishonour. 
God  has  condemned  the  flesh.  And  here  it  may  be 
repeated  that  it  is  no  question  of  pardoning  the  sinner, 
but  of  condemning  the  fallen  nature ;  and  this  so  as  to 
give  the  soul  both  power  and  a  righteous  immunity 
from  aU  internal  anguish  about  it.  For  the  truth  is 
that  God  has  in  Christ  condemned  sin,  and  this  for  sin 
definitely ;  so  that  He  has  nothing  more  to  do  in  con- 
demnation of  that  root  of  evil.  What  a  title,  then,  God 
gives  me  now  in  beholding  Christ,  no  longer  dead  but 
risen,  to  have  it  settled  before  my  soul  that  I  am  in 
Him  as  He  now  is,  where  all  questions  are  closed  in 
peace  and  joy !  For  what  remains  unsolved  by  and  in 
Christ?  Once  it  was  far  otherwise.  Before  the  cross 
there  hung  out  the  gravest  question  that  ever  was 
raised,  and  it  needed  settlement  in  this  world ;  but  in 
Christ  sin  is  for  ever  abolished  for  the  believer;  and 
this  not  only  in  respect  of  what  He  has  done,  but  in 
what  He  is.  Till  the  cross,  well  might  a  converted 
soul  be  found  groaning  in  misery  at  each  fresh  discovery 

D 


34  INTKODTJCTOEY  LECTUKES. 

of  evil  in  himself.  But  now  to  faith  aU  this  is  gone — 
not  lightly,  hut  truly — in  the  sight  of  God ;  so  that  he 
may  live  on  a  Saviour  that  is  risen  from  the  dead  as 
his  new  life. 

Accordingly  Eomans  viii.  pursues  in  the  most  prac- 
tical manner  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  has  made 
us  free.  First  of  all,  the  groundwork  of  it  is  laid  in 
the  first  four  verses,  the  last  of  them  leading  into 
every- day  walk.  And  it  is  well  for  those  ignorant  of 
it  to  know  that  here,  in  verse  4,  the  apostle  speaks 
first  of  "walking,  not  after  the  fiesh,  but  after  the 
Spirit."  The  latter  clause  in  the  first  verse  of  the 
authorised  version  mars  the  sense.  In  the  fourth  verse 
this  could  not  be  absent;  in  the  first  verse  it  ought 
not  to  be  present.  Thus  the  deKverance  is  not  merely 
for  the  joy  of  the  soul,  but  also  for  strength  in  our 
walking  after  the  Spirit,  who  has  given  and  found 
a  nature  in  which  He  delights,  communicating  withal 
His  own  delight  in  Christ,  and  making  obedience  to  be 
the  joyful  service  of  the  believer.  The  believer,  there- 
fore, unwittingly  though  really,  dishonours  the  Saviour, 
if  he  be  content  to  walk  short  of  this  standard  and 
power;  he  is  entitled  and  called  to  walk  according  to 
his  place,  and  in  the  confidence  of  his  deliverance  in 
Christ  Jesus  before  God. 

Then  the  domains  of  flesh  and  Spirit  are  brought 
before  us:  the  one  characterized  by  sin  and  death 
practically  now;  the  other  by  life,  righteousness,  and 
peace,  which  is,  as  we  saw,  to  be  crowned  finally  by  the 
resurrection  of  these  bodies  of  ours.  The  Holy  Ghost, 
who  now  gives  the  soul  its  consciousness  of  deliverance 
from  its  place  in  Christ,  is  also  the  witness  that  the 
body  too,  the  mortal  body,  shaR  be  delivered  in  its  time. 


ON   THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE  EOMANS.  35 

"If  the  Spirit  of  him  that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the 
dead  dwell  in  you,  he  that  raised  up  Christ  from  the 
dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies  by  [or  be- 
cause of]  his  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  you." 

Next,  he  enters  upon  another  branch  of  the  truth — 
the  Spirit  not  as  a  condition  contrasted  with  flesh 
(these  two,  as  we  know,  being  always  contrasted  in 
Scripture),  but  as  a  power,  a  divine  person  that  dwells 
in  and  bears  His  witness  to  the  believer.  His  witness 
to  our  spirit  is  this, — that  we  are  children  of  God.  But 
if  children,  we  are  His  heirs.  This  accordingly  leads, 
as  connected  with  the  deliverance  of  the  body,  to  the 
inheritance  we  are  to  possess.  The  extent  is  what 
God  Himself,  so  to  speak,  possesses — the  universe  of 
God,  whatever  will  be  under  Christ :  and  what  will 
not  ?  As  He  has  made  all,  so  He  is  heir  of  all.  We 
are  heirs  of  God,  and  joint -heirs  with  Christ. 

Hence  the  action  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  a  double 
point  of  view  comes  before  us.  As  He  is  the  spring  of 
our  joy.  He  is  the  power  of  sympathy  in  our  son-ows, 
and  the  believer  knows  both.  The  faith  of  Christ  has 
brought  divine  joy  into  his  soul;  but,  in  point  of  fact, 
he  is  traversing  a  world  of  infirmity,  suffering,  and 
grief  Wonderful  to  think  the  Spirit  of  God  associates 
Himself  with  us  in  it  all,  deigning  to  give  us  divine 
feelings  even  in  our  poor  and  narrow  hearts.  This 
occupies  the  central  part  of  the  chapter,  which  then 
closes  with  the  unfailing  and  faithful  power  of  God  for 
us  in  all  our  experiences  here  below.  As  He  has  given 
us  through  the  blood  of  Jesus  fuU  remission,  as  we 
shall  be  saved  by  this  life,'  as  He  has  made  us  know 
even  now  nothing  short  of  present  conscious  deliver- 
ance from  every  whit  of  evil  that  belongs  to  our  very 

D  2 


36  INTEODUCTORY   LECTUKES. 

nature,  as  we  have  the  Spirit  the  earnest  of  the  glory 
to  which  we  are  destined,  as  -we  are  the  vessels  of 
gracious  sorrow  in  the  midst  of  that  from  which  we  are 
not  yet  delivered  but  shall  be,  so  now  we  have  the 
certainty  that,  whatever  betide,  God  is  for  us,  and  that 
nothing  shall  separate  us  from  His  love  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 


Then,  in  chapters  ix.-xi.,  the  apostle  handles  a 
difficulty  serious  to  any  mind,  especially  to  the  Jew, 
who  might  readily  feel  that  all  this  display  of  grace  in 
Christ  to  the  Gentile  as  much  as  to  the  Jew  by  the 
gospel  seems  to  make  very  cheap  the  distinctive  place  of 
Israel  as  given  of  God.  If  the  good  news  of  God  goes 
out  to  man,  entirely  blotting  out  the  difference  between 
a  Jew  and  a  Gentile,  what  becomes  of  His  special  pro- 
mises to  Abraham  and  to  his  seed  ?  What  about  His 
word  passed  and  sworn  to  the  fathers?  The  apostle 
shows  them  with  astonishing  force  at  the  starting-poiat 
that  he  was  far  from  slighting  their  privileges.  He 
lays  down  such  a  summary  as  no  Jew  ever  gave  since 
they  were  a  nation.  He  brings  out  the  peculiar  glories 
of  Israel  according  to  the  depth  of  the  gospel  as  he 
knew  and  preached  it;  at  least,  of  His  person  who  is 
the  object  of  faith  now  revealed.  Far  from  denying  or 
obscuring  what  they  boasted  of,  he  goes  beyond  them — 
"  Who  are  Israelites,"  says  he,  "  to  whom  pertaineth  the 
adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,  and  the 
giving  of  the  law,  and  the  service  of  God,  and  the  pro- 
mises ;  whose  are  the  fathers,  and  of  whom  as  con- 
cerning the  flesh  Christ  came,  who  is  over  all  God 
blessed  for  ever."     Here  was  the  very  truth  that  every 


ON  THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   ROMANS.  67 

Jew,  as  such,  denied.  What  blindness !  Their  crown- 
ing glory  was  precisely  what  they  would  not  hear  of. 
What  glory  so  rich  as  that  of  the  Christ  Himself  duly 
appreciated?  He  was  God  over  all  blessed  for  ever, 
as  well  as  their  Messiah.  Him  who  came  in  humiliation, 
according  to  their  prophets,  they  might  despise ;  but  it 
was  vain  to  deny  that  the  same  prophets  bore  witness 
to  His  divine  glory.  He  was  Emmanuel,  yea,  the 
Jehovah,  God  of  Israel.  Thus  then,  if  Paul  gave  his 
own  sense  of  Jewish  privileges,  there  was  no  unbeliev- 
ing Jew  that  rose  up  to  his  estimate  of  them. 

But  now,  to  meet  the  question  that  was  raised,  they 
pleaded  the  distinguishing  promises  to  Israel.  Upon 
what  ground?  Because  they  were  sons  of  Abraham. 
But  how,  argues  he,  could  this  stand,  seeing  that  Abra- 
ham had  another  son,  just  as  much  his  child  as  Isaac  ? 
What  did  they  say  to  Ishmaelites  as  joint-heirs  ?  They 
would  not  hear  of  it.  No,  they  cry,  it  is  in  Isaac's 
seed  that  the  Jew  was  called.  Yes,  but  this  is  another 
principle.  If  in  Isaac  only,  it  is  a  question  of  the 
seed,  not  that  was  born,  but  that  was  called.  Conse- 
quently the  call  of  God,  and  not  the  birth  simply, 
makes  the  real  difference.  Did  they  venture  to  plead 
that  it  must  be  not  only  the  same  father,  but  the  same 
mother  ?  The  answer  is,  that  this  will  not  do  one  whit 
better ;  for  when  we  come  down  to  the  next  generation, 
it  is  apparent  that  the  two  sons  of  Isaac  were  sons  of 
the  same  mother ;  nay,  they  were  twins.  What  could 
be  conceived  closer  or  more  even  than  this  ?  Surely  if 
equal  birth-tie  could  ensure  community  of  blessing — if 
a  charter  from  God  depended  on  being  sprung  from  the 
same  father  and  mother,  there  was  no  case  so  strong,  no 
claim  so  evident,  as  that  of  Esau  to  take  the  same 


38  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

rights  as  Jacob.  Why  would  they  not  allow  such  a 
pretension  ?  Was  it  not  sure  and  evident  that  Israel 
could  not  take  the  promise  on  the  ground  of  mere 
connection  after  the  flesh  ?  Birthright  from  the  same 
father  would  let  in  Ishmael  on  the  one  hand,  as  from 
both  parents  it  would  secure  the  title  of  Esau  on  the 
other.  Clearly,  then,  such  ground  is  untenable.  In 
point  of  fact,  as  he  had  hinted  before,  their  true  tenure 
was  the  call  of  God,  who  was  free,  if  He  pleased, 
to  bring  in  other  people.  It  became  simply  a  question 
whether,  in  fact,  God  did  call  GentUes,  or  whether  He 
had  revealed  such  intentions. 

But  he  meets  their  proud  exclusiveness  in  another  way. 
He  shows  that,  on  the  responsible  ground  of  being  His 
nation,  they  were  wholly  ruined.  If  the  first  book  in 
the  Bible  showed  that  it  was  only  the  call  of  God  that 
made  Israel  what  they  were,  its  second  book  as  clearly 
proved  that  all  was  over  with  the  called  people,  had  it 
not  been  for  the  mercy  of  God.  They  set  up  the  golden 
calf,  and  thus  cast  off  the  true  God,  their  God,  even 
in  the  desert.  Did  the  call  of  God,  then,  go  out  to 
Gentiles  ?  Has  He  mercy  only  for  guilty  Israel  ?  Is 
there  no  call,  no  mercy,  of  God  for  any  besides  ? 

Hereupon  he  enters  upon  the  direct  proofs,  and  first 
cites  Hosea  as  a  witness.  That  early  prophet  tells 
Israel,  that  in  the  place  where  it  was  said  unto  them. 
Ye  are  not  my  people,  there  it  shall  be  said  unto  them, 
Ye  are  the  sons  of  the  living  God.  Jezreel,  Lo-ruhamah, 
and  Lo-ammi  were  of  awful  import  for  Israel ;  but,  in 
presence  of  circumstances  so  disastrous,  there  should  be 
not  merely  a  people  but  sons  of  the  living  God,  and 
then  should  Judah  and  Israel  be  gathered  as  one  people 
under  one  head.    The  application  of  this  was  more 


ON  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EOMANS.  39 

evident  to  the  Gentile  than  to  the  Jew.  Compare 
Peter's  use  in  his  first  epistle,  chap.  ii.  10.  Finally  he 
brings  in  Isaiah,  showing  that,  far  from  retaining  their 
blessing  as  an  unbroken  people,  a  remnant  alone  would 
be  saved.  Thus  one  could  not  fail  to  see  these  two 
weighty  inferences :  the  bringing  in  to  be  God's  sons  of 
those  that  had  not  been  His  people,  and  the  judgment 
and  destruction  of  the  great  mass  of  His  undoubted 
people.  Of  these  only  a  remnant  would  be  saved.  On 
both  sides  therefore  the  apostle  is  meeting  the  grand 
points  he  liad  at  heart  to  demonstrate  from  their  own 
Scriptures. 

Tor  all  this,  as  he  presses  further,  there  was  the 
weightiest  reason  possible.  God  is  gracious,  but  holy; 
He  is  faithful,  but  righteous.  The  apostle  refers  to 
Isaiah  to  show  that  God  would  "lay  in  Zion  a  stum- 
bling-stone." It  is  in  Zion  that  He  lays  it.  It  is  not 
among  the  Gentiles,  but  in  the  honoured  centre  of  the 
polity  of  Israel.  There  would  be  found  a  stumbling- 
stone  there.  What  was  to  be  the  stumbling-stone  ?  Of 
course,  it  could  hardly  be  the  law :  that  was  the  boast 
of  Israel.  What  was  it  ?  There  could  be  but  one  satis- 
factory answer.  The  stumbling-stone  was  their  despised 
and  rejected  Messiah.  This  was  the  key  to  their  diffi- 
culties— this  alone,  and  fully  explains  their  coming  ruin 
as  well  as  God's  solemn  warnings. 

In  the  next  chapter  (x.)  he  carries  on  the  subject, 
showing  in  the  most  touching  manner  his  affection  for 
the  people.  He  at  the  same  time  unfolds  the  essential 
difference  between  the  righteousness  of  faith  and  that 
of  law.  He  takes  their  own  books,  and  proves  from  one 
of  them  (Deuteronomy)  that  in  the  ruin  of  Israel  the 


40  INTKODtrCTOET   LECTURES. 

resource  is  not  going  into  the  depths,  nor  going  up  to 
heaven.  Christ  indeed  did  both ;  and  so  the  word  was 
nigh  them,  in  their  mouth  and  in  their  heart.  It  is  not 
doing,  but  believing;  therefore  it  is  what  is  proclaimed 
to  them,  and  what  they  receive  and  believe.  Along 
with  this  he  gathers  testimonies  from  more  than  one 
prophet.  He  quotes  from  Joel,  that  whosoever  shall 
call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shaU.  be  saved.  He 
quotes  also  from  Isaiah — "Whosoever  believeth  on  Him 
shall  not  be  ashamed."  And  mark  the  force  of  it — 
"Whosoever."  The  believer,  whosoever  he* might  be, 
should  not  be  ashamed.  Was  it  possible  to  limit  this  to 
Israel?  But  more  than  this — "Whosoever  shall  call." 
There  is  the  double  prophecy.  Whosoever  believed 
should  not  be  ashamed;  whosoever  called  should  be 
saved.  In  both  parts,  as  it  may  be  observed,  the  door 
is  opened  to  the  Gentile. 

But  then  again  he  intimates  that  the  nature  of  the 
gospel  is  involved  in  the  publishing  of  the  glad  tidings. 
It  is  not  God  having  an  earthly  centre,  and  the  peoples 
coming  up  to  worship  the  Lord  in  Jerusalem.  It  is  the 
going  forth  of  His  richest  blessing.  And  where  ?  How 
far?  To  the  limits  of  the  holy  land?  Tar  beyond. 
Psalm  xix.  is  used  in  the  most  beautiful  manner  to 
insinuate  that  the  limits  are  the  world.  Just  as  the  sun 
in  the  heavens  is  not  for  one  people  or  land  alone,  no 
more  is  the  gospel.  There  is  no  language  where  their 
voice  is  not  heard.  "  Yea  verily,  their  sound  went  forth 
into  all  the  earth,  and  their  words  unto  the  ends  of 
the  world."  The  gospel  goes  forth  universally.  Jewish 
pretensions  were  therefore  disposed  of;  not  here  by 
new  and  fuller  revelations,  but  by  this  divinely  skilful 
employment  of  their  own  Old  Testament  Scriptures. 


ON  THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   ROMANS.  41 

Finally  he  comes  to  two  other  witnesses ;  as  from  the 
Psalms,  so  now  from  the  law  and  the  prophets.  The  first 
is  Moses  himself.  Moses  saith,  "  I  will  provoke  you  to 
jealousy  by  them  that  are  no  people,"  &c.  How  could 
the  Jews  say  that  this  meant  themselves  ?  On  the 
contrary,  it  was  the  Jew  provoked  by  the  Gentiles — 
"  By  them  that  are  no  people,  and  by  a  foolish  nation 
I  will  anger  you."  Did  they  deny  that  they  were  a 
foolish  nation  ?  Be  it  so  then ;  it  was  a  foolish  nation 
by  which  Moses  declared  they  should  be  angered.  But 
this  does  not  content  the  apostle,  or  rather  the  Spirit  of 
God ;  for  he  goes  on  to  point  out  that  Isaiah  "  is  very 
bold"  in  a  similar  way;  that  is,  there  is  no  concealing 
the  truth  of  the  matter.  Isaiah  says :  "  I  was  found  of 
them  who  sought  me  not;  I  was  made  manifest  unto 
them  that  asked  not  after  me."  The  Jews  were  the 
last  in  the  world  to  take  such  ground  as  this.  It  was 
undeniable  that  the  Gentiles  did  not  seek  the  Lord,  nor 
ask  after  Him ;  and  the  prophet  says  that  Jehovah  was 
found  of  them  that  sought  Him  not,  and  was  made 
manifest  to  them  that  asked  not  after  Him.  Nor  is 
there  only  the  manifest  caU.  of  the  Gentries  in  this,  but 
with  no  less  clearness  there  is  the  rejection,  at  any 
rate  for  a  time,  of  proud  Israel.  "  But  unto  Israel  he 
saith,  All  day  long  have  I  stretched  out  my  hands  unto 
a  disobedient  and  gainsaying  people." 

Thus  the  proof  was  complete.  The  Gentiles — the 
despised  heathen — were  to  be  brought  in;  the  self- 
satisfied  Jews  are  left  behind,  justly  and  beyond  ques- 
tion, if  they  believed  the  law  and  the  prophets. 

But  did  this  satisfy  the  apostle  ?  It  was  undoubtedly 
enough  for  present  purposes.      The  past   history  of 


42  mTRODTJCTOEY  LECTURES. 

Israel  was  sketched  in  Eomans  ix.;  the  present  more 
immediately  is  before  us  in  chapter  x.  The  future  must 
he  brought  in  by  the  grace  of  God ;  and  this  he  accord- 
ingly gives  us  at  the  close  of  chapter  xi.  First,  he  raises 
the  question,  "  Has  God  cast  away  his  people  ?"  Let  it 
not  be !  Was  he  not  himself,  says  Paid,  a  proof  to  the 
contrary  ?  Then  he  enlarges,  and  points  out  that  there 
is  a  remnant  of  grace  in  the  worst  of  times.  If  God 
had  absolutely  cast  away  His  people,  would  there  be 
such  mercy?  There  would  be  no  remnant  if  justice 
took  its  course.  The  remnant  proves,  then,  that  even 
under  judgment  the  rejection  of  Israel  is  not  complete, 
but  rather  a  pledge  of  future  favour.  This  is  the  first 
ground. 

The  second  plea  is  not  that  the  rejection  of  Israel 
is  only  partial,  however  extensive,  but  that  it  is  also 
temporary,  and  not  definitive.  This  is  to  fall  back 
on  a  principle  he  had  already  used.  God  was  rather 
provoking  Israel  to  jealousy  by  the  call  of  the  Gentiles. 
But  if  it  were  so.  He  had  not  done  with  them.  Thus 
the  first  argument  shows  that  the  rejection  was  not 
total ;  the  second,  that  it  was  but  for  a  season. 

But  there  is  a  third.  PoUowing  up  with  the  teaching 
of  the  oKve-tree,  he  carries  out  the  same  thought  of  a 
remnant  that  abides  on  their  own  stock,  and  points  to 
a  re-instatement  of  the  nation.  And  I  would  just 
observe  by  the  way,  that  the  Gentile  cry  that  no  Jew 
ever  accepts  the  gospel  in  truth  is  a  falsehood.  Israel 
is  indeed  the  only  people  of  whom  there  is  always  a 
portion  that  believe.  Time  was  when  none  of  the 
English,  nor  French,  nor  of  any  other  nation  believed 
in  the  Saviour.  There  never  was  an  hour  since  Israel's 
existence  as  a  nation  that  God  has  not  had  His  remnant 


ON  THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   EOMANS.  43 

of  them.  Sucli  has  been  their  singular  fruit  of  promise ; 
such  even  in  the  midst  of  all  their  misery  it  is  at  pre- 
sent. And  as  that  little  remnant  is  ever  sustained  by 
the  grace  of  God,  it  is  the  standing  pledge  of  their 
final  blessedness  through  His  mercy,  whereon  the 
apostle  breaks  out  into  raptures  of  thanksgiving  to 
God.  The  day  hastens  when  the  Eedeemer  shall  come 
to  Zion.  He  shall  come,  says  one  Testament,  out  of 
Zion.  He  shall  come  to  Zion,  says  the  other.  In  both 
Old  and  New  it  is  the  same  substantial  testimony. 
Thither  He  shall  come,  and  thence  go  forth.  He  shall 
own  that  once  glorious  seat  of  royalty  in  Israel.  Zion 
shall  yet  behold  her  mighty,  divine,  but  once  despised 
Deliverer;  and  when  He  thus  comes,  there  will  be  a 
deliverance  suited  to  His  glory.  All  Israel  shall  be 
saved.  God,  therefore,  had  not  cast  oJEf  His  people,  but 
was  employing  the  interval  of  their  slip  from  their 
place,  in  consequence  of  their  rejection  of  Christ,  to  call 
the  Gentiles  in  sovereign  mercy,  after  which  Israel  as  a 
whole  should  be  saved.  "  0  the  depth  of  the  riches 
botli  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God !  how  un- 
searchable are  his  judgments,  and  his  ways  past  finding 
out !  For  who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord  ?  or 
who  hath  been  his  counsellor  ?  or  who  hath  first  given 
to  him,  and  it  shall  be  recompensed  unto  him  again? 
Por  of  him,  and  through  him,  and  to  him,  are  aU  things : 
to  whom  be  glory  for  ever." 


The  rest  of  the  epistle  takes  up  the  practical  conse- 
quences of  the  great  doctrine  of  God's  righteousness, 
which  had  been  now  shown  to  be  supported  by,  and  in 
no  wise  inconsistent  with.  His  promises  to  Israel.     The 


44  INTKODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

"whole  liistory  of  Israel,  past,  present,  and  future,  falls 
in  with,  although  quite  distinct  from,  that  which  he 
had  been  expounding.     Here  I  shall  be  very  brief. 

Chapter  xii  looks  at  the  mutual  duties  of  the  saints. 
Chapter  xiii.  urges  their  duties  towards  what  was  oi\t- 
side  them,  more  particularly  to  the  powers  that  be,  but 
also  to  men  in  general.  Love  is  the  great  debt  that  we 
owe,  which  never  can  be  paid,  but  which  we  should 
always  be  paying.  The  chapter  closes  with  the  day  of 
the  Lord  in  its  practical  force  on  the  Christian  walk. 
In  chapter  xiv.  and  the  beginning  of  xv.  we  have  the 
delicate  theme  of  Christian  forbearance  in  its  limits 
and  largeness.  The  weak  are  not  to  judge  the  strong, 
and  the  strong  are  not  to  despise  the  weak.  These 
things  are  matters  of  conscience,  and  depend  much  for 
their  solution  on  the  degree  to  which  souls  have  attained. 
The  subject  terminates  with  the  grand  truth  which  must 
never  be  obscured  by  details — that  we  are  to  receive 
one  another,  as  Christ  has  received  us,  to  the  glory  of 
God.  In  the  rest  of  chapter  xv.  the  apostle  dwells  on 
the  extent  of  his  apostleship,  renews  his  expression 
of  the  thought  and  hope  of  visiting  Eome,  and  at  the 
same  time  shows  how  well  he  remembered  the  need  of 
the  poor  at  Jerusalem.  Chapter  xvi.  brings  before  us 
in  the  most  instructive  and  interesting  manner  the 
links  that  grace  practically  forms  and  maintains  be- 
tween the  saints  of  G-od.  Though  he  had  never  visited 
Eome,  many  of  them  were  known  personally.  It  is 
exquisite — the  delicate  love  with  which  he  singles  out 
distinctive  features  in  each  of  the  saints,  men  and 
women,  that  come  before  him.  Would  that  the  Lord 
would  give  us  hearts  to  remember,  as  well  as  eyes  to 
see,  according  to  His  own  grace !    Then  follows  a  warn- 


ON   THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE  ROMANS.  45 

ing  against  those  who  bring  in  stumbling-blocks  and 
offences.  There  is  evE  at  work,  and  grace  does  not 
close  the  eye  to  danger;  at  the  same  time  it  is  never 
under  the  pressure  of  the  enemy,  and  there  is  the 
fullest  confidence  that  the  God  of  peace  wiU.  break  the 
power  of  Satan  under  the  feet  of  the  saints  shortly. 

Last  of  all,  the  apostle  links  up  this  fundamental 
treatise  of  divine  righteousness  in  its  doctrine,  its  dis- 
pensational  bearings,  and  its  exhortations  to  the  walk  of 
Christians,  with  higher  truth,  which  it  would  not  have 
been  suitable  then  to  bring  out ;  for  grace  considers  the 
state  and  the  need  of  the  saints.  True  ministry  gives 
out  not  merely  truth,  but  suited  truth  to  the  saints.  At 
the  same  time  the  apostle  does  allude  to  that  mystery 
which  was  not  yet  divulged — at  least,  in  this  epistle; 
but  he  points  from  the  foundations  of  eternal  truth 
to  those  heavenly  heights  that  were  reserved  for  other 
communications  in  due  time. 


46  INTKODUCTOKY  LECTUEES. 


M, 

FIRST   COEINTHIANS. 

As  usual,  the  introductory  words  (verses  1-3)  of  the 
epistle  give  us  no  little  intimation  of  that  which  is  to 
follow.  The  apostle  speaks  of  himself  as  such — 
"  called  [to  be]  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  through  the 
will  of  God/'  but  coupling  a  brother  with  him,. "and 
Sosthenes  our  brother,"  he  writes  to  "  the  church  of  God 
at  Corinth  " — not  to  the  saints,  as  was  the  case  in  the 
epistle  to  the  Eomans,  but  to  the  church  at  Corinth — 
"  to  them  that  are  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus,"  as  in  the 
former  epistle — "  called  [to  be]  saints,  with  aU  that  in 
every  place  call  upon  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord,  both  theirs  and  ours." 

This  wUl  be  found  to  lead  the  way  into  the  main 
subject  of  the  present  communication.  Here  we  must 
not  look  for  the  great  foundations  of  Christian  doctrine. 
There  is  the  unfolding  of  the  assembly  in  a  practical 
way;  that  is,  the  church  of  God  is  not  viewed  here  in 
its  highest  character.  There  is  no  more  than  an  inci- 
dental glance  at  its  associations  with  Christ.  No  notice 
is  here  taken  of  the  heavenly  places  as  the  sphere  of 
our  blessing;  nor  are  we  given  to  hear  of  the  bridal 
affections  of  Christ  for  His  body.  But  the  assembly  of 
God  is  addressed,  those  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus, 
saints  called,  "  with  all  that  in  every  place  call  upon 
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."     Thus  room  is  left 


ON  FIRST  EPISTLE   TO   THE   COEINTHIANS.  47 

for  the  profession  of  the  Lord's  name.  It  is  not,  as  in 
Ephesians,  "  to  the  saints  which  are  in  Ephesus,  and  to 
the  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus."  There  is  no  such  close- 
ness of  application,  nor  intimacy,  nor  confidence  in  a 
really  intrinsically  holy  character.  Sanctified  they  were 
in  Christ  Jesus.  They  had  taken  the  place  of  being 
separate,  "calling  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord;"  but 
the  remarkable  addition  should  be  noticed  by  the  way 
— "  with  aU  that  in  every  place  call  upon  the  name  of 
the  Lord,  both  theirs  and  ours."  And  this  is  the 
more  notable,  because  if  there  be  an  epistle  which  the 
unbelief  of  Christendom  tries  more  than  another  to 
annul  in  its  application  to  present  circumstances,  it  is 
this  first  letter  to  the  Corinthians.  ISTor  need  we 
wonder.  Unbelief  shrinks  from  that  which  calls,  now 
rather  recalls,  the  saints  to  a  due  sense  of  their  respon- 
sibility in  virtue  of  their  position  as  the  church  of 
God  here  below.  Those  at  Corinth  had  forgotten  it. 
Christendom  has  not  merely  forgotten  but  denied  it, 
and  so  would  fain]  treat  a  large  part  of  that  which  will 
come  before  us  to-night  as  a  bygone  thing.  It  is  not 
disputed  that  God  did  thus  work  in  times  past;  but 
they  have  not  the  smallest  serious  thought  of  submit- 
ting to  its  directions  as  authoritative  for  present  duty. 
Yet  who  can  deny  that  God  has  taken  more  care  to 
make  this  plain  and  certain  in  the  very  frontispiece  of 
this  epistle  than  anywhere  else  ?  He  is  wise  and  right : 
man  is  not.     Our  place  is  to  bow  and  believe. 

There  is  another  point  also  to  be  weighed  in  the  next 
verses  (4-8).  The  apostle  tells  them  how  he  thanks 
his  God  always  on  their  behalf,  but  refrains  from  any 
expression  of  thankfulness  as  to  their  state.  He  recog- 
nises their  rich  endowments  on  God's  part.     He  owns 


48  INTKODUCTOKT  LECTURES. 

how  they  had  been  given  all  utterance,  and  all  know- 
ledge, the  working  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  His  power. 
This  is  exceedingly  important ;  for  there  is  a  disposition 
often  to  consider  that  difficulties  and  disorder  among 
the  saints  of  God  are  due  to  a  want  of  government  and 
of  ministerial  power.  But  no  amount  of  gift,  in  few  or 
many,  can  of  itself  produce  holy  spiritual  order. 
Disorder  is  never  the  result  of  weakness  alone.  This, 
of  course,  may  be  taken  advantage  of,  and  Satan  may 
tempt  men  to  assume  the  semblance  of  a  strength  they 
do  not  possess.  No  doubt  assumption  would  produce 
disorder ;  but  weakness  simply  (where  it  leads  souls,  "as 
it  should,  to  spread  out  their  need  before  the  Lord) 
brings  in  the  gracious  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
the  unfailing  care  of  Him  who  loves  His  saints  and 
the  assembly.  It  was  not  so  at  Corinth.  Theirs  was 
rather  the  display  of  conscious  strength;  but  at  the 
same  time  they  lacked  the  fear  of  God,  and  the  sense  of 
responsibility  in  the  use  of  what  God  had  given  them. 
They  were  like  children  disporting  themselves  with 
not  a  little  energy  that  wrought  in  vessels  which 
altogether  failed  in  self-judgment.  This  was  a  source, 
and  a  main  source,  of  the  difficulty  and  disorder  at 
Corinth.  It  is  also  of  great  importance  to  us ;  for  there 
are  those  that  continually  cry  out  for  increase  of  power 
as  the  one  panacea  of  the  church.  What  reflecting 
spiritual  mind  could  doubt  that  God  sees  His  saints 
are  not  able  to  bear  it  ?  Power  in  the  sense  in  which 
we  are  now  speaking  of  it — that  is,  power  in  the  form 
of  gift — is  far  from  being  the  deepest  need  or  the 
gravest  desideratum  of  the  saints.  Again,  is  it  ever 
the  way  of  God  to  display  Himself  thus  in  a  fallen 
condition  of  things  ?    Not  that  He  is  restrained,  or  that 


THE   FIRST   EPISTLE  TO   THE   CORINTHIANS.  49 

He  is  not  Sovereign.  Not,  moreover,  that  He  may  not 
give,  and  liberally,  as  suits  His  own  glory;  biit  He 
gives  wisely  and  bolily,  so  as  to  lead  souls  now  into 
exercise  of  conscience  and  brokenness  of  spirit,  and  thus 
keep  and  even  deepen  their  sense  of  that  to  which  God's 
church  is  called,  and  the  state  into  which  it  has  fallen. 
At  Corinth  there  was  a  wholly  different  state  of 
things.  It  was  the  early  rise  of  the  church  of  God, 
if  I  may  so  say,  among  the  Gentiles.  And  there  was 
not  wanting  an  astonishing  sample  of  the  power  of  the 
Spirit  in  witness  of  the  victory  that  Jesus  had  won 
over  Satan.  This  was  now,  or  at  least  should  have 
been,  manifested  by  the  church  of  God,  as  at  Corinth. 
But  they  had  lost  sight  of  God's  objects.  They  were 
occupied  with  themselves,  with  one  another,  with  the 
supernatural  energy  which  grace  had  conferred  on  them 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  The  Holy  Ghost  in  inspiring 
the  apostle  to  write  to  them  in  no  way  weakens  the 
sense  of  the  source  and  character  of  that  power.  He 
insists  on  its  reality,  and  reminds  them  that  it  was  of 
God ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  brings  in  the  divine  aim 
in  it  all.  "God,"  says  he,  "is  faithful,  by  whom  ye 
were  called  unto  the  fellowship  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord."  Immediately  after  he  alludes  to  the  schisms 
that  were  then  at  work  among  them,  and  calls  on  them 
to  be  perfectly  joined  together  in  the  same  mind  and  in 
the  same  judgment;  informing  them  of  the  tidings 
which  had  reached  him  through  the  house  of  Chloe, 
that  there  were  contentions  among  them,  some  saying, 
"I  am  of  Paul,"  others  "I  am  of  ApoUos;"  some,  "I 
am  of  Cephas,"  and  others  "I  am  of  Christ  himself." 
There  is  no  abuse'  to  which  flesh  cannot  degrade  the 
truth.     But  the  apostle  knew  how  to  introduce  the 

E 


50  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

Lord's  name  and  grace  with  the  grandly  simple  but 
weighty  facts  of  His  person  and  work.  It  was  unto 
His  name  that  they  were  baptized ;  it  was  He  that  had 
been  crucified.  And  be  it  observed,  that  from  the  first 
of  this  epistle  it  is  the  cross  of  Christ  that  has  the 
prominence.  It  is  not  so  much  His  blood-shedding, 
nor  even  His  death  and  resurrection,  but  His  cross. 
This  would  have  been  as  much  out  of  place  in  the 
beginning  of  Eomans  as  the  putting  forward  of  pro- 
pitiation would  be  out  of  place  here.  Expiation  of  sins 
by  Christ,  His  death  and  resurrection,  are  given  of  God 
to  be  displayed  before  the  saints,  who  needed  to  know 
the  firm,  immutable  foundation  of  grace ;  but  what  the 
saints  wanted  most  was  to  learn  the  gross  inconsistency 
of  turning  to  selfish  ease,  honour,  and  aggrandisement 
the  privileges  of  God's  church,  and  the  power  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  that  wrought  in  its  members. 

It  is  the  cross  which  stains  the  pride  of  man,  and 
puts  all  his  glory  in  the  dust.  Hence  the  apostle  brings 
Christ  crucified  before  them.  This  to  the  Jew  was  a 
stumblingblock,  and  to  the  Greek  foolishness.  These 
Corinthians  were  deeply  affected  by  the  judgment  of 
both  Jews  and  Greeks.  They  were  under  the  influence 
of  man.  They  had  not  realized  the  total  ruin  of  nature. 
They  valued  those  that  were  wise,  scribes,  or  disputers 
of  this  world.  They  were  accustomed  to  the  schools 
of  their  age  and  country.  They  conceived  that  if 
Christianity  did  such  great  things  when  those  who 
possessed  it  were  poor  and  simple,  what  might  it  not 
do  if  it  could  only  be  backed  by  the  ability,  and  the 
learning,  and  the  philosophy  of  men!  How  it  must 
ride  triumphantly  to  victory!  How  the  great  must 
bow,  and  the  wise  be  brought  in!    What  a  glorious 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINXHIANS.  51 

change  would  result  when  not  the  unlettered  poor  only, 
hut  the  great  and  the  noble,  the  wise  and  the  prudent, 
were  all  joined  in  the  confession  of  Jesus ! 

Their  thoughts  were  fleshly,  not  of  God.  The  cross 
writes  judgment  on  man,  and  foUy  on  his  wisdom,  as  it 
is  itself  rejected  by  man  as  folly ;  for  what  could  seem 
more  egregiously  unreasonable  to  a  Greek  than  the  God 
that  made  heaven  and  earth  becoming  a  man,  and,  as 
such,  crucified  by  the  wicked  hands  of  His  creatures 
here  below  ?  That  God  should  use  His  power  to  bless 
man  was  natural ;  and  the  Gentile  could  coalesce  as  to  it 
with  the  Jew.  Hence  too,  in  the  cross,  the  Jew  found  his 
stumblingblock ;  for  he  expected  a  Messiah  in  power 
and  glory.  Though  the  Jew  and  the  Greek  seemed 
opposite  as  the  poles,  from  different  points  they  agreed 
thoroughly  in  slighting  the  cross,  and  in  desiring  the 
exaltation  of  man  as  he  is.  They  both,  therefore,  (what- 
ever their  occasional .  oppositions,  and  whatever  their 
permanent  variety  of  form,)  preferred  the  flesh,  and 
were  ignorant  of  God — the  one  demanding  signs,  the 
other  wisdom.  It  was  the  pride  of  nature,  whether 
self-confident  or  founded  on  religious  claims. 

Hence  the  apostle  Paul,  in  the  latter  part  of  chap,  i., 
brings  in  the  cross  of  Christ  in  contrast  with  fleshly 
wisdom,  as  well  as  religious  pride,  urging  also  God's 
sovereignty  in  calling  souls  as  He  will  He  alludes  to 
the  mystery  (chap,  ii.),  but  does  not  develope  here  the 
blessed  privileges  that  flowed  to  us  from  a  union  with 
Christ,  dead,  risen,  and  ascended;  but  demonstrates 
that  man  has  no  place  whatever,  that  it  is  God  who 
chooses  and  calls,  and  that  He  makes  nothing  of  flesh. 
There  is  glorying,  but  it  is  exclusively  in  the  Lord. 
"  No  flesh  should  glory  in  his  presence." 

E  2 


52  INTEODUCTOEy  LECTUEES. 

This  is  confirmed  in  chapter  ii.,  where  the  apostle 
reminds  them  of  the  manner  in  which  the  gospel  had 
entered  Corinth.  He  had  come  there  setting  his  face 
against  all  things  that  would  commend  himself  No 
doubt,  to  one  of  such  eminent  ability  and  such  varied 
gifts  as  the  apostle  Paul,  it  was  hard,  to  speak  after  the 
manner  of  men,  to  be  nothing.  How  much  it  must 
have  called  for.  self-denial  utterly  to  decHne  that  which 
he  could  have  handled  so  well,  and  which  people  at 
Corinth  would  have  hailed  with  loud  acclamation.  Just 
think  of  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  on  the  im- 
mortality of  the  soul,  giving  free  rein  to  the  mighty 
spirit  that  was  in  him!  But  not  so.  What  absorbed 
his  soul,  in  entering  the  intellectual  and  dissolute 
capital  of  Achaia,  was  the  cross  of  Christ.  He  deter- 
mined therefore,  as  he  says,  to  know  nothing  else — not 
exactly  to  know  the  cross  alone,  but  "  Jesus  Christ  atid 
him  crucified."  It  was  emphatically,  though  not  ex- 
clusively, the  cross.  It  was  not  simply  redemption, 
but  along  with  this  another  order  of  truth.  Eedemp- 
tion  supposes,  undoubtedly,  a  suffering  Saviour,  and  the 
shedding  of  that  precious  blood  which  ransoms  the 
captives.  It  is  Jesus  who  in  grace  has  undergone  the 
judgment  of  God,  and  brought  in  the  fuU  delivering 
power  of  God  for  the  souls  that  believe.  But  the  cross 
is  more  than  this.  It  is  the  death  of  shame  pre- 
eminently. It  is  utter  opposition  to  the  thoughts, 
feelings,  judgments,  and  ways  of  men,  religious  or  pro- 
fane. This  is  the  part  accordingly  that  he  was  led  in 
the  wisdom  of  God  to  put  forward.  Hence  the  feelings 
of  the  apostle  were  distrust  of  seK,  and  dependence  on 
God  according  to  that  cross.  As  he  says,  "  I  was  with 
you  in  weakness,  and  in  fear,  and  in  much  trembling." 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO   THE   COEINTHIANS.  53 

Thus,  as  Christ  Himself  is  said  in  2  Cor.  xiii.  to  be 
crucified  in  weakness,  such  was  also  the  servant  here. 
His  speech  and  his  preaching  was  "not  in  enticing 
words  of  man's  wisdom,  but  in  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit  and  of  power."  Accordingly,  in  this  chapter  he 
proceeds  to  supplement  the  application  of  the  doctrine 
of  the  cross  to  the  state  of  the  Corinthians  by  bringing 
in  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  this  again  supposes  the  incapa- 
city of  man  in  divine  things. 

All  is  opened  out  in  a  manner  full  of  comfort,  but 
at  the  same  time  unsparing  to  human  pride.  Weigh 
from  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah  the  remarkable  quotation — 
"Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  en- 
tered into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath 
prepared  for  them  that  love  him.  But  God  hath  re- 
vealed them  unto  us  by  his  Spirit."  There  is  first  the 
great  standing  fact  before  our  eyes.  Such  is  the  Sa- 
viour to  the  saved.  Christ  crucified  is  the  death-knell 
on  all  man's  wisdom,  and  power,  and  righteousness.  The 
cross  writes  total  condemnation  on  the  world.  It  was 
here  the  world  had  to  say  to  Jesus.  All  that  it  gave 
Him  was  the  cross.  On  the  other  hand,  to  the  believer 
it  is  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God, 
because  he  humbly  but  willingly  reads  in  the  cross  the 
truth  of  the  judgment  of  his  own  nature  as  a  thing  to 
be  delivered  from,  and  finds  Him  that  was  crucified, 
the  Lord  Himself,  undertaking  a  deKverance  just,  pre- 
sent, and  complete;  as  he  says,  "Of  him  are  ye  in 
Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom, 
and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption." 
Flesh  is  absolutely  put  down.  Man  cannot  go  lower 
for  weakness  and  ignominy  than  the  cross  on  which 
hangs  all  the  blessedness  God  gives  the  believer.    And 


54  INTEODUCTOKT  LECTURES. 

therein  God  is  glorified  as  He  is  nowhere  else.  This  in 
both  its  parts  is  exactly  as  it  should  he ;  and  faith  sees 
and  receiyes  it  in  Christ's  cross.  The  state  of  the 
Corinthians  did  not  admit  of  Christ  risen  being  brought 
in,  at  least  here.  It  might  have  drawn  a  halo,  as  it 
were,  round  human  nature — this  presenting  the  risen 
man  in  the  first  instance.  But  he  points  to  God  as  the 
source,  and  Christ  as  the  channel  and  means,  of  all  the 
blessing.  "  Of  him,"  says  he,  "  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus, 
who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness, 
and  sanetification,  and  redemption."  But  then,  as  he 
shows,  there  was  not  only  this  great  source  of  blessing 
in  Christ,  but  there  is  the  power  that  works  in  us. 
Never  is  it  the  spirit  of  man  that  lays  hold  of  this 
infinite  good  which  God  vouchsafes  him.  Man  requires 
a  divine  power  to  work  within  him,  just  as  he  needs 
the  Saviour  outside  himself 

Accordingly,  in  chapter  ii.,  still  carrying  on  the 
thought  of  Christ  crucified,  and  connecting  it  with 
their  condition,  he  intimates  that  he  was  in  no  wise 
limited  to  it.  If  persons  were  grounded  in  Christianity, 
he  was  prepared  to  go  into  the  greatest  depths  of  re- 
vealed truth;  but  then  the  power  of  entering  safely 
was  not  human,  but  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Man  is  no 
more  capable  of  fathoming  the  depths  of  divine  things 
than  a  brute  can  comprehend  the  works  of  human  wit 
or  science.  This  doctrine  was  utterly  repulsive  to  the 
pride  of  the  Greeks.  They  might  admit  man  to  have 
need  of  pardon,  and  of  moral  improvement.  They  fuUy 
admitted  his  want  of  instruction,  and  refinement,  and, 
so  to  speak,  of  spiritualization,  if  it  only  might  be. 
Christianity  deepens  our  estimate  of  every  want.  Man 
not  only  wants  a  new  life  or  nature,  but  the  Holy 


THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKINTHIANS.  55 

Ghost.  It  is  not  merely  His  grace  in  a  general  sense, 
but  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  personally  dwelling  in 
him.  It  is  this  alone  which  can  lead  us, into  the  deep 
things  of  God.  And  this,  he  lets  us  see,  affects  not 
merely  this  particular  or  that,  but  the  whole  working 
of  divine  grace  and  power  in  man.  The  whole  and  sole 
means  of  communicating  blessing  to  us  must  be  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Hence  he  insists,  that  as  it  is  the  Spirit 
of  God  in  the  first  place  who  reveals  the  truth  to  us,  so 
it  is  the  same  Spirit  who  furnishes  suitable  words,  as, 
finally,  it  is  through  the  Holy  Ghost  that  one  receives 
.the  truth  revealed  in  the  words  He  Himself  has  given. 
Thus,  from  first  to  last,  it  is  a  process  begun,  carried  on, 
and  completed  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  How  little  this 
makes  of  man ! 

This  introduces  the  third  chapter  and  gives  point  to 
his  rebukes.  He  taxes  them  with  walking  as  men. 
How  remarkable  is  such  a  reproach !  Walking  as  men ! 
Why,  one  might  ask,  how  else  could  they  walk  ?  And 
this  very  difficulty — as  no  doubt  it  would  be  to  many 
a  Christian  now  (that  walking  as  men  should  be  a 
reproach) — was  no  doubt  a  clap  of  thunder  to  the  proud 
but  poor  spirits  at  Corinth.  Yes,  walking  as  men  is  a 
departure  from  Christianity.  It  is  to  give  up  the  dis- 
tinctive power  and  place  that  belongs  to  us;  for  does 
not  Christianity  show  us  man  judged,  condemned,  and 
set  aside  ?  On  the  faith  of  this,  living  in  Christ,  we 
have  to  walk.  The  Holy  Ghost,  besides,  is  brought  in 
as  working  in  the  believer,  and  this,  of  course,  in  virtue 
of  redemption  by  our  Lord  Jesus.  And  this  is  what 
is  meant  by  being  not  in  the  fiesh,  but  in  the  Spirit, 
which  is  proved  by  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  us. 

Here  the  apostle  does  not  explain  aU  this,  and  he 


56  mTRODUCTOET  LECTURES. 

gives  a  very  withering  reason  for  his  reticence.  These 
Corinthians  had  an  uncommonly  good  opinion  of  them- 
selves, and  so.they  must  be  told  plainly  the  reason  why 
he  does  not  open  out  these  deep  things.  They  them- 
selves were  not  fit ;  they  were  but  babes.  What !  the 
polished  Greek  believers  no  more  than  babes !  This 
was  rather  what  they  would  have  said  of  the  apostle 
or  of  his  teaching.  They  thought  themselves  far  in 
advance.  The  apostle  had  dwelt  on  the  elementary 
truths  of  the  gospel.  They  yearned  after  the  fire  of 
Peter  and  the  rhetoric  of  .ApoUos.  No  doubt  they 
might  easily  flatter  themselves  it  was  to  carry  on  the 
work  of  God.  How  little  many  a  young  convert  knows 
what  will  best  lead  him  on !  How  little  the  Corinthians 
dreamt  of  depreciating  the  Second  man,  or  of  exalting 
the  first !  Hence  the  apostle  tells  them  that  he  could 
not  speak  unto  them  as  unto  spiritual,  but  as  unto 
carnal,  even  as  unto  babes  in  Christ.  "  I  have  fed  you 
with  mUk,  and  not  with  meat."  Far  from  denying,  he 
owns  that  their  insiauation  was  true — he  had  only 
brought  before  them  elementary  truths.  They  were 
not  in  a  condition  to  bear  more.  Now  this  is  fuU  of 
meaning  and  importance  practically  at  all  times.  We 
may  damage  souls  greatly  by  presenting  high  truths  to 
those  that  want  the  simplest  rudiments  of  divine  truth. 
The  apostle,  as  a  wise  master-builder,  laid  the  foun- 
dation. The  state  of  the  Corinthians  was  such  that  he 
could  not  build  on  the  foundation  as  he  would  have 
desired.  His  absence  had  given  occasion  for  the  break- 
ing out  of  their  carnal  wishes  after  the  world's  wisdom. 
They  were  making  even  the  ardour  of  a  Peter  and  the 
eloquence  of  an  ApoUos  to  be  a  reason  for  dissatisfaction 
with  one  that,  I  need  not  say,  was  superior  to  both 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE   TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  57 

of  them.  But  tlie  apostle  meets  them  in  a  way  most 
unexpected  to  their  self-satisfaction  and  pride,  and  lets 
them  know  that  their  carnality  was  the  real  reason  why 
he  could  not  go  on  with  them  into  deeper  things. 

This  leads  him  to  point  out  the  seriousness  of  the 
work  or  building ;  for  he  presents  the  church  of  God 
under  this  figure.  What  care  each  servant  needs  to 
take  how  and  what  he  builds !  What  danger  of  bring- 
ing in  that  which  would  not  stand  the  fire  or  judgment 
of  God — nay,  further,  of  bringing  in  that  which  was 
not  simply  weak  and  worthless,  but  positively  corrupt- 
ing; for  it  was  to  be  feared  there  were  such  elements 
even  then  at  Corinth !  Again  he  brings  in  another 
principle  to  bear  upon  them.  Their  party  spirit,  their 
feeling  of  narrowness,  the  disposition  to  set  up  this 
servant  of  Christ  or  that,  was  not  only  a  dishonour  to 
the  Master,  but  a  real  loss  to  themselves.  Not  that 
there  is  any  ground  to'  suppose  it  was  the  fault  of  Peter 
or  Apollos  any  more  than  of  Paul.  The  evil  was  in 
the  saints  themselves,  who  indulged  in  their  old  zeal 
of  the  schools,  and  allowed  their  natural  partiality  to 
work.  In  point  of  fact  this  never  can  be  without  the 
most  grievous  impoverishment  to  the  soul,  as  well  as 
a  hindrance  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  What  faith  must  learn 
is,  that  "  all  things  are  yours,  whether  Paul,  or  ApoUos, 

or  Cephas; aU  are  yours."    Thus  the  subject 

enlarges,  as  is  his  wont,  taking  in  an  immense  breadth 
of  the  Christian's  possessions — life,  death,  things  pre- 
sentj  and  things  to  come.  "All  are  yours,  and  ye  are 
Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's." 

This  again  brings  in  another  point  before  the  subject 
closes.  He  is  not  content  with  the  pressing  of  responsi- 
bility on  others;  he  had  a  solemn  sense  of  his  own 


58  INTEODUCTOBY  LECTUEES. 

place,  which  made  him  wonderfully  independent  of  the 
judgments  of  men.  Obedience  gives  &mness  as  well 
as  humility.  'Not  in  the  smallest  degree  was  the  pride 
of  the  Corinthians  met  by  pride  on  his  part,  but  by 
keeping  the  Lord  and  His  wiU.  before  his  souL  Yet 
this  is  certainly  true  that  this  effect  of  faith  looks 
like  pride  to  a  man  who  merely  views  things  on  the 
surface.  The  calm  going  on  in  the  service  of  Christ, 
the  endurance  of  this  spirit  or  that,  as  no  more  than 
the  idle  wind,  was  no  doubt  exceedingly  unpleasant  to 
such  as  were  wise  in  their  own  conceit,  and  valued 
the  criticism  they  freely  bestowed  on  the  different 
servants  of  the  Lord.  But  Paul  sees  all  in  the  light  of 
the  eternal  day.  They  had  forgotten  this,  and  were  in 
a  sense  trafiicking  with  these  powers  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.  They  were  making  them  the  counters  of  a  game 
they  were  playing  in  this  world.  They  had  forgotten 
that  what  God  gives  He  gives  in  time,  but  in  view  of 
eternity.  The  apostle  puts  the  truth  of  the  case  before 
their  souls  as  he  had  it  vividly  before  his  own.  (Ch.  iv.) 
Another  thing  is  noticeable  here.  He  had  reproached 
them  with  walking  not  as  Christians  but  as  men  (that 
is,  with  their  habitual  life  and  conversation  formed  on 
human  principles  instead  of  divine).  On  the  other 
hand,  it  would  appear  from  what  follows,  that  they 
reproached  the  apostle  in  their  hearts, — not,  of  course,  in 
so  many  words, — ^with  not  being  enough  of  a  gentleman 
for  their  taste.  This  seems  to  me  the  gist  of  the  fourth 
chapter.  It  was  a  thing  that  they  considered  quite 
beneath  a  Christian  minister  to  work  from  time  to  time 
with  his  hands,  often  poor,  occasionally  in  prison, 
knocked  about  by  crowds,  and  so  on.  All  this  they 
thought  the  fruit  of  indiscretion  and  avoidable.    They 


THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.  59 

would  have  preferred  respectability,  public  and  private, 
in  one  who  stood  in  the  position  of  a  servant  of  Christ. 
This  the  apostle  meets  in  a  very  blessed  way.  He 
admitted  that  they  were  certainly  not  in  such  circum- 
stances ;  they  were  reigning  as  kings.  As  for  him  it  was 
enough  to  be  the  off-scouring  of  all  men,  this  was  his 
boast  and  blessedness.  He  wished  that  they  did  indeed 
reign,  that  he  might  reign  with  them  (that  the  blessed 
time  might  really  arrive).  How  his  heart  would  rejoice 
in  that  day  with  them !  And  surely  the  time  wiU  come, 
and  they  would  all  reign  together  when  Christ  reigns 
over  the  earth.  But  he  quite  admits  that  for  the  pre- 
sent the  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings  was  the  place 
he  had  chosen.  Of  honour  in  the  world,  and  ease  for 
the  flesh,  he  at  least  could  not,  if  they  could,  boast. 
Present  greatness  was  what  he  in  no  wise  coveted ;  to 
suffer  great  things  for  His  sake  was  what  the  Lord  had 
promised,  and  what  His  servant  expected  in  becoming 
an  apostle.  If  his  own  service  was  the  highest  position 
in  the  church,  his  was  certainly  the  lowest  position  in 
the  world.  This  was  as  much  an  apostle's  boast  and 
glory  as  anything  that  God  had  given  them.  No 
answer  can  I  conceive  more  telling  to  any  one  of  his 
detractors  at  Corinth  who  had  a  heart  and  conscience. 

In  chapter  v.  we  enter  on  another  and  more  painful 
part  of  the  epistle.  A  fearful  instance  of  sin  had  come  to 
light,  so  gross,  indeed,  that  the  like  was  not  even  named 
among  the  Gentiles.  In  fact  it  was  a  case  of  incest,  and 
this  among  those  called  of  God,  and  sanctified  in  Christ 
Jesus !  The  question  is  not  in  the  least  raised  whether 
the  guilty  person  was  a  saint  or  not ;  still  less  does  he 
allow  that  which  one  so  often  and  painfully  heard 
pleaded  in  extenuation,  "  Oh,  but  he  [or  she]  is  a  dear 


60  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

Christian."  Christian  affection  is  most  excellent;  as 
brethren  we  should  love  even  to  laying  down  life  for 
each  other ;  as  it  is  also  very  right  that  we  should  own 
the  work  God  has  wrought,  above  all  what  He  has 
wrought  in  grace.  But  when  one  bearing  the  name 
of  the  Lord  has,  through  unwatchfulness,  fallen  into 
wickedness,  which  of  course  grieves  the  Holy  Ghost 
and  stumbles  the  weak,  it  is  not  the  time  to  talk  thus.  It 
is  the  time,  in  the  very  love  that  God  implants,  to  deal 
sternly  with  that  which  has  disgraced  the  name  of  the 
Lord.  Is  this  to  fail  in  love  to  the  person  ?  The  apostle 
showed  ere  long  that  he  had  more  love  for  this  evil- 
doer than  any  of  them.  The  second  epistle  to  the  Corin- 
thians entreats  them  to  confirm  their  love  to  him  whom 
they  had  put  away.  They  were  too  hard  against  him 
then,  as  they  were  too  loose  now.  Here  their  con- 
sciences needed  to  be  roused.  To  deal  with  the  matter 
they  owed  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  was  not  merely  getting 
rid  of  the  obnoxious  man.  They  had  to  prove  themselves 
clear  in  the  matter  certainly ;  but  he  puts  before  them 
another  course,  whenever  the  guilty  one  had  repented. 

"I  verily,  as  absent  in  body,  but  present  in  spirit, 
have  judged  already,"  &c.  The  case  was  most  gross,  and 
there  was  no  question  about  it.  The  facts  were  indis- 
putable ;  the  scandal  was  unheard  of  "  I  have  judged 
already,  as  though  present,  concerning  him  that  hath 
so  done  this  deed,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
when  ye  are  gathered  together,  and  my  spirit,  with  the 
power  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  deliver  sucb  an  one 
unto  Satan  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh."  There  was 
no  discussion  raised  whether  the  person  might  be  con- 
verted. The  fact  is,  church  discipline  supposes  and  goes 
on  the  ground  that  those  on  whom  it  is  exercised  are 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO   THE  CORINTHIANS.  61 

Christians ;  but  when  it  is  a  question  of  discipline,  it  is 
not  the  season  for  the  display  of  Christian  affection. 
This  would  falsify  the  conscience  and  turn  the  eye  from 
off  the  point  to  which  the  Holy  Ghost  was  directing 
attention.  There  was  wickedness  in  their  midst ;  and 
while  known  and  unjudged,  all  were  implicated ;  none 
could  be  clean  till  it  was  put  away.  Accordingly  the 
apostle,  while  he  expresses  the  desire  that  the  spirit  of 
the  man  should  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord,  flesh 
being  destroyed,  at  the  same  time  rouses  the  saints  to 
that  which  became  the  name  of  the  Lord  on  the  very 
ground  that  they  were  unleavened.  If  they  were  free 
from  evil,  let  them  act  consistently.  Let  them  preserve 
that  purity  in  practice  which  was  theirs  in  principle. 
They  were  unleavened,  and  therefore  should  be  a  new 
lump.  Notoriously  there  was  old  leaven  among  them. 
What  business  had  it  there  ?  "  Put  away  from  " — not 
the  table  of  the  Lord  merely,  this  he  does  not  say,  but 
— "put  away  from  among  yourselves."  This  is  much 
stronger  than  expelling  from  the  table.  Of  course,  it 
implies  exclusion  from  the  Lord's  table,  but  from  their 
table  too — "with  such  an  one,  no,  not  to  eat."  An 
ordinary  meal,  or  any  such  act  expressive  even  in 
natural  things  of  fellowship  with  the  person  thus  dis- 
honouring the  Lord,  is  forbidden. 

Mark,  they  must  put  away.  It  is  not  the  apostle  acting 
for  them ;  for  God  took  particular  care  that  this  case, 
demanding  discipline  to  the  uttermost,  should  be  where 
the  apostle  was  not.  What  an.  admirable  instruction 
for  us  who  have  no  longer  an  apostle !  None  can  pre- 
tend that  it  was  an  assembly  where  there  was  a  high 
degree  of  knowledge  or  spirituality.  The  very  reverse 
was  the  case.     The  responsibiUty  of  discipline  depends 


62  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

on  our  relationship  as  an  assembly  to  the  Lord,  not  on 
its  changing  states.  The  Corinthians  were  babes ;  they 
were  carnal.  He  who  loved  them  well  coxild  not  speak 
of  them  as  spiritual.  Nevertheless,  this  responsibility  at- 
tached to  the  very  fact  that  they  were  members  of  Christ 
— His  body.  If  saints  are  gathered  to  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  and  so  are  God's  assembly,  if  they  have  faith  to 
take  such  a  position  here  below,  and  have  the  Holy 
Ghost  owned  as  in  their  midst,  this,  and  nothing  short 
of  this,  is  their  responsibility;  nor  does  the  ruined  state 
of  the  church  touch  the  question,  nor  can  it  relieve 
them  from  their  duty  to  the  Lord.  The  church  at 
Corinth  had  soon  failed  most  gravely  far  and  wide. 
This  was  the  more  shameful,  considering  the  brightness 
of  the  truth  vouchsafed  to  them,  and  the  striking  mani- 
festation of  divine  power  in  their  midst.  The  presence 
of  apostles  elsewhere  in  the  earth,  the  beautiful  display 
of  Pentecostal  grace  at  Jerusalem,  the  fact  that  so  short 
a  time  had  elapsed  since  they  had  been  brought  out  of 
heathenism  into  their  standing  in  God's  grace,  all  made 
the  present  state  of  the  Corinthians  so  much  the  more 
painful;  but  nothing  can  ever  dissolve  the  responsibility 
of  saints,  whether  as  individuals  or  as  an  assembly. 
"  Put  away  from  among  yourselves  that  wicked  person." 
Another  thing  is  to  be  observed, — that  the  Holy 
Spirit's  scale  of  sin  is  not  that  of  man.  Which  of  you, 
my  brethren,  would  have  thought  of  classing  a  railer 
with  an  adulterer?  A  railer  is  one  who  uses  abusive 
language  for  the  purpose  of  injuring  another, — not  the 
transient  out-breaking  of  flesh,  sad  as  it  is,  but  provoked 
it  may  be,  or  at  any  rate,  happening  through  unwatch- 
fulness.  The  habit  of  evil  speaking  stamps  him  who 
practises  it  as  a  railer;  and  such  a  man  is  unfit  for 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO   THE  CORINTHIANS.  63 

the  company  of  the  saints,  for  God's  assembly.  It  is 
the  old  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness.  He  is  un- 
clean. Doubtless  the  world  would  not  so  judge;  but 
this  is  not  the  world's  judgment.  The  Corinthians  were 
under  the  inflxience  of  the  world.  The  apostle  had  already 
shown  that  to  walk  as  men  is  beneath  the  Christian. 
Now  we  see  that  to  walk  as  the  world,  no  matter 
how  refinedly,  ever  exposes  Christians  to  act  worse  than 
men  of  the  world.  God  has  stamped  upon  His  children 
the  name  of  Christ;  and  what  does  not  express  His 
name  is  inconsistent,  not  only  with  the  Christian,  but 
with  His  assembly.  They  are  all  as  such  held  respon- 
sible, according  to  the  grace  and  holiness  and  glory  of 
Christ,  for  the  sin  done  in  their  midst,  of  which  they 
are  cognisant.  They  are  bound  to  keep  themselves 
pure  in  ways. 

There  was  another  case  also :  brother  was  going  to 
law  with  brother.  (Chap,  vi.)  "We  have  no  reason  to 
think  they  had  fallen  so  far  as  to  go  to  law  with  those 
that  were  not  brethren ;  this  would  seem  to  be  a  lower 
step  stiU.  But  brother  was  going  to  law  with  brother, 
and  this  before  the  unjust.  How  often  now- a- days 
one  hears,  "  Well,  one  expects  something  better  from  a 
brother ;  and  surely  he  ought  to  suffer  the  consequences 
of  his  ill -doing.''  This  was  just  the  feeling  of  the 
Corinthian  plaintiff.  What,  then,  is  the  weapon  that 
the  apostle  uses  in  this  case?  The  dignified  place  ia 
the  glory  that  God  designs  for  the  Christian :  "  Know 
ye  not  that  we  shall  judge  the  world — judge  angels  ?" 
Were  such  going  before  the  Gentiles?  Thus  is  seen 
how  practical  all  truth  is,  and  how  God  casts  the 
bright  light  of  the  approaching  day  on  the  smallest 
matters  of  the  life  of  to-day. 


64  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

Again,  there  was  no  quarter  in  the  world  where 
personal  purity  was  more  unknown  than  at  Corinth. 
Indeed,  such  were  the  habits  of  the  ancient  world,  it 
would  only  defile  the  ears  and  minds  of  God's  children 
to  have  any  proofs  of  the  depravity  in  which  the  world 
then  lay,  and  that  too  in  its  best  estate,  the  wisest  and 
the  greatest  not  excepted, — those,  alas,  whose  writings 
are  in  the  hands  of  the  youth  of  our  day,  and  more 
than  ever,  perhaps,  in  their  hands.  Those  wits,  poets, 
and  philosophers  of  heathen  antiquity  lived  in  habitual, 
yea,  often  in  unnatural  grossness,  and  thought  nothing 
of  it.  It  is  a  danger  for  the  saints  of  God  to  be 
tinctured  by  the  atmosphere  of  the  world  outside  when 
the  first  fervour  of  grace  cools,  and  they  begin  to  take 
up  their  old  habits.     It  was  certainly  so  at  Corinth. 

Accordingly  the  believers  there  were  betrayed  into 
their  former  uncleanness  of  life  when  the  heavenly  light 
got  dim.  And  how  does  the  apostle  deal  with  this? 
He  recalls  to  them  the  Holy  Spirit's  dwelling  in  them. 
What  a  truth,  and  of  what  force  to  the  believer !  He 
does  not  say  simply  that  they  were  redeemed,  though 
he  brings  it  in  also ;  still  less  does  he  merely  reason  on 
the  moral  heinousness  of  the  sin ;  neither  does  he  cite 
the  law  of  God  that  condemned  it.  He  presses  upon 
them  that  which  was  proper  to  them  as  Christians.  It 
was  no  question  of  man,  let  him  be  Gentile  or  Jew,  but 
of  a  Christian.  Thus  he  sets  before  them  the  distinctive 
Christian  blessing — the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  the 
believer,  and  making  his  body  (not  his  spirit  but  his 
hody)  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  for  here  was  precisely 
where  the  enemy  seems  to  have  misled  these  Corinthians. 
They  affected  to  think  they  might  be  pure  in  spirit,  but 
do  what  they  liked  with  their  bodies.    But,  answers  the 


THE   FIRST   EPISTLE  TO    THE   CORINTHIANS.  65 

apostle,  it  is  the  body  which  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  The  body  belongs  to  the  Lord  and  Saviour ;  the 
body,  therefore,  and  not  the  spirit  only.  He  claims  now. 
No  doubt  that  the  spirit  be  occupied  with  Christ  is  a 
grand  matter;  but  the  licentious  flesh  of  man  would 
talk,  at  any  rate,  about  the  Lord,  and  at  the  same  time 
indulge  in  evU.  This  is  set  aside  by  the  blessed  fact 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  even  now  dwells  in  the  Christian, 
and  this  on  the  ground  of  his  being  bought  with  a 
price.  Thus  the  very  call  to  holiness  ever  keeps  the 
saint  of  God  in  the  sense  of  his  immense  privileges  as 
well  as  of  his  perfect  deliverance. 

Chapter  vii.  naturally  leads  from  this  into  certain 
questions  that  had  been  proposed  to  the  apostle  touch- 
ing marriage  and  slavery — questions  which  had  to  do 
with  the  various  relationships  of  life.  The  apostle 
accordingly  gives  us  what  he  had  learned  from  the 
Lord,  as  well  as  what  he  could  speak  of  as  a  command- 
ment of  the  Lord,  distinguishing  in  the  most  beautiful 
manner,  not  between  inspired  and  non-inspired,  but 
between  revelation  and  inspiration.  AU  the  word  is 
inspired ;  there  is  no  difference  as  to  this.  There  is  no 
part  of  Scripture  that  is  less  inspired  than  another. 
"  AU  (every)  scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God ; " 
but  aU  is  not  His  revelation.  We  must  distinguish 
between  parts  revealed  and  the  whole  inspired.  When 
a  thing  is  revealed  of  God,  it  is  absolutely  new  truth, 
and  of  course  is  the  commandment  of  the  Lord.  But 
the  inspired  word  of  God  contains  the  language  of  all 
sorts  of  men,  and  very  often  the  conversation  of  wicked 
men — nay,  of  the  devil.  I  need  not  say  that  all  this 
is  not  a  revelation ;  but  God  communicates  what  Satan 
and  wicked  men  say  (as  for  instance  Pilate's  words  to 

F 


66  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTTJEES. 

our  Lord  and  the  Jews).  None  of  these  evidently  was 
that  which  is  called  a  revelation ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost 
inspired  the  writers  of  the  book  to  give  us  exactly 
what  each  of  these  said,  or  revealed  what  was  in  the 
mind  of  God  about  them.  Take,  for  example,  the  book 
of  Job,  in  which  occur  the  sayings  of  his  friends. 
What  intelligent  reader  could  think  that  they  were  in 
any  way  authorised  communicators  of  the  mind  of 
God?  They  say  sometimes  very  wrong  things,  and 
sometimes  wise,  and  often  things  that  do  not  in  the 
smallest  degree  apply  to  the  case.  Every  word  of  the 
book  of  Job  is  inspired ;  but  did  all  the  speakers  utter 
necessarily  the  mind  of  God  ?  Did  not  one  of  the 
speakers  condemn  one  or  other  of  the  rest  ?  Need  one 
reason  on  such  facts  ?  This,  no  doubt,  makes  a  certain 
measure  of  difficulty  for  a  soul  at  the  first  blush ;  but 
on  maturer  consideration  all  becomes  plain  and  har- 
monious, and  the  word  of  God  is  .enhanced  in  our  eyes. 
And  so  it  is  in  this  chapter,  where  the  apostle  gives 
both  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,  and  his  own 
matured  spiritual  judgment,  which  he  expressly  says 
was  not  the  commandment  of  the  Lord.  StiU  he  was 
inspired  to  give  his  judgment  as  such.  Thus  the  whole 
chapter  is  inspired,  one  part  of  it  just  as  much  as 
another.  There  is  no  difference  in  inspiration.  What 
was  written  by  the  different  inspired  instruments  is  of 
God  as  absolutely  as  if  He  had  written  it  aU  without 
them.  There  is  no  degree  in  the  matter.  There  can  be 
no  difference  in  inspiration.  But  in  the  inspired  word 
of  God  there  is  not  always  revelation.  Sometimes  it  is 
a  record  which  the  Spirit  gave  a  man  to  make  of  what 
he  had  seen  and  heard,  sometimes  he  recorded  by  the 
Spirit  what  no  man  could  have  seen  or  heard.  Sometimes 


THE   FIRST   EPISTLE   TO   THE   CORINTHIANS.  67 

it  was  a  prophecy  of  the  future,  sometimes  a  communi- 
cation of  God's  present  mind  according  to  His  eternal 
purpose.     But  all  is  equally  and  divinely  inspired. 

The  apostle  then  lays  down — at  least  as  far  as  may 
be  here  briefly  sketched — that  while  there  are  cases 
where  it  is  a  positive  duty  to  be  married,  undisguisedly 
there  was  a  better  place  of  undivided  devotedness  to 
Christ.  Blessed  is  he  who  is  given  thus  to  serve  the 
Lord  without  let:  still  it  must  be  the  gift  of  God. 
The  Lord  Jesus  had  laid  down  the  same  principle 
Himself  In  Matthew  xix.,  it  is  needless  to  say,  jomm 
have  the  selfsame  truth  in  another  form. 

Again,  while  the  Lord  employs  the  apostle  thus  to 
give  us  both  His  own  commandment  and  His  mind, 
the  general  principle  is  stated  as  to  the  relationships  of 
life.  It  is  broadly  laid  down  that  one  should  remain  in 
that  condition  in  which  he  is  called,  and  for  a  very 
blessed  reason.  Supposing  one  were  a  slave  even,  he  is 
already,  if  a  Christian,  a  freeman  of  Christ.  You  must 
remember  that  in  these  days  there  were  everywhere 
bondmen  :  those  that  then  ruled  the  world  took  them 
from  all  classes  and  all  countries.  There  were  bondmen 
highly  educated,  and  once  in  a  high  position  of  life. 
Need  it  be  said  that  often  these  boudmen  rose  up 
against  their  cruel  masters  ?  The  very  knowledge  of 
Christ,  and  the  possession  of  conscious  truth,  if  grace 
did  not  counteract  mightily,  would  tend  to  increase 
their  sense  of  horror  at  their  position.  Suppose,  for 
instance,  a  refined  person,  with  the  truth  of  God  com- 
municated to  his  soul,  was  the  slave  of  one  living  in 
all  the  filth  of  heathenism,  what  a  trial  it  would  be  to 
serve  in  such  a  position !  The  apostle  urges  the  truth 
of  that  liberty  in  Christ  which  Christendom  has  well- 

r  2 


68  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

nigh  forgotten — that  if  I  am  Christ's  servant  I  am 
emancipated  already.  Match  if  you  can  the  manu- 
mission he  has  got.  Twenty  millions  will  procure  no 
such  emancipation.  At  the  same  time,  if  my  master 
allows  me  liberty,  let  me  use  it  rather.  Is  it  not  a 
remarkable  style  of  speech  and  feeling  ?  The  Christian, 
even  if  a  slave,  possesses  the  best  freedom  after  all : 
anything  else  is  but  circumstantial.  On  the  other  hand, 
if  you  are  a  freeman,  take  care  how  you  use  your 
liberty  :  use  it  as  the  Lord's  bondman.  The  freeman  is 
reminded  of  his  bondmanship ;  the  bondman  is  re- 
minded of  his  freedom.  What  a  wonderful  antithesis 
of  man  is  the  Second  Man !  How  it  traverses  all  the 
thoughts,  circumstances,  and  hopes  of  flesh ! 

Then  he  brings  before  us  the  different  relationships 
at  the  end  of  the  chapter,  as  they  are  afiected  by  the 
coming  of  the  Lord.  And  there  is  nothing  which 
shows  more  the  importance  of  that  hope  as  a  practical 
power.  There  is  not  only  the  direct  but  the  indirect 
allusion  when  the  heart  is  filled  with  an  object;  and  the 
indirect  is  a  yet  stronger  witness  of  the  place  it  holds 
than  the  direct.  A  mere  hint  connects  itself  with  that 
which  is  your  joy  and  constant  expectation;  whereas 
when  a  thing  is  little  before  the  heart  you  require  to 
explain,  prove,  and  insist  upon  it.  But  this  chapter 
brings  vividly  before  them  how  all  outward  things  pass 
away,  even  the  fashion  of  this  world.  Time  is  short. 
It  is  too  late  either  to  make  much  of  scenes  so  changing, 
or  to  seek  this  thing  or  that  here  below  with  such  a 
morrow  before  our  eyes.  Hence  he  calls  on  those  who 
had  wives  to  be  as  those  who  had  none,  on  those  who 
were  selling  and  buying  to  be  above  all  the  objects  that 
made  up  the  sum  of  business.    In  short,  he  puts  Christ 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE   TO    THE   CORINTHIANS.  69 

and  His  coming  as  the  reality,  and  all  else  as  the 
shadows,  transitions,  movements  of  a  world  that  even 
now  crumbles  underneath  us.  No  wonder  that  he 
follows  all  up  at  the  end  with  his  own  judgment, — that 
the  man  most  blessed  is  he  who  has  the  least  entangle- 
ment, and  is  the  most  thoroughly  devoted  to  Christ  and 
His  service. 

Next  in  chapter  viii.  he  begins  to  take  up  another 
danger  for  the  Corinthian  saints.  They  had  the  sound 
of  the  truth  ringing  in  their  ears  ;  and  assuredly  there 
are  few  sounds  sweeter  than  the  liberty  of  the  Chris- 
tian. But  what  is  more  liable  to  abuse  ?  They  had 
abused  power  to  self-exaltation;  they  were  now  turning 
liberty  to  license.  But  there  is  a  solemn  fact  which 
none  can  afford  to  forget  as  to  both  power  and  liberty — 
that  without  re^onsibility  nothing  is  more  ruinous  than 
either.  Herein  lay  the  sad  failure  of  these  saints.  In 
the  sense,  of  responsibility  they  were  utterly  wanting. 
They  seem  to  have  forgotten  completely  that  the  Lord 
from  whom  the  liberty  had  come  is  the  One  in  whose 
sight,  and  for  whose  glory,  and  according  to  whose  will, 
all  power  was  to  be  used.  The  apostle  recalls  them  to 
this ;  but  he  takes  up  their  license  in  going  into  heathen 
temples,  and  eating  things  offered  to  idols,  not  first  of 
all  on  the  high  ground  of  the  Lord,  but  on  account  of 
their  brethren.  In  their  boasted  liberty,  and  because 
they  knew  an  idol  was  nothing,  they  considered  that 
they  might  go  anywhere,  and  do  what  they  pleased. 
Nay,  not  so,  cries  the  apostle ;  you  must  consider  your 
brother.  There  is  many  a  disciple  who,  far  from  know- 
ing how  vain  idolatry  is,  thinks  a  good  deal  of  the  idol. 
Thus,  you  that  know  so  much,  if  you  make  light  of 
going  here  and  there,  will  induce  other  disciples  to 


70  INTEODUCTOEY   LECTUEES. 

follow  your  steps  who  may  slip  into  idolatry  through 
it,  and  thus  a  brother  perish  for  whom  Christ  died; 
and  what  is  the  liberty  of  one  who  is  instructed  may 
prove  the  extreme  ruin  of  one  who  is  equally  a  be- 
liever in  the  Lord.  Thus  he  looks  at  the  thing  in  its 
full  character  and  ultimate  tendency  if  unchecked. 
Grace,  as  we  know,  can  arrest  these  tendencies,  and 
avert  the  evO  results. 

In  chapter  ix.  he  interrupts  the  course  of  his  argu- 
ment by  an  appeal  to  his  own  place  as  an  apostle. 
Some  were  beginning  to  question  his  apostolate.  It 
was  not  that  he  in  the  slightest  degree  forgot  his  call 
by  God's  will  to  that  special  service;  neither  was  he 
insensible  to  the  blessed  liberty  in  which  he  was  serv- 
ing the  Lord.  He  could  lead  about  a  sister-wife  like 
another ;  he  had  foregone  this  for  the  Lord's  sake.  He 
coiild  look  for  support  from  the  church  of  God;  he 
preferred  to  work  with  his  own  hands.  So  in  the 
second  epistle  to  the  Corinthians  he  begs  them  to 
forgive  the  wrong;  for  he  would  not  accept  anything 
from  them.  They  were  not  in  a  condition  to  be 
entrusted  with  such  a  gift.  Their  state  was  such,  and 
God  had  so  overruled  it  in  His  ways,  that  the  apostle 
had  received  nothing  from  them.  This  fact  he  uses  in 
order  to  humble  them  because  of  their  pride  and 
licentiousness. 

The  course  of  this  chapter  then  touches  on  his 
apostolic  place,  and  at  the  same  time  his  refusal  to  use 
the  rights  of  it.  Grace  can  forego  aU  questions  of  right. 
Conscious  of  what  is  due,  it  asserts  rights  for  others,  but 
refuses  to  use  them  for  itself  Such  was  the  spirit  and 
the  faith  of  the  apostle.  And  now  he  shows  what  he 
felt  as  to  practical  state  and  walk.    Far  from  being  fuU 


THE   FIRST   EPISTLE  TO   THE   COKINTHIANS.  71 

of  his  knowledge,  far  from  only  using  his  place  in 
the  church  for  the  assertion  of  his  dignity  and  for 
immunity  from  all  trouble  and  pain  here  below,  he  on 
the  contrary  was  as  one  under  the  law  to  meet  him  that 
was  under  it;  he  was  as  a  Gentile  to  meet  him  that 
was  free  from  law  (that  is,  a  Gentile).  Thus  he  was  a 
servant  of  all  that  he  might  save  some.  Besides,  he 
lets  them  know  the  spirit  of  a  servant,  which  was  so 
lacking  in  the  Corinthians  in  spite  of  their  gifts ;  for  it 
is  not  the  possession  of  a  gift,  but  love  which  serves 
and  delights  in  service.  The  simple  fact  of  knowing 
that  you  have  a  gift  may  and  often  does  minister  to  self- 
complacency.  The  grand  point  is  to  have  the  Lord 
before  you,  and  when  others  are  thought  of,  it  is  in  the 
love  which  has  no  need  to  seek  greatness,  or  to  affect 
it.  The  love  of  Christ  proves  its  greatness  by  serving 
others. 

This,  then,  was  the  spirit  of  that  blessed  servant  of 
the  Lord.  He  reminds  them  of  another  point — that 
he  was  himself  diligent  in  keeping  his  body  in  subjec- 
tion. He  was  like  a  man  with  a  race  that  was  going 
to  be  run,  and  who  gets  his  body  into  training.  He 
puts  this  in  the  strongest  way,  "Lest  that  by  any 
means,  when  I  have  preached  to  others,  I  myself 
should  be  a  castaway."  Mark  the  tact  of  the  apostle. 
When  he  has  something  discreditable  to  say,  be  prefers 
to  say  it  about  himself;  when  he  has  something  pleas- 
ing to  say,  he  loves  to  put  it  with  regard  to  others.  So 
here  he  says,  "  Lest  /  myself  become  a  castaway,"  not 
"  you!'  He  meant  their  profit,  no  doubt ;  his  aim  was 
for  them  to  have  their  own  consciences  searched  by  it. 
If  Paul  even  was  exercising  himself  to  have  a  conscience 
void  offence ;  if  Paul  was  keeping  his  body  in  subjec- 


72  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

tion,  how  much  more  did  these  men  need  it?  They 
■were  abusing  all  the  comfort  that  Christianity  brings,' 
to  live  at  ease  and  play  the  gentleman,  if  one  may 
speak  according  to  modern  language.  They  had  not 
entered  in  the  smallest  degree  into  the  spirit  of  the 
moral  glory  of  Christ  humbled  here  below.  They  had 
dislocated  the  cross  from  Christianity.  They  had 
severed  themselves  from  the  power  of  service.  Thus 
they  were  in  the  utmost  possible  jeopardy;  but  the 
apostle,  who  had  the  blessedness  of  Christ  before  him, 
and  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings  as  scarce  another 
had  like  him, — even  he  used  all  diligence  of  heart, 
and  held  a  tight  rein  over  himself  Faithful  man  as  he 
was,  he  allowed  himself  none  of  these  licenses.  Liberty 
indeed  he  prized,  but  it  was  not  going  here  and  there 
to  feasts  of  idols.  He  was  free  to  serve  Christ,  and 
time  was  short:  what  had  such  an  one  to  do  with 
heathen  temples  ? 

Thus  he  wants  them  to  feel  their  danger,  but  first  of 
all  he  begins  with  himself.  He  was  free  but  watchful ; 
and  he  was  jealous  over  himself,  the  greater  the  grace 
shown  him.  It  was  not  that  he  in  the  smallest  degree 
doubted  his  security  in  Christ,  as  some  so  foolishly  say; 
or  that  such  as  have  eternal  life  may  lose  it  again.  But 
it  is  plain  that  men  who  merely  take  the  place  of 
having  eternal  life  may,  and  often  do,  abandon  that 
place.  Those  who  have  eternal  life  prove  it  by  godli- 
ness ;  those  who  have  it  not  prove  the  lack  of  it  by 
indifference  to  holiness,  and  lack  of  that  love  which  is 
of  God.  So  the  apostle  shows  that  all  his  knowledge 
of  the  truth,  far  from  making  him  careless,  prompted 
him  to  yet  greater  earnestness,  and  to  daily  denial  of 
himself.    This  is  a  very  important  consideration  for  us 


THE   FIKST   EPISTLE  TO   THE   CORINTHIANS.  73 

all  (I  press  it  more  especially  on  the  young  in  such 
a  day  as  this);  and  the  greater  the  knowledge  of  the 
saints,  the  more  they  need  to  keep  it  in  view. 

The  apostle  draws  their  attention  to  another  warning 
in  the  history  of  Israel.  These  had  eaten  of  the  same 
spiritual  meat,  for  so  he  calls  it ;  they  had  the  heaven- 
sent manna, — had  drunk  of  the  same  spiritual  drink ; 
yet  what  became  of  them  ?  How  many  thousands  of 
them  perished  in  the  wilderness  ?  The  apostle  is  ap- 
proaching far  closer  to  their  state.  He  began  with 
application  to  his  own  case,  and  now  he  points  to 
Israel  as  a  people  sanctified  to  Jehovah.  At  length  the 
word  is,  "  Wherefore  let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth 
take  heed  lest  he  fall.  There  hath  no  temptation  taken 
you  but  such  as  is  common  to  man ;  but  God  is  faithful." 
This  was  a  great  comfort,  but  it  was  also  a  serious  cau- 
tion. "God  is  faithful  who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be 
tempted  above  that  ye  are  able."  It  is  in  vain,  therefore, 
to  plead  circumstances  as  an  excuse  for  sin.  "  But  [He] 
will,  with  the  temptation,  also  make  a  way  to  escape, 
that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it.  Wherefore,  my  dearly 
beloved,  flee  from  idolatry."  He  makes  it  plain  that  he 
is,  with  characteristic  address,  dealing  with  their  little- 
exercised  consciences  from  the  statement  of  his  own 
earnest  vigilance  over  his  ways,  and  then  from  the  sad 
and  solemn  history  of  Israel  judged  of  the  Lord.  Thus, 
too,  he  goes  forward  into  new  ground, — the  deeper 
spiritual  motives,  the  appeal  to  Christian  affection  as 
well  as  to  faith.  The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless, 
is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  He 
begins  with  that  which  most  nearly  touches  the  heart. 
It  would  have  been  an  order  more  natural,  if  one  may 
so  say,  to  speak  of  the  body  of  Christ ;  as  we  know  in 


74  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTDKES. 

the  Lord's  supper  habitually,  there  is  that  which  brings 
before  us  first  the  body  and  then  the  blood.  The  de- 
parture from  what  may  be  called  the  historical  order 
makes  the  emphasis  incomparably  greater.  More  than 
that,  the  first  appeal  is  founded  on  the  blood  of  Christ, 
the  answer  of  divine  grace  to  the  deepest  need  of  a  soul 
found  in  its  guilt  before  God  and  covered  with  defile- 
ment. Was  this  to  be  slighted  ?  "  The  cup  of  blessing 
which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  blood 
of  Christ?  The  bread  which  we  break,  is  it  not  the 
communion  of  the  body  of  Christ?"  He  does  not  here 
say,  "the  blood"  or  the  "body  of  the  Lord."  This 
we  find  in  chapter  xi. ;  but  it  is  here  Christ,  because  it 
becomes  a  question  of  grace.  "  The  Lord"  brings  in  the 
idea  of  authority.  Thi.s,  then,  is  evidently  an  immense 
advance  in  dealing  with  the  subject.  Accordingly  he 
now  developes  it,  not  on  the  ground  of  injury  to  a 
brother,  but  as  a  breach  of  fellowship  with  such  a 
Christ,  and  indifference  to  His  immense  love.  But  he 
does  not  forget  His  authority:  "Ye  cannot  drink  the  cup 
of  the  Lord  and  the  cup  of  demons ;  ye  cannot  be  par- 
takers of  the  Lord's  table  and  of  the  table  of  demons." 
It  is  not  simply  the  love  of  Christ,  but  His  full  authority 
as  the  Lord.  The  apostle  contrasts  two  mighty  powers 
that  were  contesting — demons,  on  the  one  hand,  a  power 
stronger  than  man,  struggling  as  to  him  here  below;' 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  the  Lord  that  had 
shed  His  blood  for  them,  but  the  Lord  of  all  who  should 
judge  quick  and  dead.  Hence  he  follows  up  with  a 
comprehensive  and  simple  principle,  but  full  of  liberty 
withal,  that  in  going  into  the  market  you  need  ask  no 
questions.  If  I  do  not  know  that  the  food  has  been 
connected  with  idols,  the  idol  is  nothing  to  me;  but  the 


THE   FIRST   EPISTLE   TO    THE   COEINTHIANS.  75 

moment  I  know  it,  it  is  no  longer  the  question  of  an 
idol  but  a  demon ;  and  a  demon,  be  assurred,  is  a  very 
real  being  indeed.  Thus  what  the  apostle  insists  on 
amounts  to  this,  that  their  vaunted  knowledge  was  short 
indeed.  Whenever  a  person  boasts,  you  will  in  general 
iind  that  he  particularly  fails  precisely  where  he  boasts 
most.  If  you  set  up  for  great  knowledge,  this  will  be 
the  point  in  which  you  may  be  expected  to  break  down. 
If  you  set  up  for  exceeding  candour,  the  next  thing  we 
may  well  dread  to  hear  is  that  you  have  played  very 
false.  The  best  thing  is  to  see  that  we  give  ourselves 
credit  for  nothing.  Let  Christ  be  all  our  boast.  The 
sense  of  our  own  littleness  and  of  His  perfect  grace  is 
the  way,  and  the  only  way,  to  go  on  well.  "  This  is  the 
victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith.  Who 
is  he  that  overcometh,  but  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus 
is  the  Son  of  God?" 

Then  in  chapter  xi.  we  enter  on  another  point.  It 
would  seem  that  the  sisters  at  Corinth  gave  them  a 
deal  of  trouble,  and  that  they  had  forgotten  entirely 
their  due  relative  place.  No  doubt  the  men  were  at 
least  as  much  to  blame.  It  is  hardly  possible  that 
women  should  ever  put  themselves  forward  in  the 
church  unless  Christian  men  have  deserted  their  true, 
responsible  position  and  public  action.  It  is  the  man's 
place  to  guide;  and  although  women  may  assuredly 
be  far  more  useful  in  certain  cases,  still,  unless  the 
man  guides,  what  an  evident  departure  from  the  order 
God  has  assigned  to  them  both !  How  complete  a 
desertion  of  the  relative  position  in  which  they  were 
placed  from  the  first !  Thus  it  was  at  Corinth.  Among 
the  heathen,  women  played  a  most  important  part,  and 
in  no  quarter  of  the  world,  perhaps,  so  prominent  a  one 


76  INTEODUCTOEY   LECTUEES. 

as  there.  ISTeed  it  be  said  that  this  was  to  their  deep 
shame?  There  was  no  city  in  which  they  were  so 
degraded  as  that  in  which  they  attained  such  con- 
spicuous and  unnatural  prominence.  And  how  does 
the  apostle  meet  this  new  feature  ?  He  brings  in 
Christ.  This  is  what  decides  all.  He  affirms  the  ever- 
lasting principles  of  God,  and  he  adds  that  which  has 
so  brightly  been  revealed  in  and  by  Christ.  He  points 
out  that  Christ  is  the  image  and  the  glory  of  God,  and 
that  the  man  stands  in  an  analogous  place  as  connected 
with  and  distinguished  from  the  woman.  That  is  to 
say,  the  woman's  place  is  one  of  unobtrusiveness,  and 
in  fact,  she  is  most  effective  where  she  is  least  seen. 
The  man,  on  the  contrary,  has  a  public  part — a  rougher 
and  ruder  task,  no  doubt — one  that  may  not  at  all 
bring  into  play  the  finer  affections,  but  which  demands 
a  calmer  and  more  comprehensive  judgment.  The  man 
has  the  duty  of  the  outward  rule  and  administration. 

Accordingly  he  marks  the  first  departure  from  what 
was  right  by  the  woman's  losing  the  sign  of  her  sub- 
jection. She  was  to  have  a  covering  on  her  head ;  she 
was  to  have  that  which  indicated  as  a  sign  that  she 
was  subject  to  another.  The  man  seemed  to  have  failed 
just  in  the  opposite  way ;  and  although  this  may  seem 
a  very  little  thing,  what  a  wonderful  thing  it  is,  and 
what  power  it  shows,  to  be  able  to  combine  in  the  same 
epistle  eternal  things  and  the  very  smallest  matter  of 
personal  decorum,  the  wearing  of  long  hair  or  short, 
the  use  of  a  covering  on  the  head  or  not !  How  truly 
it  marks  God  and  His  word !  Men  would  scorn  to 
combine  them  both  in  the  same  epistle;  it  seems  so 
petty  and  so  incongruous.  But  it  is  the  littleness  of  man 
which  calls  for  big  matters  to  make  him  important; 


THE   FIRST   EPISTLE    TO   THE   CORINTHIANS.  77 

but  the  smallest  things  of  God  have  significaace  when 
they  bear  on  the  glory  of  Christ,  as  they  always  do. 
In  the  first  place,  it  was  out  of  order  that  a  woman 
should  prophesy  with  her  head  uncovered ;  man's  place 
was  to  do  so.  He  was  the  image  and  the  glory  of  God. 
The  apostle  connects  it  all  with  first  principles,  going 
up  to  the  creation  of  Adam  and  Eve  in  a  very  blessed 
manner,  and  above  all  bringing  in  the  second  Man, 
the  last  Adam.    Did  they  think  to  improve  on  both  ? 

The  latter  part  of  the  chapter  takes  up  not  the  rela- 
tive place  of  the  man  and  the  woman,  but  the  supper 
of  the  Lord,  and  so  the  saints  gathered  together.  The 
first  part  of  it,  as  is  evident,  has  nothing  to  do  with 
the  assembly,  and  thus  does  not  dispose  of  the  question 
whether  a  woman  should  prophesy  there.  In  fact, 
nothing  is  said  or  implied  in  the  early  verses  of  the 
assembly  at  all.  The  point  primarily  mooted  is  of  her 
prophesying  after  the  manner  of  a  man,  and  this  is 
done  with  the  greatest  possible  wisdom.  Her  pro- 
phesying is  not  absolutely  shut  out.  If  a  woman  has 
a  gift  for  prophecy,  which  she  certainly  may  have  as 
well  as  a  man,  for  what  is  it  given  of  the  Lord  but  for 
exercise?  Certainly  such  an  one  ought  to  prophesy. 
Who  could  say  the  gift  of  prophecy  given  to  a  woman 
is  to  be  laid  up  in  a  napkin  ?  Only  she  must  take  care 
how  she  does  exercise  it.  First  of  all,  he  rebukes  the 
unseemly  way  in  which  it  was  done — the  woman  for- 
getting that  she  was  a  woman,  and  the  man  that  he  is 
responsible  not  to  act  as  a  woman.  They  seem  to  have 
reasoned  in  a  petty  way  at  Corinth,  that  because  a 
woman  has  a  gift  no  less  than  a  man,  she  is  free  to  use 
the  gift  just  as  a  man  might.  This  is  in  principle 
wrong;  for  after  all  a  woman  is  not  a  man,  nor  like 


78  INTRODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

one  officially,  say  what  you  please.  The  apostle  sets 
aside  the  whole  basis  of  the  argument  as  false ;  and  we 
must  never  hear  reasoning  which  overthrows  what  God 
has  ordained.  Nature  ought  to  have  taught  them  better. 
But  he  does  not  dwell  on  this ;  it  was  a  withering 
rebuke  even  to  hint  at  their  forgetfulness  of  natural 
propriety. 

Then,  in  the  latter  verses,  we  have  the  supper  of  the 
Lord,  and  there  we  find  the  saints  expressly  said  to  be 
gathered  together.  This  naturally  leads  the  way  to  the 
spiritual  gifts  that  are  treated  of  in  chapter  xii.  As  to 
the  supper  of  the  Lord,  happily  I  need  not  say  many 
words  to  you.  It  is,  by  the  great  mercy  of  God,  familiar 
to  most  of  us ;  we  live,  I  may  say,  in  the  enjoyment  of 
it,  and  know  it  to  be  one  of  the  sweetest  privileges  God 
vouchsafes  us  here  below.  Alas !  this  very  feast  had 
furnished  occasion,  in  the  fleshly  state  of  the  Corin- 
thians, to  a  most  humiliating  abuse.  What  led  to  it 
was  the  Agape,  as  it  was  styled;  for  in  those  days 
there  was  a  meal  which  the  Christians  used  to  take 
together.  Indeed,  the  social  character  of  Christianity 
never  can  be  overlooked  without  loss,  but  in  an  evil 
state  it  is  open  to  much  abuse.  Everything  that  is 
good  may  be  perverted;  and  it  never  was  intended  to 
hinder  abuse  by  extinguishing  that  which  was  only 
to  be  maintained  aright  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
of  God.  No  rules,  no  abstinence,  no  negative  measures, 
can  glorify  God,  or  make  His  children  spiritual; 
and  it  is  only  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
producing  a  sense  of  responsibility  to  the  Lord  as  well 
as  of  His  grace  that  saints,  are  duly  kept.  So  it  was 
then  at  Corinth,  that  the  meeting  for  the  Lord's  Supper 
became   mingled  with   an   ordinary   meal,   where  the 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE   TO   THE  CORINTHIANS.  79 

Christians  ate  and  drank  together.  They  were  glad  to 
meet — at  any  rate,  originally  it  was  so,  when  love  was 
gratified  with  the  company  of  each  other.  Being  not 
merely  young  Christians,  but  unwatchful  and  then  lax, 
this  gave  rise  to  sad  abuse.  Their  old  habits  re-asserted 
their  influence.  They  were  accustomed  to  the  feasts  of 
the  heathen,  where  people  thought  nothing  whatever  of 
getting  drunk,  if  it  was  not  rather  meritorious.  It  was 
in  some  of  their  mysteries  considered  a  wrong  to  the  god 
for  his  votary  not  to  get  drunk,  so  debased  beyond  all 
conception  were  the  heathen  in  their  notions  of  religion. 
Accordingly  these  Corinthian  brethren  had  by  little 
and  little  got  on  until  some  of  them  had  fallen  into 
intemperance  on  the  occasion  of  the  Eucharist;  not, 
of  course,  simply  by  the  wine  drank  at  the  table  of 
the  Lord,  but  through  the  feast  that  accompanied  it. 
Thus  the  shame  of  their  drunkenness  fell  upon  that 
Holy  Supper;  and  hence  the  apostle  regulated,  that 
from  that  time  forward  there  should  be  no  such  feast 
coupled  with  the  Lord's  Supper.  If  they  wished  to 
eat,  let  them  eat  at  home;  if  they  came  together  in 
worship,  let  them  remember  it  was  to  eat  of  the  Lord's 
body,  and  to  drink  of  the  Lord's  blood.  He  puts  it 
in  the  strongest  terms.  He  does  not  feel  it  needful 
or  suitable  to  speak  of  "the  figure"  of  the  Lord's 
body.  The  point  was  to  make  its  grace  and  holy  im- 
pressiveness  duly  felt.  It  was  a  figure,  no  doubt ;  but 
still,  writing  to  men  who  were  at  least  wise  enough  to 
judge  aright  here,  he  gives  all  its  weight,  and  the 
strongest  expression  of  what  was  meant.  So  Jesus  had 
said.  Such  it  was  in  the  sight  of  God,  He  that  par- 
took undiscerningly  and  without  self-judgment  was 
guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus.     It 


80  INTEODUCTOEY   LECTUKES. 

was  a  sin  against  Him.  The  intention  of  the  Lord,  the 
true  principle  and  practice  for  a  saint,  is  to  come, 
examining  his  ways,  trying  his  springs  of  action,  putting 
himself  to  the  proof ;  and  so  let  him  eat  (not  stay  away, 
because  there  is  much  discovered  that  is  humbling). 
The  guard  and  warning  is,  that  if  there  be  not  self- 
judgment,  the  Lord  will  judge.  How  low  is  the  state 
of  things  to  which  all  saints  tend,  and  not  the  Corin- 
thians only !  There  ought  to  have  been,  I  suppose,  an 
interposition  of  the  church's  judgment  between  the 
Christian's  lack  of  self-judgment  and  the  Lord's  chast- 
enings ;  but,  alas !  man's  duty  was  altogether  lacking. 
It  was  from  no  want  of  gifts.  They  had  no  sense  of 
the  place  God  designed  self-judgment  to  hold  j  but  the 
Lord  never  fails. 

In  chapter  xii.  accordingly,  the  apostle  enters  on  a 
full  statement  of  these  spiritual  powers.  He  shows  that 
the  distinctive  feature  of  that  which  the  Spirit  of  God 
leads  to  is  the  confession,  not  exactly  of  Christ,  but  of 
Jesus  as  Lord.  He  takes  the  simplest  and  most  neces- 
sary ground — that  of  His  authority.  This  is  observable 
in  verse  3 :  "Wherefore  I  give  you  to  understand  that  no 
man  speaking  by  the  Spirit  of  God  calleth  Jesus  ac- 
cursed ;  and  that  no  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord 
but  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  Impossible  that  the  Spirit 
should  dishonour,  yea,  that  He  should  not  exalt.  Him 
who  humbled  Himself  for  God's  glory.  "Now,  there 
are  diversities  of  gifts,  but  the  same  Spirit ;  and  there 
are  differences  of  administrations,  but  the  same  Lord; 
and  there  are  diversities  of  operations,  but  it  is  the 
same  God  that  worketh  all  in  aU."  They  had  forgotten 
all  this.  They  were  pre-occupied  with  human  thoughts, 
with  this  clever  Jew  and  that  able  Gentile.     They  had 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.  81 

lost  sight  of  God  Himself  working  in  their  midst.  The 
apostle  points  out  that  if  there  were  different  services,  if 
distinct  gifts  to  one  and  another,  it  was  for  the  common 
good  of  all.  He  illustrates  the  nature  of  the  church  as  a 
hody  with  its  various  members  subserving  the  interests 
of  the  body  and  the  wUl  of  the  head.  "  By  one  Spirit  were 
we  aU  baptized  into  one  body ;"  it  is  not  the  Holy  Ghost 
merely  making  many  members,  but  "  one  body."  Ac- 
cordingly he  confronts  with  this  divine  aim  their  misuse 
of  their  spiritual  powers, — independence  one  of  another, 
disorder  as  to  women,  self-glorification,  and  the  like,  as 
we  see  in  chapter  xiv.  the  detail.  He  presses  that 
the  least  comely  members,  those  that  are  least  seen, 
may  be  of  more  importance  than  any  others ;  just  as  in 
the  natural  body  some  of  the  most  vital  parts  are  not 
even  visible.  What  would  a  man  do  without  a  heart, 
or  liver,  or  lungs  ?  So  in  the  spiritual  body  there  are 
members  which  are  'most  important  and  not  seen  at  aU. 
But  men  are  apt  to  value  most  those  which  make  a 
showy  appearance.  Thus  he  rebukes  the  whole  tenor 
and  spirit  of  Corinthian  vanity;  at  the  same  time  he 
maintains  their  place  of  blessing  and  responsibility  to 
the  last.  After  all  their  faults  he  does  not  hesitate  to 
say,  "Now  ye  are  the  body  of  Christ."  This  way  of 
dealing  with  souls  has  been  grievously  enfeebled  in  the 
present  day.  Grace  is  so  feebly  known,  that  the  first 
thought  you  will  find  amongst  godly  people  is  what 
they  might  to  he;  but  the  ground  and  weapon  of  the 
apostle  Paul  is  what  they  are  by  God's  grace.  "  Ye  are 
the  body  of  Christ,  and  members  in  particular;  and 
God  hath  set  some  in  the  church."  It  was  far  from  his 
mind  in  the  least  to  deny  it.  Observe  here  an  important 
use  of  the  expression,  "the  church."     It  cannot  be  the 

G 


82  INTEODUCTOfiY  LECTURES. 

local  assembly,  because,  looking  at  GoriDth,  no  apostles 
were,  there.  Whatever  might  be  the  providential  ar- 
rangements outside  in  the  world,  he  is  looking  at  the 
assembly  of  God  here  on  earth ;  and  it  is  the  assembly 
as  a  whole,  the  Corinthian  assembly  beiug,  as  every  true 
assembly  is,  a  kind  of  representative  of  the  church 
universally.  It  is  the  church  of  God  here  below;  not 
merely  churches,  though  that  was  true  also. 

Thus  we  can  look  at  what  the  church  will  be 
by-and-by — glorified  and  absolutely  perfect.  "We  can 
also  look  at  a  particular  local  assembly.  Besides  there  is 
this  most  important  sense  of  the  church  never  to  be 
forgotten — namely,  that  divine  institution  viewed  as  a 
whole  on  earth.  Members  of  Christ  no  doubt  compose 
it ;  but  there  is  His  body,  the  assembly  as  a  whole,  in 
which  God  works  here  below.  Such  is  the  reason  why 
we  do  not  find  in  this  epistle  evangelists  or  pastors, 
because  it  is  not  a  question  of  what  is  needed  to  bring 
souls  in  or  lead  them  on.  He  looks  at  the  church  as  a 
thing  already  subsisting  as  the  witness  of  the  power  of 
God  before  men.  Therefore  it  was  not  at  all  necessary 
to  dwell  on  those  gifts  which  are  the  fruit  of  Christ's 
love  to  and  cherishing  of  the  church.  It  is  regarded  as 
a  vessel  of  power  for  the  maintenance  of  God's  glory, 
and  responsible  for  this  here  below.  Therefore  tongues, 
miracles,  healings,  the  use  of  outward  powers,  are 
largely  dwelt  on  here. 

But  we  pass  on  to  another  and  a  still  more  important 
theme,  a  wonderfully  full  picture  even  for  God's  word, 
that  most  perfect  and  beautiful  unfolding  of  divine 
love  which  we  have  in  chapter  xiii.  After  all,  if  the 
Coriuthians  had  coveted  gifts,  they  had  not  coveted 
the  best.     But  even  if  we  maiy  desire  the  best  gifts. 


THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO   THE  CORINTHIANS.  83 

there  is  better  still;  and  the  best  of  all  is  charity — 
love.  Accordingly  we  have  this  in  the  most  admirable 
manner  brought  out  both  in  what  it  is  and  in  what  it 
is  not,  and  that  too  as  corrective  of  the  wrong  desires 
of  the  Corinthians,  and  the  evil  spirit  which  had  mani- 
fested itself  in  the  exercise  of  their  gifts ;  so  that  what 
seems  to  be  an  interruption  is  the  wisest  of  parentheses 
between  chapter  xii.,  which  shows  us  the  distribution 
of  gifts  and  their  character,  and  chapter  xiv.,  which 
directs  the  due  exercise  of  gifts  in  the  assembly  of 
God.  There  is  but  one  safe  motive-power  for  their  use, 
even  love.  Without  it  even  a  spiritual  gift  only  tends 
to  puff  up  its  owner,  and  to  corrupt  those  who  are  its 
objects. 

Hence  chapter  xiv.  thus  opens:  " Polio w  after  charity, 
and  desire  spiritual  gifts,  but  rather  that  ye  may  pro- 
phesy." And  why  ?  Prophecy  seemed  to  be  somewhat 
despised  amongst  the  Corinthians.  Miracles  and  tongues 
were  liked,  because  these  made  themselves  of  import- 
ance. Such  wonders  made  men  stare,  and  drew  general 
attention  to  those  who  were  invested  evidently  with  a 
superhuman  energy.  But  the  apostle  lays  it  down, 
that  the  gifts  which  suppose  the  exercise  of  spiritual 
understanding  have  a  far  higher  place.  He  himself 
could  speak  more  tongues  than  they  aU.  It  need  hardly 
be  added  that  he  did  more  miracles  than  any  of  them. 
Still,  what  he  valued  most  was  prophesying.  "We  must 
not  suppose  that  this  gift  simply  means  a  man  preach- 
ing. Prophesying  never  means  preaching.  More  than 
this,  prophesying  is  not  simply  teaching.  It,  no  doubt, 
is  teaching;  but  it  is  a  good  deal  more.  Prophesying 
is  that  spiritual  application  of  the  word  of  God  to  the 
conscience  which  puts  the  soul  in  His  presence,  and 

Q    2 


84  INTRODtJCTOEY  LECTURES. 

makes  manifest  as  light  to  the  hearer  the  mind  of  God. 
There  is  a  great  deal  of  valuable  teaching,  exhortation, 
and  application,  that  has  no  such  character.  It  is  all 
very  true,  but  it  does  not  put  the  soul  in  the  presence 
of  God;  it  gives  no  such  absolute  certainty  of  God's 
mind  flashing  on  the  condition  and  judging  the  state  of 
the  heart  before  Him.  I  do  not  speak  now  of  the 
unconverted,  though  prophesying  might  affect  such  as 
■well  as  the  converted.  The  direct  object  of  it  was,  of 
course,  the  people  of  God;  but  in  the  course  of  the 
chapter  the  unbeliever  is  shown  coming  into  the  assem- 
bly and  falling  on  his  face,  and  owning  that  God  was 
among  them  of  a  truth.  Such  is  the  genuine  effect. 
The  man  finds  himself  judged  in  the  presence  of  God. 

There  is  no  need  to  enter  into  aU  that  this  chapter 
brings  before  us,  but  it  may  be  weU  to  observe  that  we 
have  giving  of  thanks  and  blessing,  as  well  as  singing 
and  prayer.  Prophesying  and  the  rest  are  brought  in  as 
all  pertaining  to  the  Christian  assembly.  What  was  not 
directly  edifying,  as  speaking  in  a  tongue,  is  forbidden 
unless  one  could  interpret.  I  doubt  very  much  whether 
there  was  any  revelation  after  the  scheme  of  Scripture 
was  complete.  To  suppose  anything  revealed,  when 
that  which  is  commonly  called  the  canon  was  closed, 
would  be  an  impeachment  of  God's  purpose  in  it.  But 
till  the  last  portion  of  His  mind  was  written  down  in  a 
permanent  form  for  the  church,  we  can  quite  understand 
His  goodness  iu  allowing  a  special  revelation  now  and 
then.  This  gives  no  warrant  to  look  for  anything  of 
the  sort  at  any  time  subsequent  to  the  completion  of 
the  Kew  Testament.  Again,  it  is  plain  from  this  that 
there  are  certain  modifications  of  the  chapter.  Thus  so 
far  it  is  true  that  if  anything  has,  through  the  will  of 


THE  EIEST  EPISTLE  TO    THE   CORINTHIANS.  85 

God,  terminated  (for  instance,  miracles,  tongues,  or 
revelations),  it  is  evident  that  sucli  workings  of  the 
Spirit  ought  not  to  be  looked  for ;  hut  this  does  not  in 
the  smallest  degree  set  aside  the  Christian  assembly  or 
the  exercise  according  to  God's  will  of  what  the  Spirit 
still  distinctly  gives.  And  undoubtedly  He  does  continue 
aU.  that  is  profitable,  and  for  God's  glory,  in  the  present 
state  of  His  testimony  and  of  His  church  here  below. 
Otherwise  the  church  sinks  into  a  human  institute. 

In  the  end  of  the  chapter  a  very  important  principle 
is  laid  down.  It  is  vain  for  people  to  plead  the  mighty 
power  of  God  as  an  excuse  for  anything  disorderly. 
This  is  the  great  difference  between  the  power  of  the 
Spirit  and  the  power  of  a  demon.  A  demon's  power  may 
be  uncontrollable :  chains,  fetters,  all  the  power  of  man 
outside,  may  utterly  fail  to  bind  a  man  who  is  filled 
with  demons.  It  is  not  so  with  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
of  God.  Wherever  the  soul  walks  with  the  Lord,  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  on  the  contrary  is  always 
connected  with  His  word,  and  subject  to  the  Lord 
Jesus.  No  man  can  rightly  pretend  that  the  Spirit 
forces  him  to  do  this  or  that  unscripturally.  There  is 
no  justification  possible  against  Scripture;  and  the 
more  fully  the  power  is  of  God,  the  less  will  a  man 
think  of  setting  aside  that  perfect  expression  of  God's 
mind.  All  things  therefore  are  to  be  done  decently 
and  in  order — an  order  which  Scripture  must  decide. 
The  only  aim,  as  far  as  we  are  concerned,  that  God 
endorses,  is  that  all  be  done  to  edification,  and  not  for 
self-display. 

The  next  theme  (ch.  xv.)  is  a  most  serious  subject  doc- 
trinally,  and  of  capital  importance  to  all.  Not  only  had 
the  devil  plunged  the  Corinthians  into  confusion  upon 


86  INTRODUCTOEY   LECTUEES. 

moral  points,  but  when  men  begin  to  give  up  a  good 
conscience,  it  is  no  wonder  if  the  next  danger  is  making 
shipwreck  of  the  faith.  Accordingly,  as  Satan  had 
accomplished  the  first  mischief  among  these  saints,'  it 
was  evident  the  rest  threatened  soon  to  follow.  There 
were  some  among  them  who  denied  the  resurrection — 
not  a  separate  state  of  the  soul,  but  the  rising  again  of 
the  body.  In  fact  the  resurrection  must  be  of  the  body. 
What  dies  is  to  be  raised.  As  the  soul  does  not  die, 
"  resurrection  "  would  be  quite  out  of  place ;  to  the  body 
it  is  necessary  for  God's  glory  as  well  as  man.  And  how 
does  the  apostle  treat  this  ?  As  he  always  does.  He 
brings  Christ  in.  They  had  no  thought  of  Christ  in  the 
case.  They  seem  to  have  had  no  wish  to  deny  the  re- 
surrection of  Christ;  but  should  not  a  Christian  have 
at  once  used  Christ  to  judge  all  by  ?  The  apostle  at 
once  introduces  His  person  and  work  as  a  test.  If 
Christ  did  not  rise,  there  is  no  resurrection,  and  therefore 
no  truth  in  the  Gospel ;  "  your  faith  is  vain :  you  are 
yet  in  your  sins."  Even  they  were  quite  unprepared  for 
so  dreadful  a  conclusion.  Shake  the  resurrection  and 
Christianity  goes.  Having  reasoned  thus,  he  next  points 
out  that  the  Christian  waits  for  the  time  of  joy  and 
glory  and  blessing  for  the  body  by-and-by.  To  give 
up  resurrection  is  to  surrender  the  glorious  hope  of  the 
Christian,  and  to  be  the  most  miserable  of  men.  For 
what  could  be  more  cheerless  than  to  give  up  all  present 
enjoyment  without  that  blessed  hope  for  the  future  at 
Christ's  coming  ?  Thus  strongly  was  the  whole  complex 
nature  of  man  before  the  apostle's  mind  in, speaking  of 
this  hope  of  blessedness  by-and-by. 

Then,  somewhat  abruptly,  instead  of  discussing  the 
matter  any  more,  he  unfolds  a  most  weighty  revelation  of 


THE   FIRST  EPISTLE    TO   THE   COEINTHIANS.  87 

truth.  "  But  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  and 
become  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept.  For  since  by 
man  came  death,  by  man  came  also  the  resurrection  of 
the  dead.  For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall 
all  be  made  alive."  True,  the  kingdom  is  not  yet  come 
for  which  we  are  waiting,  but  it  will  come.  See  how  all 
truth  hangs  together,  and  how  Satan  labours  to  make  a 
consistency  in  error.  He  knows  the  weakness  of  man's 
mind.  Nobody  likes  to  be  inconsistent.  You  may  be 
dragged  into  it,  but  you  are  never  comfortable  when  you 
have  a  sense  of  inconsistency  about  you.  Hence,  after 
one  error  gains  empire  over  the  mind  of  man,  he  is 
ready  to  embrace  others  just  to  make  all  consistent. 

Such  was  the  danger  here  among  the'  Corinthians. 
They  had  been  offended  by  the  apostle's  supreme  indif- 
ference to  all  that  is  of  esteem  among  men.  His  habits  of 
speech  and  life  were  not  at  all  up  to  the  mark  that  they 
supposed  seemly  before  the  world  in  a  servant  of  God. 
Out  of  this  fertile  root  of  evil  has  the  clergy  grown.  It 
has  been  the  effort  to  acquire  as  much  refinement  as  pos- 
sible. Holy  orders  make  a  man  a  sort  of  gentleman  if  he 
was  not  so  before.  This  seems  to  have  been  at  work  in 
the  minds  of  these  critics  of  the  apostle.  Here  we 
find  what  lay  at  the  bottom  of  the  matter.  There  is 
generally  a  root  of  evil  doctrine  where  you  find  people 
wrong  in  practice.  At  any  rate,  where  it  is  a  deliberate, 
persistent,  and  systematic  error,  it  wUl  not  be  merely  a 
practical  one,  but  have  a  root  deep  underneath.  And 
this  was  what  now  came  out  at  Corinth.  It  was  feeble- 
ness about  that  which,  after  all,  lies  at  the  very  founda- 
tion of  Christianity.  They  did  not  mean  to  deny  the 
person  of  Christ  or  His  condition  as  risen  from  the  dead ; 
but  this  is  what  the  enemy  meant,  and  into  this  their 


GO  INTKODUCTOET  LECTURES. 

wrong  notion  tended  to  drift  them.  The  next  step,  after 
denying  resurrection  for  the  Christian,  would  be  to  deny 
it  aJjout  Christ.  And  here  the  apostle  does  not  fail  to 
rebuke  them,  and  in  a  manner  trenchant  enough.  He 
exposes  the  stupidity  of  their  questions,  wise  as  they 
flattered  themselYes  to  be.  How?  It  is  always  the  danger 
of  man  that  he  is  not  content  to  believe ;  he  would  like 
first  of  all  to  understand.  But  this  is  ruinous  in  divine 
things,  which  are  entirely  outside  sense  and  reason.  All 
real  understanding  for  the  Christian  is  the  fruit  of  faith. 
The  apostle  does  not  hesitate  in  apostrophising  the 
unbeliever,  or  at  any  rate,  the  errorist  he  has  in  view, 
to  expose  his  foUy.  "  Thou  fool,"  says  he,  "  that  which 
thou  sowest  is  not  quickened  except  it  die."  Thus  the 
strongest  possible  censure  falls  on  these  Corinthians,  and 
this  for  the  very  matter  in  which  they  plumed  them- 
selves. Human  reasoning  is  poor  indeed  outside  its  own 
sphere.  However,  he  is  not  content  merely  with  putting 
down  their  speculations;  he  brings  in  subsequent  and 
specsial  revelation.  The  previous  part  of  the  chapter 
had  pointed  out  the  connection  of  Christ's  resurrection 
with  our  resurrection,  followed  by  the  kingdom  which 
finally  gives  place  in  order  that  God  may  be  all  in  all. 
In  the  latter  part  of  the  chapter  he  adds  what  had  not 
been  explained  hitherto.  From  the  early  portion  we 
should  not  have  known  but  that  all  saints  die,  and  that 
all  rise  at  Christ's  coming.  But  this  would  not  be  the 
fuU  truth.  It  is  most  true  that  the  dead  in  Christ  rise, 
of  course,  but  this  does  not .  explain  about  the  living 
saints.  He  had  vindicated  the  glorious  character  of  the 
resurrection;  he  had  proved  how  fundamental,  and 
momentous,  and  practical,  is  the  truth  that  the  body  is 
to  be  raised  again,  which  they  were  disposed  to  deny 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.  89 

as  though  it  were  a  low  thing,  and  useless  even  if  pos- 
sible. They  imagiued  the  true  way  to  be  spiritual 
was  to  make  much  of  the  spirit  of  man.  God's  way  of 
making  us  spiritual  is  by  a  simple  but  strong  faith  in. 
the  resurrection-power  of  Christ;  look  to  His  resurrection 
as  the  pattern  and  spring  of  our  own.  Then  at  the  last 
he  adds  that  he  would  show  them  a  mystery.  On  this 
I  must  just  say  a  few  words  in  order  to  develope  its 
force. 

The  resurrection  itself  was  not  a  mystery.  The 
resurrection  of  just  and  unjust  was  a  well-known  Old 
Testament  truth.  It  might  be  founded  on  Scriptures 
comparatively  few,  but  it  was  a  fundamental  truth  of 
the  Old  Testament,  as  the  apostle  Paul  lets  us  hear  in 
his  controversy  with  the  Jews  in  the  Acts  of  th?> 
Apostles.  In  fact,  the  Lord  Jesus  also  assumes  the  same 
thing  in  the  gospels.  But  if  the  raising  of  the  dead 
saints  was  known,  and  even  the  raising  of  the  wicked 
dead,  the  change  of  the  living  saints  was  a  truth  abso- 
lutely unrevealed.  Up  to  this  it  was  not  made  known. 
It  was  a  New  Testament  truth,  as  this  indeed  ig 
what  is  meant  by  a  "mystery."  It  was  one  of  those 
truths  that  were  kept  secret  in  the  Old  Testament,  but 
now  revealed — not  so  much  a  thing  difficult  to  compre- 
hend when  stated,  as  a  thing  not  revealed  before.  "And 
behold,"  says  he,  "I  show  you  a  mystery.  We  shall 
not  aU  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be  changed."  Evidently 
this  supports  and  confirms,  while  it  might  seem  an 
exception  to,  the  resurrection ;  but,  in  point  of  fact,  it 
gives  so  much  the  more  force  and  consistency  to  the 
rising  of  the  dead  in  a  very  unexpected  way.  The 
general  truth  of  the  resurrection  assuredly  does  put 
the  sentence  of  death  on  all  present  things  to  the 


90  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

believer,  showing  that  the  earth  cannot  rightly  he  the 
scene  of  his  enjoyment,  where  all  is  stamped  with 
death,  and  that  he  must  wait  for  the  resurrection  power 
of  Christ  to  be  applied  before  he  enters  the  scene  where 
the  rest  of  God  will  be  our  rest,  and  where  there  will 
be  nothing  but  joy  with  Christ,  and  even  this  earth 
will  behold  Christ  and  His  saints  reigning  over  it  till 
the  eternal  day.  The  addition  to  this  of  the  New 
Testament  truth  of  the  change  gives  immense  impres- 
siveness  to  all,  and  a  fresh  force,  because  it  keeps  before 
the  Christian  the  constant  expectancy  of  Christ.  "  Be- 
hold, 1  show  you  a  mystery" — not  now  that  the  dead 
in  Christ  shall  rise,  but  "we"  beginning  with  the  "we" 
— "  we  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be  changed, 
in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last 
trump ;  for  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall 
be  raised  incorruptible,  and  we  shall  be  changed;  for 
this  corruptible  mtst  put  on  incorruption,  and  this 
mortal  shall  put  on  immortality."  And  "  therefore,"  as 
he  closes  with  the  practical  deduction  from  it  all,  "  my 
beloved  brethren,  be  ye  steadfast,  unmovable,  always 
abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  forasmuch  as  ye 
know  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord." 

The  last  chapter  is  now  before  us,  in  which  the 
apostle  lays  down  a  weighty  exhortation  as  to  collections 
for  the  saints.  He  puts  it  on  the  ground  of  their  being 
prospered  in  any  degree,  and  connects  it  with  the  special 
day  of  Christian  enjoyment,  when  they  gather  together 
for  the  communion  of  saints.  "Upon  the  first  day  of 
the  week  let  every  one  of  you  lay  by  in  store  as  he  has 
been  prospereij,  that  there  be  no  gatherings  when  I 
come."  Need  it  be  said  how  human  influence  has 
dislocated  the  truth  there  ?   No  doubt  this  was  precisely 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE   TO   THE   CORINTHIANS.  91 

■tvhat  the  apostle,  or  the  Holy  Ghost  rather,  discerned 
to  be  at  work  at  Corinth,  the  same  mistake  that  has 
wrought  so  malignantly  in  Christendom ;  that  is  to  say, 
personal  rank,  learning,  eloquence,  or  a  great  name  (as 
of  an  apostle  for  instance),  invoked  to  call  out  the 
generosity  of  the  saints  (perhaps,  even  of  the  world), 
and  increase  the  proceeds  by  all  these  or  like  means. 

But  is  there  not  another  danger  ?  Is  there  no  snare 
for  you,  beloved  brethren  ?  When  persons  are  more  or 
less  free  from  the  ordinary  incubus  of  tradition,  when 
they  are  not  so  much  under  the  influence  of  excitement, 
and  of  those  appeals  to  the  love  of  being  known  and 
of  pleasing  this  or  that  man,  or  the  cause,  or  any  of 
those  human  motives  that  often  do  operate,  I  apprehend 
that  they  are  exposed  to  danger  in  a  wholly  opposite 
direction.  Do  we  sufficiently  make  it  a  matter  of  per- 
sonal responsibility  to  the  Lord,  every  one  of  us,  to  give, 
and  that  in  connection  with  the  first  day  of  the  week 
and  its  blessed  surroundings  and  objects,  when  we  meet 
at  His  table  ?  Do  we  every  one  of  us  give  as  we  are 
prospered  by  the  way  ?  It  is  very  well  to  keep  clear  of 
human  influence,  but  let  us  see  to  it  that  we  do  not 
forget  that  "  the  Lord  has  need "  of  our  giving  for  the 
purposes  He  loves  here  below.  And  of  this  I  am  sure, 
that  if  we  have  rightly  cast  aside  mere  human  calls, 
and  if  we  do  thank  God  for  the  deliverance  from 
worldly  influence,  and  from  the  power  of  custom,  public 
opinion,  &c.,  it  would  be  a  deep  reproach  if  we  did  not 
do  double  as  much  now,  under  the  grace  that  confides 
in  us,  as  we  used  to  do  under  the  law  that  used  to 
govern  us.  Your  own  consciences  must  answer  whether 
you  can  meet  the  Lord  about  this  matter.  I  believe 
that  we  are  in  no  small  danger  of  settling  down  in  the 


92  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES, 

conviction  that  our  old  way  was  quite  wrong,  and 
simply  keeping  the  money  in  our  pockets.  It  does 
seem  to  me,  I  confess,  that  had  as  human  pressure  may 
he  in  order  to  raise  money,  bad  as  may  be  a  variety  of 
earthly  objects  in  this  way  or  that,  bad  as  a  worldly 
lavish  expenditure  is,  after  aU,  a  selfish  personal  keepTi 
ing  to  ourselves  of  what  we  have  is  the  worst  thing 
of  all.  I  am  quite  persuaded  that  the  danger  of  the 
saints  of  God  who  have  been  brought  outside  the 
camp  lies  here, — ^lest,  delivered  from  what  they  know  to 
be  wrong,  they  may  not  seek  in  this  an  exercised  con- 
science. Standing  in  the  consciousness  of  the  power  of 
God's  grace,  they  need  to  be  continually  looking  out 
that  they  be  devoted  to  Him.  To  cease  doing  what 
was  done  in  a  wrong  way,  and  sonietimes  for  wrong 
ends  too,  is  not  enough.  Let  there  be  zealous  and 
vigilant  exercise  of  soul,  and  enquiry  how  to  carry  out 
right  objects  in  right  ways,  and  so  much  the  more,  if 
indeed  a  simpler,  fuller  knowledge  of  God's  grace  and 
of  Christ's  glory  has  been  given  ns. 

Then  we  have  various  forms  of  ministry  noticed.  It 
is  not  here  gifts  as  such,  but  persons  devoted  to  labour- 
ing in  the  Lord ;  for  there  is  a  difference  between  the 
two  things,  as  thjs  chapter  shows  us  strikingly.  For 
instance,  the  apostle  himself  comes  before  us  in  ministry 
with  his  especial  gift  and  position  in  the  church.  Then 
again,  Timothy  is  there,  his  own  son  in  the  faith,  not  only 
an  evangelist,  but  with  a  charge  over  elders  at  length, 
to  a  certain  extent  acting  occasionally  for  the  apostle 
Paul.  Again,  we  have  the  eloquent  Alexandrian  thus 
introduced :  "As  touching  our  brother  ApoHos  I  greatly 
desired  him  to  come  unto  you,  but  his  wiH  was  not  at 
aU  to  come  at  this  time."  How  delicate  and  considerate 


THE  riEST  EPISTLE  TO   THE  COEINTHIAJSTS.  93 

the  grace  of  Paul  who  wished  Apollos  to  go  to  Corinth 
then,  and  of  Apollos  who  wished  not  to  go  under  the 
circumstances !  On  the  face  of  the  case  we  have  the 
working  of  liberty  and  responsibility  in  their  mutual 
relations ;  and  the  apostle  Paul  is  the  very  one  to  tell 
us  that  Apollos's  wiLL  was  not  to  go  as  he  himself  wished 
at  this  time.  It -was  no  question  of  one  in  a  place  of 
worldly  superiority  regulating  the  movements  of  another 
of  subordinate  degree.  The  apostle  did  express  his 
strong  desire  for  Apollos  to  go;  but  Apollos  must 
stand  to  his  Master,  and  be  assured  that  he  was  using 
a  wisdom  greater  than  that  of  man's.  Finally,  we 
observe  another  character  of  service  lower  down  in 
"  the  house  of  Stephanas."  This  was  a  simpler  case  and 
a  humbler  position,  but  very  real  before  God,  whatever 
the  danger  of  being  slighted  of  men.  Hence,  I  think, 
the  word  of  exhortation — "  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  (ye 
know  the  house  of  Stephanas,  that  it  is  the  first-fruits 
of  Achaia,  and  that  they  have  addicted  themselves  to 
the  ministry  of  the  saints,)"  &c.  They  gave  themselves 
up  in  an  orderly  manner  to  this  work.  "  That  ye  sub- 
mit yourselves,"  not  merely  to  Timothy  or  to  Apollos, 
but  to  such,  to  the  simple-hearted  Christian  men  whose 
desire  was  to  serve  the  Lord  with  the  measure  of  power 
they  had,  and  this  proved  by  their  persevering  labour. 
Undoubtedly,  in  the  midst  of  the  difficulties  of  the 
church,  in  the  face  of  the  oppositions  and  disappoint- 
ments, manifold  griefs,  enemies,  and  sources  of  sorrow 
and  shame,  it  requires  the  power  of  God  to  go  on 
without  being  moved  by  any  of  these  things.  It  is  an 
easy  thing  to  make  a  start;  but  nothing  short  of  the 
power  of  God  can  keep  one  without  wavering  at  the 
work  in  the  face  of  everything  to  cast  down.    And  this 


94  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

was  the  question.  We  may  suppose  that  these  Corin- 
thians were  troublesome  enough.  From  the  statements 
made  in  the  early  part  of  the  epistle  it  is  evident ;  and 
so  the  apostle  calls  upon  them  to  submit  themselves. 
Evidently  there  was  an  unsubject  spirit,  and  those 
ministered  to  thought  they  were  just  as  good  as  the 
house  of  Stephanas.  It  is  good  to  'submit  ourselves 
"unto  such,  and  to  every  one  that  helpeth  with  us 
and  laboureth."  I  am  persuaded,  beloved  brethren, 
that  it  is  no  impeachment  of  the  blessedness  of  the 
the  brotherhood  to  maintain  the  speciality  of  ministry 
in  the  Lord.  There  can  be  in  these  matters  no  more 
deplorable  error  than  to  suppose  that  there  is  not  to  be 
this  godly  submission  one  toward  another,  according  to 
the  place  and  power  that  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  entrust. 
The  Lord  grant  that  our  souls  may  hold  fast  the 
truth  here  revealed,  and  in  no  general  or  perfunctory 
way.  All  I  pretend  to  now  is  to  give  a  sketch  or 
combination  of  the  parts  of  the  epistle.  But  may  the 
word  itself,  and  every  part  of  it,  sink  into  our  souls 
and  be  our  joy,  that  we  may  not  only  take  the  precious 
truth  of  such  an  epistle  as  the  Eomans  for  the  peace 
and  joy  of  our  hearts  in  believing  individually,  but 
also  may  understand  our  place  by  faith  as  of  God's 
assembly  on  earth,  and  with  thankful  praise  as  those 
that  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord — ours  as  weU  as 
theirs — as  those  that  find  ourselves  practically  in  need 
of  such  exhortations.  The  Lord  give  us  His  own  spirit 
of  obeying  the  Father. 


THE   SECOND   EPISTLE   TO   THE   CORINTHIANS.         95 


m 

SECOND  COEINTHIANS. 

It  is  impossible  to  read  the  two  epistles  to  the  Corin- 
tJiians  with  the  smallest  care  without  perceiving  the 
strong  contrast  between  the  wounded  tone  of  the  first 
epistle  (the  heart  aggrieved  so  much  the  more  because 
it  loved  the  saints),  and  now,  in  the  second,  that  same 
heart  filled  with  consolation  about  them  from  God. 
This  is  exceedingly  assuring,  and  it  is  as  evidently- 
divine,  the  effectual  working  of  God's  own  grace. 

In  human  things  nothing  really  shuts  out  decay.  The 
utmost  wise  men  essay  is  to  put  a  drag  on  the  progress 
of  corruption,  and  to  stave  off  as  long  as  may  be  the 
too  rapid'  inroads  of  death.  Thanks  be  to  God,  it  is 
not  so  in  divine  things.  There  is  nothing  which  so 
brings  out  the  resources  of  God  as  His  supremacy 
over  evil  in  grace,  nothing  that  so  manifests  His  tender 
mercy  and  His  goodness  wherever  there  is  real  faith. 
And  spite  of  the  painful  disorders  of  the  Corinthians, 
reality  was  there.  So  the  apostle,  though  heart-broken 
because  of  their  state,  would  confidently  look  up  to 
God  about  them,  even  in  his  first  so  strongly  reproving 
epistle;  for  it  was  the  Lord  Himself  who  had  told 
him  He  had  much  people  in  that  city.  There  was 
small  appearance  of  it  when  he  wrote  the  earlier  letter  to 
them ;  but  the  Lord  was  right,  as  He  always  is,  and  the 
apostle  confided  in  the  Lord  spite  of  appearances.     He 


96  INTBODUCTOKY  LECTURES. 

now  tastes  the  joyful  fruit  of  his  faith  in  the  recovering 
grace  of  the  Lord.  Hence  in  this  epistle  we  have  not 
so  much  as  in  the  former  the  evidence  of  their  outward 
disorders.  The  apostle  is  not  occupied  as  there  with 
the  regulation  of  the  state  of  the  church  as  such,  but 
we  see  souls  restored.  There  is  indeed  the  result  of 
that  salutary  dealing  in  the  very  different  state  of 
individuals,  and  also  of  the  assembly;  but  very  em- 
phatically, whatever  might  be  the  effect  on  the  many, 
to  a  large  extent  there  is  a  blessed  unfolding  of  life  in 
Christ  in  its  power  and  effects. 

Thus  our  epistle  reminds  us  to  a  certain  extent  of 
the  epistle  to  the  PhUippiaus,  resembling  it,  though 
not  of  course  the  same,  nor  by  any  means  of  so  lofty 
a  character;  but  nevertheless  a  state  appears  wholly 
different  from  the  downward  path  which  the  first 
epistle  had  reproved.  For  this  change  God  had  prepared 
His  servant ;  for  He  takes  in  everything  in  His  match- 
less wisdom  and  ways.  He  considers  not  only  those 
written  to,  but  the  one  He  was  employing  "to  write. 
Assuredly  He  had  dealt  with  them,  but  He  had  also 
dealt  with  His  servant  Paul.  It  was  another  sort  of 
dealing, — not  without  humbling  to  them,  in  him  wither- 
ing to  nature,  without  the  shame  that  necessarily  befell 
the  saints  at  Corinth,  but  so  much  the  more  fitting  him 
to  go  out  in  love  toward  them.  As  he  knew  what  God's 
grace  had  wrought  in  their  hearts,  he  could  the  more 
freely  express  the  sympathy  he  felt,  and,  encouraged  by 
aU  that  had  been  wrought,  take  up  what  remained  to 
be  accomplished  in  them.  But  the  unfailing  grace  of 
God,  that  works  in  the  midst  of  weakness  and  in  the 
face  of  death,  and  had  so  wrought  mightily  in  him, 
made  the  Corinthians  very  dear  to  him,  and  enabled 


THE   SECOND   EPISTLE   TO   THE   CORINTHIANS.         97 

lum  to  bring  to  bear  on  their  circumstances  and  their 
state  the  most  suited  comfort  that  it  was  ever  the 
mission  of  that  blessed  man  to  minister  to  the  hearts  of 
those  that  were  broken  down. 

This  he  now  pours  forth  abundantly,  "Blessed  be 
God;''  for  his  heart,  surcharged  with  grief  when  the 
first  epistle  was  written,  could  open,  "  Blessed  be  God, 
even  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Father 
of  mercies,  and  the  God  of  all  comfort;  who  comforteth 
us  in  aU  our  tribulation,  that  we  may  be  able  to  com- 
fort them  which  are  in  any  trouble," — no  matter  what, 
were  it  through  grave  faults,  were  it  to  their  own  deep 
shame  and  to  his  grief  as  once.  But  now  the  comfort 
far  overcomes  the  sorrow,  and  we  are  enabled  to 
"  comfort  them  that  are  in  any  trouble,  by  the  comfort 
wherewith  we  ourselves  are  comforted  of  God."  Here 
with  a  true  heart  he  at  once  brings  in  the  sufferings 
of  Christ :  "  For  as  the  sufferings  of  Christ  abound  in 
us,  so  our  consolation  also  aboundeth  by  Christ.  And 
whether  we  be  afflicted,  it  is  for  your  consolation  and 
salvation." 

The  difference  in  this  from  Philippians,  to  which  I 
have  referred,  is  remarkable.  The  point  in  hand  there 
is,  that  they  were  working  out  their  own  salvation,  the 
apostle  being,  in  a  certain  sense,  completely  shut  out 
from  them.  Unable  from  circumstances,  he  there  lets 
them  know  that  he  does  not  mingle  himself  with  them 
in  the  same  way.  Their  state  did  not  need  it.  Un- 
doubtedly this  is  a  difference;  but  it  is  only  that  which 
is  owing  to  their  manhood  in  grace.  Here  they  wanted 
more.  It  was  the  unfolding  of  grace  in  both ;  but  the 
difference  was  largely  to  the  credit  of  His  name  in  the 
Philippians.     It  was  the  proof  of  their  excellent  con- 

H 


98  INTEODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

dition  that  the  apostle  had  such  perfect  confidence  in 
them,  even  while  he  was  absolutely  precluded  from 
heing  near  them.  He  was  at  a  distance  from  them,  and 
had  but  small  prospect  of  meeting  with  them  shortly. 

To  the  Corinthians  he  could  speak  otherwise.  He  was 
comparatively  near,  and  was  hoping  the  third  time,  as 
he  tells  us  in  the  latter  part  of  the  epistle,  to  come  to 
them.  Nevertheless  he  interweaves  his  own  experience 
with  theirs  in  a  way  which  is  wonderfully  gracious  to 
those  who  had  a  heart.  "And  whether  we  be  afflicted," 
he  says,  "it  is  for  your  consolation  and  salvation,  which 
is  effectual  in  the  enduring  of  the  same  sufferings 
which  we  also  suffer:  or  whether  we  be  comforted,  it 
is  for  your  consolation  and  salvation."  Was  it  not  the 
reckoning  of  grace  ?  Whatever  came  on  them,  it  was 
for  their  comfort.  If  affliction,  the  Lord  would  turn  it 
to  their  blessing;  if  joy  and  consolation,  no  less  to 
their  blessing.  At  the  same  time  he  lets  them  know 
what  trouble  had  come  upon  himself,  and  in  the  most 
delightful  manner  turns  it  to  account.  Whatever  was 
the  might  of  God  that  had  sustained  him  when  there 
was  nothing  on  their  part  to  give  him  comfort,  but 
rather  to  add  to  the  anguish  of  his  spirit,  now  that 
grace  was  operating  in  their  hearts,  he  shows  how 
dependant  he  felt  on  their  prayers.  Truly  beautiful  is 
grace,  and  far  different  from  the  manner  of  man. 

How  blessed  to  have  the  working  of  God  not  only  in 
Him  that  is  absolute  perfection,  but  in  one  who  feels 
like  ourselves,  who  had  the  same  nature  in  the  same 
state  that  has  wrought  such  continual  mischief  towards 
God !  At  the  same  time,  it  is  proved  by  such  a  one  as 
this  servant  of  God  to  be  only  the  means  of  furnishing 
additional  proof  in  another  form  that  the  might  of 


THE   SECOND  EPISTLE  TO   THE   CORINTHIANS.         99 

God's  Spirit  is  without  limit,  and  can  work  the  greatest 
moral  wonders  even  in  a  poor  human  heart.  Un- 
doubtedly we  should  lose  much  if  we  had  it  not  in  its 
full  perfection  in  Christ;  but  how  much  we  should  lose 
if  we  had  not  also  the  working  of  grace,  not  where 
human  nature  was  itself  lovely,  not  a  spot  without  nor 
a  taint  of  sin  within,  but  where  everything  natural  was 
evil,  and  nothing  else;  where  nevertheless  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  wrought  in  the  new  man,  lifting  the 
believer  completely  above  the  flesh.  This  was  the  case 
with  the  apostle. 

At  the  same  time  there  was  the  answer  of  grace 
in  their  hearts,  though  it  might  be  developed  com- 
paratively but  little.  Evidently  there  was  a  great 
deal  that  required  to  be  set  right  in  them;  but  they 
were  on  the  right  road.  This  was  a  joy  to  his  heart, 
and  so  at  once  he  encourages  them,  and  gives  them  to 
know  how  little  his  heart  had  turned  away  from  them, 
how  he  loved  to  link  himself  with  them  instead  of 
standing  aloof  from  them.  "Ye  also  helping  together 
by  prayer  for  us,  that  for  the  gift  bestowed  upon  us  by 
the  means  of  many  persons  thanks  may  be  given  by 
many  on  our  behalf  For  our  rejoicing  is  this,  the 
testimony  of  our  conscience,  that  in  simplicity  and 
godly  sincerity,"  &c.  He  had  been  charged  with  the 
contrary.  Being  a  man  of  remarkable  wisdom  and 
power  of  discernment,  he  paid  the  penalty  that  this 
must  always  entail  in  this  world.  That  is,  they  im- 
puted it  to  his  ability  and  natural  penetration;  and 
the  real  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  was  thus  merely 
accredited  to  flesh. 

There  was  also  an  imputation  of  vacillation  if  not 
dishonesty.     His  purpose  of  visiting  Corinth  had  been 
H  2 


100  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

Set  aside.  First  of  all  the  apostle  takes  this  up  in  a 
spirit  of  self-renunciation,  bent  on  Christ's  glory.  Sup- 
posing their  imputation  to  be  true,  supposing  Paul  had 
been  as  fickle-minded  a  man  as  his  enemies  insinuated, 
if  he  had  said  he  would  come  and  did  not  come  after  all, 
what  then  ?  At  any  rate  his  preaching  was  not  thus. 
The  word  that  Paul  preached  was  not  "yea  and  nay."  In 
Christ  it  was  "yea,"  where  there  is  no  "nay."  There  is 
no  refusal  nor  failure.  There  is  everything  to  win,  and 
comfort,  and  establish  the  soul  in  Christ.  There  is  no 
negation  of  grace,  still  less  of  uncertainty  in  Christ  Jesus 
the  Lord.  There  is  everything  that  can  comfort  the  sad, 
attract  the  hard,  and  embolden  the  distrustful.  Let  it  be 
the  very  vUest,  what  is  there  lacking  that  can  lead  on 
and  into  the  highest  place  of  blessing  and  enjoyment 
of  God,  not  only  in  hope,  but  even  now  by  the  Spirit 
of  God  in  the  face  of  all  adversaries?  This  was  the 
Christ  that  he  loved  to  preach.  By  Him  came  grace  and 
truth.  He  at  least  is  absolutely  what  He  speaks.  Who 
or  what  was  so  worthy  of  trust  ?  And  this  is  put  in  a 
most  forcible  way.  "For,"  says  he,  "all  the  promises  of 
God  in  him  are  yea,  and  in  him  Amen."  It  is  not  a 
bare  literal  accomplishment  of  the  promises.  This  is 
not  the  statement  any  more  than  the  state  of  things 
which  is  come  in  now;  but  as  to  all  the  promises  of  God, 
it  matters  not  what  they  may  be,  in  Him  is  the  yea, 
and  in  Him  the  Amen,  to  the  glory  of  God  by  us. 
They  have  found  their  every  verification  in  Christ. 

Was  eternal  life  promised  ?  In  Him  was  eternal  life 
in  its  highest  form.  For  what  will  be  eternal  life  in  the 
millennial  day  compared  with  that  which  was  and  now 
is  in  Jesus  ?  It  will  be  a  most  real  introduction  and 
outshining  of  eternal  life  in  that  day;  but  still  in  Christ 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO   THE  CORINTHIANS.      101 

the  believer  has  it  now,  and  in  its  absolute  perfection. 
Take,  again,  remission  of  sins.  Will  that  display  of 
divine  mercy,  so  needed  by  and  precious  to  the  guilty 
sinner,  be  known  in  the  millennium  at  all  comparably 
with  what  God  has  brought  in  and  sends  out  now  in 
Christ?  Take  what  you  please, — say  heavenly  glory; 
and  is  not  Christ  in  it  in  all  perfection  ?  It  does  not 
matter,  therefore,  what  may  be  looked  at,  "  whatever  be 
the  promises  of  God,  in  him  is  the  yea,  and  in  him 
the  Amen."  It  is  not  said  in  us.  Evidently  there  are 
many  promises  not  yet  accomplished  as  regards  us. 
Satan  has  not  lost  but  acquired,  in  the  dominion  of 
the  world,  a  higher  place  by  the  crucifixion  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ;  but  faith  can  see  in  that  very  act  by 
which  he  acquired  it  his  eternal  downfall.  Now  is  the 
judgment  of  the  world.  The  prince  of  the  world  is 
judged,  but  the  sentence  is  not  executed  yet.  Instead 
of  being  dethroned  by  the  cross,  he  has  thereby  gained 
in  the  world  that  remarkable  place  and  title.  But  for 
all  that,  whatever  the  apparent  success  of  the  devil, 
and  whatever  the  delay  as  to  "  the  promises  of  God,  in 
Him  is  the  yea,  and  ia  Him  the  Amen,  unto  the  glory 
of  God  by  us." 

But  further,  the  apostle  is  not  content  with  this  alone. 
He  would  have  them  know,  having  thus  described  the 
word  which  he  preached,  that  which  was  infinitely 
dearer  to  him  than  his  own  character.  Now  he  tells 
them  that  it  was  to  spare  them  he  had  not  come  to 
Corinth.  This  ought  to  have  been  a  reproof;  and  it 
is  given  in  the  most  delicate  manner.  It  was  the 
sweet  result  of  divine  love  in  his  heart.  He  pre- 
ferred to  tarry  or  turn  aside,  rather  than  to  visit  the 
Corinthians  in  their  then  condition.    Had  he  come  at 


102  INTRODUCTOET  LECTURES. 

all,  he  must  have  come  with  a  rod,  and  this  he  could 
not  endure.  He  wished  to  come  with  nothing  but 
kindness,  to  blame  nobody,  to  speak  of  nothing  painful 
and  humiliating  to  them  (albeit,  in  truth,  more  humi- 
liating to  him,  for  he  loved  them).  And  as  a  parent 
would  be  ashamed  in  his  child's  shame  far  more  than 
the  child  is  capable  of  feeling,  so  precisely  the  apostle 
had  this  feeling  about  those  he  had  begotten  in  the 
gospel.  He  loved  the  Corinthians  dearly,  spite  of  aU 
their  faults,  and  he  would  rather  bear  their  unworthy 
suggestions  of  a  fickle  mind  because  he  did  not  visit 
them  at  once,  than  come  to  censure  them  in  their 
evil  and  proud  state.  He  wished  to  give  them  time, 
that  he  might  come  with  joy. 

In  the  second  chapter  this  is  entered  into  a  little 
more,  and  the  deep  anxiety  of  his  heart  is  shown  about 
them.  We  may  easily  gather  what  an  open  door  for 
evangelizing  is  to  one  who  was  a  great  preacher  of  the 
gospel,  as  well  as  an  apostle  and  a  teacher  of  the  Gen- 
tiles. Although  such  an  opportunity  now  offered  itself, 
and  was,  no  doubt,  a  strong  impelling  cause  to  work 
there,  stUl  he  had  no  rest  for  his  spirit.  His  heart  was 
disturbed  about  the  state  of  Corinth,  and  the  case  that 
tried  him  most  in  their  midst.  It  seemed  as  if  he  felt 
nothing  else,  as  if  there  was  no  sufficient  call  to  occupy 
him  in  other  quarters.  He  could  turn  from  that  most 
animating  and  immediate  reward  to  any  labourer  in 
this  world.  Whatever  might  be  the  preciousness  of 
presenting  Christ  to  those  who  knew  Him  not,  to  see 
the  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  Christ  in  those  that 
did  know  Him,  to  see  it  restored  where  it  was  obscured 
was  something  even  nearer  to  his  heart.  The  one  would 


THE   SECOND  EPISTLE  TO   THE   CORINTHIANS.       103 

be,  no  doubt,  great  joy  to  wretched  souls,  and  the  spread 
of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  in  the  regions  beyond ;  but 
here  the  glory  of  the  Lord  had  been  tarnished  in  those 
that  bore  His  name  before  men ;  and  how  could  Paul 
feel  this  lightly  ?  What  pressed  so  urgently  on  him  ? 
Hence  it  was  that  no  attraction  of  gospel  service,  no 
promise  of  work,  however  fair,  that  called  him  else- 
where, could  detain  him.  He  felt  the  deepest  affliction 
about  the  saints,  as  he  says  here,  and  had  no  rest  in  his 
spirit,  because  he  found  not  Titus  his  brother,  who  had 
been  to  see  them. 

Then,  again,  among  the  particular  instances  which 
most  pressed  on  him  was,  his  exceeding  trouble  about 
the  man  he  had  ordered  them  to  put  away.  For  this 
he  had  authority  from  God,  and  the  responsibility  of 
heeding  it  abides,  I  need  not  say,  in  its  entirety  for  us. 
"We  are  just  as  much  under  that  authority  as  they  were. 
But  now  that  God  had  wrought  in  the  man  who  was 
the  chief  and  grossest  evidence  of  the  power  of  Satan 
m  the  assembly,  what  a  comfort  to  his  heart !  This  sin, 
unknown  even  among  the  GentUes,  and  the  more  shame- 
ful as  being  where  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  had 
been  confessed  and  the  Spirit  dwelt,  became  the  occa- 
sion of  the  most  salutary  instruction  for  all  their  souls, 
for  they  had  learnt  what  becomes  God's  assembly  under 
such  humiliating  circumstances.  And  they  had  re- 
sponded to  the  solemn  call  pressed  on  them  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  and  had  purged  out  the  evil  leaven 
from  the  midst  of  their  paschal  feast.  Only  now  they 
were  in  danger  on  the  judicial  side.  They  were  disposed 
to  be  as  over-severe  as  they  had  been  previously  un- 
exercised and  lax.  Paul  would  infuse  the  same  spirit  of 
grace  towards  the  penitent  offender  that  filled  himself. 


104  INTEODUCTOKY  LECTUKES. 

They  had  realised  at  length  the  shame  that  had  been 
done  to  the  Lord's  glory,  and  were  indignant  with 
themselves  as  parties  to  identifying  His  name,  not  to 
speak  of  themselves,  with  such  scandals.  Thus  they 
were  slow  to  forgive  the  man  that  had  wrought  such  a 
wrong,  and  Satan  sought  in  an  opposite  way  to  separate 
them  in  heart  from  the  blessed  apostle,  who  had  roused 
them  to  just  feelings  after  their  too  long  slumber.  Just 
as  Paul  was  horrified  at  their  indifference  to  sin  at  first, 
so  now  it  was  impossible  but  that  he  must  be  concerned, 
lest  there  should  be  a  failure  in  grace  as  a  little  before 
in  righteousness.  But  there  is  nothing  like  a  manifes- 
tation of  grace  to  call  out  grace;  and  he  lets  them 
know  what  was  his  own  feeling,  not  merely  about  the 
wrong-doer,  but  about  themselves.  "  To  whom  ye  for- 
give anything,  I  forgive  also ;  for  if  I  forgave  anything, 
to  whom  I  forgave  it,  for  your  sakes  forgave  I  it  in  the 
person  of  Christ ;  lest  Satan  should  gain  an  advantage 
over  us :  for  we  are  not  ignorant  of  his  devices."  This 
is  his  spirit.  It  is  no  longer  a  command,  but  a  trust 
reposed  in  the  saints;  and  when  we  think  of  that  which 
is  afterwards  to  appear  in  this  epistle,  what  was  stUl  at 
work  among  them  as  well  as  what  had  been,  it  is  cer- 
tainly a  most  blessed  and  beautiful  proof  of  the  reality 
of  grace,  and  of  the  efi'ects  which  can  be,  as  they 
have  been,  produced  by  it  in  the  heart  of  a  saint  here 
below.    What  do  we  not  owe  to  Jesus  ? 

After  having  disposed  of  this  matter  for  the  present 
(for  he  recurs  to  it  afterwards),  he  turns  to  speak  of 
the  way  in  which  he  was  led  of  God  through  trial, 
no  matter  of  what  character.  Let  the  question  be  of 
the  man  who  had  wandered  so  far  astray,  but  was  now 
restored  really  to  the  Lord,  and  to  whom  he  desired 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO   THE  CORINTHIANS.      105 

that  his  brethren  should  publicly  confirm  their  love; 
or  let  it  be  that  he  is  turned  aside  from  gospel  work 
because  of  his  anxiety  on  their  account,  he  now  tells 
them  of  the  triumph  which  the  Lord  gave  him  to  prove 
everywhere. 

This  leads  in  chapter  iii.  to  an  unfolding'  of  right- 
eousness in  Christ,  but  in  a  style  considerably  dif- 
ferent from  what  we  found  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Eomans.  There  the  broad  and  deep  foundations  were 
exposed  to  view,  as  well  as  the  Spirit's  power  and 
liberty  consequent  on  the  soul's  submission  to  Christ's 
work.  The  proposition  was — God  just  and  the  justifier, 
not  by  blood  only,  but  in  that  resurrection  power  in 
which  Christ  rose  from  among  the  dead.  According  to 
no  less  a  work  of  such  a  Saviour  we  are  justified. 

But  in  this  chapter  the  Spirit  goes  higher  stiU.  He 
connects  righteousness  with  heavenly  glory,  while  at 
the  same  time  this  righteousness  and  glory  are  shown 
to  be  perfectly  in  grace  as  regards  us.  It  is  not  in  the 
slightest  degree  glory  without  love  (as  sometimes  people 
might  think  of  glory  as  a  cold  thing) ;  and  if  it  withers 
up  man  from  before  it, — the  fleshly  nature  no  doubt,  it 
is  only  with  a  view  to  the  enjoyment  of  greater  vigour, 
through  the  power  of  Christ  resting  on  us  in  our  de- 
tected and  felt  weakness. 

The  chapter  opens  with  an  allusion  to  the  habit  so 
familiar  to  God's  church  of  sending  and  requiring  a  letter 
of  commendation.  "Do  we  begin  again  to  commend 
ourselves  ?  or  need  we,  as  some  others,  epistles  of  com- 
mendation to  you,  or  letters  of  commendation  from 
you  ?"  Not  at  all.  And  what  then  is  his  letter  of 
commendation  ?     Themselves.     What   confidence   he 


106  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

must  have  had  in  the  gracious  power  of  God,  that  his 
letter  of  commendation  could  he  the  Corinthian  saints ! 
He  does  not  look  around  to  choose  the  most  striking 
instances  of  those  converted  by  him.  He  takes  what 
was  perhaps  the  most  humiliating  scene  that  he  had 
ever  experienced,  and  he  points  even  to  these  sain±s  as 
a  letter  of  commendation.  And  why  so  ?  Because  he 
knew  the  power  of  life  in  Christ.  He  was  reassured. 
In  the  darkest  day  he  had  looked  up  to  God  with  con- 
fidence about  it,  when  any  other  heart  had  failed 
utterly ;  but  now  that  light  was  beginning  to  dawn 
upon  them,  yet  still  but  dawned  so  to  speak  afresh,  he 
could  boldly  say  that  they  were  not  merely  his,  but 
Christ's,  letter.  Bolder  and  bolder  evidently  he  be- 
comes as  he  thinks  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  and  of  that 
enjoyment  which  he  had  found,  and  found  afresh,  in 
the  midst  of  all  his  troubles.  Hence  he  says,  "  Ye  are 
our  epistle  written  in  our  hearts,  known  and  read  of  all 
men  :  forasmuch  as  ye  are  manifestly  declared  to  be  the 
epistle  of  Christ  ministered  by  us,  written  not  with  ink, 
but  with  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God ;  not  in  tables  of 
stone,  but  in  fleshy  tables  of  the  heart."  There  were 
not  wanting  there  those  that  endeavoured  to  impose 
legal  principles  on  the  Corinthians.  Not  that  here  it 
was  the  strongest  or  subtlest  effort  of  the  enemy.  There 
was  more  of  Sadducism  at  work  among  them  than 
of  Pharisaism;  but  stiU  not  unfrequently  Satan  finds 
room  for  both,  or  a  link  between  both.  His  ministry 
was  emphatically  not  that  which  could  find  its  type  in 
any  form  of  the  law,  or  in  what  was  written  upon 
stone,  but  on  the  fleshy  table  of  the  heart  by  the 
Spirit  of  the  living  God.  Accordingly  this  gives  rise 
to  a  most  striking  contrast  of  the  letter  that  kUls  and  of 


THE   SECOND   EPISTLE   TO   THE   CORINTHIANS.       107 

the  spirit  that  gives  life.  As  is  said  here,  "  Not  that  we 
are  sufficient  of  ourselves  to  think  anything  as  of  our- 
selves; but  our  sufficiencyis  of  God;  who  also  hath  made 
us  able  ministers  of  the  new  covenant."  Then  lest  any 
should  conceive  that  this  was  the  accomplishment  of 
the  Old  Testament,  he  lets  us  know  it  is  no  more  than 
the  spirit  of  that  covenant,  not  the  letter.  The  covenant 
itself  in  its  express  terms  awaits  both  houses  of  Israel 
in  a  day  not  yet  arrived ;  but  meanwhile  Christ  in  glory 
anticipates  for  us  that  day,  and  this  is,  of  course,  "  not 
of  the  letter,  but  of  the  spirit :  for  the  letter  kiUeth,  but 
the  spirit  giveth  life." 

Next,  we  find  a  long  parenthesis ;  for  the  true  connec- 
tion of  the  end  of  verse  6  is  with  verse  17,  and  all 
between  properly  forms  a  digression.  I  shall  read  the 
words  outside  the  parenthesis,  in  order  to  make  this 
manifest.  He  had  said  that  "the  spirit  giveth  life." 
Now  the  Lord  (he  adds)  "is  that  spirit;"  which  last 
word  ought  to  be  printed  with  a  small  "s,"  not  a  capital. 
Some  Bibles  have  this,  I  dare  say,  correctly;  but  others, 
like  the  one  in  my  hand,  incorrectly.  "That  spirit" 
does  not  mean  the  Holy  Ghost,  though  it  is  He  alone 
that  could  enable  a  soul  to  seize  the  spirit  under  the 
letter.  But  the  apostle,  I  believe,  means  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  the  different  forms  that  are  found 
in  the  law.  Thus  he  turns  aside  in  a  remarkable  but 
characteristic  manner;  and  as  he  intimates  in  what 
sense  he  was  the  minister  of  the  new  covenant  {i.e. 
not  in  a  mere  literal  fashion  but  in  the  spirit  of  it),  so 
he  connects  this  spirit  with  the  forms  of  the  law  all 
through.  There  is  a  distinct  divine  purpose  or  idea 
couched  under  the  legal  forms,  as  their  inner  spirit,  and 
this,  he  lets  us  know,  is  really  Christ  the  Lord.    "Now 


108  INTEODITCTOEY  LECTURES. 

the  Lord  is  tliat  spirit."  This  it  is  that  ran  through  the 
whole  legal  system  in  its  different  types  and  shadows. 

Then  he  brings  in  the  Holy  Ghost, —  "and  where" 
(not  simply  "that  spirit,"  but)  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is, 
there  is  liberty."  There  is  a  notable  difference  between 
the  two  expressions.  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord"  is  the 
Holy  Spirit  that  characterizes  Christianity ;  but  under- 
neath the  letter  of  the  Jewish  system,  faith  seized  "the 
spirit"  that  referred  to  Christ.  There  was  the  outward 
ritual  and  commandment  with  which  flesh  made  itself 
content ;  but  faith  always  looked  to  the  Lord,  and  saw 
Him,  however  dimly,  beyond  the  letter  in  which  God 
marked  indelibly,  and  now  makes  known  by  ever  accu- 
mulating proofs,  that  He  from  the  first  pointed  to  the 
One  that  was  coming.  A  greater  than  anything  then 
manifested  was  there ;  underneath  the  Moseses  and  the 
Aarons,  the  Davids  and  the  Solomons,  underneath  what 
was  said  and  done,  signs  and  tokens  converged  on  One 
that  was  promised,  even  Christ. 

And  now  "  where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is 
liberty.''  This  was  unknown  under  the  Levitical  order 
of  things.  There  was  a  veiled  form  of  truth,  and  now  it 
is  manifest.  The  Holy  Ghost  brings  us  into  the  power 
and  enjoyment  of  this  as  a  present  thing.  Where  He 
is,  there  is  liberty. 

But  looking  back  for  a  moment  at  the  parenthesis, 
we  see  that  the  direct  effect  of  the  law  (no  matter  what 
may  be  the  mercy  of  God  that  sustained,  spite  of  its 
curse)  is  in  itself  a  ministration  of  death.  Law  can 
only  condemn;  it  can  but  enforce  death  as  on  God's 
part.  It  never  was  in  any  sense  the  intention  of  God 
by  the  law  to  introduce  either  righteousness  or  life. 
Nor  these  only,  but  the  Spirit  He  now  brings  in  through 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.      109 

Christ.  "If  the  ministration  of  death,  written  and 
engraven  in  stones,  was  glorious,  so  that  the  children  of 
Israel  could  not  stedfastly  behold  the  face  of  Moses  for 
the  glory  of  his  countenance;  which  glory  was  to  be 
done  away," — it  was  not  at  all  an  abiding  thing,  but 
merely  temporary  in  its  own  nature, — "how  shall  not 
the  ministration  of  the  Spirit  be  rather  glorious  ?  For 
if  the  ministration  of  condemnation"  (another  point 
after  the  ministration  of  death ;  if  it  then)  "  be  glory, 
much  more  doth  the  ministration  of  righteousness 
exceed  in  glory."  It  is  not  simply  the  mercy  of  God, 
you  observe,  but  the  ministration  of  righteousness. 
When  the  Lord  was  here  below,  what  was  the  character 
of  His  ministration?  It  was  grace;  not  yet  a  minis- 
tration of  righteousness.  Of  course,  He  was  emphatically 
righteous,  and  everything  He  did  was  perfectly  con- 
sistent with  the  character  of  the  Eighteous.  Never 
was  there  the  smallest  deflection  from  righteousness  in 
aught  He  ever  did  or  said.  Grace  and  truth  came  by 
Jesus  Christ.  But  when  He  went  up  to  heaven  on  the 
footing  of  redemption  through  His  blood.  He  had  put 
away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself :  the  ministration 
was  not  of  grace  merely,  but  of  righteousness.  In  short, 
righteousness  without  redemption  must  destroy,  not  save; 
grace  before  redemption  could  not  deliver,  but  at  most 
forbear  to  jixdge;  but  righteousness  founded  on  redemp- 
tion provides  the  stablest  possible  basis  for  the  believer. 
Whatever  the  mercy  displayed  to  us  now,  it  is  per- 
fectly righteous  in  God  to  show  it.  He  is  vindicated  in 
everything.  Salvation  is  no  stretch  of  His  prerogative. 
Its  language  is  not,  "The  person  is  guilty;  but  I  will 
let  him  off;  I  will  not  execute  the  sentence  against 
him."    The  Christian  is  now  admitted  to  a  place  before 


110  INTBODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

God  according  to  the  acceptance  of  Christ  Himself. 
Being  altogether  by  Christ,  it  brings  nothing  but  glory 
to  God,  because  Christ  who  died  was  God's  own  Son, 
given  of  His  own  love  for  this  very  purpose,  and  there 
in  the  midst  of  all  wrongs,  of  everything  out  of  course 
here  below,  while  the  evil  still  remains  unremoved,  and 
death  ravages  stUl,  and  Satan  has  acquired  all  possible 
power  of  place  as  god  and  prince  of  this  world,  this 
deepest  manifestation  of  God's  own  glory  is  given, 
bringing  souls  which  were  once  the  guiltiest  and  the 
vilest  out  of  it,  not  only  before  God,  but  in  their  own 
souls,  and  in  the  knowledge  and  enjoyment  of  it,  and 
aU  righteously  through  Christ's  redemption.     This  is 
what  the  apostle  triumphs  in  here.     So  he  calls  it  not 
the  ministration  of  life  indeed;  for  there  was  always 
the  new  birth  or  nature  through  the  mercy  of  God;  but 
now  he  brings  in  a  far  fuller  name  of  blessing,  that  of 
the  Spirit,  because  the  ministration  of  the  Spirit  is  over 
and  above  life.     It  supposes  life,  but  moreover  also  the 
gift  and  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  great  mistake 
now  is  when  saints  cling  to  the  old  things,  lingering 
among  the  ruius  of  death  when  God  has  given  them  a 
title  flowing  from  grace,  but  abundant  in  righteousness, 
and  a  ministration  not  merely  of  life,  but  of  the  Spirit. 

So  he  goes  on  farther,  and  says  that  "that  which  was 
made  glorious  had  no  glory  in  this  respect,  by  reason 
of  the  glory  that  excelleth.  For  if  that  which  is  done 
away  was  glorious,  much  more  that  which  remaineth  is 
glorious."  This  again  is  another  quality  that  he  speaks 
of  We  come  to  what  abides — to  what  never  can  be 
shaken,  as  he  puts  it  to  the  Hebrews  later.  To  this 
permanence  of  blessing  we  are  come  in  Christ,  no 
matter  what  else  may  come.    Death  may  come  for  us ; 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.      Ill 

judgment  certainly  wiU  for  the  world — for  man  at  least. 
Tlie  complete  passing  away  of  this  creation  is  at  hand. 
But  we  are  already  arrived  at  that  which  remains,  and 
no  destruction  of  earth  can  possibly  affect  its  security ; 
no  removal  to  heaven  will  have  any  other  effect  than  to 
bring  out  its  lustre  and  abidingness.  So  he  says, "  Seeing 
then  that  we  have  such  hope,  we  use  great  plainness  of 
speech :  and  not  as  Moses,  which  put  a  vail  over  his 
face." 

This  characterized  the  dealings  of  the  law,  that  there 
never  was  the  bringing  God  and  man,  so  to  speak, 
face  to  face.  Such  a  meeting  could  not  yet  be.  But 
now  it  is.  Not  only  has  God  come  down  to  man  face 
to  face,  but  man  is  brought  to  look  in  where  God  is  in 
His  own  glory,  and  without  a  vail  between.  It  is  not 
the  condescension  of  the  Word  made  flesh  coming  down 
to  where  man  is,  but  the  triumph  of  accomplished 
righteousness  and  glory,  because  the  Spirit  comes  down 
from  Christ  in  heaven.  It  is  the  ministration  of  the 
Spirit,  who  comes  down  from  the  exalted  man  in  glory, 
and  has  given  us  the  assurance  that  this  is  our  portion, 
now  to  look  into  it,  soon  to  be  with  Him.  Hence  he  says 
it  is  "  not  as  Moses,  which  put  a  vail  over  his  face,  that 
the  children  of  Israel  could  not  stedfastly  look  to  the 
end  of  that  which  is  abolished :  but  their  minds  were 
blinded :  for  until  this  day  remaineth  the  same  vail 
untaken  away  in  the  reading  of  the  Old  Testament; 
which  vail  is  done  away  in  Christ."  This  is  as  in  Christ 
when  known  to  us.  So  "even  unto  this  day,  when 
Moses  is  read,  the  vail  is  upon  their  heart.  Nevertheless 
when  it  shall  turn  to  the  Lord,  the  vail  shall  be  taken 
away."  But  then  we  do  not  wait  here  for  their  turning 
to  the-  Lord,  which  will  be  their  portion  by- and -by. 


112  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

Meanwhile  the  Lord  has  turned  to  us,  turning  us  to  Him- 
self, in  His  great  grace,  and  brought  us  into  righteousness, 
peace,  as  well  as  glory  in  hope — yea,  in  present  commu- 
nion, through  redemption.  The  consequence  is,  all  evil 
is  gone  for  us,  and  all  blessedness  secured,  and  known 
to  be  so,  in  Christ ;  and,  as  he  says  here,  "  where  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty."  Then,  he  adds 
further,  "  We  aU,  with  open  [unvailed]  face,  beholding 
["as  in  a  glass"  is  uncalled  for]  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are 
changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  even 
as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  Thus  the  effect  of  the 
triumph  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  and  of  the  testimony  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  is  to  put  us  into  present  association  with 
the  glory  of  the  Lord  as  the  object  before  our  souls ; 
and  this  is  what  transforms  us  according  to  its  own 
heavenly  character. 

In  chapter  iv.  the  apostle  takes  into  account  the 
vessel  that  contains  the  heavenly  treasure.  He  shows 
that  as  "we  have  this  ministry,"  and  "have  received 
mercy"  therefore  to  the  uttermost,  "we  faint  not;  but 
have  renounced  the  hidden  things  of  dishonesty,  not 
walking  in  craftiness,  nor  handling  the  word  of  God 
deceitfully;  but  by  manifestation  of  the  truth  com- 
mending ourselves  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the 
sight  of  God.  But  if  our  gospel  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them 
that  are  lost."  Such  is  the  solemn  conclusion  :  "  In 
whom  the  god  of  this  world  hath  blinded  the  minds  of 
them  which  believe  not,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious 
gospel  of  Christ,  who  is  the  image  of  God,  should  shine 
unto  them.  For  we  preach  not  ourselves,  but  Christ 
Jesus  the  Lord ;  and  ourselves  your  servants  for  Jesus' 
sake.     For  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out 


THE  SECONU  EPISTLE  TO   THE  COKINTHIANS.      113 

of  darlmess,  hath  shined  in  our  hearts,  to  give  the  light 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of 
Jesus  Christ." 

This  is  the  gospel  of  the  glory  of  Christ.  It  is  not 
merely  that  we  have  the  heavenly  title,  as  we  are  taught 
in  chapter  xv.  of  the  first  epistle.  I'he  utmost  on  this 
subject  brought  before  us  there  was,  that  we  are  desig- 
nated "heavenly,"  and  are  destined  to  bear  the  image  of 
the  heavenly  One  by-and-by.  The  second  epistle  comes 
between  the  two  points  of  title  and  destiny,  with  the 
transforming  effect  of  occupation  with  Christ  in  His 
glory  on  high.  Thus  space  is  left  for  practice  and  expe- 
rience between  our  calling  and  our  glorification.  But 
then  this  course  between  is  by  no  means  sparing  to 
nature;  for,  as  he  shows  here,  "we  have  this  treasure 
in  earthen  vessels,  that  the  excellency  of  the  power 
may  be  of  God,  and  not  of  us."  God  makes  us  feel 
this,  and  helps  on  the  practical  transformation ;  and  by 
what  means  ?  By  bringing  us  into  every  kind  of  trouble 
and  sorrow,  so  as  to  make  nothing  of  flesh.  For  it  is 
the  allowed  liveliness  of  nature  that  hinders  the  mani- 
festation of  the  treasure ;  whereas  its  judgment  leaves 
room  for  the  light  to  shine  out.  This,  then,  is  what 
God  carries  on.  It  explained  much  in  the  apostle's 
path  which  they  had  not  been  in  a  state  to  comprehend; 
and  it  contributed,  where  received  and  applied  in  the 
Spirit,  to  advance  God's  objects  as  regards  them.  "Death 
worketh  in  us,  but  life  in  you."  "What  grace,  and 
how  blessed  the  truth !  But  see  the  way  in  which  the 
process  is  carried  on,  "We  are  troubled  on  every 
side,  yet  not  distressed;  we  are  perplexed,  but  not  in 
despair;  persecuted,  but  not  forsaken;  cast  down,  but 
not  destroyed;  always  bearing  about  in  the  body  the 

I 


114  INTROBTJCTOET  LECTUKES. 

dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  the  life  also  of  Jesus 
might  be  made  manifest  in  our  body.  For  we  which 
live  are  alway  delivered  unto  death.''  He  speaks  of 
the  actualisation :  all  helps  the  great  object,  even  such 
circumstances  as  seemed  the  most  disastrous  possible. 
God  exposed  His  servant  to  death.  This  was  only 
carrying  out  more  effectually  the  breaking  down  that 
was  always  going  on.  "  So  then  death  worketh  in  us, 
but  life  in  you.  "We  having  the  same  spirit  of  faith, 
according  as  it  is  written,  I  believed,  and  therefore  have 
I  spoken ;  we  also  believe,  and  therefore  speak ;  know- 
ing that  he  which  raised  up  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  raise 
up  us  also  by  Jesus,  and  shall  present  us  with  you. 
For  all  things  are  for  your  sakes."  And  thus  then,  if 
there  was  the  endurance  of  afliction,  he  would  encour^ 
age  their  hearts,  calling,  as  he  felt  it,  "  light  affliction." 
He  knew  well  what  trial  was.  "Our  light  affliction, 
which  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more 
exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory;  while  we  look 
not  at  the  things  which  are  seen,  but  at  the  things 
which  are  not  seen :  for  the  things  which  are  seen 
are  temporal;  but  the  things  which  are  not  seen  are 
eternal." 

This  introduces  the  Christian's  estimate  of  both  death 
and  judgment  as  measured  by  Christ.  He  looks  now 
steadily  at  all  that  can  possibly  appal  the  natural  heart. 
Death  the  Christian  may  pass  through.  Judgment  wiU 
never  be  for  the  Christian.  Nevertheless  his  sense  of 
judgment,  as  it  really  wiU  come,  although  not  for  him- 
self, is  most  iQfluential  and  for  others  too.  There  may 
be  a  mighty  effect  on  the  soul,  and  a  deep  spring  of 
worship,  and  a  powerful  lever  in  service,  through  that 


THE   SECOND   EPISTLE  TO   THE   COEINTHIANS.       115 

whicli  does  not  concern  us  at  all.  The  sense  of  wtat  it  is 
may  be  all  the  more  felt  because  we  are  delivered  from 
its  weight;  and  we  can  thus  more  thoroughly,  because 
more  calmly,  contemplate  it  in  the  light  of  God,  seeing 
its  inevitable  approach  and  overwhelming  power  for 
those  that  have  not  Christ.  Accordingly  he  says,  "  We 
know  that  if  our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were 
dissolved,  we  have  a  building  of  God,  an  house  not 
made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.  For  in  this 
we  groan,  earnestly  desiring  to  be  clothed  upon  with 
our  house  which  is  from  heaven." 

But  let  us  not  forget  that  he  takes  care  (for  his 
heart  was  not  relieved  as  to  every  individual  in 
Corinth)  to  add  solemnly,  "If  so  be  that  being  clothed 
we  shall  not  be  found  naked."  He  was  not  quite  sure 
but  that  some  there  might  be  found  exposed,  because 
devoid  of  a  Saviour.  There  are  those  who  give  this  a  very , 
different  turn,  and  make  it  to  be  a  verse  of  consolation 
instead  of  warning;  but  such  a  view  deprives  us  of 
the  true  scope  of  the  clause.  The  common  version  and 
natural  interpretation  appears  to  me  quite  correct.  It 
does  not  mean  "since  being  clothed  we  shall  not  be 
found  naked,"  which  has  no  worthy  lesson  to  convey  to 
any  soul.  The  readings  differ,  but  that  which  answers 
to  the  common  version  1  believe  to  be  correct.  The 
apostle  would  warn  every  soul  that,  although  every  one 
wOl  be  clothed  in  the  day  that  is  coming  (namely,  at 
the  resurrection  of  the  body,  when  souls  are  no  longer 
found  without  the  body  but  clothed),  nevertheless  some, 
even  in  spite  of  that  clothing,  shall  be  found  naked. 
The  wicked  are  then  to  be  clothed  no  less  than  the 
saints,  who  wlU  have  been  already  raised  or  changed; 
their  bodies  shaU.  be  raised  from  the  dead  just  as  truly 


116  INTEODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

as  those  of  the  righteous;  but  when  the  unrighteous 
Stand  in  resurrection  before  the  great  white  throne,  how 
bare  will  they  appear  ?  What  will  it  be  in  that  day  to 
have  no  Christ  to  clothe  us  ? 

After  so  salutary  a  caution  to  such  as  made  too  much 
of  knowledge  in  the  neglect  of  conscience,  the  apostle 
turns  to  that  fulness  of  comfort  which  he  was  com- 
municating to  the  saints.  "  We,"  he  says,  "  that  are  in 
this  tabernacle  do  groan,  being  burdened."  He  has  no 
wish  to  deny  the  sorrow  and  weakness.  He  knew  what 
it  is  to  suffer  and  be  sorrowful  far  better  than  any  of 
them.  "  We  that  are  in  this  tabernacle  do  groan,  being 
burdened :  not  for  that  we  would  be  unclothed."  Thus 
there  is  no  mere  wish  to  get  away  from  the  present 
scene  with  its  sadness  and  trial.  It  is  never  allowed 
one  to  be  impatient.  To  desire  to  be  with  Christ  is 
right ;  but  to  be  restive  under  that  which  connects  us 
with  shame  and  pain  is  not  of  Christ.  "Not  for," 
then,  "  that  we  would  be  unclothed,  but  clothed  upon." 
This  was  his  ardent  wish, — to  be  "clothed  upon,  that 
mortality  might  be  swallowed  up  of  life."  It  is  not 
that  he  might  die,  but  the  very  reverse, — that  the  mor- 
tality already  working  in  him  might  be  swallowed  up 
by  Him  who  is  eternal  Hfe,  and  our  life. 

"  He  that  hath  wrought  us  for  the  self-same  thing  is 
God."  It  is  not  here  wrought  something  for  us,  but 
"  wrought  us."  This  is  a  remarkable  expression  of  the 
grace  of  God  in  associating  with  His  unfailing  purpose 
in  Christ.  "  He  that  hath  wrought  us  for  the  self-same 
thing  is  God,  who  also  hath  given  unto  us  the  earnest 
of  the  Spirit;"  given  us,  therefore,  even  now  a  taste  of 
the  blessedness  and  glory  that  are  in  store  for  us.  "There- 
fore we  are  always  confident."   Think  of  such  language! 


THE   SECOND   EPISTLE  TO   THE   COKINTHIANS.       117 

Think  of  it  as  the  apostle's  words  describing  our  por- 
tion, and  in  full  view  of  both  death  and  judgment ! 
"We  are  always  confident."  We  can  easily  understand 
one  whose  eye  was  simply  on  Christ  and  His  love,  say- 
ing, "We  are  confident,"  though  turning  to  look  at  that 
which  might  well  tax  the  stoutest  heart.  Certainly  it 
were  madness  not  to  be  overwhelmed  by  it,  unless 
there  were  such  a  ministration  of  the  Spirit  as  the 
apostle  was  then  enjoying  in  its  fruits  in  his  soul.  But 
lie  did  enjoy  it  profoundly ;  and,  what  is  more,  he  puts 
it  as  the  common  enjoyment  of  all  Christians.  It  is 
not  alone  a  question  of  his  own  individual  feelings,  but 
of  that  which  God  gave  him  to  share  now  with  the 
saints  of  God  as  such.  "  Therefore,"  says  he,  "  we  are 
always  confident,  knowing  that,  whilst  we  are  at  home 
in  the  body,  we  are  absent  from  the  Lord  :  for  we  walk 
by  faith,  not  by  sight :  we  are  confident,  I  say,  and 
willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the  body,  and  to  be 
present  with  the  Lord.  Wherefore  we  labour,  that, 
whether  present  or  absent,  we  may  be  accepted  of  him. 
For  we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of 
Christ." 

This,  again,  is  a  very  important  truth  indeed  in  its 
own  place,  and  the  effect  is  most  striking;  namely, 
deep  anxiety  about  the  lost,  and  the  consciousness 
of  our  own  manifestation  to  God  now.  Not  that  I 
mean  by  this  that  we  shall  not  be  manifested  by-and- 
by ;  for  we  shall  be  perfectly.  But  if  we  are  manifest 
in  conscience  before  God  now,  it  is  evident  that 
there  is  nothing  that  can  cause  the  slightest  uneasi- 
ness in  our  being  manifested  before  Christ's  tribunal. 
The  truth  is,  so  far  is  the  manifestation  before  our  Lord 
a  source  of  alarm  to  the  saint  (though  it  should  surely 


118  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

solemnise  the  heart),  that  I  am  persuaded  the  soul 
■would  lose  a  positive  and  substantial  blessing,  if  it 
could  by  any  possibility  escape  being  manifested  there. 
'Not  does  it  matter  what  the  degree  of  manifestation 
may  now  be  in  conscience.  Still,  it  can  never  be  per- 
fect till  then ;  and  our  God  would  give  us  perfection 
in  this  as  in  all  else.  It  is  now  hindered  by  various 
causes,  as  far  as  we  are  concerned.  There  is  the  working 
of  self-love  in  the  hearts  of  the  saints;  there  is  that 
which  has  cast  a  film  over  the  eye  which  dulls  our 
souls.     Alas  !  we  know  it  too  well. 

The  effect  of  our  manifestation  before  the  tribunal 
of  Christ  is,  that  we  shall  know  as  we  are  known. 
That  is,  it  will  be  carrying  out  in  absolute  perfection 
what  we  now  know  in  the  measure  of  our  spirituality. 
Now,  what  is  the  effect  of  one's  arriving  at  a  better 
knowledge  of  himself,  and  a  deeper  consciousness  of 
the  Christian's  place  in  Christ  ?  Always  a  real  blessing, 
and  a  means  of  greater  enjoyment  of  Christ.  Is  it  not 
much  to  have  a  lowlier  feeling  about  ourselves?  to 
esteem  others  better  than  ourselves  ?  and  thus  to  deepen 
daUy  in  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  And  are  not 
these  things  the  result?  And  will  the  perfect  know- 
ledge of  ourselves  be  a  loss,  and  not  a  gain? 

At  the  same  time,  it  is  solemn  assuredly  for  every 
secret  to  be  spread  out  between  the  Lord  and  ourselves. 
It  is  solemn  for  all  to  be  set  in  the  light  in  which  we 
may  have  been  misled  now,  and  which  may  have  caused 
trouble  and  grief  to  others,  casting  reproach  on  the 
name  of  the  Lord, — in  itself  an  affecting  and  afflicttag 
thing.  Never  should  we  be  deceived  by  Satan.  He 
may  accuse  the  saints,  but  they  ought  in  no  case  to  be 
deceived  by  him.     He  deceives  the  world,  and  accuses 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIAlfS.      119 

the  brethren.  Alas !  we  know,  in  point  of  fact,  that  we 
are  liable  through  unwatchfulness  to  his  wiles;  but 
this  does  not  make  it  less  a  humiliation  for  us,  and  a 
temporary  advantage  for  Satan  when  we  fall  into  his 
trap.  We  are  not  ignorant  of  his  devices;  but  this 
wUl  not  always,  nor  in  itself  in  any  case,  preserve  us. 
There  are  defeats.  The  judgment-seat  of  Christ  will 
disclose  all;  where  each  hidden  thing  wiU  be  clear; 
where  nothing  but  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  shall  stand 
for  ever. 

Nevertheless  the  sight  of  that  judgment -seat  brings 
at  once  before  his  eye,  not  the  saints,  but  the  perishing 
world ;  and  so  complete  is  the  peace  of  his  own  spirit, 
so  rich  and  sure  the  deliverance  Christ  has  accomplished 
for  all  the  saints,  that  the  expressed  effect  is  to  kindle 
his  heart  about  those  that  are  braving  everlasting  de- 
struction— those  on  whom  the  judgment-seat  can  bring 
nothing  but  hopeless  exclusion  from  God  and  His  glory. 

For  we  say  here  by  the  way,  that  we  must  be  all 
inanifested,  whether  saiats  or  sinners.  There  is  a 
peculiarity  in  the  phrase  which  is,  to  my  thinking,  quite 
decisive  as  to  its  not  meaning  saints  only.  As  to  the 
objection  to  this  founded  on  the  word  "  we,"  there  is  no 
force  in  it  at  aU.  "We"  is  no  doubt  commonly  used 
in  the  apostolic  epistles  for  saints,  but  not  for  them 
exclusively.  Context  decides.  Be  assured  that  all  such 
rules  are  quite  fallacious.  What  intelligent  Christian 
ever  understood  from  scripture  all  the  canons  of  criti- 
cism in  the  world?  They  are  not  to  be  trusted  for  a 
moment.  Why  have  confidence  in  anything  of  the  sort  ? 
Mere  traditional  formulas  or  human  technicalities  will 
not  do  for  the  ascertainment  of  God's  word.  The 
moment  men  rest  on  general  laws  by  which  to  interpret 


120  INTBODUCTOKY  LECTURES. 

scripture,  I  confess  they  seem  to  me  on  the  brink  of 
error,  di  doomed  to  wander  in  a  desert  of  ignorance. 
We  must  be  disciplined  if  we  would  learn  indeed ;  and 
we  need  to  read  and  hear  things  as  God  writes  them ; 
but  we  do  well  and  wisely  to  eschew  all  human  by- 
ways and  short-cuts  for  deciding  the  sense  of  what  God 
has  revealed.  It  is  not  only  the  students  of  mediaeval 
divinity,  or  of  modern  speculation,  who  are  in  danger. 
None  of  us  is  beyond  the  need  of  jealousy  over  self, 
and  of  simple-hearted  looking  to  the  Lord. 

Here,  indeed,  the  apostle's  reasoning,  and  the  nicety 
of  language,  furnish  demonstrative  evidence  in  the 
passage  (that  is,  both  in  the  spirit  and  in  the  letter), 
that  we  must  all,  whether  saints  or  sinners,  be  mani- 
fested before  Christ ;  not  at  the  same  time  nor  for  the 
same  end,  but  all  before  His  judgment-seat  at  some  time. 
Had  the  language  been,  "  we  must  all  be  judged,"  the 
"we"  must  have  been  there  limited  to  the  unconverted. 
While  they  only  come  into  judgment,  believer  and 
unbeliever  must  alike  be  manifested.  The  effect  of 
manifestation  for  the  believer  will  be  the  fulness  of  rest 
and  delight  in  the  ways  of  God.  The  effect  of  the  mani- 
festation for  the  unbeliever  will  be  the  total  withering 
up  of  every  excuse  or  pretence  that  had  deceived  him 
here  below.  No  flesh  shall  glory  in  His  presence,  and 
man  must  stand  self-convicted  before  the  Judge  of  all. 
Thus  the  choice  of  language  is,  as  usual  in  scripture, 
absolutely  perfect,  and  to  my  mind  quite  decisive  that 
the  manifestation  here  is  universal.  This  acts  on  the 
servant  of  Christ,  who  knows  what  the  terror  of  the 
Lord  is,  and  calls  him  out  to  "persuade  men."  What 
is  meant  by  this  ?  It  is  really  to  preach  the  gospel  to 
men  at  large. 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.      121 

At  the  same  time  the  apostle  adds,  "We  commend 
not  ourselves  again  imto  you,  but  give  you  occasion  to 
glory  on  our  behalf."  For  he  had  expressed  his  trust 
of  being  made  manifest  to  their  consciences,  as  well  as 
stated  how  absolutely  we  are  manifested  to  God.  "For 
whether  we  be  beside  ourselves,  it  is  to  God:  or  whether 
we  be  sober,  it  is  for  your  cause."  Then  he  brings  in 
the  constraining  power  of  the  love  of  Christ,  and  why? 
Because,  as  he  looked  round  him,  he  saw  nothing  but 
death  written  on  man,  and  all  that  pertains  to  him  here 
below.  The  whole  scene  was  one  vast  grave.  Of  course, 
he  was  not  thinking  of  the  saints  of  God,  but,  con- 
trariwise, in  the  midst  of  this  universal  death,  as  far 
as  man  is  concerned,  he  rejoices  to  see  some  alive.  I 
understand,  therefore,  that  when  he  says,  "If  one  die 
for  all,  then  were  all  dead,"  he  means  those  who  had 
really  died  by  sin,  and  because  of  the  contrast  it 
seems  to  me  plain  "He  died  for  all,  that  they  which 
live"  (these  are  the  saints,  the  objects  of  God's  favour) 
"  should  not  henceforth  live  unto  themselves,  but  unto 
him  which  died  for  them,  and  rose  again."  What  was 
the  effect  of  this  ?  That  having  thus  before  his  soul, 
not  the  universal  death  of  all  only,  but  some  who  by 
grace  were  alive,  through  the  death  and  resurrection  of 
Christ,  he  now  brings  out,  not  the  contrast  of  the  new 
creation  with  all  that  went  before — yea,  the  contrast 
of  the  Messianic  hopes  as  such  with  that  higher  glory 
which  he  was  now  asserting.  Even  a  living  Messiah 
could  not  satisfy  what  his  soul  had  learnt  to  be  in 
accordance  with  the  glory  of  God.  Not,  of  course,  that 
he  did  not  delight  in  the  hope  of  his  nation.  It  is  one 
thing  to  value  what  God  will  do  for  the  earth  by-and-by, 
it  is  quite  another  to  fail  in  appreciating  that  which 


122  INTEODXrCTOET  LECTURES. 

God  has  now  created  and  revealed  in  a  risen  Christ 
above, — once  rejected  and  dying  for  us.  Accordingly  it 
is  one  glory  that  will  display  the  promises  and  ways  of 
God  triumphing  over  man  and  Satan;  it  is  another  and 
far  surpassing  glory  which  He  who  is  the  Messiah,  but 
much  more,  and  now  the  heavenly  man,  reveals.  His 
death  is  the  judgment  of  our  sins  in  God's  grace,  and 
an  end  of  the  whole  scene  for  us,  and  hence  perfect 
deliverance  from  man  and  from  present  things — yea, 
even  from  the  best  hopes  for  the  earth. 

What  can  be  better  than  a  Messiah  come  to  bless 
man  in  this  world  ?  But  the  Christian  is  not  occupied 
with  this  at  all.  According  to  the  Old  Testament  he 
looked  at  it,  but  now  that  the  Messiah  is  seen  dead  and 
risen,  now  that  He  is  passed  into  heavenly  glory  through 
death,  this  is  the  glory  for  the  Christian.  "  Henceforth 
know  we  no  man  after  the  flesh  :"  this  puts  the  saints 
in  a  common  position  of  knowledge.  "Henceforth  know 
we  no  man  after  the  flesh :  yea,  though  we  have  known 
Christ  after  the  flesh."  As  for  a  living  Messiah,  and  all 
the  expectations  that  were  bound  up  with  Him  and  His 
coming  here  below,  all  this  is  passed  away  for  the 
Christian.  It  is  not  that  the  Messiah  will  not  return 
as  such ;  but  as  for  the  sphere  and  character  of  our  own 
relations,  they  are  founded  on  death  and  resurrection, 
and  seen  on  high.  Such  is  the  way  the  apostle  treats 
it.  He  looks  at  Christ  in  His  relationship  with  us  as 
One  that  has  passed  out  of  this  earth  and  the  lower 
creation  into  heavenly  places.  It  is  there  and  thus  we 
know  Him.  By  knowing  Him  he  means  the  special 
form  of  the  truth  with  which  we  are  concerned,  the 
manner  in  which  we  are  put  into  positive,  living  asso- 
ciation with  Him.    That  which  we  know  as  our  centre 


THE   SECOND   EPISTLE  TO   THE   COEINTHIANS.       123 

of  union,  as  the  object  of  our  souls,  is  Christ  risen 
and  glorified.  In  any  other  point  of  view,  however 
bright  and  glorious,  "  now  henceforth  know  we  him  no 
more.     Therefore  if  any  man  be  in  Christ,"  &c. 

It  is  not  merely  if  any  man  look  to  Christ :  the 'Old 
Testament  saints  rejoiced  to  see  His  day ;  but  this  is  a 
very  different  thing  from  being  in  Christ.  There  are 
many  who  take  the  scriptures  in  so  crude  and  vague  a 
manner  that  to  their  eyes  it  is  all  the  same ;  but  I  hope 
such  is  not  the  case  with  any  here.  No  doubt,  to  be  in 
Christ  as  we  are  now  is  through  looking  to  Him.  But 
it  was  not  always  so.  Take  the  disciples  in  the  days  of 
Christ's  pathway  here  below:  were  they  in  Christ  then  ? 
Certainly  not.  There  was  the  working  of  divine  faith 
in  them.  They  were  unquestionably  "born  again;''  but 
is  this  the- same  thing  as  being  "in^ Christ"?  Being  in 
Christ  means  that,  redemption  having  come  in,  the 
Holy  Ghost  can  and  does  give  us  a  conscious  standing 
in  Christ  in  His  now  risen  character.  To  be  "  in  Christ " 
describes  the  believer,  not  in  Old  Testament  times, 
but  now. 

"Therefore  if  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new 
creature:  old  things  are  passed  away;  behold,  all 
things  are  become  new.  And  all  things  are  of  God, 
who  hath  reconciled  us  to  himself  by  Jesus  Christ,  and 
hath  given  to  us  the  ministry  of  reconciliation ;  to  wit, 
that  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto 
himself"  Thus  there  is  a  blessed  and  suited  ministry. 
The  law  directed  a  people  at  a  distance  from  God.  It 
supposed  such  a  condition  and  dealt  accordingly.  Even 
if  a  poor  brute  touched  the  mountain,  it  was  to  be 
stoned.  At  length  God  came  down  to  meet  man  in 
grace  as  he  is;   and  man  rejected  God  manifest  in 


124  INTKODUCTOKY  LECTUEES. 

flesh.  Eedemption  was  thereby  effected;  man  is  brought 
without  sin  to  God.  Christ  is  the  person  who  made  both 
good.  He  brought  God  down  to  man,  and  He  brought 
man  in  Himself  up  to  God.  Such  is  the  position  in 
which  we  stand.  It  is  not  any  longer  merely  God 
coming  down  to  man  in  Christ.     This  is  neither  the 

o  

manner  nor  the  measure  in  which  He  reveals  Himself 
now.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  gone  up  to  heaven; 
and  this  not  as  a  sole  individual,  but  as  the  head  of  a 
family.  He  would  not  take  the  place  of  headship  until 
all  the  evil  was  completely  gone.  He  would  give  us 
His  own  acceptance  before  God.  He  took  His  stand 
on  retrieving  God's  moral  glory  by  bearing  our  sias; 
yet  as  He  came  down,  so  He  went  up  to  God,  holy  and 
spotless.  He  had  by  His  own  blood  blotted  out  the 
sins  of  others  who  believe  in  Him.  It  was  not  merely 
a  born  Messiah,  the  chief  of  Israel,  but  "God  was  in 
Christ." 

Observe,  not  that  God  is  in  Christ,  but  that  He 
was.  It  is  a  description  of  what  was  manifested  when 
the  Lord  was  here  below.  But  if  it  be  a  mistake  to  read 
God  is,  it  is  a  still  greater  error  too  common  in  books, 
old  and  new  alike,  that  God  has  reconciled  the  world. 
This  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  statement.  The  English 
version  is  perfectly  right;  the  criticism  that  pretends 
to  correct  it  is  thoroughly  wrong.  It  is  never  said  that 
the  world  is  reconciled  to  God.  Christ  was  a  blessed 
and  adequate  image  of  God;  and  God  was  in  Him 
manifesting  Himself  in  the  supremacy  of  His  own  grace 
here  below.  No  doubt  His  law  had  its  suited  place; 
but  God  in  grace  is  necessarily  above  the  law.  As  man, 
at  least  as  of  Israel,  Jesus  was  bom  under  the  law;  but 
this  was  in  not  the  slightest  degree  an  abandonment  of 


THE   SECOND   EPISTLE  TO   THE   CORINTHIAl^S.       125 

God's  rights,  and  still  less  of  His  grace.  God  came 
near  to  men  in  love  in  the  most  attractive  form,  going 
in  and  out  among  them,  taking  up  little  children, 
entering  into  houses  when  asked,  conversing  by  the 
way,  going  about  doing  good,  and  healing  all  that  were 
oppressed  of  the  devil ;  for  God  was  with  Him.  It  was 
not  merely  in  quest  of  the  lost  sheep  of  Israel.  How 
could  such  grace  be  restrained  only  to  Jews  ?  God  had 
larger  thoughts  and  feelings  than  this.  Therefore  let  a 
Gentile  centurion  come,  or  a  Samaritan  woman,  or  any 
body  else :  who  was  not  welcome  ?  For  "  God  was  in 
Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself,  not  imputing 
their  trespasses  unto  them." 

Full  of  grace  and  truth.  He  would  not  even  raise 
the  question  of  this  trespass  or  that.  There  was  no 
doubt  of  man's  guilt ;  but  this  was  not  the  divine  way 
of  Christ.  Other  and  more  efficacious  aims  were  in  the 
hand  of  the  God  of  all  grace.  He  would  save,  but  at 
the  same  time  exercise  the  conscience  more  than  ever. 
For  great  would  be  the  loss  for  a  sinner  awakened,  if  it 
were  possible  for  him  not  to  take  God's  part  against 
himself.  This  is  the  real  course  and  effect  of  repen- 
tance in  the  soul.  But  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling 
the  world  for  all  that,  yea  in  order  to  it.  It  was  not  a 
question  of  dealing  with  them  for  their  trespasses.  And 
what  now  that  He  is  gone  away  ?  "  He  hath  committed 
unto  us  the  word  of  reconciliation."  He  is  gone,  but 
not  the  errand  of  mercy  for  which  He  came.  The 
Messiah  as  such  disappears  for  the  time ;  there  remains 
the  fruit  of  the  blessed  manifestation  of  God  in  Christ 
in  an  evil  world.  "  Now  then  we  are  ambassadors  for 
Christ,  as  though  God  did  beseech  by  us :  we  pray  in 
Christ's  stead,  be  reconciled  to  God."    But  how  can 


126  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

this  be?  On  what  basis  can  we  essay  such  a  task? 
Not  because  the  Spirit  of  God  is  in  us,  however  true  it 
may  be,  but  because  of  the  atonement.  Eedemption  by 
Christ's  blood  is  the  reason.  "  For  God  hath  made  him 
to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin ;  that  we  might  be 
made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him." 

Then,  following  up  this  in  the  next  chapter  (vi.),  the 
true  moral  traits  of  the  Christian  ministry  are  shown, 
and  what  a  price  it  had  in  his  eyes.  What  should  not  be 
done  and  endured  for  the  sake  of  worthily  carrying  out 
this  ministration  of  Christ  here  below !  What  should 
be  the  practical  witness  to  a  righteousness  not  acquired 
by  us,  but  freely  given  of  God !  Such  is  the  character  of 
it,  according  to  the  work  of  Christ  before  God  and  of 
His  redemption ;  so  we  should  "  give  no  offence  in  any 
thiug,  that  the  ministry  be  not  blamed:  but  in  all 
things  approving  ourselves  as  the  ministers  of  God,  in 
much  patience,  in  afflictions,  in  necessities,  in  distresses, 
in  stripes,  in  imprisonments."  In  every  thing  crushing 
to  nature  did  the  apostle  fulfil  his  mission.  Is  the 
reproach  of  Christ  to  be  an  apostoHc  perquisite  ?  Are 
not  His  servants  to  share  it  still  ?  Is  it  not  true  from 
first  to  last  ? 

Again,  in  serving  the  Lord,  there  are  two  special 
ways  in  which  we  are  apt  to  go  astray.  Some  err 
by  an  undue  narrowness,  others  by  as  injurious  laxity. 
In  fact,  it  is  never  right  to  be  narrow,  and  always 
wrong  to  be  lax.  In  Christ  there  is  no  license  or 
excuse  for  either.  But  the  Corinthians,  like  others,  were 
in  danger  on  both  sides ;  for  each  provokes  the  other. 
Hence  the  appeal,  "0  ye  Corinthians,  our  mouth  is  open 
unto  you,  our  heart  is  enlarged.     Ye  are  not  strait- 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.      127 

ened  in  us,  but  ye  are  straitened  in  your  own  bowels." 
There  was  the  caution  against  a  narrow  heart ;  but  now 
against  a  lax  path  he  warns,  "  Be  not  unequally  yoked 
together  with  unbelievers:  for  what  fellowship  hath 
righteousness  with  unrighteousness  ?  and  what  com- 
munion hath  light  with  darkness?  and  what  concord 
hath  Christ  with  Belial?  or  what  part  hath  he  that 
beheveth  with  an  infidel?  and  what  agreement  hath 
the  temple  of  God  with  idols?"  Thus  is  embraced 
individual  responsibility  as  well  as  corporate.  "  For  ye 
are  the  temple  of  the  living  God ;  as  God  hath  said,  I 
will  dwell  in  them." 

Thus,  as  in  the  exercise  of  ministry  according  to 
Christ,  there  was  nothing  that  should  not  be  endured ; 
there  was  no  scorn  or  trial,  no  pain  or  shame,  but  what  he 
himself  counted  as  nothing  that  Christ  only  should  be 
served,  and  the  witness  of  His  name  kept  up  in  this, 
■world  according  to  His  grace;  so  now  he  presses  on 
the  saints  what  is  incumbent  on  them  as  the  epistle 
of  Christ,  to  make  good  a  true  witness  for  Him  in  this 
world,  steering  clear  of  all  that  is  hard  and  narrow, 
which  is  altogether  alien  from  the  grace  of  God,  and  of 
that  laxity  which  is  still  more  offensive  to  His  nature. 
In  the  first  verse  of  chapter  vii.  the  whole  matter  is 
wound  up,  "Having  therefore  these  promises,  dearly 
beloved,  let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of 
the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of 
God."  The  second  verse  evidently  belongs  to  the  sub- 
ject succeding.  In  the  rest  of  the  seventh  chapter  he 
renews  (and  has,  I  think,  connected  both  with  these 
words  about  the  ministry  and  the  responsibility  of  the 
saints)  what  he  had  alluded  to  already  among  them. 
He  touches,  with  that  delicate  tact  so  characteristic  of 


128  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

him,  on  their  repentance.  He  would  encourage  their 
hearts  in  every  way,  hut  now  ventures  to  go  somewhat 
farther  in  the  grace  of  Christ. 

Accordingly  his  own  feelings  are  told  out, — how  ex- 
ceedingly cast  down  he  had  heen,  and  oppressed  on 
every  side,  so  that  he  had  no  rest.  "Without  were 
fightings,  within  were  fears."  Indeed,  the  fear  had  gone 
so  far,  that  he  had  actually  been  tried  as  to  the  inspired 
epistle  he  had  written.  The  apostle  had  a  question 
raised  in  his  mind  about  his- own  inspired  epistle  J 
Yet  what  writing  was  more  certainly  of  God?  "For 
though  I  made  you  sorry  with  the  letter,  I  do  not  regret, 
though  I  did  regret."  How  clearly  we  learn,  whatever 
the  working  of  God  in  man,  that  after  aU  the  inspira- 
tion of  a  vessel  is  far  above  his  own  wUl,  and  the  fruit 
of  the  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost !  As  we  find  an  un- 
holy man  might  be  inspired  of  God  to  bring  out  a  new 
communication — for  example,  a  Balaam  or  a  Caiaphas, 
so  holy  men  of  God  stiU  more.  But  the  remarkable 
thing  to  note  is  the  way  in  which  a  question  was  raised 
even  about  an  epistle  which  God  has  preserved  in  His 
own  book,  and,  without  a  doubt,  divinely  inspired.  But 
he  also  mentions  how  glad  he  was  now  that,  having 
sent  off  that  letter,  he  had  made  them  sorry.  "  For  I 
perceive  that  the  same  epistle  hath  made  you  sorry, 
though  it  were  but  for  a  season.  Now  I  rejoice,  not 
that  ye  were  made  sorry,  but  that  ye  sorrowed  to  re- 
pentance; for  ye  were  made  sorry  according  to  God, 
that  ye  might  receive  damage  by  us  in  nothing."  How 
great  is  the  grace!  "For  sorrow  according  to  God 
worketh  repentance  to  salvation  not  to  be  regretted: 
but  the  sorrow  of  the  world  worketh  death.  For  behold 
this  selfsame  thing,  that  ye  sorrowed  according  to  God, 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKINTHIANS.      129 

what  carefulness  it  ■wrought  in  you,  yea,  what  clearing 
of  yourselves,  yea,  what  indignation,  yea,  what  fear, 
yea,  what  vehement  desire,  yea,  what  zeal,  yea,  what 
revenge !  In  all  things  ye  have  approved  yourselves  to 
be  clear  in  this  matter."  What  a  comfort  to  the  heart 
that  had  been  so  profoundly  touched  by  their  state ! 

In  chapters  viiL  ix.  the  subject  of  contributing  for 
saints  is  resumed,  though  a  great  deal  more  fully  than 
in  1  Cor.  xvi.,  and  with  a  fresh  spring  of  joy  communi- 
cated to  his  spirit.  What  an  evidence  is  given  of  the 
exercises  of  his  heart  in  this  thing  too !  It  appears  he 
had  spoken  confidently  about  the  Corinthian  saints. 
There  had  been  afterwards  much  to  wound  and  weaken 
that  confidence ;  but  he  now  returns  to  the  matter,  and 
reckons  with  certainty  that  the  God  who  had  wrought 
in  the  painful  matter,  not  of  the  guUty  man  only,  but 
in  them  aU  about  it, — that  His  grace  would  also  give 
him  cause  for  joy  in  rousing  their  hearts  into  largeness 
of  love  for  those  that  were  depressed  elsewhere.  He 
had  boasted  of  the  liberality  of  the  Corinthians,  which 
had  kindled  zeal  in  others.  On  the  one  hand,  he  would 
have  his  hope  of  them  verified,  on  the  other  he  desired 
none  to  be  burdened,  but  certainly  fruit  Godward  both 
in  the  givers  and  in  the  receivers.  How  rich  and  en- 
riching in  His  grace !  Blessed  be  God  for  His  unspeak- 
able gift ! 

In  chapters  x.  xi.  he  comes  to  another  subject — his 
own  ministry — on  which  a  few  words  must  suffice. 
Enough  had  been  cleared  away  to  open  his  heart  on  it  : 
he  could  enlarge  here.  It  was  his  confidence  in  them 
that  made  him  write.     When  his  spirit  was  bound, 

K 


130  INTRODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

because  of  there  being  so  much  to  cause  shame  and 
pain,  he  could  not  be  free;  but  now  he  is.  Hence  we  have 
here  a  most  blessed  opening  of  what  this  servant  of  God 
felt  in  what  was  necessarily  a  sore  distress  to  his  spirit. 
For  what  could  be  more  humbling  than  that  the  Corin- 
thian saints,  the  fruit  of  his  own  ministry,  had  admitted 
into  their  hearts  insinuations  against  him,  doubts  of  the 
reality  of  his  apostolate,  all  that  lowering  which,  in  Other 
forms  but  not  substantially  unlike,  we  may  have  too 
often  observed,  and  just  in  proportion  to  the  importance 
and  spiritual  value  of  the  trust  reposed  of  God  in  any 
on  the  earth?  The  apostle  knew  sorrow  as  no  other  ever 
knew  it.  Not  even  the  twelve  tasted  its  bitterness  as 
he  did,  from  spirituality  and  from  circumstances ;  and 
the  manner  in  which  he  deals  with  it,  the  dignity,  and 
at  the  same  time  the  lowliness,  the  faith  that  looked 
right  to  the  Lord,  but  at  the  same  time  the  warmth  of 
affection,  grief  of  heart  mingliag  with  joy,  furnish  such 
a  tableau  as  is  unique  even  in  the  word  of  God.  No  such 
analysis  appears  anywhere  else  of  the  heart  of  one 
serving  the  saints  in  the  midst  of  the  greatest  outrages 
to  his  love,  as  we  recognise  in  this  epistle.  He  bows 
to  the  charge  of  rudeness  in  speech;  but  they  had  used 
the  admitted  power  of  his  letters  against  himself  Yet 
he  warns  lest  what  he  is  absent  they  may  learn  in 
him  present.  Others  might  exalt  themselves  through 
his  labours ;  he  hoped  when  their  faith  was  increased  to 
preach  the  gospel  in  the  regions  beyond.  (Chap,  x.)  They 
had  exalted  the  other  apostles  in  disparagement  of  him. 
They  had  even  imputed  to  him  selfishness.  It  might 
be  true,  thought  they,  that  he  had  reaped  no  material 
benefit  himself  from  them ;  but  what  about  others,  his 
friends?     How  much  there  was  calculated  to  wound 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE   COEINTHIA.NS.       131 

that  generous  heart,  and,  what  he  felt  yet  more,  to 
damage  his  ministry !  But  in  the  midst  of  such  sorrow 
and  the  rather  as  flowing  from  such  sources,  God  watched 
over  all  with  observant  eye.  Wonderfully  hedged  in 
was  His  servant,  though  to  speak  of  himself  he  caUs 
his  folly.  (Chap,  xi.)  But  no  human  power  or  wit  can 
protect  a  man  of  God  from  malice ;  nothing  can  shut 
out  the  shafts  of  evil  speaking.  In  vain  to  look  to  flesh 
and  blood  for  protection :  were  it  possible,  how  much 
we  should  have  missed  in  this  epistle !  Had  his  detrac- 
tors been  brethren  of  the  circumcision  from  Jerusalem, 
neither  the  trial  nor  the  blessing  would  have  been  any- 
thing like  what  it  is  for  depth ;  but  the  fact  that  it  came 
to  Paul  from  his  own  children  in  Achaia  was  enough  to 
pain  him  to  the  quick,  and  did  prove  him  thoroughly. 

But  God  sometimes  lifts  us  up  to  look  into  the  glory, 
as  He  comes  down  into  the  midst  of  our  sorrows  in  piti- 
ful mercy.  This,  with  his  own  heart  about  it,  the  apostle 
brings  before  us  lovingly,  though  it  is  impossible,  with- 
in my  limits,  so  much  as  to  touch  on  aU.  He  spreads 
before  us  his  sorrows,  dangers,  and  persecutions.  This 
was  the  ministry  of  which  he  had  boasted.  He  had 
been  often  whipped  and  stoned,  had  been  weary,  thirsty, 
hxmgry,  by  sea  and  land :  these  were  the  prizes  he  had 
received,  and  these  the  honours  which  the  world  gave 
him.  How  it  all  ought  to  have  gone  to  their  hearts,  if 
they  had  any  feeling  at  all,  as  indeed  they  had !  It  was 
good  for  them  to  feel  it,  for  they  had  been  taking  their 
ease.  He  closes  the  list  by  telling  them  at  last  how  he 
had  been  let  down  from  the  wall  of  a  city  in  a  basket, 
— ^not  a  very  dignified  position  'for  an  apostle.  It  was 
anything  but  heroism  thus  to  escape  one's  enemies. 

But  the  same  man  who  was  thus  let  down  imme- 
E  2 


132  rNTEODUCTOKT  LECTUKES. 

diately  after  speaks  of  being  caught  up  to  heaven.  Now, 
it  is  this  combination  of  the  truest  and  most  proper 
dignity  that  ever  a  man  had  in  this  world, — for  how 
few  of  the  sons  of  man,  speaking  of  course  of  Chris- 
tians, that  approached  Paul  in  this  respect ;  so  on  the 
other  hand,  how  few  since  have  known  the  dignity  of 
being  content  to  suffer  and  be  nothing,  of  having  every 
thought  and  feeling  of  nature  thoroughly  crushed,  like 
Paul,  within  as  well  as  without !  So  much  the  more 
as  he  was  one  who  felt  all  most  keenly,  for  he  had  a 
heart  and  miud  equally  capacious.  Such  was  he  who 
had  to  be  thus  tried  as  Christ's  bondman.  But  when 
he  comes  to  special  wonders,  he  does  not  speak  about 
himself;  when  about  the  basket  he  is  open.  Thus  here  he 
talks  ambiguously.  "  I  know  a  man"  is  his  method  of 
introducing  the  new  portion.  It  is  not  I,  Paul,  but  "  a 
man  in  Christ"  is  taken  up,  who  had  seen  such  things  as 
could  not  be  expressed  in  human  words,  nor  suited  to 
man's  present  state.  It  is  therefore  left  completely 
vague.  The  apostle  himseK  says  he  does  not  know 
whether  it  was  in  the  body,  or  out  of  the  body;  so  com- 
pletely was  all  removed  from  the  ordinary  experience 
and  ken  of  man.  But  he  adds  what  is  much  to  be 
observed,  "And  lest  I  should  be  exalted  above  measure 
through  the  abundance  of  the  revelations,  there  was 
given  to  me  a  thorn  in  the  flesh."  Thus  a  deeper 
humiliation  befell  him  than  he  had  ever  known, — "a 
thorn  in  the  flesh,  the  messenger  of  Satan,"  —  the 
allowed  counterbalance  to  such  extraordinary  expe- 
riences. It  was  Paul.  The  secret  could  not  be  hid. 
But  Christ  is  here,  as  ever,  the  theme  of  the  apostle  from 
first  to  last.  This  was  the  treasure  in  the  earthen 
vessel;  and  in  order  to  bring  about  corresponding  profit. 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.       133 

God  works  by  external  means  as  well  as  by  inward 
grace,  so  as  to  carry  forward  His  work  of  enbancing 
always  and  increasingly  what  is  in  Christ,  and  making 
less  and  less  of  man. 

The  close  of  the  chapter  sketches,  with  painful  truth 
but  a  loving  hand,  the  outbreakings  of  that  nature, 
crushed  in  him,  pampered  in  them.  For  he  dreaded  lest 
God  should  humble  him  among  them  because  of  their 
evil  ways.    What  love  such  a  word  bespeaks ! 

The  final  chapter  (xiii.)  answers  a  challenge  which 
he  kept  for  the  last  place,  as  indeed  it  ill  became  the 
Corinthians  above  all  men.  What  a  distress  to  him  to 
speak  of  it  at  all !  They  had  actually  dared  to  ask  a 
proof  that  Christ  had  spoken  to  them  by  him.  Had 
they  forgotten  that  they  owed  their  life  and  salvation 
in  Christ  to  his  preaching?  As  he  put  in  the  fore- 
ground patience  as  a  sign  of  apostleship,  which  in  him 
assuredly  was  taxed  beyond  measure,  so  now  he  fixes 
on  this  as  the  great  seal  of  his  apostleship — at  least,  to 
them.  What  can  be  more  touching?  It  is  not  what 
Jesus  had  said  by  him  in  books,  or  in  what  power  the 
Spirit  had  wrought  by  him.  "Since  ye  seek  a  proof 
of  Christ  speaking  in  me,  which  to  you-ward  is  not 

weak,  but  is  mighty  in  you examine  yourselves, 

whether  ye  be  in  the  faith;  prove  your  ownselves." 
They  were  the  living  proof  to  themselves  that  he  was 
an  apostle  of  Christ  to  them.  There  is  no  allowance 
of  a  doubt  in  this  appeal :  rather  the  very  reverse  was 
assumed  on  their  part,  which  the  apostle  admirably 
turns  to  the  confusion  of  their  indecorous  and  baseless 
doubts  about  himself.  "  Therefore  I  write  these  things 
being  absent^  lest  being  present  I  should  use  sharpness, 


134  INTEODUCTOET  LECTURES. 

according  to  the  power  -wliich  the  Lord  hath  given  me 
to  edification,  and  not  to  destruction."  Brief  and  preg- 
nant salutations  follow,  with  the  grace  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  love  of  God,  and  the  communion  of 
the  Holy  Ghost. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.  135 


GALATIANS. 

We  saw  the  second  of  Corinthians  characterized  by  the 
most  rapid  transitions  of  feeling,  by  a  deep  and  fervent 
sense  of  God's  consolations,  by  a  revulsion  so  much 
the  more  powerful  in  a  heart  that  entered  into  things 
as  few  hearts  have  ever  done  since  the  world  began. 
For  as  the  first  epistle  had  put  down  man  in  every 
form,  and  more  particularly  man  as  an  expression  of 
the  world  in  its  pride,  so  the  second  epistle  breathes 
the  comfort  of  God's  restoring  grace,  and  is  charac- 
terized therefore  by  the  strongest  emotions  of  the  heart; 
for  he  ardently  loved  these  saints.  He  had  felt  their 
wrong,  but  at  the  same  time  had  been  lifted  marvel- 
lously above  what  might  be  called  personal  feeling,  and 
so  much  the  more,  therefore,  could  have  the  grief  of 
love  unmingled  with  that  which  really  impairs  its 
strength,  and  leaves  its  sensibilities  incomparably  less 
acute.  So  much  the  more,  then,  we  find  the  working 
of  spiritual  feeling  as  expressed  by  him  in  the  second 
epistle,  where  he  speaks  of  God  Lifting  up  those  that 
were  cast  down,  as  He  had  delivered  himself  from  the 
immiaent  danger  to  which  he  had  been  exposed  even 
as  to  life. 

In  the  epistle  to  the  Galatians  we  have  another  ton^ 
and  style,  a  serious  and  grieved  spirit,  with  feelings  not 
less  deep — it  may  be,  even  more  profoundly  moved — 


136  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

than  in  writing  to  the  Corinthians ;  and  for  this  reason, 
that  the  foundations  were  still  more  deeply  affected 
by  that  which  was  working  among  the  assemblies  of 
Galatia.  It  was  not  the  worldly  presumption  of  man, 
nor  the  slight  which  this  would  inevitably  cast  on  apos- 
tolic authority,  as  well  as  on  the  order  of  the  church, 
on  morality  even,  at  least  on  Christian  morality,  on  the 
comely  ways  of  brethren  one  with  another  in  private 
as  well  as  in  their  public  assemblies.  In  the  epistle 
to  the  Galatians  a  deeper  question  was  raised — nothing 
less  than  the  fountain  of  grace  itself.  Hence  in  this 
epistle  it  is  not  so  much  the  laying  bare  the  need  of 
man — of  the  sinner,  as  the  vindication  of  that  same 
grace  of  God  for  the  saint,  with  the  exhibition  of  the 
ruinous  results  to  him  who  is  drawn  aside  from  the 
deep  and  broad  groundwork  that  God  has  laid  for  souls 
in  Christ.  Here  particularly  the  Christian  is  guarded 
against  the  inroads  of  legalism.  If  the  'world  were 
the  great  enemy  at  Corinth,  the  law  perverted  is  that 
against  which  the  Spirit  of  God  raises  up  the  apostle 
in  writing  to  the  Galatians.  Mesh  alas !  has  an  af&nity 
for  both.  This  epistle,  as  those  to  the  Corinthians,  opens 
with  an  assertion  of  his  apostolic  place.  At  the  outset 
here  (not  there)  he  sets  aside  human  intervention.  Men 
were  not  his  source,  nor  was  man  even  a  medium  to 
him.  He  strikes  accordingly  at  the  root  of  all  succes- 
sional  or  derived  authority.  "Paul,  an  apostle,  not  of 
men,  neither  by  man,  but  by  Jesus  Christ  and," — in 
order  to  make  it  still  more  evident, — "by  God  the 
Father,  who  raised  him  from  the  dead."  This  is  pecu- 
liar to  our  epistle.  In  the  epistle  to  the  Ephesians  we 
shall  find  that  the  apostle  claims  a  still  higher  character 
for  all  ministry.    There  it  is  not  traced  to  God  the  Fa- 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.  137 

ther,  that  raised  Christ  from  the  dead;  hut  it  descends 
from  Christ  ascended  to  heaven  (■which,  we  shall  soon 
see,  perfectly  fits  in  with  that  epistle).  Here  it  is  the 
total  judgment  of  flesh  in  its  religious  pretensions,  and 
more  particularly  a  blow  to  that  which  is  an  essential 
principle  of  law.  The  whole  legal  institution  depended 
on  a  people  lineally  descended  from  Abraham,  as  their 
priests  on  a  similar  succession  from  Aaron.  Being,  of 
course,  dying  men,  whether  it  be  the  general  privileges 
of  Israel,  or  the  special  place  of  the  priest,  all  was 
transmitted  from  father  to  son.  In  its  own  proper 
sphere  and  blessings  Christianity  knows  nothing  of 
the  sort,  but  denies  it  in  principle.  So  here  Paul  is 
"  an  apostle,  not  of  men,  neither  by  man,  but  by  Jesus 
Christ,  and  God  the  Father,  that  raised  him  from  the 
dead." 

To  have  been  with  the  Messiah,  the  hearer  of  His 
words  and  the  witness  of  His  work,  up  to  His  depar- 
ture, was  ever  a  condition  to  those  who  were  accus- 
tomed to  the  twelve  apostles.  The  apostle  himself 
meets  that  difficulty  in  the  face,  and  in  effect  concedes 
to  his  detractors  that  he  was  not  made  an  apostle  by 
Christ  here  below.  But  if  not  called  to  have  his  place 
among  the  twelve,  it  was  the  Lord's  sovereign  dealing 
to  give  him  a  better  one.  There  is  no  approach  to  a 
vaunt  about  his  dignity.  He  does  not  even  deign  to 
fill  up  the  sketch.  He  leaves  it  to  spiritual  wisdom  to 
gather  what  was  the  evident  impression  of  the  truth. 

For  his  own  special  call  was  an  indisputable  fact; 
and  it  is  a  great  joy  to  the  heart  to  think  how  Chris- 
tianity (while  it  leaves  the  deepest  and  the  highest 
space  in  all  directions,  so  to  speak,  for  the  working  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  while  there  is  more  room  in  it  than 


138  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

anywhere  else  for  the  play  both  of  the  renewed  mind 
and  the  affections  that  the  Spirit  of  God  gives,  whUe, 
consequently,  it  admits  of  the  richest  possible  exercises 
of  both  mind  and  heart),  nevertheless,  in  its  grand 
truths  rests  on  the  most  patent  and  certain  facts.  For 
God  considers  the  poor ;  He  has  regard  to  the  simple  ; 
He  has  children  in  His  eye.  And  facts  teU  on  their 
mind.  Indeed,  there  is  no  soul  really  above  them, 
Whoever  despises  the  facts  of  Christianity,  as  if  nothing 
in  Scripture  were  worthy  of  meditation,  or  of  minister- 
ing to  others  but  exercises  and  speculative  deductions, 
will  be  found,  if  he  do  not  find  himself  often,  on  the 
verge  of  dangerous  delusions,  both  for  the  mind  and  for 
the  walk. 

But  the  apostle  here  does  not  reason  about  the 
matter.  He  simply  states,  as  I  have  said,  that  his 
apostolic  character  was  not  only  from  Jesus,  but  from 
God  the  Father,  that  raised  Him  from  the  dead.  It 
had  a  resurrection-source,  instead  of  being  from  Christ 
on  earth,  and  in  relation  to  the  work  God  was  doing 
when  He  sent  His  Son  here  below.  Along  with  himself 
he  takes  care  expressly  to  couple  others  :  "  and  all  the 
brethren  which  are  with  me."  Paul  did  not  stand 
alone.  He  had  the  faith  that  could  by  grace  cleave  to 
God  if  he  had  not  a  companion ;  but  God  blesses  that 
faith,  and  acts  by  it  on  the  conscience  of  others,  even  on 
those  that,  alas !  too  often  might  be  ready  to  turn  aside. 
In  this  case,  happily,  the  brethren  near  at  hand  went 
along  with  him  in  heart.  After  wishing  those  addressed 
grace  and  peace,  as  usual,  he  speaks  of  the  Lord  in 
a  manner  singularly  in  unison  with  the  object  of  the 
epistle  :  "  Who  gave  himself  for  our  sins,  that  he  might 
deliver  us" — not  from  judgment,  not  from  the  wrath  to 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.  139 

come,  but — "from  this  present  evil  world."  The  evil 
that  was  gaining  ground  among  the  Galatian  believers 
— ^legalism — links  the  soul  with  the  world,  and  indeed 
proves  it  to  he  evil  by  giving  present  credit  to  the  flesh, 
and  association  with  all  the  system  that  is  around  us 
now.  But  in  truth  the  Lord  "gave  himself  for  our  sins, 
that  he  might  deliver  us  from  this  present  evil  world, 
according  to  the  will  of  God  and  our  Father :  to  whom 
be  glory  for  ever  and  ever." 

At  once  the  apostle  launches  into  the  troubled  sea. 
There  is  no  recounting  what  God  had  done  for  them. 
There  is  no  mention  here  of  grace,  nor  even  of  any 
special  powers  conferred  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  We 
shall  find  he  does  not  forget  this  elsewhere  :  he  reasons 
on  it  in  another  part  of  the  epistle.  But  his  heart  was 
too  agitated  not  to  betak?  himself  at  once  to  the  point 
of  their  danger.  Consequently,  without  further  pre- 
amble, and  with  an  ominous  silence  as  to  their  state 
(for,  indeed,  it  could  not  be  spoken  of),  he  at  once 
breaks  the  ground.  "  I  marvel  that  ye  are  so  soon  re- 
moved from  him  that  called  you  in  the  grace  of  Christ 
unto  another  gospel :  which  is  not  another." 

Mark  how  nicely  every  word  was  suited  to  deal  with 
their  souls.  He  speaks  of  "the  grace  of  Christ."  He 
warns  against  "another  gospel,"  i.e.,  a  different  one, 
which  was  really  none  at  all.  It  was  not  another,  as 
he  says.  "But  there  be  some  that  trouble  you,  and 
would  pervert  the  gospel  of  Christ."  And  then  he, 
indignant  at  such  a  thought,  makes  his  most  solemn 
appeals.  "But  though  we" — Paul  himself,  or  any  that 
were  associated  with  him — "though  we,  or  an  angel 
from  heaven,  preach  any  other  gospel  unto  you  than 
that  which  we  have  preached  unto  you,  let  him  be 


140  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

accursed."  Nor  this  only.  "As  we  have  said  before, 
so  I  say  now  again,  If  any  man  preach  any  other 
gospel  unto  you  than  that  ye  have  received."  The 
apostle  stands  to  the  truth  preached  and  received. 
What  he  preached  was  the  truth  as  to  this  matter* 
He  does  not  deny  that  others  preached  it;  but  if  so, 
they  preached  the  same  truth.  The  apostle  was  given 
to  preach  the  truth  more  fully  than  any  other.  To 
depart  from  this  was  fatal  Nor  this  only.  If  he  had 
preached  the  full  truth  of  the  gospel,  he  insists  that 
they  had  received  it.  He  will  not  hear  of  any  pre- 
tended misunderstanding.  He  refuses  aU  cover  for 
different  thoughts.  In  either  case  "let  him  be  ac- 
cursed." 

And  he  justifies  this  strength  of  warning:  "For  do 
I  now  persuade  men  or  God  ?  Do  I  seek  to  please 
men?  For  if  I  yet  pleased  men,  I  should  not  be  a 
servant  of  Christ."  Impossible  to  serve  two  masters ! 
Christ  never  mingles  with  flesh  or  law  any  more  than 
with  the  world.  Bondage  is  there;  and  He  is  a  de- 
liverer, but  it  is  to  God's  glory,  and  for  His  own  service 
in  the  liberty  of  grace. 

And  now  the  apostle  enters  on  another  part  of  his 
subject.  His  account  proves  how  independent  he  was 
of  the  very  persons  whom  they  would  have  desired  to 
have  seen  associated  with  him.  It  was  an  offence  in 
the  eyes  of  the  Jewish  Christians,  and  perhaps  specially 
of  the  Christians  that  Judaize,  that  the  apostle  had 
been  so  little  at  Jerusalem — that  his  intercourse  was 
so  scanty  with  the  twelve.  The  apostle  accepts  the 
fact  in  all  its  strength.  Far  from  wishing  to  gain 
credit,  either  for  the  gospel  or  for  his  own  apostolic 
place,  in  consequence  of  being  linked  with  those  that 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIAKS.  14:1 

had  been  apostles  before  him,  he  insists  on  that  very 
independence  which  they  counted  a  reproach.  His  is  an 
apostleship  to  itself,  as  real  as  that  of  the  twelve,  but 
of  another  order,  not  at  the  same  time,  nor  in  the  same 
manner.  All  sprang,  no  doubt,  from  the  same  God, 
from  the  same  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  but  even  so  from 
God  and  from  the  Lord  in  other  relationships.  Very 
particularly  was  it  marked  by  the  manner  of  his  call, 
that  his  apostleship  had  no  connection  with  either  the 
world  or  the  flesh.  It  had  nothing  whatever  to  do 
even  with  the  Lord  Himself,  in  the  days  of  His  flesh, 
when  acting  as  minister  of  the  circumcision  in  the 
land  of  Judsea.  Invariably,  where  man  seeks  to  briag 
in  a  successional  apostleship,  the  twelve  become  the 
great  model. 

Hence  it  is  that  Eome,  which  most  decidedly  in 
principle  rests  on  human  succession  (as  all  wordly 
religion  must,  to  a  certain  extent,  embrace  the  same 
principle) — Eome,  I  say,  seeks  to  derive  her  authority, 
as  all  know,  from  Peter.  No  person  can  intelligently 
read  the  New  Testament  without  perceiving  the  utter 
fallacy  of  such  a  system;  for  Peter  was  expressly,  as 
the  ;iext  chapter  of  this  epistle  tells  us,  apostle  of  the 
cu-cumcision.  So  were  the  others  that  seemed  to  be 
the  chief.  If  any  apostleship  would  have  served  for 
the  Gentiles,  it  ought  to  have  been  Paul's  then;  for 
Paul  was  the  apostle  of  the  uncircumcision.  What  a 
condemnation  of  themselves,  that  no  system  which  ever 
seeks  for  an  earthly  succession  can  ia  the  least  make 
Paul  answer  its  purpose !  In  his  case  the  breach  with 
man  was  evident ;  the  association  with  heaven,  and  not 
Jerusalem,  was  too  plain  to  be  disputed  or  evaded. 
Successor  to  Paul  there  is  none ;  if  so,  who  and  where  ? 


142  INTEODUOTOEY  LECTURES. 

In  the  case  of  the  twelve,  we  do  find  an  apostle  chosen 
to  supply  the  gap  of  Judas — chosen,  I  admit,  of  God, 
though  after  a  Jewish  sort,  as  Chrysostom  justly  re- 
marks, for  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  given.  I  admit 
that  this  was  all  in  place  and  season  then  for  Jerusalem. 
But  at  the  same  time  it  is  plain  that  the  apostle  Paul 
here  starts  with  the  instructive  fact,  that  the  very  thing 
for  which  some  Judaizers  then  blamed  him  was  the 
distinctive  glory  of  that  to  which  the  Lord  had  called 
him.  "I  certify  you,  brethren,"  says  he,  "that  the 
gospel  which  was  preached  of  me  is  not  after  man. 
For  I  neither  received  it  of  man,  neither  was  I  taught 
it,  but  by  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  For  ye  have 
heard  of  my  conversation  in  times  past  in  the  Jews' 
religion,  how  that  beyond  measure  I  persecuted  the 
church  of  God,  and  wasted  it:  and  profited  in  the 
Jews'  religion  above  many  my  equals  in  mine  own 
nation,  being  more  exceedingly  zealous  of  the  traditions 
of  my  fathers.  But  when  it  pleased  God,  who  sepa- 
rated me  from  my  mother's  womb,  and  called  me  by 
his  grace,  to  reveal  his  Son  in  me,  that  I  might  preach 
him  among  the  heathen;  immediately  I  conferred  not 
with  flesh  and  blood :  neither  went  I  up  to  Jerusalem 
to  them  which  were  apostles  before  me;  but  I  went 
into  Arabia,  and  returned  again  unto  Damascus." 

Now,  it  is  evident — and  to  this  I  call  your  particular 
attention — that  the  apostle  here  binds  ^  together  his 
gospel  with  his  apostolic  place.  This  was  the  serious 
move  of  the  enemy.  You  cannot  attack  such  a  servant 
without  attacking  his  testimony.  You  cannot  weaken 
his  apostleship  without  endangering  the  very  gospel 
that  you  have  received  yourselves.  And  this  is  always 
true  in  its  measure,  and  shows  the  exceeding  gravity 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATUNS.  143 

of  opposition  where  God  raises  up  for  His  own  special 
work  in  this  world;  hut  more  particularly  where,  as  in 
the  apostle's  case,  the  mere  manner  of  his  conversion, 
the  special  form  of  his  separation  unto  God,  hears  the 
impress  of  the  truth  he  was  to  preach.  To  impugn 
the  one  is  to  imperil  the  other.  The  Galatians  did  not 
think  of  this;  people  that  are  thus  blinded  by  the 
enemy  never  do.  To  them,  no  doubt,  it  appeared  as 
if  they  were  zealous  and  sincere  champions  of  unity. 
They  were  grieved  to  think  that  the  Jewish  church, 
with  its  twelve  apostles  and  its  elders,  with  its  manifold 
links  with  antiquity  and  God's  past  testimony  on  earth, 
should  seem  separated  in  any  measure  from  the  apostle 
and  his  work.  No  doubt  there  was  a  difference  of 
tone.  Had  a  man  come  down  from  the  teaching  of 
the  twelve,  albeit  inspired  of  God  to  write,  as  we  know 
some  of  them  were,  and  aU  of  them  having  a  most 
truly  apostolic  place,  he  might  have  been  startled  by 
the  teaching  of  St.  Paul.  Can  it  be  doubted  that  the 
special  form  of  spiritual  thought  and  feeling  formed, 
for  instance,  by  James's  or  Peter's  teaching,  yea,  even 
by  that  of  John,  while  harmonizing,  where  the  heart 
was  open,  with  the  instruction  of  Paul,  nevertheless 
would  appear  at  first  very  different?  We  know  how 
feeble  and  slow  the  heart  is,  and  how  apt  disciples  in 
general  are  to  narrow  the  riches  of  the  grace  and  truth 
of  God.  Even  in  Christianity  how  much  need  there  is 
to  remember  what  the  Lord  warns  us  of  in  Luke  v. — 
that  no  man  accustomed  to  old  wine  straightway  desires 
new,  but  says.  The  old  is  better.  This  was  at  work 
even  in  those  early  days.  It  had  tainted  among  others 
the  Galatians ;  for  although,  in  point  of  fact,  what  had 
converted  them  was   the  heavenly  testimony  of  the 


144  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

apostle  Paul,  nevertheless  they  had  in  time  become  ac- 
quainted with  Christians  who  had  not  been  so  favoured, 
perhaps  from  the  churches  in  Judsea.  Saints  they  may 
have  been;  and  such,  we  know,  moved  about  from 
Jerusalem.  At  any  rate,  the  Galatians,  naturally  fickle, 
were  quick  to  take  up  prejudices.  They  had  somehow 
become  uneasy.  Those  that  were  used  of  Satan,  both 
to  oppose  the  apostle  in  person,  and  also  to  distrust 
that  testimony  which  they  had  not  spirituality  enough 
to  appreciate,  busily  insinuated  doubts  into  the  minds 
of  these  Gentile  brethren,  and  found  too  ready  an  ear 
among  them. 

Thus  the  apostle  had  to  link  together  the  gospel 
of  grace  with  his  own  apostolic  dignity;  and  we  do 
well  to  take  heed  to  this  remarkable  fact.  With  the 
utmost  simplicity  he  shows  that  his  own  separation 
from  man  was  a  part  of  God's  ways  for  the  purpose  of 
making  more  strikingly  felt  the  great  truth  that  he  was 
afterwards  to  proclaim.  He  had  been  himself  (could 
they  deny  it  ?)  at  least  as  zealous  for  the  Jews'  religion 
as  any  Jew  of  the  straitest  sect.  He  had  made  as  much 
proficiency  as  any  of  his  day — it  may  be,  more.  Who 
of  his  nation  had  advanced  in  Judaism  beyond  him? 
Who  more  zealous  of  the  doctrines  of  his  fathers? 
Therefore,  it  came  to  pass  that  there  was  nothing  the 
apostle  had  not  learned  of  which  they  boasted.  He 
had  been  trained  up  under  the  most  distinguished 
teacher — the  great  Eabbin  Gamaliel;  but  "when  it 
pleased  him,  who  had  separated  him  from  his  mother's 
womb,  and  called  him  by  his  grace,  to  reveal  his  Son 
ia  him."  Mark,  again,  the  strength  of  the  expression. 
It  is  not  simply  that  he  was  brought  to  follow  Jesus, 
to  believe  and  confess  His  name;  but  God  revealed 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   GALATIANS.  145 

His  Son  in  Mm.  And  we  can  all  see  how  exactly  the 
phrase  falls  in  with  the  words  of  our  Lord  given  in  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles;  for  the  wonderful  truth  burst 
upon  the  apostle's  ear  from  the  beginning,  in  the  Sa- 
viour's call  to  him  from  heaven.  The  oneness  of  the 
saints  with  Christ  Himself  is,  as  we  all  familiarly  know, 
clearly  intimated.  So  here  it  is  said  that  God  was 
pleased  to  reveal  His  Son  in  him,  that  he  might  preach 
the  good  news  of  Him  among  the  heathen. 

Immediately,  then,  as  it  is  added,  he  conferred  not 
with  flesh  and  blood ;  neither  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to 
them  which  were  apostles  before  him;  but  went  Hato 
Arabia,  and  returned  again,  not  to  Jerusalem,  but  to 
Damascus,  the  place  near  which  he  had  been  called  at 
first.  "  Then  after  three  years,"  he  says,  "  I  went  up  to 
Jerusalem  to  see  Peter."  Surely  now  there  was  some 
link  with  the  twelve!  N"ot  so.  He  went  simply  to  make 
the  acquaintance  of  Peter,  and  abode  with  him — how 
long  ?  Fifteen  days.  Far  too  short  a  time,  if  it  were 
a  question  of  due  initiation  into  the  testimony  of  the 
twelve.  But,  in  point  of  fact,  he  did  not  see  the  twelve. 
He  saw  Peter ;  but  "  other  of  the  apostles  saw  I  none, 
save  James  the  Lord's  brother.''  To  this  he  gives  the 
most  solemn  asseveration :  "  The  things  which  I  write 
unto  you,  behold,  before  God,  I  lie  not."  Thus  he 
accepts  the  challenge  that  was  given  by  unbelief.  He 
heartily  avows  what  they  counted  a  defect;  and  not 
only  so,  but  with  the  greatest  solemnity  assures  them 
that  he  had  not  seen  the  apostles,  save  only  Peter,  and 
James  the  brother  of  the  Lord,  and  these  but  for  a 
short  space. 

The  apostleship  of  Paul,  therefore,  was  entirely  inde- 
pendent of  Jerusalem  and  the  twelve.    He  had  derived 

L 


146  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

the  gospel  that  he  preached  from  the  Lord,  and  not 
from  any  of  his  fellow-servants  who  had  been  engaged 
in  the  work  before  him.  Nor  had  he  conferred  even 
then  -with  flesh  and  blood ;  his  mission  as  well  as  con- 
version and  call  were  alike  independent  of  it.  He  had 
been  called,  as  none  could  deny,  in  a  way-  which  not 
even  any  other  apostle  had  ever  known.  Of  none  else 
could  it  be  so  said  that  "it  pleased  God  to  reveal  his  Son 
in  him."  It  was  not  thus  that  Peter  or  the  rest  were 
drawn  to  follow  their  Master.  The  language  M'ould  not 
have  been  applicable  when  the  other  apostles  were 
called.  There  was  no  question  of  revealing  His  Son  in 
them  then.  The  very  utmost  that  could  be  said  was, 
that  God  had  been  pleased  to  reveal  His  Son  to  Peter 
and  the  others.  But  there  was  no  sense  of  union  then. 
There  was  no  consciousness  of  the  identification  of  the 
saint  with  Christ.  Accordingly,  the  language  would 
have  been  premature  and  entirely  beyond  the  conscious 
experience  of  the  saints,  or' the  real  truth  of  the  matter 
in  the  sight  of  God.  But  God  took  care  that  the  call 
of  Paul  should  be  delayed  till  the  whole  order  of  the 
Jewish  apostleship  should  be  complete.  He  took  care 
also  that  the  twelfth  apostleship  should  be  filled  up; 
for  it  is  a  profound  mistake  to  suppose  that  Peter  and 
the  other  apostles  had  been  hasty  in  numbering  Matthias 
with  them,  and  that  Paul  was  really  the  twelfth  apostle 
according  to  the  mind  of  the  Lord.  The  truth  is,  that 
they  had  their  relationship  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 
This  seems  to  have  been  the  reason  of  their  being 
twelve ;  and  it  is  to  me  clear  that  our  Lord  establishes 
this  as  the  true  reference  and  key  when  He  declares 
that,  in  the  regeneration,  the  Son  of  Man  shall  sit  upon 
the  throne  of  his  glory,  and  they  shall  sit  upon  twelve 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   GALATIANS.  147 

thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  One  of 
them  fell  from  his  place,  but  the  vacancy  was  filled  up 
directly. 

Thus  all  had  been  duly  prepared  of  God,  with 
a  far-reaching  wisdom,  to  make  the  call  of  Paul  an 
evidently  and  entirely  separate  thing,  to  make  his 
apostleship  as  distinct  in  fact  as  in  form ;  to  give  him 
fresh  communications,  even  as  to  the  Lord's  supper,  and 
to  convey  anew  the  very  gospel  that  he  preached  as  the 
revelation  of  the  Son  in  him.  The  Lord  did  stamp  the 
testimony  of  Peter  as  being  truly  the  revelation  of  His 
Father.  Flesh  and  blood  had  not  revealed  it.  It  was 
not  a  question  of  man's  wit.  His  Father  had  made  a 
revelation  to  Peter.  What  had  been  revealed  ?  He  re- 
vealed that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living 
God.  But,  I  repeat,  this  simply  was  revealed  to  him.  You 
cannot  go  farther.  Jesus,  the  rejected  Messiah,  was  the 
Son  of  the  living  God,  the  giver  of  life,  the  quickening 
Son  of  God.  In  Paul's  case  the  Holy  Ghost  could  go 
a  .step  farther,  and  that  step  He  seems  to  me  to  take. 
The  apostle  states  it  with  perfect  calmness,  and  without 
comparing  others.  There  is  no  depreciating  of  any 
soul,  but  the  plain  statement  of  the  positive  truth, 
which  after  all  is  the  best  and  the  humblest  way,  that 
most  of  all  magnifies  God,  and  edifies  His  children.  So 
it.was,  then,  that  the  apostle  presents  his  own  wonder- 
ful relation  to  Christ.  It  was  not  merely  that  Paul  was 
lowered  by  the  carping  Judaizers — God's  grace  was 
being  sacrificed.  It  was  not  merely  that  his  apostleship 
was  doubted — God's  magnifying  of  His  own  Son  was 
set  at  naught.  It  was  the  ungrateful  heart  of  man 
that,  in  its  avidity  after  something  that  would  bring 
an  appearance  of  strength  and  unity,  would  sacrifice 

L   2 


148  INTRODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

that  which  was  of  heaven  for  what  was  after  all  con- 
nected with  the  earth  and  the  flesh. 

Another  thing,  too,  let  me  just  point  out  in  passing. 
If  ever  there  was  a  man  who  more  than  another  con- 
tended for  the  oneness  of  the  saints  in  every  sense, — 
above  all,  for  the  one  body  of  Christ,  for  the  imity  of  the 
Spirit, — it  was  the  apostle  Paul.  Nevertheless,  there 
never  was  one  that  had  a  deeper  sense  of  the  import- 
ance of  walking,  if  need  were,  alone  with  God.  Be 
assured  that  it  is  the  same  simplicity  of  faith  which 
enters  iuto  both  these  things  now.  On  the  other  hand, 
where  unity  becomes  an  object,  it  is  never  understood; 
and  at  the  same  time  the  walk  of  faith  cannot  be 
maintained.  In  short,  the  man  who,  occupied  with 
Christ  above,  enters  for  that  very  reason  most  into  the 
blessedness  of  the  body  of  Christ  here  below  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven,  is  the  very  one 
that  will  know  in  fit  season  what  it  is  not  to  confer 
with  flesh  and  blood.  No  doubt  this  might  be  pro- 
voking to  human  importance  sometimes.  It  might  seem 
eAtirely  despising  his  brethren.  "Immediately  I  con- 
ferred not  with  flesh  and  blood." 

No  doubt  also  his  line  of  procedure  did  not  at 
all  consort  with  their  desires,  who  were  sticklers  for 
earthly  order,  and  a  line  that  looks  safe  and  respectable 
to  natural  eyes.  What !  an  apostle,  or  at  any  rate  qpe 
that  says  he  is  an  apostle,  setting  aside  what  God 
inaugurated  in  Jerusalem,  not  even  conferring  with 
those  whom  the  Lord  Himself  called  by  BLis  personal 
summons  here  below  ?  Here  they  might  flatter  them- 
selves were  plain  tangible  facts;  here  the  amplest 
testimony  on  the  Lord's  part  that  the  twelve  are  really 
His  chosen  apostles.     But  as  for  the  apostle  Paul,  he 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   GALATIANS.  149 

says  he  was  called,  and  this  by  his  master  from  heaven; 
but  by  his  own  showing  nobody  heard  the  call  of 
Christ  but  himself  One  can  readily  conceive  men  of 
strong  prejudice  and  of  weak  faith  thus  hesitating, 
especially  in  presence  of  the  apostle's  strong  assertion 
of  entire  liberty  from  the  law  for  the  Gentiles.  Con- 
sequently it  is  plain  from  the  begiuning,  that  the 
apostleship  of  Paul  made  a  demand  upon  faith  which 
the  other  apostolate  did  not.  He  was  an  enemy  stop- 
ped in  sovereiga  grace.  He  was  not  converted  first, 
and  then  gradually  led  into  that'  highest  degree,  but 
called  at  once  to  be  an  apostle  as  well  as  saint  in  a 
way  that  belonged  to  no  one  but  himself  It  was 
from  and  in  connection  with  Christ  in  heaven.  He 
acts  on  this  in  faith ;  he  understands  it  with  an  energy 
and  a  brightness  that  increased  even  in  his  Eoman 
prison. 

But  it  was  true  from  the  first.  "  Immediately  I  con- 
ferred not  with  flesh  and  blood."  Had  Paul  gone  up 
to  present  his  credentials  to  the  others,  he  would  have 
lowered,  obscured,  and  done  as  far  as  in  him  lay  to 
destroy  the  special  blessedness  and  peculiar  glory  of 
his  apostleship.  But  he  was  not  thus  disobedient  to  the 
heavenly  vision.  And  God  held  the  reins  that  the  truth 
might  be  kept  unsullied  and  pure ;  and  he  goes  south 
and  north  as  the  Lord  guided  His  servant,  but  not  to 
Jerusalem  to  those  that  were  apostles  before  him.  He 
visits  Arabia  and  Damascus  once  more.  Then  after  a 
certain  lapse  of  time  he  does  see  Jerusalem,  but  no 
more  than  Peter  and  James, — not  the  apostolic  coUege 
officially.  And  you  will  observe  the  immense  import- 
ance attached  to  this  simple  account;  for  all  here  is 
plain  matter  of  fact,  but  pregnant  with  the  weightiest 


150  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

consequences  as  long  as  the  cliurch  and  the  gospel  last 
here  below. 

"  The  things  which  I  write  unto  you,  behold,  before 
God,  I  lie  not.  Afterwards  I  came  into  the  regions 
of  Syria  and  Cilicia,  and  was  unknown  by  face  unto 
the  churches  of  Judaea  which  were  in  Christ."  "Was 
this  then  a  reproach  ?  Be  it  so :  such  was  true.  It 
was  really  part  of  God's  wondrous  ways  with  him,  as 
indicating  the  true  character  of  Christianity  and  of  its 
ministry  as  contrasted  with  Judaism.  It  was  there- 
fore not  only  for  him,  but  for  the  instruction  of  the 
Galatians,  and  of  us  all.  If  understood,  it  completely 
cut  all  the  earthly  swaddling-clothes  of  the  heavenly 
church,  and  of  the  Christian.  Those  who  lived  in 
Jerusalem  were  too  prone  to  preserve  the  clothes  and 
the  cradle  which  had  their  place  and  use  at  first,  but 
had  no  claim  to  be  kept  up  among  the  Gentiles. 
"Whatever  might  be  the  apostle's  tenderness  toward  his 
nation  elsewhere,  not  an  earthly  link  but  must  be 
snapped.  Accordingly  the  apostle  lays  stress  on  the 
fact  that  he  was  "  unknown  by  face  unto  the  churches 
of  Judaea  which  were  in  Christ :  but  they  had  heard 
only,  that  he  which  persecuted  us  in  times  past  now 
preacheth  the  faith  which  once  he  destroyed.  And 
they  glorified  God  in  me." 

This,  be  it  observed,  was  part  of  God's  way  with  him 
beyond  all  others.  There  was  no  such  thing  as  a  gradual 
training.  The  other  apostles  enjoyed  this  more.  They 
had  followed  Jesus  in  His  earthly  path  of  presentation 
to  Israel.  They  had  been  by  degrees  instructed  accord- 
ing to  the  testimony  which  the  Lord  Jesus  was  pleased 
to  give ;  and  most  suited  it  was,  of  course,  to  the  time, 
people,  and  circumstances.    Anything  else  would  have 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.  151 

been  imperfect;  but  still  it  had  essentially  a  transitional 
character.  It  was  partly  directed  to  the  hearts  and 
consciences  of  the  Jews,  partly  in  view  of  the  approach- 
ing rupture  of  all  ties  with  Israel. 

In  Paul's  case  there  was  nothing  of  the  sort.  His 
testimony  was  characteristically  though  not  of  course 
exclusively  heavenly,  as  it  was  also  the  witness  of 
grace  to  the  fullest.  How  could  it  be  otherwise  with 
one  persecuting  at  the  moment  that  he  was  arrested, 
in  hot  deadly  opposition  to  God's  church  up  to  his 
most  unexpected  call  from  heaven?  Thus  is  seen 
sovereign  grace,  and  nothing  else,  as  well  as  a  hea- 
venly link  instantly  formed  between  the  Lord  in  glory 
and  His  servant  on  earth.  No  wonder  that  the  apostle 
attached  the  greatest  moment  to  the  facts  of  his  con- 
version and  call,  and  that,  instead  of  hiding  his  lack 
of  familiarity  both  with  the  apostles  and  with  the 
churches  in  Judea,  he  glories  in  it.  It  was  through  no 
such  channel  that  he  had  his  apostleship.  Christ  on 
high  had  called  him.  Such  was  the  will  of  Grod  the 
Father  that  had  raised  Christ  from  the  dead. 

But  we  have  a  good  deal  more.  He  tells  us  that 
fourteen  years  after  he  again  went  up  to  Jerusalem. 
He  went  up  with  Barnabas,  taking  Titus  with  him. 
It  was  by  revelation,  not  by  summons  from  Jerusalem, 
or  to  acquire  a  title  thereby.  And  "  Titus,"  as  he  says 
here,  "who  was  with  me,  being  a  Greek,"  &c.  So  far  from 
this  being  the  smallest  allowance  of  Jewish  prejudice, 
it  was  itself  a  powerful  blow  against  it.  Thus,  going 
up  with  Barnabas,  he  took  Titus,  a  Gentile,  along  with 
him ;  and  even  so  by  revelation.  It  was  rather  to  have 
Gentile  liberty  secured  by  the  twelve  apostles,  and  that 
the  Judaizers  should  be  condemned  by  the  church  at 


152  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

Jerusalem.  It  was  the  very  reverse  of  deriving  his 
authority  from  either.  He  went  up  by  revelation  for 
the  purpose  of  getting  a  condemnation  in  Jerusalem  , 
itself  of  those  who  would  force  Jewish  principles  on 
the  church  of  God  at  large.  The  legal  mischief  had 
emanated  from  Jerusalem :  the  remedy  of  grace  must 
he  applied  by  the  apostles,  elders,  and  brethren  there. 
It  was  a  misuse  of  the  respect  naturally  accorded  to 
some  who  came  from  Jerusalem ;  and  so  God  took  care 
to  correct  the  evil  by  a  formal,  public,  authoritative 
sentence  of  the  body  there,  instead  of  a  pure  and  sim- 
ple rejection  of  the  error  among  the  Gentile  churches, 
which  might  have  looked  like  a  schism,  or  at  least 
a  divergence  of  feeling  between  them  and  the  apostle 
Paul.  It  might  have  been  inferred  that  Paul  was  to 
do  what  he  could  with  the  Gentile  churches,  but  that 
the  twelve  exclusively  cared  for  the  churches  in  Judaea, 
he  consequently  having  nothing  to  do  with  them.  But 
it  is  not  so.  The  apostle  goes  up  to  Jerusalem,  not  only 
with  Barnabas,  who  had  come  from  thence,  but  taking 
with  him  Titus,  who  seems  not  to  have  been  there 
before — -Titus,  his  own  valued  companion  in  labour, 
but  a  Gentile.  In  fact,  what  Jerusalem  had  done,  as 
far  as  this  was  concerned,  was  to  let  slip  men  that 
would  impose  circumcision — evil  workers,  as  he  in  a 
later  epistle  contemptuously  calls  such  Uke  of  the  con- 
cision; for  they  were  corrupting  the  Gentile  churches 
by  Judaism,  instead  of  helping  them  in  Christ. 

Thus,  then,  God  directed  and  ruled  that  the  apostle 
should  go  up  and  have  the  evil  condemned  on  the  spot, 
and  at  the  centre  from  which  it  had  emanated.  And  when 
he  went  there,  was  it  a  question  of  receiving  aught  from 
the  twelve?    Nay;  he  communicated  unto  them  the 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   GALATIANS.  153' 

gospel  which  he  preached  among  the  Gentiles.  It  was 
not  that  they  communicated  to  him  the  gospel  they  had 
learned  from  Jesus  here  below,  but  he  communicated 
to  them  that  gospel  he  was  in  the  habit  of  preaching 
among  the  Gentiles.  But  it  was  in  no  vain  glory,  in 
no  tone  of  superiority,  though,  no  doubt,  it  was  a  far 
fuUer  and  higher  testimony  than  theirs ;  for  he  adds, 
"  privately  to  them  which  were  of  reputation,  lest  by  any 
means  I  should  run  or  had  run  in  vain."  He  granted 
that  persons  might  indulge  in  some  such  thoughts 
about  him.  It  was  for  the  chiefs  at  Jerusalem  to  judge 
for  themselves,  and  they  did  judge  to  the  confusion  of 
the  apostle's  adversaries.  "  But  neither  Titus  [he  takes 
occasion  to  say  parenthetically],  being  a  Greek,  was 
compelled  to  be  circumcised."  And  what  was  the 
result  of  all  this  ?  Why,  that  though  there  were  "  false 
brethren  unawares  brought  in,  who  came  in  privily  to 
spy  out  our  liberty  which  we  have  in  Christ  Jesus,  that 
they  might  bring  us  into  bondage,"  Paul  did  not  give 
place  by  subjection  even  for  an  hour,  "that  the  truth 
of  the  gospel  might  continue  with  them."  For  the 
foundation  was  at  stake.  "But  of  thesfe  who  seemed 
to  be  somewhat."  Here  he  takes  up,  not  the  mis- 
chievous troublers  of  the  GentUes,  whom  he  does  not 
hesitate  to  call  "false  brethren,"  but  the  highest  in 
of&ce  he  found  there.  "Of  these  who  seemed  to  be 
somewhat  (whatsoever  they  were,  it  maketh  no  matter 
to  me)."  It  is  interesting  to  note  the  earnestness  and 
strength  with  which  the  apostle  speaks,  now  the  question 
had  been  fairly  raised.  Pungent,  abrupt,  indignant,  he 
none  the  less  was  led  of  God.  "  But  of  these  who  seemed 
to  be  somewhat,  (whatsoever  they  were,  it  maketh  no 
matter  to  me :   God  acoepteth  no  man's  person :)  for 


154  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

they  who  seemed  to  he  somewhat  in  conference  added 
nothing  to  me;  but  contrariwise,  when  they  saw  that 
the  gospel  of  the  uncircumcision  was  committed  unto 
me,  as  the  gospel  of  the  circumcision  was  unto  Peter,"  &c. 
A  different  issue  ensued  from  their  settling  down  in  the 
mutual  independence  of  the  Gentile  churches  and  the 
Jewish.  "They  gave  to  me  and  Barnabas  the  right 
hands  of  fellowship ;  that  we  should  go  unto  the  heathen, 
and  they  unto  the  circumcision."  They  thus  acted  and 
pronounced  according  to  the  evident  intention  of  God 
conveyed  in  the  character  of  their  apostolates  respec- 
tively. 

Thus,  it  is  seen,  the  truth  was  established.  The  apostle 
Paul  interferes  in  no  way  with  the  work  which  God 
had  given  the  others  to  do.  He  owned  and  valued,  in 
its  own'  place,  the  difficult,  weighty,  and  momentous 
work  which  God  had  assigned  to  Peter,  James,  and  the 
rest ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  stood  firmly — humbly, 
of  course,  and  loAdngly,  but  firmly — for  that  which  the 
Lord  had  assigned  to  himself  and  his  colleagues  among 
the  Gentiles;  and,  so  far  from  Christ's  liberty  having 
been  in  the  least  weakened,  the  apostolic  conclave  put 
their  seal,  with  the  whole  church  at  Jerusalem,  upon  it 
most  heartily.  (Acts  xv.)  As  it  is  said  here,  "  They  gave 
to  me  and  Barnabas  the  right  hands  of  fellowship,  that 
we  should  go  unto  the  heathen  and  they  unto  the  cir- 
cumcision. Only  they  would  that  we  should  remember 
the  poor;  the  same  which  I  also  was  forward  to  do." 
But  this  was  not  all.  He  mentions  another  fact,  and  of 
the  greatest  gravity,  closing  this  part  of  his  argumeiit — 
that  when  Peter  subsequently  came  down  into  the 
Gentile  quarters,  he  had  been  himself  affected  by  the 
subtle  spirit  of  Judaism,  i.e.,  the  chief  of  the  twelve! 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   GALATIANS.  155 

How  little  is  man  to  be  accounted  of !  And  Paul,  far 
from  deriving  his  apostleship  or  aught  else  from  Peter, 
was  obliged  to  rebuke  bim,  and  this  publicly.  "  When 
Peter  was  come  to  Antioch,  I  withstood  him  to  the  face, 
because  he  was  to  be  blamed :  for  before  that  certain 
came  from  James,  he  did  eat  with  the  Gentiles;  but 
when  they  were  come,  he  withdrew  and  separated  him- 
self, fearing  them  which  were  of  the  circumcision.  A.nd 
the  other  Jews  dissembled  likewise  with  him;  insomuch 
that  Barnabas  also  was  carried  away  with  their  dis- 
simulation. But  when  I  saw  that  they  walked  not 
uprightly  according  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  I  said 
unto  Peter  before  them  all,  If  thou,  being  a  Jew, 
livest  after  the  manner  of  Gentiles,  and  not  as  do  the 
Jews,  why  compellest  thou  the  Gentiles  to  live  as  do 
the  Jews?"  I  call  your  attention  particularly  to  this, 
brethren,  that  an  act  apparently  so  simple  as  Peter's 
ceasing  to  eat  with  the  Gentiles  had  such  a  solemn 
character  in  the  eye  of  the  apostle  Paul,  that  he  con- 
sidered it  a  question  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  Are 
you  prepared  for  this  searching  judgment  of  what 
looked  a  small  and  indifferent  matter  ?  Do  your  souls 
go  along  with  Paul's  decision  ?  Or  are  you  inclined  , 
toward  the  easy-going  yieldingness  of  Peter  ?  Can  you 
seize  the  gravity  of  this  ? 

Eemember  what  it  must  have  been  to  one  like  Paul 
to  censure  the  most  honoured  of  the  twelve.  Por  Peter 
is  not  said  to  have  withdrawn  from  fhe  Lord's  table 
where  the  uncircumcised  met,  but  from  the  simple 
matter  of  eating  with  the  Gentiles.  The  truth  of  the 
gospel,  to  the  apostle  Paul's  mind,  was  at  stake.  Need 
it  be  added  that  he  was  right  and  Peter  wrong  ?  The 
gospel  had  brought  in  before  God  this  double  conclu- 


156  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

sion,  founded  on  the  first  Adam  and  the  last.  It 
supposed,  and  went  forth  to  every  creature  on  the 
ground  of  the  total  ruin  of  Jew  and  Gentile.  There 
was  no  difference :  all  had  sinned.  And  it  proclaimed 
the  full  and  equally  blessed  standing  of  those  who 
received  Christ.  There  was  no  difference  in  the  bless- 
ing of 'Christ:  man's  guilt  and  God's  grace  were  alike 
indiscriminate.  There  was  no  difference  either  way. 
(Eom.  iii.  x.)  But  the  act  of  Peter  went  to  maintain 
a  difference.  The  truth  of  the  gospel,  therefore,  was 
compromised.  And  there  were  reasons  why  Peter  was 
grievously  in  fault,  particularly  as  he  did  no  longer 
adhere  to  the  law,  but  lived  as  one  conscious  of  the 
freedom  from  it  which  the  gospel  gives  those  who 
believe  in  a  risen  Christ.  Why  then  did  he  want  the 
Gentiles  to  live  as  did  the  Jews  ? 

The  apostle  accordingly  now  turns  to  the  great 
argument  of  his  epistle,  and  the  discussion  of  those 
grand  principles  that  are  characteristic  to  Christianity, 
and  in  full  agreement  with  the  facts  that  have  already 
been  brought  before  you.  "We  who  are  Jews  by 
nature,  and  not  sinners  of  the  Gentiles,  knowing  that 
.a  man  is  not  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law,  but  by 
the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  even  we  have  believed  in 
Jesus  Christ,  that  we  may  be  justified  by  the  faith  of 
Christ,  and  not  by  the  works  of  the  law;  for  by  the 
works  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified."  But  then 
he  goes  farther.  He  says,  "If,  while  we  seek  to  be 
justified  by  Christ,  we  ourselves  also  are  found  sinners, 
is  Christ  therefore  the  minister  of  sin?"  This  would 
have  flowed  from  Peter's  conduct.  Had  Peter  been 
right,  it  was  evident  that  the  gospel  had  put  Peter  in 
the  wrong.    The  gospel  had  led  Peter  to  treat  the  Jews 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   GALATIANS.  157 

and  Gentiles  all  alike.  The  gospel  had  given  him  to 
sanction  in  his  ways  and  words  the  overthrow  of  the 
partition  wall.  If  Peter  was  acting  rightly  now,  this 
had  all  been  a  mistake,  and  consequently  the  gospel — 
nay,  solemn  to  say,  Christ  Himself — would  he  thus  a 
minister  of  sin.  Such  was  the  serious  but  necessary 
import  of  Peter's  act.  Peter  would  have  been  horrified 
at  such  a  conclusion.  This  shows  us  the  exceeding 
seriousness  of  a  step  apparently  so  trifling  as  his 
abstaining  from  further  intercourse  with  the  Gentiles 
in  mere  ordinary  life.  The  apostle's  discerning  eye  at 
once  judged  by  Christ  and  by  that  gospel  which  he  had 
learned  from  Him.  He  habitually  measured  things  not 
so  much  by  their  bearing  on  Jews  or  Gentiles  as  by  their 
effect  on  Christ's  glory.  In  point  of  fact,  to  bring  in 
Christ  is  also  best  of  all  to  secure  the  blessing,  the 
privileges,  the  glory  that  God  has  in  His  grace  for 
every  one  that  believes.  Paul  was  pleading  for  the  real 
interests  of  the  Jew  just  as  much  as  of  the  Gentile ; 
but  lie  presses  this  most  clenching  argiiment  —  that 
Peter's  conduct  involved  the  making  Christ  Himself 
the  minister  of  sin;  "for  if  I  build  again  the  things 
which  I  destroyed,  I  make  myself  a  transgressor." 

Then  the  apostle  at  once  explains,  as  anncKed  to  this, 
the  real  state  of  the  case.  "  I  through  the  law  am  dead 
to  the  law."  As  you  know,  he  had  been  under  law  as  a 
Jew.  And  what  was  the  effect  of  God's  giving  him  to 
have  an  application  of  law  in  his  own  conscience? 
Why,  to  feel  himself  a  dead  man.  As  it  is  reasoned 
out  in  Romans  vii.,  the  law  came,  and  he  died.  "I 
through  law  am  dead  to  law,  that  I  might  live 
unto  God."  The  law  in  itself  never  produces  such  a 
result.     All  that  the  law  can  do,  even  when  yielded  by 


158  INTEODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

the  might  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  is  to  force  on  a  soul 
the  consciousness  of  being  dead  before  God.  The  law  is 
never  life  to  the  dead,  but  kills  morally  those  who  seem 
alive.  "I  through  law  am  dead  to  law."  It  is  thus,  then, 
that  grace  uses  it  to  give  me  death  in  my  conscience 
before  God.  Thus  I  am  dead  through  the  law.  The 
Spirit  of  God  can  employ  it  to  make  a  man  feel  that 
all  is  over  with  him ;  but  He  goes  farther  in  grace,  and 
by  that  very  law  brings  the  man  in  dead  to  the  law,  and 
not  merely  condemned.  He  through  law  died  to  law, 
that  he  might  live  to  God !  Here  he  comes  to  the  posi- 
tive blessing  ;  for  the  Spirit  cannot  rest  in  what  is  but 
negative.  But  it  is  life  after  death  to  law,  and  conse- 
quently in  another  sphere. 

He  next  announces  the  true  secret  of  it  all :  "  I  am 
crucified  with  Christ."  It  is  not  merely  that  I  have 
found  in  Christ  a  Saviour,  but  I  am  crucified  with 
Christ.  My  very  nature  is  dealt  with.  All  that  I  have 
as  a  living  man  in  the  world  is  gone, — not,  of  course,  as 
a  mere  matter  of  fact,  but,  what  is  far  more  important, 
as  a  matter  of  faith.  The  history  of  the  flesh — its  sad 
and  humbling  history — is  soon  over;  but  the  history 
that  faith  opens  into  never  closes.  "I  am  crucified  with 
Christ."  This  terminates  aU  for  me  as  a  living  man 
here  below.  "  Nevertheless  " — astonishing  to  say,  for  it 
could  not  be  natural  life — "  nevertheless,  I  live."  And 
what  sort  of  life  can  this  be  ?  "  Yet  not  I,  but  Christ 
Kveth  in  me."  How  precious  to  have  done  with  one's 
sinful  self  and  to  begin  a  life  so  perfect  as  Christ's ! 
"And  the  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by 
the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me,  and  gave 
himself  for  me." 

I  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  law  any  more,  even  if 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   GALATIANS.  159 

I  had  been  once  under  it  as  a  Jew.  For  the  law  was  used 
with  killing  power ;  and,  slain  as  it  were  in  my  con- 
science, I  found  in  that  very  place  Christ  Himself  by 
the  grace  of  God, — Christ  that  died  for  me;  and  not 
merely  this,  but  Christ  in  whom  I  died.  I  am  crucified 
with  Christ:  consequently  all  that  remains  for  me  is 
living  this  new  life  which  Christ  is  in  me.  And  this 
life  is  sustained  by  the  very  same  person  who  is  its 
source.  "  The  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live 
by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me,"  &c.  It 
is  not  a  question  of  my  loving  Him,  though  this  is  and 
must  be  true  of  the  saints ;  but  this  vrould  tend  to 
throw  the  soul  on  self,  and  it  is  not  the  reckoning  of 
grace.  What  comforts  the  soul,  what  strengthens  and 
keeps  it  up,  is  that  He  "loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for 
me." 

Thus,  as  he  says  most  emphatically,  "  I  do  not  frus- 
trate the  grace  of  God;"  they  did,  every  one  who 
substituted  aught  but  Christ  and  His  cross.  Every  one 
who  went  back  from  such  a  gospel  as  this  was,  as  far 
as  it  went,  frustrating  the  grace  of  God.  "  If  righteous- 
ness come  by  the  law,"  (he  does  not  merely  say,  "  come 
of  the  law,"  but  come  ly  it,)  "then  Christ  is  dead 
[died]  in  vain."  Not  so  ;  it  is  exclusively  of  grace  by 
Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified.  It  is  wholly  apart 
from  works  of  law. 

Accordingly,  in  the  next  chapter  he  pursues  his 
reasoning.  "  0  foolish  Galatians,"  he  now  breaks  out  in 
an  impassioned  appeal  to  them,  "who  hath  bewitched 
you  [that  ye  should  not  obey  the  truth  should  here 
vanish],  before  whose  eyes  Jesus  Christ  hath  been  eyi- 
dently  set  forth  crucified  among  you?"  Observe  the 
place  the  cross  has  here,  not  merely  Christ's  blood,  but 


160  INTEODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

His  death  on  the  cross.  As  we  saw  it  in  the  Corinthians 
applied  to  judge  the  worldliness  of  the  saints  there,  so 
here  it  judges  their  legalism.  "This  only  would  I  learn 
of  you,  Eeceived  ye  the  Spirit  by  the  works  of  the  law, 
or  by  the  hearing  of  faith  ?"  There  are  two  things  in 
the  Christian;  he  has  a  life,  a  new  life  in  Christ,  but 
he  has  also  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  law  kills  instead 
of  giving  life,  and  puts  under  condemnation  instead  of 
giving  that  Spirit  which  is  necessarily  a  spring  of,  son- 
ship  and  liberty.  Having  brought  in  the  true  character 
of  the  Christian's  life  as  flowing  simply  and  solely  from 
Christ,  and  from  Christ  crucified  too,  so  here  he  takes 
up  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  was  given,  whether  in  power  or 
in  person,  not  by  the  law,  but  by  the  hearing  of  faith. 

"Are  ye  so  foolish?  having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  are 
ye  now  made  perfect  by  the  flesh  ?  Have  ye  suffered  so 
many  things  in  vain,  if  it  be  yet  in  vain  ?  He  there- 
fore that  ministereth  to  you  the  Spirit,  and  worketh 
miracles  among  you,  doeth  he  it  by  the  works  of  the 
law,  or  by  the  hearing  of  faith?"  There  could  be  but 
one  answer.  This  immense  privilege  had  no  connec- 
tion with  law  whatever.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  given  as 
the  seal  of  faith  in  Christ  on  the  accomplishment  of 
redemption,  not  before  nor  otherwise. 

Then  he  takes  up  Abraham ;  for  this  is  always  the 
stock  argument  of  those  who  would  bring  in  circum- 
cision and  the  law,  Abraham  being  emphatically  the 
friend  of  God  and  the  father  of  the  faithful.  And  mark 
how  the  Holy  Ghost  turns  Abraham  into  an  additional 
and  most  unexpected  proof  of  the  grace  of  God  and  the 
truth  of  the  gospel.  Only  we  must  carefully  bear  this 
in  mind,  that  in  the  epistle  to  the  Galatians  we  never 
rise  exactly  to  church  ground.     It  is  Christian  ground. 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   GALATIANS.  161 

certainly,  but  not  the  church  as  such.  Of  course  the 
same  persons  who  are  here  in  present  view  belonged  to 
the  church  of  God ;  but  then  they  are  not  contemplated 
in  their  heavenly  relationship,  but  as  the  children  of 
promise,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  end  of  this  very  chapter. 
There  are  many  present  privileges  and  future  glories 
that  belong  to  the  Christian ;  and  promise  is  one  of  them. 
"We  are  not  to  suppose  that  a  higher  and  more  heavenly 
character  blots  out  the  lesser  place ;  of  this  the  apostle 
takes  advantage  here.  But  he  proves  more  when  he 
says  that  Abraham  believed  God ;  it  was  plainly  not  a 
question  of  law.  Abraham  never  heard  of  the  law. 
"Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was  accounted  to  him 
for  righteousness.  Know  ye  therefore  that  they  which 
are  of  faith"  (not  those  that  cry  up  the  law)  "  are  the 
children  of'  Abraham.  And  the  Scripture,  foreseeing 
that  God  would  justify  the  heathen  through  faith,"  not 
by  becoming  proselytes  of  the  gate,  or  entering  on  a 
legal  basis,  but  "  foreseeing  that  God  would  justify  the 
heathen  through  faith,  preached  before  the  gospel  unto 
Abraham,  saying.  In  thee  shall  all  nations  be  blessed." 
Later,  and  in  a  far  fuller  way  now,  the  gospel  was  the 
blessed  answer  to  this  early  grace.  He  does  not  say 
that  it  is  the  complement  of  it ;  but  most  decidedly  it 
flows  from  the  same  divine  spring  of  grace.  The 
gospel,  not  the  law,  owns  its  kindred  with  the  promise. 
"  So  then,"  says  he,  "  they  which  be  of  faith  are  blessed 
with  faithful  Abraham."  The  law  holds  out  but  never 
gives  blessing.  Those  that  are  of  faith,  not  those  who 
pretend  to  the  law  and  do  it  not,  are  blessed  with  their 
father. 

But  he  goes  deeply.     He  teUs  them  that  as  many  as 
take  the  ground  of  law-works   are  under  the   curse 

M 


162  INTBODUCTOET  LECTURES. 

already.  Not  that  they  have  actually  broken  down  and 
failed ;  but  so  incapable  is  man  of  standing  before  God 
on  the  principle  of  doing  the  law,  that  it  is  all  over 
with  him  the  moment  he  pretends  to  it.  "  As  many  as 
are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse  :  for  it 
is  written,  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in 
all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to 
do  them."  The  consequence  is,  that  no  man  is  justified 
by  the  law  in  the  sight  of  God ;  and  this  he  proves,  not 
only  from  the  promise,  but  from  the  prophets.  When 
the  prophet  speaks  of  any  one  living,  it  is  by  faith — 
"The  just  shall  live  by  faith."  Hence,  you  see,  all 
exactly  suits  the  gospel  as  Paul  insisted  on  it.  "  Christ 
hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made 
a  curse  for  us:  for  it  is  written.  Cursed  is  every  one 
that  hangeth  on  a  tree :  that  the  blessing  of  Abraham 
might  come  on  the  Gentiles  through  Jesus  Christ."  He 
does  not  say,  that  the  Gentiles  were  under  that  curse, 
but  that  Christ  bought  off  us  who  were  in  this  position 
from  its  curse ;  for  in  truth,  whatever  might  be  our 
boast,  all  we  (the  Jews)  got  from  the  law  was  a  curse, 
not  a  blessing ;  and  what  Christ  did  for  us  was  to  pur- 
chase us  from  that  awful  plight  in  which  the  law  could 
not  but  put  us  because  we  had  transgressed  it.  And 
thus  the  blessing  of  Abraham  could  flow  freely  towards 
the  Gentiles  who  never  were  there. 

And  this  leads  to  another  point, — the  relation  of 
the  law  to  the  promises.  How  do  they  stand  related  1 
and  how  do  they  affect  each  other  ?  The  apostle  turns 
this  into  an  admirable  piece  of  divine  reasoning  in 
defence  of  the  gospel.  "Brethren,  I  speak  after  the 
manner  of  men;  though  it  be  but  a  man's  covenant,  yet, 
if  it  be  confirmed,  no  man  annuUeth  or  addeth  thereto." 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   GALATIANS.  163 

Everybody  knows  this.  When  once  a  covenant  is 
"  signed,  sealed,  and  delivered,"  it  must  not  be  meddled 
with.  You  cannot  lawfully  add  to  it,  any  more  than 
set  aside  its  provisions.  "Now  to  Abraham  were  the 
promises  spoken,  and  to  his  seed.  He  saith  not.  And 
to  seeds,  as  to  many ;  but  as  to  one.  And  to  thy  seed, 
which  is  Christ.  And  this  I  say,  that  the  covenant 
confirmed  before  by  God  unto  Christ,  the  law,  which 
was  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  after,  can  not  annul 
so  that  it  should  make  the  promise  of  none  effect." 
Such  is  the  application.  "For  if  the  inheritance  be 
of  law,  it  is  no  more  of  promise : "  otherwise  by  the 
condition  of  law  you  would  annul  the  promise.  That 
is  to  say,  the  covenant  that  was  made  between  God  and 
Abraham  had  reference  to  the  seed  which  was  coming, 
symbolized  by  Isaac,  but  really  looking  onward  to 
Christ.  Nothing  that  God  afterwards  introduced  an- 
nulled this.  If  the  law,  introduced  afterwards,  were 
allowed  to  exercise  control,  the  effect  would  be  to  set 
aside  the  promise.  It  would  be  first  adding  to  it,  and 
not  only  so,  but  annulling  it.  The  inheritance,  there- 
fore, depends  on  the  grace  of  God  fulfilling  His  promise, 
not  on  man's  accomplishment  of  the  law,  even  if  pos- 
sible. The  promise  is  therefore  entirely  distinct  from 
the  law,  which  was  not  heard  of  for  four  hundred  and 
thirty  years  after.  The  long  lapse  of  time  ought  to- 
have  guarded  men  from  mixing  up  the  law  with  the 
promise,  and  thus  from  the  appearance  of  annulling 
the  promise  by  the  law,  for  this  would  be  most  dis- 
honouring to  God.  We  can  understand  a  foolish  man 
making  a  covenant,  and  the  next  day  repenting  of  it, 
which  is  never  true  of  the  divine  purposes.  In  this 
case  it  was  God  that  gave  the  promise ;  it  was  He  that 

M    2 


164  INTRODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

confirmed  the  covenant  to  Christ,  without  saying  a 
word  about  the  law  till  four  hundred  and  thirty  years 
after.  How  impossible,  therefore,  to  add  the  law  to  the 
promise !  Still  less  is  it  possible  to  let  the  law  set  its 
force  aside.  "To  Abraham  were  the  promises  made,  and 
to  his  seed." 

This  is  exceedingly  important,  and  the  more  as  I 
believe  the  scope  of  the  allusion  to  Abraham  and  to 
his  seed  is  not  often  appreciated.  The  argument  is 
founded  upon  the  unity  of  the  seed  of  promise  in  this 
connection.  For  God  does  speak  elsewhere,  and  even 
on  this  occasion,  of  a  rvwmerous  seed.  One  of  the  en^ 
couragements,  as  we  know,  which  God  furnished  to 
Abraham  was,  that  he  should  have  a  seed  like  the  sand 
of  the  sea,  and  like  the  stars  of  the  sky.  These  were  his 
lineal  posterity.  But  where  the  Gentiles  are  mentioned, 
God  only  speaks  of  seed  without  reference  to  number. 

This  is  best  seen  by  turning  to  Genesis  xxii.,  where 
both  facts  are  found  in  the  same  context.  I  just  refer 
to  it  for  a  moment,  because  it  adds  much  to  the  beauty 
of  the  reasoning  in  Galatians.  In  verse  17  it  is  written, 
"In  blessing  I  will  bless  thee,  and  in  multiplying  I 
will  multiply  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of  the  heaven,  and 
as  the  sand  which  is  upon  the  sea  shore."  At  first 
sight  it  seems  most  extraordinary,  if  the  apostle  referred 
to  such  a  Scripture  for  the  proof  of  the  importance  of 
one  seed ;  because,  if  there  is  anything  that  lies  on  the 
surface  of  the  passage,  it  is  the  multiplicity  of  the  seed 
— a  seed  expressly  said  to  exceed  all  reckoning.  This, 
then,  is  not  what  the  apostle  Paul  has  in  view,  but  in 
contrast  with  it.  And  mark  the  difference.  When  God 
speaks  of  the  seed  numerous  as  the  sand  or  the  stars. 
He  gives  them  a  Jewish  character  of  blessing.     "Thy 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   GALATIAlfS.  165 

seed  (i.e.,  the  numerous  seed)  shall  possess  the  gate  of 
his  enemies."  God  promises  the  final  power  and  glory 
of  Israel  in  the  earth,  putting  down  their  foes,  and  so 
forth. 

But  immediately  after  this  it  is  added,  "In  thy 
seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed." 
Here  we  have  the  Gentiles  expressly  named,  and  to 
this  the  apostle  refers.  Mark  it  well.  When  God 
gives  a  pledge  not  of  possessing  the  gate  of  enemies, 
when  He  speaks  of  the  blessing  of  the  nations,  instead 
of  the  overthrow  of  Israel's  foes,  then  he  speaks  simply 
of  "thy  seed."  There  is  no  comparison  of  countless 
seed ;  there  is  not  an  allusion  to  the  sand  of  the  sea,  or 
to  the  stars  of  the  sky.     On  this  the  apostle  reasons. 

What  the  Jews  would  have  liked,  no  doubt,  was  power 
(and  the  Galatians,  after  all,  were  in  danger  of  slipping 
into  the  same  snare;  for  the  law  suits  the  world,  as 
grace  does  not),  and  in  the  world  present  power  and 
honour.  This  the  Jews  are  destined  to  have  by-and-by; 
for  the  promises  to  Abraham  are  not  exhausted  yet. 
Whereas  the  Holy  Ghost  by  the  apostle  draws  attention 
to  the  contrast  of  "thy  seed"  (as  one)  with  the  numerous 
seed,  with  earthly  blessing  attached  to  them;  whilst 
to  "thy  seed"  simply,  without  reference  to  stars  or 
to  sand,  no  more  is  annexed  than  the  blessing  of  Gen- 
tiles. This  it  is  to  which  we  are  come  now  under 
Christianity.  By-and-by  will  be  fulfilled  the  promised 
earthly  blessing,  and  power,  and  glory  for  Israel  like 
the  sand  and  the  stars.  The  Jews  will  surely  be  ex- 
alted, as  well  as  converted  nationally,  and  they  will 
then  put  down  their  enemies,  being  made  the  head 
when  other  nations  become  the  tail.  But  meanwhile, 
under  the  gospel,  there  is  an  express  promise  of  the 


166  INTRODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

blessing  of  the  Gentiles  when  God  spoke  of  the  one 
seed,  which  is  Christ.  Already  "  thy  seed,"  the  true 
Isaac,  is  given,  and  in  that  true  seed  the  Gentiles  are 
being  blessed.  It  is  no  question  now  of  being  subject 
to  the  Jews,  who  shall  never  possess  the  gate  of  their 
enemies,  but  be  peeled  and  scattered  and  few,  while 
the  gospel  is  going  forth.  The  other  part  remains,  and 
must  be  accomplished  in  its  own  day,  when  Israel's 
heart  turns  to  the  Lord.  Meanwhile  another  and  a 
better  sort  of  blessing  is  given,  as  a  better  Seed  also 
is  given — the  true  Heir  of  all  the  promises  of  God, 
even  Christ  the  Lord.  And,  doubtless,  God  had  all  this 
in  view  when  He  pledged  Himself  with  an  oath  to 
Abraham.  He  did  not  forget  His  people  Israel;  but  He 
had  always  the  glory  of  Christ  before  Him ;  and  the 
moment  we  rise  up  to  this  blessed  Seed  of  all  blessing 
(the  true  Isaac,  dead  and  risen  really,  as  the  son  of 
Abraham  was  then  in  figure),  the  blessing  of  the  Gen- 
tiles is  secured  in  that  one  sole  person,  before  the  Jews 
are  multiplied  in  their  land  under  the  new  covenant, 
and  possess  the  gate  of  their  enemies. 

This  then  is  the  apostle's  allusion  and  reasoning; 
but  he  proceeds  to  meet  a  natural  objection.  If  the 
promise  be  the  only  means  of  enjoying  the  inheritance, 
what  is  the  good  of  the  law  ?  Does  not  this  make  very 
light  of  it?  You  say  that  the  promise  is  everything, 
and  that  the  law  cannot  either  set  aside  the  promise  or 
add  other  clauses  to  it.  What  then  is  the  end  of  the 
law  ?  It  is  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  in  transgression, 
answers  the  apostle.  This  is  all  that  people's  zeal  and 
labour  come  to.  They  spring  from  unbelief — from  undue 
thoughts  of  self,  from  ignorance  of  God,  from  slight 
thoughts  of  Christ.     Legal  activity  is  but  labouring  in 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   GALATIANS.  167 

the  fire  for  vanity;  and  if,  alas!  the  Christian  dooms 
himself  to  such  hard  labour  instead  of  resting  in  the  faith 
of  Christ,  whom  has  he  to  blattie  ?  Certainly  not  God, 
nor  His  plain  and  precious  word.  He  will  gain  trans- 
gression thereby;  nothing  more,  nothing  better.  "Where- 
fore then  serveth  the  law?  It  was  added  because  of 
transgressions,  till  the  seed  should  come  to  whom  the 
promise  was  made;  and  it  was  ordained  by  angels  in 
the  hand  of  a  mediator."  Thus  it  is  evident  that  the 
legal  system  is  a  parenthesis.  Promise  was  before  the 
law,  and  flowed  out  of  the  grace  of  God.  The  law  came 
in  meanwhile,  serving  its  own  object,  which  was  to 
bring  out  what  was  in  the  heart  of  man.  For  he  is  a 
sinner;  and  the  law  called  out  the  sin  into  articulate 
transgressions,  and  made  it  perfectly  plain  that  the  heart 
is  only  evil  continually,  and  proves  it  by  plain  transgres- 
sions ;  that  is  all.  Then  comes  the  seed,  and  the  promise 
is  made  Yea  and  Amen  in  Him — all  the  promises  of 
God.  As  made  under  the  law  He  was  for  Israel ;  but 
He  died  and  rose,  and  was  thus  free  to  bless  a  Gentile 
as  much  as  a  Jew.  For  what  has  a  risen  man  to  do 
with  Israel  more  than  the  nations?  All  question  of 
natural  ties  drops  in  death ;  as  the  cross  is  the  disproof 
of  any  right  to  Christ  in  either.  For  Jew  and  Gentile 
were  alike  guilty  of  crucifying  Him.  All  therefore 
becomes  a  matter  of  the  pure  grace  of  God ;  and  He  is 
pleased  to  bless  the  Gentiles  in  the  Seed,  even  Christ 
dead  and  risen. 

The  law  is  of  a  wholly  different  nature,  and  hence 
was  ordained  of  angels  in  the  hand  of  a  mediator. 
The  creature  intervenes  here,  and  the  consequence  soon, 
appears.  For  he  comes  to  another  and  most  cogent 
argument.     "  Now  a  mediator  is  not  a  mediator  of  one. 


168  INTEODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

but  God  is  one."  The  meaning  is  that  you  never  can 
get  stability  in  blessing  until  you  have  simply  God 
putting  forth  His  own  power  according  to  His  own  grace. 
Leave  room  for  God,  and  for  God  alone.  Such  is  the 
only  possible  way  in  which  blessing  can' be  brought  in, 
in  order  that  such  souls  as  we  are  should  be  blessed  and 
maintained  in  it.  And  thus  it  is  with  the  promise.  In 
it  there  is  one  party, — even  God  Himself,  who  gave  it, 
and  accordingly  fulfils  it  in  that  Seed  to  whom  the  cove- 
nant was  confirmed.  But  the  moment  you  bring  in  the 
law,  you  have  two  parties ;  and,  strange  to  say,  instead 
of  the  greater  party  being  God,  it  becomes  man,  whose 
responsibility  is  to  God.  God  asks,  and  man  is  called  to 
give,  i.e.,  is  called  to  obedience.  Alas!  we  know  too  well 
the  result  from  sinful  man.  Grace  alone  in  such  a  case 
brings  glory  to  God.  Thus,  clearly,  in  the  law  man 
becomes  the  prominent  and  responsible  party,  not  God.' 
This  never  can  bring  man  to  God  any  more  than  glory 
to  God.  The  law,  accordingly,  never  was  the  truth, 
either  on  God's  side,  or  man's.  It  was,  of  course,  alto- 
gether just  and  right  in  itself  Man  had  his  duty  to 
God,  and  he  ought  to  have  done  his  duty ;  but  it  was 
precisely  what  he  could  not  do,  because  he  was  a  sinner. 
To  make  this  evident  by  transgressions  was  the  object 
of  the  law.  It  was  to  demonstrate  his  sinfulness,  not 
to  gain  the  inheritance.  But  this  was  only  provisional 
and  parenthetic.  After  all,  what  God  had  at  heart  was 
the  accomplishment  of  His  own  promise  in  grace.  When 
He  gave  the  promise  to  Abraham,  He  said,  "I  will  give." 
And  now  in  Christ  He  has  accomplished  it — I  mean 
already.  But  before  He  sent  the  promised  Seed,  man's 
self-confidence  needed  the  discipline  of  the  intermediate 
thing,  the  law;  and  after  infinite  long-suffering  on  God's 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   GALATIANS.  169 

part,  the  people  who  undertook  to  ohey  it  had  to  be 
swept  out  of  the  land  for  their  disohedience. 

The  law  was  given  them  with  all  pomp  and  solemnity. 
It  was  ordained  by  angels,  who  had  nothing  to  do  with 
promise,  which  God  gave  direct  to  His  friend.  When 
He  had  anything  unfailing  to  do  or  say,  He  loved  to 
appear  in  grace ;  He  said  it  Himself,  and  did  it  for 
Himself.  But  when  men  would  have  anything  fraught 
with  distress  to  His  people,  when  through  their  folly 
coufusion  must  ensue,  contrary  to  all  that  His  heart 
loved,  then  it  was  left  to  others.  Thus  the  law  was 
ordained  by  angels  in  the  hands  of  a  mediator.  A 
double  intervention  comes  between  God  and  man,  in 
contrast  with  the  simplicity  of  His  ways  of  grace.  In 
grace,  God  in  the  person  of  His  Son  speaks  and  accom- 
plishes ALL ;  and  thus  He  is  glorified  from  first  to  last, 
Man  is  only  the  receiver ;  and  truly,  as  we  know,  "  it  is 
more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  God  reserves  to 
Himself  this  great  blessedness  in  the  gospel ;  whereas 
under  the  law  there  was  nothing  of  the  kind.  Then  I 
miist  repeat  that  God  could  only  make  claims ;  and  man 
had  to  take  the  place,  if  he  could,  of  giving  to  God — of 
rendering  his  obedience.  He  was  bound  to  do  what  he 
ought ;  but,  in  point  of  fact,  all  was  a  failure,  and  could 
be  nothing  else,  because  man  was  a  sinner. 

This  then  is  what  the  law  brought  in.  Is  it  against 
the  promise  of  God?  Not  at  all.  Eather,  if  man  had 
been  able  to  obey  the  law  and  so  acc[uire  a  title,  then  two 
systems  would  have  interfered  with  each  other  as  being 
to  the  same  end.  Some  would  have  received  the  inheri- 
tance because  of  promise,  and  others  on  the  ground  of 
law.  Thus  the  two  totally  opposite  roads  of  grace  and 
law  would  have  been  leading  to  the  same  result.    This 


170  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

must  be  indeed  confusion;  as  it  is,  there  is  none. 
Under  law  all  is  lost ;  under  grace  all  is  saved.  The 
law  and  the  promise  are  both  from  God,  but  the  law's 
use  is  only  negative  and  condemnatory.  It  cannot  and 
ought  not  to  spare  sinners.  The  promise  has  another 
and  most  blessed  place.  It  brings  in  deliverance  for 
man  in  the  accomplishment  of  God's  purpose  in  Christ. 
This  is  what  is  found  under  it.  Thus  the  law  pulls 
down  what  is  evil,  and  the  promise  gives  what  is  good 
and  builds  it  up.  The  law  brings  man  in  his  nothing- 
ness into  evidence,  it  proves  that  he  is  only  a  poor  lost 
sinner.  Grace  brings  out  the  faithful  promise  of  God, 
and  His  goodness  to  him  that  deserves  nothing.  Thus, 
rightly  understood  and  applied,  the  law  and  the  pro- 
mises, "while  wholly  distinct,  are  in  no  way  inconsistent 
with  each  other.  Merge  them,  as  unbelief  does,  and  all 
is  confusion  and  ruin. 

Further,  it  is  laid  down,  if  there  had  been  a  law 
capable  of  giving  life,  righteousness  would  be  by  the 
law.  But  this  could  not  be.  On  the  contrary,  "the 
Scripture  hath  concluded  all  under  sin" — not  under 
righteousness — by  law.  Thus,  whether  it  be  the  Gen- 
tile without  law,  or  the  Jew  with  it,  all  are  shut  up 
under  sin.  "The  scripture  hath  concluded  all  under 
sin,  that  the  promise  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  might  be 
given  to  them  that  believe." 

But,  he  adds,  faith  is  come  (that  is,  the  testimony  to 
be  believed  by  man  now,  or  the  gospel).  This  he  means 
here  by  "  faith."  "  Before  faith  came  we  [Jews]  were 
kept  under  the  law,  shut  up  unto  the  faith  which 
should  afterwards  be  revealed.  Wherefore  the  law  was 
our  schoolmaster  unto  Christ,  that  we  might  be  justified 
by  faith.    But  after  that  faith  is  come,  we  are  no  longer 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   GALATIANS.  171 

under  a  schoolmaster.  For  ye  are  aU  the  children  of 
God."  Instead  of  being  under  a  slave,  with  rigorous 
and  humiliating  discipline,  there  is  now  the  place  of 
a  child  before  his  Father ;  the  Christian  stands  by  faith 
of  Jesus  in  direct  relationship  to  God.  "Ye  are  all 
the  children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus." 

This  is  shown  still  more  fully  in  the  allusion  to  bap- 
tism :  "As  many  of  us  as  have  been  baptized  into  Christ 
have  put  on  Christ."  It  is  of  course  assumed  that 
every  Christian  had  been  baptized.  There  was  no 
doubt  or  difficulty  on  this  head  in  these  early  days. 
There  was  no  believer,  Jew  or  Gentile,  who  had  not 
gladly  submitted  to  that  very  blessed  sign  of  having 
part  with  Christ,  and  of  that  which  is  made  good  by 
Christ.  "  As  many  as  have  been  baptized  into  Christ 
have  put  on  Christ."  It  is  not  a  question  of  law  at  all. 
Christian  baptism,  contrariwise,  supposes  man  dead ; 
and  the  only  death  that  can  deliver  man  out  of  his 
own  death  is  the  death  of  Christ.  Therefore,  when  a 
man  is  baptized,  he  is  not,  of  course,  baptized  into  his 
own  death ;  there  is  no  sense  in  such  a  thought.  He 
is  baptized  into  Christ's  death,  which  is  the  sole  means 
of  deliverance  out  of  his  state  of  sin.  So  here  the 
Christian  puts  on  Christ,  not  the  law  or  circumcision. 
He  wants  to  get  rid  of  the  first  Adam  and  all  its  appli- 
ances, not  to  keep  it  on ;  and  therefore  he  puts  on 
Christ.  "There  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  there  is 
neither  bond  nor  free,  there  is  neither  male  nor  female ; " 
all  is  Christ  and  only  Christ.  It  is  not  an  old  creation, 
but  a  new  one.  Can  anything  prove  that  it  is  not  an 
old  creation  better  than  this — that  there  is  neither  Jew 
nor  Greek,  bond  nor  free,  male  nor  female,  which  last  at 
least  is  an  absolute  necessity  for  the  perpetuation  of 


172  INTRODUCTORY  LECTUEES. 

the  race  ?  All  this  vanishes  in  Christ ;  we  are  all  one 
in  Him ;  and  if  you  are  Christ's,  what  need  to  be  cir- 
cumcised? You  do  not  want  to  become  the  children  of 
Abraham  in  that  sense,  which  would  be  the  revival  of 
the  flesh.  If  Christ's,  they  were  Abraham's  seed  already, 
"and  heirs  according  to  the  promise;",  for  Christ,  he 
had  shown  before,  was  the  one  true  Seed ;  and  if  we 
are  Christ's,  we  belong  to  that  one  true  Seed,  and  there- 
fore are  the  children  of  Abraham  without  circumci- 
sion at  all.  isTothing  can  be  more  conclusive  than 
this  disproof  of  the  iieshly  pretensions  that  were  con- 
nected with  Jerusalem,  and  were^^^rgught  in  under 
cover  of  Abraham,  but  really  toThe  subversion  of  the 
gospel. 

In  chapter  iv.  the  relation  is  taken  up,  not  ofHhe 
law  to  the  promise,  but  of  the  Christian  now  to  the 
condition  of  the  saints  of  old — a  very  important  point 
also.  Here  one  may  be  very  brief:  "The  heir,  as  long  as  , 
he  is  a  child,  differeth  nothing  from  a  servant,  thougii 
he  be  lord  of  all ;  but  is  under  tutors  and  governors, 
until  the  time  appointed  of  the  father.  Even  so  we, 
when  we  were  children,"  &c.  The  comparison  would  take 
in  the  Old  Testament  saints  ;  or  t|ie  application  ("  even 
so  we")  is  to  those  then  alive,  who;  had  been  under  that 
state  of  things.  "  "We,  when  we  were  children,  were  in 
bondage  under  the  elements  of  the  world  ;  but  when 
the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  God  sent  forth  his 
Son  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law,  to  redeem 
them  that  were  under  the  law,  that  we  might  receive 
the  adoption  of  sons."  The  apostle  shows  that,  so  far 
from  bringing  in  Christians  and  putting  them  on  the 
ground  of  the  Old  Testament,  God  is  really  leading 
those  who  were  in  that  connection  out  of  it  all  by  re- 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   GALATIAKS.  173 

demption.  He  fully  allows  that  the  Lord  was  both  made 
of  a  woman  and  made  under  the  law ;  but  what  was 
the  ultimate  object  in  view  ?  It  was  not  to  keep  people 
under  the  law,  still  less  could  it  be  to  put  any  under 
the  law,  but  to  bring  them  clean  out  if  they  had  been 
under  it  before.  Such  was  the  case  with  the  Old  Testa- 
ment believers,  and  many  Jewish  believers  then  alive. 
Was  it  possible,  then,  that  any  could  desire  to  put  the 
Gentiles  under  law,  when  they  had  been  brought  out 
from  it  themselves  by  the  will  of  God,  the  work  of 
Christ,  and  the  witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit?  What  a 
gross  inconsistency !  What  a  subversion,  not  only  of 
the  truth  of  God  revealed  in  the  gospel,  but  also  of 
redemption,  which  is  its  basis  !  For  Christ  bought  off 
those  that  were  under  the  law,  that  we  might  receive  the 
adoption  of  sons,  bringing  them  by  grace  into  a  place  of 
known  salvation  and  intelligent  joy  in  relation  with  our 
God  and  Father,  out  of  that  bondage  and  nonage  which 
the  law  supposes. 

Eut  what  about  the  Gentiles  ?  "  Because  ye  are 
sons."  He  does  not  condescend  to  reason  about  their 
place  in  the  matter,  but  puts  them  at  once  in  their  due 
relationship.  Because  they  were  sons,  God  sent  that 
blessed  proof  and  power  of  their  sonship.  He  gives 
freely  the  Holy  Ghost  on  their  acceptance  of  Christ's 
name;  or,  as  it  is  here  written,  "He  sent  forth  the 
Spirit  of  his  Son  in  your  hearts,  crying,  Abba,  Father." 
That  is,  if  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given  as  the  seal  of 
their  redemption,  and  as  the  joy  of  the  sonship,  where- 
in they  now  stood,  in  the  exercise  of  their  nearness 
to  God  and  enjoyment  of  His  love,  they  cry,  "Abba, 
Father," — the  very  words  of  Christ  himself  (but  in 
how  different  circumstances !)  to  His  I'ather.     "  Where- 


174  INTEODTJCTOET  LECTURES. 

fore,  thou  art  no  more  a  servant,  but  a  son;  and  if  a 
son,  then  an  heir  of  God  through  Christ." 

Thence  he  advances  to  another  point  of  his  argument. 
Indeed,  we  may  say  that  now  he  thunders  on  the  Gala- 
tians  that  were  dragging  in  the  law.     Did  they  know 
that  for  a  Gentile  Christian  to  take  up  Judaic  elements 
is  in  principle  to  go  back  to  heathenism  ?    Heathenism ! 
Why  they  thought  they  were  becoming  more  truly  re- 
ligious, more  reverent  in  their  value  for  Scripture.  They 
thought  that  Christianity  would  be  all  the  better  for 
adopting  the  ancient  forms  and  beautiful  figures  of  the 
law.     Not  at  all,  says  the  apostle^  you  are  returning 
straight  into  your  old  heathenism  without  knowing  it 
yourselves.     For  he  had  shown  that  our  purchase  by 
Christ  delivers  even  the  Jew  from  subjection  to  the  law; 
whilst  Gentiles  are  set  at  once  on  the  ground  of  grace 
without  the  intervention  of  any  legal  apprenticeship 
whatever.     "  Howbeit  then,  when  ye  knew  not  God,  ye 
did  service  unto  them  which  by  nature  are  no  gods.  But 
now,  after  that  ye  have  known  God,  or  rather  are  known 
of  God,  how  turn  ye  again  to  the  weak  and  beggarly 
elements,  whereunto  ye  desire  again  to  be  in  bondage?" 
What  can  be  conceived  more  serious  or  trenchant  than 
such  a  statement  as  this  ?     Impossible  to  find  a  blast 
more  withering  to  all  that  they  were  aiming  at.     Born 
and  bred  in  the  abominable  idolatries  of  the  heathen, 
they  were  strangers  to  the  institutions  of  Israel.     They 
had  been  lately  brought  by  the  grace  of   God  into 
Christianity,  where  they  found  Jewish  brethren,  now 
made  one,  as  it  is  said,  in  Christ.     Ignorant  or  false" 
men  had  made  them  hanker  after  circumcision.     What 
were  they  doing?    When  a  Gentile  Christian,  mark, 
takes  up  such  Old  Testament  elements,  according  to  the 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   GALATIANS.  175 

Holy  Ghost,  it  is  not  to  him  merely  Judaism,  but  a 
return  to  his  Gentile  idols,  little  as  he  may  think  so. 

Jewish  elements  were  borne  with  in  a  Jew.    The  apos- 
tle Paul  himself,  in  Eom.  xiv.,  insists  upon  the  forbear- 
ance of  a  Gentile  even  towards  the  Jew  that  might  ,be 
still  encumbered  by  his  days,  meats,  and  so  on.  But  the 
moment  a  GentUe  takes  the  system  up,  or  a  Jew  presses 
it  on  a  Gentile,  it  is  nothing  but  downright  heathenism. 
Who  would  have  ventured  to   say,  without   express 
scripture,  that  the  old  Jewish  forms  thus  adopted  by  a 
Gentile  believer  have  such  an  idolatrous  character? 
Yet  how  true  it  is,  the  more  we  look  below  the  surface  ; 
indeed,  in  our  day  it  becomes  more  and  more  palpable 
to  the   eye.      Eitualism  is  the  present  most  patent 
comment  on  the  apostle's  statement.     The  very  defence 
set  up,  and  the  meanings  which  these  men  put  on  the 
forms  and  ceremonies  of  which  they  make  Christianity 
so  largely  to  consist,  demonstrate  their  most  barefaced 
turning  back  to  idolatry.    Do  not  suppos'e  that  idolatry 
has  its  character  saved  because  Jesus  is  worshipped. 
Christianity  refuses  to  be  mingled  with  anything  but 
itself.     Tender  and  comprehensive  as  Christianity  is,  it 
is  also  the  most  exclusive  thing  that  can  be.     Truth 
must  necessarily  be  exclusive,  and  all  who  hold  the 
truth  must,  in  their  adhesion  to  it  and  Him  who  is  its 
personal  expression,  be  exclusive  too.    (I  mean  by  this, 
of  course,  exclusive  of  sin  and  falsehood.)    There  can  be 
no  compromise ;  but  to  be  exclusive  in  any  sense  save 
as  the  expression  of  the  truth  in  Christ  would  be  in  its 
own  way  an  utter  and  heartless  falsehood.     There  is 
nothing  that  requires  more  the  power  of  grace;  for  even 
the  truth  itself,  if  severed  from  grace,  ceases  to  be  the 
truth.     Being  found  only  in  Christ,   it  supposes  the 


176  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

manifestation  of  grace ;  light  does  riot  in  the  same 
way  that  truth  does.  "  Grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus 
Christ."  (Compare  John  i.  9  and  17.) 

N"ow  the  Galatians  were  unwittingly  in  danger  of 
giving  up  the  truth.  They  were  only,  as  they  supposed, 
beginning  to  cherish  a  becoming  attitude  toward  the 
religion  of  the  fathers,  and  of  all  who  had  before  Christ 
honoured  God  on  earth.  Venerable  religion ! — the  only 
system  of  earthly  worship  which  had  ever  possessed 
God's  sanction.  Why  not  adopt  what  was  wanting  in 
Christianity  ?  Where  was  the  harm  of  taking  up  what 
saints  of  old  submitted  to  ?  Ko,  rejoins  the  apostle ; 
you  are  going  back  to  heathenism.  They  had  been 
idolaters  before  they  became  Christians ;  and  to  take 
up  Jewish  principles  in  addition  to  Christ  is  to  turn 
back  again  to  their  cast-off  idols.  W"ext,  we  are  told, 
wherein  this  consisted.  "  Ye  observe  days,  and  months, 
and  times,  and  years."  What !  is  this  all  ?  I  have 
known  a  divine  who  had  a  character  for  intelligence 
use  these  words  as  a  motto  and  sanction.  And  no 
wonder.  Christendom  is  built  upon  this  footing.  They 
think  that  it  is  quite  right,  for  the  church  especially,  to 
appoint  days  for  this  and  that  saint ;  to  have  certain 
seasons  to  remind  one  of  the  Lord's  incarnation,  minis- 
try, and  crucifixion,  of  His  resurrection,  ascension,  and  so 
on.  I  choose  the  best  facts ;  for  I  have  no  wish  to  rake 
up  abuses.  All  this  is  counted  a  great,  wise,  and  sen- 
sible help  to  devotion.  Well,  "sensible"  help  in  the  mean- 
ing of  an  appeal  to  nature  it  is ;  but  it  is  a  sensible  help 
to  idolatry,  not  to  living  faith.  This  is  the  very  evil 
which  the  Spirit  of  God  so  earnestly  and  energetically 
denounces  here  by  the  apostle  Paul.  He  does  not  charge 
them  with  anything  of  an  openly  gross  or  immoral 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE    GALATIANS.  177 

nature ;  but  what  a  proof  that  the  truth  of  God,  that 
the  grace  of  Christ,  is  exclusive  of  everything  but  itself! 
Nor  is  there  a  greater  evidence  of  God's  tender  and 
considerate  care  for  us  than  such  a  fact  as  this.  For  He 
knows  our  tendency  to  mingle  law  with  grace  in  some 
form  or  measure,  and  treats  that  which  was  of  the 
fathers  and  long  before  Moses,  as  a  foreign  ingredient 
deleterious  to  Christians.  As  God  has  wrought  for  us  on 
the  cross,  and  delivered  us  from  every  atom  of  sin  ia 
Christ,  so  He  will  not  allow  us  to  mix  one  earthly  or 
legal  element  with  the  revelation  of  His  grace,  which 
He  has  made  ours  in  redemption,  and  proclaimed  to  us 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven. 

Hereon  the  apostle  puts  before  them  another  expos- 
tulation :  "  I  am  afraid  of  you,  lest  I  have  bestowed 
upon  you  labour  in  vain."  And  this  directly  follows 
his  censure  of  their  observance  of  times  and  seasons. 
"  Brethren,  I  beseech  you,  be  as  I  am ;  for  I  am  as  ye 
are."  They  knew  very  well  that  he  had  nothing  to  do 
with  the  law  or  its  ordinances.  "  Be  as  I  am."  By  this 
he  plainly  means — free  from  law.  "  For  I  am  as  ye  are." 
They  were,  after  all.  Gentiles,  and  as  such  ought  to 
have  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  law.  So  he  calls  on 
them  to  be  as  free  of  the  law  as  himself.  For  he,  though 
a  Jew,  had  completely  done  with  the  law,  and  all  that 
pei-tains  to  it.  "  For  I  am  as  ye  are ;  ye  have  not 
injured  me  at  all."  That  is,  the  apostle,  instead  of  re- 
garding his  despised  freedom  from  the  law  as  a  just 
reproach,  glories  in  it.  There  was  no  insult  to  him,  nor 
injuiy  done,  in  saying  that  he  did  not  acknowledge  the 
law  for  a  Christian. 

But,  further,  he  refers  in  a  very  affecting  manner  to 
some  personal  circumstances — how  in  his  own  body  he 


178  INTEODUCTORT  LECTURES. 

was  a  witness  of  having  nothing  to  do  with  flesh ;  for 
what  God  had  been  pleased  to  put  upon  him  as  serving 
Him  in  the  gospel  was  not  great  power  of  nature,  but 
that  which  made  him  contemptible  in  his  preaching. 
It  is  evident  that  the  thorn  in  the  flesh  was  something 
which  left  him  open  to  a  slight,  and  made  it  difficult 
indeed  for  any  one  to  understand  how  a  man  who  was 
called  to  be  an  apostle  should  find  it  hard  to  convey 
plainly  his  mind  in  preaching.  It  is  quite  obvious  that 
there  was  a  hindrance  of  some  sort.  It  seems  to  have 
been  something  which  affected  his  speech  too,  and  ex- 
posed him  to  ridicule  and  to  unfavourable  comments 
where  men  were  carnally-minded.  But  in  this  he  could 
glory.  It  was  something  painful  to  bear.  At  first  he 
prayed  the  Lord  to  take  it  from  him ;  but  no !  though 
he  had  prayed  thrice,  as  his  Lord  had  done  on  another 
and  wondrous  occasion,  so  the  apostle  was  to  have 
communion  with  Christ  in  this  way,  and  learn  that 
there  is  something  better  than  the  taking  away  of  that 
which  makes  nothing  of  the  flesh.  The  power  of  Christ 
must  rest  upon  him.  Thus  it  appears  that  the  Gala- 
tians  as  weU  as  the  Corinthians  had  been  similarly 
affected.  And  this  leads  him  to  speak  of  another 
trial.  When  they  first  knew  him,  there  was  no  diffi- 
culty felt  on  this  score ;  they  heard  him  as  an  angel  of 
God.  It  was  they  who  had  changed,  not  he.  They  had 
so  completely  lost  sight  of  the  grace  of  Christ,  the 
sweetness  and  the  bloom  of  it,  that  he  travailed  again 
for  them:  his  soul  once  more  passed  through  that  which 
had  exercised  him  when  they  were  converted. 

Then  he  gives  a  closing  blow  to  those  who  doted 
about  the  law.  He  says  to  those  who  would  be  under 
the  law,  why  do  you  not  listen  to  the  law  ?    Look  at 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE    GALATlANS.  179 

Abraham  and  his  house ;  look  at  the  maid  Hagar ;  look 
at  Isaac  and  Ishmael.  There  you  have  in  a  figure  the 
two  parties  that  are  still  found  on  the  earth :  the  law 
party  symbolized  by  Ishmael,  the  child  of  flesh;  and 
those  that  cling  to  the  grace  of  God,  who  have  their 
pattern  in  Isaac,  the  child  of  promise.  Now,  what  does 
God  say  about  it?  Why  this:  "Abraham  had  two 
sons,  the  one  by  a  bondmaid,  and  the  other  by  a  free- 
woman."  The  apostle  expressly  reasons  on  Abraham, 
as  they  were  always  anxious  to  cite  Abraham,  the  father 
of  circumcision.  Their  main  support  then,  as  they 
thought  Abraham,  had  two  sons;  but  they  stood,  ac- 
cording to  Scripture,  on  wholly  different  principles. 
"  The  child  of  the  bondwoman  was  born  after  the  flesh ; 
but  he  of  the  freewoman  was  by  promise."  How  apt 
the  illustration  for  exposing  the  judaizers !  The  case 
is  hit  off  exactly  to  the  life.  Wldch  son  represented 
them?  Under  which  type  did  they  fall — Ishmael  or 
Isaac  ?  Whom  did  their  principle  make  them  resemble  ? 
There  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  matter.  "  Tell  me,  ye 
that  desire  to  be  under  the  law,  do  ye  not  hear  the  law  ?" 
"  Which  things  are  an  allegory :  for  these  are  the  two 
covenants ;  the  one  from  the  mount  Sinai,  which  gender- 
eth  to  bondage,  which  is  Agar.  For  this  Agar  is  mount 
Sinai  in  Arabia,  which  answereth  to  Jerusalem  which 
now  is,  and  is  in  bondage  with  her  children.  But 
Jerusalem  which  is  above  is  free,  which  is  the  mother 
of  us  [all?].  Por  it  is  written,  Eejoice,  thou  barren  that 
bearest  not;  break  forth  and  cry,  thou  that  travailest 
not :  for  the  desolate  hath  many  more  children  than 
she  which  hath  a  husband."  The  application  of  this 
is  as  plain  as  it  is  conclusive,  for  those  who  appealed 
to  Abraham  and  bowed  to  the  word  of  God.     Instead 

^  2 


18(J  INTRODUCTOET  LECTURES. 

of  going  up  to  Jerusalem  on  earth,  instead  of  endea- 
vouring to  effect  a  junction  with  the  law  or  anything 
else  here  below,  the  gospel  wants  no  such  allies,  but 
repudiates  them  all.  The  very  reverse  of  their  system 
is  true.  The  true  link  is  with  Jerusalem  above,  as 
our  prototype  is  Isaac,  the  child  of  the  freewoman. 
Theirs  was  the  slave's  son — Ishmael. 

Then,  bringing  in  the  name  of  Jerusalem,  the  Spirit 
leads  him  to  apply  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  which  shows 
that  millennial  Israel  (in  their  turn  abandoning  self- 
righteousness,  and  made  free  by  God's  grace  in  Christ) 
will  look  back  and  count  as  their  own  those  now 
brought  in  as  Christians,  and  find  far  more  children 
begotten  by  the  gospel,  in  the  time  of  their  own  desola- 
tion, than  even  when  they  flourished  of  old,  and  had 
all  that  earthly  power  and  glory  could  give.  Thus  a 
decisive  blow  is  struck  at  the  principle  of  connection 
with  the  law;  and  it  was  evident  that  they  did  not 
truly  "  hear  the  law."  Their  ears  were  heavy,  and  their 
eyes  blinded  by  their  legalism.  Nor  did  they  under- 
stand the  prophets  better.  To  be  under  law  was  fatal 
to  Jerusalem.  Everything  lost  then  would  be  gained 
when  promise  has  its  way.  Up  to  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  it  was  law;  but  now,  under  Christianity, 
Jerusalem,  being  rebellious  and  scorning  promise  like 
Ishmael,  is  cast  out  and  has  nothing.  She  is  desolate; 
she  is  no  longer  in  the  condition  of  the  married  wife, 
but  like  the  fugitive  bondwoman.  She  is  as  one  that 
has  no  husband.  Yet,  wondrous  to  say,  when  she  de- 
sires to  be  under  grace  by-and-by,  all  those  that  are 
now  brought  in  by  promise  will  be  accounted  as  chil- 
dren to  her.  Such  is  the  reasoning  in  which  the  apostle 
uses  this  very  remarkable  prophecy.     When  Jerusalem 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE    GALATIANS.  181 

IS  humbled  by  the  mercy  of  God,  and  betakes  herself 
to  her  Messiah  and  the  new  covenant,  she  will  "  hear 
the  law,"  and  the  prophets  will  be  accomplished  in  her 
blessing,  and  in  the  largeness  of  love  the  present  chil- 
dren of  promise  (even  Christians,  as  being  in  a  certain 
mystical  sense  children  of  Jerusalem)  will  be  her  boast. 
But  this  will  be  Jerusalem,  under  not  law  but  promise 
and  liberty,  restored  by  grace  after  having  lost  every- 
thing by  the  law,  and  reduced  to  utter  desolation.  But 
for  us  now  the  apostle  carefully  adds  the  principle  of 
our  heavenly  character.  Ours  is  Jerusalem  above,  not 
a  city  on  earth.  That  is,  he  links  on  the  heavenly  cha- 
racter of  Jerusalem  for  us  before  touching  on  the  deso- 
late place  of  Jerusalem  after  the  flesh,  or  of  the  predicted 
change  of  heart  and  blessing  in  grace,  when  she  will  be 
glad  to  appropriate,  as  it  were,  the  Christians  born  now 
after  the  Spirit.  This  closes  the  course  of  the  apostle's 
argument. 

Next  he  turns  to  direct  exhortation,  the  chief  salient 
points  of  which  will  call  for  but  few  words.  It  is  liberty 
and  not  law  that  the  Christian  stands  in.  At  the  same 
time  he  insists  in  the  most  peremptory  manner  that  our 
liberty  in  Christ  is  to  be  used  for  holiness.  He  shows 
that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelling  in  the  believer  gives 
no  license  for  the  action  of  the  flesh.  In  other  words, 
if  the  believer  simply  were  one  forgiven  by  grace, 
without  having  either  life  in  Christ  or  the  Holy  Ghost 
dwelling  in  him,  he  might,  perhaps,  plead  that  he  could 
not  avoid  sinning.  He  had  been  brought  to  a  place  of 
blessing  outside  himself  and  by  another,  the  Saviour, 
which  in  itself  gives  the  soul  motives  indeed  but  not 
power;  whereas,  for  the  soul  who  is  brought  to  God  by 


182  INTRODUCTOET  LECTURES. 

the  gospel,  and  planted  in  the  liberty  wherein  Christ 
makes  free  before  God,  it  is  no  more  a  question  of  flesh, 
but  of  the  Holy  Ghost  who  is  given  to  him.  And  who 
will  venture  to  say  that  the  indwelling  Spirit  of  God 
fails  to  supply  power  to  him  who  submits  to  the  right- 
eousness of  God  in  Christ  ?  Hence  the  point  is  not  at 
all  whether  we  have  intrinsic  power,  but  whether  He  is 
not  now  abiding  in  us  as  "  a  Spirit  of  power,  and  of 
love,  and  of  a  sound  mind."-  Undoubtedly  such  is  the 
assurance  of  God's  word  to  His  children ;  and  thus 
Galatians  v.  is  in  contrast  with  Eomaus  vii.  In  that 
chapter  of  Komans  we  have  a  man  converted  indeed, 
but  without  liberty,  and  consequently  powerless.  He 
sees  the  right,  feels  the  good,  desires  the  holy,  but  never 
accomplishes.  The  reason  is,  that  he  has  not  yet  come 
to  own  bj'  faith  that  he  has  no  strength  any  more  than 
righteousness,  and  that  Christ  is  all  and  in  all.  He  is 
afresh  making  efforts  to  improve,  yet  still  in  bondage 
and  misery.  He  is  occupied  with  himself.  He  feels 
what  he  ought  to  do,  but  he  does  it  not,  and  thus  is 
increasingly  wretched.  Sense  of  duty  is  not  power. 
What  gives  power  is  the  heart  surrendering  itself  in 
everything,  and  thus  set  at  liberty  by  Christ.  I  am 
perfectly  delivered,  and  the  measure  of  my  deliverance 
is  Christ,  and  Christ  raised  from  the  dead.  This  is 
Christianity ;  and  when  the  soul  thankfully  accepts 
from  God  this  blessed  liberty,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given 
to  and  acts  in  the  believer  as  a  Spirit  of  peace  and 
power ;  so  that  if  there  is  the  flesh  lusting  against  the 
Spirit,  the  Spirit  resists  this,  in  order  that  (for  such  is 
the  true  meaning)  they  should  not  do  the  things  that 
they  would. 

Accordingly  he  draws  from  this  a  most   weighty 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   GALATIANS.  183 

argument  against  bringing  in  the  law  as  the  rule  of  life 
for  the  believer.  You  do  not  need  it,  because  the  Holy 
Ghost  thus  working  strengthens  you  unto  love.  Liberty 
comes  first,  mark;  power  and  love  afterwards.  And 
how  true  all  this  is !  Make  a  child  thoroughly  happy, 
and  you  will  soon  see  that  its  duty  becomes  compara- 
tively light  and  a  joy.  But  when  one  is  miserable, 
does  not  every  duty,  even  where  it  may  be  as  light  as 
a  feather,  feel  as  if  it  were  an  iron  chain  on  you  ?  It 
is  no  wonder  that  one  who  is  thus  tied  and  bound 
feels  restive  under  it.  Far  otherwise  is  God's  waj''  with 
souls.  He  makes  one  first  thoroughly  happy  in  the 
sense  of  His  grace  and  the  liberty  Christ  has  won,  and 
then  the  Holy  Ghost  becomes  an  indwelling  spring  of 
power,  though  His  power  is  put  forth  in  us  only  as  we 
have  Christ  kept  before  us.  Thus,  if  we  walk  in  the 
Spirit,  we  shall  not  fulfil  the  desires  of  the  flesh.  Such 
is  the  secret  of  true  power.  The  consequence  is,  "If 
ye  are  led  of  the  Spirit,  ye  are  not  under  the  law ; "  and 
more  than  this,  if  we  are  producing  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit,  he  can  easily  say,  "Against  such  there  is  no 
law."  Let  others  talk  as  they  will  of  the  law,  no  law 
can  censure  the  real  fruits  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  those 
in  whom  they  are  found. 

Then  we  come  to  the  closing  chapter;  and  here  we 
find  the  Spirit  of  God  calling  for  tenderness  in  dealing 
with  those  who  are  overtaken  in  a  fault.  "Ye  which 
are  spiritual  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meek- 
ness ;  considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted." 
Besides,  we  have  a  more  daily  duty  :  "  Bear  ye  one 
another's  burdens."  It  is  not  merely  to  seek  in  love  a 
fallen  brother,  but  to  be  the  succourer  of  others  in  their 
difficulties.     Love  finds  its  activity  in  caring  for  those 


184  INTKODUCTOKY  LECTURES. 

that  are  cast  down,  "  and  so  ftdfils  the  law  of  Christ." 
Do  you  want  a  law  ?  Is  not  this  just  the  law  for  you  ? 
It  is  the  law  of  Christ.  Thus  He  lived  and  moved 
here  below.  The  law  of  Moses  tells  a  man  to  do  his 
duty  in  his  own  place.  The  law  of  Christ  makes  the 
going  out  of  love  towards  another,  so  to  speak,  to  be 
his  joy.  It  was  exactly  what  Christ  was  on  earth ; 
and  the  expression  of  Christ  is  the  prime  call  of  the 
Christian. 

But  there  is  more  for  us.  He  shows  that  God  would 
give  us  a  deliverence  from  self-importance;  and  what  a 
mercy  it  is  to  be  so  blessed,  that  one  can  afford  to  for- 
get one's  self !  Now,  the  law  always  brings  fallen  man 
into  importance :  such  it  must  be  in  its  principle.  The 
law  necessarily  makes  the  man,  and  the  man's  doings, 
to  be  the  prominent  object.  Hence  the  effect  of  the  law 
in  all  its  ramifications  on  man  is  the  same.  Thus  it 
wrought  among  the  Galatians.  After  all  their  vapour- 
ing about  the  law,  they  were  biting  and  devouring  one 
another.  "Was  this  the  love  the  law  claimed?  Had 
they  been  occupied  with  Christ,  they  would  have  really 
loved  one  another,  and  in  other  respects  too  fulfilled 
the  law,  without  thinking  about  themselves  or  it.  Such 
is  the  effect  of  Christianity,  and  such  in  perfection 
was  Christ  Himself.  But  spite  of,  or  rather  because  of, 
their  use  of  law,  they  were  self-important,  without  holy 
power,  and  judged  instead  of  loving  each  other.  How 
abortive  is  man  in  the  things  of  God!  "For  if  a  man 
think  himself  to  be  something  when  he  is  nothing,  he 
deeeivetb  himself.  But  let  every  man  prove  his  own 
work,  and  then  shall  he  have  rejoicing  in  himself  alone, 
and  not  in  another.  For  every  man  shall  bear  his  own 
burden."    Thus,  whatever  may  be  the  energy  that  seeks 


THE.  EPISTLE  TO  THE   GALATIANS.  185 

Souls  in  love,  there  is  nothing  after  all  like  Christianity 
for  maintaining  individual  responsibility  intact. 

How  wholesome  is  the  language  here,  "Every  one 
shall  bear  his  own  burden ! "  But  responsibility  is  always 
according  to  the  relation  in  which  one  stands,  and  the 
measure  of  knowledge  which  each  possesses,  or  ought 
to  possess.  Let  me  press  this  gravely  upon  those  who 
are  here  this  night,  If  I  am  a  man,  I  am  responsible 
as  such ;  being  fallen  and  sinful,  this  will  end  in  judg- 
ment. If  I  am  a  Christian,  I  am  responsible  according 
to  that '  position  and  privilege.  My  responsibility  is 
defined  by  the  place  in  which  I  am  found.  If  I  am  a 
mere  man,  a  sinner,  the  end  of  that  is  (for  respon- 
sibility is  not  like  power,  destroyed  by  sin)  the  eternal 
judgment  of  God.  If  I  am  a  Christian,  I  acquire  a  new 
kind  of  responsibility.  My  business  is  to  act  consis- 
tently with  the  new  place  in  which  grace  has  put  me. 
Let  us  never  confound  the  two.  One  of  the  most  danger- 
ous errors  in  Christendom  is,  that  these  two  things  are 
lumped  together.  The  truth  is  the  distinctive  boon  and 
mark  of  Christendom.  There  is  now  much  confusion 
of  things  that  differ;  and  so,  more  or  less,  error  runs 
through  the  whole  of  it  in  all  its  parts ;  but  I  know 
not  anything  more  ruinous  than  this.  The  most  diflScult 
thing  in  Christendom  is  for  people  to  know  what  it  is 
to  be  Christians,  and  to  take  this  place  by  the  faith  of 
Christ  themselves.  That  is,  the  most  simple  and  most 
obvious  truth  is  just  the  last  thing  a  man  thinks  about. 
And  no  wonder.  What  Satan  aims  at  is,  that  people 
should  not  count  themselves  what  they  are,  and  that 
they  should  be  always  slipping  into  what  they  are  not. 
The  result  of  this  is,  that  neither  God  has  His  place, 
nor  they.     AU  is  confusion.     Christ  is  forgotten. 


186  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

But  then  there  is  another  point  of  exhortation  too ; 
and  surely  we  ought  not  to  forget  that  there  are  not  only 
the  common  links  of  love,  and  the  willingness  to  succour 
one  another,  as  we  see,  heginning  with  a  most  extreme 
case  and  ending  with  a  general  one ;  but  still  further, 
"  Let  him  that  is  taught  in  the  word  communicate  unto 
him  that  teacheth  in  all  good  things ;"  and  not  only 
that,  but  also  the  general  responsibility  of  the  saint  and 
in  a  solemn  manner.  It  is  not  only  that  we  are  put 
now  where  we  can  be  the  witness  to  grace  in  all  its 
outgoings,  but,  besides  that,  we  are  where  flesh  might 
show  itself.  And  this  is  a  universal  principle.  If  I 
sow  to  the  flesh,  I  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption ;  if 
I  sow  to  the  Spirit,  I  shall  reap  life  everlasting.  Eternal 
life  is  beyond  doubt  the  gift  of  divine  grace ;  but,  besides, 
the  eternal  life  that  I  have  now  by  pure  and  simple 
faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  what  I  find  at  the  end 
of  my  course  as  well  as  at  the  starting.  There  is  such 
a  thing  as,  by  patient  continuance  in  well  doing,  to  seek 
for  eternal  life.  Eternal  life  is  spoken  of  in  this  double 
way  in  scripture  (Rom.  vi.  22,  23);  and  I  also  press  this 
as  a  truth  of  no  small  importance  and  but  too  much 
forgotten. 

Then,  further,  attention  is  drawn  to  another  topic — his 
own  writing  of  this  letter.  It  was  a  very  unusual  cir- 
cumstance. The  apostle,  as  far  as  I  know,  wrote  no 
other  letter  to  any  one  of  the  churches  of  the  saints. 
To  the  Galatians  there  was  an  exception.  If  he  wrote 
to  the  Eomans,  it  was  transcribed,  or  at  any  rate  written, 
by  another.  He  signed  ordinarily,  putting  his  subscrip- 
tion at  the  end,  i.e.,  his  own  name,  to  verify  it ;  but  he 
did  not  write  it.  Writing  was  a  somewhat  laborious 
task  in  those  days,  and  it  was  a  kind  of  profession  to 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   GALATIANS.  187 

be  a  writer  or  scribe,  before  printiug,  of  course,  was 
known.  Now  the  apostle  in  writing  to  the  Galatians 
was  so  moved  in  love,  and  so  yearned  over  them  in 
their  danger,  that  he  actually  wrote  the  epistle  with  his 
own  hand.  He  draws  particular  attention  to  this  fact 
ere  he  closes :  "  You  see  how  large  a  letter  I  have 
written  unto  you  with  mine  own  hand."  Thus  it  was 
the  ardour  of  love  and  grief;  it  was  the  earnestness  of 
his  purpose  that  could  not  bear  in  this  instance  to  em- 
ploy an  intermediary.  Just  as  he  had  shown  that  God 
in  His  love  to  man  had  given  the  promise  direct,  so  the 
apostle  Paul  acts  in  his  care  for  the  saints  of  God  where 
all  the  foundations  were  endangered. 

Finally,  he  concludes  by  putting  the  sentence  of 
death,  if  I  may  so  say,  on  circumcision,  and  all  such  as 
might  adopt  it.  He  intimates  also  how  vain  a  thing  is 
legalism,  because  those  that  were  pleading  for  circum- 
cision in  no  case  carried  out  their  own  principle.  Bring 
in  one  part  of  law,  and  you  fall  under  the  authority  of 
the  whole.  You  are  bound  to  carry  it  out  consistently. 
This  they  never  thought  of  doing.  The  enemy  had 
ensnared  them  by  crying  up  circumcision,  in  order  to 
betray  them  into  a  link  with  Judaism;  but  they  had 
no  thought  of  bearing  the  real  burden  of  the  law.  As 
for  himself,  he  gloried  only  in  the  cross.  "  God  forbid 
that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  by  whom  the  world  is  crucified  unto  me,  and  I 
unto  the  world."  Along  with  the  cross  goes  a  new  crea- 
tion. How  blessed,  and  how  all-important  for  our 
souls !  The  cross  has  sentenced  the  world ;  and  this 
very  sentence  of  the  world  is  our  deliverance  from  the 
world.  We  are  crucified  unto  it  by  grace,  as  the  world  is 
crucified  unto  us  by  judgment.     For  the  world  there 


188  INTKODUCTOKY  LECTUEES. 

is  nothing  yet  executed,  any  more  than  ihe  great  results 
of  grace  for  the  saints  as  yet  appear  in  their  fulness. 
The  solemnities  of  Christ's  judgment  await  men  in  the 
day  of  the  Lord.  But  the  whole  matter  is  decided 
before  God.  And  this  is  of  immense  moment  to  re- 
member. Christianity  brings  everything  to  a  climax; 
it  also  settles  all  questions.  The  Christian  by  the  cross 
of  Christ  has  terminated  his  connection  with  flesh,  with 
the  world,  with  the  law.  He  is  brought  into  another 
condition.  And  what  is  this?  He  is  a  new  creature 
in  Christ.  Therefore,  no  wonder  that  he  says,  "God 
forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ." 

At  the  same  time  it  is  shown  to  be,  not  what  it  might 
seem,  a  negative  power  only,  but  along  with  it  is  the 
new  creation  into  which  grace  forms  us.  "In  Christ  Jesus 
neither  circumcision  availeth  any  thing,  nor  uncircum- 
cision,  but  a  new  creature."  Gentiles  might  boast  in 
their  freedom.  What  ground  is  there  for  boasting  in 
this  ?  In  Christ  alone,  in  His  cross,  let  us  boast,  and  in 
the  new  creature  which  is  by  Christ.  Therefore  the 
apostle  adds,  "And  as  many  as  walk  according  to 
this  rule  [that  is,  the  rule  of  the  new  creation],  peace 
be  on  them,  and  mercy,  and  upon  the  Israel  of  God." 
Those  that  walk  according  to  this  rule  would  be  saints 
in  general.  The  "  Israel  of  God,"  I  apprehend,  would 
mean,  that  the  only  part  of  Israel  whom  God  owns  now 
consists  of  those  that  really  are  of  faith — those  that 
received  Jesus.  It  is  not  a  vague  general  expression 
for  all  saints,  but  implies  that  fleshly  Israel  was  no- 
thing now.  If  any  of  them  believe  in  the  Crucified,  they 
were  God's  Israel.  Soon  all  wUl  believe  in  Christ, 
and  all  Israel  be  saved.     But  this  is  a  future  prophetic 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   GALATIANS.  189 

vision  not  touched  on  here.  The  new  creation  is  a 
present  blessing  that  the  soul  already  enjoys.  It  is  an 
actual  result  of  the  cross  of  Christ.  Consequently  we 
have  no  allusion  to  the  Lord's  coming  in  this  epistle  to 
the  Gaktians.  It  is  all  devoted  to  the  deliverance  of 
the  saint  from  this  present  evil  age  by  the  cross  of 
.Christ,  and  his  consistent  maintenance  of  the  new 
nature  and  position  of  grace — of  the  new  creation  in 
Christ  Jesus. 

May  the  truth  of  God  sink  into  our  hearts !  Thus  all 
things  fall  into  their  place,  and  the  Spirit  connects  us 
*in  heart  with  that  which  God  is  doing  and  will  do  for 
the  glory  of  Christ.  The  apostle  had  heard  enough  of 
circumcision:  it  was  repulsive  to  him  henceforth.  It 
was  his  to  bear  in  his  body  a  very  different  brand — 
"the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  the  scars  of  the  only 
warfare  that  is  precious  in  the  sight  of  God  the  Father. 
Lastly,  he  desires  for  his  brethren,  that  "the  grace  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  might  be  with  their  spirit. 
Nothing  more  in  keeping  with  the  wants  of  those 
addressed,  who  had  so  soon  turned  aside  from  the  grace 
of  Christ  to  a  different  gospel. 


190  INTEODUCTOKY  LECTURES. 


V. 

EPHESIANS. 

In  this  epistle  we  have  the  unfolding  of  the  grace  of 
God  in  all  its  fulness,  not  merely  the  application  of  His 
righteousness  to  man's  need  on  His  part,  but  God  from 
out  of  Himself,  and  for  Himself,  as  the  adequate  motive 
and  object  before  Him,  even  His  own  glory.  Hence  it 
is  that  righteousness  disappears  in  this  epistle.  We 
have  had  the  gospel  thus  in  all  the  epistles  that  have 
gone  before.  In  Komans,  in  1st  and  2nd  Corinthians, 
and  in  Galatians,  righteousness  was  largely  used.  It 
was  developed  in  a  positive  and  comprehensive  way,  as 
in  Eomans.  It  was  brought  in  either  to  convict  the 
Corinthians  of  their  utter  departure  through  the  spirit 
of  the  world,  the  flesh  taking  that  shape,  or  it  was 
brought  in  triumphantly  on  their  restoration.  Again, 
by  it  the  apostle,  writing  to  the  Galatians,  vindicated 
God's  ways  with  man,  and  set  the  Christian  outside 
the  law. 

But  in  Ephesians  the  aim  is  of  a  much  more  absolute 
and  direct  character.  It  is  not  the  wants  of  man  in  any 
sense,  either  positively  or  negatively.  Here  God  from 
Himself  and  for  Himself  is  acting  according  to  the 
riches  of  His  own  grace.  Accordingly  the  very  opening 
brings  before  us  this  astonishingly  elevated  manner  of 
presenting  the  great  truth  with  which  the  apostle's 
heart  was  filled.     "Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EPHESIANS.        191 

the  will  of  God."  It  was  pre-eminently  for  this  that  he 
had  been  chosen  as  an  apostle ;  and  he  represents  his 
apostleship  not  here  as  a  question  of  calling,  but  "  by 
the  will  of  God  : "  everything  in  this  epistle  flows  from 
the  will  of  God ; — "  to  the  saints  which  are  at  Ephesus, 
and  to  the  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus." 

Although  about  to  show  us  what  the  church  is  in  its 
heavenly  blessing,  that  is,  in  its  highest  associations, 
he  always  begins  with  the  individual.  This  was  pe- 
culiarly needed.  The  tendency  is  ever  to  set  aside  what 
is  personal  for  that  which  is  corporate.  The  epistle  to 
the  Ephesians  truly  understood  will  help  none  so  to  do. 
It  may  be  perverted  to  this  or  anything  else;  but  so  far 
is  our  corporate  place  from  being  put  in  the  foreground 
that  we  do  not  hear  one  word  about  the  assembly  as 
such  till  the  close  of  the  first  chapter.  Only  in  verse 
22  is  the  church  even  named  for  the  first  time,  where 
it  is  said  God  has  given  Christ  "to  be  the  head  over 
all  things  to  the  church."  But  up  to  this  the  saints 
are  contemplated  as  such.  The  moral  order  of  this  is 
exceedingly  beautiful.  In  the  admirable  wisdom  and 
grace  of  God  it  is  the  direct  setting  aside  of  that  which 
is  found  in  all  earthly  systems,  where  the  individual  is 
merely  a  portion  of  a  vast  body  which  arrogates  to 
itself  the  highest  claims.  It  is  not  so  in  the  word  of 
God.  There  the  individual  blessing  of  the  soul  has  the 
first  place.  God  would  have  us  set  thoroughly  clear 
and  intelligently  appreciating  our  individual  place  and 
relation  to  Himself  Where  these  are  made  and  kept 
right,  we  can  then  safely  follow  what  God  will  show  ug 
in  due  time,  but  not  otherwise. 

As  usual  the  apostle  salutes  the  saints  with  the 
best  wishes  for  their  blessing.      "Grace  be  to  you, 


192  INTBODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

and  peace,  from  God  our  Father,  and  from  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  Then,  without  delay,  the  next  verses 
introduce  a  general  view  of  the  glorious  topic  that 
occupied  him.  "  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  It  is  God  in  His  proper  nature, 
and  in  His  relationship  to  Jesus.  He  is  the  God  of 
Jesus;  He  is  the  Father  of  Jesus.  But  the  God  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  hath  blessed  us  with 
all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ."  It 
is  not  carnal  blessing  such  as  was  in  measure  given 
under  the  law  to  Israel,  and  wUl  be  under  the  new 
covenant  by  and  by;  it  is  spiritual  blessing.  The  earth  is 
their  sphere ;  it  is  there  that  Israel  looks  to  be  blessed, 
and  the  Gentiles  somewhat  farther  off,  but  all  in  the 
ordered  blessing  of  the  Most  High  God.  Altogether 
differently  here  "  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ "  has  blessed  us  where  Christ  is  on  high.  There 
is  no  place  good  enough  for  Christ  the  Son  but  heaven. 
There  it  is  God  Himself  displays  most  His  own  glory ; 
there  He  displays  Christ  Himself  to  aU  the  heavenly 
hosts,  delighting  to  put  honour  on  that  Man  whom  He 
raised  from  the  dead  and  set  at  His  own  right  hand.  It 
is  there  not  merely  that  He  means  to  bless  us,  but  that 
He  has  blessed  us  already.  Such  is  the  character  of  our 
blessing,  and  such  its  seat.  The  character  is  spiritual, 
the  seat  heavenly ;  and  as  the  whole  is  given  by  the 
God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  so  it  is  secured  in 
Christ. 

In  the  next  verse  the  apostle  opens  out  that  which 
is  more  particularly  connected  with  "the  God  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  "According  as  he  hath  chosen  us 
in  him  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  that  we 
should  be  holy  and  without  blame  before  him  in  love." 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   EPHESIANS.  193 

If  "  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  has 
blessed  us  with  every  spiritual  blessing  above  in  Christ, 
this  is  the  first  need — to  have  a  nature  capable  of  com- 
munion with  His  God,  to  have  a  condition  that  would 
do  no  dishonour,  not  only  to  the  highest  sphere,  but  to 
the  holiest  form  and  sphere  in  which  God  has  ever  made 
Himself  known.  This  is  the  nature  that  is  given  to 
the  believer  now.  But  it  is  not  merely  a  thing  im- 
parted. The  special  point  before  the  apostle's  mind 
is  that  this  was  the  choice  of  God  before  the  world,  in 
which  we  are  brought  to  know  the  infinite  blessing. 
It  was  entirely  unconnected  with  the  world.  Far  dif- 
ferent was  Israel's  case,  however  favoured  as  a  nation. 
They  were  chosen  in  time.  N'ot  only  were  they  called 
in  time  as  we  have  been,  but  they  were  chosen  in 
time,  which  we  were  not.  The  choice  of  the  saints  for 
heavenly  blessedness  was  before  the  creation  of  the 
universe,  before  the  foundation  of  the  world. 

This  gives  a  very  peculiar  character  to  our  blessed- 
ness. It  is  altogether  independent  of  the  old  creation,  of 
thatcwhich  might  fail  and  pass  away.  It  was  a  choice  of 
God  Himself  before  there  was  any  creature  responsible 
or  dependent.  God  made  known  His  choice,  not  when 
the  creature  was  to  be  proved,  but  when  it  had  failed  to 
the  uttermost ;  but  the  choice  itself  was  decided  on  by 
God  Himself  before  the  creature  came  into  being.  It  is 
the  moral  answer  to  what  was  shown  in  Christ, — "  that 
we  should  be  holy  and  without  blame  before  him  in 
love."  Indeed,  these  are  the  very  qualities  of  God  Him- 
self. He  is  holy  in  nature,  and  blameless  in  His  ways, 
Man  may  cavil  and  murmur  now  in  unbelief;  but  God 
will  vindicate  them  every  one  when  man  shall  be  silent 
for  ever.     Besides,  there  is  love,  the  activity,  as  well  as 

0 


194  INTEODUCTORT  LECTUEES. 

the  moral  qualities,  of  His  being.  Love  it  is  which,  as 
it  were,  puts  all  in  movement  that  belongs  to  God.  It 
is  not  something  extraneous  that  acts  on  God  as  a 
motive,  but  EQs  own  love  flowing  out  from  Himself  ac- 
cording to  His  holy  nature,  and  in  perfect  consistency 
with  His  character  and  ways. 

This  is  the  moral  nature  which  God  confers  on  us 
who  are  born  of  Him.     This  and  nothing  less  or  else 
is  what  He  chooses  us  to  be  before  Him — chooses  us 
to  be  in  Christ  in  His  own  sight,  and  therefore  with 
the  fullest  certainty  that  it  shall  be  according  to  His 
own  mind.      It  is  not  merely  in  the  presence  of  an 
angel,  still  less  before  the  world.      Angels  are  not 
adequate  judges  of  what  pertains  to  us ;  they  may  be 
witnesses,  but  not  judges.   God  Himself  is  acting  for  His 
own  glory  and  according  to  His  own  love.    But  then  the 
possession  of  a  nature  capable  of  communing  with  God 
did  not  and  could  not  satisfy.    He  would  have  something 
more.  "WTiat  could  this  possibly  be  ?  Is  He  not  satisfied 
with  giving  us  a  nature  like  His  own  ?    No,  not  even 
so,  and  for  this  reason — God  has  relationships,  and  these 
relationships  are  shown  in  Jesus  just  as  much  as  His 
nature  is.     If  we  want  to  know  what  the  holiness,  and 
blamelessness,  and  love  of  God  is,  we  must  look  at  Him; 
but  in  the  same  way  also,  if  we  desire  to  know  what 
are  the  relationships  into  which  God  puts  those  He 
loves,  where  shall  we  find  the  highest  ?     Certainly  not 
in  the  first  man  Adam.     Israel's  was  at  best  a  mere 
creature  relationship,  though,  no  doubt,  having  a  special 
place  in  creation.     Of  all  the  creatures  that  live  and 
breathe,  man  is  the  only  one  on  earth  that  became  a 
Hving  soul  by  the  breath  of  the  Lord  God,  who,  as  it 
is  written,  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life. 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   EPHESIANS.  195 

That  is,  there  is  a  creative  connection  between  God  and 
man  which  is  the  source  of  man's  moral  relations  with 
God,  and  the  reason  why  man,  and  man  alone  of  all 
creatures  on  the  earth,  shall  live  again  and  give  an 
account  of  himself  to  God. 

But  in  that  which  comes  before  us  in  our  epistle, 
it  is  not  a  question  even  of  the  highest  creature 
on  earth — one  that  was  called  to  have  dominion  on 
earth,  and  be  the  image  and  glory  of  God  here  below. 
God  had  in  view  One  infinitely  above  man;  and  yet 
He  was  a  man.  It  was  Jesus ;  and  Jesus  stood  in  what 
was  altogether  peculiar^in  a  relationship  that  was  per- 
fectly according  to  God's  counsels ;  but  more  than  that, 
according  to  a  relationship  that  was  peculiar  to  His 
own  person.  There  was  counsel,  but  besides  there  was 
intrinsic  glory  altogether  independent  of  any  plans  of 
conferred  honour.  In  other  words,  the  Son  of  God 
never  was  made  the  Sou,  He  is  never  even  called  the 
child  (reicvov)  of  God.*  To  us,  to  be  called  children  of 
God  is  more  intimate  than  to  be  s  by  led  His  sons;  but 
it  would  derogate  from  the  Lord.  Jesus  is  never  called 
a  child  in  the  sense  in  which  I  am  now  speaking.  He 
has  His  own  relationship  to  the  Father  eternally.  To 
us  it  is  more  to  be  born  of  the  very  nature  of  God, 
than  to  be  sons  adopted  into  the  family  of  God.  There 
might  be  an  adopted  sou  without  the  nature.  One 
might  be  altogether  a  stranger  to  him  that  adopts.  But 
in  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  there  was  this  character  of 
Son  in  His  own  title  and  being  from  everlasting.  Need  I 
say  that  this  is  altogether  above  human  comprehension? 

*  The  Lord  Jesus  is  repeatedly  called  vaie,  translated  "son"  and 
"cluld"  in  the  BngKsli  version  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  hut  more 
properly  God's  servant  as  Messiah. 

o  2 


196  INTEODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

Yet  nothiEg  is  more  certain  than  that  God  so  speaks 
to  our  faith.  Were  there  an  interval  of  one  instant 
between  the  Father  and  the  Son,  did  the  Father  exist 
in  any  respect  before  the  Son  as  such,  all  the  truth  of 
God  as  revealed  in  the  Bible  perishes.  He  to  whom  I 
look  up,  by  and  in  whom  alone  I  can  know  God  and 
the  Father,  is  God  Himself.  Let  the  notion  of  time 
come  into  the  conception  given  of  Godhead  and  of  the 
persons — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  and  all  would 
be  falsehood  and  confusion.  The  Son  would  be  a  crea- 
ture— not  self-subsisting,  not  therefore  truly  God.  For 
if  God,  He  is  as  such  not  less  truly  God  than  the 
Father;  for  there  can  be  no  difference  as  to  Godhead. 
As  the  Father  is  everlasting,  so  is  the  Son.  The  relation- 
ship in  the  Godhead  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  question 
of  time ;  and  the  great  mistake  that  has  been  wrought 
by  aU  human  philosophy  is  from  introducing  notions  of 
time  where  time  can  have  no  place  whatever. 

Thus  in  the  Godhead  there  are  the  relationships  of  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  I  confine 
myself  now  to  the  relationship  of  the  Son  to  the  Father 
from  everlasting.  And  God,  having  these  counsels  be- 
fore Him  from  everlasting,  deigns  to  have  a  people,  not 
only  capable  of  enjoying  Him  as  having  the  very  same 
nature  as  His  own,  without  which  they  could  not  enjov 
glory ;  but,  besides,  if  He  has  us  in  His  presence.  He 
would  have  us  in  the  highest  relationship  into  which 
grace  could  bring  us.  Now,  the  highest  being  that  of 
the  Son,  we  accordingly  are  brought  into  that  relation- 
ship, though  not,  of  course,  in  the  sense  in  which  He 
was  eternally  so.  To  us  it  could  be  but  eternal  purpose, 
to  Him  eternal  being;  to  us  pure  grace,  but  to  Him 
His  own  indefeasible  right.     But  the  Son  being  before 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   EPHESIANS.  197 

the  Father  as  His  supreme  object  of  love  and  delight 
from  all  eternity,  to  bring  us  as  sons  before  Him  was 
as  much  a  part  of  His  counsels  as  to  make  us  partakers 
of  divine  nature.  Thus  nature  is  the  subject  of  verse 
4,  as  relationship  is  of  verse  5.  Hence  in  the  latter 
we  find,  not  exactly  choosing,  but  predestinating  us: 
"Having  predestinated  us  unto  the  adoption  of  children 
by  Jesus  Christ  to  himself,  according  to  the  good  plea- 
sure of  his  will." 

It  is  well  to  mark  the  difference.  To  be  before  Him 
without  having  His  own  nature  would  be  impossible ; 
and  therefore  it  is  not  stated  as  a  matter  of  predestina- 
tion, but  of  choice.  He  might  have  been  pleased  to  choose 
none ;  but  if  we  are  to  be  brought  into  His  presence 
at  all,  it  is  impossible  to  be  there  without  having  the 
divine  nature,  in  a  moral  sense  (and,  of  course,  one  only 
speaks  of  this).  It  is  not  the  impartation  of  Godhead  : 
none  can  be  so  foolish  as  to  think  of  such  a  thing. 
But  the  divine  nature  is  given  to  us  in  its  qualities 
of  holiness  and  love.  On  the  other  hand,  we  find  that  the 
predestination  is  "according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his 
will,"  because  no  necessity  operates  in  this.  There  was 
a  moral  necessity  for  a  nature  suitable  to  God,  if  we 
were  to  be  in  His  presence  at  all;  but  there  was  none 
for  this  special  relationship.  He  might  have  put  us  in 
any  degree  of  relationship  He  pleased.  Angels,  for 
instance,  are  there;  but  they  have  no  such  relationship. 
His  grace  has  predestinated  us  to  the  very  highest 
relation — that  of  sons  unto  Himself  by  Jesus  Christ 
"  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will."  And  the 
apostle  concludes  the  whole  of  this  part  of  the  matter 
"to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  grace,  wherein  he 
hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  beloved."    All  this  won- 


198  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

« 

drous  scheme  is  to  the  glory  of  His  grace.  He  uses 
therefore  the  highest  terms  in  order  to  express  it.  Grace 
alone  would  not  suffice,  glory  alone  would  not  serve, 
but  both.  It  is  "to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his 
grace."  Meanwhile  it  is  again  presented  to  us  in  this 
new  fact,  that  we  are  brought  in  as  objects  of  His  per- 
fect favour  in  the  Beloved.  Such  is  the  measure,  if 
measure  it  can  be  called,  of  the  grace  wherein  we  stand. 

But  then  those  in  respect  of  whom  God  the  Father 
had  such  thoughts  were  in  point  of  fact  sinners.  The 
next  verse  shows  that  this  is  not  forgotten,  for  account 
is  taken  of  the  fact,  and  it  is  provided  for.  The  same 
"  Beloved  "  who  accounts  to  us  for  the  counsels  of  God 
has  brought  in  redemption.  In  Him  we  enter  into 
favour,  "in  whom  we  have  redemption  through  his  blood, 
the  forgiveness  of  oifences,"  not  exactly  according  to  the 
praise  of  his  glory,  "  but  according  to  the  riches  of  His 
grace."  It  is  a  present  thing  in  every  sense,  though,  of 
course,  needed  for  heaven  and  eternity.  Hence  the 
expression  does  not  go  beyond  the  riches  of  God's  grace. 
Thus  is  touched,  incidentally,  the  need  of  our  souls  as 
offenders  against  God,  but  only  so  far  as  to  show  that  it 
was  in  no  way  overlooked. 

Next  the  apostle  turns  to  the  boundless  scene  that  lies 
before  us,  as  in  the  preceding  verses  he  had  looked  at 
what  is  behind  us.  And  why  is  all  this?  Clearly  God 
has  a  purpose,  a  settled  and  glorious  plan  to  gather  the 
whole  universe  under  Christ  as  its  Head.  Are  those  that 
He  has  brought  into  a  share  of  His  own  moral  nature 
and  the  relationship  of  sons  to  be  left  out  of  this?  In 
nowise :  even  now  He  has  abounded  toward  them  "in 
all  wisdom  and  prudence."  These  words  do  not  attribute 
to  God  all  wisdom  and  prudence,  which  certainly  would 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EPHESUNS.  199 

be  nothing  new;  but  they  intimate  that  He  has  now  con- 
ferred on  His  saints  all  wisdom  and  prudence.  It  is  truly 
an  astonishing  statement.  The  contrast  is  with  Adam, 
who  had  a  knowledge  that  was  suited  to  his  own  place 
and  relationship.  Accordingly  we  hear  in  Genesis  ii. 
how  he  gave  names  to  all  that  was  put  under  him.  And 
as  to  his  wife,  he  instantly  understands,  though  he  had 
been  in  a  deep  sleep  while  she  was  being  formed.  But 
when  presented  to  him,  he  knows  all  that  it  was  meet 
for  him  to  know  then.  He  knows  instinctively  that  she 
was  part  of  himself,  and  gives  her  a  name  suitably. 
Such  seems  to  have  been  the  measure  of  Adam's  wis- 
dom and  prudence.  As  being  the  image  and  glory  of 
God  on  earth,  he  is  the  one  that  gives  names  to  his 
companion,  or  to  the  subject  creation.  It  is  not  merely 
that  he  accepts  names  given  him  by  God,  but  God 
delights  in  putting  him  in  this  place  of  lordship,  and  to 
a  certain  extent  also  of  fellowship — lordship  to  that 
which  is  below  him,  and  fellowship  as  regarded  his  wife. 
Thus,  then,  Adam  acts  and  speaks. 

But  the  saints,  now  being  made  the  objects  of  these 
heavenly  counsels  of  God,  have  a  wisdom  and  prudence 
of  their  own,  quite  peculiar  to  the  new  creation  in  Christ, 
and  its  proper  relations :  God  puts  no  limits  to  it.  In 
point  of  fact.  He  looks  for  the  expression  and  exercise  of 
it,  be  assured,  from  all  of  us,  though  no  doubt  according 
to  our  measure.  It  is  no  use  merely  taking  it  up  as  a 
name  or  barren  title.  Our  God  and  Father  does  look  for 
the  display  of  the  mind  of  Christ  in  us,  so  that  we  should 
be  able  to  form  a  judgment  according  to  Himself,  and  to 
express  it  about  whatever  comes  before  us.  For  if  we 
are  in  Christ,  we  have  a  vantage  ground  which  makes  aU 
things  clear.    Christ  is  not  darkness  but  light,  and  puts 


200  DfTSODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

all  in  the  light;  He  makes  us  to  he  children  of  the  lightj 
that  so  we  may  be  able  to  judge  ourselves,  not  discerned 
by  man  as  such,  but  capable  of  discerning  whatever 
cMms  our  attention.  Such  is  the  place  of  a  Christian, 
and  a  wondrous  place  it  is,  flowing  from  the  nature 
and  relationship  which  we  possess  by  the  grace  of  our 
God. 

But  the  connection  is  important.  God  has  "abounded 
toward  us  in  all  wisdom  and  prudence ;  having  made 
known  unto  us  [what  is  the  special  proof  of  it]  the 
mystery  of  his  will."  This  does  not  yet  appear;  for 
there  is  nothing  to  indicate  to  mankind  what  He  pur- 
poses to  do.  It  is  an  absolutely  new  thing ;  and  this 
new  purpose  is  "  according  to  the  good  pleasure  which 
he  hath  purposed  in  himself:  that  in  the  dispensation 
of  the  fulness  of  times  he  might  gather  together  in  one 
all  things  in  Christ,  both  which  are  in  heaven,  and 
which  are  on  earth,  even  in  him;  in  whom  also  we 
have  obtained  an  inheritance,  being  predestinated  ac- 
cording to  the  purpose  of  him  who  worketh  all  things 
after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will,  that  we  should  be  to 
the  praise  of  his  glory,"  &c. 

Here  the  apostle  repeats  that  high,  large,  and  blessed 
phrase  already  so  familiar  to  us,  "that  we  should  be 
to  the  praise  of  his  glory,  who  first  trusted  in  Christ ; 
in  whom  ye  also  [trusted]."  It  was  not  confined  to 
those  that  had  their  hope  founded  on  Christ  while 
the  nation  refused  Him.  Paul  was  one  of  those ;  and 
there  were  others  at  Ephesus,  as  we  well  know — in 
point  of  fact  the  first  nucleus  of  the  assembly  there. 
The  first  saints  and  faithful  in  the  city  of  Ephesus,  as 
Acts  xix.  shows,  were  persons  who  had  been  baptized 
with  the  baptism  of  John,  and  afterwards  brought  from 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE  EPHESIANS.  201 

Jewish  to  Christian  ground  by  the  apostle  Paul.  Hence 
he  says,  "that  we  should  be  to  the  praise  of  his  glory, 
who  first  trusted  in  Christ,"  referring  to  himself  and 
any  other  saints  who  had  been  chosen  from  the  people 
of  the  Jews.  At  the  same  time  there  is  no  exclusion 
of  Gentile  believers,  but  the  reverse.  "In  whom  ye 
also  [trusted],  after  that  ye  heard  the  word  of  truth,  the 
gospel  of  your  salvation."  For  the  mass  subsequently 
brought  in  were  Gentiles,  and  the  gospel  of  salvation 
they  forthwith  received,  without  going  through  the 
intermediate  steps  that  the  others  knew.  The  Jews,  or 
those  who  had  been  under  Jewish  teaching,  had  been 
for  a  while  in  an  infantine  state,  or  an  Old  Testament 
condition;  but  the  Gentiles  by  faith  passed  simply 
and  directly  into  the  full  Christian  blessing.  "In  whom 
also,  after  that  ye  believed,  ye  were  sealed  with  the 
holy  Spirit  of  promise,  who  is  the  earnest  of  our 
inheritance  untH  the  redemption  of  the  purchased  "pos- 
session, unto  the  praise  of  his  glory." 

It  cannot  have  escaped  observation  that  there  are 
two  great  parts  in  that  which  has  come  before  us.  The 
first  is  nature;  the  second  is  relationship.  The  Holy 
Ghost  is  here  viewed  according  to  these  two.  Connected 
with  nature.  He  has  sealed  us,  as  it  is  said  here  and 
elsewhere ;  and  connected  with  relationship,  He  is  the 
earnest.  For  "if  children,  then  heirs ;  heirs  of  God,  and 
joint-heirs  with  Christ."  The  Holy  Ghost  thus  takes 
a  corresponding  part.  Just  as  Christ  is  the  sample  and 
model  whether  of  nature  or  relationship,  so  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  not  without  His  own  proper  place  in  bringing 
the  saint  into  the  reality,  knowledge,  and  enjoyment  of 
both.  The  Holy  Ghost  gives  us  the  certainty  and  joyful 
assurance  of  our  place  as  saints;  the  Holy  Ghost  at 


202  INTRODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

the  same  time  gives  us  the  foretaste  of  the  bright  in- 
heritance of  God  that  lies  beyond. 

Then  follows  a  prayer  of  the  apostle — the  first  of 
those  he  pours  out  for  the  Ephesian  saints.  Naturally 
this  prayer  grows  out  of  the  two  great  truths  he  had 
been  urging.  He  prays  for  the  saints  "  that  the  God  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Father  of  glory  [for  this  is 
what  his  mind  connected  with  it],  may  give  unto  you 
the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  in  the  knowledge 
of  him,  the  eyes  of  your  understanding  being  en- 
lightened, that  ye  may  know  what  is  the  hope  of  his 
calling,  and  what  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  inherit- 
ance in  the  saints."  These  are  the  two  former  points. 
The  "  hope  of  his  calling"  is  the  bright  prospect  of  the 
saints  themselves,  as  they  are  in  Christ  before  God. 
"  The  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  inheritance "  embrace, 
of  course,  that  vast  scene  of  creation  which  is  to  be 
put  under  the  glorified  saints.  He  prays  accordingly 
that  they  might  enter  into  both,  realizing  the  holy 
peaceful  atmosphere  of  the  one,  and  the  glorious  expec- 
tations that  were  bound  up  with  the  other ;  for  clearly 
the  future  is  before  his  mind.  But  then  he  adds  a  third 
point,  which  was  not  given  in  the  previous  part  of  the 
chapter;  namely,  that  they  might  know  "what  is  the 
exceeding  greatness  of  his  power  to  us-ward  who  believe, 
according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty  power,  which  he 
wrought  in  Christ,  when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead." 

This  last  was  of  all -importance  to  the  saints,  and 
the  rather  as  that  power  had  already  been  put  forth. 
It  shines  in  full  contrast  with  Israel  If  the  latter 
enquired  how  God  had  interfered  most  conspicuously 
for  them,  no  doubt  they  were  reminded  of  the  power 
that  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.    This 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   EPHESIANS.  203 

was  always  tlieir  comfort  in  the  midst  of  disasters  and 
troubles.  The  God  that  divided  the  Eed  Sea,  and 
brought  them  across  Jordan,  was  equal  to  any  difficulty 
that  might  ever  assail  them  again.  In  the  prophets  this 
too  remains  always  the  standard,  until  God  exert  His 
power  in  another  way,  when  He  shall  be  no  longer 
spoken  of  as  Jehovah  that  brought  them  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt,  but  out  of  the  north  country  into  their 
land,  where  He  shall  settle  them  for  ever.  Thus  Israel 
stands  in  the  permanent  remembrance  of  power  that 
redeemed  them  from  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  in  the 
anticipation  of  a  still  greater  manifestation  that  will 
eclipse  whatever  had  been  seen  of  old. 

But  the  Christian  is  even  now  himself,  with  his 
fellow-saints,  the  object  of  the  very  same  power  which 
never  can  be  outshone — the  power  that  raised  up  Christ 
from  the  dead.  We  wait  for  nothing  greater  nor  its 
match ;  we  await  the  results  of  this  glorious  power  for 
the  body  and  the  creation;  but  we  look  for  no  new  put- 
ting forth  of  power  which  can  enter  into  competition 
with  that  which  God  has  already  shown  in  Christ.  The 
moment  that  Jesus  presents  Himself  as  the  answer  to 
what  has  been  put  forth  already,  the  saints  rise  or  are 
changed  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  Besides,  it  is  not 
merely  that  the  body  will  immediately  respond  to  the  call 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  even  now  the  very  same  power 
has  wrought  toward  us  in  making  us  Christians  which 
"  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead, 
and  set  him  at  his  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly 
places,  far  above  all  principality,  and  power,  and  might, 
and  dominion,  and  every  name  that  is  named,  not  only 
in  this  age,  but  also  in  that  which  is  to  come:  and 
hath  put  all  things  under  his  feet,  and  gave  him  to  be 


204  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

the  head  over  all  things  to  the  church,  which  is  his 
body,  the  fulness  of  him  that  fiUeth  all  in  all."  Such  is 
the  power  that  has  wrought  now — wrought  toward  us 
even  while  we  are  in  this  world. 

Accordingly,  in  chapter  ii.,  the  apostle  pursues  this 
train,  and  shows  that  it  is  not  another  exertion  of  power, 
but  a  part  of  the  very  same  work  of  God  which  raised 
up  Jesus  from  the  dead.  In  other  words,  Christ  was 
not  raised  up  as  an  insulated  individual,  severed  from 
all  others  by  His  glory  and  their  sin  and  shame.  The 
gospel  of  God's  grace  proclaims  the  very  reverse.  He 
was  raised  up  as  the  great  manifestation  of  divine  power 
for  effectuating  God's  counsels  as  well  as  redemption. 
Not  only  was  His  resurrection  this  manifestation,  but 
also  whatever  God  put  forth  toward  us  was  in  virtue  of 
that  display  of  His  energy — was,  so  to  speak,  morally 
included  in  that  power  which  raised  up  Christ  from  the 
dead.  This  clearly  is  of  the  deepest  possible  interest  to 
the  saints.  Throughout  the  epistle  all  the  secret  is  just 
this — God  would  associate  us  with  Christ  (that  is,  of 
course,  in  everything  that  is  consistent  with  the  mainte- 
nance of  the  divine  glory).  Whatever  could  contribute 
to  it,  whatever  fell  in  according  to  it,  everything  that 
God  Himself  could  do  to  bind  us  up  with  Christ, 
sharing  with  us  all  that  is  glorious  in  Christ  His  own 
Son,  even  to  His  holy  nature  and  relationship  with  the- 
Father,  as  far  as  this  could  be  conferred  on  a  creature, 
is  no  more  than  God  had  in  His  heart — yea,  is  what 
God  has  given  us  now,  and  will  display  in  heavenly 
places  ere  long. 

So  the  apostle  says,  "You  hath  he  quickened,  who 
were  dead  in  offences  and  sins;"  for  now  we  can 
bear  to  learn  anything,  however  humiliating,  and  He 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE  EPHESIANS.  205 

can  speak  of  anything,  no  matter  how  exalted  or  holy. 
God  had  never  so  spoken  of  man  before.  In  Eomans 
the  sinner  is  regarded  as  alive  in  sins ;  and  death,  the 
death  of  Christ,  is  the  means  of  deliverance.  In  Ephe- 
sians  death  is  the  very  first  place  where  we  find  even 
Christ.  Not  a  word  is  said  of  sending  Him  into  the 
world,  or  of  His  life  and  labours  there,  any  more  than 
of  our  doing  this  or  being  that.  The  first  place  where 
Christ  is  seen  is  in  the  grave  whence  God  according  to 
the  mightiest  action  of  His  almighty  power  raised  Him 
up.  It  was  an  absolutely  new  thing:  never  was  seen 
one  so  glorious,  never  can  there  be  another  so  trium- 
phant, as  the  power  there  put  forth.  Man,  Satan,  yea, 
the  judgment  of  God  that  had  gone  forth  against  Him 
because  of  our  sins,  had  no  force  to  detain  Him  in  the 
grave.  That  judgment  had  fallen  on  Him  necessarily  and 
unsparingly;  but  in  the  face  of  everything  calculated 
to  hinder,  God's  power  broke  up  the  last  stronghold  of 
the  enemy.  There  was  Jesus  lying  in  the  grave;  and 
from  that  grave  God  raised  Him,  and  set  Him  on  the 
highest  pinnacle  of  heaven's  glory — not  only  of  that 
which  then  was,  but  that  ever  shall  be.  Such  is  the 
very  power  that  has  taken  you  and  me  up  in  divine 
grace,  and  wrought  toward  us.  The  very  power  that 
brought  you  out  of  the  world  and  of  your  sins  is  the 
power  that  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead,  set  Him  in 
the  heavenly  places,  and  gave  Him  as  head  over  aU 
things  to  the  church,  which  is  His  body,  the  fulness  of 
that  glorious  Head  to  whom  it  is  united. 

This  is  pursued  then  first  with  reference  to  the  Gen- 
tiles, for  now  the-  order  is  reversed.  In  chapter  i.  he 
began  with  the  Jews,  and  then  showed  the  Gentiles 
brought  in ;  but  now  he  begins  with  the  outer  circle 


206  INTRODUCTOBT  LECTURES. 

where  the  Gentiles  were.  "And  you  hath  he  quickened, 
who  were  dead  in  offences  and  sins ;  wherein  in  time 
past  ye  walked  according  to  the  course  of  this  world, 
according  to  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  the 
spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobe- 
dience." What  can  be  conceived  more  dreadful  than 
such  a  condition,  positively  without  spiritual  life,  dead 
in  offences  and  sins !  Not  only  so,  but  they  had  walked 
according  to  the  course  of  that  which  is  most  of  aU 
offensive  to  God — "of  this  world,  according  to  the  prince 
of  the  authority  of  the  air,  the  spirit  that  now  worketh 
in  the  children  of  disobedience;"  for  indeed  they  were, 
one  as  much  as  another,  children  of  disobedience. 
"Among  whom  also  we  all,"  &c.,  for  he  does  not  let  slip 
the  Jews,  but  turns  round  on  their  estate,  equally  life- 
less as  the  Gentiles.  They  might  otherwise  think  them- 
selves more  or  less  superior.  He  had  spoken  of  the 
poor  idolatrous  Gentiles  and  their  awful  condition ;  but 
"  we  all,"  says  he, — putting  himself  along  with  them, — 
Jews  as  we  were,  children  of  the  covenant  and  what 
not,  were  none  the  less  dead  in  offences  and  sins. 
"Among  whom  also  we  all  had  our  conversation  in 
time  past  in  the  lusts  of  our  flesh,  fulfilling  the  desires 
of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind ;  and  were  by  nature  the 
children  of  wrath,  even  as  the  rest.  But  God,  who  is 
rich  in  mercy,  for  his  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us,, 
even  when  we  were  dead  in  sins,  quickened  us  to- 
gether with  Christ  (by  grace  ye  are  saved),  and  raised 
us  up  together."  Now  he  unites  both  in  this  place  of 
richest  blessing ;  for  He  has  even  "made  us  sit  together 
in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus :  that  in  the  ages 
to  come  he  might  shew  the  exceeding  riches  of  his 
grace  in  his  kindness  toward  U5  through  Christ  Jesus." 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   EPHESIANS.  207 

In  truth  it  is  His  grace  to  the  full,  and  for  heaven  (not" 
earth),  though  given  to  us  to  know  here  before  we  get 
there;  "for  by  grace  are  ye  saved."  The  whole  work  is 
thus  presented  in  its  completeness  from  first  to  last ; 
nevertheless,  it  is  only  "  through  faith  "  as  yet.  This  is 
and  must  be  the  medium,  as  far  as  the  saints  are  con- 
cerned, grace  being  the  spring  on  God's  part :  "  and 
that  not  of  yourselves:  it  is  the  gift  of  God:  not  of 
works,  lest  any  man  should  boast.  Tor  we  are  his 
workmanship." 

It  is  clearly  not  a  question  of  righteousness  here, 
or  consistency  with  any  known  standard  of  judg- 
ment. God  would  frame  a  new  sort  of  workmanship 
worthy  of  Himself;  and  therefore  all  question  of  ante- 
cedent measures  disappears.  Eighteousness  supposes  a 
claim  in  the  first  place,  however  met ;  even  though  it 
may  be  God's  righteousness,  still  it  is  God  acting  in 
consistency  with  Himself  and  His  own  claims.  But  in 
Ephesians  we  are  in  presence  of  a  new  creation  in  Christ, 
where  claim  is  out  of  the  question.  Who  would  demand 
of  God  to  make  the  objects  of  His  mercy  like  Christ 
the  Son  ?  Who  could,  before  He  revealed  His  purpose, 
have  so  much  as  conceived  such  a  dealing  possible? 
Even  now,  though  plainly  made  known  in  this  epistle 
and  elsewhere,  how  few  Christians  there  are  who  rest  in 
it  as  their  assured  portion !  So  totally  and  absolutely  is 
it  outside  the  range  of  human  thought  and  feeling  that 
the  difficulty  is  to  drop  self,  jfco  cut  all  the  strings  that 
bind  us  to  human  nature  and  the  world,  to  see  aU 
ended  even  now  that  is  connected  with  the  present 
course  of  this  age,  so  that  we  may  be  simply  occupied 
and  filled  with  that  heavenly  blessedness  which  God 
unfolds  to  our  souls. 


208  INTRODUCTOKY  LECTURES. 

However  this  be,  "  We  are  his  workmanship,  created 
in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works," — a  peculiar  kind  of 
good  works,  suited  to  the  relationship  in  which  we 
stand.  This  is  the  great  point  to  seize  always  through- 
out Scripture.  There  never  can  be  spiritual  understand- 
ing, unless  souls  let  in  this  after  aU  plain  principle, 
that  the  suited  good  depends  on  the  relationship  in 
which  we  are  placed,  whether  to  God,  or  to  any  other. 
The  good  for  an  Israelite,  for  a  Gentile,  for  a  man, 
is  whoUy  different  from  the  good  for  a  Christian, 
because  their  relationships  are  not  the  same  as  his. 
Now  we  are  Christians;  and  this  decides  the  character 
of  the  duties  we  have  to  pay,  or  of  the  good  works 
which  He  has  before  prepared  that  we  should  walk  in 
them ;  for  "  we  are  his  workmanship,  created  in  Christ 
Jesus  "  for  this  very  purpose.  It  is  not  at  all  put  as  a 
question  of  command  according  to  the  law ;  but  "  God 
had  before  prepared,"  as  a  part  of  His  wonderful  scheme, 
"that  we  should  walk  in  them."  He  merely  now 
touches  on  the  principle,  as  he  had  before  let  us  see  not 
merely  God's  counsels  from  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world,  but  the  manner  and  means  of  their  application 
through  Christ  our  Lord  to  us  in  time.  Hence  the  con- 
dition in  which  we  were  found  here  below  came  into 
view ;  and,  as  we  have  seen,  it  was  total  ruin,  whether 
Jew  or  Gentile  be  looked  at. 

But  now  from  verse  11  of  chapter  ii.  the  apostle 
enters  into  particulars,  and  shows  that  the  bringing 
down  from  God's  own  heights  of  these  glorious  coun- 
sels and  making  them  thus  manifest  in  man  here  below, 
completely  sets  aside  the  Jewish  system,  or  rather  sup- 
poses the  setting  aside  of  all  Jewish  elements.  Hence, 
being  "Gentiles   in  the   flesh,   who    are   called  Un- 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   EPHESIANS,  209 

circumcision  by  that  which  is  called  the  Circumcision 
in  the  flesh  made  by  hands;  [the  apostle  bids  such 
remember]  that  at  that  time  ye  were  without  Christ, 
being  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and 
strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise,  haviug  no 
hope,  and  without  God  in  the  world."  And  what  had 
God  done  now  ?  Had  He  brought  the  Gentiles  into  the 
place  that  Israel  once  occupied?  The  Jews  had  re- 
jected their  own  Messiah.  Of  old  they  had  forfeited 
every  claim  according  to  the  law,  and  were  spared  and 
kept  in  God's  mercy  and  faithfulness.  But  now  they  had 
consummated  their  rebellion  by  refusing  the  Christ  of 
God.  What  was  to  be  done  ?  Would  God  send  out  and 
bring  in  the  Gentiles  to  fill  their  place  ?  Another  plan 
discloses  itself.  The  Jews  who  believe  are  taken  out  of 
their  former  place,  as  much  as  the  Gentiles,  who  had  no 
place.  Both  are  now  introduced  by  grace  into  an  en- 
tirely new  and  heavenly  place  in  Christ,  which  was  not 
so  much  as  heard  of  before.  Accordingly  not  only 
does  he  enforce  the  truth  first  presented  in  the  end  of 
chapter  i.,  the  church  which  is  the  body  of  Christ,  but 
he  also  still  more  qualifies  it  as  a  "  new  man,"  and  as 
"  one  body ; "  because,  in  treating  of  the  two  objects 
of  grace,  and  component  parts  of  the  church,  Jews  and 
Gentiles  who  believe,  he  shows  that  God  does  not  pur- 
pose to  form  two  societies  of  these  saints,  but  one  body. 
It  is  not  a  mere  aggregate  of  Gentiles  into  the  well- 
known  line  of  old  blessing,  but.  one  new  man,  not 
merely  fresh  in  time,  but  of  an  absolutely  new  order, 
never  seen  or  experienced  before.  It  is  not  again  a  sim- 
ple question  of  a  new  nature,  but  of  a  new  man :  the 
first  Adam,  with  all  remedial  or  corrective  dealings  in 
him  disappear,  and  one  new  man  comes  before  our  view. 

p 


210  INTKODUCTOEY  LECTXJKES.        ' 

Here  again  the  apostle  brings  in  the  relation  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  to  the  new  thing.  The  consequence  is  that 
we  find  the  Spirit  of  God,  now  sent  down  from  heaven, 
not  only  putting  the  saints  into  relationship  with  the 
Father,  but,  besides,  dwelling  in  them  and  making  them 
God's  habitation  through  the  Spirit. 

Thus  we  have  at  last  the  church  developed  in  its  two 
main  characters.  It  has  its  heavenly  association  as  the 
one  body  of  Christ;  it  has  its  earthly  place  and  respon- 
sibility as  the  "  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit." 
All  this,  it  will  be  observed,  is  consequent  on  the  cross. 
The  one  was  not  at  all,  nor  was  the  other  in  such  sort 
before.  God  had  a  dwelling-place  of  old  in  Israel ;  but 
it  was  a  house  made  with  hands,  however  magnifical, 
that  followed  the  tabernacle  of  witness  in  the  desert, 
in  both  of  which  the  Shechinah,  or  visible  sign  of  His 
glory,  deigned  to  dwell  Such  is  not  the  character  of 
God's  dweUiag  now.  It  is  neither  the  tabernacle,  nor 
the  temple,  but  His  habitation  in  Spirit.  It  is  not,  of 
course,  a  display  of  glory  before  men's  eyes ;  yet  is  it 
most  real — a  proper  dwelling  of  God  on  earth,  answer- 
ing to,  though  not  necessarily  coextensive  with,  those 
who  are  constituted  the  body  of  Christ  glorified  on  high. 
liTot  that  the  body  is  there  yet,  but  that  the  body  of 
Christ  is  heavenly  in  its  character,  although  in  fact  on 
the  earth  now.  Besides,  as  we  have  seen,  the  church  is 
the  dwelling-place  of  God  through  the  Holy  Ghost's 
presence  here  below. 

This  leads  to  the  third  chapter,  in  which  the  apostle 
unfolds  things  parenthetically.  It  is  a  revelation  of  God 
that  comes  in  at  the  time  when  the  Jews  have,  at  least 
temporarily,  lost  their  place  altogether.  The  very  struc- 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   EPHESIANS.  211 

tufe  of  the  chapter,  as  has  been  noticed,  is  a  sort  of 
confirmation  of  this.  The  chapter  itself  is  a  parenthesis. 
"For  this  cause  I  Paul,  the  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ 
for  you  Gentries,  if  ye  have  heard  of  the  dispensation 
[administration  or  stewardship]  of  the  grace  of  G-od 
wMch  is  given  me  to  you-ward :  how  that  by  revelation 
he  made  known  unto  me  the  mystery  (as  I  wrote  afore 
in  few  words ;  whereby,  when  ye  read,  ye  may  under- 
stand my  knowledge  in  the  mystery  of  Christ);  which 
in  other  ages  was  not  made  known  unto  the  sons  of 
men,  as  it  is  now  revealed."  Observe,  therefore,  that 
what  was  the  first  in  counsel  is  the  last  in  revelation. 

Accordingly,  when  all  was  complete  in  the  communi- 
cation of  God's  plans  in  the  Bible,  there  was  one  subject 
that  was  left  a  blank.  Paul  was  the  chosen  witness  to 
fill  up  that  blank.  He  wrote  in  few  words  no  doubt, 
but  he  has  written  with  divine  perfection,  and  clearly 
enough  for  those  by  God's  grace  made  competent  to 
understand,  let  the  words  be  ever  so  few.  Many  wonder 
that  such  truths  as  these  should  not  have  more  words 
used  in  communicating  them.  But  profound  truths  are 
for  those  who  have  spiritual  understandings ;  and  such 
do  not  require  many  words  to  comprehend  them.  When 
persons  are  only  learning  the  elements  of  truth,  the 
grace  of  God  provides  precept  on  precept,  line  on  line,  for 
those  who  want  it.  If  He  is  showing  needy  souls  how 
they  may  be  forgiven  of  God,  He  displays  it  in  a  thou- 
sand forms;  if  the  need  of  righteousness.  He  repeats 
it  over  and  over  again.  But  it  is  not  so  with  the 
revelation  of  the  mystery.  There  is  a  certain  spiritual 
competence  supposed, —  a  due  preparation  not  only  of 
heart,  but  also  of  knowledge;  or,  as  the  apostle  said, 
"we  speak  wisdom  among  them  that  are  perfect."  Plere 

p  2 


212  INTEODUCTOET  LECTTJEES. 

no  lengthy  exposition  would  he  wanted  about  it,  be- 
cause they  were  not  so  infantine  as  to  suppose  that  the 
truth  of  God  depends  on  the  number  of  times  that  a 
thing  is  asserted.    Once  is  enough  for  the  intelligent. 

God  therefore  has  not  been  pleased  in  the  heights  of 
divine  truth  to  repeat  words  in  the  same  way  as  His 
grace  leads  Him  to  do  when  He  is  helping  the  babes. 
Hence  the  apostle  Paul,  in  what  is  by  no  means  the 
simplest  utterance  he  has  given,  writes  in  few  words. 
He  could  .condescend.  We  know  how  he  would  bend 
down  and  be  as  it  were  a  Gentile  to  one  without  law, 
and  a  Jew  to  one  under  law,  to  do  good  to  souls. 

But  now  he  speaks  briefly.  He  was  not  constrained 
to  enter  into  a  full  or  long  explanation.  But  as  he  said 
that  by  revelation  it  was  made  known  to  him,  so  he 
would  from  God  communicate  it  to  them.  "  Which  in 
other  ages  was  not  m^de  known  unto  the  sons  of  men, 
as  it  is  now  revealed  unto  his  holy  apostles  and  prophets 
by  the  Spirit."  It  is  remarkable  that  the  mystery, 
though  revealed  to  His  holy  apostles  and  prophets  in 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  was  not  revealed  hy  them. 
It  was  revealed  by  Paul  alone.  Eevealed  to  all  the 
apostles  and  prophets  of  the  'New  Testament,  to  one  as 
much  as  another,  it  never  seems  to  have  taken  siich  a 
hold  of  the  others  as  of  Paul.  In  point  of  fact,  from 
his  conversion  right  through,  the  revelation  of  the 
mystery  was  involved.  That  which  comforted  his  soul 
was  Christ  in  heavenly  glory  far  above  aU  things.  As 
the  light  that  shone  then  was  brighter  than  the  sun  at 
noonday,  so  in  the  vision  the  truth  about  to  be  learnt 
was  entirely  outside  and  superior  to  the  present  or  the 
past.  It  was  grace  in  its  deepest  character  and  in  its 
highest,  form,  and  so  the  apostle  Paul  was  the  suited 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE  EPHESIANS.  213 

vessel  that  God  employed  to  instruct  others, — not  merely 
the  one  to  whom  the  revelation  was  made,  but  by  whom 
the  revelation  was  to  be  communicated.  It  is  revealed 
to  us  here. 

We  must  (EarefuUy  remember  that  the  mystery  does 
not  mean  the  church  merely.  It  is  the  mystery  of  Christ 
emphatically;  and  the  part  about  Christ  is  the  higher 
of  the  two.  The  church  is  but  a  consequence ;  and  we 
bless  God  for  this,  and  bless  Him  also  that  we  know  the 
church  is  but  the  complement  of  Christ.  One  might  dis- 
trust a  mystery,  if  it  centred  in  the  church.  Who  that 
knows  what  man  is,  and  God,  as  Christ  has  made  both 
known,  would  dare  to  rest  in  any  one  person  or  thing 
which  did  not  find  its  brightest  form  in  Christ  Himself? 
And  the  reason  is  simple;  so  inadequate  is  the  creature, 
so  untrustworthy  is  the  first  Adam,  that  one  might  well 
be  certain  the  true  meaning  of  the  Bible  was  lost  to 
him  who  judged  otherwise.  Such  an  one  must  have 
only  got  the  lower  end  of  the  Une,  and  not  the  full 
truth  in  its  own  native  purity  and  freshness  from  God. 
Impossible  that  the  Head  should  not  be  there  as  well 
as  the  body;  and  the  apostle  speaks  as  to  Christ  yet 
more  than  as  to  the  assembly. 

God  then  brings  out  His  own  secret,  after  having  kept 
it  hidden  from  all  past  ages  and  generations,  though,  of 
course,  it  has  been  before  Him  from  the  beginning.  If ' 
God  reveals  it  now,  the  idea  of  man — of  ourselves — 
being  the  first  and  main  object  in  the  mind  of  God  is 
impossible.  It  is  the  mystery  of  Christ;  and  this  is 
what  secures  the  blessing  in  its  fulness  and  purity  for 
the  church  of  God.  Therefore  we  need  never  fear,  no 
matter  what  the  blessing  and  the  privilege  may  be.  If 
it  be  illustrated  in  Christ,  if  it  be  bound  up  with  Him, 


214  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

fear  not.  to  trust  simply  and  to  believe  implicitly.  Enter 
boldly  into  the  sweetness  of  His  grace  and  fulness  of 
His  glory.  We  never  can  go  astray,  if  we  follow  the 
path  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

Though  it  is  the  mystery  of  Christ,  it  is  not  ex- 
clusively about  Christ.  So  in  chapter  v.  he  says,  "This 
is  a  great  mystery  :  but  I  speak  concerning  Christ  and 
the  church."  Is  there  not  good  reason  for  saying  that 
the  church  is  but  a  consequence?  The  church  foUows; 
and  as  it  belongs  to  Christ,  so  it  is  a  part  of  Him. 
Hence,  to  make  the  mystery  to  be  the  church  is  a  very 
serious  moral  as  well  as  doctrinal  mistake. 

The  apostle  adds  that  it  was  now  revealed  of  the 
Spirit,  "That  the  Gentiles  should  be  fellowheirs,  and 
of  the  same  body,  and  partakers  of  His  promise  in 
Christ  by  the  gospel :  whereof  I  was  made  a  minister, 
according  to  the  gift  of  the  grace  of  God  given  unto 
me  by  the  effectual  working  of  his  power.  Unto  me, 
who  am  less  than  the  leasst  of  all  saints" — there  is 
nothing  like  this  truth,  where  it  is  learnt  from  the  Holy 
Ghost,  for  humbling  the  soul,  were  it  even  the  greatest 
of  the  apostles, — "is  this  grace  given,  that  I  should 
preach  among  the  Gentiles  the  unsearchable  riches  of 
Christ ;  and  make  all  see  what  is  the  fellowship  [rather 
administration]  of  the  mystery,  which  from  the  begin- 
'  ning  of  the  world  hath  been  hid  in  God,  who  created  all 
things  [by  Jesus  Christ  ?] :  to  the  intent  that  now  unto 
the  principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly  places  might 
be  known  by  the  church  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God." 

God  had  something  more  to  teach  those  who  are  the 
natural  denizens  of  heaven.  They  had  to  learn  what 
they  had  never  known.  They  had  seen  creation,  and 
sung  at  the  sight.     They  had  seen  the  ways  of  God 


THE.  EPISTLE  TO   THE   EPHESIANS.  215 

?Kfith  man,  ahd  wiih  Israel;  and  surely  they  had  entered 
into  the  glory  of  God  that  was  involved  in  all  His 
ways.  Nevertheless,  whether  it  was  creation,  whether 
man  or  favoured  Israel,  there  was  so  much  the  more 
painful  a  declension  that  portended  the  judgment  of  God 
upon  them.  Thus  there  were  dark  shadows,  and  lower- 
ing clouds.  But  now  appeared  something  altogether 
new. ,  Latest  of  all,  God  divulged  His  wonderful  scheme 
in  which  the  man  that  came  from  above,  the  Son  that 
became  a  man,  the  "Word  made  flesh,  had  gone  down  to 
the  very  lowest  in  order  to  make  good  the  glory  of  God 
morally  in  the  scene  where  He  had  been  most  put  to 
shama  But  now,  consequent  on  His  resurrection  from 
the  dead,  and  of  the  place  given  Him  in  heaven  above  all, 
there  was  made  known  to  these  very  principalities  and 
powers  "the  manifold  wisdom  of  God," — made  known 
to  them  before  it  came  to  pass,  the  sure  deliverance  of 
the  whole  scene  of  creation,  of  man,  of  Israel,  as  well  as 
of  the  earth.  But  not  merely  this.  That  man  who  came 
down  but  was  found  alone  to  the  end  of  His  earthly 
course  would  now  be  alone  no  more;  He  would  have 
a  new  and  suited  body,  believing  Jews  and  Gentiles 
fellow- heirs  and  of  the  same  body.  Most  wholesome 
blessedness !  for  who  should  be  more  above  the  feelings 
of  jealousy  than  those  who  delight  in  that  which  shows 
the  greatness,  and  the  glory,  and  the  perfect  goodness 
of  God  in  His  greatest  wotk?  This,  then,  was  what 
was  needed  for  the  principalities,  and  powers,  and  this 
is  what  they  behold  in  the  church  of  God. 

The  apostle  accordingly  is  now  led  at  the  sight  of 
the  mystery  of  Christ  into  another  prayer,  in  which  h 
asks  "  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  [for  now  he 
takes  up  the  other  relationship],  of  whom  the  whole 


216  INTKODTTCTORY  LECTUKES, 

[rather,  every]  family  in  heaven  and  earth  is  named, 
that  he  would  grant  you,  according  to  the  riches  of  his 
glory,  to  be  strengthened  with  might  by  his  Spirit  in 
the  inner  man;  that  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts 
by  faith;  being  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,  that  ye 
may  be  able  to  comprehend  with  aH  saints  what  is  the 
breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height;  and  to 
know  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge,  that 
ye  may  be  filled  with  aU  the  fulness  of  God." 

Here  the  prayer  is  not,  as  in  the  first  chapter,  that 
they  might  know  the  power  that  had  wrought  toward, 
them ;  it  is  now  that  their  hearts  might  be  in  the  secret 
of  His  grace  accordiag  to  the  power  that  works  in  them. 
That  is,  he  looks  at  the  inner  source,  not  merely  at  the 
glorious  results.  Here  he  prays  to  the  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus,  not  simply  to  the  God  that  had  raised  up 
the  Christ  from  the  dead,  and  was  glorifying  Him  on 
high.  It  wOl  be  observed  that  the  desire  is  not  merely 
that  they  might  be  enlightened  as  to  the  special  glory 
of  their  standing,  but  that  their  hearts  might  be  filled 
with  the  love  of  Christ,  and  this  too  as  a  present  thing 
filling  them  to  overflowing,  though  surely  not  to  cease 
in  the  ages  to  come.  "Unto  him  that  is  able  to  do 
exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think, 
according  to  the  power  that  worketh  in  us,  unto  him 
be  glory  in  the  church  by  Christ  Jesus  throughout  all 
ages,  world  without  end."  This  is  not  a  question  there- 
fore of  the  place  or  standing  of  the  Christian,  but  rather 
of  his  condition  or  state,  which  the  Spirit  would  have 
in  unison  with  the  love  of  Him  who  alone  made  either 
possible.  Consequently  here  it  is  not  an  energy  al- 
ready put  forth,  but  he  pleads  that  Christ  might  dwell 
by  faith  in  their  hearts.    It  is  not  a  conferred  position. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EPHESIANS.  217 

however  blessed,  but  practical  enjoyment — even  that 
Christ  Himself  might  he  habitually  the  object  before 
them,  now  that  all  question  of  deliverance  and  blessing 
was  settled  in  their  favour.  It  was  all  a  known  thing 
that  they  were  blessed  by — yea,  with — Christ,  forming 
a  part  of  Christ,  expressly  fellow-heirs,  and  of  the 
same  body.  But  now,  founded  on  this,  the  apostle  prays 
thus  for  them,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  would  so  act  in  the 
inner  man  that  there  might  be  no  hindrance  to  Christ, 
and  that  they  might  know,  not  the  Holy  Ghost  (for  this 
they  did  not  doubt),  but  Christ  dwelling  there  by  His 
power  constantly. 

Unquestionably  the  Spirit  of  God  does  evermore 
dwell  in  the  Christian,  though  I  am  not  aware  that 
He  is  ever  said  to  dwell  in  our  hearts.  He  may  shed 
abroad  the  love  of  God  therein ;  but  He  is  rather  said 
to  dwell  in  us,  making  the  body  God's  temple.  Here 
the  apostle  would  have  Christ  to  be  more  the  satisfying 
object  of  our  affections.  This  is  the  point.  Far  be  it 
from  us  just  to  know  that  He  loves  us  through  the 
word  of  God,  as  a  security  to  us,  like  a  dry  parchment 
deed  of  gift  that  we  quietly  keep  in  a  strong  box, 
Eather  is  the  very  gospel  to  the  sinner  free  and  full, 
that,  having  the  certainty  of  the  divine  fulness  of  our 
blessing,  our  hearts  may  be  now  open  to  enjoy  Christ, 
and  be  occupied  with  His  love.  "  That  Christ  may  dwell 
in  your  hearts  by  faith;"  not  that  ye,  being  rooted  and 
grounded  in  love,  but  "rooted,"  &c.,  that  ye  "may  be 
able  to  comprehend  with  aU  saints."  It  is  not  here 
deliverance,  let  it. be  ever  so  complete;  it  is  not  the 
knowledge  of  our  position  in  Christ  as  in  chap,  i.;  but 
rather  the  converse — Christ  dwelling  in  us  by  faith, 
and  the  heart  entering  into  the  positive  excellency  of 


318  .       INTRODUCTOEY   LECTUEES. 

the  Son,  the  only  adequate  object  of  the  Father's  own 
delight.  Hence  it  was  that  they  might  "be  able  to 
comprehend  with  all  the  saints  what  is  the  breadth, 
and  length,  and  depth,  and  height;  and  to  know  the 
love  of  Christ."  It  is  not  only  the  full  extent  of  glory, 
but  the  sole  satisfying  spring,  Christ  thus  dwelling  in 
our  hearts  in  the  consciousness  of  His  love-^"  to  know 
the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge,  that  ye 
might  be  filled  with  aU  the  fulness  of  God."  He  is 
the  ultimate  blessedness  with  which  we  are  filled,  the 
One  in  whom  we  most  confide,  being  the  Son,  in  whom 
dwells  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  .bodily. 

Thus,  having  Him  who  is  the  centre  of  all  glory 
dwelling  in  our  affections  by  faith,  we  enter  into,  and 
become  established  in,  the  grace  which  is  the  secret  of 
it  all.  In  communion  with  the  objects  of  it,  we  go 
out  into  the  resulting  scenes  of  glory  on  every  side; 
knowing  Christ's  love  though  unknowable,  and  filled 
into  God's  fulness  though  infinite.  The  apostle  con- 
cludes his  prayer  with  an  ascription  of  glory  to  Him 
in  the  Church  unto  all  generations  of  the  age  of  the 
ages,  able  to  do  far  above  aU  we  ask  or  think  according 
to  His  power  which  works  in  us.  It  is  thus  seen  to 
be  founded  on  the  great  facts  and  standing  privileges 
mentioned  at  the  end  of  chap.  ii. ;  but  it  is  the  desire 
that  the  saints  should  know  God's  present  power  to  an 
indefinite  extent  working  in  them  in  spiritual  enjoy- 
ment, through  the  Holy  Ghost's  power,  giving  us  to 
have  Christ  the  definite  and  constant  object  of  the  heart. 

Chapter  iv.  begins  the  proper  exhortatory  portion; 
and  here,  first  of  aU,  urges  a  walk  in  view  of  such  a 
calling  as  is  ours,  dUigently  keeping  the  unity  of  the 


THE  .EPISTLE  TO  THE  EPHESIANS.  219 

Spirit  in  the  tond  of  peace.  Theu  the  diversities  are 
brought  before  us.  "I  therefore,  the  prisoner  of  the 
Lord,  beseech  you  that  ye  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation 
wherewith  ye  are  called,  with  all  lowliness  and  meek- 
ness, with  longsuffering,  forbearing  one  another  in  love." 
The  very  truth  which,  learnt  and  enjoyed  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,  conduces  to  all  lowliness  and  meekness,  as 
it  calls  for  mutual  forbearance  in  love,  flesh  would 
abuse  to  all  pride  and  vain-.gloriousness,  to  high- 
minded  contempt  of  others,  and  bitter  self-confidence. 
Than  these  nothing  less  becomes  those  so  blessed. 
Oh  that  we  might  have  grace  to  walk  in  communion 
with  such  grace!  But  if  we  are  to  walk  thus,  let  us 
not  forget  the  prayer  for  the  state  of  our  hearts  which 
precedes  these  exhortations.  Knowledge  of  standing, 
and  a  state  answering  to  Christ's  love,  are  the  basis  of  a 
walk  worthy  of  our  calling.  "The  unity  of  the.  Spirit" 
seems  to  be  the  general  name  for  that  great  fact  which  is 
now  established — that  unity  of  which  Christ  is  the  chief, 
and  to  which  we  all  belong.  The  apostle  treats  it  as 
our  business  diligently  to  observe  it.  It  is  impossible 
for  flesh  to  be  true  to  it.  This  is  as  it  should  be.  An 
easy  path  could  not  be  divine,  as  men  and  things  are 
on  earth.  We  need,  but  we  have,  the  Holy  Spirit  who 
is  surely  all-suf&cient,  if  looked  to.  It  is  impossible  to 
exaggerate  the  snares  and  difficulties  of  Christendom. 

But  what  are  difficulties  to  the  Spirit  of  God  ?  This 
is  the  great  want — simple,  genuine  faith  in  the  Holy 
Ghost.  He  is  equal  to  all,  and  would  have  us  count  on 
His  presence  and  power  answering  to  the  name  of 
Christ.  What  has  all  the  confusion  of  men  to  do  with 
the  glorious  reality  that  God  has  established — His  unity, 
of  which  we  all  form  part  by  the  power  of  His  Spirit? 


220  rUTEODUCTORT  LECTURES. 

What  does  it  matter  about  times,  persons,  or  circum- 
stances, if  the  Spirit  abide  to  enable  us,  according  to 
Scripture,  diligently  to  keep  His  own  unity  ?  Numbers 
are  of  small  account  here.  The  Lord  might  be  where 
there  are  only  two  gathered  together  imto  His  name. 
If  but  two  acted  accordiagly,  they  ought  to  be  and  would 
be  an  expression  of  the  unity  of  the  Spirit.  What  is 
the  value  of  any  other  unity  ?  It  can  never  rise  above 
its  human  source.  Evidently  also,  it  is  no  essential 
matter  for  present  practice  of  faithfulness,  whether  few 
or  many  see  and  feel  it :  this  is  a  (Question  for  God's 
win,  who  wiU  act  for  His  own  glory,  whether  by  many 
or  by  few.  Let  this  then  rest  in  His  hands.  Be  it  our 
part  with  diligence  (for  this  is  needed)  "to  keep  the 
unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace." 

Then  we  hear  the  particulars,  and  in  a  very  orderly 
manner.  "  There  is  one  body,  and  one  Spirit,  even  as 
ye  are  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling."  This  verse 
states  the  intrinsic  unity  that  never  passes  away,  be- 
ginning with  the  fact  of  "  one  body;"  then  the  ef&cient 
power,  one  Spirit ;  and  lastly  the  cause  of  it  all  in  the 
calling  of  grace.    Nothing  touches  these. 

In  the  next  verse  we  have  that  which  has  been  justly 
designated  the  unity  of  profession,  where  all  things 
may  come  in  to  mar.  Hence  it  is  said,  "  One  Lord," 
which  is  precisely  that  which  is  owned  in  the  common 
creed  of  Christendom.  And  as  there  is  one  Lord,  so 
"  one  faith."  It  is  neither  "faith"  nor  "  the  faith."  That 
is,  it  may  not  be  sincere,  nor  even  doctrinally  the  truth 
that  is  held;  but  we  hear  of  "one  faith"  in  contrast  with 
Judaism  on  one  hand,  and  with  Paganism  on  the  other. 
Hence  "  one  baptism"  follows,  which  the  context  shows 
to  be  the  plain  initiatory  rite  of  Christian  profession, 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE  EPHESIANS.  221 

and  nothing  else.  In  the  verse  before  the  apostle  had 
spoken  of  the  "one  Spirit,"  and  hence  it  would  be 
superfluous  to  introduce  the  statement  of  His  baptism 
here,  even  if  the  adjuncts  did  not  exclude  the  idea. 

Thus  we  have  had,  first  of  all,  the  great  spiritual 
reality  which  is  always  true  of  Christians,  and  of 
none  else.  They,  and  only  they,  have  "one  Spirit" 
dwelling  in  them.  They  only  have  the  "  one  hope  of 
their  calling."  But  the  moment  you  come  to  the  "  one 
Lord,"  this  city,  yea  every  city  in  Christendom,  is  a 
witness  to  a  wide -spread  profession  of  His  name.  As 
He  is  outwardly  called  on,  so  there  is  everywhere  the 
"  one  faith,"  which  does  not  mean  (alas !  we  know  too 
well)  saving  faith  necessarily,  but  the  faith  of  Chris- 
tendom; and  accordingly  "one  baptism"  is  its  mark, 
because  thus  they  are  put  on  or  take  the  ground  of 
professing  the  one  Lord  and  one  faith. 

Lastly,  "one  God  and  Father  of  all."  Here  we  come  to 
what  is  universal.  Each  circle  hitherto  was  getting  larger 
and  larger.  First  there  was  the  true  company  that  had 
divine  life  and  the  Spirit  of  God ;  secondly,  the  circle 
of  profession  very  much  more  extensive;  and  thirdly 
remains  the  universal  unity,  which  embraces  not  Chris- 
tendom only,  but  all  the  creatures  of  God  included 
under  their  one  God  and  Father — whatever  derived  its 
being  from  God,  the  God  that  created  all  things,  as  we 
were  told  in  chapter  iii.  9.  He  consequently  is  the  "one 
God  and  Father  of  aU,"  not  merely  of  all  believers, 
for  this  is  a  mistake  of  its  force,  but  of  all  absolutely; 
just  as  we  were  told  in  verse  15  of  that  same  chapter, 
that  of  Him  every  family  in  heaven  and  earth  is  named. 
No  matter  whether  Jews  or  Gentiles,  principalities  or 
powers,  every  family  is   derived  from  this  universal 


222  INTEODUCTORT  LECTURES. 

Source  of  existence — "  One  God  and  Father  of  all,  whd 
is  above  all  [there  we  find  His  supremacy],  and  through 
all  [there  we  find  His  permeance,  if  one  may  so  say,  as 
the  support  of  the  whole  universe],  and  in  you  all" 
[His  intimacy  with  the  saints].  The  moment  the  apostle 
comes  to  inward  relationship,  he  leaves  the  universality 
of  phrase  and  speaks  only  of  the  saints  of  God — "in 
you  alL"    No  statement  can  he  conceived  more  exact. 

Now  we  must  turn  to  the  diversities.  "  But  to  every 
[each]  one  is  given  grace  according  to  the  measure  of 
the  gift  of  Christ."  And  as  the  unity  flowed  from  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  sent  down  from  heaven;  so  now 
when  we  come  to  gifts,  it  is  expressly  connected  with 
Christ  in  glory.  "Wherefore  he  saith,  when  he  as- 
cended up  on  high,  he  led  captivity  captive,  and  gave 
gifts  unto  men.  Now  that  he  ascended,  what  is  it  but 
that  he  also  descended  first  into  the  lower  parts  of  the 
earth  ?  He  that  descended  is  the  same  also  that  as- 
cended." Yes,  but  He  did  not  go  up  as  He  came  down 
from  above.  He  came  a  divine  person  filled  with  love; 
and  He  went  a  man  also,  triumphant  not  with  love 
only  but  in  righteousness  and  power,  to  give  effect 
to  all  the  glorious  counsels  of  His  Father,  which  un- 
judged  sin  would  have  for  ever  frastrated.  He  went 
up  after  all  the  working  of  evil  had  been  really  defeated 
and  destroyed  in  the  sight  of  God.  Satan  is  allowed 
to  go  on  for  a  little  while  longer,  because  God  is 
gathering  out  the  joint-heirs,  while  the  evil  developes 
itself  in  a  new  form.  Man  had  been  shown  to  be  the 
enemy  of  all  righteousness,  and  now  betrays  himself- 
the'  enemy  of  all  grace.  As  the  end  of  the  latter  will  be 
incomparably  worse  than  the  former,  so  judgment  will 
be  commensurate  with  man's  apostasy  from  grace ;  for 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE  EPHESUNS.  223 

the  Lord  must  come  from  heaven,  "  in  flaming  fire 
taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  on 
them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ." 

Meanwliile,  before  a  blow  is  struck  at  man's  failure 
in  the  presence  of  righteousness,  or  at  his  apostasy  from 
grace,  that  blessed  Saviour,  the  only  begotten  Son  in 
the  bosom  of  the  Father,  the  Son  of  man  who  is  in 
heaven,  went  down  to  the  very  uttermost,  and  (having 
exhausted  the  powers  of  evil,  and  blotted  out  all  that 
could  rise  against  the  objects  of  God's  grace,)  was  raised 
and  seated  by  God  in  heaven.  He  takes  His  place  there, 
of  course  always  the  Son ;  but,  wonderful  to  say,  humanity 
makes  an  integral  and  everlasting  part,  so  to  speak,  of 
that  divine  person,  the  Son  of  God.  And  here  is  the 
key,  and  that  which  accounts  for  the  astonishing  dis- 
play of  what  God  is  now  doing  in  man.  How  could  it 
be  otherwise,  seeing  that  He  who  sits  on  His  throne, 
far  above  every  creature  in  God's  presence  and  in  all 
ages,  is  a  man,  but  withal  the  very  Son  of  God  ?  The 
Son  is  as  truly  man  as  God,  and  as  such  gives  gifts  to 
men.  Angels  are  not  the  object.  They  had  a  dis- 
tinguished place  before  the  Son  became  man.  Since 
then  it  is  not  so  much  they  that  have  lost,  but  man. in 
and  by  Christ  that  has  gained  such  a  place  as  they 
never  had  nor  could  have.  Never  were  they  to  reign ; 
never  will  they  be  one  with  Christ  like  the  saints. 
They  are  "ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister 
for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation." 

But  Christ  at  the  right  hand  of  God  gives  gifts  unto 
men ;  and,  as  it  is  said  here,  "  He  gave  some,  apostles ; 
and  some,  prophets ;  and  some,  evangelists ;  and  some, 
pastors  and  teachers;" — ^bringing  in  both  the  highest 


224  INTEODTJCTOKT  LECTURES. 

gifts  and  also  those  ordinarily  requisite  for  the  good  of 
the  saints.  I  say  "requisite,"  simply  in  view  of  Christ's 
love  towards  the  church.  It  is  not  a  question  of  ren- 
dering a  testimony  of  the  power  of  God  working  in 
man  and  dealing  with  the  first  creation.  In  Corin- 
thians we  have  this,  and  properly  in  its  place.  There 
we  have  tongues,  miracles,  &c. ;  hecause  all  that  is  con- 
nected with  man  in  the  flesh  and  in  the  world  is  a  sign 
to  unhelievers,  showing  them  the  goodness  of  God,  and 
the  defeat  of  that  wicked  power  which  governs  human 
nature  as  it  is. 

But  in  the  epistle  to  the  Ephesians  we  have  none  of 
these  dealings  with  the  first  man,  but  that  which  forms 
and  nourishes  the  new  creation.  Hence  we  have  those 
gifts  alone  which  are  the  expression  of  the  grace  of 
Christ  toward  the  saints  that  He  loves,  for  ministerial 
Work,  for  the  building  up  of  His  body.  In  this  order  He 
gave  them — the  body  to  be  edified,  and  ministry  carried 
on,  but  always  the  individual  first.  The  building  up  of 
the  body  is  the  fruit  of  God's  blessing  the  individual 
saints.  It  cannot  be  otherwise.  It  is  in  vain  to  look  for 
the  church's  prosperity,  if  saints  individually  do  not 
grow  up  unto  Christ.  And  so  these  gifts  are  given,  as 
it.  is  said,  "tiU  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith, 
and  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  unto  a  perfect 
man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of 
Christ :  that  we  henceforth  be  no  more  children,  tossed 
to  and  fro,  and  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  doc- 
trine, by  the  sleight  of  men,  and  cunning  craftiness, 
whereby  they  lie  in  wait  to  deceive ;  but  speaking  the 
truth  in  love,  may  grow  up  unto  him  in  all  things, 
which  is  the  head,  even  Christ." 

Then  we  have  in  the  centre  of  this  chapter  no  longer 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EPHESIANS.  225 

the  unity  or  the  gifts  differing,  but  the  moral  walk  of 
the  saints.  And  what  is  the  first  lesson  of  the  truth  as 
it  is  in  Jesus  ?  This ; — not  only  that  we  hear  of  the 
one  body,  and  that  saints  compose  this  body,  but  that  a 
new  man  is  seen.  Introducing  this  great  practical  truth; 
he  reminds  them  of  what  they  had  been,  but  also  teUs 
them  what  they  are  now.  Our  duties  flow  from  what 
we  are,  or  are  made.  And  what  then  is  the  truth  as  it 
is  in  Jesus  ?  Our  having  put  off  the  old  man,  and  our 
having  put  on  the  new  man.  Such  is  the  truth,  if 
indeed  we  have  learnt  the  Christ  as  God  teaches  Him. 
Anything  short  of  this  is  not  the  true  Christian  measure, 
Jesus  could  occupy  Himself  in  divine  love.  Self  would 
have  hindered ;  had  there  been  a  particle,  it  would  have 
ruined  both  His  person  and  His  work ;  but  this  is  not 
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  He  came  so  as  to  be  "left 
absolutely  free  to  occupy  Himself  in  love  for  God's 
glory  and  our  desperate  need.  And  now,  id  Him  who  is 
dead  and  risen,  the  Christian  has  put  completely  off  the 
old  man,  is  being  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  his  mind,  and 
has  put  on  the  new  man,  which  according  to  God  is 
created  in  righteousness  and  holiness  of  truth. 

Not  only  is  there  this  new  man  that  God  has  created 
after  the  image  of  Christ  in  contrast  with  the  first 
Adam,  but  this  is  the  ground  why  all  moral  evil  is  to  be 
judged,  beginning  with  deceit  and  falsehood.  "Where- 
fore putting  away  lying,  speak  every  man  truth  with 
his  neighbour :  for  we  are  members  one  of  another.  Be 
ye  angry,  and  sin  not:  let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon 
your  wrath :  neither  give  place  to  the  deviL  Let  the 
stealer  steal  no  more."  How  solemn  to  learn  what  the 
old  man  is  in  its  most  detestable  forms,  against  aU 
which  the  Christian  is  warned !     "  Let  no  corrupt  com- 

Q 


226  INTEODUCTOET  LECTURES. 

munication  proceed  out  of  your  mouth,  but  that  which 
is  good  to  the  use  of  edifying,  that  it  may  ministeir 
grace  unto  the  hearers." 

But,  besides  the  new  man  which  lives  in  dependence, 
we  need  to  guard  against  losing  power  according  to 
God.  "  Grieve  not  the  holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  ye 
are  sealed  imto  the  day  of  redemption."  Thus  the  great 
basis  of  all  our  walk  is,  that  the  old  man  has  been 
judged  in  Jesus,  and  the  new  man  we  have  already  put 
on;  but,  moreover,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given,  and  we  are 
sealed  by  Him.  Thus  we  have  a  new  nature  which 
hates  sin,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  which  gives  power  for 
that  which  is  good.  • 

Then  he  adds  the  great  exemplar  and  spirit  of  it  all, 
according  to  the  forgiveness  with  which  God  met  us 
in  Christ.  "  Be  ye  kind  one  to  another,  tenderhearted, 
forgiving  one  another,  even  as  God  in  Christ  hath  for- 
given you."  But  there  is  yet  more.  To  forgive  another's 
wrongs  is  not  enough  for  a  Christian.  No  doubt  it  is 
a  giving  up  of  self,  and  therefore  the  fruit  of  divine 
grace.  But  in  Ephesians  God  cannot  but  have  us  imitate 
His  own  ways  as  they  have  shone  in  Christ.  He  Him- 
self is  the  measure  of  the  walk  of  the  new  man,  and 
the  manifestation  of  it  is  Christ  Himself.  Nothing  short 
of  this  suffices.  What  has  God  done  ?  He  has  forgiven 
you  in  Christ;  and  you  are  called  to  do  the  same.  But  was 
this  all  ?  Was  there  only  this  ?  Was  there  not  positive 
love,  far  beyond  forgiveness  ?  And  what  is  the  mani- 
festation of  love  ?  Not  the  law,  but  Christ.  "  Be  ye 
therefore  followers  of  God,  as  dear  children ;  and  walk 
in  love,  as  Christ  also  hath  loved  us,  and  hath  given 
himself  for  us  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a 
sweet-smelling  savour." 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   EPHESIANS.  227 

Do  you  think  this  devotedness  too  much?  yea,  im- 
possible? Not  so.  Take  a  passage  in  2  Corinthians  > 
(viiL  5),  which  has  heen  before  us  only  a  short  time 
ago:  "And  this  they  did,  not  as  we  hoped,  but  first 
gave  their  own  selves  to  the  Lord,  and  unto  us  by  the 
will  of  God."  How  blessed  is  the  character  and  the 
spring  of  Christian  service !  Think  of  their  giving 
themselves  first  to  the  Lord,  then  to  us  by  the  will  of 
God.  It  is  just  the  answer  to  the  grace  of  God  in 
Christ.  Nor  is  there  full  Christian  service,  except  in 
proportion  as  it  is  according  to  this  pattern  and  in  this 
power.  In  Christ  it  was,  of  course,  absolutely  perfect : 
He  did  give  Himself  for  us.  But  this  was  not  enough. 
He  might  have  given  Himself  ever  so  truly  in  pity  for 
us ;  but  it  would  not  have  been  perfection,  had  He  not 
"  given  himseK  for  us  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God 
for  a  sweet -smelling  savour."  And  so  accordingly  all 
that  is  acceptable  takes  this  shape.  "  But  fornication, 
and  all  uncleanness,  or  covetousness,  let  it  not  be  once 
named  among  you,  as  becometh  saints ;  neither  filthi- 
ness,  nor  foolish  talking  [even  light  words  dishonour 
the  Christian,  as  being  contrary  to  Christ],  nor  jesting, 
which  are  not  convenient :  but  rather  giving  of  thanks. 
Por  this  ye  know,  that  no  whoremonger,  nor  unclean 
person,  nor  covetous  man,  who  is  an  idolater,  hath  any 
inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  of  God." 

But  there  are  other  elements.  God  is  not  only  love 
but  light;  and  inasmuch  as  this  epistle  reveals  how 
fully  God  associates  us  with  Christ  according  to  His 
own  nature,  so  having  first  shown  us  the  privilege  of 
loving,  as  He  Himself  loved  us  in  Christ,  now  it  shows 
that  we  are  made  "light  in  the  Lord."  But  it  is  not 
said  that  we  are  love.    This  would  be  too  strong,  yea, 

a  2 


228  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

false.  Love  is  God's  nature,  but  it  is  a  sovereign  pre- 
rogative in  Him.  In  His  own  aetiags  it  has  no  motive 
or  spring  except  in  Himself.  This  could  not  be  true  of 
us.  We  need  both  motive  and  object,  and  hence  could 
not  be  said  to  be  love;  because  not  we,  but  only  God 
acts  from  Himself,  as  much  as  for  Himself  Impossible 
that  the  creature  could  be  or  do  so ;  and  therefore  the 
creature  is  never  said  to  be  love.  But  there  is  love 
after  a  divine  sort  iu  the  new  nature,  which  is  said  to  be 
light,  because  this  is  the  necessity  of  the  new  nature. 
Impossible  that  the  new  nature  could  countenance  sin; 
the  very  essence  of  it  is  rejection  and  exposure  of  what 
is  contrary  to  God.  It  is  sensitive  about  sin;  detects  and 
detests  it  thoroughly.  Hence  we  are  said  to  be  "light 
in  the  Lord,"  and  we  need  to  shake  off  the  things  of 
death  that  encumber  the  light,  and  hinder  it.  And 
so  Christ  gives  us  more  light.  For  the  word  is,  "Awake, 
thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ 
shall  give  thee  light."  But  just  as  before,  in  the  walk 
which  shuts  out  hatred,  and  anger,  and  so  on,  we  were 
■warned  against  grieving  the  Spirit  of  God;  so  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  asserts  itself  here.  Here  it  is  not 
merely  "  Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit."  He  goes  farther, 
and  says,  "  Be  filled  with  the  Spirit."  "  Be  not  drunk 
■with  wine,  wherein  is  excess ;  but  be  fiUed  with  the 
Spirit;  speaking  to  yourselves  in  psalms  and  hymns 
and  spiritual  songs,  singing  and  making  melody  in  your 
heart  to  the  Lord." 

And  is  this  aU  ?     It  is  not.     There  has  been  the  full  • 
unfolding  of  God's  love,  and  the  answer  to  it  in  the 
saints  here  below  in  their  nature,  and  in  the  ways  that 
manifest  the  new  nature.     But,  besides,  we  have  rela- 
tionships ;  and  now  we  have  God  manifesting  Himself 


TEE   EPISTLE   TO   THE  EPHESIANS.  229 

in  each  of  oiir  positions,  and  showing  us  that  these 
are  meant  to  give  us  opportunity  of  glorifying  God 
by  the  good  works  that  were  before  ordained  of  God. 
Accordingly  he  brings  in  the  most  important  of  them, 
first,  the  wife  and  the  husband;  then,  childreu  and  their 
parents ;  and,  finally,  servants  and  masters. 

All  through  these  then  we  have,  but  more  particularly 
in  the  first,  the  interweaving  of  the  duty  with  the 
manifestation  of  God's  grace :  "  Christ  also  loved  the 
church."  It  is  not  now  either  sovereign  love,  or  love  of 
complacency.  There  was  the  sovereign  love  of  God  ia 
Christ  forgiving  us ;  there  was  love  of  complacency, 
inasmuch  as  we  were  to  love  according  to  that  love 
with  which  we  were  loved,  as  shown  us  in  the  matchless 
love  of  Christ.  But  now  there  is  love  of  relationship 
as  well ;  and  here  too  Christ  appears,  who  is  the  pattern 
and  perfection  of  grace  in  every  respect.  "  Husbands, 
love  your  wives,  even  as  Christ  also  loved  the  church, 
and  gave  himself  for  it;  that  he  might  sanctify  and 
cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word,  that 
he  might  present  ^it.  to  himself."  Just  look  into  this 
revelation  of  His  love.  How  everything  is  connected 
with  Christ !  He  gave  Himself  for  us.  What  was  it  for  ? 
"That  he  might  present  it  to  himself  [not  merely  to 
the  Father,  but  present  it  to  himself  J  a  glorious  church, 
not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing;  but  that 
it  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish."  More  than 
this ;  for  "  no  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh ;  but 
nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it,  even  as  the  Lord  the 
church."  Everywhere  Christ  Jesus  Himself  is  inter- 
mixed with  every  portion.  He  Himself  is  the  begin- 
ning. He  Himself  the  end,  He  Himself  all  the  way 
through.    He  gave  Himself  as  the  beginning;  and  He 


230  DfTEODTTCTORY  LECTUKES. 

presents  it  to  Himself  as  the  end.  Meanwhile  He 
tenderly  cares  for  the  church.  "  He  that  loveth  his  wife 
loveth  himself;  ...  for  we  are  members  of  his  body,  of 
his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones."  "  This  is  a  great  mystery," 
he  adds  at  the  close;  "but  I  speak  asip  Christ  and  as 
to  the  church."  ^ 

Then  we  have  the  children,  who  are  called^to  obey 
their  parents  in  the  Lord.  It  was  not  a  question  of  the 
flesh :  how  could  this  be  trusted  ?  Let  them  obey  in 
the  Lord.  To  honour  one's  father  and  mother  was  k)th' 
an  obligation  and  had  a  special  promise  under  IJbe- 
And  if  children  that  had  a  relationship  with  /their 
parents  in  the  flesh  and  under  law  did  so  (fian.'  it  was 
indeed  right),  how  much  more  did  it  become  Christian 
children  to  pay  them  reverence  ? 

This  is  followed  up  by  an  exhortation  to  parents: 
"And  ye  fathers,  provoke  not  your  children  to  wrath : 
but  bring  them  up  in  the  nurturb  and  admonition  of  the 
Lord."  Thus  is  the  Lord  ever  presented  as  the  pattern. 
Then  come  the  slaves  similarly.  He  was  privileged  to 
do  all  as  unto  Christ ;  as  the  master  again  must  remem- 
ber that  he  had  his  own  Master  in  heaven.  This  also 
answers  to  the  grand  doctrine  of  this  epistle. 

Then  the  apostle  introduces  us  to  another  topic.  It 
is  not  the  source  of  the  blessing  (chap.  L);  nor  the  place 
into  which  we  are  now  brought  as  being  made  one  with 
Christ  (chap,  ii.) ;  nor  the  objects  to  whom  we  are  bear- 
ing testimony,  (chap,  iii.)  The  closing  theme  shows 
us  where  and  with  whom  are  our  true  conflicts  as 
Christians.  As  such  we  have  not  properly  to  fight  with 
flesh  at  all,  any  more  than  to  fight  with  the  world. 
All  other  combats  are  outside  the  calling  of  a  Christian. 


THE,  EPISTLE  TO   THE  EPHESIANS.  231 

•  1  do  not  deny  but  that  a  Christian  may  slip  elsewhere. 
But  as  long  even  as  he  is  merely  in  conflict  with  his 
own  nature,  he  can  hardly  be  said  to  be  on  Christian 
ground  at  all.  He  may  be  a  converted  person;  and  God 
may  be  truly  dealing  with  him  in  the  way  of  gracious 
action.  A  really  awakened  soul  may  stiU  have  a  great 
many  unsettled  questions  in  agitation  within  him. 
He  has  not  come  to  God  consciously.  Now  the  very 
baptism  of  a  Christian  man  is  the  confession  of  the 
truth,  that  God  has  in  Christ  judged  flesh  root  and 
branch.  Is  not  this  the  meaniSg  of  the  institution? 
How  far  the  person  has  realised  it  is  another  matter; 
but  such  is  the  meaning  of  baptism.  Judging  what  I 
am,  I  confess  that  aU.  my  blessing  is  in  the  Saviour, 
who  did  not  merely  come  to  bless  me  as  a  living  man 
in  the  world,  but  died  and  is  risen  again;  and  I,  con- 
fessing Him  who  is  thus  dead  and  risen,  have  part 
in  His  death.  The  conflict  of  the  Christian  is  not 
therefore  with  flesh,  still  less  is  it  with  the  world,  but 
with  Satan,  and  with  his  power,  viewed  as  interposing 
and  hindering  our  enjoyment  of  our  heavenly  blessing. 
Is  not  this  the  meaning  of  the  combat  as,  described 
here?  The  wrestling  is  not  with  flesh  and  blood, 
"but  against  principalities,  against  powers,  against  the 
world-rulers  of  this  darkness,  against  spiritual  wicked- 
ness in  heavenly  places."  The  English  translators  did 
not  know  what  to  make  of  the  apostle,  and  so  they 
changed  it  to  "high  places,"  which  was  an  unwarrantable 
liberty,  and  gives  the  most  perverse  meaning.  This  has 
misled  many  beside  the  poor  Puritans,  who  fancied 
they  were  called  of  God,  as  a  Christian  duty,  to  strive 
against  kings  and  all  in  authority,  when  not  satisfied 
with  their  ways  or  measures.     I  mention  this,  because 


232  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

it  is  a  striking  proof  that  an  error  imported  into  Scrip- 
ture leads  even  right-minded  men  into  sad  evil.  It  is 
expressly  not  against  any  powers  that  were  living  and 
acting  in  the  world.  The  conflict  is  against  Satan  and 
his  hosts.  Just  as  the  Canaanites  tried  to  keep  the 
Israelites  out  of  the  land  which  God  assured  Moses  the 
tribes  were  to  have  for  their  possession,  so  Satan's  great 
effort  is  to  hinder  the  saints  of  God  from  realizing  their 
blessedness  in  heavenly  places. 

But  for  this  the  most  careful  provision  is  laid  on 
us.  The  first  thing  is  to  "be  strong  in  the  Lord, 
and  in  the  power  of  his  might."  That  is,  all  our 
strength  is  to  lean  on  another,  even  the  Lord.  The 
next  thing  is  that  we  take  "  the  whole  armour  of  God, 
that  we  may  be  able  to  withstand  in  the  evil  day, 
and,  having  done  all,  to  .stand.  Stand  therefore,  having 
your  loins  girt  about  with  truth  [inwardly  appHed, 
and  thus  bracing  us  morally],  and  having  on  the 
breast-plate  of  righteousness."  The  internal  state  is 
the  great  point  here.  Carefully  remember  this.  Our 
standing  is  quite  another  matter,  which  itself  could  not 
avail  here.  The  panoply  is  against  Satan  and  not  God. 
It  is  a  question  not  of  acceptance  before  God,  but  of 
resisting  the  enemy  who  would  take  advantage  of  loose 
ways  and  a  bad  conscience.  The  breast -plate  means 
the  practical  righteousness  of  the  saint  himself.  "And 
your  feet  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of 
peace."  So  should  our  walk  be.  Besides,  take  "the 
shield  of  faith,  wherewith  ye  shall  be  able  to  quench 
aU  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one."  It  is  the  confi- 
dent trust  of  the  heart  in  the  favour  of  God  in  which 
we  stand,  not  the  remembrance  of  our  first  subjection 
to  the  gospel.    Finally,  "  receive  the  helmet  of  salva- 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   EPHESIA.NS.  233 

tion,  [there  the  head  is  lifted  up,  not  in  presumption, 
but  with  none  the  less  joy  and  courage,]  and  the  sword 
of  the  Spirit,"  which  is  expressly  said  to  be  the  word 
of  God.  The  defensive  comes  before  the  offensive; 
and  all  should  follow  dependence  on  the  Lord.  The 
sword  must  be  the  real  intrinsic  power  of  the  word 
wielded  in  the  Spirit,  which  does  not  spare  anything. 
Thus,  first  blessed,  strengthened,  and  enjoying  the  grace 
and  truth  of  God  in  Christ,  we  can  then  go  out  with 
the  sword  of  the  Spirit  to  deal  with  what  is  contrary 
to  His  nature,  which  Satan  would  use  to  obstruct  our 
realization  of  our  heavenly  privileges. 

Finally,  there  is  the  activity  now  for  others,  just  as 
before  there  was  dependence  for  ourselves.  "Praying 
always  with  all  prayer  and  supplication  in  the  Spirit, 
and  watching  thereunto  with  aU.  perseverance  and  sup- 
plication for  all  the  saints ;  and  for  me  [as  the  apostle 
blessedly  adds],  that  utterance  may  be  given  unto  me, 
that  I  may  open  my  mouth  boldly  to  make  known 
the  mystery  of  the  gospel" — (what  a  gracious  way  of 
encouraging  and  strengthening  saints,  giving  them  a 
feeling  of  the  value  of  their  prayers,  both  in  the  sight  of 
God,  and  in  fellowship  with  the  most  blessed  apostle 
that  God  ever  gave  the  church !) — "  for  which  I  am  an 
ambassador  in  bonds :  that  therein  I  may  speak  boldly, 
as  I  ought  to  speak."  He  felt  his  need  and  that  of  the 
work.  Also  he  counted  on  their  loving  desire  to  know 
his  affairs,  as  well  as  to  have  their  hearts  comforted 
through  Tychicus. 


234  INTROD0CTOKY  LECTURES. 


PHILIPPIANS. 

There  is  no  epistle  in  the  New  Testament  whicli  gives 
so  little  space  to  the  development  of  doctrine  as  this  to 
the  Philippians.  Feed  it  be  said  that  it  has  not  the  less 
its  own  proper  office  on  that  account?  And  what  is 
this  but  the  unfolding  of  the  truth  in  the  heart  and  in 
the  ways  of  the  Christian  ?  Hence  it  is  that,  although 
doctrine  is  sparse,  if  not  almost  excluded,  nevertheless 
what  little  appears  comes  in  as  ancillary  to  the  main- 
purpose.  It  is  interwoven  with  practical  appeal,  and 
indeed  the  chief  development  of  doctrine  (namely,  in 
the  second  chapter)  forms  a  ground  of  exhortation. 

Accordingly,  from 'the  very  starting-point,  we  are 
prepared  for  a  difference  of  tone  and  character.  The 
apostle  drops  entirely  his  official  status  in  addressing 
the  saints  at  PhUippi.  He  associates  Timothy  with 
himself, — not  merely,  as  elsewhere,  himself  apostle  and 
Timothy  in  some  other  relation,  but  here  conjointly — 
"Paul  and  Timotheus,  the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ." 
He  thus  takes  a  common  place  with  his  beloved  son  in 
the  gospel.  This  place  throughout  is  one  of  proinoting, 
enlarging,  deepening,  and  purifying  the  experience  of 
the  saints  themselves  in  that  which  iilled  his  own  heart 
with  joy  in  the  Lord.  We  shall  see  the  importance  of 
this  elsewhere.  It  is  what  enabled  him  to  look  at  the 
saints,  as  he  called  them  to  look  at  one  another,  esteem- 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   PHILIPPIANS.  235 

ing  others,  as  he  says,  tetter  than  themselves.  Had  it 
been  a  question  of  his  apostolic  dignity,  this  could  not 
have  been;  but  an  apostle  even  could,  and  did,  and 
loved  to,  take  the  place  of  one  that  served  others  whom 
he  viewed  directly  in  their  relationship  to  Christ.  His 
own  place  toward  them  was  but  to  sei-ve  them  in  love. 
Such  did,  such  was,  Christ.  There  is  nothing  so  high  as 
that  which  we  all  have  been  made  in  our  blessed  Lord. 
So  here  at  the  beginning  he  simply  takes  the  place 
of  servant  with  Timothy,  owning  all  the  saints  as  weU  as 
the  officials  in  their  place:  "To  all  the  saints  in  Christ 
Jesus  which  are  at  Philippi,  with  the  bishops  and 
deacons."  This  last  is  but  a  confirmation  of  the  same 
truth.  It  is  not  at  all  a  question  of  ecclesiastical  order, 
in  which  naturally  the  chief  guides  would  have  front 
rank.  The  apostle  is  here  contributing  to  that  which 
shall  never  pass  away,  and  hence  begins  with  the 
"saints  in  Christ  Jesus"  as  such.  These  PhOippians 
wUl  not  be  less  saints  in  heaven,  where  there  can  be 
no  such  charges  as  "bishops  or  deacons."  I  do  not  say 
that  the  fruits  of  the  loving  service  of  any  one  of  them 
wiU  be  'forgotten  there ;  nor  that  even  glory  will  not 
bear  the  impress  of  that  which  has  been  reaUy  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  here.  Nevertheless  there  is  that  which  is 
suited  only  to  the  conditions  of  time;  there  is  that 
which,  given  here,  survives  all  change.  The  apostle  loved 
to  give  God's  place  and  value  to  everything ;  and  here 
it  is  the  mingling  of  Christ  with  the  circumstances  of 
every  day.  It  is  the  forming  of  the  heart  with  the 
affections  and  the  judgments  of  the  Lord.  It  is  the 
imbuing  of  the  Christian  with  that  which  is  life  ever- 
lasting, but  the  life  that  he  is' now  living  by  "  the  faith 
of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  him  and  gave  himself 


236  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUKES. 

for  him."  Hence  he  at  once  begins,  not  with  a  doc- 
trinal preparation  after  the  introduction,  but  the  intro- 
duction brings  us  as  usual  into  the  general  spirit  if  not 
special  object  of  the  epistle.  "  I  thank  my  God  for  my 
whole  remembrance  of  you,"  says  he,  after  his  usual 
salutation  and  wish,  "  always  in  every  prayer  of  mine 
making  request  for  you  all  with  joy." 

There  is  no  epistle  that  so  abounds  in  joy.  This  is 
the  more  remarkable  because  it  is  so  intensely  practical. 
Por  we  can  all  understand  joy  in  believing;  we  can 
readily  feel  how  natural  is  joy  to  the  Christian  who 
dwells  on  his  eternal  portion.  The  trial  is  to  keep 
that  joy  undimmed  in  the  midst  of  the  difficulties  and 
sorrows  that  every  day  may  bring.  This  epistle  treats 
of  daily  sorrows  and  difficulties,  yet  does  it  manifestly 
overflow  with  joy,  which  aU  the  dangers,  sufferings,  and 
trials  only  made  the  more  triumphant  and  conspicuous. 

So  he  brings  before  them  another  remarkable  feature 
of  it — their  fellowship;  and  this  fellowship  too  with  the 
gospel.  Their  happy  and  bright  state  in  Christ  did  not 
dim  their  fellowship  with  the  gospel.  But  whatever  might 
be  their  own  proper  joy,  whatever  might  be  their  delight 
in  that  which  G-od  works  in  the  church,  they  had  full 
and  simple-hearted  fellowship  with  His  good  news.  It 
had  always  been  so,  as  the  apostle  gives  us  to  learn.  It 
was  not  some  sudden  fit,  if  one  may  so  say,  nor  was  it 
the  influence  of  passing  circumstances.  It  was  a  calm, 
fixed,  cordial  habit  of  their  souls,  which  indeed  had 
distinguished  them  from  the  first.  This  was  now  among 
the  last  outpourings  of  the  apostle's  heart,  as  he  him- 
self had  almost  arrived  at  the  end  of  his  active  labours, 
if  indeed  it  was  not  absolutely  their  end.  He  was  in 
prison,  long  shut  out  from  that  which  had  been  his 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPHANS.  237 

joyful  service,  though  in  constant  toil  and  suffering  for 
so  many  years.  But  his  spirit  was  as  bright  as  ever,  his 
joy  perfectly  fresh,  deep,  and  flowing.  And  now  he 
would  have  them  looking  to  Christ,  that  no  damp  should 
gather  round  their  hearts  from  anything  that  might 
befall  him, —  that  nothing  which  happened,  whether 
to  themselves,  to  other  saints,  or  even  to  the  apostle, 
should  interfere  for  a  moment  with  their  unclouded  and 
abounding  confidence  in  the  Lord:  So  he  tells  them  that 
he  always  thus  remembered  them  for  their  "fellowship 
with  the  gospel  from  the  first  day  until  now,  being 
confident  of  this  very  thing,  that  he  who  hath  begun  a 
good  work  in  you  will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesua 
Christ." 

There  is  not  even  the  allowance  of  the  possibility  of 
their  turning  aside  from  the  bright  career  both  of  possess- 
ing a  Saviour  they  knew,  and  of  enjoying  Him  increas- 
ingly. He  had  no  theory  that  first  love  must  necessarily 
wane  and  cool  down,  but  the  very  reverse.  Himself  the 
striking  witness  to  the  contrary,  he  looked  for  nothing 
less  in  the  saints  he  so  dearly  loved.  Indeed  that  which 
had  drawn  out  the  epistle  was  the  proof  that  the  trying 
circumstances  of  the  apostle  had  but  called  out  their 
affections.  His  being  out  of  sight  rather  made  the 
remembrance  of  his  words  and  ways  the  more  distinct, 
and  imparted  a  chastened  earnestness  to  their  desires  of 
pleasing  the  Lord.  "  Being  confident,"  he  therefore  says, 
"  of  this  very  thing,  that  he  which  hath  begun  a  good 
work  will  perform  it  unto  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ,  even 
as  it  is  meet  for  me  to  think  this  of  you  all."  It  is  not 
one  who  cherished  a  trust  in  the  Lord's  fidelity  spite  of 
what  was  visible.  This  counting  on  the  Lord  the  apostle 
might  have  even  where  things  were  wrong.     It  was  so 


'238  INTRODTJCTOEY  LECTURES. 

as  to  the  Corinthians ;  nay,  it  was  not  wholly  wanting 
for  the  Galatians,  though  that  which  they  allowed  im- 
perilled the  foundations  of  grace  and  faith.  But  the 
practical  ways  and  spirit  of  the  Philippians  were  the 
living  evidence  not  only  of  life,  but,  so  to  speak,  of 
vigorous  health  in  Christ.  So  it  was  right  for  him  to 
anticipate  good  and  not  evU,  not  as  in  the  authorized 
version  and  other  translations,  because  "  I  have  you  in 
my  heart,"  which  would  be  no  ground  of  assurance  for 
them,  but  because  "ye  have  me  in  your  heart,"  which 
showed  their  spiritual  feelings  to  be  true  and  sound. 
This  seems  to  me  the  real  meaning,  which  the  margin 
gives  rightly. 

It  is  a  thing  more  important  in  practice  than  many 
suppose.  There  is  no  more  common  device  of  Satan 
than  to  seek  the  destruction  of  the  power  of  testimony 
by  the  allowance  of  evil  insinuations  against  him  who 
renders  it.  Of  course,  the  enemy  would  have  desired 
above  all  and  at  any  cost  to  lower  such  an  one  as  the 
apostle  Paul  in  the  loving  esteem  of  God's  saints,  more 
particularly  where  all  had  been  sweet  and  happy ;  but, 
notwithstanding  every  effort,  grace  hitherto  had  pre- 
vailed, and  these  saints  at  Philippi  felt  the  more  for  the 
apostle  when  he  was  a  prisoner.  When  God  does  not 
interpose,  men  are  apt  to  allow  reflections  and  reasonings. 
Not  seldom  do  they  begin  to  question  whether  it  can 
be  possible  that  such  a  one  is  really  of  value  to  the 
church  of  God.  Would  God  in  this  case  let  His  servant 
be  so  long  kept  away  from  the  gospel  or  the  church  ? 
Surely  there  must  have  been  something  seriously  wrong 
to  judge  in  him ! 

It  was  not  thus  that  the  true-hearted  Philippians 
felt;    and  spiritual  feeling  is  worth  more  than  all 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  239 

reasoning.  Their  affections  were  right.  Eeasonings  on 
such  matters  are  in  general  miserably  wrong.  Their 
sympathies,  drawn  out  by  the  afflictions  of  the  apostle 
in  his  work,  were  the  workings  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
their  souls — at  least  the  instincts  of  a  life  that  was  of 
Christ,  and  that  judged  in  view  of  Him,  and  not  accord- 
ing to  appearances.  They  had  him  in  their  heart,  as 
he  says,  "Inasmuch  as  both  in  my  bonds,  and  in  the 
defence  and  confirmation  of  the  gospel,  ye  aU  are  par- 
takers with  me  of  grace,"  or  "  of  my  grace."  "  For  God 
is  my  record,  how  greatly  I  long  after  you  all  in  the 
bowels  of  Jesus  Christ."  For  his  was  a  heart  deeply 
sensible  of  love,  and  consequently  he  was  not  one  that 
had  sought  either  to  make  the  saints  dependent  upon 
him,  and  still  less  did  the  apostle  depend  on  the  saints 
for  anything  that  was  the  fruit  of  grace  in  them.  He 
desired  not  anything  for  himself,  but  only  what  should 
abound  to  their  account  in  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ: 
This  he  must  wish  for  them,  if  he  wished  them  well; 
Accordingly  he  prays  for  them,  that  as  they  had  shown 
this  true  and  unabated  love  for  himself  as  Christ's 
servant,  so  their  love  might  abound  yet  more  and  more, 
and  this  too  in  knowledge  and  in  all  judgment. 

This  is  the  great  value  of  Christian  experience.  It 
is  not  love  growing  less  but  more,  and  this  abounding, 
in  intelligence  and  knowledge,  which  could  not  be  looked 
for  in  saints  just  beginning  their  career.  There  is  no 
necessity — and  where  is  the  epistle  that  more  thoroughly 
disproves  the  thought  of  any  necessity  ? — that  a  saint 
should  decline.  To  abound  in  love  is  far  from  declen- 
sion. To  "abound  yet  more  and  more," — to  have  that 
love  tempered  by  divinely  given  wisdom  and  divinely 
exercised  judgment, — is  the  very  reverse  of  going  back. 


240  mTEODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

Their  trae  and  constant  progress  was  what  the  apostle 
had  before  his  own  soul  in  prayer  for  them,  instead  of 
coolly  giving  up  the  saints,  as  if  the  new  nature  must 
grow  feebler  day  by  day — as  if  the  things  of  the  world 
must  overcome  faith,  and  the  things  which  are  seen 
outweigh  those  which  are  unseen  and  eternal.  Is  this 
your  measure  of  the  love  of  Christ?  Is  He  really  so 
far  from  any  of  those  that  caU  upon  Him  ? 

Thus,  then,  he  prays  for  them,  and  to  this  end, — not 
that  they  might  become  more  intelligent  merely — ^not 
that  they  might  grow  more  able  to  discourse  of  divine 
things,  though  I  doubt  not  that  there  would  be  growth 
in  these  respects  also;  but  aH  here  has  an  eminently 
practical  form, — "that  ye  may  approve  things  that  are 
more  excellent;  that  ye  may  be  pure  and  without 
offence  tiU  the  day  of  Christ."  Such  is  the  thought  that 
the  apostle  had  before  his  soul  of  that  which  became  the 
Christian.  He  would  have  one  who  begins  with  Christ 
to  go  on  with  Christ,  have  nothing  but  Christ  before' 
his  eyes,  and  pursue  this  path  without  a  stumble  till  the 
day  of  Christ.  It  is  a  blessed  and  refreshing  picture 
even  in  thought.  Oh  that  the  Lord  might  make  it  true 
of  His  own !  This  is  certainly  what  the  apostle  here 
puts  before  these  saints.  "  Pilled,"  says  he,  "  with  the 
fruit  of  righteousness,  which  is  by  Jesus  Christ;"  for  it 
is  all  supposed  to  be  fruit,  not  isolated  fruits  here  and 
there,  but  as  a  whole,  which  adds  greatly  to  the  strength 
of  it.  It  should  be  "the  fruit  of  righteousness,  which 
is  by  Jesus  Christ,  unto  the  glory  and  praise  of  God." 

Then  he  turns,  not  to  doctrine  after  this  opening,  but 
to  circumstances, — to  circumstances,  however,  illumined 
with  Christ.  The  most  ordinary  details  are  taken  out 
of  their  own  pettiness  (though  it  is  really  a  little  mind 


THE  .EPISTLE   TO   THE   PHILTPPIANS.  241 

which  counts  them  petty),  and  are  made  simple  and 
genuine,  and  this  through  Christ  Jesus  intermingled 
with  them.     Oh,  it  is  a  blessed  thing,  that  in  the  midst 
of  the  sorrows  of  this  world,  the  Holy  Spirit  knows  how 
thus  to  blend  the  name  of  Christ,  as  the  sweetest  balm, 
with  the  sorrow,  however  bitter,  and  to  make  the  very 
memory  of  the  grief  pleasant  because  of  Christ,  who 
deigns  to  let  Himself  into  it  all.     It  was  this  that  so 
cheered  the  apostle's  heart  in  his  loneliness  often,  in  his 
desertion  sometimes,  when  the  sight  of  a  brother  would 
have  given  fresh  courage  to  his  heart.     Looking  to  the 
Lord,  as  it  is  the  life-breath  of  love,  so  it  adds  to  the 
value  of  brotherly  kindness  in  its  season.     Thus  we 
know  how  on  approaching  Eome  Paul  was  lifted  up 
and  comforted,  as  he  saw  those  who  came  to  greet  him. 
But  there  he  was  soon  to  experience  the  faltering  of 
brethren  ;  there  he  was  to  see  not  one  standing  by  him 
in  the  hour  of  his  shame  and  need.     He  must  be  con- 
formed to  his  Master  in  all  things ;  and  this  was  one  of 
them.     But  out  of  the  midst  of  bitter  experience  he 
had  learned  Christ,  as  even  he  had  never  known  Him 
before.     He  had  proved  long  the  power  and  the  joy  of 
Christ  for  every  day,  and  for  every  circumstance  of  it. 
It  was  such  an  one,  truly  the  servant  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  so  much  the  more  their  servant  because  His,  even 
their  servant  for  Jesus'  sake — it  was  such  an  one  that 
wrote  from  Eome  to  the  tried  saints  at  Philippi.     !N"or 
was  he  in  that  which  he  was  about  to  write  without 
deep  feeling;  but  he  had  learned  Christ  for  all;  and 
this  is  the  key-note  of  the  epistle  from  the  first,  though 
only  uttered  distinctly  at  the  last.    He  had  learned 
practically  what  Christ  is,  and  what  He  does,  and  what 
He  can  enable  even  the  least  to  do,  (as  he  says  himself, 

B 


242  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

"less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,")  and  so  much  the 
more,  because  the  least  in  his  own  eyes. 

Thus  then  he  writes,  telling  them,  "I  would  ye 
should  understand,  brethren,  that  the  things  which 
happened  unto  me  have  fallen  out  rather  unto  the 
furtherance  of  the  gospel."  He  knew  well  how  much 
they  might  be  tried  by  the  report  of  his  own  imprison- 
ment, and  no  deliverance  coming  as  yet.  But  he  had 
himself  gone  through  the  trial ;  he  had  weighed  it  all ; 
he  had  brought  it  into  the  presence  of  God.  He  had 
put  aU,  as  it  were,  into  the  hands  of  Christ,  who  had 
Himself  given  him  His  own  comfort  about  it.  "I 
would,  then,  that  ye  should  understand,  that  the  things 
which  happened  unto  me  have  fallen  out  rather  unto  the 
furtherance  of  the  gospel."  Once  you  are  right  about 
Christ,  you  are  right  about  everything  while  He  is  before 
you.  There  is  nothing  assuredly  right,  on  the  other 
hand,  where  Christ  is  not  the  object  of  the  soul.  With 
Him  you  will  be  right  about  the  gospel,  right  about  the 
church,  right  about  doctriae,  walk,  and  service.  There 
is  not  one  of  these  things  but  may  in  itself  become  the 
veriest  snare ;  and  so  much  the  more  dangerous  because 
each  looks  fair.  What  looks  and  sounds  better  than 
the  saints  of  God  ?  what  than  the  ministry  of  Christ  ? 
what  than  the  testimony  for  God?  Yet  there  is  not 
one  of  these  things  that  has  not  become  the  ruin  of 
souls ;  and  there  are  none  that  ought  to  know  this  bet- 
ter than  those  I  am  addressing  this  night.  Who  have 
had  more  mournful  proofs  of  the  danger  of  putting 
saints  practically  in  the  place  of  Christ  ?  Who  have 
had  more  palpable  witness  that  service  may  become  the 
object  rather  than  Christ  ?  Has  it  not  been  the  rock  on 
which  many  a  gallant  bark  has  made  shipwreck  ? 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   PHILIPPIANS.  243 

But  now  the  apostle  was  shut  out  from  every  labour 
apparently.  Surely  he,  most  of  aU,  must  have  felt  the 
change — the  heart  that  took  in  the  Gentiles,  that  swept 
the  circle  of  lands  from  Jerusalem  to  Illyricum,  that 
yearned  over  Spain,  ever  going  out  farther  and  farther, 
boundless  in  his  desires  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  He 
was  for  a  considerable  time  a  prisoner.  He  is  at  Eome, 
where  he  desired  to  be,  no  doubt,  but  which  he  had  never 
expected  to  visit  as  one  in  bonds.  And  that  he  ever  was 
anything  but  a  prisoner  there,  man  at  least  cannot  say. 
A  prisoner  he  was ;  and  such  is  all  that  Scripture  tells 
about  him  there.  We  may  see  the  moral  harmony  of 
that  lot  with  his  testimony,  and  how  suitable  it  seems 
that  he,  who  was  above  all  men  identified  with  the  gos- 
pel of  the  glory  of  Christ,  should  be  a  prisoner,  and 
nothing  but  a  prisoner  in  Eome.  At  any  rate,  such  is 
the  picture  that  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  of  him  there. 
And  now  as  he  had  Christ  before  his  soul,  in  this  way 
the  gospel  itself,  he  can  feel,  is  only  promoted  so  much 
the  more.  Far  from  him  was  the  vanity  of  being  the 
man  first  to  preach  Christ  in  the  great  metropolis.  He 
forgot  himself  in  the  gospel.  His  desire  above  all  was 
that  Christ's  name  might  go  forth.  This  was  very  dear 
to  him,  let  God  use  whom  he  would.  The  things  that 
happened  to  him  he  could  therefore  judge  calmly  and 
clearly.  What  seemed  to  some  the  death  of  the  gospel 
was  in  point  of  fact  distinctly  for  the  furtherance  of  it. 

The  manner,  too,  in  which  these  things  happened 
seemed  to  make  all  as  remote  as  possible  from  furthering 
the  gospel;  but  here  again  he  brings  in  Christ.  This 
disperses  all  clouds  from  the  soiil.  This  filled  Paul 
with  sunshine ;  and  he  would  have  others  to  enjoy  the 
same  bright  light  which  the  name  of  Christ  cast  on 

B  2 


244  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

every  otjeet.  And  mark,  it  is  not  the  anticipation  of  light 
■with  Christ  in  heaven,  but  His  light  now  while  He  is 
in  heaven  shining  on  the  heart,  and  on  the  circumstances 
of  the  pathway  here  below.  He  says  that  they  had 
happened  rather  for  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel, — "  so 
that  my  bonds  in  Christ  are  manifest;"  for  this  is  the 
way  in  which  he  looks  at  it — •"  my  bonds  in  Christ." 
Oh,  how  honourable,  how  sweet  and  precious,  to  have 
bonds  in  Christ !  Other  people  would  have  merely 
thought  of  or  seen  bonds  under  the  Eoman  emperor, 
the  bonds  of  that  great  city  that  ruled  over  the  kings 
of  the  earth.  Not  so  Paul.  They  were  bonds  in  Christ ; 
how  then  could  he  be  impatient  under  them?  How 
could  any  murmur  who  believed  they  were  really  bonds 
in  Christ  ?  "  My  bonds  in  Christ,"  he  says,  "  are  mani- 
fest in  all  the  palace."  Strange  way  of  God !  but  so  it 
was  that  thus  the  gospel,  the  glad  tidiugs  of  His  grace, 
should  reach  the  highest  quarters.  They  were  "  mani- 
fest in  all  the  palace,  and  in  all  other  places ;  and 
many  of  the  brethren  in  the  Lord,  waxing  confident  by 
my  bonds,  are  much  more  bold  to  speak  the  word  with- 
out fear." 

Blessed  is  this  confidence  in  Christ,  and  wondrous 
are  His  ways !  Who  would  have  expected  that  the 
timid  man  Mcodemus,  and  the  honourable  councillor 
Joseph  of  Arimathea,  would  have  been  brought  out 
at  the  very  time  when  even  the  apostles  themselves 
had  fled  trembling  with  fear?  Yet  they  were  the 
witnesses  of  Christ  whom  God  had  put  forth  at  the 
close;  for  it  was  manifestly  of  Him.  God  never  can 
fail;  and  the  very  trials  that  would  seem  to  crush 
all  hope  for  the  glory  of  Christ  on  the  earth  are  the 
precise  occasions  in  which  God  proves  that  after  all  it 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   PHILIPPIANS,  245 

is  He  alone  who  triumphs,  while  man  always  fails  eveit 
if  he  be  an  apostle.  But  the  weakest  of  saints  (how 
much  more  this  greatest  of  the  apostles !)  cannot  but  be 
conqueror,  more  than  conqueror,  where  the  heart  is 
fiUed  with  Christ.  There  was  victory  to  his  faith  by 
the  grace  of  God.  And  so,  too,  he  could  now  read  and 
interpret  all  things  in  that  bright  light  around  him. 
Had  he  occupied  himself  with  the  persons  that  were  so 
preaching  the  gospel,  how  disconsolate  he  must  have 
been !  What  might  you  and  I  have  thought  of  such  ? 
Is  it  too  much  to  say  that  many  a  groan  would  have 
gone  forth  from  us  that  are  here  ?  Instead  of  this  a 
song  of  joy  and  thanks  comes  from  the  blessed  man  of 
God  at  Eome;  for,  as  he  says  here,  "Some  indeed  preach 
Christ  even  of  envy  and  strife ;  and  some  also  of  good 
wUL  The  one  preach  Christ  of  contention,  not  sincere- 
ly,"— nor  was  this  all,  but — "supposing  to  add  affliction 
to  my  bonds." 

Not  only  was  an  utterly  wrong  spirit  indulged  in 
the  work  itself,  and  toward  others  engaged  actually 
in  it;  but  even  as  to  the  apostle,  shut  out  from  such 
service,  a  desire  to  pain  and  wound  was  not  wanting. 
"  The  one  preach  Christ  of  contention  supposing  to  add 
affliction  to  my  bonds  :  but  the  other  of  love,  knowing 
that  I  am  set  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel.  What 
then  ?  notwithstanding,  every  way,  whether  in  pretence, 
or  in  truth,  Christ  is  preached."  Christ  is  the  sovereign 
balm  for  every  wound;  and  it  was  the  apostle's  joy, 
whatever  men's  spirit  might  be,  not  only  to  enjoy  Christ 
himself,  but  that  His  name  was  being  proclaimed  far 
and  wide  by  many  lips,  that  souls  might  hear  and  live. 
Whatever  the  motives,  whatever  the  manner,  the  Lord 
would  surely  deal  with  these  in  His  own  day ;  but,  at 


246  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

any  rate,  Christ  was  now  preached,  and  God  would  use 
this  both  for  His  own  glory  and  for  the  salvation  of 
souls. 

Hence,  says  he,  "  I  therein  do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will 
rejoice.  For  I  know  that  this  shall  turn  to  my  salvation 
through  your  prayer,  and  the  supply  of  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  Jesus."  "We  must  carefully  remember  throughout 
all  this  epistle  that  "salvation"  never  means  acceptance. 
If  this  be  borne  in  mind  a  lai^e  part  of  the  difficulty 
that  some  have  found  completely  disappears.  Impos- 
sible that  anything  done  by  other  saints  should  turn  to 
one's  acceptance  any  more  than  what  is  done  by  himself. 
The  apostle  uses  salvation  throughout  his  letter  to  the 
Philippians  (nor  is  it  confined  to  this  scripture  only)  in 
the  sense  of  the  complete  and  final  triumph  over  all  the 
power  of  Satan.  Hence  it  may  be  remarked  that  in 
the  epistle  to  the  Philippians  it  is  not  a  question  of 
lusts  of  the  flesh ;  the  flesh  is  not  so  much  as  named 
here,  except  in  a  religious  way ;  not  in  its  gross  sins,  as 
man  would  judge,  but  in  its  pretensions  to  religion.  See 
for  instance  chapter  iii.  Hence  the  conflict  is  never  with 
internal  evil,  but  rather  with  Satan.  For  such  conflict  we 
need  the  power  of  the  Lord  and  the  whole  armour  of 
God.  But  that  power  displays  itself  not  in  our  strength, 
or  wisdom,  or  any  conferred  resources.  The  supply  of 
the  Spirit  of  Christ  Jesus  shows  itself  in  dependence, 
and  this  expresses  itself  therefore  in  prayer  to  God. 
And  observe,  too,  that  the  apostle  felt  the  value  of 
others'  prayers.  They  contributed  to  his  victory  over 
the  foe.  How  lovely  that  even  such  a  man  should  speak, 
not  merely  of  his  own  prayers,  but  of  theirs,  turning  all 
to  such  account.  "  This  shall  turn,"  says  he,  "  to  my 
salvation  through  your  prayers,  and  the  supply  of  the 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   PHILIPPIANS.  247 

Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ."  There  is  nothing  so  unaffectedly 
humble  as  real  faith,  and,  above  all,  that  character  of 
faith  -which  lives  on  Christ,  and  -which  consequently 
lives  Christ.  Such  -was  the  apostle's  faith.  To  him  to 
live  -was  Christ. 

"  According  to  my  earnest  expectation  and  my  hope, 
that  in  nothing  1  shall  be  ashamed."  If  he  desired  for 
them  that  they  should  be  without  one  stumble  till  the 
day  of  Christ,  it  -was  the  purpose  to  -which  grace  had 
girded  up  his  own  loins.  But  "  that  in  nothing  I  shall 
be  ashamed."  What  a  word,  and  how  calculated  to  make 
its  ashamed!  It.  is  not  a  question  of  acceptance  in 
Christ.  No;  it  is  practical.  It  is  his  state  and  experience 
every  day,  as  to  which  his  hope  was  that  in  nothing 
he  should  be  ashamed ;  "  but  that  with  all  boldness,  as 
always,  so  now  also  Christ  shall  be  magnified  in  my 
body,  whether  it  be  by  life,  or  by  death." 

And  what  is  it  that  gave  such  a  hope  to  one  that 
o-wns  himself  the  chief  of  sinners  and  less  than  the 
least  of  aU  saints  ?  There  was  but  one  spring  of  power 
— even  Christ.  And,  let  me  observe,  it  is  not  merely 
that  Christ  is  my  life.  Sweet  and  wondrous  word  to 
say  that  Christ  is  our  life ;  but  the  question  is,  how  are 
we  living  ?  Are  we  living  out  that  life  which  we  have  ? 
Is  this  the  life  that  is  practically  exercised  ?  or  are  there 
mingled  ways  and  mixed  motives?  Is  there  the  struggle 
of  the  old  with  the  appearance  sometimes  of  the  new? 
Does  this  content  our  hearts  ?  Or  is  it,  on  the  settled 
judgment  of  the  old  as  altogether  and  only  self  and  sin, 
that  we  are  habitually  manifesting  Christ?  Have  we 
that  one  blessed  person  as  the  hope,  motive,  beginning, 
end,  way,  and  power  of  all  that  occupies  us  from  day 
to  day  ?     It  was  so  with  the  apostle.     May  it  be  so 


248  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

with  US !    " To  me"  may  each  say  truly,  " to  live  is 
Christ." 

Habitually,  indeed  throughout  this  epistle,  we  find 
the  word  "me"  and  a  very  different  "me"  from  the  "me" 
of  Eomans  vii.  There  it  was  an  unhappy  "  me,"  though 
distinct  from  the  flesh :  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am !' 
Here  it  would  be,  0  happy  man  that  I  am !  He  is  one 
who  has  his  joy  exclusively  from  and  in  Christ.  When 
first  he  tasted  it,  he  found  it  so  sweet  that  he  cared  for 
none  other.  And  thus  it  was  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  that  gave  him  to  look  out  in  the  midst  of  all  that  he 
passed  through  day  by  day,  that  all,  whatever  it  might 
be,  should  be  done  to  Christ,  and  so  too  all  by  Christ, 
the  Holy  Ghost  working  it,  so  to  speak,  in  his  soul  to 
give  him  simply  and  settledly  in  everything  that  oc- 
curred an  opportunity  of  having  Christ  Himself  as  the 
substance  of  his  living  and  serving,  no  matter  what 
might  come  in  the  course  of  duty.  "  To  me  to  live  is 
Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain."  In  any  case,  indeed,  to  the 
Christian,  death  is  gain ;  but  he  could  best  say  it  who 
could  say,  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ,"  who  could  say  it 
not  merely  as  the  faith  of  Him,  but  as  a  matter  of  sim- 
ple, unconstrained,  spontaneous  enjoyment  of  Christ  in 
practical  ways. 

Now  he  proceeds  to  give  his  reason.  It  is  his  own 
personal  experience;  and  this  is  the  reason  why  we  have 
"  I "  so  often  here.  It  is  not  legal  experience,  for  which 
you  must  turn  to  the  chapter  spoken  of  in  Eomans  vii., 
the  only  bit  of  a  saint's  experience  under  law,  as  far  as 
I  know,  that  the  New  Testament  affords  (certainly  in  the 
epistles).  But  here  is  the  proper  experience  of  a  Chris- 
tian. It  is  the  apostle  giving  us  what  his  heart  was 
occupied  with  when  he  could  not  go  forth  in  the  activi- 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE  PHILIPPIANS.  249 

ties  of  work,  and  when  it  seemed  as  if  lie  had  nothing 
to  do.  Now  we  all  know  that  when  a  man  is  carried  on 
the  top  of  the  wave,  when  the  winds  fill  the  sails  and 
all  goes  prosperously,  when  hearts  are  gladdened  in  sor- 
row, when  one  witnesses  the  joy  of  fresh  deliverance 
from^day  to  day,  it  is  a  comparatively  easy  thing.  But 
to  one  cut  off  from  such  work  it  was,  in  appearance  at 
least,  a  heavy  burden  and  an  immense  trial ;  but  Christ 
changes  all  for  us.  His  yoke  is  easy,  and  His  burden 
light.  It  is  Christ,  and  Christ  only,  that  thus  disposes 
of  grief  and  pressure.  And  so  accordingly  His  servant 
says  here,  "  If  I  live  in  the  flesh,  this  is  the  fruit  of  my 
labour." 

It  is  needless  to  recount  the  comments  on  these 
words.  They  really  mean,  this  is  worth  my  while, — 
a  well-known  phrase  in  Latin  too.  He  puts  it  as  a 
matter  left  for  him  to  judge  of  and  decide  by  Christ. 
"  If  I  live  in  the  flesh,  it  is  worth  my  while."  But  if 
not,  what  then  ?  Why,  it  was  gain.  As  far  as  he  was 
concerned,  therefore,  why  could  be  choose?  In  a  certain 
sense  too  he  could  not,  and  in  another  he  would  not 
choose.  Christ  was  so  truly  before  his  heart,  that  in  fact 
there  was  no  self  left  unjudged  to  warp  the  choice.  This 
is  what  brings  him,  if  one  may  so  say,  into  the  dilemma 
of  love.  If  he  left  this  world,  he  would  be  with  Christ ; 
if  he  lived  longer  in  this  world,  Christ  was  with  him. 
In  short,  he  was  so  living  Christ,  that  it  was  only  a 
question  of  Christ  here  and  of  Christ  there.  After  all 
it  was  better  for  Christ  to  choose,  not  for  him.  But  the 
moment  he  has  Christ  before  him  thus,  he  judges  ac- 
cording to  the  affections  of  Christ,  and  he  looks  at  the 
need  of  saints  here  below. 

The  question  is  at  once  settled  as  a  matter  of  faith. 


250  INTRODUCTORY  LECTUBES. 

Though  he  wist  not  to  choose  what  between  the  two 
before,  when  the  need  of  souls  rises  before  him,  he  says 
that  he  shall  live,  and  is  not  yet  going  to  die.  Through 
the  wonderful  sight  of  the  love  of  Christ,  this  answered 
the  question  to  his  faith,  leaving  aU  circumstances 
entirely  aside.  Witnesses,  prosecutors,  judges,  emperor, 
everybody,  became,  in  point  of  fact,  nothing  to  him.  "I 
can  do  all  things,"  as  he  says  elsewhere,  "  through  him 
that  strengtheneth  me."  So  he  could  settle  now  about  his 
life  and  death.  "  Therefore,"  says  he,  "  though  I  am  in 
a  strait  betwixt  two,"  as  he  had  said  before,  "  having  a 
desire  to  depart,  and  to  be  with  Christ;  which  is  far 
better :  nevertheless  to  abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  need- 
ful for  you.  And  having  this  -confidence,  I  know  that  I 
shall  abide  and  continue  with  you  all  for  your  further- 
ance and  joy  of  faith ;  that  your  rejoicing  may  be  more 
abundant  in  Jesus  Christ  for  me  by  my  coming  to  you 
again." 

Only  he  desires  that  their  conversation  should  be  as 
it  became  the  gospel  of  Christ.  It  was  not  merely  their 
calling  in  Christ,  their  being  Christians,  that  was  before 
him,  but  a  walk  as  it  became  the  gospel  of  Christ.  It 
is  not  at  aU  as  the  objects  of  the  gospel,  but  as  having 
fellowship  with  it,  their  hearts  bound  up  and  identified 
with  all  the  trials  and  difficulties  that  the  gospel  was 
sustaining  in  its  course  throughout  the  world.  "  Only 
let  your  conversation  be  as  it  becometh  the  gospel  of 
Christ."  Thus  fervour  of  desire  for  others  is  the  happy 
index  of  this  whenever  coupled  with  adequate  know- 
ledge of  ourselves.  But  how  can  this  be  unless  the 
heart  is  perfectly  at  ease  as  to  itself  ?  "  Only  let  your 
conversation  be  as  it  becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ." 
Let  me  press  this,  because  alas  !  there  is  no  small  ten- 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   PHILIPPIAJirS.  251 

dency  whenever  people  know  the  gospel  well,  if  this  be 
all,  to  settle  down,  thinking  they  have  nothing  more  to 
do  with  the  matter.  It  was  not  so  with  the  Philippians. 
They  had  so  much  the  more  to  do  because  Christ  had 
done  all  for  their  souls.  They  were  coupled  with  the 
gospel  in  aU  its  conflict  and  progress.  It  was  not  because 
of  their  own  personal  interest,  though  this  was  great 
and  fresh,  but  they  loved  that  it  should  go  forth.  They 
identified  themselves,  therefore,  with  all  who  were  de- 
claring it  throughout  the  world.  Hence  he  desired  that 
their  conversation  should  be  as  became  such  zeal ;  "  that 
whether  I  come  and  see  you,  or  else  be  absent,  I  may 
hear  of  your  affairs,  that  ye  stand  fast  in  one  spirit,  with 
one  mind  striving  together  for  the  faith  of  the  gospel ; 
and  in  nothing  terrified  by  your  adversaries  :  which  is 
to  them  an  evident  token  of  perdition,  but  to  you  of 
salvation,  and  that  of  God." 

This  is  the  more  important,  because  such  fear  is  the 
main  weapon  of  Satan.  It  is  always  the  power  of 
Satan  that  is  in  view  here.  He  is  regarded  as  the  true 
adversary,  working,  of  course,  by  human  means ;  but  none 
the  less  is  it  his  power.  It  may  be  remarked  here,  that 
from  an  expression  often  misunderstood  in  chapter  ii. 
it  might  seem  as  if  the  apostle  wished  somehow  to 
weaken  their  confidence.  So  unbelief  interprets,  but 
most  assuredly  it  is  wrong.  The  apostle  does  call  for 
"  fear  and  trembling"  on  the  part  of  the  saints  in  that 
chapter;  but  there  is  not  an  atom  of  dread  or  doubt  in  it. 
He  would  have  them  realize  the  solemnity  of  the  strife 
that  is  going  on.  He  desires  for  them,  not  anxiety 
about  the  issue  of  it,  but  true  gravity  of  spirit,  because 
of  feeling  that  it  is  a  question  between  God  and  the 
devil,  and  that  we  have  to  do  with  that  struggle  in  the 


252  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES. 

most  direct  way.  We  need  to  draw  from  God,  the 
spring  and  the  only  supplier  of  power  that  can  resist 
the  devil;  but,  at  the  same  time,  that  we  have  the 
devil  to  resist  in  His  power  is  a  conviction  that  may 
well  demand  "fear  and  trembling;"  and  this,  lest  in 
such  a  conflict  we  should  let  in  anything  of  self,  which 
would  at  once  give  a  handle  to  the  devil.  In  Him,  we 
know,  who  was  the  perfect  model  in  the  same  warfare, 
which  He  fought  single-handed,  conquering  for  God's 
glory  and  for  us,  the  prince  of  this  world  came,  and 
had  nothing  in  Him,  absolutely  nothing.  With  us  it  is 
far  otherwise;  and  only  as  we  live  on  Christ  do  we 
remove,  as  it  were,  from  the  enemy's  hand  that  which 
would  furnish  him  abundant  occasion. 

In  rich  measure  did  the  apostle  live  thus  himself 
— it  was  the  one  thing  he  did ;  and  he  would  have  the 
saints  to  be  living  in  it  too.  "In  nothing,"  says  he, 
"  terrified  by  your  adversaries  [this  is  the  other  side]  : 
which  is  to  them  an  evident  token  of  perdition,  but  to 
you  of  salvation,  and  that  of  God.  For  unto  you  it  is 
given  in  the  behalf  of  Christ,  not  only  to  believe  on 
him,  but  also  to  suffer  for  his  sake."  Thus  the  very 
suffering  which  unbelief  might  interpret  wrongly,  and 
regard  as  a  severe  chastening,  and  so  cause  the  heart  to 
be  cast  down,  instead  of  taking  comfort  before  God, — 
the  suffering  for  Christ's  sake  is  a  gift  of  His  love,  as 
much  a  gift  as  the  believing  in  Christ  for  the  salvation 
of  the  soul.  For,  in  point  of  fact,  through  this  epistle 
salvation  is  seen  as  going  on  from  first  to  last,  and  not  yet 
complete,  being  never  viewed  as  such  till  the  conflict 
with  Satan  is  altogether  closed.  Such  is  the  sense  of  it 
here.  Hence  he  speaks  of  the  conflict  which  they  once 
saw  to  be  in  him,  and  now  heard  to  be  in  him. 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   PHILIPPIANS.  253 

Next,  not  only  did  he  exhort  them  not  to  be  terrified 
by  the  power  of  Satan,  which  is  itself  an  evident  and 
solemn  sign  of  perdition  to  those  that  oppose  the  saints 
of  God ;  but  he  calls  on  them  to  cast  out  the  sources 
of  disunion  among  themselves ;  and  this  he  does  in  the 
most  touching  way.  They  had  been  manifesting  their 
mindful  love  for  the  apostle,  who  on  his  part  was  cer- 
tainly not  forgetful  of  its  least  token.  If,  then,  they 
really  loved  him, — "  If  there  be  therefore  any  consola- 
tion in  Christ,  if  there  be  any  comfort  of  love,  any 
fellowship  of  the  Spirit,  if  any  bowels  and  mercies," — he 
would  venture  to  seek  another  proof  of  it.  That  there 
was  all  this  abundantly  in  these  saints  he  did  not  doubt; 
they  had  just  shown  him  the  fruit  of  love  personally. 
Did  he  want  more  for  himself?  Far  from  it.  There 
was  another  way  which  would  best  prove  it  to  his 
heart;  it  was-  not  something  future  secured  to  Paul  in 
his  need,  which  would  be  the  way  of  nature,  not  of  love 
or  faith.  Not  so  :  Christ  is  always  better;  and  so  says 
he,  "  Fuliil  ye  my  joy,  that  ye  be  likeminded,  having 
the  same  love,  being  of  one  accord,  of  one  mind.  Let 
nothing  be  done  through  strife  or  vain-glory."  There 
is  always  danger  of  these,  and  the  more  so  where  there 
is  activity  among  souls.  There  was  evidently  energy 
among  these  Philippians.  This  commonly  is  apt  to 
give  occasion  for  strife  as  well  as  vain-glory.  No  saints 
are  outside  the  danger. 

Nothing,  then,  would  the  apostle  have  done  in  strife 
or  vain-glory ;  "  but  in  lowliness  of  mind  each  esteem- 
ing other  better  than  themselves."  Let  me  look  at 
another  as  he  is  in  Christ.  Let  me  think  of  myself 
as  one  that  is  serving  Him  (oh,  how  feebly  and  fail- 
ingly !)  in  this  relationship,  and  it  is  an  easy  thing  to 


254  INTRODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

esteem  others  better  than  myself.  It  is  not  sentiment, 
but  a  genuine  feeling,  thus  "looking  not  each  at  his 
own  things,  but  each  also  at  the  things  of  others." 
Now  the  saint  that  has  Christ  Himself  before  him  looks 
abroad  with  desires  according  to  the  activity  of  divine 
love. 

"  Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which  was  also  in  Christ 
Jesus:  who,  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it 
not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God :  but  made  himself 
of  no  reputation,  and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a 
servant,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men:  and 
being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself." 
There  are  two  chief  stages  of  His  humiliation  flowing 
out  of  His  perfect  love.  Eirst  of  all  He  emptied  Him- 
self, becoming  a  slave  and  a  man;  and  having  thus 
come  down,  so  as  to  take  His  place  in  the  likeness  of 
men,  He,  found  in  figure  as  a  man,  humbled  Himself, 
becoming  obedient  even  to  the  lowest  point  of  degra- 
dation here  below.  He  "  became  obedient  unto  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross.  Wherefore  God  also  hath 
highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which  is 
above  every  name :  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every 
knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in 
earth,  and  things  under  the  earth;  and  that  every  tongue 
shoidd  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of 
God  the  Father." 

It  will  be  observed  that  there  is  no  such  thing  in  the 
first  instance  as  "to  the  glory  of  God,"  when  we  hear 
of  all  bowing  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  To  the  confession 
of  His  Lordship,  is  added  "  to  the  glory  of  God  the 
Father."  The  reason  is,  in  my  judgment,  perfectly  beau- 
tiful "Jesus"  is  His  own  name.  His  personal  name. 
Jesus  is  Jehovah,  although  a  man;  consequently  the 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  255 

bowing  in  that  name  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father 
does  not  occur  to  the  apostle.  Why,  then,  is  it  so  in 
the  next  instance  ?  Because  he  looks  at  Jesus,  not  in 
His  own  personal  right  and  glory,  where  necessarily  all 
must  bow,  but  rather  at  Him  in  His  official  place  as 
Lord — the  place  He  has  righteously  acquired  as  man. 
This  is  wholly  distinct  from  His  own  intrinsic  eternal 
glory.  He  was  made  Lord  and  Christ.  The  moment 
you  look  at  what  He  is  made,  then  it  is  to  the  glory  of 
Him  who  thus  exalted  Him.  It  was  God  the  Father 
that  made  Him  Lord  and  Christ,  but  God  the  Father 
never  made  Him  Jehovah.  He  was  Jehovah,  equal 
with  God  the  Father.  Impossible  that  He  could  be 
made  Jehovah.  Eeason  and  sense  are  out  of  the  ques- 
tion, though  reason  must  reject  a  creature's  becoming 
God.  Such  a  notion  is  unknown  to  scripture,  and 
revolting  to  the  spiritual  mind.  Hence  we  see  the 
great  importance  of  this  truth.  All  error  is  founded 
on  a  misuse  of  a  truth  against  the  truth.  The  only 
safeguard  of  the  saints,  of  those  that  love  the  truth  and 
Himself,  is  simple  subjection  to  the  word  of  God — to 
the  whole  truth  He  has  revealed  in  scripture. 

Evidently,  therefore,  two  glories  of  Jesus  are  referred 
to  here.  There  is  His  own  personal  glory;  and  this 
first.  The  other  is  what  suits  it,  but  a  conferred  posi- 
tion. If  Jehovah  so  served,  it  was  but  natural  that  He 
should  be  made  Lord  of  aU,  and  so  He  is.  It  was  due 
to  His  humiliation  and  obedience;  and  so  it  is  here 
treated. 

Thus,  in  both  parts  of  the  history  of  Christ,  pre- 
sented to  us  in  no  obscure  contrast  with  the  first 
Adam,  we  have  first  of  all  His  own  glory,  who  humbled 
Himself  to  become  a  servant.     The  very  fact,  or  way  of 


256  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

putting  it,  supposes  Him  to  be  a  divine  person.  Had 
He  not  been  God  in  His  own  being  and  title,  it  would 
have  been  no  humiliation  to  be  a  servant,  nor  could  it 
be  indeed  a  question  of  taking  such  a  place.  The  arch- 
angel is  at  best  but  a  servant ;  the  highest  creature,  far 
from  having  to  stoop  in  order  to  become  a  servant,  can 
never  rise  above  that  condition.  Jesus  had  to  empty 
Himself  to  become  a  servant.  He  is  God  equally  with 
the  Father.  But  having  deigned  to  become  a  servant, 
He  goes  down  lower  still.  He  must  retrieve  the  glory 
of  God  in  that  very  death  which  confessedly  had  brought 
the  greatest  shame  on  God  outwardly.  For  God  had 
made  the  world  full  of  life ;  He  "  saw  every  thing  that 
He  had  made,  and,  behold,  it  was  very  good,"  and  Satan 
apparently  won  the  victory  over  Him  in  it.  Ail  here 
below  was  plunged  under  the  sentence  of  death  through 
Adam's  sin;  and  God's  word  could  but  seal  it  tiU 
redemption. 

The  Lord  Jesus  not  only  comes  down  into  the  place 
of  servant  in  love  among  men,  but  goes  down  into  the 
last  fortress  of  the  enemy's  power.  He  breaks  it  com- 
pletely, becomes  conqueror  for  ever,  wins  the  title  for 
God's  grace  to  deliver  righteously  every  creature,  save 
only  those  who,  far  from  receiving  Christ,  dare  to  re- 
ject Him  because  of  that  very  nature  which  He  took 
on  Him,  and  that  infinite  work  on  the  cross  which  had 
caused  Him  suffering  to  the  utmost  in  working  all  out  for 
the  glory  of  God.  Oh,  is  it  not  awful  to  think,  that  the 
best  proof  of  the  love  of  Christ  and  of  His  glory  is  the 
very  ground  which  the  base  heart  of  man  turns  into  a 
reason  for  denying  both  His  love  and  His  glory?  But  so 
it  is ;  and  thus  the  food  of  faith  becomes  the  poison  of 
unbelief  But  the  day  is  coming  when  "every  knee  shall 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  257 

bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and 
things  under  the  earth."  Not  that  all  shall  be  de- 
livered and  centred  in  Him,  but  that  all  must  bow. 
All  who  believe  shall  surely  shine  in  His  glory;  and 
the  universal  creation,  which,  belonging  to  Him  as  His 
inheritance,  He  will  share  with  His  own,  shall  be  re- 
conciled and  delivered  in  due  time.  But  there  are  the 
things,  or  if  you  will,  the  persons  under  the  earth  which 
can  never  be  delivered.  Yet  these  shall  bow,  no  less 
than  those  in  heaven,  or  on  earth.  In  His  name  all 
must  bow.  Thus  the  difference  between  reconciliation 
and  subjection  is  manifest.  The  lost  must  bow;  the 
devils  must  bow ;  the  lake  of  fire  must  own  the  glory 
of  Him  who  has  power  to  cast  them  there,  as  it  is  said, 
"  unto  the  glory  of  God  the  Father."  But  all  in  heaven 
and  on  earth  shall  be  in  reconciliation  with  God  and 
headed  up  in  Christ,  with  whom  the  Church  shall  share 
the  unbounded  inheritanca  (Compare  Eph.  i.  and  Col.  i.) 
But  all,  even  these  in  hell,  must  confess  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father. 

But  now  the'apostle  turns  to  the  use  that  he  makes, 
of  so  blessed  a  pattern,  "  Wherefore,  my  beloved,  as  ye 
have  always  obeyed,  not  as  in  my  presence  only,  but 
now  much  more  in  my  absence."  It  was  the  exact  re- 
verse in  good  of  what  the  Galatians  were  in  evU,  for 
they  had  been  cordial  and  bright  when  the  apostle  was 
with  them;  but  directly  his  back  was  turned,  their  hearts 
were  "alienated.  Even  he  who  knew  them  well  mar- 
velled that  they  were  so  soon  shifting,  not  only  from 
him,  but  from  the  gospel,  after  he  left  them.  But  with 
the  Philippians  there  was  increased  jealousy  for  Christ. 
They  were  more  obedient  in  his  absence  than  in  his 


258  INTEODUCTOBT  LECTUEES. 

presence.  Hence  he  calls  upon  them,  as  one  that  could 
not  be  with  them  to  help  them  in  the  conflict,  to  work 
out  their  own  salvation.  Such  is  the  force  of  the  ex- 
hortation. This  epistle  is  therefore  eminently  instruc- 
tive to  those  who  could  not  have  an  apostle  with  them. 
God  was  pleased,  even  whilst  the  apostle  was  alive,  to 
set  him  aside  and  to  prove  the  power  of  faith  where  he 
was  not. 

Hence  he  says,  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with 
fear  and  trembling."  It  is  not  the  dread  of  losing 
the  Saviour  of  their  souls,  but  because  they  felt  for  His 
name ;  "  for  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you  both  to 
will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure."  Therefore  he 
in  treated  them  to  "do  all  things  without  murmurings 
and  reasonings,  that  they  might  be  blameless  and  harm- 
less, the  sons  of  God,  without  rebxike,  in  the  midst  of  a 
crooked  and  perverse  nation,  among  whom  they  shone 
as  lights  in  the  world ;  holding  forth  the  word  of  Mfe." 
It  is  a  description  that  might  almost  do  for  Christ 
himself,  so  high  is  the  standard  for  those  that  belong 
to  Christ.  Christ  was  surely  blameless  in  the  highest 
sense,  as  His  ways  were  harmless, — *holy,  harmless, 
undefiled,"  as  it  is  said  elsewhere.  Christ  was  Son  of 
God  in  a  sole  and  supreme  sense.  Christ  was  "without 
rebuke,  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  nation." 
Christ  shone  as  the  true  light  in  the  world — the  light 
of  life.  Christ  held  it  forth ;  nay,  more,  He  was  it.  For 
what  believer  would  deny  that,  however  close  the  con- 
formity, there  is  always  that  dignity  and  perfection 
which  is  proper  to  Christ,  and  exclusively  His?  Let 
us  uphold  the  glory  of  His  person,  but,  nevertheless, 
let  us  not  forget  how  the  apostle's  picture  of  the 
saint   resembles   the   Master!     like  another  apostle 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS,  259 

(2  Jolin  8)  he  does  not  hesitate  to  blend  with  all  this 
an  appeal  to  their  hearts  for  his  own  service  in  their 
well-being. 

"That"  (says  he,  after  he  had  exhorted  the  Philip- 
pians  thus  to  stand,)  "I  may  rejoice  in  the  day  of 
Christ,  that  I  have  not  run  in  vain,  neither  laboured 
in  vain.  Yea,  and  if  I  be  offered  upon  the  sacrifice 
and  service  of  your  faith."  How  truly  he  accounted 
himself  less  than  the  least  of  them!  How  gladly 
would  he  be  a  libation  upon  the  sacrifice  of  their 
faith  !  He  esteemed  men  better  than  himself.  He  too 
in  love  stiU  keeps  up  the  servant -character,  and  gives 
them  as  it  were  the  Christ -character.  This  is  the  un- 
failing secret  of  it  all — the  true  source  of  humility  in 
service.  "For  the  same  cause  also  do  ye  joy  and  rejoice 
with  me.  But  I  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  to  send  Timo- 
theus  shortly  unto  you,  that  I  also  may  be  of  good 
comfort,  when  I  know  your  state." 

And  now  there  is  the  most  lovely  picture  of  Christ 
again;  for  it  is  always  Christ  here,  and  this  again 
practically.  Timothy  was  very  dear  to  him,  and  was 
then  with  him;  but  he  is  going  to  part  with  the  one 
that  was  so  much  the  more  valued  by  him  in  his 
solitariness  and  sorrow  because  of  his  circumstances  at 
Eome.  Indeed  he  esteemed  others  better  than  himself 
He  is  just  about  to  send  Timothy  from  himself  that 
he  might  know  about  them.  "Por  I  have  no  man 
likeminded,  who  will  naturally  care  for  your  state." 
Timothy  shared  the  unselfishness  of  the  apostle's  heart. 
"For  they  aU  seek  their  own."  It  might  have  been  thought 
that  so  much  the  more  would  Paul  need  his  love  and 
services.    Whatever  he  needed,  love  is  never  itself  but 

s  2 


260  INTEODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

in  Tinselfisli  action  and  suffering.  I  speak  of  Christian 
love,  of  course.  "  For  all  seek  their  own,  not  the  things 
■which  are  Jesus  Christ's.  But  ye  know  the  proof  of 
him,  that,  as  a  son  with  the  father,  he  hath  served  with 
me  in  the  gospel.  Him  therefore  I  hope  to  send  pre- 
sently, so  soon  as  I  shall  see  how  it  will  go  with  me. 
But  I  trust  in  the  Lord  that  I  also  myself  shall  come 
shortly.  Yet  I  supposed  it  necessary  to  send  to  you 
Epaphroditus,  my  brother,  and  companion  in  labour, 
and  fellow- soldier,  but  your  messenger,  and  he  that 
ministered  to  my  wants." 

He  loves,  we  see,  to  couple  with  the  relationship  to 
himself  what  was  related  to  them.  Epaphroditus  was 
his  feUow- servant,  and  indeed  more  than  that — "my 
brother,  and  companion  in  labour,  and  fellow- soldier, 
but  your  messenger,  and  he  that  ministered  to  my  wants. 
For  he  longed  after  you  all,  and  was  fuU  of  heaviness." 
"Why?  because  he  himself  had  been  sick?  N"o;  but 
"because  that  ye  had  heard  that  he  had  been  sick." 
How  lovely  that  this  it  was  that  pained  him — ^unselfish 
love !  the  love  of  Christ  everywhere !  "  For  indeed  he 
was  sick  nigh  unto  death:  but  God  had  mercy  on  him." 
"Was  this  all  the  apostle  had  to  say?  Not  so.  "And 
not  on  him  only,  but  on  me  also,"  (what  a  difference 
is  made  when  love  interprets!)  "lest  I  should  have 
sorrow  upon  sorrow.  I  sent  him  therefore  the  more 
carefully,  that,  when  ye  see  him  again,  ye  may  rejoice, 
and  that  I  may  be  [not  rejoicing  here,  but]  the  less 
sorrowful"  He  did  feel  it.  Love  feels  acutely — nothing 
so  much ;  but  it  triumphs.  "  Eeceive  him  therefore  in 
the  Lord  with  aU  gladness;  and  hold  such  in  repu- 
tation" (he  would  turn  it  again  to  practical  profit  as  to 
others) :  "  because  for  the  work  of  Christ  he  was  nigh 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   PHILIPPIANS.  261 

unto  death,  not  regarding  his  life,  to  supply  your  lack 
of  service  toward  me." 

This  chapter  then  looks  for  the  working  of  the 
gracious  feelings  of  Christ  Himself  in  the  Christian 
individually,  showing  us,  first,  the  fulness  of  them  all  in 
Christ  in  contrast  with  the  first  Adam.  But  it  gives 
us  also  the  effect  of  Christ  in  the  saints  eventually — of 
Paul  himself,  of  Timothy,  of  Epaphroditus,  and  indeed 
of  the  Philippian  saints.  It  shows  us  grace  practically 
in  different  measures  and  forms.  But  the  grace  of  Christ 
wrought  in  them  all;  and  that  was  the  great  joy  and 
delight  of  the  apostle's  heart. 

In  chapter  iii.  it  is  not  the  display  of  intrinsic  affec- 
tion in  Christ,  or  the  gracious  dispositions  of  Christ  in 
the  saints.  Not  the  passive  side  of  the  Christian  as  being 
in  the  world,  but  the  active  comes  before  us.  Accord- 
ingly, this  being  not  so  directly  the  subject  of  the  epistle 
though  a  very  important  part  of  it,  it  comes  in  paren- 
thetically in  a  large  measure,  not  now  in  any  wise  as 
a  question  of  truth  or  development  of  the  mystery  of 
Christ,  as  we  saw  in  Ephesians  iii.,  but,  nevertheless,  as 
a  parenthesis;  for  he  resumes  afterwards  the  internal 
side  again,  as  we  shall  see  in  chapter  iv.  Energy  is  not 
the  best  or  highest  aspect  of  Christianity.  There  is  real 
power,  there  is  strength  from  God  that  works  in  the 
saint;  but  the  feelings  of  Christ,  the  mind  of  Christ 
morally,  is  better  than  all  energy.  Nevertheless,  energy 
there  is,  and  this  assuredly  judges  what  is  contrary 
to  Christ. 

Here,  accordingly,  it  is  not  the  outgoings  of  love,  but 
the  zeal  that  burns  indignantly  as  to  what  dishonours 
the  Lord.     This  is  one  of  the  main  features  of  our 


262  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEBS. 

chapter.  "Finally,"  says  he,  "my  brethren,  rejoice  in 
the  Lord.  To  write  the  same  things  to  you,  to  me 
indeed  is  not  grievous,  but  for  you  it  is  safe.  Beware 
of  dogs."  In  Matthew  xxiii.  we  have  woe  upon  woe 
pronounced  upon  scribes  and  Pharisees,  and  so  it  is  here. 
As  it  was  a  true  though  distressing  part  for  Christ  to 
judge  religious  evil,  something  akin  could  not  be  absent 
here;  but  at  the  same  time  it  was  by  no  means  a 
prominent  characteristic  of  Christ's  task  here  below — 
far  from  it.  It  was  a-  necessary  duty  sometimes  as 
things  are  on  the  earth,  but  nothing  more ;  and  so  it  is 
stni.  "Beware  of  evil  workers;  beware  of  the  con- 
cision." 

"For  we  are  the  circumcision,  which  worship  God 
in  the  spirit,  and  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no 
confidence  in  the  iiesh."  This  is  the  only  allusion,  as 
far  as  I  know,  to  flesh  in  this  epistle,  but  it  is  flesh  ia 
its  religious  form,  and  not  as  a  source  of  evil  lusts  and 
passions.  It  is  all  judged,  and  its  religious  form  not 
least,  by  Christ.  "  Though,"  says  he, "  I  might  also  have 
confidence  in  the  flesh.  If  any  other" — carrying  on  the 
same  thought  of  the  flesh — "  if  any  other  man  thinketh 
that  he  hath  matter  of  trust  in  the  flesh,  I  more.  Cir- 
cumcised the  eighth  day,  of  the  stock  of  Israel,  of 
the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews ; 
as  touching  the  law,  a  Pharisee;  concerning  zeal,  per- 
secuting the  church;  touching  the  righteousness  which 
is  in  the  law,  blameless."  And  what  did  the  apostle 
do  with  all  this  roU  of  fleshly  advantages  ?  It  was 
seen  laid  in  the  grave  of  Christ.  "  What  things  were 
gain  to  me,  those  I  counted  loss  for  Christ."  WUl  it  be 
said  that  this  is  what  the  apostle  felt,  and  did,  and  suf- 
fered in  the  freshness  of  his  first  acquaintance  with 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   PHILIPPUNS.  263 

Christ  ?  It  was  also  what  he  carried  up  to  the  moment 
of  writing  to  the  Philippians  as  ardently  as  ever. 
"  Yea/'  said  he,  "  and  I  count  all  things  but  loss."  It  is 
not  only  his  reckoning  in  the  first  fervour  of  love  for 
the  Saviour.  "Yea  doubtless,  and  I  count  aU  things 
but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
Jesus  my  Lord." 

Such  experience  is  both  a  real  and  a  precious  boon. 
Let  us  not  mistake  in  this ;  let  us  not  be  driven  from 
it  by  a  too  common  misuse.  That  which  men  call  by 
this  name  is  really  the  trial  of  what  flesh  is  under  law 
much  more  than  experience  of  Christ.  But  let  us  not 
be  turned  aside,  and  think  that  it  is  merely  a  question 
of  believing  and  of  knowing  our  place  secure ;  but  let 
us  live  of  that  very  Christ  who  is  our  life.  This  is 
what  he  did,  and  accordingly  this  is  the  source,  not 
merely  of  a  firm  faith  and  confidence  as  to  the  issue, 
but  of  present  joy  and  all-overcoming  power.  This  is 
what  gives  force  to  our  affections,  and  rivets  them  on 
Christ.  This  is,  accordingly,  what  flows  forth  in  praise 
from  himself,  and  in  calling  out  praise  from  other  hearts. 
So  he  says  here,  "  For  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord :  for  whom  I  have  suffered  the 
loss  of  all  things,  and  do  count  them  but  dung."  Thus 
the  two  things  are  repeated— the  past  judgment  and  the 
present  power :  "  and  do  count  them  but  dung,  that  I 
may  win  Christ."  This  will  be,  no  doubt,  at  the  end  of 
the  journey:  the  faithful  win  Christ  where  He  is.  For 
it  is  not  meant  looking  to  Him  now,  or  having  Him  as 
one's  life:  to  win  Christ  means  having  Him  at  the  other 
side.     He  always  looks  there  in  Philippians. 

It  is  not  at  all  a  question  of  what  one  has  here.  This 
has  its  most  weighty  place  elsewhere;  but  when  it  is  a 


264  IKTEODUCTOET  LECTURES. 

question  of  experience,  the  end  cannot  be  here.  There 
is  the  present  joy  of  Christ;  but  this  does  not  content 
the  soul.  The  more  one  enjoys  Christ  here,  the  more 
one  wants  to  be  with  Him  there.  "  That  I  may  win 
Christ,"  therefore  he  says ;  "  and  be  found  in  him,  not 
having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law." 
This  was  precisely  what  he  desired  when  a  Jew.  Now, 
having  seen  Christ,  if  he  could  even  bring  his  own 
righteousness  into  heaven,  he  would  not.  It  would  be 
mere  independence  of  Christ  if  he  could  have  stood 
without  a  single  flaw,  as  blameless,  in  fact,  as  in  a 
certain  sense  outwardly  he  was  under  the  law,  until 
the  Spirit  of  God  gave  him  to  see  what  he  was  in 
God's  mind.  Then  he  found  himself  a  dead  man — 
condemned  and  powerless.  But  supposing  it  possible 
to  be  clothed  with  the  righteousness  of  the  law,  he 
would  not  have  it  now.  He  had  got  a  better  righteous- 
ness, and  he  desired  nothing  so  much  as  to  be  found  in 
Christ,  having  that  which  is  through  faith  of  Christ, 
the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith.  Nothing 
but  the  righteousness  that  was  of  God  as  its  source 
satisfied  him.  It  is  the  only  place  in  Scripture  where 
the  phrase  means,  not  simply  the  righteousness  of  God 
in  point  of  character,  but  the  righteousness  of  God  in 
point  of  source.  Such  is  the  meaning  here.  Elsewhere 
it  is  God's  or  divine  righteousness.  Here  the  object 
seems  to  be  to  make  its  difference  from  legal  obedience 
more  felt — the  contrast  with  the  law  more  complete. 

"  That  I  may  know  him."  Now  here  we  have  what  is 
present;  so  that  the  passage  presents  some  difficulty  to 
souls  because  of  intermingling  the  present  with  the 
future.  Thus  easily  do  we  fall  into  error,  because  the 
human  mind  likes  to  have  either  one  thing  or  another, 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   PHILIPPIANS.  265 

and  thus  avoid  all  difficulty  in  Scripture,  having  each 
squared  according  to  our  notions.  But  it  is  not  so  that 
God  has  written  His  word.  Nevertheless,  God  will 
surely  teach  His  own,  and  knows  how  to  clear  up  what 
is  hidden  from  them.  He  has  written  His  word  not  to 
perplex,  but  to  enlighten.  Thus  the  true  bearing  of 
the  passage  is,  that  from  the  iirst  the  eye  of  faith  is 
fixed  steadily  on  the  end  of  the  journey.  "That  I  may 
win  Christ,  and  be  found  in  him" — where  not  a  vestige 
of  self  remains,  but  all  will  be  Christ,  and  nothing  but 
Christ.  This  is  the  righteousness  whose  source  is 
in  God;  it  is  also  by  faith  of  Christ,  and  not  through 
the  law,  which,  of  course,  would  have  man's  righteous- 
ness if  it  could. 

But  now  he  adds,  "That  I  may  know  him"  (speaking 
of  entrance  by  faith  into  communion  with  Christ) — 
"that  I  may  know  him,  and  the  power  of  his  resur- 
rection." This  is  open  to  the  heart  now.  "And  the 
fellowship  of  his  sufferings" — again  and  certainly  a 
present  thing,  not  relating  to  heaven.  "Being  made 
conformable  to  his  death:" — this  too  is  clearly  in  the 
world  now.  "  If  by  any  means  I  might  attain  unto  the 
resurrection  from  the  dead."*    Clearly  we  here  look  out 

*  There  is  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  received  text  is  wrong, 
followed  by  the  Authorised  Version  ("of,"  instead  of  "from"  the 
dead).  The  Alexandrian,  Vatican,  Sinai,  Clermont,  and  St.  Germain 
Uncials,  supported  by  some  ten  cursives,  very  many  versions,  and  the 
chief  Greek  and  Latin  ecclesiastical  writers  read  ti^v  iKavaaraaiv 
Trjv  h  viKpS>v.  Codd.  F  and  G,  by  manifest  error,  read  twv  Ik,  and 
this  seems  to  have  been  corrected  (or  rather  corrupted)  in  order  to 
make  sense  into  tUv  (omitting  ik)  in  K  and  L  and  the  mass  of  cur- 
sives. But  in  my  opinion  the  sense,  and  even  the  Greek,  seems  bad ; 
for  on  the  one  hand  both  ItavaaTaaiv  and  the  drift  of  the  argument 
point  to  a  resurrection  of  favour  and  blessedness,  not  to  that  in  which 
the  unjust  must  rise  to  judgment;  while  on  the  other  hand  tuv 
vtx^dv  would  imply  the  dead,  i.e.  aU  the  dead,  as  a  class.    Hence  I 


266  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

of  the  world  and  into  a  state  to  come,  when  we  have 
the  consummation  of  our  hopes  and  the  end  of  the 
journey.  This  is  what  he  calls  "  salvation."  It  cannot 
be  tUl  the  Christ  is  risen  according  to  the  pattern  of 
Christ  Himself. 
Thus  we  see  here  the  power  of  a  risen  and  a  heavenly 

cannot  tut  consider  it  a  surprising  error  in  Grrieabach  that  lie  edited 
tlie  received  text  in  this  place.  Alter  and  Matthaei  followed  according 
to  their  plan  the  manuscripts  before  them;  but  the  latter  was  too 
good  a  scholeir  not  to  feel  the  difference,  though  he  appears  to  impute 
it  to  a  corrector  for  the  sake  of  elegance  in  his  second  edition.  Long 
before  them,  Mill  had  given  his  judgment  in  favour  of  the  more  ancient 
reading ;  and  Wetsteiu  repeated  it  apparently  -with  approval.  Bengel 
hesitated ;  but  Dr.  Wells  in  this,  as  in  many  other  instances,  showed 
his  sound  judgment  and  quiet  courage  in  rejecting  the  common  text, 
and  adopting  that  which  has  by  far  the  best  authorities. 

Dr.  S.  T.  Bloomfield  indeed  (Addit.  Annotations  in  loo.)  admits 
that  the  external  testimony  is  quite  in  its  favour,  though  it  is  hard  to 
see  what  he  means  by  the  internal  evidence  being  in  this  case  denied ; 
for  he  suggests  himself  that  r-qv  Ik  may  have  been  a  oorreotion  pro- 
ceeding from  those  who  thought  that  the  sense  which  the  context 
requires,  "the  resurrection  from  the  dead,"  could  not  be  extracted 
from  i%av.  tS>v  vtKpiov.  The  critical  reading  he  owns  has  force  and 
propriety;  but  he  does  "not  see  why  e^nvanT.  tSiv  viKpdv  should  not 
of  itself  have  the  same  sense  as  that  conveyed,  with  more  propriety  of 
expression  (and  for  that  reason  likely  to  be  adopted  in  the  early 
Uncial  MSS.),  i^av.  rfiv  in  viKpSiv.  Little  probable  is  it  that  the 
reading,  itavaaT.  ti]V  Ik  tmv  vtKpSiv  should  have  been  altered  to  15 
tC!>v  vtxp.  There  is  great  reason  to  think  that  the  Ik  arose  from 
those  who  thought  it  necessary  to  the  sense,  and  did  not  see  that  it 
could  be  fetched  from  the  e?  in  IKavaar.  Hence  I  am  inclined  to  retain 
k^av.  Twv  vcKft.  as  a,  popular  and  familiar  mode  of  expression  (suitable 
to  the  persons  addressed),  according  to  which  the  expressions  tig  tijv 
i^av.  T&v  advert — as  at  Eom.  iv.  16,  and  elsewhere — to  the  state  of 
the  persons  in  question,  that  state  or  kind  of  resurrection  unto  life  of 
those  who  have  died  in  the  Lord,  and  whose  resurrection  will  be  a 
resurrection  unto  life  and  glory,  their  bodies  being  raised  incorruptible, 
and  both  body  and  soul  united  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  See  1  Thess. 
iv.  6-18." 

I  have  transcribed  this  note  at  length,  because  it  is  a  fair  sample 
of  Dr.  B.'s  critical,  scholastic,  and  exegetic  manner.    Enough  has 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIiNS.  267 

Christ,  not  now  treated  doctrinally  as  in  1  Corinthians 
XV.  or  2  Corinthians  v.  and  elsewhere,  but  as  that  which 
bears  on  the  Christian  for  the  constant  experience  of 
every  day.  Hence  that  which  judged  and  put  aside 
religion  after  the  flesh,  righteousness  after  the  law,  all 
that  was  now  left  completely  and  for  ever  behind,  and 

teen  already  said  atove,  'before  I  even  knew  of  his  reasoning,  to 
prove  how  unfounded  it  is  in  every  point  of  view.  The  internal 
evidence  {i.e.  the  scope  of  the  context)  is  as  decidedly  for  Tr)v  Ik  as  the 
weightiest  external  witnesses.  How  the  text  got  gradually  changed 
from  the  most  correct  form  {not  correction)  in  the  early  Uncials  has 
heen  explained.  "When  the  distinction  of  the  resurrection  of  the  just 
from  that  of  the  unjust  got  lost  in  Christendom,  and  all  were  merged 
in  the  error  of  one  general  indiscriminate  resurrection,  one  can 
understand  that  people  would  not  feel  the  impropriety  of  suhstituting 
Taiv  for  rjjv  £K  (for  as  to  Tijv  Ik  tuiv,  of  which  Dr.  B.  speaks,  it  exists 
in  no  document  whatever).  There  is  therefore  not  the  slightest  ground 
to  countenance  the  rather  dangerous  idea,  that  the  apostle  did  not 
employ  a,  phrase  analogous  to  the  correct  one  which  is  found  else- 
where in  the  New  Testament,  and  adopted  "  a  popular  and  familiar 
mode  of  expression,"  i.e.  a  really  inaccurate  mode.  And  why  should 
our  Lord  adopt  a  correct  form  to  the  Sadduoees  (Luke  xx.  repeated  in 
Acts  iv.),  and  Paul  an  incorrect  one  to  the  Philippians  ?  Who  can 
understand  why  it  should  he  "  suitahle  to  the  persons  addressed,"  on 
Dr.  B's  showing  ?  Of  the  two,  the  converse  would  be  more  intelli- 
gible; hut  my  conviction  is  that  both  the  Lord  and  His  apostle 
used  similar  and  correct  phraseology,  as  did  the  Holy  Spirit  elsewhere. 
And  as  to  Eom.  iv.  17  (which  was  probably  meant  rather  than  16), 
it  has  no  bearing  on  the  matter,  as  it  is  there  merely  a  question  of 
God's  power  displayed  in  quickening  the  dead,  and  calling  things  that 
are  not  in  being  as  in  being,  and  in  no  way  distinguishing  the  resur- 
recti^  of  life  from  that  of  judgment.  When  the  state  or  kind  of 
resurrection  is  meant  to  he  expressed,  the  anarthrous  form  is  requisite, 
as  we  see  in  verse  24  of  this  very  chapter,  and  regularly  so.  (See  Eom. 
i.  4.)  I  believe,  therefore,  that  iKavdaraaiv,  especially  if  ix  be  sup- 
posed to  be  fetched  (as  Dr.  B.  says)  from  i^avdar,  is  incompatible 
with  rCiv  vcKpHv,  the  one  conveying  the  notion  of  a  selected  com- 
pany, and  the  other  of  the  dead  universally.  Modem  editors  of  value, 
however  differing  in  their  system  of  recension  agree  in  the  ancient 
as  against  the  received  reading;  so  Scholz,  Lachmann,  Tischendorf, 
Ellicott,  Alford,  Tregelles,  Wordsworth,  &c. 


268  INTRODUCTOEY  LECTURES, 

the  saint  is  set  on  the  road  that  nothing  can  satisfy 
him  but  being  in  the  same  glorious  condition  with  Christ 
Himself.  Hence  he  says,  "  Not  as  though  I  had  already 
attained,  either  were  already  perfect ;  but  I  follow  after, 
if  that  I  may  apprehend  that  for  which  also  I  am 
apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus.  Brethren,  I  count  not 
myself  to  have  apprehended :  but  this  one  thing  I  do, 
forgetting  those  things  which  are  behind."  This,  care- 
fully remember,  does  not  mean  forgetting  sins.  Far 
from  losing  sight  of  our  past  ways,  it  is  a  very  whole- 
some thing  indeed  to  remember  them:  we  are  never 
safe  in  forgetting  what  we  are  and  have  been.  What 
he  means  by  forgetting  the  things  that  are  behind  is, 
that  we  should  not  think  of  any  progress  we  may  have 
made  in  following  Christ, — that  we  should  lose  sight  of 
everything  calculated  to  give  us  self-satisfaction.  This 
were  to  spoil  all,  because  it  would  please  the  flesh. 

It  is  our  progress  then  that  we  are  to  forget.  Let  us  be 
humbled  on  account  of  our  sins.  Self-judgment,  where 
grace  is  known,  is  a  most  wholesome  exercise  of  soul ; 
and  we  shall  have  it  in  perfection  even  in  heaven  itself 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.  One  of  the  elements 
of  heavenly  happiness  will  be  the  calm  and  settled 
knowledge  of  all  that  we  have  been  here  below.  This 
will  not  detract  for  an  instant  from  the  perfect  enjoy- 
ment of  Christ,  but  rather  promote  it  so  much  the  more, 
making  it  more  evidently  and  always  pure  grace  3ven 
in  glory.  Thus  "forgetting  those  things  which  are 
behind  "  refers  to  the  progress  that  we  may  make.  True 
experience  is  still  the  great  theme  which  the  apostle 
has  in  hand  here  as  well  as  in  his  own  personal  history. 
He  was  too  much  bent  on  what  was  before  to  be 
occupied  with  calling  to  mind  what  was  behind  him; 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   PHILIPPIAITS.  269 

it  must  have  impeded  hira  in  the  race.  "  Let  us  there- 
fore, as  many  as  be  perfect,  he  thus  minded :  and  if  in 
any  thing  ye  he  otherwise  [i.  e.  differently]  minded,  this 
also  will  God  reveal  to  you."  Differences  there  may 
be  among  the  saints,  and  especially  when  we  come 
to  the  question  of  experience.  But  in  truth  it  may 
betray  itself  in  doctrine  and  practice  in  various  shapes. 

And  what  is  the  true  divine  rule  1  Is  it  agreeing  to 
differ?  This  is  but  a  poor  human  resource,  as  un- 
worthy of  the  saints  as  of  the  truth  of  God,  who  would 
not  have  us  to  wink  at  any  mistake.  It  is  no  rule,  but 
an  evasion.  There  is,  however,  a  sure  and  only  divine 
standard:  as  far  as  we  have  attained,  our  call  is  to 
walk  in  the  same  path.  And  this  is  true  from  the  first 
moment  of  our  career  as  God's  children.  For,  let  me 
ask,  what  is  our  title  to  communion  1  What  is  it  that 
brings  us  into  the  blessed  fellowship  that  we  enjoy? 
There  is  but  one  title,  there  can  be  no  sufficient  ground 
but  the  name  of  Christ — Christ  known  and  confessed 
in  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  where  He  is  simply  before  us, 
the  progress  is  most  real,  if  not  always  easy  and  sensible. 
It  is  not  meant  that  there  are  no  difficulties,  but  that 
Christ  makes  the  burden  light  and  all  happy  to  the 
praise  of  God's  grace ;  whereas  any  other  means  or 
measure  detracts  from  His  glory  and  draws  attention 
to  self. 

Supposing,  for  instance,  we  mingle  with  Christ  know- 
ledge or  intelligence  about  this  truth  or  that  practice, 
does  it  not  give  a  necessary  prominence  to  certain  dis- 
tinctive points,  which  so  far  must  make  Christ  of  less 
account?  Even,  therefore,  if  you  could  have  (what  is 
impossible)  ever  so  much  real  spiritual  knowledge 
along  with  Christ,  who  would  so  much  as  notice  these 


270  INTEODUCTOBY  LECTURES. 

acquisitions  in  comparison  with  Christ?  Let  us  merely 
take  up  a  single  point  of  the  primary  ground  of  fitness 
for  fellowship,  which  is  often  a  difficulty  with  the 
saints.  Yet  the  truth  as  to  this  abides,  not  only  at 
the  starting-point,  but  all  the  way  through.  What  is 
there  that  you  can  rightly  plead  but  Christ's  own 
name  ?  And  this  ground  is  one  which  always  brings  in 
the  strength  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  it  is  based  on  God's 
mighty  work  of  redemption.  If  right  here,  we  are  at 
one,  so  to  speak,  with  His  present  purposes.  What  is 
the  Spirit  now  doing?  He  is  exalting  Christ.  It  is 
not  merely  exalting  His  work,  or  His  cross ;  it  is  not 
so  much  His  blood,  as  Christ  Himself.  The  name  of 
Christ  Himself  is  the  true  centre  of  the  saints ;  unto 
this  the  Spirit  gathers.  As  he  had  said  elsewhere 
before,  so  he  says  here,  "Be  followers  together  of  me, 
and  mark  them  which  walk  so  as  ye  have  us  for  an  en- 
sample.  For  many  walk,  of  whom  I  have  told  you 
often,  and  now  tell  you  even  weeping,  that  they  are  the 
enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ."  Thus,  as  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  chapter,  there  was  the  energy  that  went 
out  against  the  evil  workers,  with  a  religious  mind 
after  the  flesh,  so  now  there  is  the  energy  that  bursts 
forth  against  those  that  were  misusing  Christianity, 
making  it  an  earthly  system,  setting  their  mind  on 
things  here  below,  under  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus ; 
and  between  the  two,  is  set  forth  the  positiveuess,  if 
one  may  so  speak,  of  Christ  Himself. 

It  is  plain,  then,  that  in  PhUippians  ii  the  great 
spring  of  power  is  the  love  and  the  glory  of  Him  who 
came  down;  who,  even  when  He  did  so  come,  went 
down  still  lower,  where  none  could  accompany  Him, 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE  PEILIPPIANS.  271 

Yet  we  may  follow,  and  seek  conformity  unto  His 
death;  but  there  was  that  in  His  death  on  the  cross 
which  could  he  His  alone. 

In  Philippians  iii.  there  is  no  coming  down  from 
glory  in  the  power  of  divine  love,  resulting  in  His  ex- 
altation by  and  for  the  glory  of  God  the  Father  after  a 
new  sort.  Here  we  see  One  who  is  in  glory,  and  on 
whom  the  eye  of  the  believer  is  set ;  and  accordingly 
the  judgment  of  evil  is  from  the  side  of  heaven.  The 
one  thing  that  suits  is  to  pursue  the  glory  before  him, 
till  he  is  in  the  same  glory  along  with  Christ.  This  is 
the  object  set  before  us  in  Philippians  iii.  The  one 
therefore,  I  say,  is  the  passive  side  of  the  Christian ; 
the  other  is  his  activity.  The  passive  shines  in  Christ 
coming  down ;  the  active  is  realized  by  the  eye  that  is 
fixed  on  Christ,  who  is  actually  in  glory.  This  sepa- 
rates from  all,  and  judges  the  best  of  man  to  be  dung, 
as  the  former  conforms  the  heart  after  His  love. 

The  last  chapter  is  founded  on  both.  The  apostle 
takes  up,  no  doubt,  the  sweet  affections  of  chapter  ii., 
but  then  they  are  strengthened  by  the  energy  that  Christ 
seen  in  glory  imparts,  as  in  chapter  iii.  Hence  he  thus 
opens,  "Therefore,  my  brethren  dearly  beloved  and 
longed  for,  my  joy  and  crown."  One  cannot  overlook 
the  amazing  strength  with  which  he  speaks  even  of  his 
affections.  "  My  joy  and  crown,"  "  my  dearly  beloved." 
Not  that  there  were  not  difficulties ;  there  were  many. 
"I  beseech  Evodia"  (we  may  just  notice  the  true  form 
in  passing ;  Euodias  sounds  like  a  man's  name,  whereas 
here  it  is  really  a  woman).  "I  beseech  Evodia,  and 
beseech  Syntyche,  that  they  be  of  the  same  mind  in  the 
Lord.  Yea  \not  and],  I  entreat  thee  also,  true  yokefellow, 


272  IKTBODUCTOKY  LECTUKES. 

help  those  women  which  labour  with  me."  According 
to  the  true  meaning  it  is  not  others,  but  those  very  sisters 
that  he  commends  to  Epaphroditus  in  desire  for  their 
blessing,  "which  labour  with  me  in  the  gospel  [or 
seeing  that  they  shared  the  conflict  of  the  gospel  with 
me]."  "Laboured"  gives  a  wrong  sense.  Many  hence  have 
wrongly  gathered  that  they  were  preachers.  There  is 
really  no  reason  to  supp'ose  that  they  preached  at  alL 
What  they  did  seems  a  much  more  proper  thing,  in  my 
judgment,  for  a  woman.  They  shared  the  conflict  of  the 
gospel;  they  partook  of  the  reproach  that  covered  those 
who  preached  it.  This  is  lost  in  the  idea  of  labouring 
in  it.  We  must  think  rather  of  the  conflict  of  the 
gospel :  there  was  often  for  all  concerned  disgrace,  and 
pain,  and  scorn. 

Let  nobody  suppose  me  to  insinuate  that  a  woman 
is  not  in  place  when  exercising,  according  to  the  Scrip- 
ture, any  gift  God  has  given  her.  Women  may  have 
gifts  as  well  as  men.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that, 
because  we  are  men,  we  monopolise  all  the  gifts  of 
Christ.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  walk  according  to  the 
place  which  God  has  given  us.  At  the  same  time,  God's 
word  is  to  me  plain  as  to  the  manner  in  which  the  gifts 
are  to  be  exercised.  And  is  there  not  evidently  a  path  of 
unobtrusiveness  (for  the  veil  or  sign  of  power  on  the  wo- 
man's head  is  no  vain  figure)  which  most  befits  a  woman  ? 
I  believe  that  a  woman  shines  most  where  she  does  not 
appear.  Hers  is  a  more  delicate  place  than  that  which 
becomes  the  man,  and  one  which  a  man  attempting  it 
would  awkwardly  fiU.  But  while  a  man  is  quite  unfit 
to  do  a  woman's  work,  can  it  be  doubted  that  a  woman 
brings  no  honour  to  herself,  or  to  the  Lord,  by  attempt- 
ing to  do  a  man's  task  ?    The  Lord  has  laid  down  their 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   PHILIPPIANS.  273 

places  respectively  with  distinctness.  It  is  ignorance  and 
absurdity  to  answer  such  scriptures  by  the  text,  that  in 
Christ  there  is  neither  male  nor  female.  We  do  not 
speak  of  standing  in  Christ  now,  but  of  their  allotted 
services.  In  this  we  hear  of  difference ;  and  scripture 
does  not  obliterate  but  contrariwise  asserts  it,  and  treats 
the  practical  denial  of  it  as  a  scandal  brought  in  by 
Corinthian  headiness.  No  doubt  the  new  creation  is 
essentially  neither  male  nor  female  ;  it  is  not  a  race  per- 
petuated in  a  fleshly  way ;  but  all  things  are  of  God 
and  in  Christ.  Notwithstanding,  it  has  been  already 
explained  that  the  man  has  a  relative  place  as  the 
image  and  glory  of  God,  being  set  in  a  remarkable 
position  between  God  and  the  woman  in  matters  of 
outward  decorum. 

Eeturning,  however,  to  the  women  Evodia  and  Syn- 
tyche,  they  had  devoted  themselves  to  an  exceedingly 
happy  and  prized  service.  They  joined  with  those 
who  preached  the  truth  and  partook  of  their  oblo- 
quy. They  helped  them,  and  in  that  sense  "  laboured  " 
if  you  will.  At  any  rate  they  endured  the  conflicts 
of  the  gospel  in  its  earlier  days  at  Philippi.  Why 
should  women  expose  themselves  ?  Why  go  in  the  way 
of  crowds  of  soldiers  or  civil  officers  ?  Why  should  such 
as  they  face  the  unmannerly  officials  that  took  advan- 
tage of  the  imperial  government  to  treat  with  injury 
those  identified  with  the  gospel?  Love  does  not  calcu- 
late these  costs  and  dangers,  but  goes  calmly  forward, 
come  what  will,  trouble,  scorn,  or  death.  No  wonder  the 
apostle  was  grieved  to  think  of  differences  among  such 
women  as  these.  "  Help  them  "  (says  he)  "  with  Clement 
also,  and  with  my  other  fellow-labourers,  whose  names 
are  in  the  book  of  life." 

T 


274  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

Finally,  lie  calls  them  again  to  rejoice,  and  now  with- 
more  emphasis  than  ever.  "Eejoice  in  the  Lord  alway." 
In  sorrow  1  Yes.  In  afHiction,  in  prison,  everywhere. 
"Eejoice  in  the  Lord  alway:  and  again  I  say,  Eejoice." 
He  did  not  make  a  mistake.  He  did  not  forget,  but 
meant  what  he  said.  "Again  I  say,  Eejoice."  Let  your 
moderation  go  along  with  it,  because  along  with  this 
joy  there  might  be  a  certain  enthusiastic  spirit  that 
would  hinder  calm  judgment.  But  this  is  not  the 
character  of  Christian  joy.  "  Let  your  moderation  be 
known  unto  all  men;"  that  is,  the  meekness  and  gentle- 
ness which  bends  to  the  blow,  instead  of  resisting  it 
in  the  spirit  that  ever  asserts  its  rights  and  lights  for 
them.  Have  rather  that  spirit  which  counts  nothing  as 
a  right  to  be  claimed,  but  all  one  has  as  gifts  of  grace 
to  be  freely  used  in  this  world,  because  one  has  Christ 
in  view.  "Let  your  moderation  be  known  unto  all 
men,"  strengthened  by  this  consolatory  truth, — "the 
Lord  is  at  hand." 

And  this  nearness  of  Christ  I  take  simply  to  be 
the  blessed  hope  here  made  a  practical  power.  It  is 
not  the  Lord  at  hand  to  succour  one  now  and  here'  from 
time  to  time.  No  one  denies  this,  which  is,  or  ought  to 
be,  no  new  thing  for  a  Christian.  He  means  the  Lord, 
really,  personally,  at  hand ;  as  he  had  said  in  the  end 
of  the  last  chapter,  that  this  was  what  we  look  for. 
"Our  conversation  is  in  heaven  ;  from  whence  we  wait 
for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  Saviour" — for  this  is  the 
true  meaning  of  it.  And  this  puts  the  doctrine,  as  far 
as  there  is  doctrine  in  the  epistle,  in  a  very  clear  light. 
There  is  no  looking  at  Him  as  Saviour  on  the  cross 
merely;  but  when  He  comes  for  us,  there  will  be  in  the 
final  sense  (as  ever  in  our  epistle)  "  salvation."  'Thus  he 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   PHILIPPIANS.  275 

anticipates  the  removal  of  the  last  trace  of  the  first 
Adam ;  he  looks  for  our  being  brought  fully,  even  as  to 
the  body,  into  the  likeness  of  the  Second  Man,  the  last 
Adam.  This  is  salvation  in  truth.  Hence  he  says,  "We 
look  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  Saviour :  who  shall 
change  our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like 
unto  his  glorious  body,  according  to  the  working  where- 
by he  is  able  to  subdue  all  things  unto  himself"  It 
does  not  matter  how  unlike  they  may  be,  or  how  op- 
posed; it  does  not  matter  what  vessels  of  shame  and 
misery  they  may  have  been  now;  "He  is  able  to  subdue 
all  things  unto  himself" 

Then,  as  to  our  practical  every- day  expectation,  "the 
Lord  is  at  hand."  And,  accordingly,  why  should  one 
be  a  prey  to  care,  if  this  be  really  so  ?  "  Be  anxious  [or 
be  careful]  for  nothing;  but  in  everything" — this  is  the 
resource — "in  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication, 
with  thanksgiving,  let  your  requests  be  made  known 
unto  God."  Better  not  make  them  known  to  men ;  it 
is  a  dangerous  snare.  By  aR  means  let  them  be  made 
known  unto  God.  There  is  something  which  ought  to 
be  made  known  unto  men,  namely,  the  not  fighting, 
for  your  rights.  "  Let  your  moderation  be  made  known 
unto  men."  "Let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto 
God."  It  is  not  that  you  have  failed,  perhaps,  or  broken 
down  in  some  particular.  Certainly  this  is  painful  and 
humbling.  But  it  is  better  for  you  to  lose  your  cha- 
racter, than  for  Christ  through  you  to  lose  His;  for 
you  are  responsible  to  display  the  character  of  Christ. 
"Let  your  moderation  be  known  unto  all  men.  The 
Lord  is  at  hand."  "  Let  your  requests,"  whatever  they 
may  be,  "be  made  known  unto  God;"  and  not  only 
so,  but "  with  thanksgiving."  You  may  be  perfectly  sure 

T   2 


276  INTKODTJCTOEY  LECTURES. 

of  aa  answer  when  you  make  known  your  requests : 
therefore  let  it  be  with  thanksgiving.  And  what  is  the 
result?  "And  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all 
understanding,  shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds 
through  Christ  Jesus," — feeling,  judgment,  everything, 
guarded  and  governed  by  this  precious  peace  of  God. 
The  peace  which  God  has  in  everything  He  will  com- 
municate to  keep  you  in  everything ;  and  not  only  so, 
but  the  heart,  being  free  from  care,  will  enter  into  what 
pleases  Him.  And  therefore,  "whatsoever  things  are 
honest,  whatsoever  things  are  just,  whatsoever  things 
are  pure,  whatsoever  things  are  lovely,  whatsoever 
things  are  of  good  report ;  if  there  be  any  virtue,  and 
if  there  be  any  praise,  think  on  these  things.''  lur 
stead  of  occupying  oneself  with  all"^^  hears  that 
would  cast  down,  now  that  we  have  coni^litted  aU^ 
that  is  miserable  to  God,  we  can  go  on  delighting*!^ 
the  goodness  of  God,  as  well  as  in  its  fruits.  In  Go/d 
there  is  ample  supply.  All  we  want  is,  that  the  eye^iaf 
faith  be  a  little  open;  but  it  is  only  Christ  befor&-the 
eye  that  keeps  it  open.  ""^^i^^  _^>- 

Then  he  turns  to  what  had  drawn -out  the  epistle.  "I 
rejoiced  in  the  Lord  greatly,  that  now  at  the  last  your 
care  of  me  hath  flourished  again ;  wherein  ye  were  also 
careful,  but  ye  lacked  opportunity."  So  tender,  so  delicate 
is  his  sense,  that  he  would  not  spare  what  was  needful 
if  there  had  been  any  want  of  thought,  but  at  the 
same  time  he  hastens  to  make  whatever  apology  love 
could  suggest.  "Not,"  says  he,  "that  I  speak  in  respect 
of  want :  for  I  have  learned,  in  whatsoever  state  I  am," 
— this  is  the  great  design  of  the  epistle;  it  was  not 
truth  that  was  made  known  simply,  but  experience 
that  was  grown  into — "I  have  learned,  in  whatsoever 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   PHILIPPIAifS.  277 

state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  conteut.  I  know  both  how 
to  be  abased,  and  I  know  how  to  abound  :  every  where 
and  in  all  things  I  am  instructed  both  to  be  full  and  to 
be  hungry,  both  to  abound  and  to  suffer  need.  I  can 
do  all  things  through  him  who  strengtheneth  me."  At 
the  same  time  he  intimates  his  value  for  their  love,  and 
takes  care  that  his  was  independence  founded  on  de- 
pendence,— an  independence  of  circumstances  which 
finds  its  strength  in  simple  and  absolute  dependence 
upon  God. 

So  the  apostle  lets  them  know  that  he  owned  their 
hearty  love ;  "  not,"  he  says,  "  because  I  desire  a  gift." 
For  no  personal  end  did  he  mention  their  grace ;  "but 
I  desire  fruit  that  may  abound  to  your  account."  It 
was  not  that  he  wanted  more.  We  know  well  that 
as  men  have  sarcastically  said,  gratitude  is  a  kind  of 
fishing  for  fresh  favours.  There  was  the  very  reverse  in 
Paul's  case.  As  he  tells  them,  fruit  that  might  abound 
to  their  account  was  all  that  his  heart  really  yearned 
after.  Their  gift  to  him  was  "an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell, 
a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well-pleasing  to  God."  What  a 
God  is  ours,  so  to  treat  that  which,  connected  with  the 
world,  Christ  Himself  calls  "  unrighteous  mammon ! "  His 
goodness  can  even  take  this  up  and  thus  make  it  fragrant 
even  to  Himself.  "  But  my  God  shall  supply  all  your 
need."  How  rich  and  full  he  was  of  the  goodness  of 
the  God  he  had  proved  so  long  and  could  reccommend 
so  well !  And  there  is  not  now  merely  His  riches  of 
grace,  but  he  looks  forward  into  the  glory  where  he  was 
going,  and  can  say,  "My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need 
according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus." 

Thus  with  salutations  of  love  he  closes  this  most' 
characteristic  and  cheering  even  of  Paul's  epistles. 


278  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 


vm. 

COLOSSIANS. 

The  most  cursory  reader  discerns  at  once  that  the 
epistle  to  the  Colossians  is  the  counterpart  of  that  to 
the  Ephesiaus.  They  are  in  nowise  the  same,  but  may 
be  viewed  each  as  a  supplement  to  the  other.  The 
epistle  to  the  Ephesians  developes  the  body  in  its  rich 
and  varied  privileges ;  the  epistle  to  the  Colossians 
brings  before  us  the  Head,  and  not  only  this,  but  the 
glories  of  Him  who  holds  that  relation  to  the  church. 
There  was  no  doubt  a  srdtability  for  each  line  of  truth 
in  the  wants  of  the  saints  respectively  addressed ;  nor 
do  I  think  it  can  be  intelligently  questioned  that  the- 
condition  of  the  Ephesian  saints  was  better  than  that 
of  those  at  Colosse. 

To  the  former  the  Holy  Ghost  could  launch  out 
into  the  fulness  of  our  blessing  in  Christ.  The  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  our  God  and 
Father ;  and  He  has  blessed  with  every  possible  bless-' 
ing,  and  in  the  highest  sphere  and  on  the  best  ground. 
There  was  no  hindrance  to  the  flow  of  the  Spirit  in 
unfolding  the  truth.  To  the  Colossians  the  Holy  Ghost 
has  to  speak  about  their  state,  and  along  with  this  to 
present  the  truth  of  Christ  as  a  remedy  for  it ;  not  so, 
much  as  the  centre  of  blessedness  and  joy  in  the  com-- 
munion  of  the  saints,  but  as  supplying  the  true  and  only 
divine  corrective  to  the  efforts  of  Satan^  who  would  drag* 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  279 

tliem  down  into  tradition  on  the  one  hand,  and  into 
philosophy  on  the  other,  the  too  common  snares  of  human 
nature,  and  the  latter  more  particularly  for  cultivated 
and  reasoning  minds.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  to 
enter  on  the  privileges  of  the  church,  the  body  of  Christ, 
would  have  in  nowise  met  the  evil  which  the  enemy 
was  seeking  to  inflict  on  the  Colossians.  They  needed 
to  be  drawn  away  from  every  theme  and  object  but 
Christ  Himself.  They  needed  to  learn  especially  the 
vanity  of  all  that  man's  mind  delights  in.  They  needed 
to  know,  I  will  not  say,  that  Christ  suffices  only ;  but 
that  there  is  such  fulness  of  blessing  and  glory  in  Christ 
as  utterly  to  eclipse  and  condemn  all  that  flesh  would 
glory  in.  Hence,  too,  a  main  part  of  the  difference  be- 
tween these  two  epistles.  There  are  many  nice  shades 
in  detail ;  but  I  have  referred  now  to  that  which  is  the 
principal  point  whence  the.  two  lines  of  truth  diverge. 
It  is,  however,  evident  from  what  has  been  remarked, 
that  the  two  letters  do  in  the  most  remarkable  manner 
correspond  to  each  other  ;  the  one  presenting  the  Head, 
the  other  the  body.  Thus  they  have  a  closer  connec- 
tion than  any  others  in  the  New  Testament. 

We  may  proceed  to  trace  now  the  course  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  in  this  deeply  instructive  epistle.  The  apostle 
addresses  the  Colossian  Christians  in  terms  substantially 
similar  to  those  which  are  addressed  to  the  saints  at 
Ephesus.  Here  he  gives  prominence,  it  is  true,  to  their 
being  "  brethren."  Of  course  the  Ephesian  saints  were 
so ;  but  here  it  is  expressed.  It  was  not  so  unmingled 
an  address  as  where  he  views  them  simply  as  they  were 
in  Christ.  The  expression  "  brethren,"  though  of  course 
flowing  from  Christ,  brings  forward  their  relationship 
by  grace  to  each  other. 


280         ^  INTKODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

Ifext  we  enter  on  the  apostle's  thanksgiving.  It  was 
not  so  in  the  Ephesian  epistle,  where  one  of  the  richest 
developments  of  divine  truth  precedes  any  particular 
allusion  to  the  saints  in  that  city.  *  Here  he  at  once 
addresses  himself,  after  the  thanksgiving,  to  their  con- 
dition and  of  course  to  their  need.  First,  as  usual,  he 
owns  what  they  had  of  God.  "  We  give  thanks  to  God 
and  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  praying  always 
for  you,  since  we  heard  of  your  faith  in  Christ  Jesus, 
and  of  the  love  which  ye  have  to  all  the  saints,  for  the 
hope  which  is  laid  up  for  you  in  heaven."  It  is  not,  as 
in  the  Ephesian  epistle,  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  God's 
inheritance  in  the  saints,  but  closely  resembles  a  com- 
paratively lower  line  of  things  which  comes  before  us 
in  the  first  epistle  of  Peter.  It  need  hardly  be  said 
that  they  were  equally  true,  and  each  in  its  place  most 
appropriate,  but  not  all  equally  elevated.  The  hope 
laid  up  for  us  in  heaven  supposes  a  position  on  the 
earth.  The  epistle  to  the  Ephesians  views  the  saiut  as 
already  blessed  by  God  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ. 
In  the  one  they  are  waiting  to  be  taken  to  heaven  in 
an  actual  sense;  in  the  other  they  belong  already  to 
heaven  by  virtue  of  their  union  with  Christ. 

Yet  it  remains  true,  that  "the  hope  is  laid  up  for 
you,''  as  he  says,  "in  heaven,  whereof  ye  heard  before 
in  the  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel ;  which  is  come 
unto  you,  as  it  is  in  all  the  world :  and  bringeth  forth 
fruit  and  groweth,  as  also  in  you,  since  the  day  ye 
heard  of  it,  and  knew  the  grace  of  God  in  truth."  All 
momentous  and  blessed,  but  nevertheless  by  no  means 
the  same  fulness  of  privilege  of  which  he  could  discourse 
at  once  in  writing  to  the  Ephesians.  "As  ye  also  learned 
of  Epaphras  our  dear  fellow -servant,  who  is  for  you  a 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  281 

faithful  minister  of  Christ ;  who  also  declared  unto  us 
3'our  love  in  the  Spirit."  This  is  the  only  allusion  to 
the  Spirit,  as  far  as  I  remember,  in  the  epistle.  It 
does  not  present  the  Spirit  of  God  as  a  person  down 
here,  though  He  is  a  person  of  course,  but  rather  as 
characterizing  the  love.  The  love  was  not  natural  affec- 
tion; it  was  love  in  the  Spirit:  but  this  is  very  far  from 
the  rich  place  given  to  His  personal  presence  and  action 
elsewhere. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  epistle  to  the  Ephesians 
abounds  with  such  allusions.  There  is  not  a  chapter 
in  it  where  the  Holy  Ghost  has  not  a  most  important 
and  essential  place.  If  you  look  at  the  saints  indi- 
vidually. He  is  the  seal  and  the  earnest.  He  is  also 
the  power  of  all  their  growth  in  understanding  the 
things  of  God.  Only  through  Him  are  the  eyes  of  the 
heart  enlightened  to  know  what  God  has  wrought  and 
secured  for  the  saints.  So  again  by  Him  alone  do  all, 
Jews  and  Gentiles,  draw  near  to  the  Father.  In  the 
Spirit  are  both  built  together  for  God's  habitation.  He  it 
is  who  has  now  revealed  the  mystery  that  was  kept  hid 
through  ages  and  generations.  He  it  is  who  strengthens 
the  inner  man  to  enjoy  through  Christ  all  the  fulness 
of  God.  He  only  is  the*  constitutive  power  of  the  unity 
that  we  are  exhorted  to  keep-  He  it  is  who  works  in 
the  various  gifts  of  Christ,  welding  them  together,  so 
that  it  may  be  truly  Christ  through  His  body.  He  it 
is,  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  who  we  are  warned  not  to 
grieve.  He  it  is  who  fills  the  saints,  guarding  them  from 
the  excitement  of  the  flesh,  and  guiding  into  that  holy 
joy  which  issues  in  thanksgiving  and  praise.  For  the 
Christian  and  the  church  must  sing  their  own  psalms, 
hymns,  and  spiritual  songs.     He  it  is  finally  who  gives 


^82 


INTEODUCTORY  LECTUEES. 


vigour  for  all  the  holy  conflicts  we  have  to  wage  with 
the  adversary.  Thus  it  matters  not  what  part  of  Ephe- 
sians  is  looked  at.  We  have  now  traversed  the  varied 
contents  of  the  epistle,  and  it  is  evident  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  forms  an  integral  part  of  the  divine  truth  un- 
folded in  it  from  beginning  to  end. 

This  makes  it  so  much  the  more  striking,  the 
epistle  to  the  Colossians  being  the  complement  of  an 
epistle  so  full  of  the  Spirit,  that  there  should  be  in  the 
former  so  marked  an  absence  of  Him,  that  He  is  only 
referred  to  once,  and  only  as  characterizing  the  love  of 
the  saints.  It  may  be  added  that  what  is  said  of  the 
same  truth  is  in  Colossians  attributed  to  Christ,  or 
that  life  which  we  have  in  Christ.  To  the  Ephesians, 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  treated  as  a  divine  person  acting  for 
the  glory  of  Christ,  bat  this  in  the  saints  and  in  the 
church.  Also  the  reason  seems  obvious.  When  men's 
eyes  are  turned  away  from  Christ,  the  doctrine  of  the 
Spirit  might  add  to  the  danger  and  delusion,  as  it  has 
wrought  in  all  ages  to  puff  up  men  not  established  in 
Christ.  For  inasmuch  as  the  Spirit  does  act  in  the 
church — in  man,  if  the  eye  be  not  on  Christ  and  only 
on  Him,  the  action  of  the  Spirit,  whether  in  the  indi- 
vidual or  the  church,  gives  importance  to  both.  In  such 
a  state  dwelling  on  it  would  detract  from  Christ's  glory; 
whereas  when  Christ  alone  is  the  object  of  believers, 
they  can  bear  to  know  and  to  dwell  upon,  and  to  enter 
into,  and  understand,  the  various  operations  of  the 
Spirit,  which  turns  so  much  the  more  to  the  glory  of 
Christ. 

Another  reason  is  this,  that  the  presence  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,  both  in  the  individual  and  in  the  church,  is  a 
most  essential  part  of  christian  privileges,  while,  for  the 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  S83 

reasons  already  alleged,  it  was  not  for  the  well-being  of 
their  souls  that  it  should  be  unfolded  here.  The  -whole 
point  therefore  of  this  epistle  is  a  recall  to  Christ  Him- 
self, because  of  what  had  crept  in  through  Satan's  wiles. 
The  needed  and  only  remedy  was  to  turn  the  eyes  of 
the  saints  from  other  objects,  even  their  own  privileges, 
and  to  fix  them  on  Christ.  Hence,  though  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  really  on  earth,  dwelling  in  the  saint  and  in 
the  church,  yet  under  such  circumstances,  to  occupy  the 
mind  even  with  the  blessed  Spirit,  would  clearly  have 
interfered  with  His  own  great  aim  in  glorifying  Jesus. 
Therefore,  as  it  seems,  does  He  call  away  undividedly  to 
Christ.  When  the  soul  has  been  in  peace  weaned  from 
all  else,  and  found  all  its  joy  and  boast  in  Christ,  it 
can  then  hear  more  freely.  Not  that  there  may  not  be 
danger  even  then;  save  that  as  long  as  the  eye  is  on 
Christ  there  is  none,  because  what  is  inconsistent  with 
His  name  is  refused.  The  Spirit,  having  secured  His 
glory,  is  more  at  liberty  as  to  every  other  topic. 

In  the  next  place,  we  have  the  apostle's  prayer :  "For 
this  cause  we  also,  since  the  day  we  heard  it,  do  not 
cease  to  pray  for  you,  and  to  desire  that  ye  might  be 
filled  with  the  knowledge  of  his  will  in  all  wisdom  and 
spiritual  understanding  ;  that  ye  might  walk  worthy  of 
the  Lord  unto  all  pleasing,  being  fruitful  in  every  good 
work,  and  growing  by  the  knowledge  of  God."  It  is 
plain  that  however  blessed  this  is,  still  it  supposes  wants, 
and  a  measure  of  weakness,  and  this  for  the  ordinary  walk 
of  the  Christian  ;  that  they  might  "walk  worthy  of  the 
Lord,"  says  he.  He  could  not  say  in  this  epistle  "worthy 
of  your  vocation,"  as  in  writing'  to  the  Ephesians.  He 
does  not  even  say  worthy  of  Christ,  but  "of  the  Lord." 
That  is,  he  brings  in  His  authority,  for  there  can  be  no 


284  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

mistake  for  the  Christian  more  profound  than  to  sup- 
pose that  the  presentation  of  the  Lord  as  such  is  the 
more  elevated  for  the  saint.  It  is  most  true  in  its  place ; 
but  it  addresses  rather  the  sense  of  responsibility  than 
the  communion  of  affections  of  the  children  of  God. 
If  a  man  does  not  own  Him  to  be  Lord,  he  is  nothing 
whatever;  but  one  may  bow  to  Him  as  Lord,  and  yet  be 
painfully  insensible  to  the  higher  glory  of  His  person, 
and  to  the  depths  of  His  grace.  Alas !  multitudes  have 
so  failed,  nor  is  anything  more  common  at  this  present 
moment,  even  as  it  was  always  so. 

The  Spirit  of  God,  as  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
began  with  the  simplest  confession  of  Christ's  name. 
This  is  habitually  His  way.  That  which  brought  in 
thousands  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  and  afterwards  was 
the  preaching  and  the  faith  that  Jesus  was  made  Lord. 
But  not  a  few  of  those  that  were  baptized  from  early  as 
in  later  days  turned  out  untrue  to  the  glory  of  Christ. 
We  can  readily  understand  that  the  Spirit  did  not  bring 
out  the  fulness  of  the  glory  of  Christ  then,  but  as  it  was 
needed.  Nor  is  it  denied  that  some  souls  enjoyed  a 
remarkable  maturity  of  intelligence,  so  that  from  the 
beginning  they  saw,  believed,  and  preached  Jesus  in  a 
deeper  glory  than  His  Lordship.  There  is  no  one  that 
rises  before  our  mind's  eye  more  readily  and  strikingly 
in  this  respect  than  the  apostle  Paul  himself  But  the 
apostle  was  singular  in  this;  for  even  those  who  did 
know  that  Christ  was  the  Son  of  the  living  God,  in  the 
highest  and  eternal  sense,  seemed  but  little  to  have 
preached  it,  at  any  rate  in  their  earlier  testimony.  As 
the  withering  evils  of  Satan  came  in,  the  value  of  that 
which  their  hearts  clung  to  formed  an  increasing  part 
of  their  testimony,  until  at  last  the  full,  undiminished. 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  285 

and  even  brightening  truth  of  His  divine  glory  was 
brought  out  in  all  its  fulness.  True,  and  known  to  some 
from  the  first,  the  Spirit  would  brook  no  hiding  of  it  in 
order  to  meet  the  daring  of  men  and  the  subtilty  of  the 
enemy,  who  were  taking  advantage  of  the  lower  glory 
of  Christ,  so  as  to  deny  all  that  was  higher — His  deity 
and  eternal  Sonship. 

It  appears  to  me  then  that,  in  writing  to  the  Colos- 
sians,  the  terms  employed  by  the  Spirit  of  God  afford 
clear  evidence  that  their  souls  at  Colosse  rested  on  by 
no  means  the  same  firm  and  lofty  ground  as  that  which 
the  epistle  to  the  Ephesians  contemplates ;  and  the 
apostle  consequently  could  not  appeal  in  their  case  to  the 
same  mighty  motives  which  at  once  rose,  by  the  Holy 
Ghost's  inspiration,  in  the  apostle's  heart  in  writing 
the  kindred  epistle.  "That  ye  might  walk  worthy  of  the 
Lord  unto  all  pleasing,"  urges  he,  "being  fruitful  in  every 
good  work."  For  Christianity  is  not  a  mere  thing  of 
doing  this  or  not  doing  that;  it  is  a  growth,  because  it  is 
of  the  Spirit  in  life  and  power.  If,  as  men  have  fabled, 
spiritual  beings  sprang  forth  ready  armed,  as  well  as  in 
fulness  of  wisdom  and  vigour,  it  would  not  be  Christi- 
anity. Babes,  young  men,  and  fathers :  such  is  in  grace 
as  in  nature  the  divine  way  with  us.  God  has  been 
pleased  to  call  the  church  a  body;  and  so  in  truth  it 
is.  As  also,  looked  at  individually,  the  Christian  is  a 
son  of  God,  so  there  should  be  a  growth  up  to  Christ 
in  all  things.  There  is  scarce  anything  more  offensive 
than  a  child  who  looks,  talks,  and  acts  the  old  man. 
Every  right-minded  person  revolts  from  it  as  a  lusus 
naturce,  and  a  piece  of  affectation  or  acting.  So,  in 
spiritual  things,  the  mere  taking  up  and  repeating 
thoughts,   deep   and    high    but  unproved   experience. 


286  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES. 

cannot  be  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  of  God's  teaching. 
Nothing  more  lovely  (whether  spiritually,  or  even  in 
its  place  naturally)  than  that  each  should  be  just  what 
God  has  made  him,  only  thenceforth  diligently  seeking 
increase  of  inward  power  by  the  operation  of  God's 
grace.  There  is  then  a  healthful  progress  in  the  Lord. 
While  there  is  no  doubt  that  which  requires  to  be  cut 
down  or  pruned  on  every  side,  there  is  a  gradual 
development  of  divine  life  in  the  saints  of  God;  and 
this,  as  being  through  the  Spirit's  use  of  the  truth,  by 
no  means  can  be  aU  at  once.  In  no  case  indeed  is 
it  really  so. 

Thtis  it  is  then  that  for  these  saints  the  desire  is  that 
they  should  steadily  advance.  In  material  science  it  is 
not  so,  in  schools  of  doctrine  it  is  not  so :  there  is  some- 
thing altogether  circumscribed,  in  known  limits,  and 
definite  enough  to  satisfy  the  mind  of  man.  All  that  is 
to  be  got  in  certain  provinces  may  be  acquired  after  no 
long  study.  The  Spirit  of  God  applies  the  truth  of  Jesus 
Christ,  which  resists  all  such  thoughts  as  human.  The 
Colossians  from  their  dabbling  with  tradition  and  phi- 
losophy were  in  danger  on  this  side.  So,  says  he,  "being 
fruitful  in  eveiy  good  work,  and  growing  (not  exactly 
in,  but)  by  the  knowledge  of  God."  But  still  there  is 
growth  supposed.  How  could  it  be  otherwise  if  by  the 
knowledge  of  God?  He  is  the  only  divine  source,  sphere, 
and  means  of  real  growth  for  the  soul.  But  there  is  far 
more  than  growth  in  knowledge,  or  even  by  the  know- 
ledge of  God.  There  is  not  only  the  contemplative  side 
but  the  active,  and  this  makes  the  saint  truly  passive ; 
for  if  we  are  strengthened,  it  is  mainly  not  to  do,  but 
to  endure  in  a  world  which  knows  not  Christ.  Thus  we 
are  "strengthened  with  aU  might,  according  to  the  power 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  287 

of  his  glory,  unto  all  patience  and  longsuffering  -with 
joyfulness." 

How  good  as  well  as  vast  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  of 
God !  Who  conld  ever  have  combined  with  God's  glory 
such  a  place  for  man  too  ?  No  man,  I  will  not  say 
anticipated,  but  approached  in  thought  such  a  portion 
for  souls  on  earth.  See  how  and  for  what  the  apostle 
gives  thanks  again.  Although  there  were  difficulties 
and  hindrances,  how  much,  he  feels,  there  is  for  which 
to  praise  our  God  and  Father :  "  Giving  thanks  unto 
the  Father,  which  hath  made  us  meet"  (and  observe 
well,  it  is  not  merely  for  the  certainty  that  He  will,  but 
in  the  peaceful  assurance  that  He  has  made  us  meet) 
"to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light."  Human  words  fail  to  add  to  such  a  thought. 
His  grace  has  qualified  us  now  for  His  glory :  such,  as 
far  as  this  goes,  is  the  clear  meaning  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  He  looks  not  at  some  advanced  souls  at 
Colosse,  but  at  aU  the  saints  there.  There  were  evils 
to  be  corrected,  dangers  to  be  warned  against ;  but  if 
he  thinks  of  that  which  the  Father  has  in  view  for 
them,  and  of  them  in  view  of  His  glory,  less  he 
could  not  say,  neither  could  he  say  more.  The  Father 
has  made  them  meet  already  for  the  inheritance  of 
the  saints  in  light;  and  this,  too,  fully  taking  into 
account  the  awful  state  of  the  heathen  world,  and  their 
past  personal  wickedness  when  drawn  to  God  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  who  hath  delivered  us  from 
the  power  of  darkness,  and  hath  translated  us  into  the 
kingdom  of  the  Son  of  his  love  :  in  whom  we  have 
redemption  [through  his  blood,  is  added  to  the  Ephe- 
sians]  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins." 

At  this  point  we  come  to  one  of  the  main  and  dis- 


288  INTBOUUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

tinctive  ol)jects  of  the  epistle.  WLo  and  what  is  the 
Son  of  His  love,  in  ■whom  we  have  redemption  ?  Little 
did  the  Colossians  conceive  that  their  endeavour  to  add 
to  the  truth  of  the  gospel  was  in  reality  to  detract 
from  His  glory.  Their  desire,  we  may  be  sure,  was  as 
well  meant  as  any  mistake  can  he.  Like  others,  they 
may  have  reasoned  that  if  Christianity  had  done  such 
great  things  in  the  hands  of  fishermen,  tax-gatherers, 
or  the  like  (who  could  be  of  no  great  account  in  the 
world's  scale,  or  in  the  schools  of  men),  what  might  it 
not  accomplish  if  it  were  but  arrayed  in  the  wisdom 
of  philosophy;  if  it  possessed  the  ornaments  of  litera- 
ture and  science;  if  it  went  forth  on  its  career  of 
victory  with  that  which  attracts  the  feelings  and  com- 
mands the  intellect  among  humanity  ?  The  Holy 
Spirit  brings  in  that  which  completely  judges  and 
sets  aside  all  such  speculations.  No  one,  no  thing,  can 
add  to  Christ's  power,  lustre,  or  value  in  any  one 
respect.  If  you  knew  Him  better,  you  would  feel  it 
yourself.  Infinitely  vainer  is  the  thought  for  any  man 
to  impart  fresh  worth  to  Christ,  than  for  David  to  have 
met  Goliath  in  Saul's  armour.  Indeed,  the  trappings 
which  men  so  cry  up  are  a  positive  hindrance  to  Christ ; 
and  in  the  precise  measure  in  which  they  are  prized, 
they  reduce  their  votaries  to  slavery,  and  the  faith  they 
profess  to  zero.  Judge  these  same  things,  and  they  may 
become  of  some  account  to  the  glory  of  God.  But  treat 
them  as  means  desirable  to  attract  the  world,  or  as 
objects  to  be  valued  for  their  own  sake  by  Christians, 
and  as  they  are  intruders,  so  they  will  prove  to  be 
aliens,  and  enemies  of  the  glory  of  Christ. 

Christ  is  the  image  of  God,  in  fulness  and  perfection; 
He  only  showed  out  the  invisible  God.  Tradition  never 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  289 

manifested  the  true  God.  Philosophy,  on  the  contrary, 
made  matters  worse,  as  indeed  did  the  resources  of 
human  religion.  Christ,  and  Christ  alone,  has  truly 
represented  God  to  man,  as  He  alone  was  perfect  man 
before  God.  And  as  He  is  the  image  of  the  invisible 
God,  so  is  He  the  first-born  of  all  creation;  for  the 
Holy  Spirit  here  brings  together  a  kind  of  antithesis 
as  to  Christ  in  relation  to  God,  and  in  relation  to 
the  creature.  Of  God  He  is  the  image,  not  exactly  in 
an  exclusive,  but  assuredly  in  the  only  adequate  sense. 
Others  may  be — as  the  Christian  is — we  know,  and  man 
even  in  a  certain  and  real  way  as  a  creature.  But,  as 
truly  and  fully  making  God  known,  there  is  none  but 
Christ.  He  is  the  truth;  He  is  the  expi-ession  of  what 
God  is.  This  is  the  fountain  of  all  true  knowledge,  and 
so  Christ  is  the  truth  as  to  everything  and  every  one. 
In  this  phrase,  however,  all  that  the  apostle  asserts 
is  in  relation  to  the  invisible  God.  Utterly  impossible 
that  man  should  see  Him  who  is  invisible :  he  needed 
one  to  bring  God  down  to  him,  and  display  His  word 
and  ways,  and  Christ  is  that  one  image  of  the  invisible 
God. 

Besides,  Christ  is  the  first-born  of  all  creation.  ISTot, 
of  course,  that  He  was  the  earliest  on  the  earth  like 
Adam.  In  point  of  time  the  world  had  grown  com- 
paratively old  before  Jesus  appeared.  How  then  could 
He  that  came  and  was  seen  in  the  midst  of  men  four 
thousand  years  after  Adam  was  made, — -how  could  He 
be  in  any  sense  first-born  of  all  creation  ?  We  have 
not  to  imagine  a  reason,  for  the  Spirit  of  God  has 
given  His  own,  and  this  will  be  found  to  set  aside  all 
others.  Every  thought  of  man  is  vain  in  the  presence 
of  His  wisdom.   Jesus  is  the  first-born,  no  matter  when 

u 


290  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

He  appeared.  Had  it  been  possible,  consistently  with 
other  plans  of  God  (which  it  was  not),  for  Himi  to  be 
the  last  (in  point  of  fact)  born  here  below.  He  had 
been  the  first-born  all  the  same.  Impossible  that  He 
could  be  aught  but  the  first-born.  And  why?  Because 
He  was  the  greatest,  the  best,  the  holiest  1  For  none 
of  these  reasons,  though  He  was  all  this,  and  more. 
Still  less  was  it  because  of  anything  conferred  on  Him, 
whether  of  power  or  office.  On  no  such  ground,  nor 
on  all  together,  was  He  the  first-born.  The  word  of 
God  assigns  one  greater  than  all,  which  is  the  true  and 
only  key  to  the  person  and  work  of  Christ :  "  For  by 
him  were  all  things  created." 

Oh,  what  majesty,  as  well  as  adaptation  to  need,  in 
the  truth  of  God !  It  has  only  to  be  heard  by  a  heart 
touched  by  grace  to  carry  conviction.  But  alas !  there 
is  in  fallen  man,  as  such,  a  will  that  hates  the  truth, 
and  despises  the  grace  of  God.  Does  it  not  prove  both 
by  being  jealous  of  the  glory  of  Christ  ?  It  remains, 
however,  that  He  is  the  first-born  of  all  creation,  because 
He  is  the  Creator  of  all  things,  above  or  below,  material 
or  spiritual :  "  For  by  him  were  all  things  created,  that 
are  in  heaven,  and  that  are  in  earth,  visible  and  in- 
visible." It  is  not  a  question  of  the  lower  ranks  of 
creation  only,  but  takes  in  the  highest :  "  whether  they 
be  thrones,  or  dominions,  or  principalities,  or  powers : 
all  things  were  created  by  him."  Do  you  say,  Yes,  but 
why  might  not  God  create  by  the  highest  as  an  instru- 
ment? There  is  more  said  even  here  to  maintain  the 
full  glory  of  Christ.  All  things  were  created  by  Him,  no 
doubt;  but  they  were  created  for  Him  also — not  by  Him 
for  the  Father.  They  were  created  &y  Him,  and  for 
Him,  equally  with  the  Father.    And  as  if  this  were  not 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  291 

enough,  we  are  further  told  that  He  is  before  all  things, 
and  by  (ev)  Him.  all  things  consist.  He  is  the  upholder 
of  all  creation,  so  that  the  very  universe  of  God  subsists 
in  virtue  of  Him,  Without  Him  all  sinks  at  once  into 
dissolution. 

Nor  is  this  all.  He  is  the  Head  of  the  body — one  of 
the  chief  topics  of  this  epistle.  Such  is  His  relationship 
to  the  church.  And  how  is  He  the  Head  of  the  body  ? 
Not  because  He  is  the  first-born  of  all  creation  simply, 
nay,  nor  because  He  is  the  creator  of  all.  Neither  His 
headship  of  all  creation  as  the  Heir  of  all  things,  nor 
His  creatorial  rights,  would  in  themselves  give  a  suf- 
ficient title  to  be  the  Head  of  the  body.  In  it  is 
another  kind  of  blessedness  and  glory;  for  it  a  new 
order  of  existence  appears ;  and  not  least  of  all  beings 
we  ought  to  understand  this  difference.  Who  can  be 
so  deeply  concerned  as  the  Christian  ?  for  if  we  have 
any  part  or  lot  in  Christ,  if  we  belong  to  the  church  of 
God,  we  ought  clearly  to  know  the  character  of  our  own 
blessing.  Christ  it  is  who  determines  this,  as  all  else. 
But  the  distinctive  character  is  that  He  is  "the  begin- 
ning,  the  first-born  from  the  dead" — not  merely  the  first- 
born of,  but  the  first-born  out  of.  He  is  the  first-born 
from  among  the  dead,  as  well  as  the  Head  and  first- 
born Heir  of  all  subsisting  creation.  Thus  it  is  that 
He  rises  into  a  new  condition,  leaving  behind  that 
which  had  fallen  under  vanity  or  death  through  its 
sinning  chief,  the  first  Adam.  He  has  annulled  the 
power  of  him  that  had  the  power  of  death — that  word 
so  terrible  for  the  heart  of  man,  and  most  surely  foreign 
to  the  mind  and  heart  of  our  God  and  Father,  but  a 
stern  necessity  that  came  in  through  rebellion. 

Where  sin  brought  man,  grace  brought  Christ.  And  the 

u  2 


292  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

glory  of  His  person  enabled  Him  in  grace  and  obedience 
to  go  down  into  depths  never  before  fathomed;  and  out 
of  the  whole  scene,  not  of  a  rejecting  guilty  world 
only,  but  of  the  realm  of  death  (and  such  a  death!) 
Jesus  emerged.  And  now  He  is  risen  from  the  dead, 
the  beginning  of  a  new  order  of  existence  altogether; 
and  as  He  is  the  Head,  so  the  church  is  His  body- 
founded,  indeed,  on  Christ,  but  on  Him  dead  and  risen. 
As  such — not  bom  merely,  but  risen  again  from  the 
dead — He  is  the  beginning.  All  question,  therefore, 
of  what  existed  before  His  death  and  resurrection  is  at 
once  excluded.  He  who  believes  this  would  understand 
that  it  was  still  an  unrevealed  secret  during  Old  Testa- 
ment times.  The  dealings  of  God  were  not  only  not 
on  the  principle  of  a  body  on  earth,  united  to  a  glorified 
Head,  once  dead  and  risen,  but  incompatible  with  such 
a  state  of  things.  Thus  whoever  by  faith  receives 
simply  the  intimation  of  this  verse,  as  of  a  crowd  of 
other  scriptures,  has  all  this  very  needless  controversy 
closed  for  him ;  he  knows  and  is  sure  by  divine 
teaching  that  Jesus  was  not  merely  the  highest  of  that 
creation  which  had  been  already,  but  the  beginning 
of  a  new  thing  and  its  Head.  This  He  was  pleased  to 
begin  in  resurrection  from  the  dead.  It  was  in  no  wise 
the  old  thing,  elevated  by  the  glory  of  Him  who  had 
deigned  to  descend  into  it,  but  a  new  state  of  things, 
of  which  the  risen  Christ  is  both  the  Head  and  be- 
ginning ;  as  it  is  said,  "  Who  is  the  beginning,  the  first- 
born from  the  dead ;  that  in  all  things  he  might  have 
the  pre-eminence." 

As  this  gives  us  the  new  estate,  and  position,  and 
relation  in  which  stands  the  glorious  person  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  so  next  we  have  a  view  of  His  work  suitably  to 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  293 

the  object  of  the  epistle:  "For  all  the  fulness  was 
pleased  in  him  to  dwell."  I  take  the  liberty  of  rendering 
the  verse  coiTectly,  as  is  well  known  to  most  of  my 
brethren  now  present.  There  are  few  here,  it  is  to  be 
supposed,  who  are  not  already  aware  that  to  put  in 
"the  Father"  (as  is  done  in  the  Authorized  Version  in 
italics)  is  to  take  away  from  the  Son  without  warrant 
and  dangerously.  It  was  not  the  Father,  but  the  God- 
head. It  pleased  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost.  So  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  was  pleased  to 
dwell  in  Him.  Yet  even  this  did  not  reconcile  man  to 
God,  but  the  'very  reverse  rather ;  it  proved  that  man 
was  irreconcilable  as  far  as  he  was  concerned. 

If  a  divine  person  was  pleased  to  appear  here  below, 
and  to  bring  in  unimagined  goodness  and  power,  dealing 
with  every  need  and  every  one  with  whom  He  came  in 
contact,  and  who  sought  or  even  accepted  His  gracious 
action,  it  might  have  been  supposed  that  man  could  not 
resist  such  unhesitating  love  and  unmeasured  power. 
But  the  actual  result  demonstrated  beyond  doubt  that 
never  before  was  witnessed  such  hearty,  universal,  and 
causeless  hatred  as  against  Jesus  the  Son  of  God.  There 
was,  there  could  be,  no  lack  of  the  attractiveness  of  love 
and  power  in  Him  who  went  about  doing  good;  yet 
miserable  hearts  did  not  turn  to  Him,  save  where  the 
grace  of  God  the  Father  drew  them  to  the  only  adequate 
expression  of  Himself  None  could  pretend  that  He 
had  ever  refused  a  single  soul;  none  could  say  that  they 
had  gone  empty  away.  Their  motives  were  far  from 
good  sometimes.  They  might  come  for  what  they  could 
get ;  but  at  length  they  would  not  have  Him  or  any- 
thing He  had  to  give  on  any  terms.  They  had  done 
with  Him,  and,  as  far  as  will  was  concerned,  they  had 


294  INTEODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

done  with  Him  for  ever.  The  cross  terminated  the 
awful  struggle  and  heart-hreaking  sight  of  man  thus 
manifestly  led  captive  of  the  devil  at  his  will. 

And  what  was  to  be  done  ?  Ah !  this  was  the  serious 
question,  and  this  it  was  which  God  was  waiting  to  solve. 
He  meant  to  reconcile  man  spite  of  himself;  He  would 
prove  His  own  love  to  be  the  conqueror  of  his  hatred. 
Let  man  be  unmendable,  let  his  enmity  be  beyond  all 
thought,  God,  in  the  calmness  of  His  own  wisdom,  and 
in  the  strength  of  His  unwearied  grace,  accomplishes 
His  purpose  of  redeeming  love  at  the  very  moment 
when  man  consummates  his  wickedness.  It  was  at  the 
cross  of  Christ.  And  so  it  was  that,  when  all  seemed 
to  faU,  all  was  won.  The  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwelt 
in  Jesus ;  but  man  would  have  none  of  it,  and  proved 
it  above  all  in  the  cross.  Yet  the  cross  was  the  precise 
and  only  place  where  the  foundation  that  cannot  be 
moved  was  laid.  As  he  says,"haviQg  made  peace  through 
the  blood  of  his  cross,  by  him  to  reconcile  all  things  unto 
himself;  by  him,  I  say,  whether  it  be  things  on  earth  or 
things  in  heaven." 

First  the  apostle  brings  in  all  things  as  a  whole, 
the  universal  creaturehood,  earthly  and  heavenly ;  thus 
giving  us  an  adequate  notion  of  the  perfect  triumph  of 
God  at  the  time  when  it  seemed  as  if  Satan  had  com- 
pletely succeeded  through  man  against  the  counsels  of 
God.  But  is  this  all  ?  Is  it  merely  that  all  the  universe 
has  thus,  in  the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  a  foundation 
laid  for  their  reconciliation  ?  There  is  a  present  witness 
of  the  victory  of  Jesus.  The  universe  goes  on  as  before, 
the  lower  creation  at  least  subject  to  vanity;  but  God 
(and  it  is  like  Him)  hastens  to  use  His  victory,  though 
not  yet  as  far  as  outward  things  are  concerned.     This 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  295 

remains  for  the  day  of  Christ's  glory,  and  will  fill  a 
most  important  part  in  the  purposes  of  God.  But  God 
has  even  now  a  far  greater  purpose  at  heart.  What 
could  be  more  vast  than  the  reconciliation  of  aU  things 
in  heaven  and  earth  ?  The  veriest  victims  of  Satan,  the 
open  enemies  of  Christ,  the  fiercest — powerless  let  them 
be,  but  the  fiercest  in  their  will  of  opposition  against 
God — are  precisely  those  that  God  has  already  recon- 
ciled to  Himself;  and  this  where  Satan  had  but  just 
appeared  to  conquer  in  leading  them  to  crucify  Christ. 
In  that  field  of  blood  where  His  ancient  people  joined 
the  idolatrous  Gentiles,  and  indeed  incited  them  to  plant 
the  cross  for  their  own  Messiah — there  it  is  that  God's 
grace  has  established  a  righteous  deliverance  for  such 
as  He  has  reconciled. 

Satan  is  allowed  apparently  to  go  on  as  if  he  had 
won  the  final  victory;  but  God  brings  the  truth  of  what 
He  has  done  into  the  heart  where  Satan  had  most  of  all 
deceived  before.  "You  that  were  sometime  alienated 
and  enemies  in  your  mind,"  says  he  (for  the  full  truth 
is  brought  before  them  as  to  their  condition),  "enemies 
in  your  mind  by  wicked  works,  yet  now  hath  he  recon- 
ciled in  the  body  of  his  flesh  through  death."  While 
He  lived,  this  work  was  wholly  unaccomplished.  The 
incarnation,  blessed  and  precious  as  it  is,  never  recon- 
ciled man  to  God.  It  presented  to  us  the  person  of  Him 
who  was  to  reconcile;  in  itself  it  was  thus  a  most 
important  step  towards  the  reconciliation.;  but,  in  fact, 
there  was  no  reconciliation  yet  for  a  solitary  soul :  the 
cross  of  Christ  wrought  it  aU.  "In  the  body  of  his  flesh 
through  death,  to  present  you  holy  and  unblameable  and 
unreproveable  in  his  sight."  What  a  change ! 
.  But  he  adds :  "  If  ye  continue  in  the  faith  grounded 


296  INTKODtrCTOEY  LECTUKES. 

and  settled ;"  and  we  must  not  weaken  this.  It  is  not 
at  all,  "  since  ye  continue."  Scripture  must  not  be  sacri- 
ficed rudely  to  our  seeming  comfort.  Besides,  when 
men  thus  slur  over  its  true  force,  and  would  extract 
consolation  where  God  intends  warning,  it  is  a  proof 
not  of  firm  but  of  weak  faith.  For  assuredly  God  is 
not  trusted  where  there  is  so  much  as  a  desire  thus  to 
alter  or  turn  aside  a  single  word,  for  one's  own  con- 
venience or  any  pretext  whatsoever.  Yet  there  is 
nothing  more  common  ;  it  is  precisely  what  men,  and 
sometimes  Christians  to  no  small  extent,  are  doiug  now 
very  generally ;  and  what  have  they  gained  by  it  ? 

A  father's  stroke  that  chastises  the  erring  is  a  mercy. 
To  receive  it  as  the  faithful  blow  of  our  best  friend 
in  His  own  word  may  not  seem  the  readiest  way  to- 
ward comfort ;  but  the  comfort  that  we  get  in  the  end 
from  Him  who  thus  smites  is  both  real  and  stable,  and 
rich  in  profit  to  the  soul.  But  the  apostle  meant  not 
so  much  to  administer  consolation  to  these  Colossian 
saints  as  to  caution  them.  They  needed  rather  reproof, 
and  they  are  warned  that  the  course  on  which  they  were 
entering  was  slippery  and  perilous.  The  pursuit  of 
tradition  or  of  philosophy,  as  a  graft  on  Christianity, 
continually  tends  to  bring  in  that  which  poisons  the 
springs  of  truth,  and  grace  is  always  annulled  by  either. 
Therefore  he  might  well  press,  "If  ye  continue." 

All  the  blessedness  that  Christ  has  procured  is  for 
those  that  believe;  but  this  of  course  supposes  that 
they  hold  Him  fast.  Hence  it  runs:  "If  ye  continue 
in  the  faith  grounded  and  settled,  and  be  not  moved 
away  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel,  which  ye  have  heard, 
and  which  was  preached  to  every  creature  which  is 
under  heaven."    The  language  does  not  in  the  smallest 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIiNS.  297 

degree  insinuate  that  there  is  any  uncertainty  for  a 
believer.  We  must  never  allow  one  triith  to  be  either 
shut  out  or  enfeebled  by  another;  but  then  we  need 
also  to  remember  that  there  are,  and  have  always  been, 
those  that,  having  begun  seemingly  well,  have  ended  by 
becoming  the  enemies  of  Christ  and  the  church.  Even 
antichrists  are  not  from  without  in  their  origin.  "  They 
went  out  from  us,  because  they  were  not  of  us."  There 
are  no  enemies  so  deadly  as  those  who,  having  received 
enough  truth  to  over-balance  them  and  to  abuse  to  their 
own  self- exaltation,  turn  again,  and  would  rend  the 
church  of  God,  wherein  they  learnt  all  that  gives  them 
power  to  be  specially  mischievous.  The  apostle  could 
not  but  dread  the  slide  oa  which  the  Colossians  found 
themselves;  and  the  more  so  as  they  themselves  had 
no  fears,  but  on  the  contrary  thought  highly  of  that 
which  had  attracted  their  minds.  If  there  was  danger, 
certainly  it  was  love  to  admonish  them;  and  in  this 
spirit  he  therefore  says,  "If  ye  continue  in  the  faith, 
grounded  and  settled." 

As  for  the  apostle  he  lays  before  them  another  point. 
He  was  a  minister  both  of  the  gospel,  and,  as  is  said  a 
little  later,  of  the  church — two  very  different  spheres, 
seldom  united  in  the  same  individual.  He  was  minister 
of  both,  and  of  the  latter,  it  would  seem,  in  a  peculiar 
and  weighty  sense :  not  merely  as  ministering  to  the 
church,  but  as  the  instrument  that  God  has  employed 
to  make  known  to  us  its  character  and  calling  more 
than  any  other.  Indeed  we  may  say  that  Paul  presents 
the  gospel  as  the  display  of  divine  righteousness  beyond 
all,  while  he  alone  developes  in  his  epistles  the  mystery 
of  Christ  and  the  church.  This  may  seem  a  strong 
statement,  and  I  wonder  at  none  feeUng  sm-prised,  till 


298  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

they  have  rigidly  examined  it  with  the  scriptures ;  for 
probably  no  one  could  believe  it  unless  he  had  proved 
its  truth. 

But  I  must  repeat  that  there  is  not  a  single  apostle 
who  so  much  as  speaks  of  being  justified  by  faith, 
except  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  James  notori- 
ously presents  what  many  think  harden  my  judgment 
quite  reconcilable,  equally  inspired  of  God,  and  most 
important  for  man,  but  not  the  same  thing,  nor  for  the 
same  end.  It  is  somewhat  startling  at  first  sight  to 
realize  such  a  fact,  but  if  it  be  a  fact — as  I  unqualifiedly 
assert — is  it  not  of  great  moment  to  understand  it  ? 
Neither  James  nor  Peter,  neither  John  nor  Jude,  treat 
of  justification  before  God  by^faith  in  Jesus.  Who  has 
done  so  ?  Paul  only.  I  am  very  far  from  insinuating 
that  Peter,  James,  John,  Jude,  and  all  the  rest,  did  not 
preach  justification  by  faith.  But  it  was  given  to  Paul, 
and  to  Paul  alone,  to  communicate  this  great  truth  in 
his  epistles ;  and  he  alone  has  used  the  well-known 
phrase.  None  of  the  others  has  touched  on  it — not  one. 
They  have  undoubtedly  taught  that  which  is  consistent 
with  it  and  even  supposes  it.  They  have  pressed  other 
truth,  which  is  incompatible  with  anything  else  but 
justification  by  faith ;  he  asserts  it  often  and  openly. 

Thus  the  most  perfect  harmony  reigns  between  all 
the  apostles;  but  Paul  was  emphatically  minister  of 
the  gospel,  and  minister  of  the  church.  Not  only  did 
he  preach  the  one  and  teach  the  other  (which  the  others 
no  doubt  did  too),  but  he  has  committed  to  inspired 
writings  the  gospel  as  none  other  did ;  and  he  has,  alone 
of  aU,  brought  out  the  church  in  the  fullest  way.  He 
might  well,  therefore,  say  (and  what  a  serious  occasion 
for  the  Colossians  that  it  was  needful  to  say  it  as  an 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSUNS.  299 

admonition !)  he  was  minister  of  both.  Yet  there  were 
men  not  wanting  then  that  denied  him  to  be  an 
apostle.  The  most  honoured  servants  of  God  invari- 
ably stir .  up  the  keenest  opposition  from  man.  But 
woe  to  such  iniquitous  and  ungrateful  adversaries !  and 
none  the  less  because  they  name  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
Some  of  old  were  not  Jews  nor  Gentiles,  but  baptized 
men  and  women.  It  was  they  that  yielded  to  these 
feelings  of  hostility.  They  might  detract  little  or  nothing 
as  to  his  personal  qualities ;  they  might  even  affect  to 
condescend  and  patronize.  But  that  for  which  they 
were  opposed  to  him  was  the  very  thing  for  which, 
most  of  all,  they  should  have  owned  their  debt  under 
God.  Satan  knew  weU  what  he  sought  in  alienating 
many  a  Christian  from  this  blessed  man  of  God,  and 
in  carping  at  his  ministry,  and  the  testimony  he  was 
given  to  bear. 

The  apostle,  however,  speaks  of  his  service  in  these 
two  respects :  the  gospel,  which  is  universal  in  its  aspect 
to  every  creature  under  heaven ;  and  the  church,  which 
is  a  special  and  chosen  body.  As  for  the  gospel,  it  is 
not  a  question  whether  every  creature  hears,  but  such 
is  the  sphere ;  and  doubtless  if  the  apostle  could  have 
preached  to  every  individual  in  the  world,  he  would 
have  gladly  done  it.  At  any  rate  this  was  his  mission. 
There  was  no  class  under  ban,  nor  was  any  individual 
refused  the  beams  of  its  heavenly  light.  In  its  own 
nature  like  the  rays  from  the  sky,  it  was  the  sun  not 
for  one  part  of  the  world  alone,  but  for  every  quarter. 
So  to  the  church  he  says,  "I  rejoice  in  my  sufferings  for 
you,  and  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions 
of  Christ  in  my  flesh  for  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the 
church:  whereof  I  am  made  a  minister,  according  to' 


300     ■     INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

the  dispensation   [or  stewardship]   of  God  which  is 
given  to  me  for  you,  to  fulfil  the  word  of  God." 

Space  was  left :  a  revelation  was  yet  lacking.  God  had 
given  the  law ;  He  had  embodied  His  past  ways  in  an 
inspired  history  of  His  people ;  He  had  given  prophets 
to  proclaim  what  was  future.  But  for  all  that  a  gap  was 
left  on  which,  when  filled  up,  types  might  more  or  less 
bear,  wholly  different  from  the  history,  and  not  more 
answering  to  the  prophecy.  How  was  it  then  to  be 
filled  up  ?  Our  Lord  Himself  marked  the  break  in  His 
reading  of  Isaiah  in  the  synagogue  at  NazaretL  See 
the  same  thing  in  the  famous  seventy  weeks  of  Daniel. 
You  come  to  that  space  from  time  to  time  in  the  pro- 
phets. Paul  was  the  one  that  God  raised  up  to  fiU.  the 
gap.  Not  that  others  did  not  supplement  this  or  that. 
As  we  know,  the  church  is  built  on  the  foundation,  not 
of  Paul,  but  of  His  holy  apostles  and  prophets.  Mark 
and  Luke,  although  they  were  not  apostles,  were  surely 
prophets.  The  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets 
took  in  the  Tew  Testament  writers  in  general.  The 
'  apostle  brings  in  his  own  special  part.  It  was  neither 
a  gospel  contributed,  nor  a  sublime  series  of  prophetic 
visions.  His  function  was  to  fill  up  the  word  of  God, — 
"  even  the  mystery  which  hath  been  hid  from  ages  and 
from  generations,  but  now  is  made  manifest  to  his 
saints :  to  whom  God  would  make  known  what  is  the 
riches  of  the  glory  of  this  mystery  among  the  Gentiles ; 
which  is  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory." 

Hence  we  learn,  it  may  be  seasonable  to  remark, 
that  the  shape  given  to  the  mystery  here  is  not  that 
Christ  is  exalted  in  heaven,  and  that  the  church,  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  thence,  is  united  to  Him 
the  Head  there.    This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  epistle  to. 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  30l 

the  Ephesians.  Here  we  see  the  other  side — Christ  in 
or  among  you  Gentiles,  "  the  hope  of  glory."  In  the 
epistle  to  the  Colossians,  glory  is  always  that  which  we 
are  waiting  for.  There  is  no  such  thing  here  as  our 
sitting  in  heavenly  places.  It  is  heavenly  glory  that  is 
waited  for,  but  only  in  hope.  Christ  was  now  in  these 
Gentiles  who  believed  the  hope  of  a  heavenly  glory  in 
prospect  for  them.  It  is  another  aspect  of  the  mystery, 
but  as  true  in  its  place  as  what  we  find  in  Ephesians ; 
not  so  high,  but  in  itself  precious,  and  not  less  differing 
from  the  expectation  raised  by  the  Old  Testament. 
What  we  read  of  there  is  that,  when  Christ  had  come. 
He  forthwith  sets  up  His  kingdom,  in  which  the  Jews 
are  promised  to  be  His  specially  favoured  subjects. 
They  are  not  indeed  to  reign  with  Him :  this  was  by 
no  man  and  at  no  time  promised  to  them.  But  they  are 
to  be  the  people  in  whose  midst  the  glory  of  Jehovah 
will  take  up  its  abode.  Here  the  apostle  speaks  of 
another  system  altogether :  Christ  come,  but  the  glory 
not  yet  apparent,  but  only  coming.  Meanwhile,  instead 
of  the  Jews  enjoying  glory  along  with  Christ  in  their 
midst,  rejected  by  the  Jews,  Christ  is  in  the  Gentiles; 
and  they  who  receive  His  name  are  waiting  for  hea- 
venly glory  with  Christ.  It  is  a  quite  different  state 
of  things  from  what  could  be  gathered  from  the  Old 
Testament.  Not  a  prophet,  not  even  the  smallest  shred 
of  any  prophecy,  reveals  such  a  truth.  It  was  an  ab- 
solutely new  truth,  in  contrast  with  the  ancient  and 
millennial  order,  yet  altogether  different  from  what  is 
found  in  the  Ephesians ;  nevertheless  they  both  con- 
stitute substantive  parts  of  the  mystery. 

Thus  the  mystery  includes,  iirst,  Christ  as  Head  above, 
we  though  here  being  united  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  Him 


a 


302  INTEODUCrORY  LECTUEES. 

glorified.  Secondly,  Christ,  meanwhile,  is  in  or  among 
the  Gentiles  here  below.  Were  He  among  the  Jews, 
it  would  be  the  introduction  of  the  promised  earthly 
;lory.  But  it  is  not  so.  The  Jews  are  enemies,  and 
unbelieving;  the  Gentiles  are  specially  the  object  of 
God's  present  ways.  Having  Christ  among  them, 
heavenly  glory  is  their  hope,  even  to  share  with  Him 
that  glory.  This,  then,  shows  Christ,  in  a  certain  sense, 
in  the  Gentiles  here  below ;  as,  in  the  Ephesians,  Christ 
is  seen  above  and  we  in  Him.  There  Jew  or  Gentile  is 
aU.  alike,  and  those  who  believe  the  gospel  are  by  the 
Spirit  united  to  Him  as  His  body,  Here  the  Gentries 
in  particular  have  Him  in  them,  the  pledge  of  their 
participating  in  His  heavenly  glory  by  and  by.  And 
as  this  was  so  blessed  and  novel  a  truth,  the  apostle 
states  his  own  earnestness  about  it — "  whom  we  preach, 
warning  every  man,  and  teaching  every  man  in  all  wis- 
dom; that  we  may  present  every  man  perfect  in  Christ." 
There  is  no  slovenliness  here;  no  careless  assump- 
tion that,  because  you  are  members  of  Christ's  body, 
all  else  must  be  right,  and  may  be  left;  for  he  who 
knew  best  the  faithful  love  of  Christ  is  none  the 
less  urgent  individually  with  "every  man."  Hence  his 
unflagging  expenditure  of  labour.  Hence  the  spending 
of  heart  and  thought  that  "every  man"  might  be  thus 
built  up  in  the  truth,  and  especially  the  heavenly  truth 
of  Christ,  which  was  entrusted  to  his  stewardship 
and  ministry,  "warning  every  man  and  teaching  every 
man,  that  we  may  present  every  man  full  grown  iq 
Christ."  This  is  the  meaning  of  "perfect."  There  is 
no  reference  to  a  question  of  evil  within,  but  of  arriving 
at  maturity  in  Christ,  instead  of  babes,  resting  merely 
in  forgiveness.   "  Whereunto  I  also  labour,  striving  ac- 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  303 

cording  to  his  working,  which  worketh  in  me  mightily." 
Thus  the  striving  of  the  apostle  was  by  no  means  only 
in  the  way  of  evangelizing.  There  was  much  more  than 
this.  It  influenced  him  deeply  and  habitually  in  all 
the  anxieties  of  love. 

"For  I  would  that  ye  knew  what  great  conflict  I 
have  for  you,  and  them  at  Laodicea,  and  for  as  many  as 
have  not  seen  my  face  in  the  flesh;  that  their  hearts 
might  be  comforted,  being  knit  together  in  love,  and 
unto  all  riches  of  the  full  assurance  of  understanding, 
to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  mystery  of  God,  and  of 
the  Father,  and  of  Christ;  in  whom  [or  rather  which] 
are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge." 
The  mystery  is  now  revealed,  even  the  relation  of  Christ 
and  the  church;  the  actual  testimony  of  God's  counsels  in 
Christ  to  those  who  compose  His  body.  And  as  a  rule,  it 
is  always  what  God  is  actually  doing  that  is  the  urgently 
needed  truth.  Special  wants  may  spring  up  and  claim 
attention  at  particular  moments ;  but  since  Christ  was 
set  on  high,  this  is  the  truth  for  the  saints,  and  for  a  very 
simple  and  sufBcient  reason^ — it  is  what  God  the  Father 
designed  for  the  day  of  salvation.  It  is  of  this  Christ 
is  the  objective  centre  and  Head.  In  this  we  have  what 
the  Spirit  occupies  Himself  with  as  sent  down  from 
heaven.  Satan  being  invariably  the  personal  and  per- 
sistent antagonist  of  Christ,  whatever  is  God's  purpose 
in  Christ  becomes  peculiarly  the  object  of  Satan's  hatred 
and  hostility. 

Hence,  as  the  apostle  Paul  was  one  on  whom  God 
set  particular  honour  in  developing  the  mystery,  and 
communicating  it  in  inspired  words  also,  so  he  was 
more  than  any  other  called  to  suffer  the  consequences 
in  this   present  evil   world.      His  labours  were  not 


304  INTRODUCTORY  LECTUEES. 

merely  indefatigable,  but  accompanied  by  the  sorest 
trial  and  anguish  of  spirit,  as  well  as  continual  detrac- 
tion with  public  hatred  and  persecution.  Everything 
which  could  break  the  heart  of  a  holy  man  from  day  to 
day  he  passed  through.  Yet,  carrying  out  his  ministry 
with  continual  tears,  he  looked  before  men  as  one 
whom  none  of  these  things  moved.  Nevertheless,  he 
lets  the  Colossians  know  what  he  went  through  for 
their  sakes  and  other  saints  who  were  before  his  heart, 
even  though  unknown  in  the  flesh.  "And  this  I  say, 
lest  any  man  should  beguile  you  with  enticing  words. 
For  though  I  be  absent  in  the  flesh,  yet  am  I  with  you 
in  the  spirit,  joying  and  beholding  your  order,  and  the 
steadfastness  of  your  faith  in  Christ.*'  There  was  much 
that  was  blessed  at  Colosse;  and  the  apostle  loves  to  give 
full  credit  for  it.  "As  ye  have  therefore  received  Christ 
Jesus  the  Lord,  so  walk  ye  in  him :  rooted  and  buUt  up 
in  him,  and  stabKshed  in  the  faith,  as  ye  have  been 
taught,  abounding  therein  with  thanksgiving."  In  fact, 
this  was  their  fault:  they  were  not  content  with  Christ 
and  Him  only.  Not  appreciating  His  glory  and  fulness, 
they  did  not  see  that  the  secret  of  true  wisdom  and 
blessing  is  in  going  on  to  know  more  of  Christ  than  is 
already  possessed.  Such  is  the  only  sure  root  of  all 
blessing,  and  in  this  above  all  is  real  faith  and  spiritu- 
ality shown.  Is  the  heart  satisfied  with  Him  ?  Do  we 
feel  and  know  that  we  can  add  nothing  to  Him  ?  Is  it 
all  we  want  to  draw  from  Him  ? 

Then  he  brings  in,  accordingly,  his  first  solemn  cau- 
tion. "Beware,"  says  he,  "lest  any  man  spoil  you  through 
philosophy  and  vain  deceit,  after  the  tradition  of  men, 
after  the  rudiments  of  the  world,  and  not  after  Christ." 
Here  we  have  the  mingling,  I  apprehend,  of  natural  man's 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  305 

philosophy,  and  religious  man's  tradition.  These  things 
at  iirst  sight  appear  far  apart,  but  they  are  not  so  in 
result.  They  may  seem  to  be  far  as  the  poles  asunder; 
but  in  point  of  fact,  there  is  nothing  that  more  shows 
an  energetic  spirit  of  evil  at  work  in  the  world  than  the 
way  in  which  he  marshals  and  combines  these  two 
armies,  that  outwardly  look  enemies  to  each  other.  Have 
you  not  proved  it  ?  Somehow  or  another,  freethinkers 
and  superstitious  men  coalesce  in  reality.  There  is  no 
feature  of  the  present  day  more  remarkable  than  the 
success  with  which  Satan  is  massing,  as  it  were,  his 
forces,  bringing  together  "at  the  very  same  point,  where 
they  are  wanted,  these  two  parties ;  that  is  to  say,  the 
heavier  arms  of  human  tradition,  and  the  lighter  ones 
of  man's  philosophy.  This  is  the  reason  why  at  each 
grave  juncture  you  will  find  that  ritualists  will  as  a 
rule  support  rationalists,  and  rationalists  will  try  to 
extenuate  the  proceedings  of  ritualists.  They  may  wear 
the  semblance  of  being  altogether  hostile  to  each  other : 
they  are  both  of  them  only  hostile  to  the  truth.  They 
both  are  thoroughly  and  essentially  ignorant  of  Christ ; 
but  the  Christ  that  they  ignore,  for  religion  or  reason, 
is  that  blessed  Person  not  so  much  as  He  who  here  lived 
and  laboured,  as  especially  dead  and  risen.  They  use 
freely  His  name ;  they  in  word  and  bodily  exercise  do 
Him  no  small  reverence ;  but  without  faith  all  is  vain. 

Beloved,  the  Christ  that  we  know  gives  no  glory  to 
the  first  man;  neither  does  He  put  honour  on  ordi- 
nances or  human  priesthood.  How  He  would  have  been 
exalted,  if  He  had  consented  to  shed  the  halo  of  His 
own  glory  on  the  race  as  such!  But  our  Lord  is  the 
Christ  who  condemned  the  first  man.  Pallen  humanity 
by  Him  was  detected  and  judged  root  and  branch.  This 

X 


306  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

cannot  be  forgiven  by  all  wbo  cleave  to  the  first  man, 
on  the  side  either  of  ordinances  or  of  philosophy.  How 
can  man  brook  that  he,  and  the  world  that  he  has  built 
up  since  he  lost  Eden,  should  be  made  nothing  of  ?  It 
is  impossible  to  look  for  it  from  human  nature.  He 
who  probed  it  all  cannot  be  endured.  We  must  and  do 
judge  all  things  as  they  are.  This  is  truth  about  them; 
and  He  who  is  the  truth  told  it  out.  The  cross  of  Christ 
is  the  death-knell  of  the  world  in  all  its  pretensions 
before  God.  His  grave  is  man's  grave.  Brethren,  the 
Christ  that  God  has  made  known  to  us  is  the  Christ 
that  man  scorned,  cast  out  and'  crucified.  But  He  is  the 
Christ  that  God  raised  from  the  dead  and  seated  in 
heavenly  glory.  And  this  is  the  truth  that  is  so  offen- 
sive to  flesh  in  every  form.  Never  will  it  be  received, 
either  by  the  world's  religion,  or  by  its  philosophy. 

How  vain  and  perilous — at  least  for  themselves — was 
the  effort  of  the  Colossians !  They  were  endeavouring 
to  strike  an  alliance  between  Christ  and  the  world. 
They  had  really  themselves  slipped  away  in  heart :  no 
such  hope  had  found  favour  otherwise.  It  was  not 
wonderful  that  he  said  in  chapter  i.,  "If  ye  continue 
in  the  faith  rooted  and  grounded,  and  not  moved  away 
from  the  hope  of  the  gospel."  They  had  been  moving 
away,  not  perhaps  so  rapidly  as  the  Galatians ;  in  faith 
they  had  been  infirm.  And  now  the  apostle  would 
recall  them :  "  Walk  in  him,  rooted  and  built  up  in 
him."  Let  them  beware  of  philosophy  and  tradition  ; 
"for  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
bodily."  lb  is  not  to  be  found  in  tradition,  still  less  in 
philosophy. 

Philosophy  is  an  idol  of  man  or  nature,  a  blind  substi- 
tute for  the  knowledge  of  God.    It  is  false  and  ruinous, 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  307 

whether  it  leaves  Him  out  or  brings  Him  in — whether 
it  denies  the  true  God,  or  makes  everything, a  sham  god. 
Atheism  and  Pantheism  are  the  ultimate  results  of 
philosophy,  and  both  in  reality  set  God  aside.  As  to 
tradition,  it  invariably  puts  man  as  far  off  from  God  as 
it  can,  and  calls  this  religion.  The  truth  in  Christ  is  not 
merely  that  God  came  down  to  man  in  love,  but  that 
man,  the  believer  in  Christ,  is  now  dead  and  risen 
in  Him.  Is  Christ  in  the  glorious  presence  of  God  ? 
The  Christian  is  one  with  Him.  Accordingly,  he 
brings  in  now  for  this  object  the  twofold  truth :  "  for 
in  him,"  says  he,  "  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  God- 
head bodily.  And  ye  are  complete  in  him."  How 
blessed!  If  He  is  the  fulness,  you  are  made  full  in 
Him,  "which  is  the  head  of  all  principality  and  power." 
Away,  then,  with  every  pretence  to  add  to  Him ;  away 
with  all  possible  expedients  to  give  lustre  to  Christ! 
"He  is  the  head  of  all  principality  and  power:  in  whom 
also  ye  are  circumcised  with  the  circumcision  made 
without  hands,  in  putting  off  the  body  of  the  flesh  [for 
so  it  runs]  by  the  circumcision  of  Christ :  buried  with 
him  in  baptism,  wherein  also  ye  are  risen." 

Constructively,  to  my  mind,  this  points  to  the  great 
sign  of  His  death.  It  is  in  baptism  rather  than  in 
Him.  Hence  it  seems  to  me  not  in  whom,  biit  rightly 
"  wherein  also  ye  are  risen  with  him  through  the  faith 
of  the  operation  of  God."  Thus  baptism  is  not  limited 
to  signifying  death.  Yet  it  is  never  the  sign  either 
of  life  or  of  bloodshedding,  but  of  a  state  of  privilege 
beyond.  When  the  apostle  was  told  to  wash  away  his 
sins,  calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord,  blood  does  not 
seem  to  have  been  meant,  but  water.  For  this  is  the 
sign  not  so  much  of  what  would  expiate  as  cleanse. 

X  2 


308  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

But  the  cleansing  as  well  as  expiation  is  by  the  death 
of  Christ,  out  of  whose  side  flowed  both. 

Here  the  doctrine  carries  one  a  little  farther  than 
either  Eomans  vi.  or  1  Peter  iii.  There  is  death  and 
hnrial  of  all  we  were ;  but  there  is  here  at  least  resur- 
rection with  Christ — death  and  resurrection.  In  Eomans 
the  emphatic  point  is  simply  death,  because  the  argu- 
ment of  the  apostle  in  chapter  vi.  does  not  admit  of 
going  beyond  the  truth  that  the  baptized  believer  is 
alive  from  the  dead — not  exactly  risen,  but  alive  unto 
God.  In  Colossians  the  argument  requires  that  our 
resurrection  with  Christ,  as  well  as  death  and  burial, 
should  be  distinctly  stated.  And  so  it  is.  "Buried 
with  him  in  baptism,  wherein  also  ye  are  risen  with 
him  through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God,  who 
has  raised  him  from  the  dead." 

He  applies  the  truth  to  the  case  in  hand  after  this : 
"  And  you,  being  dead  in  your  sins  and  the  uncircum- 
cision  of  j'our  flesh,  hath  he  quickened  together  with 
him,  having  .forgiven  us  all  trespasses ;  blotting  out  the 
handwriting  of  ordinances  that  was  against  us."  He  does 
not  say  "against  you^'  because,  in  truth,  the  Colossian 
saints  had  never  been  under  the  law  and  its  ordinances; 
they  had  been  Gentiles.  But  whereas  he  said,  "that 
you,  being  dead,"  were  now  thus  raised,  so  he  says, 
"blotting  it  out  against  us;"  for  all  that  we,  poor  Jews, 
could  boast — the  ordinances — were  against  us  instead 
of  being  for  us,  and  they  are  gone  now. 

"Blotting  out  the  handwriting  of  ordinances  that 
was  against  us,  which  was  contrary  to  us,  and  took 
it  out  of  the  way,  nailing  it  to  his  cross ;  and  having 
spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  he  made  a  show  of 
them  openly,  triumphing  over  them  in  it.     Let  no  man 


THE  EPISTLK   TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  309 

therefore  judge  you  in  meat,  or  in  drink,  or  in  respect 
of  an  holy  day,  or  of  the  new  moon,  or  of  the  sabbath 
days :  which  are  a  shadow  of  things  to  come ;  but  the 
body  is  of  Christ."  Thus  is  seen  first  of  all,  in  virtue 
of  the  dead  and  risen  Christ  in  whom  they  believed, 
that  they  were  quickened  and  all  their  trespasses  for- 
given,— two  things  here  strikingly  united  together.  The 
very  life  that  I  have  in  Christ  is  a  witness  that  my 
sins  are  forgiven.  It  is  not  merely  the  life  of  a  Christ 
that  lived  in  this  world,  but  the  life  of  Him  that  was 
lifted  up  on  the  cross,  and  bore  my  sins  there.  But 
now  the  work  is  done,  and  the  atonement  is  accepted 
before  that  new  life  is  given  me  in  Him  risen. 

One  cannot  therefore  be  quickened  together  with  Christ 
without  having  one's  trespasses,  yea,  all  (for  if  not  all, 
none)  forgiven.  The  guilt  which  a  broken  law  charged 
on  the  conscience  is  gone  by  an  act  infinitely  more 
glorifying  to,  God  than  the  personal  righteousnesses  of 
all  the  men  that  ever  lived,  not  to  speak  of  the  con- 
scious pardon  which  is  also  secured  to  those  who 
possess  it.  Had  you  to  do  with  the  law  ?  The  mighty 
work  of  Christ  has  entirely  delivered  from  it.  The 
sentence  is  blotted  out ;  the  power  of  Satan  is  spoiled 
openly;  Christ  risen  triumphs  over  all.  There  is  no 
new  means  of  grace ;  there  is  no  development,  still  less 
supplement  to  Christ.  The  one  and  same  Christ  it  is 
who  has  settled  everything. 

As  to  the  Jewish  rites  and  feasts  that  some  were 
endeavouring  to  re-impose,  take  for  an  instance  the 
Sabbath,  which  is  the  stronger,  because  it  was  from  the 
beginning  of  the  first  man,  yet  unfallen,  and  of  course 
long  before  the  Jewish  people.  "Let  no  man  judge 
you"  is  the  exhortation.  They  were  shadows.  Have  you 


310;  INTfiODUCTOEY    LECTURES. 

not  got  the  substance?  Why  be  found  running  from 
the  substance  after  the  shadow  ?  "  Let  no  man  beguile 
you  of  your  reward  in  a  voluntarj'  humility  and  wor- 
shipping of  angels,  intruding  into  those  things  which 
he  hath  not  seen,  vainly  puffed  up  by  his  fleshly  mind, 
and  not  holding  the  head."  Thus  the  fact  of  prying 
into  that  which  God  has  not  revealed,  and  man  has 
not  seen, — such  as  speculations  about  angels, — is  the 
patent  proof  that  the  heart  is  not  really  satisfied  with 
its  portion.  This  is  not  holding  the  Head.  He  who 
keeps  fast  Christ  thus,  in  conscious  union  with  Him, 
could  never  be  craving  after  angels.  In  Christ  the 
saint  is  above. them,  and  leaves  them  to  God  without 
anxiety  or  envy.  We  know  well  that  God  is  making 
a  good  use  of  them,  and  that,  in  point  of  fact,  if  we 
meddle,  it  can  only  be  to  loss  and  confusion.  "And 
not  holding  the  head,  from  which  all  the  body  by  joints 
and  bands  having  nourishment  ministered,  and  knit, 
together,  inereaseth  with  the  increase  of  God." 

Next,  the  doctrine  is  applied  stUl  more  definitely. 
"Wherefore,"  says  he,  "if  ye  be  dead  with  Christ" — 
which  is  one  grand  part  of  his  subject — ■"  if  ye  be  dead 
with  Christ  from  the  rudiments  of  the  world,  why,  as 
though  living  [or  alive]  in  the  world,  are  je  subject  to 
ordinances  ?"  Of  course  it  is  not  at  all  being  dead  to 
what  a  man  had  as  a  natural  life  in  the  world.  Such 
is  not  the  Christian  lifei  which  is  really  the  life  of  Him 
that  died  and  rose  again.  He  died — this  is  the  point 
■here — and  therefore  I  am  dead  too.  But  if  I  am  dead, 
what  have  I  to  do  with  those  things  that  only  affect 
men  as  long  as  they  live?  Certainly  they  have  no 
relation  to  me  now  risen  with  Him.  A  man  alive  in  the 
world  is  under  these  ordinances^  and  owns  them.    Such. 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  311 

was  the  position  of  Israel.  They  were  a  people  living 
in  the  world,  and  the  whole  system  of  Judaism  sup- 
posed and  dealt  with  a  people  in  the  world. 

In  moral  truth,  as  well  as  literal  fact,  the  veil,  shadow- 
ing their  state,  was  not  yet  lifted  up  from  the  unseen 
world.  But  the  first  characteristic  result  of  Christ's 
work  on  the  cross  was  the  veil  that  shut  up  the  holiest 
rent  from  top  to  bottom.  Thus  it  begins,  not  with  the 
incarnation  (for  sin  was  not  yet  judged,  nor  man  brought 
to  God),  but  with  the  cross,  with  redemption.  There 
was  no  Christianity — i.e.,  no  deliverance  of  man  and 
setting  him  in  the  Second  Man — before  Christ  became 
first-born  from  among  the  dead.  Clearly,  therefore,  the 
whole  character  of  the  new  system  depends,  first,  on 
the  Deity  of  the  incarnate  Saviour,  and,  secondly,  on 
the  glorious  truths  of  His  atoning  death  and  of  His 
resurrection.  Thus  we  should  hold  Him  fast,  not 
only  in  other  respects,  but  in  this  special  relation  of 
"  Head." 

So  he  says,  "If  ye  be  dead  with  Christ  from  the 
rudiments  of  the  world,  why,  as  though  living  in  the 
world,  are  ye  subject  to  ordinances  ?"  Then  he  gives  a 
specimen  of  these :  "  Touch  not ;  taste  not ;  handle 
not."  But  this  is  not  the  character  of  Christianity,  but 
of  Judaism.  It  pertains  to  a  life  in  this  world  to  say, 
"  Touch  not ;  taste  not ;  handle  not."  It  is  all  well  for 
a  Jew,  because  he  has  got  his  abstinences  and  his 
restrictions.  But  this  is  not  at  aU  the  divine  way  of 
dealing  with  the  Christian.  We  are  not  Jews;  w^ 
have  our  place  in  Christ  dead  and  risen,  or  are  nothing. 
Such  prohibitory  commands  had  their  day;  but  the 
time  of  reformation  is  come.  It  is  a  question  now  of 
truth  and  holiness  in  the  Spirit — of  Christ,  in  short. 


312  INTEODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

These  restrictions  dealt  with  meats  and  drinks,  and 
such  like  things,  which  perish  in  the  using.  The 
Christian  never  stood  on  any  such  fleshly  ground.  He 
is  dead  with  Christ;  consequently  he  has  passed  out 
of  the  sphere  to  which  such  dealings  apply.  "Which 
things  have  indeed  a  show  of  wisdom  in  will-worship, 
and  humility,  and  neglecting  of  the  body ;  not  in  any 
honour  to  the  satisfying  of  the  flesh."  Proud,  fallen 
nature  is  satisfied  even  by  these  efforts  to  put  down  the 
body;  whereas  God  would  have  the  body  to  have  a 
certain  honour  in  its  own  place,  and  that  of  the  Chris- 
tian is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Thus  in  every 
way  the  ritualistic  system  is  false,  and  a  traitor  to  Him 
^vho  died  on  the  cross. 

But  there  is  far  more  than  that :  "If  ye  then  be  risen 
with  Christ."  Here  we  enter  not  merely  what  clears 
one  out  from  the  rudiments  of  the  world,  but  what 
introduces  us  into  the  new  thing.  AVe  need  the  positive 
as  well  as  the  negative ;  and  as  we  have  just  had  the 
latter,  so  the  former  now  comes  before  us.  Instead  of 
letting  the  reins  free  now  to  run  in  the  race  of  im- 
proving the  world  and  bettering  society,  or  any  of  the 
objects  that  occupy  men  as  such,  the  saints  of  God 
should  abstain  altogether.  Many  who  really  love  the 
Lord  are  in  this  quite  misguided  as  to  the  duty  of  the 
Christian  here  below.  "  If  ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ, 
seek  those  things  which  are  above,  where  Christ  sitteth 
on  the  right  hand  of  God."  And  as  if  that  were  not 
precise  enough,  it  is  added,  "  Set  your  affection  on 
things  above."  It  is  rather  "your  mind;"  for  here,  how- 
ever important  the  state  of  the  heart,  it  is  a  question 
simply  of  the  whole  bent  and  judgment.  "  Set  your 
mind  on  things  above,  Twt  on  things  on  the  earth."    It 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   COLOSSUyS.  313 

is  not  merely  bringing  the  heavenly  into  them,  so  to 
speak;  and  decidedly  not  of  joining  the  two  things 
together.  The  Colossians,  like  others,  would  have  liked 
this  well  enough ;  it  is  just  what  they  were  about,  and 
the  very  thing  that  the  apostle  is  here  correcting.  The 
apostle  will  not  sanction  such  an  amalgam,  but  refuses 
it ;  and  we  must  remember  that  in  these  exhortations 
it  was  the  Lord  acting  by  the  Spirit  in  His  servant. 
"  Set  your  mind  on  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the 
earth ;  for  ye  are  dead." 

TSTote  well  again  that  it  is  not  here  man  striving 
to  become  dead,  which  is  a  notion  unknown  to  the 
revelation  of  God,  new  or  old.  In  fact  there  was  not 
even  the  thought  of  striving  to  be  dead  before  the  death 
of  Christ  came ;  and  when  He  died,  the  Spirit  in  due 
time  revealed  not  alone  that  He  died  for  us,  but  that 
we  died  in  Him.  Thus  no  room  was  left  for  striving 
to  die.  The  Christian  owns  his  death  in  his  very 
baptism ;  and  what  is  wanted  is  not  effort  to  attain,  but 
the  Spirit's  power  in  acting  on  the  truth  by  faith.  This 
it  is  that  always  settles  the  difficulties  in  the  great 
conflict  that  rages  now  as  ever,  and  more  than  ever, 
between  human  religion  and  the  truth  of  God.  Since 
men  have  a  certain  knowledge  of  Christ's  death,  they 
are  striving  to  die.  It  is  the  law  in  a  new  and  im- 
possible shape.  That  is  the  meaning  of  all  that  seems 
good  in  the  world's  piety.  It  is  an  effort  to  become 
dead  to  what  is  wrong ;  to  cultivate  what  is  felt  to  be 
glorifying  to  God ;  to  avoid  what  is  contrary  to  His 
will,  and  injurious  to  the  soul.  But  does  this  so  much 
as  resemble  the  provision  of  grace  for  the  Christian  ? 
Is  this  the  truth  ?  Must  we  not  first  and  foremost  be 
subject  to  the  truth  ?     If  I  have  Christ  as  a  Saviour  at 


314  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

all,  instead  of  struggling  to  die  in  the  sense  meant,  I 
am  called  to  believe  that  I  am  already  dead. 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  two  well-known  and  stand- 
ing institutions^ — I  will  not  call  them  ordinances — -of 
Christianity,  baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper,  are  the  plain 
and  certain  expression  of  death  ia  grace.  When  a  per- 
son is  ba]^tized,  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  act ;  nor  has 
it  any  true  force,  but  is  an  illusion,  otherwise.  Eor  the 
baptized  soul  confesses  that  the  grace  of  God  gives 
death  to  sin  in  Him  who  died  and  rose  again.  The 
Jew  looked  only  for  a  mighty  King  Messiah ;  the  Chris- 
tian is  baptized  into  the  death  of  Him  who  suffered  on 
the  cross,  and  finds  not  alone  his  sins  forgiven,  but  sin, 
the  flesh,  condemned,  and  himself  now  viewed  of  God 
as  dead  to  all;  for  nothing  less  is  set  forth  in  bap- 
tism. Thus  it  is  from  the  first  the  expression  of  a 
most  needed  truth,  which  remains  the  comfort  of  grace 
throuo-hout  the  whole  Christian  career,  and  is  therefore 
never  repeated.  Again,  on  each  Lord's  day,  when  we 
are  gathered  together  to  Christ's  name,  what  is  before 
us  according  to  God's  word  and  will  ?  A  substantially 
similar  blessing  is  stamped  on  the  table  of  the  Lord. 
When  the  Christians  unite  in  breaking  bread,  they 
show  forth  the  death  of  Christ  till  He  come.  It  is  not 
a  mere  duty  that  has  to  be  done ;  but  the  heart  is  in 
presence  of  the  objective  fact  that  He  died  for  us.  His 
body.  As  believing  in  Him,  this  is  our  place.  Such 
is  the  basis  of  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  has  set  us 
free.  It  is  a  liberty  founded  on  death,  displayed  in 
resurrection,  known  in  the  Spirit.  Having  this  in  the 
soul,  one  is  entitled  to  have  it  in  the  body  also  at  His 
coming.     Beside.s,  we  are  one  bread,  one  body. 

Hence  we  find  the  glorious  future  display  referred 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  315 

to  here:  "When  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  appear;"  for 
we  have  both  "  ye  are  dead,"  and  "  your  life  is  hid  with 
Christ  in  God."  We  may  be  content  to  be  hidden  while 
He  is  hidden ;  but  He  is  not  always  to  be  out  of  sight. 
The  Christian  will  have  all  the  desires  of  the  new  man 
gratified.  Now  he  may  have  the  blessed  enjoyment 
of  communion  with  Christ,  but  it  is  a  Christ  crucified 
on  earth.  His  glory  is  in  heaven.  A  man  seeks  to 
shine  in  the  world  now ;  it  is  a  heedless  if  not  heartless 
forgetfulness,  that  here  He  knew  nothing  but  rejection. 
Am  I  then  false  or  true  to  the  constant  sign  of  my 
Master's  death  ?  Am  I  to  court  the  honour  of  those 
who  refused  Christ,  and  gave  Him  a  cross  ?  Am  I  to 
forget  His  glory  in  the  presence  of  God  ?  Ought  I  not, 
in  my  measure  of  faith,  to  be  the  expression  of  both  ? 
Ought  I  not  to  share  my  Master's  shame  and  dishonour 
here  ?  Ought  I  not  to  wait  to  enter  the  same  glory 
with  the  Christ  of  God?  So  it  is  said  here,  "When 
Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  also 
appear  with  him  in  glory."  Accordingly  the  path  of 
Christian  duty  is  grounded  on  these  wondrous  truths. 
"Mortify  therefore  your  members  which  are  upon  the 
earth ;  fornication,  uncleanness,  inordinate  affection,  evil 
concupiscence,  and  covetousness,  which  is  idolatry." 
What  a  humbling  consideration  that  those  so  blessed 
(dead,  as  we  have  said,  and  risen  with  Christ)  are  here 
told  to  mortify  what  is  most  shameful  and  shameless  ! 
But  so  it  is.  It  is  really  what  man  is ;  and  such  is  the 
nature  which  alone  we  had  as  children  of  Adam.  These 
are  alas !  in  the  singularly  energetio  language  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  here  called  the  members  of  the  man. 
"  Mortify  therefore  your  members  which  are  upon  the 
the  earth;  fornication,  uncleanness,  inordinate  affeotiouj 


316  INTRODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

eYil  concupiscence,  and  covetousness,  -which  is  idolatry: 
for  which  things'  sake,  the  wrath  of  God  cometh  on  the 
children  of  disobedience  :  in  the  which  ye  also  walked 
sometime." 

It  is  no  use  denying  the-  plain  truth  "  when  ye  lived 
in  them;"  it  is  blessed  to  know  that  we  are  dead  now. 
Let  us  hearken,  "But  now,  ye  also  put  off  all  these."  Here 
we  come  not  merely  to  that  which  is  displayed  in  the 
forms  of  the  corruption  that  goes  on  through  things  or 
persons  outside  us,  as  it  were,  but  by  inner  feelings  of 
violence :  "  But  now  ye  also  put  off  all  these ;  anger, 
wrath,  malice,  blasphemy,  filthy  conimunication  out  of 
your  mouth."  Falsehood,  too,  is  judged  as  it  never  was 
before,  "  Lie  not  one  to  another,  seeing  that  ye  have  put 
oif  the  old  man  with  his  deeds ;  and  have  put  on  the 
new  man,  which  is  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the 
image  of  him  that  created  him."  Not  Adam,  but  Christ 
is  the  standard — Christ  who  is  God  as  well  as  man; 
"  where  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  circumcision 
nor  uncircumcision,  barbarian,  Scythian,  bond  nor  free : 
but  Christ  is  all,  and  in  all."  How  blessed ! — "  Christ 
is  all,  and  in  all." 

Thus  the  believer  can  look  round  full  of  joy  upon  his 
brethren;  he  can  count  up  souls  from  every  tribe,  tongue, 
and  station.  Who  has  been  overlooked  in  the  compre- 
hensive and  active  grace  of  our  God  ?  And  what  is  he 
then  entitled  to  see?  Christ  in  them.  And  what  a 
deliverance  from  self  to  see  Christ  in  them !  Yes,  but 
Christ  is  "all"  as  truly  as  He  is  "in  all."  Oh,  to  forget  all 
that  which  produces  jealousy,  pride,  vanity,  each  and 
every  feeling  contrary  to  God  and  unedifying  to  man; 
to  be  comforted  and  to  comfort  others  with  such  a 
(iruth — Christ  is  all,  and  Christ  is  in  all!  Such  is  God's 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  317 

word,  and  are  we,  or  are  we  not,  entitled  to  say  so  now  ? 
Sorrowful  circumstances  may,  alas!  require  us  to  pro- 
nounce on  evil  ways  in  order  to  look  into  this  evil  doc- 
trine or  that ;  but  the  apostle  speaks  now  of  the  saints 
in  their  ordinary  and  normal  manner.  Does  not  this 
stiU  abide  true  ?  Am  I  entitled,  as  I  look  upon  Chris- 
tians henceforth,  to  see  nothing  but  Christ  in  any  and 
Christ  in  every  one  ?  Yes,  Christ  is  in  all,  and  Christ  is 
all.  "Put  on,  therefore"  (says  he,  in  the  enjoyment  of 
such  grace.  Now  comes  the  positive  character  to  be  borne) 
— "  Put  on,  therefore,  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  be- 
loved." How  like  the  description  is  to  Christ  Himself ! 
He  was  God's  chosen  One  in  the  highest  sense;  He  was 
the  holy  and  beloved.  Who  ever  appealed  in  distress,  and 
did  not  find  in  Him  bowels  of  mercies,  kindness,  humble- 
ness of  mind,  meekness,  longsuffering  ?  Then  follows 
that  which  could  be  said  of  us  alone.  "If  any  man 
have  a  quarrel  against  any,  even  as  Christ  forgave  you, 
so  also  do  ye."  Forgiving  one  another  is  fortified  by 
His  example  who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  evil  found  in 
His  mouth.  Christ  on  earth  was  a  blessed  pattern  of 
forgiveness  and  forbearance.  "Even  as  Christ  forgave 
you."  He  now  brings  Hipi  in  openly,  and  to  ourselves. 
But  there  is  a  crowning  quality:  "And  above  all  these 
things  put  on  charity,"  because  this  is,  as  nothing  else 
can  be,  the  fullest  sign  of  that  which  God  is  Himself, 
the  energy  of  His  nature.  His  light  may  detect,  but 
His  love  is  the  spring  of  all  His  ways.  No  matter 
what  may  be  the  demand,  love  is  after  all  most  essential 
and  influential  too.  It  lies  at  the  bottom  when  we 
think  of  the  wants  of  the  saints  of  God  here  below. 
There  is  a  figure  especially  characteristic  of  the  divine 
nature  morally  considered — I  need  not  say  light,  as  we 


318  INTEODUCTOET  LECTURES. 

are  •  told  more  fully  in  tlie  epistle  to  the  Epliesians. 
Yet  above  all  the  saints  are  to  put  on  charity,  which  is 
the  bond  of  perfectness;  "and  let  the  peace  of  Christ 
rule,"  for  so  it  reads,  not  the  peace  of  God,  but  the 
peace  of  Christ.  Everything  in  our  epistle  is  traced  up 
to  Christ  as  the  head  of  all  possible  blessing. 

So  "let  the  peace  of  Christ  rule  in  your  hearts;"  that 
is,  the  very  peace  which  Christ  Himself  lived  and  moved 
in.  Let  His  peace  rule.  He  knows  everything  and  feels 
everything.  T  may  be  perfectly  certain,  whatever  may 
be  my  sorrow  or  travail  of  spirit  about  anything,  Christ 
feels  far  more  deeply  (yea,  infinitely  deeper  than  any 
other)  those  that  may  excite  any  of  us.  Yet  He  has 
absolute  peace,  never  broken  or  ruffled  for  an  instant. 
And  in  us,  poor  feeble  souls,  why  should  not  this  peace 
rule  in  our  hearts,  to  the  which  also  we  are  called  in 
one  body?  "And  be  ye  thankful.  Let  the  word  of  Christ" 
(it  was  God's  word,  but  still  called  the  word  of  Christ 
here)  "dwell  in  you  richly  in  all  wisdom."  There  might 
be  a  word  of  God  which  was  not  in  the  same  way  the 
word  of  Christ.  There  are  many  portions  of  the  scrip- 
tures that  do  not  by  any  means  suit  or  suppose  the 
estate  and  path  of  the  Christian.  "And  let  the  word  of 
Christ  dwell  in  you  richly  in  all  wisdom;  teaching  and 
admonishing  one  another."  It  is  not  Christ  Himself,  as 
in  Ephesians  iii.,  the  wondrous  issue  even  now  in  us 
by  the  power  of  the  Spirit ;  but,  at  least,  in  His  word 
is  found  (what  the  Colossians  needed)  an  active  and 
most  pure  spring  of  instruction  and  counsel,  and  mutu- 
ality of  help  by  it.  Such  is  the  fruit  of  His  word  thus 
dwelling  in  us.  Nor  is  this  all.  "  In  psalms  and  hymns 
and  spiritual  songs,  singing  with  grace  in  your  hearts  to 
the  Lord."     It  matters  little  how  weU  taught  the  saint 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   COL08SIAN9.  819 

may  be,  nor  how  he  may  know  the  moral  beauty  and  the 
unfailing  wisdom  of  the  word,  if  positive  fruit  be  not 
increased:  if  the  spirit  and  power  of  worship  abound 
not,  there  is  something  altogether  short,  or  wrong. 
"  And  whatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  deed,  do  all  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  siving  thanks  to  God  and  the 
Father  by  him."  Thus,  even  if  there  be  not  actually 
formal  praise,  the  Lord  looks  for  thankfulness  of  heart, 
as  counting  on  love  in  everything. 

After  this  follow  particular  exhortations,  on  which 
we  need  not  at  present  dwell.  We  have  wives  and 
husbands,  children  and  fathers,  servants  and  masters, 
brought  together  successively  up  to  the  first  verse  of 
chapter  iv.,  which  should,  of  course,  close  chapter  iii. 
rather  than  begin  a  new  one. 

Then  come  general  injunctions.  "  Continue  in  prayer, 
and  watch  in  the  same  with  thanksgiving."  JSTeither 
completeness  in  Christ,  nor  joyful  sense  of  heavenly 
relationship,  nor  heed  to  our  own  relations  in  this  life, 
should  weaken  for  an  instant,  but  rather  minister  to 
an  increased  sense  of  the  need  and  value  of  depend- 
ing on  God.  Nor  is  continuance  in  prayer  all;  but 
vigilant  watch  in  the  same,  which  does  not  let  slip 
the  just  occasion  for  supplication ;  and  as  all  things 
were  to  be  done  with  thanksgiving,  so  prayer  also, 
which  would  assuredly  not  forget  the  need  of  those  in 
the  forefront  of  the  spiritual  warfare  and  toil  of  love. 
"  Watch  in  the  same  with  thanksgiving ;  withal  praying 
also  for  us,  that  God  would  open  unto  us  a  door  of 
utterance,  to  speak  the  mystery  of  Christ,  for  which  I 
am  also  in  bonds :  that  I  may  make  it  manifest,  as  I 
ought  to  speak."  Nor  is  there  to  be  unwatchfulness, 
but  consideration  in  love  of  those  without.    "  Walk  in 


320  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

wisdom  toward  them  that  are  without,  redeeming  the 
time.  Let  your  speech  be  alway  with  grace,  seasoned 
with  salt,  that  ye  may  know  how  ye  ought  to  answer 
every  man."  The  fit  time  and  suited  speech,  always  in 
grace,  not  without  faithfulness  Godward,  how  good  and 
needful  they  are ! 

Further,  we  see  how  Christian  love  delights  to  com- 
municate and  to  hear.  It  was  his  confidence  in  their 
love;  and  this  is  shown  not  merely  in  his  desire 
to  hear  about  them,  but  in  the  conviction  that  they 
would  like  to  hear  about  Mm.  Can  anything  be  sweeter 
than  this  genuine  simplicity  of  affection  and  mutual 
interest  ?  In  a  man  it  would  be  vain  and  curious :  it 
is  blessed  in  a  Christian.  "  No  right-minded  man,  as 
such,  could  take  for  granted  that  others  would  care  to 
know  about  his  affairs  any  more  than  he  theirs,  unless 
indeed  in  case  of  a  relation,  or  a  friend,  or  a  public 
and  extraordinaiy  personage.  But  here  writes  the 
lowly-minded  apostle,  in  the  full  assurance  that,  though 
he  had  never  seen  them,  or  they  him,  it  would  be  real 
and  mutual  gratification  to  know  about  one  another 
from  him  who  went  between  them.  What  a  spring  of 
power  is  the  love  of  Christ!  Truly  charity  is  "the 
bond  of  perfectness."  "And  my  state  shall  Tychicus 
declare  unto  you,  who  is  a  beloved  brother,  and  a 
faithful  minister  and  fellow-servant  in  the  Lord :  whom 
I  have  seflt  unto  you  for  the  same  purpose,  that  he 
might  know  your  state,  and  comfort  your  hearts ;  with 
Quesimus,  a  faithful  and  beloved  brother,  who  is  one 
of  you.  They  shall  make  known  unto  you  all  things 
which  are  done  here." 

Then  come  allusions  to  his  various  fellow-prisoners 
and  feUow-servants,  particularly  noting  Epaphras,  who 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  321 

laboured  fervently  in  prayer  for  them.  This,  I  am 
sure,  should  not  be  weakened,  brethren.  We  know 
that  there  is  danger  on  aU  sides.  We  may  have  proved 
how  sadly  everything  of  the  sort  has  been  perverted; 
but  there  is  a  sense,  and  a  most  weighty  one  too,  in 
which  we  cannot  too  much  strengthen  the  links  of  love 
between  the  saints  of  God,  and  that  too  where  there 
is  a  real  holy  ministry  for  their  good.  And  this  the 
apostle  was  doing,  and  particularly  for  one  that  came 
from  them.  We  might  well  suppose  that  there  was 
some  hindrance  to  the  full  flow  of  affection  on  their 
part.  But  the  apostle  took  every  pains  to  show  how 
great  was  the  love  of  Epaphras  for  them ;  for  his  faith- 
ful spirit  knew  some  little  of  that  which  the  apostle 
knew  well, — that  the  more  abundantly  he  loved,  the 
less  he  was  loved.  "  For  I  bear  him  record,  that  he  hath 
a  great  zeal  for  you,  and  them  that  are  in  Laodicea." 
His  was  by  no  means  a  love  inactive  or  limited.  There 
was  no  such  notion  as  only  caring  for  the  saints  in  his 
own  particular  place.  Paul  narrowed  himself  to  no 
local  ties,  nor  should  we  allow  such  a  thing  for  an 
instant.  All  the  saints  belong  to  us,  as  we  belong  to 
all  of  them.  And  so  he  mentions  particularly  others, 
even  if  some  little  felt  this  link.  "  Luke,  the  beloved 
physician,  and  Demas,  greet  you.  Salute  the  brethren 
which  are  in  Laodicea,  N"ymphas,  and  the  church  which 
is  in  his  house.  And  when  this  epistle  is  read  among 
yoTi,  cause  that  it  be  read  also  in  the  church  of  the 
Laodiceans."  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  these  apos- 
tolic epistles  were  meant  to  circulate  among  the  saints. 
And  perhaps  this  may  be  the  key  to  what  we  are  next 
told :  "And  ye  likewise  read  the  epistle  from  Laodicea.'' 
The  epistle  to  Laodicea  is  not  said :  so  we  have  no  suf&- 

Y 


322  INTEODUCTOET  LECTURES. 

cient  reason  to  trouble  ourselves  about  there  being  a 
lost  portion  of  the  inspired  writings.  There  is  no  proof 
of  the  sort.  I  am  aware  that  men  have  reasoned  much 
about  it ;  but  this  is  a  proof  that  evidence  fails.  Why- 
should  we  heed  conjecture?  Had  they  prayed  more, 
the  result  might  have  been  to  better  purpose.  Possibly 
apostles  may  have  written  epistles  that  were  not  intended 
for  the  permanent  instruction  of  the  church ;  but  that 
what  was  so  intended  is  lost  we  may  resolutely  deny 
from  all  we  know  of  our  God.  Whatever  insinuates  it 
denies  that  He  has  adequately  provided  for  His  church 
here  below :  this  He  has  surely  done  in  every  form  in  His 
word.  There  is  no  impeifectness  in  that  word,  neither 
does  any  ground  exist  to  suppose  that  any  part  of  it  has 
vanished  away.  No  doubt  we  may  detect  the  flaws  of 
man's  negligence,  not  inowing  how  to  treat  with  be- 
coming care  the  precious  deposit  of  truth ;  but  there  is 
nothing  more.  That  is  to  say,  there  may  be  a  difference 
of  reading  here  and  there  which  impairs  the  full  beauty 
and  accuracy  of  the  blessed  word  of  God;  but,  as  to 
the  substance,  the  most  timid  may  be  assured-  that  you 
have  it  in  the  worst  editions  of  Christendom.  Do  not 
be  uneasy  at  the  talk  of  critics :  it  is  natural  for  dealers 
to  cry  tip  their  wares.  They  live  in  minute  points  and 
uncertainty. 

As  this  epistle  then  is  not  said  to  have  been  addressed 
to  Laodicea,  we  may  gather  that  it  was  either  from 
that  church,  or,  if  apostolic,  going  its  round  from  one 
assembly  to  another.  If  the  latter,  it  had  got  to  Laodicea, 
whence  the  Colossians  were  to  procure  it  in  their  turn. 

Archippus  was  to  take  heed  to  the  ministry  he  had 
received  in  the  Lord.  No  doubt  the  hint  is  wanted  by 
some  of  us  stUl.    May  He  make  and  keep  us  faithful ! 


FIRST   EPISTLE   TO   THE   THESSALONIANS.  323 


FIEST  AND  SECOND  THESSALONIANS. 

There  is  a  special  interest  in  examining  the  epistles  to 
the  Thessalonians,  more  particularly  the  first,  because, 
in  point  of  fact,  it  was  the  earliest  of  the  letters  of  the 
apostles ;  and  as  the  first  on  the  part  of  Paul,  so  also 
to  an  assembly  found  in  the  freshness  of  its  faith,  and 
in  the  endurance  of  no  small  suffering  for  Jesus'  sake. 
This  has  given  a  colour  to  the  character  of  the  epistle. 
Besides,  the  very  truth  which  most  strongly  charac- 
terized the  assembly  there — the  habitual  waiting  for 
the  Lord  Jesus — was  that  which  the  enemy  perverted 
into  a  means  of  danger.  It  is  always  thus.  Whatever 
God  has  specially  given  to  the  church,  whatever  He 
has  caused  to  be  brought  out  in  any  marked  nianner  at  _ 
any  time,  is  that  which  we  may  expect  Satan  to  sap 
and  undermine  with  all  diligence.  We  might  have 
supposed,  a  priori,  that  any  characteristic  truth  wovild 
be  that  in  which  the  children  of  God  would  be  more 
earnest,  and  strong,  and  united.  Undoubtedly  it  is  that 
for  which  they  are  specially  responsible ;  but  for  this 
very  reason  they  are  the  object  of  the  continual  and 
subtle  attacks  of  Satan  in  respect  of  it. 

Now  these  epistles  (for  both  in  fact  show  us  the 
same  truth,  but  on  different  sides,  guarding  it  against  a 
different  means  used  by  the  enemy  to  injure  the  saints) 
present  on  their  very  face,  in  great  fulness  of  applica- 

y  2 


324  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

tion,  the  hope  of  the  Christian,  and  that  which  sur- 
rounds it  and  flows  from  it.  At  the  same  time,  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  no  way  limits  Himself  to  that  one 
subject  in  all  its  parts;  but  as  we  receive  the  truth  in 
its  fulness  in  Christ,  so  we  have  the  great  elements  of 
Christianity,  as  well  as  the  attractive  state  of  the 
believers  in  Thessalonica,  formed  by  the  hope  which 
animated  them,  and  by  the  truth  in  general  seen  in  its 
light.  The  apostle  writes  to  them  in  a  manner  to  confirm 
their  faith :  "  Paul,  and  SQvanus,  and  Timotheus,  unto 
the  church  of  the  Thessalonians,  which  is  in  God  the 
Father,  and  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  He  does  not 
mean  by  this  to  set  forth  any  great  advance,  any  high 
standing  on  the  part  of  the  believer,  as  has  been  some- 
times drawn  from  these  words,  but  rather  the  contrary. 
It  was  the  infantine  condition  of  the  assembly  of  the 
Thessalonians  which  appears  to  have  suggested  this 
mode  of  address  from  the  apostle.  Just  as  the  babe 
of  the  family  would  be  an  especial  object  of  a  father's 
concern — more  particularly  if  peril  surrounded  it,  so 
does  the  apostle  cheer  the  church  of  the  Thessalonians, 
by  speaking  of  their  being  in  God  the  Father,  and  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (Compare  John  x.  28,  29.)  It 
is  as  children,  not  merely  in  the  sense  of  being  born'  of 
God,  but  as  babes ;  and  the  Spirit  of  God  views  the 
assembly  of  the  Thessalonians  in  this  way.  As  a  proof 
that  this  is  correct,  it  may  be  noticed  that  there  does 
not  appear  at  this  time  to  have  been  any  regular  over- 
sight established  in  their  midst.  There  is  no  hint  of 
elders  appointed  here  as  yet,  any  more  than  at  Corinth. 
There  was  no  small  vigour;  but,  at  the  same  time,  it 
had  the  stamp  of  youth.  The  fresh  flow  of  affection 
filled  their  hearts,  and  the  beauty  of  the  truth  had  but 


FIEST  EPISTLE   TO   THE   THESSALONIAlfS.  325 

just  dawned,  as  it  were,  on  their  souls.  This,  and  more 
of  kindred  character,  may  be  traced  very  clearly.  And 
we  find  here  an  instructive  lesson  how  to  deal  with 
the  entrance  of  error,  and  the  dangers  that  threaten  the 
children  of  God,  more  particularly  such  as  may  be  com- 
paratively unformed  in  the  common  faith. 

After  his  salutation  the  apostle,  as  usual,  gives  thanks 
to  God  for  them  all,  making  mention  of  them  in  his 
prayers,  as  he  says :  "  Eemembering  without  ceasing  your 
work  of  faith,  and  labour  of  love,  and  patience  of  hope 
in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  sight  of  God  and  our 
Father."  From  the  outset  we  find  the  eminently  prac- 
tical shape  which  the  truth  had  taken ;  as  indeed  must 
always  be  the  case  where  there  is  the  care  and  activity 
of  the  Spirit  of  God.  There  is  no  truth  that  is  not 
given  both  to  form  the  heart,  and  to  guide  the  steps  of 
the  saints,  so  that  there  may  be  a  living  and  a  fruitful 
service  flowing  to  God  from  it.  Such  was  the  case 
with  these  Thessalonians ;  their  work  was  the  work  of 
faith,  and  their  labour  had  love  for  its  spring;  and 
more  than  that,  their  hope  was  one  which  had  proved 
its  divine  strength  by  the  power  of  endurance  which 
it  had  given  them  in  the  midst  of  their  afflictions.  It 
was  really  the  hope  of  Christ  Himself,  as  it  is  said — : 
"  patience  of  hope  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  sight 
of  God  and  our  Father."  Thus,  we  see,  all  was  kept  in 
conscience  before  God ;  for  this  is  the  meaning  of  the 
words — "in  the  sight  of  God  and  our  Father." 

All  this  brings  them  before  the  soul  of  the  apostle  in 
confidence,  as  being  simple-hearted  witnesses,  not  only 
of  the  truth,  but  of  Christ  the  Lord.  "  For  our  gospel," 
he  says,  "came  not  unto  you  in  word  only,  but  also  in 
power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance ; 


326  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

as  ye  know  what  manner  of  men  we  were  among  you 
for  your  sake."  The  apostle  could  unburden  himself, 
and  speak  freely.  With  the  Corinthians  he  could  not 
so  open  his  heart :  there  was  such  fleshly  vaunting 
among  them  that  the  apostle  speaks  to  them  with  no 
small  reserve.  But  here  it  is  otherwise ;  and  as  there 
was  fervent  love  in  their  hearts  and  ways,  so  the  apostle 
could  speak  out  of  the  very  same  love ;  for  assuredly 
love  was  not  less  on  his  part.  Hence  he  could  enlarge 
with  joy  on  that  which  was  before  him — the  manner  in 
which  the  gospel  had  come  to  them ;  and  this  is  of  no 
small  consequence  in  the  ways  of  God.  We  should  by 
no  means  pass  by  a  due  consideration  of  the  manner  in 
which  God  deals  either  with  individual  souls,  or  with 
saints,  in  any  special  place.  For  aU  things  are  of  God. 
The  effect  of  a  storm  of  persecution,  accompanying  the 
introduction  of  the  gospel,  could  not  have  been  without 
its  weight  in  forming  the  character  of  the  saints  who 
received  the  truth;  and,  yet  more,  the  way  in  which 
God  had  wrought — particularly  in  him  who  was  the 
bearer  of  His  message — at  that  time  would  not  be 
without  its  modifying  influence  in  giving  such  a 
direction  to  it  as  would  be  for  the  Lord's  glory  and 
praise.  I  doubt  not,  therefore,  that  the  apostle's  en- 
trance among  them,  the  notable  accompanying  circum- 
stances of  it,  the  faith  and  love  that  had  been  then 
tried  —  of  course,  habitually  there,  but,  nevertheless, 
put  at  that  juncture  to  the  proof  to  a  remarkable 
degree  at  Thessalonica — had  all  their  source  in  God's 
good  guidance;  so  that  those  that  were  to  follow  in 
the  wake  of  the  same  feith,  who  would  have  to  stand 
and  suffer  in  the  name  of  the  same  Lord  Jesus  at  a 
later  day,  were  thus  strengthened  and  fitted,  as  no  othet 


FIRST   EPISTLE   TO   THE   THESSALONIANS.  327 

■way  could  have  done  so  well,  for  what  was  to  befall 
them. 

The  apostle,  therefore,  does  not  hesitate  to  say,  "Ye 
became  followers  of  us  and  of  the  Lord,  having  received 
the  word  in  much  affliction,  with  joy  of  the  Holy 
Ghost :  so  that  ye  were  ensamples  to  all  that  believe 
in  Macedonia  and  Achaia."  And  this  was  so  true  that 
the  apostle  did  not  need  to  say  anything  in  proof  of  it. 
The  very  world  wondered  how  the  word  wrought  among 
these  Thessalonians.  Men  were  struck  by  it;  and  what 
impressed  even  people  outside  was  this — that  they  not 
only  abandoned  their  idols,  but  henceforth  were  serving 
the  one  living  and  true  God,  and  were  waiting  for  His 
Son  from  heaven.  Such  was  the  testimony,  and  an  un- 
commonly bright  one  it  is.  But,  indeed,  simplicity  is 
the  secret  for  enjoying  the  truth,  as  well  as  for  receiving 
it;  and  we  shall  find  always  that  it  is  the  sure  mark 
of  God's  power  in  the  soul  by  His  word  and  Spirit. 
For  there  are  two  things  that  characterize  divine 
teaching :  real  simplicity,  on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the 
other,  that  defiuiteness  which  gives  the  inward  con- 
viction to  the  Christian  that  what  he  has  is  the  truth 
of  God.  It  might  be  too  much  to  expect  the  develop- 
ment, or,  at  any  rate,  a  large  exercise  of  such  precision 
as  this  among  the  Thessalonians  as  yet;  but  one  may 
be  sure  that  if  there  was  true  simplicity  at  first,  it 
would  lead  into  distinctness  of  judgment  ere  long.  We 
shall  find  some  features  of  this  kind  for  our  guidance, 
and  I  hope  to  remark  upon  them  as  they  come  before 
me. 

But,  first  of  all,  take  notice  that  the  first  description 
which  is  given  of  them,  in  relation  to  the  coming  of  the 
Lord,  is  simply  awaiting  the  Son  of  God  from  heaven. 


328  INTEODUCTORT  LECTURES. 

We  do  not  well  to  fasten  upon  this  expression  more 
than  it  was  intended  to  convey.  It  does  not  appear  to 
me  to  mean  anything  more  than  the  general  attitude  of 
the  Christian  in  relation  to  Him  whom  he  expects  from 
above.  It  is  the  simple  fact  of  their  looking  for  the 
same  Saviour  who  had  already  come,  whom  they  had 
known^that  Jesus  who  had  died  for  them  and  was  raised 
again  from  the  dead,  their  Deliverer  from  the  wrath  to 
come.  Thus  they  were  waiting  for  this  mighty  and  gra- 
cious Saviour  to  come  from  heaven.  How  He  was 
coming  they  knew  not;  what  would  be  the  effects  of 
His  coming  they  knew  little.  They  of  course  knew 
nothing  about  the  time,  no  soul  does ;  it  is  reserved  in 
the  hands  of  our  God  and  Father;  but  they  were,  as 
became  babes,  waiting  for  Him  according  to  His  own 
word.  Whether  He  would  take  them  back  into  the 
heavens,  or  at  once  enter  on  the  kingdom  under  the 
whole  heaven,  I  am  persuaded  they  did  not  know  at 
this  time. 

It  seems  therefore  a  mistake  to  press  this  text,  as  if  it 
necessarily  taught  Christ's  coming  in  order  to  translate 
saints  into  heaven.  It  leaves  the  aim,  mode,  and 
result  an  entirely  open  matter.  We  may  find  ourselves 
sometimes  forcing  scripture  in  this  way;  but  be  assured, 
it  is  true  wisdom  to  draw  from  scripture  no  more  than 
it  distinctly  undertakes  to  convey.  It  is  much  better, 
if  with  fewer  texts,  to  have  them  more  to  the  purpose. 
We  shall  find  ere  long  the  importance  of  not  multiply- 
ing proof- texts  for  any  particular  aim,  but  of  seeking 
rather  from  God  the  definite  use  of  each  scripture. 
Now  all  that  the  apostle  has  here  in  view  is  to  remind 
the  Thessalonian  saints  that  they  were  waiting  for  that 
same  Deliverer,  who  was  dead  and  risen,  to  come  from 


FIRST  EPISTLE   TO   THE   THESSALONIANS.  329 

heaven.  It  is  likely  that  as  His  coming  is  presented  in 
the  character  of  Son  of  God,  it  may  suggest  more  to  the 
spiritual  mind,  and  probably  did  suggest  more  to  them 
at  a  later  day.  I  am  only  speaking  of  what  is  impor- 
tant to  bear  in  mind  at  their  first  conversion.  ,It  was 
the  simple  truth  that  the  divine  person,  who  loved 
them  and  died  for  them,  was  coming  back  from  heaven. 
What  would  be  the  manner  and  the  consequences  they 
had  yet  to  learn.  They  were  waiting  for  Him  who  had 
proved  His  love  for  them  deeper  than  death  or  judg- 
ment ;  and  He  was  coming :  how  could  they  but  love 
Him  and  wait  for  Him  ? 


The  second  chapter  pursues  the  subject  of  the  apos- 
tle's ministry  in  connection  with  their  conversion.  He 
had  not  left  them  when  they  had  been  brought  to  the 
knowledge  of  Christ.  He  had  laboured  among  them. 
"For  yourselves,  brethren,  know  our  entrance  in  unto 
you,  that  it  w^s  not  in  vain:  but  even  after  we  had 
suffered  before,  and  were  shamefully  entreated,  as  ye 
know,  at  Philippi,  we  were  bold  in  our  God  to  speak 
unto  you  the  gospel  of  God  with  much  contention." 
The  apostle  had  gone  on  in  persevering  faith,  undis- 
turbed by  that  which  had  followed.  He  was  not  to  be 
turned  aside  from  the  gospel.  It  had  brought  trouble 
on  him,  but  he  persevered.  "  For  our  exhortation,"  he 
says,  "was  not  of  deceit,  nor  of  uncleanness,  nor  in 
guile:  but  as  we  were  allowed  of  God  to  be  put  in  trust 
with  the  gospel,  even  so  we  speak;  not  as  pleasing  men, 
but  God,  which  trieth  our  hearts.  For  neither  at  any 
time  used  we  flattering  words,  as  ye  know,  nor  a  cloke 
of  covetousness ;  God  is  witness:  nor  of  men  sought 


330  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

we  glory,  neither  of  you,  nor  yet  of  others,  when  we 
might  have  been  burdensome,  as  the  apostles  of  Christ." 

Here  we  see  how  entirely  his  ministry  had  been 
above  the  ordinary  motives  of  men.  There  was  no  self- 
seeking  It  was  not  a  question  of  exalting  himself,  or 
of  earthly  personal  gain;  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  was 
there  the  indulging  of  the  passions,  either  gross  or 
refined  None  of  these  things  had  a  place  in  his  heart, 
as  he  could  appeal  to  God  solemnly.  Their  own  con- 
sciences were  witnesses  of  it.  But,  more  than  that,  love 
and  tenderness  of  care  had  wrought  toward  them.  "  We 
were  gentle  among  you,  even  as  a  nurse  cherisheth  her 
children :  so  being  affectionately  desirous  of  you,  we 
were  willing  to  have  imparted  unto  you,  not  the  gospel 
of  God  only,  but  also  our  own  souls,  because  ye  were 
dear  unto  us."  What  a  picture  of  gracious  interest  in 
souls,  and  of  this,  not  in  Him  who  has  the  full  expres- 
sion of  divine  love,  but  in  a  man  of  like  passions  with 
ourselves !  For  if  we  must  ever  look  for  the  per- 
fection of  it  in  Christ  alone,  it  is  good  for  us  to  see  the 
life  and  love  of  Christ  in  one  who  had  to  contend  with 
the  very  same  evils  which  we  have  in  our  nature. 

Here,  then,  we  have  the  lovely  picture  of  the  grace  of 
the  apostle  in  watching  over  these  young  Christians ;  and 
this  he  presents  in  a  two-fold  form.  First,  when  in  the 
most  infantine  condition,  as  a  nurse  he  cherished  them; 
but  when  they  grew  a  little,  he  pursued  his  course, 
"labouring  night  and  day,  because  we  would  not  be 
chargeable  unto  any  of  you,  preaching  unto  you  the 
gospel  of  God.  As  ye  know  how  we  exhorted  and  com- 
forted and  charged  every  one  of  you,  as  a  father  doth 
his  children."  As  they  advanced  spiritually,  so  the 
character  of  ministering  to  their  need  was  changed;  but 


FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  331 

it  was  the  very  same  love  in  exhorting  them  as  a  father, 
which  had  cared  for  them  as  a  nurse.  This  may  be  the 
beau  ideal  of  a  true  pastor ;  but  it  is  the  picture  of  a 
real  apostle  of  Christ,  of  Paul  among  the  Thessalonians, 
whose  one  desire  was  that  they  should  walk  worthy  of 
God,  who  had  called  them  to  His  kingdom  and  glory.  "For 
this  cause  also  thank  we  God  without  ceasing,  becau.se, 
when  ye  received  the  word  of  God  which  ye  heard  of 
us,  ye  received  it  not  as  the  word  of  men,  but  as  it  is 
ia  truth,  the  word  of  God,  which  effectually  worketh 
also  in  you  that  believe." 

Then  follows  a  sketch  of  that  suffering  which  faith 
entails,  as  sooner  or  later  it  must  come;  and  as  he  had 
charged  them  to  walk  worthy  of  God,  who  had  cheered 
them  with  the  prospect  of  the  unseen  and  eternal  things, 
so  he  would  have  them  to  prove  by  their  constancy  and 
endurance  that  it  was  God's  word  which  so  powerfully 
wrought  in  them,  spite  of  all  man  could  do.  "For  ye, 
brethren,  became  followers  of  the  churches  of  God 
which  in  Judsea  are  in  Christ  Jesus :  for  ye  also  have 
suffered  like  things  of  your  own  countrymen,  even  as 
they  have  of  the  Jews :  who  both  killed  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  their  own  prophets" — not  exactly  their  own  pro- 
phets, but  the  prophets — "and  have  persecuted  us; 
and  they  please  not  God,  and  are  contrary  to  all  men : 
forbidding  us  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles."  What  a  con- 
trast with  the  grace  of  God !  The  people  who  had  the 
prestige  of  religion  could  not  endure  that  the  gospel 
should  go  to  the  despised  Gentiles,  their  enemies.  Yet 
why  should  they  have  been  so  careful  of  it,  siuce  they 
did  not  believe  in  it  themselves?  How  came  to  pass  this 
their  sudden  interest  in  the  spiritual  welfare  of  the  hea- 
then? Whence  originated  this  unwearied  zeal  to  deprive 


332  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

others  of  the  gospel  they  themselves  scorned  ?  If  the 
gospel  were  such  an  irrational  and  immoral  and  trum- 
pery matter  as  they  professed  to  consider  it,  how  was  it 
that  they  spared  no  pains  to  prejudice  men  against  it, 
and  to  persecute  its  preachers?  Men  do  not  usually 
feel  thus — do  not  set  themselves  so  bitterly  and  con- 
tinuously against  that  which  does  not  prick  their  con- 
sciences. One  can  understand  it  where  there  is  the 
sense  of  a  good  of  which  they  are  not  prepared  to  avail 
themselves :  the  rebellious  heart  vents  itself  then  in 
implacable  hatred  at  seeing  it  go  to  others,  who  per- 
adventure  would  receive  it  gladly.  It  is  man  always  the 
enemy,  the  persistent  antagonist  of  God,  and  more 
particularly  of  His  grace.  But  it  is  religious  man,  as 
the  Jew  was,  here  and  everywhere — man  with  a  mea- 
sure of  traditional  truth,  who  feels  thus  sore  at  the 
operations  of  God  in  His  mighty  grace. 

But  the  apostle  as  he  had  shown  us  men  the  objects 
of  the  gospel,  and  the  constant  interest  of  grace  in 
Christians,  contrasted  with  those  who  hindered  because 
they  hated  the  grace  of  God,  so  he  also  lets  them  know 
the  affectionate  desire  that  was  not  weakened  by  absence 
from  it,  but  rather  the  contrary.  "But  we,  brethren, 
being  taken  from  you  for  a  short  time  in  presence,  not 
in  heart,  endeavoured  the  more  abundantly  to  see  your 
face  with  great  desire."  There  is  nothing  so  real  upon 
earth  as  the  love  of  Christ  reproduced  by  the  Spirit  in 
the  Christian.  "  Wherefore  we  would  have  come  unto 
you,  even  I  Paul,  once  and  again ;  but  Satan  hindered 
us."  There  is  a  reality  for  evU  in  Satan,  the  great  per- 
sonal enemy,  as  much  in  a  certain  sense  as  there  is  in 
Christ  for  good.     Let  us  not  forget  it. 

On  the  other  hand,  what  is  the  encouragement  to 


FIRST   EPISTLE   TO   THE   TKESSALONIANS.  333 

siiffering  love  and  toil  along  the  road  ?  "  What  is  our 
hope,  or  joy,  or  crown  of  rejoicing  ? "  It  matters  little 
what  the  circumstances  may  be  in  regard  to  true  ministry 
in  the  grace  of  Christ.  Trial  shows  how  superior  it  is 
to  circumstances.  Bodily  presence  or  absence  only  tests 
it.  Afiiictions  only  prove  its  strength.  Distance  only 
gives  room  to  its  expression  to  those  who  are  absent. 
The  unfailing  and  only  adequate  comfort  is  the  certain 
re-union  of  those  who  minister,  and  those  who  are 
ministered  to,  in  the  day  when  all  opposition  wUl  van- 
ish, and  around  the  board  where  all  the  fruits  of  true 
ministry,  whether  of  a  nurse  or  of  a  father  that  ex- 
horts those  who  are  growing  up  in  the  truth,  will  be 
tasted  in  the  joy  of  our  Lord.  The  apostles  and  their 
companions  in  labour  were  content  to  wait  for  the 
reward  of  loving  oversight  exercised  among  the  saints 
of  God. 

But  this  did  not  in  the  slightest  degree  hinder  the 
apostle's  tender  sympathy  with  those  who  were  pressed 
down  by  any  special  sufferings.  For  Christianity  is  not 
dreamy  or  sentimental,  but  most  real  in  its  power  of 
adapting  itself  to  every  need.  It  is  the  true  deliverance 
from  aU  that  is  fictitious,  whether  on  the  side  of  reason 
or  of  imagination  in  the  things  of  God.  Superstition  has 
its  perils;  but  quite  as  much  has  the  dogmatism  of  mere 
intellect.  Scripture  raises  the  believer  above  both ;  yet 
the  apostle  shows  what  anxiety  of  feeling  was  his  about 
the  Thessalonians.  He  did  not  doubt  the  Lord's  watch- 
ful eye.  Nevertheless  aU  his  heart  was  in  movement 
about  them.  He  had  sent  Timotheus  when  he  could  not 
go  himself;  and  he  was  rejoiced  to  hear  the  good  ac- 
count which  he  thus  gleaned  through  him,  for  he 
dreaded  lest  they  might  be  shaken  by  the  great  wave  of 


334  INTRODUCTOBY  LECTUEES. 

trouble  that  was  sweeping  over  them.  No  doubt  they 
had  been  prepared  for  this  in  a  measure;  for  he  had 
told  them,  when  with  them,  that  they  were,  appointed 
thereunto. 

But  now,  how  cheered  was  his  spirit  to  find  that  the 
tempter  had  been  foiled!  Timotheus  had  come  with 
good  tidings  of  their  faith  and  love.  Spite  of  all,  they 
had  "good  remembrance  of  us  always,  desiring  greatly 
to  see  us,  as  we  also  to  see  you."  Love  was  still  fervent, 
as  in  him,  so  in  them.  "  Therefore,  brethren,  we  were 
comforted  over  you  in  aU  our  affliction  and  distress  by 
your  faith:  for  now  we  live,  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord." 
But  in  the  midst  of  thanksgiving  he  prays  for  them. 

We  may  notice  two  prayers  particularly  in  this  epistle. 
The  first  occurs  at  the  end  of  chapter  iii.,  and  the  second 
at  the  end  of  the  last  chapter.  The  first  is  more  parti- 
cularly a  review  of  the  entrance  of  the  gospel  among 
the  Thessalonian  saints  and  of  his  own  ministry,  which 
was  no  doubt  meant  to  be  suggestive  to  them  of  the 
true  character  and  method  of  serving  the  Lord  in  deal- 
ing with  all  men.  He  winds  it  up  with  prayer  to  the 
effect :  "Now  God  himself  and  our  Pather,  and  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  direct  our  way  unto  you.  And  the  Lord 
make  you  to  increase  and  abound  one  toward  another, 
and  toward  all  men,  even  as  we  do  toward  you :  to  the 
end  he  may  stablish  your  hearts  unblameable  in  holi- 
ness before  God,  even  our  Father,  at  the  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  all  his  saints." 

Here  at  once  we  come  to  very  distinct  guidance  for 
our  thoughts;  and  this  in  more  ways  than  one.  He 
prays  not  that  they  may  be  established  in  holiness,  in 
order  that  they  might  love  one  another,  but  that  they 
might  abound  in  love,  in  order  that  they  might  be 


FIRST   EPISTLE   TO   THE   THESSALONIANS.  335 

establislied  in  holiness.  Love  always  precedes  holiness. 
It  is  true  from  conversion — from  the  beginning  of  the 
work  in  the  soul— and  it  is  also  true  to  the  last.  What 
first  raises  the  heart  to  God  is  some  faint  sense  of  His 
love  in  Christ.  I  do  not  say  anything  at  all  like  the 
love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  given  us.  There  may  then  be  no  power  to  rest  on 
divine  love ;  there  can  be  no  abounding  in  love  in  such 
a  state.  But,  for  all  that,  there  is  a  hope  of  love — if  it 
be  the  feeblest  thought ;  if  it  be  only  that  "  there  is 
bread  enough  and  to  spare"  for  the  merest  prodigal 
that  betakes  himself  to  the  father's  house.  If  we  look 
at  God  and  Christ,  and  at  the  grace  that  suits  the 
Father's  counsels  and  the  Son's  work,  I  admit  all  this 
is  a  scanty  measure — a  poor  thing  on  their  part,  to  give 
a  servant's  portion  in  such  a  house.  But  it  was  no 
small  prize  for  the  heart  of  a  sinner,  darkened  and  nar- 
rowed by  selfishness,  and  the  indulgence  of  lust  and 
passion.  And  what  is  sin  in  every  form  but  selfishness  ? 
We  know  how  this  shuts  up  the  heart,  and  how  it  de- 
.  stroys  every  expectation  of  goodness  in  others.  The 
grace  of  God,  contrariwise,  works  and  kindles,  it  may 
be,  a  very  little  spark  at  first,  but  still  a  beginning  of 
what  is  truly  great,  good,  and  eternal.  Accordingly,  as 
we  read,  the  prodigal  starts  from  the  far  country,  and 
cannot  rest — though  there  was  incomparably  more  ear- 
nestness on  the  part  of  the  father  to  meet  him,  as  well 
we  know ;  for  it  was  not  the  prodigal  that  ran  to  the 
father,  but  the  father  to  the  prodigal.  And  thus  it  is 
always.  The  same  true  working  of  love,  however 
at  first  dimly  seen,  that  wakes  the  sinner  from  his 
wretched  bed  of  sin — for  rest  it  cannot  be  called — this 
rouses  him  from  the  guilty  dreams  of  death.     On  the 


336  mTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

other  hand,  it  is  the  fulness  of  love  which  gives  the 
heart  to  enter  into  the  riches  of  grace  towards  us,  shed- 
ding abroad,  not  an  earnest  of  it,  but  itself  in  the  heart. 
And  this  holiness,  not  in  desire  only,  but  real  and  deep, 
keeps  pace  with  love. 

It  is  not,  of  course,  my  present  task  to  unfold  the 
wonderful  way  in  which  that  love  has  been  proved  to 
us.  It  does  not  come  before  me  now,  nor  is  it  for  me  to 
leave  my  theme  even  to  speak  of  its  display  in  Christ, 
by  whom  God  commends  His  own  love  to  us,  in  that, 
while  yet  sinners,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the 
death  of  His  Son,  till  we  can  joy  in  Himself  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  I  afi&rm  that  all  practical 
holiness  is  the  fruit  of  the  love  to  which  the  heart  has 
surrendered,  and  which  it  receives  simply  and  enjoys 
fully.  This,  then,  is  true  of  the  soul  that  is  only  seek- 
ing to  know  the  grace  of  God. 

But  here  he  earnestly  desires  their  growth  in  holiness, 
and  prays  for  them  that  they  might  "increase  and  abound 
in  love  one  toward  another,  and  toward  all  men,  even  as 
we  do  toward  you:  to  the  end  he  may  stablish  your 
hearts  unblameable  in  holiness.''  And  the  manner  in 
which  this  is  connected  with  the  coming  of  Christ  here 
is  very  noticeable.  He  supposes  it  to  be  flowing  out  of 
love,  and  going  on  in  holiness,  proceeding  unbroken, 
until  the  saint  finds  himself  at  last  in  the  display 
of  glory;  not  when  Christ  comes  to  take  us  up,  but 
when  God  brings  us  with  Him.  Why  (let  me  ask)  is 
there  not  presented  His  coming  to  receive  the  saints 
in  this  chapter,  as  in  the  next  ?  Because  our  walking 
in  love  and  holiness  is  the  question  in  the  hand  of 
the  Holy  Spirit;  and  this  has  the  most  intimate  con- 
nection with  Christ's  appearing,  when  we  come  with 


FIRST  EPISTLE   TO   THE   THESSALONIANS.  337 

Him.  And  for  this  there  is  a  simple  reason.  Where 
the  walk  comes  in,  we  have  clearly  responsibility  before 
the  saints.  Now  the  appearing  of  the  Lord  Jesiis  is 
that  which  wUl  manifest  us  in  the  results  of  responsi- 
bility. Then  we  shall  each  see,  when  self-love  can  no 
longer  darken  our  judgment  of  ourselves,  or  our  estimate 
of  others,  when  nothing  but  the  truth  shall  remain  and 
be  displayed  of  all  that  has  been  wrought  in  us,  or 
done  by  us.  Por  the  Lord  will  assuredly  come  to 
translate  us  to  His  presence;  but  He  wiU  also  cause  us 
to  appear  with  Him  in  glory,  when  He  appears ;  and 
when  this  moment  arrives,  it  will  be  made  manifest  how 
far  we  have  been  faithful,  and  how  far  faithless.  All 
will  be  turned  to  His  own  glory.  Accordingly  then  in 
this  chapter  iii.  we  see  the  reason  why,  as  it  appears  to 
me,  the  Spirit  directs  attention  to  His  coming  vjith  all 
His  saints,  not /or  them. 

The  next  portion,  or  second  half  of  the  epistle,  opens 
with  practical  exhortation.  The  early  part  insists  on 
purity;  then  follow  a  few  words  on  love.  It  might  seem 
strange  that  it  should  be  needful  to  guard  these  saints, 
walking  as  we  have  seen  so  simply  and  delightfully, 
against  unclean  offences  even  in  the  closest  relations  of 
life — that  Christian  men  should  be  warned  against 
fornication  and  adultery ;  but  we  know  that  so  desperate 
is  the  evil  of  the  flesh,  that  no  circumstances  nor  posi- 
tion can  secure,  yea,  even  the  joy  of  the  blessing  of 
God's  grace,  without  exercise  of  conscience  and  self- 
judgment;  and  hence  these  solemn  admonitions  from 
the  Lord.  It  was  particularly  needed  at  that  time  and 
in  Greece,  because  such  sins  were  rather  sanctioned 
than  judged  in  the  heathen  world.     Even  mankind  in 

z 


338  INTEODXrCTOEY  LECTURES. 

later  days  have  profited  enormously  by  the  change. 
They  can  now  no  doubt  enrich  themselves  with  truth, 
and  talk  largely  about  holiness;  but  how  little  they 
knew  of  either  before  they  borrowed  from  Scripture!  It 
is  all  stolen  goods,  every  bit  of  real  value.  The  men 
of  whom  they  are  the  successors  were  unclean  to  the 
last  degree.  The  Aristotles  and  Platos  were  really  not  fit 
for  decent  company.  I  admit  our  Grecians  would  scowl 
at  such  an  estimate,  or  scorn  it ;  but  they  lack  the  ele- 
ments for  forming  an  adequate  moral  appraisal,  or  they  do 
not  look  the  facts  in  the  face,  plain  enough  as  they  are. 
If  knowingly  they  endorse  or  make  light  of  such  morals 
as  Plato  counted  desirable  for  his  republic,  it  cannot  be 
doubted  where  they  themselves  are.  Undoubtedly  there 
were  some  fine  speculations,  but  nothing  more;  for  men 
thought  that  talking  about  morality  would  do  as  well 
as  the  thing  itself.  It  is  Christ,  and  Christ  alone,  that 
has  brought  in  the  very  truth  of  God  in  word  and  deed. 
It  was  unknown  to  man  before :  still  more  the  ultimate 
proof  in  the  cross  that  He  is  love.  Christ  first  displayed 
absolute  purity  in  the  very  nature  which  had  revelled 
in  lust  and  passion  heretofore. 

But  the  Thessalonians  in  general  might  not  have  esti- 
mated its  importance  fully,  being  young  in  the  truth. 
There  was  doubtless  good  reason  why  the  apostle  in 
writing  to  them  had  to  lay  great  stress  on  moral  purity. 
The  fact  is,  that  it  was  a  matter  of  course  then  for  men 
to  live  just  as  they  listed.  There  was  no  restriction, 
except  so  far  as  mere  human  vengeance  or  punishments 
of  the  law  might  deter  them.  Men  indulged  themselves 
in  anything  they  could  do  safely.  And  so  indeed  it  is 
to  this  day,  except  so  far  as  Christianity  or  the  pro- 
fession of  it  prevents  them. 


FIRST  EPISTLE  TO   THE   THESSALONIA.NS.  339 

After  spealcing  of  purity,  the  apostle  treats  of  loving 
one  another,  and  adds  that  there  was  no  need  to  say 
much  about  it.  They  themselves  were  taught  of  God ; 
they  knew  what  they  were  called  to  in  brotherly  love. 
But  he  does  exhort  them  to  be  quiet  and  to  mind 
their  own  business,  working  with  their  own  hands,  as 
he  not  only  commanded  them  when  in  their  midst,  but 
exemplified  it  from  day  to  day  himself  He  had  it 
deeply  at  heart  that  they  should  walk  reputably  toward 
those  without,  and  have  need  of  no  one  or  thing. 

But  we  come  in  the  next  place  to  a  main  topic  of 
the  epistle.  They  had  fallen  into  a  serious  mistake  as 
to  some  of  the  brethren  that  had  fallen  asleep.  They 
feared  that  these  departed  saints  would  miss  much  at 
the  coming  of  the  Lord — in  fact,  that  they  would  lose 
their  part  in  the  joyful  meeting  between  the  Lord  Jesus 
and  His  saints.  This  at  once  shows  us  that  we  must 
not  estimate  the  Thessalonian  believers  according  to 
that  standard  which  these  mistakes  helped  to  elicit 
from  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  have  the  advantage  of  the 
entire  development  of  the  truth,  much  of  which  was 
the  inspired  correction  of  evils  and  errors.  The  New 
Testament,  you  must  remember,  was  not  then  written ; 
a  very  small  part — one  gospel,  or  at  most  perhaps  two, 
and  not  one  of  the  epistles.  Thus,  except  the  teaching 
that  they  had  received  from  the  apostle  during  his  com- 
paratively short  stay  in  Thessalonica,  they  had  little  or 
no  means  of  further  instruction  in  the  truth,  and  we 
know  how  easily  that  which  is  only  heard  passes  away. 
We  may  learn  from  this  the  invaluable  blessing  we 
have,  not  merely  in  the  word,  but  in  the  written  word 
of  God — scripture.  However,  at  this  time,  for  the  most 
part,  th6  New  Testament  books  were  not  yet  written. 

z  2 


340  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

It  was  that  part  of  scripture  wliicli  most  of  all  con- 
cerned these  saints.  We  must  not,  therefore,  wonder 
that  they  were  ignorant  of  what  had  regard  to  their 
brethren  who  had  fallen  asleep.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
not  meant  that  they  entertained  any  fears  of  their  being 
lost.  This  could  not  arise  in  the  minds  of  souls  grounded 
in  what  the  apostle  calls  our  gospel ;  and  no  charge  is 
so  much  as  hinted  of  any  failure  in  this  respect.  Still 
a  delay  might  have  been  conceived  before  they  entered 
into  full  blessedness.  One  can  understand  their  per- 
plexity for  want  of  light  on  what  the  Lord  would  do 
with  them.  They  did  not  know  whether  they  would 
then  enter  the  kingdom,  or  how,  or  when.  These  were 
questions  unsolved. 

The  Holy  Ghost  meets  their  difficulties  now,  and 
tells  them  to  this  effect :  "  I  would  not  have  you  to  be 
ignorant,  brethren,  concerning  them  which  are  asleep, 
that  ye  sorrow  not  even  as  others  which  have  no  hope. 
For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even 
so  them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus  wUl  God  bring  with 
him."  Clearly  we  hear  agaia  of  the  Lord  coming,  and 
bringing  these  saints  with  Him.  It  is  not  the  Lord, 
however,  receiving  them  to  Himself,  but  bringing  them 
with  Him.  That  is,  we  have  once  more  the  Lord  coming 
in  glory  with  His  saints  already  glorified.  When  that 
moment  comes,  at  any  rate,  they  will  be  with  Him. 
Such  is  the  first  statement  of  the  apostle.  But  this 
very  truth,  which  made  part  of  their  old  difficulty, 
raises  another  difficulty.  How  could  the  saints  that 
had  fallen  asleep  come  with  Him  now?  How  could 
all  the  saints  appear  in  glory  with  Christ  ?  They  seem 
to  have  understood  that  when  the  Lord  came,  there 
would  be  saints  here  below  waiting  for  Christ;  and  that 


FIRST  EPISTLE   TO   THE   THESSALONIANS.  341 

these  would  somehow  be  with  Him  in  glory.  But  they 
were  utterly  perplexed  as  to  the  saints  that  had  fallen 
asleep.  They  did  not  know  what  to  make  of  the  interim 
— if  indeed  they  suspected  an  interim.  They  did  not 
know  the  process  by  which  the  Lord  would  deal  with 
those  that  had  died;  and  it  is  now  explained. 

"  For  this  we  say  unto  you  by  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
that  we  which  are  alive  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of 
the  Lord  shall  not  prevent  [shall  in  no  wise  anticipate] 
them  which  are  asleep."  If  they  had  remained  alive, 
no  difficulty  had  been  felt  in  the  case.  Some  in  our  day 
seem  to  feel  a  good  deal  surprised  at  such  a  difficulty 
as  this ;  but  the  truth  is  that  the  sorrow  of  the  Thes- 
salonians  arose  from  the  simplicity  of  their  faith,  and 
men's  feeling  no  difficulty  now  is  partly  owing  to  their 
lack  of  any  genuine  faith  in  it.  Had  they  more  faith, 
they  might  have  their  perplexities  too,  not  at  the  end, 
but,  as  usual,  at  the  beginning.  It  was  certainly  so 
with  the  Thessalonians  at  this  time. .  It  is  always  the 
effect  of  faith  at  first.  Newly-entered  light  gives  occa- 
sion to  the  perception  of  much  which  we  cannot  solve 
at  once.  But  God  comes  in  to  the  aid  of  the  believer, 
and  in  His  own  grace  and  time  solves  one  difficulty 
after  another.  Then  the  apostle  clears  it  up  thus:  "We 
which  are  alive  and  remain  unto  the  coming  [or  pre- 
sence] of  the  Lord,"  &c.  The  word  "  coming "  means 
the  fact  of  being  present  in  contrast  with  absence.  "We 
which  are  alive  and  remain  unto  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  shall  not  precede  them  which  are  asleep."  I  take 
the  liberty  of  changing  the  word  "  prevent,"  which  is 
old  English,  into  a  phrase  which  gives  the  same  mean- 
ing as  "  prevent "  when  the  translation  was  made. 

We  "shall  not   precede  them  which  are  asleep."- 


342  INTKODUCTOBi"  LECTURES. 

Thus,  suppose  we  are  waiting  for  Christ  to  come,  and 
that  He  comes,  we  shall  not  be  before  those  saints  that 
have  departed  previously.  How  can  this  be?  It  is 
answered  in  the  next  verse.  "  For  the  Lord  himself," 
says  he,  "  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with 
the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God : 
and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first :  then  we  which 
are  alive  and  remain  shall  be  caught  up  together  with 
them  in  the  clovids,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air :  and  so 
shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  Thus  it  is  evident 
that,  if  there  be  a  moment  of  difference,  it  is  in  favour 
of  the  sleepers,  and  not  of  those  which  remain  alive. 
Those  that  are  asleep  are  first  wakened  up.  Bear  in 
mind,  sleep  is  for  the  body;  the  soul  is  never  said  or 
supposed  in  scripture  to  be  asleep.  But  those  who  are 
asleep  in  their  graves  will  be  wakened  up  by  the  shout 
(Kekeuo-fm)  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  for  the  word  means  the 
call  of  a  commander  to  his  men  that  follow,  or  of  an 
admiral  to  his  sailors.  It  is  from  one  who  has  a  rela- 
tion to  others  under  his  authority;  it  is  not  a  vague 
call  to  those  that  may  not  own  his  command,  but  to 
his  own  people. 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  notion  entertained  by 
some,  that  this  shout  must  be  heard  by  men  in  general, 
is  refuted  by  these  words,  as  well  as  other  facts.  Men 
in  general  have  no  such  relation  to  the  Lord.  It  is  a 
shout  that  is  heard  by  those  to  whom  it  appertains. 
Not  a  word,  therefore,  includes — but,  rather  the  con- 
trary, shuts  out — those  to  whom  Christ  stands  in  no 
such  connection.  In  other  words,  it  is  the  Lord's  call 
to  His  own,  and  accordingly  the  dead  in  Christ  rise 
first,  as  the  immediate  fruit  of  it.  "Then  we,  the  living, 
that  remain,  shall  be  caught  up  together  with  them  iu 


FIEST   EPISTLE   TO   THE   THE3SAL0NIANS.  343' 

tlie  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air :  and  so  shall 
we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  This  at  once  dispels  the 
difficulty  as  to  those  who  were  asleep.  So  far  from 
missing  the  moment  of  meeting  between  the  Lord  and 
His  own,  they  rise  first ;  we  immediately  join  them ; 
and  thus  both  together  are  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord 
in  the  air,  and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  Him. 

Then  the  apostle,  having  left  with  the  Thessalonians 
the  comfort  of  this  about  their  brethren,  turns  to  the 
day  of  the  Lord,  or  His  appearing.  "  But  of  the  times 
and  the  seasons,  brethren,  ye  have  no  need  that  I  writ-e 
unto  you.  For  yourselves  know  perfectly  that  the  day 
of  the  Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night."  "  The 
day  of  the  Lord  "  is  invariably  in  Scripture  that  period 
when  the  Lord  will* come  in  manifest  and  awful  judg- 
ment of  sinful  men.  It  is  never  applied  to  any  dealing 
with  the  Christian  as  on  the  earth.  We  find  a  very 
particular  application  of  it,  which  seems  connected  with 
the  saints.  This  is  not  exactly  called  the  day  of  the 
Lord,  but  "  the  day  of  Christ."  Confessedly  there  is  a 
connection  between  the  two.  The  day  of  Christ  means 
that  aspect  of  the  day  of  the  Lord,  in  which  those  who 
are  in  Christ  will  have  their  special  place  in  the  king- 
dom assigned.  Consequently,  where  it  is  a  question  of 
the  fruit  of  labour  in  the  service  of  Christ,  reward  of 
faithfulness,  or  anything  of  the  kind,  "the  day  of  Christ" 
is  mentioned. 

But  "the  day  of  the  Lord,"  as  such,  is  invariably 
the  day  of  the  Lord's  dealing  in  judgment  with  man 
as  such  on  the  earth.  Of  that  day,  then,  the  apostle 
felt  no  need  to  write.  It  was  already  known  perfectly 
that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  coming  as  a  thief  in  the 
night.    This  was  a  matter  of  Old  Testament  sta^tement 


344  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

and  pliraseology.  All  the  prophets  speak  of  it.  If 
you  search  from  Isaiah  to  Malachi,  you  will  find  that 
the  day  of  Jehovah  is  that  moment  of  divine  inter- 
vention when  man  is  no  longer  allowed  to  pursue  his 
own  path,  when  the  Lord  God  will  deal  with  the  world's 
system  in  all  its  parts,  when  the  idols  of  the  nations 
shall  all  perish  together  with  their  benighted  votaries. 
But  the  Lord  Himself  shall  be  exalted  in  that  day,  and 
His  people  shall  be  brought  into  their  true  place,  and 
the  Gentiles  shall  accept  theirs.  This  will  be  the  time 
of  displayed  divine  government.  Jehovah  wOl  take 
Zion  as  the  central  seat  of  His  earthly  throne,  and  all 
peoples  shall  submit  to  His  authority  in  the  person  of 
Christ. 

Hence,  therefore,  the  apostle,  when  he  speaks  of  the 
day  of  the  Lord,  alludes  to  it  as  already  too  notorious 
to  need  fresh  words  about  it.  The  Thessalonians  did 
not  require  to  be  instructed  as  to  that.  But  this  makes 
most  plain  the  distinction  of  the  manner  in  which  the 
saints  and  mankind  will  be  dealt  with.  When  he  treats 
of  the  Lord's  coming,  they  require  to  be  instructed ; 
where  he  speaks  about  the  day  of  Jehovah,  they  do 
not.  The  day  of  Jehovah  was  matter  of  common  know- 
ledge from  the  Old  Testament.  To  a  scribe  instructed, 
thus,  there  was  no  doubt  about  its  bearing.  Not  even 
a  Jew  disputed  about  it,  and  of  course  a  Christian 
would  be  subject  to  the  testimony  of  God  in  the  Old 
Testament.  But  a  Christian  might  not  know  that  which  - 
most  of  all  it  was  desirable  for  him  to  understand, — the 
manner  in  which  his  own  proper  hopes  would  link 
themselves  with  the  day  of  Jehovah. 

It  is  exactly  there  many  make  such  utter  confusion ; 
for  they  do  not  distinguish  between  the  hope  of  the 


riEST   EPISTLE   TO   THE   THESSALONIANS.  345 

Christian  and  "the  day"  for  the  world.  And  this  lets  out  a 
great  secret— the  heart's  desire  to  think  of  the  two  things 
together.  We  can  all  understand  that  people  would  like 
to  have  the  best  of  both.  But  it  cannot  be  done.  Hence 
in  speaking  of  the  day  of  the  Lord  (and  I  draw  your 
attention  to  it,  because  we  shall  find  its  importance  in 
the  next  epistle)  he  says,  "  When  they  shall  say.  Peace 
and  safety,  then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them, 
as  travail  upon  a  woman  with  child."  He  does  not  say 
"  you,"  but  "  they."  Why  this  difference  ?  When  he  is 
speaking  about  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  he  says  "you," 
"we;"  but  when  treating  of  the  day  of  Jehovah,  he 
says  "they." 

Indeed,  the  apostle  excludes  the  believer;  for  he 
says,  "  Ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  that  that  day 
should  overtake  you  as  a  thief."  Besides,  he  gives  a 
moral  reason,  "Ye  are  children  of  light,  and  the  chil- 
dren of  the  day :  we  are  not  of  the  night,  nor  of 
darkness.  Therefore  let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others ;  but 
let  us  watch  and  be'  sober.  For  they  that  sleep  sleep  in 
the  night ;  and  they  that  be  drunken  are  drunken  in 
the  night.  But  let  us,  who  are  of  the  day,  be  sober, 
putting  on  the  breastplate-  of  faith  and  love ;  and  for  an 
helmet,  the  hope  of  salvation.  For  God  hath  not  ap- 
pointed us  to  wrath,  but  to  obtain  salvation  by  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  Salvation  here  means  complete  deliverance 
not  yet  come — the  redemption  of  the  body  and  not  that 
of  the  soul  alone.  For  Christ  "died  for  us,  that  whether 
we  wake  or  sleep,  we  should  live  together  with  him." 

Carefully  remember  that  waking  or  sleeping  here 
has  reference  to  the  body;  it  has  no  reference  at  all 
to  anything  of  moral  state.  It  is  impossible  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  should  say  that,  whether  in  a  right  state 


346  INTSODUCTORY   LECTDfiES. 

or  wrong,  we  should  live  together  with  Him.  The  Holy 
Spirit  never  makes  light  of  the  condition  of  «in.  Nor 
is  there  anything  more  foreign  to  the  tone  of  scripture, 
than  that  the  Spirit  of  God  should  treat  with  indif- 
ference the  question  whether  a  saint  was  in  a  good  or  a 
bad  state.  He  had  no  doubt  just  used  the  words  "  wake 
or  sleep"  in  another  sense;  but  he  seems  to  me  to 
assume  the  impossibility  of  a  saint  applying  them  in  a 
moral  sense  when  he  pursues  the  subject  farther.  In 
verse  6,  for  instance,  the  sleeping  and  watching  are 
moral  states;  but  when  we  come  down  to  verse  10,  they 
refer  to  the  question  of  life  or  death  in  the  body,  and 
not  to  the  saints'  ways.  In  fact  this  manner  of  taking 
up  words,  and  applying  them  in  another  sense,  wiU  be 
found  to  be  one  of  the  characteristics  of  the  abrupt, 
animated,  and  forcible  style  of  the  apostle. 

I  should  not  make  the  remark  if  I  had  not  known 
excellent  men  sometimes  in  considerable  danger  from 
overlooking  this,  and  taking  scripture  in  a  narrow  and 
•  pseudo-literal  sense.  But  this  is  not  the  way  to  under- 
stand the  Bible.  It  is  one  of  the  great  misuses  to 
which  a  concordance  exposes  those  who  are  caught  by 
verbal  analogies,  instead  of  entering  into  the  scope  of 
thought  and  real  meaning. 

We  shall  live  with  Him  then.  "  Wherefore,"  he  says, 
"  comfort  yourselves  together,  and  edify  one  another." 
Then  he  gives  them  certain  instructions;  and  I  add 
this  observation,  which  is  one  of  practical  importance. 
He  calls  upon  these  young  believers  to  know  those 
who  laboured  among  them,  and  were  over  them,  or  took 
the  lead  in  the  Lord,  and  admonished  them.  They  were 
to  esteem  them  very  highly  in  love  for  their  work,  being 
at  peace  at  the  same  time  among  themselves. 


FIRST    EPISTLE   TO   THE   THESSALONIANS.  347 

This  exhortation,  always  right,  has,  to  my  own  mind, 
great  wisdom  and  worth  for  us  now;  for  the  simple 
reason  that,  so  far,  we  stand  in  a  measure,  as  to  cir- 
cumstances— though  not  from  the  same  cause— with 
these  Thessalonian  saints.  Assuredly  they  were  in  a 
comparatively  infantine  condition,  quite  as  much  or 
more  than  those  I  am  now  addressing.  Yet  if  saints, 
no  matter  how  informed,  then  had  among  them  those 
that  laboured  and  were  over  them  in  the  Lord,  surely 
the  same  Lord  gives  still  the  same  helps  and  govern- 
ments. He  raises  up  and  sends  His  workmen  in  the 
world,  and  those  who  bring  in  that  moral  power  and 
wisdom  which  enable  some  to  take  the  lead.  Hence 
it  is  beyond  just  controversy  —  from  the  case  of  the 
Thessalonians  (and  it  is  not  alone) — that  for  some  to 
be  over  others  in  the  Lord  did  not  depend  on  apostolical 
appointment.  It  is  a  defective  and  even  mistaken  idea 
to  restrict  it  to  this,  though  it  is  admitted  that  the 
apostles  used  to  appoint  such  elders.  But  the  essence 
of  what  we  find  here  is,  that  in  that  appointment 
spiritual  power  and  might  did  show  itself  in  this  way ; 
and  that  the  greatest  of  the  apostles  exhorts  the  saints 
to  acknowledge  those  who  were  thus — and  only  thus — 
over  them  in  the  Lord,  altogether  independently  of  any 
apostolic  act.  ISTo  doubt  the  due  external  appointment 
was  desirable  and  important  in  its  place.  But  what  of 
places  (and  I  would  add,  what  of  times)  where  it  could 
not  be  had  ? 

These  are  our  circumstances  now;  for  no  matter 
how  much  we  might  welcome  and  value  such  out- 
ward appointment,  we  cannot  have  it.  Without  the 
proper  scriptural  authority,  who  is  to  appoint  ?  Any 
body  unquestionably,  and  leaders  especially,  might  imir 


348  INTEODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

tate  Paul  and  Barnabas,  or  Titus.  But,  assuredly,  mere 
imitation  is  nothing,  or  worse;  and  those  that  take 
the  lead,  or  are  qualified  to  do  so,  are  the  persons 
to  be  appointed — not  to  appoint,  if  we  really  bow  to 
the  Lord.  More  than  this — direct  authority  from  the 
Lord  for  the  purpose  was  needed.  Where  is  it  now  ? 
The  moment  you  make  an  appointing  power  of  your 
own,  it  is  evident  that  its  authority  cannot  rise  above 
its  source.  If  it  is  only  a  humanly  given  authority, 
it  can  exercise  no  more  than  a  human  power.  But  the 
apostle — or  rather  the  prescient  Spirit  of  God — meets 
various  contingencies  in  the  exhortation,  and  shows  that 
a  company  of  believers,  even  though  not  long  gathered, 
might  have  more  than  one  in  their  midst  qualified  to 
lead  the  rest,  and  entitled  to  respect  and  love  on  the 
score  of  their  work,  as  thus  labouring.  If  there  be  such 
now,  (and  who  will  deny  it  ?)  are  the  saints  not  called 
on  to  know  them  ?  Are  there  none  who  labour  among 
them — none  that  take  the  lead  among  them  in  the 
Lord  ?  It  is  evident  that  there  ought  to  be  no  flinching 
from  such  a  truth  as  this.  For  the  present  and  long- 
existing  confusion  of  Christendom  in  no  way  neutralizes 
it,  but  rather  creates  a  fresh  reason  for  adhering  to  it, 
as  to  all  scripture.  No  doubt  it  may  not  be  always 
pleasant  to  high-minded  men ;  but  be  assured,  it  is  a 
thing  of  no  small  moment  in  its  place. 

Again,  under  the  circumstances  of  Thessalonica,  as 
there  must  have  been  danger  of  headiness,  the  apostle 
calls  on  the  brethren  to  watch  against  unruly  ways.  The 
two  things  would  be  likely  to  go  together :  peace  pro- 
motes love  and  respect.  Disorderly  folk  are  apt  to  know 
nobody  over  them  in  the  Lord.  Hence  he  calls  on  all  to 
admonish  them,  to  comfort  the  faint-hearted,  to  support 


SECOND   EPISTLE  TO   THE   THESSALONIANS.         349 

the  weak,  to  be  patient  toward  all.  Then  follows  a 
cluster  of  other  exhortations  on  which  I  need  not  dwell 
now.  My  object  is  not  so  much  to  insist  on  the  ex- 
hortatory  part  of  the  epistle,  as  to  present  the  general 
thread  of  design  that  runs  though  each,  so  as  to  give  a 
comprehensive  view  of  its  structure. 

The  Second  Epistle  takes  up  another  difficulty.  It 
was  written  in  view  of  another  abuse  of  the  truth  of 
the  Lord's  coming— a  danger  that  threatened  the  saints. 
As  the  first  epistle  was  intended  to  guard  the  saints 
from  an  error  about  the  dead,  the  second  epistle  was 
more  particularly  meant  to  correct  them  about  the 
living.  They  were  distressed  at  finding  that  some  of 
their  brethren  died  before  the  Lord  came.  So  filled 
were  they  with  the  constant  expectation  of  Christ  from 
heaven,  that  it  never  occurred  to  them  that  a  single 
Christian  might  depart  from  the  world  before  His  return. 
How  they  must  have  realized,  in  their  habitual  waiting, 
the  nearness  of  that  blessed  hope !  They  now  learnt 
that  they  need  not  sorrow  on  such  a  score ;  for  the  dead 
in  Christ  shall  rise  first,  and  then  we,  the  living  at  His 
coming,  shall  be  caught  up  with  them  to  join  the  Lord 
together.  But  the  second  epistle  grew  out  of  another 
and  more  serious  error.  We  have  seen  that  they  were 
greatly  alarmed  and  agitated.  The  apostle  was  really 
uneasy  about  them  lest  the  tempter  should  tempt  them, 
and  his  labour  come  to  nought — lest,  moved  by  their 
sore  affliction,  they  should  fall  into  fear  about  the  awful 
day  of  the  Lord,  which  the  enemy  knows  well  how  to 
use. 

Everybody  who  has  read  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel, 
and  the  lesser  prophets  knows  what  they  tell  us  of  the 


350  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

horrors  for  men  when  the  day  of  Jehovah  comes  upon 
the  earth, — that  it  will  be  a  day  of  dismay  and  darkness, 
when  all  earthly  things  are  utterly  confused,  and  the 
people  of  God  seem  about  to  be  swallowed  up  by  their 
enemies.  False  doctrine  ever  sets  one  truth  against  an- 
other; and  it  was  not  wanting  among  the  Thessalonians 
at  this  time.  For  some  sought  to  persuade  them  that 
the  day  of  the  Lord  was  even  then  arrived.  They 
probably  argued  that  their  troubles  were  part  of  the 
circumstances  of  that  day.  Certainly  they  sought  to 
shake  them  by  pretending  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  was 
actually  there.  There  was  such  fearful  persecution  and 
trouble  among  them,  that  this  might  be  plausibly  enough 
mixed  up  as  supporting  the  idea  that  the  day  of  the 
Lord  was  begun.  For  this  false  rumour  seems  to  imply 
that  they  must  have  given  some  sort  of  figurative  colour 
to  "  that  day"  (as  it  was  certainly  so  used  in  Old  Testa- 
ment prophecy).  At  any  rate,  they  must  have  supposed 
that  "  the  day  of  the  Lord "  did  not  necessarily  require 
the  presence  of  the  Lord  Himself  In  other  words,  they 
might  think,  as  many  Christians  since  have  imagined, 
that  a  dreadful  time  of  trouble  must  befall  the  world 
before  the  Lord  comes  to  receive  His  own  to  Himself 
above. 

This  second  epistle  was  written  to  disabuse  the  minds 
of  the  Thessalonian  saints  ;  and  indeed  it  directly  tends 
to  set  all  Christians  free  from  any  anxiety  of  the  kind, 
though,  of  course,  there  may  be  persecution  again,  as 
there  was  then,  and  repeatedly  afterwards,  especially 
from  Pagan  and  from  Papal  Eome.  But  this  is  wholly 
different  from  the  dread  which  the  enemy  sought  to 
infuse  among  the  Thessalonians.  The  apostle  accordingly 
sets  himself  to  this  task.   First  of  all  he  comforts  them. 


SECOND  EPISTLE  TO   THE  THESSALONIANS.        351 

"  Paul,  and  Silvanus,  and  Timotheus,  unto  the  church 
of  the  Thessalonians  in  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  We  are  bound  to  thank  God  always  for 
you,  brethren,  as  it  is  meet,  because  that  your  faith 
groweth  exceedingly,  and  the  charity  of  every  one  of 
you  all  toward  each  other  aboundeth ;  so  that  we  our- 
selves glory  in  you."  It  may  be  noticed  that  he  leaves 
out  "  the  patience  of  hope."  How  comes  this  ?  It  was 
exactly  the  hope  that  was  no  longer  bright  in  their 
hearts.  So  far  the  enemy  had  succeeded.  They  had 
been  comforted,  but  they  had  lost  somewhat  of  the  light 
and  joy  of  the  hope.  They  were  moved  more  or  less  by 
their  tribulation ;  not  perhaps  so  much  by  the  outward 
pressure  as  by  the  insinuation  of  Satan  through  false 
teaching,  which  is  a  far  more  dangerous  thing  for  the 
child  of  God.  It  is  plain  that  the  apostle  merely  men- 
tions their  faith  growing,  and  their  love  increasing.  He 
no  longer  praises  nor  names  their  patience  of  hope,  but 
rather  prays  for  them  in  chapter  iii.  in  such  a  way  as  to 
show  there  was  a  lack  in  this  respect.  That  is,  he  takes 
up  two  of  the  qualities  mentioned  in  the  first  epistle, 
and  not  the  third.  This,  which  was  bound  up  with  the 
whole  structure  of  the  first  epistle,  is  left  out  of  the 
second.  There  was  too  good  reason  for  it.  Por  the  time 
they  had  let  it  slip,  as  I  have  just  explained.  It  is  true 
that  the  apostle  tells  them,  "we  glory  in  you  in  the 
churches  of  God  for  your  patience  and  faith  "  (he  does 
not  speak  of  their  "patience  of  hope")  "in  all  your  per- 
secutions and  tribulations  that  ye  endure,"  They  were 
holding  on,  and  not  giving  up  Christ ;  but  their  souls 
had  not  the  former  spring  through  Christ  their  hope. 
We  shall  have  the  evidence  of  this  more  fully  soon. 

There  was  "a  manifest  token,"  says  he,  "of  the  right- 


352  INTEOUUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

eous  judgment  of  God,  that  ye  may  be  counted  worthy 
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  for  which  ye  also  suffer."  So 
far  it  was  well.  "  Seeing  it  is  a  righteous  thing  with 
God  to  recompense  tribulation  to  them  that  trouble  you; 
and  to  you  who  are  troubled  rest  with  us,  when  the  Lord 
Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  his  mighty 
angels,  in  ilaming  fire  taking  vengeance  on  them  that 
know  not  God,  and  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  Observe  the  reason  why  he  brings  in 
"that  day."  It  was  a  false  doctrine  about  the  day,  which 
draws  out  an  explanation  of  its  nature  and  its  relation 
to  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  When  that  day  comes,  it 
will  not  fall  with  its  troubles  on  the  children  of  God. 
In  truth  the  Lord  will  then  execute  judgment  on  their 
enemies — I  do  not  mean  on  the  dead  till  the  close,  but 
on  the  quick  or  living.  It  will  be  no  more  in  some 
figurative  and  preparatory  sense  of  exceeding  affliction, 
or  of  natural  overthrow;  but  its  description  here  is  the 
Lord  Jesus  revealed  from  heaven  in  flaming  iire.  There 
will  be  no  doubt  about  its  nature  or  effects.  Every  eye 
shall  see  Him. 

That  is,  even  chapter  i.  plainly  prepares  us  for  the 
complete  discomfiture  of  the  iUusory  and  alarming 
dreams  which  these  false  teachers  had  been  foisting  in 
under  false  colours  among  the  Thessalonian  saints.  But 
he  pursues  the  matter  farther.  He  will  take  vengeance 
on  two  classes — on  those  that  know  not  God,  and  those 
that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
These  seem  the  Gentiles  and  the  Jews  respectively;  but 
why  do  not  we  find  here  some  allusion  to  the  third 
class — His  relation  to  the  church  of  God?  Because 
those  who  compose  the  church  are  no  longer  here. 

Thus  it  is  shown  that  the  Lord  will  deal  with  all  on 


SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         §53 

iearth, — not  merged  in  one,  but  discriminated;  for  He 
executes  judgment,  and  hence  does  not  confound  those 
who  differ  in  a  common  class.  There  is  thus  a  definite 
distinction  drawn ;  but  this  so  much  the  more  precisely 
leaves  out  the  Christian.  Its  force  is  more  understood 
the  mdre  it  is  weighed.  The  apostle  does  not  declare  all 
at  once,  but  prepares  the  way  with  much  circumspection. 
When  he  says  "them  that  know  not  God,"  he  means 
the  idolatrous  Gentiles.  Then  he  adds  with  another 
Article,  "  and  those  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ"  (not,  as  we  have  it  in  English  here,  "and 
that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus ;"  as  if  all 
were  one  and  the  same  class).  There  are  two  classes, 
and  therefore  accuracy  would  seem  to  call  on  iis  to 
make  the  sense  more  definite — "  and  on  them  that  obey 
not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  At  all  events, 
whatever  mode  of  rendering  may  be  preferred,  I  have 
no  hesitation  in  saying  that  such  is  the  sense  of  the 
Greek,  and  nothing  else.  They  are  the  Gentiles,  who 
knew  not  God,  (or,  as  Bengel  has  it,  "qui  in  ethnica 
ignorantia  de  Deo  versantur,")  and  the  Jews,  who  might 
know  God  after  a  sort  and  to  a  certain  point  beyond 
Gentiles,  but  who  did  not  obey  the  gospel  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  ("  Judaeis  maxim  e,  quibus  evangelium  de 
Christo  praedicatum  fuerat.")  For  unbelief  is  always 
convicted  by  the  test  that  God  employs ;  and  the  day 
of  the  Lord  will  deal  with  every  form.  The  Gentiles 
that  know  not  God  wiU  be  punished,  and  the  Jews  that 
abuse  the  forms  of  Old  Testament  revelation  to  disobey 
the  gospel  will  not  escape,  still  less  nominal  and  apos- 
tate Christendom. 

The  reason  why  no  notice  is  taken  of  Christians  as 
then  on  earth  we  shall  see  assigned  a  little  lower  down ; 

A  A 


354  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

I  merely  now  remark  that  he  could  not  put  himself 
in  either  of  those  two  classes.  It  is  evident  that  on 
whomsoever  that  day  is  to  fall  it  has  no  bearing  on 
such.  If  therefore  the  Christians  were  troubled  now, 
it  was  in  no  way  the  same  character  of  trouble  as  that 
which  shall  be  in  the  day  of  the  Lord.  The  teaching  of 
those  who  had  spread  this  impression  was  utterly  false; 
and  if  they  claimed  the  highest  sanction  for  it,  they 
were  worse  than  mistaken — they  were  the  guilty  tools  of 
Satan.  But  as  to  both  the  classes  we  have  seen  described 
by  the  apostle,  they  "shall  be  punished  with  everlasting 
destruction,"  both  "  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and 
from  the  glory  of  his  power ;  when  he  shall  come  to  be 
glorified  in  Ids  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in  all  them 
that  believed :"  for  this  is  the  full  force  of  it. 

In  the  new  age  people  will  be  blessed  abundantly; 
but  the  blessing  of  the  millennium  does  not  exactly 
take  the  shape  of  belief.  They  shall  behold  the  glory  of 
the  Lord.  Such  is  their  form  as  assigned  by  scripture. 
The  earth  shajl  be  filled  with  the  knowledge — not  with 
the  faith,  but  with  the  knowledge — of  the  glory  of  Je- 
hovah, as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.  It  will  be  in  count- 
less cases  the  fruit  of  true  divine  teaching ;  but  know- 
ledge describes  it  better  than  faith ;  and  we  may  easily 
understand  the  difference.  They  will  behold  the  glory, 
they  will  look  upon  the  Lord,  no  longer  hidden  but 
displayed.  The  blessed  spoken  of  in  our  chapter  are 
clearly  those  that  have  already  believed.  So  indeed  the 
apostle  states :  "  Wherefore  we  pray  always  for  you, 
that  our  God  would  count  you  worthy  of  the  calling, 
and  fulfil  all  the  good  pleasure  of  his  goodness,  and  the 
work  of  faith  with  power ;  that  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  may  be  glorified  in  you,  and  ye  in  him, 


SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         355 

according  to  the  grace  of  our  God  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ." 

Next  (ch.  ii.)  he  comes  to  the  special  error  in  ques- 
tion. "  Now  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  by  the  coming 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ....  that  ye  be  not  soon 
shaken  in  mind  nor  troubled,  neither  in  spirit  nor  by 
word,  nor  by  letter  as  from  us,  as  that  the  day  of  the 
Lord  is  present."  It  is  well  known  that  "  of  the  Lord  " 
(not  of  Christ)  is  unquestionably  required  by  the  best 
manuscripts,  and  other  ancient  witnesses. 

"EveVnjKe  does  not  mean  "at  hand,"  but  actually  come. 
I  do  not  enter  into  any  long  proof  of  this  just  now, 
having  already  done  so  elsewhere.  Suffice  it  to  say, 
that  the  word  occurs  in  half  a  dozen  places  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  nowhere  can  bear  any  sense  but  the 
one  alleged.  Nor  does  it  ever  convey  any  such  meaning 
as  "at  hand"  in  any  correct  Greek  author.  It  has  been 
so  thought;  but  it  ie  a  mistake.  It  always  means 
present,  in  contrast  with  future  ever  so  imminent.  So 
in  two  instances  of  the  New  Testament  it  stands  over 
against  future  things ;  as  when  it  is  expressly  said  (in 
Eomans  viii.  and  1  Cor.  iii.),  "things  present  and  things 
to  come."  The  latter  might  be  "at  hand,"  but  not  the 
former.  The  things  to  come  are  in  pointed  opposition 
to  those  actually  arrived.  Again,  we  have  (Gal.  i.  4) 
"this  present  evil  world."  This  is  now  only.  The  age  to 
come  is  not  evil  but  good.  It  is  in  contrast  with  the 
present.  And  so  as  to  "for  the  time  then  present," 
(Heb.  is.)  and  '  for  the  present  necessity."  (1  Cor.  vii.) 
It  is  not  a  question  of  the  future,  but  solely  of  the 
present;  a  necessity  now,  and  at  no  other  time.  In 
short,  it  is  the  regular  word  for  "present."  If  a  Greek 
meant  to  say  "present"  in  contrast  with  the  future, 

A  A  2 


356  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

there  was  no  more  emphatic  word  to  use.  What,  then, 
can  be  conceived  more  calculated  to  destroy  the  right 
understanding  of  this  epistle  than  the  common  mis- 
translation ?  Such  is  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  I  am 
bold  to  say. 

But  clearly  this  gives  an  immense  help  to  the  under- 
standing of  the  passage.  The  apostle  appeals  to  the 
saints.  It  is  not  a  question  of  teachiag  in  this  verse, 
but  the  apostle  beseeches  them  by  a  certain  powerful 
motive,  which  was  still  in  their  souls.  He  does  not 
mean,  "We  beseech  you  concerning,"  as  some  conceive, 
but  as  our  English  version  says,  "by."  It  is  a  legitimate 
meaning  of  the  preposition  with  words  of  entreaty.  He 
uses  the  hope  of  being  gathered  to  Christ  at  His  coming 
as  a  motive  why  they  should  not  listen  to  those  mis- 
leading the  saints.  Wow  mark  the  character  of  this 
false  teaching.  It  was  not  the  excitement  of  hope,  but 
of  terror  produced  on  the  spirit.  It  caused  them  to 
shake,  hindering  them  from  a  settled,  holy,  hearty  wait- 
ing for  Christ.  The  error  occupied  them  with  the  terrors 
of  some  intervening  trouble.  The  pretence  "was  that  all 
the  afflictions  they  had  been  enduring  were  parts  or 
signs  of  the  well-known  day  of  trouble,  the  day  of  the 
Lord.  Not  at  aU,  says  the  apostle  :  the  trouble  of  that 
day  wiU  befall  the  enemies,  not  the  friends,  of  the  Lord. 
As  they  knew  that  every  believer  loved  His  name,  the 
notion  propagated  was  wholly  astray.  It  was  morally 
false,  as  ignoring  in  the  first  place  His  unfailing  and 
perfect  love  for  them. 

Therefore  he  could  say,  "We  beseech  you,  brethren, 
by  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  our  gather- 
ing together  unto  him,  that  ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in 
mind,  nor  troubled,  neither  by  spirit,  nor  by  word,  nor  by 


SECOND   EPISTLE   TO   THE   THESSALONIANS.         357 

letter  as  by  us,  as  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  present." 
I)o  you  not  know  that  Christ  is  coming  for  you,  and 
that  the  first  aim  and  effect  of  His  coming  will  be  your 
gathering  together  to  meet  Him  in  the  air?  Why, 
therefore,  be  uneasy  at  such  a  rumour  about  His  day, 
with  aU  its  awful  associations  ?  You  have  been  taught 
that  from  God;  why  be  disturbed  by  this  effort  of  the 
enemy,  who  falsely  pretends  to  the  Spirit  and  word,  and 
an  alleged  letter  of  mine  ?  That  day  wiU  fall  on  the 
world.  Indeed,  the  apostle  had  implied  in  the  opening 
of  this  epistle,  as  well  as  in  the  latter  part  of  his  first, 
that  the  day  of  the  Lord  does  not  concern  the  saints, 
who  were  sons  of  light  and  of  day.  They  would  come 
accordingly  with  that  day,  instead  of  its  overtaking 
them  as  a  thief  by  night,  because  so  it  comes  on  whom 
it  may.  It  comes  from  the  Lord  in  His  execution  of 
judgment  on  a  guilty  world;  and  the  very  fact  of  their 
being  sons  of  light  ought  to  have  proved  that  it  cannot 
surprise  such,  because  they  belonged  to  the  region 
whence  it  comes. 

With  striking  pithiness  he  briefly  points  to  the  ways 
of  deceit  and  darkness  which  accompanied  the  notion, 
and  betrayed  its  real  source.  Truth  refuses  an  admix- 
ture of  falsehood;  and  the  pretence  that  any  had  a 
spiritual  intimation  to  themselves,  or  a  word  for  others, 
that  the  day  of  the  Lord  was  really  come,  was  mani- 
festly of  the  serpent,  not  of  God.  Such  and  so  rapid 
are  the  steps  of  evil,  one  wrong  leading  to  another.  But 
the  allegation  that  they  had  the  apostle's  own  authority 
for  the  delusion  gave  him  a  direct  opportunity  to  con- 
tradict the  error.  "Let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any 
means:  for  [it  shall  not  come]  unless  there  shall  come 
the  apostasy  first,  and  the  man  0/  sin  be  revealed,  the 


358  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

son  of  perdition."  These  are  two  different  things.  The 
apostle  affirms  that  the  day  cannot  be  before  both. 
Christendom  will  have  abandoned  the  faith,  and  the 
man  of  sin  must  be  revealed.  What  a  prospect !  Do  the 
children  of  God  believe  it  ?  We  know  the  world  has 
wholly  opposite  expectations.  Those  who  allow  them- 
selves with  so  little  seriousness  to  bear  the  excellent 
name  of  the  Lord  will  openly  fall  away  from  the  con- 
fession of  the  gospel;  and  then  a  suited  leader  into  the 
gulf  of  perdition  wiU  soon  appear  for  the  apostates. 

I  am  perfectly  persuaded  that  some  of  the  most 
important  parts  of  Satan's  means  of  bringing  about 
the  apostasy  are  now  actively  at  work.  God  has  been 
graciously  fiUing  many  hearts  with  joy  and  comfort  of 
the  truth.  He  has  given  not  a  few  to  believe  these 
words,  the  moral  signs  of  which  are  becoming  daily 
more  and  more  manifest.  The  apostasy  again  must 
come,  and,  in  contrast  with  the  man  of  righteousness, 
the  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  even  the  final  Judas,  "  the 
son  of  perdition,  who  opposeth  and  exalteth  himself 
above  every,  one  called  God,  or  an  object  of  veneration; 
so  that  he  sitteth  down  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing 
himself  that  he  ia  God."  How  sharply  in  contrast 
with  the  Lord  Jesus,  who,  though  really  God,  in  love 
became  man,  in  order  to  accomplish  the  glorious  coun- 
sels of  God  and  man's  salvation  by  grace !  This  one  is 
the  son  'of  perdition  to  the  ruin  of  those  who  trust 
him.  Although  he  be  but  a  man,  and  the  man  of 
sin,  he  takes  the  place  of  being  the  true  God  here  on 
earth,  and  this  too,  not  in  the  world,  but  in  the  temple 
of  God  of  that  time.  Thus  he  not  merely  takes  the 
place  of  God  here  below,  but  actually  as  such  enters 
His  temple.     I  do  not  i  doubt  that  the  temple  will- 


SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         S59 

tli'en  be  in  Jerusalem ;  so  that  as  Ghristendom  began 
at  Jerusalem,  the  holy  city  will  be  its  last  scene  of 
sinful  pride  and  of  divine  judgment,  though  not  its 
only  place  of  judgment.  Jerusalem !  Eome ! — they  are 
two  names  of  most  solemn  import  as  to  the  subject  to 
which  I  am  briefly  alluding.  "  Eemember  ye  not  that, 
when  I  was  yet  with  you,  I  told  you  these  things  ? 
And  now  ye  know  what  withholdeth  that  he  might  be 
revealed  in  his  time.''  It  is  no  absolute  restraint,  but 
provision  only;  for  he  must  be  revealed  in  his  own 
season. 

,  The  reference  to  previous  teachihg  left  the  matter  in 
comparative  obscurity,  and  has  given  rise  to  a  great  deal 
of  discussion.  I  think  the  true  answer  neither  difficult 
nor  uncertain.  It  is  evident  that  what  withholds  or 
restrains  must  be  a  power  superior  to  man  or  Satan,  and 
of  a  nature  totally  opposite  to  the  man  of  sin.  As  this 
is  the  embodiment,  or  rather  head,  of  evil,  so  that  which 
restrains  his  revelation  would  naturally  be  the  power 
of  good  which  suppresses  as  long  as  God  pleases  the 
full  manifestation  of  the  lawless  one.  There  seems  to  be 
a  good  reason  why  the  matter  is  put  in  this  general,  if 
not  vague,  manner.  What  withholds  is  presented  as  a 
principle  or  power  in  an  abstract  way,- and  not  as  a 
person  only.  It  might,  I  suppose,  assume  a  different 
shape  at  different  times. 

Thus  we  find  ourselves  within  narrow  limits  in  order 
to  fix  the  restraint  and  the-  restrainer.  The  Thessa- 
lonians,  who  were  but  young  in  truth,  already  knew 
what  restrains,  "  that  he  might  be  revealed  in  his  own 
time.  For  the  mystery  of  iniquity"  [or  "lawlessness," 
which  is  the  true  force  of  the  word]  "doth  already 
■vrork:    only  there  is  one  who  restraineth  now  until 


360  INTRODUCTOiRY   LECTUEES. 

he  be  taken  away;  and  then  shall  the  lawless  one  be 
revealed,  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  consume  with  the 
breath  of  his  mouth,  and  shall  destroy  with  the  appear- 
ing of  his  coming"  or  presence.  Evidently,  then,  we  find 
here  a  power  that  hinders  the  manifestation  of  the  law- 
less one — a  power  which  is  also  a  person.     Where,  do 
we  find  one  that  effectually  checks  the  plans  of  Satan^ 
a  person  no  less  than  a  power  ?    We  need  not  consider 
long,  but  answer,  without  hesitation,  the  Spirit  of  God. 
Undeniably  He  is  both  a  power  and  a  person;  and 
save  in  Him  it  will  be  far  from  easy,  if  possible,  to  find 
an  answer  that  combines  these  two  distinct  intimations, 
as  well  as  both  the  character  and  the  extent  of  the  power 
involved.    It  can  hardly  be  said  to  be  the  Spirit  of  God 
dwelling  in  the  church,  except  in  the  most  general  way. 
We  must  recollect  that  the  Holy  Spirit  not  only  dwells 
there,  but  also  acts  providentially  in  the  government  of 
the  world.      I  am  far  from  meaning  that,  when  the 
church  is  gone.  He  wUl  restrain  the  powers  of  the  world 
much  longer.    There  are  men  of  the  world  who  have  no 
confidence  in  its  stability ;  though  it  exercises  no  salu- 
tary fear  over  their  souls,  and  they  cling  to  it  all  the 
same.     I  am  sure  that  no  Christian  man  should  trust  it 
for  a  moment.     They  are  not  called  to  promise  fair 
things  to  that  which  cast  out  and  slew  the  Lord  of 
glory.     They  know  that  its  doom  is  coming  quickly, 
but  not  till  they  have  formally  rejected  the  truth,  and 
accepted  the  man  of  sin.     But  no  matter  what  the 
wicked  will  of  man  and  the  wUes  of  Satan  may  be, 
they  will  not  be  able  absolutely  to  extinguish  divinely- 
controlled  government  among  men  as  soon   as  they 
desire.     There  is  One  that  still  restrains,  who  could 
always  indeed,  but  who  will  cease  only  when,  according 


& 


SECOND  EPISTLE   TO   THE   THESSALONIANS.         361: 

to  God,  the  time  for  the  final  oiithurst  arrives.  It  does 
not,  I  think,  terminate  at  once,  even  when  the  Lord 
shall  have  come  and  taken  up  His  saints,  both  those 
that  sleep  and  all  those  ahve  and  waiting  for  Him.  I 
say  "all,"  for,  you  must  remember,  it  is  invariably 
assumed  in  scripture  that  every  saint  waits  for  Christ. 
The  notion  that  a  person  may  be  a  saint,  and  not 
looking  for  His  coming,  does  not  enter  into  the  mini  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  One  may  fall,  of  course,  into  a  wrong 
state  from  bad  teaching  or  careless  ways ;  but  if  Christ 
is  my  life  and  righteousness,  I  shall  surely  love  Him ; 
and  if  so,  I  must  want  to  see  and  be  with  Him  in  the 
condition  of  glory,  where  alone  such  life  and  righteous- 
ness, and  the  love  that  gave  them,  have  their  just  display 
and  results.  Hence  it  is  always  assumed  that  every 
Christian  is,  in  the  knowledge  of  His  love,,  waiting  for 
Christ  to  come  and  receive  us  to  Himself,  that  we  may 
be  with  Him  in  the  Father's  house  before  He  executes 
judgment  on  the  world.  Till  then  the  Spirit  of  God 
acts  as  a  check  on  the  designs  of  Satan;  and  even  after 
the  church  is  gone  (as  I  think)  He  wDl  restrain  for  a 
short  space. 

Prom  the  Apocalypse  we  learn  that  for  a  little  while 
God  carries  out  certain  agencies  of  blessing.  Not  only 
does  He  not  immediately  cease  to  deal  with  souls,  but 
we  do  not  at  once  see  either  the  apostasy  or  the  man 
of  sin.  This  is  a  consideration  that  bears  on  the  ques- 
tion; for  undoubtedly  it  is  not  the  will  of  man  that 
either  sheds  blessing  on  souls  or  restrains  the  proudest 
effort  of  Satan.  After  the  church  is  taken  up,  then  the 
Spirit  of  God  works;  and  this  doubly.  He  will  bring 
souls  into  the  knowledge  of  the  testimony  that  God 
will  then  raise  up  to  meet  the  existing  circumstances, 


362  INTEODUCTOET  LKCTUBES. 

for  His  own  glory  as  well  as  in  His  pitiful  riiercy  to 
man.  But,  besides,  He  will  even  then  restrain  the 
powers  that  he  from  falling  instantaneously  into  the 
devices  of  the  devU.  At  a  certain  given  moment,  which 
the  Eevelation  clearly  defines,  Satan  will  be  cast  down 
from  heaven,  and  will  then  bring  forward  his  long- 
meditated  plan.  The  empire  that  has  disappeared  from 
among  men  fot  so  long,  that  the  wise  men  of  the  world 
think  its  resurrection  impossible — the  Eoman  empire — 
will  come  forward  clothed  with  a  diabolical  energy. 
This  is  the  moment  when  the  Spirit  ceases  to  restrain. 
Accordingly  the  Western  empirS  will  use  all  its  might, 
and  Satan  will  help  it,  to  establish  a  politico-religious 
power  in  Jerusalem,  who  will  be  the  head  of  the  Jews, 
and  at  the  same  time  the  religious  chief  of  the  West. 
Such  is  the  issue  of  idolatrous  Christ-rejecting  Judaism 
and  of  apostate  Christendom.  The  man  of  sin  will  sit 
and  be  worshipped  as  God,  in  His  temple  at  Jerusalem. 
This  will  enable  the  Eoman  empire  still  to  carry  on  its 
political  game  of  opposition  to  the  Eastern  powers.  The 
West,  I  say,  will  support  and  be  supported  by  the 
Antichrist,  and  consequently  must  share  in  the  awful 
destruction  that  the  Lord  will  Himself  execute  when 
He  appears.  Angels  will  do  their  part,  and  the  breath 
of  the  Lord  like  a  stream  of  brimstone;  for  they  will 
be  caught  red-handed  in  their  opposition  to  the  Lamb, 
little  knowing  that  He  is  Lord  of  lords  and  King  of 
kings.  As'  for  the  civil  and  religious  leaders,  the  beast 
and  the  false  prophet,  they  wiU  be  consigned  to  ever- 
lasting destruction,  without  even  the  form  of  trial. 
Nothing  less  awaits  these  last  and  seemingly  greatest 
leaders  of  the  world's  false  glory.  But,  remember,  the 
flower  of  the  West  (of  these  lands  that  boast  of  religion, 


SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         363 

and,  civilization,  and  progress)  shall  perish  in  this 
destruction  of  the  revived  imperial  power  and  its  Jewish 
ally. 

I  dare  not  prophesy  smooth  things  to  our  own 
country  and  race.  I  believe  that  all  these  kingdoms 
of  the  West,  now  so  confident  in  their  resources  and 
power,  will  fall  helplessly  into  the  hands  of  Satan  at 
last.  At  Jerusalem  the  man  of  sin,  as  at  Eome,  the 
civil  head  of  empire,  with  his  confederate  but  subject 
kings,  wiU  be  the  two  beasts  of  Eev.  xiii.  It  is  not 
the  time  to  enter  into  further  details  now;  but  I  may 
state  my  conviction,  that  the  man  of  sin,  whom  2  Thess. . 
shows  enthroned  in  God's  temple,  will  be  the  accepted 
Messiah  of  the  deceived  Jews  in  Jerusalem,  as  the  first 
beast  is  the  imperial  head  at  Eome;  for  the  civU  power 
will  then  be  separate  from  the  rebgious,  and  we  all 
know  how  ardently  men  desire  this  now.  But  its  ac- 
complishment will  have  results  far  different  from  what 
most  look  for. 

I  confess  I  am  struck  by  the  solemn  fact,  that  one 
cannot  speak  of  these  subjects,  even  at  short  intervals 
of  time,  without  perceiving  new  features  which,  in 
principle,  bring  us  more  and  more  up  to  the  brink 
of  the  precipice.  I  do  then,  from  every  point  of  view, 
warn  all  those  who  are  looking  for  bright  hopes  on  the 
earth,  and  promising  improvement  to  men.  It  ig  serious 
to  observe  that  the  lawless  one  here  described  and 
reserved  for  such  a  destiny  is  related  very  nearly  to  the 
mystery  of  lawlessness  which  was  then  at  work,  as  the 
apostle  lei  us  know,  and  which  has  gone  on  increasing, 
and  is  immensely  increased  now.  It  is  true  that  the  law- 
less one  will  not  be  revealed  until  the  restraint  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  over  the  world  is  removed.    This  appears 


364  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

to  me  to  be  the  unforced  deduction  from  the  apostle's 
statement,  compared  with  the  light  thrown  on  the  sub- 
ject by  other  Scriptures,  which,  by  common  consent, 
treat  of  the  same  time  and  point.  It  is  the  Spirit  of 
God  ceasing  to  restrain  in  the  world  as  well  as  in  the 
church,  since  He  will  for  a  brief  space  both  act  on 
souls  and  restrain  Satan  in  the  world,  after  the  church 
has  been  caught  up  to  heaven. 

This  I  consider  a  comprehensive  and  correct  view  of 
what  is  revealed.  It  is  put  generally  here  both  as  "  he 
who  withholds"  and  as  "that  which  withholds."  The 
.particular  from  of  withholding  power  might  differ  accord- 
ing to  varying  circumstances.  The  Christians  of  old  used 
to  think  the  Eoman  empire  withheld  them.  'Not  was 
their  idea  far  from  the  mark;  because  the  empire  was 
assuredly  among  the  powers  ordained  of  God,  as  I  do 
not  doubt  emperors,  kings,  presidents,  &c.,  are  still.  But 
the  hour  hastens  when  the  powers  that  be  will  cease  to 
derive  their  authority  from  God;  when  the  West  above 
all  will  openly  renounce  the  true  God,  and  the  beast 
will  rise  up  from  the  abyss.  Our  chapter  adds  a  true 
picture  of  the  extent  to  which  the  man  of  sin  will  be 
allowed  to  go  in  diabolical  imitation  of  what  God  wrought 
by  Christ  when  here  below.  It  is  the  hour  of  retribu- 
tion, when  the  proud  apostates  who  refused  the  truth, 
accept  and  perish  in  the  lie  of  the  enemy.  How  blessed 
the  lot  of  the  saints  which  the  apostle  contrasts  with 
this!  (Verses  13-17.) 

The  next  chapter  (iii.)  closes  the  epistle  with  divers 
desires,  and  a  prayer  for  them  that  the  Lord  would 
direct  their  hearts  into  the  love  of  God,  and  into  the 
patience  of  Christ.     The  key-note  is  thus  maintained. 


SECOND  .EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         365 

from  first  to  last.  As  Christ  waits  to  come,  so  should 
we,  that  we  may  meet  Him  then.  But  the  apostle  would 
not  have  this  hope  nor  the  Lord  Himself  dishonoured  by 
the  reproach  of  disorderly  ways.  And  thus  he  nowhere 
more  enjoins  the  duty  of  honourable  industry,  appealing 
to  his  own  example,  than  in  the  epistles  which  most 
insist  on  Christ's  coming  as  the  proximate  and  constant 
hope  of  the  Christian.  If  any  would  pervert  such  a 
truth,  or  any  other,  to  idleness  and  disorder,  he  was  to 
be  marked  as  unworthy  of  Christian  companionship, 
not  of  course  counted  an  enemy  (like  the  wicked  or 
heretics),  but  admonished  as  a  brother.  Idleness  is  fruit- 
ful of  disorder  and  the  foe  of  peace,  which  the  apostle 
desired  for  them  from  the  Lord  of  peace  Himself  always 
and  in  every  way. 

May  we  seriously  heed  the  truth,  and  its  immediate 
application  to  our  consciences  and  ways !  May  God 
give  us  quiet  energy  without  restlessness  or  excitement, 
but  so  much  the  more  calmly,  because  of  the  realized 
nearness  of  the  Lord's  return,  and  the  solemn  con- 
sequences for  all  mankind  1  Oh  for  an  earnest,  burning 
zeal;  for  self-denying  love;  for  hearts  devoted  to  Christ, 
which  might  warn  men  of  their  impending  destruction, 
that,  if  they  have  not  been  won  by  His  love,  they  may 
at  least  tremble  at  the  hopeless  inextricable  ruin  in 
which  their  unbelief  wOl  soon  leave  them  for  ever. 


366  INTEODUCTOET  LECTURES. 


IX. 

FIRST  AND   SECOND   TIMOTHY. 

We  enter  now  on  the  confidential  communications  of 
the  apostle  to  some  of  his  fellow-labourers,  and  to- 
night on  the  epistles  to  Timothy.  The  two  have  much 
in  common,  but  they  have  also  not  a  little  that  is  dis- 
tinct. The  first  epistle  is  characterized  by  laying  down 
the  order  which  becomes  both  individuals  and  the  church 
of  God  viewed  as  His  house.  We  shall  find,  I  trust, 
how  remarkably  His  care  for  godly  moral  order,  which 
descends  into  the  family,  into  the  relations  of  children 
and  parents,  of  servants  and  masters,  of  man  and 
woman,  is  also  bound  up  with  some  of  the  main  doc- 
trines of  the  epistle.  At  the  same  time,  while  this 
pertains  more  particularly  to  the  first  epistle,  there 
is  a  striking  expression  which  meets  us  on  the  very 
threshold,  and  belongs  not  merely  to  these  two  epistles, 
but  also  to  that  addressed  to  Titus.  God  is  not  here 
regarded  as  our  Father,  but  as  our  Saviour  God.  We 
have  in  harmony  with  this  none  of  the  special  privileges 
of  the  family  of  God.  The  relationships  before  us 
wear  another  character.  Thus,  we  have  nothing  at  all 
about  the  body  of  Christ ;  we  hear  nowhere  again  of 
the  bride  of  the  Lamb ;  but  what  tallies  with  God  as 
a  Saviour.    It  is  not  Christ  our  Saviour,  thoughj  of 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  367 

course,  He  is  so;  but  there  is  broader  truth' pressed— ' 
even  of  God  our  Saviour,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

This  prepares  for  much  that  yve  shall  find.  God,  as 
a  Saviour  God,  is  certainly  in  contrast  with  His  dealings 
under  law,  or  in  government.  Nevertheless  it  takes  in 
also  His  preserving  care,  which  extends  far  beyond 
believers,  though  very  especially  toward  believers.  It 
embraces  also  that  which  is  much  deeper  than  presi- 
dential care,  even  the  salvation  which  is  in  course  of 
accomplishment  through  Christ.  I  do  not  say  accom- 
plished ;  because  salvation  here,  as  elsewhere,  must  not 
be  limited  simply  to  redemption,  but  gOes  out  into  the 
results  of  that  mighty  work  on  the  cross,  whereby  the 
soul  is  kept  all  the  way  through  the  wilderness,  and 
the  body  of  humiliation  changed  into  the  likeness  of 
the  Lord's  glorious  body. 

Accordingly,  Paul  introduces  himself  as  the  "apostle 
of  Jesus  Christ  by  commandment  of  God."  Authority 
has  a  large  place  in  these  epistles ;  thence  the  apostle 
shows  it  was  not  his  writing  to  his  child  Timothy  in 
this  respect  without  the  Lord.  It  was  not  merely  love, 
it  was  not  simply  that  the  Spirit  of  God  empowered 
him  to  meet  need,  but  he  styles  himself  in  it  the 
"  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  commandment  of  God 
our  Saviour,  and  Christ  Jesus,  our  hope ;  to  Timothy, 
my  true  child  in  faith  :  grace,  mercy,  and  peace,"  &c. 

Another  feature  of  these  epistles  meets  us  in  the 
place  which  is  given  to  mercy.  I  do  not  merely  now 
refer  to  what  has  been  often  observed — the  introduc- 
tion ;  but  we  shall  find  that  mercy  is  wrought  into  the 
tissues  and  substance  of  the  epistle.  Mercy  supposes 
the  need,  the  constant  wants,  the  difficulties,  the  dan- 
gers, of  the  saints  of  God.    It  supposes  also  that  God 


■368  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

is  acting  iu  love,  aud  in  full  view  of  these  difficiiltiesi 
Hence  we  find  that,  while  there  is  jealous  care,  there 
is  also  a  remarkable  tenderness,  which  appears  every 
now  and  then,  in  these  epistles ;  and  this  is  just  and 
beautiful  in  its  season.  The  apostle  was  drawing 
toward  the  close  of  his  career,  and  (although  all  be  in- 
spired, and  he  was  a  rare  jewel  even  among  the  apostles) 
there  is,  I  am  persuaded,  an  evidence  of  a  tone  more 
suitable  to  the  growing  trials  and  necessities  of  the 
saints  of  God;  a  tenderness  towards  those  that  were 
faithful  and  tried,  that  is  far  more  manifest  here  than 
in  the  earlier  epistles.  I  do  not  say  that  all  was  not  in 
its  due  time  and  measure,  but  we  can  well  understand 
it.  As  a  faithful  servant,  he  had  been  for  many  years 
not  only  leading  on,  but  sharing  too  the  hardest  of  the 
fight,  and  had  gone  through  perils  such  as  had  left 
many  of  his  companions  behind.  Shame,  afilictions, 
persecutions,  the  enticements  of  Satan  too,  had  drawn 
away  some  that  had  been  in  the  foremost  ranks  of  old. 
He  was  now  left  with  comparatively  few  of  the  famUiar 
faces  of  those  he  had  loved  and  laboured  with  so  long. 
We  can  easily  understand,  then,  how  calculated  such 
circumstances  were  to  draw  out  the  expression  of  a  love 
that  was  always  there,  but  that  would  be  in  a  more 
comely  and  suitable  manner  expressed  at  such  a  con- 
juncture of  circumstances.  This  we  shall  find  in  these 
epistles.  He  writes  to  Timothy  as  his  genuine  chUd ;  it 
is  not  at  all  the  usual  way  in  the  earlier  epistles.  It  was 
his  Bethany.  Here  and  now  was  the  opening  of  that 
long  pent-up  heart.  At  the  same  time  he  was  also 
laying  an  important  commission  on  one  that  was  raised 
up  of  God  for  the  purpose,  who  was  comparatively 
young,  who  would  soon  have  to  fi^ht  his  way  without 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  369 

the  sympathy  and  the  countenance  of  one  that  had 
been  so  blest  to  him.  Hence  he  says  here,  "  Grace, 
mercy,  and  peace."  He  felt  his  need,  but  certainly  the 
mercy  was  not  lacking  in  God,  but  rich  and  ready  to 
flow.  "  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace,  from  God  our  Father 
and  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  As  I  besought  thee  to 
abide  still  at  Ephesus,  when  I  went  into  Macedonia." 
We  see  the  love  that  even  an  apostle  adopts  towards 
his  child  in  faith.  It  was  not  at  all  a  peremptory  word, 
though  full  of  earnest  desire  for  the  work  of  the  Lord. 
He  wishes  Timothy  to  stay,  "that  thou  mightest  charge 
some  not  to  be  teachers  of  other  doctrine,  nor  to  give 
heed  to  fables  and  endless  genealogies,  which  minister 
questions,  rather  than  God's  administration*  which  is 
in  faith." 

Then  he  explains  what  the  nature  of  this  charge  was. 
Often,  I  fear,  "commandment"  gives  the  English  reader 
a  wrong  impression.  I  do  not  say  that  "commandment" 
is  not  correct,  but  that  so  naturally  do  people  in  Christen- 
dom turn  to  what  we  call  the  Ten  Commandments,  or 
ten  words  of  the  law,  that  whenever  the  word  "com- 
mandment" occurs,  you  may  expect  many,  even  children 
of  God,  who  might  and  ought  to  know  better,  at  once 
unconsciously  turning  back  to  the  law.     But  so  far  was 

*  The  true  reading,  represented  by  K  ifiod.  iSin.)  and  all  otlier  uncials 
save  the  Clermont,  and  almost  if  not  all  the  cursive  manuscripts,  is 
o'lKovoji'iav,  dispensation,  in  the  sense  of  administration,  or  steward- 
ship. Even  Matthaei  joins  the  rest  of  the  critics,  with  the  Gompluten- 
sian  FoVyijlott,  against  the  received  otnoSoiiiav,  which  he  considers  a 
mere  blunder  of  S  for  v  by  Erasmus's  printers.  But  this  does  not 
account  for  the  Latin,  Syriac  (save  later),  Gothic,  &o.;  even  supposing 
d  was  the  slip  of  the  scribe.  It  is  evident  that  "edification"  is  not 
the  point  in  question,  but  the  right  order  of  the  house  of  God,  and 
this  in  faith.  Internal  evidence  is  thus  as  strong  as  external  as  to 
the  true  reading. 

B  B 


370  INTRODUCTOKT  LECTUEES. 

this  from  being  the  writer's  thought  here,  that  we  shall 
find  him  in  a  moment  deprecating  most  strongly  that 
whole  system  of  idea  as  a  misuse  of  the  law.  What 
the  apostle  means  by  the  commandment  is  the  charge 
that  he  was  laying  on  his  child  in  the  faith  and  fellow- 
labourer  Timothy.  The  end  of  the  charge  or  command- 
ment "is  love  out  of  a  pure  heart,  and  of  a  good 
eonscienbe,  and  of  faith  unfeigned."  It  was,  in  point  of 
fact,  not  merely  that  charge  that  he  was  giving  him,  but 
the  charge  touched  the  truth  of  the  gospel;  it  was  the 
care  of  the  faith,  jealousy  for  the  revelation  of  God 
Himself,  our  Saviour  God  in  Christ.  The  end  of  all 
this  was  "love,  and  a  good  conscience,  and  faith  un- 
feigned." And  so  then,  as  remarked  already,  far  from 
leaving  the  smallest  reason  for  any  perversely  to  con- 
found this  with  the  law,  the  apostle  instantly  turns  to 
that  perverting  of  the  law,  which  is  so  natural  to  the 
heart  of  man.  "From  which  some  having  swerved 
have  turned  aside  unto  vain  jangling;  desiring  to  be 
law-teachers;  understanding  neither  what  they  say,  nor 
whereof  they  affirm;"  and  thereupon  he  parenthetically, 
as  disposing  of  this  matter,  shows  what  the  lawful  use 
of  the  law  is.  They  were  not  to  suppose  that  he  meant 
that  God  could  make  anything  without  a  real  use.  As 
there  is  no  creature  of  God  that  has  not  its  value,  so 
certainly  the  law  of  God  has  its  right  field  of  applica- 
tion, and  its  own  proper  use.  Thus  he  vindicates  God 
in  what  He  has  given,  as  well  as  afterwards  in  what  He 
has  made,  and  nowhere  so  much  as  in  this  epistle  do 
we  find  this. 

At  the  same  time  it  is  evident  that  he  consigns  the 
law  to  what  we  may  call  a  comparatively  negative  use. 
The  use  of  the  law  is  to  condemn,  to  kill,  to  deal  with 


THE  FIEST   EPISTLE   TO   TIMOTHY.  371 

evil.  This  never  could  be  the  full  expression  of  God. 
It  does  keep  up  a  witness  to  God's  hatred  of  evil  no 
doubt;  those  that  are  presumptuous  it  leaves  without 
excuse.  But  a  Christian,  who  takes  up  the  law  as 
the  rule  of  his  own  life,  must  in  the  very  first  instance 
give  up  his  place  as  being  in  Christ,  and  abandon 
that  righteousness  of  God  which  he  is  made  in  Him. 
The  law  was  not  enacted  for  the  Christian.  It  is  not, 
of  course,  that  any  Christian  deliberately  intends  such 
folly;  but  this  is  really  what  the  error  implies.  The 
very  principle  of  taking  the  law  for  himself  is  the 
abandonment  (without  knowing  or  intending  it)  of  all 
his  blessing  in  Christ.  To  apply  it  thus  is  ignorance 
of  the  mind  of  God  It  was  never  designed  for  such  a 
purpose.  But  there  remains  the  lawful  use  of  the  law. 
It  was  made  not  for  the  righteous,  but  for  an  unrighteous 
man.  Clearly  what  Satan  here  aimed  at  was  to  put  the 
saints  under  the  law.  But  the  apostle  will  not  hear  of 
it,  treating  it  as  simply  condemnatory  of  the  bad,  and 
in  no  way  either  the  power  or  the  rule  of  what  is  good 
for  the  believer.  "Knowing  this,  that  the  law  is  not 
made  for  a  righteous  man,  but  for  lawless  and  dis- 
obedient, for  ungodly  and  for  sinners,  for  unholy  and 
profane,  for  smiters  of  fathers  and  smiters  of  mothers, 
for  manslayers,  for  whoremongers,  for  them  that  defile 
themselves  with  mankind,  for  menstealers,  for  liars,  for 
perjured  persons,  and  if  there  be  any  other  thing  that  is 
contrary  to  sound  doctrine." 

A  weighty  sentence,  and  eminently  characteristic  also 
of  these  epistles.  The  time  was  appropriate  for  it.  The 
saints  (at  Ephesus  especially)  had  heard  a  great  deal  of 
heavenly  truth.  There  was  also  an  effort,  as  we  see,  to 
correct  what  was  supposed  to  be  a  defect,  in  those  that 

S   B    2 


372  INTBODUCTOEY   LECTURES. 

were  living  on  heavenly  fare,  by  supplementing  their 
truth  with  the  law.  But  this  is  all  wrong,  cries  the 
apostle.  It  is  an  unwitting  denial  not  only  of  Chris- 
tians, but  even  of  your  place  as  righteous  men.  Very 
different  from  this  is  the  true  and  divine  principle. 
But  "sound  doctrine"  is  brought  in  here;  and  we  shall 
see  how  very  beautifully  this  is  applied  in  the  epistle  at 
a  later  point.  For  a  moment  he  just  touches  on  the 
wholesome  thought,  then  turns  to  a  higher  one.  There 
is  in  Christ  that  which  lifts  entirely  out  of  nature,  and 
puts  one  before  God  according  to  all  that  is  in  his 
heart — his  counsels  of  glory  for  us  in  Christ.  In  fact, 
immediately  after  this  he  calls  what  he  preached  the 
"gospel  of  the  glory"  ("the  glorious  gospel,"  as  it  is 
styled  in  our  version,)  "of  the  blessed  God."  "According 
to  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God,  which  was 
committed  to  my  trust."  He  takes  great  pains  to  show 
that  no  glory  that  is  revealed  in  Christ,  no  blessedness 
in  our  total  clearance  from  flesh,  no  setting  of  the 
believer  free  before  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  impairs,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  gives  importance  to  "  sound  doctrine." 
By  "sound  doctrine"  we  shall  find  that  he  brings 
in  the  nicest  care  for  the  least  relations  of  this  life,  as 
flowing  from  the  grace  and  truth  of  God.  This  is  the 
true  guard  against  an  abuse  of  heavenly  truth;  not 
putting  persons  under  law,  which  is  inevitable  bondage 
and  condemnation,  that  brings  no  glory  to  -God,  nor 
power  or  holiness  to  the  man.  But  at  the  same  time 
heavenly  truth,  so  far  from  being  inconsistent,  never 
shines  so  much  as  when  it  is  seen  in  the  smallest  details 
of  walk  in  the  home,  in  the  family,  in  the  ordinary 
occupation,  in  the  bearing  and  tone  of  a  man  in  his  life 
day  by  day.     It  is  not  merely  in  the  assembly;  neither 


THE   FIRST  EPISTLE   TO   TIMOTHY.  373 

is  it  in  worship  only;  it  is  not  certainly  in  ministerial 
"work  alone,  but  in  the  quiet  home.  The  relationship  of 
a  servant  to  his  master  gives  a  blessed  opportunity  in  its 
place  for  showing  out  what  the  truth  of  the  glory  is  to 
faith,  and  what  the  strength  of  the  grace  which  is  come 
to  man  in  Christ  the  Lord.  This  is  what  we  shall  find 
in  these  epistles  to  Timothy — that  the  apostle  combines 
in  his  own  wonderful  way  his  reference  to  ordinary 
duty,  and  even  enters  into  the  smallest  matters  of  this 
life,  according  to  the  gospel  of  the  glory  of  the  blessed 
God.  He  refers  to  his  own  case;  for  he  was  so  much 
the  better  a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  because  he  so  deeply 
felt  himself  an  object  of  the  grace  of  God,  who  revealed 
it  in  Christ  to  him.  What  can  be  conceived  more 
remarkably  characteristic  of  the  man  ?  The  bearing  of 
the  passage  is  therefore  intensely  personal  and  practical. 
"And  I  thank  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  who  hath  enabled 
me,  for  that  he  counted  me  faithful,  appointing  me  unto 
ministry."  He  does  not  forget  this,  but  he  takes  care 
to  assert  another  and  a  far  nearer  and  more  immediate 
want — "who  was  before  a  blasphemer,  and  a  perse- 
cutor, and  insolent:  but  I  obtained  mercy,  because  I 
did  it  ignorantly  in  unbelief.  And  the  grace  of  our 
Lord  was  exceedingly  abundant  with  faitli  and  love 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus." 

This  accordingly  brings  out  a  statement  of  the 
gospel :  "  Faithful  is  the  word,  and  worthy  of  all 
acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to 
save  sinners ;  of  whom  I  am  chief.  Howbeit  for  this 
cause  I  obtained  mercy."  It  is  always  mercy,  as  may 
be  observed.  It  is  not  so  much  a  question  of  righteous- 
ness ;  justification  is  not  here  prominent,  as  in  other 
epistles.     "I  obtained   mercy,  that  in  me  first  Jesus 


374  INTEODUCTOKY  LECTURES. 

Christ  might  shew  forth  all  long-suffering,  for  a  pattern 
to  them  which  should  hereafter  believe  on  him  to  life 
everlasting."  This  draws  out  his  ascription  of  praise 
and  thanksgiving  to  the  Lord  ;  and  then  he  repeats  the 
words  of  the  fifth  verse :  "  This  charge  I  commit  unto 
thee."  It  is  not  the  law,  nor  any  supposed  adaptation 
of  it,  to  direct  the  path  of  those  who  receive  the  gospel. 
"This  charge,"  he  maintains,  is  the  commandment  of 
our  Saviour  God.  It  is  that  which  He  is  sending  out 
now,  and  nothing  else.  "  This  charge  I  commit  to 
thee,  child  Timothy,  according  to  the  prophecies  which 
went  before  on  thee,  that  thou  mightest  war  the  good 
warfare;  holding  faith,  and  a  good  conscience,  which 
some  having  put  away,  concerning  faith  have  made 
shipwreck.'' 

There  again  we  find  the  same  mingling  of  the  faith 
and  good  conscience  as  we  had  earlier.  Some  having 
put  away,  not  the  faith,  but  a  good  conscience,  made 
shipwreck  of  the  faith.  Thus,  no  matter  what  you 
may  hold  or  appear  to  delight  in,  abandoning  jealousy 
over  your  ways,  giving  up  self-judgment  in  the  great 
or  small  matters  which  each  day  brings  before  us,  is 
fatal.  It  may  be  a  very  little  sin  that  is  allowed, 
but  this,  where  it  is  unjudged  in  God's  sight,  becomes 
the  beginning  of  a  very  great  evil.  Having  put  away 
a  good  conscience,  their  ship  no  longer  answers  the 
helm,  and  as  to  faith  they  make  shipwreck  :  "  of  whom 
is  Hymenseus  and  Alexander,  whom  I  have  delivered 
unto  Satan,  that  they  may  be  instructed  not  to  blas- 
pheme." Satan's  power  is  regarded  and  reaUy  is  in 
the  outside  world.  The  apostle  had  delivered  these 
men  to  him.  The  power  to  torment  and  harass  the  soul 
with  fears  does  not  belong  to  the  house  of  God,  where, 


THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO   TIMOTHY.  375 

as  we  shall  find,  His  presence  is  known,  and  this  is 
incompatihle  with  fear,  with  doubt,  with  question  of 
acceptance  and  of  blessing  in  His  sight.  The  apostle 
had  given  up  to  the  enemy  these  men,  who  had  aban- 
doned all  that  was  holy,  not  only  in  practice,  but  also 
afterwards,  as  a  consequence,  in  faith.  They  were  con- 
signed to  Satan,  not  necessarily  to  be  lost — surely  not ; 
but  that  they  might  be  so  troubled,  by  proving  what 
the  power  of  Satan  is  by  the  flesh,  and  in  the  world, 
that  they  might  be  thus  brought  back  broken  in  all  their 
bones,  and  glad  to  find  a  refuge  again  in  the  house  of 
God.  Better  surely  not  to  need  such  discipline ;  but,  if 
we  do  need  it,  how  precious  to  know  that  God  turns  it 
to  account  in  His  grace,  that  they  might  be  thoroughly 
dealt  with  and  exercised  in  the  conscience ! 

In  the  next  chapter  (ii.)  the  apostle  carries  on  his  care 
as  to  what  was  becoming.  This,  you  will  find,  is  a  main 
topic  of  the  epistle.  It  is  not  merely  instruction  for 
saints,  or  conversion  of  sinners,  but  also  the  comeliness 
that  belongs  to  the  saints  of  God — their  right  attitude 
toward  those  without  as  well  as  those  within.  In  it 
we  begin  with  what  is  toward  those  in  authority,  that 
are  without.  "  I  exhort  therefore,  that,  first  of  all,  sup- 
plications, prayers,  intercessions,  and  givings  of  thanks, 
be  made  for  all  men;  for  kings,  and  for  all  that  are 
in  eminence ;  that  we  may  pass  a  quiet  and  peaceable 
life  in  all  godliness  and  gravity."  May  it  not  be  a 
question  whether  we  are  sufficiently  careful  and  exer- 
cised in  heart,  as  to  that  which  becomes  us  in  this 
respect  ?  Do  we  really  enter  on  our  due  place  of  in- 
tercession, and  exercise  that  which  becomes  us  before 
God,  as  having  so  blessed  a  function — the  mind  of  God 


376  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

in  this  world,  and  care  for  those  that  seem  to  be  outside 
our  reach?  But  in  truth  to  stand  in  this  world  in  known 
and  near  relationship  with  a  Saviour  God,  with  One 
that  we  know,  at  once  brings  before  us  also  those  that 
are  outside.  Christianity  fosters  no  spirit  of  harsh 
unruly  independence.  And  what  then  becomes  us  in 
respect  of  them?  Prayer,  intercession,  even  for  the 
highest,  let  them  be  kings  or  in  eminence;  they  need 
it  most.  Nothing  but  the  strong  sense  of  the  infinite 
blessing  of  the  place  that  grace  has  given  us  could  lead 
to  or  keep  up  such  prayer.  But  sometimes  we  are  apt 
to  settle  down  in  the  enjoyment  of  thie  grace,  without 
reflecting  on  that  which  becomes  us  asl  to  those  outside 
it.  From  pre-occupation  within,  haw  often  we  forget 
those  without! 

But  the  reason  goes  deeper.  "  For  this  is  good  and 
acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  our  Saviour ;  who  desires 
that  all  men  should  be  saved :"  speaking  now  of  His 
gracious  willingness.  ITot  His  counsels  but  His  nature 
rises  before  us.  We  must  be  blind  if  we  fail  to  see 
that  a  great  point  in  these  epistles  is  the  good  and 
loving  nature  of  God,  that  would  have  us  look  at  all 
men  without  exception.  It  is  another  thing  how  far  the 
counsels  of  God  work,  how  far  the  effectual  work  of 
His  grace  is  applied ;  but  nothing  alters  God's  nature. 
And  this  is  true  both  in  the  spirit  of  grace  that  becomes 
the  saints,  and  also  in  their  zealous  care  for  the  glory 
of  God.  Hence  he  says :  "  There  is  one  God,  and  one 
mediator  between  God  and  men."  This  is  always  the 
ground  and  character  of  the  First  and  Second  of  Timothy. 
It  is  not  the  Father  and  His  family ;  it  is  God  and  man. 
And  it  is  not  merely  God  as  He  once  dealt  with  Israel, 
for  then  this  Mediator  was  not.     There  was  a  promise. 


THE   FIRST   EPISTLE   TO    TIMOTHY.  377 

but  the  Mediator  of  grace  was  not  come.  But  now,  apart 
from  the  heavenly  relations  that  are  ours,  and  much 
that  we  know  and  enjoy  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  our 
hearts  here  below,  there  is  this  that  needs  to  be  looked 
after  and  maintained,  that  is,  the  public  character ^ — if 
we  may  so  speak — of  the  Christian,  and  that  which 
belongs  to  him  thus  broadly  before  men.  It  is  the  testi- 
mony of  God  as  a  Saviour  God,  of  a  God  that  has  to 
do  with  men.  Accordingly  He  has  revealed  Himself  in 
a  Mediator.  Thus  he  speaks  of  Hira :  "  There  is  one 
God,  and  one  mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  man 
Christ  Jesus ;  who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all,  the 
testimony  in  its  own  season.  Whereunto  I  was  ap- 
pointed a  preacher  and  an  apostle  (I  speak  the  truth  in 
Christ,  and  lie  not),  a  teacher  of  Gentiles  in  faith  and 
truth." 

His  general  exhortation  is  pursued,  but  still  in  view 
of  the  due  and  decent  outward  order,  of  that  which  met 
the  eye  even  of  an  unconverted  person.  "  I  will  there- 
fore that  the  men" — that  is,  not  women — "that  the  men 
pray  in  every  place,  lifting  up  holy  hands,  without  wrath 
and  disputing."  There  are  occasions  and  places  where 
it  would  be  wholly  unsuitable  for  women  to  speak,  but 
as  to  men  they  pray  everywhere.  There  is  no  place 
where  it  is  not  in  season,  but  let  it  be  "  without  wrath 
and  disupting,"  or  "reasoning."  Either  would  be  al- 
together opposed  to  the  spirit  of  prayer.  Prayer  is  the 
expression  of  dependence  on  God;  and  wrangling  on 
the  one  hand,  and  all  angry  feeling  on  the  other,  even 
supposing  it  might  have  some  righteousness  about  it, 
still  are  unsuitable  to  prayer.  Thus,  what  may  have  its 
place  may  really  be  uncomely  in  drawing  near  to  God. 
A  spirit  of  reasoning  would  be  quite  as  out  of  place. 


378  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

But  with  regard  to  woman  he  says,  "  In  like  manner 
also,  that  the  women  adorn  themselves  in  orderly  guise, 
with  modesty  and  sobriety;  not  with  plaits  and  gold,  or 
pearls,  or  costly  array."  It  does  not  matter  what  may 
be  the  particular  taste  and  habits  of  the  day  or  of  the 
country,  the  Christian  woman,  as  much  as  the  Christian 
man,  oftght  to  be  above  the  age,  and  unlike  the  world. 
And  indeed  it  is  this  very  want  that  he  here  takes  oc- 
casion to  connect  with  Christianity  itself  in  its  outward 
order  before  man ;  so  that  we  may  truly  desire  that  our 
Saviour  God  should  not  lose,  as  it  were.  His  character 
in  and  by  His  people ;  for  this  is  the  great  point  that 
the  apostle  is  so  full  of  in  these  epistles.  Such  is  the 
way  in  which  a  woman  can  contribute  to  a  right  and 
godly  testimony  as  well  as  a  man. 

But  he  pursues  it  a  little  more.  He  says,  "Let  the 
woman  learn  in  silence  with  all  subjection.  But  I  suffer 
not  a  woman  to  teach,  nor  to  usurp  authority  over  the 
man."  In  truth  he  really  goes  somewhat  beyond  this. 
A  woman  might  say,  "  I  do  not  usurp  authority;  I  only 
exercise  it."  But  this  precisely  is  what  is  wrong.  It 
is  forbidden  to  be  exercised.  Nothing  therefore  can  be 
more  exclusive.  It  does  not  matter,  if  the  man  may  be 
weak  and  the  woman  strong ;  it  would  have  been  better 
they  had  thought  of  this  before  they  became  husband 
and  wife.  But  even  thus  no  excuse  avails ;  the  woman 
is  not  to  exercise  authority  over  the  man ;  nor  (need  I 
add  ?)  in  any  other  relationship.  For  this  he  traces 
things  to  their  roots.  "Adam  was  first  formed,  then 
Eve.  And  Adam  was  not  deceived,  but  the  woman 
being  quite  deceived  was  in  transgression."  That  is,  he 
decides  things  with  that  marvellous  power  which  God 
gave  him  beyond  any  of  the  other  apostles  of  tracking 


THE   FIKST  EPISTLE   TO  TIMOTHY.  379 

the  stream  to  its  source,  both  in  man  and  to  God ;  and 
this  ruling  of  the  case  he  deduces  from  the  unquestion- 
able facts  of  the  beginning  of  divine  history  as  to  the 
man  and  woman.  The  man  was  not  deceived,  in  a 
certain  sense:  so  much  the  worse;  he  was  a  bold  sinner. 
Tlie  woman  was  weak  and  misled  by  the  serpent ;  the 
man  deliberately  did  what  he  did — with  his  eyes  open. 
Adam  sinned  against  God  knowingly.  Of  course  it 
was  dreadful  and  ruinous ;  nevertheless  this  shows  the 
difference  in  their  character  from  the  outset.  Men 
as  a  class  are  not  so  liable  to  be  deceived  as  woman 
She  is  more  open  to  be  taken  in  by  appearance.  The 
man  may  be  ruder  and  worse — bolder  in  his  sin,  but 
stiH  the  Lord  remembers  this  even  to  the  last.  At  the 
same  time  the  apostle  mingles  this  with  that  which  is 
the  lot  of  women  here  below :  "  But  she  shall  be  pre- 
served in  childbearing,  if  they  continue  in  faith  and 
charity  and  holiness  with  sobriety."  It  is  not  merely 
if  "  she,"  but  if  "  they ''  continue.  How  serious  is  the 
word  for  both  man  and  woman !  In  the  government 
of  God  He  mingles  the  most  solemn  things  with  that 
which  is  the  most  thoroughly  personal,  showing  how 
He  would  have  the  conscience  exercised,  and  jealous 
care  even  on  such  a  matter  as  this.  I  do  not  agree 
with  those  who  refer  the  childbearing  to  the  Incarnation. 

And  now  he  comes  (chapter  iii.),  not  so  much  to 
comely  order  as  to  the  outside,  or  as  to  the  relation  of 
man  and  woman,  but  to  the  ordinary  governments  and 
helps  of  the  saints.  He  takes  up  what  was  of  a  graver 
kind,  and  touching  more  on  spiritual  things,  namely, 
bishops  (or  elders) ;  then  deacons ;  and  this  leads  him 
naturally  to  the  house  of  God.     "  Faithful  is  the  word, 


380  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

If  any  one  aspireth  to  oversight,  he  desireth  a  good 
work.  The  overseer  then  must  he  hlameless,  husband 
of  one  wife,  vigilant,  sober,  of  good  behaviour,  given  to 
hospitality,  apt  to  teach;  not  given  to  wine,  no  striker; 
but  patient,  not  a  brawler,  not  covetous;  one  that  ruleth 
well  his  own  house,  having  his  children  in  subjection 
with  all  gravity."  It  is  plain  that  this  is  not  at  all  a 
question  of  spiritual  gift.  One  might  be  endowed  with 
a  good  gift  and  yet  not  have  a  well-regulated  house. 
Perhaps  the  wife  might  not  behave  properly,  or  the 
children  be  unruly:  no  matter  what  his  gift,  if  the  wife 
or  the  family  were  a  dishonour,  he  could  not  be  an 
overseer  (for  this  is  the  simple  and  true  meaning  of 
"  bishop"). 

In  early  days  persons  were  brought  in  to  the  confes- 
sion of  Christ  who  had  been  Pagans,  and  trained  up  in 
its  habits.  Some  of  these  had  more  than  one  wife.  A 
true  and  gifted  Christian  one  might  be;  but  if  such  were 
his  unhappy  position,  he  was  precluded  from  exercising 
formal  oversight.  The  evil  of  polygamy  could  not  be 
corrected  at  that  time  by  strong  measures.  (Since  then 
in  Christendom  it  is  dealt  with  as  criminal.)  To  dismiss 
his  wives  would  be  wrong.  But  the  Holy  Spirit  by  such 
an  injunction  applied  a  principle  which  was  destined  to 
undermine,  as  in  fact  it  did  undermine,  polygamy  in 
every  form.  There  was  a  manifest  censure  conveyed  in 
the  fact,  that  a  man  with  two  or  more  wives  could  not 
be  set  in  the  charge  of  elder  or  deacon.  A  man  was  not 
refused  as  a  confessor  of  Christ,  nor  was  he  forbidden 
to  preach  the  gospel,  because  such  might  have  been  his 
sad  circumstances  at  home.  If  the  Lord  called  him  by 
His  grace,  or  gave  him  as  a  gift  to  the  church,  the  church 
bowed.     But  an  elder  or  bishop  was  to  be  one  that  not 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO   TIMOTHY.  381 

only  had  a  suitable  gift  for  liis  work,  but  also  in  the 
family  or  in  his  circumstances  must  be  free  from  all 
appearance  of  scandal  on  the  name  of  the  Lord.  He 
must  have  a  good  report,  and  be  morally  irreproachable 
in  himself  and  his  household.  There  might  be  trial  or 
sorrow, — few  families  were  without  both;  but  what 
is  spoken  of  here  is  something  that  damaged  the  public 
repute  of  the  assembly.  For  this  very  reason  the  grand 
point  for  local  oversight  was  moral  weight.  It  was  not 
only  the  ability  to  inform,  counsel,  or  rebuke,  but  in 
order  to  do  all  this  efficiently  a  certain  godly  influence 
proved  at  home  and  abroad.  In  the  practical  difficulties 
with  which  an  elder  or  bishop  would  be  called  to  inter- 
fere continually  in  an  assembly,  there  should  never  be 
room  for  those  whose  conduct  might  be  in  question  to 
point  to  flaws  in  his  own  home,  or  in  his  own  open  life 
and  spirit.  Thus  wisely  and  holily  did  the  Spirit 
demand  that  he  should  be  a  person  of  good  report  him- 
self, that  neither  past  ways  nor  present  habits  should 
in  the  least  degree  compromise  the  office;  and  again, 
with  a  stainless  reputation  as  well  as  a  man  of  some 
spiritual  experience  in  his  family — "one  that  ruleth  well 
his  own  house,  having  his  children  in  subjection  with 
all  gravity ;  not  a  novice,  lest  being  lifted  up  with  pride 
he  fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil."  These 
things  would  not  apply  to  a  man's  ministry  in  the  word. 
A  Christian  may  begin  to  preach  almost  as  soon  as  he 
believed  the  word  of  truth,  the  gospel  of  salvation ;  but 
for  one  to  be  clothed  with  a  public  and  responsible 
place  as  elder  in  an  assembly  is  another  thing  altogether. 
As  a  rule  the  apostle  never  appointed  persons  elders 
directly  after  they  were  converted.  A  certain  time  was 
needful  for  the  Spirit  of  God  to  work  in  the  soul,  and 


382  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

discipline  them  in  the  midst  of  their  brethren.  They 
woidd  then  and  thus  manifest  certain  capabilities  and 
moral  qualities,  and  acquire  weight,  which  would  make 
them  respected  and  valued,  besides  gaining  experience 
in  godly  care  for  the  well-being  of  the  saints  of  God. 
All  these  things,  where  there  were  circumstantial  requi- 
sites, relative  and  personal  suitability,  would  mark  out 
a  person  for  this  ofBce. 

Besides,  though  this  is  not  said  here,  in  order  to  be 
an  overseer,  one  must  be  appointed  by  a  valid  authority; 
and  the  only  one  recognised  by  Scripture  is  an  apostle 
or  an  apostolic  delegate.  Thus  the  Christians  that  a 
superficial  observer  of  the  present  day  might  tax  with 
inattention  to  godly  order  in  these  respects  are  in  truth 
those  alone  who  are  really  adhering  to  it.  For  manifestly 
to  set  up  men  in  such  a  position  of  charge  without  a 
proper  validating  authority  is  really  to  vitiate  all  in  its 
very  springs.  Those  who  refuse  to  exceed  their  powers 
are  clearly  in  the  right,^ — not  those  who  imitate  the 
apostles  without  warrant  from  the  Lord.  I  am  perfectly 
satisfied  therefore  that  those  now  gathered  to  His  name 
have  been  mercifully  and  truly  led  of  God  in  not  pre- 
suming to  appoint  elders  or  bishops.  They  do  not  pos- 
sess the  needful  authority  more  than  others ;  and  there 
they  stop,  using,  and  blessing  God  for,  such  things  as 
they  have.  Appointment  miist  always  raise  the  ques- 
tion, who  they  are  that  appoint.  And  it  is  impossible 
for  an  honest  man  of  intelligence  to  find  a  scriptural 
answer,  so  as  to  sanction  those  who  pretend  to  ordain, 
or  those  who  claim  to  be  duly  ordained,  in  Christendom. 
There  was  no  dif&culty  in  primitive  days.  Here  indeed 
(if  we  except  a  debatable  allusion  in  another  place) 
the  apostle  does  not  touch  the  subject  of  appointment 


THE   FIRST  EPISTLE    TO   TIMOTHY.  383 

as  he  does  to  Titus.  He  merely  puts  before  Timothy 
the  qualities  requisite  for  both  the  local  charges. 

After  the  overseers  he  turns  to  the  deacons.  "  Like- 
wise must  the  deacons  be  grave,  not  double-tongued, 
not  given  to  much  wine,  not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre; 
holding  the  mystery  of  the  faith  in  a  pure  conscience. 
And  let  these  also  first  be  proved."  The  modern  deacon 
in  the  larger  and  national  bodies  has  no  resemblance 
to  this,  and  is  indeed  an  unmeaning  form.  It  is  a  mere 
noviciate  for  the  so-called  presbyters  who  compose  the 
body  of  the  clergy.  Of  old  no  inexperienced  man  ought 
to  have  been  in  such  a  position.  Even  though  it  was  a 
function  aboiit  outward  things,  still  they  were  to  be  first 
proved.  "Then  let  them  use  the  office  of  a  deacon, 
being  found  blameless.  Even  so  must  their  wives  be 
grave."  It  is  plain  on  the  face  of  it  that  this  is  more 
particularly  insisted  on  for  the  deacons  than  for  the 
elders.  The  reason  was,  that  as  the  deacons  had  to  do 
more  with  externals,  there  was  greater  danger  of  their 
wives  making  mischief  and  heart-burning.  They  might 
interfere  with  these  matters,  which  we  know  are  apt  to 
gender  strife,  as  they  cast  a  gloom  over  the  Pentecostal 
Church  at  an  early  day.  There  was  not  the  same  tempta- 
tion for  the  wives  of  the  elders  or  overseers.  Hence  it 
is  written  here,  "Even  so  must  their  wives  be  grave,  not 
slanderers,  sober,  faithful  in  all  things.  Let  the  deacons 
be  the  husbands  of  one  wife."  In  this  we  find  the  same 
thing  as  was  said  of  the  elders:  both  must  rule  their 
children  and  their  own  houses  well.  "For  they  that 
have  served  well  purchase  to  themselves  a  good  degree, 
and  much  boldness  in  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus." 

Then  the  apostle  sums  up  these  regulations,  and  says, 
"  These  things  write  I  unto  thee,  hoping  to  come  unto 


384  INTEODTTCTORY  LECTURES. 

thee  shortly:  but  if  I  tarry  long,  that  thou  mayest 
know  how  thou  oughtest  to  behave  thyself  in  the  house 
of  God,"  (may  we,  too,  profit  by  his  words,  beloved 
brethren !)  "  which  is  the  church  of  the  living  God,  the 
pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth."  The  church  is  the 
guardian  of  the  truth,  its  sole  responsible  witness  on 
the  earth.  The  church  owes  all  in  the  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  to  the  truth.  It  may  not  be  competent  to 
define  the  truth :  inspired  men  have  done  so.  At  the 
same  time  it  is  bound  to  hold  forth  God's  word  as  the 
truth,  and  to  allow  nothing  inconsistent  with  it  in  the 
doctrine  or  ways  of  the  assembly.  For  we  are  called  to 
be  a  manifestation  of  the  truth  before  the  world,  even 
of  that  which  goes  beyond  that  of  which  the  church  is 
the  embodiment.  The  acts  done  should  always  be  an 
expression  of  the  truth.  It  is  a  most  important  duty, 
therefore,  and  one  requiring  continual  watchfulness. 
God  alone  can  vouchsafe  or  keep  it  good. 

Truly,  there  are  often  difiBculties  that  arise  in  the 
church  of  God,  and  prudence  might  suggest  many  plans 
to  meet  the  difficulty ;  but  then  it  is  the  house  of  God, 
not  merely  the  house  of  the  prudent  or  the  good.  It 
is  a  divine  institution.  It  has  nothing  in  common 
with  well-intentioned  men  doing  their  best.  Let  the 
matter  be  ever  so  simple,  whether  it  be  a  question  of 
discipline  or  order,  it  should  express  the  truth  of  God 
applied  to  the  case.  This  shows  the  exceeding  solem- 
nity of  either  advising  or  resisting  any  course  that 
might  be  the  will  of  God  in  any  particular  matter. 
Excellent  desires,  zeal,  honesty,  are  in  no  way  sufficient 
for  the  purpose.  God  can  employ  the  most  feeble 
member  of  the  assembly ;  but  still  ordinarily  one  looks 
for  better  guides.     One  might  expect  that  while  God 


THE.  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  385 

would  give  no  allowance  to  a  man  presuming  on  gift  or 
experience, — because  the  moment  you  begin  to  assume 
to  yourself  or  to  others,  there  is  danger, — but  never- 
theless, surely  one  might  expect  that  God  would,  by 
suitable  means,  bring  out  that  which  is  wholesome,  and 
true,  and  godly — in  short,  what  would  express  His  own 
mind  on  any  given  subject. 

These  are  among  the  reasons  why  the  apostle  main- 
tains it  here.  We  have  it  viewed  in  its  outward  comely 
order  in  this  world,  but  the  principle  of  the  maintenance 
of  this,  and  nothina;  less  than  this,  always  remains  true. 
No  renewed  state  gives  any  reason  for  abandoning  it. 
The  great  thing  is  never  to  let  details  swamp  the  prin- 
ciple. There  is  always  a  way  for  those  who,  consciously 
weak,  distrust  themselves  ;  and  this  is  to  wait,  to  refuse 
to  act  until  God  shows  His  way.  Faith  waits  till  it  gets 
a  distinct  word  from  God.  No  doubt  it  is  hard  to  be 
at  one's  wits'  end,  but  it  is  a  good  thing  for  the  soul. 
So  here :  he  bids  Timothy  to  take  heed  to  these  things, 
in  case  he 'himself  tarried. 

And  what  is  that  truth  especially  which  characterizes 
the  church  ?  This  is  another  instance  of  the  tone  of 
the  epistle.  "  Without  controversy  great  is  the  mystery 
of  godliness."  Mark  the  expression  "  mystery  of  godli- 
ness," or  piety.  It  is  not  simply  the  mystery  of  Christ 
in  the  church,  but  the  "  mystery  of  godliness."  "  God  * 
was  manifested  in  liesh,  was  justified  in  Spirit,  was  seen 
of  angels,  was  preached  among  Gentiles,  was  believed  on 
in  [the]  world,  was  received  up  in  glory."  It  is  not  God 
reigning  over  a  people  here  below.  This  was  no  mystery, 
but  the  wonted  expectation  of  all  Israel,  indeed,  of 

*  Coil.  Sin.  (N)  agrees  with  the  great  authorities  which  give  oj, 
"who"  (or  others,  o,  "which")  instead  of  Otoe,  "God." 

C   C 


386  INTKODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

saints  before  Israel.  They  expected  the  Messiah,  the 
Eedeemer  to  come,  the  One  that  would  make  good  the 
promises  of  God.  But  now  "God  was  manifested  in 
flesh,  was  justified  in  Spirit."  The  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  had  shown  itself  all  through  His  life,  had  been 
proved  to  the  uttermost  in  His  death,  and  now  marked 
Him  but  as  Son  of  God  in  resurrection.  He  was 
"  seen  of  angels,"  not  of  man  alone ;  He  was  "  preached 
among  Gentiles,"  instead  of  being  found  on  a  throne 
amongst  the  Jews ;  He  was  "  believed  on  in  the  world," 
instead  of  manifestly  governing  it  by  power.  Another 
state  of  things  altogether  is  present:  it  is  Christianity; 
but  Christianity  viewed  in  the  person  of  Christ  Him- 
self, in  the  grand  bearings  of  His  own  person  and  His 
work ;  not  as  forming  a  heavenly  body,  nor  even  pur- 
suing the  special  privileges  of  the  habitation  of  God 
through  the  Spirit ;  but  laying  the  foundation  for  the 
house  of  God,  as  the  scene  and  support  of  His  truth 
and  moral  order  before  the  world.  The  whole  matter  is 
closed  by  Jesus,  not  only  "  believed  on  in  the  world," 
but  "  received  up  in  glory." 

Now  what  is  the  reason  why  this  is  brought  in  here? 
It  seems  to  be  set  in  contrast  with  the  speculations  of 
men  (chap,  iv.)  who  wanted  to  interweave  with  Chris- 
tianity certain  dreams  of  a  fancied  spirituality  above 
the  gospel.  What  was  this  scheme  ?  They  fancied 
that  the  gospel  would  be  a  still  better  system  if  the 
converts  would  eat  no  meat ;  if  they  would  not  marry, 
and  so  on.  This  was  their  notion  of  bringing  in  some 
"higher  life,"  superior  to  anything  that  the  apostles 
had  taught.  How  does  he  meet  them?  He  shows  here 
the  "mystery  of  godliness;"  but  along  with  this,  and 
immediately  after  it,  he  brings  in  the  most  necessary 


THE  FIRST   EPISTLE   TO   TIMOTHY.  387 

fundamental  truth.  This  is  the  point  that  has  much 
struck  my  mind  in  speaking  of  1  Timothy  at  this  time. 

That  is  to  say,  there  is  a  combination  of  God's 
revelation  in  Christ,  in  most  essential  and  even  lofty 
features,  with  the  plainest  and  simplest  truth  of  God  as 
to  creation.  Now,  you  will  find  that  the  way  in  which 
false  doctrine  enters  habitually  is  in  contrast  with 
this.  Men  thus  break  down,  who  despise  common 
duties;  they  are  far  too  good  or  too  great  for  occupy- 
ing themselves  with  the  homely  things  that  become  a 
Christian  man  or  woman.  They  may  perhaps  weave 
the  love  of  Christ  (we  will  suppose)  into  some  high- 
flown  speculations ;  but  they  set  aside  that  which 
connects  itself  every  day  with  moral  propriety.  Oh, 
how  often  this  has  been  the  case !  how  one  could  easily 
recount  one  name  after  another,  if  it  would  become 
any  so  to  do !  Such  then  is  the  way  in  which  error 
is  prone  to  show  itself  The  man  who  most  of  all 
brings  out  what  is  heavenly  and  divine  is  he  who  should 
be  devoted  and  obedient  in  the  simplest  duties  of  every 
day.  This  very  epistle  is  the  witness  of  it.  Whereas 
the  moment  one  sanctions  the  principle  of  making 
little  of  the  family  relations,  setting  aside  duty,  neglect- 
ing it  personally,  and  making  it  even  a  boast  to  do  so, 
as  if  jealousy  for  the  Lord's  glory  were  mere  legalism, 
the  result  will  be  that,  while  they  set  aside  the  common 
claims  of  every  day's  duty,  the  conscience  is  ruined, 
and  shipwreck  of  the  faith  is  inevitable.  They  first 
cast  aside  a  good  conscience,  and  then  the  faith  itself 
comes  to  nothing. 

Thus  the  apostle  brings  the  reader  into  close  juxta- 
position with  the  mystery  of  godliness,  or,  as  it  is 
emphatically  called,  the  mystery  of  piety.  The  glorious 
0  c  2 


388  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

person  of  Christ  is  traced  through  from  His  mani- 
festation in  flesh,  or  incarnation,  until  He  is  beheld 
"  received  up  in  glory."  The  work  of  God  proceeds  in 
the  church  on  earth  founded  on  this.  In  contrast  with 
it  chapter  iv.  follows  up :  "  But  the  Spirit  speaketh 
expressly,  that  in  the  latter  times  some  shall  depart  from 
the  faith,  giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits,  and  doctrines 
of  demons;  in  hypocrisy  of  liars,  cauterised  in  their 
own  conscience,  forbidding  to  marry,  [bidding]  to  ab- 
stain from  meats,  which  God  created  to  be  received 
with  thanksgiving  of  those  that  are  faithful  and  know 
the  truth."  Some  necessary  changes  are  here  made,  so 
as  to  convey  what  seems  to  me  the  meaning.  Then 
he  proceeds :  "For  every  creature  of  God  is  good,"  &c; 
"We  can  hardly  descend  to  anything  lowlier  than  this. 

But  these  airy  speculators  had  completely  forgotten 
God.  They  despised  the  simple  self-evident  truth  that 
every  creature  of  God  is  good.  So,  too,  we  see  that 
they  put  a  disparagement  on  the  basis  of  family  life, 
and  the  social  system — marriage.  Not  to  marry  through 
devotedness  to  God's  work  may  be  right  and  most 
blessed ;  but  here  it  was  a  pretension  to  superior  sanc- 
tity. As  a  principle  and  practice,  Christian  people 
were  urged  not  to  marry  at  all.  Now  the  moment  that 
this  ground  is  taken,  the  same  apostle  who  tells  us  what 
he  believed  to  be  the  best  thing  (namely,  to  be  free  from 
fresh  ties,  so  as  to  care  only  for  the  Lord),  defends  reso- 
lutely the  sanctity  of  marriage,  and  resents  the  blow, 
struck  at  the  creatures  of  God.  It  was  really  a  slight  of 
His  outward  love,  and  of  His  providential  arrangements^ 
Danger  threatens  wherever  there  is  a  virtual  setting 
aside  of  God's  rights,  no  matter  what  the  plea.  Oriental 
philosophy,  which  tinctured  some  of  the  Greeks,  fosi 


THE.  FIRST   EPISTLE    TO   TIMOTHY.  389 

tered  these  liigh  soarings  of  men.  As  usual,  Paul  brings 
in  God,  and  the  dream  is  dissipated.  The  moment  you 
use  anything  so  as  to  set  aside  the  plain  duty  of  every 
day,  you  prove  yourself  to  be  losing  the  faith,  to  have 
slipped  from  a  good  conscience,  to  have  fallen  a  victim 
to  the  enemy's  deceits;  and  what  will  be  the  end  of 
it? 

The  apostle  then  gives  personal  counsel  to  Timothy, 
of  a  very  salutary  character.  As  he  also  desires  that 
none  should  despise  his  youth,  so  he  urges  that  he 
should  be  a  model  of  the  believers,  in  word,  conversa- 
tion, love,  faith,  and  purity.  He  was  to  give  himself  to 
reading,  to  exhortation,  to  teaching,  and  not  to  neglect 
his  gift,  given  him  through  prophecy,  in  the  imposition 
of  the  hands  of  the  presbytery  or  elderhood.  Nothing 
simpler,  nor  more  wholesome.  It  might  have  been 
thought  that  one  so  specially  endowed  as  Timothy  was 
not  called  to  occupy  himself  thus,  and  be  wholly  in 
them,  that  his  profiting  should  appear  to  all.  But  no ; 
grace  and  gift  create  a  corresponding  responsibility, 
instead  of  absolving  from  it.  Timothy  must  give  heed  to 
himself,  as  well  as  to  the  teaching ;  and  he  must  continue 
in  them,  instead  of  relaxing  after  a  rigorous  beginning. 
Depend  upon  it  that  those  who  seek  to  give  out  had 
better  take  care  that  they  take  in  ;  that  both  labourers 
and  those  laboured  amongst  may  ever  grow  in  the  truth. 
Doing  thus,  Timothy  would  save  both  himself  and  those 
that  heard  him. 

In  chapter  v.  the  apostle  gives  needful  directions  to 
Timothy  as  regards  an  elder.  He  was  not  to  be  rebuked 
sharply,  but  to  be  entreated  as  a  father.  Undoubtedly 
Timothy  stood  in  a  prominent  place  of  trust  and  service ; 
but  this  gave  no  exemption  from  the  comeliness  that 


390  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

becomes  every  one — especially  a  young  man.  The 
apostle  had  maintained  his  post  of  honour  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter ;  now  lie  will  not  let  him  forget  the  due 
consideration  of  others.  How  often  does  over-frankness 
drop  words  which  rankle  in  the  memory  of  an  elder, 
easily  floated  over  when  love  flows  freely,  but  when  it 
ebbs,  an  occasion  of  shipwreck !  Again,  "younger  men 
as  brethren;  the  elder  women  as  mothers;  the  younger 
as  sisters,  with  all  purity."  Nothing  more  beautiful, 
more  tender,  more  holy;  nothing  more  calculated  to  edify 
and  cement  the  saints  to  the  glory  of  God,  whilst  His 
wisdom  enters  into  all  circumstances,  with  an  easy 
elasticity  which  is  characteristic  of  His  grace. 

So  too  we  find  divinely- furnished  regulations  as  to 
those  who  ought  to  be  cliargeable  to  the  assembly — what 
was  right  in  the  case  of  the  younger  widows — ^what  was 
desirable  as  to  younger  women  in  general ;  and  then 
again  the  obligations  toward  elders,  not  now  when 
faulty,  but  in  their  ordinary  functions  and  service. 
"  Let  the  elders  that  preside  well  be  counted  worthy  of 
double  honour,  especially  they  who  labour  in  the  word 
and  doctrine."  But  what  if  they  were  charged  with 
wrong?  "Against  an  elder  receive  not  an  accusation, 
but  before  two  or  three  witnesses.  Them  that  sin  rebuke 
before  all,  that  others  also  may  fear."  Prejudice  and 
partiality  must  be  eschewed  at  all  cost.  Finally,  care 
must  be  taken  to  avoid  any  compromise  of  the  name  of 
the  Lord.  Thus  the  well-known  sign  of  blessing  in  the 
outward  act  of  laying  on  hands  was  to  be  done  circum- 
spectly. "  Lay  hands  suddenly  on  no  man,  neither  be 
partaker  of  other  men's  sins :  keep  thyself  pure." 

There  is  condescension  even  to  so  small  a  point 
seemingly  as  to  tell  hira  not  to  be  a  water-drinker.    It 


THE. FIRST   EPISTLE    TO    TIMOTHY.  391 

would  seem  that  Timothy's  scrupulous  conscience  felt 
the  dreadful  habits  of  those  times  and  lands  so  as  to 
bring  him  into  bondage ;  but  the  apostle,  not  in  a  mere 
private  note,  but  in  the  body  of  the  inspired  letter 
itself,  sets  aside  his  scruples,  and  bids  him  "  use  a  little 
wine  for  thy  stomach's  sake  and  thine  often  infirmities." 
I  am  aware  that  men  have  cavilled  at  this,  yielding  to 
their  own  thoughts  of  what  they  deem  fit  subjects  for 
the  pen  of  inspiration;  but  if  we  exclude  anything 
whatever  from  the  range  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  we  make 
it  to  be  merely  a  question  of  the  will  of  man.  And 
what  must  issue  from  this  ?  There  is  nothing  either  too 
great  or  too  little  for  the  Holy  Spirit.  Is  there  any- 
thing that  may  not,  that  ought  not,  to  be  a  question  of 
doing  God's  will  ?  Thus,  if  a  person  takes  wine,  or  any- 
thing else,  except  to  please  God,  and  is  not  in  danger  on 
the  score  of  morality,  certainly  he  has  lost  all  adequate 
sense  of  his  own  place  as  a  witness  of  the  glory  of  God. 
How  happy  ought  we  to  be  that  God  giyes  us  perfect 
liberty!  only  let  us  see  to  it  that  we  use  it  solely  for  His 
praise. 

In  the  last  chapter  (vi.)  comes  the  question  of  servants 
and  their  masters,  which  also  it  was  important  to  regu- 
late ;  for  we  all  know  that  a  servant  might  turn  to  a 
selfish  account  that  his  master  and  himself  were  brethren 
in  Christ.  It  is  all  very  well  for  the  master  to  say  so ; 
and  certainly  he  should  never  act  without  bearing  in 
mind  his  own  spiritual  relationship  to  his  servant ;  but 
I  do  not  think  it  becomes  a  servant  to  say  "  brother  "  to 
his  master.  My  business  is  to  know  him  as  my  master. 
No  doubt  it  would  be  grace  on  his  part  to  own  me  as 
his  brother.  Everything  therefore  where  grace  is  at 
work  will  be  found  to  have  its  blessed  place.     Whoever 


392  INTEODTJCTOEY   LECTURES.         ' 

thought  differently  (and  such  have  never  been  wanting)' 
was  puffed  up,  and  could  only  suggest  evil. 

Then  he  touches  on  the  value  of  piety  with  a  con- 
tented mind  in  contrast  with  the  love  of  money,  and  its 
various  snares  in  this  age  as  in  all  that  are  past.  These 
things  will  be  found  dealt  with  successively,  until,  at 
last  the  apostle  calls  on  the  man  of  God  to  flee  these 
things  himself,  and  to  pursue  the  path  of  righteousness, 
&c.,  as  well  as  strive  in  the  good  combat  of  faith; 
otherwise  a  man  of  God  was  in  no  degree  free  from 
danger.  He  was  to  lay  hold  of  eternal  life,  to  which  he 
had  been  called,  and  had  confessed  the  good  confession 
before  many  witnesses,  and  this  in  view  of  the  great 
event  which  will  display  our  fidelity  or  the  lack  of  it — 
the  appearing  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  in  its 
own  time  the  blessed  and  only  Potentate  shall  show. 
At  the  same  time  he  calls  on  him  to  charge  them  that 
are  rich  neither  to  be  high-minded  nor  rely  on  aught  so 
uncertain.  What  would  give  weight  to  the  charge? 
That  he  was  above  such  desires  himself,  trusting  in  the 
living  God,  who  affords  us  all  things  richly  for  enjoy- 
ment. Let  them  be  rich  in  good  works,  liberal  in  dis- 
tributing, ready  to  communicate,  laying  up  for  them- 
selves a  good  foundation  for  the  future,  that  they  may 
lay  hold  of  what  is  really  life.  "  0  Timothy,  keep  that 
which  is  committed  to  thy  trust,  avoiding  profane  and 
vain  babblings,  and  oppositions  of  false-named  know- 
ledge, which  some  professing  have  erred  concerning  the 
faith.     Grace  be  with  thee." 

Turning  to  the  Second  Epistle,  we  find  that,  although 
there  is  the  same  grand  truth  of  the  Saviour  God  main- 
tained, the  state  of  things  had  become  sensibly  worse. 


THE   SECOND  EPISTLE  TO   TIMOTHY.  393'. 

and  the  hour  for  the  apostle's  departure  from  the  world 
was  drawing  near.  Accordingly,  there  is  a  depth  of 
feeling  that  one  may  safely  say  far  exceeds  the  first 
epistle,  although  it  had  shown  so  much  tenderness 
and  care  both  for  Timothy  and  the  faithful  of  those 
days.  But  now  there  were  other  reasons  for  it,  namely, 
that  Christians  were  neglecting  godliness  and  order. 
They  had  heen  long  accustomed  to  the  truth,  and  alas ! 
human  nature  began  to  show  itself  out  in  indifference. 
There  was  no  longer  the  freshness  of  a  new  thing  ;  and 
where  the  heart  was  not  kept  up  in  communion  with 
the  Lord,  the  value  of  divine  things  was  less  felt,  if  it 
did  not  quite  fade  away.  Accordingly,  in  much  grief 
of  heart,  the  apostle  writes  to  his  tried  and  ti-embling 
child  in  the  faith,  and  seeks  to  strengthen  him,  above  all 
things  not  to  be  discouraged,  and  to  make  up  his  mind 
to  endure  hard  things.  "Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus 
Christ  by  the  will  of  God,  according  to  the  promise." 
It  is  not  "the  commandment,"  as  of  authority,  but  "ac- 
cording to  the  promise  of  life  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus." 
The  crumbling  away  of  everything  here  was  before  the 
apostle;  and  accordingly  it  is  one  of  the  peculiar  fea- 
tures of  this  second  epistle,  that  he  brings  out  that 
which  never  can  decay — which  was  before  there  was 
a  world  to  dissolve — namely,  that  life  which  was  in 
Christ  Jesus  before  the  world  began. 

Thus  the  apostle  comes  to  the  close  of  his  ministry, 
and  touches  upon  the  line  of  St.  John.  There  i^  no  part 
of  John's  doctrine  more  strikingly  characteristic  than 
life  in  Christ.  Now  we  see  that  when  Paul  was  touching 
the  confines  of  that  difficult  and  most  perilous  moment 
when  John  was  to  be  left  alone,  he  brings  out  as  his 
last  note  that  very  truth  which  John  was  to  develope 


394  INTEODUCTOET  LECTURES. 

with  special  care  and  fulness.  "  To  Timothy,  my  dearly- 
beloved  child :  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace,  from  God  the 
Father  and  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  I  thank  God,  whom 
I  serve  from  my  forefathers," — what  singular  language 
this  from  Paul !  How  comes  it  so?  Paul  "the  aged,"  as 
he  says,  was  just  about  to  leave  this  world.  Activity  of 
service  was  no  longer  before  him.  This  he  had  known 
most  extensively,  but  it  was  closed ;  no  longer  had  he 
before  him  any  prospect  of  having  to  fight  the  battles 
of  the  church  of  God.  He  had  fought  the  good  fight 
of  faith.  Others  must  do  that  kind  of  work  in  future. 
But  now  before  his  heart — just  as  in  principle  before 
the  dying  Lord  Himself,  wonderful  to  say — two  things 
come  together:  a  deeper  sense  of  what  is  in  God,  as 
revealed  in  Christ  Himself,  before  there  was  any  crea- 
tion at  all ;  and  on  the  other  hand  so  much  the  deeper 
sense  also  of  what  could  be  owned  in  nature.  Now 
these  seem  to  many  very  difficult  indeed  to  combine. 
They  appear  to  think  that  if  you  hold  life  in  Christ  to 
be  the  one  thing  that  is  most  precious,  to  be  the  prize 
that  your  heart  reverts  to,  all  owning  of  anything  short 
of  this  would  be  out  of  place ;  but  it  is  exactly  the 
contrary.  When  the  Lord  was  entering  on  His  ministry 
He  says,  "Woman,  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?"  But 
when  dying  upon  the  cross.  He  calls  to  John  to  behold 
His  mother.  We  find  a  precisely  similar  kind  of  com- 
bination in  Paul.  Of  course  it  was  infinitely  higher,  it 
is  needless  to  say,  in  the  Master ;  but  the  servant  was 
as  closely  as  possible  following  in  His  steps. 

It  is  beautiful  to  trace  this  double  working  and  cur- 
rent of  the  apostle — that  is,  what  is  imperishable,  above 
and  beyond  nature;  and,  along  with  this,  the  utmost 
value  put  on  everything  that  he  would  own  in  those 


THE   SECOND   EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  '395 

naturally  bound  up  with  him — those  of  either  family 
that  feared  God.  "  I  thank  God,  whom  I  serve  from 
my  forefathers  with  pure  conscience,  that  without  ceas- 
ing I  have  remembrance  of  thee  in  my  prayers  night 
and  day,  greatly  desiring  to  see  thee,  being  mindful  of 
thy  tears."  He  had  not  said  a  word  about  them  before. 
There  was  infirmity  in  the  character  of  Timothy.  There 
might  be  a  mixture  of  timid  shrinking  from  pain  and 
shame.  He  was  one  that  needed  to  lean  on  an  arm 
stronger  than  his  own.  It  was  a  part  of  his  lot.  Thus 
it  was  that  God  had  made  him :  there  was  no  use  deny- 
ing it.  But  the  apostle  at  the  same  time  owns,  and 
loves  to  own,  that  which  another  might  perhaps  despise. 
There  was  no  despising  natural  links  or  spiritual  here, 
far  from  it. 

Timothy,  again,  winced  under  trials, — too  sensitive  to 
slights,  disappointments,  and  the  manifold  griefs  that 
came  upon  him.  But  the  apostle  remembered  it  all, 
felt  deeply  for  if  not  with  him,  and  greatly  desiring  to 
see  him  once  more.  His  own  desire  after  going  to 
the  Lord  did  not  prevent  this,  but  the  reverse:  "that 
I  may  be  filled  with  joy :  when  I  call  to  remembrance 
the  unfeigned  faith  that  is  in  thee,  which  dwelt  first 
in  thy  grandmother  Lois,  and  thy  mother  Eunice ;  and 
I  am  persuaded  that  in  thee  also."  I  refer  to  this 
just  to  remark  that  such  links  as  these,  which  are  con- 
nected with  nature,  all  come  before  the  apostle's  mind, 
at  the  very  moment  when  a  spurious  feeling  would  have 
judged  it  precisely  the  time  to  banish  and  forget  them. 
There  are  persons  who  think  that  the  approach  of  death 
is  intended  to  blot  oiit  everything  here.  Not  so  the 
apostle  Paul.  In  that  large  heart  which  weighed  so  justly 
and  with  single  eye,  there  was  a  deepening  feeling  as 


396  INTRODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

to  all  that  he  saw  around  him ;  there  was  a  realizing  of 
the  importance  of  things  of  which  he  had  said  not  a  . 
■word  before.  For  him  the  light  of  eternity  already 
shone  strongly  on  present  things,  instead  of  taking 
him  completely  out  of  them.  And  this,  I  believe,  is 
much  to  be  considered. 

"I  put  thee  in  remembrance  that  thou  stir  up  the 
gift  of  God,  which  is  in  thee  by  the  putting  on  of 
my  hands.  For  God  hath  not  given  us  the  spirit  of 
fear"  (it  was  what  Timothy  was  manifesting),  "but 
of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a  sound  mind.  Be  not 
thou  therefore  ashamed  of  the  testimony  of  our  Lord" 
(there  must,  I  suppose,  have  been  some  ground  for  the 
exhortation),  "  nor  of  me  his  prisoner :  but  be  thou 
partaker  of  the  afflictions  of  the  gospel,  according  to. 
tlie  power  of  God ;  who  hath  saved  us,  and  called  us 
with  an  holy  calling,  not  according  to  our  works,  but 
according  to  his  own  purpose  and  grace,  which  was 
given  us  in  Christ-Jesus  before  the  world  began."  Here 
we  have  him  recurring  to  that  which  vs'as  entirely  out- 
side nature,  and  before  its  very  platform  existed.  At 
the  same  time  there  is  the  carrying  on  his  full  notice 
of  everything  found  here  below  that  would  be  a  source 
of  comfort  to  one  who  anticipated  the  ruin  of  Chris- 
tendom. 

Afterwards  he  also  speaks  of  his  own  work  and  of 
that  which  he  was  suffering.  Instead  of  hiding  either 
from  Timothy,  he  points  all  out  to  him.  He  wants  to 
accustom  his  mind  to  expect  hardship  instead  of  shirk- 
ing it.  He  tells  him  further  to  "  hold  fast  the  form  of 
sound  words,  which  thou  hast  heard  of  me,  in  faith  and 
love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  That  good  thing  which; 
was  committed  unto  thee  keep  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which; 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  397 

dwelleth  in  us."  At  the  same  time  he  shows  also  his 
sense  of  the  kindness  of  a  particular  individual  and 
his  family.  "The  Lord  give  mercy  unto  the  house  of 
Onesiphorus ;  for  he  oft  refreshed  me,  and  vi^as  not 
ashamed  of  my  chain ;  but,  when  he  was  in  Eome,  he 
sought  me  out  very  diligently,  and  found  me."  It 
appears  it  was  not  merely  in  Eome.  "  The  Lord  grant 
unto  him  that  he  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that 
day."  The  same  tone  of  mercy  is  equally  promised  in 
this  epistle  as  in  the  last.  "And  in  how  many  things  he 
ministered  unto  me  at  Ephesus,  thou  knowest  very  well." 

In  the  second  chapter  he  turns  to  another  theme, 
he  instructs  and  exhorts  Timothy  as  to  communicating 
(not  authority,  or  status,  or  gift,  but)  truth  to  others. 
It  is  not  a  question  here  about  elders,  but  what  would 
abide  all  the  same  when  elders  could  not  be  duly  ap- 
pointed. He  is  now  looking  at  the  state  of  disorder  in 
the  house  of  God,  instead  of  contemplating  it  in  its 
public  integrity,  as  in  the  first  epistle.  There  was  a 
state  of  things  coming  when  it  would  be  impossible  to 
have  local  charges  chosen  according  to  the  full  sanction 
which  they  had  in  apostolic  days.  Indeed  it  may  be 
well  to  remark  here,  that  we  never  read  of  Timothy 
appointing  bishops  or  elders.  Possibly  he  did  appoint 
them ;  but  there  is  no  scriptural  proof  of  it.  Titus,  we 
know,  did  so ;  but  God  took  care  that  it  should  never 
be  positively  stated  about  Timothy.  The  peculiar  task 
confided  to  the  latter  was  care  of  doctrine  much  more 
than  of  outward  order.  As  far  as  appointment  went, 
Titus  had  a  commission  to  establish  elders  in  each  city 
of  Crete;  but  not  so  Timothy,  as  far  as  the  inspired 
records  speak. 


398  INTROBUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

"  Thou  therefore,  my  son,  be  strong  in  the  grace  that 
is  in   Christ  Jesus.     And  the  things  that  thou  hast 
heard  of  me  among  many  witnesses,  the  same  commit 
thou  to  faithful  men."     We  must  not  be  afraid  of  a 
manifest  duty  because  it  has  been' abused.     There  are 
those  who  shrink  from  helping  on  others  in  order  to  the 
work  and  doctrine  of  the  Lord.    This  I  cannot  but  con- 
sider as  a  proof  of  want  of  faith.     What  is  a  man  well 
taught  in  the  truth  for,  if  not  to  communicate  his 
knowledge  to  others  that  are  faithful,  but  not  equally 
instructed  in  the  word  of  God  ?  Surely  if  it  is  an  urgent 
call  to  convey  what  we  know  of  Christ  and  the  truth 
to  those  that  know  nothing,  it  is  a  great  privilege  to 
help  to  contribute  a  greater  knowledge  of  the  truth  to 
those  that  know  little.     The  great  thing  is  to  do  the 
will  of  God,  let  others  say  what  they  please;  and  so 
the  apostle  Paul  exhorts  Timothy.    It  is  to  be  supposed 
that  the  younger  labourer  cowered  somewhat,  unwilling 
to  incur  the  odious  charge,  so  easUy  made  but  hard  to 
refute,  of  setting  himself  up  and  taking  the  place  of 
some  great  one.      This  might  deter  a  sensitive  saint 
from  his  duty.    But,  says  the  apostle,  "  be  strong  in  the 
grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."     This  was  to  touch  the 
right  chord  in  his  heart.     Had  the  Lord  Jesus  not  sent 
him  ?     Why  then  yield  to  the  enemy  ?    Assuredly  he 
would  rejoice  to  scare  Timothy  from  the  field  of  serving 
Christ,  and  would  shrink  from  no  means  to  secure  it. 

"And  the  things  that  thou  hast  heard  of  me  among 
many  witnesses,  the  same  commit  thou  to  faithful  men, 
who  shall  be  able  to  teach  others  also."  He  would  not 
have  him  to  be  spreading  doubtful  opinions  ;  but  what 
he  had  heard  from  the  apostle  himself  he  need  not 
scruple  to  give  out  freely.     Let  me  remark,  that  there 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  399 

are  comparatively  few  indeed  that  receive  truth  without 
help  of  others  directly  from  God.  A  great  many  certainly 
flatter  themselves  that  they  are  thus  favoured ;  but  the 
cases  are  uncommon  where  it  is  more  than  pretence.  The 
fact  is  that  God  loves  to  make  His  children  mutually 
dependent ;  and  if  we  are  only  humble,  there  are  very 
few  saints  from  whom  we  may  not  derive  some  good, 
though  not  always  in  the  same  way.  Nor  do  I  at  all 
see  that  any  Christians  should  be  above  learning,  if 
others  can  teach.  At  any  rate  the  apostle  presses  this 
very  strongly  on  Timothy.  He  was  to  communicate 
the  things  he  had  learnt  of  Paul,  that  they  might  be 
able  to  teach  others  also. 

Next  he  comes  to  a  more  personal  need.  "Thou 
therefore  endure  hardness,  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus 
Christ."  To  take  pains  and  to  endure  are  requisite  even 
in  what  pertains  to  this  life.  "No  man  that  warreth 
entangleth  himself  with  the  affairs  of  this  life"  (he  must 
be  unencumbered,  and  undivided  in  his  object) ;  "  that 
he  may  please  him  who  hath  chosen  him  to  be  a  soldier. 
And  if  a  man  also  strive  for  masteries,  yet  is  he  not 
crowned,  except  he  strive  lawfully."  He  must  take  care 
of  the  manner  in  which  he  strives.  And  then  again  "the 
husbandman  that  laboureth  must  be  first  partaker  of 
the  fruits."  Eather  he  must  "  labour  before  he  partake 
of  the  fruits."  That  is,  he  must  first  labour,  and  then 
partake  of  the  fruits.  God  takes  care  of  His  people,  and 
ensures  them  a  blessed  end.  At  the  same  time  He 
will  have  them  undividedly  for  Himself;  and  He  is  also 
jealous  of  the  way  in  which  they  seek  even  the  ends  of 
God. 

Then  the  apostle  puts  before  them  a  blessed  model 
of  that  which  he  had  before  his  own  soul.     "  Consider 


400  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

what  I  say ;  and  the  Lord  give  thee  understanding  in 
all  things.     Remember  that  Jesus  Christ,  of  the  seed 
of  David,  was  raised  from  the  dead  according  to  my 
gospel."     This  is  a  very  striking  word.     For  he  does 
not  say  Jesus  Christ  simply  in  His  connection  with  the 
church,  but  "of  the  seed  of  David,"  the  fulfiUer  of  the 
promises,  and  object  of  the  prophecies.     Even  if  we 
look  at  Him  so,  He  was  raised  from  the  dead.     Eesur- 
rection  is  the  form  and  character  of  the  lowest  blessings 
of   which  Jesus  is  the  dispenser;  much  more  is  He 
risen  to  exalt  God  in  the  highest.     Death  and  resurrec- 
tion, then,  are  thus  put  before  this  servant  of  God; 
the  more  remarkably,  because  the  point  here  is  a  prac- 
tical and  not  a  doctrinal  question.  He  was  to  remember, 
then,  "that  Jesus  Christ,  of  the  seed  of  David,  was 
raised  from  the  dead  according  to  my. gospel:  wherein 
I  suffer  trouble,  as  an  evil-doer,  even  unto  bonds ;  but 
the  word  of  God  is  not  bound."     Paul  suffered  as  he 
taught :   a  single  eye  to  Christ  and  His  grace  made 
him  consistent.     "  Put  them  in  remembrance,  charging 
them  before  the  Lord  that  they  strive  not  about  words 
to  no  profit,   but  to  the  subverting  of  the  hearers. 
Study  to  show  thyself  approved  unto  God,  a  workman 
that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  rightly  dividing  the 
word  of  truth.     But  shun  profane  and  vain  babblings." 
It  was  thus  Paul  treated  the  proud  reasonings  and 
speculations  of  man;  withal  briefly  touching  on  those 
that  had  gone  entirely  astray — Hymenseus  and  Philetus. 
It  was  not  merely  now  that  they  had  made  their  con- 
sciences bad  and  slipped  away  from  faith.     Their  own 
word  would  eat  as  a  canker,  and  do  harm  to  others  as 
well  as  to  themselves,  "  who  concerning  the  truth  have 
erred,  saying  that  the  resurrection  is  past  already ;  and 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  401 

overthrow  tlie  faith  of  some."  This  was  to  reverse 
the  lesson  of  a  risen  Christ,  and  to  open  the  way  for 
all  laxity.  It  was  a  kindred  error,  though  in  an  oppo- 
site dixection,  to  that  which  false  teachers  sought  to 
infuse  among  the  Thessalonians:  there  that  the  day  of 
the  Lord  was  come,  producing  panic;  here  that  the 
resurrection  was  past,  leading  to  ease.  The  one  was 
suited  to  upset  the  young,  the  other  to  beguile  the 
old. 

Then  the  apostle  brings  out  most  important  directions 
for  the  days  that  were  then  coming  in,  but  now  come, 
and  more.  Questions  are  before  him  more  serious  than 
a  maintenance  of  order.  How  are  we  to  walk  so  as 
to  please  the  Lord  when  disorder  reigns,  claiming  to 
be  the  only  true  order?  In  a  measure,  no  doubt,  the 
truth  is  in  Christendom,  and  only  there ;  for  one  can- 
not look  for  the  truth  in  Judaism  or  heathenism  now: 
Judaism  had  its  divine  institutions  and  hopes,  but  the 
truth  is  found  in  Christendom  only :  nevertheless  in 
Christendom,  who  fails  to  discern  Jewish  elements  and 
heathenish  enormities?  How  is  a  man  to  walk  in 
such  a  state  of  things  as  this  ?  In  the  former  epistle, 
Timothy  was  told  how  to  behave  in  the  house  of  God, 
as  yet  in  order ;  but  now  we  are  told  how  to  behave 
in  such  a  state  of  things  as  the  present  disorder.  "The 
foundation  of  God  standeth  sure  [or,  the  firm  foun- 
dation of  God  standeth],  having  this  seal.  The  Lord 
knoweth  them  that  are  his.  And,  let  every  one  that 
nameth  the  name" — not  of  "Christ,"  but — "of  the  Lord 
depart  from  iniquity."  I  must  do  so,  if  I  own  Him  only 
in  the  indispensable  truth  of  His  Lordship — if  I  own 
Him  simply  as  the  One  that  has  authority  over  my  soul. 
And  a  less  confession  than,  this  God  never  permitted 

D   D 


402  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

the  church  to  accept;  nor  in  fact  in  Jerusalem  itself 
was  less  ever  accepted  than  the  naming  the  name  of 
the  Lord.  God  had  made  Jesus  to  be  Lord  and  Christ, 
preached  Peter  on  that  day  of  power,  when  as  yet  much 
lay  hid,  and  the  great  instrument  of  the  revelation  of  the 
mystery  was  stUl  shrouded  in  the  darkness  of  midnight. 
But,  if  one  confesses  the  name  of  the  Lord,  the  word 
is  imperative:  "let  him  depart  from  iniquity."  The 
disorder  might  he  so  great  that  we  might  make  mis- 
takes in  our  anxiety ;  but  "  The  Lord  knoweth  them 
that  are  his."  On  the  other  hand,  if  a  soul  confesses  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  he  must  have  done  with  iniquity. 

This  of  itself  indicates  that  the  epistle  provides 
for  a  time  when  it  is  no  longer  simply  a  question  of 
recognising  persons  coming  out  of  the  world.  It  is 
needful  to  exercise  judgment  now.  One  must  try 
disorders  and  prove  profession.  Truth  and  holiness 
and  endurance  are  wanted,  not  authority  or  outward 
order.  Why  cannot  a  man  be  as  simple  now  as  in 
apostolic  times?  Why  not  baptize  at  once  every  soul 
around  ?  It  would  not  be  accordant  with  the  mind  of 
God.  It  is  a  duty  in  the  present  state  of  confusion  to 
use  scriptural  means;  and  here  we  have  our  warrant, 
as  in  the  epistles  we  find  more.  Whatever  therefore 
may  be  right  in  certain  cases,  the  assembly  of  God 
ought  never  to  be  forced  to  put  every  case  on  the  same 
dead  level — ought  never  to  be  bound  by  any  special 
process,  as  if  it  were  unalterable.  The  cause  of  this 
is  the  present  confusion,  and  accordingly  the  apostle 
brings  a  picture  of  it  before  Timothy's  mind. 

"  In  a  great  house  there  are  not  only  vessels  of  gold 
and  of  silver,  but  also  of  wood  and  of  earth;  and  some 
to  honour,  and  some  to  dishonour.    If  a  man  therefore 


THE   SECOND   EPISTLE  TO   TIMOTHY.  403 

purge  himself  from  these,  he  shall  be  a  vessel  unto 
honour,  sanctified,  and  meet  for  the  master's  use,  and 
prepared  unto  every  good  work."     That  is,  it  is  not 
enough  that  I  should  walk  with  the  Lord  individually, 
but  I  must  clear  myself  of  association  with  that  which 
is  contrary  to  His  name.     Such  is  the  meaning  of 
purging  himself.     It  is  not  the  question  of  discipline — 
dealing  with  evil  ways;  but  here  we  are  in  a  state  of 
things   where  we  are  in  danger  of  being  mixed  up 
with  vessels  unto  the  Lord's  dishonour.     Nothing  can 
sanction  this.     I  am  not  at  liberty  of  course  to  leave 
Christendom,  I  dare  not  get  out  of  the  great  house  at 
aU ;  indeed  I  cannot  (at  any  rate  without  becoming  an 
apostate)  leave  the  house  of  God,  however  bad  its  state 
may  be.     This  is  evidently  not  the  true  remedy — to 
abandon  the  confession  of  Christ :   only  an  apostate 
could  think  of  it.     On  the  other  hand,  it  is  unholy  to 
tamper  with  evil.     Therefore  it  is  incumbent  for  the 
Christian  to  look  to  this  gravely, — never  to  be  dragged 
by  the  fear  of  breaking  unity  into  accrediting  what 
dishonours  the  Lord.    Now  this  is  in  particular  a  diffi- 
culty for  saints,  when  they  have  revived  before  the  soul 
the  blessedness  of  maintaining  the  unity  of  the  Spirit. 
It  can  never  cease  to  be  a  Christian's  duty  to  main- 
tain the  unity  of  the  Spirit ;  but  it  is  not  maintaining 
the  unity  of  the  Spirit  to  couple  with  the  name  of  the 
Lord  that  which  is  fleshly  and  sinful.     It  is  well  to 
be  exclusive  of  sin,  but  of  nothing  else.     It  is  well  to 
maintain  the  largest  heart  for  everything  that  is  really 
of  Christ.    But  we  must  exclude  that  which  is  contrary 
to  His  name;  and  the  very  same  desire  to  prove  one's 
love,  one's  faith,  one's  appreciation  of  Christ,  will  make 
one  anxious  not  to  be  dragged  into  that  which  is  not 

D  D   2 


404  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

for  His  glory.  "  If  a  man  therefore  purge  himself  from 
these,  he  shall  be  a  vessel  unto  honour,  sanctified,  and 
meet  for  the  master's  use,  and  prepared  unto  every 
good  work." 

But  then  another  thing.  He  lets  Timothy  know  that 
while  he  laid  this  on  others,  he  must  look  carefully  to 
his  own  ways.  "  Flee  also  youthful  lusts  :  but  follow 
righteousness,  faith,  charity,  peace."  It  is  not  simply 
now  to  follow  these,  as  urged  in  the  first  epistle  (vi.  11).; 
but  he  adds  a  most  characteristic  word  in  the  second 
epistle.  And  this,  I  apprehend,  is  the  reason.  He  forbad 
his  going  on  in  association  with  those  that  dishonour 
the  Lord,  with  vessels  to  dishonour;  but  he  tells  Mm 
to  follow  these  things  "with  them  that  caU  on  the 
Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart."  Therefore,  isolation  is 
never  desirable,  though  it  may  be  sometimes  necessary. 
But  no  man  ought  to  separate  himself  from  the  chil- 
dren of  God,  unless  it  be  a  dire  necessity  for  the  Lord ; 
it  is  clearly  not  according  to  Christ.  It  seems  to  me,  I 
confess,  that  if  there  were  simplicity  of  faith,  the  Lord 
would  give  one  eyes  to  see  some  at  least  that  call  upon 
the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart. 

Thus  we  have  everything  cared  for  here ;  the  state  of 
confusion  is  clearly  depicted,  as  it  then  was  beginning, 
and  as  results  have  proved  yet  more.  How  gracious 
of  the  Lord  to  point  out  the  path  for  the  saint,  separate 
from  that  which  grieves  the  Lord,  yet  enjoying  aU  that 
He  sees  good  for  us  of  the  privileges  of  Christianity ! 
Otherwise  this  might  have  seemed  to  be  (what  unbelief 
taunts  and  stigmatizes  it,  spite  of  His  sanction)  pride 
of  heart  and  presumption.  And  the  comfort  is  that,  if 
j)repared  to  cleave  to  the  will  of  the  Lord  alone,  we 
shall  have,  through  His  grace,  fellowship  with  the  true^ 


THE   SECOND   EPISTLE   TO   TIMOTHY.  405 

hearted.  "Follow  righteousness,  faith,  charity,  peace, 
with  them  that  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart. 
But  foolish  and  unlearned  questions  avoid,  knowing 
that  they  do  gender  strifes.  And  a  servant  of  the  Lord 
must  not  strive,  but  be  gentle  toward  all,  apt  to  teach, 
forbearing,  in  meekness  correcting  those  that  oppose,  if 
perhaps  God  may  give  them  repentance  for  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  truth,  and  they  may  for  his  will  wake 
up  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  having  been  taken 
captive  by  him."  This  was  always  the  becoming  tone ; 
but  now  it  is  imperiously  necessary,  as  well  as  wise 
and  good. 

Then  in  chapter*  iii.  he  proceeds  to  show  us  not 
merely  a  picture  of  the  condition  that  Christianity  will 
fall  into,  but,  besides,  a  state  of  things  that  would  be 
produced  by  this  confusion.  Here  we  find  the  perilous 
times  fairly  brought  before  us.  "  Men  shall  be  lovers 
of  their  own  selves,  covetous,  boasters,  proud,  blas- 
phemers, disobedient  to  parents,  unthankful,  unholy, 
without  natural  affection,  truce-breakers,  false  accusers, 
incontinent,  fierce,  despisers  of  those  that  are  good, 
traitors,  heady,  high-minded,  lovers  of  pleasures  more 
than  lovers  of  God."  Things  are  very  much  taking 
this  direction  of  late,  and  at  the  present  moment.  Take 
what  is  called  physical  Christianity — a  stupid,  gross, 
and  heathenish  phrase,  but  just  enough  to  show  where 
people  are  drifting  to.  It  answers  not  a  little  to  the 
kind  of  thing  set  forth  here.  As  we  know,  there  may 
be  over  it  all  a  certain  form  of  godliness,  but  under- 
neath it  is  really  wickedness.  This  the  apostle  guards 
Timothy  against,  and  indeed  ourselves.  He  warns  him 
how  seduction  would  go  on  more  and  more,  but  "  from 


406  INTEODUCTORT  LECTURES. 

such  turn  away."  No  matter  wliat  the  reasons  or  ex- 
cuses for  joining  with  them,  "  turn  away." 

Then  he  points  out  the  two  principal  guards  for  the 
faithful,  in  such  a  perilous  state.  The  first  is  the  moral 
character  of  the  source  or  channel  whence  Timothy  had 
derived  what  he  knew.  "Thou  hast  fully  known  my 
doctrine,  manner  of  life,  purpose,  faith,  long-suffering, 
charity,  patience,  persecutions,  afflictions."  It  is  the 
whole  spiritual  experience,  so  to  speak,  of  the  apostle. 
He  was  to  continue  in  the  things  which  he  had  learned, 
and  had  been  assured  of,  knowing  of  whom  he  had 
learned  them — a  very  important  point.  Persons  some- 
times say  it  does  not  matter  who  taught ;  but  God  does 
not  treat  the  matter  so  lightly.  It  is  often  a  very  great 
safeguard  for  the  saint  of  God ;  for,  after  all,  it  makes 
no  small  diJBFerence  who  says  this  or  that.  A  word  al- 
together unbecoming  in  one  mouth  might  be  most 
proper  in  another.  The  apostle  well  knew  that  the  God 
who  had  brought  these  glorious  truths  to  man,  the  God 
that  had  manifested  His  grace,  had  given  a  witness  of 
their  reality  in  the  man  from  whom  he  had  learned 
them ;  and  this  was  meant  to  have  an  enduring  effect 
on  the  conscience  and  heart  of  Timothy.  Por  it  is 
not  dogma  pure  and  simple,  it  is  not  mere  instruction ; 
and  we  may  thank  God  for  it.  It  is  an  immense  bless- 
ing that  we  have  the  truth  not  only  in  a  book,  but  in 
a  practical  shape,  the  truth  that  comes  out  of  the  heart 
and  from  the  lips  of  living  men  of  God.  Accordingly 
the  apostle  reminds  Timothy  of  this. 

At  the  same  time  there  is  not  the  smallest  slight  of 
the  only  and  abiding  standard.  He  brings  out  the 
infinite  value  of  the  Scriptures,  that  is  of  what  was 
written,  the  one  transcendent  resource  for  perilous  times 


THE  SECOND   EPISTLE   TO  TIMOTHY.  407 

when  we  have  not  the  presence  and  personal  help  of 
apostles.  It  is  not  merely  what  had  been  preached,  but 
what  is  in  a  permanent  shape  for  the  good  of  the  saints 
of  God  here  below,  which  elicits  the  remarkable  asser- 
tion of  its  peculiar  worth.  "  Every  scripture  " — for  this 
is  the  proper  force  of  the  passage — "Every  scripture 
is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profitable  for 
doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruction  in 
righteousness:  that  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect, 
thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works." 

The  closing  chapter  (iv.)  then  gives  his  solemn  charge, 
and  at  the  same  time  his  own  expression  of  what  was 
before  him.  As  Timothy  was  about  to  enter  upon  a  new 
phase  of  his  ministry,  without  the  apostle's  presence  or 
living  counsel, ,  the  latter  charges  him  with  great  em- 
phasis, "before  God,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
shall  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  at  his  appearing  and 
his  kingdom;  preach  the  word,  be  instant  in  season, 
out  of  season;  reprove,  rebuke,  exhort  with  all  long- 
suffering  and  doctrine."  And  the  reason  why  he  makes 
it  so  urgent  not  to  be  turned  aside  was,  that  the  time 
would  come  when  men  would  not  endure  sound  doc- 
trine; but  after  their  own  lusts  they  should  heap  to 
themselves  teachers,  having  itching  ears;  and  they 
should  turn  away  their  ears  from  the  truth,  and  should 
be  turned  unto  fables.  "  But  watch  thou  in  all  things, 
endure  afflictions,  do  the  work  of  an  evangelist,  make 
fuU  proof  of  thy  ministry.  For  I  am  now  ready  to  be 
offered,  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand.  I 
have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my  course,  I 
have  kept  the  faith :  henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me 
a  crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous 


408  INTEODTJCTOET  LECTUEES. 

judge,  shall  give  me  at  that  day:  and  not  to  me  only, 
but  unto  all  them  also  that  love  his  appearing."  Thus 
he  looks  not  to  the  coming  of  the  Lord  to  receive  him 
to  Himself,  hut  to  the  "  appearing  of  the  Lord,"  which 
is  the  usual  side  of  the  truth  taken  in  these  epistles. 
The  reason  is  ohvious.  The  coming  of  the  Lord  will 
in  no  way  manifest  the  faithfulness  of  the  servant ;  His 
appearing  will.  At  "  that  day"  will  be  the  display  of 
whatever  has  been  endured,  as  well  as  done,  for  the 
Lord's  sake. 

With  this  prospect  he  comforts  Timothy  no  less 
than  his  own  spirit ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  speaks 
as  to  joining  him,  with  a  glance  at  one  that  had  for- 
saken him.  "Demas  hath  forsaken  me,  having  loved 
this  present  world,  and  is  departed  unto  Thessalonica ; 
Crescens  to  Galatia,  Titus  unto  Dalmatia.  Only  Luke 
is  with  me."  He  was  comparatively  alone.  If  he  does 
not  hide  the  sorrowful  view  of  an  old  fellow-labourer's 
cooling  in  zeal,  with  aU  its  dangers,  the  consolation  is 
also  before  Timothy  both  of  those  that  go  on  in  faithful 
labour,  and  of  one  at  least  restored.  "  Take  Mark,  and 
bring  him  with  thee :  for  he  is  profitable  to  me  for  the 
ministry."  So  we  find  that  God  knows  how  to  temper 
the  bitter  with  the  sweet,  always  doing  the  right  thing 
in  the  right  place  and  time. 

Thus  he  comforts  Timothy  at  the  same  time  that  he 
admonishes  him.  In  the  midst  of  all,  he  is  told  to 
bring  the  cloak  that  he  left  at  Troas  with  Carpus,  and 
the  books,  but  especially  the  parchments.  This  again 
has  stumbled  the  minds  of  men.  They  cannot  under- 
stand an  inspired  apostle  talking  about  a  cloak  in  the 
midst  of  a  divinely  given  pastoral  charga  The  reason 
is  manifest:  they  themselves  savour  of  the  things  of 


THE   SECOND  EPISTLE   TO   TIMOTHY.  409 

men,  and  not  of  God.  There  is  nothing  that  more 
shows  God  than  His  ability  to  combine  that  which 
is  eternal  with  care  for  the  smallest  things  of  this  life. 
It  was  not  then  an  indifferent  matter  to  God.  The 
Holy  Spirit  would  make  it  to  be  most  practical  and 
precious.  Be  assured,  that  if  you  do  not  bring  the 
Spirit  of  God  into  these  matters,  perhaps  your  cloak, 
perhaps  a  book,  will  become  a  snare  to  you.  To  many  a 
man  and  woman  has  a  little  bit  of  dress  done  no  small 
injury,  just  because  they  think  it  is  too  little  for  the 
Spirit  of  God  to  direct  them  in.  "The  cloke,"  then 
says  he,  "  that  I  left  at  Troas  with  Carpus,  when  thou 
comest,  bring  with  thee,  and  the  books," — not  only  the 
clothing,  but  even  that  which  he  is  to  read, — "especially 
the  parchments  ; " — what  he  was  going  to  write  on, 
probably.  "Alexander  the  coppersmith  did  me  much 
evU :  the  Lord  reward  him  according  to  his  works :  of 
whom  be  thou  ware  also ;  for  he  hath  greatly  withstood 
our  words." 

rinally,  we  have  his  assertion  of  the  blessed  Lord's 
care,  and  his  confidence  in  Him  that  He  would  preserve 
him  from  all  evil  to  His  heavenly  kingdom ;  closing 
this  solemn  and  touching  epistle  (it  would  seem  the 
last  words  he  wrote)  with  salutations  to  various  saints. 


410  INTRODUCTOKT  LECTUKES. 


X. 

TITUS  AND  PHILEMOK 

The  Epistle  to  Titus  has  much  in  common  with  those 
to  Timothy,  as  all  must  ohserve;  not  only  as  heing 
addressed  to  a  fellow -servant,  and  indeed  a  son  in 
the  faith,  but  in  general  similarity  of  character.  Like 
them,  its  objects  are  pastoral,  as  being  addressed  to  a 
companion  in  labour,  whose  work  lay  among  the  assem- 
blies of  God.  Nevertheless,  there  is  no  portion  but  what 
has  its  own  special  design ;  nor  could  there  be  a  single 
scripture  lacking  without  positive  loss  to  the  saints, 
and,  indeed,  to  God's  glory  by  us. 

In  writing  to  Titus,  we  shall  see  the  apostle  giving 
more  prominence  to  external  order  than  in  the  epistles 
to  Timothy.  We  have  observed  already  that  although 
in  these  epistles  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not  develope  the 
higher  and  special  privileges  of  the  saints  of  God,  never- 
theless the  church,  in  its  earthly  place  of  responsi- 
bility, is  brought  largely  before  us.  It  is  the  house  of 
God ;  first  in  order,  next  in  disorder.  The  one  gave  the 
measure  of  responsibility;  the  other  furnished  provision 
for  the  guidance  of  those  whose  desire  is  towards  the 
Lord,  and  who  would  shrink  from  the  least  approach  to 
presumption.  These  are  instructed  of  the  Spirit  to  be 
faithful,  without  fear  or  favour ;  leaving  with  God  all 
consequences,  and  judging  simply  as  in  conscience  be- 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   TITUS.  411 

fore  Him.  Hence  they  have  it  laid  upon  them  as  a 
positive  obligation  to  carry  themselves  in  such  a  way 
as  the  love  and  humbleness  of  a  saint  of  God  might 
have  hesitated  to  take,  without  a  peremptory  word 
from  the  Lord.  Of  course,  there  is  no  real  ground  to 
charge  such  with  presumption;  but  faith,  in  its  lan- 
guage and  ways  alike,  looks  so  to  those  who  do  not 
possess  it.  Much  more  are  they  open  to  it  who  despise 
His  word,  and  ignore  their  own  state.  Those  who  purge 
themselves  from  the  vessels  of  dishonour  are  found 
in  the  lowliest  place  of  all — that  of  obedience. 

But  in  writing  to  Titus  the  apostle  does  not  take  up 
so  much  the  question  of  the  house  of  God,  either  in 
its  responsible  order,  or  in  the  provision  which  the  Lord 
makes  for  the  worst  of  times.  He  introduces  himself 
as  "  a  servant  of  God,  and  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ, 
according  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect,  and  the  acknow- 
ledging of  the  truth  which  is  after  godliness."  It  is 
evident,  therefore,  that  it  is  more  a  question  of  the 
truth  here  than  of  the  house  of  God.  It  is  that  which  is 
not  only  not  perishable,  but  whose  value  is  increasingly 
felt  when  in  face  of  the  ruins  of  Christendom.  The 
house  of  God,  alas !  we .  know,  might  be  grievously 
affected.  Called  to  be  the  pillar  and  the  support  of 
the  truth,  it  nevertheless  might  be  grossly  corrupted, 
as,  in  point  of  fact,  it  has  been ;  but  the  faith  of  God's 
elect  abides,  and  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth  which 
is  after  godliness  is  always  a  duty.  In  the  very  nature 
of  things  this  does  not  change.  God  holds  to  it  and 
maintains  it,  and  so  do  those  who  bow  to  His  word. 

There  is  great  force,  therefore,  in  the  description — 
"the  faith  of  God's  elect."  I  do  not  mean  that  the 
latter  designation  is  limited  to  the  epistle  to  Titus.   The 


4l2  INTRODUCTOET  LECTURES. 

apostle  employs  it  in  the  epistle  to  the  Eomans,  and 
there,  too,  with  very  marked  emphasis,  in  closing  his 
grand  recapitulation  of  the  Christian  privileges — the 
ordinary  standing  blessing  of  the  saints  of  G-od — in 
presence  of  all  that  cotdd  harm  them.  He  takes  the 
ground  of  a  challenger.  Let  what  will  be  brought 
against  them,  "Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge 
of  Grod's  elect  ?  It  is  God  that  justifieth ;  who  is  he 
that  condemneth?"  In  the  present  case  it  is  not  a 
question  of  furnishing  Christians  with  a  knowledge 
of  their  privileges,  and  a  maintenance  of  them  against 
all  antagonists,  as  in  chapter  viii.  of  Eomans,  but  the 
calm  yet  serious  writing  of  the  apostle  to  a  confidential 
fellow -servant,  in  which,  as  at  an  earlier  day,  so  now 
in  one  of  his  latest  communications,  he  still  holds  this 
blessed  word,  "  God's  elect."  But  he  adds  another  ele- 
ment— "  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth  which  is  after 
godliness."  There  is  no  small  importance  in  this  acknow- 
ledgment. The  faith  of  God's  elect  is  not  to  be  hidden 
under  a  bushel;  it  must  be  owned  before  men  and 
the  enemy,  as  well  as  learnt  from  God.  It  is  to  be 
confessed  without  compromise,  no  matter  what  the 
difficulty.  The  acknowledgment — not  the  belief  only — 
of  the  truth  must  never  be  given  up,  and  in  its  most 
practical  shape — "the  truth  which  is  after  godliness; 
in  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God,  that  cannot  lie, 
promised  before  the  world  began." 

There  we  touch  again  that  which  came  before  us  in 
the  second  epistle  to  Timothy;  but  a  few  words  more 
may  be  now  added.  The  occasion  was  exactly  suitable 
for  it.  The  value  of  eternal  life  is  proved  when  all  that 
is  connected  with  the  testimony  of  God  among  men 
has  received  a  severe  shock.   In  this  lies  the  blessedness 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   TITUS.  413 

of  seeing  how  truly  that  into  which  we  are  brought  is 
of  God.  There  was  a  creation  formed  of  God  on  a 
ground  of  responsibility.  Its  tenure  depended  on  the 
fidelity  of  man.  Soon  all  was  ruined;  but  in  the 
midst  of  this  havoc  God  wrought,  according  to  His 
own  wisdom,  and  in  various  ways,  for  the  purpose  of 
making  manifest  the  whole  question  of  the  state  of 
the  creature  in  relation  to  HimseK  Now,  late  in  the 
world's  history,  the  Son  of  God  is  come,  who  was 
Himself  that  eternal  life  which  was  with  the  Father, 
and  has  displayed  it  in  every  possible  circumstance 
here  below. 

Here  we  have  another  order  of  things,  the  truth  in 
fact  revealed — grace  and  truth.  Those  who  are  called 
to  follow  and  to  confess  the  Saviour  have  themselves 
proved  that,  looked  at  in  their  responsibility,  they  too 
had  brought  shame  and  confusion  on  the  name  of  the 
Lord.  So  far  from  God  giving  up  His  glorious  counsels, 
the  truth  of  eternal  life  is  brought  out  far  more  fuUy  in 
the  decay  of  Christian  profession.  In  the  sad  flood  of 
evils  that  had  swept  over  Christendom,  this  was  just  the 
moment  when  the  Holy  Ghost  saw  fit  to  call  attention 
not  merely  to  the  grace  of  God  saving  sinners,  and  the 
faithfulness  of  God  keeping  His  own  children,  but  to 
the  character  of  the  life  which  was  their  portion  in 
Christ.  Thus,  therefore,  the  apostle  here  refers  to  it  in 
the  introduction  to  this  epistle.  "  In  hope  (says  he)  of 
eternal  life,  which  God  that  cannot  lie" — an  expression 
evidently  used  because  of  the  character  of  the  per- 
sons to  whom  he  is  writing,  who  are,  indeed,  but  a 
sample  of  what  man  has  always  proved  himself,  even 
such  as  bear  the  name  of  Christ.  God,  at  any  rate,  that 
cannot  lie,  promised  it,  "  before  the  world  began."  Nor 


414  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

can  anything  touch  this  life;  but  the  value  is  now  more 
felt  of  this  eternal  life  that  was  in  Christ  before  the 
world  began.  It  had  come  down  into  this  scene;  it 
had  been  utterly  rejected  by  man;  but  it  nevertheless 
became  the  possession  of  faith  in  Christ.  Now  it  shines. 
It  was  not  merely  a  reality,  not  merely  that  believers 
had  it  in  Christ;  but  now  the  Holy  Ghost  causes  them 
to  take  notice  of  it,  brings  out  the  value  of  it,  and 
strengthens  them  in  the  confidence  of  it.  After  all, 
that  eternal  life  in  the  hope  of  which  they  had  been 
formed  and  called  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
that  eternal  life  which  God  who  could  not  lie  promised 
before  the  world  began,  was  now  their  known  portion. 
They  had  it  in  Christ.  It  is  also  of  exceeding  encourage- 
ment, and  indeed  a  truth  of  immense  import  for  souls, 
both  in  itself  and  in  the  fact,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  brings 
us  into  the  more  distinct  apprehension  and  enjoyment 
of  the  wondrous  bliss  of  possessing  the  very  eternal  life 
of  Christ,  when  all  that  can  decay  has  already  shown 
the  most  fatal  symptoms  at  work. 

In  accordance  with  this,  it  may  be  profitable  to 
observe  the  ways  of  God.  It  was  before  the  world  be- 
gan, no  doubt;  but  in  due  time  it  had  been  manifested. 
He  had  "in  due  time  manifested  His  word  through 
preaching."  This  gives  us  to  see  the  very  special  place 
that  Christianity  has  in  the  ways  of  God.  We  do  not 
often  take  notice  of  what  is  after  all  a  very  striking 
and  evident  fact,  that,  for  very  much  the  largest  period 
of  this  world's  history,  no  such  thing  was  known  as 
preaching.  We  are  so  used  to  think  of  preaching,  that 
we  do  not  always  weigh  what  it  means,  or  what  a  light 
it  casts  on  the  character  of  God,  and  on  that  blessing 
which  He  has  now  given  us  in  Christ.    AU  through  the 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  415 

previous  history  of  the  world,  the  creature  as  such  was 
the  object  of  the  divine  dealings.  Now  it  is  not  so. 
Christ  is  the  object  before  Him;  and  our  best  blessing 
of  grace  through  redemption  is  that  we  have  Him  as 
our  very  life.  Oh  that  God's  children,  with  all  simpli- 
city, laid  hold  of  this  truth !  What  a  place  it  gives  us 
as  passing  through  the  world !  I  am  not  merely  speak- 
ing of  being  secured.  The  heart  continually  lowers 
eternal  life  to  a  simple  question  of  being  delivered  from 
wrath,  and  going  to  heaven,  perhaps,  through  a  process 
of  judgment.  Were  this  all  true,  how  short  of  Chris- 
tianity! How  much  more  to  know,  with  the  authority 
of  a  God  that  cannot  lie,  and  in  all  the  breadth  that 
preaching  gives,  that  we  no  longer  belong  to  this  crea- 
tion, in  virtue  of  the  only  life  we  have  as  saints ;  that 
God  has  now  made  it  a  revealed  certainty,  that  the 
eternal  life  which  was  in  Christ,  and  which  Christ  was, 
is  now  for  ever  ours  in  Him.  Accordingly  God  has 
manifested  His  word  now  through  preaching,  showing 
the  universality  of  the  testimony  of  grace  in  contrast 
with  the  narrow  limits  of  law.  Thus,  when  the  spe- 
cial separation  of  Christians  takes  place,  when  God 
attaches  unto  Himself  His  children  here  below,  He 
makes  them  conscious  that  they  do  not  belong  to  the 
world;  yet  is  it  coincident  with  the  gospel  sent  forth 
everywhere.  His  church  is  gathered  out  from  the  world 
at  the  same  time  that  His  word  goes  aU  over  the  whole 
world.  These  two  points  are  very  characteristic  of 
Christianity;  and  they  are  of  immense  importance  for 
the  soul  to  seize  clearly,  and  not  let  slip. 

Let  me  just  sum  up  briefly  again.  First  of  all  the 
life  that  we  have  received  in  Christ  shuts  us  up,  as  it 
were,  to  Him,  and  gives  us  the  consciousness  that  we 


416  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

belong  as  Christians  to  an  order  of  being  which  never 
can  be  impaired  or  corrupted — of  course,  therefore,  to 
that  which  has  no  connection  whatever  with  the  world, 
or  with  the  creature  that  has  sKpped  through  sin  into 
ruin.  That  eternal  life,  which  is  ours  now,  was  in  the 
Son  of  God,  and  this  before  there  was  a  world  made  or 
lost.  While  man's  probation  in  various  forms  went  on, 
it  was  hidden ;  when  the  world  was  manifestly  lost,  as 
in  the  rejection  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  it  was  manifested  by 
preaching.  Up  to  this  time  the  dealings  of  God  were 
comparatively  narrow,  and  had  either  individuals  or  a 
particular  race  as  their  object — aU.  this  while  there  was 
no  revelation  of  eternal  life  at  all.  Now  there  is,  and 
with  increasing  distinctness,  when  it  became  evident 
that  Christendom  itself  proved  no  exception  to  the  past 
ages  of  man's  failure.  Thus,  when  all  had  closed  in  the 
cross,  God  stiU  waits  tiU  Christendom  was  a  judged 
thing,  too,  in  principle.  Then  it  is  that  the  Spirit  of 
God,  not  exactly  gives  us  the  life  in  Christ,  but  makes 
us  know  that  we  have  the  life  that  was  true  in  Christ 
when  the  gospel  went  out.  But  when  the  gospel  was 
being  corrupted,  as  far  as  men  could,  or  rather  when 
there  were  the  manifest  germs  of  Christendom  every- 
where showing  the  ruin  of  the  latest  and  highest  testi- 
mony of  God,  then  it  is  that  God  directs  fresh  attention 
to  the  kernel  of  the  blessing  conveyed  to  us.  Come  what 
will,  eternal  life  is  our  portion.  Let  the  world  dissolve 
by  judgment,  let  the  creature  perish  morally  by  its  own 
sin,  eternal  life  never  can.  That  eternal  life  was  in 
Christ;  that  eternal  life  is  now  given  to  us;  that  eternal 
life  God  would  have  us  to  enter  into  more  than  ever, 
enjoying  it  at  its  fullest  worth  at  the  very  time  when 
thpre  seems  nothing  else  to  enjoy,  when  it  becomes 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   TITUS.  417 

simply  a  qaestion  of  falling  back  on  that  which  never  can 
be  lowered  or  destroyed.  Such,  then,  is  the  "due  time" 
when  "  he  manifested  his  word  through  preaching." 

Thus  there  is  the  other  point — what  goes  out,  as  well 
as  shuts  us  up  to  Christ,  giving  the  true  principle  of 
separation  to  God  in  the  most  blessed  manner :  for  it 
has  nothing  to  do  with  assuming  or  pretending  to  any- 
thing. Setting  up  of  ourselves  is  wholly  excluded.  How 
can  a  man,  according  to  nature,  vaunt  of  another  who 
proves  his  own  good-for-nothingness  ?  All  evil  boast- 
ing, all  that  is  injurious,  is  of  self;  but  that  which 
is  our  only  just  ground  of  exultation  is  in  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.  Consequently,  though  we  have  in  Him  a 
worthy  object  of  boast,  it  flows  from  the  grace  of  God, 
and  is  thus  the  fountain  of  genuine  humility  in  His 
sight.  We  are  thus  shut  up,  so  to  speak,  in  the  circle 
of  divine  life;  it  may  seem  a  narrower  one,  but,  in 
truth,  there  is  nothing  that  can  rival  it  in  point  of  large 
and  deep  affection — not  alone  resting  on  those  within, 
but  actively  going  out ;  for  along  with  the  fact  that  we 
have  Christ  Himself  as  our  actual  and  eternal  life — life 
in  the  Son — our  changeless  portion,  there  is  an  increas- 
ing and  world-wide  manifestation  through  preaching. 

True,  you  wUl  find  that,  whenever  children  of  God 
take  up  one  of  these  truths  to  the  exclusion  of  the 
other,  there  is  invariably  very  great  damage  done  to 
souls.  Thus,  take  some  whose  hearts  go  out  to  what 
they  consider  the  only  desirable  aim,  that  is,  the  spread 
of  the  good  news  through  evangelizing.  It  is  a  blessed 
work;  but  it  is  never  safe  when  exclusive.  Again, 
look  at  another  section  of  God's  children,  all  whose 
comfort  is  confined  to  the  circle  of  what  is,  elect,  or 
Christian.     But  the  truth  embraces  both.     It  is  ex- 

E   E 


418  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

cellent  to  hold  fast  Christ,  and  to  know  that  we  have 
eternal  life  in  Him ;  but  do  you  not  see  that  when  God 
was  pleased  to  make  this  known,  in  the  person  of  His 
Son,  is  just  the  time  when  the  glad  tidings  are  sent 
out  hy  His  grace  to  all  men,  breaking  through  every 
question  of  race,  tongue,  law,  or  any  other  distinction 
you  please?  "When  a  ministration  of  death  and  con- 
demnation was  in  question,  a  limit  was  good  and  wise ; 
when  eternal  life,  and  remission  of  sins  in  Christ's 
name  were  the  burden,  God  could  not,  would  not,  keep 
the  good  news  pent  up  to  one  only  class  of  the  human 
family.     "  Preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature." 

It  is  evident  that  in  all  this,  lower  glories  disappear 
from  view.  It  is  no  longer  a  question  of  the  Messiah 
as  such.  The  title  of  Son  of  David  did  connect  Christ 
with  a  particular  nation.  But  now,  when  we  be- 
hold a  far  deeper  glory  of  Christ  brought  out,  there 
is  an  unlimited  manifestation  of  God's  word  through 
preaching,  "which  is  committed  unto  me,"  says  the 
apostle.  In  point  of  fact,  it  will  be  found  that  Peter, 
for  instance,  speaks  but  little  of  this  great  truth.  He 
does  tell  us  of  life;  he  makes  much  of  our  blessed 
Lord  Himself  as  the  Living  Stone;  he  treats  of  the 
saints  of  God  as  living  stones,  as  also  of  their  being 
begotten  again  by  the  word  of  God.  But  he  never 
handles  the  subject  either  in  the  comprehensive,  or  in 
the  precise,  manner  of  the  apostle  Paul.  If  he  writes, 
it  is  only  to  those  that  were  of  the  dispersion.  Both 
his  epistles  are  addressed  to  believers  of  the  circum- 
cision. It  would  be  unnatural,  therefore,  that  there 
should  be  either  depth  or  breadth  comparable  to  that 
which  appears  when  St.  Paul  presents  it.  I  need  not 
now  dwell  on  James  or  Jude,  who  are  manifestly  dis- 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   TITUS.  419 

tinct.  John  does  take  up  the  very  point  at  which 
Paul  leaves  off;  for  his  special  work  was  to  show  life 
eternal.  But  then  he  traces  it  as  a  question,  first,  of 
divine  life  in  the  person  of  Christ,  for  the  purpose  of 
maintaining  His  glory;  and,  secondly,  as  that  life,  or 
divine  nature,  in  the  saints  of  God.  He  does  not  pre- 
sent it  in  its  connection  with  the  ruin  of  Christendom, 
neither  does  he  treat  it  explicitly  in  his  epistle  as  a 
testimony  to  man  at  large.  Paul  presents  it  both  in 
the  counsels  and  in  the  ways  of  God ;  John,  rather  as 
bound  up  with  His  nature,  first  in  Christ,  and  then 
in  the  saints.  Both  are  admirably  suited  to  the  objects 
of  God,  but  they  are  different,  however  harmoniously 
they  may  blend. 

The  apostle  then  gives  his  salutation,  "To  Titus, 
mine  own  child  in  the  common  faith :  grace,  mercy,  and 
peace,  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
our  Saviour;"  and  next  proceeds  to  instruct  him  as  to 
the  object  for  which  he  was  writing.  "For  this  cause 
left  I  thee  in  Crete,  that  thou  shouldest  set  in  order  the 
things  that  are  wanting,  and  establish  elders  in  every 
city,  as  I  had  appointed  thee.  If  any  be  blameless, 
the  husband  of  one  wife,  having  faithful  children,  not 
accused  of  riot  or  unruly.  For  the  overseer  must  be 
blameless."  Here  we  have  positive  regulations,  as  well 
as  principles  laid  down,  that  were  to  guide  the  conduct 
of  Titus.  One  main  part  of  his  commission  was  the 
appointment  of  men  in  certain  exterior  charges. 

A  difficulty  may  be  felt  by  some  children  of  God. 
They  may  enquire,  how  is  it,  if  these  charges  were  not 
intended  to  be  continued,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  inspired 
these  directions  ?  I  believe  that  they  are  of  the  utmost 
practical  value  in  two  ways  :   first,   negatively,   and 

E  E  2 


420  INTRODUCTOKY  LECTUKES. 

second,  positively;  negatively,  inasmuch  as  they  en- 
able us  to  judge  the  pretensions  of  those  who  appoint, 
and  of  those  that  are  appointed.  By  their  help,  we 
can  see  that  those  who  boast  most  of  ministerial  order 
are  the  very  men  who  palpably  offend  against  these 
scriptures  as  well  as  others.  It  will  always  be  found, 
and  more  particularly  in  a  day  of  difficulty  and  dark- 
ness, that  there  is  no  security  except  by  dependence  on 
the  Lord  and  cleaving  to  His  word.  Not  only  do  the 
simple  and  the  humble  find  themselves  kept  of  the 
Lord's  grace,  but  the  truest  order  will  prove  to  be 
among  them.  Wherever  order  is  confidently  vaunted 
of,  be  not  surprised  to  discover  a  real  departure  from 
that  which  the  Lord  prescribes.  His  word  invariably 
refutes,  as  His  Spirit  never  formed,  so  self-complacent 
a  tone. 

But  then  there  is  a  more  direct  value  still.  Un- 
doubtedly there  are  some  things  wanting  now ;  and  I 
for  one  believe  that  it  is  of  God  that  they  should  be 
wanting  in  the  present  state  of  Christendom.  Where 
would  be  the  moral  fitness  of  sound  exterior  order, 
when  the  condition  is  deplorably  bad,  the  world  is 
rampant,  the  word  exercises  small  authority,  and  the 
Spirit  of  God  is  systematically  hindered  and  quenched? 
As  to  the  matter  of  appointing  these  local  officers,  the 
apostles  were  the  pillars  of  authority.  The  absence  of 
apostles,  and  consequently  of  such  a  delegate  as  Titus, 
is  fatal  to  those  who  set  up  to  have  everything  fully 
and  literally  according  to  the  word  of  God.  For  my 
part,  far  from  considering  this  fatal  for  God's  glory  in 
the  present  state  of  Christendom,  I  believe  that  the 
presence  of  apostles  would  be  an  enormous  anomaly. 
The  reason  is  simple.   Anything  would  be  unseasou- 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   TITUS.  421 

able  now  that  tends  to  weaken  the  sense — first,  that 
God's  mind,  God's  truth — no  matter  what  it  may 
be  about — abides  unchangeable  and  obligatory;  and, 
secondly,  that  God  takes  account  of  the  present  scatter- 
ing of  His  children,  and  would  have  us  to  feel  the 
havoc  that  has  been  wrought  in  Christendom,  ilfow 
suppose  the  apostles  (as  we  cannot  but  suppose  they 
must)  adhere  to  nothing  but  the  word  of  God,  what 
could  keep  them  from  seeming  to  deny  the  relationship 
of  the  mass  of  misled  Christians,  carried  away  by 
error,  self-will,  human  tradition,  &c.,  contrary  to  the 
word?  God  was  pleased,  in  view  of  the  corruption 
already  begun,  and  still  graver  departure  from  His 
word  that  was  impending,  to  cause  that  there  should 
be  no  perpetuation  of  the  apostles ;  that  there  should 
be  consequently  a  lack  felt,  which  could  not  be  made 
good,  yet  essential  to  that  outward  order  which  men 
would  most  loudly  pretend  to  when  it  was  irreparably 
lost. 

Thus  the  path  of  lowly  obedience  is  easily  proved  to 
be  the  only  safe  and  sound  one ;  because  it  refuses  to 
swerve  from  God's  word ;  it  acknowledges  the  absence 
of  a  validating  authority  which  none  on  earth  posses- 
ses ;  it  justifies  the  Lord,  who  is  adequate  for  all 
exigencies,  and  provides  amply  for  every  present  need ; 
it  confesses  the  ruined  state  of  God's  testimony  in 
the  earth,  while  it  owns  whatever  of  Himself  there 
may  be,  and  wherever  it  is.  Yet  none  the  less,  but 
the  more,  it  adheres  to  the  word  of  God,  as  the  only 
and  the  sufficient  warrant  of  faith  and  conduct  in  a 
state  of  ruin.  The  directions  that  the  apostle  gives 
are  not  in  vain,  though  neither  you  nor  I  can  do  all 
that  Titus  did.    To  do  so  would  be  presumption.    He 


422  INTRODTICTORT  LECTURES. 

was  expressly  left  in  Crete,  and  charged  by  the  apostle 
to  appoint  elders  there;  and  we  are  not.  There  is  no 
disobedience  nor  neglect  on  our  part,  but  rather  fear  of 
God,  and  maintenance  of  godly  order  in  not  exceed- 
ing our  real  powers.  But  there  is  manifest  haughtiness 
in  all  who  imitate  an  apostle,  or  an  apostolic  delegate, 
without  warrant  from  the  Lord,  and  infringing  His 
word  in  that  imitation.  Who  on  earth  now  can  authorize 
like  Paul?  Who  can  appoint  like  Titus?  Certainly 
not  a  minister  of  the  Crown,  or  an  ordinary  preacher, 
or  a  synod  of  preachers,  still  less  a  Christian  congre- 
gation. 

God  took  care  that  the  direction  should  not  be  in  a 
general  epistle,  nor  in  one  addressed  to  an  assembly. 
In  the  epistles  to  the  Eomans,  Corinthians,  Galatians, 
Ephesians,  &c.  no  such  orders  are  given,  any  more  than 
in  those  of  James,  Peter,  or  John.  When  the  apostle 
addresses  the  church  in  any  place,  he  never  lays  down 
injunctions  about  the  appointment  of  elders  or  bishops. 
Had  it  been  so,  either  the  leading  brethren,  or  perhaps 
the  saints  as  a  whole,  wordd  have  been  too  ready  to 
take  the  matter  into  their  own  hands.  As  it  is,  there 
is  no  possible  excuse  for  it.  Directions  are  given  to 
individuals  who  had  a  special  place  in  the  work  and 
church  of  God.  No  other  was  qualified  so  to  do.  Thus 
Apollos  and  Silas  never  attempt  it,  while  Titus  does. 
An  inspired  epistle  was  addressed  to  him.  No  doubt 
there  was  a  suitability  in  his  gift ;  but  besides  that  he 
has  an  outward  authority  and  inspired  credentials,  on 
which  he  was  entitled — nay,  bound — to  act.  Where  is 
there  such  a  person  at  the  present  time  ?  Hence,  there- 
fore, for  any  one  to  act  upon  the  fact  that  Titus  was 
thus  empowered  by  the  Spirit  of  God  would  be  altogether 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   TITUS.  423 

invalid.  But  then  for  that  reason  these  directions,  far 
from  being  obsolete,  are  of  permanent  value. 

To  this  use  I  would  now  direct  attention,  that  al- 
though we  cannot,  in  the  absence  of  apostles,  have  the 
due  outward  authority  to  clothe  men  with  local  charges 
in  this  or  that  place,  still,  if  we  see  those  in  whom  the 
qualities  are  really  found, — if  we  see  men  who  possess 
that  which  the  Spirit  of  God  treats  as  suitable  for  the 
overseer  or  elder,  it  is  evident  that  it  is  the  positive  duty 
of  the  children  of  God  to  own  this  in  their  persons.  No 
doubt  an  unfaithful  heart  would  take  advantage  of  the 
fact  that  they  had  never  been  formally  installed  as 
elders.  A  believer  with  the  spirit  of  godly  obedience 
would  if  possible  be  more  careful  to  own  and  honour  in 
the  absence  of  any  such  outward  title.  Thus  a  state  of 
ruin  always  tests  the  heart  more  than  when  things  are 
in  primitive  order.  When  all  is  in  its  normal  state, 
even  the  careless,  or  those  that  sooner  or  later  turn  out 
refractory,  are  overawed  by  the  strength  of  the  current 
that  runs  in  the  right  direction ;  but  when  that  current 
becomes  weaker,  and  shallows  begin  to  show  themselves, 
and  all  sorts  of  obstructions  in  the  way,  then  is  precisely 
the  moment  when  real  faith  and  humility  of  heart  are 
not  only  displayed  by  the  saints,  but  are  specially 
honoured  of  the  Lord.  Observe  it,  for  instance,  in  the 
messages  to  the  seven  churches ;  so  that  we  may  surely 
see  that  the  grace  of  the  Lord  is  never  defeated  or  in 
vain. 

We  cannot  now  nominate,  then,  because  we  are  not 
apostles,  nor  even  apostolic  delegates.  Still  we  are 
wholly  wrong  if  we  do  not  profit  by  that  which  the 
word  of  God  has  laid  down  as  to  local  charges.  We  can 
gather  from  these  and  other  scriptures  at  least  enough 


424 


INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 


for  our  practical  warning  and  guidance.  We  are  thus 
kept  from  the  confusion  of  gifts  with  them,  which  is 
the  parent  of  the  clerical  system— Popish,  national,  or 
dissenting ;  and  we  can  discern  what  remains  and  what 
exists  no  longer.  "If  any  be  blameless,  husband  of 
one  wife,  having  faithful  children  not  accused  of  riot  or 
unruly."  Thus  moral  weight  is  the  main  point  here. 
And  this  is  much  to  be  heeded.  It  is  not  a  question  of 
eminent  gift.  In  dealing  with  the  practical  difficulties 
of  the  saints  of  God,  spiritual  power  and  experience,  of 
course  free  from  outward  reproach,  personal  or  relative, 
are  of  the  greatest  possible  value.  These  are  the  men 
who  really  do  act  on  souls  for  good  day  by  day  in  the 
jar  of  circumstances,  and  justly  so.  Others  may  possess 
far  more  ability,  either  for  spreading  the  gospel  or  for 
unfolding  the  word  of  God.  I  do  not  mean  that  in 
dealing  with  practical  difiSculties  men  are  duly  qualified 
for  eldership  who  cannot  aptly  wield  the  word  in 
application  to  passing  things.  But  it  is  clear  that  an 
elder  or  bishop  is  not  necessarily  a  teacher,  though  he 
should  be  apt  to  teach — able  to  use  the  word  so  as  to 
convince  gainsayers  and  encourage  the  weak.  All  this 
is  evident  on  the  surface  of  scripture ;  but  it  does  not 
constitute  exactly  a  doctoral  gift.  It  might  not  go  beyond 
house  to  house  service.  I  believe  therefore  that  it  still 
remains  a  positive  duty  and  an  important  part  for  the 
children  of  God  to  take  heed  that  they  be  not  absorbed 
in  those  that  are  called  to  a  large  public  work.  No 
doubt  in  Christendom  generally  the  error  is  complete ; 
but  those  who  seek  to  purge  themselves  from  the  vessels 
to  dishonour  may  not  have  considered  this  with  the 
gravity  it  deserves. 

While  giving  then  evangelists  and  teachers  their 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   TITUS.  425 

place,  we  should  also  value  those  who  in  a  simpler  and 
less  obtrusive  way  are  devoting  themselves  day  by  day 
to  strengthen  the  links  of  affection,  and  to  repress  the 
sources  of  disorder  which,  as  we  all  know,  continually 
spring  up  in  Christian  assemblies.  Now  these  are  the 
persons  that  were  of  old  by  competent  authority  ap- 
pointed elders  or  overseers,  as  it  is  said  here,  "the 
overseer  must  be  blameless,  as  God's  steward,  not  self- 
willed,  not  soon  angry,  not  given  to  wine,  not  a  striker, 
not  given  to  filthy  lucre ;  but  a  lover  of  hospitality,  a 
lover  of  good  men,  sober,  just,  holy,  temperate;  holding 
fast  the  faithful  word  as  he  hath  been  taught,  that  he 
may  be  able  by  sound  doctrine  both  to  exhort  and  to 
convince  the  gainsayers."  And  if  we  see  men  of  such 
ways  and  endowments  labouring  now,  surely  they  are 
to  be  respected  and  acknowledged  as  the  men  who  have 
the  qualities  and  do  the  work  of  elders,  though  from 
circumstances  their  formal  appointment  is  no  longer 
possible. 

What  made  this  to  be  the  more  urgently  needful, 
even  for  these  Gentile  minds,  among  the  Cretans  as 
well  as  elsewhere,  was  the  Jewish  element,  the  constant 
fruitful  cause  of  trouble,  and  in  two  ways  that  we  might 
not  reasonably  expect  to  see  united.  "  There  are  many 
unruly  and  vain  talkers  and  deceivers,  specially  they  of 
the  circumcision :  whose  mouths  must  be  stopped." 
Not  that  I  mean  necessarily  Jews,  when  speaking  of 
the  Jewish  element.  Alas !  the  evil  of  Judaism  infects 
Gentiles;  the  spirit  of  tradition  pervades  some,  legalism 
imbues  others  very  largely.  These  are  the  persons 
who  give  especial  trouble,  "whose  mouths,"  we  are  told, 
"  must  be  stopped,  who  subvert  whole  houses,  teaching 
things  which  they  ought  not,  for  filthy  lucre's  sake." 


426  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

To  this  end  is  used  the  testimony  of  one  of  their  own 
prophets.  This  witness,  says  the  apostle,  is  true.  One 
of  themselves,  not  wanting  in  patriotism,  had  conscience 
enough  to  confess  that  "  Cretans  are  always  liars,  evil 
beasts,  slow  bellies."  Therefore  Titus  was  to  rebuke 
them  sharply.  What  sin  and  folly  to  brand  care  for 
their  souls  as  lack  of  charity  or  love  of  domination ! 
Let  us  remember  the  whole  case  for  our  own  profit  and 
guidance. 

Although  men  have,  alas !  common  qualities  of  evil, 
and,  no  matter  where  they  are  found,  the  same  corrupt 
nature,  the  Spirit  of  God  takes  national  character  into 
account,  and  more  particularly  in  practical  service.  This 
requires  wisdom,  and  also  experience,  where  our  lot 
may  be  cast.  So  in  connection  with  the  overseers  of 
whom  he  had  been  speaking.  Elders  are  a  local  charge. 
They  are  not  like  teachers  and  preachers,  many  of  whom 
went  about  visiting  various  lands  and  widely- scattered 
towns  in  their  wide  circuit  among  the  nations.  Elders 
as  such  were  necessarily  limited  in  that  function  to  the 
quarters  in  which  they  lived,  though  they  might  have 
gifts  which  would  carry  them  elsewhere.  For  them  it 
was  of  the  utmost  importance  to  bear  in  mind  the  par- 
ticular tendencies  of  those  among  whom  they  lived  and 
laboured.  The  apostle  here  acts  and  speaks  on  this 
himself  He  refers  to  the  sentiment  uttered  by  one 
of  their  own  poets;  for  a  poet  is  often  truer  than  a 
philosopher,  and  a  religious  zealot  can  never  be  trusted. 
Your  boasted  "  thinker  "  loses  himself  for  the  most  part 
in  dreamy  speculations  of  the  closet.  A  poet  may  be 
frivolous  indeed,  but  after  all  he  lets  out  the  real 
character;  it  may  be  in  hie  own  person,  but  at  any  rate 
he  ordinarily  expresses  the  feeling  of  the  age  and  place 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   TITUS.  427 

in  which  he  lives,  if  not  the  heart  in  its  depths.  And 
this  was  what  one  of  their  own  poets,  whom  the  apostle 
cites,  tells  about  his  countrymen.  Here  Paul  was  not 
writing  to  the  church.  It  might  be  a  matter  of  doubt 
whether  to  speak  out  so  bluntly  to  themselves ;  but 
there  could  be  no  question  of  its  importance  as  infor- 
mation for  the  fellow- servant  to  bear  in  mind  in  their 
midst. 

Their  national  character  must  be  taken  into  account ; 
for  though  this  is  a  small  thing  where  the  grace  of  the 
Spirit  is  in  question,  it  becomes  a  serious  handle  to  the 
enemy  of  souls,  who  turns  the  various  workings  of  flesh 
to  his  purpose  of  opposition  to  the  glory  of  Christ. 
Their  slippery  turn  of  mind  would  expose  them  to  re- 
ceive Jewish  fables,  as  these  would  to  misuse  the  law 
in  general.  This  was  the  twofold  mischief  of  which  I 
wish  to  say  a  few  words.  ]!fot  merely  does  the  law 
generate  habits  of  tradition,  of  slavish  adherence  to 
human  prescription  in  the  things  of  God,  which  so  soon 
are  apt  to  rise  up  to  the  destruction  of  practical  faith, 
but  along  with  this  goes  what  might  not  at  first  be  sus- 
pected—  imaginativeness ;  Jewish  fables,  as  he  says. 
And  it  is  remarkable  how  the  famous  repository  of 
Eabbinism  to  this  day  wears  this  twofold  character :  on 
the  one  hand,  the  most  servile  adherence  to  the  letter, 
without  the  least  insight  into  the  spirit  of  Holy  Scrip- 
ture; and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  wildest  fictions  to 
feed  the  fancies  of  women  and  children.  How  con- 
trasted is  the  word  of  God,  that  affords  the  most  healthy 
exercise  for  heart  and  conscience,  according  to  the  faith 
of  God's  elect! 

There  is  nothing  like  scripture  for  delivering  from 
both   snares.      The   word  of   God  never  gives  us   a 


428 


INTRODUCTOEY  LECTURKS. 


mere  line  of  duty  to  be  followed.  In  scripture  the 
duties  are  the  expressions  of  life,  in  the  relationships 
■wherein  God  has  set  us;  and  the  main  object  of 
every  teacher  should  be  not  to  impose  anything  as  a 
bare  work,  to  be  done  blindfold  and  uninteliigently,  but 
to  bind  up  with  Christ  Himself  the  course  of  God's 
wiU  we  have  to  foUow,  so  that  each  servant  may  be  led 
into  direct  communication  with  the  Master,  and  look  to 
His  grace  alone  for  all  needed  wisdom  and  strength,  in 
carrying  out  whatever  may  be  His  call.  Thus,  even 
supposing  the  teacher  disappears  in  any  way,  Christ 
abides,  and  that  which  is  according  to  Him  tells  on  the 
heart.  The  Christian  might  not  have  been  able  to  see 
it  without  the  teacher ;  but  all  else  vanishes  away  when 
the  man  is,  so  to  speak,  brought  face  to  face  with  Christ 
and  His  word. 

Such,  according  to  God,  is  the  object  of  all  teaching ; 
never  to  interpose  the  teacher,  nor  the  mere  letter  of  a 
duty,  between  the  soul  and  the  Lord,  but  to  blend  the 
smallest  practical  duty  with  His  will,  and  grace,  and 
glory,  who  is  our  life.  This  is  what  the  apostle  did 
himself,  as  he  sought  also  to  guard  Titus,  and  direct 
him,  as  his  plenipotentiary — if  I  may  so  say — acting 
among  the  Cretans.  And  it  is  no  easy  task  to  keep 
souls  from  that  which  is  the  devil's  substitute  for  the 
truth — fables;  and  the  law  misused.  For  these  shut 
out  the  word  of  God,  which  is  the  one  aliment  of  faith. 
On  the  one  hand,  the  law  appealed  to  man  in  flesh, 
instead  of  judging  him  for  dead.  On  the  other  hand, 
Jewish  fables  tilled  the  imagination,  instead  of  the  heart 
and  mind  being  drawn  out  by  the  blessed  entrance  into 
the  life  of  Christ,  and  carrying  it  out  here  below  ac- 
cording to  the  word. 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   TITUS.  429 

After  this  he  adds  another  point  of  instruction : 
"  Unto  the  pure  all  things  are  pure :  but  unto  them 
that  are  defiled  and  unbelieving  is  nothing  pure."  How 
true !  Unbelief  always  degrades  even  the  precious  word 
of  God,  turns  it  into  a  path  of  self,  and  in  effect  severs 
it  from  Christ.  This  accordingly  is  to  make  nothing 
pure.  On  the  other  hand,  the  power  of  the  saint  of 
God  is  the  Holy  Spirit  acting  on  that  life  which  is  in 
Christ.  He  is  speaking  of  practical  ways  here  below. 
How  great  then  is  the  spring  that  the  believer  pos- 
sesses !  Would  that  those  who  teach  always  knew 
where  their  secret  of  strength  lies !  It  is  the  ability 
to  mingle  Christ  with  everything  that  comes  before  ug, 
and  that  is  incumbent  on  us.  Hence,  in  contrast  with 
the  power  of  faith,  which  makes  all  things  pure  to  the 
pure,  the  apostle  speaks  most  solemnly  of  the  character 
of  those  that  believe  not.  "  They  profess  that  they 
know  God,  but  in  works  they  deny  him,  being  abo- 
minable and  disobedient,  and  unto  every  good  work 
reprobate."  What  a  filling  up  of  the  picture  Christen- 
dom manifests  at  this  day  ! 


The  next  chapter  (ii.)  turns  from  the  question  of  those 
that  guide  and  govern  in  each  assembly  and  district  to 
the  saints  themselves.  Titus  is  exhorted  to  speak  the 
things  which  become  sound  doctrine,  taking  in  first  aged 
men  and  aged  women,  and  then  young  women  and 
young  men.  It  is  all  remarkably  simple,  homely,  and 
wholesome.  There  is  nothing  that  more  marks  Chris- 
tianity than  this  very  elasticity  and  breadth.  Where 
there  is  not  humility  or  true  greatness,  people  are 
afraid  of  little  matters  ;  they  shrink  instinctively  from 


430  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

touching  on  work-a-day  details.  The  power  of  Christ 
makes  everything  sweet  and  precious,  and  lends  dignity 
to  the  very  smallest  thing  that  occupies  the  heart  and 
mind.  How  blessed  that  there  is  not  a  person  you  may 
have  to  do  with  who  does  not  become  to  you  an  object 
for  drawing  out  the  grace  of  Christ.  May  we  cultivate 
the  desire  that  there  may  be  the  growing  manifestation 
of  our  life,  according  to  His  image  who  is  its  source 
and  only  perfect  exemplar! 

Hence,  therefore,  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  the  apostle,  puts 
before  Titus  things  and  persons  exactly  as  they  were, 
and  as  He  would  have  them  be.  "That  the  aged  men  be 
sober,  grave,  temperate,  sound  in  faith,  in  charity,  in 
patience.  The  aged  women  likewise,  that  they  be  in 
behaviour  as  becometh  holiness,  not  false  accusers,  not 
given  to  much  wine;  teachers  of  good  things;  that  they 
may  teach  the  young  women  to  be  sober,  to  love  their 
husbands,  to  love  their  children,  to  be  discreet,  chaste, 
keepers  at  home,  good,  obedient  to  their  own  husbands, 
that  the  word  of  God  be  not  blasphemed."  There  are 
those  who  might  think  these  exhortations  uncalled  for, 
setting  up  their  judgment,  and  regarding  it  as  a  slight 
on  Christians,  as  if  it  were  impossible  that  godly  men 
and  women  could  fall  into  such  snares  as  taking  too 
much  wine,  or  violence  in  word  and  deed.  But  vre  must 
remember  that  the  corruption  of  the  best  thing  is  the 
worst ;  and  if  Christianity  has  unbound  fetters,  liberty 
may  be  used  to  shameful  excesses.  It  was  wise  aud 
needful  to  exhort  young  women,  among  the  rest,  to  be 
keepers  at  home,  to  mind  their  children,  as  well  as  to 
be  obedient  to  their  husbands.  I  believe  you  will  find 
that  the  starting-point  of  many  a  Christian's  ruin  is 
apt  to  begin  practically  with  high-minded  inattention 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   TITUS.  431 

to  the  small  duties  of  daily  life.  How  many  persons, 
who  afterwards  fell  into  the  depths  of  gross  sin,  failed 
originally  in  something  that  looks  trivial  and  common- 
place, which  even  natural  conscience  would  recognize 
and  rebuke ! 

The  true  safeguard,  then,  of  the  saints'  well-being  is 
an  exercised  conscience,  in  self -judgment  before  God, 
with  dependence  on  Him,  whilst  withal  the  heart  enters 
into  that  blessed  truth  which  the  apostle  himself  put 
before  Titus — eternal  life  in  Christ  before  the  world 
began.  What  can  be  more  completely  out  of  the  scene 
of  present  things  than  that  which  is  here  presented? 
But  if  there  be  what  my  soul  knows  I  have  got,  un- 
changing, before  time,  and  entirely  outside  the  first 
creation,  God  reveals  it  to  me  that  it  may  be  proved 
and  manifested  in  the  family,  with  the  children,  with 
men  at  large,  with  the  aged  and  the  young  of  either 
sex.  There  is  no  relationship,  there  is  not  a  single 
thing  of  the  most  ordinary  kind,  that  does  not  become 
a  test.  And  this  is  particularly  shown  in  what  follows  : 
"Young  men  likewise  exhort  to  be  sober-minded.  In 
all  thing  shewing  thyself  a  pattern  of  good  works." 
For  the  example  of  an  eminent  servant  of  God  is  of 
great  consequence ;  therefore  he  adds,  "  In  doctrine 
shewing  uncorruptness,  gravity,  sincerity,  sound  speech, 
that  cannot  be  condemned ;  that  he  that  is  of  the  con- 
trary part  may  be  ashamed,  having  no  evil  thing  to 
say  of  you."  But  this  also  draws  out  in  a  remarkable 
way  what  to  my  mind  is  very  characteristic  of  Chris- 
tianity. I  refer  to  the  great  price  that  God  sets  on 
the  poor,  yea,  the  very  slave.  None  but  God  so  thought 
of  them  then,  though  even  infidelity  has  filched  it 
from  the  Bible  to  work  into  the  aggrandisement  of  the 


432  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

first  man  since,  and  at  no  time  more  than  in  our  day, 
for  the  final  struggle. 

Writing  to  a  cherished  fellow- servant,  when  the 
apostle  comes  to  the  slaves,  he  breaks  out  into  one  of 
the  finest  developments  of  the  doctrine  of  grace  found 
in  this  epistle,  or  anywhere.  If  God  pays  particular 
attention  to  any,  it  is  to  those  that  man  as  such  de- 
spised. If  G-od  makes  much  of  one,  it  is  because 
circumstances  particularly  expose  that  one  to  be  passed 
by.  "Exhort  slaves,"  then  says  he,  "to  be  obedient 
unto  their  masters,  and  to  please  them  well  in  all 
things ;  not  answering  again ;  not  purloining."  What ! 
Christian  slaves  ?  To  what  might  not  Satan  tempt, 
and  into  what  might  not  those  fall,  especially,  who  re- 
gard it  as  impossible  !  "  Kot  answering  again  ;  not 
purloining,  but  showing  aU  good  fidelity ;  that  they  may 
adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things." 
Here  he  opens  to  us  the  lovely  view  of  what  the  doc- 
trine of  God  our  Saviour  is.  "For  the  grace  of  God 
that  bringeth  salvation  unto  all  men  hath  appeared, 
teaching  us  that,  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts, 
we  should  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly,  in  this 
present  age  ;  looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and  the  ap- 
pearing of  the  glory  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ." 

Thus  we  have  in  the  most  truthful,  terse,  and 
luminous  terms  the  foundation,  the  walk,  and  the  hope 
of  the  believer.  The  foundation  is  not  a  law  which 
puts  man  to  the  proof,  discovering  his  vanity  and 
the  impossibility  of  so  standing  in  the  presence  of 
God,  but  holding  out  in  its  ordinances  the  pledges  of 
good  things  to  come.  The  good  is  come;  the  test  of 
the  first  man,  and  the  shadows  are   not  before  the 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  433 

ChristiaD.  They  had  their  place  in  schooling  the  flesh, 
if  it  could  be ;  but  the  time  is  arrived  for  realities, 
which  never  pass  away ;  and  the  greatest  reality  of 
all  is  that  which  God  has  revealed  to  us  in  the  Saviour, 
and  His  great  salvation.  It  is  the  saving  grace  of 
Grod,  therefore ;  for  man  deserves  it  not,  and,  as  a  lost 
sinner,  has  no  claim  on  the  God  he  despises  and  re- 
bels against.  But  it  holds  out  salvation  unto  all,  and 
so  it  has  appeared.  It  is  neither  hidden  nor  limited. 
When  it  was  a  question  of  the  law,  bringing  death 
and  condemnation,  its  range  was  restricted ;  when  it  is 
salvation  that  goes  forth,  how  could  a  God  of  grace 
confine  it  in  boundaries  narrower  than  the  need  of 
ruined  man  ?  I  do  not  speak  of  how  far  it  takes  effect, 
but  I  say  that  God  sends  it  wherever  there  are  wants, 
and  that  He  loves  to  display  it  where  there  is  the 
most  palpable  ruin. 

The  grace  of  God,  therefore,  that  bears  salvation  to 
all  men,  has  appeared,  instead  of  a  law  directed  to  a 
particular  nation.  Ifothing  is  farther  from  the  revealed 
truth  of  God  than  the  theory  that,  when  we  are  saved 
of  grace,  we  are  put  back  again  under  the  law.  Eather 
does  the  grace  which  saves  teach  us  to  deny  ungodliness 
and  worldly  lusts ;  for  God  will  make  us  feel  what  we 
are,  what  our  nature  is ;  but  then  it  is  grace  that  makes 
us  judge  what  we  are,  and  most  truly  teaches  us  to 
detect  its  evil  and  lusts. 

Observe,  too,  that  it  is  not  a  question  simply  of 
fleshly  but  of  worldly  lusts.  All  was  hatred  to  God, 
and  discontentedness  with  that  which  He  gives  as 
our  portion.  Hence  insatiable  yearning  is  indulged 
after  that  which  we  have  not.  These  are  worldly  lusts  ; 
but  God's  grace  teaches  us  that,  denying  ungodliness 

s  F 


434  INTEODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 

and  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live  soberly  as  to  our- 
selves, righteously  as  to  those  around  us,  godly  in  His 
sight,  and  all  this  in  the  present  world  where  we  find 
ourselves,  once  sinners  but  now  brought  to  God. 

Nor  is  this  all.  The  heart  wants  that  which  may 
lift  it  above  all  present  things ;  and  God  does  not  fail 
to  supply  it.  He  fills  not  the  imagination  but  the 
heart,  and  this  with  a  bright  vision  of  divine  and 
enduring  glory,  so  much  the  more  needed  where  there 
is,  alas !  the  reality  of  sin  and  misery  and  sorrow  all 
around.  "Looking  therefore  for  that  blessed  hope,  and 
the  appearing  of  the  glory  of  our  great  God  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ."  If  grace  has  appeared,  we  know  that 
glory  is  about  to  appear.  God  does  not  mean  to  have 
the  world  always  wretched;  He  intends  to  put  down 
His  enemies  with  a  high  hand ;  He  will  not  consent 
that  His  saints  shall  ever  more  be  exposed  to  the 
efforts  and  wiles  of  Satan,  who  lures  men  to  his 
deceits  and  their  own  destruction.  The  falsehood  of 
either  ameliorating  human  nature  or  improving  the 
world  will  soon  end  in  worse  confusion  and  in  the 
sorest  judgment.  What  a  comfort  for  the  Christian 
to  have  the  certainty  that  God  will  take  it  in  hand ! 
It  is  His  fixed  mind  so  to  do.  Hence,  therefore,  we 
have  a  blessed  hope,  as  sure  as  the  faith  that  rests  on 
His  grace  that  has  already  appeared. 

But  when  His  glory  appears,  it  will  be  that  of  our 
great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  the  glory  of 
no  secondary  God.  Any  subordinate  sense  is  here  repu- 
diated explicitly.  If  there  is  any  difference,  there  is 
always  maintained  in  scripture  the  utmost  care  to 
assert  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  His  humiliation  in 
grace  placed  Him  in  circumstances  where  His  supreme 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   TITUS.  435 

glory  might  be  questioned;  man  readily  took  advantage 
of  it;  and  Satan,  always  the  antagonist  of  the  Son  of 
God,  has  prompted  men  to  abuse  His  grace  so  as  to 
deny  His  glory.  But  He,  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus, 
is  our  great  God  as  well  as  Saviour,  and,  if  this  be 
His  glory,  it  is  the  very  same  Jesus  who  gave  Himself 
for  us,  that  He  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity, 
and  purify  unto  Himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of 
good  works.  Thus  the  heart,  when  it  looks  forward 
to  the  appearing  of  the  glory  of  our  great  God  and 
Saviour,  finds  in  Him  who  will  usher  in  the  glory  the 
very  One  who  gave  Himself  for  us  in  self-sacrificing, 
atoning  love.  Hence  the  affections  are  kept  in  the 
liveliest  play,  and  all  dread,  so  natural  to  be  felt  at 
the  approach  of  the  glory  of  the  great  God  and  Saviour, 
is  a  denial  of  the  love  we  have  already  and  so  fully 
proved  in  Him,  "who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might 
redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,"  &c.  "  These  things,"  says 
he,  "  speak,  and  exhort,  and  rebuke  with  all  authority. 
Let  no  man  despise  thee." 

In  the  last  chapter  (iii.)  the  exhortation  is  pursued,  as 
to  what  was  more  outside.  "  Put  them  in  mind  to  be 
subject  to  principalities  and  powers,  to  obey  magistrates, 
to  be  ready  to  every  good  work,  to  speak  evil  of  no 
man,  to  be  no  brawlers,  but  gentle,  shewing  all  meek-, 
ness  unto  all  men."  There  are  two  reasons  given  to 
confirm  the  saints  in  this.  The  first  is  that  we  our- 
selves were  once  so  evil;  the  second  is  that  God  has 
been  so  good  to  us.  "  For  we  ourselves  were  sometimes 
foolish,  disobedient,  deceived,  serving  divers  lusts  and 
pleasures,  living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful,  and  hating 
one  another."  What  could  be  worse  ?  "  But  after  that 
p  p  2 


436  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour  toward  man 
appeared,  not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have 
done  " — we  have  done  the  very  reverse — "  but  accord- 
ing to  his  mercy  he  saved  us,"— and  how  ? — "  by  the 
washing  of  regeneration,  and  renewing  of  the  Holy 
Ghost." 

It  is  not  to  be  thought  that  these  two  things  are 
exactly  the  same.  The  washing  of  regeneration  looks 
at  our  old  condition,  outside  of  which  it  places  us ;  the 
renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  looks  more  at  that  inward 
work  which  is  made  ours  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  The 
former  appears  to  be  set  forth  in  baptism ;  the  latter 
refers  rather  to  our  connection  with  the  new  creation. 
According  to  the  language  of  the  day,  the  one  is  a 
change  of  position  or  objective,  the  other  is  subjective 
and  inward.  This  seems  the  difference  between  the 
two.  And  this  is  carried  on  in  the  next  verse  more 
fully.  Speaking  of  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
it  is  added,  "  which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour."  It  is  not  merely  that  God 
continues  the  work  He  has  always  wrought  in  souls. 
There  never  was  a  time,  since  sin  came  into  the  world 
and  grace  followed,  when  souls  were  not  born  again. 
It  must  be  so,  unless  all  were  left  to  perish.  None 
could  enter  the  kingdom  of  God  unless  they  had  a 
nature  capable  of  under.standing  and  enjoying  the  true 
God.  This,  of  course,  the  Christian  has  ;  bat  then  the 
Christian  should  not  only  know  that  he  has  this  new 
nature,  but  that  he  has  it  after  the  richest  sort  and 
fullest  measure — "which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour." 

Here  we  learn  the  blessed  truth  of  Christianity.  There 
is  no  disparagement  done  to  what  was  of  old  among 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   TITUS.  437 

tbe  saints ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  hiding 
the  transcendent  blessedness  of  the  Christian.  Of  no 
Old  Testament  saint  could  it  be  said  that  it  was  shed 
abundantly.  This  was  suitable  and  only  imparted  when 
our  Lord  Jesus  accomplished  redemption.  God  would 
put  honour  on  Christ  and  His  cross  in  every  way ;  so 
that,  as*  the  fruits  of  His  infinite  work,  the  richest 
blessing  is  lavished  on  the  Christian  now.  This  is 
what  is  referred  to  here — "  which  he  shed  on  us  abun- 
dantly through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour,  that  being 
justified  by  his  grace  we  should  be  made  heirs  according 
to  the  hope  of  eternal  life.''  Thus  he  binds  together 
the  doctrine  which  met  us  in  the  preface  of  the  epistle 
with  the  rest;  but  that  which  comes  before  us  at  the 
close  as  at  the  first — eternal  life,  has  justly  an  immense 
place  here. 

Then  in  the  closing  verses  he  gives  some  needed 
practical  exhortations.  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and 
these  things  I  will  that  thou  affirm  constantly,  that 
they  which  have  believed  in  God  might  be  careful  to 
maintain  good  works."  It  is  a  beautiful  trait  to  find 
the  apostle,  near  the  end  of  his  course,  so  exceedingly 
simple.  Not  that  the  depths  of  truth  were  not  prized  by 
him  or  not  intimated.  But  plain  every- day  need  goes 
along  with  the  deepest  truth  (and  there  is  no  deeper 
or  more  blessed  way  of  looking  at  the  saint  than  as 
having  life  in  Christ  which  was  before  the  world  began). 
While  the  unearthly  place  of  the  saint  is  affirmed, 
there  is  the  greatest  care  to  maintain  these  small  mat- 
ters so  often  overlooked  and  neglected.  Is  not  all  this 
worthy  of  God  ?  It  tells  its  own  tale  to  every  heart 
that  can  appreciate  what  the  blessedness  of  the  truth 
is.     How  needful  for  us  to  be  reminded  of  that  which 


438  INTKODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

such  high  truth  might  seem  to  leave  out  of  sight !    But 
it  is  not  so  with  the  Spirit  of  God. 

Nor  does  he  speak  only  of  those  within.  "Avoid 
foolish  questions,  and  genealogies,  and  contentions,  and 
strivings  about  the  law;  for  they  are  unprofitable  and 
vain.  A  man  that  is  an  heretic  after  the  first  and 
second  admonition  reject."  By  "  heretic  "  is  not  meant 
necessarily  one  who  holds  false  doctrines.*  Such  is  the 
sense  that  is  in  modern  usage  put  upon  the  word.  In 
scripture  a  "heretic"  might  be  sound  enough  in  doctrine. 
The  evil  is  making  his  own  particular  views,  &c.  the 
occasion  and  badge  of  a  party.  Supposing,  for  instance, 
a  person  were  to  press  his  private  opinions  of  the  law 
of  Moses,  or  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  and  make 
either  these  or  anything  else  an  indispensable  condition 
for  reception  as  a  Christian,  or  of  Christian  fellowship, 
such  a  course  would  stamp  him  as  a  heretic.  Nor  am  I 
now  raising  a  question  of  his  thoughts  (right  or  wrong) 
either  about  the  law  or  the  Second  Advent :  the  use  made 
is  the  evil  here.  At  the  same  time  one  finds  commonly 
that  where  men  despise  practical  grace  and  godliness, 
their  doctrine  sooner  or  later  is  apt  to  turn  out  unsound. 
Fundamental  error  as  to  Christ  is  called  in  scripture 
antichrist.  A  man  that  overthrows  His  personal  glory 
is  not  merely  a  heretic  (in  the  Biblical  meaning)  but  an 
antichrist;  and  this  must  be  dealt  with  in  the  most 
stringent  and  peremptory  manner  if  we  pretend  to  obey 
God's  word.  Nothing  less  is  due  to  Christ.  2  John 
goes  far  beyond  2  Thess.  iii.  or  even  1  Cor.  v.  It  is  not 
merely  a  question  of  our  own  soul,  though  it  is  certainly 
perilous  for  any  to  treat  it  lightly,  but  there  is  a  holy 

*  Pravity  of  doctrine,  as  to  Christ's  person  at  least,  constitutes  the 
ground  of  the  darker  guilt  of  an  "Antichrist"  in  scripture. 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   TITUS.  439 

duty  to  Christ ;  and  it  is  our  bounden  obligation  to  the 
slighted  Son  of  God  that  we  never  make  terms  of  com- 
promise or  neutrality  with  His  dishonour.  The  only 
scriptural  procedure  is  to  deal  unsparingly  with  such 
evil  doctrine  as  is  fatal  to  the  glory  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour.  Need  I  say  that  He  ought  to  be  infinitely 
dear  to  us — dearer  than  friends,  life,  or  even  the  church 
itself? 

But  a  "heretic"  here  is  quite'  another  thing.  It  supposes 
the  making  of  a  party.  Disputes  within  lead  to  heresies 
without.  (Gal.  v.)  When  a  man  has  turned  his  back  on 
the  assembly,  when  he  leaves  the  table  of  the  Lord, 
and  this  because  of  his  own  views,  drawing  others  after 
him,  you  have  not  a  schismatic  only  but  the  "  heretic  " 
of  these  passages.  Consequently  there  is  no  question 
of  removing  such  an  one  from  the  midst  of  the  saints ; 
he  is  away;  he  has  gone  himself,  and  would  form  a 
party  outside.  I  fear  that  the  present  distractions  of 
Christendom  blind  many  to  this  sin.  How  often  we  hear 
believers  indulging  in  words  of  this  sort  as  to  such : 
"Ah  yes;  but  still  he  is  a  dear  brother,  and  we  ought 
to  go  after  him  and  try  to  win  him  back."  What  does 
the  apostle  say  of  a  man  who  is  a  heretic,  even  to  such 
a  confidential  labourer  as  Titus  ?  "After  one  first  and 
a  second  admonition  shun."  Have  nothing  more  to  do 
with  him.  And  this  is  the  more  instructive  because 
certainly  Titus  was  no  common  man.  He  stood  in  a 
post  of  special  authority,  and  was  surely  gifted  with 
suitable  wisdom  and  power  for  the  extraordinary  office 
that  the  Lord  called  him  to ;  but  even  he  was  not  to  be 
tampering  with  this  evil  thing.  Titus  himself  is  forbid- 
den to  have  intercourse  with  him  after  a  first  and  second 
admonition.     And  it  is  found  constantly  in  practice,  as 


440  INTRODUCTORY  LECTUEES. 

I  have  known  cases  myself  over  and  over  again,  that 
when  a  Christian  presumes  to  trust  his  own  mind,  feel- 
ings, or  instinct,  in  the  face  of  such  a  warning  as  this, 
the  result  is  not  that  the  party-man  is  won,  but  that  he 
gains  another  adherent.  There  are  then  two  "heretics," 
we  may  say,  instead  of  one.  Our  best  wisdom  is  im- 
plicit subjection  to  God's  word ;  whilst  the  man  who, 
with  the  best  of  intentions,  tries  to  correct  according  to 
his  own  mind  and  heart  him  that  forms  a  party  away 
from  the  Lord  and  His  table,  enters  into  temptation, 
and  gets  drawn  into  that  evil  or  some  other  erratic 
course  himself.  There  is  neither  fidelity  nor  even  security 
except  in  rejecting  such  ways  and  persons,  and  the  word 
of  God  is  the  only  just  and  divine  measure  of  rejecting. 
We  must  always  stand  on  the  authority,  and  seek 
simply  the  just  application  of  the  word  of  God.  The 
one  question  for  us  is,  "  What  is  the  case  to  which  the 
scripture  applies?"  The  moment  you  have  ascertained 
that  this  or  that  is  what  the  scripture  means,  then 
simply  obey,  trusting  the  Lord,  no  matter  what  may  be 
the  reproach.  People  may  denounce  or  detract :  if  we 
cleave  to  the  Lord  and  His  word,  it  matters  not^  The 
reproaches  of  men  are  no  more  than  the  dust  of  the 
balance.  The  one  thing  is  to  do  the  will  of  God.  He 
that  does  His  will  abides  for  ever. 

The  reason  assigned  here  confirms  what  has  been  said, 
and  makes  all  very  plain.  "A  man  that  is  a  heretic 
after  a  first  and  second  admonition  shun;  knowing 
that  he  that  is  such  is  subverted,  and  sinneth,  being 
condemned  of  himself."  The  whole  root  of  it  is  self. 
He  first  takes  up  his  own  opinion  and,  contrary  to  the 
word  of  God,  presses  it  on  others.  Not  that  it  must 
be  heterodox  in  itself;   the  opinion  may   be  sound 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   TITUS.  441 

enough,  but  the  use  made  is  sectarian.  He  that  prefers 
his  own  opinions  and  line  to  the  church  is  self- con- 
demned. Sometimes  indeed  the  opinions  may  be  quite 
erroneous ;  but  this  matters  little.  The  question  is  not 
whether  one's  view  is  erroneous  or  not:  to  go  out  be- 
cause of  it  is  purely  selfish,  and  contrary  to  Christ. 
The  party- maker  is  pressing  his  will  or  view  for  ends 
of  his  own ;  and  he  that  does  so  sins — yea,  as  it  is 
said  here,  is  self-condemned. 

The  word  "  lieresies "  in  1  Cor.  xi.  19  may  confirm 
what  is  after  all  a  very  important  point,  especially  at 
the  present  time,  in  regard  to  Christendom.  The  apostle 
tells  the  Corinthians  that  there  were  already  divisions 
or  schisms  among  them,  and  says  that  "  there  must  be 
also  heresies"  among  them.  There  is  no  connection 
whatever  necessarily  between  a  schism  and  a  false  doc- 
trine ;  but  there  is  a  most  vital  link  between  a  schism 
within  leading  to  a  party  without.  The  schismatics 
still  met  at  the  same  table  of  the  Lord.  But  the  apostle 
lets  them  know  that  if  they  made  splits  within,  these 
are  sure  to  work  with  increase  of  evil  till  the  fomenters 
go  without  as  a  fixed  party  there.  Divisions  already  ex- 
isted within  the  Corinthian  church.  These  if  unjudged 
would  end  in  open  heresies  or  "sects"  (as  in  the  margin) 
outside.  But  the  result  would  be  in  God's  hand  that 
the  approved  were  to  be  made  manifest. 

This  is  a  graver  matter  than  many  might  imagine. 
What  a  call  to  us  always  and  resolutely  to  resist  the  first 
germs  of  evil !  It  matters  not  what  the  occasion  may 
be.  Take  that  which  may  pain  and  grieve  deeply :  we 
are  entitled  in  the  grace  of  the  Lord  to  be  above  it;  and 
the  more  right  we  may  be,  the  more  we  can  afford  to  be 
gracious.   Let  us  leave  results  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord. 


442  INTKODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

If  ever  so  right,  still,  if  one  fights  for  self,  it  will  effec- 
tually hinder  the  vindication  which  the  Lord  can  give  in 
His  own  due  time.  From  the  very  fact  of  your  fighting 
people  will  never  give  you  credit  for  singleness  of  eye. 
It  always  stirs  up  opposition  in  others.  ISTo  sooner  do 
you  leave  it  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord  than  He  appears, 
and  will  make  it  perfectly  manifest  who  is  on  His  side 
and  who  is  against  Him. 

There  is  another  thing,  too,  that  must  claim  our 
notice  for  a  moment.  The  apostle  speaks  about  sending 
a  faithful  labourer  to  Titus.  "  When  I  shall  have  sent 
Artemas  unto  thee,  or  Tychicus,  be  diligent  to  come 
unto  me  to  Nicopolis :  for  there  I  have  determined  to 
winter."  Of  course,  such  directions  were  in  accordance 
with  the  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  a  great  mis- 
take to  suppose  that  there  may  not  be  such  a  thing  as 
arrangement  in  ministry.  Need  I  say  that  what  was 
wrong  in  itself  would  not  be  consecrated  by  an  apostle's 
doing  it?  An  apostle  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
would  never  in  writing  call  for  a  thing  that  was  con- 
trary to  the  mind  of  the  Lord.  Now  Paul  does  speak 
of  sending  to  Crete  one  or  other  of  his  fellow-labourers 
in  whom  he  had  confidence ;  and  it  was  quite  right. 
It  is  a  matter  that  requires  wisdom  from  above,  because 
one  might  send  a  wrong  person.  But  the  principle  is 
caring  for  the  work  of  the  Lord,  and  not  leaving  things 
as  if  it  were  contrary  to  truth  and  the  Lord  to  have  an 
interest  even  where  you  cannot  be.  The  notion  that 
such  things  must  be  untouched  through  fear  of  trench- 
ing on  the  Lord  is  a  fallacy;  it  is  contrary  to  this 
word  of  God  and  others  also.  Scripture  authorizes 
care  in  this  kind  of  way.  If  I  could  be  a  means  of 
sending  or  inclining  the  heart  of  a  servant   of  the 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   TITUS.  443 

Lord  to  a  place  where  he  was  calling  another  servant 
from  it,  it  would  be  my  duty  to  do  it.  Not  that  this 
should  be  meddled  with  unless  the  Lord  give  assurance 
of  His  own  mind  in  the  matter;  but  it  is  not  a  thing 
to  be  left,  as  if  it  were  contrary  to  faith  to  desire  such 
a  thing.  The  apostle  here  proves  to  my  mind  the  clean 
contrary. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  everybody  that 
possesses  a  competent  judgment  about  such  a  matter ; 
and  there,  too,  is  need  of  the  Lord's  own  power.  The 
word  and  the  Spirit  of  God  are  amply  sufficient,  al- 
though we  have  neither  apostles  nor  the  charges  that 
depended  on  them.  Now,  what  He  tells  the  apostle 
here  is  (and,  I  have  no  doubt,  was  meant  in  the  long 
run)  for  the  instruction  of  the  saints  of  God.  "  When 
I  shall  send  Artemas  or  Tychicus,  bring  Zenas  the 
lawyer,  and  ApoHos  on  their  journey  diligently,  that 
nothing  be  wanting  unto  them."  He  adds  a  few  words 
of  great  practical  moment :  ''  Let  ours  also  learn  to 
maintain  good  works  for  necessary  uses,  that  they  be 
not  unfruitful."  It  was  not  merely  a  question  of  man 
suppljdng  his  own  wants;  we  ought  to  have  a  heart 
for  others.  It  is  a  great  joy  that  God  uses  one  for  the 
good  of  another;  and  as  He  does  so  spiritually.  He 
would  have  the  saints  also  consider  the  value  of  an 
honest  occupation ;  not  merely  to  provide  for  necessary 
uses,  but  also  not  to  be  unfruitful.  What  a  joy  is  the 
joy  of  grace,  the  joy  of  believers  over  circumstances, 
the  joy  that  makes  us  feel  we  are  identified,  in  our 
measure,  with  the  great  and  blessed  work  of  God  here 
below ! 


444  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

Various  considerations  call  on  me  to  be  comparatively 
brief  on  the  epistle  to  Philemon.  This  has  altogether  a 
different  character  from  the  epistles  that  have  lately 
been  occupying  us.  Here  the  Holy  Ghost  by  the  same 
apostle  takes  up  a  domestic  matter,  and  makes  it  the 
occasion  of  the  sweetest  application  of  the  grace  of 
God. 

From  his  prison  he  writes  to  one  that  evidently  was 
his  friend,  one  at  a  former  day,  yea,  for  ever,  deeply  in- 
debted to  him,  inasmuch  as  he  was  brought  to  a  know- 
ledge of  Christ  through  him.  Now  Paul  informs  him  of 
another  no  less  indebted  to  him  in  the  grace  of  Christ, 
and  this  none  other  than  Onesimus,  the  slave  of  Phile- 
mon. Wonderful  ways  of  God !  He  had  deserted,  and 
probably  otherwise  defrauded  (verse  18),  his  excellent 
master — an  act  w^hich  even  the  most  worthless  lord 
could  not  but  punish  with  the  utmost  severity.  Onesi- 
mus had  left  Philemon,  we  may  be  sure,  for  nothing 
justifiable,  and  thus  proved  himself  a  vile  person,  who 
could  not  appreciate  goodness.  But  what  is  too  hard 
for  the  Lord,  who  led  him  into  Paul's  path,  converted 
him,  and  turned  his  heart  and  steps  back  to  his  master? 

This  circumstance  becomes  the  occasion  of  an  inspired 
epistle.  The  church  throughout  all  ages  profited,  and 
the  grace  of  Christ  unfolded  therein  by  Paul  the  apostle ! 
Oh,  what  a  God  is  ours !  And  what  a  word  is  His, 
delivering  from  the  world,  and  from  the  thoughts  and 
feelings  of  nature!  How  far  have  we  derived  blessing 
by  it  ?  Is  this  what  would  commend  itself  to  our  souls  ? 
Does  aught  else  draw  out  the  admiration  and  the  thank- 
fulness of  our  hearts  ? 

"Paul,  a  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ:"  thus  he  opens 
the  letter.   He  would  not  put  his  request  on  the  ground 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   PHILEMON.  445 

of  his  apostleship,  lest  he  might  bring  in  the  force  of 
authority,  where  all  that  would  meet  and  reflect  Christ 
in  the  matter  must  turn  on  the  state  and  the  willing 
answer  of  his  heart  to  whom  he  was  appealing  in  grace. 
"Paul,  a  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  Timothy  our 
hrother,"  for  the  desire  was  not  confined  even  to  Paul, 
but  Timothy  gladly  joined  himself  with  this  most 
touching  communication  of  Paul — "  unto  Philemon  our 
dearly  beloved."  There  was  no  doubt  as  to  right  and 
wrong :  Onesimus  was  inexcusable;  but  love  abides,  and 
can  never  fail.  To  love  and  count  on  love  is  of  faith, 
and  prevails.  But  Philemon  was  not  only  an  object 
of  tender  affection,  but  a  "fellow -labourer,"  and  the 
nature  of  the  case  made  it  expedient,  unlike  the  usual 
character  of  apostolic  addresses,  to  add  the  household. 

Again,  observe,  his  wife  is  remembered.  She  would 
thus  feel  that  she  was  not  left  out  in  the  delicate  ways 
of  grace,  but  is  included,  as  in  the  injury,  so  now  in  the 
good  the  apostle  wished  them  to  manifest.  "And  to 
our  beloved  Apphia."  A  mistress  might  have  particular 
reason  to  feel  the  misconduct  of  a  slave.  Whatever 
the  special  motive,  she,  at  any  rate,  is  addressed,  and 
coupled  with  her  husband  in  it.  She  is  thus  given  a 
direct  interest  in  its  new  phase,  but  it  was  the  interest 
of  grace. 

The  apostle  brings  in  Archippus  also,  honoured  with 
the  title  of  "our  fellow-soldier."  It  is  the  same  indi- 
vidual whom  he  exhorted  at  the  close  of  Colossians  to 
take  heed  to  the  ministry  he  had  received  in  the  Lord. 
Let  him  not  forget  to  cast  in  whatever  help  he  could 
render  in  this  charge  of  grace.  Small  or  great,  let  all 
be  done  to  the  Lord.  Finally,  Paul  includes  the  church 
in  Philemon's  house.     There  were  others  in  the  Lord, 


446  INTEODUCTOEY   LECTUEES. 

either  of  the  household  or  in  the  habit  of  meeting 
there. 

How  blessed  is  grace,  and  how  large !  And  all  this 
movement  of  heart  about  a  runagate  slave !  Yet  is  it 
defined  within  the  right  bounds.  The  assembly,  and 
only  the  assembly,  in  Philemon's  house  are  compre- 
hended in  the  appeal.  The  saints  at  Colosse  are  not 
included ; — why,  we  can  all  appreciate.  Further,  mark 
the  wisdom  of  it.  In  any  other  case  the  assembly  had 
been  the  first;  but  here  mark  the  lovely  ways  of  God, 
who  now  pursues  a  different  course.  After  all,  the  slave 
is  Philemon's,  who  therefore  is  put  first.  There  never 
is  a  change,  not  even  of  order,  in  the  word  of  God,  but 
what  has  some  adequate  divine  motive,  and  the  beauty 
of  grace  and  truth  in  it.  I^ever  is  an  insertion  or 
omission  of  a  casual  sort:  all  flows  from  a  wise  purpose, 
which  would  be  impaired,  though  we  may  not  all  be 
spiritual  enough  to  say  how,  were  a  single  feature  of  it 
either  left  out  or  superadded.  It  is  aU  a  vital  organism ; 
every  part  of  the  living  body  of  truth  is  needed  for  His 
own  glory. 

The  formula  usually  introducing  the  longest  epistle 
to  the  greatest  assembly  follows.  "Grace  to  you,  and 
peace,  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
Then  Paul  addresses  PhUemon  personally:  "I  thank 
my  God,  making  mention  of  thee  always  at  my  prayers, 
hearing  of  the  love  and  faith  which  thou  hast  toward 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  toward  all  the  saints,"  (he  was 
about  to  be  tried  whether  his  love  would  stand  true 
toward  all  the  saints,)  "so  that  the  communication  of 
thy  faith  may  become  effectual  in  the  acknowledging 
of  every  good  thing  which  is  [not  "in  you,"  which 
really  gives  no  sense  in  the  passage,  but  "which  is]  in 


THE   EPISTLE   TO    PHILEMON.  447 

tis"  (according  to  the  best  and  most  ancient  authorities) 
unto  Christ  Jesus." 

Thus  Paul  thoroughly  acknowledges  the  grace  and 
faith  that  was  in  him  generally;  but  the  question 
remained,  whether  Philemon  would  answer  to  that 
which  was  in  Paul's  heart  in  writing  about  Onesimus. 
His  participation  in  the  faith  was  owned;  but  was  it 
now  to  operate  in  practical  communion  between  them  ? 
Paul  would  do  nothing  as  from  authority  in  such  a 
case :  this  would  be  to  become  a  director,  not  an  apostle 
of  Christ.  Everything  here  must  be  of  grace.  Hence 
he  adds,  "  For  we  [or  I]  had  [the  best  reading]  great 
joy  and  consolation  in  thy  love,  because  the  bowels  of 
the  saints  are  refreshed  by  thee,  brother."  Philemon 
seems  to  have  been  a  man  habitually  given  to  acts  of 
love,  and  thus  a  continual  channel  of  refreshment  by 
grace  among  God's  children.  But  the  most  excellent  of 
men  have  broken  down  occasionally  by  the  pettiest 
things  that  entice  or  provoke  self. 

And  now  there  was  a  matter  which  might  touch 
Philemon's  sense  of  injury — he  might  have  and  retain 
a  keen  sense  of  the  wrong  Onesimus  had  done  him  as  a 
Christian  master.  How  often  persons  who  were  amiability 
itself  in  all  respects  that  had  come  to  our  view  prove 
quite  unprepared  for  something  which  grates  against 
their  feelings  in  an  unexpected  quarter !  What  the  apostle 
desired  was,  for  others  as  for  himself,  that  they  should 
live  Christ  in  everything.  So  he  says,  "  For  love's  sake 
I  beseech  thee,  being  such  an  one  as  Paul " — not  merely 
"  the  prisoner,"  which  had  been  already  pleaded  as  to 
his  actual  circumstances,  and  soon  to  be  repeated  with 
emphasis,  but  now  he  takes  another  ground,  Paul — "the 
aged."     Would  Paul,  "the  prisoner"  and  "the  aged," 


448  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

have  a  feetle  ineffectual  claim  on  the  heart  of  Philemon? 
Not  Paul  the  apostle  in  any  case;  yet  was  he  not  a 
whit  behind  the  chief.  And  indeed  he  proves  how  well 
he  knew — not  that  he  now  forgot — the  distinctive  value 
of  his  apostleship,  by  keeping  it  hidden  wherever  the 
assertion  of  it  might  (not  to  say  must)  have  marred  the 
free  exercise  of  grace.  Accordingly,  "  being  such  an  one 
as  Paul  the  aged,  and  now  also  a  prisoner  of  Jesus 
Christ,  I  beseech  thee  for  my  child  Onesimus,  whom  I 
have  begotten;"  and  not  this  merely,  but  begotten  "in 
my  bonds."  This  would  make  him  specially  an  object 
of  interest  and  affection  to  one  who  venerated  and 
delighted  in  the  apostle.  If  Philemon  loved  Paul,  he 
would  love  his  child ;  and  Onesimus  was  his  child,  as 
he  says.  He. names  him  at  least  as  emphatically  his 
child  as  either  Titus  or  Timothy;  but  more  than  this, 
he  was  a  son  born  as  neither  Timothy  nor  Titus  was — 
begotten  in  his  bonds — bonds  destined  in  the  grace  of 
God  to  be  more  fruitful  for  the  instruction  of  saints 
than  his  most  free  service  and  world-wide  labours  ;  for 
Paul  was  never  so  honoured  in  the  service  of  God  for 
the  leading  up  of  the  church  of  God  as  when  he  was 
bound  a  prisoner  in  Eome. 

It  was  at  this  time,  and  under  such  circumstances,  that 
Onesimus  was  born  in  the  faith.  It  is  true  that  once 
he  "was  to  thee  unprofitable,  but  now  profitable  to  thee 
and  to  me" — an  allusion  to  his  name,  as  is  well  known, 
and  which  becomes  yet  more  evident  in  verse  20.  He 
had  been  unserviceable  before,  but  now  Paul  assures 
himself  that  grace  will  not  fail  its  effectual  work — 
"  whom  I  have  sent  back :  thou  therefore  receive  him, 
that  is,  mine  own  bowels  :  whom  I  would  have  retained 
with  me,  that  in  thy  stead  he  might  have  ministered 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   PHILEMON.  449 

unto  me  in  the  bonds  of  the  gospel ;  but  \vithoiit  thy 
mind  would  I  do  nothing."  The  apostle  would  have 
Philemon's  good  to  be  not  as  of  necessity  but  of  willing- 
ness. The  delicacy  of  feeling,  and  the  sense  of  propriety 
that  grace  forms,  are  truly  exquisite.  There  is  nothing 
that  maintains  right  so  much  as  grace.  At  the  same 
time  it  relinquishes  its  own  dues,  it  maintains  those  of 
others !  This  is  of  all  importance  for  our  souls  to  heed. 
The  contrary  alas !  habitually  appears.  A  person  abuses 
grace  in  humbling  another :  the  use  of  grace  is  to  hum- 
ble one's  self,  showing  aU  godly  respect  to  every  other 
in  our  place.  I  do  not  deny  that  there  is  that  which 
becomes  others  in  their  place :  surely  no  saint  is  exempt 
from  the  exercise  of  grace.  But  with  this  I  have 
nothing  to  do  in  the  way  of  dictation,  whatever  one's 
desires.  I  have  to  do  with  the  grace  that  has  reached 
my  own  soul;  and  this  ever  gladly  accords  to  others 
that  which  is  their  due  or  more.  There  is  nothing  that 
truly  delivers  from  the  spirit  of  self  but  the  mighty 
grace  of  God. 

The  apostle  so  writes  to  his  friend  and  brother. 
"For  perhaps  he  therefore  departed  for  a  season,  that 
thou  shouldest  receive  him  for  ever ;  not  now  as  a  slave, 
but  above  a  slave,  a  brother  beloved,  specially  to  me, 
but  how  much  more  unto  thee,  both  in  the  flesh,  and  in 
the  Lord  ?"  There  cannot  be  a  more  exquisite  apology 
for  one  whose  return  might  have  recalled  painful  feel- 
ings, and  who,  in  fact,  was  so  guilty  in  law  that  his 
master  would  have  been  by  it  justified  in  the  sternest 
measures.  But  the  grace  in  Christ,  while  it  makes  evil 
more  heinous,  changes  all,  because  it  brings  in  that  love 
which  met  our  own  yet  greater  need  and  guilt,  and  the 
mercy  that   has  left  no  room  for  blessing,  however 

G  G 


450  INTJBODUCTOEY   LECTUKES. 

feebly  we  enjoy  and  appreciate  it.  Onesimns  had  failed 
in  the  very  first  duty  of  a  slave ;  he  had  denied,  in  fact, 
his  relationship  to  his  master.  But  now  the  apostle 
takes  simply  and  solely  the  ground  of  grace,  and  appeals 
to  the  heart  of  Philemon  in  the  presence  of  all  Christ 
had  done  for  him,  and  through  the  same  instrument 
who- had  been  used  toward  his  bondman.  This  he  knew 
would  dissipate  the  smallest  cloud  of  suspicion  that 
might  otherwise  have  hung  over  Onesimus  on  his 
return  to  his  master.  As  he  says  here,  "  If  thou  count 
me  therefore  a  partner,  receive  him  as  myself  If  he 
hath  wronged  thee,  or  oweth  thee  ought,  put  that  on 
mine  account ;  I  Paul  have  written  it  with  mine  own 
hand,  I  wiU  repay  it :  albeit  I  do  not  say  to  thee  how 
thou  owest  unto  me  even  thine  own  self  besides." 

The  great  practical  lesson,  beloved,  we  ought  all  to 
gather  from  this  is  that  it  is  not  merely  a  question  of 
doing  the  right  thing,  but  of  the  way  in  which  it  should 
be  done.  It  is  too  often  thought  by  many  that  if  only 
the  object  be  right,  this  is  enough.  But  not  so  :  Christ 
is  as  much  the  way  as  He  is  the  end.  If  it  is  not 
Christ  along  every  step  of  the  road,  the  best  intentions 
often  turn  out  productive  of  very  grave  disorder ;  and 
for  this  simple  reason,  that  we  are  incompetent  for  any- 
thing of  ourselves:  Christ  alone  can  guide  us  through. 

This  is  just  what  is  taught  in  the  epistle  before  lis. 
Who  but  God  would  have  thought  of  bringing  in  Christ 
at  every  point  of  that  which  concerned  Onesimus? 
But  now,  that  He  has  so  spoken,  this  is  precisely  the 
privilege  of  the  Christian.  It  is  the  introduction  of 
Christ,  not  merely  for  the  regulation  of  elders  and 
young  men,  widows,  households,  and  the  like.  It  is 
not  merely  the  regulation  of  outward  order  by  the 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   PHILEMON.  451 

application  of  the  same  name:  Titus  does  this.  But 
the  epistle  to  Philemon  lets  us  into  another  atmosphere, 
for  it  shows  us  Christ  brought  in,  yea,  the  name  of 
Christ  and  the  grace  of  Christ  bound  up  with  all  the 
relations  of  the  family,  with  matters  that  might  seem 
•  to  belong  solely  to  the  domain  of  human  rights  or 
wrongs,  wherein  it  was  for  a  master  in  his  generosity  to 
forgive.     Here,  too,  we  are  taught  how  to  live  Christ. 

I  am  aware  some,  enamoured  of  theories,  and  sa- 
vouring the  things  of  men  rather  than  of  God,  would 
think  it  dreadful  to  discuss  or  deal  with  the  relations  of 
a  master  and  a  slave.  "Why  not  condemn  the  whole 
principle,  root  and  branch?  But  this  is  not  Christ.  The 
Spirit  of  Grod  does  not  establish  a  mere  code  of  human 
rights.  Christianity  is  not  a  system  of  earthly  right- 
eousness ;  it  is  the  unfolding  of  the  grace  of  Christ,  and 
of  heavenly  hopes.  It  is  the  bringing  of  souls  to  God, 
who  by  that  cross  delivers  them  from  all  wrongs,  spite 
of  their  guilt  and  His  most  deserved  judgment.  It 
elevates  them  above  these  rights,  not  in  pride  of  heart, 
but  bowed  down  by  the  rich  mercy  of  the  Lord.  No- 
thing so  maintains  the  rights  of  others ;  but  at  the  same 
time  it  is  no  question  of  adhering  to  our  own.  It  is  a 
question  of  using  the  grace  of  Christ,  and  thus  of  glori- 
fying God.  "  Yea,  brother,  let  me  have  joy  of  thee  in 
the  Lord :  refresh  my  bowels  in  the  Lord.  Having 
confidence  in  thy  obedience  I  wrote  unto  thee,  knowing 
that  thou  wilt  do  also  more  than  I  say.  But  withal 
prepare  me  also  a  lodging:  for  I  trust  that  through 
your  prayers  I  shall  be  given  unto  you."  Salutations 
follow  in  verses  23-25. 

Throughout  the  Spirit  speaks  to  the  renewed  affec- 
tions. What  the  effect  of  this  epistle  may  have  been 
6  a  2 


452  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

it  is  not  for  us  to  say,  as  not  knowing.  But  it  appears 
to  me  not  douMful.  The  heart  that  could  stand  out 
against  such  appeals  of  grace,  from  such  a  quarter,  was 
far  from  Philemon.  But  is  it  not  a  call  to  you  and  to 
me,  as  living,  fresh,  applicable,  and  imperiously  needed, 
if  we  value  nothing  so  much  as  Christ?  The  literal- 
circumstances  are  changed,  no  doubt;  but  why  is  it 
given  here?  Why  is  it  that  such  an  epistle  should 
have  been  inspired  ?  Why  was  it  not  a  private  com- 
munication ?  It  is  as  necessary  in  its  own  place  as  any 
one  of  the  epistles  we  have  had  before  us :  I  do  not 
mean  to  the  same  degree,  but  as  necessary,  if  in  truth 
our  object  is  to  glorify  our  Lord  Jesus. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS.  453 


Xi, 

HEBEEWS. 

I. TI. 

The  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  differs  in  some  important 
respects  from  all  those  which  have  been  before  us ;  so 
much  so  that  many  have  questioned  whether  it  be  the 
writing  of  the  apostle  Paul,  of  Apollos,  of  Barnabas,  &c. 
Of  this  my  mind  has  no  doubt.  I  believe  that  Paul, 
and  no  other,  was  the  author,  and  that  it  bears  the 
strongest  intrinsic  traits  of  his  doctrine.  The  style  is 
different,  and  so  is  the  manner  of  handling  the  truth ; 
but  the  line  of  truth,  though  it  be  affected  by  the  object 
that  he  had  in  ^dew,  is  that  which  savours  of  Paul 
beyond  all :  not  of  Peter,  or  John,  or  James,  or  Jude, 
but  of  Paul  alone. 

One  good  and  plain  reason  which  has  graven  a  differ- 
ence of  character  on  the  epistle  is  the  fact,  that  it  goes 
outside  his  allotted  province.  Paul  was  the  apostle  of 
the  uncircumcision.  If  writing  for  the  instruction  of 
Jews,  as  here  he  clearly  was,  to  believers  or  Christians 
that  had  once  been  of  that  nation,  he  was  evidently 
outside  the  ordinary  function  of  his  apostolic  work. 

There  is  another  reason  also  why  the  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  diverges  very  sensibly  and  materially  from  the 
rest  of  the  writings  of  St.  Paul,  that  it  is  not,  strictly 


454  INTRODUCTOKT  LECTUEES. 

speaking,  an  exercise  of  apostleship  at  all,  but  of  the 
writer  (apostle  though  he  were)  as  a  teacher,  and  here 
a  teacher  clearly  not  of  Gentiles,  as  he  says  elsewhere, 
but  of  Jews.  Now  it  is  plain,  if  he  that  was  an  apostle 
and  preacher  and  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  faith  and 
truth  was  led  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  address  the  saints 
that  were  of  the  old  Jewish  fold,  there  must  have  been 
a  marked  departure  from  his  usual  methods  in  the 
manner  of  using  and  presenting  the  truth  of  God  to 
these.  But  we  have  this  blessed  result  of  his  acting 
outside  his  own  ordinary  sphere,  that  it  is  the  finest 
and  indeed  the  only  specimen  of  teaching  properly  so 
called  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  not  a  revelation  given 
by  prophetic  or  apostolic  authority;  and  for  this  reason, 
I  presume,  he  does  not  introduce  himself  at  all.  It  is 
always  a  failure  when  the  teacher  as  such  is  prominent. 
The  point  for  such  an  one  is,  that  the  teaching  (not 
himself)  should  arrest  and  instruct.  But  in  revealing 
truth  the  person  whom  God  employs  in  that  work  is 
naturally  brought  before  those  addressed ;  and  hence 
the  apostle  took  particular  care,  even  if  he  did  not  write 
an  epistle,  to  put  his  name  to  it,  introducing  himself 
at  the  beginning  through  the  amanuensis  that  he  em- 
ployed, and  with  scrupulous  care  adding  his  own  name 
at  the  end  of  each  epistle. 

In  writing  to  the  Hebrew  believers  it  is  not  so. 
Here  the  apostle  is  what  indeed  he  was.  Besides  being 
apostle  of  the  uncircumcision,  he  was  a  teacher;  and 
God  took  care  that,  although  expressly  said  to  be  a 
teacher  of  GentUes,  his  should  be  the  word  to  teach 
the  Christian  Jews  too ;  and,  in  fact,  we  may  be  assured 
that  he  taught  them  as  they  never  were  taught  before. 
He  opened  the  scriptures  as  none  but  Paul  could,  ao 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS.  455 

cording  to  the  gospel  of  the  glory  of  Christ.  He  taught 
them  the  value  of  the  living  oracles  that  God  had  given 
them ;  for  this  is  the  beautiful  characteristic  here. 
Indeed  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  stands  unique.  By 
it  the  believing  Jew  was  led  into  a  divine  application 
of  that  which  was  in  the  Old  Testament — that  which 
they  had  habitually  read  in  the  law,  Psalms,  and  pro- 
phets, from  their  cradle  we  may  say,  but  which  they 
had  never  seen  in  such  a  light  before.  That  mighty, 
logical,  penetrating,  richly-stored  mind !  that  heart  with 
such  affections,  large  and  deep,  as  scarce  ever  were 
concentred  in  another  bosom!  that  soul  of  experience 
wonderfully  varied  and  profound! — he  was  the  one 
whom  God  was  now  leading  in  a  somewhat  unwonted 
path,  no  doubt,  but  in  a  path  which,  when  once  taken, 
at  once  approves  itself  by  divine  wisdom  to  every  heart 
purified  by  faith. 

For  if  Peter,  as  is  known,  were  the  apostle  of  the 
circumcision  pre-eminently,  it  was  through  him  that 
God  first  of  all  opened  the  door  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  to  the  Gentiles ;  and  if  the  apostle  Paul,  with 
the  concurrence  of  the  heads  of  the  work  among  the 
circumcision,  had  gone  to  the  Gentiles,  none  the  less 
did  the  Spirit  of  God  (it  may  be  without  asking  those 
who  seemed  to  be  somewhat  at  Jerusalem)  employ  Paul 
to  write  to  the  believers  of  the  circumcision  the  most 
consummate  treatise  on  the  bearing  of  Christ  and 
Christianity  upon  the  law  and  the  prophets,  and  as  prac- 
tically dealing  with  their  wants,  dangers,  and  blessing. 
Thus  did  God  most  carefully  guard  in  every  form  from 
the  technical  drawing  of  lines  of  rigid  demarcation  to 
which  even  Christians  are  so  prone,  the  love  of  settling 
things  in  precise  routine,  the  desire  that  each  should 


456 


INTEODUCTOET  LECTUEES. 


Lave  his  own  place,  not  only  as  the  proper  sphere  of 
his  work,  but  to  the  exclusion  of  every  other.  With 
admirable  vrisdom  indeed  the  Lord  directs  the  work  and 
the  workmen,  but  never  exclusively;  and  the  apostle 
Paul  is  here,  as  j«st  shown,  the  proof  of  it  on  one  side 
as  Peter  is  on  the  other. 

What  is  the  consequence  under  the  blessed  guidance 
of  the  Spirit  ?  As  the  great  teacher  of  the  believers 
from  among  the  Jews,  we  have,  afler  all,  not  Paul, 
but  through  him^  God  Himself  left  to  address  His  own, 
in  the  words,  facts,  ceremonies,  offices,  persons  so  long 
familiar  to  the  chosen  people.  Paul  does  not  appear. 
This  could  hardly  have  been  by  any  other  arrange- 
ment, at  any  rate  not  so  naturally.  "  God,"  says  he, 
"having  in  many  measures  and  in  many  manners  spoken 
in  time  past  to  the  fathers  in  the  prophets,  at  the  last 
of  these  days  spoke  to  us  in  his  Son,  whom  he  appointed 
heir  of  all  things,  by  whom  also  he  made  the  worlds." 
Paul  would  show  them  thus  the  infinite  dignity  of  the 
Messiah  whom  they  had  received.  Never  would  Paul 
weaken  the  personal  rights  or  the  of&eial  place  of  the 
Anointed  of  Jehovah.  Contrariwise,  he  would  lead 
them  on  to  find  what  they  had  never  yet  seen  in  their 
Messiah,  and,  wonderful  to  say,  he  founds  his  proofs, 
not  on  new  revelations,  but  on  those  very  words  of  God 
which  they  had  read  so  superficially,  the  depths  of  which 
they  had  never  approached,  nor  had  they  so  much  as 
suspected.  The  facts  of  Christianity  they  knew;  the 
linking  of  all  scripture  witb  Christ's  person,  and  work, 
and  glory  they  had  yet  to  discover. 

But  mark  the  manner  of  the  writer.  He  is  careful  to 
establish  the  thread  of  connection  with  God's  word  and 
ways  of  old ;  and  yet  there  is  not  a  single  epistle  which 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  457 

more  elaborately  througlio'ut  its  entire  course  sets  tlie 
believer  in  present  relationship  to  Clirist  in  heaven ;  I 
think  one  might  be  bold  to  say,  none  so  mnch.  Prom 
the  very  starting-point  we  see  Christ,  not  merely  dead 
and  risen,  but  glorified  in  heaven.  There  is  no  doubt 
that  the  writer  meant  his  readers  to  hold  fast,  that  He 
who  suffered  all  things  on  earth  is  the  same  Jesus  who 
is  now  at  the  right  hand  of  God ;  but  the  first  place  in 
which  we  hear  of  Him  is  as  Son  of  God  on  high 
according  to  chapter  i.,  and  there  it  is  we  see  Him  as 
Son  of  man  according  to  chapter  ii.  It  was  there,  in 
fact,  that  Paul  had  himself  first  seen  the  Lord.  Who 
then  was  so  suitable  to  introduce  Jesus,  the  rejected 
Messiah,  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  as  Saul  of  Tarsus  ? 
On  the  way  to  Damascus  that  staunchest  of  Jews  had 
his  eyes  first  opened — blinded  naturally,  but  enabled 
by  grace  so  much  the  more  to  see  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  the  glorified  Christ. 

It  is  to  Christ  in  heaven,  then,  that  Paul,  writing 
to  the  Christian  Jews,  first  directs  their  attention.  Put 
he  does  it  in  a  manner  which  shows  the  singularly 
delicate  tact  given  him.  True  affection  is  prudent  for 
its  object  when  peril  is  nigh,  and  delights  to  help 
effectively,  instead  of  being  indifferent  whether  the 
way  of  it  wounds  those  whose  good  is  sought.  In  no 
way  are  the  former  messages  of  God  forgotten  in  the 
days  of  their  fathers,  lifor  would  one  gather  from  this 
epistle  that  its  writer  laboured  among  the  Gentiles, 
nor  even  that  there  was- a  calling  of  Gentile  believers 
in  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  never 
speaks  of  either.  We  can  understand,  therefore,  how 
active-minded  men,  who  occupied  themselves  with  the 
surface — the  method,  the  style,  the  unusual  absence  of 


458  INTRODUCTOET  -LECTUEES. 

the  writer's  name,  and  other  peculiarities  in  the  phe- 
nomena of  this  epistle,  too  readily  hesitated  to  attribute 
it  to  Paul.  They  might  not  attach  much  moment  to  the 
general  tradition  which  ascribed  it  to  him.  But  they 
ought  to  have  looked  more  steadily  into  its  depths, 
and  the  motives  for  obvious  points  of  difference,  even 
were  it  written  by  Paul. 

Granted  that  there  is  a  striking  absence  of  aUusion 
to  the  one  body  here.  But  there  was  one  nearer 
and  dearer  to  Paul  than  even  the  church.  There 
was  one  truth  that  Paul  laboured  yet  more  to  hold 
up  than  that  one  body,  wherein  is  neither  Jew  nor 
Greek — the  glory  of  Him  who  is  the  head  of  it.  Christ 
Himself  was  what  made  the  assembly  of  God  precious 
to  him.  Christ  Himself  was  infinitely  more  precious 
than  even  the  church  which  He  had  loved  so  well, 
and  for  which  He  gave  Himself.  Of  Christ,  then,  he 
would  deliver  his  last  message  to  his  brethren  after 
the  flesh  as  well  as  Spirit ;  and  as  he  began  preaching 
in  the  synagogues  that  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  (Acts  ix.) 
so  here  he  begins  his  epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  He 
would  lead  them  on,  and  this  with  gentle  but  firm 
and  witting  hand.  He  would  deepen  their  knowledge 
lovingly  and  wisely.  He  would  not  share  their  un- 
belief, their  love  of  ease,  their  value  for  outward  show, 
their  dread  of  suffering;  but  he  would  reserve  each 
folly  for  the  most  fitting  moment.  He  would  lay  a 
vigorous  hand  on  that  which  threatened  their  departure 
from  the  faith,  but  he  would  smooth  lightly  lesser 
difficulties  out  of  their  way.  But  when  he  gained  their 
ear,  and  they  were  enabled  to  see  the  bright  lights  and 
perfections  of  the  great  High  Priest,  there  is  no  warn- 
ing more  energetic  than  this  epistle  affords  against  the 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  459 

imminent  and  remediless  danger  of  those  who  abandon 
Christ,  whether  for  religious  form,  or  to  indulge  in  sin. 
AU  is  carried  on  in  the  fuU  power  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  but  with  the  nicest  consideration  of  Jewish  pre- 
judices, and  the  most  scrupulous  care  to  bring  every 
warrant  for  his  doctrine  from  their  own  ancient  yet 
little  understood  testimonies. 

It  is  evident,  however,  even  from  the  opening  of 
the  epistle,  that  though  he  does  not  slight  but  uphold 
the  Old  Testament  scriptures,  yet  he  will  not  let  the 
Jews  pervert  them  to  dishonour  the  Lord  Jesus. 
How  had  God  spoken  to  the  fathers?  In  many  mea- 
sures and  in  many  manners.  So  had  He  spoken  in 
the  prophets.  It  was  fragmentary  and  various,  not  a 
full  and  iinal  manifestation  of  Himself  Mark  the 
skill !  He  thereby  cuts  off,  by  the  unquestionable  facts 
of  the  Old  Testament,  that  over-weening  self-compla- 
cency of  the  Jew,  which  would  set  Moses  and  Elias 
against  hearing  the  Son  of  God.  Had  God  spoken  to 
the  fathers  in  the  prophets?  Unquestionably.  Paul, 
who  loved  Israel  and  estimated  their  privileges  more 
highly  than  themselves,  (Eom.  ix.)  was  the  last  man 
to  deny  or  enfeeble  it.  But  how  had  God  spoken  then  ? 
Had  He  formerly  brought  out  the  fulness  of  His  mind  ? 
Not  so.  The  early  communications  were  but  refracted 
rays,  not  the  light  unbroken  and  complete.  Who 
could  deny  that  such  was  the  character  of  all  the  Old 
Testament?  Yet  so  cautiously  does  he  insinuate  the 
obviously  and  necessarily  practical  character  of  that 
which  was  revealed  of  old,  that  at  a  first  reading,  nay, 
however  often  read  perfunctorily,  they  might  have  no 
more  perceived  it  than,  I  suppose,  most  of  us  must 
confess  as  to  ourselves.     But  there  it  is ;  and  when  we 


460  INTEODUCTOKY  LECTUEES. 

begin  to  prove  the  divine  certainty  of  every  word,  we 
weigh  and  weigh  again  its  value. 

As  then  it  is  pointed  out  that  there  were  formerly 
many  portions,  so  also  were  there  many  modes  in  the 
prophetic  communications  of  God.  This  was,  beyond 
doubt,  the  way  in  which  His  revelations  had  been 
gradually  vouchsafed  to  His  people.  But  for  this  very 
reason,  it  was  not  complete.  God  was  giving  piece- 
meal His  various  words,  "here  a  little,  and  there  a 
little."  Such  was  the  character  of  His  ways  with 
Israel.  They  could  not — man  could  not — ^bear  more  till 
redemption  was  accomplished,  after  the  Son  of  God 
Himself  was  come,  and  His  glory  fully  revealed.  Now 
when  promises  were  given  to  the  fathers,  they  did  not 
go  beyond  the  earthly  glory  of  Christ;  but  known 
to  Him  were  all  things  from  the  beginning,  yet  He  did 
not  outrun  the  course  of  His  dealings  with  His  people. 
But  as  they  manifested  themselves  in  relation  to  Him- 
self, and  alas !  their  own  weakness  and  ruin,  higher 
glories  began  to  dawn,  and  were  needful  as  a  support 
to  the  people.  Hence,  invariably,  you  will  find  these 
two  things  correlative.  Eeduce  the  glory  of  Christ, 
and  you  equally  lower  your  judgment  of  the  state  of 
man.  See  the  total  absolute  ruin  of  the  creature ;  and 
none  but  the  Son  in  all  His  glory  is  felt  to  be  a  suffi- 
cient Saviour  for  such. 

The  apostle  was  now  being  led  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  wean  these  believers  from  their  poor,  meagre,  earthly 
thoughts  of  Christ — from  that  so  common  tendency 
to  take  the  least  portion  of  the  blessing,  contenting 
ourselves  with  that  which  we  think  we  need,  and 
which  we  feel  to  be  desirable  for  us,  and  there  sitting 
down.     God,  on  the  contrary,  whUe  He  does  adapt 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  461 

Himself  to  the  earliest  wants  of  souls,  and  the  feeblest 
answer  to  Christ  by  the  Spirit  of  God  working  within 
us,  nevertheless  has  in  His  heart  for  us  what  suits 
His  own  glory,  and  this  He  wiU  accomplish ;  for  faith- 
ful is  He  who  hath  promised,  and  He  will  do  it.  He 
means  to  have  all  that  love  the  Saviour  like  Him; 
and  all  that  He  purposes  to  do  for  the  Saviour's  honour. 
He  has  perfectly  unfolded  to  us.  No  doubt,  this  sup- 
poses the  resurrection  state,  and  it  never  can  be  till 
then;  but  He  graciously  works  now,  that  we  may  learn 
by  degrees  that  only  such  a  Saviour  and  Lord — 
the  effulgence  of  His  glory,  and  full  expression  of  His 
substance,  the  Son  of  God  Himself — could  suit  either 
God  or  us. 

Accordingly,  while  he  intimates  thus  that  aU  was 
but  partial,  being  piecemeal  and  multiform,  in  the  re- 
velations from  God  to  the  fathers,  he  lets  them  know, 
in  the  next  verse,  that  the  same  God  had,  in  the  last 
of  these  days,  "  spoken  unto  us  in  his  Son,  whom  he 
appointed  heir  of  all  things,  by  whom  also  he  made  the 
worlds."  If  such  and  so  great  were  His  glory,  what  must 
not  be  the  word  of  such  a  Son  ?  What  the  fulness  of 
the  truth  that  God  was  now  making  known  to  His 
people  by  Him  ?  Was  this  to  slight  the  glory  of  the 
Messiah?  Let  them  rather  take  heed  that  there  be 
no  oversight  of  Him  on  their  part;  none  could  justly 
put  it  to  the  account  of  God.  For  who  was  He,  this 
Messiah,  that  they  would  fain  occupy  themselves  with 
as  a  king,  and  would  have  confirmed,  had  it  been 
possible,  to  aggrandize  themselves — ^the  ancient  people 
of  God  ?  The  brightness  of  God's  glory,  the  express 
image  of  His  substance;  the  upholder,  not  of  Israel 
or  their  land  only,  but  of  all  things  "  by  the  word  of 


462  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

his  power."  But  hearken  — "  when  he  had  hy  himself 
purged  our  sins,"  was  not  the  whole  Jewish  system 
hlotted  out  by  such  a  truth? — "when  he  had  by  Mnisd/ 
purged  our  sins."  It  is  to  the  exclusion  of  every  other 
instrument.  Help  there  was  not;  means  there  could 
not  be.  He  Himself  undertook  and  achieved  the  task 
alone ;  and,  when  He  had  thus  done  it,  "  sat  down  on 
the  right  hand  of  the  majesty  on  high ;  being  made  so 
much  better  than  the  angels,  as  he  hath  by  inheritance 
obtained  a  more  excellent  name  than  they." 

This  furnishes  the  first  part  of  the  doctrine  on  which 
the  apostle  insists.  If  any  beings  had  special  account 
or  stood  highly  exalted  in  a  Jew's  eye,  the  holy  angels 
were  they ;  and  no  wonder.  It  was  in  this  form  that 
Jehovah  ordinarily  appeared,  whenever  He  visited  the 
fathers  or  the  sons  of  Israel.  There  were  exceptions ; 
but,  as  a  rule,  He  who  made  known  the  will  and  mani- 
fested the  power  of  Jehovah  in  these  early  days  to  the 
fathers  is  spoken  of  habitually  as  the  angel  of  Jehovah. 
It  is  thus  He  was  represented.  He  had  not  yet  taken 
manhood,  or  made  it  part  of  His  person.  I  do  not 
deny  that  there  was  sometimes  the  appearance  of  man. 
An  angel  might  appear  in  whatever  guise  it  pleased 
God;  but,  appear  as  He  might.  He  was  the  representative 
of  Jehovah.  Accordingly,  the  Jews  always  associated 
angels  with  the  highest  idea  of  beings,  next  to  Jehovah 
Himself,  the  chosen  messengers  of  the  divine  will  for 
any  passing  vision  among  men.  But  now  appeared 
One  who  completely  surpassed  the  angels.  Who  was 
He  ?  The  Son  of  God.  It  ought  to  have  filled  them 
with  joy. 

We  may  easily  understand  that  every  soul  truly  born 
of  God  would  and  must  break  forth  into  thanksgiving 


THE  BPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  463 

to  hear  of  a  deeper  glorj'  than  he  had  first  perceived 
ia  Christ.  We  must  not  look  on  the  Lord  according 
to  our  experience,  if  there  has  been  simplicity  in  the 
way  God  has  brought  us  to  the  perception  of  His 
glory;  we  must  endeavour  to  put  ourselves  back, 
and  consider  the  prejudices  and  difficulties  of  the 
Jew.  They  had  their  own  peculiar  hindrances ;  and 
one  of  their  greatest  was  the  idea  of  a  divine  person 
becoming  a  man ;  for  a  man,  to  a  Jew,  was  far  below 
an  angel.  Are  there  not  many  now,  even  professing 
Christians  (to  their  shame  be  it  spoken)  who  think 
somewhat  similarly  ?  Not  every  Christian  knows  that 
a  mere  angel,  as  such,  is  but  a  servant;  not  every  Chris- 
tian understands  that  man  was  made  to  rule.  No  doubt 
he  is  a  servant,  but  not  merely  one  so  accomplishing 
orders,  but  having  a  given  sphere,  in  which  he  was  to 
rule  as  the  image  and  glory  of  God :  a  thing  never  true 
of  an  angel — never  was,  and  never  can  be.  The  Jews 
had  not  entered  into  this;  no  man  ever  did  receive 
such  a  thought.  The  great  mass  of  Christians  now  are 
totally  ignorant  of  it.  The  time,  the  manner,  and  the 
only  way  in  which  such  a  truth  could  be  known,  was 
in  the  person  of  Christ;  for  He  became  not  an  angel 
but  a  man. 

But  the  very  thing  that  to  us  is  so  simple,  when  we 
have  laid  hold  of  the  astonishing  place  of  man  in  the 
person  of  Christ — this  was  to  them  the  difficulty.  His 
being  a  man,  they  imagined,  must  lower  Him  necessarily 
below  an  angel.  The  apostle,  therefore,  has  to  prove 
that  which  to  us  is  an  evident  matter  of  truth — of 
revelation  from  God — without  argument  at  all.  And 
this  he  proves  from  their  own  scriptures.  "For  unto 
which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any  time,  Thou  art  my 


'464  INTEODUCTOKY  LECTURES. 

SoQ,  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee  ?"  Now  it  is  true 
that  angels  are  sometimes  called  "sons  of  God,"  but 
God  never  singles  out  one  and  says,  "Thou  art  my 
Son."  In  a  vague  general  way,  He  speaks  of  all  men 
as  being  His  sons. ,  He  speaks  of  the  angels  in  a  similar 
way,  as  being  His  sons.  Adam  was  a  son  of  God— 
apart,  I  mean,  from  the  grace  of  God — as  a  mere  crea- 
ture of  God  into  whose  nostrils  He  breathed  the  breath 
of  life.  Adam  was  a  son  of  God,  angels  were  sons  of 
God ;  but  to  which  of  the  angels  did  God  ever  speak 
in  such  language  as  this  ?  No,  it  was  to  a  man ;  for 
He  was  thus  speaking  of  the  Lord  as  Messiah  here 
below;  and  this  is  what  gives  the  emphasis  of  the 
passage.  It  is  not  predicated  of  the  Son  as  eternally 
such ;  there  would  be  no  wonder  in  this.  None  could 
be  surprised,  assuredly,  that  the  Son  of  God,  viewed  in 
His  own  eternal  being,  should  be  greater  than  an  angel. 
But  that  He,  an  infant  on  earth,  looked  at  as  the  son  of 
the  Virgin,  that  He  should  be  above  all  the  angels  in 
heaven — this  was  a  wonder  to  the  Jewish  mind;  and 
yet  what  had  in  their  scriptures  a  plainer  proof  ?  It 
was  not  to  an  angel  in  heaven,  but  to  the  Babe  at  Beth' 
lehem,  that  God  had  said,  "  Thou  art  my  Son ;  this  day 
have  I  begotten  thee ;"  and,  again,  "  I  will  be  to  him 
a  Father,  and  he  shall  be  to  me  a  Son" — words  said 
historically  of  David's  son ;  but,  as  usual,  looking  on- 
ward to  a  greater  than  David,  or  his  wise  son,  who 
immediately  succeeded  him.  Christ  is  the  true  and 
continual  object  of  the  inspiring  Spirit. 

But  next  foUows  a  still  more  powerful  proof  of  His 
glory:  "And  again,  when  he  bringeth  in  the  first- 
begotten  into  the  world,  he.  saith.  And  let  all  the 
angels  of  God  worship  him."     So  far  from  any  angel 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS.  465 

approaching  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  it  is  God 
Himself  who  commands  that  all  the  angels  shall  wor- 
ship Him.  "  And  of  the  angels  he  saith,  "Who  maketh 
his  angels  spirits,  and  his  ministers  a  flame  of  fire." 
They  are  but  servants,  whatever  their  might,  function, 
or  sphere.  They  may  have  a  singular  place  as  servants, 
and  a  spiritual  nature  accomplishing  the  pleasure  of 
the  Lord ;  but  they  are  only  servants.  They  never  rule. 
"  But  unto  the  Son  he  saith.  Thy  throne,  0  God,  is  for 
ever  and  ever :  a  sceptre  of  righteousness  is  the  sceptre 
of  thy  kingdom.  Thou  hast  loved  righteousness,  and 
hated  iniquity;  therefore  God,  even  thy  God,  hath 
anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  thy  fel- 
lows." Not  a  word  is  said  about  His  fellows  until 
God  Himself  addresses  Him  as  God.  The  angels 
worshipped  Him:  God  now  salutes  Him  as  God;  for 
such  He  was,  counting  it  no  robbery  to  be  on  equality 
with  God,  one  with  the  Father. 

But  this  is  far  from  all.  The  chain  of  scriptural 
testimony  is  carried  out  and  confirmed  with  another 
and  even  more  wondrous  citation.  "God"  may  be 
used  in  a  subordinate  sense.  Elohim  has  His  repre- 
sentatives, who  are,  therefore,  called  gods.  Magis- 
trates and  kings  are  so  named  in  scripture.  So  are 
they  styled,  as  the  Lord  told  the  Jews.  The  word  of 
God  came  and  commissioned  them  to  govern  in  earthly 
things ;  for  it  might  be  no  more  than  in  judicial  mat- 
ters. Still,  there  they  were,  in  their  own  sphere,  repre- 
senting God's  authority,  and  are  called  gods,  though 
clearly  with  a  very  subordinate  force.  But  there  is 
another  name  which  never  is  employed  in  any  sense 
save  that  which  is  supreme.  The  dread  and  incom- 
municable name  is  "Jehovah."     Is,  then,  the  Messiah 

H  H 


466  INTIIODUCTOEY   LECTURES. 

ever  called  Jehovah?  Certainly  He  is.  And  under 
what  circumstances  ?  In  His  deepest  shame.  I  do 
not  speak  now  of  God's'  forsaking  Christ  as  the  point 
of  view  in  which  He  is  looked  at,  though  at  the  same 
general  time. 

We  that  believe  can  all  understand  that  solemn 
judgment  of  our  sins  on  the  part  of  God,  when  Jesus 
was  accomplishing  atonement  on  the  cross.  But  there 
was  more  in  the  cross  than  this,  which  is  not  the 
subject  of  Psalm  cii.,  but  rather  the  Messiah  utterly- 
put  to  shame  by  man  and  the  people;  nevertheless 
taking  it  all — for  this  was  His  perfection  in  it — from 
the  hand  of  Jehovah.  It  is  under  such  circumstances 
He  pours  out  His  plaint.  Jehovah  raised  Him  up, 
and  Jehovah  cast  Him  down.  Had  atonement,  as  such, 
been  in  view  here  as  ia  Psalm  xxii.,  would  it  not  be  put 
as  casting  Him  down,  and  then  raising  Him  up?  This 
is  the  way  in  which  we  Christians  naturally  think  of 
Christ  in  that  which  is  nearest  to  the  sinner's  need  and 
God's  answer  of  grace.  But  here  Jehovah  raised  Him 
up,  and  Jehovah  cast  Him  down,  which  evidently  refers 
to  His  Messianic  place,  not  to  His  position  as  the  suf- 
fering and  afterwards  glorified  Christ,  the  Head  of  the 
church.  He  was  raised  up  as  the  true  Messiah  by 
Jehovah  on  earth,  and  He  was  cast  down  by  Jehovah 
on  earth.  No  doubt  man  was  the  instrument  of  it. 
The  world  which  He  had  made  did  not  know  Him; 
His  own  people  received  Him  not,  neither  would 
have  Him.  Jewish  unbelief  hated  Him:  the  more 
they  knew  Him,  the  less  could  they  endure  Him.  The 
goodness,  the  love,  the  glory  of  His  person  only  drew 
out  the  deadly  enmity  of  man,  and  specially  of  Israel ; 
for  they  were  worse  than  the  Eomans :   and  all  this 


THE   EPISTLE   To   THE   HEBREWS.  467 

He,  iu  the  perfectaess  of  His  dependence,  takes  from 
Jehovah.  For  Himself,  He  came  to  suffer  and  die  by 
wicked  hands,  but  it  was  in  the  accomplishment  of  the 
will  and  purpose  of  God  His  Father.  He  knew  full 
well  that  aU.  the  power  of  man  or  Satan  would  not 
have  availed  one  instant  before  Jehovah  permitted  it. 
Hence  all  is  taken  meekly,  but  with  none  the  less 
agony,  from  Jehovah's  hand;  and  less  or  other  than 
this  had  not  been  perfection.  In  the  midst  of  Mes- 
siah's profound  sense  and  expression  of  His  humiliation 
to  the  lowest  point  thus  accepted  from  Jehovah,  He 
contrasts  His  own  estate,  wasted,  prostrate,  and  coming 
to  nothing.  He  contrasts  it  with  two  things.  First, 
the  certainty  of  every  promise  being  accomplished  for 
Israel  and  Zion  He  unhesitatingly  anticipates;  whilst 
He,  the  Messiah,  submits  to  be  given  up  to  every  pos- 
sible abasement.  He  then  contrasts  Himself  with  the 
great  commanding  truth  of  Jehovah's  own  permanence, 
And  what  is  the  answer  from  on  high  to  the  holy 
sufferer  ?  Jehovah  from  above  answers  Jehovah  below ; 
He  owns  that  the  smitten  Messiah  is  Jehovah  —  of 
stability  and  unchangeableness  equal  with  His  own. 

What  need  of  further  proof  after  this?  Nothing 
could  be  asked  or  conceived  more  conclusive,  as  far  as 
concerned  His  divine  glory.  And  all  that  the  apostle 
thinks  it  necessary  to  cite  after  this  is  the  connecting 
link  of  His  present  place  on  the  throne  of  Jehovah  in 
heaven  with  all  these  ascending  evidences  of  His  divine 
glory,  beginning  with  His  being  Son  as  begotten  in 
time  and  in  the  world ;  then  His  emphatic  relationship 
to  God  as  of  the  lineage  of  David — not  Solomon,  save 
typically,  but  the  Christ  really  and  ultimately;  then  wor- 
shipped by  the  angels  of  God ;  next,  owned  by  God  as 

H  H  2 


468  INTKODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

God,  and,  finally,  as  Jehovah  by  Jehovah.   All  is  closed 
by  the  citation  of  Psalm  ex.  1,  which  declares  that  God 
bids  Him  sit  as  man  at  His  right  hand  on  high  till 
the  hour  of  judgment  on  His  foes.     It  is  one  of  the 
most  interesting  psalms  in  the  whole  collection,  and  of 
the  deepest  possible  moment  as  preparatory  both  to 
what  is  now  brought  in  for  the  Christian  (which,  how- 
ever, is  hidden  here)  and  to  what  it  declares  shall  be 
by-and-by  for  Israel.     Thus  it  is  a  sort  of  bridge  be- 
tween old  and  new,  as  it  is  more  frequently  quoted  in 
the  New  Testament  than  any  other   Old  Testament 
scripture.     "Therefore"  (as  should  be  the  conclusion, 
though  commencing  the  next  chapter)  "we  ought  to 
give  the  more  earnest  heed  to  the  things  which  we 
have  heard,  lest  at  any  time  we  should  let  them  slip. 
For  if  the  word  spoken  by  angels" — clearly  he  is  still 
summing  up  the  matter — "was   stedfast,  and  every 
transgression  and  disobedience  received  a  just  recom- 
pence  of  reward :  how  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect 
so  great  salvation ;  which  at  the  first  began  to  be  spoken 
by  the  Lord,  and  was  confirmed  unto  us  by  them  that 
heard  ?"    It  is  striking  to  see  how  the  apostle  takes  the 
place  of  such  as  simply  had  the  message,  like  other  Jews, 
from  those  who  personally  heard  Him :  so  completely 
was  he  writing,  not  as  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles 
magnifying  his  office,  but  as  one  of  Israel,  who  were 
addressed  by  those  who  companied  with  Messiah  on 
earth.     It  was  confirmed  "unto  us,"  says  he,  putting 
himself  along  with  his  nation,  instead  of  conveying  his 
heavenly  revelations  as  one  taken  out  from  the  people, 
and  the  Gentiles,  to  which  last  he  was  sent.  He  looks  at 
what  was  their  proper  testimony,  not  at  that  to  which 
he  had  been  separated  extraordinarily.     He  is  dealing 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  469 

with  them  as  much  as  possible  on  their  own  ground, 
though,  of  course,  without  compromise  of  his  own.  He 
does  not  overlook  the  testimony  to  the  Jews  as  such  : 
"  God  also  bearing  them  witness,  both  with  signs  and 
wonders,  and  with  divers  miracles,  and  distributions 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  according  to  his  own  will." 

Now  he  enters  on  another  and  very  distinct  portion 
of  the  glory  of  Christ.  He  is  not  only  the  Son  of 
God,  but  Son  of  man ;  and  they  are  both,  I  will  not 
say  equally  necessary,  but,  without  doubt,  both  abso- 
lutely necessary,  whether  for  God's  glory  or  for  His 
salvation  to  whomsoever  it  may  be  applied.  Touch 
Christ  on  either  side,  and  all  is  gone.  Touch  Him 
on  the  human  side,  it  is  hardly  less  fatal  than  on 
the  divine.  I  admit  that  His  divine  glory  has  a  place 
which  humanity  could  not  possess  ;  but  His  human 
perfection  is  no  less  necessary  to  found  the  blessing  for 
us  on  redemption,  glorifying  God  in  His  righteousness 
and  love.  This  accordingly  the  apostle  now  traces. 
Jesus  was  God  as  truly  as  mau,  and  in  both  above  the 
angels.  His  superiority  as  Son  of  God  had  been  proved 
in  the  most  masterly  manner  from  their  own  scriptures 
in  the  first  chapter.  He  had  drawn  his  conclusions, 
urging  the  all-importance  of  giving  heed,  and  the  danger 
of  letting  slip  such  a.  testimony.  The  law,  as  he  had 
said  elsewhere,  was  ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of 
a  mediator.  He  had  just  said,  if  it  was  firm,  and  every 
transgression  and  disobedience  received  just  recompence 
of  reward ;  how  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great 
salvation  ?  Outward  infraction  and  inner  rebellion  met 
their  retribution.  The  sanction  of  the  gospel  would  be 
commensurate  with  its  grace,  and  God  would  avenge 
the  slightings  of  a  testimony  begun  by  the  Lord,  farther 


470  INTEODUCTOKY  LECTUKES. 

carried  on  and  confirmed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  with  sign3, 
wonders,  powers,  and  distributions  according  to  His 
will. 

Now  he  takes  the  other  side,  saying,  "Unto  the  angels 
hath  he  not  put  in  subjection  the  world  to  come." 
Whatever  may  have  been  God's  employment  of  angels 
about  the  law,  the  world  to  come  was  never  destined  to 
be  subjected  to  them.  It  is  the  good  pleasure  of  God 
to  use  an  angel  where  it  is  a  question  of  providence,  or 
law,  or  power ;  but  where  it  comes  to  be  the  manifes- 
tation of  His  glory  in  Christ,  He  must  have  other 
instruments  more  suitable  for  His  nature,  and  according 
to  His  affections.  "  For  one  has  somewhere  testified, 
saying.  What  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him  ?  or 
the  son  of  man,  that  thou  visitest  him  ?  Thou  madest 
him  a  little  lower  than  the  angels ;  thou  crownedst  him 
with  glory  and  honour,  and  didst  set  him  over  the  works 
of  thy  hands."  Thus  we  see  the  first  question  raised  is 
one  as  to  the  littleness  of  man  in  comparison  with  that 
which  God  has  made;  but  the  qiiestiou  is  no  sooner 
raised  than  answered,  and  this  by  one  who  looks  at  the 
Second  Man  and  not  at  the  first.  Behold  then  man  in 
Christ,  and  then  talk,  if  you  can,  about  His  littleness. 
Behold  man  in  Christ,  and  then  be  amazed  at  the 
wonders  of  the  heavens.  Let  creation  be  as  great  as  it 
may  be.  He  that  made  all  things  is  above  them.  The 
Son  of  man  has  a  glory  that  completely  eclipses  the 
brightness  of  the  highest  objects.  But  also  He  shows 
that  the  humiliation  of  the  Saviour,  in  which  He  was 
made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  was  for  an  end  that 
led  up  to  this  heavenly  glory.  Grant  that  He  was  made 
a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  what  was  it  for  ?  "  We 
see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  him.     But  we  behold 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBEEWS.  471 

Jesus,  who  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels  for 
the  suffering  of  death,  crowned  with  glory  and  honour; 
so  that  by  the  grace  of  God  he  should  taste  death  for 
everything."  Nor  was  this  the  only  object;  He  was 
"crowned  with  glory  and  honour"  as  fruit  of  His  suffer- 
ings unto  death ;  but  it  had  a  gracious  object  as  well  as 
a  glorious  end;  "so  that  by  the  grace  of  God  he  should 
taste  death  for  everything ;"  for  thus  was  the  only  door 
of  deliverance  for  what  was  ruined  by  the  fall,  and  this 
because  it  was  the  only  means  of  morally  vindicating 
God,  who  yearned  in  love  over  every  work  of  His  hands. 
There  can  be  otherwise  no  ef&cacious  because  no  right- 
eous deliverance.  It  may  be  infinitely  more,  but  right- 
eous footing  it  must  have;  and  this  the  death  of  Christ 
has  given.  Flowing  from  God's  grace,  Christ's  death  is 
the  ground  of  reconcUiation  for  the  universe.  It  has 
also  made  it  a  part  of  His  righteousness  to  bring  man 
thus  out  of  that  ruin,  misery,  and  subjection  to  death 
in  which  he  lay.  It  has  put  into  the  hands  of  God 
that  infinite  fund  of  blessing  in  which  He  now  loves  to 
admit  us  reconciled  to  Himself 

The  apostle  does  not  yet  draw  all  the  consequences ; 
but  he  lays  down  in  these  two  chapters  the  twofold 
glory  of  Christ — Son  of  God,  Son  of  man ;  and  follow- 
ing up  the  latter,  he  approaches  that  which  fitted  Him, 
on  the  score  of  sympathy,  for  the  priesthood.  I  do  not 
mean  that  Jesus  could  have  been  High  Priest  according 
to  God  because  He  was  man.  Not  His  manhood  but 
His  Godhead  is  the  ground  of  His  glory;  nevertheless, 
if  He  had  not  been  man  as  well  as  Son  of  God,  He 
could  not  have  been  priest.  As  for  atonement  so  for 
priesthood,  that  ground  was  essential.  But  it  was  for 
man,  and  therefore  He  too  must  be  man.     So  it  is  here 


472  INTEODUCTOKY  LECTUEES. 

sliQ-wn  that  it  "became  him,  for  whom  are  all  things, 
and  by  whom  are  all  things,  in  bringing  many  sons 
unto  glory,  to  make  the  captain  of  their  salvation  per- 
fect through  sufferings.  For  both  he  that  sanctifieth 
and  they  who  are  sanctified  are  all  of  one."  Eemark,  it 
■  is  not  "  all  one."  We  never  reach  that  height  in  the 
epistle  to  the  Hebrews ;  never  have  we  the  body  here, 
any  more  than  unity.  For  the  body  we  must  search 
into  some  other  epistles  of  Paul,  though  unity  we  may 
see  in  another  shape  in  John.  But  the  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  never  goes  so  far  as  either.  It  does  what  was 
even  more  important  for  those  whom  it  concerned,  and, 
I  add,  what  is  of  the  deepest  possible  moment  for  us. 
For  those  who  think  that  they  can  live  according  to 
God  on  the  truth  of  either  Ephesians  or  of  the  epistles 
of  St.  John,  without  the  doctrine  of  the  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,  have  made  a  miserable  mistake. 

Say  what  men  will,  we  have  our  wants,  as  traversing 
this  wilderness ;  and  although  we  might  like  to  soar,  it 
cannot  long,  if  at  all,  prosper.  "We  have,  therefore,  the 
adaptation  of  Christ  as  priest  to  the  infirmities  that 
we  feel,  and  so  much  the  more  because  of  an  exercised 
conscience  towards  God,  and  a  realizing  of  the  desert 
sin  has  made — this  defiled  scene  of  our  actual  pilgrim- 
age. 

Accordingly,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  chapter,  the 
apostle  begins  to  introduce  the  great  truths  which  form 
so  large  a  part  of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  He 
speaks  of  Christ,  the  Sanctifier:  "He  that  sanctifieth 
and  they  who  are  sanctified  are  all  of  one."  He  means 
one  and  the  same  condition,  without  entering  into  par- 
ticulars. "  For  which  cause  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call 
them  brethren."   There  is  a  common  relationship  which 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS.  473 

the  Sanctifier  and  the  sanctified  possess.  It  might  be 
supposed,  because  He  is  the  Sanctifier  and  they  are 
the  sanctified,  that  there  could  be  no  such  communion. 
But  there  is :  "  for  which  cause  he  is  not  ashamed  to 
call  them  brethren."  He  never  called  them  so,  till  He 
became  a  man ;  nor  did  He  so  fully  then,  till  He  was 
man  risen  from  the  dead.  The  apostle  here  most  fittingly 
introduces  Psalm  xxii.,  &c. :  "  Saying,  I  will  declare  thy 
name  unto  my  brethren  :  in  the  midst  of  the  church  will 
I  sing  praise  unto  thee.  And  again,  I  will  put  my 
trust  in  him."  He  is  proving  the  reality  of  this  common 
relationship  of  the  Sanctifier  and  the  sanctified.  He, 
like  themselves,  can  say,  and  He  alone  could  say  as 
they  never  did,  "I  will  put  my  trust  in  him."  Indeed 
Psalm  xvi.  was  the  expression  of  all  His  course  as  man 
— trust  in  life,  trust  in  death,  trust  in  resurrection.  As 
in  everything  else,  so  in  this,  He  has  the  pre-eminence ; 
but  it  is  a  pre-eminence  founded  on  a  common  ground. 
It  could  not  have  been  true  of  Him,  had  He  not  been 
a  man ;  had  He  been  simply  God,  to  talk  of  trusting 
in  God  would  have  been  altogether  unnatural  and  im- 
possible. As  for  Him  then,  though  the  Sanctifier,  He 
and  they  were  all  of  one.  And  so  fvirther :  "  Behold  I 
and  the  children  which  God  hath  given  me."  Here  is 
again  a  different  but  equally  good  proof  of  mutual 
relationship. 

"Forasmuch  then  as  the  children  are  partakers  of 
flesh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  likewise  took  part  of 
the  same  ;  that  through  death  he  might  destroy  him 
that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil ;  and 
deliver  them  who  through  fear  of  death  were  all  their 
lifetime  subject  to  bondage.  For  verily  he  took  not  on 
him  the  nature  of  angels."     This  last  should  be,  that 


474  INTKODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

He  does  not  take  up  angels ;  He  does  not  lielp  them. 
They  are  not  the  objects  of  His  concern  in  the  work 
here  described ;  "  but  he  takes  up  the  seed  of  Abraham. 
Wherefore  in  all  things  it  behoved  him  to  be  made  like 
unto  his  brethren,  that  he  might  be  a  merciful  and 
faithful  high  priest" — here  you  have  the  object  of  all 
the  proof  of  His  being  man — "in  things  pertaining  to 
God,  to  make  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  people." 
I  use  the  word  "  atonement,  or  expiation,  as  being 
decidedly  preferable  to  reconciliation."  You  cannot  talk 
of  reconciling  sins.  It  is  not  a  question  of  making  sins 
right.  They  are  atoned  for ;  people  are  reconciled.  Those 
who  have  been  sinners  are  reconciled  to  God;  but  as  to 
sins  they  do  not  admit  of  being  reconciled  at  all  (which 
is  a  mistake).  There  is  need  of  a  propitiation,  or  expia- 
tion, for  the  sins  of  His  people.  "For  in  that  he  himself 
hath  suffered  being  tempted,  he  is  able  to  succour  them 
that  are  tempted."  Temptation  to  Him  was  nothing 
but  suffering :  He  suffered,  being  tempted,  because  there 
was  that  intrinsic  holiness  which  repelled,  but,  at  the 
same  time,  most  acutely  felt  the  temptation. 

Thus  the  apostle  enters  on  the  vast  field  that  will 
come  before  us  a  little  while  longer  to-night.  He  has 
laid  the  basis  for  the  high -priesthood  of  Christ.  He 
could  not  have  been  such  a  High  Priest,  had  He  not 
been  both  divine  and  human ;  and  he  has  proved  both, 
in  the  fullest  manner,  from  their  own  scriptures. 

But  before  he  enters  upon  the  unfolding  of  His  high- 
priesthood,  there  is  a  digression  (the  two  chapters  that 
follow,  I  apprehend,  linking  themselves  with  the  two 
we  have  considered).  Thus,  "Christ  as  Son  over  his 
own  house"  answers  pretty  much  to  the  first  chapter, 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  475 

as  the  rest  of  God  by-and-by  answers  to  the  second 
chapter;  for  I  hope  to  prove  it  is  to  be  in  the  scene 
of  future  glory.  In  writings  so  profound  as  the  apostle's, 
one  generally  hails  the  least  help  towards  appreciating 
the  structure  of  an  epistle :  let  the  reader  consider  it. 

We  need  not  dwell  long  on  these  intervening  chapters. 
It  is  evident  that  he  opens  with  our  Lord  as  "  apostle 
and  high-priest   of  our  confession,"  in   contrast  with 
the  apostle  and  high  priest  of  the  Jews.     Moses  was 
the  revealer  of  the  mind  of  God  of  old,  as  Aaron  had 
the  title  and  privilege  of  access  then  into  the  sanctuary 
of  God  for  the  people.     Jesus  unites  both  in  His  own 
person.     He  came  from  God,  and  went  to  God.     The 
holy  brethren,  then,  partakers  of  a  heavenly  calling 
(not  earthly  like  Israel's),  are  told  to  consider  the  Apos- 
tle and  High  Priest  of  our  confession,  even  Jesus,  who 
is  faithful  to  Him  that  appointed  Him,  as  also  Moses 
in   all  his   house.     Moses,   "as  a   servant,"  he  takes 
care    particularly   to    say,  in    everything    shows    the 
superiority  of  the  Messiah.    "For  he  was  counted  wor- 
thy of  greater  glory  than  Moses,  by  how  much  he 
that  built  it  hath  more  honour  than  the  house."     He 
becomes  bold  now.  He  can  venture,  after  having  brought 
out  such  glory  to  Christ,  to  use  plainness  of  speech; 
and  they  could. bear  it,  if  they  believed  their  own  scrip- 
tures.    If  they  honoured   the    man   who  was    God's 
servant  in  founding  and  directing  the  tabernacle  (or 
house  of  God  in  its  rudimentary  state),  how  much  more 
did  the  ancient  oracles  call  attention  to  a  greater  than 
Moses — to  Jehovah-Messiah,  even  Jesus.    How  plainly 
this   chapter  pre-supposes  the  proofs   of  the  divine 
glory  of  Christ !     We  shall  see  also  His  Sonship  pre- 
sently.    "  And  Moses  was  faithful  in  all  his  house,  as 


476  mXEODUCTORY  LECTUEES. 

a  servant,  for  a  testimony  of  the  things  to  be  spoken 
after ;  but  Christ,  as  Son  over  his  house,  whose  house 
are  we."  Christ,  being  divine,  built  the  house ;  Christ 
built  all  things.  Moses  ministered  as  servant,  and 
■was  faithful  in  God's  house;  Christ  as  Son  is  over 
the  house;  "whose  house  are  we,  if  we  hold  fast  the 
confidence  and  the  rejoicing  of  the  hope  firm  unto  the 
end." 

There  were  great  difficulties,  circumstances   calcu- 
lated especially  to  affect  the  Jew,  who,  after  receiving 
the  truth  with  joy,  might  be  exposed  to  great  trial, 
and  so  in  danger  of  giving  up  his  hope.     It  was,  be- 
sides, particularly  hard  for  a  Jew  at  first  to  put  these 
two  facts  together :  a  Messiah  come,  and  entered  into 
glory;  and  the  people  who  belonged  to  the  Messiah 
left  in  sorrow,  and  shame,  and  suffering  here  below. 
In  fact,  no  person  from  the  Old  Testament  could,  at 
first  sight  at  least,  have  combined  these  two  elements. 
We  can  understand  it  now  in  Christianity.    It  is  partly, 
indeed,  to  the  shame  of  Gentiles,  that  they  do  not  even 
see  the  difficulty  for  a  Jew.     It  shows  how  naturally, 
so  to  speak,  they  have  forgotten  the  Jew  as  having  a 
special  place  in  the  word  and  purposes  of  God.     They 
consequently  cannot  enter   into  the  feelings  of  the 
Jew ;  and  by  such  the  authority  and  use  of  this  epistle 
was  grievously  slighted.     It  is  the  self-conceit  of  the 
Gentile,  (Rom.  xi)  not  their  faith,  that  makes  the  Jew- 
ish difficulty  to  be  so  little  felt.     Faith  enables  us  to 
look  at  all  difficulties,  on  the  one  hand  measuring 
them,  on  the  other  raising  us  above  them.    This  is  not 
at  all  the  case  with  ordinary  Gentile  thought.     Unbe- 
.  lief,  indifferent  and  unfeeling,  does  not  even  see,  stUl 
less  appreciate,  the  trials  of  the  weak. 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  477 

The  apostle  here  enters  into  everything  of  value 
for  the  way.  Although  it  is  perfectly  true  that  the 
Son  is  in  this  place  of  universal  glory,  and  in  re- 
lation to  us,  Son  over  His  house  (God's  house  having 
an  all- comprehending  sense  and  a  narrower  one),  he 
explains  how  it  is  that  His  people  are  in  actual 
weakness,  trial,  exposure,  danger  and  sorrow  here  be- 
low. The  people  are  still  travelling  through  the  wilder- 
ness, not  yet  in  the  land.  He  immediately  appeals  to 
the  voice  of  the  Spirit  in  the  Psalms :  "Wherefore — (as 
the  Holy  Ghost  saith.  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice, 
harden  not  your  hearts,  as  in  the  provocation,  in  the 
day  of  temptation  in  the  wilderness :  when  your  fathers 
tempted  me,  proved  me,  and  saw  my  works  forty  years. 
Wherefore  I  was  grieved  with  that  generation,  and 
said.  They  do  alway  err  in  heart;  and  they  have  not 
known  my  ways.  So  I  swear  in  my  wrath.  They  shall 
not  enter  into  my  rest.) — take  heed,  brethren,  lest 
there  be  in  any  of  you  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  in 
departing  from  the  living  God.  But  exhort  one  another 
daily,  while  it  is  called  To-day ;  lest  any  of  you  be 
hardened  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.  For  we  are 
made  partakers  of  Christ,  if  we  hold  the  beginning  of 
our  confidence  stedfast  unto  the  end ;  while  it  is  said, 
To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your 
hearts,  as  in  the  provocation.  For  some,  when  they 
had  heard,  did  provoke  :  howbeit  not  all  that  came  out 
of  Egypt  by  Moses." 

What  is  pressed  here  is  this :  that  the  people  of 
God  are  still  in  the  path  of  faith,  just  like  their  fathers 
of  old  before  they  crossed  the  Jordan ;  that  now  there 
is  that  which  puts  our  patience  to  the  proof;  that  the 
grand  thing  for  such  is  to  hold  fast  the  beginning 


478  INTRODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

of  the  assurance  firm  unto  the  end.  They  were  temp- 
ted to  stumble  at  the  truth  of  Christ,  because*  of  the 
bitter  experiences  of  the  way  through  which  they  were 
going  onward.  To  turn  back  is  but  the  evil  heart 
of  unbeKef ;  to  abandon  Jesus  is  to  turn  away  from 
the  living  God.  To  be  fellows  or  companions  of  the 
Messiah  (Psalm  xlv.)  depends  on  holding  fast  the  begin- 
ning of  the  assurance  to  the  end ;  for,  remember,  we  are 
in  the  wilderness.  PoUowing  Christ,  as  of  old  Moses,  we 
are  not  arrived  at  the  rest  of  God.  "  But  with  whom 
was  he  grieved  forty  years  1  was  it  not  with  them  that 
had  sinned,  whose  carcases  fell  in  the  wilderness  ?  And 
to  whom  sware  he  that  they  should  not  enter  into  his 
rest,  but  to  them  that  believed  not?  So  we  see  that 
they  could  not  enter  in  because  of  unbelief." 

This  leads  us  to  the  very  important,  but  often  mis- 
understood, chapter  iv.  What  is  the  meaning  of  the 
"rest  of  God"?  Not  rest  of  soul,  nor  rest  of  conscience, 
any  more  than  of  heart.  It  is  none  of  these  things, 
but  simply  what  the  apostle  says,  God's  rest.  His  rest 
is  not  merely  your  rest.  It  is  not  our  faith  seizing  the 
rest  that  Christ  gives  to  him  that  trusts  Himself,  as 
when  He  says,  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and 
are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  He  did  not 
say,  "  I  wiU  give  you  God's  rest."  It  was  not  the  time, 
nor  is  it  of  that  nature.  God's  rest  is  the  rest  of  His 
own  satisfaction.  His  rest  is  a  change  of  all  the 
present  scene  of  trial  and  toil,  the  consequences  of  sin. 
Of  course  the  people  of  God  must  be  formed  for  the 
scene,  as  weU  as  it  for  them.  They  are  incomparably 
more  to  God  than  that  which  they  are  going  to  fill. 
Bat  the  scene  has  its  importance  too.  It  would  not 
suit  God,  if  it  would  suit  us,  to  be  ever  so  blessed  in 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS.  479 

such  a  world  as  this.  He  means  to  have  a  rest  as 
worthy  of  Himself  as  the  righteousness  we  are  made  in 
Christ  is  worthy  of  Himself  now.  As  it  is  His  right- 
eousness, so  will  it  be  His  rest.  Therefore  it  is  not 
merely,  as  Gentiles  are  apt  to  suppose,  the  bringing  of 
comfort  into  the  heart,  and  the  spirit  filled  with  the 
consciousness  of  blessings  from  God  and  of  His  grace 
to  us.  The  Jew,  too,  had,  in  another  direction,  a  miser- 
ably inadequate  conception  of  it;  for  it  was  earthly, 
if  not  sensual.  Still,  what  a  Jewish  believer  often 
staggered  at,  what  he  felt  to  be  a  serious  riddle  for 
his  mind,  was  the  contrast  between  the  circumstances 
through  which  he  was  passing,  and  the  Christ  of  which 
the  prophets  had  spoken  to  him.  Now  the  apostle  does 
not  in  any  way  make  light  of  the  grief  by  the  way, 
nor  forget  that  the  pilgrimage  in  the  desert  is  the  type 
of  our  earthly  circumstances.  He  takes  the  scriptures 
that  speak  of  Israel  journeying  toward,  but  not  yet  in, 
the  pleasant  land,  applying  them  to  the  present  facts, 
and  at  the  same  time  he  sets  before  them  in  hope  the 
rest  of  God. 

"  Let  us  therefore  fear,  lest,  a  promise  being  left  us  of 
entering  into  his  rest,  any  of  you  should  seem  to  come 
short  of  it.  Tor  unto  us  were  glad  tidings  preached,  as 
well  as  unto  them :  but  the  word  preached  did  not  profit 
them,  not  being  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  heard  it. 
For  we  who  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest."  That  is, 
we  are  on  the  road.  He  does  not  say  that  we  have 
entered,  nor  does  he  mean  anything  of  the  sort,  which  is 
clean  contrary  to  the  argu.ment  and  aim.  It  is  altogether 
a  mistake,  therefore,  so  to  interpret  the  passage.  The 
very  reverse  is  meant,  namely,  that  we  have  not  entered 
into  the  rest,  but,  as  the  hymn  says,  we  are  on  our  way. 


480  INTRODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

I  will  not  say  to  God,  but  assuredly  to  His  rest.  We 
are  entering  into  the  rest,  having  got  it  before  us,  and 
on  to  that  rest  we  move;  but  we  are  not  yet  there. 
"  We  which  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest,  as  he  said. 
As  I  have  sworn  in  my  wrath,  if  they  shall  enter  into 
my  rest."  It  is  quite  true  that  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost's 
object  to  bring  the  rest  close  to  us,  so  as  to  make  us 
always  conscious  of  the  little  interval  that  separates 
lis  from  the  rest  of  God;  but  still,  let  the  interval  be 
ever  so  short,  we  are  not  there  yet,  we  are  only  going 
towards  it.  Tor  the  present,  our  place,  beyond  contro- 
versy, is  viewed  as  in  fact  in  the  wilderness.  According 
to  the  doctrine  of  this  epistle  (as  of  the  Romans,  the 
Corinthians,  and  the  Philippians)  to  present  us  as  in  hea- 
venly places  would  be  altogether  out  of  place  and  season. 
To  the  Ephesians  he  does  develops  our  blessing  as  in 
and  with  Christ  in  the  heavenlies.  There  it  was  exactly 
consonant  to  the  character  of  the  truth ;  for  it  is  truth, 
and  of  the  highest  order.  But  as  far  as  the  Epistle  to 
the  Hebrews  goes,  we  should  never  have  learnt  this  side 
of  the  truth  of  God,  or  its  appropriation  to  us;  for  we 
are  only  regarded  in  our  actual  place,  that  is,  marching 
through  the  desert. 

Here  objections,  which  might  be  founded  on  the 
scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament,  are  met.  There  were 
two,  and  only  two,  occasions  of  old  whence  it  might  be 
argued  that  there  had  been  an  entrance  into  God's  rest. 

The  first  was  when  God  made  the  creation;  but  was 
there  any  entering  of  man  into  that  rest  ?  God,  doubt- 
less, rested /ram  His  works;  but  even  God  is  never  said 
then  to  have  rested  in  His  works.  Was  there  anything 
that  satisfied  God  or  blessed  man  permanently  ?  All 
was  good,  yea,  very  good ;   but  could  God  rest  in  His 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  481 

love  ?  Surely  not,  till  all  could  be  founded  on  the  basis 
of  redemption.  Before  all  worlds  God  meant  to  have 
this.  Nothing  but  redemption  could  bring  into  His 
own  rest.  Consequently,  a  rest  capable  of  being  spoilt, 
and  all  requiring  to  be  begun  over  again  in  a  new  and 
more  blessed  way,  never  could  meet  the  heart  or  mind 
of  God,  This,  accordingly,  is  not  His  rest ;  it  served  as 
a  sign  and  witness  of  it,  but  nothing  more. 

Then  we  come  down  lower  to  the  second  instance  of 
deep  and  special  interest  to  IsraeL  When  Joshua 
brought  the  people  triumphantly  into  the  possession  of 
Canaan,  was  this  the  rest  of  God  ?  Not  so.  How  is  it 
disproved?  By  the  self-same  Psalm — "If  they  shall 
enter  into  my  rest,"  written  afterwards.  So  wrote  David, 
"  To-day,  after  so  long  a  time."  Not  only  after  the  crea- 
tion, but  after  Joshua  had  planted  the  people  in  the 
land,  a  certain  day  is  determined  in  the  future.  For 
if  Jesus  [i.e.,  Joshua]  had  brought  them  into  rest,  he 
would  not  have  spoken  afterwards  about  another  day. 
They  had  not  entered  into  it  yet. 

The  "  rest "  was  still  beyond.  Is  it  not  future  still  ? 
What  has  there  been  to  bring  people  into  the  rest  of 
God  since  then  ?  What  is  there  to  be  compared  with 
creation,  or  with  His  people  settled  in  Canaan  by  the 
destruction  of  their  foes  ?  That  which  Gentile  theology 
has  brought  into  the  matter,  namely,  the  work  of  the 
Lord  on  the  cross,  or  the  application  of  it  to  meet  the 
needs  of  the  soul — precious  as  it  was  to  the  apostle,  as  it 
must  be  to  faith — has  no  place  whatever  in  the  apostle's 
argument.  If  so,  where  does  he  bring  it  into  the 
context  ?  The  idea  that  this  is  the  point  debated  is  so 
perfectly  foreign  and  futile,  that  to  my  mind  it  demon- 
strates exceeding  prepossession,  if  not  looseness,  of  mind, 

I  I 


482  INTRODUCTOET  LKCTUEES. 

as  well  as  a  lack  of  subjection  to  scripture,  in  those 
who  allow  their  theories  to  override  the  plain  word  of 
God,  which  is  here  conspicuous  for  the  absence  of  that 
infinite  truth. 

The  apostle,  therefore,  at  once  draws  the  conclusion, 
that  neither  at  creation,  nor  in  Canaan,  was  the  rest 
of  God  really  come.  The  latter  part  of  the  Old 
Testament  shows  us  how  Israel  got  unsettled,  and 
finally  driven  from  their  land ;  though  it  also  predicts 
their  future  ingathering.  The  New  Testament  shows 
us  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  the  ruin  of  Israel,  the 
salvation  of  believers,  the  church  formed  of  such  in  one 
body,  (whether  Jews  or  Gentiles,)  but  in  the  stronger 
contrast  with  the  rest  of  God.  Consequently,  the  rest  is 
but  coming,  not  come;  it  is  future.  This  is  the  applica- 
tion :  "  There  remaineth  therefore  a  rest"  (or  sabbatism) 
"  to  the  people  of  God.  For  he  that  hath  entered  into 
his  rest,  he  also  hath  ceased  from  his  works,  as  God 
did  from  his  own."  I  must  ask  you  thus  to  alter  the 
passage,  the  authorised  version  giving  it  wrongly.  The 
emphasis  is  taken  out  of  one  place,  and  put  into 
another,  without  the  slightest  reason. 

What  he  deduces  is,  "  Let  us  use  diligence  therefore 
to  enter  into  that  rest."  The  meaning  is,  you  cannot 
be  labouring  and  resting  in  the  same  sense  and  time. 
All  must  confess  that  when  you  rest,  you  cease  from 
labour.  His  statement  is  that  now  is  the  time  not 
for  rest,  but  for  diligence ;  and  the  moral  reason  why 
we  labour  is,  that  love — whether  looked  at  in  God 
Himself,  in  His  Son,  or  in  His  children — love  never 
can  rest,  where  there  is  either  sin  or  wretchedness.  In 
the  world  there  is  both.  No  doubt  for  the  believer,  his 
sins  are  blotted  out  and  forgiven,  and  hope  anticipates 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  483 

with  joy  the  final  deliverance  of  the  Lord.  But  as  to 
the  course  of  this  age  and  all  things  here  below,  it  is 
impossible  to  think  or  speak  of  rest  as  these  are,  not 
even  for  our  bodies,  as  part  of  the  fallen  creation.  There 
ought  not  to  be  rest,  therefore,  beyond  what  we  have 
by  faith  in  our  souls.  It  would  be  mere  sentimental- 
ising ;  it  is  not  the  truth  of  God.  I  ought  to  feel  the 
misery  and  the  estrangement  of  the  earth  from  God ;  I 
ought  to  go — however  joyful  in  the  Lord — with  a  heart 
sad,  and  knowing  how  to  weep,  in  a  world  where  there 
is  so  much  sin,  and  suffering,  and  sorrow.  But  the 
time  is  coming  when  God  will  wipe  away  tears  from 
all  eyes,  yea,  every  tear;  and  this  will  be  the  rest  of 
God.  To  this  rest  we  are  journeying,  but  we  are  only 
journeying.  At  the  same  time  we  should  labour :  love 
cannot  but  toil  in  such  a  world  as  this.  If  there  be  the 
spirit  that  feels  the  pressure  of  sin,  there  is  the  love 
that  rises  up  in  the  power  of  God's  grace,  bringing  in 
that  which  lifts  out  of  sin  and  delivers  from  it.  So  he 
says,  "Let  us  be  diligent  therefore  to  enter  into  that  rest." 
AUow  me  to  say  a  word  to  any  person  here  who  may 
be  a  little  confused  by  old  thoughts  on  this  subject. 
Look  again  a  little  more  exactly  into  the  two  chief 
calls  of  the  chapter  (verses  1  and  11),  and  let  me  ask 
you  if  it  be  safe  and  sound  to  apply  them  to  rest  for 
the  conscience  now  ?  Are  souls  who  have  never  yet 
tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious  to  be  summoned  to 
fear?  And  how  does  the  call  to  labour  or  diligence 
square  with  the  apostle's  word  in  Eomans  iv.  4,  5, 
where  justification  by  faith,  apart  from  works,  is  beyond 
cavil  the  point  of  teaching  ?  What  can  be  the  effect 
of  such  prejudices  of  interpretation  (no  matter  who 
may  have  endorsed  them)  but  to  muddle  the  gospel 

I  I  2 


484  INTRODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

of  God's  grace  ?  Thus  it  seems  to  me  clearly  and  cer- 
tainly such  a  notion  is  proved  to  be  false.  The  test 
of  a  wrong  notion  is  that  it  always  dislocates  the  truth 
of  God ;  often,  indeed,  like  this,  running  counter  to  the 
plainest  and  most  elementary  forms  of  the  gospel  itself. 
Thus,  take  the  text  already  referred  to — "  To  him  that 
worketh  not,  but  believeth  on  him  that  justifieth  the 
ungodly"— the  popular  misinterpretation  sets  people 
working  to  enter  into  rest  for  their  conscience.  But  the 
doctrine  is  as  false  as  the  written  word  is  true;  and  the 
meaning  of  that  which  is  before  us  is,  not  rest  now  for 
the  soul  by  faith,  but  the  rest  of  God,  when  He  has 
made  a  scene  in  the  day  of  glory  as  worthy  of  Himself 
as  it  will  be  suited  for  those  whom  He  loves. 

Accordingly,  we  are  next  shown  the  provision  of 
grace,  not  for  the  rest  of  glory,  but  for  those  who  are 
only  journeying  on  towards  it  here  below.  And  what 
is  that  provision  ?  The  word  of  God,  which  comes  and 
searches,  tries  and  deals  with  us,  judging  the  thoughts 
and  intents  of  the  heart ;  and  the  priesthood  of  Christ, 
which  converts  and  strengthens,  and  applies  all  that  is 
needed  here — the  grace  and  mercy  of  our  God.  "Let 
us  therefore  come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace,  that 
we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time 
of  need." 

And  now  (chap,  v.)  we  enter  upon  the  priesthood; 
for  it  is  a  priest  that  we  want  who  stand  already  ac- 
cepted by  sacrifice.  Not  a  priest,  but  a  sacrifice,  is  the 
foundation  of  all  relationship  with  God ;  but  we  need 
along  the  way  a  living  person,  who  can  deal  both  with 
God  for  us  and  for  God  with  us.  Such  a  great  High 
Priest  who  passed  through  the  heavens,  yet  able  to 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  485 

sympathize  with  our  infirmities,  we  have  in  Jesus  the 
Son  of  God.  How  little  these  Jews,  even  when  saints, 
knew  the  treasure  of  grace  that  God  had  given  in- 
Him  whom  the  nation  abhorred !  As  previously,  the 
apostle  takes  the  proofs  from  their  own  oracles.  It  is 
not  a  question  of  revealing,  but  of  rightly  applying,  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  word  they  had  in  their  hand. 

"  For  every  high  priest  taken  from  among  men  is  es- 
tablished for  men  in  things  pertaining  to  God,  that  he 
may  offer  both  gifts  and  sacrifices  for  sins."  It  might 
seem  scarcely  credible  that  these  words  could  be  ap- 
plied to  Christ.  '  But  there  is  nothing  too  bad  for  the 
heart  of  man ;  ■  and  these  are  mistakes  of  the  heart. 
They  do  not  arise  froih  intellectual  feebleness.  It 
would  be  folly  so  to  judge  of  Grotius,  for  instance. 
They  spring  from  unbelief.  Call  it  ignorance  of  Christ 
and  of  the  scriptures,  if  you  will,  but  it  is  not  found 
only  with  the  ignorant,  as  men  would  speak.  I  am 
sure  we  ought  to  have  great  compassion  for  the  honest 
ignorance  of  simple-minded  men.  But,  as  in  other  sad 
cases,  the  error  is  often  combined  with  ample  learning 
of  the  schools,  though  with  lamentable  lack  of  divine 
teaching  even  in  foundation  truth.  I  do  not  denj'  that 
God  may  ddgn  to  use  anything  in  His  service;  but 
these  men  confide  in  their  learning  and  their  powers 
generally,  instead  of  becoming  fools  that  they  may 
become  wise,  which  is  the  truest  learning  according  to 
God,  if  one  may  speak  of  "learning"  in  respect  of  that 
wisdom  which  comes  down  from  the  Father  of  lights. 

Thus  men,  confident  in  their  own  resources,  have 
dared  to  apply  this  description  of  priesthood  to  Christ. 
They  have  failed  to  see  that  it  is  a  distinct  contrast 
with  Christ,  and  not  at  all  a  picture  of  His  priesthood. 


486  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

It  is  evidently  general,  and  sets  before  us  a  human 
priest,  not  Jesus — God's  High  Priest.  K  there  be 
analogy,  there  is  certainly  the  strongest  contrast  here. 
An  ordinary  priest  is  able  to  exercise  forbearance  to- 
ward the  ignorant  and  erring,  since  he  himself  also  is 
compassed  with  infirmity.  "And  by  reason  hereof  he 
ought,  as  for  the  people,  so  also  for  himself,  to  offer 
for  sins."  Did  Christ  need  to  offer  for  Himself,  yea,  for 
sins  ?  This  blasphemy  would  follow,  if  the  foregoing 
words  applied  to  Christ.  "And  no  one  taketh  this 
honour  unto  himself,  but  he  that  is  called  of  God,  even 
as  Aaron.  So  also  Christ  glorified  not  himself  to  be 
made  an  high  priest.''  Now  he  teaches  a  point  of  con- 
tact, as  the  other  was  of  contrast.  AU  you  can  pro- 
cure from  among  men  is  one  that  can  feel,  as  being  a 
man,  for  men  after  a  human  sort.  Such  is  not  the  priest 
that  God  has  given  us,  but  one  who,  though  man, 
feels  for  us  after  a  divine  sort.  And  so,  we  are  told, 
that  Christ,  while  He  was  and  is  this  glorious  person 
in  His  nature  and  right,  nevertheless  as  man  did  not 
glorify  Himself  to  be  made  an  high  priest ;  "  but  he 
that  said  unto  him.  Thou  art  my  Son,  to-day  have  I 
begotten  thee ;  as  he  saith  also  in  another  place.  Thou 
art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec." 

The  same  God  who  owned  Him  as  His  Son,  born  of 
the  Virgin,  owned  Him  also  as  Priest  for  ever  after  the 
order  of  Melchisedec.  And  in  this  order  too :  first.  Son 
(on  earth);*  next,  the  true  Melchisedec  (in  heaven,  as 

*  I  see  no  ground  whatever  for  applying  the  citation  from  Psalm  ii. 
to  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  Acts  xiil.,  ■which  is  usually  quoted  to 
prove  it,  really  distinguishea  the  raising  up  of  Jesus  as  Messiah,  the 
Son  of  God  here  below,  from  His  resurrection  which  is  made  to  rest 
on  Isaiah  Iv.  and  Psalm  xvi.  Neither  does  Psalm  ii.  set  forth  His 
eternal  Sonship,  all-important  a  truth  as  it  is,  and  clearly  taught  by 
John  above  all. 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  487 

we  shall  find).  Albeit  true  God  and  Son  of  God,  in 
everything  He  displays  perfect  lowliness  among,  naen, 
and  absolute  dependence  on  God :  such  also  was  His 
moral  fitness  for  each  ofiice  and  function  which  God 
gave  Him  to  discharge.  Mark,  again,  the  skill  with 
which  all  is  gradually  approached — how  the  inspired 
writer  saps  and  mines  their  exorbitant  (yet  after  all 
only  earthly)  pretensions,  founded  on  the  Aaronic  priest- 
hood. Such  was  the  great  boast  of  the  Jews.  And 
here  we  learn  out  of  their  own  scriptures  another  order 
of  priesthood  reserved  for  the  Messiah,  which  he  knew 
right  well  could  not  but  put  the  Aaronic  priesthood 
completely  in  the  shade.  "Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever 
after  the  order  of  Melehisedec." 

At  the  same  time,  it  is  plain  that  there  is  no 
forgetfulness  of  the  suffering  obedience  of  Christ's 
place  here  below;  but  He  is  presented  in  this  glory 
before  we  are  given  to  hear  of  the  path  of  shame 
which  ushered  it  in.  "Who  in  the  days  of  his  flesh, 
when  he  had  offered  up  prayers  and  supplications  with 
strong  crying  and  tears  unto  him  that  was  able  to  save 
him  from  death,  and  was  heard  in  that  he  feared;  though 
he  were  a  Son,  yet  learned  he  obedience  by  the  things 
which  he  suffered;  and  being  made  perfect,  he  became 
the  author  of  eternal  salvation  unto  all  them  that  obey 
him,  called  of  God  an  high  priest  after  the  order  of 
Melehisedec."  The  apostle  had  much  to  say,  but  hard  to 
be  interpreted,  because  they  were  become  dull  of  hear- 
ing. It  is  not  that  the  word  of  God  in  itself  is  obscure, 
but  that  men  bring  in  their  difficulties.  Nor  does  His 
word,  as  is  often  thought,  want  light  to  be  thrown  on 
it;  rather  is  it  light  itself.  By  the  Spirit's  power  it 
dispels  the  darkness  of  nature.     Many  .obstacles  -there 


488  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

ai-e  to  the  entrance  of  light  through  the  word,  but  there 
is  none  more  decided  than  the  force  of  reKgious  pre- 
judice ;  and  this  would  naturally  operate  most  among 
the  Hebrew  saints.  They  clung  too  much  to  old  things; 
they  could  not  take  in  the  new.  We  may  see  a  similar 
hindrance  every  day.  What  Paul  had  to  say  of  the 
Melchisedec  priesthood  was  hard  to  explain  to  them, 
not  because  the  things  were  in  themselves  unintelligible, 
but  they  were  dull  in  hearing.  "  For  when  for  the  time 
ye  ought  to  be  teachers,  ye  again  have  need  that  one 
teach  you  the  elements  of  the  beginning  of  the  oracles 
of  God." 

There  is  nothing,  I  repeat,  which  tends  to  make 
dulness  in  spiritual  things  so  much  as  religious  tradi- 
tion. The  next  to  it  in  dead  weight,  and  in  other 
respects  more  daringly  dangerous,  wiU  be  found  to  be 
philosophy.  At  any  rate,  it  is  remarkable  that  these 
are  the  two  occasions  of  this  reproach  from  the  apostla 
So  he  wrote  to  the  Corinthians,  who  generally  admired 
rhetoric,  and  had  no  small  confidence,  like  other  Greeks, 
in  their  own  wisdom.  They  did  not  consider  Paul, 
either  in  style  or  topics,  at  all  up  to  the  requirements 
of  the  age — at  least  in  their  midst.  How  cutting  to 
hear  themselves  counted  babes,  and  incapable  of  meat 
for  gTown  men,  so  that,  being  carnal,  they  must  have 
milk  administered  to  them!  The  apostle  had  to  put 
them  down,  and  tell  them,  with  all  their  high-flown 
wisdom,  they  were  such  that  he  could  not  discourse  to 
them  about  the  deep  things  of  God.  This,  no  doubt, 
was  a  painful  surprise  for  them.  So  here  the  same 
apostle  writing  to  the  Hebrew  believers  treats  them  as 
babes,  though  from  a  different  source.  Thus  we  see  two 
errors  totally  opposed  in  appearance,  but  leading  to  the 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  489 

same  conclusion.  Both  unfit  the  soul  for  going  on  with 
God;  and  the  reason  why  they  so  hinder  is  because  they 
are  precisely  the  things  in  which  man  lives.  Whether 
it  he  the  mind  of  man  or  his  natural  religiousness,  either 
idolizes  its  own  object;  and  consequently  blindness 
ensues  to  the  glory  of  Christ. 

Hence  the  apostle  could  not  but  feel  himself  arrested 
by  their  state.  He  shows  also  that  this  very  state  was 
not  merely  one  of  weakness,  but  exposed  them  to  the 
greatest  danger ;  and  this  is  pursued  not  on  the  philo- 
sophical siije  so  much  as  on  that  of  religions  forms. 
"We  have  already  seen  both  at  work  in  Colosse,  as  I 
have  just  pointed  out  the  snare  that  the  wisdom  of  the 
world  was  to  the  Corinthians.  But  on  the  Hebrews  he 
presses  their  excessive  danger  of  abandoning  Christ  for 
religious  traditions.  First  of  all  these  hinder  progress ; 
finally  they  draw  the  soul  aside  from  grace  and  truth ; 
and,  if  the  mighty  power  of  God  does  not  interfere, 
they  ruin.  This  had  been  the  course  of  some :  they 
had  better  be  watchful  that  it  be  not  their  own  case. 
He  begins  gently  with  their  state  of  infantine  feebleness; 
and  then  in  the  beginning  of  the  following  chapter  he  sets 
before  them  the  awful  picture  of  apostasy.  "  For  every 
one  that  useth  milk  is  unskilful  in  the  word  of  right- 
eousness :  for  he  is  a  babe.  But  strong  meat  belongeth 
to  them  that  are  of  full  age,  even  those  who  by  reason 
of  use  have  their  senses  exercised  to  discern  both  good 
and  evil." 

"  Therefore,"  (adds  he,  in  chapter  vi.)  "  leaving  the 
word  of  the  beginning  of  Christ,  let  us  go  on  to  perfec- 
tion." He  proves  that  we  cannot  safely  linger  among 
the  Jewish  elements  when  we  have  heard  and  received 
Christian  truth ;  that  not  merely  blessing,  not  simply 


490  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

power  and  enjoyment,  but  the  only  place  even  of  safety 
is  in  going  on  to  this  full  growth.  To  stop  short  for 
them  was  to  go  back.  Let  those  that  had  heard  of 
Christ  return  to  the  forms  of  Judaism,  and  what  would 
become  of  them  ? 

Then  he  speaks  of  the  various  constituents  that  make 
up  the  word  of  the  beginning  of  Christ  (i.  e.,  Christ 
known  short  of  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension). 
He  would  have  them  advance,  "not  laying  again  a 
foundation  of  repentance  from  dead  works  and  faith  in 
God,  of  a  teaching  of  washings  and  imposition  of  hands, 
and  of  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  eternal  judgment." 
Not  that  these  were  not  true  and  important  in  their 
place :  no  one  disputed  them ;  but  they  were  in  no 
way  the  power,  nor  even  characteristic,  of  Christianity. 
They  go  in  pairs;  and  a  mere  Jew  would  hardly  object ; 
but  what  is  all  this  for  the  Christian?  Why  live  on 
such  points ?  "And  this"  {i. e.  going  on  to  full  growth) 
"will  we  do  if  God  permit.  For  it  is  impossible  [as  to] 
those  once  enlightened,  and  that  tasted  the  heavenly 
gift,  and  were  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
that  tasted  the  good  word  of  God,  and  the  powers  of 
the  age  to  come,  and  fell  away,  to  renew  [them]  again 
to  repentance,  seeing  they  crucify  for  themselves  and 
expose  the  Son  of  God." 

It  is  a  question  of  persons  drawn  into  apostasy  after 
having  enjoyed  every  privilege  and  power  of  the  gospel, 
short  of  a  new  nature  and  that  indwelling  of  the  Spirit 
which  seals  renewed  souls  tiU  the  day  of  redemption. 
For  them  rejecting  the  Messiah  on  earth  under  Juda- 
ism God  gave  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  ;  but  if 
they  gave  up  the  risen  and  glorified  Christ,  there  was 
no  provision  of  grace,  no  third  estate  of  Christ  to  meet 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  491 

the  case.  It  is  not  the  case  of  a  person  surprised  into 
sin ;  nay,  not  even  the  very  awful  case  of  one  who  may 
go  on  in  sin,  sorrowful  to  think  that  it  may  be  so  with 
one  of  whom  we  had  hoped  better  things.  But  here 
there  is  another  evil  altogether.  They  were  those  who 
might  be  ever  so  correct,  moral,  religious,  but  who, 
having  confessed  Jesus  as  the  Christ  after  the  outpour- 
ing of  the  Spirit,  had  lapsed  back  into  Jewish  elements, 
counting  it  perhaps  a  wise  and  wholesome  check  on  a 
too  rapid  advance,  instead  of  seeing  that  in  principle  it 
was  an  abandonment  of  Christ  altogether.  The  full  case 
here  supposed  is  a  thorough  renunciation  of  Christian 
truth. 

The  apostle  describes  a  confessor  with  all  the  crown- 
ing evidences  of  the  gospel,  but  not  a  converted  man. 
Not  a  word  implies  this  either  here  or  in  2  Peter. 
Short  of  this  he  uses  uncommonly  strong  expressions, 
and  purposely  so :  he  sets  forth  the  possession  of  the 
highest  possible  external  privileges,  and  this  in  that 
abundant  form  and  measure  which  God  gave  on  the 
ascension  of  the  Lord.  He  says  it  all,  no  doubt,  about 
the  baptized ;  but  there  is  nothing  about  baptism  as 
the  ancients  would  have  it,  any  more  than,  with  some 
moderns,  the  progressive  steps  of  the  spiritual  life. 
There  is  knowledge,  joy,  privilege,  and  power,  but  no 
spiritual  life.  Enlightenment  is  in  no  sense  the  new 
birth,  nor  does  baptism  in  scripture  ever  mean  illumi- 
nation. It  is  the  effect  of  the  gospel  on  the  dark  soul — 
the  shining  on  the  mind  of  Him  who  is  the  only  true 
light.  But  light  is  not  life;  and  life  is  not  predicated 
here. 

Further,  they  had  "  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift."  It 
is  not  the  Messiah  as  He  was  preached  when  the  dis- 


492  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

ciples  went  about  here  below,  but  Christ  after  He  went 
on  high ;  not  Christ  after  the  flesh,  but  Christ  risen  and 
glorified  above. 

But,  again,  they  were  "  made  partakers  of  the  Holy 
Ghost."  Of  Him  every  one  became  a  partaker,  who 
confessed  the  Lord  and  entered  into  the  house  of 
God.  There  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelt;  and  aU  who  were 
there  became  partakers  after  an  outward  sort  (not 
KOLvaivol,  but  fieroxoi)  of  Him  who  constituted  the  assem- 
bly of  God's  habitation  and  temple.  He  pervaded,  as  it 
were,  the  whole  atmosphere  of  the  house  of  God.  It 
is  not  in  the  least  a  question  of  a  person  individually 
born  of  God,  and  so  sealed  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  There  is 
not  an  allusion  to  either  in  this  case,  but  to  their  taking 
a  share  in  this  immense  privilege,  the  word  not  being 
that  which  speaks  of  a  joint  known  portion,  but  only 
of  getting  a  share. 

Moreover,  they  "tasted  the  good  word  of  God." 
Even  an  unconverted  man  might  feel  strong  emotions, 
and  enjoy  to  a  certain  extent,  more  particularly  those 
that  had  lain  in  JuSaism,  that  dreiry  valley  of  dry 
bones.  What  fare  was  the  gospel  of  grace !  Certainly 
nothing  could  be  more  miserable  than  the  scraps  which 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees  put  before  the  sheep  of  the 
house  of  Israel.  There  is  nothing  to  forbid  the  natural 
mind  from  being  attracted  by  the  delightful  sweetness 
of  the  glad-tidings  which  Christianity  proclaims. 

Lastly,  we  hear  of  "  the  powers  of  the  age  to  come." 
This  seems  more  than  a  general  share  in  the  presence' 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  inhabited  the  house  of  God. 
They  were  positively  endued  with  miraculous  energies 
■^^samples  of  that  which  will  characterize  the  reign  of 
the  Messiah.     Thus  we  may  fairly  give  the  fullest  force 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  493 

to'  every  one  of  these  expressions.  Yet  write  them  out 
ever  so  largely,  they  fall  short  both  of  the  new  birth 
and  of  sealing  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  There  is  every- 
thing, one  may  say,  save  inward  spiritual. life  in  Christ, 
or  the  indwelling  seal  of  it.  That  is  to  say,  one  may 
have  the  very  highest  endowments  and  privileges,  in 
the  way  both  of  meeting  the  mind,  and  also  of  exterior 
power;  and  yet  all  may  be  given  up,  and  the  man 
become  so  much  the  keener  enemy  of  Christ.  Indeed 
such  is  the  natural  result.  It  had  been  the  mournful 
fact  as  to  some.  They  had  fallen  away.  Hence  renewal 
to  repentance  is  an  impossibility,  seeing  they  crucify 
for  themselves  the  Son  ,of  God,  and  put  Him  to  open 
shame. 

Why  impossible?  The  case  supposed  is  of  persons, 
after  the  richest  proof  and  privilege,  turning  aside 
apostates  from  Christ,  in  order  to  take  up  Judaism 
once  more.  As  long  as  that  course  is  pursued,  repent- 
ance there  cannot  be.  Supposing  a  man  had  been  the 
adversary  of  Messiah  here  below,  there  was  still  the 
opening  for  him  of  grace  from  on  high.  It  was  pos- 
sible that  the  very  man  that  had  slighted  Christ  here 
below,  might  have  his  eyes  opened  to  see  and  receive 
Christ  above;  but,  this  abandoned,  there  is  no  fresh 
condition  in  which  He  can  be  presented  to  men.  Those 
who  rejected  Christ  in  all  the  fulness  of  His  grace,  and 
in  the  height  of  glory  in  which  God  had  set  Him  as 
man  before  them, — those  that  rejected  Him  not  merely 
on  earth,  but  in  heaven,  what  was  there  to  fall  back 
on  ?  what  possible  means  to  bring  them  to  a  repentance 
after  that  ?  There  is  none.  "What  is  there  but  Christ 
coming  in  judgment  ?  Now  apostasy,  sooner  or  later, 
must  fall  under  that  judgment.     Such  is  the  force  of 


494  INTEODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

the  comparison.  "  For  land  which  hath  drunk  in  th^ 
rain  that  cometh  oft  upon  it,  and  bringeth  forth  herbs 
meet  for  them  by  whom  it  is  dressed,  receiveth  blessing 
from  God :  but  that  which  beareth  thorns  and  briers  is 
rejected,  and  is  nigh  unto  cursing;  whose  end  is  for 
burning." 

"But  we  are  persuaded  better  things  of  you,  be- 
loved." There  might  seem  too  much  ground  for  fear, 
but  of  the  two  ends  he  was  persuaded  respecting  them 
the  better  things,  and  akin  to  salvation,  if  even  he  thus 
spoke;  for  God  was  not  unrighteous,  and  the  apostle 
too  remembered  traits  of  love  and  devotedness  which 
gave  him  this  confidence  about  them.  But,  says  he, 
"  We  earnestly  desire  that  each  of  you  show  the  same 
diligence  to  the  full  assurance  of  hope  unto  the  end : 
that  ye  be  not  slothful,  but  followers  of  those  who 
through  faith  and  longsuffering  inherit  the  promises." 
Here  is  given  a  remarkable  instance  of  the  true  cha- 
racter of  the  epistle ;  namely,  ttie  combination  of  two 
features  peculiar  to  the  Hebrews.  On  the  one  hand 
are  the  promises,  the  oath  of  God,  taking  up  His  ways 
with  Abraham;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  hope  set 
before  us,  that  enters  into  what  is  within  the  veil.  We 
may  account  for  the  former,  because  the  writer  was 
not  confining  himself  to  that  which  feU  within  the 
proper  sphere  of  his  apostleship.  But,  again,  had  he 
been  writing  according  to  his  ordinary  place,  nothing 
was  more  strictly  his  line  of  testimony  than  to  have 
dwelt  on  our  hope  that  enters  within  the  veil.  The 
peculiarity  of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  lies  in  com- 
bining the  promises  with  Christ's  heavenly  glory.  None 
but  Paul,  I  believe,  would  have  been  suited  to  bring  in 
the  heavenly  portion.  At  the  same  time,  only  in  writing 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBEEWS.  495 

to  the  Hebrews  could  Paul  have  brought  in  the  Old 
Testament  hopes  as  he  has  done. 

Another  point  of  interest  which  may  be  remarked 
here  is  the  intimation  at  the  end  compared  with  the 
beginning  of  the  chapter.  We  have  seen  the  highest 
external  privileges — not  only  the  mind  of  man,  as  far 
as  it  could,  enjoying  the  truth,  but  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  making  the  man,  at  any  rate,  an  instrument 
of  power,  even  though  it  be  to  his  own  shame  and 
deeper  condemnation  afterwards.  In  short,  man  may 
have  the  utmost  conceivable  advantage,  and  the  greatest 
external  power  even  of  the  Spirit  of  God  Himself;  and 
yet  all  comes  to  nothing.  But  the  very  same  chapter, 
which  affirms  and  warns  of  the  possible  failure  of  every 
advantage,  shows  us  the  weakest  faith  that  the  whole 
New  Testament  describes  coming  into  the  secure  pos- 
session of  the  best  blessings  of  grace.  Who  but  God 
could  have  dictated  that  this  same  chapter  (Heb.  vi.) 
should  depict  the  weakest  faith  that  the  New  Testa- 
ment ever  acknowledges  ?  What  can  look  feebler,  what 
more  desperately  pressed,  than  a  man  fleeing  for  refuge  ? 
It  is  not  a  soul  as  coming  to  Jesus ;  it  is  not  as  one 
whom  the  Lord  meets  and  blesses  on  the  spot;  but 
here  is  a  man  hard  pushed,  fleeing  for  very  life  (evi- 
dently a  figure  drawn  from  the  blood-stained  fleeing 
from  the  avenger  of  blood),  yet  eternally  saved  and 
blessed  according  to  the  acceptance  of  Christ  on  high. 

There  was  no  reality  found  to  be  in  those  so  highly 
favoured  of  the  early  verses ;  and  therefore  it  was  (as 
there  was  no  conscience  before  God,  no  sense  of  sin, 
no  cleaving  to  Christ)  that  everything  came  to  nought; 
but  here  there  is  the  fruit  of  faith,  feeble  indeed  and 
sorely  tried,  but  in  the  light  that  appreciates  the  judg- 


496  mTRODUCTOEY  LECTtTEES. 

ment  of  God  against  sin.  Hence,  although  it  he  only 
fleeing  in  an  agony  of  soul  to  refuge,  what  is  it  that 
God  gives  to  one  in  such  a  state?  Strong  consola- 
tion, and  that  which  enters  within  the  veil..  Im- 
possible that  the  Son  should  be  shaken  from  His  place 
on  the  throne  of  God :  so  is  it  that  the  least  believer 
should  come  to  any  hurt  whatever.  The  weakest  of 
saints  more  than  conqueror  is ;  and  therefore  the  apostle, 
having  brought  us  to  this  glorious  point  of  conclusion, 
as  well  as  shown  us  the  awful  danger  of  men  giving 
up  such  a  Christ  as  that  which  we  have  presented  to 
us  in  this  epistle,  now  finds  himself  free  to  unfold  the 
character  of  His  priesthood,  as  well  as  the  resulting 
position  of  the  Christian.  But  on  these  I  hope  to  enter, 
if  the  Lord  will,  on  another  occasion. 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  497 


HEBREWS. 

TII. XIII. 

The  apostle  now  resumes  his  great  theme,  Christ  called 
a  Priest  of  God  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec. 
He  alludes,  iu  the  beginning  of  our  chapter,  to  the 
historical  facts  of  Genesis.  We  must  bear  in  mind 
that  Melchisedec  was  a  man  like  any  other.  There  is 
no  ground,  in  my  judgment,  for  the  thought  of  anything 
mysterious  in  the  facts  as  to  his  person.  The  manner 
in  which  scripture  introduces  him  is  such  as  to  furnish 
a  very  striking  type  of,  Christ.  There  is  no  necessity 
for  considering  anything  else,  but  that  the  Spirit  of 
God,  forecasting  the  future,  was  pleased  to  conceal  the 
line  of  Melchisedec's  parentage,  or  descendants  if  any, 
of  their  birth  or  death.  He  is  suddenly  ushered  upon  the 
scene.  He  has  not  been  heard  of  by  the  reader  before ; 
he  is  never  heard  of  again  in  history.  Thus  the  only 
time  when  he  comes  into  notice  he  is  acting  in  the 
double  capacity  here  spoken  of :  King  of  righteouness 
_  as  to  his  name.  King  of  Salem  as  to  his  place,  blessing 
Abraham  on  his  return  from  the  victory  over  the  kings 
of  the  Gentiles  in  the  name  of  the  Most  High  God,  and 
blessing  the  Most  High  God  the  possessor  of  heaven 
earth  in  the  name  of  Abraham. 

The  apostle  does  not  dwell  on  the  detailed  application 
K  K 


498  INTSODUCTORY  LECTURES.   . 

of  His  Melchisedec  priesthood,  as  to  the  object  and 
character  of  its  exercise.  He  does  not  draw  attention 
here  to  the  account,  that  there  was  only  blessing  from 
man  to  God,  and  from  God  to  man.  He  does  not 
reason  from  the  singular  circumstance  that  there  was 
no  incense,  any  more  than  sacrifice.  He  alludes  to 
several  facts,  but  leaves  them.  The  point  to  which  he 
directs  the  reader  is  the  evident  and  surpassing  dignity 
of  the  case — the  unity  too  of  the  Priest  and  the  priest- 
hood ;  and  this  for  an  obvious  reason. 

The  time  for  the  proper  exercise  of  the  Melchisedec 
priesthood  of  Christ  is  not  yet  arrived.  The  millennial 
day  will  see  this.  The  battle  which  Abraham  fought, 
the  first  recorded  one  in  scripture,  is  the  type  of  the 
last  battle  of  this  age.  It  is  the  conflict  which  intro- 
duces the  reign  of  peace  founded  on  righteousness, 
when  God  will  manifest  Himself  as  the  Most  High 
God,  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth.  This  is,  as  is  well 
known,  the  special  characteristic  of  the  millennium. 
Heaven  and  earth  have  not  been  united,  nor  have  they 
been  in  fact  possessed  for  the  blessing  of  man  by  the 
power  of  God,  since  sin  severed  between  the  earth  and 
that  which  is  above  it,  and  the  prince  of  the  power 
of  the  air  perverted  all,  so  that  what  should  have 
been,  according  to  God's  nature  and  counsels,  the  source 
of  every  blessing,  became  rather  the  point  from  which 
the  guilty  coiiscierice  of  man  cannot  but  look  for  judg- 
ment. Heaven,  therefore,  by  man's  own  conviction,, 
must  be  arrayed  in  justice  against  earth  because  of  sin. 
But  the  day  is  coming  when  Israel  shall  be  no  more 
rebellious,  and  the  nations  shall  be  no  longer  deceived, 
and  Satan  shall  be  dethroned  from  his  bad  eminence, 
and  all  idols  shall  flee  apace,  and  God  shall  be  left  the 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  499 

undisputed  and  evidently  Most  High,  the  possessor  of 
heaven  and  earth.  In  that  day  it  will  be  the  joy  of 
of  Him  who  is  the  true  Melchisedec,  to  bring  out  not 
the  mere  signs,  but  the  reality  of  all  that  can  be  the 
stay  and  comfort  of  man,  and  all  that  sustains  and 
cheers,  the  patent  proof  of  the  beneficent  might  of 
God,  when  "  no  good  thing  will  he  withhold  from  them 
that  walk  uprightly." 

But  meanwhile,  confessedly,  the  Spirit  of  God  directs 
attention,  not  to  the  exercise,  but  to  the  order  of  the 
Melchisedec  Priest.  If  we  have  to  wait  for  the  exercise 
at  a  future  day,  the  order  is  as  true  and  plain  now  as 
it  ever  can  be.  Indeed,  at  no  time  will  its  order  be 
more  apparent  than  at  present;  for  I  think  there  can 
be  little  doubt  to  any  unbiassed  Christian  who  enters 
with  intelligence  into  the  Old  Testament  prophecies, 
th*  there  is  yet  to  be  an  earthly  sanctuary,  and,  con- 
sequently, earthly  priests  and  sacrifices  for  Israel  in 
their  own  land ;  that  the  sons  of  Zadok,  as  Ezekiel  lets 
us  know,  will  perpetuate  the  line  at  the  time  when  the 
Lord  shall  be  owned  to  be  there,  in  the  person  of  the 
true  David  their  King,  blessing  His  people  long  dis- 
tressed but  now  joyful  on  earth.  But  this  time  is  not 
yet  come.  There  is  nothing  to  divert  the  heart  from 
Christ,  the  great  High  Priest  in  the  heavens.  No  doubt 
all  will  be  good  and  right  in  its  due  season  then. 
Meanwhile  Christianity  gives  the  utmost  force  to  every 
type  and  truth  of  God.  The  undivided  place  of  Christ 
is  more  fully  witnessed  now,  when  there  are  no  others 
to  occupy  the  thought  or  to  distract  the  heart  from 
Him,  as  seen  by  faith  in  glory  on  high. 

Hence  the  apostle  applies  the  type  distinctly  now,  as 
far  as  the  "order"  of  the  priesthood  goes.  We  hear  first 

K    K    2 


500  INTRODUCTORY  LEOTUBES. 

of  Melohisedec  (King  of  righteousness),  next  of  Salem 
or  peace ;  without  father,  withoiit  mother,  without 
genealogy.  Unlike  others  in  Genesis,  neither  parents 
are  recorded,  nor  is  there  any  hint  of  descent  from 
him.  In  short,  there  is  no  mention  of  family  or  an- 
cestors, "having  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end  of 
life" — neither  is  recorded  in  scripture; — "hut  made  like 
unto  the  Son  of  God,  abideth  a  priest  continually." 

The  next  point  proved  is  the  indisputable  supe- 
riority of  the  Melchisedec  priesthood  to  that  of  Aaron, 
of  which  the  Jews  naturally  boasted.  After  all,  the 
telling  fact  was  before  them  that,  whoevet  wrote  the 
epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  it  was  not  a  Christian  who 
wrote  the  book  of  Genesis,  but  Moses ;  and  Moses 
bears  witness  to  the  homage  which  Abram  rendered  to 
Melchisedec  by  the  payment  of  tithes.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  priests,  Aaron's  family,  among  the  son* of 
Levi,  "have  a  commandment  to  take  tithes  of  the 
people  according  to  the  law,  that  is  of  their  brethren, 
though  they  come  out  of  the  loins  of  Abraham."  Thus 
Melchisedec,  "whose  descent  is  not  of  Aaron  nor  of 
Levi,"  like  Jesus,  "received  tithes  of  Abraham,  and 
blessed  him  that  had  the  promises !"  "And  without  all 
contradiction  the  less  is  blessed  of  the  better."  No 
argument  could  be  more  distinct  or  conclusive.  The 
other  descendants  of  Abraham  honoured  the  house  of 
Aaron  as  Levitical  priests ;  but  Abraham  himself,  and 
so  Levi  himself,  and  of  course  Aaron,  in  his  loins 
honoured  Melchisedec.  Thus  another  and  a  higher  priest- 
hood was  incontestably  acknowledged  by  the  father  of 
the  faithful.  ''And,  as  I  may  so  say,  Levi  also,  who  re- 
ceiveth  tithes,  payed  tithes  in  Abraham.  For  he  was  yet 
in  the  loins  of  his  father,  when  Melchisedec  met  him." 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  501 

This  leads  to  another  point;  for  the  change  of  the 
priesthood  imports  a  change  of  the  law.  "  If  therefore 
perfection  were  by  the  Levitical  priesthood,  (for  under 
it  the  people  received  the  law,)  what  further  need  was 
there  that  another  priest  should  rise  after  the  order  of 
Melchisedec,  and  not  be  called  after  the  order  of 
Aaron?"  This  change  was  clearly  taught  in  the  book 
of  Psalms.  It  was  not  only  that  there  had  been  at  the 
beginning  such  a  priest,  but  that  fact  became  the  form 
of  a  glorious  anticipation  which  the  Holy  Ghost  holds 
out  for  the  latter  day.  Psalm  ex.,  which,  as  all  the  Jews 
owned,  spoke,  throughout  its  greater  part  at  least,  of 
the  Messiah  and  His  times,  shows  us  Jehovah  Himself 
— by  an  oath,  which  is  afterwards  reasoned  on — sig- 
nifying that  another  priest  should  arise  after  a  different 
order  from  that  of  Aaron.  "  The  priesthood  being 
changed,  there  is  made  of  necessity  a  change  also 
of  the  law.  For  he  of  whom  these  things  are  spoken 
pertaineth  to  another  tribe,  of  which  no  man  gave  at- 
tendance at  the  altar.  For  it  is  evident  that  our  Lord 
sprang  out  of  Juda;  of  which  tribe  Moses  spake  no- 
thing concerning  priesthood.  And  it  is  yet  far  more 
evident :  for  that  after  the  similitude  of  Melchisedec 
there  ariseth  another  priest."  Thus  the  Pentateuch  and 
the  Psalms  bore  their  double  testimony  to  a  Priest 
superior  to  the  Aaronic. 

Further,  that  this  Priest  was  to  be  a  living  one,  in 
some  most  singular  manner  to  be  an  undying  Priest, 
•was  made  evident  beyond  question,  because  in  that 
Psalm  it  is  said,  "He  testifieth.  Thou  art  a  priest  for 
ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec."  This  was  also 
a  grand  point  of  distinction.  Where  could  they  find 
such  a  Priest?  where  one  competent  to  take  up  that 


502  INTKODUCTOEY  LECTUEKS. 

word  "for  ever"?  Such  was  the  Priest  of  whom  God 
spoke.  "  For,"  says  he,  "  there  is  verily  a  disannulling 
of  the  commandment  going  before  for  the  weakness  and 
unprofitableness  thereof  (for  the  law  made  nothing  per- 
fect)." He  uses  in  the  most  skilful  manner  the  change 
of  the  priest,  in  order  to  bring  along  with  it  a  change 
of  the  law,  the  whole  Levitical  system  passing  away — 
"but  [there  is]  the  bringing  in  of  a  better  hope."  Sach 
is  the  true  sense  of  the  passage.  "  For  the  law  made 
nothing  perfect "  is  a  parenthesis.  By  that  hope,  then, 
"  we  draw  nigh  unto  God." 

But  again  the  solemn  notice  of  Jehovah's  oath  is 
enlarged  on.  "Inasmuch  as  not  without  an  oath  he 
was  made  priest :  (for  those  priests  were  made  without 
an  oath  " — no  oath  ushers  in  the  sons  of  Aaron — "  but 
he  with  an  oath  by  him  that  said  as  to  him.  The  Lord 
sware  and  will  not  repent,  Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever 
after  the  order  of  Melchisedec  :)  by  so  much  was  Jesus 
made  a  surety  of  a  better  covenant." 

And,  finally,  he  sums  up  the  superiority  of  Christ 
in  this,  that  "they  truly  were  many  priests,  because 
they  were  not  suffered  to  continue  by  reason  of  death : 
but  he,  because  of  his  continuing  for  ever,  hath  the 
priesthood  intransmissible."  There  was  but  one  such 
Priest. 

In  every  point  of  view,  therefore,  the  superiority  of 
the  Melchisedec  priest  was  demonstrated  over  the  line 
of  Aaron.  The  fulfilment  of  the  Melchisedec  order  is 
found  in  Christ,  and  in  Him  alone.  The  Jews  them- 
selves acknowledge  that  Psalm  ex.  must  be  fulfilled  in 
Christ,  in  His  quality  of  Messiah.  Nothing  but  stupid, 
obstinate,  unbelieving  prejudice,  after  the  appearance  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  could  have  suggested  any  other  applica- 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  503 

tion  of  the  Psalm.  Before  Jesus  came,  there  was  no 
question  of  it  among  the  Jews.  So  little  was  it  a  ques- 
tion, that  our  Lord  could  appeal  to  its  acknowledged 
meaning,  and  press  the  difficulty  His  person  created  for 
unhelief  By  their  own  confession  the  application  of 
that  Psalm  was  to  the  Messiah,  and  the  very  point  that 
Jesus  urged  upon  the  Jews  of  His  day  was  this — how, 
if  He  were  David's  Son,  as  they  agreed,  could  He  be 
his  Lord,  as  the  Psalmist  David  confesses  ?  This  shows 
that,  beyond  question,  among  the  Jews  of  that  day. 
Psalm  ex.  was  understood  to  refer  to  the  Christ  alone. 
But  if  so.  He  was  the  Priest  after  the  order  of  Mel- 
chisedec,  as  well  as  seated  at  Jehovah's  riglit  hand — a 
cardinal  truth  of  Christianity,  the  import  of  which  the 
Jews  did  not  receive  in  their  conception  of  the  Messiah. 
Hence  throughout  this  epistle  the  utmost  stress  is  laid 
on  His  being  exalted  in  heaven.  Yet  there  was  no 
excuse  for  a  difficulty  on  this  score.  Their  own  Psalm, 
in  its  grand  prophetic  sweep,  and  looking  back  on  the 
law,  pointed  to  the  place  in  which  Christ  is  now  seated 
above;  and  where  it  is  of  necessity  He  should  be,  in 
order  to  give  Christianity  its  heavenly  character. 

The  doctrine  follows:  "Wherefore  he  is  able  also 
to  save  them  to  the  uttermost."  He  does  not  mean 
by  this  the  worst  of  sinners,  but  saving  believers  to 
the  uttermost,  bringing  through  every  difficulty  those 
"that  come  unto  God  by  him."  A  priest  is  always  in 
connection  with  the  people  of  God,  never  as  such  with 
those  that  are  outside,  but  a  positive  known  relation 
with  God — "  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  them.  For  such  an  high  priest  became  us,  who  is 
holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners,  and 
made  higher  than  the  heavens."   This  statement  is  so 


504  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

much  the  more  remarkable,  because  in  the  beginning  of 
this  epistle  he  had  pointed  out  what  became  God.  It 
became  Him  that  Christ  should  suffer.  It  became  us 
to  have  a  Priest,  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  made  higher 
than  the  heavens." 

What  infinite  thoughts  are  those  that  God's  word 
gives ;  as  glorifying  for  Himself  as  elevating  for  our 
souls !  Yet  who  beforehand  would  have  anticipated 
either  ?  It  became  God  that  Christ  should  go  down  to 
the  uttermost ;  it  became  ms  that  He  should  be  exalted 
to  the  highest.  And  why  ?  Because  Christians  are  a 
heavenly  people,  and  none  but  a  heavenly  Priest  would 
suit  them.  It  became  God  to  give  Him  to  die;  for 
such  was  our  estate  by  sin  that  nothing  short  of  His 
atoning  death  could  deliver  us;  but,  having  delivered 
us,  God  would  make  us  to  be  heavenly.  None  but  a 
heavenly  Priest  would  suffice  for  the  counsels  He  has 
in  hand.  "  Who  needeth  not  daily,"  therefore  says  He, 
"  as  those  high  priests,  to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his 
own  sins,  and  then  for  the  people's/'  He  always  keeps 
up  the  evidence  of  the  utter  inferiority  of  the  Jewish 
priest,  as  well  as  of  the  accompanying  state  of  things, 
to  that  of  Christianity.  "  For  this  he  did  once,  when  he 
offered  up  himself  For  the  law  maketh  men  priests 
which  have  infirmity ;  but  the  word  of  the  oath  which 
was  since  the  law,  a  Son  perfected  (or  consecrated)  for 
ever."  This  was  the  very  difficulty  that  the  Jew  pleaded; 
but  now,  in  point  of  fact,  it  was  only  what  the  Psalm 
of  Messiah  insisted  on,  the  law  itself  bearing  witness 
of  a  priest  superior  to  any  under  the  law.  Holy  Scrip- 
ture then  demanded  that  a  man  should  sit  down  at  the 
right  hand  of  God.  It  was  accomplished  in  Christ, 
exalted  as  the  great  Melchisedec  in  heaven.    If  they 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  505 

■were  Abraham's  children,  and  not  his  seed  only,  surely 
they  would  honour  Him. 

Hence,  in  chapter  viii.,  the  apostle  draws  his  con- 
clusion. "  Now  of  the  things  that  are  being  spoken  of 
this  is  a  summary :  We  have  such  an  high  priest,  who 
is  set  down  on  [the]  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  the 
Majesty  in  the  heavens;  a  minister  of  the  holies,  and 
of  the  true  tabernacle,  which  the  Lord  pitched,  and  not 
man."  In  Hebrews  i.  it  is  written,  that  "having  by 
himself  made  purification  of  our  sins,  he  sat  down  on 
the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high."  The  point 
there  is  personal  glory.  No  other  seat  was  suitable  to 
such  a  One.  He  sat  down  there  as  of  His  own  right 
and  title,  but  nevertheless  making  a  part  of  His  divine 
glory  to  be  witnessed  in,  as  indeed  His  person  was 
necessary  to  make  His  blood  efficacious  to  the  purging 
of  our  sins.  But  in  chapter  viii.  He  sits  there  not 
merely  as  the  proof  of  the  perfectness  with  which  He 
has  purged  our  sins  by  Himself  alone,  but  as  the  Priest; 
and  accordingly  it  is  not  merely  said  "on  high,"  but 
"  in  the  heavens."  .  Such  is  the  emphasis.  Accordingly 
observe  the  change  of  expression.  He  has  been  proved 
to  be  a  divine  person,  and  the  true  royal  priest  of  whom 
not  Aaron  only  but  Melchisedec  was  the  type.  Hence 
the  right  hand  of  the  throne  is  introduced,  but,  besides, 
"of  the  Majesty  in  the  heavens."  So  that,  let  the  Jews 
say  what  they  might,  there  was  only  found  what  an- 
swered to  their  own  scriptures,  and  what  proved  the 
incontestable  superiority  of  the  great  Priest  whom  Mel- 
chisedec shadowed  out,  and  of  whom  it  was  now  for  the 
Christian  justly  to  boast.  He  is  "minister  of  the  holies 
and  of  the  true. tabernacle,  which  the  Lord  pitched,  and 


506  INTRODUCTOEY  LECTUKES. 

not  of  man."  Wow  the  tone  becomes  bolder  with  them, 
and  shows  clearly  that  the  Jew  had  but  an  empty  form, 
a  foreshadow  of  value  once,  but  now  superseded  by  the 
true  antitype  in  the  heavens. 

Here,  too,  he  begins  to  introduce  what  a  priest  does, 
that  is,  the  exercise  of  his  functions.  "  For  every  high 
priest  is  constituted  to  offer  gifts  and  sacrifices :  where- 
fore it  is  of  necessity  that  this  man,  have  somewhat  also 
to  offer.  For  if  he  were  on  earth,  he  should  not  even 
be  a  priest,  seeing  that  there  are  priests  that  offer  gifts 
according  to  the  law :  who  serve  the  representation  and 
shadow  of  heavenly  things,  as  Moses  was  oracularly 
told  when  about  to  make  the  tabernacle:  for.  See,  saith 
he,  that  thou  make  all  things  according  to  the  pattern 
that  was  shown  to  thee  in  the  mountain.  But  now  hath 
he  obtained  a  more  excellent  ministry,  by  how  much 
also  he  is  the  mediator  of  a  better  covenant.".  Thus, 
before  he  enters  on  the  subject  of  the  sacrifices  at  length, 
he  takes  notice  of  the  covenants,  and  thence  he  draws  a 
conclusion  from  the  well-known  prophecy  in  Jeremiah, 
where  God  declares  that  the  days  were  coming  when 
He  would  make  a  new  covenant.  What  is  the  inference 
from  that  ?  He  presses  the  fact  of  a  new  principle,  as 
well  as  an  institution  established  on  better  promises, 
upon  the  Jews.  For  why  should  there  be  a  new 
covenant,  unless  because  the  first  was  faulty  or  in- 
effectual ?  What  was  the  necessity  for  a  new  covenant 
if  the  old  one  would  do  as  well  ?  According  to  the 
Jews  it  was  quite  impossible,  if  God  had  once  established 
a  covenant.  He  could  ever  change;  but  the  apostle  re- 
plies that  their  own  prophet  is  against  their  theory., 
Jeremiah  positively  declares  that  God  will  make  a  new 
covenant.     He  argues  that  the  word  "new"  puts  the 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  507 

other  out  of  date,  and  this  to  make  room  for  a  better. 
A  new  covenant  shows  that  the  other  must  have  there- 
by become  old,  and  therefore  is  decaying  and  ready  to 
vanish  away. 

All  this  is  a  gradual  undermining  the  wall  until  the 
whole  structure  is  overthrown.  He  is  labouring  for 
this,  and  with  divine  skill  accomplishes  it,  by  the  tes- 
timonies of  their  own  law  and  prophets.  He  does 
not  require  to  add  more  to  the  person  and  facts  of 
Christ  than  the  Old  Testament  furnishes,  to  prove  the 
certainty  of  Christianity  and  all  its  characteristic  truths 
with  which  he  occupies  himself  in  this  epistle.  I  say 
not  absolutely  all  its  great  truths.  Were  it  a  question  of 
the  mystery  of  Christ  the  Head,  and  of  the  church  His 
body,  this  would  not  be  proved  from  the  Old  Testament, 
which  does  not  reveal  it  at  all.  It  was  hid  in  God  from 
ages  and  generations.  There  are  types  that  suit  the 
mystery  when  it  is  revealed,  but  of  themselves  they 
never  could  make  it  known,  though  illustrating  par- 
ticular parts  when  it  is.  But  whether  we  look  at  the 
heavenly  supremacy  of  Christ  over  the  universe,  which 
is  the  highest  part  of  the  mystery,  or  at  the  church 
associated  with  Him  as  His  body,  composed  of  both 
Jew  and  Gentile,  where  all  distinction  is  gone,  no  wit 
of  man  ever  did  or  could  possibly  draw  this  beforehand 
from  the  Old  Testament.  Indeed,  not  being  revealed 
of  old,  according  to  the  apostle,  it  is  altogether  a  mis- 
take to  go  to  the  Old  Testament  for  that  truth. 

Hence  in  Hebrews  we  never  find  the  body  of  Christ  as 
such  referred  to.  We  have  the  church,  but  even  when  the 
expression  "church"  occurs,  it  is  the  church  altogether 
vaguely,  as  in  chapter  ii.  12,  or  viewed  in  the  units  that 
compose  it — not  at  all  in  its  unity.     It  is  the  assembly 


508  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

composed  of  certain  individuals  that  make  it  up,  re- 
garded either  as  brethren,  as  in  the  second  chapter  ("In 
the  midst  of  the  church  will  I  sing  praise  unto  thee"), 
or  as  the  church  of  the  first-born  ones,  as  in  chapter  xii., 
persons  who  drew  their  title  from  Christ  the  first-born 
Heir.  There  we  have  those  that  compose  the  church, 
in  allusion  to  Christ,  contrasted  with  the  position  of 
Israel  as  a  nation,  because  of  the  nearness  which  they 
possess  by  the  grace  of  Christ  known  on  high. 

It  may  be  observed,  too,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  appears 
but  little  in  this  epistle.  Not  of  course  that  one  denies 
that  He  has  His  own  proper  place,  for  all  is  perfect  as 
to  each  person  of  the  Trinity  and  all  else,  but  never  to 
this  end.  Tor  a  similar  reason  we  never  find  life  treated 
in  the  epistle,  nor  righteousness.  It  is  not  a  question 
of  justification  here.  We  hear  of  sanctification  often, 
but  even  what  is  thus  spoken  of  throughout  is  rather 
in  connexion  with  separation  to  God  and  the  work  of 
Christ,  than  the  continuous  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
except,  as  far  as  I  remember,  in  one  practical  passage — 
"  Follow  peace  with  all  men,  and  holiness,  without  which 
no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  In  other  eases  the  epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  speaks  of  sanctification  by  God's  call, 
and  Christ's  blood.  I  refer  to  the  fact  just  to  exemplify 
on  the  one  hand  the  true  bearing  of  the  epistle,  and 
what  I  believe  will  be  discovered  in  it,  and  on  the  other 
hand  to  guard  against  the  mistake  of  importing  into  it, 
or  trying  to  extract  from  it,  what  is  not  there. 

Chapter  ix.  brings  us  into  the  types  of  the  Leviti- 
cal  ritual,  priesthood  and  sacrifice.  Before  developing 
these,  the  apostle  refers  to  the  tabernacle  itself  in  which 
these  sacrifices  were  offered.  "  There  was  a  tabernacle 
made;,  the  first,  wherein  was  the  candlestick,  and  the 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  509 

table,  and  the  shewbread;  which  is  called  holy.  And 
after  the  second  veil,  the  tabernacle  which  is  called 
holy  of  holies ;  which  had  the  golden  censer,  and  the 
ark  of  the  covenant  overlaid  round  about  with  gold." 
Carefully  observe  that  it  is  the  tabernacle,  never  the 
temple.  The  latter  is  not  referred  to,  because  it  repre- 
sents the  millennial  glory;  the  former  is,  because  it 
finds  its  proper  fulfilment  in  that  which  is  made  good 
in  the  Christian  scheme  now.  This  supposes  the  people 
of  God  not  actually  settled  in  the  land,  but  still  pilgrims 
and  strangers  on  the  earth;  and  the  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,  we  have  already  seen,  looks  emphatically  and 
exclusively  at  the  people  of  God  as  not  yet  passed 
out  of  the  wilderness ;  never  as  brought  into  the  land, 
though  it  might  be  on  the  verge ;  just  entering,  but  not 
actually  entered.  There  remainis,  therefore,  a  sabbath- 
keeping  for  the  people  of  God.  Thither  they  are  to  be 
brought,  and  there  are  means  for  the  road  to  keep  us 
moving  onward.  But  meanwhile  we  have  not  yet  entered 
on  the  rest  of  God.  It  remains.  Such  is  a  main  point, 
not  of  chapter  iv.  only,  but  of  the  epistle.  It  was  the 
more  urgent  to  insist  on  it,  because  the  Jews,  like 
others,  would  like  to  have  been  settled  in  rest  here 
and  now.  This  is  natural  and  pleasant  to  the  flesh, 
no  doubt ;  but  it  is  precisely  what  opposes  the  whole 
object  of  God  in  Christianity,  since  Christ  went  on 
high  till  He  come  again,  and  therefore  the  path  of 
faith  to  which  the  children  of  God  are  called. 

Accordingly,  then,  as  suiting  this  pilgrim-path  of  the 
Christian,  the  tabernacle  is  referred  to,  and  not  the 
temple.  And  this  is  the  more  remarkable,  because  his 
language  is  essentially  of  the  actual  state  of  what  was 
going  on  in  the  temple;  but  he  always  calls  it  the 


510  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

tabernacle.  In  truth,  the  substratum  was  the  same, 
and  therefore  it  was  not  only  quite  lawful  so  to  call  it, 
but  if  he  had  not,  the  design  would  have  been  marred. 
But  this  shows  the  main  object  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in 
directing  us  for  the  type  that  applies  to  the  believer 
now  to  an  unsettled  pilgrim- condition,  not  to  Israel 
established  in  the  land  of  promise. 

To  what,  then,  is  the  allusion  to  the  sanctuary 
applied?  To  mark  that  as  yet  the  veil  was  unrent. 
"Into  the  second  [goes]  the  high  priest  alone  once 
every  year,  not  without  blood,  which  he  offered  for 
himself,  and  for  the  errors  of  the  people :  the  Holy 
Ghost  this  signifying,  that  the  way  of  the  holies 
was  not  yet  made  manifest,  while  as  yet  the  first 
tabernacle  was  standing :  which  is  a  figure  for  the 
present  time,  according  to  which  are  offered  both  gifts 
and  sacrifices  that  could  not,  as  pertaining  to  the 
conscience,  make  him  that  did  the  religious  service 
perfect;  which  stood  only  in  meats  and  drinks,  and 
divers  washings,  and  carnal  ordinances,  imposed  on 
them  until  the  time  of  reformation."  With  all  this 
Christianity  is  contrasted.  "But  Christ  being  come  a 
high  priest  of  good  things  to  come,  by  the  better  and 
more  perfect  tabernacle,  not  made  with  hands,  that 
is,  not  of  this  creation,  nor  by  blood  of  goats  and 
calves,  but  by  his  own  blood  entered  in  once  into  the 
holies,  having  obtained  eternal  redemption."  Here  the 
words  "for  us"  had  better  be  left  out.  They  really  mar 
the  sense,  because  they  draw  attention  not  to  the  truth 
in  itself  so  much  as  its  application  to  us,  which  is  not 
the  point  in  chapter  ix.,  but  rather  of  chapter  x.  Here 
it  is  the  grand  truth  itself  in  its  own  character.  What 
is  the  value,   the  import,  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS.  511 

viewed  according  to  God,  and  as  bearing  on  His  ways  ? 
This  is  the  fact.  Christ  has  gone  into  the  presence  of 
God,  "  having  obtained  eternal  redemption."  For  whom 
it  may  be  is  another  thing,  of  which  he  wUl  speak 
by-and-by.  Meanwhile  we  are  told  that  He  has  obtained 
(not  a  temporary,  but)  "  eternal  redemption."  It  is  that 
which  infinitely  exceeds  the  deliverance  out  of  Egypt, 
or  any  ceremonial  atonement  ever  wrought  by  a  high 
priest  for  Israel.  Christ  has  obtained  redemption,  and 
this  is  witnessed  by  the  token  of  the  veil  rent  from  top 
to  bottom.  The  unrent  veil  bore  evidence  on  its  front 
that  man  could  not  yet  draw  near  into  the  holiest — 
that  hfe  had  no  access  into  the  presence  of  God.  This 
is  of  the  deepest  importance.  It  did  not  matter  whe- 
ther it  was  a  priest  or  an  Israelite.  A  priest,  as  such, 
could  no  more  draw  near  into  the  presence  of  God  in 
the  holiest  than  any  of  the  common  people.  Chris- 
tianity is  stamped  by  this,  that,  in  virtue  of  the  blood 
of  Christ,  once  for  all  for  every  believer  the  way  is 
made  manifest  into  the  holiest  of  all.  The  veil  is 
rent :  the  believer  can  draw  near,  as  is  shown  in  the 
next  chapter.;  but  meanwhile  it  is  merely  pointed  out 
that  there  is  no  veil  now,  eternal  redemption  being 
obtained. 

Thus  does  the  apostle  reason  on  it :  "For  if  the  blood 
of  bulls  and  goats,  and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling 
the  unclean,  sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh" 
(which  the  Jew  would  not  contest) :  "  how  much  more 
shall  the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit 
offered  himself  without  spot  to  God,  purge  your  con- 
science from  dead  works  to  do  religious  service  to  the 
livino'  God  ?  And  for  this  cause  he  is  mediator  of  the 
new  covenant,  that  by  means  of  death,  for  redemption 


512  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

of  the  transgressions  under  the  first  covenant,  the 
called  might  receive  the  promise  of  the  eternal  inherit- 
ance." Thus  the  power  of  vrhat  Christ  had  wrought 
was  now  brought  in  for  future  ends  ;  it  was  not  merely 
retrospective,  but  above  all  in  present  efficacy  while  the 
Jews  refuse.  Christ. 

The  allusion  in  the  last  clause  to  the  eternal  inherit- 
ance (for  everything  is  eternal  in  the  Hebrews,  standing 
in  decided  contrast  with  Jewish  things  which  were  but 
for  a  season)  leads  the  Holy  Spirit  to  take  up  the  other 
meaning  of  the  same  word,  which  was  and  is  rightly 
enough  translated  covenant.  At  first  sight  every  one 
may  have  been  surprised,  especially  those  that  read  the 
New  Testament  in  the  language  in  which  God  wrote  it, 
at  the  double  meaning  of  the  word  which  is  here  trans- 
lated "covenant."  It  (pia.6-^icr)J  means  "testament"  as 
well  as  "  covenant."  In  point  of  fact  the  English  trans- 
lators did  not  know  what  to  make  of  the  matter.;  for 
they  give  sometimes  one,  sometimes  the  other,  without 
any.  apparent  reason  for  it,  except  to  vary  the  phrase. 
In  my  judgment  it  is  correct  to  translate  it  both  ways, 
never  arbitrarily,  but  according  to  context.  There  is 
nothing  capricious  about  the  usage.  There  are  certain 
surroundings  which  indicate  to  the  competent  eye 
when  the  word  "  covenant "  is  right  and  when  the  word 
"  testament "  is  better. 

It  may  then  be  stated  summarily,  in  few  words, 
unless  I  am  greatly  mistaken,  that  the  word  should 
always  be  translated  "covenant"  in  every  part  of  the 
New  Testament,  except  in  these  two  verses ;  namely, 
Hebrews  ix.  16,  17.  If,  therefore,  when  you  find  the 
word  "testament"  anywhere  else  in  the  authorized 
version,  you  turn  it  into  "covenant,"  in   my  opinion 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  513 

you  will  not  do  amiss.  If  in  these  two  verses  we  bear 
in  mind  that  it  really  means  "  testament,''  growing  out 
of  the  previous  mention  of  the  "  inheritance,"  I  am  per- 
suaded that  you  will  have  better  understanding  of  the 
argument.  In  short,  the  word  in  itself  may  mean  either; 
but  this  is  no  proof  that  it  may  indifferently  or  without 
adequate  reason  be  translated  both  ways.  The  fact  is, 
that  love  of  uniformity  may  mislead  some,  as  love  of 
variety  misled  our  English  translators  too  often.  It  is 
hard  to  keep  clear  of  both.  Every  one  can  understand, 
when  once  we  find  that  the  word  means  almost  always 
"  covenant,"  how  great  the  temptation  is  to  translate  it 
so  in  but  two  other  occurrences,  especially  as  before  and 
after  it  means  "covenant "  in  the  same  passage.  But  why 
should  it  be  "  testament"  in  these  two  verses  alone,  and 
"  covenant "  in  all  other  places  ?  The  answer  is,  that 
the  language  is  peculiar  and  precise  in  these  same  two 
verses,'  requiring  not  a  covenant  but  a  testament,  and 
therefore  the  sense  of  testament  here  is  the  preferable 
one,  and  not  covenant.  The  reasons  will  be  given  in  a 
moment. 

Eirst  of  all,  as  has  been  hinted,  that  which  suggests 
"testament"  is  the  end  of  verse  15 — "They  which  are 
called  might  receive  the  promise  of  eternal  inheritance." 
How  is  it  that  anybody  ordinarily  gets  an  inheritance  ? 
By  a  testament,  to  be  sure,  as  every  one  knows.  Such 
has  been  thp  usual  form  in  all  countries  not  savage, 
and  in  all  ages.  No  figure  therefore  would  be  more 
natural  than  that,  if  God  intended  certain  persons 
called  to  have  an  inheritance,  there  should  be  a  testa- 
ment about  the  matter.  Accordingly  advantage  is 
taken  of  an  unquestionable  meaning  of  the  word  for 
this  added  illustration,  which  is  based  on  the  death  of 

L   L 


514  INTRODUCTOET  LKCTUEES. 

Christ,  "Where  a  testament  is,  there  must  also  of 
necessity  be  the  death  of  the  testator."  That  the  word 
(puWefievos)  in  this  connection  means  "testator"  appears 
to  me  heyond  just  question.  I  am  not  aware  that  it  is, 
nor  do  I  believe  that  it  could  be,  ever  used  in  such  a 
sense  as  "  covenanting  victim,"  for  which  some  contend. 
It  often  .means  one  who  arranged  or  disposed  of  pro- 
perty, or  anything  else,  such  as  a  treaty  or  covenant. 

Let  us  next  apply  the  word  "covenant"  here,  and 
you  will  soon  see  the  insuperable  difficulties  into  which 
you  are  plunged.  If  you  say, "  For  where  a  covenant 
is,  there  must  also  of  necessity  be  the  death  of  the 
covenanter" — the  person.  Now  is  it  an  axiom,  that  a 
covenant-maker  must  die  to  give  it  force  ?  It  is  quite 
evident,  on  the  contrary,  that  this  is  not  only  not  the 
truth  which  all  recognize  when  stated,  but  altogether 
inconsistent  with  the  Bible,  with  all  books,  and  with 
all  experience.  In  all  the  covenants  of  scripture  the 
man  that  makes  it  has  never  to  die  for  any  such  end. 
Indeed  both  should  die ;  for  it  usually  consists  of  two 
parties  who  are  thus  bound,  and  therefore,  were  the 
maxim  true,  both  ought  to  die,  which  is  an  evident 
absurdity. 

The  consequence  is,  that  many  have  tried  (and  I 
remember  making  efforts  of  that  kind  myself,  until  con- 
vinced that  it  could  not  succeed)  to  give  o  SiaOifievos,  in 
the  English  Bible  rightly  rendered  "  the  testator,"  the 
force  of  the  covenanting  victim.  But  the  answer  to  this 
is,  that  there  is  not  a  single  writer  in  the  language,  not 
sacred  only  but  profane,  who  employs  it  in  such  a  sense. 
Those  therefore  that  so  translate  our  two  verses  have 
invented  a  meaning  for  the  phrase,  instead  of  accepting 
its  legitimate  sense  as  attested  by  all  the  monuments  of 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBEEWS.  515 

the  Greek  tongue ;  whereas  the  moment  that  we  give  it 
the  meaning  assigned  here  rightly  by  the  better  trans- 
lators, that  is,  the  sense  of  "  testator  "  and  "  testament," 
all  runs  with  perfect  smoothness,  and  with  striking 
aptitude. 

He  is  showing  us  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  death.  He 
demonstrates  its  vicarious  nature  and  value  from  the 
sacrifices  so  familiar  to  all  then,  and  to  the  Jew  parti- 
cularly, in  connection  with  the  covenant  that  required 
them.  Now  his  rapid  mind  seizes,  under  the  Spirit's 
guidance,  the  other  well-known  sense  of  the  word, 
namely,  as  a  testamentary  disposition,  and  shows  the 
necessity  of  Christ's  death  to  bring  it  into  force.  It  is 
true  that  victims  were  sometimes  slain  in  ratifying  a 
covenant,  and  thus  were  the  seal  of  that  covenant;  but, 
first,  they  were  not  essential;  and,  secondly  and  chiefly, 
6  Sia6ifjLei/os,  the  covenanter  or  contracting  party  had  iu 
no  case  to  die  in  order  to  make  the  contract  vahd.  On 
the  other  hand  it  is  notoriously  true,  that  in  no  case 
can  a  testament  come  into  execution  without  the  tes- 
tator's death — a  figure  that  every  man  at  once  discerns. 
There  must  be  the  death  of  him  who  so  disposes  of  his 
property  in  order  that  the  heir  should  take  it  under 
his  testament.  Which  of  these  two  most  commends 
itself  as  the  unforced  meaning  of  the  passage  it  is  for 
the  reader  to  judge.  And  observe  that  it  is  assumed 
to  be  so  common  and  obvious  a  maxim  that  it  could 
not  be  questioned.  "For  where  a  testament  is,  there 
must  also  of  necessity  be  the  death  of  the  testator." 
The  addition  of  this  last  clause  as  a  necessary  condition 
confirms  the  sense  assigned.  Had  he  merely  referred 
to  the  covenant  {i.e.  the  sense  of  the  word  which  had 
been  used  before),  what  would  be  the  aim  of  the  "also  ?" 

L    L    2 


516  INTRODUCTOKT  LECTUEES. 

It  is  just  what  he  had  been  speaking  of  throughout,  if 
covenant  were  stiR  meant.  Apply  it  to  Christ's  death 
as  the  testator,  and  nothing  can  be  plainer  or  more 
forcible.  The  death  of  Christ,  both  in  the  sense  of  a 
victim  sacrificed,  and  of  a  testator,  though  a  double 
figure,  is  evident  to  all,  and  tends  to  the  self- same 
point.  "  For  a  testament  is  of  force  after  men  are  dead 
(or,  in  case  of  dead  men,  Im  veKpois) :  since  it  is  never 
of  force  when  the  testator  liveth." 

But  now,  returning  from  this  striking  instance  of 
Paul's  habit  of  goiag  off  at  a  word  (StaSijmj),  let  us 
resume  the  regular  course  of  the  apostle's  argument. 
"  Whereupon  neither  the  first  [covenant]  was  dedicated 
without  blood.  For  when  Moses  had  spoken  every 
precept  to  all  the  people  according  to  the  law,  he  took 
the  blood  of  calves  and  goats,  with  water,  and  scarlet 
wool,  and  hyssop,  and  sprinlded  both  the  book  itself, 
and  all  the  people,  saying,  "This  [is]  the  blood  of  the 
covenant  which  God  hath  enjoined  unto  you.  And 
he  sprinkled  likewise  with  blood  both  the  tabernacle, 
and  all  the  vessels  of  the  ministry.  And  almost  all 
things  are  according  to  the  law  purged  with  blood;  and 
without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission.  It  was 
therefore  necessary  that  the  representations  of  things 
in  the  heavens  should  be  purified  with  these;  but  the 
heavenly  things  themselves  with  better  sacrifices  than 
these.  For  Christ  is  not  entered  into  holies  made 
with  hands,  figures  of  the  true ;  but  into  heaven  itself, 
now  to  appear  before  the  face  of  God  for  us." 

Thus  distiactly  have  we  set  before  us  the  general 
doctrine  of  the  chapter, — that  Christ  has  suffered  but 
once,  and  has  been  offered  but  once;  that  the  offering 
cannot  be  severed  from  the  suffering.     If  He  is  to  be 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBEEWS.  517 

often  offered,  He  must  also  often  suffer.  The  truth  on 
the  contrary  is,  that  there  was  but  one  offering  and 
but  one  suffering  of  Christ,  once  for  all ;  in  witness 
of  the  perfection  of  which  He  is  gone  into  the  presence 
of  God,  there  to  appear  for  us.  Thus  it  will  be  ob- 
served, at  the  end  of  all  the  moral  and  experimental 
deaKngs  with  the  first  man  (manifested  in  Israel),  we 
come  to  a  deeply  momentous  point,  as  in  God's  ways, 
so  in  the  apostle's  reasoning.  Up  to  this  time  man 
was  the  object  of  those  ways;  it  was  simply,  and 
rightly  of  course,  a  probation.  Man  was  tried  by  all 
sorts  of  tests  froiln  time  to  time.  God  knew  perfectly 
well,  and  even  declared  here  and  there,  the  end  from 
the  beginning;  but  He  would  make  it  manifest  to  every 
conscience,  that  all  He  got  from  man  in  these  His 
varied  dealings  was  sin.  Then  comes  a  total  change: 
God  takes  up  the  matter  Himself,  acting  in  view  of 
man's  sin ;  but  in  Jesus,  in  the  very  Messiah  for  whom 
the  Jews  were  waiting,  He  has  put  away  sin  by  the 
sacrifice  of  Himself,  and  has  accomplished  this  mighty 
work,  as  admirably  befitting  the  goodness  of  God,  as 
it  alone  descends  low  enough  to  reach  the  vilest  man, 
and  yet  deliver  him  with  a  salvation  which  only  the 
more  humbles  man  and  glorifies  God.  For  now  God 
came  out,  so  to  speak,  in  His  own  power  and  grace, 
and,  in  the  person  of  Christ  on  the  cross,  put  away 
sin — abolished  it  from  before  His  face,  and  set  the 
believer  absolutely  free  from  it  as  regards  judgment. 

"  But  now  once  in  the  consummation  of  the  ages," — - 
this  is  the  meaning  of  "  the  end  of  the  world ; "  it  is 
the  consummation  of  those  dispensations  for  bringing 
out  what  man  was.  Man's  worst  sin  culminated  in  the 
death  of  Christ  who  knew  no  sin;   but  in  that  very 


518  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

death  He  put  away  sin.  Christ,  therefore,  goes  into 
heaven,  and  will  come  again  apart  from  sin.  He  has 
nothing  more  to  do  with  sin;  He  will  judge  man  who 
rejects  Himself  and  slights  sin,  as  He  will  appear  to  the 
salvation  of  His  own  people.  "  And  as  it  is  appointed 
unto  men  once  to  die,  but  after  this  the  judgment :  so 
Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many ;  and 
unto  them  that  look  for  him  shall  he  appear  the  second 
time  without  sin  unto  salivation." 

It  is  perfectly  true  that,  if  we  think  of  Christ,  He 
was  here  below  absolutely  without  sin ;  but  He  who 
was  without  sin  in  His  person,  and  aU  His  life,  had 
everything  to  do  with  sin  on  the  cross,  when  God  made 
Him  to  be  sin  for  us.  The  atonement  was  at  least  as 
real  as  our  sin ;  and  God  Himself  dealt  with  Christ  as 
laying  sin  upon  Him,  and  treating  Him,  the  Great 
Substitute,  as  sin  before  Himself,  that  at  one  blow  it 
might  be  all  put  away  from  before  His  face.  This  He 
has  done,  and  done  with.  Now  accordingly,  by  virtue 
of  His  death  which  rent  the  veil,  God  and  man  stand 
face  to  face.  What,  then,  is  man's  actual  estate  ?  "As 
it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die," — wages  of  sin, 
though  not  all, — "but  after  this  the  judgment,"  or  the 
full  wages  of  sin, — "so  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear 
the  sins  of  many;" — this  He  has  finished; — "and  unto 
them  that  look  for  Him  shall  He  appear  the  second 
time  without  sin  unto  salvation."  He  will  have  nothing 
more  to  do  with  sin.  He  has  so  absolutely  swept  it 
away  for  those  who  believe  on  Him,  that  when  He 
comes  again,  there  will  be  no  question  of  judgment,  as 
far  as  they  are  concerned,  but  only  of  salvation,  in  the 
sense  of  their  being  cleared  from  the  last  relic  or  result 
of  sin,  even  for  the  body.    Indeed  it  is  only  the  body 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS.  SI 9 

that  is  here  spoken  of.  As  far  as  the  soul  is  concerned, 
Christ  would  not  go  up  to  heaven  until  sin  was  abro- 
gated before  God.  Christ  is  doing  nothing  there  to  take 
away  sin;  nor  when  He  comes  again  wiU.  He  touch  the 
question  of  sin,  because  it  is  a  finished  work.  Christ 
Himself  could  not  add  to  the  perfeetness  of  that  sacri- 
fice by  which  He  has  put  away  sin.  Consequently, 
when  He  comes  again  to  them  that  look  for  Him,  it  is 
simply  to  bring  them  into  all  the  eternal  results  of  that 
great  salvation. 

In  chapter  x.  he  applies  the  matter  to  the  present 
state  of  the  believer.  He  had  shown  the  work  of  Christ, 
and  His  coming  again  in  glory.  What  comes  in  between 
the  two  ?  Christianity.  And  here  we  learn  the  direct 
application.  The  Christian  stands  between  the  cross 
and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  rests  confidingly 
on  the  cross,  that  only  valid  moral  basis  before  God ; 
at  the  same  time  he  is  waiting  for  the  glory  that  is  to 
be  revealed.  "For  the  law  having  a  shadow  of  good 
things  to  come,  and  not  the  very  image  of  the  things, 
can  never  with  those  sacrifices  which  they  offered  year 
by  year  continually  make  the  comers  thereunto  perfect. 
For  then  would  they  not  have  ceased  to  be  offered  ? 
because  that  the  worshippers  once  purged  should  have 
had  no  more  conscience  of  sins."  Ko  Jew  could  or 
ought  to  pretend  to  such  purgation  as  its  result. 

I  should  like  to  ask  whether  (or  how  far)  all  the 
believers  here  assembled  can  take  this  as  their  place 
with  simplicity.  You,  as  a  Christian,  ought  to  have 
the  calm  settled  consciousness  that  God,  looking  on 
you,  discerns  not  one  spot  or  stain,  but  only  the  blood 
of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  that  cleanses  from  all  sin. 
You  ought  to  have  the  consciousness  that  there  is  no 


520  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

judgment  for  you  with  God  by-and-by,  however  truly' 
He,  as  a  Father,  judges  you  now  on  earth.  How  can 
such  a  consciousness  as  this  be  the  portion  of  the  Chris- 
tian ?  Because  the  Holy  Ghost  bears  this  witness,  and 
nothing  less>  to  the  perfectness  of  the  work  of  Christ. 
If  God's  word  be  true,  and  to  this  the  Spirit  adheres, 
the  blood  of  Christ  has  thus  perfectly  washed  away  the 
sins  of  the  believer.  I  mean  his  sins  now;  not  sin  as  a 
principle,  but  in  fact,  though  it  be  only  for  faith.  "  The 
worshippers  once  purged  should  have  had  no  more  con- 
science of  sins."  It  is  not  implied  that  they  may  not 
sin,  or  that  they  haVe  no  consciousness  of  their  failure, 
either  past  or  present.  "Conscience  of  sins"  means  a 
dread  of  God's  judging  one  because  of  his  sins.  For 
this,  knowing  His  grace  in  the  work  of  Christ  for  them, 
they  do  not  look;  on  the  contrary,  they  rest  in  the 
assurance  of  the  perfection  with  which  their  sins  are 
effaced  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ. 

This  epistle  insists  on  the  blood  of  Christ,  making  all 
to  turn  on  that  efficacious  work  for  us.  It  was  not  so 
of  old,  when  the  Israelite  brought  his  goat  or  calf  "  In 
those  sacrifices,"  referring  to  the  law  to  which  some 
Hebrew  Christians  were  in  danger  of  going  back,  "there 
is  a  remembrance  made  again  of  sins  every  year.  For 
it  is  not  possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats 
should  take  away  sins."  Therefore  all  such  recurring 
sacrifices  only  call  sins  to  remembrance;  but  what  the 
blood  of  Christ  has  done  is  so  completely  to  blot  them 
out,  that  God  Himself  says,  "  I  will  remember  them  no 
more." 

Accordingly  he  now  turns  to  set  forth  the  contrast 
between  the  weakness  and  the  unavailingness  of  the 
Jewish  sacrifices,  which,  in  point  of  fact,  only  and  always 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBEEWS.  521 

brought  up  sins  again,  instead  of  putting  them  away 
as  does  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  In  the  most  admirable 
manner  he  proves  that  this  was  what  God  was  all  along 
waiting  for.  First  of  all,  "Sacrifice  and  offering  thou 
wouldest  not,  but  a  body  hast  thou  prepared  me :  in 
burnt  offerings  and  sacrifices  for  sin  thou  hast  had  no 
pleasure.  Then  said  I,  Lo,  J  come  (in  the  volume  of 
the  book  it  is  written  of  me)  to  do  thy  will,  0  God." 
There  we  find  these  two  facts.  First,  in  God's  counsels 
it  was  always  before  Him  to  have  One  more  than  man 
though  a  man  to  deal  with  this  greatest  of  all  trans- 
actions. There  was  but  One  that  could  do  God's  will  in 
that  which  concerned  man's  deepest  wants.  Who  was 
this  One  ?  Jesus  alone.  As  for  the  first  Adam  and  all 
his  race,  their  portion  was  only  death  and  judgment, 
because  he  was  a  sinner.  But  here  is  One  who  proffers 
Himself  to  come,  and  does  come.  "  In  the  volume  of 
the  book  it  is  written  of  me" — a  book  which  none  ever 
saw  but  God  and  His  Son.  There  it  was  written,  "  Lo, 
I  come  to  do  thy  will,  0  God."  Eedemption  was  the  first 
thought  of  God — a  counsel  of  His  previous  to  the  deal- 
ings with  man  which  made  the  necessity  of  redemption 
felt.  God  meant  to  have  His  will  done,  and  thereby  a 
people  for  Himself  capable  of  enjoying  His  presence 
and  His  nature,  where  no  question  of  sin  or  fall  could 
ever  enter. 

First,  He  makes  a  scene  where  sin  enters  at  once. 
Because  His  people  had  no  heart  for  His  promises-. 
He  imposed  a  system  of  law  and  ordinances  that  was 
imjudged  in  them,  which  provoked  the  sin  and  made  it 
still  more  manifest  and  heinous.  Then  comes  forth  the 
wondrous  counsel  that  was  settled  before  either  the  sin 
of  man,  or  the  promises  to  the  fathers,  or  the  law  which 


522  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

subsequently  put  man  to  the  test.  And  this  blessed 
person,  single-handed  but  according  to  the  will  of  God, 
accomplishes  that  will  in  offering  Himself  on  the  cross. 

So  it  is  said  here,  "  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  0  God. 
He  taketh  away  the  first"  (that  is,  the  law),  "that  he 
may  establish  the  second"  (that  is,  God's  will,  often 
unintgUigently  confounded  by  men  with  the  law,  which 
is  here  set  in  the  most  manifest  contradistinction).  Next 
the  apOstle,  with  increasing  boldness,  comes  to  the  proof 
from  the  Old  Testament  that  the  legal  institution  as  a 
whole  was  to  be  set  aside.  "  He  taketh  away  the  first." 
Was  this  Paul's  doctrine  ?  There  it  was  in  the  Psalms. 
They  could  not  deny  it  to  be  written  in  the  fortieth  psalm. 
"  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  wouldest  not,  but  a  body 
hast  thou  prepared  me:  in  biirnt  offerings  and  sacrifices 
for  sin  thou  hast  had  no  pleasure.  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I 
come  (in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me)  to 
do  thy  will,  0  God."  All  he  does  is  to  interpret  that 
will,  and  to  apply  it  to  what  was  wrought  on  the  cross. 
"By  the  which  wiU"  (not  man's,  which  is  sin,  but  God's) 
"we  are  sanctified  through  the  offering  of  the  body  of 
Jesus  Christ  once  for  all." 

This  leads  to  a  further  contrast  with  the  action  of 
the  Aaronic  priest.  "  Every  priest  standeth  daily  minis- 
tering and  offering  oftentimes  the  same  sacrifices,  which 
can  never  take  away  sins :  but  this  man,  after  he  had 
offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins,  for  ever  sat  down  on  the 
right  hand  of  God."  Jesus  sits  down  in  perpetuity. 
This  is  the  meaning  of  the  phrase,  not  that  He  wiU  sit 
there  throughout  all  eternity.  Ets  to  Sii^veke?  does  not  ex- 
press eternity  (which  would  be  ds  t6v  alSiva,  or  some  such 
form  of  words)  but  "for  continuance."  He  sits  there 
continually,  in  contrast  with  the  Jewish  priest,  who  was 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS.  523 

always  rising  up  in  order  to  do  fresh  work,  because 
there  was  fresh  sin;  for  their  sacrifices  never  could 
absolutely  put  away  sin.  The  fact  was  plain  that  the 
priest  was  always  doing  and  doing,  his  work  being 
never  done;  whereas  now  there  is  manifested,  in  the 
glorious  facts  of  Christianity,  a  Priest  sat  down  at  God's 
right  hand,  a  Priest  that  has  taken  His  place  there  ex- 
pressly because  our  sins  are  blotted  out  by  His  sacrifice. 
If  there  was  any  place  for  the  priest,  one  might  have 
supposed,  to  be  active  in  his  functions,  it  would  be  in 
the  presence  of  God,  unless  the  sins  were  completely 
gone.  But  they  are  completely  gone ;  and  therefore  at 
God's  righthand  sits  down  He  who  is  its  witness. 

How  could  this  be  disputed,  by  one  who  simply 
believed  Psalm  ex.  ?  For  there  is  seen  not  only  the 
proof  that  the  Messiah  is  the  One  whom  God  pronounced 
by  an  oath  "a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Mel- 
chisedec,"  but  the  glorious  seat  He  has  taken  at  the 
righthand  of  God  is  now  worked  into  this  magnificent 
pleading.  Christianity  turns  everything  to  account. 
The  Jew  never  understood  his  law  until  the  light  of 
Christ  on  the  cross  and  in  glory  shone  upon  it.  So 
here  the  Psalms  acquire  a  meaning  self- evidently  true, 
the  moment  Christ  is  brought  in,  who  is  the  truth,  and 
nothing  less.  Accordingly  we  have  the  third  use  of  the 
seat  Christ  has  taken.  In  the  first  chapter  we  saw  the 
seat  of  personal  glory  connected  with  atonement;  in 
the  eighth  chapter  it  is  the  witness  of  His  priesthood, 
and  where  it  is.  Here  it  is  the  proof  of  the  perpetual 
efficacy  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  "We  shall  find  another 
use  before  we  have  done,  which  I  hope  to  notice  in  its 
place. 

But  the  Holy  Ghost's  testimony  is  not  forgotten.    As 


524  INTRODTJCTOEY  LECTURES. 

it  was  God's  will  and  the  worlk  of  Christ,  so  the  Holy- 
Ghost  is  He  who  witnesses  to  the  perfectness  of  it.  It 
is  also  founded  on  one  of  their  own  prophets.  "  This  is 
the  covenant,"  says  he,  "that  I  will  make  with  them 
after  those  days,  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  put  my  laws  into 
their  hearts,  and  in  their  minds  will  I  write  them ;  and 
their  sins  and  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more.  Now 
where  remission  of  these  is,  there  is  no  more  offering 
for  sin." 

Then  we  hear  of  the  practical  use  of  all.  "Having 
therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holies 
by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by  a  new  and  living  way,  which 
he  hath  consecrated  for  us  through  the  veil,  that  is  to 
say,  his  flesh;  and  having  an  high  priest  over  the 
house  of  God;  let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart  in 
full  assurance  of  faith,  having  our  hearts  sprinkled 
from  an  evil  conscience,  and  our  bodies  washed  with 
pure  water.  Let  us  hold  fast  the  profession  of  our  hope 
[for  so  it  should  be]  without  wavering  (for  he  is  faith- 
ful that  promised) ;  and  let  us  consider  one  another  to 
provoke  unto  love  and  to  good  works:  not  forsaking 
the  assembling  of  ourselves  together,  as  the  manner  of 
some  is ;  but  exhorting  one  another :  and  so  much  the 
more,  as  ye  see  the  day  approaching."  But  the  higher 
the  privilege,  the  greater  the  danger  of  either  despising 
or  perverting  it. 

In  the  sixth  chapter,  we  saw  that  the  Spirit  of  God 
brings  in  a  most  solemn  warning  for  those  who  turn 
their  back  on  the  power  and  presence  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  as  bearing  witness  of  Chi'istianity.  Here  the 
apostle  warns  those  that  turn  their  back  on  Christ's 
one  sacrifice.  It  is  evident  that  in  these  we  have 
the  two  main  .parts  of  Christianity.     The  foundation 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  525 

is  sacrifice ;  the  power  is  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The 
truth  is,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  down  for  the 
purpose  of  bearing  His  witness ;  and  he  that  deserts 
this  for  Judaism,  or  anything  else,  is  an  apostate  and 
lost  man.  And  is  he  better  or  safer  that  slights  the 
sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  goes  back  either  to 
earthly  sacrifices  or  to  lusts  of  flesh,  giving  a  loose 
rein- to  sin,  which  is  expressly  what  the  Son  of  God 
shed  His  blood  to  put  away?  He  who,  having  professed 
to  value  the  blessing  of  God,  abandons  it,  and  rushes 
here  below  into  the  sins  of  the  flesh  knowingly  and 
deliberately,  is  evidently  no  Christian  at  aU.  Accord- 
ingly it  is  shown  that  such  an  one  becomes  an  adversary 
of  the  Lord,  and  God  will  deal  with  him  as  such.  As 
in  chapter  \i.  he  declares  that  he  is  persuaded  better 
things  of  them,  than  that  they  would  abandon  the 
Holy  Ghost ;  so  here  he  expected  better  things  than 
that  they  would  thus  dishonour  the  sacrifice  of  Christ. 
In  that  case,  he  says,  God  was  not  unrighteous  to  for- 
get their  work  and  labour  of  love ;  in  this  case,  he  lets 
them  know  that  he  had  not  forgotten  the  way  in  which 
they  had  suffered  for  Christ.  There  it  was  more  parti- 
cularly the  activity  of  faith ;  here  it  is  the  suffering  of 
faith. 

This  leads  into  the  life  of  faith,  which  was  a  great 
stumbling-block  to  some  of  these  Christian  Jews.  They 
could  not  understand  how  it  was  they  should  come 
into  greater  trouble  than  before.  They  had  never 
known  so  great  and  frequent  and  constant  trial.  It 
seemed  as  if  everything  went  against  them.  They  had 
looked  for  advance  and  triumph  and  peace  and  pros- 
perity everywhere;  on  the  contrary,  they  had  come 
into  reproach  and  shame,  partly  in  their  own  persons. 


526  INTEODUCTOKY  LECTURES. 

partly  as  becoming  the  companions  of  others  who  so 
suffered.  But  the  apostle  takes  all  this  difficulty  by 
the  horns,  as  good  as  telling  them,  that  their  having 
suffered  all  this  was  simply  because  it  is  the  right  road. 
These  two  things,  the  cross  on  earth  and  glory  on  high, 
are  correlative.  As  they  are  companions,  so  do  they 
test  a  walk  with  God ;  one  is  faith,  the  other  is  suffer- 
ing. This,  he  maintains,  has  always  been  so;  it  is 
no  novelty  he  is  preaching.  Accordingly  the  epistle  to 
the  Hebrews,  while  it  does  put  the  believer  in  associa- 
tion with  Christ,  does  not,  for  all  this,  dissociate  him 
from  whatever  is  good  in  the  saints  of  God  in  every  age. 
Hence  the  apostle  takes  care  to  keep  up  the  real  link 
with  the  past  witnesses  for  God  in  faith  and  suffering, 
not  in  ordinances. 

In  the  beginning  of  chapter  xi.  we  are  told  what 
faith  is.  It  is  "  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the 
evidence  of  things  not  seen."  It  is  no  definition  of 
what  it  is  to  believe,  but  a  description  of  the  qualities 
of  faith.  "  For  by  it  the  elders  obtained  a  good  report." 
How  could  any  believers  put  a  slight  upon  it  ?  "  Through 
faith  we  understand  that  the  worlds  were  framed  by 
the  word  of  God ;" — a  simple  but  a  most  sublime  truth, 
and  one  that  man  never  really  found  out — that  we  are 
entirely  dependent  on  faith  for  after  all.  The  wise 
men  of  the  present  day  are  fast  giving  up  the  truth  of 
creation.  They  do  not  believe  that  God  called  all  things 
into  being.  The  greater  number  of  them  may  use  the 
word  "creation,"  but  it  must  never  be  assumed  that 
they  mean  what  they  say.  It  is  wise  and  necessary  to 
examine  closely  what  they  mean.  Never  was  there  a 
time  when  men  used  terms  with  a  more  equivocal 
design  than  at  the  present  moment.     Hence  they  apply 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWS.  527 

some  terms  to  the  work  of  God  in  nature  similar  to 
what  they  apply  to  His  work  in  grace.  The  favourite 
thought  is  "development;"  and  so  they  hold  a  develop- 
ment or  genesis  of  matter,  not  a  creation :  matter  con- 
tinually progressing,  in  various  forms,  until  at  last  it 
has  progressed  into  these  wise  men  of  our  day.  This 
is  precisely  what  modern  research  amounts  to.  It  is  the 
setting  aside  of  God,  and  the  setting  up  of  man ;  it  is 
the  precursor  of  the  apostasy  that  is  coming,  which 
again  will  issue  in  man  taking  the  place  of  God,  and 
becoming  the  object  of  worship,  instead  of  the  true 
Creator.  Nor  is  it  that  redemption  only  is  denied,  but 
creation  also ;  so  that  there  is  very  great  importance 
in  maintaining  the  rights  and  the  truth  of  God  in 
creation. 

Therefore  it  is  well  to  stand  clear  of  all  men's  schemes 
and  thoughts,  ever  rising  up  more  and  more  presump- 
tuously, because  they  mainly  consist  of  some  slight  in 
one  way  or  another  on  the  word  of  God.  A  simple 
word  of  scripture  settles  a  thousand  questions.  What 
the  wise  men  of  antiquity,  'the  Platos  and  Aristotles, 
never  knew — what  the  modern  sages  blunder  about, 
without  the  slightest  reason,  after  all — the  word  of  God 
has  made  the  possession  of  every  child  of  His.  "  In  the 
beginning  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth." 

There  is  no  indulgence  of  human  curiosity.  We  do 
not  know  the  steps  of  His  work,  until  we  come  to  the 
preparation  of  an  abode  for  man.  Nothing  can  be  more 
admirable  than  this  reserve  of  God.  We  are  not  told 
the  details  of  what  preceded  the  great  week  when  God 
made  the  man  and  the  woman.  I  am  not  going  to  enter 
into  any  statement  of  facts  as  to  this  now,  but  there  is 
no  truth  in  its  own  place  more  important  than  that 


528       .   INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

with  -wliicli  the  apostle  commencea  in  this  chapter, 
namely,  that  "through  faith  we  understand  that  the 
worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of  God."  It  is  not 
only  that  we  believe  it,  but  we  understand  it  thereby. 
There  is  nothing  more  simple;  at  the  same  time  it  is 
just  one  of  those  questions  that  God  has  answered, 
and  this  so  as  to  settle  the  mind  perfectly,  and  fill  the 
heart  with  praise.  Man  never  did  nor  could  settle  it 
without  the  word  of  God.  There  is  nothing  here  below 
so  difficult  for  the  natural  mind;  and  for  the  simple 
reason  that  man  can  never  rise  above  that  which  is 
caused.  The  reason  is  obvious — because  he  is  caused 
himself  Therefore  is  it  that  men  so  naturally  slip  into, 
or  rest  on,  second  causes.  He  is  only  one  of  a  series 
of  existing  objects,  and  consequently  never  can  rise 
above  that  in  his  own  nature.  He  may  infer  that  there 
must  be;  but  he  never  can  say  that  there  is.  Eeason  is 
ever  drawing  conclusions ;  God  is,  and  reveals  what  is. 
I  may,  of  course,  see  what  is  before  my  eyes,  and  may 
so  far  have  sensible  evidence  of  what  exists  now ;  but 
it  is  only  God  who  can  tell  me  that  He  in  the  beginning 
caused  to  be  that  which  now  is.  God  alone  who  spake 
it  into  being  can  pronounce  upon  it.  This  is  just  what 
the  believer  receives,  feeds  on,  and  lives  accordingly. 

"  Through  faith  we  understand  that  the  worlds  were 
framed  by  the  word  of  God."  It  is  possible  that  the 
word  "worlds,"  which  is  a  Hebraistic  word,  belonging 
to  the  Alexandrian  Jews  particularly,  may  embrace 
dispensations;  but  undoubtedly  the  material  world  is 
included  in  it.  It  may  mean  the  worlds  governed  by 
dispensations ;  but  still  that  the  idea  of  the  whole  uni- 
verse is  in  it  cannot  be  fairly  contested  by  competent 
minds.    "  The  worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of  God, 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBKEWS.  529 

SO  that  things  which  are  seen" — which  would  not  be 
the  case  if  it  was  only  a  dispensation — "were  not  made 
of  things  which  do  appear." 

Having  laid  this  as  the  first  application  of  faith,  the 
next  question  is — when  man  fell,  how  was  he  to  ap- 
proach God  ?  The  answer  is,  by  sacrifice.  This  then  is 
brought  before  us.  "  By  faith  Abel  offered  a  more  excel- 
lent sacrifice  than  Cain." 

The  third  point  is  how  to  walk  with  God,  and  this 
again  is  by  faith.  Thus  in  every  case  it  is  faith.  It 
owns  the  creation;  it  recognizes  sacrifice  as  the  only 
righteous  means  of  being  accepted  with  God — the  only 
means  of  approaching  Him  worthily.-  Faith,  again,  is 
the  only  principle  of  walk  with  God;  as  it  is,  again, 
the  only  means  of  realizing  the  judgment  of  God 
coming  on  all  around  us. 

Here,  it  is  plain,  we  have  the  chief  lineaments  of 
revealed  truth.  That  is  to  say,  God  is  owned  in  His 
glory,  as  Creator  of  all  by  His  word.  Then,  consequent 
on  the  fall,  comes  the  ground  of  the  believer's  accept- 
ance; then  his  walk  with  God,  and  deliverance  from 
His  judgment  of  the  whole  scene,  in  the  midst  of 
which  we  actually  are.  Faith  brings  God  into  every- 
thing. (Verses  1-7.) 

But  then  comes  far  more  definite  instruction,  and, 
beginning  with  Abraham,  the  details  of  faith.  The 
father  of  the  faithful  was  the  one  first  called  out  by 
promise.  At  first  it  was  (ver.  8)  but  the  promise  of  a 
land;  but  when  in  the  land  he  received  the  promise 
of  a  better  country,  that  is,  a  heavenly,  which  raised  his 
eyes  to  the  city  on  high,  in  express  contrast  with  the 
earthly  land.  When  he  dwelt  in  Mesopotamia,  he  had 
a  promise  to  bring  him  into  Canaan ;   and  when  he  got 

M   M 


530  INTEODrrcTOEY  LECTUEES. 

there,  he  had  a  promise  of  what  was  higher  to  lead  his 
heart  above.  At  the  end  of  his  course  there  was  a  still 
heavier  tax  on  him.  Would  he  give  up  the  one  that 
was  the  type  of  the  true  Seed,  the  progenitor,  and  the 
channel  of  the  promised  blessing,  yea,  of  the  Blesser  ? 
He  knew  that  in  Isaac  his  seed  was  to  be  called.  Would 
he  give  up  Isaac?  A  most  searching  and  practical 
question,  the  very  unseen  hinge  in  God  Himself  on 
which  not  Christianity  only,  but  all  blessing,  turns  for 
heaven  and  earth,  at  least  as  far  as  the  fallen  creation 
is  concerned.  For  what  did  the  Jews  wait  in  hope? 
For  Christ,  on  whom  the  promises  depend.  And  of 
what  did  Christianity  speak  ?  Of  Christ  who  was  given 
up  to  death,  who  is  risen  and  gone  above,  in  whom  we 
find  aU  the  blessing  promised,  and  after  a  better  sort. 
Thus  it  is  evident  that  the  introduction  of  the  last  trial 
of  Abraham  was  of  all  possible  moment  to  every  one 
that  stood  in  the  place  of  a  son  of  Abraham.  The 
severest  and  final  trial  of  Abraham's  faith  was  giving 
up  the  son,  in  whom  all  the  promises  were  infolded,  to 
receive  him  back  on  a  resurrection  groiind  in  figure. 
It  was,  parabolically,  like  that  of  Christ  Himself  The 
Jews  would  not  have  Him  living.  The  Christians  gained 
Him  in  a  far  more  excellent  way  after  the  pattern  of 
resurrection,  as  Abraham  at  the  close  received  Isaac 
as  it  were  from  the  dead. 

Then  we  have  the  other  patriarchs  introduced,  yet 
chiefly  as  regards  earthly  hopes,  but  not  apart  from 
resurrection,  and  its  connexion  with  the  people  of  God 
here  below.  On  these  things  I  need  not  now  dwell 
farther  than  to  characterize  all,  from  Abraham  inclu- 
sively, as  the  patience  of  faith.  (Verses  8-22.) 

Then,  having  finished  this  part  of  the  subject,  the 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  631 

apostle  turns  to  another  characteristic  in  believers — the 
mighty  power  of  faith  which  knows  how  to  draw  on 
God,  and  breaks  through  all  difficulties.  It  is  not 
merely  that  which  goes  on  quietly  waiting  for  the 
accomplishment  of  the  counsels  of  God.  This  it  was 
of  all  consequence  to  have  stated  first.  And  for  this 
simple  reason :  no  place  is  given  herein  to  man's  im- 
portance. Had  the  energetic  activity  of  faith  been  first 
noticed,  it  would  have  made  more  of  man;  but  when 
the  heart  had  been  disciplined  in  quiet  endurance,  and 
lowly  expectancy  from  God,  then  he  could  be  clothed 
with  the  energy  of  the  Spirit.  Both  are  true;  and 
Moses  is  the  type  of  the  latter,  as  Abraham  of  the 
former.  Accordingly  we  find  everything  about  Moses, 
as  well  as  done  by  him,  extraordinary.  His  deliver- 
ance was  strange;  stUl  more  his  decision  and  its  results. 
He  goes  out,  deliberately  and  knowingly,  just  at  the 
time  of  life  when  a  man  is  most  sensitive  to  the  value 
of  a  grand  sphere  of  influence,  as  well  as  exercise  of 
his  powers,  wherein,  too,  he  could  have  ordinarily 
exerted  all  in  favour  of  his  people.  Not  so  Moses.  He 
acted  in  faith,  not  policy.  He  made  nothing  of  himself, 
because  he  knew  they  were  God's  people.  Accordingly 
he  became  just  the  more  the  vessel  of  divine  power  to 
the  glory  of  God.  He  chose  "rather  to  suffer  afdiction 
with  the  people  of  God  than  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of 
sin  for  a  season;  esteeming  the  reproach  of  Christ 
greater  riches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt:  for  he  had 
respect  unto  the  recompence  of  the  reward."  And  what 
then?  "By  faith  he  forsook  Egypt,  not  fearing  the 
wrath  of  the  king."  This  was  in  the  ways  of  God  the 
necessary  moral  consequence  of  his  self-abnegation. 
"Through  faith  he  instituted  the  passover,  and  the 
SI  u  2 


Missing  Page 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS.  533 

heaven  ?  One  can  well  understand  that  the  apostle 
would  leave  his  readers  to  gather  thus  generally  what 
it  must  have  been.  God  then  has  provided  some  better 
thing  for  us.  He  has  brought  in  redemption  in  present 
accomplishment,  and  at  the  same  time  He  has  given 
scope  for  a  brighter  hope,  founded  on  His  mighty  work 
on  the  cross,  measured  by  Christ's  glory  as  its  present 
answer  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  Hence  He  crowns  the 
noble  army  of  witnesses  with  Christ  Himself  "Where- 
fore seeing  we  also  are  compassed  about  with  so  great 
a  cloud  of  witnesses,  laying  aside  every  weight,  and 
the  sin  which  doth  so  easily  beset  us,  let  us  run  with 
patience  the  race  that  is  set  before  us,  looking  off  unto 
Jesus  the  captain  and  completer  of  faith;  who  for  the 
joy  that  was  set  before  him  endured  the  cross,  despising 
the  shame,  and  is  set  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
throne  of  God." 

This  is  a  different  way  of  looking  at  His  session  there. 
In  all  the  other  passages  of  the  epistle  the  meaning 
of  the  word  is,  that  He  took  His  seat,  or  simply  sat 
down  there.  It  is  the  fact  that  there  He  sat  down; 
but  in  this  place  it  will  be  observed  that  His  taking 
His  seat  there  is  the  reward  of  the  life  of  faith.  As 
the  result  of  enduring  the  cross,  having  despised  the 
shame,  the  word  for  sitting  down  here  has  a  remarkably 
beautiful  shade  of  meaning  different  from  what  is  given 
in  all  the  other  occurrences.  Its  force  implies  that  it 
is  not  merely  what  He  did  once,  but  what  He  is  also 
doing  still.  Attention  is  drawn  to  the  permanence  of 
His  position  at  the  right  hand  di  God.  Of  course  it  is 
true  that  Jesus  took  His  seat  there,  but  more  is  con- 
veyed in  the  true  form  of  the  text  {KiKoBiKev)  here. 

This,  however,  only  by  the  way.    Beyond  question 


534  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTUEES. 

the  Lord  is  regarded  as  the  completer  of  the  whole  walk 
of  faith  in  its  deepest  and,  morally,  most  glorious  foi-m. 
Instead  of  having  one  person  illustrating  one  thing, 
another  person  another,  the  Lord  Jesus  sums  up  the  per- 
fection of  all  trial  in  His  own  pathway,  not  as  Saviour 
only,  but  in  the  point  of  view  of  bearing  witness  in  His 
ways  for  God  here  below.  Who  ever  walked  in  faith  as 
He  ?  For  indeed  He  was  a  man  as  really  as  any  other, 
though  infinitely  above  man. 

From  this  practical  lessons  of  great  value  are  drawn. 
"For  consider  him  that  endured  such  contradiction  of 
sinners  against  himself,  lest  ye  be  wearied  and  faint  in 
your  minds.  Ye  have  not  yet  resisted  unto  blood, 
striving  against  sin.  And  ye  have  forgotten  the  exhor- 
tation which  speaketh  unto  you  as  unto  children."  Thus 
the  first  part  of  the  chapter  shows  us  simply  what 
God  holds  out  to  the  new  man ;  but  the  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  never  looks  at  the  Christian  simply  in  the  new 
man,  but  rather  as  a  concrete  person.  From  the  begin- 
ning to  the  end  of  it  the  Christian  in  Hebrews  is  not 
thus  dealt  with  apart  from  the  old  nature,  as  we  may 
see  him  regarded  in  the  ordinary  epistles  of  Paul,  where 
the  old  and  the  new  man  are  most  carefully  separated. 
It  is  not  the  case  in  the  epistles  of  James  and  Peter, 
with  which  so  far  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  agrees. 
The  reason  I  take  to  be,  that  the  apostle  meets  the 
Jewish  believer  where  he  is,  as  much  as  possible 
giving  credit  for  what  was  really  true  in  the  Old 
Testament  saints,  and  so  in  the  Jewish  mind.  Now 
it  is  evident  that  in  the  Old  Testament  the  distinction 
was  not  made  between  flesh  and  spirit  in  the  way  in 
which  we  have  it  brought  out  in  the  general  doctrine 
of  Christianity. 


THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  535 

The  apostle  is  dealing  with  the  saints  as  to  their 
walk ;  and  as  he  had  shown  how  Christ  alone  had 
purged  the  sins  of  the  believer,  and  how  He  is  on  high, 
as  the  Priest  in  the  presence  of  God,  to  intercede  for 
them  in  their  weakness  and  dangers;  so  now,  when  he 
is  come  to  the  question  of  the  walk  of  faith,  Christ 
is  the  leader  of  that  walk.  Accordingly,  this  is  an 
appeal  to  the  hearts  which  cleave  to  Christ  the  rejected 
King,  and  Holy  Sufferer,  who  is  now  in  glory  above.  He 
necessarily  completes  all  as  the  pattern  for  the  Chris- 
tian. But  then  there  are  impediments  as  well  as  sin, 
by  which  the  enemy  would  keep  us  from  the  race  set 
before  us ;  whilst  God  carries  on  His  discipline  in  our 
favour.  And  the  apostle  shows  that  we  need  not  only 
a  perfect  pattern  in  the  walk  of  faith,  but  chastenings 
by  the  way.  This,  he  says,  must  be  from  a  father  who 
loves  his  true  and  faulty  children:  others  enjoy  no 
such  care.  First  of  all,  it  is  love  that  calls  us  to  the 
path  that  Christ  trod ;  next,  it  is  love  that  chastens  us. 
Christ  never  needed  this,  but  we  do.  He  reasons  that, 
while  our  parents  only  chastise  us  the  best  way  they 
can  (for  after  all  their  judgment  might  not  be  per- 
fect), the  Father  of  spirits  never  fails.  He  has  but  one 
settled  purpose  of  goodness  about  us ;  He  watches  and 
judges  for  our  good,  and  nothing  but  our  good.  He 
has  set  His  mind  upon  making  us  patterns  of  His 
holiness.  It  is  what  He  carries  on  now.  Fully  does 
He  allow,  as  connected  with  this,  that  the  chastening 
seems  not  joyous  but  grievous.  "We  begin  with  His 
love,  and  shall  end  in  it  without  end.  He  only  removes 
obstructions,  and  maintains  our  communion  with  Him- 
self; surely  this  ought  to  settle  every  question  for  the 
believer.    If  we  know  His  perfect  love  and  the  wisdom. 


536  INTEODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

of  it,  we  have  the  best  answer  to  silence  every  mur- 
inuring  thought  or  wish  of  the  heart. 

There  is  nothing  more  serious  than  to  set  grace 
against  holiness.  Nowhere  does  the  apostle  give  the 
smallest  occasion  for  such  a  thought.  So  here  he  tells 
them  to  "follow  peace  with  all  men,  and  holiness, 
without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord:  looking 
diligently  lest  any  man  lack  the  grace  of  God."  It  is 
not  a  question  of  the  law,  which  a  Jew  might  naturally 
conceive  to  be  the  standard  of  the  will  of  God  now  as 
of  old  for  Israel.  How  easily  we  even  forget  that  we  are 
not  Jews  but  Christians !  Eeaaon  can  appreciate  not 
grace  but  law ;  and  so  people  are  apt,  when  things  go 
wrong,  to  bring  in  the  law.  It  is  quite  legitimate  to 
employ  it  in  an  d,  fortiori  way,  as  the  apostle  does  in 
Ephesians  vi.  For  assuredly  if  Jewish  children  honoured 
their  father  and  mother  on  legal  grounds,  much  more 
ought  Christian  children  on  grounds  of  grace. 

Another  great  call  was,  to  beware  "  lest  any  root  of 
bitterness  springing  up  trouble  you,  and  thereby  many 
be  defiled;  lest  there  be  any  fornicator,  or  profane 
person,  as  Esau,  who  for  one  morsel  of  meat  sold  his 
birthright."  Thus  you  see,  either  corrupt  passion  on  the 
one  hand,  or  profanity  on  the  other,  are  unsparingly 
condemned  by  the  grace  of  God.  If  the  law  could  show 
little  mercy  in  such  a  case,  the  grace  of  God  views  all 
sin  as  intolerable. 

This  leads  him,  from  speaking  of  Esau's  case,  to  add 
as  a  known  fact,  that  afterward,  when  he  desired  to 
have  inherited  the  blessing,  he  was  rejected  (for  he 
found  no  place  of  repentance),  though  he  sought  it 
carefully  with  tears.  That  is,  he  sought  carefully  with 
tears  the  blessing  given  to  Jacob;  but  there  was  no 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  537 

room  left  for  repentance,  simply  in  the  sense  of  change 
of  mind;  for,  I  suppose,  the  word  here  has  that  sense, 
which  sometimes,  no  doubt,  it  has.  In  its  ordinary 
usage,  it  has  ■  a  much  deeper  force.  Every  change  of 
mind  is  far  from  being  repentance,  which  doctrinally 
means  that  special  and  profound  revolution  in  the  soul 
when  we  take  God's  part  against  ourselves,  judging  our 
past  ways,  yea,  what  we  are  in  His  sight.  This  Esau 
never  sought;  and  there  never  was  one  who  did  seek 
and  failed  to  find  it.  Esau  would  have  liked  well  to 
have  got  or  regained  the  blessing;  but  this  was  given 
of  God  otherwise,  and  he  had  forfeited  it  himself. 
Arranged  aU  beforehand,  neither  Isaac's  partiality  nor 
Jacob's  deceit  was  able  to  divert  the  channel.  His  pur- 
pose utterly  failed  to  secure  the  blessing  for  his  profane 
but  favourite  son.  He  saw  his  error  at  last,  and  put  his 
seal  on  God's  original  appointment  of  the  matter. 

And  here  we  are  favoured  with  a  magnificent  picture 
of  Christianity  in  contrast  with  Judaism.  We  are  not 
come  to  Sinai,  the  mountain  that  burned  with  fire,  nor 
unto  blackness,  and  darkness,  and  tempest,  and  a  voice 
more  terrible  than  that  of  the  elements.  To  what  then 
are  we  come  ?  To  mount  Zion.  And  what  is  its  dis- 
tinctive character  as  here  introduced  ?  If  we  examine 
the  historical  facts  as  found  in  the  Old  Testament  story, 
what  is  it  rises  up  before  all  eyes  as  to  Zion  ?  When 
does  it  first  appear  ?  After  the  people  had  been  tried 
and  found  wanting;  after  the  priests  had  wrought,  if 
possible,  greater  corruption;  after  the  king  of  Israel's 
choice  had  reduced  them  to  the  lowest  degradation.  It 
was  therefore  a  crisis  after  the  most  painful  accumula- 
tion of  evils  that  weighed  on  the  heart  of  Israel.  But  if 
people  and  priest  and  king  were  proved  thus  vain,  God 


538  INTRODUCTORV  LECTURES. 

was  there,  and  His  grace  could  not  fail.  Their  abject 
ruin  placed  them  just  in  the  circumstances  that  suited 
the  God  of  all  grace.  At  that  very  moment  therefore 
the  tide  begins  to  turn.  God  brings  forward  His  choice, 
David,  when  the  miserable  end  of  Saul  and  Jonathan 
saw  the  Philistines  triumphant,  and  Israel  disheartened 
as  they  had  scarce  been  beyond  that  moment.  The  hill  of 
Zion  up  to  this  time  had  been  the  constant  menace  of 
the  enemy  against  the  people  of  the  Lord ;  but  in  due 
time,  when  David  reigned,  it  was  wrested  out  of  the 
hands  of  the  Jebusites,  and  became  the  stronghold  of 
Jerusalem,  the  city  of  the  king.  Thenceforward  how  it 
figures  in  the  Psalms  and  prophets !  This  then  is  the 
monument  for  such  as  we  are.  Let  blinded  Jews  turn 
their  sightless  eyeballs:  to  the  mountain  of  Sinai.  Let 
men  who  can  see  only  look  there,  and  what  will  be 
found  ?  Condemnation,  darkness,  death.  But  what  at 
Zion  ?  The  mighty  intervention  of  God  in  grace — yea, 
more  than  that,  forgiveness,  deliverance,  victory,  glory, 
for  the  people  of  God. 

For  not  merely  did  David  receive  from  Jehovah  that 
throne,  but  never  were  the  people  of  God  lifted  out  of 
such  a  state  of  distress  and  desolation,  and  placed  on 
such  a  height  of  firm  and  stable  triumph  as  under  that 
one  man's  reign.  He  had  beyond  all  mere  men  known 
sorrow  and  rejection  in  Israel ;  yet  he  himself  not  only 
mounted  the  throne  of  Jehovah,  but  raised  up  His 
people  to  such  power  and  prosperity  as  was  never 
reached  again.  For  although  outwardly,  no  doubt,  the 
prosperity  lasted  in  the  time  of  Solomon,  it  was  mainly 
the  fruit  of  David's  suffering,  and  power,  and  glory. 
God  honoured  the  son  for  the  father's  sake.  It  remained 
for  a  brief  season;  but  even  then  it  soon  began  to  show 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS.  539 

rents  down  to  the  foundations,  which  became  apparent 
too,  too  quickly  in  Solomon's  son.  With  Zion  then  the 
apostle  justly  begins.  Where  is  the  mountain  that  could 
stand  out  so  well  against  Sinai?  What  mountain  in 
the  Old  Testament  so  much  speaks  of  grace,  of  God's 
merciful  interference  for  His  people  when  all  was  lost  ? 

Eightly  then  we  begin  with  Zion,  and  thence  may  we 
trace  the  path  of  glory  up  to  God  Himself,  and  down 
to  the  kingdom  here  below.  Impossible  to  rise  higher 
than  the  Highest,  whence  therefore  the  apostle  descends 
to  consequences.  Indeed  we  may  say  that  the  whole 
epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is  just  this :  we  start  from  the 
foundation  of  grace  up  to  God  Himself  in  the  heavens; 
and  thence  springs  the  certainty  that  the  stream  of 
grace  is  not  exhausted,  and  that  undoubtedly  it  will 
issue  in  unceasing  blessing  by-and-by  for  the  earth, 
and  for  the  people  of  Israel  above  all,  in  the  day  of 
Jehovah. 

Accordingly  we  have  a  remarkable  line  of  blessing 
pursued  for  our  instruction  here.  "Ye  are  come  unto 
mount  Zion,"  which  was  the  highest  Old  Testament 
point  of  grace  on  earth.  Others  doubtless  could  speak 
of  their  Ararat,  their  Olympus,  their  ^tna ;  but  which 
boasted  of  the  true  God  that  loved  His  people  in  the 
way  that  Zion  could?  But  would  a  Jew  infer  hence 
that  it  was  only  the  city  of  David  he  was  speaking  of  ? 
Let  him  learn  his  error.  "And  unto  the  city  of  the 
living  God,  (not  of  dying  David,)  the  heavenly  Jeru- 
salem" (not  the  earthly  capital  of  Palestine).  This  I 
take  to  be  a  general  description  of  the  scene  of  glory  for 
which  Abraham  looked.  He  could  know  nothing  of  the 
mystery  of  the  church,  Christ's  body,  nor  of  her  bridal 
hopes ;    but  he  did  look  for  what  is  called  here  the 


540  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

"heavenly  Jerusalem/'  that  city  "whose  maker  and 
builder  is  God."  In  this  phrase  there  is  no  allusion 
whatever  to  the  church ;  nor  indeed  anywhere  in  the 
Hebrews  is  there  any  reference  to  its  distinctive  portion 
in  union  with  its  Head.  When  it  says  that  Abraham 
looked  for  the  city,  it  means  a  blessed  and  ordered  scene 
of  glory  on  high,  which  eclipsed  the  Holy  Land  before 
his  eyes.  This,  however,  does  not  mean  the  church,  but 
rather  the  future  seat  of  general  heavenly  bliss  for  the 
glorified  saints. 

Then  he  adds:  "And  to  myriads  of  angels,  the 
general  assembly" — for  such  is  the  true  way  to  divide 
the  verse — "and  to  the  church  of  the  firstborn,"  &c. 
This  proves  that  the  city  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem 
does  not  mean  the  church,  because  here  they  are  cer- 
tainly distinguished  from  each  other,  which  therefore 
completely  settles  all  the  argument  that  is  often  founded 
on  Abraham's  looking  for  a  heavenly  city.  It  was  not 
the  church,  I  repeat,  but  what  God  prepares  above  for 
those  who  love  Him.  True,  the  apostle  John  uses  this 
very  city  as  the  figure  of  the  bride.  But  this  essen- 
tial difference  separates  between  the  city  for  which 
Abraham  looked  and  the  bride  so  symbolised  in  the 
Apocalypse.  "When  the  apostle  Paul  speaks  of  "the 
city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,"  he 
means  the  scene  of  future  heavenly  blessedness ;  whereas 
when  John  speaks  of  the  new  Jerusalem  descending 
out  of  heaven  from  God,  he  means,  not  when  but  what 
we  are  to  be.  The  difference  is  very  great.  The  epistle 
sets  before  us  the  seat  of  glory  prepared  on  high ;  the 
Eevelation  speaks  of  the  bride  represented  as  a  glorious 
golden  city  with  figures  beyond  nature.  The  one  is 
what  may  be  called  the  objective  glory;  the  other  is 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  5-il 

the  subjective  condition  of  those  that  compose  the 
bride,  the  Lamb's  wife. 

Having  brought  us  to  see  the  "church  of  the  first- 
born which  are  written  in  heaven,"  the  apostle  next  can 
only  speak  of  "God  the  Judge  of  all."  He  describes 
Him  thus  in  His  judicial  character.  The  reason  appears 
to  be,  because  he  is  going  to  tell  us  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment saints.  They  had  known  God  in  His  providence 
and  dealings  on  the  earth,  though  looking  for  a  Messiah 
and  His  day.  Hence,  therefore,  he  now  introduces  us 
"to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect."  These 
evidently  are  the  elders  of  olden  times.  None  but  the 
Old  Testament  saints,  as  a  class,  can  all  be  in  the 
separate  state :  not  the  church,  or  New  Testament 
saints,  for  we  shall  not  all  sleep ;  nor  the  millennial 
saints,  for  none  of  them  will  die.  The  reference  is  there- 
fore plain  and  sure. 

Then  we  hear  of  "Jesus,  the  mediator  of  the  new 
covenant" — the  pledge  of  Israel's  full  and  changeless 
blessing.  Lastly,  he  points  "  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling, 
that  speaketh  better  than  Abel:"  the  assurance  that  the 
earth  shall  be  delivered  from  its  long  sorrow  and  slavery. 

Thus  the  chain  of  blessedness  is  complete.  He  has 
shown  us  the  symbolic  mount  of  grace  in  Zion,  con- 
trasted with  Sinai  the  mountain  of  law.  If  the  one 
figured  the  imposed  measure  of  man's  responsibility, 
which  can  only  but  most  justly  condemn  him,  in  the 
other  we  behold  the  mountain  of  God's  grace  after  all 
■was  lost.  Then  follows  the  heavenly  glory,  to  which 
grace  naturally  leads ;  then  the  natural  inhabitants  of 
the  heavenly  land,  namely,  the  angels — "  and  to  myriads 
of  angels,  the  general  assembly."  Then  he  shows  us 
others  higher  than  these,  by  a  divine  call — "  and  to  the 


542  INTRODUCTOEY  LECTURES. 

church  of  the  firstborn,  which  ar^  written  in  heaven.' 
They  do  not  belong  to  heaven  like  the  angels ;  but  God 
had  an  eternal  purpose,  which  brought  them  by  an 
extraordinary  favour  there.  And  then,  in  the  centre 
■  of  all,  we  have  God  Hiniself.  But  having  looked  up 
to  Him  who  is  above  all,  he  speaks  of  the  highest 
group  next  to  God  in  His  judicial  character,  namely, 
the  Old  Testament  saints.  Then  he  descends  to  a  new 
or  fresh  covenant  (not  Kaiv^s,  as  elsewhere,  but  vias),  the 
recently  inaugurated  covenant  for  the  two  houses  of 
the  ancient  people.  Although  the  blood  on  which  that 
covenant  was  founded  may  be  now  long  shed,  when  the 
covenant  comes  into  force  for  them,  will  it  not  be  as 
fresh  as  the  day  the  precious  Victim  died  and  shed 
His  blood  ?  The  reference  here  I  cannot  but  regard  as 
exclusively  to  the  two  houses  of  Israel.  And  as  thus 
were  shown  the  people  immutably  blessed  (for  salt  shall 
not  be  wanting  to  that  covenant)  in  the  scene  that  will 
soon  come,  we  finally  hear  of  the  earth  itself  joyful 
in  the  curse  removed  for  ever.  It  is  "the  blood  that 
speaketh  better  than  Abel."  For  the  martyred  saint's 
blood  the  earth  cried  to  God  for  vengeance;  but  Christ's 
blood  proclaims  mercy  from  God,  and  the  millennial 
day  will  be  the  glorious  witness  of  its  depth,  and  ex- 
tent, and  stability,  before  the  universe. 

The  rest  of  the  chapter  brings  in,  accordingly,  the 
closing  scene,  when  the  Lord  comes  to  shake  everything, 
and  establish  that  blessed  day.  But  although  it  will 
be  the  shaking  of  all  things,  not  of  earth  only  but  also 
heaven,  yet,  marvellous  to  say,  such  confidence  of  heart 
does  grace  give,  that  this,  which  may  be  regarded  as  the 
most  awful  threat,  turns  into  a  blessed  promise.  Think 
of  the  shaking  of  heaven  and  earth  being  a  promise ! 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  54S 

Nothing  but  absolute  establishment  of  heart  in  God's 
grace  could  have  gazed  on  a  destroyed  universe,  and 
yet  call  it  a  "promise."  But  it  is  the  language  for  us  to 
learn  and  speak,  as  we  are  called  to  rest  on  <Jod  and 
not  on  the  creature. 

The  last  chapter  follows  this  up  with  some  practical 
exhortations  as  to  brotherly  love  continuing;  then  as  to 
kindness  to  strangers,  or  hospitality;  iinally,  as  to  pity 
for  those  in  bonds.  "  Be  mindful  of  those  in  bonds,  as 
bound  with  them ;  and  of  those  which  suffer  adversity." 
Again  he  insists  upon  the  honour  and  purity  of  the 
marriage  tie,  and  the  abhorrence  that  God  has  for  those 
that  despise  and  corrupt  it,  and  the  sure  judgment 
which  will  come  upon  them.  He  presses  a  conversation 
without  covetousness,  and  a  spirit  of  content,  founded 
on  our  confidence  in  the  Lord's  care. 

At  the  same  fime  he  exhorts  the  believers  as  to  their 
chiefs,  that  is,  those  who  guided  them  spiritually.  It  is 
likely  that  the  Hebrew  believers  were  somewhat  unruly. 
And  their  relation  to  their  leaders  he  puts  forward  in 
various  forms.  First,  they  were  to  remember  those  that 
once  ruled  them.  Those  were  now  gone  from  the  scene 
of  their  trials  and  labours,  of  "whom,  considering  the 
issue  of  their  conversation,  imitate  the  faith." 

This  naturally  leads  the  apostle  to  bring  before  them 
One  that  never  ends — "Jesus  Christ  [is]  the  same  yester- 
day, and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  Why  should  His  saints 
be  carried  away  with  questions  about  meats  and  drinks  ? 
He  is  the  same  unchangingly  and  evermore,  as  He  has 
ever  been.  "Be  not  carried  about  with  divers  and 
strange  doctrines.  For  it  is  a  good  thing  that  the  heart 
be   established  in  grace."      See  how  this   word,  this 


544  INTKODUCTOEY  LECTUEKS. 

thought,  always  predominates  in  the  epistle.  Why 
turn  back  to  "meats,  which  have  not  profited  them' 
that  have  been  occupied  therein?" 

Had  they  been  taunted  with  having  no  altar,  with 
possessing  nothing  so  holy  and  so  glorious  in  its  asso- 
ciations ?  It  was  only  owing  to  the  blindness  of  Israel. 
For,  says  he,  "we  have  an  altar,"  yea,  more  than  that, 
an  altar,  "whereof  they  have  no  right  to  eat  which 
serve  the  tabernacle."  You  that  go  after  the  tabernacle 
(as  he  persists  in  calling  it,  even  though  now  the  tem- 
ple) have  no  title  to  our  altar,  with  its  exhaustless 
supplies.     To  us  Christ  is  all. 

But  this  becomes  the  occasion  of  a  remarkable  allu- 
sion, on  which  I  must  for  a  moment  dwell.  He  draws 
attention  to  the  well-known  rites  of  the  atonement  day ; 
at  any  rate,  if  not  of  that  day  exclusively,  wherever  there 
was  a  beast  the  body  of  which  was  burnt  without  the 
camp,  and  the  blood  carried  within  the  veil.  Do  you 
not  discern  in  this  striking  combination  the  distinctive 
features  of  Christianity  ?  Alas !  it  is  not  the  dulness 
of  Jewish  prejudice  only,  but  exactly  what  is  denied  by 
every  system  of  which  men  boast  in  Christendom.  For 
these  very  features  did  Judaism  despise  the  gospel.  But 
let  not  the  Gentile  boast,  no  less  unbelieving,  no  less 
arrogant,  against  true  Christianity.  Christendom  pre- 
cisely takes  the  middle  ground  of  Judaism  between 
these  two  extremes.  The  mean  looks  and  sounds  well, 
but  is  utterly  false  for  the  Christian.  The  two  extremes, 
offensive  to  every  lover  of  the  via  media  of  religious 
rationalism,  must  be  combined  in  Christianity  and  the 
Christian  man,  if  he  is  to  maintain  it  unimpaired  and 
pure.  The  first  is,  that  in  spirit  the  Christian  is  now 
brought  by  redemption,  without  spot  or  guUt,  into  the 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS.  545 

presence  of  God.  If  you  believe  in  Christ  at  all,  such 
is  your  portion— nothing  less.  If  I  know  what  Christ's 
redemption  has  accomplished  for  all  who  believe,  I  must 
know  that  God  has  given  me  this.  He  honours  the 
work  of  Christ,  according  to  His  estimate  of  its  efficacy, 
as  it  is  only  according  to  His  counsels  about  us  for 
Christ's  glory.  Of  this  we  saw  somewhat  in  chapter  x. 
And  what  is  the  effect  of  it  ?  As  a  Christian  I  am  now 
free,  by  God's  will,  to  go  in  peace  and  assurance  of  His 
love  into  the  holiest  of  all— yes,  now.  I  speak,  of  course, 
of  our  entrance  there  only  in  spirit. 

As  to  the  outer  man  also,  we  must  learn  to  what  we 
are  called  now.  The  apostle  argues  that,  just  as  the 
blood  of  the  beast  was  brought  into  the  holiest  of  all, 
^hile  the  body  of  the  same  animal  was  taken  outside 
the  canip  and  burnt,  so  this  too  must  be  made  good  in  our 
portion.  If  I  have  an  indisputable  present  title  of  access 
into  the  holiest  of  all,  I  must  not  shrink  from  the  place 
of  ashes  outside  the  camp.  He  that  possesses  the  one 
must  not  eschew  the  other.  In  these  consists  our  double 
present  association  by  faith,  while  on  the  earth.  The 
apostle  earnestly  insists  on  them  both.  We  belong 
to  the  holiest  of  all,  and  we  act  upon  it,  if  we  act 
rightly,  when  we  worship  God;  nay,  when  we  draw 
near  to  God  in  prayer  at  all  times.  Brought  nigh  to 
God  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  we  have  perfect  access,  so 
that  there  is  nothing  between  God  and  us;  for  Christ 
suffered  once  to  bring  us  to  God,  as  He  intercedes  that 
we  may  have  communion  with  Him  in  this  place  of 
nearness.  Our  being  brought  to  God  supposes,  and  is 
founded  on  the  fact,  that  our  sins  are  gone  perfectly  by 
His  one  offering ;  otherwise  no  madness  is  greater  than 
indulging  such  a  thought.     If  it  be  not  the  truth,  it 

N  N 


546  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

would  be  the  height  of  presumption  indeed  But  far 
from  this,  it  is  the  simple  fact  of  the  gospel.  "  He  suf- 
fered once  for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,"  says  another 
apostle,  "  that  he  might  bring  us  " — not  to  pardon,  nor 
to  peace,  nor  to  heaven,  but; — "  to  God."  Compare  also 
Eph.  ii.  "We  are  brought,  then,  washed  from  our  sins, 
to  God,  and,  according  to  this  epistle,  into  the  holiest  of 
all,  where  He  displays  Himself.  The  real  presumption, 
therefore,  is  to  pretend  to  be  a  Christian,  and  yet  to 
doubt  the  primary  fundamental  truth  of  Christianity 
as  to  this. 

But  the  bodies  of  those  beasts  were  burnt  without 
the  camp :  my  place,  so  far  as  I  in  the  body  am  con- 
cerned, is  one  of  shame  and  suffering  in  this  world. 

Are  those  two  things  true  of  you  ?  If  you  have  and 
prize  one  alone,  -yon  have  only  got  the  half  of  Chris- 
tianity— yea,  of  its ,  foundations.  Are  they  both  true 
of  you?  Then  you  may  bless  God  that  He  has  so 
blessed  you,  and  given  you  to  know  as  true  of  yourself 
that  which,  if  not  so  known,  effectually  prevents  one 
from  having  the  full  joy  and  bearing  the  due  witness 
as  an  unworldly  and  simple-hearted  servant  of  Christ 
here  below.  It  is  true,  He  does  not  always  call  at  once 
into  the  place  of  reproach  and  suffering.  He  first 
brings  us  into  the  joy  and  nearness  of  His  presence. 
He  satisfies  us  with  the  perfectness  with  which  Christ 
has  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  blood,  and  has 
made  us  kings  and  priests  to  His  God  and  Father. 
But  having  done  this.  He  points  us  to  the  place  of 
Christ  without  the  camp.  "  Let  us  go  forth  therefore 
unto  Mm  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach."  This 
was  the  very  thing  that  these  Jewish  Christians  were 
shrinking  from,  if  not  rebelling  against.   They  had  not 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   HEBREWS.  547 

made  up  their  minds  to  suffer:  to  be  despised  was 
odious  ia  their  eyes.  Nor  is  it  pleasant  to  nature.  But 
the  apostle  lets  them  know  that  if  they  understood 
their  true  blessing,  this  was  the  very  part  of  it  that  was 
inseparably  bound  up  with  their  present  nearness  to 
God,  as  set  forth  typically  by  the  central  and  most 
important  rite  of  the  Jewish  system.  This  is  the  mean- 
ing of  the  blood  carried  within,  and  of  the  body  burnt 
without. 

Let  us  then  seek  to  combine  these  two  things : 
perfect  nearness  to  God,  and  the  place  of  utter  scorn 
in  the  preseuce  of  man.  Christendom  prefers  the 
middle  course ;  it  will  have  neither  the  conscious  near- 
ness to  God,  nor  the  place  of  Christ's  reproach  among 
men.  All  the  effort  of  Christendom  is  first  to  deny 
the  one,  and  then  to  escape  from  the  other.  I  ask  my 
brethren  here  if  they  are  looking  to  God  strenuously, 
earnestly,  for  themselves  and  for  their  children,  not  to 
allow  but  to  oppose  as  their  adversary  every  thing  that 
tends  to  weaken  either  of  these  truths,  which  are  our 
highest  privilege  and  our  truest  glory  as  Christians 
here  below.  What  a  surprise  to  the  Hebrew  believers 
to  find  such  truths  as  these  so  strikingly  shown  out 
in  tj^e  even  in  the  Jewish  system ! 

But  the  apostle  goes  farther,  as  indeed  was  due 
to  truth.  These  characteristics  he  proves  to  be  really 
found  in  Christ  Himself  He  is  evidently  gone  into 
the  holiest  of  all  in  His  own  person.  But  how? 
What  had  immediately  preceded  this  ?  The  cross.  Thus 
the  cross  and  heavenly  glory  must  go  together.  The 
gracious  Lord  gives  and  designs  that  we  should  take 
His  own  place  both  in  heaven  and  here.  "  Let  us  go 
forth  therefore  unto  him  without  the  camp."     This  is 

N  N   2 


348  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES. 

just  the  closing  practical  word  of  the  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews.  God  was  going  openly  to  set  aside  the  Jewish 
system,  as  it  had  already  been  judged  morally  in  the 
cross  of  Christ.  "When  the  Messiah  was  crucified,  Juda- 
ism was  in  principle  a  dead  thing ;  if  it  was  in  any 
sense  kept  up,  it  was  no  more  than  a  decent  time  before 
its  burial.  But  now  God  sends  His  final  summons, 
founded  on  their  own  ritual,  to  His  people  who  were 
hankering  after  the  dead,  instead  of  seeing  the  Living 
One  on  high.  He  as  it  were  repeats,  "  Let  the  dead 
bury  the  dead."  The  Eomans  will  do  the  last  sad  offices. 
But  as  for  you  who  believe  in  Jesus,  wait  not  for  the 
Eomans ;  let  Judaism  be  nothing  but  a  corpse,  which 
does  not  concern  you.  "  Let  us  go  forth  therefore  unto 
him  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach." 

This  was  a  final  call ;  and  how  gracious !  If  God  had 
reserved  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  until  after  He  sent 
forth  His  armies  and  burned  up  their  city,  destroy- 
ing their  polity  root  and  branch,  it  might  have  been 
retorted  that  the  Christians  valued  the  Jewish  ritual 
as  long  as  it  was  available,  and  only  gave  it  up  when 
earthly  temple  and  sacrifice  and  priest  were  gone. 
But  God  took  care  to  summon  His  children  outside — 
to  abandon  the  whole  system  before  it  was  destroyed. 
They  were  to  leave  the  dead  to  bury  their  dead ;  and 
they  did  so.  But  Christendom  has  wholly  failed  to 
profit  by  the  call,  and  is  doomed  to  perish  by  a  judg- 
ment yet  more  solemn  and  wide -spread  than  that 
which  swept  away  the  ancient  temple. 

Another  point  follows,  connected  with  what  we  have 
had  before  us,  and  demanding  our  attention.  Instead 
of  pining  after  that  which  is  about  to  be  destroyed,  or 
repining  at  the  call  to  go  out  to  the  place  of  Christ's 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  549 

shame  on  earth,  Christianity,  which  replaces  Judaism 
now,  may  well  cause  us  to  offer  "  the  sacrifice  of  praise 
to  God  continually."  There  are  two  kinds  of  sacrifice 
to  which  we  are  now  called.  "By  him  therefore  let 
us  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God  continually,  that 
is,  the  fruit  of  our  lips,  confessing  his  name.  But  to 
do  good  and  to  communicate  forget  not :  for  with  such 
sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased."  That  may  have  a  higher 
character,  these  a  lower ;  but  even  the  highest  is  never 
to  supersede  or  make  us  forgetful  of  the  lowest. 

Then  comes  a  second  exhortation  as  to  their  guides, 
or  leading  men  among  the  brethren.  (Compare  Acts 
XV.  22.)  "  Obey  your  leaders,  and  submit  yourselves  ; 
for  they  watch  for  your  souls,  as  those  that  shall  give 
account."  There  is  no  sanction  here,  of  course,  of  the 
vulgar  and  outrageous  error  that  pastors  give  an  account 
of  the  souls  of  their  flock.  It  is  an  idea  that  superstition 
hatched,  for  the  purpose  of  spuriously  exalting  a  clerical 
order.  The  meaning  is,  that  spiritual  guides  shall  give 
an  account  of  their  own  behaviour  in  watching  over 
other  souls ;  for  it  is  a  work  that  calls  for  much  jealousy 
over  self,  patience  with  others,  painstaking  labour,  low- 
liness of  mind,  and  that  hearty  love  which  can  bear  all, 
endure  all,  believe  all.  There  is  then  the  solenm  ad- 
monition of  the  account  they  are  to  render  by-and-by. 
They  watch  as  those  that  shall  give  an  account.  Now 
is  the  time  for  self-denying  labour,  and  endurance  in 
grace;  by-and-by  the  account  must  be  given  to  the 
Lord  that  appointed  them.  And  the  apostle  would 
that  their  work  of  watching  might  be  done  with  joy, 
and  not  groaning,  for  this  would  be  unprofitable  for 
the  saints. 

But  even  the  apostle  felt  his  own  need  of  the  prayers 


550  INTEODTJCTOEY  LECTURES. 

of  the  faithful,  not  because  he  had  gone  wrong,  hut 
because  he  was  conscious  of  no  hindrance  to  his  work 
from  a  bad  conscience.  "Pray  for  us:  for  we  trust  we 
have  a  good  conscience ;  in  all  things  willing  to  live 
honestly.  But  I  beseech  you  the  rather  to  do  this,  that 
I  may  be  restored  to  you  the  sooner." 

Then  he  commends  the  saints  to  God.  "Now  the 
God  of  peace,  that  brought  again  from  the  dead  our 
Lord  Jesus,  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  in  virtue 
of  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  perfect  you  in 
every  good  work  to  do  his  will,  working  in  you  that 
which  is  well -pleasing  in  his  sight,  through  Jesus 
Christ;  to  whom  be  glory  for  the  ages  of  the  ages." 

Finally,  he  beseeches  his  brethren  to  bear  the  word 
of  exhortation.  Such  is  pre-eminently  the  bearing  of 
this  epistle  to  those  who  had  Jio  such  frequent  oppor- 
tunities of  profiting  by  his  teaching  as  the  Gentile 
churches.  We  can  understand,  therefore,  both  the 
delicacy  that  thus  entreated  them,  and  the  meaning 
of  the  added  words,  "for  also  in  few  words  I  have 
written  to  you."  Nor  does  it  seem  so  natural  for  any 
as  the  great  apostle  to  inform  them  of  his  child  and 
fellow  -  labourer :  "Know  that  the  brother  Timothy  is 
set  at  liberty;  with  whom,  if  he  come  pretty  soon,  1 
will  see  you.  Salute  all  your  leaders,  and  all  the  saints. 
They  from  Italy  salute  you.  Grace  be  with  you  all. 
Amen." 

Thus  the  apostle  closes  this  most  striking  and  precious 
epistle,  brimful  to  overflowing  with  that  which  had 
an  especial  and  very  touching  interest  to  a  Jew,  but 
nevertheless  needed  as  certainly  by  us,  and  as  rich  in 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  551 

instruction  for  us  in  this  day  as  for  those  at  any  time 
that  has  passed  away.  For  let  me  say  this  as  a  parting 
word,  and  I  say  it  advisedly,  hecause  of  circumstances 
that  might  well  be  before  our  hearts, — no  deliverance, 
however  enjoyed,  no  place  of  death  to  law,  world,  or  sin, 
no  privilege  of  union  with  Christ,  will  enable  a  soul  to 
dispense  with  the  truths  contained  in  this  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews.  We  are  still  walking  here  below ;  we  are  in 
the  place  therefore  where  infirmity  is  felt,  where  Satan 
tempts,  where  we  may  fail  through  unwatchfulness. 
The  greater  part  of  the  affections  of  the  Christian  are 
drawn  out  toward  our  Saviour  by  all  this  scene  of  sin 
and  sorrow  through  which  we  are  passing  on  to  heaven. 
If  we  formed  our  Christian  character  practically  on 
such  epistles  as  those  to  the  Ephesians  and  Colossians 
alone,  depend  on  it  there  may  not  be  the  hard  lines  of 
the  law,  but  there  will  be  very  far  from  the  fervent 
affections  which  become  him  who  feels  the  grace  of 
Christ.  Be  assured  it  is  of  the  deepest  possible  moment 
to  cherish  the  activity  of  Christ's  present  love  and  care 
for  us,  the  activity  of  that  priesthood  which  is  the 
subject  of  this  epistle.  Holding  fast  the  permanence  of 
the  blotting  out  of  our  guilt,  may  we  nevertheless  and 
besides  own  the  need  of  such  an  One  as  Christ  to 
intercede  for  us,  and  deal  in  grace  with  all  our  feeble- 
ness or  faults.  The  Lord  forbid  that  anything  should 
enfeeble  our  sense  of  the  value  and  necessity  of  such 
daily  grace.  There  may  be  that  which  calls  for  con- 
fusion of  face  in  us,  but  there  is  unceasing  ground  also 
for  thanksgiving  and  praise,  however  much  we  have  to 
humble  ourselves  in  the  sight  of  God. 


Loudon:  W.  H.  Broom,  Paternoster  Row. 


BY   THE    SAME    AUTHOR. 


LECTUKES  INTRODUCTORY  TO  THE  STUDY  OF 
THE  GOSPELS. 

Price  7s.  6d. 

LECTURES   ON   FUNDAMENTAL  TRUTHS   CONNECTED 
WITH  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

Price  3s. 

LECTURES  ON  THE  SECOND  COMING  AND  KINGDOM 
OF  THE  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST. 

Price  4s. 

LECTURES   ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT   DOCTRINE   OF 
THE  HOLY  SPIRIT. 

Price  5s. 
THE  REVELATION  OF  JOHN, 

EDITED  IN  OB££K  WITH  ji  MEW  ENGLIBH  TEBSION,  AND  A  STATEMENT  OF  THE 
CHIEF  AUTH0BITIE8  AND  TAEIOUS   BEADINOS. 

Price  4s.  6d. 

THE  SAME,  WITH  LECTURES  ON  THE  BOOK. 
Morocco,  gilt  edges,  20s. 


