Lectures on the book of Revelation deliver 


Ironside, Henry Allan 
Life Pacific College Alumni Library 


LLF.E. College Library 
ty % Clendale Rlud 


Ironside, Henry Allan 
Lectures on the book of Revelation 


OEMCO 


aa 
IZO}1 7 


DATE DUE 


FEB 1 9 1 
Dec 1 1084 


DEC 9 199 


2 
3 
» 
i 
& 


LIB.E. College Library © 
1100 Glendale Blvd. 
tos Anaeles, Calif. 90024 


EBC LURES 
ON THE BOOK OF 


REVELATION 


By 
H. A. IRONSIDE, Litt.D. 
Author of NOTES ON JEREMIAH AND LAMENTATIONS; 


‘NOTES ON EZEKIEL THE PROPHET; LECTURES ON DANIEL THE PROPHET; 
NOTES ON THE MINOR PROPHETS, etc., etc. 


1236/6 
eis) 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS 
Neptune, New Jersey 


L.LF.E. Collec ary 
1100 Glendale Blvd. 


FIRST EDITION, SEPTEMBER 1920 
Twenty-ninth Printing, December 1971 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


a LIFE Pacific Collec 


Alumni Library 
1100 West Covina Blv 
San Dimas, CA 9177 
PREFACE to the 1930 EDITION 


The eleven years that have elapsed since these 
lectures were first issued in printed form, have 
but given added proof that the system of inter- 
pretation followed is the Scriptural one. The 
word of prophecy is confirmed by the passing of 
the years. Everything in the Church, in Jewry, 
and in the world, moves on exactly as predicted 
in the Holy Scriptures. 

It is a matter of sincere gratification to the 
author, that, in preparing a new edition, in 
response to the ever-increasing demand for this 
unpretentious volume, there has not been an in- 
terpretation to discard nor a matter of any im- 
portance to alter. A few typographical errors 
have been corrected; an occasional sentence has 
been recast; here and there an entire paragraph 
has been altered; but only to make the teaching 
less ambiguous, or to change awkward expres- 
sions so as to clarify the whole. Otherwise this 
edition is practically the same as that of 1919. 

May God continue to use it to the awakening 
of believers to the imminence of the Lord’s re- 
turn, and to the arousing of the unsaved that they 
may come to Christ ere the door of grace be 
closed. 

—H. A. IRONSIDE. 


Chicago, IIl., Sept. 1930. 


PREFACE 


N reproducing these lectures in book form, I 
simply accede to the requests of many who 
heard them, either in Oakland or in other cities 
where I have spoken on the same Book in recent 
years. Heretofore I have always refused to bring 
out a volume on the Apocalypse, as it seemed to 
me there were so many already in print better 
than any Icould hope to write. But while this 
fact remains as true to-day as ever, the great war 
and other colossal movements of the past five 
years have combined to so emphasize and clarify 
much that abler brethren had written in years 
gone by, that it now seems to me there is a need 
for some later exposition of the last prophetic 
book of the Bible which would take cognizance 
of these many significant events. 

It must be very gratifying to sober students 
of prophecy to find that their position is only 
strengthened by recent happenings, and their pre- 
vious conclusions confirmed. On the other hand, 
the self-styled optimistic school, who have ever 
closed their eyes to the solemn facts of prophecy, 
might well be humiliated to find their vain-glori- 


4 Preface 


ous prognostications proven so utterly false, and 
their confidence in human brotherhood, as a pre- 
ventive of war and cruelty, shown te be a foolish 
hallucination, which ignored the word of God 
and the corruption of the human heart. 

In preparing these addresses for the press, I 
have not changed their form materially, though 
here and there altering ambiguous sentences, and 
occasionally enlarging on some theme for the 
sake of clearness. The first lecture was only par- 
tially reported, and therefore had to be almost 
completely recast. The others are largely as de 
livered. 

Trusting that the book may be used to arouse 
an interest in the study of prophecy and to pre- 
pare a people for the Lord's return, I send it forth 
in His Name. 

H. A. IRONSIDE. 


Oakand, Caf, 1919 


INDEX 


LECTURE PAGE 
I, Chapter1;1-18. ThelIntroduction. ....., 7 


Il. Chapter 1: 9-20, The First Vision. . ... .18 
Ill. Chapter 2. The Seven Churches. .. .. . 88 
IV. Chapter 3. The Seven Churches (continued) . . 59 
VY. Chapter 4. The First Vision of Heaven. . . . 79 
VI. Chapters 5: 1--6; 8. The Seven-sealed Book . . 88 
VII. Chapter 6: 9-17. The Fifth and Sixth Seals. . 106 


VIL. Chapter 7. The Hundredand Forty-four Thousand 
and the Great Multitude of Gentiles. . . 128 


IX. Chapter 8. The Breaking of the Geventh Seal. . 138 
XK. Chapter 9. The First and Second “Woe” Trumpets 155 
Xl. Chapter 10. Eating the Little Opened Book . . 170 


XII. Chapter 11. The Two Witnesses and the Seventh 
Pinecone tn ate) ay wor yarod, oP coui-% 186 


XIJI. Chapter 12. The Woman and the Man-child . 203 


XIV. Chapter 13: 1-10. The Coming “Federation 
LINO toe) a) ti a? ee ee so SD 


XV. Chapter 13: 11-18. The Personal Antichrist. . 236 
XVI. Chapter 14. The Karvest and Vintage . , 253 
XVII. Chapters 15, 16. The Vials of the Wrath of God 269 


6 Index—continued 
LECTURE PAGE 
XVIII. Chapter17, Babylon: Its Character and Doom 285 


XIX. Chapters 18: 1—19:5. Babylon; Its Character 
and Doom (continued). . . . . . .- . 808 
XX. Chapter 19: 6-21. The Two Suppers , . . 318 


CXI. Chapter 20. The Millennium and the Judgment 
of the Great White Throne . . . . . . 333 


XXII. Chapters 21,22. Closing Scenes . .. . 850 


LECTURES ON THE 
REVELATION 


LECTURE. I 
THE INTRODUCTION 
(Chapter 1: 1-8) 


T is certainly cause for deep regret that to so 
many Christians the Book of Revelation seems 
to be what God never intended it should be —a 
sealed book. The book of Daniel was to be sealed 
till the time of the end (Dan. 12:9), but of Revela- 
tion it is written: “Seal not the sayings of the 
prophecy of this book: for the time is at hand” 
(Chap. 22:10). It is clearly evident that this por- 
tion of Holy Scripture was given for our instruc- 
tion and edification, but thousands of the Lord’s 
people permit themselves to be robbed of blessing by 
ignoring it. 
Significantly enough, it is the one book of the 
Bible which begins and ends with a blessing pro- 


nounced on those who read and keep what is writ- 
7 


8 Lectures on tke Revelation 


ten therein (Chap. 1:3; 22:7). Surely God did 
not mean to mock us by promising a blessing on all 
who keep what they cannot hope to understand! It 
is only unbelief that would so reason. Faith de- 
lights to appropriate every part of the sacred record, 
and finds that “they are all clear to him that un- 
derstandeth.” 

The true title is given us in the opening verse. 
It is, ‘‘ The Revelation of Jesus Christ;”’ not “ The 
Revelation of St. John the Divine.” There is no 
MS. authority for this latter designation, and it 
shows all too plainly how far some early editor had 
slipped away from first principles. John was a 
saint as all believers are saints. He was not a 
divine! Such a title would have amazed him be- 
yond measure. Nor is the book the revelation of 
John or of any other servant of God. It is the 
revelation of Jesus Christ Himself. 

The word rendered “ revelation,” and sometimes 
“ apocalypse,’ means literally an unveiling, or mani- 
festation. So this book is the unveiling of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. He is its one great theme. It 
presents Him as the Son of Man in the midst of 
the churches during the present dispensation; and as 
the Judge and the King in the dispensations to come. 
If you would learn to appreciate Christ more, read 
this book, frequently and prayerfully. It reveals 
Him as the Lamb rejected, soon to reign in glory — 
the Lamb on the throne! 


The Introduction (chap. 1: 1-8) 9 


And observe the title is not in the plural. People 
often speak of the book of Revelations. There is 
no such book in the Bible. It is the Revelation — 
one blessed, continuous manifestation of God’s 
unique Son, the anointed Prophet, Priest and King. 
Revelation is the crowning book of the Bible. It is 
like the Head-stone of Zech. 4: 7 that completes and 
crowns the whole wondrous pyramid of truth. 

Of this vast pyramid the Pentateuch of Moses 
forms the broad, solid foundation. Upon this is 
built up the Covenant History. Then the Psalms 
and Poetical Books. Then the Prophetic Series of 
the Old Testament. Higher up we have the Gos- 
pels and the Acts. Then the Epistles with their 
deep spiritual instruction ; and to complete the glori- 
ous structure, this last, solemn, but exceedingly pre- 
cious book, the Revelation, linking all the rest with 
the soon-to-be-manifested glory of God. 

Or if you think of Holy Scripture as forming a 
great golden circle of truth, we start with Genesis, 
the book of beginnings, and go on through the Testa- 
ments until we come to Revelation — the book of the 
last things; and, lo, we find it dovetails exactly into 
the book of Genesis, and thus perfects the inspired 
ring! The Word of God is one absolutely perfect, 
unbroken, and unbreakable circle. 

A comparison of Genesis and Revelation will 
readily make this plain, and show how we have the 
types in Genesis and the completion of the truth in 


10 Lectures on the Revelation 


Revelation : — in the one book the beginning, in the 
other the consummation. 

Genesis gives us the creation of the heavens and 
the earth. Revelation presents a new heaven and 
a new earth. 

Genesis shows us the earthly paradise, with the 
tree of life and the river of blessing, lost through 
sin. Revelation gives us the Paradise of God with 
the Tree of Life and the pure river of water of life 
proceeding out of the throne of God and the Lamb 
— Paradise regained through Christ’s atonement. 

In Genesis we see the first man and his wife set 
over all God’s creation. In Revelation we behold 
the Second Man and His Bride ruling over a re- 
deemed world. 

In Genesis we are told of the first typical sacrifi- 
cial lamb. In Revelation the Lamb once slain is 
in the midst of the throne. 

In Genesis we learn of the beginning of sin, 
when the serpent first entered the garden of delight 
to beguile Adam and Eve with his sophistries. In 
Revelation that old Serpent called the devil and 
Satan is cast into the lake of fire. 

In Genesis we have the first murderer, the first 
polygamist, the first rebel, the first drunkard, ete. 
In Revelation all such, who refuse to accept God’s 
grace in Christ Jesus, are banished from His pres- 
ence forever. 

In Genesis we view the rise of Babel, or Babylon. 


The Introduction (chap. 1: 1-8) II 


In Revelation we are called to contemplate its doom. 

In Genesis we see man’s city; in Revelation the 
city of God. 

Genesis shows us how sorrow, death, pain and 
tears, the inevitable accompaniments of sin and re- 
bellion, came into the world. Revelation does not 
close until we have seen God wiping away all tears, 
and welcoming His redeemed into a home where 
sin, death, pain and sorrow never come. 

And so we might go on for an hour, contrasting 
and comparing these two books, but enough has 
been cited, I trust, to stir each interested believer 
to study for himself. What we get ourselves out 
of our Bibles in the presence of God is worth far 
more than all that another passes on to us. We may 
learn from each other, but it is best to take nothing 
for granted; but, like Ruth the Moabitess, to “ beat 
out that which we have gleaned” through medita- 
tion and prayer. 

But before we examine with some degree of care 
the opening verses of this remarkable book, it may 
be well to point out that there are three very dis- 
tinct views of Revelation presented by those who 
seek to comment upon, or expound it. They are 
generally known as the Preterist, Historical, and 
Futurist. Each of the three systems of interpreta- 
tion might be subdivided into various, conflicting 
schools, but the names give the main point of view 
in each case. 


12 Lectures on the Revelation 


As a rule, the preterists see very little in the book 
beyond a weird religio-political document supposedly 
written by some unknown person who took the name 
of John in order to give acceptance to his writings, 
or else some other John than the apostle of that 
name, whose real object was to comfort his Chris- 
tian brethren in a time of great persecution under 
one of the Roman Emperors by portraying the final 
outcome of the stern conflict as a great victory 
for the saints, resulting in the overthrow of pagan- 
ism and the recognition of a glorious city of God 
in its place. 

The historical school believe they see in the mo- 
mentous events of the last nineteen hundred years, 
the fulfilment of the seals, trumpets and vials, and 
the other special visions of the book. According 
to this, there can be no possible understanding of 
Revelation apart from a thorough knowledge of the 
history of the nations comprising Christendom — 
the sphere where Christ’s authority is nominally 
owned. Many and varied are the schools of in- 
terpretation founded on this supposition or hypo- 
thesis. 

The futurists as a rule consider that the largest 
part of the book applies to a period still future, and 
that only the first three chapters refer to the present 
Church dispensation. Some extreme futurists even 
relegate these chapters to the end-times also, and so 
do not see the Church in Revelation at all. 


The Introduction (chap. 1: 1-8) 13 


As we go on with our attempt to expound the 
book, our own position will be seen to coincide with 
that of the futurists first mentioned, but we reserve 
for a later lecture the ground upon which this view 
is based. 

Turning again to the text, we note, in verse one, 
that the Revelation of Jesus Christ was given by 
the Father to the Son, as David revealed to Solomon 
all his plans in connection with the building of the 
future temple. God is represented as being in coun- 
sel with our Lord Jesus Christ concerning “ things 
which must shortly come to pass,” and which it is 
the joy of His heart to communicate to His servants. 
An angel becomes the medium to make all known 
to the beloved apostle John, who, in this sense, is to 
tarry in the Church till the coming of the Lord — 
that is, his line of ministry carries us on to that 
blessed event. Note then the order through which 
the revelation came down to us. God gave it to 
Jesus Christ, who sent it by His angel to His servant 
John to show unto His servants the coming things. 

He is said to have signified it; that is, He made it 
known by signs or symbols. It is important to 
bear this in mind. This book is a book of sym- 
bols. But the careful student of the Word need 
not exercise his own ingenuity in order to think out 
the meanings of the symbols. It may be laid down 
as a principle of first importance that every symbol 
used in Revelation ts explained or alluded to some: 


14 Lectures on the Revelation 


where else in the Bible. Therefore, he who would 
get God's mind as to this portion of His Word must 
study with earnest and prayerful attention every 
other part of Holy Scripture. Undoubtedly this is 
why so great a blessing is in store for those who 
read and hear the words of this prophecy, and keep 
the things written therein (ver. 3). 

Verses 4 to 8 comprise the salutation. The book 
is particularly addressed, as a great general epistle, 
to “ the seven churches in Asia.’ By the term Asia 
we are not to understand the continent that now 
bears that name, nor yet what we speak of as Asia 
Minor, but a Roman proconsular province which of 
old was distinctively denominated ‘“ Asia.” In 
John’s day there were many Christian churches al- 
ready established in that province, and of these, 
seven are selected to be especially addressed. If 
any ask why these seven were selected in preference 
to others (as for instance Colosse and Hierapolis, in 
both of which were important churches), my answer 
is that the geographical position of these churches 
was in keeping with the vision presented in verses 
12 to 18. They formed a rough circle in the midst 
of which Christ was beheld by the seer, standing 
in His priestly garb, taking note of all that was go- 
ing on. 

But there was more than this: the internal con- 
ditions prevailing in these churches were suited to 
portray the state of the whole sphere of Christian 


The Introduction (chap. 1: 1-8) 15 


profession in seven distinct periods, from the aposto- 
lic days to the close of the church’s testimony on 
earth. Even the very names of the seven cities, 
when interpreted, help to make this plain; they be- 
come, so to speak, keys to the different periods to 
which they apply. But the proof of this must be 
reserved for the next three addresses. 

Observe how the three Persons of the Holy Trin- 
ity are linked together in the salutation. ‘‘ He who 
is, and who was, and who is to come,” is Jehovah. 
This is the literal meaning of the mystic name com- 
municated to Moses. ‘ Jehovah” is a compound 
formed from three words: the first meaning He is, 
the second, He was, the third, He will be, or He 
will come. Jehovah is the triune God, hence the 
Father, the Son, and the Spirit are alike called by 
this name. But in the present passage it is clearly 
God the Father who is in view. The Spirit comes 
before us in the next clause, “and from the seven 
Spirits that are before His throne.” If it is hard 
to understand how the one, eternal Holy Spirit can 
be so pictured, turn to Isaiah 11:1, 2. There we 
read of the seven Spirits who rest upon the Branch 
of Jehovah, our Lord Jesus Christ. Note the order 
given. 


1. The Spirit of the Lord. 
2. The Spirit of Wisdom. 
3. The Spirit of Understanding. 


16 Lectures on the Revelation 


4. The Spirit of Counsel. 

5. The Spirit of Might. 

6. The Spirit of Knowledge. 

7. The Spirit of Fear of the Lord. 


There you have the one Spirit in the seven-fold 
plenitude of His power. Seven, mentioned so fre- 
quently in this book, is the number of perfection, 
and is so used here. Then, with the Father and 
the Spirit, we have Jesus Christ as “the faithful 
Witness ” when here on earth, “the First-begotten 
of the dead” in resurrection glory, and “the Prince 
of the kings of the earth’? when He comes again to 
reign. 

No wonder an outburst of praise and worship 
follows at this full revelation of His glories: 
“Unto Him that loveth us, and hath loosed us from 
our sins by His own blood, and hath made us a 
kingdom, priests to God and His Father, to Him be 
glory and dominion forever and ever. Amen.” 
John’s heart was full and could hold in no longer. 
Adoration and praise were the spontaneous result 
of contemplation of Christ’s person and offices as 
Prophet, Priest and King. 

Then he heralds the glad news of His coming 
again. He is going to return — not as a babe, born 
of woman, but the glorified One descending from 
heaven; and by a stupendous miracle, every eye shall 
see Him, while ‘all tribes of the land shall mourn 


The Introduction (chap. 1: 1-8) 17 


because of Him.” This, I am persuaded, is the 
true meaning, and refers to ‘ech. 12, where all the 
tribes of restored Israel are seen by the prophet 
mourning over their past rejection of Christ, and 
lament their folly, while awaiting His return. John 
speaks for all the church when he cries with rapture, 
“Even so. Amen!’ Does your heart take up the 
same glad welcoming shout; or can it be that you 
are unready to meet Him, and would dread His 
return? 

In the 8th verse it is the Son who speaks, and now 
He declares Himself to be Jehovah also, One eter- 
nally with the Father. He is the Alpha and Omega 
— the first and last letters of the Greek alphabet — 
the beginning and the ending: He created all things; 
He will wind up all things, and bring in the new 
heavens and the new earth. He is, and was, and 
is the coming One, E/] Shaddai who of old appeared 
to Abraham — the Almighty. May our hearts be 
occupied with Himself, and His return be ever for 
us “that blessed Hope!” 


LECTURE II 
THE FIRST VISION 
(Chapter 1: 9-20) 


N our study of the first chapter last week, we got 
down to the first vision of the book. The 
apostle John tells us that for the Name’s sake of the 
Lord Jesus Christ he was a prisoner banished to 
“the isle called Patmos ’— a little rocky island in 
the Mediterranean Sea. There, shut away from all 
Christian fellowship, God had a greater mission 
for him than he had ever known in the past. 

You remember on the occasion when the Lord 
Jesus restored Peter’s soul after his fall, He told 
him how when he was old another would gird him 
and lead him whither he would not, thus signifying 
by what death he should glorify God. Then Jesus 
said, “‘ Follow me.” Peter turned and saw the 
disciple whom Jesus loved following, and _ said, 
“Lord, what shall this man do?” The Lord an- 
swered, “If I will that he tarry till I come, what 
is that to thee? Follow thou Me.” You will no- 
tice that in that sentence the Lord Jesus very clearly 
sets forth two things that are often confounded by 

18 


The First Vision (chap. 1: 9-20) 19 


some Christian teachers — death and the second 
coming of Christ. He says, “ If I will that he tarry 
till I come, what is that to thee?” and He clearly 
puts “tarry till I come” in contrast with Peter’s 
dying before He comes. There is no place in Scrip- 
ture where death and our Lord's second coming are 
confounded. For death, instead of being the sec- 
ond coming of the Lord, is that which is to be swal- 
lowed up in victory at that second coming. But, 
you know, most of us are extremists, so when the 
Lord said to Peter, “If I will that he tarry till I 
come,” we are told that this saying went abroad 
among the disciples that “that disciple should not 
die”’; but Jesus said not that he should not die, 
but “If I will that he tarry till I come.” And, of 
course, time proved that their hasty conclusion was 
incorrect. 

And John also died, long years ago; but some 
years before the end of his earthly life, while on 
that desolate island of Patmos, where he was ban- 
ished for his faithfulness, he had a wonderful vision 
unfolded before him, of truth connected with our 
Lord Jesus’ second coming, by means of which his 
ministry abides with us until Christ shall come again. 
John is absent from the body, but present with the 
Lord — has been for over 1800 years; but through 
the ministry given to us in this wonderful book of 
Revelation, John abides still until Jesus comes, 
throwing light upon all the complex problems that 


20 Lectures on the Revelation 


God’s people would have to meet in this present 
dispensation, and gives us to understand, as no other 
ministry does, the great programme that God Him- 
self is soon going to carry out. 

So we see that the devil really over-reached him- 
self when Domitian banished John to the isle of 
Patmos; for if he had remained ministering the 
Word to the saints and preaching to the unsaved, 
he might not have been able to write the book of 
Revelation and we might not have the visions this 
book gives us. But there, shut off from all his 
service, on that lonely isle, the veil was rolled back, 
and he was enabled to give us this wonderful record 
of the unveiling of Jesus Christ. 

He tells us he was “in the Spirit on the Lord's 
Day.” The Lord’s Day is a divinely given desig- 
nation for the first day of the week. I know there 
are those who tell us the Lord’s Day here is the 
Jewish Sabbath, which in the Old Testament is 
called the Sabbath of the Lord; and they tell us 
that inasmuch as nowhere in the New Testament is 
the Jewish Sabbath done away with, it should still 
be observed. But, in answer to that, we may notice 
that nowhere in all the New Testament, after the 
resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ from the dead, 
do we ever have any special honor paid to the 
seventh day — Israel's Sabbath. On that day, the 
Lord lay in the tomb. On the morning of the first 
day of the week, “‘ when the Sabbaths were past ’’— 


The First Vision (chap. 1: 9-20) 21 


as the 28th of Matthew puts it, that is, when the 
Jewish Sabbaths were ended —the Lord rose in 
triumph from the dead, and that new day became 
distinctly the Lord’s Day. 

You find in the Word of God that ‘‘on the first 
day of the week the disciples came together to break 
bread ”’; on the first day of the week the Lord met 
with His own in the upper room. In connection 
with their gathering thus together, see the 16th 
chapter of I Corinthians, 2nd verse: ‘‘ Upon the 
first day of the week let every one of you lay by 
him in store, as God hath prospered him.” Thus 
Christian giving and the weekly remembrance of the 
Lord are linked together. It is safe to say that if 
Christians everywhere carried this out, there would 
be no “financial problem” in the church of God 
to-day. 

The first day of the week is preeminently the day 
for Christians. Whenever the earliest Christian 
writers refer to the term “‘ Lord’s Day,” they speak 
of it as the first day of the week; the day after the 
Jewish Sabbath; the day we Christians call “the 
Lord’s Day.” I venture to say that people who 
lived from fifty to two hundred years after the 
apostle John were far more likely to know what 
was meant by the term “ Lord’s Day” than people 
who live 1800 years after. I know there are some 
prophetic students who confuse the Lord’s Day with 
the “‘ great day of the Lord,” but there is a decided 


22 Lectures on the Revelation 


difference in the two terms. The Lord’s Day is not 
in the possessive case in the original. The word 
translated “ Lord’s”” is an adjective. If it were per- 
missible to say the Lordian day, you would have 
the exact meaning of this word. Such an adjective 
has been formed from the word Christ. We say a 
“Christian spirit,” ete. So the Lordian or Lordly 
Day is the day on which the Lord Jesus Christ broke 
the bonds of death asunder and rose, never more to 
die; and we Christians love to keep this day in 
memory of Him. 

On that day, John says, “I was in the Spirit.” 
John was far away from any Christian assembly, 
but he found his pleasure in the things of God. 
Some Christians you know go to meeting every 
Lord’s day when at home, but when on their vaca- 
tions, or away from town, the Lord’s day is just 
like any other day because nobody knows them. 
But John, shut away from any Christian associa- 
tion, was ‘“‘in the Spirit on the Lord’s day.” It is 
good to see a Christian take his Bible with him when 
on a vacation, and have daily intercourse with the 
Lord, or look up some one who does not know Jesus 
Christ and seek to make Him known to that needy 
one. See to it that you are in the Spirit on the 
Lord’s day. 

Being “‘in the Spirit’? on the Lord’s day, John 
had a glorious vision of the Lord Himself. First 
he heard a voice, then he saw a form. He heard 


The First Vision (chap. 1: 9-20) 23 


a voice saying, “I am Alpha and Omega, the First 
and the Last. What thou seest, write in a book,” 
etc. ‘And being turned I saw seven golden lamp- 
stands.” If I understand it aright, these were not 
like the candlesticks in the temple and in the taber- 
nacle. Those were seven-branched; six  side- 
branches, and the central shaft made the seven. 
But John saw seven separate lampstands. Christ is 
represented by the seven-branched candlestick in 
the holy place, and the Spirit of God is represented 
by the seven lamps upon it. But during His ab- 
sence — during the time of His priesthood up there 
in heaven, His people are to be lights for Him in 
this world. So John sees in this first vision not one 
candlestick with seven branches, but seven distinct 
lampstands in the form of a circle, and in the midst 
of them he sees One like unto the Son of Man girt 
about the breasts with a golden girdle. It is the 
Lord judging in the midst of His assemblies. 

Then we learn what these lampstands symbolize. 
They are the seven churches situated in the Roman 
proconsular province of Asia, and these seven were 
selected from all the assemblies of God, in order 
that they might picture for us the whole course of 
the church's history until the coming again of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. In His absence, the church of 
God is responsible to keep a light burning in the 
midst of the darkness. You remember He said, 
while here on earth, “‘ I am the Light of the world,’ 


24 Lectures on the Revelation 


etc., and before He went away, He said to His dis- 
ciples, “ Ye are the light of the world.” He has 
gone up to the glory, and we and all the members 
of His church are to shine for Him here. What 
kind of light are you giving out for Jesus? Do 
your next-door neighbors appreciate your Chris- 
tianity? Do the people that you do business with 
think much of it? What about the tradesmen and 
your business associates —all these folks with 
whom you have to do so much of the time? i 
would rather get the testimony of the people with 
whom you have to do than of those you meet in the 
public assemblies. When a man is really con- 
verted, it changes him through and through. 

The church of God and individual assemblies of 
Christians are in this world to shine for Christ. 
Weare here not merely to enjoy the things of Christ 
ourselves, but to hold up Christ to the world. 
Speaking of the Lord’s Supper, the apostle says, in 
I Cor. 11:26: “For as often as ye eat this bread 
and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord’s death till 
He come.” The word translated “show” in that 
passage is the same word that is used elsewhere for 
preaching; “ you preach the Lord’s death.” It isa 
testimony to sinners, as well as something for the 
church to enjoy. The church of God is here to 
shine for Christ, and we shine for Him as He is 
exalted in our gatherings and manifested in our 
lives. 


The First Vision (chap. 1: 9-20) 25 


“TI saw seven golden lampstands, and in the 
midst, one like unto the Son of Man.” In many 
respects He seemed different from what John re- 
membered Him, except when on the Mount of 
Transfiguration. But he knew who He was— 
“One like unto the Son of Man.” John had known 
Him well on earth, and he knew Him the moment 
He appeared in that glorious vision. 

Note how He is described, ‘‘ clothed with a gar- 
ment down to the foot’—the priestly garment. 
He is there in the long, white garments of the high- 
priest, and girt about the breasts with a golden 
girdle. The girdle speaks of service. We read of 
the servant girding himself and waiting upon the 
table. Here it is a high-priestly service. Our 
blessed Lord is now serving us at God’s right hand. 
Looking back to the cross where Jesus hung in sacri- 
fice for us, we rejoice to remember His dying words, 
“It is finished.” Nothing can be added to, and 
nothing taken away from, that completed work. 
But there is another work He is now carrying on 
for His people. Although up there in the glory, 
He is serving us still. His people need His help 
all along the way. The moment you belong to the 
Lord Jesus, you are brought into living union with 
our great High Priest at God’s right hand. “ He 
is able to save to the uttermost ” all those who come 
to God through faith by Him, seeing “ He ever 
liveth to make intercession for them.” He does not 


26 Lectures on the Revelation 


ask you to go in your own strength. Trust Him as 
Saviour, and let Him fill your heart and control 
your life. He will live His life in you, to His 
praise and glory. We are to come boldly to a 
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find 
seasonable help. The girdle is a golden one, and 
Christ’s service is in full accord with God’s holy 
and righteous ways. 

Notice the 14th verse: ‘“‘ His head and His hairs 
were white like wool, as white as snow; and His 
eyes were as a flame of fire.” I said last Sunday 
night that every figure, every symbol, found in this 
book is explained somewhere else in the Bible. 
Turn now to Daniel 7:9-13. There we read of 
the Ancient of Days and of the Son of Man. Now 
observe John said that the One in the midst of the 
seven lampstands was “like unto the Son of Man.” 
He was undoubtedly linking that up with the seventh 
chapter of Daniel. He goes on to describe Him as 
one ‘‘ whose hair is white as snow.’’ He had all the 
appearance of great age, though the Lord Jesus was 
cut off at the age of thirty-three. Observe again 
the 7th of Daniel, verse 9, “And the Ancient of 
Days did sit, and the hair of his head as pure wool,” 
etc. Who is the Ancient of Days? In the 7th of 
Daniel He is the Jehovah of Israel, and to Him the 
Son of Man comes. But we learn that the Son of 
Man is Himself the Ancient of Days. In other 
words, the Jehovah of the Old Testament is the 


The First Vision (chap. 1: 9-20) 27 


Jesus of the New Testament. Christ is Himself 
“God manifest in the flesh.” Turn to Micah 5:2, 
“But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be 
little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of 
thee shall He come forth unto Me that is to be ruler 
in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, 
from everlasting.” Who is the Saviour born in 
Bethlehem? He is the One ‘“ whose goings forth 
have been from of old, from everlasting.” The 
Lord Jesus Christ is the Ancient of Days, and this 
is one of the truths that Christians are called to 
contend for in these times of apostasy. Ministers 
are telling people that we are all sons of God. They 
deny Christ’s virgin birth and deity, and say that 
He is simply the greatest of all teachers sent from 
God. But that is not enough for the Christian. 
Christ is God, or we and those in heaven are idola- 
ters, for it is He who is worshiped there, and here. 
The Unitarian believes in God the Father, but not 
in the Son; he says, “Don’t draw the lines too 
straight — Jesus is only a creature.” If that Uni- 
tarian is right, I am an idolater, for I am worshiping 
Jesus Christ. I worship, not Buddha, not Brahma, 
but Jesus, and own Him as God. Yet some would 
tell me that it does not make any difference! It 
makes a tremendous difference, for both time and 
eternity. It is going to mean all the difference be- 
tween heaven and hell. For the Lord Jesus says, 
“Except ye believe that I am, ye shall die in your 


28 Lectures on the Revelation 


sins, and whither I go ye cannot come.” We con- 
fess Jesus Christ as God manifest in the flesh, the 
Only-begotten Son of God, the anointed One who 
came in grace to save lost, guilty sinners. Are 
you trusting Him as your Saviour? 

So we see that this One in the midst is the Son 
of Man, yet God Himself. The Lord Jesus has 
that double character, and His place is always in 
the midst. Jesus in the midst! No company of 
believers deserves to be called a Christian com- 
pany that does not give Him that place. But, 
“Where two or three are gathered together unto 
My name,” He says, “there am I in the midst.” 
You remember when He hung on that cross, be- 
tween two thieves, He saved one of them who 
turned to Him in faith. When He rose from the 
dead, and His disciples were gathered together 
in the upper room, “Then came Jesus and stood 
in the midst.” In the 5th chapter of the Reve- 
lation, John looked and saw the Lamb “in the 
midst of the throne, in the midst of the elders, 
and in the midst of the living creatures.” This 
is the place that ever belongs to the Lord Jesus 
—the central place, the preeminent place. God 
must have Jesus in the midst. 

But let us turn back to our chapter. ‘His 
eyes were as a flame of fire.’ John did not 
know Him in that way on earth, except per- 
haps as He rebuked the Pharisees; but re- 
member that all who do not accept Him now 
are going to see His eyes like a flame of 


The First Vision (chap. I: 9-20) 29 


fire. There will be nothing hid from those eyes. 
They will discern everything that you would fain 
hide. All will be out in the light, and brought into 
judgment. Oh, have everything out with Him now. 
Do you realize that the first time you meet God, 
you must meet Him with all your sins upon your 
soul? Have you had a meeting with Him yet? 
If the first time you meet Him is at the day of 
judgment, it will be too late. You can have your 
first meeting with Him in this world. You can 
meet Him by faith. Do not try to improve or to 
make yourself better. Come just as you are, with- 
out one plea, but that He is the sinner’s Saviour 
and invites you to come; you will find that those 
eyes, that are as a flame of fire and look into the 
depths of your soul, will become filled with tenderest 
love, and will draw you to Himself. 

But John’s description goes on to say: “ His 
feet were like molten brass.’ Brass in the Old 
Testament is the symbol of judgment. The brazen 
altar which stood before the tabernacle was that 
on which the fire of God’s judgment was burning 
continually. It was of brass,1 because brass could 
stand the fire. You will find throughout Scripture 
it is a symbol of judgment. And here He has feet 
like brass; for His ways are in righteousness un- 

iThe peculiar metal referred to was really a very hard 


copper alloy; but I use the word “brass” as employed in our 
English Bible. 


30 Lectures on the Revelation 


yielding. The day is coming when He shall put 
His feet on everything contrary to truth and right- 
eousness. Everything unholy will be stamped out 
in divine judgment. 

His voice is as the sound of many waters. When 
you stand on the cliff by the seaside and hear the 
sound of many waters, you are awed by their power. 
Yon ship, which looks so large and strong at the 
docks, what a helpless thing it is when the ocean 
rouses itself in furious anger. His voice is as the 
sound of the billows of the sea — a voice of power. 
That power, put forth in grace, means your salva- 
tion; put forth in judgment, it means your eternal 
damnation! You may pass from death into life 
by hearing His voice now. He can speak to your 
poor soul, and in a moment create your heart anew. . 
Here is what He says: ‘“ The hour is coming, and 
now 1s, when the dead shall hear the voice of the 
Son of God, and they that hear shall live.” Hear- 
ing His voice, believing His word, you live! Have 
you heard that voice of power? Soon, His people 
will hear that same mighty voice calling them from 
earth away, “for the Lord Himself shall descend 
from heaven with a shout,” and the dead in Christ 
shall rise first, and the living saints shall be changed. 
Sometimes Christians become discouraged, but 
when that voice, like the sound of many waters, says 
from heaven, “ Arise, my love, my fair one, and 


The First Vision (chap. 1: 9-20) 31 


come away,” we will be caught up in a moment to 
meet Him in the air, 

“He had in His right hand seven stars.” The 
stars speak of ministry committed to His saints, as 
responsible to shine by His light and for Him in this 
world. “They that turn many to righteousness 
shall shine as the stars forever and ever.” He holds 
the stars in His right hand. ‘‘ Out of His mouth 
went forth a sharp, two-edged sword.” It is the 
Word of God (Hebrews 4:12). Men are trifling 
with that two-edged sword, but they will find out 
soon that it is powerful, irresistible. 

“His countenance was as the sun shining in his 
strength.” Malachi 4:2; ‘But unto you that 
fear my Name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise 
with healing in his wings.” When Saul of Tarsus 
was stricken down, remember what he saw —a light 
above the brightness of the sun. It was the glory 
of God in the face of Christ Jesus. It was this that 
John saw, and he fell at His feet. But He laid 
His right hand upon John, and said, “ Fear not, I 
am the First and the Last. I am the Living One. 
I was dead, but I am alive for evermore. I have 
the keys of death and of Hades.” 

What is death? It is the body without the spirit: 
“The body without the spirit is dead.” There is 
no such thing in the Bible as soul-sleeping. The 
spirit of the man is not in the grave. The body 


32 Lectures on the Revelation 


goes down to the grave. But the spirit is in the un- 
seen world. Hades is the condition of the spirit 
without the body. Christ has the keys of both 
death and Hades. 

In the 19th verse we get the three-fold division 
of the Book of the Revelation: ‘“‘ Write the things 
which thou hast seen, and the things which are, and 
the things which shall be hereafter’’— or, “after 
these things.” 

“ The things which thou hast seen” are the things 
of chapter one — the first division of the Book of 
the Revelation. 

“The things which are’ follow in the next two 
chapters and make the second division. “The 
things which are”’ have to do with the present dis- 
pensation. The seven churches give us a picture . 
of the whole professing church’s history from the 
apostolic period to the coming of the Lord Jesus. 
These two chapters portray the condition of the 
thurch on earth, in seven distinct periods. The 
church’s history ends at the rapture, when Jesus 
comes as the Bright and Morning Star. That event 
closes the present dispensation. 

“The things which shall be after these things,’ 
chapters 4 to the end, make the t/ird and last divi- 
sion of the book — the things which shall take place 
after the church’s history ends — the great tribula- 
tion, the kingdom, and the eternal state. 

But our time is up and I must close for to-night, 


LECTURE. Uf 
THE SEVEN CHURCHES 
(Chapter 2) 


E now turn to the letters addressed to the 

first four churches, as found in chapter 2. 
In the last address I tried to make it clear that the 
key to the structure of the book is the 19th verse 
of the first chapter. We have already been occu- 
pied with the things which the apostle John had 
seen — that is, the first vision of the book, where 
he beheld the glorified Lord in the midst of the 
lampstands, as set forth on the chart. The third 
division is clearly indicated in the opening words of 
chapter 4, where in the Revised Version we read, 
“ After these things I looked, and behold, a door 
was opened in heaven.” Necessarily then, the sec- 
ond division must take in simply what we have in 
chapters 2 and 3 —“the things which are” (pres- 
ent, continuous tense)— the things which are now 
in progress; and this is the only part of the Apoca- 
lypse that has to do specifically with the present, 
the church period, though it is all written for our 
instruction, our warning, and our encouragement. 

33 


34 Lectures on the Revelation 


In fact, I believe that the real value of the Revela- 
tion consists in this: that it gives us the full-grown 
trees which we now see as developing saplings. We 
need this book in order to judge aright the various 
movements that are now going on. For myself, I 
am sure that if I did not know something of the 
teaching of this book, I would long since have been 
identified with many movements which I have come 
absolutely to distrust, because I believe I can see, 
by a careful study of the Apocalypse, what the end 
of them will be. 

Let me illustrate: Someone asks concerning the 
so-called “Church Federation scheme.”’ Wouldn't 
it be a wonderful thing if all the churches united? 
If we simply had one great organization, wouldn't 
it be grand? All could agree to accept a common - 
creed so worded that everyone could subscribe to 
it, and so the shame of Christendom’s divisions be 
at anend. Now, why not go in for something like 
that? Would not this be the fulfilment of the 
prayer of our Lord, “that they all may be one”? 
Well, I might be caught by such a proposal, but I 
turn to the Book of Revelation and I learn that just 
such a religious federation is going to arise after 
the church of God has been caught away to be 
with the Lord Jesus Christ; and it is designated in 
the 17th chapter as “ Babylon the Great.”’ This will 
be the big world-church. The present movement 
is just a preparation for this, and when I have the 


The Seven Churches (chap. 2) 35 


light from heaven shining upon it in the Book of 
the Revelation, I say, that if that is the way it is 
going to end, the thing to do is to have no part in 
it now. Separation from evil — not fusion of di- 
verse systems — is the divine order: and so we see 
that the prophetic book throws the light of the fu- 
ture upon events and movements that are in progress 
at present, in order that we may take warning and be 
preserved from that which is contrary to the mind 
of God. 

Before we begin our study of “ The Things which 
are,” let me give you this parable. Sometime ago, 
rummaging through an old castle, some people came 
across a very strange-looking old lock which se- 
cured a stout door. They shook the door and tried 
to open it, but to no avail. They tried one way 
and another to move the lock, but could not turn it. 
By and by somebody picked up a bunch of old keys 
from some rubbish on the floor and he said, “ Maybe 
I can unlock it.” He tried one key and it made 
no impression. He tried another and it gave a 
little; another and it gave a little more; and so on, 
but none would open the lock. At last he came to 
a peculiar old key. He slipped it into the lock, 
gave a turn, and the lock was open. They said, 
“Undoubtedly this key was meant for this lock.” 

You will understand my parable if I draw your 
attention to the fact that, in the 20th verse of the 
Ist chapter, we are told that there was a mystery 


36 Lectures on the Revelation 


connected with the seven lampstands. The seven 
lampstands are said to symbolize the seven churches 
of Asia, but there was a mystery connected with 
them. While some have tried one key and some 
have tried another (and there have been all kinds of 
efforts made to interpret this mystery), no solution 
was found until some devout students of Scripture 
weighing this portion said, ‘‘ Might it not be that in- 
asmuch as this section of the book presents ‘the 
things which are,’ God has been pleased to give us 
here a prophetic history of the church for the en- 
tire dispensation?’ But would the key fit the lock? 
They compared the first part of the church’s history 
with the letter to Ephesus. Here it fitted perfectly. 
They went on and compared the letter to Smyrna 
with the second part of the church’s history, and 
the agreement was most marked. They went on 
right down to the end, and when they came to Lao- 
dicea they found that what is written to the church 
of Laodicea answers exactly to the condition of the 
professing church in the days in which we live, and 
they said: ‘“‘ There, the mystery is all clear. The 
lock has been opened; therefore we have the right 
key.” 

For myself, I have no question that this was in 
very truth the mind of the Lord in sending these 
letters to the seven churches. Seven churches were 
chosen because seven in Scripture is the number of 
perfection; and you have only to read these seven 


The Seven Churches (chap. 2) 37 


letters, then take any good, reliable church history 
and see for yourself how perfectly the key fits the 
lock. 

The very names are significant. It would be im- 
possible to reverse any of these names. If the 
order were changed they would not apply. Take 
the first one. Ephesus means “ desirable,” such a 
term as a Greek applied to the maiden of his choice. 
Ephesus gives us a picture of the Church as it was 
in the beginning, when the Lord held the stars (His 
servants) in His hand, and controlled their ministry. 
He sent them here and there, just as He would, to 
proclaim the glad gospel of His grace and to min- 
ister to His saints. But human systems have largely 
changed all that. He walked in the midst of His 
churches. His eyes were upon everything, and He 
was there to admonish, to correct, and to control. 
Observe that in the beginning His Name was the 
only centre, and unto Him was the gathering of His 
saints. Read the second and third verses: 

“T know thy works and thy labour, and thy patience, 
and how thou canst not bear them which are evil: and 
thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and are 
not, and hast found them liars: and hast borne, and hast 
patience, and for my name’s sake hast laboured, and hast 
not fainted.” 


The early church was walking in separation from 
the world. The Greek word ecclesia, translated 
“church” in our Bibles, means a called-out com- 


38 Lectures on the Revelation 


pany. This is God’s ideal, and every effort to amal- 
gamate the church and the world is opposed to His 
mind and must end in confusion, for the church will 
never convert the world in the present dispensation. 
Someone asked Dr. A. T. Pierson, on one occasion, 
“Don’t you really think that the world is getting 
converted already?” ‘‘ Well,” he said, “I admit 
that the world has become a little churchy, but the 
church has become immensely worldly.” If it were 
possible that the church could convert the world, 
that would be the end of the church. What do I 
mean? Simply this, that the church is a called-out 
company, and if the world were converted, there 
would not be anything else left out of which to call 
the church. 

Believers, in the days of Ephesus, could not bear 
those who were evil. In our day, discipline in the 
church is almost at an end. In many quarters, any- 
one is welcome to full participation in all church- 
privileges, particularly if they have a good bank 
account; but in the beginning it was very different. 
That little Ephesian assembly said, ‘“‘ We don’t want 
numbers if they are not holy numbers. We don’t 
want growth at the expense of holiness.” More 
than that, they were loyal to the truth. They tried 
those who claimed to be apostles, and if they found 
they were deceivers they refused them as liars, in- 
stead of saying, “ Oh well, you know Dr. So-and-so 


The Seven Churches (chap. 2) 39 


comes with such good recommendations, he is such 
a lovely man and so cultured, and though he doesn’t 
happen to believe in the virgin birth, the deity of 
Christ, or His atonement, etc., still he has so many 
good qualities that we mustn't be hard on him.” 
The early church would have said, “ Are you a 
servant of the Lord Jesus Christ?” and put a few 
serious questions to him. If he was not what he 
professed to be, they soon unmasked him and re- 
fused his unholy ministrations. But in these days 
teachers can deny almost any truth of Scripture, 
and the professing church never knows the differ- 
ence. Oh, for more of the zeal and piety of early 
days! 

In verse three we learn that these saints were suf- 
fering for the Name’s sake of the Lord Jesus. It 
was not suffering for the name of any denomina- 
tion, nor yet for some special theories or usages. It 
was suffering for Christ’s sake. For His Name’s 
sake they bore trial and endured persecution. 

And yet, even then, we have the evidence of early 
decline. Fourth verse: “ But I have against thee 
that thou hast left thy first love.” They had left 
their first love. The heart was drifting away from 
Christ. The decline that began in these first days 
of the church has continued. There has been no 
corporate recovery. That spirit of declension has 
gone on increasing until the present Laodicean days. 


40 Lectures on the Revelation 


In the next letter we see that the Lord, whose 
love never changes, permitted something to take 
place to arouse His people from their lethargy. 

“And unto the angel of the church in Smyrna write; 
These things saith the first and the last, which was dead, 
and is alive; I know thy works, and tribulation, and 
poverty (but thou art rich), and I know the blasphemy 
of them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are 
the synagogue of Satan.” 


Smyrna means myrrh. It is frequently mentioned 
in Scripture in connection with the embalming of the 
dead. Myrrh had to be crushed in order to give out 
its fragrance. This sets forth the period when the 
church was crushed beneath the iron heel of pagan 
Rome, yet it never gave out such sweet fragrance 
to God as in those two centuries of almost constant 
martyrdom. 

“These things saith the first and the last, which 
was dead and is alive.” What a blessed thing to 
know that the children of God are linked up with a 
resurrected Christ! The power of His resurrec~ 
tion works in them. He says, “I know thy works 
and tribulation and poverty, but thou art rich.” 
This was the day when the church was hated, out- 
lawed and persecuted. Instead of worshiping in 
magnificent buildings, they gathered together in 
caves, catacombs and other hidden places, with 
sentries posted to warn them of the approach of 
their foes. Despised by the world, condemned as 


The Seven Churches (chap. 2) 41 


enemies of the Empire because of their faith in 
and loyalty to Christ, their lives were precious to 
God. They were in His eyes rich. They were 
poor in this world’s goods, but rich in faith. 

But even then, all was not perfection; so He says, 
“I know the blasphemy of them which say they are 
Jews and are not, but are the synagogue of Satan” 
— referring to the Judaizing movement that came 
into the church in the early centuries. It was the 
leaven of Galatianism which had never been wholly 
judged, and which made astonishing progress in the 
second and third centuries. He says, “Fear not 

. . thou shalt have tribulation ten days.” It is 
significant that in the two centuries of Roman perse- 
cution, which began with Nero and which terminated 
312 A.D., there were ten distinct edicts demanding 
that governors seek out Christians everywhere and 
put them to death. The last was under Diocletian. 
He was the tenth persecutor. The early Christians 
believed he would be the last, and he was. ‘“ The 
blood of the martyrs is the seed of the church,” said 
Augustine. The testimony of the dying again and 
again led their very persecutors to receive the Lord 
Jesus Christ as their Saviour because of the con- 
vincing power of the truth manifested in the mar- 
tyrs. Satan’s effort to destroy Christianity by per- 
secution was in vain. But those were days when it 
meant something to be a Christian. When God’s 
people were being crushed like myrrh, what a sweet 


42 Lectures on the Revelation 


odor of devotion, what fragrance of Christian love 
was wafted up to the very throne of God! 


Pergamos has two meanings. It means “ mar- 
riage,” and “elevation.” It speaks of the time when 
the church was elevated to a place of power, and 
was married to the world. It depicts the time when 
church and state were united, under Constantine and 
his successors. 

Read the 12th and 13th verses: 


“And to the angel of the church in Pergamos write; 
These things saith he which hath the sharp sword with 
two edges; I know thy works and where thou dwellest, 
even where Satan’s seat is: and thou holdest fast my 
name, and hast not denied my faith, even in those days 
wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain 
among you, where Satan dwelleth.” 


The Lord Jesus judges everything by the Word. 
The word that He spoke will judge men in the 
last day. If you reject it now it will judge you 
then. “I know where thou dwellest,’ He says, 
even on “Satan’s throne.” What was Satan’s 
throne? If you had asked any of the Smyrna be- 
lievers, they would have pointed you to the Em- 
peror’s throne in Rome. In Pergamos you find the 
very church of God sitting upon the imperial throne. 
How did that happen? Those of you who are fa- 
miliar with Roman history and church tradition 
will recall that after the death of Diocletian and 


The Seven Churches (chap. 2) 43 


Galerius, Constantine and Maxentius contended for 
the throne. Constantine is said to have seen a vision 
of across of fire and to have heard a voice saying, 
“In this sign, conquer.” He wondered what the 
vision could mean. He was told that the cross was 
the sign of the Christian religion, and that it must 
mean that the God of the Christians was calling him 
to be the champion of the Christian religion; that 
if he obeyed the voice he would be victor over the 
hosts of Maxentius and become emperor of the 
world. He called for Christian bishops and asked 
them to explain their religion to him. He accepted 
the new doctrine and declared himself to be its God- 
appointed patron and protector. Some writers 
make a great deal of this so-called conversion of 
Constantine, but it is questionable if he ever became 
a child of God by faith in Christ Jesus. He wona 
great victory over his opponent and thus became em- 
peror of the world, and one of his first acts was to 
liberate the Christians and to stop all persecution. 
He bestowed unwonted honors on the bishops; they 
sat on thrones with the nobles of the empire. 

It was at this time that the truth of the second 
coming of Christ was given up. Before the days 
of Constantine the church was looking for Him. 
That was their expectation and hope. But after 
the great change in their circumstances, this truth 
was largely lost sight of. Christian bishops said, 
“We have been looking for Christ’s reign but we 


44 Lectures on the Revelation 


have been wrong. Constantine’s empire is Christ’s 
kingdom.” They thought the church was already 
reigning; so it went on until the days of the Refor- 
mation, when the light began to dawn again. 

But now note a most interesting thing: At the 
very time that the Lord said, “I know where thou 
dwellest, even where Satan’s seat (or throne) is,” 
He goes on to say, “ Thou holdest fast my Name, 
and hast not denied my faith,” etc. Here is some- 
thing very remarkable. At the same time that 
Christ sees them sitting on Satan’s throne, He can 
yet commend them for holding fast His Name. 

It was at that time that the Arian controversy was 
fought out. Arius denied the eternity of the Word. 
John says, “In the beginning was the Word ’— 
He always existed. When everything that had a 
beginning began, the Word was. Arius declared 
that the Word was the greatest of all beings that 
ever emanated from God. His opponents insisted 
that the Word was one with the Father, in one eter- 
nal Trinity — Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: one 
God in three Persons. It was the most tremendous 
issue the church had ever been called to face, and, 
for over a century, it was the burning question that 
provoked heated controversy everywhere. For 
years the church was almost rent asunder over two 
words, “homoiosian” and “ homoousian.’ The 
one word meant “ of like substance,” the other “ of 
the same substance.” The first was the battle-cry 


The Seven Churches (chap. 2) 45 


of the Arians; the second of the orthodox, headed 
by Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria. So irrecon- 
cilable were the contending parties that Constantine 
at last decided to take a hand in the matter himself, 
and he called a great church-council, which convened 
in the city of Nicea, and there debated the question 
as to what the apostolic teaching really had been. 
Was Jesus truly God, or was He only the greatest 
being that God had ever brought into existence? 
Over three hundred bishops met together, and Con- 
stantine, sitting on a golden throne, presided as the 
acknowledged head of the Christian church, at the 
very time that he still bore the title Pontifex Max- 
imus, or High Priest of the Heathen — the same 
title that the Pope bears at the present time. 

The matter in question was examined from all 
sides. Again and again Constantine was called in 
to quell disturbances ; feelings ran so high. On one 
occasion it is related that a brilliant Arian seemed to 
have almost silenced opposition, and the great as- 
semblage appeared to be about to cast its vote in 
favor of the damnable unitarian heresy, when a 
hermit from the deserts of Africa sprang to his feet, 
clad chiefly in tiger’s skin. This latter he tore from 
his back, disclosing great scars (the result of having 
been thrown into the arena among the wild beasts, 
and his back dreadfully disfigured by their claws), 
crying dramatically, “‘ These are the brand-marks of 
the Lord Jesus Christ, and I cannot hear this blas- 


46 Lectures on the Revelation 


phemy.” Then he proceeded to give so stirring an 
address, setting forth so clearly the truth as to 
Christ’s eternal deity, that the majority of the coun- 
cil realized in a moment that it was indeed the voice 
of the Spirit of God. Whether this story be actually 
true or not I cannot say, but it well sets forth the 
spirit pervading many who were in attendance, most 
of whom had passed through the terrible persecu- 
tion of Diocletian. The final result was that the 
council of Nicea put itself on record as confessing 
the true deity of our Lord Jesus Christ, “ Very God 
of Very God,” “ Light of Lights,” ‘ perfection of 
perfection ””— God and man in one blessed Person, 
nevermore to be separated. Thus was settled once 
and forever, in a public way, the acknowledged faith 
of the church of God, which held fast His Word, 
and did not deny His Name. 

Did you ever stop to think what would have been 
the case if the council had decided the other way? 
It would have meant this: Unitarianism would have 
henceforth borne the stamp of orthodoxy, and the 
truth of the deity of Christ would have been branded 
as heresy. 

We have no record as to who the Antipas was re- 
ferred to in the latter part of the verses above 
quoted, but it is singular that the word means 
“against all.” Many years after the council of 
Nicea, when the Arian party were again largely in 
the ascendency, Athanasius, that doughty old cham- 


The Seven Churches (chap. 2) 47 


pion of the truth, was summoned before the Arian 
emperor Theodosius, who demanded that he cease 
his opposition to the teaching of Arius — who by 
the way, was long since dead—and admit the 
Arians to the table of the Lord. This Athanasius 
refused. Theodosius reproved him bitterly for 
what he considered his insubject spirit, and asked 
sternly, ‘Do you not realize that all the world is 
against you?”’ The champion of the truth drew 
himself up and answered the emperor, “ Then I am 
against all the world.” He was a true Antipas, 
a faithful witness to the end of his days, despite ban- 
ishment and opposition of various kinds. 

Oh, my brethren, God wants to-day, just such 
men, men of God, who, for the truth’s sake, are 
willing to stand, if need be, against all the world! 

We now turn to consider another phase of things 
in the Pergamos period —the introduction of the 
doctrine of Balaam and the teaching of the Nicolai- 
tanes in the church. Balaam taught Balak to cast a 
stumbling-block before the sons of Israel by leading 
them to make unholy alliances with the Midianitish 
women, as recorded in Numbers 25: 1-9. In figure 
this is the union of the church and the world. Dur- 
ing the Smyrna period, Satan sought to destroy the 
church by persecution. In the next three centuries 
he tried different tactics: he endeavored to ruin the 
testimony by worldly patronage from without, and 
the introduction of false principles from within. 


48 Lectures on the Revelation 


You know it is far more dangerous for the church 
to be patronised by the world than when the world is 
openly arrayed against it. Take any of the differ- 
ent denominations in Christendom. When were 
they shining most brightly for the Lord? It was 
in the days of their first love, when they were suf- 
fering from the world and were the objects of its 
bitter persecution. But when those had passed, 
when the period of persecution ended and the 
world began to look upon them with complacency, 
to greet them with the outstretched hand and the 
smiling face, instead of with the sword and the 
frown, in every instance decline set in. So it was 
in the Pergamos period. Constantine’s patronage 
did what Diocletian’s persecution could not do. It 
corrupted the church, and she forgot her calling as 
a chaste virgin espoused to an absent Lord; then she 
gave her hand in marriage to the world that had 
crucified Him, thus entering into an unholy alliance 
of which she has never really repented. 

In close connection with this we have the intro- 
duction of wrong principles within — the teaching 
of the Nicolaitanes. Others have often pointed out 
that this is an untranslated Greek word meaning, 
“Rulers over the people.” Nicolaitanism is really 
clerisy — the subjugation of those who were con- 
temptuously styled “the laity” by a hierarchical or- 
der who lIcrded it over them as their own posses- 
sions, forgetting that it is written, “One is your 


The Seven Churches (chap. 2) 49 


Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren.” In 
the letter to Ephesus the Lord commended them for 
hating the deeds of the Nicolaitanes, those who, like 
Diotrephes, loved to have the preeminence among 
them. But, in the Pergamos letter, we have Nico- 
laitanism designated as a distinct system of teaching. 
It was then that clerisy was accepted as of divine or- 
igin, and therefore something that must be bowed to. 


All this prepared the way for the Thyatira period, 
according to the letter that follows. 

I have already tried to point out that every one 
of these names seems to be significant. Thyatira is 
perhaps the most difficult of all to define. Scholars 
tell us that it comes from two words, one meaning 
a sacrifice, or an incense-offering; the other, that 
which goes on continually. A suggested interpreta- 
tion, therefore, is “‘ continual sacrifice.” And this is 
very significant, because Thyatira undoubtedly sets 
forth the period which was the result of the union 
of church and State, already noticed. It was in the 
7th century that the Bishop of Rome was first reg- 
ularly recognized as Christ’s vicegerent, and visible 
head of the church. This was, properly speaking, 
the beginning of the papacy. There was no Roman 
Catholic church, in the full sease, until the Pope was 
the acknowledged head of Christendom. It is im- 
portant for Protestants to keep this in mind. You 
will often hear papists say, ‘ You know the first 


50 Lectures on the Revelation 


church was the Roman Catholic church, and all the 
different branches of the Protestant church have 
simply broken off from Rome. There was no Pro- 
testant church until the days of Luther.” That is 
an absolute sophistry. There was no such thing as 
the papacy until the 7th century of the Christian era. 
For six centuries before that, the church was be- 
coming more and more corrupt — had been drifting 
further away from the Word of God until, in the 7th 
century, men professing themselves to be servants 
of God were ready to acknowledge the Pope as head 
of all Christendom. A Roman Catholic once asked 
a bright Protestant school-girl, “Where was your 
church before the days of Henry the VIII?” 
“Why, sir, where yours never was, in the Bible,” 
was her sensible and correct reply. It is a far cry 
from the simplicity of early Christianity, when in 
the 7th century they were ready to own the preten- 
sions of the bishop of Rome. 

I said that Thyatira seemed to imply a continual 
sacrifice. You will see the significance of this in 
the great fundamental error of the church of Rome 
—the sacrifice of the mass. The Roman Catholic 
priests declare that, in the mass, they offer a con- 
tinual sacrifice for the sins of the living and the 
dead. Other errors of the church of Rome spring 
from that. There are many things that Protestants 
might be able to condone. ‘This is the central, the 
root, blasphemy — the denial of the finished work of 


The Seven Churches (chap. 2) 51 


the Lord Jesus on Calvary’s cross — the one, only 
and all-sufficient offering for the sins of a guilty 
world. Every time the priest stands at Rome’s al- 
tar to offer the sacrifice of the mass, he denies the 
unchanging efficacy of the work wrought by the 
Lord Jesus on Calvary’s cross. 

I have often pressed this question home to Cath- 
olic priests: “What is your function as a sacri- 
ficing priest?” They say, “It is my privilege to 
offer up the Lord Jesus from time to time a continual 
sacrifice for the sins of the living and the dead.” 
I generally put it like this: ‘‘ Well, Christ has to 
be slain that He may be offered up; doesn’t He? ”’— 
“Yes.” “ You claim then that every time you of- 
fer the sacrifice of the mass, every time you pro- 
nounce the blessing, you are sacrificing Christ for 
the sins of the living and the dead?”—“ Yes.” 
“Well then, you kill Christ afresh every time you 
offer that sacrifice!”’ Then they begin to hedge. 
But there is no escape from this horrible conclusion. 
The Roman priest says that when he offers the sac- 
rifice of the mass he is presenting Christ again for 
the sins of the living and the dead. And the only 
way that Christ can be a sacrifice is to be put to 
death; therefore, the priest kills Him afresh every 
time he offers. They cannot get away from it. 
The apostle Peter said at Pentecost, ‘ Him, being 
delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowl- 
edge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands 


52 Lectures on the Revelation 


have crucified and slain: whom God hath raised up, 
etc.” If Christ has to be offered continually, then 
every priest is guilty of murdering the Lord Jesus 
Christ in the sight of God. 

God is going to judge Rome in a little while: so 
Christ’s letter to Thyatira properly speaks of this 
central blasphemy of the church of Rome. Con- 
tinual sacrifice? Never! No other sacrifice is 
needed. The dignity of the Lord is so great, the 
value of His blood is so absolutely infinite, that it is 
vain for you or any other man to speak about a new 
sacrifice. 

You may say, “I agree with you, sir.” Well; 
now let me ask, Have you a personal interest in that 
one offering made once upon the cross? Can you 
say, ‘“ Thank God, He gave Himself a propitiation 
for my sins, and He is my Saviour. I need no 
other sacrifice. My soul is resting on the finished 
work of Christ. I require nothing more on which 
to enter the presence of God.” 

But let us turn to the Lord's address to Thyatira: 


“ And unto the angel of the church in Thyatira write: 
These things saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes like 
unto a flame of fire, and his feet are like fine brass.” 


It is very significant the way the Lord presents 
Himself in each one of these letters, so as to meet 
the special condition in which the church is found. 
When He addresses Himself to the church of Thya- 


The Seven Churches (chap. 2) 5a 


tira, He speaks solemnly as “the Son of God.” 
Why does the Lord Jesus Christ emphasize the fact 
of His deity here? Because Rome everywhere has 
accustomed people to think of Him as the Son of 
Mary. I once talked with a woman who told me 
she would sooner go to Mary than to Christ or the 
Father. She said, ‘‘ There is nobody that has so 
much influence with a son as his mother, and if 
Jesus Christ is inclined to be a bit hard-hearted, I 
just go to His good, kind mother, and I ask her to 
please say a good word to Ilim for me.” What a 
caricature of our Lord Jesus Christ! Think of hav- 
ing to go to anybody else to win His favor. Who 
else could be compared with Him? Thus Christ is 
degraded into the position of the Son of Mary, 
rather than the Son of God, who came in infinite 
grace to save poor sinners. 

But, observe, He has “ eyes like unto a flame of 
fire, and his feet are like fine brass.” This speaks 
of His holiness and righteousness. He must judge 
all that is evil. And yet He never overlooks what 
can be commended. He goes on to say, 


“T know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, 
and thy patience, and thy works: and the last to be more 
than the first.” 


The Lord gives Rome credit for a great deal that 
is good. Remember from the 7th century on to 
the present time there has been a great deal in the 


54 Lectures on the Revelation 


way of good works in the Roman Catholic church 
that cannot be overiooked. There have been Roman 
Catholic nuns and monks who have been ready to 
lay down their lives for the needy and the sick. 
There were centuries before Luther when every 
hospital in Western Europe was simply a Roman 
Catholic monastery or convent. The Lord does not 
forget all that. Where there is a bit of faith, His 
love takes note of it all. If there are hearts in 
the Church of Rome that, amid 'the superstition, 
reach out to the blessed Lord Himself, He meets 
them in grace and manifests His love to them. 
But having done this, He then puts His finger on 
the sore spot: 


“Notwithstanding, I have a few things against thee, 
because thou sufferest that woman Jezebel, which calleth 
herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants 
to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto 
idols.” 


To understand this well, we need to go back 
to Israel’s history in the days of King Ahab. 
Jezebel was an adept in the art of mixing. She 
undertook to unite in one the religion of Israel 
and the religion of Phoenicia. That is just 
what Romanism is—a mixture of Heathenism 
and Christianity and Judaism. It is not Chris- 
tianity—yet there is in it quite a little that is 
Christian. Where did its superstition and 
image worsnip come from? It was all taken 
bodily over from heathenism, under the plea 


The Seven Churches (chap. 2) 55 


that it would help to convert the pagans. The 
church became very accommodating. In the 4th, 
5th and 6th centuries you find the church compromis- 
ing with heathen rites and heathen ceremonies to 
such a degree that, by the 7th century, one could 
hardly tell heathen from Christian temples. The 
amalgamation is such that it is almost impossible 
to separate the one from the other. Go to a Roman 
Catholic church, and, after sitting through the whole 
ceremony, take your Bible and search it from one 
end to the other, and ask yourself, “Is there any- 
thing like that in the Book?’”’ You will say, ‘‘ No.” 
Where does it come from then? Go from there toa 
heathen temple. Observe its ritual, and you will 
say, “ Yes, they are the same.” 

Romanism is Christianity, Judaism, and Heathen- 
ism joined together; and the Lord abhors the vile 
combination. Note two things that He _ holds 
against Rome — spiritual fornication and idolatry. 
The first is the union of the church and the world: 
and ‘the friendship of the world is enmity against 
God.” Idolatry is the worship of images, strictly 
forbidden in the second commandment (Ex. 20: 4, 
5). God gave her space to repent and she repented 
not. Go back to the days of Savonarola in Italy, 
Wickliffe and Cranmer of England, John Knox in 
Scotland, Martin Luther in Germany, Zwingle in 
Switzerland, Calvin in France —all those mighty 
reformers whom God raised up throughout the 


56 Lectures on the Revelation 


world to call Rome to repent of her iniquity, but 
“she repented not.” 

Mark this, you could not transpose these 
churches. You could not put Thyatira in the place 
of Smyrna. It could not be said to the church in 
that carly day, “I gave her space to repent, and 
she repented not;” but it is fully applicable to the 
Church of Rome. And, in our day, we have a lot 
of foolish Protestants who believe that the old 
Rome is now a harmless old pussy-cat sitting on 
the banks of the Tiber: she purrs so contentedly. 
They say, “We never understood Rome. What a 
pity we ever had that Reformation at all.’”’ And 
so efforts are being made to re-unite the various 
great bodies of Christendom in one vast society 
headed by the Pope. This is the avowed purpose 
of many leaders in the larger Protestant bodies. 
What foolish people these Protestants are!—Pro- 
testants who have long ceased to protest against 
evil doctrine, forgetting the millions of lives that 
were sacrificed for the precious truth. Depend 
upon it, if the day ever comes that the Pope gets 
into the saddle again, and gets control of the pro- 
posed union, it will only be at the expense of life 
if people will worship scripturally at all. But 
Protestant leaders are dazzled with the thought 
of a great united church, and are hurrying us 
on to a union with Rome which Scripture shows 
clearly enough will yet take place. But, thank 
God, not until the church of Christ has been 
caught up to meet the Lord in the clouds, to 


The Seven Churches (chap. 2) 57 


be with Himself, according to His promise (Jno. 
14:2, 3). God gave Rome space to repent. If she 
had had any desire to get right with Him, she would 
have repented in the 16th century. 

Since the 16th century she has added to her blas- 
phemies and errors the declaration of the absolute 
sinlessness of the Virgin Mary, lifting her to the po- 
sition of a female God, and declared that she was 
caught up to heaven without dying and crowned 
queen of heaven. 

At the Council of the Vatican less than 75 years 
ago, the Church of Rome produced another of her 
wretched dogmas —the infallibility of her Popes. 
This dogma was so utterly without reason that many 
bishops said, “‘ This is going too far. We know that 
Popes have reversed each other over and over 
again.” But Rome never repented; she has added 
sin upon sin to the heavy list God had against her 
in the middle ages, and will remain the same to the 
end.’ It behooves Protestants to keep clear of it all. 
God says He is going to cast her into the great trib- 
ulation. Ephesus is at an end; Smyrna at an end 
about 312 A. D.; Pergamos at an end; Thyatira be- 
gins in the 7th century, and goes right on into the 
Great Tribulation, and manifests herself at last as 
Babylon the Great. Her children are to be judged; 
but wherever there is a remnant found who “have 
not known the depths of Satan,” the Lord owns 
them as His, and exhorts them to hold fast what 


58 Lectures on the Revelation 


they have until He come. To the overcomer He 
promises what Rome has always sought — power 
over the nations. They will rule with Him when 
He comes again. Thus the hope of the Second 
Coming of Christ is put before them, and henceforth 
has a large place in each of these church-letters. 
Time has not permitted so full an exposition as I 
would have liked, but I trust enough has been 
brought before us to stir our hearts to search the 
Scriptures for ourselves, and to study as never be- 
fore this marvelous portion of God’s holy Word. 


LECTURE TV 
THE SEVEN CHURCHES (Continued) 
(Chapter 3) 


ONE of you can have a keener sense than I 

of the cursory nature of these addresses. 

Time forbids going into that detail on all points 
which alone would enable one to give anything like 
a complete exposition of this marvelous portion of 
the Word of God. But if I can but whet your appe- 
tite for further study, and start Christians searching 
the Word for themselves, and weighing, too, what 
others have written and published on this theme, I 
shall feel that these addresses have not been in vain.? 


1It is always a pleasure to me to commend the writings 
of trustworthy servants of Christ, who are true to the Book. 
There are a number of excellent expositions of Revelation, 
each one of which would, I am sure, be a help in the further 
study of the subject.; 
“Exposition of the Revelation” by Walter Scott 
“Lectures on Revelation’ by Wm. Kelly 
“The Book of Revelation” by A. C. Gaebelein 
On the Seven Churches I especially commend, “The 
Prophetic History of the Church” by F. W. Grant, 
All of these can be procured from the publishers of 


hi k, 
this boo 50 


60 Lectures on the Revelation 


We now go on to look at the next part in the mar- 
velous series of this great annotated time-table of 
the church’s history. 


“ And unto the angel of the church in Sardis write; 
These things saith he that hath the seven Spirits of God, 
and the seven stars; I know thy works, that thou hast a 
name that thou livest, and art dead. Be watchful, and 
strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to 
die: for I have not found thy works perfect before God. 
Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, 
and hold fast, and repent.” 


Sardis means “a remnant,” or, “ those who have 
escaped.” This is surely very significant, and tells 
its own story too plainly to be misunderstood. It 
brings before us, prophetically, the great State- 
churches of the Reformation, who escaped from 
Rome, only to fall eventually (alas, that it should be 
so) into cold, lifeless formalism. 

It is plainly to be seen, from the first verse, that 
there is a measure of return to early principles. The 
Lord’s introduction of Himself to this church is 
very similar to that in the letter to Ephesus, and yet 
the difference is most marked. Here He is said to 
have the seven stars; there He was said to hold the 
seven stars in His right hand. It is, at least, the 
recognition that ministry belongs to Christ. Minis- 
ters are Christ’s ministers — not the Church’s. Yet, 
even in the glorious days of the Reformation, the 
truth was not fully apprehended that ministers are 


The Seven Churches (chap. 3) 61 


to be controlled by, and subject to, Christ, without 
any human intermediary. While the Protestant 
ministry is very different from the Romish hierar- 
chy, unfortunately human ordination has done much 
to becloud a proper conception of the servant’s re- 
sponsibility to the Master. 

The Lord declares solemnly, “I know thy works, 
that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead.” 
How sad and solemn the indictment! One might 
well ask in amazement, How can such things be after 
the blessing and revival of Reformation days? But 
when we remember that the State-churches were, 
from the first, intended to include all the population 
of a given country, who were supposed to be made 
members of the church and kingdom of Christ by 
baptism in infancy, one can readily understand why 
such churches, though, possibly, strictly orthodox, 
may yet be largely composed of persons still dead 
in trespasses and in sins. Nothing can be much 
sadder than vast congregations of people, baptized, 
banded together as Christians, “taking the sacra- 
ment ” of the Lord’s Supper, zealous for church and 
Christianity, and yet largely devoid of personal, 
saving faith in Christ —trusting rather in forms 
and ceremonies, and what some have called “ birth- 
right membership,” than in new birth through the 
Word and Spirit of God. 

What is needed everywhere is a great revival of 
decided gospel preaching, pressing home on the con- 


62 _ Lectures on the Revelation 


sciences of men and women their lost condition, de- 
spite church membership, if they have not personally 
received the Lord Jesus Christ. The Word says, 
“Break up the fallow ground”; sow not among 
“thorns.” We often hear people say they would 
like to see more old-time conversions. Well, there 
must first be the old-time preaching of the exceed- 
ing sinfulness of sin, and the lost condition of all 
men by nature as well as practice, until the old-time 
conviction will seize upon the souls of Christless men 
and women, and then the old-time gospel will be 
hailed as the only relief. 

No wonder the Lord says to Protestantism, “ Be 
watchful and strengthen the things which remain, 
that are ready to die; for I have not found thy works 
perfect before God.’ And He calls upon them to 
remember how they had received and heard, and 
to hold fast and repent. Now, surely, it must be 
plain to anyone who carefully examines the Scrip- 
ture, that this message would in no sense have been 
as applicable to the Thyatira as to the Sardis period. 
Such words would not have the same force when ad- 
dressed to Rome as when addressed to the churches 
of the Reformation. What did these latter receive 
and hear? Clearly the great truths proclaimed so 
fearlessly in the days of the Reformation, and em- 
bodied for the instruction of future generations in 
the creeds of the 16th and 17th centuries. And, 
may I say, I am not one of those who waste time de- 


The Seven Churches (chap. 3) 63 


nouncing creeds. Credo means “I believe.” Any 
man who believes anything has a creed. All the 
great creeds of Protestantism were but the care- 
fully drawn-up declarations of the faith of those 
who had escaped from Romish superstition, who 
desired to make clear to their children what they 
recognized as the truth which they had received 
from God. We need not be surprised if we find 
in these creeds some statements which fuller light 
and knowledge would lead us to refuse or revise, 
but I think we may say that there is not one of 
these symbols which does not hold within it every 
fundamental truth of the Word of God. Take 
the Augsburg Confession of the Lutherans; the 
Westminster Confession of the Presbyterians; 
the 39 Articles of the Church of England; and 
others too numerous to mention. Every one of 
them insists on the true deity of Christ and the 
efficacy of His atoning work on Calvary’s cross. 
All alike declare that salvation is only through 
faith, apart from works. 

Those creeds stand, I repeat, for the fundamen- 
tal truths of Christianity; and it is not to any 
minister’s credit to-day, if still attached to any 
such denomination as I have just referred to, 
to stand up in the pulpits of such churches and 
say, “I have thrown the creed of the church 
overboard.” When a man reaches that point 
he either ought to be thrown out of the church 
whose principles he no longer believes, or he 
should be honest enough to take himself out. 


64 Lectures on the Revelation 


One of the worst features of the present apostasy is 
that there are thousands of men occupying suppos- 
edly orthodox pulpits, who would, if they could, 
destroy everything for which their respective denom- 
inations are understood to stand. 

And so we may thank God for the truths con- 
tained in these creeds; while, on the other hand, we 
recognize that, where the Word of God is bowed to, 
no humanly-drawn-up creed is needed. Neverthe- 
less, it is in view of these very confessions, | am 
persuaded, that the Lord says, “ Remember how 
thou hast received and heard.” He calls upon Prot- 
estants to remember the great truths committed to 
them at the Reformation, and hold them fast, and 
repent for the slack way in which they have treated 
them in the past. 

And now, for the second time in these letters, 
the Lord speaks of His approaching advent: “If 
therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee 
as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I 
will come upon thee.” How different this to the 
word in the 5th chapter of 1 Thessalonians. There, 
the apostle speaking of the same wondrous advent, 
writes, “ But ye, brethren, are not in darkness that 
that day should overtake you as a thief.” It is very 
evident, therefore, that the coming of the Lord 
should be the daily expectation of His own beloved 
people. It is only to the great mass of mere profes- 
sors that His return will be as the coming of a thief, 


The Seven Churches (chap. 3) 65 


that is, as the unexpected and unlooked-for One, 
whose coming will spread dismay instead of glad- 
ness. 

Blessed it is to know the declaration and promise 
of the Lord in verse 4. Even in Sardis He beholds 
a few names which have not defiled their garments, 
and such He declares shall walk with Him in white, 
for they are worthy. His blood alone has made 
them so. There are thousands in Christendom who, 
though linked up with much that is unscriptural, 
and often almost undistinguishable from the mass, 
are yet plainly discernible to His eye, for it is writ- 
ten, “The Lord knoweth them that are his.” To 
these overcomers the promise is made that they shall 
be clothed in white raiment, nor will their names be 
blotted out of the Book of Life, when the thousands 
of names, representing a Christless profession, will 
be expunged from the records of those who profess 
to have life, in the day of manifestation. 

It is not a question of people, who have been truly 
born of God, losing that eternal life given them in 
Christ, for that, as many other Scriptures show, is 
an impossibility. In fact, were it otherwise, it 
would not be eternal life at all. But the Lord is re- 
ferring to those who have a name to live, but are 
dead. ‘Their names are registered among those 
who profess to have life in Christ. In reality they 
are, as Jude puts it, “ twice dead ”— dead in tres- 
passes and sins, and dead to their profession of life 


66 Lectures on the Revelation 


So, in the day of manifestation, their names will be 
eliminated, and only those left who have proven by 
continuance in well-doing that they truly have life 
in Christ. Such will be confessed before the Father 
and the angels at the Lord’s second coming. 


The next in order is the letter to the church in 
Philadelphia, which means “ brotherly love.” 


“ And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write; 
These things saith he that is holy, he that is true, he 
that hath the key of David, he that openeth, and no man 
shutteth; and shutteth, and no man openeth; I know thy 
works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and 
no man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and 
hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name... . 
Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also 
will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall 
come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the 
earth.” 


This, I believe, brings us to what we may call the 
revival period. Following the Reformation there 
came a time when a cold, lifeless formalism seemed 
to settle down over all Protestant Christendom — 
an era in which men were content simply to confess 
a creed, and as we have already mentioned, were 
supposed to be united to the church by baptism. But 
in the 18th and 19th centuries there came over all 
those lands where the Reformation had gone a great 
wave of blessing. God began to work afresh in 


The Seven Churches (chap. 3) 67 


mighty power. There were marvelous awakenings 
all over northern Europe and the British Isles. A 
half century later the same mighty power began to 
manifest itself in America. Spirit-filled servants of 
Christ went through these various countries like fire- 
brands of the Lord, calling on sinners to repent, and 
saints to awaken to their privileges. A little later, 
in the early part of the last century, God, in a very 
special way, began to arouse many of His people to 
a deeper sense of the value of His Word, and its 
all-sufficiency for the guidance of His people in this 
scene. This led to the recognition of the fact that 
Christ Himself is the gathering centre for His peo- 
ple; and for His name’s sake thousands left all hu- 
man systems, and began to meet in simplicity, seek- 
ing to be guided alone by the Word of God. 

Now I do not mean to imply that we are to under- 
stand any special movement or association of believ- 
ers to be in itself Philadelphia, but, just as Sardis 
sets forth State churches of the Reformation, so J 
believe Philadelphia sets forth those in Protestant- 
ism who emphasize the authority of the Word of 
God, and the preciousness of the name of Christ. 
For any particular company to claim to be Philadel- 
phia is but detestable ecclesiastical pretension, and 
God has very evidently blown upon all such con- 
ceit, 

Notice what, in a special way, would mark those 
who seek to walk as Philadelphians. In the first 


68 Lectures on the Revelation 


place there is the very name of this church —“ broth- 
erly love.” This implies that those contemplated 
here, love as brethren. They are born of God, and 
His love is shed abroad in their hearts by the Holy 
Spirit given unto them, and they are characterized by 
love to all who are Christ’s. Alas, how little is this 
characteristic seen among many who make very loud 
pretensions to being the testimony of the Lord at 
the present time. There may be much high truth, 
and a great pretension to divine ground and main- 
taining of scriptural principles, but if this first mark 
of brotherly love be missing, depend upon it you 
have not yet found Philadelphia. 

In the second place, observe the character in which 
the Lord presents Himself to this church. “ These 
things saith He that is holy, He that is true.” This 
is, in itself, a challenge to separation from evil in 
life, and error in doctrine. If we would walk in 
fellowship with the Holy One, we must remember 
the word, “ Be ye holy, for I am holy.” And if we 
would enjoy communion with Him who ¢s true, we 
must refuse Satan’s lies, and love and live the truth 
ourselves. Hence it follows, as it has been put by 
others, that ‘‘ separation from evil is God's prin- 
ciple of unity.” Not, indeed, separation in a cold, 
pharisaic sense, but separation to Christ from that 
which is evil. 

In the next place the Lord speaks of Himself as 
“He that hath the key of David, He that openeth 


The Seven Churches (chap. 3) 69 


and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man open- 
eth.” In Isaiah 22:22, he who had the key of 
David was the treasurer of David’s house. And 
the word used here is clearly a reference to that 
passage. There it is said of Eliakim, ‘ The key of 
the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; so 
he shall open and none shall shut; and he shall shut 
and none shall open.” The remainder of the pas- 
sage shows that Eliakim was but a type of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, the one’ upon whom should be hung all 
the glory of His Father’s house. He, by His Spirit, 
opens the great treasure-house of divine truth, and 
none can shut it. On the other hand where there is 
perversity of spirit, and an unwillingness to walk 
in the truth, He shuts and none can open. So He 
has said elsewhere, “If the light that is in thee be- 
come darkness, how great is that darkness.” 

And it is blessed to realize that, while Christ is 
said to have the key of David, there is another sense 
in which we see that Himself is the key, for it is 
by the presentation of Himself to the souls of His 
people that He opens up the treasures of His Word. 
Thus Christ is the key to the Holy Scriptures, and 
no other is needed. To understand the Bible you 
need only to know Christ. 

Perhaps there is another sense in which we might 
apply the words in regard to opening and shutting ; 
that is, they may have an application to service. 
The Lord Himself opensthe doors for those whom 


70 Lectures on the Revelation 


He sends forth, and He it is who closes them when 
He so wills. And this is one thing that Philadel- 
phian believers, generally, have found. Acting on 
the truth that Christ is Son over His own house, and 
that He has commanded His servants to go into all 
the world and preach the gospel to every creature, 
thousands have gone forth, in dependence on Him 
alone, not only in the home-land, but to lands be- 
yond the seas, even among heathen people, without 
any organization or Board behind them and have 
found the Lord Himself all-sufficient to meet every 
need, and to open and close just as He will. “‘ Faith 
can firmly trust Him, come what may.” I think the 
8th verse emphasizes this second application, for 
there He says, “I have set before thee an open door, 
and no man can shut it, for thou hast a little strength, 
and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my 
name.” 

Observe these important characteristics of Phila- 
delphia. His Word is kept, His Name confessed. 
The keeping of His Word involves a great deal more 
than just believing the Bible, or reading and study- 
ing it. It implies obedience to the revealed will of 
the Lord. It is a blessed thing to realize that ‘ All 
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is pro- 
fitable for reproof, for correction, for instruction in 
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, 
thoroughly furnished unto all good works.” What 
immense scope is there here for faith to act upon! 


The Seven Churches (chap. 3) 71 


This blessed book of God marks out all my path, 
and, so long as I seek to walk in obedience, I will 
never be found in circumstances where this Book 
cannot guide me. And this, I believe, is what is 
involved in keeping His Word. 

The denial of His Name is the increasing apostasy 
around us on every hand. Those who have not de- 
nied His Name refuse all fellowship with this God- 
dishonoring condition of things. Christ is to them 
more precious than all else; even for the sake of 
service, they refuse to link themselves with that 
which dishonors or blasphemes that worthy name 
whereby they are called. 

It is significant that, wherever Philadelphian truth 
has been proclaimed, the devil has raised up a coun- 
terfeit to draw people's hearts away from the truth, 
and so, in verse 9, the Lord speaks of those who will 
be manifested as the synagogue of Satan, “ who 
say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie.” The 
day will come when they will have to worship before 
the feet of those who are faithful to the Lord, and 
shall know that He has loved them. It is, undoubt- 
edly, that false Judaizing system which is contem- 
plated, whose advocates everywhere oppose the 
truth of grace, and seek in every way to hinder the 
carrying out of those principles which we have been 
noticing as pleasing to the Lord. In their ignor- 
ance, these teachers give up the true Christian posi- 
tion, claiming to be the spiritual Israel, appropriat- 


72 Lectures on the Revelaticn 


ing to themselves Jewish promises and Jewish hopes, 
and would put the consciences of Christians under 
the bondage of Jewish legalism, thus really doing 
Satan’s work. 

The promise of verse 10, like all the promises to 
these different churches, is for every true child of 
God. ‘“‘ Because thou hast kept the word of my pa- 
tience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temp- 
tation, which shall come upon all the world, to try 
them that dwell upon the earth.” This is the Lord’s 
own pledge to those who love His Name, and seek 
to. keep His word —they shall not be left down 
here to pass through the appalling tribulation which 
is just ahead of those who “ dwell upon the earth.” 
This expression is found frequently in the book of 
Revelation. It does not simply mean those who live 
in the world, but a careful reading of the various 
passages in which this peculiar term is found, will 
make it manifest that “the earth-dwellers ” are in 
contrast to those whose citizenship is in heaven. 
They are persons who, while professing to be Chris- 
tians, refuse the heavenly calling, and prove by their 
earthly-mindedness and worldly ways, that they 
really belong to this world. All their hopes are 
here, and their treasures likewise, and the Lord has 
said, ““ Where your treasure is, there will your heart 
be also.’ The coming Great Tribulation will be, 
for them, a time of fearful trial. 

Of this hour of turmoil the bulk of the book of 


The Seven Churches (chap. 3) 73 


Revelation treats, as we shall demonstrate in later 
lectures. But when that hour comes the church of 
the present dispensation will have been caught up to 
meet the Lord in accordance with the promise in 
1 Thess. 4: 13-18. And to this agrees the verse 
that follows in our chapter, “ Behold, I come 
quickly; hold that fast which thou hast, that no 
man take thy crown.” The Lord’s return is the 
hope of every Christian heart. They long to see 
Him who loved them and gave Himself for them. 
At His return, they will be manifested before His 
judgment-seat, and be rewarded according to serv- 
ice here. Then He will give out the crowns for 
service in this day of His rejection. Observe that 
the warning is, ‘ Let no man take thy crown.” It 
is not, ‘‘ Let no man take thy life,” or “thy salva- 
tion.” That is eternally secure in Christ. Being 
born of God, I cannot lose my salvation; but, if I 
am not a faithful servant, I may lose my crown. 

The overcomer will be made a pillar in the temple 
of God, the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, and shall 
dwell in the Father’s house to go no more out for- 
ever. Upon him will be written the name of God, 
the name of the Holy City, and Christ’s new name. 
All that is involved in this is beyond our poor, 
finite comprehension, but it speaks of stability, of 
security, of fellowship, of intimacy with the Lord 
Himself, which will make heaven to the believer — 
his blessed and eternal home. 


74 Lectures on the Revelation 


Laodicea completes this septenary series, and 
brings us down, practically, to the last stage of the 
professing church’s history on earth — the close of 
the present dispensation. 


“And unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans 
write; These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true 
witness, the beginning of the creation of God; I know 
thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would 
thou wert cold or hot. So then because thou art luke- 
warm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of 
my mouth.” 


Laodicea is a compound word, and means “the 
rights of the people.” Could any other term more 
aptly set forth the condition of present-day church 
affairs? It is the era of democratization, both in 
the world and in the church. The masses of the 
people are realizing their power as never before. 
The terrific slogan, vox populi, vox Dei (The voice 
of the people is the voice of God), is ringing 
through the world with clarion-like distinctness. 
Imperialism and every form of aristocratic govern. 
ment is disappearing — at least for the time being. 
The age of anarchy is almost upon us. Bolshevism 
is not confined to unhappy Russia, it is making tre. 
mendous progress in all Christendom. Statesmen 
and capitalists never were more anxious and nervous 
than at the present time. In the great war we were 
told our soldiers were fighting to make the world 
safe for democracy. Ina little while statesmen will 


The Seven Churches (chap. 3) 75 


be attempting to raise armies to make the world safe 
from democracy. The spirit of this ultra-demo-~ 
cratic age has invaded a large portion of the pro- 
fessed church. The authority of God and His 
Word is rapidly being denied. The spirit of the 
age is the spirit of a large part of the church; hence 
the striking correspondence between this letter to 
the Laodiceans and the latitudinarianism so preva- 
lent about us. 

In a day when faithful witnesses to God’s truth 
are becoming fewer and fewer, the Lord addresses 
Himself to the church as the Amen (that is, the es- 
tablisher of all God’s promises), the faithful and 
true Witness, who will maintain to the last what is 
of God, though the great majority of those who 
profess to follow Him be swept away by the apos- 
tasy. He reproves the church for its lukewarmness 
and indifference to Himself and the truth. He says, 
“ Because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor 
hot, I am about to spue thee out of my mouth.” 
There is neither burning zeal for His word, nor yet 
absolute repudiation of Christ and the Bible. In- 
stead there is a nauseating, lukewarm condition, 
that is abhorrent to the Spirit of God. Lukewarm 
water is, in itself, an emetic; and this is the figure 
the Lord here uses. He cannot tolerate such con- 
ditions much longer, but will spue out the whole 
disgusting mass in judgment. 

Meantime the church goes on in its pride and self- 


76 Lectures on the Revelation 


satisfaction, saying, “I am rich and increased with 
goods, and have need of nothing”; knowing not 
that, in His eyes, it is “ poor, and miserable, and 
blind, and naked.” Never were church dignitaries 
and carnally-minded religious leaders more satisfied 
with themselves and their great work than at the 
present time. Anything and everything is advo- 
cated that will seem to make for the church’s popu- 
larity. The rights of the people alone must be 
considered ; the rights of the Lord Jesus Christ are 
not even thought of. We have come to a time 
when, in many places, it is easier to get on without 
Christ than with Him; easier to carry on religious 
programmes without the Holy Spirit than if He 
were working among us in mighty power. No won- 
der He says, “I counsel thee to buy of Me gold 
tried in the fire (that is, divine righteousness), that 
thou mayest be rich; and white raiment (that is, 
practical righteousness) that thou mayest be clothed, 
and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve (that is, the 
anointing of the Holy Spirit) that thou mayest 
see.” Yes, there is lots of work, much fleshly en- 
ergy and human effort being put forth to reclaim 
the world, and make it a comfortable place for men 
to live in, apart from Christ; but the great things 
of God’s truth are largely neglected, and myriads 
of so-called church-workers are utter strangers to 
the new birth, without which no one can see the 
Kingdom of God. 


The Seven Churches (chap. 3) 77 


And so we see the Lord standing at last outside 
the door of the professing church, and saying so 
tenderly, “ Behold, I stand at the door and knock: 
if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will 
come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with 
Me.” Ah, beloved friends, it is getting late in the 
dispensation: the night-shades are fast falling; and 
the Lord who, in the beginning, was in the midst 
of His church, stands outside that lukewarm system 
which calls itself by His name, and He knocks in 
vain for entrance! Yet, individuals here and there 
open to Him, and find His presence is more to them 
than all else that the earth or the professing church 
can afford. 

And so we have come down to the closing days 
of the present dispensation of grace. The Ephesus 
period passed away long ago, and the same is true 
of the Smyrna and Pergamos periods. Thyatira, 
which, as we have seen, speaks of Romanism, and 
began properly when the Pope was recognized as 
universal Bishop, is with us still, and will go on to 
the end. Sardis, which began centuries later, re- 
mains to the present time, and will remain till the 
Lord shall come. Philadelphia, thank God, is also 
here, and, though it has but a little strength, will 
also abide to the end. But Laodicea is more and 
more in evidence, and seems to be almost swamping 
everything that is of God. 

The next great event is the coming of the Lord 


78 Lectures on the Revelation 


Jesus Christ, and our gathering together unto Him. 
For this we wait, and our longing hearts cry, ““ Even 
so, come, Lord Jesus.” 


LECTURE V 
THE FIRST VISION OF HEAVEN 
(Chapter 4) 


S we turn from chapter 3 to chapter 4, how 

different the scenes! We are no longer oc- 
cupied with the professing church in the place of 
testimony, nor with events on the earth at all; but a 
door is opened in heaven, and, escorted by the be- 
loved apostle John, if I may so speak, we are carried 
far above the shifting scenes of this poor world, 
and permitted to gaze with awe-struck eyes upon 
a scene of glory indescribable, and to hear things 
kept secret from the foundation of the world. 

The opening verse begins the third great division 
of this book —‘‘ The things which shall be after 
these things’; the stirring panorama of wonders, 
both heavenly and earthly, which must take place 
after the church’s history is ended. From the close 
of chapter 3, we never see the church on earth 
again through all the rest of this solemn book. We 
read of “saints,” but they are distinct altogether 
from the church of the present dispensation. Israel 
comes into view and a great multitude of spared 


80 Lectures on the Revelation 


Gentiles, saved out of the great tribulation; but no 
church, no body of Christ, no bride of the Lamb 
any more upon the earth! 

The fact is patent enough for every careful reader 
to notice it. What is the explanation of it? Sim- 
ply this, I believe: we must understand the rapture, 
of I Thess. 4: 16, 17, as transpiring between chap- 
ter 3 and chapter 4. Of this the rapture of the 
apostle is the symbol. He sees the door opened in 
heaven. His attention is turned from earth to 
glory. He is, in spirit, caught up, and far above 
all the mists of this lower scene he beholds a 
“throne set in heaven,” and a Throne-sitter upon 
it. The likeness of this august Being he cannot 
even attempt to portray. He only tells us he beheld 
a Presence whose glory was like a jasper and a 
sardius. 

The jasper of the Revelation is not the opaque 
stone we know by that name. It is later described 
as clear as crystal (chap. 21:11). It is probably 
the diamond, the most brilliant of all the precious 
jewels. The other stone is blood-red, and may 
really be the ruby. Thus the two together give the 
idea of glory and of sacrifice. Remembering that 
many of the first readers of the Revelation were 
converted Jews, we might ask, What would these 
stones suggest to them? Surely every instructed 
Hebrew would instantly recall that they were the 
first and last stones in the breastplate of the high 


The Vision of Heaven (chap. 4) 81 


priest (Ex. 28: 17-20). As these stones bore the 
names of the tribes of Israel, arranged according to 
the births of the twelve patriarchs, the one would 
suggest at once the name Reuben, “ Behold a Son,” 
and the other Benjamin, “Son of my right hand.” 
It is Christ enthroned; the Son about to reign in 
power who is before the Seer’s vision. Round 
about the throne a rainbow, like an emerald, the 
stone of Judah (“ Praise’’) is seen, suggesting the 
perpetuity of the Noahic covenant, and God’s un- 
changing goodness, despite all man's failure, folly 
and wickedness. 

But now the fourth verse brings before us a 
sight never beheld in heaven on any previous oc: 
casion: twenty-four thrones (not merely “ seats ”’) 
surrounding the central throne, and upon them 
twenty-four elders seated, with victors’ crowns (not 
diadems) upon their heads, and clothed in priestly 
robes of purest white. Who are these favored ones 
gathered around the glorious central Being? I do 
not think we need be in any doubt as to their iden- 
tity, if we compare scripture with scripture and dis- 
trust our own imagination, which can but lead us 
astray. 

In 1 Chronicles, chapter 24, we read of some- 
thing very similar; and again I would remind you 
that many of John’s first readers were Hebrews, 
thoroughly familiar with the Old Testament. Can 
we question for a moment that every Jewish be- 


82 Lectures on the Revelation 


liever would instantly remember the twenty-four 
elders appointed by King David to represent the 
entire Levitical priesthood? He divided the priests 
into twenty-four courses, each course to serve for 
two weeks at a time in the temple which Solomon 
was to build. The same arrangement was in force 
when our Lord’s forerunner was announced. Zach- 
arias was “of the course of Abiah,” the eighth in 
order (Luke 1:5). 

The priests were many thousands in number; 
they could not all come together at one time, but 
when the twenty-four elders met in the temple pre- 
cincts in Jerusalem, the whole priestly house was 
represented. And this is the explanation, I submit, 
of the symbol here. The elders in heaven repre- 
sent the whole heavenly priesthood — that is, all 
the redeemed who have died in the past, or who 
shall be living at the Lord's return. In vision they 
were seen — not as a multitudinous host of millions 
of saved worshipers, but just twenty-four elders, 
symbolizing the entire company. The church of 
the present age and Old Testament saints are alike 
included. All are priests. All worship. There 
were twelve patriarchs in Israel, and twelve apostles 
introducing the new dispensation. The two to- 
gether would give the complete four and twenty. 

Then, observe further: these persons are not an- 
gels. They are redeemed men who have overcome 
in the conflict with Satan and the world, for they 


The Vision of Heaven (chap. 4) 83 


wear victors’ wreaths upon their brows. Angels 
are never said to be “crowned,” nor have they 
known redemption. 

There are two kinds of crowns mentioned in 
this book: the victor’s crown, and the ruler’s dia- 
dem. The former is the word here used. It refers 
to the wreath, of laurel or of pine, bound about the 
brow of the victor in the Greek games; it is the same 
word so often used in the New Testament when 
reward for service is the theme. And now, note 
carefully: no saints will ever be crowned until the 
apostle Paul receives that crown of righteousness 
which the Lord revealed to him as his reward. In 
2 Tim. 4:8, he says: ‘‘ Henceforth there is laid 
up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, 
the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day; and 
not to me only, but unto all them also that love (or, 
have loved) His appearing.” The expression “ at 
that day ” refers to the day of Christ, when He shall 
come for His own, and they will all be manifested 
before His judgment-seat. He says: “ Behold, I 
come quickly, and my reward 1s with Me, to give 
every man according as his work shall be” (Rev. 
22:12). Surely it follows then that no rewards 
are given out till He returns for His saints. There- 
fore there can be no crowned elders in heaven till 
after the rapture. 

This, I believe, is a point of greatest importance 
to-day; for many are being troubled by the thought 


84 Lectures on the Revelation 


that perhaps the great tribulation, of which so large 
a part of this book treats, has already begun. But 
all such fears are set at rest when the facts I have 
been emphasizing are kept in mind. But as I want 
to dwell a little on this in the next lecture, I forbear 
further comment now. Only I trust it is clear to 
all that the elders are the heavenly saints, surround- 
ing the Lord in glory, God the Son sitting on the 
central throne. 

There are circumstances connected with that 
throne which make it clear that a dreadful storm is 
about to burst on that world below, from which 
they are viewed as having so lately come. Light- 
nings, thunderings, and voices tell of this; and as we 
go on in the study of the book, we shall see more 
added from time to time as conditions become in- 
creasingly solemn. 

Following out the symbolism of the tabernacle, 
seven lamps of fire are seen burning before the 
throne, as the seven-branched lampstand burned just 
outside the veil, before God’s throne on earth — 
the ark of old. These lamps are said to be ‘“‘ the 
seven Spirits of God,’ a figure which we have al- 
ready seen (in chapter 1:4) sets forth, not seven 
distinct Spirits, but the one Holy Spirit in the seven- 
fold plenitude of His power. 

The sea of glass of verse five calls to mind the 
sea of brass in Solomon’s temple. That sea sym- 
bolized, like the laver, the Word of God, for it con- 


The Vision of Heaven (chap. 4) 8, 


tained the water used for priestly cleansing, and we 
are sanctified and cleansed by ‘‘the washing of 
water by the Word.” But this sea is not for cleans- 
ing, so it is as crystal, and later, we find the mar- 
tyred tribulation-saints standing on it. It is the 
Word of God still, but no longer needed for cleans- 
ing, because desert experiences are viewed here as 
forever passed. But the Word abides, stable and 
sure forevermore — a glassy sea filled with crystal 
— firm and glorious, on which the people of God 
can stand eternally. 

It is well known that instead of four “ beasts ” 
connected with the throne, we should read four 
“living ones.” ‘They are not beasts. The word is 
very different to that used in chapter 13. They are 
not created beings, for they are in the midst of the 
throne, where only Deity can dwell, and they are 
linked with it round about. They represent the 
attributes of the living God. The lion is the well- 
known symbol of divine majesty. The young ox, 
the divine strength graciously serving man. The 
face of a man indicates intelligence and purpose; it 
tells us that Deity is no mere blind force, nor the 
“Great First Cause”? or impersonal Law simply. 
The eagle suggests swiftness in detecting evil and 
executing judgment. Six-winged and full of eyes, 
they speak of incessant activity and omniscience. 
“ The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding 
the evil and the good.” They cry, “ Holy, holy, 


86 Lectures on the Revelation 


holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and 
is to come,” for all God's attributes glorify the 
Eternal Son. 

The elders bow in worship at this announcement, 
and cast their crowns at the feet of Him that sits 
upon the throne, adoring Him as Creator, saying, 
“Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and 
honor, and power; for Thou hast created all things, 
and for thy pleasure they are and were created.” 
A higher note is struck in chapter five, but the 
blessed truth is here proclaimed, that He who died 
on the cross is worshiped by all the redeemed in 
heaven. There can be no mistake as to the Person, 
If John chap. 1, Col. 1 and Heb. 1 are all carefully 
compared with this closing verse, it makes it per- 
fectly clear that it is Christ Jesus, the Son, who 
created all things. Without Him was nothing made. 
All things are by Him and for Him. So He it is 
who fills the throne and is the centre of the worship 
here described. 

In a day such as ours, when His glory as the 
Eternal Son is so often denied, when His true 
Deity, His virgin-birth, His sinless humanity are 
all alike flouted by apostate teachers as so much 
traditional lore to be rejected at will, how refreshing 
to the soul to turn from earth to heaven and con- 
template the glory displayed there as His and the 
unhindered adoration of His own as they prostrate 
themselves before His throne. If He be not God, 


The Vision of Heaven (chap. 4) 87 


then heaven will be filled with idolaters, for it is 
written: “Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, 
and Him only shalt thou serve.” 

But we need not for a moment enter such an 
“if.” He is “God over all, blessed forever,” and 
He is also Man. God the Son in grace was born 
of the virgin, and He it is who fills the throne 
above. Nor will He ever abdicate that throne, 
even though He shall soon descend to gather His 
own to Himself, and to reign over all the earth 
as Son of Man, sitting on the throne of His father 
David. Both thrones are His, for all glory be- 
longs to Him by the Father’s firm decree. Thus 
shall all men eventually honor the Son even as 
they honor the Father. 

I add a further word as to the living creatures. 
In chapter 4 we see them linked peculiarly with 
the throne. In chapter 5 they are most parti- 
cularly linked with the elders. We have suggested 
that they represent the divine attributes. Dur- 
ing the present age and ere the Lamb takes the 
book of judgment these are largely seen in angelic 
ministry. But “Unto the angels hath He not 
put in subjection the age to come.” In that day 
God will work through His redeemed ones, hence 
the living ones join in the New Song, voicing the 
joy of the saints in whom the divine glory will 
be displayed. The living creatures of Ezekiel’s 
vision and the cherubim on the mercy-seat tell the 


same story. 


LECTURE VI 
THE SEVEN-SEALED BOOK 
(Chapters 5: 1 —6:8) 


AST Friday evening our subject was the 4th 

chapter — the redeemed gathered around the 
throne of God and the Lamb in heaven. We no- 
ticed that the four and twenty elders, seen by John 
in vision sitting around the throne, represent all 
the heavenly saints of this and past dispensations. 
I cannot reiterate, except to remind you that the 
symbol is evidently taken from the twenty-four 
elders of the priesthood of Israel. We can see 
how aptly the entire heavenly company would be 
represented by these heads of the Levitical priest- 
hood. In heaven there is no special sacerdotal 
family. All of God’s people are priests. 

In the 5th chapter we are still occupied with the 
same vision as in chapter 4. There we saw the 
Lord Jesus Christ worshiped as Creator. Here a 
higher glory is His — He is worshiped as Redeemer. 
“°Twas great to speak a world from nought; ’twas 
greater to redeem.” 

The first thing that attracts our attention is what 


is said of the seven-sealed book in the right hand 
88 


The Seven-Sealed Book (chap. 5:1-6:8) 89 


of Him who sits on the throne. We have already 
seen in our review of chapter 4 that the Son is on 
that throne; but we must not forget that it is like- 
wise the throne of God the Father. And so here 
we have in the Father’s right hand a book written 
within and on the backside, and sealed with seven 
seals. When we read of a “book” we must not 
think of a volume such as we are familiar with, but 
rather of a roll of parchment. The ancient books 
of Israel were generally sheepskin rolls; and when 
we are told that this book was sealed with seven 
seals, we are to understand that the book was rolled 
up to a certain point, and there a seal was put upon 
the edge, so that it could not be opened until that 
seal was broken. It was rolled up a little farther 
and another seal put on, and so on, until there were 
six seals on the edge of the book and one seal closing 
the entire scroll. When the first seal was opened 
a certain portion of the book was exposed to view, 
and so with each one following. When the seventh 
was broken then the entire book would be unrolled. 

What is this sealed book? I will again remind 
you of a principle which I want to keep before you 
in all of these lectures, and that is, in studying the 
Book of the Revelation it is never necessary to fall 
back on our own imagination as to what a particu- 
lar symbol means. Every symbol 1s explained, or 
alluded to, somewhere else in the Bible. Turn to 
the 32nd chapter of Jeremiah. The prophet Jere 


gO Lectures on the Revelation 


miah lived in a day just previous to the fall of 
Jerusalem under Nebuchadnezzar. He had been 
telling the people of Israel that they were going to 
be carried captives to Babylon. For seventy years 
they would be in captivity; but, at the end of that 
time, they would be restored, and would build again 
the waste places (ch. 29:10). Hanameel, Jere- 
miah’s cousin, who had a piece of ground, knew 
well that it was soon to be absolutely worthless, 
and he was anxious to get it off his hands and 
realize what he could from it. He concluded to 
try to sell it to his prophet-cousin who was in prison 
at the time for the truth’s sake. The Lord said to 
Jeremiah, “ Buy the field.” He was commanded to 
accept it as though it were really worth having, be- 
cause the time was coming when it would be worth 
having; for just as surely as God’s people were go- 
ing down into Babylon, so surely were they coming 
back again. That land would be worth far more 
in that day, and he would have it in his family. 

So we are told, in chap. 32:8, that Hanameel 
came and besought him to buy the field. Jeremiah 
acquiesced. The title-deeds were made out and 
sealed and hidden away. The land was purchased 
by Jeremiah, but he was not going to enter into 
possession of it. He, too, was to be driven out — 
to be rejected and set to one side; but some day that 
sealed roll would be of great value, when the restora- 
tion took place. He gave it to his secretary to hide 


The Seven-Sealed Book (chap. 5:1-6:8) 91 


away with a view of making known to his heirs 
where the deed was which was to give them the 
title to the land. The sealed book was the title- 
deed to Jeremiah’s inheritance, and when the people 
of Israel came back from Babylon there would be 
a man who could go into court and say, ‘‘ This deed 
belongs to me. I am Jeremiah’s heir. I have the 
right to break the seals and take the property.” 
With this illustration from the Old Testament be- 
fore us, we have no difficulty in seeing what the 
seven-sealed book in Revelation means. The book 
that John saw in the hand of Him that sat upon the 
throne is the title-deed to this world; and when God 
says, “‘ Who is worthy to take the book and to loose 
the seals thereof?”’ it is just another way of say- 
ing, Who is the rightful heir? Who can say, “I 
have title to break those seals, title to claim that 
world, it belongs to me?”’ Who is worthy to take 
possession of that world and subject it to himself? 

Adam, what about your Wasn't that world 
given to you? When God created you and placed 
you in the Garden of Eden, did He not say that all 
of this was yours? Why do you not come forward 
and take this title-deed and claim your property? 
Adam says, “I forfeited my inheritance because of 
sin. It was mine, but I sinned it away. The devil 
cheated me out of it, and I have no longer any title 
to it.” Is there any angel who can step up and take 
the book? No, not an angel among all the serried 


92 Lectures on the Revelation 


ranks of heaven’s hosts can say, “I have title to 
that world.’”’ Not a man in all God’s universe can 
say, “It is mine.” And John says, “I wept much, 
because no one was found worthy.” But as he was 
weeping, one of the elders said, ‘‘ Weep not, the 
Lion of the tribe of Judah has prevailed to take the 
book, and to loose the seven seals thereof.’”’” And 
John looked for the Lion of the tribe of Judah, 
the majestic roaring King of Beasts, ready to spring 
upon the prey; but he beheld a Lamb. Why, the 
Lamb is the Lion! The Lamb of God is the Lion 
of Judah’s tribe. The lamb that speaks of inno- 
cence, of meekness, of gentleness and sacrifice, is 
the One who is to go forth as the mighty conqueror 
and claim this world as His own, and drive all 
His enemies from before His face. I like the 
translation of Weymouth here. He says, “I saw 
in the midst of the throne a lamb that looked as 
though it had been offered in sacrifice,’”— the Lamb 
in the very glory of God that will have through all 
eternity the marks of death upon His glorified body! 
It is right to sing as we sometimes do, 


“T shall know Him, I shall know Him, 
As redeemed by His side I shall stand; 

I shall know Him, I shall know Him, 
By the print of the nails in His hand.” 


When He came forth from the tomb the print of 
the nails was there. When John saw Him many 


The Seven-Sealed Book (chap. 5:1-6:8) 93 


years after in vision up there in glory, he saw a 
Lamb that looked as though it had once been of- 
fered in sacrifice; and when we get home to heaven 
we will never make any mistake in identifying Him. 
We will never be found worshiping Gabriel instead 
of Christ; we will not mistake so loving an apostle 
as John even for his Lord. We will have only eyes 
for the Lamb upon whose body will be for all 
eternity the marks that tell of our redemption. Ah, 
what a sight that will be for God's beloved people — 
when we look upon His face, feel His gentle touch, 
behold the print of the nails in His hands and feet, 
and see the mark left by the Roman spear in His 
side! 

The prophet Habakkuk describes Him as having 
“bright beams coming out of His side, and there 
was the hiding of His power” (Hab. 3:4, literal 
trans.). There, where the cruel spear pierced Him, 
is the hiding of His power. 


“Oh, the Lamb, the bleeding Lamb, 
The Lamb of Calvary; 

The Lamb that was slain, that liveth again, 
To intercede for me.” 


Do you know this blessed Lamb of God? Are you 
acquainted with Him? Is He your own Saviour? 
Have you cast yourself on His mercies? 

It says that the Lamb in the midst of the throne 
had seven horns. Horns speak of power. In the 


94 Lectures on the Revelation 


Old Testament we read of the “strong bulls of 
Bashan,” of great heads, thick necks, and powerful 
horns. Israel would thus be accustomed to con- 
nect the thought of power with the horns. But it is 
not a mighty bull that is seen, but a lamb, and the 
diminutive form of the word, ‘‘a little lamb,” with 
seven horns! Just as horns speak of power, seven 
speaks of perfection. Perfect power belongs to the 
Lamb of God. And we are told He had seven eyes, 
which is interpreted as meaning seven Spirits of 
God sent forth into all the world, which we have 
connected with Isaiah 11:1, 2. The Holy Spirit 
is the Spirit of Christ. “In Him dwells all the 
fulness of the Godhead bodily.” All spiritual 
graces are His. He is anointed with the oil of 
gladness above His fellows, and He it is who gives 
the Holy Spirit to us. 

He came and took the book out of the right hand 
of Him that sat upon the throne. What right had 
He thus to act? Because He went to the cross in 
infinite grace to pay the great debt of sin, thus to 
redeem this forfeited inheritance and free it from 
Satan’s domination. The Lamb has title to the 
book! The Lamb can claim the title-deed to this 
world because when He died on Calvary’s cross He 
purchased the entire world to be His own —in 
which the glory of God is to be displayed through a 
thousand wondrous years. It was His because He 
treated it. He gave it to man, but man forfeited 


The Seven-Sealed Book (chap. 5:1-6:8) 95 


it through sin; and the Lord Jesus Christ bought 
it all back when He hung on Golgotha’s tree; but for 
1900 years He has been waiting patiently up there 
in the glory until the appointed time for claiming His. 
inheritance. So the book of the title-deeds has been 
sealed. In this interval, men have been having 
pretty much their own way down here; the devil 
has been running things to suit himself, but in a 
little while Christ is coming again. He is going 
to put everything right, but He will have to act in 
judgment to do so. For the very world in which 
the Lord Jesus died is going to be the sphere in 
which the glory of God will be displayed, and that 
not only in the Millennium, but afterward in the 
new earth, as well as in the new heaven. 

The moment that the Lamb takes the book, in 
verse 8, the four living ones and the four and 
twenty elders fall down before Him, having every 
one of them harps, and golden bowls full of odors, 
which are the prayers of saints. You know, I am 
very sentimental about the harp. I love it. I al- 
ways think when I hear the harp being played that 
it is the instrument I am going to play in heaven. 
It is a figure, of course, but a very lovely one. 
“And they sang a new song, saying, Thou art 
worthy to take the book, and to loose the seals 
thereof, for Thou wast slain and hast redeemed to 
God, by thy blood, out of every kindred and tongue, 
and people, and nation, and hast made them unto 


96 Lectures on the Revelation 


our God a kingdom of priests, and they shall reign 
over the earth” (vers. 9, 10, literal trans.). It is 
not merely of themselves they sing, but of all the 
redeemed; so the living ones, the divine attributes, 
join init, too. And note the great throng suggested 
by the words of the song. Far more people will be 
in heaven than will ever be lost in hell! All the 
babes that died in infancy will be there. What a 
throng will fill that Home! And oh, how wonder- 
ful the fellowship! We shall have the society of all 
the pure and holy, made pure by the blood of Jesus. 
But notice carefully what they sing up there. They 
ascribe their redemption entirely to the Lamb and 
His work. Those are the saints of God. Then 
you find another company in the next two verses, 
but they are angels. You will notice that you have 
an inner circle composed of sinners that were re- 
deemed. That will be the glory of heaven. 

You often hear of the angels singing; but it is 
remarkable that when you go to the Bible there is 
only one place where you read of angels singing; 
it is in the 38th chapter of the Book of Job. The 
morning stars there are angels, and they sang to- 
gether when this world in its pristine beauty sprang 
from God's hand. But that ancient song was stilled. 
Sin came in and marred that beautiful creation, and 
from the time that sin came in we never read again 
that angels sang. At the birth of our Lord Jesus 
a multitude of the heavenly hosts praised God, say- 


The Seven-Sealed Book (chap. 5:1-6:8) 97 


ing, “Glory to God in the Highest,”’ but we do not 
read that they sang. It is the redeemed that sing, 
and they sing “a new song.” It is the song of 
redemption. Will you be able to sing that song? 
Angels will praise the Lamb, truly, though it does 
not say they will sing. Let me read the passage, 


“And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels 
round about the throne, and the living ones and the 
elders; and the number of them was ten thousand times 
ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; saying with a 
loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive 
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, 
and glory, and blessing.” 


What a host! You would think that God had 
enough without us. Old John Bunyan says, ‘“ Oh, 
this Lamb of God! He had a whole heaven to 
Himself, myriads of angels to do His pleasure, but 
this could not satisfy Him. He must have sinners 
to share it with Him!” If you are ever going to 
sing up there you will have to start in down here. 
Can you say, “ Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed 
me by Thy blood ’”’? 

The angels stand in an outer circle. In other 
words, the angels stand off and look on and say, 
“The Lamb deserves all the honor He is receiving.” 
Then there is a third company, a third circle, em- 
bracing all creation. John looks throughout the 
universe, and he sees every creature extolling the 
Lamb. The day is coming when all created intelli- 


08 Lectures on the Revelation 


gences will join in saying, “Glory to the Lamb.” 

And now the Lamb, having taken the book, pro- 
ceeds to open the seals. Here I want to pause for 
a moment in the course of the exposition. Many 
have come to me since the great world-war began 
and said, ‘‘ Don’t you think that, perhaps, the Great 
Tribulation has already commenced? There have 
been events following one another in the last few 
years which so nearly answer to this opening part 
of the Book of the Revelation that one would be 
justified in believing we are already in the throes 
of the Tribulation.” My answer is this: There 
can be no period of tribulation such as is depicted 
here until the Lamb breaks the seals of the seven- 
sealed book. But the Lamb does not break the first 
seal of this book until the redeemed are seen crowned 
in heaven; and no redeemed one will ever get his 
crown until they are taken up at the coming of the 
Lord Jesus Christ to the air, and the setting up of 
the judgment-seat. All the crowns are going to be 
given out at the judgment-seat of Christ before the 
Lamb takes the book, and before the seals. are 
broken. 

A lady said to me, ‘‘ But, dear brother, what tribu- 
lation could be worse?” Well, conditions are cer- 
tainly terrible, but there has never been a war in 
which the organizations that profess to stand for 
righteousness have done so much for the soldiers, 
and the relatives, and the afflicted, as in this awful 


The Seven-Sealed Book (chap. 5:1-6:8) 99 


conflict. Consider the Red Cross, for instanee. It 
was the spirit of sacrifice that caused people to 
start the society, and many of the founders of it 
were devoted to Christ; wherever the red cross was 
seen it was the reminder of the cross of Christ. 
There will be no Red Cross in the Great Tribula- 
tion. The cross of Christ will be so hated then 
that it will never be seen anywhere. Then look 
at the Y. M. C. A. . I know all about the criticisms, 
and I have had to speak plainly myself, but the Y. 
M. C. A. movement was started by a man of God, 
and its original objective was to bring men to 
Christ. Much of their recent work is indeed open 
to just criticism; it is a shame that it has added to 
and detracted from its original purpose, yet we can 
thank God for the New Testament and the com- 
forts it has brought to millions of men. Take the 
work of the Salvation Army: I have heard scores 
testify about the Salvation Army preaching the gos- 
pel of God in the trenches. Now think of a greater 
war than this (and it is in the future), a war in 
which there will be no Salvation Army, no Y. M. 
C. A., no Red Cross, no Bible Societies, no Chris- 
tian workers — absolutely no spiritual ministry of 
any kind to alleviate the awful conditions that will 
then prevail. The thought is unspeakably terrible, 
but such a war is predicted in this Book. 

But, I repeat, that tribulation time cannot begin 
until the redeemed are gathered around the Lord 


100 Lectures on the Revelation 


in the glory and crowned there. And it cannot be 
emphasized too much that no saints in heaven now 
have crowns. The apostle says, “ Henceforth there 
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which 


the Lord . . . shall give to me at that day: and not 
to me only, but unto all them also that love his ap- 
pearing.” “ That day” when the saints are gath- 


ered around the judgment-seat of Christ: that is the 
day when they will get their crowns. 

Well then, after the church has gone, what is go- 
ing to take place in the world? When I get to this 
chapter, I always like to view it this way : that we are 
in heaven already, the rapture having taken place. 
Look at it with me from that standpoint. Let us 
suppose that last night, while things were going on 
in the ordinary way, suddenly there was a hearten- 
ing shout heard from the glory and every redeemed 
one responded to the trump of God: and in a mo- 
ment the graves were opened, and in every place 
where the believing dead were resting, the bodies 
were raised and the living saints were changed. We 
found ourselves caught away, and we entered with 
Him into the Father’s house, and gathered around 
the throne and fell down to worship. We will say 
that we have had twenty-four hours in heaven. O 
sinner, you wouldn’t be there. It is saved people I 
am talking about. At first our hearts would just 
be too full of Christ to think of anything else. But 
He, Himself, stirs us at last to think of what He is 


The Seven-Sealed Book (chap. 5:1-6:8) or 


about to do. We say to ourselves, What is going 
to be the next thing in that world we have left be- 
hind? We look down to that poor scene where we 
lived yesterday. Men are going on much as before, 
only in great excitement. Look at the streets of the 
great cities. We can see the newsboys shouting, 
“Extra! Extra! a great number of people have 
disappeared!” There is a rush to get the news- 
papers to find out. all about this strange event. 
Throngs are crowding the popular churches to hear 
the Rev. Dr. Ananias and his like give their ex- 
planation of the great disappearance of so many 
people. 

I believe there will be lots of church-going for a 
little while after the rapture of God’s people; they 
will be crowding into the churches as never before. 
I think I see the Rev. Mr. Smooth-things standing in 
his pulpit, with pale, wan face, as he looks at scores 
of parishioners he hasn’t seen for many years, and 
thinking to himself, “ Now, I see I have got to ex- 
plain to these people. I have been telling them for 
twenty years that this talk of the Second Coming is 
false.”” People who believed in the Second Com- 
ing were looked upon as idiotic ranters who didn’t 
know what they were talking about. I think I hear 
mutterings down in the congregation: ‘‘ We trusted 
our souls to you. You had been to the colleges, 
seminaries and universities, read a whole library of 
books, and we believed you when you told us the 


LIF.E. College Library 
1100 Glendale Blvd. 


102 Lectures on the Revelation 


old idea of salvation by the blood of Christ was all 
worn out, and that we could save ourselves by cul- 
ture. We believed you when you said Christ’s 
second coming was only a fantastic notion; now 
explain this to us.’ Another cries, “ What about 
my grandmother? She believed in her Bible to the 
last. She was reading just the other day, ‘In an 
hour when ye think not, the Son of Man cometh.’ 
Now Grandmother is gone, and J am here. Now, 
Doctor, explain all this.” Oh, there are going to 
be some wonderful meetings after the Lord has 
come! There is that world seething with corrup- 
tion, men’s hearts failing them for fear. Christian 
statesmen will have gone; Christian business men, 
people of all ranks who knew Christ will have dis- 
appeared. Cities and communities will be in tur- 
moil. What are they going to do? Let’s look at 
the Book and see. 

“And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, 
and I heard, as it were the noise of thunder, one of the 
four beasts saying, Come! And I saw, and behold a 
white horse: and he that sat on him had a bow; and 4 


crown was given unto him: and he went forth conquering, 
and to conquer.” 


We behold the Lamb as He breaks the first seal, 
and John hears a noise as of thunder. Thunder 
speaks of a coming storm, though the scene seems 
peaceful enough. What is this? A warrior comes 
forth on a white horse, and a bow isin his hand. A 


The Seven-Sealed Book (chap. 5: 1-6:8) 103 


bow speaks of distant warfare. Horses, as in 
Zechariah 1, symbolize providential movements. 
This rider on the white horse evidently pictures 
man’s last effort to bring in a reign of order and 
peace while Christ is still rejected. It will be the 
world’s greatest attempt to pull things together after 
the church is gone. It will be the devil’s cunning 
scheme for bringing in a mock millennium without 
Christ. How long will it last? 


“And when he had opened the second seal, I heard 
the second beast say, Come! And there went out an- 
other horse that was red: and power was given to him 
that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that 
they should kill one another: and there was given unto 
him a great sword.” 


He opens the second seal, and a red horse ap- 
pears. Anarchy, a bloody warfare! ‘“‘ When they 
shall say, Peace and safety, sudden destruction 
cometh upon them.” The first effort, down in the 
world we are supposed to have left, will be to bring 
in universal peace, apart from Christ; but it will end 
in universal, bloody warfare, greater far than has 
ever been known. The rider on the blood-red horse 
has a sword; it speaks of warfare of a different 
type altogether from that of the bow: man wrestling 
with man, nation with nation. Internal strife, 
class-wars, civil wars, the breaking up of all es- 
tablished order is here set forth. 


104 Lectures on the Revelation 


“ And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the 
third beast say, Come! And I beheld, and lo, a black 
horse; and he that sat on him had a pair of balances in 
his hand. And I heard a voice in the midst of the four 
beasts say, A measure of wheat for a penny, and three 
measures of barley for a penny; and see thou hurt not 
the oil and the wine.” 


Very naturally, when he had opened the third 
seal, a black horse appears, with his rider holding 
a pair of balances. We have that which inevitably 
follows world-wide war — world-wide famine. I 
don’t wonder that people think they have seen all 
this in the last four years. An effort to bring in 
universal peace, but almost universal war; and 
famine in many parts of the world. But, by and 
by it is going to be all over the world. We know 
a little better now what this means than when these 
things were first opened up by men of God. We 
have had our food sold to us by measure, and we 
have known much of the high cost of living, but, in 
this coming day, conditions will be so dreadful that 
it will be a measure of wheat for a denarius, or 
three measures of barley for the same amount. The 
word translated “ measure’? means just enough 
wheat to make a‘man one meal, and the denarius was 
a full day’s wages. Enough food for one meal for 
a whole day’s wages! That is, if one is going to eat 
wheat. Now if they will take barley they will get 
three meals for a day’s work. What hard condi- 


The Seven-Sealed Book (chap. 5:1-6:8) 105 


tions! We thought war prices exorbitant, but they 
are going to be unprecedented in those days of the 
tribulation. 

“But see thou hurt not the oil and the wine.” 
The oil and the wine are put in contrast with the 
wheat and the barley. The wheat and barley are 
the food of the poor — almost out of reach; but the 
food of the rich, or the luxuries, are not touched. 


“ And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the 
voice of the fourth beast say, Come! And I looked, and 
behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on him was 
Death, and Hell followed with him. And power was 
given unto them over the fourth part of the earth, to 
kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death, and 
with the beasts of the earth.” 


And now he opens the fourth seal, and a pale 
horse ridden by Death appears. The word rendered 
pale means green, chrome. A better translation 
would be a livid horse, in the sense of being the color 
of acorpse. Of what is it the picture? Of pesti- 
lence, which always follows war and famine. We 
have known something of that in this last year, 
but the complete fulfilment awaits a not far-distant 


day. 


1JI thought at first of recasting this lecture, as it seemed 
somewhat too colloquial and localized. But I concluded to 
let it remain largely as given. The reader will understand it 
was delivered during the armistice year, and while the influ- 
enza plague was still in progress. 


LEGIURE..VII 
THE FIFTH AND SIXTH SEALS 
(Chapter 6: 9-17) 


EFORE examining what is written concerning 

the breaking of the fifth and sixth seals, it is 

necessary to say something as to God’s dispensa- 

tional dealings with His earthly people Israel, and 

to endeavor to show how the book we are studying 
links up with the older prophecy of Daniel. 

For fifteen hundred years before the Cross, God 
was dealing in covenant-relationship with this one 
people which He had chosen to be peculiarly His 
own, in accordance with His promise to Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob. He separated them to Himself, 
giving them the land of Canaan as their inheritance, 
so long as they remained faithful to Him as their 
unseen King. He gave them His holy law, and 
declared that if they obeyed His voice they should 
be the head of all nations and His witnesses to the 
ends of the earth. On the other hand, He warned 
them that, if they were disobedient to Him, if they 
did not keep His testimonies, if they broke His com- 


mandments, if they turned to the false gods of the 
106 


The Fifth and Sixth Seals (chap.6:9-17) 107 


surrounding nations, He would no longer protect 
them from their enemies, but would give them up 
to desolation and scattering, until they judged them- 
selves and turned from their sins, when He would 
remember His covenant with their fathers, and 
would restore them to their own land and fulfil all 
His promises. 

They completely broke down under every test; 
and in accordance with His word ten tribes were 
carried away by the king of Assyria and a little later 
the remaining two tribes were deported to Babylon, 
where they remained in bondage for seventy years. 
Upon the expiration of this prophetic period they 
were permitted to return to their own land, that they 
might be there to welcome their promised Messiah 
when He should be manifested. Only a remnant 
of the Jews availed themselves of this privilege, and 
it was their descendants who were living in Pales- 
tine when the Lord Jesus Christ appeared in the 
fulness of time, only to be rejected by the very 
nation that had waited for Him so long. 

The time of His coming had been very definitely 
foretold in the book of Daniel. In the ninth chap- 
ter we are told that a heavenly messenger brought 
the word to the prophet that God had appointed 
seventy weeks to His people and their holy city. 
These are not to be understood as weeks of days, 
but sevens of years. The term “ weeks ” might bet- 
ter be simply rendered sevens. Seventy times seven 


108 Lectures on the Revelation 


years would be 490 years. It is an appointed period 
in the course of time, and has to do especially with 
the Jews and Jerusalem. 

This period was divided into three parts,— 7 
weeks, or 49 years, in which the streets and the wall 
of the city were to be re-built. Then, 62 weeks, or 
434 years, immediately following the completion of 
this work, unto the appearing and cutting off of 
Messiah the Prince. Then, one final week, or 7 
years, to complete the cycle, at the end of which the 
King would be reigning in the holy city and all 
prophecy fulfilled by the establishment of the king- 
dom so long foretold. The starting-point is clearly 
defined as, “ The going forth of a commandment 
to restore and build Jerusalem,” which is the decree 
of Artaxerxes as recorded in Nehemiah, chap. 2. 
During the next 49 years the city was rebuilt. Then, 
434 years later, our Lord rode into Jerusalem and 
was acclaimed by the multitudes as King, the Son of 
David, but a few days later was rejected and cruci- 
fied. Thus Messiah was cut off and had nothing. 

What then of the last week? Has it been ful- 
filled? It has not. When His Son was cast out, 
God cast off the nation, and that week will not be 
fulfilled till a future day, when He takes up Israel 
again. 

The angel-revealer said to Daniel, “ Until the 
END shall be war; desolations are determined.” 
This gives the whole history of Palestine for the 


The Fifth and Sixth Seals (chap.6:9-17) 109 


past 1900 years. It has been a great battleground 
and a scene of almost unparalleled desolation, be- 
cause Israel knew not the time of their visitation. 
Their times are not in progress now. God is doing 
another work. While the Jews are blinded, in part, 
and wanderers over the face of the earth, He is 
gathering out the Church, the body of Christ, a 
heavenly company, who will reign with Christ when 
He establishes His kingdom of righteousness upon 
the earth. The last week, of 7 years, cannot begin 
to run till the Jews are again in the land, and Jeru- 
salem becomes the Jewish capital, after the church 
has been caught up to meet the Lord in the air. Of 
this last week the greater part of the book of the 
Revelation treats. It is only when this is seen that 
all becomes plain and the prophecy becomes in- 
telligible. 

The church began on the day of Pentecost, when 
the Holy Spirit, sent by Christ glorified, came upon 
the disciples, though the full truth of this wonderful 
mystery was not made known until Saul of Tarsus 
became Paul the apostle. To him, and through him 
to us, was made known the truth of the present 
dispensation. The church of Christ is one, though 
men who take His name and claim to be His fol- 
lowers have become sadly divided and have formed 
many systems, often embracing saved and unsaved 
alike. But God’s church consists only of those who 
are born of the Spirit; and all such are by the same 


110 Lectures on the Revelation 


Spirit baptized into “the body of Christ ”— the 
church. This special work will cease at the return 
of the Lord to the air, which is the first stage of His 
second coming. The second stage will be when He 
comes to the earth in manifested glory to reign. 
The oth, or last week of Daniel, comes in between 
these two momentous events. The Lord spoke of 
this period as the “end of the age’’ in Matt. 24, 
and He divides it into two parts, “ the beginning of 
sorrows” and “the great tribulation.” 

A careful comparison of our Lord’s great 
prophecy with the portion of Revelation which we 
have before us, will, I believe, make it plain that the 
first six seals answer to the first half of the week — 
“the beginning of sorrows ” ; while from the opening 
of the seventh seal we are introduced to the great 
tribulation itself with all its attendant horrors. His 
warning as to false Christs, implying false hopes of 
a lasting peace, corresponds to the first seal. His 
declaration that wars and rumors of wars will fol- 
low fits perfectly with the second seal. In like 
manner His solemn warnings of famine and pesti- 
lence find their counterparts in the third and fourth 
seals. 

The Lord then goes on to foretell a time when 
His followers shall be ruthlessly slain, and when it 
will be all one’s life is worth to confess His name. 
This brings us to the breaking of the fifth seal, when 
John saw under the altar the souls of those who had 


The Fifth and Sixth Seals (chap.6:9-17) 111 


been beheaded for the word of God and the testi- 
mony of the Lord. 


“And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under 
the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word 
of God, and for the testimony which they held: and they 
cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy 
and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on 
them that dwell on the earth? And white robes were 
given unto every one of them; and it was said unto them, 
that they should rest yet for a little season, until their 
fellowservants also and their brethren, that should be 
killed as they were, should be fulfilled.” 


Who are these martyred saints, and to what dis- 
pensation do they belong? They cannot belong to 
the church, for as we have already seen, that is 
represented by the throned and crowned elders in 
heaven before the first seal is broken. But the 11th 
chapter of the epistle to the Romans makes it clear 
that after the fulness of the Gentiles has come in, 
that is, after the present dispensation has come to 
an end and the church has been removed to heaven, 
the blindness will pass away from Israel, and they 
will realize their true condition and their sin in re- 
jecting their Messiah. Then they shall call upon 
Him for deliverance. Thus a new company of 
saints will be formed upon the earth, altogether dif- 
ferent from the present heavenly company. Many 
of these Jewish believers will be martyred by the 
Satanic hosts of the last days, and it is these who 


z12 Lectures on the Revelation 


are seen as having been sacrificed and their souls 
poured out at the bottom of the altar. They cry 
for vengeance on their adversaries, for this is fully 
in keeping with the dispensation of judgment to 
which they belong; whereas it would be thoroughly 
contrary to the grace of the present gospel dispen- 
sation. God’s people are taught of His Spirit to 
pray according to the ruling principle of the specific 
time in which their lot is cast. This accounts for 
what often disturbs and even shocks sensitive souls 
—the so-called imprecatory psalms. They cannot 
understand the cries for vengeance that seem so op- 
posed to the grace of God as now made known. 
And it is no wonder they are troubled and hesitate 
to take such words upon their lips, for they do not 
belong to us at all. But they will be exactly suited 
to the remnant of Israel, suffering for Jehovah’s 
sake, but with no clear knowledge of an accom- 
plished redemption — waiting for their Messiah to 
appear and overthrow the last great Gentile con- 
federation, which, as we shall see when we come to 
chapter 13, will be bent upon their absolute ex- 
termination. 

To these souls under the altar, invoking the judg- 
ment of God upon their merciless adversaries, white 
robes are given, and they are told that they must 
wait a little season till the time of Jacob’s trouble 
is ended and they are joined by their brethren who 
are yet to be slain, as the hatred to God and His 


The Fifth and Sixth Seals (chap.6:9-17) 113 


Christ rises ever higher until the Lord Jesus shall 
be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, taking ven- 
geance on those that know not God, as we read in 
2 Thessalonians, chap. I. 

The opening of the sixth seal gives a marvellous 
symbolic picture, of such grave import that I must 
give it to you in its entirety. John says, 


“And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, 
and, lo, there was a’ great earthquake; and the sun be- 
came black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became 
as blood; and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, 
even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is 
shaken of a mighty wind. And the heaven departed as 
a scroll when it is rolled together; and every mountain 
and island were moved out of their places. And the 
kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, 
and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every 
bondman, and every free man, hid themselves in the dens 
and in the rocks of the mountains; and said to the moun- 
tains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of 
him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the 
Lamb: for the great day of his wrath is come; and who 
shall be able to stand?” 


It should be evident from the balance of the book 
that we are not to take this as a literal earthquake, 
though our Lord’s words in Matthew 24 show us 
that there will be such phenomena in divers places, 
terrific in character as the end draws near. Already, 
perhaps we have had, in the past two decades, some 
noteworthy reminders and warnings in the many 


114 Lectures on the Revelation 


horrors of this nature that shocked the civilized 
world, but are apparently so easily forgotten within 
a very short time. But the earthquake of the sixth 
seal is of a different character altogether. It cannot 
be merely literal, as the actual islands, mountains, 
and seas, together with the cities of the nations are 
still seen to be in existence long after this vision 
has had its fulfilment. It rather sets forth the com- 
plete breaking up of society as now constituted, the 
destruction of the boasted civilization of our present 
day. Looked at from this standpoint, we have 
abundant Old Testament scripture to throw light 
upon it and to make plain its awful portents. 

We shall be helped, too, if we remember that in the 
very beginning of the book we are told that the 
Lord sent and “ signified it unto His servant John.” 
That is, He made it known by signs or symbols. If 
these be kept in mind we shall be preserved from 
taking literally what God meant us to take sym- 
bolically, and so we shall be more likely to get the 
mind of the Spirit in regard to the future of both 
Christendom and Judaism, the two spheres with 
which this book specially deals. 

It is therefore not a world-wide, literal earthquake 
that the sixth seal introduces, but rather the de- 
struction of the present order — political, social, and 
ecclesiastical — reduced to chaos; the breaking down 
of all authority, and the breaking up of all estab- 
lished and apparently permanent institutions. 


The Fifth and Sixth Seals (chap.6:9-17) 115 


We may see, I believe, a foreshadowing of this in 
what has so lately taken place in Russia; the over- 
turning of the throne, the blotting out of the Roman- 
off Dynasty, the wrecking of all industrial and social 
order, the fearful orgies of fanatical Bolshevism, 
blood-red anarchy everywhere holding sway, making 
wild promises of liberty while destroying every safe- 
guard against the unrestrained brutality of beast- 
like men. Take.as but one horrible instance the 
attempted abolition of marriage (that which God 
Himself instituted, at the very beginning of human 
history, for the sanctity and blessing of His crea- 
tures), and the substitution of the degrading custom 
of forcing all women to be common property, taken 
by whoever may desire them, and all children born 
in these abominable conditions to be taken from 
their parents and reared as children of the State. 
Natural affection at once receives its death-blow, 
and all restraint on man’s animal propensities is at 
an end. Another event that has shocked the world 
has been the overturning of Russia’s State Church. 
It is true that it had become unspeakably corrupt, 
but in their wild desire to destroy it the Soviet Gov- 
ernment has declared war on all that bears a religious 
name, whether human or divine. ‘“ No God and no 
church”’ is the cry ringing through the unhappy 
land, and who can foretell what the dreaded future 
has in store? 

Many thought in the past century that they saw 


116 Lectures on the Revelation 


the French Revolution portrayed in this sixth seal, 
and it was indeed but an earlier sample of the same 
conditions we have been considering; so was the 
break-up of the Roman Empire in the fifth, sixth, 
and seventh centuries. But none of these cata- 
clysms, stupendous as they were, fully met the re- 
quirements of the prophecy; for the church of the 
First-born is still here, and the gospel of the grace 
of God is still being proclaimed to a guilty world. 
But we have already seen that when the seals are 
broken the church will be with Christ, waiting for 
the moment when He will descend to take His world- 
kingdom and establish His authority in righteous- 
ness. 

But we must now proceed to look at the passage 
in detail that we may the better grasp its true import. 

The sun, we are told, became black as sackcloth 
of hair. The sun, the source of light and life for 
this planet, speaks of supreme authority, and is the 
well-known type of the Lord Himself. ‘“‘ Unto you 
that fear my Name shall the Sun of Righteottsness 
arise with healing in his wings.” Such is Malachi’s 
declaration concerning the coming of Christ the sec- 
ond time. At present Christendom, at least nom- 
inally, owns His lordship. We even date our letters 
Anno Domini. We speak of Him as our Lord, and 
profess to receive our governments from His hand. 
But soon He will be entirely rejected and His word 
utterly despised. Thus will the sun be blotted out 


The Fifth and Sixth Seals (chap.6:9-17) 117 


from the heavens, and God will seem to have been 
dethroned. 

Naturally enough this will mean the complete de- 
struction of all derived authority, so we next read, 
“the moon became as blood.” The moon gets all 
its light from the sun, just as “the powers that be 
are ordained of God,” and are appointed by Him for 
man’s blessing. But all government being thrown 
down, the lurid glare of anarchy will take its place, 
for a time at least. 

The stars falling from heaven indicate, I take it, 
the downfall and apostasy of great religious lead- 
ers, the bright lights in the ecclesiastical heavens. 
In Daniel, those who turn many to righteousness 
shine as the stars. In the first part of our book the 
stars are said to be the messengers of the churches. 
So it would seem clear that we are to understand 
the symbol in the same sense here. After the true 
church has been caught up to meet the Lord in the 
air, there will be a vast host of unconverted ec- 
clesiastics left behind; thousands of church digni- 
taries, both Protestant and Romanist, who, though 
looked upon as guides in things spiritual, shall be 
manifested as utterly bereft of divine life — pro. 
fessional clergymen who, despite their pretensions 
and exalted calling, are simply natural men intrud- 
ing into spiritual things, like the Philistines of old 
who dwelt in the land of Canaan and gave their 
name, Palestine, to the whole thing as though it be- 


118 Lectures on the Revelation 


longed of right to them, while all the time they were 
unwarranted intruders of Egyptian descent. These 
are the stars who will be hurled from their places 
of power and eminence in that awful day of the 
wrath of the Lamb, and who, apostatizing from the 
last vestiges of Christianity, will soon become lead- 
ers in the worship of Antichrist. 

Thus the heavens, the ecclesiastical powers of 
every description, will depart as a scroll when it is 
rolled up. The whole fabric of Christendom will 
be wound up as something obsolete and out of date. 
Recently, leaders of religious thought, as they are 
called, have been questioning the finality of the Chris- 
tian religion, and declaring that out of the chaotic 
conditions brought about by the war shall arise a 
new religious conception altogether, superseding that 
of “the Nazarene” and resulting in the worship of 
humanity — a new conception of God as immanent 
in all men and only to be found within the heart 
of man. That such teachers are correct as to their 
expectation there can be no doubt, and for this 
Christian Science, so-called, the New Thought, the 
New Theology, Theosophy, and kindred cults (all 
founded on the same basic philosophy), are prepar- 
ing the world. But as long as the Holy Spirit is 
here on earth, dwelling in the church of God, the 
full development of this mystery of iniquity is 
checked ; but as soon as He goes up with the church, 
the whole profession that is left will be destroyed, 


The Fifth and Sixth Seals (chap.6:9-17) 119 


and out of its ruins will arise the final Satanic mas- 
terpiece of the last days. 

The destruction of all organized religion will but 
intensify the frightful conditions of that dreadful 
time, however. Men drunk with their sham liberty, 
and rejoicing in the triumph of a blatant God-defy- 
ing demagoguery, will for a brief period turn this 
earth into a great mad-house. The vile orgies of 
those days will be indescribable, until there shall 
dawn upon multitudes the realization that the Lamb 
of God whom they had rejected and whose gentle 
rule they had spurned has in some way visited their 
sins upon their own heads. Then we have depicted 
what some one has called “the greatest prayer- 
meeting of all history,’ when “the kings of the 
earth, the great men, the rich men, the chief cap- 
tains, the mighty men, the bond and the free”’ shall 
hide themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the 
mountains, crying out in their sore distress for the 
mountains and the rocks to cover them and hide 
them from the face of Him that sitteth upon the 
throne and from the wrath of the Lamb, “ for,” 
they will cry as with one voice, “the great day of 
His wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?” 

Yet we read of no repentance, no true turning 
back to God or trusting His Christ — just an awful 
realization that it is the rejected Lamb with whom 
they have to do, and whose wrath they would fain 
escape. They are like those of whom Jeremiah 


120 Lectures on the Revelation 


prophesied who will cry in that day of the fierce 
anger of the Lord, ‘“‘ The harvest is passed, the sum- 
mer is ended, and we are not saved.” 

Notice the solemnity of the expression, “ The 
wrath of the Lamb.” We are not accustomed to 
couple the thought of wrath, or indignation, with 
the Lamb, which has ever been the accepted symbol 
of gentleness. But there is a terrible truth involved 
in it nevertheless. For if the grace of the Lamb of 
God be rejected, His indignation and wrath must be 
faced. It cannot be otherwise. It is part of eternal 
righteousness so to do. God Himself will not, and 
in accordance with the holiness of His nature can- 
not, have it otherwise; as we read elsewhere, “‘He 
cannot deny Himself.” 


“ Hear the just law, the judgment of the skies: 
He that hates truth must be the dupe of lies: 
And he who will be cheated to the last, 
Delusions strong as hell must bind him fast.” 

— CowPeEr. 


For such there can be nothing in reserve but a cer- 
tain fearful looking-for of judgment and fiery in- 
dignation which shall devour the adversaries; and 
this of a much sorer character than that which be- 
fell those who despised Moses’ law, for they now 
defy God revealed in grace, who has come out to 
man in the person of His Son. For such there 
must be “the wrath of the Lamb.” 


The Fifth and Sixth Seals (chap.6:9-17) 121 


“Grace like this despised, brings judgment 
Measured by the wrath He bore.” 


But the wrath of God is even a deeper and more 
intense form of judgment, which will be poured out 
upon the earth from the “ seven vials (or bowls) of 
the wrath of God,” and under which the Christ- 
rejector must abide for eternity, for it is written, 
“ He that believeth not the Son shall not see life, 
but the wrath of God abideth on him.” Note the 
hopelessness of the condition here depicted. Abid- 
ing wrath precludes any thought of either annihila- 
tien or restoration, and tells us that the results of 
refusing the matchless grace of God are eternal; 
for that which “ abides” is unending. 

But I must bring this address to a close. and as 
I do so I would again remind you that this sixth 
seal brings us to the end of the first part of that last 
unfulfilled week of the ninth chapter of Daniel. It 
divides into two parts, and the Lord Himself defines 
the first part as “the beginning of sorrows,” while 
He designates the last part as “the great tribula- 
tion.” This is introduced for us in the book of 
Revelation by the breaking of the seventh seal, and 
that will come before us after the great parenthesis 
of the seventh chapter. 

The wrath of the Lamb is visited upon the nations 
in the beginning of sorrows; the wrath of God will 
be their portion in the great tribulation. May He 


122 Lectures on the Revelation 


grant, in His mercy, that none who hear these words 
may enter into either the one or the other. Grace 
is still reigning through righteousness, and a just 
God waits in loving kindness to be the justifier of 
everyone that believeth in Jesus. 


LECTURE VIII 


THE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FOUR THOU- 
SAND AND THE GREAT MULTITUDE 
OF GENTILES 


(Chapter 7) 


N our last address we were occupied with the 

first half of the 7oth week, yet future, of Dan- 
iel’s prophecy: “the beginning of sorrows” when 
“the wrath of the Lamb” will be poured out on 
guilty Christendom and apostate Judaism. Now we 
find that before the Lord gave John the vision of the 
opening of the seventh seal (which introduces the 
great tribulation in all its intensity), we have this 
parenthetic seventh chapter in which are recorded 
two important visions. In the first, John sees a 
hundred and forty-four thousand Israelites sealed 
by an angel, and in the second, he beholds a great 
multitude of Gentiles led in triumph by the Lamb 
who is in the midst of the throne, taking possession 
of the millennial earth. 

I am sure that many of my hearers have often 
been perplexed by conflicting theories regarding the 


hundred and forty-four thousand. The way in 
123 


124 Lectures on the Revelation 


which so many unscriptural and often positively 
heretical sects arrogate to themselves this title would 
be amusing, if it were not so sad. You are perhaps 
aware that the Seventh-Day Adventists apply it to 
the faithful of their communion, who will be found 
observing the Jewish Sabbath at the Lord’s return. 
They suppose that these will be raptured when the 
Lord descends, and judgment poured out upon the 
rest of the church. Then we have the followers of 
the late Pastor Russell who teach that the hundred 
and forty-four thousand include only the “ over- 
comers” of their persuasion who continue faithful 
to the end, following the teaching of the system com- 
monly called ‘ Millennial Dawnism.” That very 
absurd and weird cult known as the “ Flying Roll”’ 
makes claim to the same thing; only with them, 
the hundred and forty-four thousand are those who 
will have their blood so cleansed that they cannot 
die, but will have immortal life on this earth! Be- 
sides these, there are many other sects, whose lead- 
ers consider their own peculiar followers will be the 
hundred and forty-four thousand sealed ones at the 
time of the end. All of these, however, overlook a 
very simple fact, which, if observed, would save 
them from their folly. That is, the hundred and 
forty-four thousand are composed of twelve thou- 
sand from each tribe of the children of Israel. 
There is not a Gentile among them, nor is there con- 
fusion as to tribe. Whenever I meet people who 


Saved Jews and Gentiles (chap. 7) 125 


tell me they belong to the hundred and forty-four 
thousand, I always ask them, “‘ Which tribe, please? ” 
and they are invariably pat to confusion for want of 
an answer. 

Now let us look carefully at the three opening 
verses. 


“ And after these things I saw four angels standing on 
the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of 
the earth, that the wind should not blow on the earth, 
nor on the sea, nor on any tree. 

“And I saw another angel ascending from the east, 
having the seal of the living God: and he cried with a 
loud voice to the four angels, to whom it was given to 
hurt the earth and the sea, saying, Hurt not the earth, 
neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the serv- 
ants of our God in their foreheads.” 


John tells us that he saw “ four angels” (four 
is the world number) “ standing on the four corners 
of the earth, holding the four winds of heaven that 
the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on the 
sea, nor on any tree.” In Daniel’s vision, as re- 
corded in the seventh chapter of his prophecy, he 
beholds “‘ the four winds of heaven” striving upon 
the great sea, and as a result you have the various 
world empires coming forth like wild beasts from 
beneath the restless waves. Here we have the angels 
holding back these four winds until a certain event 
takes place. It is very evident that they are re- 


126 Lectures on the Revelation 


straining the last wild beast from making his ap- 
pearance. In chapter thirteen, the beast with seven 
heads and ten horns, the Roman Empire in its last 
form, comes forth from the sea, symbolizing the na- 
tions in unrest. This is the great federation of na- 
tions which God’s word predicts for the very near 
future — a federation of Satanic origin, and which 
will not be developed until after the church is gone, 
and even then certain events must transpire before 
it assumes its final diabolical form. 

Verses two and three make clear what this event 
is that must first take place. John sees another 
angel ascending from the east, having the seal of 
the living God: “ and he cried with a loud voice te 
the four angels, to whom it was given to hurt the 
earth and the sea, saying, Hurt not the earth, neither 
the sea nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants 
of our God in their foreheads.” The point is, you 
see, that God has chosen a remnant of Israel to in- 
herit the kingdom under the Son of Man, which is 
so soon to be established; and ere the final form of 
the Roman Empire is fully developed, these are 
sealed, marked out for God's protecting care; so 
that all the power of the Beast and all the hatred 
of his ally the Antichrist will not be able to destroy 
them, and thus prevent the carrying out of God’s 
purpose. 

Verses four to eight leave no doubt whatever as 
to the identity of these sealed ones. John “ heard 


Saved Jews and Gentiles (chap. 7) 127 


the number of them that were sealed : and there were 
sealed a hundred and forty-four thousand of all the 
tribes of the children of Israel.” 

As you go over the last half you note that the 
tribe of Dan is absent, and instead you have two 
tribes from Joseph— Manasseh and Ephraim. 
Ephraim, however, bears Joseph’s name. Why is 
Dan omitted from the twelve, and the twelfth made 
up in another way? I cannot positively tell you. 
The rabbis used to say that the false Messiah (the 
Antichrist) would arise from Dan, and they based 
the supposition on Jacob’s words in Genesis 49:17: 
“Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in 
the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider 
shall fall backward.” We note from the historical 
record, in the book of Judges, that Dan was the first 
tribe to go into idolatry, and it would not be a mat- 
ter of surprise if Dan would be the leader in the 
last great idolatry —the worship of Antichrist. 
But we may leave this where faith leaves every other 
difficulty — resting in the infinite wisdom of God 
and knowing that He has revealed all that is neces- 
sary for us to know in the present age. 

The balance of the chapter, from verse nine, 
brings before us an entirely different company. 
John says, 

“ After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude which 


no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and 
people, and tongues, stood before the throne and before 


128 Lectures on sne Revelation 


the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their 
hands; and cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to 
our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the 
Lamb. And all the angels stood round about the throne, 
and about the elders and the four beasts, and fell: before 
the throne on their faces and worshiped God, saying, 
Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks- 
giving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our 
God for ever and ever. Amen. And one of the elders 
answered, saying unto me, What are these which are ar- 
rayed in white robes? and whence came they? And | 
said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, 
These are they which came out of great tribulation 
(literally, the tribulation, the great one), and have washed 
their robes, and made them white in the blood of the 
Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and 
serve Him day and night in His temple: and He that sit- 
teth on the throne shall dwell among them (or, spread 
His tabernacle over them). They shall hunger no more, 
neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on 
them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst 
of the throne shall feed (or, shepherd) them, and shall 
lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall 
wipe away all tears from their eyes.” 


It seems very strange that some have taught that 
in this great multitude we have the raptured church; 
hence they have supposed that the Lord would not 
come for His church until the middle of the tribu- 
lation period: but a careful study of the passage 
makes it very evident, it seems to me, that we are 
here gazing upon an earthly, not a heavenly, com- 
pany. This great multitude embraces the Gentile 


Saved Jews and Gentiles (chap. 7) 129 


nations who will enter into millennial blessing. It 
is the great ingathering of the coming dispensation, 
when from all nations, and kindreds, and peoples, 
and tongues, a vast throng from all parts of the 
earth will be redeemed to God by the blood of the 
Lamb, and will enter into the earthly kingdom of 
our Lord. During the dark days of the great 
tribulation they will heed the testimony which will 
be carried to the ends of the earth by Jewish mission- 
aries, “the wise among the people”’ (see Dan. 12), 
who shail instruct many in righteousness. They are 
identical, I take it, with the “sheep” of Matthew 
25, who are placed on the right hand of the Son of 
Man when He comes in His glory and all His holy 
angels with Him, and who inherit the kingdom pre- 
pared for them from the foundation of the earth. 
They are said in verse fourteen to “come out of 
the great tribulation,” to have washed their robes 
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb; 
but they are nowhere said to be taken away to heaven 
— quite the contrary; they are in a scene where it 
is necessary that the Lamb should feed them and 
lead them, and spread his tabernacle over them. 
Verse 15 plainly tells us: ‘‘ Therefore they are be- 
fore the throne of God, and minister before Him 
day and night in his temple’: that is, I take it, the 
millennial temple, which is to be built in the land 
in that coming day. There will be no day and night 
in heaven. The expression can only refer, in this 


130 Lectures on the Revelation 


connection, to the temple on earth. Then we read, 
“He that sitteth on the throne shall spread His 
tabernacle over them.’’ The reference is undoubt- 
edly to the Lord's covering His people when He led 
them of old through the wilderness. The pillar of 
cloud by day and fire by night not only guided 
them through the scene but sheltered them from the 
fierce rays of the desert sun. Thus will He protect 
and shield His redeemed ones in the age to come. 

Weare also told that “ they shall hunger no more, 
neither thirst any more, neither shall the sun light 
on them, nor any heat, for the Lamb which is in the 
midst of the throne shall shepherd them, and shall 
lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God 
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.” It is 
probably because people have not realized the bless- 
edness of the millennial day that these verses are 
made to refer to heaven, but they are at one with 
the predictions of Isaiah, and others of the prophets, 
in regard to the blessing that the saved nations shall 
enjoy when the Lamb Himself reigns. The strug- 
gle for daily bread will be over — they shall hunger 
no more; the ofttimes vain effort to quench their 
thirst will be at an end — they shall thirst no more. 
Even the unpleasant and disagreeable things with 
which men have been afflicted because of the way sin 
has jarred God’s creation will be at an end. The 
sun shall not light upon them, nor any heat. 

In that day all the saved of the nations will be 


Saved Jews and Gentiles (chap. 7) 131 


able to take up, in the fullest sense, the beautiful 
words of the Psalmist, which we but feebly enter 
into now: “ The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not 
want. He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: 
He leadeth me beside the still waters. He restoreth 
my soul: He leadeth me in the paths of righteous- 
ness for his name’s sake.” 

While it is true that the church of God will be in 
a far better scene; while our hope is heavenly, not 
earthly, yet we can indeed rejoice and our hearts 
may well swell with gladness to think of the blessing 
awaiting the earth and its inhabitants. And God 
has surely promised it, and will fulfil all that He 
has caused to be written by His holy prophets in 
the sacred Scriptures, for “the Scripture cannot be 
broken.” 

What a long, dreary night, with what frightful 
disturbing nightmares, if I may so speak, has this 
world known, since sin, with all its attendant evils, 
came in to wreck man’s hopes of joy and gladness! 
But how precious to know that evil shall not always 
have the upper hand; that a time is coming, aye, 
and is very near, when the curse will be lifted, the 
desert shall rejoice and blossom like the rose; even 
the lower creation will be changed and revert to 
former habits ere sin entered; ‘“‘ the lion shall eat 
straw like the ox ”’; the little child need not fear the 
most savage of beasts; for they shall not hurt nor 
destroy in that day. Then government will be right- 


132 Lectures on the Revelation 


eously regulated; abuses of every kind will be 
stopped, and for a thousand glorious years our Lord 
Himself shall reign in righteousness. 

But there is one thing I wish especially to press 
upon both saved and unsaved, and that is this: 
Whether in dispensations past, in the present age, 
in the period of judgment just before this world, 
or in that glorious millennial age, every one who 
is saved at all will be saved through the precious 
blood of Christ. God has never had any other way 
of reconciling man to Himself than through the 
blood of His Son. In Old Testament times, men 
were saved, if I may so say, on credit. The Lord 
Jesus Christ had already pledged Himself to pay the 
fearful debt with His own most precious blood, and 
all who, in every dispensation, owned their guilt and 
believed the record God had given, were justified by 
faith on the basis of the work that Christ was yet 
to accomplish. That work having now been com- 
pleted, God has manifested His righteousness in 
passing over these sins done aforetime in the days 
of His forbearance, and now He shows Himself 
to be just and the justifier of him that believeth in 
Jesus. If you own your sin, dear unsaved one, if 
you confess your guilt and put your heart’s trust in 
that blessed One, who on Calvary’s cross gave Him- 
seif for you, then you will be justified and accepted 
with God in all the value of that precious blood. 
In the coming hour of tribulation, the hundred and 


Saved Jews and Gentiles (chap. 7) 133 


forty-four thousand of Israel, and all the Gentiles 
who receive their message, will be saved in exactly 
the same way, but saved for earth — not for heaven. 
To the very end of the millennium that precious 
blood will still have the same cleansing efficacy, and 
the last soul who trusts in Christ will have an un- 
impeachable standing before the throne of God 
through its infinite value. 

So all blessing for time and eternity rests upon 
the cross of Christ, and the reason the nations have 
missed their way in the past nineteen hundred years, 
and are struggling in vain for peace and a govern- 
ment in righteousness, is because they have ignored 
the blood of that cross, where, alone, peace was 
made, both in relation to time and eternity. 

And now in closing, let me emphasize one thing 
which I believe needs to be emphasized in these days. 
I have run across the error in many recent books 
on the coming of the Lord, that after the rapture of 
the church there will be a great revival, an un- 
precedented spiritual awakening in Christendom, 
when vast numbers of people who have been unde- 
cided during the present dispensation of grace will 
turn to the Lord; and it is being widely taught that 
these will form the great multitude of which we have 
been speaking. Let me say that I have searched my 
Bible diligently for any confirmation of such teach- 
ing, but I fail to find it. On the contrary, we are 
distinctly told in 2 Thessalonians 2: 11 that God is 


134 Lectures on the Revelation 


going to give up those who, during the present age, 
receive not the love of the truth that they might be 
saved; they will be given up to hardness of heart 
and perversity of spirit. We read in verses eleven 
and twelve, “And for this cause God shall send 
them strong delusion that they should believe a lie; 
that they all might be damned that believed not the 
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.” Now, 
there is no intimation here that people who refuse 
the gospel in this dispensation will have another op- 
portunity to be saved, if they are still living when 
the dispensation of judgment begins. A careful 
reading of the entire passage will show that the time 
referred to is when the mystery of iniquity is fully 
developed and the wicked one revealed — that is, the 
man of sin. In that age, the Holy Spirit will have 
been withdrawn. He will go up with the church at 
the Lord’s return to the air. 

This is not to say that the Holy Spirit will not 
act afterwards, during the tribulation period, but 
His operations will be similar to His activities in 
Old Testament times. From heaven He will influ- 
ence the hearts of men, opening the eyes of the rem- 
nant of Israel, and through them reach, as we have 
seen, an innumerable multitude of Gentiles. But 
there is no promise that He will operate for blessing 
on the hearts of those who have had the opportunity 
to be saved and have refused it. They will be given 
up to the strong delusion of the last days. They 


Saved Jews and Gentiles (chap.7) 135 


will believe the lie of the Antichrist, and thus go 
into judgment because they deliberately refused the 
truth when it was offered to them, choosing instead 
error and sin. 

It is a very solemn thing to harden the heart 
against God and His message of grace. Pharaoh 
tried it, and is the standing example of what strong 
delusion really means. He hardened himself 
against the message that Moses brought, and after- 
wards God Himself confirmed him in his course. 
Light rejected brings abiding night. Darkness may 
be natural: in this all are born. It may be wilful: 
in this men deliberately choose darkness in place of 
light. It may be, and alas, often is, judicial: in this 
men are given up to darkness because of their own 
perversity. So we read in Jeremiah 13:16, “ Give 
glory to the Lord your God, before He cause dark- 
ness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark 
mountains; and, while ye look for light, He turn it 
into the shadow of death, and make it gross dark- 
ness.” 

No man need be lost for want of light. He who 
will follow the slightest gleam that God gives may 
be sure of increasing light, and light sufficient tu 
lead him to the knowledge of sins forgiven. But, I 
repeat, light rejected brings night! And, therefore, 
let me plead with any one who has not closed with 
God’s offer of grace in Christ Jesus, to receive now 
the gift of His love, and thus be assured of a place 


136 Lectures on the Revelation 


with Christ in that coming day. For if the Lord 
should descend from heaven to call His church away, 
you who have heard the gospel and are rejecting it, 
abiding in your sins, your doom will be eternally 
sealed. 

Among the heathen nations, where the gospel has 
not yet been fully proclaimed, in the waste places 
and the neglected parts of the world, where the 
grace of God is as yet unknown, a vast number will 
be found to receive the message of the Israelitish 
remnant as they flee from Antichrist’s persecutions 
and proclaim to all the world the gospel of the king- 
dom. But you will not be numbered among them 
if the coming of the Lord finds you still unsaved. 
You will be in exactly the same condition of soul, 
and position of condemnation before God, as if you 
had died in your sins. Jesus said, “ When once the 
master of the house has risen up and shut the door ” 
— who is there that shall open it? The five fool- 
ish virgins, left outside when the Bridegroom came, 
knocked in vain for admittance later. They pic- 
ture those who will be on the wrong side of the 
door, closed for all eternity. 

Yet, strangely enough, this very parable of the 
ten virgins has been used by certain teachers to 
bolster up their unsound theory of a second chance 
for Christ-rejecters after the Saviour calls His 
church away. The foolish virgins are, by them, 
supposed to represent persons afterwards gathered 


Saved Jews and Gentiles (chap. 7) 137 


in, but who miss the heavenly blessing. Others 
have based on this parable the equally unscriptural 
hypothesis that only the more spiritual saints will be 
caught up at the rapture, and the weaker ones will! 
be left behind to be purified during the great tribu- 
lation. This is a virtual denial of the truth of the 
one body, the unity of the body of Christ. The 
weakest member of that body is as dear to the 
Head as the strongest, and all who are Christ’s will 
have their part in the rapture, irrespective of their 
more or less advanced stage in the Christian life. It 
is the perfection of the work of redemption that 
gives title to any of the promises of God; it is not 
as a reward for service or merit. 


LECTURE IX 


THE BREAKING OF THE SEVENTH 
SEAL 


(Chapter 8) 


AM to speak to you to-night on the breaking of 
the seventh seal, which opens fully the book of 
title-deed to this world,— the roll that was put into 
the hands of the Lord Jesus by the Father after the 
church, represented by the glorified elders, was seen 
around the throne in heaven. 

First let me make a few remarks, which I think 
have not previously been made in the course of 
these lectures, in regard to the structure of the 
Book of the Revelation: The main body of the 
book is divided into four sevens. There are the 
letters to the seven churches of Asia; then the seven 
seals; then the seven trumpets; and farther on the 
seven vials of the wrath of God. 

In connection with these last three sevens, there 
is something vesy striking. We have, first, six 
seals opened ; then a parenthesis which takes up chap- 
ter seven. In chapter eight, the seventh seal is 
opened, and the book as a whole is open to view. 

138 


The Seventh Seal (chap. 8) 139 


This seventh seal we find includes the seven 
trumpets. Six trumpets are sounded, and there is 
again a parenthetical portion, including chapters ten 
and eleven to verse fourteen. At the conclusion of 
this parenthesis the seventh trumpet brings us to the 
end of all things. 

Chronologically, we are as far on when we reach 
chapter eleven, verse eighteen, as when we reach 
the Great White Throne in chapter twenty; for the 
seventh trumpet introduces the world-kingdom of our 
God and His Christ, and goes right on to the time 
when the dead shall be judged. So you see we really 
have a duplication, in measure, of prophetic truth 
from this point on. That is, from chapter four to 
the end of chapter eleven you have truth presented 
in orderly sequence —a prophetic outline of the 
things that shall take place after the rapture of the 
church right on to the end of time. 

Then, commencing with chapter twelve, God 
seems to turn the roll over that we may view the 
other side, and He gives us a second view of the 
events, but especially in relation to Israel. We have 
details which bring before us the great actors for 
good and evil in the last days — the woman clothed 
with the sun; the Man-child, Christ, who is to rule 
the nations with a rod of iron; Michael, who is the 
archangel; the dragon, who is that old serpent, the 
devil; the coming world-confederacy and its blas- 
phemous head; the lamb-like Beast, who I believe is 


140 Lectures on the Revelation 


the Antichrist, who looks like a lamb but speaks 
like a dragon—the counterfeit of the Lamb of 
God. There follows a parenthetical portion in chap- 
ter fourteen, which in a very vivid way brings be- 
fore us the final issues once more. 

Then, in chapters fifteen and sixteen, we have the 
vials, or bowls, of the wrath of God; and once more, 
you will notice, we have the same structure that has 
engaged our attention in connection with the seals 
and trumpets. We have six bowls, and then a pa- 
renthesis. In this instance the parenthesis occupies 
only one verse (Chap. 16:15). Immediately fol- 
lowing this, the seventh bowl of the wrath of God 
is outpoured, bringing us on to the doom of Baby- 
lon, described in detail through chapters 17 and 18; 
then in chapter 19 we have the Lord’s descent to the 
earth, accompanied by the armies of heaven, to es- 
tablish His millennial kingdom and reign for a thou- 
sand years. At the close of this the final judgment 
takes place; the heavens and the earth as we now 
know them, with all the works of man, will be de- 
stroyed, and there shall be brought in new heavens 
and a new earth, where God will be all in all through- 
out an eternity of bliss: while the wicked — those 
who have persistently rejected the Lord Jesus 
Christ, both before the Cross and since, and the 
millennial dispensation of righteousness — all who 
have rejected the message of God, will be cast into 
the lake of fire. 


The Seventh Seal (chap. 8) 141 


I have searched this Book of God through and 
through, over and over again, to find one ray of 
hope for men and women who leave this world re- 
jecting Christ, and I have never been able to find it. 
I have looked into all kinds of theories, and I have 
read hundreds of volumes, some depicting the anni- 
hilation of all the wicked dead, some, like the wild 
dream of the so-called “‘ Pastor Russell,” promising 
a second chance after death, but I have never found 
one statement in all these books, one based upon the 
word of God, to give the slightest hope to the Christ- 
rejector. This is the only world in which God is of- 
fering salvation to Christless men; and if you refuse 
the message of His grace now, if you deliberately 
steel your heart against the convicting power of the 
Holy Spirit and you die in your sins, go down to a 
Christless grave, you will be Christless for all eter- 
nity! Ithink the most awful picture the Bible gives 
us of the doom of the lost is in the Epistle of Jude, 
which forms such a fitting preface to the Book of 
Revelation. He speaks of those who make light of 
God’s salvation and who follow after unrighteous- 
ness, as “‘ wandering stars, to whom is reserved the 
blackness of darkness forever.” 1 cannot see the 
least hope for a Christless soul in that figure. 

When I was a mere boy in my home in Canada, I 
remember how, night after night, a blazing comet 
appeared in the skies; and I heard older people tell- 
ing that this particular “night wonder” had not 


142 Lectures on the Revelation 


been seen before for something like three hundred 
years. lIasked in amazement where it had been, and 
for the first time in my young life I came up against 
the wonder of infinite space. I was told that that 
comet had been driving on with tremendous velocity 
millions and millions of miles away from the sun 
for one hundred and fifty years, and that one hun- 
dred and fifty years ago it had gradually begun to 
come back toward the sun, and that was why it was 
then visible. Ina few weeks it passed out of sight, 
to appear to us no more for another three hundred 
years. Ican recall pondering in my mind as to what 
would happen if that comet went off on a tangent 
(though I do not suppose I knew that word then, 
nor its meaning), and never came back! And, my 
friend, this is the appalling picture that Jude pre- 
sents in the passage referred to. ‘Vhose who turn 
the grace of God into lasciviousness, those who de- 
spise the boundless mercy He has bestowed upon 
them in His blessed Son, and persist in refusing His 
goodness, continuing in their sins, will be driven 
away from the Sun of Righteousness into the outer 
darkness, and will drive on, and on, and on, through- 
out eternity, nevermore to find their way back into 
the presence of God. He is giving a little space 
now for repentance, but the day of His grace will 
be over when He rises to shake terribly the earth. 
And how are you treating His offer of mercy? 
But we return to our chapter. 


The Seventh Seal (chap. 8) 143 


“ And when he had opened the seventh seal there was 
silence in heaven about the space of half an hour.” 


In the first place, notice the opening verse. We 
are told that when the Lamb had opened the seventh 
seal there was silence in heaven about the space of 
half an hour. May we not say it is the “calm be- 
fore the coming storm”? — the most awful storm 
that shall ever break over this poor world. Some of 
you have lived in regions where thunder-storms are 
common, and you have often, no doubt, noted on a 
hot summer day the clouds suddenly gathering in the 
heavens, becoming heavier and darker every mo- 
ment. You have heard the thunder reverberating 
in the skies, peal after peal, with ever increasing in- 
tensity. You have observed the lightning flashes 
striking terror into many a heart. Then suddenly 
ali became still; there seemed to be not even a 
breath of wind to move the leaves upon the trees; 
and yet, an overcast, threatening sky, causing the 
fowls to run for a hiding place, the cattle to move 
uneasily, and all nature is expectant. A few mo- 
ments pass by; then vivid flashes of lightning cause 
us to shrink back, dreading to be stricken; crash 
upon crash follow, and the windows of the heavens 
seem to be opened — the storm pouring down in a 
deluge! 

We have something similar to this here. We saw 
in chapters four and five the saints gathered around 


144 Lectures on the Revelation 


the throne of God and of the Lamb, and we noted 
that from the throne proceeded thunder and light- 
ning. As the seals were broken, one after another, 
judgment followed judgment in quick succession 
upon the poor world from which God had gathered 
out His beloved people. But even the crashing un- 
der the sixth seal is not the climax. In heaven lies 
the mystery of God’s dealing with this world and 
the judgments yet to fall upon it. But when the last 
seal is broken it will be clearly manifested then just 
what side God takes in all the affairs of earth. He 
will judge according to the holiness of His character 
and the righteousness of His throne. The seventh 
seal, as we have before noted, introduces the final 
drama of the great tribulation. No wonder there is 
silence in heaven for half an hour before that seal is 
broken! 

It is as though all heaven is waiting in breathless 
expectation. We seem to hear the questions: What 
will the Lamb do next? What will be God's next 
move toward judging and reclaiming that rebellious 
world? The verses that follow give the answer. 
John says: 


“ And I saw the seven angels which stood before God; 
and to them were given seven trumpets. And another 
angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden 
censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that 
he should offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the 
golden altar which was before the throne. And the smoke 


The Seventh Seal (chap. 8) 145 


of the incense, which came with the prayers of the saints, 
ascended up before God out of the angel’s hand. And 
the angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of the 
altar, and cast it into the earth: and there were voices, 
and thunderings, and lightnings, and an earthquake” 
(verses 2-5). 


Careful readers of the Bible will connect the seven 
trumpets with the fall of Jericho: that great city 
just across the Jordan that barred the progress of 
the people of Israel into the promised land — the 
city that fell with the blast of God alone. The 
priests of Israel were given the trumpets of judg- 
ment, and for seven days they marched about the 
city blowing the trumpets ; seven times on the seventh 
day they did so and at the seventh blast the walls fell 
down flat. Jericho is a type of this present world 
in its estrangement from God, with enmity to the 
people of God. Jericho fell at the sound of seven 
trumpets, and the world, as you and I know it, is 
going to fall at the sound of the seven trumpets of 
doom, blown by these angels of judgment. 

The seal is broken, the book is fully unrolled, 
and the seven angels appear to whom are given seven 
trumpets. And as these angel messengers stand by, 
waiting one after the other to herald with a trumpet- 
blast the coming judgments, we are told that another 
angel came and stood to officiate at the golden altar. 
He is seen offering incense; therefore is an angel- 
priest. Who is this angel-priest? I think you will 


146 Lectures on the Revelation 


agree that he can be no created angel. Scripture 
never speaks of any created angel offering incense 
with the prayers of saints to make them acceptable 
to God. The Church of Rome does; but nowhere 
in the Bible do you get anything of the kind. 
Throughout the Old Testament, the pre-incarnate 
Christ is again and again presented as the Angel of 
Jehovah. He was the angel who appeared to Abra- 
ham; He was the angel who guided the children of 
Israel; He was the angel who wrestled with Jacob 
and put his thigh out of joint by the brook at Peniel. 
He was the angel who appeared to Moses in the 
mount when the prophet prayed that he might be- 
hold God ; He was the angel who appeared to Joshua 
to lead the people of Israel against their foes in the 
land of Canaan; He was the angel of Jehovah again 
and again manifesting Himself throughout the en- 
tire dispensation. In the Book of Zechariah He is 
the angel-advocate who stands to plead for Joshua, 
the high priest. So we again find Him in the Book 
of the Revelation presented as an angel-priest who 
still has a people on earth for whom to plead. They 
are not members of the church of God, but, as we 
saw in connection with the fifth seal and the paren- 
thetical portion of chapter seven, the hundred and 
forty-four thousand, a remnant who will be taken 
out of Israel after the church of God will be called 
home. 

The word of God is very clear on all this. The 


The Seventh Seal (chap. 8) 147 


eleventh chapter of Romans pictures the Gentiles as 
having been grafted into Israel’s olive tree of prom- 
ise (Romans 11:17). And the Holy Ghost goes 
on in that chapter to make it plain that when the 
Gentile church becomes apostate, God is going to 
reject it, and turn back to Israel. In the tribulation 
period they will again be grafted into their own 
olive tree. They will be the witnessing remnant of 
that awful time, and for them the Lord Jesus will 
make intercession in heaven, as He now does for 
His church. He will not be indifferent to their 
sorrows and their perplexities in those days of un- 
paralleled tribulation; but He will, as the faithful 
High Priest, bear His people on His heart and on 
His shoulders, even as Aaron of old bore the names 
of the twelve tribes on the breastplate and on the 
onyx stones set in the ouches of gold upon his shoul- 
ders. So we see Him pictured by this angel-priest 
offering incense at the golden altar, in the very pres- 
ence of God. 

In this present time the Jews bewail their desola- 
tion, and cry out in anguish of heart year after year 
at the most solemn of their set-times, “ Woe unto us, 
for we have no Mediator!” But when their eyes 
are opened and grace begins to operate in their 
souls they will know the blessedness of priestly in- 
tercession on the part of their once-rejected Messiah, 
whom they will learn to identify with the Angel of 
the Covenant of old. They will search their Bibles ; 


148 Lectures on the Revelation 


they will doubtless read the Book of Hebrews; they 
will study the four Gospels, and will see the truth. 
They will look upon Him whom they pierced, they 
will repent and mourn, as described in Zechariah 
12: 10-14, and God will receive Israel and make her 
His messenger to the nations. We are not sur- 
prised, therefore, when we get this look into glory, 
and see the Lord Jesus as the Angel-priest. 

He has a golden censer. Is it not a blessed thing 
to think that Israel will have such an Intercessor 
in the coming day? We are told that the smoke of 
the incense is the prayers of the saints — those suf- 
fering saints on the earth. The angel took the cen- 
ser, and filled it with the fire of the altar, and emp- 
tied it upon the earth. Here is the answer to the 
cry of His afflicted ones down in that scene of tribu- 
lation. The prayers went up to the Father, and 
judgment came down, “ and there were thunderings, 
lightnings and an earthquake.” The final storm 
breaks at last! 


“ The first angel sounded, and there followed hail and 
fire mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the 
earth; and the third part of trees was burnt up, and all 
green grass was burnt up” (ver. 7). 


I cannot explain the symbol fully, but I think I 
can see a hint of the awful time that is before the 
people of Christendom who have refused the gos- 
pel. Do you remember that the grass is used as a 


The Seventh Seal (chap. 8) 149 


symbol of man? (Isaiah 40:6.) Grass trampled 
beneath the foot is the picture of man in his frailty 
and weakness. What about the tree? It is but an- 
other picture of man, but rising up in his pride and 
independence of God. You remember how Nebu- 
chadnezzar is likened unto a great tree; how the 
rulers in Israel were spoken of as great cedars. 
John the Baptist said, ‘‘ Now the ax is laid to the 
root of the trees. Every tree that beareth not good 
fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.” Grass is 
man in his weakness, man in his littleness; the tree 
is man in his dignity, in his greatness, in his inde- 
pendence — man lifting himself up against God. 
So the first angel's trumpet distinctly indicates a 
fiery judgment upon that part of the human race that 
has rejected the gospel now so freely proclaimed, 
It is an appalling picture, but, remember, the reality 
is far worse than the picture! 

This is followed by another fearful portent that 
has to do especially, I believe, with the judgment 
of the great world-church that has borne sway over 
the consciences of so many people, and enslaved so 
many nations. 


“ And the second angel sounded, and as it were a great 
mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea; and the 
third part of the sea became blood; and the third part of 
the creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died; 
and the third part of the ships were destroyed” (verses 


8, 9) 


150 Lectures on the Revelation 


May I direct your attention to Jeremiah 51:25? 
There we have the same symbol — a great mountain 
cast into the sea. I have already said that every 
symbol in the Book of the Revelation was explained 
somewhere else in the Bible. Now here in the Old 
Testament a great mountain burning with fire is the 
symbol of Babylon, literal Babylon. In the New 
Testament this great destroying mountain burning 
with fire, that is cast into the sea and brought to an 
end under the judgment of God in this coming day, 
is evidently spiritual Babylon. Babylon of old was 
the fountainhead of idolatry. Every idolatrous sys- 
tem has had its root in Babylon. Spiritual Baby- 
lon is the direct successor of literal Babylon. The 
direct communication between the mystic religions of 
the old Babylon and spiritual Babylon of to-day is 
so marked that if anyone attempts to make a study 
of it he is perfectly astonished to find where many of 
the ritual services used in “ Christian” churches 
sprang from. In the coming day when the second 
angel's trumpet sounds, Babylon will be cast into the 
great sea of the nations. ‘That is, in the day of 
God’s wrath, the false church will be utterly de- 
stroyed by the people over whom she once tyran- 
nized. Of this we shall learn more when we come 
to chapter eighteen. 

The third angel follows. We read: 


“And the third angel sounded, and there fell a great 
star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell 


The Seventh Seal (chap. 8) I5I 


upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains 
of waters; and the name of the star is called Wormwood: 
and the third part of the waters became wormwood; 
and many men died of the waters, because they were made 
bitter” (vers. 10, II). 


A great star falls from heaven. Stars in the pro- 
phetic scriptures are religious dignitaries. They 
that turn many to righteousness are to shine as the 
stars forever and ever, and the symbol is used again 
and again in the Bible for persons occupying places 
of importance in the spiritual, or religious world, as 
we say. Here we have a star whose influence over 
man is so great that when he falls the third part of 
men are poisoned because of the evil influence of 
this apostate leader. 

Who is this star? While I do not want to try to 
prophesy, let me give you a suggestion. Who oc- 
cupies the highest place in the church in the minds 
of millions of professing Christian people? Many 
would say, the Pope. Can you imagine what might 
be the effect on vast numbers of people if to-morrow 
the newspapers came out with an “ Extra” some- 
thing like this: “ The Pope declares that Christian- 
ity is all a sham, that religion is just a fraud!” ? 
Can you imagine the effect that would have? Tens 
of thousands who would say, “ Well, the man we 
looked upon as the head of the church, as infallible, 
as the authoritative voice on all matters of a relig- 
ious nature, has denied it all. Now, whom can we 


152 Lectures on the Revelation 


trust, and what can we believe?”’ Leo X did this 
privately. Suppose a Pope in the future did it 
openly. I do not say certainly it will be so. Iam 
just giving you a hint of what might be. Do we 
not see the same thing on a small scale to-day? 
When a professing Christian leader gives up what 
he has once stood for, it has a tremendous influence 
for evil upon people of lesser influence and lesser 
knowledge. And after the true church is gone, I 
gather from this symbol that one of the greatest 
“lights” in the false system left behind will openly 
apostatize, and his teachings become as wormwood, 
poisoning and embittering, to his deluded followers. 

The darkness deepens when the fourth trumpet 
sounds. 


“And the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of 
the sun was smitten, and the third part of the moon, and 
the third part of the stars; so as the third part of them 
was darkened, and the day shone not for a third part of 
it, and the night likewise. And I beheld, and heard an 
angel flying through the midst of heaven, saying with a 
loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabitants of the earth 
by reason of the other voices of the trumpet of the three 
angels, which are yet to sound” (vers. 12, 13). 


Again I do not attempt to tell you exactly what this 
symbolizes ; but it is evident that light is being rap- 
idly withdrawn. The third part of the sky is smit- 
ten. The third part of the moon and stars were 
darkened. What does it mean? Well, you know 


The Seventh Seal (chap. 8) 153 


what the Lord Jesus says to the individual, “If the 
light that is in thee be darkened, how great is that 
darkness.” “ Light obeyed increaseth light — light 
resisted bringeth night.” Do you know why so 
many people in Christendom are going into what 
they call Christian Science and Theosophy and Spir- 
itualism and so-called New Theology? Do you 
know why so few people ever get out of them? Be- 
cause of this: They have had the opportunity to re- 
ceive light from God and they have rejected it, and 
it is written in the Word that “‘ God shall send them 
strong delusion that they should believe a lie, that 
they all might be damned who obeyed not.the truth 
but had pleasure in unrighteousness” (2 Thess. 
2:11, 12). When God presents His truth to peo- 
ple, responsibility comes with it. When God pre- 
sents Christ to them, tremendous responsibility is 
put upon them. If you hear the message and re- 
ject Christ, do not be surprised if you are caught in 
one of these unholy ideas of the present day, and 
perhaps never be delivered from it until you wake up 
in a lost eternity. 

The thirteenth verse introduces, in a very solemn 
way, the three trumpets yet to follow, which are dis- 
tinguished from the four we have already com- 
mented upon, as “ woe” trumpets. They speak of a 
more intensified form of judgment than any previ- 
ously portrayed. These will occupy us in our next 
lecture. I only desire now to call your attention to 


154 Lectures on the Revelation 


the expression, “the inhabiters of the earth.” A 
similar term we find frequently in this book, “ Them 
that dwell upon the earth.” Upon these the heaviest 
judgments fall. They are not merely they that live 
here upon earth, but they form a distinctive class. 
They are the people who have rejected the heavenly 
calling. When God offered them full and free sal- 
vation through the death of His beloved Son, they 
turned away from Him, because to have closed in 
with Christ would have meant to give up their 
worldly desires and love of sin, therefore they be- 
come the “ dwellers on the earth.” 


BECTURE X 


THE FIRST AND SECOND “WOE” 
TRUMPETS 


(Chapter 9) 


E are to be occupied this evening with the 

fifth and sixth trumpets, known respectively 

as the first and second “ woes.” The added designa- 

tion of these trumpets implies a solemnity and a 

fearfulness beyond anything we have previously 

considered. That we may have all the details clearly 

before us, I will quote the text in full as we go on 
with the address. 


“And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star fall 
from heaven unto the earth: and to him was given the 
key to the bottomless pit. And he opened the bottomless 
pit; and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke 
of a great furnace; and the sun and the air were dark- 
ened by reason of the smoke of the pit” (vers. 1, 2). 


In place of “I saw a star fall from heaven,” we 
should read, “I saw a star fallen from heaven.” 
The reference, I take it, is undoubtedly to that apos- 
tate leader referred to under the third trumpet. 

155 


156 Lectures on the Revelation 


There we read of a great star who fell from heaven 
burning like a lamp, and who, falling upon the third 
part of the rivers and fountains of waters, poisoned 
them so that men drinking of them died, the waters 
being made bitter. Under this fifth trumpet we 
have the development of the apostasy, of which this 
leader is evidently the head. He opens the bottom- 
less pit, using a “key.” We have been made 
familiar, in the Gospels, with the thought of the key 
where Christ commits to Peter the keys of the king- 
dom of heaven; and you will remember our Lord’s 
words to the lawyers, “ Ye have taken away the 
key of knowledge.” From these Scriptures it is 
clear that a key implies a system of teaching, and 
possibly ritual observances connected with it. With 
this hint we can readily understand what follows. 

This arch-apostate, by a system of erroneous teach- 
ing, damnable heresies, denying the Lord that bought 
them, opens up the bottomless pit, from whence 
issues a blinding smoke as the smoke of a great fur- 
nace, so intense that the sun and air become dark. 
ened by reason of the smoke of the pit. It is the 
strong delusion, to which we have had occasion to 
refer frequently in the course of these addresses. 
While it is said in 2 Thessalonians that ‘‘ God shall 
send strong delusion,’ we here learn that He sends 
it by permitting this Satanic envoy to delude the na- 
tions. Darkening of the sun by means of these 
Stygian fumes implies the blotting out, from before 


First and Second Woes (chap. 9) 157 


men’s eyes or minds, the supreme source of light. 
Their whole spiritual sky will be made dark by the 
false system with which they will be deluded. The 
air is particularly Satan’s realm. He is called “ the 
prince of the power of the air.”” The darkening of 
the air implies the control of this realm by Satanic 
agencies. I do not think we will be far wrong if we 
identify with this coming delusion the occult sys- 
tems of gnostic origin, so largely prevailing and so 
rapidly spreading at the present time. These sys- 
tems, as we have before noticed, are a unit in deny- 
ing (in any true sense) the personality of God and 
in asserting the divinity of humanity. They repro- 
duce, in some form or other, the primeval lie, ‘‘ Ye 
shall be as Elohim.” ‘This is the very essence of 
New Thought, New Theology, Eddyism, Spiritism, 
Theosophy, and other offshoots of these evil sys- 
tems. After the restraining power of the Holy 
Ghost has been removed, they will spread like locusts 
over all the earth, having tremendous power over the 
minds of men. This is what the third verse indi- 
cates: “‘ And there came out of the smoke locusts 
upon the earth: and unto them was given power, as 
the scorpions of the earth have power.” Anyone 
familiar with the locust plagues of the East will un- 
derstand at once the figure here used. Travelers 
have told us how the locusts appear in swarms so 
vast that they seem like great clouds, actually shut- 
ting out the sun and filling the whole air. They de- 


158 Lectures on the Revelation 


vour everything before them. Falling upon a green 
field, within a few minutes they leave it as bare as 
though no vegetation had been there at all. They 
are the dread of Oriental husbandmen, who are ut- 
terly powerless to combat them. They aptly typify 
or symbolize the spiritual plague of the last days. 
The symbol of the locusts is coupled with that of the 
scorpion, because of the torment these evil teachings 
eventually bring to those who accept them. 

That we do not have any merely literal plague of 
locusts in view here the next verses make evident: 


“And it was commanded them that they should not 
hurt the grass of the earth, neither any green thing, 
neither any tree; but only those men which have not the 
seal of God in their foreheads. And to them it was given 
that they should not kill them, but that they should be 
tormented five months: and their torment was as the 
torment of a scorpion, when he striketh a man” (vers. 


4,5). 


Literal locusts would do the very thing which these 
are commanded not to do. The grass of the earth, 
green things, trees of all descriptions, are here dis- 
tinctly protected from their power. This verse 
seems to be rather in the way of explanation than a 
continuation of the symbol; otherwise we might 
think of the grass and trees as representing man- 
kind. But it would appear that the apostle here ex- 
pounds rather than continues the description of his 
vision, in order that we may not be misled by a lit- 


First and Second Woes (chap. 9) 159 


eral application. The locusts’ power is expended 
upon those men which have not the seal of God in 
their foreheads. These are tormented by them for 
five months, a torment akin to that of a scorpion 
when he striketh a man. We have already seen 
that those bearing the seal of God are the remnant 
of Israel. These alone in Christendom and Judaism 
will be preserved from the strong delusion of that 
day. Our Lord Himself limits Satan’s power in 
the same way, when, referring to this very period, 
and the plague of false teaching, He says, “If it 
were possible, they would deceive the very elect.” 
Thank God, it is not possible; for the seal of the liv- 
ing God in the present dispensation is the indwelling 
Holy Spirit, given to guide into all truth, and in 
that coming dispensation of judgment the same Holy 
Spirit will illumine the minds of those who repent in 
Israel, and thus preserve them from this Satanic de- 
lusion. 

For the rest, so great will be the distress caused 
by these evil teachings when men fully give them: 
selves up to them, that, ‘In those days shall men 
seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire ta 
die, and death shall flee from them” (ver. 6). 

Anyone who has ever sought to give spiritual help 
to persons awakening in measure from the delusions 
of Eddyism, or Spiritism, or in fact any other Sa- 
tanic system, will understand at once the condition 
of mind here depicted. I shall never forget the al- 


160 Lectures on the Revelation 


most insane glare of the eye and the hopeless wail 
in the voice of a poor woman who, after having been 
under spiritualistic influences for a number of years, 
at last began dimly to apprehend the dreadful char- 
acter of the system that had been enslaving her. It 
was only through much prayer and earnest holding 
on to God on her behalf that she was delivered, but 
she told me on one occasion that she had suffered all 
the torments of the damned during the year and a 
half when she was seeking deliverance from demon- 
control. 

A few years ago I was laboring among the Mor- 
mons in Utah. There I learned of a most pitiable 
ease. A family who had accepted the Mormon delu- 
sion and emigrated from Great Britain to Utah, after 
practising the heathenish rites of Joseph Smith’s 
abominable system for thirty years, were at last 
awakened to the untrustworthiness of it all by the 
perfidious conduct of certain eminent church-leaders. 
As a result, they renounced the entire system and 
were left, if one may so speak, without religious con- 
victions of any kind. A few months later, the wife 
and mother was dying. She tossed upon her bed in 
the greatest agony of mind, moaning in her distress 
and despair, afraid to meet God in her sins. A min- 
ister of the gospel was urged by some friends to call 
and see her, though much against the will of the fam- 
ily, and finally gained admittance to the dying wom- 
an’s room. He sought faithfully to present the 


First and Second Woes (chap. 9) 161 


precious truth of the gospel from God’s holy Werd, 
but though for a time she seemed to listen eagerly, 
she turned from him at the very last, crying out, 
“Oh! sir, after one has been fooled by one religion 
all her life, it is too late to trust another in the hour 
of death.” And so, in great agony, she passed 
away, so far as he could tell, into a hopeless eternity. 

Oh! J would that I had the power to impress upon 
men and women everywhere the dreadful responsi- 
bility they assume when they tamper with these un- 
holy teachings which already have escaped from the 
bottomless pit, and which even now have for many 
souls darkened the air and blotted out the light of 
the sun. No torture can be compared to spiritual 
torment, and the only remedy is that perfect love 
alone, displayed in Calvary’s cross, which casteth out 
all fear. In the days to which our chapter refers, 
those who have rejected the grace of God will never 
again hear that precious gospel, and so they are left 
to cry out in their anguish, seeking death and finding 
it not. 

In verses seven to twelve we have a highly sym- 
bolic description of this delusion, which I wish to 
examine in detail, so I quote the passage in full. 


“ And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses 
prepared unto battle; and on their heads were as it were 
crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of 
men. And they had hair as the hair of women, and their 
teeth were as the teeth of lions. And they had breast- 


162 Lectures on the Revelation 


plates, as it were breastplates of iron; and the sound of 
their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses 
running to battle. And they had tails like unto scorpions, 
and there were stings in their tails: and their power was 
to hurt men five months. And they had a king over them, 
which is the angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in 
the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue 
hath his name Apollyon. One woe is past; and, behold, 
there come two woes more hereafter.” 


The shapes of the locusts, we are told, are like unto 
horses prepared unto battle, thus symbolizing their 
rapid progress and apparently providential irresist- 
ibility, in obtaining sway over those unprepared to 
do battle with them. “ Upon their heads were 
crowns like gold ”— for apostasy, during that time 
of delusion, will seem to carry all before it tri- 
umphantly, driving from Christendom the last ves- 
tige of orthodoxy. Our Lord Jesus asked the sol- 
emn question in view of His second advent, ‘‘ When 
the Son of Man cometh shall He find faith on the 
earth?” The “coming of the Son of Man” re- 
fers not to the rapture, but to the appearing in glory; 
at that time it will, for the moment, seem as though 
all true faith has been driven from the prophetic 
earth; nevertheless there will arise by the power of 
God’s word, from the distant parts of the world, a 
vast company, as we have seen, who will not have 
bowed the knee to this latter day Baal. 

We are next told “their faces were as the faces 


First and Second Woes (chap. 9) 163 


of men, and they had hair as the hair of women, and 
their teeth were as the teeth of lions.” Three sym- 
bols here intermingle, all of which are very evidently 
found in the occult systems to which we have re- 
ferred. Faces as of men would seem to imply in- 
telligence, and these evil teachers make a great appeal 
to human reason, and ridicule the truth of God as 
a system of cunningly devised fables, while actually 
they themselves follow but sophistical and illogical 
theories. Their appeal is to human intelligence — 
to the mind rather than to the heart and conscience, 
which Scripture does. Moreover they are charac- 
terized by intense seductiveness and attractive fan- 
cies, typified by “the hair of women.” A woman’s 
hair, we are told in Scripture, is her glory; and in 
the Song of Solomon 7:5, following the marginal 
reading, we are told, “ Thy head upon thee is like 
Carmel, and the hair of thy head like purple; the 
king is held in the tresses.” How many have been 
turned aside from the path of duty by natural at- 
tractions, grossly misused for the purpose of accom- 
plishing unholy ends. 

But seductive and apparently rational as these sys- 
tems are when first presented, they prove at last to 
have teeth like the teeth of lions, tearing to pieces 
those who put their trust in them. In the ninth 
verse we read: “And they had breastplates, as it 
were breastplates of iron; and the sound of their 
wings was as the sound of chariots of rany horses 


164 Lectures on the Revelation 


running to battle.’ These iron breastplates utterly 
destroy all conscience, or, rather, render them im- 
pervious to the shafts of truth, so that the conscience 
is never reached ; while the wings, whose sound is as 
that of myriads of chariots rushing to battle, would 
speak of the swiftness with which they conquer those 
who have turned from the truth and had pleasure in 
unrighteousness. 

The tenth verse again emphasizes the scorpion- 
like torment they produce. ‘‘ And they had tails 
like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their 
tails: and their power was to hurt men five months.” 
What a mercy that their power is thus limited. I 
see no reason why we should not understand the 
five months literally. For a very limited time this 
apostate leader and his emissaries will be permitted 
to dominate those who would not have Christ the 
Lord to reign over them. In His place, Satan him- 
self is worshiped as Abaddon and Apollyon. ‘‘ And 
they had a king over them, which is the angel of the 
bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is 
Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue hath his name 
Apollyon”’ (ver. 11). This can only refer to the 
Devil himself. He alone is the angel of the bottom- 
less pit. So it is made evident at last that the “‘ God 
within,” to which men are turning to-day, is no other 
than Satan, the great arch-enemy, who has been plot- 
ting man’s destruction from the very beginning. 
Self-worshipers are devil-worshipers, and in some 


First and Second Woes (chap. 9) 165, 


instances already this has been avowed by the fol- 
lowers of present day apostasy. This then is the 
first ‘‘ woe.” ‘‘ One woe is past; and, behold, there 
come two woes more hereafter” (ver. 12). 

We next read, 

“And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice 
from the four horns of the golden altar which is before 
God, saying to the sixth angel which had the trumpet, 
Loose the four angéls which are bound in the great river 
Euphrates. And the four angels were loosed, which were 
prepared for an hour, and a day and a month, and a year, 
for to slay the third part of men” (vers. 13-15). 


This is evidently something very different from 
that which we have already been looking at. It 
seems to be the result, however, of the previous woe. 
That is, it shows us what the effect upon the world 
will be when Satan-worship becomes everywhere 
prevalent in what was once called Christendom. 
It will bring about a tremendous conflict, setting 
nation against nation, and man against man, until 
the third part of men will be destroyed. 

I think we have had a remarkable illustration of 
this in the great conflict from which we have so 
lately emerged. Who can deny that it was the direct 
result of rationalistic “‘ Kultur,” and the denial of 
the authority of the Word of God? If education 
without Christ could save, Germany should have 
been the most blest nation on the face of the earth, 
for there, education seemed to have reached its high- 


166 Lectures on the Revelation 


est point — but with what dire results, not only to 
that nation but to a large part of the human race! 
German philosophy had poisoned the world. The 
colleges and universities of almost every civilized 
land drank greedily from the poisoned streams of 
Teutonic philosophies and infidel hypotheses, and it 
is only now that we are beginning to awaken to the 
baleful effects of such folly. I have no doubt that 
Satan himself would have restrained men from rush- 
ing into such bloody conflict had it been possible. 
What I mean is this: He was seeking to entrap 
men with his specious theories and unholy philos- 
ophies, and the great war of 1914 was an almost un- 
foreseen result of this. The nations were thrown 
into confusion by the teachings they had imbibed. 
The war was like a great explosion which could no 
longer be prevented. 

These considerations will help us, I think, to un- 
derstand the second “ woe.” In chapter seven we 
saw the four angels restrained from letting loose the 
four winds of the earth upon the great sea of the na- 
tions. Here, a voice from the four horns of the 
golden altar which is before God, in response, un- 
doubtedly, to the angel-priest’s intercession in chap- 
8:3, cries out to the angel which had the sixth 
trumpet, “ Loose the four angels which are bound in 
the great river Euphrates.’ These angels are evi- 
dently at the present time restraining the great Asi- 
atic hordes from pouring themselves upon the Land 


First and Second Woes (chap. 9) 167 


of Palestine and Europe. The Euphrates formed 
the eastern limit of the Roman Empire, and thus 
was the barrier, as it were, between the East 
and the West. We are told that the four angels 
were prepared, not exactly —as our Authorized 
Version reads—for an hour, and a day, and a 
month, and a year, but for “the hour, day, month, 
and year.” That is, there is a definite moment 
in the mind of God at which this awful power 
is to be let loose. Until that hour strikes, not 
all the evil machinations of men, not all the am- 
bitions of nations, can bring about the conflict 
here predicted. But when that hour does strike, 
no astute statesman’s policy, no treaties, no 
world-federation movements can prevent the dire 
catastrophe predicted. Two hundred thousand 
thousand horsemen are hurled upon the west of 
Asia and upon Europe. They seem like unearth- 
ly warriors, with breastplates of fire, and of 
jacinth, and brimstone. The horses’ heads ap- 
pear as the heads of lions, because of the un- 
speakable ferocity of these Asiatic hordes; while 
fire, and smoke, and brimstone seem to issue 
from their mouths, telling of the Satanic char- 
acter of this dire invasion. The result will be 
a third part of men killed, by the fire, and by the 
smoke, and by the brimstone, which issue from 
their mouths. When we recall the millions who 
have perished as the direct or indirect result of 
the recent war and pestilence, we can see how a 
greater war in the future may well tend to almost 


168 Lectures on the Revelation 


depopulate the earth, destroying one-third of the 
prophetic earth, which is identical with the limits of 
the old Roman empire. In verse nineteen we read: 
“For their power is in their mouth, and in their 
tails; for their tails were like unto serpents, and 
had heads, and with them they do hurt.” Isaiah 
9:15 helps us to understand both this passage and 
that in verse ten. “ The prophet that teacheth lies, 
he is the tail.” Whether it be the occult woe of the 
fifth trumpet or the carnage woe of the sixth 
trumpet, in each case lying prophets are the leaders 
in each movement and are responsible for the men- 
tal, spiritual and physical harm accomplished. 

It is a solemn thing to realize that even judg- 
ments such as these will have no effect so far as 
leading men back to God and to repentance is con- 
cerned. Punishment does not of itself lead men to 
repentance; so we are told in verses 20, 21, ‘‘ The 
rest of the men which were not killed by these 
plagues yet repented not of the works of their hands, 
that they should not worship devils, and idols of 
gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood: 
which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk: neither 
repented they of their murders, nor of their sor- 
ceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts.” 
This is in accordance with the general testimony of 
Scripture, which nowhere intimates that punishment 
produces penitence. The Restorationist and Uni- 
versalist teachers deny this and insist that all pun- 


First and Second Woes (chap. 9) 169 


ishment, whether in time or eternity, is with a 
view to the final salvation of the delinquent, and 
that eventually all men will learn by judgment, if 
they refused to learn by grace, and will turn to 
God for salvation. But both here, and later in 
this same Book of Revelation, we find that the 
heaviest judgments of God, falling on guilty men, 
do not soften the stony, rebellious hearts; but that 
rather men become hardened in their sins and are 
more blasphemous and God-defiant when judg- 
ment is poured out upon them than before. 

In eternity, God will not permit open defiance 
of His will. Our Lord Jesus tells us that, in hell, 
there will be not only “weeping’’ because of suf- 
fering, but “gnashing of teeth,” which expresses 
not manifest opposition but the angry defiance of 
the heart of man, which will be filled with hatred 
to God but be powerless to openly oppose His 
government. If the cross of Christ, with its 
marvelous exhibition of holy love, will not re- 
concile men to God, punishment will never avail 
to win their hearts. 


BECTUR ct 
EATING THE LITTLE OPENED BOOK 
(Chapter 10) 


E will look this evening at the first part of 
the parenthetical portion that comes in be- 
tween the sixth and seventh trumpets. We have al- 
ready noticed that there are similar parentheses be- 
tween the sixth and seventh seals and the sixth and 
seventh vials. It is an evidence of divine order not 
to be overlooked. The seventh trumpet ushers in 
the millennial kingdom, and goes right on to the 
close of the course of time and the establishment of 
the Great White Throne for the judgment of the 
wicked dead. But ere this consummation is brought 
to our attention, we are given fuller instruction re- 
garding the place that Israel has in the mind of God 
in connection with these future events. 

This tenth chapter contains truth largely of a 
moral character, and because of that, one is likely, 
in studying the book, to pass it over without very 
careful attention. It does not seem, at first sight, 


to have to do with any of the great movements we 
170 


The Little Opened Book (chap.t0) 171 


have been considering in connection with either Is- 
rael or the Gentiles. But just as in the first chap- 
ter of the Book of Daniel we have set before us, in 
the history of the three Hebrew youths who refused 
to be defiled with the king’s meat, the moral condi- 
tion suited to instruction in the things of God, so in 
this tenth chapter we find the Lord dealing in a very 
special way with His beloved apostle John, in order 
that he may be the better prepared to unfold the 
great mysteries lying just beyond us in the rest of 
this solemn Book. And in the Lord’s preparation 
of His servant John, we get great moral principles 
that should speak to our own hearts, and, if laid 
hold of aright, fit us the better to serve the living 
and true God while we wait for His Son from 
heaven. In verses I-3 we read: 


“ And I saw another mighty angel come down from 
heaven, clothed with a cloud: and a rainbow was upon 
his head, and his face was as it were the sun, and his 
feet as pillars of fire: and he had in his hand a little 
book open: and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his 
left foot on the earth, and cried with a loud voice, as 
when a lion roareth: and when he had cried, seven thun- 
ders uttered their voices.” 


This mighty angel can surely be no other than that 
same glorious Angel of the covenant whom we have 
already beheld standing at the golden altar officiat- 
ing as the Angel-priest of the heavenly sanctuary. 
Of no created angel could such glorious things be 


172 Lectures on the Revelation 


said as those John here mentions in connection with 
this wondrous being. 

The reason our Lord is brought before us in this 
angelic character, is, that in this portion of the Book 
of Revelation we are dealing largely with Israel, the 
earthly people, and that before their Messiah has 
been revealed to them. Therefore it is but natural 
that He should take the same position that He occu- 
pied toward them in Old Testament times. A fuller 
revelation they will receive when He descends in 
glory, and they behold the marks of His passion 
and cry out in amazement, “ What are those wounds 
in thy hands?” Then He will answer, “ Those 
with which I was wounded in the house of my 
friends.” At last the full truth will burst upon 
them that the crucified Nazarene and the Angel of 
the covenant are identical, and “ they shall look upon 
Him whom they have pierced, and shall mourn for 
Him as one mourneth for his only son, and as one 
who is in bitterness for his firstborn.” This will 
be, for Judah and Jerusalem, the true day of atone- 
ment, when they will afflict their souls as they real- 
ize the enormity of their sin in rejecting their divine 
Saviour, and the merits of His atoning work shall be 
applied to their hearts and consciences ; then will they 
be able to cry out in the full assurance of faith, “‘ He 
was wounded for our transgressions; He was 
bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our 
peace was upon Him; and with His stripes we are 


The Little Opened Book (chap.10) 173 


healed.” But until that moment of His full mani- 
festation, He is to them the Angel cf the covenant 
—an uncreated angel, therefore — Jehovah's fel- 
low; for, as we have intimated above, to no created 
angel could this description be rightly applied. He 
comes down out of heaven, clothed not merely with 
a cloud, but the cloud, as it should read, and the 
cloud is the symbol of the divine glory. 

The cloud is the chariot in which He led His peo- 
ple of old through the wilderness all the way from 
Egypt to the Land of Promise. We are expressly 
told that in that cloud was the Angel of the cove- 
nant. It is the uncreated cloud of glory that dwelt 
between the cherubim, in the tabernacle, above the 
mercy-seat. When Solomon built the temple and 
dedicated it to Jehovah, He came in the cloud, dwell- 
ing in it as His house. When nearly five centuries 
afterward Ezekiel was called upon to declare the des- 
olation of that once holy house, he beheld the cloud 
lifted up from the most holy place, tarrying a mo- 
ment over the door of the sanctuary, then departing 
and hanging above the city wall as though loath to 
give up the place where His glory had so long been 
manifested. Slowly the cloud moved over to the 
adjoining mountain on the east, that is the Mount of 
Olives, and then up into the heavens. 

Thus the visible manifestation of Jehovah’s pres- 
ence had disappeared from Israel because of their 
sins. That cloud never returned to the land of Pal- 


174 Lectures on the Revelation 


estine, until our Lord Jesus Christ went up into the 
holy mount, which we commonly call the Mount of 
Transfiguration, where Peter, James and John had 
a vision of the coming kingdom —“ the power and 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.” There they saw 
Him transfigured, and talking with Moses and Elijah 
— Moses representing the saints who have died and 
will be raised again at our Lord’s return, and Elijah 
picturing those who shall be caught up at Christ’s 
coming, without dying. Peter, overwhelmed by 
such an abundant revelation, knowing not what to 
say, cried, ‘“‘ Lord, it is good for us to be here, and 
let us make three tabernacles, one for Thee, and one 
for Moses, and one for Elias.’ And while he thus 
spake, “there came a cloud and overshadowed 
them.’ This was the Father’s way of showing 
them that He would have no mortal man, however 
holy and devoted, put on a level with His beloved 
Son. After Christ had died on the cross, and was 
raised from the dead by omnipotent power, He led 
His disciples out to the Mount of Olives nigh unto 
Bethany, and with hands lifted up in blessing was 
parted from them, and they beheld Him going up, 
until the cloud received Him out of their sight. 
When He returns again we shall behold Him on the 
cloud and every eye shall see Him. So here, when 
John says, “I saw a mighty angel clothed with the 
cloud,” we may understand at once that this angel 
can be no creature, but is Himself the Creator of 


The Little Opened Book (chap.10) 175 


all things, our Lord Jesus Christ, clothed with the 
sign of the divine majesty. 

Observe, in the next place, that the rainbow which 
we saw in chapter four round about the throne of 
God, is now seen wrapped, as it were, about the head 
of this mighty angel. it seems to speak of His com- 
ing to confirm the covenant made of old with Noah 
after the world had been destroyed by a flood. An- 
other evidence that it is a divine person who is here 
brought before us, is found in the next clause: “ His 
face was as it were the sun.” It is the same face 
that Saul of Tarsus saw when he was marching 
along the Damascus turnpike, his heart filled with 
hatred against the Lord Jesus and burning with rage 
against His followers. Stricken to the earth, he 
saw a light above the brightness of the sun, and in 
that glorious light beheld the once-crucified Christ 
of God, and heard Him ask in tenderest accents, 
“Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?” When 
He comes again it will be as the Sun of Righteous- 
ness. 

“‘ His feet,’ we are told, “ were as pillars of fire,” 
thus linking Him with the same wondrous Being de. 
scribed in chapter one, of whom we read that “ His 
feet were like unto fine brass, as if they burned ina 
furnace,’’— the same, too, that Daniel saw and de- 
scribes in similar terms in his seventh chapter. 

Weare next told that He had in His hand “a little 
open book.” There have been various speculations 


176 Lectures on the Revelation 


as to what this book might be, but it seems to me it 
could be no other than the very book we have had be- 
fore us heretofore. It is the title-deed to the earth, 
the seals of which have been broken, one after the 
other, until the entire scroll is seen unrolled. The 
Lord descends with all the evidences of divine maj- 
esty, and with this title-deed in His hand, He sets 
His right foot upon the sea and His left foot upon 
the earth, as indicative of taking possession of His 
own inheritance — that inheritance which, as Man 
on earth, He had redeemed with His own precious 
blood. 

His voice is the voice of. the conqueror: “ He 
cried as a lion roareth”’; for the Angel and the Lion 
of Judah’s tribe are one and the same. When He 
had cried, seven thunders uttered their voices. The 
thunder, we have noticed before, speaks of judg- 
ment, and John says, ‘‘ When the seven thunders 
had uttered their voices, I was about to write: and 
I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Seal 
up those things which the seven thunders uttered, 
and write them not.” As Mediator of the New 
Covenant He seals up the utterance of the seven 
thunders. It is not necessary for us to know what 
they uttered. They speak of judgment due to way- 
ward man, but He Himself has borne the judgment, 
and those who trust in Him need never know its 
dreadful secrets. 


The Little Opened Book (chap.10) 177 


“Let us love, and sing, and wonder, 
Let us praise the Saviour’s name; 
He has hushed the law’s loud thunder, 
He has quenched Mount Sinai’s flame. 
He has bought us with His blood; 
He has brought us home to God.” 


Have you ever noticed how inquisitive people 
often are in regard to those things which the wisdom 
of God has purposely kept from them? In the Old 
Testament dispensation the law was hidden in the 
ark, covered with the mercy-seat; yet the men of 
Bethshemesh foolishly looked into the ark, and were 
smitten in judgment. So there are things hidden 
from the people of God in all dispensations, which 
He would have them leave with Himself. ‘‘ The 
secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but the 
things that are revealed are for us and our children.” 
Alas, it is only too natural for man to pass over the 
precious revealed truth which would be for his sanc- 
tification and blessing, and occupy himself with hid- 
den things, which are not given him now to know, 
and which, if it had been for his blessing to know, 
God would have revealed them. J am often asked, 
“What do you suppose was written in the flying 
roll of Zechariah’s vision?’’ I only know what the 
Word has said. “ What were the unspeakable 
things Paul heard when caught up into the third 
heaven?” If Paul could not utter them, how could 


178 Lectures on the Revelation 


we? Andso many a one has puzzled over the things 
which the seven thunders uttered, but faith rests in 
the fact that John was commanded to write them 
not. 


“And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea and 
upon the earth lifted up his hand to heaven, and sware by 
Him that liveth for ever and ever, who created heaven, 
and the things that therein are, and the earth, and the 
things that therein are, and the sea, and the things which 
are therein, that there should be time no longer: but in 
the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall 
begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, 
as He hath declared to His servants the prophets” (vers. 
ear 


It is important here to notice the difference be- 
tween the last clause of verse six, as found in the 
Authorized Version and in any critical translation. 
Instead of reading, ‘‘ That there should be time no 
longer,” read, “‘ That there should be no longer de- 
lay.”’ Because of the erroneous translation given 
in our generally correct and excellent English ver- 
sion, many have been misled into supposing that this 
vision brings us to the end of time, whereas, the con- 
text makes it very plain that such is not the case. 
The vision is distinctly a pre-millennial one. The 
point is that the hour of accomplishment has almost 
struck, and God will not delay the completion of 
His plans and the fulfilment of His promises. “A 
short work will the Lord make upon the earth,” 


The Little Opened Book (chap.10) 179 


The Angel swears by Him that liveth for ever and 
ever (that is, by Jehovah Himself, the Creator of all 
things), that nothing shall cause any more delay; 
but in the days when the seventh angel sounds, the 
mystery of God, that is, the mystery of God's long 
tolerance of evil, will be finished. Everything will 
then be made plain. The mystery of retribution — 
the mystery of predestination — the mystery of the 
great struggle between light and darkness and good 
and evil —all will be explained then. There will 
be no more secrets in God’s ways and dealings, and 
man need no longer question; the dispensations of 
faith will have come to an end, and the dispensa- 
tion of sight will have dawned. Are you often 
troubled by questions as to God’s purpose, His coun- 
sels, His judgments, His apparently strange dealings 
with you and with the world? To the man who has 
not the secret of the Lord, His ways may seem con- 
tradictory. Learn from this scripture to wait in 
patience until God Himself makes all clear in the 
days of the voice of the seventh angel. 

In the second part of the chapter we are occupied 
with a very different line of things. We are now 
to read of an experience the apostle John had, which 
God would have every student of His Word enter 
into. He tells us, 

“ And the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto 


me again, and said, Go and take the little book which is 
open in the hand of the angel which standeth upon the 


180 Lectures on the Revelation 


sea and upon the earth. And I went unto the angel, and 
said unto him, Give me the little book. And he said unto 
me, Take it, and eat it up; and it shall make thy belly 
bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey. And 
I took the little book out of the angel’s hand, and ate it 
up; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as 
soon as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter” (vers. 8-10). 


Now what are we to understand by this? You 
will, at once, recall that a similar experience was 
given to the prophet Ezekiel (Ez. chap. 3). He, too, 
was called upon to “eat the book.’’ And the lesson 
in both instances is the same. It is only as we feed 
upon and digest the Word of God, that we ourselves 
are nourished and built up in the truth of our most 
holy faith, and in a right condition of soul to use 
that Word for the help and instruction of others. 
David said, ‘‘ Thy word have I hid in my heart, that 
I might not sin against Thee.” And again, “ Thou 
desirest truth in the inmost parts, and in the hidden 
parts Thou wouldst make him to know wisdom.” 
This, I take it, is what John’s experience illustrates. 
He was commanded to eat the little book that was 
in the angel’s hand, that is, to meditate upon it, to 
make it thoroughly his own. 

Scmeone has said that meditation, in these busy 
days of ours, is a lost art. Would to God it were 
restored, and that His people, generally, were more 
given literally to feed upon His truth. For it is not 
only that God would have John and Ezekiel eat the 


The Little Opened Book (chap.10) 181 


book, He wants you to eat it likewise. He has given 
it to you who believe on His Son, to be the food of 
your own souls, to make you fit to serve Him in this 
scene. And remember this is just as true of the 
prophetic books as of every portion of the Word of 
God. In both the instances cited it is particularly 
the prophetic word that is in view. Lay hold of 
dispensational truth, of prophetic teaching, in this 
very practical way, and it must have a most bene- 
ficial effect upon your inner man. 

John tells us that when the book was in his mouth 
it was very sweet, but when he had eaten it his in- 
ward parts were made bitter. This is most in- 
structive. There is no sweeter portion in all Scrip- 
ture than that which God has revealed concerning 
the manifestation of His blessed Son. Prophetic 
truth is generally sweet and attractive to those whose 
interest is just being awakened in it. But, if fol- 
lowed up, if the book is really eaten, it leads to self- 
judgment, and to separation from evil, and this will 
always be bitter; for there is not one of us who 
readily takes the place that God’s Word would put 
him in during this period of Christ’s rejection. And 
so the point here is that God’s truth makes demands 
upon people. And you, who are following these 
studies with me, will soon find this out, if you have 
not already done so. Jf you conscientiously under- 
take to walk in the truth revealed, you too will know 
something of its bitterness. You cannot enjoy 


182 Lectures on the Revelation 


things that you used to enjoy, if you receive the 
prophetic testimony, and walk in the power of what 
is there revealed. As the great divine programme 
unfolds before your mind, it may be very interesting, 
and, in this sense, the book is sweet; but, as great 
divine principles enter your hearts, and you realize 
more and more the call to strangership in this Satan- 
controlled scene, the truth becomes bitter indeed, and 
it makes demands upon you. How many a soul has 
greatly enjoyed his first taste of instruction as to 
the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ! It 
was all so new, so wonderful, so different to the 
platitudes perchance that he had been hearing as he 
sat under the ministry of some cold semi-worldling, 
posing as a minister of Christ. But as this truth 
got a grip upon him, as it entered into his inmost 
being, he found it made demands from which he 
shrank, and required of him what at first he felt he 
could not give. It was bitter, truly; yet it is not 
always the sweet things that are best for us. We 
need the bitter as well as the sweet; and every soul 
who has walked in the truth, as God has revealed 
it to him, has found, at last, the blessedness of obedi- 
ence. “To obey is better than sacrifice, and to 
hearken than the fat of rams.” 

It is a very sad thing indeed, when truth is simply 
held in the intellect, with no particular bearing upon 
the life. The apostle John tells us, speaking of the 
second coming of the Lord, ‘“‘ Every man that hath 


The Little Opened Book (chap.10) 183 


this hope in Him. purifieth himself, even as He is 
pure.” It is a truth that should affect the believer 
at every angle of his life. Anyone, who really be- 
lieves it, cannot afterwards live for self or for the 
world. If one professes to hold the second coming 
of Christ, and yet lives like the world, it but evi- 
dences the fact that, whatever he may hold mentally, 
the truth of the Lord’s coming does not hold him. 
That truth believed, makes carnal Christians spir- 
itual; it makes worldly people heavenly; it makes 
covetous people generous; it makes careless people 
earnest. And so I want to be very frank with you. 
If you do not desire to let this truth have its sway 
over your lives, it might be better to cease studying 
this Book of the Revelation right here, for all God’s 
truth has been made known for the obedience of 
faith. And I am certain of this, that these truths 
are going to change the lives of some people com- 
pletely, or they will harden them in their wayward- 
ness, and be the means of searing their consciences 
as with a hot iron. 

After the apostle had eaten the book, the angel 
said unto him, ‘‘ Thou must prophesy again, before 
many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings ” 
(ver. 11). This is of importance in connection 
with the further opening up of the book. The Lord 
says to John, ‘‘ Thou must prophesy again.” It is 
not that he is to go to other peoples and nations, 
&c., to prophesy. Rather he is to prophesy in re- 


184 Lectures on the Revelation 


gard to these nations, to the same servants of God 
to whom he has already been giving the word. The 
point is that, when the seventh trumpet sounds (of 
which we shall read in the next chapter), the present 
outline of prophecy comes to a close; for, as previ- 
ously mentioned, the seventh trumpet carries us 
right on to the great day of judgment at the end of 
time. But in the last verse of the 11th chapter 
(which properly belongs to chapter 12), John be- 
gins once more to prophesy concerning nations, and 
kings, and tongues, and people, and this second 
great outline culminates in the new heaven and new 
earth. You will remember that the roll which was 
seen in the hand of Him that sat upon the throne, 
the seals of which were broken by the Lamb, was 
written on two sides. As the book was unrolled, 
John would see clearly what was written on the 
inside, and this, I take it, is the outline we have 
already had before us. But, beginning with chap- 
ter 12, the roll is, so to speak, reversed, and we see 
what was written on the other side. That is, God 
confirms the former outline, and fills in details there 
omitted, so that we have a clearer and fuller under- 
standing of the great events yet to take place in the 
eworld where our Lord was crucified. 

If this is clearly seen, the book becomes plain. 
Otherwise there is confusion. There are those who 
endeavor to make everything chronological with 
their scheme of interpretation. The trumpets not 


The Little Opened Book (chap.10) 185 


only follow the seals, which is quite correct, but 
these interpreters go on to make the vials, or bowls 
of wrath, follow the trumpets, and this necessarily 
puts the 12th chapter and the rapture of the man- 
child far over into the 70th week, whereas, as we 
shall see when we reach that point, the 12th chap- 
ter and chapter 4 fit together chronologically. As of 
old God gave Pharaoh two dreams (the one con- 
firming the other) so here the message is duplicated, 
if I may so say, that we may know the certainty of 
the words of truth wherein we are being instructed. 


LECTURE XII 


THE TWO WITNESSES AND THE 
SEVENTH TRUMPET 


(Chapter 11) 


N the first thirteen verses of this eleventh chap- 
ter, which we are now to consider, we have the 
remainder of the parenthesis which has occupied us 
in our study of chapter ten. The careful student of 
the Word of God will, upon reading this portion, 
immediately call to mind the measuring of Jeru- 
salem in the 2d chapter of Zechariah and the meas- 
uring of the millennial temple in the 4oth chapter 
of Ezekiel. In this same Book of Revelation we 
also read of the measuring of the holy city, the new 
Jerusalem, in chapter 21. In the opening verses of 
our present section, John says, 


“ And there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and 
the angel stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of 
God, and the altar, and them that worship therein. But 
the court which is without the temple leave out, and 
measure it not; for it is given unto the Gentiles: and the 
holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two 
months” (vers. I, 2). 

186 


The Two Witnesses (chap. 11) 187 


The vision clearly involves Jerusalem and the fu- 
ture temple in the last days. I think we may say 
that throughout the Bible when God speaks of meas- 
uring anything the thought is implied that He is 
marking it off as that which belongs to Himself. 
When one purchases a piece of ground, or is about 
to take possession of a property, it is a very common 
thing to measure it and mark off its lines. In the 
second chapter of Zechariah we are told that the 
prophet beheld a man with a measuring line in his 
hand, to whom he put the question, ‘‘ Whither goest 
thou?” and the answer was, “ To measure Jerusa- 
lem, to see what is the breadth thereof, and what is 
the length thereof.” And in the fourth verse the an- 
gel who is interpreting the visions for Zechariah says 
to another angel, ‘‘ Run, speak to this young man, 
saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without 
walls, for the multitude of men and cattle therein: 
for I, saith the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire 
round about, and will be the glory in the midst of 
her.”” Then, in the balance of the chapter, we have 
a very distinct prophecy of the future deliverance of 
God’s earthly people from all their foes, when they 
will be brought from the land of the north and from 
all parts of the world where they have been carried 
in the days of their captivity. This will not be fully 
accomplished until the Lord Jesus Himself has ap- 
peared in glory, for verse eight reads, “‘ Thus saith 
the Lord of hosts; After the glory hath He sent me 


188 Lectures on the Revelation 


unto the nations which spoiled you: for he that 
toucheth you toucheth the apple of his eye. For, 
behold, I will shake my hand upon them, and they 
shall be a spoil to their servants: and ye shall know 
that the Lord of hosts hath sent me.” The daughter 
of Zion is then called upon to rejoice because Je- 
hovah Himself will dwell in the midst of her. 
“ And many nations shall be joined to the Lord in 
that day, and shall be His people”: and He will 
dwell in the midst of them, and they shall know that 
the Lord of hosts hath sent His prophet unto them. 
“And the Lord shall inherit Judah his portion in 
the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again,” is 
the sure word of God. 

Clearly, it is this very restoration that God had in 
mind when He gave to John the vision of this 
eleventh chapter. The angel calls upon him to 
“Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the 
altar, and them that worship therein.” That is, 
once more God owns a witnessing company, a wor- 
shiping people in Jerusalem, and this, observe, is in 
the days of the great tribulation before the com- 
plete fulfilment of Zechariah’s prophecy, for the 
glory will not yet have appeared. Therefore he is 
instructed to leave out the court which is without 
the temple, and measure it not, for it is still to be 
given to the Gentiles, ‘‘ and the holy city shall they 
tread under foot forty and two months’’; that is, 
for the last three and a half years of the final seven 


The Two Witnesses (chap. 11) 189 


that compose Daniel’s 70th week, which, as we 
have seen, has not yet been fulfilled, nor can be 
until Jerusalem and the people of the Jews are 
again owned by God as His own. 

It is very evident that already God is over- 
ruling events with a view to this restoration. The 
marvelous deliverance of Jerusalem in December, 
1917, when the Turkish flag was hauled down 
after practically 1260 years of misrule and op- 
pression, and the banners of the Entente Allies 
raised in its place, was preparing the way for this 
very thing. It was indeed a most important 
event, fraught with greater meaning than mil- 
lions dreamed of, when General Allenby received 
from the Turkish Governor of Jerusalem the sur- 
render of the Holy City. And it is well known 
that General, now Lord, Allenby, to whom God 
gave this great victory over the Turkish Army, 
was instructed in the truth of the Second Coming 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and this event was 
clearly ordered of God in view of the promised 
restoration of Israel to the land. It was one of 
His hidden purposes when He permitted the 
World War. The surrender of the Holy City, 
without the firing of a shot, as the air-planes of 
the allied forces circled about over the ancient 
capital of the land of Palestine, was undoubtedly 
in answer to the prayers of thousands of the peo- 
ple of God who could not bear to think of the 
representative of a so-called Christian nation 
shelling the city where our Saviour taught and 


190 Lectures on the Revelation 


died, and which must ever be sacred in the eyes 
of both Jew and Christian. When the armies of 
the Allies entered through the Jaffa Gate, as 
Allenby walked in before his troops, Arab, Jew 
and Christian alike recognized the fact that the 
hour had struck for God to open the way for the 
fulfilment of many prophecies of bygone ages, as 
recorded in His Word. Many stories have been 
told of this event, some of which have not been 
substantiated, but even allowing for a large per- 
centage of unverified tales, it is evident that the 
whole civilized world saw in it a most extraor- 
dinary event, and it was undoubtedly the turn- 
ing-point of the entire conflict, for in eleven 
months afterwards the armistice was signed. 
Zionism has from this time taken on new and 
remarkable vigor, and money has been pouring 
into its coffers to transplant the poor of the 
flock from the lands of the north and the country 
where they have suffered so much, to their own 
ancient patrimony. Alas! they little realize what 
they are going back to! Their hopes are high, 
their jubilation great, but Scripture makes it 
very plain that they have before them the bitter- 
est experiences they have ever known, and these 
to be endured right in their own land. For 
though the Turkish power no longer holds Jeru- 
salem, yet it is still subject to the Gentiles, and 
will be, until the Lord Himself returns in person 
for its complete deliverance. He declared that from 
the days of Titus Jerusalem should be “trod- 


The Two Witnesses (chap. 11) 191 


den down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gen- 
tiles be fulfilled.” 

The expression, “the times of the Gentiles,” re- 
fers to the entire period of Gentile supremacy, be- 
ginning with the day when God gave Judah into 
the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and 
continuing on to the time when the Stone from 
heaven shall smite the image on its feet; that is, 
when the Lord Jesus Christ, at His second coming 
in judgment, shall destroy all Gentile dominion, and 
His own kingdom shall supersede every other. 

The last three and a half years, designated here 
so definitely as forty and two months, will be the 
worst of all this period of Gentile treading-down. 
So dreadful will be the tribulation of those days, 
our Lord has told us, that except they be shortened, 
no flesh would be saved. And the centre of all this 
tribulation will be the land of Palestine itself. But 
during this time, and immediately preceding it, God 
will not leave Himself without witness. So we 
read: 

“T will give power unto my two witnesses, and they 
shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore 
days, clothed in sackcloth. These are the two olive trees, 
and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the 
earth” (vers. 3, 4). 


I speak somewhat diffidently here, but it seems 
clear to me that the twelve hundred and sixty days 
of these verses refers to the first half of the week, 


192 Lectures on the Revelation 


during which God will have a witnessing remnant 
in Jerusalem testifying to the near coming of the 
kingdom, and calling upon all Israel to repent in view 
of that time of the restitution of all things spoken of 
by the prophets. 

I do not know that we need limit the witnesses to 
two individuals. Two is the number of testimony, 
and we need to remember that we are dealing here 
with symbols, not necessarily with the literal person- 
alities. Therefore the two witnesses might well 
symbolize the witnessing remnant of Judah as a 
whole. But I would not be dogmatic as to this, for 
it might be the mind of God to send two individuals, 
as here described, to herald the near coming of His 
Son. The fourth verse again links the prophecy 
with the Book of Zechariah, chap. 4, ver. 3:— 
“ And two olive trees by it, one upon the right side 
of the bow], and the other upon the left side thereof.” 
There, the two olive trees are priesthood and pro- 
phetic testimony, keeping the candlestick shining for 
God. Here the olive trees are said to be two candle- 
sticks, but the thought, I take it, is the same. It is 
worship and testimony in that time when Jacob’s 
trouble is just beginning. 

These witnesses are “immortal until their work 
is done,” for, we are told that “if any man will 
hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and 
devoureth their enemies; and if any man will hurt 
them, he must in this manner be killed ”— that is, 


The Two Witnesses (chap. 11) 193 


if any man willeth or desires to hurt them, he is cut 
off in judgment. 

We next learn that “these have power to shut 
heaven, so that it rain not in the days of their 
prophecy : and have power over waters to turn them 
to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as 
often as they will” (ver. 6). It is a testimony in 
the power and spirit both of Elijah and of Moses. 
Hence, some have drawn the conclusion that the 
two witnesses would be Moses and Elijah sent back 
to earth ere the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
I admit the possibility of this, though it does not 
seem to me probable; but just as John the Baptist 
came of old in the spirit and power of Elijah — 
and, to those who would receive it, he was Elijah 
which was to come — so these witnesses, whether 
actually two only, or in reality a much larger com- 
pany thus symbolized, will be in the spirit and power 
both of the prophet who came to restore Israel to 
the true God, and the great prophet who first led 
them out of Egypt. 

Nothing can interfere with their witness-bearing 
until they shall have finished their testimony; then 
“the beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit ” 
(of whom we shall learn more when we come to 
study chapter thirteen) “shall make war against 
them, and shall overcome them, and kill them.” 
They will be the objects of the bitter enmity of the 
vile head of the coming revived Roman Empire, or 


194 Lectures on the Revelation 


Western Federation of Nations, who will not toler- 
ate any worship but that which is offered to himself. 
He, therefore, will destroy them, “and their dead 
bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which 
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also 
our Lord was crucified” (ver. 8). It is Jerusalem, 
God’s holy city, which through apostasy, culminat- 
ing in the worship of the Antichrist and the Beast, 
shall sink at last to the level of Sodom, from which 
Lot was only saved by fire, and Egypt, out of which 
Israel of old were delivered by Jehovah. Through 
them (the unbelieving Jews) “the name’of God 
has been blasphemed among the Gentiles’; by them 
the Lord of glory was crucified, and wrath shall 
come upon them to the uttermost. 

In verses nine and ten we have the sad picture of 
joy amongst the nations because this last testimony 
for God on earth has been destroyed. We see the 
whole apostate world — Christendom and Judaism 
alike — congratulating one another that there is no 
longer any voice raised to call in question their 
apostasy and wicked ways. 


“ And they of the people and kindreds and tongues and 
nations shall see their dead bodies three days and an 
half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in 
graves. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice 
over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one te 
another; because these two prophets tormented them that 
dwelt upon the earth” (vers. 9, 10). 


The Two Witnesses (chap. 11) 195 


In the present time of our Lord’s rejection and 
His session at God’s right hand, Christendom, in the 
very manner here depicted, pretends to observe 
Christ’s coming to earth. Having crucified the 
Lord of glory, the nations join in celebrating what 
is called “‘ His birthday,” sending gifts one to an- 
other. In that coming day, in the same way, they 
will make merry and manifest their delight because 
the last voice on His behalf has been silenced, and 
they will rejoice over the dead bodies of His wit- 
nesses. What a solemn scene it shall be —civil- 
ized peoples making merry in that awful day when 
the wrath of God is just about to be poured out in 
all its fulness upon that guilty, guilty world. For 
three days and a half it will seem as though Satan 
were triumphant, and everything that is of God 
overthrown! 


“And after three days and a half the spirit of life 
from God entered into them, and they stood upon their 
feet; and great fear fell upon them which saw them. 
And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto 
them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven 
in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them” (vers. 11, 12). 


It is another rapture — another cohort of the first 
resurrection — taking place in the midst of that final 
week. These martyrs, who had sealed their testi- 
mony with their blood, are raised in power and 
caught up to be with their still rejected Lord. Like 
Himself, they shall ascend to heaven in a cloud, 


196 Lectures on the Revelation 


but, unlike their Master, their enemies will behold 
them. And it would seem as though this visible 
rapture will have some effect upon those remaining 
in Jerusalem, for in verse thirteen we learn, ‘‘ The 
same hour was there a great earthquake, and the 
tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake 
were slain of men seven thousand: and the remnant 
were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of 
heaven.” Observe He is still the God of heaven, 
but in a little while He will be manifested as the 
God of the whole earth, as verse four has already 
intimated. This is the first time that we read of 
any during that period of tribulation giving glory to 
God, but whether this implies any true turning of 
heart to Himself on the part of some, I dare not 
attempt to say. All that this scripture says is that 
“the remnant were affrighted,”’ and this in itself 
does not necessarily imply that there is any true 
conscience work. 


With this great earthquake the second woe is past, 
and we are told, “‘ Behold, the third woe cometh 
quickly.” This third woe is none other than the 
seventh and last of the trumpets, which ushers in the 
world-kingdom of our God and His Christ. It is 
a woe only to His enemies, but a cause of great re- 
joicing to all who love His name, in view of crea- 
tion’s deliverance from bondage to sin. 


The Two Witnesses (chap. 11) 197 


“ And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great 
voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are 
become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of His Christ; and 
He shali reign for ever and ever. And the four and 
twenty elders, which sat before God on their thrones, fell 
upon their faces, and worshiped God, saying, We give 
Thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, 
and art to come; because Thou hast taken to Thee thy 
great power, and hast reigned. And the nations were 
angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, 
that they should be judged, and that Thou shouldest give 
reward unto thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, 
and them that fear thy name, small and great; and 
shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth” (vers. 
15-18). 

I purposely refrained from reading the last verse, 
as it properly belongs to the next chapter. What 
we have before us completes the present prophetic 
series. The seventh angel’s trumpet brings in 
Christ’s long waited for and glorious kingdom. And 
upon its proclamation, the saints in heaven, as sym- 
bolized by the four and twenty elders, will fall be- 
fore God on their faces, worshiping Him and giving 
Him thanks — He, the everlasting Jehovah — be- 
cause He has taken to Himself His great power to 
reign. 

The eighteenth verse covers the entire millen- 
nium and carries us on to the judgment of the 
wicked dead, to the end of time, for to the Lord 
Jesus Christ all judgment has been committed. And 


198 Lectures on the Revelation 


we need to remember that the entire millennium is a 
period of judgment. First, judgment upon the an- 
gry nations when the wrath of God is poured out 
upon them at the beginning of the millennium; 
judgment for His own servants who shall be re- 
warded in that glorious kingdom according to their 
faithfulness during Christ's rejection; judgment 
upon the wicked dead who, at the great white throne, 
will answer for the deeds done in the body, and be 
dealt with accordingly. Those who have arrogated 
to themselves the right to judge and destroy others 
will then be judged and destroyed themselves when 
the great moral Governor of the universe, who has 
kept Himself hidden so long, will be fully mani- 
fested, If you will refer to the chart, you will see 
that the seventh angel’s trumpet brings us to the end 
of the first prophetic outline. That is, chapter 
11:18 carries us as far along chronologically as 
chapter 20; II-15. 

And now may I press upon all here present the 
importance of being prepared for the near coming 
of the Lord Jesus Christ, in view of the remarkable 
manner in which Palestine, the Jews, the nations of 
Christendom, and the professed church of God are 
even now being prepared for the very experiences 
we have been attempting to describe? These things 
are not “cunningly devised fables” but stern reali- 
ties, and anyone who has his eyes opened and un- 
derstands something of the teaching of the prophetic 


The Two Witnesses (chap. 11) 199 


word, can see clearly that we are very near the end 
of the present dispensation. 

I remember on one occasion speaking in the city 
of San Jose, California, before a group of minis- 
ters, something over forty being present, on the sec- 
ond advent of our Lord. Many of them ridiculed 
the idea — only four declared themselves as believ- 
ing in it. Most of them were non-committal, hav- 
ing no definite convictions either for or against my 
theme. One dear old minister seemed to resent the 
thought of the Lord’s coming as a future thing, de- 
claring that, to him, Christ came when, some forty 
years previously, he had been converted to God. 
But I was invited to return a week later, and for 
an hour and a half we had a most animated debate 
on the subject. Finally one clergyman declared that 
he thought the personal coming of the Lord Jesus 
was an absolute absurdity. He did not believe He 
existed as a distinct personality, clothed with a resur- 
rected body; His resurrection was entirely spiritual, 
and, to quote his own words, “ He only exists to- 
day as part of the all-pervading spirit of the uni- 
verse.”’ ‘“ Therefore,’ exclaimed he, dramatically, 
“T believe, my brethren, in no apocalyptic coming of 
Jesus. I never expect to see Him in a body, but 
I believe in the ever-coming Christ. He is coming 
in the clouds, but they are not literal clouds. He 
comes in the clouds of affliction, in the political 
clouds, in the war clouds. in the clouds of sorrow 


200 Lectures on the Revelation 


and distress, but a personal pre-millennial advent is, 
in my judgment, an utter impossibility.” This 
brought to his feet the minister who had somewhat 
opposed me at the previous meeting, and he cried in 
distress, “Do I understand, Doctor, that I shall 
never see my Lord who saved me by His death upon 
the cross?” ‘I think not,” was the reply. “ Have 
I then,”’ exclaimed the other, “ been wrong all these 
years as I have sung, 


‘IT shall know Him, I shall know Him, 
As redeemed by His side I shall stand; 
I shall know Him, I shall know Him 
By the print of the nails in His hand’?” 


“Oh!” replied the other, “that’s all very well as 
poetical license, but I don’t think you should take it 
literally.” “‘ Brethren,’ cried the aged minister, as 
the tears burst from his eyes, ‘I take back what I 
said last week. I find I agree with this brother, 
who has been speaking to us on the coming of the 
Lord, far more than I thought I did. I look to see 
the personal coming of my Saviour. I shall never 
be satisfied until I behold the King in His beauty. 
But I have always supposed He would not come 
until the day of judgment; but as I think it over, it 
seems to me that, after all, that is what my brother 
believes; only he thinks the day of judgment will 
be a thousand years long. And, Doctor,” he said, 
turning to the minister who had presented such 


The Two Witnesses (chap. 11) 201 


unscriptural and unholy views, “I am afraid, if 
there are many in the church like you, it will take 
a thousand years to put things right.” 

My friends, this is indeed what I would impress 
upon you, and what the seventh angel’s trumpet so 
clearly intimates. The day of judgment will be a 
thousand years long. The judgment-seat of Christ 
takes place in the heavens immediately after the rap- 
ture of the church. The judgment of the living 
nations referred to in Matthew chap. 25 will take 
place upon the earth when the Son of Man shall 
come in His glory, and all His holy angels with Him, 
to establish His kingdom over ail the world. That 
thousand years will be the reign of righteousness, 
when He shall rule all nations with a rod of iron, 
and judge unsparingly everything that ventures to 
lift itself up against His authority —all that re- 
fuses to be subject to His dominion. And at the 
close He will judge all the wicked dead, who shall 
be raised for that very purpose, and cast into the 
lake of fire because they have rejected His grace. 
And in view of all this, I plead with you who are 
out of Christ, ‘‘ Agree with thine adversary quickly, 
whilst thou art in the way with him.” In other 
words, come to God in Christ Jesus now, and have 
your case settled out of court, for if you first meet 
God in that solemn hour of judgment, you will be 
forever beyond the reach of mercy. 

For all who trust in the Lord Jesus now, there will 


LIFE. College Library 
1100 Glendale Blvd. 


202 Lectures on the Revelation 


be no judgment in that solemn day, for He has said, 
“Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my 
word, and believeth on Him that sent Me, hath ever- 
lasting life, and cometh not into judgment (R. V.), 
but is passed from death unto life” (John 5:24). 
How sweet and precious the promise here given to 
every believer in the Lord Jesus Christ! Observe 
that all such possess eternal life mow. It is not 
that they are looking forward to receiving eternal 
life in the day of judgment, or at the coming of 
the Lord —though they will enter into life then; 
that is, they will become participants in that scene 
where eternal life is fully revealed. But they have 
that life now by virtue of having received Christ, 
for “he that hath the Son, hath life.”’ Therefore 
they shall not come into judgment. While they will 
be called to appear at the judgment-seat of Christ to 
give an account of their service for the Lord. Since 
His grace saved them they shall never be called into 
judgment for their sins, and that for the best of 
all possible reasons — because those sins have al- 
ready been judged upon the person of the Lord Jesus 
Christ when He died on Calvary’s cross where He 
bore the condemnation of all who would put their 
trust in Him. Such have already passed out of 
death unto life, and enjoy even now the earnest of 
the coming glory. 


LECTURE XIII 
THE WOMAN AND THE MAN-CHILD 
(Chapter 12) 


E begin, with the present address, our study 
of a very distinct part of the Book, embrac- 
ing chapters 12, 13 and 14, which form a connected 
outline of events. The first two of these chapters, 
as noted on the chart, bring before us “the great 
actors for good and evil in the last days,” to use the 
very striking language of another;* while chapter 
fourteen gives us the consummation — the Lamb on 
Mount Zion, returned to bless the remnant of Israel, 
and through them the world, and the final judgments 
relating to the preparation for the actual setting up 
of the kingdom. 

I think I may say without exaggeration, that I 
have read or carefully examined several hundred 
books purporting to expound the Revelation. I 
have learned to look upon this twelfth chapter as 
the crucial test in regard to the correct prophetic out- 
line. If the interpreters are wrong as to the woman 


1 Walter Scott.. 
203 


204 Lectures on the Revelation 


and the man-child, it necessarily follows that they 
will be wrong as to many things connected with 
them. Therefore, I ask your particular attention as 
we endeavor to see what light Scripture itself throws 
upon this remarkable vision. 

As indicated in the previous address, we should 
begin to read from verse 19 of chapter eleven, as 
this is the commencement of the third great division 
of the Book. 


“And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and 
there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament: 
and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, 
and an earthquake, and great hail.” 


It may be well here to draw attention to the several 
“openings” in their order. In chapter 4:1, we 
read, “A door was opened in heaven,” which intro- 
duces the third division of the Book, and shows us 
the saints in heaven around the throne of God and 
the judgments that follow the taking of the seven- 
sealed book. 

In chapter 11:19 we have, “ The temple of God 
was opened in heaven,” and there is seen in the tem- 
ple the Ark of the Covenant, which at once calls to 
mind God’s covenant with His earthly people Israel, 
and shows us that though the lightnings, voices, 
thunderings, earthquake, and great hail that fol- 
lowed the opening of the temple, speak of fearful 
judgments to be poured out upon the prophetic earth, 


The Woman and the Man-Child (chap.12) 205 


God will remember His covenant with Israel and 
preserve the remnant safely through it all. 

In chapter 15:5, this thought is intensified in 
connection with the coming forth of the seven angels 
that have the seven last plagues. There we read, 
“ After that I looked, and, behold, the temple of the 
tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened,” 
and from that temple the seven angels went forth. 
The fact that the testimony is thus mentioned, again 
emphasizes God’s protecting care of His earthly 
people. 

The fourth “opening” is in chapter 19:11. 
* And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white 
horse; and He that sat thereon was called Faithful 
and True, and in righteousness He doth judge and 
make war.’ The chapter goes on to describe, in 
highly symbolic form, the Lord’s appearing in open 
judgment. These four openings are of deep sig- 
nificance and help greatly to an understanding of 
the Book. The first we have already considered. 
The second is to occupy us to-night and for several 
evenings. The third introduces the seven last 
plagues, in which is filled up the wrath of God. 
And the fourth ushers in the glorious millennial 
kingdom. 

Now let us note carefully the vision of chapter 
12:1-6. I read the first four verses: 


“And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; a 
woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her 


206 Lectures on the Revelation 


feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars: and 
she being with child cried, travailing in birth, and pained 
to be delivered. 

“ And there appeared another wonder in heaven; and 
behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten 
horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. And his tail 
drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast 
them to the earth: and the dragon stood before the woman 
which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child 
as soon as it was born.” 


It is a divinely given picture, in which God is 
throwing His own white light upon events which 
otherwise would be incomprehensible to His crea- 
tures. A woman appears, arrayed with the sun, and 
the moon beneath her feet, and upon her head a 
crown of twelve stars. She cries out in anguish, 
travailing in birth, until she is delivered of a man- 
child. And this man-child is distinctly said to be the 
one who is to rule all the nations with a rod of iron. 
The woman has a terrible, a most vindictive ad- 
versary —a great red dragon, who is described as 
having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his 
heads seven diadems, for it is well to notice that the 
word rendered “crown” in the Authorized Version 
is not the word we have already had before us in 
this Book — the crowns on the heads of the elders 
in heaven. Theirs was a victor’s wreath, but the 
dragon wears the imperial diadem. His is a reign- 
ing crown, for he is “ the prince of this world,” act- 
ing, as we shall see shortly, through the Roman 


The Woman and the Man-Child (chap. 12) 207 


Empire. His tail, we are told, “ drew a third part 
of the stars of heaven, and did cast them down to 
the earth.” 

John beheld him, in the vision, standing before 
the woman, waiting for her deliverance, that he 
might devour her child immediately upon its birth. 
But he was thwarted in his malignant intentions, for 
the child was caught up unto God, and to His throne, 
and the woman, the mother, then fled into the wilder- 
ness, where God Himself had prepared a place for 
her, that she might be kept in security and nour- 
ished for a thousand two hundred and sixty days. 

Now, first of all, who or what are we to under- 
stand this woman to represent? Many tell us she is 
the church. Others, and their number I notice of 
late is increasing, insist that she represents, rather, 
some system of teaching. Roman Catholic exposi- 
tors have seen in her the Virgin Mary, and suppose 
the whole scene to depict her assumption into heaven, 
and her glory as its queen. 

There have not been wanting individuals all down 
through the Christian era who have arrogated the 
vision to themselves, as for instance, Johanna South- 
cott, who gave herself out as the Bride of Christ, a 
century or so ago, and deceived many. Or in our 
own day, Mrs. Mary Baker Patterson Glover Eddy, 
who very modestly conceived and gave forth the 
thought that the woman was a highly symbolic pic- 
ture of — herself! and the man-child represented 


208 Lectures on the Revelation 


that which she brought forth — Christian Science; 
whereas, the dragon was “ mortal mind ” endeavor- 
ing to destroy her new religion! With such theories 
as these two, however, I need not take up the time 
of sane people. 

The first view I mentioned is one that needs care- 
ful examination. In doing this, let us first inquire 
who, or what, does the man-child symbolize? If 
we allow Scripture itself to answer, we find there is 
a person and a company of people answering to this 
description. In the 2d Psalm Jehovah says to Mes- 
siah, “ Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten 
Thee. Ask of Me, and I shall give Thee the na- 
tions for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts 
of the earth for thy possession. Thou shalt break 
them with a rod of iron; Thou shalt dash them in 
pieces like a potter’s vessel’’ (vers. 7-9). This, 
clearly enough, is our Lord Jesus Christ, who is soon 
to reign over all the earth, and undoubtedly He is 
primarily the Man-child who is to rule the nations 
with a rod of iron, and the special object of Satan’s 
malignity. But we have already seen, in Rev. 
2: 26-28, that when He reigns He will not reign 
alone, for His promise to the faithful overcomers in 
the church period is, ‘‘ And he that overcometh, and 
keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give 
power over the nations: and he shall rulethem with 
a rod of iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they 
be broken to shivers: even as I received of my 


The Woman and the Man-Child (chap. 12) 209 


Father. And I will give him the morning star.” Is 
there then any incongruity in understanding the 
man-child to represent both Christ Jesus our Lord 
and His church? Surely not, for He is the Head 
of the body, the church, which is the fulness, or 
completion, of Himself, so that the title “ The 
Christ ” is applied to both head and body viewed as 
one in 1 Cor. 12:12, where we read, “ For as the 
body is one, and hath many members, and all the 
members of that one body, being many, are one 
body: so also is Christ’; literally it reads, ‘the 
Christ.” We may then, on the authority of Scrip- 
ture itself, safely affirm that the man-child repre- 
sents the one New Man who is to rule the nations 
with a rod of iron— Christ, the Head, and the 
church, His body. If this be so, then it is impos- 
sible that the woman should symbolize the church. 

But there are those who tell us, and their number 
is not few, that only the strong spiritual members 
of the church are designated in Scripture as over- 
comers, and that the woman pictures the church as 
a whole; whereas, the man-child symbolizes the over- 
coming part of the church who, they say, will be 
raptured prior to the great tribulation, while the rest 
of the church will be purified through that time of 
trouble. But Scripture definitely determines the un- 
truthfulness of this contention, for we are told dis- 
tinctly, “‘ Who is he that overcometh the world, but 
he that believeth that Jesus is the Christ? This is 


210 Lectures on the Revelation 


the victory that overcometh the world, even our 
faith.’ An overcomer is one who has personal 
faith in Christ, and every believer in this sense over- 
comes. Those who do not are proven not to have 
real faith, and are simply professors, not possessors. 
This theory, to which I refer, denies the unity of 
the body of Christ; it fails to recognize the intimate 
relation existing between the head and all its mem- 
bers. 

But who, then, is this star-crowned, sun-robed 
woman, who has the moon beneath her feet? First, 
let me ask, “Is there any other place in Scripture 
where we have the sun, moon and twelve stars 
brought together in a similar way?” You will at 
once recall Joseph’s dream. He beheld the sun, 
moon and eleven stars making obeisance to him. 
He himself was the twelfth star. His father rightly 
saw in this a picture of all Israel with its twelve 
tribes. And this was a hint worth considering. 
But, again, we are distinctly told concerning our 
Lord Jesus that it was of Israel ‘as concerning the 
flesh that Christ came” (Rom. g:5). And it is of 
Israel that Isaiah is singing when he exclaims, 
“Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given: 
and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and 
his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The 
mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of 
Peace” (Isa.9g:6). Israel is the mother of whom, 
as concerning the flesh, Christ came. The church 


The Woman and the Man-Child (chap.12) 211 


did not give birth to Christ. He founded the 
church. He, as the last Adam, slept in death that 
the church might be taken from His wounded side. 
But He did come from Israel. Over and over again 
in the Old Testament that nation is depicted as being 
in travail-pain, waiting for His appearing. Turn 
to Micah 5:2 and Isa. 66:7, 8. By a comparison 
of these scriptures with the one before us we see that 
“ before Israel travailed, she brought forth.” That 
is, Christ Himself personally was actually born be- 
fore the time of her great period of anguish in the 
days of the coming tribulation, but it will be during 
that time of trouble that He will be born in the con- 
sciousness of the nation, and that they will realize 
that He belongs to them,— that He is Israel’s Son. 
The twelve stars upon her head may well speak of 
her twelve patriarchs and her twelve tribes. The 
moon beneath her feet speaks of the reflected glory 
of the Old Covenant, while the sun, in which she is 
enwrapped, tells of the New Covenant glory, in 
which she appears before God. At Christ’s actual 
birth, Satan put into operation the power of the 
Roman Empire through Herod, its puppet in Jeru- 
salem, to seek His destruction. But He was pre- 
served from Herod's efforts, when the young chil- 
dren of Bethlehem were destroyed; and though cru- 
cified by a Roman Governor and by Roman author- 
ity, was raised from the dead by the glory of the 
Father, and caught up to God and to His throne. 


212 Lectures on the Revelation 


Now I apprehend that in the vision before us this 
is in view; but there is more than that, for we have 
seen that the man-child symbolizes both Head and 
body — the complete Christ. Therefore, as in other 
prophecies, the entire present dispensation is passed 
over in silence, and the church is represented in its 
Head, caught up with Christ. For immediately 
after this, Satan, again acting through the Roman 
Empire which is to be revived in the last days, turns 
upon the woman Israel and seeks to vent his wrath 
and indignation against her. But God prepares a 
place for her, and she is hidden in the wilderness — 
possibly the wilderness of the peoples, as Ezekiel 
(chap. 20:35) so graphically puts it. There she 
will be protected during the 1260 days, which, as we 
have already seen, appear to refer to the first half 
of the 7oth week —“ the beginning of sorrows.” 

In the next section of the chapter, verses seven 
to twelve, our attention is turned from earth to 
heaven; it is a future great conflict, to occur in the 
heavenly places. 

“ And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels 
fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and 
his angels, and prevailed not; neither was their place 
found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was 
cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, 
which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into 
the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. And I 
heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salva- 
tion, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the 


The Woman and the Man-Child (chap.12) 213 


power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is 
cast down, which accused them before our God day and 
night. And they overcame him by the blood of the 
Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved 
not their lives unto the death. Therefore rejoice, ye 
heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the in- 
habiters of the earth and of the sea! for the devil is 
come down unto you, having great wrath, because he 
knoweth that he hath but a short time.” 


A third actor’ in these stirring scenes is now in- 
troduced; it is Michael, the leader of the heavenly 
hosts. But he is no stranger to the reverent student 
of the Word of God. We have already made his 
acquaintance in the Book of Daniel, and we know 
him as the great angelic prince, the archangel, who 
is particularly charged with the care of Daniel’s 
people; and Daniel's people, we have seen, are sym- 
bolized by the woman whom we have been consider- 
ing. When our Lord Jesus Christ returns for His 
church, we are told that the voice of the archangel 
will be heard from heaven, together with the shout 
of the Lord and the trump of God. Michael’s voice 
will awaken, or call together, all those of Israel 
who have died in the past dispensation, and who 
will have their part in the first resurrection. To- 
gether with the church and the saints of previous 
ages, they will enter into the Father’s house. Their 
passage through the air and enthronement in glory 
would seem to be the signal for the driving out of 
Satan and his hosts from the upper air, where they 


214 Lectures on the Revelation 


have been permitted to maintain their hold during 
the past five thousand years. Satan is called the 
prince of the power of the air. Believers are told 
that their conflict is with wicked spirits in heavenly 
places. These evil hosts are continually endeavor- 
ing, by deception, to keep Christians from enjoying 
their present portion in Christ, but when the church 
is caught up, they will be ignominiously driven from 
what we might call the “outer court of heaven” 
and cast down upon the earth. The great dragon, 
the energizing spirit of the old Roman Empire, and 
the one who is to be the energizing spirit of the 
same Empire when revived, is to be cast down, and 
in verse nine, that there may be no possibility of mis- 
take, he is distinctly designated as: “ the old serpent, 
called the Devil, and Satan, the deceiver of the whole 
earth.” 

When he and his accursed followers are hurled 
from the heavens, a voice of praise is heard above, 
celebrating the full salvation of God’s redeemed, and 
the establishment in power of the kingdom of our 
God and the authority of His Christ, because of the 
fact that the accuser of our brethren has been cast 
down, who accused them before our God day and 
night. This is no new thought; he appeared in this 
way in the days of Job, accusing that righteous man 
before the Lord; Zechariah also, in vision, beheld 
him accusing Joshua, the high priest. He has been 
permitted by God to act as the great prosecuting at- 


The Woman and the Man-Child (chap.12) 215 


torney, if I may so put it, at the High Court of the 
Universe, but no charge that he has ever been able 
to bring against those redeemed to God by the pre- 
cious blood of Christ has ever stood, because that 
infinite sacrifice has fully availed to meet them all. 
Well may we sing: 


“T hear the accuser roar 
Of ills that I have done; 

I know them all, and thousands more, 
Jehovah findeth none.” 


Or, as a verse of another beautiful hymn puts it: 


“Though the restless foe accuses, 
Sins recounting like a flood; 
Every charge our God refuses — 
Christ has answered with His blood.” 


Christ is our advocate, and it is Satan’s malicious 
accusations that call for His constant advocacy on 
our behalf. Asa result of this, the Holy Spirit ap- 
plies to the hearts of the saints on earth the truth of 
God in divine power, practically cleansing their 
ways. And so it is said, “ They overcame him be- 
cause of the blood of the Lamb, and because of the 
word of their testimony; they loved not their life 
even unto death” (ver. 11, R.V.) 

Satan's casting down will be the signal then for 
great rejoicing in the heavens, where the Old and 
New Testament saints will have been caught up; 
but it will be the signal also of great sorrow upon 


216 Lectures on the Revelation 


the earth, because the devil will have come down in 
great wrath, knowing that his time is short. He has 
ever been the hater of all who belong to Christ, and 
will seek for any on earth who own His name in 
that day, utterly to destroy them. This is what is 
brought before us in verses 13-17: 


“ And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the 
earth, he persecuted the woman which brought forth the 
man-child. And to the woman were given two wings of 
a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into 
her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, 
and half a time, from the face of the serpent. And the 
serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood after the 
woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the 
flood. And the earth helped the woman, and the earth 
opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the 
dragon cast out of his mouth. And the dragon was wroth 
with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant 
of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and 
have the testimony of Jesus Christ.” 


The explanation is plain in view of what we have 
already had before us. The dragon will at once 
turn all his energies against Israel, but God has 
pledged Himself to preserve her through the great 
tribulation. And so, we are told, there were given 
to the woman not merely two wings of a great eagle, 
but emphatically, the two wings of the great eagle, 
that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, 
there to be nourished by God for a time, and times, 
and half a time, from the face of the serpent. That 


The Woman and the Man-Child (chap. 12) 217 


is, for the last three and a half years of the tribula- 
tion period. “A time” indicates a year; “ times,” 
two years; and “half a time,” six months. This is 
the same as the forty-two months of the previous 
chapter. As to the expression “ the two wings of 
the great eagle,” God says in regard to Israel, “I 
bore you on eagles’ wings, and brought you unto 
Myself.”’ He who delivered them from Egypt and 
cared for them in the wilderness will, in that coming 
day, deliver them from the wrath of the dragon and 
protect them in the wilderness of the peoples, from 
which they will afterwards come up in great num- 
bers to dwell in their own land. 

In vain the serpent casts out of his mouth water as 
of a great river, hoping that he might cause her to be 
carried away by the stream. He would seek to ruin 
her by that which comes forth from his mouth — 
evil teachings, I take it, in contrast to the water of 
life given by our Lord Jesus Christ. We may get 
the idea of this if we recall the fact that to-day myr- 
iads of Jews are being carried away by that Satanic 
flood from the mouth of the dragon known as Chris- 
tian Science. So, in the days of the great tribula- 
tion, Satan will try to swamp and destroy Israel as 
a nation by the evil teachings he will spread through 
the world. But even the earth itself will help the 
woman, opening her mouth and swallowing up the 
river which the dragon casts out. That is, driven 
out among all the nations, as I take it, Israel will be 


218 Lectures on the Revelation 


so shocked and horrified by the evil results of these 
Satanic teachings that they will themselves be pre- 
served from them. Just as of old a sojourn in 
Babylon, the fountain-head of idolatry, cured Judah, 
for the time being, of her own idolatrous tendencies, 
so Israel’s experiences among the Gentiles in the last 
days will be used of God to preserve her from the 
evil river in which the dragon would drown her. 
Unable to destroy the nation as such, he makes a 
special effort to ruin the rest of her seed, or the rem- 
nant that keep the commandments of God and the 
testimony of Jesus. These, I take it, are those who 
remain in the land, as pictured by the two witnesses, 
and there maintain a testimony for God against all 
the persecutions of the Antichrist. How the devil 
will seek to destroy these the next chapter will tell 
us. 


LECTURE XIV 


THE COMING “ FEDERATION OF 
DA LION'S.” 


(Chapter 13: 1-10) 


FEDERATION of Nations! How much is 
A this phrase on the lips of politicians and 
persons interested in national affairs at the present 
time! It was far otherwise but a few years ago. 
When teachers of prophecy declared that the Word 
of God predicted just such a federation as men are 
now deeply interested in, they were met with ridi- 
cule. It was openly declared that they were dream- 
ers, giving rein to foolish imaginations, and pro- 
claiming something which could never be fulfilled. 
But the great war and new conditions have changed 
the viewpoint of these cavillers considerably in the 
last few years. Now there are those who hold the 
confederacy of nations as the one solution to the 
difficulties everywhere confronting statesmen, and 
many consider that it will be the panacea for all re- 
construction perils. Just what will come out of it 
all, while the church still remains on earth, one would 
not attempt to prophesy. But after the church is 


220 Lectures on the Revelation 


gone, there will, indeed, be a great confederacy of 
the nations that have sprung out of the old Roman 
Empire, which will be Satanic in origin and char- 
acter, and will, in fact, be the devil’s last card, if I 
may borrow such an expression, ere he is obliged 
to own his complete defeat. It is of this the pres- 
ent portion treats. 

In our last lecture we were noticing that the en- 
mity of Satan will be turned against God’s earthly 
people Israel in a special manner, after the church 
has been caught up to meet the Lord in the air. In 
conclusion I said that we would see, to-night, just 
what form that enmity will take. And in properly 
placing what now comes before us, let me emphasize 
the necessity of keeping in mind the fact that, 
throughout all this portion of the Book of Revela- 
tion, we have in view a time of solemn and moment- 
ous import, after the first resurrection and transla- 
tion of the saints at the rapture, and before the ap- 
pearing of the Lord Jesus Christ in glory as the 
long-looked-for Messiah of Israel, who is to sit upon 
the throne of His father David, and the Son of Man, 
who is to reign over all the earth in righteousness, 
If there is confusion as to this, nothing will be clear. 

It is not hard to imagine something of the condi- 
tion in which this world will be found after all real 
Christians have been snatched away to be with the 
Lord; especially when we realize that many in high 
places — rulers, governors, and cther political lead- 


Federation of Nations (chap. 13:1-10) 221 


ers, are at heart Christian men. Perhaps, I should 
hardly say “many,” that is, compared with those 
who are unsaved and indifferent to the claims of 
Christ, they may be few indeed; for Scripture tells 
us that “not many mighty, not many noble, are 
called.” You will remember that Lady Huntington, 
that earnest, devoted woman who lived in the days 
of Whitefield and the Wesleys, and who was such a 
help in spreading the gospel, used to say that she 
was just going to heaven by an “M.” Had the 
word been “ Not any noble,” there would have been 
no hope for her, but the “ M”’ took her in. 

But certainly there are some in high places who 
truly know the Lord, and would be caught away with 
the church at His coming. Their removal would 
be like the breaking of a dyke, permitting the rush- 
ing waters of anarchy and Bolshevism to sweep over 
every land. Think how evil will then be intensified. 
What frightful lengths unsaved men will go to in 
their efforts to bring about a millennium without 
Christ. Whether carnal men realize it or not, the 
true Christians are the light of the world and the 
salt of the earth. Let every Christian suddenly be 
taken away from this scene, and you will have gross 
darkness covering the earth. With the preservative 
power of righteousness gone, the masses of men will 
be given up to corruption and violence. Read the 
account of the days before the Flood, and you will 
have some sense of the chaotic condition that will 


222 Lectures on the Revelation 


prevail. Even now we see lawlessness spreading 
everywhere in the world, and it is only with the 
greatest difficulty that the vile thing called Sovietism 
is kept from gaining a foothold, even in this land of 
liberty. And back of all this is a Satanic effort to 
destroy all faith in God and His Word, and to sub- 
stitute, in place of this, evil systems that can only 
result in eternal ruin to those who follow them. 

In our day, though the enemy comes in like a 
flood, the Spirit of God is here to lift up a standard 
against him. The Word of God tells us that the 
mystery of lawlessness does already work, but dur- 
ing this dispensation there is one who hinders the 
full development of evil, that is, the Holy Ghost; 
but when He is taken out of the world, that is, when 
the Holy Spirit takes the church up to meet the Lord 
in the air, then the last hindrance to the power of 
evil will be gone; there will no longer be any re- 
straint on the machinations of the devil. In the 
heavens the saints will be presented before the judg- 
ment-seat of Christ, and, as we have seen, for the 
last time Satan will appear as the prosecuting attor- 
ney against them before God, as he has done for so 
many centuries, day and night. But he will be ut- 
terly cast out of heaven, and will come down to the 
earth, having great wrath, because he knoweth that 
his time is short. In Israel alone will he find a tes- 
timony for God in that day, and against that people 
he will turn all his malice, and will undertake to 


Federation of Nations (chap. 13: 1-10) 223 


work for their ruin through human government, 
when it has utterly cast off God. 

You will recall how, in the book of Daniel, we 
are told that Nebuchadnezzar had a dream of a great 
image, which, I think all will agree, sets forth “ the 
times of the Gentiles.” By this term is meant the 
period during which the Jews are scattered among 
the Gentiles, the times in which the nations hold 
authority over the land of Palestine. These Gen- 
tile times began with Nebuchadnezzar, the head of 
gold. He is so represented in the image. Follow- 
ing this comes the rule of the Medes and Persians, 
depicted by the silver breast and arms, and that, in 
turn, was succeeded by the Greco-Macedonian Em. 
pire, set forth by the brazen torso of the image. 
The last world-empire is the kingdom of iron, the 
Roman. But Daniel goes on to show that the 
Roman Empire would take on a very peculiar form 
in the time of the end. In the feet of the image you 
have an attempt to amalgamate that which cannot 
be amalgamated, iron and clay. It is a picture of 
man’s attempt to amalgamate the iron of imperial- 
ism with the potter’s clay of social democracy. 

If you ask me where we are in the course of time, 
so far as represented in this image, I should say, un- 
hesitatingly, that we have reached the feet of the 
image. We see, even now, the great nations of Eu- 
rope making a tremendous attempt to amalgamate 
the iron and the clay. And the troubles of recent 


224 Lectures on the Revelation 


years have been, largely, the result of this. Great 
national leaders are at their wits’ end, trying to save 
something of imperialism while still obliged to bow 
to the demands of the people for a government of a 
democratic character. But it is impossible to mix 
the two. The one must, of necessity, destroy the 
other. And this scripture, which we now have be- 
fore us, makes it plain that, at last, the imperial 
power is going to triumph in measure. Men will 
grow weary of the constant conflict, which has been 
so prolonged; for, whatever optimistic statesmen 
still may say, God’s word shows that the confusion 
will grow worse and worse. And we need not be 
surprised if, even before the Church is taken away, 
instead of raising armies “to make the world safe 
for democracy,” it may become necessary to con- 
script the young manhood of our nation in an at- 
tempt to save the world from democracy. The peo- 
ple will soon attempt to take everything into their 
own hands, thus jeopardizing all property rights. 
This is a condition which cannot forever be tol- 
erated, and out of it all will rise, eventually, after the 
Church has been caught up to meet the Lord, one 
man who will combine in himself the statesmanship 
of a Cesar, the military genius of a Napoleon, and 
the personal attractiveness of a Chesterfield. This 
man will head a combination of ten powers, formed, 
as before mentioned, from the nations that have 
sprung out of the old Roman Empire. When they 


Federation of Nations (chap. 13: 1-10) 225 


have cast off all allegiance to God and His Word, 
through this confederacy he will, for a time at least, 
dominate the world. 

As already intimated, Daniel pictures this final 
phase of things by the ten toes of the image. Of 
old, the Roman Empire was divided into the Eastern 
and Western parts, which is symbolized by the two 
legs of the great image, but united under one central 
authority until disintegration began. 

In Daniel’s 7th chapter you have the same thing 
pictured in a different way. The man of God him- 
self had a vision of the times of the Gentiles. He 
saw in them nothing beautiful or grand, but the four 
great empires were represented as four ravenous 
beasts, watching to spring one upon the other — 
beasts so dreadful that nothing on earth fully an- 
swers to the description of the wild creatures there 
depicted. The Babylonian Empire was symbolized 
by a lion with the wings of an eagle,—a hybrid, 
formed from a beast of the earth and fowls of the 
air. The Medo-Persian dominion appeared as a 
bear, lifting itself up on one side: it had between its 
teeth three ribs dripping with blood, representing 
probably the three chief cities of the Babylonian Em- 
pire which were sacked by the Medes and Persians 
under Cyrus. The Grecian, or Alexandrian Em- 
pire, was pictured as a leopard with four heads, and 
four wings of a fowl upon his back. The four 
heads, of course, set forth the fourfold division of 


226 Lectures on the Revelation 


this Greco-Macedonian Empire after Alexander’s 
death. Finally, Daniel tells us that the fourth beast 
was dreadful and terrible, and had great iron teeth, 
and brake in pieces and devoured all that came in 
its way. He gives no exact description of it: he 
adds, however, that it had ten horns. 

Now that last beast clearly answers to the iron 
legs of the image, the Roman power, and the ten 
horns to the ten toes, which set forth the last form in 
which it will appear. I think there can be no doubt 
whatever that it is this last dreadful beast which is 
fully delineated for us in our present chapter. It is 
the Roman power which was in existence when the 
Lord was born, and was responsible for His death 
upon the cross: for the Jews had no power at all un- 
less it were ratified by Pilate, as representing Czesar. 
Therefore the Roman Empire, of which Pontius 
Pilate was the official representative, crucified the 
Lord of glory. It is true that Pilate simply gave 
the sentence which the Jews desired, and therefore 
they are held responsible for killing their Messiah; 
but the Roman procurator must face that clause, re- 
peated over and over again through the centuries 
in the recitation of the Apostles’ Creed: ‘‘ He was 
crucified under Pontius Pilate.” Pilate can never 
get away from that. It shall stand against his 
record forever. 

We have already seen in the 12th chapter, that the 
great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, 


Federation of Nations (chap. 13: I-10) 227 


represents Rome energized by Satan seeking to de- 
stroy the Man-child. Here, in chapter 13, we have 
Rome in the time of the end. The Empire revived, 
summoned from the sea of the nations by the devil 
himself, for verse one should read, according to the 
best manuscripts, “ He stood upon the sands of the 
sea,” that is, Satan, the dragon. And it is he who 
summons the wild beast to rise up out of the waters, 
“having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his 
horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the names of 
blasphemy.” This is imperial Rome revived, as the 
ten crowns declare. 

After the death of the Lord Jesus Christ the 
Roman Empire continued in existence for something 
like 500 years, though divided into the Eastern and 
Western parts, which till the end of its history held 
together more or less loosely. It was finally de- 
stroyed by the invaders from the North and the 
East. But though the Empire as such was broken 
in pieces, nevertheless Roman principles prevailed 
throughout the great part of Europe and became the 
basis of the civilization which we now know. Our 
American system of jurisprudence is founded upon 
that of Rome. In the recent world-war the Entente 
Allies, and America too, were all representatives of 
the old Roman Empire, with the exception, of course, 
of Japan, China, and other heathen nations. On 
the other side we saw the very same powers joined 
together (the Goths, Vandals and Huns), who, 


228 Lectures on the Revelation 


in the 4th, 5th and 6th centuries, hurled themselves 
upon the Roman Empire and destroyed it. It was a 
most singular thing surely, and almost unexplainable 
for those who do not read their Bibles, that in the 
2oth century the same great divisions were main- 
tained as in the closing days of Roman domination. 
But we may see from this how readily that Roman 
Empire will be revived through a great international 
movement —a confederation, offensive and defen- 
sive, of all the Latin or Latinized nations. One of 
the great agencies which shall have much to do in 
bringing this about will be the Roman Church, whose 
power is increasing continually, even in the very 
lands where the Reformation, at one time, would 
have made this impossible. 

It was the boast of the Roman conquerors that 
they never destroyed a civilization, but absorbed into 
their own great commonwealth everything that was 
best of the various nations which they subjugated. 
And we cannot but be reminded of this as we read 
the second verse: “ And the beast which I saw was 
like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a 
bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the 
dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great 
authority.’”’ Observe how,. in these few words, you 
have distinctly set forth the fact that the last phase 
of the Roman Empire will be linked up with all that 
has gone before. In Rome you have the leopard 


Federation of Nations (chap. 13: 1-107 229 


of Greece, the bear of Persia, and the lion of Baby- 
lon. Thus you have incorporated into this last great 
confederacy the chief elements of every civilization 
that has left a great mark upon the world. Every- 
thing that man has been able to build up, and has 
learned to value throughout the centuries, will be 
headed up in this final federation of nations. 

For it is not Rome as existing in John’s day 
merely which is in'view, but Rome as it will exist in 
the closing days of the dispensation, as is plain from 
the 3rd verse, if rightly understood: ‘ And I saw 
one of his heads as it were wounded to death; and 
his deadly wound was healed: and all the world won- 
dered after the beast.’”’ We shall find help in re- 
gard to the heads if we turn to chapter 17: 8-13. 
There we are told that the same beast is in view: 


“The beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and 
shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdi- 
tion: and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder, 
whose names were not written in the book of life from 
the foundation of the world, when they behold the beast 
that was, and is not, and yet is (or, shall be). Here is 
the mind which hath wisdom: The seven heads are 
seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth. And there 
(or, they) are seven kings: five are fallen, and one is, 
and the other is not yet come: and when he cometh, he 
must continue a short space. And the beast that was, 
and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and 
goeth into perdition. And the ten horns which thou 


230 Lectures on the Revelation 


sawest are ten kings, which have received no kingdom as 
yet; but receive power as kings one hour, with the beast. 
These have one mind, and shall give their power and 
strength unto the beast.” 


Now, in those brief words, you have a synopsis of 
the whole history of the Roman Empire. For some- 
thing like goo years it was the greatest earthly power 
men had to reckon with. But a time came when it 
could be truly said “ the beast is not.” It had been 
destroyed; its imperial head had been wounded to 
death. No man, for centuries, unenlightened by 
the Word of God, would have been bold enough to 
have predicted the return of imperial power to that 
fallen dominion; but Scripture had declared that it 
should come to pass; and while statesmen and carnal 
theorists have rejected what seemed to them a ridicu- 
lous assumption, students of prophecy, guided by the 
Spirit of God, have for nearly a century taught that 
the nations into which the Roman Empire had been 
divided should again come together under one head; 
and he would be a bold man to-day who would deny 
the likelihood of this very thing. But when states- 
men talk of a coming world federation, how little 
they realize who it is who is going to bring this 
about. The Beast is to ascend out of the abyss; for 
it is Satanic power that will bring into existence 
what is here pictured. It will be the devil’s last ef- 
fort to make men believe that they do not need God’s 
Christ, that they can have peace and security while 


Federation of Nations (chap. 13: 1-10) 231 


the Prince of Peace is rejected. But God will blow 
upon all their plans, for He has said, “I will over- 
turn, overturn, overturn, until He shall come whose 
right it is.” 

But now notice two interpretations of the seven 
heads. Weare told they are seven mountains, upon 
which the woman sitteth, and they “ are seven kings; 
five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet 
come; and when he cometh he must continue a short 
space. And the beast that was, and is not, even he is 
the eighth, and is of the seven, and goeth into per- 
dition.” 

The seven mountains have generally been taken as 
meaning the seven hills upon which the imperial 
city is built. I am inclined to think this is correct, 
even though some would refuse the idea from the 
fact that the hills themselves are not in any sense 
mountainous in character; but the very fact that it 
was the delight of the Romans to speak of their cap- 
ital as the seven-hilled city, would, naturally, bring 
this city to mind to any one who read John’s de- 
scription. 

As to the second interpretation, a king is the fa- 
miliar symbol for a form of government. Livy, the 
Roman historian, shows us that Rome had passed 
through five very distinct forms of government prior 
to John’s day. The sixth, which was in existence in 
John’s time, was the imperial. That was the form 
which was destreved. and I am persuaded that this 


232 Lectures on the Revelation 


was the head wounded to death, of our chapter. 
But that deadly wound is to be healed, for the impe- 
rial form is to be restored, but under altogether dif- 
ferent conditions, making it distinctly the seventh. 
For ten nations, all banding themselves together, will 
elect one of their number as the head of the confed- 
eracy. This man is distinctly called “the Beast.” 
It reminds us of Louis XIV, who said, ‘‘ I am the 
State.” This Beast will continue to exercise author- 
ity, as the elected head, for but a short time, when he 
will throw off all restraint (as did Napoleon, elected 
as first consul, and later declaring himself emperor), 
thus bringing about the eighth form, which is of the 
seventh. 

So spectacular will be his coup d’état that men 
will be thrilled with admiration at his masterly gen- 
ius; and, accepting the principle that nothing but an 
imperial form of government can give them settled 
and continuous peace, they will readily acknowledge 
his pretensions, and in doing so will worship the 
dragon which gave power unto the Beast, and do 
homage to the Beast himself, saying, “ Who is like 
unto the Beast; who is able to make war with him? ” 
I think God has given us a wonderful illustration of 
this very thing in the history of Napoleon Bona- 
parte, as mentioned above. Think of this Corsican, 
low born, utterly insignificant, first coming into no- 
tice as a Second Lieutenant in the revolutionary 
army. Suddenly, after the bloody reign of terror, 


Federation of Nations (chap. 13: I-10) 233 


emerging from his former obscure place, and becom- 
ing the central figure of the world in that day. 
Elected by an overwhelming majority as First Con- 
sul of France, proclaiming himself Imperator, daz- 
zling all France and the world for a time, and ending 
_ his course on the isle of St. Helena. 

A greater than Napoleon shall yet arise out of the 
chaotic conditions which will prevail in Europe, after 
the church has been'taken home. He will be a man 
of marvelous appearance and transcendant ability, 
wholly given up to Satan. He will be the great civil 
leader of the last days — the man who will have the 
final word in all matters, religious as well. All the 
civilized earth will wonder after him, do homage tc 
him and his hidden master, the devil. In his pride 
and his folly he will speak great and blasphemous 
things against God. He will doubtless consider 
himself the man of destiny whom no power, human 
or divine, can overthrow. But the God whom he 
denies has limited his sway, for power will be given 
him only “ to continue forty and two months ”’; that 
is, for three and a half years, the last half of Daniel’s 
7oth week, he will be in authority over the prophetic 
earth. During that time he will open his mouth in 
plasphemy against God, and blaspheme His name 
and His tabernacle, and all that dwell in heaven, 
namely, the saints who will have been caught up at 
the rapture. With saints on earth, the faithful in 
God’s restored Israel, he will make war and over- 


234 Lectures on the Revelation 


come them, power being given him over all countries, 
and tongues, and nations. 

This then is the manner in which the dragon will 
attempt the destruction of the remnant of the wom- 
an’s seed. His effort will be to completely root out 
everything that is of God in the earth; and in order 
to do this he will have a trusty lieutenant dwelling 
in the land of Palestine itself, who will uphold him 
in all his nefarious plans, but of this assistant I can- 
not speak to-night. We will be occupied with him 
in our next lecture. 

There can be no question, I think, that the days 
of the Beast are the days referred to by our Jord 
Jesus Christ, when He says that if it were possible 
the very elect would be deceived. But, thank God, 
He will preserve His own, even in that dreadful day, 
so we learn from verse 8 that none will be deceived 
by him, nor do homage to him, but “ those whose 
names are not written in the book of life from the 
foundation of the world.’ How solemn the chal- 
lenge of the oth and roth verses of our 13th chapter 
in this connection: ‘If any man have an ear, let 
him hear. He that leadeth into captivity shall go 
into captivity : he that killeth with the sword must be 
killed with the sword. Here is the patience and the 
faith of the saints.” These will be the days of the 
Great Tribulation, which, in all its intensity, will be 
directed against Israel. But the Lord will be watch- 
ing over His little flock, and, scattered as they will 


Federation of Nations (chap. 13: 1-10) 235 


be among the heathen, He will be to them a little 
sanctuary in every place that they may wander. 

Only those who have exchanged the heavenly hope 
for an earthly one will be deceived by this great 
leader. He is the coming man for whom the world 
is waiting. Mistaken and blinded statesmen will 
hail him as the head of the nations, the one who will 
solve the problems — social, political and economic 
—— that are now disturbing the world. How blessed 
to be warned by God Himself of all these things be- 
forehand, that we may walk apart from everything 
that savors of that day of reproach and blasphemy. 
And when it actually comes, who can question the 
value of this present scripture for the guidance and 
consolation of God’s earthly people Israel, who oth- 
erwise might well be in despair at the apparent defeat 
of righteousness and the triumph of iniquity. 

But “ the triumphing of the wicked is short,” and 
“the man of the earth” will be destroyed in due 
time, while faith will have its reward when the Lord 
appears from heaven to take vengeance on all who 
dare lift up their bloody hands against His afflicted 
people. “Here is the patience and faith of the 


saints.” 


LECTUREXY 
THE PERSONAL ANTICHRIST 
(Chapter 13: 11-18) 


HE world is waiting for an authoritative re- 
ligious leader. In anage of doubt and uncer- 

tainty men are longing for one who can speak a final 
word on all the ethical, religious, and political ques- 
tions which to-day trouble so many. Instructed 
Christians know that God has already spoken au- 
thoritatively in the person of His Son, and revealed 
His mind in His holy Word; but they, too, are look- 
ing for a coming One, even the coming of the Lord 
Jesus Christ from glory to establish heaven’s author- 
ity and power on the earth. He will descend from 
heaven, and with all His glorified saints will reign 
over the earth for a thousand years of peace and 
blessing. ‘‘ The coming man,” for whom unbeliev- 
ers look, is one whom they expect to be born on the 
earth —a man of the earth, earthy, therefore not 
the Lord from heaven. This expectation is to have 
its fulfilment in “ the man of sin,” the personal Anti- 
christ, the false Messiah, who will soon be mani- 


fested. In fact, it is a very solemn consideration 
236 


The Personal Antichrist (chap.13:11-18) 237 


that he may already be in this world—perhaps a 
babe in arms—possibly a precocious youth—not 
improbably a man of affairs! But he will not be 
made known until after the church of the first- 
born has been raptured at the presence of the 
Lord. 

The remarkable thing is that many are waiting 
expectantly for the Antichrist who imagine they 
are looking for a reincarnation of Christ Himself. 
They profess to wait for a saviour, and expect 
him to appear on earth, born after the course of 
nature. Theosophists and others are expectantly 
waiting for a great world-teacher, despite the 
disappointment of Mrs. Besant’s Order of the 
Star of the East, whose puppet Krishnamurti has 
fallen so far short of their hopes. They are 
really preparing the world for the advent of the 
man of sin, the son of perdition. 

To be forewarned is to be forearmed: God’s 
holy Word has predicted the coming of this false 
one, and has clearly shown what will lead up to 
his manifestation. I desire to look into the Word 
with you on this subject to-night, in connection 
with the passage we have read. 

No Spirit-taught Bible student can fail to 
observe the shadow of the Antichrist falling 
athwart many pages of prophecy. “Ye have 
heard,” writes the apostle of John, “that Anti- 
christ shall come.” The only question that 
troubles many has to do with the identifica- 
tion of the person or thing referred to. 


238 Lectures on the Revelation 


Is the Antichrist a person or a system? Many 
weighty names could be quoted in favor of either 
view, but, in order that our faith may not stand in 
the wisdom of men, but in the power of God in this 
matter, as in all else, we desire to be guided by the 
written Word. But before turning to a number of 
definite scriptures, let me remind you of this blessed 
fact: Christ is a person—a glorified, holy, all- 
powerful person — one of the eternal Trinity, Who 
has taken humanity into union with Deity through 
being born on earth of a virgin, where He humbled 
Himself as man to the death of the cross. Logically 
one would expect that the Antichrist would also be a 
man, a definite personality, opposed to the Lord 
Jesus Christ, yet claiming to be all that He was 
— usurping the place of Christ. 

But we would not forget that there is in the world 
a body united to Christ of which He is the glorified 
Head. There is also a great apostate system op- 
posed to this divine one; falsely claiming to be the 
spouse of Christ, and the only authorized custodian 
of the mysteries of God. Is this system the Anti- 
christ, or is it rather Babylon the Great, the anti- 
church? I think we shall see as we go on that the 
latter view is the correct one. 

The prophetic scriptures outline two great re- 
ligious deceptions ; a false Christ, and a false church: 
but the one is not to be confounded with the other. 
The Antichrist will be a man, as the Christ of God is 


The Personal Antichrist (chap. 13: 11-18) 239 


a Man. Babylon is a vast organized system, even 
as the church of God is a divine organization. But 
the one is a Satanic counterfeit of the other. 

When the voice of prophecy speaks of the Anti- 
christ, the masculine pronoun “he” is used. 
When it speaks of the false church it uses either the 
neuter or the feminine, “ it’ or “she.’’ There is 
good reason for this. The Antichrist is the final 
head of the apostate system, which bears the same 
relationship to him, in an outward way, that the 
church does to Christ. Ever since the primeval 
promise of the Seed of the woman, who was to 
bruise the serpent’s head, men have looked and 
longed for a deliverer to arise from among them- 
selves. Such an expectation was grounded upon 
Scripture, and was fulfilled in the birth of Christ. 
But since He has been rejected, this expectation has 
become a perversion of the truth; for the God-sent 
deliverer, ‘ the woman’s Seed,” has been caught up 
to God, and to His throne. It is the serpent’s seed 
who is coming (the Anti-Curist), and they who 
wait for him realize it not! The serpent has for 
millenniums been the symbol of esoteric religion, 
which stands for wisdom, and the coming one will 
claim to be the wisdom of God. Esoteric religion, 
I may say, is the religion par excellence of the Anti- 
christ. 

A man then is being waited for. His advent 
draws near. He will come when, at last, the re- 


240 Lectures on the Revelation 


straining power, the Holy Spirit, has gone up to the 
heavens whence He came. This coming one is the 
Grand Monarch of the New Humanity cult. He is 
the coming Imaum, or Mahdi, of the Mussulmans. 
He is the long-expected last incarnation of Vishnu 
waited for by the Brahmins; the coming Mon- 
tezuma of the Aztecs; the false Messiah of the 
apostate Jews; the great Master of all sects of 
Yogis; the Ultimate Man of the evolutionists; the 
Uebermensch of Nietzsche, the Hun philosopher, 
whose ravings prepared the way for the world war. 
He will be a Satan-controlled, God-defying, con- 
scienceless, almost super-human, man — an individ- 
ual whose manifestation will mean the consumma- 
tion of the present apostasy, and the full deification 
of humanity to his bewildered dupes. 

Thus the world will turn away from the Christ 
of God and stretch out eager hands to welcome the 
coming “Man of Sin.” And, depend upon it, he 
will be on time! God’s Word has declared his ad- 
vent as surely as it predicts the second coming of 
the Lord Jesus Christ from glory. 

Meantime the great antichurch (the evil system 
that is but a counterfeit of the true church for which 
Christ died) is casting overboard every truth of 
Scripture, and follows the lies that shall prepare 
them to receive “the liar” of whom 1 John 2:22 
speaks — the Antichrist. ‘‘ Whosoever loveth and 
maketh a lie shall have his part in the lake that 


The Personal Antichrist (chap. 13: 11-18) 241 


burneth with fire and brimstone,” is the unalterable 
decree of the God of truth. That none here may 
be entangled in this awful iniquity is my sincere de- 
sire, and, in order to preserve from it, I earnestly 
ask your attention to a number of scriptures. 

The most complete description of Antichrist is 
found in Daniel 11: 36-45. 


“ And the king shall do according to his will; and he 
shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every 
god, and shall speak marvellous things against the God 
of gods, and shall prosper till the indignation be accom- 
plished: for that that is determined shall be done. Neither 
shall he regard the God of his fathers, nor the desire 
of women, nor regard any god: for he shall magnify 
himself above all. But in his estate shall he honor the 
God of forces: and a god whom his fathers knew not 
shall he honor with gold, and silver, and with precious 
stones, and pleasant things. Thus shall he do in the most 
strong holds with a strange god, whom he shall acknowl- 
edge and increase with glory: and he shall cause them 
to rule over many, and shall divide the land for gain. 
And at the time of the end shall the king of the south 
push at him: and the king of the north shall come against 
him like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, 
and with many ships; and he shall enter into the coun- 
tries, and shall overflow and pass over. He shall enter 
also into the glorious land, and many countries shall be 
overthrown: but these shall escape out of his hand, 
even Edom and Moab, and the chief of the children of 
Ammon. He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the 
countries: and the land of Egypt shail not escape. But 
he shall have power over the treasures of gold and of 


242 Lectures on the Revelation 


silver, and over all the precious things of Egypt: and the 
Libyans and the Ethiopians shall be at his steps. But 
tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble 
him: therefore he shall go forth with great fury to de- 
stroy, and utterly to make away many. And he shall 
plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas in the 
glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to his end, 
and none shall help him.” 


Notice that here it is predicted that a king will arise 
in Jerusalem who will be an utter atheist, and yet, 
evidently, a Jew; for it is distinctly predicted of him 
that ‘‘ he shall not regard the God of his fathers, nor 
the desire of women.” The expression “the God 
of his fathers ” can mean nothing else than the God 
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. It is frequently so 
used in Scripture; whereas the expression “the de- 
sire of women”’ is recognized by both Jewish and 
Christian expositors as referring to the Messiah. 
This point is, I think, very important, for the Anti- 
christ could not be the false Messiah if he were not a 
Jew, as otherwise he would have no claim upon the 
allegiance of Israel. He will, I take it, be a great 
Jewish leader, who will seem, at first, to be a won- 
derful lover of his people, and who will establish 
them in their own land. But he will soon throw off 
all restraint; and, exalting himself, will magnify 
himself against every god, and speak marvelous 
things against the God of gods during the last three 
and a half years of Daniel’s 70th week which we 


The Personal Antichrist (chap. 13: 11-18) 243 


have had so constantly before us in our study of the 

book of Revelation. This passage connects so inti- 
mately with the portion we have read to-night that I 
want you to notice the two in comparison. In Reve- 
lation 13:11 we read: “I beheld another beast 
coming up out of the earth, and he had two horns 
like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon.” Observe he 
does not arise from the Gentile nations as does the 
first Beast, but he comes up out of the earth, or 
land, that is, the land of Palestine, the very same 
land in which the king, in Daniel chap. 11, is to be 
manifested. He had “two horns like a lamb,” for 
he seems, at first, to have both the meekness and 
strength of the Lamb of God, but his dragon-like 
speech betrays him. It is the speech of self-exalta- 
tion, which indicates that his condemnation is the 
same as that of his master, the devil, who fell 
through pride. 

Now Daniel tells us that though the wilful king 
will not regard any supernatural god, yet he will 
honor one who is called “ the god of forces ”— evi- 
dently a man, for he is one to whom he pays tribute: 
“a god whom his fathers knew not shall he honor 
with gold, and silver, and precious stones, and pleas- 
ant things.” This mighty one will be the backer, if 
I may say so, of the Antichrist, and, in return for 
his protection, he will cause Palestine to submit to 
his authority, and pay tribute to him. Thus “a 
strange god shall he acknowledge and increase with 


244 Lectures on the Revelation 


glory, and shall cause him to rule over many, and 
divide the land for gain.”” Now this same thing is 
implied in the 12th verse of our chapter: ‘‘ And he 
exerciseth all the power of the first beast before him, 
and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein 
to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was 
healed.” He is, you see, the vicegerent of the first 
Beast; and this first Beast, whom the world recog- 
nizes as a god (in the sense, of course, in which it 
recognized the Czsars of old as gods), is the mas- 
ter whom he enriches with Jewish wealth. 

But he is not only an astute statesman, a crafty 
politician, but a wonder-worker as well, as the 13th 
and 14th verses tell us: 


“And he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire 
come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of 
men, and deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the 
means of those miracles which he had power to do in 
the sight of the beast; saying to them that dwell on the 
earth, that they should make an image to the beast, which 
had the wound by a sword, and did live.” 


With this agrees the striking account of “ the law- 
less one” in 2nd Thess. 2: 3-12: 


“Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day 
shall not come, except there come a falling away first, 
and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition; 
who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is 
called God, or that is worshiped; so that he, as God, 
sitteth in the temple of God showing himself that he 


The Personal Antichrist (chap. 13: 11-18) 245 


is God ... even him, whose coming is after the work- 
ing of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders, 
and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them 
that perish; because they received not the love of the 
truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God 
shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe 
a lie: that they all might be damned-who believed not the 
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.” 


Here is a prediction of the coming of the atheist 
king of Daniel 11, and the wonder-worker of Rev- 
elation 13. 

One of the signs of the times in our own days is 
the unhealthy craving for marvels and wonders, 
which is so prevalent in many quarters. It is a most 
dangerous condition of mind, and Christians might 
well beware of anything of the kind. We are too 
near the end of the dispensation to expect divine 
miracles in any number; but Satanic signs and won- 
ders will increase, as we draw nearer the end, and, 
when the Antichrist himself appears, he will give 
men all the marvels for which they long — only to 
deceive them, and to lead them to accept his un- 
godly pretensions. 

Just exactly what is meant by the “image ”’ of the 
Beast, I do not pretend to say. I have no doubt it 
is linked with our Lord’s warning as to “ the abom- 
ination of desolation ”’ that is to be set up in the holy 
place. At any rate, it will be the culmination of 
the apostasy, and will be the signal for all believing 


246 Lectures on the Revelation 


Jews, who in that day of great persecution cleave to 
the Lord, to flee from Jerusalem, and hide them- 
selves in distant parts among the nations, until the 
appearing of the Messiah Himself. We are told 
that the lamblike Beast will give life to the image, 
and it will speak, and cause “that as many that 
would not worship the image of the Beast should 
be killed.” A great society will be formed of apos- 
tate Jews and apostate Gentiles, which will be pat- 
terned somewhat after our present-day labor unions, 
and oath-bound organizations. This is intimated in 
verses 16 and 17: “ And he causeth all, both small 
and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive 
a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads: 
and that no man might buy or sell, save he that had 
the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of 
his name.” It is well for Christians in this present 
time that they keep themselves from all such worldly 
associations and unequal yokes. 

Our Lord Jesus told the Jews of His day, “I am 
come in my Father’s name, and ye receive me not; 
if another shall come in his own name, him ye will 
receive’? (John 5:43). He was speaking of this 
awful person whom we have seen portrayed in these 
various scriptures. With them we might also link 
Zechariah 11:16, 17: “For, lo, I will raise up a 
shepherd in the land,” (note this, he will arise in the 
land of Palestine) “ which shall not visit those that 
be cut off, neither shall seek the young one, nor 


The Personal Antichrist (chap. 13: 11-18) 247 


heal that that is broken, nor feed that that standeth 
still: but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear 
their claws in pieces. Woe to the idol shepherd that 
leaveth the flock! the sword shall be upon his arm, 
and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried 
up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.” 
This idol shepherd is put in contrast to the Good 
Shepherd whom Zechariah was to impersonate or 
represent, as described in the first part of the same 
chapter, who was sold for thirty pieces of silver. 
This part of the prophecy has been literally fulfilled, 
and we may be certain that the rest will all come to 
pass in due time. 

For this idol shepherd the Jews are even now 
waiting, though they little realize it. At a Zionist 
Congress, some years before the recent war, Max 
Nordau declared, according to the published reports, 
“We are ready to welcome any man as our Messiah 
who will lead us back to our own land and establish 
us there in prosperity.”” Max Nordau is a so-called 
reformed Jew, who has given up the Messianic 
hope as set forth in the Holy Scriptures. But only 
recently, when Dr. Mosinsohn, of the Hebrew Col- 
lege of Jaffa, was touring America in the interests of 
the same Zionist movement, I had the privilege of 
hearing him give an address at the University of 
California. In the course of his remarks he said, 
“ Think of all the great religious leaders who have 
come out of the East. Moses arose in the East; 


248 Lectures on the Revelation 


Buddha, Confucius, Jesus and Mahomet all arose 
in the East. And we say to you people of the West, 
with confidence, that if you will restore the Jew to 
his ancestral home it will not be long until we will 
give you another great religious leader who will per- 
haps transcend all who have gone before.” <A 
Christian physician and I, who had gone there to- 
gether, looked at one another in amazement. We 
felt that we were listening to a John-the-Baptist of 
the Antichrist, so startling was the announcement. 
And with the light that the prophetic word throws 
upon the now very near future, who can doubt that 
this Hebrew leader’s declaration will indeed seem to 
an unbelieving world to be fulfilled in the wilful 
one who is to be raised up in the land of Palestine, 
and who will be acknowledged by apostate Judaism 
and apostate Christendom alike as the Christ — the 
coming man. Toward this awful end all modern 
cults and isms are tending, and when the personal 
presence of the Holy Spirit has been withdrawn 
from the earth, his manifestation will not long be 
withheld. 

I know that the Reformers, and many moderns, 
have considered the papacy to be the fulfilment of 
the prophecies we have been considering; and I do 
not wonder at this, for that unholy system is one of 
the most amazing counterfeits of what is of God 
that the world has ever seen; but it certainly does 
not meet all the requirements of the case, though it is 


The Personal Antichrist (chap. 13: 11-18) 249 


undoubtedly one of the “many antichrists” of 
which the apostle John writes, when forewarning us 
of “ the Antichrist ”’ whose coming is still future. 

I would direct your attention to six things pre- 
dicted of this false one which have never been true 
of the papacy, and, it seems to me, are never likely 
to be. 

First: The Antichrist must be a Jew, otherwise 
he would not be owned by Israel as their Messiah. 

Second: He is to rise up in the land of Palestine, 
not in Italy; in Jerusalem, not in Rome. 

Third: He is to be subject to, and in league with, 
the civil power ; not dominating it, as the papacy did 
for centuries. 

Fourth: He is to be acknowledged by the mass of 
the Jews as their king and religious leader, and it is 
well-known that the Jews have never owned the pre- 
tensions of the popes. 

Fifth: He is to be the patron of Israel, whereas 
the Romish church has ever been their persecutor. 

Sixth: He is not to be manifested until after 
the hindering Holy Spirit shall be removed, and that 
will only be when He goes up with the church at the 
return of the Lord Jesus Christ for His people, be- 
fore the hour of judgment strikes for this godless 
world where the Word of God, the Christ of God, 
the Spirit of God, and the church of God have all 
been rejected. 

There are other systems equally antichristian with 


250 Lectures on the Revelation 


the papacy, but none of them answer to the above re- 
quirements; therefore none of them are to be con- 
founded with the personal Antichrist who is yet to 
arise and delude for a time those “ who refused the 
love of the truth that they might be saved.” The 
many antichrists are but preparing the way for this 
incarnation of iniquity; and the avidity with which 
men and women drink in their evil teachings may 
give us some idea of how easy a thing it will be for 
the false Messiah to establish his claims. 

Some would ridicule the thought of vast numbers 
responding to such monstrous pretensions, but we 
need to remember that God Himself is going “to 
give them up,” in retributive judgment, “ to believe 
the} lie,’ because they would not have His truth. 
And, in our own day, how easily have deceivers like 
Mrs. Mary Baker Patterson Glover Eddy, Mrs. El- 
len G. White, Madame Blavatsky, Annie Besant, 
Katherine Tingley, John Alexander “ Elijah” 
Dowie, and other charlatans, not to speak of Rome 
itself, been able to enslave the minds and consciences 
of vast multitudes of people who refuse the simple 
truth of the Word of God; and, mark you, all this 
with the Holy Spirit still in the world, waiting to 
guide into all truth every honest soul who is will- 
ing to be led by Him and taught through the Word! 


1in the original it is the definite article —“ the lie,” t.e., the 
lie of the Antichrist. 


The Personal Antichrist (chap. +3: 11-78) 251 


How much easier will it be for error to assert itself 
when He is no longer here! 

But time presses, and it is necessary that I briefly 
touch on the last verse of our chapter. 

I know that many of you will be anxious to have 
me attempt to expound this verse, and tell you 
plainly what is meant by its mystic number. “ Here 
is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count 
the number of the. beast: for it is the number of a 
man; and his number is Six hundred three score and 
six.” All I can say is that six is the number of man, 
and three of manifestation. In these three sixes I 
see the full manifestation of what is in the heart of 
man— man’s last effort to attain to divinity and 
deity, to rob God of His glory and to exalt him- 
self. But, undoubtedly, when the Antichrist actu- 
ally appears, and the first Beast is manifested, the 
meaning will be so plain that every one who turns 
to God in that day will be warned thereby to “ have 
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of dark- 
ness,” but will cleave to the Lord all the more ear- 
nestly because they know that the end has drawn so 
nigh. Guesses as to the meaning of 666 have been 
innumerable; I shall not add another. 

And in closing, I would again remind my hearers, 
that time for us also is flying quickly by. If any of 
you are unsaved, it is well for you to remember that 
mercy’s day is quickly gone. Gospel light already 


252 Lectures on the Revelation 


seems to be vanishing from the earth; the darkening 
apostasy is making rapid strides; a famine for hear- 
ing the Word of the Lord will soon be here. Oh, 
that now, in this day of grace, men would heed the 
testimony of the Scripture of truth, receive the vir- 
gin-born Son of God as Saviour and Lord, and 
spurn the lies of every antichrist. 


“Oh earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord! ” 
“Hear, and your soul shall live.” 


“He that heareth my word, and believeth Him 
that sent Me, hath everlasting life, and cometh not 
unto judgment, but is passed from death unto life.” 


LECTURE XVI 
THE HARVEST AND VINTAGE 
(Chapter 14) 


HIS 14th chapter forms a distinct section of 

the Book. It consists of one vision divided 

into six parts, and evidently has to do with the clos- 
ing up of the Great Tribulation and the introduc- 
tion of the kingdom. It is as though God would 
give to John, and to us, a heartening view of the con- 
summation, ere depicting the closing trials in detail 
which will occupy the last half of the tribulation 


period. 
The first part of the vision is that of the Lamb on 


Mt. Sion. John tells us, 


“ And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount 
Sion, and with him a hundred and forty and four thou- 
sand, having his Father’s name written in their foreheads. 
And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many 
waters, and as the voice of a great thunder; and I heard 
the voice of harpers harping with their harps: and they 
sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before 
the four living ones, and the elders: and no man could 
learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thou- 
sand, which were redeemed from the earth. These are 

253 


254 Lectures on the Revelation 


they which were not defiled with women; for they are 
virgins. These are they which follow the Lamb whither- 
soever He goeth. These were redeemed from among 
men, being the firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb. 
And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are 
without fault before the throne of God” (14: 1-5). 


This is a beautiful little prophetic picture, quite 
complete in itself. It sets forth that which is to 
take place after the desolations of Israel are ended, 
and the glory is dawning in the land where Jesus 
lived and died and rose again, and to which He is 
coming back in person. 

Observe, to begin with, that Mt. Sion is on the 
earth. The vision has to do with the return of the 
Lamb to the city that once rejected Him. It isa 
very common thing for Bible readers to spiritualize 
the various localities mentioned in the Bible. Thus 
Jerusalem, Mt. Sion, and Israel are all made to 
mean the church, or possibly, even heaven itself, 
whereas they have no such application. When God 
says Israel, He means Israel. When He speaks of 
Jerusalem He does not intend us to understand that 
either heaven or the church is in view; and Mt. Sion 
is that Mt. Sion which David first set apart to God, 
and is a distinct locality to this day in the land of 
Palestine, within the limits of the city of Jerusalem. 
It is a place on earth, not in heaven, and there the 
Lord Jesus Christ is going to gather the Israelitish 
remnant to Himself, when He comes to set up His 


The Harvest and Vintage (chap.14) 255 


kingdom. For, although many have taught the con- 
trary, I have no question in my own mind but that 
the 144,000 of this chapter are the very same as the 
sealed 144,000 of chapter 7. In the earlier chapter 
John saw them sealed before the Great Tribulation 
began; God had pledged Himself to protect them. 
No matter how vindictively their enemies might as- 
sail them, He had set His own mark upon them, and 
He had promised to bring them safely through those 
tempestuous and difficult days. Now, in chapter 14, 
we see that same company gathered about the Lamb 
on Mt. Sion, the firstfruits of the kingdom age. 
The Lord reveals His Father's Name to them; 
the seal of the living God upon their foreheads is, in 
fact, this blessed revelation. They know God as 
Father, and rejoice in His protecting care and tender 
love. In heaven there are those who rejoice with 
them in a very special way, and these are distin- 
guished from the elders, who represent, as we have 
already seen, the entire priestly company caught up 
at the rapture. But, as the Great Tribulation goes 
on, Jewish believers, who will be martyred because 
of their faith, will also join that heavenly throng. 
and so we are told that John heard “‘a voice from 
heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the 
voice of a great thunder; the voice of harpers harp- 
ing with their harps.” These “sing, as it were, a 
new song before the throne, and before the living 
ones and the eiders, and no man could learn that song 


256 Lectures on the Revelatios 


but the hundred and forty and four thousand, whicy 
were redeemed from the earth.” These in heaven 
and those on earth will have passed through the same 
experiences in measure. There will be a sympa- 
thetic cord struck, to which both respond. The new 
song is, of course, here, as elsewhere, the song of re- 
demption. 

The company on Mt. Sion are next described as 
undefiled, a virgin band, who have kept themselves 
from the uncleanness everywhere prevailing in those 
fearful days. It is to be their hallowed privilege to 
follow the Lamb wherever He goes, for they are de- 
scribed as being redeemed from among men, being 
the firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb. Thus we 
have a firstfruits of the kingdom age, even as our 
Lord Himself is described as the firstfruits of the 
present dispensation, and His church, associated 
with Him, is ‘‘a kind of firstfruits of His crea- 
tures.”’ 

The blessing of Psalm 32 pronounced upon the 
man in whom is no guile, the blessing that our Lord 
pronounced upon Nathanael, is the portion of this 
special company. A guileless man is not a sinless 
man; he is one who has nothing to hide. When sin 
is all confessed and judged in the presence of God, 
guile is absent. And so this guileless company are 
described as without fault before the throne of God; 
not, indeed, that they appear there in any righteous- 
ness of their own, but saved by the same precious 


The Harvest and Vintage (chap.14) 257 


blood that to-day makes faultless every believer in 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 

The second section is that of the everlasting gos- 
pel, as recorded in verses 6 and 7. 


“And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, 
having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that 
dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, 
and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear 
God, and give glory to Him; for the hour of his judgment 
is come: and worship Him that made heaven, and earth, 
and the sea, and the fountains of waters.” 


This everlasting gospel is not to be distinguished 
from the gospel that has been proclaimed throughout 
the centuries. In truth, the very fact that it is called 
“everlasting” shows that it is identical with the 
gospel as proclaimed from the beginning. It is the 
good news, of all the ages, that God is sovereign, and 
man’s happiness consists in recognizing His author- 
ity. To this blessed fact is added, in the present 
dispensation, the full truth of the gospel of the grace 
of God. The gospel of the kingdom is but another 
aspect of this same news from heaven, emphasizing 
particularly the Lordship of Christ. There can only 
be one gospel, for the apostle tells us, “ Though we, 
or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel 
unto you, than that which we have preached unto 
you, let him be accursed.” But that one gospel has 
different phases. In the epistle to the Galatians 
Paul speaks of “the gospel of the circumcision ” 


258 Lectures on the Revelation 


and the “ gospel of the uncircumcision ’"— the same 
gospel, but presented in one way to the Jews and 
another to the Gentiles. When the Lord was here 
on earth ministering, as also was John the Baptist, 
they preached the gospel of the kingdom; but men 
rejected the kingdom, and so, for the time being, the 
kingdom is in abeyance. This is the day of the 
church. 

The Son of Man is likened unto a man who has 
gone into a far country to receive for himself a 
kingdom, and to return. When the word is given by 
the Father He will descend to take the kingdom; to 
be proclaimed as King of kings, and Lord of lords. 
Throughout the present dispensation He is taking 
out from among both Jews and Gentiles all who be- 
lieve on His name, and unites them into the one 
body, the church. After the church has gone, there 
will not be a Christian left on earth. Then it is that 
God is going to commence again to work among the 
Jews, and will send them out to preach the gospel 
of the kingdom unto the ends of the earth. Finally, 
we have the very last phase of that gospel, im- 
mediately preceding His coming. It is the final 
call for the guilty nations to prostrate themselves in 
the dust, and pay homage to their Creator. It is 
mercy indeed, to God’s creatures everywhere, that 
in that hour of judgment, before the last blow falls, 
the call will still go forth to men everywhere to own 
the claims of the Omnipotent One whose mercies 


The Harvest and Vintage (chap.14) 259 


have been rejected so long. We do not hear, how- 
ever, of any response, at least not in this chapter, 
but Scripture elsewhere warrants the thought that 
many, who had never previously heard and rejected 
the gospel, will, in that day, open their hearts to the 
message and repent, and thus be led to welcome the 
King. 

The third section of the vision is that of verse 8: 


“And there followed another angel, saying, Babylon 
is fallen, is fallen, that great city, because she made all 
nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.” 


Babylon is more fully described for us in chap- 
ters 17 and 18, but we have to defer any detailed ex- 
position of this subject until a later lecture, except to 
say that just as Babylon of old was the fountain- 
head of idolatry, so is mystic Babylon to-day the 
mother of all false religious teaching in Christianity. 
In the time of the end it will be headed up in one 
great false church — that worldly church, which has 
proved so unworthy and false to her Lord, is to be 
broken absolutely to pieces, to be utterly destroyed. 
I have no doubt that all over the world there will 
then be such scenes as are now going on in Russia, 
with men crying, ““ No God; no church.” 

I know that many religious leaders at the present 
time are very enthusiastic about what they call “ the 
reunion of Christendom,” but that reunion will 
simply be a great federation of Christless churches, 


260 Lectures on the Revelation 


forming the most powerful religious association 
that has ever been known in this world — 
Catholic, Greek, Protestant, and all other systems 
united into one — after the true believers have gone. 
For a time, this great institution will dominate every- 
thing, until men will say at last, “ What is the use 
of a church like this; why not destroy the whole 
thing and be done with it once and for all?’”” And 
so they will destroy it throughout the world, as they 
once destroyed it in France, and as they are now 
destroying it in Russia. 

Would that professed preachers of the gospel re- 
alized, ere it is too late, that, when men take up 
religion in which there is no real conversion, and 
which has no place for the work of the Holy Spirit, 
the whole thing will soon go on the rocks. In spite 
of the latitudinarianism of the times in which we 
live, it is still blessedly true that when faithful men 
preach the genuine old-time gospel of the grace of 
God in power, people are willing to go and hear. 
Speaking generally, even unsaved men and women 
have more respect for the old, old story of redeeming 
love than they have for these modern shams. When 
a man comes to the place where he no longer believes 
in the Bible, in the blood of Christ, in regeneration, 
he says to himself, “ What a fool I am, paying money 
to keep up the church. I had better pay it to a 
lodge or a club. I can get more out of something 
like that than I can get out of the church.” Have 


The Harvest and Vintage (chap.14) 261 


you ever noticed that Unitarianism has never been a 
financial success? Therefore when a preacher, in 
one of our orthodox churches comes to this, that 
he no longer believes in orthodoxy, you will observe 
that generally he holds on to his position in the or- 
thodox institution as long as he can. Loaves and 
fishes are commoner there, after all, than in the 
heretical systems that are languishing all about us. 
And so we can understand how it will be in the 
Great Tribulation. Babylon, for a while, will dom- 
inate everything. The head of the nations will be 
the head of the church. The Antichrist will be su- 
preme in religious matters; but when Babylon falls, 
what a tremendous smash-up there is going to be! 

The next section gives us the third angel’s mes- 
sage. We read in verses 9 to 13, 


“And the third angel followed them, saying with a 
loud voice, If any man worship the beast and his image, 
and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, 
the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, 
which is poured out without mixture into the cup éf his 
indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and 
brimstone in the presence of the hory angels, and in 
the presence of the Lamb: and the smoke of their torment 
ascendeth up for ever and ever: and they have no rest 
day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and 
whosoever receiveth the mark of his name. Here is the 
patience of the saints: here are they that keep the com- 
mandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. And I heard 
a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write. Blessed are 


262 Lectures on the Revelation 


the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, 
saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors; and 
their works do follow them.” 


What a solemn thing this is! A message from 
heaven declaring that those who turn away from 
the true God, who reject His Word, who instead 
worship the Beast and his image, will have to drink 
the very dregs of the cup of God’s wrath. 

I need not turn aside to animadvert upon the ab- 
surd interpretation given to this vision by the 
Seventh-Day Adventists. But they tell us that the 
third angel’s message is the Sabbath message, and 
that worshiping the Beast and receiving his mark 
consists in recognizing the holiness of the first day 
of the week. What can be the mental condition, 
not to speak of the moral state, of a man or woman 
who can conceive of a God of love and grace pour- 
ing out His wrath upon men because, with earnest 
desire to glorify Him, they keep the resurrection 
day, which from the earliest period of church history 
has been known as the Lord’s day? Surely, one 
must have lost all sense of moral values to advocate 
a theory so absurd, even though they were mistaken 
as to the proper day to hallow. But when one re- 
alizes that the judgment pronounced here is the doom 
of apostasy, for which, in retributive judgment, God 
will press the cup of His wrath to the lips of those 
who have refused the cup of salvation, all is per- 
fectly clear. Nor is there any evidence that that 


The Harvest and Vintage (chap.14) 263 


judgment will come to an end, for verse 11 dis- 
tinctly says, “The smoke of their torment ascend- 
eth up forever and ever: and they have no rest day 
nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and 
whosoever receiveth the mark of his name.” 

It will indeed require courage of a very high order 
to stand up against all that apostate condition, and 
firmly hold to the truth of God as then revealed. 
And so we are told in verse 12, “ Here is the pa- 
tience of the saints: here are they that keep the 
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.” 
This is strikingly in line with what we have been 
pointing out, that these converts will be Jewish be- 
lievers. They keep tie commandments of God, as 
made known in the Old Testament, and yet the faith 
of Jesus as declared in the New. Their part is not 
in the body of Christ: that glorious truth of the 
present dispensation is not for them, but they will 
have learned, at last, that Jesus is the promised 
Messiah, who was rejected by their nation when He 
came in grace, but coming again in mighty power; 
and so they will bring forth fruits meet for repent- 
ance, manifested by their pious, godly lives and de- 
sire to glorify the One their nation rejected. 

And now we come to a very striking word in 
verse 13. Notice that little word “ henceforth.” 
You have often heard this verse used in connection 
with funerals in the present dispensation, and I do 
not question that it may be so used, and very bless- 


264. Lectures on the Revelation 


edly too; but its full application refers to a coming 
day. A voice from heaven says, “ Blessed are the 
dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, 
saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors ; 
and their works do follow them.”’ The point, I take 
it, is this: the darkest part of the Great Tribulation 
is still before them. The storm-clouds, heavy with 
judgment, may break at any moment; but, imme- 
diately following, the kingdom is to be set up. 
Those who pass through the tribulation will enter 
into the kingdom on earth. Those who die during 
its course will have their part in the heavenly king- 
com, and so a special blessing will be theirs: in 
other words, from that point on it will really be 
better to die than to live. They will rest from 
their labors, be spared further tribulation on the 
earth, and shall have their place with their Lord in 
heaven, which will be far better than the highest 
place in the kingdom here on earth, glorious as that 
will be. 

And now let me press a question upon my hear- 
ers, whether saved or unsaved. You also must 
leave this scene shortly; what kind of works are 
going to follow you? If saved, what have you 
been doing for the Lord? If unsaved, oh then, I 
beg you remember, your sins will follow after you — 
those sins you have been trying to forget; those 
sins from which you have fled; those sins for which, 
in your folly, you thought you could atone by effort 


The Harvest and Vintage (chap.14) 265 


of your own. When you stand up, at last, poor, 
and naked, and miserable, before the great white 
throne, you will find all your sins there, and they 
will fasten upon you like the hell-hounds that they 
really are, and drag you down to the lake of fire. 
Do not, I beseech you, turn away from this solemn 
truth. The blood of Christ alone can wash you 
from all those sins, and then, as a believer in the 
Lord Jesus, you can live for Him in this scene, and 
your works will follow you to heaven, for all that 
is done for Christ will abide for eternity. 

The fifth part of the vision is that of the harvest, 
and a most solemn one it is, as recorded in verses 
14 to 16. 


“ And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon 
the cloud one sat like unto the Son of Man, having on 
his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle. 
And another angel came out of the temple, crying with 
a loud voice to Him that sat on the cloud, Thrust in thy 
sickle, and reap: for the time is come for Thee to reap: 
for the harvest of the earth is ripe. And He that sat 
on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth; and the 
earth was reaped.” 


You will remember that our Lord Jesus spoke 
about the harvest, and He declared that it is the end 
of the age, the time when the wicked are going to be 
separated from the just, when He is going to gather 
the wheat into His garner, but burn up the chaff with 
fire unquenchable. This is what you have here: it 


266 Lectures on the Revelation 


is discriminating judgment. The earth is reaped: 
everything that is of God, the Son of Man will claim 
for Himself; all that is contrary will be given up 
to judgment. Observe that it is the Son of Man 
who sits upon the cloud and directs the reapers. All 
judgment is committed unto the Son: the One who 
once hung on Calvary’s cross is the same blessed per- 
son who is coming to execute judgment. This is, I 
take it, the same, in nature, as the judgment in Matt. 
25. It is pre-millennial, and not, like the judgment 
of the great white throne, post-millennial. Jesus is 
coming back to the world that crucified Him, and 
He is going to gather for His kingdom, out of all 
nations, those who have heeded His message and 
cared for His messengers; but all who have heard 
His gospel, only to reject it, will be given up to 
judgment. 

The last part of the vision is that of the vintage. 
It is very different from the harvest, in that the 
harvest is, as we have just seen, discriminatory, 
while the vintage is unsparing judgment. 


“And another angel came out of the temple which is 
in heaven, he also having a sharp sickle. And another 
angel came out from the altar, which had power over 
fire; and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp 
sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the 
clusters of the vine of the earth; for her grapes are fully 
ripe. And the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, 
and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the 
great winepress of the wrath of God. And the wine- 


The Harvest and Vintage (chap.14) 267 


press was trodden without the city, and blood came out 
of the winepress, even unto the horse bridles, by the 
space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.” 


The vintage has to do with the vine —the vine 
of the earth — and this vine is apostate Israel. We 
are familiar with the figure, as used in regard to 
Israel in the Old Testament. Isaiah uses it, and in 
Hosea we hear the Lord saying, “ Israel is an empty 
vine, he bringeth forth fruit unto himself.” The 
same figure is used in psalms 80 and 81. When 
our Lord was here He could say, “I am the true 
vine.” He was the only one in Israel bearing good 
fruit; and all who accept His message become 
branches in the living vine. By and by, the vine 
is going to be replanted in Palestine. In fact, we 
may go further and say, The vine is being replanted 
in Palestine. The Jews are going back to their own 
land; it stirs one’s soul as Scripture is being ful- 
filled before our eyes. They are being replanted in 
their own vineyard, but replanted for what? For 
the vintage of the wrath of God. <A remnant will 
be gathered out, separated to the Lord, but the rest 
will be given up to unsparing judgment in the time 
of Jacob’s trouble. Fleshly Israel, the vine of the 
earth, can produce no fruit for God. But, in that 
day of great distress, the clusters of the vine of the 
earth will be cast into the great winepress of the 
wrath of God. And we are told the winepress was 
trodden without the city, and blood came out of the 


268 Lectures on the Revelation 


winepress, even unto the horse bridles, by the space 
of a thousand and six hundred furlongs. This is 
said to be the actual length of the land of Palestine. 
The picture is that of the entire land drenched in 
blood up to the horse bridles. What will the reality 
be? O Lord, how long? 

Thank God, there are brighter things ahead. In 
fact, the best days for Israel, and the whole earth, 
lie beyond that awful scene of wrath and carnage. 
But we need to remember that the people of the Jews 
brought their judgment upon their own heads by 
refusing the Prince of Peace when He came in grace 
to deliver them. In Pilate’s judgment hall they 
cried, “‘ His blood be on us and on our children.” 
How dreadfully has this fearful imprecation been 
answered by a just God the centuries bear witness. 
The scene depicted in these closing verses of the 
present chapter shows that a more dreadful fulfil- 
ment is yet in the future. Immanuel’s land, once 
stained with His own precious blood, will be red 
with the gore of those who reject Him, and who, 
even in that day, when their own Scriptures will be 
so marvelously fulfilled before their very eyes, will 
still refuse Him and own instead the unholy claims 
of the Antichrist. Of old, they chose Barabbas in 
place of Jesus which is called Christ. Unchanged 
in spirit to the very end, they will prefer the “son 
of perdition” to the Son of God, and thus bring 
upon themselves swift destruction. 


LECTURE XVII 
THE VIALS OF THE WRATH OF GOD 
(Chapters 15 and 16) 


T is my purpose this evening to go briefly over 
chapters 15 and 16, as these form one connected 
vision, depicting the final scenes of the dispensation 
of judgment which has been so largely occupying us 
in these addresses. We need to remember that the 
Revelation is primarily a book of judgment, and, 
_ while it may seem very pessimistic to be occupied 
_ with so many fearful scenes, all is bright at the end. 
The book does not close until the new heavens and 
new earth are brought in, wherein righteousness 
shall dwell throughout a blissful eternity. I need 
not apologize therefore for bringing so continually 
before you picture after picture of God’s judicial 
dealings with the prophetic earth. He has given 
us these revelations out of kindness to us, that we 
may be warned thereby to avoid what lies ahead of 
- this guilty world, and to shua every form of the 
apostasy which He is so soon coming to judge. 
The seven vials (more properly, bowls) of the 
wrath of God, with which the 16th chapter deals, 
are all included in the judgments of the last half of 
HQ 


270 Lectures on the Revelation 


the Great Tribulation. They show the intensive 
character that these judgments will take as the end 
draws on. I do not like to speak positively where I 
have no definite word of Scripture to guide, but it 
seems to me the series covers but a very brief period 
at the close of the last half of the week, thus set- 
ting forth the judgments that will fall upon the 
kingdom of the Beast and the sphere of the Anti- 
christ’s special sway, at the very end of the Great 
Tribulation. 

In our last address we noticed that there was one 
particular company of saints in heaven who re- 
sponded in a very noticeable manner to the 144,000 
Israelites standing on Mt. Sion. In the 15th chapter 
the scene is changed. The prophet sees what is go- 
ing on in heaven, and this company at once comes 
before his vision. He says, 


“And I saw another sign in heaven, great and mar- 
vellous, seven angels having the seven last plagues; for 
in them is filled up the wrath of God. And I saw as it 
were a Sea of glass mingled with fire: and them that had 
gotten the victory over the beast, and over the number 
of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harps 
of God. And they sing the song of Moses the servant 
of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and 
marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and 
true are thy ways, Thou King of saints” (vers. 1-3). 


This redeemed company standing on the sea of 
glass, having the harps of God, is not to be con- 


The Vials of God’s Wrath (chaps. 15,16) 271 


founded with the church of the present dispensa- 
tion. We are told that they sing the song of Moses 
the servant of God and the song of the Lamb. 
Clearly then, they are Israelites. They are singing 
the song of Moses, which is the celebration of Je- 
hovah’s victory over Israel’s foes, and the song of 
the Lamb, which is the song of redemption. They 
are those who have been slain by the servants of the 
last great apostate power, but who have been raised 
from the dead, and raptured during the tribulation 
period. They are, perhaps, identical with the two 
witnesses of chapter 11, though I do not press this. 
But they are at least like them in these particulars, 
they have been faithful witnesses on earth, and, be- 
cause of their witness-bearing, have been put to 
death. They are seen as raised from the dead and 
caught up to God and to His throne. Like the eld- 
ers, they have in their hands the harps of God, and 
are a worshiping company. 

These are said to stand upon the sea of glass, 
which is here represented as mingled with fire. The 
sea of glass, as pointed out in a previous lecture, an- 
swers to the brazen sea in Solomon’s temple, and 
the brazen laver in the court of the tabernacle. It is 
the type of the Word of God, needed for cleansing 
here ; in heaven, crystallized, a glassy sea upon which 
the glorified saints take their stand to praise Him 
who has redeemed them to Himself, and made them 
forever clean. The glass is seen here as mingled 


272 Lectures on the Revelation 


with fire, because of the fiery trial through which 
these martyrs have passed. 

I would observe that the rendering “ King of 
saints,” at the close of verse 3, is generally recog- 
nized as faulty. The better manuscripts read “ na- 
tions,’ though some have “ages” in place of 
“ saints.” Nowhere is the Lord spoken of as “ King 
of saints.’ He is, however, “ King of the nations.’ 
and the “ Ruler of the ages.” These glorified wit- 
nesses to His saving power praise and adore Him for 
His justice and truth, recognizing the righteousness 
of His ways, and the holiness of His person. Be 
cause of this, all nations shall come and worship be- 
fore Him in the day that His judgments are made 
manifest. Observe, it is not the grace of God that 
will thus bring the nations to own His authority and 
worship before Him; it is ‘‘ when his judgments are 
in the earth that the inhabitants of the world will 
learn righteousness.” Scripture nowhere teaches 
the conversion of the world through the preaching 
of the gospel in this dispensation. The world will, 
eventually, be converted, but it will only be after 
the unbelieving portion has been purged out by judg- 
ment, and the remnant left for the kingdom will give 
glory to the God of heaven. 

In the 5th verse we have another of the “ open- 
ings”? of this marvelous book. We read, “ And 
after that I looked, and, behold, the temple of the 
tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened.” 


The Vials of God’s Wrath (chaps. 15,16) 273 


The mention of the tabernacle of the testimony 
brings Israel again before us, and reminds us that 
these judgments are in order to the carrying out of 
God’s covenant with His ancient people Israel, when 
the nations that have oppressed them must be pun- 
ished. 

“ Jerusalem is a burdensome stone for all people: 
all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in 
pieces, though all the people of the earth be gath- 
ered together against it’? (Zech. 12:3). There- 
fore the nations who have vented their hatred upon 
Israel cannot escape the wrath of God. 

The temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in 
heaven being opened, John tells us, 


“The seven angels came out of the temple, having the 
seven plagues, clothed in pure and white linen, and hav- 
ing their breasts girded with golden girdles. And one of 
the four beasts (or, living ones) gave unto the seven 
angels seven golden vials (or, bowls) full of the wrath 
of God, who liveth for ever and ever. And the temple 
was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from 
his power; and no man was able to enter into the tem- 
ple, till the seven plagues of the seven angels were ful- 
filled” (vers. 6-8). 


These seven angels are to complete the wrath of 
God. They introduce and close His final visitations 
in judgment upon the Gentiles. Then will be ful- 
filled the many prophecies of retribution with which 
Scripture abounds. “It is a righteous thing,” says 


274 Lectures on the Revelation 


the apostle Paul, “to recompense tribulation to 
those who trouble you.” If this could be said in re- 
gard to saints of the church period, how much more 
in regard to Israel. Many people have been trou- 
bled with what are called the Imprecatory Psalms. 
They cannot understand David calling down the 
judgment of God upon His enemies, or, what 
amounts to the same thing, Israel’s prayer for the 
overthrow and destruction of all their foes. But, 
in the righteous government of God, it must be that 
those nations that have oppressed and sought the de- 
struction of His people shall themselves be visited 
with the fierceness of His wrath. 

Joseph Cook tells how on one occasion a gentle- 
man, in conversation with a minister of the gospel, 
was objecting to the Imprecatory Psalms because 
they did not seem to him to be in harmony with the 
spirit of Christianity. It was just at the beginning of 
the Civil War. As they talked together a newspaper 
was brought in, and the minister read, “‘ The Federal 
Army is marching upon Richmond.” ‘“‘ Good,” ex- 
claimed the other: “I hope they will destroy it.” 
“That,” cried the preacher, “is an imprecatory 
psalm.” The point is that it is thoroughly in keep- 
ing with God’s mind to desire the triumph of right- 
eousness and the overthrow of what is iniquitous. 

God’s glory is at stake; His righteousness de- 
mands the punishment of iniquity, both in this world 
and in that which is tocome. He does not apologize 


The Vials of God’s Wrath (chaps.15,16) 275 


for dealing thus with unrighteousness, nor do His 
servants need to apologize for Him. 

Verse 8 indicates that when the seven angels are 
about to come forth to execute their awful mission, 
it will be one of intense concern in heaven. The 
temple is seen filled with smoke from the glory of 
God, and from His power, and man, though re- 
deemed, is represented as standing without, in awe, 
awaiting developments. Then a great voice out of 
the temple is heard saying to the seven angels, “‘ Go 
your ways, and pour out (or, empty) the bowls of 
the wrath of God upon the earth” (chap. 16:1). 
As in the case of the seven trumpets, and, in meas- 
ure, of the seven seals, I do not profess to be able to 
tell you just how much we are to take as symbolic, 
and how much as literal, in this septenary series of 
judgments. We know that the book of Revelation 
is a book of symbols, and yet there may be a great 
deal more in it that is literal than many of us sup- 
pose. The literal judgments may be intimately 
linked with the symbolical. No one reading this 
chapter carefully can fail to observe how intimately 
the bowls of wrath are linked, in their results upon 
the earth, with the plagues that fell upon Egypt 
preparatory to Israel’s deliverance. God is again 
about to deliver His people, and this for the last 
time. The outpouring of these bowls depict, in 
large measure, the woes that were visited upon the 
kingdom of Pharaoh. But, as above temarked, 


276 Lectures on the Revelation 


descriptions perhaps must be taken symbolically 
rather than literally; or, perhaps, both interpreta- 
tions coalesce. 

In verse 2 we read, “And the first went, and 
poured out his vial upon the earth; and there fell 
a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which 
had the mark of the Beast, and upon them which 
wosshiped his image.’’ This answers to the plague 
in Egypt, where God smote man and beast with boils 
and blains. It perhaps symbolizes a spiritual plague, 
which will cause those who have received the mark 
of the Beast and worship his image, as great annoy- 
ance as the physical suffering that would follow such 
a noisome and grievous sore upon the bodies of men. 
Notice that the sphere of this plague is the earth; 
and it answers to the first trumpet of chapter 8. But 
it is very evident that, while the sphere is the same, 
the judgment is more intense. 

In the same way the second angel’s bow! links 
with the second angel’s trumpet, which affected the 
sea. But again we have greater intensity, for, in 
verse 3, we read, “And the second angel poured out 
his bowl upon the sea; and it became as the blood 
of a dead man: and every living soul died in the 
sea.” What a scene of death and desolation, 
whether we think of it as physical or spiritual, or 
both. ‘ All they that hate me,” says Wisdom in the 
book of Proverbs, “love death.” And so death is 


The Vials of God’s Wrath (chaps.15,16) 277 


the portion for those who have refused the life that 
is in Christ Jesus. 

The third angel’s trumpet affected the rivers and 
fountains of waters, and in verse 4 we read, ‘“‘ The 
third angel poured out his bowl upon the rivers and 
fountains of waters: and they became blood.” 
Thus the very sources of life are destroyed, as in 
the plague that fell upon Egypt when the river itself 
became blood. In verses 5-7, God's righteousness, 
in thus dealing with those who had slaughtered His 
servants, is fully attested: ‘“‘ And I heard the angel 
of the waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which 
art, and wast, and shalt be, because Thou hast judged 
thus. For they have shed the blood of saints and 
prophets, and Thou hast given them blood to drink; 
for they are worthy. And I heard another out of 
the altar say, Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and 
righteous are thy judgments.” Every right-think- 
ing person will add his “ Amen,” for God is right- 
eous in all His ways, whether in grace or in judg- 
ment. 

The fourth angel’s bowl is poured out upon the 
sun, even as at the sounding of the fourth trumpet 
the third part of the sun was smitten. But again 
we have greater intensity in the judgment than in 
the trumpet series, for ‘“‘ Power was given unto him 
to scorch men with fire. And men were scorched 
with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, 


278 Lectures on the Revelation 


which hath power over these plagues: and they re- 
pented not to give Him glory.” The sun is the 
supreme source of light, and this implies that that 
which should have been for man’s comfort becomes 
a curse instead, and the means of his bitter suffer- 
ing. But, though their anguish is so great, men are 
not brought to repentance by punishment. God's 
name is blasphemed, and His creatures refuse to 
give Him glory. This is a solemn consideration 
for those who teach that punishment is really only 
chastisement, and is always corrective. 

The next section intensifies this in a remarkable 
way. For, when the fifth angel empties his bowl 
upon the seat of the Beast, thus smiting the last 
great confederation at its centre, filling his kingdom 
with darkness, we read that “they gnawed their 
tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven, 
because of their pains and their sores, and repented 
not of their deeds.” Darkness and anguish do not 
tend to soften men’s hearts, or to lead them to 
confess their sins. Their very suffering but stirs 
them up to blaspheme God the more. And so, in the 
outer darkness of a lost eternity, our Lord has told 
us there shall not only be weeping and wailing be- 
cause of suffering endured, but there will be the 
gnashing of teeth, which implies rage and indignation 
against God. With permanency of character he 
who rejects Christ is guilty of eternal sin, and eter- 
nal punishment necessarily follows. 


The Vials of God’s Wrath (chaps. 15,16) 279 


At the sounding of the fifth angel’s trumpet, we 
were told “ the bottomless pit was opened, and there 
arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great 
furnace, and the sun and the air were darkened 
by reason of the smoke of the pit”? (chap. 9:2). 
This, doubtless, explains the darkness that fills the 
kingdom of the Beast when the fifth angel’s bowl of 
wrath is poured upon the seat of the Beast. It is 
judicial darkness brought about by demoniacal de- 
lusions. 

We now come to a portion which has been very 
much before people in these past years of bloody 
warfare. Again and again the question has been 
raised whether this great world-war is the Armaged- 
don conflict predicted in the Bible. Teachers in- 
structed by the Word have invariably assured anx- 
ious questioners that, while this war may be ar- 
ranging the stage, if one may so speak, for Armaged- 
don, it cannot be that great conflict itself. Arma- 
geddon is a definite locality in the land of Palestine. 
The word means “ the mountain of Megiddo,” and 
it refers to the mountain that overlooks the valley 
of Esdraelon—the great plain of Jezreel in the 
northern part of the land of Palestine, which Napo- 
leon Bonaparte said would make an ideal battle- 
ground for all the armies of the world. There, the 
last great battle is to be fought, just before the ap- 
pearing of the Lord in glory. And this the sixth 
angel’s bow] introduces: 


280 Lectures on the Revelation 


“And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the 
great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried 
up, that the way of the kings of the east might be pre- 
pared. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come 
out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of 
the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. 
For they are the spirits of devils (or, demons), working 
miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and 
of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that 
great day of God Almighty. Behold, I come as a thief. 
Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, 
lest he walk naked, and they see his shame. And he 
gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew 
tongue Armageddon” (16: 12-16). 


The great river Euphrates was formerly the 
eastern boundary of the Roman Empire and later 
of the Turkish dominion, and it speaks, I believe, 
of the destruction of that power. Luther said, 
“When the Turk is driven out of Europe, then 
comes the day of judgment.” And, in a certain 
sense, this will undoubtedly be true — not the 
day of judgment for the wicked dead, but the 
day of judgment for the living nations. The 
Turk is an intruder in Europe, the enemy of both 
God and man; but I am convinced that his hold 
upon Constantinople and surrounding country 
is very nearly ended. God will drive the Ottoman 
Empire from Europe,* and punish that nation 
which has so well deserved the name of “The un- 
speakable Turk.” The cry of martyred Armenia, 
and of other peoples who have suffered so 


* Since the above was written the Ottoman Empire has 
fallen and the Angora Republic taken its place. 


The Vials of God’s Wrath (chaps. 15,16) 281 


fearfully from these Asiatic hordes, will be an- 
swered by the destruction of the nation that wrought 
such havoc. It is very evident, I think, that God is 
already beginning to bring this to pass. If you 
have a map of Europe of one hundred years ago, 
notice the place that the Turkish Empire then had, 
and compare it with a map ofthe present day, and 
see how much of its territory has been wrested 
from it. . 

Turkey, long known as “ the sick man of Europe,” 
is sicker than ever now, and hanging on with the 
clutch of despair to one little corner of Europe; and 
I am convinced that it will not be long before he is 
driven out altogether. Then, according to tne book 
of Daniel, he will “ pitch his tent between the seas 
in the glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to 
his end, and none shall help him.” Driven into 
Asia Minor, he will finally, I take it, attempt to 
establish himself in the land of Palestine. And this 
will arouse, not only the European powers in the 
league of the ten kingdoms, but it will stir up the east- 
ern and northern nations besides. Turkey will, if I 
understand the prophetic scheme aright, be backed 
in the last days by Russia and, possibly Germany too, 
in opposition to the Western Confederation. Both 
these Great Powers will be anxious to hold the land 
of Palestine, which is admittedly the key to the so- 
called Eastern Question. But the activity of these 
European nations will arouse the races of the Far 


282 Lectures on the Revelation 


East, for, when the Euphrates is dried up, we are 
told it is ‘that the way of the kings of the East 
might be prepared.’”’ Who are the kings of the 
East? Various theories have been suggested. 
Some consider they may be the so-called lost ten 
tribes of Israel, returning to their land. Others, 
the dominions of Persia, Afghanistan, and so on. 
It is significant that the word rendered “ the east” 
is really “the sun-rising.”” Is it only a coincidence 
that, for a millennium at least, Japan has been 
known as “ the kingdom of the rising sun”? May 
not the Mongolian races, possibly allied with India, 
be the kings of the East, here depicted as coming in 
conflict with the powers of the West? Thus the 
whole world will be thrown into bloody warfare, 
and all nations be gathered together against Jeru- 
salem to battle. This great world-conflict will be 
the direct result of the working of demons, for we 
are told that three unclean frog-like spirits came 
out of the mouths of the dragon, the Beast, and the 
false prophet — demons working miracles, visiting 
the kingdoms of the earth (that is, the prophetic 
earth), and of the whole world (that is, the nations 
outside the prophetic earth), to gather them to the 
battle of that great day of God Almighty. This 
will be the great and final Armageddon conflict — 
the place where they will meet one another in an 
attempt to settle the final issues. 

Notice that there is a parenthesis, however, in 


The Vials of God’s Wrath (chaps. 15,16) 283 


verse 15, which comes in just before the close of 
this section, and thus preceding the seventh bowl. 
It is the voice of the Lord Himself, “ Behold, I 
come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and 
keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they 
see his shame.” The time of His manifestation is 
very close. He would have those who look for His 
appearing watching, and keeping their garments un- 
defiled, lest they be put to shame before the ungodly. 
The undefiled are those who keep themselves from 
all fellowship with the Satan-inspired movements of 
the last days, walking with God in holy separation 
from the abounding iniquity, as directed by His 
Word. The voice is for us as well as for the saints 
in a future day. 

The seventh angel’s bowl is poured out into the 
air, and, we are told, 

“ There came a great voice out of the temple of heaven, 
from the throne, saying, It is done. And there were 
voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and there was a 
great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon 
the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great. And 
the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities 
of the nations fell: and great Babylon came in remem- 
brance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine 
of the fierceness of his wrath. And every island fled 
away, and the mountains were not found. And there 
fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone 
about the weight of a talent: and men blasphemed God 
because of the plague of the hail; for the plague thereof 
was exceeding great” (vers. 17-21). 


284 Lectures on the Revelation 


This indicates the utter destruction of every spir- 
itual and religious institution that man has built up 
apart from God. It is the absolute overthrow of 
civilization, and the complete wreck of all man’s 
hopes to bring in even livable conditions in this 
world, while rejecting the Lord Jesus Christ. The 
scene is one of anarchy and confusion, but, despite 
the signs of divine wrath resting on the souls of 
men, they still blaspheme God, and give no sign of 
repentance. 

Time forbids taking up great Babylon’s judgment 
to-night. It will, however, come before us in our 
next address. 

In closing, let me remind you that the Church 
of God is to be caught up ere these scenes take place 
upon the earth. We are looking for the Lord Jesus 
Christ, who is our Saviour from the coming wrath. 
Do you know Him? If not, I plead with you in 
the light of all we have had before us, “ Flee from 
the wrath to come.” 


LECTURE XVIII 
BABYLON: ITS CHARACTER AND DOOM 
(Chapter 17) 


‘JT AM to address you to-night on a theme, the 

wonder of which grows upon me every time I 
speak of it, namely, the Mystery of Iniquity in its 
final form: Babylon the Great. It is that vast sys- 
tem of error which is so like Christianity in some 
respects that thousands of apparently spiritually- 
minded people like Fénelon, Pascal, Faber and 
others, have not been able to distinguish it from 
Christianity ; yet, when tested by the Word of God 
it is seen to be but a counterfeit of that church 
which God has purchased with the blood of His own 
Son. 

Twice already in the course of this book we have 
heard of Babylon’s fall, but as yet we have not 
learned what city or system was referred to. But 
the chapter now before us is entirely devoted to 
that interesting and solemn subject, and a careful 
study of what is here revealed ought to leave us free 
from all doubt or perplexity as to the identification 


of Babylon. 
285 


286 Lectures on the Revelation 


This chapter, and the one that follows, is another 
of the great parentheses of this book. Chronolog- 
ically the 19th chapter immediately follows chapter 
16; but ere going on with the direct order of events, 
John is taken aside as it were to see this remarkable 
vision of the false church, ere he beholds the union 
of the true church with the Lamb in the glory. 

I ask your careful attention to the apostle’s own 
words as recorded in verses I to 6: 


“ And there came one of the seven angels which had 
the seven vials (or, bowls), and talked with me, saying 
unto me, Come hither; I will show unto thee the judg- 
ment of the great harlot that sitteth upon many waters; 
with whom the kings of the earth have committed fornica- 
tion, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made 
drunk with the wine of her fornication. So he carried 
me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and I saw a 
woman sitting upon a scarlet-colored beast, full of names 
of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns. And 
the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and 
decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having 
a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthi- 
ness of her fornication: and upon her forehead was a 
name written, MYSTERY: BABYLON THE GREAT, 
THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINA- 
TIONS OF THE EARTH. And I saw the woman 
drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood 
of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered 
with great admiration (or, amazement).” 


I have quoted this somewhat lengthy portion in 
full that we may have the complete description be- 


Babylon’s Character and Doom (chap.17) 28> 


fore us. The beast is beyond question the same as 
that of chapter 13, and is therefore indubitably the 
Roman Empire. It is the empire as a whole, but 
with the last phase especially emphasized. The 
woman is a religious system, who dominates the 
civil power, at least for a time. The name upon her 
forehead should easily enable us to identify her. 
But in order to do that we will do well to go back 
to our old Testament, and see what is there revealed 
concerning literal Babylon, for the one will surely 
throw light upon the other. We have also the added 
instruction of secular history which supplies us with 
some very important facts in this connection, and 
throws a flood of light upon the succession of spir- 
itual Babylon of the Apocalypse to litera! Babylon 
of the Old Testament. 

As we go back into the dim twilight of history 
with Scripture, we learn that the founder of Bab-el, 
or Babylon, was Nimrod, of whose unholy achieve- 
ments we read in the 10th chapter of Genesis. He 
was the arch-apostate of the patriarchal age. He is 
described as “a mighty hunter before the Lord ”— 
“a hunter of the souls of men,” the rabbis said. 
Going out from the presence of the Lord, he im- 
piously sought to gather a multitude about himself, 
and, in defiance of the express command of God to 
spread abroad upon the face of the earth, he per- 
suaded his associates and followers to join together 
in “ building a city and a tower which should reach 


288 Lectures on the Revelation 


unto heaven.” Not surely, as some of us were 
taught in our childhood, a tower by which they 
might climb up into the skies to escape another pos- 
sible flood, but a tower of renown, rising to a great 
height, to be recognized as a temple or rallying 
centre for those who did not walk in obedience to 
the word of the Lord. With all the effrontery of 
our modern apostates, they called their city and 
tower Bab-El, the gate of God; but it was soon 
changed by divine judgment into Babel, Confusion. 
It bore the stamp of unreality from the first, for we 
are told “they had brick for stone, and slime had 
they for mortar.” An imitation of that which is 
real and true has ever since characterized Babylon, 
in all ages. 

Nimrod, or Nimroud-bar-Cush, as he is called 
on the monuments, was a grandson of Ham, the un- 
worthy son of Noah, whose character is revealed in 
his exposure of his father’s shame. We know that 
Noah had brought through the flood the revelation 
of the true God, for he was a preacher of righteous- 
ness, and his utterances on more than one occasion 
show that he had the prophetic gift. Ham on the 
other hand seems to have been all too readily af- 
fected by the apostasy that brought the flood, for 
he shows no evidence of self-judgment, but the very 
opposite. His name, as spelled out upon Egyptian 
monuments, is Khem, and this agrees with the literal 
sound of the Hebrew word rendered Ham in our 


Babylon’s Character and Doom (chap.17) 289 


9 


Bibles. It means “ swarthy,” ‘“ darkened,” or, more 
literally, “the sun-burnt.” And the name indicates 
the state of the man’s soul. For what is a sun- 
burnt person? One who is darkened by light from 
heaven. Ham had been granted wonderful mercies, 
he was saved from the flood because of his father’s 
faith; but he abused his privileges and “turned the 
grace of God into lasciviousness.’”’ He was actually 
darkened by the burning rays of the light that God 
caused to shine upon his soul. Thus his conscience 
became seared as with a hot iron, and he became the 
founder of a race that departed from the living God 
and led the way into idolatry, worshiping and serv- 
ing the creature more than the Creator. 

We know something of what this means. We 
speak of people to-day who have become, as we say, 
gospel-hardened. They too have been darkened by 
the light, and they are often the ring-leaders in 
apostasy: “If the light that is in thee become 
darkened, how great is that darkness.” There are 
many in the world to-night, who used to listen with 
tears in their eyes to the story of the matchless grace 
of God as revealed in the cross of Christ, but are 
unmoved now though that story be told never so 
tenderly; they have become hardened in their sins, 
and their seared consciences no longer feel the 
Spirit’s breath. It is a most dangerous thing to 
trifle with light from heaven. 

But to proceed with our theme. Ham became 


290 Lectures on the Revelation 


darkened by the light. We know his failure and 
sin. But when Noah had recovered himself and 
knew what his son had done unto him he pro- 
nounced, by the spirit of prophecy, a curse upon 
Canaan, not on Ham. Do you wonder at that? 1 
did, until I saw that God had already pronounced 
a blessing upon all the three sons of Noah — Shem, 
Ham and Japheth. So Noah passes over his un- 
worthy son and utters a curse upon Canaan, who 
we can well believe was, as we say, “a chip off the 
old block.” Ham begat a son named Cush, “ the 
black one,’ and he became the father of Nimrod, 
the apostate leader of his generation. 

Ancient lore now comes to our assistance, and 
tells us that the wife of Nimroud-bar-Cush was the 
infamous Semiramis the First. She is reputed to 
have been the foundress of the Babylonian mysteries 
and the first high-priestess of idolatry. Thus Baby- 
Jon became the fountainhead of idolatry, and the 
mother of every heathen and pagan system in the 
world. The mystery-religion that was there orig- 
inated spread in various forms throughout the whole 
earth, and, as we shall see in a few minutes, it is 
with us to-day: it is identical with the mystery of 
iniquity which wrought so energetically in Paul’s 
day, and shall have its fullest development when the 
Holy Spirit has departed and the Babylon of the 
Apocalypse holds sway. 

Building on the primeval promise of the woman’s 


Babylon's Character and Doom (chap.17) 291 


Seed who was to come, Semiramis bore a son whom 
she declared was miraculously conceived! and when 
she presented him to the people, he was hailed as 
the promised deliverer. This was Tammuz, whose 
worship Ezekiel protested against in the days of the 
captivity. Thus was introduced the mystery of the 
mother and the child, a form of idolatry that is older 
than any other known to man. The rites of this 
worship were secret. Only the initiated were per- 
mitted to know its mysteries. It was Satan’s effort 
to delude mankind with an imitation so like the 
truth of God that they would not know the true 
Seed of the woman when He came in the fullness 
of time. To this Justin Martyr bears definite wit- 
ness. 

From Babylon this mystery-religion spread to all 
the surrounding nations, as the years went on and 
the world was populated by the descendants of 
Noah. Everywhere the symbols were the same, and 
everywhere the cult of the mother and the child 
became the popular system; their worship was cele- 
brated with the most disgusting and immoral prac- 
tices. The image of the queen of heaven with the 
babe in her arms was seen everywhere, though the 
names might differ as languages differed. It be- 
came the mystery-religion of Phoenicia, and by the 
Phoenicians was carried to the ends of the earth. 
Ashtoreth and Tammuz, the mother and child of 
these hardy adventurers, became Isis and Horus in 


292 Lectures on the Revelation 


Egypt, Aphrodite and Eros in Greece, Venus and 
Cupid in Italy, and bore many other names in more 
distant places. Within 1000 years Babylonianism 
had become the religion of the world, which had 
rejected the Divine revelation. 

Linked with this central mystery were countless 
lesser mysteries, the hidden meaning of which was 
known only to the initiates, but the outward forms 
were practised by all the people. Among these 
were the doctrines of purgatorial purification after 
death, salvation by countless sacraments such as 
priestly absolution, sprinkling with holy water, the 
offering of round cakes to the queen of heaven as 
mentioned in the book of Jeremiah, dedication of 
virgins to the gods, which was literally sanctified 
prostitution, weeping for Tammuz for a period of 
40 days, prior to the great festival of Istar, who 
was said to have received her son back from the 
dead; for it was taught that Tammuz was slain by 
a wild boar and afterwards brought back to life. 
To him the egg was sacred, as depicting the mys- 
tery of his resurrection, even as the evergreen was 
his chosen symbol and was set up in honor of his 
birth at the winter solstice, when a boar’s head was 
eaten in memory of his conflict and a yule-log burned 
with many mysterious observances. The sign of the 
cross was sacred to Tammuz, as symbolizing the 
life-giving principle and as the first letter of his 
name. It is represented upon vast numbers of the 


Babylon's Character and Doom (chap.17) 293 


most ancient altars and temples, and did not, as 
many have supposed, originate with Christianity. 
From this mystery-religion, the patriarch Abra- 
ham was separated by the divine call; and with this 
same evil cult the nation that sprang from him had 
constant conflict, until under Jezebel, a Phoenician 
princess, it was grafted onto what was left of the 
religion of Israel in the northern kingdom in the 
day of Ahab, and was the cause of their captivity 
at the last. Judah was polluted by it, for Baal- 
worship was but the Canaanitish form of the Baby- 
lonian mysteries, and only by being sent into cap- 
tivity to Babylon itself did Judah become cured of 
her fondness for idolatry. Baal was the Sun-God, 
the Life-giving One, identical with Tammuz. 
When Christ came into this world the mystery of 
iniquity was everywhere holding sway, save where 
the truth of God as revealed in the Old Testament 
was known. Thus, when the early Christians set 
out upon the great task of carrying the gospel to 
the ends of the earth, they found themselves every- 
where confronted by this system in one form or 
another; for though Babylon as a city had long 
been but a memory, her mysteries had not died with 
her. When the city and temples were destroyed, 
the high-priest fled with a company of initiates and 
their sacred vessels and images to Pergamos, where 
the symbol of the serpent was set up as the emblem 
of the hidden wisdom. From there, they after- 


294 Lectures on the Revelation 


wards crossed the sea and emigrated to Italy, where 
they settled in the Etruscan plain. There the ancient 
cult was propagated under the name of the Etrus- 
can Mysteries, and eventually Rome became the 
headquarters of Babylonianism. The chief priests 
wore mitres shaped like the head of a fish, in honor 
of Dagon, the fish-god, the Lord of life — another 
form of the Tammuz mystery, as developed among 
Israel’s old enemies, the Philistines. The chief 
priest when established in Rome took the title Ponti- 
fex Maximus, and this was imprinted on his mitre. 
When Julius Cesar (who, like all young Romans 
of good family, was an initiate) had become the 
head of the State, he was elected Pontifex Maximus, 
and this title was held henceforth by all the Roman 
emperors down to Constantine the Great, who was, 
at one and the same time, head of the church and 
high priest of the heathen! The title was after- 
wards conferred upon the bishops of Rome, and is 
borne by the pope to-day, who is thus declared to 
be, not the successor of the fisherman-apostle Peter, 
but the direct successor of the high priest of the 
Babylonian mysteries, and the servant of the fish- 
god Dagon, for whom he wears, like his idolatrous 
predecessors, the fisherman’s ring. 

During the early centuries of the church’s his- 
tory, the mystery of iniquity had wrought with such 
astounding effect, and Babylonian practices and 
teachings had been so largely absorbed by that which 


Babylon’s Character and Doom (chap.17) 295 


bore the name of the church of Christ, that the truth 
of the Holy Scriptures on many points had been 
wholly obscured, while idolatrous practices had been 
foisted upon the people as Christian sacraments, 
and heathen philosophies took the place of gospel in- 
struction. Thus was developed that amazing sys- 
tem which for a thousand years dominated Europe 
and trafficked in the bodies and souls of men, until 
the great Reformation of the 16th century brought 
in a measure of deliverance. 

It was this that filled the apostle with such amaze- 
ment. It seemed incredible that the glorious move- 
ment with which he had been identified for a genera- 
tion should ever become so perverted as to become . 
the mother of harlots and of every abomination, 
and should even become the slaughterer of the saints 
of God and the martyrs of Jesus. But her bloody 
history during the dark days of persecution bears 
awful witness to the truth of the vision. The angel, 
however, goes on to show that the future has more 
marvellous things in store than we should otherwise 
have dared to imagine; for no past period of Rome’s 
history fully answers to what is brought before us 
in the rest of the chapter. 

We hear a great deal about the desirability of 
church-federation at the present time, but men seem 
to forget, or never to have known, that it is God 
Himself who has rent Christendom asunder because 
of her unfaithfulness and apostasy. We are told 


296 Lectures on the Revelation 


that it would be a most excellent thing if the differ- 
ent denominations of Protestants could be united in 
one great body, and then join hands with the three 
so-called Catholic churches — Anglican, Greek and 
Roman. It is pointed out that such a vast union- 
church could dominate the world, and besides it 
would make for such increased efficiency, and would 
simplify the financial problems which have so 
troubled and perplexed our boards and officials for 
so long. But we need to remember that such a 
union as this would not be the body of Christ at all. 
It would simply be a worldly confederacy of saved 
and unsaved — just great Babylon over again. The 
body of Christ remains undivided in spite of Chris- 
tendom’s unhappy schisms, for it is composed of 
all truly saved people who have by the Spirit’s bap- 
tism been made one in Christ. While outward 
unity is desirable, it would not be a blessing if at 
the expense of the truth. 

But we must now consider the angel’s interpreta- 
tion of the vision. He said to John, 

“Wherefore didst thou marvel? I will tell thee the 
mystery of the woman, and the beast that carrieth her, 
which hath the seven heads and ten horns. The beast 
that thou sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend out 
of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition: and they 
that dwell upon the earth shall wonder, whose names 
were not written in the book of life from the foundation 


of the world, when they behold the beast that was, and 
is not, and yet is” (vers. 7, 8). 


Babylon’s Character and Doom (chap.17) 29) 


We have already seen in our study of the 13th 
chapter that this Beast sets forth the Roman Empire 
as revived in a Satan-inspired league of nations after 
the church dispensation is over. This will be a 
very different thing to any league that may be 
formed in our times, and which may result from the 
recent war, while the church is still here. The fed- 
eration of the futuse will be utterly godless and 
God-defiant. When that league is formed it will 
be but natural that a confederacy of all religious 
systems be wrought out, and this too will be satanic 
in character. It will be a union of Christless pro- 
fessors, inheriting all the human and demoniacal 
mysteries of Babylon. In other words all sects will 
be swallowed up in the one distinctively Babylonish 
system that has ever maintained the cult of the 
mother and the child. This system will for the first 
part of the tribulation period dominate the civil 
power. Thus the woman will be in the saddle again 
and ride the beast! He who has eyes to see and a 
heart to understand can readily discern the prepara- 
tions now in progress, with this very end in view. 

From verses 9 to 11 we learn the identity of the 
city where Babylon has her seat, and also that it is 
when the final form of the empire appears that she 
will attain the position of pre-eminence that she has 
sought so long. Rome alone answers to the de- 
scription given. On a previous occasion we saw 
that the eighth head, who is of the seven, is the last 


298 Lectures on the Revelation 


great world-ruler who will dominate the League ot 
Nations in the time of the end, and whose capital 
will be the so-called eternal city. 

It would seem however from verses I2 to 14 
that the other ten kings act in fullest harmony with 
the Beast; and this completely nullifies the theory 
that the vision refers to any past history of the na- 
tions into which the Roman Empire was divided. 
Never have they thus acted in unison, but Europe 
has ever been a scene of conflicting nations and 
warring powers since the break-up of the Empire 
itself. It is to the future we must look for a time 
when the ten kings shall receive power one hour 
with the Beast. Then they will impiously make war 
with the Lamb only to be overcome by Him who is 
King of kings and Lord of lords. 

The similitude of the waters is explained for us 
inverse 15: ‘“ The waters which thou sawest, where 
the harlot sitteth, are peoples and multitudes, and 
nations and tongues.’”’ Over all nations has Baby- 
lon borne sway in the past, deceiving them with the 
wine of her fornication. Over all nations will she 
again bear rule, until wearied with her blandish- 
ments, the world, whose favor she courted, will 
spurn her at last. For the angel continues his ex- 
planation of the mystery by saying, 

“And the ten horns which thou sawest and the beast 


(not, upon the beast, as in the A. V.), these shall hate 
the harlot, and shall make her desolate and naked. and 


Babylon’s Character and Doom (chap.17) 299 


shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. For God 
hath put in their hearts to fulfil his will, and to agree, and 
give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of 
God shall be fulfilled. And the woman which thou sawest 
is that great city, which reigneth over the kings of the 
earth” (vers. 16-18). 


There is no mistaking her identity. Pagan Rome 
was the lineal successor of Babylon. Papal Rome 
absorbed the Babylonian mysteries; and the Rome 
of the Beast in the last days will be the seat of the 
revived satanic system that began with Nimrod and 
his infamous consort Semiramis, which has from 
that day to this been opposed to everything that is 
of God; and which changed the truth of God into 
a lie, worshiping and serving the creature more than 
the Creator. 

Babylon of old, as we have seen, was the mother 
of idolatry. In Jer. 50: 38 we read, “ It is the land 
of graven images; they are mad upon their idols.” 
It was she who taught the nations to substitute idol- 
atry for spiritual worship, and to-day one-third of 
Christendom has followed her in the adoration of 
images, and another third worships ikons, or pic- 
tures. There can be no question as to the Babylon- 
ish origin of these abominations. Nothing of the 
kind was known in the churches of God until the 
heathen mysteries were grafted unto Christianity. 
The images of the mother and child that are en- 
shrined in Rome’s temples are only different in 


300 Lectures on the Revelation 


name to the images worshiped in the groves and 
temples of Semiramis, Ashtoreth, Isis, and other so- 
called ‘‘ queens of heaven.” In many instances the 
old idols were simply re-named and adored as be- 
fore. There is in one place in southern Europe a 
statue of Apollo, the sun-god, identical with Tam- 
muz and Baal, which is worshiped by deluded Ro- 
manists as St. Apollos; and the S is carved upon 
the pedestal by a later hand than the original namef 
The mother of the Lord Jesus Christ assumed ne 
such place among the early Christians as she has 
now been given in Rome’s mysteries. She is seen 
as a lowly worshiper, and as joining with others in 
prayer, in Acts 2; and this is the last mention of 
her in Scripture. Of the fable of her assumption 
and crowning as Queen of Heaven the Bible gives 
no hint. It is Babylonianism pure and simple. 
The word of the Lord to His people of old is most 
instructive for us now in the light of all we have 
been going over. “ Flee out of the midst of Baby- 
lon, and deliver every man his soul; be not cut off 
in her iniquity; for this is the time of the Lord’s 
vengeance; He will render unto her a recompense. 
Babylon hath been a golden cup in the Lord's hand, 
that made all the earth drunken: the nations have 
drunken of her wine; therefore the nations are mad. 
Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed: how! for 
her; take balm for her pain. if so be she may be 
healed. We would have healed Babylon. but she is 


Babylon’s Character and Doom (chap. 17) 30) 


not healed: forsake her, and let us go everyone to 
his own country; for her judgment reacheth unto 
heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies” (Jer. 
51:6-9). 

It is a lamentable fact that Babylon’s principles 
and practices are rapidly but surely pervading the 
churches that escaped from Rome at the time of the 
Reformation. We may see evidences of it in the 
wide use of high-sounding ecclesiastical titles, once 
unknown in the reformed churches, in the revival of 
holy days and church feasts such as Lent, Good Fri- 
day, Easter and Christ’s Mass, or, as it is generally 
written, Christmas. I quite admit that some of 
these festivals if divested of any ecclesiastical char- 
acter may be observed in innocence in the home, 
but when they are turned into church festivals they 
certainly come under the condemnation of Gal. 
4:9-11, where the Holy Spirit warns against the 
observance of days and months and times and sea- 
sons. All of them, and many more that might be 
added are Babylonish in their origin, and were at 
one time linked with the Ashtoreth and Tammuz 
mystery-worship. It is through Rome that they 
have come down to us; and we do well to remember 
that Babylon is a mother, with daughters who are 
likely to partake of their mother’s characteristics, 
for is it not written, ‘‘ As is the mother so is the 
daughter’? Therefore it behooves all who love 
the Lord and desire His approbation to “ depart 


LIFE. College Library 


302 Lectures on the Revelation 


bf 


from iniquity,” and seek to “ follow righteousness, 
faith, love and peace with them that call upon Him 
out of a pure heart.” 

We shall have a fuller account of Babylon’s doom 
in our next study, and shall perhaps see some things 
more clearly which we could not well go into in de- 
tail to-night. 


Note: To those who desire to make a fuller investigation 
of Babylonianism, I commend Hyslop’s monumental work, 
“The Two Babylons,” to which I am indebted for many of 
the above facts. 


LECTURE XIX 


BABYLON: ITS CHARACTER AND DOOM 
(Concluded ) 


(Chapters 18, 19: 1-5) 


N my last address I sought to identify the Baby- 

‘lon of the Apocalypse, and to show just how it 
was linked with Babylon of old, the literal city in the 
land of the Chaldeans on the plain of Shinar. To- 
night we have more details as to its unholy char- 
acter and its awful doom. We also get a better 
idea of the marvelous way in which its principles 
have permeated the very warp and woof of civiliza- 
tion, affecting the entire civil and commercial tabric 
of the age in which we live, all of which must be 
destroyed in order to prepare the way for a higher 
and happier condition of society to be ushered in 
at the Lord’s return. We read: 


“And after these things I saw another angel come 
down from heaven, having great power; and the earth 
was lightened with his glory. And he cried mightily 
with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, 
is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils (or more 
properly, demons, as there is but one devil, but many 
demons) and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage 

#3 


304 Lectures on the Revelation 


of every unclean and hateful bird. For all nations have 
drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and 
the kings of the earth have committed fornication with 
her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich 
through the abundance of her delicacies” (vers. 1-3). 


This, I take it, synchronizes with the second angel’s 
message of chapter 14:8, and introduces the judg- 
ment of the seventh vial as foretold in chapter 
16:19. Babylon will therefore continue up to the 
very end of the tribulation period; its destruction 
by the Beast and his ten kings being a last frantic 
effort to rid themselves of this dreadful incubus, 
just before they are destroyed by the appearing of 
the Lord in glory. The Antichrist will be the pre- 
tended incarnation of the woman’s Seed and will 
be accepted as such by apostate Christendom and 
apostate Judaism. Thus Satan’s masterpiece will 
seem to carry all before it; but only until the true 
Seed of the woman appears from heaven, descend- 
ing with all His holy ones, to the consternation of 
His enemies and the joy of His suffering saints, the 
persecuted remnant of Israel and those from among 
the nations who will receive their testimony in that 
day. Not, be it again observed, people who in this 
present dispensation of grace have refused the mes- 
sage of the gospel, but those to whom that message 
will not have gone until after the rapture of the 
church. To this, 2 Thess. chap. 2 bears a clear and 
convincing testimony. 


Babylon’s Doom (chaps. 18,19: 1-5) 305 


The description of fallen Babylon as the habita- 
tion of demons and the hold of evil spirits and a 
cage of unclean birds is a most graphic one, and 
strikingly depicts the horrible end of the apostasy. 
That which professes to be the spouse of Christ, 
and which issues its ofttimes blasphemous decrees 
as under the direction of the Spirit of God, is seen 
to be but a Satan-inspired and demon-directed sys- 
tem, where every unholy thing flourishes, where evil 
men can find shelter and are protected in the promul- 
gation of their evil doctrines and practices. To this 
the papacy has fully answered in the past, and its 
character remains unchanged to this present hour. 
It would be practically impossible to find a viler 
history than that of the medieval popes and their 
emissaries. It was a Roman Catholic writer who 
said of this period, ‘“‘ The annals of the church are 
the annals of hell.” 

The proverb, “ The corruption of the best thing 
is the worst of corruptions ”’ is strikingly illustrated 
in the history of the church. It seems almost im- 
possible to believe that the church to which the 
apostle Paul addressed his epistle could, in a few cen- 
turies, degenerate into the Roman church as now 
known. But this is the mystery of Babylon, as we 
have already seen. And a more amazing thing, if 
that were possible, is the solemn fact that the 
Reformation churches, once delivered from this vile 
system, should now hopefully look for reconciliation 


306 Lectures on the Revelation 


with it, so readily be able to forget its dreadful past, 
and overlook its present wicked pretensions! We 
in America, and our brethren in Britain, see Rome 
at its best, for men do not readily do in the light 
what they will do in the dark. But, as it has been 
said, “ Character is what a man is in the dark,” 
and we may test this system by the same principle. 
If, then, you want to know the true character of 
Romanism, go to the lands where the light of 
Reformation has barely penetrated ; look at the coun- 
tries south of us, to the great Latin-American re- 
publics, where the papacy has borne sway and 
poisoned the morals of the people for centuries. 
There you will see the results of Babylonianism un- 
checked by enlightened Christianity. What a hor- 
rible cesspool of iniquity it is, let those tell who have 
seen it for themselves. There idolatry reigns in 
most abhorrent form, and the gospel is a proscribed 
teaching, which would be absolutely prohibited had 
the church full power as in the days of old. 

In the Old Testament, idolatry is branded as spir- 
itual fornication, In the New Testament it is the 
unhallowed union of the church and the world. We 
see both in this evil system. Who is so unblush- 
ingly idolatrous as Rome? And who has so per- 
sistently courted the world’s favor as she? And 
even now we may see how brazenly she is coquetting 
with the kings of the earth, and by her blandishments 
endeavoring once more to win their admiration and 


Babylon's Doom (chaps. 18,19: 1-5) 307 


attentions. Nor will she stop until the scarlet 
woman again rides the Beast — until the church 
dominates the State. Subtly she is enlarging her 
sphere of influence. By devious ways she seeks to 
“make America catholic,” and undo the work of the 
Reformation in England. She largely controls a 
venal press, and even the theatre, which, alas, is all 
the church some people attend, is being pressed into 
her service. I am told on good authority that it is 
becoming more and more common, both on the regu- 
lar stage and in the picture-palaces, to caricature 
Protestant ministers, and to introduce on suitable 
occasions representations of Romish priests and 
nuns in a most attractive and solemn way. All this 
is part of a studied and far-reaching propaganda 
that is insidiously working in our midst to turn this 
nation Romewards. 

Commercialism has always flourished under the 
patronage of the popes, and this is another power- 
ful weapon that Rome knows well how to use. 
Commerce is the goddess of the present feverish 
age, and to her everything must be sacrificed. And 
the Babylon of the future is not only a great church, 
but a great commercial system as well, for to her 
men will finally turn for the solution of the prob- 
lems that now perplex them. How largely is union 
labor to-day under the power of Rome! And 
while she is the professed enemy of socialism, she 
delights to be regarded as the patron of the working- 


308 Lectures on the Revelation 


classes on the one hand, and as the protector of 
capital on the other. She has a veritable genius for 
the commercial. ‘‘In Rome,” cried Luther, “ they 
sell everything. They would sell the Father, and 
sell the Son, and sell the Holy Ghost.” The stamp 
of simony is on her brow, and it behooves all who 
would glorify God to avoid her principles and flee 
from “the error of Balaam.”’ 

The call of verse 4 is, if I understand it aright, 
not merely a warning to saints in a coming day who 
may be in danger of being deceived by her, but it is 
a message for all who even now discern her true 
character: ‘“‘I heard another voice from heaven, 
saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her 
plagues.” Separation from evil is imperative for 
all who would have the Lord’s approval. This was 
the call heard by the reformers of the 16th century. 
But, alas, alas, many who are supposed to be their 
successors have returned in spirit to that which their 
fathers left behind, and there is many a Babylonish 
garment to-day hidden in Protestant tents, or even 
displayed upon Protestant shoulders. How else are 
we to account for the widespread return to prin- 
ciples and practices once abhorrent to those whose 
boast it was that ‘“ The Bible and the Bible alone is 
the religion of Protestants.’ Where that Bible is 
losing its hold upon the consciences of the people 
(because its inspiration and authority is being so 


Babylon’s Doom (chaps. 18, 19: 1-5) 309 


widely denied by those who have solemnly sworn 
to teach it and defend it) we need not wonder that 
Babylonish ways and teachings are coming into 
vogue again. Men want something stable, some- 
thing infallible; and if they cannot have the infat- 
lible Word of the living God they will turn to a pro- 
fessedly infallible church. 

But the hour of God’s judgment draws on apace. 
He will not forever be a silent spectator of all these 
abominations. Soon He will pour out the bowls of 
His wrath upon spiritual Babylon as He did of old 
upon the city of idolatry on the Euphrates, ‘ For her 
sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remem- 
bered her iniquities.”’” Then will go forth the sen- 
tence, 


“Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double 
unto her double according to her works; in the cup 
which she hath filled, fill to her double. How much she 
hath glorified herself and lived deliciously, so much tor- 
ment and sorrow give her: for she saith in her heart, 
I sit a queen and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow” 
Cvers.,0, 7): 


A comparison of the prophecies of Isaiah and Jer- 
emiah in regard to the fall of ancient Babylon will 
show how plainly the doom of the spiritual counter- 
part is there prefigured. In several instances the 
same identical figures are used, and this has led 
some commentators to suppose that the doom of the 
literal city was not final; and so it is taught by some 


310 Lectures on the Revelation 


that Babylon is to be rebuilt on her ancient site, to 
flourish for a few years as the religious and com- 
mercial metropolis of the world, only to be again 
destroyed, and that finally, at, or immediately pre- 
ceding the Lord’s second coming. These teachers 
generally agree in making this restored Babylon the 
seat of the Antichrist, whom they, as a rule, iden- 
tify with the future world-emperor. But I think we 
have already shown that a careful comparison of the 
Old and New Testament scriptures on these subjects 
make this view untenable. The city of old has fallen 
to rise no more. The system that succeeded it is 
to be judged by God and destroyed as literally as her 
predecessor, according to the word now before us: 
“Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, 
death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be 
utterly burned with fire, for strong is the Lord God 
who judgeth her’ (ver. 8). 

And we learn that although God will use the ten 
kings and the Beast to bring this about, yet they will 
themselves bewail her fall, when they find to their 
horror that the whole fabric of civilization is falling 
with her. Something like this was seen in the days 
of the French Revolution, and has been seen in 
measure in other lands of late. With the destruc- 
tion of the church, no matter how corrupt, came the 
breaking up of all social barriers and a flood of an- 
archy and violence seemed likely to involve the en. 
tire nation in ruin, so that even Napoleon the First 


Babylon’s Doom (chaps. 18,19: 1-5) 311 


saw the necessity of re-establishing the church — 
though largely shorn of its power — on the ground 
that a poor religion is better than none at all in 
holding the masses in restraint. 

We can readily understand therefore how Baby- 
lon’s fall will send a thrill of horror through all 
who have been in any way linked with her, causing 
the kings of the earth who have enjoyed her favor 
to bewail her and lament for her, when they see 
the smoke of her burning. Standing afar off, they 
cry, “ Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty 
city! for in one hour is thy judgment come.” It 
would seem that, coincident with the fall of the sys- 
tem, comes the fall of the city where she has had 
her seat ; and that, by some act of God, perhaps such 
as a great earthquake, will be forever destroyed that 
proud and haughty capital which has borne the title 
of “The Eternal City” for two millenniums, but 
whose doom is sure because of her impiety and hate- 
ful pride. It is a well-known fact that all southern 
Italy is of a peculiarly volcanic character. The very 
soil seems to be “ stored with fire,” to use a Scrip- 
tural phrase which is applied in 2 Peter 3: 7 (literal 
rendering) to the heavens and earth as a whole. 
In a very remarkable manner is this true of the vi- 
cinity of Rome, and it may yet prove to be the means 
of its complete destruction. In such a case the 
words “ the smoke of her burning ” may be far more 
literal than some have supposed. 


312 Lectures on the Revelation 


This seems to be intensified in the lament of the 
merchants of the earth in verses 11 to 19. It isa 
magnificent elegy, and deserves more careful con- 
sideration than our limited time will permit. It 
pictures the destruction of the great commercial sys- 
tem that men are building up with such painstaking 
tare, and which some fondly look upon as the pan- 
acea for all the disturbances that have wrought such 
distress among the nations. How often was it said 
before the outbreak of the great world-war that la- 
bor would not fight and that capital dare not. It 
was claimed that there was too much at stake; but 
how false have all such predictions proved. We 
may however be assured that when it is over, for a 
time, a tremendous effort will be put forth to build 
up a financial system that will be world-embracive 
and that will unite the nations in the bonds of com- 
mercial self-interest so securely that the danger of 
such another world-conflict will be at an end. We 
know that all such schemes are doomed to disap- 
pointment, for the prophetic word has clearly fore- 
told their failure. There can be no lasting peace 
until the Prince of Peace becomes the Governor 
among the nations. 

And so we are permitted in this present portion 
of our book to stand by as it were and look on as 
Bablyon falls, and to hear her merchants bewailing 
her doom and their own tremendous losses. As her 
merchandise is tabulated, now with none to buy, we 


Babylon's Doom (chaps. 18,19: 1-5) 313 


notice among the precious things mentioned are the 
bodies and souls of men — not merely “ slaves,” as 
in the Authorized Version. And this is the awful 
thing about Babylon. She has made merchandise 
of the bodies and souls of her dupes, who, turning 
away from the rich grace revealed in the gospel, have 
sought to purchase what God was freely offering, 
only to find at last that they have sold their souls to 
a cruel and avaricious system that is conscienceless, 
and remorseless as the grave. How fearful must be 
the accounting at the judgment bar of God of those 
responsible for such terrible deceptions! 

No wonder Babylon’s fall brings joy in heaven, 
though it involves the earth-dwellers in selfish sor- 
row. ‘“ Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy 
apostles and prophets; for God hath avenged you on 
her”? (ver. 20). She had shed their blood like 
water, but the vengeance of God, though it seems 
to slumber long, shall awaken at last, and every up- 
right soul will justify God when He visits her in 
His wrath and indignation with the judgments here 
symbolized. 

The figure used in Jer. 51:63 is repeated in de- 
picting this end. A mighty angel is seen casting 
into the sea a great stone, like a tremendous mill- 
stone (fit symbol indeed of that mysterious power 
which had crushed the nations and ground the saints 
of God beneath it for so long) ; he cast it into the 
sea, crying, 


314 Lectures on the Revelation 


“Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be 
thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. And 
the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers and 
trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no 
craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found 
any more in thee; and the sound of a millstone shall be 
heard no more at all in thee; and the light of a candle 
shall shine no more at all in thee; and the voice of the 
bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more 
at all in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of 
the earth; for by thy sorceries were all nations deceived ” 
(vers. 21-23). 


How solemnly do the angel’s words fall on the ear, 
and how solemnly do they contrast with the lamenta- 
tions of the merchants of the earth, whose only grief 
is that no man buyeth their merchandise any more. 
It is the destruction of the greatest schemes and 
works of man, to make way for that which has been 
in the mind of God and promised through His 
prophets from the beginning of the world. Cain 
went out from the presence of the Lord and builded 
a city, after the murder of his brother Abel. This 
was the beginning of man’s boasted civilization. 
All the arts and sciences had their origin there. 
There were artificers in brass and iron. Trade and 
barter, the pursuit of the unrighteous mammon be- 
gan there; and there too dwelt those who handled the 
harp and the organ. Music charmed the weary sons 
of Cain as they sought to make themselves happy 
and this world attractive apart from God. The 


Babylon’s Doom (chaps. 18,19: 1-5) 315 


Lord blotted all this out in the deluge, but it is evi- 
dent that Ham, Noah’s son, had learned the same 
ways. In his family the world as an ordered sys- 
tem of things, apart from God, had a new beginning. 
Nimrod builded a city and a tower, as we have seen, 
and it became the mother-city from whence others 
went out and built a civilization, godless and selfish, 
That system eventually crucified the Lord of Glory, 
and His accusation was written above Him in He- 
brew, the language of religion, Greek, the language 
of culture, and Latin, the language of world-politics 
— the world, as such, arrayed against God and His 
Christ. And this is the world which is to reach its 
culmination in Babylon the Great, presided over by 
the greatest geniuses that earth has ever produced, 
only to be judged by God because of its inveterate 
enmity to everything holy, and its constant rejection 
of His Son. Its downfall will prepare the way for 
the establishment of the kingdom of God and the 
reign of righteousness and peace, for which human- 
ity has sighed so long. Man’s city must fall to give 
place to the city of God which shall stand forever. 
Therefore the joy in heaven at Babylon’s destruc- 
tion. 

“ And in her,” that is, in Babylon, “ was found the 
blood of prophets and of saints, and of all that were 
slain upon the earth.” This closing verse of chap- 
ter 18, I think, should make it manifest that while, as 
I have been trving to show, Rome is the inheritor 


316 Lectures on the Revelation 


of the mysteries of ancient Babylon, it also is a 
world-inclusive system of apostasy. This, and this 
alone, fully meets the requirements of this last verse. 
When God makes inquisition for blood, He finds it 
all shed by this guilty thing, Babylon the Great. 
For, had man not gone out from the presence of the 
Lord, this earth would never have been stained with 
human blood; brotherhood and righteousness would 
everywhere have prevailed. “ Babylon” therefore 
is guilty of all the corruption and violence that have 
darkened the history of the human race; it caused 
the death of the Christ of God Himself. May grace 
be given to all to whom this message comes to “ flee 
from the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man 
his soul.” 

In the opening verses of the 19th chapter we are 
given another look into heaven, and permitted to 
note the exultation that the judgment of the great 
harlot causes up there: 


“ And after these things I heard a great voice of much 
people in heaven, saying, Alleluia! Salvation, and glory, 
and honor, and power, unto the Lord our God: for true 
and righteous are His judgments: for He hath judged 
the great harlot, which did corrupt the earth with her 
fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at 
her hand. And again they said, Alleluia! And her 
smoke rose up for ever and ever. And the four and 
twenty elders and the four living ones fell down and 
worshiped God that sat upon the throne, saying, Amen; 
Alleluia!” (vers. 1-4). 


Babylon’s Doom (chaps. 18,19: 1-5) 317 


All the redeemed of every age, who when on earth 
knew something of this awful power of iniquity, will 
then rejoice that it is forever overthrown. This is 
the last time the twenty-four elders are seen in the 
book. The symbol changes in the next section, and 
the Bride, the Lamb’s wife, takes its place. The 
elders represent the heavenly saints as a worshiping 
company of holy and royal priests. But when the 
harlot-church is off the scene, the true bride appears 
and the elders are never again mentioned. It is 
noteworthy that on this their last appearance, as 
upon their first in chapter 4, they are seen in the at- 
titude of worship. They adore the Lamb as Creator 
and as Redeemer in chapter 4, and here they adore 
God as moral Governor of the universe, for the 
display of His righteous judgment. 

In response to their note of praise comes a voice 
from the throne itself, saying, ‘‘ Praise our God, all 
ye His servants, and ye that fear Him, both small 
and great.” This concludes the solemn and soul- 
stirring portion under consideration, in which the 
character and doom of the great mystery of Baby- 
lon have been so vividly portrayed. Happier scenes 
lie before us; scenes, however, that could only be in- 
troduced by the judgment of that which had so griev- 
ously departed from the living God. Happy will it 
be for us if we learn to judge, not only the unclean 
system we have been dwelling upon, but every ten- 
dency in ourselves to partake of its spirit. 


LECTURE XX 
THE -TW0O.SUPPERS 
(Chapter 19:6~-21) 


E are to be occupied with two opposite scenes 

on this occasion; one of which is to take 
place very shortly in heaven, and the other on earth. 
Both are called Suppers. The one is the Marriage 
Supper of the Lamb. The other is the Great Sup- 
per of God. The first is all joy and gladness. The 
second is a scene of deepest gloom and anguish. 
The Marriage Supper of the Lamb ushers in the ful- 
ness of glory for the heavenly saints. The Great 
Supper of God concludes the series of judgments 
that are to fall upon the prophetic earth, and opens 
the way for the establishment of the long-waited-for 
kingdom of God. 

When I use the term “ the prophetic earth,” I re- 
fer to the Roman earth; that is, to that portion of 
the world which lies within what were once the con- 
fines of the Roman Empire, and in addition to this, 
that part of the world where Babylon will hold 
sway at the time of the end. As I understand it, the 
heathen nations that have not yet taken professedly 

318 


The Two Suppers (chap. 19:6-21) 319 


Christian ground will not be included in the scene 
upon which God’s heaviest judgments will fall, 
though necessarily all the world will suffer in meas- 
ure when Christendom and Judaism are visited by 
the fires of His wrath. “The day of God’s red 
heavens ” will be world-wide, but its intensity will 
be upon the prophetic earth. 

After the harlot Babylon has passed out of the 
vision of the apostle, his attention is transferred to 
heaven, and he tells us: 


“T heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and 
as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty 
thunderings, saying, Alleluia! for the Lord God omnip- 
otent réigneth. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give 
honor to Him: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, 
and his wife hath made herself ready” (vers. 6, 7). 


The hour for the heavenly nuptials will then have 
struck. But who is the bride, or the wife of the 
Lamb, thus mentioned for the first time? Is this 
special dignity the portion of Israel, or is it that of 
the church of the present dispensation? Both views 
have been advocated by godly and able teachers, and 
one should perhaps speak with diffidence when dwell- 
ing on a theme concerning which there has been so 
much controversy. 

In the Old Testament Israel certainly is the wife 
of Jehovah; but is this the same thing as “ the bride, 
the Lamb’s wife”? Are there not revealed in these 
two expressions two different glories — the one to 


320 Lectures on the Revelation 


be manifested on earth, the other in heaven? It 
seems very plain to me that the Marriage Supper of 
the Lamb takes place in heaven just before the Lamb 
descends with all His saints to take His great power 
and reign. When He reigns His Bride will reign 
with Him. And this is certainly the church, which 
He has called out of the world for that very purpose. 
There will be other heavenly saints, as we know, 
but these are distinguished for us from the Bride. 

It also seems clear that there is a very real differ- 
ence between the wife of Jehovah (now put away 
for her sins, but to be owned by God as His own in 
the day of her repentance) and the heavenly bride 
of the Lamb, the incarnate Son, now espoused as a 
chaste virgin unto her absent Lord, and waiting for 
her marriage nuptials till He calls her home. But 
some have objected to this, to use their own words, 
as a kind of spiritual polygamy. My answer would 
be that where we are only speaking in figures the 
objection does not apply, and the church which is 
His body is distinctly identified with His wife, in 
Eph. 5 : 30-32, otherwise the figures there used be- 
come meaningless. So it seems plain that we are 
warranted in viewing Israel as the earthly bride, 
and the church as the heavenly bride, both alike dear 
to His heart who purchased them with His precious 
blood, but each having a special character of her 
own. 

The Marriage Supper of the Lamb is the time of 


The Two Suppers (chap. 19:6-21) 321 


displayed glory, when the results of the judgment- 
seat of Christ will be fully manifest in the saints. 
That event itself, as we have seen, takes place irnme- 
diately after the rapture of the church, for the Lord’s 
word is clear as to this, “ Behold, I come quickly, 
and my reward is with Me, to give every man ac- 
cording as his work shall be.’’ But the full mani- 
festation of the saints in the same glory with their 
Head and Lord, their heavenly Bridegroom, can 
only be after the false church has been exposed and 
judged; then the Lamb’s marriage day shall come 
And so we are told, concerning the Bride, that “ to 
her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine 
linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the right- 
eousness of saints” (ver. 8). It is well known to 
students of the original text that the word rendered 
“righteousness ” in this verse is in the plural, and 
should therefore be translated “ righteousnesses,”’ 
or “righteous acts.” It is not imputed righteous- 
ness that is here in view, nor the believer being made 
the righteousness of God in Christ. It is that which 
we have already seen in connection with the elders: 
the fine linen sets forth the righteous acts of the 
saints themselves, right-doing while here on earth, 
which the judgment-seat of Christ will make mani- 
fest, and which will form the wedding-garment of 
the bride on her nuptial day. 

In the light of this Scripture we may well be exer- 
cised as to our own ways. Are you, dear fellow- 


322 Lectures on the Revelation 


believer, preparing-any fine linen for that coming 
day? You are familiar with the thought of the 
prospective bride’s hope-chest. How interested the 
engaged damsel is in preparing beautiful and spotless 
articles of wearing apparel in view of her wedding 
day. May I say that we too have a spiritual hope- 
chest to fill? Everything that is really done for 
Christ is something added to that bridal chest. 
Some of us, I am afraid, will have rather a poor 
supply. The wedding garments are to be prepared 
here on earth, as the Spirit of God Himself works 
in us to will and to do of His good pleasure. Let 
us not be neglectful of this, for the time is short, and 
the night cometh when no man can work. It is true 
that even our very best deeds, our most devoted serv- 
ice, all need to be washed and made white in the 
blood of the Lamb; but He will not fail to value 
aright and to richly reward everything that was for 
His own glory in our poor straitened lives. But all 
that is done for self, all that springs from unholy 
motives, will disappear in that day ; while that which 
was the result of His Spirit working within us will 
abide forever to His praise and glory, and for our 
own eternal joy, as we see what pleasure we have 
given Him. 

But we must now pass on to verse 9. “ And He 
saith unto me, Write, Blessed are they that are called 
unto the marriage supper of the Lamb. And He 
saith unto me, These are the true sayings of God.” 


The Two Suppers (chap. 19:6-21) 323 


flere we have a class who are certainly to be dis- 
tinguished from the Bride. These are all friends 
of the Bridegroom, who rejoice in His joy and share 
in His gladness. I understand them to be the Old 
Testament saints and the tribulation saints, who, 
though they form no part of the church, are sharers 
in the heavenly glory; and these are pictured as the 
guests at the wedding who participate in the general 
gladness of the occasion, and whose presence, too, 
adds to the happiness cf the Bride and Groom. 
Thus we have a scene oi unalloyed delight and holy 
mirth, a mirth that shall never have an ending, for 
sin shall never enter there to destroy that hal- 
lowed joy. 

So ravished and enraptured was John’s heart as 
this vision passed before him that he tells us he fell 
down to worship at the feet of the angel who showed 
him these things, only to be rebuked for his grave 
mistake by the glorious messenger, who cried, “ See 
thou do it not; I am a fellow-servant with thyself 
and thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: 
worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit 
of prophecy.” Our Lord Himself, because He was 
God, received worship and blessed the worshiper in 
the case of Thomas when convinced of His resurrec- 
ticn; but the angel scrupulously refuses what be- 
longs to Deity alone. 

But the rapidly changing prophetic pictures hurry 
us on, and time too does not stay. So we ask, What 


324 Lectures on the Revelation 


will follow the Marriage Supper of the Lamb? 
What will be the next great event? Verses 11 to 16, 
which I must quote in full, will give the answer. 


“And I saw heaven opened” (and this is the last of 
those wondrous “ openings” to which I drew attention in 
a previous lecture), “and behold a white horse; and He 
that sat upon him was called Faithful and True, and in 
righteousness He doth judge and make war. His eyes 
were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns 
(or, diadems) ; and He had a name written, that no man 
knew, but He Himself. And he was clothed with a ves- 
ture dipped in blood: and his name is called The Word 
of God. And the armies which were in heaven followed 
Him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and 
clean. And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that 
with it He should smite the nations: and He shall rule 
them with a rod of iron: and He treadeth the winepress 
of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. And He 
hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, 
KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.” 


How the heart thrills and the pulses bound as we 
read this description of the descending Christ of God 
and His saints! It is the coming of the Lord to the 
earth with His redeemed, as before we have been 
occupied with His coming to the air to rapture them 
to Himself. 

You will remember that we read of a rider on a 
white horse when the first seal was broken: but that 
one did not come from heaven. He went forth on 
the earth and was of the earth; and his plans were 


The Two Suppers (chap. 19:6-21) 328 


doomed to disappointment. This rider comes from 
heaven and His plans shall never miscarry. And 
right here is the safety of the Christian. He knows 
that no future earth-born man can ever be the Christ 
for whom the Word has taught him to wait. Jesus 
came once in lowly guise, born of a woman, albeit a 
virgin; He comes again, descending from heaven, 
and all who come in any other way saying “I am 
Christ ” are but deceivers and antichrists. ‘‘As it 
is appointed unto men once to die and after this the 
judgment, so Christ was once offered to bear the sins 
of many, and unto them that look for Him shall 
He appear the second time, without sin (or, apart 
from sin, having nothing to do with the sin-ques- 
tion), unto salvation.” This is the appearing that 
is depicted here. It is the manifestation of the Son 
of God, to take vengeance on His enemies and to 
deliver His earthly people, who will be looking for 
Him with longing hearts and eager, anxious eyes. 

The description of the descending Lord is most 
striking. He rides a white horse as the Prince of 
Peace. He is called Faithful and True, as in the 
message to the church in Laodicea. He comes to 
execute righteous judgment and thus to establish the 
divine authority over all the earth. His eyes as a 
flame of fire, tell, as in the vision of the Son of Man 
in the midst of the lampstands, of His readiness to 
detect and deal with all iniquity. The many dia- 
dems upon His head proclaim His authority over all 


326 Lectures on the Revelation 


the kingdoms of the earth. The reign of misrule is 
to end when He takes the sceptre, and all the crowns 
are given to Him. ‘A Name written that no man 
knew but He Himself ” speaks of His essential glory 
as the Eternal Son, concerning which He declared 
that “no man knoweth the Son but the Father.”’ 
The mystery of His glorious person is beyond all hu- 
man ken. We sing, and rightly, 


“The Father only Thy blest name 
Of Son can comprehend.” 


His garments are to be reddened with the blood of 
His enemies, as we are told by the prophet Isaiah, 
but the vesture dipped in blood with which He is 
here seen clothed, is, I take it, like the rams’ skins, 
dyed red, in the tabernacle, the sign of His conse- 
cration unto death. It is His own blood that is here 
in view, the price of our redemption. 

It is noteworthy that He is said to have three 
names. One, we have already seen, is beyond man’s 
comprehension. The second name is “ The Word 
of God.” And we know what is involved in that: 
for it is as “ the Word made,” or more literally, “ be- 
come flesh ” that He has revealed God to us. That 
Word was spoken in time, of which we read: “In 
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with 
God, and the Word was God. The same was in the 
beginning with God” (Jno.1:1,2). Here we have 
eternity of Being, one Substance with the Father, 


The Two Suppers (chap. 19:6-21) 327 


but distinct Personality —true Deity, and eternal 
Sonship. This was the Word unspoken; but when 
the Son became incarnate, God spoke in Him, ac- 
cording to the first chapter of Hebrews, and so we 
read, “‘ No man hath seen God at any time, the only- 
begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father 
He hath revealed Him,” or, ‘‘ told Him out.” This 
is just a little of what is involved in this second glor- 
ious name. 

In order not to break the connection we might 
look now at the third name or title that He bears. In 
verse 16 we are told that “ He hath on His vesture 
and on His thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS 
AND LORD OF LORDS.” This is His official 
title, and it belongs to Him as Son of Man, the 
rightful Heir of all things. Earth would not recog- 
nize His claims when He was here the first time, 
and in derision they crowned Him with thorns and 
gave Him a cross instead of a throne; but God is 
going to reverse all this soon. He is to “ be exalted 
and extolled and be very high.’ All the kingdoms 
of earth are to be His and He will rule the nations 
with the iron rod of unswerving justice. 

It will be noticed, then, that in these three names 
we have set forth, first, our Lord’s dignity as the 
Eternal Son. Second, His incarnation — the Word 
become flesh. And, lastly, His second advent to 
reign as King of kings and Lord of lords. 

The armies in heaven who follow Him comprise 


328 Lectures on the Revelation 


(1) the church, which we have just seen as the 
Bride, (2) the saints of former dispensations, and 
(3) the tribulation saints who had been slain under 
the Beast and the Antichrist. All ride forth with 
Him, their now triumphant Lord, when He comes 
to take His great power and reign. 

The sharp sword that proceeds from His mouth is 
His word. This we have already seen in the first — 
chapter, and we remember His warning to the church 
in Thyatira, that if there were no repentance He 
would fight against them with the sword of His 
mouth. 

We are told that He treads the winepress of the 
wrath of God. The winepress is the figure of un- 
sparing judgment. This we have also become fa- 
miliar with in chapter 14. In Isaiah 63: 1-6 we 
have a remarkable passage that bears on what we 
have here: 


“Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed 
garments from Bozrah? This that is glorious in His 
apparel, travelling in the greatness of His strength? I 
that speak in righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore 
art Thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him 
that treadeth in the winefat? I have trodden the wine- 
press alone, and of the people there was none with Me: 
for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them 
in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my 
garments, and I will stain all my raiment. For the day 
of vengeance is in my heart, and the year of my re- 
deemed is come. And I loaked, and there was none to 


The Two Suppers (chap. 19:6-21) 329 


help; and I wondered that there was none to uphold: 
therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me; and 
my fury, it upheld me. And I will tread down the peo- 
ple in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, 
and I will bring down their strength to the earth.” 


This marvelous prophecy, which had a partial ful- 
filment in judgments meted out to Israel’s foes in the 
past, will have its complete fulfilment when the Lord 
comes the second time to tread the winepress of 
wrath, and to destroy all who are His own and His 
people’s foes, as depicted in the last part of our 
chapter. 

From verse 17 to the end we have a graphic por- 
trayal by the Master-Artist of the closing scene of 
judgment — the Great Supper of God — for it is 
not exactly “the supper of the great God.” The 
adjective has become transposed in our English ver- 
sion, and is there made to qualify God Himself; 
whereas, as any critical version will show, it should 
rather qualify the Supper. An angel standing in the 
sun (for the source of light which seemed to be 
blotted out under the bowls of wrath is now seen 
resplendent in glory) summons the fowls of the air 
that fly in the midst of heaven to feast upon the 
flesh of the great ones of earth and their vast armies 
who are seen gathering together for the Armaged- 
don conflict, the location of which we previously 
noticed. 

The Beast is seen marshalling his hosts, and with 


330 Lectures on the Revelation 


him his blasphemous ally and satellite, the false 
prophet — that is, the Antichrist. The kings of the 
earth, with all their hordes, are hurrying to the fray, 
all combining in one last desperate effort to make 
successful war against the Lord Jesus Christ and 
everything that is of God. But like the hosts of 
Sennacherib of old, they are palsied and stricken by 
the blast of His mouth, and their armies become food 
for the birds of prey. It is an awful picture — 
the climax of man's audacious resistance to God; a 
picture too that may fill the heart with gladness as it 
tells of the end of unrighteous rule on this planet, 
and the ushering in of the Golden Age for which all 
nations have sighed. 

Two men, be it noted, are taken alive. They are 
the two arch-conspirators who have bulked so largely 
in this book — the Beast and the false prophet, the 
civil and religious leaders of the last league of na- 
tions, which will be Satan-inspired in its origin, and 
Satan-directed until its doom. These two men are 
“cast alive into the lake burning with fire and brim- 
stone,” where a thousand years later they are still 
said to be “ suffering the vengeance of eternal fire,”’ 
thus incidentally proving that the lake of fire is not 
annihilation, and that it is not purgatorial either, 
for it neither annihilates nor purifies these two 
fallen foes of God and man after a thousand years 
under judgment. 

In the Old Testament we read of two men who 


The Two Suppers (chap. 19:6-21) 331 


went to heaven without passing through death 
Enoch and Elijah were translated that they should 
not see death. And here, ere we come to the close 
of the New Testament, we have two men brought be- 
fore us who are cast into hell-fire without undergo- 
ing physical death. Their awful doom is for the 
warning of all who turn away from Him that speaks 
from heaven, whose indignation is soon to fall upon 
all who refuse the message of His grace. 


“Lamb of God, when Thou in glory 
Shalt to this sad earth return, 

All Thy foes shall quake before Thee, 
All that now despise Thee, mourn; 

Then shall we, at Thine appearing, 
With Thee in Thy kingdom reign: 

Thine the praise and Thine the glory, 
Lamb of God, for sinners slain.” 


And now as I close, I would seek solemnly to im- 
press upon each one of my hearers that you may 
have a part in one or the other of these two Sup- 
pers which we have been considering. If saved, I 
know you will have a place at the Marriage Supper 
of the Lamb, for every blood-redeemed one of this 
dispensation will be there. Not one will be missing, 
because our blessed Lord, in grace, became the Lamb 
of God to die for your sins upon the cross, and you 
will share in that scene of bliss with Him. But you 
who refuse His grace, what will you do when the 
things of which we have been speaking take place 


332 Lectures on the Revelation 


You may be among those deceived by Satan, accept- 
ing the leadership of the Beast, and own the claims 
of the Antichrist. In that case you would have part 
in “the great Supper of God!” May God draw 
you to Himself now. Resist not the pleadings of 
the Holy Spirit, but flee at once for refuge to Him 
who said, “ Him that cometh unto Me, I will in no 
wise cast out.” 


LECTURE XXI 


THE MILLENNIUM AND THE JUDGMENT 
OF THE GREAT WHITE THRONE 


(Chapter 20) 


T is often said by those who object to the doc- 
trine of an earthly Millennium, that the term 
itself is not found in the Bible. They insist that 
neither in the Old nor in the New Testaments do we 
ever read of a millennium, and they argue from this 
that the teaching is man-made, not derived from the 
Word of God. We might reply that the mere fact 
that a certain term is not used in Scripture does not 
necessarily prove that the doctrine for which the term 
stands is not taught there. The word Trinity is not 
found in the Bible, but all sound Christians admit the 
doctrine of three persons in one God. The word 
substitution is not there either, but it is written, “‘ He 
was wounded for our transgressions,’ and that is 
substitution. Where will you find the terms, Eter- 
nal Sonship, Deity, Fall of man, Depravity, Incarna- 
tion, Impeccability (as applied to Christ), and many 
more of similar character? Certainly not on the 
333 


334 Lectures on the Revelation 


pages of the Authorized Version of our English 
Bibles. But all these terms mentioned stand for 
great truths unmistakably taught in the Book, and 
are a vital part of the teaching of Christianity. So 
the mere omission of a title or name of a doctrine 
does not prove the absence of the doctrine itself, nor 
does it prove that it is but man-made. 

However, we are not shut up to reasoning of this 
kind in regard to the Millennium, for the word in 
question is but the Latin equivalent of an expression 
that is found six times in the chapter that now de- 
mands our attention. It simply means a thousand 
years; just as a century means one hundred years, or 
a jubilee indicates the expiration of fifty years. 

A millennium, then, is a time-period. It does 
not necessarily carry with it any thought of perfec- 
tion or happiness, nor of an era of manifested divine 
government. Six millenniums have almost elapsed 
since God put man upon this globe, and there is an- 
other millennium and a fraction yet to run ere the 
course of time is finished. That last thousand years 
is the period with which we are now to be occupied, 
and I trust to show that it is the predicted kingdom- 
age of the prophets, and the “ dispensation of the 
fulness of times” of the New Testament. It is not 
only in what some have called an obscure passage in 
the Revelation, that we read of this “ good time 
coming,” but it is taught everywhere in Scripture. 

The binding of Satan, the arch-foe of God and 


Millennium and Judgment (chap. 20) 335 


man, is the first notable event of this reign of right- 
eousness. The seer says: 


“And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having 
the key of the bottomless pit (or, the abyss) and a great 
vthain in his hand. And he laid hold of the dragon, that 
old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him 
a thousand years, and cast him into the bottomless pit, 
and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should 
deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years 
should be fulfilled, and after that he must be loosed a 
little season ” (vers. I-3). 


Without attempting to explain all the symbols here 
used, it is enough to say that the passage very defi- 
nitely indicates that there is a coming time when men 
will no longer be deceived and led astray by the great 
tempter who, ever since his victory over our first 
parents in Eden, has been the persistent and malig- 
nant foe of mankrnd, and by whose wiles untold 
millions have been defrauded of their birthright 
privileges. If men sin during the millennium it will 
not be on account of having been deceived. It will 
be simply because of self-will, and the yielding to the 
lusts of their own hearts. For we need to remember 
that the kingdom age is not to be a dispensation of 
sinlessness. There will be some, even in that blessed 
time, who will dare to act in defiance of the will of 
God, but such will soon be dealt with in condign 
judgment. Such cases will, I take it, be very ex- 
ceptional, but Scripture makes it plain that there will 


330 Lectures on the Revelation 


be offences even when God’s King reigns over the 
earth. 

In the present dispensation of grace, those who 
will live godly in Christ Jesus suffer persecution; 
righteousness suffers. But in the Millennium right- 
eousness will reign: ‘A King shall reign in right- 
eousness.” In the eternal state, which follows the 
Millennium, righteousness will dwell. It will be at 
home, and every adverse thing will be forever ban- 
ished from the new heavens and the new earth. 

Daniel prophesied of the time coming when “ the 
saints will possess the kingdom.”’ To this agree the 
words of the 4th verse: “‘ And I saw thrones, and 
they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto 
them: and I saw the souls of them that were be- 
headed for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of 
God, and which had not worshiped the Beast .. . 
and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand 
years.” We have here, if I understand the passage 
aright, the last cohort of the first resurrection. 
With our Lord Himself, and the saints raised at the 
rapture of the church, and the witnessing remnant 
that were slain, and raised up in the last, the 7oth 
week of Daniel, they all share in the “ administration 
of the fulness of the seasons,” as the late Wm. Kelly 
translated the expression rendered in our Bibles 
“the dispensation of the fulness of times.” These 
saints appear in glory with the Lord, but we are not 
to understand by that, that either He or they are to 


Millennium and Judgment (chap. 20} 337 


return to earth to live. Their relationship to the 
earth will be, I presume, very much like that of the 
angels in the patriarchal dispensation ; able to appear 
and disappear at will, and exercising a benevolent 
oversight on behalf of those who live in this scene. 
“Unto the angels hath He not put into subjection 
the world to come whereof we speak.” That world 
will be subjected to the Son of Man, and associated 
with Him will be all who have shared with Him in 
His rejection. These are the throne-sitters first 
mentioned. With them will be the rest of the tribu- 
lation saints, who will suffer death rather than deny 
their God in the awful days of Antichrist’s ascend- 
ancy. Their rapture will be when the Lord appears 
for the establishment of the kingdom. 

“But the rest of the dead,” we are told in the verse 
that follows, “lived not again until the thousand 
years were finished. This is the first resurrection.” 
This does not militate against the teaching already 
advanced that the first cohort of the first resurrection 
will be summoned from their graves prior to the trib- 
ulation period, and the second in the midst of that 
time of trouble: but we have here a summing up. 
All of these classes together make up the first resur- 
rection — the resurrection of life; which is thus dis- 
tinguished from the resurrection of judgment. Be- 
tween these two will elapse the entire millennial age. 
The unsaved will remain in their graves until the 
heavens and the earth pass away. Their souls in 


338 Lectures on the Revelation 


Hades (erroneousiy rendered “hell ” in our version, 
but really the state between death and resurrection), 
and their bodies in the grave, they await the day of 
judgment at the end of time. 

“Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first 
resurrection: on such the second death hath no 
power, but they shall be priests of God and of 
Christ, and shall reign with Him a thousand years” 
(ver. 6). This is the kingdom described in such 
glowing terms by Isaiah, who throughout his entire 
prophecy sees, through faith’s telescope, the glorious 
time when Israel and Judah shall be one people in 
their own land, restored in soul to God, dwelling in 
peace every man under his own vine and fig-tree, and 
the glory of the Lord covering the earth as the 
waters cover the sea. He tells how even nature 
itself shall respond to Messiah’s rule, and the wilder- 
ness and the solitary place shall be glad for them, 
and the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose. 
The brute creation too shall be delivered from the 
curse. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all God’s 
holy mountain. The lion shall eat straw like the ox. 
The lamb shall lie down with the lion, and “a little 
child shall lead them.” All nations will then ask 
the way to Zion; and Jerusalem shall become the 
metropolis, not only of a rejuvenated Palestine, but 
of the whole earth. 

Jeremiah takes up the same happy strain, and fore- 
sees the God of Israel sending “ fishers”? out into 


Millennium and Judgment (chap.20) 339 


the sea of the nations, fishing out His people no 
matter where they may be hidden, and bringing them 
back to the land of their fathers. He sees the city 
built again and inhabited by a peaceful, happy nation 
under the reign of the righteous Branch whom God 
has promised to raise up unto David, and “in his 
days, Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell 
safely; and this is his name whereby He shall be 
called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.” 
Then they shall no longer need to “‘ teach every man 
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, 
Know the Lord, for they shall all know Him, from 
the least to the greatest of them.” 

Ezekiel adds to the wondrous story, and tells of 
the Spirit being poured out from on high, and de- 
scribes the service of the regenerated Israel, a 
priestly nation, through whom the law of God goes 
forth to all the lands of the nations. He depicts the 
millennial temple, and even tells us how the land is 
to be divided among the tribes, and does not close 
his remarkable book until he can say, “‘ The name of 
the city from that day shall be Jehovah-Shammah — 
THe LORD IS THERE,” 

All the visions of Daniel’s companion-apocalypse 
conclude with the bringing in of the fifth universal 
kingdom; and this he tells us is the kingdom of the 
Son of Man, which is to displace every other, and is 
to stand forever. This is the Stone cut out without 
hands that falls upon the feet of the Gentile image 


340 Lectures on the Revelation 


and grinds it to powder, and then becomes a great 
mountain and fills the whole earth. This is the 
kingdom conferred upon the Son of Man by the An- 
cient of Days, when the bodies of the beasts (sym- 
bolizing the four great empires that have borne rule 
over all the civilized earth) shall be cast into the 
burning flame. 

Hosea shows how Messiah would come in lowly 
grace, but, rejected by Israel, would go and return 
to His place until they acknowledged their sin, and 
would seek His face, when He will return to restore 
their souls and to ransom them from the power of 
the grave, bringing in everlasting righteousness, and 
making them a blessing to all nations. 

Joel sees the great tribulation in all its intensity, 
but beholds the glory that shall follow, and predicts 
the outpouring of the Spirit, not on Israel only, but 
on all flesh. 

Amos bears witness to the gathering again of the 
outcasts of Israel, and their re-settlement in their 
land under Jehovah’s perfect rule. 

Obadiah, who wrote the shortest of all the prophe- 
cies, though he speaks chiefly of judgment upon 
Edom, declares triumphantly, “ The kingdom shall 
be the Lord’s.” 

Jonah, alone of all the prophetic brotherhood, 
seems to have no reference to that day of Jehovah’s 
power: yet we may learn through him how wonder- 
fully God will own the testimony of Hebrew mis- 


Millennium and Judgment (chap.20) 341 


sionaries in the beginning of the kingdom age, as 
they go forth to spread the gospel among those who 
have not heard His fame, nor seen His glory. 

But Micah joins with Isaiah in describing the time 
when “ the mountain of the Lord’s house shall be es- 
tablished in the top of the mountains, and all nations 
shall flow to it,” when “ the law shall go forth from 
Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.” 
Then “ the nations shall beat their swords into plow- 
shares and their spears into pruning-hooks, and shall 
learn war no more.” 

Nahum predicts the judgments that shall befall the 
enemies of Jehovah in the day of His preparation; 
while Habakkuk, standing on his watch-tower, sees 
the coming King bringing in the glory. 

Zephaniah and Haggai point onwards to the res- 
toration of Israel, and through them the blessing of 
the whole world, when the Lord their God is en- 
throned in the midst of them, and they serve Him 
with one consent. 

Zechariah, the prophet of glory, gives minute de- 
tails that no others have touched upon, and even 
tells of the provision to be made for children’s play- 
grounds in the restored capital of Palestine, for he 
says, “‘ The broad places of the city shall be full of 
boys and girls, playing in the broad places thereof ”’ 
(literal rendering). He sees every spot in Jeru- 
salem holy to the Lord, and all nations wending their 
way thitherward from year to year to keep the feast 


342 Lectures on the Revelation 


of tabernacles. While Malachi completes the series 
and announces the soon-coming of the King, her- 
alded by the prophet Elijah, to tread down the 
wicked and sit as a refiner of silver, to purify the 
sons of Levi, and to make His name great from 
the rising of the sun to the going down of the 
same. 

Thus “to Him give all the prophets witness,” not 
only that through His name remission of sins is now 
to be proclaimed among all nations, but that He is 
to reign in righteousness over all the world, when 
He comes the second time to claim the inheritance 
which is His by Divine fiat, as Son and Heir of all 
things. Then will all the earth rejoice, for the eyes 
of the blind shall be opened, the tongue of the dumb 
shall sing, the lame man shall leap as the hart, sor- 
row and sighing shall flee away, and the Lord alone 
shall be exalted for a thousand glorious years! 


“And when the thousand years are expired, Satan 
shall be loosed out of his prison, and shall go out to de- 
ceive the nations which are in the four quarters of the 
earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle: 
the number of whom is as the sand of the sea. And they 
went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the 
camp of the saints about, and the beloved city: and fire 
came down from God out of heaven and devoured them. 
And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake 
of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false 
prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night for- 
ever and ever” (vers. 7-10). 


Millennium and Judgment (chap. 20) 343 


This is indeed an amazing anti-climax to the story 
of human life on this earth. Who but God could 
have foreseen such an ending? But it shows us the 
incorrigible evil of the heart of man if left to him- 
self. While Satan is shut up in the abyss, there will 
be many born into the world whose obedience to the 
King will only be feigned ; the heart will not be in it; 
and when the devil is loosed for a little season at the 
end of the Millennium, he finds a host of these ready 
to do his bidding and to join him in the last great 
rebellion against Omnipotence. 

It is the old story of Satanic hatred to God, and 
man’s frailty told out again; but this time under the 
most favorable circumstances, so far as man is con- 
cerned. Therefore his sin is absolutely inexcusable. 
Tested in the garden of delight man broke through 
the one only prohibition laid upon him. Tested un- 
der conscience, corruption and violence filled the 
earth, and the scene had to be cleared by the deluge. 
Tested under the restraining influence of divinely- 
appointed government, man went into idolatry, thus 
turning his back upon his Creator. Tested under 
law, he cast off all restraint and crucified the Lord of 
Glory. Tested under grace, in this present dispen- 
sation of the Holy Spirit, he has shown himself ut- 
terly unable to appreciate such mercy, has rejected 
the gospel and gone ever deeper into sin. Tested 
under the personal reign of the Lord Jesus Christ for 
a thousand years, some will be ready to listen to the 


344 Lectures on the Revelation 


voice of the tempter when at the close he ascends 
from the pit of the abyss bent upon one last defiant 
effort to thwart the purpose of God. It is a melan- 
choly history indeed, and emphasizes the truth that 
the heart of man is incurably evil. “ The carnal 
mind is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed 
can be’’; therefore the need, in all ages, of a second 
birth through the Word and the Spirit of God. 

“The heavens and the earth that are now,” we 
are told by the apostle Peter, “are reserved unto 
fire against the judgment of the great day.” This 
pent-up fire breaking forth from the heavens will 
destroy the hosts of Satan’s dupes, and purify the 
very globe itself, as once before it was cleansed by 
water. This closes the course of time and intro- 
duces the unending ages of eternity, during which 
the devil will be confined in the great prison-house of 
the lost, who have resisted God’s mercy and spurned 
His grace. What an end for him who was once 
“the anointed cherub” that covered the throne of 
God, but whose heart was lifted up because of his 
beauty, and who thus falling through pride became 
the most accursed creature in all the universe of God! 
Our Lord tells us that the devil “ abode not in the 
truth.” He is the prince of all apostates, and apos- 
tasy has ever been the great sin into which he has 
malignantly sought to lead the human race. 

The judgment of the great white throne is the 
final scene ere the new heavens and the new earth are 


Millennium and Judgment (chap. 20) 345 


introduced. It is, as a careful study makes exceed- 
ingly clear, not “the general judgment’ at the end 
of the world, as many have supposed, but the judg- 
ment of the wicked who, during Christ’s reign of a 
thousand years, have been left in the realms of the 
dead. The righteous, who share in heavenly glory 
are to be manifested, as we have seen, at the judg. 
ment-seat of Christ, there to be rewarded according 
to their service while in this world; the living na- 
tions will be summoned to appear before the Son of 
Man when He comes in His glory at the beginning 
of the Millennium, as Matthew chap. 25 makes clear. 
The wicked dead are to be raised at the end of that 
reign of righteousness and dealt with according to 
their works. The condemnation now is that men re- 
ject the Lord Jesus Christ who has made full atone, 
ment for sin, in order that all may be freed from 
wrath through Him. But if He is rejected finally, 
of very necessity men must face the penalty of sin 
themselves. 

Solemn indeed is the description of that last great 
assize. 


“And I saw a great white throne, and Him that sat 
on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled 
away; and there was found no place for them. And I 
saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the 
books were opened: and another book was opened, which 
is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of 
those things which were written in the books, according 


346 Lectures on the Revelation 


to their works. And the sea gave up the dead which 
were in it; and death and hell (or, correctly, hades — 
the unseen world, the abode of departed spirits) delivered 
up the dead which were in them: and they were judged 
everyone according to their works. And death and hell 
(hades) were cast (literally, emptied) into the lake of 
fire. This is the second death. And whosoever was not 
found written in the book of life was cast into the lake 
of fire” (vers. II-I5). 


The august Throne-occupant, we know from other 
Scriptures, will be none other than our Lord Jesus 
Christ, for “the Father judgeth no man, but hath 
committed all judgment unto the Son. . . that all 
men should honor the Son even as they honor the 
Father.” He who once hung on Calvary’s cross 
is to be the judge of living and dead. With the first 
aspect of the judgment we have already been largely 
occupied. It is, as already mentioned, the doom of 
the wicked dead that is now engaging our attention. 

When the throne is set, the heavens and the earth, 
as we now know them, shrink away, as though the 
material universe were awed by the face of Him 
who summons the dead to their accounting. What 
a sea of faces will appear before Him in that solemn 
hour of tremendous import! All the lost of all the 
ages; all who preferred their sins to His salvation; 
all who procrastinated until for them the door of 
mercy was closed; all who spurned His grace, and 
in self-will chase the way “that seemeth right unto 


Millennium and Judgment (chap. 20) 347 


a man,” but was in truth “ the way of death ’— all 
such are to be summoned to stand before that inex- 
orably righteous throne. No condoning of sin then; 
no palliating or excusing in that day: for the judg- 
ment of God will be according to truth, and every 
circumstance shall be taken into account. Nothing 
shall be overlooked. Therefore some will be beaten 
with many stripes, and some with few, according to 
the measure of light given and rejected. “The 
Judge of all the earth shall do right.’”’ And there 
shall be no appeal from His decisions, for His is the 
Supreme Court of the Universe. ‘“ What a magnifi- 
cent conception,” exclaims Thomas Carlyle, “is that 
ofalast judgment! A righting of all the wrongs of 
the ages.” And, I may add, the tracing back of 
every evil act to its source, and the placing of re- 
sponsibility for every offence against the moral law, 
where it belongs. 

None will be great enough to escape that assize; 
none too insignificant to be overlooked. The dead, 
“ small and great,” will be there. Even though their 
bodies had been buried for centuries, yea, for mil- 
lenniums in the depths of the sea, they shall come 
forth at His bidding, who when He speaks will not 
be denied. Death, the grave which has claimed 
what was mortal of man, his body, will give up its 
prey. Hades, the world unseen, will surrender the 
undying spirits and souls of the lost. Body, soul 
and spirit re-united, the man will stand trembling 


348 Lectures on the Revelation 


before that judgment Bar. The books of record 
will be opened. Memory will respond to every 
charge. The word of God too will be opened there ; 
for Jesus declared that Moses’ words and His words 
should judge men in the last day. And the book of 
life too will be unfolded there; for many in that vast 
throng had taken it for granted their names were 
there because, perchance, they had been listed on the 
roll of some church or religious society. Let them 
search and look. It will bear witness against them. 
The Lamb has not inscribed their name in that book. 
“And whosoever was not found written” in that 
book will be “ cast into the lake of fire.” 

Will any be saved who stand before the great 
white throne? Not one, if we read the account 
aright ; for death and hades are to be “ emptied into 
the lake of fire.” All the lost, whose spirits and 
bodies they have held in durance so long, will be 
emptied out into the pit of woe. And, says God’s 
Word, “ This is the second death.” Death is the 
separation of body and spirit, we are told in James 
2:26. The second death is the final separation of 
the lost from the God who created man. Like liv- 
ing planets, which, possessed of will, have swung 
out of their orbits, they dash off into the outer dark- 
ness, never to find their way back to that great cen- 
tral Sun. 

The lake of fire is the symbol of sorrow immeas- 
urable, of torment eternal. It is a divine picture in- 


Millennium and Judgment (chap.20) 349 


tended to make the soul of the sinner shrink with 
dread as he contemplates the end of those who obey 
not the gospel. It is human character made perma- 
nent, abiding in eternal sin, and therefore under the 
wrath of God forever. Not until Judas Iscariot, 
and John the beloved who wrote this book, clasp 
hands in heavenly glory, will the woes of the wicked 
come to an end., As to Judas, the Master he be- 
trayed has declared, ‘‘ It were good for that man if 
he had never been born.’’ Were there salvation 
ahead at last, even after ages of suffering, as an- 
other has strikingly pointed out, even Judas might 
well thank God that he had ever been permitted to 
live. But over the portals of the lost they inscribed 
of old, ‘“‘ Abandon hope, ye who enter here.” 

Now is the time acceptable. Now a gracious 
Saviour waits to catch the first breathing of repent- 
ance, and answers the feeblest cry of faith. Trifle 
not with His mercy, hope not for some vague second 
chance, but close with Christ now, and know for a 
certainty that you will have no part in the doom pro- 
nounced at the great white throne. For the Lord 
Himself has said, “ Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
He that heareth my word and believeth Him that 
sent Me, hath everlasting life, and cometh not into 
judgment, but is passed out of death into life” 


(John 5:24, R.V.). 


LECTURE XXII 
CLOSING SCENES 
(Chapters 21 and 22) 


T is my desire in this final address of the present 
series to briefly outline the truth presented so 
vividly in these last two chapters. There are three 
distinct divisions here. In chapter 21, vers. 1-8 in- 
clusive, we have the eternal issues. In verses 9 to 
27, and the first five verses of chapter 22, we have 
a supplementary portion giving us a detailed sym- 
bolic description of the Holy Jerusalem, the city of 
God, holding sway over the earth during the Mil- 
lennium. Then from verse 6 of chapter 22 to the 
end of the book, we have the divine epilogue, consist- 
ing in the main of practical messages from the glor- 
ified Lord to all those to whom this book may come 
in the course of time. 

In regard to the first division it is important to 
note that prophecy does not properly relate to the 
eternal state. It is particularly occupied with this 
earth up to and including the Millennium. Only 
occasionally do we have any reference in the pro- 
phetic scriptures to the unending ages that are to 

350 


Closing Scenes (chaps. 21, 22) 351 


follow afterwards. Here we are told, “ And I saw 
a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven 
and the first earth were passed away; and there was 
no more sea” (ver.1). This reminds us of Isaiah’s 
prophecy, “ For, behold, I create new heavens and a 
new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, 
nor come into mind” (Isa. 65: 17) ; and in verse 22 
of chapter 66, he says, ‘“‘ For as the new heavens and 
the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before 
Me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and your 
name remain.” Now the two chapters from which 
these verses are quoted have to do with the Mil- 
lennium, but I take it that we have here faith’s tele- 
scope looking out, even in that past dispensation, to 
the unchanging and unchangeable condition that 
shall abide forever. I have no doubt it is to these 
promises that the apostle Peter refers in his second 
epistle, after describing the destruction by fire of 
the heavens and the earth that now are, he says, 
“Nevertheless we, according to His promise, look 
for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth 
righteousness” (chap. 3:13). This, then, is the 
glorious consummation to which the opening verses 
of our present chapter introduce us. And the most 
marvelous object of that unending condition, next 
to the blessed Lord Himself, will be the church, 
which has been redeemed to God by the precious 
blood of His Son. For, observe, the bridal condi- 
tion does not cease at the close of the Millennium. 


352 Lectures on the Revelation 


Verse 2 says, “‘ And I John saw the holy city, new 
Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, 
prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.” A 
thousand years of the reign of righteousness will 
have rolled by ere the fulfilment of this verse, and 
yet the holy city is seen in all the freshness and 
loveliness of an adorned bride. And this happy 
state will abide forever, for the next two verses de- 
scribe a scene of blissful communion, which is never 
to be terminated. 


“And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, 
Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and He will 
dwell with them, and they shall be His people, and God 
Himself shall be with them, and be their God. And God 
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall 
be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall 
there be any more pain: for the former things are passed 
away” (vers. 3, 4). 


The passage is beautiful in its simplicity, and com- 
ment would only seem to be like an attempt to paint 
the rose. How longingly must every believing heart 
look forward to that glorious day! 

A voice from the throne cries, ‘‘ Behold, I make 
all things new.” And John is again commanded to 
write, and assured that ‘‘ these words are true and 
faithful.” The voice then exclaims solemnly “ It is 
done. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and 
the end.” It is the proclamation that all the ways of 


Closing Scenes (chaps. 21, 22) 353 


God have found their final issue in the full glory of 
His blessed Son, who is the first and the last. 

In verse 8 we are told of those who shall never 
enter the holy city, who will have no part in the 
bright glories depicted above. But, ere giving the 
awful list the Lord graciously extends another gos- 
pel invitation, that all to whom these words shall 
come may know that there is mercy still if they will 
but avail themselves of it. “I will give unto him,” 
He says, “ that is athirst of the fountain of the water 
of life freely.” And He follows this with a word 
of encouragement to the overcomer, “ He that over- 
cometh shall inherit all things ; and I will be his God, 
and he shall be my son.” The world may bid for us 
now, and the treacherous flesh within may seek to act 
in concert with that world and its god, and thus woo 
our souls from Christ, but who with the glorious 
promises of this book before him, but must long to 
rise above the power of present things, and, in the 
energy of the Holy Spirit overcome the world by 
faith, in view of what He is preparing for those who 
love Him! 

How gladly would we believe that not one soul of 
man will fail of the joy that is kept in store for those 
who know Christ; but, alas, alas, sin has made this 
impossible of realization; so this part of our chapter 
closes with the tremendously solemn announcement 
that “the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abomin- 


354 Lectures on the Revelation 


able, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcer- 
ers, and idolators, and all liars, shall have their part 
in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: 
which is the second death”’ (ver. 8). The list in- 
cludes not only those who are generally looked upon 
as discreditable sinners but, the cowardly — who 
were fearful of confessing Christ, because, perhaps, 
of the sneers of professed friends, or the conse- 
quences of turning from the world; together with 
the unbelieving — who refused to credit the testi- 
mony God had given, and to rest their souls upon 
the work of Christ — these both are linked up with 
the unclean and unholy of all classes, and inasmuch 
as ‘‘all have sinned, and come short of the glory of 
God,” there can be no difference in their final doom 
if Christ is rejected, though, as already noticed in 
our last lecture, every transgression and disobedi- 
ence will receive its just recompense of reward. 


Beginning with the 9th verse we have a marvelous 
description of the New Jerusalem. Note that this 
comes in upon the conclusion of the prophetic outline. 
It is a kind of appendix or supplementary descrip- 
tion. Just as one of the seven angels which had 
the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues gave to 
John a vision of Babylon the Great, in the 17th and 
18th chapters, so here one of the same angels now 
bids him come and view the Bride, the Lamb’s wife. 
Carrying him away in the Spirit to a great and high 


Closing Scenes (chaps. 21, 22) 355 


mountain, he shows him that great city, the holy 
Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God. 
Babylon was both a city and a woman— both a 
great system and a company of people professing 
to be in bridal relation with the Lamb, so here the 
holy Jerusalem is both a city and a woman. The 
city is the Bride as well as the home of the saints; 
just as we speak of Rome when we mean the church 
that has her seat there, as well as the city where she 
sits. 

_By this great city descending out of heaven from 
God, I understand then the diffusion of heavenly 
principles over all this earth during the Millennium 
by the heavenly saints, for it is through His saints 
that the Lord is going to claim His inheritance. We 
may learn in this symbolic description of the city, 
the great guiding principles which are to hold full 
sway in that coming age, and which are full of in-~ 
struction for us at the present time. The city has 
the glory of God, and her light is described as “ like 
unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone, 
clear as crystal” (ver. 11). The church is to be the 
vessel for the display of the glory of God throughout 
that age of righteousness, and, indeed, as verse 2 has 
already informed us, throughout all the ages to 
come. The “ wall great and high” speaks of sep- 
aration, a divine principle that runs throughout the 
Word of God, from the time that sin entered to the 
close. A wall is for protection too, and the separa- 


356 Lectures on the Revelation 


tion of God’s people is not an arbitrary principle, 
to their discomfort, as some seem to think, but is 
manifestly for their blessing, protecting from the 
evil without. Though the wall is great and high, 
there are twelve gates, the number of administrative 
completeness, and the gate itself, you will remember, 
is in Scripture the place of judgment ; so the thought 
would seem to be that we have here righteousness 
reigning, and provision made for entrance and 
egress, holy and happy liberty in accord with the 
holiness of God’s nature. At the gates are twelve 
angels, divine messengers, and on the gates names 
are written, which are the names of the twelve tribes 
of the children of Israel; for in the Millennium 
government is to be maintained, as we have already 
seen, through God’s earthly people being restored to 
their own land and to unbroken fellowship with the 
Lord. Thus the heavens will respond to God’s 
earthly people, Jezreel (the seed of God), in a way 
that means blessing for all the world. Three gates, 
on each of the four sides of the city, speak of the 
universality of the divine government thus fully 
manifested. 

The wall, we are told, had twelve foundations, 
and in them the names of the twelve apostles of the 
Lamb. This strikingly accords with our Lord’s 
promise to the twelve that, inasmuch as they had 
followed Him in His rejection, when the day of the 
earth’s regeneration comes they will sit upon twelve 


Closing Scenes (chaps. 21, 22) 357 


thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Just as 
in Ephesians chap. 2 the church is pictured as a holy 
temple, builded upon the foundation of the apostles 
and prophets, so here the holy city rests upon the 
chosen messengers, who are to be the representatives 
of that authority in the age to come. 

The angel who talked with John, measured the 
city with a golden reed, and the dimensions are given 
in the 16th and 17th verses. “ And the city lieth 
foursquare,” the length being as large as the breadth, 
and this, in each instance, is twelve thousand fur- 
longs, while the wall itself is one hundred and forty- 
four cubits high. We are told that the length, the 
breadth, and the height of the city are equal. It 
has been suggested from this that the city is a cube, 
which may indeed be, but I frankly confess that I 
find the symbolism in that case exceedingly difficult 
to visualize before the mind’s eye. I rather think of 
that holy city as the mountain of God, a vast pyra- 
mid resting on a foursquare base, twelve thousand 
furlongs each way, and rising to a height as great as 
its length and breadth, and the throne of God and of 
the Lamb, the very apex of it, from which flows the 
river of the water of life, winding about the moun- 
tain, in the midst of the one street of gold on either 
side of that river. But in either case, whether we 
think of a cube or a pyramid, the thought is the 
same: it is a city of absolute perfection. Twelve, 
the number, as previously mentioned, of govern- 


358 Lectures on the Revelation 


mental completeness is seen everywhere. Who can 
attempt to depict, any more clearly than the verses 
themselves describe it, a city whose wall is of jas- 
per — the glory of God; built of pure gold, like unto 
clear glass —the divine glory maintained by right- 
eousness. 

The foundations of the wall garnished with all 
manner of precious stones, answering to the stones 
seen in the breastplate of the high priest, tell of the 
particular and peculiar preciousness that each be- 
liever has in the eyes of the Lord. 

The twelve gates are twelve pearls, every several 
gate of one pearl — thus reminding us, at every en- 
trance-way, of that one pearl of great price for 
which our Lord, the heavenly merchantman, sold all 
that He had, with which to buy the church; for 
though He was rich, yet He became poor, that He 
might make it His own forever. 

The street of pure gold reminds us that our feet 
shall stand on the righteousness of God forever; in 
His justice we shall stand and walk forever. It is 
not mere mercy that is the ground of our salvation, 
but God’s glory has been fully and righteously main- 
tained in the work of Calvary’s cross, and thus He is 
faithful and just in receiving all who trust His Son. 

Whereas on earth the church is pictured as a holy 
temple unto the Lord, in that day there will be no 
temple seen, for the Lord God Almighty and the 
Lamb are the temple of it. Nearness to God will be 


Closing Scenes (chaps. 21, 22) 359 


what will characterize every saint; none will be shut 
out. Our Lord said, “ Thou hast loved them as 
Thou hast loved Me’’; so that we can sing even 
now, 
“ So near, so very near to God, 
I could not nearer be; 
For in the person of His Son, 
I am as near as He.” 


And when we get home there will be no separating 
veil, there will be no outer court, beyond which we 
dare not come, but we shall all be at home with God 
and the Lamb forevermore. That city will have no 
need of created light-bearers, such as sun and moon 
to shine init. These are for this world, not for that 
which is to come. The glory of God will be the 
light, everywhere displayed, and the Lamb Himself 
the lamp thereof. For the rendering, “ the Lamb is 
the light” hardly conveys the full thought. The 
glory of God is the light, and the Lamb is the One 
on whom that glory is centralized; He is the lamp 
from which it all shines. The glory of God in the 
face of Christ Jesus is our light even now, a light 
that has shone into our darkened hearts, and that 
light we will enjoy eternally in the home of the saints 
above. The nations who are spared to enter the 
millennial kingdom shall walk in its light, and all 
earth’s rulers will bring their glory and honor unto 
that throne city, and light their tapers at that celestial 
fire. 


360 Lectures on the Revelation 


The gates, we are told, shall not be shut at all by 
day, and night will be unknown there. I do not 
dwell on this now, for we have the same expression 
repeated in the next chapter. In that city of holi- 
ness and blessing, no unclean thing shall ever enter 
in to defile. No deceiving serpent shall enter into 
that paradise of God, nor any who manifest kinship 
with Satan, the father of lies; only those who are 
written in the Lamb’s book of life—and all who 
have judged themselves in the presence of God, and 
put their trust in Him who shed His precious blood 
for our sins on that cross of shame, may rest as- 
sured that in His book their names are written 
even now, and shall be there displayed, in the holy 
city. 

Passing on to chapter 22 we read, 


“And he showed me a pure river of water of life, 
clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and 
of the Lamb. In the midst of the street of it, and on 
either side of the river, was there the tree of life, which 
bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit every 
month: and the leaves of the tree were for the healing 
of the nations.” 


David sang of a river, the streams of which shall 
make glad the city of God. This river is the Holy 
Spirit’s testimony to the glory of Christ. It pro- 
ceeds from the throne of God and of the Lamb, for 
the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the 
Son. Who that has tasted on earth of that refresh- 


Closing Scenes (chaps. 21, 22) 361 


ing stream but longs to drink to the full of its living 
stream throughout the unending day! 

When man sinned in the garden on earth, God 
drove him forth, and set the cherubim with a flaming 
sword to guard the way to the tree of life, lest he 
should eat and live forever. But that sword of 
flame has been sheathed in the heart of the Lord 
Jesus Christ Himself. And now the blessed truth 
is made known that He who died and rose again is 
that tree of life, the leaves of which shall be for the 
healing of the nations during Messiah’s glorious 
reign, and the fruit of which shall be for the refresh- 
ment and gladness of His redeemed saints, as they 
gather by that river of joy. There the curse shall 
be unknown, for the throne of God and of the Lamb 
shall be established in unquestioned authority, and 
His servants will find delight in ever serving Him 
who, in the hour of their deep, deep need, served 
them so faithfully. Not as hirelings, seeing not the 
Master’s face, shall they serve, but with holy glad- 
ness, in His presence, beholding the light of His 
countenance, and His name stamped upon their fore- 
heads. 

The wonderful description closes with the 5th 
verse: ‘‘ There shall be no night there; and they 
need no candle, neither light of the sun; for the Lord 
God giveth them light: and they shall reign for 
ever and ever.” Oh, the nights of darkness and of 
anguish many of God’s beloved people have known 


362 Lectures on the Revelation 


in this poor world! The night is the time of mys~ 
tery, the time of suffering too, and of unfulfilled de- 
sire. The day will bring the glad fruition of all 
our hopes, and, in the full blessing of that uncreated 
light, we shall reign in light through the ages of 
ages — at home in the city of God! 

The closing verses need not detain us long. They 
are so plain, so simple, that they require but little 
comment, if any. And yet, they are so intensely 
solemn, we must not pass them lightly by, but would 
desire that each added message might sink in deeper 
into our hearts. 

The 6th verse links us again with the opening of 
the book. “ He said unto me, These sayings are 
faithful and true: and the Lord God of the holy 
prophets sent his angel to show unto his servants the 
things which must shortly be done.’’ How soon 
may all be fulfilled that we have been studying of 
late! Three times the Lord speaks announcing His 
near return. In verse 7 He says, “ Behold, I come 
quickly : blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the 
prophecy of this book.’”’ In verse 12, “ And, behold, 
I come quickly ; and my reward is with Me, to give 
every man according as his work shall be.” And 
again, in verse 20, the last word sent down to us by 
our Lord from heaven, ere the canon of Scripture 
was closed, was this: ‘‘ He which testifieth these 
Yhings saith, Surely I come quickly,” to which John, 


Closing Scenes (chaps. 21, 22) 363 


as representing all the saints, replies, “ Amen. Even 
so, come, Lord Jesus.” 

We can scarcely wonder that a second time the 
beloved apostle, overwhelmed by the abundance of 
the revelation given to him, fell down to worship 
before the feet of the angel who showed him these 
things, but again, as on the previous occasion, he is 
forbidden so to do, and the angel declares he is a 
fellow-servant both of John and of his brethren the 
prophets, and of us, in like manner, if we are among 
those who keep the sayings of this book. ‘“ Wor- 
ship God,’ he commands; and in worshiping our 
Lord Jesus Christ we worship God: ‘ For in Him 
dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily.” 

Daniel’s prophecy closes with the admonition, 
“Go thy way, Daniel, for the words are closed up 
and sealed till the time of the end ”; and, in a former 
verse, the word to him was, “ But thou, O Daniel, 
shut up the words, and seal the book, even until the 
time of the end.” But to John the angel says, “‘ Seal 
not the sayings of the prophecy of this book: for the 
time is at hand.” 

In the 11th verse we have set before us the great 
truth that science itself demonstrates, equally with 
the Word of God, namely that character tends to 
permanence. “He that is unjust, let him be unjust 
still: and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still: and 
he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and 


364 Lectures on the Revelation 


he that is holy, let him be holy still.” It is a divine 
emphasis upon the solemn truth that as a man is 
found in that coming day, so shall he remain for all 
eternity. In this world God is calling men to re- 
pent. Here, and now, He waits to renew, by divine 
grace, those who commit themselves to Him. But 
in the eternal world there will be no power that has 
not been in exercise here, to make the unjust right- 
eous or the filthy clean. 

The 14th verse, it is well to notice, is differently 
rendered in the Revised Version, and that in accord- 
ance with the best manuscripts. It is thus: 
“Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they 
may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in 
through the gates into the city.” The promise rests 
on no legal grounds. It is not doing that gives one 
title to that home of the saints. It is only the pre- 
cious blood of Christ, by which the acts of the saints 
(however well intentioned) must be washed, that fits 
any for entrance there. Outside, forevermore will 
be the false, apostate teachers, designated as dogs, 
with those trafficking with evil spirits, the unclean, 
and all murderers and idolaters, and whosoever lov- 
eth and maketh a lie. They will be outside because 
they would not prepare to enter inside while God 
was offering mercy through His Son’s atoning work. 

It is worthy of note that, when the blessed Lord 
introduces Himself by His personal name, and de- 
clares His official title in connection with Israel, and 


Closing Scenes (chaps. 21, 22) 365 


His special title in connection with the church, the 
Spirit and the bride alike are aroused to send up the 
invitation shout, ““Come.’’ We read, “I Jesus have 
sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in 
the churches. I am the Root and the Offspring of 
David.” He is the root of David because David 
sprang from Him — David's Creator and Lord, 
who called him to guide His people Israel. And 
He is the offspring of David, for as man He was 
born from a daughter of David. And He is “the 
Bright and Morning Star.” Immediately the Spirit 
and the bride respond, saying, “ Come.” It is an in- 
vitation to Him to return to shine forth and gather 
His own to Himself. And all that hear are urged to 
join in this cry, “Come.” To all those who do not 
yet know Him, the gospel invitation, for the last 
time, goes forth in view of His near return, “ Let 
him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let 
him take the water of life freely.” 

In the 18th and 1oth verses, in unmistakable so- 
lemnity, the glorified Lord Himself testifies unto 
every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of 
this book, 


“Tf any man shall add unto these things, God shall 
add unto him the plagues that are written in this book: 
and if any man shall take away from the words of the 
book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out 
of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from 
the things which are written in this book.” 


366 Lectures on the Revelation 


Oh, how unspeakably awful must be the fate of 
those who reject this testimony, and reject its mes- 
sage! Better far, never to have been born than thus 
to refuse the Word of the living God. 

Surely every believing heart can join with the 
apostle in the prayer, “ Even so, come, Lord Jesus.” 
But while we wait for His return, we would still seek 
to make known the message of His grace to a guilty 
world. 

And so, with the apostolic benediction, this book, 
and with this book the entire canon of Scripture, 
comes to a close, “The grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ be with you all. Amen.” 


ege Library 


dale Blvd. 
Calif. 90026 


LIFE. Coll 
1100 Glen 
Los Angeles, 


CLP Coltegaihe rary 
1100 Glendale Blvd. 


ee ee oe) ee 


H. A. IRONSIDE, internationally be- 
loved Bible teacher and preacher, was 
author of more than 60 volumes as well 
as many pamphlets and articles on Bible 
subjects. His writings include addresses 
or commentaries on the entire New 
Testament, all of the prophetic books 
of the Old Testament, and a great many 
volumes on specific Bible themes and 
subjects. 


Countless thousands of readers testify 
to Dr. Ironside’s helpful faculty of get- 
ting to the heart of any Scripture, and 
his clear, easily grasped outlines of even 
the most complex passages make the 
_ Bible easier to study and to understand. 


ULF E Co} 

ge Lib 
1100 Glen ale Bly 
©s Angeles 


sarapharector 
istecataes 


in 
ei 


eae gt 


is 


Ae eStats 
i 
Tike noyeanchiab
