V 


^v  OF  PRiNcTr^ 


£55 


LECTURES 


•l^f 


THE  BOOK  OF  REVELATION. 


<5^^UV  OF  FRI..,^^, 


WILLIAM    KELLY. 


NEW  EDITION. 


LONDON : 
W.   H.   BROOM,    28,   PATEENOSTER  ROW. 

187L 


.^lGi   juim  1883 


PREFACE. 


The  Lectures  here  presented  to  the  reader  were  delivered  about 
fifteen  years  ago,  taken  in  shorthand,  and  printed  in  1858-9  in 
a  periodical  form,  with  additions  or  retrenchments  throughout. 
In  1861  a  new  and  corrected  edition  appeared,  preceded  in  1860 
by  a  critical  edition  of  the  Greek  text  with  a  close  English 
translation  and  a  full  statement  of  the  authorities  (MSS.,  versions, 
and  early  citations)  and  various  readings  in  the  notes.  In  1868  a 
new  edition  in  the  periodical  form  was  issued,  and  the  following 
year  again  in  the  collected  form. 

I  trust  that,  in  spite  of  many  hindrances  to  such  a  revision  as 
one  might  desire,  the  present  edition  will  be  found  not  only 
enlarged  but  more  accurate,  though  few  are  likely  to  be  so 
sensible  of  its  defects  as  myself  May  the  gracious  Lord,  who 
deigned  to  use  it  for  the  good  of  souls,  even  when  certainly 
encumbered  with  greater  drawbacks,  bless  its  fresh  circulation 
to  the  refreshment  of  His  own  and  the  warning  of  the  careless 
or  even  the  scornful  among  such  as  know  Him  not ! 


K* 


INTRODUCTION. 


That  the  day  in  which  we  live  is  serious  and  fraught  with 
change  of  the  gravest  character  is  doubted  by  no  thoughtful 
mind.  A  sage  of  this  world  has  issued  his  Latter-day  Pamphlets. 
For  near  a  century  the  air  has  been  full  of  revolution.  Men  take 
pleasure,  especially  in  experimental  science,  which  has  yielded 
not  a  few  brilliant  results,  and  some  of  them  eminently  prac- 
tical in  facilitating  the  intercourse  of  men  and  minds.  Hence  a 
tendency  to  glorify  success,  especially  in  material  things,  and  to 
look  more  than  ever  for  progress  in  the  future.  The  past  is 
either  slighted  utterly  or  condoned  patronisingly  and  with  pity. 
All  things  are  made  matters  of  question.  The  age  prepares  to 
put  the  most  venerable  authority  on  its  trial  speculatively  as  it 
will  in  fact  ere  long.  But  it  essays  a  more  audacious  flight ;  it 
already  counts  itself  wiser  than  God's  word,  and  will  soon  accept 
a  man  as  God  Himself  in  His  temple. 

Has  the  Holy  Spirit  wrought  after  no  special  sort  in  presence 
of  Satan's  activity  and  new  wiles  ?  As  it  is  according  to  God 
to  work  invariably  for  His  own  glory  but  in  ways  admirably 
adapted  to  the  dangers  and  wants  of  His  own,  so  has  He  proved 
in  our  day.  He  has  recalled  His  children  far  and  wide  to 
Christ's  person  and  work,  to  the  Spirit  and  His  presence,  to  their 
own  forgotten  privileges  as  Christians  and  the  church  now,  as 
well  as  to  the  hope  of  His  coming  shortly. 

Hence  if  on  one  side  the  world's  restless  love  of  change  has 
imperilled  the  solid  hold  of  what  is  good  and  of  God,  on  the 
other  side  grace  has  disabused  many  of  prejudices,  detected 
faulty  or  imperfect  views,  and  opened  hearts  to  truths  stored  in 

a 


VI  INTRODUCTION. 

scripture  but  in  vain  till  the  Holy  Ghost  made  them  living.  To 
this  the  powerful  conviction  that  the  Lord  is  at  hand  contributed 
largely,  as  it  raised  in  hearts  and  consciences  the  solemn  question 
of  the  church's  state  and  of  our  own  as  individuals. 

Thus  for  good  as  for  evil  it  does  not  satisfy  to  cite  the  ways 
and  thoughts  of  men  in  the  last  few  centuries.  Some  doubtless 
drench  themselves  with  the  dregs  of  the  dark  ages ;  others  go 
back  to  the  impressions  of  the  first  four  centuries  after  Christ,  and 
think  they  have  done  much  when  they  find  themselves  coinciding 
with  the  Greek  or  Latin  ecclesiastics  of  those  days.  But  not  a 
few  there  are,  I  thank  the  God  and  Father  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  who 
have  been  taught  of  Him  to  confide  only  in  the  scriptures  by 
the  Spirit — not  in  testimony  since  the  apostles,  but  in  their 
divinely- inspired  writings. 

If  the  spirit  of  revolution  or  of  superstition  slight  the  work 
which  God  effected  by  the  labours  of  the  reformers,  faith  values 
indeed  and  gives  God  thanks  for  what  He  did  then,  but  goes 
straight  up  to  the  fresh  fountains  of  revealed  truth,  and  owns 
these  to  be  the  needed,  sweet,  and  sure  resource  of  divine  grace 
for  an  hour  when  evil  men  and  seducers  wax  worse  and  worse, 
deceiving  and  being  deceived. 

It  appears  to  me  then  that,  while  it  is  wanton  to  reject  the 
work  of  the  Lord's  servants  either  at  the  Eeformation  or  in  days 
before  or  since,  it  is  not  the  wisdom  which  befits  the  believer  at 
any  time,  least  of  all  in  face  of  our  increasing  snares  and  perils, 
to  stop  short  of  the  sources  which  are  as  accessible  to  us  as  to 
those  who  originally  received  them,  which  only  unbelief  prompted 
men  to  forsake,  to  the  grief  of  the  Spirit  and  their  own  irre- 
parable loss.  It  is  good  to  respect  Luther,  Calvin,  Bucer,  Cran- 
mer,  Jewell;  it  is  better — yea,  a  bounden  duty  to  test  what 
these  said  and  others,  respectable  indeed  but  inferior  to  them, — 
to  test  their  thoughts  by  the  living  and  abiding  word  of  God. 
Why  swear  to  the  words  of  an  earthly  master,  or  of  a  school 
which  sprung  later  from  his  words,  when  God  has  vouchsafed 
His  own,  and  given  us  the  Spirit  who  abides  in  us  for  ever  ? 

Rationalism  can  find  not  a  little  material  and  an  apparent 
sanction  for  its  own  bolder  impiety  from  the  unguarded  words 
of  the  greatest  of  reformers.     Pious  Protestanta  cherish   the 


INTRODUCTION.  VU 

memory  of  their  works,  and  hang  on  their  words  as  articles 
of  faith  and  hope.  But  there  is  no  need  for  the  Christian  to  be 
a  Protestant,  no  excuse  for  becoming  a  rationalist.  Why  not 
take  the  whole  written  word  and  trust  the  Holy  Spirit  to  give 
us  all  the  truth  suited  to  the  exigencies  of  to-day,  as  He  was 
pleased  to  strengthen  others  yesterday?  The  word  of  God  as 
such  claims  our  homage  as  the  sole  rule,  and  this  too  as  a  whole, 
not  that  measure  only  which  was  blessed  to  and  in  others  who 
have  passed  before  us.  The  Keformation  is  not  Christianity, 
nor  are  Luther  and  his  fellows  the  apostle  Paul  and  the  other 
apostles. 

I  am  thoroughly  convinced  that  the  admirable  men  of  the 
Eeformation,  though  greatly  beyond  those  who  followed  in  the 
seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries,  were  no  more  spiritually 
fit  to  traverse  safely  the  field  of  prophecy  than  their  descendants 
at  the  present  time.  It  is  a  thing  as  unknown  among  Protes- 
tants as  among  Eomanists  to  meet  with  souls  consciously  dead 
to  sin  and  law,  standing  fast  in  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ 
makes  free.  Still  less  do  they  apprehend  aright  the  union  of 
saints  with  Christ  by  the  Spirit,  and  the  character  of  the  as- 
sembly of  God  as  the  body  of  Christ  or  even  as  the  house  of 
God.  Unacquainted  with  these  truths,  as  little  emancipated 
individually  from  every  hindrance  and  bond  as  their  systems 
are  from  the  Popish  leaven  of  a  consecrated  caste  with  its 
efficacious  rites,  they  habitually  gravitate  toward  Judaism,  and 
this  in  a  prophetic  scheme  quite  as  much  as  in  doctrine  and 
walk. 

The  grounds  of  this  judgment  the  reader  may  find  too  abun- 
dantly, if  otherwise  he  himself  knows  it  not,  in  these  lectures. 
It  is  useless,  save  for  party  purposes,  to  meet  the  charge  by 
peremptory  denial  and  haughty  contempt,  I  am  sure  I  love 
the  reformers  with  a  hearty  affection  in  the  Lord,  as  I  do  those 
who  adopt  their  views  as  a  standard  in  our  day;  but  I  believe 
that  it  is  no  disparagement  to  either  if  we,  profiting  it  may  be 
by  their  footsteps,  seek  to  go  on  to  know  the  word  of  the  Lord 
more  fully. 

The  reader  will  see  that  there  is  frequent  reference  in  these 
pages  to  Mr.  E.  B.  Elliott's  Horae  Apocalypticae.     I  meant  this 

a  2 


VUl  INTKODUCTION. 

as  an  act  of  sincere  respect  to  him  and  his  elaborate  commen- 
tary, the  best  representative  of  the  Protestant  school.  It  is 
with  regret  that  one  observes  a. ruffled  tone  in  his  notice  of  my 
criticisms.*  His  answers  I  shall  here  review  in  the  hope  that  he 
may  be  convinced  of  oversight  at  least  in  some  important  details, 
if  not  in  grave  first  principles. 

And  first  I  must  say  that  it  is  not  fairly  put  (i.  p.  18)  to 
assert  that  I,  whom  he  is  pleased  to  classify  "  on  the  Futurist 
side,"  have  distinctly  renounced  many  of  the  chief  dogmas  of 
the  original  "  Futurist  school."  I  might  have  let  this  pass, 
though  in  my  opinion  likely  to  produce  the  erroneous  impression 
that  I  had  put  forth  futurism  once  and  since  "renounced"  many 
of  its  chief  dogmas ;  but  taken  along  with  his  still  stronger 
language  in  the  same  direction  (iv.  p.  644),  it  seemed  due  both  to 
Mr.  Elliott  and  to  his  readers  to  correct  the  error.  "  In  fine  (says 
he),  we  may,  I  think,  safely  conclude  to  receive  Mr.  W.  Kelly's 
judgment,  so  far  as  it  goes,  in  favour  of  the  Protestant  Historical 
view  of  the  Apocalyptic  prophecy,  as  that  forced  upon  a  person 
originally  altogether  prejudiced  against  it."  Mr.  E.  has  not 
the  least  warrant  for  these  last  words.  I  am  sorry  to  occupy 
space  about  a  personal  matter.  It  is  more  important  to  state 
that,  years  before  the  first  edition  of  the  Home  A^wcalyjHicae 
appeared  in  1844,  there  were  Christians  who  waited  for  Christ 
and  looked  for  the  personal  Antichrist,  with  the  many  momen- 
tous consequences  of  both  views,  yet  held  the  general  application 
of  the  Apocalypse  to  the  saints  and  the  world  since  the  time  of 
St.  John,  as  stated  in  my  lectures.  Nor  ought  ]\Ir.  Elliott  to 
have  forgotten  this  (as  I  doubt  not  he  did);  for  I  have  so  told 
him  orally  and  given  him  a  work  by  a  friend  of  mine  to  that 
effect,  which  was  publiished  in  1839.  He  should  not  therefore 
have  spoken  of  "renouncing"  futurist  dogmas  once  entertained, 
any  more  than  of  "a  person  originally  altogether  opposed  to 
the  Protestant  view." 

On  another  point  too  I  am  surprised  that  such  a  man  should 

•  Thus  his  note  3  to  p.  643  is  a  groat  exaggeration  of  anything  I  expected, 
which  was,  not  that  ho  would  abandon  liis  general  scheme  (no  such  exorbitant 
thought  V)eing  ever  anticipated),  but  that  ho  might  sec  how  incorrect  wore  some 
of  his  positions,  not  only  in  detailed  points,  but  oven  in  the  structural  division 
of  Rev.  xxi. 


INTRODUCTION.  ix 

SO  gravely  misunderstand.  He  contrasts  with  Mr.  Barker's 
vague  and  indefinite  views  my  writing  "  distinctly  and  expressly, 
and  moreover  in  a  certain  way  authoritatively,  as  if  speaking 
as  the  organ  of  a  not  unimportant  party  in  the  Christian 
Church" — this  because  of  my  using  the  word  "we"  sufficiently 
often  to  leave  this  impression,  {e.g.  Introd.  p.  ix.)  Let  me  say  in 
few  words  that  I  am  simply  comparing  the  thoughts  of  such 
as  like  myself  admit  a  partial  application  of  the  Revelation  to 
the  past,  but  believe  that  the  grand  and  close  fulfilment  of  its 
central  prophetic  visions  —  vi.  to  xvi. — will  be  after  the  trans- 
lation of  those  set  forth  by  the  elders  or  glorified  saints,  and  in 
order  to  their  appearing  with  Christ  in  glory.  I  am  not  alone  in 
these  convictions,  which  are  shared  by  many  intelligent  persons, 
both  Anglican  and  Nonconformist,  besides  those  who  like  myself 
refuse  to  take  a  sectarian  place  in  the  present  chaos  of  Christen- 
dom. Whatever  of  "authoritativeness"  was  in  my  words  is  due 
solely  to  my  firm  conviction  of  the  divine  word,  not  in  the  least 
to  being  the  organ  of  a  party  important  or  not,  a  thing  as  far 
from  the  fact  as  foreign  to  my  own  feeling  and  judgment  of 
what  is  due  to  the  Lord  and  the  church. 

The  first  and  main  difference  which  severs  Mr.  E.  and  my- 
self as  interpreting  the  book  is  his  denial  of  that  which  to  me 
is  certain,  that  the  epistles  to  the  seven  Asiatic  churches  were 
intended  to  give  more  than  the  actual  state  in  St.  John's  day, 
and  to  figure  successively  the  most  characteristic  phases  of  the 
church  from  apostolic  times  to  the  consummation.  Mr.  E.  in  a 
periodical  long  since  defunct  had  urged  some  objections  to  the 
late  Mr.  Trotter's  statement  of  similar  convictions  in  his  well- 
known  Plain  Papers.  It  seemed  to  Mr.  E.  inconsistent  with  the 
analogy  of  scripture  prophecy  and  with  plain  fact.* 

My  answer  was  that  it  is  in  vain  to  appeal  to  Dan.  ii.  vii.  xi. 
or  other  such  prophecies,  which  have  no  analogy  with  the 
addresses  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  these  Christian  assemblies. 
These  are  manifestly  sui  generis  and  have  no  connexion  with 
the  fortunes  of  the  world,  or  the  successive  rising  and  setting 
of  its  powers.      Supposing  such  quasi -prophetic  sketches  to 

*  I  cite  the  substance  of  the  remarks  that  follow  from  the  Introduction  of  the 
same  edition,  pp.  iv.  -  vi. 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

have  been  intended  of  God,  the  intermingling  of  the  chief 
changes  of  civil  government  among  men  would  be  to  my 
mind  an  incongruous  mixture,  instead  of  being  a  necessary 
element  of  consistency. 

Next  it  is  said  to  be  contrary  to  plain  fact ;  because  in  more 
than  one  of  the  epistles  the  prominent  characteristics  of  the 
church  addressed  disagree  utterly  from  the  state  of  the  Christian 
church  at  the  assigned  era.  So,  for  example,  very  specially  in 
that  to  Thyatira,  where  nothing  less  than  an  unintentional*  muti- 
lation is  charged  on  the  effort  to  make  out  a  case  at  all  plausible 
for  applying  it  to  the  dominion  of  Popery  in  the  dark  ages,  the 
eye  being  fixed  on  the  exception  Jezebel,  not  on  the  church 
in  Thyatira.  Whereas,  instead  of  prevalent  irreligion  and  the 
almost  complete  extinction  of  testimony  for  Christ,  the  epistle 
depicts  a  high  state  of  piety  in  the  general  professing  body 
there:  and  with  the  power  in  their  hands,  which  it  was  their 
grand  fault  not  duly  to  exercise,  of  interdicting  and  stopping 
the  teaching  of  the  woman  Jezebel. 

Such  is  a  full  statement  of  this  objection ;  but  it  has  no  real 
force.  For  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  our  [i.e.  Mr.  T.'s  and 
my]  hypothesis  assumes  a  twofold  application,  and  therefore 

♦  In  the  H.A.,  iv.  642,  note,  Mr.  E.  says  "Not  '  iyitentionaV  mutilation;  as 
Mr.  W.  K.  very  unwarrantably  represents  mo  as  saying.  I  had,  and  have,  too 
much  regard  for  Mr.  T.  to  entertain  such  an  idea."  This  somewhat  startled  me,  as 
I  had  certainly  written  as  Mr.  E.  said  K«intentional ;  and  so  it  was  in  all  the  copies* 
of  my  book  that  I  could  see.  Accordingly  I  wrote  to  Mr.  E.  asking  whether  it 
was  the  fact  that  his  copy  of  my  book  made  me  represent  him  as  saying  "  inten- 
tional"  where  I  had  really  written  the  precise  reverse,  as  he  said  himself.  It  was 
possible  of  course  that  in  his  particular  copy  the  printer  might,  by  some  singular 
accident  if  not  intention,  have  thrown  out  the  important  prefix  "un"  which 
had  led  him  to  so  strong  and  rash  a  charge  against  me,  who  certainly  would  not 
on  any  account  misrepresent  any  man.  INIr.  E.  wrote  immediately  a  private 
acknowledgment  that  it  was  his  mistake,  not  my  misrepresentation.  I  under- 
stood from  him  that  he  had  been  troubled  before  he  wrote  his  critique  with  an 
attack  of  a  complaint  which  often  leads  men  to  see  things  in  a  wrong  light. 
Any  one  is  liable  to  a  mistake,  particularly  if  he  writes  a  rejoinder,  when  it  is 
not  a  case  of  the  "double  sight"  he  imputes  metaphorically  to  mc  in  the  same 
page,  but  under  the  influence  of  such  a  malady  (not  morally,  but  physically) 
not  quite  passed  away.  But  I  humbly  think  that  ho  owed  it  to  the  Lord,  his 
readers,  and  himself,  to  have  publicly  corrected  so  gross  and  groundless  an 
insinuation,  instead  of  leaving  it  to  mo  now  nine  years  after  it  was  disseminated 
to  all  the  world. 


INTRODUCTION.  xi 

necessarily  shuts  out  a  rigid  facsimile,  which  supposes  a  single 
set  of  circumstances  wherein  it  can  be  verified.  The  churches 
are  addressed  as  such,  that  is,  as  standing  on  the  footing  on 
which  Christ  had  set  the  church,  though  the  evils  that  were 
come  or  coming  in  are  notified  to  those  churches  as  thus  respon- 
sible. The  address  is  not  to  Balaam  or  Jezebel,  but  to  assem- 
blies where  the  germs  of  those  symbolic  forms  of  iniquity  were 
found,  and  therein  to  those  who  had  the  consciousness  of  the 
Christian  profession.  Plainly  therefore  it  is  the  character,  not 
necessarily  the  extent,  of  the  evil  (or  of  the  state,  whatever  it 
might  be),  which  is  or  could  be  noticed  here.  If  it  was  general 
deadness,  such  is  the  state  indicated,  and  that  in  a  particular 
order ;  if  the  seductions  of  false  teachers  were  aimed  at,  this  is 
also  found ;  but  in  no  case  is  there  an  attempt  to  define  the 
extent  of  the  sphere  which  might  be  thus  leavened. 

Hence  I  do  not  see  in  Thyatira  a  broken  centre  in  the  array 
of  evidence,  but  rather  an  unmistakably  strong  and  conspicuous 
front.  The  solemn  principle  that  appears  in  it  is  that  even 
there  the  church  was  then  the  birthplace  of  children  born  to 
Jezebel  in  adultery.  The  point  is  not  the  number  of  her  chil- 
dren ;  but  that,  up  to  the  Lord's  warning,  the  saints  accepted  this 
condition  of  things.  There  might  be  ever  so  abundant  works 
and  service,  faith  and  love.  Still  the  evil  of  Jezebel  was  allowed. 
The  good  was  no  doubt  far  more  prominent  in  the  primitive 
Christian  assembly,  the  evil  no  longer  an  exception  winked  at, 
but  infinitely  more  developed  and  systematized  in  mediaeval 
Christendom ;  though  I  am  far  from  thinking  that,  in  these 
dark  ages,  there  may  not  have  been  an  amount  of  loving  though 
unintelligent  devotedness,  of  which  it  becomes  not  men  of  the 
present  hour  to  speak  too  lightly.  In  short  the  epistle  applied 
literally  to  Thyatira  in  St.  John's  days,  while  for  him  who  has 
ears  to  hear  there  is  much  to  intimate  a  further  reference  to  a 
time  when  Jezebel  and  her  children  might  have  the  upper  hand, 
a  faithful  remnant  be  defined  most  strikingly,  and  faith  called 
to  look  onward  to  the  Lord's  coming  as  the  only  solace. 

It  is  quite  the  mistake  of  Mr.  E.  that  this  view  implies  that 
Protestants  are  "the  synagogue  of  Satan."  For  I  agree  with 
many,  living  as  well  as  dead,  that  Protestantism  is  set  forth  by 


XU  INTRODUCTION. 

Sardis.  The  other  most  sweeping  sentence  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
prefigured  those  who  msist  on  a  traditional  religion  of  sacramen- 
talism  and  succession,  the  modern  Judaizers,  who  have  put  forth 
such  painfully  successful  efforts  to  revive  a  system  of  doctrine 
and  rites,  which,  nipped  in  the  bud  by  apostolic  vigilance, 
especially  by  St.  Paul,  afterwards  expanded  into  gigantic  pro- 
portions in  the  catholic  days  of  early  Christendom,  even  before 
the  empire  had  renounced  Paganism,  and  of  course  long  before 
the  full-blown  Popery  of  Eome.  (Compare  Rev.  ii.  9  with  chap, 
iii.  9.)  Can  anything  more  exactly  describe  them,  though  good 
men,  like  a  Barnabas  of  old,  may  be  ensnared  in  it  for  a  while  ? 

The  argument  drawn  from  the  agreement  or  from  the  discord 
of  commentators,  Mr.  E.  probably  knows  I  do  not  consider 
entitled  to  much  attention.  But,  from  the  days  of  Abbot  Joachim 
at  least  till  our  own,  it  is  impossible  to  deny  that  some  of  the 
most  godly  and  thoughtful  students  of  the  book  have  embraced 
the  view  of  a  prophetic  as  well  as  historical  sense  of  these 
epistles.  Brightman,  Forbes,  Mede,  More,  Gill,  Sir  I.  Newton, 
Vitringa,  and  Cuninghame,  are  among  the  names  of  departed 
writers,  who  might  well  claim  respectful  attention,  especially 
from  their  companions  of  the  Protestant  school.  Shades  of 
difference  there  are  between  these  and  others ;  but  all  agree  in 
the  common  principle  of  a  continuous  and  periodistic  force 
appertaining  to  the  seven  epistles.  And  so  far  is  this  from  being 
a  peculiarity  of  those  who  look  for  a  future  personal  Antichrist, 
that  on  the  contrary  mere  futurism  is  opposed  to  it  as  decidedly 
as  praeterism. 

In  short  I  do  not  affirm  that  the  seven  epistles  to  the  Asiatic 
churches  are  strictly  prophetic,  like  "  the  things  which  must  be 
after  these,"  which  are  the  prophecies  of  the  book.  But  I  do 
hold  that,  just  as  Daniel  iii.-vi.  gives  us  historical  facts  divinely 
selected,  as  is  ever  the  case  with  inspiration,  and  in  strict  keeping 
as  prophetic  types  with  the  formal  visions  of  the  prophet,  so  is 
it  with  the  mystery  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks.  They  had, 
like  the  incidents  recorded  of  the  kings  in  Babylon,  a  bearing 
deeper  than  the  history,  and  like  them  also  they  pave  the  way 
for  the  predictions  which  follow.  As  with  all  types  or  parables, 
it  is  only  a  cavil  to  insist  on  a  technical  minuteness  of  appli- 


INTRODUCTION.  xiii 

cation  in  order  to  throw  overboard  the  profound  lessons  of  truth 
they  convey  to  the  circumcised  ear.  The  objection  of  Mr.  E, 
is  the  less  reasonable  in  the  instance  of  Thyatira,  because  in 
types  every  one  familiar  with  them  knows  that  the  woman 
typically  represents  a  given  state,  good  or  evil,  the  man  rather 
activity  in  good  or  evil.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was  important 
to  guard  against  the  notion  that  God  sanctioned  so  frightful  a 
state  of  Popery,  which  was  but  an  enormous  falling  away  from 
the  truth,  the  real  witnesses  in  His  eyes  being  now  "  the  rest" 
or  "  remnant,"  who  were  then  first  defined  in  this  typico-historic 
sketch  of  Christendom.  For  myself,  though  I  may  fail  to  con- 
vince those  who  are  strongly  committed  to  a  denial  of  the 
protracted  view  of  "  the  things  that  are,"  I  cannot  see  how,  if 
the  Spirit  had  designed  such  a  view,  the  elements  for  it  could 
have  been  otherwise  so  admirably  disposed  to  that  end  without 
destroying  its  past  use.  What  Mr.  E.  taunts  as  "  a  most  curious 
double  view"  is  really  characteristic  of  scripture  in  general ; 
and  of  all  the  inspired  writers,  he  who  is  at  once  the  deepest 
and  the  most  sober  is  tlie  one  who  most  frequently  initiates  us 
into  this  use  of  Old  Testament  facts  and  persons.  That  it  should 
be  employed  in  a  more  orderly  method  and  a  more  complete 
measure  in  the  Eevelation  than  in  preceding  books  of  prophecy 
is  exactly  in  harmony  with  what  is  true  in  all  other  respects  of 
that  book  as  compared  with  the  prophets  who  went  before  St. 
John.  Why  should  deep-reaching  perfectness  be  incredible  in 
his  eyes  ?  Ample  reasons  have  been  given  for  so  interpreting 
these  epistles,  besides  answering  his  objections  in  a  way  satis- 
factory to  many  unbiassed  men. 

_N"or  does  Mr.  E.  attempt  fairly  to  grapple  with  the  vision 
of  the  twenty-four  crowned  elders  in  Rev.  iv.  v.,  corroborated  by 
their  position  throughout  the  book,  as  proving  the  translation  of 
the  saints  after  the  seven  churches  are  closed  and  before  the 
proper  prophetic  action  begins.  "A  double  view  truly  marvel- 
lous !"  (p.  648)  is  a  feeble  reply  to  a  plain  fact  which  I  urge 
afresh  on  Mr.  E.,  and  which  neither  he  nor  any  other  historicalist 
has  ever  fairly  faced.  There  is  scarce  more  difficulty  in  the  mode 
of  the  twofold  application  here  than  in  the  ordinary  difference  of 
the  type  and  its  antitype  (p.  644),    Such  a  difference  is  credible 


XIV  INTRODUCTION. 

to  Mr.  E.  in  the  high  priest  literally  and  typically;  nor  is  there 
a  whit  more  of  particularity  in  the  Apocalypse  than  in  Leviticus. 
The  order  and  accuracy  in  detail  are  divinely  perfect  throughout 
scripture,  though  Dr.  Fairbairn  in  his  Typology  is  as  slow  to 
believe  in  the  figures  of  the  law  as  Mr.  E.  in  those  of  the 
Apocalypse.  I  am  sure  that  "  my  more  intelligent  readers  "  will 
agree  with  me  that  this  is  little  to  the  credit  of  two  men  who 
have  undertaken  a  task  to  which  they  prove  themselves  some- 
what unequal,  and  that  such  reasoning  and  pleasantry,  or  what- 
ever it  may  be  best  designated,  will  be  acceptable  to  such  only  as 
feebly  know  the  scriptures  and  the  power  of  God. 

Thus  was  the  case  put  in  my  former  Introduction  :  "In  passing 
it  may  here  be  asked,  What  satisfactory  reason  can  historicalists 
offer  for  the  occurrence  of  such  scenes  [as  Eev.  iv.  v.]  at  this 
point  ?  It  is  easy  to  make  remarks  on  the  heavenly  company 
and  the  Apocalyptic  scenery;  that  is,  particular  points  in  the 
vision ;  but  why  and  how  have  we  such  a  vision  here  at  all  ? 
There  is  no  serious  attempt  that  I  know  of  to  account  for  the 
disappearance  of  churches  on  earth  thenceforward,  nor  for  the 
fact  that  tlie  full  company  of  the  royal  priesthood,  or  at  least 
the  representative  heads  of  all  the  courses,  are  then  seen  in 
heaven.  What  event  was  there  in  Mr.  E.'s  view,  immediately 
before  the  reign  of  Nerva,  which  could  call  out  the  special  joy 
and  worship  of  heaven,  or  the  new  action  with  wliich  God  and 
the  Lamb  begin  to  occupy  themselves  ?  If  that  wondrous  change, 
the  removal  to  heaven  of  the  saints  now  glorified,  be  supposed 
to  have  taken  place,  all  is  explained.  A  turning  point  is  reached 
in  the  application  of  the  ways  of  God,  who,  having  gathered  to 
Himself  His  heavenly  redeemed  from  the  beginning  to  that 
epoch,  then  proceeds  to  reveal  the  process  of  His  providence  for 
accomplishing  His  earthly  purposes  to  His  own  glory  and  that 
of  Christ;  that  is.  His  future  dealings,  not  as  now  with  the  one 
body  wherein  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,  but  expressly  with 
Israel  and  the  nations,  remnants  of  whom  will  be  raised  up  to 
bear  a  testimony  to  the  plans  which  God  will  have  in  hand. 
Not  that  He  will  not  have  His  saints  and  witnesses  among 
them  both ;  but  they  are  so  foreshown  in  the  character  of  their 
experiences  Godward  and  manward,  and  the  attitude  of  God 


INTRODUCTION.  XV 

Himself  toward  them  and  men  generally  is  so  described,  as  to 
evince  a  condition  essentially  different  from  that  which  subsists 
now;  and  all  most  confirmatory  of  the  idea  that  the  rapture  of 
the  saints  will  then  be  an  accomplished  fact.  Nothing  simpler, 
if  the  church  state,  '  the  things  which  are,'  continue  no  longer, 
the  risen  saints  be  gone  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  the  eve 
of  the  great  crisis  of  the  earth  come.  Not  a  hint  is  dropped  that 
the  crowned  and  enthroned  elders  are  disembodied  spirits,  but 
the  contrary  is  implied  in  all  that  is  said  of  them.  When  souls 
are  meant,  they  are  so  specified,  as  in  Eev.  vi.  and  xx.  Moreover 
the  elders  are  a  complete  symbol.  Whatever  the  special  portion 
in  glory  assigned  to  subsequent  sufferers,  the  elders  remain  a 
definite  company  from  chap,  iv,  to  xix.,  and  receive  no  addition 
to  their  number.  Their  complement  is  made  up  from  the  first 
presentation  above,  and  that  figure  only  vanishes  when  the 
marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and  a  new  symbol  is  needed  to 
convey  the  new  circumstances  of  the  saints  already  transfigured 
and  taken  to  heaven. 

"On  the  protracted  Protestant  scheme,  which  I  believe  to 
have  a  certain  measure  of  truth,  the  vision  may  be  regarded 
vaguely  as  a  sort  of  pictured  pledge,  or  perhaps  anticipation,  of 
the  church's  heavenly  glory,  while  the  providential  actings  of 
God  toward  the  world  are  afterwards  unfolded.  But  when  we 
raise  the  question  of  exact  and  full  interpretation,  I  see  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  these  chapters  reveal  the  position  of  the 
glorified  saints  above,  after  churches  are  no  longer  spoken  of  on 
earth,  and  Ijefore  the  Lord  and  His  armies  emerge  from  heaven 
for  the  war  witli  the  beast  and  the  reign  over  the  earth.  It  is 
properly  a  scene  in  heaven  after  the  actual  ecclesiastical  state  is 
closed,  and  before  the  millennium  commences — a  scene  which 
inaugurates  the  very  momentous  interval  between  the  two,  when 
it  becomes  a  question  of  judicial  inflictions  from  God,  and  new 
classes  of  saints,  invested  with  a  testimony  most  appreciably 
distinct  from  the  church,  are  called  to  glorify  Him  in  the  midst 
of  the  fires." 

If  Mr.  E.  thinks  he  has  truth,  and  cares  for  many  who  believe 
him  utterly  wrong  as  to  this  which  I  am  convinced  is  the  key 
to  the  just  and  full  understanding  of  the  Apocalypse,  he  would 


XVI  INTRODUCTION. 

do  well  to  put  forth  all  he  can  in  meeting  the  brief  statement 
now  repeated  with  the  detailed  proofs  which  are  continually 
referred  to  as  evidence  presents  itself  through  my  lectures  on 
the  Eevelation.  If  I  am  right,  the  closer  his  examination  the 
less  he  will  have  to  regret  it ;  if  he  can  shew  me  wrong,  I  trust 
I  shall  be  truly  grateful  for  his  serving  the  Lord  in  correcting 
me  and  those  swayed  by  my  statements. 

In  his  tabular  scheme  given  of  the  Apocalyptic  plan  according 
to  my  thoughts  (p.  645),  I  have  only  to  remark  that  it  is  tlie 
coming  Eoman  prince  who  breaks  covenant  with  the  Jews,  veiy 
likely  in  concert  with  the  Antichrist  or  wilful  king  in  the  holy 
land;  that  is,  the  beast  from  the  sea  in  all  probability  along 
with  the  second  beast  (from  the  earth  or  land),  if  we  speak  in 
the  symbolic  language  of  Eev.  xiii.  As  they  are  thus  of  one 
mind  and  policy,  the  confusion  of  these  two  practically  is  of 
little  moment.  Not  so  if  (as  I  understand  Mr.  E.'s  vi.)  he  makes 
me  teach  that  the  Assyrian  is  the  last  head  of  the  re-united 
Eoman  empire.  The  Assyrian  may  be  identified,  as  I  judge, 
with  the  king  of  the  north  (Dan.  xi.),  but  he  is  certainly  not  the 
Apocalyptic  beast  from  the  abyss,  any  more  than  he  is  the  king  in 
the  holy  land  with  whom  he  wages  war  at  the  time  of  the  end. 
I  wonder  that  an  intelligent  man  like  the  author  of  ^.  -4.  could 
so  misconstrue  some  of  the  main  points  of  my  book,  whereon  I 
have  strongly  objected  to  the  muddle  of  ancients  and  moderns. 
Here  Mr.  E.  seems  to  make  me  just  like  the  rest  where  I  stand 
firmly  opposed.  So  again  I  do  not  understand  his  representing 
my  thought  thus  at  the  close  of  all — 

"  Great  white  Throne. 
1000  days." 
Can  any  reader  divine  ?  It  crossed  me  that  he  perhaps  meant 
1000  years ;  but  he  knows  well  that  I  consider  hh  putting  the 
great  white  throne  before,  instead  of  after,  the  thousand  years 
and  the  short  space  that  follows,  a  blunder  of  the  greatest  mag- 
nitude, though  he  is  not  quite  alone :  two  writers  at  least  had 
preceded  him  in  so  flagrant  a  perversion  of  the  chapter.  But 
1000  days  or  years  are  alike  wrongly  imputed  to  me  ;  for  I  judge 
that  eternity  (the  new  heaven  and  earth  in  the  most  absolute 
sense)  is  the  one  and  only  thing  that  follows  the  resurrection 


INTRODUCTION.  XVll 

and  judgment  of  the  wicked  dead,  who  have  their  portion  in  the 
lake  of  fire. 

In  his  "Addendum"  (pp.  644-653)  Mr.  E.  complains  of  sundry 
strong  animadversions  of  mine  on  certain  points  of  his  Apoca- 
lyptic Exposition  "by  no  means  altogether  in  that  spirit  of 
fairness  and  candour  which  might  have  been  anticipated  from 
the  courteous  notice  of  myself  and  my  Commentary  in  his 
Introduction."  He  has  certainly  overrated  the  careful  study 
I  had  given  to  the  H.  A.,  though  it  is  true  that  I  bore  in  review 
the  book  as  a  whole  in  revising  the  reports  of  my  lectures  for 
the  press.  These  he  arranges  under  two  heads  as  follows  : — 1st, 
Mr.  E.'s  asserted  errors  in  the  adoption  of  certain  wrong  readings 
of  the  Apocalyptic  Greek  Text,  as  readings  of  quite  insufficient 
authority ;  2ndly,  asserted  errors  in  certain  of  his  renderings 
of  the  Greek,  and  of  his  historical  applications  of  the  prophecy. 
"  1.  Asserted  erroneous  readings  of  the  Greek  text  preferred  in  the 
Horae."  Of  these  Mr.  E.  selects  four,  which  he  seems  to  think 
most  important. 

"  1.  In  Apoc.  xi.  8,  Mr.  E.  repeatedly  but  incorrectly,  of  course 
through  oversight,  represents  the  reading  in  the  critical  editions 

[he  says   now]  ctti  rqs  TrXaruas  ttjs  rrokews  rrjs  /AcyaAiyy    (contradis- 

tinctively,  I  presume,  to  ttX.  ttoA.  tt/s  /^ey.,  without  the  tyjs).  So 
Mr.  K.,  p.  198."  The  reader  will  be  surprised,  and  I  doubt  not 
Mr.  E.  himself,  to  hear  that  I  do  nothing  of  the  kind ;  and  that 
Mr.  E.  not  only  misunderstood  but  misquotes  me  is  the  whole 
point  of  the  matter.  What  I  really  say  is,  "  Were  the  reading  such 
as  Mr.  E.  repeatedly  represents  it  (of  course  through  oversight), 
7rAaT£ta  rrjs  ir.  ttjs  fji-  (H.  A.,  [4th  ed.]  vol.  ii.  p.  396,  note  4,  and 
yet  more  incorrectly  in  vol.  iv.  p.  543,  note  2),  there  had  been 
no  room  for  this  rendering  ['the  great  street  of  the  city'],  which 
some  very  competent  judges  prefer." 

Eeally  it  is  beyond  measure  careless  to  add  a  fresh  series  of 
blunders  now.  The  fact  is,  though  it  was  always  in  my  eyes  a 
point  of  no  moment,  Mr.  E.  misquoted  the  Greek  text  from  the 
New  Testament  in  his  fourth  edition,  and  misquotes  me  in  his 
fifth,  and  has  evidently  not  seen  that  all  this  is  exclusively  and 
inexcusably  his  own  mistake,  which  strongly  illustrates  my 
accusation  of  the  great  want  of  critical  knowledge  and  tact,  not 


XVm  INTRODUCTION. 

only  a  conspicuous  feature  in  a  man  of  his  general  ability,  and 
acquirements,  but  most  injurious  to  a  commentator  on  a  book 
which  from  its  wretched  state  in  the  received  text  demands  these 
qualities  more  than  any  other  in  the  New  Testament. 

Here  then  I  reiterate  to  the  letter  my  statement,  which  Mr.  E. 
must  see,  if  instead  of  trying  to  defend  himself  from  a  charge 
of  nothing  more  than  oversight,  he  will  kindly  compare  the 
two  references  to  his  fourth  edition  according  to  my  note.  I  did 
not  object  to  the  rrjs,  for  it  is  my  own  reading,  as  it  is  that  of 
every  critical  editor  of  the  Revelation,  save  Griesbach  and 
Scholz.  But  in  that  fourth  edition  he  misquoted  TrXaTcta  for 
7r\aT€ias,  the  unquestionable  reading  of  all  jNISS.;  but  on  the 
second  occasion  referred  to  he  says  ev  ry  TrXaTcto,  rqs  TroXcwy  Tqs 
fieyakrjs,  which  differs  in  the  first  three  words  from  every  known 
copy  and  edition.  Had  Mr  E.  taken  the  trouble  to  read  his  own 
quotations  with  my  remark,  comparing  both  with  any  Greek 
Testament  whatever  (not  to  speak  of  a  critical  edition),  he  would 
have  seen  that  I  was  simply  correcting  two  misquotations  of 
his,  the  last  much  the  worst,  which  last  is  repeated  once  more 
with  its  three  first  words  quite  wrong  in  the  5th  edition,  iv.  579, 
note  1 — not  p.  580,  which  contains  no  such  reference.  "What  Mr. 
E.  deduces  at  the  end  of  the  paragraph  of  course  therefore  falls 
to  the  ground.  The  whole  case  is  no  bad  example  of  the  extreme 
looseness  of  citation  in  the  H.  A.  Had  he  looked  into  my 
Greek  text,  he  would  have  seen  that  I  read  as  all  save  the  two 
already  named,  who  seem  to  have  neglected  entirely  their  own 
evidence,  as  well  as  much  since  better  known.  Bishop  Middleton 
is  quite  right  in  what  he  says  that  the  article  is  required  before 
TToXeois.  Even  the  Complutensian  edition  is  correct,  and  though 
Erasmus  introduced  the  error  into  the  first  published  edition  and 
all  those  which  followed,  it  is  now  known  that  it  was  his  own 
error,  not  the  bad  reading  of  his  manuscrij^t ;  for  Codex  Reuch- 
lini  exhibits  tVi  Ttjs  ttX.  Trjt  ir. 

"2.  At  page  203  Mr.  K.  animadverts  on  my  preferring  the 

reading  rjvoiyrj  6  vaoj  Tov  0eou  ev  to)  ovpavio,  in  Apoc.  xi.  19,  to  rjvoiyr]  6 

vaos  TOV  0.  6  €v  TO)  ovp.,  which  he  regards  as  that  of  best  MS.  autho- 
rity. In  reply  to  which  charge  I  have  to  say  that  what  I  prefer 
is  the  reading  of  Griesbach,  Scholz,  Heinrichs,  Tregelles,  Alford; 


INTRODUCTION.  XIX 

Wordsworth  alone  of  the  critical  editors  by  me  prefening  the 
other  reading." 

What  I  do  say  in  my  page  203  makes  Mr.  E.'s  present  state- 
ment just  cited  more  serious  than  the  former  one,  and  is  to  my 
mind  unaccountable  in  a  careful  scholar.  "The  true  reading 
is  probably  6  cv  tw  oipavw  (i.e.  which  is  in  heaven).  At  any  rate, 
so  the  Alexandrian  and  the  Paris  rescript,  the  Leicester,  a  Vati- 
can cursive  (579),  the  Middlehill,  the  Montfort,  and  one  of  the 
Parham  (17)  manuscripts  say,  not  to  speak  of  the  Cod.  Coislin. 
of  Andreas  and  Victorinus.  Mr.  E.  is  also  quite  wrong  in 
saying  that  '  according  to  Tregelles  this  is  a  mistake.'  It  is  true 
that  in  his  first  edition,  he  omits  this  various  reading,  though 
long  before  noted  by  Walton,  Mill,  Bengel  (Wetstein  probably 
[I  now  add  certainly]),  and  even  adopted  without  question  in 
the  text,  not  of  Wordsworth  only,  but  of  Lachmann  and 
Tischendorf,  as  it  appears  to  be  by  Tregelles,  judging  from  the 
new  edition  of  1859  [which  gave  the  English  only,  not  the 
Greek].  How  it  was  that  Mr.  E.  did  not  find  it  in  the  critical 
editions  of  Griesbach  and  of  Scholz,  it  is  not  for  me  to  say ;  but 
there  it  unquestionably  may  be  found  by  any  who  examine 
them.  In  Hahn's  manual  one  could  not  rightly  expect  such  a 
thing."  Such  was  my  notice  of  Mr.  E.'s  note  5,  page  478, 
vol.  ii.,  fourth  edition,  where  he  had  the  temerity  to  say  "Words- 
worth reads  6  vaos  rov  ©eov  6  ev  TO)  ovpavio,  with  the  article  6 :  as  if 
in  A  and  C.  [! !]  But  according  to  Tregelles  this  is  a  mistake. 
Nor  do  I  find  it  in  any  of  the  critical  editions,  whether  Gries- 
bach, Scholz,  Hahn,  Tregelles,  or  Heinrichs.  And  in  the  parallel 
passage,  Apoc.  xv.  5,  Wordsworth,  as  well  as  all  the  others, 
read  rjvotyr]  6  vaos  .  .  .  ev  T<a  ovpavw."  Now  it  must  be  evident  to 
any  candid  mind  that  my  fault  with  Mr.  E.  was  not  the  question 
of  adopting  o,  for  I  myself  bracketed  it  in  my  Greek  text,  and 
therefore  doubted  it  more  than  the  greatest  of  modern  critics, 
and  only  used  the  word  "probably"  in  the  note  before  Mr.  E. 
What  I  charged  him  with  was  the  extraordinary  tissue  of  errors, 
which  he  now,  one  is  sorry  to  see,  evades  by  an  argument  about 
the  reading.  He  distinctly  affirmed  in  his  fourth  edition  that 
when  W.  read  the  disputed  6  as  if  in  A  and  C,  this  was  a 
mistake  according  to  Tregelles.    I  denied  both  the  mistake  and 


XX  INTRODUCTION. 

that  T.  says  anything  of  the  sort.  Dr.  T.  knows  the  readings  of 
the  Eevelation  far  too  well  to  be  guilty  of  an  assertion  so  mon- 
strous in  the  eyes  of  any  one  acquainted  with  such  matters. 
He  never  said  so.  He  omitted  this  various  reading  in  his  first 
edition — a  rare  fault  with  him;  for  the  book  was  in  most  respects 
very  well  done  and  abounded  in  sound  information.  But  T.'s 
omission  (which  the  most  careful  may  fall  into  sometimes)  is  no 
warrant  for  using  his  name  to  deny  o  to  be  the  reading  of  A  and 
C,  as  it  certainly  is.  And  I  corroborated  this  by  referring  to 
Tregelles's  new  edition  (English)  of  1859,  in  which  he  gives 
the  clause,  "And  the  temple  of  God*  which  is  in  heaven  was 
opened."  This  can  leave  no  doubt  how  utterly  mistaken  Mr.  E. 
was.  Further,  though  not  adopted  in  the  text  of  Griesbach  or 
Scholz,  the  reading  is  given  with  the  authorities  then  ascertained. 
I  must  add  too  that  the  changes  in  the  new  note  seem  to  shew 
that  Mr.  E.  was  aware  in  measure  that  his  statement  in  the 
fourth  edition  could  not  be  justified.  For  he  has  materially 
modified  the  matter  in  liis  fifth  edition  (ii.  489,  note  5) : 
"Wordsworth  comments  on  this,  as  if  6  vaos  tov  ©eou  6  ev  iw  ovpavio, 
with  the  article  6,  were  the  true  reading.  But  such  is  not  the 
case.  I  do  not  find  it  in  any  of  the  critical  editions,  whether  of 
Griesbach,  Scholz,  Hahn,  Tregelles,  Heinrichs,  or  Wordsworth 
himself  Moreover,  in  the  parallel,"  &c.  It  is  some  satisfaction 
to  me  that,  if  Mr.  E.  defends  himself  so  bravely  in  vol  iv.  when 
he  is  criticising  me,  it  is  very  plain  that  he  silently  used  the 
correction  afforded  as  to  some  of  the  chief  points  here  which 
disappear  from  the  fifth  edition  as  compared  with  the  fourth.  It 
is  odd  to  class  Hahn  and  Heinrichs  with  the  principal  crracs, 
and  to  leave  out  several  which  have  cleared  the  ground  or 
advanced  the  frontiers  since  Griesbach  and  Scholz.  I  presume 
the  reason  why  Mr.  E.  could  not  find  the  reading  6  in  the  critical 
editions  is  that  he  uses  mere  manuals,  not  their  real  editions 
wherein  they  present  the  various  readings  whether  adopted  or 
not.  But  the  question  here  with  Mr.  E.  was  not  the  reading 
but  the  facts  which  were  altogether  misstated  in  ed.  4,  and  only 
in  part  stated  rightly  in  ed.  5.  It  is  a  province,  as  I  have  always 

*  In  his  explanation  of  marks  used  Dr.  T.  says,  "  An  anten'^k  (*)  is  inserted 
wlicncvor  the  ancient  text  differs  from  the  modern." 


INTRODUCTION,  XXI 

judged,  in  which  Mr.  E.  is  not  at  home;  and  the  self-defence, 
he  may  be  assured,  will  only  fix  it  more  by  calling  attention  to 
the  facts  among  all  who  are  competent  to  form  a  solid  opinion 
on  the  subject. 

Lastly  Mr.  E.  states  what  is  absolutely  contrary  to  fact  when 
he  says  in  his  zeal  that  "Mr.  Kelly,  indeed,  would  here  too 
[Apoc.  XV.  5]  read  6  ev  tw  ovpavio :  for  he  gives  as  the  English, 
'the  temple  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  testimony  in  heaven  was 
opened ; '  not  '  was  opened  in  heaven.'  But  altogether,  so  far  as 
I  know,  without  authority.  And  why  ?  It  seems  to  be  onlj/ 
because  of  its  suiting  his  peculiar  interpretation  of  the  passage, 
and  idea  of  the  Apocalyptic  scenery ;  the  very  fault  he  has  so 
often  and  wrongly  ascribed  to  me." 

The  simple  answer  to  all  this  is  that  I  do  not  read  6  in  Eev. 
XV.  5,  as  Mr.  E.  may  see  in  the  Greek  text  published  the  year 
before  the  edition  of  the  lectures  he  cites,  which  is  there  trans- 
lated as  nearly  as  possible  in  the  order  of  the  Greek,  "there  was 
opened  the  testimony  of  the  tabernacle  in  heaven."  Eurther  it 
is  not  the  fact  that  in  giving  the  words  as  he  says  in  the  lecture 
I  make  the  smallest  use  of  them  in  the  way  he  imputes  as  a 
motive  to  me.  The  whole  of  this  remark  therefore  is  due  to 
imagination,  and  certainly  not  of  a  noble  or  amiable  kind. 

"  3rdly  comes  m}^  adoption  in  the  fourth  seal  (IT.  A.,  vol.  i. 
p.  189,  4th  ed.,  or  in  this  5th  ed.,  p.  201)  of  a  reading  corre- 
spondent with  Jerome's  well  known  Latin  translation  in  the 
Vulgate,  super  quatuor  partes  terras,  '  on  the  four  parts  of  the 
earth;'  instead  of  that  found  in  our  Greek  MSS.  all  but  [is  it 
not  altogether?]  universally,  ctti  to  rerapTov  rrjs  yr]s,  'on  the  fourth 
part  of  the  earth.'"  Here  the  case  is  simple  enough.  There  are 
five  uncial  MSS.  of  the  Eevelation,  and  upwards  of  a  hundred 
cursives,  in  not  one  of  which  lias  there  been  found  the  smallest 
ground  for  justifying  Jerome's  "  quatuor  partes."  Two  or  three 
later  Latins  who  used  the  Vulgate  (not  always  without  dis- 
crepancy) give  the  same  very  naturally;  but  neither  Greek 
ecclesiastical  writer  nor  Oriental,  nor  any  version  save  the  Vul- 
gate, countenances  the  change.  In  my  judgment  it  is  critically 
discreditable  and  doctrinally  dangerous  to  adopt  such  a  change 
on  such  a  precarious  footing.     Nothing  like  it  can  be  produced 

b 


xxil  INTRODUCTION. 

from  the  entire  New  Testament.  Why  should  it  be  here  ?  How 
much  better  to  leave  the  ditHculty  unsolved  than  to  adopt  a 
resource  so  desperate  ?  Mr.  E.  refers  to  my  own  principle  of 
using  internal  evidence.  Certainly  I  do  to  decide  between  read- 
ings with  good  external  support  on  botli  sides,  never  where  all 
the  direct  witnesses  are  on  one  side,  and  you  have  hear -say 
evidence  of  one  type  on  the  other  side.  The  rest  of  Mr.  E.'8 
reasons  and  remarks  as  to  this  I  can  happily  leave  with  a  brief 
answer.  That  there  should  be  difficulty  according  to  the  his- 
torical scheme  in  finding  a  precise  fulfilment  of  "the  fourth 
part"  I  can  well  believe ;  but  this  is  in  perfect  harmony  with 
my  view,  which  supposes  vagueness  in  that  application  and 
precision  only  in  the  future.  In  itself  the  fourth  part  is  tho- 
roughly plain  and  intelligible.  That  it  cannot  be  readily  adjusted 
to  history  is  an  obstacle  to  Mr.  E.,  not  to  me. 

"4.  There  is  noticed  by  Mr.  K.  'the  flagrant  proof  of  my 
proneness  to  prefer  a  manifestly  spurious  reading  where  my 
hypothesis  requires'  in  my  preference  of  €7rt  to  Orjpiov  to  Kai  to 
6r]p.  in  Apoc.  xvii.  16.  So  W.  K.,  p.  304.  And  no  doubt  the 
evidence  of  Greek  MSS.  is  very  strong  in  favour  of  the  kqi. 
Moreover,  I  have  in  the  course  of  this  last  revision  of  my  book 
found  that  I  was  mistaken  in  supposing  that  the  early  Hippolyiiis 
read  ctti,  in  common  with  the  early  Latin  Father  Tertullian,  and 
also  probably  with  Jerome ;  being  misled  by  the  Latin  translation 
of  Ilippolytus'  '  De  Christo  et  Antichristo.'  Hence  my  confidence 
in  decidedly  preferring  the  ctti  is  less  strong  than  before."  As 
Mr.  E.  speaks  thus  moderately  of  the  point  raised,  I  do  not  feel 
it  needful  to  swell  this  introduction  with  an  answer  to  his  stout 
defence  of  the  Protestant  scheme  and  assault  on  futurism,  sup- 
posing Kttt  to  be  the  true  reading,  as  I  am  satisfied  it  is.  Any 
one  who  knows  Mr.  E.'s  system  will  be  able  to  judge,  spite  of 
his  arguments,  whether  his  system  can  sustain  the  shock  given 
to  it  by  the  inspired  prediction  that  the  beast  and  the  ten  horns 
unite  their  fury  against  Kome,  first  in  rendering  it  contemptible, 
next  in  enriching  themselves  with  its  substance,  and  lastly 
in  its  destruction.  The  effort  to  bring  in  the  beast  joining 
the  Goths  and  Vandals  to  destroy  the  old  heathen  city  is  more 
worthy  of  "Bossuet  than  of  Mr.  E. ;  and  the  rather  as  the  phrase 


INTRODUCTION.  XXIU 

of  the  Spirit  is  most  precise.  It  is  the  whore,  not  the  woman 
merely ;  that  is,  it  is  the  corrvipt  religious  state,  not  Rome 
viewed  simply  as  a  city.  Further,  it  is  a  state  of  final  revulsion 
aft&r  the  beast  had  carried  her  in  ease  and  honour  and  influence, 
and  just  hefore,  the  war  of  the  beast  and  the  kings  with  the 
Lamb.  Any  spiritual  man  can  judge  whether  this  suits  the 
Protestant  scheme  of  the  prophecy. 

"  1.  Says  Mr.  Kelly, '  Mr.  E.  contends  for  the  strangest  possible 
version  of  ets,  2^%  =  after,  or  at  the  expiration  of  the  aggregated 
period,  of  the  hour,  day,  month,  and  year  in  Apoc.  ix.  15.'  So 
p.  150.  When  Mr.  K.  has  shewn  that  the  same  Greek  preposi- 
tion placed  before  a  time,  times,  and  half  a  time  in  Dan.  xii.,  as 
well  as  before  the  1335  days  in  a  verse  immediately  following, 
does  not  mean  hefore  [it  should  be  afte,r\  or  at  the  exjyiration  of, 
those  aggregated  periods,  he  will  be  in  a  better  position  for  so 
expressing  himself  about  my  rendering  of  the  clause  in  Apoc. 
ix.  15.  But,  though  he  had  these  parallel  passages  before  his 
eyes  in  my  Commentary,  as  very  mainly  my  justification  in  the 
rendering  of  Apoc.  ix.  15,  Mr.  K.  makes  no  allusion  to  them." 

Mr.  E.  should  have  understood  better  my  motive  for  silence. 
The  two  passages  "very  mainly"  rested  on  for  justification  are 
not  parallel.  The  first  certainly  cannot  bear  the  smallest  ap- 
proach to  the  meaning  he  would  put  on  them.  Indeed  Mr.  E. 
gives  the  Greek  according  to  the  received  punctuation  (not  as 
he  says  of  the  Septuagint  copies,  but)  of  Theodotion's  version, 
and  then  translates  without  regard  to  that  punctuation ;  for  he 
clearly  should  put  at  least  a  comma  at  the  end  of  the  clause, 
the  effect  of  which  would  be  nearly  what  he  gives  with  a  period 
in  his  foot-note.  But,  to  avoid  the  smallest  charge  of  forcing 
anything,  I  shall  cite  Sir  L.  C.  L.  Brenton's  version,  "that  it 
should  he  for  a  time  of  times*  and  half  a  time :  when  the  dis- 
persion is  ended,  they  shall  know  these  things."  Now  if  this 
be  so,  this  witness  must  disappear. 

But  Mr.  E.  is  very  confident  as  to  verse  12,  where  however 
Sir  C.  B.  equally  fails  him,  for  he  translates  it  thus,  "  Blessed  is 
he  that  waits  and  comes  to  the  thousand  three  hundred  and 

*  So  it  is  in  Holmes  and  Parsons'  text,  ilg  Knipbv  Kaipwv  Kal  ijfi.  Kaipov. 
Many  MSS.  and  editions  however  give  Kaipovg  for  KaipCJv. 

h  2 


XXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

thirty-jfive  days."  This  latest  and  most  exact  rendering  of  the 
Greek  Bible  is  then  opposed  to  the  desired  issue. 

But  I  must  go  farther,  while  allowing  of  course  that 
there  are  cases  where  ««  may  mean  for  the  space,  or  to  the 
amount  of,  as  ds  iviavrov  "  for  a  year,"  that  is,  not  till  it  begins 
merely,  but  for  that  term.  Such  I  believe  is  the  true  sense  of 
the  last  case,  not  after  or  at  the  expiration  of,  which  even,  if  true 
in  fact  for  the  blessed  person,  is  in  no  way  the  sense  of  the 
word  either  here  or  anywhere  else.  But  the  important  point 
which  every  scholar  must  see  is  that  the  structure  of  the  clause 
in  Eevelation  has  nothing  akin  to  that  in  Daniel,  on  which 
depends  the  precise  shade  of  meaning  intended  and  legitimate. 
Mr.  E.'s  notions  are  most  vague  and  uncritical,  as  I  have  often 
had  occasion  to  notice  with  regret ;  and  he  is  mistaken  if  he 
thinks  that  the  examples  adduced  could  not  be  multiplied.  Thus 
he  reasons  at  length  on  the  possible  difference  of  dTroKTetVwo-iv,  as 
if  it  might  be  taken  either  as  tlie  present  or  as  the  aorist  subj. ; 
whereas  the  real  turning  point  is  the  connexion  with  rfToifxaa- 
fx.ivoL,  as  well  as  with  the  purpose  expressed  in  the  last  clause. 
Now  I  affirm,  without  fear  of  contradiction  from  any  un- 
biassed man  competent  to  deal  with  these  questions,  that  the 
sense  of  such  a  phrase  is  and  can  only  be  "  prepared  for,  or  as 
we  say  idiomatically  against,  the  hour,"  &c.  'No  doubt  those 
are  wrong  who  confound  the  perfect  participle  with  either  the 
present  or  the  aorist.  It  is  neither  the  course  of  preparation 
nor  the  simple  historical  fact  that  they  were  prepared,  but  the 
present  result  of  a  past  preparation,  as  usual  in  such  forms. 
But  this  does  not  touch  the  true  force  of  ««,  any  more  than  the 
question  wliether  the  slaying  the  third  of  men  be  a  continuous 
action,  or  one  viewed  as  summed  up  in  its  conclusion.  The 
nearest  and  a  true  parallel  that  I  observe  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment   is    John  xii.   7,    ets  t^i'  rj/xepav   tow   evTafjuacrfJioii  fJ.ov  TiTrjp-qMv 

avTo.  Here  it  is  the  finite  verb,  not  the  participle;  but  this 
does  not  affect  the  question.  Indeed  the  sense  is  beyond  con- 
troversy. It  was  for  or  against  the  day  of  Christ's  burial  she 
had  kept  the  unguent,  certainly  not  after  or  at  its  expiration, 
whatever  others  may  have  done.  It  is  just  the  same  with  the 
phrase  in  the  Eevelation,  though  the  nature  of  the  case  may 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 

forbid  the  absurdity  of  after  being  so  conspicuous.  Had  it  been 
said  in  Dan.  xii.  "  Blessed  is  he  that  comes  to  the  1260  days," 
or  even  to  the  1290  days,  I  could  understand  Mr.  E.'s  argument, 
though  even  so  it  would  seem  to  me  invalid.  But  the  period  is 
one  which  overlaps  these  times  of  horror  and  destruction,  and, 
as  I  believe,  goes  up  to  the  day  of  settling  Judah  and  Israel  in 
the  land,  though  the  millennial  age  may  not  be  in  its  full  cha- 
racter till  the  1335  days.  We  can  readily  see  then  that  he  who 
arrives  at  these  days  is  blessed  indeed.  And  the  Hebrew  confirms 
this  as  the  true  meaning.  But  in  Rev.  ix.  it  is  an  aggregated 
period  which  must  elapse  before  the  end  of  the  slaying.  To 
begin  the  work  of  slaughter  at  the  end  of  that  period  is  contrary 
to  all  analogy  of  dates,  and  untenable  according  to  the  true 
force  of  the  phrase  employed.  If  ««  can  mean  after,  it  can  as 
truly  mean  hefore,  and  language  would  dissolve  into  a  linguistic 
chaos.  It  appears  therefore  that  Mr.  E.  by  his  bold  challenge 
only  secures  the  exposure  of  his  erroneous  criticism ;  and  with 
all  the  respect  that  I  retain  for  excellent  points  in  the  book, 
it  appears  to  me  plain  enough  that  critical  acumen  in  the  Greek 
tongue  is  as  weak  a  point  in  the  Horae  Ajjoc.  as  acquaintance 
with  the  sources  of  the  text  and  the  comparative  value  of 
readings. 

"  2.  I  utterly  reject  Mr.  E.'s  statement  that  '  at  one  and  the 
same  time'  is  the  true  rendering  of  the  Greek  phrase  in  Apoc. 
xvii.  of  fji.tav  wpav  /xcra  rov  6-qpiov.  It  sliould  be,  he  says,  for  the 
same  time,  marking  duration,  not  epoch  or  occasion.  So  Mr.  K., 
p.  300.  But  as  in  the  preceding  case,  so  here  let  me  say,  when 
Mr.  K.  has  succeeded  in  setting  aside  the  parallels  of  John  iv, 
52,  Acts  X.  3,  and  Eev.  iii,  3,  adduced  by  me  in  loc,  where 
the  accusative  of  time  is  unquestionably  in  the  sense  of  epoch  at 
which,  it  will  be  time  enough  to  reply  to  him  further  on  this 
point." 

How  others  may  regard  such  an  answer  it  is  not  for  me  to 
say.  But  I  avow  that  to  me  the  effort  to  escape  the  regular 
rule  in  the  use  of  the  accusative  and  the  dative  of  time  seems 
far  beneath  a  Christian  of  less  reputation  than  the  author  oi  H.A. 
For  there  is  not  the  remotest  resemblance  between  these  three 
exceptional  instances  culled  out  of  the  New  Testament  and  the 


XXVI  INTRODUCTION. 

ordinary  construction  under  which  falls  Eev.  xvii.  12.  This  I 
pointed  out  at  some  length  in  the  note  to  which  the  citation 
refers.  There  is  no  rule  whatever  without  an  exception.  What 
can  one  think  of  the  judgment  which  musters  a  few  exceptions 
against  the  plainest  examples  of  a  plain  principle  of  the  Greek 
language?  The  true  scholar  would  rather  seek  to  understand 
what  lay  secretly  under  the  three  irregularities,  and  thus  to 
account  for  them,  instead  of  perverting  them  to  set  aside  instances 
where  no  such  modifying  influences  wrought. 

Thus,  to  take  the  first,  any  scholar  ought  to  observe  that  the 
reason  why  the  accusative  is  found  is  not  because  it  can  ever  in 
itself  mean  the  point  at  which  a  given  fact  occurred.  This  is 
the  force  of  the  temporal  dative,  though  it  properly  requires  the 
preposition  iv  to  define  it.  The  accusative  here  is  due  solely  to 
the  context.  The  courtier  enquired  from  liis  servant  rqv  Sipav  in 
which  his  son  got  better.  And  they  said  to  him,  Yesterday 
wpav  e/S86fxr}v  the  fever  left  him.  It  is  the  former  clause  which 
thus  influences  the  latter.  But  this  would  not  justify  the  con- 
clusion that,  when  such  a  disturbing  cause  did  not  interfere,  the 
accusative  could  have  been  employed  per  se.  Hence  in  the  very 
next  verse,  wlien  it  does  not  operate,  the  grammar  returns  to  its 
ordinary  conditions.     The  father  knew  tlierefore  that  it  was  eV 

rfi  wpa  ev  tj  k.t.A. 

As  to  the  second,  Mr.  E.  is  not  entitled  to  cite  it,  because  the 
very  best  manuscripts,  the  Sinai,  Alexandrian,  Vatican,  Palimp- 
sest of  Paris,  and  the  Laudian  of  Oxford,  with  more  than  twenty 
cursives  and  other  authorities,  give  wo-ci  Trepi  u>pav  ivdrrjv,  and  so 
it  is  edited  by  Alford,  Lachmann,  Tregelles,  as  well  as  Tischen- 
dorf  in  his  most  recent  (8th)  edition. 

There  remains  only  Rev.  iii.  4,  which  is  strange  indeed  either 
to  misunderstand  in  itself  or  to  compare  with  the  phrase  in 
debate.  The  reason  for  the  accusative  is  even  more  obvious  and 
closer  than   in  John  iv.  52,  though  similar  in  principle.     It 

depends  on  the  yvoSr  just  before  :   oi  fxij  yi/aJs  iroiav  wpav  r}$o>  €7ri  crt. 

If  the  construction  were  filled  up,  it  would  be  rrjv  wpav  ttoux  wfx/.. 
As  far  as  grammar  is  concerned  therefore,  it  was  open  to  omit 
either  the  accusative  or  the  dative,  as  both  would  be  cumbrous 
and  uncalled  fn'.     So  in  JNTatt.  xxiv.  42  we  have  ovk  otSart  ttoi^ 


INTEODUCTION.  xxvii 

wpa,  in  our  passage  we  have  yvwy  iroiav  wpav.  But  to  infer  from 
this  that,  where  no  such  reason  occurs  for  a  compendious  mixed 
construction,  the  accusative  can  be  used  for  a  point  of  time  or 
the  dative  for  duration,  or  that  the  radical  difference  does  not 
always  really  abide  underneath  such  an  ellipse,  is  contrary  to 
every  just  thought  of  language.*  We  are  not  at  liberty  to  reason 
from  these  peculiar  instances  to  others  wholly  different;  it  is 
as  illogical  as  can  be. 

I  have  in  my  lectures  shewn  tlie  importance  of  the  true  force 
of  the  accusative  in  Eev.  xvii.  12.  Like  "  at,"  it  supposes  the 
same  starting-point  for  the  beast  and  the  ten  horns;  but  it  adds 
the  other,  and  this  the  main  and  intended,  information  that  they 
receive  authority  as  kings  for  one  hour  with  the  beast :  not  the 
Roman  empire  as  once  without  the  kings,  nor  the  kings  as 
afterwards  without  the  empire,  but  both  together,  the  revived 

*  Such  has  alwaj's  been  my  conviction,  as  any  one  can  see  in  the  earliest  edition. 
But  I  thought  it  might  be  more  satisfactory  to  others,  perhaps  to  Mr.  E.,  if  I 
submitted  the  point  of  grammar  to  the  learned  author  of  the  latest  and  most 
elaborate  work  of  the  kind  which  has  emanated  from  Oxford.  The  following  is 
the  reply: — "I  have  no  doubt  but  that  in  the  two  passages,  John  iv.  52,  Rev, 
iii.  3,  the  accusative  depends  upon  the  verb.  In  the  latter  the  full  construction 
would  be  noia  ijv  &pa  iv  y,  or  more  briefly  and  simply  uifiav  kv  y  (or  7)  alone) 
K.T.X. ;  and  the  relative  is  attracted  to  the  accusative  and  prefixed  to  it,  just 
like  ov  TpoTTov,  ov  xpovov,  &c.  In  the  former  (John  iv.  53)  this  full  construc- 
tion does  occur,  the  attraction  being  prevented  by  the  insertion  of  sv  before  the 
relative.  In  Acts  x.  3,  the  accusative  is  used,  just  as  it  would  be  with  a  Trspl  for 
an  indefinite  and  general  notion  of  time ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  the 
writer  followed  the  analogy  of  ntpi,  though  he  chose  to  express  the  notion  by 
wati  [that  is,  even  according  to  the  common  text,  without  Tripi].  Moreover, 
where  time  is  indefinitely  expressed,  it  is  in  reality  a  space  of  time  and  not  a 
point,  and  its  construction  would  follow  the  analogy  of  the  expression  for  a 
space  of  time  (accusative)  rather  than  that  of  the  expression  for  a  point  of 
time  (dative).  "When  you  say,  'about  three  o'clock,'  there  is  no  definite  point 
presented  to  the  mind,  but  a  space  extending  (say)  from  ten  minutes  before  to 
ten  minutes  after.  This  seems  to  be  the  philosophy  of  the  accusative  after  nspi 
in  such  expressions.  To  my  mind  then  neither  of  the  three  passages  justify 
the  taking  fiiav  w/^av  (Rev.  xvii.  12)  as  a  point  of  time.  I  am  happy  to  say 
that  I  have  no  theological  or  mystical  bias  one  way  or  the  other;  I  really  do 
not  know  which  of  the  various  Apocalyptical  parties  I  am  favouring  when  I 
say  that  to  my  mind,  looking  at  it  grammatically,  the  words  can  only  mean  '  one 
and  the  same  space  of  time  with  the  beast,'  not  '  one  and  the  same  point  of  time.' 
My  answer  would  have  been  sent  sooner,  had  I  not  been  from  home,  so  that  the 
letter  was  some  time  in  reaching  me.  I  am,  dear  sir,  yours  faithfully,  W.  E. 
Jelf." 


XXVm  INTRODUCTION. 

empire  in  its  place,  the  kings  in  theirs,  enduring  for  the  same 
space  till  they  all  perish  together  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus. 

3.  It  is  the  question  of  the  seven  thunders ;  but  inasmuch  as 
Mr.  E.  adds  nothing,  we  can  dismiss  it  without  farther  notice. 

4.  Here,  as  Mr.  E.  admits  that  the  rendering  of  Rev.  xi.  9  in 
his  former  editions  was  unsatisfactory,  I  am  happy  to  say  little. 
It  seems  to  me  plain,  however,  from  the  context,  that  the  sense 
is  not  merely  that  their  testimony  was  perfected  but  finished 
when  the  beast  slays  them. 

In  5  and  6  we  have  the  questions  whether  the  vaos  includes 
the  court  sometimes,  and  whether  toads  and  frogs  are  inter- 
changeable, both  of  which  Mr.  E.  answers  affirmatively,  which 
I  doubt. 

His  7  calls  for  a  fuller  notice.  "At  p.  246  Mr.  K.  insists  on  the 
right  translation  of  cveaTr^Kcv  in  2  Thess.  ii.  2  being  'is  present;' 
not  as  in  our  English  authorized  version,  and  as  in  the  Hm^ae, 
'is  at  hand.'  At  p.  92  of  my  vol.  iii.,  in  this  edition,  my  readers 
will  find  the  point  more  fully  argued  out  than  before ;  and  the 
latter  rendering  of  the  word,  I  may  unhesitatingly  say,  on  the 
grounds  of  Greek  criticism,  fully  justified.  Let  me  only  here 
ask  Mr.  K.  the  question  how  he  supposes  the  Thessalonian 
Christians  could  have  believed  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  was 
then  actually  present,  when  putting  together  the  two  facts — first, 
that  they  knew  from  St.  Paul's  former  epistles  that  the  primary 
event  of  the  day  of  the  Lord  would  be  the  gathering  of  Christ's 
saints,  both  the  dead  and  the  living,  to  meet  Christ  in  the  air ; 
secondly,  that  neither  themselves  nor  even  St.  Paul  had  thus  far 
been  made  the  subjects  of  that  promised  blessed  rapture  ?  Will 
Mr.  K.  be  agitated  by  the  idea  of  the  day  of  Christ  having  begun, 
so  long  as  he  is  conscious  that  neither  on  himself  nor  on  any 
of  his  most  honoured  Christian  friends  has  any  change  taken 
place?" 

The  reader  will  find  in  the  text  and  note, pp.  299-304,  a  tolerably 
complete  refutation  of  what  I  judge  to  be  mistaken  in  Mr.  E.'s 
argument.     He  starts  with  the  common  error*  of  confounding 

•  The  want  of  light  that  prevails  among  commentators  in  general  on  tlio 
subject  of  propliecy  affects  their  criticism  seriously.  Thus  assuming,  as  they 
almost  all  do  with  excessive  vagueness,  that  the  coming  of  the  Lord  to  gather 


INTRODUCTION.  XXIX 

the  presence  of  the  Lord  to  gather  His  saints  with  the  day  of 
the  Lord  to  execute  judgment  on  His  enemies.  This  necessarily 
vitiates  all  that  follows,  as  it  misses  wholly  the  force  and  even 
sense  of  the  apostle's  opening  entreaty.  For  where  would  be  the 
wisdom  of  entreating  them  for  the  sake  of  the  same  thing  as 
that  in  respect  of  which  he  was  going  to  disabuse  their  mind  ? 
The  apostle  is  guilty  of  no  such  slip  or  paralogism.  He  begs 
them  by  reason,  or  for  the  sake,  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  and  our  gathering  together  unto  Him  that  they  be 
not  soon  shaken  in  mind  [or  literally  "from  their  mind,"  though 

it  is  hardly  English], as  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is 

present.  This  to  my  thinking  is  not  only  intelligible  but  plain 
and  conclusive  for  the  object  in  hand  when  we  distinguish 
according  to  the  lisfht  given  in  1  Thess.  iv.  and  v.,  where  these 
two  things,  the  presence  and  the  day  of  the  Lord,  are  both 
discussed  and  distinguished  as  here.  It  was  the  false  teachers 
who  brought  in  confusion,  and,  instead  of  holding  up  the  bright 
hope  of  Christ's  coming  to  receive  His  own  to  Himself  as  the 
apostle  did  and  does  everywhere,  sought  to  fill  and  alarm  them 
with  the  terrors  of  the  day  of  the  Lord — that  term  of  solemn 
judicial  dealing  which  abounds  in  Old  Testament  prophecy.    It 

His  saints  is  the  theme  ahout  which  the  apostle  is  about  to  give  instruction  in 
the  verses  which  follow,  many  were  influenced  to  translate  wTrep  here  as  nearly 
equivalent  to  Trspi,  whereas  this  is  hardly  the  case  with  verbs  of  prayer,  beseeching, 
&c.,  like  ipioTOLoj.  Each  has  its  own  appropriated  force,  as  any  intelligent  man 
can  verify  with  a  Greek  Concordance.  Had  these  writers  seen  that  he  entreats 
the  saints  on  account  of  their  own  bright  hope  not  to  be  alarmed  by  the  false 
rumour  that  the  day  of  the  world's  judgment  was  arrived,  they  would  have 
avoided  an  error  singularly  gross  and  grave,  not  so  much  lexically,  though 
certainly  phraseologically  (for  tpojTau)  virep  means,  "I  beg,  not  concerning  or 
with  regard  to,  but  on  account  of,  by  reason  of,  by  or  for  the  sake  of"),  but 
mainly  because  of  the  contextual  fact  that  he  urges  the  one  as  a  motive  of  com- 
fort against  the  uneasiness  inspired  by  the  mistake  as  to  the  other,  instead  of 
treating  of  one  and  the  same  thing  throughout.  Dan.  ii.  18;  Kom.  ix.  27; 
2  Cor.  V.  12,  vii.  4,  -^aii.  23,  ix.  3  ;  Phil.  i.  7;  2  Thess.  i.  4,  on  which  Mr.  E.  leans 
with  Rosenmiiller,  Macknight,  Whitby,  &c.,  are  beside  the  mark ;  they  none  of 
them  follow  a  verb  of  entreaty.  It  is  true  that  both  vnkp  and  ncpi  may  often 
be  translated  "for,"  and  virkp  sometimes  even  "concerning;"  but  there  are 
limits  to  such  approximations  of  meaning  as  a  scholar  knows,  instead  of  vaguely 
catching  at  a  possible  sense  and  applying  it  to  suit  a  purpose.  Words  of  entreaty, 
as  far  as  I  have  noticed,  exclude  such  a  sense  when  joined  with  vnsp  and  require 
7rt|0('.     It  is  absurd  to  identify  them  at  random. 


XXX  INTRODUCTION. 

is  well  known  that  it  Las  there  an  incipient  application  to  such 
a  frightful  judgment  as  befel  Babylon,  Egypt,  or  other  earthly 
states.  In  some  such  way  the  misleaders  at  Thessalonica  seem 
to  have  interpreted  the  trouble  through  which,  we  can  see  from 
the  first  epistle,  the  saints  there  were  then  passing.  They  pre- 
tended, like  many  since  their  time,  that  the  dread  day  was 
come,  pretending  to  the  Spirit's  revelation  of  it,  teaching  it,  and 
even  led  on  by  the  enemy  to  allege  a  letter  purporting  to  be 
from  the  apostle  to  that  effect.  If  they  so  misimderstood  the 
first  epistle,  as  Jerome  throws  out  and  Mr.  E,  doubts  not,  it  is 
certainly  not  the  meaning  of  St'  iirLo-ToXrjs  ws  8t  rjixCiv.  I  know  what 
Paley  says ;  but,  j5ace  tanti  viri,  the  apostle  here  means  a  sup- 
posititious letter  falsely  bearing  his  name,  not  his  own  epistle : 
yet  this  is  the  only  basis  they  have  for  the  thought. 

Mr.  E.  contends  (ii.  92)  for  "partly"  some  forged  words  or 
letter  ascribed  to  St.  Paul,  and  "partly  too"  misconstruction  of 
words  which  he  had  really  written  in  his  first  epistle  about 
Christ's  coming  again  to  gather  to  Himself  His  saints  both 
quick  and  dead.  But  this  is  utterly  baseless.  There  is  but  one 
clause  for  the  inference,  and  the  Greek  phrase  cannot  possibly 
mean  both.  It  is  only  laxity  of  mind  or  negligence  which 
could  seriously  think  of  extracting  partly  the  one  thing  and 
partly  the  other  from  words  wliich  can  bear  but  one  unequivocal 
meaning.  Had  the  apostle  intended  his  own  epistle,  he  would 
have  so  expressed  it.  He  might  have  said  (as  he  does  later  in 
this  very  chapter,  where  such  is  his  intention)  St'  eTrto-roX^s  rjfxuiv, 
or  rather,  as  he  would  in  that  case  have  referred  to  his  previously 
existing  letter,  Sta  t^j  tTrtorroA^s,  with  or  without  t7/awv.  But  to 
convey  such  an  idea,  he  could  not  have  Avritten  as  he  does 
St*  iTTUTToXrjs  u)s  St'  rjfjiwv,  which  can  only  signify  a  letter  falsely 
inofessing  to  come  through  the  apostle  and  his  companions. 

Hence  says  Theodoret,  /x^/re  et  Trpoo-TroioivTO  XPV^H-^^fi^v  koI  7rpo<f>rj- 
revttv;  tovto  yap  Aeyci,  M^re  Sia  Trvev/xaTOs'  fxrjTt.  d  TrXao-dfj.€voL  u)s  i$ 
avTov  ypat^ticrav  tTnaToXrjv  irpocjiepouv,  pnqn  (I  dypd<f)(Ds  avTW  elprjK^vaL 

keyouv.   (Opera,  iii.   532,  ed.  Schulze.)*     If  they  claimed  the 

*  I  understand  Chrysostom  to  bo  of  the  same  mind  (Opera,  iv.  231,  232,  ed. 
Savile) ;  and  the  ablest  of  modern  German  expositors,  as  well  as  Ellicott  and 
Alford. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXI 

apostle's  authority  for  their  affirmation  in  writing  or  in  word,  it 
was  spurious,  as  far  as  the  apostle  informs  us  and  we  there- 
fore have  ground  to  believe  ;  not  a  question  of  misunderstanding 
either  his  oral  teaching  or  his  first  epistle.  Of  this  there  can 
be  no  doubt  for  such  as  fairly  judge  the  words  with  a  competent 
knowledge  of  the  Greek  tongue,  or  pay  due  heed  to  any  right 
translation  of  the  words.  For  in  no  language  whatever  is  Mr. 
E.'s  inference  well  founded  or  defensible. 

I  have  already  perhaps  sufficiently  anticipated  the  answer  to 
Mr.  E.'s  questions  without  delaying  to  notice  the  mistake  which 
treats  the  gathering  of  the  saints  as  an  event,  primary  or  not,  of 
the  day  of  the  Lord  (which  scripture  never  does) ;  but  I  reply 
that,  though  the  Thessalonians  had  been  set  right  as  to  the  dead 
saints  by  the  first  epistle,  the  second  proves  that  they  were 
liable  to  go  astray  as  to  the  living  saints,  and  needed  therefore 
fresh  instruction.  They  already  knew  the  fact,  that  the  Lord 
would  come  to  translate  the  saints,  deceased  or  alive,  and  that 
His  day  is  to  fall  with  swift  destruction  on  the  world ;  but  the 
mutual  relation  of  these  two  things  they  clearly  did  not  know, 
and  hence  were  open  to  those  who  pretended  that  the  day  was 
arrived  with  its  dangers  and  troubles  before  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  to  gather  them  home  on  high.  The  heresiarchs  at  Tlies- 
salonica  probably  taught  a  quasi -spiritual  day  of  the  Lord,  as 
others  went  so  far  later  as  to  teach  similarly  that  the  resurrec- 
tion had  taken  place  already.  There  is  not  the  least  force 
therefore  in  what  Mr.  E.  urges,  particularly  as  1  Thess.  does  not 
unfold  the  relative  order  of  the  two  events,  the  presence  and 
the  day  of  the  Lord,  in  such  a  way  as  to  preclude  the  false 
rumour  which  is  refuted  in  2  Thess.  We  know  now  that  such 
a  notion  must  be  unfounded;  but  how  this  could  have  been 
known  before  the  second  epistle  was  written  is,  I  believe,  beyond 
Mr.  E.'s  power  to  prove. 

The  reader  has  before  him  the  substance  of  Mr.  E.'s  critique 
on  my  criticism.  He  has  left  many  remarks  without  notice,  in 
which  I  consider  him  wrong :  how  far  he  has  defended  himself 
to  purpose  in  those  he  selected  for  a  reply,  it  is  for  others  to 
judge  rather  than  for  me  to  say  more.  It  must  be  plain  what 
my  opinion  is.     Were  it  the  object  to  give  a  complete  review  of 


XXXll  INTRODUCTION. 

the  Horae  Apocalypticae,  faults  and  defects  especially  in  the 
intelligent  criticism  of  the  text  could  be  enormously  increased 
from  the  first  chapter  to  tlie  last.     From  the  first  I  have  ever 
felt  that  this  was  one  of  the  chief  drawbacks ;  and  a  singular 
sight  it  is  to  me  that,  with  a  great  deal  of  interesting  history  and 
ingenious  applications  of  antiquities,  such  a  book  should  give 
continual  evidence  of  the  want  of  an  average  amount  and  ex- 
actitude of  knowledge  in  what  ought  to  be  the  groundwork — 
the  best  readings  and  their  evidence.     I  also  think  that  the 
version  preferred  is  too  often  vulnerable.     The  grand  deside- 
ratum of  all  however  is  of  another  sort :  I  need  not  rehearse  it 
here,  having  often  pressed  it  in  the  lectures  and  the  notes. 
There  is  an  absence  throughout  of  truth  as  to  the  heavenly 
relations  of  Christ  and  the  church ;  and  hence  failure  in  dis- 
criminating between  the  proper  Christian  hope  and  prophecy. 
This  in  such  a  book  must  needs  be  ruinous  if  true,  as  I  firmly 
believe  it  to  be.     Of  course  it  is  to  me  matter  of  regret  that 
Mr.  E.  should  say  or  think  that  my  criticisms  on  his  book  were 
wanting  in  fairness  and  candour ;    but  the  reader  will  have 
perceived  that  the  reason  was  in  part  or  wholly  due  to  the  fact 
that  he  has  not  even  understood  many  erroi's  already  pointed 
out.     I  have  always  considered  the  H.  A.  peculiarly  defective  in 
this,  tliat  the  author  did  not  first  diligently  ascertain,  according 
to  his  best  judgment  or  tliat  of  the  ablest  critical  inquirers,  the 
true  text,  and  then  seek  to  expound  it.     I  can  honestly  say  that 
such  lias  been  my  own  course ;  whereas  his  book  constantly 
gives  the  impression  of  one  who  up  to  its  fiftli  edition  is  not 
yet  in  possession  of  the  full  grounds  for  a  sound  judgment,  of  a 
mind  either  unused  or  not  adapted  to  the  resolution  of  such 
questions,  and  consequently  choosing,  as  his  system  seemed  to 
require,  such  readings  as  suited,  not  those  which  command  the 
acceptance  of  the  most  competent  judges  on  the  broadest  basis. 
I  believe  I  could   make  good  this  opinion  of  Mr.  E.'s  book 
throughout  every  chapter,  if  it  were  called  for  ;  and  the  attentive 
reader  of  my  lectures  will  have  seen  many  more  instances  than 
the  author  has  sought  to  defend.  But  I  will  take  as  an  example 
the  first  and  last  chapters,  with  one  in  the  middle  of  the  book, 
which  Mr.  E.  professes  to  give  as  corrected  by  critical  authority. 


INTRODUCTION,  XXXIU 

(1.)  Chap.  i.  2  presents  an  instance  of  extreme  carelessness. 
How  could  any  one,  unless  barely  reprinting  the  received  text  or 
the  Authorised  Version,  intelligently  keep  tc  in  the  Greek  text 
or  the  last  "  and"  in  English  ?  The  best  MSS.  and  versions  are 
unanimous  ;  and  so  are  all  careful  editors.  The  erroneous  addi- 
tion falsifies  the  sense ;  for  it  makes  of  John's  visions  a  third 
division  of  his  testimony,  instead  of  representing  them  as  quali- 
fying the  word  of  God  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  which  he 
testified.  (2.)  His  neglect  of  the  present  form  of  the  participle 
Tw  dyairSiVTi  is  a  glaring  fault  in  verse  5 ;  but  I  have  dwelt  so 
much  on  its  force  in  its  proper  place  in  the  following  pages,  that 
I  need  say  no  more.  The  external  authority  is  overwhelming  in 
its  favour  and  against  the  vulgar  aorist  which  Mr.  E.  continues 
without  remark.  (3.)  The  KaC  with  dSeXc^o'y  in  verse  9  is  contrary 
to  the  best  authorities,  and  even  to  Erasmus'  Cod.  Eeuchlini, 
though  he  (not  the  Complut.)  inserted  it  in  his  text.  It  is  a 
manifest  clog  to  the  sense.  Tn  the  same  verse  should  be  a  still 
more  needed  restoration  of  the  right  reading  by  striking  out  iv  ttj, 
"  in  the,"  before  kingdom,  which  mars  the  sense.  I  say  nothing 
of  two  disputed  questions  in  the  same  verse ;  but  Mr.  E.  is  as 
silent  about  the  two  certain  and  necessary  changes  as  he  is 
about  the  points  which  may  be  considered  still  sub  judice.  (4.) 
Mr.  E.  properly  omits  the  ill-attested  clauses  in  verse  11,  but 
does  not  bring  out  the  distinctive  force  of  cXaXei  as  supplanting 
the  common  eXaXqae  in  verse  12.  (5.)  In  verse  14  he  gives  the 
Authorised  Version  where  it  differs  from  the  received  text  as 
much  as  from  that  approved  by  all  judicious  critics  and  required 
by  the  best  witnesses.  It  should  be  "  white  as  white  wool,  as 
snow,"  (6.)  Verses  17, 18,  he  fails  to  represent  according  to  any 
good  text.  It  should  be,  "  I  am  the  first  and  the  last,  and  the 
living  one  [or  "he  that  liveth"]  ;  and  I  M'as  [or  became]  dead," 
&c.  (7.)  He  omits  the  beautiful  and  emphatic  ow  of  the  best 
authorities  in  verse  19:  "Write  therefore,"  &c.  Minor  points 
are  omitted ;  but  such  errors  as  these  are  found  too  commonly 
to  allow  the  claim  of  the  H.  A.  to  take  rank  as  a  critical  work 
up  to  the  fair  requirements  of  earnest  and  intelligent  students 
in  our  days.  The  favourable  opinion  of  an  English  judge  or  of 
an  Edinburgh  reviewer  will  not  affect  the  judgment  of  any  com- 


XXXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

competent  to  pronounce  on  questions  in  which  one  could  not 
fairly  expect  such  persons  to  be  at  home.  The  first  requisite  in 
a  comment  surely  is  that  it  be  founded  on  a  correct  text.  Is  it 
so  with  the  H.  A.?     I  believe  it  is  not. 

Let  us  now  review  the  last  chapter  similarly.  (1.)  In  the 
first  verse  Mr.  E.  gives,  without  the  least  warrant,  "the"  river  of 
the  water  of  life.  It  should  be  of  course  "  a  river  of  water  of 
life."  All  agree  in  omitting  the  KaOapov  of  the  received  text.  (2.) 
In  verse  3  there  is  a  needless  departure  from  the  regular  sense 
of  the  Kat.  On  the  disputed  reading  in  verse  5  I  say  nothing ; 
but  (3.)  verse  8  is  as  loosely  given  in  the  Horae  as  the  Authorised 
Version.  For  surely  it  must  be,  "  And  I  John  am  [or  was]  he 
that  heard  and  saw  these  things ;"  and  in  this  order,  spite  of  N 
and  some  cursives.  (4.)  In  verse  12  the  true  reading  I  believe 
to  be  ecTTtv  "is"  as  in  n,  A,  and  two  cursives  in  the  Vatican. 
Still,  as  the  Eescript  of  Paris  and  the  Porphyrian  uncial  are 
here  deficient  and  the  Basilian  Vatican  with  the  other  cursives 
opposed,  I  would  say  no  more  than  that  an  exact  commentator 
ought  to  have  noticed  a  good  reading,  which  is  far  more  energetic 
than  the  common  one,  even  if  he  adhered  to  the  received  text, 
lo-Ttti,  "  shall  be."  (5.)  In  verse  13  I  suppose  there  can  be  no 
doubt  Mr.  E.  is  wrong  in  adhering  to  the  order  of  the  common 
text,  contrary  to  the  critics  who  follow  the  ancient  MSS.  (6.) 
In  verse  14,  though  agreeing  with  Mr.  E.  in  adopting  7rA.vvoi/Tcr 
T.  (TToXas  avTwv  on  the  authority  of  N,  A,  7,  38  against  all  other 
known  manuscripts,  I  cannot  accept  his  connecting  this  verse 
Avith  chap.  vii.  9,  13,  14;  as  if  the  one  were  the  anticipation, 
the  other  the  realization,  but  rather  as  a  similar  blessing  pos- 
sessed by  two  distinct  classes  of  saints.    (7.)  "  For"  (8c)  in  verse 

15  is  absent  from  the  best  MSS.  and  editions.  Its  insertion  in 
H.  A.  spoils  the  contrast  intended.     (8.)  The  readings  in  verse 

16  may  be  considered  doubtful ;  but  there  need  be  no  hesitation 
in  striking  out  Kai  from  the  received  text  before  o  deXwv,  which 
Mr.  E.  keeps  in.  Again,  it  is  wrong  to  say  as  he  does,  "  of  the 
waters  of  life."  "  Of  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life"  is  all 
right  in  chap.  xxi.  6 ;  here  it  is  simply  "  life's  water,"  without  a 
various  reading. 

I  will  finally  take  a  central  portion  (chap,  xi.),  with  a  view  to 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV 

a  similar  test.  (1.)  Mr.  E.  is  far  too  reluctant  in  accepting  the 
critical  correction  of  the  received  text  in  verse  1 ;  and  the  diffi- 
culty of  construction  is  due  to  not  seeing  the  Hebraism  of  the 
style.  (Compare  chaps,  iv.  1  ;  xiv.  6,  7  ;  xix.  7.)  The  Sinaitic 
and  Porphyrian  uncials  confirm  the  Alexandrian  and  upwards 
of  thirty  cursives,  with  most  of  the  ancient  versions,  against 
the  reading  of  the  Basilian  Vatican,  and  ten  cursives,  with  the 
later  Syriac  and  the  Armenian ;  which  is  indeed  an  evident 
gloss  to  get  rid  of  the  seemingly  harsh  phrase  in  the  original 
text.  The  Sinaitic  alone  reads  Xeyet  for  Aeywy  ;  but  this  is  of  no 
moment,  especially  in  the  Eevelation,  where  slips  of  the  kind 
are  more  tlian  usually  common.  (2.)  On  Mr.  E.'s  version  of 
TeXeo-wo-t  in  the  sense  of  perfected,  to  avoid  its  natural  meaning, 
"  completed,"  I  will  not  here  delay  further  than  to  express  dissent. 
(3.)  Surely  "in  that  hour"  is  the  right  rendering  of  iv  iKuvrj  ry 
wpoy  rather  than  "  at  that  same  time."  It  is  a  fair  question  as  to 
yjKovaa  or  y]Kov(jav,  the  latter  having  decidedly  the  best  ancient 
evidence  in  its  favour,  as  well  as  the  more  modern  copies  from 
which  the  received  text  was  drawn ;  but  the  former  has  good 
authority,  uncial  and  cursive,  supported  by  most  of  the  ancient 
versions,  and  the  general  analogy  of  the  phrase  in  the  book. 
(4.)  KoX  6  epxo/Aevos  is  rejected  by  the  Sinaitic,  the  Porp)hyrian,  the 
Basilian  Vatican  (B  2066),  as  well  as  A  and  C,  and  the  mass  of 
cursives;  also  by  the  Complut.  and  even  by  Erasmus'  Cod. 
Eeuchl.,  though  he  boldly  inserted  it  (probably  out  of  deference 
to  the  Vulgate,  not  knowing  that  its  best  copies,  Aniiat.  Fuld. 
Demidov.  and  Harl.,  reject  the  clause).  .Mr.  E.  might  have  been 
therefore  a  little  bolder,  had  he  known  the  facts  more  fully.  (5.) 
I  have  elsewhere  discussed  the  question  of  6  eV  tw  ovpav(^,  so  that 
I  need  say  no  more  here.  What  Mr.  E.  remarks  on  it  is  incor- 
rect ;  but  I  do  not  say  that  it  is  "  the  true  reading."  In  1860  I 
bracketed  the  article  before  iv  as  doubtful ;  I  should  be  disposed 
to  do  the  same  in  1871. 

This  will  serve  as  a  sample  of  the  H.  A.,  examined  at  the 
beginning,  middle  and  end,  in  order  to  test  its  critical  accuracy 
as  to  the  text,  which  is  evidently  the  most  fundamental  of  all 
questions  for  the  commentator  who  aims  at  precision  on  a  solid 
footino-. 


THE   REVELATION   OF  JOHN. 


TKANSLATED    FROM    A    TEXT    DRAWN    FROM    THE    BEST    MANUSCRIPTS. 


Eevelation  of  Jesus  Christ  which  God  gave  him  to  shew  his 
servants  things  whicli  must  shortly  come  to  pass ;  and  sending 
by  his  angel  he  signified  it  to  his  servant  John;  ^who  testified  the 
word  of  God  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ — whatsoever 
things  he  saw.  ^Blessed  is  he  that  readeth,  and  they  that  hear 
the  words  of  the  prophecy  and  keep  the  things  written  in  it; 
for  the  time  is  at  hand. 

*  John  to  the  seven  churches  that  are  in  Asia :  Grace  to  you 
and  peace  from  him  that  is  and  that  was  and  that  is  to  come ; 
and  from  the  seven  Spirits  who  are  before  his  throne;  ^and  from 
Jesus  Christ,  the  faithful  witness,  the  first-born  of  the  dead,  and 
the  prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth.  To  him  that  loveth  us  and 
washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  blood,  ^and  he  made  us  a  king- 
dom, priests  to  his  God  and  Father :  to  him  he  the  glory  and  the 
might  unto  the  ages  of  the  ages.     Amen. 

''Behold,  he  cometh  with  the  clouds,  and  every  eye  shall  see 
him,  and  those  which  pierced  him ;  and  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth 
shall  wail  on  account  of  him.  Yea,  Amen.  *I  am  the  Alpha 
and  the  Omega,  saith  the  Lord  God,  that  is  and  that  was  and 
that  is  to  come,  the  Almighty. 

^I,  John,  your  brother  and  joint -partaker  in  tribulation  and 
the  kingdom  and  patience  in  Christ  [Jesus],  was  in  the  isle  that 
is  called  Patmos,  because  of  the  word  of  God  and  [because  of] 
the  testimony  of  Jesus  [Christ].  ^°I  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the 
Lord's  day,  and  heard  behind  me  a  loud  voice  as  of  a  trumpet, 
"  saying,  What  thou  seest  write  in  a  book,  and  send  to  the  seven 
churches ;  unto  Ephesus,  and  unto  Smyrna,  and  unto  Pergamos, 
and  unto  Thyatira,  and  unto  Sardis,  and  unto  Philadelphia,  and 


XXXVlll  THE   REVELATION   OF    JOHN, 

unto  Laodicea.  '''And  I  turned  to  see  the  voice  which  was 
speaking  with  me.  And  having  turned  I  saw  seven  golden 
lamp -stands,  '^and  in  the  midst  of  the  [seven]  lamp-stands  one 
like  the  Son  of  man,  clad  in  a  garment  down  to  the  foot,  and  girt 
about  at  the  paps  with  a  golden  girdle :  '4iis  head  and  his  hairs 
white  as  white  wool,  as  snow ;  and  his  eyes  as  a  flame  of  fire ; 
"and  his  feet  like  fine  brass,  as  glowing  in  a  furnace ;  and  his 
voice  as  a  voice  of  many  waters  :  '^and  he  had  in  his  right  hand 
seven  stars ;  and  out  of  his  mouth  proceeded  a  sharp  two-edged 
sword :  and  his  countenance  as  the  sun  shiueth  in  its  strength. 
"And  when  I  saw  him,  I  fell  at  his  feet  as  dead :  and  he  laid 
his  right  hand  upon  me,  saying,  Fear  not;  I  am  the  first  and  the 
last,  ^*'and  the  living  one :  and  I  was  dead,  and,  behold,  I  am 
alive  unto  the  ages  of  the  ages ;  and  I  have  the  keys  of  death 
and  of  hades.  "Write  therefore  the  things  which  thou  sawest, 
and  the  things  which  are,  and  the  things  which  are  about  to 
come  to  pass  after  these :  '^"the  mystery  of  the  seven  stars  which 
thou  sawest  on  my  right  hand,  and  the  seven  golden  lamp- 
stands;  the  seven  stars  are  angels  of  the  seven  churches,  and  the 
seven  lamp-stands  are  seven  churches. 

II.  To  the  angel  of  the  cliurch  that  is  in  Ephesus  write.  These 
things  saith  he  that  holdeth  the  seven  stars  in  his  right  hand, 
that  walketh  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  lamp-stands  :  'I 
know  thy  works  and  [thy]  toil  and  thy  patience,  and  that  thou 
canst  not  bear  evil  men;  and  thou  hast  tried  those  that  call 
themselves  apostles  and  are  not,  and  hast  found  them  liars : 
"and  hast  patience,  and  hast  borne  for  my  name's  sake,  and  art 
not  wearied.  ''  But  I  have  against  thee  that  thou  hast  relaxed 
thy  first  love.  '^Eemember  therefore  whence  thou  art  fallen,  and 
repent,  and  practise  the  first  works ;  but  if  not,  I  am  coming  to 
thee  [quickly],  and  will  remove  thy  lamp-stand  out  of  its  place, 
except  thou  repent.  ^But  this  thou  hast,  that  thou  hatest  the 
deeds  of  the  Nicolaitanes,  which  I  also  hate.  'He  that  hath  an 
ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches.  To  him 
that  overcometh  I  will  give  him  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  which 
is  in  the  paradise  of  [my]  God. 

"And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  that  is  in  Smyrna  write. 


THE    REVELATION   OF   JOHN,  XXxix 

These  things  saith  the  first  and  the  last,  who  was  dead  and  lived  : 
"I  know  [thy  works  and]  thy  tribulation  and  poverty  (but  thou 
art  rich),  and  the  blasphemy  of  those  who  say  they  are  Jews 
and  are  not,  but  a  synagogue  of  Satan.  'Tear  not  the  things 
which  thou  art  about  to  suffer:  behold,  the  devil  is  about  to 
cast  of  you  into  prison  that  ye  may  be  tried,  and  ye  shall  have 
tribulation  ten  days :  be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will 
give  thee  the  crown  of  life.  "He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear 
what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches.  He  that  overcometh 
shall  in  no  wise  be  hurt  of  the  second  death. 

^^And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  that  is  in  Pergamos  write, 
These  things  saith  he  that  hath  the  sharp  two-edged  sword:  ^^I 
know  [thy  works,  and]  where  thou  dwellest,  where  the  throne 
of  Satan  is ;  and  thou  boldest  fast  my  name  and  hast  not  denied 
my  faith,  even  in  those  days  wherein  was  Antipas,  my  faithful 
witness  who  was  killed  among  you,  where  Satan  dwelleth.  '*But 
I  have  a  few  things  against  thee,  [because]  thou  hast  there  some 
that  hold  the  doctrine  of  Balaam,  who  taught  Balak  to  cast  a 
stumbling-block  before  the  sons  of  Israel,  to  eat  things  sacrificed, 
to  idols  and  to  commit  fornication.  '"So  hast  thou  also  some  that 
liold  the  doctrine  of  the  Nicolaitanes  in  like  manner.  '"Eepent 
therefore ;  but  if  not,  I  am  coming  to  thee  quickly,  and  will 
fight  with  them  with  the  sword  of  my  mouth.  "He  that  hath 
an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches.  To 
him  that  overcometh,  I  will  give  him  of  the  hidden  manna,  and 
will  give  him  a  white  stone,  and  upon  the  stone  a  new  name 
written,  which  no  one  knoweth  save  he  that  receiveth  it. 

'*And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  that  is  in  Thyatira  write, 
These  things  saith  the  Son  of  God,  that  hath  his  eyes  as  a  flame 
of  fire,  and  his  feet  are  like  fine  brass :  "I  know  thy  works  and 
love  and  faith  and  service,  and  thy  patience,  and  thy  last  w^orks 
more  than  the  first.  -"But  I  have  against  thee  that  thou  lettest 
alone  the  woman  Jezebel  that  calleth  herself  a  prophetess  ;  and 
she  teacheth  and  deceiveth  my  servants  to  commit  fornication 
and  to  eat  things  sacrificed  to  idols.  ^'And  I  gave  her  space  to 
repent,  and  she  willeth  not  to  repent  of  her  fornication. 
'^^  Behold,  I  cast  her  into  a  bed,  and  those  that  commit  fornication 
with  her  into  great  tribulation,  except  they  repent  of  her  works. 

c  2 


Xl  THE   REVELATION   OF  JOHN. 

'^And  I  will  kill  her  children  with  death  ;  and  all  the  churches 
shall  know  that  I  am  he  that  searcheth  reins  and  hearts ;  and  I 
will  give  you  each  according  to  your  works.  ''^But  to  you  I  say, 
the  rest  that  are  iu  Thyatira,  as  many  as  have  not  this  doctrine 
which  have  not  known  the  depths  of  Satan  (as  they  say) :  I  put 
upon  you  no  other  burden :  '*  but  that  which  ye  have  hold  fast 
till  I  shall  come.  ^®And  he  that  overcometh  and  he  that  keepeth 
my  works  until  the  end,  I  will  give  him  authority  over  the 
nations;  '^''and  he  shall  rule  them  with  an  iron  rod, —  as  the 
vessels  of  a  potter  are  broken  to  shivers :  as  I  also  received  of 
my  Father.  *®And  I  will  give  him  the  morning  star.  ^^He  that 
hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches. 

III.  And  to  the  angel  of  tlie  church  that  is  in  Sardis  write, 
These  things  saith  he  that  hath  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  and 
the  seven  stars  :  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  liast  a  name  that 
thou  livest,  and  art  dead, 

"Be  watchful,  and  strengthen  the  things  that  remain  which 
were  about  to  die :  for  I  have  not  found  thy  works  complete 
before  my  God.  ^Remember  therefore  how  thou  liast  received 
and  heard ;  and  keep  it,  and  repent.  If  therefore  thou  watch 
not,  I  will  come  [upon  thee]  as  a  thief,  and  thou  shalt  in  no 
wise  know  what  hour  I  will  come  upon  thee.  ''But  thou  hast  a 
few  names  in  Sardis  which  have  not  defiled  their  garments;  and 
they  shall  walk  with  me  in  white,  for  they  are  worthy.  ^He 
that  overcometh,  he  shall  be  clothed  in  white  garments ;  and  I 
will  in  no  wise  blot  out  his  name  from  the  book  of  life,  and  I 
will  confess  his  name  before  my  Father  and  before  his  angels. 
'He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the 
churches. 

■"■And  to  the  angel  of  the  cliurch  that  is  in  Philadelphia  write, 
These  things  saith  he  that  is  holy,  he  that  is  true,  he  that 
hath  the  key  of  David,  he  that  openeth  and  no  one  shall  shut, 
and  that  shutteth  and  no  one  shall  open :  ®I  know  thy  works. 
Behold,  I  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door  which  no  one  can 
shut:  for  tliou  hast  a  little  strength,  and  hast  kept  my  word,  and 
hast  not  denied  my  name.  "Behold,  I  give  of  the  synagogue  of 
Satan  those  that  say  they  are  Jews  and  are  not  but  lie :  behold, 


THE   REVELATION   OF   JOHN.  xli 

I  will  make  them  to  come  and  do  homage  before  thy  feet,  and 
know  that  I  have  loved  thee.  ^"Because  thou  hast  kept  the 
word  of  my  patience,  I  also  will  keep  thee  from  the  hour  of 
trial  that  is  about  to  come  on  all  the  habitable  world,  to  try 
those  that  dwell  on  the  earth.  "I  am  coming  quickly:  hold 
fast  that  which  thou  hast,  that  no  one  take  thy  crown.  ^'^He 
that  overcometh,  I  will  make  him  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my 
God,  and  he  shall  never  go  out  more :  and  I  will  write  upon 
him  the  name  of  my  God,  and  the  name  of  the  city  of  my  God, 
the  new  Jerusalem,  that  cometh  down  out  of  the  heaven  from 
my  God,  and  my  new  name.  "He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him 
hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches. 

'^And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  that  is  in  Laodicea  write, 
These  things  saith  the  Amen,  the  faithful  and  true  witness,  the 
beginning  of  the  creation  of  God :  ^^I  know  thy  works,  that 
thou  art  neither  cold  nor  hot;  I  would  thou  wert  cold  or  hot. 
^''So,  because  thou  art  lukewarm  and  neither  hot  nor  cold,  I  am 
about  to  spue  thee  out  of  my  mouth.  "Because  thou  sayest,  I 
am  rich  and  am  become  rich  and  have  need  of  nothing ;  and 
knowest  not  that  thou  art  the  wretched  and  the  pitiable  and  poor 
and  blind  and  naked;  "I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  purified 
by  fire  that  thou  mayest  wax  rich,  and  white  garments  that  thou 
mayest  be  clothed  and  the  shame  of  thy  nakedness  may  not  be 
manifested ;  and  eye-salve  to  anoint  thine  eyes  that  thou  mayest 
see.  ^®I,  as  many  as  I  love,  rebuke  and  chasten:  be  zealous 
therefore  and  repent.  *°  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock : 
if  any  one  hear  my  voice,  and  open  the  door,  I  will  [both]  come 
in  to  him,  and  will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  me.  "^^He  that 
overcometh,  I  will  give  him  to  sit  down  with  me  in  my  throne, 
as  I  also  overcame  and  sat  down  with  my  Father  in  his  throne. 
^"He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the 
churches. 

IV.  After  these  things  I  saw,  and,  behold,  a  door  opened  in 
the  heaven ;  and  the  first  voice  which  I  heard  as  of  a  trumpet 
talking  with  me  said.  Come  up  hither,  and  I  will  shew  thee  the 
things  which  must  come  to  pass  after  these.  ^[And]  imme- 
diately I  was  in  the  Spirit ;  and,  behold,  a  throne  was  set  in  the 


xlii  THE  REVELATION   OF   JOHN. 

heaven,  and  upon  the  throne  one  sitting:  ^and  he  that  sat  in 
appearance  like  a  jasper  stone  and  a  sardius :  and  a  rainbow 
round  about  the  throne  in  appearance  like  an  emerald.  *And 
round  about  the  throne  were  twenty- four  thrones  :  and  upon 
the  twenty- four  thrones  /  scm  elders  sitting  clothed  in  white 
garments,  and  upon  their  heads  golden  crowns.  ''And  out  of 
the  throne  proceeded  lightnings  and  voices  and  thunders ;  and 
seven  lamps  of  fire  burning  before  the  throne,  which  are  the 
seven  Spirits  of  God  ;  ^and  before  the  throne  as  a  sea  of  glass 
like  crystal ;  and  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  and  around  the 
throne,  four  living  creatures  full  of  eyes  before  and  behind : 
'and  the  first  living  creature  like  a  lion,  and  the  second  living 
creature  like  a  calf,  and  the  third  living  creature  had  the  face 
as  of  a  man,  and  the  fourth  living  creature  like  a  flying  eagle. 
^And  the  four  living  creatures,  having  each  of  them  six  wings, 
round  about  and  within  are  full  of  eyes ;  and  they  have  no 
rest  day  and  night,  saying,  Holy,  holy,  holy,  the  Lord  God  the 
Almighty  that  was  and  that  is  and  that  is  to  come.  "And  when 
the  living  creatures  shall  give  glory  and  honour  and  thanks  to 
him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  unto  the  ages  of  the  ages,  "the 
twenty- four  elders  shall  fall  down  before  him  that  sitteth  on 
the  throne,  and  shall  worship  him  that  liveth  unto  the  ages  of 
the  ages,  and  shall  cast  their  crowns  before  the  throne,  saying, 
"Thou  art  worthy,  0  Lord  [and  our  God],  to  receive  the  glory 
and  the  honour  and  the  power :  for  thou  createdest  all  things, 
and  because  of  thy  will  they  were  and  were  created. 

V.  And  I  saw  upon  the  right  hand  of  him  that  sat  on  the 
throne  a  book  written  within  and  on  the  back,  sealed  up  with 
seven  seals.  ''And  I  saw  a  strong  angel  proclaiming  with  a 
loud  voice,  "Who  is  worthy  to  open  the  book  and  to  loose  the 
seals  thereof  ?  *And  no  one  in  the  heaven  nor  on  the  eartli  nor 
under  the  earth  was  able  to  open  the  book  neither  to  look 
thereon.  *And  I  wept  much,  because  no  one  was  able  to  open 
the  book  neither  to  look  thereon.  *And  one  of  the  elders  saith 
to  me.  Weep  not :  behold,  the  lion  hath  overcome  that  is  of  the 
tribe  of  Judah,  the  root  of  David,  that  opcneth  the  book  and 
the  seven  seals  thereof     *'And  I  saw  in  the  midst  of  the  throne 


THE   REVELATION   OF  JOHN.  xliii 

and  of  the  four  living  creatures,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  elders, 
a  Lamb  standing  as  slain,  having  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes 
which  are  the  [seven]  Spirits  of  God  sent  forth  into  all  the 
earth.  ''And  he  came  and  took  [the  book]  out  of  the  right  hand 
of  him  that  sat  upon  the  throne.  ®And  when  he  took  the  book, 
the  four  living  creatures  and  the  twenty-four  elders  fell  down 
before  the  Lamb,  having  each  a  harp  and  golden  bowls  full  of 
incense,  which  is  the  prayers  of  the  saints.  ^And  they  sing  a 
new  song,  saying.  Thou  art  worthy  to  take  the  book  and  to  open 
the  seals  thereof  :  for  thou  wast  slain  and  hast  bought  [us]  to 
God  by  thy  blood  out  of  every  tribe  and  tongue  and  people  and 
nation;  "and  hast  made  them  to  our  God  kings  and  priests;  and 
they  shall  reign  over  the  earth.  "And  I  saw,  and  I  heard  the 
voice  of  many  angels  around  the  throne  and  the  living  creatures 
and  the  elders :  and  the  number  of  them  was  myriads  of  myriads 
and  thousands  of  thousands,  ^'^  saying  with  a  loud  voice,  Worthy 
is  the  Lamb  that  is  slain  to  receive  the  power  and  riches  and 
wisdom  and  strength  and  honour  and  glory  and  blessing.  ^^And 
every  creature  which  is  in  the  heaven  and  on  the  earth  and 
under  the  earth  and  [such  as  are]  on  the  sea  and  all  things  in 
them  heard  I  saying.  To  him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  and  to 
the  Lamb  he  the  blessing  and  the  honour  and  the  glory  and  the 
might  unto  the  ages  of  the  ages.  "And  the  four  living  creatures 
said.  Amen :  and  the  elders  fell  down  and  worshipped. 

VI.  And  I  saw  when  the  Lamb  opened  one  of  the  seven  seals, 
and  I  heard  one  of  the  four  living  creatures  saying,  as  a  voice  of 
thunder.  Come.  '^And  I  saw,  and,  behold,  a  white  horse,  and  he 
that  sat  upon  him  having  a  bow ;  and  there  was  given  him  a 
crown :  and  he  came  out  conquering  and  that  he  might  con- 
quer. 

^And  when  he  opened  the  second  seal,  I  heard  the  second 
living  creature  saying,  Come.  ^And  there  came  out  another 
horse  that  was  red :  and  to  him  that  sat  upon  him  it  was  given 
him  to  take  peace  from  the  earth,  and  that  they  should  slay  one 
another ;  and  there  was  given  him  a  great  sword. 

^And  when  he  opened  the  third  seal,  I  heard  the  third  living 
creature  saying.  Come.     And  I  saw,  and,  behold,  a  black  horse, 


xliv  THE   REVELATION   OF  JOHN. 

and  he  that  sat  upon  him  had  a  balance  in  his  hand.  *Aud  I 
heard  [as]  a  voice  in  the  midst  of  the  four  living  creatures  say- 
ing, A  choenix  of  wheat  for  a  denarius,  and  three  choenixes  of 
barley  for  a  denarius  ;  and  the  oil  and  the  wine  thou  must  not 
hurt. 

'And  when  he  opened  the  fourth  seal,  I  heard  the  fourth 
living  creature's  voice  saying,  Come,  ®And  I  saw,  and,  behold, 
a  pale  horse,  and  his  name  that  sat  on  him  luas  death,  and  hades 
followed  with  him ;  and  there  was  given  him  authority  over  the 
fourth  part  of  the  earth,  to  kill  with  sword  and  with  hunger  and 
with  death  and  by  the  beasts  of  the  earth. 

®And  when  he  opened  the  fifth  seal,  I  saw  under  the  altar 
the  souls  of  those  slain  because  of  the  w^ord  of  God  and 
because  of  the  testimony  which  they  held.  "And  they  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,  saying.  How  long,  0  Master,  the  holy  and 
true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood  on  those  that 
dwell  on  the  earth  ?  "And  there  was  given  them  [each]  a 
white  robe ;  and  it  was  said  to  them  that  they  should  rest  yet 
for  a  [little]  space,  until  their  fellow-servants  also  and  their 
brethren  should  be  completed  that  were  to  be  killed  even  as 
they. 

'^And  I  saw  when  he  opened  the  sixth  seal,  and  there  was  a 
great  earthquake ;  and  the  sun  became  black  as  sackcloth  of 
hair,  and  the  whole  moon  became  as  blood ;  "and  the  stars  of 
the  heaven  fell  unto  the  earth,  as  a  fig  tree  shaken  by  a  great 
wind  easteth  its  untimely  figs.  "And  the  heaven  departed  as  a 
scroll  rolled  up ;  and  every  mountain  and  island  were  moved 
out  of  their  places.  '*And  the  kings  of  the  earth  and  the  great 
men  and  the  chiliarchs  and  the  rich  and  the  mighty  and  every 
bondman  and  freeman  hid  themselves  in  the  caves  and  in  the 
rocks  of  the  mountains ;  '*and  they  say  to  the  mountains  and 
rocks,  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth 
on  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb :  "for  the  great 
day  of  his  wrath  is  come ;  and  who  is  able  to  stand  ? 

VII.  [And]  after  this  I  saw  four  angels  standing  upon  tlie 
four  corners  of  the  earth,  holding  the  four  winds  of  the  earth, 
that  no  wind  should  blow  on  the  earth  nor  on  the  sea  nor  upon 


THE   EEVELATION    OF   JOHN,  xlv 

auy  tree.  *And  I  saw  another  angel  rising  up  from  the  east, 
having  the  seal  of  the  living  God;  and  he  cried  with  a  loud 
voice  to  the  four  angels  to  whom  it  was  given  to  hurt  the  earth 
and  the  sea,  'saying.  Hurt  not  the  earth  nor  the  sea  nor  the 
trees,  till  we  have  sealed  the  servants  of  our  God  on  their  fore- 
heads.* And  I  heard  the  number  of  the  sealed — a  hundred  and 
forty-four  thousand  sealed  out  of  every  tribe  of  the  sons  of 
Israel;  ^out  of  the  tribe  of  Juda  twelve  thousand  sealed;  out 
of  the  tribe  of  Eeuben  twelve  thousand;  out  of  the  tribe  of  Gad 
twelve  thousand;  "^out  of  the  tribe  of  Aser  twelve  thousand  ; 
out  of  the  tribe  of  Nepthalim  twelve  thousand ;  out  of  the  tribe 
of  Manasses  twelve  thousand;  ^out  of  the  tribe  of  Simeon  twelve 
thousand ;  out  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  twelve  thousand ;  out  of  the 
tribe  of  Issachar  twelve  thousand ;  ^out  of  the  tribe  of  Zabulon 
twelve  thousand ;  out  of  the  tribe  of  Joseph  twelve  thousand ; 
out  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  twelve  thousand  sealed. 

^After  these  things  I  saw,  and,  behold,  a  great  multitude, 
which  no  one  could  number,  out  of  every  nation  and  tribes  and 
peoples  and  tongues,  standing  before  the  throne  and  before  the 
Lamb,  clothed  with  white  robes,  and  palms  in  their  hands ; 
^°and  they  cry  with  a  loud  voice,  saying.  The  salvation  to  our 
God  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  and  to  the  Lamb.  '^And  all  the 
angels  stood  around  the  throne  and  the  elders  and  the  four 
living  creatures,  and  they  fell  before  the  throne  upon  their  faces, 
and  worshipped  God,  '*  saying,  Amen :  The  blessing  and  the 
glory  and  the  wisdom  and  the  thanksgiving  and  the  honour 
and  the  power  and  the  strength  to  our  God  unto  the  ages  of 
the  ages.  [Amen.]  ^^And  one  of  the  elders  answered,  saying  to 
me,  These  that  are  clothed  with  white  robes,  who  are  they,  and 
whence  came  they  ?  "And  I  said  to  him,  My  lord,  thou  knowest. 
And  he  said  to  me.  These  are  they  that  come  out  of  the  great 
tribulation,  and  they  washed  their  robes  and  made  them  white 
in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  ^*  Therefore  are  they  before  the  throne 
of  God  and  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple ;  and  he  that 
sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  tabernacle  over  them.  ^''They  shall 
hunger  no  more  neither  thirst  any  more  nor  in  any  wise  shall 
the  sun  fall  upon  them  nor  any  heat.  "For  the  Lamb  that  is 
in  the  midst  of  the  throne  shall  tend  them  and  shall  lead  them 


xlvi  THE   REVELATION   OF  JOHN. 

to  fountains  of  waters  of  life,  and  God  shall  wipe  away  every 
tear  from  their  eyes. 

VIII.  And  when  he  opened  the  seventh  seal,  there  was  silence 
in  the  heaven  aljout  half  an  hour.  ''And  I  saw  the  seven  angels 
who  stand  before  God ;  and  there  were  given  to  them  seven 
trumpets.  "And  another  angel  came  and  stood  at  the  altar, 
having  a  golden  censer ;  and  there  was  given  him  much  incense, 
that  he  should  give  cjficacy  to  the  prayers  of  all  the  saints  upon 
the  golden  altar  that  was  before  the  throne.  ^And  the  smoke 
of  the  incense  rose  up  with  the  prayers  of  the  saints  out  of 
the  angel's  hand  before  God.  *And  the  angel  took  the  censer 
and  filled  it  with  the  fire  of  the  altar  and  cast  it  unto  the 
earth ;  and  there  were  thunders  and  lightnings  and  voices  and 
an  earthquake. 

"And  the  seven  angels  that  had  the  seven  trumpets  prepared 
themselves  that  they  should  sound.  'And  the  first  sounded;  and 
there  was  hail  and  fire  mingled  with  blood,  and  they  were  cast 
unto  the  eartli ;  and  the  third  of  the  earth  was  burnt  up,  and 
the  third  of  the  trees  was  burnt  up,  and  all  the  green  grass  was 
burnt  up. 

^And  the  second  angel  sounded;  and  as  a  great  mountain 
burning  with  fire  was  cast  into  the  sea ;  and  the  third  of  the 
sea  became  blood :  ^and  the  third  of  the  creatures  that  were  in 
the  sea  that  had  life  died;  and  the  third  of  the  ships  were 
destroyed. 

^"And  the  third  angel  sounded;  and  there  fell  out  of  the 
heaven  a  great  star  burning  as  a  torch,  and  it  fell  upon  the 
third  of  the  rivers  and  upon  the  fountains  of  the  waters.  "And 
the  name  of  the  star  is  called  Wormwood ;  and  the  third  of  the 
waters  became  wormwood ;  and  many  of  the  men  died  of  the 
waters  because  they  were  made  bitter. 

"And  the  fourth  angel  sounded ;  and  the  third  of  the  sun 
was  smitten  and  the  third  of  the  moon  and  the  third  of  the 
stars,  that  the  third  of  them  might  be  darkened,  and  the  day 
should  not  shine  for  the  third  thereof  and  the  night  likewise. 

"And  I  saw,  and  I  heard  an  eagle  flying  in  mid-Iieaven, 
saying  with  a  loud  voice,  Woe,  woe,  woe  to  those  that  dwell  on 


THE   REVELATION    OF   JOHN.  xlvii 

the  earth  from  the  rest  of  the  voices  of  the  trumpet  of  the  three 
angels  that  are  to  sound  ! 

IX.  And  the  fifth  angel  sounded ;  and  I  saw  a  star  fallen  out 
of  the  heaven  unto  the  earth,  and  there  was  given  him  the  key 
of  the  pit  of  the  abyss.  *And  he  opened  the  pit  of  the  abyss, 
and  smoke  arose  out  of  the  pit  as  the  smoke  of  a  great  furnace: 
and  the  sun  was  darkened  and  tlie  air  by  the  smoke  of  the  pit. 
^And  out  of  the  smoke  came  forth  locusts  unto  the  earth,  and 
there  was  given  them  power  as  the  scorpions  of  the  earth  have 
power.  *And  it  was  said  to  them  that  they  should  not  hurt  the 
grass  of  the  earth  nor  any  green  thing  nor  any  tree,  but  the  men 
which  have  not  the  seal  of  God  on  their  foreheads.  *And  it 
was  given  them  that  they  should  not  kill  them,  but  that  they 
should  be  tormented  five  months ;  and  their  torment  was  as  the 
torment  of  a  scorpion  when  it  striketh  a  man.  'And  in  those 
days  shall  men  seek  death  and  shall  in  no  wise  find  it,  and  shall 
desire  to  die,  and  death  fleeth  from  them.  ''And  the  likenesses 
of  the  locusts  tverc  like  horses  prepared  for  war,  and  upon  their 
heads  as  crowns  like  gold,  and  their  faces  as  the  faces  of  men. 
^And  they  had  hair  as  liair  of  women,  and  their  teeth  were  as 
of  lions. '  ® And  they  had  breastplates  as  iron  breastplates,  and 
the  sound  of  their  wings  was  as  a  sound  of  chariots  of  many 
horses  running  unto  war.  ^°And  they  have  tails  like  scorpions, 
and  stings ;  and  in  their  tails  was  their,  power  to  hurt  men  five 
months.  "  They  have  a  king  over  them,  the  angel  of  the  abyss: 
his  name  in  Hebrew  is  Abaddon ;  and  in  the  Greek  he  hatli  the 
name  Apollyon. 

^'^The  first  woe  is  past;  behold,  there  come  two  woes  more 
after  these  things. 

"And  the  sixth  angel  sounded  ;  and  I  heard  a  voice  from  the 
four  horns  of  the  golden  altar  that  is  before  God,  "saying  to  the 
sixth  angel  that  had  the  trumpet,  Loose  the  four  angels  that  are 
bound  at  the  great  river  Euphrates.  '^And  the  four  angels  were 
loosed  that  were  prepared  for  the  hour  and  day  and  month  and 
year,  that  they  might  slay  the  third  of  men.  ''And  the  number 
of  the  armies  of  the  cavalry  vms  two  myriads  of  myriads :  I 
heard  the  number  of  them.     ''And  thus  I  saw  the  horses  in  the 


xlviii  THE   llEVELATION   OF  JOHN. 

vision,  and  those  that  sat  on  them,  having  breastplates  of  fire 
and  of  jacinth  and  of  brimstone :  and  the  heads  of  the  horses 
were  as  heads  of  lions ;  and  out  of  their  mouths  proceeded  fire 
and  smoke  and  brimstone.  '^  By  these  three  plagues  were  killed 
the  third  of  men,  by  the  fire  and  the  smoke  and  the  brimstone 
that  proceeded  out  of  their  mouths.  "For  the  power  of  the 
horses  is  in  their  mouth  and  in  their  tails :  for  their  tails  are 
like  serpents  and  have  heads ;  and  with  them  they  do  hurt. 

'^"And  the  rest  of  the  men  who  were  not  killed  by  these 
plagues  repented  not  of  the  works  of  their  hands,  that  they 
should  not  worship  demons,  and  idols  of  gold  and  of  silver  and 
of  brass  and  of  stone  and  of  wood  which  can  neither  see  nor 
hear  nor  walk  ;  "  and  they  repented  not  of  their  murders  nor  of 
their  sorceries  nor  of  their  fornication  nor  of  their  thefts. 

X.  And  I  saw  another  strong  angel  coming  down  out  of  the 
heaven,  clothed  with  a  cloud ;  and  the  rainbow  on  his  head,  and 
his  face  as  the  sun,  and  his  feet  as  pillars  of  fire :  "and  he  had 
in  his  hand  a  little  book  open :  and  he  set  his  right  foot  on  the 
sea,  and  the  left  on  the  earth,  "and  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  as  a 
lion  roareth  :  and  when  he  cried,  the  seven  thunders  uttered  their 
own  voices.  ''And  when  the  seven  thunders  spoke,  I  was  about 
to  write  :  and  I  heard  a  voice  from  the  heaven,  saying.  Seal 
the  things  which  the  seven  thunders  spoke,  and  write  them  not. 
*And  the  angel  whom  I  saw  standing  on  the  sea  and  on  the 
earth  lifted  up  his  right  hand  unto  the  heaven,  "and  sware  by 
him  that  liveth  unto  the  ages  of  the  ages,  who  created  the 
heaven  and  the  things  therein,  and  the  earth  and  the  things 
therein,  and  the  sea  and  the  things  therein,  that  there  should  be 
no  more  space,  ''but  in  the  days  of  the  voice  of  the  seventh 
angel,  when  he  is  to  sound,  the  mystery  of  God  should  be 
finished,  as  he  announced  the  glad  tidings  to  his  servants  the 
prophets.  ®And  the  voice  which  I  heard  from  heaven  was  again 
speaking  with  me,  and  said.  Go,  take  the  book  that  is  open  in 
the  hand  of  the  angel  that  standeth  on  the  sea  and  on  the  earth. 
"And  I  went  away  to  the  angel,  saying  to  him  that  he  should 
give  me  the  little  book.  And  he  said  to  me.  Take,  and  eat  it  up ; 
and  it  shall  make  thy  belly  bitter,  but  in  thy  mouth  it  shall  be 


THE   REVELATION   OF  JOHN.  xlix 

sweet  as  honey.  ^°And  I  took  the  little  book  out  of  the  hand  of 
the  angel,  and  ate  it  up;  and  it  was  in  my  mouth  sweet  as 
honey,  and  when  I  ate  it,  my  belly  was  made  bitter.  "And  they 
say  to  me,  Thou  must  again  prophesy  of  peoples  and  [of] 
nations  and  tongues  and  many  kings. 

XI.  And  there  was  given  me  a  reed  like  a  rod,  saying.  Rise, 
and  measure  the  temple  of  God,  and  the  altar,  and  those  that 
worship  therein.  ^And  the  court  that  is  without  the  temple 
cast  out,  and  measure  it  not;  for  it  was  given  to  the  nations: 
and  the  holy  city  shall  they  tread  forty  [and]  two  months. 
'And  I  will  give  efficacy  to  my  two  witnesses,  and  they  shall 
prophesy  a  thousand  two  hundred  and  sixty  days,  clothed  with 
sackcloth.  *  These  are  the  two  olive  trees,  and  the  two  lamp- 
stands  that  stand  before  the  Lord  of  the  earth.  "And  if  any 
one  desire  to  hurt  them,  fire  proceedeth  out  of  their  mouth,  and 
devoureth  their  enemies :  and  if  any  one  desire  to  hurt  them, 
thus  must  he  be  killed.  ® These  have  authority  to  shut  the  heaven 
that  no  rain  fall  during  the  days  of  their  prophecy ;  and  they 
have  authority  over  the  waters  to  turn  them  into  blood,  and  to 
smite  the  earth  with  every  plague  as  often  as  they  will.  ''And 
when  they  shall  have  finished  their  testimony,  the  beast  that 
riseth  up  out  of  the  abyss  shall  make  war  with  them  and  shall 
overcome  them  and  shall  kill  them.  ®And  their  dead  body  shall 
he  on  the  street  of  the  great  city  which  is  called  spiritually 
Sodom  and  Egypt,  where  also  their  Lord  was  crucified.  °And 
some  of  the  peoples  and  tribes  and  tongues  and  nations  see  their 
dead  body  three  days  and  a  half,  and  do  not  suffer  their  dead 
bodies  to  be  put  into  a  sepulchre.  '"And  those  that  dwell  on 
the  earth  rejoice  over  them  and  make  merry  and  shall  send 
gifts  to  one  another,  because  these  two  prophets  tormented  those 
that  dwell  on  the  earth.  "And  after  the  three  days  and  a  half 
the  spirit  of  life  from  God  entered  [into]  them,  and  they  stood 
upon  their  feet,  and  great  fear  fell  upon  those  that  beheld  them. 
'-And  I  heard  a  loud  voice  out  of  the  heaven  saying  to  them, 
Come  up  hither.  And  they  went  up  to  the  heaven  in  the  cloud ; 
and  their  enemies  beheld  them.  "And  in  that  hour  was  there  a 
great  earthquake,  and  the  tenth  of  the  city  fell,  and  there  were 


1  THE    REVELATION    OF  JOHN". 

slain  in  the  earthquake  seven  thousand  names  of  men :  and  the 
rest  became  afraid,  and  gave  glory  to  the  God  of  the  heaven. 

'^The  second  woe  is  past;  behold,  the  third  woe  cometh 
quickly. 

''And  the  seventh  angel  sounded ;  and  there  were  loud  voices 
in  the  heaven,  saying,  The  kingdom  of  the  world  hath  become  our 
Lord's  and  his  Christ's,  and  he  shall  reign  unto  the  ages  of  the 
ages.  '^And  the  twenty-four  elders,  who  sit  before  God  upon 
their  thrones,  fell  upon  their  faces  and  worshipped  God,  "saying, 
We  give  thee  thanks,  0  Lord  God  the  Almighty,  that  art  and 
that  wast ;  because  thou  hast  taken  thy  great  power  and  reigned. 
'*And  the  nations  were  wroth,  and  thy  wrath  is  come,  and  the 
time  of  the  dead  to  be  judged,  and  to  give  the  reward  to  thy 
servants  the  prophets,  and  to  the  saints,  and  to  them  that  fear 
thy  name,  the  little  and  the  great;  and  to  destroy  those  that 
destroy  the  earth. 

''And  there  was  opened  the  temple  of  God  [that  is]  in  the 
heaven,  and  there  was  seen  the  ark  of  his  covenant  in  his 
temple ;  and  there  were  lightnings  and  voices  and  thunders  [and 
an  earthquake]  and  great  hail. 

XIL  And  a  great  sign  was  seen  in  the  heaven :  a  woman 
clothed  with  the  sun,  and  the  moon  under  her  feet,  and  on  her 
head  a  crown  of  twelve  stars ;  ^aud  being  with  child  she  crieth, 
travailing  and  pained  to  bring  forth.  ^And  there  was  seen 
another  sign  in  the  heaven ;  and,  behold,  a  great  red  dragon, 
having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and  upon  his  heads  seven 
diadems.  *And  his  tail  draweth  the  third  of  the  stars  of  the 
heaven,  and  cast  them  unto  the  earth  :  and  the  dragon  stood  before 
the  woman  that  was  about  to  bring  forth,  that  when  she  brought 
forth  he  might  devour  her  child.  *And  she  brought  forth  a  male 
son,  who  is  to  rule  all  the  nations  with  an  iron  rod :  and  her 
child  was  caught  up  to  God,  and  to  his  throne.  "And  the  woman 
fled  into  the  wilderness,  where  she  hath  a  place  prepared  of 
God,  that  there  they  should  nourish  her  a  thousand  two  hundred 
and  sixty  days.  ^And  there  was  war  in  the  heaven :  Michael 
and  his  angels  went  to  war  with  the  dragon :  and  the  dragon 
made  war  and  liis  augels ;  "and  he  prevailed  not,  neither  was 


THE  REVELATION   OF   JOHN.  li 

their  place  found  any  more  in  the  heaven.  ®And  the  great  dragon 
was  cast  out,  the  ancient  serpent,  that  is  called  the  Devil  and 
Satan,  that  deceiveth  the  whole  habitable  world :  he  was  cast 
into  the  earth,  and  his  angels  were  cast  with  him.  "And  I  heard 
a  loud  voice  in  the  heaven,  saying,  Now  is  come  the  salvation 
and  the  power  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God  and  the  authority 
of  his  Christ :  for  the  accuser  of  our  brethren  is  cast  out  that 
accused  them  before  our  God  day  and  night.  "And  they  over- 
came him  because  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  because  of  the 
word  of  their  testimony ;  and  they  loved  not  their  life  unto 
death.  ^'^ Therefore  rejoice,  ye  heavens,  and  ye  that  tabernacle  in 
them.  Woe  to  the  earth  and  to  the  sea !  for  the  devil  is  gone 
down  unto  you,  having  great  fury,  knowing  that  he  hath  a  short 
time.  ^^And  when  the  dragon  saw  that  he  was  cast  unto  the 
earth,  he  persecuted  the  woman  which  brought  forth  the  male 
child.  "And  there  were  given  to  the  woman  [the]  two  wings  of 
the  great  eagle,  that  she  should  fly  into  the  wilderness  into  her 
place,  where  she  is  nourished  there  a  time  and  times  and  half  a 
time  from  the  serpent's  face.  ''And  the  serpent  cast  out  of  his 
mouth  after  the  woman  water  as  a  river,  that  he  might  make  her 
as  carried  away  by  a  river.  ^^And  the  earth  helped  the  woman, 
and  the  earth  opened  her  mouth  and  swallowed  up  the  river 
which  the  dragon  cast  out  of  his  mouth.  '''And  the  dragon  was 
wroth  at  the  woman,  and  went  away  to  make  war  with  the  rest 
of  her  seed  that  keep  the  commandments  of  God  and  have  the 
testimony  of  Jesus. 

XIII.  And  I  stood  upon  the  sand  of  the  sea.  And  I  saw  a 
beast  rising  out  of  the  sea,  having  ten  horns  and  seven  heads, 
and  on  his  horns  ten  diadems,  and  upon  his  heads  names  of 
blasphemy.  ^And  the  beast  which  I  saw  was  like  a  leopard, 
and  his  feet  as  a  bear's,  and  his  mouth  as  a  lion's  mouth ;  and 
the  dragon  gave  him  his  power  and  his  throne  and  great  autho- 
rity. ®And  I  saw  one  of  his  heads  as  slain  unto  death;  and  his 
deadly  wound  was  healed :  and  the  whole  earth  wondered  after 
the  beast.  ^And  they  worshipped  the  dragon,  because  he  gave 
the  authority  to  the  beast;  and  they  worshipped  the  beast, 
saying,  Who  is  like  the  beast?  and  who  is  able  to  make  war 


lii  THE    REVELATION    OF   JOHN. 

with  him  ?  'And  there  was  given  him  a  mouth  speaking  great 
things  and  blasphemy;  and  there  was  given  him  authority  to 
work  forty- two  months.  ®And  he  opened  his  mouth  unto  blas- 
phemies against  God,  to  blaspheme  his  name  and  his  tabernacle 
[and]  those  that  tabernacle  in  the  heaven.  ''And  it  was  given 
him  to  make  war  with  the  saints,  and  to  overcome  them ;  and 
there  was  given  him  authority  over  every  tribe  and  people  and 
tongue  and  nation.  ^And  all  that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall 
worship  him,  of  whom  the  name  is  not  written,  in  the  book  of 
life  of  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  from  the  world's  foundation. 
^If  any  one  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear.  "If  any  one  is  for 
captivity,  into  captivity  he  goeth ;  if  any  one  will  kill  with 
sword,  with  sword  must  he  be  killed.  Here  is  the  patience  and 
the  faith  of  the  saints. 

"And  I  saw  another  beast  rising  up  out  of  tlie  earth ;  and  he 
had  two  horns  like  a  lamb,  and  he  spake  as  a  dragon.  ^^And 
all  the  authority  of  the  first  beast  he  exerciseth  before  him,  and 
causeth  the  earth  and  those  that  dwell  therein  to  worship  the 
first  beast,  whose  deadly  wound  was  healed.  ^^And  he  doeth 
sreat  siras,  so  that  even  fire  he  maketh  come  down  out  of  the 
heaven  unto  the  earth  before  men;  "and  he  deceiveth  those 
that  dwell  on  the  earth  because  of  the  signs  which  it  was  given 
him  to  do  before  the  beast,  saying  to  them  that  dwell  on  the 
earth,  that  they  should  make  an  image  to  the  beast,  who  hath 
the  wound  of  the  sword  and  lived.  ^'And  it  was  given  him  to 
give  breath  to  the  image  of  the  beast,  that  the  image  of  the 
beast  should  both  speak  and  cause  [that]  as  many  as  would  not 
worship  the  image  of  the  beast  should  be  killed.  '"And  he 
causeth  all,  the  little  and  the  great,  and  the  rich  and  the  poor, 
and  the  free  and  the  bond,  that  they  should  give  them  a  mark 
on  their  right  hand,  or  upon  their  forehead,  '^and  that  no  one 
may  be  able  to  buy  or  sell,  save  he  that  hath  the  mark,  the 
name  of  the  beast,  or  the  number  of  his  name.  ''Here  is 
wisdom.  Let  him  that  hath  understanding  coimt  the  number  of 
the  beast:  for  it  is  a  man's  number;  and  his  number  is  (jQQ). 

XIV.  And  I  saw,  and,  behold,  the  Lamb  standing  upon  the 
mount  Sion,  and  with  him  an  hundred  forty  and  four  thousand, 


THE   REVELATION   OF  JOHN.  liii 

having  his  name  and  his  Father's  name  written  on  their  fore- 
heads. ^And  I  heard  a  voice  out  of  the  heaven,  as  a  voice  of 
many  waters  and  as  a  voice  of  loud  thunder:  and  the  voice 
wliich  I  heard  was  as  of  harpers  harping  with  their  harps ;  ^and 
they  sing  [as]  a  new  song  before  the  throne,  and  before  the  four 
living  creatures  and  the  elders  ;  and  no  one  could  learn  the  song 
but  the  hundred  forty  and  four  thousand  that  were  bought  from 
the  earth.  *  These  are  they  who  were  not  defiled  with  women: 
for  they  are  virgins.  These  [are]  they  that  follow  the  Lamb 
whithersoever  he  goeth.  These  were  bought  from  among  men, 
first-fruits  to  God  and  to  the  Lamb:  "and  in  their  mouth  was 
found  no  falsehood  ;  [for]  they  are  blameless. 

^And  I  saw  [another]  angel  flying  in  mid -heaven,  having  the 
everlasting  gospel  to  announce  unto  those  that  sit  on  the  earth, 
and  unto  every  nation  and  tribe  and  tongue  and  people,  ''saying 
with  a  loud  voice,  Tear  God,  and  give  him  glory;  for  the  hour 
of  his  judgment  is  come :  and  worship  him  that  made  the 
heaven  and  the  earth  and  [the]  sea  and  fountains  of  waters. 

®And  another,  a  second  angel  followed,  saying,  Fallen  [fallen] 
is  Babylon  the  great,  who  hath  given  all  the  nations  to  drink  of 
the  wine  of  the  fury  of  her  fornication. 

®  And  another,  a  third  angel  followed  them,  saying  with  a  loud 
voice,  If  any  one  worshippeth  the  beast  and  his  image,  and 
receiveth  a  mark  on  his  forehead  or  upon  his  hand,  "even  he 
shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the  indignation  of  God  that  is  mixed 
undiluted  in  the  cup  of  his  wrath ;  and  he  shall  be  tormented 
with  fire  and  brimstone  before  the  holy  angels  and  before  the 
Lamb :  "and  the  smoke  of  their  torment  riseth  up  unto  the 
ages  of  the  ages ;  and  they  have  no  rest  day  and  night,  that 
worship  the  beast  and  his  image,  and  if  any  one  receiveth  the 
mark  of  his  name.  ^'^Here  is  the  patience  of  the  saints,  that 
keep  the  commandments  of  God  and  the  faith  of  Jesus. 

^' And  I  heard  a  voice  out  of  the  heaven,  saying.  Write,  Blessed 
are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord  henceforth.  Yea,  saith  the 
Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from  their  toils ;  for  their  works  follow 
with  them. 

"And  I  saw,  and,  behold,  a  white  cloud ;  and  upon  the  cloud 
/  saiv  one  sitting  like  the  Son  of  man,  having  upon  his  head  a 

d 


liv  THE   REVELATION   OF  JOHN. 

golden  crown  and  in  his  hand  a  sharp  sickle.  "And  another 
angel  came  forth  out  of  the  temple,  crying  with  a  loud  voice  to 
him  that  sat  on  the  cloud,  Send  thy  sickle  and  reap ;  for  the 
time  to  reap  hath  come :  for  the  harvest  of  the  earth  is  dried 
up.  ^®And  he  that  sat  upon  the  cloud  put  his  sickle  upon  the 
earth ;  and  the  earth  was  reaped. 

"And  another  angel  came  forth  out  of  the  temple  that  is  in 
the  heaven,  he  also  having  a  sharp  sickle.  "And  another  angel 
came  forth  out  of  the  altar,  having  authority  over  the  fire,  and 
cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  him  that  had  the  sharp  sickle,  saying, 
Send  thy  sharp  sickle,  and  gather  the  clusters  of  the  vine  of 
the  earth;  for  her  grapes  are  fully  ripe.  ^^And  the  angel  put 
his  sickle  unto  the  earth,  and  gathered  the  fruit  of  the  vine  of 
the  earth,  and  cast  it  into  the  great  winepress  of  the  indignation 
of  God.  ^°And  the  winepress  was  trodden  without  the  city, 
and  blood  came  forth  out  of  the  winepress  unto  the  bridles  of 
the  horses,  a  thousand  six  hundred  stadia  off. 

XV.  And  I  saw  another  sign  in  the  heaven,  great  and  won- 
derful :  seven  angels  liaving  the  seven  last  plagues ;  for  in  them 
was  finished  the  indignation  of  God. 

"And  I  saw  as  a  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire,  and  those  that 
won  the  victory  over  the  beast  and  over  the  number  of  his 
name,  standing  upon  the  sea  of  glass,  having  harps  of  God.  *And 
they  sing  the  song  of  Moses  the  servant  of  God,  and  the  song 
of  the  Lamb,  saying.  Great  and  wonderful  are  thy  works,  O 
Lord  God  the  Almighty ;  just  and  true  arc  thy  ways,  thou  King 
of  the  nations.  *Who  shall  not  fear,  0  Lord,  and  glorify  tliy 
name?  for  tliou  only  art  holy:  for  all  the  nations  shall  come  and 
worship  before  thee ;  for  thy  righteousnesses  were  manifested. 

'And  after  these  things  I  saw,  and  there  was  opened  the 
temple  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  testimony  in  the  heaven ;  ^aud 
the  seven  angels  that  had  the  seven  plagues  came  [out  of  the 
temple],  clad  in  pure  bright  linen,  and  girt  round  about  their 
breasts  with  golden  girdles.  ''And  one  of  the  four  living 
creatures  gave  the  seven  angels  seven  golden  bowls,  full  of  the 
indignation  of  God  that  liveth  unto  the  ages  of  the  ages.  *And 
the  temple  was  filled  with  smoke  from  the  glory  of  God,  from 


THE   REVELATION   OF   JOHN.  Iv 

liis  power ;  and  no  one  was  able  to  enter  into  the  temple  till 
the  seven  plagues  of  the  seven  angels  were  finished. 

XVI.  And  I  heard  a  loud  voice  [out  of  the  temple]  saying  to 
the  seven  angels,  Go  your  ways,  and  pour  out  the  seven  bowls 
of  the  indignation  of  God  unto  the  earth. 

"And  tlie  first  went  away  and  poured  out  his  bowl  unto  the 
earth  ;  and  there  came  an  evil  and  grievous  sore  upon  the  men 
that  had  the  mark  of  the  beast,  and  upon  those  that  worshipped 
his  imaije. 

°And  the  second  poured  out  his  bowl  into  the  sea ;  and  it 
became  blood  as  of  a  dead  man;  and  every  living  soul  died, 
those  in  the  sea. 

^And  the  third  poured  out  his  bowl  into  the  rivers  and  [into] 
the  fountains  of  waters ;  and  they  became  blood.  ^And  I  heard 
the  angel  of  the  waters  say,  Righteous  art  thou  that  art  and 
that  wast  holy,  because  thou  hast  judged  these  things.  ®For 
they  shed  the  blood  of  saints  and  prophets,  and  thou  gavest 
them  blood  to  drink :  they  are  worthy.  ''And  I  heard  the  altar 
say.  Yea,  0  Lord  God  the  Almighty,  true  and  righteous  are  thy 
judgments. 

*And  the  fourth  poured  out  his  bowl  upon  the  sun ;  and  it 
was  given  him  to  scorch  men  with  fire.  "And  the  men  were 
scorched  with  great  scorching,  and  blasphemed  the  name  of  God 
that  had  authority  over  these  plagues ;  and  they  repented  not 
to  give  him  glory. 

"And  the  fifth  poured  out  his  bowl  upon  the  throne  of  the 
beast ;  and  his  kingdom  became  darkened ;  and  they  gnawed 
their  tongues  for  the  pain,  "and  blasphemed  the  God  of  the 
heaven  for  their  pains  and  for  their  sores,  and  repented  not  of 
their  works. 

^"And  the  sixth  poured  out  his  bowl  upon  the  great  river,  the 
Euphrates;  and  the  water  thereof  was  dried  up,  that  the  way 
of  the  kings  that  are  from  the  east*  might  be  prepared.  ^^And 
I  saw  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  dragon,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of 
the  beast,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  false  prophet,  three 
unclean  spirits   as   frogs.     ^^For   they   are   spirits   of   demons 

*  Or  "sun-rising,"  as  in  chaps,  vii.  2;  xxi.  13. 

d  2 


Ivi  THE   REVELATION   OF   JOHN. 

working  signs,  who  go  forth  unto  the  kings  of  the  whole  habit- 
able world  to  gather  them  together  unto  the  war  of  [that]  great 
day  of  God  the  Almighty.  ^^  (Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief :  blessed 
is  he  that  watcheth,  and  keepeth  his  raiment,  that  he  walk  not 
naked,  and  they  see  not  his  shame.)  ^'^And  they*  gathered  them 
together  unto  the  place  that  is  called  in  Hebrew  Harmagedon. 

"And  the  seventh  poured  out  his  bowl  upon  the  air;  and 
there  came  forth  a  loud  voice  from  the  temple  [of  the  heaven], 
from  the  throne,  saying,  It  is  done.  ^®And  there  were  lightnings 
and  voices  and  thunders,  and  there  was  a  great  earthquake,  such 
as  was  not  since  a  man  was  on  the  earth — such  an  earthquake, 
so  great.  '^And  the  great  city  became  three  parts,  and  the  cities 
of  the  nations  fell :  and  Babylon  the  great  was  remembered 
before  God  to  give  her  the  cup  of  the  wine  of  the  indignation 
of  his  wrath.  ^°And  every  island  fled  away,  and  no  mountains 
were  found.  ^^And  great  hail  as  of  a  talent's  weight  cometh 
down  out  of  the  heaven  upon  men :  and  men  blasphemed  God 
for  the  plague  of  the  hail ;  because  the  plague  thereof  is  exceed- 
ing great. 

XVII.  And  there  came  one  of  the  seven  angels  that  had  the 
seven  bowls,  and  spoke  with  me,  saying.  Come  hither;  I  will 
shew  thee  the  judgment  of  the  great  harlot  that  sitteth  on  [the] 
many  waters;  ^with  whom  the  kings  of  the  earth  committed 
fornication,  and  those  that  inhabit  the  earth  were  made  drunk 
with  the  wine  of  her  fornication.  'And  he  carried  me  away  in 
the  Spirit  into  a  wilderness ;  and  I  saw  a  woman  sitting  upon  a 
scarlet  beast  full  of  [the]  names  of  blasphemy,  having  seven 
heads  and  ten  horns.  ''And  the  woman  was  clothed  with  purple 
and  scarlet,  and  decked  with  gold  and  precious  stone  and  pearls, 
having  in  her  hand  a  golden  cup  full  of  abominations  and  the 
unclean  things  of  her  fornication,  *and  upon  her  forehead  a 
name  written :  Mystery,  Babylon  the  great,  the  mother  of 

THE  harlots  and  OF  THE  ABOMINATIONS  OF  THE  EARTH.   "And  I 

saw  the  woman  drunk  with  the  blood  of  the  saints  and  with  the 
blood  of  the  witnesses  of  Jesus;  and  when  I  saw  her,  I  wondered 
with  great  wonder.    ^And  the  angel  said  to  me,  Wherefore  didst 

*  Or  "he." 


THE   REVELATION    OF   JOHN.  Ivii 

thou  wonder  ?  I  will  tell  thee  the  mystery  of  the  woman,  and 
of  the  beast  that  beareth  her,  that  hath  the  seven  heads  and 
the  ten  horns.  ®The  beast  which  thou  sawest  was  and  is  not, 
and  is  to  rise  up  out  of  the  abyss  and  go  into  perdition :  and 
they  shall  wonder  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  of  whom  the  name 
is  not  written  in  the  book  of  life  from  the  world's  foundation, 
when  they  behold  the  beast  that  he  was  and  is  not  and  shall  be 
present.  ^Here  is  the  mind  that  hath  wisdom.  "The  seven 
heads  are  seven  mountains,  where  the  woman  sitteth  on  them ; 
and  they  are  seven  kings :  five  are  fallen,  one  is,  the  other  is 
not  yet  come ;  and  when  he  shall  have  come,  he  must  continue 
a  short  space.  "And  the  beast  which  was  and  is  not,  even  he  is 
an  eighth  and  is  of  the  seven  and  goeth  into  perdition.  ■'^'And 
the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest  are  ten  kings  which  have  not 
yet  received  a  kingdom ;  but  they  receive  authority  as  kings 
one  hour  with  the  beast.  ^' These  have  one  mind  and  give  their 
power  and  authority  to  the  beast.  "These  shall  make  war  with 
the  Lamb,  and  the  Lamb  shall  overcome  them  (for  he  is  Lord 
of  lords  and  King  of  kings),  and  those  that  are  with  him,  called 
and  chosen  and  faithful.  ^^And  he  saith  to  me,  The  waters 
which  thou  sawest,  where  the  harlot  sitteth,  are  peoples  and 
multitudes  and  nations  and  tongues.  ^"And  the  ten  horns  which 
thou  sawest,  and  the  beast,  these  shall  hate  the  harlot  and  shall 
make  her  desolate  and  naked,  and  shall  eat  her  flesh  and  shall 
burn  her  with  fire.  "For  God  hath  put  into  their  hearts  to 
accomplish,  his  mind,  and  to  accomplish  one  mind,  and  to  give 
their  kingdom  to  the  beast,  till  the  words  of  God  shall  be 
finished.  ^^And  the  woman  whom  thou  sawest  is  the  great  city 
that  hath  kingship  over  the  kings  of  the  earth. 

XVIII.  After  these  things  I  saw  another  angel  coming  down 
out  of  the  heaven,  having  great  authority;  and  the  earth  was 
illumined  with  his  glory,  ^And  he  cried  with  a  strong  voice, 
saying,  Fallen  [fallen]  is  Babylon  the  great,  and  is  become  a 
habitation  of  demons,  and  a  haunt  of  every  unclean  spirit,  and 
a  haunt  of  every  unclean  and  hated  bird.  Tor  of  the  wine  of 
the  fury  of  her  fornication  all  the  nations  drank,  and  the  kings 
of  the  earth  committed  fornication  with  her,  and  the  merchants 
of  the  earth  became  rich  by  the  power  of  her  luxury.     *And  I 


Iviii  THE   REVELATION    OF   JOHN. 

heard  another  voice  out  of  the  heaven,  saying,  Come  out  of  her, 
my  people,  that  ye  have  no  fellowship  with  her  sins,  and  that 
ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues:  ^for  her  sins  have  reached  unto 
the  heaven,  and  God  hath  remembered  her  iniquities.     ® Render 
to  her  as  she  also  rendered,  and  double  [the]  double  according 
to  her  works :  in  the  cup  which  she  mixed  mix  to  her  double. 
''How  much  she  glorified  herself  and  lived  luxuriously,  so  much 
torment  and  mourning  give  her.   Because  in  her  heart  she  saith, 
I  sit  a  queen  and  am  no  widow  and  shall  in  no  wise  see  mourn- 
ing; therefore  in  one  day  shall  her  plagues  come,  death  and 
mourning  and  famine ;  and  she  shall  be  utterly  burnt  with  fire : 
for  strong  is  the  Lord  God  that  judged  her.     ®Aud  the  kings  of 
the  earth  that  committed  fornication  and  lived  luxuriously  with 
her  shall  weep  and  wail  on  account  of  her,  when  they  see  the 
smoke  of  her  burning,  ^"standing  afar  off  because  of  the  fear  of 
her   torment,  saying,  Woe,   woe,   the  great  city  Bal)ylon,  the 
strong  city!   for  in  one  hour  came  thy  judgment.     "And  the 
merchants  of  the  earth  weep  and  mourn  on  account  of  her ;  for 
their  lading  no  one  buyeth  any  more — "lading  of  gold  and  of 
silver  and  of  precious  stone  and  of  pearl  and  of  fine  linen  and 
of  purple  and  of  silk  and  of  scarlet;  and  all  thyine  wood  and 
all  furniture  of  ivory  and  all  furniture  of  most  precious  wood, 
and  of  brass  and  of  iron  and  of  marble ;  ^*aud  cinnamon  and 
amomum  and  incense  and  unguent  and  frankincense  and  wine 
and  oil  and  fine  flour  and  wheat  and  cattle  and  sheep,  and  of 
horses  and  of  chariots  and  of  bodies  and  souls  of  men.     "And 
the  fruits  of  the  desire  of  thy  soul  have  departed  from  thee,  and 
all  the  sumptuous  and  the  bright  things  have  perished  from 
thee,  and  never  shall  they  find  them  any  more.  ^'The  merchants 
of  these  things  that  became  rich  by  her  shall  stand  afar  off 
because  of  the  fear  of   her  torment,  weeping  and   mourning, 
^"saying,  Woe,  woe,  the  great  city,  that  was  clothed  with  fine 
linen  and  purple  and  scarlet,  and  decked  with  gold  and  precious 
stone  and  pearls!  "for  in  one  hour  were  so  great  riches  made 
desolate.    And  every  pilot  and  every  voyager  and  sailors  and  as 
many  as  trade  by  the  sea  stood  afar  off,  ^''and  cried,  seeing  the 
smoke  of  her  burning,  saying,  What  citi/  is  like  the  great  city ! 
"And  they  cast  dust  upon  their  beads,  and  cried,  weeping  and 


THE   REVELATION   OF  JOHN.  lix 

mourning,  saying,  Woe,  woe,  the  great  city,  wherein  all  that  had 
ships  in  the  sea  became  rich  by  reason  of  her  costliness  !  for  in 
one  hour  was  she  made  desolate.  ^"Eejoice  over  her,  0  heaven, 
and  ye  saints,  and  ye  apostles,  and  ye  prophets :  for  God  hath 
judged  your  judgment  on  her.  ^'And  a  strong  angel  took  up  a 
stone  as  a  great  millstone,  and  cast  it  into  the  sea,  saying,  Thus 
with  violence  shall  Babylon  the. great  city  be  cast  down,  and 
shall  in  no  wise  be  found  more.  '^^And  no  voice  of  harpers  and 
musicians  and  pipers  and  trumpeters  shall  be  heard  any  more  in 
thee;  and  no  craftsman  of  any  craft  shall  be  found  any  more  in 
thee ;  and  no  sound  of  millstone  shall  be  heard  any  more  in 
thee ;  ^^and  no  light  of  lamp  shall  shine  any  more  in  thee ;  and 
no  voice  of  bridegroom  and  of  bride  shall  be  heard  any  more  in 
thee;  for  thy  merchants  were  the  great  ones  of  the  earth;  for 
by  thy  sorcery  were  all  the  nations  deceived.  '"And  in  her  the 
blood  of  prophets  and  of  saints  was  found,  and  of  all  that  were 
slain  on  the  earth. 

XIX.  After  these  things  I  heard  as  a  loud  voice  of  a  great 
multitude  in  the  heaven,  saying,  Alleluia!  the  salvation,  the  glory, 
and  the  power  of  our  God :  ^for  true  and  righteous  are  his 
judgments;  for  he  hath  judged  the  great  harlot  who  corrupted 
the  earth  with  her  fornication,  and  hath  avenged  the  blood  of 
his  servants  at  her  hand.  ^And  a  second  time  they  said,  Alleluia  ! 
and  her  smoke  riseth  up  unto  the  ages  of  the  ages.  *And  the 
twenty- four  elders  and  the  four  living  creatures  fell  down 
and  worshipped  God  that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  saying.  Amen, 
Alleluia !  ®And  a  voice  came  forth  out  of  the  throne,  saying. 
Praise  our  God,  all  ye  his  servants,  and  ye  that  fear  him,  the 
little  and  the  great.  ^And  I  heard  as  a  voice  of  a  great  multi- 
tude, and  as  a  voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  a  voice  of  strong 
thunders,  saying.  Alleluia  !  for  the  Lord  [our]  God  the  Almighty 
hath  reigned.  ''Let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice  and  give  the  glory  to 
him :  for  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and  his  wife  hath 
made  herself  ready.  ®And  to  her  it  was  granted  that  she  should 
be  clothed  with  fine  linen  bright  [and]  pure  :  for  the  fine  linen 
is  the  righteousnesses  of  the  saints.  ^And  he  saith  to  me.  Write  : 
Blessed  are  those  that  are  called  unto  the  marriage  supper  of 


Ix  THE    REVELATION    OF   JOHN. 

the  Lamb.  And  he  saith  to  me,  These  are  the  true  words  of 
God.  ^°And  I  fell  before  his  feet  to  worship  him.  And  he  saith 
to  me,  See  thou  do  it  not:  I  am  fellow- servant  of  thee  and  of 
thy  brethren  that  liave  the  testimony  of  Jesus:  worship  God. 
For  the  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy. 

"And  I  saw  the  heaven  oj^ened,  and  Iteliold,  a  white  horse ; 
and  he  that  sat  upon  liini  was  called  faithful  and  true,  and  in 
righteousness  he  doth  judge  a,nd  make  war.  ^^His  eyes  were  [as] 
a  flame  of  fire,  and  upon  liis  head  loere  many  diadems ;  he  had 
[names  written  and]  a  name  written  which  no  one  knoweth  but 
he  himself;  ^^and  he  was  clothed  with  a  garaient  dyed  with 
blood:  and  his  name  is  called  The  Word  of  God.  ^*And  the 
armies  that  are  in  the  heaven  followed  him  upon  white  horses, 
clad  in  white  pure  fine  linen.  ^'''And  out  of  his  mouth  proceeded 
a  [two-edged]  sharp  sword,  that  with  it  he  should  smite  the 
nations :  and  he  shall  rule  them  with  an  iron  rod  :  and  he 
treadeth  the  winepress  of  the  wine  of  the  indignation  of  the 
wrath  of  God  the  Almighty.  ^''And  he  hath  upon  the  garment 
and  u[)on  his  thigh  a  name  written,  King  of  Kings  and  Lord  of 
Lords.  ^^And  I  saw  an  angol  standing  in  the  sun ;  and  he  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,  saying  to  all  the  fowls  that  fly  in  mid-heaven, 
Come,  gather  yourselves  together  unto  the  great  supper  of  God  ; 
^^that  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of  kings,  and  the  flesh  of  chiliarchs, 
and  the  flesh  of  strong  men,  and  the  flesh  of  horses,  and  of 
those  that  sit  on  them,  and  the  flesh  of  all,  both  free  and  bond, 
and  both  little  and  great.  ^"And  I  saw  the  beast,  and  the  kings 
of  the  earth,  and  their  armies,  gathered  together  to  make  war 
with  him  that  sat  on  the  horse  and  with  his  army.  ^"^And  the 
beast  was  taken,  and  with  him  the  false  prophet  that  wrought 
the  signs  before  him,  with  which  he  deceived  those  that  had 
received  the  mark  of  the  beast  and  those  that  worshipped  his 
image  :  they  two  were  cast  alive  into  the  lake  of  fire  that  burnetii 
with  brimstone.  ^^And  the  rest  were  slain  with  the  sword  of 
him  that  sat  on  the  horse — the  sword  that  came  forth  out  of  his 
mouth ;  and  all  the  fowls  were  filled  with  their  flesh. 

XX.  And  I  saw  an  angel  coming  down  from  the  heaven, 
having  the  key  of  the  abyss,  and  a  great  chain  upon  his  hand. 
'•^And  he  laid  hold  on  the  dragon,  the  ancient  serpent,  which  is 


THE   REVELATION   OF  JOHN.  Ixi 

the  Devil  and  Satan,  and  bound  him  a  thousand  years,  ^and  cast 
hiiji  into  the  abyss,  and  shut  and  sealed  it  over  him,  that  he 
might  deceive  the  nations  no  more  till  the  thousand  years  were 
finished :  after  these  must  he  be  loosed  a  little  space. 

^And  I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  tliem,  and  judgment 
was  given  to  them ;  and  the  souls  of  those  beheaded  because  of 
the  testimony  of  Jesus  and  because  of  the  word  of  God ;  and 
those  who  had  not  worshipped  the  beast  nor  his  image  and  had 
not  received  the  mark  upon  their  forehead  and  upon  their  hand : 
and  they  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ  [the]  thousand  years. 
■''[And]  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  till  the  thousand  years 
were  finished.  This  is  the  first  resurrection.  ^Blessed  and  holy 
is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection :  over  these  the 
second  death  hath  no  power,  but  they  shall  be  priests  of  God 
and  of  Christ  and  shall  reign  with  him  a  thousand  years.  ''And 
when  the  thousand  years  shall  have  been  finished,  Satan  shall 
be  loosed  out  of  his  prison,  ^and  shall  go  out  to  deceive  the 
nations  in  the  four  corners  of  the  earth,  Gog  and  Magog,  to 
gather  them  togetlier  unto  the  war  :  the  number  of  whom  is  as 
the  sand  of  the  sea.  ^And  they  went  up  upon  the  breadth  of  the 
earth,  and  encompassed  the  encampment  of  the  saints  and  the 
beloved  city :  and  there  came  down  fire  out  of  the  heaven  [from 
God]  and  devoured  them.  ^°And  the  devil  that  deceived  them 
was  cast  also  into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone,  where  also  the 
beast  and  the  false  prophet  are;  and  they  shall  be  tormented 
day  and  night  unto  the  ages  of  the  ages. 

"And  I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  him  that  sat  upon  it, 
from  whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled  away,  and  there 
was  found  no  place  for  them.  ^^And  I  saw  the  dead,  the  great 
and  the  little,  standing  before  tlie  throne,  and  books  were 
opened ;  and  another  book  was  opened,  which  is  tlte  hooh  of  life : 
and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  the  things  written  in  the  books 
according  to  their  works.  ^^And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead  that 
were  in  it ;  and  death  and  hades  gave  up  the  dead  that  were  in 
them ;  and  they  were  judged  each  according  to  their  works. 
^*And  death  and  hades  were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  This  is 
the  second  death,  the  lake  of  fire.  ^^And  if  any  one  was  not  found 
written  in  the  book  of  life,  he  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire. 


Ixii  THE   REVELATION   OF   JOHN. 

XXI.  And  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  ;  for  the 
first  heaven  and  the  first  earth  had  passed  away ;  and  the  sea  is 
no  more.  ^And  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusalem,  I  saw  coming 
down  out  of  the  heaven  from  God,  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned 
for  her  husband.  ^Aiid  I  heard  a  loud  voice  out  of  the  throne, 
saying,  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  he  shall 
tabernacle  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  his  people,  and  God 
himself  shall  be  with  them,  their  God.  *And  [God]  sliall  wipe 
away  every  tear  from  their  eyes ;  and  death  shall  be  no  more, 
and  no  mourning  nor  crying  nor  pain  shall  be  any  more:  for 
the  first  things  have  passed  away.  ^And  he  that  sat  upon  the 
throne  said.  Behold,  I  make  all  things  new.  And  he  saith  [to 
me].  Write :  for  these  words  are  faithful  and  true.  ^And  he  said 
to  me,  They  are  done.  I  am  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the 
beginning  and  the  end.  To  him  that  is  athirst  I  will  give  of 
the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life  freely.  ''He  that  overcometh 
shall  inherit  these  things ;  and  I  will  be  God  to  him,  and  he 
shall  be  a  son  to  me.  ^But  for  the  cowardly  and  faithless  and 
abominable  and  murderers  and  fornicators  and  sorcerers  and 
idolaters  and  all  liars,  their  part  sliall  he  in  the  lake  that  burneth 
with  fire  and  brimstone,  which  is  the  second  death. 

^And  there  came  one  of  the  seven  angels  tliat  had  the  seven 
bowls  full  of  the  seven  last  plagues  and  talked  with  me,  saying, 
Come  hither,  I  will  shew  thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife. 
^°And  he  carried  me  away  in  the  Spirit  to  a  great  and  high 
mountain,  and  shewed  me  the  holy  city  Jerusalem,  coming 
down  out  of  the  heaven  from  God,  having  the  glory  of  God. 
^^Its  light  was  like  a  stone  most  precious,  as  a  jasper  stone 
clear  as  crystal;  ^^it  had  a  wall  great  and  high ;  it  had  twelve 
gates,  and  at  the  gates  twelve  angels,  and  names  written  thereon, 
which  are  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  the  sons  of  Israel : 
^^on  tlic  east  three  gates,  and  on  the  north  three  gates,  and  on 
the  south  three  gates,  and  on  tlie  west  three  gates.  ^■*And  the 
wall  of  the  city  had  twelve  foundations,  and  on  them  twelve 
names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb.  ^^And  he  that  talked 
with  me  had  a  golden  measuring  rod  to  measure  the  city  and 
the  gates  of  it  and  the  wall  of  it.    ^*^And  the  city  lieth  quadran- 


THE   REVELATION   OF   JOHN.  Ixiii 

gular,  and  the  length  of  it  is  as  much  as  the  breadth  ;  and  he 
measured  the  city  with  the  reed — twelve  thousand  stadia :  the 
length  and  the  breadth  and  the  height  of  it  are  equal.  ^'''And 
he  measured  the  wall  of  it,  an  hundred  forty  and  four  cubits,  a 
man's  measure  which  is  of  the  angel.  ^^And  the  building  of  its 
wall  was  jasper ;  and  the  city  pure  gold  like  pure  glass.  ^^The 
foundations  of  the  wall  of  the  city  were  adorned  with  every 
precious  stone ;  the  first  foundation  jasper,  the  second  sapphire, 
the  third  chalcedony,  the  fourth  emerald,  ^^the  fifth  sardonyx, 
the  sixth  sardius,  the  seventh  chrysolyte,  the  eighth  beryl,  the 
ninth  topaz,  the  tenth  chrysoprasus,  the  eleventh  jacinth,  the 
twelfth  amethyst.  ^^And  the  twelve  gates  were  twelve  pearls; 
each  one  of  the  gates  severally  was  of  one  pearl :  and  the  street 
of  the  city  pure  gold  as  transparent  glass.  ^^And  I  saw  no 
temple  in  it :  for  the  Lord  God  the  Almighty  is  the  temple  of 
it,  and  the  Lamb.  ^^And  the  city  has  no  need  of  the  sun  nor  of 
the  moon,  that  they  should  shine  on  it :  for  the  glory  of  God 
illumined  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  lamp  of  it.  ^^And  the  nations 
shall  walk  by  its  light ;  and  the  kings  of  the  earth  bring  their 
glory  unto  it.  ^^And  the  gates  of  it  shall  in  no  wise  be  shut  by 
day :  for  there  shall  be  no  night  there.  ^^And  they  shall  bring 
the  glory  and  honour  of  the  nations  unto  it.  ^''And  there  shall 
in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any  thing  common,  and  one  practising 
abomination  and  a  lie ;  but  those  that  are  written  in  the  Lamb's 
book  of  life. 

XXII.  And  he  shewed  me  a  river  of  water  of  life  bright  as 
crystal  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb.  ^In 
the  midst  of  the  street  of  it  and  of  the  river,  on  this  side  and 
on  that  side,  was  the  tree  of  life  producing  twelve  fruits,  every 
month  yielding  its  fruit ;  and  the  leaves  of  the  tree  for  healing 
of  the  nations.  ^And  there  shall  be  no  more  curse :  and  the 
throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  in  it ;  and  his  servants 
shall  serve  him,  *and  shall  see  his  face ;  and  his  name  shall  be 
on  their  foreheads.  ^And  there  shall  be  no  night  [there]  and  no 
need  of  lamp  and  sunlight ;  for  the  Lord  God  will  illumine 
them  :  and  they  shall  reign  unto  the  ages  of  the  ages. 

''And  he  said  to  me.  These  words  are  faithful  and  true ;  and 


Ixiv  THE   REVELATION   OF  JOHN. 

the  Lord  God  of  the  spirits  of  the  prophets  hath  sent  his  angel 
to  shew  his  servants  the  things  which  must  come  to  pass  shortly. 
^And,  behold,  I  am  coming  quickly:  blessed  is  he  that  keepeth 
the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book.  **And  I  John  was  he 
that  heard  and  saw  these  things.  And  when  I  heard  and  [when 
I]  saw,  I  fell  down  to  worship  before  the  feet  of  the  angel  that 
shewed  me  these  things.  ^And  he  saith  to  me,  See  thoit  do  it 
not:  I  am  fellow- servant  of  thee  and  of  thy  brethren  the  pro- 
phets and  of  those  that  keep  the  words  of  this  book :  worship 
God.  ^•'And  he  saith  to  me,  Seal  not  the  words  of  the  prophecy 
of  this  book  :  [for]  the  time  is  at  hand.  ^^He  that  is  unjust,  let 
him  do  unjustly  still :  and  he  that  is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still : 
and  he  that  is  righteous,  let  liim  practise  righteousness  still :  and 
he  that  is  holy,  let  him  be  sanctified  still.  ^^  Behold,  I  am  coming 
quickly;  and  my  reward  with  me  to  give  each  as  his  work  is. 
^3 1  am  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the  first  and  the  last,  the  begin- 
ning and  the  end.  ^*  Blessed  are  those  that  wash  their  robes,  that 
they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life  and  may  enter  in  by  the 
gates  into  the  city.  ^^  Without  are  tlie  dogs  and  the  sorcerers  and 
the  fornicators  and  the  murderers  and  the  idolaters  and  every 
one  that  lovetli  and  practiseth  a  lie.  ^*^I  Jesus  have  sent  mine 
angel  to  testify  to  you  these  things  in  the  churches.  I  am  the 
root  and  the  offspring  of  David,  the  bright  [and]  the  morning 
star.  ^''And  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  Come  ;  and  let  him  that 
heareth  say,  Come.  And  let  him  that  is  athirst  come  ;  let  him 
that  willeth  take  life's  water  freely.  ^^I  testify  to  every  one  that 
heareth  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book,  If  any  one  add 
to  them,  God  shall  add  to  him  the  plagues  that  are  written  in 
this  book  :  ^''and  if  any  one  shall  take  away  from  the  words  of 
the  book  of  this  prophecy,  God  shall  take  away  his  part  from 
the  tree  of  life  and  out  of  the  holy  city  that  are  written  in  this 
book. 

2'' He  that  testifieth  these  things  saith,  Yea,  I  am  coming 
quickly.     Amen  !     Come,  Lord  Jesus. 

2^  The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  [Christ]  he  with  all  [the  saints. 
Amen.] 


LECTURES 

ON 

THE   BOOK    OF   REVELATION". 


CHAPTER  I. 


Every  Christian  of  spiritual  intelligence  must  have  felt  more 
or  less  fully  the  peculiar  character  of  the  book  on  the  study 
of  which  we  now  enter.  It  is  a  "revelation  of  Jesus  Christ 
which  God  gave  him."  It  is  evident  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is 
■viewed  here,  not  in  His  place  of  intimacy  as  the  only  begotten 
Son  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  but  in  one  of  comparative 
distance.  It  is  His  revelation,  but,  moreover,  the  revelation 
which  God  gave  Him.  Somewhat  similar  is  the  remarkable 
expression  which  has  perplexed  so  many  in  the  Gospel  of  ]\Iark 
(chap.  xiii.  32),  "  But  of  that  day  and  that  hour  knoweth  no 
man :  no,  not  the  angels  which  are  in  heaven,  neither  the  Son, 
but  the  Father."  He  is  the  servant  Son  of  God  all  through  that 
Gospel ;  and  it  is  the  perfection  of  a  servant  not  to  know  what 
his  lord  does — to  know,  if  we  may  so  say,  only  what  he  is  told. 
Here  Christ  receives  a  revelation  from  God ;  for,  however 
exalted,  it  is  the  position  He  took  as  man  which  comes  out  con- 
spicuously in  the  Eevelation.  And  what  makes  this  the  more 
striking  is  that,  of  all  the  inspired  writers  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, none  dwells  with  such  fulness  upon  His  supreme  and 
divine  glory  as  John  in  his  Gospel.  In  the  Revelation,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  is  the  same  Jolm  who  brings  out  with  the  greatest 
detail  His  human  glory,  but  without  hiding  that  He  is  God. 
In  keeping  with  this,  the  Revelation  is  "  to  shew  his  servants 

B 


THE   TITLE. 


things  which  must  shortly  come  to  pass."  How  very  different  is 
the  tone  of  John  xv.  15,  "  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants;" 
aiid  also  of  John  xvi.  speaking  of  tlie  Sjnrit,  "  He  shall  glorify 
me,  for  He  shall  receive  of  mine  and  shall  shew  it  unto  you. 
All  tilings  that  the  Father  hath  are  mine ;  therefore  said  I  that 
He  shall  take  of  mine  and  shall  shew  it  unto  you."  So  we  see 
throngh  the  Gospel  from  first  to  last,  that  the  design  of  the 
Spirit  is  to  give  the  disciples  the  title  and  consciousness  of  their 
sonship  with  and  through  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God  in  the  highest 
sense.  Tlius  in  chapter  i.  11,  12,  "  He  came  unto  his  own,  and 
his  own  received  him  not.  But  as  many  as  received  him,  to 
them  gave  he  power  to  become  the  children  of  God."  And 
again,  after  His  death  and  resurrection,  the  Lord  says,  chap.  xx. 
17,  "Go  to  my  brethren  and  say  unto  them,  I  ascend  unto  my 
Father  and  your  Father;  and  to  my  God  and  your  God."  Of 
course  they  were  servants  also,  and  there  is  not  a  shade  of  in- 
congruity. Still  the  difference  of  the  relationships  is  immense ; 
and  the  Kevelation  clearly  is  addressed  to  the  lower  of  these 
relations.  The  reason,  I  presume,  is,  partly  because  God  is 
therein  making  known  a  certain  course  of  earthly  events  with 
which  the  lower  position  is  most  in  harmony  (the  higher  one  of 
sons  being  more  suitable  to  communion  with  the  Father  and 
with  His  Son) ;  and  partly  because  God  seems  here  to  prepare 
the  way  for  dealing  with  His  people  in  the  latter  day,  when 
their  position  as  His  servants  will  be  more  or  less  manifested, 
but  not  the  enjoyment  of  nearness  as  sons — I  allnde  to  the 
interval  after  the  removal  of  the  church. 

The  next  words  greatly  confirm  this  ;  for  the  Lord  "  sent  and 
signified  it  by  his  angel  unto  his  servant  John."  Tiiat  is,  the 
prophetic  communication  is  made,  not  directly,  but  through 
the  intervention  of  an  angel ;  and  John  is  no  longer  spoken  of 
as  "  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  which  also  leaned  upon  his 
breast  at  supper,"  but  as  "  his  servant,"  "  who  testified  the  word 
of  God,  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,  whatever  things  he 
saw."  It  has  to  be  remarked  here,  that  the  last  "  and"  ought  to 
disappear,  which  makes  no  small  difference  in  the  sense.  For 
"  whatever  things  he  saw"  must  not  be  regarded  as  a  third  and 
additional  division,  but    rather  as  explaining  or  limiting  the 


THE   INTRODUCTION.  3 

word  of  God  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  visions 
of  John  compose  "  the  word  of  God  and  the  testimony  of 
Jesus"  here  intended.  How  many  have  slighted  them!  Let 
them  learn  how  they  are  characterised  by  the  Lord  here,  and 
tremble  lest  their  blind  depreciation  come  into  collision  with 
Ilis  sentence.  It  is  the  word  of  God  who  gives  the  revelation ; 
it  is  the  testimony  of  Jesus  (not  to  but  of  Jesus)  who  testified 
the  Avord  of  God  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,  whatever 
things  he  saw.    (Compare  chap.  xxii.  8.) 

Very  different  indeed  is  the  revelation  of  God  here,  and  the 
testimony  which  Jesus  bears  in  this  book,  from  what  we  find  in 
John's  Gospel.  The  Word  of  God  there  is  the  Lord  .lesus  Him- 
self, who  in  the  beginning  was  with  God  and  was  God ;  the  full 
and  personal  expression  of  God,  and  that  not  merely  as  the 
Creator  of  all  things,  but  in  perfect  grace.  "  In  him  was  life, 
and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men."  "  And  the  Word  was  made 
flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  and  we  beheld  his  glory  (the  glory 
as  of  the  only-begotten  of  the  Father),  full  of  grace  and  truth." 
In  the  Eevelation,  on  the  contrary,  even  when  He  is  spoken  of 
as  the  Word  of  God,  it  is  as  the  expression  of  divine  judgment, 
because  the  whole  book  is  eminently  judicial.  "He  was  clothed 
with  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood  ;  and  his  name  is  called  the 
Word  of  God."  (Eev.  xix.  13.)  So  too  in  the  Gospel  the  testi- 
mony that  Jesus  Christ  renders  is  to  the  Father,  as  it  is 
throughout  the  Father's  joy  to  bear  witness  of  the  Son.  Indeed 
the  Son  Himself,  towards  the  close  of  His  ministry,  sums  up 
the  pith  and  character  of  the  testimony  there  in  these  few 
words  :  "He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  (John 
xiv.  9.) 

All  this  makes  the  distinctive  features  oi  the  Eevelation  to 
stand  out  in  broader  contrast.  For  throughout  the  book  the 
very  name  of  the  Father  occurs  but  rarely,  and  even  where  it 
does,  the  object  is  in  no  way  the  revelation  of  His  love  as 
Father  to  His  family.  In  Eev.  i.  1,  iii.  21,  and  xiv.  2,  He  is 
spoken  of  as  such  in  relation  to  Jesus  only.  The  grand  subject 
is  God  manifested  in  His  judgments,  as  well  as  the  beneficent 
power  of  His  kingdom  here  below  at  the  appearing  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  "  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords."     Even  when  the 

B  2 


4  •  THE   BLESSING. 

churches  are  in  question,  it  is  given  about  them  to  another,  not 
to  tlieuiselves  directly. 

"  Blessed  is  he  that  readeth,  and  the}-  that  hear  the  words  of 
the  prophecy,  and  keep  the  things  therein  written  :  for  the  time 
is  at  hand."  What  a  serious  mistake  in  the  face  of  such  words 
as  these  for  Christians  to  think  that  this  book  or  any  part  of  it 
is  unprofitable,  and  that  it  may  be  safely  set  aside  either  as  too 
difficult  to  understand,  or,  if  understood,  as  having  no  practical 
bearing  upon  the  soul !  It  is  remarkable  indeed  with  what 
special  care  the  Lord  has  commended  it,  not  only  here  at  the 
commencement  but  at  the  close,  where  we  read,  "  These  sayings 
are  faithful  and  true  ;  and  the  Lord  God  of  the  spirits  of  the 
prophets  sent  his  angel  to  shew  his  servants  the  things  which 
must  shortly  come  to  pass.  Behold,  I  come  quickly ;  blessed  is 
he  that  keepeth  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book."  It 
would  seem  that  the  Lord's  prescient  eye  anticipated  in  such 
warnings  the  neglect  with  which  the  Apocalypse  would  be 
treated  by  His  servants,  and  that  He  was  thus  solemnly  guard- 
ing them  against  it  by  commending  the  book  emphatically  to 
their  study  and  use.  It  is  a  little  remarkable,  by  the  way, 
that  a  somewhat  similar  admonition  occurs  in  the  close  of 
1  Thessalonians,  which  was  the  first  of  Paul's  epistles,  and  the 
one  which  above  all  others  developes  the  grand  truth  of  the 
coming  of  the  Lord.  In  Eev.  i.  3  the  Lord  takes  pains  to 
encourage  every  possible  class  of  people  who  might  come  in 
contact  with  the  book.  Not  only  the  individual  who  reads  is 
pi'onounced  blessed,  but  those  who  hear  its  words  and  keep  (or 
observe)  what  is  written  therein.  And  certain  I  am  that  the 
Lord  does  not  fail  to  encourage  His  saints  who  count  on  His 
assured  faithfulness  and  blessing.  He  has  never  turned  aside 
from  using  it  for  good,  and  especially  in  times  of  danger,  spite 
of  all  contenq)t  or  perversion. 

The  objection  to  tlie  study  of  prophecy  arises  from  a  root  of 
unbelief,  sometimes  deeply  hidden,  which  supposes  all  blessing 
to  depend  on  the  measure  in  which  a  subject  bears  immediately 
on  one's  self  or  one's  circumstances.  Thus  Avlien  some  cry  out. 
That  is  not  essential,  I  would  ask,  Essential  to  what  ?  If  they 
mean  essential  to  salvation,  we  agree.  But  then  on  wliat  a  ground 


THOSE   ADDKESSED.  5 

do  such  objectors  stand  !  The  anxiety  to  examine  only  what 
they  deem  indispensable  to  salvation  shews  that  they  have  no 
consciousness  of  salvation  themselves,  and  that  this  need  of 
their  souls  is  the  only  thing  they  are  alive  to.  Now  all  hold 
that  not  prophecy  but  the  gospel  should  be  put  before  the  un- 
converted. The  coming  of  Christ  in  glory,  which  is  the  centre 
of  unfulfilled  prophecy,  ought  to  be  terror  to  their  hearts,  instead 
of  a  mere  question  for  interesting  discussion.  To  the  believer 
indeed  His  coming  is  "that  blessed  hope."  We  wait  for  the 
Son  of  God  from  heaven,  and  we  await  Him  not  only  without 
anxiety  but  with  joy,  because  we  know  Him  to  be  "Jesus  which 
delivered  us  from  the  wrath  to  come."  But  for  any  man,  whf) 
has  not  peace  by  faith  in  Him  dead  and  risen,  to  occupy  his 
mind  either  with  this,  the  church's  hope,  or  with  the  events  of 
which  prophecy  treats,  is  but  a  diversion  of  which  the  enemy 
can  make  fearful  use,  if  it  be  not  a  proof  of  utter  deadness  of 
conscience  as  to  his  own  condition  before  God, — though  I  am 
far  from  saying,  that  God  may  not  make  use  of  that  truth  to 
arouse  it.  On  the  other  hand  prophecy  is  essential  to  our  due 
appreciation  of  Christ's  glory  and  of  the  glory  that  is  to  be 
revealed.  To  slight  prophecy  therefore  is  to  despise  unwittingly 
that  glory  and  the  grace  which  has  made  it  known  to  us.  It  is 
the  plainest  evidence  of  the  selfishness  of  our  hearts,  which 
wants  every  word  of  God  to  be  directly  about  ourselves. 

God  takes  for  granted  that  His  children  love  to  hear  whatever 
will  exalt  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  result  too  is  striking  and  serious : 
where  Christ  is  the  object  of  our  hearts,  all  is  peace  ;  where  our 
own  happiness  is  the  first  thought,  there  is  wont  to  be  disap- 
pointment and  uncertainty. 

Another  form  in  which  this  egotism  works,  and  must  be 
watched  against,  even  among  those  who  do  hear  the  words  of 
this  prophecy,  is  the  assumption  that  its  visions  are  about  the 
church — that  the  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials,  for  instance,  are  of 
chief  value  and  interest,  because  they  concern  ourselves  {i.e.,  the 
church)  either  in  the  past  or  in  the  future.  But  this  is  a  funda- 
mental mistake,  as  we  may  gather  from  the  very  words  of  the 
verse  before  us.  The  divine  ground  alleged  for  the  importance 
of  taking  heed  to  this  book  lies  not  in  the  time  being  come  or 


b  THE   SALUTATION. 

our  being  in  the  circumstances  described,  but  in  their  being 
near ;  "for  the  time  is  at  hand."  How  far  it  contemplates  those 
on  Christian  or  cliurch  ground,  when  we  see  a  wholly  different 
state  come  in  before  this  age  closes,  then  in  the  millennium  and 
finally  in  eternity,  is  a  question  for  investigation  as  we  proceed 
in  the  study  of  the  book.  But  even  from  the  opening  it  seems 
clearly  as  unfounded  to  assume  from  our  possession  of  the  book 
that  we  must  be  in  the  predicted  circumstances,  as  to  reason  from 
God's  confidential  announcement  to  Abraham,  that  he  neces- 
sarily in  his  own  person  was  concerned  in  the  doomed  cities  of 
the  plain.  The  principle  is  erroneous,  overlooks  the  grace  in 
which  the  Christian  stands,  and  ignores  the  fact  that  there  are 
to  be  in  tlie  latter  day  servants  of  God  in  a  different  position 
from  ours,  and  more  immediately  mixed  up  with  its  horrors, 
thougli  warned  and  saved,  as  just  Lot  was  in  time  to  escape 
the  worst.  If  nevertheless  the  book  in  the  apostle's  days  could 
profit  saints  of  God  who  were  not  personally  concerned  in  the 
judgments,  equally  at  least  may  it  avail  for  us.  The  Lord  grant 
that  we  may  increasingly  value  the  place  in  which  He  has  set 
us,  peacefully  "  knowing  these  things  before." 

Ver.  4-6.  "  John  to  the  seven  churches  which  arc  in  Asia."* 
Even  the  three  verses  already  looked  at  give  us  a  certain  measure 
of  insight  into  the  peculiar  features  of  this  book,  which  are 
obviously  distinct  from  the  other  parts  of  the  New  Testament. 
God  reverts  a  great  deal  to  the  principles  on  which  He  had 

*  By  Asia  is  meant  not  even  Asia  Minor,  but  that  part  of  its  western  coast 
which  constituted  the  Roman  proconsular  province.  The  kingdom  of  Pcrgamus 
had  that  title  given  to  it,  just  as  part  of  the  Carthaginian  territory  was  called 
the  province  of  Libya  or  Africa.  Some  account  for  the  absence  of  allusion  to 
Colosse  and  lliorapolis  by  the  circumstance  that  they  were  destroyed  by  an 
earthquake  soon  after  St.  Paul's  epistle  to  the  former.  If  Euscbius  and  Tacitus 
refer  to  the  same  fact  (for  their  dates  differ),  it  seems  that  Laodicea,  though 
involved  in  the  catastroplir,  was  rebuilt  before  the  reign  of  Domitian.  But 
adopting  the  earlier  date  of  tlie  lioman  historian  (a.u.  61),  how  can  this  consist 
with  the  usual  reference  of  the  Colossian  epistle  to  a.d.  64  ?  May  I  also 
express  my  surprise  that  the  strange  notion  of  Theodoret,  that  St.  Paul  founded 
the  churches  of  Colosse,  Laodicea,  and  Hierapolis,  should  be  held  by  any  un- 
biassed p(;rsou?  I  am  aware  of  Lardner's  elaborate  effort.  But  Col.  ii.,  if 
rightly  understood,  includes  the  Colossians  and  Laodicoans  among  those  wlm 
had  not  set.'n  the  apostle  in  the  flesh. 


THE   NAME   OF   GOD.  7 

acted  ill  Old  Testament  times.  One  can  see  that  the  positive 
edification  of  the  church  is  not  the  subject,  nor  the  unfolding  of 
(Jod's  special  dealings  in  niei-cy.  We  have  here  to  do  with  His 
judgment  of  evil,  whether  in  the  churches  or  in  the  world.  In 
perfect  harmony  with  this,  God  introduces  Himself  to  His 
people  by  a  style  and  title  that  differs  from  the  rest  of  the 
apostolic  addresses.  "  Grace  to  you  and  peace  from  him  that  is, 
and  that  was,  and  that  is  to  come."  It  is  generally  what  answers 
in  the  New  Testament  to  Jehovah  in  the  Old.  There  is  this 
peculiarity,  that  He  is  here  revealed  as  first  He  that  is  in  His 
absolute  ever-present  being,  then  He  that  was,  and  He  that  is  to 
come.  The  "  I  am"  takes  precedence,  but  He  was  before,  and  is 
the  coming  One.  God  of  old  revealed  Himself  to  Israel  as  the 
unchangeable  One,  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever." 
But  now  He  speaks  in  the  language  of  the  Gentiles,  and  by 
these  words—"  Him  that  is,  and  that  was,  and  that  is  to  come," 
translates  as  it  were  that  name  of  Jehovah,  never  before  so 
communicated  to  them.  He  is  going  to  return  to  His  ancient 
people  Israel ;  but  before  He  does  so,  there  must  necessarily  be 
a  sweeping  judgment  upon  the  professing  mass  that  calls  itself 
by  the  name  of  the  church.  Thus,  when  God  has  set  Christen- 
dom aside,  He  will  bring  in  Israel  again — no  longer  on  the 
ground  of  law  but  of  grace.  The  law  executed  death  on  sinful 
man,  but  the  grace  of  God  substituted  the  person  of  the  Son  of 
God,  as  in  Heb.  ii.  9  it  is  written,  "  that  he  by  the  grace  of  God 
should  taste  death  for  every  man."  But  God,  in  the  death  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  also  gave  a  stronger  expression  of  His  hatred  of 
sin  than  in  any  other  dealing.  So  in  witness  of,  and  as  an 
answer  to.  His  death  does  grace  now  flow  out  to  the  very  worst. 
In  that  day  Israel  will  know  this  for  themselves  ;  but  they  will 
know  better  what  Jehovah  means.  And  of  what  mighty  import 
it  will  prove  to  them  that  His  personal  name  in  the  government 
of  this  world  is  the  precious  token  given  to  them  nationally, 
the  title  of  relationship  in  which  they  have  Him  revealed  as 
their  God!  This  book  then  is  the  transition  from  a  morally 
judged  Christendom  to  "  that  day." 

Again,  the  style  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  is  here  introduced 
is  as  strikingly  characteristic  of  the  book  as  what  we  have  just 


8  THE   NAME    OF   THE   LORD. 

traced  ;  and  so  too  is  the  way  in  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself 
is  spoken  of  after  that.  "  Grace  be  to  you  and  peace  .... 
from  the  seven  Spirits  who  are  before  his  throne."  Of  course, 
the  same  Holy  Ghost,  known  as  the  "One  Spirit"  in  the  Epistle 
of  Paul  to  the  Ephesians,  is  here  mentioned  as  "the  seven 
Spirits  which  are  before  his  throne."  He  is  spoken  of  as  the 
"One  Spirit,"  where  it  is  a  question  of  the  one  body,  the  church, 
as  in  Eph.  iv.  4.  But  here  it  is  the  "seven  Spirits;"  because, 
when  God  shall  have  finished  His  present  work  in  the  church. 
He  will  infallibly  cut  off  the  faithless  (Jewish  or  Gentile),  and 
will  no  longer  gather  Jews  and  Gentiles  into  one  body  on  the 
earth.  On  the  contrary,  in  the  millennial  kingdom  on  earth, 
Israel  is  to  be  put  above  the  Gentiles.  (Compare  Isaiah  ii.  2-4, 
xi.,  xii.,  xxiv.,  xxxv.,  xlix.,  liv.,  Iv.,  lix.,  Ixv.,  and  the  prophets 
generally.)  It  will  be  a  different  state  of  things  altogether ;  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  therefore  is  regarded  in  His  various  fulness  of 
operations  (as  He  is  in  connexion  with  Messiah  in  Isaiah  xi.), 
and  not  in  His  heavenly  unity.  It  is  added,  "  who  are  before 
his  throne,"  because  the  main  subject  of  this  book  is  the  govern- 
ment of  God ;  first  providentially  and  preparatorily  in  the  seals 
trumpets  and  vials ;  next  personally  at  our  Lord's  appearing  till 
the  kingdom  be  given  up  and  God  be  all  in  all. 

In  general,  when  we  have  "  grace  be  to  you  and  peace,"  it  is 
"  from  God  the  Father,  and  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  But 
in  this  place  the  order  is  as  different  as  the  style  :  finst  it  is 
"  from  him  that  is,  and  that  was,  and  that  is  to  come,"  i.e.,  from 
Jehovah;  then  "from  the  seven  Spirits,"  &c. ;  and  lastly  "from 
Jesus  Christ."  I  think  this  departure  from  the  usual  order  is 
because  Jesus  is  here  spoken  of,  not  so  much  as  related  to  the 
believer  nor  in  His  divine  glory  as  Son  of  God,  but  in  special 
reference  to  the  earth  and  His  rightful  claims  over  the  world. 

The  Lord  is  first  viewed  as  "  the  faithful  witness."  All  other 
witnesses  had  more  or  less  failed.  He  alone  had  been  the  faithful 
witness  of  God  and  for  God  on  the  earth.  But  this  was  at  all 
cost  to  Himself  Jiut  though  put  to  death,  it  was  tlie  defeat  of 
this  world's  prince,  not  of  Christ;  and  hence  in  resurrection  He 
stands  "the  first-begotten  of  the  dead."  He  is  the  first  who 
entered  into  resurrection-life  in  this  wondrous  way  which  defied 


THE   SONG.  9 

corruption  to  touch  it.  "  Being  raised  from  the  dead,  he  dieth 
no  more ;  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  him."  But  much 
more  than  this  is  conveyed.  He  is  the  heir  and  chief  of  the 
new  estate,  according  to  divine  righteousness  and  counsels,  of 
man  beyond  death  and  the  grave,  Lord  not  only  of  the  living 
but  of  the  dead,  and  this  proved  and  displayed  in  the  power  of 
His  resurrection.  This  He  is,  as  faithful  witness  He  was.  So 
moreover  He  will  prove  to  be  at  His  coming  in  glory  "the 
Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth,"  when  it  is  a  question  of  the 
government  of  the  world.  All  these  things  are  connected  with 
what  He  w^as,  is,  and  will  be,  as  man.  It  is  Jesus  viewed  in  His 
earthly  connexions,  or  at  least  without  speaking  of  what  He  is 
in  heaven.  His  intermediate  relation  to  the  church  (as  its  Head, 
and  as  the  "great  High-priest")  disappears,  as  not  falling  in 
with  the  design  of  the  divine  government  here. 

But  mark  the  beauty  of  wdiat  follows.  The  moment  Jesus  is 
presented  to  the  churches,  and  announced  as  "  the  faithful  wit- 
ness, the  first-begotten  of  the  dead,  and  the  Prince  of  the  kings 
of  the  earth,"  the  answer  of  joy  and  praise  can  be  withheld  no 
longer.  The  saints  interrupt,  if  one  may  so  say,  the  message  of 
John,  and  break  forth  into  a  song  of  thanksgiving — "To  him 
that  loveth  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood, 
and  hath  made  us  a  kingdom* — priests  to  his  God  and  Father." 
He  satisfies  the  affections  by  His  love.  He  has  cleared  the  con- 
science by  His  blood,  and  has  put  us  in  such  glorious  relationships 
as  He  stands  in  Himself  to  God  and  the  Father.  Yet  even  here 
it  is  not  the  distinctively  Christian  relationship.  It  is  not  son- 
ship  known  by  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  in  our  hearts,  nor  is  it  our 
membership  of  Christ's  body.  It  is  blessed  to  have  access  as 
priests,  glorious  to  reign  with  Him  ;  but  in  both  we  share  with 
the  Apocalyptic  sufferers  at  the  end  of  the  age.  (See  Eev.  v.  10, 
and  especially  chapter  xx.  4.)  What  is  common  will  be  true  for 
all ;  but  this  does  not  hinder  distinction  of  privilege. 

*  It  is  a  clear  allusion  to  Exodus  xix.,  and  follows  the  Hebrew  idiom  in  the 
true  reading,  not  exactly  kings  and  priests  here,  but  "a  kingdom,  priests." 
There  is  of  course  this  essential  difference,  that  there  it  was  but  an  offer  condi- 
tional on  Israel's  legal  obedience  ;  here  grace  has  given  us  the  position,  but  the 
position  itself  is  formulated  Jewishly  like  all  else,  as  the  reader  may  have 
seen  and  may  see  yet  more. 


10  THE   TESTIMONY. 

There  is  a  little  alteration  that  should  be  made  on  excellent 
authority  in  this  verse,  which  greatly  adds  to  its  sweetness  and 
force.  In  the  correct  text  it  is  "  To  hi  in  that  loveth  us,"  not 
"  that  loved  us."  It  is  quite  true  that  "  Christ  loved  the  church 
and  gave  himself  for  it."  Eph.  v.  shews  us  this ; — equally  true 
that  He  "  loved  me  and  gave  himself  for  me,"  as  in  Gal.  ii.  But 
the  first  of  Eevelation  shews  us  the  present  love  of  Jesus.  It 
is  not  that  He  is  always  washing  us  from  our  sins  :  He  washed 
us  with  His  own  blood  once  for  all,  and  does  not  require  so  to 
wash  us  again.  There  is  however  the  practical  cleansing  day 
by  day — the  washing  of  water  by  the  word;  but  this  is  not 
what  is  spoken  of  here,  but  in  His  blood,  a  finished  work,  and 
one  that  lasts  all  through  to  His  praise.  But  how  blessed  it  is 
to  know,  while  listening  to  the  very  book  which  most  unfolds 
the  ways  and  means  by  which  God  is  about  to  put  aside  un- 
faithful Christendom,  and  to  judge  tlie  evil  of  the  world,  that  in 
presence  of  all  this  we  can  look  up  in  the  full  confidence  of  His 
present  abiding  love,  and  say — "  To  him  tliat  loveth  us,  and 
washed*  us  from  our  sins  in  his  blood  ...  to  him  be  the  glory 
and  the  might  unto  the  ages  of  the  ages.     Amen." 

After  the  salutation,  "  Grace  be  to  you  and  peace,"  &c.,  we 
had  an  interruption.  It  was  the  voice  of  the  heavenly  saints 
breaking  forth  into  a  strain  of  praise.  Now  we  have  (verse  7) 
those  solemn  but  blessed  words,  "  Behold,  he  cometh  with  the 
clouds ;  and  every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  those  who  pierced 
him :  and  all  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of  him. 
Even  so  (or  "Yea"),  Amen."  This  is  not  a  part  of  the  song,  but 
a  testimony  quite  distinct  from  it.  And  we  often  find  these 
two  things :  that  which  forms  the  communion  of  a  saint  of 
God,  and  then  that  which  is  or  should  be  his  testimony. 

The  communion  with  each  other  is  a  great  element  of  Christian 
happiness.  Now  it  is  the  presentation  of  Christ  and  the  know- 
ledge of  Him  and  of  our  portion  in  Him  which  produces  the 

*  Another  reading  Xvaavri,  "loosed,"  is  supported  by  the  three  best  uncials 
N  A  C,  a  few  good  cursives,  the  Syriac,  some  Slav,  copies,  and  early  writers.  But 
or  might  be  easily  merged  in  v,  and  the  idea  of  washing  seems  most  in  keeping 
with  the  style  elsewhere.  The  common  reading  is  supported  by  B  P,  the  vast 
majority  of  the  cursives,  vei-sions,  and  citations.  Doctrinally  the  diffei-encc  of 
sense  is  unimportant. 


THE   HOPE   AND   PROPHECY.  11 

sense  of  fellowship  and  calls  out  worship.  Besides  this,  the 
believer  is  acquainted  by  God  with  what  is  coming  upon  the 
world.  And  this  is  a  part  of  our  testimony,  but  not  the  theme 
with  which  tlie  heart  should  be  most  filled.  With  a  person  who 
merely  dwells  on  prophecy  you  may  find  interesting  and  grave 
topics,  but  not  much  fellowship  of  heart.  For,  however  true 
may  be  his  judgment  of  passing  events,  however  sound  his 
expectation  of  the  future,  grace  in  Christ  alone  leads  to  com- 
munion. It  would  be  quite  wrong  to  despise  prophecy,  and  he 
who  does  will  be  sure  to  fall  into  some  snare  or  other.  But  if 
the  Christian  is  always  occupied  with  the  details  of  prophecy, 
there  never  will  be  power  for  heavenly  worship ;  nor  does  it 
necessarily  deliver  a  man  from  the  ways  of  the  world.  A  person 
may  have  impressions  correct  enough  about  the  Jews,  the  judg- 
ments on  Babylon  and  the  beast,  &c.,  who  may  not  yet  walk  in 
separation  from  the  world.  But  when  the  heart  is  set  upon 
Christ,  and  these  predicted  things  come  in  as  a  sort  of  back- 
ground, then  they  all  find  their  level.  The  Holy  Spirit  leads  us 
into  all  the  truth,  glorifying  Christ,  and  also  shewing  us  "  things 
to  come." 

So  in  2  Peter  i.  19  it  is  said,  speaking  of  the  word  of  prophecy, 
"whereunto  ye  do  well  that  ye  take  heed."  It  is  important  that 
I  should  see  what  is  coming,  and  that  I  should  not  indulge 
myself  in  an  easy  path  here  below.  To  know  that  the  Lord  is 
coming  to  judge  the  habitable  world  ought  never  to  be  a  comfort 
to  those  who  are  swimming  with  its  current.  But  there  is 
something  else  that  may  well  be  the  delight  of  the  soul — day 
dawning  and  the  day-star  arising  in  the  heart.  Peter  does  not 
here  speak  of  the  day  arriving  for  the  world,  but  affirms  that 
the  word  of  prophecy  is  an  admirable  lamp  until  you  get 
heavenly  light,  and  the  day- star  arises  in  your  heart.  It  is  the 
heart  awakening  to  better  hopes  than  Israel's,  and  of  Christ 
Himself  coming  for  us  as  its  own  proper  portion.  How  many 
still  as  then,  and  naturally  most  of  all  among  Jewish  Christians, 
do  not  rise  above  a  hope,  formed  by  Old  Testament  prophecy, 
which  is  true  and  important,  but  not  the  heavenly  hope  given 
to  us  ?  This  is  never  presented  in  scripture  as  a  bare  prophetic 
event.     Christ  waited  for  and  known  as  One  who  may  come  at 


12  ASSOCIATION   WITH    CHRIST. 

any  time  to  gather  us  together  to  Himself — such  is  the  form 
taken  by  our  blessed  hope.  It  is  the  apostle  Paul  who,  while 
fully  presenting  the  appearing  and  the  kingdom,  specially  brings 
out  the  hope  of  the  church.  John  too  looks  at  Christ  as  the 
Bridegroom,  at  what  He  is  for  the  heart,  after  he  has  closed  the 
general  testimony  of  the  Eevelation  to  His  judicial  dealings  and 
government. 

When  the  Lord  comes  to  receive  us,  He  is  not  said  to  come 
"  with  the  clouds."  When  He  ascended,  a  cloud  received  Him. 
Even  so  will  it  be  with  us :  we  sliall  be  caught  up  together  in 
clouds  to  meet  Him.  Bat  here  He  is  manifested  for  judgment 
of  the  world,  and  especially  of  the  Jews.  "  Behold,  he  cometh 
with  the  clouds."  This  is  a  revelation  known  and  testified  by 
the  heavenly  saints,  who  cannot  but  love  His  appearing  as  that 
which  will  break  the  yoke  of  evil  for  the  world,  and  secure 
God's  glory  and  blessing  to  all  creation  here  below;  but  it  is 
not  their  own  peculiar  joy  in  communion.    "  Even  so,  Amen." 

In  Colossians  the  association  of  the  saints  with  Christ  is  very 
fully  brought  out  in  chapters  ii.  iii.  He  is  my  life,  and  I  am 
identified  with  Him.  Thus,  inasmuch  as  Christ  my  Saviour  is 
dead  to  the  world,  with  Him  I  also  have  died  to  the  world.  Hence 
not  only  is  my  treasure  there,  but  the  very  religion  of  the  world 
is  judged,  because  Christ  was  cast  out  by  the  world's  religion. 
And  when  He  our  life  shall  be  manifested,  then  shall  we  too  be 
manifested  with  Him  in  glory.  So  liere,  when  He  comes  with 
the  clouds,  every  eye  shall  see  Him.  But  this  will  not  be  the 
case  when  He  comes  to  gather  His  own  to  Himself  on  high. 
(2  Thess.  ii.  1.)  God  is  gathering  the  friends  of  Christ  round  the 
name  of  Clirist  now.  The  church  is  a  body  that  is  called  while 
Christ  is  not  seen,  and  the  Christian,  having  his  portion  in  Him 
now,  is  hidden  with  Him.  "  Your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God." 
Next  we  are  caught  up  to  meet  Him.  After  that  (how  long  after 
we  may  seek  to  learn)  God  brings  us  with  Him  at  His  revelation 
from  heaven.  Not  now  chosen  witnesses,  but  "  every  eye"  shall 
see  Him  then,  and  especially  the  Jews,  characterized  as  having 
pierced  Him  (compare  Zech.  xii.  10  with  John  xix.  37),  and  all 
the  tribes  of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of  Him.  The  words 
will  eciually  l»ear  the  scn.se  of  "the  land;"  in  which  case  the 


APPEARING   WITH    CHRIST.  13 

clause  would  take  in  not  the  Jews  only  but  the  whole  SuScKac^uXov 
or  twelve-tribed  nationality  of  Israel.  Let  the  reader  judge  which 
best  suits  the  context,  as  well  as  the  enumeration  of  the  verse. 
It  is  certainly  not  the  twelve  tribes  in  those  who  pierced  Him, 
but  of  Israel  distinguished  from  the  more  direct  guilt  of  Judah, 
unless  it  be  still  wider. 

In  this  verse  then  it  is  not  the  Lord  coming  to  meet  His  own 
and  gather  them  to  Himself  in  the  air;  but  "every  eye  shall  see 

him and  all  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of 

him."  When  the  Lord  comes  to  translate  the  church,  it  will  be 
far  otherwise.  God  has  joined  us  even  now  by  the  Spirit  to 
Christ  in  heav^en,  according  to  all  the  efficacy  of  His  death  and 
resurrection.  As  far  as  the  spirit  is  concerned  this  is  true  now, 
and  it  will  be  true  of  the  body  itself  when  Christ  comes.  The 
resurrection  of  Christ  calls  me  to  live  thoroughly  to  God,  as  the 
death  of  Christ  makes  me  as  truly  dead  in  principle  to  the  world 
as  if  I  were  already  buried.  In  practice,  alas  !  we  have  to  own 
sad  falling  short.  Still,  says  the  apostle,  "  your  life  is  hid,"  &c. 
It  is  the  life  of  Christ  you  have  received.  As  long  as  Christ  is 
hidden,  you  are  hidden  also.  But  the  time  is  at  hand  when  this 
will  no  longer  be  the  case.  "  When  Christ  who  is  our  life  shall 
appear,  then  shall  ye  also  appear  with  him  in  glory."  When 
Christ  comes  to  receive  the  church,  no  eye  will  see  Him  but 
those  for  whom  Christ  comes.  When  the  world  sees  Christ,  it 
will  be  when  He  comes  in  glory,  bringing  His  saints  with  Him 
— revealed  from  heaven  with  the  angels  of  His  power,  in  flaming 
fire  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God  (the  Gentiles), 
and  on  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
(the  Jews).  If  the  world  were  to  see  Christ  coming  alone  in 
glory  before  tlie  church  is  caught  up  to  Him,  the  inseparable  asso- 
ciation of  which  the  apostle  Paul  made  so  much  to  the  Colos- 
sians,  would  cease  to  be  true.  But  scripture  cannot  be  broken. 
The  world  can  never  see  Christ  coming  to  receive  the  saints, 
because  then  they  must  have  seen  Him  without  them  and  before 
them ;  whereas  the  same  moment  of  His  appearing  is  to  be  the 
epoch  of  our  appearing  with  Him.  He  will  come  for  us  ;  and 
we  subsequently  come  along  with  Him.  And  this  does  not 
merely  rest  on  a  word  here  and  there :  it  is  the  doctrine  of  the 


14  T^yoFOLI)  aspect  of  Christ's  second  coming. 

whole  passage.     The  same  truth   is  sliewn  and  confirmed  by- 
other  proofs  througliout  tlie  New  Testament. 

Witli  Christ  by  Ilis  death  we  are  dead  to  the  world  ;  united 
to  Him  risen  we  are  risen,  and  are  therefore  to  have  our  hearts 
set  upon  heavenly  things  before  we  see  them.  And  more  than 
that :  Christ  is  not  always  to  be  hidden.  He  is  about  to  be 
manifested ;  and  when  He  is,  we  too  shall  be  manifested  along 
with  Him.  It  is  plain  that  Christ  and  the  church  must  liave 
been  together  before  they  are  manifested  to  the  world,  if  they 
are  to  appear  together.  In  Eev.  xix.  11  we  have  this  taught 
beyond  all  doubt.  "  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  behold  a  white 
horse ;  and  he  that  sat  upon  him  was  called  Faithful  and  True. 

And  the  armies  that  are  in  heaven  followed  him  upon 

white  horses,  clad  in  fine  linen,  white,  pure."  The  horse  is  an 
emblem  of  aggressive  power;  the  white  horse,  of  this  power 
prospering  or  victorious.  Here  it  is  the  Lord  Jesus  coming  in 
judgment,  substantially  the  same  time  when  He  comes  with  the 
clouds.  These  armies  that  were  seen  in  the  prophetic  vision 
following  Him  out  of  heaven,  clad  in  fine  linen,  are  not  angels. 
The  text  says  that  the  fine  linen  [Pva-cnvov)  is  the  righteousnesses 
of  saints.  Now  it  is  to  be  remarked  that,  although  ant>els  are 
described  in  chapter  xv.  as  being  "  clad  in  pure  bright  linen," 
a  different  word  (Xivov)  is  used.  Thus  the  heavenly  saints  are 
those  described  in  chapter  xix.  as  the  armies  of  heaven,  &c. 
They  were  in  heaven  therefore  before  the  way  was  opened  for 
Christ  to  come  out  in  judgment ;  they  had  been  caught  up  to 
meet  Him  before;  and  now  they  follow  Him  from  heaven  ^\'hen 
He  comes.  I  doubt  not  that  angels  are  in  His  train  also,  as 
appears  from  other  texts ;  but  they  do  not  seem  spoken  of  here. 
There  are  thus  two  important  and  different  stages  of  the 
Lord's  second  coming.  First  of  all  He  will  come  to  receive  His 
peoi)le  to  Himself,  and  the  church  ought  always  to  be  waiting 
for  this.  In  the  next  place  He  will  come  to  judge  tlie  world, 
when  He  has  already  taken  up  the  heavenly  saints,  and  \vicked- 
ness  rises  to  its  head  apace.  Then  suddenly  the  heavens  will 
open,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  come  and  the  church  with 
Him,  appearing  togetlier  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  with  power 
and  great  glory.     Is  it  asked  how  ?     Israel  was  not  told  how 


JOHN   IN   PATMOS.  15 

they  were  to  be  delivered  out  of  Egypt.  Jehovali  was  going  to 
deliver  them ;  but  He  did  not  explain  the  method  before  it  came 
to  pass.  And  the  Lord  is  going  to  take  the  church  to  heaven 
by  His  coming.  Besides  this,  He  will  judge  the  wickedness  of 
the  world  ;  but  then  the  church  will  come  along  with  Him  from 
heaven. 

Verse  8.  Here,  it  seems  to  me,  that  we  have  God  as  such, 
though  as  always  not  to  the  exclusion  of  Christ,*  uttering  tlie 
titles  of  His  various  but  divine  glory,  as  a  sort  of  seal  of  the 
foregoing,  and  an  introductory  basis  for  what  follows:  "I  am 
the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  saith  the  Lord  God,  He  that  is,  and 
that  was,  and  that  is  to  come,  the  Almighty."  The  first  (the 
aA^a  and  the  w)  is  evidently  a  name  most  suited  to  the  book 
wliich  so  admirably  closes  the  written  communications  of  God. 
He  is  the  God  of  Israel,  the  ever  subsisting  Eternal,  who  had 
sustained  the  fathers,  and  thus  attests  the  truth,  not  of  the 
solemn  warning  alone  just  given,  but  of  all  here  revealed  to  the 
end  of  time.  Assuredly  all  His  names  here  announced,  it  would 
be  wholesome  for  the  saints  to  remember,  whether  for  us  before 
the  trial,  or  for  those  who  shall  be  called  on  to  pass  through  it. 
It  is  to  be  observed  however  that  the  special  revelation  to  the 
Christian  is  precisely  what  is  omitted  here.  He  does  not  call 
Himself  our  Father  in  this  prophecy.  This,  and  the  reason  for 
it,  readers  have  too  often  forgotten.  Our  hope  and  prophecy 
differ,  as  heaven  does  from  the  earth. 

Verse  9  is  not  quite  correctly  given  in  the  ordinary  text.  "  I 
John,  your  l)rother  and  companion  in  tribulation."  The  word 
"also"  is  left  out  in  the  best  copies.  And  what  follows  should 
be  read  thus  :  "your  brother  and  companion  in  the  tribulation 
and  kingdom  and  patience  in  Christ  [Jesus]."  The  trouble,  reign 
and  patience  all  go  together.  He  purposely  speaks  of  himself, 
not  as  a  member  of  the  body  of  Christ,  but  as  their  brother  and 

*  At  the  close  of  the  book  (ch.  xxii.  13)  the  Lord  takes  similar  titles  ;  for  if 
He  were  the  exalted  man  and  is  to  come  and  to  judge  as  such.  He  was  much 
more,  and  no  designation  of  the  Eternal  God  could  exceed  the  dignity  of  His 
person.  But  the  words  of  the  common  text  in  verse  11  ("I  am  Alpha  and 
Omega,  the  first  and  the  last  and")  are  an  interpolation  there,  and  mar  the  sym- 
metry of  the  context.  All  the  best  MSS.,  versions,  &c.  reject  them,  and  require 
'•  God"  in  verse  8. 


16  KINGDOM   AND   PATIENCE. 

companion  in  tribulation  (perhaps  because,  after  the  church  is 
taken  away,  there  will  still  be  saints  on  earth  and  our  brethren). 
Jolin  puts  himself  along  with  them.  The  Holy  Ghost  loves  us, 
whatever  specialities  of  privilege  may  come  in,  as  much  as  pos- 
sible to  take  our  place  along  with  the  saints  of  God  at  all  times. 
The  book  of  Eevelation  was  written  for  the  church,  just  when 
it  was  drifting  into  a  state  of  ruin.  In  chap.  vi.  we  have  some  of 
these  companions  in  tribulation ;  but  what  they  say  proves  that 
they  do  not  belong  to  the  church.     "  How  long,  0  Lord,  holy 

and  true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood ?" 

We  find  a  proper  Christian  appeal  to  God  in  the  case  of  Stephen 
— "Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  The  Cliristian  is 
always  called  to  suffer  in  the  world.  These  Apocalyptic  saints 
will  understand  that  the  Lord  is  about  to  judge,  and  they  will 
ask  Him  to  do  so.  It  would  be  wrong  now  to  ask  this,  for  it  is 
the  day  of  grace  still.  Faith  habitually  takes  its  language  from 
what  God  is  doing,  and  He  is  dealing  in  grace  and  not  in  judg- 
ment now.  We  are  called  to  retire  from  the  way  of  the  world, 
and  to  attach  our  hearts  simply  to  all  that  is  glorious  and 
heavenly,  for  this  is  the  present  object  of  Christ.  The  white 
robes  given  to  these  sufferers  in  chapter  vi.  are  an  evident 
mark  of  God's  approbation.  They  were  to  rest  till  their  brethren 
who  should  be  killed  as  they  were  should  be  fulfilled.  Judg- 
ment must  then  take  its  course. 

"  In  the  tribulation  and  kingdom  and  patience."  It  will 
be  the  kingdom  of  Christ  in  power  when  the  tribulation  and 
patience  are  all  over.  But  now  the  circumstances  of  that 
kingdom  involve  tribulation.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  as  pre- 
sented in  the  prophecy  of  Daniel  is  no  mystery.  It  means  the 
reign  of  heaven  on  (or  over)  the  earth.  But  Christ,  instead  of 
getting  His  rightful  place  as  Messiah  when  He  came,  was 
rejected,  and  went  up  to  heaven ;  and  thus  it  is  that  the 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom  come  in  while  He  is  there  unseen 
save  to  faith.  Hence  it  is  that  there  must  now  be  suffering 
and  endurance  in  the  kingdom  as  it  actully  is  for  the  Christian. 
When  Christ  appears  in  glory,  all  this  will  be  at  an  end.  Then 
will  come  the  kingdom  and  power.  (See  Rev.  xii.)  It  is  the 
kingdom  and  patience  in  Christ  now.     That  word  "patience," 


THE   KINGDOM   AS   IT   IS.  17 

or  endurance,  is  to  be  weighed  well.  We  have  communion 
with  Jesus  in  this  patient  expectation;  we  wait  for  wdiat  He 
waits.  A  man  that  is  born  anew  now  is  not  in  the  kingdom 
and  power,  but  in  the  kingdom  and  patience  in  Christ.  Hence 
suffering  here  below  naturally  follows.  So  here  the  apostle 
John  was  thrown  into  the  isle  of  Patmos  "  for  the  word  of  God 
and  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus."  It  was,  I  presume,  for  his  faithful 
w^ork  as  an  apostle  in  the  gospel  and  in  the  church,  ministering 
Christ  in  both.  But  he  was  inspired  to  speak  of  it  in  the  tone 
of  this  book  for  reasons  already  suggested. 

Thus  the  ground  on  which  John  addresses  the  churches  is 
not  expressly  as  an  apostle,  but  as  their  brother  and  companion 
in  the  tribulation  and  kingdom  and  patience  in  Christ  Jesus. 
One  remarkable  trait  which  Christianity  has  brought  out  is,  that 
God  has  opened  to  us  another  kingdom  of  an  order  differing  from 
the  earthly  or  Jewish  one — a  kingdom  in  wdiicli  for  the  present 
there  is  tribulation,  as  far  as  our  circumstances  are  concerned, 
and  patient  hope  the  corresponding  and  distinguishing  grace;  for 
Christ's  love  has  made  us  kings,  and  we  shall  reign  with  Him. 

But  the  church  has  slipped  out  of  its  place  of  suffering  and 
endurance ;  it  has  sought  and  taken  the  place  of  power  in  the 
w^orld — the  place  that  had  belonged  only  to  the  Jews  of  right, 
and  to  the  Gentile  empires  in  divine  sovereignty  because  of 
Israel's  sins.  In  the  presence  of  general  failure  it  becomes  no 
one  to  be  high-minded;  where  there  is  real  separation  from  evil, 
may  there  be  humility!  Wherever  it  is  a  question  of  ceasing  to  do 
evil,  there  is  great  need  of  looking  to  the  Lord,  lest  one  should 
say,  "  This  is  what  I  have  done,  and  wdiat  others  have  not  done." 
Say  rather  it  is  all  the  Lord's  grace.  But  those  Christians  who 
desire  to  stand  aloof  from  the  evil  around  them  are  in  evident 
danger  of  giving  themselves  somewhat  of  credit  for  doing  some- 
thing that  others  are  not  doing.  In  the  presence  of  evil  that 
we  may  liave  done  and  left,  the  effects  of  which  we  have  still 
to  judge  in  ourselves,  it  is  not  a  time  to  indulge  in  high 
thoughts  of  ourselves. 

When  God  executes  His  purposes  towards  the  earth.  His  peo- 
ple will  have  fellowship  with  wliat  He  is  doing,  as  of  old  in  the 
land  of  Egypt,  in  the  wilderness,  and  in  Canaan.     But  when  we 

c 


18  ETERNAL  LIFE. 

look  at  Clii'istianity,  it  is  not  a  question  of  earthly  purposes,  but 
of  Jesus  crucified  through  weakness,  and  of  power  put  forth  to 
raise  Him  again  from  the  dead.  Tliere  will  be  again  a  most 
solemn  dealing  on  God's  part  when  Christ  will  judge  not  only 
the  living  but  the  dead.  But  for  us  the  fire  of  God's  wrath  has 
fallen  upon  Christ ;  His  judgment  was  borne  in  grace  by  His 
beloved  Son.  And  now  God  is  imprinting  on  the  hearts  of  His 
people  heavenly  glory.  He  is  forming  their  character  by  these 
two  great  facts  which  meet  in  Christ ;  the  one  is  the  cross,  and 
the  other  is  the  glory  into  which  He  ascended.  What  God  has 
thus  done  in  Christ  is  what  He  wants  us  to  have  communion 
with.  As  the  Israelites  had  the  law  engraven  on  stones,  so  by 
the  Spirit  should  Christ  be  written  on  our  hearts  and  ways. 
The  life  of  a  creature  may  be  lost,  but  Avhat  the  believer  has 
is  tlie  life  of  Christ;  and  can  the  life  of  Christ  ever  perish? 
Christ  went  through  death  in  order  that  He  might  give  a  cha- 
racter of  life  which  death  could  not  touch.  When  the  Lord  God 
made  man,  He  made  him  out  of  the  dust  of  the  field,  but  He 
breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life ;  and  therefore  is  it 
that  the  soul  is  immortal.  Adam  had  tliis  life  direct  from  the 
breath  of  the  Lord  God.  Sin,  however,  may  toucli  it,  and  the 
second  death — eternal  misery  in  the  lake  of  fire  for  soul  and 
body.  But  that  which  Christ  breathed  after  He  rose  from  the 
dead  (John  xx.  22)  was  a  life  which  death  never  could  conquer, 
nor  even  assail  more,  over  which  nothing  had  a  claim  ;  and  such 
is  the  life  of  every  believer. 

And  yet  there  are  those  who  fancy  that  the  life  of  a  believer 
may  be  lost !  I  can  only  say  that  God  does  not  deal  with  those 
who  so  think  according  to  their  thoughts  of  Him.  The  life  is 
as  strong  in  the  Arminian  as  in  the  Calvinist,  because  it  is  the 
life  of  Christ.  When  a  man  is  conscious  that  he  has  gravely  failed 
against  God,  he  is  in  danger  of  yielding  to  the  fear  that  his 
blessing  is  gone.  But  no;  you  have  sinned  against  that  life,  and 
against  Him  who  is  the  source  of  it;  but  the  life  itself  is  there 
still,  and  cannot  be  touched ;  it  is  eternal.  Again,  where  a 
person  is  occupied  in  looking  at  the  spiritual  life  within  him,  he 
will  never  have  comfort.  The  proof  that  he  is  a  Christian  is 
that  he  has  received  the  testimony  of  God's  love  in  Jesus, 


THE   lord's    day.  19 

Verse  10.  "I  was  in  the  Spirit  on  tlie  Lord's  day."  John  does 
not  merely  intimate  that  he  had  the  Spirit  as  every  Christian 
has,  nor  tliat  he  was  filled  with  the  Spirit  as  the  Christian 
should  be,  but  that  he  became  as  completely  characterized  by 
His  power  for  the  divine  purpose  of  seeing  and  writing  these 
visions,  as  he  is  for  evil  who  is  possessed  of  an  unclean  spirit. 
It  was  on  the  Lord's  day  or  first  day  of  the  vveek.  For  the 
"  Lord's  day  "  is  not  at  all  the  same  thing  as  the  "  day  of  the 
Lord  (fiixepa  Kvpiov)."  The  same  expression  (KupiaKos)  was  used 
with  regard  to  the  Lord's  supper,  because  it  was  not  a  common 
meal,  but  a  holy  and  divinely  instituted  memorial  of  the  Lord. 
So  the  Lord's  day  is  not  a  common  day,  but  one  specially  set 
apart,  not  as  a  command,  but  as  the  expression  of  the  highest 
privilege,  for  the  worship  of  the  Lord.  The  sabbath  was  the 
last  day  which  Jehovah  claimed  out  of  man's  week ;  the  Lord's 
day  is  the  first  day  of  God's  week,  and  in  a  sense,  we  may  say, 
of  His  eternity.  The  Christian  begins  with  the  Lord's  day,  that 
this  may  as  it  were  give  a  character  to  all  the  days  of  the  week. 
In  spirit  the  Christian  is  risen,  and  every  day  belongs  to  the 
Lord.  Therefore  is  he  to  bring  up  the  standard  of  each  day 
that  follows  in  the  week  to  that  blessed  beginning — the  Lord's 
day.  To  bring  down  the  Lord's  day  to  the  level  of  another  day 
only  shews  how  gladly  the  heart  drinks  in  anything  that  takes 
away  somewhat  from  Christ.  The  man  who  only  obeys  Christ 
because  he  must  do  so  has  not  the  spirit  of  obedience  at  all. 
We  are  sanctified  not  only  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  but  to 
the  obedience  of  Jesus  Christ — to  the  obedience  of  sons  under 
grace,  not  to  that  of  mere  servants  under  law.  The  lawlessness 
which  despises  the  Lord's  day  is  hateful ;  but  that  is  no  reason 
why  Christians  should  destroy  its  character  by  confounding  the 
Lord's  day,  the  new  creation-day,  with  the  sabbath  of  nature  or 
of  the  law. 

On  that  day  then,  specially  dear  to  the  Christian,  bright  visions 
of  glory  passed  before  the  prophet's  eye.  First,  John  tells  us 
what  he  saw  on  that  occasion :  this  is  what  we  have  in  the  rest 
of  the  first  chapter  (verses  12-20).  It  was  the  vision  of  the 
glory  of  Christ's  person  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  lamp- 
stands.     "The  things  which  are"  (ver.  19)  we  have  in  chapters 

c  2 


20  VISION   OF   THE   SON    OF   MAN. 

ii.  iii.,  which  describe  the  condition  of  the  churches  at  that  time. 
The  third  division  of  the  Eevelation  consists  of  "  the  things 
which  shall  be  after  these."  The  version  "hereafter"  is  vague, 
for  it  niiglit  mean  thousands  of  years  after.  "After  these" 
expresses  the  sense  of  the  phrase  much  better.  It  means  what 
was  about  to  happen  immediately  after  "  the  tilings  which  are" 
now — i.e.  after  the  church-condition.  Those  we  have  from  chap. 
iv.  to  the  end  of  the  book.  The  "things  which  are"  continue 
still  (in  the  most  important  application  of  the  book).  And  what 
next  ?  "  What  is  about  to  happen  after  these  things,"  when  the 
church  has  ceased  to  subsist  on  earth. 

Let  us  look  a  little  at  what  the  apostle  saw.  First  of  all,  he 
hears  behind  him  "  a  loud  voice,  as  of  a  trumpet,  saying,*  What 
thou  seest  write  in  a  book  (or  roll),  and  send  to  the  seven 
churches  :  unto  Ephesus,"  &c.  (ver.  11.)  "And  I  turned  to  see 
the  voice  that  was  speaking  with  me.  And  being  turned  I  saw 
seven  golden  lamp-stands."  These  were  evidently  derived  from 
the  light  of  the  tabernacle.  Only  in  this  case  the  lamp-stands 
were  separate,  so  that  the  Lord  could  stand  between  them. 
They  were  golden,  as  in  divine  righteousness  set  here  to  give 
light.  Such  was  their  responsibility.  But  another  object  fixes 
the  attention  of  the  prophet :  Christ  was  in  their  midst  as  a 
judge.  In  the  midst  of  the  seven  candlesticks  he  sees  not 
exactly  the  Son  of  man,  but  "  one  like  [the  or  a]  Son  of  man." 
He  is  really  God,  but  He  is  not  so  presented  in  the  first  instance 
here.  From  John  v.  we  may  learn  the  force  of  this,  and  why  it 
is  in  this  instance  Son  of  man,  and  not  Son  of  God.  As  Son 
of  God  He  is  one  who  quickens,  because  He  is  a  divine  person ; 
He  quickens  in  communion  with  the  Father.  Thus  giving  life 
He  is  called  the  Son  of  God;  but  as  Son  of  man  He  executes 
judgment,  because  God  will  have  Him  honoured  in  the  very 
nature  in  which  man  outraged  Him.  This  at  once  shews  us  the 
bearing  of  what  we  have  in  the  Eevelation.     It  is  as  Son  of 

*  11  is  well  known  that  the  words  in  the  common  text  here,  "  I  am  Alpha 
and  Omega,  the  first  and  the  last,  and"  have  no  suffieiont  authority,  and  were 
evidently  inserted  by  the  mistake  of  some  scriio.  Admirable  where  God  in- 
serts them  repeatedly  in  this  book,  they  only  mar  the  connexion  here  when 
man  added  them  wrongly. 


HIS    GARB   AND   PERSON.  21 

man  on  the  earth  that  Christ  is  here  presented  ;  and  as  such  He 
is  about  to  execute  judgment  upon  the  seven  churches,  as  well 
as  by  and  by  upon  the  world.  For  thus  it  is  He  will  inherit  all 
things,  though  otherwise  also. 

The  "  garment  down  to  the  foot,"  with  which  He  was  clothed, 
indicates  not  activity  of  work,  but  rather  dignified  priestly 
judgment.  "  Gold,"  as  here  in  the  girdle,  is  the  symbol  of  divine 
righteousness;  linen  is  explained  to  be  what  is  saintly  and 
displayed  before  men.  "  His  head  and  his  hairs  were  white 
as  white  wool,  as  snow."  Thus,  besides  being  Son  of  man,  and 
being  seen  in  the  garb  and  place  of  priestly  discrimination, 
there  are  the  emblems  too  of  divine  glory,  as  appears  by  com- 
paring this  passage  with  Daniel  vii.  What  is  said  of  the 
Ancient  of  days  by  Daniel  is  applied  to  the  Son  of  man  by 
John,*  the  Ancient  of  days  being  the  eternal  God.  John  sees 
here  that  the  Son  of  man  is  Himself  the  Ancient  of  days ;  as 
indeed  Daniel  shews  Him  coming  as  such  (vii.  22).  The  same 
who  wrote  "  The  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God," 
and  "  the  Word  was  made  flesh,"  beholds  now  in  prophetic  vision 
the  combination  of  humanity  with  the  emblems  they  appro- 
priated to  Deity  in  the  person  of  the  Son  of  man.  The  head  and 
hairs  being  "  white  as  white  wool,  as  snow,"  shew  fulness  of 
divine  wisdom.  There  is  no  mitre  as  if  He  were  acting  as  high 
priest  in  gracious  intercession ;  He  is  judging.  Still  less  do  we  see 
the  crown  or  diadem.  The  time  for  His  reign  is  not  yet  come. 
He  is  set  down  on  the  Father's  throne ;  not  yet  on  His  own. 

"His  eyes  like  a  flame  of  fire"  set  forth  the  penetration  that 
marked  Him  in  judgment.  "  His  feet  like  fine  brass,t  as  if 
burned  in  a  furnace" — they  could  not  contract  any  defilement, 
and  are  unbending  in  judicial  strength,  as  dealing  with  respon- 

*  The  article  is  wanting  in  Greek  to  indicate  the  character  in  which  Christ 
was  seen:  "a  son  of  man"  therefore  is  too  vague  and  not  the  sense.  If  the 
article  had  been  inserted,  it  would  have  conveyed  the  idea  of  Him  as  the  known 
person  whom  John  loved  and  followed  on  earth,  rather  than  the  character  in 
which  He  appeared  now. 

t  The  word  x«^'<^o^/5«»'V  seems  compounded  of  xaXKoc,  copper,  and  p7, 
white — a  compound  of  Greek  and  Hebrew,  which  has  been  conjectured  to  har- 
monize with  the  book.  Compare  in  this  chapter  vai  a/ir]i^,  ver.  7 ;  also  chap,  ix, 
1 1 ;  and  perhaps  elsewhere. 


22  HIS   OFFICIAL   ASPECT. 

sible  man  according  to  God.  "  His  voice  as  the  voice  of  many 
waters"  expressed  resistless  power  and  majesty  outside  the 
control  of  men  (verses  12-15).  Such  He  is  personally  and 
relatively. 

Official  description  follows  in  verse  16.  "And  he  had  in  his 
right  hand  seven  stars,"  the  emblem  of  tlie  angels,  or  represen- 
tative rulers,  of  the  seven  churches.  "  A  sharp  two-edged  sword," 
the  word  of  judgment,  not  morally  alone,  but  to  death  where 
needed,  and  this  even  against  the  apostles  at  the  end,  went  out 
of  His  mouth ;  because  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  speak  the 
word  is  at  once  to  strike  the  blow.  "  He  spake,  and  it  was  done." 
"  His  countenance  was  as  the  sun  shineth  in  his  strength." 
Supreme  authority  in  government  was  His  as  man.  Such  He 
was  officially.  The  churches'  angels  were  represented  as  "stars" 
only,  as  being  of  course  subordinate  to  the  Lord  as  instruments 
of  heavenly  light.  Clearly  then  we  have  in  the  Lord  sovereign 
authority,  and  universal  in  its  range,  as  the  stars  are  His  ad- 
ministrative lights  in  the  churches,  which  He  maintains  by 
His  power.  He  judges  by  His  word  those  v.lio  have  it  or  refuse 
it. 

When  John  sees  this  wonderful  vision  of  the  Son  of  man,  he 
falls  at  His  feet  as  dead.  ■  But  the  Lord  puts  His  right  hand  of 
sustaining  power  upon  His  servant  who  lay  trembling,  nay  as 
dead,  before  Him,  and  says,  "Fear  not ;  I  am  the  first  and  the 
last,  and  the  living  One ;  and  I  became  dead,  and,  behold,  I  am 
alive  nnto  the  ages  of  ages."*  Here  is  no  deprecating  the  more 
than  homage  of  His  servant,  but  the  re-assuring  him  whose 
nature  was  as  it  were  withered  uj)  before  him.  He  is  Jehovah 
yet  man ;  but  if  He  had  not  died,  we  should  not  have  known 
Him  in  the  blessed  character  and  energy  of  life  that  He  has 
proved  now — life  more  abundantly.  Who  then  could  say,  "  Fear 
not"  as  He  ?  Christianity  presents  Christ  as  having  passed 
through  death,  and  as  risen  in  triumph  for  God  and  His  people. 
John  is  going  to  hear  about  judgments,  and  the  wiles,  power,  and 
wrath  of  Satan  beyond  the  previous  experience  of  men  ;  but  the 

*  The  "Anion,"  though  rea«l  by  B  and  most  of  the  cursives,  seems  duo  to 
the  copyists  making  the  phrase  a  doxology,  either  through  unconscious  habit,  or 
dcsiij^ncdly  adding  afiijv  as  a  correction. 


THE  KEYS  OF  DEATH  AND  HADES.  28 

knowledge  that  the  right  hand  of  Him  who  was  alive  for  ever- 
more  had  been  upon  him,  and  the  words  of  His  mouth,  w^ould 
give  him  strength  and  courage  for  everything  to  come.  And  as 
this  is  the  spirit  in  which  the  book  was  written,  so  it  should  be 
read. 

"  Behold,  I  am  alive  uuto  the  ages  of  ages,  and  have  the  keys 
of  death  and  of  hades."  The  succession  of  these  words  in  the 
common  text  is  a  mistake.  Hades  follows  death,  and  does  not 
go  before  it.  (Rev.  vi.)  See  also  chap.  xx.  where  we  liave  "death 
and  hades"  mentioned  several  times  in  their  regular  order.  And 
so  in  the  best  authorities  it  is  here.  When  the  Lord  says  that 
He  has  the  keys  of  death  and  of  hades,  He  intimates  that  He 
is  the  absolute  master  of  all  that  might  threaten  man  whether 
for  the  body  or  the  soul.  Satan's  power  in  this  respect  is 
annulled  ;   Christ  has  it  all. 

Accordingly  also,  in  verse  19,  there  ought  on  the  best 
authority  to  be  read  a  little  word  which  adds  somewhat  to 
the  force  and  connexion.  "  Write  therefore  what  thou  hast 
seen:"  because  I  am  risen  from  the  dead  and  am  alive  for 
evermore,  and  the  sole  ruler  of  death  and  hades,  write  therefore. 
He  who  bade  John  write  (verses  11,  19)  was  the  Son  of  man, 
with  the  characteristics  of  the  Ancient  of  days ;  but  He  was 
also  the  living  victorious  Lord,  the  security  against  terror  and 
death,  the  strengthener  of  His  servants  in  presence  of  glory. 
"Write  tlierefore  what  thou  hast  seen,  and  the  things  which  are, 
and  the  things  which  are  about  to  be  after  these."  Human 
nature  might  well  be  confounded  by  the  sight ;  but  He  who  was 
revealed  to  John  characterised  Himself  both  as  G-od  and  as  the 
man  who  had  passed  through  death  and  destroyed  Satan's  title 
and  held  the  power  for  His  own.  And  this  was  to  be  written, 
this  revelation  of  Jesus  as  seen  of  John,  as  well  as  the  existing 
church-state,  and  the  things  which  should  follow  (17-19). 

Verse  20  explains  the  mystery  of  the  stars  and  lamp-stands, 
as  already  indicated.  It  is  the  connecting  link  between  the 
vision  of  Christ  and  the  judgment  of  the  church,  or  house  of 
God  on  earth  (Rev.  ii.  iii.),  as  long  as  its  existence  there  is 
recognized  as  the  object  of  His  government.  After  that  it  is 
the  judgment  of  the  world  from  God's  throne  in  heaven,  and 


24  THE   CIIUIJCHES    IlISTOPJC' 

Jews  and  Gentiles  are  variously  dealt  with,  but  churches  never 
in  that  part  of  the  book.  All  this,  and  the  reasons  for  it,  will 
appear  more  distinctly  as  we  proceed. 

It  is  plain,  from  chapter  i.  4,  11,  and  from  what  follows, 
that  seven  actually  existing  churches  of  provincial  Asia  were 
primarily  meant.  But  while  it  is  true  that  there  were  special 
reasons  for  addressing  those  particular  churches,  it  does  not  to 
my  own  mind  admit  of  a  doubt,  that  they  were  selected  with 
the  further  and  larger  design  of  presenting  successive  pictures 
of  the  church  in  general  from  the  apostolic  days  to  the  close  of 
its  existence  on  earth.  Hence  it  is  that  there  were  seven  golden 
lamp -stands,  seven  being  the  well-known  symbol  of  spiritual 
completeness.  There  might  have  been  other  churches  as  well 
or  better  known,  and  one  of  these  seven  had  been  already 
addressed  formally  by  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  But 
Ephesus  is  again  taken  up,  and  six  other  churches  are  asso- 
ciated, so  as  to  make  up  a  mystical  and  perfect  sketch  of  the 
more  important  moral  features  which  then  existed,  and  which 
at  the  same  time  would  successively  be  developed  in  the  after 
history  of  the  professing  body  upon  the  earth.*  Many  things 
which  might  seem  most  important  in  the  eyes  of  men  and  even  of 
Christians  are  passed  by,  for  the  Lord  sees  not  as  man  sees. 

Another  striking  feature  claims  our  notice  and  admiration. 
It  might  have  seemed  impossible  to  reconcile  prophetic  light,  as 

*  Every  believer  in  the  inspiration  of  the  Ai)Ocalypsc  of  course  admits  the 
ever-living  application  of  the  moral  pictures  set  forth  in  Hev.  ii.  iii.,  as  is  true 
of  the  Acts  in  the  New  Testament,  or  of  the  histories  in  the  Old  Testament. 
But  the  idea  that  the  seven  churches  represent  all  churches,  or  the  general  state 
and  character  in  John's  day,  appears  to  be  mere  confusion.  The  truth  is,  that 
each  represents  a  distinct  moral  state,  in  which  the  professing  body,  wholly  or 
in  part,  might  bo  at  some  given  time.  In  a  word,  that  the  local  assemblies  then 
exhibited  the  special  features  described  is  true ;  but  they  could  not  all  charac- 
terise the  then  existing  state  of  the  church  in  general,  because  they  set  forth 
difFcront  and  even  opposed  moral  conditions.  If  we  admit  then,  as  we  must,  an 
enlarged  application,  beyond  that  to  the  actual  assemblies  or  to  mere  individual 
conduct,  the  natural  reference'  is  to  successive  phases  of  spiritual  condition,  good 
or  bad,  in  the  history  of  the  Christian  profession.  Perhaps  the  extreme  partizana 
of  the  Protestant  school  of  interpretation  are  not  generally  aware  that  their 
learned  l<>adei',  ]M(!de,  thus  (ixju-esses  hiinself  in  his  more  mature  "Short  Obser- 


AND    MYSTICAL.  25 

to  the  successive  phases  the  church  might  assume  from  the 
apostolic  age  as  long  as  it  is  found  here  below,  with  the  continual 
expectation  of  Christ.  But  divine  wisdom  solved  the  difficulty 
even  here,  as  the  same  end  is  secured  in  the  Gospels  and 
Epistles.  The  Lord  was  pleased  to  address  seven  contempo- 
raneous and  actually  existing  assemblies ;  but,  in  dealing  with 
existing  facts.  He  knew  how  to  select  and  shape  His  instruction, 
so  as  to  suit  the  states  which  should  follow  till  He  comes. 
What  a  comment  on  the  Lord's  answer  to  Peter's  query,  "  Lord, 
what  shall  this  man  [John]  do  ?  Jesus  saith  unto  him.  If  I  will 
that  he  tarry  till  I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee  ?  Follow  thou 
me."  In  this  X3art  of  the  book  mere  literal  time  is  excluded. 
It  is  not  future  but  present,  however  protracted — "the  things 
which  are." 

But  it  will  be  found,  I  think,  that  He  has  here  given  promi- 
nence to  those  features,  whether  good  or  bad,  which  should 
reappear,  and  most  aptly  set  forth  what  He  foresaw  to  be  of  the 
deepest  moment  for  him  who  might  have  an  ear  to  hear  till  He 
comes  again.  And  this  extensive  application  seems  to  be 
strongly  confirmed  by  that  clause  of  the  threefold  division  in 
chapter  i.  19,  which  bears  on  these  churches.  They  are  charac- 
terized as  "  the  things  which  are."  No  doubt  they  existed  then 
in  the  time  of  John;  but  if  they  continued  to  exist,  and  if  seeds 
that  were  then  sown  germinated  yet  more  in  after  days,  and 
thus  imparted  a  graver  significance  to  the  words  and  warnings 

vations  on  the  Apocalj'pse"  (Works,  p.  905): — "If  we  consider  their  number 
being  seven,  which  is  a  number  of  revolution  of  time,  and  therefore  in  this  book 
the  seals  and  trumpets  and  vials  also  are  seven ;  and  if  we  consider  the  choice  of 
the  Holj'  Ghost,  in  that  He  taketh  neither  all,  no,  nor  the  most  famous  church 
in  the  world,  as  Antioch,  &c.,  and  such  no  doubt  had  need  of  instruction,  as  well 
as  those  here  named ; — if  these  things  be  well  considered,  may  it  not  seem  that 
these  seven  churches,  besides  this  literal  respect,  were  intended  to  be  as  patterns 
and  types  of  the  several  ages  of  the  catholic  church  a  principio  ad  Jin  cm,  that  so 
these  seven  churches  should  prophetically  sample  unto  us  a  sevenfold  successive 
temper  and  condition  of  the  whole  visible  church,  according  to  the  several  ages 
thereof,  answering  to  the  pattern  of  the  seven  churches  here  ?  And  if  this  be 
granted,  viz.,  that  they  were  intended  to  be  so  many  patterns  of  so  many  states 
of  the  church,  succeeding  in  the  like  order  the  churches  are  named,  then  surely 
the  first  church  (viz.,  the  Ephesian  state)  must  be  first,  and  the  last  be  the  last," 
&c. 


26  THE   CHURCHES   SKETCHED, 

of  our  Lord,  that  subsisting  state  of  the  church  on  earth  would 
still  be  fitly  designated  "  the  things  which  are," 

Thus  Ephesus  is  the  first  great  sample  of  decline  through  a 
relaxation  or  abandonment  of  first  love.  But  was  not  this  the 
notorious  fact  in  Christendom  generally  before  the  last  apostle 
departed  to  be  with  the  Lord  ?  If  in  those  days  and  yet  more 
in  the  times  which  followed,  there  was  a  similar  moral  state, 
what  more  apt  and  natural  than  to  treat  the  moral  circumstances 
so  as  to  convey  the  general  lesson  ?  Again,  without  questioning 
that  the  message  to  Smyrna  fully  applied  at  that  time,  it  is  easy 
to  see  that  tlie  great  and  repeated  persecutions  which  broke  out 
upon  Christians  from  the  heathen  are  admirably  set  forth  by  it. 
So  again  the  Balaam  element  would  naturally  come  into  great 
distinctness,  when  the  world  patronised  instead  of  persecuting. 
Then  further  Jezebel  is  an  immense  advance  in  evil;  and  though 
no  doubt  there  was  that  which  furnished  occasion  for  these 
references  at  the  time  when  tlie  Apocalypse  was  given,  can  it  be 
denied  that  the  outline  was  filled  up  in  a  most  striking  way, 
after  the  throne  of  the  world  established  Christianity  by  its 
edicts,  and  when  at  a  later  epoch  still  the  professing  church 
formed  a  guilty  union  with  virtual  heathenism  and  enmity  to 
the  truth  of  God  ? 

This  glance,  rapid  as  it  is,  over  chapters  ii.  iii.  will  shew,  on 
the  one  hand,  why  I  conceive  that  the  Apocalyptic  churches 
are  to  be  viewed  as  having  a  real,  if  indirect,  prophetic  bearing 
upon  the  sul^sequent  states  of  the  church  as  they  presented 
themselves  to  the  Lord's  all-searching  judgment.  On  the  other 
hand  it  is  clear,  that  to  have  made  this  bearing  so  marked  as  to 
be  apparent  from  the  first — to  have  given  a  distinct  chronological 
history,  if  one  may  so  say — would  have  falsified  the  true  posture 
of  the  church  in  habitually  waiting  for  the  IxDrd  from  lieaven. 
For  the  Lord  has  nowhere  else  so  spoken  to  or  about  the  church 
as  to  keep  it  necessarily  waiting  for  ages  upon  the  earth.  Of 
course  the  Lord  knew  that  it  would  be  so ;  but  He  revealed 
nothing  that  would  interfere  with  the  full  enjoyment  of  the 
blessed  hope  of  the  Lord's  return  as  an  immediate  thing.  In 
the  parables  of  tlie  Gospels  which  set  forth  His  return,  while 
space  is  left  for  delay,  room  is  left  for  His  coming,  if  so  it 


SUCCESSIVE,   YET   IN   PART    CO-EXISTENT.  '27 

pleased  God,  in  their  lifetime  whom  He  then  addressed.  And  so 
it  is  here.  Though  in  the  seven  churches  the  full  course  of  the 
church  on  earth  is  comprised  in  such  varying  and  at  last  con- 
current phases  as  it  seemed  fit  to  the  Lord  to  notice.  He  took 
care  to  found  all  on  facts  then  present  before  His  divinely 
piercing  gaze,  so  as  to  maintain  the  balance  of  truth  undisturbed. 

Some  have  taken  advantage  of  this  indistinctness  to  deny 
that  these  seven  churches  have  the  successive  and  protracted 
character  which  I  have  alluded  to;  but  the  evidence  will  appear 
more  fully  as  we  look  at  each  church  severally.  Another  con- 
sideration which  ought  to  weigh  much  is,  that  after  these  two 
chapters  (ii.  iii.)  churches  are  nowhere  referred  to  as  existing 
longer  on  the  earth.  In  the  concluding  remarks  of  the  book 
(chap.  xxii.  16)  the  Lord  says  that  He  has  sent  His  angel  to 
testify  these  things  in  the  churches.  But  throughout  the  entire 
course  of  the  visions,  and  in  all  that  is  intimated  of  the  con- 
dition of  men  here  below,  after  Eev.  iii.  right  onward,  there  is 
the  most  unaccountable  silence  as  to  the  church  on  earth,  if  the 
church  be  really  there ;  while  nothing  is  more  simple,  if  that 
state  of  things  be  closed.  And  this  quite  agrees  with  chapter 
i.  19  :  "The  things  which  are,  and  the  things  which  shall  come 
to  j)ass  after  these."  After  the  churches  are  done  with,  and  no 
longer  seen  as  such  upon  the  earth,  the  directly  prophetic  por- 
tion of  the  book  begins  to  have  its  course. 

Further  it  seems  that  the  introduction  of  a  new  phase  in  the 
succession  of  the  churches  does  not  necessarily  imply  the  dis- 
appearance of  what  had  been  before  it.  In  a  word,  after  the 
new  condition  appears,  there  may  be  still  the  co-existence  of 
older  ones,  and  each  may  run  on  in  its  own  sphere.  This  appears 
to  be  distinctly  true  of  the  last  four,  being  marked  thenceforth 
by  a  distinct  reference  to  the  Lord's  coming,  as  may  be  seen  in 
Thyatira  and  the  churches  which  follow. 

Thus  much  may  be  said  of  the  churches  as  a  whole.  Ee- 
sponsibility  on  earth  is  the  question  :  not  the  privileges  of  the 
church  or  the  saints  in  Christ,  but  the  obligation  of  the  churches 
to  represent  Him,  and  His  estimate  of  their  state.  The  light- 
bearers  are  formally  under  His  scrutiny  and  judgment.  Paul 
long  before  (1  Tim.)  had  shewn  the  church  of  the  living  God  to 


28  APPLICATION   TO    THE   LAST   FOUR. 

be  the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  trutli.  Nowhere  else  in  the 
world  is  the  truth  so  inscribed  and  held  up  as  in  that  house  of 
God ;  but  even  he  (2  Tim.  ii.)  lets  us  see  that  such  a  privilege 
and  responsibility  would  in  no  way  preserve  it  from  ruin  ;  for 
in  this  his  last  epistle  he  described  its  condition  as  that  of  a 
great  house  with  vessels  not  to  honour  only  but  to  dishonour, 
from  which  last  the  godly  man  had  to  purge  himself.  John  here 
sets  before  us  the  solemn  fact  of  (not  the  church  judging,  but) 
the  Lord  morally  judging  the  churches  by  His  word.  Alas!  the 
church  pretending  to  be  a  judge,  and  hence  becoming  a  murderous 
false  prophetess,  is  a  part  of  the  evil  that  is  judged  in  the  church 
at  Thyatira,  as  we  shall  see  in  chapter  ii. 

Thyatira  has  another  distinctive  mark,  in  that  it  first  has  the 
Lord's  coming,  not  spiritually  or  providentially  as  in  the  message 
to  Ephesus  and  Pergamos,  but  actually,  and  hence,  while  these 
may  have  passed  away,  goes  down  to  the  end,  as  do  those  states 
which  follow — Sardis,  Philadelphia,  and  Laodicea,  remarkable 
for  being  addressed  by  the  Lord  in  characteristics  either  in  part 
or  wholly  different  from  His  appearance  in  the  vision  of  chap,  i., 
the  characteristics  of  which  last  were  uniformly  employed  in 
the  addresses  of  the  first  three  churches.  And  if  we  cannot  but 
discern  Popery  in  the  Jezebel  of  Thyatira,  not  without  the  faith- 
ful remnant  which  in  its  simplicity  refused  her  abominations 
and  bore  up  against  her  bloodiest  policy,  can  we  fail  to  see  in 
Sardis  the  cold  correctness  of  Protestantism  verging  toward  the 
world,  with  whose  doom  it  is  threatened  ;  in  Philadelphia  a 
testimony  feeble  but  dependent  on  Christ,  cleaving  to  His  word 
and  not  denying  His  name,  with  "that  blessed  hope"  full  in 
view ;  and  in  Laodicea  that  finally  nauseous  state  of  self-com- 
placent indifferentism  which  is  more  than  ever  rising  up  around 
us  ? 


EPHESUS.  29 


CHAPTEE   II. 


EPHESUS. 


"VVe  will  now  look  at  the  first  of  the  seven  churches  more 
particularly  (verses  1-7).  First,  let  us  observe  that  John  is  told  to 
write  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Ephesus.  The  address  is  no 
longer  to  "  the  saints  which  are  at  Ephesus,  and  to  the  faithful 
in  Christ  Jesus."  Nor  is  it  to  the  saints  with  the  bishops  and 
deacons,  as  the  word  was  to  the  Philippian  church.  Why  is 
this  ?  The  Lord's  ways  are  always  full  of  grace  ;  but  they  are 
righteous  withal,  and  the  church  was  a  fallen  and  falling  thing, 
so  that  He  could  no  longer  address  them  in  His  familiar  love  as 
formerly.  Thus  there  was  departure  of  the  most  serious  kind 
from  Himself,  and  John  is  directed  to  address,  not  the  church, 
but  its  angel  or  representative.  The  angels  spoken  of  in  these 
epistles  were  men,  and  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  class 
of  spiritual  beings  called  angels.*  The  apostle  John  is  employed 
by  the  Lord  to  send  a  message  to  them,  and  it  would  be  con- 

*  Origen  and  Andreas  adopted  the  latter  meaning,  but  Epiphanius  and  others 
expressly  reject  it.  Many  moderns  suppose  that  the  term  is  derived  from  the 
synagogue  and  that  it  answers  to  the  "1"12^V  Hvti'  and  nD33n  jTll.  But  if  this 
be  so,  the  angel  of  the  church  cannot  mean  even  a  presbyter,  much  less  the 
president  or  chief  of  the  presbyters,  as  Vitringa  argues,  but  rather  what  is  called 
clerk  or  sexton.  The  New  Testament  term  for  this  chazan  or  angel  of  the 
synagogue  seems  to  be  inrrjpBTrjg,  who  had  the  care  of  the  books,  &c.  (Luke  iv. 
20.)  The  ruler,  or  (1(0  ;^i(ruvdywy  Of,  was  quite  distinct;  and  of  these  there  were 
several.  (Acts  xiii.  15.)  Compare  Lightfoot.  (0pp.  ii.  pp.  279,  310.)  Some  on 
the  other  hand  supposed  that  envoys  may  have  been  sent  from  the  churches 
in  Asia  to  John,  that  hence  they  were  called  dyyiXoi  fKKXrjffituv  (as  John's  dis- 
ciples sent  to  the  Lord  were,  Luke  vii.  24 ;  others  sent  by  the  Lord  Himself 
while  here  below,  Luke  ix.  52,  and  the  spies  sent  by  Joshua,  James  ii.  25),  and 
that  the  Lord  accordingly  so  addresses  them  in  the  messages  which  He  com- 
mands to  be  written  to  the  churches.  But  I  prefer  the  idea  of  representatives, 
as  most  in  keeping  with  the  prophecy  as  a  whole. 


30  THE  ANGEL  OF  THE  CHURCH. 

trary  to  all  the  ways  of  God  to  use  man  as  a  messenger  to 
angels  in  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word.  Angels  often  acted 
between  God  and  man,  but  not  men  between  Him  and  angels. 

But,  further,  there  is  no  sufficient  ground  to  affirm  that  the 
angel  here  addressed,  though  a  man,  is  in  such  an  official  place 
necessarily  as  a  bishop  or  elder.*  He  might  have  such  a  charge, 
or  he  might  not.  "  The  angel"  always  gives  the  thought  of 
representation.  In  the  Old  Testament  we  have  the  angel  of 
Jehovah,  of  the  covenant,  &c.,  and  in  Daniel  we  read  of  angels 
who  were  identified  with  Israel  or  other  powers.  In  the  New 
Testament  we  have  the  angels  of  the  little  children  always 
beholding  the  face  of  their  Father  in  heaven,  which  clearly  means 
their  representatives.  So  of  Peter,  in  Acts  xii.,  they  said  it  was 
his  angeh  We  may  gather  then  that  the  angel  here,  though  a  man, 
is  in  some  way  or  another  the  ideal  responsible  representative 
of  an  assembly.  Hence,  it  could  be  said,  "  I  will  remove  thy 
lamp-stand."  It  would  be  extremely  objectionable  to  make  this 
a  defined  official  place,  as  it  would  introduce  not  merely  a 
novelty,  but  one  that  clashes  with  all  that  is  elsewhere  taught 
in  scripture  as  to  the  assembly.  But  it  will  not  be  doubted  that 
in  assemblies  we  find,  as  a  fact,  a  particular  person  whom  the 
Lord  specially  links  with  tlie  assembly  as  characterizing  it :  he 
is  morally  identified  with  it,  and  receives  from  the  Lord  either 
praise  or  condemnation  according  to  the  state  of  the  assembly. 

Here  the  angel  is  directly  charged  with  the  state  of  the 
assembly.  The  address  being  to  him,  and  not  to  the  assembly, 
put  them  as  it  were  at  farther  distance  from  the  Lord.  What 
a  tale  this  tells  of  the  dreadful  condition  into  which  the  church 

*  Wc  know  from  Acts  xx.  17,  28,  that  in  the  church  at  Ephesus  elders  or 
bishops  were  duly  appointed,  as  was  usual  at  any  rate  in  assemblies  at  all  mature 
■where  an  apostle  or  an  apostolic  delegate  like  Titus  could  visit  them  for  the 
purpose.  But  we  have  no  ground  to  hi'lieve  that  "angel"  ever  was  an  official 
title  for  a  chief  ruler.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  the  misunderstanding  of 
this  very  term  may  have  suggested  or  confirmed  the  invention  of  episcopacy, 
which  was  at  first  congregational  rather  than  diocesan.  Ignatius  so  singularly 
harps  on  that  dignitary  even  in  the  most  reduced  form  of  his  few  genuine 
epistles  as  to  give  the  idea  of  one  anxious  to  accredit  a  comparatively  new  insti- 
tution. It  is  certain  that  scrijiture  does  not  countenance  it  unless  it  be  in  this 
prophetic  book  of  mysterious  symbol — a  precarious  basis  for  a  most  impoi'tant 
charge  which  is  ignored  in  the  scrijiturcs  devoted  to  questions  of  rule. 


FIRST  LOVE.  31 

had  got !  He  could  no  longer  address  these  assemblies  im- 
mediately. He  had  spoken  directly  to  the  Corinthians  even ; 
for,  guilty  as  they  were,  they  had  not  so  loved  Him  and  then 
relaxed.  But  here  the  message  is,  "Thou  hast  left  thy  first  love." 
Yet,  if  the  church  were  not  faithful,  He  had  a  faithful  servant 
at  least  in  John ;  and  he  it  is  who  in  tlie  first  instance  is 
addressed.  And  be  it  ever  remembered  that  the  church  has 
never  since  recovered  from  that  failure  and  place  of  comparative 
distance.*  The  church,  the  house  of  God,  is  a  complete  ruin  here 
below.  And  in  ruin  the  first  thing  that  becomes  us  is  that  we 
feel  it  before  Him. 

This  in  no  way  touches  eternal  salvation ;  but  the  certainty 
of  salvation  is  abused  when  employed  to  lessen  what  is  due  to 
God.  In  fact  there  is  never  a  real  sense  of  sin  before  conver- 
sion ;  for  if  it  could  thus  be,  it  would  be  accompanied  with 
absolute  despair.  But  after  we  have  not  conversion  only  but 
perfect  peace,  we  can  bear  to  look  at  our  sin,  and  we  can  afford 
to  judge  it  thoroughly.  A  holy  angel  does  not  know  God  as  we 
ought  to  do — I  do  not  say  as  we  do,  though  that  be  true  also. 
An  angel  enters  into  the  wonders  of  God's  power,  "  hearkeninor 
unto  the  voice  of  his  word."  But  the  depths  of  God  come  out, 
marvellous  to  say,  about  our  sin,  and  in  His  Only-begotten, 
"seen  of  angels"  indeed,  but  in  living  relationship  with  us. 

Here  the  Lord  presents  Himself  as  the  One  "that  holdeth 
the  seven  stars  in  his  right  hand,  that  walketh  in  the  midst  of 
the  seven  golden  lamp-stands  "  (verse  1).  He  speaks  of  Himself 
as  having  authority  over  all  the  representatives  of  the  heavenly 
light,  and  going  about  among  the  vessels  of  His  testimony. 
Tli^  representative  is  addressed ;  the  assembly  is  none  the  less 

*  In  this  sense  it  is  that  we  can  understand  how  the  churches,  turning  a  deaf 
ear  to  these  messages  of  Christ  as  they  certainly  did  ere  long,  ceased  to  be  re- 
cognized of  God,  and  thus  the  strictly  prophetic  part,  a  fieXXn  yiviaOca  fiira 
Tavra,  might  apply  in  an  inchoate  or  partial  and  protracted  way  ever  since, 
while  in  a  full  and  final  sense  there  remains  the  absolute  cutting  off  of  the  faithless 
Gentile  profession,  and  the  brief  crisis  of  the  latter  when  the  prophetic  portion  is 
punctually  carried  out  to  the  letter.  This  seems  to  be  much  confirmed  by  the 
mode  employed  to  describe  this  abnormal  ecclesiastical  state,  a  tlai,  "the things 
which  are,"  which  easily  admit  of  indefinite  prolongation.  It  is  not  the  seven 
churches,  nor  the  messages  to  them,  but  a  phrase  easily  applicable  both  to  their 
then  condition,  and  to  the  protracted  state  of  ruin  in  which  we  are  now. 


32  GENERAL   IN    CHARACTER, 

responsible  and  dealt  with  accordingly.  He  is  come  to  investi- 
gate, to  judge — not  yet  of  course  the  ungodly  world,  but — the 
assembly  in  Ephesus.  What  a  difference  between  such  a  sight 
as  this,  and  the  view  we  have  of  Him  and  of  the  church  too  in 
Ephesians  i.  ii. !  There  He  is  seated  at  God's  right  hand  in  the 
heavenly  places,  and  there  too  God  has  made  us  sit  together  in 
heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus.  Here  He  is  walking  in  the 
midst  of  the  candlesticks.  His  liand  is  needed;  for  none  but 
He  could  meet  the  difficulties.  But  is  it  not  solemn  tliat  He  is 
so  presented  to  that  very  church  to  which  Paul  had  opened  out 
the  fulness  of  His  heavenly  grace,  the  fulness  of  their  own 
blessing  in  Him  ?  But  here  He  is  obliged,  as  it  were,  to  walk 
and  vindicate  His  authority,  not  among  those  who  know  Him 
not,  but  where  His  love  had  once  been  well  known — alas  !  now 
forgotten  and  dishonoured. 

Observe  the  general  character,  as  has  been  truly  remarked,  of 
this  the  first  address  throughout  all  its  parts.  Such  is  Christ's 
description ;  such  too  the  sin ;  such  the  warning  to  the  angel ; 
and  such  the  promise  to  the  overcomer.  The  Lord's  position  is 
ecclesiastical  generally,  holding  the  seven  stars  and  walking  iu 
the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  lamp-stands. 

"  I  know  thy  works,  and  thy  labour,  and  tliy  patience,  and 
that  thou  canst  not  bear  evil  men;  and  thou  hast  tried  those 
that  call  themselves  apostles  and  are  not,  and  hast  found  them 
liars  :  and  thou  hast  patience,  and  hast  borne  for  my  name's 
sake  and  art  not  wearied"  (verses  2,  o). *  Thus  there  were 
many  things  to  praise.  There  was  patience,  and  this  is  the  first 
sign,  if  not  the  greatest,  that  Paul  gives  of  his  own  apostleship. 
More  than  this,  nothing  is  more  ready  to  break  down  than 
patience,  after  it  has  stood  many  a  trial.     But  here  at  Ephesus 

•  The  common  text,  followed  by  the  Authorized  version,  is  in  some  respects 
corrupted.  Their  toil  was  known,  and  endurance  they  wore  not  only  eminent 
for,  but  they  had  it  still.  They  had  proved  intolerant  of  evil  persons,  and 
especially  of  such  as  falsely  claimed  high  ecclesiastical  authority,  whilst  they 
had  manifested  their  willingness  to  bear  wrongs  or  afflictions  for  Christ's  sake ; 
and  in  all  this  they  were  not  weary.  Such  is  the  sense  of  the  right  readings 
and  the  true  order.  A  few  MSS.  (16,  37,  38,  69),  and  versions  drop  ov  before 
(cfKOTTirticaf,  perliiips  to  seem  verbally  consistent  witli  kottov  in  the  verse  before; 
but  the  evidLiice  for  wliat  I  have  given  seems  overwhelming. 


THE   LAMP-STAND    REMOVED.  33 

there  was  endurance.  (Compare  verses  2,  3.)  Again,  where 
there  is  patience,  there  might  be  the  tendency  to  pass  over  evil, 
or  at  least  evil  men.  But  it  was  not  so  here.  They  had  borne 
for  His  name's  sake,  but  they  could  not  bear  evil  persons ;  and 
they  had  tried  those  that  pretended  to  the  highest  place — to  be 
apostles,  and  had  found  them  liars.  And  thus  they  had  gone 
on  and  were  not  weary.  How  sweet  of  the  Lord  (in  His  sorrow 
and,  if  we  may  so  say,  His  disappointed  love)  thus  to  begin 
with  all  that  was  good  ! 

But  though  there  was  what  He  could  praise,  He  had  against 
them  that  they  had  left  their  first  love.  It  is  quite  evident  that 
this  is  nothing  special,  but  the  general  spirit  or  principle  of 
declension  of  the  church  at  large.  Indeed  it  is  very  broad :  so 
the  angels  that  left  their  first  estate  ;  so  Adam  ;  so  Israel.  Alas ! 
we  must  add  now  the  assembly  of  God,  blessed  and  loved  beyond 
them  all.  They  had  let  slip  the  consciousness  of  the  Lord's  love 
to  them,  and  hence  the  fresh  energy  of  their  own  love  to  Him 
had  waned.  What  produced  love  in  them  was  their  appreciation 
of  the  Lord's  love. 

Let  me  just  remark  that  the  word  "somewhat,"  in  verse  4, 
seems  to  weaken  the  sense.  It  might  convey  the  idea  that  the 
Lord  had  but  little  against  them ;  whereas,  in  truth.  He  was 
exceedingly  grieved.  Not  to  feel  His  love,  not  to  return  it  con- 
sequently, was  no  small  failure,  especially  where  that  love  had 
once  been  enjoyed.  But  now  it  was  faded,  and  what  would  not 
follow  in  time  ?  "  Eemember,  therefore,  whence  thou  art  fallen, 
and  repent  and  do  the  first  works  ;  or  else  I  am  coming  unto 
thee,  and  I  will  remove  thy  lamp-stand  out  of  its  place,  except 
thou  repent."  Solemn  announcement !  Not  only  is  an  assembly 
liable  to  lose  its  place  of  holding  up  the  holy  light  of  God,  but 
assured  that  so  it  must  be  if  it  depart  from  first  love  and  repent 
not.  It  is  a  much  easier  thing  to  be  zealous  in  doing  than  in 
repenting.  But  even  this  would  not  satisfy  His  heart,  unless  they 
got  back  to  that  first  love  which  had  produced  their  first  works: 
otherwise  the  lamp-stand  must  be  removed.  The  spring  of  grace 
is  as  gone. 

I  doubt,  on  grounds  both  external  and  internal,  that  "  quickly" 
should  be  in  ver.  5.    For  when  He  thus  comes  to  judge  the  ways 

D 


34  REPENTANCE. 

of  His  own  people,  can  it  Le  so  said?  Doubtless,  when  He 
comes,  whether  to  fight  with  the  Nicolaitans,  or  to  take  us  to 
Himself,  it  is  quickly.  (Kev.  ii.  1(3;  iii.  11;  xxii.  7,  12,  20.) 
But  the  Lord  gives  space  for  repentance,  even  if  it  were  to 
Jezebel ;  and  how  much  more  to  His  beloved  Ephesians  ? 

The  removal  of  the  lamp-stand  does  not  imply  that  the  church 
might  not  go  on  apparently  as  before  ;  but  that  it  lost  its  place 
as  a  trustworthy  witness  for  the  Lord.  Here  again  all  is  general : 
it  would  suit  the  Christian  everyw,Jiere.  Nothing  makes  up  for 
distance  between  His  people  (or  between  the  soul)  and  Christ. 
And  such  was  the  case,  not  merely  with  the  assembly  in 
Ephesus,  but  with  the  church  generally,  I  think  we  may  say, 
even  then.  This  to  my  mind  confirms  the  successional  aim  of 
"  the  things  which  are."  Outward  testimony  might  go  on,  but 
that  is  not  what  the  Lord  most  values  ;  though  value  it  He  does, 
as  far  as  it  is  simple,  genuine,  and  faithful.  Still  He  cannot 
but  prize  most  of  all  hearts  devoted  to  Himself,  the  fruit  of  His 
own  personal,  self-sacrificing,  perfect  love.  He  has  a  spouse  upon 
earth,  whom  He  desires  to  see  with  no  object  but  Himself,  kept 
pure  for  Him  from  the  world  and  its  ways.  God  has  called  us 
for  this  :  not  only  for  salvation,  and  for  a  witness  to  Himself  in 
godliness,  though  this  is  most  true  and  important,  but  beyond 
all  for  Christ — a  bride  for  His  Son !  Surely  this  should  be  our 
first  and  last  and  constant  and  dearest  thought;  for  we  are 
affianced  to  Christ,  and  He  at  least  has  proved  the  fulness  and 
faithfulness  of  His  love  to  us  !     But  what  of  ours  ? 

The  effect  of  thus  looking  at  Christ  is  that  the  Christian  is 
kept  in  the  dust,  and  yet  always  rejoicing  in  Him.  For  the 
sense  of  failure  in  ourselves  and  others  would  be  oppressive, 
but  that  we  are  entitled  to  find  our  joy  in  One  who  has  never 
failed,  and  who  notwithstanding  loves  us  who  have  given  such 
a  feeble  and  falteiing  witness  for  Him.  Hence  if  we  but  go  to 
Him  so  known,  even  in  sorrowful  confession.  He  will  not  let  us 
part  without  blessing  and  strength.  It  is  due  to  Him  to  own 
and  feel  our  sin ;  but  to  be  occupied  merely  with  failure  never 
gives  power  :  Christ  must  have  the  glory.  And  assuredly  He  who 
has  delivered  us  from  the  wrath  to  come.  He  who  can  save  from 
hell,  can  keep  or  snatch  from  every  ditch  on  earth.     Only  let 


NICOLAITANISM.  ^5 

the  Christian  confess  his  sin,  cleaving  to  Jesus ;  this  vindicates 
the  name  of  Him  who  comes  to  his  succour,  and  then  the 
victory  is  sure. 

But  what  a  comfort  and  how  reassuring  to  find  that,  after  His 
censure,  the  Lord  again  speaks  of  what  He  can  commend ! 
"  But  this  thou  hast,  that  thou  hatest  the  deeds  of  the  Nicolai- 
tans,  which  I  also  hate"  (verse  6).  The  essence  of  Nicolaitanism 
seems  to  have  been  the  abuse  of  grace  to  the  disregard  of  Chris- 
tian or  even  moral  practice.  The  Ephesian  saints  had  failed  in 
cleaving  with  fresh  fervour  to  that  which  is  good,  but  they  had 
fellowship  with  the  Lord,  rejecting  false  pretensions,  and  abhor- 
ring what  is  evil.  People  often  say,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a 
perfect  church  on  earth.  I  would  ask  such  what  they  mean  by 
a  perfect  church.  Will  any  Christian  man  tell  me  that  we  are 
not  to  aim  at  everything  consistent  with  the  holiness  of  God  ? 
I  claim  for  the  church  just  what  must  be  allowed  for  every  indi- 
vidual Christian.  As  there  may  be  too  many  faults  in  the 
individual,  so  there  may  be  in  the  church.  But  then  there  is 
this  blessedness,  that  as  there  is  One  who  dwells  in  the  indi- 
vidual to  guide  and  bless  him,  so  the  same  Spirit  dwells  in  the 
church,  and  Christ,  cleanses  it  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the 
word.  It  is  with  the  assembly  as  with  the  individual,  that  has 
both  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  the  power  of  good,  and  the  flesh 
which  lusts  against  him.  As  in  a  man  the  soul  may  be  said  to 
pervade  the  whole  body,  animating  it  in  every  part ;  so  does 
the  Spirit  act  in  the  church  of  God.  When  persons  maintain 
that  unholiness  may  be  tolerated  because  no  man  is  free  from  sin, 
it  is  Antinomianism ;  and  I  believe  it  to  be  the  very  principle  of 
the  Nicolaitans.  Each  individual  is  bound  to  be  ready  to  meet 
the  Lord,  having  nothing  left  to  be  wound  up  when  He  comes. 
The  Lord  looks  for  the  same  thing  from  the  assembly,  because 
there  is  a  divine  power  against  evil  in  the  church  as  in  the 
saint. 

Then  comes  the  promise,  with  the  word  of  admonition  before 
it,  but  all  general,  like  the  danger  and  the  threat.  "He  that 
hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches ; 
To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life, 
which  is  in  the  paradise  of  my  God  "  (verse  7). 

D  2 


36  THE   PARADISE   OF   GOD. 

As  for  the  paradise  of  creation,  man  had  been  put  there  and 
tried  by  the  simplest  test  of  obedience  in  a  single  instance ;  but 
he  fell.  Now  a  new  scene  is  opened.  It  is  no  longer  the  garden 
of  Eden,  but  the  paradise  of  God — "  gfjnyGod,"  says  the  Lord 
Jesus — not  of  God  only,  in  contrast  with  man,  but  of  "m^  God  " 
as  Jesus  knew  Him.  Into  this  redemption  brings  us.  And 
therein  is  no  tree  of  responsibility  that  could  bring  in  sorrow 
and  death.  Tlie  tree  of  life  alone  is  there,  which  the  glorified 
saint  shall  enjoy  in  peace.  The  church  in  Ephesus  had  fallen, 
it  is  true,  from  first  love :  but  is  anything  too  hard  or  good  for 
the  Lord  ?  Did  any  feel  deeply  and  aright  the  wrong  that  was 
done  to  His  grace  ?  If  there  was  but  one  who  overcame  (and 
overcoming  must  be  by  strong  faith,  not  mere  preservation  of 
original  blessing  ;  it  is  overcoming  inside  the  church  too),  to  him 
was  this  promise  given  to  comfort  and  cheer  his  soul.  The 
Lord's  grace  is  just  as  full  now.  May  there  be  no  soul  here  who 
has  not  ears  to  hear :  if  there  are  any  who  have,  may  they  hear 
and  overcome ! 

It  is  all  well  to  "  hear  the  church  "  in  discipline,  confiding  in 
Him  who  is  in  the  midst.  But  when  the  church  leaves  its  first 
love,  and  claims  all  the  more  loudly  to  be  heard,  taking  the 
place  of  Christ  or  of  the  Spirit,  pretending  to  teach,  what  then  ? 
"  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the 
churches."  Individual  responsibility  comes  distinctly  out  now 
as  a  principle  for  the  Christian,  as  in  IVIatthew  xiii.  for  the  dis- 
ciple, after  the  proclamation  in  chapter  xii.  of  the  judgment  of 
Israel. 

SMYRNA. 

In  the  message  to  Ephesus  we  have  seen  departure  from  first 
standino-.  The  next  state  is  a  different  one.  We  have  the  church 
at  Smyrna  in  trouble;  the  saints  of  God  are  suffering.  They 
may  have  thought  the  fiery  trial  some  strange  thing  that  had 
ha])pened  to  them.  But,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  more  true  that  the 
Lord  is  grieved  with  a  Christian  when  He  leaves  him  without 
trouble  for  righteousness  or  for  His  name's  sake.  The  Lord  had 
Himself  known  tribulation  to  the  utmost;  but  in  Him  it  was 
only  the  trial  of  the  good  that  was  within,  and  the  bringing  out 
of  His  perfection.     And  poor  as  we  are,  we  too  may  know  trial 


TROUBLE   FOR   THE    CHRISTIAN.  37 

apart  from  our  evil.  The  Lord  has  two  objects  in  view  when 
He  lays  His  hand  upon  a  Christian  in  the  way  of  chastening. 
It  may  come  either  because  there  has  been  something  wrong,  or 
because  he  is  in  danger  of  it  and  this  is  little  felt  by  him. 
When  David  was  out  of  tribulation,  he  falls  into  a  snare.  When 
his  circumstances  were  full  of  trouble,  then  it  was  that  he 
(inspired,  of  course,  by  the  Holy  Ghost)  poured  out  those  sweet 
strains  that  we  read  with  joy  to  this  day.  The  desire  to  get  out 
of  trial  is  a  perilous  thing  for  the  soul.  The  trial  may  be  sent 
to  shew  us  what  we  really  are,  or,  what  is  better,  to  prove  what 
God  is  for  us  and  to  us :  but  it  may  be  also  sent  to  prevent  us 
from  falling  into  sin.  The  Lord  in  His  love  thus  often  averts 
the  evil  which  He  sees  and  we  do  not.  I  do  not  doubt  that  there 
is  another  and  a  deeper  character  of  suffering,  even  fellowship 
with  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  which  must  not  be  confounded 
with  the  Lord's  faithful  discipline,  though  sometimes  it  would 
seem  the  two  things  may  be  in  a  measure  combined.  In  a 
certain  sense  all  saints  suffer  now  with  Him,  though  all  may 
not  be  called  to  suffer  for  Him. 

In  Smyrna  the  Lord  appears  to  have  been  meeting  the 
declension  from  first  love  that  had  set  in,  and  in  order  to  do 
this  He  sent  tribulation.  It  is  no  uncommon  case — thanks  to 
His  name,  for  He  is  good  and  faithful.  In  what  capacity  does 
He  speak  to  them  ?  "  These  things  saith  the  first  and  the  last, 
which  was  dead  and  is  alive."  His  title,  first  of  all,  is  that  of 
a  divine  Person  as  against  Satan.  The  Spirit  claims  for  Jesus 
here,  what  Isaiah  had  before  challenged  for  Jehovah.  (Isaiah 
xli.  4.)  And  what  was  there  that  could  not  be  claimed  for 
Him  ?  He  "which  was  dead  and  is  alive."  What  a  comfort  for 
those  who  were  in  trial !  Who  is  it  that  speaks  to  them  in 
their  tribulation  ?  The  One  who  had  been  in  the  deepest  of 
sorrow  and  had  gone  through  death  itself.  He  who  was  the 
First  and  the  Last,  and  who  had  formed  all — He  was  the  One 
that  had  died  and  was  alive  again.  And  this  is  the  very  One 
that  I  have  to  flee  to  in  my  trial.  You  will  see  thereby  what  a 
connection  there  is  between  the  quickening  of  the  dead  and  the 
comfort  of  those  who  are  in  trial.  (Compare  2  Cor.  i.-v.)  Jesus 
was  God,  but  He  was  man  also.    He  was  the  suffering  man,  and 


38  JEWS   USKl)   SYMBOLICALLY. 

He  was  the  triumpliant  man ;  and  as  such  He  was  able  to  com- 
fort them  in  their  tribulation.  What  had  He  not  gone  through 
Himself? 

"  I  know  [thy  works  and]  tribulation,  and  poverty,  (but  thou 
art  rich,)  and  the  blasphemy  of  them  which  say  they  are  Jews 
and  are  not,  but  are  the  synagogue  of  Satan"  (verse  9).  The 
word  "Jews"  here  is  used  symbolically.  It  was  a  name  given 
to  the  nation  that  was  known  as  God's  people,  above  all  others, 
in  olden  time ;  and  these  symbols  were  taken  from  the  Old 
Testament.  It  seems  to  mean  persons  who,  taking  the  place  of 
being  children  of  God,  went  back  to  hereditary  religion.  On 
the  one  hand,  there  was  this  outward  trouble,  which  the  Lord 
allowed  for  their  blessing,  and,  on  the  other,  there  were  those 
who  were  insisting  on  Jewish  principles.  (Phil.  iii.  2.)  But  the 
Lord  says,  "  Fear  not  those  things  which  thou  slialt  suffer." 
Do  not  mind  what  persons  say,  or  things  done  against  you. 
"  Behold  the  devil  shall  cast  from  among  you  into  prison,  that 
ye  may  be  tried."  Thus,  by  God's  grace,  the  enemy  himself  is 
used  as  an  instrument  for  the  good  of  God's  people  in  the  per- 
secutions which  he  stirs  up  against  them.  There  is  nothing,  on 
the  other  hand,  whereby  Satan  more  effectually  draws  aside 
than  through  a  sort  of  quiet,  easy-going,  half-and-half  Chris- 
tianity. God  grant  that  His  children  may  be  preserved  from 
having  two  faces  or  characters — that  the  Christian  may  never 
be  worldly  with  worldly  ])eople,  and  then  put  on  the  ways  and 
words  of  a  saint  with  his  brethren. 

It  is  no  new  thing  for  the  Lord  thus  to  allow  tlie  efforts  and 
enmity  of  Satan  for  the  blessing  of  His  saints.  In  the  case  of 
Job  we  see  the  same  thing :  indeed  the  Lord  probed  his  servant 
there  far  more  deeply.  At  each  successive  trial  from  Satan 
Job  retained  his  integrity,  and  blessed  the  Lord ;  but  the  Lord 
shewed  Job  himself — the  very  thing  he  needed  for  the  full 
blessedness  of  turning  away  from  self  to  the  Lord.  Then  He 
shewed  him  Ood,  and  Job's  comfort  at  last  was  as  deep  as  his 
self-abasement. 

Job  had  no  idea  that  he  thought  too  much  of  himself;  but 
this  was  just  what  God  had  to  shew  him  he  did.  He  loved  to 
recall  the  time  when  the  fruits  of  i^odliness  in  him  drew  forth 


PAGAN   PERSECUTION.  39 

the  respect  and  esteem  of  men.  But  God  shewed  him  how  evil 
a  thing  it  is  to  be  occupied  with  the  effects  of  grace  in  himself 
or  on  others.  What  the  enemy  of  God  and  man  could  not  do, 
Job's  friends  did.  He  could  stand  against  the  temptations  of 
Satan,  but  he  was  provoked  to  folly  by  his  friends  coming  to 
condole  with  him,  and  giving  their  misdirected  opinions.  When 
a  person  talks  much  about  grace,  not  a  little  unjudged  self  is 
apt  to  be  found  there,  we  may  be  sure.  Even  Job  had  to  be  put 
in  the  furnace  to  find  out  tliat  there  was  a  great  deal  more 
besides  grace  in  him.  But  though  Satan  might  tempt  without 
success,  and  his  friends  only  provoke,  when  the  Lord  Himself 
comes  in,  then  Job  is  soon  thoroughly  humbled.  He  sees  him- 
self in  the  light  of  the  presence  of  God,  and  exclaims,  "  Mine 
eye  seeth  thee.  Wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust 
and  ashes."  But  the  end  of  the  Lord  is  as  good  at  least  as  His 
beginning.  He  is  ever  pitiful,  and  of  tender  mercy.  When 
Job  thinks  nothing  of  himself  in  the  presence  of  God,  the  true 
stream  of  grace  flows  out,  and  he  prays  for  his  friends.  "  And 
the  Lord  turned  the  captivity  of  Job  when  he  prayed  for  his 
friends." 

The  case  of  Smyrna  follows  that  of  Ephesus.  As  already 
hinted,  I  should  apply  the  church  of  Smyrna  to  the  time  when 
the  church  was  called  to  pass  through  the  tribulation  that  fol- 
lowed the  era  of  the  apostles — -the  persecutions  that  were  inflicted 
on  the  Christians  by  the  lloman  emperors.  But  it  is  good  to 
remember  that  all  is  measured  of  the  Lord.  "  Behold,  the  devil 
shall  cast  [some]  of  you  into  prison,  that  ye  may  be  tried  ;  and 
ye  shall  have  tribulation  ten  days"  (verse  10).  The  sufferings, 
death  for  Christ's  sake,  &c.,  of  the  Christians,  were  the  few 
bright  spots  and  manifestations  of  life  in  the  second  and  begin- 
ning of  the  third  centuries. 

"  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  crown 
of  life"  (ver.  10).  The  distinction  of  God's  servants  in  glory  is 
an  important  doctrine.  For  while  it  is  essential  to  maintain 
that  the  very  same  grace  which  pardoned  the  thief  on  the  cross 
was  needed  to  save  Paul  of  Tarsus,  yet  it  would  be  a  grand 
mistake  to  suppose  that  the  thief  will  have  the  same  reward  in 
glory.     Nevertheless  we  must  not  be  afraid  when  the  Lord  says 


40  NO   HUllT   FROM    THE   SECOND   DEATH. 

to  US,  "  I  know  thy  works."  For  though  the  vessels  that  are  to 
contain  the  blessing  may  not  be  equally  large,  the  little  cup  will 
be  as  full  as  the  big  one ;  and  filled,  if  I  may  so  say,  with  the 
same  materials  of  joy  and  blessing.  In  a  glorified  state  there 
will  be  no  such  thing,  of  course,  as  a  person  being  tried — no 
question  of  being  faithful  or  unfaithful  then.  Before  we  get 
there,  spiritual  differences  exist ;  and  when  we  are  there,  the 
distinctions  of  Christ's  kingdom  will  answer  to  the  character 
and  measure  of  service  here  below,  though  the  sovereignty  of 
God  must  be  maintained  also.    (Matt.  xix.  xx.) 

There  follows  this  suited  word  of  comfort  to  the  faithful  in 
Smyrna :  "  He  that  overcometh  shall  not  be  hurt  of  the  second 
death"  (verse  11).  Do  not  fear  the  first  death;  it  is  only  a 
servant  to  usher  you  into  the  presence  of  God :  the  second 
death  will  not  injure  you.  The  Lord  is  like  that  tree  of  old 
which  was  cast  into  the  waters  of  Marah.  He  went  into  the 
bitterest  waters  of  death,  which  have  thus  been  changed  into 
sweetness  and  refreshing  for  us. 

PERGAMOS. 
Tlie  Lord  here  announces  Himself  to  the  angel  of  the  church 
in  Pergamos  as  One  armed  with  all-piercing  power  by  the  word 
of  God,  the  two-edged  sword  that  judges  (verse  12).  In 
the  book  of  Revelation  the  sharp  sword  is  at  the  command  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  as  the  instrument  of  judgment.  What  the  sword 
is  in  the  hands  of  man,  so  is  the  word  that  reveals  God  search- 
ing out  and  cutting  through  all  obstacles.  This  the  Lord  applies 
in  power ;  it  decides  all  questions  that  have  to  do  with  Him, 
There  is  always  a  great  and  beautiful  connexion  between  the 
way  or  title  in  which  He  presents  Himself  and  the  state  of  the 
church  which  He  is  addressing.  It  was  because  the  word  was 
no  longer  that  which  liad  living  energy  to  judge  in  the  church, 
that  tlie  Lord  Jesus  takes  care  to  prove  that  it  had  never  lost 
its  power  in  His  hands.  As  the  first  church  shews  us  declen- 
sion set  in,  even  in  the  days  of  the  apostle  John,  and  Smyrna 
the  time  of  persecution  from  the  heathen,  so  here  we  have  a 
totally  different  state  of  things.  Pergamos  is  the  scene  of 
Satan's  llEittering  ] tower  or  seduction,  whicli  was  just  what  he 


DANGER   OF   PIIOSPERITY.  41 

used  after  the  violence  of  persecution  liacl  spent  itself.  It  was 
a  more  dangerous  device  than  the  second  ;  for  when  set  on  any- 
thing that  is  wrong,  there  is  nothing  that  more  shews  a  case  far 
gone  and  desperate  than  God's  giving  one  up  to  his  own  will 
without  further  remonstrance.  "  Ephraim  is  joined  unto  idols  : 
let  him  alone."  In  the  case  of  Smyrna  we  see  the  clean  con- 
trary of  this :  the  Lord  was  intercepting  the  power  of  Satan 
through  persecution  from  without,  which  was  used  of  God  to 
hinder  the  growing  corruption  within. 

Afterwards  the  god  of  this  world  promised  Christians  every 
worldly  advantage.  The  emperor  himself  offered  to  become  a 
Christian,  though  he  put  off  baptism  till  his  death-bed.  There 
was  no  plainer  proof  how  completely  the  church  had  fallen 
through  forgetfulness  of  the  Lord's  name,  than  when  it  accepted 
the  emperor's  terms  and  the  patronage  of  the  world.  Even 
those  who  were  saved  had  entirely  lost  sight  of  what  the  church 
was,  as  not  belonging  to  the  world,  but  of  heaven.  The  Eoman 
empire  was  essentially  the  world's  power.  The  church  had  been 
called  out  to  be  the  standing  witness  of  these  two  things  :  first 
of  the  world's  ruin ;  and  secondly  of  God's  love.  But  when 
we  see  the  church  shaking  hands  with  the  world  all  is  gone,  and 
the  church  slips  down  into  the  mind  of  this  age.  If  the  world 
gains  in  some  respects,  the  church  loses  in  everything ;  and  no 
wonder,  because  it  is  at  the  cost  of  the  will  and  glory  of  Christ. 

Satan's  "  throne "  is  the  sense :  in  presence  of  it,  who  does 
not  see  the  propriety  with  which  the  Lord  presents  Himself,  as 
armed  with  the  sharp  two-edged  sword  ?  It  is  the  same  word 
as  is  used  for  "  seat "  as  well  as  "  throne  "  in  other  parts  of  this 
very  book ;  but  here  it  is  properly  a  "  throne,"  because  Satan  is 
spoken  of  in  respect  of  authority.  It  is  obvious  that  all  this 
exactly  describes  the  state  of  things  in  Constantine's  time. 
Instead  of  being  at  the  stake  and  suffering  for  Christ's  sake, 
the  church  was  now  yoked  with  the  world  in  a  mere  profession 
(jf  Christianity ;  for  as  the  world  did  not  really  rise  to  Christ, 
the  church  must  sink  to  the  world's  level.  No  wonder  the  Lord 
says  thereon,  "  Thou  dwellest  where  Satan's  throne  is."  Yet  He 
allows  all  that  He  can,  even  where  this  miserable  association 
was  found — His  assembly  dwelling  where  Satan's  throne  was. 


42  DOCTRINES   OF   BALAAM. 

They  maintained  still  His  name,  and  did  not  deny  the  faith 
which  was  given  to  the  saints ;  but  this  was  all.  They  held 
fast  His  personal  glory,  and  did  not  deny  that  which  was 
revealed  of  Him  because  of  flesh  and  blood.  They  believed  of 
Him  what  eye  had  not  seen — His  Deity.  Against  this  Satan's 
wiles  were  directed,  as  of  late  he  had  sought  to  destroy  those 
who  confessed  the  truth.  They  had  just  come  out  of  the  great 
persecution  in  which  Antipas  was  slain.  But  now  the  church 
at  Pergainos,  instead  of  suffering,  was  dwelling  quietly  in  the 
world.  Like  Lot,  they  too  had  their  righteous  souls  vexed  with 
the  ungodliness  of  those  around. 

The  Lord  accordingly  brings  forward  the  things  of  which 
He  had  to  warn  them.  "  Thou  hast  there  them  that  hold  the 
doctrine  of  Balaam  "  (verse  14).  What  was  the  leading  feature 
we  see  in  the  son  of  Beor  ?  He  was  led  by  his  covetousness  to 
try  and  serve  the  bad  king  of  Moab  by  cursing  the  people  of 
God.  When  God  gave  him  an  answer,  he  goes  to  God  a  second 
time,  because  his  heart  wanted  its  own  way.  And  it  is  solemn 
to  learn  that  if  God  gives  you  up  you  may  get  what  you  want. 
Balaam  afterwards  falls  into  even  worse  evil.  He  was  indeed  a 
man  whose  heart  was  not  with  God.  He  said  some  true  things, 
but  his  spirit  was  not  in  them.  He  always  speaks  as  it  were 
from  without,  as  a  miserable  man,  afar  from  the  blessing  which 
he  saw.  "  I  shall  see  him,  but  not  now ;  I  shall  behold  him, 
but  not  nigh,"  &c.  He  goes  on  step  by  step,  until  he  lends 
himself  to  be  the  corrupter  through  tlie  world  even  of  God's 
chosen  people. 

And  so  it  was  with  the  church.  Even  the  philosophers  began 
to  take  up  Christian  truth,  and  in  the  writings  of  the  fathers 
we  find  pretty  much  what  we  have  here.  What  fornication  is  in 
moral  things,  such  was  their  illicit  commerce  with  the  world  in 
the  things  of  God.  There  were,  I  doubt  not,  witnesses  who  were 
made  very  little  account  of,  save  in  heaven ;  but  one  of  the  men 
who  had  the  largest  and  most  lasting  influence  of  all,  Augustine, 
was  a  true  saint  of  God,  and,  though  it  may  not  mean  much, 
the  greatest  light  of  the  western  church.  He  had  held  the 
name  of  Christ  and  had  not  denied  his  faith.  All  agree  that 
these  epistles  applied  prinuirily  to  the  churches  to  which  John 


DOCTRINE   OF   THE   NICOLAITANS.  43 

wrote ;  but  many  do  not  see  that  they  also  apply  to  different 
stages  of  the  church,  and  describe  its  various  states  successively. 

The  doctrine  of  the  Mcolaitans*  seems  an  evil  from  within, 
as  that  of  Balaam  was  rather  from  without.  Such  it  was  in 
principle  and  doctrine  now.  AVe  read  of  tlieir  deeds  in  Ephesus, 
but  this  went  farther  and  deeper.  It  was  a  corruption  of  grace, 
a  turning  it  to  licentiousness.  Sanctity  is  the  greatest  snare  if 
it  be  not  real,  yea,  if  it  flows  not  from  the  truth ;  yet  nothing 
more  terrible  than  that  grace,  where  it  is  known  or  at  least 
talked  of,  should  be  abused.  If  we  search  our  own  hearts  and 
ways,  we  shall  find  that  it  is  the  very  thing  we  all  tend  to  do. 
Grace  has  set  us  completely  free  through  Him  who  died  and 
rose  again ;  and  what  claim  has  it  not  on  our  hearts  ?  Do  we 
not  often  treat  God's  grace  to  us  in  the  very  same  way  that  our 
children  in  their  most  hardened  mood  treat  us  ?  They  then  take 
all  as  a  matter  of  right.  Though  creation  has  been  brought 
under  subjection  to  vanity  on  account  of  Adam's  sin,  yet  there 
is  no  moral  evil  connected  with  its  lower  forms.  But  in  man's 
case  it  is  not  so.  Knowing  the  evil,  he  yet  goes  on  in  it.  And 
even  when  we  have  got  the  certainty  of  deliverance,  if  the  joy 
of  it  have  passed  away  in  a  measure,  we  begin  to  use  the  Lord's 
grace  just  to  serve  ourselves.  This,  carried  out  without  con- 
science, is  Nicolaitanism. 

God's  grace  was  meant  to  bind  us  thoroughly  to  Himself  We 
might  see  a  person  fall  into  evil  (and  this,  of  course,  is  truly 
sorrowful  in  a  Christian),  but  there  is  a  great  deal  more  of  evil 
that  others  do  not  see.  God  gives  us  the  opportunity  of  jud<j-incr 
ourselves  when  no  one  else  perhaps  knows  anything  about  it. 
If  we  do  not  judge  "it,  then  the  end  here  below  is,  that  the  very 
world  may  pronounce  on  it ;  and  we  may  be  sure  what  a  vast 
amount  of  evil  must  have  gone  on  in  secret,  when  God  allows 
one  to  fall  so  that  the  careless  world  judges  one's  course  as  evil. 
But  we  must  not  Ije  discouraged.  It  is  just  where  the  truth  is 
most  preached  and  held  that  Satan  will  invariably  try  to  brin"- 
in  the  worst  conduct  and  heresies,  in  order  to  bring  shame  upon 

*  The  true  reading  of  verse  15  is  "likewise,"  instead  of  "which  thing  I 
hate,"  which  was  probably  copied  from  ii.  6.  The  sense  is,  that  there  were  such 
as  held  the  Nicolaitan  doctrine,  as  well  as  those  who  held  that  of  Balaam. 


44  THE   HIDDEN   MANNA. 

the  testimony  of  God.  When  a  man  slips  from  a  pinnacle  or 
height,  he  must  have  a  fall  so  much  the  more  terrible ;  as  also 
it  will  be  much  more  manifest  to  the  world  than  if  he  had 
merely  upset  on  the  plain. 

The  Lord  does  not  say,  "I  will  fight  against  thee  with  the 
sword  of  my  mouth,"  but  "against  them"  (ver.  16).  The  sword 
of  judgment  may,  it  is  true,  act  in  taking  them  away  by  death, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  Corinthian  saints,  who  were  judged  of  the 
Lord  here  below  that  they  might  not  afterwards  be  condemned 
with  the  world.  Christian  discipline  does  not  mean  putting 
away  those  who  are  not  Christians  from  those  who  are;  rather 
it  contemplates  the  purging  out  of  Christians  who  are  walking 
wrongly,  in  order  to  maintain  the  honour  and  holiness  of  the 
Lord  in  their  midst.  Mercy  is  the  great  motive  of  discipline, 
next  to  the  maintaining  of  Christ's  character  in  the  church.  It 
is  at  the  bottom  of  the  Lord's  ways  with  us,  and  surely  it  should 
be  so  for  us  with  others. 

The  fact  of  the  church's  getting  into  the  world  isolated  at 
once  the  faithful  Christian.  The  church  only  became  invisible 
through  sin.  It  was  not  God's  intention,  it  is  not  according  to 
His  heart,  that  it  should  ever  be  so,  though  I  believe  that  all 
was  permitted  and  ordered  wisely.  God  did  not  make  a  light  to 
be  hid,  but  to  be  set  on  its  due  stand.  Such  was  the  fact  now  : 
Catholicism  reigned,  if  you  take  the  protracted  view,  which  soon 
paved  the  way  for  Popery.  But  if  the  word  penetrated  him  who 
had  an  ear  to  hear,  it  gave  secret  fellowship  with  Christ  when 
the  public  position  had  become  settledly  false.  Hence  to  a  true- 
hearted  saint,  amid  all  this  ruin  and  confusion.  He  says,  "  I  will 
give  to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna"  (verse  17).  The  manna  repre- 
sents Christ  Himself  as  He  came  down  from  heaven  and  took 
a  place  of  abasement  in  the  world.  Those  who  were  slipping 
away  into  the  world  are  reminded  of  the  place  which  Christ 
took  down  here.  The  "hidden  manna"  refers  to  the  use  which 
was  made  of  the  manna  for  the  ark  :  a  certain  portion  of  it  %vas 
taken  into  the  holy  place  as  a  memorial  before  God.  The 
faithful  are  to  eat  not  of  the  manna  only,  but  of  the  hidden 
manna. 

It  is  not  merely  that  wc  shall  share  in  and  enjoy  with  Chri.st 


AND   THE   WHITE   STONE.  45 

all  His  glory  as  exalted  on  high  and  as  disj^layed  before  the  world, 
but  God  will  give  tis  special  communion  with  Christ  as  He  was 
here  below.  How  sweet  in  glory  it  will  be,  that  He  who  will 
have  brought  us  into  all  the  enjoyment  and  peace  of  heaven  is 
the  same  One  we  have  known  in  all  His  path  of  sorrow  and 
rejection  in  this  world,  with  whom  we  have  shared  it  ever  so 
feebly  here,  feeding  on  Him  as  our  portion  even  now  !  The 
white  stone  was  a  mark  of  entire  acquittal.  May  we  be  thus 
looking  forward  to  Christ ;  and  may  God  give  us  to  taste  His 
own  delight  in  His  Son  as  He  was  here  below  in  His  outcast 
position  !  Along  with  this  goes  the  white  stone,  the  portion  of 
souls  faithful  to  Christ  in  a  state  of  things  like  that  of  Pergamos, 
when  the  church  and  the  world  were  enjoying  themselves 
together.  When  in  heaven  such  will  enjoy  the  same  food  that 
sustained  them  here.  Christ  will  be  there  more  than  ever  to 
enjoy  on  high ;  and  such  shall  have  the  white  stone,  "  and  on 
the  stone  a  new  name  written,  which  no  one  knoweth  save  he 
that  receiveth  it"  {i.e.,  the  expression  of  Christ's  own  secret 
satisfaction  in  the  way  in  which  you  have  suffered  for  Him  and 
served  Him  below).  Assuredly  the  heart  will  most  prize  what 
Christ  will  give  between  Himself  and  it  alone — what  none  will 
know  but  ourselves  and  Himself.  The  Lord  grant  that  we  may 
be  separate  from  every  allurement  which  Satan  offers  through 
the  world,  althoucrh  none  should  know  all  but  Himself  now. 
Even  in  glory  the  joy  of  His  secret  approval  will  not  be  lost 
but  known  more  profoundly  than  ever. 

CHANGE   IN   THE   STKUCTUEE   OF  THE   APOCALYPTIC   EPISTLES. 

There  is  an  important  change  of  arrangement  that  occurs  in 
this  cliapter,  beginning  with  the  epistle  to  Thyatira.  In  the 
first  three  clmrches  the  warning  word  ("  He  that  hath  an  ear, 
let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches")  comes 
before  the  promise ;  but  all  the  four  concluding  churches  have 
the  promise  before  the  call  to  hear.  These  at  least  will  be  found 
to  be  the  representatives  of  states  of  the  church  which  go  down 
to  the  end. 

Now  there  must  be  a  reason  for  such  a  change — a  sufficient 
reason  why  the  Holy  Ghost  should  uniformly  adopt  one  ar- 


46  THE    PROMISE, 

rangement  in  the  three  earlier  epistles,  and  as  uniformly  depart 
from  this  and  adopt  another  arrangement  in  the  four  last.  There 
is  nothing  haphazard  in  the  word.  As  everything  He  has  done 
in  His  dealings  with  man,  as  all  that  He  has  made  even  in 
creation  has  its  purpose  impressed  by  Him,  so  is  it  much  more 
with  that  word  which  developes  His  ways  and  displays  His 
moral  glory.  And  this  is  of  vast  practical  moment  to  us.  For 
remember  the  secret  of  strength  is  in  a  Spirit-taught  knowledge 
of  God  and  His  ways  in  Christ.  To  enter  into  and  enjoy  the 
thoughts  and  feelings  of  God,  as  manifested  in  what  He  does 
and  says  in  His  own  revelation  of  Himself,  is  that  which  wins 
and  keeps,  purifies  and  strengthens  the  heart  of  the  believer. 
Israel  did  not  understand  His  ways,  and  therefore  never  know- 
ing His  heart,  they  erred  in  their  own ;  as  it  is  said,  "  they  do 
always  err  in  their  heart,  for  they  have  not  known  my  ways." 
Moses,  on  the  other  hand,  did  appreciate  the  heart  of  God,  and 
accordingly  of  him  it  is  written,  that  "the  Lord  made  known 
His  ways  unto  Moses." 

In  the  first  three  churches,  then,  the  call  to  hear  is  addressed 
formally  to  the  whole  assembly  concerned  ;  but  in  the  last  four 
the  change  of  situation  appears  to  mark  greater  reserve.  It 
seems  to  be  intimated  by  this,  that  none  is  expected  to  hear  but 
he  who  overcomes.  Therefore  this  class  is  thenceforth,  in  a 
manner,  singled  out  from  the  rest.*  Evil  has  now  set  in  over 
the  professing  body ;  so  that  the  promise  is  not,  and  could  no 
longer  be,  held  out  in  the  old  indiscriminate  way.  From  this 
distinction  we  gather  a  remnant  begins  to  be  more  and  more 
clearly  indicated. 

Something  analogous  to  tliis  appears  elsewhere.  Thus  in  the 
seven  parables  of  ]\Iatt.  xiii.  the  last  three  were  unquestionably 

*  It  is  a  singular  oversight  that  any  thoughtful  readier  should  meet  the  ques- 
tion, "To  whom  does  the  Spirit  address  these  words?"  by  the  answer,  "To  tho 
angels  of  those  churches,"  even  supposing  the  angels  to  be  their  "bishops," 
which  has  been  shewn  to  be  not  only  unfounded  but  contrary  to  the  tone  and 
object  of  the  Revelation.  It  is  a  sorry  thing  to  deduce  either  episcopacy  or 
congregational  ministry  from  a  most  solemn  appeal  to  him  that  has  ears  to  hear, 
when  the  church  is  being  morally  judged.  The  Spirit  speaks  to  the  churches, 
but  the  individual  is  made  prominent  even  here;  and  this,  still  more  strikingly 
viewed  as  following  the  ovcrcomcr,  from  and  after  Thyatira. 


AND   THE   CALL   TO    HEAR.  47 

marked  off  from  their  predecessors,  and  were  addressed  to  a 
higher  degree  of  spirituality.  The  first  four  were  uttered  out- 
side to  the  multitude,  the  last  three  to  the  disciples  only  within 
the  house.  Wherever  we  fiud  in  the  Bible  a  series  of  parables, 
prophetic  visions,  or  the  like,  grov^ped  together  as  these  are, 
there  is  commonly,  not  to  say  invariably,  some  such  line  drawn 
between  those  which  commence  with  a  general  bearing,  and 
those  which  become  more  special  and  narrow  as  we  approach 
the  goal.  This  is  strikingly  true  of  these  Apocalyptic  epistles, 
the  last  four  of  which  sever  the  overcomer  from  the  unfaithful 
surrounding  mass.  In  short  the  formation  of  a  faithful  remnant, 
who  were  at  first,  I  suppose,  only  morally  separate  from  the 
mass  which  bore  the  Lord's  name  (now  alas !  untruly),  becomes 
increasingly  distinct.  In  the  case  of  Thyatira  the  Spirit  of  God 
seems  to  make  the  principle  plain  and  patent,  as  will  appear 
presently. 

THYATIRA. 

The  Lord  Jesus  introduces  Himself  here  in  His  character  of 
Son  of  God,  followed  by  a  description  borrowed  in  the  main 
from  the  vision  which  the  apostle  had  seen  in  chap.  i.  "  And  to 
the  angel  of  the  church  in  Thyatira  write,  These  things  saith 
the  Son  of  God  that  hath  his  eyes  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  his 
feet  [are]  like  fine  brass"  (verse  18). 

If  we  trace  what  the  scriptures  say  of  the  Lord  Jesus  viewed 
thus,  two  things  more  particularly  are  seen.  As  Son  of  God, 
He  is  the  source  and  sovereign  giver  of  life.  (John  v.)  The  life 
which  we  by  faith  derive  ("  for  he  that  believeth  hath  everlast- 
ing life  ")  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  life  in  such  power,  that 
even  the  bodies  of  such  as  possess  it  in  Him  will  rise  from  the 
graves  to  a  life-resurrection  ;  while  others  who  have  it  not  must 
rise  to  a  judgment-resurrection.  (John  v.  28,  29.)  In  the  resur- 
rection of  judgment  none  can  be  saved.  No  Christian  will 
appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Clirist  as  a  criminal  to  be 
tried.  All  Christians  will  appear  before  it  (as  must  all  men) ; 
but  the  result  before  the  world  will  be,  in  spite  of  loss  of  reward 
in  certain  cases,  their  glorious  manifestation  as  justified  men. 
But  if  you  or  I  had  to  appear  to  see  whether  we  were  righteous, 
and  so  could  escape  condemnation,  could  there  be  one  ray  of 


48  THE   SON   OF   GOD. 

hope  for  us  ?  Notwithstanding  there  never  can  be,  or  at  least 
there  never  ought  to  be,  a  doubt  as  to  the  absolute  salvation  of 
those  who  have  life  in  and  from  the  Son  of  God.  The  judg- 
ment-seat of  Christ  will  clearly  display  them  as  justified  persons. 
But  we  need  not  and  should  not  wait  for  the  judgment-seat  to 
know  that  we  are  justified;  we  are  dishonouring  God's  grace 
and  His  Son's  work  not  to  know  it  now,  "  whereof  the  Holy 
Ghost  also  is  a  witness  to  us."  Faith  is  entitled  by  divine  war- 
rant to  a  full  justification  now  and  here  below,  according  to  the 
worth  and  acceptance  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  God's  sight. 

And  this  leads  us  to  the  second  of  the  privileges  alluded 
to,  as  connected  with  the  "Son  of  God."  Pie  gives  liberty  as 
well  as  life.  "  If  the  Son,  therefore,  shall  make  you  free,  ye 
shall  be  free  iudeed."  (John  viii.  3G.)  These  are  the  two  great 
aspects  of  blessing  which  characterize  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God. 
He  imparts  not  only  life  but  liberty  too.  Not  that  they  have 
always  or  necessarily  gone  together.  For  a  man  might  have 
spiritual  life  and  yet  be  in  grievous  bondage,  as  one  observes 
too  often.  This  is  also  what  we  read  of  in  Eom.  vii.  A  person 
who  is  converted  has  life,  but  may  be  withal  the  most  miserable 
of  men  as  regards  his  own  experience.  "  0  wretched  man  that 
I  am  !  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?"  In 
chap.  viii.  we  have  the  answer  of  grace.  "For  the  law  of  the 
Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me  free  [or  delivered 
me]  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death."  Liberty  now  goes  with 
the  life  of  the  Son  of  God,  for  He  is  the  risen  Lord  who  died, 
for  me  and  discharged  me  from  all  the  claims  of  law,  and  of 
every  other  thing  or  one  which  might  else  arrest  my  blessing. 
The  servant  does  not  abide  ever  in  the  house,  he  might  have 
notice  to  quit ;  but  there  is  no  such  thing  as  the  son's  leaving  the 
house.  And  it  is  thus  as  sons  God  puts  us  in  His  house,  in 
the  place  of  full  and  holy  liberty. 

What  a  searching  but  blessed  title  this  was  for  the  Lord 
Jesus  to  take,  especially  if  lie  were  not  only  providing  for  the 
then  need  of  the  assembly  in  Thyatira,  but  picturing  besides 
that  state  of  departure  from  truth,  and  even  the  depths  of 
Satan,  which  characterized  the  middle  ages !  In  Ephcsus,  when 
almost  all  the  apostles  had  disappeared  from  the  world,  there 


THE   JEZEBEL-STATE.  49 

was  decay  of  first  love ;  in  Smyrna,  persecution  from  tlie 
heathen  powers ;  then  in  Pergamos,  the  allusion  is  plain  to  the 
era  when  Christianity  gained  the  ascendant  in  the  world,  and 
when  consequently  the  church  consummated  and  sealed  the  loss 
of  her  sacred  and  heavenl)'  separateness  upon  the  earth.  The 
power  of  the  world  never  gained  a  greater  victory  than  when  it 
was  externally  vanquished  by  the  cross ;  when,  by  merely  pro- 
fessing Christ's  name  in  baptism,  all  the  Eoman  world  was 
treated  as  born  of  God ;  in  short,  when  apparently  heathenism, 
but  really  Christianity,  succumbed  before  the  rising  sun  of 
Christendom.  In  many  respects  it  may  have  been  a  mercy  for 
mankind,  as  it  certainly  was  the  greatest  event  in  the  govern- 
ment of  the  world  since  the  flood ;  but  who  can  estimate  the 
loss  for  the  saints,  and  the  dishonour  of  their  Lord,  when  the 
Christian  body  exchanged  their  place  of  suffering  now  in  grace, 
hoping  for  glory  with  Christ  at  His  coming,  for  present  authority 
in,  yea  over,  the  world  ?  In  Thyatira  we  arrive  at  a  period 
darker  still — the  natural  consequences  of  those  pleasures  of  sin 
for  a  season.  When  the  empire  professed  the  cross  and  arrayed 
it  with  gold,  it  was  not  only  that  God's  children  were  favoured 
and  caressed,  instead  of  having  to  wander  in  sheep-skins  and 
froat-skins,  or  to  hide  in  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,  but 
inevitably  their  enemies  were  attracted,  and  the  Balaam-state 
became  developed,  and  man  ran  greedily  after  error  for  reward. 
But  the  Jezebel-state  is  worse  even  than  that,  and  most  signifi- 
cant of  the  bloody  and  idolatrous  prophetess  who  sought  to  be 
universal  mistress  in  the  so-called  dark  ages,  and  dark  indeed 
they  were  !  Of  this  I  believe  the  church  in  Thyatira  to  be  the 
remarkable  foreshadowing. 

But  the  Lord  loves  to  praise  what  He  can,  and  it  is  in  a 
dreary  time  that  He  is  glad  to  be  able  to  approve  of  the  least 
good.  Here  in  the  growing  darkness  of  the  public  state,  there 
was  growing  devotedness  among  the  real  saints.  "  I  know  thy 
works,  and  love,  and  faith,  and  service,*  and  thy  patience,  and 
thy  last  works  [to  be]  more  than  the  first"  (verse  19).  "And 
thy  works"  ought  to  be  left  out,  and  the  clause  following  should 
be,  "and  thy  last  works,"  &c.,  on  ample  authority.     This  the 

*  This  is  the  true  order. 
E 


50  A  FAITHFUL  REMNANT. 

sense,  I  think,  fully  confirms  to  a  spiritual  mind.  "  But  I  have 
against  thee  that  thou  sufferest  the  woman  [or,  thy  wife]  Jezebel 
that  calleth  herself  a  prophetess;  and  she  teacheth  and  de- 
ceiveth  my  servants  to  commit  fornication,  and  to  eat  things 
sacrificed  to  idols."  Thus  there  was  much  energy  and  devoted 
service;  but  withal  the  greatest  evil  threatened  them  or  even 
then  was  at  work. 

When  Jezebel  sat  as  a  queen  in  Israel  all  was  ruin  and  con- 
fusion ;  but  the  Lord  did  not  fail  to  raise  up  a  suited  witness 
for  Himself     It  was  then  that  we  find  an  Elijah  and  an  Elisha, 
and  even  another  where  naturally  one  might  least  expect  it — in 
the  very  house  where  evil  was  paramount.     There  was  he  who 
gave  refuge  and  food  to  the  persecutetl  prophets  of  the  Lord. 
Just  as  in  the  New  Testament  we  hear  of  saints  chiefly  to  be 
saluted  who  were  of  Caesar's  household,  so  of  old  there  was  an 
Obadiah,  who  feared  the  Lord  greatly,  over  the  house  of  Ahab, 
"  which  did  sell  himself  to  work  wickedness  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,  whom  Jezebel  his  wife  stirred  up."     It  was  then  too  was 
found  the  remnant  of  7000  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee  to 
Baal.     I  think  the  Lord  would  have  said  of  that  remnant  what 
we  have  in  the  epistle  to  Thyatira — "  Thy  last  works  more  than 
the  first."    The  wickedness  of  those  who  surrounded  them  made 
their  faithfulness  more  precious  to  the  Lord;  and  He  praises 
them  more,  perhaps  we  may  add,  than  if  they  had  lived  in  a 
day  less  trying;  just  as,  on  the  other   hand.  He  cannot  but 
deal  niost  sternly  with  evil,  which  is  done  in  a  day  of  special 
light  and  mercy.     How  many  Ananiases  and  Sapphiras  have 
there  been  since  Pentecostal  times,  who  have  not  been  visited 
in  the  same  open  and  unsparing  way  as  when  great  grace  was 
upon  all !     This  is  an  encouragement  to  us  who  know  ourselves 
to  be  exposed,  not  indeed  to  a  storm  of  persecution,  but  to  a 
season  far  more  perilous.     There  never  was  a  time  when  man 
thought  better  of  himself;  and  this  is  so  much  the  graver  sin, 
inasmuch  as  the  testimony  of  God's  truth  to  the  contrary  has 
been  widely  spread  abroad.     I  do  not  deny  that  it  is  a  day  of 
no  small  effort  among  Christians.     But  "  to  obey  is  better  than 
sacrifice,  and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams ;"  and  never  has 
there   been  less  subjection  to  the  will  of   Cod  than  at  this 


SUITABILITY   OF   CHEIST'S   TITLE.  51 

moment.  There  is  mucli  association,  which  sounds  well, — 
much  taking  counsel  together ;  but  confederacy  is  one  thing, 
endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  is  another  and 
widely  different  thing.  But  the  Lord  says,  "  To  this  man  will 
T  look,  even  to  him  that  is  ]DOor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit,  and 
trembleth  at  my  word."  The  matter  of  real  weight  is  not 
getting  Christians  together,  even  if  they  were  all  Christians, 
but  together  in  the  Lord's  way,  and  for  the  Lord's  glory  as  their 
object — the  "one  thing"  they  have  to  do.  If  but  two  or  three  are 
thus  gathered  unto  His  name,  we  have  his  own  assurance  that 
His  power  and  blessing  will  be  there,  spite  of  all  appearances 
to  the  contrary.  Had  we  two  or  three  thousand  together,  but 
not  in  immediate  subjection  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  we  should  have 
only  shame  and  sorrow  in  the  end,  however  it  might  look  for 
awhile.  If  we  are  seeking  to  please  men,  so  far  we  cannot  be 
the  servants  of  Christ. 

It  was  then,  it  seems  to  me,  when  the  Lord  has  before  His 
eye  the  state  of  a  church  which  might  well  prefigure  the  dark 
development  of  an  after-day  (when  the  saints  should  be  in  great 
bondage,  and  that  which  was  altogether  alien  in  the  midst  per- 
secuting them,  and  His  own  authority  null  in  practice),  that  He 
brings  out  His  title  of  "  Son  of  God,"  whose  eyes  were  as  a  flame 
of  fire,  and  His  feet  like  burnished  brass.  Peter  of  old  had  con- 
fessed Him  to  be  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God  ;  and 
thereon  the  Lord,  immediately  after  pronouncing  him  blessed 
and  emphatically  naming  hini  by  the  new  name  He  had  given, 
adds,  "  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  church."  Now  alas  ! 
the  Lord  anticipates  that  the  professing  church  would  lose  its 
balance  and  set  itself  up  virtually  in  His  own  place,  giving  out 
that  she,  the  lady,  "that  calleth  herself  a  prophetess,"  was  to  be 
heard  in  matters  of  faith,  not  He,  the  Lord.  Here  then  we  have 
the  assertion  of  His  personal  glory  and  the  attributes  of  His  all- 
searching  and  unbending  judgment  of  men — a  serious  but  com- 
forting thought  for  His  own  people,  who  might  be  in  the  midst 
of  this  sad  confusion,  and  the  perfect  provision  of  His  wisdom  to 
deliver  them  from  what  was  setting  or  set  in.  They  would  need 
and  enjoy  the  immutable  foundation,  the  Son  of  God,  and  the 
assurance  that  His  church  built  on  that  rock  could  not  fail, 

E  2 


52  DEGKEES  OF  EVIL  CONNEXION. 

when  public  appearances  were  against  it  as  against  Himself  in 
Israel.  They  were  worse  than  nothing  in  the  eyes  of  their  per- 
secutors ;  they  were  precious  in  Christ.  It  was  a  severer  trial 
than  from  Jews  or  heathens  ;  but  the  Son  of  God  was  no  heed- 
less spectator  of  all.  So  too  His  promise  (26,  27)  ought  to  guard 
them  from  seeking  a  present  kingdom,  a  so-called  spiritual 
millennium  without  Christ,  where  they  should  be  either  free 
to  enjoy  the  world  or  entitled  to  govern  it  as  yet. 

In  the  church  at  Thyatira  there  were  faithful  and  loving 
souls,  earnest  too,  especially  in  good  works ;  but  there  was  this 
plague-spot  also  —  the  sufferance  of  "the  woman*  Jezebel." 
Jezebel,  as  we  are  told  here,  was  a  false  prophetess,  who  was 
teaching  and  deceiving  Christ's  servants  to  commit  fornication 
and  eat  idolatrous  sacrifices.  This  was  worse  than  the  iniquity 
of  him  who  loved  the  wages  of  unrighteousness,  a  step  farther 
even  in  Balaam's  line.  "  And  I  gave  her  space  to  repent,  and 
she  is  not  willing  to  repent  of  her  fornication.  Behold,  I  cast 
her  into  a  bed,  and  those  that  commit  adultery  with  her  into 
great  tribulation,  except  they  repent  of  her  works.  And  I  will 
kill  her  children  with  death,  and  all  the  churches  will  know 
that  I  am  he  that  searcheth  the  reins  and  hearts,  and  I  will  give 
to  you,  each  one,  according  to  your  works"  (verses  21-23). 

What  could  be  more  shocking  than  the  evil  here  foreshown ! 
Jezebel,  as  all  knew,  was  one  who  added  violence  to  corruption, 
the  counsellor  of  blood,  the  active  hater  of  all  God's  witnesses, 
the  patroness  in  private  and  public  of  the  idolatrous  priests 
and  prophets  of  Baal.  And  now  in  Thyatira  Avas  fouud  that 
which  intimated  to  the  Lord's  eye  the  dark  and  cruel  idolatry 
which  was  to  be  formally  taught  and  imposed  by  a  pretended 
infallible  authority  within  the  bosom  of  the  professing  church. 
Even  now  the  actual  germ  could  not  be  hid  from  Him  whose 
eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire.  Jezebel  was  there  and  "her  cliil- 
dren"  too.  It  was  a  deep  and  lasting  source  of  evil.  But  the 
judgment  of  her  and  of  all  that  sprang  from  her  was  severe, 

*  The  Sinai  and  rorphyiian  uncials  lend  thoir  stroni?  support  to  the  Paris 
palijnpsost,  with  many  cursives  and  versions,  against  the  insertion  of  aov,  as  read 
in  Codd.  A.  "2,  and  many  cursives,  &c.,  which  would  reipiire  the  rendering  of 
"  thy  wife." 


"THE   WOMAN."  53 

however  it  might  seem  to  linger.  The  Lord  discerns  different 
degrees  of  connexion;  but  none  should  go  unpunished,  let 
Christendom  decide  as  they  might  that  evil  must  be  allowed 
under  His  adored  name.  Kepentance  was  absolutely  refused, 
though  the  Lord  had  given  ample  space  for  it.  "Fornication" 
(for  such  is  the  figure  used)  was  both  taught  and  practised. 
Long  patience  on  His  part  is  the  sure  sign,  both  that  the  object 
to  be  judged  was  in  a  thoroughly  evil  condition  (else  He  comes 
quickly  in  the  jealous  care  of  true  love  that  counts  on  a  true 
answer),  and  that  when  the  judgment  comes,  it  must  be  defini- 
tive and  unsparing.  "  The  woman,"  it  has  been  long  remarked, 
symbolizes  the  general  state,  as  "the  man"  has  the  place  of 
responsible  activity. 

The  words  "  a  few  things,"  in  verse  20,  must  disappear.  It 
was  not  a  little  complaint,  but  one  of  unusual  gravity  and  com- 
plication. The  phrase  crept  in,  I  conceive,  from  verse  14,  as 
there  is  otherwise  resemblance  enough  to  suggest  such  an  assi- 
milation to  a  copyist.  But  on  a  closer  inspection  the  difference, 
as  we  have  seen,  is  great,  especially  if  we  are  to  read  "thy  wife* 
Jezebel."  The  sin  of  fornication  or  adultery  here  is  symbolical 
of  that  wicked  commerce  with  the  world,  which  is  in  the  same 
relation  to  the  Christian  or  the  church,  as  intermarriage  with  a 
Canaanite  would  have  been  to  an  Israelite.  To  eat  idol-sacrifices 
sets  forth  communion  with  what  had  a  direct  link  with  the 
power  of  Satan ;  for  "  the  things  which  the  Gentiles  sacrifice 
they  sacrifice  to  devils,  and  not  to  God;"  and  it  is  an  easy 
thing,  little  as  men  may  think  it  or  Christians  may  estimate 
aright  its  enormity,  to  have  fellowship  with  devils. 

Besides  the  leading  corruptress  and  fountain-head  of  the 
mischief,  we  have  two  classes  of  persons  mentioned  who  were 
guilty  in  a  positive  way.  There  were  Christ's  servants  whom 
she  deceived  to  illicit  commerce  with  the  world,  and  there  were 
others  who  were  the  immediate  offspring  of  Jezebel,  "  her 
children."  With  each  one  the  Lord  would  deal  according  to  his 
works.  He  was  the  righteous  Judge,  and  man  as  such  must 
be  judged,  and  all,  saints  or  sinners,  must  be  manifested  before 
His  judgment-seat.  Yet  it  is  remarkable  how  the  Lord  avoids 
*  But  see  the  preceding  note. 


54  "THE  rest"  or  remnant. 

saying  that  the  saints  will  be  judged.  "I  will  give,"  says  He, 
"to  you,  to  each  according  to  your  works;"  and  so  in  chapter 
xxii.  12,  and  many  similar  scriptures.  On  the  one  hand  we  are 
positively  told  that  the  believer  shall  not  come  into  judgment 
(for  John  V.  24  means  judgment,  and  not  "condemnation," 
however  certainly  this  is  the  result  of  it).  On  the  other  hand 
we  know  from  Eev.  xx.  12,  13,  that  the  wicked  are  to  stand 
before  the  throne,  and  to  be  judged,  each  one  according  to  their 
works.  Their  resurrection  is  one  of  judgment  (and  in  effect,  of 
condemnation)  contrasted  with  that  of  the  righteous,  which  is 
a  life-resurrection.  Thus  it  is  certain,  that  if  put  on  my  trial 
for  salvation  or  perdition,  according  as  my  works  deserve,  I 
must  be  lost,  for  I  have  sinned  and  have  sin ;  yet  is  it  equally 
sure  that  the  Lord  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  the  work  and 
labour  of  love,  and  so  He  will  give  to  each  one  according  to  his 
works.  Christ  Himself,  Christ's  love,  is  the  only  right  motive 
for  a  Christian  in  anything;  but  there  are  rewards  for  those  who 
have  suffered  for  Christ  and  been  cast  out  for  righteousness'  or 
for  His  name's  sake. 

The  remnant  comes  out  with  great  clearness  in  the  next 
verse.  "  But  to  you  I  say,  the  rest  (or  "remnant;"  omitting  the 
words  "and  unto,"  which  have  no  right  to  be  here)  in  Thyatira" 
(verse  24).  Here  we  have  a  faithful  few,  who  are  called  "  the 
rest,"  distinguished  from  the  mass  in  Thyatira.  The  Lord  had 
been  speaking  of  His  servants  who  had  been  seduced  to  dally 
with  the  evil  of  Jezebel,  and  of  her  own  children,  for  which 
last  class  there  was  to  be  no  mercy  from  Him.  Then  another 
class  is  addressed,  the  remnant,  or  "you  that  remain."  The 
corrupt  exterior  body  goes  on,  and  there  is  a  remnant  that  the 
Lord  now  had  specially  in  view.  He  supposes  them  to  be  igno- 
rant of  what  Christendom  then  counted  knowledge,  and  only 
says,  "  as  many  as  have  not  this  doctrine,  who  (on-tvcy,  such  as) 
have  not  known  the  depths  of  Satan  (as  they  speak),  I  put  upon 
you  no  other  burden:  but  that  which  ye  have  hold  fast  till  I 
come"  (verses  24,  25).  These  "depths  of  Satan"  they  had  not 
known.  They  valued  no  knowledge  which  undermined  the  call 
to  holiness.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  bcuinning  of  wisdom  ; 
and  this  beginning  at  least  they  cherished;  and  they  were  right. 


THE  KINGDOM.  55 

It  might  seem  but  insignificant ;  but  they  had  kept  clear  of  a 
great  evil,  and  holding  their  little  fast,  they  would  surely  have 
their  reward  when  the  Lord  comes.  There  were  those  who 
suffered  much  for  Christ,  who  witnessed  for  Him  in  these  dark 
ages.  Such  were  (if  not  the  Albigenses)  the  Waldenses  and 
others.  "  You,  the  rest  in  Thyatira,"  I  take  to  refer  to  these  per- 
secuted companies,  who  held  tenaciously  what  they  had  from 
God,  mainly  practical  piety  and  religious  ways.  They  did  not 
know  much,  but  they  were  a  remnant  separated  in  conscience 
and  suffering  from  the  evil  around  them,  especially  from  Jezebel. 
Their  comfort  lies  in  no  promise  of  amendment  to  the  church, 
but  in  a  hope  outside  all  on  earth,  even  the  kingdom  and  coming 
of  Christ  in  person.  Meanwhile  they  are  called  to  overcome 
and  keep  Christ's  works  unto  the  end. 

There  could  not  be  a  more  admirable  sketch  in  a  few  words 
than  what  we  have  here.  And  it  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that 
the  book  of  the  Eevelation  was  much  prized  by  these  saints. 
Indeed  this  has  always  been  more  or  less  the  case  in  times  of 
persecution :  not  that  it  is  the  best  motive ;  for  the  book  is 
valued  most  when  the  Lord  leads  His  people  to  wait  for  His 
return.  But  His  tenderness  to  His  sufferers  in  a  dark  day  is 
most  sweet ;  and  what  a  promise  ! — "And  he  that  overcometh, 
and  he  that  keepeth  my  works  until  the  end,  I  will  give  him 
authority  over  the  nations,"  &c.  (verses  26,  27).  What  the 
mediasval  church  arrogantly  and  wickedly  sought,  the  saints 
then  persecuted  or  despised  are  yet  to  possess  in  the  coming 
and  kingdom  of  their  Lord,  and  these  hopes  accordingly  are 
here  brought  in  as  their  suited  objects.  The  guilty  church  was 
not  more  cruel  towards  the  true  saints  than  ambitious  of  power 
over  the  world.  Things  ecclesiastical  had  got  to  their  grossest 
j)oint.  But  it  is  good  to  wait  for  the  Lord's  way  and  time  :  He 
is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  When  the  earthly 
power  has  been  put  aside  and  judged,  those  who  have  suffered 
with  Christ  shall  reign  with  Him.  But  He  adds  more  than 
authority  over  the  nations,  and  ruling  them  with  a  rod  of  iron 
....  as  Christ  also  received  of  His  Father.  "  And  I  will  give 
him  the  morning  star"  (verse  28).  Is  not  this  blessed?  not 
merely  association  with  Christ  in  the  day  of  His  power,  when 


56  THE   HOPE. 

the  stronghold  of  men  shall  be  broken  to  shivers  like  the 
vessels  of  a  potter,  but  "gathering  together  unto  Him"  before 
that  day.  The  hope  abides  in  all  its  fulness,  and  as  fresh  as  at 
the  first.     Christ  only  could  so  speak  and  act. 

The  sun,  when  it  rises,  summons  man  to  his  busy  toil,  but 
the  morning-star  shines  for  those  only  who  sleep  not  as  do 
others — for  those  who  watch  as  children  of  light  and  of  the 
day.  We  shall  be  with  Christ  doubtless  when  the  day  of  glory 
dawns  upon  the  world ;  but  the  morning-star  is  before  the  day, 
and  Christ  not  only  says,  "  I  am  ...  .  the  bright  and  morning 
star,"  but  "  I  will  give  ....  the  morning-star."  He  will  come 
and  receive  His  heavenly  ones  before  they  appear  with  Him  in 
fdory.  May  we  be  true  to  Him  in  the  refusal  of  present  ease, 
and  honour,  and  power !  May  we  follow  Him,  taking  up  our 
cross  and  denying  ourselves  daily !  He  will  not  forget  us  in 
His  day,  and  He  will  give  us  ere  it  comes  the  morning-star. 

I  would  here  add,  in  closing  this  sketch  of  Eev.  ii.,  that 
Thyatira  has  a  sort  of  transitional  place,  being  linked  with  the 
three  preceding  churches  as  on  church-ground,  whatever  the 
corruption  allowed  which  characterized  its  public  state.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  is  connected  with  the  three  churches  which 
follow  on  the  ground  of  truth  or  testimony  (not  regularly  eccle- 
siastical), both  as  being  the  first  of  those  marked  by  the  change 
of  position  in  the  call  to  hear,  and  as  also  expressly  running 
down  to  the  end.  The  others  were  transient  phases.  This 
begins  the  more  permanent  states  in  view  of  the  Lord's  advent. 
It  may  be  noticed  accordingly  that  the  dealing  after  Thyatira, 
when  threatened,  falls  on  the  angel:  up  to  this  it  had  been 
either  on  the  candlestick,  as  in  Ephesus,  or  on  the  evil-doers, 
as  in  Pergamos  and  Thyatira.  Smyrna  and  Philadelphia  have 
a  special  exemption,  one  in  each  of  the  two  series.  To  the 
angel  of  the  church  in  Sardis  the  word  is,  "  I  will  come  on  thee 
as  a  thief;"  when  similar  language  was  used  in  a  former  case, 
Christ  said,  "I  will  fight  against  them,"  &c. ;  "I  will  cast  her" 
and  "  I  will  kill  her  children,"  &c.  In  the  latter  series  it  is  a 
question  of  a  separated  witness  in  Christendom,  where  fidelity 
is  everything,  as  with  the  disciples  in  the  Gospels.  Judgment 
must  fall  on  the  whole,  tliough  not  without  distinguishing  tlic 


TRANSITION,  57 

true-hearted.  In  this  new  part  (with  a  sKght  exception  in 
Sardis,  which  is  necessary  and  only  proves  the  rule)  the  titles 
of  Christ  are  distinct  from  those  seen  in  the  opening  vision  of 
chap,  i.,  and  point  to  His  future  reign.  This  is  seen  with  special 
emphasis  in  Laodicea,  so  that  "the  things  that  are"  may  vanish 
away  thenceforth,  as  in  fact  they  do. 


58  KE-COMMENCEMENT. 


CHAPTER  III. 

SARDIS. 

It  may  be  assumed  that  any  discerning  reader  will  perceive 
that  we  are  entering  upon  an  entirely  new  order  of  things  in 
this  chapter,  or,  at  least,  a  sort  of  fresh  start.  What  was  de- 
scribed in  the  vision  of  Christ  walking  in  the  midst  of  the 
candlesticks  is  not  here  as  in  chap,  ii.,  unless  it  be  the  "  seven 
stars,"  no  longer,  however,  held  in  His  right  hand.  It  is  quite 
true  that  what  we  have  been  looking  at  in  the  former  chapter 
may  still  exist  and  be  verified  at  the  same  time  with  new  features 
as  they  are  brought  out  here.  Not  only  may  there  be  points 
morally  like  what  we  have  seen  in  Ephesus,  Smyrna,  or  Perga- 
mos,  but  a  continuing  public  state  like  the  evil  depicted  in  the 
message  to  the  angel  of  the  assembly  in  Thyatira,  which  goes 
on  to  the  end  in  a  way  that  differs  from  its  predecessors.  We 
find  in  Sardis  another  condition,  and  one  which  answers  to  the 
general  state  of  Protestantism  after  the  Reformation.  We  have 
not  so  much  open  evil,  like  idolatry  and  the  other  horrors  that 
have  been  described  before ;  but  now  we  have  a  more  correct 
outward  form  and  orthodox  aspect  of  things.  As  the  four 
churches  in  the  second  chapter  follow  on  consecutively,  and 
describe  the  state  of  tilings  before  the  rise  of  Luther,  &c.,  so 
Sardis  describes  what  followed  the  Reformation,  when  tlie  glow 
and  fervour  of  truth  and  the  first  flush  of  blessing  had  passed 
away,  and  a  cold  formalism  had  set  in. 

The  way  in  which  the  Lord  presents  Himself  is  wonderfully 
suitable.  "  These  things  saith  he  that  hath  the  seven  Spirits  of 
God  and  the  seven  stars"  (verse  1).  This  is  a  new  point  of 
view  in  which  to  see  Christ.  In  chapter  i.  "  the  seven  Spirits  " 
were  distinct  from  His  person  and  connected  with  the  throne. 


POWER   AND   AUTHORITY   IN   CHRIST.  59 

The  seven  Spirits  of  God  refer  to  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God, 
viewed  in  His  various  perfections  and  the  ways  in  which  He 
works ;  and  this  not  so  much  in  the  church  as  towards  the 
world.  In  chap,  v.,  when  the  churches  are  done  with,  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  described  symbolically  as  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain, 
having  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes,  which  are  the  seven  Spirits 
of  God  sent  forth  into  all  the  earth — the  Holy  Ghost  as  acting 
with  a  view  to  the  government  of  the  earth.  It  is  not  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  all  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  into  which  He  brought 
the  church  in  its  unity  or  dwelling  there.  It  is  the  expression 
of  the  Spirit  in  fulness  of  quality  and  power  to  make  good  God's 
will  on  earth. 

But  whatever  might  be  the  condition  of  the  church,  the  Lord 
Jesus  possesses  the  complete  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and 
at  the  same  time  fulness  of  spiritual  authority.  There  were  no 
two  things  more  separated  than  these  at  the  time  of  the 
Eeformation.  There  was  then  a  large  body  calling  itself  the 
church,  which  claimed  the  power  of  settling  everything,  as 
being  the  spouse  of  Christ,  No  wonder  that  the  claim  of 
infallibiLity  was  strongly  advanced ;  for  assuredly  those  who 
assume  irresponsible  authority  as  Christ's  vicar  to  settle  the 
affairs  of  the  church,  to  define  doctrine,  &c.,  ought  to  be  in- 
fallible. This  body  had  wrought  for  ages,  gathering  influence 
for  itself ;  but  at  last  the  struggle  came,  and  it  was  proved  to 
be  a  mass  of  the  greatest  evil  against  God  and  His  Son  that 
had  ever  been  congregated  on  the  earth.  There  might  have  been 
true  saints  of  God  in  it  at  the  worst  of  times ;  and  even  from 
an  early  day  some  excellent  men  had  even  helped  to  give  the 
see  of  Eome  a  false  and  absurd  authority.  St.  Bernard  himself 
sanctioned  the  persecutions  of  the  Waldenses. 

But  God  can  turn  such  lessons  to  our  profit.  For  it  is  well 
to  bear  in  mind  that  there  cannot  be  a  greater  fallacy  than  to 
abide  in  what  is  wrong  merely  because  we  find  true  saints  of 
God  there.  Indeed  the  great  aim  of  Satan  is  to  gain  all  by 
getting  good  people  to  do  bad  things.  When  at  last  the  crisis 
arrived,  and  men  rose  up  in  a  considerable  part  of  the  world 
against  this  frightful  evil,  there  ensued  a  divorce  between  the 
two  thoughts  of  ecclesiastical  authority  and  spiritual  power. 


60  ECCLESIASTICAL   CONFUSION. 

Instead  of  its  being  a  body  that  claimed  both,  in  derogation  and 
in  spite  of  Christ's  rights,  everything  ecclesiastical  fell  into  dis- 
order, and  men  fell  back  on  the  power  of  the  world  in  order  to 
gain  freedom  from  the  dominion  of  the  Pope. 

Thus  Protestantism  was  always  wrong  ecclesiastically  from 
the  very  beginning,  because  it  looked  up  to  the  civil  ruler  as 
the  one  in  whose  hand  ecclesiastical  authority  was  vested ;  so 
that  if  the  church  had  been  under  Popery  the  ruler  of  the 
world,  the  world  now  became  in  Protestantism  the  ruler  of  the 
church.  It  is  not  a  question  of  church  and  state  that  politicians 
may  discuss ;  which  is  a  great  deal  too  narrow  and  low  a  ques- 
tion for  a  Christian.  There  is  but  one  thing  satisfactory — to  be 
in  the  path  of  Christ,  giving  honour  to  Him. 

"  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest, 
and  art  dead."  This  describes  the  cold  and  formal  ways  of 
relio'ion  that  were  found  after  the  Eeformation  among  those  that 
were  not  really  Christians.  The  Lord  Jesus  shews  what  He  dis- 
approves of  in  Protestantism.  Why  not  be  thoroughly  Christians  ? 
It  was  a  poor  thing  to  boast  of  not  being  as  bad  as  Jezebel ;  it 
was  death  if  not  abomination. 

In  Protestant  lands  there  is  ordinarily  a  measure  of  truth,  as 
there  is  still  more  commonly  liberty  of  conscience.  But  the 
object  of  God  is  not  merely  to  deliver  either  from  gross  evils,  or 
from  mistake  in  detail,  but  that  the  soul  should  be  right  with 
God,  and  should  allow  the  Lord  to  have  His  way  and  glory  in 
the  Christian  assembly — liberty  for  the  Lord  to  work  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  according  to  His  will.  When  He  is  allowed  His 
rifht  place,  there  is  the  blessed  fruit  of  it  in  love  and  holy 
liberty.  It  is  not  a  human  liberty  derived  from  the  power  of 
the  world  that  we  want  (though  God  forbid  that  we  should 
speak  a  word  against  the  powers  that  be  in  their  sphere),  but 
the  liberty  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  the  sin  of  Christians  to 
let  the  powers  assume  a  false  position  in  divine  things.  The 
Lord  Jesus  touches  the  root  of  the  whole  matter  in  the  way  in 
which  He  presents  Himself  to  the  church  of  Sardis.  Whether 
it  is  spiritual  power  or  the  outward  authority  flowing  from  it, 
the  Lord  claims  it  all  as  belonging  to  Him.  In  Ephesus  it  was 
said  that  Ho  held  the  seven  stars  in  His  right  hand,  and  walked 


CHRIST   ABIDES   FAITHFUL.  61 

in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  lamp-stands ;  but  here  are 
united  the  two  things,  inward  spiritual  power,  and  outward 
authority.  He  hath  the  Spirits  of  God  and  the  stars.  It  is  not 
said  here  that  He  holds  the  stars  in  His  right  hand,  but  only 
that  they  are  His,  as  well  as  the  fulness  of  spiritual  com- 
petency ;  still  less  is  He  said  to  be  walking  in  the  midst  of  the 
lamp-stands.  It  is  an  assertion  of  His  rights,  not  of  their 
exercise. 

In  the  great  mass  of  Protestant  churches  they  gave  up,  as  it 
were,  the  regulation  of  the  stars  into  the  hands  of  the  powers 
that  be.  On  the  other  hand,  the  persons  who  revolted  from 
that  fell  into  the  sad  evil  of  suffering  the  church  to  have  the 
stars  in  its  own  keeping.  There  is  not  such  a  doctrine  in  the 
whole  scripture  as  either  the  world  or  the  church  having  this 
kind  of  authority  in  its  own  hands.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  still 
all  under  Himself  He  has  not  given  it  up.  Therefore  let  the 
church  only  own  what  He  is,  and  He  will  act  accordingly. 
When  there  is  faith  to  look  to  Him  in  His  place  as  Head  of 
the  church,  He  will  assuredly  supply  every  need.  If  He  listens 
to  the  simplest  cry  of  His  lambs,  does  He  not  enter  into  the 
deep  need  of  the  church  ?  Is  it  not  an  object  near  His  heart 
and  affecting  His  moral  glory  ?  He  took  His  headship  of  the 
church  only  in  heavenly  glory,  and  He  went  on  high  not  merely 
to  he,  but  to  act,  as  Head.  What  is  the  character  of  His  func- 
tions in  this  respect  ?  He  exercises  authority,  having  persons 
to  act  under  Him  here  below.  Thus  the  existence  of  rule  and 
gift  in  the  church  of  God  is  the  result ;  and  these  are  not 
touched  by  the  ruin  of  the  church.  The  Lord,  anticipating  the 
time  when  there  would  be  a  revolt  from  under  the  spurious 
authority  of  the  body  calling  itself  the  church,  and  foreseeing 
all  the  confusion  that  would  be  the  result,  presents  Himself  as 
the  One  who  is  superior  to  it  all.  Whatever  may  be  the  con- 
dition of  things  here,  strength  is  in  Christ :  and  we  can  never 
find  strength  in  looking  at  the  condition  of  the  church,  but  at 
Christ. 

When  the  apostles  were  here  below,  they  were  empowered  to 
act  for  Christ  in  a  very  special  way ;  but  when  they  were  taken 
away,  the  real  source  of  the  power  in  which  they  had  acted 


62  CHRIST   IS   THE   STANDARD, 

suborJinately  to  Christ  was  not  dried  up;  the  Lord  Jesus  has  it 
all  in  His  own  keeping  still.  There  was  a  name  to  live,  but 
real  death.  He  was  speaking  of  their  condition  as  a  body,  and 
not  as  individuals.  "Be  watchful,  and  strengthen  the  things 
that  remain,  which  were  about  to  die :  for  I  have  not  found  thy 
works  perfect  [tilled  up]  before  my  God."  Here  we  have  again 
a  very  striking  feature  of  what  took  place  in  Protestantism.  In 
the  desire  to  escape  from  the  abuse  of  works  by  the  Eomish 
system,  it  is  evident  that  Christian  practice  lost  its  due  place  in 
the  minds  of  many — its  place  for  those  who  have  been  brought 
nigh  to  God.  For  God  does  look  for  a  real  separate  and  distinct 
path  to  be  taken  by  His  people  ;  and  He  finds  fault  with  Sardis 
because  of  their  failure  in  this.  The  saints  of  God  even  in 
Thyatira  were  commended  of  God  for  their  earnestness,  in  spite 
of  all  evil.  Their  last  works*  were  more  than  the  first.  Pro- 
testantism has  weakened  the  idea  of  obedience,  under  the  plea 
of  "no  perfection,"  either  in  the  church  or  in  the  individual. 
Thus  there  has  been  a  lowering  of  the  just  criterion  wherever 
Protestantism  has  prevailed:  but  our  God  looks  for  perfection  as 
the  standard  His  children  should  judge  tliemselves  by — I  do 
not  say  attain.  He  has  grace  to  meet  failures ;  but  it  is  quite 
another  thing  for  persons  to  settle  down  in  self-complacency, 
from  not  having  the  divine  standard  before  their  eyes.  The 
Lord  always  goes  back  to  this. 

It  is  better,  in  seeking  to  have  that  standard  before  us,  to  fail 
in  carrying  it  out,  than  to  succeed  ever  so  much,  if  we  gave  it 
up.  For  what  does  the  Lord  most  value  ?  The  heart  that  wants 
to  please  Him.  The  child  may  come  to  its  father  and  saj^  "  See 
what  a  pretty  thing  I  have  been  making;"  but  if  the  parent 
had  told  him  to  do  something  else,  he  would  ask  the  child,  "  Is 
that  what  I  desired  you  to  do  V  The  Lord  has  His  own  will, 
which  meets  us  in  our  first  need  as  sinners  awakened,  and  is 
the  source  of  our  very  salvation.  But  it  is  far  I'rom  the  natural 
thought  of  the  heart,  which  dislikes  subjection  to  another's 
will.    It  is  but  part  of  the  lie  of  the  enemy.   The  will  of  God,  we 

*  I  am  fur  from  tliinking  the  Romanist  idea  of  works  sounder  than  their 
depreciation  of  faith.  The  remnant  in  Tliyatira,  viewed  mystically,  were  not 
Romanists,  but  persecuted  by  Jezebel. 


NOT   THE   individual's   NEED.  63 

know,  was  that  which  accomplished  our  sanctification,  through 
Him  who  said,  "  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will."  In  Eom.  x.  the 
apostle  puts  our  part  of  the  matter  in  contrast  with  Jewish 
feeling.  They  thought,  if  they  accomplished  as  much  of  the 
law  as  they  could,  that  God  was  merciful  and  would  make  up 
the  rest;  but  the  apostle  shews  that  subjection  to  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  is  salvation.  God's  will  is  the  very  spring  and 
power  of  our  blessing,  not  only  in  the  matter  of  forgiveness, 
but  all  the  way  through.  Take  God's  ways  in  the  church. 
These  were  subjects  that  were  particularly  neglected  at  the 
.  Eeformation.  Individual  truth,  such  as  justification  by  faith, 
was  brought  out  forcibly  and  over  a  large  field.  But  this  was 
made  the  great  point  and  aim  of  everything,  and  the  conse- 
quence was  that  people  never  knew  thoroughly  they  were  justi- 
fied. The  moment  one  makes  one's  own  blessing  the  one  or  chief 
object  of  research  in  the  Bible,  never  can  anything  be  known 
aright ;  but  he  who  receives  God's  thoughts  and  objects  is 
sure  to  know  directly  that  he  is  saved  and  blessed  indeed.  He 
cannot  look  at  the  cross  of  Christ  without  seeing  at  the  same 
time  his  utter  ruin,  and  his  complete  deliverance  in  the  resur- 
rection. If  a  man  hesitates  whether  he  is  so  very  bad  as  God 
declares,  he  has  to  wait  before  he  enjoys  the  riches  of  His  grace; 
but  if  he  trust  himself  unhesitatingly  in  God's  h-ands,  there  is  not 
a  blessing  that  does  not  flow  abundantly.  We  find  ourselves  to 
be  as  bad  or  worse  than  Israel,  and  then  we  are  brought  inside 
a  circle  of  goodness  and  mercy  superior  to  any  thing  they  ever 
possessed. 

At  the  Reformation  all  this  was  comparatively  lost  sight  of; 
and,  in  escaping  from  the  fearful  net  of  popery,  men  fell  into 
the  sin  of  putting  church  power  into  the  hands  of  the  civil 
magistrate.  Others  again,  who  avoided  this  evil,  made  what  they 
considered  a  true  church  to  be  the  depository  of  this  power ; 
whereas  it  is  Christ  Himself  still  working  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
who  maintains  His  own  lordship,  a  truth  which  is  taught  at 
large  in  the  epistles.  Supposing  a  person  labours  as  a  pastor 
or  a  teacher,  from  what  authority  is  he  to  act?  Apostles 
or  their  envoys  did  choose  those  who  had  to  do  with  local 
matters ;  yet  wherever  it  was  a  question  simply  of  ministry  in 


64  DISOEDER   OF   MAN'S   ORDER. 

the  word  there  was  no  appointment  from  the  first.  Even  in 
the  case  of  choosing  a  successor  to  the  vacant  seat  of  Judas, 
the  apostles  did  not  themselves  elect,  but  threw  it  out  of  their 
own  hands  into  those  of  the  Lord.  (Acts  i.  24.)  And  when  the 
Lord  afterwards  chose  another  apostle,  we  find  "  one  Ananias  " 
indeed  sent  to  baptize  him;  but  there  was  no  idea  of  that 
disciple,  or  any  one  else,  making  him  an  apostle.  In  what  we 
have  afterwards  (Acts  xiii.),  i.e.  the  case  of  hands  being  laid  on 
the  apostles  Paul  and  Barnabas,  it  was  not  a  bestowal  of  any 
orders  or  mission,  for  it  was  done  by  men  inferior  to  themselves 
in  point  of  spiritual  gift  and  power;  but  was  simply  their 
brethren  commending  them  to  the  Lord  before  they  set  out  on 
a  particular  missionary  tour  to  the  Gentiles.  We  have  a  right 
to  look  for  the  Lord  to  maintain  His  authority  in  the  church. 
In  all  ages  we  find  Him  helping  His  people  in  their  need,  and 
doing  His  work  by  His  servants.  If  a  person  wants  to  preach, 
he  naturally  thinks  he  must  have  the  warrant  of  some  autho- 
rity ;  but  if  we  seek  an  authority  at  all,  we  should  have  a  com- 
petent one.  Although  there  may  be  more  respectability  in  the 
world  where  these  outward  credentials  are  looked  for,  the  ques- 
tion arises,  Does  the  Lord  require  authority  to  validate  a  person's 
preaching  the  gospel  ?  The  apostles  did  appoint  elders  and 
deacons ;  but  these  might  or  they  might  not  be  preachers  and 
teachers :  their  being  deacons  was  another  thing  altogether. 
Philip  was  a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  but  this  depended  on  his 
having  a  gift  from  Christ  as  the  Head  of  the  church,  and 
not  on  his  being  one  of  "  the  seven."  Men  have  slipped  into 
habitual  departure  from  God's  principles ;  and  this  is  called 
"  order,"  because  it  is  the  most  prevalent  custom  now  in  the 
professing  church.  Yet  when  we  thus  give  up  true  principles, 
we  slip  into  wrong  practice.  The  Lord  attaches  great  importance 
to  our  owning  Him  as  the  One  who  has  all  ]")ower  and  authority 
in  His  own  hands.  The  moment  we  recognise  this,  it  so  much 
the  more  binds  the  conscience.  If  one  knows  a  thing  to  be  wrong, 
the  conscience  is  held  to  it.  One  may  not  be  able  to  see  at  once 
what  is  tlie  right  ]"»ath  to  take ;  but  to  cease  from  what  is  evil 
is  evidently  tlie  first  step,  and  it  is  imperative. 

The  connexion  between  the  end  of  the  second  verse  ("  I  have  ■ 


CHRIST'S    COMING   AS   A   THIEF.  65 

not  found  thy  works  perfect  before  God")  and  what  follows 
("  Eemember,  therefore,  how  thou  hast  received  and  heard,"  &c.) 
is  to  be  remarked.  He  recalls  them  to  what  they  had  received 
from  God  Himself  at  the  first.  No  such  thoucjht  is  allowed  as 
that  because  things  are  not  as  they  were  then,  therefore  every 
church  has  a  right  to  form  its  own  laws.  If  it  would  be  down- 
right rebellion  to  say,  because  the  Queen  does  not  live  in 
Ireland,  that  therefore  the  Irish  people  were  at  liberty  to  make 
what  laws  they  pleased,  it  is  as  bad  or  worse  if  we  think  that, 
because  things  are  changed,  the  apostles  gone,  and  confusion 
come  into  the  church,  men  are  left  free  to  desert  the  word  of 
Christ  and  do  their  own  wills :  the  Lord  has  left  us  His.  The 
very  word  of  God  which  tells  me  what  I  once  was,  but  that  I 
am  washed,  sanctified,  and  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God,  this  same  portion  enters  into 
all  questions  of  the  assembly,  and  the  working  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  it  by  whom  He  will.  (1  Cor.  xii.)  There  may  be  no 
tongues,  or  gifts  of  miracles,  and  healings ;  but  is  the  Holy 
Ghost  here  ?  What  He  continues  to  do  is  according  to  the  same 
principle  and  presence  as  at  first,  tliough  in  a  very  different 
measure  of  power :  else  we  have  no  divine  rule  in  these  things. 

Eemark  that  the  Lord's  coming  is  spoken  of  just  in  the  way 
it  was  threatened  on  the  world.  (See  1  Thess.  v.)  "  If  therefore 
thou  shalt  not  watch,  I  will  come  on  thee  as  a  tliief"  (verse 
3).  He  would  come  upon  them  when  they  were  not  aware — 
suddenly  and  unwelcome.  Had  they  not  got  into  the  world? 
Let  them  then  beware  of  the  portion  of  the  world.  If  you  have 
taken  the  world's  ease,  you  must  needs  dread  the  world's  judg- 
ment. Such  is  not  the  way  in  which  the  Lord  speaks  of  His 
coming  to  the  church.  In  reality  and  in  all  the  extent  of  the 
words,  it  will  be  upon  the  professing  mass,  and  not  upon  real 
believers,  that  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief 

"  But  thou  hast  a  few  names  iu  Sardis  which  have  not  defiled 
their  garments ;  and  they  shall  walk  with  me  in  white :  for  they 
are  worthy.     He  that  overcometh,  he"^"  shall  be  clothed  in  white 

*  The  Alexandrian  and  Paris  uncials  with  a  fair  support  from  cursives,  and  es- 
pecially from  versions,  read  ovrwe  "thus ; "  but  the  Basilian,  Vat.  and  Porphyrian 
uncials,  and  most  of  the  juniors  with  some  versions  read  ovTog.     Cod.  Sinaitic, 

F 


66  A    SINdLE   EYE   VINDICATED    BY   THE   LORD. 

raiment"  (verses  4,  5).  The  Lord  brings  in  this  suited  comfort, 
that  as  some  in  Sardis  had  sought  to  act  faithfully  on  earth, 
they  sliouhl  walk  with  Him  in  white.  As  they  had  maintained 
real  personal  purity  liere  below,  they  should  appear  in  full 
justification  of  their  ways  bcibro  God  above.  But  this  is  spoken 
of  individually.  The  state  of  the  church  as  a  whole  was  beyond 
question  worldly,  and  as  such  it  should  be  judged. 

The  moment  a  person  ascertains  that  his  association  is  con- 
trary to  the  word,  he  should  feel  how  grave  that  fact  is,  and 
consider  what  is  due  to  the  Lord.  It  might  seem  incredible,  if  one 
did  not  know  the  fact,  that  there  have  been  and  are  men  of  God, 
guides  of  the  Hock,  who  not  only  abide  in  evil  which  they  know, 
but  seek  to  find  a  palliative  in  the  circumstances  of  a  righteous 
Asa  or  a  godly  Jehoshaphat,  who  nevertheless  did  not  remove 
the  high  places.  Alas  !  that  the  solenni  vevelations  of  God 
should  be  thus  perverted  so  as  to  serve  the  ends  of  the  enemy, 
and  that  a  repeated  warning  should  be  tortured  into  a  justifica- 
tion of  sin.  "  The  light  of  the  body  is  the  eye  :  therefore  when 
thine  eye  is  single,  thy  whole  body  also  is  full  of  light;  but 
when  thine  eye  is  evil,  thy  body  also  is  full  of  darkness.  Take 
heed  therefore  that  the  light  which  is  in  thee  be  not  darkness." 
It  is  not  enough  to  correct  thoughts,  and  rest  there  ;  but  if  the 
Lord  has  given  a  judgment,  is  it  not  in  order  that  the  walk  may 
be  correspondent  ?  Satan  contrives  to  make  the  path  of  the 
Lord  ai)[)ear  dark  and  satl  ;  as  he  colours  a  worldly  course  with 
the  semblance  of  humility,  order,  and  the  like.  lUit  the  word 
makes  all  plain  now,  as  ])Ower  will  by  and  by  even  lo  the  world. 

Miiy  we  walk  with  the  Lord  now,  and  surely  we  shall  walk 
with  Him  in  white  hereafter !  Instead  of  a  blotted  name,  ours 
He  will  cojifcss  before  His  Father  and  the  holy  angels. 

rillLADELl'IIIA. 

Tlu!  tone  of  the  ei»istle  to  riiiladelphia  must,  I  think,  confirm 
the  idea  presented  as  to  Sardis,  that  in  this  portion  ("Rev.  iii.) 

gives  tho  former  first,  and  then  corrects  it  Ly  tho  latter,  and  perhaps  by  the 
orif^iiial  Hcribo.  Kxternally  thoroforo  the  Lahmco  is  nearly  even.  But  in  tho 
oldtr  MSS.  especially  tho  interchange  of  o  and  to  is  so  conunon  as  to  make  their 
ovidonco  in  such  cases  of  slight  value.  Internal  consideration  greatly  inclines 
in  my  oj)inion  to  ovrot;,  as  in  tho  text. 


POSITIVENESS   OF    PHILADELPHIA.  67 

we  have  not  so  much  the  early  church,  or  that  of  the  middle 
ages,  but  what  is  found,  or  is  developed,  in  modern  times. 
Sardis  is  the  beginning  of  this  :  a  state  of  things  not  marked 
by  flagrant  evil,  but  by  one  sad  and  fatal  characteristic — it  is 
negative.  Any  fair  persons,  who  have  thought  deeply  on  what 
is  called  Protestantism,  must  know  that  this  is  the  sorrowful 
thing  which  we,  who  have  been  Protestants  and  thus  share  its 
shame,  have  to  acknowledge.  Men  stand  up  too  much,  at  least 
too  self-complacently,  for  certain  controversial  points,  which 
hide  in  a  great  measure  their  own  wants  and  failures  ;  they 
pride  themselves  on  keeping  apart  from  certain  evils,  such  as 
the  supremacy  of  the  Pope,  the  infallible  authority  of  the 
church,  the  worship  of  the  Virgin,  saints,  and  angels,  the 
doctrine  of  the  mass,  purgatory,  &c.  Suj^posing  the  most 
rigid  orthodoxy  as  to  tliese,  there  might  be  a  thousand  evils 
of  another  character,  yet,  together  with  outward  correctness, 
the  heart  be  thoroughly  away  from  the  love  and  honour  of  the 
Lord.  This  is  precisely  what  we  saw  in  Sardis — a  name  to  live, 
but  yet  dead.  As  in  Israel,  when  the  Lord  was  on  earth,  the 
old  idolatry  had  passed  away,  the  unclean  spirit  had  left  the 
house,  and  had  not  returned ;  so  the  swept  and  garnished  con- 
dition of  the  house  answers  to  that  which  followed  the  Eeforma- 
tion.  But  we  must  distinguish  between  that  and  the  work 
which  God  gave  the  Eeformers  to  do.  Let  none  speak  dis- 
paragingly of  these  men,  whether  Luther  or  others.  But  while 
God  was  working  in  that  great  movement,  it  would  have  been 
better  and  holier  if  they  had  left  earthly  governments  to  their 
own  proper  functions.  No  doubt  their  patrons  spared  them 
persecutions  and  secured  them  honours,  which,  instead  of  help- 
ing on  God's  work,  proved  a  great  hindrance.  And  so,  when 
the  fervour  of  first  zeal  had  passed  away,  the  state  of  things 
corresponds  with  Sardis. 

In  Philadelphia  we  have  something  totally  different.  The 
first  thing  that  strikes  us  is  not  what  the  Lord  does  or  has,  but 
what  the  Lord  is  Himself.  If  there  is  anything  that  delivers 
from  mere  dogma,  with  all  its  chilling  influences,  it  is,  I  appre- 
hend, the  person  of  the  Lord  appreciated  in  any  special  way. 
And  this  is  seen  in  the  epistle  to  Pliiladelphia.     The  Lord  here 

F  2 


68  Christ's  person  in  view. 

presents  Himself  personally  more  than  in  any  other  of  these 
epistles.  It  is  true  He  is  said  to  have  the  key  of  David ;  but 
before  anything  appears  about  this,  He  says  that  He  is  the  Holy 
One  and  the  True.  In  the  other  epistles  we  do  not  find  the 
Lord  characterised  in  the  same  moral  point  of  view.  This  is, 
in  my  opinion,  what  grace  has  been  making  good  in  God's  chil- 
dren during  late  years.  The  impulse  given  to  evangelization  by 
the  spread  of  Bibles  and  missionary  efforts  has  marked  it  out- 
wardly; but  inwardly  the  sense  of  ruin  has  been  used  of  the 
Spirit  to  lead  the  saints  to  the  word,  and  hence  to  a  fuller  appre- 
ciation of  the  person  of  Christ-^the  only  oliject  in  which  we  can 
rest,  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  He  was  God  the  Father's  when 
He  walked  on  earth. 

There  is  something  very  beautiful  in  the  way  in  which  the 
grace  of  the  Lord  operates,  after  the  epistle  to  Sardis,  which 
was  in  a  dead  worldly  state.  Christ  made  Himself  known ; 
and  He  is  the  resurrection  and  the  life.  And  what  can  give 
new  life,  put  the  church  in  its  proper  attitude,  or  bring  a 
remnant  to  the  walk  and  sentiments  which  become  a  time  of 
ruin,  but  the  Lord  presenting  Himself  personally?  This  is 
characteristic  of  John's  Gospel ;  the  person  of  Christ  in  His 
rights,  not  only  humbling  Himself  to  death,  but  baptizing  with 
the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  activity  of  gracious  power  which  is 
suitable  to  His  glory.  The  first  portion  of  it  brings  His  person 
before  us ;  the  second,  the  other  Comforter,  whom  the  absent 
Lord  was  to  send  down  from  heaven.  It  is  beautiful  thus  to 
see  the  place  that  John's  Gospel  has  in  the  scriptures  of  God. 
It  was  written  very  late,  the  last  of  all  the  gospels,  and  suited 
to  a  day  of  declension.  There  is  no  question  of  Jerusalem  or 
of  the  Jews,  as  the  immediate  object  of  God,  even  in  the  way  of 
testimony.  They  are  noticed  as  a  people  outside,  whom  God  has 
nothing  to  do  with  for  the  time.  Hence  the  Lord  speaks  of  the 
pa.ssover  as  a  "  feast  of  the  Jews,"  and  so  on.  In  Matthew,  on  the 
contrary,  there  is  the  recognition  of  Israel  for  the  truth  of  God. 
The  boar  out  of  the  wood  may  wvaste,  and  the  beast  devour,  but 
it  is  Israel's  land  still ;  and  Jerusalem  is  called  the  holy  city, 
even  in  connexion  with  Christ's  death  and  resurrection.  In 
John  all  that  is  at  an  end.     Not  only  had  Jerusalem  and  th(> 


A   LITTLE   STRENGTH.  69 

Jews  forfeited  all  claim  upon  God,  having  departed  from  Him 
as  Jeliovali,  and  the  law  and  the  prophets,  but  they  had  rejected 
Christ;  yea,  and  when  the  Holy  Ghost  came,  they  rejected 
Him  too,  and  would  not  listen  to  Him  any  more ;  so  that  there 
was  no  resource.  God  had  manifested  Himself  in  every  possible 
way.  No  manifestation  of  God,  where  man  was  under  law, 
could  do  any  good.  Individuals  laid  hold  of  God's  grace  all 
through,  but  the  nation  was  under  law.  The  Gospel  of  John 
starts  from  this  point,  that  all  was  darkness,  and  there  the  True 
Light  shines  though  the  darkness  comprehends  it  not.  In  Him 
was  life.  This  ever  remains  true,  though  He  may  deal  judicially 
here. 

But  to  return  to  these  churches :  there  had  been  declension 
from  first  love,  suffering  from  heathen  power,  Satan  tempting 
through  the  power  of  the  world,  Jezebel  seducing  to  idolatry, 
and,  in  short,  every  kind  of  evil  commerce  with  the  world,  with 
persecution,  but  now  we  find  a  modern  state — outward  clean- 
ness, but  the  heart  given  up  to  itself.  (See  2  Tim.  iii.)  Sardis 
gives  us  this  picture :  some  walking  purely,  but  there  was  no 
such  thing  as  the  heart  thoroughly  subjected  to  the  Lord.  But 
will  He  be  content  with  this  ?  The  Lord  must  raise  up  a  wit- 
ness for  Himself ;  and  the  only  way  whereby  He  makes  a  person 
an  adequate  witness  for  Himself  is  by  presenting  Himself  to  the 
affections.  The  moment  we  see  the  Lord  Himself,  there  is 
strength  to  serve  Him  with  gladness. 

Here  the  Lord,  disgusted  with  the  state  of  Sardis,  comes,  as 
it  were,  saying,  "  I  want  to  have  the  heart,  and  must  have  it." 
He  removes  the  vail  brought  in  through  the  sin  of  the  profess- 
ing church.  When  they  see  that  Blessed  One,  so  to  speak,  a 
little  nearer,  there  is  a  state  that  answers  (but  oh  how  feebly  !) 
to  His  desires  for  their  heart,  which  will  be  made  good  without 
fail,  when  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is. 

"  Thou  hast  a  little  strength."  It  is  not  the  way  of  God  to 
produce  great  strength  at  a  time  of  general  ruin.  At  the  era  of 
the  return  from  the  Babylonish  captivity,  the  Lord  wrought  in 
great  grace.  There  was  no  outward  power;  on  the  contrary, 
they  were  so  apparently  contemptible,  that  it  was  the  taunt  of 
their  enemies  that  a  fox  could  jump  over  their  wall.     But  we 


70  HE  THAT  IS  HOLY,  HE  THAT  IS  TEUE. 

find  the  same  sort  of  spirit  as  in  Philadelphia.  They  build  no 
fortification  to  keep  out  the  Samaritans ;  the  Lord  was  a  wall  of 
fire  round  about  them ;  but  the  first  thing  they  erect  is  an  altar 
to  Hiiu.  The  Lord  was  the  first  object  of  their  hearts.  If  He 
was  their  wall,  they  could  afford  to  wait  before  building  another. 
There  was  no  such  thing  as  the  angel  smiting  the  first-born,  no 
miracle  wrought  on  their  behalf,  not  a  word  about  plagues  on 
their  enemies  ;  but  "  my  Spirit  remaineth  among  you  :  fear  ye 
not."  Whenever  Israel  were  afraid  of  their  adversaries,  they  had 
no  strength  ;  but  in  looking  to  the  Lord  they  forgot  enemies. 

When  we  lean  on  Him  now,  it  strikes  more  terror  into  the 
hearts  of  those  who  are  against  Him  than  anything  else.  When 
the  heart  is  true  to  the  Lord,  it  tells  upon  the  conscience  of 
others.  What  joy  that  the  Lord's  heart  is  toward  His  people  !  It 
is  this  which  produces  proper  feelings  toward  Him  and  toward 
one  another.  The  very  name  of  this  church  is  significant  of  the 
relationship  which  He  had  established;  but  it  is  also  important 
to  remember  that  it  is  a  holy  relationship  we  bear  to  one 
another.  While  it  is  certain  that  those  who  care  for  one 
another's  heavenly  interest  will  not  be  careless  otherwise,  still 
the  church  is  not  a  club,  where  men  must  be  ready  to  help  on 
each  other,  right  or  wrong.  This  would  be  Chartism  or  any 
thing  rather  than  the  brotherhood  of  the  Lord. 

The  first  words  are  the  key.  "  He  that  is  holy,  he  that  is  true" 
(verse  7).  Look  at  the  first  Epistle  of  John.  The  expression  is 
not  often  used  about  the  Lord,  but  we  find  it  there.  In  the 
second  chapter  of  that  epistle,  speaking  to  the  little  ones  of  the 
family  of  God,  it  is  written,  "  Ye  have  an  unction  from  the 
Holy  One,  and  ye  know  all  things."  He  that  is  Holy,  He  that 
is  true,  has  all  for  tiieni.  There  might  be  weakness,  but  He  has 
the  key  of  David.  In  the  genealogy  of  our  Lord  in  ^Matthew 
we  find  the  expression,  David  "the  king,"  not  Solomon  the 
king,  or  any  other ;  because  David  is  the  person  who  first  cha- 
racterized royalty  in  Israel.  He  was  the  man  according  to 
God's  own  heart.  As  long  as  David  walked  in  faith,  no  diffi- 
culties could  stand  in  his  way.  True,  the  type  was  imperfect :  no 
type  reaches  the  mark,  because  it  is  not  Christ,  though  it  may  be 
a  witness  of  Him.    W^c  see  the  failure  of  the  man  ;  but  where  the 


THE   KEY   OF   DAVID.  71 

power  of  God  wrought  in  David  what  was  bright,  and  blessed, 
and  good,  we  have  the  germ,  as  it  were,  of  that  which  we  see 
fully  in  the  Lord.  "The  key  of  David"  represents  administra- 
tive power,  the  means  of  access  to  whatever  he  possessed. 
Thus  it  is  said  (Isa.  xxii.),  "the  key  of  the  house  of  David  will 
I  lay  upon  his  shoulder ;  so  he  shall  open,  and  none  shall 
shut,"  &c.  This  was  the  consequence ;  he  who  had  it  had  all 
things  under  his  hand;  and  it  was  his  business  to  take  care  of 
everything. 

The  Lord  presents  Himself  as  having  the  key  of  David. 
Therefore  they  ought  not  to  look  to  the  power  of  the  world, 
nor  to  man ;  for  if  He  had  the  key,  it  was  the  very  thing  they 
wanted.  The  energy  of  man  might  be  at  work  all  around, 
Jezebel,  false  prophets,  &c. ;  but  there  was  this  Blessed  One, 
the  Holy  and  the  True  ;  and  so  much  the  more  needed,  because 
they  were  weak.  They  had  so  little  strength  that,  perhaps,  they 
could  not  even  open  the  door ;  but  He  says  that  He  had  opened 
it  for  them ;  He  had  brought  them  into  a  large  place  where 
there  was  no  such  thing  as  bondage  or  constraint.  It  is  plain 
that  the  Lord  is  here  marked  according  to  what  He  is  personally 
and  morally ;  not  only  as  the  great  source  of  holiness  and  truth, 
but  as  the  Holy  One  and  the  True.  We  find  the  latter  also  in 
the  first  Epistle  of  John.  "  We  are  in  him  that  is  true,  even  in 
his  Son  Jesus  Christ ;"  but  there  lie  goes  farther  still,  "  This  is 
the  true  God  and  eternal  life."  Thus  then  we  have  the  Lord's 
person  brought  before  them :  it  was  what  they  coveted.  They 
valued  Christ.  They  wished  to  know  more  of  Him;  and  He 
knew  their  heart.  So  it  is  said,  "  If  thine  eye  be  single,  thy  whole 
body  shall  be  full  of  light."  They  were  tried  by  a  mere  form 
of  godliness ;  they  knew  it  was  as  possible  to  be  lost  or  to  dis- 
honour the  Lord  in  orthodoxy  as  in  the  world.  They  turn  to 
the  Lord,  and  He  presents  Himself  as  the  Holy  One  and  the 
True ;  not  as  against  them,  but  full  of  tenderness  and  grace, 
putting  before  them  an  open  door,  and  giving  them  the  certainty 
that  no  man  could  shut  it. 

"  Thou  hast  a  little  strength,  and  hast  kept  my  word,  and  hast 
not  denied  my  name"  (ver.  8).  Here  we  have  three  expressions 
concerning  them.     They  are  in  a  state  not  marked  by  outward 


72  THE   VALUE   OF 

note  or  strength.  Like  Himself,  they  are  unknown  to  the 
world,  but  they  had  kept  His  word ;  and  more  than  this,  they 
had  not  denied  His  name.  Consider  what  it  is  to  keep  Christ's 
word.  It  is  evident  there  had  been  a  departure  from  His  word. 
It  might  have  l)een  circulated ;  but  had  it  been  cherished  ?  Had 
it  been  loved  and  sought  into,  as  for  hid  treasure  1  Was  it  for 
this  thing  that  men  met  together  to  pray  and  read — that  they 
might  understand  it  better  ?  What  a  movement  in  advance  for 
the  church,  where  the  Lord's  person  becomes  more  than  ever  the 
object,  and  the  word  as  His  word  !  It  is  not  mere  evangelization, 
blessed  as  that  is  in  its  place,  and  in  its  effect  on  the  world. 
But  here  it  is  the  inner  circle  of  the  saints,  who  love,  serve, 
and  adore  Christ  for  Himself. 

In  this  epistle  we  also  find  the  great  value  of  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  In  1  Cor.  i.  the  address  is  not  to  the  Corin- 
thians alone,  but  "to  all  who  in  every  place  call  upon"  that 
name.  In  other  words,  the  first  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  is  in 
no  way,  more  than  the  second,  of  private  application,  but  for 
all  Christians  everywhere.  In  fact  the  generalizing  address  is 
not  put  so  strongly  in  any  other ;  and  tliis,  perhaps,  because  the 
Spirit  of  God  foresaw  that,  more  than  any  other,  it  would  be 
set  aside.  In  these  days,  when  there  is  no  extraordinary  mani- 
festation of  power,  men  might  say.  It  is  not  for  us,  it  belongs 
to  a  day  that  is  bygone.  True,  it  is  of  no  use  to  talk  of  regu- 
lating tongues,  if  you  have  not  got  them.  But  we  liave  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and,  blessed  be  God !  the  church  will  never  know 
the  day  when  it  will  be  without  the  Holy  Ghost.  Look  at  its 
darkest  hour  —  the  middle  ages,  Eomanism,  &c.  The  Holy 
Ghost  was  always  there,  not  indeed  justifying  evil,  or  putting 
His  seal  upon  disobedience,  but  He  was  there  for  the  certainty 
of  faith,  according  to  the  Lord's  word,  "He  shall  abide  with 
)'ou  for  ever."  The  idea  of  looking  for  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be 
poured  out  again  on  us  is  utterly  wrong.  Such  is  the  Jewish 
hope.  For  the  church  to  make  such  a  petition  is  in  effect  to 
deny  that  it  is  the  church.  It  may  be  well  for  us  to  throw 
ourselves  down  before  the  Lord,  and  own  that  we  have  acted  as 
though  we  had  it  not.  But  let  us  bless  God  that  we  have  the 
Spirit,  nut  only  dwelling  in  individuals,  but  binding  us  together 


THE   NAME   OF   THE   LORD.  73 

for  an  habitation  of  God.  The  manifestation  of  this  is  broken, 
it  is  true,  but  the  fact  remains ;  just  as  we  say  of  a  man  whose 
circumstances  are  bad,  that  he  is  a  ruined  man,  while  the  man 
still  exists.  This  gives  us  ground  for  humbling  ourselves  the 
more ;  that  the  church  had  the  Spirit  and  yet  went  wrong. 
Men  might  say,  If  we  had  a  Pentecost  now,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  sent  down  again,  we  should  go  right ;  but  the  fact  is 
that,  when  they  had  the  Holy  Ghost  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
they  declined  and  fell.  What  God  calls  upon  us  to  do  is,  not 
now  to  wait  for  fresh  gifts  of  power,  but  to  humble  ourselves 
before  Him,  because  we  have  gone,  even  as  Christians,  in  the 
saddest  opposition  to  His  will.  Alas !  though  the  Holy  Ghost 
dwelt  there,  one  golden  calf  after  another  has  been  set  up,  till 
there  is  as  much  sin  as  was  in  Israel.  This  is  what  the  Lord 
calls  us  to  feel.  The  sympathies  of  the  Philadelphian  saints 
were  with  Him. 

Clearly  then  what  the  Spirit  presents  is  a  despised  company, 
but  the  word  of  Christ  specially  prized,  and  the  Lord's  name 
maintained.  We  have  learned  that  the  church  is  never  bound 
to  go  on  in  sin.  "  Let  him  that  nameth  the  name  of  the  Lord 
depart  from  iniquity."  There  may  be  moral  iniquity  and 
worldly  lusts ;  and  what  is  there  so  bad  as  church  iniquity, 
except  that  which  is  against  the  person  of  Christ  Himself? 
If  a  man  perseveres  in  violating  the  outward  order  of  the 
church,  it  is  evil,  but  not  to  be  compared  with  sin  against  the 
Lord  Jesus  personally.  This  is  the  worst  evil  (2  John  7),  and  the 
test  of  souls.  The  first  of  all  duties  is  that  the  heart  should  be 
true  to  Christ.  God  looks  for  it.  The  Father  will  have  Him 
honoured  Himself 

Here  then  we  see  Christ  bringing  Himself  out  personally  to 
the  church,  and  this  not  with  a  general  expression  of  love,  but 
manifesting  a  special  attachment  of  His  heart  to  them.  Hence 
it  is  said,  "J  have  loved  thee."  The  Lord  loves  all  His  people, 
but  it  is  equally  true  that  He  has  special  affections.  There  may 
be  a  peculiar  link  between  Him  and  saints  at  particular  times 
of  danger  and  trial.  His  grace  removes  the  hindrances  and 
makes  it  to  be  enjoyed  in  its  strength.  They  know  His  place 
in  glory,  but  that  which  touches  their  hearts  is  that  He  loves 


74  nis  WORD, 

them  in  all  that  glory.  His  love  is  the  great  basis  and  spring  of 
their  love. 

"Thou  hast  a  little  strength."  He  knows  they  are  weak; 
but  they  have  "  kept  my  word  and  not  denied  my  name."  See 
here  the  personal  links — "  my  word,"  and  "  my  name."  The  name 
of  Christ  apprehended  by  the  soul  is  salvation ;  but  it  is  much 
more  ;  it  is  all.  When  the  heart  is  brought  down  to  submit  to 
God's  judgment  of  its  sin,  He  Himself  brings  before  that  soul 
Christ's  name ;  when  it  finds  that  it  has  no  name  in  which  to 
stand  before  God,  He  says.  Here  is  a  name,  My  Son's  name. 
Faith  supposes  a  man  giving  himself  up  as  a  good-for-nothing, 
and  saying,  "  God  has  been  good  to  me,  when  I  was  only  bad 
for  Him."  God  has  laid  down  this  name  as  a  foundation-stone 
for  the  poor  sinner.  It  looks  weak  ;  it  is  called  a  "  stumbling- 
stone,"  as  it  is  to  unbelief ;  but  I  ought  to  believe  in  it.  If  I 
merely  look  at  the  gospel,  I  am  lost,  because  then  I  reason 
about  it ;  but  if  I  believe  it,  I  am  saved.  What  did  Abraham 
do  ?  He  did  not  reason;  he  considered  not  his  own  body  which 
was  dead,  but  he  gave  glory  to  God.  If  he  had  felt  strong,  he 
might  have  sought  glory  to  himself  This  is  one  practical  aim 
that  God  etfects,  that  we  may  know  our  own  nothingness. 

But  is  this  the  only  use  of  Christ's  name  ?  No :  He  assembles 
round  Himself  Jesus  is  the  great  object  and  attractive  point 
to  which  the  Holy  Ghost  gathers.  Suppose  it  were  the  question 
of  a  person  coming  in  who  holds  what  people  call  Calvinistic 
views  or  Arminian,  never  having  learnt  fully  the  ruin  of  man  ; 
you  may  say,  "  We  do  not  like  to  be  troubled."  But  the  test  is, 
what  does  the  Lord  say  ?  Has  He  no  power  to  judge  that 
question  ?  Has  He  delegated  it  to  our  discretion  ?  The  Lord 
has  named  His  name  over  that  saint,  and  I  am  therefore  to 
receive  him.  Another  comes  and  says,  "  I  hear  you  receive  all 
Christians ;  but  I  do  not  believe  tliat  Christ  was  exempt  from 
the  fall,  either  in  His  nature  or  in  His  relation  to  God."  "  No," 
we  reply,  "  you  cannot  use  the  name  of  Christian  to  dishonour 
Christ."  But  wherever  a  man  is  found  liumbly  confessing  the 
name  of  the  Lord  (whether  he  be  churchman  or  dissenter,  that 
is  not  tlie  point),  we  are  bound  to  receive  him.  It  is  sorrowful 
that  the  church  should  have  these  names  of  variance :  they  will 


AND   HIS   NAME.  75 

all  be  at  an  end  by  and  by.  But  we  must  not  gainsay  the  name 
of  the  Lord  now.  Wherever  it  is  heard  it  becomes  a  passport 
all  over  the  church.  It  is  no  question  of  joining  us :  he  who 
is  joined  to  Christ  is  indeed  joined  to  us.  True,  the  Lord  has 
His  servants ;  but  we  do  not  acknowledge  any  one  as  a  centre 
in  the  church  but  Christ. 

A  further  use  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  is  in  discipline.  What 
is  the  object  of  discipline  ?  Not  to  keep  up  our  character,  but 
that  His  name  should  have  its  just  place  and  honour,  keeping 
it  bright  even  where  Satan's  throne  is.  In  the  very  camp  of  the 
enemy  there  is  a  name  that  cannot  be  put  down.  The  Holy 
Ghost  is  there,  not  merely  to  give  us  comfort,  but,  having 
delivered  us  from  anxiety  about  our  own  sins.  He  leaves  us  free 
to  care  for  Christ  and  to  serve  Him.  The  question  in  the 
maintenance  of  discipline  is.  Is  there  departure  from  iniquity  ? 
The  Lord  never  acknowledges  anything  as  the  church  where 
iniquity  is  sanctioned.  There  is  a  difference  between  sin 
detected  there,  and  the  sanction  of  sin  when  detected.  Any 
iniquity  may  break  out ;  it  did  in  the  apostolic  churches.  The 
man  was  put  away  at  Corinth  because  he  was  a  Christian  (as  it 
is  said,  "that  the  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord 
Jesus").  It  might  be  thought,  from  the  terrible  nature  of  his  sin, 
that  he  could  not  have  been  one.  The  Holy  Ghost  shews  us 
thereby  that  if  a  Christian  slips  away  from  Christ,  he  is  capable 
of  anything  except  positive  indifference  to  Christ  Himself 
From  this  I  think  the  Holy  Ghost  would  always  keep ;  as  in 
the  case  of  Solomon's  judgment,  the  false  woman  was  determined 
at  all  events  to  have  her  half  of  the  child,  while  the  real  mother 
would  rather  yield  it  than  let  its  life  be  touched.  But  a  Christian 
may  fall  into  a  cold  state  of  feeling  about  Christ,  unnatural  as 
this  may  seem;  and  when  in  this  state,  so  as  not  to  have  a  just 
sense  of  the  name  of  the  Lord,  what  good  can  be  expected  of  him  ? 
It  was  not  so  with  the  Philadelphian  saints.  They  did  not  deny 
His  name;  and  the  Lord  uses  the  tenderest  expressions  of  ]f)ve 
towards  them.  All  ecclesiastical  pretension,  it  has  been  well 
said,  was  against  them.  They  were  quite  despised  by  those  who 
said  they  were  Jews.  But  He  says  of  them,  "  I  will  make  them 
come  and  worship  before  thy  feet,"  &c.   (verse  9.)     They  were 


76  NEVER   CHOOSE   ONE   OF   TWO   EVILS. 

in  the  midst  of  a  great  deal  of  profession  that  was  hollow.  But 
the  Lord  promises  to  vindicate  them  by  His  own  power.  What 
comfort  there  is  in  not  seeking  to  vindicate  ourselves,  but  in 
ffoins  on  with  the  Lord  ! 

It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  see  that  the  name  of  the 
Lord  will  never  oblige  a  man  to  choose  between  two  evils  ;  and 
this  is,  in  my  judgment,  what  God  has  been  pressing  of  late. 
There  is  a  path  without  evil.  Not  that  the  flesh  of  man  may  not 
bring  in  evil ;  but  if  a  man  persists  in  any  sin,  you  say  he  is 
not  walking  as  a  Christian ;  he  cannot  be  owned  as  a  Christian, 
though  we  pray  for  him.  Again,  take  a  company  of  Christians. 
Evil  comes  in.  We  cannot  say,  "  These  are  not  Christians."  No, 
but  bring  in  the  authority  of  the  Lord's  name  to  put  the  evil 
away.  He  having  absolute  authority,  it  is  ours  to  take  the 
place  of  full  subjection  to  Hiui.  The  church  belongs  to  God. 
If  it  were  ours,  we  might  make  our  own  rules ;  but  woe  be  to 
the  man  that  meddles  with  the  church  of  God,  bringing  in  his 
own  regulations !  This  was,  it  would  seem,  what  was  felt  by 
these  Philadelphians.  They  valued  the  authority  of  the  name 
of  the  Lord.  They  avowed  that  they  were  weak,  but  they 
knew  that  the  power  of  Christ  was  strong  enough  to  keep  them. 
Why  should  they  be  afraid  ?  When  Christians  own  His  name 
as  a  gathering  centre,  it  is  not  said  that  evil  will  not  come  in  ; 
but  looking  to  the  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  His  Spirit,  we 
do  not  mean  to  sanction  evil.  Let  us  only  leave  the  door  open 
for  the  Lord  to  come  in.  There  may  be  much  to  try  our  patience ; 
but  what  we  have  to  do  is  to  wait  on  the  Lord.  This  is  what 
the  Lord  seeks — that  we  should  have  confidence  in  what  He  is 
and  has,  taking  the  place  of  weakness  and  dependence  in  prayer, 
however  much  we  may  be  tried. 

It  is  of  great  interest  to  note  here  the  re-appearance  of  the 
Catholic  system  at  this  point.  It  developed  itself  first  in  its 
fulness  in  the  era  of  early  heathen  persecution  under  the  fathers 
so  called — the  Smyrna  period.  (Compare  chapter  ii.  9.)  Now  it 
conies  up  again,  the  enemy's  counterfeit,  the  real  antagonist  of 
the  testimony  of  God  in  our  own  day.  But  the  Lord  will  compel 
them  yet  to  recognise  where  the  truth  is,  and  where  the  Lord's 
approving  love  rests  especially.     "  Behold,  1  will  make  them  of 


REVIVAL   OF   CATHOLICISM   AGAINST   CHRIST.  77 

the  synagogvie  of  Satan,  which  say  they  are  Jews,  and  are  not, 
but  do  lie"  (ver.  9).  These  claimed  to  be  exclusively  the  cove- 
nant people ;  others  (in  particular  those  meant  by  the  assembly 
in  Philadelphia)  they  regarded  as  outside,  unworthy  of  a  name 
save  of  contempt.  For  this  it  is  which  tries  the  saint,  not  per- 
secution from  open  external  enemies  as  also  in  Smyrna.  The 
boasters  in  tradition,  antiquity,  priesthood,  order,  and  ordinances, 
shall  yet  be  forced  to  acknowledge  those  they  desj)ised  as  the 
beloved  of  the  Lord.  Fidelity  to  Him,  however  feeble,  is  pre- 
cious in  His  eyes. 

In  Pergamos  they  kept  His  word :  here  they  did  more. 
"  Because  thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  my  patience,  I  will  keep 
thee  from  the  hour  of  temptation"  (ver.  10).  In  these  churches 
the  Lord  evidently  looks  forward  to  a  state  of  things  up  to  the  very 
close.  It  is  plain  that,  as  the  hour  of  temptation  is  still  future, 
room  is  left  for  the  application  of  this  promise  up  to  the  end. 
This  is  not  His  word  only,  but  of  His  patience.  Christ  is  coming 
to  receive  His  church,  and  afterwards  to  be  the  Judge  of  all  the 
earth.  But  we  are  not  looking  for  signs.  God  will  graciously 
give  signs  to  the  Jews,  but  the  church  was  never  called  to  be 
guided  in  its  thoughts  by  what  it  saw,  like  Thomas.  "  Blessed 
are  they  that  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed."  It  was 
wdien  the  Lord  was  no  longer  seen  that  the  church  was  born 
into  the  world ;  and  since  then  the  church  is  waiting,  but  was 
never  meant  to  depend  on  outward  tokens.  It  was  when  He 
took  His  place  above  as  Head  that  His  body,  the  church,  was 
formed ;  for  there  could  not  be  a  body  except  there  were  first  a 
head.  God  would  have  the  church  waiting  not  for  signs,  but 
for  Christ  Himself     He  will  cause  His  voice  to  be  heard,  and 

the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with 

the  Lord.  Christ  is  waiting  for  this  patiently.  As  far  as  I 
have  noticed,  the  Lord  does  not  speak  about  His  coming  as  if 
there  w^ere  any  haste  connected  with  it.  He  w^aits  patiently  for 
it.  He  lingers  in  His  love,  that  there  may  be  a  lengthening  of 
mercy  to  the  world,  and  that  souls  may  be  brought  to  Him. 
The  church  knows  that  He  is  Avaiting,  and  is  called  to  the  same 
patience — to  have  fellowship  with  Him  in  His  patience. 

"I  will  keep  thee  from  the  hour  of  temptation"  (verse  10). 


78  CHRIST   COMING   QUICKLY. 

This  is  not  tlie  portion  of  the  Jews.  To  them,  when  the  time 
of  trial  comes,  God  says,  "  Come,  my  people,  enter  into  thy 
chambers."  (Isaiah  xxvi.)  Ours  is  the  place  of  Abraham.  He 
had  not  to  fly  to  a  little  Zoar  like  Lot,  who  was  saved  indeed 
out  of  the  judgment,  but  not  much  to  his  honour.  The  Lord 
had  a  heavenly-minded  saint,  as  well  as  an  earthly-minded  one. 
Abraham  was  not  in  the  sphere  of  that  temptation  at  all.  So 
the  church  will  be  kept  from  the  coming  hour.  This  is  our 
confidence — not  merely  preserved  in  or  through  it,  but  "  from" 
it.  Take  another  figure — that  of  the  deluge.  Enoch  had  been 
translated  to  heaven  before  the  flood,  while  Noah  was  carried 
through  its  waters.  Thus  God  gives  us  blessed  witnesses 
from  the  beginning  of  the  two-fold  preservation,  like  Enoch 
and  Abraham  in  spirit  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  like 
Noah  and  Lot.  These  last  were  in  the  circumstances  of  the 
trial ;  and  this  will  be  the  case  with  the  converted  remnant  of 
Israel  during  the  time  of  the  dreadful  judgments.  The  Chris- 
tian's hope  is  to  be  with  the  Lord  in  heaven,  and  the  church 
ought  to  be  looking  for  it.  Assuredly  the  cry  is  now  going  forth, 
"  Behold  the  Bridegroom  cometh  ;  go  ye  out  to  meet  him." 

Let  me  ask,  have  you  gone  out  ?  There  were  those  who  not 
only  believed  when  they  heard  the  cry,  but  went  out.  Have 
you  left  everything  that  is  contrary  to  Him  ? — what  you  know — 
not  what  I  know — to  be  contrary  to  Him  ?  Ask  yourselves 
whether  you  are  ready  to  meet  Him  :  if  so,  you  need  not  be  afraid. 
Be  assured  that  anything  the  will  of  man  wants  to  keep  is  not 
worth  the  pains.  It  is  gain  to  go  out  from  all  to  meet  Him ; 
it  is  joy  to  be  in  the  path  of  His  sorrow.  Has  this  reached 
your  heart  ?  Do  not  be  content  with  saying,  "I  have  got  oil  in 
my  vessel,  and  it  does  not  matter  where  I  am."  What  more  selfish 
and  unholy?  The  Lord  grant  that  such  may  not  be  your  feeling! 
He  has  saved  me  that  I  may  think  of  Him.  He  wishes  me  to 
go  out  to  meet  Him — to  value  the  precious  hope  of  His  coming. 
Are  you  then  keeping  His  word  ?  Do  you  not  know  ?  This  is 
a  question  between  your  own  conscience  and  the  Lord.  When 
you  have  kept  what  you  do  know,  you  will  learn  more  and  find 
it  the  truest  liberty  ever  to  serve  Him. 

"  I  am  coming  quickly  :  hold  that  fast  which  thou  liast,  that 


A   PILLAE   IN   THE   TEMPLE.  79 

no  one  take  thy  crown"  (verse  11).  This  is  a  precious  word. 
The  Lord  spoke  of  coming  like  a  thief  even  to  Sardis,  which 
had  taken  the  world  as  its  mistress,  and  allowed  the  nnpurged 
to  govern  in  place  of  the  Lord.  Here  He  comes  as  one  that 
has  a  crown  to  give.  The  Lord  Himself  coming  to  meet  us  is 
the  jewel  He  has  given  us  to  keep.  May  He  grant  us  to  hold  it 
fast,  that  it  be  not  taken  from  us  ! 

We  are  indeed  weak  now,  but  the  Lord  says,  "If  you  are 
content  to  be  weak  now,  I  will  make  you  a  pillar  in  the  temple 
of  my  God."  A  pillar  is  the  emblem  of  strength  (that  which 
supported  the  temple)  contrasted  with  weakness.  It  is  a  hard 
thing  to  be  content  to  be  weak.  To  flesh  it  is  comfortable  to 
feel  the  world's  strength  under  one.  But  if  willing  to  appear 
what  we  are  now,  the  Lord  tells  us  what  He  will  do  for  us 
then :  "  I  will  make  you  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God " 
(verse  12).  As  I  have  known  my  God,  I  will  bring  you  into 
fellowship  with  me.  You  were  content  to  wait  for  my  coming, 
and  none  shall  take  your  crown.  For  those  who  have  thought 
of  Christ  now,  Christ  will  provide  all  the  joy  He  can  give  them 
then.  The  Lord  grant  that  this  may  be  our  comfort  while  w^e 
wait  for  Him !  We  may  for  Christ  be  outside  all  that  looks 
strong  and  orderly.  In  that  day  we  shall  go  no  more  out,  but 
enjoy  the  most  intimate  association  with  Christ,  be  a  pillar  in 
the  temple  of  His  God,  and  have  the  name  of  His  God  and  of 
tlie  city  of  His  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  His  new 
name  described  on  us. 

Weak  as  these  were  they  took  the  place  of  weakness ;  and  as 
they  had  thought  of  His  word  and  of  His  name,  the  Lord  says. 
When  I  have  you  in  my  temple,  I  will  write  upon  you  "  my 
new  name,"  and  will  make  you  a  pillar  "in  the  temple  of  my 
God."  He  does  not  say  the  throne,  which  would  be  the  ex- 
pression of  power,  but  the  temple,  which  is  another  thought 
from  the  throne.  The  temple  is  the  place  of  worship,  where 
God  is  exalted  in  the  beauty  of  holiness.  Just  so,  when  it  was 
a  question  of  the  worship  of  God,  David  wears  an  ephod.  His 
own  wife  despised  him  (she  was  looking  at  him  as  the  son-in- 
law  of  her  father  Saul  the  king)  because  he  did  not  come  out 
in  some  robe  suitable  to  royalty :  but  David  had  the  thought  of 


80  WORSHIP. 

God  before  him,  and  in  his  eyes  it  was  his  greatest  possible 
exaltation  to  wear  the  ephod,  and  so  to  serve  Jehovah  and 
rejoice  in  His  goodness  who  deigned  to  be  in  their  midst. 

So  the  Philadelphians  seem  specially  those  who  entered  into 
worship,  because  they  appreciated  the  person  and  character  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  It  is  this  that  draws  out  the  heart.  Thus  when 
Jesus  revealed  Himself  after  giving  sight  (John  ix.),  the  blind 
man  paid  Him  homage.  Worship  is  little  enjoyed  in  general 
even  by  real  children  of  God.  A  man  might  receive  favour 
from  God,  and  give  thanks  heartily  for  it,  and  yet  know  little 
of  worship.  This  is  a  higher  step  and  nearer  to  Himself.  It 
does  not  merely  appreciate  the  favours  that  come  down  to  us 
from  God,  but  what  tlie  God  is  who  gives  them.  Eeal  worship 
is  always  this.  The  Father  seeks  worshippers,  but  it  is  to  draw 
them  back  to  the  source  from  which  the  grace  has  flowed.  Not 
that  the  word  worship  is  used  in  the  address  to  Philadelphia, 
except  in  verse  9,  where  it  is  in  quite  a  different  sense,  merely 
signifying  that  the  men,  wlio  were  now  scorners,  would  have  to 
humble  themselves  and  give  honour  to  those  wliom  they  had 
despised.  Worship  is  the  drawing  near  to  God  in  the  appre- 
ciation not  only  of  what  He  does  but  of  Himself  There  is  this 
which  always  prepares  the  way  for  worship — the  full  and  simple 
knowledge  of  our  being  brought  near  to  God  as  weU  as  of  the 
work  of  Christ  and  its  blessed  results  for  us. 

LAODICEA. 

We  have  already  noticed  the  strong  contrast  between  the 
state  of  Sardis  and  the  previous  order  of  things.  Gross  cor- 
ruption, open  evil,  persecution,  hatred  of  the  holiness  and 
truth  of  God,  false  prophets  liad  reigned  in  Thyatira,  tliougli 
there  was  a  remnant  found  there,  and  a  faithful  remnant.  If 
Thyatira  represents  the  dark  ages,  when  the  Lord  had  His  faith- 
ful saints  hidden  away  in  nooks  and  corners  of  the  world,  in 
Sardis  we  have  a  correct  appearance  of  things — a  name  to  live, 
and  death  almost  universal;  yet  even  in  Sardis  there  were  those 
who  had  not  defded  their  garments.  If  there  is  so  marked  a 
distinction  between  Sardis  and  Tliyatira,  there  is  an  etiually 
strong  line  of  demarcation  between  Pliiludelphia  and  Laodicea. 


CONTKAST   WITH    PHILADELPHIA.  81 

"  To  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Laodicea,"  not  "  of  the 
Laodiceans."  (So,  as  to  the  first,  it  should  be  "  the  church  in 
Ephesus."  Rev.  ii.  1.) 

Let  us  look  at  the  character  that  God  gives  of  this  church, 
and  what  He  brings  to  light  of  its  condition.  If  there  are  two 
churches  that  stand  in  more  pointed  contrast  to  one  another,  it 
is  surely  these  last.  The  reason,  I  think,  is  this ;  that  when 
God  works  in  any  special  way,  wlien  He  puts  forth  His  grace 
in  some  new  form  and  light,  it  always,  since  the  slipping  aside 
of  Christendom,  draws  in  its  train  a  peculiarly  dark  shadow. 
So  we  saw  in  Philadelphia  a  bright  picture.  They  were  weak, 
but  they  were  to  depend  on  Him  in  peace ;  for  the  Lord  had 
023ened  the  door,  and  He  would  keep  it  so.  Christ  was  all  their 
confidence,  in  contrast  with  the  pretentious  religionists  who 
appear  at  the  same  time  claiming  to  be  the  people  of  God  with 
no  care  for  Christ.  The  church  should  have  been  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  a  real  testimony  to  the  new  creation,  of  which  Christ  is 
both  the  only  source  and  the  bright  exemplar.  But  it  had 
wholly  failed  and  never  so  much  as  in  this  last  phase.  For 
when  we  come  to  look  at  Laodicea,  what  a  difference  we  find  ! 

Does  the  Lord  here  speak  of  waiting  upon  their  need,  having 
the  key  of  David,  and  presenting  Himself  as  the  object  of  their 
affections — as  the  holy  and  true  One,  in  His  moral  grandeur, 
which  called  out  all  the  heart  to  worship  Him  ?  Does  He  not 
now  speak  in  another  tone  ?  "  These  things  saith  the  Amen, 
the  faithful  and  true  Witness,  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of 
God."  The  end  of  haughty  profession  was  at  hand.  He  was 
the  "Amen,"  the  only  securer  of  divine  promise,  the  solitary 
"  faithful  and  true  AVitness,"  when  all  else  had  failed.  This  pre- 
sentation of  Himself  supposes  that  those  to  whom  He  was 
writing  were  utterly  faithless  and  had  revived  the  old  things 
which  had  been  buried  in  the  grave  of  Christ.  Even  a  saint 
like  Job  was  not  in  the  presence  of  God  when  he  was  thinking 
so  much  about  himself.  ("  When  the  ear  heard  me  and  the  eye 
saw  me,"  &c.)  We  may  say  he  was  in  the  presence  of  himself 
and  not  of  God.  It  is  always  a  poor  sign  if  we  see  a  man  stop 
to  look  at  himself,  whether  his  good  or  his  bad  self  Even  if 
converted,  why  should  we  thus  dwell  on  the  change  in  ourselves  ? 

G 


82  CONTRAST   OF   PHILADELPHIA 

This  is  not  to  forget  the  things  that  are  behind  (which  does  not 
mean,  by  the  way,  our  sins,  but  our  progress) :  if  the  Lord  has 
given  us  to  take  a  step  forward,  it  is  that  we  may  get  nearer  to 
Himself,  and  increase  in  the  knowledge  of  God.  Along  with 
this  there  will  always  be  increase  in  the  knowledge  of  ourselves, 
but  never  in  the  way  of  self-admiration.  As  belonging  to  Christ, 
He  is  the  object  that  happily  keeps  us  low.  When  Job  was 
brought  at  the  close  really  into  the  presence  of  God,  he  was 
in  the  dust.  He  did  not  know  what  it  was  to  be  thoroughly 
nothing  before  God  till  he  was  brought  there,  and  his  eye  saw 
Him.  Before,  he  had  been  looking  more  at  what  God  had  pro- 
duced in  him,  but  now  he  saw  himself  to  be  as  dust.  After 
this  we  fmd  him  even  praying  for  his  friends,  and  we  have 
burnt-offerings.  This  was  the  spirit  of  intercession  and  worship 
too.  It  appears  to  me  that  such  was  the  spirit  into  which  the 
Philadelphian  church  had  been  brought.  They  understood 
worship,  because  they  in  their  measure  knew  Him  that  was 
from  the  beginning.  The  Lord  loves  us  to  be  strong  in  Christ, 
growing  up  into  Him  in  all  things. 

In  Laodicea  there  was  no  such  thought — nothing  like  an  en- 
trance into  the  riches  of  the  Lord's  grace.  There  is  nothing  we 
ought  to  feel  our  lack  in  so  much  as  in  worship,  just  because 
we  do  value  it.  It  is  spiritual  feeling,  thougli  feeble  indeed, 
that  makes  us  alive  to  our  little  power  of  worship.  Be  assured 
that  the  spirit  of  worship  is  our  true  power  for  service.  Thus 
in  John  x.  the  Lord  says,  "  I  am  the  door :  by  me,  if  any  man 
enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved,  and  shall  go  in  and  ou^,  and  find 
pasture."  It  is  no  longer  the  Jewish  sheepfold  and  the  bondage 
of  the  law,  but  perfect  liberty,  going  in  for  worship  and  out  for 
service,  everywhere  finding  food  and  blessing.  How  sweet  to 
think  that  the  time  is  coming  when  we  shall  go  in,  never  to 
come  out  more  !  It  will  be  always  service  in  immediate  coji- 
nexion  with  the  Lord  Himself — enjoyment  of  the  presence  of 
God  and  of  the  Lamb — eternal  worship.  And  let  me  again 
ask,  for  whom  would  this  be  a  welcome  and  happy  promise  ? 
For  those  who  hnd  valued  and  enjoyed  worship  here  below ;  as 
in  Ps.  Ixxxiv.,  "They  will  be  still  praising  thee."  Tlie  place 
where  the  Lord  dwelt  was  graven  even  in  the  liearts  of  those 


WITH  LAODICEA.  83 

going  there — "in  whose  heart  are  the  ways."  They  felt  that 
they  must  get  where  God  was,  and  there  they  dwell. 

The  Lord  does  not  reveal  Himself  in  the  same  personal  way, 
and  still  less  ecclesiastically;  but  certain  qualities  and  titles 
belonging  to  Him  are  taken  up,  which  reach  out  from  what 
He  had  been  for  God  to  that  which  links  Him  with  the  new 
scene  in  which  He  is  about  to  be  displayed  as  Head  over 
all.  This  cannot  fail.  He  was  "  the  Amen,  the  faithful  and 
true  Witness,  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  God."  They  had 
failed  in  everything,  they  had  been  unfaithful  witnesses ;  but 
He  as  good  as  says  to  them,  "You  have  not  met  a  single 
thought  of  my  heart.  I  will  now  present  myself  to  you  as  all 
you  should  have  been."  He  was  also  "  the  beginning  of  the 
creation  of  God"  (verse  14).  Christendom  is  at  its  beginning, 
certainly  from  apostolic  days,  a  rejected  witness.  Christ  is  in 
relationship  with  the  new  creation. 

"  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  art  neither  cold  nor  hot"  (verse 
15).  This  is  latitudinarianism.  It  is  not  ignorance  that  works 
this  deadly  mischief,  but  the  heart  remaining  indifferent  to  the 
truth,  after  it  has  been  fully  brought  before  it.  Such  an  one 
does  not  want  the  truth,  because  he  feels  the  sacrifice  and  the 
separation  from  the  world  which  must  ensue,  if  it  be  really 
followed.  We  ought  to  bear,  wherever  there  is  unw^illing 
ignorance  ;  but  indifference  to  truth  is  quite  another  thing,  and 
hateful  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord. 

Thus  latitudinarianism  is  never  the  condition  of  souls  that 
are  simple-hearted,  but  of  those  by  whom  the  truth  has  been 
heard  and  who  are  not  prepared  for  the  cross.  God's  truth 
must  put  people's  hearts  to  the  test.  It  is  not  merely  some- 
thing I  have  to  learn,  but  I  am  proved.  If  the  sheep  is  in  a 
healthy  condition,  it  will  hear  the  Shepherd's  voice,  and  not 
even  know  the  voice  of  strangers ;  but  if  the  sheep  strays 
after  others,  it  becomes  so  confounded  that  it  may  cease  to  dis- 
tinguish the  well-known  voice.  This  arises  in  Laodicea,  and,  as 
it  would  appear,  from  despising  the  testimony  given  in  the 
former  church.  Laodicea  is  the  fruit  of  the  rejection  of  the 
special  truth  that  formed  Philadelphia.  There  He  shewed  Him- 
self, and  assured  each  heart  that  received  Him,  that  as  His  name 

G  2 


84  LUKEWAKMNESS. 

was  everytliin^^  to  us  on  earth,  so  Tic  will  give  us  His  new 
name  in  the  time  of  glory.  Every  affection  that  has  been 
spiritual,  all  that  the  Lord  wrought  in  our  hearts,  shall  come  out 
more  1  nightly  in  heaven.  To  Laodicea  He  says,  "Thou  art 
neither  cold  nor  hot.  They  must  have  had  some  stinmlant,  as 
the  cold  was  not  absolute.  They  were  not  honest.  Laodicea  is 
the  last  state  of  decay,  which  the  Lord  could  net  allow  to 
go  on  any  longer —  a  time  when  persons  have  had  a  great  deal 
of  truth  in  a  certain  fashion,  but  their  souls  not  touched  by 
it.  If  the  heart  had  been  in  ever  so  little  a  measure  true,  even 
though  ignorant,  it  would  have  enjoyed  all  that  came  from  the 
Lord.  In  1  John  ii.  the  persons  who  are  said  to  have  an  unction 
fi'om  the  Holy  One,  and  to  know  all  things,  are  not  the  "fathers" 
(who  of  course  had  been  thus  anointed  also)  but  "  the  babes." 
The  ability  to  judge  what  is  not  of  Christ  depends  on  the  heart 
being  true  to  Him.  Hence  the  youngest  saint,  if  single-eyed, 
can  discern  with  certainty,  where  the  theologian  is  lost  in  end- 
less genealogies. 

Every  spirit  that  confesses  not  but  denies  Christ  (the  Christ 
of  God)  is  of  antichrist.  There  were,  there  are  now,  many  anti- 
christs, and  the  place  to  look  for  them  is  where  He  has  been 
named.  If  Christ  had  not  been  known,  there  could  not  have 
been  an  antichrist,  which  was  the  dark  shadow  that  followed 
the  truth.  As  surely  as  the  Lord  works  in  His  gracious  way, 
Satan  is  at  "work  too.  To  be  "  lukewarm  "  was  to  be  false  with 
the  ])retension  of  the  trutli  ;  and  the  Lord  says,  "I  will  spue 
tlicc  out  of  my  iiioiitli."  Tliore  is  not  such  a  contemptuous 
ex])ression  iised  by  11  im  anywhere  else  that  I  know.  This  is 
sensibly  dil'ferent  from  the  dealing  with  Sardis,  Avhere  the 
general  judgment  ol'  rrolcsl autism  is  given, — judged  like  the 
world,  and  the  Lord  coming  as  a  thief.  Is  this  the  Avay  that  wc 
nmasure  things  ?  We  should  have  said  probably  that  Jezebel 
was  to  be  fcilt  most  about ;  but  would  it  have  struck  us  that  to 
be  luke\\arm  was  the  worst  of  all  ?  Yet  this  was  what  drew 
forth  all  the  Lord's  indignation,  and  He  only  is  wise. 

"  Because  thou  sayest,  I  am  rich,  and  increased  with  goods," 
&c.  (verse  10).  Here  is  a  plain  }>roof  that  they  had  heard  a 
great   deal    about   the    truth.     They  thought  themselves  rich. 


SELF-SATISFACTION.  85 

Learning  and  intcllectualisni  in  religion  they  counted  a  prize. 
It'  tliese  grow  (at  least  in  extent,  even  though  not  in  deptli), 
what  ground  for  satisfaction  ?  The  spread  of  the  outward  know- 
ledge of  God  is  what  hastens  on  the  last   crisis — God's  final 
judgment  and  setting  aside  of  all  that  hears  His  name  falsely 
and  self-complacently.     They  had  sought  man  and  the  world, 
which  promise  much  to  the  eye.    But  this  is  no  righteous  judg- 
ment ;  for  nature  thus  allowed  in  the  church  is  so  much  loss,  to 
the  utter  exclusion  of  what  is  divine  and  heavenly — the  real 
and  bitter  impoverishment  unto  all  true  riches.     This  the  Lord 
proceeds  next  to  lay  before  the  angel.     Absence  of  discernment 
follows.     "And  knowest  not  that  thou  art  the  wretched,  and 
the  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind  "  (ver.  17).  This  was  because 
they  had  rejected  the  testimony  of  God.    His  testimony  always 
produces   the   sense  of  being  nothhig,  but  it  never   weakens 
confidence  in  Him.     There  may  be  tests, — the  Epistles  of  John 
are  full  of   them ;    but  there  never  is  such  a  thought  as  the 
Spirit  leading  a  believer  to  doubt  God's  being  for  him.    He  may 
and  surely  will  work  in  a  soul  that  is  slipping  aside  from  the 
Lord  to  bring  him  back ;  He  may  make  us  feel  our  weakness ; 
but  it  is  not  at  all  His  way  to  produce  a  doubt  of  the  truth;  and 
it  is  ever  a  sign  of  the  ilesh  being  at  work,  "  lusting  against  the 
Spirit,"  when  we  give  way  to  distrust.  The  Spirit  of  God  always, 
wherever  He  is,  aims  at  making  a  man  thoroughly  humble 
himself,  judging  and  renouncing  the  folly  of  the  flesh.    There  is 
and  must  be  reality  and  truthfulness  in  God's  presence. 

Laodicea  says,  "  1  am  rich,  and  am  become  rich,  and  have 
need  of  nothing."  But  we  luive  the  Spirit  of  God  pronouncing 
this  to  be  carnal  presumption,  the  heart  knowing  not  its  need, 
and  refusing  grace.  There  had  been  momentary  warmth,  which 
made  it  so  hateful  to  God.  ]3ut  this  is  just  what  men  are  doing 
who  talk  about  the  church  of  the  future.  The  early  times  they 
call  the  infancy  of  the  church ;  afterwards  the  church  became 
overgrown  and  haughty:  and  now  they  are  looking  for  a  church 
of  the  future,  when  it  will  be  no  longer  subject,  but  will  act 
for  itself — will  act  like  a  man.  Alas  !  wliere  will  not  these 
aspirations  end?  For  God  will  be  left  out  of  the  so-called 
church,  and  His  authority  got  rid  of 


86  INDIFFERENTISM. 

This  is  working  now  extensively.  And  are  God's  children 
lukewarm  ahout  it?  about  God's  tnitli  being  shut  out?  Ke- 
nieniber  wliat  the  Lord  here  says,  "  I  will  spue  thee  out  of  my 
mouth."  It  would  be  a  grave  mistake  to  suppose  that  there 
were  no  good  men  among  them.  It  is  no  question  however  of 
individuals,  but  of  the  assembly :  as  such  the  Lord  said  He 
would  spue  them  out  of  His  mouth.  People  cannot  congregate 
in  large  masses  without  Laodiceanism  as  the  result,  if  it  be  not 
also  the  spring.  Popularity  is  one  thing;  quite  another  the 
Spirit  of  God  gathering  souls  to  Christ  at  the  present  time. 
The  Lord  be  thanked  if  there  are  a  few  gathered  out  to  His 
name !  Let  God's  children  remember  that  they  must  answer 
to  the  Lord  Jesus,  whether  they  are  represented  by  Laodicea  or 
not;  wliether  they  are  living  for  Christ,  or  for  what  merely  bears 
His  name  as  a  vail  over  indifferentism. 

Yet  the  Lord  does  not  give  them  up.  He  says,  "  I  counsel 
thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in  the  fire,"  &c.  (verse  18.)  Gold 
is  used  as  tlie  symbol  of  intrinsic  righteousness  in  God's  nature, 
or  divine  righteousness;  and  white  raiment  or  linen  stands  for 
the  righteousnesses  of  saints,  as  we  see  from  chapter  xix. 

Divine  righteousness  had  slipped  from  their  thoughts.  They 
were  neither  appreciating  tlie  righteousness  of  God,  which  a 
Christian  is  made  in  Christ,  nor  the  practical  righteousness  dis- 
played before  men,  whicli  the  Spirit  leads  in.  So  He  counsels 
them  to  buy  of  Him  the  true  gold,  and  white  raiment  that 
there  might  be  the  holiness  that  became  them  before  others. 
"  Anoint  thine  eye  with  eyesalve,  that  thou  mayest  see."  There 
was  the  secret — the  lack  of  unction  from  the  Holy  One.  They 
did  not  see  anything  properly,  not  even  their  need  of  divine 
righteousness. 

"As  many  as  I  love  I  rebuke  and  chasten;  be  zealous,  there- 
fore, and  repent"  (verse  19).  Depend  upon  it  that  this  is  the 
Lord's  voice  for  the  present  moment.  Here  alas !  it  was  what 
the  Laodiceans  needed.  The  Lord  is  dealing  with  Plis  people ; 
He  constantly  puts  before  them  something  to  humble  them  in 
their  thoughts  of  themselves :  He  does  not  tell  them  to  do 
or  try  something  new,  but  calls  on  them  "to  repent."  He 
does  )iot  ask  them  to  stretch  their  wings  for  some  greater  ilight 


CALL   TO   EEPENTANCE.  87 

in  the  future,  but  to  see  where  they  are,  and  to  confess  their 
failure.    But  this  is  irksome  to  the  light  self-complacent  heart. 

The  call  to  repentance  here,  however,  as  in  Sardis,  differs 
greatly  from  that  in  the  message  to  Ephesus  and  Pergamos, 
where  all  were  thus  urged  on  penalty  of  the  Lord's  solemn 
chastening,  whether  general  or  special.  Thyatira  had  here  too 
an  intermediate  place  :  "  I  gave  her  space  to  repent  of  her 
fornication;  and  she  repented  not."  Hence  the  threat  of  judg- 
ment followed,  and  the  vast  change  ensued  in  all  its  extent. 

It  is  a  far  higher  thing  to  suffer  for  Christ  and  with  Christ 
than  to  be  active  in  doing.  When  the  Apostle  once  asked, 
"What  shall  I  do?"  the  Lord  answered,  "I  shall  shew  thee 
what  great  things  thou  must  suffer."  This  is  what  the  Lord 
specially  prizes — not  mere  sufferings  as  men,  but  sufferings  for 
Christ.     "  If  we  suffer,  we  shall  also  reign  with  him." 

Here  they  were  persons  as  sunken  as  they  were  proud,  called 
upon  to  be  zealous  and  repent,  to  humble  themselves  before 
God  on  account  of  their  condition.  Yet  the  Lord  utters  a 
gracious  word,  "  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock" 
(verse  20).  Is  it  not  a  solemn  thing  that  the  Lord  should  be 
there,  thus  taking  the  place  of  one  outside?  Nevertheless  He 
was  ready  to  come  in  where  He  found  a  soul  true  to  Him.  "  If 
any  man  hear  my  voice,  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to 
him,"  &c.  Need  it  be  said  that  this  is  not  an  address  to  the 
world  in  order  to  be  saved  ?  In  John  x.  the  Lord  presents 
Himself  in  full  grace,  saying,  "  I  am  the  door,  by  me  if  any 
man  enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved."  But  here  He  speaks  thus 
to  the  church.  What  a  solemn  position  !  How  utterly  fallen 
now !  What  ought  to  be  the  enjoyed  portion  of  all  the  church, 
whether  in  approaching  God  or  in  display  before  men,  or  in 
the  communion  of  Christ,  is  proffered  in  pure  grace  to  him  who 
hearkens  and  humbles  himself  before  the  grace  of  the  Lord. 
He  certainly  had  no  sympathy  with  their  self-satisfaction. 
He  stood  outside,  knocking  at  the  door,  if  perchance  there 
should  be  a  heart  within,  not  too  much  occupied  with  the 
things  and  the  persons  around,  that  would  open  to  Him.  To 
such  He  says,  "  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  sup  with  him,  and 
he  with  me."     But  it  is  all  individual.     In  presence  of  the 


88  SITTING   IN    CHRIST  S   THRONE. 

gravest  departure,  are  we  to  say,  "  there  is  no  hope  "  ?  Not  so ; 
for  the  Lord  is  standing  at  the  door  and  knocking.  There  may 
not  be  many  to  answer  His  call,  but  some  will ;  and  the  promise 
is,  "  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  give  to  sit  down  with  me 
in  my  throne ;  even  as  I  also  overcame,  and  sat  down  with  my 
Father  in  his  throne." 

It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  this  is  comparatively  a  glo- 
rious promise :  we  are  apt  to  think  so,  because  we  naturally 
value  display.  But  God  does  not  estimate  things  thus.  His 
holy  love,  proving  itself  divine  most  of  all  when  Christ  humbled 
Himself,  in  coming  down  to  man  and  dying  for  him — this  is 
the  standard  of  value,  rather  than  power  or  glory.  He  could 
make  a  thousand  worlds  with  far  more  ease  than  He  gave  His 
Son  to  suffer.  I  do  not  question  the  grace  of  such  a  word, 
spite  of  such  evil ;  but  our  sharing  the  kingdom  with  Christ  is 
not  the  most  blessed  thing  we  shall  enjoy.  And  the  promise 
here  does  not  go  farther.  What  we  have  and  shall  have  in 
Christ  Himself  is  much  more  precious.  Yet  is  this  a  portion 
with  Christ.  In  John  xvii.  23  the  Lord  shews  that  the  display 
of  glory  is  for  the  vindication  of  Himself  before  the  world. 
All  the  glory  disclosed  in  the  future  will  be  the  proof  to  the 
world,  that  they  may  know  that  the  Father  loves  us  as  He 
loved  His  Son.  But  we  are  entitled  to  know  it  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  now.  We  do  not  wait  till  then  to  know  the  love  that 
has  given  us  the  glory — a  deeper  thing  than  the  appearing  to 
the  world,  or  thrones  in  the  kingdom.  The  personal  affection 
of  the  Lord  to  His  people  is  a  better  portion  than  anything  dis- 
played before  men  or  angels. 

Here  the  Lord  closes  the  churches.  He  had  reached  the  last 
phase.  The  wisdom  of  God  has  provided  in  these  chapters  not 
so  much  deep  truth  as  what  requires  conscience :  this  rather 
than  great  ability  is  what  we  are  to  understand.  The  need  for 
guidance  is  the  eye  fixed  on  Christ.  Besides  these  epistles  being 
messages  to  local  churches  in  the  name  of  St.  Jolin,  we  have 
seen  in  them  a  sketch  of  the  whole  history  of  the  cliurch  till 
the  Lord  comes.  For  properly  speaking,  the  Lord's  addresses  to 
the  churches  themselves  or  their  angels  constitute  "  the  things 
which  are"  or  the  actual  state  in  John's  day.     Tlie  addresses, 


CONCLUSION   OF   THE    CHUKCHES.  89 

while  primarily  connected  with  the  facts  then  existing,  go 
far  beyond  them,  and  reach  out  into  a  prolonged  moral  appli- 
cation, till  there  is  no  longer  any  recognised  assembly,  the  last 
(though  with  mercy  to  individuals)  having  been  summarily 
rejected  as  a  public  witness  by  the  Lord.  After  that  we  never 
hear  of  the  churches  any  more  upon  the  earth.  On  the  con- 
trary the  curtain  drops,  and  we  have  a  new  scene  altogether. 
The  seer  no  longer  turns  round  to  see  who  spoke  behind  him 
on  earth,*  but  hears  the  same  voice  above,  whither  he  is  now 
invited  to  ascend.  The  government  of  the  world  from  the 
throne  in  heaven,  its  accompaniments  and  consequences,  are 
the  things  which  follow,  when  the  church's  time-state  is  closed. 
After  this  we  have  individual  saints  both  among  the  twelve 
tribes  of  Israel  and  out  of  all  nations  mentioned  as  such,  but 
this  only  makes  the  contrast  more  striking.  Henceforward,  if 
specified  at  all,  they  are  named  as  Jews  and  Gentiles,  because 
there  was  no  longer  any  thing  of  the  nature  of  the  assembly  of 
God  upon  earth :  for  the  very  meaning  and  essence  of  the 
church  is,  that  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,  because  all  are 
one  in  Christ. 

In  the  detail  of  these  seven  epistles  there  is  also  abundant 
practical  instruction.  It  is  true  that  the  Spirit  addressed  them 
to  the  churches ;  but  "  he  that  hath  an  ear "  is  expressly  en- 
joined to  give  heed ;  and  this  to  the  challenges  of  the  Lord  sent 
to  them  all.  Such  application,  however,  falls  more  fittingly 
within  the  domain  of  ordinary  ministry  in  the  word. 

*  The  chief  opponent  of  the  future  or  rather  protracted  application  of  the 
Apocalyptic  epistles,  draws  from  the  local  direction  of  the  voice  that,  according 
to  a  mode  of  interpretation  then  prevalent,  the  visions  ahout  to  be  shewn  would 
refer  to  events  yvt  future  and  behind,  in  the  course  of  time.  [Mora  Apocalypticce, 
5th  edition,  vol.  i.  page  70.)  If  there  be  any  truth  in  that  interpretation, 
it  strongly  confirms  thi  future  bearing  of  the  seven  addresses.  But  it  is  certain 
from  Rev.  iv.  1,  that  when  the  purely  prophetic  visions  are  about  to  begin,  the 
speaker's  voice  is  above,  not  behind.  What  the  turning  to  the  voice  behind  in 
chapter  i.  really  shews  is,  that  the  prophet's  eye  was  forward,  as  it  were,  in  the 
direction  of  the  kingdom,  and  that  he  was  recalled  to  take  notice  of  the  churches, 
"  the  things  which  are,"  as  justifying  the  Lord  in  His  setting  aside  of  Christen- 
dom in  order  to  the  introduction  of  His  kingdom  in  power,  when  patience  shall 
no  longer  be  demanded.  For  the  Lord  will  create  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth  : 
first,  in  a  partial  preparatory  sense — the  millennium ;  and  then  fully  and  finally, 
the  eternal  state.    The  church  state  is  thus  emphatically  treated  as  present  time. 


90  BISHOP   NEWTON'S    OBJECTIONS 

It  may  be  well,  now  that  we  have  gone  over  the  ground  of 
the  Apocalyptic  epistles,  to  notice  the  objections  urged  against 
the  larger  view  of  their  meaning  by  Bishop  Newton.  "  Many 
contend,  and  among  them  such  learned  men  as  More  and 
Vitringa,  that  the  seven  epistles  are  prophetical  of  so  many 
successive  periods  and  states  of  the  church,  from  the  beginning 
to  the  conclusion  of  all.  But  it  doth  not  appear  that  there  are, 
or  were  to  be,  seven  periods  of  the  church,  neither  more  nor 
less ;  and  no  two  men  can  agree  in  assigning  the  same  periods. 
There  are  likewise  in  these  epistles  several  innate  characters 
which  were  peculiar  to  the  church  of  that  age,  and  cannot  be 
so  well  applied  to  the  church  of  any  other  age.  Besides  other 
arguments,  there  is  also  this  plain  reason ;  the  last  state  of  the 
church  is  described  in  this  very  book  as  the  most  glorious  of 
all,  but  in  the  last  state  in  these  epistles,  that  of  Laodicea,  the 
church  is  represented  as  '  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor, 
and  blind,  and  naked.'"  {Newton's  Works,  vol.  i.,  p.  549,  edition 
1782.) 

Now  it  is  plain  that  "  it  doth  not  appear "  is  rather  an  as- 
sumption than  a  proof.  Why  does  it  not  appear  ?  Anotlier 
might  urge  the  same  objection,  and  perhaps  with  quite  as  much 
weight,  against  the  seven  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials.  God  has 
been  pleased  to  specify  in  each  of  these  instances  seven  salient 
points,  so  to  speak,  as  His  complete  account  of  each.  "The 
main  subjects  of  this  book,"  the  Bishop  had  just  before  remarked, 
"  are  comprised  of  sevens,  seven  churches,  seven  seals,  seven 
trumpets,  and  seven  vials,  as  seven  was  also  a  mystical  number 
throughout  the  Old  Testament."  If  this  answer  satisfy  as  to 
the  seven  vials,  why  not  as  to  the  seven  epistles  ?  Doubtless 
more  spirituality  may  be  required  for  right  discernment  in  the 
latter  than  in  the  former  case ;  because  one  series  relates  to 
external  judgments  in  the  world,  whereas  the  other  series  takes 
cognizance  of  such  remarkable  spiritual  conditions,  good  and 
bad,  in  the  history  of  the  church,  as  it  seemed  good  to  the  Lord 
to  notice.  Hence  a  2Ji'^ori  one  might  be  prepared  for  a  greater 
divergence  of  judgment  among  Christians  in  their  adaptation  of 
Rev.  ii.  iii.,  than  in  their  views  of  any  other  parts  of  the  book. 
If  there  had  been  therefore  a  considerable  measure  of  truth  in 


ANSWEKED.  91 

wliat  he  says,  tlie  general  principle  would  still  remain  undis- 
turbed. But  this  is  not  the  case.  There  is  a  striking  agreement 
as  regards  the  first  three  or  four  churches.  This  of  course  is 
not  urged  as  in  the  least  degree  authoritative,  but  as  a  sufficient 
answer  to  the  charge  of  hopeless  discrepancy  preferred  by  Bp. 
Newton.  Eetort  would  be  easy  on  the  discordant  schemes  of 
interpreting  the  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials. 

It  is  singular,  however,  that  the  Bishop  bears  testimony  in 
the  next  page  to  the  mystical  meaning  of  the  epistle  to  Smyrna. 
For  the  "tribulation  ten  days"  is  there  explained  of  the  greatest 
persecution  that  the  primitive  church  ever  endured,  Diocletian's 
persecution,  which  lasted  ten  years,  and  grievously  afflicted  all 
the  Eastern  churches.  Conscious  that  such  an  application,  not 
in  the  promises  attached  but  in  the  body  of  the  epistle,  is  fatal 
to  his  own  exclusively  literal  application,  the  Bishop  thereon 
allows  that  the  "  promissory  or  threatening  part  foretells  some- 
tliing  of  their  future  condition,"  and  asserts  that  "  in  this  sense, 
and  in  no  other,  can  these  epistles  be  said  to  be  prophetical" 
(p.  550). 

But  how  stop  here,  once  you  own,  as  he  does  in  the  Smyrnean 
epistle,  a  bearing  beyond  the  bare  single  church  in  or  near  that 
age,  once  you  extend  its  scope  to  all  the  East,  and  its  date  to 
the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century  ?  Indeed,  that  fierce  per- 
secution was  not  confined  to  the  East;  for  all  the  empire,  not 
excepting  Spain  and  Britain,  was  stained  with  Christian  blood. 
If  the  principle  is  true  in  one  epistle,  why  not  in  all  ?  And  in 
fact  was  not  general  declension  within  as  clearly  marked  in 
Ephesus,  as  persecution  from  without  in  Smyrna  ?  and  does  not 
Pergamos  portray  the  corrupting  influences  of  worldly  exalta- 
tion, as  palpably  as  Thyatira  sets  forth  the  proud  unrelenting 
false  prophetess  of  Popery  ? 

No  doubt  the  unsatisfactory  character  attached  by  our  Lord 
to  Sardis  must  be  painful  and  startling  to  those  whose  eye  is 
filled  with  ordinary  Protestantism  and  its  decent  orthodoxy. 
And  perhaps  yet  more  distasteful  is  the  sight  of  another  and  a 
subsequent  testimony,  which  sets  those  who  bear  it  in  weakness 
and  scorn  outside  the  religious  world,  with  the  coming  of  Christ 
their  blessed  and  animating  hope. 


92       THE  LAST  STATE  OF  THE  CHURCH  ON  EARTH. 

But  it  is  plain  tliat  the  picture  of  the  last  assembly,  in  its 
deplorahle  lukewarmness  and  the  Lord's  peremptory  rejection 
of  it,  was  the  great  difficulty  to  Bishop  Xewton,  because  of  its 
inconsistency  with  his  theory  of  the  last  state  of  the  church, 
"  described  in  this  very  book  as  the  most  glorious  of  all."  But 
this  is  a  total  mistake.  The  Revelation  never  describes  the 
church  on  earth  after  Laodicea.  The  glorious  description,  to 
which  the  Bishop  refers  is  probably  in  Rev.  xix.-xxi.,  where 
the  entire  church  is  glorified  above.  In  a  word  this  reason  is 
plainly  invalid.  The  bride  of  the  Lamb  is  to  reign ;  but  this 
does  not  contradict  the  solemn  testimony  of  the  Laodicean 
epistle,  that  the  last  state  of  Christendom  here  below  is  to  be, 
like  that  of  Israel  before  it,  "  worse  than  the  first."  The  general 
testimony  of  the  New  Testament  entirely  confirms  the  witness 
borne  by  this  particular  part,  as  appears  from  Luke  xvii.  26-37  ; 
2  Thess.  ii.  1-12  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  1-5  ;  2  Peter  ii.  iii. ;  1  John  ii.  18  ; 
Jude  11-19.  The  gratuitous  assumption  that  the  last  phase  of 
the  church's  condition  on  earth  must  be  the  brightest  is  then 
clearly  opposed  to  the  direct  testimony  of  Clirist  and  the 
Apostles,  as  well  as  to  the  solemn  warning  of  the  Apocalypse. 
How  humbling  that  all  this  sliould  be  explained  away  for  many 
souls  by  the  unintelligent  reasons  we  have  just  disproved ! 
Nor  is  the  evil  speculative  only,  but  very  great  practically ;  and 
the  danger  becomes  every  day  greater  for  those  thus  misled. 
For  if  the  soul  be  taught  to  view  events  as  gradually  moving  on 
toward  a  glorious  future  for  the  closing  years  of  the  gospel 
here  below,  it  cannot  but  be  thrown  off  its  guard  and  exposed  to 
a  loss  of  discernment  in  its  desire  after  such  a  consummation, 
instead  of  being  called  to  watch  as  during  a  long  sad  night,  and 
to  judge  eacli  new  move  and  measure,  as  good  soldiers  in  an 
enemy's  land.  And  if  it  be  certain  that  the  falling  away  or 
apostacy  is  the  predicted  issue,  the  means  taken  for  the  widest 
development  and  apparent  triumpli  of  the  church  on  earth, 
must  finally  at  least  be  but  means  for  consummating  that 
apostacy,  and  a  prime  object  for  the  Lord's  judgment  at  His 
appearing. 


A   DOOR   SET   OPEN   IN    HEAVEN.  93 


CHAPTEE  IV. 

We  are  now  come  to  the  strictly  prophetic  part  of  the  book 
of  Eevelation.  The  seven  churches  formed  together  what  tlie 
Holy  Ghost  calls  "  the  things  which  are."  And  the  Son  of  man 
was  seen  judging  the  house  of  God  on  earth,  represented  by  the 
Asiatic  churches.  They  existed  in  the  time  of  St.  John ;  and 
in  a  mystic  sort  at  least,  they  have  an  existence  continuous, 
and  to  a  certain  extent  successive,  as  long  as  there  is  any 
testimony  rendered  by  the  professing  body  on  the  earth.  If  the 
literal  application  is  past,  the  protracted  representative  bearing 
still  goes  on.  In  chapter  i.  19  we  were  told  that,  besides  "  the 
things  which  thou  hast  seen"  and  "the  things  which  are,"  there 
is  a  third  division — "  the  things  which  shall  be  hereafter."  The 
word  "hereafter"  is  vague,  whereas  the  sense  intended  appears 
to  be  precise :  it  should  be  read  "  the  things  which  shall  be  after 
these,"  meaning  what  is  to  follow  after  the  church  has  come  to 
an  end  on  the  earth.  Its  present  history  closes  here,  though  it 
will  have  a  better  existence  in  heaven,  and  it  will  reign  over 
the  earth  too  in  the  day  of  millennial  glory.  We  then  arrive 
at  this  wholly  prophetical  portion.  Chapters  iv.  and  v.  are  a 
kind  of  preface  to  "the  things  wliich  shall  be  after  these." 
Their  great  object  is  to  shew  us,  not  events  occurring  on  the 
earth,  but  the  attitude  or  aspect  in  which  God  appears,  and  the 
place  of  those  who  are  nearest  to  Him,  during  the  occurrence 
of  these  future  events,  or  the  crisis  of  the  present  age.  I  must 
here  dwell  a  little  on  the  first  of  these  chapters. 

"After  these  things  I  looked,  and,  behold,  a  door  opened  in 
heaven,  and  the  first  voice  which  I  heard  [was]  as  it  were  of  a 
trumpet,  talking  with  me,"  &c.  (ver.  1).  The  "first  voice"  here 
does  not  mean  the  first  of  the  voices  that  were  about  to  speak. 


94  THE   GLORY   OF   GOD. 

as  some  have  strangely  thought,  but  the  voice  that  John  had 
ah-eady  heard  in  chaj^ter  i. — the  voice  of  Him  who  had  been  in 
the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  lamp-stands.  It  still  addresses 
him  like  a  trumpet,  no  longer  from  earth  but  from  heaven. 
There  was  a  door  there,  and  the  voice  spake  from  thence,  so  that 
this  portion  of  the  book  supposes  the  earth  done  with  for  the 
moment,  and  the  scene  lies  above.  It  is  not  merely  that  saints 
render  testimony  on  the  earth,  but  the  voice  speaks  from  heaven, 
shewing  the  things  that  should  follow  the  church-condition  on 
earth  now  concluded.  "  Come  up  hither,  and  I  will  shew  thee 
the  things  which  must  happen  after  these  things."  John  is  said 
to  be  immediately  in  the  Spirit  (ver.  2) ;  that  is,  by  the  Holy 
Ghost's  power  he  was  rapt  and  characterised,  so  as  to  enter  into 
the  new  scenes  he  was  now  to  behold. 

"Behold,  a  throne  was  set  in  heaven,  and  one  sat  on  the 
throne.  And  he  tliat  sat,"  &c.  God  is  not  named  as  such  in 
this  account,  save  as  "  He  that  sat  upon  the  throne."  John  is 
about  to  shew  us  what  the  aspect  seemed  of  tlie  One  who  sits 
upon  the  throne,  while  there  is  that  in  God  which  "no  man  hath 
seen  or  can  see."  This  is  a  representation,  in  a  symbolical  way, 
of  the  glory  of  God.  He  may  assume  any  appearance  that 
pleases  Him ;  but  as  far  as  He  permitted  it  to  be  displayed  here, 
it  was  what  could  be  compared  to  these  precious  stones.  In 
chapter  xxi.  the  bride,  the  New  Jerusalem,  comes  down  "  out  of 
heaven  from  God,  having  the  glory  of  God  ;  her  light  [was] 
like  a  stone  most  precious,  as  a  jasper  stone,"  &c.  It  is  quite 
evident  that  this  cannot.be  the  essential  glory  of  God.  It 
rather  means,  I  think,  that  it  was  not  a  human  but  a  divine 
glory.  There  is  in  God  that  which  He  can  confer  upon  tlie 
creature,  and  there  is  that  which  is  incommunicable.  Here 
divine  glory  is  meant  in  contrast  with  creature  glory — not  that 
which  would  derogate  from  His  majesty,  but  be  a  reflection  of 
it.  Her  light  was  like  a  jasper  stone;  the  wall  also  was  of 
jasper  (verse  18),  and  the  first  foundation  (verse  19).*     The 

*  The  application  of  the  jasper,  in  the  account  of  the  heavenlj'  city,  seems 
decisively  to  sot  aside  the  notion  that  the  colour  of  this  stone  was  intended  to 
convey  something  in  the  appearance  very  awful  as  well  as  glorious.  It  is  utterly 
out  of  the  question  to  attribute  such  a  feature  to  the  Ne\t  Jerusalem,  of  which 


UKKS    OK    TIIK    .JASI'KK.  05 

^'('iKiral  appearance  of  the  city  was  as  it  wore  of  jasper.  This 
a  Jiitle  answers,  T  tliiiik,  to  tlie  vi(!W  we  liave  in  cliai»ter  iv.  ol' 
what  -J(jlin  enjoyed  of  the  sight  of  llini  that  sat  uj)on  the; 
throne.  In  lioni.  v.  2  it  is  said,  not  only  that  we  have  access 
to  the  grace  of  God  in  which  we  stand,  hut  that  we  rejoice  in 
]i(i]k;  of  the  glory  of  God.  That  glory  of  liini  who  sat  on  the 
tlirone,  .as  far  as  it  could  be  viewed  hy  the  creature,  was  pic- 
sented  under  the  figure  of  jasper  and  sai'dius  (verse  3) ;  and 
when  tlie  church  comes  forth  in  the  glory  of  God,  her  light  will 
1)0  jasper-like.  That  is,  tlx;  thought  of  Cjiod's  glory,  not  man's, 
is  the  thing  conveyed  to  tlio  mind.  I^>on  in  the  "et(;rii;d  dity," 
there  will  Vjo  no  such  change  as  God  aljandoning  or  lowei'ing  tlio 
dignity  of  His  own  propiir'  Godhead;  I'or  thei'O  must  aJwiiys  lie 
an  infinite  dilforenco  Ijctween  God  and  tlie  most  exalted  of  His 
creatures.  Still,  tluii'o  is  a  res(!iiil)lanc(!  l)etw(;en  the  glory  of 
God  as  seen  by  m;in,  and  the  elnireh's  glory  by  and  hy.  And 
this  answers  exactly  to  the  words  of  our  Lord  in  the  Gosp(;l  of 
John  fxvii.  22,  2?>):  "The  glory  which  thou  gavest  me  f  have 
given  them  ;  tliat  tliey  may  be  one,  even  as  we  ai'o  one  :  1  in 
th(!m,  and  thou  in  me,  that  tliey  may  be  made  pei'fect  in  one ; 
mid  that  the  world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent  me,  and  hast 
hjved  them,  as  thou  hast  loved  me." 

But,  besides  the  appearance  of  divine  glory,  there  was  a  rain- 
bow round  about  the  throne.  This  evidently  carries  owy  thoughts 
back  to  tlie  covenant  tliaX  God  niaih;,  not  with  His  poo])l(.'  Isnu'.l, 
but  with  the  oaith  at  ]ai-gc.  Th(i  covenant  with  His  ]K!0];1(;  is 
noticed  for  the  first  time  in  chaptoi'  xi.  of  tliis  l>ook,  whoni  w(! 
have  heaven  opened  and  the  ai'k  of  His  t(!Stament  seen  in  His 
temple.  Tt  is  not  the  ikjw  covenant  itscdf;  for  wIkju  this  is 
Inought  about,  there  will  be  no  earthfjuakes,  and  lightnings,  a,nd 
thunders,  &c.,  but  the  day  of  peace  and  blessing  for  Israel. 
l>ut  at  the  time  to  which  that  vision  refers,  God  will  shew  that 

Iho  fifjuro  iH  uHOfl  still  more  omphatically.  T  cannot  but  think,  therefore,  that 
wo  muHt  fioarch  for  a  moaning  in  kooping  with  hoth,  and  that  tho  idea  of  glory 
and  Hplondour  hcHt  moets  all  rcquiromontH. 

Far  more  untonaldo  is  tho  viow  that  tho  jaspor  HotH  forth  tho  incarnation.  It 
appoarH  to  mo  to  fall  in  with  not  a  ninglo  occurronco  of  the  figure;  it  sets  Rev. 
iv.  ]i(j])(,'loHHly  at  variance  with  ohajitor  v.,  and  it  would  involve,  I  fear,  HorlouH 
iihoriution  from  wound  doctino,  if  carried  out  in  chapter  xxi. 


96  A   EAINBOW   ROUND   THE   THRONE. 

He  has  respect  to  His  covenant.  Here  the  rainbow  is  God's 
remembrance  of  His  covenant  with  the  earth.  The  ark  spoken 
of  in  chapter  xi.  is  God's  remembrance  of  His  covenant  with 
His  people,  God  is  going  to  pour  forth  judgments  on  the  earth 
and  on  those  who  had  the  responsibility  of  being  His  people. 
But  He  takes  pains  to  shew  that,  before  a  single  judgment  falls, 
there  is  mercy  in  store.  Before  He  touches  creation,  there  is 
the  sign  of  His  covenant  with  the  earth,  just  as  when  He  is 
forced  to  pour  down  plagues  on  His  people  Israel,  the  ark  of 
His  covenant  is  seen.  The  rainbow  was  the  witness  that  God 
had  not  let  slip  His  ancient  word :  He  could  not  forget  it.  The 
rainbow  is  the  sign  of  mercy.  It  spans  the  heavens,  and  takes 
in  earth  and  sea,  the  whole  compass  of  that  blessed  security  of 
which  God  had  hung  out  the  token  on  high.  And  now  we  have 
the  rainbow  not  merely  over  the  world,  but  round  about  the 
throne  in  heaven.  This  is  not  its  usual  place ;  but  it  was  com- 
forting for  John  to  see,  in  the  midst  of  all  that  bright  glory, 
how  God  wished  to  fill  the  heart  with  confidence.  He  had  not 
merely  the  vision  of  what  was  coming  on  earth,  but  in  the 
circle  of  the  divine  manifestation  and  power  the  rainbow  is  seen 
above.  If  God  shews  us  His  own  glory  at  the  same  time,  the 
rainbow  would  tell  us  that  God  is  true  —  that  He  was  pur- 
posely putting  man  in  mind  of  His  pledge,  given  after  the  great 
judgment  of  old,  and  the  rather  as  now  He  set  it  in  this  peculiar 
place,  where  a  rainbow  had  never  been  seen  before,  in  order  to 
assure  our  hearts.  But  though  peculiar,  what  could  be  more  in 
character  ?  For  it  is  the  throne  of  God  the  Almighty,  the 
Creator  and  supreme  Lord  of  all  tilings. 

Perhaps  it  is  needless  to  remark  that  no  such  things  will 
happen  literally;  but  the  vision  was  a  panoramic  sign,  putting 
all  before  the  eyes  of  the  prophet — a  most  lively  and  admirable 
way  of  conveying  what  God  meant  to  teach.  When  persons 
are  once  thoroughly  founded  in  His  grace,  nothing  is  more  im- 
portant than  the  study  of  this  book.  But  it  may  be  injurious 
to  souls  who  have  not  been  so  established  to  get  absorbed  in  the 
Revelation, 

First,  then,  we  have  the  throne  of  One  who  is  the  centre  and 
source  of  all  the  action,  God's  glory  and  majesty  being  set  forth 


EVENTS  MUST  BE  SEEN  FROM  HEAVEN.  97 

by  the  symbol  of  the  jasper  and  sardine;  and  next  there  is  the 
rainbow,  the  familiar  emblem  of  God's  faithfulness  to  creation. 
The  rainbow  was  of  a  particular  kind,  "  in  appearance  like  an 
emerald"  (verse  3).  We  could  scarcely  have  colours  more 
opjDosed  than  those  which  represented  the  divine  majesty,  and 
the  emerald  so  refreshing  for  the  eye  to  look  upon.  The  Holy 
Ghost  gives  us  a  vivid  impression  by  these  simple  symbols.  For 
this  book  was  not  written  for  great  scholars ;  it  was  intended 
for  suffering  saints.  Even  by  men  of  the  world  it  has  been 
noticed,  that  the  Eevelation  was  specially  the  book  sought  into 
by  persecuted  Christians;  and  certain  it  is  that,  while  those 
who  make  it  a  field  for  human  research  and  speculation  go 
wrong  here  and  everywhere  else,  a  general  or  even  bright  idea 
would  present  itself  to  the  mind  of  an  unlettered  believer,  who 
looks  up  to  God  and  desires  the  glory  of  His  Son. 

The  first  thought  suggested  to  one  by  the  chapter  is,  that  the 
only  true  j)lace  from  which  to  look  at  the  things  coming  to 
pass  after  the  seven  churches  is  heaven.  It  is  not  upon  and 
from  the  earth  that  we  can  rightly  judge  of  these  events.  It 
is  from  above  that  we  must  learn  and  look ;  if  we  are  earthly- 
minded,  we  shall  never  understand  them.  If  I  am  merely  on 
the  level  of  the  scene  upon  which  the  judgments  are  passing,  I 
shall  endeavour  to  make  the  best  of  present  things,  and  to  put 
off  the  judgments  ;  I  am  not  entering  in  by  the  door  opened  in 
heaven.  A  heavenly  standing  must  be  taken  as  the  ground, 
and  the  only  ground,  on  which  these  visions  can  be  rightly 
estimated. 

The  main  object  seen  is  God  and  His  throne — His  power 
ruling  in  providence.  The  throne  is  not  in  itself  connected 
with  priesthood,  but  with  the  power  whence  divine  government 
proceeds.  God  would  establish  souls  in  the  thought  that  He 
governs,  even  in  the  midst  of  all  the  wickedness  that  was  to  be 
developed  in  the  time  of  the  beasts,  or  the  final  apostacy.  The 
vision  is  of  the  throne  of  One  who  did  not  need  to  be  named, 
but  who  permits  His  glory  to  be  seen  as  far  as  it  can  be  by  the 
creature.  From  His  throne  above  He  is  dealing  with  the  world. 
Then  we  have  His  throne  surrounded  by  the  remembrance  of 
His  covenant  with  creation.     Next,  in  the  fourth  verse,  the 

H 


98  THE   TWENTY-FOUK   THRONES   AND   ELDEES. 

prophet  sees  that,  round  about  the  central  throne  of  God,  there 
are  other  thrones.  The  reason  why  thrones  here  are  preferable 
to  "  seats"  is,  that  it  is  an  essential  part  of  the  vision  to  shew 
that  the  persons  seated  there  were  possessed  of  kingly  dignity. 
The  same  word  means  a  throne  and  a  seat,  and  the  choice  is 
only  determined  by  the  connexion  in  which  it  stands.  We 
should  not  say  of  a  person  in  humble  life  that  he  was  sitting 
upon  a  throne,  nor  of  the  sovereign  when  in  state  that  he  was 
upon  a  seat.     We  can  judge  by  the  subject-matter. 

Around  the  throne  of  God  then,  in  the  scene  of  such  glory 
as  man  perhaps  never  saw  before,  there  are  other  thrones  with 
elders  seated  on  them — that  is,  those  endowed  with  wisdom 
from  on  high,  who  entered  into  the  thoughts  and  counsels  of 
God.  They  are  clothed  in  white  raiment,  answering  to  their 
priestly,  as  their  crowns  do  to  their  kingly,  dignity.  They  are 
clearly  saints  and  at  home  in  heaven  by  glory  around  the  great 
central  throne  before  the  world's  judgment  begins.  The  number 
of  these  is  twenty-four,  corresponding  with  the  twenty-four 
courses  of  priesthood  in  Israel.  When  the  forerunner  of  the 
Lord  was  to  be  born,  his  father  Zacharias  was  a  priest  of  the 
course  or  order  of  Abia.  In  1  Chron.  xxiv.  we  must  look  to  see 
these  divisions,  and  we  find  the  eighth  was  the  one  in  ques- 
tion. The  priesthood  was  divided  into  these  courses  in  order 
that  each  in  succession  might  take  up  the  work  of  the  priest- 
hood, every  course  having  its  own  chief  priest.  The  High  I*riest 
is  not  named  here :  we  all  know  who  He  is ;  but  we  have 
the  twenty-four  elders  answering  to  these  twenty-four  courses 
of  priesthood,  or  rather  to  the  chiefs  who  represented  them 
(verse  4). 

But  a  deeply  interesting  inquiry  arises :  If  these  crowned  and 
enthroned  elders  represent  the  heavenly  saints,  as  few  will  deny, 
when  and  to  what  condition  does  the  vision  apply  ?  Docs  it 
speak  (1)  of  those  who  have  departed  to  be  with  Christ  ?  Or  (2) 
does  it  foreshadow  the  manifested  kingdom  of  Christ  and  His 
saints  during  tlie  millennium  ?  Now  it  appeais  certain  that  both 
these  questions  nmst  be  answered  in  the  negative,  and  that  the 
time  of  this  chapter  iv.,  and  therefore  the  interval  during  which 
the  elders  are  thus  engaged  on  high,  is  after  the  separate  state  is 


HEADS   OF   THE    HEAVENLY   PKIESTHOOD.  99 

over,  as  far  as  they  are  concerned,  and  before  the  millennial  reign 
begins. 

For  (1)  it  is  obvious  that  the  symbol  of  the  twenty-four  elders 
implies  the  sum  of  the  heads  of  the  heavenly  priesthood — not  a 
part,  however  large,  but  the  whole.  There  were  just  so  many 
courses,  and  no  more.  In  the  vision  they  are  complete ;  and  in 
the  reality,  which  it  symbolizes,  this  can  never  be  the  case,  while 
the  saints  are  absent  from  the  body  and  thus  present  with  the 
Lord.  During  that  state  of  things  there  will  always  be  members 
of  tlie  church  on  the  earth.  For  "  we  shall  not  all  sleep."  And 
when,  at  the  Lord's  return,  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first, 
"we  which  are  alive  and  remain  shall  be  caught  up  together 
with  them,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air ;  and  so  shall  we  ever  be 
with  the  Lord."  That  is  to  say,  the  symbol  understood  and  in- 
terpreted aright  requires  that  all  the  members  of  Christ  should 
be  together  and  in  the  same  condition;  and  as  this  will  never 
be  true  of  the  separate  spirits,  it  necessarily  follows  that  the 
vision  will  be  realized  only  when  "we  shall  all  be  changed" 
and  with  the  Lord. 

But  (2)  it  is  clear,  that  whatever  may  be  anticipatively  pre- 
sented in  the  songs  of  the  elders,  or  of  others  who  catch  up  as 
it  were  the  chorus  of  their  strains,  both  the  actions  of  the  elders, 
and  the  entire  heavenly  scenery,  in  which  they  take  so  prominent 
a  part  from  Eev.  iv.  to  chap,  xix.,  suppose  that  the  reigning  over 
the  earth  does  not  arrive  as  a  literal  fact  till  Christ  and  His 
saints  have  left  heaven  for  the  judgment  of  His  enemies.  But 
the  full  complement  of  the  elders  is  made  up  a  considerable  time 
previously :  none  can  deny  they  are  in  heaven  before  and  during 
the  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials.  The  inference  is  plain.  The  saints 
represented  by  them  must  be  as  a  whole  in  lieaven  before  these 
judgments  begin  to  be  fulfilled.  The  millennium  does  not  come 
till  Eev.  XX.;  the  elders,  shadowing  the  glorified  saints,  are  with 
the  Lord  in  their  changed  bodies  long  before.  When  He  comes 
from  heaven  to  the  destruction  of  the  beast,  they  follow,  and 
with  Him  they  subsequently  reign  for  a  thousand  years.  Others, 
I  doubt  not,  will  be  joined  with  them  in  that  reign :  these  will 
not  be  glorified  in  their  bodies  till  Eev.  xx.,  having  suffered  after 
the  rapture  of  the  church  under  the  beast,  &c.     But  Eev.  iv. 

H  2 


100  DIFFERENCE   IN   EZEKIEL. 

intimates,  that  the  rapture  will  then  have  taken  place,  and  that 
the  saints  caught  up  are  viewed  as  a  royal  priesthood,  interested, 
as  having  the  mind  of  Christ,  in  the  trials,  sufferings,  testimony, 
and  liopes  of  those  who  succeed  themselves,  as  witnesses  for  God, 
during  the  hour  of  temptation  which  will  then  come  upon  all 
the  world,  to  try  those  that  dwell  on  the  earth.  Even  for  the 
raptured  saints  on  high  it  is  not  yet  the  time  for  the  marriage  of 
the  Lamb ;  and  therefore,  as  well  as  for  other  reasons,  they  are 
here  regarded,  not  as  the  body  or  bride,  but  as  kings  and  priests 
worshipping,  and  as  yet  waiting  for  their  manifestation  in  glory 
when  they  shall  judge  the  world. 

There  is  a  solemn  connexion  with  this  in  Ezekiel,  where  we  / 
have  twenty-five  men  named  (Ezek.  viii.  J.6)  ;  and  to  my  own  / 
mind  it  appears  that  they  were  the  whole  of  the  heads  of  the 
priesthood — the  twenty-four  chiefs  and  the  high  priest  besides. 
But  where  were  they  now  ?  Alas  !  they  were  the  promoters  of 
the  idolatry  and  wickedness  perpetrated  in  the  temple  of  Jehovah. 
They  were  there  not  as  those  whose  raiment  told  of  the  blood 
that  cleanses,  but  the  corrupters  of  God's  holy  standard  and  the 
defilers  of  Israel,  leading  them  on  to  apostacy ;  so  that,  if  judg- 
ment is  to  be  inflicted,  it  must  begin  with  the  house  of  God. 
There  is  a  tacit  contrast  between  the  scene  here  described  and 
that  in  Ezekiel.  There  we  had  the  living  creatures  first,  the 
symbol  of  the  executive  judgments  of  God — of  His  judicial 
power  putting  down  evil.  The  earthly  result  of  the  action  of 
tliese  living  creatures,  as  seen  in  Ezekiel,  might  be  the  destruc- 
tion of  Jerusalem ;  but  this  was  only  what  man  saw. 

The  cherubim  and  the  living  creatures  (^wa)  are  the  same 
substantially ;  they  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  the 
beasts  {d-qpia)  we  read  of  afterwards.  The  first  mention  of  the 
cherubim  is  in  tlie  early  part  of  the  book  of  Genesis.  (Chap,  iii.) 
Wlien  sin  entered  the  world,  immediately  we  find  them :  they 
were  the  beings  to  whom  the  work  of  judgment  was  entrusted. 
"Tie  placed  in  the  garden  of  Eden  cherubim  and  a  flaming 
sword,  to  kee])  the  way  of  tlie  tree  of  life."  The  emblem  of 
their  power  was  the  flaming  sword.  Again,  if  we  look  at  the 
second  book  of  Moses,  we  find  the  cherul)im  in  a  new  but 
blessed  way.     Where  were  they  looking  ?     Within.     Had  they 


THE   CHERUBIM   IN   SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE.  101 

been  looking  outwards,  they  would  have  seen  sinners  ;  had  they 
looked  under,  that  is,  into  the  ark,  they  would  have  seen  the 
law ;  but  they  were  looking  within  on  the  mercy-seat,  where 
the  blood  of  atonement  was  sprinkled.  There  was  the  blood 
that  spoke  of  the  perfect  mercy  of  God  which  had  met  and 
triumphed  over  sin;  and  there  was  the  power  of  God — both 
combined  in  preserving  the  glory  of  God,  and  both  really  for 
man  instead  of  against  him. 

If  we  examine  this  again  in  the  time  of  Solomoji,  we  find 
a  remarkable  difference.  The  position  of  the  cherubim  com- 
pletely changes,  for  instead  of  looking  within  they  are  looking 
out,  because  Solomon's  day  typifies  the  time  of  glory,  when  the 
true  Man  and  Prince  of  Peace  shall  rule.  And  why  should  they 
not  look  out  then  ?  Sin  will  have  been  judged,  and,  instead  of 
the  goodness  of  the  Believed  falling  as  it  were  in  drops  here  and 
there,  the  King  shall  come  down  like  rain  on  the  mown  grass ; 
as  showers  that  water  the  earth,  and  the  whole  earth  shall  be 
filled  with  His  glory — the  just  answer  to  the  glory  of  David's 
Son.  When  mercy  will  have  had  its  full  way,  and  judgment  has 
been  executed,  there  will  be  nothing  to  hinder  the  cherubim 
from  proclaiming  the  goodness  of  the  Jehovah. 

But  in  Ezekiel  a  terrible  crisis  came.  The  mercy-seat  had 
been  despised,  and  Solomon's  glory  had  faded  away.  Israel  was 
sinning  with  a  high  hand,  and  now  the  very  temple  itself  was 
the  spot  where  the  greatest  dishonour  was  done  to  God,  and 
there  the  cherubim  again  as  good  as  ask.  Can  God  have  nothing 
to  do  with  this  wicked  people  ?  Judgment  must  have  its  course. 
Accordingly  they  leave  Israel,  though  they  bring  judgment  on  the 
land.  They  are  only  seen  again  as  giving  the  signal  for  judg- 
ment, and  putting  it  in  force  by  the  hand  of  Nebuchadnezzar. 

We  have  the  same  thing  in  Eevelation,  with  this  difference, 
that  in  Ezekiel  the  living  creatures  are  seen  more  in  connexion 
with  the  earth ;  and  this  may  be  the  reason  why  they  are  there 
said  to  have  wheels  as  well  as  wings.  In  Eevelation,  the  earthly 
people  being  dropped  for  a  season,  and  a  heavenly  people  called, 
they  are  simply  seen  with  the  wings  suited  for  heaven,  and  not 
the  wheels  suited  for  earth.  From  this  omission  it  is  easily 
seen  that,  if  God  is  going  to  speak  about  judgment,  the  very 


102  TRANSITIONAL  PERIOD   OF   THE  VISION. 

form  that  the  executive  of  His  judgment  takes  tells  us  that  a 
heavenly  interruption  has  come  in,  ere  the  world's  history  is 
resumed.  Is  it  not  then  of  immense  importance,  if  we  are  to 
view  these  things  aright,  to  get  a  firm  footing  on  the  ground  on 
which  the  apostle  stood — to  enter  in,  as  it  were,  by  the  door 
opened  in  heaven? 

But,  besides  this,  "  Out  of  the  throne  proceed  lightnings,  and 
voices,  and  thunders"  (verse  5).  Evidently  this  is  not  the 
throne  that  we  draw  near  to  ;  for  ours  is  a  throne  of  grace,  and 
this  is  emphatically  of  judgment.  Its  aspect  described  here  has 
nothing  whatever  to  do  with  grace.  There  proceeds  later  on 
from  the  throne  a  stream  clear  as  crystal,  as  in  the  view  of  the 
throne  mentioned  in  chap,  xxii.;  but  here  "are  lightnings,  and 
voices,  and  thunders,"  &c.,  expressive  of  God's  terrors.  Even  the 
symbolic  likeness  given  here  of  God's  Spirit  is  in  keeping  with 
it.  "  There  were  seven  lamps  [or  torches]  of  fire  burning  before 
the  throne,  which  are  the  seven  Spirits  of  God."  The  Holy 
Ghost  does  not  take  the  symbol  of  lamps  of  fire  when  God's  grace 
to  the  church  is  set  forth.  No  doubt  on  the  day  of  Pentecost 
we  have  tongues  as  of  fire,  a  beautiful  emblem  of  what  God 
was  then  about  to  do ;  for  it  M'as  divine  force  that  gave  those 
unlettered  men  to  speak  in  every  tongue.  On  the  Lord  Jesus 
He  descended  in  the  form  of  a  dove ;  but  this  was  quite  a 
different  thing  from  what  we  have  in  Revelation.  Here  it  is 
the  consuming  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Fire  is  the  well- 
known  emblem  of  the  searching  holiness  of  God.  The  Holy 
Ghost  in  full  perfection  as  light  and  as  a  fire  burning  up  evil  is 
the  representation  that  the  Spirit  gives  of  His  own  relation  to 
this  epoch.  It  is  plain  that  the  reference  is  not  to  the  millennial 
kingdom,  for  then  a  stream  clear  as  crystal  is  to  proceed  out 
of  the  throne  of  God  ;  still  less  would  such  a  symbol  apply  to 
His  action  in  the  body  of  Christ  during  the  present  time.  Nor 
is  God's  throne  now  one  from  which  proceed  lightnings  and 
thunders. 

To  what  period  then  is  the  reference  ?  To  a  short  space 
between  the  two,  when  God  has  done  His  present  church-work, 
and  before  the  millennial  glory  begins.  The  present  is  the  time 
when  God  is  gaLliering  out  His  heirs,  joint-iieirs  with  Christ, 


THE    SEA   OF   GLASS.  103 

and  forming  the  bride;  and  now  there  is  a  throne  of  grace,  where 
we  may  receive  mercy  and  find  grace  for  seasonable  help.  Here, 
on  the  contrary.  His  judgments  issue  from  the  throne,  and  the 
Hol}^  Ghost  is  the  Spirit  of  judgment  and  burning,  just  as  much 
as  the  throne  is  judicial  and  the  source  of  terrors  for  the  earth. 
Thus  then  it  is  neitlier  the  peaceful  era  of  the  millennial  glory, 
nor  the  present  display  of  unbounded  grace,  but  a  time  between 
tlie  two.  It  is  not  conceivable  for  a  person  to  have  just  light 
upon  this  book  who  does  not  see  that  the  Eevelatiou  fills  up  the 
interval  after  the  Lord  has  taken  the  church,  and  before  He 
comes  out  of  heaven  and  the  church  along  with  Him.  (Chapter 
xix.)  I  speak,  of  course,  of  the  prophetic  visions  which  fill  the 
body  of  the  book,  and  not  of  the  three  introductory  chapters, 
nor  of  the  close,  when  the  Lord  is  about  to  appear.  There  the 
whole  scene  is  changed ;  the  heavens  are  opened  to  send  forth 
the  Lord  Jesus,  for  the  purpose  of  putting  the  last  stroke  of 
judgment  to  man's  iniquity  and  Satan's  power,  and  then  we 
have  the  full  flow  of  blessing  far  and  wide.  Here  we  have  the 
time  that  precedes  it — an  interval  of  most  solemn  character  for 
the  world,  when  the  heavenly  saints  shall  have  been  caught  up. 

"And  before  the  throne  there  was  a  sea  of  glass"  (verse  6).  It 
is  not  a  sea  of  water,  where  persons  could  bathe,  but  a  sea  of 
glass.  The  Holy  Ghost  uses  the  washing  of  water  now  by  the 
word  for  the  purpose  of  purging  defilement.  There  was  no 
longer  need  for  this  in  those  before  the  throne.  In  chapter  xv. 
another  class  is  mentioned  as  standing  upon  a  sea  of  glass, 
shewing  that  it  is  not  there  a  question  of  the  Spirit's  power  in 
dealing  with  what  is  contrary  to  God,  but  the  victory  is  won. 
So  here  all  question  of  the  trial  of  the  heavenly  saints  is  over. 
The  scene  where  they  had  been  tried  is  now  closed  (Eev.  iv.), 
and  they  are  seated  round  God's  own  throne. 

Here  too  are  the  four  living  creatures,  full  of  eyes  before  and 
behind,  which  are  the  symbol  of  discernment ;  for  though  it  is 
judgment  they  have  to  execute,  it  is  not,  we  need  hardly  say, 
unintelligible  judgment.  "  The  first  living  creature  was  like  a 
lion,  the  second  like  a  calf,  the  third  had  the  face  as  of  a  man, 
and  the  fourth  was  like  a  flying  eagle  "  (verse  7).  The  various 
symbols  are  taken  from  the  heads  of  G     's  creation  here  below. 


104  MEANING   OF   THE   LIVING   CREATURES. 

and  represent  different  qualities  of  His  judgments  :  the  lion  as 
the  head  of  wild  beasts,  the  ox  or  calf  the  head  of  cattle,  man 
of  intelligent  beings,  and  the  eagle  of  birds.  The  lion  conveys 
the  idea  of  strength  or  majestic  power,  the  ox  of  patient  endur- 
ance, the  man  of  intelligence,  and  the  eagle  of  rapidity.  God 
shews  us  the  strength,  patience,  intelligence,  and  rapidity  with 
which  His  judgments  should  be  executed.  The  four  living 
creatures,  having  each  of  them  six  wings,  denoted  supernatural 
rapidity,  and  the  eyes  within  intrinsic  discernment  (verse  8). 
Some  have  supposed,  chiefly  from  the  nearness  of  the  living 
creatures  to  the  supreme  throne,  that  they,  rather  than  the  elders, 
must  set  forth  the  church.*  But  this  is  quite  a  misconception. 
The  reason,  as  it  seems,  wliy  the  living  creatures  are  thus  near, 
is  because  they  are  the  judicial  executive,  and  providential  judg- 
ments will  then  be  in  progress.  They  characterize  the  action  of 
the  throne. 

"And  they  have  no  rest  day  and  night,  saying.  Holy,  holy, 
holy  Lord  God  Almighty,  who  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come."  This 
is  a  remarkable  word.  It  is  not  occupation  with  evil ;  but  when 
God  shews  us  the  means  or  agencies  by  which  He  executes  judg- 
ment, we  have  one  unceasing  cry  as  regards  Him — "  Holv,  holy, 
holy." 

One  of  the  most  important  features  of  this  scene  for  the  soul 
is  that  the  elders  symbolize  the  heavenly  saints  in  glory,  the 
heads  of  the  heavenly  priesthood,  found  in  their  blessed  employ 
above.     But  observe  that  when  they  are  seen  there  first  they 

*  All  admit  that  the  cherubim  arc  invariable  attendants  on  the  throne  of  God, 
and  that  they  were  therefore,  when  in  the  most  holy  place,  made  of  the  same  piece 
of  gold  as  the  ark  itself  on  which  Jehovah  sat.  But  it  is  argued  that,  though  in 
all  the  Old  Testament  instances  they  were  angelic,  because  the  law  had  been 
ordained  by  angels  (Gal.  iii.  17),  they  might  become  human  in  the  Apocalypse, 
because  the  world  to  come  is  to  bo  made  subject  to  man.  (Hebrews  ii.  5.)  Thus 
the  cherubim  and  the  elders  would  represent  the  saints  in  a  twofold  aspect, 
active  and  contemplative.  And  certainly  it  is  a  notable  fact,  as  another  has  re- 
marked, that  before  the  Lamb  appears  and  takes  the  book,  there  are  no  angels 
mentioned  who  praise,  and  the  cherubim  or  living  creatures  only  express  or 
celebrate  the  holy  character  of  God,  but  are  not  associated  with  intelligent 
worship  ;  whereas,  when  the  Lamb  is  in  the  scone,  the  elders  and  cherubim 
join  in  intelligent  worship,  and  the  angels  are  expressly  distinguished.  But 
more  may  be  said  \\lu'n  we  treat  of  chapter  v. 


INTELLIGENT   WORSHIP   OF   THE   ELDERS,  105 

are  perfectly  familiar  with  the  scene :  there  is  no  hurry  and  no 
anxiety.  They  are  peacefully  seated  on  the  thrones.  Tliere  is 
no  trembling  even  in  the  presence  of  God.  These  thunders  and 
lightnings  and  judgments  might  proceed  from  His  throne,  but 
still  they  sit  peacefully  on  their  thrones :  not  a  single  move- 
ment is  produced.  And  what  is  it  that  does  move  them  ?  They 
were  entirely  undisturbed  by  terror  :  judgment  does  not  shake 
them  from  the  thrones ;  but  when  those  living  creatures  shall 
give  glory  and  honour  and  thanks  to  Him  that  sat  on  the 
throne,  the  four-and-twenty  elders  shall  fall  down,  &c.  Directly 
honour  is  given  by  the  executors  of  judgment  to  Him  that 
sat  upon  the  throne,  the  elders  worship.  What  satisfaction  in 
God — what  certainty  that  sin  was  at  an  end — does  this  shew  ! 
He  is  surely  going  to  judge,  but  He  will  not  judge  those  who  are 
made  His  righteousness  in  Christ.  They  are  in  sympathy  with 
Him ;  and  when  the  living  creatures  address  God  and  ascribe 
glory  and  honour  and  thanks  -to  Him,  then  it  is  that  they  rise 
from  their  thrones  and  are  found  prostrate  before  Him.  More 
than  that,  in  their  homage  they  cast  their  crowns  before  the  throne, 
saying,  "  Thou  art  worthy,  0  Lord,  to  receive  the  glory  and  the 
honour  and  the  power  :  for  thou  hast  created  all  things,  and  for 
thy  will  they  were,  and  were  created,"  They  enter  into  His 
personal  worthiness  in  a  way  that  the  living  creatures  do  not, 
and  with  greater  spiritual  intelligence.  They  are  elders  ;  they 
understand  here  the  creatorial  and  providential  glory  of  God, 
just  as  in  chap.  v.  we  see  that  they  enter  into  the  worthiness 
and  work  of  the  Lamb.  "  For  thou  didst  create  all  things,"  &c. 
It  is  not,  "are  created  and  were  created;"  but  for  His  will,  or 
pleasure,  they  were  in  existence,  even  as  they  were  originated 
at  first  (verses  10,  11).  Thus  their  praise  embraces  the  two 
great  thoughts  in  the  chapter — the  creation  glory  and  the  govern- 
mental glory  of  God.  "They  were"  (or  they  existed  now  under 
the  care  and  the  government  of  God),  "  and  they  were  created  " 
(or  to  Him  they  owed  their  origination). 

It  is  not  merely  what  we  shall  feel  then  that  God  reveals  to 
us ;  but  He  desires  us  to  enter  now  into  what  we  shall  have 
then.  This  glory  is  given  us  already.  Assuredly  we  shall  not 
have  such  a  place  then,  if  we  have  not  got  its  title  upon  earth. 


106  THE  WORSHIP   OF   GOD   NOW. 

It  is  ours  now  by  faith,  though  then  we  shall  have  it  in  its 
fulness.  What  enables  the  elders  to  be  so  calm  in  the  midst  of 
judgment?  That  which  God  had  done  for  them  through  the 
cross  of  Jesus.  But  God  has  done  this  now.  In  Christ  was 
wrought  as  perfect  a  work  upon  earth  as  there  could  be  in 
heaven.  He  will  not  do  another  or  a  better  work  there,  though 
it  may  be  enjoyed  more  above.  But  God  has  revealed  this  scene 
to  His  own  that  they  may  now  enter  into  it  intelligently,  and 
may  be  worshippers  according  to  its  spirit,  even  upon  earth, 
seeing  the  glory  which  will  be  theirs  in  heaven.  Worship  is  a 
more  serious  thing  than  is  supposed  by  many.  Anything  that 
does  not  suit  the  presence  of  God  in  heaven  is  unfit  for  the  pre- 
sence of  God  on  earth.  Even  in  outward  things  He  looks  for 
our  hearts  to  be  exercised.  It  is  a  bad  sign  when  the  children 
of  God  allow  themselves  in  any  thing  that  is  inconsistent  with 
His  presence.  We  are  responsible  that  the  worship  of  God 
should  be  conducted  in  a  way  worthy  of  Him — in  solemnity 
but  in  liberty.  We  should  be  careful  that  we  do  not  distract 
others,  but  rather  help  one  another  to  enjoy  Him  better. 

The  Lord  grant  that,  walking  in  holy  liberty,  and  remembering 
that  it  is  not  the  order  of  the  flesh  or  of  forms  that  we  have  to 
keep  up,  we  may  be  preserved  from  thinking  that  His  order  is 
less  reverent  than  man's !  May  He  vouchsafe  us  to  seek  what 
becomes  the  presence  of  Him  whom  we  come  together  to  exalt ! 
He  has  given  us  the  place  of  worshippers :  may  we  worship 
Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth !  A  better  relation  or  employment 
God  Himself  could  not  give  even  in  heaven. 


THE   LAMB   IN   HEAVEN.  107 


CHAPTEE  V. 

We  have  had  in  the  preceding  chapter  a  sight  of  the  greatest 
significance  and  interest;  God  unfolding  the  interior,  so  to  speak, 
of  heaven — its  thoughts  and  its  employment,  before  the  fall  of  a 
single  blow  of  judgment  upon  the  earth  comes  before  us.  But 
the  picture  would  have  been  incomplete,  if  the  Holy  Ghost  had 
not  added  the  scene  which  we  have  revealed  to  us  in  this  chapter. 
For  if  there  was  a  divine  manifestation,  and  the  elders  entered 
with  spiritual  intelligence  into  the  worship  of  God,  acknowledg- 
ing His  glory  in  creation  and  in  providential  government,  yet 
they  had  no  song  there,  much  less  did  they  sing  "  the  new  song." 
Now  it  is  the  great  object  of  the  chapter  before  us  to  shew  this 
other  and  fuller  way  in  which  the  elders  are  found  prostrating 
themselves  before  the  Lamb,  and  worshipping  Him.  The  Holy 
Ghost  takes  particular  pains  to  point  out  that  God,  as  He  dis- 
closes Himself,  must  be  the  object,  spring,  and  foundation  of  all 
the  adoration  from  the  creature  that  follows.  It  is  not  an  image 
conceived  by  the  mind  of  man;  that  would  be  an  idol.  We  must 
have  a  divine  revelation  to  have  divine  truth  and  acceptable 
worship.  The  images  of  chap.  iv.  left  God  in  a  sort  of  mysterious 
grandeur  and  majesty.  Accordingly  the  worship  of  the  elders 
did  not  go  beyond  recognising  that  God  had  created  and  sustained 
all  things.  It  was  His  glory  in  creation  and  in  providence,  and 
theirs  was  suited  intelligent  praise. 

In  this  chapter  we  have  a  sweeter  scene.  And  why  ?  Because 
we  have  the  Lamb.  What  blessing  does  He  not  bring !  He  has 
blotted  out  sin — has  removed  the  sting  of  death — has  brought 
us  nigh  to  God,  and  has  put  a  song  in  our  mouth  fit  for  His 
presence  on  high.  In  this  blessed  portion  of  the  word  we  have, 
as  the  great  subject  of  it,  the  bearing  of  redemption  on  the  occu- 
pation or  worship  of  heaven,  and  the  connexion  of  it  with  the 


108  CHRIST   THE   TEST   OF    ALL   THINGS. 

counsels  and  ways  of  God  on  the  earth.  As  long  as  it  was  only 
the  creation-glory  of  God,  we  had  no  book  at  all.  But  now  the 
prophet  looks,  and  he  sees  in  the  right  haud  of  Him  that  sat  on 
the  throne  a  book-roll  written  within  and  on  the  back  side, 
sealed  up  with  seven  seals  (verse  1).  In  ancient  times  a  book 
was  a  manuscript  roll,  written  only  in  the  inside  in  ordinary 
cases.  But  here  there  is  a  fulness  of  revelation.  It  flows  over, 
as  it  were,  and  is  inscribed  on  the  back  as  well  as  within,  and 
altogether  is  secured  by  seven  seals. 

But  observe  that,  if  God  is  seen  with  this  book  in  His  hand, 
it  is  only  the  Lamh  who  opens,  and  in  connexion  with  the  Lamb 
that  the  contents  of  the  book  appear.  How  plain  that  there  never 
can  be  any  opening  out  of  God's  mind  as  regards  things  to  come 
without  the  knowledge  of  Clirist  and  of  His  glory  in  respect  of 
them !  Every  Christian  knows  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as 
being  saved  without  Christ;  but  many  do  not  perceive  that  there 
is  no  real  understanding  of  prophecy  without  Christ,  nor  any 
right  knowledge  of  what  the  church  is. 

Thus  men  easily  make  religious  societies,  and  call  them 
churches.  But  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  it  were  easier  to 
make  heaven  and  earth  than  to  make  the  church  of  God.  But 
man's  presumption  has  risen  to  svich  a  height  that  the  highest 
and  holiest  things  of  God  are  made  the  work  (not  to  say  the 
sport)  of  human  hands,  because  they  have  practically  divorced 
the  church  from  Christ.  They  treat  the  subject  as  optional  and 
external,  instead  of  owning  that  it  is  the  especial  field  of  the 
deepest  and  purest  operations  of  tlie  Spirit,  the  dearest  object 
of  the  affections  and  the  witness  of  the  chief  glories  of  Christ. 
The  ordering  of  the  church  and  the  ways  of  God  therein  bring 
out  the  very  depths  and  lieights  of  divine  wisdom  and  grace. 

Again,  one  main  difficulty  now,  as  ever,  is  that  those  whom 
the  Holy  Ghost  brings  together  round  the  name  of  the  Lord 
are  apt  to  carry  with  them  a  load  of  notions  out  of  the  country 
from  whence  they  come — the  long-cherished  thoughts  and  habits 
which  they  have  got  to  unlearn.  They  have  also  the  same  flesh 
as  others — the  same  vanity,  haste,  conceit,  &c.  We  must  remem- 
ber that  what  other  people  have  done  we  are  in  no  less  danger 
of  doing  ourselves.    If  the  church  fell  away  so  soon  after  God  had 


CHEIST  THE  KEY  TO  PROPHECY.  109 

brought  out  His  new  and  blessed  counsels  of  heavenly  grace  here 
below,  it  is  much  more  easy  now  (when  Christendom  has  for- 
saken and  well-nigh  forgotten  its  best  privileges)  to  fall  again 
into  the  same  error  and  unfaithfulness.  The  great  root  of  the  mis- 
chief is  the  tendency  to  look  at  the  church  as  ours,  not  Christ's. 
You  never  know  the  full  truth  of  anything  that  concerns  either 
God  or  ourselves  apart  from  Christ.  It  remains  always  true  that 
"  the  law  was  given  by  Moses "  (and  he  was  a  most  honoured 
servant  of  God),  but  "grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ." 

It  is  the  same  with  prophetical  interpretations.  If  I  connect 
prophecy  with  myself,  with  my  country,  or  my  time,  I  may  find 
in  the  seventh  vial  the  last  French  Eevolution,  or  the  potato 
disease,  or  the  Asiatic  cholera,  or  the  Crimean  war,  or  the  more 
recent  struggles  in  Germany,  Italy,  and  France.  I  may  read  the 
land  "bordering  with  wings"  of  Great  Britain  and  her  colonies; 
I  may  interpret  the  vessels  of  bulrushes  (Isa.  xviii.)  of  her  iron 
steamers.  Do  you  think  this  too  absurd  ?  Christian  men  do 
so  think,  and  this  because  they  connect  things  with  themselves 
instead  of  with  Christ.  The  moment,  on  the  other  hand,  any- 
thing is  viewed  in  relation  to  Christ,  He  is  the  light,  and  we  are 
delivered  from  these  thoughts  of  men.  For  what  is  our  country 
or  our  time  ?  Neither  one  nor  other  is  Christ.  If  I  seek  com- 
munion with  Him,  I  shall  at  once  be  free  from  the  desire  to  make 
something  connected  with  myself  the  centre  of  my  system.  If 
people  look  with  an  historical  eye  at  the  fall  of  the  Roman 
empire  or  at  the  rise  of  the  Papacy,  at  the  dark  ages,  or  at  the 
previous  invasions  of  the  barbarians,  they  think  it  all  very  in- 
teresting, and  assume  that  God  could  not  have  left  these  out  of 
His  book — that  He  must  have  said  something  about  aTtraiisition 
so  important.  Thus  even  the  invention  of  gunpowder  has  been 
conceived  to  be  anticipated  in  Rev.  ix.,  the  discovery  of  America 
in  chap,  x.,  and  the  political  importance  of  Protestantism  in 
chap.  xi.  In  short,  what  is  too  wild  for  men  to  think  they  have 
not  found  out  in  the  Apocalypse  ?  And  these  things  are  put  forth 
even  by  godly  men.  Is  not  God  warning  us  by  all  this  ?  May 
we  be  preserved  from  the  same  snare  which  has  led  away  persons 
naturally  as  sober  (or  as  weak)  as  we  are  !  He  shews  us  that 
no  amount  of  information,  learning,  or  ingenuity — nay,  that  not 


\k.. 


110  CHRIST,   NOT   THE   CHURCH,   THE   TRUE   CENTRE. 

even  piety — will  enable  us  to  understand  God,  or  His  word. 
What  then  will  ?     Christ  only. 

The  Lamb  is  the  key  to  the  things  of  God,  and  not  our  own 
minds.  There  are  many  who  think  that,  the  church  being  the 
peculiar  object  of  God's  love,  all  prophecy  must  refer  to  it.  Most 
erroneous  idea !  The  reverse  is  true.  It  would  be  more  true 
to  say  that  the  church  is  never  the  subject  about  which  pro- 
phecy occupies  itself.  Its  proper  province  is  to  treat  of  earthly 
events ;  but  the  church  has  its  place  in  heavenly  glory.  When 
we  come  really  to  apprehend  this  book,  we  find  that  judgment  is 
the  subject  of  it ;  and  the  express  object  of  these  two  chapters 
is  to  shew  that,  before  one  of  the  judgments  comes  from  the 
throne,  the  church  is  taken  out  of  the  scene,  and  is  housed,  we 
may  say,  in  heavenly  glory.  The  joint-heirs  being  then  with 
Christ,  God  prepares  to  introduce  the  First-born  Heir  into  the 
world.  Unless  this  is  seen,  the  Eevelation  as  a  whole  cannot 
be  understood.  A  person  might  derive  comfort  from  particular 
parts,  but  this  is  not  comprehending  the  book.  To  understand 
the  scope  of  the  prophecy,  I  must  make  Christ  the  object,  and 
not  the  church;  otherwise  I  am  out  of  the  line  of  vision  in  which 
the  Spirit  wrote  it.  Not  the  church,  but  Christ,  is  the  centre  of 
God's  kingdom.  Astronomers  used  to  think  that  the  earth  was 
the  centre  round  which  the  other  heavenly  bodies  revolved, 
judging  superficially  by  what  presented  itself  to  the  senses. 
Christ  is  the  true  sun  and  centre  of  God's  system. 

Here  then  we  find  God  about  to  unveil  what  man's  mind 
could  not  possibly  discover.  "A  strong  angel  proclaims  with 
a  loud  voice,"  &c.  (verse  2).  Angels  are  those  that  "  excel  in 
strength"  —  not  in  intelligence.  It  is  nowhere  taught  that  they 
possess  the  same  kind  of  spiritual  understanding  as  the  members 
of  the  body  of  Christ.  The  angels  are  never  said,  nor  could 
they  be  said,  to  be  sealed  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  He  it  is, 
witnessing  to  Christ,  who  is  the  power  of  intelligence  in  the 
feeblest  child  of  God.  If  I  want  to  know  the  true  place  of  the 
church,  the  body,  I  must  look  at  the  place  of  Christ  the  Head ; 
and  if  I  desire  to  learn  what  God  is  going  to  do  with  the  earth, 
I  must  examine  God's  account  of  Christ  as  Son  of  David  and 
as  Son  of  man.     If  I  am  (unwittingly,  no  doubt)  putting  the 


THE  BOOK  SEALED  TO  ALL  OTHEKS.  Ill 

church  in  His  stead,  I  shall  get  all  wrong.  It  is  most  true 
that  God  loves  His  saints,  and  intends  that  they  shall  share 
with  Christ  the  rule  over  all  the  earth.  Man  draws  from  this 
the  conclusion  that  the  church  must  go  on  and  prosper  here 
below  ;  but  when  the  divine  revelations  touching  Christ  are 
weighed  more  fully,  I  learn  another  truth — that  Christ  is  coming 
in  the  way  of  judgment.  This  of  course  supposes  that  the 
professing  body  has  not  fulfilled  its  mission  ;  for  if  it  had,  who 
would  there  be  in  Christendom  for  God  to  pour  out  His  judg- 
ment upon  ?  "  That  servant  who  knew  his  Lord's  will,  and 
prepared  not  himself,  neither  did  according  to  his  will,  shall  be 
beaten  with  many  stripes." 

Look  at  the  truth  God  brings  before  us  here.  First,  there  is 
the  book,  that  is  to  say,  the  revelation  of  the  counsels  of  God 
as  to  the  earth.  Not  a  creature  was  found  worthy  to  open  the 
book,  neither  to  look  thereon.  The  prophet  weeps  because  of 
this  (verses  3,  4).  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  this  book 
the  apostle  John  is  not  presented  in  his  full  place  as  an  apostle 
to  the  church,  but  rather  as  a  prophet.  He  was,  it  is  true,  a 
luost  honoured  member  of  the  body  of  Christ ;  but  the  object  of 
the  book  is  to  not  shew  our  nearness  to  God  in  that  relationship  : 
as  a  prophet  of  intermediate  judgment  and  of  final  glory  John 
writes.  He  is  not  here  viewed  as  having  perfect  communion 
with  what  was  passing  around  him.  But  this  is  very  much  the 
characteristic  of  what  is  described  of  the  Old  Testament  seers; 
as  it  is  said  in  1  Peter  i.  10,  11,  "  Of  which  salvation  the  prophets 
have  enquired,"  &c.  It  may  be  also  that  the  prophet  John  is 
here  found  in  this  position  in  the  main,  because  the  book  of  the 
Apocalypse  was  not  merely  intended  for  the  church  which  was 
to  be  translated  to  heaven,  and  then  symbolically  seen  there ; 
but  it  also  meant  to  help  a  body  of  witnesses  to  be  found  o 
earth  after  the  church  is  removed,  who  will  go  through  tre- 
mendous suffering  in  the  last  times.  He  is  a  representative 
man,  but  rather  as  it  seems  of  those  who  are  to  enjoy  the 
Spirit  of  prophecy  here  below  in  Israel,  after  the  removal  of 
the  church  to  heaven,  than  of  those  who  as  sons  are  entitled 
by  grace  to  communion  with  their  Father's  heart. 

The  elders  shew  us  the  true  place  that  belongs  to  the  heavenly 


112  THE   LION    OF  JUDAII,   THE   ROOT   OF   DAVID. 

saints ;  and  accordingly  when  John  was  weeping  much,  one  of 
the  elders,  who  thoroughly  understood  the  matter,  says  to  him, 
"Weep  not:  behold,  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  lioot  of 
David,  hath  prevailed  to  open  the  book  and  the  seven  seals 
thereof"  (verse  5).  There  at  once  we  find  the  Lord  Jesus  in- 
troduced. His  person  is  brought  out,  but  it  is  in  connexion 
with  the  earthly  purposes  of  God.  He  is  in  relation  with  David 
here.  Jesse's  son  was  he  whom  Jehovah  elected  King  of  Israel. 
(Psalm  Ixxviii.)  He  was  emphatically  David  "the  king."  This 
title  therefore  expresses  the  purposes  of  God  about  Christ,  as  far 
as  the  earth  and  Israel  are  concerned. 

Judah  we  know  to  be  the  tribe  from  which  sprang  the  Christ 
or  Messiah.  Hence  the  style  and  character  in  which  the  elder 
announced  the  only  One  who  could  open  the  book — "  the  Lion 
of  the  tribe  of  Judah."  Majesty  and  power  among  wild  beasts 
upon  earth  are  conveyed  by  the  metaphor  employed.  Jacob  com- 
pared Judah  to  a  lion.  One  great  cliain  runs  through  all  scrip- 
ture. The  Holy  Ghost  who  spoke  by  Jacob  on  his  death -bed 
speaks  now  through  John,  and  reveals  that,  rejected  as  He  may 
be  on  earth,  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  is  owned  on  high, 
the  One  in  whom  God's  purposes  all  centre.  He  is  also  "  the 
root  of  David."  This  implies  more  than  being  David's  Son : 
He  is  David's  Lord.  He  might  be  of  David's  line,  but  He 
is  David's  root,  the  real  though  secret  cause  of  all  his  titles 
and  promises ;  just  as  Jolm  the  Baptist  said  that  He  who  came 
after  him  really  was  before  him.  But  there  is  another  remark- 
able intimation.  It  is  not  merely  said  that  He  is  worthy,  but 
that  "He  hath  prevailed."  That  little  word  "prevailed"  (con- 
quered or  overcame)  is  bound  up  with  tlie  whole  subject  of  the 
chapter.  It  is  the  victory  of  Jesus  by  His  blood.  The  Lord 
Jesus  had  personal  worthiness  at  any  time  to  take  the  book,  but 
if  He  had  received  and  opened  it  on  the  ground  of  His  own 
worthiness  alone,  what  would  this  have  availed  for  us  ?  All  must 
have  been  sealed  to  us  still.  Therefore  the  Lord  not  only  proved 
that  He  had  personal  worthiness  to  open  the  book  which  con- 
tained these  future  counsels  of  God,  but  He  prevailed,  and  by 
virtue  of  that  prevailing  we  are  entitled  to  listen  and  to  under- 
stand the  mind  of  God  even  as  to  the  future. 


"A   LAMP.    AS    IT   HAD    BEEN    SLAIN."  113 

"  And  I  saw  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  and  of  the  four  living 
creatures,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  elders,  a  Lamb  standing  as  it 
had  been  slain,"  &c.  (ver.  6).  John  had  heard  of  a  Lion,  but  now 
that  he  came  to  look,  it  was  a  Lamb.  When  he  expected  to  see 
the  S3Mnbol  of  power,  there  stood  before  all  the  picture  of  most 
holy  suffering  and  rejection.  And  this  was  the  emblem  of  Christ 
as  seen  even  on  the  throne  in  all  the  glory  of  heaven — a  smitten 
One,  guileless  and  unresisting,  "  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain." 
He  is  clothed  with  perfection  of  power ;  the  seven  horns  no 
doubt  mean  as  much.  The  seven  eyes  are  the  .symbol  of  perfect 
intelligence — the  fulness  of  the  Spirit,  here  in  respect  of  earth 
and  its  government.  But  the  One  who  is  seen  with  all  the  power 
and  wisdom  is  the  Lamb.  The  basis,  I  believe,  of  all  our  blessing 
stands  in  that  blessed  truth.  The  Lord  of  glory  has  become  a 
Lamb,  and  as  such  must  be  known,  if  we  are  to  profit  by  Him. 

The  Lamb,  as  in  John  i.  29,  is  what  answers  to  the  idea  of 
redemption.  Even  with  the  Jews,  when  the  lamb  was  offered 
up  morning  and  evening,  God  was  shewing  that,  if  a  poor  sinful 
people  had  anything  to  do  with  Him,  and  if  He  could  go  on  with 
them,  it  was  because  of  the  lamb.  Those  who  by  faith  under- 
stood looked  forward,  however  obscurely,  to  a  better  Lamb. 
God's  Son  was  to  become  God's  Lamb.  And  now  that  He  is  sent 
away  from  the  world,  He  is  the  rejected  One,  and  though  glorified 
in  heaven.  He  still  bears  there  the  marks  of  the  sufferer.  He  is 
seen  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain. 

Yet  the  sacrifice  of  the  Lamb  is  not  so  much  the  subject  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  here  as  His  being  the  holy  sufferer  accepted 
above.  Only  foundation  for  the  sinner,  He  is  also  the  pattern 
and  the  source  of  the  hopes  of  His  own,  and  for  this  reason, 
that  if  we  suff'er,  we  shall  also  reign  with  Him.  Here  then,  as 
everywhere,  we  find  that  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords 
was  the  greatest  of  sufferers.  God  brings  those  two  thoughts 
into  connexion  in  chap.  xvii. — the  suffering  and  rejected  Lamb, 
and  the  King  of  kings.  Why  ?  Because  God  would  shew  us 
all  glory  resting  on  Christ,  the  earth-rejected  and  despised  One. 
The  very  cross,  which  seemed  to  be  the  death-blow  of  all  hopes 
for  Israel,  opens  the  way  for  better  thoughts  and  higher  counsels 
of  glory  than  ever.     If  we  looked  at  Calvary  in  itself,  it  might 

I 


114  THE  LOUD  JESUS  AS  THE  LAMB. 

have  appeared  that  all  was  at  an  end,  and  hope  itself  for  ever 
laid  in  the  grave ;  for  there  was  the  One  who  might  have  blessed 
them,  and  vanquished  Satan,  and  terminated  human  misery  and 
sin,  Himself  cast  out  and  crucified !  All  seemed  to  be  nipped 
in  the  bud,  and  prematurely  closed  in  the  death  of  Christ ;  and 
yet  such  was  the  very  way  God  took  that  He  might  readily  and 
eternally  bless  according  to  His  own  heart.  What  seemed  for 
the  time  to  be  the  victory  of  Satan  was  really  the  triumph  of 
God  for  ever  over  him  and  his  works. 

Observe,  it  is  as  the  Lamb  that  the  Lord  Jesus  takes  His 
place  in  heaven.  What  is  the  practical  effect  of  this  on  our 
souls  ?  The  more  a  man  enters  into  it,  the  less  does  he  look  for 
a  place  of  honour  and  esteem  in  the  world.  He  knows  well 
that,  while  Satan  is  god  of  this  world,  and  Christ  liid  in  God, 
truth  must  be  despised  here  below ;  and  consequently  he  is  not 
surprised  if  he  sees  prosperity  crowning  that  which  is  evil.  He 
will  be  prepared  for  ail  this,  because  it  is  just  the  history  of 
Christ.  The  slain  Lamb  brings  before  us  the  whole  moral  course 
of  the  world.  But  one  thing  more  let  me  ask,  Does  the  Lamb 
bring  before  your  soul  your  own  history  ?  Do  you  know  what 
it  is  to  be  cast  out  because  of  Christ,  not  because  you  deserve 
to  be  rejected  (though  in  another  sense  this  is  true),  but  because 
you  desire  to  stand  for  the  Lord  Jesus  at  all  cost  ? 

But  there  is  another  side  :  Christ  is  glorified  now — not  indeed 
as  yet  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  But  heaven  is  opened  to  our 
view,  and  we  find  that  He  who  was  most  despised  here  is  exalted 
in  heaven,  and  that  God  has  gathered  there  round  the  Lamb 
that  was  slain  others  into  association  witli  Him.  I  ask,  Has  He 
called  you  ?  Has  He  given  you  the  portion  of  the  slain  Lamb 
on  the  earth  ?  If  you  are  a  Christian,  you  ought  not  to  be  happy 
without  knowing  something  of  this.  A  saint  ought  to  be  pained 
if  he  finds  that,  instead  of  realizing,  he  does  not  know  wliat  such 
language  means.  God  desires  that  we  shouhl  know  it,  not  only 
about  Christ,  but  as  our  own  portion  here  on  eartli. 

In  the  days  of  old  David,  though  God's  anointed  king,  knew 
sorrow  and  rejection,  while  another  king  had  the  power  for  the 
time.  So  now,  though  the  power  of  the  beast  is  not  yet  fully 
developed,  the  world  gets  ready  for  him  to  come  and  govern 


THE   ANTITYPE   OF   DAVID.  115 

it.  David  was  cast  out,  despised,  insulted — thought,  or  at  least 
by  insinuation  said  by  Nabal,  to  be  some  run-away  from  his 
master  ;  and  certainly  appearances  looked  very  unpromising, 
surrounded  as  he  was  in  the  cave  of  Adullam  by  a  band  of  the 
distressed  and  indebted  in  Israel.  There  were  many  of  his 
followers  who,  as  far  as  nature  was  concerned,  may  have 
justly  deserved  to  be  thought  lightly  of  But  what  a  change 
grace  makes  !  David  was  the  special  person  whom  God's  heart 
rested  on,  and  they  knew  it,  and  gathered  round  the  object  of 
God's  love.  There  was  a  dignity  that  now  accrued  to  them 
because  of  their  companionship  with  David.  We  can  hardly  be 
more  miserable  and  weak  than  we  are,  but  as  that  one  object 
gave  all  the  value  to  the  inmates  of  the  cave  of  Adullam,  so  it 
is  from  association  with  Christ  that  all  our  blessing  flows.  The 
priests  of  God  were  even  drawn  there  by  David.  But  a  greater 
than  David  is  come,  and  God  has  sent  down  the  Holy  Ghost 
that  we  may  know  that  the  despised  One  is  now  in  glory.  And 
the  Lord  grant  that  we  may  have  more  practical  acquaintance 
with  His  place  of  rejection  here  below,  and  not  want  to  escape 
or  deny  it !  There  is  nothing  the  flesh  dislikes  so  much  as  to  be 
despised.  It  is  coinparatively  easy  to  buckle  up  one's  strength 
to  meet  persecution  or  determined  opposition,  but  it  is  another 
thing  to  be  content  in  being  nothing  at  all.  In  us,  worms  as 
we  are,  this  touches  the  will  most ;  yet  this  is  exactly  what  the 
Lord  of  glory,  Jesus,  condescended  to  be  ;  and  the  enmity  that 
despised  Him  rose  to  its  climax  at  the  cross.  In  spite  of  all  the 
pretended  enlightenment  and  liberalism  of  the  present  day,  the 
spirit  of  the  world  is  not  really  changed.  I  would  not  trust  for  a 
single  moment  that  which  arises  from  mere  indifference  toward 
God,  or  from  glorifying  the  rights  of  man.  Men  count  truth 
and  error  all  as  one,  have  no  conscience  toward  God,  and  preach 
respect  for  each  other.  The  spirit  of  the  age  that  now  looks 
and  speaks  so  fair  might  at  any  moment  rise  up  fiercely  against 
God,  and  then  we  should  learn  the  truth  of  our  experience,  that 
it  is  a  slain  Lamb  whom  we  know  and  worship  on  high.  We 
should  discover  the  reality  of  it,  and  of  fellowship  with  Him, 
and  it  would  arouse  many  a  saint  of  God  from  the  slumber  in 
which  he  is  now  ;  for  even  the  wise  virgins  may  sleep.    "  Awake ! 

I  2 


116  SUFFERING   AND    BLOOD-SHEDDING. 

thou  that  slee])esi"  is  said  to  Christians.  If  you  have  been 
asleep  among  dead  things  and  persons,  the  Lord  grant  that  you 
may  not  remain  in  this  condition,  but  speedily  clear  yourself 
from  these,  "and  Christ  shall  give  you  light!" 

It  is  the  slain  Lamb  that  is  evidently  the  great  centre  of 
heavenly  worship.  Now  that  sin  is  come  into  the  world,  the 
creative  glory  of  God  is  not  enough,  nor  even  His  providential 
government.  If  He  is  to  be  glorified,  save  in  pure  judgment  of 
His  adversaries,  if  displays  of  merciful  goodness  are  to  be  known 
in  such  a  world  as  this,  if  a  new  song  is  to  be  sung  in  heaven, 
there  must  be  redemption,  and  this  not  by  power  only,  but  by 
suffering  and  blood.  Hence,  as  the  central  throne  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter  was  filled  by  the  Lord  God,  the  Almighty,  so  here 
the  central  object  on  whom  all  blessing  for  the  creature  depends, 
to  whom,  equally  with  Him  who  sat  on  the  throne,  worship  is 
offered,  is  the  Lamb.  All  heaven  honours  Him  as  the  Father  is 
honoured.  He  is  the  First-born,  the  Heir,  not  only  by  rights  of 
creation  and  intrinsic  personal  glory,  but  by  redemption  the 
divinely  appointed  "  Heir  of  all  things."  God  destines  the  wide 
universe  for  His  sceptre.  But  how  and  on  what  plea  would 
Christ  take  the  inheritance  ?  By  power  ?  Surely,  all  power  was 
His.  In  the  day  of  His  humiliation  the  demons  were  subject  to 
the  least  of  His  servants  through  His  name.  Even  then  He 
could  say,  "  I  beheld  Satan  as  lightning  fall  from  heaven,"  the 
energy  of  the  seventy  in  casting  out  demons  being  to  His  spirit, 
I  apprehend,  the  sign  and  earnest  of  complete  victory  in  due 
time.  "  Behold,  I  give  unto  you  power  to  tread  on  serpents  and 
scorpions,  and  over  all  the  power  of  the  enemy."  Why  not  take 
the  inheritance  then  and  there  ?  After  the  evidence  of  such 
triumphs  over  the  usurper,  why  go  down  unto  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross  ?  "  Because  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser 
than  men ;  and  the  weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  men." 
Because  God  must  be  vindicated  in  His  majesty,  love,  wisdom, 
and  righteousness.  Because  Christ  could  not  accept  a  defiled 
inheritance.  (Compare  Col.  i.  20  and  Heb.  ix.  21-23.)  Be- 
cause He  would  not  reign  alone,  and  in  this  He  and  His  Father 
were  of  one  mind.  In  His  grace  He  would  have  joint-heir.s,  the 
sharers  of  His  glory.     Such  a  reconciliation  was  only  possible 


PURCHASE   BY   BLOOD.  117 

through  death,  even  if  the  offering  were  the  body  of  His  flesh, 
all  spotless  flesh  as  it  was.  Peace  could  not  be  made  stably  and 
divinely  save  through  the  blood  of  His  cross.  Therefore  is  it 
that  He  is  here  seen  and  sung  as  the  Lamb.  God  means  as- 
suredly to  bring  the  First-begotten  into  the  habitable  world; 
and  the  book  in  His  right  hand  describes,  I  suppose,  the  process 
whereby  the  inheritance  is  to  be  put  into  His  hands ;  but  pur- 
chase by  blood,  blessed  be  His  name,  is  the  ground  on  which  all 
is  taken.  When  He  receives  the  book,  all  is  in  motion.  As  in 
chap,  iv.,  when  the  living  creatures  pay  honour  to  God,  the 
twenty-four  elders  fall  down  and  do  homage,  so  here,  when  the 
Lamb  takes  the  book  out  of  the  right  hand  of  Him  that  sat  on 
the  throne,  the  four  living  creatures  and  the  twenty-four  elders 
are  prostrate  before  Him.  Though  it  might  be  opened  for  the 
purpose  of  striking  some  blow,  there  was  no  apprehension,  no 
trouble,  no  concern  about  themselves  in  particular ;  they  fell 
down  before  the  Lamb.  It  was  not  a  question  of  merely  receiving 
from  God,  but  they  would  exalt  Him.  Far  from  taking  away 
anything  from  God,  on  the  contrary,  in  the  very  presence  of  the 
throne  and  of  Him  that  sat  on  it,  the  Lamb  is  the  object  of 
worship,  the  source  of  its  purest  and  deepest  strains.  God  is 
best  glorified  when  the  Lamb  has  His  meed  of  praise. 

They  liad  "  each  a  harp  and  golden  bowls  *  full  of  odours, 
which  are  the  prayers  of  saints."  In  the  tabernacle  service  of 
the  wilderness  silver  trumpets  were  used  for  holy  purposes  by 
the  priests.  David  first  introduced  the  harp,  sej)arating  the  sons 
of  Asaph,  Heman,  and  Jeduthun,  for  songs  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  with  cymbals,  psalteries,  and  harps.  These,  like  the  priests, 
were  divided  into  twenty-four  classes ;  so  that  the  allusion  is 
obvious,  with  that  measure  of  difference  which  is  characteristic 

*  The  reviewer  in  Evangelical  Christendom,  August,  1860,  p.  451,  objects, 
among  other  departures  from  "  the  time-honoured  expressions  of  our  venerable 
Saxon  Bible,"  that  I  have  given  "bowls"  instead  of  "vials."  But  sm-ely  he 
must  be  aware  that  "a  small  bottle"  is  not  intended  by  <pia.\r]  here,  or  any- 
where else  in  the  book,  but  rather  a  broad  open  vessel  or  bason.  Compare  in  the 
LXX.  Exod.  xxvii.  3 ;  xxxviii.  3 ;  Num.  vii.  passim :  also  answering  to  other 
Hebrew  words,  Num.  iv.  14  ;  2  Chron.  iv.  16,  &c.  We  ought  not  to  sacrifice  the 
sense  to  sound.  The  English  word  "vial,"  though  derived  from  the  Greek, 
really  misleads.     Habit  or  the  ear  may  account  for  such  a  preference. 


118  THE   SAINTS   THAT   Pit  AY. 

of  the  Apocalypse.  Priestly  and  choral  services  are  here  bleuded 
in  perfection.  Does  not  this  also  serve  to  shew  that  the  elders 
only  are  here  said  to  have  harps  and  basons  of  incense  ?  In  chap. 
XV.  the  four  living  creatures  give  the  angels  the  seven  golden 
bowls  full  of  divine  wrath.  Thus  all  is  in  keeping  :  the  elders 
being  the  heads  of  royal  priesthood,  as  the  cherubim  wait  on  the 
execution  of  God's  judgments,  though  both  unite  (chap,  v.)  in 
the  fullest  homage  to  the  Lamb.  But  who  are  those  "saints" 
that  pray  ?  The  elders,  or  the  church,  were  in  heaven,  and  in 
full  choir  of  praise.  Whose  prayers  then  are  these  ?  They  come 
from  saints  who  will  suffer  when  the  church  is  above.  The  elders 
are  those  heavenly  saints  who  have  been  removed  previously, 
including  perhaps  the  Old  Testament  saints.  They  are  in  the 
place  of  adoration  and  praise,  whereas  prayer  implies  need.  If 
they  have  to  do  with  prayers,  it  is  the  prayers  of  others,  not  their 
own.  Besides  they  sing  a  new  song,  that  of  the  Lamb's  purchase 
by  blood,  saying,  "  Thou  art  worthy,  for  thou  wast  slain,"  &c. 

A  very  important  change  occurs  in  this  verse,  well  known  to 
every  person  tolerably  acquainted  with  the  original  scriptures. 
Persons  who  have  studied  the  most  ancient  manuscripts  and 
other  witnesses  of  this  book,  all  agree  that  it  is,  "  and  hast  made 
them  to  our  God  kings  (or  a  kingdom)  and  priests"  (ver.  10). 
Who  are  those  meant  by  "them"  and  made  kings  and  priests 
"  to  our  God "  ?     They  do  not  speak  of  themselves. 

Indeed,  I  am  prepared  to  go  farther,  and  am  bound  to  state  my 
firm  impression  that  in  the  ninth  verse  the  word  "us"  was  put 
in  by  copyists  who  supposed  that  the  elders  were  celebrating 
their  own  blessing.*     But  the  elders  are  so  perfectly  at  rest 

*  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  true  readings  of  Kov.  v.  9,  10,  are  some  of  them 
unusually  hard  to  bo  decided.  Out  of  five  there  are  four  uncial  MSS.  available, 
one  of  the  oldest  being  deficient  from  Rev.  iii.  19,  to  v.  16.  The  versions  too  are 
conflicting,  and  so  are  the  editors.  There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  vie  are 
obliged  to  road  ni/Tovf,  "them"  (andnot  j//iae,  "us")  in  verse  10,  on  the  authority 
of  the  four  uncials  (the  palimpsest  of  Paris  being  here  deficient  and  so  leaving 
us  one  short),  forty  cursives,  and  many  ancient  versions.  But  evidently  that 
substitution,  true  and  certain  as  it  is,  of  them  for  "us"  in  verse  10,  obscures  or 
destroys  the  connexion  with  the  preceding  verse,  if  "us"  is  supposed  to  hold 
its  ground  in  verso  9.  And  this  is  the  more  noticeable,  as  both  clauses  form  part 
of  the  same  song  in  the  month  of  the  same  personages.  For  what  more  incon- 
gruous than  "redeemed  ii.s and  made  tlnm,"  wlu.-n  no  other  class  has  been 


THE  BETTER  TEXT  AND  TRUE  SENSE.  119 

about  themselves,  that  they  can  be  occupied  about  others.  I 
believe,  accordingly,  that  the  true  sense  is  this  :  "  Thou  art 
^vorthy  to  take  the  book,  ....  for  thou  wast  slain,  and  hast 
bought  to  God  by  thy  blood  out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue, 
and  people,  and  nation ;  and  hast  made  them  to  our  God  kings 

referred  to  between  the  clauses  ?  Hence  the  strangest  solutions  of  the  difficulty- 
have  been  proposed.  Thus  Prof.  M.  Stuart,  who  takes  for  granted  the  correct- 
ness of  the  text  of  Griesbach  and  Scholz,  refers  the  uvtovq  of  verse  10  to  (pvXfjg, 
yXuiarffTjg  k.t.X.  i.e.  "thou  has  made  every  tribe,"  &c.,  "to  be  kings  and  priests." 
Now,  limit  this  as  you  may,  it  is  a  construction  awkward  in  the  extreme,  and 
without  parallel  in  St.  John,  or  perhaps  in  any  other  author.  Besides,  it  ignores, 
instead  of  solving,  the  enigma.  For  >)/iae  ek  is  left  out  of  the  result,  and  if  the 
same  party  is  intended  (as  Prof.  S.  thinks),  the  question  is,  why  should  "us" 
be  used  in  verse  9,  and  "them"  in  verse  10?  The  alternative  to  which  the 
Professor  is  reduced,  of  portioning  out  this  short  song  between  the  living  crea- 
tures and  the  elders,  and  thus  accounting  for  the  change  in  the  pronouns,  strikes 
one  as  an  evidence  of  the  difficulty  rather  than  of  its  removal.  Singular  to  say, 
he  alludes  to  the  true  key,  as  it  seems  to  me,  as  if  it  had  no  authority  beyond  the 
conjecture  of  an  eccentric  German.  The  truth  is  that  in  one  of  the  best  manu- 
scripts (A  or  the  Codex  Alexandrinus)  which  contain  the  passage,  rifxag  in  verse  9 
does  not  appear;  nor  is  any  equivalent  given  in  one  of  the  oldest  extant  versions, 
— the  Aethiopic  of  the  fourth  century.  It  is  also  wanting  in  a  cursive  MS.  known 
as  Codex  Borgiae.  I  admit  that  in  this  case  the  amount  of  testimony  is  far  from 
being  considerable.  Nevertheless  the  omission  seemed  probable  to  Griesbach ; 
and  in  fact  it  is  dropped  in  some  of  the  latest  editions  of  the  Greek  Testament, 
which  appeal  to  ancient  authority.  Tischendorf  omitted  it  from  the  first,  as  he 
does  still :  Lachmann  had  it  in  his  earlier  manual,  but  erased  it  in  his  second  and 
more  correct  edition:  and  the  younger  Buttmann  has  it  not  in  his  recent  manual 
Greek  Testament  (Leipsic,  1856)  :  so  Dean  Alford.  These  critics  have  arrived  at 
that  conclusion  on  independent  principles,  and  on  purely  external  grounds.  If 
it  be  sound,  the  construction  is  elliptical  but  frequent,  especially  in  the  writings 
of  St.  John  (compare  John  xvi.  17  ;  2  John  4  ;  Rev.  ii.  10  ;  iii.  9  ;  xi.  9).  There 
can  be  no  objection,  therefore,  on  the  score  of  phraseology,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
he  sentence  runs  quite  in  his  style  without  y'lfiag.  Some  scribe,  ignorant  of  this, 
and  supposing  that  the  saints  in  heaven  must  needs  sing  there  of  their  own  re- 
demption, as  they  had  done  on  earth  (chap.  i.  5,  6),  may  have  inserted  the  first 
I'mag.  This,  in  turn,  producing  a  jar  with  the  avrovg  in  the  following  verse, 
would  natm-aUy  require  the  further  demand  of  taking  its  place  there ;  and  that 
again  would  lead  to  the  change  in  the  person  of  the  verb  in  the  last  clause.  The 
internal  considerations  I  believe  to  be  very  weighty  in  favour  of  the  omission ; 
but  these  have  been,  perhaps,  sufficiently  given  above  in  the  text.  The  reading 
i]y6fja<yaQ  T(p  Quf  I'mwv  (as  in  Cod.  44)  appears  to  bo  the  original  text.  The 
Alexandi'ian  MS.  which  is  the  nearest  among  those  that  diverge,  followed  pretty 
closely  by  the  Aethiopic,  omits  j'/juaJv  in  verse  9  and  ry  9tii)  I'jfiwv  in  verse  10. 
But  these  words  are  unquestionably  genuine,  and  add  much  to  the  proof  that  the 
elders  praised  the  Lamb  for  His  redemption  of  others,  distinct  from  themselves. 


120  OTHER   SAINTS    ON    EARTH. 

and  priests ;  and  they  shall  reign  over  the  earth."  They  are 
speaking  about  the  saints  whose  prayers  they  were  offering 
As  they  were  occupied  with  their  prayers,  so  here  they  were 
praising  the  Lord  for  His  goodness  to  the  saints  still  on  earth. 
They  intimate  that  in  taking  above  the  heavenly  saints,  He  had 
not  done  with  His  rich  mercy ;  that,  even  in  the  midst  of  His 
judgments,  He  would  have  a  purchased  people,  who  were  to 
share  the  glory  of  the  kingdom  as  a  royal  priesthood,  instead  of 
being  swallowed  up  in  the  delusions  of  antichrist. 

These  anticipated  companions  are  the  same  probably  that  we 
see  in  chapter  vi.  as  "  souls  under  the  altar,  slain  for  the  word 
of  God,"  &c.  ;  and  in  chapter  xiv.,  "  Blessed  are  the  dead  that 
die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth,"  &c. ;  and  in  chapter  xv.,  "  Them 
that  had  gotten  the  victory  over  the  beast,"  &c.  There  are  other 
allusions  also  in  the  body  of  the  book  to  the  righteous.  Clearly 
they  were  saints  of  God  upon  the  earth  in  conflict  or  tribulation, 
after  the  elders  (who,  as  we  saw,  represent  the  church  or  the 
heavenly  saints)  were  translated  to  heaven.  As  to  the  saints 
who  won  the  victory  over  the  beast,  "they  sing  the  song  of 
Moses,  the  servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb."  Observe 
the  mingled  character  of  the  scene.  True,  it  was  the  song  of  the 
Lamb  ;  but  it  was  the  song  of  Moses  too  :  it  was  partly  earthly 
and  partly  heavenly.  Again,  in  chapter  xx.  4,  it  is  said,  "  And 
I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  them."  These  are  the  elders, 
already  risen  or  changed,  seated  upon  the  thrones.  "  And  I  saw 
the  souls  of  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus, 
and  for  the  word  of  God"  {i.e.,  the  people  whose  souls  he  had 
seen  in  chapter  vi.) ;  and,  again,  those  "  which  had  not  wor- 
shipped the  beast,  neither  his  image,  neither  had  received  his 
mark  upon  their  foreheads;"  these  last  being  the  persons  that 
had  sung  the  song  of  victory  in  chapter  xv.  Thus  the  two  classes 
which  had  suffered,  after  the  rapture  of  the  church,  are  at  length 
united  with  the  rest  in  glory,  and  all  reign  together  with  Christ. 

It  will  be  remarked  how  thoroughly  the  whole  agrees  with 
the  song  in  chapter  v.  The  elders  are  in  heaven,  in  the  enjoy- 
ment of  God  and  the  Lamb  ;  but  there  are  saints  on  earth  who 
are  praying,  and  the  elders  above  are  occupied  about  their 
prayers,  and  celebrate  the  worthiness  and  work  of  the  Lamb  in 


JOY  IN  THE  GOOD  OF  OTHEES.  121 

behalf  of  others  who  should  reigu  over  the  earth  as  well  as 
themselves.*  Instead  of  this  taking  a  single  fraction  away 
from  us,  it  adds  indirectly,  if  not  in  itself,  to  the  place  of  glory 
in  which  the  church  is  seen  in  heaven.  They  are  so  fully  blest 
that  they  can  heartily  rejoice  in  the  good  of  others.  There  are 
some  too  apt  to  be  restless  if  they  are  not  always  listening  to 
the  gospel  for  themselves — not  because  they  value  it  more  than 
others,  but  because  they  are  not  thoroughly  established  in  grace. 
When  our  hearts  are  quite  satisfied,  we  do  not  feel  the  need 
of  anxiously  picking  and  choosing  in  the  scriptures  ;  we  prefer 
the  Lord  to  choose  for  us,  and  are  thankful,  because  it  may  be 
something  to  His  praise  that  we  perhaps  have  not  known  before, 
or  a  weapon  we  may  want  in  our  next  conflict  with  the  enemy. 
Whatever  exalts  Christ  and  glorifies  Him  is  that  which  we 
should  delight  in.  Whatever  detects  the  deceitfulness  of  our 
hearts  is  most  salutary  to  us.  When  the  elders  are  found 
thanking  God,  they  take  up  His  goodness  to  those  who  are 
suffering  on  the  earth,  and  they  bless  the  Lamb  because  He  had 
been  slain  and  had  bought  these  also  to  their  God.    It  was  their 

*  I  cannot  but  think  Mr.  E.'s  remarks  and  notes  on  this  {Rorae  Apoc.  i.  pp. 
86-96)  confused  and  unsatisfactory.  He  reasons  from  vulgar  readings  which  no 
competent  critic,  whatever  may  be  his  bias,  can  entertain.  It  is  easy  to  convert 
a  preconceived  opinion  into  a  decision  that  our  own  view  is  much  more  simple. 
It  is  also  a  serious  mistake  to  say  that  the  sense  is  "substantially  the  same," 
whether  we  have  us  or  they  in  verse  10.  Again,  the  Sinaitic  and  Porphyrian 
MSS.  turn  the  scale  in  favour  of  the  twenty-two  ciirsives,  and  the  better  ancient 
versions,  which  support  jia<yCKivaov(nv  against  A  B,  eighteen  cursives,  &c.,  exhi- 
biting the  present  tense.  But  fjfiag  and  fiacnXtvofiev  are  indefensible  and  mani- 
festly the  work  of  a  meddling  corrector.  It  is  strange  too  that  the  question  of 
the  ellipse  in  verse  9  is  passed  over  in  silence,  seeing  that  there  "us"  is,  to  say 
the  least,  doubtful ;  and  if  spurious  removes  the  main  reason  for  viewing  the 
^da  as  redeemed.  Mr.  E.  treats  this  last  idea  as  "unquestionable,"  of  which 
there  is  really  no  proof  whatever.  It  is  evident,  further,  that  there  is  much 
embarrassment  as  to  the  condition  of  the  elders,  in  one  page  referring  their 
insignia  to  the  resurrection-state,  and  in  the  next  concluding  that  it  is  the 
division  of  the  church  consisting  of  the  departed  in  paradise  especially,  that  we 
must  suppose  depicted  here.  Finally,  it  is  erroneous  to  speak  of  "  the  general 
assembly  of  the  church ;"  for  iravrjyvpti  belongs  to  the  clause  about  the  angels. 
But  letting  this  pass  (as  the  authorised  version  m.isleads  many  in  Heb.  xii.),  what  is 
meant  by  the  apparent  distinction,  in  p.  94,  between  the  church  of  the  first-bom, 
and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect  ?  I  quite  allow  this ;  but  I  do  not  see 
its  consistency  with  Blr.  E.'s  statement  about  the  elders  and  cherubim. 


122  THE  angels'  praise. 

delight  to  think  of  that  work  so  rich  in  results  for  God — to 
think  of  others  from  every  quarter  who  should  share  the  king- 
dom over  the  earth. 

The  angels  take  up,  not  the  new  song  in  view  of  the  Lamb's 
purchase,  but  His  worthiness  to  receive  power,  and  riches, 
and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  blessing. 
Loudly  do  they  proclaim  His  title  to  dominion  whom  man  de- 
spised and  slew.  "Worthy  [not  "art  thou,"  but]  is  the  Lamb  that 
was  slain"  (verses  11,  12).  They  do  not  sing  of  His  purchase, 
because  they  were  not  so  bought ;  they  have  not  to  do  with  it, 
though  they  are  sustained  by  the  power  of  God ;  but  those  who 
have  known  their  need  as  poor  sinners  can  well  sing  the  new 
song.  The  angels  speak  of  His  worth  and  His  death,  but  they 
do  not  chant  the  deep  and  joyous  notes  of  the  blood-bought. 
If  I  look  at  the  gift  and  person  of  Christ,  I  can  see  how  God's 
character  comes  out,  and  His  love  is  manifested.  If  I  look  at 
the  great  work  of  Christ,  and  what  I  have  in  and  with  Him  as  He 
is,  I  can  see  how  the  love  of  God  with  us  is  perfected.  But  where 
is  anything  in  the  glory  of  heaven  that  shines  so  much  as  the 
cross  of  Christ  ?  We  may  follow  Jesus  on  the  earth,  and  see  the 
holiness  of  God ;  we  may  glance  above,  and  see  how  He  delights 
in  having  us  happy  around  Him ;  we  may  look  again  at  Jesus 
in  His  path  on  earth,  seeking  out  the  lost,  the  miserable,  and 
laying  His  hands  on  babes,  even  touching  the  leper ;  but  whether 
we  think  of  the  holiness  or  the  love  of  God,  of  His  righteousness 
or  His  grace,  it  is  in  the  cross  where  all  is  found  and  displayed 
to  faith,  as  we  can  get  it  nowhere  else. 

"  And  every  creature  which  is  in  the  heaven,  and  on  the  earth, 
and  under  the  earth,*  and  such  as  are  on  the  sea,  and  all  things 

*  Every  creature  "under  the  earth,"  viroKarm  Tijg  yije,  must  be  carefully 
distinguished,  notwithstanding  Bcngel,  from  the  KaraxOoviiov  in  Phil.  ii.  10. 
The  former,  I  suppose,  means  the  things,  animate  or  inanimate,  beneath  the 
earth's  surface  which  anticipate  in  the  vision,  their  deliverance  from  corruption 
into  the  liberty  of  the  ^lor;/  of  the  children  of  God.  They  cannot  of  course  share 
the  liberty  oi grace  which  we  enjoy;  but  when  wo  arc  in  the  glory,  it  will  be  the 
pledge  of  their  glorious  change  speedily  to  follow.  The  latter  in  Philippiana 
means  the  infernal  beings,  who  must  bow  with  every  knee  elsewhere  at  (or  in) 
tlie  name  of  Jesus.  I  am  aware  that  Dean  Alford,  with  Theodoret,  &c.,  takes 
Karax-  as  the  dead;  but  this,  thougli  a  classical  usage  of  the  word,  seems  to 
be  far  from  the  scope  of  the  passage. 


EVERY  CREATURE — HOW  THEN  ?  123 

ill  them,  heard  I  saying,  Blessing,  ...  to  him  that  sitteth  on  the 
throne,  and  to  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever"  (verse  13).  The 
chord  is  touched,  the  keynote  sounded,  and  heard  at  last  in 
heaven.  If  the  Lamb  takes  the  book,  not  a  creature  but  responds 
in  joy  to  the  ear  of  the  seer,  as  now  the  whole  of  the  lower  uni- 
verse groans  in  sorrow  because  of  Adam's  sin.  Why  should  they 
not  rejoice  if  God  and  the  Lamb  unite  to  deliver  ?  Doubtless  it 
is  but  the  opening  out  of  the  Lamb's  title-deed  •  and  much  re- 
mains to  be  done  in  destroying  the  works  of  the  devil,  and  those 
that  destroy  the  earth.  Still  this  is  the  sure  signal,  and  before 
God  every  creature  anticipates  in  sympathy. 

All  bow  down  before  the  Lamb.  The  myriads  of  angels  join 
in  acknowledgment  of  His  death ;  but  it  is  the  place  of  the 
heavenly  saints  to  enter  into  the  sense  of  its  efficacy,  yea,  and 
into  the  deep  joy — God's  joy — in  the  blessing  of  others,  and  not 
merely  their  own.  The  four  living  creatures  set  to  it  their  seal, 
and  say,  "  Amen ; "  but  the  elders  fall  down  and  do  homage.* 
They  did  not  merely  yield  their  assent  to  all,  but  their  hearts 
went  along  with  it.     It  is  ever  their  place. 

Such  a  subject  as  this  may  well  leave  one  immensely  behind. 
We  must  be  living  very  much  in  its  depths  in  order  to  feel  it 
aright,  or  to  give  it  an  adequate  expression.  But  if  I  have  directed 
attention  to  the  blessedness  of  Christ  as  the  slain  Lamb,  and 
shewn  that  God  makes  Him  to  be  the  key  for  understanding  His 
otherwise  hidden  purposes,  I  shall  be  thankful.  Even  to  under- 
stand God's  purposes  about  the  earth,  we  must  see  the  Lamb. 
It  is  only  in  communion  with  Him  that  we  can  enter  into  them. 
To  appreciate  what  follows,  we  must  be  subject  to  God's  thoughts 
of  Christ ;  we  must  go  back  to  what  God  begins  with  ;  we  must 
see  and  hear  the  Lamb.  The  Lord  grant  that  such  may  be  our 
better  portion !  We  shall  be  near  that  Blessed  One,  in  whose 
person  and  work  shines  all  that  is  gracious  and  blessed  in  God, 
from  whom  we  can  learn  in  peace  His  most  solemn  judgment  of 
man's  rebellion  and  apostasy. 

*  It  is  well  to  note  that  all  the  reliable  authorities,  including  all  the  five 
uncials,  a  vast  body  of  cursives,  and  most  versions,  &c.,  omit  ^wiri  tig  tovq  aidvag 
ruiv  aiijjviiiv.  How  admirably  this  omission  coalesces  with  the  context  and  main- 
tains the  glory  of  God  and  the  Lamb  as  the  common  object  of  homage  on  the 
part  of  the  elders  is  evident. 


124  HEAVEN   NOT   HO   FAU   OFF 


CHArTER  VI. 

From  tlio  two  pvcc(Mlin^'  cha,])tcr.s  the  lessons  arc  apparent,  and 
1  do  nut  doubt  should  bo  learned  :  firstly,  God  sits  on  the  throne, 
whence  proceed  lightnings,  voices,  and  thunders  ;  secondly,  all 
tliinrr.s  are  j^iven  into  the  hands  of  the  Lamb,  who  unfolds  all ; 
thirdly,  the!  perfect  secui'ily  and  the  blessed  (Miijiloynient  of  the 
heavenly  saints,  thru  I'ciiiovrd  from  tlu^  scene  of  trial;  and  (his 
lon<^f  before  the  tiay  of  tlie  Lord,  when  tlunr  bli'ssin^;-  will  be 
manift'sted  I'ully  to  the  world.  The  moment  the  sold  and  the 
l)ody,  or  both  (the  soul  now,  tht'  soul  luid  body  united  at  the 
eominj^'  of  ( Christ),  leave  this  worlil,  there  is  for  the  saints,  1 
believe,  immediate  onjoynuMit  of  the  Lord.  Is  that  a  scriptural 
thought  which,  in  a  hynm  wo  sometimes  sing,  about  "soaring  to 
worlds  unknown  ";'  Does  scripture  intimate  anything  at  all  like 
a  sold  journeying  on  a  voyage  of  disct)very  ?  On  the  contrary 
does  it  not  meet  w  ith  peaceful  and  immediate  entrance  into  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  ?  When  heaven  is  allowed  to  burst  for  a 
moment  ujjon  men  on  the  earth  (as,  for  instance,  at  the  birth  and 
the  transliguration,  ami  in  the  cases  of  Stephen,  Paul,  &c.)  it 
appears  that  there  is  no  such  great  distance  between  them.  Of 
course  it  is  not  a  (piestion  of  mere  physical  space,  lint  there  is 
a  divine  power  which  at  once  brings  a  person  out  of  the  present 
state  of  existence  into  the  enjoyed  presence  of  the  Lord.  So  when 
He  1  limself  was  speaking  to  the  ]K)or  dying  thief,  it  was  "  to-day 
shalt.  thou  be  with  mt>  in  paradise," — that  very  day.  There  is 
iiotliiiig  to  my  miiul  like  the  poetieal  sentiment  of  soaring  to 
W()rlds  unknown. 

Hut  while  the  soul  goes  at  once  into  the  ]»resenee  of  the  Lonl 
in  the  case  i>f  death,  and  "in  a  mouu'iit,  in  the  twinkling  of  an 
eye,"  the  saints  will  be  caught  up  at  the  ei)ming  of  Christ;  yet 
we  must  remember  that  their  manifestation  will  be  a  diil'ereut 


JUDGMENTS    ON    CHKISTENDOM.  125 

and  later  event.  Other  passages  prove  or  imply  an  interval. 
But  we  should  not  be  able  so  plainly  to  gather  from  other  scrip- 
tures how  considerable  it  will  be  between  their  gathering  to 
the  Lord  and  their  manifestation  to  the  world,  but  for  the  pro- 
phetic part  of  the  Eevelation,  which  makes  it  quite  clear.  God 
has  important  purposes  to  fulfil  during  this  interval.  He  has 
to  put  the  earth  into  a  condition  to  receive  the  Lord  Jesus,  who 
as  the  great  Heir  of  all  things  must  be  put  in  possession  of  the 
inheritance.  But,  further.  He  purposes  to  bring  the  joint-heirs 
from  heaven  along  with  Jesus.  Accordingly  the  interval  is  filled 
up  with  the  preparations  for  all  this.  To  accomplish  it,  there 
must  be  judgments  upon  the  world's  wickedness ;  but,  parallel 
with  these  judgments,  we  have  some  signal  acts  of  divine  mercy. 
When  the  great  and  terrible  day  of  Jehovah  comes,  there  will 
be  forbearance  no  longer  with  such  as  are  found  evil ;  "  the  door 
is  shut."  But  during  the  intervening  time  there  will  be  testi- 
mony and  the  reception  of  it  among  both  Jews  and  Gentiles ; 
but  so  much  the  more  surely  judgment  for  those  who,  having 
heard  the  gospel  now,  will  have  rejected  it.  I  see  small  ground 
to  conclude  that  there  will  be  hope  of  mercy  for  such.  There 
will  be  an  interval  of  some  years,  in  which  God  will  work  in 
judgment  and  in  mercy — judgments  increasing  in  severity  on 
these  favoured  lands  where  the  gospel  has  been  preached ;  but 
I  doubt  any  such  thing  as  the  grace  that  now  is.  The  sad 
reverse  will  appear.  God  will  give  up  to  blind  hardness  those 
who  have  now  refused  His  mercy.  He  will,  as  it  were,  retire 
from  tliese  countries  to  save  outside  them ;  and  from  those  who 
have  been  talking  so  self-complacently  about  the  light  with 
which  they  are  favoured,  God  will  then,  if  I  read  prophecy 
aright,  turn  to  such  as  are  now  far  away  from  the  gospel. 

Is  it  not  a  solemn  thought  that,  where  the  light  of  Christen- 
dom is  now  most  found,  there  will  be  the  greatest  darkness  of 
apostacy?  As  to  this  scripture  it  is  plain  enough.  (2  Thess.  ii.)  He 
lets  us  know  that  the  favoured  scene  of  God's  mercy,  where  He 
is  now  at  work  and  His  word  is  most  circulated,  is  destined  to 
fall  back  into  the  most  frightful  and  fatal  idolatry — into  the 
union  of  infidelity  along  with  it — into  anti-christianism.  (Dan. 
xi.  36  et  scqq. ;  Rev.  xiii.)    Such  a  change  may  be  set  down  as 


126  PRESENT   VALUE   OF    PKOPHECY. 

the  gloomy  dream  of  a  feverish  mind.  But  this  is  because  men 
prefer  to  believe  their  own  thoughts  and  fancies,  and  do  not 
take  the  trouble  of  searching  into  God's  word  to  see  what  is 
there.  Alas !  do  not  too  many  in  Christendom  even  make  the 
prophetic  word  a  butt  for  their  ridicule?  Will  it  be  believed 
that  men  pride  themselves  on  their  ignorance  of  a  great  part  of 
scripture  ?  Would  it  be  conceived,  if  it  were  not  the  fact,  that 
the  wise  and  prudent  hold  as  an  axiom  that  prophecy  was  not 
given  to  shew  us  what  is  coming,  but  only,  when  the  events 
are  past,  to  prove  that  God  had  foreknown  them  ?  Surely  the 
Christian  wants  no  proof  of  this  ;  and  prophecy  is  given  that  the 
believer  should  know  how  God  opens  to  us  His  secrets  about 
what  He  is  going  to  do  on  the  earth.  We  have  the  word  and 
the  Spirit  to  make  us  understand  it.  But  if  Christians  have 
not  faith  in  the  prophetic  word,  it  cannot  profit  them ;  for,  like 
the  rest  of  scripture,  that  word  must  be  mixed  with  faith  in  them 
that  hear  it. 

One  important  thing,  then,  we  have  seen  to  be  assumed — the 
removal  of  the  heavenly  saints  from  the  earth.  In  chaps,  iv.  v. 
and  throughout  the  body  of  the  book  they  are  no  longer  found 
there.  They  are  glorified  in  heaven,  and  yet  it  is  not  until  chap, 
xix.  that  they  are  manifested,  when  they  come  out  of  heaven. 
Between  these  two  points  we  have  evidently  a  long  series  of 
events.  We  have  seven  seals,  seven  trumpets,  seven  vials,  with 
various  episodes  of  great  interest  and  importance.  These  three 
different  series  of  judgments  are  not  executed  by  the  Lord  in 
person.  It  is  manifest  that  they  must  occur  after  the  Lord  has 
come  to  receive  His  church,  but  before  He  executes  His  grand 
personal  judgment  in  cliap.  xix.  For  it  is  beyond  dispute  that, 
before  the  saints  are  taken  to  the  Lord  and  so  can  come  with 
Him,  He  must  have  come  for  them.  How  then  did  those  sym- 
bolised by  the  four  and  twenty  glorified  elders  get  to  heaven  ? 

It  may  be  said,  they  might  have  been  taken  into  this  position 
individually  through  death,  or  that  their  souls  might  be  glorified 
there.  But  there  is  no  such  thought  in  scripture  as  the  souls  of 
the  saints  being  seated  on  thrones,  and  having  crowns  on  their 
heads.  Neither  do  the  souls  of  the  saints  form  the  complete 
headship  of  heavenly  priests,  as  taught  us  by  the  four  and  twenty 


THE   ELDERS   ARE   THE   GLORIFIED   SAINTS.  127 

elders ;  for  we  know  from  1  Thess.  iv.  that  part  of  the  heavenly 
company  will  be  found  alive  on  earth  up  to  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  which  raises  the  dead  and  changes  the  living  believers. 
There  can  be  no  such  completeness,  then,  as  is  meant  by  the  sym- 
bol till  the  Lord  will  have  translated  both  to  meet  Him  above. 
The  allusion  is  to  the  twenty-four  orders  of  the  priesthood  set 
up  by  king  David.  Now  Christ  is  at  that  time  about  to  take  the 
place  of  king ;  and,  just  as  before  the  kingdom  of  Solomon 
was  established,  David  divided  the  priesthood  into  twenty-four 
courses,  so  we  find  that  before  the  true  Solomon,  the  Lord  Jesus, 
comes  out  in  all  His  glory,  we  have  the  antitypical  courses  as  a 
whole.     The  heavenly  priesthood  is  seen  complete. 

It  might  be  asked.  Why  is  it  only  the  heads  that  are  seen,  and 
not  the  body  of  the  priesthood  ?  It  appears  probable,  but  I  only 
offer  it  as  a  suggestion,  that  those  that  are  taken  up  when  the 
Lord  comes  will  form  the  heads  of  the  priesthood,  and  that  those 
who  suffer  after  and  join  them  may  be  the  subordinate  body. 
Twenty-four  is  necessarily  the  complete  sum  of  the  courses,  or 
of  their  chiefs.  Now,  the  souls  in  heaven  can  never  be  even  that 
completed ;  because  till  Christ  comes,  there  will  always  be  a  part 
of  the  church  remaining  on  the  earth,  as  we  have  just  seen.  I 
conceive,  therefore,  that  by  the  full  priestly  number  twenty-four 
surrounding  the  throne,  God  intends  to  shew  that  they  are  not 
that  portion  which  consists  of  the  souls  in  paradise ;  *  for  it  re- 
quires the  addition  of  us  who  are  alive  and  remain,  in  order  to 
make  up  the  church  of  the  firstborn,  or  the  then  complete  sum 
of  the  risen  and  changed  saints.  The  heavenly  saints  up  to  that 
time  must  then  be  necessarily  removed  to  their  seats  on  high. 

How  and  when  did  this  take  place?  There  is  no  real  difficulty 
about  their  translation,  because  they  never  can  be  removed  as  a 
complete  body,  and  changed,  till  the  Lord  Jesus  comes  Himself ; 
as  He  said,  "If  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come 

*  The  reader  of  the  Horae  Apoc.  will  rememher  how  embarrassed  the  aiithoi 
is  on  this  very  point  (i.  91-96).  He  is  compelled  to  own  that  the  elders'  insignia 
point  to  the  resui-rection-state  after  Christ's  coming,  page  92 ;  yet  in  the  next 
page,  93,  he  says,  it  seems  that  it  is  especially  the  dej)arted  in  paradise  that  we  must 
suppose  figured  here.  For  want  of  seeing  the  distinction  between  the  vrapovcria  of 
the  Lord  and  the  tTri<pdvfia  Trjg  -napovniaQ  avTov  (2  Thess.  ii.  1,  8),  these  and 
other  perplexities  constantly  spring  up. 


128  TRANSLATION   AT   CHRIST'S   COMING. 

again,  and  receive  you  unto  myself."  And  this  evidently  is  not 
sending  angels  for  them.  We  find  angels  sent  to  gather  in  elect 
Jews,  or  Israel,  from  the  four  quarters  of  heaven  (Matt,  xxiv.) ; 
but  to  gather  in  His  church  He  comes  Himself.  And  this  falls 
in  with  what  we  said  elsewhere.  The  saints  in  Thessalonica  were 
told  to  wait  for  God's  Son  from  heaven  (1  Thess.  i.) ;  and  as  to 
those  who  were  gone,  they  were  not  to  sorrow  as  those  who  had 
no  hope.  For  the  Lord  Himself — not  merely  by  angelic  or  pro- 
vidential intervention,  but  the  Lord  Himself — would  descend 
from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and 
with  the  trump  of  God.  There  might  be  angels,  but  there  is  not 
a  word  said  about  them  here.  When  the  Lord  is  revealed  exe- 
cuting vengeance,  angels  will  accompany  Him  ;  but  here,  at  the 
descent  of  the  Lord  Himself,  "  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first," 
forming  one  portion  of  the  heavenly  saints;  then  "we  which  are 
alive  and  remain"  shall  be  caught  up  together  with  tliem.  There 
and  then,  as  it  seems  to  me,  we  have  the  twenty-four  elders, 
evidently  the  whole  of  the  priestly  heads.  The  saints  whose 
bodies  are  in  their  graves  are  raised  first,  then  the  surviving  saints 
are  changed,  by  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  There  is  but  the 
barest  interval  of  a  moment  between  those  two  momentous 
effects  of  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God.  And  so  shall  we,  caught 
up  together,  ever  be  with  the  Lord. 

This  most  solemn  and  blessed  event  must  occur  therefore 
between  chapters  iii.  and  iv.  of  this  book.  It  is  not  described, 
because  the  object  of  the  Eevelation  is  not  to  shew  the  Lord's 
coming  in  the  way  of  grace,  though  there  are  of  course  allusions 
to  it.  There  is  an  entire  passing  over  of  His  presence  to  meet 
His  heavenly  saints  in  the  prophetic  visions  of  the  Revelation, 
but  a  full  description  of  His  coming  ivith  them  in  chap.  xix. 
This  last  is  what  is  styled  elsewhere  the  appearing  or  day  of 
the  Lord,  when  He  punishes  with  everlasting  destruction  from 
His  presence,  and  from  the  glory  of  His  power.  During  this 
interval  the  heavenly  saints  are  with  the  Lord  above  ;  all  the 
members  of  the  church  are  there,  and  in  their  bodies  of  glory. 
The  first  mention  of  them  is  in  the  fourth  chapter,  where  we 
Ihid  not  angels,  but  redeemed  men — persons  whose  very  vesture 
of  white,  whose  thrones,  and  crowns  of  gold,  are  all  connected 


TITLES    OF   GOD.  129 

witli  redemption  —  persons  who  are  evidently  exercising  their 
priesthood  before  God  in  chap.  v.  These  are  the  elders.  How 
did  they  get  there  ?  The  Lord  must  have  come,  and  have 
gathered  theiii  to  Himself  in  the  air,  and  so  have  accomplished 
His  promise  to  them : — "  In  my  Father's  house  are  many 
mansions."  "I  will  come  again  and  receive  you  unto  myself; 
that  where  I  am  ye  may  be  also."  So  now  when  this  future 
scene  arrives,  having  prepared  the  place,  He  will  have  come  for 
them,  and  taken  them  to  the  Father's  house. 

It  is  remarkable,  however,  as  shewing  the  character  of  this 
book,  that,  although  we  do  see  them  in  the  presence  of  God, 
it  is  not  called  the  house  of  the  Father.  On  the  contrary, 
it  is  a  throne  that  is  seen;  and  so  too,  when  He  who  sits 
tliereon  is  named,  it  is  not  as  the  Father,  but  as  the  Lord  God 
Almighty.  When  we  speak  of  God  as  "the  Father,"  it  is  to 
express  the  nearest  place  of  affection  into  which  God  has 
brought  us;  and  when  we  hear  of  God  as  "the  Lord  God 
Almighty,"  it  is  connected  with  the  putting  forth  of  Divine 
power  and  government.  "  God,"  as  such,  is  tlie  most  general 
and  abstract  name,  and  implies  no  relationship  with  another 
being.  But  to  be  called  "  the  Father"  necessarily  implies  the 
closest  relationship  of  love,  whether  spoken  in  the  highest  and 
intrinsic  and  eternal  sense  of  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  the  Father, 
or  subordinately  of  those  whom  He  has  taken  into  the  adoption 
of  sons,  loved  with  the  same  love.  (John  xvii.  and  1  John  iii.) 

In  Genesis  i.  creation  is  the  subject,  and  God  (or  Elohim)  is 
spoken  of  as  the  One  who  originates.  In  the  next  chapter  of 
Genesis  He  is  called  the  "  Lord  (or  Jehovah)  God,"  because  He 
is  there  entering  into  special  connexion  with  His  creatures,  and 
Adam  is  put  in  the  place  of  responsibility  to  Him  as  Jehovah- 
Eloliim,  that  is  the  God  of  creation  in  moral  relationship.  How 
perfect  is  every  word  of  God !  Infidels,  instead  of  seeing  the 
perfectness  of  His  word,  have  only  reasoned  from  their  own 
ignorance  and  impotence,  and  have  endeavoured  to  prove  that 
these  chapters  must  have  been  written  by  two  different  persons, 
because  of  the  different  titles  given  to  God.  But  instead  of 
being  the  varying  style  of  different  men,  it  is  the  wisdom  of 
God  that  discovers  itself  in  these  distinctions.     When  the  rela- 

K 


130  THE   FATHER   OF   JESUS. 

tionship  of  authority  occurs,  and  man  is  put  under  the  test  of 
obedience,  Jehovah-Elohim  is  the  title  used ;  but  when  in  the 
New  Testament  He  enters  into  relationship  with  sons,  it  is  "  the 
Pather."  He  did  not  bring  out  the  latter  name  as  a  formal  name 
until  THE  Son  came,  who  opened,  so  to  speak,  the  sluice,  that  all 
God's  grace  might  flow  out,  and  specially  in  His  resurrection  by 
virtue  of  His  death.  But  between  the  two  extremes  of  the  trial 
of  the  creature  in  Eden  and  the  accomplishment  of  redemption, 
God  brought  out  first  the  name  of  Almighty,  and  next  that  of 
Jehovah.  Abraham  was  called  to  leave  his  own  country  and 
kindred,  called  to  be  a  pilgrim,  having  none  but  God  to  look 
to,  and  so  Jehovah  most  suitably  reveals  Himself  to  him  as 
El-Shaddai,  God  Almighty.  (Gen.  xvii.  1.)  Subsequently  He 
makes  Himself  known  to  Israel  by  His  name  Jehovah,  as  a 
ground  of  national  relationship. 

Here  the  Lord  constantly  brings  out  these  names,  but  not 
that  of  Father,  or  at  least  not  to  us,  but  to  Jesus.  Just  as  the 
scene  is  not  the  Father's  house,  but  the  throne,  so  the  title  taken 
by  God  is  not  that  of  Father.  The  centre  of  this  heavenly  scene 
is  the  throne  of  God,  and  the  saints  are  not  alluded  to  as  enjoy- 
ing mansions  with  the  Son  in  the  Father's  house,  but  are  seen 
enthroned.  God  will  be  no  longer  gathering  the  church  on  earth ; 
Jesus  will  have  come  for  it,  and  gone  above.  When  the  church 
was  the  object  of  God's  care  on  the  earth,  they  even  hcr(>  below 
called  Him  Father ;  but  when  He  is  going  to  execute  judgment 
on  the  earth,  they,  already  raptured  and  in  heaven,  understand 
it  and  address  Him  accordingly. 

The  Lord's  coming,  then,  to  receive  the  church  must  have  been 
before  the  facts  which  answer  to  the  vision  of  the  twenty-four 
enthroned  elders.  Some  people  may  be  slow  to  believe  that  the 
prophecy  would  pass  over  such  an  important  event  in  silence. 
But  it  is  forgotten  that,  whenever  and  wherever  you  put  it,  there 
*s  silence  as  to  the  act  of  the  saints'  rajiture  in  tlie  book  of 
Revelation.  The  only  question  is,  Where  according  to  our  best 
light  from  scripture  is  it  to  be  understood  here  ?  It  must,  in 
my  judgment,  be  supposed  before  the  heavenly  saints  can  be 
seen  as  a  complete  body  above,  M'hich  is  in  clia[)ter  iv.  The 
Lord  will  then  have  come  and  received  the  glorified  saints,  and 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  THE  QUICK.  181 

given  thera  their  place  in  the  presence  of  God,  before  any  of  the 
judgments  come  on  the  world.  Terrible  things  in  righteousness 
are  going  to  be  enacted,  but  the  saints  will  be  above  them  all. 
The  seals,  and  vials,  and  trumpets,  have  no  terrors  for  them  ; 
they  call  out  from  the  glorified  not  trembling,  but  worship  only. 
Nay,  these  risen  ones  will  be  occupied,  it  seems,  about  their 
brethren  who  are  still  in  the  midst  of  trial ;  for  there  shall  be 
saints  called  after  the  present  work  of  God  in  forming  the  church 
is  done  with,  brethren  who  will  suffer  on  the  earth  after  we  are 
gone.  Of  these  the  central  part  of  the  Eevelation  treats  (chaps, 
vi.  vii.  viii.  xi.  xii.  xiii.  xiv.  xv.  xvi.,  &c.).  Again  there  will  be 
godly  souls  alive  when  the  King  comes  to  sit  on  the  throne  of 
His  glory,  and  all  the  nations  are  gathered  before  Him,  whom 
He  will  call  "  my  brethren."  As  is  plain  in  the  latter  part  of 
Matt.  XXV.,  the  living  Gentiles,  or  nations  then  on  the  earth,  will 
be  treated  according  to  the  way  in  which  they  may  have  behaved 
to  the  messengers  of  the  King.  The  sheep  will  have  proved 
themselves  to  liave  faith  in  the  King,  because  they  have  received 
His  servants  ;  the  conduct  of  the  goats  will  have  shewn  their 
incredulity.  For  when  all  the  preliminary  warnings  given  to 
those  on  the  earth  are  over  ;  when  all  the  judgments  that 
proceed  from  the  throne  in  rapid  succession  have  been  proved 
to  be  in  vain,  and  the  rebellious  hearts  of  men  are  only  rising 
higher  against  God,  the  Lord  says  as  it  were,  "  I  will  send  them 
no  more  chastenings,  will  wait  no  longer  for  a  repentance 
which  is  refused,  but  will  come  myself  and  sweep  them  away  to 
destruction."  Accordingly  this  day  of  judgment  on  the  quick 
we  have  in  Eevelation  xix.  And  the  interval,  from  chapters 
iv.  and  v.  to  chapter  xix.,  is  filled  by  new  dealings  of  God  in 
providential  judgments,  by  intermingled  mercy  to  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  and  by  glances  at  the  heavenly  saints  in  the  presence 
of  God. 

No  doubt  the  souls  of  dying  saints  go  to  God  during  the 
interval,  but  whatever  may  be  the  blessedness  reserved  for  such 
(Eev.  xiv.  13),  the  saints  who  are  already  changed  remain  there 
through  the  whole  period.  The  heavenly  saints,  including  those 
that  are  true  Christians  now,  those  that  have  been  such  before, 
and  tlie  Old  Testament  saints,  may  be  caught  up  at  any  time  to 

K  2 


132  AFTER   OUR   TRANSLATION   SAINTS   ON    EARTH. 

be  with  the  Lord.  I  know  no  scriptural  ground  which  entitles 
a  believer  to  say,  He  will  not  come  to-morrow.  Who  can  affirm 
with  divine  authority  that  there  is  something  yet  remaining  to 
be  done  before,  that  there  must  be  a  delay  ?  No  doubt  there  may 
be  more  or  less  time  to  intervene  ;  but  scripture  never  puts  the 
delay  between  us  and  Christ's  coming,  but  before  His  day.  As  a 
servant  with  his  hand  upon  the  door,  and  on  the  stretch  as  it 
were  for  his  master's  arrival,  so  as  to  be  able  when  he  comes 
to  open  unto  him  immediately  —  such  is  the  true  attitude  of 
the  child  of  God  now.  So  says  our  Lord  Himself.  He  would 
have,  if  so  we  may  speak,  everything  settled  up.  He  looks  for 
practical  readiness  at  all  times.  Not  as  though  we  could  do 
anything  by  way  of  preparation.  Thanks  be  to  God,  He  has 
made  us  meet  through  the  grace  of  Christ.  But  there  may  be 
things  in  our  ways  and  walk,  in  our  spirit  and  hopes  and  objects, 
which  will  not  stand  the  light  of  His  presence.  Whatever  we 
do,  we  should  seek  to  enter  on  nothing  that  renders  the  thought 
of  the  Lord's  coming  unwelcome. 

We  must  then,  if  wise,  beware  of  speculations  or  plans  which 
suppose  us  to  have  a  long  time  before  us.  The  Lord  desires  us 
to  be  as  travellers  passing  through  a  foreign  land,  and  withal 
going  out  in  desire  to  meet  Him  who  is  speedily  coming  for  us. 
The  Lord  may  be  a  little  longer  than  we  think;  but  He  is 
comine,  and  this  too  at  an  hour  when  men  think  not.  His 
coming  will  immediately  act  on  all  the  heavenly  saints,  raising 
the  dead,  clianging  the  living,  and  removing  botli  to  Himself 
above.  Then  follow  the  scenes  of  Eev.  iv.  and  v.,  which  let  us 
see  the  interest  of  the  glorified  saints  in  the  righteous  who 
suffer  on  the  earth,  after  the  others  are  gone  to  heaven.  They 
cannot  apply  fully,  either  while  only  a  part  of  the  church  is 
above  and  in  the  separate  state ;  or  when  the  millennial  reign 
is  arrived.  They  suppose  an  interval  between  these  two  things, 
when  the  Lord  will  have  come  and  changed  them  into  His 
risen  likeness,  and  before  they  accompany  Him  from  heaven  in 
order  to  judge  and  reign.* 

*  It  will  1)0  observed  that  this,  if  \vcll-fi)un(lud,  decides  the  question  of  the 
true  and  proper  application  of  the  rest  of  the  book.  For  what  more  weighty 
tliaii  to  know  wliether   it  isi)eaks  throughout  ith  tenlral    vibions  of  tlie   time 


THE   SEALS   PROVIDENTIAL   JUDGMENTS.  138 

Next  we  come  to  the  earthly  course  of  "  the  things  that 
must  be  after  these."  The  seals  are  not  judgments  executed  by 
the  Lord,  but  of  a  providential  nature.  Some,  because  of  the 
white  horse,  have  thought  that  the  first  seal  applied  to  Christ. 
On  tlie  face  of  it,  what  more  strange  than  to  conceive  Him  so 
represented,  seeing  that  He  it  is  who,  as  the  Lamb,  opens  the 
seals  successively,  and,  when  clearly  alluded  to  under  the  con- 
tents of  the  sixth  seal,  still  preserves  the  name  of  the  Lamb ! 
And  yet  stranger  that  He  should  enter  on  a  course  of  conquest 
at  the  very  time,  if  you  take  it  historically,  when  all  Asia  had 
turned  away  from  Paul ;  when  Timothy  had  the  sad  and  sure 
foreboding  of  evil  men  and  seducers  waxing  worse  and  worse  ; 
when  John  himself  had  written,  or  was  about  to  write,  "  Little 
children,  it  is  the  last  time :  and  as  ye  have  heard  that  antichrist 
shall  come,  even  now  are  there  many  antichrists ;  whereby  we 
know  that  it  is  the  last  time."  Nevertheless  most  of  the  ancients 
and  not  a  few  moderns  begin  their  comments  with  this  false 
start. 

Some,  again,  refer  it  to  the  second  advent ;  but  this  quite 
upsets  the  order  of  the  seals  fixed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
indeed  the  structure  of  all  the  book.  It  is  true  that  in  Rev.  xix. 
where  the  "Lord  comes  judicially  and  in  person.  He  is  repre- 
sented as  riding  upon  a  white  horse.  But  there  is  all  the 
difference  possible  between  that  vision  of  the  white  horse  and 
the  opening  of  Rev.  vi.  This  horse  does  not  issue  from  heaven, 
as  that  in  chap.  xix.  does.  Next,  there  is  not  a  word  in  chap.  vi. 

during  \Yhich  the  church  is  still  on  earth,  or  of  the  days  which  follow — the  great 
crisis  when  the  church  is  not  here  but  risen,  and  God  is  dealing  with  the  earth 
after  another  pattern?  To  say  that  it  is  given  to  us  to  know  these  visions  proves 
nothing.  All  scripture  is  given  to  us  and  is  gooA.  for  us,  but  it  is  certainly  not 
all  about  us ;  and  we  are  most  profited,  not  by  the  fancy  that  God  is  always 
thinking  of  us,  but  by  really  understanding  its  objects,  scope,  and  end.  Had 
Abraham  imagined  that  he  was  to  be  involved  in  the  impending  catastrophe  of 
Sodom  because  the  Lord  graciously  revealed  it  to  him  before  it  came  to  pass, 
such  a  delusion  would  have  done  him  harm.  It  was  not  to  Lot  who  was  there, 
but  to  Abraham  who  was  not,  that  the  fullest  communication  was  made.  And 
so  it  will  be,  I  doubt  not.  A  remnant  is  to  be  saved — saved  as  through  fire. 
May  our  place  be  above  it  all — above  the  world  in  spirit  now,  and  looking  down 
upon  its  plans  and  progress  with  the  abiding  consciousness  of  a  judgment  that 
hastens — destined  to  be  actually  above  when  that  judgment  comes. 


134  THE  HORSE  AND  THE  THRONE. 

about  the  rider,  which  Decessarily  means  Christ ;  whereas  in 
chap.  xix.  He  is  called  Faithful  and  True,  and  said  to  judf^e  and 
make  war  in  righteousness.  Of  whom  could  this  be  said  save 
of  One  ?  Ilis  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire.  His  written  name 
none  know  but  Himself.  The  Word  of  God— King  of  kings, 
Lord  of  lords — can  l)e  the  titles  of  none  but  Jesus.  Not  to 
speak  of  the  blood-dipped  vesture,  the  sword  proceeding  out  of 
the  mouth,  the  iron  rod  w^herewith  to  rule,  and  the  treading 
the  wine-press  of  divine  wrath,  are  descriptions  in  chap.  xix. 
to  which  nothing  answers  in  the  rider  of  chap.  vi.  No  armies 
followed  here,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  &c.  And  though  the  rider 
is  said  to  have  a  crown  given  to  him,  the  word  is  quite  different 
from  that  employed  in  chap,  xix.,  which  signifies  a  kingly  diadem, 
the  crown  of  royalty.  The  earlier  Eomans  were  fond  of  a  sort 
of  chaplet,  which  did  not  to  their  mind,  like  the  imperial  diadem, 
convey  the  idea  of  absolute  authority ;  and  that  is  the  crown 
mentioned  in  chapter  vi. 

Furthermore,  there  are  two  frequent  figures  or  symbols  used 
in  scripture  to  express  power;  the  one  is  the  throne,  and  the  other 
is  the  horse.  Thus  we  have  already  seen  the  supreme  throne 
above,  and  now  we  have  the  horse  with  the  rider  on  earth.  The 
same  thing  is  seen  in  chaps,  xix.  and  xx.  The  symbol  of  horses 
in  the  one  chapter,  and  of  thrones  in  the  other.  The  difference 
between  the  bearing  is  this :  When  power  is  meant  by  putting 
down  of  rival  or  opposing  authority  on  earth,  "the  horse"  is 
taken,  as  from  its  use  in  war,  it  is  intended  to  subdue ;  but  when 
the  victory  is  won,  and  it  is  a  question  not  of  subjugation,  but 
of  governing  and  judging,  "the  throne"  is  used,  as  being  the  fit 
emblem  of  rule  over  those  who  have  been  thus  subdued  or  are 
subject.  When  Christ  is  going  to  put  down  His  enemies.  He  is 
seen  in  the  vision  of  chap.  xix.  on  the  horse,  used  to  represent 
the  exertion  of  Plis  power  to  subdue  ;  when  the  subsequent 
sway  is  meant,  thrones  appear  in  chap.  xx.  It  would  be  quite 
weak,  of  course,  for  persons  to  confound  this  symbolic  use  with 
a  material  horse  or  throne.  The  idea  of  the  former  is  power  to 
subdue,  and  of  the  latter  is  dominion  after  the  victory  has  been 
gained.  The  throne  may  also  be  used,  as  it  is  afterwards,  for  the 
r.olcmn  and  et(M'n:d  judgment  of  the  dead  — a  throne  of  stainless 


WHAT   THE   FOUR   HORSES   ARE   NOT.  135 

holiness.     Still  even  here,  it  is  Christ's  judgment   before   the 
kingdom  is  given  up  to  God.  (1  Cor.  xv.  ;  2  Tim.  iv.) 

Of  course  we  cannot  apply  the  four  horses  and  their  riders  to 
the  great  empires,  three  of  which  had  long  disappeared.  Equally 
untenable  at  least  is  the  notion  that  four  successive  religions 
are  intended,  especially  when  one  hears  it  gravely  laid  down 
that  Infidelity  closes  the  list,  which  primitive  Christianity  opens, 
followed  by  Mahomedanism  and  Popery.  It  is  hard  to  say 
whether  such  thoughts  are  most  opposed  to  time  or  place,  to 
congruity  or  context.  Again,  it  is  agreed  that  it  is  harsh  in  the 
extreme,  and  in  almost  every  point  of  view,  to  understand  the 
first  seal  of  Christ  or  the  church  in  early  gospel  triumphs,  and 
then  the  three  subsequent  ones  of  the  Eoman  empire  or  emperors. 

But  it  is  important  here  to  notice,  that  there  is  positive  ground 
from  the  Apocalypse  itself  to  deny  the  assumption  that  the  horse 
means  the  Eoman  empire.  I  do  not  refer  to  passages  like  chapter 
ix.  17,  where  literal  cavalry  seem  to  be  meant;  but  chapter  xix. 
furnishes  an  example  of  its  symbolic  use.  Does  the  Lord  on  the 
white  horse  mean  His  direction  of  the  Koman  empire  ?  Or  the 
white  horses  of  the  linen-clad  hosts,  do  they  imply  imperial 
powers?  Surely  we  must  look  for  an  interpretation  more  in 
keeping  with  its  usage  elsewhere.  It.  means,  in  my  judgment, 
a  militant  aggresive  agency  towards  the  earth,  though  it  may  be 
from  heaven.  Hence,  as  in  Zech.  i.,  it  may  apply  to  the  Lord, 
or  to  the  various  imperial  powers  which  succeeded  Babylon. 
And  so  the  chariots  with  the  horses  of  various  colours  in  Zech. 
vi.  But  as  distinguished  from  the  horns  (chapter  i.  19),  the 
former  symbol  rather  refers  to  the  providential  instruments 
behind  the  scene,  and  connected  especially  with  these  empires, 
than  to  the  rulers  themselves  or  their  realms.  Plainly  therefore 
there  is  no  ground  from  the  book  itself  or  from  Zechariah,  to 
which  the  allusion  is  obvious,  to  interpret  the  horse  simply  of 
the  Eoman  empire. 

IsTor  is  there  better  ground  in  profane  history  to  maintain  that 
the  horse  is  the  special  sign  of  that  people  and  power.  And  no 
wonder.  Por  the  Eoman  infantry  was  more  characteristic  of 
their  military  power  than  their  cavalry.  No  doubt  the  horse 
abounds  on   their  medals,  but  not   more   comparatively  than 


136  THE    HORSE   SYMBOLICALLY. 

among  other  warlike  nations,  particularly  in  the  east,  who  so 
set  forth  their  victories.  It  had  formerly  been  one  of  the 
Eoman  standards  of  war,  but  for  two  centuries  before  Domitian 
all  the  varieties  had  given  way  to  the  eagle. 

Abstractly,  then,  the  horse  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  necessary 
national  badge  of  Eome,  or  emblem  of  the  Eoman  empire. 
Whether  it  be  referred  to  here  must  depend  on  contextual 
considerations.  And  here  it  appears  to  me  that  the  fourth  seal 
rises  up  conclusively  against  such  a  view,  the  four  seals  being 
providential  judgments  homogeneous  in  character  but  differing 
in  form.  The  Eoman  earth  may  be  the  sphere,  but  this  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  symbolic  force  of  the  horse  in  the 
passage. 

Without  further  discussion  let  me  state  my  own  view.  We 
have  a  regular  series  of  providential  judgments.  The  first  is 
the  white  horse,  the  symbol  of  triumphant  and  prosperous 
power.  "He  that  sat  on  him  had  a  bow"  (verse  2).  The  bow 
is  the  symbol  of  distant  warfare.*  His  course  is  evidently  that 
of  unchecked  victory.  The  moment  he  appears,  he  conquers. 
The  battle  is  won  without  a  struggle,  and  apparently  without 
the  carnage  of  the  second  judgment,  where  the  sword,  the 
symbol  of  close  hand-to-hand  fighting,  is  used.  But  this  first 
conqueror  is  some  mighty  one  who  sweeps  over  the  earth,  and 
gains  victory  after  victory  by  the  prestige  of  his  name  and 
reputation.     There  is  no  intimation  of  slaughter  here. 

But  the  second  judgment  is  of  a  more  appalling  character. 
There  went  out  a  horse  that  was  red,  and  the  one  who  sits  upon 
him  is  not  the  proudly  prosperous  victor  to  whom  people  tamely 
submit,  but  one  who,  if  he  wins,  waves  his  standard  over  heaps 
of  slain.  Accordingly,  he  has  a  blood-red  horse — the  symbol 
of  power  connected  with  frightful  carnage.  The  result  of  the 
first  seal  {i.e.  of  the  victorious  career  of  the  white-horse  rider) 
may  have  been  peace  and  comparatively  bloodless  changes  ;  but 

*  The  ingenuity  of  Mr.  E.'s  attempt  to  make  out  in  tho  bow  an  allusion  to 
the  Cretan  origin  of  Nerva's  ancestry  is  undeniaWe.  Y'et  even  if  one  admitted 
a  more  precise  reference  to  past  history  than  I  conceive  to  be  intended,  I  am 
convinced  that  tho  meaning  of  the  symbols  is  not  to  be  sought  in  recondite 
points  of  antiquarian  research,  but  rather  on  tho  surface,  or  at  least  in  the  broad 
and  natural  features  of  the  scriptural  portrait. 


THE   BLACK   HORSE.  137 

all  is  sanguinary  under  the  second  seal  (ver.  4).  The  fiery-red 
horse,  the  peace  taken  from  the  earth,  the  mutual  slaughter,  the 
great  sword,  are  tokens  too  plain  to  be  misunderstood. 

The  third  horse  is  black,  the  hue  of  mourning.  It  is  a  colour 
chosen  to  shew  that  there  must  next  follow  peculiar  sorrows, 
caused  not  now  by  bloodshed,  but  by  scarcity,  and  perhaps,  we 
may  add,  to  man's  feeling,  a  most  capricious  famine.*''     Here  we 

*  It  is  almost  incredible  the  amount  of  discussion,  if  not  of  careful  research, 
which  has  been  expended  on  this  verse,  and  especially  on  the  import  of  "  a 
measure  of  wheat  for  a  penny"  {i.e.,  a  choenix,  or  about  \\  pint  English,  for  a 
denarius,  or  about  8d.  of  our  money).  Is  a  time  of  scarcity  or  abundance  in- 
dicated ?  Or  does  the  verse  proclaim  an  authoritative  adjustment  of  a  due 
average  price  ?  It  appears  to  me  that,  (1)  occurring  as  the  third  seal  does  in  a 
series  of  providential  judgments;  such  a  question  ought  not  to  have  been  raised 
by  the  least  enlightened  reader ;  for,  in  such  a  connexion,  how  incongruous  the 
idea  of  plenty  or  a  fair  price!  And  (2)  are  not  these  thoughts  particularly 
contradicted  by  the  details  of  the  seal  in  question,  as  e.ff.  by  the  black  or  mourn- 
ing colour  of  the  horse,  and  by  the  balances  in  the  hand  of  the  rider?  (Compare 
with  the  last  Lev.  xxvi.  26.)  The  facts  of  the  case  are  on  the  whole  plain  and 
decisive.  Thus  from  Cicero's  Orations,  we  learn  that  the  Senate  estimated 
wheat  at  four  serterces  the  modius  (=  8  times  the  choenix) ;  and,  what  is  more 
important,  that  the  then  market  price  in  Sicily  was  two  serterces,  or  at  most 
three.     "  Hoc  reprehendo,  quod,  cum  in  Sicilia  IIS  II  tritici  modius  esset  .  .  . 

.   .  summum  HS  ternis tum  iste  pro  tritici  modiis  singulis  ternos  ab 

aratoribus  denario  exegit."  (In  Verr.  Act.  ii.  lib.  iv.  81.)  The  inference  is 
that  the  extortion  was,  say,  half  the  Apocalyptic  price.  Again,  it  is  allowed  that 
the  ordinary  price  under  the  Emperor  Julian  and  his  successors  {i.e.,  long  after 
St.  John)  was  moderate.  From  the  Misopogon  it  seems  that  the  price  of  the 
modius  was  then  about  12d.  of  our  money,  and  therefore  the  choenix  =  l^d.  or 
less  than  a  fifth  of  the  Apocalyptic  rate.  But  it  is  argued  from  a  passage  in  the 
Natural  History  of  the  elder  Pliny  (lib.  xviii.  10),  that  in  his  time,  which  was 
a  little  before  the  Apocalyjjse  was  written,  the  medium  price  of  wheat  was  about 
the  same  as  in  the  text.  This  would  be  the  more  extraordinary,  not  only  as 
opposed  to  Roman  experience  both  before  and  after,  but  also  because  that 
laborious  compiler  does  not  speak  of  the  prices  then  current  as  extravagant. 
"We  know  that  in  nothing  are  MSS.  less  to  be  relied  on  than  in  numerals. 
Besides  it  would  seem  that  several  elements  more  or  less  mistaken  have  con- 
curred to  perplex  the  case.  "  The  comparison  of  ancient  and  modern  prices  of 
com  is  a  difficult  subject,  and  the  results  hitherto  obtained  are  unsatisfactory." 
{Enr/lish  Cyclopcedia,  Arts  and  Sciences,  vol.  iii.  col.  251.)  It  is  well  known 
that  Dr.  Arbuthnot's  tables  no  longer  carry  their  former  authority,  and  that 
modern  scholars  reject  some  of  his  premises,  and  most  of  his  conclusions.  Now 
it  was  on  his  computations  chiefly  that  the  author  of  the  Home  Apoe.  depended. 
But  (1)  if  I  understand  Pliny,  he  speaks  in  the  passage  cited,  not  of  the  price  of 
bread,  but  of  flour,   which   then  cost  forty  asses  the  modius.     But  it  would 


138  THE   THIRD   SEAL. 

have  the  voice  proclaiming  (ver.  6),  "  A  choenix  of  wheat  for  a 
denarius,  and  three  choenixes  of  barley  for  a  denarius  ;  and  see 
that  thou  hurt  not  the  oil  and  the  wine."  The  penny  in  our 
country  would  give  the  idea  of  something  insignificant  in  value, 
but  in  those  times  and  lands,  a  choenix  of  wheat  for  a  denarius 
was  very  costly ;  for  not  long  before  men  could  procure  seven  or 
eight  choenixes  for  the  money.  A  denarius  was  given  for  the 
daily  wage,  and  was  barely  enough  for  a  man's  daily  food ;  for 
the  choenix  of  wheat  appears  to  have  been  a  minimum,  being 
the  allowance  given  to  a  slave.  But  while  there  should  be  this 
scarcity  of  the  very  staff  of  life,  tliere  was  a  command  not  to 
touch  the  luxuries  of  life,  the  oil  and  the  wine.  What  the  richer 
classes  requ.ire  was  not  to  be  touched,  but  only  what  people 
want  of  the  prime  necessaries  of  life.  God  is  laying  His  hand 
upon  the  world. 

Yet  such  events  as  these  might  happen  in  ordinary  times. 
There  might  be  some  great  conqueror  any  time,  and  this  might 
be  followed  by  bloody  struggles ;  and  this  again  by  famine,  &c. 
And  in  the  fourth  seal  we  have  God's  four  sore  plagues  let  loose 

appear  that  the  similago  or  flour  spoken  of  was  by  no  moans  coarse,  thoupfh 
there  might  be  finer;  for  out  of  n  pock  of  wheat  came  hut  a  half  peck  of  this 
flour,  with  a  large  residue  of  pollen,  coarse  meal,  and  bran.  (2)  There  is  no 
evidence  that  I  am  aware  of  in  St.  John's  time  to  set  aside  the  common  Attic 
choenix,  which  was  the  eighth  (not  the  fourth)  part  of  a  modius  or  peck.  The 
verses  of  Fannius  Ehemnius  are  not  forgotten,  nor  the  reading  which  Facciolati 
and  others  prefer,  which  reduces  the  quantum  of  the  choenix  one  half,  and  thus 
harmonizes  with  other  authors.  And  why  were  they  cited  if  it  be  another  scale, 
seeing  that  he  lived  a  considerable  time  after  not  St.  John  only,  but  even  the 
epoch  to  which  the  Protestant  liistorical  school  would  refer  the  accomplishment  of 
the  third  sealr'  (3)  The  denarius,  no  doubt,  in  very  early  times  equalled  ten  asMs, 
whence  the  name  was  derived ;  but  it  is  notorious  that  about  the  second  Punic 
war,  B.C.  214,  it  was  by  law  made  equivalent  to  sixteen  assen,  save  in  military 
pay,  fiines,  &c.,  which  were  reckoned  by  the  old  standard.  Who  or  what  will 
the  reader  suppose  is  our  authority  for  this?  The  very  same  work  of  Pliny 
(lib.  xxxiii.  3).  Nay,  more,  in  the  same  chapter  wr  are  informed  that,  forty 
years  later,  the  Papyrian  law  reduced  the  as  one  half.  It  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  bear  in  mind  these  extensive  changes  in  order  to  avoid  the  astound- 
ing rosidts  in  which  Dr.  A.  lands  his  followers.  The  true  inference,  it  seems  to 
me,  is  that  the  price  in  the  Revelation  shews  decided  and  painful  scarcity,  as  it 
exceeds  that  of  the  Cassian  law  eight  times,  and  the  actual  Sicilian  market  price 
of  Cicero's  day  yet  more  (xii.  76).  It  seems  about  as  fair  to  cite  on  the  one 
side  the  starvation  price  related  by  Ciusar  {Dc  Bell.  Civ.  i.  52),  as  the  poetical 


THE   FOUETH    SEAL.  139 

together,  the  sword,  famine,  death,  and  pestilence,  and  the  wild 
beasts  of  the  earth,  but  here  limited  to  a  fourth  part.  They 
are  but  preparatory  chastisements  as  yet.  "And  behold  a  pale 
horse,  and  his  name  that  sat  on  him  was  Death,  and  Hades 
followed  with  him"  (verse  8).  In  Ezekiel  xiv.  you  will  find  that 
these  four  same  things  are  mentioned  together  in  connexion  with 
Israel.  In  these  first  judgments  God  does  not  proceed  to  any  very 
extraordinary  measures.  A  conqueror  is  no  rare  thing  in  the  earth, 
a  bloody  and  perhaps  civil  war  not  uncommon.  These  might 
be  followed  by  a  famine,  and  that  naturally  enough  might  breed 
pestilence,  &c.  Thus  man  would  account  for  these  things,  and 
the  wise  are  cauglit  in  their  own  craftiness.  But  we  know 
before,  through  God's  word,  that  there  is  a  time  of  conquest 
coming — then  of  bloody  warfare — next  of  dearth — and  lastly  of 
the  outpouring  of  God's  sore  plagues.  The  heavenly  saints  must 
be  set  in  rest  and  peace  in  the  presence  of  God — the  church 
must  be  safely  sheltered  before  these  judgments  begin. 

The  next  scene,  under  the  fifth  seal,  is  a  remarkable  one. 
The  living  creatures  drop  their  cry  of  "  Come,"  *  which  was 

licence  of  Martial  on  the  other.  There  is  hardly  a  siege  or  a  lengthened  cam- 
paign, even  now,  without  raising  the  price  to  a  degree  that  would  be  fabulous 
under  other  circumstances.  The  adulteration  of  the  denarius  under  the  second 
Sever  us  to  a  third  of  its  original  value  is  deemed  by  Mr.  E.  to  set  right  his  great 
difficulty  in  the  price  of  the  wheat.  But  the  question  is  as  to  its  value  in 
exchange.  Wheat  must  be  excessively  dear,  if  a  man  could  not  do  more  than 
procure  a  quart  for  his  day's  labour.  Nor  would  there  be  any  disposition  to 
employ  labourers,  if  the  prices  of  provisions  were  such  that  a  man's  daily  wages 
were  swallowed  up  in  buying  five  or  six  lbs.  of  barley.  The  ratio  of  the  barley 
to  the  wheat  is,  I  admit,  singular,  as  it  was  and  is  usually  one-half,  instead  of 
a  third .  In  Home,  however,  wheat  was  the  food  of  men,  barley  of  horses ;  and 
it  was  a  military  penalty  to  use  barley.  According  to  Seneca  a  slave's  monthly 
allowance  then  consisted  of  five  modii  [=  40  choenixcs),  and  five  denarii.  Under 
the  emperors  Roman  citizens  (save  senators)  received  corn  gratuitously,  and  the 
tessera  was  inherited,  bequeathed,  or  sold.  For  such  to  buy  at  the  price  prescribed 
must  press  heavily  indeed.  Jerome's  interpretation  of  Eusebius'  Chronicon 
puts  the  modius  at  six  drachmae  or  denarii,  during  the  famine  in  Greece  in  the 
eighth  or  ninth  year  of  the  Emperor  Claudius.  Syncellus  doubles  this,  which 
Scaliger  prefers.  It  is  but  fair  to  add  that  the  Armenian  text  edited  by  P.  J. 
B.  Aucher  (ii.  153,  193,  Ven.  1818)  confirms  this  emendation. 

*  It  may  be  well  to  mention  in  this  note  my  opinion  that  the  words  "  and 
see"  (which,  according  to  the  common  text  and  the  authorised  version,  follow 
"  ComeW  in  the  call  of  the  four  living  creatures)  appear  to  be  an  interpolation. 


140  THE   FIFTH    SEAL. 

connected  only  with  external  judgments  in  providence.  But 
now  we  have  a  series  of  events  somewhat  different.  The  fifth 
seal  discloses  that  God  has  a  people  on  earth  still.  Who  are 
these  that  are  suffering  now  ?  The  prophet  sees  their  souls  under 
the  altar,  where  they  are  as  holocausts  offered  up.  Though  dead, 
they  yet  speak.  They  were  slain  because  of  the  word  of  God, 
and  because  of  their  testimony.  Man  after  that  has  no  more 
that  he  can  do.  They  call  for  retribution  ;  for  after  the  Lord  has 
taken  home  His  heavenly  saints,  He  will  begin  to  call  earthly 
ones.  They  will  not  of  course  be  born  again  by  a  different  Spirit, 
but  they  will  be  called  to  a  different  path,  and  will  not  know 
God  in  the  same  full  and  near  way  wherein  He  reveals  Himself 
to  us  now,  and  as  we  ought  to  know  Him.  These  saints  wall  have 
"  the  Spirit  of  prophecy."  Such  was  the  mode  the  Holy  Ghost 
wrought  in  the  Old  Testament  saints.  The  effect  of  the  Spirit 
of  prophecy  was  that  they  were  waiting  for  Christ  to  come 
for  the  accomplishment  of  promise  and  prophecy ;  and  so  these 
saints  will  wait  for  Christ  to  appear  in  glory.  All  their  hopes 
hang  on  Him,  who  is  to  be  their  deliverer  from  circumstances  of 
such  excessive  sorrow. 

Not  thus  do  we  expect  Christ  for  ourselves.  We  have  rest  in 
Him  now.  Thougli  surely  looking  for  Christ  to  come,  we  have 
present  connnuniou  with  Him  in  peace,  and  tlie  title,  whether 
slain  or  not,  always  to  rejoice  in  Him.  It  does  not  become 
Christians  when  persecuted  to  say,  "  Plow  long,  0  Lord,  holy 
and  true,  dost  thou  not  judge,  and  avenge  our  blood?"    Stephen 

In  the  case  of  the  .second  (verse  3)  there  is  no  difference  of  judgment  among 
critical  editors  of  the  least  note ;  but,  strange  to  say,  Griesbach  and  Scholz 
retain  the  ordinary  sense  in  the  last  two,  and,  in  the  first  case  of  all,  Knapp 
along  with  them.  Buttmann,  Hahn,  Lachmann,  Tischendorf,  and  Tregclles 
omit  the  words  unifonnly,  and,  as  I  think,  with  reason.  The  difference  as  to 
interpretation  would  be  this :  as  the  text.  rec.  stands,  it  is  a  call  from  each  li^^ng 
creature  to  John ;  but  if  they  merely  cry  "  Come,"  it  would  seem  to  be  a 
direct  address  to  the  riders  on  the  several  horses,  who  accordingly  come  forth 
at  their  bidding.  The  connection  of  the  living  creatures  with  the  action  of  the 
horsemen  in  providence  is  made  clearer  and  stronger  by  this  little  change. 
Besides,  it  entirely  precludes  such  remarks  as  those  of  Mr.  A.  Jenour  in  his 
Rationale  Apocalypticum,  vol.  i.  pp.  214-217.  That  ipx^v  refers  to  chapter 
xxii.  17,  22,  and  means  the  groaning  of  creation  or  a  prayer  forChi-ist's  coming, 
is  quite  wrong.  Why  should  any  of  these  bo  "as  a  voice  of  thunder?"  That 
the  call  of  divines  providence  should  be  so  heard  is  natural.  * 


VENGEANCE   IN   THE   PSALMS  AND    HEKE.  141 

"  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge." 
Such  also  is  the  only  right  and  suitable  prayer  for  the  saints  of 
the  heavenly  calling. 

But  here  the  sufferers  are  on  different  ground.  They  take  up 
the  position,  and  express  the  sentiments  described  in  the  Psalms, 
which  call  for  divine  vengeance.  Hence  such  as  think  that  the 
Psalms  are  intended  to  convey  our  place  and  proper  feelings  as 
Christians  find  great  difficulty  in  understanding  the  language  of 
imprecation  that  is  used  in  them.  It  is  an  error  so  to  apply  them ; 
for  "  what  the  law  saith,  it  saith  to  them  that  are  under  the 
law"  is  the  apostle's  comment  after  quoting  from  the  Psalms. 
(Eom.  iii.)  But  when  the  church  is  removed,  God — from  His 
place  on  the  throne — will  pour  out  the  judgments  described  in 
this  prophecy ;  and  then  it  is  that  these  Psalms  fully  apply. 
God  deals  in  mercy  now :  then  it  will  be  earthly  judgment. 
When  these  visions  are  really  accomplishing,  God  will  shew  not 
as  now  the  exceeding  riches  of  His  grace,  but  the  exceeding- 
terrors  of  His  righteous  wrath :  and  so  when  that  day  comes, 
and  men  are  yet  heedless,  the  saints  living  or  dying  say,  "  How 
long,  0  Lord,"  &c. 

"And  a  white  robe  was  given  unto  each  one  of  them"  (verse 
11).  That  is,  vindication  has  been  accorded  them,  though  they 
do  not  take  their  place  on  thrones  till  chapter  xx.  Disembodied 
spirits  are  never  said  to  sit  there.  We  do  not  read  of  spirits 
glorified,  but  of  bodies,  when  they  enter  on  their  destined  blessed- 
ness abov^e.  They  will  reign  with  Christ.  Thus,  after  the  church 
is  gone,  there  will  be  persons  who  witness  for  God  here  below, 
but  taking  up  totally  different  language — the  claim  of  retribu- 
tion and  not  long-suffering  grace.  It  was  a  holy  duty  once  to 
exterminate  the  Canaanites;  it  would  be  far  from  a  Christian's 
place  now.  How  unbecoming  for  us,  if  God  would  shew  mercy  ! 
But  when  He  introduces  His  kingdom  by  judgments,  that  con- 
duct will  be  right  and  suitable  which  would  not  now  be  in  season. 
When  God  sees  that  the  due  moment  is  arrived  for  the  earth  to 
be  chastised  and  judged,  it  will  be  a  holy  thing  to  take  part  in 
it.  But  if  the  Christian  were  to  occupy  himself  in  judging  bad 
people  on  the  earth  now,  he  would  be  doing  what  the  Lord  is 
not  doing — nay,  the  very  reverse  of  what  engages  Him.     He  is 


142         MORE  THAN  ONE  CLASS  OF  MARTYRS. 

now  at  work  in  marvels  of  grace,  and  thus  all  who  understand 
Him  will  be  acting  in  the  same  spirit. 

The  tremendous  convulsion  (verse  12)  of  the  sixth  seal  comes 
apparently  in  answer  to  the  prayer  of  the  saints  who  are  con- 
cerned. The  language  at  the  close  of  the  chapter  shews  that  the 
powers  and  instruments  high  or  low  of  the  persecuting  world 
received  an  earnest  of  their  doom,  as  truly  as  the  slain  ones  in 
the  seal  before  have  their  recognition  in  part  before  they  inherit 
the  kingdom.  Their  blood,  we  may  say,  cried  to  the  Lord  of 
Sabaoth.  They  lived  unto  God,  and  shall  surely  rise  again ;  but 
they  must  wait.  Another  class  of  martyrs  must  yet  be  made  up. 
"  It  was  said  to  them  that  they  should  rest  yet  a  little  space, 
until  their  fellow-servants  also  and  their  brethren,  that  should 
be  killed  even  as  they,  should  be  completed."  No  account  of  the 
killing  of  these  saints  appears  here :  we  must  seek  for  this  in 
other  and  subsequent  parts  of  the  book.  The  earlier  sufferers 
meanwhile  enjoy  the  result  of  righteousness,  and  are  owned  of 
God ;  but  they  are  to  await  the  fillhig  up  of  a  new  and  distinct 
band  of  martyred  brethren,  who  are  to  suffer  up  to  the  close. 
Then  retribution  will  come.  Iniquity  must  reach  its  height  and 
do  its  worst  ere  the  hour  of  full  divine  judgment.  Another  and 
final  outburst  of  persecution  must  precede.  But  mark  here  also 
that  no  such  hope  is  held  out  to  a  single  individual  as  the  Lord's 
translating  them  without  passing  through  death. 

We  have  stated  that  the  heavenly  saints  (that  is,  the  dead  in 
Christ,  and  we  who  remain  to  the  coming  of  the  Lord)  have 
already  been  taken  from  the  earth,  as  chapter  iv.  had  shown,  the 
fifth  chapter  adding  another  thing,  that  while  they  are  above, 
there  are  righteous  persons  on  earth  in  whose  prayers  the  risen 
saints  are  interested.  That  is  to  say,  those  above  are  found  in 
the  place  of  intercession  ;  and  there  is  nothing  sweeter  than 
that  place — nothing  in  which  we  are  ])ractically  brought  nearer 
to  Christ,  save;  in  our  immediate  relationship  to  Himself  The 
church  is  destined  to  have  that  privilege  in  glory,  as  we  have  it 
now  in  grace  for  all  men  (1  Tim.  ii.) — the  privilege  of  inter- 
cession for  others  still  in  trial  on  the  earth.  The  church  will 
take  the  deepest  concern  in  their  sorrows,  blessings,  and  hopes. 
But  who  are  these  sufferers  on  earth  ?    In  chap.  vi.  9,.  as  we 


WHAT   THE   CHRISTIAN    IS.  143 

have  seen,  there  was  a  dreadful  slaughter  of  the  saints.  They 
cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  we  are  permitted  with  and  through 
St.  John  to  hear  their  cry.  They  appeal  to  God  as  the  Sovereign 
and  arbiter  of  every  soul.  "  How  long,  0  Lord,  the  holy  and 
true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood  on  them  that 
dwell  on  the  eartli  ?"  Evidently  this  is  not  a  Christian  cry:  I 
do  not  say  it  will  not  be  a  believing  one,  but  suited  to  their 
circumstances  and  to  the  then  dealings  of  God.  People  are  so 
narrow  that  they  think  a  person  can  never  be  a  believer  without 
being  a  Christian.  It  is  quite  true  that  now  a  believer  is,  of 
course,  a  Christian.  Even  the  babes  know  the  Father.  "  Who- 
soever denieth  the  Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  Father ;  he  that 
acknowledgeth  the  Son  hath  the  Father  also."  But  in  divine 
things  we  ought  always  to  gather  our  thoughts  and  our  language 
from  scripture,  not  from  our  own  imagination.  Now,  though 
Abraham  and  all  the  Old  Testament  saints  were  born  of  tlie 
Spirit,  yet  they  were  not  Christians  in  a  proper  New  Testa- 
ment sense.  For  a  Christian  is  not  only  one  who  has  faith  in 
Christ,  but  one  to  whose  faith  Christ  dead  and  risen  has  been 
presented  by  God,  and  who  has,  consequently,  the  Holy  Ghost 
uniting  him  to  Christ  in  heaven.  But  this  was  not  and  could 
not  be  till  Christ  had  come  and  finished  the  work  of  redemp- 
tion. They  had  the  new  birth  no  doubt,  for  to  be  born  again 
does  not  necessarily  imply  that  the  work  of  atonement  had 
been  previously  accomplished ;  but  still  there  is  a  difference  of 
position  into  which  the  accomplished  work,  and  the  consequent 
presence  of  tlie  Spirit  during  Christ's  absence  in  heaven,  has 
brought  us. 

From  those  under  tlie  altar,  then,  we  do  not  hear  Christian 
accents,  but  that  which  reminds  us  of  the  state  and  feelings 
revealed  of  old.  From  the  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus  came  into 
the  world,  and  went  up  on  high,  as  the  rejected  One  now  glori- 
fied— from  that  time  the  sufferings  of  Christ  as  the  righteous 
witness  for  God,  and  in  perfect  grace  to  man,  become,  so  to 
speak,  reproduced  in  His  people.  The  Holy  Ghost  puts  them  in 
sympathy  with  Christ.  What  was  in  a  measure  true  before  was 
now  the  appointed  portion  for  the  saints.  None  but  Christ  could 
possibly  know  suffering  from  God  for  bearing  sin.     But  part  of 


144  THE  APOCALYPTIC  SUFFERERS. 

the  suffering  even  of  the  cross  was  because  Christ  was  put  there 
through  the  wickedness  of  men  :  another  and  a  far  deeper  part 
was,  tliat  He  was  put  there  by  the  grace  of  God  for  the  vindi- 
cation of  His  holiness,  and  the  deliverance  of  the  sinner.  In 
the  last  He  suffered  for  us ;  in  the  first  we  may  and  should  suffer 
with  Him.  Hence,  the  apostle  Paul  did  not  hesitate  to  say, 
"  That  I  may  know  him  .  .  .  and  the  fellowship  of  his  sufferings, 
being  made  conformable  unto  his  death."  A  Christian  might 
share  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  in  the  sense  of  being  cast  out  even 
unto  death.  The  apostle  himself  had  it  often  literally  before 
him  in  this  way.  (See  2  Cor.  i.  iv.)  He  knew  the  fellowship  of 
Christ's  sufferings  ;  Stephen  knew  the  same. 

Such  is  not  this  cry.  Here  the  sufferers  were  under  the  deep 
feeling  of  the  wrong  that  was  done  to  them,  and  they  called 
only  for  the  judgment  of  God.  How  different  the  state  of  things 
when  persons,  instead  of  shrinking  from  prison  and  from  judg- 
ment, thanked  God  and  went  away  full  of  joy,  because  they 
were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  the  name  of  Jesus !  Is 
this  what  we  get  here  ?  No  doubt,  the  world  is  as  unrighteous  as 
ever ;  but  is  there  not  something  more  blessed  now  than  appeals 
to  God  to  deal  with  the  world  as  the  world  has  dealt  with  us  ? 
This  was  the  state  of  things  when  men  had  to  do  with  the  law  ; 
as  the  principle  of  righteous  retribution  will  appear  again  in  the 
millennial  day,  when  they  will  have  the  law  written  on  their 
hearts.  As  far  as  the  moral  import  (SiKaiwyxa)  of  the  law  is  con- 
ceriieil,  (!od  makes  that  good  in  His  peoi>le  now.  But  there  is 
anotlier  principle  wliich  is  being  displayctl  now  in  every  form ; 
for  God's  grace  is  going  out  to  the  lost.  Christ's  death  is  the 
greatest  manifestation  of  that  grace,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  works 
after  this  pattern  in  the  hearts  of  His  people.  But  the  cry 
under  the  fifth  seal  is  that  sin  may  be  laid  to  the  charge  of  their 
oppressors,  and  vengeance  taken  accordingly.  This  is  righteous- 
ness, but  not  grace.  Let  us  bear  in  mind,  however,  tliat  God 
does  not  allow  us  to  take  up  a  righteous  or  a  gracious  cry  just 
when  we  like.  We  are  always  wrong  wlien,  under  suffering  from 
the  world,  a  gracious  cry  is  not  brought  out  by  the  blow.  When 
we  have  to  do  with  one  another,  we  are  entitled  to  look  for  godly 
and  righteous  ways  from  Christians :  indeed,  it  is  part  of  the 


THE  JEWISH  FORM  OF  DELIVERANCE.  145 

character  of  a  Christian  to  feel  what  is  wrong,  as  well  as  to  value 
what  is  right.  (Eom.  xii.)  But  there  should  always  be  power  to 
rise  above  evil,  and  to  bring  out  Christ  to  meet  it,  whether  it  be 
in  the  way  of  discipline  for  those  within,  or  of  intercession  for 
those  that  are  without.  God  is  dealing  in  perfect  grace,  and  so 
should  we,  with  the  world. 

Here,  in  the  seals  and  sequel  of  the  Revelation,  it  is  another 
state  of  things  God  is  judging  in  a  preparatory  way  for  His 
people;  it  is  another  order  of  relationship,  not  that  in  which  He 
has  set  us  till  the  Lord  receives  us  to  Himself.  Accordingly 
it  is  the  Jewish  expectation  of  deliverance  through  God's 
destruction  of  the  adversaries,  not  the  Christian's  hope  of 
removal  out  of  the  scene  to  heaven.  Eighteous  vengeance  is 
invoked  on  those  that  dwell  on  the  earth.  Not  that  vindictive- 
ness  is  implied,  but  assuredly  it  is  not  practical  grace.  They 
look  therefore  for  God  to  judge,  instead  of  longing,  as  we  should 
do,  for  Christ  to  come  and  take  us  to  Himself.  "  The  Spirit  and 
the  bride  say,  Come.     And  let  him  that  heareth  say,  Come." 

Eemark,  that  the  word  used  here  for  "  Lord"  is  not  the  one 
that  is  generally  employed ;  but  the  same  term  occurs  in  Ijuke 
ii.  29,  Acts  iv.  24,  Jude  4.  It  means  the  Lord  as  "sovereign 
master."  It  is  also  used  in  2  Peter  ii.  1  :  "  Even  denying  the 
Lord  that  bought  them."  We  have  not  here  the  nearness  in 
which  we  know  Him  as  "  our  Lord,"  but  the  general  authorita- 
tive relation  in  which  the  Lord  is  the  Master  of  the  whole 
world — of  all  men,  whether  bad  or  good.  It  is  never  said  that 
those  who  know  Christ  by  the  Holy  Ghost  can  deny  the  Lord 
who  bought  them. 

However  that  may  be,  the  appeal  is  answered  by  the  throes 
of  nature  universally,  presenting  in  symbols  to  the  prophet's 
eye  what  was  coming.  "And  I  beheld  when  he  opened  the 
sixth  seal,  and  there  was  a  great  earthquake;  and  the  sun 
became  black  as  sackcloth  of  hair,  and  the  whole  moon  became 
as  blood ;  and  the  stars  of  heaven  fell  unto  the  earth,  even  as  a 
fig-tree  casteth  its  untimely  figs,  when  it  is  shaken  by  a  mighty 
wind.  And  the  heaven  departed  as  a  scroll  when  it  is  rolled 
together;  and  every  mountain  and  island  were  moved  out  of 
their  places"  (verses  12-14).    The  heavens  are  convulsed  from 

L 


146  THE   SIXTH   SEAL   NOT   THE    LORD's  APPEARING. 

one  end  to  the  other;  the  stars  fall,  &c.,  evidently,  as  it  seems 
to  me,  in  the  vision  only.  "  And  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and 
the  great  men,  and  the  chieftains,  and  the  rich,  and  the  mighty, 
and  every  bondman  and  free  man,  hid  themselves  in  the  dens 
and  in  the  rocks  of  the  mountains ;  and  they  say  to  the 
mountains  and  rocks,  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of 
him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath  of  the 
Lamb:  for  the  great  day  of  his*  wrath  is  come;  and  who  is 
able  to  stand  ?"  (verses  15-17.)  Ev^ery  class  of  men  is  in 
agitation  through  these  impending  judgments.  It  is  not  really 
the  great  day  of  the  Lamb's  wrath,  yet  people  think  that  it  is. 
They  fear  that  the  last  day  is  already  come. 

An  idea  has  prevailed  with  many  that  this  seal  represents  the 
epiphany  of  the  Lord  in  judgment  at  the  end  of  the  age.     This 


*  The  Vulgate  with  good  authority,  as  we  have  seen,  has  "  their"  wrath  (ip- 
sorum,  not  ipsius).  But  I  take  this  opportunity  of  saying  that,  invaluable  as  the 
best  Latin  copies  are  as  a  support  of  ancient  and  excellent  readings,  it  seems  a 
perilous  thing  to  throw  aside  all  the  MSS.  and  every  other  version,  and  all  the 
early  writers  save  those  who  merely  echo  the  Vulgate,  as  Mr.  Elliott  does  in 
following  its  "quattuor  partes"  (verse  8).  There  is  really  no  ground  but  the 
exigencies  of  his  system.  To  square  with  facts,  according  to  his  application,  it 
should  have  been  not  the  fourth,  but  the  whole  of  the  Roman  empire.  Hence 
Jerome's  manifest  oversight  is  adopted,  and  it  is  argued  that  he  must  have  had 
ancient  witnesses  now  lost !  But  this  is  most  unreasonable  when  we  see  that 
Jerome  is  often  loose.  To  take  this  chapter  alone,  is  it  pretended  that  "  vocem," 
in  vferse  1,  the  omission  of  "  et,"  in  verse  2,  "singulae,"  in  verse  9,  "insulae," 
in  verse  14,  rest  on  original  authority?  Are  they  not  evidently  due  to  mere 
laxity  of  rendering?  And  why  impute  "quattuor  partes"  to  a  higher  source? 
The  wonder  is  that  we  have  not  some  of  the  later  Greek  manuscripts  influenced 
by  the  Latin  in  verse  8,  as  perhaps  26  was  in  verses  1  and  2.  We  know  there 
are  stupendous  blunders  occasionally  in  the  best  copies  of  the  Vulgate,  as  in 
1  Cor.  XV.  51  ;  Heb.  xi.  21.  Why  give  it  a  place  in  this  verse,  which  is  not 
claimed  for  it  in  any  other  verse  of  Old  or  New  Testament?  Besides,  is  it 
according  to  tho  analogy  of  this  book,  or  of  any  other  book,  to  speak  of  "  four 
parts,"  if  the  entire  empire  were  intended  ?  The  attempted  historical  answer 
of  quadripartition  seems  to  mo  extremely  meagre.  -  Thin,  of  course,  is  matter  of 
opinion.  But  it  is  serious  when  the  author  is  so'enuuiourod  of  his  theory  as  to 
bid  his  readers  "  well  mark  that  if  the  prophecy  here  diiTor  from  the  history,  it 
differs  from,  and  is  inconsistent  with,  itself  also :  seeing  that  the  whole  horse  is 
depicted  with  the  pale  death-like  hue,  not  its  fourth  pari  only." — II. A.,  i.  201. 
This  is  bolder  than  man  ought  to  be  with  God's  word,  unless  there  were  infinitely 
graver  grounds  against  tho  text.  The  inference  from  the  horse  I  have,  I  think, 
shewn  to  be  unsound. 


DISTINCTION    FROM   THE   LORD'S    PROPHECY.  147 

has  disposed  them  to  understand  the  description  as  a  literal 
account  of  the  heavenly  and  earthly  changes  which  accompany 
that  great  event.  But  there  is  no  solid  foundation  for  such 
thoughts.  In  the  first  place,  the  seventh  seal  is  not  yet  opened, 
so  that  the  end  it  cannot  be,  even  if  one  adopted  the  system 
which  supposes  the  trumpets  to  be  a  rehearsal  from  another 
point  of  view.  Again,  not  a  word  occurs  alluding  to  the  presence 
of  the  Lord.  There  is  a  great  earthquake  ;  but  the  appearing  of 
Jesus  is  incomparably  more  serious  than  any  possible  commotion 
in  the  world.  The  difference  is  manifest,  if  we  compare  these 
verses  with  chap.  xix.  11-21  of  this  book,  and  with  1  Thess.  v. ; 
2  Thess.  i. ;  Luke  xvii.  24-37,  &c.  Not  to  speak  of  the  sixth 
trumpet,  under  the  seventh  vial  (which  must  surely  be  owned 
as  at  least  not  earlier  than  the  sixth  seal)  there  is  an  earthquake, 
of  which  the  Holy  Ghost  speaks  in  still  stronger  terms.  Yet  we 
know  that  this  is  before  the  day  of  the  Lord ;  for  all  admit 
that  the  vials  are  poured  out  before  He  comes  as  a  thief  And 
d  .fortiori  why  not  the  sixth  seal  ?  Had  these  convulsions  been 
given  under  tlie  seventh  seal,  there  might  have  seemed  more 
tenable  ground  :  as  it  is  there  is  really  none. 

There  is  also  this  marked  difference  between  our  seal  and  the 
passages  in  Matthew  xxiv.,  Mark  xiii.,  and  Luke  xxi.,  with  which 
some  would  connect  it,  that  in  the  latter  the  Son  of  man  is  ex- 
pressly said  to  be  seen  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  with 
power  and  great  glory,  in  the  former,  as  has  been  remarked, 
there  is  not  a  trace  of  it.  It  is  represented  under  the  seal,  that 
all  men  in  their  terror  say  to  the  mountains  and  rocks,  (is  this 
literal,  after  they  had  been  moved  out  of  their  places  ?)  "  Fall 
on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne, 
and  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb :  for  the  great  day  of  his  *  wrath 
is  come  ;  and  who  is  able  to  stand  ?"  But  it  is  a  revelation,  not 
of  that  which  God  declares  about  the  time  or  circumstances,  but 
of  men's  alarm  and  its  effect  on  their  consciences.  To  take  what 
John  saw  in  the  vision  as  so  many  physical  realities,  to  be  then 
verified  in  the  literal  sun,  moon,  stars,  and  heaven,  is,  I  think, 

*  The  Sinai  MS.,  the  palimpsest  of  Paris,  and  the  excellent  Vatican  cursive, 
conventionally  known  as  38,  with  the  Vulgate  and  Syriac,  read  aiiTiuv, 
"  their  : "  which  admirably  fits  in  with  the  context. 

L    2 


148  NOT   THE   DAY   OF   JEHOVAH. 

an  opinion  adopted  \vithoiit  due  consideration.  Would  there, 
could  there,  be  need  for  any  to  invoke  the  fall  of  the  mountains 
and  rocks,  if  the  stars  really  fell  unto  the  earth  ?  Could  men  or 
the  globe  survive  such  a  shock  ?  Besides,  it  is  plain  that  the 
description  alludes  at  any  rate  to  passages  in  the  Old  Testament, 
such  as  Isa.  xiii.,  xxxiv. ;  Ezek.  xxxii.  7,  8,  and  Joel  ii.  Now 
the  last  distinctly  states  that  the  signs  therein  predicted  are 
before  the  great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord  come,  and  the  first 
had  its  accomplishment  in  the  past  fall  of  Babylon,  though  there 
be  also  types  of  a  more  solemn  and  universal  catastrophe  at  the 
close. 

All  this  is  to  my  mind  decisive  that  the  sixth  seal,  according 
to  its  natural  place  in  the  prophecy,  in  no  way  means  the  great 
day  of  the  Lord,  but  sets  forth,  first  in  figures  and  then  in  simple 
language,  an  overwhelming  revolution  which  overthrows  existing 
institutions  and  governmental  order.  The  authorities,  supreme, 
dependent,  and  subordinate,  are  broken  up.  The  shock  is  uni- 
versal. They  think  the  last  reckoning  is  come.  Not  the  Lord, 
but  their  bad  and  affrighted  consciences  call  it  the  day  of  His 
wrath.  But  when  that  day  does  come  (as  in  chapter  xix.),  they 
are  bold  as  lions.  The  very  frequency  of  divine  judgment  acts 
upon  the  hard  hearts  of  men  ;  and  so,  though  the  trumpets  have 
yet  to  blow,  and  the  judgments  become  more  and  more  intense, 
yet  when  the  Lord  conies  in  person,  instead  of  calling  on  the 
mountains  to  cover  them,  they  are  found  fighting  against  Him- 
self When  their  consciences  were  not  so  hardened,  they  were 
alarmed ;  but  when  the  great  day  arrives,  they  are  in  open  re- 
bellion against  Christ.  What  a  thing  is  the  heart  of  man  !  and 
what  an  infinite  mercy  which  has  brought  us,  not  in  the  thought 
of  His  wrath — though  the  Lord  grant  that  this  may  be  used  to 
awaken  some  souls — but  by  His  grace  to  enjoy  the  peace  He 
has  made  by  the  blood  of  His  cross !  He  will  have  us  also  in 
the  full  fruition  of  our  heavenly  blessedness,  when  all  these 
judgments  are  passing  beneath  us.  To  be  above  in  the  presence 
of  Him  who  will  then  direct  and  at  last  execute  all  needful 
infliction — this  is  to  be  our  portion.  The  Lord  grant  that  we 
may  walk  in  His  grace  now,  not  dragged  down  into  the  spirit 
of  the  world,  nor  standing  for  our  own  riLrhts.     Alas !  if  sinful 


CHKISTIANS   SHOULD   ASSERT   THE   RIGHTS   OF   CHRIST.      149 

men  begin  to  talk  about  their  I'ights,  let  them  remember  that  in 
the  sight  of  God  the  only  thing  they  have  a  right  to  is  to  be 
lost  for  ever.  If  He  dealt  with  us  on  that  ground,  when — how 
— could  we  be  saved  ?  But  He  has  forgiven  us  all  our  wrongs, 
and  has  given  us  the  joy  of  standing  for  His  rights.  May  we 
be  true  to  Him  and  to  His  cross  ! 


150  THE   PARENTHESIS    OF   THE   SIXTH    SEAL. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

The  careful  reader  of  the  Revelation  will  have  noticed  tliat  this 
chapter  does  not  perform  any  part,  properly  speaking,  of  the 
course  of  events.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  neither  one  of  tlie  seals, 
nor  of  the  trumpets,  nor  of  the  vials.  We  liave  not  finished 
tlie  seals  yet.  In  the  sixth  chapter  we  have  had  six  seals,  and 
there  is  a  seventh  that  comes  before  us  in  chapter  viii.  What 
then  is  the  meaning  of  chapter  vii.?  It  is  an  interval — a  sort  of 
parenthesis  in  these  events — that  occurs  between  the  sixth  and 
seventh  seals.  Under  the  sixth  seal  there  is  a  frightful  catas- 
trophe among  kings  and  subjects,  high  and  low,  calling  to  the 
rocks  and  mountains  to  fall  on  them,  and  hide  tliem  from  the 
wrath  of  the  Lamb.     To  their  minds  His  day  was  come. 

On  the  other  hand,  when  He  opens  the  seventh  seal  (chap, 
viii.),  there  is  silence  in  heaven  about  the  space  of  half-an- 
hour :  so  that  the  whole  of  chap.  vii.  is  no  link  in  the  regular 
chain  of  the  liistory  foreseen.  Yet  this  apparent  interruption  of 
historic  sequence  is  just  as  orderly  as  the  formally  numbered 
series  of  the  judgments,  because  all  that  God  does  is  perfect : 
every  detail  is  lixed  witli  the  greatest  care  and  nicety.  What 
confirms  this  is  that,  when  we  come  to  the  seven  trumpets,  tlie 
sixth  trumpet  is  given  in  chap.  ix.  and  the  seventh  does  not 
appear  till  chap.  xi.  15 ;  so  that  the  whole  of  chap.  x.  and  the 
larger  part  of  chap.  xi.  form  a  great  parenthetic  revelation  of 
events,  similar  to  what  we  have  in  the  chapter  before  us.  In- 
deed to  me  it  is  still  more  remarkable  in  the  trumpets;  for  you 
will  observe  in  chap.  ix.  12  it  is  said,  "  One  woe  is  past,  and 
behold  there  come  two  woes,"  &c.;  and  then  we  have  the  sixth 
angel  sounding,  and  the  description  of  the  Euphratean  horsemen. 
But  it  is  not  till  chap.  xi.  14  that  "  the  second  woe  is  past," 
evidently  referring  to  the  Euphratean  horsemen  mentioned  before 


PARENTHETIC  STRUCTURE.  151 

in  chap.  ix.  So  that  the  whole  scene  of  the  mighty  angel 
coming  down  from  heaven,  of  the  little  book  tliat  was  to  be 
taken  and  eaten  by  the  seer,  of  the  temple  and  worshippers 
measured,  of  the  court  and  city  abandoned  for  forty-two  months, 
of  the  two  witnesses,  their  testimony,  death,  resurrection,  and 
ascension, — all  this  forms  part  of  the  striking  episode.  Thus, 
as  there  is  a  parenthesis  between  the  sixth  and  seventh  seals, 
there  is  an  exactly  corresponding  one  between  the  sixth  and 
seventh  trumpets;  and  not  only  so,  but  we  have  something 
analogous  in  the  vials.  If  you  look  at  the  sixth  vial  (chap.  xvi. 
12),  you  will  find  there  is  an  interruption  between  it  and  the 
seventh.  P'irst  the  water  of  the  great  river  Euphrates  is  dried 
up,  that  the  way  of  the  kings  from  the  East  might  be  prepared, 
and  then  we  have  a  totally  different  subject.  "  I  saw  three 
unclean  spirits  ....  they  are  the  spirits  of  demons;"  and 
then,  distinct  again  from  this,  "  Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief. 
Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth,"  &c.  This  is  a  brief  but  singular 
parenthesis,  containing  both  the  account  of  the  evil  and  the  Lord's 
coming  in  judgment  on  it.  I  only  refer  to  it  now  for  the  pur- 
pose of  shewing  that  there  is  nothing  but  what  is  laid  down 
with  the  most  astonishing  precision  of  purpose  in  God's  word, 
and  in  this  book,  it  may  l)e  added,  conspicuously. 

Taken  up  at  first  sight,  the  Eevelation  may  appear  all  a  maze  ; 
but  it  is  not  so  really  ;  for  the  impression  arises  from  ignorant 
haste  or  from  incapacity  to  discern.  The  fact  is,  that  people 
bring  certain  feelings  or  wishes  with  them  to  the  book,  instead 
of  waiting  in  the  desire  to  know  what  God  thinks  and  speaks 
to  them  in  it.  Let  us  take  the  highest  ground  of  faith  for  the 
word  of  God,  and  maintain  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  only 
power  for  understanding  any  part  of  that  word.  Whether  for  a 
man's  soul,  for  his  salvation  and  hopes,  for  his  practical  guidance, 
either  individually  or  corporately,  for  his  ways  in  the  church  or 
in  the  world,  for  his  instruction  as  to  the  worship  and  the  service 
of  God,  or  even  as  to  his  relative  duties  on  earth,  whatever  it  be, 
there  is  divine  light  for  every  step  of  the  way;  and  the  only 
reason  why  we  do  not  all  see  it  is,  because  we  have  not  the 
single  eye  which  faith  produces.  It  is  faith  that  receives  the 
blessing;  and  I  believe  that,  as  it  is  ever  true  that  "according  to 


152  JEWS  AND  GENTILES  SEPARATE. 

thy  faith  so  be  it  unto  thee,"  it  will  also  be  blindness  according 
to  the  measure  of  unbelief  The  Lord  always  gives  what  faith 
counts  on  from  Himself;  unbelief  inevitably  finds  the  barren- 
ness that  it  deserves. 

In  this  chapter,  however,  it  had  long  been  a  difficulty  how 
there  could  be  here  the  sealing  of  a  body  of  elect  Jews  and 
the  vision  of  an  innumerable  company  of  spared  Gentiles,  when 
their  blessing  only  comes  at  a  later  part  of  the  book.  *  But  the 
moment  I  learnt  that  it  was  all  a  parenthesis,  and  that  the  actual 
time  when  the  sealed  remnant  of  Israel  and  the  saved  Gentiles 
come  into  public  action  and  take  their  place  upon  the  stage  is 
another  thing  altogether,  that  difficulty  was  at  an  end.  God  for 
our  comfort,  while  the  judgments  are  going  on,  allows  the  curtain 
to  part  for  a  little  moment,  and  we  see  that  they  are  all  safe 
under  His  eye  and  ready  to  be  manifested  in  due  time.  But 
when  they  come  publicly  into  view  is  another  question.  In 
chapter  xiv.  there  is  a  body  spoken  of,  144,000,  of  whom  the 
Lamb  is  the  centre,  and  these  stand  with  Him  on  mount  Zion, 
having  His  name  and  His  Father's  name  v.'ritten  on  tlieir  fore- 
heads. That  body  is  evidently  similar  to,  though  not  tlie  same 
as,  the  144,000  that  we  have  here ;  and  perhaps  also  we  may 
compare,  but  nut  identify,  the  "nations"  in  Eev.  xxi.  24-26  with 
the  countless  host  of  Gentiles  here.  Still  more  striking  is  the 
resemblance  to  the  sheep  of  Matt,  xxv.,  because  these  are  not 
merely  the  blessed  Gentiles  of  the  millennial  day,  but  had  stood 
the  test  during  the  interval  of  grievous  trial  which  preceded  it. 

*  Not  many  of  my  readora  will  bo  more  disposed  than  myself  to  accept  Mr. 
Elliott's  way  of  accounting  for  the  occurrence  of  the  sealing  and  palm-bearing 
visions  at  this  particular  time.  Augustine,  the  celebrated  Bishop  of  Hippo, 
flourished  at  the  date  to  which  he  applies  the  sixth  seal,  or  rather  its  conse- 
quences !  Mr.  E.  has  culled  from  his  copious  writings  whatever  might  be  sup- 
posed to  strengthen  this  far-fetched  idea ;  and  certainly  it  would  be  strange  if 
in  so  large  a  field  he  did  not  find  abundance  to  his  hand.  But  when  he  begs 
"  the  reader  to  pause  and  consider  with  himself,  whether  he  can  possibly  imagine 
any  two  symbolic  figurations  that  would  more  exactly  sj-mbolize  the  doctrinal 
revelations  uiade  to  Augustine  than  those  that  were  exhibited  at  the  exactly 
correspondent  epoch  in  the  Patmos  visions  to  the  representative  man  St.  John," 
I  must  answer  that  I  think  if  the  vision  of  the  holy  city  Jerusalem  had  been 
inserted  after  the  sealing  and  instead  of  the  palm-bearers,  Mr.  E.  would  have 
sung  yet  louder  in  praise  of  so  marvellous  a  foreshadowing  of  Augustine's  great 
work  Li  Civitate  I)vi.     Let  the  candid  reader  judge. 


BRETHREN  AND  SHEEP  IN  MATT.  XXV.         153 

And  observe  that  the  sheep  in  that  passage  are  distinguished 
from  the  King's  brethren  who  have  a  position  yet  nearer  to  Him- 
self— Jewisli  saints  who,  after  the  church  is  taken  to  heaven, 
will  be  entrusted  with  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  which  is  to 
be  preached  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness  to  all  nations  before 
the  end  comes.  Thus,  in  Matt.  xxv.  31-46,  Israelitish  brethren 
of  the  King,  just  before  the  close,  test  the  Gentiles,  who  at  His 
appearing  are  summoned  before  His  throne,  and  discriminated 
as  blessed  or  cursed,  their  faith  or  unbelief  being  proved  by  the 
way  they  had  carried  themselves  towards  the  messengers  of  the 
coming  kingdom  in  the  time  of  their  sorrowful  testimony. 
Millions  of  the  nations  will  be  born  during  the  peaceful  mil- 
lennial reign,  for  whom  the  loosing  of  Satan  at  its  close  will  be 
fatal,  even  were  all  spared  at  first  born  of  God. 

In  this  chapter,  then,  there  are  simply  two  striking  scenes, 
connected  in  sense  if  not  as  to  epoch,  outside  the  regular  march 
of  things.  The  Spirit  of  God,  who  laid  down  the  historical  order 
of  the  divine  judgments,  leaves  that  for  the  moment  and  shews 
us  that  God  has  mercy  in  store  even  in  the  coming  day  of  dis- 
tress. Israel  will  be  in  frightful  circumstances:  "Jerusalem  shall 
receive  of  Jehovah's  hand  double  for  all  her  sins."  As  she  had 
been  strong  in  her  hatred  against  the  Lord,  so  will  He  reckon 
that  His  vengeance  has  been  doubly  poured  forth  upon  the  guilty 
city.  We  have  had  judgments,  first  beginning  with  compara- 
tively ordinary  events,  such  as  a  great  conqueror  going  forth, 
bloodshed,  scarcity,  God's  sore  plague  (death  referring  to  the 
body  and  hades  to  the  soul);  then  a  remorseless  outburst  of 
persecution  on  God's  people ;  next  a  universal  and  dreadful 
convulsion  before  the  eyes  of  the  seer,  affecting  heaven,  earth, 
and  sea,  the  greatest  alarm  and  bewilderment  among  men,  who 
think  that  the  day  of  the  Lamb's  wrath  is  come.  But  that  day 
was  not  come  then.  When  it  does  arrive,  the  Lord  will  execute 
judgment  in  person  on  the  dead  and  the  living.  But  now  it  is  a 
panic  which  leads  men  to  dread  judgment-day.  And  the  kings 
of  the  earth,  and  the  nobles,  and  the  chieftains,  and  the  rich,  and 
the  mighty,  and  every  one,  bond  and  free,  were  in  the  utmost 
consternation. 

But  here  we  find  that  the  Lord  stops  and  draws  us   aside 


154  CHRIST   IS   THE   LAMB   UNDER   THE   SEALS. 

for  a  season  to  shew  us  what  His  mercy  is  going  to  do.  "  [And] 
after  this  I  saw  four  angels  ....  holding  the  four  winds  of 
the  earth."  They  are  kept  in  check  for  the  moment.  "And 
I  saw  another  angel  ascending  from  the  east,  having  the  seal 
of  the  living  God :  and  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  the  four 
angels,  to  whom  it  was  given  to  hurt  the  earth  and  the  sea, 
saying,  Hurt  not  the  earth,  neither  the  sea,  nor  the  trees,  till  we 
have  sealed  the  servants  of  our  God  on  their  foreheads"  (verses 
2,  3).  Some  have  conceived  that  the  sealing  angel  is  Christ, 
partly  because  it  is  assumed  that  the  work  done  is  communicating 
the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise,  the  seal  of  redemption.  To  me  all 
this  is  more  than  doubtful.  It  is  not  till  we  reach  the  trumpet 
series  that  our  Lord  ever  assumes  the  angelic  form  and  title. 
Whether  we  look  at  the  seals,  or  at  the  parenthesis  between  the 
two  last.  He  is  invariably,  where  the  reference  is  certain,  spoken 
of  as  the  Lanib.  Again,  this  angel  rises  up  from  the  sun-rising. 
I  can  readily  apply  such  a  movement  to  angels  subject  to  the 
Son  of  man,  ascending  and  descending  to  do  His  pleasure.  But 
when  the  Lord  appears  in  angelic  garb,  He  either  ministers  as 
High  Priest  with  the  golden  censer,  or  He  comes  down  with  un- 
mistakable tokens  and  proclamation  of  His  dominion  and  power. 
In  the  present  scene  nothing  is  said  which  unequivocally  reveals 
His  own  glory.  Much  has  been  made  of  the  phrase  "till  ive  have 
sealed,"  as  if  it  corresponded  with  the  allusion  to  the  persons  in 
the  Godhead,  as  in  Gen.  i.  26.  I  am  surprised  that  the  rest  of 
the  sentence  was  not  observed  to  be  incompatible  with  such  a 
meaning.  Would  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  (which  in  that 
case  would  be  the  sense)  say,  "  till  we  have  sealed  the  servants 
of  our  God  1 "  The  idea  seems  to  me  unfounded.  Nor  even  if  our 
Lord  exclusively  could  be  imagined  so  to  speak,  does  it  seem 
to  be  consistent  with  His  dignity.  He  teaches  His  disciples  to 
say  "  our  Father,"  but  does  not  say  it  with  them.  When  He  does 
associate  them  with  Himself  risen  from  the  dead,  it  is  even  then 
" M/j  Father  and  your  Father,  vi>/  God  and  your  God" — never 
"  oiir  (Jod." 

The  meaning  then  is,  that  before  the  various  judgments  are 
poured  out  on  creation,  God  will  have  appropriated  a  certain 
people  for  Himself     They  are  sealed  with  the  seal  of  the  living 


SEALED   ISKAELITES,  155 

God ;  that  is,  a  character  is  put  upon  them  as  set  apart  to  God. 
Cain  had  a  very  different  mark  put  upon  him  by  Jehovah;  it 
was  to  screen  him  from  man's  judgment.  Here  also  protection 
may  be  involved.  At  any  rate,  they  are  sealed  on  their  fore- 
heads, which,  of  course,  means  no  physical  mark,  but  God's 
setting  them  apart  for  Himself,  and,  I  suppose,  publicly.  Who 
are  the  sealed  ones  ?  A  measured  remnant  from  His  ancient 
people. 

Thus  the  angels  are  seen  restraining  the  judgments  that  are 
about  to  fall  on  all  creation,  and  we  have  the  seal  of  God  upon 
a  certain  chosen  number  out  of  Israel.  He  will  have  an  election 
from  that  people,  but  it  will  be  a  personal  and  individual 
election — not  a  merely  national  one  as  of  old.  When  David 
attempted  to  number  the  people,  it  was  a  presumptuous  sin,  but 
here  it  is  the  grace  of  God  appropriating  a  complement  of  the 
tribes  of  Israel  to  Himself.  The  number  144,000  is  a  regular 
and  complete  number,  though  it  be  a  mystical  one,  as  I  suppose, 
with  a  view  to  God's  use  of  the  favoured  nation  here  below. 
The  number  twelve  always  has  a  reference  to  what  is  perfect  for 
God's  accomplishment  of  His  work,  administered  by  man.  This 
may  be  seen  in  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  twelve  patriarchs, 
twelve  apostles,  and  even  the  twelve  gates  and  twelve  founda- 
tions of  the  New  Jerusalem.  It  is  a  perfect  number  where 
human  administration  comes  in.  Hence,  when  the  nation  of 
Israel  are  to  be  brought  in  again,  it  is  the  multiple  of  twelve 
that  we  have,  and  this  expressed  in  thousands ;  the  full  result, 
as  far  as  Israel  is  concerned,  of  the  administration  that  God  will 
commit  to  man. 

An  important  question  has  been  raised  here,  whether  the 
tribes  of  Israel  are  to  be  interpreted  literally  or  mystically.  For 
the  latter  sense  it  is  argued,  that  the  very  first  vision  of  the 
seven  candlesticks,  borrowed  from  the  Jewish  sanctuary,  and 
the  allusions  in  the  seven  epistles  that  follow,  but  more  particu- 
larly in  chapter  iii.  12  compared  with  chapter  xxi.  12,  sustain 
the  Christian  meaning  throughout  the  book.  But  does  not  such 
reasoning  overlook  the  fact  that  the  application  of  Jewish 
emblems  to  the  churches,  while  they  are  expressly  spoken  of 
here  below,  and  of  others  to  the  church,  either  glorified  above 


156  ISRAEL   DURING   THE   JUDGMENTS. 

or  following  Christ  out  of  heaven  in  tlie  day  of  the  Lord,  is 
totally  distinct  from  the  question  whether  certain  symbols,  taken 
from  Israel,  may  not  also  apply  to  a  dillerent  class  of  witnesses 
on  earth  between  those  two  points  ?  The  real  question  is  about 
the  interval,  when  churches  are  no  longer  spoken  of,  and  before 
the  bride  appears  with  the  Bridegroom  in  glory.  To  state  the 
question  aright  is  enough  to  shew  the  inconclusiveness  of  the 
argument,  as  applied  (not  to  Rev.  i.  ii.  iii.,  nor  in  Rev.  xxi.  12, 
where  in  the  main  we  all  agree,  but)  to  the  prophetic  visions 
from  chapter  vi.  onward. 

Besides,  it  is  allowed  by  the  more  intelligent  of  the  historical 
school,  that  about  the  close  of  the  age  the  Jews  will  be  con- 
verted and  take  the  lead  in  the  earthly  song  of  praise  on  the 
occasion.  This  may  be  put  too  late  in  the  book  and  founded  on 
the  feeble  evidence  of  the  occurrence  of  the  Hebrew  word 
"Hallelujah"  in  Rev.  xix.  3.  Still  the  fact  is  admitted — an 
Apocalyptic  prophecy  of  that  wliich  is  to  happen  before  the 
a])pearing  of  the  Lord.  What  is  more,  a  large  part  of  the  same 
scliool,*  represented  by  one  of  their  most  jjopular  books,  (Bp. 
Newton's  Dissertations  on  the  Proi^hecics ;  Works,  i.  pp.  578, 
579,)  understand  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  be  meant  in  their 
natural  lustorial  import,  and  apply  the  prophecy  to  the  vast 
influx  of  converted  Jews  in  the  reign  of  Constantino.  In 
fact  the  earliest  Christian  writer  who  alludes  to  the  chapter, 
Irenaeus  the  pious  Bishop  of  Lyons,  unhesitatingly  solves  the 
omission  of  Dan  so  as  to  prove  that  he  considered  the  actual 
tribes  of  Israel  to  be  meant.  So  also  speaks  Victorinus  in  one 
passage  at  least  of  the  earliest  extant  commentary  on  the  book. 
Others  soon  began  to  veer  towards  the  allegorizing  method,  till 

*  Mr.  Birks  widoly  diffurs  from  Mr.  Elliott,  and  this  too  in  perhaps  tho  most 
acrimonious  attack  ever  made  on  futuro-litt^ralism.  Even  Mr.  I?,  confesses  that 
"in  tho  ahstract,  it  can  neither  be  unreasonable  nor  impmhalile  that  they  should 
bo  a  direct  object  of  the  prophecy,  and,  since  no  more  appropriate  symbol  could 
be  found  for  them,  that  they  should  be,  so  to  speak,  their  own  emblem.  Thoso 
who  view  tho  book  in  general  as  symbolical  may,  therefore,  without  incon- 
sistency, conceive  litei'al  Jews  to  bo  desi^jned."  (Elements  of  Prophecy,  pp. 
2S6,  257,  the  "masterly  work"  in  which,  according  to  Mr.  E.,  the  writer  has 
shewn  himself  tho  maitil  and  /iiniimer  of  truth  against  tho  reveries  of  tho 
futurists.) 


ISKAEL   NOT   MYSTICAL   HERE.  157 

at  length  the  anti-Judaic  theory  became  much  the  more  general 
view. 

But  it  may  be  well  to  notice  briefly  the  reasons  alleged  by 
one  of  the  ablest  advocates  of  the  mystical  class — Vitringa. 
First  he  argues  that  if  the  names  were  to  be  taken  in  the  letter, 
so  must  the  number.  But  does  this  follow  ?  And  if  it  were  a 
necessity,  what  is  to  hinder?  He  who  reserved  7,000  in  Elijah's 
day  may  seal  144,000  of  Israel  in  a  future  epoch.  But  I  see  no 
need  for  this.  The  people  might  be  literal,  the  number  sym- 
bolical, without  difficulty  save  to  one  fascinated  by  the  love  of 
excessive  simplification.  It  is  not  denied  that  symbols  exist, 
nor  that  they  yield  a  determinate  sense ;  but  to  look  for  a  sort 
of  pictorial  consistency  in  all  the  parts  is  contrary  to  the  facts 
everywhere.  Moreover  what  could  be  the  meaning  of  a  mystical 
Eeuben,  Gad,  Asher,  &c.  ?  Nobody  that  I  know  pretends  to 
assign  a  distinctive  signification,  unless  persons  in  the  last  degree 
fanciful.  Yet  if  they  are  to  be  so  taken,  one  might  expect  each 
to  have  a  meaning,  which  is  looked  for  in  vain  in  those  who 
plead  strenuously  for  the  general  idea.  Next  it  is  urged  that  by 
the  sealed  must  be  understood  God's  elect,  who  are  to  be  pre- 
served from  an  otherwise  universal  calamity;  and  who  can 
assert  these  to  be  Jews  only  ?  But  who  affirms  that  none  are 
elect  save  these  ?  We  shall  see  presently  that  the  scope  of  the 
prophecy  and  the  connexion  of  the  passage  intimate  the  con- 
trary. The  false  assumption  therefore  is,  not  that  the  sealed 
thousands  are  out  of  the  actual  tribes  of  Israel  only,  but  that 
there  will  be  no  other  saints  than  these.  Thirdly  the  omission  of 
Dan  seems  to  be  at  least  as  great  a  difficulty  on  the  mystical  as 
on  the  literal  hypothesis.  In  the  blessing  of  Moses  (Deut. 
xxxiii.)  Simeon  is  left  out.  Is  this  list  of  the  tribes,  then,  to  be 
taken  allegorically  ?  Fourthly,  the  alleged  parallel  text,  Eev. 
xiv.  1,  by  no  means  proves  that  the  tribes  are  not  literally  of 
Israel.  The  144,000  in  chap.  xiv.  are  saints  on  earth,  not  long 
before  the  final  catastrophe,  and  in  contrast  with  those  defiled 
l)y  Babylon  and  enslaved  by  the  Beast.  That  they  are  not  the 
church,  but  rather  a  godly  remnant  of  Israelites  associated  in 
tlie  Spirit's  mind  with  the  suffering  but  now  exalted  Christ,  is 
what  writers  of  this  stamp  have  never  even  fairly  weighed, 


158      ABSUKDITY  OF  IDENTIFYING  ISRAEL  AND  THE  GENTILES. 

much  less  have  they  decided  on  good  grounds  one  way  or  the 
other. 

On  the  other  hand,  I  conceive  that  the  specification  of  the 
tribes  is  inconsistent  with  any  sense  but  the  literal.  Then  again 
the  contradistinction  is  as  plain  and  positive  as  words  can  make 
it,  between  the  sealed  numbers  out  of  Israel  and  the  innumerable 
multitude  from  all  nations  and  kindreds  and  peoples  and  tongues. 
So  that  the  mystical  theory,  when  closely  examined,  cannot 
escape  the  charge  of  absurdity ;  for  it  identifies  the  sealed 
Israelites  with  the  palm-bearing  Gentiles,  spite  of  the  evident 
and  express  contrast  on  the  face  of  the  chapter.  This  results 
from  trying  to  make  out  that  the  Gentile  crowd  consists  of  all 
the  afjsreuated  freneratious  of  the  elect  from  the  tribes.  As  to 
the  sealed  ones,  not  a  hint  appears  of  a  succession  :  indeed  the 
command  to  suspend  the  action  of  the  four  winds  till  after  the 
sealing  implies  the  contrary.  It  was  a  precise  limited  hour,  as 
it  was  a  special  class.  But  what  clenches  the  matter  is  that  the 
palm-bearing  Gentiles  {i.e.,  according  to  some,  the  Christian 
church  in  its  heavenly  completeness)  are  all  described  as  coming 
out  of  the  great  tribulation — a  tribulation  which  even  tliey  view 
as  following  the  days  of  Constantine.  Thus  all  seems  to  me 
strong  and  conclusive  that  the  sealed  here  are  literal  Israelites — 
not  only  of  Israel,  but  Israel,  the  Israel  of  God;  as  the  mystical 
reading  of  the  first  part  of  the  chapter,  with  the  literal  under- 
standing of  the  rest,  involves  its  advocates  in  consequences  the 
more  gross  where  it  is  most  systematically  pursued. 

With  regard  to  the  tribes  mentioned,  there  is  a  certain 
peculiarity  on  which  I  can  say  little.  Tliere  are  the  sons  of 
the  various  wives  of  Jacob :  first,  the  two  sons  of  Leah,  Judali 
and  Reuben ;  then  of  Zilpah,  Leah's  maid,  Gad  and  Asher ;  then 
Napthali,  the  son  of  tlie  maid  Bilhah,  and  instead  of  Dan  her 
other  son,  Manasseh  (Joseph's  firstborn)  is  substituted.  Then 
tliere  are  the  four  sons  of  Leah,  Simeon,  Levi,  Issachar,  and 
Zebulun  ;  and  finally,  the  sons  of  liachel,  Joseph,  and  Benjamin. 
Clearly  we  have  the  sons  arranged  according  to  the  different 
mothers,  the  oflspring  of  the  bondwomen  being  intermingled 
with  that  of  the  free.  Dan,  who  had  been  the  most  consjncuous 
for  idolatry,  is  left  out,  and  instead  of  P^jhraim,  the  younger  son 


LARGE  GATHEKING  OUT  FROM  THE  NATIONS.       159 

of  Joseph,  Joseph  himself  appears.  We  find  here  the  sealed  of 
Israel,  but  the  tribes  numbered  and  arranged  in  a  singular 
manner.  They  are  no  longer  merely  taken  up  in  a  natural  way 
according  to  the  order  of  birth,  but  God  seems  to  intimate  that 
He  would  make  them  a  spiritual  people  also,  stamped  with  His 
seal.  They  will  then  be  Israelites  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  guile. 
Nor  is  Dan  at  last  disinherited.  (Ezek.  xlviii.  1,  32.) 

Nor  this  only ;  God  is  also  going  to  save  a  multitude  of  Gen- 
tiles, and  here  no  numbering  appears.  This  is  a  most  refreshing 
thought  from  its  largeness.  Tor  though  from  them  God  is  now 
gathering  a  people  to  His  name,  yet  when  we  think  of  the 
multitudes  that  are  immersed  in  darkness,  of  the  myriads  on 
myriads  of  men  in  heathen  countries,  of  a  handful — yea,  perhaps 
but  one — among  them  here  and  there  having  the  knowledge  of 
God,  it  is  an  afflicting  and  humbling  reflection.  But  is  it  not 
remarkable  that  when  God  is  to  shew  us  the  increasing  wicked- 
ness of  both  Jew  and  Gentile,  and  when  His  judgments  are 
about  to  fall,  we  find  there  is  this  multitude  of  Israel  numbered 
with  the  greatest  care,  and  God  not  forgetful  of  the  poor  Gentiles? 
They  may  not  be  put  in  the  same  high  place  as  the  Jews,  yet 
God  will  bless  them  wonderfully  notwithstanding.  But  the 
prophet,  who  had  just  known  the  election  of  Israel  sealed  and 
had  heard  the  number  of  them,  has  to  turn  to  one  of  the  elders 
in  order  to  learn  who  the  countless  company  are.  They  were 
to  John  a  new  unknown  crowd  among  the  blessed.  If  theij 
were  sealed  on  their  foreheads,  is  it  reasonable  that  they  should 
just  after  seem  so  strange  ? 

The  multitude  spoken  of  here  is  distinct  from,  if  not  in  con- 
trast with,  the  church;  and  it  is  thus  that  we  ascertain  it  clearly. 
The  elders  represent  the  heavenly  saints  as  the  heads  of  priest- 
hood. Now  God  might  use  two  different  symbols  to  mean  the 
same  body ;  as,  for  instance,  the  wise  virgins  and  the  good  and 
faithful  servants  in  Matt.  xxv.  are  successive  representatives  of 
the  heavenly  saints.  But  here  we  have  the  Gentile  multitude 
and  the  elders  given  as  distinct  jMrties  in  the  same  scene.  Again 
you  have  the  elders  doing  one  thing  and  the  multitude  doing 
another.  Above  all,  note  that  the  way  in  which  God  speaks  of 
this  multitude  totally  separates  them  both  from  the  church  of 


160  THE   GREAT   TRIBULATION. 

God  and  from  the  Old  Testament  saints.  This  cannot  be  so 
clearly  seen  in  our  authorized  translation,  but  the  right  version 
in  verse  14  is  this :  "  These  are  they  which  come  out  of  the 
great  tribulation."  One  could  understand  of  course  that  as  a 
figure  the  whole  of  this  dispensation  might  be  called  a  time  of 
tribulation,  or  even  of  great  tribulation.  But  here  it  is  not 
merely  said,  "  These  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribula- 
tion," but  "  out  of  the  great  tribulation."  It  is  not  possible  to 
make  "  the  great  tribulation  "  extend  over  all  the  time  between 
the  first  and  second  comings  of  Christ.  Even  the  vague  Pro- 
testant interpreters  make  it  specific,  but  apply  it,  as  is  natural 
in  them,  to  the  fierce  persecutions  of  the  Papacy — "the  great 
predicted  tribulation  of  the  coming  apostacy  and  Antichrist." 
The  phrase  means  a  special  time  of  trouble,  and  we  gather  from 
elsewhere  that  it  is  yet  to  come ;  and  it  is  exactly  this  time 
that  the  central  part  of  the  Eevelation  includes,  and  chiefly 
covers.  In  the  epistle  to  Thyatira  it  was  said,  "  Behold  I  will 
cast  her  into  a  bed,  and  them  that  commit  adultery  with  her 
into  great  tribulation,  except  they  repent  of  theii-  deeds."  !May 
we  not  judge  that  the  threat  of  this  great  tribulation  is  to  be 
fulfilled  now.  The  scene  of  the  cliurch  is  closed,  the  great  tribu- 
lation comes  on  apace,  and  those  who  liad  professed  Christianity 
but  who  had  gone  back  into  idolatry  would  be  cast  into  it  with 
others.  Thus,  what  God  shews  us  here  is  a  multitude  of  saved 
Gentiles:  not  the  Jews,  for  we  have  had  them  just  before;  and 
not  Christians,  for  these  will  then  be  in  heaven.  Those  are  a 
Gentile  body  called  after  the  church  is  taken  up  ;  they  are  to  be 
in  the  great  tribulation  but  shall  be  preserved  tlirough  it. 

We  shall  find  the  great  tribulation  spoken  of  in  several  parts 
of  the  word  of  God.  In  Jeremiah  it  is  named  in  connexion 
with  the  Jews.  (Jer.  xxx.  7.)  "Alas!  for  that  day  is  great,  so 
that  none  is  like  it ;  it  is  even  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble,  but 
lie  shall  be  saved  out  of  it."  There  is  to  be  a  time  of  excessive 
angui.sh,  which  closes  with  the  day  of  the  Lord,  and  Jacob  is  to 
be  saved  out  of  it ;  so  that  tliere  you  have  the  Jew  in  trouble, 
and  the  Jew  delivered  out  of  it.  ]>at  in  Daniel  it  is  still  more 
explicit.  (Dan.  xii.)  The  angel  speaks  of  Daniel's  own  people, 
the  Jews.     "At  that  time  ....  there  shall  be  a  time  of  trouble, 


JEWS  AND    GENTILES   TO   BE   IN  THE   TRIBULATION.  161 

sucli  as  never  was  since  there  was  a  nation,  even  to  that  same 
time  :  and  at  that  time  thy  people  shall  be  delivered,  every  one 
that  shall  be  found  written  in  the  book."  This  is  "  the  time  of 
Jacob's  trouble,  but  he  shall  be  saved  out  of  it."  It  is  evidently 
the  j)lain  counterpart  of  the  words  of -Jeremiah;  and  it  warrants 
the  inference  that  there  is  to  be  a  future  "  time  of  trouble,  such 
as  never  was " — the  immediate  precursor  of  deliverance  for 
Jacob's  people  as  spoken  of  in  these  prophecies. 

In  Matthew  xxiv.  the  Lord  Himself  refers  to  it :  "  For  then 
sliall  be  great  tribulation,  such  as  was  not  since  the  beginning 
of  the  world  to  this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be."  There  again 
we  have  the  same  time,  the  Lord  quoting  the  very  passage  of 
Daniel  just  cited.  It  is  quite  plain  that  He  is  speaking  only  of 
Jews,  because  they  are  supposed  to  be  connected  with  the  tem- 
ple, and  they  are  told  to  pray  that  their  flight  be  not  on  the 
sabbath  day,  in  which  case  they  could  not  go  beyond  a  sabbath 
day's  journey,  nor  in  winter.  In  either  case  there  would  be  a 
hindrance  to  their  flight,  whether  on  God's  part,  or  in  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  season.  We  have  the  same  thing  referred  to 
in  Mark,  but  Luke  seems  to  speak  in  a  more  general  way. 

What  parties  then  are  to  be  in  the  scene  of  the  tribulation  ? 
First  a  Jewish  one  spoken  of  in  the  Prophets  and  the  Gospels, 
the  object  of  God's  care,  who  will  deal  tenderly  with  a  remnant 
of  Israel,  and  deliver  them  out  of  their  distresses.  Then  in 
Eev.  vii.  9  we  hear  of  a  Gentile  multitude.  But  neither  party  is 
the  church. 

Never  have  we  God  dealing  thus  with  the  Jew  and  with  the 
Gentile  as  such,  and  forming  the  church  at  the  same  time ;  for 
then  God  would  have  at  least  two,  if  not  three,  objects — not 
various  only  but  opposed  objects — of  special  affection  on  the 
earth  at  the  same  time,  with  quite  different  modes  and  aims  of 
action. 

Suppose  there  were  two  persons,  whom  the  Lord  was  bringing 
near  to  Himself.  If  He  were  dealing  with  the  Jew,  He  would 
have  acknowledged  an  earthly  temple,  priesthood,  and  worship. 
The  Lord  Jesus  recognised  the  Jews  as  such  when  He  was  on 
earth,  and  in  a  still  more  blessed  way  He  will  do  so  in  the  day 
that  is  coming.    But  as  long  as  the  Lord  is  occupied  with  form- 

M 


162         THE  CHURCH  NOT  SAID  TO  BE  IN  THE  TRIBULATION. 

ing  the  church,  Jewish  order  ceases  to  have  any  claim.  Thus 
then  suppose  that  God  were  blessing  the  Jews  as  Jews,  and  at 
the  same  time  forming  the  church  on  earth,  if  two  persons  were 
converted,  the  one  might  say,  I  must  still  have  my  priest  and 
go  to  the  temple ;  while  another  would  exclaim,  There  is  no 
priest  but  Christ,  and  the  temple  is  in  heaven.  See  the  confusion 
that  would  spring  from  God's  owning  an  earthly  and  a  heavenly 
people  at  the  same  time  here  below. 

In  this  time  of  tribulation,  when  the  Lord  will  recognize  the 
Jew  (or  the  godly  remnant)  to  a  certain  extent,  the  church  will 
not  be  in  the  scene.  The  objects  of  deliverance  will  be  elect 
Jews  and  elect  Gentiles,  each  distinct  from  the  other,  and  not  the 
church  of  God,  where  both  are  united  and  all  distinctions  dis- 
appear. We  have  seen  direct  proof  of  the  removal  of  the  church 
in  chaps,  iv.  and  v.  Here  there  is  indirect  evidence,  because  we 
have  Jews  sealed  and  Gentiles  saved,  and  the  latter  expressly 
distinguished  from  the  elders  or  heavenly  saints.  The  sealing 
of  the  Jews  included  the  election  from  the  whole  twelve  tribes 
of  Israel,  except  where  there  was  a  special  brand  of  evil,  as  in 
the  case  of  Dan.  But  the  moment  we  find  the  Jew,  we  have 
God  looking  also,  though  separately,  at  the  nations ;  because, 
having  once  visited  the  Gentile  with  His  mercy,  He  will  never 
take  it  back.  Thus,  when  here  He  speaks  of  mercy  to  a  com- 
plement of  Israel,  there  is  also  salvation  to  a  multitude  out  of 
eveiy  nation  and  kindred  and  people  and  tongue. 

We  saw  that  if  the  guilty  Christian  professors  went  on  in 
their  sin  with  Jezebel,  they  would  be  given  up,  and  would  be 
left  to  go  through  great  tribulation.  Here  we  find  the  great 
tribulation  come ;  and  not  only  are  Israelites  sealed,  but  a 
multitude  of  Gentiles  are  delivered  out  of  it.  The  Old  Testament 
does  not  speak  of  Gentiles  being  delivered  thence,  but  Jews. 
Meantime,  God  has  been  sending  salvation  to  the  Gentiles. 
Hence  in  the  New  Testament  prophecy  Gentile  deliverance  is 
as  prominent  as  Jewish  deliverance  is  in  the  Old  Testament. 
God  shews  that,  in  the  last  days,  He  is  going  to  save  a  vast 
throng  of  Gentiles.  But  will  it  be  so  in  these  countries  where 
the  light  of  the  gospel  has  shone  and  has  been  despised  ? 
"  They  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth,  that  they  might  be 


RETRIBUTIVE   DARKNESS   OF   CHRISTENDOM.  163 

saved.  And  for  this  cause  God  shall  send  them  strong  delu- 
sion, that  they  should  believe  a  lie  :  that  they  all  might  be 
damned  who  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  imright- 
eousness."  (2  Thess.  ii.  10-12.)  God  will  visit  those  who  have 
not  enjoyed  this  testimony,  the  external  peoples  who  have  not 
had  Christ  rightly  presented  to  them.  The  church  has  com- 
pletely failed  in  what  God  looks  for  from  us.  He  called  on  the 
church  to  take  up  the  cross  and  to  follow  Christ ;  but  the 
church  has,  in  practice,  given  up  the  cross  and  followed  the 
world.  All  this  has  hardened  the  heathen,  who  find  that  the 
church  does  not  bring  forth  the  fruits  that  are  suitable  to  the 
grace  and  truth  which  we  profess  to  have  found  in  Christ.  But 
God,  in  His  fulness  of  mercy,  will  go  to  those  outside.  Thus  I 
believe  that  these  very  countries  which  have  set  themselves  up 
as  the  centre  from  whence  the  light  emanates  will  then  be  in 
antichristian  idolatry,  while  those  which  have  been  in  darkness 
will  come  out  into  light.  It  will  only  be  the  tale  of  Galilee  of 
the  nations  again,  when  Jerusalem  despised  and  lost  the  Son  of 
God — alas  !  how  long. 

Here  we  see  the  blessed  result.  There  will  be  this  innumerable 
multitude  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  peoples,  and  tongues, 
who  stand  before  the  throne*  and  before  the  Lamb.  Theirs  are 
the  robes  of  righteousness,!  and  their  palms  are  the  palms  of 
victory ;  but  they  do  not  sing  the  new  song.  There  is  nothing 
like  the  high  and  exulting  tone  of  chap,  v.,  no  intercession  for 
others,  nay,  not  a  word  of  being  made  kings  and  priests  to  God. 

*  John's  vision  of  them  there  does  not  imply  that  they  are  to  be  in  heaven, 
rather  than  on  the  earth,  when  the  kingdom  comes.  "  Before  the  throne  and 
before  the  Lamb"  is  moral  rather  than  local.  (Compare  Kev.  xii.  1;  xlv.  3.) 
It  merely  expresses  where  the  prophet  beholds  them  in  the  mind  of  God.  The 
description  with  which  the  chapter  closes  conveys  the  idea  of  people  delivered 
from  bitter  sorrow,  and  sheltered  for  ever.  No  doubt  this  will  be  inexpressible 
comfort  to  them :  but  nothing  they  say  rises  to  the  height  of  the  joj"^  and 
intelligence  which  are  seen  in  the  elders,  nor  is  anything  said  of  them  which  at 
all  sets  them  on  equal  ground  with  these.  They  are  never  presented  with  crowns 
nor  seated  on  thrones  like  the  twenty-four.  They  are  in  relationship  with  God 
when  He  is  no  longer  viewed  as  seated  on  a  throne  of  grace  such  as  we  know 
now,  but  as  on  a  throne  whence  judgments  proceed.  All  harmonizes  with  the 
interval  of  introductory  government  which  precedes  the  millennium. 

t  It  has  been  sought  to  draw  out  the  contrast  between  these  Gentiles  in  Rev. 
vii.  and  our  own  position  in  Rev.  i.  5,  6,  by  dwelling  on  the  dilfcrent  statements, 

M   2 


164      THE   ELDERS   DISTINCT    FKOM   THE   SPARED   GENTILES. 

They  cry  with  a  loud  voice,  "Salvation  unto  our  God  who 
sitteth  upon  the  throne  and  unto  the  Lamb."  They  are  saved 
persons,  but  the  ascription  is  limited  to  the  title  that  He  takes 
upon  the  throne  and  to  the  Lamb.  God  is  not  now  sitting  upon 
the  throne  that  is  described  here :  at  least  it  is  not  thus  He 
reveals  Himself  while  the  church  is  on  earth.  He  will  by  and 
by  take  His  place  there  as  One  issuing  judgments ;  and  the 
great  point  seems  to  be,  that  although  it  is  a  time  of  preparatory 
wrath  and  judicial  action,  yet  God  is  shewing  signal  mercy, 
even  to  Gentiles.  In  verse  13,  we  have  the  elders  looking 
upon  the  scene.  How  could  they  be  looking  upon  themselves  ? 
Yet  this  must  be  the  case,  if  the  elders  and  the  innimierable 
multitude  are  both  supposed  to  set  forth  the  church.  We  have 
two  distinct  parties.  If  the  elders  are  the  church,  the  multitude 
is  not ;  and  if  the  multitude  is,  then  the  elders  cannot  be.  I 
well  understand  a  man  having  a  picture  taken  of  himself  in 
one  suit  of  clothing  at  one  time  and  in  a  different  suit  at 
another.  But  we  could  not  possibly  have  a  portrait  of  a  man 
taken  at  the  same  moment  with  two  different  sets  of  robes  upon 
him,  so  as  to  display  distinct  characters,  and  fulfil  opposite 
functions  together. 

In  the  church  of  God  which  is  being  called  now  there  is 
neither  Jew  nor  Gentile.  The  moment  you  find  the  distinction 
kept  up  between  them,  there  cannot  be  the  church.  Whenever 
you  separate  the  Jew  from  the  Gentile,  you  are  off  church-ground. 
Before  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  God  was  not  forming 
Jew  and  Gentile  into  one  body.  Thus,  even  when  tlie  Lord 
Jesus  was  upon  earth.  He  forbade  His  disciples  to  go  to  the 
Gentiles,  or  so  much  as  enter  the  Samaritan  cities.  But  when 
He,  the  beginning,  the  firstborn  fi'om  tlic  dead,  was  about  to 

that  th(]i  washed  their  robes,  and  that  lie  washed  us.  But  such  comparisons 
oft(^n  lead  to  fjjrave  misconception,  as  indeed  this  has  done.  I  wish,  therefore, 
explicitly  to  stato  my  own  conviction  (i7i  which,  douhtloss,  the  writer  referred  to 
would  cordially  join),  that  the  salvation  of  all  the  saved  at  all  times  depends 
on  the  work  of  Christ,  and  that  the  Spirit  is  tlu'  only  ellicacious  applicr  of  it 
tf)  any  soul.  The  real  queslion  is  as  to  the  various  dealin<xs  of  Clod  and  TTis 
Bovcroign  arrangcmonts  amonp^  the  saved.  Scripttire,  in  my  opinion,  is  quite 
clear  as  to  all  this,  if  men  would  but  give  uj)  preconceived  notions  and  wait  om 
God  for  the  answer. 


WHAT    THE    CHURCH    IS.  165 

form  the  church,  He  charged  them  to  go  everywhere  and  preach 
the  gospel  to  every  creature,  instead  of  merely  seeking  out  him 
that  was  worthy  in  Israel.  Thus,  a  complete  change  was  evinced 
in  the  ways  of  God,  not  as  if  He  knew  not  the  end  from  the 
beginning,  but  with  a  view  to  fresh  displays  of  His  glory  in  His 
Son.  So  too  when  the  present  calling  closes,  His  mercy  will 
flow  out  in  fresh  channels,  as  we  have  seen. 

I  trust,  then,  it  has  been  shewn  plainly  that  the  subject  of 
this  chapter  is  not  the  church,  but  Israel  and  the  Gentiles 
blessed  as  such.  Indeed,  one  need  not  hesitate  to  say  that,  if 
any  person  supposed  Eev.  vii.  treated  of  the  church,  it  would 
argue  that  he  had  no  true  idea  of  its  nature  and  calling — that 
he  had  no  conception  of  what  the  Holy  Ghost  connects  with 
the  body  of  Christ  here  below.*     The  church  of  God  is  essen- 

*  The  following  extract  from  Dr.  John  Owen's  Prelim.  Dissert,  to  his  Com- 
ment, on  the  Hebrews  (Exer.  vi.)  is  endorsed  with  strong  commendation  by  a 
living  Professor  of  Theology,  and  may  serve  as  evidence  of  the  darkness  that 
reigns  on  the  subject.  "At  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  there  was  not  one 
church  taken  away,  and  another  set  up  in  its  room ;  but  the  church  continued 
the  same,  in  those  that  were  the  children  of  Abraham  according  to  the  faith. 
The  Christian  church  is  not  another  church,  but  the  very  same  that  was  before 
the  coming  of  Christ,  having  the  same  faith  with  it,  and  interested  in  the  same 
covenant.  The  olive  tree  was  the  same ;  only  some  branches  were  broken  and 
others  grafted  into  it :  the  Jews  fell,  and  the  Gentiles  came  in  their  room.  And 
this  doth  and  must  determine  the  difference  between  the  Jews  and  Christians 
about  the  promises  of  the  Old  Testament.  They  are  all  made  unto  the  church. 
No  individual  hath  any  interest  in  them,  but  by  virtue  of  his  membership  with 
the  church.  This  church  is,  and  always  was,  one  and  the  same.  With  whom- 
soever it  remains,  the  promises  are  theirs ;  and  that,  not  by  application  or 
analogy,  but  directly  and  properly.  They  belong  as  immediately  at  this  day, 
either  to  Jews  (?)  or  Christians,  as  they  did  of  old  to  anj-.  The  question  is 
with  whom  is  this  church  which  is  founded  on  the  promised  seed  in  the 
covenant  ?  for  where  it  is,  there  is  Zion,  Jerusalem,  Israel,  Jacob,  the  temple  of 
God."  There  is  not  a  clause  that  is  not  an  error ;  for  even  where  there  is  a 
certain  substratum  of  truth,  the  use  is  ftiUacious.  The  Judaising  of  the  church 
on  this  scheme  is  complete.  The  truth  is  that  Dr.  O.  confounds  the  calling  of  the 
church,  according  to  the  mystery  hid  from  ages  and  generations,  with  the 
earthly  order  in  which  the  promises  are  administered.  Thus  the  doctrine  of 
Ephesians,  Colossians,  and  other  such  scriptures,  is  left  out  and  unknown ;  that 
is,  the  doctrine  of  a  body  united  to  Christ  its  glorified  head,  and  manifested  on 
earth  by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven.  Such  a  state  of  things  did 
not  exist  before  Christ's  first  advent,  nor  can  it  be  after  His  second.  As  to  the 
inheritance  of  the  promises,  we  share  this  with  the  saints  of  old ;  but  it  is  not 
our  peculiar  place  fif  blessing.     The  church,  ns  such,  is  quite  a  distinct  thing, 


166  TEW,    GENTILE,   AND    CHURCH. 

tially  a  heavenly  body  that  entirely  sets  aside  all  distinction 
of  Jew  and  Gentile.  The  scope,  if  not  object,  of  this  chapter 
shews  that  these  distinctions  reappear  at  the  time  that  is  referred 
to.  We  have  first  a  company  of  Israel,  then  an  innumerable 
crowd  out  of  the  Gentiles.  Besides  these,  that  class  of  the  re- 
deemed formed  out  of  the  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  long  familiar 
to  us  in  this  book  (namely,  the  crowned  elders),  are  seen  as  a 
distinct  body  altogether. 

Thus  we  have  in  this  chapter  "  the  Jew,  the  Gentile,  and  the 
church  of  God" — sealed  Jews  and  saved  Gentiles,  for  the  earth, 
as  I  suppose,  and  the  church  with  the  Old  Testament  saints  pre- 
served for  heavenly  glory.     While  the  elect  of  the  twelve  tribes 

though  the  members  of  it  are,  with  others,  heirs  through  Christ.  So  with  the 
olive  tree ;  doubtless  the  Gentiles  are  now  grafted  in  :  but  is  it  possible  a  spirit- 
ual man  could  confound  this  with  the  body  of  Christ  ?  The  Jews  were  natural 
branches,  the  olive  was  their  own  olive  tree :  even  the  unbelieving  branches 
formed  part  of  it,  though  at  length  broken  off  to  let  Gentiles  in.  Does  one 
word  of  this  bring  out  the  church  as  shewn  in  Ephos.  i.  ii.  ?  Is  not  aU  above 
nature  here  ?  In  that  one  body,  it  is  not  Jews  making  way  for  Gentiles,  but 
the  believers,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  brought  out  of  their  old  previous  con- 
dition, reconciled  in  one  by  the  cross,  and  builded  together  for  an  habitation  of 
God  through  the  Spirit.  All  this  is  neutralised  by  Dr.  Owen's  theory.  At 
least,  as  regards  the  future, INIr.  Elliott  renounces  it.  "The  church  of  the  first- 
born, the  bride,  may  be  complete ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  none  afterwards 
can  bo  saved.  Wliat  is  said  of  the  kings  of  the  earth,  walking  in  the  light  of 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  seems  to  me  to  imply  an  enjoyment  of  the  blessing  by 
other  parties,  besides  those  that  constitute  Christ's  bride,  the  New  Jerusalem. 
The  very  statement  of  Christ's  being  a  priest  upon  His  throne  (if  applicable,  as 
I  think  it  is,  to  the  millennial  era)  implies  Christ's  still  exercising  His  inter- 
cessory and  other  priestly  functions.  And  if  I  am  correct  in  my  view  of  John 
xvii.  21,  23,  it  was  a  marked  point  in  His  earliest  intercessor}'  prayer  that  the 
world's  believing  on  Him  generally  might  be  the  result  of  the  distinctive 
manifestation  in  glory  of  the  church  of  His  disciples  of  the  present  dispensa- 
tion ; — that  manifestation  which,  as  all  agree,  will  be  only  at  His  second  coming." 
(//.  A.,  iv.  p.  187.)  Every  one  must  allow  that  in  the  millennium  the  olive  tree 
will  flourish  moi-e  than  ever,  and  the  Abrahamic  promises  be  fulfilled  to  the 
letter.  If  then  the  church,  Christ's  bride,  is  distinct  from  the  millennial  saints, 
albeit  these  last  inherit  the  promises  and  are  branches  in  the  olive  tree,  tho 
principle  is  evidently  given  up.  Tho  same  thing,  tlien,  mat/  be  true  of  tho  Old 
Testament  saints.  It  becomes  a  question  of  tho  te.stimony  of  scripture.  Now 
this,  wo  have  seen,  pronounces  clearly  that  the  church  of  God,  Christ's  body, 
depends  on  the  gift  and  presence  of  tho  Holy  Ghost,  consequent  on  the  death, 
resurrection,  and  glorification  of  the  Saviour.  (Matt.  xvi.  18;  John  vii.  39; 
xiv  -xvi. ;  Acts  i.  ii. ;   1  Cor.  xii.,  &c.) 


GOD    IS    TO    OVERSHADOW   THE    GENTILES.  167 

are  said  to  have  great  mercy  shewn  them,  and  the  Gentiles  too, 
who  might  have  been  thought  to  be  forgotten  then  (ver.  14-17), 
yet  it  is  not  the  same  exalted  privilege  that  we  shall  enjoy. 
"  They"  {i.e.,  these  spared  Gentiles)  "serve  day  and  night  in  his 
temple."  But  when  the  Holy  Ghost  is  shewing  us  our  special 
place  of  blessing,  the  prophet  says,  "  I  saw  no  temple  therein." 
In  chapter  xxi.,  where  he  describes  the  bride  or  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem,  it  is  a  state  of  things  totally  different  from  what  we 
have  here.  Though  it  be  the  city  where  you  might  above  all 
expect  to  find  a  sanctuary,  he  says,  "  I  saw  no  temple  therein." 
Why  is  this  ?  Because  that  city  is  the  symbol  of  the  bride,  and 
when  God  brings  out  the  blessedness  and  glory  of  the  church, 
He  speaks  of  it  as  drawing  near  to  Himself,  so  that  there  shall 
be  none  but  Christ  between  Him  and  them,  if  we  can  call  that 
between,  where  Christ  Himself  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God, 
the  One  who  reveals  God  to  us  and  who  is  God.  It  excludes 
the  idea  of  the  temple.  Here,  on  the  contrary,  we  have  the 
temple.  One  of  their  greatest  privileges  spoken  of  is  that  they 
serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His  temple,  and  "  He  that  sitteth 
on  the  throne  shall  dwell  again  among  them."  There  might 
seem  to  be  a  difficulty  in  this,  but  there  really  is  a  careful  guard 
against  the  thought  that  might  be  drawn  from  the  words  "  dwell 
among  them."  The  true  meaning  is,  God  having  His  tabernacle 
over  them,  not  among  them.  In  chap.  xxi.  we  find  God  dwelling 
among  men.  It  is  not  the  same  phrase  at  all.  Similar  in  English, 
it  is  totally  different  in  the  Greek.  In  chapter  vii.  the  idea  is 
that  the  presence  of  God  overshadows  the  Gentiles,  but  there  is 
no  such  thing  intended  as  God's  taking  His  place  among  them. 
They  are  blessed  of  God,  overshadowed  and  protected  as  Israel 
of  old  under  the  cloud  of  His  presence.  Like  them  too  in  the 
future  (Isa.  xlix.),  they  shall  not  hunger  nor  thirst,  neither  shall 
the  sun  nor  heat  smite  them;  blessed  expressions,  but  rather 
conveying  an  earthly  position  than  a  heavenly  one.  We  have 
the  Lamb  Himself  to  feed  us  now.  Even  here  He  gives  us  to 
have  in  us  wells  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life,  and 
out  of  us  flow  rivers  of  living  water. 

I  have  been  endeavouring  to  prove,  then,  that  God's  purposes 
are  not  limited  by  what  He  is  doing  now.     Besides  forming  the 


168  THE  church's  privilege. 

heavenly  body,  the  church,  and  conferring  upon  it  the  highest 
privileges  even  He  can  give,  God  is  going  to  visit  the  Gentiles 
by  and  by.  They  will  be  remembered  ;  and  this  will  be  done  in 
tlie  midst  of  the  most  appalling  judgments  which  precede  the 
great  day.  And  God  makes  plain  our  own  position  amidst  it  all ; 
for  we  see  the  elders  distinct,  and  they  have  the  mind  of  Christ. 
This  last  is  the  portion  of  the  church  even  on  earth,  just  as 
Joseph  was  in  his  time  the  depositary  of  God's  wisdom.  Whether 
in  prison  or  out  of  prison,  he  catered  into  the  thoughts  of  God 
and  was  able  to  explain  them  to  others.  This  is  the  place  that 
God's  goodness  puts  us  in ;  alas  !  how  little  it  is  prized  or  acted 
on.  It  is  one  of  the  most  precious  privileges  that  belongs  to  the 
church  of  God,  save  the  position  in  which  God  sets  us  as  brought 
nigh  in  Christ  to  Himself.  Thei'c  ought  to  be  the  power  of  an- 
nouncing the  revealed  thoughts  of  God  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 


THE   TRUMPETS.  169 


CHAPTEE  VIIL 

To  me  it  is  manifest  that  the  seventh  seal  is  followed  by  a  short 
but  solemn  pause,  which  again  is  introductory  to  a  new  course  of 
divine  inflictions.*  "And  when  he  opened  the  seventh  seal,  there 
was  silence  in  heaven  about  the  space  of  half  an  hour.  And  I 
saw  the  seven  angels  who  stand  before  God ;  and  to  them  were 
given  seven  trumpets."  Now  these  judgments  that  come  before 
us  under  the  trumpets  are  of  a  somewhat  different  character 
from  what  we  have  seen  in  the  seals.  In  the  first  place,  the  seals 
in  general  appear  to  have  a  larger  extent,  but  the  blows  were 

*  Strange  as  it  may  seem  that  so  simple  a  matter  should  give  rise  to  long  doubt 
and  interminable  discussion,  such  is  the  fact.  Perhaps  the  earliest  interpretation 
on  record,  that  of  Victorinus  (a  mart>T  in  Diocletian's  persecution)  applies  the 
half-hour's  silence  to  the  beginning  of  eternal  rest.  And  this  remains  the  re- 
source still  of  most  who  understand  the  seven  seals  to  embrace  the  outline  of 
events  in  providence,  down  to  the  second  advent  of  the  Lord,  save  that  some 
would  rather  style  the  seventh  seal  a  pause  at  His  return.  It  is  plain  that  the 
view  rests  mainly  upon  the  assumption  that  the  sixth  seal  introduced  the  day  of 
the  Lord,  with  its  dependent  sealing  and  palm-beariag  visions  representing  the 
consummated  glory  of  the  blessed.  Nobody  can  conceive  that  silence  in  heaven 
for  half-an-hour  would  have  been  so  viewed,  unless  the  seal  before  had  necessi- 
tated to  their  minds  some  such  reference.  And  yet  it  is  evidently  unnatural ; 
for  if  we  had  the  rest,  be  it  millennial  or  eternal,  described  fully  in  the  close  of 
chapter  vii.,  why  did  it  need  a  fresh  seal  to  inaugurate  or  continue  it  in  the  com- 
mencement of  chapter  viii.  ?  And  with  what  propriety,  either  as  to  time  or 
character,  is  it  conveyed  in  the  seventh  seal  ?  This  has  led  others  to  adopt  the 
stiU  stranger  idea  that  the  sixth  seal  closes  the  sequence  of  events,  the  seventh 
being  merely  indicative  of  a  separation  between  this  series  and  the  parallel  one 
of  the  trumpets.  And  the  very  curious  circumstance  is,  that  some  who  receive 
this  anomalous  arrangement  have  persuaded  themselves  that  theirs  is  the  only 
perfect  clue  to  the  order  of  the  book,  whereas  it  is  nothing  but  hopeless  con- 
fusion. That  I  may  not  be  charged  with  injustice,  let  me  give  the  following 
statement  from  Three  Letters  on  the  Prophecies,  pp.  2,  3,  by  J.  H.  Frere, 
reprinted  in  1859.  "Every  commentator  who  has  hitherto  written  on  the 
Apocalypse,  by  erroneously  understanding  the  mention  of  the  seventh  seal 
having  been  opened,  which  occurs  at  chapter  viii.  1,  to  be  an  introduction  of 
the  events  of  that  seal,  has  committed  the  greatest  possible  chronological  error  : 


170  ■    DIFFERENCE   FROM   THE   SEALS. 

not  SO  severe.  It  is  true  we  had  in  Eev.  vi.  8  a  certain  limita- 
tion (viz.  the  fourth  part),  used  with  regard  to  the  extent  of  the 
blow  then  to  be  struck.  But  in  the  other  instances  there  was  no 
such  restraint ;  whereas  in  most  of  the  trumpets  it  is  the  third 
part,  with  some  slight  exceptions.  The  trumpets,  then,  may  be 
less  extensive  in  their  range,  but  it  will  by  and  by  appear  that 
they  are  more  intensely  judicial  than  the  seals. 

Further,  we  find  that  the  very  name  indicates  a  difference. 
The  trumpet  sets  forth  a  loud  and  solemn  call  of  God.  It  is 
God  summoning  men ;  for  if  they  have  rejected  His  grace,  they 
must  hear,  even  if  they  forget,  these  sharp  warnings  of  His 
judgment.  The  seals  might  not  so  readily  have  been  regarded 
as  divine  interferences,  unless  God  had  beforehand  told  us  that 
such  they  were,  with  their  nature  and  their  order.  In  them- 
selves, and  especially  in  the  first  four,  they  ushered  in  disastrous 
but  not  unprecedented  occurrences.  But  when  we  come  to  the 
trumpets  it  is  not  so  requisite  to  announce  that  they  are  heaven- 
embracing  in  the  midst  of  the  seals,  and  therefore  amidst  the  events  of  time,  the 
eternal  state  of  the  glorified  church,  represented  by  the  vision  of  the  palm-bear- 
ing multitude  before  the  throne,  of  the  preceding  chapter  (vii.  9-17) :  so  that  no 
chronological  arrangement  of  the  Apocalj-pse  has  as  yet  even  been  proposed,  seeing 
that  eternity  has  thus  been  universally  introduced  between  the  sixth  and  seventh 
seals.  The  Apocalypse,  however,  will  be  found  really  to  consist  of  these  chi-ono- 
logical  histories,  viz.,  the  seven  seals,  contained  in  chapters  vi.  and  vii.,  con- 
cluding with  the  vision  of  the  eternal  state ;  the  seven  trumpets,  consisting  of 
chapter  viii.  to  x.  7,  concluding  (like  the  prophecy  of  Daniel,  chapter  xii.  7) 
■with  the  vision  of  Christ  assuring  His  church,  by  the  solemnity  of  an  oath,  that 
he  regards  their  sufferings  and  sets  bounds  to  their  dui"ation ;  and  the  little 
opened  book  (Rev.  x.  8  to  xiv.)  concluding  with  the  great  judgment  of  the 
treading  of  the  wine-press  of  Annageddon."  It  is  manifest  that  this  unheard  of 
and  systematic  disorder  is  due  to  the  groat  primary  error  that  Rev.  vi.  17  is  a 
prophecy  of  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb,  instead  of  being  the  predicted  expression  of 
men's  apprehension  at  that  early  epoch  of  judgment.  The  seventh  seal  is  ren- 
dered meaningless,  the  sixth  seal  being  virtually  made  the  seventh,  and  the 
contents  of  it  and  of  the  parenthetical  chapter  vii.  entirely  misimderstood. 
Equally  are  the  trumpets  mistaken.  They  do  )iot  conclude  with  Christ's  oath, 
any  more  than  the  preceding  scries  concluded  with  the  vision  of  the  eternal 
state.  Neither  does  the  little  open  book  conclude  with  Armageddon.  Like  the 
sealing  and  palm-bearing  visions,  it  is  a  parenthesis  revealed  within  the  limits 
of  the  sixth  trumpet,  instead  of  following  the  seventh  trumpet.  The  reader  will, 
therefore,  see  the  immense  importance  of  steadily  resisting  the  too  common  error 
as  to  the  sixth  seal,  and  will  understand  why  I  have  run  the  risk  of  repeating 
its  confutation  too  frequently. 


THE   LAMB   DISAPPEARS.  171 

sent  judgments.     Their  sound  or  summons  is  quite  plain  and 
urgent.     They  appeal  far  more  unmistakably  to  men. 

But  there  is  another  remarkable  difference  and  of  a  more 
spiritual  nature.  The  Lamb  disappears  under  these  new  scenes. 
The  Lord  Jesus  is  not  spoken  of  in  that  point  of  view  while 
these  destructive  judgments  run  their  course.  This  supposes 
and  marks  a  great  change,  and  we  have  to  enquire  what  God 
would  have  us  to  gather  from  it.  If  the  Lord  Jesus  is  introduced 
at  all,  it  is  in  another  guise  or  aspect,  and  not  as  the  Lamb.  It  is 
not  the  Lamb  that  takes  the  golden  censer,  but  an  angel.  I  do 
not  deny  that  Christ  is  referred  to,  but  it  is  in  His  angelic  con- 
nexion, or  at  least  in  an  angelic  form.  He  is  presented  in  a 
more  distant  way  than  ever  the  church  or  the  Christian,  as 
such,  knows  Him  in.  In  Heb.  ii.  we  find  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
reasons  upon  the  fact  of  Christ's  having  taken  the  place  of  man. 
"■  For  verily  he  took  not  on  him  [the  nature  of]  angels,"  &c.  In 
our  version  the  expression  is  too  strong  and  the  italics  a  mistake. 
The  meaning  is  that  He  did  not  take  up  the  angels  :  they  were 
not  the  object  of  God's  calling  nor  of  His  redemption.  Jesus 
took  hold  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  (as  it  is  given  correctly  in 
the  margin),  and  because  of  this,  "Forasmuch  as  the  children 
are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  likewise  took 
part  of  the  same."  He  did  not  undertake  the  cause  of  angels. 
He  stands  in  no  such  relationship  towards  them.  Still  there  is 
nothing,  as  it  seems  to  me,  to  contradict  the  idea  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  may  be  and  is  intended  in  chapter  viii.  as  the  officiating 
angel  at  the  altar;  for  indeed  He  is  the  Head  of  everything, 
the  head  of  all  principality  and  power.  Why,  then,  might  He 
not  be  viewed  here  in  exalted,  angelic  glory?  The  personage 
spoken  of  acts  as  the  angel-priest.  Undoubtedly  it  is  not  thus 
that  He  has  to  do  with  the  heavenly  saints,  and  that  He  minis- 
ters before  God  for  us.  But  then  the  Lord,  at  the  point  of  time 
to  which  we  are  come  in  the  prophecy,  has  entirely  done  with 
His  ministration  for  the  partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling,  at 
least  so  far  as  provision  for  their  failure  is  concerned;  but  we 
learn  His  interest  in  another  class  of  saints — in  "all  the  saints" 
of  course — who  will  be  upon  the  earth  when  the  church  has 
been  taken  up  to  heaven. 


172  DIFFERENCK   AS    TO   SUFFERING. 

There  is  less  introduction  here  of  the  suffering  saints  of  God 
than  anywhere  else.  The  judgments  fall  almost  entirely  upon 
the  world,  upon  men  in  their  circumstances  and  persons,  and 
finally  upon  men  in  their  responsible  relationship  to  God. 
Outwardly  the  saints  would  seem  to  be  mixed  up  with  them. 
This  accounts  for  the  absence  of  the  Lamb ;  for  wherever  He 
appears  as  such  in  the  book  of  the  Eevelation,  it  is  Christ  in 
His  character  of  the  holy  and  earth-rejected  sufferer.  Accord- 
ingly, the  Lamb  is  peculiarly  brought  .out  where  there  are 
sufferers  mentioned.  For  that  word  remains  always  true,  that 
"  when  he  putteth  forth  his  own  sheep,  he  goeth  before  them." 
He  never  puts  them  in  a  path  of  which  He  has  not  tasted  the 
bitterest  sorrow  before  them.  Here  lie  retires,  as  it  were,  and 
is  only  seen  in  comparatively  distant,  angelic  glory. 

Eemark  also  how  full  of  symbols  the  chapter  is,  and,  from 
the  first  trumpet,  of  how  external  a  kind.  Everywhere  mys- 
teriousness  prevails.  It  is  not  God  opening  out  His  heart  of 
complacency  in  those  He  loves.  Whenever  this  is  the  subject. 
He  speaks  as  it  were  face  to  face.  He  is  simple  and  explicit. 
Without  leaving  this  book,  take  for  instance  chap.  xiv.  There 
He  is  going  to  speak  of  persons  who  were,  or  were  to  be,  exposed 
to  all  sorts  of  trials,  because  of  association  with  Jesus ;  and  the 
first  thing  that  we  see  on  the  mount  Sion  is  the  Lamb,  and  the 
portion  of  the  wicked  follows  in  the  most  distinct  manner.  So 
again  in  chap.  xii.  "  they  overcame  him  [the  dragon-accuser]  by 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb  and  by  the  word  of  their  testimony  ; 
and  they  loved  not  their  lives  unto  death."  But  here  we  have 
God's  dealings  with  the  world,  and  the  scantiest  notice  of  His 
own  people  as  a  separate  class ;  and  as  the  world  has  no  claim 
on  God,  whatever  His  mercy  to  it,  as  the  wotld  has  no  tie  with 
Him  and  only  despises  His  love,  so  God  speaks  but  of  His 
earthly  judgments  in  forms  more  and  more  a\.ful.  He  does  not 
bring  iicrsotis  so  distinctly  forward  as  in  other  scenes  ;  and  thus, 
as  I  conceive,  even  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  therefore  not 
set  forth  evidently.  For  here,  as  elsewhere,  we  find  that  there 
is  the  most  surprising  harmony  governing  all  scripture,  when 
once  the  key  to  it  is  seen. 

First  of  all  there  are  the  angels  standing  before  God,  and  tlicy 


THE   ANGEL -PRIEST.  173 

take  their  trumpets,  the  seventh  seal  being  a  sort  of  preparation, 
or  a  signal,  for  a  renewed  course  and  another  class  of  judgment. 
But  before  this  begins  we  have  an  angel-priest.  There  are  those 
to  whom  God  is  faithful,  for  His  eyes  are  over  tlie  righteous, 
and  His  ears  open  to  their  prayers  ;  but  the  face  of  the  Lord  is 
against  them  that  do  evil.  Though  there  may  be  but  a  passing 
glimpse  at  the  saints,  yet  God  would  never  have  us  to  forget  that 
even  at  this  time  there  are  objects  of  His  care  on  the  earth. 

"And  another  angel  came  and  stood  at  the  altar,  having 
a  golden  censer;  and  there  was  given  him  much  incense." 
Wherever  the  altar  occurs  without  qualification,  it  invariably 
means,  I  believe,  the  brazen  altar — the  first  means  or  point  of 
contact  between  God  and  men  on  earth.  There  the  holocaust 
was  burnt,  and  the  other  offerings  of  sweet  savour ;  thence  was 
the  fire  taken,  in  order  to  cause  the  incense  to  ascend  from  its 
appropriate  altar  in  the  holy  place.  And  this,  as  it  flows  from 
or  agrees  with  the  rest  of  scripture,  so  it  is  in  perfect  accord 
with  its  uses  in  the  Eevelation  (chap.  vi.  9;  xi.  1 ;  xiv.  18  ;  xvi. 
7).  Where  the  altar  of  iucense  is  in  question,  it  is  characterized 
as  "  the  golden  altar"  before  the  throne,  or  before  God  (chap, 
viii.  3  ;  ix.  13).  Both  are  referred  to  here.  Had  the  same  altar 
been  intended  in  the  beginning  as  in  the  end  of  verse  3,  tlie 
full  description  would  surely  have  been  furnished  at  the  first 
mention  rather  than  at  the  second.  Nor  is  there  more  difficulty 
as  to  seeing  the  great  altar  in  the  heavenly  vision  here,  than  the 
sea  or  laver  in  chap.  iv. ;  for  according  to  the  Jewish  type  they 
were  equally  in  the  court.  At  this  altar  then  which  connected 
the  fire  with  the  offering  and  acceptance  of  Christ,  the  angel 
stood  with  the  golden  censer  pertaining  to  the  holy  of  holies. 
The  very  phrase  conveys  to  my  mind  that  it  was  not  his  usual 
place  :  he  came  and  stood  there.  In  the  authorised  version  it  is 
said  of  the  incense  "that  he  should  offer  it  with  the  prayers," 
&c.  But  if  we  take  the  phrase  as  it  is  given  in  chap,  xi.,  the 
sense  becomes  plainer  and  more  just.  There  we  read  (ver.  3), 
"  I  will  (jim  power  unto  my  two  witnesses."  Now  it  is  exactly  the 
same  form  of  expression  hero,  and  moans  that  He  should  give 
fovjcr  to  the  prayers  or  render  them  efficacious.  "And  the 
smoke  of  the  incense  which  came  with  the  prayers  of  the  saints 


174  EFFECT   OF   INTERCESSION   HERE. 

ascended  up  before  God,"  &c.  (ver.  4.)  What  is  the  effect  of 
the  prayers  and  the  incense  ?  All  would  feel  that  the  Holy- 
Ghost  does  not  lead  persons  to  pray  for  what  is  contrary  to  the 
mind  of  God,  though  when  a  mistaken  prayer  is  offered,  He 
will  listen  in  His  long-suffering,  and  knows  how  to  teach  His 
children  the  foolishness  of  such  requests.  But  none  can  say 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  ever  suggested  or  sustained  a  prayer  which 
was  not  according  to  God's  purpose.  Observe  also  that  incense 
out  of  the  angel's  hand  accorDj)anies  these  prayers  of  the  saints, 
and  they  are  offered  up  to  God. 

But  the  fifth  verse  records  a  new  action :  "  And  the  angel 
took  the  censer  and  filled  it  with  fire  of  the  altar."  Surely  this 
is  the  brazen  altar,  where  not  the  incense  but  the  fire  was 
burning.  The  result  is,  not  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  work  comes 
up  before  God  in  more  and  more  sweetness  (as  we  see  in  the 
case  of  the  offerings  put  on  tlie  brazen  altar  in  Leviticus),  but 
that  here  the  fire  was  cast  into  the  earth,  and  immediately 
followed  "  thunderiugs,  and  lightnings,  and  voices,  and  an 
earthquake."  So  that  thus  we  find  evidently  prayer  of  another 
character  and  with  a  different  effect  produced — nay,  the  very 
priest  himself  viewed  in  another  manner,  as  compared  with 
what  is  going  on  now.  For  us  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  has 
passed  through  the  heavens,  a  High  Priest  who  was  in  all  points 
tempted  like  us,  apart  from  sin.  He  died  for  our  sins.  He  can 
sympathize  with  our  infirmities,  having  suffered  to  the  utmost 
both  in  temptation  and  atonement.  Our  God  also  is  on  a 
throne  of  grace,  whence  mercy  and  grace  come  forth  to  help  in 
time  of  need.  (Heb,  iv.)  Again,  our  attitude  towards  those 
without  is  akin ;  and  hence  supplications,  prayers,  intercessions 
and  giving  of  thanks,  are  and  ought  to  be  made  for  all  men. 

But  here  is  not  mercy  but  judgment;  for  though  there  may 
be  the  incense  and  the  prayers  of  saints,  the  immediate  issue 
is  that  the  symbols  of  God's  judgments  are  seen  taking  effect 
through  the  earth.  There  is  perfect  congruity  in  all  the  scenes 
that  are  portrayed  here.  Although  a  priest,  and  saints,  and 
an  altar  (both  altars,  as  it  seems  to  me),  and  incense,  and  the 
censer,  and  the  fire  are  all  found  in  due  order,  yet  it  is  in 
communion  with  God  chastising  the  earth :  hence  too  the  place 


"ALL   THE   SAINTS."  175 

of  comparative  distance  already  noticed.  If  the  Lord  is  brought 
out  at  all,  it  is  as  an  angel  and  not  in  His  full  dignity  as  the  Son 
of  God  consecrated  for  evermore.  Of  course  He  is  always  the 
Son  of  God,  but  He  has  other  dignities  beside,  and  here  the 
prophetic  vision  presents  Him  in  a  totally  different  title  and 
glory. 

Again  does  it  not  seem  an  unintelligent  inference,  be  it 
made  by  HistoricaHst  or  by  Futurist,  that  "  all  the  saints  "  is  a 
phrase  which  necessarily  involves  the  conclusion  that  the 
church  of  God  is  meant  ?  The  question  must  be  judged  by  the 
convictions  we  have  as  to  the  bearing  of  all  this  part  of  the 
book.  And  it  has  been  abundantly  shewn  that,  ever  since 
chapter  iv.  began,  the  church  is  viewed  as  already  and  wholly 
glorified  in  heaven.  Hence  the  church  is  really  out  of  the 
question  here,  and  these  are  all  the  saints  on  earth  subsequently 
for  whom  deliverance  is  prepared.  The  angel  offers  their  prayers, 
and  judgment  on  earth  for  their  deliverance  is  the  reply.  The 
ordinary  reasoning  is  therefore  beside  the  mark.  All  the  saints 
are  of  course  the  Lord's  people — a  converted  class,  Jewish  or 
Gentile.  That  this  is  what  scripture  calls  christians  or  the  church 
is  another  matter,  which  the  objectors  would  do  well  to  inquire 
into. 

"  And  the  seven  angels  that  had  the  seven  trumpets  prepared 
themselves  to  sound.  And  the  first  sounded,  and  there  followed 
hail  and  fire  mingled  with  blood,"  &c.  The  general  bearing  of 
this  is  apparent.  These  things  are  not  to  be  taken  in  their  mere 
obvious  or  physical  drift.  Supposing  one  looks  at  such  a  thing 
literally  as  a  mountain  falling  into  the  sea  (verse  8),  would  it 
ever  turn  the  water  into  blood  ?  Nothing  of  the  sort.  The  fact 
is  that  these  were  pictures  that  passed  before  the  eyes  of  the 
prophet.  What  the  figures  meant  we  have  to  gather  from  the 
general  tenor  of  the  word,  by  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit.  I  presume 
that  even  the  prophet  himself  had  to  learn  their  meaning  from 
the  scriptures.  For  here  we  have  St.  John,  not  in  the  place  of 
one  before  whom  all  was  naked  and  open  and  at  once  under- 
stood, but  rather  simply  as  a  Seer.  He  is  not  necessarily  able, 
as  a  matter  of  course,  to  enter  fully  into  all  that  is  passing  be- 
fore him,  but  has  need  to  mark,  learn,  and  inwardly  digest.   We 


176        GROUND  AND  CHARACTER  OF  TROPHECY. 

come  in  the  Apocalypse  to  the  ground  of  prophecy,  and  this  is 
a  different  region  from  that  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  opens  out 
to  us  the  things  of  Christ  in  the  way  of  communion.  Indeed 
what  is  told  us  of  the  prophet  John  himself  throughout  the 
book  shews  tliat  he  did  not  always  nor  of  necessity  appreciate 
the  meaning  of  that  wliich  he  beheld  in  the  Spirit.  In  other 
words  he  saw  a  sort  of  panorama,  and  recorded  the  visions  just 
as  they  appeared  to  himself;  and  we  liave  to  use  the  word  of 
God  by  the  Spirit  to  know  what  the  symbols  imply.  We  are 
not  to  suppose  that  the  event  itself  will  be  a  mere  formal  repe- 
tition of  what  the  prefiguration  was,  but  a  reality  answering  to 
the  foreseen  shadow,* 

*  The  excessive  fancifulncss  and  uncertainty  of  the  schemes  of  interpreting 
the  trumpets,  especially  of  those  who  deny  that  they  follow  the  seals  and  attempt 
to  deduce  a  stream  parallel  to  them,  may  be  gleaned  from  the  subjoined  sketch 
drawn  up  by  one  of  the  ablest  of  themselves.  "  It  will  be  enough  to  select  nine 
or  ten  commentators,  of  considerable  eminence  and  reputation,  that  the  diversity 
of  their  views,  in  detail,  may  be  seen ;  while  there  is  uniform  agreement  in  the 
main  idea,  that  these  trumpets  denote  political  judgments  which  fell  in  the  early 
ages  on  the  Roman  empire.  Let  us  compare  Mede,  Cressencr,  Sir  Isaac  Newton, 
Whiston,  and  Lowman  ;  and  of  living  authors,  Mr.  Faber,  Mr.  Cuninghamc, 
Mr.  Frere,  and  Dr.  Keith,  with  the  last  of  whom  Mr.  Elliott  nearly  agrees  in  the 
arrangement  of  this  jjart  of  the  prophecy.  The  first  trumpet  l/e</i>is,  according 
to  Lowman,  in  the  time  of  Constaniiue ;  according  to  Mr.  Cuninghamc  and 
Mr.  Frere,  with  the  dea/h  of  Valentinian,  a.d.  376,  and  cuds  with  the  death  of 
Theodosius,  a.d.  395.  But  Mede,  Newton,  Dr.  Keith,  and  Mr.  Elliott,  make  it 
beffin  with  the  deafh  of  T/icodosius,  and  reach  to  the  death  of  Alaric,  a.d.  410. 
Crcsscner  and  Whiston  include  in  it  both  periods.  Mr.  Faber  agrees  with 
Mode  and  Newton  in  its  commencement,  but  continues  it  fort;/  years  after 
Alaric's  death,  a.d.  395-450.  The  second,  according  to  Lowman,  Mr.  Cuning- 
hame,  and  Mr.  Frere,  reaches  from  Theoditsius  to  Alaric,  the  exact  interval  which 
Mede,  Newton,  Dr.  Keith,  and  Mr.  Elliott  assign  to  the  first.  Mede  refers  it  to 
iho  fall  of  the  Roman  sovereignty,  a.d.  410-465;  Cressencr,  to  the  Transalpine 
invasions,  a.d.  410-448;  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  to  the  ViKir/oths  and  Vandals,  407- 
427  ;  Whiston,  Mr.  Faber,  and  Dr.  Keith,  to  the  Vandals  only,  but  within  diflFer- 
ont  limits,  a.d.  407-450,  439-447,  and  429-477  respectively.  The  third  trumpet 
by  Sir  Isaac  Newton  is  applied  to  the  Vandals,  a.d.  427-430 ;  by  Whiston,  Mr. 
Cuninghamc,  and  Dr.  Keith,  to  Attilr  and  the  Jlniis,  a.d.  441-462;  by  Mode, 
Cressencr,  and  Lowman,  to  tho  troubles  of  Italy,  or  settinr/  of  the  Western  Casar, 
A.D.  450-470;  by  Mr.  Faber,  to  tho  same,  ^vithin  narrow  limits,  a.d.  462-47G; 
and  by  Mr.  Frere,  to  the  Ncstorian  heresy.  Lastly,  tho  fourth  is  referred  by 
Mr.  Cuningliame  to  tho  fall  of  the  empire,  a.d.  455-476;  by  AVlnVton,  to  the 
extinction  itself,  a.d.  476  ;  by  Mede,  Crossonor,  Lowman,  and  Dr.  Keith 
to  tho  subsequent  eclipse  of  Some,  a.d.  476-540;  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  to  the 
wars  of  Belisarius,  a.d.  535-552 ;  by  Mr.  Faber  and  Mr.  Frere,  to  the  reign 


THE   FIRST   TRUMPET.  177 

Tlius,  when  the  first  blast  is  sounded,  there  comes  a  violent 
tempest  of  hail  and  fire  mingled  with  blood — the  blood  dis- 
tinguishing it  from  all  previous  storms,  as  being  beyond  nature. 
This  betokened  or  ushered  in  a  furious,  sanguinary,  and  de- 
structive outburst  that  would  agitate  and  rage  over  its  sphere. 
"And  the  third*  of  the  earth  was  burnt  up,  and  the  third  of 

of  Phocas  and  the  Persian  invasion  of  the  East,  a.d.  602-610.  The  remark  of 
Mr.  Faber  on  these  dififercnces,  in  earlier  writers,  is  very  natural  and  just. 
'  While  they  agree  that  the  downfall  of  the  Roman  power  in  the  West  is  at 
least  the  most  prominent  object  of  the  prophecy,  scarcely  any  two  expositors 
concur  as  to  the  division  of  that  subject  among  the  several  trumpets,  that  are 
supposed  to  relate  to  it.  The  general  result  brought  out  is  the  subversion  of  the 
Western  empire,  but  the  particular  steps  are  as  multifarious  and  discordant  as 
can  well  be  imagined.  So  curious  a  circumstance  may  well  be  deemed  the 
opprobrium  of  Apocalyptic  interpretation,  and  may  naturaUj'  load  us  to  suspect 
that  the  true  key  to  the  distinct  application  of  .the  four  first  trumpets  has  never 
yet  been  found,  or,  if  found,  has  never  yet  been  satisfactorily  used.'  The 
natural  inference  from  this  strange  variety  of  opinion  among  the  best  expositors 
is,  that  the  historical  divisions  thny  have  adopted  or  assumed  are  dim  and  vague, 
when  compared  with  the  distinctness  of  the  emblems  in  the  four  trumpets." — 
BLrks'  Mysterij  of  Frovide)ice,  pp.  103,  104.  I  must  add,  however,  that  few  have 
exceeded  Mr.  B.  in  the  loose  rein  ho  has  allowed  himself  in  applying  this  chapter. 
Verses  2-4  are  called  the  season  of  intercession,  and  are  applied  to  the  time 
from  Nerva  till  after  Aurelius  (a.d.  86-180) — why  then,  more  than  at  any  other 
epoch,  does  not  clearly  appear.  Then  verses  5,  6,  are  the  warning  and  prepara- 
tion (a.d.  181-248) ;  next,  verse  7,  the  first  trumpet  (a.d.  250-268),  with  an 
imaginary  pause  of  judgment  (a.d.  270-365) ;  verses  8,  9,  the  second  (a.d.  365- 
476) ;  verses  10, 11,  the  third  (a.d.  431-565)  ;  verse  12,  the  fourth  (a.d.  540-622). 
Verse  13  might  be  thought  to  denote  at  least  as  much  as  the  invisible  pause  of 
j  ndgment  between  verses  7  and  8,  but  it  is  passed  by  without  any  chronological 
notice.  Indeed,  the  first  woo  is  made  to  trench  even  upon  the  fourth  trumpet, 
being  dated  a.d.  609-1063,  as  the  second  a.d.  1037-1453.  But  I  have  reason  to 
believe  the  author  has  abandoned  it,  and  now  in  the  main  coalesces  with  Mr. 
Elliott. 

*  "The  third"  is  an  expression  often  occui-ring  in  the  first  four  trumpets. 
It  refers,  as  I  conceive,  to  the  Wistcrn  part  of  the  Roman  empire.  In  chapter 
ix.  wc  find  it  again  in  a  different  connexion  where  it  must  be  modified  in  mean- 
ing ;  for  there  can  be  no  doubt,  I  think,  that  the  first  two  woe-trumpets  (what- 
ever may  be  thought  of  the  last)  find  their  local  application  in  the  East,  In 
fact,  this  is  so  clear  that  one  writer  of  our  day  would  rule  the  use  of  the  phrase 
in  chapter  viii.  by  its  undoubted  oriental  (or,  as  he  perhaps  would  call  it,  Greek) 
reference  in  the  following  chapter.  But  this  is  obviously  illegitimate,  and  the 
ordinal  allusion  to  the  third  emblem  of  Daniel  is  an  error.  In  itself  "  the  third" 
defines  nothing,  save  that  there  is  a  tri-partite  division.  It  is  equally  appli- 
cable to  any  of  the  three  parts :  to  ascertain  which  particularly  is  meant,  wc 
must  take  the  context  into  account. 

N 


178  THE   SECOND   TKUMJ'ET. 

the  trees  was  burnt  up,  and  all  green  grass  was  burnt  up"  (verse 
7).  This  evidcntlydoes  not  refer  to  the  literal  earth,  trees,  or 
herbage.  In  scripture  grass  is  the  symbol  connnonly  used  to 
denote  man  in  his  weakness,  his  very  glory  being  like  the  flower 
of  grass.  Human  prosperity  then  would  be  set  fortli  by  green 
grass.  Here  we  have  a  judgment  of  God  upon  it.  Not  a  certain 
part  only,  however  large,  but  the  whole  of  it  is  destroyed.  The 
trees  represent  such  as  are  high  and  exalted  among  men.  It  is  a 
very  connuon  symbol  in  the  word  of  God  to  express  those  that 
are  deeply  rooted,  with  a  lofty  bearing  and  extensive  influence 
here  below.  (Look  for  instance  at  Ezek.  xxxi.  3  ;  Dan.  iv.,  &c.) 
Thus,  then,  a  blow  is  struck  at  a  defined  part  of  the  scene  of 
God's  moral  dealings ;  and  both  the  low  universally,  and  the 
higher  classes  to  a  large  extent,  feel  the  ruinous  effects. 

The  second  blow  supposes  a  great  change ;  it  falls  on  the  sea, 
and  so  refers  not  to  that  sphere  which  is  under  special  and 
settled  government,  but  to  what  is  or  will  then  be  in  a  state  of 
confusion  and  anarchy.  The  nations  which  are  in  this  condition 
do  not  remain  scatheless.  "  And  the  second  angel  sounded  :  and 
as  it  were  a  great  mountain  burning  with  fire  was  cast  into  the 
sea ;  and  the  third  of  the  sea  became  blood ;  and  tlie  third  of 
the  creatures  whicli  were  in  the  sea,  that  had  life,  tlied ;  and  tlie 
third  of  tlie  ships  were  destroyed  "  If  Jeremiah  be  consulted, 
it  will  be  seen  that  these  tilings  arc  not  explained  arbitrarily  or 
out  of  mere  imagination.  As  this  is  not  so  common  a  judg- 
ment, it  would  seem  that  God  deigns  to  furnish  us  witli  another 
example ;  for  just  where  we  should  be  likely  to  make  mistakes, 
there  God  conies  in  with  light  and  instruction.  The  "  mountain 
burning  with  fire"  represents  a  system  of  power,  itself  under 
the  judgment  of  God  and  the  occasion  of  judgment  to  otliers. 
In  Jer.  li.  25  it  is  said,  "  IJehold,  I  am  against  thee,  0  destroying 
mountain,  saith  the  Lord,  which  destroy  est  all  the  earth ;  and  I 
will  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  thee,  and  roll  thee  down  from 
the  rocks,  and  will  make  thee  a  burnt  mountain."  There  we 
have  what  answers,  in  some  measure,  to  what  we  have  here. 
Babylon,  in  Jeremiah,  was  to  be  "a  burnt  mountain,"  hurled 
down  from  its  place  of  eminence.  Here  the  mountain  is  said  to  be 
"  burning."    Babylon  was  itself  to  be  as  a  consumed  or  deaUoyed 


A   MOUNTAIN    SYMBOLICALLY.  179 

Tiiountain.  Here  the  mountain  is  the  means  of  destroying 
others,  as  in  the  Jewish  prophet :  "  0  destroying  mountain, 
saith  the  Lord,  wliicli  de.stroyest  all  the  eai-th." 

A  mountain  is  regularly  the  symbol  of  settled  and  exalted 
power;  but  here  it  is  cast  into  thie  sea,  because  it  is  made  the 
means  of  judgment  to  others,  and  not  merely  the  object  of  judg- 
ment itself.  The  Lord  Jesus  Himself  uses  a  part  of  the  figure 
with  regard  to  Israel.  Seeing  a  fig-tree  with  nothing  but  leaves, 
He  pronounced  that  no  fruit  should  grow,  nor  man  eat  of  it 
henceforward  for  ever.  He  had  come  and  found  no  fruit  upon 
it,  only  abundance  of  leaves.  And  presently  the  fig-tree  withered 
away.  Now  almost  every  person  who  has  read  the  word  of  God 
with  care  has  viewed  that  fig-tree  as  the  .symbol  of  Israel,  re- 
sponsible to  bear  fruit  unto  God,  but  completely  failing  to  do 
so.  The  fig-tree  was  figurative  of  "  that  generation,"  and  in 
connexion  with  this  the  Lord  says  to  His  disciples,  "ye  shall 
not  only  do  this  ....  but  also  if  ye  shall  say  unto  this  moun- 
tain. Be  thou  removed,  and  be  thou  cast  into  the  sea,  it  shall  be 
done."  And  so  it  was  done ;  for  no  sooner  had  the  apostles' 
testimony  gone  out  to  Lsrael,  and  Israel  had  utterly  rejected 
what  the  Holy  Ghost  preached  to  them  therein,  than  judgment 
came  upon  tliern.  It  was  not  merely  that  they  bore  no  fruit,  but 
there  was  a  positive  judgment  and  an  uprooting  from  where  they 
were.  The  mountain  was  cast  into  the  sea;  the  place  and  nation 
of  Israel  completely  disappeared  in  the  mass  of  the  Gentiles. 
This  was  much  more  than  their  merely  ceasing  to  produce  fruit. 
Their  polity  was  broken  up  and  completely  vanislied,  just  as 
much  as  a  mountain  would  be  that  was  torn  up  from  its  base 
and  cast  into  the  sea. 

So  here  a  great  power,  that  seemed  to  be  settled,  is  removed 
from  its  place,  and  that  power  is  not  so  much  shattered  itself 
as  it  is  made  the  means  of  suffering  to  others.  It  is  burning 
with  fire,  and  the  consequence  is  destruction  to  the  third  of 
living  creatures  and  ships  in  the  sea,  the  whole  being  a  figure 
taken  from  what  would  be  the  effect  of  a  volcano  cast  into  the 
sea.  It  is  thus  that  the  Lord  fills  up  the  picture  of  destruction 
by  a  great  consuming  power  that  falls  upon  confused  masses  of 
people,  with  human  carnage  and  political  anarchy  as  the  result. 

N  2 


180  THIRD   AND    FOURTH   TRUMPETS. 

There  may  be  some  more  precise  meaning,  Lut  I  am  only  pre- 
senting what  little  I  see  of  the  symbols,  independent  of  their 
application  to  a  particular  time,  place,  or  people. 

The  third  judgment  in  the  series  of  the  trumpets  is  of  another 
kind.  "  The  third  angel  sounded,  and  there  fell  a  great  star  from 
heaven,  burning  as  it  were  a  torch,  and  it  fell  upon  the  third  of 
the  rivers,  and  upon  the  fountains  of  the  waters  ;  and  the  name 
of  the  star  is  called  Wormwood :  and  the  third  of  the  waters 
became  wormwood ;  and  many  of  the  men  died  of  the  waters, 
because  they  were  made  bitter."  Now  a  star,  as  we  have  seen  in 
an  earlier  chapter,  though  in  another  connexion  (chap.  i.  20),  is 
the  figure  of  one  who  holds  a  place  of  subordinate  authority — 
one  who  may  give  light  to  others — suljject  himself  to  another, 
but  still  ruling.  Here  it  is  a  degraded  ruler,  a  dignitary  fallen 
from  his  place  of  authority.  Waters  are  the  symbol  of  people 
unformed,  fountains  are  the  sources  of  their  refreshment,  and  a 
river  that  which  characterises  their  course.  A  certain  proportion 
is  tainted  by  the  fall  of  the  star  or  ruler,  which  embitters  what- 
ever it  touches,  and  many  die  because  of  the  waters  being  made 
bitter.  Here  the  infliction  seems  not  so  much  of  a  political  kind 
as  the  previous  judgment;  it  is  rather  the  poisoning  of  all 
that  ought  to  be  the  means  of  blessing  to  man  and  that  concerns 
his  ordinary  life. 

Under  the  fourth  trumpet  there  is  something  higher.  The 
waters  are  poisoned  before;  but  now  we  find  that  the  highest 
authorities  are  touched.  It  is  not  a  star  that  falls  from  heaven, 
but  tlie  third  of  the  sun,  and  the  third  of  tlie  moon,  and  the 
third  of  the  stars  are  smitten  ;  "  that  the  third  of  them  misiht 
be  darkened,  and  the  day  should  not  shine  for  the  third  thereof, 
and  the  night  likewise."  I  apprehend  that  this  is  a  judgment 
of  God  on  the  supreme  as  well  as  the  inferior  authorities  of  the 
world  within  the  given  range,  which  are  all  to  a  certain  extent 
extinguished,  or  at  least  eclipsed. 

An  important  question  now  arises  —  the  proper  fulfilment  of 
these  trumpet  judgments.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  the 
answer  must  depend  on  the  still  larger  issue  of  the  time  and 
condition  to  which  the  prophetic  vision  in  general  applies.  For 
this  is  no  matter  of  detail,  but  of  broad  principle,  and  it  is  not 


THE   APPLICATION.  181 

for  me  to  deny  the  immense  practical  consequences  of  the  true 
application  on  the  one  hand,  or  of  views  which  mislead  on  the 
other.  Believing  that  the  seven  epistles  had  an  immediate  literal 
hearing  on  the  actual  Asiatic  assemblies  of  St.  John's  day,  I 
for  one  cannot  doubt  that  the  seals  prefigured  the  course  of  the 
Roman  Empire  from  that  epoch  onward,  and  that  they  have  thus 
had  an  application  by  no  means  immaterial  (substantially  as  the 
ordinary  historical  system  insists)  down  to  the  overthrow  of 
X^aganism  and  the  nominal  supremacy  of  Christianity,  with  tbe 
natural  results  of  vast  accessions  of  souls  from  Israel  in  a 
measure,  but  far  more  from  the  Gentiles  in  that  sphere  and  day. 
According  to  this  idea,  the  early  trumpets  appear  to  me  almost 
of  necessity  to  refer :  first,  to  the  Gothic  invasions  of  Alaric, 
Rhadagaisus,  &c. ;  secondly,  to  the  depredations  of  Genseric  and 
his  Vandals  ;  thirdly,  to  the  "  scourge  of  God,"  as  Attila  the  Hun 
was  pleased  to  entitle  himself ;  and  fourthly,  to  the  memorable 
era  signalised  by  the  extinction  of  the  Roman  empire  in  the 
west. 

But  fully  allowing  these  intimations  to  be  contained  within 
the  scope  of  the  visions  thus  far,  it  is  to  my  own  mind  manifest 
that  the  seven  epistles  are  stamped  with  the  most  comprehensive 
aims,  and  from  strong  internal  marks  imply  the  varying  phases 
which  the  house  of  God  in  its  protracted  existence  here  below 
would  assume,  till  the  Lord  removes  the  faithful  to  heaven, 
keeping  them  out  of  the  hour  of  temptation  which  awaits  the 
earthly-minded,  and  spueing  out  of  His  mouth  the  self-compla- 
cent mass  of  Christendom.  In  harmony  with  this  continuous 
and  successive  view  of  the  churches,  which  in  one  shape  or 
another  has  commended  itself  to  godly  and  discerning  enquirers 
of  different  ages,  the  most  simple  interpretation  of  chapters  iv. 
and  V.  is,  that  they  suppose  the  rapture  and  glorification  of  the 
church  of  the  firstborn  to  have  taken  place,  and  that  chapters 
vi.  et  seqq.  begin  to  receive  their  grand  fulfilment  subsequent  to 
that  event.  It  is  easy  for  an  ingenious  mind  to  conjure  up  diffi- 
culties and  to  muster  objections  in  formidable  array :  no  part  of 
scripture,  nor  truth  revealed  in  it,  is  exempt  from  exposure  to 
attacks  exactly  similar.  But  nobody  can  deny  that,  going  by  the 
sacred  text  itself,  this  is  the  most  natural  way  of  taking  chaps. 


182  THE   TROPER   OBJECT   OF   THE   PROPHECY, 

iv.  v.,  or  that  the  common  theory  leaves  these  admirable  scriptures 
without  adequate  adaptation  to  the  then  circumstances,  whether 
we  look  at  the  scene  as  a  whole  or  at  the  particular  figures  therein 
exhibited.  Their  occurrence  here,  on  the  ordinary  view,  is  an 
enormous,  unexplained  and  perhaps,  it  may  be  added,  inexpli- 
cable difficulty ;  but  with  the  rapture  of  the  saints,  then  an 
accomplished  fact  as  the  key,  they  are  a  beautiful  and  needed 
preface  to  all  that  follows. 

Nor  this  only ;  for  Eev.  vi.  and  the  chapters  that  succeed 
raise  the  fundamental  question,  whether  churches  or  Christians, 
in  the  proper  sense  of  the  terms,  are  any  longer  involved  in  the 
scenes  they  depict  on  earth,  when  their  full,  and  not  merely  their 
inchoate,  accomplishment  is  in  progress.  Why  should  writers 
on  prophecy,  without  anything  like  reasonable  show  of  evidence, 
assume  the  affirmative  ?  Why  not  prove  it,  if  they  can  ?  The 
more  indispensable  the  point  may  be  to  the  popular  system,  the 
less  satisfactory  to  unbiassed  persons  it  seems  to  find  its  advo- 
cates preserving  a  silence  so  absolute,  not  indeed  as  regards  re- 
iterating and  reasoning  from  that  assumption,  but  as  to  attempting 
a  demonstration.  Who  can  allege  that  the  proposition  is  self- 
evident?  Who  does  not  know  that  there  are  man}'  intelligent 
students  of  the  prophetic  word  who  believe  that  not  the  church 
but  a  godly  Jewish  remnant,  with  Gentiles  converted  but  sepa- 
rate, are  the  parties  contemplated  and  directly  concerned  in  the 
struggles  of  the  latter  day  ?  Is  it  not  worth  discussing  ?  What 
prophetic  question  more  vital  or  more  comprehen,sive  ?  It  would 
not  be  charitable  to  impute  this  singular  reticence  to  a  feeling 
of  contempt  for  their  brethren ;  neither  would  it  be  fair  to  in- 
sinuate that  they  are  conscious  of  their  own  inability  to  give 
some  appearance  of  scriptural  proof  in  favour  of  their  sentiments. 

AVe  deny  that  these  prophecies,  precious  as  they  are  for  our 
profit,  are  fully,  much  less  exclusively,  about  the  church:  if  any 
assert  that  such  is  the  case,  on  them  lies  the  burden  of  proving 
it.  It  is  simply  taken  for  granted.  Would  it  not  be  better  to 
gather  up  and  present,  as  forcibly  as  may  be,  the  evidence  which 
strikes  their  own  minds?  We  appeal  to  tlie  very  scriptures  in 
debate,  some  as  clearly  evincing  a  glorified  condition  of  the 
Christian   body  in  heaven,  before  the  earthly  judicial  events 


JEWS   AND    GENTILES.  183 

transpire,  others  as  clear  that  Jews  and  Gentiles,  distinct  from 
each  other  and  not  associated  in  one  body  like  the  church,  are 
after  this  seen  on  earth,  and  that  they  are  the  real  objects  in 
the  crisis  of  the  close.  If  we  are  right,  a  vast  amount  of  the 
differences  among  those  who  study  the  subject  would  be  decided 
without  further  contest.  Why  then  waste  time  in  the  shallow 
fields  of  Germanising  Praeterists  or  of  Eomanising  Futurists  ? 
Why  not  grapple  with  the  evidence  produced  by  Christians  who 
are,  through  God's  mercy,  at  least  as  far  removed  from  Babylon 
as  the  most  zealous  of  Protestants  can  pretend  to  be  ?  If  this, 
as  I  am  sure,  be  the  sound  and  satisfactory  interpretation,  we  are 
not  compelled  to  bend  the  past  into  a  reluctant  and  far-fetched 
accomplishment,  nor  are  we  at  liberty  to  explain  away  the  fre- 
quent and  obvious  indices  of  the  future.  It  satisfies  all  just 
requirement  that  there  be  an  unforced  and  general  resemblance, 
sufficient  to  shew  the  direct  finger  of  God,  yet  not  such  as  to 
exhaust  the  prediction,  but  rather  to  leave  room  for  a  still  closer 
final  application  when  the  saints,  body  and  soul,  are  above. 

"And  I  beheld  and  heard  an  eagle*  flying  through  mid- 
heaven,  saying  with  a  loud  voice.  Woe,  woe,  woe,  to  the  dwellers 
on  the  earth  by  reason  of  the  other  voices  of  the  trumpet  of  the 
three  angels  which  are  yet  to  sound"  (verse  13).  It  was  an  eagle, 
I  believe,  which  John  saw  here,  an  angel  in  Eev.  xiv.  6,  to  which 
our  verse  may  have  been  assimilated,  if  the  two  words  were  not 
confounded  by  mere  carelessness.  The  eagle's  flight  in  mid- 
heaven  was  the  dark  and  most  suited  harbinger  of  comins  woe. 
Nor  is  there  any  real  difficulty  in  its  loud  utterance ;  for  the 
altar  itself  is,  in  the  true  text,  made  to  speak  in  chapter  xvi.  7. 

We  have  had  the  preliminary  judgments  ushered  in  by  the 
first  four  trumpets.  They  dealt,  to  a  certain  extent,  with  man's 
prosperity  high  or  low — first,  in  the  settled  ordered  system,  and 

*  Mr.  E.  refers  after  Zullig  to  the  "learned  critic"  Wolf's  preference  of  the 
common  text.  I  doubt  that  he  would  have  cited  such  an  auxiliary,  if  he  had  been 
aware  that  the  main  object  of  the  Curae  Philol.  seems  to  be  the  maintenance  of 
the  received  readings  against  the  best  authorities,  and  esi^ecially  in  opposition 
to  Bengel.  Besides,  he  is  far  from  positive  in  this,  though  greatly  suspecting 
aiTov.  "  Quod  si  tamen  aquilae  mentio  facta  censeri  debeat,  malim  omnino  cum 
Seideliano  codice  et  Primasio  legere  ayyeXou  wg  atrov  ireTwukvov." — (C.  P.,  vol. 
V.  p.  514.) 


184  DIVISION   OF  TRUMPETS. 

next  in  a  state  of  confusion;  then  the  blow  fell  on  the  means 
of  human  enjoyment,  turned  into  bitterness  and  destruction; 
and  lastly,  the  whole  fabric  of  political  rule,  supreme  and  sub- 
ordinate, has  to  suffer  a  notable  eclipse.*  Thus,  it  was  a  judg- 
ment of  circumstances,  rather  than  a  personal  visitation.  But 
we  also  see  a  closing  intimation  of  still  deeper  iniiictions,  marked 
off  in  the  most  definite  way  from  the  series  that  preceded : 
"  Woe,  woe,  woe,  to  those  that  dwell  on  the  earth,"  &c.  The  un- 
sealed do  not  escape  in  the  first;  the  third  of  men  are  killed  in 

*  I  know  but  must  demur  to  the  reasoning  of  Mr.  E.  in  behalf  of  the  suppo- 
sition that  the  literal  and  the  symbolical  are  mingled  in  these  trumpets.  The 
general  examples  of  figure  and  fact  from  Ps.  xxii.  prove  nothing  for  such  a  book 
as  the  Apocalypse.  The  real  question,  as  he  feels  himself,  is  one  of  .admitting 
literal  geography  into  obviously  symbolical  prophecies.  So,  again,  an  incidental 
allusion  (as  in  Ezek.  xxvii.  26 ;  xxxii.  6,  7 ;  Ps.  Ixxx.  8,  11 ;  Jer.  iii.  6,)  is  not 
fairly  to  be  compared  with  an  elaborate  orderly  series  of  symbolical  images,  as 
in  our  prophecy,  where  earth  and  sea  have  a  definite  meaning,  quite  independent 
of  literal  locality ;  the  former  referring  to  the  scene  of  settled  government,  and 
the  latter  to  a  state  of  anarchy  (cf.  Rev.  xii.  12  ;  xiii.  2,  11).  Indeed,  the  in- 
stances of  Rev.  xiii.  are  admitted  on  all  hands.  It  is  most  natural,  therefore,  to 
adhere  to  the  same  sense  of  the  prophetic  language  in  our  chapter.  The  mean- 
ing afforded  also  seems  simple  and  excellent,  without  the  incongruous  mixture 
contended  for.  And  as  we  saw  under  the  seals,  so  here  in  the  trumpet  series,  the 
fourth,  not  to  speak  of  the  third,  presents  an  insuperable  barrier.  For  surely, 
we  must  take  the  heavenly  luminaries  in  a  homogeneous  sense  ;  and  how  then 
can  these  be  understood  literally  ?  The  occurrence  of  the  figure  in  the  woe- 
trumpets  would  not  have  been  so  conclusive ;  for  a  difference  there  is,  when  we 
enter  on  the  fifth  trumpet.  But  it  is  in  the  fourth  that  we  have  sun,  moon,  and 
stars  smitten.  If  these,  then,  arc  confessedly  symbolical,  why  cut  the  thread  of 
consistency  ?  why  not  interpret  the  three  preceding  trumpets,  as  to  land,  sea, 
river,  and  fountains,  in  a  kindred  spirit  ?  The  solo  reason  I  can  conceive  for  the 
opposite  course  is  the  dilBculty  that  is  found  in  adapting  the  successive  inroads 
of  the  barbarians,  in  a  sufficiently  definite  form,  to  the  various  tnmipet-blasts. 
But  even  so,  what  ineftectual  effort  and  uncertainty  after  all !  If  I  imderstand 
the  llorue  A.,  i.  in  loco,  "the  burning  of  trees  and  herbage"  is  viewed  physically 
by  one  who  is  generally  the  intrepid  antagonist  of  literalism  in  the  mouths  of 
his  Futurist  friends.  Why  not  exjTOund  tlie  burning  of  the  third  of  the  earth, 
which  critics  admit  must  bo  received  into  the  text  ?  Taken  figiu-ativcly,  all  is 
easy  and  plain,  as  well  as  harmonious.  Again,  if  the  thunders,  lightnings, 
voices,  and  earthquake  in  chapter  viii.  5  are  answered  by  the  primary  insurrec- 
tion of  the  Goths  under  Alaric,  immediately  after  the  death  of  Theodosius  the 
Great,  what  is  the  analogous  reference  of  the  lightnings,  voices,  and  thimdors  of 
chapter  iv.  6  '(  Mr.  Birks  has  urged  repeated  inst^mces  where  the  prefiguration 
ill  accords  with  Mr.  E.'s  alleged  fulfilment  in  history  ;  but  I  am  not  careful  to 
insist  on  such  points. 


THE   DWELLERS    ON   EARTH.  185 

the  second.    Under  the  last  we  come,  in  a  general  way,  to  the 
end  of  all. 

"The  dwellers  on  earth"  may  have  a  local  significance,  especially 
during  the  great  final  crisis.  But  it  appears  to  me  that  a  survey 
of  the  various  occurrences  of  the  phrase  warrants  the  conclusion 
that  a  moral  force  is  the  chief  and  most  prominent  intention  of 
the  Spirit.  Twice  has  it  been  seen  in  the  Apocalypse  before 
this,  and  it  plays  an  increasingly  grave  part  as  we  draw  near 
the  close.  First  it  is  found  in  the  epistle  to  the  angel  of  the 
church  in  Philadelphia,  where  the  Lord  promises  to  keep  those 
who  kept  the  word  of  His  patience,  from  the  hour  of  temptation, 
which  is  to  come  upon  all  the  habitable  world,  to  try  them  that 
dwell  on  the  earth.  (Eev.  iii.  10.)  The  reason,  I  suppose,  why  the 
earthly-minded  are  brought  out  so  distinctly  there  is,  because  the 
church  in  question  supposes  an  unusual  apprehension  of  Christ, 
and  this  in  a  heavenly  way,  both  as  to  present  enjoyment  of 
Him,  and  as  to  the  hope  of  His  return.  Hence  the  contrast  of 
the  portion  of  tliose  whose  hearts  were  here  below.  They  shall 
eat  the  bitter  fruit  of  their  choice  when  the  great  tribulation 
comes,  as  those  whose  affections  are  set  on  heavenly  things  will 
then  actually  be  where  they  dwell  now  in  spirit.  Next  under 
the  fifth  seal  (Kev.  vi.  10)  the  souls  of  the  early  Apocalyptic 
sufferers  are  represented  as  calling  upon  the  Sovereign  Lord  to 
judge  and  avenge  their  blood  on  "them  that  dwell  on  the  earth." 
These  will  then  have  broken  out  into  relentless,  deadly  persecu- 
tion against  the  witnesses,  whom  God  will  have  on  earth  when 
the  seals  are  being  fulfilled.  Now  under  the  woe -trumpets, 
we  find  them  to  be  the  special  objects.  Further  details  we 
must  defer  till  we  come  to  the  chapters  that  treat  of  them  more 
particularly. 


186  THE   FIFTH   TRUMPET. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

A  PREFATORY  remark  I  may  be  permitted  to  make  is,  that  our 
chapter  furnishes  an  incidental  proof  that  the  trmiipets  are  not 
coincident  with  the  seals.  For  the  sealing  was  given  in  the  large 
parenthesis  (Kev.  vii.)  which  followed  the  sixth  seal,  whereas  it 
is  referred  to,  not  after  the  sixth  trumpet,  but  before  it.  This 
could  not  be  if  the  two  series  of  judgments  ran  parallel  to  each 
other.  The  natural,  and  I  believe  true,  inference  is,  that  the 
seals  had  finished  their  course  before  the  trumpets  begin,  so 
that  when  the  fifth  trumpet  sounds  the  first  "  woe,"  the  men  of 
the  earth  fall  under  its  predicted  torment,  those  who  were  sealed 
being  referred  to  as  in  the  scene,  but  exempted  from  the  scourge. 
How  could  there  be  a  commission  to  hurt  nothing  but  those  men 
who  have  not  the  seal  of  God,  if  there  had  been  no  sealing  yet? 
If  the  sealing  had  already  taken  place,  parallelism  there  is  not 
between  the  respective  seals  and  trumpets,  nor  can  they  even 
harmonize  in  point  of  time.  They  are  consecutive,  and  not  con- 
current, and  the  last  seal,  as  we  have  seen,  is  the  mere  prelude 
of  silence  for  the  new  series  of  divine  plagues  to  commence. 
How  could  that  be  if  they  were  to  be  accomplished  side  by 
side?  For  if  the  first  six  seals  confessedly  follow  in  regular 
order,  the  seventh  must  be  the  last  in  accomplislirnent,  as  well 
as  in  revelation ;  but  the  seventh,  instead  of  shadowing  some 
additional  dealing  in  providence  like  its  predecessors,  is  only 
a  brief  pause  in  heaven  ushering  in  another  and  more  severe 
class  of  decreed  judgments.  And  of  these  trumpets  we  must 
now  enter  upon  the  fifth  and  sixth  (that  is,  the  first  two  woes), 
to  which  chap.  ix.  is  devoted. 

"  And  the  fifth  angel  sounded,  and  I  saw  a  star  fallen  from 


OE  FIRST  WOE.  187 

heaven  unto  the  earth ;  and  to  him  was  given  the  key  of  the 
pit  of  the  abyss.  And  he  opened  the  pit  of  the  abyss ;  and 
there  arose  a  smoke  out  of  the  pit,  as  the  smoke  of  a  great 
furnace ;  and  the  sun  and  the  air  were  darkened  by  reason  of 
the  smoke  of  the  pit.  And  out  of  the  smoke  came  locusts  unto 
the  earth,  and  to  them  was  given  power  as  the  scorpions  of  the 
earth  have  power.  And  it  was  commanded  them  that  they 
should  not  hurt  the  grass  of  the  earth,  neither  any  green  thing, 
nor  any  tree,  but  the  men  who  have  not  the  seal  of  God  upon 
their  foreheads"  (verses  1-4). 

The  star  fallen  from  heaven  to  earth  is  a  dignitary  in  an 
apostate  state ;  for  a  real  personage  is  intended,  as  the  next 
words  shew — "to  Mm  was  given  the  key  of  the  pit  of  the 
abyss."  The  allusion  seems  evident  to  Isaiah  xiv,  12,  where 
the  king  of  Babylon  is  taunted  with  "  How  art  thou  fallen,  O 
Lucifer  [i.e.,  day-star],  son  of  the  morning  ?  .  .  .  .  Yet  thou  shalt 
be  brought  down  to  hell,  to  the  sides  of  the  pit."  Here  it  is  not 
his  doom,  but  the  authority  he  was  permitted  to  exercise  over 
the  abyss,  which  is  the  expression  of  the  source  of  Satanic  evil 
and  misery.  "  He  opened  the  pit  of  the  abyss,  and  there  arose 
a  smoke  out  of  it,  as  the  smoke  of  a  great  furnace,"  the  symbol 
of  a  delusion  which  darkens  the  mind  of  man.  "  The  sun  and 
the  air  were  darkened  by  reason  of  the  smoke  of  the  pit."  The 
supreme  power  and  all  healthful  social  influence  suffer  pre- 
eminently from  its  blinding  effects.  Nor  was  this  the  sole 
result.  "  Out  of  the  smoke  came  locusts,"  the  figure  of  the 
aggressive  instruments  of  rapine,  and  these  clothed  with  a 
singular  power  of  torment,  "as  the  scorjiions  of  the  earth  have 
power."  The  command  given  shews,  I  think  very  plainly,  the 
error  of  such  as  apply  the  locusts  in  a  literal  way.  They  were 
not  to  hurt  the  grass  of  the  earth,  &c.,  that  is,  their  natural 
food,  if  real  locusts  were  meant.  Men  were  to  be  the  objects 
of  these  symbolic  depredators  men,  save  God's  sealed  ones. 
And  yet  it  was  the  destiny  of  these  marauders  not  to  kill,  but 
to  torment  men  five  months  (verse  5).  It  is  a  limited  predatory 
chastisement,  not  judgment-day.  "  And  their  torment  [was]  as 
the  torment  of  a  scorpion  when  it  striketh  a  man.  And  in  those 
days  shall  men  seek  death,  and  shall  not  find  it ;  and  shall  desire 


188  LOCUSTS   DESCRIBED,    AND   TFIKIR    KING. 

to  die,  and  death  fleeih  from  them"  (verse  6).  Nothing  on  earth 
can  exceed  the  agony  of  conscience  which  will  be  inflicted  on 
their  victims.  It  is  a  yet  stronger  colouring  of  wretchedness 
than  that  in  which  Jeremiah  (chapter  viii.  3)  depicts  the  deso- 
lated and  dispersed  Jews  in  all  the  places  whither  they  should 
be  driven  in  tlie  Lord's  sore  displeasure. 

But  there  is  a  further  description.  "And  the  likenesses  of 
the  locusts  [were]  like  horses  prepared  for  battle  ;  and  [there 
were]  on  their  heads  as  it  were  crowns  of  gold;  and  their 
faces  [were]  as  the  faces  of  men.  And  they  had  hair  as  the  hair 
of  women,  and  their  teeth  were  as  [the  teeth]  of  lions.  And 
they  had  breastplates  as  it  were  iron  breastplates,  and  the  sound 
of  their  wings  [was]  as  the  sound  of  chariots  of  many  horses 
running  to  battle.  And  they  have  tails  like  scorpions,  and 
stings  ;*  and  their  power  [was]  in  their  tails  to  hurt  men  five 
months.  They  have  as  king  over  them  the  angel  of  the  abyss  ; 
his  name  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  [is]  Abaddon ;  and  in  the  Greek 
tongue  he  hath  the  name  Apollyon"  (verses  7-11). 

Tliey  were  not  mere  plunderers,  but  had  warlike  energy,  and 
they  claimed  for  their  onward-rushing  career  the  righteous  sanc- 
tion of  God,  whose  image  and  glory  they  bore  outwardly,  whereas 
in  truth  they  were  thoroughly  subject  to  man  and  Satan  too. 
Ferocity  is  theirs,  and  hearts  steeled  against  every  emotion  of 
pity  in  their  swift  career.  But  their  worst  power  was  the  venom 
of  falsehood  which  followed.  It  was  the  energy  of  false  doctrine, 
represented  by  the  scorpion  sting  in  the  tail.  And  we  know  from 
elsewhere,  "  the  prophet  that  speaketh  lies,  he  is  the  tail." 

Finally,  the  king  is  the  angel  of  the  abyss,  the  same  perhaps 
as  the  fallen  star,  who  had  the  key  of  the  pit.  If  so,  it  is  a 
dark  Satanic  destroyer,  if  not  Satan.  It  is  in  this  world  that 
the  devil  is  so  exalted,  its  prince  ;  he  is  ruler  also  of  the  power 
of  the  air  and  the  god  of  this  age.  In  the  abyss  he  will  be 
bound  as  a  prisoner  for  a  long  season  ;  in  iioll  he  will  be  tor- 
mented for  ever  and  ever,  the  most  miserable  object  there,  and 
in  no  ^yise  ruling  as  king  in  either  the  one  or  the  other.  So 
poets  dream  ;  but  not  so  says  the  scripture. 

*  Tho  common  reading  is  followed  by  the  authorised  version,  "  and  there 
were  stings :  and  their  power  was  to  hurt  men  five  months." 


THE   SIXTH   TKUMPET.  189 

"  And  the  sixth  angel  sounded,  and  I  heard  a  voice  from  the 
four  horns  of  the  golden  altar  which  is  before  God,  saying  to 
the  sixth  angel  which  had  the  trumpet.  Loose  the  four  angels 
that  are  bound  at  the  great  river  Euphrates.  And  the  four 
angels  were  loosed,  that  were  prepared  for*  the  hour  and  day 
and  month  and  year,  for  to  slay  the  third  of  men.  And  the 
number  of  the  army  of  the  horsemen  [was]  twot  myriads  of 
myriads  :  I  heard  the  number  of  then).  And  thus  I  saw  the 
horses  in  the  vision,  and  those  that  sat  on  them,  having  breast- 
plates fiery  and  hyacinthine  and  brimstone-like ;  and  the  heads 
of  the  horses  [were]  as  the  heads  of  lions ;  and  out  of  their 
mouths  issued  fire  and  smoke  and  brimstone.  By  tliese  three 
plagues  was  the  third  of  men  killed,  by  the  fire,  and  the  smoke, 
and  the  brimstone,  which  issued  out  of  their  mouths.  For  the 
power  of  the  horses  is  in  their  mouth,  and  in  their  tails  :  for 
their  tails  were  Kke  unto  serpents,  and  had  heads,  and  with 
them  they  do  hurt.  And  the  rest  of  the  men  who  were  not 
killed  by  these  plagues  repented  not  of  the  works  of  their  hands, 
that  they  should  not  worship  demons,  and  idols  of  gold  and 
silver  and  brass  and  stone  and  wood :  which  can  neither  see, 
nor  hear,  nor  walk  :  neither  repented  they  of  their  murders,  nor 

*  Mr.  Elliott  seems  singularly  unfortunate  in  his  remarks  on  the  Greek  text. 
Thus,  in  verse  15,  he  contends  for  the  strangest  possible  version  of  etc,  as  =  after, 
or  at  the  expiration  of,  the  aggregated  period  in  question ;  and  he  twice  in  i.  p. 
518,  519,  speaks  of  a-TioKTiivat,  a  form  and  import  different  from  'iva  aTroKrtivwaiv, 
the  true  phrase  beyond  all  doubt,  as  he  gives  it  in  p.  521.  It  needs  no  reasoning 
to  see  that  the  action  is  not  momentary  but  continuous,  and  that  the  preposition 
therefore  has  its  ordinary  sense,  as  Mr.  Birks  has  properly  remarked. 

t  Mr.  E.  is  quite  wrong  {JI.  A.,  i.  p.  480,  note)  in  supposing  that  Gricsbach 
prefers  altogether  to  reject  the  ^vo.  Michaelis  considers  it  "  a  very  improbable 
reading"  in  the  ill-considered  and  unsound  last  chapter  of  his  Introduction.  No 
such  doubt  is  expressed,  but,  on  the  contrary,  5vo  is  the  reading  preferred,  both 
in  Griesbach's  first  and  second  edition,  and  in  the  London  reprint,  1810,  1818. 
This  odd  mistake  is  repeated  in  yet  stronger  terms  in  note  2  to  p.  506,  where  it 
is  said  that  Griesbach,  on  external  evidence,  prefers  the  more  simple  reading  ft.  fi. 
"which  seems  to  me  preferable  on  internal  also."  The  common  text,  read  by 
many  cursives,  tirrns  out  to  be  that  of  the  Sinai  MS.,  and  its  equivalent  in  sense 
appears  in  the  Alexandrian  and  the  Porphyrian  uncials,  and  a  few  good  later 
copies.  B  and  very  many  others,  supported  by  the  Arabic  of  the  Polyglotts  and 
a  Slav.  MS.,  but  contrary  to  all  other  ancient  versions,  omit  Svo.  Matthaei 
follows  them  in  that  reading,  which  is  the  easier  of  the  two.  All  other  editors 
of  note,  like  Griesbach,  retain  the  Ivo,  Svg,  or  dig. 


190  THE   GOLDEN   ALTAR. 

of  their  sorceries,  nor  of  their  fornication,  nor  of  their  thefts" 
(verses  13-21). 

It  is  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  no  doubt,  which  is  heard  from  the 
horns  of  the  golden  altar.  But  what  a  solemn  sound  is  this — 
above  all,  issuing  thence  ?  For  ordinarily  that  altar  is  the  special 
witness  of  His  all -prevailing  intercession.  Thence  the  incense 
rose  up  before  God.  It  was  the  horns  of  the  brazen  altar  merely 
which  received  the  blood  of  the  sin-offering,  when  an  individual 
sinned,  whether  a  ruler  or  one  of  the  common  people.  But  when 
the  whole  congregation  were  guilty,  the  priest  was  commanded 
to  put  some  of  the  victim's  blood  on  the  horns  of  the  golden 
altar;  for  the  communion  of  the  people  as  a  whole  was  inter- 
rupted, and  needed  to  be  restored.  Here  how  different !  The 
voice  from  the  four  horns  of  the  golden  altar  orders  the  angel  of 
the  sixth  trumpet  to  loose  the  four  angels  that  were  up  to  that 
time  bound  at  (or  by)  the  Euphrates.  There  they  had  been  pre- 
pared for  (not  "  an,"  but)  the  hour  and  day  and  month  and  year 
to  slay  the  third  of  men.  They  were  prepared,  not  during  that 
time,  much  less  when  it  was  expired,  but  with  a  view  to  it: 
when  that  hour  and  day  and  month  and  year  arrived,  or  rather 
until  the  term  was  over,  they  were  ready  to  accomplish  their 
prescribed  slaugliter.     They  destroyed  men  by  apostacy. 

Still,  if  it  be  terrible  to  hear  such  a  signal  from  the  altar  of 
incense,  how  comforting  to  think  that  all  in  the  judgment  is  so 
minutely  ordered  and  fore-ordained  of  the  Lord  !  He  it  is  who 
first  gives  the  word,  and  gives  it  to  the  holy  angel.  The  angel 
again  looses  the  four  bound  at  the  Euphrates.  The  evil  can  only 
act  when  and  as  far  as  is  allowed  of  the  good,  and  the  good, 
however  they  may  excel  in  strength,  only  do  His  command- 
ments, hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  His  word.  The  notion  that 
we  are  to  identify  the  four  here  with  the  angels  who  restrained 
the  winds  in  chap.  vii.  is  strange,  seeing  that  contrast  is  marked, 
not  resemblance.  Here  they  are  not  restraining  but  restrained, 
which  is  nowhere  said  of  the  holy  angels.  There  they  stood  at 
the  four  corners  of  the  earth,  as  separate  as  they  could  be ;  here 
all  are  bound  in  the  same  sj)ot. 

As  to  the  character  of  the  second-  woe  itself,  it  is  not  torment 
like  the  lirst,  but  destruction  of  life.     Not  that  there  is  no 


DIFFERENCE   OF   THE   TWO   WOES.  191 

element  of  false  prophecy  here,  as  also  was  there ;  "  for  the 
power*  of  the  horses,"  it  is  said,  "is  in  their  mouth  and  in  their 
tails:  for  their  tails  [are]  like  serpents,  and  have  heads,  and  with 
them  they  do  hurt."  Tliat  is,  venomous  error  they  propagated 
and  left  behind  them,  and  this  with  more  settled  plan  than  in 
the  locust-woe.  The  locusts  in  the  first  woe  had  scorj^ion-like 
tails  and  stings:  the  horses  in  the  second  had  serpent-like  tails, 
which  had  heads.  But  they  had  power  in  their  mouth  also. 
"  And  thus  I  saw  the  horses  in  the  vision,  and  those  that  sat  on 
them,  having  breastplates  of  fire  and  jacinth,  and  like  brim- 
stone :  and  the  heads  of  the  horses  were  as  the  heads  of  lions ; 
and  out  of  their  mouths  proceeded  fire  and  smoke  and  brim- 
stone." It  is  the  judicial  power  of  Satan,  as  far  as  God  permits 
that.  Besides,  it  far  surpasses  in  energy  and  aggressive  de- 
structive warfare  the  preceding  woe.  This  was  spiritual — evilly 
so,  of  course ;  the  second  is  more  destructive,  though  in  its 
train  follows  the  injury  of  the  enemies'  delusion  and  falsehood. 
It  seems  also  more  varied  as  far  as  leaders  go ;  for  the  other 
had  but  one,  this  had  four  angelic  agents  at  the  head. 

"And  the  rest  of  the  men  who  were  not  killed  by  these 
plagues  repented  not,"  &c.  Humbling  lesson,  and  most  needful 
to  remember !  God  has  been  sending  judgment  upon  judgment, 
first  on  men's  circumstances,  and  then  on  themselves,  and  in 
this  last  case  torment,  and  finally  death  itself.  But  it  is  in  vain. 
Such  is  man  after  all  this,  that  he  repents  not  of  his  evil,  either 
religiously  or  morally.     Satan's  last  effort  remains. 

The  reader  will  perceive  that  I  am  merely  anxious  to  present 
the  leading  feature  of  each  woe,  as  far  as  I  am  enabled,  so  as  in 
some  measure  to  help  souls  to  the  understanding  of  the  pro- 
phecy.    This,  he  will  remember,  is  a  very  distinct  thing  from 

*  In  note  5  to  p.  513  of  the  Ilorae  Apoc,  vol.  i.,  Mr.  E.  omits,  "Mill  reads"  in 
his  last  edition,  and  contents  himself  with  the  remark  "  at  t^ovaiai  arjruiv, '  their 
authoritien  are  in  their  tails,'  is  the  notable  reading  in  some  MSS.  The  word  is 
similarly  used  in  the  plural,  Luke  xii.  11 ;  Rom.  xiii.  1,  &c."  How  strange  is  the 
effect  of  a  system !  The  truth  is  that  the  plural  here  is  due  to  Erasmus's, 
which  It.  Stephens  followed!  And  Mill's  text  is  merely  third  edition  with 
some  errata  corrected.  It  is  clear  from  Mill's  note  that  the  evidence  is  entinjly 
adverse.  There  is  not  a  shadow  of  doubt  that  the  singular  is  right;  and 
probably  al  yap  ovpai  led  to  a'l  yap  i^ovffiai. 


192  THEIR   APPLICATION 

the  application  of  a  prophecy.  The  question  of  the  persons,  or 
places,  or  times  alluded  to,  may  be  deeply  interesting,  but  it  is 
subordinate  to  the  understanding  of  the  book. 

For  my  own  part,  I  do  not  doubt  that  the  common  ajiplication 
of  the  locusts  to  the  Saracens  and  of  the  Euphratean  horsemen 
to  the  Turks  is  well  founded.  But  we  have  seen  repeatedly  that 
the  fulfilment  of  the  Eevelation  cannot  properly  be  before  the 
heavenly  saints  are  caught  up,  and  the  earthly  people  are  once 
more  the  objects  of  God's  dealings  on  the  earth  and  in  their 
own  land,  though  by  no  means  to  the  exclusion  of  divine  tes- 
timony and  its  blessed  effects  among  the  Gentiles.  According 
to  this  later  and  final  accomplishment,  the  second  woe  would 
be  fulfilled,  I  suppose,  in  the  early  ravages  of  the  north-eastern 
(or  Assyrian)  armies,  as  the  first  might  be  antichrist's  delusive 
agency  in  the  land  of  Palestine.  I  conceive  that  when  the 
prophecy  will  be  realised  in  all  its  precision,  the  scene  where 
these  mysterious  locusts  are  to  enact  their  bitter  but  transitory 
torment  will  be  the  land  where- at  that  time  the  Jews  will  have 
largely  gathered,  but  as  regards  the  mass  in  unbelief  The  un- 
sealed naturally  points  to  them  and  most  probably  to  their  land. 
For  it  will  be  noticed  that  there  is  no  "  third "  under  this 
trumpet  to  intimate  the  direction  of  the  woe,  nor  any  index 
that  I  observe,  save  the  exemption  of  the  sealed.  The  rest  of  the 
Jews  were  still  in  judicial  blindness,  and  are  the  implied  objects 
of  this  judgment.  If  they  are  the  preparatory  movements  of 
these  two  powers,  each  is  as  decidedly  opposed  to  the  other  as 
both  are  to  the  Lord  Jesus :  they  are  to  bi;  successively  judged 
and  destroyed  when  He  comes  in  power  and  glory. 

It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the  same  chap.  xiv.  of  Isaiah, 
which  I  referred  to  as  an  illustration  of  the  star  fallen  from 
heaven  {i.e.,  the  chief  personage  under  the  first  woe),  treats  also 
of  the  Assyrian  enemy,  which  I  judge  to  be  the  full  meaning  of 
those  who  figure  under  the  second  woe.  "  Tlie  Lord  of  hosts  hath 
sworn,  saying.  Surely  as  I  have  thought,  so  shall  it  come  to 
pass  ;  and  as  I  have  purposed,  so  shall  it  stand ;  that  I  will  break 
the  Assyrian  in  my  land,  and  upon  my  mountains  tread  him 
under  foot ;  then  shall  his  yoke  depart  from  off  tliem,  and  his 
burden  depart  fioin  off  their  shoulders.     This  is  the  purpose 


THEIK   FULFILMENT.  193 

that  is  purposed  upon  the  whole  earth:  and  this  is  the  hand 
that  is  stretched  out  upon  all  the  nations.  For  the  Lord  of 
hosts  hath  purposed,  and  who  shall  disannul  it  ?  and  his  hand 
is  stretched  out,  and  who  shall  turn  it  back?"  (verses  24-27.) 
The  difference  is  that  Isaiah  gives  us  the  end  of  their  career  for 
the  deliverance  of  Israel,  while  St.  John  shews  us  rather  its 
beginning  and  course,  as  a  scourge  upon  apostate  Judaism  and 
Christendom.  It  would  be  a  mistake  to  limit  Isaiah  to  the 
bygone  history,  or  to  take  the  past  as  more  than  a  type  of  the 
future,  however  important  in  its  day.  For  in  the  history  the 
Assyrian  fell  first,  and  Babylon's  doom  was  long  after.  In  the 
prophecy  it  is  the  last  representative  of  Babylon  {i.e.,  the  beast 
of  the  crisis,)  who  is  destroyed  first,  and  then  he  who  answers 
to  the  great  Assyrian  leader  of  the  nations  shall  come  to  his 
end,  and  none  shall  help  him.  So  it  is  written  in  Isaiah  x.  12, 
"  Wherefore  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  when  the  Lord  hath 
performed  his  whole  work  upon  mount  Zion  and  on  Jerusalem, 
I  will  punish  the  fruit  of  the  stout  heart  of  the  king  of  Assyria, 
and  the  glory  of  his  high  looks,"  &c.  Our  chapter  of  the  Keve- 
lation  gives  us  some  of  the  early  policy  of  the  Assyrian,  if  not 
of  antichrist,  or  of  their  respective  parties. 

According  to  the  more  vague  and  protracted  historical  appli- 
cation, which  I  conceive  to  liave  been  comprehended  in  the 
divine  purpose  of  these  visions,  it  may  be  asked  how  this  chap- 
ter is  to  be  understood.  I  have  already  briefly  shewn  how  the 
earlier  trumpets  brought  us  down  to  the  extinction  of  the 
Western  Roman  empire.  Pursuing  the  same  thread,  the  fifth 
trumpet  has  a  distinct  bearing  upon  the  Saracenic  infliction,  as 
the  sixth  refers  to  the  furious  onset  of  the  Turks.  Hence  one 
is  quite  willing  to  allow  the  general  reference  of  the  fallen  star 
to  Mohammed,  who  was  the  instrument  of  Satan  in  opening  on 
the  world  the  delusion  of  the  abyss,  with  all  its  darkening  effects. 
Certainly  the  description  suits  in  many  of  its  characteristic 
features,  not  the  gradual  growth  and  spread  of  the  doctrinal 
and  moral  pravities  of  Christendom,  but  that  host  of  marauders 
who,  embracing  with  ardour  the  hell-inspired  creed  of  the  Ai'a- 
bian  false  prophet,  sprang  forth  on  their  ambitious  and  fanatical 
career.    Not  that  I  can  accept  without  serious  drawback  much 

0 


194  EMBLEMS   WHETHEK   LOCAL   Oil   NATIONAL. 

that  has  been  made  of  the  local  or  national  significance  of  the 
locusts  and  the  scorpions,  the  horses  and  the  lions,  the  faces 
of  men,  the  hair  of  women,  and  the  breastplates  of  iron.  For 
instance,  it  is  plain  that  the  nation,  whose  rapid  devastation  of 
Palestine  is  portrayed  in  Joel  ii.  (the  prototype  of  the  Apocalyp- 
tic locusts),  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  Saracens  or  Arabia,  but 
is  rather  the  northern  army,  "the  Assyrian,"  of  which  the 
Jewish  prophets  so  often  speak.  Compare  also  Nahum  iii.  17, 
the  reference  of  which  confirms  the  same  thing.  An  exactly 
similar  argument  applies  to  the  use  of  "  scorpions  "  as  in  Ezek. 
ii.  6,  where  it  is  used  figuratively  as  here,  but  with  not  the  most 
distant  alance  at  the  robbers  of  the  desert.  As  to  the  "horses" 
the  very  next  vision  of  the  Euphratean  warriors  refutes  the 
notion  of  a  geographical  reference ;  for  the  Turks  are  a  totally 
distinct  race  and  emerged  from  a  different  quarter ;  and  yet 
horses  are  just  as  prominent  here  as  in  the  prophecy  of  their 
precursors.*  Also,  in  the  one  we  have  the  heads,  in  the  other  the 
teeth,  of  "  lions."  This  therefore  destroys  anything  like  an  exclu- 
sively distinct  usage,  not  to  speak  of  the  manifold  application 
which  other  scriptures  indicate.  The  truth  is  that  the  Spirit  is 
making  up  an  apt  and  complete  symbolic  picture,  and  in  no  way 
ties  Himself  to  the  animals,  &c.,  peculiar  to  the  countiy. 

To  my  mind  the  intention  is  moral,  not  geographical ;  and 
this  kind  of  teaching  detracts  from  the  real  force  of  Scripture, 
occupying  the  mind  with  that  which  may  be  partially  true  in  a 
natural  way,  but  not  I  believe  tlie  object  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Hence  does  it  not  seem  almost  trifling  to  extract  from  the  faces 
of  men,  the  hair  of  women,  and  crowns  like  gold,  an  allusion  to 
beard  or  moustache,  coupled  with  literal  flowing  hair  sur- 
mounted by  a  turban  ?  Taken  as  emblems  of  character,  the 
dignity  of  the  divine  word  is  vindicated  and  felt.  The  locusts 
naturally  point  to  countless  swarms,  devouring  in  specified 
limits,  but  more  distinguished  by  the  tormenting  sting  of  false 

*  Compare  also  what  some  of  these  very  writers  found  upon  the  horses  of 
Rev.  vi  Egypt  is  the  first  power  historically  celehratcd  for  its  horses.  (Exod. 
XV.)  So  it  was  the  great  market  in  Solomon's  day  (1  Kings  x.  28),  as  Togarmah 
was  for  Tyre.  (Ezek.  xxvii.  14  )  See  Isaiah  xxxi.  1,  3.  In  Zechariah  they  sym- 
bolize the  variouH  imperial  powers. 


HEBREW  AND  GREEK  ALLUSIONS.  195 

doctrine.  The  unsealed,  the  men  of  the  earth,  were  the  victims 
of  the  scourge,  but  the  object  was  a  conquering  propagandism : 
not  the  extinction  of  prosperity,  but  rather  the  maintenance  of 
it  at  the  expense  of  the  truth,  and  this  for  a  limited  period. 
The  resemblance  to  horses  prepared  for  battle  is  the  expression 
of  their  aggressive  attitiide,  and  the  crowns  like  gold  seem  to 
intimate  their  vaunted  confidence  in  a  divinely-righteous  mission 
of  victory.  Their  faces  as  of  men,  but  with  the  hair  of  women, 
may  denote  that,  with  all  their  claim  to  act  authoritatively  in 
the  name  of  God,  they  were  nevertheless  subject  to  the  merest 
human  authority,  and  not  to  God  after  all.  The  iron  breastplates, 
the  lion-teeth,  the  sounding  wings,  I  regard  as  the  figure  of  the 
unflinching  courage  of  fanaticism  (their  strongest  armour),  and 
the  ferocious  depredations  that  accompanied  their  wonderfully 
rapid  warfare.  The  Hebrew  name  of  their  king  confirms,  in  my 
opinion,  the  fall  reference  to  the  special  wasting  of  the  Jews,  as 
also  a  connexion  with  the  Eastern  Empire  may  be  implied  in 
the  Greek. 

I  have  thus  rehearsed  the  spiritual  significance  of  the  first 
woe's  emissaries,  stating  particularly  what  might  be  supposed  to 
prefigure  the  past  accomplishment,  according  to  which  the  five 
months,  of  course,  must  be  taken  as  months  of  years.  But  I 
protest  against  the  arbitrariness  of  interpreting  one  part  of  the 
account  literally  and  the  other  figuratively.  Again,  if  we  ex- 
amine it  closely,  the  utmost  allowable  is  some  such  partial 
incipient  accomplishment.  For  it  is  plain  that  the  prophet  of 
Mecca  was  more  like  a  rising  star  than  a  fallen  dignitary;  inso- 
much that  Mede,  with  the  earlier  writers  in  general,  applies  it 
to  Satan,  as  others  to  the  Pope,  &c.  Again,  the  command  not  to 
kill  is  very  hard  to  reconcile  with  the  exterminating  policy  of 
the  Saracenic  incursions ;  and  the  term  of  150  years  has  been 
doubled  by  some  of  great  weight,  because  of  a  repeated  mention 
(but  compare  Eev.  xx.),  in  order  to  eke  out  a  more  plausible 
solution.  Even  this  improbable  inference  from  the  twofold 
statement  of  the  five  months  labours  under  its  own  difticulties, 
as  others  have  sufdciently  shewn. 

As  regards  the  second  woe,  the  first  difficulty  which  the  pro- 
tracted view  has  to  encounter  is  the  meaning  of  the  four  angels 

02 


196  DIFFICULTIES   AS   TO   THE   PAST. 

that  were  bound  by  the  Euphrates.  Most  of  the  Protestant 
school  ajjply  them  to  four  Mussulman  powers,  either  successive 
or  contemporaneous.  But,  says  Mr.  Elliott,*  "  the  interpretations 
are  found  on  examination  to  be  one  and  all  inadmissible.  As 
the  conunissioning  and  loosening  of  the  four  angels  in  vision  was 
but  a  single  act,  so  the  agencies  symbolized  must  necessarily 
have  been  at  one  and  the  same  time  loosed  or  commissioned : 
by  which  consideration  alone  all  such  successions  of  destroying 
agencies  seemed  excluded,  as  Vitriuga  and  after  him  Wood- 
house  have  suggested  in  explanation.  And  as  to  cotemporary 
Turkman  dynasties,  whether  we  refer  to  the  list  given  by  Mede, 
and  by  Newton  after  him,  or  that  by  Faber  and  by  Keith,  from 
Mills  and  Gibbon,  there  is  no  quaternion  of  them  that  can  be 
shewn  either  to  have  combined  together  in  the  destruction  of 
the  Greek  empire, — to  have  been  all  locally  situated  by  the 
Euphrates, — to  have  had  existence  at  the  time  asserted  to  be  that 
of  the  commissioning  of  the  four  angels, — or  to  have  continued 
in  existence  up  to  the  time  of  the  completion  of  tlie  commission 
given,  in  tlie  destruction  of  the  Greek  empire.  In  short,  the 
manifest  inconsistency  with  historic  fact  of  every  such  attemjjted 
solution  has  been  hitherto,  in  the  minds  of  the  more  thoughtful 
and  learned  prophetic  students,  like  as  it  were  a  millstone  about 
the  neck  of  the  whole  Turkish  theory  of  interpretation."  This 
at  least  is  a  candid  confession,  especially  when  we  consider  that 
it  is  about  a  prophecy  which  has  been  acquiesced  in  more  gene- 
rally than  any  other  perhaps  in  the  Apocalypse. 

But  what  is  the  view  suggested  that  is  to  leave  the  general 
application  unencumbered?  The  resource  of  superhuman  angelic 
intelligences  directing  the  subordinate  human  energies,  and  this 
without  reference  to  the  number  of  earthly  instruments  em- 
ployed. In  fact  Mr.  E.  identifies  these  angels  at  the  Euphrates 
with  the  angels  parenthetically  introduced  in  the  sixth  seal 
(chapter  vii.),  and  reasons  from  the  assumption  that  the  judg- 
ments of  the  preceding  trumpets  were  the  probable  results  of 
their  actings.  But  this,  it  is  clear,  does  not  hang  well  together 
with  the  scheme  which  insists  that  the  fallen  star  of  the  first  woe 
was  not  an  angelic  being  but  Mohannned.    Consistency  would 

*  lloiae  Apoc,  i.  pp.  488,  4'JO. 


THE  FUTURE  NEEDFUL  TO  COMPLETE  ALL.        197 

demand,  one  would  think,  that  if  the  angel  of  the  abyss  in  the 
preceding  trumpet  sets  forth  a  man,  these  four  must  represent 
similar  leaders.  Certainly  these  are  in  contrast  with  the  angels 
whose  office  it  was  rather  to  restrain  the  winds  tlian  to  urge 
on  their  devastating  blasts.  All  the  accessory  circumstances 
strengthen  their  distinction.  Again,  the  use  made  of  the  fire  and 
smoke  and  brimstone  which  issued  out  of  the  horses'  mouths,  as 
if  they  prefigured  the  Turkish  artillery,  of  the  breastplates  of  fire 
and  jacinth  and  brimstone,  as  an  allusion  to  the  Ottoman  war- 
like apparel  of  scarlet,  blue,  and  yellow,  and  of  the  serpent-like 
horsetails  having  heads,  as  the  emblem  of  Turkish  pashas,  seems 
to  me  both  inconsistent  witli  other  parts  of  the  Apocalypse,  and 
(shall  I  say  ?)  grotesque  in  itself 

I  deny  not  the  application  of  the  horsemen  and  horses  to  the 
past  inroads  of  the  Turks,  as  distinguished  from  their  Saracen 
predecessors,  devoting  themselves  to  their  destructive  task  in 
the  Eastern  Koman  or  Greek  empire,  with  far  more  of  system, 
and  with  more  permanent  results.  In  their  fierce  career  they 
breathed  out  in  no  slight  measure,  along  with  all  the  old 
diabolical  delusion,  an  infernal  spirit  of  judgment;  and  as  were 
their  weapons,  such  was  their  armour.  Fire  and  brimstone 
represent  the  most  extreme  form  of  divine  judgment;  for  they 
are  the  same  symbols  used  of  the  lake  of  fire  at  the  end  of 
alL  things  into  whicli  the  wicked  dead,  after  their  resurrection 
and  judgment,  are  to  be  cast.  Again,  it  was  this  peculiarly 
Satanic  power,  not  like  the  scorpion  now,  but  the  serpent,  to 
whicli  the  Holy  Ghost  draws  attention  as  the  grand  source  of 
mischief  The  moral  false-prophet  action  is  there,  and  this  too 
invested  with  authority  ;  for  the  tails  had  heads,  and  with  them 
they  do  hurt.  Throughout  the  permitted  sphere  the  result  was 
the  utter  extinction  of  Christian  profession,  while  the  rest,  alas  ! 
heeded  not  the  warning.  But  these  features,  in  my  judgment, 
involve  elements  still  more  terrible  than  anything  yet  seen  on 
earth ;  so  that  all  confirms  me  in  the  conviction  that  we  must 
look  for  another  and  final  answer  to  the  imagery,  in  the  last 
scourge  for  the  corrupt  and  idolatrous  East.*     An  awful  sketch 

■*  It  may  be  seasonable  here  to  notice  briefly  Dr.  D.  M'Causland's  Latter 
Bays  of  JerusaUm  and  Borne.     He  regards  (pp.  212,  213)  the  flood  prevailing 


198  THE  FINAL  EASTERN  SCOURGE. 

is  given  after  the  judgment  has  run  its  course :  "And  the  rest 
of  the  men  who  were  not  killed  by  these  plagues  repented  not  of 
the  works  of  their  hands,  that  they  should  not  worship  demons, 
and  idols  of  gold  and  silver  and  of  brass  and  of  stone  and  of 
wood,  which  can  neither  see,  nor  hear,  nor  walk ;  neither  repented 
tliey  of  their  murders,  nor  of  their  sorceries,  nor  of  their  forni- 
cations, nor  of  their  thefts."  Thus  even  the  apostacy  of  those 
who  fell  under  the  scourge  from  God  fails  to  awaken  the  seared 
consciences  of  men,  all  the  worse  for  having  seen  Init  slighting 
the  light  of  the  gospel.  Nothing  then  remains  but  a  state  of 
abandonment  to  all  immorality  and  superstition. 

150  days  upon  the  earth  as  the  type  of  the  fifth  trumpet  visitation ;  but  why 
the  destruction  of  all  flesh  should  tj'pify  the  torment,  not  the  death,  of  the 
future  victims,  docs  not  appear.  The  sixth  trumpet,  he  thinks,  confirms  this, 
because  the  time  prescribed  there  (391  days  and  an  hour)  carries  us  down,  if 
reckoned  on  the  scale  of  a  day  for  a  year,  from  the  deluge  to  the  epoch  of  the 
judgment  on  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  Now  supposing  there  were  no  chronological 
objections,  where  is  the  congruity  of  taking  the  five  months  literally  in  the  first 
■woe,  and  the  hour  and  day  and  month  and  year  symbolically  in  the  second  ? 
Besides,  here  again  the  destruction  in  the  type  exceeds  the  proportion  of  the 
antitype ;  and,  what  is  more  material,  our  Lord  applies  both  the  deluge  and  the 
destruction  of  Sodom  to  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  the  day  when  He  is 
revealed.  These  would  answer  to  Rev.  xix  ,  not  to  chapter  ix.,  which  discloses 
preliminary  chastisements.  Still  less  can  I  accept  the  singular  idea  that  the  four 
angels  or  their  chivalry  set  forth  Israel  and  Ephraim  flying  on  the  shoulders  of 
the  Philistines  towards  the  west,  and  purging  away  the  filth  of  Jerusalem.  For 
"the  men"  he  conceives  to  be  the  unsealed,  who  were  to  be  tormented  but  not 
killed  by  the  antichristian  locusts :  the  horsemen  of  Israel  finish  the  work. 

The  same  friend  who  directed  Mr.  E.'s  attention  to  Griesbach's  citation  of 
avcfiovQ  and  dvt/ioi  from  30  (Cod.  Guclph.  of  the  fourteenth  century)  for  nyy 
in  verses  14,  15,  recalls  this  variation  to  me.  It  is  also  supported  by  98.  (Cod. 
Bodl.  Can.  of  the  sixteenth  century.)  But  I  agree  with  the  editors  in  general 
that  it  is  barely  worth  a  notice. 


SIXTH   TRUMPET   PARENTHESIS.  199 


CHAPTER   X. 

Some  will  remember  a  resemblance  already  pointed  out  between 
the  two  orders  of  seals  and  trumpets.  When  we  come  to  the 
sixth  in  each  series,  there  is  an  interruption  of  a  most  interest- 
ing kind.  We  saw  that  after  the  sixth  seal  there  was  such  an 
episode,  not  of  judgment  but  of  mercy— God  interfering  on  be- 
half of  man,  after  the  most  signal  convulsion  among  men  and 
things  on  the  earth ;  and  not  only  so,  but  the  powers  of  the 
lieavens  also  shaken.  Then  we  found  God  shewing  us  that  in 
the  midst  of  judgment  He  remembers  mercy.  For  there  was 
the  sealing  of  a  full  complement  out  of  the  twelve  tribes  of 
Israel,  and  besides  clear  and  affecting  proof  was  furnished  that 
the  poor  Gentiles  were  not  forgotten.  Thus,  when  the  prophet 
looks,  he  sees  a  countless  multitude  out  of  all  nations,  and  kin- 
dreds, and  peoples,  and  tongues.  These  were  evidently  delivered 
by  the  great  goodness  of  God,  and  come  out  of  that  terrible 
tribulation  that  is  yet  to  be.  Now  in  chap.  ix.  we  have  had  the 
sixth  trumpet ;  and,  answering  to  what  we  have  seen  in  the 
seals,  there  is  an  interruption  between  it  and  the  seventh 
trumpet,  which  is  only  announced  in  chap.  xi.  15.  There  is  a 
vision  described  of  a  very  marked,  and,  considering  the  visions 
that  accompanied  all  the  trumpets,  of  an  extraordinary  character. 
A  mighty  angel  comes  down  from  heaven,  who  appears  to  be  the 
Lord  Himself  So  we  saw  in  a  previous  chapter  the  angel-priest 
at  the  golden  altar,  putting  incense  to  the  prayers  of  the  saints 
which  He  offered  up  to  God.  And  I  suppose  few  woidd  imagine 
that  God  could  commit  this  service  of  the  heavenly  sanctuaiy 
to  any  mere  created  being.     In  the  Old  Testament  Jehovah  had 


200  CHRIST   AND   THE   ANGEL   IN   THE   VISION. 

occasionally  assumed  an  angelic  form ;  and  as  this  book  brings 
us  back  to  a  great  deal  wliicli  is  akin  to  the  Jewish  Scriptures, 
herein  may  be  one  reason  why  we  have  Christ  thus  taking  the 
form  of  an  angel.  As  before  tlie  trumpets  were  blown,  the 
angel  who  gave  the  signal  for  all  was  seen  in  a  'priestly  point  of 
view,  here  he  is  in  power  preparing  the  way  of  the  kingdom. 
Accordingly  there  is  every  circumstance  of  majesty  surrounding 
him. 

"  And  I  saw  another  mio-htv  angel  coming  down  from  heaven, 
clothed  with  a  cloud."  The  cloud,  as  any  one  will  recollect  who 
is  conversant  with  scripture  idea  and  phrase,  was  the  well-known 
badge  of  Jehovali's  presence.  When  the  Lamb's  blood  was  shed 
and  Israel  were  being  led  out  of  the  land  of  their  bondage,  God 
Himself  went  before  them  as  the  angel  of  the  covenant,  and  the 
cloud  was  the  visible  form  or  token  of  it.  (Ex.  xiii.  21  ;  xxiii.  20, 
23 ;  xl.  36,  38  ;  Num.  ix.  15-23.)  In  the  angel  that  we  have  here 
there  is  much  that  seems  to  indicate  the  presence  of  tlie  Lord 
Himself,  laying  claim  to  the  possession  of  the  world  at  large. 
One  remarkable  sample  may  be  remembered  even  in  the  New 
Testament,  at  the  time  when  there  was  a  little  foreshadowing 
given  of  the  coming  kingdom.  Now  what  was  it  that  testified 
to  the  immediate  presence  of  God  ?  and  what  made  Peter  and 
John  tremble,  accustomed  though  they  were  to  the  company  of 
Jesus  and  to  the  most  marvellous  effects  of  His  power  ?  "  They 
feared  as  they  entered  into  the  cloud,"  because  the  cloud  was  the 
known  and  j)eculiar  mark  of  Jehovah's  presence. 

Here  then,  1  think,  it  was  no  mere  creature,  but  the  Ci'cator 
Himself,  who  took  the  form  of  an  angel.  It  may  be  too  the 
Lord  retreating,  if  one  may  so  say,  from  all  that  would  have 
linked  Him  manifestly  and  directly  with  His  ])eople,  and  this 
for  a  very  solemn  reason.  His  people  during  the  trumpets  are 
supposed  to  have,  only  not  wholly,  lost  their  distinctive  separa- 
tion and  to  ])('.  sunk  down  into  the  world,  so  that  God  morally 
could  not  own  in  a  public  way  His  connexion  with  them.  In 
Hebrews  xi.  it  is  said  of  certain  believers  that  God  was  not 
ashamed  to  l)e  called  their  CJod.  Alas  !  there  are  saints  of  wliom 
God  inould  be  asiiamed  to  be  called  their  CJod.  It  was  not  so 
witli  the  early  patriarchs,  with  Abraliam,  Isaac,  and  Jacob:  God 


SILENCE   AS   TO   THE   PEOPLE   OF   GOD.  201 

was  their  God.  But  He  never  calls  Himself  the  God  of  Lot. 
This  is  a  serious  matter  for  thought,  and  our  hearts  ought  to 
watcli  against  anything  that  could  make  Him  ashamed  to  be 
called  our  God.  It  has  been  alluded  to  before,  when  we  noticed 
that  the  Lord  is  never  spoken  of  in  this  series  as  the  Lamb, 
because  the  people  of  God  will  have  got  so  much  mixed  up 
with  unbelievers.  When  these  judgments  fall,  the  saints  will 
be  painfully  merged  in  the  world,  so  that  much  of  the  chastise- 
ment will  come  upon  both.  Eemember  also  that  the  Lord  tells 
us  the  slips  of  His  people  that  we  may  be  warned  by  them. 
How  sad  to  use  the  prophecy  of  unfaithfulness  in  order  to 
justify  it,  and  to  attribute  the  effects  of  our  unbelief  to  the 
providence  of  God ! 

At  the  time  of  the  trumpets  there  is  an  ominous  silence  as  to 
the  people  of  God.  There  is  just  an  allusion  to  their  exemption 
from  the  torment  of  the  apostates  in  chapter  ix.  4;  but  this 
is  the  only  distinct  reference  till  the  parenthesis  of  chapters  x. 
and  xi.  If  you  apply  the  seals  and  trumpets  to  the  past  history 
of  the  world,  the  meaning  is  so  plain'  that  most  thoughtful 
Christians  have  agreed  in  the  main.  Constantine  brought  in 
Christianity  by  force  of  arms.  The  consequence  of  this  was  the 
great  downfall  of  Paganism,  with  intimations  of  mercy  by  the 
by,  and  the  seventh  seal  was  followed  by  silence  in  heaven  for 
about  half  an  hour.  No  false  expectation  could  be  there.  God. 
knew  that,  so  far  from  the  world  being  made  really  better  by 
that  astonishing  change,  all  would  end  in  the  frightful  con- 
sequences of  grace  abused,  corrupted,  and  despised.  The  vast 
liody  which  had  given  up  idolatry  for  the  profession  of  Chris- 
tianity would  ripen  for  judgment.  The  immediate  result  here 
is  the  cominw  in  of  these  trumpets.  And  what  then  ?  God  was 
ashamed  of  Christendom ;  heaven  was  silent  now,  and  yet  we 
know  joy  is  felt  there  over  one  sinner  that  repents.  It  was, 
externally  at  least,  a  swamp  of  forms ;  and  where  was  the  Eock 
of  salvation  ?     Alas  !  He  is  once  more  lightly  esteemed. 

Connected  with  this,  I  think,  the  Lord  Jesus  is  no  longer 
spoken  of  as  the  Son  of  man,  much  less  as  the  Lamb  :  if  seen 
here.  He  is  in  angelic  guise.  And  as  before  (in  order  to  distiu- 
guisli  Him  particularly  from  all  otliers)  He  was  engaged  with  the 


202  DESCRIPTION   OF   THE   ANGEL. 

incense  at  the  golden  altar;  so  here  we  find  He  was  "clothed 
with  a  cloud" — the  badge  of  Jehovali's  glory ;  "  and  the  rainbow 
[was]  over  his  head,"  that  is,  the  pledge  of  God's  unchanging 
covenant  with  creation.  "  His  face  [was]  as  it  were  the  sun." 
The  sun  is  ever  the  symbol  of  supreme  glory  in  rule,  and  the 
face  of  this  angel  is  said  to  be  like  the  sun.  So  it  was  on  the 
holy  mount  (Matt.  xvii.  2),  and  when  John  saw  his  Lord  again 
at  Patmos.  (Rev.  i.  16.)  "His  feet  as  pillars  of  fire"  united,  it 
would  seem,  the  solidity  of  the  "pillar"  and  the  thorough  final 
judgment  that  is  so  constantly  conveyed  by  "  fire."  He  plants 
the  left  on  the  sea,  meaning  the  unformed  masses  of  the  outside 
world,  and  the  right  on  the  earth,  i.e.,  that  part  of  the  world 
which  is  favoured  with  divine  testimony  and  government.  In 
other  words,  it  is  the  Lord's  universal  claim  over  men,  over  the 
world.  It  is  a  public  declaration  of  His  right,  not  in  respect 
of  the  church,  but  of  the  earth :  not  yet  His  actual  investiture 
as  Son  of  man,  but  a  dealing  of  providential  character,  which 
involves  a  recommencing  of  testimony  preparatoiy  to  His  speedy 
assumption  of  universal  dominion. 

But  a  further  step  has  to  be  taken  now.  It  is  not,  as  in 
chapter  v.,  God  seated  upon  His  throne  with  the  sealed  book 
in  His  right  hand,  and  then  the  Lamb  opening  tlie  book  as  the 
One  who  had  prevailed  to  do  so.  And  how  prevailed  ?  Through 
death.  It  is  not  by  creature -strength  that  the  man  of  God 
conquers.  The  victories  that  will  shine  most  and  brightest  are 
always  those  cast,  so  to  speak,  in  the  mould  of  the  death  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  In  poor  man's  case  it  is  life  first  and  then  death, 
because  we  are  by  nature  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins ;  but  in 
that  of  .the  Lord  Jesus  it  is  death  first  and  then  resurrection- 
life  ;  and  such  is  the  pattern  for  the  Christian's  faith  to  realize. 
Our  whole  life,  as  believers,  should  ilow  according  to  the  same 
cross  that  has  wrought  our  salvation  ;  for  the  cross  is  God's 
power  for  us  all  the  way  through.  (Gal.  vi.)  It  is  God  who  lias 
given  us  to  suffer,  and  then  comes  power  practically ;  but  this 
is,  perhaps  always,  after  there  ha.s  been  more  or  less  a  realization 
of  weakness  and  suffering.  (2  Cor.  xii.  xiii.  4.)  A  man  cannot 
win  Christian  victories  until  he  is  bare  and  low  before  God.  He 
must  1)0  broken  down  in  on(^  wav  or  another.     And  blessed  it  is 


THE   LITTLE   OPEN   BOOK.  203 

if  we  are  broken  down  in  the  presence  of  Christ ;  for  if  it  be 
not  there,  we  must  be  broken  down,  if  one  may  say  so,  in  our 
own  presence,  and  haply  too  in  that  of  others.  In  chapter  v., 
liowever,  Christ  opens  the  book  that  was  unintelligible  to  all 
the  mind  of  man,  and  He  shews  us  from  the  seals  certain 
judgments  of  God,  so  little  removed  from  ordinary  events  in 
providence  that  we  should  scarce  have  known  them  to  be  judg- 
ments, save  by  that  divine  unveiling.  But  the  Lamb  unfolds 
all,  and  we  find  that  God  is  at  work  to  introduce  the  kingdom 
of  the  First-begotten,  to  put  the  Heir  in  actual  possession  of  the 
inheritance. 

In  the  chapter  before  us  there  is  a  difference.  It  is  not  a 
sealed  book  that  we  have,  but  an  open  one:  and  it  is  also  em- 
phatically a  little  book.  There  is  nothing  mysterious  about  the 
matter.  We  come  here  to  a  notable  change  in  the  Revelation. 
Instead  of  its  being,  as  hitherto,  events  that  were  the  secret 
effects  of  God's  unseen  hand,  there  is  a  manifestation  of  His 
power  and  purpose  with  regard  to  His  people.  All  becomes  quite 
plain.  We  have  no  longer  symbolical  locusts,  having  a  king  (cf. 
Prov.  XXX.  27),  or  strange  and  strangely  numerous  horses  and 
horsemen,  &c.  It  is  now  God's  open,  brief,  and  decisive  actings. 
This  I  apprehend  to  be  the  difference  between  the  two  books. 
The  first  was  in  the  hand  of  God  and  sealed,  so  that  none  could 
open  it,  save  the  blessed  One  who  suffered  all  for  the  glor}^  of 
God.  Here  it  is  an  open  book,  which  the  prophet  takes  from 
the  angel's  hand;  and  immediately  we  have  no  longer  the  more 
secret  or  enigmatical  appearances  of  earlier  visions,  but  the 
temple,  the  holy  city,  the  Gentiles  treading  it  under  foot — all 
an  obvious  manifestation  that  God  is  acting  on  the  Jews.  We 
have  before  had  the  sealing  a  certain  number  out  of  the  tribes 
of  Israel,  scattered,  as  I  suppose,  throughout  the  whole  world. 
But  here  (chapter  xi.)  we  come  to  a  smaller  scale,  where  God's 
dealings  are  concentrated  on  Jerusalem,  the  sanctuary,  altar, 
worshippers,  two  witnesses,  &c.,  and  where  they  are  also  brought 
out  so  plainly  that  there  need  be  no  mistake  as  to  what  God 
means  thereby.  The  beast  as  such  also  appears  here  in  undis- 
guised and  tremendous  opposition  against  God  and  His  servants. 
And  evidently  the  Lord  Jesus  is  shewing  that  the  time  approaches 


204  PROCLAMATION    OF   THE   RIGHTS   OF   CHRIST. 

when  He  must  take  all  into  His  own  hands.  This  then  is  an 
open  book,  because  all  that  it  contains  is  perfectly  plain ;  and  it 
is  a  very  little  book,  because  but  a  sliort  time  and  a  narrow 
compass  are  contemplated  in  it. 

"  And  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  as  when  a  lion  roareth,  and 
when  he  had  cried,  the  seven  thunders  uttered  their  own  voices. 
And  when  the  seven  thunders  had  uttered  [them],  I  was  about 
to  write:  and  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying.  Seal  the  things 
which  the  seven  thunders  uttered  and  write  them  not"*  (ver.  3,  4). 
"  Will  a  lion  roar  in  the  forest,  when  he  hath  no  prey  ?  will  a 
young  lion  cry  out  of  his  den,  if  he  have  taken  nothing  ?  .  .  . 
shall  a  trumpet  be  blown  in  the  city,  and  the  people  not  be 
afraid?  shall  there  be  evil  in  a  city,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done 
it  ?  Surely  the  Lord  God  will  do  nothing,  but  he  revealeth  his 
secret  unto  liis  servants  the  prophets.  The  lion  hath  roared,  who 
will  not  fear?  The  Lord  God  liath  spoken,  who  can  but  pro- 
phesy?" (Amos  iii.)  I  cannot  but  regard  this  passage  of  the 
Jewish  prophet  as  in  various  elements  ilhistrative  of  the  vision 
we  are  examining.  Again,  thunder  in  the  Old  Testament  was 
constantly  the  expression  of  God's  authority  in  the  way  of  judg- 
ment. We  are  summoned  to  hear  this  awful  announcement  of 
God's  judgments.    John  was  about  to  write,  but  a  voice  from 

*  In  the  first  clause  of  v.  4,  the  uncial  MSS.  N  AB  C  P,  the  majority  of  cursives, 
and  almost  all  the  ancient  versions,  besides  Greek  and  Latin  fathers,  omit  tuq 
(pojvtiQ  tavriov,  and  the  renderinj^  would  tht^n  be,  "  And  when  the  seven  thunders 
hiid  spokc'U,"  for  P^n^lish  hardly  admits  of  the  absolute  "had  uttered."  I  sup- 
jiose  that  the  phrase  was  assimilated  to  the  close  of  verse  3,  wJicrcas  the  true  form 
is  corroborated  by  the  latter  clauses  of  verse  4.  The  difference  in  sense  wonld 
bo  that  these  thunders  not  only  emitted  their  own  proper  sounds,  but  convej-ed 
something  intelligible  to  the  prophet.  At  the  end  of  verso  4,  /u>)  nvra  ypaxpyt; 
is  supported  by  the  overwhelming  preponderance  of  manuscripts.  The  cojumon 
text  has  ravra  with  a  few  cursives,  most  of  which,  with  the  old  Cappadocian 
commentator  Andreas,  read  fitTa  for  n>i.  This  last,  I  presume,  was  the  mere 
blunder  of  a  scribe,  who  probably  confounded  a  conti-aotion  of  the  former  with 
the  latter,  and  this  might  be  the  more  readily,  inasmuch  as  fUTo.  ravra  ("  after 
these  things")  is  a  frequent  formula  in  Revelation.  It  is  curious  that  this  obviDUs 
mistake,  yielding  a  sense  totally  different  from,  and  nearly  opposite  to,  the  one 
intended,  has  been  followed  in  more  than  one  of  the  old  foreign  editions,  begin- 
ning, if  I  mistake  not,  with  the  Complutensian,  though  the  fact  is  not  stated  by 
Tregelles,  &c.  There  arc  also  discrepancies  as  to  the  form  of  the  last  word,  but 
there  is  the  less  reason  to  record  them,  as  that  which  some  authorities  give  is  not 
even  sense. 


NO    MORE   DELAY.  205 

heaven  forbids  it.  He  was  not  to  communicate  the  details  of 
what  God  was  going  to  do  now.  But  the  angel  "  lifted  up  his 
right  hand  to  heaven  and  sware  by  him  that  liveth  for  ever  and 
ever,  who  created  heaven  ....  that  there  should  be  no  more 
space  [or  delay],  but  in  the  days  of  the  voice  of  the  seventh 
angel,  when  he  should  be  about  to  sound,  the  mystery  of  God 
also  should  be  finished,  as  he  announced  to  his  servants  the 
prophets"*  (verses  5-7). 

I  apprehend  that  people  often  gather  a  vague  if  not  wrong 
notion  from  those  words,  "there  shall  be  time  no  lonaer." 
Many  imagine  that  it  means — there  was  then  to  be  an  end  of 
time,  and  eternity  was  to  begin.  But  this  is  not  at  all  the  sense, 
and  the  case  shews  the  importance  of  seeking;  light  from  God. 
The  meaning  is,  that  God  would  no  longer  allow  time  to  run  on 
before  He  interfered  with  the  course  of  this  world.  It  is  not 
that  eternity  was  at  once  to  begin,  but  that  there  should  be  no 
longer  any  lapse  of  time  before  His  last  summons  to  the  world 
and  the  introduction  of  a  new  dispensation,  in  which  He  will 

*  The  right  readings  here,  I  believe,  are  \p6vog  ovketi  iarai  ....  ku'i 
krikkadi).  The  former  confirms  the  sense  given  in  the  text  and  evidently  means 
that  there  shall  be  no  longer  space  or  delay,  but  in  the  days,  &c.  "The  time 
shall  not  be  yet"  would  require  6  Kaipog  instead  of  xf^ovog,  and  ovTrui  rather  than 
ouKSTi,  which,  in  constructions  like  the  present,  means  "  no  more."  Others  take 
it  as  "a  [mystical]  time;"  but  this  also  in  scripture  is  always  Kaipog.  The 
meaning  which  results  from  the  latter  very  accurately  falls  in  with  the  senti- 
ment, for  orav  fiiWy  (TaXnii^fii'  avoids  the  indefiniteness  of  the  mere  future,  and 
intimates  that,  when  the  seventh  angel  should  just  sound,  the  mystery  of  God 
should  also  be  finished,  or  literally  "was  finished,"  the  Greek  aorist  being  em- 
ployed to  express  the  summariness  of  its  completion — its  coincidence,  as  it  were, 
with  that  seventh  blast.  Bp.  Middleton  (and  before  him,  it  seems,  Piscator  and 
Vitringa)  suggested  a  Hebraism  as  the  source  of  this  peculiar  use  of  the  aorist; 
for  the  Hebrew  preterite  very  frequently  stands  for  the  future  when  that  tense 
goes  before  and  is  joined  by  the  conjunction.  Indeed,  as  Gesenius  remarks 
(Rodiger's  ed.,  §  124,  6),  the  Pret.  with  Vau  conversive  relates  to  futurity,  also 
when  it  is  not  preceded  by  a  future  tense,  but  by  some  other  indication  of  futurity, 
and  even  where  none  such  appears.  This  solution,  if  it  be  true  here,  confinns 
Kal  iTsXhrrOtj.  Here,  again,  rtXtaOrjfftTai  would  leave  a  vague  future  open,  and 
another  form  is  employed,  which  may  appear  harsh  at  first,  but  the  propriety  of 
which  becomes  apparent,  the  more  the  requirements  of  the  passage  are  under- 
stood. TtXecrOy  is  good  in  sense,  and  fairly  supported ;  but  it  is  easier  than 
iTtXiffdr)  and  may  have  been  the  correction  of  a  copyist.  The  converse  appears 
to  me  improbable. 


206  SUSPENSE   OF  JUDGMENT. 

deal  ill  an  open  manner  with  men  on  the  earth.  Since  the 
rejection  and  ascension  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  men — "  His  citizens" 
— have  sent  a  message  after  Him,  saying  (at  least  in  their 
hearts),  "  We  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us."  Such 
has  been  the  voice  of  the  world  ever  since  He  went  into  the  far 
country.  The  real  desire  of  man  is  to  be  rid  of  Christ ;  and  in 
general  he  thinks  he  is.  And  no  wonder  he  dislikes  to  hear  of 
His  return  in  power  and  glory  ;  for  the  scriptures  declare  ex- 
pressly that  Christ  is  to  judge  man,  and  man  does  not  like  to 
stand  before  his  judge.  Hence  he  puts  off  as  long  as  possible 
the  warning  of  Christ's  advent  to  judge  siu  and  sinners.  The 
Lord  intimates  here  that  there  is  to  be  ere  long  a  close  put  to 
the  present  delay.  All  the  time  that  Christ  is  away  at  the  right 
hand  of  God  there  is  a  suspense  of  judgment.  But  God  feels 
deeply  for  His  people,  suffering  as  they  must  during  the  inter- 
val of  Christ's  rejection;  and  now  He  is  not  going  to  allow  such 
a  state  of  things  to  continue  any  longer,  for  there  are  the  evident 
signs  and  tokens  of  the  Lord's  coming  to  deal  with  His  enemies. 

Tlie  iniglity  angel  swears  that  there  should  be  no  further 
delay  (not  before  eternity,  but)  before  the  day  of  the  Lord.  The 
space  or  day  spoken  of  here  is  man's  day,  and  when  this  ends, 
the  day  of  the  Lord  begins,  which  latter  in  scripture  is  never 
confounded  with  eternity,  because  that  day  has  an  end;  whereas 
of  course  eternity  never  can  terminate.  Viewed  from  every 
side,  the  real  force  then  is  "  that  tliere  should  be  no  longer 
delay."  And  remark  the  words  in  the  following  verse:  "But  in 
the  days  of  the  voice  of  the  seventh  angel,  when  he  should  be 
about  to  sound,  the  mystery  of  God  shoukl  be  finished,"  &c. 
These  words  at  once  contradict  the  thought  that  eternity  was  to 
follow  immediately.  On  the  contrary,  after  this  the  whole  of 
the  millennium  comes  in ;  after  it  a  little  season,  and  then 
eternity.  Souls  are  sometimes  hindered  from  entering  into  the 
truth  of  God  by  one  little  word,  and  so  1  believe  it  has  been 
with  this  passage.  Often  when  a  slight  obscurity  is  cleared  up, 
heaps  of  difticulties  disappear. 

God  will  put  a  stop  to  the  present 'delay  :  "the  mystery  of 
God  "  will  tlien  be  finished.  Tiiis  I  take  to  mean  the  secret  of 
His  allowing  Satan  to  have  his  own  way,  and  man  too  (that  is 


DISTINCT   FROM    THE   MYSTERY   OF   HIS   WILL.  207 

to  say,  the  wonder  of  evil  prospering  and  of  good  being  trodden 
under  foot)  God  checks,  no  doubt,  the  evil  in  a  measure,  partly 
through  human  government  and  partly  through  His  own  provi- 
dential dealings.  And  indeed  it  is  an  immense  mercy  that  there 
are  such  restraints  upon  the  evil  of  this  world,  for  what  would 
it  be  without  them,  when,  even  in  the  midst  of  God's  providen- 
tial checks,  wickedness  is  often  so  triumphant,  and  godliness 
thrown  to  the  ground  ?  Still  there  is  an  influence  for  evil  that 
no  government  can  root  out,  and  good  that  is  belied  and  so  has 
comparatively  little  influence.  That  is  what  seems  so  mysterious 
a  thing  to  us,  when  we  know  God  and  how  He  hates  evil.  But 
it  is  soon  coming  to  an  end.  God  is  about  to  touch  all  that  is 
contrary  to  Himself,  to  bring  all  that  has  been  promised  from 
(jf  old,  and  to  'Ave  credit  for  all  that  has  been  done  according 
to  Himself  And  He  is  going  to  do  this  by  His  Son.  The  One 
whom  man  despised  and  rejected  is  the  very  person  whom  God 
will  send  to  reduce  all  into  holy  order  and  beauty  out  of  the 
existing  mass  of  confusion. 

"  The  mystery  of  God "  must  not  be  confounded  with  the 
mystery  of  His  will  in  Eph.  i.  9.  This  last  is  what  has  been 
always  near  to  His  heart,  for  it  involves  the  glory  not  of  the 
church  onlv  but  of  Christ.  It  is  "  according  to  His  good 
pleasure  which  He  hath  purposed  in  Himself"  There  was  no 
one  that  suggested  it.  It  was  His  own  will.  And  what  is  the 
mystery  of  His  will  ?  "  That  in  the  dispensation  of  tlie  fulness 
of  times  He  might  gather  together  in  one  all  tilings  in  Christ, 
both  which  are  in  heaven  and  which  are  on  earth,  even  in 
Him."  All  these  things  •  that  Satan  has  scattered  now  will  be 
reunited  in  one  under  Christ.  Mercy  and  truth  will  tlieu  meet 
together,  righteousness  and  peace  kiss  each  other.  This  is  true 
even  now  for  the  believer,  as  far  as  his  own  reconciliation  to 
God  is  concerned.  Satan  may  challenge  you: — How  can  it  be 
had  in  the  presence  of  so  much  evil  within  ?  No  wonder  that 
this  cuts  right  into  the  conscience  of  the  man  that  doubts  God, 
and  even  of  the  one  that  believes  Him,  if  he  is  looking  at 
himself.  When  occupied  with  myself  these  doubts  may  well 
arise,  but  not  if  I  am  looking  only  to  Christ.  He  alone  is  entitled 
to  give  me  rest  before  God.    It  is  Christ  alone  who  can  dissipate 


208  THE   MYSTERY   OF    HIS   WILL   NOT   PROPHECY. 

tlie  waves  and  the  winds.  Satan  has  set  man  against  God  in 
every  way,  even  against  goodness  coming  down  from  Him  ;  but 
God  is  not  going  to  allow  evil  to  pass  a  certain  limit.  Though 
Satan's  opposition  is  allowed  to  frustrate  God's  plans  for  the 
present,  yet  every  one  of  the  ways  in  which  He  has  been  at 
work  in  the  earth  from  the  first  is  destined  to  triumph  and  to 
triumph  together  in  the  end.  (Hosea  ii.  21,  23.)  There  was  a 
man  set  up  in  Adam ;  there  was  government  put  into  the  hands 
of  Noah;  there  was  God's  calling  given  to  Abraham;  there 
was  the  long  and  patient  test  of  the  law ;  finally,  there  was 
the  mission  of  His  Sou  and  of  His  Spirit.  All  these  things,  so 
to  speak,  have  been  streams  from  God  flowing  through  this 
earth.  They  have  been  refused  or  corrupted  by  man  from  the 
first,  and  through  the  enemy's  power  men  will  abuse  these  very 
dealings  of  God  to  bring  in  the  most  daring  and  deadly  con- 
spiracy that  the  world  has  ever  seen — Satan  and  man  combined 
against  God,  who  will  allow  all  this  evil  to  come  out,  and  will 
then  put  an  end  to  it  by  judgment.  This  is  the  finishing  of 
the  mystery. 

But  that  which  is  called  "  the  mystery  of  His  will "  is  not 
the  subject  of  prophecy.  Christ  will  be  the  Head  of  all  bless- 
ing and  He  will  gather  all  things  in  united  blessing  under  His 
own  headship  —  all  that  Satan  had  contrived  to  spoil.  What 
God  made  originally  was  merely  in  a  condition  of  innocence ; 
but  what  the  Lord  Jesus  will  accomplish  in  the  end,  the 
reconciliation  of  all  things,  will  be  beyond  Satan's  power  to 
touch.  All  will  be  gathered  together  in  one,  even  in  Christ 
their  chief.  And  another  thing  it  is  well  to  state.  In  this 
mystery  of  God's  will  we  are  not  merely  to  be  blessed  under 
Christ,  but  in  order  to  get  the  full  character  of  the  blessing, 
we  are  blessed  with  Him.  And  this  is  what  we  have  here  in 
I'^jhesians :  not  that  we  will  be  a  sort  of  inlieritance  for  Christ, 
but  we  are  j'oint-heirs  with  Him.  In  that  great  mystery  of  God 
in  Christ,  there  are  two  thoughts  —  Christ's  universal  headship, 
and  the  church's  union  to  Ilim.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  our 
l>cing  united  under  Christ's  power;  but  all  things  that  ever 
have  been  made  are  to  be  united  under  His  headship  ;  and, 
wonderful  thought !  the  church  is  to  share  all  that  glory  along 


CHRIST  AND  THE  CHURCH.  209 

with  Him.  It  is  not  what  belongs  to  Christ  as  a  divine  person, 
but  what  He  takes  as  the  reward  of  redemption.  And  this  very 
work  gives  Him  a  title  to  bestow  it  on  whom  God  will.  The 
church  is  united  as  the  body  and  bride  of  Him  who  is  the  Lord 
of  all.  She  is  the  Eve  of  the  Second  Adam.  In  Ephesians  v.  St, 
Paul  takes  up  more  particularly  the  latter  part  of  the  subject. 
Christ  is  to  present  it  to  Himself  a  glorious  church,  not  having 
spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing.  The  great  mystery  brought 
out  there  is  the  nearness,  the  love,  the  intimacy  of  bridal 
relationship  between  Christ  and  the  church. 

In  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  you  have  the  same  thing 
referred  to  (chapter  ii.  2) :  "  To  the  acknowledgment  of  the 
mystery  of  God  [and  of  the  Father,  and  of  Christ]."  These 
last  words  seem  inserted  without  adequate  authority,  and  when 
persons  try  to  mend  scripture,  they  only  damage  it.  There  is 
a  certain  great  mystery  spoken  of  in  Colossians  i.  (verse  26.) 
The  meaning  of  the  word  mystery  is  a  secret.  It  may  not  be 
a  secret  now,  but  it  means  a  thing  that  was  a  secret.  Where 
there  is  anything  that  people  cannot  understand,  they  are  apt 
to  designate  it  a  mystery.  But  in  scripture  it  means  a  ti'uth 
that  God  kept  hid,  but  that  is  so  no  longer — something  which 
they  did  not  know  as  men  or  Jews,  but  that  Christ  was  to 
teach  them  as  Christians.  There  is  another  statement  about  it 
in  the  next  verse :  "  To  whom  God  would  make  known  what 
is  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  this  mystery  among  the  Gentiles, 
which  is  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory." 

As  to  the  predictions  of  Christ  in  the  Old  Testament,  it  is  a 
mistake  to  call  this  or  the  fact  itself  a  mystery  :  enough  was 
quite  plain.  What  the  Jewish  prophets  proclaimed  was  a  Messiah 
coming  who  would  reign  over  them,  and  who  would  unite  sal- 
vation with  being  "  the  great  King."  What  they  did  not  under- 
stand, though  revealed,  was  His  humiliation  and  death.  They 
stumbled  over  Him.  Again  "  the  mystery  "  is  a  term  never  ap- 
plied to  Christ's  death  and  resurrection.  This  was  not  a  secret 
at  all,  but  on  the  contrary  is  very  plainly  predicted  in  Isaiah 
liii..  Psalms  xvi.  xxii.  Ixix.  cvi.,  and  many  other  passages. 

But  it  was  a  mystery  that,  when  Christ  was  rejected  by  His 
people,  and  during  the  time  of  His  exaltation  in  heaven,  God 

p 


210  CHKIST  AND  THE  CHUECH. 

would  make  Him  to  be  the  Head  of  a  heavenly  body,  chosen 
by  His  grace  out  of  all — Jews  or  Gentiles.  This  was  not 
treated  of  in  the  Old  Testament.  There  were  certain  things 
that  we  can  now  shew  to  be  types  of  it,  but  they  never 
would  have  yielded  the  least  light  upon  it,  if  the  mystery  had 
not  been  brought  out.  There  was  no  such  thing  then,  nor  even 
any  such  predicted,  as  Jew  and  Gentile  being  blessed  together 
in  one  body ;  and  this  is  the  reason  why  it  is  called  "  the 
mystery  hidden  from  ages  and  from  generations."  It  was  a 
secret  hid  in  God  that  tlie  prophets  did  not  touch  upon.  When 
the  Jews  have  their  Messiah,  it  will  not  be  as  the  hope  of  glory, 
but  as  the  One  who  Himself  brings  in  the  glory.  When  the 
time  comes  for  the  blessing  they  are  looking  for,  there  will  be 
no  doubt  about  it,  for  all  will  be  manifested,  whether  for  friends 
or  foes ;  neither  will  it  be  a  hope,  but  the  actual  accomplishment 
of  glory  in  their  midst.  But  now  there  is  an  extraordinary 
state  of  things  that  God  is  effecting  among  the  Gentiles  while 
the  Jews  are  cast  off.  The  Gentiles  have  Christ  now,  not  as 
bringing  in  glory  visibly  on  the  earth,  as  it  will  be  among  the 
Jews  by  and  by,  but  they  have  Him  in  them  the  hope  of  glory 
by  and  by,  and  in  heaven. 

The  term  "mystery  of  God"  may  be  used  in  our  chapter, 
because  it  was  specially  during  the  time  of  God's  non-interven- 
tion with  the  world  that  He  had  been  working  out  the  won- 
derful secret  of  Christ  and  the  church.  Now  this  was  done  with. 
Still  the  mystery  of  evil  being  permitted  to  prosper  goes  on  for 
a  time  longer — that  passiveness  of  God,  whereby  He  does  not 
hinder  evil  from  having  the  upper  hand,  and  good  from  being 
trampled  down.  It  should  soon  close,  as  He  declared  the 
glad  tidings  to  His  servants  the  pro[)]iets.  The  voice  speak.s 
aoain  and  says,  "  Go  take  the  little  book  which  is  open  in  the 
hand  of  the  angel,"  &c.  (verse  8.)  Accordingly  John  takes  the 
book,  and  finds  it,  when  he  has  eaten,  in  his  mouth  sweet  as 
honey  ;  but  when  he  ponders  its  contents,  and  digests  its  results, 
liow  bitter  within !  So  it  is  and  will  be.  When  we  see  how 
God  will  accomplish  all,  it  must  be  pain  to  think  what  is  re- 
served for  man,  as  indeed  it  is  to  know  how  perseveringly  he 
rebels  against  God,  and  forsakes  his  own  mercies. 


GENERAL  REFERENCE  TO  THE  REFORMATION.      211 

The  Lord  grant  that  what  has  been  of  God  for  the  clearing  of 
our  standing  from  earthly  principles,  and  awakening  a  just  feel- 
ing of  the  exceeding  dignity  of  the  place  in  which  God  has  put 
us,  may  be  impressed  upon  our  hearts !  None  are  in  so  respon- 
sible a  place  as  those  who  are  occupied  with  heavenly  things. 
And  let  us  not  suppose  that  position,  or  even  truth,  will  of 
itself  keep  a  soul :  nothing  but  the  Spirit  of  God  can ;  and  He 
never  will,  where  there  is  not  dependence  and  self-judgment. 
He  is  come  to  glorify  Christ.  The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  watch 
and  pray  !  For  while  the  truth  is  calculated  to  separate  from  the 
world,  yet  where  it  is  abused  and  degenerates  into  that  knowledge 
which  puffs  up,  one  is  prepared  for  the  worst  results. 

It  remains  to  add  a  few  words  as  usual  on  the  past  measure  of 
accomplishment  which  this  parenthetical  vision  has  received.  I 
am  not  disposed  to  question  its  general  application  to  that  won- 
derful divine  intervention,  the  Eeformation.  The  Eastern  empire 
had  for  some  time  succumbed  to  the  furious  onset  of  the  Turks  ; 
the  West  was  not  a  whit  less  steeped  and  impenitent  than  before 
in  abominable  idolatry  and  imposture,  when  that  sudden  light 
from  on  high  shone  upon  astonished  Europe.  Not  that  the 
grace  of  Christ  was  deeply  realized,  or  reflected  in  the  Reforma- 
tion. The  testimony  of  its  leading  spirit,  Luther,  expressed  itself 
in  a  way  more  akin  to  the  lightnings  and  thunders  of  Sinai,  and 
savoured  too  often  of  earth  rather  than  of  heaven.  In  fact  it 
is  this  comparative  earthliness  of  character,  which  enables  the 
Historicalists  to  find  so  many  apparent  coincidences  between 
that  great  work  and  the  vision  before  us.  It  is  just  because 
Luther  so  much  approximated,  not  to  St.  Paul's  line  of  minis- 
try, but  to  the  prophetic  testimony  of  Jesus  which  is  yet  to  be 
borne  by  the  latter-day  witnesses,  that  there  seems  so  much  in 
common  between  the  tenor  of  his  life  and  the  tendency  of  his 
labours,  and  the  predictions  of  what  they  are  to  teach  and  do 
and  suffer  by  and  by.  The  idea  of  comparing  it  with  the 
original  sending  out  of  the  gospel  and  formation  of  the  church 
at  Pentecost  is,  I  cannot  but  feel,  a  gross  misconception. 

Besides,  is  it  true  that  there  is  not  a  particular  in  the  vision 
to  which  the  Reformation  does  not  exactly  answer  ?  Does  the 
blaze  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness  intimate  the  republication  of 

p  2 


212        THE  PARTICULARS  DO  NOT  CORRESPOND, 

His  gospel  ?  I  do  not  doubt  that  the  full  meaning  of  the  vision 
involves  a  public  testiuioiiy  to  the  coming  of  "  the  day;"  but 
for  this  reason  the  gospel  is  excluded,  as  any  spiritual  person 
may  see  who  dispassionately  weighs  Mai.  iv.  For  the  essence 
of  the  gospel  is  that  therein  God  justifies  the  ungodly  and  saves 
the  lost ;  whereas  it  is  "  unto  you  [the  godly  remnant  of  the 
Jews]  that  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arises  with  healing  in  his 
wings ;  and  ye  shall  go  forth  and  grow  up  as  calves  of  the  stall. 
And  ye  shall  tread  down  the  wicked ;  for  they  shall  be  ashes 
under  the  soles  of  your  feet  in  the  day  that  I  shall  do  this,  saith 
Jehovah  of  hosts.  Remember  ye  the  law  of  Moses  my  servant." 
There  may  be  a  measure  of  resemblance  between  this  and  the 
aims  and  course  (though  not  the  issue)  of  the  more  warlike 
Reformers ;  but  in  that  very  proportion  it  is  the  reverse  of  the 
gospel,  or  of  the  practical  conduct  which  flows  from  and  is  suit- 
able to  it. 

Again  the  cloud  recalls  the  deliverance  of  Israel,  as  the  rain- 
bow does  the  covenant  with  the  earth,  when  government  was 
instituted ;  the  pillars  of  fire  represent  judicial  firmness,  and 
the  loud  liun-like  voice  is  tlie  terror-striking  assertion  of  His 
rights,  preceded  by  the  significant  claim  laid  to  the  whole  world, 
and  followed  by  the  complete  utterance  of  God's  power.  These 
with  the  little  open  book  (which  appears  to  mean  known  prophecy 
relative  to  tlie  city  and  temple)  are  all  of  them  features  entirely 
agreeing  with  the  approaching  resumption  of  the  Lord's  relations 
with  Jerusalem  and  the  Jews,  and  the  world  in  general,  but  not 
one  of  them,  as  it  seems  to  me,  in  its  full  import  like  the  gospel 
of  God's  grace.  Heaven  and  the  church  are  entirely  unseen  : 
it  is  a  question  of  an  earthly  people,  and  hence  of  kings  and 
nations ;  it  is  the  recommencement,  not  of  evangelising,  much 
less  of  edifying  the  body  of  Christ,  but  of  the  prophetic  testi- 
mony here  below.  The  decree  is  declared.  Jehovah's  anointed 
King  is  about  to  take  Zion,  His  liill  of  holiness,  nay,  the  nations 
for  His  inheritance,  and  tlie  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  His 
possession,  lie  is  no  longer  to  ask  tlie  Father  for  the  heavenly 
sons,  but  for  the  world  itself — no  longer  to  set  apart  by  the  truth 
for  association  with  Himself  above,  but  to  reduce  people  with  a 
rod  of  iron,  and  to  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel. 


THE   SEVEN   THUNDERS.  213 

"  Be  wise  now,  therefore,  0  ye  kings :  be  instructed,  ye  judges 
of  the  earth."  Such  is  the  obvious  connexion  of  the  scene 
before  us.  In  view  of  this,  it  is  a  preliminary  interference. 
Had  the  Reformers  understood  the  high  calling  of  the  saints,  or 
the  nature,  character,  and  consequences  of  our  union  with  Christ 
in  heavenly  places,  there  would  have  been  a  contrast,  not  an 
analogy.  In  truth  it  was  (I  repeat)  the  effect  of  their  lack  of 
spiritual  intelligence  as  Christians,  and  their  approximation  to 
godly  Jews,  which  imprinted  on  their  movement  whatever 
assimilation  there  is  to  the  scene  we  are  reviewing. 

Further,  the  attempt  to  make  it  the  complete  answer  involves 
at  least  the  ordinary  amount  of  strain,  and  I  might  almost  add 
of  the  absurd.  For,  in  his  haste  to  apply  the  principle  of  allusive 
reference,  as  it  has  been  called,  the  author  of  the  Horae  Apoc. 
does  not  even  glance  at  the  connexion  of  the  seven  thunders 
with  Christ.  It  was  too  good  an  opportunity  to  lose  for  an 
allusion  to  the  thunders  of  the  Vatican.  But  here,  strange  to 
say,  and  in  opposition  as  it  appears  to  me  to  the  very  principle 
invoked,  Mr.  Elliott  wrests  these  thunders  from  Him  who  is  the 
primary  figure  in  the  vision,  and  applies  them  exclusively  to 
the  Pope !  The  reasoning  that  is  offered  in  support  of  the 
proposition,  so  monstrous  to  any  mind  not  under  the  over- 
whelming bias  of  a  system,  appears  to  me  wholly  groundless, 
though  not  unworthy  of  Mr.  E.'s  well-known  ingenuity.  1.  The 
vocality  of  the  thunders  is  not  altogether  unprecedented  in  this 
book  (chap.  vi.  1),  and  besides,  the  trumpets  are  said  to  have 
the  same  (chap.  viii.  13).  Compare  also  Rev.  xvi.  7  for  the 
altar.  The  supposed  parallel  in  John  xii.  28  is  certainly  not  in 
favour  of  papal  oracles.  2.  The  reflective  pronoun  no  doubt 
implies  that  the  voices  were  their  own,  the  sounds  proper  to  the 
thunders  spoken  of;  but  that  they  were  in  opposition  to  the 
angel's  crying  as  with  lion's  roar  is  the  most  unnatural  of 
inferences.  Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  theory  of  an 
allusion  to  Leo  X.,  even  so  the  analogy  of  every  other  vision  is 
in  favour  of  the  thought  that  the  direct  reference  is  the  full 
expression  of  divine  power,  as  God's  seal  upon  the  angel's  asser- 
tion of  title.  3.  It  seems  to  me  almost  awful  to  lay  it  down 
that  the  proposition,  "  write  them  not,"  implies  that  the  voices 


214  NO  ALLUSION  TO  PAPAL  BULLS. 

were  "  not  the  true  sayings  of  God,  but  instead  thereof  false  and 
an  imposture"  {H.  A.,  vol.  ii.  p.  105.)  The  real  reason  is  very 
simple.  The  general  fact,  that  "the  voice  of  Jehovah"  echoes 
the  claims  of  Christ  to  the  possession  of  the  world  is  given  ; 
the  details  are  not  to  be  written.  The  apostle  Paul  was  caught 
up  into  paradise  and  heard  secrets  (apprjTa  pT/jfiara)  which  it  is  not 
allowed  for  man  to  utter.  The  prophet  John  was  about  to  write 
what  the  thunders  divulged,  but  the  voice  from  heaven  com- 
mands the  things  to  be  sealed,  not  written — a  mode  of  dealing 
most  extraordinary,  if  the  utterances  are  supposed  to  be  the 
false  decrees  of  Eome,  but  well  harmonizing  with  the  conclusion 
that  other  things  were  yet  to  be  revealed,  before  the  power  of 
God  was  enforced  and  the  earthly  rights  of  Christ  are  made 
good  by  judgment.  4.  Hence,  I  utterly  reject,  as  a  mere 
corollary  of  the  last  error,  the  idea  of  reference  here  to  the  seven 
hills  of  Eome.  Hitherto  the  septenary  usage  of  the  Eevelation 
has  been  entirely  independent  of  that  local  sign,  which  occurs 
only  in  chap,  xvii.,  where  the  context  proves  that  Eome  is  in 
question.  Here,  for  the  same  reason  of  the  connexion,  the  Eoman 
hills  are  an  intrusion,  while  the  idea  of  completeness  is  the 
natural  sense.  5.  This  also  accounts  for  the  prefixed  article, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  seven  angels  (chap,  viii.),  who,  I  presume, 
have  no  special  connexion  with  that  city.  As  to  the  opinion 
that  there  is  nothing  but  the  Papal  bulls  to  which  the  seven 
Apocalyptic  thunders  have  been  made  to  answer,  it  is  natural  in 
the  quarter  whence  it  flows  ;  but  when  the  writer  adds  "  or  can 
he"  he  passes,  1  humbly  think,  beyond  the  bounds  of  wisdom 
or  modesty.  None  of  us  is  the  measure  of  divine  knowledge 
nor  of  what  the  Lord  may  bestow.  Further,  I  for  one  confess 
my  inability  to  discern,  even  with  the  special  pleading  of  the 
Horae,  the  peculiar  suitability  of  the  angel's  oath  to  the  pre- 
valent convictions  of  the  Eeforming  i'atlu;rs  or  their  Protestant 
children.  Savonarola  and  others  before  him  seem  to  have  been 
rather  more  full  of  the  nearness  of  Christ's  kingdom  than 
Luther  and  his  coadjutors.  What  tlie  great  German  expected 
was  ratlier  the  destruction  of  the  J*ope's  kingdom  by  the  wo^'d 
alone,  and  this  founded  on  his  construction  of  Daniel  quite  as 
much  as  St.  Paul ;  i.e.  it  seems  to  me,  in  contrast  with  the  open 


THE   angel's    oath    REFERS   TO    THE   FUTURE.  215 

book  and  the  angel's  most  soleran  announcement.  Nor  did 
Melancthon  improve  on  Luther,  when  he  assigned  Dan.  vii.  to 
Mohammedanism  and  Dan.  viii.  to  the  Papacy.  Neither  can  I 
admit  that  prophesying,  as  addressed  to  John,  and  predicated  of 
the  two  witnesses,  or  indeed  ever,  is  the  mere  function  of  ex- 
pounding the  scriptures  and  exhorting  from  them,  as  fulfilled  in 
every  faithful  gospel  minister.  The  notion,  too,  that  in  the 
words,  "  Go  take  the  little  book,"  and  "  thou  must  prophesy 
again,"  we  are  to  read  (not  now  of  course,  an  allusive  reference, 
but)  a  sort  of  prefiguration  of  the  deacon's  ordination  to  preach 
the  gospel  or  Christian  ministry,  and  of  the  taking  in  hand  the 
New  Testament  to  translate  it  into  the  vernacular  tongue ;  and 
yet  more,  that  St.  John's  being  made  representative  of  the 
faithful  ministers  of  the  Eeformation  at  this  epoch  intimates 
that  they  were  all  in  the  line  of  evangelical  succession,  is  to 
me  more  like  playing  with  feelings  than  a  grave  exposition  of 
this  chapter.  It  is  the  attempt  to  apply  the  details  to  the  past, 
which  betrays  the  unsatisfactoriness  of  the  exclusive  Protestant 
scheme :  a  bearing  on  it,  definite  enough  to  shew  that  such  a 
work  as  the  Eeformation  was  not  overlooked  of  God,  in  the 
protracted  application  of  the  book,  I  have  already  admitted. 
The  full  literal  carrying  out  of  every  word  awaits  the  end  of 
the  age. 


216  JERUSALEM    IN    VIEW, 


CHAPTER   XL 

From  the  inonient  tliat  God  begins  to  deal  with  the  eartli  in  an 
open  manner,  Israel  naturally  comes  forward  and  also  the  Gen- 
tiles as  connected  with  them.  (Deut.  xxxii.  8,  9.)  We  have  had 
the  twelve  tribes  scattered  abroad  and  a  measured  number  sealed; 
but  the  land  of  Judea  and  Jerusalem  is  the  great  foreground  of 
the  picture  that  we  see  here.  "  Else/'  it  is  said  to  the  prophet, 
"  and  measure  the  temple  of  God,  and  the  altar,  and  them  that 
worship  therein."  The  altar,  I  think,  clearly  refers  to  the  brazen 
altar ;  for  the  golden  altar  was  mcluded  in  the  temple.  "  They 
that  worship  therein"  are  persons  who  are  characterized  by 
nearness  to  God.  The  altar  was  the  expression  of  true  approach 
to  God,  and  they  have  drawn  near  Him.  It  was  the  place  of 
tlie  burnt-offering  which  marked  the  acceptance  of  the  person. 
Now  this  shews  us  tliat  here  we  have  God  owning  a  certain 
number  of  people  on  the  earth  as  capable  of  drawing  near  to 
Him.  "  Measure  the  temple,"  &c.,  meant,  I  suppose,  that  God 
appropriated  thus  far  Himself  (verse  1).* 

*  The  received  text  gives  /cai  o  iiyytXog  I'laTiiKH,  the  Complutensiiin,  fullow- 
ing  several  MSS.,  has  the  same  words,  thus — kui  ekxt.  6  dyy.  Erasmus  and  R. 
St(Ji)heii8  had  more  rightly  left  them  out,  as  do  the  Alexandrian  -IMS.,  more 
than  thirty  cursives,  and  all  the  ancient  versions,  save  the  Arm.  and  Syr.,  which 
in  the  Apocal ypHc  are  not  seldom  encumbered  with  glosses.  The  present  addition 
was  probably  drawn  from  Zechariah  iii.  3  through  the  scholiast  Andreas.  The 
elliptical  construction  perplexed  people,  and  disposed  them  to  ado])t  some  such 
interpolation.  Beza  was  the  first,  after  the  Complutcnsian  editors,  who  sanc- 
tioni^d  the  clause  in  the  common  printed  copies ;  and  this  to  avoid  the  absurdity 
of  the  reed's  seeming  to  speak.  But  there  is  no  necessity,  as  ho  himself  admits, 
for  Ruch  a  meaning,  if  we  do  adhere  to  the  best  authorities.  At  the  same  time 
it  is  a  mistake  to  say  that  the  words  are  wanting  in  all  the  most  ancient  Greek 
MSS. ;  for  N  A  P  omit  and  B  has  them,  while  C  being  deficient  cannot  therefore 
be  cited. 


NOT   KOME,  217 

"  And  the  court  which  is  without  the  temple  leave  out,  and 
measure  it  not ;  for  it  is  given  unto  the  Gentiles  ;  and  the  holy 
city  shall  they  tread  under  foot  forty  and  two  months  "  (ver.  2). 
The  Jew  is  owned  to  a  certain  extent  by  God;  and  consequently 
their  city  is  spoken  of  as  the  holy  city,  and  the  Gentiles  as 
those  who  were  defiling  and  treading  it  under  foot.  But  it  is 
important,  before  we  go  any  farther,  to  enquire  whether  there  is 
any  reference  in  other  scriptures  to  this  same  period,  spoken  of 
here  as  forty  and  two  months.  It  will  not  be  doubted  that  the 
prophecy  of  Daniel  is  the  book  which  most  nearly  answers  in 
the  Old  Testament  to  the  Apocalypse  in  the  New.  We  find  there 
a  period  mentioned  of  three  years  and  a  half,  called  in  mystical 
language  "  a  time,  times,  and  a  half"  Let  us  turn  to  Daniel  vii. 
There  we  find  the  Gentile  powers  represented  as  wild  beasts, 
having  in  part  some  resemblances  in  nature.  There  was  a  winged 
lion  and  a  bear;  and  the  leopard  was  presented  as  a  four-winged 
witness  to  the  swiftness  of  conquest  men  would  see  in  the  power 
represented  by  that  beast.  Every  one  knows  there  never  was 
an  empire  in  antiquity  like  the  Macedonian  under  Alexander 
for  spreading  itself  by  rapid  conquest ;  and  not  only  this,  but  it 
had  its  roots  deep,  so  that  even  to  this  day  the  remains  of  the 
Grecian  empire  are  seen ;  and  these,  not  exhumed  as  it  were, 
but  in  living  effects.  The  fourth  beast  was  of  a  composite  cha- 
racter, unlike  anything  that  had  been  before.  Upon  its  head 
were  ten  horns,  and  after  them  in  their  midst  another  little 
horn  was  seen  by  the  prophet  to  emerge.  This  last  takes  the 
place  of  three  others,  and  becomes  the  great  object  with  which 
the  Spirit  of  God  is  occupied,  not  of  course  because  of  anything 
good  connected  with  it,  but  because  of  its  deadly  hostility  to 
God  and  His  people.  Daniel  looks  at  him  more  particularly  in 
his  political,  and  the  Eevelation  in  his  politico-religious  charac- 
ter. It  is  with  this  fourth  Gentile  empire,  the  Eoman  beast, 
and  in  relation  to  the  Jews,  that  the  period  is  given. 

It  does  seem  no  slight  hallucination  of  mind  to  divert  these 
scriptures  from  Judea,  and  to  transport  Eome  into  them.  But 
the  cause  is  apparent.  Men  had  been  so  occupied  with  the 
controversies  between  Protestantism  and  Popery,  that  they 
naturally  looked  through  the  scriptures  to  find  something  about 


218  THE   SCENES   AND   TIMES   OF    DANIEL. 

the  pope ;  and  finding  there  was  one  person  more  wicked  llian 
any  other  (the  antichrist),  they  came  to  the  conclusion  tliat  the 
antichrist  and  the  pope  were  the  same  thing.  Now,  it  is  true 
that  they  both  do  similar  things  to  a  certain  extent ;  but  when 
you  look  into  the  scriptures,  antichrist  finds  his  place  in  Judea, 
and  in  connexion  with  the  Jewish  people,  in  a  way  the  pope  has 
never  done.  I  do  not  say  the  pope  may  not  do  so ;  but  it  is  im- 
possible yet  to  apply  fully  and  exclusively  what  is  said  about 
the  antichrist  to  the  pope  as  such.  There  is  a  future  system  of 
lawlessness,  and  a  future  person  at  its  head,  who  will  rise  up 
against  Christ  in  His  Jewish  rights  and  glory,  uniting  political 
power  with  religious  pretension,  and  this  in  the  city  of  the  great 
King.  There  are  many  antichrists,  it  is  true,  and  the  pope  may 
truthfully  be  regarded  as  one  of  them  ;  but  not  as  the  antichrist 
who  is  to  come.  That  is  reserved  for  the  time  immediately  pre- 
ceding Christ's  appearing  from  heaven.  He  will  personally  affect 
and  oppose  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  will  by  Him  personally  be  put 
down.  People  ought  to  be  prepared  for  this  ;  but  they,  on  the 
contrary,  imagine  that  Popery  is  the  last  antichrist,  and  that  it 
is  getting  so  decrepid  as  to  be  well-nigh  sinking  into  its  grave. 
But  the  Bible  is  clear  that  the  most  hateful  development  of  law- 
lessness is  yet  to  come ;  and  that  when  it  arrives  it  will  carry 
away,  not  Popish  countries  only,  but  Protestant  ones,  and  the 
Jews  themselves,  in  its  fatal  delusions. 

In  Daniel  vii.  the  little  horn  is  said  to  speak  great  words 
against  the  Most  High,  "and  shall  wear  out  the  saints  of  the 
Most  High,  and  think  to  change  times  and  laws ;  and  they 
shall  be  given  into  his  hands,  until  a  time,  and  times,  and  the 
dividing  of  time."  Now  it  appears  to  me  perfectly  certain  that 
the  "times  and  laws"  in  question  here  are  those  the  prophet 
Daniel  was  familiar  with.  These  "  times"  had  to  do  with  Israel's 
festivals,  and  the  "laws"  with  the  Jewish  polity  or  ritual.  The 
saints  of  the  Most  High  were  those  whom  the  prophist  knew  and 
was  interested  in;  just  as  in  chapter  xii.  "the  children  of  thy 
people"  {i.e.,  Daniel's  people)  are  intended.  This  shews  that  a 
special  enemy  of  God's  people  in  Judea  who  will  arise  in  that 
day  is  here  spoken  of.  He  meddles  with  tlie  Jews  when  they 
have  begun  to  be  owned  in  a  measure  by  God.    This  iniquitous 


THE   SEVENTIETH   WEEK.  219 

power  wears  out  the  saints  of  the  high  places,  and  thinks  to 
change  times  and  laws  ;  and  they  shall  be  given  into  his  hand. 
Not  that  the  saints  should  be  so  given,  for  God  never  relinquishes 
them  to  the  enemy  :  He  may  permit  saints  to  be  worried  for  a 
while,  but  He  never  gives  them  up.  It  is  the  times  and  laws 
that  are  thus  given  for  a  season,  because  the  nation  is  not  owned 
thoroughly  till  the  Messiah  comes.  As  yet  it  is  only  a  partial 
recognition  of  their  worship.  These  are  then  to  be  abandoned 
to  liim  "for  a  time,  and  times,  and  the  dividing  of  time."  You 
have  this  same  period  referred  to  in  the  forty-two  months,  which 
is  exactly  the  same  length  of  time,  taking  "a  time''  as  meaning 
a  year. 

In  Daniel,  chapter  ix.,  you  have  another  note  of  time,  the 
famous  seventy  weeks  (verse  26).  "  And  after  threescore  and  two 
(or  rather,  after  the  threescore,  in  addition  to  the  previous  seven) 
weeks  shall  Messiah  be  cut  off  and  (margin)  shall  have  nothing ; " 
i.e.,  after  sixty-nine  of  the  seventy  weeks  Messiah  is  cut  off. 
Then  an  interruption  follows  on  account  of  this ;  all  the  weeks 
do  not  expire.  There  remains  one,  the  last,  to  be  fulfilled,  which 
is  kept  separate,  lilce  a  link  wrenched  off  from  the  preceding 
chain.  You  will  observe  that,  after  the  death  of  Messiah  the 
Prince,  another  prince  is  alluded  to  as  yet  to  come  ;  and  he  is 
evidently  an  antagonistic  prince,  a  prince  of  the  Eoman  people. 
The  grave  mistake  is  made  by  many,  that  this  prince  was  Titus, 
who  came  and  took  the  city  of  Jerusalem  ;  but  it  is  not  so. 
The  verse  does  not  state  that  the  prince  should  destroy,  &c. ; 
but  "  the  people  of  the  prince  that  shall  come  shall  destroy 
the  city  and  sanctuary ;"  and  so  they  did.  The  Eomans  came 
under  that  general.  But  when  we  are  told  of  "  the  people 
of  the  prince  that  shall  come,"  it  is  a  plain  intimation  to  ray 
mind  that  there  was  a  certain  great  ruler  to  follow — a  prince 
connected  with  the  lioman  empire.  His  people  were  to  come 
first,  which  they  did  under  Titus  ;  afterwards  the  prince  comes 
himself,  which  I  believe  to  be  still  future.  For  mark  well,  that 
the  past  destruction  of  the  city  and  sanctuary  is  not  included  in 
the  course  of  the  seventy  weeks  at  all.  It  is  after  the  sixty-ninth, 
and  before  the  seventieth  begins.  There  was  a  chain,  so  to  speak, 
of  sixty-nine  weeks  of  years  up  to  the  death  of  Christ ;  then  it 


220  CHANGES   OF   GENTILE   FEELING 

was  broken.  There  was  an  important  link,  the  seventieth  week, 
remaining.  What  becomes  of  it  ?  The  last  verse  takes  it  up,  and 
is  clear  enough  that  this  seventieth  week  has  to  do  (not  with 
Christ  but)  with  His  enemy  who  is  to  have  a  manifest  connexion 
with  the  Eoman  people,  and  also  with  the  Jews.  Observe  that, 
in  the  twenty-sixth  verse,  after  the  threescore  and  two  weeks  iu 
addition  to  the  seven,  when  the  Messiah  is  cut  off,  there  is  no 
mention  of  the  weeks.  In  what  comes  after,  we  have  no  date, 
till  we  enter  upon  verse  27;  shewing  that  what  intervenes  is  not 
counted  as  a  part  of  the  continuous  line  of  the  weeks.  "  The  end 
thereof  shall  be  with  a  flood,  and  unto  the  end  thereof  desola- 
tions are  determined."  The  city  and  sanctuary  were  destroyed 
long  since,  but  the  desolations  are  "unto  the  end;"  and  they 
still  go  on. 

Till  lately,  of  all  people  of  the  earth  a  Jew  had  the  greatest 
difficulty  to  get  into  the  land.  There  is  a  change  coming  over 
the  spirit  of  the  nations  towards  Israel,  I  admit.  Some  of  the 
Gentiles  seem  to  forget  that  the  Jew  is  under  a  peculiar  judg- 
ment of  God.  This  is  no  excuse  for  dealing  harshly,  of  course, 
but  it  is  a  grave  reason  why  men  should  not  meddle  with  them 
politically.  For  the  Jew  to  be  so  mixed  up  with  the  Gentiles  is 
a  sort  of  apostacy,  and  for  the  Gentile  it  is  to  despise  God's 
judgment  and  eventually  to  incur  it.  It  will  be  found  that  God 
cannot  be  with  such  an  union.  When  the  Gentiles  liave  given 
up  every  thought  of  divine  election  of  the  Jew,  I  believe  that 
the  hand  of  God  will  confound  their  schemes,  and  that  He  will 
interfere  to  bring  out  His  people  distinctly  and  separately  from 
all  others,  first  for  judgment  and  then  for  blessing.  When  all 
seems  to  be  quiet  and  prospering,  God  will  spoil  what  man 
thinks  he  is  doing;  for  He  has  not  finally  cast  off  Israel.  The 
Jew  may  have  given  up  God  and  have  amalgamated  with  the 
Gentile ;  but  God  will  never  forget  that  He  chose  the  fathers 
and  made  promises  as  to  the  children.  True,  the  Jews  undertook 
to  be  His  people  and  miserably  failed  in  fulfilling  their  obliga- 
tions ;  but  God  will  not  fail  to  accomplish  His  purpose.  When 
the  Gentile  mariners  had  got  Jonah  in  their-ship,  God  was  de- 
termined to  have  him  out.  If  they  did  not  cast  him  forth  into 
the  sea,  God  would  break  their  ship  to  get  His  prophet  out  so  as 


TOWAKDS   THE   JEWS.  221 

to  be  with  Himself  and  His  work.  So  it  will  be  in  the  day  that 
speedily  approaches. 

From  Isaiah  xviii.  we  find  that  there  is  to  be  a  partial  restora- 
tion of  Israel  by  Gentile  power,  chiefly  through  the  influence  of  a 
certain  maritime  power  "  that  sendeth  ambassadors  by  the  sea." 
They  may  bring  some  of  the  Jews  back  to  their  own  land, 
but  tlie  Jews  will  still  be  rebellious  and  unbelieving.  All  seems 
to  flourish,  but  suddenly  there  comes  a  blight  from  God.  Quite 
unexpectedly  He  allows  the  ancient  enmity  to  break  out  among 
the  Gentiles  against  tlie  Jews.  "  The  fowls,"  as  it  is  said,  "  shall 
summer  upon  them ;  and  all  the  beasts  of  the  earth  shall 
winter  upon  them."  Every  kind  of  unrelenting  hatred  is  shewn 
once  more.  They  are  the  dead  body ;  and  where  the  carcase 
is,  there  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  together.  The  Gentiles  who 
seemed  to  be  so  kind  will  again  stand  aloof  from  them,  and  as 
of  old  unite  for  the  purpose  of  crushing  them.  And  what  will 
be  the  end  ?  The  Gentiles  having  relapsed  into  their  old  hatred 
against  Israel,  God  will  espouse  the  cause  of  His  people.  He  re- 
frains while  man  is  meddling  ;  but  when  an  immense  host  comes 
up  against  them,  in  that  very  day  "  shall  the  present  be  brought 
unto  Jehovah  of  hosts  of  a  people  scattered  and  peeled,  and 
from  a  people  terrible  from  their  beginning  hitherto."  God,  as 
I  understand  the  prophet  to  say,  will  bring  a  present  to  Himself 
of  His  long-scattered  and  persecuted  Israel. 

This  will  shew  how  naturally  in  the  IJevelation  we  have  a 
reorganization  of  the  Jewish  polity  and  worship,  after  the  church 
has  been  caught  up  to  heaven  and  before  the  appearing  of  Christ. 
We  see  a  little  remnant  in  the  midst  of  the  mass  which  were  to 
be  given  over  to  the  Gentiles.  For  forty-two  months  the  holy 
city  is  to  be  trodden  under  foot.  The  Lord  allows  a  certain 
period  to  go  on  as  far  as  the  many  were  concerned,  but  He 
measures  the  temple,  and  the  altar,  and  them  that  worship 
therein  for  Himself.  This  remnant  might  be  killed,  but  He 
values  them.  When  some  of  the  Jews  are  thus  in  their  own 
land,  but  Israel  as  a  whole  is  not  yet  thoroughly  brought  in  by 
God,  the  predicted  Roman  prince  will  come,  who  will  "  confirm 
a  [not  the]  covenant  with  [the]  many  for  one  week."  I  am 
aware  that  some  apply  this  to  Christ.     But  the  Lord   never 


222  THE  PRINCE  THAT   SHALL   COME. 

made  a  covenant  for  a  week  or  for  seven  years.  It  is  impossible 
rightly  to  refer  the  words  to  any  covenant  the  Lord  ever  made, 
much  less  to  a  covenant  njade  since  His  death.  "  The  everlasting 
covenant"  is  obviously  tlie  contrast,  and  not  the  accomplish- 
ment, of  a  covenant  made  for  a  week.  Many  apply  it  thus;  but 
those  who  so  interpret  Dan.  ix.  27  have  forgotten  that  Christ 
had  been  looked  at  as  "  cut  off "  in  the  previous  verse. 

"  In  the  midst  of  the  week  he  shall  cause  the  sacrifice  and  the 
oblation  to  cease ;  and  for  the  overspreading  of  abominations  lie 
shall  make  it  desolate,"  &c.  Here  we  have  subsequent  events 
of  a  totally  different  nature.  How  and  when,  it  will  be  asked, 
are  we  to  suppose  this  arrest  of  sacrifice  and  oblation  ?  AVlio 
and  whence  is  the  personage  who  causes  them  to  cease  ? 
Messiah,  the  Prince,  and  "the  prince  that  shall  come" — are  they 
the  same  person,  or  different  individuals  ?  The  history  ends  as 
to  the  Messiah  with  verse  26.  "The  people"  of  that  coming 
prince  were  the  enemies  of  Israel,  subject  to  an  opposed  power, 
and  not  Messiah's  people.  In  verse  27  the  prince,  whose 
coming  was  announced  in  verse  26,  is  himself  come ;  and  he  it 
is  who  confirms  a  covenant  with  the  "many,"  or  mass  of  the 
Jews,  for  one  week ;  but  in  the  midst  of  the  week  he  shall 
cause  the  sacrifice  and  the  oblation  to  cease,  and  for  the  over- 
spreading of  abominations,  &c.  The  language  may  be  some- 
what obscure,  but  at  least  it  is  quite  plain  that  there  is  to  be  a 
certain  prince  after  the  death  of  Christ, — a  lloman  prince — 
whose  people  first  come  for  a  desolation  l(.)ng  accomplished,  and 
at  length  he  comes.  After  that  he  appears  upon  the  stage,  the 
last  week  of  Daniel  begins.  This  interruption  between  the 
si.xty-ninth  and  seventieth  weeks  may  seem  strange,  and  people 
may  ask.  How  can  there  be  such  a  gap  ?  But  it  is  not  witliout 
precedent.  The  same  thing  in  principle  occurs  in  Luke  iv., 
when  the  Lord  was  reading  in  Isaiah.  The  portion  read  was 
the  description  of    His  own  ministry  in   Isa.  Ixi.  1,  2:   "The 

Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me He  hath  sent  me  to  heal 

the  broken-hearted to  preach  the  acceptable  year  of  Je- 
hovah. .  .  .  And  he  closed  the  book."  He  did  not  finish  the 
sentence.  Why  ?  Because,  if  one  may  reverentially  answer,  the 
prophecy  went  on  with  "the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God." 


COVENANT   FOR   A   WEEK.  223 

Proclaiming  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  was  what  Christ 
did  at  His  first  coming,  but  it  was  not  then  the  day  of  Jeho- 
vah's vengeance ;  so  that  the  whole  of  Christianity  and  the 
calling  of  the  Church  came  in  between  the  acceptable  year  of 
Jehovah  and  the  day  of  vengeance.  When  Christ  came  in 
humiliation  and  love,  it  was  the  acceptable  year  of  Jehovah, 
and  therefore  He  closed  tlie  book ;  but  the  day  of  vengeance  is 
deferred  till  tJie  Lord  comes  again  in  glory. 

So  here  in  Daniel,  the  sixty-nine  weeks  run  on  till  Messiah 
is  cut  off,  and  then  we  have  an  evident  gap.  The  destruction 
of  Jerusalem  is  not  included  in  the  course  of  the  sixty-nine 
weeks,  and  as  evidently  does  not  take  place  in  the  seventieth 
week.  For  if  you  iuter})ret  the  last  week  as  commencing  from 
the  death  of  the  Messiah,  this  would  only  give  seven  years, 
whereas  Jerusalem  was  not  taken  till  forty  years  after  the  death 
of  Christ.*  The  seventieth  week  had  nothing  to  say  to  that 
siege,  and  in  point  of  fact  the  wars  and  desolations  were  given 
before  we  arrive  at  the  seventieth  week,  which  is  not  named  till 
the  last  verse. 

In  tlie  last  or  27th  verse  a  covenant  is  made.  Did  Titus,  did 
any  Eoman  prince,  make  a  covenant  with  the  Jews  for  one  week  ? 
And  further  it  is  said,  "  In  the  midst  of  the  week  he  shall  cause 
the  sacrifice  and  the  oblation  to  cease."  This  shews  that  there 
is  to  be  a  renewal  of  religious  service  by  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem 
in  the  latter  day.  Sacrifice  and  oblation  will  have  been  restored ; 
and  this  prince,  in  spite  of  the  covenant  made  with  them,  puts 
an  end  to  all.     And  what  then?     Abominations,  which  means 

*  If,  with  Ussher,  the  death  of  Christ  he  put  in  the  midst  of  the  seventieth 
week,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  confusion  is  only  increased.  For,  in  all  fairness 
of  interpretation,  the  last  week  does  not  hegin  to  be  accomplished  until  the  city 
and  the  sanctuary  have  been  destroyed  by  the  Romans,  not  to  speak  of  a  course 
of  subsequent  desolation.  So  that  the  Ussherian  view  of  verse  27  really  puts 
the  death  of  Christ  at  least  three  and  a  half  years  after  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  if  the  latter  part  of  verse  26  is  duly  considered.  The  truth  is,  the 
right  understanding  of  the  prophecy  itself  leaves  room  for,  and  supposes,  a  gap 
of  undefined  length  after  the  Messiah  is  cut  off,  before  the  last  week  commences. 
It  is  certain  that  the  Eoman  invasion  and  the  Jewish  sorrows  that  follow, 
exclusive  of  the  closing  dealings  of  the  coming  prince,  are  not  in  the  sixty-nine 
weeks  any  more  than  in  the  seventieth.  The  text  itself  therefore  proves  this 
lonor  interval. 


224  IDOLATRY  OF   JEWS   ONCE   MORE. 

idolatry,  are  publicly  set  up  and  protected.  They  are  to  be 
brought  into  the  sanctuary  itself,  which  was  not  the  case  at  the 
past  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  Then  there  was  much  appalling 
wickedness — every  other  kind  of  crime  and  madness,  but  no 
idolatry.  Here,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  supposed  to  be  the  open 
support  of  idolatry  in  the  temple.  This  does  not  answer  to  the 
capture  by  Titus,  nor  to  the  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  for 
at  that  time  the  unclean  spirit  of  idolatry  had  departed  out  of 
the  nation,  which  from  the  time  of  the  Babylonish  captivity, 
excepting  the  defilement  of  Antiochus,  had  kept  clear  of  such 
abominations,  and  in  that  sense  was  "empty,  swept,  and  gar- 
nished." But  we  know  that  unclean  spirit  is  to  return  in  greater 
force  than  ever.  (Matt.  xii.  45.)  Christendom  and  Judaism  will 
each  contribute  to  the  last  form  of  evil — antichristianism.  You 
may  remember  that  the  Pharisees  charged  the  Lord,  when  He 
was  upon  earth,  with  doing  His  miracles  by  Satanic  power,  and 
the  meaning  of  the  parable  then  given  to  them  is  really  the 
history  of  Israel  itself.  The  old  unclean  spirit  had  gone  away. 
The  people  or  their  leaders  were  full  of  zeal  for  their  ordinances. 
But  what  does  the  Lord  say  ?  That  the  old  and  long-departed 
unclean  spirit  was  to  return.  And  when  it  does,  it  will  bring 
with  it  seven  other  spii'its  worse  than  itself  The  Jews  are  to 
iall  into  idolatry,  in  union  with  antichristianism,  and  their  last 
state  will  be  worse  than  the  first.  (Compare  also  Isa.  Ixv.  Ixvi.) 

But  let  us  now  go  back  to  the  lievelation.  There  is  this  state 
of  things  in  Israel — a  measure  of  recognition  on  God's  part,  and 
worship  going  on,  though  the  outward  profession  is  given  over 
to  Gentile  oppression.  And  remark,  that  the  Lord  says,  "  I  will 
<yive  [power]  unto  my  two  witnesses,  and  they  shall  prophesy  a 
thousand  two  hundred  and  threescore  days,  clothed  in  sack- 
cloth" (verse  3).  The  Lord  mentions  them  as  so  many  days 
here,  rather  than  as  forty-two  months,  it  would  seem,  to  mark 
His  value  for  their  testimony.  He  makes,  so  to  speak,  as  much 
of  it  as  He  can.  He  does  not  sum  it  together,  as  when  speaking 
of  the  beast  (chapter  xiii.  5).  Lovingly  he  speaks  of  the  time 
as  days,  as  though  He  were  counting  them  all  out.  "  They  shall 
testify  a  thousand  two  hundred  and  threescore  days,  clothed 
in  sackcloth" — a  testimony  borne  in  sorrow.     It  is  not  Chris- 


THE   TWO   WITNESSES   JEWISH.  225 

tiauity,  nor  is  it  the  state  of  things  that  will  subsist  after  Messiah 
has  appeared  in  glory.  But  it  is  the  time  of  transition  after  the 
church  has  been  taken  away,  and  before  it  comes  out  of  heaven 
with  the  Lord  Jesus — the  time  when  man  will  have  brought  in 
God's  people  to  their  land,  at  least  the  mass  of  them  thoroughly 
unht  to  be  in  relation  with  God.  There  is  a  little  remnant  of 
believing  ones,  there  is  worship,  and  besides  a  prophetic  testi- 
mony, but  evidently  Jewish  in  its  character.  In  Zechariah, 
though  there  are  two  olive-trees  mentioned,  there  is  only  one 
candlestick ;  here  there  are  two,  because  they  are  the  two  wit- 
nesses who  prophesy  of  the  coming  earthly  glory,  but  who  do 
not  bring  it  in  personally.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  not  the  regular 
order  of  God,  but  a  proof  that  His  eye  is  upon  His  people  for 
good  before  full  blessing  comes. 

"And  if  any  man  will  hurt  them,  fire  proceedeth  out  of  their 
mouth,  and  devoureth  their  enemies  :  and  if  any  man  will  hurt 
them,  he  must  in  this  manner  be  killed"  (verse  5).  This  shews 
that  it  was  not  proper  Christian  testimony,  nor  the  corresponding 
practical  fruits.  It  was  the  very  thing  the  Son  would  not  do 
when  He  was  upon  earth  (save,  of  course,  in  the  figurative  sense 
of  Luke  xii.  49),  and  that  He  rebuked  James  and  John  for  de- 
siring. (Luke  ix.  54,  55.)  Here,  on  the  contrary,  fire  proceeds 
out  of  their  mouth,  and  devours  their  enemies — a  perfectly  right 
thing  when  God  is  about  to  take  the  place  of  Judge  on  earth. 
But  the  Lord  does  not  take  that  place  now.  He  is  saving  sinners, 
and  otherwise  displaying  full  grace ;  and  as  long  as  He  so  acts. 
He  does  not  desire  His  people  to  be  the  depositaries  of  earthly 
power.  Thus,  the  miracles  of  His  servants,  during  this  time  of 
the  display  of  His  grace,  have  not  been  of  a  destroying  nature. 
The  Lord  might  deal  with  a  person  now  because  of  some  sin,  as 
with  the  Corinthian  saints :  I  do  not  see  why  He  should  not  at 
any  time.  But  it  would  be  foreign  to  Christianity  and  contrary 
to  all  that  it  breathes,  if  a  saint,  because  another  was  evilly 
opposed  to  him,  wished  his  death  or  injury.  Christianity  shews 
that  the  victory  grace  gives  us  is  to  shew  love  and  kindness  to 
one's  enemy.  It  may  be  heaping  coals  of  fire  upon  his  head; 
but  such  is  the  Lord's  way — overcoming  evil  with  good.  Yet  it 
is  the  Lord  who  here  sanctions  the  destructive  power  which 


226  RESEMBLANCE  TO   MOSES   AND   ELIJAH. 

accompanies  the  testimony  of  His  Jewish  witnesses ;  for  He 
says,  "  I  will  give  [power]  to  ray  two  witnesses  ....  And  if  any 
man  will  hurt  them,  he  must  in  tliis  manner  be  killed."  It  is 
what  He  means  them  to  do — what  evidently  is  to  be  done  ac- 
cording to  the  thought  of  God.  It  indicates  another  condition, 
and  not  the  Christian  called  to  suffer  unresistingly.  It  is  the 
close  of  the  age  when  Christianity  will  have  done  its  work,  and 
the  Lord  will  again  begin  to  act  on  the  Jews. 

Besides,  their  ministry  and  miracles  have  the  same  character 
as  that  which  is  attached  to  those  of  Moses  and  Elias.  Thus 
they  "  have  authority  over  waters  to  turn  them  to  blood,  and  to 
smite  the  earth  with  all  plagues,"  as  in  the  time  of  Mcjses  ;  and 
"  they  have  authority  to  shut  heaven  that  it  rain  not  in  the  days 
their  prophecy,"  as  in  the  time  of  Elias  (verse  6).  And  in  fact 
what  will  be  found  in  these  times  answers  much  to  what  you 
have  in  Moses  and  Elijah.  Tliere  was  idolatry  in  Israel  then, 
and  a  remarkable  testimony  of  Elijah  against  it.  God  Himself 
chastised  His  people — the  heavens  were  as  brass  towards  them. 
So  will  it  be  found  again.  The  person  who  then  sways  the  des- 
tinies of  Israel  will  be  an  apostate  who  admits  and  enforces 
idolatry.  Again,  Israel  will  be  found  in  subjection  to  Gentile 
authority,  as  they  were  in  the  days  of  Moses  ;  yet  there  will  be 
a  little  remnant  set  apart  for  God.  But  although  these  two  wit- 
nesses are  guarded  for  a  certain  time  by  miracles,  yet  the  moment 
the  days  are  over  they  have  no  power,  so  to  speak.  The  beast 
that  ascends  out  of  the  bottomless  pit  makes  war  with  them,  and 
they  are  killed  like  others. 

"And  their  dead  bodies  [shall  be]  on  the  street  of  the  great 
city,  which  spiritually  is  called  Sodom  and  Egypt,  where  also 
their  Loid  was  crucified"  (verse  8).  It  is  perfectly  plain  that 
this  is  Jerusalem.  Many  think  it  is  Eome,  because  as  has  been 
said  before,  Protestants  are  absorbed  in,  and  biassed  by,  their 
controversies  witli  Popery.  God  attaches  the  greatest  possible 
interest  to  His  people  Israel,  when  His  rights  as  to  the  earth 
are  in  (picstion.  But  why  is  there  not  more  said  about  Popery 
in  the  scriptures  ?  Because  God  never  acknowledges  His  church 
as  an  earthly  people.  The  politics,  pursuits,  and  interests  of 
this  world  are  well  enough  for  tliose  who  liave  nothin"  but  an 


THE   BEAST.  227 

earthly  povtiou  and  want  no  earthly  intruder;  but  to  strive 
with  the  potsherds  of  the  earth  is  beneath  those  of  heavenly 
birth. 

We  have  now  come  down  in  this  chapter  to  Jerusalem,  the 
centre  of  God's  dealings  and  testimony,  and  of  the  opposition 
from  the  abyss.  Their  great  antagonist  is  plainly  mentioned 
here,  for  the  first  time  in  the  Eevelation,  as  "the  beast,"  just  as 
if  you  had  known  all  about  him  before.  It  is  a  remarkable 
power,  not  merely  arising,  as  in  clrap.  xiii.,  out  of  the  sea,  but 
here,  as  in  chap,  xvii.,  said  to  ascend  "  out  of  the  bottomless  pit." 
This  empire  does  not  arise  out  of  the  earth,  the  symbol  of  a  state 
of  settled  government,  as  the  second  beast  in  chap.  xiii.  11,  nor 
only  out  of  the  sea,  which  sets  forth  an  unsettled  revolutionary 
condition.  There  is  the  extraordinary  and  awful  feature  added 
in  this  passage,  that  it  rises  out  of  the  abyss.  Satan  has  to  do 
with  its  last  state.  It  has  been  a  darling  project  of  men  from 
time  to  time  to  form  a  vast  universal  empire.  Charlemagne 
tried  it,  but  he  failed.  He  never  got  the  old  Roman  earth  under 
his  hand.  And  some  can  remember  another  who  had  the  same 
thing  near  his  heart,  but  he  too  failed  and  died  a  miserable  exile. 
But  the  time  hastens  when  that  very  scheme  will  be  realised. 
In  otlier  empires  there  has  always  been  the  providence  of  God 
overruling.  There  was  God  above  them,  God  calling  on  His 
people  to  shew  allegiance  to  the  powers  that  be,  no  matter  how 
they  were  formed.  The  Christian  was  not  to  meddle  with  them, 
but  to  acknowledge  them  and  to  pay  tribute.  But  there  is  an 
empire  about  to  be  formed,  that  will  be  as  thoroughly  under  the 
immediate  power  of  Satan,  as  all  past  empires  have  been  under 
the  providence  of  God ;  and  God  will  withdraw  that  care  and 
check  that  He  has  hitherto  kept  over  the  kingdoms  of  the  world 
and  will  allow  all  to  ripen  to  a  head  under  Satan.  Justly,  there- 
fore, is  this  empire  said  to  arise  out  of  the  bottomless  pit. 

This  corresponds  with  what  we  have  in  Daniel.  The  person 
that  would  specially  meddle  with  the  Jews  (chap.  vii.  25  ;  ix.  27) 
is  the  Roman  beast,  the  leader  of  that  very  empire  which  in  its 
last  state  God  does  not  own.  When  Jesus  was  born,  the  fourth 
or  Roman  empire  was  tliere,  and  God  took  advantage  of  its  de- 
crees to  bring  the  heir  of  David  to  Bethlehem.     It  was  "the 

Q  2 


228  RESTORATION    OF   THE   ROMAN   EMPIRE. 

beast "  that  was  there.  In  Rev.  xvii.  it  is  written,  "  the  beast 
that  was,  and  is  not,  and  shall  ascend  out  of  the  bottomless  pit " 
(verse  8).  But  observe  a  notable  feature  that  Daniel  does  not 
furnish,  and  that  John  does.  He  gives  three  successive  stages 
of  the  Eoman  empire.  It  was  existing  in  John's  time  ;  then  it 
was  to  cease ;  and  last  of  all  it  should  arise  out  of  the  bottom- 
less pit,  special  Satanic  influence  being  connected  with  its  final 
state.  The  beast  "  that  is  not "  describes  exactly  its  present 
condition  of  non-existence.  The  Goths  and  Vandals  came  down 
upon  it,  and  the  old  Roman  empire  came  to  ruin.  Since  tlien, 
men  have  never  been  able  to  re-organize  it,  because  God  has 
another  thought.  He  has  laid  it  down  in  His  word  that  it  is  to 
be  re-organized,  not  by  man,  but  by  Satan's  power.  Its  sources 
will  be  from  beneath.  How  remarkable  is  all  this  !  We  have 
had  the  decline  and  fall  of  the  Roman  empire,  but  there  is  one 
thing  that  no  historian  could  trace — that  prophecy  alone  could 
and  does  give;  viz.,  the  restoration  of  the  Roman  empire.  May  we 
see  it,  not  as  being  on  earth,  but  as  looking  on  it  from  heaven  ! 

I  believe  that  those  who  reject  the  gospel  now  will,  if  then 
alive,  be  carried  away  by  the  dreadful  delusions  of  that  day. 
They  will  receive  the  mark  of  the  beast  in  their  right  hand  or 
in  their  foreheads ;  they  will  worship  his  image ;  and  it  is  writ- 
ten by  God  that  those  who  do  shall  be  tormented  in  everlasting 
lire.  The  world  may  fancy,  from  all  the  increase  of  grandeur 
and  prosi)erity  and  luxury  which  will  be  brought  in  then  or  pre- 
viously, tliat  the  millennium  is  come ;  but  it  will  be  Satan's 
millennium.  That  is  the  fate  reserved  for  these  countries  ;  for 
it  is  part  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  that  where  the 
"ospel  has  been  preached,  and  the  world  has  trifled  with  it,  even 
allowing  idolatry  for  political  purposes,  He  will  withdraw  the 
light  and  send  them  strong  delusion.  And  then  Satan  will  bring 
out  the  man  of  sin.  There  is  inniiense  practical  importance  in 
all  this.  People  may  ask,  "  What  is  the  good  of  it  all  to  us  as 
Christians,  if  we  are  to  be  taken  away  before  ?"  Such  a  way  of 
speaking  slights  what  God  has  been  pleased  to  reveal  to  us. 
When  God  spoke  beforehand  about  the  destruction  of  Sodom  did 
Abraham  say.  What  has  that  to  do  with  me  ?  God  would  have 
our  hearts  to   be  drawn  out  in  praise  and  thanksgiving  for 


PEOPLES,  ETC.,  AND  THEY  THAT  DWELL  ON  THE  EARTH.   229 

His  grace  and  His  love  to  our  own  souls,  but  He  tells  us  also 
the  sad  doom  which  awaits  the  world,  and  awakens  the  spirit 
of  intercession  as  with  Abraham  for  Lot  for  unfaithful  saints 
who  may  be  mixed  up  with  it. 

I  would  just  remark,  as  to  the  two  witnesses,  that  there  is  no 
necessity  to  take  them  as  two  persons :  they  might  be  two  hun- 
dred. They  are  viewed  as  two  witnesses  (whether  literally  so  or 
not),  because  it  is  a  divine  principle  that  "  out  of  the  mouth  of 
two  or  three  witnesses  every  word  shall  be  established."  God 
was  giving  a  sufficient  testimony.  These  maintained  Christ's 
title  to  the  earth,  that  He  was  "the  Lord*  of  the  earth,"  and 
this  excited  enmity.  "The  beast"  might  not  so  much  have  cared 
if  they  had  said  "the  Lord  of  heaven;"  but  they  claimed  the 
earth,  not  for  themselves,  but  for  Him,  and  men  will  not  bear  it. 

Unbelief  likes  present  enjoyment,  and  anything  which  inter- 
feres with  this  and  makes  conscience  uneasy  is  hateful  and 
unwelcome.  And  so,  when  the  testimony  is  finished,  and  the 
witnesses  are  overthrown,  not  only  the  beast  but  two  great  parties 
of  mankind  are  affected  by  their  fall.  "And  some  of  the  peoples, 
and  kindreds,  and  tongues,  and  nations,  see  their  dead  bodies 
three  days  and  an  half,  and  do  not  suffer  their  dead  bodies  to  be 
put  into  a  grave;  and  they  that  dwell  on  the  earth  rejoice  over 
them  .  .  ,  and  shall  send,"  &c.  (verses  9,  10.)  It  is  not  the  first 
or  the  only  time  that  we  have  this  distinction  drawn  between 
"  peoples,  and  kindreds,  and  tongues,  and  nations,"  and  "  those 
that  dwell  on  the  earth."  The  latter  does  not  mean  men  in  earth 
merely ;  it  carries  a  moral  force  with  it,  and  means  those  who 
are  essentially  earthly-minded,  who  do  not  in  heart  and  ways 
rise  above  the  earth.  The  dead  bodies  of  the  witnesses  are  on 
the  street  of  the  great  city  ;  and  they  of  the  people,  and  kin- 
dred, and  nations  see  them  there  three  days  and  a  half,  and  do 
not  suffer  them  to  be  put  in  graves.  This  was  bad  enough — 
being  the  malice  of  man  against  those  who  witnessed  for  God. 
But  "  they  that  dwell  on  the  earth "  go  much  farther.     For  in 

*  The  received  reading  9eov  is  not  without  the  support  of  some  cursives, 
^th.,  Slav.,  &c.  But  all  the  uncials  and  most  cursives,  version.s,  and  fathers 
read  Kvpiov.  The  former  was  probably  due  to  the  tempting  antithesis  r^  0£y 
Toil  ovpavoii,  in  verse  13. 


230  THE   CLOUD. 

their  case,  there  is  positive  rejoicing  and  making  merry,  and 
sending  gifts  one  to  another.  And  why  was  all  this  ?  Because 
it  is  said,  "  these  two  prophets  tormented  them  that  dwelt  on 
the  earth." 

This  is  not  a  mere  imaginary  distinction,  nor  only  founded 
upon  one  passage.  If  you  look  elsewhere,  you  will  find  the 
same  thing.  Thus  in  chapter  xiv.  6,  "  And  I  saw  another  angel 
tiy  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  having  the  everlasting  gospel  to 
preach  unto  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  and  to  every  nation, 
and  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,"  there  is  the  converse  of 
what  we  have  here.  We  first  find  the  mass  of  the  Gentile 
people,  who  shew  out  their  evil  against  the  two  witnesses  by 
not  allowing  their  dead  bodies  to  be  buried.  But  the  special 
rejoicing  is  on  the  part  of  the  dwellers  on  the  earth,  or  the 
earthly-minded.  But  in  chapter  xiv.  we  find  God  sends  a  solemn 
message,  the  everlasting  gospel.  And  with,  whom  does  He 
begin?  With  the  worst — "them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,"  tow 
KaO-rjixeuovi,  literally  "that  sit,"  which  seems  stronger  than  tovs 
KUTOLKovvTas,  aud  tlieu  the  message  is  extended  to  men  generally. 
And  on  examination  you  will  find  this  thoroughly  confirmed  by 
other  passages.  In  other  words,  to  "  dwell  on  the  earth  "  is  not 
a  mere  vague  description  of  men,  but  it  expresses  a  moral 
condition. 

But  to  return :  God  interferes.  "  And  after  three  days  and 
an  half,  the  [or  a]  Spirit  of  life  from  God  entered  into  them,  and 
they  stood  upon  their  feet ;  and  great  fear  fell  upon  them.  And 
they*  heard  a  loud  voice  from  heaven  saying  unto  them.  Come 
up  hither.  And  they  ascended  up  to  heaven  in  the  cloud ;  and 
their  enemies  beheld  them"  (verses  11,  12).  It  is  not  merely 
in  a  cloud  (as  in  the  authorised  version),  but  in  the  cloud.  I 
suppo.se  it  was  the  cloud  seen  in  the  beginning  of  chapter  x., 
whicli  encircled  the  mighty  angel.  The  cloud,  the  known  especial 
emblem  of  Jehovah's  presence,  was  that  wliicli  received  the  wit- 

•  The  four  Lest  ancient  uncials  that  are  known  as  yet,  N'  A  C  P,  with  very  many 
cursives  confirm  the  rectdved  reading,  which  is  rather  strengllicned,  it  seems  to 
me,  by  the  fact  that  elsewhere  the  hook  has  I'lKovaa.  For  assimilation,  under 
such  circtimstances,  whether  hy  accident  or  design,  is  far  more  proLablo  than 
the  introduction  of  a  difference.  If  this  he  so,  the  sense  is  that  the  witnesses 
had  a  puhlic  and  glorion.^  vindication  in  the  sight  and  hearing  of  their  enemies. 


THE   GOD    OF   HEAVEN.  231 

nesses  and  proved  that  their  Lord,  the  Lord  of  heaven  as  well 
as  earth,  was  for  them.  They  ascended  up  to  heaven  in  the 
very  face  of  their  enemies.  "And  in  the  same  hour  was  there 
a  great  earthquake,  and  the  tenth  part  of  the  city  fell,  and  in 
the  earthquake  were  slain  of  men  seven  thousand  :  and  the 
remnant  were  affrighted,  and  gave  glory  to  the  God  'of  heaven." 
One  word  I  would  say,  before  going  farther,  on  a  remarkable 
distinction  that  occurs  in  this  same  verse.  The  witnesses  tes- 
tified for  the  Lord  of  the  earth ;  but  the  people  that  were 
affrighted,  when  they  saw  how  the  cause  of  His  martyred  ser- 
vants was  vindicated,  gave  glory  to  the  God  of  heaven.  It  will 
be  then  an  easier  thing  for  men  to  acknowledge  God  above  in  a 
vague  sort  of  way,  than  to  own  Him  as  the  Lord  of  the  earth, 
concerning  Himself  about  what  men  do  here  below.  The  former 
might  be  merely  to  regard  Him  as  One  seen  in  the  distance ; 
though  in  a  higher  sense  I  may  know  Him  as  One  that  comes 
down  to  give  me  a  portion  with  Himself  above.  Thus  God  in 
heaven  is  either  exceedingly  near  to  His  people,  or  far  off  to  those 
who  are  merely  acted  upon  by  transient  terror.  The  worldly  man 
can  well  allow  the  thought  of  God  afar  from  himself;  and  this 
is  just  what  we  have  here.  They  were  alarmed  by  what  was 
near.  But  there  was  no  reception  of  the  testimony,  no  conver- 
sion. They  should  have  bowed  to  the  Loixl  of  the  earth.  They 
gave  glory  to  the  God  of  heaven.  But  it  is  too  late.  There  was 
slain  in  the  earthquake  "  seven  thousand  names  of  men,"  as  the 
margin  gives  it  literally. 

First  of  all,  we  have  seen  the  priestly  remnant  occupied  in 
the  worship  of  God — His  holy  remnant  in  the  midst  of  the 
Jews  in  the  latter  day.  After  this  we  have  the  witnesses,  who 
did  not  bring  out  on  God's  part  what  He  is  manifesting  now, 
but  asserted  His  rights  with  regard  to  the  future,  as  prophecy 
naturally  implies.  Another  remark  I  may  here  make.  In  the 
Eevelation  an  expression  occurs  that  has  often  been  misunder- 
stood. "  The  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy."  The 
meaning  is  not  that  all  prophecy  refers  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
(which  in  a  certain  sense  may  be  true),  but  that  the  witness  of 
Jesus  such  as  this  book  contains — what  Jesus  testifies  in  the 
Eevelation  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy.     It  is  the  Holy  Spirit  as 


232  THE  WORLD-KINGDOM   OF   OUR   LORD. 

He  is  shewn  lis  throiigliout  the  book ;  not  brini^anj?  into  present 
comrauniou  with  the  Lord  Jesus  in  heaven,  but  communicating 
what  He  is  to  do  by  and  by.  They,  the  witnesses,  asserted  the 
title  of  Christ  to  the  earth.  Whatever  men  might  say,  the  Lord 
was  the  one  to  whom  it  belonged,  and  He  would  soon  come  and 
make  good  their  record. 

There  is  a  third  thing  that  the  end  of  the  chapter  contains. 
Besides  a  priestly  place,  and  then  a  prophetical  testimony,  there 
comes  the  kingdom.  The  trumpet  sounds.  And  now  it  is  not, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  witnesses,  a  proclamation  fenced  by  mira- 
culous power ;  that  has  come  to  a  close — their  own  blood  has 
sealed  their  work.  But  if  it  looked  as  if  the  beast  had  played 
an  easy  part  in  their  death,  God  points  to  another  thing :  "  The 
seventh  angel  sounded,  and  there  were  loud  voices  in  heaven," 
&c.  There  is  the  announcement  of  a  kingdom,  heard  not  upon 
earth,  but  in  heaven,  and  therefore,  as  soon  as  it  is  made,  those 
that  had  the  mind  of  Christ,  "the  twenty-four  elders,  who  sit 
before  God  on  their  thrones,  fell  upon  their  faces  and  worshipped 
God."  A  little  word  I  would  desire  to  say  upon  this  verse  15. 
As  it  stands  now,  it  has  a  very  weakened  turn  given  to  it :  "  The 
kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord 
and  of  his  Christ."  The  true  force  is  :  "  The  world-kingdom  of 
our  Lord  and  of  his  Christ  is  come."  This  gives,  in  my  opinion, 
a  very  different  and  weightier  meaning  to  the  verse.  It  is  the 
world-kingdom  ;  and  why  ?  Because  this  book  has  shewn  us 
from  the  very  beginning  that  there  was  another  order  of  king- 
dom altogether.  In  chapter  i.  John  spoke  of  himself  as  a 
"brother  and  companion  in  tril)ulation,  and  in  the  kingdom  and 
patience  in  Christ."  Thus  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  there,  and 
yet  characterized,  or  at  least  accompanied,  by  tribulation  and 
patience !  But  the  angel  heralds  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Lord 
and  of  His  Christ,  as  to  this  world.  Previously  it  had  been  one 
only  known  to  faith  and  calling  for  patience — a  thing  conse- 
quently that  the  world  would  not  believe.  Talk  to  them  of  a 
kingdom  where  people  suffer,  and  where  Christ  allows  them  to 
suffer,  instead  of  maintaining  His  rights !  And  this  is  exactly 
what  God's  children  have  been  called  to  go  through  from  that 
day  to  this. 


SUFFERING   NOW,   REIGNING   THEN.  238 

But  let  me  here  say  that  this  shews  the  extreme  error  of 
many  good  people  who  thiuk  it  quite  right  to  use  earthly  power 
in  seeking  to  establish  the  cause  of  Christ.  For,  not  to  speak 
of  Eomanism  but  to  look  at  Puritanism,  they  completely  forget 
that  the  kingdom  of  Christ  now  is  the  kingdom  of  patience,  and 
not  of  power.  They  judged  because  theirs  was  the  right  as  they 
believed,  therefore  they  ought  not  to  suffer;  whereas  the  only  thing 
that  God  insists  on  is,  that  because  the  world  is  wrong  and  they 
right,  therefore  His  children  must  suffer.  Hence  Peter  testifies, 
"  If,  when  ye  do  well,  and  suffer  for  it,  ye  take  it  patiently,  this 
is  acceptable  with  God."  There  evidently  you  have  the  great 
moral  consequence  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  practical  things  :  a 
Christian  is  not  buffeted  because  he  is  wrong,  but  because  he 
does  well.  There  is  such  a  thing,  even  among  God's  people,  as 
the  being  buffeted  because  they  have  gone  astray.  What  was 
the  trial  of  Lot  ?  And  what  that  of  Abraham  ?  It  was  to 
prove  that  the  latter  was  faithful ;  but  Lot's  was  because  he 
was  unfaithful.  Not  that  Abraham  was  always  true  to  God ; 
but  unfaithfulness  with  him  was  the  exception,  whereas  I  am 
afraid  it  was  too  often  the  case  with  poor  Lot.  No  doubt,  Lot 
was  more  happy  in  his  outward  circumstances.  He  was  in  the 
gate  of  the  city,  as  we  are  told — sitting  where  he  ought  not, 
though  where  the  flesh  would  like  to  be.  We  are  not  to  sup- 
pose that  he  was  drawn  into  the  ungodliness  of  the  community 
wherein  he  dwelt.  No  doubt  he  could  expostulate  very  well  as 
to  the  evil  they  were  doing ;  but  evidently  he  was  in  the  place 
of  dishonour,  as  far  as  God  was  concerned,  though  not  in  the 
commission  of  open  sin,  if  we  only  think  of  moral  conduct. 
He  was  delivered  through  God's  mercy,  but  ignominiously. 
His  sons-in-law  remained  behind;  his  wife  was  made  a  lasting 
monument  of  her  folly  and  sin. 

Abraham  knew  another  kind  of  sorrow,  the  sorrow  of  a  man 
that  knew  God,  and  that  had  come  out  at  His  word.  We  do 
find  failure  in  Abraham,  as  for  instance  in  Genesis  xii.  and  xx. 
But  though  there  were  slips,  still — looking  at  his  spirit  and 
walk  as  a  whole — Abraham  was  a  most  blessed  man  of  God, 
and  a  sample  of  faith  to  all,  as  God  Himself  puts  him  before 
us  in  Heb.  xi.  and  elsewhere.     He  knew  trial,  because  he  was 


234  THE   SEVENTH    ANGEL   SOUNDS. 

true  to  Gofl  and  to  his  calling.  Lot  knew  it,  because  he  was 
grasping  after  some  present  thing,  a  place  in  the  world.  And 
what  was  the  issue  ?  A  blow  comes  on  that  part  of  the  world, 
and  Lot  was  carried  a\vay  by  it;  and  all  that  he  had  set  his 
affections  upon  was  swept  away,  and  only  restored  to  him  by 
Abraham's  timely  succour,  to  be  lost  for  ever  when  the  judg- 
ment of  Sodom  came.  At  the  close  a  dark  spot  of  shame  fastens 
upon  that  man,  and  he  had  bitterly  to  learn  that  for  the  believer 
a  worldly  path  is  one  of  frequent  pain  and  disappointment, 
which,  if  persevered  in,  ensures  present  sorrow,  and  leaves  be- 
hind it  alike  seeds  of  misery  and  fruits  of  shame.  We  must 
have  one  or  otlier  kind  of  suffering,  if  we  are  children  of  God 
at  all ;  either  the  suffering  that  comes  upon  the  world,  if  we  are 
unfaithful  to  God,  or  the  sufferings  of  Christ  because  we  confess 
Him. 

Thus  the  seventh  angel  gives  the  signal  that  the  mysterious 
form  of  the  kingdom  is  at  an  end.  Heavenly  voices  proclaim 
that  this  world's  kingdom  is  become  that  of  the  Lord  and  His 
Christ.  Instead  of  merely  having  a  kingdom  open  to  faith,  and 
that  none  but  believers  value — a  kingdom  whose  earthly  portion 
is  tribulation  and  waiting  for  the  Lord,  the  only  place  that  hope 
can  take  now — instead  of  this  we  have  an  entire  change.  God 
will  no  longer  allow  the  world  to  be  the  camp,  and  parade,  and 
sport  of  Satan  ;  and  when  the  seventh  trumpet  sounds,  it  is 
announced  that  this  world's  kingdom  of  the  Lord  is  come.  If  it 
be  objected  that  the  Lord  Himself  in  John  xviii.  declares  that 
His  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,  I  reply  that  this  is  beside  the 
mark.  This  world  is  never  the  source  of  His  kingdom ;  but  is  it 
not  destined  to  be  its  sphere  ?  It  was  not  His  kingdom  then, 
but  this  does  not  prove  that  it  is  not  to  be  His  kingdom  at  some 
future  time,  when  He  will  fight  and  His  servants  too,  though  in 
a  new  way.  Here  you  have  the  positive  word  of  God  that  the 
world-kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Clirist  is  come.  The 
sovereignty  of  the  universe  is  transferred  to  the  Lord  Jesus: 
"  And  he  shall  reign  unto  the  ages  of  the  ages."  Of  course  such 
a  phrase  as  this  must  be  taken  in  connection  with  the  whole 
subject.  When  eternity  is  spoken  of,  it  must  be  taken  in  its  full 
and  unlimited  extent;  but  here  it  can  oidy  mean  "for  ever"  in 


NOT   JEWS   BUT    CHRISTIANS   CALLED   TO   EEIGN.  235 

the  sense  of  as  long  as  the  world  lasts.  And  I  feel,  though  it  is 
not  the  brightest  thought  which  our  souls  can  enjoy  in  connec- 
tion with  the  future,  yet  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  to  take  the 
throne  of  the  world  is  a  very  great  rest  to  the  heart  in  all  the 
present  confusion.  It  lifts  one  out  of  the  spirit  of  the  present ; 
because  if  I  know  that  this  is  not  the  place  of  the  church,  but 
that  I  am  now  in  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus  Christ,  I 
shall  not  be  wanting  honour  or  power  in  this  world.  We  are  to 
have  a  much  better  place  in  heaven,  and  the  saints  who  will  be 
on  earth,  when  the  Loi'd  appears  and  we  are  with  Him  in  glory, 
will  be  in  the  place  of  subjects.  But  what  is  the  place  of  those 
who  are  in  the  kingdom  and  patience  in  Christ  Jesus  ?  We  shall 
not  be  subjects  merely  of  Christ  when  He  thus  comes,  but  kings 
reigning  with  Him.  Even  now  those  who  are  rejected  for  Christ 
are  rejected  kings.  They  do  not  merely  sing,  "  He  loveth  us,"  but 
"  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father." 

The  Lord  will  have  a  kingdom  suited  to  the  earth;  but  the 
Jews  are  not  destined  to  be  kings.  They  will  have  on  earth  a 
very  honoured  place ;  but  even  when  the  nation  is  converted  to 
Him,  they  will  never  have  the  nearness  that  belongs  to  every 
soul,  Jew  or  Gentile,  who  believes  in  Christ  now.  Our  portion 
may  seem  to  unbelief  to  be  a  most  trying  one,  and  trying  it  is 
now.  But  the  Lord  Jesus  has  trodden  the  path  before,  and  known 
suffering  such  as  none  other  could.  He  has  gone  through  it  all, 
and  when  He  comes  and  takes  the  kingdom,  He  will  assign  His 
sufferers  their  place.  They  will  be  like  the  near  companions  of 
David  when  he  came  to  the  throne  ;  there  was  David  in  the  cave 
of  Adullam,  and  David  hunted  about  upon  tlie  mountains  by 
Saul;  but  it  was  David's  faith,  as  a  means,  that  had  kindled  the 
flame  in  their  hearts.  They  caught  the  tone  of  David's  soul;  and 
though  they  had  a  time  of  sorrow,  and  there  were  many  foolish 
men  like  Nabal  who  could  taunt  him  with  being  some  runaway 
servant,  yet  while  David  was  rather  quick  to  feel  and  too  ready 
to  gird  his  sword  to  his  thigh,  he  takes  a  word  from  even  a 
weaker  vessel,  and  retreats  into  the  better  place  of  grace — the 
place  of  doing  well,  suffering  for  it  and  taking  it  patiently.  And 
soon  came  the  throne.  What  then  ?  The  poor  ones  that  had 
known  his  path  of  suffering  and  had  shared  his  sorrows  in  the 


236  TYPE   OF   DAVID   AND    HIS    FOLLOWEKS. 

day  of  his  rejection  were  now  to  share  his  honours.  Wliere  was 
Jonathan  in  that  day?  It  is  true  that  his  heart  clung  to  David, 
but  his  faith  was  not  equal  to  the  trial.  And  what  was  the  con- 
sequence ?  He  fell  on  the  mountains  of  Gilboa  with  his  miserable 
father;  and  he  whose  heart  would  willingly  have  given  the  first 
place  to  David,  and  who  had  already  stripped  himself  for  David's 
sake,  now  falls  with  the  world  with  which  he  had  outwardly 
remained  to  the  last.  Thus  whatever  may  be  our  affection  for 
Christ,  if  I  remain  in  a  false  worldly  position,  it  will  never  be 
to  my  honour  in  the  day  of  Christ,  when  they  that  suffer  shall 
reign  with  Him.  May  we  wait  for  that  kingdom  with  hearts 
exercised  by  the  truth  ! 

It  will  be  found  that  there  are  many  persons  who  hear  re- 
luctantly about  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  professing  always  to 
like  something  touching  more  on  the  immediate  need  of  the 
soul.  But  does  not  God  know  better  what  we  want?  What 
we  most  need  is  not  to  trust  ourselves,  but  the  living  God. 
Always  giving  the  first  and  last  place  to  the  cross  of  Christ, 
may  we  not  forget  that  His  kingdom  is  coming.  Though  the 
cross  is  the  only  resting-phace  for  the  sinner,  the  kingdom  is 
what  cheers  and  encourages  the  saint  in  his  path  of  faith  and 
patience.  There  were  those  that  followed  David  in  his  suffer- 
ings— separated,  wherever  they  went,  from  all  around.  They 
were  gathered  from  all  conditions,  and  out  of  all  parts :  but  it 
was  being  round  David,  and  sharing  God's  thoughts  and 
purposes  about  hiui,  which  sustained  them.  Though  God  has 
anointed  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  it,  still  He  lias  not  yet  taken 
the  kingdom  in  the  sense  of  the  world-kingdom  that  I  have 
been  speaking  of.  Having  been  rejected  and  crucified.  He  is 
gone  above  and  we  wait  for  Him,  suffering  meanwhile.  But 
the  day  fast  comes  when  it  will  no  longer  be  tribulation  and 
patience,  but  power  and  glory.  All  will  be  brought  under 
sulijection  to  Christ,  and  He  will  reign  for  ever  and  ever. 

When  this  is  heard  in  heaven,  the  twenty-four  elders  rise 
from  their  thrones  (verse  16).  How  sweet  is  this !  Before, 
when  glory  was  ascribed  to  God,  or  the  Lamb  appeared,  they 
rose  and  cast  themselves  down  before  Him.  They  were  ready 
for  everything   that  exalted   the   Godhead.     If   it  be  as  the 


OMISSION   OF   "AND   ART   TO    COME."  237 

Creator  (chap,  iv.),  they  prostrate  themselves  before  Him  that 
sat  on  the  throne ;  or  if  they  hear  of  the  slain  Lamb  who  is 
about  to  unveil  the  secrets  of  futurity  (chap,  v.),  they  fall  down 
before  Him  and  proclaim  Him  worthy. 

So  here  now  the  last  trumpet  sounds,  "  the  world-kingdom  of 
our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ"  is  announced,  and  forthwith  the 
twenty-four  elders  are  on  their  faces,  giving  God  thanks,  because 
He  had  taken  to  Him  His  great  power  and  had  reigned.  It  is 
true  that  it  must  be  through  much  sorrow  for  guilty  men.  For 
the  sword  of  judgment  has  to  clear  the  way,  that  the  sceptre  of 
righteousness  may  have  free  course.  "  The  nations  were  angry, 
and  thy  wTath  is  come,"  &c.  But  they  knew  well  that,  though 
man  must  come  down  with  a  crash,  he  will  be  exalted  in  the 
only  true  and  enduring  way  in  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  of 
His  Anointed.  And  so  they  give  thanks  to  the  Lord  God 
Almighty,  "that  art,  and  wast  [and  art  to  come]"  (verse  17). 
I  beg  leave  to  omit  the  last  clause,  "and  art  to  come" — not  as 
a  conjecture  (for  conjecture  on  scripture  is  presumption),  but 
because  of  what  the  best  witnesses  for  the  word  of  God  really 
maintain.  The  clause,  "  and  art  to  come,"  was  put  in  to  make 
it  square  with  other  passages  which  contain  a  similar  phrase. 

In  the  first  chapter  you  may  remember  that  the  salutation 
was,  "  Grace  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  Him  which  is,  and  which 
was,  and  which  is  to  come."  All  these  three  clauses  are  from 
God.  They  assert  that  He  is  Jehovah,  the  One  that  is,  and 
was,  and  is  to  come ;  they  are  almost  a  translation  into  the 
Greek  of  the  name  Jehovah — One  who  is  always  the  same. 
A  similar  phrase  appears  in  chapter  i.  8,  only  there  it  is  not 
John's  salutation  to  the  churches,  but  the  direct  word  of  God 
Himself:  "I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  saith  the  Lord  God,  which 
is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to  come,  the  Almighty," — 
evidently  pointing  to  the  unchanging  continuity  of  His  being. 
In  chap.  iv.  there  is  a  little  departure  from  the  order  given  in 
the  previous  passages,  and  quite  rightly  :  "  Holy,  holy,  holy, 
Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come;"  not 
"  which  is,  and  was,"  &c.,  but  here,  "  which  was  and  is."  It  may 
seem  a  slight  change,  but  it  is  not  without  meaning.  The 
emphasis  in  chap.  i.  is  thrown  upon  the  words,  "  which  is,"  be- 


238  COMPARISON    OF   CHANGES   IN   THE   PHKASE, 

cause  God  is  presenting  Himself  as  the  ever-existing  One. 
"Which  was"  is  put  first  in  chapter  iv.,  possibly  because  the 
living  creatures  (who  had  been  the  instruments  of  God's  judg- 
ments in  past  dispensations,  as  tliey  will  be  in  the  future)  may 
look  back  upon  the  past,  and  therefore  do  not  lay  stress  upon 
"  which  is,"  but  begin  with  what  God  had  been  all  through  the 
past.  Certainly  they  had  been  seen  first  at  the  garden  of  Eden 
as  Cherubim  (Gen.  iii.)  ;  next  they  formed  a  sort  of  represen- 
tation of  the  judicial  power  of  God  in  the  tabernacle  and  in 
the  temple  (Exod.  xxv. ;  1  Kings  vi.) ;  and  then  finally  they 
were  active  when  Jerusalem  was  swept  away,  and  judgment 
came  upon  Israel.  In  Eev.  iv.,  Ezek.  i.  xi.  these  living  creatures, 
which  had  been  the  witnesses  of  God's  ways  all  through,  begin 
with  what  God  was,  the  perfection  of  His  being  as,  if  one  may 
so  say,  it  had  been  historically  unfolding.  In  chap.  xi.  there  is 
the  omission  of  the  words,  "  and  art  to  come,"  perhaps  because 
the  arrival  of  the  world-kingdom  of  the  Lord  is  here  celebrated, 
so  that  there  was  no  need  to  add  anything.  Before  He  came  in 
His  kingdom,  it  was  appropriate ;  but  it  would  be  hardly  suit- 
able here.  As  I  find  that  the  best  authorities  reject  the  words, 
it  is  surely  legitimate  to  try  to  shew  how  the  Ijetter  reading 
harmonizes  with  the  truth  of  God  in  the  passage  itself. 

The  general  meaning  of  the  next  verse  (18)  is  plain.  "The 
nations  were  wroth,  and  thy  wrath  is  come,  and  the  time  of  the 
dead,  that  they  should  be  judged,"  &c.,  all  which  was  to  be 
executed  afterwards.  It  is  a  sort  of  comprehensive  view  of  what 
would  take  place  from  the  beginning  of  the  kingdom,  wlien  the 
various  corruptions  should  be  judged,  and  (hiring  the  millen- 
nium up  to  "the  end,"  when  all  judgment  closes. 

The  three  great  thoughts  then  of  this  chapter,  as  we  have 
seen,  are  priestly  worship ;  next  a  pi-ophetic  testimony ;  and 
finally  the  kingdom  announced  in  heaven  as  come.  The  Lord 
grant  that  our  hearts,  brought  into  the  enjoyment  of  such 
privileges,  may  be  with  Christ,  not  merely  because  of  the  bless- 
iufr,  but  for  His  own  sake  !  Christ  is  better  than  all  the  l)lessings 
that  come  even  from  Him ;  and  we  shall  never  rightly  enjoy 
what  lie  gives,  except  in  proportion  as  we  enjoy  Himself. 


THE  REFERENCE  TO  THE  REFORMATION.         239 

That  the  greater  part  of  the  chapter  refers  to  the  antipapal 
witnesses,  crowned  by  the  Eeformatiou,  though  urged  with 
confidence  and  with  no  lack  of  ingenuity,  I  cannot  but  regard 
as  a  total  failure,  involving  in  some  places  a  sense  not  only 
different  from,  but  the  reverse  of,  the  express  language  of  the 
prophecy.  Thus  the  giving  of  a  reed  like  a  rod  to  John  is 
supposed  to  denote  the  royal  authorization  of  the  Eeformer 
whom  the  prophet  here  impersonated.  This  is  said  to  have  been 
fulfilled  after  the  death  of  Frederick,  the  Elector  of  Saxony, 
when  his  brother  and  successor  John  assumed  to  himself 
supremacy  in  ecclesiastical  matters,  and  exercised  it  resolutely 
by  forming  new  ecclesiastical  constitutions,  modelled  on  the 
principles  of  Luther,  the  example  being  followed  elsewhere  in 
Germany,  Denmark,  Sweden,  and  afterwards  in  England.  How 
singular  that  men  of  God  should  be  so  prepossessed  with  Protes- 
tantism, and  so  enamoured  even  of  its  blots,  as  to  turn  the  word 
of  God  into  a  sanction  of  the  very  things  in  which  the  Eeformers 
departed  from  scripture  as  widely  perhaps  as  they  did  from 
Rome !  I  am  aware  that  the  application  of  the  rod  in  this 
passage  to  the  intervention  of  civil  authority  is  at  least  as  old 
as  Brightman  ;  but  this  ought  to  have  given  time  for  considering 
and  rejecting  so  unworthy  a  notion.  Nothing  can  be  simpler, 
it  seems  to  me,  than  the  truth  intended.  In  prospect  of  the 
approaching  divine  government  of  the  earth,  Israel  and  their 
land  become  as  ever  the  central  object.  The  Lord  therefore 
takes  special  cognizance  of  them,  marking  what  He  owns  and 
what  He  leaves  out.  The  outside  multitude  are  disowned ; 
account  is  taken  only  of  those  who  worshipped  within — a  dis- 
tinction far  indeed  from  being  true  of  Protestants  in  contrast 
with  Papists.  The  reed  was  the  instrument  of  measurement, 
not  of  gold  (as  for  the  heavenly  Jerusalem),  but  "  like  a  rod." 
There  seems  an  allusion  to  Zech.  ii.  (and  Ezek.  xl.  3),  with  just 
such  differences  as  in  the  reference  of  verse  4  to  Zech.  iv. 
There  it  is  a  measuring  line  (axoivtW  yew/xerptKov),  and  the  entire 
city  is  to  be  measured.  Here  it  is  but  a  special  part,  measured 
by  that  which  was  not  longer  than  a  staff,  which  the  Lord 
reserved  as  His  portion  during  the  crisis,  the  rest  being  profaned 
by  the  Gentiles  for  forty-two  months.     It  is  very  far  from  being 


240  THE   SPIKIT   OF   PKOPHECY   IS   NOT   THE   GOSPEL. 

the  due  re-establishmeut  of  Jerusalem,  but  it  is  the  little  pledge 
of  all  that  is  to  follow.  A  similar  remark  applies  here  as  before. 
Precisely  so  far  as  the  Eeformers  slipped  into  Jewish  ideas  and 
order,  instead  of  falling  back  upon  the  true  and  heavenly 
peculiarities  of  the  church  of  God,  there  may  be  an  appearance 
of  definite  fulfilment.  Had  they  walked  in  separation  from  the 
world,  the  author  of  Horae  Apoc.  must  have  lost  a  large  pro- 
portion of  his  apparent  identifications. 

In  the  two  witnesses,  which  is  tlie  next  subject  of  importance, 
this  comes  out  very  clearly.  Their  earlier  history  is  supposed 
to  be  retrospectively  given,  along  with  what  remained  to  be 
fulfilled.  As  to  their  personality,  we  are  agreed  :  they  are  not 
things  or  books,  but  persons  who  testify.  But  the  testimony  of 
Jesus,  it  is  well  to  note,  means  not  merely  for  Him,  but  the 
spirit  of  prophecy  proper  to  this  book.  The  gospel  is  not  the 
subject.  Further,  the  two  olive-trees  and  the  two  candlesticks 
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  churches  (or  a  eto-ti/).  That  theme 
is  completely  closed,  as  we  have  seen  repeatedly ;  and  we  are 
here  avowedly  in  presence  of  the  proclamation  of  Christ's  title 
to  land  and  sea.  Hence,  as  it  is  added,  these  stand  "  before  the 
Lord  of  the  earth."  In  a  word,  the  connexion  is  not  with  the 
church-state,  which  then  will  have  long  past,  but  with  the  order 
predicted  in  Zech.  iv.,  which  undoubtedly  refers  to  the  millennial 
provision  for  the  light  of  God  in  the  midst  of  Israel. 

Doubtless,  there  are  points  of  distinction  ;  for  our  chapter 
belongs  in  its  full  meaning  to  the  interval  after  the  rapture  of 
the  saints  and  before  the  thousand  years.  There  is  one  candle- 
stick all  of  gold  in  Zechariah,  with  its  bowl,  its  seven  lamps, 
its  seven  pipes,  and  an  olive-tree  on  either  side ;  perfect  unity 
and  i^erfect  development.  Whatever  may  liave  been  the  then 
historical  accomplishment  in  Zerubbabel  and  Josliua,  the  two 
anointed  ones  of  the  Jewish  prophet  point  in  their  fulness  to 
the  kingly  and  priestly  offices  of  Christ,  the  grand  means  of 
dispensing  and  maintaining  divine  light  in  "  the  workl  to  come." 
Here  it  is  only  a  testimony  to  these  things  ;  and  therefore,  as  the 
least  sufficient  testimony  according  to  tlie  law,  there  M'ere  two 
witnesses.  The  oil  here  is  associated,  not  with  joy,  but  with 
mourning ;  and  the  witnesses  are  clothed,  not  with  the  garment 


JUDICIAL    CHARACTER   OF    THE   WITNESSES.  241 

of  praise,  but  Avith  the  sackcloth  of  affliction.  Avenging  power 
is  theirs,  like  that  of  Moses  and  Elijah.  How  vain  to  bend  all 
this  to  the  witnessing  Christians,  Western  or  Eastern,  earlier  or 
later !  Their  calling  practically  was  to  resist  not  evil,  to  love 
their  enemies,  to  bless  those  who  cursed  them,  to  do  good  to 
such  as  hated  them,  to  pray  for  their  persecutors ;  and  this,  as  the 
Lord  expressly  illustrated  it,  after  the  pattern  of  their  heavenly 
Father,  who,  instead  of  shutting  heaven  that  it  rain  not,  con- 
trariwise sends  it  in  indiscriminate  mercy  on  just  and  unjust. 

Of  course,  on  the  historical  view  (which  in  a  general  way  I 
allow),  the  days  of  their  prophecy  are  years,  and  the  judgments 
must  be  taken  figuratively.  But  liow,  if  it  be  pretended  that  this 
is  all  fulfilled  ?  Had  the  Paulicians  and  the  Waldenses  (sup- 
posing them  to  be  true  witnesses  untainted  by  heresy)  authority 
to  withhold  the  dew  of  grace  all  their  days,  or  to  smite  with 
plagues  as  often  as  they  would  ?  To  curse  the  earth  with  a 
spiritual  drought  is  still  more  tremendous  than  if  it  were  in  a 
physical  sense,  even  though  their  power  embraced  heaven,  earth, 
the  waters,  and  their  enemies.  I  perceive,  however,  that  an 
effort  is  made  to  escape  the  difficulty  of  the  devouring  fire  that 
issues  from  them,  by  referring  to  the  final  fiery  judgment  on  the 
adversaries  {H.  A.,  ii.  pp.  203,  407) ;  but  what  can  be  lamer  than 
such  shifts  ?  Present  judicial  power,  continuous  or  occasional, 
against  all  opposers  is  the  true  and  full  meaning  :  like  Elijah's 
in  the  midst  of  an  apostate  people,  and  like  Moses'  in  the  midst 
of  a  people  oppressed  and  enslaved  by  the  Gentiles.  But  as 
their  testimony  is  prophetic  and  not  the  gospel,  so  it  is  armed 
with  judgment  instead  of  breathing  grace.  Righteous  vengeance 
guards  the  claims  of  the  Lord  of  the  earth.  Heaven  is  the 
source,  centre,  and  home  of  grace.  It  is  in  the  vaguest  con- 
ceivable way  that  a  delineation  like  this  can  be  made  to  suit 
proper  Christian  witnesses  ;  and  it  is  chiefly  the  mixture  of 
Jewish  feeling  and  conduct,  found  alas  !  too  often  and  especially 
in  dark  times,  which  lends  a  colour  to  such  applications.  I 
hardly  like  to  notice  the  fancied  coincidence  of  the  black  goat- 
skin of  the  Vaudois  and  the  sackcloth,  or  of  the  motto  of  the 
Counts  of  Lucerna  {lux  lucet  in  tenedris)  and  the  candlestick. 

But  now  comes  another  obvious  and  grave  objection  to  the 

R 


242  TIIEY   COMPLETE   THEIR   TESTIMONY. 

scheme  of  the  Harm  Apoccdypticae.  The  natural  meaning  of 
verse  7  of  course  is,  that  when  their  12G0  days  of  testimony 
have  expired  the  beast  kills  the  witnesses.  But  this  does  not 
fit  in  with  past  facts.  Criticism  is  therefore  summoned  to  siib- 
stitute  an  ambiguous  word,  so  as  to  convey  that  after  their  death 
many  of  the  days  may  yet  remain  to  run  out.  Difficulties  are 
pressed,  but  they  are  not  insuperable.  For  the  witnesses  have 
an  exceptional  place,  and  therefore  might  be  miraculously  main- 
tained for  their  allotted  period,  while  saints  generally  were 
suffering  and  slain.  And  the  beast's  forty-two  months  might 
coincide  with  the  1260  days  of  the  witnesses  consistently  with 
the  brief  interval  of  three  and  a  half  days'  exposure  and  their 
rise  and  ascent  to  heaven,  the  earthquake,  &c.  For  what  act 
against  God  or  His  people  is  attributed  to  him  afterwards  ?  I 
know  of  none.  So  that  it  might  still  be  true  that  their  testi- 
mony and  his  "  practising"  close  together,  while  a  short  space 
might  intervene  before  the  execution  of  God's  judgments  on  the 
beast  in  the  height  of  his  triumph.  In  other  words,  the  forty-two 
months  define  the  epoch  not  of  the  beast's  destruction,  but  of 
his  being  permitted  "  to  work."  Daniel  entirely  strengthens  this 
conclusion  ;  for  we  find  in  chap.  xii.  an  interval  of  some  length 
after  the  three  and  a  half  years  before  full  blessing  comes. 

It  is  extraordinary  that  a  learned  person  should  cite  Gal.  v. 
16  and  Heb.  ix.  6,  as  parallel  with  Kev.  xi.  7.  For  it  is  plain 
from  the  absence  of  the  article  that  the  first  passage  goes  no 
farther  than  fulfilling  flesh's  lust.  That  is  it  could  not  mean  the 
termination  of  the  whole  career  of  lust.  Tiie  anarthrous  usage 
here  is,  in  fact,  the  strong  and  needed  assurance  that  walking  in 
the  Spirit  is  the  divine  safeguard  against  fulfilling  anything  of 
the  sort.  In  our  text  it  is  a  definite  testimony,  of  which  the 
length  had  been  carefully  specified ;  and  whether  you  translate 
it  finished  or  completed,  the  full  time  is,  it  seems  to  me,  neces- 
sarily involved.  The  passage  in  Heb.  ix.,  every  scholar  must 
know,  has  no  bearing  on  the  case,  because  the  tense  implies  a 
continued  or  habitually  repeated  action;  while  tlie  tense  in  Kev. 
X.  implies  an  action  complete  or  concluded.  Indeed,  it  is  plain 
that  to  the  interpreters  in  general  this  word  has  proved  an  in- 
superable difficulty.    Hence  the  rendering  of  Mede,  "  when  they 


JEKUSALEM  IS  THE  SCENE.  243 

shall  be  about  finishing,"  and  so  Bishop  Newton.  Equally  offen- 
sive to  mere  grammar  is  that  of  Daubuz,  "  whilst  they  shall 
perform  their  testimony;"  or  the  earlier  view  of  Mr.  Elliott,* 
"when  the  witnesses  shall  have  been  fulfilling."  The  truth  is 
that,  interpreted  with  simplicity,  according  to  the  regular  mean- 
ing of  the  word  and  in  harmony  with  the  context,  the  witnesses 
are  divinely  protected  the  1260  days  of  their  testimony.  Then, 
their  mission  having  been  completed,  and  not  before,  God  per- 
mits that  the  beast  should  fight,  overcome,  and  slay  them.  But 
this,  applied  strictly  on  the  year-day  scale,  completely  destroys 
Mr.  E.'s  interpretation  in  particular,  if  not  the  Protestant  school 
generally,  save  that  some  of  them  refer  a  part  as  being  yet  un- 
fulfilled to  the  future. 

jVIanifestly  the  previous  dislocation  of  the  prophecy  leads  to 
the  next  error,  that  "the  great  street  of  the  city,"  or  "the  street 
of  the  great  city"  (verse  8),  refers  to  Eome  and  not  Jerusalem. 
Now,  I  am  not  disposed  to  deny  that,  on  the  prolonged  view, 
such  an  application  is  left  room  for,  especially  considering  the 
peculiar  way  in  which  the  city  is  here  alluded  to.  But  this  is 
the  utmost  which  can  be  fairly  granted,  and  it  not  at  all  excludes 
the  closing  fulfilment  in  the  actual  city  wherein  the  Lord  of  the 
witnesses  was  crucified.  Tlie  context  seems  to  me  quite  decisive 
that  Jerusalem  is  intended ;  for  nobody  doubts  that,  whether 
literally  or  figuratively  understood,  the  holy  city  of  the  opening 
verses  (the  centre  of  the  testimony,  though  in  the  face  of  pro- 
faning Gentiles)  is  not  Eome  but  Jerusalem.  It  is  agreed  that 
the  beast  is  Eoman,  bat  this  in  no  way  strengthens  the  theory 
that  Eome  is  the  city  here  intended.  His  making  war  upon  the 
witnesses  is,  on  the  contrary,  much  more  naturally  applicable  to 
a  locality  not  under  his  own  immediate  jurisdiction.  No  doubt 
Babylon  is  the  symbolic  designation  of  Eome  in  chapter  xvii., 
where  Eome  is  confessedly  the  great  city,  and  so  of  course  in 
chapters  xiv.  xvi.  But  Babylon  has  not  been  named  as  yet,  and 
there  is  no  reason  why  Jerusalem  also  should  not  be  so  styled ; 
especially  as  the  figurative  terms,  Sodom  and  Egypt  conjoined, 

*  Is  it  right  to  refer  to  Hippolytus,  as  if  lie  agreed  with  Mr.  E.'s  idea  of  the 
witnesses  making  complete  their  testimony,  long  before  the  whole  period  as- 
signed, or  their  own  death  ?     The  very  reverse  was  his  belief. 

R   2 


244  DIFFERENCE   FROM   CIIURCII-STATE. 

are  nowhere  else  connected  with  Eome,  and  the  fact  which 
winds  up  the  description  ("  where  also  their  Lord  was  cruci- 
fied") points  to  Jerusalem.*  If  it  were  said  eKX-qOrj  historically 
(or  KeKXrjTaL,  the  present  result  of  the  past),  there  might  have 
been  more  difficulty ;  for,  though  scripture  had  already  likened 
Jerusalem  of  old  to  Sodom,  it  had  not  to  Egypt.  But  the  refer- 
ence is  to  the  moral  features  of  Jerusalem,  as  it  is  to  be  in  the 
days  of  the  witnesses,  and  so  KaAetrai  is  strictly  correct.  And 
certainly  if  Nineveli  had  the  title  as  well  as  the  Chaldean 
Babylon  in  the  Old  Testament,  it  is  hard  to  see  why,  in  the 
Apocalypse,  Jerusalem  might  not  have  it  as  well  as  Eome,  sup- 
posing that  the  context  looks  that  way.  Thus  the  question  to 
what  city  our  chapter  refers  nmst  be  judged  by  the  conclusion 
to  which  we  come  as  to  all  this  part  of  the  Eevelation,  and  as 
to  chapters  x.  and  xi.  in  particular.  The  grand  point  is  that  the 
things  which  come  to  pass  after  "the  things  that  are"  do  not 
belong  (save  in  the  general  moral  bearing  already  and  so  often 
acknowledged)  to  the  present  order  of  things,  but  to  the  transi- 
tional epoch  when  God  is  about  to  bring  the  First-born  into  the 
inhabited  earth.  Therefore  He  will  then  be  busied  with  the 
provisional  government  of  the  world,  and  hence  specially  with 
the  Jews,  who  are  the  prominent  object  and  direct  instrument  of 
His  earthly  rule.  Accordingly  the  witnesses,  as  we  have  remarked 
before,  are  said  to  stand  before  the  Lord  of  "  the  earth ; "  for  this 
is  in  question,  not  His  ways  with  the  church. 

Hence,  whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  coincidence  in 
mystic  reckoning  between  the  not  very  truthful  speech  at  the 
Fifth  Lateran  Council,  ("  Jam  nemo  reclamat,  uuUus  obsistit,") 
which  in  the  skilful  hands  of  Mr.  E.  is  made  to  denote  the  ex- 
tinction of  the  witnesses,  and  Luther's  posting  up  his  theses  at 
Wittemberg  three  and  a  lialf  years  afterwards,  whicli  denotes 
their  resurrection,  I  cannot  but  regard  the  interpretation  as 
forced  an  unnatural.  The  only  unljiassed  way  of  taking  the 
account  is  that  tlie  1260  days  were  fultilled  when  the  prophets 

•  Wcro  the  rcadinj?  such  as  Mr.  E.  repeatedly  represents  it  (of  course 
through  oversight),  nXaTiiif  Tt]Q  iz.  n/c  /i.  (7/.  A.,  vol.  ii.  p.  409,  note  4,  and 
yet  more  incorrectly  in  vol.  iv.  p.  579,  note  1),  there  had  heeu  no  room  for  this 
rendering,  which  some  very  competent  ,j  udges  prefer. 


PROTESTANT  INTEKPRETATION  OF  THE  WITNESSES.    245 

were  slain.  A\niat  more  absurd  than  to  imply  that,  in  spite  of 
their  death,  they  are  still  safe  and  sound  for  centuries  afterwards, 
and  that  the  sackcloth  testimony  on  earth  can  co-exist*  with 
their  ascent  to  heaven,  understand  heaven  as  one  may  ?  But 
once  the  Protestant  scheme  is  made  the  exclusive  fulfilment, 
can  one  be  surprised  that  the  marvellous  explanations  given  to 
the  earlier  part  of  the  chapter  are  only  surpassed  by  increasing 
wonders  in  the  latter  portion  ?  Certainly  few  councils  had  less 
claim  to  be  considered  made  up  of  delegates  from  the  peoples, 
and  kindreds,  and  tongues,  and  nations,  than  that  almost  exclu- 
sively Italian  assembly.  Dean  Waddington,  who  did  not  write 
for  the  purpose  of  illustrating  Eev.  xi.,  records  that  the  Bohe- 
mian heresy  "  was  again  rising  into  formidable  attention"  at 
this  very  time.  Who  can  think  that  the  breath  of  the  orator 
slew  them  ?  If  they  refused  to  answer  the  summons  to  Rome, 
John  Huss  had  done  the  same  before  them,  and  Luther  did  so 
after  them.  It  may  have  been  want  of  courage  ;  but  Prague, 
Augsburg,  and  Worms  were  not  the  same  thing  as  such  a  council 
held  in  Rome.  I  need  not  dwell  on  the  enactment  refusing  Chris- 
tian burial  to  heretics,  the  Pope's  extraordinary  donation  of — 
not  the  golden  rose  only,  but — the  sovereignty  of  half  the  Eastern 
world  to  the  King  of  Portugal,  the  grant  of  a  plenary  papal  in- 
dulgence, the  singing  of  the  Tc  Deum,  or  the  splendour  of  the 
dinners  and  fetes  given  on  the  triumphant  close  of  the  Council. 
But  the  deductions  from  verses  12,  13,  must  not  be  passed 
over.  The  call  to  the  witnesses  is  made  a  summons  from  the 
highest  authorities  to  ascend  "the  heaven  of  political  elevation 
and  dignity,"  and  was  fulfilled  first  by  the  pacification  of  Nu- 
remberg (1532),  and  yet  more  by  the  Peace  of  Passau  twenty 
years  after.  The  cloud  is  conceived  to  imply  that  these  political 
triumphs  were  the  terminating  result  of  Christ's  special  inter- 
vention, and  to  identify  the  cause  of  the  witnesses  with  the 
Reformation.  The  effects  of  this  mighty  revolution  in  the  over- 
throw of  the  tenth  part  of  the  city,  and  the  slaying  of  seven 
chiliads,!  are  set  forth  as  the  fall  of  papal  dominion  in  England, 

*  The  alleged  case  of  Rev.  vii.  1,  2,  has  nothing,  to  my  mind,  in  common, 
t  Some  readers  will  be  curious  to  learn  by  what  process  of  legerdemain  these 
slain  chiliads  can  be  metamorphosed  into  the  Protestant  Dutch  provinces  which 


246 


EXTRAVAGANT  VIEWS. 


and  ill  the  seven  Dutch  United  Provinces,  And  the  ascending 
Protestants  gave  glory  to  the  God  of  heaven,  as  on  Mary's  death, 
Elizabeth's  accession,  the  destruction  of  the  Armada,  and  the 
reign  of  William  III.  Thus,  commercial  and  maritime  and 
colonial  power  crowning  Protestant  England  and  Holland,  it 
began  to  appear  why  the  covenant  angel  planted  his  right  foot 
on  the  sea,  his  left  only  on  the  mainland.  Insular,  missionary, 
England  was  to  be  the  principal  instrument  of  asserting  Christ's 
claims  to  universal  dominion  and  gospel  truth  against  papal 
usurpation  and  lies.  Could  one  ask  for  more  palpable  evidence 
of  the  absurd  and  mischievous  effects  of  a  wrong  system  ?  To 
refute  such  trifling  with  the  word  of  God  appears  to  me  hardly 
called  for.  And  what  can  we  say  to  the  delusion  that  the  loud 
voices  in  heaven,  under  the  seventh  trumpet  (verse  15),  pro- 
ceeded from  "the  religious  world  of  the  great  Protestant  powers?" 
Or  that  its  general  indications  coincide  with  the  more  prominent 
characteristics  and  concomitants  of  the  past  French  Eevolution? 
(vol.  iii.  p.  338.)  We  must  impute  these  extravagancies  to  the 
necessity  of  the  case;  for  the  text  requires  that  the  last  woe 
should  follow  quichly  after  that  of  the  Turks  (verse  14).  Hence 
the  desire  to  make  out  something  in  the  seventeenth  century, 
because  of  the  great  Reformation  of  the  sixteenth,  so  as  to  fill  up 
the  great  gap  that  follows.  It  is  the  more  strange,  as  Mr.  E.  had 
already  (vol.  ii.  p.  474)  made  the  seventh  trumpet  to  include  not 

threw  off  the  Spanish  yoke.  Cocceius  threw  out  the  notion  first,  but  it  was  re- 
jected by  Vitringa  and  the  more  sober  commentators,  till  Mr.  E.  re-asserted  it. 
It  is  said  that  the  Hebrew  equivalent,  Fl^X  was  used  in  the  course  of  Jewish  his- 
tory for  a  tribal  subdivision,  without  reierencc  to  that  number,  and  even  for 
the  di.>5trict  in  question.  On  this  very  slender  basis,  in  conjunction  with  the  old 
error  of  the  Christian  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  all  is  founded.  The  fact  is,  that 
XiXirtc  in  the  Apocalypse  and  the  New  Testament  generally,  is  used  in  no  such 
contradistinction  to  the  numeral  adjective.  It  is  applied,  in  the  simplest  possible 
way,  to  soldiers,  believers,  and  Israelites.  It  is  said  of  angels,  of  men,  and  of  a 
mcasui'c.  Nor  is  there  in  the  Septuagint  the  least  real  ground  that  I  can  see  for 
taking  the  word  in  even  one  instance  as  a  province,  or  territorial  subdivision. 
Yet  the  substantive  occurs  more  commonly  than  the  adjective.  The  truth  is  that, 
according  to  the  meaning  of  the  verse,  the  seven  thousand  (or  complete  body 
devoted  to  death)  fell  with  the  tenth  part  of  the  city,  not  those  there,  and  these 
here.  And  the  affrighted  remnant  consists  of  the  other  inhabitants  of  the  guilty 
city,  in  contrast  with  the  complement  of  the  slain  in  the  sphere  of  the  earth- 
quake's ravages. 


THE  OPENED  TEMPLE  OF  GOD  IN  HEAVEN.        247 

the  events  alone,  that  are  preparatory  to  Christ's  reign,  but  the 
millennium  itself,  and  even  all  other  revealed  events  beyond  it. 

In  verse  19  I  think  that  the  opening  of  the  temple  in  heaven 
marks  a  new  portion  of  the  book,  and  that  it  is  therefore  con- 
nected, not  so  much  with  what  went  before,  as  with  what  follows ; 
for  it  is  clear  that  the  verses  before  (15-18)  gave  the  sounding 
of  the  last  trumpet,  and  the  announcement  of  the  consequences 
of  God's  taking  to  Him  His  great  power  and  reigning — not  the 
mere  sway  of  man,  but  the  power  of  God  put  forth  in  an  alto- 
gether new  way.     There  was  a  sample  of  His  power,  but  not  in 
connexion  with  Christ,  at  the  time  when  He  fought  the  battles 
of  His  people  and  put  down  the  Canaanites.     But  then  it  was 
exercised  within  failing,  guilty  Israel,  without  their  Messiah ; 
and   consequently  that   power   was   often   obliged   to   be    put 
forth  against  themselves,  and  not  against  their  enemies  only, 
because  God  can  never  have  alliance  with  sin.     But  now,  under 
the  last  trumpet,  the  kingdom  of  the  Lord  God  and  of  His 
Christ  was  come,  and  this  is  what  the  earth  looks  for,  and  the 
Lord  Himself  too  ;  for  He  is  waiting  "  till  His  enemies  be  made 
His   footstool"     Then   the   whole   scene   here    below   will   be 
changed.     He  will  come  and  execute  wrath  as  terrible  as  His 
patience  has  been  divine ;  and  the  effect  will  be  that,  "  when 
His  judgments  are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world 
will  learn  righteousness."     There  will  be  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  and  the  absence  of  Satan ;  there  will  be,  not  only 
the   execution    of  wrath  on   the   living,  but   finally  also  the 
judgment  of  the  dead.     And  these  things  seem  to  be  brought 
together  under  the  same  trumpet.     All  is  anticipated  from  the 
beginning  of  the  kingdom  to  the  end  of  it — all  the  main  dis- 
plays of  divine  glory  in  the  government  of  both  quick  and 
dead.    And  there  evidently  the  subject  closes ;  for  the  opening 
of  the  temple  of  God  in  heaven  (verse  19)  ushers  in  another 
and  wholly  different  vision,  which  has  not  directly  to  do  with 
God  in  His  kingdom,  but  here  first  of  all  it  is  a  new  theme  that 
comes  before  us. 


248  THE   CHURCH   IS   PASSED   OVEK. 


I 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Under  the  seventh  trumpet  the  elders  anticipated  the  effects  of 
the  throne  being  actually  established  over  the  earth.  But  now 
the  UiivpU  is  again  seen,  so  that  we  go  back  here,  for  we  have 
God's  purposes  in  connexion  with  the  Lord  Jesus  from  the  very- 
beginning — the  man  child  wlio  was  to  rule  all  the  nation  with 
a  rod  of  iron  being  clearly,  as  I  tliink,  Christ  Himself  It  is 
God  reverting  to  His  purpose  in  Christ,  born  as  the  heir  of  the 
world — not  in  relation  to  the  calling  of  the  church,  but  as  the 
man  of  might,  destined  to  govern  all,  and  witli  no  feeble  hand. 
It  appears  to  me  that  this  accounts  for  another  remarkable 
feature  of  the  vision.  Christ's  death  and  resurrection  are  not 
alluded  to,  but  His  birth  and  His  rapture  (not  His  death)  are 
given  in  a  summary  manner.  We  have  the  woman  in  pain  to 
be  delivered ;  and  the  man  child  is  born ;  and  then  we  have 
Him  taken  away  to  the  throne  of  God  above.  Of  course  this 
is  not  given  as  history.  The  Lord  Jesus  had  been  born  and  had 
died  long  ago :  if  it  had  been  history,  His  all-important  death 
would  not,  could  not,  have  been  passed  over. 

Here  it  is  plain  the  Holy  Ghost  connects  the  birth  of  Christ 
and  His  rapture  to-  the  throne  of  God  in  heaven  with  Israel  and 
the  purposes  of  God  about  them.  The  birth  of  Christ  is  of 
special  importance  to  Israel.  The  genealogy  of  the  INIessiah  is 
tlierefore  carefully  given  in  Matt.  i. ;  and  in  chapter  ii.  we  find 
all  Jerusalem  was  troubled  at  His  birth.  This  was  the  working 
of  the  dragon.  Herod  was  a  sort  of  expression  of  the  dragon's 
power,  who  would  gladly  have  devoured  the  child  as  soon  as  it 
was  born,  through  that  evil  king  as  his  instrument.  The  child 
was  delivered  ;  but  in  the  history,  instead  of  being  taken  up  to 
the  throne  of  God,  He  was  carried  down  into  Egypt.     So  that 


CHKIST   BOKN   OF   ISRAEL.  249 

our  chapter  cannot  be  regarded  as  historical,  in  the  early  part  at 
least ;  and  even  where  historical  facts  are  alluded  to,  they  are 
not  arranged  in  order  of  fact  at  all,  but  simply  linked  with  God's 
thoughts  about  Israel.  The  church  as  such  is  passed  over.  It 
may  be  involved  mystically  in  the  person  and  destiny  of  the 
man  child,  but  there  is  no  gradual  unfolding  of  the  thoughts  of 
God  as  to  His  having  a  heavenly  bride  for  His  Son.  Nothing  is 
said  about  a  bride  for  the  man  child.  We  have  the  mother,  but 
not  the  Lamb's  wife  here.  Israel  was  the  mother  of  Christ.  It 
was  of  them,  as  concerning  the  flesh,  that  the  Christ  was  born. 
This  is  the  great  point  which  the  apostle  Paul  urges  on  the  Jews 
in  Eomaus  ix.,  because  the  Jews  thought  he  made  light  of  their 
privileges,  and  was  against  them,  in  consequence  of  the  strong 
way  in  which  he  brought  out  God's  mercy  to  the  Gentiles. 
But  it  was  not  so  at  all.  He  demonstrates,  in  fact,  that  they 
overlooked  their  highest  distinction.  To  them  were  given  the 
adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,  and  the  giving  of 
the  law,  and  the  service  of  God,  and  the  promises.  They  had 
the  fathers  too,  and  last  of  all,  to  them  was  given  a  Son,  the 
man  child,  whom  they  knew  not — the  Christ ;  for  of  them  as 
to  the  flesh  He  came,  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever. 
Far  from  lessening  the  just  glory  of  Israel,  the  apostle  had  a 
much  more  exalted  view  of  it  than  themselves. 

As  in  Kom.  ix.  Paul  does  not  go  on  to  speak  of  the  death  and 
resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  so  it  is  here.  Accordingly  these 
two  thoughts  are  connected  in  Eev.  xii.  The  man  child  is 
brought  forth,  but  leaves  the  scene  where  the  dragon  was  op- 
posed to  Him,  and  takes  His  place  upon  the  throne  of  God, 
which  none  but  a  divine  person  was  entitled  to  do.  By  and  by 
He  will  sit  on  His  own  throne,  but  that  will  be  when  He  governs 
the  earth  in  a  direct  and  public  way ;  for  God  will  never  give 
up  the  right  and  title  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  the  earth  as  well  as 
to  the  heavens.  He  has  acquired  a  title  by  redemption,  besides 
His  essential  one  as  Creator.  But  then  He  is  going  to  do  much 
better  than  to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron,  or  even  bless 
His  earthly  people.  His  heart  is  to  be  shewn.  He  must  liave 
a  free  course  and  a  due  object  for  all  His  love.  Christ  wants  to 
have  those  that  deserve  nothing  but  judgment  as  the  sharers  of 


250  THE  TEMPLE   AND   THE   ARK. 

His  glory  above.  What  is  done  by  Christ  and  for  Christ,  whilst 
He  is  upon  the  throne  of  God,  is  not  alluded  to  here.  Israel  is 
in  question.  These  few  thoughts  may  be  helpful  to  understand 
the  proper  place  and  bearing  of  this  new  vision. 

The  temple  of  God  then  is  opened  in  heaven,*  and  there  was 
seen  in  it  the  ark  of  His  covenant,  the  pledge  of  His  faithfulness 
to  His  people.  For,  as  we  have  observed  in  the  last  chapter, 
there  was  a  certain  measured  remnant  that  drew  near  to  God  in 
the  way  of  worship,  and  to  these  witnesses  was  given  a  testi- 
mony to  the  Lord's  rights  over  the  earth,  as  finally  there  was 
the  announcement  of  the  kingdom.  Now  we  have  another  train 
of  idea.  There  was  the  throne,  and  a  rainbow  round  about  it 
in  Eev.  iv.  Here  there  is  the  temple,  and  the  ark  of  God's 
covenant  seen  in  it.  This  may  prepare  the  way  for  the  difference 
between  the  two  subjects.  There  it  was  God's  power  over 
creation.  Providential  judgments  were  about  to  fall  upon  the 
earth,  and  the  rainbow  was  to  shew,  before*  a  judgment  was 
experienced,  that  even  then  God  would  remember  mercy.  The 
rainbow  round  the  throne  in  chapter  iv.,  and  round  tlie  head 
of  the  mighty  angel  in  chapter  x.  before  the  sounding  of  this 
last  trumpet,  guaranteed  that  God  was  working,  not  for  the 
destruction,  but  for  the  deliverance  of  the  earth.     But  now  we 

*  The  true  reading  may  not  improLablj'  be  6  iv  tH  ovpavHj  which  is  in 
heaven.  At  any  rate  so  the  Alexandrian,  and  the  Paria  rescript,  the  Leicester, 
a  Vatican  cursive  (579),  the  Middlehill,  the  Mortfort  and  one  of  the  Parham  (17) 
manuscripts  say,  not  to  speak  of  the  Cod.  Coialin.  of  Andreas  and  Victorinus  : 
not  so  the  Sinai,  Basilian-Vat.,  and  Porphyrian  uncials,  with  the  mass  of  cursives. 
Mr.  E.  is  also  quite  wTong  in  saying  that  "according  to  Tregelles  this  is  a  mis- 
take." It  is  true  that,  in  his  first  edition,  he  inadvertently  omitted  to  name  this 
various  reading,  though  long  before  noted  by  Walton,  ISIill,  Bengel,  (Wetstein 
probably,)  and  even  adopted  without  question  in  the  text,  not  of  Wordsworth 
only,  but  of  Lachmann,  Tischcndorf,  Green,  and  it  appears  Tregelles  also,  judg- 
ing from  the  new  edition  of  1859.  ITnw  it  was  thnt  Mr.  E.  did  not  find  it 
in  the  critical  editions  of  Griesbach  and  of  Seholz,  it  i.^  not  for  me  to  say :  but 
there  it  unquestiunably  may  be  found  by  any  who  examine  them.  In  llahn's 
slight  manual  one  could  not  rightly  expect  it  given.  To  cite  Kcv.  xv.  5  where 
there  is  no  difference  of  reading  cannot  decide  one  way  or  another  as  to  chap, 
xi.  19,  where  there  is  such  weighty  testimony  on  both  sides.  The  chief  bearing 
of  the  later  occurrence  would  perhaps  bo  to  encourage  assimilation  in  a  bold 
scribe.  Besides  the  article  is  often  dropped  carelessly,  and  especially  might  be 
in  such  a  form  as  this,  where  its  force  is  not  at  first  sight  apparent. 


THE  CONNEXION  WITH  SATAN.  251 

come  to  a  further  point;  for  blessed  as  the  throne  is,  it  does  not 
bring  us  into  such  depths  of  God's  character,  as  do  the  asso- 
ciations of  the  temple  and  the  ark.  Displays  of  divine  power 
are  not  so  much  what  draw  out  our  hearts  in  worship,  as  when 
we  draw  near  to  the  dwelling-place  and  home  of  God  Himself ; 
for  though  there  is  no  one  thing  we  have  so  truly  to  be  ashamed 
of  as  our  poor  and  inadequate  answer  to  His  holiness,  yet  it  is 
just  there  God  has  met  us  in  His  grace. 

Now  He  is  going  to  shew  us  not  merely  creation  and  man- 
kind smitten,  but  Satan's  connexion  with  the  final  apostacy  of 
this  ageT  There  had  been  a  figurative  allusion  to  his  influence 
in  chap.  ix.  2,  where  smoke  issues  out  of  the  abyss  or  bottom- 
less pit ;  then,  in  chap.  xi.  7,  the  beast  ascends  out  of  that  pit ; 
but  here  the  evil  source  is  thoroughly  disclosed.  And  is  it  not 
precious  to  find  that,  before  God  discovers  to  us  the  tide  of  full 
evil,  and  shews  us  not  merely  the  development  and  the  instru- 
ments among  men,  but  the  great  hidden  spring  of  it  all,  and 
the  person  of  him  who  puts  himself  at  its  head,  and  who  is  yet 
to  work  out  this  tremendous  conspiracy  against  God — to  find 
that  before  all  this  the  temple  of  God  in  heaven  was  opened, 
and  there  was  seen  in  His  temple  the  ark  of  His  covenant?* 
For  the  heart  under  such  circumstances  wants  not  the  mani- 
festation of  God's  power  merely,  but  to  know  that  His  holiness 
is  secured,  and  that  in  virtue  of  it  His  people  stand.  Accord- 
ingly we  find  that  when  the  temple  is  opened  above,  it  is  not 
a  rainbow  that  is  seen,  but  God's  connexion  with  His  people  is 
set  forth  in  the  ark  which  now  appears  ;  for  the  ark  was  always 
nearest  to  God,  and  what  faith  therefore  most  clave  to.     Israel 

*  Mr.  E.  remarks  (iii.  308,  note  4),  "  It  is  clear  that  this  word  ought  to  have 
boen  here  translated  covenant  not  testament.  Indeed  so  I  think,  always  in  the 
New  Testament  specially  inclusive  of  Heb.  ix.  ?"  I  should  say  in  every  place, 
except  in  Heb.  ix.  16,  17,  where  the  reference  is  clearly  to  the  "inheritance"  just 
named  in  verse  15.  This,  it  seems  to  me,  furnishes  occasion  to  the  inspired 
writer  to  found  a  fresh  illustration  of  the  all-important  death  of  Christ  upon 
the  idea  of  a  will  or  testament,  which  comes  into  effect  only  on  the  demise  of 
the  testator,  tov  StaOiftkvov.  The  latter  word  never  means  covenanting  victim, 
nor  do  I  believe  it  possible  that  it  could.  It  was  technically  used  for  disposing 
of  property.  If  these  two  verses  be  read  parenthetically  and  with  this  sense, 
all  is  clear.  I  have  no  wish  to  speak  dogmatically  on  a  point  so  nice  ;  but  such 
is  the  view  which  commends  itself  most  to  me. 


252  god's  covenant. 

shewed  themselves  to  be  dead  to  fill  right  and  godly  feeling, 
when  they  were  willing  to  expose  it  even  in  the  hope  of 
deliverance  from  the  Philistines.  The  dying  grief  of  Eli,  and 
the  living  transports  of  David,  alike  shew  what  the  ark  was 
in  the  eyes  of  the  true-hearted.  Here  it  is  the  ark  of  God's 
covenant  in  heaven ;  not  merely  that  of  Israel  which  might  be 
taken  away.  Even  the  wise  king  did  not  adequately  value  the 
ark  of  old.  And  this  shews  the  superiority  of  David  ;  for  faith 
is  always,  if  I  may  so  say,  wiser  than  wisdom.  If  we  had  the 
largest  human  intelligence,  and  even  the  highest  natural  wisdom 
that  God  can  confer,  it  never  rises  up  to  the  height  of  simple 
faith.  Solomon  appears  before  the  great  altar.  It  was  a  mag- 
nificent spectacle,  and  he  was  an  august  king,  and  brought 
suited  offerings.  But  David  shewed  his  faith  in  this,  that  it 
was  not  the  altar  merely  which  he  prized,  but  the  ark  most 
of  all.  The  ark  was  a  liidden  thing ;  not  even  the  high  priest 
could  see  it,  save  wrapped  in  clouds  of  incense.  One  had  to 
walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight,  in  order  to  appreciate  tlie  ark 
of  God.  Therefore  David  could  not  rest  until  the  ark  had  its 
settled  place  in  Israel ;  and  he  never  had  deeper  joy  than  when 
the  ark  came  back  to  Jerusalem.  It  is  true  that  tlie  ark  brought 
judgment  upon  all  who  despised  it,  and  even  David's  heart  was 
afraid  for  a  time,  and  the  ark  rested  in  the  house  of  Obed-Edom 
the  Gittite.  But  David  regained  the  spring  of  contidence  in 
God,  which  generally  so  marked  his  career;  for  we  find  him 
afterwards  rejoicing  when  the  ark  was  welcomed  back  more 
than  ever  he  did  in  all  his  victories  put  together. 

Here,  it  is  not  the  ark  of  man's  covenant  at  all,  but  of  God's 
covenant ;  the  temple  of  God  in  heaven  is  opened,  not  on  earth 
yet  (i.e.  it  is  only  the  purpose  of  God  about  it) ;  and  associated 
witli  this  the  ark  of  His  covenant  is  seen,  the  sure  pledge  of 
mercy,  and  sign  of  faithfulness  to  His  people.  But  still  the 
circumstances  were  such  as  called  for  judgment ;  and  accord- 
ingly "  there  were  lightnings,  and  voices,  and  thunderings,  and 
an  earthquake,  and  great  hail,"*  all  of  which  were  the  tokens  of 

*  It  is  amazing  that  the  true  relation  of  this  verse  escaped  the  notice  of  so 
many  able  Christian  men,  owing  perhaps  to  tho  more  fact  of  its  being  iinfor- 
tiinatoly  tacked  to  tho  end  of  chap.  .\i.,  instead  of  opening  the  new  division 


THE   WOMAN    AND   THE   MjVN    CHILD.  253 

God's  judgment.  The  day  of  peace  and  gloiy  was  yet  to  come. 
Thus  you  get  these  two  things  united:  first,  the  pledges  of  God's 
interest  in,  and  triumph  for,  His  people ;  and  then  the  signs  of 
His  judgment  upon  the  evil  that  must  be  set  aside  before  the 
time  of  full  blessing. 

"  And  there  appeared  a  great  sign  in  heaven ;  a  woman 
clothed  with  the  sun,  and  the  moon  under  her  feet,  and  on  her 
head  a  crown  of  twelve  stars"  (verse  1).  I  think  it  probable 
there  may  be  an  allusion  here  to  the  well-known  dream  that 
Joseph  had  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  explained  by  himself 
as  alluding  to  his  parents  and  brethren.  Here  the  symbols  are 
more  general,  and  naturally  refer — the  sun  to  supreme  glory, 
the  moon  to  that  which  is  derived,  and  the  stars  to  inferior  or 
subordinate  authority.  All  this  is  seen  in  connexion  with 
Israel ;  for  God  intends,  as  far  as  this  world  is  concerned,  all 
power  and  glory  to  circle  round  Israel.  As  for  the  church,  she 
will  have  all  in  perfection  with  Christ,  and  in  Christ;  but  as  far 
as  the  earth  is  concerned,  Israel  will  be  the  centre.  The  woman 
is  the  symbol  of  God's  purpose  as  bound  up  with  Israel. 

In  the  next  verse  we  have  another  thing ;  it  is  the  man  by 
the  woman.  And  so  we  find  that  "  being  with  child,  she  crieth, 
travailing  in  birth,  and  pained  to  bring  forth;"  and  a  little  after 
we  read  (verse  5)  that  "  she  brought  forth  a  man  child  who  is 
to  rule  all  the  nations,"  &c.  Thus  we  see  it  was  not  the  woman 
who  was  of  such  importance  for  her  own  sake,  though  clothed 
with  all  these  symbols  of  glorious  power ;  but  the  reason  is 
because  from  her  comes  the  man  child.  And  we  shall  find  this 
thought  is  not  at  all  foreign  to  scripture.  Take  for  instance  the 
Psalms,  where  the  same  thing  is  alluded  to  in  a  mystical  way. 
Thus  in  Psalm  Ixxxvii.  the  word  is  that  the  Lord  is  exalted ; 
His  foundation  is  in  the  holy  mountain.  He  is  challenging  the 
world  to  compare  their  best  with  what  He  can  produce.     "  Je- 

commencing  with  chap.  xii.  If  Mr.  Elliott  had  only  observed  it,  he  might  have 
been  spared  much  trouble ;  but  then  he  would  have  lost  the  coincidence  of  the 
"great  hail"  with  the  stomi  in  July,  1788!!  and  the  "earthquake"  of  the 
French  Revolution  in  1789.  But  the  hailstorm  he  had  hitherto  interpreted  as 
an  invasion  from  the  cold  north-east.  Where  is  the  consistency  of  this  vaunted 
scheme  ?  And  what  had  the  opening  of  the  temple  of  God,  or  the  sight  of  the 
ark  of  His  covenant  there,  to  do  with  the  French  democrats  ? 


254  THIS   MAN   BORN   IN   ZION. 

hovah  loveth  the  gates  of  Zion,"  &c.  He  chose  Zion  out  of  all 
the  cities  of  Israel,  because  God's  sovereign  choice  must  be 
carried  out,  even  among  His  people.  "  I  will  make  mention  of 
Rahab  and  Babylon  to  them  that  know  me."  Rahab  was  the 
figurative  name  for  Egypt,  and  Egypt  and  Babylon  were  the 
most  famous  nations  in  the  Psalmist's  time.  Philistia,  with 
Tyre  and  Ethiopia,  were,  no  doubt,  powers  of  inferior  order, 
but  extremely  celebrated  for  their  trade,  commerce,  skill,  &c. 
Of  them  it  shall  be  said,  "  This  man  was  born  there."  And  of 
Zion,  "This  and  that  man  was  born  in  her,  and  the  Highest 
himself  shall  establish  her.  Jehovah  shall  count,"  &c.  I  be- 
lieve there  is  a  dim  allusion  to  the  birth  of  the  Christ,  where 
God  and  His  people  glory  so  to  speak,  (whatever  other  men 
may  have  been,)  that  this  man  was  born  there.  The  reference 
is,  I  think,  to  the  Lord  Jesus  chiefly,  if  not  alone.  Let  otliers 
boast  of  their  great  men,  but  "  Jehovah  shall  count  when  he 
writeth  up  the  people,  that  Tins  man  was  born  there."  When 
He  writeth  up  the  people,  of  whom  does  He  think  ?  Why  of 
Christ ;  of  the  One  that  was  born  of  the  woman,  born  of  Israel, 
and  now  caught  up  to  heaven.  When  we  are  on  the  look-out 
for  Christ,  passages  will  be  found  to  bear  upon  Him,  more  or 
less  distinctly,  all  through  scripture ;  for  He  who  wrote  tlie 
scriptures  had  Christ  ever  in  view.  It  is  not  the  death  of 
Christ  we  hear  in  this  Psalm,  because  this  would  have  brought 
the  sin  of  the  Jews  prominently  before  them.  But  it  is  His 
birth,  which  was  or  should  have  been  unmingled  joy.  And 
therefore  when  Jesus  was  born,  the  heavenly  hosts  broke  forth 
in  praises,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace, 
good-will  in  men."  There  was  no  troul)le  among  them,  what- 
ever might  be  the  feelings  of  Herod  and  all  Jerusalem,  Their 
great  joy  was  what  Christ  would  be  for  God  and  men,  and 
especially  for  the  city  of  David  :  in  other  words,  just  the  suited 
feelings  of  those  heavenly  ones,  that  were  not  occupied  with 
themselves,  permitted  to  see  the  counsels  of  God  as  to  His 
people. 

There  is  another  scripture  or  two  I  would  briefly  refer  to,  where 
we  may  get  help  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  woman  and  her  child, 
not  merely  as  to  the  fact  of  the  birth,  but  in  its  connexion  with 


THE   BIRTH    IN   MICAH.  255 

prophecy.  Micah  v.  furnishes  a  passage  that  both  acquires  and 
gives  light  when  compared  with  Eev.  xii.  "  Now  gather  thyself 
in  troops,  0  daughter  of  troops  ;  he  hath  laid  siege  against  us ; 
they  shall  smite  the  Judge  of  Israel  with  a  rod  upon  the  cheek," 
The  last  words  set  forth,  what  we  have  not  in  the  Eevelation, 
the  rejection  of  Christ  and  the  dishonour  done  to  Him  by  His 
own  people.  Then  the  Holy  Ghost  interrupts  the  course  of  the 
chapter  by  a  parenthesis ;  for  such  is  the  whole  of  verse  2.  *  "  But 
thou,  Bethlehem  Ephratah,  though  thou  be  little  among  the  thou- 
sands of  Judah,  yet  out  of  thee  shall  he  come  forth  unto  me 
that  is  to  be  the  ruler  in  Israel,  whose  goings  forth  have  been  of 
old,  from  everlasting."  It  is  Christ  after  the  flesh  who  is  God 
over  all,  blessed  for  ever.  There  you  have  the  two  points  of  the 
glory  of  Christ :  His  glory  as  a  man,  as  Messiah ;  and  withal, 
the  One  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old,  from  ever- 
lasting. Then  having  shewn  who  this  was  (the  man  to  be 
smitten  but  a  divine  person,  which  had  made  the  sin  of  smiting 
Him  unpardonable,  if  it  had  not  been  for  infinite  mercy).  He 
takes  up  again  what  we  had  in  the  first  verse.  "  They  shall 
smite  the  Judge  of  Israel  with  a  rod  upon  the  cheek  ....  There- 
fore will  he  give  them  up,  until  the  time  that  she  which 
travaileth  hath  brought  forth ;  then  the  remnant  of  his  brethren 
shall  return  unto  the  children  of  Israel," 

Mark  the  term  of  their  being  given  up  by  God — "until  the 
time"  of  the  birth.  This  shews  that  we  are  not  to  take  the 
allusion  to  the  birth  of  the  man  child  as  a  literal  reference  to 
Christ's  birth  into  the  world,  but  rather  in  conjunction  with  the 
accomplishment  of  the  purposes  of  God  respecting  Israel.  Christ 
was  born  (Micah  v.  2) :  then  comes  His  rejection,  and,  as  it  were 
measuring  His  rejection  on  earth  and  His  exaltation  in  heaven, 
the  calling  of  the  church.  But  the  prophecy  here  passes  by  all 
that  has  to  do  with  the  church  and  takes  up  Christ's  birth  figu- 
ratively, connecting  it  with  the  unfolding  of  the  divine  purposes, 
which  is  itself  symboUzed  by  a  birth.  The  Judge  of  Israel  is 
smitten  with  a  rod  upon  the  cheek,  and  therefore  Israel  is  given 
up  until  the  time  when,  to  use  the  language  of  Jeremiah,  Jacob's 
trouble  is  come,  but  he  shall  be  saved  out  of  it.  Here  it  is  put 
figuratively,  as  Zion  travailing  till  the  birth  of  this  great  pur- 


256  THE   BIIITH    IN   ISAIAH. 

pose  of  God  touching  Israel.  "  Then  the  remnant  of  his  brethren 
shall  return  unto  the  children  of  Israel."  All  the  time  the  church 
is  being  called,  the  remnant  of  the  Jews  ("  those  who  should  be 
saved  ")  are  taken  out  of  Israel,  cease  to  look  for  Jewish  hopes 
as  their  portion,  and  are  absorbed  into  the  church.  But  when 
God's  earthly  purpose  begins  to  take  effect  in  the  latter  day,  the 
remnant  of  that  time  will  form  part  of  Israel  and  will  resume 
their  ancient  Jewish  place.  The  natural  branches  shall  be  graffed 
into  their  own  olive-tree. 

Another  scripture  speaks  of  Zion's  bringing  forth ;  but  it  is 
of  a  very  different  kind.  In  the  last  chapter  of  Isaiah  the  allu- 
sion is  to  a  birth,  but  there  it  is  said  to  be  in  one  day.  "A 
voice  of  noise  from  the  city,  a  voice  from  the  temple,  a  voice  of 
Jehovah  that  rendereth  recompence  to  his  enemies.  Before  she 
travailed,  she  brought  forth ;  before  her  pain  came,  she  was  de- 
livered of  a  mail  child.  Who  hath  heard  such  a  thing  ?  who  hath 
seen  such  things  ?  Shall  the  earth  be  made  to  bring  forth  in  one 
day  ?  or  shall  a  nation  be  born  at  once  ?  for  as  soon  as  Zion  tra- 
vailed, she  brought  forth  her  children.  Sliall  I  bring  to  the  birth, 
and  not  cause  to  bring  forth  ?  saith  Jehovah :  shall  I  cause  to 
bring  forth,  and  shut  the  womb?  saith  thy  God.  Kejoice  ye  with 
Jerusalem,  and  be  glad  with  her,  all  ye  that  love  her."  It  is  evi- 
dently not  the  time  spoken  of  in  Eev.  xii.  So  that  it  is  plain 
that  there  are  three  chief  critical  points  connected  with  Israel's 
history.  First,  there  is  the  birth  of  the  Messiah ;  secondly,  the 
passage  in  Micah,  the  ripening  and  effect  of  God's  counsels  re- 
garding Israel,  which  is  to  be  connected  with  liev.  xii.  where 
God  brings  out  His  purpose  concerning  Israel,  before  tlie  beast 
and  antichrist  are  shewn  fully ;  and,  thirdly,  this  passage  in 
Isaiah  Ixvi.  which  is  a  sort  of  contrast  with  the  others,  the  cir- 
cumstances mentioned  being  the  express  reverse  of  those  that 
accompany  natural  birth  and  of  the  figure  used  in  our  chapter. 
The  three  passages  may  be  put  together  thus : — first,  Micah  v. 
shews  us  the  birth  of  Christ,  and  Israel  given  up  till  the  result 
of  God's  counsels  as  to  them  shall  appear  by  and  by ;  next,  Rev. 
xii.  unfolds  the  time  of  sorrow*  just  before  the  last  tribulation, 

*  Some,  shrinking  from  the  hypothesis  thnt  the  ])irlh  of  Christ  is  hero  alhulod 
to,  as  being  at  variance  with  the  excluaively  futuro  bearing  of  the  Apocalypso 


THE  GREAT  RED  DRAGON.  257 

when  Satan,  losing  his  old  seats,  attempts  new  plans  in  order  to 
frustrate  God's  design  to  bless  and  magnify  Israel ;  and  then, 
lastly,  Isaiah  Ixvi.  is  the  time  when  all  sorrow  is  past,  and  when 
before  Zion  travailed  she  brought  forth — Israel's  full  and  sudden 
blessing  after  the  Lord  has  appeared.  All  previous  sorrow  flees 
away  by  reason  of  the  joy  that  fills  the  city  of  Zion,  or  is  only 
remembered  to  enhance  it. 

But  now,  going  back  to  our  chapter,  we  find  that,  besides  the 
woman  and  the  man  child,  there  is  another  sign ;  a  great  anta- 
gonist of  God  appears — not  the  beast,  but  a  much  more  serious 
power — "  a  great  red  dragon."  And  there  is  this  remarkable  cir- 
cumstance— the  same  description  which  is  applied  to  the  beast 
is  used  of  the  dragon.  How  comes  this  ?  That  Satan  is  the  great 
red  dragon  there  can  be  no  doubt ;  this  very  chapter  tells  us  so 
in  verse  9  :  and  yet  he  is  described  with  the  various  character- 
istics that  we  find  in  the  Eoman  empire  (chap.  xiii.  1),  "  having 
seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and  upon  his  horns  ten  crowns."  I 
believe  the  reason  is,  that  Satan  is  viewed  in  connexion  'with 
earthly  power.  Just  as  the  woman  was  seen  invested  with  sym- 
bols of  power  from  above  which  God  has  given  her,  so  here  Satan 
is  clothed  with  the  fulness  of  earthly  authority.  He  has  seven 
heads,  the  symbol  of  deliberative  power,  that  which  rules  and 
guides,  and  ten  horns,  the  symbol  of  kings  or  kingly  dignities. 
He  is  the  prince  of  the  world,  who  surrounds  himself  with  all 
power  connected  with  the  earth.  The  Eoman  empire  is  the  grand 
representative  of  the  power  of  Satan.  But  when  we  look  at  that 
empire  in  chapter  xiii.  we  see  this  difference.  The  ci^owns  were 
upon  the  heads  of  the  dragon,  but  upon  the  horns  of  the  beast. 
That  is,  in  the  Eoman  empire  we  have  the  exercise  of  the 
power  represented  as  a  matter  of  fact,  but  in  Satan's  case  merely 
as  a  matter  of  principle  or  the  root  of  the  thing.  Satan  is  the 
great  moving  spring,  though  unseen.  It  is  a  question  of  source 
and  cliaracter,  not  of  history. 

First,  then,  we  have  had  the  thought  and  plan  of  God  in 
respect  to  Israel  and  Christ.     And  it  is  plain  that  it  is  the  des- 

incline  to  the  view  that  the  parturition  of  the  woman  means,  in  symbol,  the  for- 
mation of  Christ  in  the  hearts  of  Israel,  or  a  certain  part  of  them,  before  the 
final  crisis.  (Compare  Gal.  iv.  19.) 

S 


258  THE   dragon's  tail. 

tiuy  of  the  man  child,  not  as  yet  the  exercise  of  His  dominion 
over  all  the  nations ;  for  if  it  were  the  latter,  the  woman  would 
not  have  to  flee  to  the  wilderness,  nor  would  the  dragon  be 
permitted  to  make  war  on  her  and  the  rest  of  her  seed.  To 
apply  this  historically  is  to  entirely  miss  the  teaching  of  God, 
who  is  here  shewing  out  His  purpose,  and  no  more  as  yet.  Then 
the  dragon  appears,  the  one  that  God  looks  at  as  the  ruler  of 
this  world,  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  clothed  with  the 
same  symbols  of  earthly  power  as  we  find  later  on  in  the  Roman 
empire,  save  that  in  this  last  the  crowns  are  upon  the  horns, 
or  those  actually  swayin^^^  the  power.  (Rev.  xiii.)  "  And  his  tail 
draweth  the  third  of  the  stars  of  heaven"  (verse  4).  This 
seems  to  be  his  malignant  power  in  the  way  of  false  teaching 
and  prophesying.  In  Isaiah  ix.  we  are  told  that  "  the  prophet 
that  teacheth  lies,  he  is  the  tail."  The  tail  of  the  dragon  does 
not  set  forth  his  earthly  power,  but  his  influence,  through  false 
teaching,  in  misleading  souls,  and  specially  those  that  were  in 
the  place  of  rule  and  authority — "  the  stars  of  heaven."  "  And 
the  dragon  stood  before  the  woman  that  was  about  to  bring  forth, 
that  when  she  brought  forth  he  might  devour  her  child."  How 
wonderfully  all  scripture  hangs  together  !  For  if  you  begin  with 
the  very  first  portion  of  scripture  that  speaks  of  the  serpent,  the 
woman  and  that  subtle  foe  are  seen  face  to  face ;  and  more  than 
this,  God  appears  on  the  scene  where  Satan  had  apparently 
gained  a  great  triumph,  and  then  it  is  that  He  gives  the  blessed 
revelation  that  "  the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  ser- 
pent 's  head."  Here,  at  the  close  of  scripture,  the  same  parties 
reappear,  but  with  marked  differences.  In  the  garden  of  Eden 
it  was  the  serpent's  success,  but  here  the  certain  triumph  of  God  ; 
there  it  was  the  devil's  craft,  but  here  it  is  God's  power,  long 
displayed  in  patience,  but  all-glorious  in  the  end.  God  permits 
the  dragon  to  stand  before  the  woman,  ready  to  devour  her  child 
as  soon  as  it  was  born.  The  dragon  shews  out  his  spite  and 
wickedness  to  the  last  degree  and  in  the  next  chapter  his  plans. 
Meanwhile,  God  turns  even  the  suffering  into  more  positive 
blessing  for  the  faithful.  The  very  certainty  that  He  could  crush 
the  dragon  gives  Him  patience  to  wait,  and  He  wants  His  people 
to  be  like  Himself. 


THE  OKDER  NOT  CONSECUTIVE.  259 

I  would  just  observe  that  we  must  not  take  the  chapter  as  if 
it  were  all  consecutive.  Verse  7  begins  a  new  division.  And  a 
proof  that  all  does  not  follow  in  immediate  order  is  this ;  the 
casting  out  of  the  dragon  from  heaven  unto  the  earth  precedes 
the  woman's  flight  into  the  wilderness,  and  is  in  point  of  fact 
the  reason  of  it  (see  verse  13),  though  only  stated  afterwards. 
The  truth  is,  that  the  first  six  verses  give  us  the  complete 
picture.  In  the  divine  purpose,  there  is  the  woman  clothed 
with  the  heavenly  orbs,  setting  forth  the  power  which  God 
alone  can  confer.  But  there  is  another  side  of  the  picture. 
When  the  man  child  is  brought  forth,  the  mother  is  seen  in 
weakness,  and  is  obliged  to  fly  for  her  life  into  the  wilderness, 
where  she  had  a  place  prepared  of  God.*  God  thinks  so  much 
of  the  time  she  spends  there,  that  He  does  not  call  it  "  a  time, 
times,  and  a  half,"  but  counts  up,  so  to  speak,  every  day  she  is 
there,  "that  they  should  feed  her  there  a  thousand,  two  hundred, 
and  threescore  days."  Then  comes  a  new  scene  in  verse  7. 
It  is  no  longer  what  takes  place  on  earth,  but  in  heaven,  as  it  is 
to  many  a  new  thing,  and  startling.  A  war  is  intimated  on 
high.  How  is  that  ?  A  war  in  heaven  ?  It  is  an  easy  thing  to 
imagine  the  enemy  of  souls  upon  the  earth,  and  a  war  with  him 
there.  But  the  war  begins  elsewhere.  "  And  there  was  war  in 
heaven  ;  Michael  and  his  angels  fought  against  the  dragon  ;  and 
the  dragon  fought  and  his  angels,  and  prevailed  not ;  neither 
was  their  place  found  any  more  in  heaven." 

If  the  Bible  is  implicitly  believed,  its  intimation  is  distinct 
that  Satan  has  power  to  draw  near,  and  to  accuse  the  saints 
before  God.  People  may  be  staggered,  and  say,  it  cannot  be ; 
but  it  is  better  to  be  guided  by  the  word  of  God  than  by  the 
notions  of  men.    The  book  of  Job  shews  it ;  1  Kings  xxii.  also, 

•  It  is  true  that  tig  may  be  translated  unto  or  towards,  no  less  than  into  :  to 
decide  which  is  meant,  we  must  carefully  examine  the  nature  of  the  case,  and 
the  context.  But  Luke  ix.  56,  57,  in  no  wise  proves  that  the  woman  was  fleeing 
merely  towards  the  wilderness;  because  we  have  various  occurrences  related 
immediately  after  the  evangelist  says  that  they  proceeded  unto  another  village 
— occurrences  expressly  said  to  be  while  they  were  on  their  way.  So  with  Acts 
viii.  25 ;  xviii.  18,  &c.  The  two  wings  of  the  great  eagle  convey  the  very 
reverse  of  a  gradual  movement  thither.  Nor  does  the  parenthetic  account  of 
the  war  in  heaven  confirm  the  notion  of  progressive  stages. 

s  2 


260         OUR  CONFLICT  COMPARED   WITH   THAT   OF   ISRAEL. 

and  perhaps  Zech.  iii.  You  may  say  that  these  are  visions ; 
but  we  take  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  and  there  we  are  told 
by  St.  Paul  that  our  conflict  is  not  like  that  of  Israel,  who 
fought  with  the  Canaanites.  "  For  we  wrestle  not  against  flesh 
and  blood,  but  against  principalities,  against  powers,  against  the 
rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world  (or  the  world-rulers  of  this 
darkness),  against  spiritual  [powers]  of  wickedness  in  heavenly 
places."  Some  use  this  verse  in  order  to  justify  Christian 
persons  resisting  the  powers  of  this  world,  in  plain  contradic- 
tion of  Eom.  xiii.  and  other  passages.  But  the  principalities 
and  powers  in  high  places,  in  Eph.  vi.  12,  do  not  mean  men  at 
all.  They  are  evil  spirits,  in  contrast  with  men.  The  conflict  of 
Israel  was  with  living  men  on  earth,  while  that  of  Christians 
is  with  wicked  spirits  in  heavenly  places.  Of  course,  Satan 
cannot  draw  near  into  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  into  that 
light  wherein  God  dwells,  which  none  can  approach  unto ;  but 
he  can  draw  near  enough  to  accuse  God's  people  before  God 
Himself.  The  heavenly  places  here  mean  the  heavens  in  general, 
and  not  merely  what  is  called  the  third  or  highest  heaven.  As 
far  as  the  lower  heavens  extend,  Satan  has  access ;  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that  he  is  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air. 

Israel  had  to  fight  in  order  to  acquire  possession  of  their 
inheritance.  The  land  was  given  to  them  in  title,  and  before 
Moses  was  taken  away  from  this  life,  the  Lord  Himself  took 
him  to  the  mountain-top,  and  shewed  him  all  the  land  of  Gilead 
unto  Dan,  &c.,  calling  the  districts  by  the  names  of  the  tribes  of 
Israel,  as  if  they  had  been  already  there.  But  in  order  to  enjoy 
their  possessions,  they  had  to  fight  for  them ;  and  so  have  we 
now.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  enjoying  the  heavenly  portion 
of  the  church  without  conflict  with  the  enemy,  and  that  is  the 
reason  why  so  many  do  not  enjoy  it.  If  the  Christian  does  not 
enter  his  full  heavenly  portion  here  below,  it  is  because  he  is 
occupied  either  with  himself  or  with  the  world,  or  some 
other  idol  of  the  enemy,  and  then  he  cannot  enjoy  it.  The 
great  object  of  Satan  is  to  hinder  our  enjoying,  tasting,  and 
living  on  our  heavenly  blessings  in  Christ;  and  in  the  same 
proportion  that  the  world  or  tlie  flesh  is  allowed,  and  so  the  door 
is  left  open  to  Satan  to  darken  our  eyes,  we  cannot  see  the 


PURIFICATION   OF   THE   HEAVENS.  261 

goodly  land.  There  must  be  victory  over  Satan  before  we  can 
enter  in.  .The  adversary  has  not  merely  power  through  men's 
lusts  below,  but  specially  in  connexion  with  the  heavenly  places 
— power  of  hindering  Christians  from  appreciating  their  portion 
here.  But  there  is  an  end  coming  to  that,  though  not  witliout 
a  struggle.  God  will  put  a  stop  to  all  Satan's  means  of  access 
to  heaven. 

There  is  a  text,  often  found  obscure,  that  I  cannot  but  con- 
nect with  this.  In  Hebrews  ix.  where  the  various  applications 
of  the  death  of  Christ  are  spoken  of,  there  is  the  following 
allusion  to  the  heavenly  places :  "  It  was  therefore  necessary 
that  the  patterns  of  things  in  the  heavens  should  be  purified 
with  these ;  but  the  heavenly  things  themselves  with  better 
sacrifices  than  these."  One  reason,  I  suppose,  is  because  Satan 
was  allowed  so  long  to  have  access  there  as  an  accuser.  God 
would  long  since  have  shewn  His  own  sense  of  the  defilement 
produced  there  by  the  foe,  if  it  were  not  for  the  death  of  Christ. 
But  as  He  bears  with  the  rebellion  of  the  world,  so  does  He  also 
with  another  rebellion,  the  audacity  of  Satan,  who  ventures  to 
intrude  himself  even  into  His  own  presence,  to  carry  the  accu- 
sations of  His  people  before  Him.  But  let  us  not  forget  that  if 
there  be  one  who  loves  to  accuse,  there  is  another  to  intercede, 
the  Advocate,  who  never  slumbers  nor  sleeps.  There  may  be 
the  devil  against  tlie  saints,  but  there  is  Christ  fur  them,  who 
ever  lives  to  make  intercession.  By  and  by  God  will  not  allow 
Satan  any  longer  to  taint  the  air  of  heaven.  He  is  forcibly  cast 
down  thence,  and  has  only  power  to  deal  with  mankind  in  an 
earthly  way.  "  Woe  to  the  earth  and  to  the  sea  !  for  the  devil 
is  come  down  to  you  "  (verse  12),  &c. — that  is,  to  those  nations 
who  are  in  a  settled  or  in  an  unsettled  condition.  Satan  is 
henceforth  entirely  prevented  from  usurping  his  higher  place, 
as  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air.  The  heavens  will  then  be 
cleared  of  him  and  his  angels,  never  to  regain  their  place  above. 
He  may  come  out  on  the  earth  again  for  a  little  season,  after  he 
has  been  bound,  but  he  will  never  more  appear  in  heaven  as  the 
accuser  of  the  brethren  before  God.  The  momentous  difference 
in  the  ways  of  God  with  His  people  is  very  marked  here.  All 
through  the  present  time  the  accuser  has  a  place  in  heaven,  but 


262  THE   FALL   OF   SATAN. 

at  the  predicted  epoch  he  is  cast  out,  and  his  place  is  not  found 
any  more  there.  Now,  you  will  observe  tliat  tliis  naturally, 
not  to  say  necessarily,  supposes  the  removal  of  the  church  to 
heaven  before  the  change  takes  place ;  and  for  this  reason,  that 
if  we  suppose  the  church  to  be  still  on  earth,  when  the  devil 
and  his  angels  are  cast  out  of  heaven,  it  would  no  longer  be  true 
of  us  that  we  wrestle  with  wicked  spirits  in  heavenly  places. 
Such  will  not  be  the  condition  of  the  saints,  either  during  the 
millennium  or  in  the  great  tribulation  that  precedes  it. 

Three  years  and  a  half  roll  on  their  course,  after  Satan  is 
cast  down  to  the  earth,  during  wliich  the  woman  and  her  seed 
(that  is,  Israel)  are  the  objects  of  his  persecution.  "And  the  great 
dragon  was  cast  [out],  the  old  serpent  that  is  called  the  Devil 
and  Satan,  which  deceiveth  the  whole  world ;  he  was  cast  unto 
the  earth,  and  his  angels  were  cast  [out]  witli  him.  And  I  heard 
a  loud  voice  in  heaven  saying.  Now  is  come  the  salvation,  and 
the  power,  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God  and  the  authority  of 
his  Christ :  for  the  accuser  of  our  brethren  is  cast  [out]  that 
accused  them  before  our  God  day  and  night.  And  they  over- 
came him  because  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  because  of 
tlie  word  of  their  testimony  ;  and  they  loved  not  their  life  unto 
death"  (verses  9-11).  "The  blood  of  the  Lamb  ;"  this  was  what 
kept  their  conscience  good,  and  gave  them  confidence  before 
God.  Their  conscience  was  purged  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and, 
besides  that,  they  had  their  testimony  for  God.  He  gave  them 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb  as  well  as  the  word  of  their  testimony, 
and  they  overcame  by  both.  The  one  cleansed  them  before  God, 
the  other  they  held  before  men.  "  Therefore  rejoice,  ye  heavens, 
and  ye  that  dwell  in  them."  There  are  at  this  time  dwellers 
in  heaven,  and  they  are  to  rejoice  because  Satan  is  cast  down 
from  heaven.  The  church  is  on  high  at  the  time  of  which  John 
speaks  ;  the  saint.s  are  already  taken  away  from  the  earth. 
"  And  when  the  dragon  saw  tliat  he  was  cast  unto  the  earth, 
he  persecuted  the  woman  who  brought  forth  the  man  child. 
And  to  the  woman  were  given  two  wings  of  the  great  eagle, 
that  she  might  Hy  into  the  wilderness,  into  her  place,  where  she 
i.s  nourished  for  a  time,  and  times,  and  half  a  time,  from  the  face 
of  the  seriuiiit"  (verses  13,  14). 


THE   FLIGHT   OF   THE   WOMAN.  263 

Now,  it  is  plain  that  this  brings  us  back  to  verse  6.  The 
important  link  given  us  in  verses  7-13  was  needed,  and  after 
that  we  have  consecutive  order.  We  are  brought  down  to  the 
fact  of  the  dragon's  persecuting  the  woman  and  her  child,  and 
the  woman's  flight  into  the  desert ;  and  then  the  Spirit  of  God 
goes  back  to  shew  us  the  deeper  reasons,  and  higher  source  of 
all.  Satan  will  have  to  leave  his  place  in  heaven,  and  now  in  a 
rage,  "  knowing  that  he  has  but  a  short  time,"  he  comes  down  to 
the  earth  to  do  his  worst.  He  hates  the  woman,  well  knowing 
her  seed  is  to  crush  him ;  so  that  all  his  long-cherished  enmity 
is  concentrated  upon  the  woman  and  her  seed.  This  is  what 
leads  the  woman  to  flee  into  the  wilderness.  The  enmity  of 
Satan,  not  merely  because  she  has  brought  forth  a  child  destined 
to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron,  but  because  Satan  is  cast 
down  to  earth.  Satan  was  once  innocent,  but  he  departed  from 
the  place  of  a  creature,  admiring  himself,  and  setting  himself  up 
against  God.  Now  when  Satan  is  cast  down  from  heaven,  he 
shews  out  all  his  evil  feeling  against  God,  by  persecuting  the 
woman  and  her  seed. 

"  To  the  woman  were  given  two  wings  of  the  great  eagle,"  &c. 
Observe  the  difference  here  (analogous  to  Eev.  xi.),  "  where  she 
is  nourished  for  a  time,  and  times,  and  half  a  time."  In  a  former 
verse  the  time  seems  to  be  made,  as  it  were,  as  long  as  possible, 
because,  as  I  conceive,  God's  care  for  her  was  then  the  grand 
point.  She  had  a  place  prepared  for  her  of  God,  and  when  His 
care  and  preparation  are  in  question,  He  lengthens  out  the  time 
as  much  as  possible;  but  where  it  is  a  question  of  the  devil's 
power.  He  foreshortens  it.  It  appears  to  be  the  same  period,  only 
put  in  a  different  way.  * 

The  serpent,  so  spoken  of  because  of  his  subtle  enmity,  now 
adopts  a  new  device.    He  "cast  out  of  his  mouth  water  as  a 

*  Dr.  M'Causland  {Latter  Bays  of  Jerusalem  and  Rome,  pp.  314,  326)  conceives 
that  the  1260  days,  forty -two  months  or  three  and  a  half  times,  are  but  abstract 
indices  of  the  indefinite  period  of  the  present  dispensation  during  which  the 
Jewish  body  continues,  like  its  type  Elijah,  in  the  wilderness,  unvisited  by 
the  dew  of  the  Spirit.  Primasius  in  early  days  contended  for  a  somewhat 
similar  view ;  but  while  he  thought  that  the  dates  were  intended  to  include 
the  period  of  the  Christian  dispensation,  he  also  allowed  their  literal  application 
to  the  final  tribulation. 


264  THE   REMNANT 

flood  after  the  woman,  that  he  might  cause  her  to  be  carried 
away  of  the  flood.  And  the  earth  helped  the  woman,"  &c. 
(verse  15,  16.)  This  sets  forth  some  providential  means  used  of 
God  to  deliver  His  earthly  people  and  purpose  from  the  instru- 
ments of  the  enemy,  then  put  into  a  state  of  great  commotion. 
These  last  are  represented  by  the  waters  issuing  as  a  river  from 
the  dragon's  mouth  (people  that  are  under  the  immediate  influ- 
ence of  the  devil) ;  while  evidently  the  earth  helping  the  woman 
means  the  more  settled  parts  of  the  world,  used  providentially 
to  resist  the  efforts  of  Satan  to  overwhelm  the  Jews.  "  The 
earth"  in  this  book  may  have  morally  a  guilty  character ;  but 
God  can  create  a  diversion  where  He  sees  fit,  and  so  bring  to 
nought  that  which  is  calculated  to  overwhelm  His  people. 

"  And  the  dragon  was  wroth  with  the  woman,  and  went  away 
to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her  seed,  that  keep  the  com- 
mandments of  God,  and  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus"  (verse  17). 
It  might  be  a  difficulty  to  some  that  a  Jewish  remnant  should 
have  the  testimony  of  Jesus.  But  if  you  have  followed  me  in 
former  chapters,  it  will  not  be  insuperable ;  because  "  the  testi- 
mony of  Jesus "  in  the  book  of  Eevelation  is  always  of  Jesus 
coming  back  again  as  the  Heir  of  the  world,  and  not  of  His 
relations  in  full  heavenly  grace  that  we  know  now.  The  Jewish 
remnant  will  not  enjoy  the  same  communion  with  the  Lord  Jesus 
that  the  church  actually  possesses;  but  they  will  stand  in  faith, 
and  they  will  have  the  testimony  which  Jesus  is  rendering  in 
the  Apocalypse.  In  chapter  i.  we  read,  "The  revelation  of  Jesus 
Christ  which  God  gave  unto  him,  to  shew  unto  his  servants 
things  which  must  shortly  come  to  pass,"  &c.  It  is,  we  have 
often  seen,  a  certain  revelation  which  God  gave  to  Jesus,  con- 
nected with  events  that  were  shortly  to  come  to  pass.  This  in 
the  next  verse  is  called  "  the  word  of  God,  and  the  testimony  of 
Jesus  Christ."  So  in  Eev.  xix.  10,  "  The  testimony  of  Jesus  is 
the  spirit  of  prophecy,"  which  shews  clearly  that  it  is  a  pro- 
phetic knowledge  of  Jesus.  Thus  the  testimony  rendered  in  this 
book,  though  equally  divine,  differs  from  the  blessed  way  in 
which  God  unfolds  Christ  now  to  the  church  which  is  His  body. 
The  remnant  will  have  such  a  knowledge  as  the  saints  in  the 
Old  Testament  times  possessed — greater  probably  in  amount, 


OF   GODLY  JEWS   IN   THE   LATTER   DAY.  265 

but  similar,  it  seems  to  me,  in  kind.  They  will  be  waiting  for 
Jesus  to  come.  They  will  say,  with  penitent  hearts,  "Blessed  is 
he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  Jehovah."  They  will  plead, 
"  How  long,  0  Lord,  holy  and  true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and 
avenge  our  blood  ? "  I  do  not  deny  that  they  may  have  the  New 
Testament  before  their  eyes  ;  but  there  will  be  no  power  to 
apply  the  New  Testament  facts  to  their  own  souls,  as  far  at 
least  as  present  peace  and  communion  are  concerned.  What  a 
proof  that  not  merely  the  word  is  required,  but  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  open  it  out,  for  the  rest  and  enjoyment  of  the  soul ! 

Some  of  us,  even  as  Christians,  have  had  no  light  as  to  certain 
truths,  until  in  the  grace  of  God  He  was  pleased  to  remove  the 
film  from  our  eyes.  And  God  does  this  ordinarily  by  specific 
means ;  for  it  is  not  His  way  to  enable  persons  to  take  up  the 
Bible  and  understand  it,  independently  of  His  provision  for  the 
perfecting  of  the  saints.  God  teaches  His  children,  but  in 
general  it  is  through  those  He  has  given  for  the  good  of  the 
church,  and,  though  never  tied  down  to  that  order.  He  does  not 
set  aside  the  wise  and  gracious  arrangement  that  He  has  formed 
and  will  perpetuate  as  long  as  the  church  endures.  Nourish- 
ment is  ministered  by  joints  and  bands,  and  thus  all  the  body 
knit  together  increases  with  the  increase  of  God.  What  would 
enable  us  to  do  without  one  another  is  a  thing  that  God  never 
gives  or  sanctions.  Supposing  a  person  were  cast  upon  a  desert 
island,  God  would  bless  him  in  his  solitary  reading  of  the  word 
with  prayer  ;  but  where  there  are  other  means  and  opportunities, 
such  as  assembling  ourselves  together  for  instruction,  for  reading 
the  scriptures,  for  public  preaching,  exhortation,  &c.,  to  neglect 
or  despise  them  is  the  will  of  man  and  not  the  guidance  of  the 
Spirit  of  God. 

These  saints,  like  those  of  old,  will  fear  Jehovah,  and  obey 
the  voice  of  His  servant,  but  withal  must  walk  in  darkness,  and 
have  no  light,  till  the  Lord  returns  in  glory.  Our  place  is 
identified  with  that  of  Christ  Himself,  risen  and  glorified. 
Compare  Isa.  1.  8,  9,  with  Eom.  viii.  33,  34,  for  the  latter,  and 
Isa.  1.  10,  11,  for  the  former.  Christians  may  not  always 
act  according  to  the  light,  but  they  walk  in  the  light,  as  He  is 
in  the  light.     "  He  that  followeth  me,"  says  our  Lord,  "  shall 


266  THE   HISTORICAL   HYPOTHESIS. 

not  walk  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the  light  of  life."  The 
remnant  of  that  day  will  trust  in  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and 
stay  upon  their  God  ;  but  it  will  be  after  another  sort.  Thomas 
in  John  xx.,  as  compared  with  the  other  disciples,  may  illustrate 
this. 

And  now  let  us  briefly  notice  the  historical  theory,  as  stated 
by  one  of  the  latest  and  ablest  of  its  advocates.  The  woman 
is,  of  course,  the  Christian  church,  which  is  actually  said  to  be 
not  merely  united  as  one,  but  morally  bright  and  beautiful  in 
the  days  of  Constantine!  ascendant  for  the  first  time  in  the 
political  heaven;  with  the  sunshine  of  the  highest  (Constantine) 
of  the  three  imperial  dignities,  and  the  light  of  the  second 
(Licinius) ;  and  with  the  chief  bishops  as  a  starry  coronal,  the 
heads,  now  imperially  recognized,  of  the  8wS€Kd<f)vXov  of  the 
Christian  Israel.  (Horae  Apoc,  iii.  pp.  17,  18.)  Three  pages 
after,  the  civil  authorities  are  viewed  as  the  moon,  perhaps 
because  of  Licinius's  apostacy  and  subsequent  death.  And  the 
great  red  dragon  with  seven  heads  and  ten  horns  is  the  old 
Eoman  paganism,  concentrated  for  the  time  in  Maximin's  pro- 
hibiting the  Christian  assemblies,  and  even  killing  their  bishops 
in  his  third  of  the  empire.  Again,  Constantine  reappears  as  the 
man  child — a  baptised  (?)  emperor,  the  son  of  Christ's  faithful 
church,  elevated  over  the  whole  empire  to  an  avowedly  Christian 
throne,  that  might  be  called  the  tlirone  of  God  like  Solomon's. 
And  the  ruling  with  an  iron  rod  means  tlie  discountenance  of 
pagans  increasing  almost  to  oppression,  till  at  length,  under 
Theodosius,  all  toleration  ended,  and  their  worship  was  inter- 
dicted under  the  severest  penalties.  But  Mr.  E.,  apparently  not 
quite  satisfied  with  this  exposition,  offers  us  the  alternative  of 
Mr.  Biley,  who  thinks  that  the  question  here  was  one' of  funda- 
mental orthodoxy,  rather  than  of  political  eminence,  and  that  the 
birth  and  exaltation  of  the  man  child  refer  to  the  solenni  public 
profession  of  Christ's  divinity,  and  its  dogmatic  establishment  in 
the  general  Council  of  Nice. 

Where  is  one  to  begin,  where  end,  in  unravelling  tliis  tangled 
web  ?  Almost  the  only  thing  consistent  is  the  melancholy  result 
(God  forbid  that  I  should  say  intention)  of  degrading  the  living 
word  of  God.    If  something  like  the  real  ]ioint  of  tlie  chapter  is 


THE   DAYS   NOT   CLEARLY   DEFINED.  267 

glanced  at,  it  is  to  discard  it  summarily.  Thus,  it  was  too  plain 
to  be  quite  overlooked,  that  Christ  is  destined  to  rule  all  nations 
with  a  rod  of  iron  (Psalm  ii.),  and  that  this  is  made  part  of  the 
promises  to  the  Christians  who  overcome.  (Kev.  ii.)  But  all  such 
reference  Mr.  E.  considers  excluded  by  the  context.  For,  argues 
he,  the  woman  is  shewn  immediately  after  to  be  persecuted  by 
the  dragon,  and  then  to  spend  1260  days  in  the  wilderness.  But 
how  does  this  set  aside  the  other — the  figure  of  Christ,  take  it 
personally  or  mystically,  as  the  destined  governor  of  all  the 
nations?  On  this  view,  what  can  be  clearer?  The  woman  is 
Israel,  first  seen  in  heaven  in  the  glorious  purpose  of  God,  and 
hence  arrayed  with  that  supreme  power  which  is  to  rule  the  day, 
with  the  moon — which,  from  the  context,  may  here  be  a  symbol 
of  legal  ordinances — under  her  feet,  and  with  the  perfection  of 
administrative  authority  as  her  crown  of  glory.  It  is  not  a 
question  of  historical  fact,  but  of  divine  counsels.  Accordingly, 
in  spite  of  such  a  view  on  God's  part,  the  woman  is  seen  the 
object  of  Satan's  enmity  in  the  Koman  empire,  who,  foiled  in 
his  wishes  against  the  raptured  Man  of  might,  directs  his  efforts 
against  the  woman,  or  Israel,  fled  into  the  wilderness,  desolate 
but  preserved  of  God  for  her  destined  time  of  sorrow.  I  do  not 
deny  here,  more  than  elsewhere,  a  vague  analogy  to  the  imperial 
overthrow  of  the  power  of  the  enemy  in  idolatry.  All  I  insist  on 
is,  that  the  past  accomplishment  in  no  wise  meets  all  the  features 
of  the  case,  and  that  the  system  which  sees  nothing  else  really 
makes  God  Himself  the  author  of  that  judaizing  of  the  church 
which,  kept  in  check  by  the  apostolic  power,  soon  became  doc- 
trinally  rampant  in  the  writings  of  the  early  fathers,  and  from 
the  time  of  Constantino  was  the  established  mould  in  which  the 
Christian  profession  was  cast.  Hence,  historically,  the  date  does 
not  at  all  answer,  Mr.  E.  seems  to  be  shy  of  defining  the  1260 
years  of  the  woman's  place  in  the  wilderness.  He  considers  the 
time  soon  after  Constantine  when  the  true  orthodox  church  be- 
came insulated,  invisible  in  respect  of  its  public  worship,  and 
more  and  more  straitened  for  spiritual  sustenance :  the  latter  a 
most  unusual  effect  of  persecution  ;  the  former  an  unaccountable 
result,  if  the  eldest  son  of  the  true  church  had  the  chief  power 
in  the  empire,  and  the  old  paganism  of  Eome  shewed  itself — 


2G8   THE  DRAGON  WITH  SEVEN  HEADS  AND  TEN  HORNS. 

not  in  a  thousand  years  and  more  of  persecution,  but — in  the 
mere  transient  efforts  of  Maximin  and  Licinius  first,  and  of 
Julian  somewhat  later. 

And  if  heathenism  and  Arianism  are  strangely  put  together 
to  make  out  the  war  of  the  dragon  and  his  angels  in  heaven, 
what  can  serious  Christians  think  of  the  notion  that  Eusebius's 
extravagant  flattery  of  Constantine,  and  the  unwarranted  joy 
and  expectations  of  the  dominant  party  of  that  day,  are  the 
exact  echo  of  the  prefigurative  voice  heard  saying,  "  Now  hath 
come  the  salvation,  and  the  power,  and  the  kingdom  of  our 
God,  and  the  authority  of  his  Christ?"  Certainly  I  do  not 
wonder  that  the  eye  which  can  see  in  Zech,  iii.  compared  with 
Ezra  iv.  a  reference  to  the  accusation  of  the  Jews  before  the 
Persian  king's  court  by  their  Samaritan  foes,  should  read  the 
fulfilment  of  "  Eejoice,  ye  heavens,  and  ye  that  dwell  in  them," 
in  the  imperial  edict  which  proclaimed  liberty  to  those  who  had 
been  enslaved  or  condemned  to  the  mines.  {Horae  Apoc,  vol. 
iii.  pp.  29-32.)  Of  similar  character  is  the  criticism,  borrowed 
from  Daubuz,  that  the  use  of  the  uncommon  plural  from  hea- 
vens, instead  of  heaven,  indicates  the  then  union  of  elevation 
in  heart  to  the  spiritual  heaven,  and  elevation  and  dignity  to 
the  heaven  of  worldly  rank. 

Then  again,  when  we  turn  from  the  parenthetic  heavenly 
war,  and  its  consequences  (verses  7-12)  to  tlie  dragon's  doings 
on  earth,  we  are  told  that  the  two  wings  of  the  great  eagle  were 
fulfilled  in  Theodosius  the  Great,  whose  lot  it  was  to  unite  the 
Eastern  and  Western  divisions  of  the  empire  under  his  own 
sway,  and  use  all  his  power  as  a  protector  and  nursing  father  to 
the  orthodox  church.  Under  these  wings  Augustine's  ministry  is 
said  not  only  to  have  furnished  present  food,  but  nourishment 
for  its  long  long  sojourn  in  the  wilderness.  How  the  dragon,  or 
old  Roman  pagan  power,  should  now  have  the  seven  heads  and 
ten  horns,  from  Constantino  to  Theodosius,  does  not  appear. 
It  is  to  the  historicalist  an  obviously  insuperable  difficulty,  as 
to  which  I  see  not  a  word  of  explanation,  even  in  tlie  most 
voluminous  commentary  that  defends  the  view.  And  supposing, 
e.g.,  that  Tiieodosius  could  be  the  sun,  the  male  child,  and  the 
great  eagle's  wings  all  at  once,  it  is  hard  to  connect  the  dragon 


THE   CRISIS   VIEW.  269 

with  the  governing  power  of  the  Eoman  empire  in  that  day. 
Does  "the  pagan  remnant"  answer  to  the  persecuting  dragon, 
as  our  chapter  describes  him  ?  I  do  not  wonder  also  that  it  is 
found  convenient  to  combine  all  possible  ideas  of  the  flood  from 
the  serpent's  mouth,  and  to  make  that  a  mixture  of  foreign 
invaders  and  heresies,  of  physical  force  and  doctrinal  error, 
employed  to  overwhelm  the  true  church,  so  as  to  pass  off  a 
hazy  application  to  the  hordes  of  Goths,  Vandals,  &c.,  who 
inundated  the  empire  after  the  death  of  Theodosius.  But  "  the 
earth  helped  the  woman,"  i.e.,  according  to  Mr.  E.,  the  Eoman 
population,  superstitious  and  earthly  as  they  are  confessed  to 
have  been,  did  service  to  Christ's  church ;  and  in  their  bloody 
M'ars  the  barbarians  were  so  thinned,  that  their  incorporation 
with  the  conquered  followed,  and  their  religion  passed  through 
Arianism  into  orthodoxy.  The  flood  was  thus  swallowed  up ! 
Tf  some  very  few  stood  forth  as  witnesses,  like  Vigilantius,  &c., 
against  such  the  dragon  proceeded  to  plot,  and  so  procure  their 
destruction.  To  state  the  scheme  is  in  my  judgment  a  sufficient 
refutation. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  fulfilment  in  the  crisis  is  sufficiently 
intelligible,  whatever  measure  of  partial  resemblance  there  may 
have  been  in  past  events.  The  seventh  trumpet  has  brought  us 
down  in  a  general  way  to  the  very  end.  From  Eev.  xi.  19  we 
begin  an  entirely  new  subject,  of  which  that  verse  is  as  it  were 
the  preface.  The  ark  of  His  covenant  is  seen  in  His  temple 
above  :  it  is  not  yet  the  actual  bringing  of  the  house  of  Israel 
and  the  house  of  Judah  under  the  efficacy  of  the  new  coveliant, 
but  it  is  its  pledge.  The  sources  of  all,  whether  on  God's  part 
or  the  enemy's,  are  disclosed ;  and  hence,  as  there  confessedly  is 
retrogression,  so  I  think  there  is  nothing  harsh  in  the  supposition 
that  the  birth  and  rapture  to  heaven  of  Israel's  Messiah  may  be 
shewn,  the  special  object  of  Satan's  hatred,  and  the  occasion  of 
his  intensest  and  ever-increasing  hatred  to  the  Jews  and  to 
God's  counsels  about  tliem.  I  can  also  understand  that  the 
rapture  of  the  man  child  may  include  that  of  the  church — like 
a  binary  star,  the  two-foldness  of  which  appears  on  adequate 
inspection.  It  is  thus  in  the  Old  Testament  that  we  find  the 
church  involved,  so  to  speak,  in  Christ.     The  first  great  act  of 


270  ISRAEL  MUST   COME  INTO   PROMINENCE. 

our  Lord's  kingdom  will  be,  I  believe,  the  dejection  of  Satan 
and  the  wicked  spirits,  from  the  heavenly  places  (cf.  Eph.  vi. 
12,  and  Eev.  xii.  7-12).  On  earth  the  question  of  Israel,  God's 
chosen  people,  is  raised  at  once  ;  and  whether  as  dragon  or 
serpent,  all  his  resources  are  put  in  requisition  against  God's 
purpose  in  that  people  (yet  in  abeyance),  and  against  the  godly 
remnant  who  have  the  testimony  (prophetically,  I  conceive)  of 
Jesus,  as  the  man  of  God's  right  hand,  the  Son  of  man  whom 
He  made  strong  for  Himself.  The  development  of  his  plans  we 
shall  find  in  the  chapter  which  follows. 


THE   MAN   CHILD   IS   THE   LORD   AS   MESSIAH.  271 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

We  have  seen  that  chapter  xii.  goes  back  as  well  as  forward, 
and  connects  the  purpose  of  God  which  is  to  be  brought  out  in 
tlie  latter  day  with  the  Messiah  and  even  with  His  birth.  Thus, 
while  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  to  my  mind  clearly  referred  to 
as  the  man  child,  yet  it  is  not  His  birth  merely  or  historically, 
but  His  birth  as  it  is  linked  with  this  future  plan  of  God,  which 
the  book  reveals  here.  The  moment  Christ  is  thus  referred  to 
(that  is,  Christ  evidently  viewed  as  the  Head,  not  of  the  church, 
but  of  Israel  ruling  "  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron,"  and  taking 
the  government  of  the  world  into  His  own  hands),  Satan  appears 
in  personal  opposition.  It  is  no  other  than  might  be  looked  for ; 
for  God  Himself  had  said  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  that  He  would 
put  enmity  between  the  serpent  and  the  woman,  between  his 
seed  and  her  seed.  This  was  revealed  at  the  beginning,  and  here 
we  have  it  fulfilled  at  the  very  close.  "Without  telling  us  the 
least  about  His  humiliation,  the  man  child  was  caught  up  to 
God  and  to  His  throne.  Thus  it  is  clear  that  it  is  not  a  bare 
statement  of  the  Lord's  life,  but  such  facts  are  referred  to — the 
two  great  cardinal  ones  of  His  birth  and  of  His  rapture  to  the 
presence  and  throne  of  God — in  order  to  furnish  connecting 
links  with  what  God  has  to  do  by  and  by  with  Israel.  All  the 
intermediate  workings  of  God  in  the  church  are  left  entirely 
out,  except  as  we  may  suppose  the  church  to  be  involved  in  the 
destiny  of  the  man  child,  who  is  now  hid  with  God,  but  is  yet  to 
reign.  Just  as  what  is  said  about  Christ  in  the  Old  Testament 
is  applied  to  the  church  or  the  Christian  in  the  New  Testament; 
but  still,  most  true  and  blessed  as  that  is,  it  is  an  indirect  use. 
Here  then  we  have  the  Messiah  in  relation  to  the  future  purpose 
of  God  as  regards  Israel. 


272  THE  WAR   IN    HEAVEN,   AND    ITS    EFFECTS. 

Then  follows  the  vision  of  a  war  in  heaven.  Not  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  but  angelic  power  is  seen  used  of  God  to  put  down 
the  rebel  angels,  Satan  and  his  host.  And  from  that  moment 
Satan  loses  his  power  above  (that  is  to  say,  the  most  important 
part  of  it,  the  most  serious  in  itself,  the  most  dishonouring  to 
God,  the  most  dangerous  to  the  people  of  God) — his  power  in 
heavenly  places,  which  is  referred  to  in  Ephesians  vi.  and  other 
passages.  Accordingly,  when  Satan  loses  that  place,  there  is  joy 
in  heaven,  and  a  voice  proclaims  tliat  "  Now  is  come  salvation, 
and  strength,  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the  authority  of 
his  Christ."  But  yet,  as  far  as  the  earth  was  concerned,  the  king- 
dom was  not  actually  come :  only  Satan  had  lost  liis  place  above. 

So  we  find  a  little  answering  to  this,  that  our  Lord  alludes  to 
Satan's  fall  from  heaven  in  the  gospel  of  Luke ;  and  I  notice 
it  because  some  have  thence  supposed  that  Satan  had  been  ex- 
pelled from  the  heavens  long  ago.  It  is  in  chap,  x.,  when  the 
disciples  return  to  the  Lord,  full  of  joy  because  the  devils  even 
were  subject  to  them.  The  answer  is  that  He  "beheld  Satan, 
as  lightning,  fall  from  heaven."  Now  a  person  might  set  the 
words  in  the  evangelist  against  the  fall  of  Satan  that  is  described 
in  the  Apocalypse  as  still  future.  But  evidently  this  would  be  a 
misuse  of  scripture.  We  may  always  rest  assured  that  the  Bible 
agrees  with  itself  It  is  ignorance  and  unbelief  to  set  one  part 
of  God's  word  against  another.  To  an  unbiassed  mind,  I  think, 
it  is  certain  that  the  fall  of  Satan  in  the  prophecy  is  described 
as  a  prospective  event,  which  is  to  take  place  three  years  and  a 
half  (however  that  may  be  taken)  before  the  destruction  of  the 
beast  and  the  binding  of  Satan  himself  Consequently  it  is  a 
fall  that  in  St.  John's  time  at  least  was  yet  future.  The  imme- 
diate effect  was  to  be  a  dreadful  persecution  against  the  woman 
and  her  seed.  Again,  I  have  endeavoured  to  set  forth  a  variety 
of  considerations,  from  which  it  is  clear  to  me  that  before  this 
event  the  church  must  have  been  taken  to  heaven.  Such  the 
reader  will  remember  has  been  the  uniform  deduction  I  have 
drawn  all  through  our  former  chapters  (iv.-vi.) ;  so  that  the  fall 
of  Satan,  intimated  here,  must  be  an  event  subsequent  to  the 
removal  of  the  gloritied  saints  to  heaven.  What  then  does  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  mean  when  He  says,  "  I  beheld  Satan,  as 


ANTICIPATIVE    NOTICES.  273 

lightning,  fall  from  heaven?"  Wlien  He  sees  and  hears  the 
effects  of  the  disciples'  service  in  His  name,  then  the  vision  of 
Satan's  catastrophe  passes  before  His  eyes,  and  the  full  con- 
sequences of  PTis  power  are  hailed  in  the  then  earnest  of  it. 
He  looks  on  to  the  final  crisis  and  the  downfall  of  the  Evil 
One,  when  the  disciples  announced  so  notable  a  sample  of  "  the 
powers  of  the  world  to  come."  It  was  the  first  great  blow  struck 
by  men  at  Satan's  power ;  and  therefore  He  anticipates  the  end 
from  the  beginning,  and,  so  to  speak,  in  a  sort  of  musing,  con- 
templative vision,  He  beheld  the  adversary  fall  from  the  highest 
scene  of  his  usurpation. 

Nor  is  this  an  uncommon  thing  in  scripture.  In  another  gos- 
pel, when  the  Greeks  come  up  to  the  feast  desiring  to  see  Jesus, 
what  does  He  say  ?  "  The  hour  is  come  that  the  Son  of  man 
should  be  glorified."  He  was  going  to  the  cross  and  to  death ; 
yet  He  declares  that  the  hour  was  come  that  He  should  be 
glorified.  How  was  this?  If  you  take  it  in  a  mere  literal 
way,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  force  of  the  passage  is  lost.  Jesus 
sees  in  the  Greeks  that  were  before  Him  a  sample  of  the  in- 
gathering of  the  Gentiles ;  and  the  Lord  perfectly  well  knew 
that  the  only  thing  that  would  draw  the  Gentiles  must  be  His 
own  cross  and  His  glory  in  heaven.  So  that  He  looks  through 
all  the  intervening  scene  that  was  before  Him,  for  He  had  to 
accomplish  redemption  and  to  ascend  on  high.  But  from  this 
little  sample  He  connects  all  with  His  glorification,  and  speaks 
of  it  as  of  a  present  fact. 

.  Again  when  Judas  goes  out,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  re- 
peats similar  words,  it  is,  I  presume,  on  the  same  principle. 
(John  xiii.  31.) 

Is  not  Eev.  v.  13  analogous?  A  remarkable  movement  was 
seen  in  tlie  vision  affecting  the  universe,  when  the  sealed  book 
was  taken  in  hand  by  the  Lamb.  It  is  not  merely  that  we  had 
the  living  creatures  prostrate,  and  the  elders  taking  up  the  new 
song,  and  the  myriads  of  angels  with  their  loud  voice  of  praise ; 
but  there  is  a  chorus  in  which  the  whole  creation  joined.  "And 
every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and  on  the  earth,  and  under 
the  earth,  and  such  as  are  in  the  sea,  and  all  that  are  in  tliem, 
heard  I  saying,  Blessing,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  power,  be 

T 


274  THE  PLANS  OF  SATAN  ON  EARTH. 

unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  for 
ever  and  ever."  It  was  like  striking  a  key-note  that  would 
never  cease  to  vibrate,  till  the  remotest  bounds  of  creation  would 
be  filled  with  the  glory  of  God  and  the  Lamb.  But  the  time  of 
full  blessing  was  here  anticipated ;  it  was  in  fact  the  Lamb's 
receiving  the  book  of  the  inheritance  which  called  forth  these 
overflowings  of  worship  and  joy.  After  this  followed  the  open- 
ing of  the  seals,  which  was  but  the  prelude  of  the  latter-day 
judgments ;  and  these  would  go  on  increasing  in  severity  till 
Christ  Himself  comes  executing  wrath,  (liev.  xix.)  Not  till  then 
would  the  glory  appear,  and  these  anticipations  be  realised. 
(Chapters  xxi.  xxii.)  From  the  first  event,  however,  that  was  a 
link  in  the  chain,  the  end  is  welcomed.  This  is  the  mind  of 
Christ. 

And  so  it  is  in  Luke  x.  The  Lord  does  not  there  refer  to 
Satan's  fall  as  a  fact  actually  accomplished  then ;  but  He  looks 
on  through  what  was  true  at  that  time  to  his  future  and  more  com- 
plete humiliation,  which  we  see  here.  And  even  this  fall  of  Satan 
is  by  no  means  the  last  exertion  of  the  power  of  God  against 
the  enemy.  For  until  then  Satan  had  scarcely  been  touched, 
save  to  faith.  It  is  true  that  in  the  cross  of  Christ  he  had  been 
judged  in  principle  (John  xii.  31) ;  but,  as  a  literal  fact,  he  was 
not  yet  shaken  from  his  tlirone  of  the  world.  Doubtless,  in  the 
cross,  the  great  work  of  God  in  virtue  of  which  he  is  to  be  cast 
out  from  heaven  was  accomplished,  so  that  it  only  remains  a 
question  of  time  and  of  the  will  of  God.  And  first  of  all,  he 
loses  the  heavenly  part  of  the  power  which  he  has  usurped. 
Then  he  conies  down  to  the  earth  in  a  rage,  knowing  that  he  has 
but  a  short  time.  This  brings  us  to  chapter  xiii. ;  for  there  vv^e 
get  the  detail  of  the  doings  of  Satan  here  below,  i.e.,  upon  the 
sea  and  the  earth  (the  sea,  as  we  have  before  seen,  symbolizing 
what  was  not  under  regular  government,  and  the  earth  that  part 
of  the  world  which  enjoys  a  state  of  order).  The  two  together 
make  up  the  world  as  a  whole,  or  a  given  sphere  of  it,  under 
whatever  condition. 

The  prophet,*  it  is  said,  was  set  or  stood  upon  the  sand  of  the 

*  The  reiidor  ahould  know  that  this  is  one  of  the  most  contested  readings  in 
the  book.    The  difl'crenco  in  Greek  is  but  a  letter  more  or  less ;  but  in  the  one 


THE   BEAST   RISING    OUT   OF   THE    SEA.  275 

sea.  In  a  later  portion  (chapter  xvii.)  he  is  carried  in  the  Spirit 
into  the  wilderness  ;  and  afterwards  (chapter  xxi.)  to  a  great 
and  high  mountain.  Here,  as  everywhere,  all  is  in  keeping 
with  the  scene.  "  I  stood  upon  the  sand  of  the  sea."  The 
reason  is  manifest.  John  is  about  to  see  a  great  beast  emerging 
out  of  the  sea,  and  accordingly  he  takes  in  the  vision  a  suited 
place.  "And  I  saw  a  beast  rising  up  out  of  the  sea."  You 
must  remember  that  all  these  visions  were  like  a  great  panorama 
that  passed  before  the  eye  of  the  prophet.  What  the  meaning 
of  the  symbols  used  is,  we  have  to  find  out  by  the  teaching  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  The  sea  sets  forth  the  unformed  mass  of  the 
people  under  a  troubled  state  of  the  world — people  in  great 
agitation,  like  the  restless  waves  of  the  deep.  It  is  that  which 
represents  a  revolutionary  condition  among  men.  And  it  is  out 
of  that  mass  of  anarchy  and  confusion  that  an  imperial  power 
rises.  This  power  is  called  "the  beast."  The  same  thing  ap- 
pears in  Dan.  vii. ;  but  with  this  difference.  The  Jewish  prophet 
sees  successively  four  beasts  emerge  from  the  sea ;  not  one 
merely,  as  we  have  in  the  beginning  of  Eev.  xiii.  There  was 
the  first  beast  like  a  lion,  the  second  like  a  bear,  the  third  like  a 
leopard,  and  a  fourth  beast  of  a  peculiar  kind.  And  then, 
before  the  explanation  is  given,  one  in  the  form  of  a  son  of 
man  comes  with  the  clouds  of  heaven,  in  contrast  with  the 
powers  that  came  up  from  a  tumultuous  sea.  It  was  a  kingdom 
heavenly  in  its  source,  and  a  king  who  was  to  use  the  power  of 
God  which  is  to  be  established  over  the  earth  in  the  person  of 
the  Lord  as  Son  of  man,  instead  of  being  left  in  God's  sove- 
reignty to  those  successive  and  ferocious  beasts.  The  rising  of 
the  beasts  out  of  the  sea,  upon  which  the  four  winds  of  heaven 
strove,  portrays  probably  the  vast  commotion  of  peoples  that 

case  John  is  meant,  in  the  other  the  dragon.  The  Alexandi-ian,  Paris,  and 
Porphyrian  uncials,  with  the  Middlehill  and  Montfort  MSS.,  are  confirmed  hy 
most  of  the  ancient  versions  and  two  old  Latin  commentators  in  the  latter  sense ; 
and  aU  other  known  MSS.,  including  the  Sinai  and  Vatican  uncials,  with  the 
Coptic,  &c.,  and  the  G-reek  commentators,  give  the  former.  Modern  editors  and 
commentators  are  not  less  divided.  The  comparison  of  our  text  with  Rev.  x. 
5-10  will  perhaps  suffice  to  shew  that  there  is  no  internal  incongruity  in  assign- 
ing such  a  position  to  John.  Dan.  x.  4,  5,  xii.  5,  ought  to  be  borne  in  mind. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  it  be  "  he  stood,"  I  do  not  see  that  it  attributes  providen- 
tial power  to  Satan,  which  would  be  very  objectionable. 

T    2 


276  THE   ROMAN   EMPIRE. 

preceded  the  formation  of  the  four  great  empires.  And  it  is  an 
interesting  fact,  that  the  foundations  of  those  states  which  after- 
wards became  possessed  of  the  imperial  power  were  all  laid 
about  the  same  time.  They  emerged  from  obscurity  and  political 
chaos  pretty  nearly  together.  God  in  His  sovereignty  gave 
power  to  each  in  succession.  First,  there  was  the  Babylonian, 
then  the  Medo -Persian,  then  the  Greek  or  jMacedonian,  and 
lastly  the  Roman. 

In  this  case  John  sees  but  one  beast  rise.  The  sea  sets  forth 
a  troubled  state  of  nations,  and  the  fourth  and  last  beast  men- 
tioned by  Daniel  is  seen  by  the  prophet  coming  out  of  it.  The 
first  three  beasts  had  had  their  day,  and  they  were  gone.  The 
fourth  or  Eoman  empire  had  followed,  and  was  then  in  being 
and  power.  It  was  the  authority  of  the  Roman  beast,  which 
had  at  this  very  time  cast  John  into  Patmos.  It  seems  to  be 
its  final  rise,  previous  to  its  destruction  which  John  sees  here, 
but  what  was  to  take  place  between  its  first  appearance  as  an 
empire  and  this  reappearance  is  not  yet  described.  There  can 
be  no  doubt,  from  the  description  given,  that  it  is  the  Roman 
empire.  It  is  said  to  have  "seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and 
upon  his  horns  ten  crowns ; "  the  same  things  that  we  saw  in 
Satan  (chapter  xii.  3),  where  he  was  regarded  as  the  possessor 
of  the  power  of  the  world,  and  specially  that  of  Rome.  We 
all  may  remember  how  he  said  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  when  shewing 
Him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  "  All  this  power  will  I  give 
thee,  and  the  glory  of  them ;  for  this  is  delivered  unto  me,  and 
to  whomsoever  I  will  I  give  it."  Now  here  he  gives  it  to  the 
Roman  beast.  Satan  was,  of  course,  an  usurper ;  but  still  he 
was  the  prince  of  the  world  in  fact,  and  as  such  he  has  seven 
heads  and  ten  horns.  Tint  as  Satan,  he  does  not  present  him- 
self openly  before  men.  He  must  have  some  representative  or 
agent.  He  must  disguise  himself,  and  work  through  another, 
and  take  a  human  form  and  instrunu'iitality ;  even  as  God  was 
pleased  to  do  the  same  to  accomplisli  lli.s  blessed  purposes  of 
grace.  And  so  does  Satan — awful  counterpart  in  malice  of 
(iod's  goodness  in  Christ !  The  agent  described,  through  whom 
he  works,  is  the  Roman  ('mi)ire  in  its  last  phase.  He  took 
advantage  of  men's  lust  for  power,  because  that  which  is  the 


RELATION    TO    OTHER   EMPIRES.  277 

object  of  ambition  in  the  world  is  power.  And  here  you  have  a 
vast  imperial  power,  which  was  at  first  owned  of  God.  As  far  as 
rising  out  of  the  sea  was  concerned,  God  could  still  have  owned 
it ;  but  when  it  is  said  to  arise  out  of  the  bottomless  pit,  the 
source  is  in  no  way  providential,  but  expressly  of  the  enemy. 

But  besides  these  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  there  were  upon 
the  latter  ten  crowns.  Let  me  just  say  that  I  have  no  doubt 
the  ten  horns  ought  to  be  mentioned  before  the  heads  :  "  having 
ten  horns  and  seven  heads,  and  upon  his  horns  ten  crowns,  and 
upon  his  heads  names  of  blasphemy  "  (verse  1).  Not  that  one 
would  attach  undue  importance  to  the  order,  save  that  we  ought 
always  to  be  right ;  but  the  two  clauses  of  the  verse  agree  in 
putting  the  horns  first,  perhaps  because  the  beast  is  regarded 
here  as  having  these  powers  in  actual  exercise,  whereas  Satan 
had  them  virtually  only.  Blasphemy,  not  mere  heathenism, 
characterizes  his  heads. 

"  And  the  beast  which  I  saw  was  like  a  leopard."  This  was 
the  general  resemblance  of  its  body,  and  it  refers  to  the 
Macedonian  empire,  so  notoriously  marked  by  its  swiftness  of 
conquest.  "  His  feet  were  as  the  feet  of  a  bear,"  which  refers 
to  the  Persian,  and  imj)lies  great  tenacity  of  grasp ;  "  and  his 
mouth  as  the  mouth  of  a  lion,"  denoting  its  voraciousness,  as  in 
Nebuchadnezzar's  career  and  kingdom.  Thus  the  Eoman  empire, 
in  its  last  stage  at  least,  would  unite  in  itself  the  several 
characteristics  of  the  former  empires.  And  indeed  such  was 
the  ordinary  policy  of  the  Romans.  They  did  not  interfere  with 
what  they  found  in  the  various  nations  they  conquered.  They 
endeavoured  to  incorporate  into  their  own  system  whatever  had 
helped  on  the  power  of  those  nations.  They  did  not  force  their 
own  customs  upon  others,  but  cultivated  whatever  they  found 
advantageous,  and  turned  it  to  their  own  use.  So  this  beast,  as 
we  see  here,  was  made  up  of  the  diverse  qualities  of  power  that 
had  given  weight  to  its  imperial  predecessors. 

But  there  is  one  remarkable  difference  from  all  of  them,  and 
even  from  its  own  original  condition.  "  The  dragon  gave  him 
his  power,  and  his  throne,  and  great  authority  "  (verse  2).  This 
notable  distinction  is  subsequent  to  Satan's  fall  from  heaven. 
He  wants  to  liave  a  medium  for  acting  universally  upon  men. 


278  THE   FINAL   STATE. 

in  the  centre  of  the  workVs  civilization  and  activity,  for  the 
short  time  that  he  is  allowed  to  do  as  he  pleases  on  earth. 
Accordingly,  to  the  Roman  beast  which  had  imperial  authority 
providentially  from  God  he  gives  his  own  peculiar  di-agon  power. 
This  is  a  thing  that  has  never  yet  been  seen  on  the  earth  in  the 
full  sense  of  the  word — this  union  of  the  imperial  authority 
\vith  the  positive  impartation  of  Satanic  energy.  But  the  pro- 
phet sees  more  than  this  connected  with  the  beast's  investiture 
by  the  dragon.  "  And  [I  saw]  one  of  his  lieads  as  it  were 
slain  to  death ;  and  his  deadly  wound  was  healed :  and  the 
whole  earth  wondered  after  the  beast"  (verse  3).  I  am  inclined 
to  think  that  the  wounded  head  was  the  imperial  form  of 
government.  (Comp.  chap.  xvii.  10.)  The  heads  that  were,  as 
we  have  seen,  connected  with  the  dragon  (chap.  xii.  3)  as  well 
as  with  the  beast,  represent  the  different  forms  of  power  which 
had  existed  successively.  Of  these  one  was  to  be  lost,  as  it 
were  wounded  to  death,  but  at  this  time  was  to  be  revived 
ap^ain  through  Satanic  agency.  All  the  world  is  surprised,  and 
no  wonder.  They  will  be  seized  with  extreme  astonishment  at 
the  revival  of  the  Roman  empire,  with  more  than  its  ancient 
splendour. 

And  now%  if  we  look  at  Daniel,  we  find  a  remarkable  fact 
introduced  there,  connected  with  its  divided  state  at  the  close, 
and  of  course  also  with  its  previous  divisions  after  it  had  ceased 
to  exist  as  an  empire.  The  image  in  Dan.  ii.  has  got  feet,  "  part 
of  iron  and  part  of  clay."  There  is  weakness  consequently. 
That  metal  represents  the  original  Roman  element  in  its  strength, 
while  the  clay  was  a  foreign  ingredient,  wliich  brouglit  in  weak- 
ness wlien  it  souglit  to  ccjalesce  with  tlie  iron.*  "And  whereas 
thou  sawest  iron  mixed  with  miry  clay,  they  shall  mingle 
themselves  with  the  seed  of  men ;  but  they  shall  not  cleave 
one  to  another,  even  as  iron  is  not  mixed  with  clay"  (verse 
43).  This  exactly  accounts  for  the  state  of  things  found  in 
Western  Europe.     The  history  of  this  part  of  the  world  was 

*  Dr.  M'Causlmid  {Latter  Daijs  of  Jcrusal<m  and  Home,  pp.  336,  3o.'{)  inter- 
prets tho  miry  day  of  the  spiiitujil  power  exercised  by  the  Pai)af'y,  ami  the  iron 
of  tho  temporal  power  of  Home ;  but  this  i.s,  for  obvious  and  conclusive  reasons 
to  my  mind,  wholly  untennldo. 


ITS   DIVISIONS.  279 

completely  changed  by  the  inroads  of  the  barbarians  about  the 
fifth  century  after  Christ.  There  was  a  time  when  one  vast 
consolidated  power  had  universal  and  undisputed  sway — the 
iron  power  of  Rome.  But  at  the  epoch  named  swarms  of 
barbarians,  near  about  the  same  time  and  from  the  north  and 
east,  came  down  on  the  empire  and  assailed  it  at  almost  every 
point.  It  fell.  But  mighty  as  these  barbarians  were  in  over- 
throwing, they  could  only  establish  little  separate  kingdoms ; 
and  since  then  no  hand  has  been  able  to  gather  up  the  broken 
fragments  and  put  them  firml}'-  together  again.  It  has  not  been 
for  want  of  the  disposition  to  do  so ;  for,  on  the  contrary,  all 
sorts  of  expedients  have  been  tried — sometimes  the  sword, 
sometimes  policy,  sometimes  intermarriage — but  in  vain.  And 
thus  it  has  remained  under  the  providence  of  God.  There  has 
been  no  unity,  so  that  the  prevailing  and  favourite  expression  of 
modern  policy  has  been  and  is  "  the  balance  of  power."  It 
means  really  keeping  a  respectable  distance  among  the  scattered 
members  of  what  was  once  a  united  body.  Mutual  jealousies 
and  the  spirit  of  independence  in  each  have  ever  effectually 
hindered  re-union.  The  ordinary  aim  has  been,  by  the  formation 
of  parties  among  the  powers,  to  check  and  prevent  the  prepon- 
derance of  any  one. 

But  though  that  wound  seemed  to  be  unto  death,  it  was 
healed  notwithstanding.  "I  saw  one  of  his  heads  as  it  were 
w^ounded  to  death ;  and  his  deadly  wound  was  healed."  That 
is,  at  the  period  of  which  the  vision  speaks,  the  Eoman  power 
is  to  be  consolidated  afresh :  not  as  formerly,  with  God's  good 
hand  over  it  and  controlling  all,  whatever  might  have  been  the 
ways  of  individual  emperors ;  but  all  is  abandoned  to  the  will 
of  the  beast  as  the  immediate  instrument  of  Satan.  Satan  can 
no  longer  accuse  the  saints  before  God,  but  now  he  is  at  work 
on  the  earth  to  produce  open  blasphemy  against  God.  And 
this  is  first  done  by  means  of  political  influence.  There  is 
the  Eoman  empire  reorganised,  and  the  imperial  power  revived, 
and  a  head  over  it  that  gathers  everything  under  his  own 
control,  so  that  all  the  world  wonders  after  the  beast  to  whom 
the  dragon  had  given  his  power,  and  throne,  and  great  authority. 
In  the  next  verse  we  have  not  merely  this ;  but  "  they  worship- 


280  ITS    KE-OIKUNIZATION. 

ped  the  beast  saying,  Who  is  like  the  beast  ?  and  who  is  able 
to  make  war  with  him  ?"  (verse  4.) 

What  a  fickle  thing  is  man  !  No  doubt,  just  before  there  had 
been  a  state  of  anarchy  and  confusion,  and  thence  the  beast 
arose  and  l)ecomes  an  object  of  wonder  and  worship  to  men 
weary  of  all  their  previous  turmoil,  and  strife,  and  insecurity. 
Something  like  it  was  seen  in  a  neighbouring  country.  Men 
were  convulsed  by  a  revolution  which  tore  up  all  the  landmarks 
and  filled  their  minds  with  anxiety  and  restlessness.  And  what 
came  out  of  that  ?  A  strong  hand  takes  the  reins,  a  military 
despotism,  a  quasi-imperial  power.  And  what  was  enacted  on 
a  small  scale,  because  in  one  country  only,  will  prevail  in  all 
the  western  powers  of  Europe.  So  that  instead  of  men  having 
things  to  themselves,  some  vigorous  chief  will  take  the  rule ; 
but  it  will  not  be  the  hand  of  man  merely,  but  the  dragon's 
power.  God  will  permit  him  to  have  his  own  way ;  and  so  for 
a  short  time  he  is  allowed  to  do  his  very  worst.  Then,  besides 
distinct  governments  and  rulers,  each  over  his  own  country, 
there  will  be  an  imperial  unity  under  one  great  head,  who  will 
wield  their  power  and  preside  over  all.  Thus  will  be  accom- 
plished those  desires  of  men  that  have  hitherto  proved  but  idle 
dreams,  or  at  most  abortive  efforts. 

There  is  a  passage  in  an  early  epistle  I  would  briefly  notice, 
w^hich  refers  to  what  has  hindered,  and  hinders  still,  the  develop- 
ment of  this  and  other  allied  wickedness.  It  is  in  2  Thess.  ii. 
6,  7  :  "  And  now  ye  know  what  withholdeth,  that  he  might  be 
revealed  in  his  time.  For  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  doth 
already  work  :  only  there  is  one  who  now  letteth  until  he  be 
taken  out  of  the  way.  And  then  shall  the  lawless  one  be 
revealed,"  &c.  There  is  a  restraint  that  God  puts  upon  the  law- 
lessness of  the  world  ;  and  I  conceive  the  Holy  Ghost  who  acts 
here  below  is  the  One  spoken  of  here  as  "lie  who  now  letteth" 
or  hindereth.  Still,  after  the  church  has  been  taken  away,  God 
will  carry  on  a  testimony,  though  of  another  sort,  and  Satan 
will  be  kept  in  check  for  a  season  at  least.  This  restraint  will 
be  maintained  l)y  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  a  pro- 
vidential way.  When  this  dealing  of  God  ceases,  the  Holy 
Ghost  will  no  lo!iger  "  h't,"  as  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  sent 


THE   REMOVAL    OF   THE   HINDltANCE.  281 

forth  into  all  the  earth  ;  that  is,  the  power  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  exerts  over  the  world,  and  not  merely  in  the  church,  will 
no  longer  be  put  forth  as  now  to  keep  Satan  under.  "  He  who 
now  letteth"  will  "be  taken  out  of  the  way."  People  do  not 
know  how  much  they  owe  to  this  restraint  of  Satan  from  doing 
his  worst.  But  the  time  will  come  when  God  will  cease  to 
hinder ;  and  then  Satan  will  for  a  season  carry  all  before  him 
on  the  earth.  He  raises  up  a  person  as  head,  and  men  are 
charmed  with  the  grandeur  of  his  energy,  exercised  as  it  will 
be  without  conscience  towards  God — charmed  with  the  com- 
parative ease  that  will  result  from  having  one  person  supreme 
over  all.  In  short,  they  will  have  in  many  ways  what  is  suited 
to  meet  the  idolatry  and  pride  of  the  heart.  For  men  are,  like 
children,  constantly  disappointed  with  their  own  schemes  and 
even  successes.  Besides,  having  refused  the  love  of  the  truth, 
they  will  readily  fall  into  whatever  snare  Satan  may  put  before 
them.  So  that,  after  a  previous  storm  of  revolutions,  they  will 
gladly  fall  down  and  worship  the  beast  and  the  dragon  that 
gave  him  his  power.  But  further,  the  worship  of  the  beast  in 
the  day  that  is  coming  will  be  of  a  different  character  from 
common  idolatry.  They  will  not  merely  be  adorers  of  him, 
along  with  gods  many  and  lords  many,  as  the  heathen  of  old. 
There  will  be  an  utter  denial  of  any  god  above  the  one  who  is 
adored  as  such  on  earth.  This  miserable  being  whom  Satan  fills 
will  be  the  object  of  their  worship  ;  and  the  dragon  shares  it. 

"And  there  was  given  unto  liim  a  mouth  speaking  great 
things  and  blasphemy  :  and  power  was  given  unto  him  to  prac- 
tise [or  continue]*  forty-two  months  "  (verse  5).  Nobody  doubts, 

*  Grammatically  speaking  the  authorised  version  is  good  here.  Compare  Acts 
XV.  33 ;  xviii.  23 ;  xx.  3.  The  Hebraistic  absolute  sense  is  according  to  the 
analogy  of  Dan.  viii.  12,  24,  and  xi.  passim.  Bengel,  Griesbach,  and  others, 
doubted  as  to  the  word  in  any  sense,  and  considered  it  probably  an  interpolation 
from  verse  7-  I  believe,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  peculiarity  of  the  expression, 
to  those  that  did  not  bear  in  mind  the  phraseology  of  Daniel,  led  some  of  the 
scribes  to  insert  iroXifiov  before  or  after  wotijcrat,  as  B,  most  MSS.  (14  iroXefi^ffai) 
and  led  other  authorities,  as  the  Armenian  version,  Irenaeus,  &c.,  to  omit  iroitjaai. 
Dionysius  Alex.  (ap.  Euseb.)  has  Kal  ixrjvee.  On  the  whole  I  conceive  that  Eras- 
mus and  R.  Stephens  rightly  read  Trot  jjtrai,  and  that  the  Complutensian  editors  and 
the  Elzivers  wrongly  admitted  TroXf fiov.  The  true  sense  appears  to  be  to  practise, 
work,  act,  or  do,  rather  than  merely  "continue."     The  ancient  versions  are 


282  DIFFERENCE   OF  DANIEL   AND   JOHN. 

I  suppose,  that  this  is  connected  with  Dan.  vii.  The  same  kind 
of  language  is  heard  applying  to  and  for  tlie  same  time.  If  we 
examine  that  chapter,  some  of  the  thoughts  I  have  uttered  will 
be  found  to  be  confirmed.  It  is  said  (Dan.  vii.  7)  that  the  fourth 
beast  differs  from  all  its  predecessors.  "  It  had  ten  horns.  I 
considered  the  horns,  and,  behold,  there  came  up  another  little 
horn"  (verse  8).  There  is  nothing  of  this  in  the  Eevelation. 
Tlie  little  horn,  at  least  as  such,  is  not  mentioned  there.  But  this 
is  not  all.  Before  him  "  were  three  of  the  first  horns  plucked  up 
by  the  roots."  He  takes  possession  of  the  territory  of  three  of 
the  horns,  so  that  but  seven  remain  out  of  the  ten.  "  In  this 
horn  were  eyes  like  the  eyes  of  man," — the  symbol  of  intelli- 
gence, "  and  a  mouth  speaking  gi'eat  things," — the  utterance  of 
pride  and  blasphemy  against  God.  (Compare  verse  25.)  This 
is  what  brings  on  judgment  from  God — not  of  course  the  white- 
throne  judgment  of  the  dead,  but  the  judgment  of  the  quick, 
and  of  the  habitable  world.  And  so  it  is  written  in  the 
eleventh  verse:  "I  beheld,  then,  because  of  the  voice  of  the  great 
words  which  the  horn  spake ;  I  beheld  even  till  the  beast  was 
slain,  and  his  body  destroyed  and  given  to  the  burning  flame." 
Now  observe  that  there  is  this  difference  between  Daniel's  pro- 
phecy and  John's — what  Daniel  says  about  the  little  liorii  John 
says  about  the  beast.  (Compare  Rev.  xiii.  5,  6,  with  Dan.  vii.  8, 
25.)  The  reason  is  this  :  John  gives  us  the  character  or  prin- 
ciple, and  Daniel  the  detail  of  historical  facts.  The  fact  was  to 
be,  that  in  the  lioman  empire  there  should  arise  ten  kings, 
three*  of  whom  disappear  before  the  force  or  fraud  of  another 

sinfjuliirly  vaj^iio,  but  to  my  mind  they  indicate  action  more  or  less  energetic  or 
specific,  and  not  bare  continuance ;  and  so,  it  seems  to  mo,  the  great  majority  of 
the  best  modern  translators.  Dr.  Jl'Cansland  (pp.  300,  3G1)  prefers  "to  make 
forty-two  months,"  i.e.,  to  drive  out  the  Jew  into  the  -wildomess  for  that  period. 
This  may  bo  a  "  literal "  version  ;  but  I  cannot  commend  its  "  propriety."  Is  it 
not  plain  that  the  actiug  of  the  boast  is  in  contradistinction  to  his  speaking?  Ho 
blasphemes  God  in  every  possible  way,  Ilis  name,  Tlis  tabernacle,  and  those  that 
dwell  in  heaven  ;  and  more  than  this,  license  is  given  him  to  carry  all  out  prac- 
tically for  forty-two  months. 

•  Even  I\Ir.  E.  gives  up  the  popular  notion,  sanctioned  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton, 
Bishop  Newton,  «S.'C.,  that  this  was  fulfilled  in  the  subjection  of  Home,  part  of 
Lombardy,  and  Ilavenna,  to  the  Pope.  But  is  his  own  theory  much  bettor? 
How  can  the  destruction  of  the  Vandals  in  Corsica  and  Sardinia,  or  of  the 


THE    LITTLE   HORN    AND    THE   BEAST.  283 

kinpf,  the  little  horn — a  power  obscure  in  its  first  origin,  but 
acquiring  actual  possession  of  three  kingdoms,  and  then  becom- 
ing the  real  director  of  all  the  rest.  In  the  Revelation  (where 
of  course  it  is  assumed  that  what  had  been  disclosed  in  Daniel 
is  already  known),  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not  go  back  to  the 
historical  details,  but  speaks  as  if  the  emperor  and  the  empire 
were  one. 

We  are  bound  to  acknowledge  "  the  powers  that  be ;"  but  when 
Satan  has  given  the  beast  his  authority,  it  is  another  thing 
altogether:  we  owe  no  allegiance  to  Satan.  In  point  of  fact,  he 
is  the  one  who  leads  on  the  beast  into  all  his  own  depths  and 
heiglits  of  sin.  For  the  beast  "  opened  Ids  mouth  in  blasphemy 
against  God,  to  blaspheme  his  name  and  his  tabernacle,  [and]* 
them  that  dwell  in  heaven"  (verse  6).  The  Roman  empire  is  the 
chariot,  so  to  speak,  in  which  tliis  furious  rider  is  driving. 

But  let  us  look  further  at  Daniel  vii.  "  I  beheld,  and  the  same 
horn  made  war  with  the  saints,  and  prevailed  against  them 
(verse  21).  .  .  .  And  he  shall  speak  great  words  against  the 
Most  High,  and  shall  wear  out  the  saints  of  the  high  [places], 
and  shall  think  to  cliange  times  and  laws :  and  they  shall  be 
given  into  his  hands  until  a  time,  and  times,  and  the  dividing 
of  times."  It  is  the  same  period  of  forty-two  months  that  we 
have  here  in  Rev.  xiii. : — "a  time,"  which  means  a  year;  "and 
times,"  two  years ;  "  and  the  dividing  of  time,"  half  a  year.  I 
have  no  question  tliat  it  is  the  person  referred  to  in  Daniel, 
under  the  name  of  the  little  horn,  wlio  here  appears  under  that 

Ostrogoths  in  Italy  by  Justinian's  general  Belisarius,  and  of  the  Lombards  long 
after  by  Pepin  and  Charlemagne,  answer  to  the  little  horn's  sdbduing  three 
kings  ?  Even  of  this  petty  territory,  which  is  so  strangely  exaggerated  into  three 
kingdoms,  the  Pope  has  long  possessed  but  a  portion :  if  all  the  parts  remained, 
they  would  scarce  make  one  real  kingdom.  The  little  horn,  on  the  contrary,  con- 
quers for  himself,  and  becomes  pre-eminently  great. 

*  It  is  not  correct  to  say,  with  the  author  of  the  Ilorae  Apocalypticae,  that  the 
conjunction  is  wanting  in  all  the  critical  editions,  for  Griesbach,  Knapp,  Scholz, 
Tischcndorf,  &c.,  retain  it  with  the  Vatican,  Porphyrian,  and  uncials,  a  good 
many  MSS.,  and  almost  all  the  ancient  versions,  save  the  Syriac.  Still  there  is 
grave  authority  (N  A  C,  twenty-eight  cursives,  &c.)  against  /cat,  which  is  there- 
fore dropped  by  some  excellent  editors,  as  Matthaei,  Lachmann,  &c.  I  have, 
accordingly,  thought  it  right  to  bracket  the  word,  though  my  opinion  is  in 
favour  of  receiving  it. 


284  HEAVENLY    SEPAKATENESS    ODIOUS   TO   SATAN. 

of  the  beast.  There  he  is  the  "  horn,"  because  Daniel  gives  us 
the  gradual  succession  of  the  history,  and  adds  the  special 
Jewish  part,  the  gift  of  times  and  laws  into  his  hand ;  here, 
because  he  is  viewed  as  having  all  the  power  and  authority  of 
the  imperial  system,  he  is  called  "  the  beast."  lie  opens  his 
mouth  "  in  blasphemy  against  God,  to  blaspheme  His  name  and 
His  tabernacle,  and  them  that  tabernacle  in  heaven."  For  this 
was  the  great  object  of  Satan,  who  iises  the  beast  as  his  mouth- 
piece. It  w^as  from  heaven  he  had  been  cast  out ;  and  God  in 
heaven,  and  those  whom  He  calls  into  relationship  with  Himself 
there  are  peculiarly  odious  to  Satan  and  to  this  self-exalting 
beast.  "They  that  dwell  in  heaven"  are  unbearable  to  them. 
There  is  no  one  thing  that  stirs  the  world  even  now  so  much  as 
this.  It  does  not  always  dislike  godliness  when  connected  with 
things  on  the  earth :  it  can  appreciate  love  in  a  measure,  for  men 
can  selfishly  profit  by  it.  But  the  moment  there  is  a  godliness 
which  cares  not  for  the  things  of  the  earth — not  merely  in  the 
refusal  of  evil  things,  for  they  could  understand  this — but  in 
deliberate  separation  even  when  men  are  doing  their  best, 
(i.e.,  seeking  to  be  religious  and  to  honour  God  in  their  own  way,) 
nothingf  so  excites  men's  hatred  now ;  much  more  so  when  that 
day  comes.  For  then  Satan  will  have  lost  all  power  and  place  in 
heaven,  and  have  only  the  earth  to  work  in,  and  the  thought  of 
blessedness  above  is  hateful  to  him.  He  endeavours  to  make 
men  think  that  the  beast  is  God,  and  takes  advantage,  I  suppose, 
of  the  prophecies  in  scripture  to  make  them  believe  that  the 
predicted  good  time  is  arrived,  that  God  is  come  Ixxck  to  the 
world,  that  men  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  enjoy  all  the  bless- 
ings of  the  earth  and  of  the  day  spoken  of  when  God  was  to 
scatter  Ilis  enemies.  Satan  seeks  that  men  should  antedate  this 
under  himself  and  without  God.  He  will  know  what  is  at  hand 
and  his  own  torment  when  that  day  arrives.  He  will  endeavour 
to  turn  to  account  the  very  promises  of  God,  for  cheating  the 
world  into  the  belief  that  these  times  of  chiefest  evil  are  the 
days  of  heaven  on  the  earth.  This  is  the  time  described  here, 
when  conscience  towards  God  will  be  completely  null  and  void, 
and  what  was  true  of  Pharaoh  on  a  small  scale  will  be  verified 
in  entire  Christendom.  It  will  be  given  up  to  judicial  hardening 


ALL   THAT    DWELL   ON    EARTH.  285 

and  then  destroyed.  It  is  just  what  the  Spirit  shews  us  in  2  Thess. 
ii.  11,  12,  when  God,  grieved  with  this  world  because  of  their 
rejection  of  the  truth,  will  allow  man  and  Satan  to  do  their 
worst  together.  "For  this  cause  God  shall  send  them  strong 
delusion,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie ;  that  they  all  might  be 
damned  who  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  un- 
righteousness." And  I  most  fully  believe  not  only  that  God  will 
do  so  righteously,  but  that  the  righteousness  of  it  will  be  appre- 
hended by  any  soul  who  is  subject  to  His  word. 

Here,  then,  we  have  the  means  by  which  Satan  accomplished 
his  purposes.  He  has  given  his  vast  power  to  the  beast,  and 
now  he  makes  him  an  object  of  worship.  "And  it  was  given 
unto  him  to  make  war  with  the  saints  and  to  overcome  them  : 
and  authority  was  given  him  over  every  tribe,  and  people,  and 
tongue,  and  nation.  And  all  that  dwell  upon  the  earth  shall 
worship  him  of  whom  the  name  is  not  written  in  the  book  of 
life  of  the  slain  Lamb,  from  the  foundation  of  the  world" 
(verses  7,  8).  Here  is  the  same  distinction  that  I  have  alluded 
to  before.  "  All  that  dwell  on  the  earth  "  are  a  worse  class  than 
the  tribes,  peoples,  tongues,  and  nations,  meaning  those  that 
have  abandoned  heaven  and  heavenly  hopes,  and  are  fully  com- 
mitted to  the  latter-day  delusions.  In  the  case  of  "  every  tribe, 
and  people,  and  tongue,  and  nation,"  authority  was  given  to  the 
beast  over  them;  but  as  to  "those  that  dwell  on  the  earth,"  they 
are  completely  subject  to  him  and  fo  his  malignant  influence. 
"All  that  dwell  upon  the  earth  shall  worship  him."  That  is  not 
said  about  the  others,  but  these  are  completely  given  up.  When 
it  says,  "  whose  names  are  not  written  in  the  book  of  life  of  the 
Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  the  idea  is  not 
that  the  Lamb  was  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world, 
though  people  commonly  draw  from  it  the  inference,  as  in  1  Pet. 
i.  19,  20,  of  the  purpose  of  God.  But  the  true  meaning  of  the 
verse,  I  apprehend,  is  that  their  names  were  not  written  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world  in  the  book  of  the  slain  Lamb. 
And,  comparing  this  with  Eev.  xvii.  8,  we  find  that  the  Spirit 
has  left  out  a  portion,  which  makes  all  clear  by  removing  any 
doubt  of  the  true  connection.  "  And  they  that  dwell  on  the 
earth  shall  wonder,  whose  names  were  not  written  in  the  book 


286  SUFFERING,   NOT   RESISTANCE   TO   POWER. 

of  life  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  The  Holy  Spirit  has 
left  out  "of  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,"  and  puts  together  the 
writing  in  the  book  of  life,  with  "from  the  foundation  of  the 
world."  The  language  of  Peter,  &c.,  (1  Peter  i.  20,)  where  he 
speaks  of  the  liOrd  Jesus  as  an  unblemished,  spotless  lamb, 
"  who  verily  was  ordained  before  the  foundation  of  the  world," 
has  quite  another  bearing. 

Then  comes  a  solemn  word  of  warning,  on  whicli  I  need  not 
dwell  at  length.  "  If  any  man  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear."  If 
any  man  leadeth  into  captivity,  into  captivity  he  goeth  :  if  any 
man  killeth  with  the  sword,  he  must  be  killed  with  the  sword. 
Here  is  the  patience  and  the  faith  of  the  saints  "  (verses  9,  10). 
That  is  a  general  maxim,  true  of  any  one ;  true  even  for  the 
beast.  If  he  has  been  leading  others  into  captivity,  he  is  to  go 
into  that  or  worse  himself:  if  he  has  killed  with  the  sword,  he 
must  also  be  killed.  But  it  is  specially  intended  for  the  guidance 
of  the  saints,  who  might  naturally  infer,  from  the  wickedness  of 
the  beast,  and  his  league  with  the  dragon,  that  they  were  at 
liberty  to  resist  him.  And  there  is,  I  believe,  the  reason  why 
this  is  said,  lest  the  saint  should  bo  tempted  to  forget  his  place 
or  God's  supremacy  and  sure  judgment.  Their  place  was  not  to 
take  the  sword  in  their  own  defence.  If  they  did  so,  what 
would  be  the  result  ?  Even  then,  whatever  their  character, 
whatever  the  beast's,  God  would  hohl  to  His  principles.  They 
must  expect  what  they  sought  to  inliict.  It  is  the  law  of  God's 
retributive  government.  The  apostle  Paul,  in  Eph.  vi.,  does  not 
scruple  to  use  the  voice  of  the  law  as  to  the  honour  due  to  a 
parent.  "  Honour  thy  father  and  mother  ....  that  it  may  be 
well  with  thee,  and  thou  mayest  live  long  on  the  earth."  Of 
course  he  does  not  mean  that  a  Christian  should  look  forward 
to  living  on  the  earth  as  a  reward  for  honouring  parents.  It 
was  a  principle  laid  down  of  old  by  God,  and  the  apostle, 
referring  to  the  earthly  promise,  merely  shews  that  even  under 
the  law  there  was  a  special  blessing  attaclied  to  it.  It  was  the 
first  commandment  with  promise.  So  here  the  Spirit  of  God 
gives  a  general  principle,  true  at  all  times,  applicable  alike  to 
foes  and  friends.  "  If  any  man,"  &c. — it  does  not  matter  who. 
It  is  a  false  position  for  the  Christian  to  assume  the  place  of 


EARTHLY  RELATIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  MEN.       287 

power  ill  the  world.  What  makes  it  the  more  striking  is  that 
the  saints  spoken  of  here  are  Jewish,  who  of  all  others  might 
think  it  very  right  to  resist  with  all  their  might.  If  the  beast 
blasphemed  and  persecuted  grievously,  they  might  say,  "  Surely 
we  are  entitled  to  stand  up  in  defence  of  our  religion  and  our 
lives."     But  says  the  Lord,  "  If  any  man  have  an  ear,  let  him 

hear he  that  killeth  with  the  sword  must  be  killed  with  the 

sword."  If  He  lets  him  have  his  way  for  a  season,  what  is  our 
calling?  "Here  is  the  patience  and  the  faith  of  the  saints" — 
faith  as  regards  G^od,  and  patience  as  regards  the  enemy.  Thus 
God  will  so  much  the  more  appear  on  behalf  of  His  sufferers. 
And  if  the  place  of  faith  and  patience  belongs  to  those  Jewish 
saints  who  have  a  comparatively  earthly  position,  how  much 
more  to  us  who  have  nothing  but  a  heavenly  one  ?  (Comp.  Matt. 
xxvi.  52.) 

Our  great  business,  next  to  enjoying  Christ  and  delighting  in 
His  love,  should  be  to  cultivate  what  is  according  to  His  will : 
so  that  we  should  not  give  a  false  witness  of  what  He  is  and 
has  done  for  us.  We  are  not  of  the  world ;  and  the  moment 
we  fall  back  upon  the  resources  of  nature,  upon  our  own  per- 
sonal power,  influence,  or  authority,  we  have  deserted  Christian 
ground.  In  family  relationships,  to  act  according  to  our  place 
of  authority  is -a  perfectly  right  thing.  ISTor  will  the  blessing 
of  God  be  with  those  who  do  not  maintain  the  relative  j)lace 
that  God  has  set  them  in :  as  of  a  father  or  child,  a  husband  or 
wife,  &c.  The  affections,  most  important  as  they  are,  are  not 
everything.  God  is  to  be  respected  in  the  order  that  He  estab- 
lishes and  sanctions.  These  are  things  which  are  not  touched 
by  our  heavenly  place ;  on  the  contrary,  this  gives  us  an  ojDpor- 
tuiiity  of  shewing  we  have  got  in  Christ  a  fresh  power  for  every 
legitimate  relation.  But  to  take  our  part  as  having  an  interest 
in  this  world  is  quite  another  thing,  and  not  the  place  of  the 
Christian ;  but  rather  to  pass  lightly  over  it,  as  those  tliat  know 
their  portion  with  God  in  heaven.  Christ  is  coming  to  judge 
the  world,  which  God  regards  as  guilty  of  the  blood  of  His  Son, 
and  only  ripening  for  judgment.  This  truth  habitually  before 
our  souls  would  preserve  us  from  much  that  dishonours  the  Lord 
in  us  as  Christians. 


288  THE   SECOND    BEAST. 

May  all  we  learn  be  used  to  our  blessing  in  separating  us 
from  what  is  to  end  so  dismally  !  The  outward  effects  of  con- 
duct are  not  enough.  The  church  is  regarded  as  having  the 
mind  of  Christ,  and  we  are  responsible  to  God  to  keep  out  of 
the  secret  snares  and  springs  by  which  Satan  is  bringing  about 
this  evil.  For  we  have  to  do  with  his  working  in  a  still  more 
subtle  way  than  his  acts  in  the  world.  May  we  not  forget  what 
God  is  to  us  for  the  present  claims  of  His  glory  !  We  have  the 
most  blessed  opportunity  of  being  faithful  to  Christ  now.  It  is 
vain  to  look  wistfully  at  others,  and  to  imagine  what  we  could 
do  if  in  their  circumstances.  God  is  equal  to  all  the  difficulty 
of  our  own  position  and  time,  and  would  give  us  the  needed 
strength  if  we  waited  on  Him.  The  only  reason  why  we  are 
apt  to  magnify  the  strangeness,  &c.,  of  circumstances,  is  because 
our  eye  is  not  single  to  Christ.  When  we  see  Him  in  every- 
thing, the  danger,  difficulty,  and  temptation  are  all  at  an  end. 

Verses  11-18.  The  rise  of  the  second  beast  is  strongly  dis- 
tinguished from  that  of  the  one  already  noticed.  First,  there 
was  the  beast  out  of  the  sea;  now  we  read,  "And  I  beheld 
another  beast  coming  up  out  of  the  earth."  The  earth  we  have 
seen,  all  through  the  Revelation,  to  be  the  symbol  of  that  which 
politically  is  established  and  in  order — the  proper  scene  of  the 
testimony  and  ways  of  God  and  of  settled  human  government. 
Its  privileges  may  be  aljused ;  it  may  lapse  into  a  state  of 
frightful  moral  darkness ;  for  it  is  just  where  there  is  any  bless- 
ing from  above  that  there  is  the  danger  of  corruption  and 
apostacy.  The  sea  on  the  contrary  is  a  loose,  disorganized  aspect 
of  the  world.  Chronologically,  too,  this  might  intimate  that  the 
rise  of  the  second  beast  is  subsequent  to  that  of  the  first.  When 
the  seven -headed  monster  rises,  all  is  in  a  state  of  agitation; 
but  when  and  where  the  second  beast  comes  up,  things  are  con- 
solidated after  a  fashion.  Tlie  land  now  is  spoken  of — no  longer 
the  water,  tlie  sport  of  every  wind.  Dut  the  personage  described 
as  "  coming  up  out  of  tlie  earth  "  is  not  a  mere  individual.  It 
is  a  political,  oppressing  power  that  acts  without  conscience 
toward  God — a  beast.*     It  may  l)e,  and  I  doubt  not  this  is,  one 

*  Mr.  Elliott  considens  tho  two-horned  lamb-like  beast  to  represent  the  papal 
clergy,  secular  and  regular,  united  under  tlii'  rujje,  as  the  western  patriarch, 


IMITATION    OF    CHRIST'S    POWEK.  289 

particular  individual  that  exercises  the  power,  as  with  the  first 
beast.  But  "  beast,"  as  a  symbol,  does  not  mean  an  individual  as 
such,  but  an  imperial  power,  sometimes  with  revolting  satellites 
subject  to  itself. 

Next,  this  beast  was  evidently  of  an  extraordinary  kind ;  for 
it  is  characterized  by  an  imitation  of  Christ.  It  has  "two  horns 
like  a  lamb."  The  Lord,  we  must  have  observed,  through  the 
Eevelation,  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  "Lamb."  While  seated 
upon  the  throne  of  God,  while  described  as  Himself  the  great 
Sufferer,  actively  sympathizing  with  the  suffering  people  of  God, 
He  is  seen  as  a  "  Lamb."  But  when  the  saints  slip  out  of  and 
abandon  their  proper  lot  of  earthly  rejection,  the  Lord  ceases  to 
be  thus  symbolized.  He  seems  ashamed  of  them  and  retreats 
to  a  distance,  and  is  seen  as  an  angel  and  not  any  longer  as  a 
Lamb.  The  extraordinary  thing  that  we  see  here  is  that  this 
beast  assumes  to  be  like  Christ.  He  has  two  horns  like  a  lamb. 
He  makes  a  sort  of  pretension  to  be  like  Christ  in  ofiicial  power. 
While  the  horn  is  used  as  a  symbol  of  a  king,  it  may  also  mean 
simply  power.  It  was  so  used  when  speaking  of  David,  "the  horn 
of  his  anointed,"  &c. ;  but  still  more  is  this  meaning  of  it  apparent 
if  we  look  at  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  is  seen  in  this  book  as  having 
seven  horns  and  seven  eyes.  Clearly  the  seven  horns  there  can- 
not be  seven  kings ;  so  that  the  horns,  according  to  the  context, 
either  might  mean  kings,  or  they  might  be  simply  power.  In 
the  former  beast  we  are  told  they  signify  kings  ;  but  per  sc  they 
need  not,  and  here  they  seem  not  to  mean  more  than  power.  It 
is  not  the  perfection  of  power  as  seen  in  the  Lamb,  but  only 
pretension  to  it ;  there  were  two  horns.  The  Spirit  jof  God  has 
been  pleased  to  shew  us  in  chapter  xvii.  of  this  book,  that  the 
ten  horns  of  the  first  beast  are  ten  kings.  (Chap,  xvii.  12.) 

So  far,  then,  all  is  plain  about  this  second  beast.  It  is  a 
corporate  power  that  grows  up  when  all  was  formed  and  orderly, 
and  consequently  arising  after  the  appearance  of  the  first  beast. 

and  supporting  him  in  his  loftier  character  of  Christ's  vicar  or  antichrist. 
Matt.  vii.  15,  he  thinks,  almost  precludes  the  possibility  of  error  in  thus  inter- 
preting the  symbol  of  the  anti- christian  clerical  body.  But  does  not  a  "boast," 
in  prophetic  imagery,  alwaj's  imply  a  political  corporation  or  civil  power,  novfr 
(certainly  elsewhere)  a  priestly  class  however  organised  ?  Ought  such  an  clement 
to  be  left  out  in  interpreting  the  chapter  } 

U 


290  VOICE   LIKE   A   DRAGON. 

More  than  that.  He  arrogates  to  himself  tlie  power  of  Christ 
(he  has  two  horns  like  a  lamb);  but  his  speech  betrays  him — he 
speaks  as  a  dragon.  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart,  we 
know,  the  mouth  speaks.  Whatever  he  may  appear  to  be  out- 
wardly, when  he  does  give  utterance  to  the  real  sentiments  of 
his  heart,  it  is  the  voice  of  the  dragon.  Of  this  the  draconic 
voice  is  the  expression.  It  is  the  great  active  power  of  evil  in 
the  latter  day ;  and  this  is  one  difference  between  these  beasts. 
The  first  beast  is  the  one  for  show :  it  catches  the  profane 
world  through  the  display  of  power  and  glory.  The  second 
beast  is  much  the  more  energetic  of  the  two.  It  is  the  one 
that  most  takes  the  place  of  Christ — is  a  false  Christ,  or  rather 
is  antichrist — i.e.,  the  very  expression  of  Satan  in  his  direct 
oi:»position  to  Christ.  When  Satan  was  seen  (chapter  xii.)  wait- 
ing to  devour  the  man  child  as  soon  as  it  was  born,  he  is  not  as 
the  serpent,  but  as  the  dragon.  And  here,  in  order  to  the 
ripening  of  his  last  designs,  this  beast  speaks  as  a  dragon. 

But  it  may  be  interesting  to  look  at  some  of  the  scriptures 
that  apply  to  the  second  beast,  for  there  is  often  a  good  deal  of 
confusion  about  them  ;  and  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  for  these 
two  beasts  are  so  closely  bound  together  in  the  last  days,  that 
it  is  a  difficult  matter  to  determine  which  of  them  is  the 
antichrist.  The  word  "Antichrist"  is  only  found  in  the  Epistles 
of  John.  And  there  we  must  look  if  we  would  see  what 
is  implied  in  that  name.  In  1  John  ii.  the  Holy  Ghost  writes 
as  to  this  to  tlie  babes  of  God's  family.  For  it  is  not  at 
all  a  true  principle  that  the  young  in  Christ  are  only  to  know 
Him  for  the  salvation  of  their  own  souls.  The  rea.-son,  1  suppose, 
for  thus  writing  to  them  was,  because  they  wei-e  in  special 
danger  from  the  snares  and  deceits  of  the  enemy  ;  and  the  Lord, 
while  He  preserves,  does  not  want  us  to  l)o  kept  blindfold. 
Christian  guidance  is  not  unintelligent.  It  is  not  the  blind 
leading  the  blind,  nor  even  the  seeing  leading  tlie  blind  ;  but 
it  is  tlie  seeing  leading  the  seeing.  God  does  give  liel])  and 
instruction ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  takes  particular  pains  to 
shew  that  He  a])peals  not  to  the  saints'  ignorance,  but  to  their 
knowledge  of  the  truth.  "Little  children,  it  is  the  last  time: 
and  as  ye  have  heard  tliat  the  antichrist  shall  come,  even  now 


MANY    ANTICHRISTS.  291 

are  there  many  antichrists  ;  whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the  last 
time."  There  we  learn  with  certainty  what  was  working  from 
and  in  the  time  of  the  Apostle  John,  what  has  been  increasing 
ever  since,  and  bearing  a  terrible  harvest  up  to  the  present  time, 
though  the  fruit  of  it,  the  antichrist,  may  not  yet  be  fully  ripe. 
"  Even  now  are  there  many  antichrists,  whereby  we  know  that 
it  is  the  last  time."  That  was  the  proof — not  good,  as  men 
think,  but  the  deep  evil  of  antichrist  spreading.  "  They  went 
out  from  us,  but  they  were  not  of  us :  for  if  they  had  been  of 
us,  they  would  no  doubt  have  continued  with  us  :  but  they  went 
out,  that  they  might  be  made  manifest  that  they  were  not  all  of 
us."     What  a  solemn  thing  ! 

The  persons  displaying  the  spirit  of  antichrist  were  individuals 
that  had  once  professed  the  name  of  Christ.  In  fact,  there  could 
not  be  an  antichrist  unless  there  had  been  some  previous  pro- 
fession of  Christ.  There  must  necessarily  be  some  truth ;  for 
Satan  cannot  invent.  He  can  imitate ;  he  can  corrupt  God's 
truth,  and  use  it  for  his  own  purposes,  and  put  it  in  new  and 
evil  forms,  so  as  to  give  the  appearance  of  truth  to  what  is 
positive  error :  "  for  no  lie  is  of  the  truth."  Thus  the  great 
antichrist  is  to  come  :  but  even  then  were  there  many  anti- 
christs. These  persons,  painful  to  say,  had  once  been  in  the 
family  of  God.  There  they  had  been,  outwardly  in  the  place  of 
children,  but  not  of  course  in  reality.  Then  "they  went  out 
form  us,  but  they  were  not  of  us."  Next  he  says,  "  Who  is  a 
liar,  but  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  ?"  But  he 
goes  farther.  To  deny  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  the  first 
feature.  But  there  are  greater  abominations.  "  He  is  antichrist, 
that  denieth  the  Father  and  the  Son."  There  are  two  states 
spoken  of  here.  First,  there  is  the  denial  that  Jesus  is  the 
Messiah,  the  last  degree  of  that  infidelity  which  every  unbe- 
lieving Jew  shews  who  rejects  Christ  from  that  day  to  this. 
But  the  terrible  thing  is,  that  it  is  found  in  those  who  had  once 
taken  their  place  in  confessing  Jesus  to  be  the  Christ.  Of 
him  who  will  finally  be  the  leader  in  giving  it  up  and  renounc- 
ing, it  is  said,  "  he  is  a  liar."  But  more  than  that.  He  is  not 
only  a  liar,  but  an  antichrist  "  that  denieth  the  Father  and  the 
Son."    Jesus  was  the  Messiah,  and  nmch  more  :  the  Father  wai 

u   2 


292  REVOLT    FKOM    CHRISTIANITY   AND   JUDAISM. 

displayed  in  Him.     If  I  look  at  the  Messiah  as  such,  I  do  not 
necessarily  and  fully  see  the  Father  there.    In  Him  is  the  truth 
of  the  kingdom  of  God ;  in  Him  the  display  of  His  power  and 
faithfulness  to  His  people.     But  there  is  something  far  more 
blessed  than  the  kingdom ;  for  when  T  have  the  thought  of  the 
Father,  I  rise  not  merely  into  the  region  of  divine  power,  but 
into  that  of  the  highest,  holiest,  most  intimate  affections.     It  is 
evident  that  what  we  know  in  the  presence  of  God  now  is  an 
infinitely  nearer  thing  than  the  glory  that  He  will  give  or  display 
by  and  by.     This  will  tell  others  what  His  feelings  are  toward 
us,  proving  the  love  we  are  brought  into  now.     We  do  not  wait 
for  the  kingdom  to  know  this ;  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost  we  draw 
near  to  God  noM',  in  the  most  blessed  way  in  which  He  here  re- 
veals Himself.    Of  course  when  in  heaven  we  shall  have  a  more 
unalloyed  knowledge  of  His  love,  an  enjoyment  never  inter- 
rupted by  the  workings  of  a  carnal  mind  or  by  worldly  influ- 
ences.  Every  hindrance  will  be  removed — all  idols  will  vanish ; 
for  every  present  thing  which  becomes  an  object  to  the  mind, 
instead  of  Christ,  is  really  an  idol.     We  shall  be  out  of  and 
above  all  this  when  we  are  taken  to  be  with  the  Lord.    But  the 
love  of  the  Father  is  just  as  true  and  perfect  now,  and  we  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  are  privileged  to  enjoy  it.   We  shall  enter  more 
fully  into  the  love  then,  but  the  love  itself  is  the  same  even  now. 
It  is  the  rejection,  then,  not  merely  of  the  Messiahship  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  but  of  His  divine  glory  as  the  Son,  that  brings  in 
antichrist.    All  the  love  of  the  Father  has  come  out  in  Christ, 
witnessed  by  the  Holy  Ghost.    That  involves,  not  merely  the 
Jewish  revelation,  but  the  Christian ;  and  it  supposes  too  that  , 
Messiah  has  not  only  come  and  been  rejected,  but  has  brought 
out  all  His  divine  and  heavenly  glory.    For  His  being  the  Son 
of  the  Father  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  earth.    His  eternal 
Sonship  is  evidently  a  truth  transcending  entirely  His  Messianic 
rights  and  position.     It  \\ould  have  been  equally  true  if  there 
had  been  no  earth  or  providential  dealings.    It  was  His  eternal 
relation  and  glory ;  and  therefore,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  wants 
to  bring  us  into  our  full  place  of  l)l('ssedness,  it  is  the  Fatlier 
that  He  biiiigs  out.     "Blessed  lie  the  God  and  Father  (if  <»ur 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  blessed  us  with  all  s})iritual  bless- 


THE   SUBTLETY   OF   ANTICHRIST   IN   I.  AND  II.  JOHN.         293 

ings."  Where  ?  Here  ?  Not  at  all.  "  In  heavenly  places  in  Christ, 
according  as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world."  So  that  the  seat  of  our  blessing  is  entirely  outside 
and  above  the  whole  scene  of  the  lower  creation.  And  if  a  man 
utterly  rejects  and  despises  that,  renouncing  His  glory  whom  he 
had  once  owned,  what  is  he  ?  An  antichrist.  What  he  does  on  a 
small  scale,  the  antichrist  will  do  on  a  larger  one. 

I  refer  to  the  Epistles  of  John,  because  there  we  have  the 
antichrist  mentioned,  not  as  a  beast  as  in  the  Kevelation,  but 
as  the  end  and  chief  of  those  who  had  once  been  in  the  family 
of  God  outwardly,  had  gone  out  from  it,  abandoning  and  deny- 
ing the  blessed  truth  about  the  Father  and  the  Son,  which  they 
seemed  to  have  received.  "  He  is  antichrist  that  denieth  the 
Father  and  the  Son."  On  the  other  hand,  we  read,  "  Whosoever 
denieth  the  Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  Father."  God  always 
makes  the  utmost  account  of  His  Son.  If  you  deny  the  Son, 
everything  is  gone ;  whereas  "  he  that  acknowledgeth  the  Son 
hath  the  Father  also."  When  I  possess  the  Son  of  God  and  my 
heart  finds  satisfaction  in  Him,  I  know  the  Father.  "  He  that 
hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father  also." 

Then,  after  exhorting  them  to  let  that  abide  in  them  which 
they  had  heard  from  the  beginning,  that  so  they  might  continue 
in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father,  John  closes  the  matter  thus : 
"  These  things  have  I  written  unto  you  concerning  them  which 
seduce  you."  It  was  an  evil  that  was  at  work  from  the  very  be- 
ginning. And  what  mercy  is  there  even  in  this !  As  the  evil  did 
exist,  and  must  be  manifested  at  some  time  or  another,  God 
allowed  it  to  break  out  then,  so  as  to  put  His  own  revealed  sen- 
tence upon  it.  We  should  never  have  dared  to  have  said  such 
strong  things  of  those  whom  we  had  even  known  as  friends  or 
as  brethren  so-called.  Call  them  liars  !  How  shocking  and  un- 
charitable !  men  would  say.  But  the  moment  that  any  men  set 
themselves  against  (or  rather  deny)  the  full  revelation  of  the 
Son  of  God,  the  Holy  Ghost  knows  no  quarter ;  and  I  believe 
that  we  ought  not.  If  the  heart  is  unprepared  for  this,  you  will 
find  another  thing  that  goes  along  with  it.  Wherever  unbroken 
self-love,  sensitiveness,  and  tenacity  reign  about  what  touches 
ourselves,  there  is  but  little  care  for  the  Lord  Jesus.  You  cannot 


294  THE   PRINCIPLE    OF   ANTICIIKIST. 

have  two  master  affections.  When  the  heart  is  single  to  Clirist, 
He  lifts  us  above  personal  feelings ;  but  where  the  heart's  care 
is  for  ourselves,  there  will  not  be  found  much  devotedness  to 
Him,  nor  jealousy  for  His  name. 

In  1  John  iv.  the  apostle  refers  to  the  spirit  of  the  evil. 
"  Every  spirit  that  confesseth  not  Jesus  Christ  come  in  the  flesh 
is  not  of  God:  and  this  is  the  [spuit]  of  antichrist,  whereof  ye 
have  heard  that  it  should  come,  and  even  now  already  is  it 
in  the  world."  Why  does  the  Holy  Ghost  introduce  it  here  ? 
There  are  many  false  prophets,  as  had  been  said  in  the  first 
verse,  gone  out  into  the  world:  and  so  I  believe  there  are  now. 
But  it  is  a  most  difficult  thing  to  realize  it  at  the  time  in  which 
we  live.  We  can  see  it  in  times  that  are  past;  but  the  great 
difficulty  is  the  discerning  of  what  is  at  work  now.  We  are  in  the 
very  same  circumstances  that  the  saints  were  in  then.  For  as 
surely  as  the  Holy  Ghost  continues  to  work,  so  surely  will  the 
subtle  power  of  Satan  be  there  to  oppose.  "Every  spirit  that 
confesseth  not,"  &c.  Such  is  the  power  or  principle  of  antichrist 
"whereof  ye  have  heard  that  it  should  come,  and  even  now 
already  is  it  in  the  world."  It  is  not'  the  antichrist  fully  deve- 
loped yet,  but  the  spirit  of  it  working  among  men,  just  as  much 
as  the  Holy  Ghost  was  working  also.  The  earliest  sphere  is  not 
in  the  profane  world;  it  must  begin  with  those  who  had  once 
borne  the  name  of  Christ.  Satan  could  not  forge  such  a  rebellion 
against  God,  but  among  those  who  profess  to  believe  the  truth. 

Again,  there  is  a  notice  of  this  in  the  second  Epistle  of  John, 
where  it  is  said  that  "many  deceivers  are  entered  into  the 
world,  who  confess  not  Jesus  Christ  come  in  the  flesh.  This  is 
a  deceiver  and  an  antichrist."  It  is  no  longer  a  question  of  justi- 
fication by  faith  simply,  or  of  the  law,  but  a  more  serious  thing 
still.  It  is  Satan,  not  only  attacking  tlio  work  of  Christ  and 
seeking  to  get  persons  to  add  something,  and  so  to  take  away 
from  its  glory,  but  deprecating  and  denying  the  person  of  the 
Son.  Important  as  the  work  of  Christ  is  to  us,  the  person  of 
Christ  is  tlie  centre  and  substance  of  all  truth  and  glory.  In 
presence  of  such  a  theme,  I  desire  not  to  discuss  but  to  worship. 
Tlie  reason  wliy  i)ersons  care  more  lor  the  work  of  Clirist  is 
because  they  rightly  feel  they  cannot  be  saved  without  it ;  but 


HOW   ANTICHRIST   IS   TO   BE   DEALT   WITH.  295 

once  we  have  got  peace  of  conscience,  Christ's  person  becomes 
the  most  precious  object  of  our  hearts.  He  is  G-od's  delight ; 
and  what  is  most  precious  to  Him,  we  shall  find  to  be  the  most 
blessed,  and  full  of  blessing  for  us.  It  is  not  merely  he  that 
denies  Jesus  Christ  come  in  the  flesh,  but  he  that  does  not 
confess  Jesus  Christ  coming  in  the  flesh:  this  is  a  deceiver  and 
an  antichrist.  The  Holy  Ghost  becomes,  if  we  may  so  say, 
bolder  in  His  statements.  Does  He  lower  the  standard,  because 
Satan  apparently  gains  ground,  and  becomes  more  and  more 
audacious  against  Christ  ?  And  are  we  to  say,  "  We  must  not 
be  so  particular  now,  because  there  is  so  much  evil ;"  and  "there 
is  no  hope,  because  the  church  is  in  ruins  ?"  On  the  contrary 
the  Spirit,  making  provision  for  the  latest  time,  uses  stronger 
language  than  ever.  He  says  (verse  10),  "  If  there  come  any 
unto  you,  and  bring  not  this  doctrine,  receive  him  not  into  your 
house,  neither  bid  him  good  speed  [greeting]."  We  are  to  have 
nothing  to  say  to  him.  Not  only  was  he  not  to  be  received  into 
the  church,  the  house  of  the  living  God,  but  not  even  into  a 
Christian's  house.  He  must  have  no  sanction  nor  footing  among 
the  saints ;  for  the  Christian's  house  ought  to  be  a  fortress  for 
the  name  of  the  Lord,  a  reflection  of  what  the  Lord  loves 
and  produces  where  He  is  owned  and  honoured.  Even  ordi- 
nary greeting  is  to  be  refused.  No  matter  if  it  be  only  to 
the  lady  that  he  is  writing — one  who  is  not  called  to  teach 
or  to  rule.  But  when  it  is  a  question  of  Christ,  it  is  in 
vain  to  talk  about  her  being  a  woman,  as  an  excuse  for  laxity. 
She  wants  Christ ;  she  owes  all  to  Christ ;  and  if  she  is  a 
woman,  is  she  not  bound  to  make  Christ  the  first  question,  the 
object  of  her  soul  ?  Therefore,  if  any  person  touches  Christ,  no 
matter  who  or  what  she  may  be,  her  allegiance  to  Christ  calls 
for  promptness  and  decision.  That  at  once  becomes  the  govern- 
ing motive  to  faith,  and  the  one  grand  responsibility  of  her  soul. 
Whether  it  be  persons  who  have  the  spirit  of  antichrist,  or  the 
great  antichrist  himself  that  is  coming,  antagonism  to  Christ  is 
there ;  and  this  decides  all  to  a  true  heart. 

In  the  Eevelation  antichrist  is  described,  not  merely  as  a 
deceiver,  but  as  a  "  beast,"  as  an  earthly  power  which  has  a 
subject  kingdom — an  imperial  system,  in  fact,  rather  than  a 


296  THE    WILFUL    KING 

purely  spiritual  malignant  influence,  as  in  the  Epistles  of  John. 
If  we  look  a  little  at  some  of  the  Jewish  prophets,  we  shall 
find  more  about  him.  I  refer  more  particularly  to  Daniel  xi. 
Towards  the  close  (verse  36)  we  read  these  words :  "  The  king- 
shall  do  according  to  his  will ;  .  .  .  .  and  he  shall  exalt  himself 
and  magnify  himself  above  every  god,  and  shall  speak  mar- 
vellous things  against  the  God  of  gods."  Who  can  deny  you 
have  a  self-exalting  personage  in  the  land  of  Judea  ?  This  is 
very  plain;  for  lower  down  it  is  said  that  "in  his  estate  shall 
he  honour  the  god  of  forces :  a  god  whom  his  fathers  knew  not 
shall  he  honour  with  gold,  and  silver,  and  with  precious  stones, 
and  pleasant  things.     Thus  shall  he  do  in  the  most  strongholds 

with  a  strange  god,  &c And  he  shall  cause  them  to  rule 

over  many,  and  shall  divide  the  land  for  gain."  Now,  I  think 
that  wherever  the  Holy  Ghost  speaks  of  a  land  in  this  way,  as 
the  land,  it  refers  to  the  land  of  Israel.  He  speaks  of  it  as  the 
Lord's  own  land.  This  is  confirmed  a  verse  or  two  afterwards 
(verse  41).  "He  [the  king  of  the  north]  shall  enter  also  into 
the  glorious  land,  and  many  countries  shall  be  overthrown." 
Thus  a  great  northern  antagonist  is  to  come  against  the  king 
(verse  40)  "  like  a  whirlwind,  with  chariots  and  with  horsemen," 
&c.  Most  evidently,  then,  the  glorious  land  spoken  of  here  is 
the  very  country  which  "the  king"  had  been  distributing  to  his 
favourites.  In  short,  lie  is  a  king  in  the  land  of  Judea,  and  it 
is  expressly  said  that  the  period,  policy,  and  conflicts  described 
are  "  at  the  time  of  the  end."  Then  "  shall  the  king  of  the 
south  push  at  him  [the  king  in  Judea] ;  and  the  king  of  the 
north  shall  come  against  him,"  &c. 

If  this  be  so,  several  points  are  cleared  in  these  verses.  First 
of  all  a  king,  who  does  according  to  his  own  will,  establishes 
himself  in  the  land  of  Palestine.  But  while  you  may  find  the 
moral  features  tliat  link  him  witli  the  "  antichrist"  of  John,  he 
is  viewed  here  as  an  earthly  power,  and  is  thus  connected  with 
one  of  tlie  beasts  of  the  Revelation.  But  more  than  that,  he  is 
to  exalt  and  magnify  himself  above  every  god.  This  was  a 
novel  feature.  The  Boman  emperors  had  honours  paid  to  tliem 
in  life  and  after  death  as  divine ;  yet  never  above  every  god. 
But  "the  king"  shall  magnify  himself  supremely;  and  this  in  a 


IS   TO   REIGN   IN    PALESTINE.  297 

land  that  was  specially  Jehovah's  above  all  others,  and  amongst 
a  people  whom  God  had  called  out  to  be  a  witness  against  all 
idolatry ;  and  yet  this  man  claims  a  new  and  most  audacious 
worshi^J,  as  the  Most  High  in  God's  land  and  temple.  (Compare 
2  Thess.  ii.)  For  bad  as  Israel  had  been  of  old,  enflaming  them- 
selves "with  idols  under  every  green  tree,"  here  we  have  the 
sight,  hitherto  unknown,  of  a  man  setting  himself  up  as  the 
supreme  God.  And  yet  he  has  an  object  of  worship  himself: 
for  man  must  have  an  idol  which  enslaves  him,  unless  he  is 
truly  exalted,  as  alone  he  can  be  in  bowing  down  before  the 
true  God.  In  reality  he  is  most  elevated  when  most  subject  to 
God.  For  man,  unlike  God,  cannot  suffice  in  and  for  himself 
without  another.  He  must  either  raise  his  eyes  to  the  true  God, 
or  degrade  them  on  a  false  one.  Even  the  very  person  who  will 
try  to  get  all  beneath  him,  as  supreme  object  of  worship,  will 
himself  have  something  to  which  he  is  subject.  And  so  we  find 
(verse  37)  that  while  he  does  not  regard  the  God  of  his  fathers 
(which  confirms  his  being  a  Jew),  nor  the  desire  of  women 
(which  probably  refers  to  the  Messiah),  nor  regard  any  god,  for 
he  shall  magnify  himself  above  all ;  yet  the  Spirit  of  God  shews 
us  this  apparent  self-contradiction  (verse  38).  "  In  his  estate 
shall  he  honour  the  god  of  forces."  All  others  are  to  honour 
him,  but  he  has  this  false  god  whom  he  himself  honours 
"with  gold,  and  silver,  and  precious  stones,  and  pleasant  things. 
Thus  shall  he  do  with  a  strange  god,  whom  he  shall  acknow- 
ledge and  increase  with  glory And  at  the  time  of  the 

end  shall  the  king  of  the  south  j)ush  at  him,  and  the  king  of 

the  north  shall  come  against  him He  shall  enter  also  into 

the  glorious  land." 

Now  here  plainly  we  have  Palestine.  The  kings  of  the  south 
and  north  are  so  called  with  reference  to  the  land  of  Judea. 
The  king  of  the  north,  described  as  coming  against  him  with 
this  large  force,  is  the  enemy  so  familiar  in  the  jDrophets,  while 
the  king  of  the  south  is  the  then  sovereign  of  Egypt. 

These  two  powers  come  up  against  "  the  king,"  who,  I  appre- 
hend, is  the  antichrist  of  scripture.  The  Holy  Ghost  does  not 
here  describe  his  rise.  There  was  no  need  to  say  who  he  was, 
but  he  is  brought  in  quite  abruptly.     Thus,  if  verse  35  be 


298  REPEATED   ALLUSIONS 

examined,  one  sees  clearly  that  it  speaks  of  some  who  had  under- 
standing, referring  to  what  took  place  in  the  time  of  the  Mac- 
cabees, when  a  celebrated  and  most  wicked  prince,  Antiochus 
Epiphanes,  persecuted  the  Jews,  many  of  whom  then  withstood 
him  in  a  remarkable  way.  There  might  have  been  a  good  deal  of 
nature  and  the  spirit  of  the  world  in  their  feelings  and  actions ; 
nevertheless  they  resisted  all  efforts  to  turn  tliem  away  from 
Jehovah  to  idols.  Some  of  them  fell,  and  this  was  in  order  to 
try  others,  and  "  to  purge  and  to  make  them  white,  even  to  the 
time  of  the  end :  because  it  is  yet  for  a  time  appointed." 

Here  precisely  comes  in  the  space  where  tlie  Spirit  of  God 
drops  the  past  history.  He  first  gives  us  the  struggle  between 
Antiochus  and  his  adversaries,  followed  by  the  exploits  and 
the  sufferings  of  those  who  had  understanding  in  Israel.  The 
history  of  Israel  is  then  in  abeyance,  and  we  are  at  once 
carried  on  to  "the  time  of  the  end."  Between  these  two  points 
there  is  a  suspension  of  their  history. 

What  is  the  next  thing  ?  "  And  the  king  shall  do  according 
to  his  will."  We  are  not  here  told  anything  about  his  origin  or 
progress ;  we  hear  nothing  whence  he  comes ;  we  have  only 
that  peculiar  phrase,  "  the  king,"  as  if  this  would  be  intimation 
enough  who  was  intended.  Nor  is  it  the  only  place  in  Scriptiire 
where  "the  king"  is  spoken  of.  Look  at  the  close  of  Isaiah 
XXX.  and  you  will  find  "the  king"  introduced  there  in  no  less 
singular  a  manner.  The  reason,  I  believe,  is  this ;  that  the 
Jews,  while  they  were  looking  for  Christ,  weva  also  looking  for 
antichrist,  a  great  prince  who  should  trample  down  the  godly 
among  them  in  their  final  tribulation.  It  was  plain  in  pro- 
phecy and  so  understood  by  them.  In  this  ch.  xxx.  the  Spirit 
of  God  desciibes  two  enemies  of  Israel.  First  in  verse  31  it  is 
said,  "  For  through  the  voice  of  Jehovah  shall  the  Assyrian  be 
broken  down  which  smote  with  a  rod."  This  is  the  king  of  the 
north  that  figures  in  Daniel,  typified  in  the  early  prophet 
perhaps  by  Sennacherib,  who  was  the  Assyrian  of  that  day,  but 
of  course  only  a  foreshadow  of  the  great  northern  enemy  at  the 
close.  Then  again  it  is  said,  "  And  in  every  place  where  the 
grounded  staff  shall  pass,  which  Jehovah  shall  lay  upon  him, 
it  shall  be  with  tabrets  and  harps ;  and  in  battles  of  shaking 


IN    THE   PROPHECY    OF   ISAIA.H.  299 

will  he  fight  with  it."  Thus,  although  there  will  be  such  sorrow 
and  trial,  there  will  be  joy  too :  "  it  shall  be  with  tabrets  and 
harps."  "  For  Tophet  is  ordained  of  old  :  for  the  king  also  it  is 
prepared."  This  I  believe  to  be  the  force  of  it — "  for  the  king 
also."  Thus,  if  the  statement  made  be  correct,  you  have  at  the 
closing  scene  the  judgment  of  God  on  these  two  great  enemies 
of  Israel — the  Assyrian,  and  "  the  king"  who  is  introduced  here 
without  a  word  of  preparation. 

In  Isaiah  Ivii,  the  same  thing  appears.  I  refer  to  it  the  more, 
as  some  might  argue  that  in  chap.  xxx.  "the  Assyrian"  and  "the 
king"  are  identical.  But  in  chap.  Ivii.  it  would  be  impossible 
to  maintain  this.  The  prophet  has  just  been  describing  the 
appalling  moral  evil  of  the  last  days  among  the  Jews.  Then 
suddenly  he  says  (ver.  9),  "  Thou  wentest  to  the  king  with  oint- 
ment," &c.  It  is  plain  from  this,  that  "the  king"  is  some 
special  antagonist  of  God,  not  attacking  the  Jews  from  without 
like  the  Assyrian,  but  setting  himself  up  within  as  king  over 
the  people  of  God.  It  was  not  necessary  to  define  what  king, 
because  it  was  a  familiar  idea  to  Israel,  so  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
could  introduce  him  without  a  word  of  preface.  They  knew 
there  was  the  terrible  king  to  come — the  last  great  enemy  of 
God  and  the  Jews  in  the  land.  The  Assyrian  is  an  enemy  of 
God  and  of  Israel  too,  but  not  in  the  land ;  for  he  fights  against 
"the  king"  wlio  is  reigning  there.  The  last  wilful  king  is  the 
object  of  attack  to  the  last  mighty  Assyrian.  Outrageously 
wicked  as  both  are  to  be,  they  do  not  at  all  agree  in  their 
wickedness.  They  stand  in  each  other's  way.  There  never  can 
be  lasting  peace  between  them,  and  this  is  exactly  what  the 
eleventh  chapter  of  Daniel  shews  us.  The  forty-first  verse  is 
not  at  all  a  description  of  "  the  king."  He  seems  to  be  lost  to 
view,  and  there  follows  the  account  of  the  proud  king  of 
Assyria.  The  Holy  Ghost  presses  on  to  the  end  of  the 
Assyrian's  career,  leaving  that  of  "  the  king." 

Looking  now  at  the  New  Testament,  we  shall  find  some  new 
features  about  this  king.     In  2  Thess.  ii.*  we  have  the  fullest 

*  I  take  the  opportunity  of  stating  my  conviction,  which  I  have  reason  to 
know  Mr.  Birks  shares,  that  the  auth.  ver.  is  quite  justified  in  giving  "  by  the 
coming  (or  presence)  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  rather  than  "with  regard  to." 


300  THE    MAN   OF   SIN. 

account  of  him  that  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  iifford.  In  verse  3 
it  is  said,  "  Let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any  means :  for  [that 
day  shall  not  come,]  except  there  come  the  falling  away  first, 
and  that  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of  perdition."  There 
is  first  the  falling  away,  that  is  the  special  apostacy.  The  man 
of  sin  is  another  and  subsequent  thing.  The  apostacy  prepares 
the  way  for  the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin.     Thus  the  French 

So  it  is  in  the  iEthiopic  probably,  the  Ai-abic,  Gothic,  Syriac,  and  Vulgate. 
Mr.  Elliott,  and  the  commentators  he  follows,  have  overlooked  the  most  impor- 
tant elements  for  deciding  the  true  meaninij;.  It  is  not  a  question  of  vnep  only, 
hut  of  v-ntp  with  a  verb  of  entreating,  which  yields  regularly  the  sense  "for  the 
sake  of"  or  "by."   (Matthiae's  Gr.  Gram.  vol.  ii.  §  582;  Jclf,  vol.  ii.  §  630.) 

Bp.  Ellicott  avoids  the  error  of  Mr.  Elliott,  who  doubts  whether  virip  ever 
bears  what  he  calls  the  "adjurative  sense;"  but,  while  admitting  that  it  is 
"grammatically  tenable,"  he  contends  that  it  is  by  no  means  " exegetically 
probable,"  and  that  it  is  without  precedent  in  the  New  Testament.  But  the 
latter  is  an  unreasonable  objection ;  because  there  is  no  other  instance  in  the 
New  Testament,  that  I  know,  of  ipoiraw,  or  an  equivalent  word,  with  this 
preposition  (save  2  Cor.  v.  20,  which  Wahl  takes  as  =  per,  Mr.  Green  as  "  on 
behalf  of,"  which  is  inapplicable  here ;  but  I  wave  this  as  doubtful) ;  and  there- 
fore we  must  be  regulated  by  its  ordinary  force  in  such  constructions  But  we 
have  frequently  sp.  with  ntpi  there,  which  carries  a  sense  entirely  different. 

Again,  the  real  source  of  the  difficulty  is  owing  to  the  exegetical  mistake  that 
the  presence  of  the  Lord  is  the  same  thing  as  His  day.  It  would  be  most  un- 
natural, as  Dean  Alford  argues,  that  the  apostle  should  conjure  them  by  that 
concerning  which  he  was  about  to  teach  them.  But  the  apostle  does  no  such 
thing;  on  the  contrary,  ho  entreats  them  by  "the  coming"  of  Christ  with  all 
its  cheering  associations  and  its  bright  hope— the  gatluring  of  the  saints  to  their 
Lord,  that  they  should  not  be  agitated  by  the  terrors  of  "the  day,"  which  false 
teachers  i)retended  was  actually  present.  Both  the  Dean  of  Canterbury  and 
Bishop  of  Bristol  agree  with  me  that  tviffTijKtv  means  "is  already  come,"  not 
merely  "at  hand,"  as  very  faultily  represented  in  the  English  Bible.  St.  Paul 
in  the  first  Epistle  had  already  taught  the  Thessalonians  their  hope,  as  he  had 
also  in  his  oral  ministry  respecting  the  man  of  sin,  and  the  hindrance  which 
actually  operated  against  his  manifestation.  He  now  puts  these  truths  in  their 
order,  and  bese(?chos  them  by  Christ's  coming,  as  a  kiu)wn  motive  on  account  of 
which  they  should  not  be  moved  by  tlio  false  alarm  that  this  familiar  and 
dreaded  day  of  trouble  was  arrived.  It  is  the  presence  'irapovaia)  of  the  Lord 
which  gathers  the  saints  to  meet  Him  above  ;  it  is  the  epiphany  or  shining  forth 
of  His  presence  which  destroys  the  lawless  one  below — a  manifestly  subsequent 
event,  spite  of  Bcngel,  as  appears  beyond  a  doubt  from  comparing  it  with  liev. 
xix.  The  saints  are  already  with  Christ,  and  follow  Him  out  of  heaven  for  the 
judgment  of  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet  and  their  adherents.  The  docu- 
ment on  which  the  errorists  rested  was  a  pretended  letter  of  the  apostle,  not 
the  first  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  as  some  wrongly  assert ;  and  the  feeling 


THE   APOSTACY.  301 

revolution  answers  to  the  apostacy  rather  than  Eomanism, 
which  confesses  truths,  but  all  of  them  put  out  of  their  right 
place.  There  will  be  a  further  and  more  terrible  development 
of  the  apostacy,  though  this  illustrates  it.  But  there  is  to  be 
more  than  that— the  man  of  sin.  Who  is  he  ?  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  was  the  man  of  righteousness.  This  is  the  antagonist — 
the  man  of    sin — "  the  son   of  perdition,  who    opposeth  and 

they  sought  to  excite  was  not  the  hope  of  Christ's  coining,  but  the  fear  of  His 
day.    The  criticism  and  the  doctrine  of  the  Horae  Apoc.  as  to  this  are  unfounded. 

Others  are  no  better.  Schleusner  who  is  quoted  writes  loosely ;  and  the 
words  of  Hesychius  (vol.  i.  col.  1233,  ed.  Alberti)  do  not  warrant  the  inference 
that  the  same  word  in  the  same  tense  means  either  present  or  future ;  for 
TTpoKiifievov  seems  only  a  following  up  of  TrdpovTa,  not  another  variety  of 
signification.  The  verb  is  generally  used  for  what  lies  stretched  before,  as 
(meats)  ready  laid,  the  question  in  hand,  things  already  settled  and  agreed  on. 
I  am  not  aware  of  its  ever  distinctly  meaning  the  future.  But  so  emphatically 
the  contrary  is  evtffrwQ  that,  as  is  well  known,  grammarians  have  selected  it  as 
the  proper  term  for  the  present  tense  {xpovoc  ivearojg).  The  latest  (sixth) 
edition  of  Liddell  and  Scott's  Lexicon  shews  their  statement  modified  as  to  this; 
as  in  fact  none  of  the  throe  instances  cited  from  classical  authors  {Ai\  Nub.  779, 
Isasus,  88.  40,  Dem.  896.  49)  necessarily  means  impending,  Lat.  imniinois.  Dr. 
Scott  has  himself  acknowledged  to  me  that  they  may  all,  as  I  believe  they  all  do, 
mean  "present,"  and  thus  harmonize  instead  of  clashing  with  the  regular  force 
of  the  word  everywhere  else,  both  in  the  Sept.  (including  the  Apocrypha)  and 
the  New  Testament.  Thus  the  passage  in  the  Clouds  means  "  while  one  suit  was 
still  pending,"  i.e.,  actually  going  on,  not  impending  or  future.  Again,  Mr.  E. 
does  not  appear  to  have  hit  the  force  of  Isreus  on  the  estate  of  Hagnias ;  and 
here,  though  I  have  no  doubt  whatever,  I  prefer  for  obvious  reasons  to  cite  from 
the  celebrated  Sir  W.  Jones's  version,  p.  139  (London,  1779).  "Moreover  the 
inheritance  of  Hagnias  is  not  yet  well  secured  to  me,  since  some  actions  brought 
against  the  witnesses  for  perjury  will  make  it  necessary  for  me  to  obtain  a 
second  adjudication."  This  is  a  very  different  thing  from  an  "  impending  trial ;" 
and  confirms  the  general  rule  instead  of  being  an  exception  for  which  wc  have 
to  account.  In  the  demurrer  in  reference  to  Apaturius,  the  third  alleged  excep- 
tion, the  suits  were  already  begun  when  they  came  to  arbitration. 

So  the  argument  on  -Kapiffriv,  John  xi.  28-30,  is  invalid  for  Mr.  E.  and  rather 
strengthens  what  he  contends  against.  For  our  Lord  had  actually  quitted  the 
place  where  He  was  when  the  news  of  the  sickness  of  Lazarus  arrived,  traversed 
the  considerable  intervening  distance,  and  was  only  just  outside  the  village. 
Ylapiariv  is  strictly  true  there,  and  in  no  way  modifies  ivkaTtjKiv  in  our  text.  If 
the  false  teachers  at  Thessalonica  taught  that  the  Lord  had  left  the  right  hand 
of  God  and  begun  the  judgments  of  "that  day,"  without  having  yet  caught  up 
the  saints  in  Thessalonica  or  anywhere  else,  it  woidd  be  quite  parallel  to  the 
case  of  John  xi.  The  word  therefore  retains  here  also  and  everywhere  its 
characteristic  sense. 


302  THE    KING    SITS    IN   JERUSALEM,   IN   THE   TEMPLE. 

exaltetli  himself  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  wor- 
shipped." Just  the  same  sort  of  moral  features  that  we  see  in 
Daniel  about  "  the  king,"  we  have  in  this  man  of  sin.  "  So 
that  he  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  shewing  himself  that  he 
is  God."  Here  we  have  another  point.  He  is  evidently  one 
reigning  at  Jerusalem.  He  sits  "  in  the  temple  of  God,"  which, 
I  see  no  reason  to  doubt,  means  the  literal  and  well-known 
temple  there.*  At  the  same  time,  if  anybody  likes  to  apply 
the  principle  of  this  scripture  to  one  who  may  pervert  the  place 
of  the  church,  and  make  it  an  engine  and  sphere  for  exalting 
himself  in  now,  I  have  notliing  to  object,  I  dare  say  that  it 
may  legitimately  be  so  applied — at  least  in  part;  but  I  think 
that  it  looks  on  to  a  person  who  arrogates  to  himself  the  honour 
due  only  to  the  true  God.  "  Eemember  ye  not,"  the  apostle  says, 
"  that,  when  I  was  yet  with  you,  I  told  you  these  things  ?  And 
now  ye  know  what  withholdeth  that  he  might  be  revealed  in  his 
time.  For  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  doth  already  work."  Only 
there  is  one  that  hinders.  When  that  hindrance  is  removed,  the 
lawless  one  will  immediately  be  seen,  and  in  due  time  his  judg- 
ment come  when  the  Lord  appears. 

Just  as  the  apostle  John  says,  "Even  now  are  there  many 
antichrists ; "  so  here  the  mystery  of  iniquity  was  already  work- 
ing: only  one  was  holding  tilings  in  abeyance  just  now.  "He  who 
now  letteth  [will  let]  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way."  I  do 
not  the  least  doubt  that  the  hinderer  is  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,  not  merely  dwelling  in  the  church,  but  acting  in  the  way 
of  control  in  the  world,  as  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  sent  forth 
into  all  the  earth.  If  it  were  simply  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling 
in  the  church,  the  moment  the  church  was  taken  away,  the  man 
of  sin  would  be  revealed.    But  i.t  appears  that  the  lawless  one 

*  The  allusion  is  obvious  and  undeniable  to  Dan.  xi.,  which  has  the  Jews 
and  their  land  in  view,  not  the  church.  This  I  consider  entirelj*  confirmed  by 
Matt.  xxiv.  15,  which  certainly  refers  to  a  thing  and  time  subsequent  to  Christ's 
rejection  by  the  Jews  and  His  rejection  of  them ;  but  as  clearly,  to  my  mind, 
looks  on  to  a  time  when  He  will  again  have  a  godly  remnant,  in  the  midst  of  an 
unbelieving  generation  governed  by  a  false  king  under  Roman  influence.  If, 
under  such  circumstances,  the  temple  can  be  called  the  "  holy  place,"  why  may 
it  not  bo  also  "the  temple  of  GodP"  The  reasoning  from  what  the  house  of  God  is 
now,  while  the  church  abides  here,  is  quite  nugatory.  Compare  also  "  the  holy 
city"  in  Matt,  x.wii.  63.     God's  purpose  is  not  revoked,  spite  of  Israel's  guilt. 


UlNDKANCE   TO    HIS   MANIFESTATION.  303 

will  not  arrive  at  his  full  stature  and  manifestation  immediately 
on  the  rapture  of  the  saints.  There  will  be  an  interval  and  a 
testimony  which  God  will  give.  When  this  testimony  disappears, 
or  is  put  down  by  violence,  the  man  of  sin  comes  out  full-blown. 
This  seems  to  be  the  hour  when  the  Holy  Ghost  ceases  to  re- 
strain. He  lets  men  shew  out  then  just  what  they  are ;  and  all 
their  wickedness  comes  forth.  The  Holy  Ghost  thus  no  longer 
controlling  the  earth,  Satan  will  be  allowed  to  mature  his  w^orst 
plans  for  a  very  brief  moment. 

This,  I  think,  is  the  time,  and  such  its  character,  when  the 
hinderer  or  hindrance  will  be  taken  out  of  the  way.  The  early 
Christians  used  for  many  years  to  pray  for  the  continuance  of 
the  Eoman  empire,  because  they  thought  it  was  the  letting 
thing ;  that  gone,  they  expected  the  lawless  one  to  be  revealed 
forthwith.  And  as  its  diabolical  form  is  assuredly  to  arise  after 
a  previous  existence  and  extinction,  there  was  a  certain  measure 
of  truth  in  their  thought.  But  the  Eoman  empire  has  long  been 
extinct,  and  yet  the  man  of  sin  in  his  full  development  has  not 
yet  been  revealed.  The  re-appearance  of  the  empire,  not  its 
extinction,  is  the  critical  epoch;  and  that  will  depend  on  the 
Holy  Ghost's  ceasing  to  restrain.  When  it  does  take  place,  all 
the  evil  of  man  and  of  Satan  comes  out  without  measure  or  dis- 
guise. "  Only  he  who  now  letteth  [will  let]  until  he  be  taken 
out  of  the  way.  And  then  shall  that  lawless  one  be  revealed, 
whom  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  consume  with  the  spirit  of  his  mouth, 
and  shall  destroy  with  the  shining  forth  of  his  presence." 

Kevelation  xix.  clescribes  this  destruction.  In  that  chapter 
(verse  20),  after  a  previous  description  of  the  coming  of  the 
Lord  in  judgment,  it  is  said,  "  The  beast  was  taken,  and  with 
him  the  false  proj)het  that  wrought  miracles  before  him  .... 
These  both  were  cast  alive  into  the  lake  of  fire  burning  with 
brimstone."  They  are,  without  doubt,  the  same  systems  or 
persons  already  characterized  as  the  beasts  from  the  sea  and  the 
earth  in  Eev.  xiii.  Now  it  is  plain  that  one  or  other  of  these 
two  beasts  is  antichrist.  The  question  still  remains,  which  of 
them  is  that  man  of  sin  ?  Is  it  the  great  power  of  the  world,  the 
beast  that  rises  out  of  the  sea  ?  Or  is  it  the  other  energetic 
beast  that  rises  out  of  the  earth,  imitating  Christ  in  royal  and 


304  WHICH    BEAST   IS   THE   ANTICHRIST  ? 

prophetic  power  ?  Disposed  to  think  it  is  the  latter,  *  I  can 
frankly  allow  that  I  see  difficulties,  and  believe  it  is  not  a  thing 
to  be  dogmatized  upon.  Indeed  these  beasts  are  so  closely  linked 
together  in  their  actions  and  objects,  and  also  in  their  final  doom, 
that  we  cannot  be  surprised  if  many  find  it  hard  to  decide,  or  if 
intelligent  minds  come  to  different  conclusions.  But  the  more 
that  I  weigh  what  is  said  in  St.  Paul  about  the  man  of  sin,  and 
in  St.  John's  Epistles  about  the  antichrist,  my  mind  looks  out 
for  the  beast  that  has  most  appearance  of  rivalling  and  opposing 
Christ.  This  I  find  emphatically  in  the  beast  that  rises  out  of 
the  earth. 

Let  us  now  consider  a  little  what  the  chapter  further  gives  us, 
bringing  the  light  that  we  have  gathered  from  other  parts  of  the 
scriptures  to  bear  upon  our  enquiry.  After  the  description  of 
the  beast  in  verse  11,  we  read  of  the  exercise  of  his  power 
(verse  12).  "  He  exerciseth  all  the  authority  of  the  first  beast 
before  him,"  that  is,  in  his  presence.  He  is  the  energetic  power, 
the  one  that  cares  much  more  for  real  influence  and  energy  than 
for  outward  shew,  which  was  what  the  first  beast  most  valued. 
"  He  caused  the  earth  and  those  that  dwell  therein  to  worship 
the  first  beast,  whose  deadly  wound  was  healed."  Observe  again 
here  that  those  that  dwell  on  the  earth  are  abandoned  to  his 
delusive  power. 

Some,  seeing  that  the  second  beast  works  to  procure  worship 
for  the  first  beast,  have  conceived  that  2  Thess.  ii.  negatives  the 
idea  that  the  second  beast  is  the  same  as  the  man  of  sin;  because 
there  he  is  represented  as  allowing  no  other  object  of  worship 
tlian  himself.  Rut  it  is  manifest  that  there  are  three  i)ersoiis 
who  are  closely  connected  together  in  this  scene — the  dragon, 
tlie  world-power  or  first  beast,  and  the  politico-religious  or 
second  beast.  It  appears  from  Rev.  xiii.  4,  that  the  dragon  is 
worshipped  as  well  as  the  first  beast ;  so  that  whether  we  suppose 
the  first  beast  or  the  second  to  be  the  antichrist  and  man  of 

•  So  Hippolytus  Komanus,  a  martyr  under  Maximin  or  Decius,  and  said  by 
Photius  to  have  been  a  disciple  of  Ironacus.  It  would  seem  from  Jerome  that 
ho  wrote  furinally  on  the  Apocalypse,  beside  the  short  treatise  still  extant  Trtpt 
rov  (TuiTtjpoc:  I'lfiiov  'I.  X.  Kai  iripi  tov  (ivrixpiffrow.  In  this  last  (§  49)  he  thus 
speaks  of  the  second  beast:  to  fiiv  ovv  Qri()iov  uva^aivov  ik  r>)c  yij^  Tt)v 
(iaaiKtiuv  Tt)v  tov  avTi\piaTov  iaofiivnv  X'tyu. 


THE  SIGN  OF  THE  GOD  OF  ISKAEL.  305 

sin,  the  difficulty  would  remain  nearly  the  same.  In  either  case 
the  worship  is  shared  by  another.  In  point  of  fact,  they  are 
the  anti- trinity,  and  find  their  bond  in  the  unseen  power  of 
Satan. 

The  second  beast  is  very  important.  He  is  the  really  active 
power  in  the  Holy  Land.  The  beast  out  of  the  sea  has  his  do- 
minion over  the  west,  with  large  influence  beyond  it ;  but 
Palestine  or  Jerusalem  is  not  his  sphere,  save  that  he  destroys 
the  witnesses  and  falls  there.  It  is  the  second  beast  that  is  the 
great  power  known  to  the  Holy  Land.  "  He  doeth  great  signs, 
so  that  he  maketh  even  fire  come  down  from  heaven  unto  the 
earth  in  the  sight  of  men"  (verse  13).  What  imparts  such  deep 
and  painful  interest  to  the  miracle  is  this :  it  was  the  special 
sign  whereby  Elijah  confounded  the  false  prophets  of  Baal. 
When  the  whole  question  lay  between  God  and  Baal,  what  was 
the  turning-point  that  decided  the  claims  of  Jehovah  against 
the  false  god  ?  It  was  this  very  thing — fire  coming  down  from 
heaven.  It  had  been  a  familiar  token  in  Israel,  and  one  tliat 
they  might  justly  connect  with  the  direct  approval  and  power 
of  God.  For  He  had  caused  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven  at 
various  times,  as  a  signal  proof  of  His  approbation.  Fire  came 
out  from  before  the  Lord  when  the  priests  were  consecrated ; 
the  same  thing  too  when  the  temple  was  built  and  hallowed  by 
Solomon.  (2  Chron.  vii.)  "Now  when  Solomon  had  made  an 
end  of  praying,  the  fire  came  down  from  heaven,  and  consumed 
the  burnt-offering  and  the  sacrifices ;  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
filled  the  house."  It  was  the  crowning  evidence  of  Jehovah's 
presence  connected  with  Israel  —  of  His  presence  filling  the 
scene  and  accepting  their  sacrifices. 

Here  then  is  this  frightful  imitator  and  antagonist  of  tlie 
Lord  Jesus,  who  sets  himself  up  to  be  the  God  of  Israel  as  well 
as  the  Christ.  The  true  Messiah  was  the  God  of  Israel,  and  here 
we  find  His  majesty  and  claims  and  power  emulated ;  the  anti- 
christ too  must  cause  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven.  I  do  not 
say  fire  really  from  heaven,  but  the  appearance  of  it;  in  the 
sight  of  men  it  was  fire  coming  from  heaven.  As  Satan  could 
imitate,  so  here  was  this  wicked  power,  whose  presence  was  after 
the  working  of  Satan,  doing  apparently  what  Elijah  had  done. 

X 


306  MIRACLES  LIKE   CHRIST'S. 

The  same  proof  that  Elijah  had  given  for  Jehovah  against  Baal 
is  the  one  that  he  offers  here  in  his  own  name.  It  is  an  awful 
scene,  and  still  more  so  if  compared  with  tlie  passage  in  2  Thess. 
ii.  9.  For,  sad  to  say,  the  very  same  words  that  are  used  in 
speaking  of  tlie  miracles  of  Christ,  in  Acts  ii.  22,  are  applied 
here  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  the  man  of  sin.  "  Jesus  of  Naza- 
reth," said  St.  Peter,  "  a  man  approved  of  God  among  you,  by 
miracles,  and  wonders,  and  signs."  So  in  2  Thess.  the  lawless 
man  is  one  "whose  coming  is  after  the  working  of  Satan,  with 
all  power,  and  signs,  and  lying  wonders."  The  peculiar  signs  of 
Christ,  that  men  should  know  the  truth,  are  imitated  by  this 
impostor.  He  performs  for  falsehood  similar  things,  and  men 
are  completely  taken  in  and  deceived. 

What  prepares  the  way  for  such  an  end  is  the  dissatisfaction 
that  men  will  feel  with  Christendom  as  it  is.  I  acknowledge 
that  they  justly  speak  evil  against  the  state  into  which  Chris- 
tianity has  got.  When  it  loses  its  heavenly  separateness,  and  is 
mingled  with  worldly  principles,  confusion  is  the  result.  They 
forget  that  Satan  is  the  god  of  this  world.  Hence  he  has  blinded 
them  entirely  as  to  what  the  church  of  God  is,  and  what  is 
due  to  the  name  of  His  Son  here  below.  Christ  is  plainly  left 
out  of  the  question,  and  even  the  truthfulness  is  wanting  which 
would  be  required  by  men  in  the  commonest  things  of  this  life. 
It  is  not  that  one  would  desire  to  say  a  word  against  others;  but 
God  forbid  that  we  should  not  judge,  with  all  heart  and  con- 
science, a  thing  that  is  even  beneath  common  honesty  in  the 
things  of  this  life.  When  the  church,  or  the  individual  Chris- 
tian, ceases  to  judge,  or  if  it  condemn  in  heart,  allows  in 
practice,  in  the  holiest  things,  that  which  a  natural  man  does 
not  in  human  and  social  relations ;  so  that  oven  the  very  world 
can  see  that  what  clothes  itself  with  the  name  of  Christ  is  all 
wrong; — when  such  a  time  as  this  arrives,  can  God  longer 
refrain  ?  Judgment  is  coming  apace ;  and  what  a  mercy  it  is 
that  God  has  given  us  something  sweet  as  our  hope  and  happi- 
ness, and  not  the  perpetual  dark  foreboding  of  most  certain 
judgment !  Our  portion  is  outside  the  sphere  of  the  world. 
Judgment  there  must  be  before  the  world  can  be  fully  blest.  If 
a  person  were  merely  to  dwell  on  evil  and  its  judgment,  do  you 


RETEIBUTIVE  DELUSION   OF   CHRISTENDOM.  307 

think  it  would  give  power  to  act  for  good  ?  It  is  not  the  shewing 
up  of  what  is  wrong,  but  bringing  grace  and  truth  to  act  on 
our  souls  which  gives  power :  otherwise  it  might  only  be  getting 
out  of  one  form  of  evil  to  fall  into  another.  The  only  real 
security  is  the  getting  near  to  Christ :  we  help  other  souls  just 
so  far  as  we  put  them  in  contact  with  Him. 

We  have  seen,  then,  that  this  great  enemy  of  God  will  be 
permitted  to  do  wonders  in  imitation  of  the  power  of  Christ, 
and  in  support  of  his  claim  to  be  Jehovah.  It  is  not  surprising 
that  he  deceives  those  that  dwell  on  the  earth.  And  what 
rapidly  prepares  the  way,  and  ripens  men  for  all,  is  that  they 
are  now  listening  to  Satan,  who  has  been  dissolving  confidence 
in  the  miracles  of  Christ,  and  the  scriptures  which  relate  them. 
Thus,  when  men  not  only  review  but  see  the  horrors  of  what 
has  taken  place  in  Christendom  under  their  eyes,  and  when  they 
are  left  without  the  love  of  the  truth  in  their  hearts,  they  will 
be  at  the  mercy  of  Satan.  Then,  when  men's  desires  are  grati- 
fied without  conscience,  and  God  Himself  in  righteous  retribu- 
tion sends  strong  delusion  that  they  should  believe  the  lie, 
(saying  to  them,  so  to  speak,  "  You  have  refused  the  truth  that 
you  might  be  saved  :  now,  then,  have  all  you  like,") — then  this 
personage  comes  forward,  and  these  wonders  are  done  that  affect 
to  be  signs  from  heaven.  Is  it  amazing  that  they  fall  down  and 
worship  the  beast  and  his  image  ? 

It  is  Satan,  of  course,  who  is  behind  the  scenes;  but  his  slave, 
the  second  beast,  "deceiveth  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  by 
means  of  those  miracles  which  he  had  power  to  do  in  the  sight 
of  the  beast:  saying  to  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,*  that  they 

*  I  am  not  prepared  to  affirm  that  "  the  abomination  of  desolation,"  of  which 
our  Lord  speaks  in  Matt,  xxiv.,  referring  to  Daniel  xii.  11,  is  the  same  as  "  the 
imago  "  before  us.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  our  Lord  alluded  to  the  defile- 
ment of  the  temple  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  (Dan.  xi.  31.)  This  was  long  past; 
whereas  He  is  warning  of  another  abomination  yet  future  and  final.  Hence  too 
it  may  be  observed  that  the  phrase  given  by  the  evangelist  answers  exactly  (not 
to  Dan.  xi.  31,  but)  to  chapter  xii.  1 1  in  the  LXX.  In  Dan.  viii.  13  it  is  another 
thing,  "  the  transgression  of  desolation  ;"  and  in  Dan.  ix.  27,  though  there  may 
be  a  link  of  connexion,  it  is,  I  think,  "  because  of  the  wing,  i.e.  (the  protection) 
of  abominations  [there  shall  be]  a  desolator ;"  a  very  distinct  statement,  oven  if 
it  be  allowed  to  refer  to  the  same  time.  The  sense  is  that  antichrist  sets  up 
idolatry  in  the  temple,  because  of  which  a  desolator  appears  in  the  person  of  the 

X  2 


308  THE   FALSE   PROPHET. 

should  make  an  image  to  the  beast  which  had  the  wound  by  a 
sword  and  did  live.  And  he  had  power  to  give  life  [or  breath] 
.  .  .  that  the  image  of  the  beast  should  both  speak  and  cause* 
that  as  many  as  would  not  worship  the  image  of  the  beast 
should  be  killed"  (verses  14,  15). 

Observe,  by  the  way,  a  further  proof  that  this  second  beast  is 
after  the  final  rise  of  the  first  beast ;  for  he  causes  an  image  to 
be  made  "  to  the  beast  which  had  the  wound  by  a  sword  and 
did  live."  "  And  he  caused  all,  both  small  and  great,  rich  and 
poor,  free  and  bond,  to  receive!  a  mark  on  their  right  hand  or 
on  their  forehead.  And  that  no  man  might  buy  or  sell,  save  he 
that  had  the  mark,  the  name  of  the  beast,  or  the  number  of  his 
name"  (verses  16,  17).  That  mark  was  a  seal  of  subjection  or 
slavery  to  the  beast. 

"  Here  is  wisdom.  Let  him  that  hath  understanding  count 
the  number  of  the  beast ;  for  it  is  the  number  of  a  man,  and 
his  number  [is]  666"  (verse  18).  I  do  not  pretend  to  solve  any 
such  question  as  this.  It  would  be  easy  to  repeat  what  others 
have  thought.  Some  of  the  early  Christians,  especially  the 
pious  Bishop  of  Lyons,  Irenaeus,  supposed  that  it  was  "  the 
Latin  man."  Others  have  found  various  names,  in  accordance 
with  their  polemics  and  prejudices,  llomanists  discovered  in  it 
the  enigma  of  Luther ;  Protestants,  the  name  of  more  than  one 
Pope.  Mahomet  in  ancient,  and  Napoleon  in  modern  times, 
have  been  imagined.  But  are  such  notions  better  than  conun- 
drums ?    It  is  not  the  way  of  the  Spirit  to  occupy  God's  people 

great  northern  enemy  of  Israel.  The  effort  to  apply  it  to  the  Romans  under 
Titus,  or  to  the  Pope,  is  utterly  vain.  The  former  is  probably  due  to  the  error 
of  confounding  Matt.  xxiv.  16,  &c.,  with  Luke  xxi.  21.  It  is  the  latter  only  who 
brings  in  the  Roman  siege  and  captivity,  as  he  alone  treats  of  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles.  Matthew  on  the  other  hand,  equally  inspired  of  God,  leaves  out  this 
part  of  our  Lord's  great  prophecy,  and  dwells  at  length  on  the  closing  crisis,  in 
answer  to  the  question  of  the  end  of  the  age,  which  Luke  accordingly  omits. 

*  It  is  possible  that  the  meaning  may  be,  "that  the  imago  of  the  boast  should 
both  speak  and  act  [or  practise];  in  order  that  as  many,"  &c.  If  so,  the  state- 
ment attributes  to  the  beast's  imago  the  same  things  which  characterize  the 
be<ast  in  verso  5. 

t  Literally,  "  that  they  should  give  them,"  i.e.,  that  a  mark  should  be  given 
them.  Compare  Rev.  x.  11,  "they  say  to  mo,"  i.e.,  it  is  said.  (See  Lnko  vi.  38  ; 
xii.  20 :  xvi,  9,  for  a  similar  usage,  the  first  and  especially  the  last  of  wliich  are 
often  misunderstood.) 


PREMATURE   APPLICATION.  309 

with  reckoning  letters  or  numbers  after  this  vague  fashion.  May 
we  not  be  satisfied  that  this  is  one  of  the  points  of  detail  left 
for  "the  wise"  of  the  latter  day,  and  that  when  the  time  comes 
the  clue  Avill  be  given,  and  all  the  light  that  may  be  required  ? 
Tor  there  is  in  the  ways  of  God  a  sort  of  economy,  at  least  when 
we  come  to  matters  of  detail  and  application.  Just  as  He  does 
not  give  a  saint  the  strength  to  bear  him  through  a  special  trial 
till  it  is  at  the  doors,  so  the  Lord  may  only  vouchsafe  the 
needed  instruction  about  this  number  when  the  man  himself 
appears. 

The  application  of  the  prophecy  to  a  particular  person  will 
be  the  point  then.  It  seems  premature  and  useless  to  discuss 
such  a  question  till  the  parties  are  on  the  stage.  The  wise  shall 
understand  then,  and  all  will  be  as  clear  as  day  to  them,  but  not 
to  the  wicked.  (See  Dan.  xii.)  The  general  truth,  however,  is 
plain.  There  is  this  second  "  beast,"  the  active,  energetic  power 
that  opposes  Christ ;  but  when  the  day  of  reckoning  comes,  and 
the  judgment  of  the  Lord  is  upon  him,  he  will  be  no  longer 
spoken  of  as  a  beast,  but  as  the  "  false  prophet"  that  wrought 
miracles.  (Eev.  xix.  20.)  Supposing  the  second  beast  to  be 
antichrist,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  there  is  a  spurious  imi- 
tation of  Christ  in  his  causing  the  first  beast  to  be  worshipped. 
The  Lord  Jesus  spake  and  wrought  for  the  purpose  of  exalting 
God  the  Father,  wdiile  the  Father  Himself  makes  Christ  the 
special  object.  "Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  him"  [the 
Son] ;  and  again,  "  that  all  men  should  honour  the  Son,  even  as 
they  honour  the  Father."  So  it  is  with  the  beast.  He  will  help 
to  exalt  the  great  world-power ;  but  withal  he  equally,  and  yet 
more  in  spiritual  things,  exalts  himself  He  has  horns  like  a 
lamb.  That  is,  he  pretends  to  the  power  of  Christ.  But  he 
speaks  as  a  dragon  {i.e.,  the  expression  of  his  mind  is  Satanic). 
Being  a  beast,  it  is  intimated  that  he  is  invested  with  temporal 
authority  ;  while  he  is  also  expressly  designated  a  false  prophet. 
Thus  it  is  a  personal  antagonist  of  what  Christ  was  and  will  be, 
rather  than  of  what  He  is.  Popery — Anti-Christendom,  if  you 
will — is  a  travesty  of  Christ's  priesthood,  and  will  perish  with 
all  that  partakes  its  sin  in  the  gainsaying  of  Korah.  But  here 
(when  Christ,  having  closed  His  heavenly  work,  is  about  to 


310         THE  PAST  OR  PRESENT  BUT  PARTIAL. 

assume  His  earthly  royal  dignity)  is  one  who  opposes  and  exalts 
himself  in  the  city  of  the  great  king.  For  it  is  the  Holy  Land 
that  is  the  central  seat  of  his  power  and  deceits.  He  is,  I  think, 
the  person  that  the  Lord  Jesus  referred  to  in  contrast  with  Him- 
self in  a  passage  just  quoted  in  part,  where  He  sums  up  all  in  a 
few  little  words  (John  v.  43) ;  "  I  am  come  in  my  Father's  name, 
and  ye  receive  me  not ;  if  another  shall  come  in  his  own  name, 
him  ye  will  receive."  The  Jews  would  not  have  Him  who  came 
from  the  Father.  His  sent  One  and  servant,  though  His  equal 
in  honour  and  power,  had  so  come  and  been  refused.  But  there 
was  one  whom  they  are  to  receive,  one  who  will  flatter  and  exalt 
man  in  sin  ;  for  he  will  own  no  authority  higher  than  his  own, 
and  this  is  the  echo  of  man's  will.  Him  I  believe  to  be  the  per- 
sonage we  have  here — one  who,  as  to  actual  territorial  dominion 
and  external  splendour,  may  have  a  superior,  but  who  in  point 
of  spiritual  energy  and  weight  is  pre-eminent. 

Having  already  given  so  fully  that  which  seems  to  me  the 
true  view  of  the  very  important  chapter  which  has  just  occupied 
us,  I  need  not  say  much  of  counter-expositions,  many  grounds 
of  which  have  been  already  set  aside  by  anticipation.  Mr. 
Elliott  is  perhaps  more  than  usually  confident  in  his  hypothesis 
that  the  beast  from  the  sea  represents  the  character  and  history 
of  the  Eoman  Popes  and  Papal  Christendom,  and  the  two- 
horned  beast  the  Papal  clergy,  with  the  image  of  the  beast  as 
the  Papal  councils.  It  is  impossible  to  call  this,  at  least,  the 
Protestant  interpretation.  For  even  Luther  made  the  first  beast 
to  be  the  Latin  secular,  the  second  the  spiritual,  power ;  while 
Bullinger  viewed  the  former  as  the  Pagan  Konian  empire,  as 
did  Foxe.  Brightman,  no  doubt,  was  even  more  zealous  than 
;Mr.  E.,  for  he  makes  both  beasts  to  set  forth  the  Popes.  But 
what  is  of  more  consequence,  the  learned  Joseph  Mede,  and,  as 
far  as  I  can  collect,  Dr.  Cressener,  Jurieu  and  Daubuz  certainly 
rejected  these  notions,  regarding  the  first  beast  as  the  Eoman 
secular  empire,  and  the  second  as  the  ecclesiastical  beast,  though 
with  characteristic  points  of  difference.  So,  in  the  main,  Sir  I. 
Newton.  K  we  cncpiire  of  their  successors  nearer  our  own 
day,  the  case  is  no  better  by  Mr.  Elliott's  own  account.     "The 


THE  FULFILMENT  IN  FUTURE.  311 

explanation  of  this  first  beast  as  the  secular  Eiwperor  and 
Emjnre  of  Western  Christendom,  and  of  the  second  beast  as 
the  Pojje  and  Pontifical  Umpire,  so  as  most  of  our  modern 
English  expositors  have  taken  it;  (e.g.,  Faber,  Cuninghame, 
Bickersteth,  &c. ;)  but  I  conceive  to  have  been  one  of  the  most 
plain,  as  well  as  most  fatal,  of  Protestant  expository  errors" 
(vol.  iii.  p.  109,  note  2).  Surely  then,  if  so  plain  and  fatal,  Mr. 
E.'s  elaborate  array  of  evidence,  and  acute  correction  of  the 
Protestant  expository  error,  have  been  successful  with  every 
fair  mind !  Alas !  no.  Perhaps  the  chief  independent  ex- 
position, since  the  Horae  Ajjoc,  is  the  Rationale  Apocalypticum 
of  Mr.  Alfred  Jenour  (2  vols.  8vo,  1852) ;  and  there  I  read  that 
the  wild  beast  from  the  sea  "  must  symbolize  an  empire  about 
to  rise  after  the  ancient  Heathen  empire  had  been  destroyed, 
and  which  would  be,  as  it  were,  tliat  empire  revived.  It  must 
represent  too,  I  think,  obviously  a  secular  empire,  not  a  spiritual 
or  ecclesiastical  dominion.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  it 
partakes  in  any  degree  of  a  spiritual  or  ecclesiastical  character. 
And  I  cannot,  therefore,  but  express  my  astonishment  that  so 
many  commentators  should  have  acquiesced  in  the  interpretation 
which  makes  this  sea-born  wild  beast  the  Papacy.  There  is  not 
a  single  feature  in  the  description  of  the  beast  itself  that  can 
with  propriety  be  so  applied.  It  is,  as  I  have  said,  a  secular  not 
a  spiritual  power  we  have  here  delineated  "  (vol.  ii.  p.  75). 

On  the  one  hand,  then,  I  agree  with  Mr,  Elliott  that  it  is 
impossible  fairly  to  interpret  the  beast  from  the  sea  of  the 
empire  founded  by  Clovis  and  completed  by  Charlemagne, 
Neither  the  seven  heads  nor  the  ten  horns,  neither  the  dragon- 
character,  nor  in  any  sense  the  duration,  can  bear  a  reasonable 
application  to  it.  On  the  other  hand,  I  am  compelled  to  agree 
with  the  earliest  down  to  the  latest,  and  including  some  of  the 
very  ablest  of  Protestants,  that  not  the  Papacy  is  meant  but 
the  secular  Pioman  Empire.  The  conclusion  is  irresistible. 
Allowing  an  inconclusive  accomplishment  in  the  Papacy  and  its 
clerical  supports,  I  steadily  adhere  to  the  conviction  that  the 
future  alone  can  exhibit  the  fulfilment  of  all  the  features  pre- 
dicted, without  constraint  and  in  all  their  strength. 

It  is  not  true  that  the  Papacy  has  the  command  of  the 


312     THE  PAPACY  DOES  NOT  SATISFY  THE  PROPHECY. 

Western  powers  which  is  here  supposed,  still  less  practises  for 
1260  years  with  such  unlimited  dominion.  It  is  not  true  that 
the  Pope  has  authority  given  him  over  every  kindred  and 
people  and  tongue  and  nation,  even  if  you  confound  this  with 
(instead  of  distinguishing  it  from)  the  dwellers  in  the  Eoman 
world.  It  is  not  true  that  the  Pope  is  the  object  of  all  the 
world's  wonder,  nor  that  the  confession  is  extorted,  "Who  is 
able  to  make  war  with  him  ?"  Nor  do  all,  save  the  elect,  in 
Western  Christendom  worship  him.  Need  I  shew  how  palpably 
inapplicable  is  the  second  beast  to  those  wolves  in  sheep's 
clothing,  the  Papal  clergy  ?  Do  they  exercise  the  enormous 
power,  all  the  power,  of  the  first  beast  ?  And  in  what  fair 
sense  do  they  perform  gTeat  miracles  or  signs,  so  as  to  make  fire 
come  down  from  heaven  in  men's  sight  ?  Is  it  possible  that 
any  person,  save  blinded  by  system,  could  be  content  with  such 
an  accomplishment  as  the  wicked  and  idolatrous  figment  of  the 
mass,  or  the  lightnings  of  the  Vatican  ? 

The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  deny  ungodliness  and  worldly 
lusts,  and  this  not  only  for  wrath,  but  for  conscience'  sake  !  Yea, 
may  we  be  separated  to  Christ  in  a  spirit  of  heavenly  grace ! 
How  base  to  think  we  can  take  care  when  the  time  comes  ? 
Baser  still,  if  possible,  to  plead  that  the  church  of  God  will  be 
previously  taken  out  of  the  way  to  heaven — that  because  all 
will  be  right  then,  we  can  afford  to  do  wrong  now !  Kemember, 
that  meanwhile,  as  the  apostle  said,  are  there  many  antichrists, 
whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the  last  time.  Now,  if  you  are 
allowing  the  spirit  of  the  world,  or  are  trifiing  with  any  of  the 
influences  of  antichrist  at  the  present  moment,  what  would  you 
do  if  exposed  to  all  the  fearful  persecutions  on  the  one  hand, 
and  to  all  the  temptations  on  the  other,  of  the  day  when  the 
man  of  sin  will  be  revealed  ?  God's  grace  might  strengthen  me 
to  face  all  danger,  and  to  refuse  every  blandishment,  rather  than 
abjure  the  true  and  worship  the  false  God  and  Christ.  But  is 
it  not  most  solemn  and  humbling  if  I  join  (no  matter  what  the 
motive)  in  any  fellowship  with  known  evil  ? 

And  here  is  the  great,  moral,  present  value  of  prophecy.  I 
see  the  frightful  fall  at  the  end,  and  can  trace  the  stream  that 


MOKAL   VALUE   OF   PJROPHECY.  313 

runs  down  to  it.  Perhaps  the  way  is  long  and  winding,  and  the 
river  does  not  seem  so  perilous ;  but  look  a  little  lower  down, 
where  the  word  of  God  lifts  up  the  misty  vail  which  shrouds 
the  future,  and  behold  the  fatal  speed  with  which  all  who  float 
there  are  engulphed  to  their  utter  destruction !  There  are  many 
currents  connected  with  the  world,  and  I  may  not  see  in  their 
sources  and  first  flowings  the  full  extent  of  the  evil  which  is 
the  inevitable  result.  In  prophecy  God  graciously  shews  me 
the  end  from  the  beginning ;  so  that,  if  I  heed  it  not,  I  am 
dishonouring  the  warning  of  His  love,  who  would  have  me 
"  knowing  these  things  before."  Let  us  also  beware  not  merely 
of  one  evil,  but  of  its  every  form :  especially  let  us  not  meddle 
with  it  wherever  it  assumes  a  Christ-like  form  in  association  with 
the  world.  Here  we  have  the  end  of  the  open,  blasphemous 
power,  as  well  as  of  the  more  active  and  subtle  spiritual  evil  of 
the  crisis.  *  Men  will  be  caught  in  one  or  other  of  these  snares 
— the  bold  infidelity  or  the  religious  pravity  of  the  last  days. 
However  they  may  differ  in  appearance,  they  are  found  in  the 
strictest,  saddest,  most  fatal  union  at  the  close.  The  Lord  grant 
that  our  hearts  may  be  kept  looking  to  Christ  and  waiting  for 
Him  from  heaven  !  There  is  no  full  comfort  or  blessing,  except 
so  far  as  the  eye  is  single  to  Him. 

*  It  is  not  surprising  that  those  who  are  greatly  occupied  with  present  things 
feel  the  deepest  amazement  and  abhorrence,  not  at  the  antichrist  as  futurists 
depict  it,  but  at  Popery  as  it  has  been  and  is,  with  its  recognition  of  so  much 
revealed  truth,  and  withal  its  destruction  of  the  efficacy  of  redemption  and  of 
all  immediate  relationship  with  God,  not  to  speak  of  its  hideous  idolatries  and 
its  systematic  persecution  of  those  who  do  not  bow  to  it,  let  them  be  saints  or 
not.  But  the  more  such  minds  bring  out  its  subtle  hypocrisy,  the  more  they 
seem  to  prove  that  Eomanism  corresponds  with  the  mystery  of  iniquity.  Of 
course,  its  working  in  apostolic  days  was  but  a  germ  of  what  afterwards  went 
on,  till  it  issued  in  that  frightful  corruption  which  Protestants  have  done  faith- 
ful service  in  exposing  with  unquestionable  vigour  and  earnestness.  Hence,  in 
Kev.  xvii.  it  is  the  corrupt  woman  (not  the  ravening  beast)  whose  name  is 
"  Mysterj',  Babylon  the  great,  the  mother  of  the  harlots  and  of  the  abominations 
of  the  earth."  And  observe,  it  was  the  sight  of  the  woman  which  caused  John 
to  wonder  so  exceedingly.  Still,  "the  apostacy,"  as  I  read  scripture,  implies 
the  public  renunciation  of  Christian  truth,  not  an  orthodox  maintenance  of  the 
cardinal  facts,  at  any  rate,  of  the  gospel,  such  as  Romanism  holds  up ;  and  the 
session  and  worship  of  the  man  of  sin  in  the  temple  of  God  implies  a  defiance 
of  Jehovah,  under  the  false  expectation  of  Israel,  which  looks  onward  to  another 
and  more  daring  form  of  Satan's  power. 


314  OBJECT   OF   THE   TWO   PRECEDING   CHAPTERS. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

This  chapter  is  the  concluding  one  of  the  episode  that  separates 
the  trumpets  from  the  vials.  We  heard  the  events  under  the 
last  trumjDet  announced  ;  but  the  details  and  the  means  of  their 
actual  accomplishment  were  not  revealed  to  us.  There  were 
songs  in  heaven  celebrating  its  results;  but  the  immediate  effect 
of  the  last  trumpet  on  earth  was  only  spoken  of  in  a  general 
way ;  and  this  going  down  to  the  end  of  all,  including  even  the 
final  judgment  of  the  dead.* 

Then  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  we  have  seen,  in  chapters  xii.  xiii., 
turns  aside  to  shew  us  the  source,  character,  and  leading  instru- 
ments of  the  last  outbi-eak  of  evil,  on  which  the  vials  were  to  be 
poured  out,  after  which  the  Lord  is  to  act  in  personal  vengeance. 
We  are  come,  let  us  suppose,  in  some  comprehensive  history,  to 
an  account  of  a  battle  whicli  decides  the  fate  of  the  world  at 
any  time.  The  author  stops  to  describe  the  previous  state  of  the 
parties  and  the  causes  that  led  to  the  crisis.  Exactly  so  with 
what  we  have  here :  the  earnest  of  retribution,  as  it  were,  is 
given  us  under  the  vials.    Thus,  chapters  xii.  and  xiii.,  not  to 

*  Hence  it  is  going  too  far,  and  indeed  not  only  without  proof  but  inaccurate, 
to  say  that  the  vials  are  the  evolution  of  the  seventh  trumpet.  It  is  of  no  weight 
to  allege  that  the  trumpets  are  the  development  of  the  last  seal.  This  I  doubt 
not,  because  there  is  absolutely  nothing  under  that  seal,  save  a  half-hour's 
silence  in  heaven,  and  then  the  trumpets  are  given  to  the  seven  angels,  &c.  But 
there  is  nothing  analogous  at  the  close  of  Rev.  xi.  For  on  the  face  of  the  matter, 
chapters  xii.  xiii.  xiv.  intervene,  the  last  of  which  couUiins  the  vision  of  a  scene 
of  judgment  by  tlie  Son  of  man,  which  is  unquestionably  subsequent  to  the  vials. 
Again,  what  more  fanciful  than  the  opistho-grapliic  theory  (llorae  Apocali/pticae, 
vol.  i.  p.  99  ;  iii.  p.  'i),  that  is,  the  notion  that  the  writing  iril/iniit  and  within 
answers  to  the  twofold  series  of  visions,  one  of  which,  relating  to  matter  chiefly 
Hcvular,  ends  in  chapter  xi,,  and  the  other  of  which,  chiefly  ecclesiastical,  begins 
after  that?  Certainly,  neitlu^r  Ezekiel  ii.  9,  10,  nor  Zechariah  v.  1-3  lends  the 
slightest  countenance  to  it,  but  rather  the  contrary. 


SPECIAL   POINT    OF   THIS   CHAPTER,  315 

speak  of  chapter  xiv.,  shew  us  what  it  was  that  led  to  such  a 
dreadful  out-pouring  of  God's  wrath.  So  that,  though  they  may 
appear  to  be  an  interruption,  it  was  necessary  for  impressing  on 
us  adequately  the  horribleness  of  the  evil  the  Lord  was  dealing 
with.  We  saw  in  chapter  xii.  that  Satan  was  the  mighty  and 
subtle  spring  behind  the  scene,  hating  and  opposing  Christ  and 
His  people  from  the  very  beginning.  Then  there  was  the  war  in 
heaven  between  Michael  and  the  dragon,  with  their  respective 
angels ;  and  finally  the  conduct  of  Satan,  when  cast  down  unto 
the  earth,  was  traced  and  explained.  Again,  chapter  xiii.  shews 
us  that,  just  as  God  revealed  Himself  to  man,  not  only  in  tables 
of  stone,  but  in  the  person  of  His  Son,  in  order  that  men  might 
see  divine  grace  so  as  no  tables  of  stone  could  display  it  (but 
rather  the  reverse),  and  that  they  might  hear  it  in  their  own 
familiar  tones ;  so  Satan  finds  a  policy  suited  to  his  ends,  in 
taking  up  men  on  earth  and  making  them  the  instruments  and 
expression  of  his  will.  Accordingly  he  acts  by  the  two  beasts 
which  represent  two  great  systems  or  their  leaders  that  will  be 
at  work  during  the  short  season  of  our  adversary's  great  wrath 
on  earth.  The  violence  of  the  world  and  its  pride  and  blasphemy 
are  set  forth  by  the  beast  that  rises  out  of  the  sea.  The  beast 
from  the  earth  is  as  much  suited  to  ensnare  men  who  desire  a 
religion  which  excludes  God  and  panders  to  man  and  the  world, 
as  the  other  intimidated  them  by  its  power,  or  enticed  them  by 
its  appeals  to  their  ambition  and  love  of  outward  show. 

But  then  the  question  arises.  If  Satan  is  so  busy  himself  and 
his  instruments,  what  is  God  doing  ?  Is  He  inactive — indifferent 
He  could  not  be — all  this  time  ?  Chapter  xiv.  seems  to  be  the 
answer  to  that  question.  The  perversion  of  everything  God  has 
given  to  man,  and  of  all  Satan  can  devise,  will  come  to  a  fearful 
issue  then  in  a  few  short  months  and  years.  Dreadful  as  it  all 
is,  and  though  God  will  have  seemingly  given  up  the  world, 
just  to  see  what  Satan  and  men  together  will  make  of  it,  yet 
none  the  less  God  even  then  and  there  will  be  at  work.  And 
first,  it  is  not  now  the  heavens,  nor  the  earth,  nor  the  sea:  none 
of  these  is  the  ground  or  scene  of  what  is  brought  before  us  in 
the  early  verses  of  this  chapter.  There  is  a  new  spot  introduced 
— one  not  mentioned  before,  yet  a  most  important  one  and  full 


316  THE    PRINCIPLE   OF   ZION. 

of  significance.  "  And  I  looked,  and,  lo  !  the  Lamb  stood  on  the 
mount  Sion."  Now  let  us  just  pause  for  a  moment  and  enquire 
what  are  the  ideas  that  the  Holy  Ghost  conveys  by  or  connects 
with  the  hill  of  Zion.  The  Apocalypse  everywhere  supposes  an 
acquaintance  with  the  other  parts  of  the  word  of  God,  from 
Genesis  even  to  the  close  of  the  New  Testament,  It  would  be 
difficult  to  find  any  part  of  scripture  that  is  not  required  in  order 
to  come  to  a  full  understanding  of  this  wonderful  prophecy. 

Let  us  take  the  present  allusion  to  Zion  as  an  instance.  If  I 
do  not  know  what  God  teaches  elsewhere  by  mount  Zion,  how 
shall  I  understand  what  is  meant  by  this  opening  vision  of  Eev, 
xiv.  ?  The  first  occasion  where  Zion  comes  into  view  is  in  the 
history  of  David,  when  he  became  king  over  all  Israel.  (2  Sam. 
V.)  And  what  was  the  state  of  the  people  then?  Israel  had 
previously  chosen  a  king  after  their  own  heart;  one  that  re- 
flected them,  that  could  go  at  their  head  and  fight  their  battles. 
"  We  will  have  a  king  over  us,  that  we  also  may  be  like  all  the 
nations."  Saul  was  their  choice,  David  the  elect  of  God.  Not 
that  David  did  not  need  the  mercy  and  forgiveness  of  God ;  for 
indeed  after  God's  favour  to  him  he  fell  grievously.  Beyond 
question,  however,  David  entered  into  and  responded  to  the 
thoughts  of  God  in  a  most  remarkable  way.  He  sinned,  it  is 
true,  but  who  felt  and  owned  his  sin  more  thoroughly?  Who 
more  than  he  vindicated  God  against  himself  ?  Neither,  on  the 
other  hand,  did  God  make  light  of  his  sin  because  he  delighted 
in  David.  The  deed  was  secret,  but  it  was  published  upon  the 
housetop.  He  had  dealt  treacherously  with  his  faithful  servant, 
and  had  defiled  his  servant's  house.  And  what  a  tale  of  sorrow 
did  his  own  house  shew  for  many  a  long  year  afterwards !  (2  Sam. 
xii.)  It  was  then  under  David,  when  Israel  had  been  in  con- 
fusion, when  the  priests  had  corrupted  them  and  the  king  had 
wrought  no  deliverance,  when  all  were  in  rebellion  against  God 
and  constantly  exposed  to  the  razzias  and  tyranny  of  their 
Philistine  neighbours.  All  was  in  ruin  ;  the  sanctuary,  in  what 
a  state  was  it!  The  very  tabernacle  and  the  ark  of  God  were 
severed.  Thus,  in  all  respects,  sacred  and  political,  great  and 
small,  public  and  private,  the  picture  was  most  dismal.  And  it 
was  then  that  God  began  to  work  energetically  by  His  Spirit  in 


PLACE   OF   ZION   IN   THE   HISTORY    OF    ISRAEL.  317 

the  people.  Justly  were  they  suffering  under  the  law  which  they 
had  undertaken  at  Sinai.  True,  there  was  mercy  and  faithful- 
ness too,  in  the  midst  of  all,  on  God's  part ;  but  still  evil  was 
fast  increasing,  and  in  Israel  there  was  no  hope  and  no  resource. 
And  what  then  ?  God  calls  David  out  step  by  step,  and  Zion 
acquires  a  most  marked  place  in  his  history.  It  was  there 
David's  city  was  built,  the  seat  of  his  royalty.  It  may  not  be 
thought  much  of  now  in  the  world,  but  in  one  sense  all  the 
blessing  of  this  world  as  such  is  suspended  over  that  little  spot; 
and  never  will  there  be  rest  or  glory  for  the  earth  until  the  city, 
which  was  a  stay  in  the  downward  progress  of  Israel,  and  was 
meant  to  be  a  resting-place  for  faith,  shall  by  and  by  be  taken 
up  by  God.  In  the  Psalms  and  the  Prophets  it  constantly  re- 
appears, the  Spirit  of  Christ  ever  leading  on  the  hearts  of  the 
saints  to  anticipate  the  full  result  which  the  early  type  promised 
as  it  were  in  the  germ. 

In  Hebrews  xii.  the  Holy  Ghost  refers  to  it,  though  perhaps 
in  a  different  way.  Still  the  great  thought  is  the  intervention 
of  God's  grace.  The  passage  contrasts  the  position  of  Israel 
with  that  of  the  Christian  ;  and,  after  having  described  the 
vision  of  Sinai,  with  its  blackness,  and  darkness,  and  tempest — 
all  most  terrible  even  to  the  mediator,  it  proceeds : — "  But  ye 
are  come  unto  mount  Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God, 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem,"  &c.  Now  there  we  see  just  the  same 
great  and  precious  principle.  Israel  had  come  to  Sinai,  and  that 
was  the  mountain  that  characterised  their  whole  course  from 
beginning  to  end.  And  what  was  the  result  of  it?  As  it 
began  with  darkness  and  distance,  so  it  ended  with  misery  and 
death.  As  they  were  and  Sinai  was,  they  could  not  but  shrink 
back  from  God  ;  for  there  God  was  in  His  majesty  of  judgment 
— not  in  the  love  that  comes  down  and  puts  itself  under  the 
burden,  in  order  to  take  it  away.  That  could  not  be  at  Sinai ; 
for  there  it  was  a  just  God  in  the  presence  of  sinners  only;  and 
therefore  He  could  but  overawe  and  fill  all  with  terror  and  the 
forebodings  of  judgment.  Bounds  must  be  set  round  the  moun- 
tain. If  even  an  unconscious  beast  touched  it,  death  was  the 
penalty :  and  this  was  Sinai.  "  But  ye  are  come,"  says  the 
Spirit,  "  unto  mount  Sion,"  the  mountain  of  God's  intervention 


318  EOYALTY  IN   GRACE. 

in  grace,  as  Sinai  was  of  man's  responsibility ;  and  witli  Sinai, 
what  could  be  the  effect  for  the  sinner  ?  Only  to  press  his  con- 
science with  the  terror  of  death.  The  Israelite  was  as  good  as 
a  dead  man,  when  he  stood  there,  being  already  a  sinner ;  and 
death  would  be  as  surely  executed,  after  he  left  the  burning 
mount.  The  Apostle  shews  the  Christian  ground  of  grace,  the 
exact  opposite  of  man  trembling  before  a  God  who  righteously 
demanded  what  the  flesh  could  not  do.  Now,  it  is  God  who 
has  come  down — it  is  God  who  has  accomplished  His  work  of 
love.  When  Zion  first  appeared  by  name,  it  was  when  Israel — 
people,  priests,  king  —  had  utterly  failed.  Then  God  entered 
unsought,  established  the  king  of  his  own  choice  in  Zion,  and 
raised  him  and  his  son  to  such  a  pitch  of  glory  as  never  was  or 
will  be  in  Israel  again,  till  the  true  David  comes  and  plants  His 
royal  glory  on  Zion,  never  more  to  be  moved. 

The  principle  involved  in  Zion,  then,  is  God's  activity  for  His 
people  in  the  way  of  grace,  when  all  was  lost  under  the  law. 
This  gives  the  mountain  of  Zion  its  true  force  in  Eev.  xiv.  It 
is  the  gracious  interference  of  God  on  behalf  of  those  who  sit 
with  the  holy  sufferer — the  Lamb.  God  acts  for  His  Son, 
securing  His  glory  on  earth  and  gathering  round  Him  in  heart 
a  remnant,  not  merely  sealed  as  the  servants  of  God  (like  a 
similar  band  out  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  in  chapter  vii.), 
but  brought  into  association  with  the  Lamb  in  Zion,  that  is,  with 
God's  royal  purposes  in  grace.  These  seem  to  me  sufferers  of 
Judah,  who  pass  through  the  unequalled  tribulation,  which  it 
is  not  said  that  the  other  remnant  do.  This  is  what  is  meant 
by  their  standing  with  the  Lamb  on  the  mount  Zion.  There 
St.  John  saw  them.  Of  course,  I  do  not  mean  that  in  fact 
they  will  be  on  Zion,  or  that  they  will  necessarily  understand 
what  this  symbol  sets  forth.  The  question  is,  what  God  was 
conveying  to  John's  mind  or  to  any  who  desire  to  understand 
the  sayings  of  this  book.  It  was,  I  believe,  God's  special  in- 
terference on  behalf  of  His  people  in  the  last  days.  He  will 
associate  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  suffering  Messiah, 
a  full,  numbered,  godly  remnant,  who  will  be  brought  into 
fellowship  with  Him.  There  stand  in  the  vision  the  hundred 
and  forty -four  thousand,  having  the  Lamb's  name  and  His 


THE   lamb's   name   AND    HIS   FATHER'S.  319 

Father's  name  written  on  their  foreheads.  It  is  not  said  that 
they  know  God  as  their  Father.  The  Eevelation  never  con- 
templates us  in  the  position  of  children,  much  less  does  it  so 
present  the  Jewish  remnant.  Thus,  even  when  speaking  of 
the  church,  we  are  said  to  be  made  kings  and  priests  unto 
God  and  His  Father,  rather  than  ours.  And  this  is  the  more 
remarkable  in  John,  because  no  other  evangelist  takes  so  much 
pains  to  shew  the  relationship  of  children  in  which  God  has  put 
us  before  Himself  now.  Thus,  in  John  xx.,  directly  the  Lord  is 
risen  from  the  dead,  the  message  to  His  disciples  is,  "  Go  to  my 
brethren,  and  say  unto  them,  I  ascend  unto  my  Father  and  your 
Father,  and  to  my  God  and  your  God."  Nothing  of  this  appears 
here,  because  the  Eevelation  is  not  so  much  intended  to  open 
our  nearness  of  relationship  to  God  as  our  Father,  but  rather 
His  judgment  and  glory,  though  with  mercy  for  a  remnant.  I 
speak  of  the  prophetic  and  earthly  portion — not,  of  course,  of 
that  which  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  things  above.  Thus,  the  name 
of  the  Lamb  and  the  name  of  His  Father  (for  so  it  ought  to  be 
read)  written  on  their  foreheads  is  in  contrast  with  the  name  of 
the  beast  in  chapter  xiii.  The  beast's  name  or  mark  was  put  on 
the  right  hand  or  forehead  of  his  followers.  The  Lamb's  name 
and  His  Father's  these  hundred  and  forty -four  thousand  have 
on  their  foreheads — not  in  their  hearts  only,  if  we  may  so 
speak ;  they  were  evidently  and  openly  the  Lamb's. 

"  And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  as  the  voice  of  many 
waters,  and  as  the  voice  of  loud  thunder:*  and  the  voice  which 

*  "A  voice,"  says  Mr.  Elliott  {H.  A.,  vol.  iii.  p.  312),  "as  of  many  waters,  and 
of  a  great  thunder, — that  is  of  people  and  princes, — uniting  to  swell  it.  There 
can  he  no  question,  I  conceive,  as  to  some  happy  crisis  in  the  earthly  fortunes  of 
Christ's  saints  and  people  heing  so  prefigured; — some  crisis  during  the  Papal 
heast's  reign,  or  at  least  hefore  his  destruction."  And  this  he  goes  on  to  expound 
of  the  Reformation.  Let  the  reader  turn  to  Kev.  i.,  and  ask  himself  the  con- 
sistency of  such  an  interpretation  of  the  "  voice  as  the  sound  of  many  waters." 
What  room  is  there  for  dragging  in  "^people"  here?  and  what  more  for 
"princes"  in  chapter  vi.  1,  where  the  living  creature,  as  with  voice  of  thunder, 
summons  the  rider  on  the  white  horse  ?  No  reason,  indeed,  is  more  decisive 
against  so  earthly  a  view,  than  that  which  is  furnished  by  the  very  text  which 
Mr.  E.  would  have  us  compare  (/.e.  Rev.  xix.  6) ;  for  surely  if  ever  there  can  be 
conceived  a  moment  when  princes  and  people  are  not  in  unison  with  heaven's 
new  anthem  of  praise,  it  is  in  the  crisis  which  follows  the  destruction  of  Babylon 
and  precedes  their  own  still  more  awful  fate  in  the  war  with  the  Lamb. 


320  VIRGINS — WHAT  ? 

I  heard  [was]  as  it  were  of  harpers,  harping  with  their  harps. 
And  they  sing  [as  it  were]  a  new  song  before  the  throne,  and 
before  the  four  living  creatures  and  the  elders ;  and  none  could 
learn  that  song  but  the  hundred  forty  [and]  four  thousand  that 
were  redeemed  from  the  earth.  These  are  they  which  were  not 
defiled  with  women,  for  they  are  virgins.  These  are  they  that 
follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth.  These  were  redeemed 
from  among  men,  first-fruits  to  God  and  to  the  Lamb"  (ver.  2-4). 
Thus  they  are  characterized,  besides  learning  the  new  song  of 
heaven,  negatively  by  their  holy  separateness  from  all  the  various 
kinds  of  idolatry  which  will  then  prevail  on  earth,  and  positively 
by  their  faithful  allegiance  to  the  Lamb,  whatever  the  fiery  trial. 
Instead  of  becoming  the  slaves  of  the  beast,  they  were  redeemed 
for  the  earth's  first-fruits  to  God  and  the  Lamb.  They  are  a 
very  peculiar  class,  a  sort  of  link  between  heaven  and  the  earth 
from  which  they  were  redeemed.  They  were  untainted  by  the 
corrupt  influences  of  that  evil  day,  and  especially  are  they  free 
from  the  idolatries  that  will  be  one  of  its  most  grievous  marks. 
I  do  not  mean  idolatry  in  a  vague  or  virtual  sense  (as  we  are 
warned  against  covetousness,  which  is  such  morally),  but  posi- 
tive, literal  idolatry.  Many  may  think  it  absurd  to  talk  about 
the  worship  of  idols  reappearing  in  lands  neither  popish  nor 
pagan;  but  this  would  only  shew  how  little  man's  heart  is 
known  and  the  power  of  Satan.  The  word  of  God  is  perfectly 
explicit  that  the  last  days  will  be  characterized  by  the  grossest 
spirit  of  idolatry,  and  this  in  the  most  enlightened  parts  of 
Christendom,  yea,  in  Jerusalem  itself,  which  will  then  put  forth 
once  more  the  highest  pretensions.  It  is  an  apostacy  that  the 
heart  of  man  is  quite  capable  of,  and  to  which  Christendom  will 
be  given  up  by  God,  as  a  just  retribution  for  refusing  the  love 
of  the  truth  that  they  might  be  saved.  "  And  for  this  cause  God 
shall  send  them  strong  delusion,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie." 
lie  will  give  them  up  to  their  own  natural  lusts ;  and  the  heart 
prefers  any  and  every  thing  to  God. 

Tlie  saints,  associated  to  the  prophet's  eye  with  the  Lanilt  (»ii 
Zion,  are  said  not  to  be  defiled  with  women ;  i.e.,  they  were 
preserved  from  the  corruptions  that  surrounded  them.  They 
walked  in  virgin  purity.     Neither  do  they  wonder   after  the 


INTERPOLATION   OF    "BEFORE   THE   THRONE   OF   GOD."       321 

beast.  These  are  tliey  which  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he 
goeth,  "  They  were  redeemed  from  among  men,  first-fruits  to 
God  and  to  the  Lamb."  They  were  first-fruits :  the  harvest 
would  follow  in  due  course.  (See  verses  14,  16.)  "And  in  their 
mouth  was  found  no  guile  [or  rather  no  lie,  vj/evSos],  for  they  are 
without  fault."  It  is  added  in  our  common  Bible,  "  before  the 
throne  of  God"  (verse  5)  ;*  but  these  last  words  ought  not  to 
be  there.  The  best  authorities  leave  them  out :  and  a  slight 
consideration  will  shew  how  wrongly  inserted  they  seem  to  be. 
"  They  are  without  fault,"  or  blameless,  it  is  true ;  but  "  blame- 
less" here  refers,  I  think,  to  their  practical  conduct.  If  com- 
pared with  men  from  whom  they  were  redeemed,  such  they 
were.  In  their  presence  they  were  without  fault.  But  suppose 
God  puts  them  before  His  throne  to  search  into  what  they  have 
been  here,  measured  by  His  holiness — this  is  another  thing. 
There  I  need  forgiveness;  there  I  need  to  stand,  not  in  my  own 
blamelessness,  but  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Christ.  If 
I  stand  as  an  individual,  viewed  not  in  Christ  but  according  to 
my  actual  ways,  shall  I  say  that  I  am  blameless  here  ?    It  may 

*  It  is  curious  that  Mr.  EUiott  {H.  A.,  iii.  part  iv.  chapter  x.),  though  he 
rightly  rejects  or  doubts  the  clause  ivM-mov  rov  Gpovov  tov  Oiov,  nevertheless 
repeatedly,  both  in  Greek  and  English,  inserts  another  clause  which  has  abso- 
lutely no  warrant,  as  far  as  I  know.  He  says  in  the  text  of  p.  311  (and  also  in 
p.  323),  "  they  were  without  fault  before  God,"  and  then  in  the  foot-note  gives 
afiixjfioi  evojwiov  tov  Qeov.  He  adds,  "Compare  my  observation  on  the  words 
ii'ujTTiov  TOV  9r]piov,  said  in  Apoc.  xiii.  of  the  lambskin-covered  beast's  responsi- 
bility to  the  boast  antichrist  as  his  supervisor,  p.  206-208  supra.  The  words 
within  brackets  are  implied  if  not  expressed."  Now,  while  I  do  not  question  that 
politicallj'  the  second  beast  subserves  the  first,  I  demur  to  the  proof  drawn  from 
this  phrase.  Thus,  Rev.  i.  4 — the  first  occurrence  of  svuttiov  in  the  book — is 
adverse.  Subordination  is  not  the  idea.  As  little  does  the  next  occurrence,  Rev. 
iv.  14,  bear  him  out:  indeed  it  refutes  the  inference.  Balaam  taught  Balak  to 
cast  a  stumbling-block  before  the  children  of  Israel — certainly  not  under  their 
cognizance  and  judgment.  Compare  also  Rev.  iii.  8,  9  ;  iv.  6. ;  xii.  4,  10.  Nay, 
in  chapter  xiii.,  the  verse  which  follows  the  one  on  which  Mr.  E.  dwells  is  in 
mj^  judgment  a  sufficient  answer.  For  while  verse  12,  if  justly  so  interpreted, 
would  suit  the  papal  supremacy,  how  square  it  with  verse  13  P  For  there  we 
have  the  signs  or  miracles  wrought  ivwTrioj/  raii'  avOpwTrwi/,  before  men.  If  Mr. 
E.'s  theory  of  what  is  "presignified  by  this  little  word"  in  verse  12  be  applied 
to  verse  13,  it  would  teach  the  Protestant  principle  of  private  judgment,  quite  as 
much  as  the  other  justifies  "  Coram  Fctro."  The  truth  is  that  the  view  has  no 
foundation. 

Y 


322  FAITH  SHOULD  SEE  AS  GOD  DOES. 

make  this  a  little  clearer,  if  we  remember  1  John  i.,  "  If  we  say 
that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not 
in  us ;"  we  do  not  know  the  truth  about  ourselves,  and  we  have 
no  fellowship  with  Christ  in  discerning  the  evil  that  is  there. 
But  "  if  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned,"  we  make  God  a  liar, 
which  is  far  worse  than  deceiving  ourselves.  We  make  Him  a 
liar,  and  His  word  is  not  in  us ;  for  He  has  declared  the  contrary 
over  and  over.  But  in  chapter  iii.  of  the  same  epistle,  what  a 
change  !  "  He  that  committeth  sin  is  of  the  devil ;"  and  "  who- 
soever is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin,  and  he  cannot  sin, 
because  he  is  born  of  God.  In  this  the  children  of  God  are 
manifest  and  the  children  of  the  devil."  How  can  we  reconcile 
these  two  things  ?  How  account  for  the  immense  difference  of 
the  language  in  chapters  i.  and  iii.  ?  Most  simply.  In  chapter  i. 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  leading  the  Christian  to  view  himseK  in  the 
light  of  God's  presence :  he  is  before  the  Father  and  the  Son, 
He  stands  before  God,  if  I  may  so  say — not  exactly  before  the 
throne — but  before  the  Father  and  the  Son.  And  what  will  a 
man  say  when  he  stands  there  ?  Will  he  say,  I  have  no  sin ;  I 
have  not  sinned  ?  None  there  wiU  say  it.  Whoever  says  so 
here  proves  that  the  truth  is  not  in  him — tliat  the  word  has 
never  searched  him.  But  when  God  compares  His  child  with 
those  who  do  not  know  Himself  after  a  divine  sort.  He  says, 
"  he  doth  not  commit  sin,"  and  "  he  cannot  sin." 

See  Numbers.  There  we  perceive  Israel  in  a  state  of  great 
disorder  and  faibire,  every  form  of  unbelief  and  unfaithfulness 
in  their  journeying.  But  the  moment  an  enemy  comes  forward, 
and  comes  to  curse  the  people  of  God — that  same  Israel  which 
had  tempted  and  provoked  Him  ten  times  and  more,  what  does 
He  say  then  ?  Why,  that  He  has  not  belield  iniquity  in  Jacob, 
neither  has  He  seen  perverseness  in  Israel !  "  Jehovah  his  God 
is  with  him,  and  the  shout  of  a  king  is  among  them."  In  the 
very  persons  with  whom  He  had  found  fault  so  often,  when 
speaking  to  themselves.  He  can  see  none  now.  Let  Satan  and 
the  world  take  in  hand  to  damage  His  people,  and  all  His  lieart 
is  in  movement  on  their  behalf. 

As  this  verse  stands  now  in  the  common  text,  with  the  words 
"before  the  throne  of  God"  added  to  it,  we  could  only  under- 


IT  IS  NOW  THE  DAY  OF  GRACE.  323 

stand  it  as  being  true  in  Christ ;  but  here  the  sense  requires,  if 
I  mistake  not,  that  it  be  practical  conduct.  God  looks  at  them 
as  undefiled  and  truthful,  because  they  have  been  kept  by  grace 
from  all  the  idols  of  Babylon  and  the  delusive  power  of  the 
beast ;  and  thus  they  are  blameless.  I  only  notice  this  to  shew- 
that  many  of  these  little  changes  add  to  the  great  sum  of 
Christian  truth.  Every  blot  or  error  which  creeps  into  the  word 
of  God  will  be  found  to  impair  its  accuracy  and  to  detract  from 
its  perfect  beauty. 

The  second  thing  that  we  note  in  the  chapter  is  an  angel 
flying  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  having  everlasting  glad  tidings 
to  preach  unto  them  that  dwell  [or,  literally,  that  sit]  on  the 
earth,  and  to  every  nation,  and  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people. 
I  am  aware  that  some  have  applied  this  to  the  great  spread  of 
evangelical  missions  to  the  heathen  in  these  last  days.     But 
is  it  the  way  to  understand  prophecy — ever  striving  to  find  some 
present  accomplishment  of  it  ?    We  must  look  at  the  context  as 
a  whole.  If  no  such  thing  be  admitted  as  a  new  group  of  suffering 
Jews,  connected  with  Christ  in  the  hope  of  the  kingdom  in 
Israel,  it  is  in  vain  to  look  for  the  angel  with  the  everlasting 
gospel  in  the  missionary  efforts  of  the  last  half  century.     Nor 
would  the  message  itself  in  any  way  suit  the  present  purposes 
of  God.     The  ground  on  which  the  angel  appeals  to  them  is 
that  the  hour  of  God's  judgment  is  come.     Is  this  the  case 
now  ?     Evidently  not.     Is  not  the  day  of  grace  in  full  con- 
trast with  the  hour  of  judgment  ?     It  is  still  true  that  "  now  is 
the  accepted  time ;  behold,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation."    As  yet 
the  door  is  open.     It  is  forcing   scripture  to  say   "the  hour 
of  liis  judgment  is  come."     But  when  the  time  for  the  accom- 
plishment of  this  arrives,  it  will  be  the  sure  warning  of  the 
Lord  for  men.     For  then  the  closing  judgments  are  about  to  be 
executed,  and  the  outpouring  of  God's  wrath  is  just  at  hand. 
Now  you  cannot  reconcile  all  this  with  the  day  of  blessing  and 
grace,  as  if  they  could  both  run  on  together.     And  yet  there 
are  those  who  say  we  are  in  the  midst  of  the  vials !     But  this 
(where  it  is  understood  not  partially,  but  in  full  and  finally) 
indicates  the  almost  total  eclipse  which  befalls  the  trutli  in  the 

Y  2 


324  THE  EVERLASTING  GOSPEL. 

minds  of  men,  when  they  can  suppose  that  tlie  day  of  God's 
grace  and  tlie  hour  of  His  judgment  are  the  same  thing,  or  can 
be  at  the  same  time. 

And  when  we  proceed  a  little  closely  to  examine  the  message 
itself,  w^e  find  that  it  has  altogether  another  sound  from  the  glad 
tidings  which  God  is  proclaiming  now.  Does  it  call  souls  every- 
where to  repent,  because  God  has  raised  up  a  man  from  the 
dead  by  whom  He  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  ?  (Acts 
xvii.  31.)  Thus  Paul  preached  in  his  day ;  and  thus  it  is  right 
to  preach  now  a  Christ  dead,  risen,  and  coming  agaiu  to  judge 
the  world.  It  speaks  of  the  hour  of  divine  judgment,  but  there 
is  not  a  word  about  a  risen  man — nothing  about  a  Saviour  or 
His  redemption.  "  Tear  God,  and  give  glory  to  him ;  for  the 
hour  of  his  judgment  is  come :  and  worship  him  that  made 
heaven,  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  the  fountains  of  waters" 
(verse  7).  Now,  I  ask,  is  this  the  kind  of  message  that  would 
suit  to  go  about  the  country  with  ?  Telling  persons  to  worship 
God  that  made  heaven,  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  fountains  of 
waters  ?  Everlastingly  true  as  it  is,  is  it  the  special  message 
now  ?  God  forbid  that  the  creation-glory  of  God  should  be 
denied  !  It  is  exceedingly  important ;  but  its  proper  application 
is  when  God  has  finished  the  work,  now  in  hand,  of  saving  and 
calling  out  the  church  (Christ's  body)  for  heavenly  glory.  When 
Satan  has  accomplished  his  great  purpose  of  making  men  not 
only  reject  the  true  God  when  He  came  as  man,  but  worship 
a  man  as  God  on  earth,  what  will  not  be  the  urgent  need  and 
value  of  that  message  then  ?  It  will  be  the  contradiction  given 
to  eveiything  the  beast  and  the  dragon  conspire  to  bring  in. 
When  all  this  iniquitous  false  worship  is  going  on,  it  will  re- 
quire positive  faith  in  the  one  living  and  true  God  not  to  give 
way  and  fall  under  the  power  of  the  delusion.  For  Satan  will 
have  made  it  to  be  at  the  peril  of  a  man's  life  and  subsistence 
not  to  yield. 

And  so  here  is  this  message  sent :  "  Fear  God,  and  give  glory 
to  him."  All  tlie  world  had  sunk  in  idolatry,  worshipping  the 
beast  and  falling  down  before  him.  Satan  could  not  prevail  on 
the  Son  of  God  to  fall  down  and  worship  him  ;  but  he  will  have 
the  beast  as  his  tool,  and  all  the  world  is  drawn  after  him. 


WHY   CALLED    EVERLASTING  ?  325 

"Worship  him  that  made  heaven  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and 
the  fountains  of  waters."  These  are  the  claims  of  God  to 
supreme  worship  at  the  time  when  "the  earth"  will  be  com- 
pletely carried  away  by  the  anti-christian  delusion. 

But  persons  may  ask,  "Why  is  it  called  everlasting  glad 
tidings  or  gospel?"  Perhaps  because  it  is  always  true.  It 
has  been  so  from  the  beginning,  and  up  to  the  close  it  must  be 
unchanged.  "  Fear  God,  and  give  glory  to  him."  The  peculiar 
ground  on  which  it  is  put  here  ("  for  the  hour  of  his  judgment 
is  come")  could  not  always  apply.  But  still  the  word,  "Fear  God 
....  worship  him  that  made  heaven  and  earth"  (that  is,  the 
glory  of  God  proved  or  witnessed  in  creation),  is  of  course 
always  a  standing,  fundamental  truth.  But  it  will  be  emphati- 
cally regarded  and  brought  out  when  Satan  has  gained  over  the 
world  to  deny  the  true  God,  and  to  worship  a  creature  instead 
of  the  Creator. 

The  seventh  verse  is  pretty  plain;  but  I  add  a  few  words  more 
with  regard  to  the  term  "  gospel."  It  is  used  in  scripture  with 
much  more  latitude  than  men  are  now  accustomed  to.  The  glad 
tidings  to  Israel  in  the  wilderness  held  out  that  they  should 
inherit  the  land  of  promise.  It  was  glad  tidings  to  Abraham 
that  in  him  should  all  nations  be  blessed.  (Gal.  iii.  8.)  The 
glad  tidings  in  the  time  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  preached  by 
him,  meant  in  substance  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  at 
hand.  So  also  the  Lord  Himself  preached  and  His  disciples 
during  His  ministry  on  earth.  But  the  people  would  not  have 
Him ;  and  the  consequence  was  that,  though  the  kingdom  was 
set  up,  it  was  so  in  a  way  that  differed  emphatically  from  what 
the  people  expected  who  looked  for  it.  It  was  set  up  in  the 
person  of  the  rejected  King  in  heaven,  till  He  comes  again  in 
power,  when  it  will  be  established  manifestly  over  the  earth. 
Thus  we  have  different  messages,  different  glad  tidings,  accord- 
ing to  the  various  subjects  or  hopes  that  God  was  presenting 
at  different  times.  But  the  everlasting  gospel  necessarily  was 
before  Abraham,  or  any  other  of  these  special  glad  tidings.  It 
has  always  been,  and  must  be,  that  God  is  the  only  worthy 
object  of  worship.  "  There  is  none  good  but  one — God."  And 
when  the  blessed  day  does  dawn — when  the  King  comes  in  His 


326  THE  FALL   OF   BABYLON, 

glory — when  the  kingdom  prepared  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world  will  be  enjoyed — when  God  wili  have  His  blessed  ones 
around  Him  from  the  north  and  south,  from  the  east  and  from 
the  west  (not  only  the  risen  ones,  but  also  those  in  tlieir  natural 
bodies  who  will  be  spared  and  be  blessed  on  the  earth,  at  the 
same  time  that  the  risen  saints  will  enjoy  heavenly  glory  under 
the  headship  of  the  only  One  who  can  concentrate  all  in  bless- 
ing), what  will  be  the  due  and  needed  message  previously  ? 
Why  this  :  "Fear  God,  and  give  glory  to  him."  Evidently  then 
it  is  called  with  perfect  reason,  "  the  everlasting  gospel."  You 
will  observe  that  it  is  sent  "to  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth," 
as  well  as  "  to  every  nation,  and  kindred,  and  tongue,  and 
people;"  thus  keeping  up  the  distinction  that  we  have  noticed 
before.  They  will  both  hear  the  testimony ;  but  if  those  "  who 
dwell  on  the  earth"  will  not  receive  it,  through  the  mercy  of 
God  the  nations,  kindreds,  tongues,  and  people  will  in  part 
receive  it.  (Compare  Psalm  xcvi.  and  Matt.  xxiv.  14  with  the 
results  in  chapter  xxv.  31-46.) 

After  this  comes  another  message — the  fall  of  Babylon.  I 
do  not  mean  to  dwell  on  it  just  now,  as  we  shall  find  a  great 
deal  about  that  city  in  other  chapters  of  this  book ;  for  Baby- 
lon was  so  important  as  to  require  a  special  notice  to  itself. 
But  as  it  was  evidently  the  active  source  of  corruption,  in- 
toxicating men  and  drawing  them  away  from  the  living  God,  so 
now  He  sends  this,  the  death-knell  of  Babylon.  The  object 
here,  probably,  was  to  give  its  place  in  the  order  of  God's 
dealings  at  the  close  of  the  dispensation,  its  relation  to  what 
went  before  and  to  what  follows  after  (verse  8). 

In  the  next  place,  we  have  the  solemn  warning  to  those  who 
worshipped  the  beast  and  received  his  mark,  the  sure  and 
everlasting  torment  of  all  who  were  thus  carried  away  by  him. 
There  are  many  who  apply  these  prophecies  about  Babylon  and 
the  beast  in  an  exclusive  way  to  liome ;  but  while  the  seven- 
hilled  city  has  many  of  the  principles  of  Babylon  and  the 
beast,  yet  it  is  impossible  to  find  their  complete  and  united 
fulfilment  in  Popery  as  it  now  is  or  has  been.  Besides,  the 
beast  and  Babylon  are  not  the  same  thing ;  for  the  beast  destroys 


AND  THE  JUDGMENT  OF  THE  BEAST.  327 

Babylon.  And  will  Rome  destroy  itself?  Certainly,  the 
elements  of  Babylon  are  to  be  found  there;  but  if  the  matter 
be  looked  at  more  closely,  all  cannot  be  found  in  Rome.  For 
my  own  part,  I  believe  that  Rome,  more  than  any  other  system, 
already  is  in  a  very  true  moral  sense  Babylon,  and  that  it  will 
yet  contain  and  manifest  all  the  elements  of  that  vile  cor- 
ruptress.  But  for  this  very  reason  it  cannot  be  the  beast ;  for 
the  beast  it  is  which  destroys  Babylon,  and  after  that  the  beast, 
falling  into  its  own  worst  and  open  rebellion  against  God, 
perishes.  The  worst  state  of  the  beast  is  after  Babylon  has 
been  destroyed ;  for  then  it  exalts  itself  to  heaven,  only  to  be 
cast  down  to  hell ;  but  we  shall  have  the  fall  of  both  fully  by 
and  by.     "Here  is  the  patience  of  the  saints"  (verses  9-12). 

The  fifth  division  is  the  word  touching  the  saints  that  die  in 
the  Lord.  "  And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying,  Write, 
Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth: 
Yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from  their  labours ; 
and  their  works  do  follow  with  them"  (verse  13).  It  does  not 
mean  those  who  die  throughout  the  present  dispensation.  When 
Christian  people  die  now,  it  is  blessed ;  but  here  the  Spirit 
speaks  of  a  future  class,  all  of  whom  will  die.  You  must  take 
these  things  connected  together  as  a  whole — not  a  little  bit  that 
suits  present  circumstances,  leaving  out  the  rest  which  does  not. 
AVhat  is  the  real  meaning  of  the  verse  ?  What  is  God's  mind  ? 
It  is  the  saints  who  die  in  that  day.  Many  will  be  killed :  the 
blood  of  the  saints  will  flow.  The  everlasting  glad  tidings  had 
been  announced ;  the  hour  of  judgment  was  come,  as  the  angel 
proclaimed  ;  so  that  it  might  seem  a  dreadful  thing  for  persons 
to  be  killed  just  when  God  is  going  to  introduce  His  kingdom. 
But,  on  the  contrary,  the  voice  says,  "  Blessed  are  the  dead 
which  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth."  Do  not  be  alarmed  by 
it.  They  will  only  get  a  better  kind  of  glory.  What  will  be 
the  portion  of  those  that  die  in  the  Lord  then  ?  They  will 
reign  with  Christ  and  His  heavenly  saints.  Chapter  xx.  proves 
that  those  who  die  under  the  persecutions  of  the  beast  will  be 
raised  again  to  join  the  heavenly  saints  that  will  have  been 
taken  away  before.  "Blessed  are  the  dead,"  &c.,  cannot  in 
strictness  apply  to  the  church,  because  all  belonging  to  the 


328  BLESSED   THE   DEAD    HENCEFORTH. 

church  will  not  die.  Some  will  be  alive  and  remaining  at  the 
coming  of  the  Lord,  who  are  to  be  changed  without  passing 
through  death ;  whereas  these  are  persons  who  all  die,  as  a 
class.  It  refers  exclusively  to  those  who  die  in  the  Lord  at  that 
time ;  and  shews  that,  instead  of  losing  their  place  in  the  king- 
dom of  Christ,  they  will  gain  an  advanced  position  of  blessing. 
Their  company  also  is  complete,  and  their  full  blessedness  just 
coming  without  further  waiting — blessed  from  henceforth  (verse 
L3). 

The  spirit  of  it  may  be  applied  now ;  but  the  intention  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  seems  to  have  been  the  comfort  of  persons  who 
will  die  before  the  beast  is  judged  and  the  heavenly  glory 
appears.  It  might  be  thought  that  they  had  lost  something; 
but  it  is  not  so.  The  voice  from  heaven  says,  "  Write,  Blessed 
henceforth  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord :  Yea,  saith  the  Spirit, 
that  they  may  rest  from  their  labours ;  and  their  works  do 
follow  them."  The  Holy  Glhost  adds  His  "Yea"  of  sweet 
sympathy,  true  to  the  saints  in  joy  and  in  sorrow,  groaning  with 
their  infirmities,  and  rejoicing  with  their  speedy  triumph  and 
reward. 

Then  follow  the  two  closing  scenes  of  this  chapter.  The  first 
is  the  vision  of  one  like  the  Son  of  man*  sitting  on  a  white 
cloud,  "  having  on  his  head  a  golden  crown,  and  in  his  hand  a 
sharp  sickle."  It  is  a  vision  grounded  upon  the  idea  of  a 
harvest :  that  is,  it  is  a  separating  judgment  (verses  14-16). 
There  is  that  which  must  be  cast  away,  and  that  which  will  be 
gathered  in.  Perhaps  with  this  we  may  compare  what  is  said 
in  the  Gospels — "  one  shall  be  taken  and  the  other  left ;  so  shall 
it  be  in  the  day  when  the  Son  of  man  is  revealed."  (Luke  xvii.) 
In  the  next  judgment,  we  have  a  different  character  of  dealing. 

*  Mr.  Jenour  revives  a  doubt  as  to  "the  Son  of  man,"  and  suggests  an 
application,  symbolically,  to  the  Jews  then  to  be  converted,  and  the  groat 
evangelists  of  that  day!  just  as  Vitringa  long  ago  applied  it  to  those  princes, 
&c.,  whom  God  employed  at  the  Reformation  in  executing  his  dealings  in 
providence !  But  there  is  no  force  in  the  objection  that  St.  John  would  hardly 
have  said  of  Christ  "one  like  to  the  Son  of  man."  For  it  is  exactly  what  he 
does  say  in  chapter  i.,  whore  beyond  controversy  our  Lord  alone  can  be  meant. 
Likeness  to  a  character,  rather  than  to  a  person,  is  meant ;  and  hence  the  phrase 
is  anarthrous,  as  in  Dan.  vii.  13. 


THE    HARVEST   AND   THE   VINTAGE.  329 

It  is  the  vintage  of  the  earth,  not  its  harvest.  There  is  no  good, 
and  therefore  no  separation  here.  In  the  harvest  there  was  ; 
but  when  you  come  to  the  vintage,  a  more  serious  state  is  found. 
It  is  not  the  genuine  vine,  but  the  "vine  of  the  earth."  The 
Lord  Jesus  is  the  only  true  vine :  and  if  we  are  fruit-bearing 
branches,  it  must  be  by  abiding  in  Him.  But  here  it  is  "  the 
vine  of  the  earth."  And  what  does  the  Lord  do  with  this  vine 
of  the  earth  and  its  clusters?  There  is  nothing  but  unmixed 
judgment — no  mercy  whatever  to  mitigate  it.  The  fruit  is 
gathered  and  cast  into  the  great  winepress  of  the  wrath  of  God. 
Then  follows  the  image  of  unsparing  judgment.  "The  wine- 
press was  trodden  without  the  city,  and  blood  came  out  of  the 
winepress,  even  unto  the  horse  bridles,  by  the  space  of  a 
thousand  and  six  hundred  furlongs."*  It  is  an  awful  figure  of 
carnage — blood  flowing  in  a  deep  stream  for  about  200  miles. 
This  is  not  to  be  taken  in  a  mere  literal  way ;  but  the  great 
idea  which  God  presents  is  that  of  a  judgment  where  there  is 
nothing  but  wrath  to  the  very  uttermost  upon  the  apostates. 
Who  ever  heard  of  such  a  thing  in  any  history  of  human 
events  ?  It  is  entirely  beyond  all  that  man  could  execute. 
When  the  reality  comes,  it  will  be  still  more  terrible  than 
the  figure,  which  has  passed  as  a  prophetic  picture  before 
the  eye  of  the  prophet  (verses  17-20).  The  bloodshed  might 
be  of  religious  apostates  from  all  parts  of  Christendom ;  but  it 
appears  to  be  especially  Jewish,  as  the  scene  is  the  land.  The 
winepress  was  trodden  without  the  city — i.e.,  I  suppose,  Jeru- 
salem. (Compare  Joel  iii.) 

In  Isa.  Ixiii.  we  have  the  Lord  treading  the  winepress,  but  it 
appears  to  be  a  more  distant  scene.  There  He  is  coming  from 
Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah.  Here  it  is  "  without 
the  city,"  and  vengeance  on  those  who  had  been  religiously 
guilty  in  connexion  with  it.  They  had  heard  of  mercy,  but  it 
had  been  despised  ;  and  now  the  judgment  is  come,  and  for  them 
there  is  nothing  else.  The  mercy  had  been  only  abused ;  and 
what  is  there  that  God  so  feels  and  judges  ? 

*  Jerome  remarked  the  coincidence  of  this  with  the  length  of  Palestine,  and 
Fuller,  Faher,  &c.,  applj^  it  literally  to  that  land,  as  the  great  future  Aceldama. 
Made,  on  the  other  hand  (as  we  are  told  in  the  Horae  Ajyoc),  suggests  the  fact 
of  a  similar  length  in  the  States  of  the  Church  from  Rome  to  Verona. 


330  SEVENFOLD   DEALINGS   OF  THE   CKISIS. 

In  this  chapter,  then,  we  have  the  full  outline  of  the  dealings 
of  God  in  the  latter-day  crisis.  There  are  seven  divisions  of  it. 
First,  there  is  the  full  remnant  of  godly  Jews  associated  with 
the  Lamb  on  mount  Sion,  in  sympathy  with  His  sufferings  and 
waiting  for  the  kingdom.  Secondly,  a  testimony  to  the  Gentile 
nations  scattered  all  over  the  world  as  well  as  to  those  seated  on 
the  prophetic  earth.  Thirdly,  the  fall  of  Babylon.  Fourthly,  the 
fearful  doom,  both  in  this  world  and  in  the  next,  of  such  as 
should  worship  the  beast  and  his  image,  or  receive  the  mark 
of  his  name.  Fifthly,  the  blessedness  from  that  time  of  those 
that  die  in  the  Lord.  Sixthly,  the  discriminating  process  of  the 
harvest.  And  seventhly,  the  awful  intlictiou  of  vengeance  on 
religious  apostacy ;  the  first,  at  least,  of  these  two  last  acts  of 
judgment  being  executed  by  the  Son  of  man,  which  necessarily 
supposes  the  very  close  of  the  age:  the  wrath,  not  of  God  only, 
but  of  the  Lamb. 

Thus  the  sevenfold  series  appears  in  this  sketch  of  the  final 
ways  of  God,  whether  of  mercy  or  of  judgment.  It  is  thoroughly 
in  accordance  with  the  Kevelation.  We  have  had  seven  seals, 
seven  trumpets,  as  there  are  also  seven  vials.  Here  too,  though 
not  formally  numbered,  we  have  the  seven  dealings  of  God  that 
make  up  a  complete  account ;  but  the  details,  as  they  are  given 
afterwards,  may  come  before  us  another  time.  Although  it  is 
not  about  us,  yet  what  a  mercy  it  is  to  feel  that  we  do  not 
always  require  to  think  about  ourselves  when  reading  the  Bible  ! 
Many  suppose  it  a  very  spiritual  thing  to  be  always  asking. 
What  is  there  for  me  ?  But  we  ought  to  desire  all  the  blessing 
that  God  can  give  us,  and  not  merely  a  little  Zoar.  "  Open  thy 
mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it,"  saith  Jehovah.  If  I  desire  to 
have  my  cup  running  over,  and  thus  to  be  strengthened  in 
serving  Him,  I  shall  want  to  know  all  that  God  can  tell  me 
about  Christ.  And  is  it  not  something,  and  good  for  me,  to 
know  that  Christ  is  to  have  His  complete  remnant,  not  merely 
when  glory  comes,  but  before  it  comes,  associated  in  their 
measure  with  Him  in  suffering — like  David  when  he  came  to 
mount  Zion  ?  Then  who  were  they  that  shared  liis  honours  ? 
Those  who  had  been  the  companions  of  liis  rejection.  So  here 
with  these  144,000.    They  will  not  have  the  same  heavenly 


HISTOKICAL  VIEW.  331 

glory  that  is  reserved  for  the  church  of  the  first-born  ;  for  either 
we  have  the  very  best  blessings  now,  or  none.  All  Christians 
stand  now  in  the  most  glorious  privileges  which  it  is  possible 
for  children  of  God  to  enjoy.  Whatever  its  pretensions,  it  is  a 
time  when  Christ  is  thoroughly  rejected  by  the  world.  God 
desires  that  we  should  find  treasure  enough  in  Christ  to  despise 
the  world — to  put  its  bribes  under  our  feet.  The  hard  thing  is 
to  take  the  place  of  the  rejection  of  Christ,  and  to  be  happy  in 
keeping  it. 

And  now  that  we  have  viewed  this  chapter  as  the  closing 
scene  of  the  earth,  the  end  of  the  age,  more  particularly  God's 
working  therein  with  reference  to  the  evil  of  that  day,  it  may 
be  well  to  glance  briefly  at  the  historical  application.  None 
could  learn  the  new  song,  it  is  allowed,  but  the  144,000 — none 
but  those  converted  and  illuminated  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  a 
company  elected  out  of  the  Protestant  nations  (as  before  out  of 
the  Christianized  nations  under  Constantine)  ;  and  yet  with 
singular  inconsistency  the  voice  of  the  waters  and  great  thunders 
implied  "  the  uniting  of  both  nations  and  princes  in  the  song." 
{Horae  Apocalyjpticae,  vol.  iii.  pp.  288,  289.)  Were  the  Protestant 
nations  ever  the  election  of  grace  ?  Mr.  Jenour,  not  unreason- 
ably dissatisfied  with  the  mere  repetition  of  a  similar  class  in 
Eev.  vii.  and  xiv.,  tries  to  vary  the  tune,  and  suggests  that  those 
in  the  former  chapter  are  a  Jewish  elect  remnant,  these  in  our 
chapter  a  Gentile  one.  *  Now,  I  would  press  one  question  upon 
those  inclined  to  either  of  the  views  mentioned:  How  could  a 

*  Dr.  M'Causland  {Latter  Lays  of  Jerusalem  and  Rome,  pp.  154-160,  398- 
400),  falls  into  a  singular  cycle  of  errors:  first,  that  the  same  company  are  in- 
tended in  Rev.  vii.  xiv. ;  secondly,  that  thoy  are  the  faithful  Jews  before  Christ's 
first  advent;  thirdly,  that  the  second  company  in  chapter  vii.  (verses  9-14)  are 
in  no  way  Gentile,,  but  a  yet  future  class  of  the  redeemed  of  Israel  to  be  taken 
out  of  the  nations,  &c.,  whither  they  are  now  dispersed;  fourthly,  that  these  in 
chapter  xiv.  have  the  name  of  the  Father  on  their  foreheads^not  the  name  of 
Christ,  whereas  the  true  text  (represented  by  the  uncials,  K  A  B  C,  upwards  of 
forty  cursives,  nearly  all  the  ancient  versions  with  the  Greek  and  Latin  fathers) 
expressly  says  "his  [the  Lamb's]  name  and  his  Father's  name."  Besides,  the 
insertion  of  wc,  "as  it  were,"  before  "the  new  song,"  is  by  no  means  certain. 
It  is  omitted  by  N  the  Vatican  and  Porphyrian  uncials,  with  nearly  forty  cursives, 
most  versions,  Origen,  Methodius,  Arethas,  &c. 


332  THE   KEFORMATION. 

Christian  election  (either  under  Constantine  or  at  the  Eeforma- 
tion,  whether  an  election  out  of  Jews  or  Gentiles)  be  styled  first- 
fruits  to  God  and  to  the  Lamh  ?  If  the  church,  strictly  so  called, 
will  be  then  completed,  nothing  is  more  intelligible;  but  on  the 
scheme  which  regards  the  testimony  and  the  body  formed  there- 
by as  the  same  continuously,  a  reasonable  explanation  does  not 
appear.  If  it  be  a  special  gathering  out  of  Judah,  associated 
with  a  suffering  Messiah,  and  anticipating  the  kingdom,  what 
clearer  ?  Hence,  there  is  no  room  for  interpolating  the  declen- 
sion of  the  eighteenth  century  into  the  prophecy — no  place  for 
such  additions  to  the  words  of  this  book  as  tliat  "  the  voice  of 
the  144,000  waxed  fainter  and  feebler,  and  the  tokens  of  their 
presence  more  obscure  in  all  the  continental  Protestant  countries 
and  churches,"  while  the  light  of  England  burned  brighter  ! 

Of  the  second  division — the  angel  with  everlasting  glad 
tidings — enough  has  been  said  already  to  shew  why  one  cannot 
allow  anything  save  a  general  reference  either  to  the  era  of  the 
Eeformers,  or  to  that  of  recent  missionary  societies.  And  I  take 
this  opportunity  of  stating  my  conviction  that  the  Eeformation 
(blessed  as  it  was  in  breaking  the  dominion  of  Popery,  in  spread- 
ing the  Bible  and  Bible-reading  far  and  wide,  and  in  asserting 
strongly,  if  not  clearly,  justification  by  faith)  did  not  bring  out 
the  light  of  God  even  as  to  regeneration,  and  maintained  sub- 
stantially the  same  clerical  system  as  before.  That  is,  reformed 
doctrine  and  polity  fail  utterly,  as  a  confession  of  the  truth  of 
the  Holy  Ghost's  operations,  whether  in  quickening  souls  or 
yet  more  in  His  sovereign  action  in  the  Christian  assembly. 
Justification,  as  then  understood,  did  not  necessarily  suppose 
perception  of  God's  mind  as  to  the  operations  of  the  Spirit.  It 
is  to  me  clear  and  certain  that  the  reformed  national  bodies 
have  never  been  free  from  confusion  and  even  error  on  these 
subjects,  which  are  of  capital  moment  both  to  individuals  and 
to  the  church. 

One  might  have  expected  that,  if  the  proclamation  of  Baby- 
lon's fall  (verse  8)  had  been  fulfilled,  those  who  so  think  would 
have  tried  to  make  out  some  shew  of  facts  to  account  for  its 
appearance  here,  after  the  epoch  of  evangelic  missions.  It  may 
be  alleged  that  it  is  something  yet  future.     But  such  does  not 


THE   PROTESTANT   SCHEME   GROWINGLY    REJECTED.  333 

appear  to  be  Mr.  E.'s  opinion,  because  he  joins  on  the  message 
of  this  angel,  with  hardly  a  shred  of  comment,  to  that  of  the 
angel  evangelist;  and  he  distinctly  dwells  on  the  third  flying 
angel  as  yet  unfulfilled.  May  we  not  then  press  the  query : 
What  has  taken  place  at  all  adequately  answering  to  the  second 
angel's  mission? 

As  to  the  third  flying  angel,  Mr.  E.  thinks  its  prefiguration 
requires,  among  other  things,  a  sufiiciently  general  agreement 
among  Christ's  faithful  Protestant  servants,  as  to  what  is  meant 
both  by  the  beast  and  the  beast's  image,  to  give  weight  to  the 
judgment  denounced  against  their  worshij)pers.  That  is,  if  I 
understand  him,  there  ought  to  be  a  general  acquiescence  in 
the  system  of  the  Horae  Aijocalypticac,  an  abandonment  of  all 
reference  to  the  secular  Eoman  empire,  and  an  adoption  of  the 
discovery  that  the  beast's  image  means  the  general  councils  of 
Papal  Christendom,  especially  of  Trent.  I  am  assured  that  the 
impression  on  the  mind  of  most  intelligent  Christians  is  growingly 
opposed  to  such  theories,  and  the  absoluteness  of  the  warning 
as  to  any  individual  who  worships  the  beast,  &c.,  cannot  (save 
by  a  violence  which  convinces  no  dispassionate  person)  be  said 
to  be  fulfilled  in  Popery,  abominable  as  the  system  is.  In  the 
crisis  of  antichrist  it  will  be  literally  true.  (Compare  2  Thess. 
ii.  10-12.) 

Tlie  harvest  and  the  vintage  call  for  no  especial  remark,  as 
there  is  no  question  of  their  futurity,  and  Christ  is  admitted  to 
be  viewed  therein  as  the  initiator  and  completer  of  these  final 
judgments.  Why  they  should  not  indicate  the  time  of  His 
great  predicted  second  advent  does  not  clearly  appear  {H.  A., 
vol.  iv.  p.  11) :  in  reality  there  is  no  ground  to  doubt  it,  as  far 
as  I  see.  The  fact  of  a  distinct  subsequent  vision  of  the  con- 
flict with  the  beast  does  not  hinder  this.  They  may  all  well  be 
various  presentations  of  judgment  when  He  comes  in  the  clouds 
of  heaven.  The  error  is  the  reducing  as  much  as  possible  to 
events  in  providence. 


334  ANOTHER   SIGN   IN   HEAVEN. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

We  are  now  come  to  a  new  division  of  the  book.  The  last 
three  chapters  (xii,  xiii.  xiv.)  formed  a  most  important  portion 
to  themselves  ;  they  gave  the  whole  history  of  the  closing  deal- 
ings of  God,  and  of  the  last  plans  of  Satan,  as  far  as  the  present 
dispensation  is  concerned.  And  not  only  that,  but  before  either 
Satan's  ways  or  God's  dealings  were  brought  out,  the  hidden 
source  of  both  was  entered  into.  We  saw  in  chapter  xii.  the 
victorious  man  child  born,  and  the  dragon  and  his  angels  cast 
down  from  heaven.  Thus  we  have  two  great  parties  in  the 
scene  with  their  chiefs  opposed  face  to  face.  Whatever  might 
have  been  the  instruments  of  Satan's  power  here  below,  seen 
in  chapter  xiii.,  and  whatever  the  ways  of  God  in  His  grace  or 
in  His  judgments  in  chapter  xiv.,  all  flowed  down  from  that 
man  child,  the  object  of  Satan's  fear  and  hatred.  Then  we  come 
to  a  new  subject.  There  was  a  great  wonder  or  sign  spoken  of 
in  chapter  xii.  1.  Here  it  is  said,  "  And  I  saw  another  sign  in 
heaven,  great  and  marvellous,  seven  angels  having  the  seven 
last  plagues ;  for  in  them  is  filled  up  the  wrath  of  God."  We 
are  resuming  once  more  the  course  of  historical  events.  Under 
the  last  trumpet  you  may  remember  the  word  was,  "  The  nations 
were  wroth,  and  thy  wrath  is  come."  Now  I  think  it  must 
naturally  strike  any  one  that  here  God's  wrath  is  come,  and  the 
nations  not  merely  angry  but  blaspheming  to  the  last  degree. 
So  far  each  fresh  stroke  of  God,  instead  of  humbling  man,  only 
drew  out  this  intensity  of  enmity  against  the  Lord.  The  seventh 
trumpet  brought  us  up  to  the  close  in  a  general  way  ;  and  here 
we  have  some  of  tlie  details,  but  not  all.  There  were  two  parties 
described  under  the  vials  that  we  have  more  particularly  after- 


CHRONOLOGICAL  PLACE  OF  BABYLON'S  FALL.       335 

wards.  Chapter  xvii.  refers  to  Babylon  and  the  beast  in  their 
mutual  relations.  In  chapter  xviii.  we  have  the  destruction  of 
Babylon,  and  in  chapter  xix.  the  judgment  of  the  beast. 

There  is  another  remark  also  that  I  must  make.  Chapter  xiv. 
gives  us  these  events  all  together.  We  had  there  what  may  be 
called  the  religious  actings  of  God — His  dealing  with  man  on 
the  earth,  as  accountable  for  the  use  or  abuse  of  revealed  light, 
and  responsible  to  own  and  worship  God  alone.  These  vials 
take  up  rather  the  outward  civil  history  or  secular  condition  of 
man,  though  the  same  thing  may,  in  certain  cases,  have  both  a 
religious  bearing  and  a  secular  one.  For  instance,  look  at 
Babylon :  she  is  evidently  the  great  corrupt  and  corrupting 
power  in  religion ;  but  this  does  not  hinder  Babylon  from  med- 
dling laj'gely  in  tlie  things  of  the  world.  And,  in  fact,  this  is 
one  of  the  evils  which  form  Babylon — the  bringing  in  the 
spirit  of  the  world  even  into  spiritual  questions,  and  thus  pro- 
ducing confusion,  hateful  to  God  and  most  seductive  to  men. 
Hence  we  get  Babylon  in  chapter  xiv.  as  well  as  in  chapter  xvi. 
Chapter  xiv.  gives  us  a  summary  of  God's  dealings  at  the  end 
of  the  age  in  respect  of  religious  matters,  whether  bright  or 
dark :  grace,  testimony,  and  judgment.  It  thus  helps  us  a  good 
deal  as  to  putting  the  closing  events  in  the  order  in  which  they 
come  to  pass.  For  instance,  the  fall  of  Babylon  is  the  third  link 
brought  before  us  in  the  chain  of  chapter  xiv.  First,  we  see 
the  complete  remnant  of  godly  suffering  Jews — a  holy  remnant, 
associated  by  grace  with  the  Lamb  on  mount  Zion.  Then  follows 
the  testimony  of  everlasting  glad  tidings  to  the  earth  and  all 
nations.  And  thirdly,  there  is  the  fall  of  Babylon.  On  the  other 
hand,  in  the  vials  the  fall  of  Babylon  is  the  last  of  the  seven. 
From  this  we  gather  that  the  judgments  set  forth  by  the  pre- 
ceding six  vials  must  be  before  the  fall  of  Babylon.  That  is, 
the  first  six  vials  may  be  successively  accomplished  while  the 
Jewish  remnant  is  being  formed,  and  the  everlasting  gospel  is 
going  out  to  the  Gentiles.  The  last  vial  involves  the  fall  of 
Babylon,  which  answers  to  and  is  the  third  link  in  the  chain  of 
events  given  us  in  chapter  xiv.  This  is  of  importance  in  order 
to  hinder  confusion.  The  warning  as  to  the  worship  of  the 
beast,  the  pronounced  blessedness  of  those  who  died  in  the 


336  A   SEA    OF   GLASS 

Lord,  the  harvest,  and  the  vintage  of  the  earth,  arc  events 
clearly  all  subsequent  to  Babylon's  fall. 

Having  had  then  the  general  and  orderly  view  of  God's  ways 
both  in  mercy  and  judgment,  now  we  learn  in  chapter  xvi.  a 
part  of  these  ways,  the  details  of  some  of  which  are  connected 
with  chapter  xiv.  8,  and  perhaps  simultaneous  with  what  pre- 
cedes that  verse.  It  must  not  be  supposed,  therefore,  that  the 
vials  take  place  after  chapter  xiv.  ;  the  earlier  ones  might  be 
poured  out  while  the  remnant  tliere  spoken  of  is  being  formed, 
and  the  testimony  going  on.  Or  tliey  might  occur  rapidly  after 
these,  and  before  the  fall  of  Babylon ;  but  certainly  the  last 
vial  includes  the  fall  of  Babylon ;  and  its  fall  is  as  clearly 
before  the  very  solemn  events  which  follow  that  announcement 
in  the  latter  part  of  chapter  xiv. 

But  now  let  us  look  a  little  at  the  scene  introductory  to  the 
vials.  "  I  saw  as  it  were  a  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire." 
This  is  a  type  borrowed,  though  with  changes,  from  the  temple.* 

*  Simple  as  this  may  appear,  the  force  of  the  sea  of  glass  has  been,  in  my 
judgment,  entirely  misunderstood  both  here  and  in  chap.  iv.  by  Mr.  Elliott  and 
others.  Thus,  in  the  Ilorac  Apoc,  i.pp.  84,  85,  the  singular  error  of  Vitringa  is 
adopted,  which  confounds  it  mth  the  firmament  like  the  terrible  crystal  of 
Ezekiel;  and  in  a  note  it  is  objected  to  the  true  reference,  (1)  That  John  is 
describing  what  was  in  the  inner  sanctuary,  not  in  the  court  without ;  (2)  That  it 
is  represented  as  of  glass,  not  brazen ;  and  (3)  That  there  is  no  allusion  to  the 
laver  in  any  of  the  Apocalyptic  visions.  The  reply  is  obvious.  1.  The  Spirit 
of  God  distinctly  applies  the  position  of  souls  under  the  altar  in  chap.  vi.  to  the 
souls  of  martyrs  in  heaven.  Now,  the  altar  and  the  laver  wore  equally  in  the 
court.  Compare  also  chap.  viii.  whore  both  altars  are  found  in  the  same 
heavenly  scone,  in  contradistinction  to  the  earth.  2.  The  vessel  is  not  denied 
to  be  made  of  glass,  but  the  meaning  is  that  the  sea,  or  what  answered  to  it, 
was  of  glass,  not  water.  3.  The  last  is  not  a  reason,  but  an  assumption  of  the 
vorj'  question.  I  should  bo  disposed  to  put  the  converse,  and  to  ask,  whether  it 
would  not  bo  strange  in  the  midst  of  temple-scenery  so  marked  to  have  nothing 
answering  to  the  molten  sea.  If  the  "sea"  hero  be  the  coimteqiart  of  the 
"sea"  in  Kings  and  Chronicles,  then  the  laver  is  alluded  to  in  these  visions. 
Next,  it  is  agreed  {H.  A.,  iii.  pp.  46S,  469)  that,  were  the  "sea"  in  Rev.  xv.  a 
"  re-montion"  of  that  in  chap,  iv.,  the  definite  article  ought  to  have  been  prefixed; 
nay,  that  even  on  its  first  mention  it  was  entitled  to  the  article  because  of  its 
notoriety.  Here  again  the  answer  is  manifest.  The  seven  golden  lamp-stands 
of  Rev.  i.  nobody  doubts  to  be  an  allusion  to  the  well-known  candlestick  of  the 
Jewish  sanctuary,  and  yet  there  is  no  article  on  their  first  occurrence.  If  the 
reason  of  its  omission  hero,  as  distinguished  from  the  altars  and  the  ark,  is  due 
to  the  striking  dillcrencc  between  them  (the  Jewish  one  being  single  and  seven- 


MINGLED   WITH   FIKE.  337 

The  tabernacle  had  the  laver,  the  temple  its  molten  sea — a 
larger  vessel,  but  of  a  similar  nature,  in  which  the  priests  used 
to  wash  their  feet  and  hands  when  they  went  in  to  do  the 
service  of  the  Lord.  In  this  case  it  is  a  sea  of  glass,  and  there- 
fore not  used  for  purification.  It  was  not  a  sea  of  water,  but 
was  solid.  Its  being  of  glass  indicates  a  state  of  firm  and 
settled  purity.  It  was  not  that  which  was  used  to  cleanse,  but 
the  image  of  purity  that  nothing  can  defile.  These  saints  are 
no  longer  in  the  circumstances  where  they  have  need  of  cleansing 
through  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word.  That  was  over. 
Now  it  was  "a  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire;"  shewing  plainly 
through  what  circumstances  those  connected  with  that  sea  had 
passed.  They  had  experienced  fiery  tribulation,  they  had 
glorified  God  in  the  fires.  This  plainly  does  not  refer  to  the 
church.  "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation  "  does  apply 
to  us.    But  this  refers  to  a  special  tribulation — "  the  tribulation" 

branched,  the  Apocalyptic  consisting  of  seven  separate  lamps),  the  same  remark 
applies  to  our  matter ;  for  water  was  the  point  in  the  Jewish  temple-sea,  glass  is 
as  express  in  the  Apocalyptic,  because  the  purifying  of  those  in  relation  with 
it  was  complete.  So  again,  it  is  no  wonder  that  in  chap.  xv.  the  article  is  not 
prefixed,  seeing  that  another  change  appears  there.  It  is  for  the  first  time  a 
sea  "mingled  with  fire,"  emblematic  of  the  excessively  severe  trial  through 
which  the  victors  had  passed.  The  analogy  of  Apocalyptic  usage  also  confirms 
this ;  for  the  "beast"  is  anarthrous  in  chaps,  xiii.  1,  xvii.  3,  though,  as  I  agree 
with  Mr.  E.,  it  is  the  same  power  already  mentioned  in  chap.  xi.  7. 

And  what  is  ofi"ered  in  lieu  of  the  temple -sea  ?  The  burning  lava  of  a 
volcano,  or  overflow  of  French  revolutionary  fury  iniuidating  the  anti-Christian 
tei-ritory  of  continental  Europe ;  and,  naturally,  the  harpers  represent  the 
triumphs  of  living  revived  Protestantism  in  insular  England  under  Wilberforce 
now,  as  formerly  there  had  been  for  others  under  Augustine  and  Luther  !  As 
a  sea  of  lava  or  even  of  water  would  bo  an  incongruous  place  whereon  to  stand, 
one  cannot  be  surprised  that  "  on  the  sea"  has  been  changed  into  "by,"  which  I 
admit  the  preposition  will  bear.  On  my  view,  however,  its  more  ordinary 
meaning  holds  good.  Mr.  E.  lays  stress  on  Ik  tov  9.  k  t.  \.  as  implying  not 
only  conquest  over,  but  separation  from,  the  party  conquered.  Can  it  be 
because  his  supposed  harpers  were  not  in  any  way  within  the  fiery  scene  of 
tribulation  ?  I  should  rather  infer  that  they  had  been  in  the  furnace,  but  were 
come  victors  out  of  all.  Again,  the  reasoning  on  the  present  jjarticiple  is 
unsound  (ff.  A.,  iii.  pp.  465-467),  for  nothing  is  more  common  when  accompanied 
by  the  article  than  its  abstract  use.  Thus,  to  take  the  first  which  presents  itself, 
in  Matt.  ii.  20,  oi  ^/jrouvrtf  certainly  does  not  imply  that  they  were  still  in  the 
field.  Compare  also  Rev.  vii.  14,  said  of  a  multitude  which  is  anticipatively 
viewed  as  already  in  the  rest  of  God.     It  is,  I  believe,  just  the  same  in  ch.  xv. 

Z 


338  "AND   OVER   HIS   MARK" 

of  which  scripture  frequently  speaks.  "  I  saw  as  it  were  a  sea 
of  glass  mingled  with  fire  :  and  them  that  had  gotten  the  victory- 
over  the  beast,  and  over  his  image"  (clearly,  then,  they  are 
contemporaries  of  the  beast),  "  and  over  his  mark,  and  over  the 
number  of  his  name,  stand  on  the  sea  of  glass,  having  the  harps 
of  God."  Thus  what  is  referred  to  here  is  not  washing  in  the 
sea,  but  standing  on  it.  Their  earthly  circumstances  characterize 
them ;  but  the  scene  of  conflict  is  now  past.  The  Spirit  of  God 
anticipates  all  which  marks  those  who  had  been  troubled  by  the 
beast,  but  who  are  viewed  as  victorious  over  him.  They  were 
persons  who  had  been  cleansed  already  ;  they  had  done  with  the 
present  scene,  and  were  now  out  of  it  all.  They  were  standing 
on  the  sea  of  glass.  Not  only  this,  but  they  had  "  harps  of  God." 
That  is,  they  are  occupied  with  divine  joy  and  praise,  the 
contrast  of  all  they  had  passed  through. 

I  would  just  observe,  though  it  be  a  slight  circumstance,  that 
there  is  a  short  clause  here  which  should  be  left  out.  It  is  said 
in  verse  2,  "  Them  that  had  gotten  the  victory  over  the  beast, 
and  over  his  image,  and  over  his  mark,  and  over  the  number  of 
his  name."  But  the  clause  "  and  over  his  mark"  has  no  business 
here  whatever.  The  same  thing  occurs  in  chapter  xiii.  17 : 
"  That  no  man  might  buy  or  sell,  save  he  that  had  the  mark,  or 
the  name  of  the  beast,  or  the  number  of  his  name."  Now  the 
truth  is  that  the  little  word  "  or"  inserted  there  before  tlie  clause 
"the  name  of  the  beast"  ought  to  disappear.  The  difference  in 
the  sense  is  that  "the  mark"  might  be  either  the  name  of  the 
beast  or  the  number  of  his  name ;  not  some  third  thing  distinct 
from  these  two,  as  the  ordinary  text  might  suggest.  There  were 
two  ways  in  which  the  beast  marked  his  followers ;  one  was  by 
his  name,  and  the  other  by  the  number  of  his  name :  but  there 
would  be  no  sense  in  saying,  "  the  mark,  or  the  name  of  the 
beast,  or  the  number  of  his  name."  The  number  was  his  mark, 
though  not  the  only  one ;  there  was  the  name  besides — the  one, 
I  suppose,  being  closer  and  more  appropriate  than  the  other. 
Here,  tlien,  were  those  (chapter  xv.)  who  had  gotten  the  victory 
over  the  beast,  and  over  his  image,  and  over  the  number  of  his 
name.  Even  in  the  English  Bible  the  word  "  and  over  the 
number"  is  printed  in  italics,  and  only  adds  to  the  confusion 


AN   INTERPOLATION.  339 

with  tlie  words  "over  his  mark."  I  refer  to  it  to  shew  that 
wherever  there  is  even  such  a  little  word  as  "or"  introduced 
by  man  into  the  scripture,  the  sense  is  impaired.  In  the  lan- 
guage which  the  Spirit  uses,  it  is  but  a  letter  that  makes  the 
difference ;  but  you  cannot  even  put  a  letter  into  the  word  of 
God  without  so  far  injuring  its  beauty  and  perfectness.  Through 
the  mercy  of  God,  His  children  may  get  little  harm  through 
such  blemishes ;  but  it  is  in  part  because  they  do  not  think 
enough  about  it.  If  they  were  to  work  a  system  out  of  them, 
they  might  fall  into  some  serious  mistake  in  not  a  few  cases. 
But  happily  (this  is  the  way  God  mercifully  shields  them)  they 
do  not  really  receive  the  false  doctrine ;  they  do  not  know  what 
it  means,  and  therefore  leave  it.  But  evidently  God  is  little 
honoured  where  persons  merely  escape  error  because  they  do 
not  understand  it.  It  is  the  mercy  of  God  thus  to  preserve  His 
people  from  evil ;  but  it  is  His  overruling  hand  rather  than  the 
intelligent  guidance  of  the  Spirit.  The  book  of  Revelation  has 
suffered  more  than  any  other  from  the  carelessness  of  man ;  and 
as  we  are  looking  into  its  contents,  and  it  seems  desirable  for 
God's  children  to  have  clear  thoughts  about  His  word,  I  thought 
it  better  to  notice  it,  however  small  a  matter  it  may  appear.  I 
remember  having  myself  been  perplexed  to  make  out  the  dif- 
ference between  the  mark  of  the  beast  and  its  name  and  its 
number.  But  having  examined  the  question  more  closely,  I 
found  that  there  was  really  nothing  to  decide  about.  A  little 
fox  had  slipped  in  and  spoiled  the  vine.  In  short,  the  mark 
was  not  something  different  from  the  name  or  its  number,  but 
was  the  general  term  for  both — the  name  expressing  probably 
a  more  intimate  and  entire  subjection  to  the  beast  than  the 
number  of  his  name. 

Those  who  had  won  the  victory  over  the  beast  were  not  his 
creatures  or  slaves  ;  far  from  it — they  were  the  servants  of  God. 
Here  they  were  seen  standing  in  conscious  victory,  outside  all 
the  scene  of  their  conflicts,  having  the  harps  of  God.  And  they 
sing :  it  is  intelligent  praise.  "  They  sing  the  song  of  Moses, 
the  servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb."  There  is  a 
double  character  in  their  praise,  quite  different  from  the  song 
of  the  elders.    It  is  very  blessed,  but  not  the  same  thing.    The 

z  2 


340  THE  SONG   OF   MOSES   AND   OF   THE  LAMB. 

strain  of  the  elders  was  far  deeper.  These  saints  are  not  here 
spoken  of  as  priests  of  God,  much  less  the  heads  of  heavenly 
priesthood ;  nor  have  they  the  emblems  of  royal  dignity.  They 
sing  the  song  of  Moses.  They  were  true  saints,  but  with 
an  undoubtedly  Jewish  character.  They  sing  the  song  of  the 
Lamb  too.  If  they  did  not  know  the  Saviour,  they  would  not 
be  saints  at  all.  But  withal  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses.  They 
will  not  stand  exactly  in  the  Christian  position  that  we  now 
enjoy.  They  will  be  in  circumstances  of  trial,  when  the  church 
has  passed  out  of  the  scene  into  heaven.  But  still  the  Lord  will 
have  a  company  of  saints  then  who  will  suffer  for  Him  even 
unto  death;  for  the  beast  has  power  to  slay — and  it  may  be 
thus  that,  by  their  own  blood  as  well  as  by  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb,*  they  gain  the  victory  over  him. 

Here  they  are  seen  at  rest,  like  Israel  of  old,  on  the  triumphant 
side  of  the  Eed  Sea,  to  which  there  seems  an  allusion ;  as  the 
plagues  of  the  next  chapter  clearly  refer  to  those  that  fell  upon 
the  land  of  Eg}'pt.  "  They  sing  the  song  of  Moses  the  servant 
of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb,  saying,  Great  and  marvellous 
are  thy  works,  0  Lord  God  the  Almighty;  just  and  true  are 
thy  ways,  thou  King  of  the  nations"  (verse  3).  Now  if  we  look 
at  Psalm  ciii.  7,  we  find  that  the  Holy  Ghost  brings  into  pro- 
minence these  two  things — the  ways  of  Jehovah  and  His  acts. 
"  He  made  known  his  ways  unto  INIoses,  his  acts  unto  tlie  chil- 
dren of  Israel."  The  distinction  is  between  the  deep  hidden 
ways  of  the  Lord  which  Moses  knew,  and  the  public  acts  Mdiich 
were  conspicuous  before  all  Israel.  Here  these  saints  take  up, 
not  His  ways  first,  but  His  displayed  works.  "  Great  and  mar- 
vellous are  thy  works,  0  Lord  God  the  Almighty."  And  then 
they  rise  to  celebrate  His  ways.  "  Just  and  true  are  thy  ways, 
thou  King  of  the  nations" — I  must  say  so,  for  King  of  saints  is 
a  thing  unknown  in  any  part  of  the  Bible.  But  King  of  nations, 
given  in  the  margin,  is  most  true.  It  is  a  reference  to  Jeremiah 
X. :  "  Thou  art  great  (verse  G),  and  thy  name  is  great  in  miglit. 
Who  would  not  fear  thee,  0  King  of  nations  ?" 

Just  to  shew  the  general  truth,  I  would  observe  that,  while 
Christ  is  King,  yea  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  and  while 

*  Of  courae,  the  Lamb's  blood  alone  avails  for  sin  with  God. 


cheist's  relation  to  saints.  341 

it  is  our  joy  to  acknowledge  it  (for  Christians  indeed  are  the 
only  persons  now  who  rightly  know  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be 
King),  yet  it  is  remarkable  how  the  Holy  Ghost  avoids  calling 
Him  King  in  relation  to  the  church.  I  am  aware  that  well- 
known  hymns  may  speak  of  Him  as  "  Our  Prophet,  Priest,  and 
King,"  Scripture  often  calls  Him  King,  but  never  in  that 
relation  to  us.*  Of  course,  the  object  of  God's  word  is  not  to 
weaken  our  subjection  to  Christ.  Whatever  weakens  that  comes 
not  from  the  Spirit,  but  from  Satan.  But  is  it  not  plain,  that 
the  relation  of  a  king  and  people  is  not  so  close  and  binding, 
neither  is  it  so  full  and  all-embracing  in  its  authority,  nor  does 
it  involve  such  elements  of  affection,  as  the  relationship  of 
Bridegroom  or  of  the  Head  ?  And  this  is  the  way  in  which 
scripture  views  the  church.  There  is  the  deepest  and  most  con- 
stant subjection,  but  it  is  that  of  members  to  their  Head,  of  the 
bride  to  the  Bridegroom.  Thus  is  the  church  subject  to  Christ. 
It  is  true  that  we  are  translated  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear 
Son,  but  in  what  capacity  ?  He  has  made  us  kings  in  it.  So  we 
are  represented  as  singing  in  the  first  chapter  of  this  very  pro- 
phecy, "  Unto  him  that  loveth  us,  and  hath  washed  us  from  our 
sins  in  his  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto 
God  and  his  Father." 

While  it  is  perfectly  certain,  then,  that  we  are  in  the  king- 
dom, yet  are  we  there  not  as  subjects,  though  assuredly  subject. 
We  joyfully  own  Christ  as  our  Lord,  whose  grace  has  made  us 
kings  with  him,  and  not  as  a  mere  people  at  a  distance  under 
Him.  This  in  no  way  lessens  our  responsibility  to  obey  Him, 
any  more  than  it  takes  from  His  glory.  It  puts  us  in  the  place 
of  shewing  obedience  on  a  firmer  ground  and  from  hioher 
motives ;  it  is  not  the  weakness  of  flesh  under  law,  but  the 

*  Mr.  Elliott  hesitatingly  inclines  to  "King  of  ages"  in  his  text)  H.  A.  iii. 
p.  473)  up  to  the  last  edition  ;  but  in  his  note,  supported  by  N  C  and  a  Paris  cursive 
Coislin  202,  with  the  Vulgate  and  other  versions,  he  ventured  the  opinion  that  the 
(undoubtedly  false)  vulgar  reading  ayiatv  seems  "  best  of  all  to  suit  the  context." 
To  me  this  reluctance  to  bow  to  the  best  reading  iOvuiv  (supported  by  the  Alex. 
Porph.  and  Vat.  uncials,  forty-five  cursives,  the  iEthiopic,  Arabic  of  the  Poly- 
glotts,  Coptic,  not  to  speak  of  the  correction  in  the  Sinai  MS.,  Slav.  MSS., 
Greek  and  some  Latin  fathers)  is  not  happy.  I  am  glad  however  to  see  that  he 
omits  this,  and  seems  content  with  the  better  authorities  in  his  fifth  edition. 
Page  461  by  a  misprint  gives  C  as  well  as  A  for  tQvwv :  it  sliould  be  B. 


342  HE  IS   KING   OF   NATIONS. 

heart  purified  by  faith  and  strengthened  by  grace.  He  fills  us 
with  a  sense  of  the  glory,  of  which  we  are  joint-heirs  with 
Himself.  He  raises  us  in  hope  to  the  throne  ;  but  the  effect  is 
that,  even  in  heaven,  we  shall  fall  down  and  cast  our  crowns 
before  Him.  He  loves  that  our  obedience  should  take  as  it  were 
the  form  of  worship.  So  we  see  how  the  Lord  preserves  these 
two  things  intact.  On  the  one  hand,  He  delights  that  we  should 
look  up  and  know  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  ever  immeasurably 
above  us;  but  then,  on  the  other  hand,  Christ  has  set  us  now  in 
earnest  of  the  Spirit,  as  by  and  by  in  possession,  on  thrones, 
that  He  may  shew  that  it  is  not  merely  as  servants,  nor  as  a 
people  that  we  are  subject,  but  as  those  whom  His  perfect  and 
divine  love  has  associated  with  Himself;  for  we  are  one  with 
Him.  He  will  put  us  on  thrones  around  Him — on  His  own 
throne ;  but  even  then  subjection  to  Christ  can  never  disappear. 
Never  will  it  be  anything  else,  whether  in  the  kingdom  or  in 
the  eternal  state.  Wherever  you  look,  never  can  the  church  so 
far  forget  what  she  owes  her  Lord  and  Bridegroom  as  to  wisli  it 
otherwise.  It  were  to  abuse  His  grace  to  take  from  His  glory ; 
and  the  church  must  and  ought  to  resent  that.  If  the  elders  at 
the  sight  only  of  His  taking  the  book  fall  down  before  the  Lamb 
and  worship,  much  more  should  the  thought  of  any  indignity 
offered  to  Him  call  forth  the  strongest  feelings  of  indignation 
and  horror.  The  church  may  be  and  is  loved  of  Christ ;  but  in 
anywise  to  take  equal  ground  with  Him  were  to  display  that 
spirit  of  antichrist,  "  whereof  we  have  heard  that  it  shall  come, 
and  even  now  already  is  it  in  the  world." 

"  Just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  King  of  nations."  If  I 
apprehend  aright,  the  reason  why  "nations"  are  introduced  here 
is  tliat  these  vials  were  about  to  be  poured  out  very  particularly 
ui)on  the  Gentiles.  Under  the  trumpets,  and  in  chapters  xii.-xiv., 
we  liad  the  Jews,  or  at  least  the  Jewish  remnant,  in  an  especial 
way  the  object  of  covenant  mercy.  The  very  phrase  (chapter 
xi.),  "  the  ark  of  the  covenant,"  connects  itself  with  that  nation ; 
for  the  covenant  was  made  with  them.  Therefore  we  saw  too 
that  tlie  woman  in  tlie  next  chapter  (xii.)  represented  Israel. 
Tlien  we  had  the  remnant  of  godly  Jews,  (xiv.)  But  now 
these  saints  are  celebrating  tlie  righteous  ways  of  (Jod  witli 


"THOU    ONLY   AKT   HOLY."  343 

the  Gentiles,  or  nations.  He  is  King  of  nations — not  merely 
of  the  Jews.  Jewish  relationships  appear  in  both,  but  they  are 
distinct  visions,  oi>ened  each  by  a  very  different  sign. 

"  Who  shall  not  fear  thee,  0  Lord,  and  glorify  thy  name  ?  for 
thon  only  art  holy :  for  all  nations  shall  come  and  worship  before 
thee ;  for  thy  judgments  were  made  manifest."  The  word  used 
for  "holy"  here  is  an  unusual  one.  It  is  the  same  that  is  used 
where  scripture  speaks  of  the  mercies  of  David,  and  its  Hebrew 
counterpart  is  frequently  found  in  the  Psalms.  For  there  are 
two  words  in  both  languages  to  express  holiness.  There  is  the 
common  word  for  "  holy,"  which,  for  instance,  occurs  in  Eev.  iv. 
"  Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  Almighty."  It  always  implies 
separation  from  evil — absolute  separation.  The  holiness  spoken 
of  here  implies  mercy,  which  is  quite  another  thought.  We  are 
about  to  hear  of  the  vials,  and  the  first  thought  would  be,  "how 
dreadful !"  God's  wrath  is  going  to  be  fulfilled.  But  who  and 
what  is  the  God  whose  wrath  is  about  to  be  consummated  ?  He 
whose  holiness  is  full  of  mercy.  "  Thou  only  art  holy."  It  is 
the  holiness  of  mercy.  "  For  all  nations  shall  come  and  worship 
before  thee;  for  thy  judgments  were  made  manifest."  They  look 
through  the  judgments,  and  they  see  tlie  end  always  is  that 
"  the  Lord  is  very  pitiful  and  of  tender  mercy."  So  that,  though 
this  storm  of  judgment  may  be  about  to  fall,  they  look  to  the 
end  from  the  beginning,  and  they  celebrate  accordingly  the 
holiness  of  the  One  who  in  judgment  remembers  mercy.  No 
doubt  there  must  be  wrath,  and  God  must  complete  it ;  because 
the  first  outpouring  of  it  will  only  make  men  more  hardened. 
But  let  it  be  observed,  it  is  not  a  question  of  Christ ;  there  is  no 
such  thing  as  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  here,  not  even  in  men's 
minds ;  it  is  the  wrath  of  God.  In  chapter  xiv.  He  who  reaps 
the  harvest  is  the  Son  of  man.  But  liere  God  acts  according  to 
His  own  part,  before  Christ  comes  from  heaven  to  execute  wrath. 
This  indicates  that  the  vials  end  before  the  final  judgments  of 
chapter  xiv.  commence,  because  the  close  of  the  chapter  shews  us 
the  Son  of  man  coming  Himself  to  execute  judgment. 

And  therefore  they  can  say  as  they  look  up,  "  Who  shall  not 
fear  thee,  0  Lord  ?  ...  for  thou  only  art  holy :  for  all  nations 
shall  come  and  worship  before  thee ;  for  thy  judgments  were 


344  THE  TEMPLE  OF  THE  TABERNACLE, 

made  manifest"  (verse  4).  Another  important  truth ;  for,  as 
we  are  told  in  Isaiah  xxvi.,  as  long  as  God  deals  in  mercy, 
what  does  man  ?  He  takes  advantage  of  it,  and  refuses  to  "learn 
righteousness."  But  the  time  comes  when  the  Lord  will  lift  up 
His  arm  in  judgment ;  and  what  then  ?  "  When  thy  judgments 
are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn  right- 
eousness." So  here,  "  All  nations  shall  come  and  worship  before 
thee ;  for  thy  judgments  were  made  manifest."  Such  would  be 
the  ultimate  result. 

The  prophet  again  looks,  "  And  the  temple  *  of  the  tabernacle 
of  the  testimony  in  heaven  was  opened"  (verse  5).  Mark  the 
difference.  In  verse  19  of  chapter  xi.  (which  introduces  the 
scene  of  chapters  xii.-xiv.  before  the  vials)  the  temple  was 
opened  in  heaven,  and  the  ark  of  His  covenant  seen ;  but  no  ark 
appears  now.  There  it  was  the  fit  pledge  of  the  security  of 
God's  faithfulness — of  His  unchanging  purposes  towards  His 
people  Israel.  But  here  His  enemies  are  in  question  rather 
than  His  people  ;  and  there  is  nothing  but  the  tabernacle  of  the 
testimony,  which  is  inaugurated  as  it  were  in  judgments  on  the 
men  of  the  earth.  It  is  opened  for  wrath  as  yet,  not  for  gospel 
triumphs.  It  is  God's  testimony  judicially  to  the  condition  of 
man.  Man  is  guilty :  what  then  could  result  ?  "  The  seven 
angels  came  out  of  the  temple."  And  terrible  to  say,  they  come 
out  of  that  in  wliich  no  ark  was  now  seen.  And  wliat  would 
be,  what  is,  the  effect?  Nothing  but  wratli — the  more  awful 
because  it  flows  from  the  sanctuary.  They  "came  out  of  the 
temple,  having  the  seven  plagues."  This  was  all  that  God  could 
do  for  man  now.  "  Clothed  in  pure  and  white  linen,  and  having 
their  breasts  girded  with  golden  girdles.  And  one  of  the  four 
living  creatures" — the  great  presiding  executors  of  the  provi- 
dential judgments  of  God — "  gave  unto  the  seven  angels  seven 

♦  It  is  extraordinary  that  the  author  of  the  Horae  Apoc.  should  say  that  vaoQ 
or  temple  is  sometimes  used  more  largely  of  the  whole,  including  the  altar- 
court;  stranger  still  that  he  should  cite  Rev.  xi.  1,  2,  in  proof,  seeing  that  the 
altar  and  the  outer  court  are  so  expressly  distinguished  there  (as  I  believe 
always).  There  is  another  word  to  comprehend  all,  namely,  Upov,  which  is 
ju;ver  used  in  the  Apocalypse,  though  it  occurs  repeatedly  in  other  parts  of  the 
New  Testament.  So  also  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  and  the  hanging  at  the 
court-gate  are  not  con  founded  in  .scripture. 


WHENCE   JUDGMENT   PROCEEDS.  345 

golden  vials."  The  word  means  bowls  or  cups,  and  is  taken 
from  the  vessels  used  for  pouring  out  drink-offerings,  &c.,  before 
the  Lord.  It  is  not  drink-offerings  now,  but  wrath  coming  down 
from  God — "  seven  golden  vials  full  of  the  wrath  of  God,  who 
liveth  for  ever  and  ever.  And  the  temple  was  filled  with  smoke 
from  the  glory  of  God,  and  from  his  power;  and  no  one  was 
able  to  enter  into  the  temple,  till  the  seven  plagues  of  the  seven 
angels  were  fulfilled."  Thus,  neither  present  worship  of  God 
nor  intercession  was  any  longer  possible.  It  was  vain  for  any 
one  to  attempt  entering  there :  the  smoke  of  the  fire  of  God's 
righteous  anger  filled  the  temple,  the  smoke  proving  the  fire 
that  was  there.  Thus  there  was  no  possibility  for  any  one,  not 
even  for  a  priest,  to  enter.  None  could  draw  near  now :  wrath, 
the  smoke  of  judgment,  filled  it.  Just  as  at  Sinai,  where  smoke 
is  represented  as  going  up  from  the  mountain  as  the  smoke  of  a 
furnace  ;  and  as  in  Psalm  xviii.,  "  There  went  up  a  smoke  out 
of  his  nostrils,  and  fire  out  of  his  mouth  devoured."  So  now 
there  is  the  image  of  God's  offended  majesty  against  sin.  There 
was  nothing  He  looked  upon  here  below  that  called  for  mercy 
on  their  behalf.  The  time  was  past  for  intercession.  Accord- 
ingly the  judgments  rolled  forth,  and  the  wrath  of  God  is  finished 
(verse  6-8). 


346  THE   FIRST   FOUR   VIALS. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

Now  I  must  say  a  little  on  the  details  of  God's  judgments  in 
cliapter  xvi.  It  is  a  painful  subject  and  humbling,  when  we 
think  that  this  is  the  declared  end  of  man's  vaunted  progress. 
I  will  endeavour,  then,  briefly  to  glance  at  these  seven  plagues. 
"And  I  heard  a  loud  voice  out  of  the  temple,  saying  to  the 
seven  angels,  Go  your  ways,  and  pour  out  the  vials  of  the  wrath 
of  God  unto  the  earth"  (verse  1).  Wrath  is  no  longer  restricted 
to  the  third  or  fourth  part,  but  the  whole  scene  is  given  up  to 
judgment.  There  is  not  only  an  increase  of  severity,  but  the 
whole  of  that  which  had  once  the  light  of  God,  and  had  far 
and  wide  enjoyed  outward  privileges,  is  in  complete  apostacy, 
and  given  up  to  His  wrath. 

"  And  the  first  went  away  and  poured  out  his  vial  unto  the 
earth;  and  there  came  a  noisome  and  grievous  sore  upon  the 
men  which  had  the  mark  of  the  beast,  and  them  which  wor- 
shipped his  image.  And  the  second  poured  out  his  vial  unto 
the  sea,"  &c. 

The  first  four  vials  resembled  the  trumpets  in  this,  that  they 
both  fall  on  the  earth  and  sea,  on  the  rivers  and  fountains  of 
water,  and  finally  on  the  sun.  There  may  be  certain  differ- 
ences ;  for  in  the  trumpet  it  was  the  third  part  only  of  the  sun 
that  was  smitten.  Here  it  is  simply  said,  "  the  sun."  Still  it 
was  the  same  sort  of  sphere.  Further,  I  think  the  objects  of 
these  plagues,  the  earth,  sea,  &c.,  are  not  to  be  taken  in  a  merely 
literal  way.  The  language  is  symbolical.  Not  that  tliere  would 
be  to  my  own  mind  the  slightest  difficulty  in  believing  that 
God  could  do  these  things  in  a  literal  way,  if  this  were  His  will. 
Ho  has  turned  the  waters  of  Egypt  into  blood,  filled  a  kingdom 
with  darkness,  and  inflicted  plagues  similar  to  what  we  have 


THE   HOLY   ONE.  347 

here :  so  that  there  is  no  difficulty  in  conceiving  such  a  thing 
again.  But  the  only  question  is,  whether  this  is  what  we  are 
to  gather  from  the  chapter  before  us.  I  think  it  is  not;  and 
that  God  here  alludes  to  plagues  that  were  once  literal  in  the 
land  of  Egypt,  but  that  are  now  referred  to  symbolically,  repre- 
senting certain  judgments  of  God.  First,  the  ordered  and  settled 
parts  of  the  world  are  smitten  as  with  an  ulcerous  distemper, 
where  men  were  branded  with  subjection  to  the  apostate  civil 
power  and  his  idolatry.  Next,  there  is  a  judgment  on  the  sea ; 
that  is,  on  the  outside  regions,  where  profession  of  life  quite  died 
out.  The  third,  I  conceive,  represents  by  rivers  people  formed 
into  a  separate  condition  of  nationality,  like  waters  flowing  in  a 
distinct  channel,  under  special  local  influence ;  and  by  the  foun- 
tains rather  the  springs  of  a  nation's  prosperity.  All  the  active 
principles  assume  the  form  of  death.  The  third  judgment  comes 
down  to  smaller  details  than  the  former  ones.  The  fourth  is  on 
the  public  supreme  authority. 

In  verses  5-7  we  have  a  word  or  two  which,  when  corrected 
or  rightly  read,  adds  to  the  full  force  and  clearness  of  the 
passage  :  "  Thou  art  righteous,  0  Lord,  which  art,  and  wast,"  &c, 
I  noted  (on  chap,  xi.)  that  the  words,  "  and  shalt  be,"  were  of 
no  force  at  all  here,  and  that  another  word  is  the  best  attested — 
"  the  Holy  One."  It  is  the  very  same  word  that  occurs  in  the 
fourth  verse  of  chapter  xvi. — the  less  usual  one  for  "holy." 
Before  these  vials  are  poured  out,  God  is  celebrated  in  His 
merciful  holiness.  "  Thou  art  righteous."  This  was  plain,  for 
God  was  pouring  out  His  wrath  upon  men  in  their  iniquity,  just 
because  He  was  righteous.  But  more  than  this — "which  art 
and  wast,  the  Holy  One."  Before  the  vials  are  poured  out,  and 
now  again  while  they  are  in  course  of  pouring  out,  that  remains 
true.  The  angel  of  the  waters  attests  His  graciousness,  even 
while  He  was  judging  thus,  which  might  have  seemed  to 
contradict  it.  He  too,  from  below,  answers  to  the  song  above. 
If  the  saints,  at  rest  on  the  sea  of  glass,  celebrate  Him  as 
merciful  in  holiness,  the  angel  confirms  it. 

"  For  they  have  shed  the  blood  of  saints  and  prophets,  and 
thou  gavest  them  blood  to  drink  ;  they  are  worthy"  (verse  6). 
There  was  righteous  retribution — they  were  worthy  in  an  awful 


348  "I   HEARD   THE   ALTAR." 

sense.  "And  I  heard,"  not  another  out  of  the  altar,  but  "I 
heard  the  altar  say"  (verse  7).  It  may  seem  extraordinary  to 
speak  of  "  the  altar  saying,"  and  no  doubt  the  other  words  were 
put  in  because  people  thought  it  so  strange.  But  there  is 
nothing  really  contrary  to  prophetic  usage  if  it  be  taken  in  a 
symbolical  w^ay.  No  person  would  intentionally  foist  a  difficulty 
into  scripture :  but  it  is  too  common  to  try  and  remove  that 
which  is  not  understood  out  of  the  word,  thus  to  make  it  plain 
according  to  ordinary  modes  of  thought.  Besides,  you  have 
what  might  prepare  the  way  for  it  elsewhere.  In  chapter  ix.  13, 
it  is  said,  "  I  heard  a  voice  from  the  four  horns  of  the  golden 
altar  which  is  before  God."  Here  (chap,  xvi.)  the  figure  goes 
farther :  the  voice  is  said  to  be  that  of  the  altar  itself  To  me 
it  confirms  what  we  have  had  various  occasions  to  remark — the 
fact  and  impropriety  of  men's  meddling  with  scripture.  "  I 
heard  the  altar  say"  has  great  force  for  this  reason.  In  an 
earlier  part  of  the  book,  the  souls  of  those  that  were  "  slain  for 
the  word  of  God,  and  for  the  testimony  which  they  held,"  were 
seen  under  the  altar.  Now  here  that  altar  which  had  witnessed 
their  blood  is  said  to  cry  out  to  God,  and  to  own  that  His  judg- 
ments are  true  and  righteous.  In  the  first  book  of  the  Bible, 
the  earth  is  spoken  of  as  crying  out  to  God  about  the  blood  of 
Abel :  much  more  should  not  the  altar  cry  about  the  blood  of  God's 
martyred  saints  ?  To  my  own  mind  it  is  uncommonly  pertinent. 
If  it  had  been  merely  an  angel,  this  would  have  been  a  com- 
paratively distant  link ;  for  an  angel,  though  ministering  for 
them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation,  does  not  enter  so  directly 
into  their  sufferings,  and  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  immediate 
sympathy  with  them.  But  God  not  only  had  seen  the  bones  of 
His  slaughtered  saints  scattered  upon  the  cold  mountains,  as 
poets  sing,  but  regards  His  saints  as  so  many  burnt-offerings, 
rising  up  before  Him  whose  blood,  or  rather  the  altar  which 
witnessed  it,  calls  for  indignation  and  wrath.  The  Lord  may 
seem  to  slumber  for  a  season,  but  when  He  awakes,  as  one  out 
of  sleep,  He  will  surely  avenge  their  blood  on  them  that  dwell 
on  the  earth.  And  now  it  is  at  hand.  Great  Babylon  had  not 
yet  come  into  remembrance,  though  from  the  beginning  the 
special  corruptress  of  the  truth,  and  drunken  with  the  blood  of 


THE   FIFTH   VIAL.  349 

the  saints.  But  meanwhile  the  altar  could  not  hold  its  peace, 
and  the  Lord  listens  and  hears.  For  the  God  who  heeds  the 
groans  of  the  creature  will  surely  answer  the  altar's  cry  about 
His  slain  ones. 

"And  the  fourth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  sun;  and 
power  was  given  unto  him  to  scorch  men  with  fire"  (verse  8). 
It  is  a  judgment  on  the  sun,  the  figure  of  supreme  government ; 
so  that  what  ought  to  have  been  the  means  of  light  and  comfort 
— that  greater  light  which  rules  the  day — now  becomes  the 
means  of  scorching  men  with  fire.  The  effect  of  its  tyranny  is 
intolerable.  "And  men  were  scorched  with  great  heat,  and 
blasphemed  the  name  of  God,  which  had  authority  over  these 
plagues :  and  they  repented  not  to  give  him  glory"  (verse  9). 

"  And  the  fifth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  throne  of 
the  beast,"  &c.  (verse  10.)  We  are  now  entering  upon  a  some- 
what different  class  of  judgments;  for  the  last  three  vials  differ 
from  the  first  four,  just  as  the  last  three  trumpets  had  a  different 
character  from  the  rest.  And  so  with  the  seals  also.  It  is 
evident  that  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  vials  are  apart  from 
the  preceding  four.  The  judgment  falls  upon  the  throne  of  the 
beast  and  upon  his  kingdom — not  upon  the  beast  himself,  who 
is  apparently  untouched  by  these  vials.  He  is  reserved  for  the 
judgment  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself  at  His  coming,  and  will 
be  destroyed  by  His  appearing.  Here  the  stroke  is  merely  upon 
the  seat  of  his  authority  ;  and  just  as  of  old  king  Pharaoh  was 
hardened,  so  here  men  blasphemed  the  God  of  heaven,  and 
repented  not  of  their  deeds  (verse  11).  When  God  manifests 
Himself  as  the  God  of  the  earth,  this  will  not  be  possible. 

"And  the  sixth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  great 
river  Euphrates,  and  the  water  thereof  was  dried  up,  that  the 
way  of  the  kings" — not  exactly  of  the  east,  but — "that  are  from 
the  east  might  be  prepared"  (verse  12).  The  Euphrates  was 
the  great  eastern  boundary  of  the  Eonian  empire :  it  was  the 
regular  line  to  which  they  carried  their  conquests.  So  that  the 
drying  up  of  the  Euphrates  would  seem  to  mean  that  this  side 
of  the  empire  would  be  left  open  as  a  way  for  the  eastern  powers 
to  come  and  mingle  with  those  of  the  west,  or  to  assault  them. 


350  THE   SIXTH    VIAL. 

One  effect  of  this  vial,  then,  would  be  the  removal  of  tlie 
eastern  barrier,  and  thus  the  way  of  the  kings  from  the  east  is 
prepared  probably  for  the  great  closing  conflicts. 

But  there  is  more  than  this.  "  I  saw  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 
draiion,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  beast,  and  out  of  the  mouth 
of  the  false  prophet,  three  unclean  spirits  like  frogs"*  (ver.  13). 
It  is  just  before  the  end.  These  murmuring  spirits  issued  out  of 
the  mouth  of  the  three  powers  which  we  have  seen  in  chapter 
xiii. :  out  of  the  dragon,  the  open  enemy  of  Christ ;  out  of  the 
beast,  the  revived  Roman  Empire ;  and  out  of  the  false  prophet, 
the  ecclesiastical  beast  that  had  lamb-like  horns,  imitating 
Christ's  power,  but  now  spoken  of  only  in  his  deceptive  re- 
ligious character.  "  For  they  are  the  spirits  of  demons,  working 
signs,  who  go  forth  unto  the  kings  of  the  whole  habitable  world, 
to  gather  them  unto  the  battle  of  [that]  great  day  of  God  the 
Almighty."  This  confirms  what  I  have  just  stated  about  the 
Euphrates.  It  is  a  general  collision  of  the  kings  of  all  the 
habitable  world.  Not  only  the  western  powers  are  arrayed  for 
the  war,  but  the  eastern  also.     It  is  the  great  day. 

But  now  comes  an  important  parenthesis.  As  was  shewn 
under  the  sixth  seal  and  the  sixth  trumpet,  so  here  we  find  an 

*  Most  readers  of  the  Horae  Apoe.  will  remember  that,  after  giving  evidence 
of  the  working  of  the  frog-like  unclean  spirits  in  England  (the  draconic  spirit  of 
hcathcn-liko  anti-social  infidelity,  the  Popish  spirit,  the  Tractariun  spirit),  Mr. 
E.  recurs  to  the  hopeful  strain  of  a  bright  future  for  his  country,  and  conjectures 
that  France  may  bo  tho  country  called  to  the  bad  pre-eminence  of  being  the  chief 
secular  power  employed  by  those  demons  to  gather  the  world's  powers  to  the 
last  great  war  of  Armageddon.  "  There  is  a  curious  heraldic  fact,"  he  adds,  (vol. 
iii.  pp.  5133,  o3 1)  "  accordant  with  this  viow,  which  (considering  how  frequently 
such  national  emblems  have  been  had  in  viow  in  tho  Apocalyjjtic  figurations'!  I 
cannot  permit  myself  to  pass  over  in  silence,  though  by  no  moans  wishing  to 
insist  much  on  it;  viz.,  that,  as  (he  three  ,sj)irits  do  each  and  all  most  assuredly 
energize  in  the  French  nation  and  priesthood,  so  their  Apocalyptic  symbol,  the 
three  frogs,  aro  the  old  arms  of  France."  And  then  wo  have  a  plate  in  illustra- 
tion of  the  alleged  fact,  with  some  subjoined  annotations.  Now,  it  happens  that 
natural  history  comes  in  as  an  awkward  witness  here,  for  tho  "fact"  turns  out 
that  Mr.  E.  confounds  crapaud  with  grenouille ;  or,  as  tho  Eitcijclopicdia  Metro- 
politana  say  (and  so  Court  de  Gobelin),  cited  by  himself,  the  arms  of  France,  as 
somo  affirm,  boar  three  loads  sable,  &c.  In  a  word,  in  order  to  convey  correctly 
such  a  reference,  the  Greek  should  have  been  wf  (ppiivoi,  rather  than  (iarpaxoi. 
Fuur  other  authons  lie  produces  say  frogs;  luit  llii.s  sixnis  loose,  and  not  to  set 
aside  tho  more  precise  word.   Of  course  /  tliink  the  point  trilling  in  the  extreme. 


THE   PARENTHESIS.  351 

interruption  also.  "Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief.  Blessed  is  he 
that  watcheth  and  keepeth  his  garments,  lest  he  walk  naked, 
and  they  see  his  shame"  (verse  15).  It  is  the  Lord  coming,  but 
then  He  is  coming  in  judgment  to  surprise  the  earth  ;  and  this 
is  the  reason  why  the  figure  is  used.  The  thief  comes  unex- 
pected and  unwelcome:  still  more  unpalatable  will  be  the  Lord's 
coming  to  the  earth.  But  there  will  be  saints  to  whom  it  will 
be  welcome,  to  whom  His  appearing  will  bring  deliverance  by 
the  judgment  of  their  enemies.  And  they  are  enjoined  to  watch 
closely  the  daily  life. .  "  Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief."  Not  so  the 
Lord  presents  Himself  to  us,  save  as  telling  us  how  He  will 
appear  to  the  world  or  the  professing  mass  cast  into  it.  When 
speaking  to  us  He  says,  "Behold,  I  come  quickly:  holdfast  that 
which  thou  hast,  that  no  man  take  thy  crown."  Need  one  say 
how  much  more  blessed  is  this  word  ?  The  idea  of  coming  as  a 
thief  involves  surprise.  To  us  He  will  come  as  a  gracious  One, 
who  loves  that  we  should  have  the  rest  of  our  affections  and  our 
glory  in  and  with  Himself:  this  is  our  own  proper  portion  and 
hope.  Here  it  is  not  rapture  to  heaven,  but  Jewish  deliverance 
by  judgment. 

Then,  after  closing  the  parenthesis,  it  is  said,  "And  he  gathered 
them  together  into  a  place,  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  Arma- 
geddon." It  might  seem  strange  that  it  should  be  said,  "He 
gathered;"  for  in  the  fourteenth  verse  the  evil  spirits,  or  spirits 
of  demons,  were  those  that  went  forth  to  gather  the  kings 
together.  The  reason  is  this.  In  the  language  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  employed,  the  word  is  capable  of  meaning  either  he  or 
they  gathered.  There  are  certain  cases  where,  in  that  language, 
it  is  doubtful  whether  "they"  or  "he"  be  meant;  and  this  is 
one.  The  word  "demons"  is  of  such  a  nature,  that  the  verb 
which  has  it  for  its  subject  might  be  either  singular  or  plural. 
Here  the  subject  is  not  expressed,  so  that  it  is  quite  optional  as 
far  as  this  is  concerned:  all  depends  upon  the  sense  of  the  con- 
text. If  it  be  "  He  gathered,"  the  reference  of  course  is  to  God 
Almighty,  who  might  be  said  to  do  it  through  the  intervention 
of  these  unclean  spirits.  If  it  be  "  they  gathered,  it  would  simply 
mean  that  the  spirits  of  demons  had  accomplished  the  purpose 
for  which  they  were  sent  forth.    In  verse  14,  they  proceeded 


352  ARMAGEDDON. 

to  gather  the  kings ;  and  in  verse  16,  the  kings  are  gathered 
together. 

The  place  of  gathering  that  is  mentioned  here,  called  in 
Hebrew  Armageddon,  is,  I  think,  an  allusion  to  Judges  v.  17. 
"  The  kings  came  and  fought ;  then  fought  the  kings  of  Canaan 
in  Taanach  by  the  waters  of  Megiddo."  It  was  not  that  Megiddo 
was  a  place  of  any  great  size  or  note :  God  looks  to  the  principle 
at  issue.  Israel  was  in  a  low  state.  There  was  a  prophetess 
that  the  Lord  used  to  inspire  them  with  courage :  and  when 
encouraged  by  her,  they  won  a  great  victory  over  their  enemies. 
The  same  place  is  referred  to  in  2  Chron.  xxxv.  22,  when  Josiah 
received  his  death-wound  in  battle  with  the  king  of  Egypt. 
But  I  doubt  that  this  is  the  incident  referred  to  by  the  Spirit 
of  God  here.  For  Megiddo  in  the  day  of  the  Judges  was  a 
memento  of  joy  and  triumph  to  Israel.  In  the  time  of  Josiah  it 
was  a  place  of  gloom:  all  Judah  and  Jerusalem  mourned  for 
Josiah.  It  was  "  the  mourning  of  Hadadrimmon  in  the  valley  * 
of  Megiddon"  (Zech.  xii.  11),  which  led  historically  to  the 
writing  of  the  book  of  Lamentations.  For  this  reason  I  think 
that  Armageddon  {i.e.,  the  mountain  of  Megiddo)  here  refers 
not  to  the  sorrow  for  Josiah  in  2  Chronicles,  but  to  the  gathering 
and  defeat  of  the  Gentile  kings  in  Judges.  For  here  it  is  the 
Lord  beating  down  the  nations.  He  had  been  acknowledged  as 
king  of  the  nations  in  Eev.  xv. ;  and  therefore,  to  make  this  au 
allusion  to  a  time  when  the  godly  Jewish  monarch  was  slain  by 
a  Gentile  would  be  little  appropriate.  But  to  derive  it  from  the 
day  when  Israel  had  been  led  on  to  victory  even  by  a  woman 
well  fits  into  the  scene  that  is  here  described,  wlien  the  kings 
of  the  whole  world  will  be  gathered  only  for  a  more  terrible 
destruction. 

A  few  words  must  suffice  for  the  last  vial.  "The  seventh 
angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  air ;  and  there  came  forth  a 

•  A  mountain  of  course  implies  a  valley.  Tlie  sinijular  variation  of  A 
[noraixov,  river)  may  have  been  either  taken  from  the  waters  of  Megiddon  in 
Judges  V.  9,  or  more  probably  was  a  blunder  for  roiiov,  just  as  in  chapter  xv. 
A  C,  three  cursives,  not  to  speak  of  some  MSS.  mentioned  by  Andreas,  Bode, 
&c.,  support  XiOov,  stone !  for  \ivov.  The  llarloian  cursive  of  the  eleventh 
century  (6637)  exhibits  the  still  stiauger  Xjji/o*/. 


THE   SEVENTH   VIAL.  353 

loud  voice  from  the  temple  [of  heaven],  from  the  throne,  saying. 
It  is  done"  (verse  17).  This  is  a  more  penetrating  judgment, 
and  one  more  affecting  men  and  their  very  life-breath  than  any 
we  have  yet  seen.  It  is  on  the  air,  necessary  to  the  existence  of 
rtien.  Symbolically  it  represents  a  judgment  on  something  that 
is  as  essential  to  the  life  and  comfort  of  men  as  that  which  we 
breathe.   All  is  over  as  regards  God's  wrath  here  poured  out. 

"  And  there  were  lightnings  and  voices  and  thunders :  and 
there  was  a  great  earthquake,  such  as  was  not  seen  since  a  man 
was  on  the  earth,  so  mighty  an  earthquake  and  so  great.  And 
the  great  city  was  divided  into  three  parts,  and  the  cities  of  the 
nations  fell,"  &c.  There  was  a  vast  and  unexampled  convulsion 
of  civil  associations — breaking  up,  not  only  what  is  called  here 
"  the  great  city"  (which  means  all  that  was  established  within 
the  Eoman  empire),  but  more  than  that,  the  cities  of  the  nations 
fell ;  that  is,  it  was  the  ruin  of  all  that  the  nations  outside  Rome 
had  built  up  politically.  And  furthermore,  Babylon  the  great — 
that  counterfeit  of  the  bride,  and  hitherto  successful  system  of 
religious  evil,  the  mother  of  harlots  and  abominations  of  the 
earth ;  Babylon  the  great — came  up  in  remembrance  before  God 
to  receive  from  Him  the  cup  of  the  wine  of  the  fierceness  of 
His  wrath.  The  latter  term,  Babylon  the  great,  refers  rather  to 
moral  character  or  idolatry. 

"And  every  island  fled  away,  and  the  mountains  were  not 
found.  And  there  fell  upon  men  great  hail,  about  the  weight  of 
a  talent,  out  of  heaven,  and  men  blasphemed  God,"  &c.  (verses 
20,  21.)  It  is  not  necessary  that  I  should  speak  particularly  of 
the  explanation  offered  by  the  leading  historicalists.  The  hail- 
storm Mr.  E.  used  to  apply  to  some  fearful  infliction  of  France, 
the  most  northerly  of  the  Papal  kingdoms,  much  as  he  had  sur- 
mised in  the  minor  judgments,  as  he  would  say,  of  the  seventh 
trumpet.  And  so  it  yet  stands  in  the  text  of  Horae,  Apoc,  vol.  iv. 
p.  23.  But  in  a  note  he  observes  that  many  expositors  prefer 
to  explain  it  of  the  Russian  power.  "  And  in  revising  my  work, 
and  comparing  this  prophecy  with  one  in  Ezekiel  xxxviii.  xxxix., 
which  seems  to  point  to  Russia's  taking  part  in  the  great  pre- 
millennial  conflict,  as  will  be  noticed  in  the  end  of  my  next 
chapter,  I  cannot  but  incline  to  the  same  view.     I  observe  that 

2  A 


354  THE   HAILSTORM   NOT   GOD'S  JUDGMENT, 

the  great  hail  is  here  predicted  as  falling  after,  not  before, 
the  great  city's  tri-partition."  Having  already  expressed  my 
opinion  on  the  similar  case  of  Rev.  xi.  19,  and  sheMm  the  error 
of  connecting  this  verse  with  the  seventh  trumpet,  which  is  the 
assumption  of  these  writers,  I  need  only  remark  that  the  refer- 
ence to  Ezekiel  is  peculiarly  unhappy,  because  the  scene  there 
is  Palestine,  not  the  Papal  empire  or  the  west;  and  that  the 
issue  is  not  the  infliction  of  a  plague  on  others,  and  God  blas- 
phemed in  consequence,  but  the  utter  discomfiture  of  the  Prince 
of  Rosh,  Meshech  and  Tubal,  with  his  vast  company,  and  God 
sanctified  thereby.  "  And  I  will  plead  against  him  with  pesti- 
lence, and  with  blood ;  and  I  will  rain  upon  him,  and  upon  his 
bands,  and  upon  the  many  people  that  are  with  him,  an  over- 
flowing rain,  and  great  hailstones,  fire  and  brimstone."  Thus  it 
is  God  who  plagues  the  invading  Russian  with  great  hailstones, 
not  they  who  so  fall  on  others.  "  Thus  will  I  magnify  myself, 
and  sanctify  myself  (not  then  men  blaspheming  God  because 
of  the  plague  of  the  hail) ;  and  I  will  be  known  in  the  eyes 
of  many  nations;  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord." 
Indeed,  the  reader  has  simply  to  examine  the  context  of  the 
Jewish  prophet  in  order  to  be  satisfied  of  the  absurdity  of  con- 
necting that  scene  with  the  hailstorm  of  the  seventh  vial.  For 
the  Jews,  nay,  Israel  as  a  whole,  are  supposed  to  be  at  that  time 
restored  and  united  in  their  own  land,  when  Gog  invades  it 
through  lust  of  conquest.  There  is  no  ground  to  think  that 
such  is  the  case  under  the  vials.  Neither  does  Mr.  E.  so  judge, 
if  I  understand  his  remarks  on  the  first  occurrence  of  "  Halle- 
lujah" in  Rev.  xix.,  which  he  views  as  an  indication  of  the 
conversion  of  the  Jews,  after  the  final  catastrophe  of  Babylon, 
when  the  outpouring  of  the  vials  is  completed  and  has  marked 
the  time  for  it. 

Before  God  establishes  His  purposes  in  power,  you  see  a  moral 
accomplishment  working  either  in  His  peoi)le  or  in  the  world. 
Thus,  if  God  is  to  bring  about  a  separation  of  His  people  by 
judgment,  which  we  had  in  chapter  xv.,  I  doubt  not  that  His 
people  are  even  now  being  separated  graciously  by  the  Spirit  of 
God.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  to  be  a  delusion  over  men's 
heart.s,  so  that  even  tlie  judgtnents  of  CJod  \yill  only  aggravate 


MORAL   ACCOMPLISHMENT,   THEN   THE   CRISIS  355 

the  evil  to  all  appearance,  something  analagous  is  at  work  in 
our  day.  Is  it  not  a  fearful  sign  tliat  Christians,  in  the  face  of 
such  words  as  these,  can  look  for  any  real  amelioration  of  things 
as  they  are  ?  Here  we  have  the  true  closing  scene  disclosed  by 
God  after  all  the  efforts  and  boasts  of  men.  The  most  favoured 
part  of  the  earth,  its  civilized  and  moral  centre,  is  to  be  full  of 
a))ostacy,  and  the  wrath  of  God  must  be  finished  there.  This 
must  be  ere  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  come  in  glory  to  set  up 
His  kingdom ;  for  He  it  is  in  person  who  shall  deal  with  the 
beast.  Under  the  vials  it  is  God  chastising  in  wrath.  But  what 
is  the  effect  ?  Men  blaspheme  God.  Instead  of  repenting,  they 
become  worse  and  worse  at  every  step. 

It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  see  this  evil  morally  spreading  over 
the  world;  but  the  Lord  is  also  separating,  by  faith  and 
affection,  to  Himself.  May  we  hold  fast  grace  !  We  shall  need 
it.  It  is  the  only  place,  not  merely  of  privileges,  but  of  security. 
What  should  we  think  of  the  man  who  would  merely  go  as  far 
as  he  thinks  he  must  not  to  be  lost — who  wants  to  be  saved,  but 
withal  to  be  allowed  to  sin  as  much  as  in  his  opinion  he  may, 
so  as  to  escape  at  last?  But  as  the  Lord  is  separating  by 
personal  affection  to  Himself,  where  there  is  faith,  so,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  opposite  of  it  we  find  where  faith  is  lacking. 
God  gives  up  men  to  delusion,  and  all  that  He  does  in  the  way 
of  judgment  only  hardens  them.  Preparatorily  this  is  going  on 
now :  men  are  yielding  to  and  choosing  their  own  delusions. 
The  full  pure  truth  is  distasteful  and  dreaded.  So  that,  in  spite 
of  God's  Spirit  working  to  present  truth  with  all  simplicity  to 
His  people,  men  are  obstinately  comforting  themselves  with  the 
dream  that  things  after  all  are  not  so  bad;  that  if  there  are 
things  to  be  regretted,  the  remedy  is  at  hand.  For  now  there 
are  so  many  ways  of  helping  on  the  poor — such  delightful 
minglings  of  the  rich  with  them — such  promising  unions  which 
invite  all  men  to  come  together  and  join,  spite  of  their  little 
differences,  for  the  great  object  of  social  advancement,  the 
improvement  of  Christendom,  and  the  regeneration  of  the  world. 
But  all  this  is  founded  on  the  miserable  delusion  which 
ionores  and  denies  that  God's  wrath  is  to  be  filled  up  and 
poured  out  upon  Christendom.    It  is  impossible  that  Christians, 

2  A  2 


356  CHRIST   OUR   GRAND   TESTIMONY. 

who  realise  that  such  judgments  are  near,  could  lend  themselves 
to  schemes  which  assume  the  very  reverse.  Suppose  a  person 
going  to  execution — what  would  be  thought  of  a  Christian  man 
who,  knowing  this,  would  occupy  the  criminal's  time  with 
chemical  experiments,  or  a  lecture  on  mechanics  ?  Much  less 
would  one  who  feels  the  solemn  truth  that  the  world  lies  under 
such  a  sentence  as  God's  word  declares.  Christ  alone  is  the 
power  of  God  to  set  things  right.  When  He  comes,  and  not 
before,  the  tide  of  evil  will  be  stemmed,  and  Satan  bound  :  but 
not  even  divine  judgments  apart  from  Christ  can  avail. 

May  we  be  in  earnest,  always  seeking  to  connect  Christ  with 
our  testimony !  That  is  the  great  practical  purport  of  all  for 
the  present  moment.  Sometimes  we  may  hinder  blessing  by 
presenting  the  truth,  but  not  in  Christ,  if  I  may  so  say.  The 
heart  must  be  sadly  perverted,  if  it  refuses  Him.  The  Lord 
grant  that  we  may  keep  these  two  things  before  our  souls — 
thorough  separation  from  all  that  is  of  the  world,  and  this  place 
of  victory  held  with  joy,  our  hearts  taking  up  the  song  of  which 
the  Lamb  is  the  subject,  as  He  alone  gives  us  the  power  to  sing 
it.  May  we  ever  think  of  the  world  as  a  judged  scene,  conscious 
of  the  terrible  wrath  it  cannot  escape  !  This  will  not  make  us 
distrustful  of  the  power  of  Christ  to  deliver  individuals,  but  it 
will  preserve  us  from  any  insensibility  as  to  either  the  world's 
evil,  or  the  divine  judgment  which  awaits  it. 


RELATION  OF  THIS  CHAPTER  TO  THE  PROPHECY.     357 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

The  Spirit  of  God  has  shewn  us  the  destruction  of  Babylon 
under  the  last  vial.  We  are  now  to  learn  in  the  chapter  before 
us  what  was  her  special  evil,  what  there  was  so  hateful  to  God 
in  Babylon ;  not  only  what  her  own  conduct  was,  but  what 
there  was  in  her  connexion  with  others,  that  God  could  endure 
no  longer — why  it  was  that  He  singled  her  out  above  all 
others  for  His  vengeance.  And  this  is  not  a  thing  that  we  can 
put  aside  from  us,  as  perhaps  some  others  may  be  in  the  Apo- 
calypse, as  comparatively  foreign  or  distant.  For  though  there 
may  be,  and  I  doubt  not  will  be,  a  further  development  of 
Babylon,  yet  God  looks  at  it  as  a  moral  whole ;  as  a  system  of 
corruption  that  has  been  at  work,  and  that  is  still  at  work. 
When  judgment  can  delay  no  longer,  it  may  have  taken  a 
peculiarly  aggravated  form ;  but  the  evil  exists  and  is  active. 
Babylon  is  not  so  much  the  snare  of  a  profane  man,  as  it  is  that 
of  one  who,  having  a  certain  idea  of  religion,  seeks  to  reconcile 
it  with  the  world.  It  is  then  that  the  corrupting  influence 
becomes  a  source  of  chief  danger  to  the  soul. 

Now  we  shall  find  that,  first  of  all,  the  chapter  gives  us  the 
vision  which  the  Apostle  John  is  taken  to  see ;  and  next  we 
have  a  certain  explanation  of  that  vision.  The  angel's  word 
commences  more  particularly  in  this  way  at  the  seventh  verse, 
while  the  first  six  verses  are  occupied  with  recounting  the 
vision.  One  other  remark  I  w^ould  make  before  proceeding 
farther.  This  chapter  does  not  carry  us  forward  as  a  matter  of 
history.  It  is  rather  the  Holy  Ghost  looking  back  upon  the 
character,  conduct,  and  relationships  of  that  Babylon  which  had 
been  already  shewn  as  the  object  of  the  judgment  of  God.    This 


358  THE   HARLOT   SEATED 

is  worthy  of  note,  because,  if  not  seen,  there  is  inevitable  con- 
fusion in  our  thoughts  of  the  book.  In  chapter  xiv.  we  had  the 
fall  of  Babylon  in  connexion  with  the  evil  workings  of  Satan, 
and  with  the  dealings  of  God  in  goodness  or  power,  including 
the  Son  of  man's  judgment  at  the  close.  Now,  it  is  of  no  little 
moment  to  have  the  precise  niche  where  this  intei'vention  of 
God  is  to  be  looked  for,  and  that  we  had  in  the  next  place.  For 
we  have  seen  in  the  providential  judgments  of  God — by  which 
I  mean  those  which  are  executed  by  angels,  and  not  by  Christ 
directly — Babylon  reserved  for  the  last  stroke  of  His  wrath 
under  the  seventh  vial.  It  is  God  acting — God  still  employing 
angels.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  thus  far  quiescent,  if  I  may  so  say ; 
not  acting  yet  in  vengeance  personally  upon  the  earth. 

In  Eev.  xvii.  the  Holy  Ghost  stops  to  enter  into  the  details 
of  the  moral  cause  of  Babylon's  terrible  fall.  "  There  came  one 
of  the  seven  angels  whicli  had  the  seven  vials,  and  talked  with 
me,  saying.  Come  hither;  I  will  shew  unto  thee  the  judgment 
of  the  great  whore;  that  sitteth  on  [the]*  many  waters"  (ver.  1). 
It  is  described  as  a  harlot  liere  ;  not  only  as  a  woman,  but  as  a 
corrupt  and  licentious  one.  And  I  suppose  that  no  dispassionate 
person  would  doubt  that  this  term  is  used  in  special  reference 
to  religious  corruption.  A  little  lower  down  in  the  third  verse, 
Babylon  is  said  to  be  sitting  on  the  beast ;  here  she  sits  by  the 
many  waters.  There  is  a  slight  difference  in  the  Greek.  Sitting 
by  the  many  waters  does  not  mean  that  she  was  literally  or 
locally  thereupon,  but  beside  them.  Thus,  you  may  say,  for 
instance,  that  London  is  seated  on  the  Thames.  Now  no  one 
of  common  understanding  would  suppose  the  meaning  to  be 
that  London  was  actually  situated  and  built  over  the  bed  of  the 
river,  but  that  the  Thames  is  the  stream  whicli  characterizes 
London.  So  here  in  the  same  way  we  have  the  whore  described 
as  seated  on  (i.e.  beside)  the  many  waters.  These  are  explained 
in  verse  19.     "  The  waters  which  thou  sawest,  where  the  whore 

•  The  article  (twice)  is  omitted  by  N  A  P,  seven  cursives,  Hippolytus  and 
Andreas.  I  have  therefore  bracketed  it  as  a  mark  of  doubt,  though  disposed  to 
loan  towards  its  reception,  spite  of  its  absence  in  the  Sept.  Ver.  of  Jer.  li.  13,  &c. 
It  is  strange  that  any  should  imagine  a  rofcsrenco  in  Dan.  vii.  2,  or  Rev.  xiii.  I, 
any  more  than  hero,  to  the  literal  Mediterranean.  In  Hebrew  (or  Chaldee) 
"  the  great  sea"  when  used  of  the  Mediterranean  is  a  totally  distinct  i)hrabc'. 


BY   MANY   "WATERS.  359 

sittetli,  are  peoples  and  multitudes  and  nations  and  tongues." 
The  figure  implies  the  wide-spread  influence  which  this  aban- 
doned woman  exercises.  But  there  is  more  than  that.  In  the 
second  verse  it  is  said,  "  with  whom  the  kings  of  the  earth  have 
committed  fornication,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  have 
been  made  drunk  with  the  wine  of  her  fornication."  This  is 
something  more  than  her  seat  by  the  mass  of  waters.  It  is  im- 
mediate intercourse  of  an  evil  kind  carried  on  with  the  kings  of 
the  earth — her  power  in  drawing  away  and  seducing  the  affec- 
tions from  Christ,  who  is  the  only  worthy  object  of  all  love  and 
worship.  In  the  sphere  where  God's  light  had  been  displayed, 
the  chiefs  or  leaders  are  led  away  by  the  corruptress,  and  the 
people  are  entirely  ruined  as  to  all  discernment  of  the  mind  of 
God. 

Nothing,  then,  can  be  plainer  than  the  general  bearing  of 
these  few  verses.  We  have  the  vast  influence  of  Babylon  set 
forth  by  the  figure  of  a  woman  seated  beside  many  waters  ; 
next  we  have  the  great  leaders  of  Christendom,  the  kings  of  the 
earth,  who  have  committed  fornication  with  her ;  and  then  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth  stupefied  with  the  wine  of  her  forni- 
cation. There  are  different  degrees  of  guilt,  but  all  were  the 
result  of  connexion  more  or  less  intimate  with  Babylon.  "  So 
lie  carried  me  away  in  the  Spirit  into  the  wilderness"  (verse  3). 
In  spite  of  all  her  pride  and  worldly  glory,  to  the  saint  of  God 
the  wilderness  is  the  only  place  where  the  Spirit  leads  him  to 
behold  her.  Had  John  gone  in  his  own  spirit  (so  to  speak),  it 
might  have  carried  him  to  look  at  Babylon,  not  in  the  wilder- 
ness, but  rather  in  the  mirage  of  some  garden  of  the  Lord.  But 
he  was  carried  away  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  into  the  wilder- 
ness, and  there  he  sees  the  harlot  sitting  upon  a  scarlet-coloured 
beast ;  a  closer  thing  and  of  more  ominous  import,  as  we  noticed, 
than  her  description  at  the  end  of  verse  1.  This  shews  us  the 
actual  position  of  the  woman.  She  has  supremacy  over  the 
Eoman  empire.  For  there  can  be  no  legitimate  question  that 
the  beast  here  brought  before  us  is  that  same  Roman  empire,  of 
which  we  have  heard  such  terrible  doings,  and  so  portentous  a 
doom,  in  previous  chapters.  It  is  the  beast  that  is  full  of  the 
names  of  blasphemy,  as  his  heads  wore  so  viewed  in  chap.  xiii.  1. 


360  ABOMINATIONS,   WHAT  ? 

Babylon  is  a  whore  or  corrupting  system  ;  bjit  blasphemy  is 
what  belongs  to  the  beast.  It  is  a  more  open  and  audacious 
evil.  The  woman's  way  is  more  seductive,  and  one  that  lays 
hold  of  the  affections.  But  blasphemy  is  the  expression  of  a 
power  that  fears  neither  God  nor  man.  As  for  the  woman, 
though  seated  on  the  beast,  glad  to  be  exalted  through  him,  and 
willing  to  use  him  for  her  own  purposes,  yet  is  she  distinctively 
the  religious  system  of  the  world.  She  is  "arrayed  in  purple 
and  scarlet  colour,  and  decked  with  gold  and  precious  stones 
and  pearls : "  the  obvious  figures  of  all  tliat  the  world  counts 
great  and  glorious  and  beautiful  here  below.  But  she  has  also 
"  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand,  full  of  abominations  and  filthiness 
of  lier  fornication"  (verse  4).  In  spite  of  all  her  glittering, 
gaudy  splendour,  how  the  Holy  Ghost  brings  out  together  with 
it  what  is  most  nauseous !  He  has  no  words  too  strong  to 
express  His  sense  of  what  He  sees  in  the  cup.  It  is  "  full 
of  abominations  and  the  filthiness  of  her  fornication,"  By 
"abominations"  in  scripture  regularly  is  meant  idolatry.  This 
is  the  gravest  distinguishing  feature  in  Babylon.  As  the  beast 
was  full  of  names  of  blasphemy,  so  was  the  harlot's  cup  full  of 
abominations.  But  besides  the  idols,  there  was  this  corrupting 
influence,  here  called  the  uncleanness  of  her  fornication.  They 
are  two  distinct  things.  There  might  be  the  depraving  influence 
without  the  idols ;  but  in  Babylon  both  are  actively  at  work. 

In  the  Apocalyptic  churches  it  was  observed  that  in  Per- 
gamos  appears  the  doctrine  of  Balaam,  who  taught  among  other 
things  to  commit  fornication.  When  we  came  to  Thyatira,  there 
we  saw  Jezebel,  who  imposed  idolatry  by  force.  Here  in  Baby- 
lon both  are  united.  The  evils  that  crept  into  Christendom  in 
those  earlier  days,  discerned  in  Pergamos  and  Thyatira,  both 
appear  concentrated  and  undisguised  in  the  cup  of  this  wicked 
woman.  They  were  budding  then ;  now  they  are  full-blown  in 
all  their  hatefulness  before  the  propliet.  They  may  be  tricked 
out  in  all  the  meretricious  tinsel  of  this  world ;  but  nothing 
could  change  or  hide  their  real  character  before  God. 

"And  upon  her  forehead  a  name  written,  Mystery,  Babylon 
the  great,  the  mother  of  the  harlots  and  of  the  abominations  of 
the  earth"  (verse  o).     There  was  great  pretension  to  truth — a 


RELIGIOUS   CORKUPTION   AND   PERSECUTION.  361 

masterpiece  of  the  enemy  in  counterfeiting  the  revealed  ways  of 
God.  The  mystery  of  Christ  and  the  church  had  been  revealed  ; 
now  there  is  the  mystery  of  this  anti-church  ;  not  the  mystery 
of  faith  and  godliness,  but  of  lawlessness  —  Babylon  the  great 
seated  on  the  beast,  the  awful  contrast  of  the  church  which  is 
subject  unto  Christ.  Here  she  rules  the  beast.  The  holy  city, 
Jerusalem,  comes  down  out  of  heaven  from  God,  having  the 
glory  of  God, — not  "  that  great  city"*  but, — the  holy  city,  which 
is  the  true  way  in  which  God  characterizes  the  bride,  the  Lamb's 
wife,  the  glorified  church.  This  religious  system,  on  the  contrary, 
sprang  from  the  earth  (not  to  say  more  than  that),  enticed  into 
its  defiling  embrace  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  extended  its 
malignant  influence  far  and  wide.  Such  was  Babylon,  the 
mother  of  harlots  and  abominations  of  the  earth.  Whatever 
evil  thing  was  used  by  Satan  for  the  purpose  of  ensnaring  the 
affections  from  Christ,  whatever  idolatrous  object  took  His  place, 
she  is  the  mother  of  them  all.  Babylon  is  the  great  parent  of 
all  the  worldly  systems,  and  of  the  idolatries  used  by  the  enemy 
to  draw  away  souls  entirely  from  the  Lord. 

But  there  is  another  thing  mentioned  in  the  vision  still  more 
extraordinary  to  the  prophet's  mind.  He  could  not  doubt  the 
religious  character  of  this  woman,  Babylon  the  great ;  he  sees 
her  at  the  same  time  drunken  with  the  blood  of  the  saints. 
He  could  well  understand  a  religious  system  becoming  corrupt. 
Jerusalem  itself  had,  alas !  become  as  Sodom  and  Gomorrah, 
first  for  guilt  and  afterwards  well-nigh  for  judgment.  But  that 
the  woman  should  be  drunken  with  the  blood  of  the  saints  was 
what  filled  even  John's  mind  with  great  astonishment.  Bad  as 
passion  is,  it  is  not  the  worst  thing  that  the  heart  of  man  is 
capable  of.  The  deceivableness  of  false  religion  is  that  in  which 
Satan  displays  his  direct  power.  For  the  very  thing  which  God 
has  given  for  light  and  blessing,  to  win  the  heart  and  to  bring 
into  fellowship  with  Himself,  is  abused  by  the  enemy  to  make  a 
man  a  worse  man  than  ever — twofold  more  the  child  of  hell 
than  before. 

But  astonished  as  John  must  have  been  of  old  to  hear  such  a 
sentence  upon  beloved  but  guilty  Jerusalem,  here  he  has  to 

*  The  common  text  of  Rev.  xxi.  10  is  faulty. 


362  THE   BEAST   A   DISTINCT    SYSTEM. 

wonder  still  more  wlien  he  learns  that  the  woman  who  had 
assumed  the  place  of  the  church  should  not  only  end  in  the 
same  blood-guiltiness,  but  should  be  drunken  with  the  blood  of 
the  very  martyrs  of  Christ  Himself.  This  was  what  filled  his 
mind  with  amazement  indeed  (verse  6). 

And  we  now  come  to  the  explanation  which  the  angel 
furnishes  of  the  vision.  It  is  of  deep  importance  ;  for  you  M'ill 
find  that  when  God  interprets,  He  not  merely  opens  to  us  that 
which  needed  solution,  but  He  gives  us  truth  more  abundantly. 
"  And  the  angel  said  unto  me,  Wherefore  didst  thou  marvel  ? 
I  will  tell  thee  the  mystery  of  the  woman,  and  of  the  beast  that 
carrieth  her,  which  hath  the  seven  heads  and  the  ten  horns" 
(verse  7).  This  is  in  fact  the  main  subject  of  the  chapter ;  it 
is  a  description  of  the  woman  more  particularly,  and  of  her 
connexions  wdth  the  beast,  the  Eoman  empire.  For  manifestly 
and  beyond  denial,  the  woman  and  the  beast  are  two  distinct 
things.  For  if  the  beast  be  the  Roman  empire,  as  those  will 
have  seen  who  have  followed  me  through  this  book,  the  woman 
cannot  be.  She  may  be  seated  upon  the  beast,  but  for  that  very 
reason  she  is  not  the  same  thing.  And  not  only  is  the  woman 
distinct  from  the  beast,  but,  as  we  find  afterwards,  the  beast 
turns  against  the  woman  and  takes  his  part  in  destroying  her. 

Therefore  it  is  quite  evident,  that  it  is  impossible  to  suppose 
the  woman  and  the  beast  to  be  the  same  thing.  In  the  end  they 
are  so  violently  opposed,  that  the  one  becomes  the  destruction 
of  the  other.  So  that  the  woman  must  necessarily  be  some 
power  distinct  from  the  empire.  We  shall  find  more  reasons  that 
confirm  their  distinction. 

"  The  beast  that  thou  sawest  was,  and  is  not ;  and  is  to  ascend 
out  of  the  abyss,  and  go  into  destruction ;  and  tliey  that  dwell 
on  the  earth  shall  wonder,  whose  names  were  not  written  in 
the  book  of  life  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  wlien  they 
behold  the  beast  that  was,  and  is  not,  and  shall  be  present"  (verse 
8).  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  so  runs  the  last  clause 
of  the  verse.  This  would  not  be  questioned  by  those  wlio  are 
sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  subject  to  form  an  opinion. 
Persons  may  differ  in  the  explanation  of  the  verse ;  but  there 
can  be  no  doubt  tliat  such  is  the  true  readiufr.     The  common 


ASCENT  OUT  OF  THE  ABYSS,  363 

text  here  is  almost  contradictory  of  itseK,  and  affords  no  just 
sense. 

Now  let  us  consider  a  little  what  is  taught  by  this  verse. 
The  beast  is  the  Eonian  empire,  as  we  have  before  seen.  But 
we  learn  here  that  that  empire  was  to  cease  to  be.  The  countries 
and  peoples  that  composed  it  would  remain ;  but  its  imperial 
unity  would  cease  to  exist.  The  fractional  parts  would  be  there, 
each  nation  having  its  own  independent  government,  but  there 
would  be  no  corporate  bond.  Such  is  their  condition  in  our  day, 
as  it  has  been  for  more  than  a  thousand  years.  "The  beast 
which  thou  sawest  was,  and  is  not,  and  shall  ascend  out  of 
the  abyss."  The  angel  characterizes  this  empire  as  no  other 
empire  ever  has  been  or  could  be.  It  was  first  found  in  its 
strength,  then  to  cease,  and  afterwards  to  rise  again.  But  there 
is  an  exceedingly  grave  feature  that  attaches  to  the  reappearance 
of  the  empire ;  it  is  to  have  a  diabolical  character.  And  as  it 
comes  from  Satan,  so  must  it  end  with  Satan:  it  shall  "go  into 
destruction." 

These  things  could  not  be  said  in  the  same  sense  or  strictness 
of  any  other  empire.  None  that  has  appeared  yet  upon  earth 
but  what  has  had  its  rise,  its  splendour  for  a  little  while  in  full 
power,  and  then  its  extinction,  sudden  or  gradual,  never  to  rise 
again.  I  am  not  aware  of  any  example  to  the  contrary.  Most 
peculiar  is  the  lot  of  that  empire  which  was  so  prominent  in  the 
apostle  John's  mind.  It  existed  in  the  time  of  John:  under  it 
indeed  he  was  personally  suffering.  But  it  was  to  terminate  its 
career ;  and  then,  after  a  condition  of  non-existence,  to  rise  out  of 
the  abyss  or  bottomless  pit.  "  They  that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall 
wonder  ....  when  they  behold  the  beast  that  was,  and  is  not, 
and  shall  be  present."  When  this  beast  reappears  in  its  last 
Satanic  phase,  men  would  be  carried  away  by  their  excessive 
admiration  of  it. 

"  Here  is  the  mind  which  hath  wisdom.  The  seven  heads  are 
seven  mountains,  on  which  the  woman  sitteth"  (verse  9).  This 
is  a  material  point,  though  simple.  It  is  a  local  mark,  intended 
to  indicate  to  the  wise  mind,  where  this  woman  has  her  seat. 
There  ought  not  to  be  the  least  doubt  that  it  is  a  reference  to 
Eome.  The  word  "  Babylon "  had  been  used,  it  is  true,  in  speak- 


364  THE   SEVEN    HILLS   OR   HEADS. 

ing  of  it,  as  Sodom  and  Egypt  were  figuratively  applied  to 
Jerusalem  in  chapter  xi. ;  but  the  Chaldean  capital  had  nothing 
to  do  with  the  city  of  Rev.  xvii.  That  had  long  passed  away  as 
an  imperial  city;  whereas  in  verse  18  it  is  said  of  this  Babylon 
that  "it  reigneth  over  the  kings  of  the  earth."  More  than 
this,  the  literal  Babylon  in  Chaldea  was  built  on  the  plain  of 
Shinar.  Here  the  woman  was  seated  on  seven  mountains ;  and 
all  the  world  is  aware  that  such  is  the  well-known  characteristic 
of  Rome.  In  prose  or  in  poetry,  if  any  city  were  described  as 
being  seated  upon  seven  hills,  every  one  would  say.  That  must 
be  Rome. 

But  we  have  an  additional  explanation  in  the  following  verse. 
"There  [or  they]  are  seven  kings:  the  five  are  fallen,  the  one  is, 
and  the  other  is  not  yet  come :  and  when  he  cometh,  he  must  con- 
tinue a  short  space"  (verse  10).  Here  the  Holy  Ghost,  without 
entering  into  detail,  refers  to  the  various  forms  of  government 
which  were  to  succeed  each  other  in  the  famous  city  Rome : 
seven  heads  or  kings ;  but  not  contemporary :  for  five,  as  it  is 
said,  were  fallen ;  one  is,  and  the  other  is  not  yet  come.  This 
implies  succession.  Five  different  modes  of  government  had 
already  passed  away.  "  One  is,"  namely,  the  imperial  form  then 
subsisting,  when  the  apostle  Kved — the  line  of  Caesars.  Another 
of  the  seven  was  not  yet  come,  which,  when  it  did,  must  continue 
a  short  space. 

"  And  the  beast  that  was,  and  is  not,  even  he  is  the  eighth, 
and  is  of  the  seven,  and  goeth  into  destruction"  (verse  11).  There 
is  this  peculiar  character  attributed  to  the  beast  here,  that  in  one 
sense  he  would  be  of  the  seven,  and  in  another  he  would  form 
an  eighth  or  extraordinary  beast.  It  would  in  certain  respects 
be  a  new  form  of  power  altogether,  while  in  others  it  would  be 
but  a  revival  of  what  had  gone  before.  The  reason  is,  that  the 
beast  at  first  might  be  like  any  other  empire.  It  might  owe  its 
rise  providentially  to  human  revolutions ;  for  men  when  they 
have  tried  democracy  are  apt  to  grow  weary  and  disappointed, 
and  then  some  vigorous  arm  takes  advantage  of  the  reaction, 
and  a  despotic  power  is  the  not  unnatural  result.  I  have  no 
doubt  this  will  be  the  history  of  the  west.  The  eighth  head, 
though  an  individual  ruler,  is  spoken  of  as  the  beast  or  empire, 


THE  EIGHTH   HEAD.  365 

because  he  is  morally  the  empire,  directing  as  supreme  all  its 
authority.  He  is  of  the  seven,  for  there  will  be  a  continuance 
or  takiug  up  of  some  such  form  of  power  as  before.  But  he 
will  be  the  eighth,  because  there  will  be  something  so  peculiar 
as  to  deserve  a  name  to  itself.  That  new  feature  may  refer  per- 
haps to  the  diabolical  power  that  stamps  the  beast  in  his  last 
or  quasi-resurrection  state. 

"  Aud  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest  are  ten  kings,  which 
have  received  no  kingdom  as  yet,  but  receive  authority  as  kings 
one  hour  with  the  beast.  These  have  one  mind,  and  shall  give 
their  power  and  authority  to  the  beast."  It  is  not  that  we  are 
to  suppose  "one  hour"  to  mean  mystically,  or  literally,  such  a 
brief  division  of  time  as  it  has  been  the  vain  attempt  of  so 
many  persons  to  try  and  make  out.  But  the  meaning  is  that 
these  are  kings  who  receive  royal  authority  for  one  and  the 
same  time*  with  the  beast. 

*  Quite  agreeing  with  Mr.  E.  that  the  notion  of  horal  brevity  is  untenable, 
I  must  xitterly  reject  his  statement  {S.  A.,  iii.  pp.  81,  82,  and  often  elsewhere) 
that  "at  one  and  the  same  time"  is  either  the  most  natural  or  the  true  ren- 
dering. It  is  almost  past  comprehension  how  a  scholar  could  have  committed 
himself  to  what  he  says  in  his  notes :  "  There  is  no  doubt  that  accusative  of 
time  may  (!)  signify  duration ;  but  seldom,  I  believe,  except  after  verbs  signifying 
action  such  as  may  imply  time ;  not  often  after  verbs,  like  Xafi^avio,  of  action 
instantly  completed."  The  truth  is,  as  every  person  of  learning  must  know, 
that  as  a  rule  the  temporal  accusative  distinctively  denotes  duration,  while  the 
dative  is  just  as  notoriously  used  for  a  point  of  time,  and  the  genitive  when  time 
is  conceived  as  the  necessary  condition  of  the  action,  and  therefore  antecedent 
to  it.  Nor  is  this  confined  to  certain  words  only.  "  All  verbs  imply  a  notion  of 
time  (says  Jelf,  vol.  ii.  p.  377)  over  which  the  action  extends,  coincident  and 
co-extensive  with  it ;  whence  all  verbs  may  have  an  accusative  case  of  this  coin- 
cident notion  of  time,  if  it  be  required  definitely  to  express  it."  That  I  may 
not  appear  to  have  drawn  the  distinction  of  the  Greek  cases  for  controversial 
purposes,  I  must  cite  further  from  Jelf,  §  606,  obs.  2.  "The  genitive,  accusative, 
and  dative,  therefore,  are  all  used  to  express  relations  of  time,  and  they  difier 
as  follows :  the  time  is  represented  by  the  genitive  as  the  antecedent  condition 
of  the  action ;  by  the  dative  as  the  space  wherein  the  action  took  place  ;  while 
the  accusative  expresses  the  duration  of  the  action.  So  compare  ravnig  tt^c 
r)fitpa(t  oi"E\\r)viQ  sfiaxeffavro,  this  day  giving  them  the  occasion,  with  raVTJj 
ry  vfispq^,  on  this  day,  and  tuvttjv  t^v  fifiipav,  throughout  this  day."  These 
general  principles  find  the  fullest  illustration  in  the  Hellenistic  of  the  LXX. 
and  the  New  Testament,  as  well  as  in  classical  Greek.  See,  for  the  time  at 
which  (the  dative),  Gen.  ii.  2,  3,  17;  iii.  5;  v.  1,  2;  vi.  4;  vii.  11,  13;  viii. 
4,  5,   13,  14;    xiv.  4,   5;    xv.   16,   18;    xvii.  26;    xix.   33,   34,  35;    xxi.  4,  8 


366  ONE   HOUR 

Abstractedly,  ever  so  many  years  might  be  meant,  or  only  a 
short  period.  It  is  not  a  question  of  what  an  "hour"  means. 
These  ten  horns  should  not  merely  have  their  period  of  authority 
but  they  receive  it  for  one  and  the  same  time  with  the  beast. 
This  is  most  important  to  the  due  understanding  of  this  verse. 
It  overthrows  all  the  prophetical  systems  which  have  attempted 
to  make  out  that  this  chapter  has  been  exhausted  in  the  past  or 
present.  The  common  view  of  the  chapter  may  have  a  certain 
measure  of  truth ;  because,  as  I  fully  believe,  the  book  of  Reve- 
lation was  intended  to  be  partially  accomplished  all  through  the 
dispensation ;  but  the  complete  fulfilment  is  only  at  the  close. 
The  barbarian  hordes  came  down  from  the  north  and  east  of 
Europe  and  Asia,  about  the  fifth  century,  and  overspread  the 
Eoman  empire,  bursting  over  Europe  from  all  points,  and  at- 
tacking it  within  and  on  every  side,  so  that  the  empire,  already 
too  extended,  and  crumbling  under  its  own  weight,  found  it  im- 
possible to  hold  up  against  these  vigorous  and  repeated  assaults 
from  so  many  quarters.    By  degrees  the  Goths  and  Vandals,  &c., 

xxii.  3,  &c.  But  why  thus  run  through  the  occurrences  ?  It  were  to  cite  from 
every  book  of  the  Bible,  wherein  epochs  are  spoken  of.  I  will  only  therefore 
refer  to  the  Apocalypse,  as  it  may  be  alleged  that  the  Greek  is  peculiar  there : 
Rev.  i.  10;  ii.  13;  ix.  6;  x.  7;  xi.  13;  xviii.  8,  10,  16,  19.  On  the  contrary, 
when  duration  is  intended,  the  accusative  is  employed  with  equal  regularity : 
Gen.  iii,  14,  17 ;  v.  3,  4,  6,  7,  9,  10,  12,  13,  15,  16,  &c.,  passim;  vii.  4,  12,  17,  24; 
viii.  10,  12,  22;  ix.  28;  xi.  11-26 — in  every  verse,  &c.  So  in  Rev.  ii.  10  (in  the 
text  of  B,  thirty-two  cursives,  and  apparently  the  ancient  versions,  Ai-ethas, 
and  the  Catena,  while  A  C  many  cursives,  Andreas,  &c.,  have  ijfitpiHv) ;  vi.  1 1 ; 
viii.  1 ;  ix.  6,  10  ;  xi.  2,  3,  6  (so  in  X  A  B  C  P,  most  cursives,  Hi])polytus,  Andreas 
— save  in  one  manuscript, — Arethas  and  the  Catena),  9  ;  xii.  6,  14  ;  xiii,  5 ;  xvii. 
10  (not  to  speak  of  12) ;  xx.  2,  4,  6.  It  is  certain,  therefore,  that  the  most 
natural  rendering  of  fiiav  w(jav  is  (not  at,  but)  for  one  hour.  (Compare  Daniel 
iv.  9;  Matt.  xx.  12;  xxvi.  40.)  As  to  the  action  expressed  by  the  verb,  the 
objection  is  futile.  If  the  angel  bound  Satan  for  a  thousand  years,  the  ten 
horns  may  assuredly  receive  kingly  authority  for  one  and  the  same  time  with 
the  beast.  It  is  not  the  mere  act  of  binding  or  receiving,  but  the  effect  which 
spreads  over  the  given  time.  Is  it  denied  then  that  tlie  point  of  time  is  over 
found  in  the  accusative?  Not  at  all ;  "but  this  only  (says  Jelf,  ^  571,  obs.  1) 
in  general  notions  of  time,  such  as  seasonably,  lastly,  where  the  accusative 
stands  for  the  cognate  substantive."  Nobody  can  pretend  that  such  is  the  case 
in  the  disputed  clause.  And  in  my  oi)inioi\  it  is  more  than  questionable  in  the 
three  exceptions  which  are  produced  (as  if  they  were  the  ordinary  construction!) 
from  the  Now  Testament:  John  iv.  62,  Acts  x.  3,  Mt^  Rov.  iii.  3.  As  to  Acts 
X.  3,  we  know  that  the  best  manuscripts,  the  Alexandrian,  the  Vatican,  the 


WITH   THE   BEAST.  367 

settled  themselves  in  the  various  parts  of  that  which  was  once 
united.     They  were  the  enemies  that  destroyed  the  empire. 

But  this  is  not  what  is  shewn  us  in  the  chapter.  It  tells  us 
that  these  kings  receive  authority  for  one  hour  with  the  beast. 
Supposing  that  these  barbarian  kingdoms  had  been  exactly  ten 
in  number,  even  this  does  not  answer  to  what  we  have  here ; 
because  we  are  told  that  these  ten  kings  receive  authority  for  one 
and  the  same  time  with  the  beast.  They  only  received  their 
power  when  the  beast  was  dead,  when  the  Eoman  empire  had 
fallen.  They  destroyed  the  beast  first,  and  then  erected  them- 
selves into  independent  kingdoms. 

Nothing  can  get  rid  of  the  sure  and  simple  fact  that  these 
powers  were  not  kingdoms  in  the  empire  while  the  empire  lasted. 
They  had  not  power  with  the  beast,  much  less  did  they  give 
their  power  and  strength  to  the  beast.  For  nothing  is  more 
certain  than  that  when  they  became  kingdoms,  it  was  at  the 
expense  of  the  empire.  When  it  was  gone,  they  took  up  the 
broken  fragments,  and  converted  them  into  separate  kingdoms, 

Sinaitic,  the  Palimpsest  of  Paris,  the  Laudian  of  Oxford,  not  to  speak  of  some 
twenty-five  juniors  and  other  good  authorities,  insert  inpl,  as  all  do  in  verse  9. 
As  to  John  iv.  52,  may  it  not  be  accounted  for  by  a  reference  to  the  question  of 
the  nobleman?  He  enquired  the  hour,  Ti)v  u>pav,  iv  y.  The  servants  answer. 
Yesterday  tftSoixr^v  lopav.  Then  he  knew  that  it  was  Iv  tKiivy  ry  ojpf  in  which 
Jesus  had  spoken  the  word  of  healiag  power.  So  again,  I  think,  Rev.  iii.  3  is 
probably  due  to  a  sort  of  mixed  construction  dependent  on  yv<^g.  It  may  not  be 
known  generally  that  this  is  one  of  the  instances  alleged  by  unfriendly  criticism 
in  evidence  that  the  Apocalypse  employs  the  accusative  of  time  conti'ary  to  good 
usage.  But  this,  says  Professor  Stuart,  is  the  only  instance  of  the  kind  in  the  whole 
book.  He  explains  it  thus :  "The  time  which  is  at  the  ultimate  extent  of  his  coming 
is  here  the  prominent  idea,  and  therefore  the  accusative  is  allowable."  {Comment. 
Apoc.  p.  204.)  Matt.  xxiv.  41,  42,  43,  44,  SO ;  Luke  xii.  39,  46,  shew  plainly 
enough  the  usage  undisturbed  by  special  causes.  The  difficulty  is  merely  tech- 
nical in  the  exceptional  cases,  which  entirely  differ  from  the  text  in  question. 
As  to  it  I  see  no  ground  for  a  doubt,  nor  have  I  any  theory  to  uphold  by  it ;  for 
the  true  rendering  implies  the  same  starting-point,  but  it  also  determines  the 
equal  duration  of  the  beast  and  the  ten  horns.  The  .^thiopic  and  Arabic 
understood  the  phrase  as  expressive  of  duration,  the  Syriac  and  Latin  as  a  point 
of  time.  But  why  attach  such  moment  to  the  Vulgate  on  a  nicety  like  this,  when 
the  words  which  conclude  the  verse  contain  the  gross  blunder  of  rendering 
yLtra  tov  6.  as  if  it  were  [i.  to  9.  ?  Some  copies  add  "et"  also — "  [ef]  post 
bestiam."  Cyril  and  Theodoret  do  not  touch  the  question.  Can  Mr.  E.  produce  a 
single  instance  from  any  correct  writer  where  fiiav  u>fiav  or  r'ifikpav,  as  here 
without  a  mixed  construction,  is  used  save  for  during  one  hour  or  day  ? 


368  THE  PAST   FAILS   TO   MEET   THE   PEOPHECY. 

France,  Spain,  &c. ;  but  the  empire  as  such  was  fallen.  The 
beast  that  is  described  here  acquires  power  as  an  empire  at  the 
same  time  that  these  kings  receive  their  power  as  kings.  In 
other  words,  they  are  contemporary  powers,  the  beast  and  the 
horns,  and  not  that  which  we  find  in  history  at  all.  This 
prophecy  shews  us  that  the  empire  is  only  formed  as  such  again 
at  the  same  time  that  these  ten  kingdoms  have  their  final  power. 
They  are  co-existing,  and  have  their  dominion  together — eacli  of 
these  several  kingdoms  working  to  a  common  end  under  the 
beast. 

Thus  in  the  facts  of  the  past  we  know  there  was  a  united 
unbroken  power,  when  the  Roman  empire  governed  the  western 
world,*  and  did  not  admit  of  different  independent  kingdoms 
within  its  own  limits.  There  was  no  such  thing  then  as  the 
kings  of  Spain,  France,  Italy,  &c.  It  was  an  all-absorbing 
power,  and  would  never  have  allowed  such  separate  kingdoms 
to  cluster  round  the  imperial  city.  But  the  peculiarity  of  the 
future  revived  empire  is  that  it  will  admit  of  distinct  kings. 
Two  things  will  be  united  which  never  were  before.  First,  there 
has  been  the  empire  without  kings — at  least,  so  it  was  in  the 
west,  which  is  the  question  here.  Then  there  were  kings  without 
the  empire.  The  new  feature  will  be  this :  neither  the  beast 
without  the  kings,  nor  the  kings  without  the  beast;  but  both 
the  beast  and  the  kingdoms  going  on  together.  This  is  what 
never  has  existed  before. 

Hence  the  chapter  gives  us  a  view  of  the  Roman  empire  as  it 
will  be  resuscitated  by  the  power  of  Satan,  and  sliews  that  then 
it  is  destined  to  have  the  peculiar  stamp  of  the  enemy  upon  it. 
God  Himself  allows  him  to  have  his  way  for  a  short  space,  and 
to  perpetrate  all  his  wickedness  before  the  end.  Just  as  Judas 
was  filled  with  Satan  when  he  was  about  to  betray  the  Lord 
for  the  price  of  a  slave.  He  was  under  tlie  influence  of  Satan 
before ;  but  it  is  said  then  that  Satan  entered  into  him.  He  or 
his  high-priest  was  the  son  of  perdition  :  and  this  is  the  very 

*  That  is,  the  properly  Roman  part  only  of  the  empire,  as  wc  P'lther  from 
Dan.  ii.  34,  36,  and  chap,  vii.— not  to  speak  of  Dan.  xi. ;  from  all  which  it  is 
plain  that  the  iron-clay  kingdom  does  not  refer  to  what  was  once  under  the 
Roman  sway  outside  Europe,  hut  to  the  western  part  which  never  belonged  to 
Qroecc,  Persia,  or  Babylon. 


THE   SAINTS    COME   WITH    CHRIST.  369 

name  that  is  given  to  the  future  power  that  will  rise  up  against 
the  Lord  from  heaven.  This  empire  is  to  rise  up  out  of  the 
bottomless  pit,  and  to  be  clothed  with  a  diabolical  character  and 
energy  ;  and  when  it  comes  up,  there  are  to  be  ten  kingdoms, 
or  kings,  exercising  regal  power  for  the  same  period  with  the 
beast. 

The  next  verse  (13)  shews  us  the  policy  common  to  them. 
"  These  have  one  mind,  and  shall  give  their  power  and  strength 
nnto  the  beast."  They  are  not  jealous  of  the  beast ;  their  great 
object  is  to  exalt  him  and  to  aggrandize  his  power.  And  what 
is  the  issue  ?  what  the  use  they  make  of  their  combined  power  ? 
"These  shall  make  war  with  the  Lamb,  and  the  Lamb  shall 
overcome  them:  for  he  is  Lord  of  lords,  and  King  of  kings :  and 
they  that  are  with  him,  called  and  chosen  and  faithful"  (ver.  14). 
So  it  is  evident  from  this,  that  the  heavenly  saints  are  already 
gone  to  the  Lord.  It  is  not  that  the  Lord  receives  them  now  ; 
they  are  with  Him  in  the  conflict,  and  before  the  conflict  begins. 
And  this  is  conflrmed  by  chapter  xix.  14:  "And  the  armies 
which  were  in  heaven  followed  him  upon  white  horses,  clothed 
in  fine  linen,  clean  and  white."  Whence  did  they  follow  Him  ? 
Is  it  not  from  heaven  ?  Christ  is  coming  to  attack  the  great 
adversary  upon  the  earth  whom  Satan  employs.  But  it  is  heaven 
that  opens,  and  thence  not  only  Christ  comes,  but  "  they  that 
are  with  him,  called  and  chosen  and  faithful." 

This  is  not  a  description  of  angels :  for  though  angels  may  be 
said  to  be  "  chosen"  or  "  elect,"  they  are  never  said  to  be  "called." 
"  Called"  is  a  title  only  used  of  men,  and  supposes  the  working 
of  grace.  Angels  are  not,  and  I  think  could  not  be,  "called  ;" 
for  if  an  angel  were  in  a  position  of  evil,  he  could  not  be  de- 
livered out  of  it ;  and  if  he  were  in  a  holy  position,  he  would 
not  need  "  calling."  Calling  always  presumes  a  condition  out  of 
which  the  called  are  brought.  Tlie  believer  is  brought  from  a 
place  of  sin  and  misery  into  one  of  salvation  and  blessing.  This 
is  true  of  man  alone.  He  is  the  only  creature  of  God  that  is 
called,  through  God's  grace,  out  of  a  state  of  ruin  into  the 
blessedness  and  glory  of  redemption.  And  as  in  chapter  xvii.  14 
there  is  this  expression  which  shews  us  positively  that  saints 
and  nut  angels  are  spoken  of,  so  in  chapter  xix.  14  we  are  told 

2  B 


370  ANGELS   ARE   NOT    HERE   DESCRIBED. 

that  the  armies  which  follow  the  Lamb  out  of  heaven  are 
"  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and  clean."  Now  it  is  said  in  the 
same  chapter  (verse  8)  that  fine  linen  is  the  righteousness  of 
saints.  People  may  ask,  Are  not  angels  said  to  be  clothed  in 
linen  ?  Yes,  they  are  ;  but  it  is  not  the  same  term  that  is  used 
for  instance  in  Eev.  xv.  6.  The  Spirit  of  God  employs  a  different 
expression  to  describe  it,  never  confounding  the  two  things.  The 
plain  inference  then  is  that  the  glorified  saints  are  in  heaven 
with  the  Lord,  before  this  conflict  begins — not  that  they  then 
meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.  When  the  Lord  comes,  we  do  meet 
Him  in  the  air.  Then  it  is  that  He  will  take  us  to  heaven.  But 
when  He  comes  in  order  to  judge  and  make  war,  we  come  with 
Him  from  heaven.  How  long  a  time  may  have  expired  while 
we  are  in  heaven,  and  before  we  appear  with  the  Lord,  we  do 
not  know;  but  the  coming  of  the  Lord  for  the  saints  is  an  event 
that  takes  place  some  time  before  He  comes  with  them.  When 
He  comes  with  the  saints,  it  is  for  the  purpose  of  judging  the 
beast  and  his  adherents.  The  church  will  come  with  Him  then, 
and  the  Old  Testament  saints  too ;  for  they  will  have  been  caught 
up  to  the  Lord  at  the  same  time  that  we  are,  I  doubt  not.  "These 
shall  make  war  with  the  Lamb" — but  the  victory  is  sure — "  and 
the  Lamb  shall  overcome  them,  ....  and  they  that  are  with  him, 
called,  and  chosen,  and  faithful." 

"  And  he  said  unto  me,  The  waters  which  thou  sawest,  where 
the  whore  sitteth,  are  peoples,  and  multitudes,  and  nations,  and 
tongues.  And  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest  and  the  beast, 
these  shall  hate  the  whore,  and  shall  make  her  desolate  and 
naked,  and  shall  eat  her  flesh,  and  burn  her  with  fire"  (verses 
15,  16).  This  is  another  verse  of  great  value  for  understanding 
the  chapter.  The  common  text  thus  says,  "  the  ten  horns  which 
thou  sawest  upon*  the  beast ;"  but  it  ought  to  be  read,  "the  ten 

*  Hero  is  another  ilagnint  proof  of  Mr.  E.'s  proneness  to  prefer  a  manifestly 
Bpurioiis  reading  which  his  hypothesis  requires  to  the  reading  which  has  the 
,  support  of  the  best  authorities,  and  the  suffrages  of  perhaps  every  critic  of 
weight.  But  he  now  omits  hia  words  in  the  fifth  edition,  "I  think  with 
Daubuz,  that  this  reading  (/cnc)  is  most  unlikely.  He  writes  thus  :  '  This  (icai) 
is  the  reading  of  the  Complutcnsian  edition;  but  the  rest  have  tm  to  Gripiov 
instead  of  Kai  to  Oijptov.  This  last  is  not  consistent  with  the  description,  or 
distinction,  of  the  ten  horns  and  the  beast ;  and  therefore  I  have  received  the  other 


THE   TEN   HORNS   AND   THE   BEAST.  371 

horns  which  thou  sawest  and  the  beast."  The  importance  of  the 
change  in  this  (and  there  is  the  best  authority  for  it),  that  when 
people  read,  "  the  ten  horns  upon  the  beast,"  they  might  have 
imagined  that,  the  Eoman  empire  being  gone,  then  these  ten 
horns  took  its  place.  This  would  very  well  have  suited  the 
past  history.     But,  as  we  have  seen  before,  that  the  ten  horns 

in  my  translation.  For  the  beast,  as  such,  can  never  (!)  be  said  to  hate  the 
whore;  but  the  horns  upon  the  boast  may'  (p.  795).  Vitringa  too  adopts  the 
reading  sm,  'decern  cornu  quae  vidisti  in  Bestid.'  Bellarmine  urges  the  reading 
Kcu,  in  defence  of  the  Papacy  against  Protestants.  '  For  how  can  Bishops  of 
Home  be  antichrist,'  he  argues,  '  when  antichrist  is  to  join  with  the  ten  kings 
and  destroy  Rome  ?'  But  the  infallible  Vulgate,  we  saw,  as  well  as  his  brother 
Komanists,  Ribera  a  Lapide,  Malvenda,  &c.,  are  here  against  him.  The  pro- 
phetic sword's  edge  cannot  be  so  averted  from  Rome.  Bellarmine  admits  the 
beast  to  be  antichrist,  and  the  woman  of  the  seven  hills  to  be  Rome.  And  what 
their  pictured  relation  to  each  other  in  the  vision  but  that  of  the  closest  inti- 
macy and  alliance  ?  If  (c«t  be  read,  what  is  said  of  the  beast's  hating  the 
woman,  &c.,  can  be  understood  only  of  the  city  of  Rome,  not  the  church  of 
Rome.  For  the  apostate  church's  false  prophet  continues  with  the  beast  to  the 
end.  So  Apoc.  xix.  19.  Compare  what  is  said  of  treading  the  winepress  without 
the  city,  p.  15  supra."  {R.A.,  vol.  iv.  p.  30,  note  1.)  He  now  adds,  "  But  see  my 
note  3  on  p.  74  of  vol.  iii.  in  support  of  the  reading  eiri.  I  there  cite  Tertullian 
and  Hippolytus,  two  Fathers  of  earlier  date  than  any  extant  Greek  MSS.  of  the 
Apocalypse  in  support  of  stti.  It  is  the  reading  too  of  most  copies  of  the  Vul- 
gate :  Decern  cornu[a]  quae  vidisti  in  Bestid,  and  adopted  by  the  Romanists, 
Ribera,  a  Lapide,  Malvenda,  &c.,  as  well  as  by  our  Protestant  interpreters, 
Vitringa,  Daubuz,"  &c.  I  have  examined  these  citations,  and  am  satisfied  that 
neither  Tertullian  nor  Hippolytus  touch  the  question  of  ini.  Neither  quotes  the 
verse,  nor  says  a  word  but  what  one  who  received  xai  might  say.  Their  codices 
too  are  far  inferior  in  antiquity  to  the  great  uncials  of  the  Apocalj^pse.  The  best 
copies  of  the  Vulgate  (Amiat.  Fuld.  Tolet.  Demidov.  &c.)  read  "  et;"  so  that  no 
critic  could  hesitate  that  Jerome,  "  that  most  critical  of  all  the  Fathers,"  rejected 
the  reading  which  has  crept  into  the  inferior  Greek  and  Latin  manuscripts,  clean 
contrary  to  Mr.  E.'s  statement  in  vol.  iii.  p.  74,  note  3.  The  healing  of  the 
wounded  head  is  quite  consistent  with  the  destruction  of  the  whore.  As  to  the 
Romanist  and  Protestant  commentators,  not  one  of  those  cited  was  conversant 
with  questions  of  text.  So  Desmarets,  in  his  treatise  on  Antichrist,  is  impru- 
dent enough  to  say,  "  Emendatissimi  codices  plerique  omnes,  Stephanorum, 
nominatim,  habeat  ittI."  Can  one  wonder  that  Professor  DeUtzsch  says.  One 
untruth  is  the  mother  of  the  rest  ?  Even  Erasmus  went  against  his  authority  ; 
for  Cod.  Reuchl.  is  now  known  to  read  Kai,  not  stti.  It  is  not  even  correct 
to  speak  of  Tichonius ;  for  he  and  Bede  omit  the  phrase.  On  the  whole,  Bengel 
(a  wild  commentator  on  the  book,  but  a  true  critic  everywhere)  was  justified  in 
saying  of  the  common  reading,  "  Fecit  Erasmus,  quem  hie  quoque  sequntur, 
qui  sclent,  editorcs,  quanquam  lectionem  banc  Latinis  deterioribus  fictam  vel 
solus  Andi'eas  Caisariensis  rcdarguit."     "  Inauis  esset  tot  cotlicum  collatio,  si 

2  B  2 


372  THESE    yVLL   UNITE   AGAINST   THE   HARLOT. 

receive  their  kingdom  for  the  same  time  with  the  beast,  so  here 
the  Spirit  of  God  says,  "  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest  and 
the  beast."  Thus  any  person  who  weighs  this  with  verse  12 
would  perceive  how  mistaken  the  usual  thought  is.  "  The  ten 
horns  which  thou  sawest  and  the  beast,  these  shall  hate  the 
whore,  and  shall  make  her  desolate,"  &c.  * 

taliura  quoque  locorum  germana  lectio  aut  postponeretur  sine  fine,  aut  saltern  in 
ancii^iti  relinqueretur."  Even  the  prejudiced  Wolft",  who  differed  from  Bongel 
wherever  it  was  possible,  here  truly  remarks,  "  Vel  omnium  vel  plerumqno 
codicum  Graecorum  consensus  non  parvi  fieri  debet." 

That  Daubuz  (1720)  should  have  laboured  under  a  mistake  as  to  the  com- 
parative claims  of  the  two  readings  one  can  conceive ;  that  Vitringa,  spite  of 
his  historical  lore  and  general  ability  in  expounding,  should  have  ignored  the 
best  witnesses  then  known,  is  not  perhaps  very  wonderful.  But  it  is  passing 
strange  that  in  the  face  of  the  unanimity  of  critical  editors,  presenting  ever)' 
shade  of  religious  prejudice  and  prepossession,  such  as  Bengel,  Griesbach, 
Lachmann,  Matthaei,  Scholz,  Tischondorf,  Tregelles,  Vater,  &c.,  who  had  no 
preconceived  notions  to  blind  their  judgment,  Mr.  Elliott  should  persist  in  an 
opinion  so  unfounded.  It  is  not  a  small  matter  to  slight  the  evidence  of  tho 
three  uncials,  forty  cursives  (some  of  the  highest  character),  of  the  iEthiopic, 
Arabic  of  the  Polyglotts,  Syriac,  &c.  If  "Wilkins  is  to  be  depended  on,  the 
Coptic,  it  seems,  should  be  added.  As  to  the  Vulgate,  Mr.  E.  is  misinformed. 
Tho  common  printed  text,  no  doubt,  has  "  in  bostia ;"  but  the  very  anciont 
and  best  copies  (including  the  Amiatine  in  the  Laurentian  Library  of  Florence, 
and  others  already  named)  read  "et  bestiam."  Whatever  may  bo  the  incon- 
sistency of  Popish  apologists,  I  cannot  admire  Protestant  special  pleading  which 
contends  for  a  reading  that  is  utterly  indefensible.  In  this  instance,  at  least,  it 
is  plain  which  of  the  two  is  most  open  to  the  charge  of  blunting  the  edge  of  the 
prophetic  sword.  Rome  is  Babylon ;  but  the  ten  horns  and  the  beast  (hardly 
the  Pope !)  are  yet  to  unite  in  destroying  her.  It  is  not  the  first  intimacy  or 
alliance  which  has  closed  in  hatred  and  violence.  The  false  prophet  continues 
with  tho  beast  to  the  end ;  but  this  neither  proves  nor  disproves  that  Babylon 
is  the  Romish  church.  Why  may  there  not  be  a  new  form  of  religious  wickedness 
in  the  Holy  Land,  even  when  Rome  city  and  church  shall  have  disappeared  P 

*  The  attempt  of  Protestants  is  vain  to  reconcile  this  statement  with  their 
theory  that  the  woman  and  the  beast  refer  to  the  church  or  city  of  Rome  and 
the  Papacy.  Thus  it  has  been  recently  argued  that  the  woman  is  the  Roma 
Dea,  both  Pagan  and  Papal,  the  scene  representing  Rome  itself,  in  tho  latter 
point  of  view,  the  angel's  explanation  including  also  the  previous  pagan  history. 
Accordingly  the  idea  is  that  tho  ten  horns  undiadomed  are  tho  Gothic  powers 
desolating  Rome,  diademed  are  the  same  kingdoms  giving  their  power  to  tho 
Pope.  For  certainly  the  barbarians  ravaged  the  empire  as  a  whole,  not  tho  city 
exclusively,  and  out  of  the  dismembered  empire  formed  their  own  independent 
kingdoms.  That  is,  tho  beast  was  that  which  they  spoiled  and  destroyed  much 
more  than  tho  woman.  Nor  were  they  united  in  a  common  fooling  of  hatred 
towarda  Rome.     Envy,  covetousncss,  lust  of  conquest  would  more  aptly  charac- 


BABYLON  DOOMED,  HOWEVEE  PROUD  BEFORE  HER  FALL.   373 

A  little  sample  of  this,  uot  of  course  executed  by  the  beast  or 
by  the  kings,  but  by  the  will  of  the  people,  appears  in  the  French 
revolution  of  the  last  century.  There  you  had  an  infuriate  people 
rising  up  against  the  woman  (the  ecclesiastical  power  that  had 
ruled  the  earth  being  completely  given  up  to  the  rage  of  the 
multitude,  and  men  enriching  themselves  at  her  expense).  But 
we  must  never  meet  one  wrong  by  being  guilty  of  another.  The 
Christian  way  to  deal  with  evil  is  ever  by  grace  lifting  us  above 
it.  Events  that  have  been  seen  on  a  small  scale  will  be  then 
realised  on  a  larger  one.  Good  men — men  worthy  of  honour 
and  in  other  respects  wise — have  not  only  desired  to  get  rid  of 
Babylon,  but  have  been  too  apt  to  sanction  any  means  with  that 
aim.  I  say  not  that  saints  are  not  to  rejoice  in  her  fall;  but  that 
they  ought  not  to  mix  themselves  up  with  the  instruments  of 
it,  nor  to  cherish  unfounded  hopes  of  blessing  then  and  thence. 

Eome  will  always  be  the  central  city  of  this  corrupt  system. 
"  The  woman  which  thou  sawest  is  the  great  city  that  hath 
sway  over  the  kings  of  the  earth"  (verse  18).  There  will,  no 
doubt,  be  a  further  development  of  it  before  the  close ;  for  she 
who  sits  as  queen  has  given  proof  even  in  our  own  days  that  she 
can  invent  new  doctrines,  and  boast  new  miracles,  developing 
wickedness  without  conscience  and  with  feeble  protest,  nay,  in 
the  midst  of  all  but  universal  acclamations.  And  it  will  be  true, 
I  conceive,  of  Rome,  as  in  all  other  cases,  that  before  the  judg- 
ment comes,  her  cup  will  be  full.  It  was  so  with  the  iniquity  of 
the  Amorites,  when  God  judged  them.    But  God  will  employ 

terize  the  motives  of  the  particular  barbarians  who  attacked  the  city.  Still  less 
can  it  be  said  that,  diademed  or  not,  they  gave  their  power  to  the  Pope.  It 
would  be  more  true  to  say  that  they  derived  it  from  him  as  their  ecclesiastical 
and  spiritual  head.  For  my  part  I  altogether  admit  the  principle  that  the 
explanation  gives  us,  not  merely  the  key  to  what  was  originally  seen,  but 
additional  truth.  Only,  as  I  have  shewn,  the  absurdity  is  in  supposing  that 
the  fresh  information  is  something  about  the  past  pagan  form  of  Rome.  On  the 
contrary  it  reaUy  furnishes  the  future  closing  aspect,  when  the  beast  and  the 
ten  horns  have  a  common  policj%  first  in  wreaking  their  hatred  and  indulging 
their  avarice  on  the  whore,  and  then  in  mustering  their  forces  with  one  consent 
for  the  final  conflict  with  the  Lamb.  The  beast  is  to  ascend  from  the  abyss, 
and  the  Lord  of  lords  descend  from  the  throne  of  God.  The  chapter  gives  us 
character  and  description,  not  dates.  The  history  is  resumed  in  chapter  xix., 
first  as  to  heaven,  and  next  as  to  earth ;  chapters  x\-ii.  xviii.  forming  a  descrip- 
tive episode. 


374  OPEN  REBELLION  OF  THE  BEAST. 

the  powers  of  the  earth  to  deal  with  Babylon.  No  doubt  the 
kings  will  think  well  of  themselves  for  getting  rid  of  such  a 
scandal ;  but  then  the  means  used  may  be  as  bad  as  that  evil 
itself.  And  what  will  be  the  issue  ?  The  millennium  ?  Quite 
the  contrary — they  will  make  war  with  the  Lamb.  They  will 
not  only  have  got  rid  of  Babylon,  but  will  combine  against 
Christ  in  the  most  direct  and  deadly  way.  When  this  day 
comes  man,  instead  of  being  any  the  better  for  having  turned 
against  Babylon,  will  give  all  his  power  to  the  beast :  and,  bad 
as  Babylon  is,  the  beast  is  more  openly  wicked.  Nothing  is 
more  hateful  to  God  under  the  sun  than  religion,  where  it  is 
used  as  a  cover  for  corruption  ;  and  this  is  Babylon.  But  as  for 
the  beast  and  the  false  prophet,  they  will  deny  God  altogether. 
As  we  read  in  the  Psalms,  "  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart, 
There  is  no  God."  Babylon  is  not  that  wilful  rebellious  spirit. 
Therefore,  after  having  destroyed  Babylon  and  eaten  her  flesh 
and  burnt  her  with  fire,  after  having  enriched  themselves  at  her 
expense,  and  having  destroyed  her,  we  find  that  those  avenging 
powers  will  go  to  fight  with  the  Lamb ;  they  will  set  themselves 
in  open  opposition  to  the  One  of  God's  choice,  the  holy  and 
heavenly  Sufferer. 

"  For  God  hath  put  in  their  hearts  to  do  his  mind,  and  to  do 
one  mind,  and  give  their  kingdom  to  the  beast,  until  the  words 
of  God  shall  be  finished"  (verse  17).  How  remarkable  it  is  to 
observe  that  thus  it  is  man  accomplishing  the  words  of  God, 
when  his  only  thought  is  that  he,  in  hatred  to  God,  is  blotting 
out  the  most  corrupt  sliam  from  tlie  face  of  the  eartli !  No 
doubt  Babylon  will  have  deserved  it ;  but  the  kings,  without 
knowing  how,  are  but  doing  servile  work  for  Him  wliose  autho- 
rity they  disown.  In  vain  they  will  have  had  all  God's  dealings 
under  the  law  before  their  eyes ;  they  will  have  had  the  w^hole 
Christian  revelation  of  grace  and  holiness,  founded  on  and 
shewn  in  the  cross  of  Jesus,  only  to  despise  it ;  they  will  have 
heard  and  rejected  the  latter-day  testimony,  the  gospel  of  the 
kingdom,  which  will  be  given  by  other,  and  I  believe  by  Jewish, 
witnesses,  after  the  church  has  been  taken  to  heaven.  Anything 
pretending  to  be  a  new  testimony,  w^hile  the  church  is  on  earth, 
must  be  false.     But  when  the  church  is  gone,  God  will  take  up 


FELLOWSHIP  WITH   THE  LAMB.  375 

His  people  Israel  again,  aucl  will  give  a  testimony,  not  so  much 
meeting  souls  so  as  to  put  them  in  connexion  with  Christ  in 
heaven,  which  He  is  doing  now,  but  sending  out  far  and  wide 
through  the  habitable  world,  as  a  witness  to  all  nations,  the  glad 
tidings  that  God's  King  is  coming  to  set  up  His  kingdom  ;  "  and 
then  shall  the  end  come." 

It  is  fellowship  with  Christ  as  the  suffering  One  which  gives 
us  deliverance  from  the  spirit  of  the  beast,  the  spirit  of  proud 
independence.  How  shall  we  overcome  with  the  Lamb  ?  We 
must  be  with  Him,  and  this  is  what  gives  the  victory  now.  Our 
strength,  in  whatever  comes  before  us,  is  to  ask.  How  does  the 
Lord  feel  touching  it  ?  Supposing  I  am  invited  to  go  to  some 
great  sight,  to  join  in  some  movement  that  may  be  very  attrac- 
tive naturally,  the  question  is.  Does  the  Lord  sympathize  with 
it  ?  Is  He  there  ?  And  if  this  applies  to  all  other  questions, 
still  more  does  it  decide  in  what  concerns  the  holiest  things,  as 
for  instance  worship.  What  does  the  Lord  sanction  and  value 
in  His  praise  ?  What  is  most  according  to  His  heart  and  mind  ? 
What  really  and  intelligently  and  obediently  gives  Him  honour  ? 
Such  is  the  sole  key  for  faith  in  this  world ;  it  unlocks  many  a 
difficulty,  and  through  the  opened  door  there  is  a  plain  path  for 
our  feet. 

The  Lord  grant  that  none  of  us  may  put  aside  those  solemn 
truths !  To  neglect  His  warning  is  the  very  thing  that  tends 
so  far  to  bring  about  the  state  of  things  of  which  we  have  been 
speaking.  That  which  carries  away  in  this  direction  now  is 
slighting  the  words  of  God;  though  w^e  shall  in  the  end  be 
fulfilling  them  to  our  own  shame.  We  shall  be  proving  how 
little  we  have  known  of  real  heart-subjection  to  God — how  little 
we  had  appreciated  the  grace  in  which  we  stand,  and  how  little 
rejoiced  in  the  hope  of  His  glory.  We  shall  manifest  that  we 
have  not  counted  it  an  honour  to  bow,  and  to  give  up  what  we 
may  like,  or  what  others  might  like  for  us,  where  it  was  really 
a  question  of  God's  will.  For  to  us  this  should  decide  all ;  be- 
cause "we  are  sanctified  unto  the  obedience  and  sprinkling  of 
the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,"  that  is,  to  the  same  character  of  obe- 
dience which  marked  the  Lord  Jesus  here  below.  It  is  not 
Christian  to  obey  Christ  merely  because  we  must.    Christ  never 


376  CHKISTIAN   OBEDIENCE, 

obeyed  thus.  If  a  man  only  does  a  thing  because  if  he  does  it 
not  he  knows  he  must  be  punished,  it  shews  plainly  that  his 
heart  is  not  in  it — he  does  not  want  to  obey.  Christian  obedience 
is  the  desire  of  doing  a  thing  because  it  is  the  will  of  God,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  gives  us  power  through  presenting  Christ  to  our 
affections.  Remember  that  to  this  we  are  sanctified.  Cleansed 
by  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  instead  of  its  being  a  menace  of 
death,  as  in  Exod.  xxiv.,  we  are  sanctified  unto  the  obedience  of 
Jesus  Christ.  We  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace,  and 
led  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  May  we  enjoy  the  power  of  His  spirit 
and  the  fulness  of  His  salvation  !  Bear  in  mind,  however,  that 
we  are  thus  saved,  not  for  ourselves,  but  to  obey  after  the  same 
pattern  and  measure  of  obedience  as  that  of  Jesus. 


god's    judgment    of    BABYLON.  377 


CHAPTEE  XVIIL 

I  THINK  that  the  case  of  Babylon  ilhistrates  strikingly  how  a 
judgment  which  is  said  to  be  God's  may,  at  the  same  time,  be 
executed  by  men.  In  chap.  xvii.  we  saw  that  God  will  make  use 
of  the  ten  horns  or  kings,  into  whose  dominions  the  Eoman 
earth,  at  the  close  of  this  dispensation,  will  be  divided,  and  will 
give  especial  prominence  to  what  is  called  "  the  beast,"  that  is, 
the  power  that  gives  a  bond  to  those  otherwise  broken  parts.  The 
great  imperial  chief,  and  the  various  separate  but  no  longer  in- 
dependent powers,  his  vassals,  will  be  the  instruments  that  God 
will  employ  for  inflicting  His  judgment  upon  Babylon. 

Now  in  chapter  xviii.  not  a  word  of  this  occurs  ;  and  the 
difference  is  so  obvious  and  great  at  first  sight,  that  some  have 
laid  it  down  with  decision  that  the  judgment  in  chapter  xvii.  is 
previous  to  that  in  chapter  xviii. ;  that  the  destruction  of  Baby- 
lon in  the  former  is  merely  a  human  one ;  that  her  doom  in  the 
latter  is  subsequent  and  directly  from  God.  But  I  would  not 
dogmatize  as  to  this  explanation,  conceiving,  on  the  contrary, 
that  in  the  same  judgment  you  may  have  God's  and  man's  side 
of  the  matter,  God  dealing  providentially,  and  men  as  His  hand 
in  striking  the  blow.  If  there  be  a  real  distinction,  the  "fall" 
precedes  the  final  destruction ;  a  total  degradation  of  her  state 
ensues  upon  the  assault  of  the  civil  powers,  followed  by  an 
urgent  call  to  God's  people  to  come  out;  and  then  her  utter 
everlasting  destruction  on  the  part  of  God. 

If  we  look  at  Babylon  in  the  Old  Testament,  justly  did  the 
prophets  speak  of  its  destruction  as  the  day  of  the  Lord  upon  it. 
"  This  is  the  work  of  Jehovah  of  Hosts  in  the  land  of  the  Chal- 
deans." (Jer.  i.)     At  tlie  same  time  it  is  quite  certain  that  the 


378  HERE   HUMAN  INSTRUMENTS  DISAPPEAR. 

medium  through  which  God  brought  about  the  ruin  of  Babylon 
was  the  celebrated  Cyrus,  the  leader  of  the  Medo-Persian  army. 
In  the  same  way,  in  Kev.  xvii.,  we  see  the  actual  human  instru- 
ments. The  influence  of  Babylon  extended  much  beyond,  but 
the  ten  horns  of  the  Roman  earth  were  those  powers  that 
radiated  as  it  were  from  her  very  centre.  And  therefore  it 
may  be  that  God  mentions  in  that  chapter  that  these  powers 
which  seemed  to  be  so  linked  with  Babylon  as  her  abject  slaves 
(the  imperial  power  itself  having  been  but  a  beast  of  burden 
to  her)  are  to  turn  round  at  a  certain  time  appointed  by  God, 
and  to  wreak  their  vengeance,  scorn,  and  hatred  upon  her.  They 
have  human  objects,  no  doubt,  but  they  are  accomplishing  this 
work  of  God's  righteous  retribution.  God  will  have  put  it  into 
their  hearts  to  agree,  and  give  their  kingdom  to  the  beast,  until 
His  words  be  consummated. 

But  in  chap,  xviii.  human  instruments  disappear,  and  when 
this  other  angel  comes  down  from  heaven,  he  says  not  a  word  of 
those  that  God  had  employed  as  the  means  of  the  fall  of 
Babylon  ;  they  are  left  out,  and  the  Lord  God  it  is  that  judges 
her.  God  could  just  as  easily  have  destroyed  Babylon  without 
the  ten  kings  as  with  them.  They  were  in  no  way  necessary. 
But  it  is  a  part  of  His  government  of  the  earth,  if  she  had 
reigned  over  kings  and  committed  fornication  with  them  before, 
to  employ  the  ten  horns  to  humble  her  at  the  end.  They  might 
be  bad  men  with  bad  objects.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  shew 
the  saints  distinctly  that  God  is  against  Babylon.  Let  us  now 
consider  a  little  this  new  point  of  view,  in  which  we  have  only 
two  parties  presented  in  the  scene.  There  is  Babylon  upon  earth 
and  there  is  God  in  heaven ;  and  the  Lord  God  is  against  the 
proud  queenly  city  that  had  been  the  constant  enemy  of  God 
and  of  His  people — that  had  been  the  instrument  of  Satan  to 
entice  and  draw  away  her  victims  into  an  evil  alliance  and  into 
idolatry.  Such  is  the  way  Babylon  is  looked  at  here.  And  yet 
this  Babylon  is  the  one  that  arrogated  to  herself  the  place  and 
function  of  making  God  known.  For  the  great  city  is  no  longer 
a  heathen  power :  not  like  Babylon  of  old,  a  stranger  outside, 
and  used  of  God  as  a  means  of  inflicting  chastisement  on  His 
people  Israel.     I  conceive  that  the  Babylon  of  Revelation  is 


THE  LOED   GOD   PROMINENT.  379 

most  clearly  a  reference  to  Old  Testament  Babylon,  but  applied 
to  New  Testament  subjects.  In  the  Old  Testament,  the  great 
thought  of  God  was  His  people  and  land :  and  there  was  also  a 
city  on  which  His  eye  rested  with  special  affection.  For  He 
not  only  loved  the  people,  but  was  interested  in  what  He  gave 
the  people.  But  that  has  entirely  passed  away  since  the  rejected 
Christ  was  crucified.  From  that  moment  till  now  there  has  been 
no  one  place  more  holy  than  another.  That  which  had  been 
the  holy  city  was  now  as  it  were  Aceldama,  the  field  stained 
with  the  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  But  God's  eye  saw  that  in 
process  of  time  the  great  city  of  the  earth  would  profess  Christ's 
name,  and  would  take  advantage  of  His  own  revelation,  and  out 
of  the  corrupted  and  fallen  state  of  Christianity  would  make  a 
system  of  its  own — borrowing  all  that  it  could  take  from  Ju- 
daism, and  mingling  it  with  its  own  Gentile  evil,  so  as  thus  to 
work  out  a  system  most  hateful  to  God,  and  seducing  to  man. 

I  have  no  doubt,  therefore,  that  in  this  chapter  it  is  Eome 
that  is  the  peculiar  object  of  God's  judgment.  Not  that  Eome 
is  all  that  is  meant  by  Babylon,  but  that  Eome  is  the  centre  of 
it ;  because  it  is  of  all  others  the  most  guilty  in  God's  sight. 
Not  Eome  in  the  pagan  form ;  not  merely  Eome  in  our  own 
days,  bad  as  it  is,  and  becoming  increasingly  wicked.  But  I 
think  that  the  Babylon  of  the  Apocalypse  is  not  merely  that 
system  which  is  now  opposed  to  Christianity,  but  Babylon  when 
it  will  have  opposed  the  last  testimony  that  God  will  send — this 
testimony  of  the  Son  of  man's  kingdom  that  is  about  to  be  set 
up  over  His  beloved  people.  For  God  never  gives  up  His 
purpose.  It  is  part  of  the  character  of  God  never  to  repent  of 
His  gifts  and  calling.  Where  it  is  not  a  purpose  of  mercy  but 
a  threat,  God  may  and  loves  to  bend.  That  He  does  so  we 
know  from  the  case  of  Nineveh ;  though  the  blow  was  then 
struck  and  will  be  again  at  some  future  time.  He  will  allow 
men  to  say  that  He  has  changed  his  mind  when  it  is  a  question 
of  delaying  a  punishment  for  sin  ;  but  whenever,  on  the  other 
side,  it  is  God's  purpose  to  bless  a  people.  He  never  gives  up 
that.  This  is  worthy  of  God.  He  is  full  of  mercy.  He  will 
allow  His  prophecy  against  Nineveh  sent  through  His  servant 
Jonah  to  appear  to  be  set  aside ;  He  does  not  mind  what  men 


380  I'AST    HISTORY   OF   BABYLON. 

say  about  that.  He  is  quite  willing  for  them  to  think  that  He 
has  in  mercy  changed  His  mind,  and  that  the  sentence  of 
destruction  has  been  set  aside,  where  there  has  been  humbling 
and  repentance  before  God.  But  the  blessed  thing  we  find  is 
this,  that  though  man's  failure,  the  church's  failure,  and  the 
like  may  seem  to  have  jeoparded  the  blessed  purpose  that  God 
has  in  store  for  His  people,  and  for  His  own  glory,  all  that  is  of 
God  comes  out  only  the  brighter  another  day. 

Let  us  look  at  Babylon  in  its  past  history,  and  consider  how 
that  name  was  suited  to  express  the  special  evil  that  was  to 
wrow  up  out  of  the  corruption  of  Christianity.  In  Genesis  x.  we 
have  the  first  mention  of  Babel.  And  there  we  have  it  connected 
with  a  wilful  man,  who  had  first  shewn  his  cunning  with  regard 
to  brute  beasts,  and  who  soon  began  to  turn  against  his  fellows 
all  the  craft  and  experience  he  had  acquired  in  a  lower  sphere. 
Nimrod  is  the  first  person  with  whom  you  have  Babel  associated. 
It  is  man  concentrating  power  in  himself.  But  in  the  next 
chapter  (Gen.  xi.)  we  have  another  idea.  It  is  not  only  one 
man  exalting  himself  and  others  subjected  to  him  by  fraud  or 
force,  but  a  grand  effort  of  men  gathering  themselves  together 
to  build  something  permanent  and  strong  and  high — a  tower 
that  would  reach  toward  heaven,  and  gain  them  a  name  upon 
earth.  Here,  then,  we  have  the  two  thoughts  that  are  always 
more  or  less  connected  Avith  Babylon.  It  may  take  the  form  of 
an  individual  who  exalts  liimself,  or  of  men  combining  for  some 
notable  enterprise ;  or  it  may  be  a  mixture  of  both  principles. 

Now  this  you  have  further  and  still  more  plainly  developed, 
when  you  come  down  to  the  history  of  the  Jewish  nation.  God 
called  them  out  as  a  people,  and  gave  them  special  privileges 
and  blessings.  They  fell  into  idolatry,  the  sin  which  sprang 
from  Babylon  as  its  great  and  primitive  source ;  and  Babylon 
becomes  the  chief  means  of  judgment  for  the  people  of  God,  and 
the  scene  of  Judah's  captivity.  There  again  we  behold  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, the  golden  head  of  the  image,  answering  to  Nimrod,  and 
the  great  city  that  he  built,  which  answers  to  the  tower  of  Babel 
— the  two  ideas  being  united,  as  indeed  they  soon  became  at 
first;  for  Babel  was  the  beginning  of  Nimrod's  kingdom.  The 
natural  heart  covets  present  exaltation  for  man  on  the  earth,  and 


APPLICATION    IN   THE   NEW   TESTAMENT.  381 

this  too  clothed  with  a  religious  sanction,  but  with  an  idolatrous 
intent. 

Now  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  New  Testament  takes  up  the 
term  "Babylon"  and  applies  it  to  the  corruption  that  was  to 
issue  in  professing  Christendom.  When  God  saves  souls,  He 
does  not  allow  them  to  choose  their  own  path  in  the  world ;  still 
less  can  He  own  their  choosing  their  own  path  in  the  church. 
He  who  understands  his  place  as  belonging  to  God  has  his  will 
broken.  He  is  privileged  to  treat  his  nature  as  a  dead  and  evil 
thing  ;  not  on  tlie  ground  of  a  slave  working  for  something  and 
because  he  must,  but  in  the  liberty  of  a  son  of  God  —  of  one 
who  has  been  blessed  by  God,  and  who  has  the  interests  of  his 
Father  at  heart.  But  it  is  not  his  Father's  will  that  at  the 
present  time  he  should  meddle  with  the  world,  or  have  a  place 
in  it.  According  to  God's  mind  the  world  is  not  good  enough  for 
the  Christian,  because  it  is  practically  under  the  power  of  the 
enemy.  There  is  a  time  coming  when  the  world  will  be  put 
under  the  children  of  God,  when  they  will  judge  the  world.  But 
this  can  never  be  until  Satan  is  set  aside,  and  Christ  publicly 
exalted  over  tlie  earth  as  well  as  in  heaven.  Meanwhile  the 
saints  have  to  wait  in  faith  and  patience.  And  this  is  the  argu- 
ment which  the  apostle  urges  in  1  Cor.  vi.  why  brethren  in 
Christ  should  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  world's  judgments 
now.  It  was  beneath  their  dignity  as  children  of  God  to  carry 
their  differences  there ;  it  was  vain  to  try  to  reform  the  world. 
Such  a  thought  never  entered  the  apostle's  mind.  For  faith, 
while  it  delights  in  the  deliverance  of  poor  sinners,  looks  at  the 
world  with  God  as  already  judged,  and  only  waiting  for  the 
execution  of  the  sentence  at  Christ's  coming. 

But  while  the  apostle  exhorts  to  subjection  to  the  powers 
that  be,  he  never  says.  You  brethren,  that  have  posts  of  honour 
in  the  earth,  you  are  to  continue  there.  This  would  have  been 
to  defeat  the  object  of  God,  whose  children  are  not  of  the  world, 
even  as  Christ  is  not  of  the  world.  For  God  is  not  now  under- 
taking to  govern  the  world,  save  in  His  secret  providence  of 
course.  When  the  kingdom  of  this  world  as  a  fact  becomes  His, 
He  begins  by  judging  the  corrupters  of  the  earth,  and  more 
particularly  every  iniquity  done  under  the  name  of  Christ.  This 


382       CHRIST  BLENDED  WITH  THE  WORLD  AND  THE  PRINCIPLE, 

is  not  what  God  does  now :  He  is  rather  testing  the  souls  of  His 
peoj)le  in  a  place  of  temptation,  where  everything  is  contrary  to 
His  name.  If  they  are  faithful,  they  will  suffer  persecution  ;  if 
unfaithful,  they  may- be  made  much  of  by  the  world.  They  may 
have  its  ease  and  honour,  but  they  assuredly  will  be  used  by 
Satan  to  keep  all  quiet;  for  nothing  furnishes  such  a  sanction  to 
evil  as  a  good  man  who  joins  the  world  and  gives  it  counte- 
nance. Eemember  Lot.  He  was  in  the  gate  of  Sodom,  the  place 
where  justice  was  administered.  His  position  there  was  as  dis- 
honouring to  God  as  it  was  miserable  to  himself  He  had  to  be 
forced  out  of  it  at  last;  but  even  before  he  was  taken  out  of 
Sodom,  the  well-watered  plains  had  lost  their  value  in  his  eyes. 
Eemember  also  Lot's  wife. 

His  righteous  soul  was  vexed  with  their  unlawful  deeds,  he 
himself  was  the  object  of  their  taunts.  "  This  one  fellow,"  said 
they,  "  came  in  to  sojourn,  and  he  will  needs  be  a  judge."  They 
saw  the  incongruity  of  his  position,  as  worldly  men  generally 
are  quick  to  perceive  the  failures  of  the  believer.  Alas !  it  is 
easy  to  understand  how  a  man  may  be  godly  in  the  main,  and 
yet  found  in  circumstances  where  a  Christian  ought  not  to  be, 
and  that  so  far  he  is  not  a  true  witness  for  God.  Whether  I  look 
at  the  individual  Christian  or  at  the  churcli,  I  see  that  God's 
object  is  to  have  a  testimony  to  His  own  glory  in  the  world ;  to 
have  those  who  are  for  Him,  not  in  the  way  of  putting  down 
the  world,  much  less  of  seeking  to  get  the  honour  and  riches  of 
the  world ;  but  willing  for  Christ's  sake  to  abandon  what  they 
liked  best,  because  they  look  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen, 
but  at  the  unseen  and  eternal.  This  is  grace's  triumph,  and  so 
far  as  it  is  true  of  us,  we  are  real  witnesses  for  God.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  we  are  seeking  to  gain  or  retain  the  world  along 
with  Christ,  the  principle  of  Babylon  is  begun. 

No  doubt.  Rev.  xvii.  xviii.  go  much  farther  than  this,  and 
shew  that  a  vast  religiously  corrupting  system  is  meant.  This 
is  made  very  plain  by  comparing  chap.  xvii.  1,  2,  3,  with  chap, 
xxi.  9,  10,  11.  In  chap.  xvii.  1,  it  is  said,  "There  came  one  of 
the  seven  angels,  ....  and  talked  with  me,  saying.  Come  hither ; 
I  will  shew  thee  the  judgment  [or  sentence]  of  the  great  whore, 
that  sittcth  by  the  many  waters."     But  again,  in  chap.  xxi.  9, 


BUT  THE  DEVELOPMENT  GOES  FARTHER.        383 

we  have  another  scene.  "  There  came  unto  me  one  of  the  seven 
angels,  and  talked  with  me,  saying,  Come  hither,  I  will  shew 
thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife."  Now  it  is  evident  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  uses  the  same  kind  of  introduction  for  these  two 
women,  for  the  purpose,  I  think,  of  our  connecting  them  together. 
The  same  guide,  one  of  the  seven-vial  angels,  takes  John,  and 
shews  him  in  the  wilderness  this  earthly  and  corrupt  woman ; 
afterwards,  in  the  closing  scene,  he  takes  him  to  an  exceedingly 
high  mountain,  and  shews  him  a  heavenly  one.  As  the  heavenly 
woman  is  the  symbol  of  the  heavenly  church,  so  is  Babylon  of 
a  corrupt  religious  body.  It  is  that  which  takes  the  place  of 
the  church,  and  of  being  the  witness  for  God  upon  earth,  while 
it  carries  on  every  wicked  commerce  with  those  who  are  exalted 
here  below.  There  is  first,  as  usual,  the  carnal  and  earthly,  then 
the  spiritual  and  heavenly.  After  the  false  system  of  men  and 
Satan  disappears,  the  true  is  displayed  in  the  glory  of  God. 

Now,  though  we  may  look  for  a  future  development  of  Baby- 
lon, as  opposing  God's  final  testimony  of  the  kingdom  to  all 
nations  before  the  end  come,  yet  I  think  that,  even  at  the  present 
moment,  there  need  be  no  difficulty  in  judging  where  the  features 
of  Babylon  are  found  most  fully.  It  is  a  religious  system  that 
governs  a  number  of  kings,  not  an  establishment  that  is  at  the 
mercy  of  the  secular  government.  This  is  sin,  but  it  is  not  the 
wickedness  spoken  of  here.  Babylon  is  an  incomparably  darker, 
deeper,  and  more  wide-spread  system  of  religious  corruption — 
arrogating  to  itself  the  name  of  the  church  of  God  exclusively, 
setting  itself  above  kings,  intriguing  with  them,  but  at  the  same 
time  maintaining  its  supremacy  above  them  all ;  stupefying  the 
masses  with  the  poison  of  her  exciting  falsehoods  :  arrayed  in 
all  the  meretricious  splendour  of  the  world ;  the  fountain-head 
of  the  worst  idolatry  under  the  sun ;  and  finally  manifesting  a 
spirit  of  blood-thirsty  persecution  against  the  true  saints  and 
witnesses  of  Jesus,  under  the  usurped  pretence  of  His  will  and 
authority.  There  is  one  that  does  claim  this  place — one  that 
takes  it  as  given  by  God — one  whose  seat  and  centre  are  found 
in  the  very  heart  of  what  was  once  the  Eoman  empire — a 
religious  system  that  affects  universal  dominion,  and  that,  in 
order  to  accomplish  it,  either  wins  by  every  enticing  art,  or 


384  KOME   IS   ITS    CENTKE,    NOT   NATIONALISM. 

extinguishes  all  opposition  in  the  blood  of  heretics  so-called, 
her  victims.  "  By  thy  sorceries  were  all  nations  deceived.  And 
in  her  was  found  the  blood  of  prophets,  and  of  saints,  and  of 
all  that  were  slain  upon  the  earth"  (verses  23,  24).  For  any 
unprejudiced  person  who  reads  this  description  of  Babylon 
calmly,  and  asks  himself,  What  is  that  professing  Christian  body 
so  abounding  in  idols,  so  authoritative  over  the  kings  of  the 
earth,  so  indulgent  to  the  wicked,  and  so  cruel  to  the  righteous  ? 
it  is  impossible  not  to  see  the  answer.* 

As  to  the  Greek  and  Oriental  churches,  as  to  the  English, 
Scotch,  and  other  reformed  national  establishments,  they  are 
more  or  less  notoriously  subservient  to  the  government  which 
has  to  do  with  each  of  them.  This  may  be,  and  I  believe  is, 
evil.  But  there  are  two  ways  in  which  a  religious  system  may 
act  contrary  to  Christ :  either  by  a  guilty  subjection  to  the 
world,  or  by  a  still  more  guilty  supremacy  over  it — in  short,  by 
being  the  world's  slave  or  the  world's  mistress.  At  the  present 
time  there  is  only  one  religious  system  which  pretends  to  have 
kings  at  its  feet ;  and  this  is  the  system  of  Rome,  which 
therefore  answers  to  Babylon.  It  is  a  great  mistake  to  suppose 
that  we  have  done  with  it,  or  that  its  day  is  over.  Rome  may 
yet  have  a  short-lived  triumph.  Its  emissaries  are  actively 
abroad  all  over  the  world,  and  the  foundations  of  Protestantism 
are  being  undermined  everywhere.  Those  who  are  looking  for 
Christianity,  as  things  are,  to  overthrow  all  its  adversaries  on 
earth,  are  in  my  opinion  in  great  danger  of  being  deceived, 
through  the  uuscriptural  hope  of  getting  a  church  as  great  or 
greater  in  good  than  that  of  Rome  is  in  evil.  For  there  will 
come  a  fearful  struggle  yet,  and  Rome,  as  I  conceive,  will  seem 
to  acquire  vast  influence,  and  to  put  down  every  contrary  voice, 

•  The  effort  of  the  celebrated  and  subtle  Bossuet  to  turn  aside  the  application 
of  Babylon  in  Kev.  xvii.  and  xviii.  from  Christianised  or  Papal  Rome  is  not 
only  weak,  but  when  duly  sifted  brinj^s  out  the  truth  more  evidently.  His 
argument  is  that  the  church  being  married  to  Clirist,  the  guilty  church  would 
be  an  adulteress  rather  than  a  harlot.  The  answer  is,  not  merely  that  fornication 
is  the  generic  term,  as  every  one  may  see  in  both  Old  and  New  Testaments,  but 
that,  even  applied  witli  the  utmost  rigour,  a  harlot  moat  correctly  describes  the 
present  sin,  because  the  church  is  now  espoused  to  Oliriat,  not  married.  The 
marriage,  according  to  the  Apocalypse,  is  only  consumuiated  after  Babylon's 
final  judgment  in  chapter  xix. 


THE  TEN  HORNS  NOT  THE  KINGS  OF  THE  EARTH.    385 

except  the  feeble  whisper  of  the  few  witnesses  spoken  of  here, 
who  either  die  by  her  or  come  out  of  her.  God  will  hear  them, 
but  as  far  as  all  open  or  public  testimony  for  Ilim  is  concerned, 
it  will  be  swamped  by  Babylon.  And  as  to  putting  Babylon 
down,  it  is  not  by  the  gospel,  or  by  the  force  of  truth  that  it 
will  be  done,  but  by  the  will  and  wrath  of  men.  Wherever 
Eomanism  gains  the  day,  infidelity  is  the  necessary  consequence ; 
and,  therefore,  Babylon  always  prepares  the  way  for  the  last 
effort  of  the  beast  against  the  Lamb.  But  before  the  close,  the 
beast  gets  thoroughly  the  upper  hand,  and  Babylon  becomes 
food  for  him  and  the  ten  horns. 

Is  this  what  is  introduced  to  us  here  ?  Man  is  left  out ;  the 
ten  horns  are  not  once  alluded  to  in  chapter  xviii.,  though  the 
kings  of  the  earth  are.  The  difference  is  this.  "  In  the  kings 
of  the  earth,"  I  apprehend,  are  embraced  all  those  rulers  of 
Christendom  with  whom  she  had  been  on  terms  of  bad  inti- 
macy, or  who  had  had  evil  connexion  with  her.  The  ten  horns 
are  the  chiefs  of  the  final  divided  state  of  the  empire  and  the 
active  instruments  of  her  devastation,  as  we  are  told  in  chapter 
xvii.  The  kings  of  the  earth  are  her  mourners,  not  her  burners. 
Here  in  chapter  xviii.  her  hour  is  come,  and  it  is  the  Lord  God 
that  hath  judged  her. 

You  will  observe  the  voice  from  heaven  here :  "  Come  out  of 
her,  my  people,  that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  sins,  and  that 
ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues"  (verse  4).  The  receiving  of  her 
plagues  is  not  the  divine  motive  for  separation.  Men  would  be 
anxious  enough  about  that.  But  the  great  thing  that  God  looks 
for  from  His  people  is  this— that  they  should  not  be  partakers 
of  her  sins.  I  would  put  it  to  every  Christian,  how  far  is  he 
in  sympathy  with  God's  mind  touching  Babylon  and  its  sins  ? 
How  far  does  he  feel  the  evil  of  it,  and  judge  it  ? 

Babylon  does  not  seek  heaven,  but  the  earth — not  the  suffer- 
ings of  Christ  and  the  glories  that  should  follow,  but  to  sit  as 
a  queen  and  to  see  no  sorrow.  Babylon  is  content  with  worldly 
exaltation.  If  you  steer  clear  of  this,  Babylon  has  no  attractions 
for  you ;  and  the  present  danger  of  every  soul  from  Babylon  is 
the  gradual  caring  for  and  allowance  in  Christians  of  what  man 
values  on  the  earth.  Of  late  years  there  has  been  no  little  change 

2  c 


386  THE   SPIRIT   AND   END   OF   BABYLON. 

in  the  thoughts  of  Christians  as  to  the  present  enjoyment  of 
prosperity  and  pleasure  in  this  world.  But  there  is  amazing 
danger  in  it.  For  what  is  the  great  thought  of  it  all  ?  Man 
rising,  progressing,  exalting  himself — man  shewing  what  he  can 
do,  and  how  improve ;  and  this  is  sought  to  be  connected  with 
the  name  and  sanction  of  Christ !  Alas  !  it  is  Babylon  the 
great  (verses  9-19).  In  her  we  see  the  end  of  the  heart's  desire, 
along  with  Christ,  to  enjoy  all  that  is  in  the  world,  the  lust  of 
the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life.  I 
do  not  wonder  at  an  unconverted  man  seeking  to  make  the 
world  pleasant :  Cain  did  it,  and  there  is  such  a  thing  now  as 
going  in  the  way  of  Cain.  These  are  the  people  that  handle 
all  sorts  of  musical  instruments,  and  the  artificers  in  brass  and 
iron.  It  is  true  that  these  things  sprang  up  in  a  very  early  hour 
of  the  world,  but  still  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not  tell  us  for 
nothing  that  they  were  in  the  family  of  Cain,  not  in  the  family 
of  Seth. 

Every  child  of  man  stands  responsible  to  God,  whether  con- 
verted or  not,  to  own  his  outcast  state  as  a  sinner :  he  has  no 
right  to  drown  his  conscience  in  the  pleasures  and  glory  of  the 
world.  But  bad  as  this  may  be,  the  thing  that  God  most  hates, 
and  that  lie  will  judge  in  an  awful  and  public  manner,  even 
in  this  world,  is  the  tacking  on  the  name  of  Christ  to  the  in- 
dulgence of  worldly  lusts.  Is  it  not  the  desire,  even  of  many 
Christians,  to  have  the  grandeur  and  riches  of  the  world  at  their 
back  ?  I  do  not  doubt  that  they  heartily  wish  to  have  people 
converted,  but  they  would  like  them  to  bring  their  earthly  in- 
fluence along  with  them.  This  is  the  spirit  of  Babylon.  What 
the  Lord  looks  for  from  us  is  doing  the  will  of  God,  suffering 
for  it,  and  taking  it  patiently.  Any  of  these  things  which  the 
heart  covets  will  be  found  to  involve  the  will  of  man.  There  is 
not  a  single  position  of  distinction  or  of  glory  in  the  world  but 
what  requires  a  man  to  give  up  a  good  conscience  towards  God. 
In  other  words,  you  cannot  be  a  member  of  the  world,  and  act 
faithfully  as  a  member  of  Christ.  If  you  value  and  wish  to 
follow  the  world,  you  will  make  all  sorts  of  excuses,  and  argue 
for  a  compromise ;  but  this  only  shews  how  far  the  leaven  of 
Babylon  has  affected  your  soul. 


FUNDAMENTAL   MISTAKE   OF  POPERY.  387 

God  gathers  souls  round  Jesus — that  is,  Jesus  rejected,  and 
gone  up  to  heaven.  Therefore  the  Church  is  based  on  these  two 
fundamental  truths.  She  has  got  the  cross,  and  she  is  united  to 
Christ  in  heavenly  glory  by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down.  And 
the  cross  and  heavenly  glory  will  not  mingle  with  the  world. 
This  is  the  very  thing  that  puts  my  heart  to  the  test.  If  Christ 
is  my  object,  I  shall  not  want  the  world ;  I  shall  be  looking  up 
it  may  be  feebly,  but  still  looking  up  to  heaven  ;  and  there  will 
be  the  one  object  that  God  uses  to  strengthen  me  by,  giving 
me  wilUnsness  to  suffer  in  the  consciousness  of  havinc:  Christ 
in  the  glory.  Whenever  the  church  craves  after  something  else, 
as  the  esteem  and  honour  of  the  world,  or  even  social  improve- 
ment, she  denies  her  proper  glory. 

Popery  mistook  the  true  character  of  the  church,  followed  the 
Jewish  system,  and  thought  that  people  ought  to  bring  their  gold 
and  silver  and  precious  stones  and  goodly  things  to  lionour  the 
Lord  with.  (See  verses  12-14)  But  God  was  wiser  than  men, 
and  shews  that  all  this  pretence  of  honouring  God  is  a  mere 
sham,  and  that  what  people  really  want  is  to  honour  themselves. 
They  are  seeking  what  attracts  and  makes  them  an  object  of 
attraction,  whilst  they  cover  up  their  real  object  under  the  plea 
of  the  name  of  Christ.  This  is  what  God  will  judge,  and  what 
infects  the  whole  of  Christendom  increasingly  before  judgment 
comes.  You  may  ask  me  how  that  can  be  possible,  when  there 
are  so  many  societies  growing  up,  and  such  an  active  energy, 
religious  and  moral,  dealing  with  the  various  forms  of  public 
evil  throughout  the  world.  I  am  not  telling  you  what  I  see,  but 
what  God's  word  shews — the  all  but  universal  prevalence  before 
the  close  of  a  corrupt  system,  which  plainly  has  its  centre  in 
Eome,  though  taking  a  larger  compass,  so  as  to  embrace  every 
religious  institution*  which,  however  opposed  it  may  seem  to 
Popery  now,  does  not  link  a  soul  with  heaven.  There  is  no 
safety  for  any  person  who  is  building  on  the  earth.  The  hea- 
venly saints  will  be  taken  away  before  the  judgment  falls  upon 

*  Babylon  is  not  only  herself  "the  great  harlot,"  but  "the  mother  of  the 
harlots  and  the  abominations  of  the  earth."  There  are  more  of  kindred  corrup- 
tions in  religion,  though  Rome  is  pro-eminent,  "the  mother  and  mistress,"  as  she 
claims,  of  others. 

2  c  2 


388        DISSOLVING   AND    UNITING   PROCESSES   OF   THE   DAY. 

Babylon.  They  are  not  referred  to  in  that  word,  "  Come  out  of 
her,  my  people."  This  is  spoken  of  God's  earthly  people*  by 
and  by.  But  at  the  same  time,  its  principle  fully  applies.  For 
the  essence  of  Babylon  is  the  union  of  the  world  with  the  name 
of  Christ.  "  Wherefore  come  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye 
separate,  saith  the  Lord,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing ;  and  I 
will  receive  you." 

The  Lord  will  not  hold  any  man  guiltless  who  has  a  con- 
science of  what  is  due  to  Christ  and  does  not  follow  it.  To  such 
I  would  say,  this  is  what  you  will  prove :  you  will  go  on  for  a 
time  and  be  troubled  with  the  truth,  for  it  will  condemn  you ; 
but  ere  long  you  will  find  that  all  taste  for  it  is  lost ;  you  will 
tire  of  it  and  even  turn  against  it,  and  then  will  become  morally 
ripe  for  Babylon  when  it  bids  seriously  for  you.  If  I  am  guilty 
of  the  spirit  of  Babylon,  this  is  what  God  looks  at,  as  far  as  I 
am  concerned.  The  person  who  travels  in  her  path  cannot  but 
be  a  partaker  of  her  sin.  And  who  so  oppose  the  truth,  as  those 
that  corrupt  it  ?  Who  so  hate,  as  those  that  are  condenmed  of 
themselves  ? 

There  is  a  great  work,  not  only  of  dissolving  and  breaking  up 
what  is  old,  but  uniting  and  amalgamating  for  various  pur- 
poses, going  on  now;  and  as  this  was  found  in  Babylon  at 
the  very  beginning  (Gen.  xi.),  so,  in  the  long  run,  it  will  be  found 
to  serve  tlic  purpose  of  that  great  city  before  the  Lord  God  has 
for  ever  j  udged  her. 

There  will  be,  I  believe  from  various  scriptures,  an  astonisli- 
ing  mixture  of  professing  Cliristianity  with  Judaism  :  and  the 
latter,  as  judged  by  the  new  and  full  revelation  of  Christ  in  the 
New  Testament,  is  no  better  than  heathenism.  (Gal.  iv.)  We 
know  liow  tender  the  Spirit  was  in  bearing  with  the  weakness, 
the  scruples,  the  attachment  to  old  religious  habits  in  sucli  of 
tlie  Cliristians  as  liad  been  Jews  (Rom.  xiv.) ;  but  it  was  a  very 
different  thing  when  teachers  sought  to  impose  Jewish  ordinances 

*  Hence  there  is  no  need  to  adopt  Vitrinc^a's  odd  notion,  that  verso  6  is 
addressed  to  the  Ifings,  nor  to  destroy  the  distiiiotive  practical  calling  of  the 
church  hy  supposing  that  she  is  to  be  the  avenger  of  Babylon's  wrongs.  God's 
retributive  justice  will  send  its  more  fitting  appeal  to  His  people  the  Jews,  who 
are  to  be  the  witnesses  of  His  righteous  government  here  bulow. 


CHKIST  THE  ONLY  SAFEGUARD.  389 

Oil  the  Gentile  converts.  The  same  Spirit  treated  a  ritual  bor- 
rowed by  Gentiles  from  Jews  as  the  same  thing  in  principle  as 
old  and  open  pagan  idolatry.  "But  now,  after  that  ye  have 
known  God,  or  rather  are  known  of  God,  how  turn  ye  again  to 
the  weak  and  beggarly  elements  of  the  world,  whereunto  ye 
desire  again  to  be  in  bondage  ?  Ye  observe  days,  and  months, 
and  times,  and  years."  Popery  is  the  most  salient  and  hateful 
exhibition  of  this  amalgam  now  ;  but  greater  abominations  shall 
appear.  Sacramentalism  and  rationalism,  in  these  and  other 
Protestant  lauds,  are  each  provoking  the  other  to  excesses  pre- 
viously unexampled.  When  too  was  ever  known  such  public 
indifference,  which  desires  leisure  for  commerce  abroad  and 
social  development  at  home  ?  The  result  will  appear  in  the  last 
stages  of  Babylon  and  the  beast. 

In  the  scene  before  us  we  have  had  the  lament  of  kings, 
merchants,  and  all  who  had  to  do  with  the  unholy  traffic  of 
Babylon.  Heaven,  and  especially  the  "  saints  "  (for  so  it  should 
be  read)  and  the  apostles  and  the  prophets,  are  called  to  rejoice 
at  God's  judgment:  "God  hath  avenged  you  [or  literally,  judged 
your  judgment]  on  her."  In  the  mighty  angel's  solemn  act  and 
word,  which  closes  the  chapter  (verses  21-24),  not  only  are  set 
forth  the  violence  of  her  ruin  and  its  totality,  but  the  reason  of 
it  as  regards  the  nations — deceiving  them  all  by  her  sorceries. 
The  last  verse  adds  another  and  awful  cause — Babylon's  in- 
heritance of  Jerusalem  in  blood-guiltiness.  "And  in  her  was 
found  the  blood  of  prophets,  and  of  saints,  and  of  all  that  were 
slain  upon  the  earth." 

The  Lord  grant  that,  instead  of  merely  looking  without  and 
occupying  ourselves  with  condemning  others,  we  may  take  good 
care  that  our  own  souls  are  preserved  from  the  contaminations 
of  Babylon.  May  our  affections  be  kept  true  to  Himself — the 
only  real  guard  against  the  seductions  of  the  enemy !  We  are 
espoused  as  a  chaste  virgin  to  Christ.  "  Little  children,  keep 
yourselves  from  idols." 


390  JOY   IN   HEAVEN 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

We  are  now  approaching  a  brighter  and  happier  portion  of  the 
book.  The  providential  judgments  of  God,  whether  more  secret 
like  the  seals,  more  loudly  summoning  men  to  repent  like  the 
trumpets,  or  more  positive  and  distinct  wrath  like  the  vials, 
have  had  their  full  course.  And  now,  when  Babylon  who  had 
set  herself  up  to  represent  God  in  His  grace  and  truth  arrogated 
to  herself  exclusively  the  name  of  the  church,  the  spouse  of 
Christ — when  she  was  set  aside  for  ever,  there  was  a  burden 
gone — a  heavy  burden  that  had  long  grieved  the  heavens  and 
corrupted  the  earth. 

There  was  freedom,  so  to  speak,  now  for  God  to  make  good 
the  precious  things  which  He  had  in  His  heart  for  poor  beguiled 
men ;  and  that  too,  as  it  ought  to  be,  through  and  to  the  praise 
of  the  Lamb.  Hence  you  have  two  things  connected  together  at 
the  beginning  of  this  chapter.  The  first  is  the  call  to  rejoice. 
"The  great  whore"  had  presented  an  obstinate  barrier  to  bless- 
ing ;  not  simply  because  she  was  evil,  but  because  her  profession 
had  been  all  that  was  holy  and  true,  while  in  effect  she  it  was 
who  above  all  had  been  active  in  corrupting  grace  and  truth  as 
far  as  possible ;  she  had  utterly  and  systematically  denied  Christ 
in  effect,  though  parading  everywhere  the  outward  symbol  of 
His  cross.  In  vain  for  her  had  God's  character  shone  out  in 
Christ ;  in  vain  had  God  pronounced  on  man  and  the  world ; 
in  vain  begun  a  new  creation  whose  Head  took  His  place  in 
heavenly  glory.  She  associated  His  name  with  the  flesh  and  the 
earth,  and  there  sought  and  laid  up  her  treasures.  In  vain  had 
God  brought  light  and  incorruptibility  to  light  by  the  gospel. 
She  plunged  men  into  deeper  uncertainty  and  more  positive 


WHEN   BABYLON   IS   JUDGED.  391 

error  than  ever,  teaching  them  that  every  gift  of  God,  and  even 
salvation,  may  be  bought  with  money ;  cheating  souls  to  sleep 
by  the  hope  that  all  would  go  on  well,  and  that  the  Lord  was 
not  yet  coming  in  judgment.  Thus  had  she  shut  up,  as  far  as 
could  be,  the  streams  of  blessing  from  the  world.  But  now  the 
true  and  righteous  j  udgment  of  God  had  smitten  her,  and  there 
is  rejoicing  in  heaven. 

In  chapter  xviii.  there  was  universal  earthly  sorrow.  The 
kings  of  the  earth  who  had  committed  fornication  with  her 
lamented.  The  merchants  that  had  been  enriched  by  her  were 
wailing.  Indeed,  there  was  no  class  free  from  her  snares,  and 
now  all  that  had  had  to  do  with  her  were  full  of  sorrow  over 
Babylon.  But  heaven  was  called  to  rejoice,  and  here  we  have 
the  answer :  "  I  heard  as  it  were  a  loud  voice  of  much  people 
in  heaven,"  not  exactly,  I  heard  a  great  voice  of  much  people, 
but  "  as  it  were  a  loud  voice,"  &c.  The  words  "  as  it  were"  have 
been  dropped,  but  I  believe  they  ought  to  be  inserted ;  just  as 
a  little  lower  down,  in  verse  6,  it  is  said,  "I  heard  as  it  were 
the  voice  of  a  great  multitude,  and  as  the  voice  of  many  waters," 
&c.  "And  her  smoke  rose  up  for  ever  and  ever."  As  far  as 
Babylon  was  concerned,  this  was  her  sad  amen,  if  I  may  so  say, 
to  the  joy  of  heaven. 

But  we  are  not  left  with  a  vague  rumour  of  praise  and  glad- 
ness, not  knowing  from  whom  exactly  it  comes.  There  appear 
the  twenty-four  elders,  who  had  understanding  of  the  mind  of 
Christ,  and  the  four  living  creatures,  that  had  been  from  the 
beginning  associated  with  the  providential  judgments  of  God,  or 
at  least  a  certain  part  of  them.  These  "  fell  down  and  worshipped 
God  that  sat  upon  the  throne,  saying.  Amen ;  Alleluia"  (ver.  4). 
It  is  not  Christ,  who  has  taken  His  place  upon  His  own  throne 
yet,  but  they  worship  "  God  that  sat  on  the  throne,"  &c.  "  And 
a  voice  came  out  of  the  throne,"  for  all  must  speak  now,  "saying. 
Praise  our  God,  all  ye  His  servants,  and  ye  that  fear  him,  both 
small  and  great.  And  I  heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  great 
multitude,  and  as  it  were  the  voice  of  mighty  thunders,  saying. 
Alleluia ;  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth.  Let  us  be  glad 
and  rejoice  and  give  honour  to  him;  for  the  marriage  of  the 
Lamb  is  come,  and  his  wife  hath  made  herself  ready"  (ver.  5-7). 


392  THE  MAKRIAGE  OF  THE  LAMB. 

This  is  the  second  part.  Not  only  is  the  harlot's  day  over, 
but  the  consummation  of  the  bride's  blessing  is  come.  It  is  im- 
portant to  observe  that  this  is  not  the  moment  when  the  Lord 
comes  to  receive  the  heavenly  church.  It  is  a  scene  in  heaven, 
not  the  Lord  Jesus  meeting  His  saints  in  the  air.  A  few  verses 
lower  down  we  do  get  heaven  opened,  and  Clirist  comes  out  of 
it,  and  the  saints  follow  Him.  Nothing,  therefore,  can  be  more 
simple  or  certain  than  the  inference  that  the  saints  were  already 
there.  They  must  have  been  in  heaven  before,  in  order  to  follow 
Christ  thence  when  He  comes  to  judge.  Now,  I  ask,  how  did 
they  get  there  ?  They  are  not  said  to  be  now  taken  up  to  the 
Father's  house.  We  have  the  old  familiar  parties  in  heaven. 
But  we  have  a  new  fact:  the  bride  is  married  in  heaven — the 
one  for  whom  Christ  reserves  the  brightest  grace  and  glory — • 
she  gets  ready  ;  and  now  is  announced,  not  merely  the  song  of 
triumph,  because  of  the  judgment  of  evil,  but  the  marriage  of 
the  Lamb.  "  Let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice."  It  is  grace  that  flows 
out  to  others.  "And  to  her  was  granted  that  she  should  be 
arrayed  in  fine  linen  clean  and  white."  As  for  the  other  woman, 
she  had  somehow  fine  linen  too,  with  her  pearls  and  her  other 
adornments.  (Chap,  xviii.  12.)  But  it  was  never  said  of  Babylon 
that  it  was  granted  her.  We  do  not  hear  how  she  got  it.  But 
to  the  Lamb's  wife,  to  her  it  was  granted  that  she  should  be 
arrayed  in  fine  linen.  The  fine  linen  is  the  righteousnesses  of 
saints  (verse  8).  God  does  not  forget  the  work  of  faith  or  labour 
of  love. 

"And  he  saith  unto  me.  Write,  Blessed  are  they  which  are 
called  unto  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb."  There  is  evi- 
dently a  peculiar  solemnity  in  winding  up  this  account.  We 
are  called  upon  to  pause  and  listen  and  weigh.  "These  are  the 
true  sayings  of  God."  To  the  suffering  one,  the  one  that  had 
shared  the  Lamb's  path  of  sorrow  upon  earth,  to  her  was  now 
given  the  fullest  joy  above.  But  the  marriage  scene  of  the 
Lamb  is  only  intimated,  and  not  described  here.  Tlie  purpose 
of  tlie  Ilevelation  is  not  to  shew  us  the  Father's  house,  nor  its 
inner  scenes.  God  is  never  even  called  our  Father  in  tliis  book, 
because  it  opens  out,  not  tlie  intimacy  of  His  love  to  us,  but 
rather  tlie  righteous  ways  of  God — the  establishment  of  the 


THE   GUESTS.  393 

kingdom  and  the  end,  when  He  is  all  in  all.  True,  there  must 
be  the  stern  unsparing  judgment  of  all  this  evil,  and  this  we 
have  had.  But  when  God's  part  comes,  and  the  full  blessedness 
of  the  church,  there  is  but  an  announcement  of  it — the  bride 
has  made  herself  ready.  It  is  left  there  comparatively  hidden. 
We  are  told  of  the  invitations  to  it,  as  it  is  said  in  verse  9  : 
"  Blessed  are  they  which  are  called  unto  the  marriage  supper  of 
the  Lamb." 

And  now  I  would  just  ask  you  to  pause  before  going  farther. 
Is  it  too  much  to  suppose  that  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  is  a 
different  symbol,  that  is,  represents  a  class  of  saints  different 
from  these  blessed  ones  who  are  invited  to  her  marriage  ?  Who 
is  it  that  God  means  by  these  two  distinct  symbols  ?  As  to  the 
bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  few  would  have  the  least  difficulty. 
Almost  every  one  sees  in  her  the  church — the  one  that  is 
constantly  presented  in  the  New  Testament  scripture  as  the 
heavenly  bride  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  One  turns  to  Eph.  v., 
where  this  relationship  is  brought  out,  and  the  development 
in  her  behalf  of  the  fulness  of  Christ's  affections.  Observe,  by 
the  way,  that  there  it  is  not  merely  a  question  of  a  future  epoch, 
because  the  Holy  Ghost  shews  that  this  is  a  relationship  estab- 
lished now.  "  Christ  loved  the  church,  and  gave  Himself  for  it." 
It  is  true,  from  the  very  first  moment  when  God  began  to  form 
the  church  on  earth  by  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  sent 
down  from  heaven. 

The  church  is  always  regarded  as  a  real  and  subsisting  body, 
because  wherever  the  Holy  Ghost  is,  there  is  the  church.  The 
Holy  Ghost  was  sent  down,  and  it  is  His  personal  presence  that 
forms  the  church.  That  is  the  reason  why  those  saints  who 
depart  to  be  with  Christ  are  not  directly  spoken  of  as  the 
church.  Of  course,  individually  they  are  members  of  the 
church,  but  the  scriptures  which  speak  of  the  church  contem- 
plate its  existence  as  the  body  of  Christ  on  earth.  Ordinarily 
men  talk  of  the  church  visible  and  invisible,  militant  and 
triumphant,  and  think  that  if  Christians  depart  to  be  with 
Christ,  there  more  particularly,  and  in  the  truest  season,  is  the 
church.  Yet  the  word  of  God  never  so  speaks,  but  predicates 
the  church  of  such  as  are  called  even  here  below,  and  are  bap- 


394  THE   BRIDE. 

tized  by  one  Spirit  into  one  body.  No  doubt,  when  all  are 
gathered  together  as  a  fact  in  heaven,  it  will  be  the  church, 
and  is  so  spoken  of  in  Eph.  v.  27,  and  perhaps  a  few  more 
texts.  But  in  general  in  scripture,  where  the  church  is  spoken 
of,  it  means  the  actual  assembly  of  God  on  the  earth  at  any 
given  time.  The  Holy  Ghost  was  there  ;  and  wherever  the 
Holy  Ghost  dwells,  He  knits  and  joins  the  body  into  one. 
This  is  a  weighty  truth,  and  involves  the  most  important  con- 
sequences. 

For  I  repeat,  we  are  put  into  this  relationship  with  Christ  at 
the  present  moment.  It  is  not  that  we  have  the  hope  merely 
of  being  made  the  bride  of  Christ  by  and  by :  we  are  espoused 
to  Christ  now.  We  shall  have  the  marriage  or  the  actual  con- 
summation by  and  by,  when  all  the  members  are  brought  in. 
But  the  great  and  blessed  and  practical  thing  for  our  souls  is, 
that  we  are  brought  into  this  position  of  union  now.  It  is  not 
only  that  the  affection  on  which  the  marriage  is  grounded  is 
true  now;  but  more  than  this,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  on  earth 
uniting  the  saints  to  Christ  in  heaven,  and  making  them  as 
truly  one  with  Him  now  as  they  ever  will  be.  When  Christ 
comes,  there  will  be  the  removal  of  all  hindrances — the  putting 
aside  of  what  Satan  employs  to  make  us  forget  our  relationship 
to  Christ,  and  the  change  of  our  vile  body  according  to  the  body 
of  His  glory.  But  it  is  important  to  remember  that  our  oneness 
with  Christ  as  His  body  depends  on  the  presence  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  who  has  knit  us  up  with  Christ  in  heaven.  We  are  one 
with  Him  now. 

Here,  then,  the  Holy  Ghost  seems  to  shew  that  there  are 
others  to  be  there,  not  as  the  bride,  but  as  guests,  so  to  speak. 
These  are  the  called  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb.  You 
may  remember  John  the  Baptist  speaking  of  himself  as  the  friend 
of  the  Bridegroom.  I  presume  that  those  who  are  here  said  to 
be  invited  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb  answer  somewhat 
to  the  friends  of  the  Bridegroom.  They  are  not  angels,  for  the 
word  "called  unto  the  marriage"  would  not  be  said  of  angels. 
These  last  are  never  characterised  as  "called"  because  the  elect 
angels  have  always  abode  in  tlieir  tirst  estate.  Tlie  calling  of  God 
comes  to  those  who  are  in  a  low  place  to  deliver  them  out  of  it. 


THE  TRUE   SAYINGS   OF   GOD.  395 

We  have  all,  I  suppose,  been  in  the  habit  of  assuming  that  if  a 
man  is  a  saint  of  God  he  necessarily  belongs  to  the  church,  and 
that  there  is  only  one  common  blessing  for  all  saints  of  all  times. 
Here  you  find  the  contrary  laid  down  plainly,  and  upon  the  face 
of  scripture.  You  have  here  a  marriage  supper,  and  one  singled 
out  for  especial  joy,  called  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife  (composed, 
it  may  be,  of  myriads  of  people,  but  here  recognized  in  unity  of 
blessing,  being  united  under  one  term,  that  of  "the  bride,"  to 
shew  that  they  have  the  same  portion  of  love  and  blessedness). 
But  this  is  not  true  of  all  saints,  for  there  are  others  who  are 
not  in  this  position ;  they  are  present  as  guests  at  the  marriage 
supper  of  the  Lamb,  not  as  His  bride. 

"And  he  saith  unto  me.  These  are  the  true  sayings  of  God." 
What  strikes  me  is  the  remarkable  way  in  which  that  solemn 
appeal  comes  in,  anticipating  that  man  too  would  depart  from 
His  word.  John  was  going  to  worship  the  angel ! — the  other 
extreme ;  but  such  extremes  often  meet. 

We  had  a  similar  caution  in  the  beginning  of  the  book.  The 
Holy  Ghost  there  says,  "Blessed  is  he  that  readeth,  and  they 
that  hear  the  words  of  this  prophecy,  and  keep  those  things 
which  are  written  therein."  He  knew  well  that  many  would 
treat  the  book  lightly,  and,  not  understanding,  would  count  it 
dry  and  unprofitable.  Alas  !  for  such  as  say,  "  There  is  nothing 
for  my  soul  there ! "  There  is  no  book  in  the  Bible  where  the 
Holy  Ghost  so  encourages  you  at  the  very  threshold  to  hear 
what  God  says  therein,  as  the  Book  of  the  Eevelation.  And 
what  makes  it  the  more  striking  is,  that  the  same  kind  of 
admonition  occurs  at  the  end,  when  we  have  been  brought  to 
the  close  of  all  the  dealings  of  God,  in  the  last  chapter.  "  And 
he  said  unto  me.  These  things  are  faithful  and  true  ....  Behold, 
I  come  quickly :  blessed  is  he  that  keepeth  the  sayings  of  the 
prophecy  of  this  book : "  not  merely  that  keepeth  the  sayings  of 
some  particular  and  choice  parts  of  it,  but  of  the  book  as  a 
whole.  There  is  the  broadest  statement :  "  Blessed  is  he  that 
keepeth  the  sayings  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book."  Thus  the 
Holy  Ghost  seems  to  have  taken  especial  pains  to  warn  us 
against  the  unbelief  of  our  hearts,  as  well  as  against  our  idolatry 
(verses  9,  10). 


396  THE   CHURCH   OF   THE   FIRST-BORN. 

But  more  particularly  (verse  9)  it  would  seem  that  we  have  a 
guard  against  the  indiscriminate  notions  which  have  generally 
prevailed,  even  among  Christians. 

"  Write,  Blessed  are  they  wliich  are  called  unto  the  marriage 
supper  of  the  Lamb.  And  he  saith  unto  me,  These  are  the  true 
sayings  of  God."  Besides  the  Bride,  there  are  other  blessed 
persons  who  will  be  there.  Now,  looking  at  Heb.  xii.,  I  find 
that  in  the  roll  of  blessing  there  are  other  classes  besides  the 
church  of  the  first-born  ones.  "  But  ye  are  come  unto  mount 
Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jeru- 
salem, and  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels,  the  general 
assembly."  For  it  is  well  known  that  such  is  the  true  meaning 
and  connection  of  the  verse.  "The  general  assembly"  dges 
not  belong  to  "the  church  of  the  first-born,"  but  to  myriads 
of  angels  in  verse  22.  It  may  helj)  to  make  it  plain  to  any 
reader  if  it  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  word  "and"  is  always  the 
connecting  link,  which  introduces  every  fresh  clause.  And  this 
is  allowed  by  those  who  have  no  pretensions  to  what  is  called 
dispensational  light — that  is,  by  men  who  simply  give  their 
opinion  on  the  genuine  structure  of  the  sentence.  This  being 
admitted,  observe  what  is  next  given  here  :  "  Ye  are  come  .... 
to  the  church  of  the  first-born  ones,  which  are  written  in  heaven, 
and  to  God  the  judge  of  all,  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made 
perfect."  I  am  aware  that  there  are  some  who  say  that  all  these 
mean  the  same  thing ;  that  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  mount 
Zion,  as  well  as  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  are  sub- 
stantially no  other  than  the  church  of  the  first-born.  But  just 
look  at  the  passage  again,  and  consider  if  such  a  thought  is 
allowable  for  a  moment.  God  Himself  is  spoken  of  here,  and 
Jesus  the  Mediator,  and  myriads  of  angels.  Does  any  man 
mean  to  say,  that  these  are  all  the  same  thing  ?  And  yet  this 
might  as  well  be  said,  if  the  other  objects  in  the  scene  are  not 
expressly  distinct. 

What  then  is  the  real  meaning  of  these  clauses  ?  "  Ye  are 
come  unto  mount  Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God, 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem."  When  mount  Zion  was  referred  to, 
a  Jew  would  naturally  think  of  the  earthly  city  around  that 
celebrated  mountain.    But  the  Holy  Ghost  says,  this  is  not  your 


THE   SPIRITS   OF   JUST   MEN    PERFECTED.  397 

portion.  You  are  come  to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  ;*  not  to  the 
city  of  dying  David,  but  to  the  city  of  the  living  God.  Then 
we  have  "  an  innumerable  company  of  angels  ;"  and  this  is  called 
"  the  general  assembly." 

Here  plainly  we  have  different  objects  of  millennial  glory  to 
which  the  saints  were  already  said  to  be  come  in  spirit.     There 
is  the  mount  Zion.     Next  is  the  heavenly  city,  the  image  of 
the  glory  that  is  coming  by  and  by — the  city  for  which  Abraham 
and  the  other  patriarchs  waited.    Then  we  have  the  angelic  host. 
Next  we  see  the  church  of  the  first-born,  not  merely  the  local 
scene  of  heavenly  glory,  but  the  complete  assembly  of  the  heirs 
who  are  written  in  heaven  in  contrast  with  the  earthly  first- 
born Israel.     Then  we  rise  up  to  God  the  Judge  of  all.     The 
Spirit  has  led  us  on  from  the  mount  Zion.     And  now  we  are 
brought  down  from  God  in  His  judicial  character  to  the  spirits 
of  just  men  made  perfect.     It  is  a  very  remarkable  position  in 
which  these  are  put.     We  probably,  if  we  had  liad  to  do  with 
it,  might  have  set  them  first;    but  the  object  was  to  correct 
the  Jewish  tendencies  of  those  here  addressed,  and  to  give  pro- 
minence to  what  was  heavenly.     Then,  having  the  heavenly 
seat  of  glory,  and  the  church  in  their  due  place,  we  get  God 
Himself  as  the  Judge  of  all,  and,  following  this,  those  saints 
who  had  known  God  as  so  acting  on  the  earth.     Hence  they 
are  called  here  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect.     They  are, 
I  think,  clearly  the  Old  Testament  saints.  (Compare  chapter  xi. 
39,  40.)    Tor  they,  and  not  the  church,  are  a  class  that  could  be 
most  aptly  described  as  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect. 
They  were  in  the  separate  condition  then,  and  are  so  still.    This 
will  never  be  true  of  the  church  as  a  whole.  AVhen  the  moment 
comes  for  the  church  to  leave  the  world  and  meet  the  Lord, 
there  will  be  a  part  of  the  church  upon  the  earth,  not  in  the 
condition  of  spirits  at  all :  there  will  be  those  that  are  alive  and 
remain  to  the  coming  of  the  Lord.     Of  the  church  it  is  said, 
"We  shall  not  all  sleep."     So  that  this  description  never  can 
apply  to  the  church  of  God  as  such, 

*  It  is  not  seen  here  as  in  Revelation,  where  it  is  the  symbol  of  the  glorified 
church  itself,  but  rather  as  the  blessed  and  ordered  home  of  the  heavenly  saints, 
as  I  think  it  is  in  Heb.  xi.  10,  16.  In  the  epistle  the  city  is  objective,  in  the 
Apocalypse  subjective. 


398  THE   SPIRIT   OF  PROPHECY, 

We  have  had  the  church  already  separate  and  distinct  from 
the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect.  It  is  not  more  certain 
tliat  these  are  saints  than  that  they  are  not  the  church.  Carry 
the  light  of  this  back  to  Eev.  xix.  We  read  there  of  the  church 
having  made  herself  ready,  and  are  not  surprised  to  read  also, 
as  a  distinct  symbol  in  the  same  circle,  "  Blessed  are  they  that 
are  called*  unto  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb"  (verse  9). 
Are  they  not  plainly  all  the  risen  saints,  save  those  baptized 
into  the  one  body,  the  bride  of  Christ  ? 

John  then,  instead  of  paying  homage  to  the  angel  (so  natural 
to  the  heart),  was  to  feel  that  the  angel  is  the  fellow -servant 
of  himself  and  of  his  brethren  that  have  the  testimony  of 
Jesus.  All  such  homage  is  due  to  God.  For  we  must  also 
remember  that  the  testimony  of  Jesus  is  not  limited  to  Chris- 
tianity, nor  to  the  Spirit's  presence  in  the  church.  What  He 
works  as  the  Spirit  of  prophecy  (and  so  He  will  work  in  the 
saints  after  our  translation  to  heaven)  is  the  testimony  of  Jesus 
as  truly  as  what  He  gives  us  now  as  the  power  of  our  com- 
munion with  the  Father  and  the  Son. 

But  now  we  have  another  scene.  It  is  no  longer  what  is 
going  on  above,  but  heaven  is  open :  "  And  behold,  a  white 
horse ;  and  he  that  sat  upon  him  was  called  Faithful  and  True, 
and  in  righteousness  doth  he  judge  and  make  war."  It  is  not  a 
door  opened  in  heaven,  nor  the  prophet  caught  up  there,  as  we 
have  seen  in  chapter  iv.  Nor  is  it  anything  tliat  had  been  done 
then  or  there.  But  now  heaven  is  open,  and  the  symbol  of  the 
power  appears  which  conies  to  subdue  the  earth,  not  without 
the  signs  of  victory.     The  horse  is  always  the  symbol  of  power 

*  Mr.  E.  puts  in  his  text,  and  half  promises  in  his  note  4  (vol.  iv.  p.  52),  to 
consider  the  question  whether  those  called  to  the  Lamb's  marriage  supper  were 
a  class  the  same  aa,  or  distinct  from,  the  bride  herself ;  but  no  trace  appears,  that 
I  can  see,  either  in  chapter  iii.  following  or  anywhere  else. 

The  note  of  Daubuz  will  interest  many.  "  It  is  one  thing  to  be  married,  and 
another  to  be  invited  to  a  marriage  feast.  This  is  evident ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
di.stinguishcs  very  well  the  difTcrcnt  states  of  these  two  sorts  of  persons.  The 
bride,  to  whom  Bi/s-te  [fine  linen]  is  given,  being  the  persons  to  whom  a  perfect 
justification  and  the  effects  of  it  are  awarded,  are  persons  in  a  state  of  resur- 
rection, to  whom  Christ  has  performed  His  pre-contract.  But  they  who  are 
only  invited  to  the  feast  cannot  be  the  same  as  those  that  are  married.  They 
who  are  glorified  with  Bysse,  and  thereby  declared   fully  justified  and  holy 


THE   WHITE   HOKSE.  399 

connected  with  the  earth;  and  it  has  the  colour  of  prosperity. 
It  is  a  white  horse.  None,  I  trust,  would  be  so  foolish  as  to 
imagine  that,  when  this  blessed  scene  really  comes,  it  will  be  a 
question  of  horses  literally.  It  is  the  symbol  that  passed  before 
the  eye  of  the  prophet,  employed  to  shew  certain  realities  that 
will  take  place  by  and  by.  Heaven  is  seen  opened  for  the  pur- 
pose of  victory  over  the  earth.  And  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
Himself  is  plainly  referred  to  as  the  rider :  He  is  the  one  who 
directs  the  power — "  He  that  sitteth  on  him  [called]  Faithful 
and  True,  and  in  righteousness  doth  he  judge  and  make  war" 
(verse  11).  This  is  the  subject  of  the  chapter.  In  the  next 
chapter  it  is  not  a  white  horse  that  is  seen,  but  a  throne,  which 
is  the  symbol  of  another  character  altogether.  The  throne  is 
for  rule,  not  conquest :  the  horse  is  for  conquest,  not  a  reign. 
The  Lord  Jesus  is  here  seen  putting  forth  His  power  to  put 
down  His  enemies ;  as  in  chapter  xx.  we  have  the  picture  of 
His  reign. 

Next,  "  His  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire."  That  is,  there  is 
divine  discernment  in  judging.  "And  on  his  head  were  many 
diadems"  or  royal  crowns.  "And  he  had  a  name  written,  that 
no  man  knew  but  he  himself"  (verse  12).  It  is  not  merely  in  a 
certain  conferred  glory  that  He  comes  forth,  but  in  the  exercise 
of  His  own  divine  power.  It  is  quite  true  that  He  has  a  name 
given  to  Him,  as  we  see  in  Phil.  ii.  "  Wherefore  God  hatli 
highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which  is  above  every 
name."  But  here  it  seems  not  to  be  that  name  of  Lord  which 
we  all  confess,  but  one  "which  no  man  knew  but  he  himself." 
He  has  a  glory  that  is  essentially  His  own,  distinct  from  that 

must  of  course  be  happy ;  but  this  happiness  is  pronounced  to  another  sort  of 
persons.  Who  are  they  then  ?  Even  the  converted  nations,  (?)  all  such  men 
as,  having  not  yet  tasted  of  death  and  appeared  before  God's  judgment  seat,  till 
Death  and  Hades  are  removed,  are  still  in  this  life,  and  in  a  state  of  infirmity 
as  to  their  flesh ;  not  being  indeed  impeccable,  but  assisted  very  much  by  very 
great  and  extraordinary  effusions  of  grace.  However,  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  not 
pronounce  them  holy,  which  in  this  place  would  be  taken  for  peifect  holiness, 
but  barely  happy ;  whereas  those  who  have  a  share  in  the  first  resurrection  are 
blessed  and  holy  both.  This  blessing  and  happiness  consists,  as  it  is  expressed 
in  chapter  xxi.  24,  in  this,  that  they  walk  in  the  light  of  the  New  Jerusalem," 
&c.  [Perp.  Comm.  p.  869.)  Readers  may  differ  in  the  measure  of  their  acquies- 
cence with  these  thoughts ;  but  who  will  not  admit  their  interest  and  acutencssf 


400  THE   GLOEY   OF   CHKIST. 

which  was  His  reward  and  incapable  of  being  shared  with 
others ;  a  glory  which  He  has  in  His  own  right  as  a  divine 
person.  The  name  of  the  Lord  here  appears  to  express  this, 
what  He  really  is  in  His  own  nature.  So,  speaking  of  His 
person,  it  is  said  in  Matt,  xi.,  "  No  man  knoweth  the  Son  but 
the  Father."  And  it  is  remarkable  how  this  is  stated,  in  order 
to  guard  against  the  workings  of  our  minds.  Wherever  there  is 
a  question  of  His  Son,  God  is  ever  jealous  about  it.  When 
speaking  about  the  Father  it  is  added,  "  and  he  to  whomsoever 
the  Son  will  reveal  him ; "  but  it  is  not  said  that  the  Father 
reveals  the  Son  to  any  one.  "  No  man  knoweth  the  Son,  but 
the  Father" — and  there  we  stop.  May  we  not  say  that  thus 
God  guards  against  the  familiarity  with  which  man  would 
venture  to  analyze  the  person  of  Christ  ?  There  is  nothing  so 
offensive  to  God  as  this  irreverence.  The  humanity  and  the 
humiliation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  are  brought  out  plainly 
in  scripture. 

But  there  is  no  person  in  the  Trinity  whose  divine  glory  is 
more  strongly  maintained  than  the  Son's — i:)erhaps  none  so  much. 
It  is  remarkable  that  while  the  same  sort  of  expression  is  used 
about  God  as  such  in  Kom.  i.  25,  and  about  the  God  and  Father 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  2  Cor.  xi.  31,  as  about  Christ  in 
Rom.  ix.  6,  yet  there  is  a  further  expression  about  the  Lord 
Jesus  that  is  not  used  about  the  Father.  God  the  Father  is  said 
to  be  blessed  for  evermore,  and  Christ  "  God  over  all  blessed  for 
evermore."  The  Holy  Spirit  knew  tliat  man  was  prepared  to 
outrage  the  person  and  envy  tlie  glory  of  the  Son,  and  foresaw 
that,  even  where  they  professed  to  know  Him,  He  would  be 
crucified  afresh  and  put  to  open  shame.  Therefore  it  is  that 
there  is  no  one  thing  the  Holy  Ghost  more  insists  upon,  than 
the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  indeed  He  is  the  constant  object 
of  the  enemy's  attacks.  It  is  the  true  key  to  almost  every 
question  of  doctrinal  difficulty  one  meets  among  the  children 
of  God.  Whenever  our  souls  are  firmly  fixed  on  God's  thonglit 
of  glorifying  Him,  all  the  power  of  Satan  will  be  used  to  hinder 
in  vain.  When  Christ's  person  and  will  are  fully  seen,  difficulty, 
whatever  it  may  be,  is  at  an  end.  And  so  with  our  practical 
dilemmas   also :   tlie   moment   we   catch   the   connexion   with 


THE   ARMIES   WHICH   WERE   IN   HEAVEN.  401 

Christ,  tlie  difficulty  is  clean  gone.  Satan  would  hinder  our 
having  anything  to  do  with  Christ  about  it.  He  shuts  out  the 
glory  and  the  word  of  Christ  from  our  eyes ;  and  when  that  is 
the  case,  we  are  ready  to  fall  into  any  snare :  for  the  same 
blinding  power  that  destroys  a  worldly  man  darkens  and  hinders 
the  Christian. 

But  to  return.  We  next  hear  that  the  Lord  "  was  clothed  in 
a  vesture  dipped  in  blood"  (verse  13).  It  is  not  now  suffering 
but  aventrinsf.  He  is  coming  to  execute  righteousness  and  takes 
His  well-known  title  in  revealing  God  to  us.  "The  Word  of 
God"  had  been  peculiarly  the  name  when  the  subject  was  the 
manifestation  of  grace  and  truth,  which  He  used  for  bringing 
us  round  Himself,  and  putting  us  in  His  own  position.  Here 
He  is  the  Word  of  God  as  manifesting  divine  judgment.  I  do 
not  think  the  Holy  Ghost  refers  to  that  name  in  the  verse 
before.  It  appears  to  me  that  the  name  written  which  no  man 
knew  but  He  Himself  is  purposely  left  in  obscurity,  that  we 
may  not  forget  the  perfect,  divine  and  essential  glory  of  the  Son 
of  God. 

Now  we  learn  that  the  Lord  for  judgment  did  not  come  alone. 
When  He  came  out  of  the  opened  heaven,  there  were  armies 
that  followed.  "  And  the  armies  which  were  in  heaven  followed 
him  upon  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and  clean" 
(verse  14).  And  observe,  that  the  words,  "  which  were,"  though 
they  are  printed  in  italics,  are  rightly  inserted.  The  sense  would 
be  substantially  the  same  whether  you  read  it  with  those  words 
or  not ;  and  therefore  the  English  translators,  seeing  that  it 
ought  to  be  understood,  but  not  knowing  that  it  was  really  a 
part  of  the  text,  inserted  the  phrase  in  italics ;  but  it  ought  to 
be  adopted.  "  The  armies  which  were  in  heaven  followed  him 
upon  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and  clean."  I 
have  no  doubt  that  angels  will  be  in  the  train  of  Christ,  for  in 
some  other  parts  of  scripture  angels  are  mentioned  as  coming 
with  Him,  and  not  saints,  as  for  instance  in  2  Thess.  i.  7.  In 
this  passage  saints  are  mentioned  and  not  angels.  Such  is  the 
way  of  the  Lord.  He  does  not  state  things  as  man  does.  He 
has  always  a  moral  object  in  view,  and  therefore  just  brings  out 
that  part  of  the  truth  which  bears  on  the  particular  subject  in 

2  D 


402  SAINTS,   NOT   ANGELS,   MEANT. 

hand.  Thus  in  Matt,  xxv.,  where  the  Son  of  man  is  seen  seated 
upon  the  throne  of  His  glory,  all  the  holy  angels  are  mentioned 
as  being  with  Him.  And  why  ?  Because  the  angels  have  a 
special  connexion  with  Him  as  the  Head  of  human  glory.  (See 
Matt.  xiii.  41 ;  xvi.  27 ;  Luke  ix.  22.)  If  the  Queen  of  England 
were  setting  out  upon  some  great  political  occasion,  she  would 
be  accompanied  by  ministers  of  state.  But  if  she  were  going 
to  visit  her  army,  those  officials  need  not  be  there;  but  she 
would  require  the  presence  of  the  great  military  authorities.  If 
this  is  so  among  the  things  of  men,  much  more  is  there  a 
suitable  order  in  the  things  of  God.  The  Lord  is  called  the 
Son  of  man  in  reference  to  His  glory  as  connected  with  the 
earth :  and  when  He  takes  the  world  under  His  government, 
He  has  got  His  angels  whom  He  employs  as  the  messengers  of 
His  power.  But  He  is  not  called  here  "  Son  of  man,"  but  "  the 
Word  of  God,"  and  angels  are  not  mentioned  in  connexion  with 
that  name.  As  the  Word  of  God,  Christ  makes  Him  known. 
Here  He  expresses  God  in  the  way  of  judgment.  He  had 
shewn  Him  in  the  way  of  grace ;  as  we  have  in  the  Gospel  of 
John.  Thus  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  expression  of  all  God's  ways, 
whether  in  perfect  grace  or  perfect  judgment. 

Here  then,  the  armies  that  followed  Ilini  out  of  heaven  are 
saints.*  This  very  chapter  decides  the  question,  it  seems  to  me  ; 
because  in  the  eighth  verse,  the  fine  linen  with  which  they  are 
clothed  (and  it  is  the  same  word  that  is  used)  is  said  to  be  the 

*  It  is  difficult  to  say  how  Mr.  E.  understands  this.  Ho  asks,  parenthetically 
(JTorae  Apoc.  vol.  iv.  p.  53),  "were  they  not  his  saints,  'the  called  and  chosen 
and  faithful?'"  But  in  what  condition?  Were  they  ali-cady  changed?  Or 
are  they  still  imagined  to  bo  in  the  separate  state  ?  It  does  not  appear,  that  I 
can  perceive,  what  his  judgment,  as  to  this  impoi-tant  question,  may  be.  We 
know,  from  p.  50,  ho  infers  that  no  translation  of  the  living  saints,  or  the  resur- 
rection of  the  saints  departed  this  life,  will  have  taken  place  up  to  the  time 
figured  by  the  chorus  of  song  at  the  bop;inning  of  our  chapter,  and  this  became 
the  scenery  of  the  inmost  temple,  with  its  throne  and  seated  Divinity,  and  the 
elders  and  living  creatures  attendant  near  it,  the  mystical  representatives  of  the 
expectant  church  in  Paradise,  remain  still  figured  in  the  vision  as  before.  That 
is,  he  deduces  consequences  from  the  most  unreasonable  assumption,  which  he 
had  stfited,  though  hesitatingly,  in  commenting  on  chapters  iv.  v.,  that  the 
crowned  and  enthroned  and  complete  heads  of  heavenly  priesthood  mean  that 
portion  of  Christians  who  are  gone  to  bo  with  Christ,  separate  spirits,  not  glo- 
rified men.     This  error  arises  from  denying  the  transitional  period,  filled  with 


CHRIST  AND   THE   RISEN   SAINTS   APPEAR.  403 

righteousnesses  of  saints.  Others  might  be  there,  but  could  not 
well  be  mentioned  where  the  Lord  is  described  as  the  Word  of 
God.  Whereas  the  mention  of  the  hosts  of  heavenly  saints  is  very 
important ;  and  for  this  reason  :  the  chapter  gives  us  the  deeper 
connexion  of  the  saints  witli  Christ.  You  have  the  bride  of 
Christ,  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb,  and  the  consummation  of  the 
church's  joy  in  heaven.  As  far  as  the  world  is  concerned,  no 
stranger  intermeddles,  with  that  joy. 

But  now  God  is  going  to  put  down  all  the  wickedness  of  man 
and  of  Satan  on  earth.  Hence  the  Word  of  God  comes  from 
heaven  ;  and  those  that  had  been  the  companions  of  His  rejec- 
tion are  now  the  companions  of  His  judgment.  As  it  is  said 
in  chapter  xvii.  14,  "  The  Lamb  shall  overcome  them  ....  and 
they  that  are  with  him,  called,  and  chosen,  and  faithful."  There 
was  the  announcement  that,  when  the  battle  came.  He  would 
not  be  alone,  but  that  the  saints  would  be  with  Him — called 
by  grace,  elect,  and  faithful  ones;  and  accordingly  here  they 
are.  "  The  armies  which  were  in  heaven  followed  him,  clothed 
in  fine  linen,  white  and  clean."  They  may  not  be  all  who  will 
follow,  but  it  is  of  importance  to  see  that  these  are  saints. 

The  description  proceeds  :  "Out  of  his  mouth  goeth  a  sharp 
sword,  that  with  it  he  may  smite  the  nations :  and  he  shall  rule 
them  with  a  rod  of  iron :  and  he  treadeth  the  winepress  of  the 
fierceness  of  the  wrath  of  Almighty  God"  (verse  15).  This  is 
a  simple  description  of  the  various  judgments  that  the  Lord 
will  execute  when  He  comes.    First,  there  is  the  word  of  power 

the,  most  momentous  changes,  which  spans  the  interval  between  the  coming  of 
the  Lord  to  gather  His  saints  to  Himself,  and  the  appearing  of  His  coming 
which  destroys  the  lawless  one  and  all  his  company.  (Compare  2  Thess.  ii. 
1  and  8.)  Is  it  meant,  I  ask,  that  at  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb,  when  the 
Lamb's  wife  had  made  herself  ready,  there  was  no  more  than  spirits  separate 
from  the  body  ?  To  me  all  this  is  quite  simple,  because  I  firmly  believe  that 
what  is  properly  caUed  the  church  had  been  translated  and  in  the  glorified  state 
ever  since  chapter  iv.  But  on  Mr.  E.'s  hypothesis,  all  seems  inextricable  con- 
fusion. If  I  catch  the  meaning  of  his  note  4,  vol.  iv.  p.  203,  he  dissents  from 
Daubuz,  who  contends,  from  the  dress  of  the  hosts  that  followed  Christ,  that 
they  were  the  risen  saints,  now  associated  with  Christ  in  judgment  and  after- 
wards in  reigning.  But  text  and  notes  of  Part  vi.  chap.  iv.  present  hardly  any 
thing  but  a  jumble  of  times,  places,  persons,  and  dealings  of  God.  I  am  sorry 
to  speak  in  such  strong  terms ;  but  the  truth  should  be  dearer  to  us  than  every 
other  consideration. 

2  D  2 


404  THE   GREAT   SUPPEK   OF   GOD. 

set  forth  by  the  sharp  sword  going  out  of  His  mouth.  If  any 
must  be  destroyed,  it  is  enough  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to 
speak.  "  He  spake  and  it  was  done."  The  judgment  was  exe- 
cuted. But  besides,  "He  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron," 
This  is  the  judgment  which  is  referred  to  in  chapter  ii.,  where 
there  is  a  promise  to  those  of  Thyatira  who  overcome,  that 
they  shall  have  fellowship  with  Christ  in  this  judgment  of  the 
nations.  "And  he  treadeth  the  winepress  of  the  fierceness  of 
the  wrath  of  Almighty  God."  This  is  the  unsparing  judgment 
that  we  have  seen  before  in  chapter  xiv.  It  is  vengeance  on 
religious  wickedness,  which  is  always  reserved  for  the  severest 
stroke  that  God  can  inflict.  "And  he  hath  upon  his  vesture 
and  upon  his  thigh  a  name  written.  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of 
lords"  (verse  16) — the  same  title  that  we  have  seen  in  chapter 
xvii.  14. 

But  while  there  was  an  invitation  to  the  marriage  supper 
of  the  Lamb,  there  is  another  and  very  different  supper,  the 
great  supper  of  God.     Here  it  is  not  the  blessed  whom  God's 
grace  invites.     An  angel  speaks  obedient  to  His  word,  and  the 
instrument  of  His  power,  standing  in  the  sun — the  symbol  of 
supreme  authority.     For  it  is  not  now  a  thing  done  in  a  corner. 
There  are  no  terms  of  forbearance :   all  must  be  thoroughly 
open.     Nor  is  it  now  a  partial,  but  a  complete  and  final  judg- 
ment.    "  And  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying  to  all  the  fowls 
that  fly  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  Come  and  gather  yourselves 
together  unto  the  great  supper  of  God  (for  so  it  should  be  read) ; 
that  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of  kings,  and  the  flesh  of  captains, 
and  the  flesh  of  mighty  men,  and  the  flesh  of  horses,  and  of 
them  that  sit  on  them,  and  the  flesh  of  all  men,  both  free  and 
bond,  both  small  and  great"  (verses  17,  18).     It  is  the  same 
sort  of  contrast,  I  think,  that  we  may  liave  seen  in  Rev.  xiv., 
where  we  had  the  first-fruits  at  the  beginning  of  the  chapter, 
and  afterwards  the  harvest  before  the  chapter  closes.     Here  you 
have  the  supper  of  tlie  Lamb  above ;  and  the  great  supper  of 
God  that  He  will  make  for  those  that  prey  on  the  remains  of 
the  dead. 

"  And  I  saw  the  beast,  and  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  their 
armies,  gathered  together  to  make  war  against  him  that  sat  on 


THE  BEAST  AND  THE  FALSE  PROPHET.         405 

the  horse,  and  against  his  army.  And  the  beast  was  taken,  and 
with  him  the  false  prophet,*  that  wrought  miracles  before  him, 
with  which  he  deceived  them  that  had  received  the  mark  of  the 
beast,  and  them  that  worshipped  his  image"  (verses  19,  20).  You 
will  observe  that  one  is  here  called  the  false  prophet.  He  has 
apparently  lost  his  world-power,  and  is  therefore  not  presented 
now  as  the  second  beast  rising  from  the  earth  with  lamb-like 
horns  {i.e.,  the  imitator  of  Christ's  power) ;  He  is  the  false  pro- 
phet simply.  Whatever  dominion  he  had  is  now  merged,  and 
he  is  seen  in  his  ecclesiastical  character,  as  a  teacher  of  lies — 
in  the  capacity  of  foe  to  God's  truth.  Babylon  was  gone,  but 
there  was  still  this  wicked  ecclesiastical  power  who  had  wrought 
with  the  beast,  and  both  now  meet  with  the  same  tremendous 
judgment  at  the  hand  of  God.  "  These  both  were  cast  alive  into 
the  lake  of  fire  burning  with  brimstone." 

There  had  been  two  men  singled  out  from  all  others  for 
special  mercy  and  glory.  One  was  in  the  early  antediluvian 
world,  when  it  was  fast  coming  to  its  close.  "  He  walked  with 
God,  and  was  not,  for  God  took  him."  And  when  the  world  had 
grown  older  in  sin,  and  God's  separated  people  had  far  departed 
from  Him,  God  did  interpose  again,  and  would  shew  that  there 
are  no  times,  however  evil,  when  His  servants  may  not  walk 

*  Mr.  Birks  seems  to  be,  I  will  not  say  accurate,  but  less  under  the  influence 
of  human  system  and  bias  than  most  of  the  Protestant  school.  Thus,  in  his 
Two  Later  Visions  of  Daniel,  p.  337,  he  admits  that  it  may  be  inferred,  from  a 
careful  comparison  of  several  scriptures,  that  at  this  time  the  temple  described 
in  Ezekiel  will  have  been  built,  and  that  then  this  fierce  and  mighty  king-  will 
seat  himself  as  a  sovereign,  and  claim  to  be  the  object  of  a  divine  adoration." 
I  doubt  as  to  the  identity  with  Ezekiel' s  temple,  but  this  is  a  question  of  detail. 
Again  in  the  following  page  he  says,  "  The  Papacy,  denoted  by  the  wilful  king, 
in  its  last  hour  will  fill  up  the  measure  of  its  apostacy,  and  gather  to  itself  those 
partial  features  of  antichrist,  which  are  now  to  be  seen  in  the  Mahometan  de- 
lusion, and  its  open  rejection  of  the  Son  of  God.  At  the  same  time,  a  leader 
will  arise,  the  last  personal  head  of  the  compound  system  of  evil,  and  the 
heathen  Antiochus,  the  Pope,  and  the  Turk  contribute  to  supply  the  features  of 
his  iniquity.  The  wilful  king  in  this  last  stage  of  his  power,  and  represented 
now  by  this  leader,  will  gather  on  himself  the  predicted  character  of  a  king  of 
the  north,  and  then  come  down  like  a  whirlwind  on  the  land  of  Israel."  Here 
there  is  the  most  palpable  confusion  of  the  two  opposed  chiefs,  the  wilful  king 
in  the  Holy  Land,  and  the  northern  king  who  assails  him  there.  But  I  cite  the 
passage  to  shew  that  fair-minded  men,  spite  of  preconception,  are  obliged  to 
admit  the  all-importance  of  the  future  crisis  in  Judea. 


406  CONTRAST  WITH  ENOCH  AND   ELIJAH. 

with  Hiin.  Thus,  when  Israel  was  altogether  debased  in  sin, 
and  God  had  put  His  servant  in  the  midst  of  that  wicked  and 
corrupt  and  apostate  people  Israel ;  then  and  there  it  was  that 
Elijah  gave  his  testimony,  and  he  too,  without  dying,  was  chosen 
of  God  to  be  taken  up  to  heaven. 

And  here,  in  most  miserable  contrast,  we  find  two  singled  out 
from  all  others, — two  men  as  remarkable  for  Satan,  as  Enoch 
and  Elijah  had  been  for  God.  And  these  men,  the  heads  of 
their  respective  powers  of  wickedness  (the  open  blaspheming 
power  of  the  beast ;  and  the  more  intriguing,  corrupting  energy 
of  the  false  prophet,  who  had  specially  set  himself  against  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ),  are  found  together.  If  God  had  interposed 
to  shew  signal  mercy  in  bringing  alive  to  heaven,  so  now  God 
interposes  to  send  alive  down  to  hell.  They  had  been  leaders  in 
evil ;  they  had  worn  down  the  saints  and  overcome  them  before 
men.  Now  their  day  comes — "  And  the  beast  was  taken,  and 
with  him  the  false  prophet  that  wrought  miracles  before  him." 
"  These  both  were  cast  alive  into  the  lake  of  fire  burning  with 
brimstone!" 

The  Lord  judges  their  followers  too,  but  not  with  so  terrible  a 
doom.  They  remain  to  be  judged  another  day — they  must  stand 
and  appear  before  God.  Meanwhile  they  "are  slain  with  the 
sword  of  Him  that  sat  upon  the  horse :  and  all  the  fowls  were 
filled  with  their  flesh,"  But  as  for  the  twain,  God  required  as  it 
were  nothing  more :  they  were  the  worst  leaders  of  the  world's 
lawlessness,  and  therefore  judgment  takes  its  course  summarily 
and  for  ever.  I  know  of  no  judgment  so  tremendous  in  scrip- 
ture as  that  these  men,  untried,  should  be  cast  into  hell  before 
Satan  himself!  Yet  the  goats  or  Gentile  rebels  in  Matt.  xxv. 
approach  it. 

And,  solemn  thought !  the  time  is  fast  approaching.  It  is 
difficult  to  realize  that  such  will  soon  be  the  doom  of  the  rulers 
of  these  western  lands.  They  will  be  found  gathered  for  battle 
near  Jerusalem.  For,  as  Christendom  began  with  Jerusalem,  so 
the  last  and  terrible  end  of  Christendom  will  be  there.  As  the 
Roman  empire  will  reappear,  so  there  will  be  found  a  chief  of 
its  political  power  sustaining  and  sustained  by  the  religious 
chief  of  the  east.     Such  is  the  crisis  which,  as  God  shews 


THE   CRISIS  APPROACHING.  407 

plainly  in  His  word,  awaits  the  world.  And  I  have  the  firm 
conviction,  without  pretending  to  fix  the  time,  that  the  train  is 
being  laid  even  now.  Thus  we  see  the  remarkable  prominence 
which  in  our  day  is  given  to  the  east,  and  its  growing  connexion 
with  the  west.  These  are  facts  before  our  eyes ;  but  it  is  well 
known  to  many  readers  that  these  same  things  have  been 
affirmed  years  before  any  of  these  facts  had  taken  place.*  They 
were  stated  with  the  same  confidence  as  now,  and  to  some  of 
those  who  may  read  these  pages.  Thus  what  is  going  on  in 
the  world  comes  in  as  a  remarkable  confirmation  of  prophecy. 
It  is  not  the  circumstances  which  enable  us  to  judge  aright; 
but  taking  tlie  word  of  God  alone,  we  may  have  a  full  persuasion 
in  our  souls.  For  whether  we  see  the  events  or  not,  no  man 
ever  believed  the  word  of  God  and  was  ashamed.  "  The  days 
are  at  hand,  and  the  effect  of  every  vision." 

The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  remember  that  there  will  be  a 
power  of  deceit  in  the  world  that  will  carry  men  away !  Men 
may  fancy  that  they  will  discern  and  reject  the  beast  and  the 
false  prophet.  This  only  shews  that  they  have  very  little  idea 
of  the  influence  and  working  of  Satan.  His  most  dangerous 
power  lies  now,  not  in  that  which  looks  outwardly  bad,  but  in 
what  seems  quiet  and  fair.  Thus  is  it  still,  as  it  was  when 
Christ  was  here.  The  man  possessed  with  a  legion  of  demons 
received  deliverance  and  blessing.  But  what  did  the  Gadarenes 
do  ?     They  besought  the  Lord  to  depart  out  of  their  coasts. 

Let  me  ask  you,  do  you  not  prefer  something  to  Christ? 
You  may  not  shew  active  enmity  to  His  name.  You  may  hear 
the  gospel :  but  have  you  received  it  ?  If  not,  you  are  rejecting 
it.  God  does  not  allow  one  to  say,  there  is  something  to  be  done 
first.  He  has  done  everything.  Therefore,  it  comes  to  be  a 
question  of  positive  rejection — bidding  Christ  depart.  The 
Lord  grant  that  such  may  not  be  your  present  guilt  and  eternal 
misery ! 

*  This  was  written  above  fifteen  years  since.  I  need  hardly  add  what  fresh 
and  strong  evidence  is  furnished  by  the  late  war  (and  peace)  in  Italy. 


408  FIGURATIVE  LANGUAGE. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

The  first  three  verses  of  this  chapter  are  closely  connected  with 
the  one  that  goes  before.  For  there  we  see  the  judgment  of  the 
beast  and  the  false  prophet,  and  of  their  adherents.  Here  we 
have  what  God  saw  fit  to  inflict  for  the  present  upon  the  real 
unseen  leader  of  all  the  mischief — the  devil.  But  there  is  this 
difference,  that  it  is  not  Christ  who  deals  with  Satan.  It  was 
the  shining  forth  of  His  coming  that  destroyed  the  beast  and 
the  false  prophet.  They  were  taken  aud  were  both  cast  alive 
into  the  lake  of  fire.  And  so  we  learn  in  chapter  xx.  10,  when 
Satan's  turn  came  for  being  cast  there  also,  it  is  into  that  lake 
where  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet  already  were,  and  where 
they  shall  be  tormented  for  ever  and  ever.  But  it  was  not  yet 
the  time  for  the  last  and  most  terrible  judgment  of  Satan.  God's 
trial  of  the  world  was  not  quite  over,  and  therefore,  perhaps, 
God  did  not  interfere  by  Christ  in  person,  but  through  an  angel. 
Before  Christ  inflicts  the  last  crushing  blow  upon  Satan,  an  angel 
is  employed  to  limit  his  power  and  liberty  for  a  certain  period. 
This  is  what  we  have  here.  Satan  is  restrained  for  a  thousand 
years ;  and  the  risen  saints  judge  the  world. 

Many  persons  have  raised  difiiculties  as  to  this  chapter,  as 
indeed  to  all  the  rest  of  the  book,  on  the  ground  of  the  figurative 
language.  But  no  objection  could  be  less  reasonable ;  for  figu- 
rative or  symbolic  language  is  used  in  scripture  from  the  first 
book  to  the  last.  So  that  if  you  neglect  one  part  of  God's  word 
on  this  ground,  you  are  in  danger  of  slighting  all.  It  is  the 
commonest  thing  possible.  Take  the  language  of  God  Himself 
in  Eden,  the  words  which  the  Holy  Ghost  used  for  the  comfort 
and  salvation  of  souls  from  the  day  that  man  was  fallen  by  sin. 
Even  there  we  find  that  God  used  highly  metaphorical  language. 


UNLEARNED    LEARNING.  409 

But  if  a  soul  was  needy,  and  through  grace  desired  to  understand 
God,  there  was  always  a  sure  way.  God  waited  patiently,  and 
taught  and  led  on  His  children.  No  doubt  there  was  room  for 
growth ;  but  then  there  was  room  for  unbelief  too,  and  the  evil 
heart  could  readily  find  difficulties  to  stumble  over.  But  faith 
always  finds  out  the  way  to  understand  God.  Not  but  that 
there  are  things  hard  to  such  as  we  are;  yet  faith  pursues  its 
narrow  path  through  obstacles  and  dangers,  because  God  has 
said,  "they  shall  be  all  taught  of  God."  Nevertheless,  the 
language  in  which  God  was  pleased  to  pronounce  judgment  on 
the  enemy  and  to  intimate  a  Eedeemer  was  so  figurative,  that 
an  unbelieving  Jew  like  Josephus  could  pervert  it  and  apply  it 
merely  to  the  natural  dislike  that  men  have  to  serpents,  and 
their  desire  to  get  rid  of  them  wherever  found !  Of  course  such 
a  notion  sprang  from  not  understanding  the  mind  of  God,  and 
the  Jewish  historian  was  ignorant  of  scripture  and  of  tlie  power 
of  God. 

And  remember  that  I  do  not  use  the  word  "ignorant"  here 
to  describe  the  lack  of  human  learning,  any  more  than  scripture 
does,  when  it  says  of  certain  persons  that  "  they  are  unlearned 
and  unstable."  They  might  be  as  wise  as  Plato  and  prudent  as 
Aristotle,  but  they  were  not  learned  in  God's  will  and  in  the 
knowledge  of  His  mind.  This  is  the  learning  that  we  should 
value  and  cultivate — a  thing  that  never  can  be  gleaned  in  the 
schools  of  this  world.  On  the  contrary,  if  a  man  prosecutey-T'O  i 
human  learning  as  a  means  of  understanding  the  things  of  God,/  (  *  / 
he  is  sure  to  go  astray,  because  this  ])er  se  is  never  from  thel 
Holy  Ghost.  Doubtless  he  who  has  got  human  learning  may 
make  use  of  it  for  God.  But  the  great  point  is,  that  the  man  of 
God  must  make  learning  and  everything  that  is  of  man  to  be 
his  servant ;  whereas  the  mind  of  man,  as  such,  makes  learning 
his  master  and  becomes  its  slave.  Hence  the  danger  of  all  such 
things  proving  positive  hindrances,  even  to  the  Christian,  save 
so  far  as  he  is  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  only  possible  way 
of  understanding  God's  word  is  by  subjection  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
and  the  test  is  Christ,  because  the  object  of  the  Spirit  is  to 
exalt  Him.  Therefore  it  is  that  you  never  can  separate  growth 
in  the  things  of  God  from  the  moral  state  of  the  soul.    It  is  true 


410  CHRIST  THE   OBJECT  OF  THE  SPIRIT. 

that  a  man  who  has  learned  a  great  deal  of  truth  may  sli]>  into 
a  bad  state  of  soul :  but,  in  general,  sovmd  knowledge  of  the 
things  of  God  and  a  wise  gracious  application  of  the  truth  flow 
from  communion  with  God. 

I  have  made  these  few  remarks  not  doubting  that  many  of 
my  readers  know  them  to  be  true  from  their  own  experience ; 
but  some  perhaps  may  learn  from  them  why  they  make  small 
progress  in  the  things  of  God.  The  true  way  is  to  seek  the 
glory  of  Christ.  Where  a  man  is  bent  upon  this,  he  must  learn, 
no  doubt ;  but  all  is  open  and  clear  before  him,  because  he  is  in 
the  current  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whose  office  is  to  take  of  the 
things  of  Jesus  and  to  shew  them  unto  us.  "  When  he  is  come 
....  he  shall  glorify  me  :  for  he  shall  receive  of  mine  and  shall 
shew  it  unto  you : "  for  Christ,  not  man,  is  the  aim  and  end  of 
the  Spirit. 

Doubtless,  as  to  the  earliest  book  of  the  Bible,  Genesis,  all 
will  acknowledge  it  to  be  a  perfect  model  of  perspicuity.  It  is 
the  most  simple  book,  containing  profound  truth,  that  ever  was 
written.  In  this  book  where  God  was  putting  us  in  His  nursery 
school,  yet  what  do  we  find  ?  Not  seldom  bold  and  figurative 
language.  Hence,  if  I  am  to  give  up  the  scriptures  because  of 
figures,  I  must  give  them  up  from  Genesis  to  Revelation. 

The  revelation  of  the  woman's  Seed  tliat  was  to  bruise  the 
serpent's  head  was  the  very  word  on  which  salvation  hung ;  the 
blessed  truth  that  faith  laid  hold  of  at  all  times.  Take  a  case. 
Abel's  faith,  that  expressed  itself  in  tlie  offering  which  he 
brought,  was  grounded  upon  this  word.  He  believed  that  the 
Lord  Jesus  was  coming  (though  he  did  not  yet  know  that  name), 
who  would  be  bruised  in  order  to  destroy  the  serpent — One 
who  would  suffer,  whose  heel  would  be  bruised,  though  even- 
tually He  would  crush  the  bruiser. 

This  shews  that  faith  is  a  very  distinct  thing  from  the  ability 
to  explain  the  figures  of  a  passage,  the  general  sense  and  cer- 
tainty of  which  may  yet  be  clearly  seen.  So  much  so  that  even 
now,  if  you  were  to  take  a  Christian  and  ask  him  to  explain  all 
the  particulars  of  that  verse — what  was  meant  by  the  Seed  of 
the  woman  and  that  of  the  serpent,  the  enmity  between  them 
and  the  bruising  of  tlie  head  and  of  the  heel,  though  he  might 


THE  BINDING   OF   SATAN.  411 

be  perfectly  certain  that  it  speaks  of  Christ,  and  might  under- 
stand the  general  meaning  of  all,  yet  he  would  find  a  great  deal 
of  difficulty  in  explaining  what  each  thing  meant.  But  there 
lies  the  blessedness  of  God's  word,  that  people  are  not  saved  by 
having  clear  thoughts  on  the  obscure ;  but  G-od  knows  how  to 
direct  every  soul  that  is  saved  to  the  right  object.  Their  hearts 
rest  upon  a  Christ  who  has  suffered  for  them  and  completely 
destroyed  the  destroyer.  They  may  not  be  able  to  bring  out 
their  thoughts  clearly  to  others ;  but  the  faith  of  the  taught 
knows  the  truth  perhaps  as  well  as  the  teacher,  though  the 
latter  alone  can  develop  it  with  convincing  plainness.  This 
shews  that  even  where  God  employs  these  figures,  the  general 
thought  is  sufficiently  plain.  To  expound  them  by  words  might 
be  an  insuperable  difficulty  to  the  soul  that  has  no  question  of 
the  general  sense. 

Here  an  angel  comes  down  out  of  heaven.  This  angel,  in  the 
prophetic  vision,  has  the  key  of  the  abyss  and  a  great  chain 
hanging  on  his  hand  (verse  1).  He  is  seen  laying  hold  of  "  the 
dragon,  the  ancient  serpent,  who  is  the  Devil  and  Satan,"  the 
well-known  enemy  of  God  and  man ;  and  then  follows  the  use 
of  the  key  and  the  chain,  the  key  for  shutting  him  up  and  the 
chain  for  binding  him  fast.  Obviously  these  are  figures,  but 
they  are  familiar  to  the  simplest  mind.  There  is  no  one,  how- 
ever ignorant  about  some  things,  who  need  misunderstand  what 
is  meant.  The  Spirit  of  God  takes  advantage  of  the  commonest 
things  of  every-day  life  to  describe  an  act  of  judgment  that  is 
about  to  be  accomplished  in  His  providence  by  and  by.  God 
intends  to  restrain  Satan,  and  will  not  suffer  his  going  about  to 
deceive  the  world  as  he  does  now;  but  it  will  be  only  for  a 
season  (verses  2,  3).  He  is  not  thrown  into  the  lake  of  fire  at 
once,  but  is  a  prisoner  in  the  bottomless  pit,  which  is  the  ex- 
pression of  the  place,  under  the  control  of  Satan  ordinarily,  that 
will  then  be  made  the  place  of  his  confinement.  (Compare 
chapters  ix.  xi.  and  xvii.) 

It  is  certain  from  God's  word  that  Satan  is  not  yet  shut  up  ; 
on  the  contrary,  that  he  goes  about  now  seeking  to  deceive  and 
to  destroy  souls.  The  New  Testament  always  supposes  this.  It 
is  perfectly  clear  that  Satan  is  an  enemy  still  at  large ;  that  he 


412  SATAN   STILL  DECEIVES  AND   TERSECUTES. 

is  active  in  his  rebellion  against  God,  in  the  falsehood  that  he 
spreads  among  men,  and  in  the  death  and  ruin  that  he  causes 
everywhere.  But  this  is  to  close  when,  for  a  certain  limited 
time,  the  earth  will  be  freed  from  his  deceits.  This  is  all  that  I 
need  to  draw  from  the  passage.  I  am  not  going  to  discuss 
whether  the  thousand  years  are  to  be  taken  literally  or  mysti- 
cally; for  this  is  a  question  of  detail  and  degree  only.  But 
beyond  a  doubt  the  period  has  a  beginning  and  has  an  end;  nor 
can  it  have  begun  yet,  because  Satan  is  not  bound.  The  New 
Testament  epistles  suppose  that  Satan  still  carries  on  his  devices, 
hinders  the  work  of  God,  has  to  be  resisted,  and  is  going  about 
as  a  roaring  lion  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.  So  that  there 
must  be  a  vast  change  when  the  time  comes  for  his  restraint. 
And  God  will  have  to  cast  His  people  upon  other  parts  of  His 
word,  which  would  not  apply  to  the  past  or  the  present.  The 
saints  then  will  be  in  many  respects  in  a  totally  different  state. 
In  that  day  Christ  will  be  reigning  over  the  earth,  having  it 
under  His  direct  control ;  and  assuredly  the  change  will  be 
incalculably  great.  Satan  too  will  be  bound,  and  God's  people 
then  will  not  require  the  same  discipline  through  the  word  of 
God  as  those  do  now  who  have  to  encounter  the  assaults  of  Satan 
and  his  accusations.  God  will  deal  with  them  according  to  the 
condition  in  which  they  will  be  placed,  and  for  which  His  word 
provides. 

Allow  me  to  repeat  that  it  is  chiefly  the  influence  of  prejudice, 
with  which  persons  approach  the  book  of  the  Kevelation,  that 
makes  it  appear  so  difficult.  People  say  that  so  many  good  men 
have  made  mistakes  in  interpreting  it,  that  there  is  no  sure  way 
for  the  simple  to  take  it  up  profitably.  But  this  is  to  the  dis- 
honour of  God  ;  for  He  has  given  the  book  to  be  understood  by 
His  people  at  large,  peculiarly  commending  it  to  His  servants. 
Special  promises  of  blessing  He  attaches  to  such  as  read,  hear, 
and  keep  it,  foreseeing  the  delusion  abroad  with  regard  to  its 
obscurity.  But  why  is  it  the  devil's  object  to  hinder  people 
from  reading  this  book?  Why  is  it  that,  in  what  are  called 
Christian  churches,  every  other  part  of  the  Bible  is  read,  while 
the  book  of  Kevelation  is  scarcely  looked  at  ?  Even  the  Apo- 
crypha is  read  by  some,  while  of  the  "true  sayings  of  God"  only 


JUDGMENT   GIVEN   TO   THE   SAINTS.  413 

a  few  fragments  here  and  there  are  used  for  public  services. 
The  reason  is  because  there  is  no  book  in  the  Bible  that  Satan 
fears  more,  and  justly  too.  It  announces  first  his  sure  humi- 
liation by  angelic  power,  and  then  his  destruction  afterwards. 
Other  books  shew  his  partial  temporary  successes ;  this  dwells 
on  his  overthrow,  and  therefore  must  he  dread  it.  Again,  if 
you  have  here  the  account  of  God's  putting  down  Satan,  you 
have  also  very  fully  brought  out  the  awful  height  of  power  to 
which  he  rises  before  the  end.  For  the  divine  principle  is  never 
to  judge  evil  until  it  has  rejected  all  the  patience  of  God,  abused 
His  goodness,  and  become  thoroughly  unbearable.  Had  Chris- 
tians felt  that  Satan's  object  was  to  conceal  his  own  wiles,  and 
power,  and  ruin,  by  leading  them  to  neglect  this  book,  they 
might  have  been  more  on  their  guard.  But  this  is  the  last 
thing  he  wants  people  to  suspect ;  for  then  they  at  once  get 
upon  the  ground  where  the  Spirit  of  God  can  lead  them  on ; 
whereas,  if  they  assume  that  the  book  is  so  dark  as  to  be  prac- 
tically unintelligible,  they  are  so  far  exposed  to  his  delusion, 
though  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer  them  to  be  tempted 
above  that  they  are  able. 

In  the  next  verse  we  get  another  thing,  the  portion  of  the 
blessed.  What  will  Christ  be  doing,  and  what  they  who  are  with 
Him,  now  that  the  victory  is  won  ?  "  And  I  saw  thrones ;  and 
they  sat  upon  them,  and  judgment  was  given  unto  them"  (verse 
4).  The  heads,  civil  and  ecclesiastical,  of  the  evil  in  the  world 
had  been  summarily  judged  ;  the  hidden  source  of  all  was  next 
set  aside  "  till  the  thousand  years  should  be  finished."  But  now 
the  Lord  Jesus  has  taken  the  kiugdom  of  the  world.  Still  the 
object  here  is  not  so  much  to  shew  us  Christ's  reign,  because 
this  was  a  familiar  truth,  found  throughout  all  scripture,  and 
one  that  was  well  known  to  the  Old  Testament  saints ;  and  so 
habitually  were  they  waiting  for  the  Messiah,  and  so  prevalent 
was  the  expectation  of  His  kingdom,  even  in  the  mass  of  un- 
converted Israel,  that  Satan  took  advantage  of  it  to  make  men 
refuse  the  grace  of  Christ  coming  in  humiliation.  Here  His 
reigning  is  of  course  implied,  as  the  central  pivot  of  the  bless- 
ing ;  but  His  people,  or  at  least  His  sufferers,  are  specified  with 
the  utmost  clearness. 


414  WHY  THE   SAINTS   ARE   PROMINENT. 

Tliis  then  may  be  one  reason  why  prominence  is  here  given 
to  those  who  reign  with  Christ.  God  felt  deeply  for  His  saints. 
They  were  under  keen  trial  and  temptation.  He  takes  pains 
to  shew  that,  if  they  had  suffered,  tliey  were  also  to  reign  with 
Him.  And  therefore,  as  it  seems  to  me,  it  is  not  there  said,  I 
saw  a  great  throne,  but  "  I  saw  thrones."  *  As  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  Himself  had  said  to  the  disciples,  "  In  my  Father's  house 
are  many  mansions."  He  does  not  speak  of  one  peculiar  man- 
sion there  for  Himself,  but  He  says,  "  In  my  Father's  house  are 
many  mansions :  if  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you.  I 
go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you."  Was  it  not  in  the  same  spirit 
that  the  prophet  here  had  the  vision  of  these  thrones?  And 
they  were  not  vacant.  "  I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  them, 
and  judgment  was  given  unto  them."  They  were  now  to  exer- 
cise judgment. 

Evidently  this  is  an  accomplishment  of  the  word  in  1  Cor.  vi. 
The  apostle  there,  addressing  the  saints  at  Corinth,  says,  "Do 
ye  not  know  that  the  saints  shall  judge  the  world  ?"  And  here 
they  are  judging  the  world.  But  more  than  that.  The  Lord 
had  said  to  the  twelve  apostles,  "Ye  shall  sit  upon  twelve 
thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel."  Many  persons 
think  that  this  will  only  be  fulfilled  in  heaven.  But  there  can 
be  no  such  state  of  things  there.  The  twelve  tribes  are  not 
above.  They  are  only  known  as  such  upon  earth.  Here  below 
they  will  be  found  as  an  object  of  government ;  and  so  the 
prophets  speak.  What  will  there  be  for  saints  to  judge  in 
heaven  ?  When  the  glorified  are  there,  where  will  be  the  men 
to  judge  above  ?  All  will  be  blessed  there.  These  will  have 
passed  out  of  the  scene  of  judgment. 

*  Daubuz  notices  another  distinction  well  worthy  of  remark,  but  in  a  way 
which  needs  correction.  "These  thrones,  whoso  number  is  not  defined  [as  in 
chapter  iv.],  are  to  be  very  carefully  distinguished  from  the  twenty-four  thrones 
here  mentioned."  {Perp.  Comm.  p.  92.5.)  So  say  I ;  but  when  he  goes  on  to  teach 
that  the  state  of  the  Christian  church  and  its  primitive  and  militant  institution 
were  signified  by  the  enthroned  elders,  I  reject  such  an  explanation,  as  do  almost 
all  Christians.  Yet  that  there  is  a  notable  difference  between  that  state  of  things 
and  the  millennial  one  before  us  now  is  manifest.  Tlic  only  satisfactory  solution, 
I  am  satisfied,  depends  on  the  rapture  of  the  heavenly  saints,  previous  to  tho 
fulfilment  of  chapter  iv.,  and  the  interval  spent  before  they  appear  with  Christ 
in  glory,  as  wo  see  in  chapters  xix.  xx. 


THEY  REIGN  OVER  THE  EARTH.  415 

It  is  plain  therefore  that  this  scene  is  one  that  cannot  apply 
to  heaven :  and  that  it  supposes  the  earth  as  a  sphere  of  judg- 
ment. Those  in  question  reign  over  the  earth.  I  say,  "  over  the 
earth,"  for  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  this  world  will  be 
the  home  of  the  risen  saints  of  God.  They  may  visit  it  from 
time  to  time,  as  we  know  the  Lord  Himself  will;  but  their 
proper  dwelling-place  will  not  be  the  earth.  Even  now  our 
blessing  is  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ ;  much  more  evidently 
will  it  be  when  we  are  glorified.  The  blessing  is  heavenly  in 
its  source,  character,  and  sphere.  But  while  we  shall  thus  have 
blessing  in  heavenly  places,  the  earth  will  be  the  lower  and 
subject  province — full  of  interest  and  glory  to  God,  but  a  com- 
paratively outside  domain.  Just  as  a  man  who  owns  an  estate 
may  have  a  grand  family  seat  in  it ;  but  this  does  not  hinder 
his  having  property  outside,  which  he  must  leave  his  house  in 
order  to  see.  And  so  it  will  be  hereafter.  The  glory  above  will 
be  the  rest  and  centre  of  the  heavenly  saints  ;  but  besides  that 
they  will  judge  the  earth.*  Accordingly  it  is  written  here,  "I 
saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  on  them,  and  judgment  was  given  unto 
them."  They  were  the  destined  assessors  of  the  Lord  in  judging 
or  government. 

But  that  was  not  all.  "  And  [I  saw]  the  souls  of  them  that 
were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus,  and  for  the  word  of 

*  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  earliest  Christian  writers  shew  that  a  personal 
millennial  reign  of  Christ  was  the  early  prevalent  doctrine.  But  truth  needs  no 
exaggeration.  It  is  painful  that  such  a  man  as  Mede  {Works,  book  iii.  p.  533, 
4th  edition)  should  have  insisted  on  interpolating  a  negative  in  the  statement  of 
Justin  Martyr  {Dial,  cum  Trijph.  §  80),  where  the  father,  after  confessing  the 
faith  of  himself  and  many  others  in  a  future  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem  and  the 
literal  reign  and  blessedness  of  risen  saints  with  Christ,  admits  on  the  other 
hand  that  there  are  many  holding  the  true  and  godlj'  doctrine  of  Christians  who 
do  not  acknowledge  it.  The  fact  is  that  there  is  not  the  slightest  manuscript 
authority  for  the  insertion,  and  the  internal  evidence  is,  in  my  opinion,  decidedly 
against  it.  Thirlby  has  ver)"^  properly  pointed  out  that  Justin  distinguishes 
between  two  sets  of  the  orthodox,  as  may  be  seen  by  comparing  the  close  of  the 
same  section :  one  of  them,  in  all  respects  (/card  ■kclvto)  right  minded,  has  no 
doubt  about  the  millennial  reign,  &c. ;  the  rest  were  sound  in  general,  but 
opposed  to  chiliasm.  Nevertheless,  Mode's  oh  has  been  allowed  by  many  in 
England  from  Tillotson  down  to  Mr.  Bickersteth,  and  Daillc's  \ir)  {Be  Pooiis  et 
Satis/act.  p.  493)  has  found  favour  abroad  till  recently.  Even  Mr.  Jenour  {Sat. 
Apoc.  vol.  ii.  pp.  318,  319)  continues  to  cite  the  passage  in  its  corrupted  form, 
and  without  remark. 


416  "THE   SOULS." 

God."  Mark  the  word  "  souls."  It  is  strictly  correct.  There  are 
many  who,  in  the  main  agreeing  that  this  vision  represents  a 
judgment  exercised  by  heavenly  saints  over  men  upon  earth, 
understand  the  "souls"  spoken  of  here  to  mean  persons  ac- 
cording to  a  common  usage  of  scripture.  But  I  do  not  believe 
that  this  is  the  true  explanation.  Why  not  take  the  word 
"  souls"  here  as  meaning  those  who  were  in  the  separate  state? 
Thus,  the  apostle  John  saw  in  the  vision,  first,  thrones  with 
persons  seated  upon  them ;  secondly,  a  certain  number  of  dis- 
embodied people,  the  souls  of  them  that  had  been  beheaded  for 
the  witness  of  Jesus  and  for  the  word  of  God ;  and  besides, 
thirdly,  a  class  of  those  "  the  which  had  not  worshipped  the 
beast,  nor  yet  his  image,  and  had  not  received  his  mark  upon 
their  forehead,  or  in  their  hand."  Had  he  meant  persons  in 
their  ordinary  state,  he  might  have  said,  I  saw  the  souls  that 
were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus,  &c. ;  but  not  "  I  saw 
the  souls  of  them  that  were  beheaded."  Just  as  it  was  said  of 
Jacob,  "All  the  souls  that  came  with  Jacob  into  Egypt  .... 
all  the  souls  were  threescore  and  six."  It  is  not  said  there  "  all 
the  souls  of  them,"  or  "  of  the  people  that  came,"  &c.  (Compare 
Kev.  vi.  9.) 

Here,  then,  John  beheld  in  the  vision  some  that  were  already 
risen  from  the  dead  and  seated  upon  thrones.  "  I  saw  thrones, 
and  they  sat  upon  them."  The  reference  seems  purposely 
general,  and  implies  "the  armies"  previously  described  (chapter 
xix.  14).  Those  who  followed  the  Lord  from  heaven  to  war  are 
now  His  companions  in  His  government  of  the  earth.  Next,  he 
saw  a  company  "that  had  been  beheaded  for  the  witness  of 
Jesus,  and  for  the  word  of  God."  These  were  not  yet  raised 
from  the  dead,  but  were  still  in  the  condition  of  separate  spirits. 
And  there  was  a  third  class — persons  who  had  not  worshipped 
the  beast,  nor  submitted  to  his  pretensions  in  any  form  or 
degree.  The  two  last  were  distinct  but  connected  classes  of 
people,  who  when  first  seen  were  in  the  separate  state.  "And 
they  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years."  That  is, 
they  were  reunited  to  their  bodies  ;  for  this  of  course  is  what  is 
meant  by  "  they  lived."  It  might  have  been  thought  that  they 
had  missed  their  blessing,  or  at  least  the  privilege  of  reigning 


"THEY  LIVED."  417 

with  Christ  during  the  thousand  years.  There  were  thrones, 
and  persons  in  their  risen  bodies  who  already  occupied  them. 
What  then  was  to  become  of  those  who,  after  the  removal  of  the 
former  to  heaven,  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus  and 
for  the  word  of  God,  and  who  were  not  till  long  after  raised  from 
the  dead  ?  What  was  to  be  the  portion  not  only  of  these,  but 
of  the  last  class  that  at  a  still  later  day  refused  to  worship  the 
beast  or  receive  his  mark  ?  "  They  lived."  They  are  now  seen, 
just  before  the  reign,  united  to  their  bodies ;  and,  together  with 
those  that  had  been  previously  raised  and  already  seen  enthroned, 
they  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years.  * 

Thus  we  have  a  bright  and  interesting  light  thrown  by  and 
on  the  Eevelation.  For  there  are  passages  in  it  which  this 
verse  helps  to  clear  up ;  while  they,  on  the  other  hand,  throw 
light  back  on  a  verse  which  is  not  intelligible  unless  these  dis- 
tinctions are  seen. 

Let  us  consider  yet  a  little  more  the  different  classes  here 
spoken  of.     "  I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  them."     Evi- 

*  "I  cannot  consent  (says  Dean  Alford)  to  distort  the  words  from  their  plain 
sense  and  chronological  place  in  the  prophecy,  on  account  of  any  considerations 
of  diflSculty,  or  any  risk  of  ahuses  which  the  doctrine  of  the  millennium  may 
bring  with  it.  Those  who  lived  next  to  the  Apostles,  and  the  whole  church  for 
300  years,  understood  them  in  the  plain  literal  sense  ;  and  it  is  a  strange  sight 
in  these  days  to  see  expositors,  who  are  among  thefirst  in  reverence  of  antiquity, 
complacently  casting  aside  the  most  cogent  instance  of  consensus  which  primitive 
antiquity  presents.  As  regards  the  text  itself,  no  legitimate  treatment  of  it  will 
extort  what  is  known  as  the  spiritual  interpretation  now  in  fashion.  If,  in  a 
passage  where  two  resurrections  are  mentioned,  where  certain  »|/"x«'  iKfj'^av  at 
the  first,  and  the  rest  of  the  veKpoi  only  at  the  end  of  a  specified  period  after 
that  first, — if,  in  tZii<Tav  such  a  passage,  the  first  resurrection  may  be  understood 
to  mean  spiritual  rising  with  Christ,  while  the  second  means  literal  rising  from 
the  grave ;  then  there  is  an  end  of  all  significance  in  language,  and  scripture  is 
wiped  out  as  a  definite  testimony  to  anything.  If  the  first  resurrection  is  spiritual, 
then  so  is  the  second,  which  I  suppose  none  will  be  hard)'  enough  to  maintain  ; 
but  if  the  second  is  literal,  so  is  the  first,  which,  in  common  with  the  whole 
primitive  church  and  many  of  the  best  modern  expositors,  I  do  maintain,  and 
receive  as  an  article  of  faith  and  hope."  (Vol.  iv.  part  ii.)  I  have  only  to  add, 
as  to  "  chronological  place,"  that  as  the  sitters  on  thrones,  or  first  group  in  this 
vision,  are  not  represented  as  souls,  so  they  are  not  meant  to  be  included  in 
"they  lived."  Their  living  and  destinj'  to  reign  with  Christ  was  plain  enough 
from  their  session  on  thrones.  Of  the  subsequent  martyrs,  and  the  confessors  in 
the  final  crisis,  it  is  now  said,  these  join  the  others  in  resurrection,  and  share 
the  reign  just  beginning. 

2    E 


418  REIGNING  WITH   CHRIST. 

dently  these  first  objects  are  introduced  most  abruptly.  We  are 
not  told  where  they  came  from,  nor  who  they  were — probably 
because  the  Holy  Ghost  takes  for  granted  that  we  know  enough 
about  them  through  the  previous  statements  of  the  book.  Just 
before  they  had  come  out  of  the  opened  heaven.  (Chapter  xix.) 
When  the  rider  on  the  white  horse,  the  Lord  Jesus,  came  out  as 
a  man  of  war,  the  armies  that  were  there  followed  Him  on  white 
horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and  pure.  I  have  already 
tried  to  prove  that  these  were  the  saints  who  had  been  already 
taken  up  to  heaven,  and  ever  and  anon  shewn  to  be  there  from 
the  commencement  of  chapter  iv.  They  were  seen  then  and 
repeatedly  afterwards  under  the  symbol  of  the  twenty-four 
crowned  elders.  It  will  hardly  be  disputed  that  these  elders 
represent  the  heavenly  saints.  I  do  not  pretend  to  decide 
whether  it  is  the  church  exclusively  or  not.  Very  likely  both 
the  church  and  the  Old  Testament  saints  are  included ;  but  one 
thing  at  least  is  very  clear,  that  heavenly  saints  are  meant. 
They  follow  Christ  out  of  heaven  when  He  comes  to  make  war 
with  the  beast,  &c. ;  and  now,  when  Christ  takes  His  throne, 
when  He  is  not  merely  seen  on  a  white  horse  going  forth  to 
conquer  and  subdue,  but  He  takes  the  throne  to  reign  triumph- 
antly, they  too  are  seen  on  thrones  along  with  Him.  "  I  saw 
thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  them,  and  judgment  was  given  unto 
them." 

Every  believer  knows  that  in  some  sense  Christ  is  to  sit  on 
His  throne  and  to  judge  ;  but  some  might  think  that  it  was  too 
high  a  place  for  Christians  to  be  on  thrones  with  Him ;  wliile 
others,  who  have  etherealized  into  mist  the  direct  meaning  of 
the  mass  of  scriptures  that  treat  of  the  hopes  of  the  saints  and 
the  prospects  of  the  world,  imagine  that  they  will  be  merely  in 
the  vague  distance  of  heaven,  enjoying  everlasting  happiness 
with  Christ,  but  having  notliing  whatever  to  do  with  the  earth. 
For  my  own  part,  I  do  not  believe  that  governing  the  world  is 
by  any  means  the  highest  part  of  the  saint's  glory ;  but  it  will 
be  an  important  element  of  Christ's  glory,  and  therefore  surely 
not  beneath  the  church.  None  can  overlook  or  deny  this 
without  loss  to  their  soul.  When  rightly  held,  it  has  no  little 
practical  influence.     For  if  I  am  to  judge  the  world  then,  God 


PRACTICAL  BEAKING  NOW.  419 

would  not  have  me  meddling  with  the  world  now.  This  was  the 
very  argument  that  the  apostle  Paul  used  when  blaming  the 
Corinthian  believers,  because  they  went  before  the  judgment- 
seat  of  men.  It  is  beneath  the  Christian  calling.  Of  course, 
I  do  not  mean  by  this  in  any  way  to  slight  the  powers  that  be. 
A  Christian  ought  to  be  ready  any  day  and  in  all  things  to 
shew  them  respect.  He  can  afford  to  be  the  humblest  man  in 
the  world,  because  he  is  the  highest  one.  He  has  got  a  better 
exaltation  that  will  shine  most  when  this  world  has  come  to 
nothing.  What  a  wonderful  thing  that  we  are  anointed  kings 
now,  before  the  actual  glory  dawns,  like  David,  who  was  con- 
secrated king  long  before,  as  a  fact,  he  was  exalted  to  the 
kingdom !  The  holy,  royal  oil  was  upon  him,  even  when  he 
was  hunted  about  by  king  Saul  upon  the  mountains.  So,  in  a 
yet  higher  sense,  we  too  are  anointed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
this  not  only  thn,t  we  may  be  able  to  enter  into  the  things 
of  God,  but  as  made  kings  and  priests  to  God.  Hence  God 
looks  for  us  not  only  to  offer  spiritual  worship  to  Him  now,  but 
under  all  circumstances  to  preserve  the  sense  of  our  dignity  as 
His  kings.  (Compare  1  Peter  ii.  5,  9.)  The  world  may  mock 
and  call  us  fanatics,  but  the  world  has  done  worse  to  God 
Himself.  Alas  !  evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners ; 
and  Christians  have  fallen  from  the  truth  that  is  according  to 
godliness  as  to  this. 

They  have  sought  to  have  the  world  and  Christ  too.  People 
may  object  that  at  best  it  is  a  hope  so  purely  future  as  to  have 
no  present  bearing.  But  the  Spirit  of  God  addresses  us  as 
possessing  this  treasure  now,  as  having  in  principle  all  that 
Christ  is  going  to  display  in  us  in  His  kingdom  by  and  by. 
Hence  we  are  responsible  to  God  to  walk  in  the  faith  of  it  now. 
It  was  so  in  the  highest  way  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He 
knew  that  He  was  a  king ;  and  when  Satan  came  and  shewed 
Him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  and  the  glory  of  them, 
offering  to  give  them  to  Him  if  He  fell  down  and  worshipped 
liim,  the  Lord  utterly  rejected  all.  But  Satan,  as  it  were, 
repeated  the  offer  to  the  church,  and  she  at  length  accepted  it. 
In  seeking  the  glory  of  the  world,  she  has  sought  honour  wliere 
Satan  is  the  prince.     Can  any  man  read  his  Bible  and  not  own 

2  E  2 


420  KOOM   FOR   GKOWTH. 

the  truth  of  this  ?  What  did  the  Lord  Jesus  do  when  men 
wanted  to  make  llini  a  king  ?  He  departed  from  them.  When 
He  stood  before  Pilate,  He  admitted  that  He  was  a  king,  but 
said,  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  ....  Now  is  my  king- 
dom not  from  hence."  By  and  by  it  will  be.  "  Tlie  kingdom 
of  the  world  shall  become  our  Lord's  and  his  Christ's."  And 
when  it  passes  into  His  hands,  the  reign  of  Christians  will 
begin.  His  people  will  share  the  kingdom  along  with  Him. 
Hence  faith  waits  for  this :  and  meanwhile  we  are  put  to  the 
test  now,  "  as  having  nothing,  and  yet  possessing  all  things." 

To  some  it  will  appear  presumption  to  claim  such  a  privilege 
now.    But  not  so.    It  is  faith,  and  its  fruit  is  growing  separation 
from  the  world.     The  principle  is  the  thing  of  value.     For  if  a 
man  only  strive  for  the  simplest  thing  in  this  world  that  is  an 
object  to  him, — for  some  present  (even  if  it  be  a  petty)  dis- 
tinction, there  is  the  trace  of  the  enemy's  work.     God  looks  for 
holy  separateness  from  the  world  in  all  His  saints  :  they  are  not 
of  the  world,  even  as  Christ  is  not  of  it.     Let  it  only  be  in 
proportion  to  a  man's  spirituality  and  intelligence.     Thus,  when 
a  Christian  begins  his  path  of  faith,  God  does  not  say  to  him 
all  at  once,  You  must  cut  off  this  and  renounce  that ;  He  leaves 
room  for  the  exercise  of  grace  and  progress  in  truth.     In  the 
day  that  salvation  came  to  the  house  of  Zaecheus,  the  Lord  said 
not  a  word  of   his  odious  position  in  the  world  as  a  Jewish 
tax-gatherer.     Nor  are  we  told,  in  the  case  of  Cornelius,  that  he 
must  forthwith  give  up  his  place  as  a  centurion  of  the  Italian 
band ;  because  the  whole  blessedness  of  God's  ways  would  be 
destroyed  by  laying  down  and  enforcing  rules  in  that  fashion. 
The  church  is  not  governed  by  a  code  of  formalities.    She  is  led 
on  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  according  to  His  word. 
Just  as  with  a  child  ;  when  of  tender  years  he  speaks  as  a  child, 
understands  as  a  child,  and  thinks  as  a  child.     One  could  not 
wish  babes  to  assume  the  ways  of  adults.    So  it  is  with  spiritual 
children.     The  Lord  does  not  look  for  such  to  be  occupied  with 
the  things  of  men  and  fathers  in  Christ.     He  leaves  room  for 
growth  in  grace.     Now,  if  a  man  is  in  a  bad  state,  he  takes 
advantage  of  grace,  and  asks,  Is  there  any  harm  in  this  ?     Is 
there  any  command  for  that  ?     Sometimes  a  soul  only  refrains 


THOSE   ON   THE   THRONES   THEN  RISEN.  421 

from  evil  doings,  in  the  thought  that  if  he  persists  he  is  in 
danger  of  being  lost.  But  what  God  values  is  simple-hearted 
obedience ;  the  doing  God's  will  because  it  is  His  will,  because 
it  is  delight  to  do  His  will,  because  it  glorifies  Him.  He  saves 
us  by  His  grace,  and  saves  us  so  as  not  to  see  a  single  fault  in 
us.  And  now  He  says.  If  I  have  saved  you  and  put  you  in 
such  sureness  and  perfection  of  blessing  before  me,  the  thing 
that  I  look  for  is  your  heart,  its  confidence  in  my  love  and 
wisdom,  your  worship  and  your  obedience. 

But  God  also  gives  us  the  knowledge  of  the  coming  kingdom 
that  we  are  to  share  with  Christ  our  Lord.  It  is  well  to  remem- 
ber that  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not  bring  about  the  kingdom. 
Not  He,  but  the  Lord  Jesus  only  is  the  king.  Thus  Christ's 
presence  is  essential  to  the  kingdom,  at  least  in  the  full  mani- 
fested sense.  It  would  be  a  kingdom  without  a  king,  if  Christ 
were  not  personally  there ;  and  therefore  it  is  said,  "  They  lived 
and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years."  Christ  Himself  was 
present,  and  He  is  the  centre  of  all  glory,  and  blessing,  and  joy. 
In  chap.  xix.  we  had  Christ  and  them  coming  out  of  heaven  in 
judgment,  and  thereon  in  chap.  xx.  the  kingdom  is  established 
in  peace  over  the  earth. 

This  may  answer  the  first  question,  as  to  who  they  are  whom 
John  first  saw  sitting  on  the  thrones,  and  of  course  in  risen 
bodies.  They  are  heavenly  saints,  including  (if  not  exclusively) 
the  church.  The  next  question  is,  Who  are  those  whose  souls 
w^ere  seen  not  at  first  united  to  their  bodies  ?  The  answer  is 
plain.  If  Eev.  iv.  v.  shew  us  glorified  saints  under  the  symbol 
of  the  twenty-four  elders,  and  corresponding  with  those  first 
mentioned  in  our  verse,  chap.  vi.  lets  us  into  another  scene.  It 
tells  us  that  there  will  be  saints  called  to  suffer  after  that,  whose 
sou.ls  John  then  saw  under  the  altar.  They  had  been  slain  for 
the  word  of  God,  and  for  the  testimony  which  they  held,  and 
they  call  upon  God  to  judge  and  avenge  their  blood  on  them 
that  dwell  on  the  earth.  Who  are  these  saints  that  appeal  to 
God's  vengeance  ?  It  is  not  the  church  in  this  case,  one  can 
answer  with  the  utmost  confidence.  It  could  not  be  indeed ;  for 
the  church  had  been  already  removed  to  heaven.  But,  besides, 
is  the  church  ever  said,  in  scripture,  to  call  upon  God  to  judge 


422  OTHER  ^VITNESSES  FOLLOW. 

and  avenge  the  blood  of  saints  shed  on  the  earth?  It  would 
falsify  the  very  design  of  God  in  the  church,  and  in  the  in- 
dividual Christian  too.  We  are  the  epistle  of  Christ,  called 
expressly  to  shew  out  His  glory  in  Christ,  and  His  grace  towards 
the  world  ever  since  the  cross.  And  as  <jrod  has  allowed  men 
to  put  to  death  His  own  Son,  and,  so  far  from  judging  the  guilt, 
has  only  made  it  an  occasion  for  shewing  more  grace  still,  so 
the  church  is  called  to  suffer,  and  if  need  be  even  to  death,  for 
His  name's  sake,  without  such  a  thought  or  wish  as  calling  for 
vengeance. 

Take  a  plain  and  signal  example  of  this  in  Stephen.  He  was 
most  grievously  trodden  down :  they  cast  him  out  of  the  city 
and  stoned  him.  But  he  kneels  down  and  cries,  "  Lord,  lay 
not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  It  was  with  a  loud  voice  too,  for 
it  was  not  a  thing  that  his  heart  did  not  feel  earnestly ;  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  desired  that  those  who  were  round  him  should 
know  his  heart's  desire  about  them,  guilty  as  they  were  of  his 
blood.  Was  this  calling  upon  God  to  avenge  his  blood?  The 
very  contrary ;  and  so  all  through.  Look  at  the  apostles  Peter 
and  John,  who  when  they  were  beaten  depart  from  the  council, 
rejoicing  that  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  the 
name  of  Jesus.  Look  again  at  the  first  Epistle  of  Peter ;  and 
what  do  you  find  there  ?  This  is  the  principle :  "  If  when  ye 
do  well  and  suffer  for  it,  ye  take  it  patiently,  this  is  acceptable 
with  God.     For  even  hereunto  were  ye  called." 

On  the  other  hand,  the  world  could  not  go  on  for  a  day  on 
such  a  ground  as  this ;  it  must  go  to  pieces,  if  evil  were  not  to 
be  punished,  and  those  who  did  well  and  suffered  wrongfully 
were  merely  to  give  thanks.  But  such  exhortations  were  not 
intended  for  the  world.  And  there  is  the  mistake  so  often 
made.  jMcn  forget  that  the  church  was  called  to  be  a  witness 
of  lieaven — was  meant  to  express  the  mind  and  grace  of  Christ, 
while  walking  upon  the  earth.  This  is  our  "one  thing" — our 
business  here  below.  Of  course,  this  need  not  hinder  the  pro- 
viding things  honest  in  the  sight  of  all  men.  It  is  right  for  the 
Christian  to  do  this,  but  let  him  weigh  well  how  he  does  it. 
Our  behaviour  in  the  mo.st  ordinary  employment  should  be  a 
testimony  to  this — that  we  are  not  of  the  world ;  that  we  look 


THE   EAKLIER   AND    LATER   SUFFEKERS.  423 

not  for  honour  and  credit  in  the  world,  but  to  glorify  Christ  in 
heaven  ;  that  instead  of  seeking  to  help  on  the  plans  of  men, 
and  to  be  an  ornament  in  the  world,  our  mission  is  to  make 
Him  known  to  it,  and  to  do  His  will  during  the  little  while  we 
are  here. 

But  to  return.  We  have  seen  that,  though  the  enthroned  elders 
are  in  heaven  (Kev.  iv.  v.),  there  are  afterwards  saints  on  earth, 
new  witnesses  who  are  called  to  suffer  unto  death  for  the  word  of 
God  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus ;  but  who,  when  they  die,  cry 
for  God  to  avenge  their  blood  on  their  enemies.  Nor  is  that 
wrong  in  them,  though  it  would  be  foreign  to  us,  because  it  is 
not  the  will  of  God  concerning  us.  But  when  God  has  formed 
the  church,  and,  after  it  has  been  taken  to  heaven,  has  raised  up 
fresh  witnesses  for  Himself  on  earth.  He  will  begin  to  deal  with 
the  world  judicially  Himself.  And  therefore  when  these  holy 
sufferers  cry  to  God  against  their  adversaries,  they  will  have 
communion  with  Him ;  and  this  is  what  faith  always  seeks — 
communion  with  God  in  what  He  is  actually  doing  or  about  to 
do.  God  does  not  thus  interfere  to  judge  the  world  now,  and 
therefore  His  saints  should  not  ask  Him,  as  these  do,  to  judge 
and  avenge.  God  now  endures  in  perfect  patience  the  wicked- 
ness of  the  world ;  and  therefore  a  Christian  should  rather  ask 
God  to  turn  His  long-suffering  into  salvation  for  souls.  But 
when  Eev.  vi.  is  being  fulfilled,  God  will  pour  down  judgment 
upon  judgment;  and  the  witnesses  for  God  in  that  day  will  ask 
God  to  judge,  and  rightly.  They  take  up  the  language  of  the 
Psalms,  in  general  so  misunderstood  and  misapplied  now,  but 
then  most  appropriate  and  prophetically  provided  of  God. 

This  shews,  then,  that  there  is  to  be  a  very  different  state  of 
things  after  the  church  has  been  taken  away.  God  begins  then 
to  act  in  the  way  of  judgment,  and  those  whose  hearts  are  con- 
verted, and  who  desired  His  glory,  will  be  in  great  darkness 
compared  with  the  church.  Still,  their  godly  testimony  will  be 
intolerable  to  the  powers  of  the  world,  who  will  spill  their  blood 
like  water.  The  sufferers  will  cry  to  God  for  judgment,  and  He 
will  hear  them.  Look  at  verses  9,  10,  11  of  chapter  vi. :  "  And 
when  he  had  opened  the  fifth  seal,  I  saw  under  the  altar  the 
souls  of  them  that  had  been  slain  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for 


424  THREE  CLASSES  DESCRIBED. 

the  testimony  which  they  held."  Observe  how  this  agrees  with 
the  two  classes  mentioned  in  chapter  xx.  4 :  "  I  saw  the  souls 
of  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus,  and  for 
the  word  of  God."  For  mark  the  answer.  They  cry,  "  How  long, 
0  Master,  holy  and  true,"  &c.  "And  white  robes  were  given  unto 
every  one  of  them ;  and  it  was  said  unto  them  that  they  should 
rest  yet  for  a  little  while,  until  their  fellow-servants  also  and 
their  brethren,  that  should  be  killed  as  they  were,  should  be 
fulfilled."  When  the  earlier  sufferers,  after  the  removal  of  the 
church,  had  been  called  out  and  slain,  they  were  told  of  another 
and  subsequent  class  who  should  be  killed  as  tliey  before  the 
full  judgment. 

This  is  exactly  what  we  find  in  our  chapter  xx.  First,  there 
are  those  who  sit  on  the  thrones,  invested  witli  royal  judgment ; 
next,  tliere  are  those  who  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus 
and  for  the  word  of  God ;  and,  thirdly,  their  brethren  who,  as  it 
was  said  in  chapter  vi.,  had  yet  to  be  completed.  These,  when 
the  beast  brought  out  his  idolatry,  &c.,  and  it  was  a  question  of 
being  killed  or  of  worshipping  him,  refused  :  they  were  faithful 
unto  death.  Well,  here  they  are.  "  I  saw  ....  and  those  who 
had  not  worshipped  the  beast,  nor  his  image,  and  had  not 
received  his  mark  upon  their  foreheads,  or  in  their  hands." 
Thus  the  Eevelation  gives  us  the  full  answer,  as  to  these  three 
classes.  The  twenty-four  elders  correspond  with  those  who  sit 
on  the  thrones;  the  second  class  are  the  souls  of  them  that  were 
beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus,  &c.,  we  had  in  chapter  vi. ; 
and  then  the  latter  part  of  the  book  shews  "  their  brethren  that 
should  be  killed  as  they  themselves  were,"  and  for  whom  they 
were  told  to  wait.  In  Eev.  xiii.  7,  it  was  said  that  it  was  given 
to  the  beast  to  make  war  with  the  saints,  and  to  overcome  them. 
And  more  than  that.  The  latter  half  of  the  chapter  supplies 
another  part  of  the  description,  and  shews  us  how  these  saints 
came  to  be  characterized  in  Revelation  xx.  as  those  who  liad  not 
worshipped  the  beast  nor  his  image,  neither  had  received  his 
mark  on  their  forehead,  or  in  their  hand.  In  verse  14  the  second 
beast  is  said  (chapter  xiii.)  to  deceive  "  them  that  dwell  on  the 
earth,  on  account  of  tliose  miracles  which  he  had  power  to  do  in 
the  presence  of  tlie  beast ;  saying  to  them  that  dwell  on  the 


GLORIFIED   BODIES,   NOT   SOULS.  425 

earth,  that  they  should  make  an  image  to  the  beast,  which  had 
the  wound  by  a  sword  and  did  live.  And  he  had  power  to  give 
breath  to  the  image  of  the  beast,  that  the  image  of  the  beast 
should  both  speak  and  cause  that  as  many  as  would  not  worship 
the  image  of  the  beast  should  be  killed."  Now  this  most  clearly 
pertains  to  the  last  or  third  class.  Those  referred  to  in  chapter 
xiv.  12,  13,  are  probably  the  same.  But  again,  see  chapter  xv, 
2  :  "  I  saw  as  it  were  a  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire:  and  them 
that  had  gotten  the  victory  over  the  beast,  and  over  his  image, 
and  over  the  number  of  his  name,  stand  on  the  sea  of  glass, 
having  the  harps  of  God."  Thus  the  Eevelation  answers  fully 
the  question.  Who  are  these  saints  ?  It  shews  us,  first,  the  risen 
saints,  who  had  been  taken  up  to  heaven,  and  who  come  out 
with  Christ.  This  is  one  reason  why  they  are  seen  separate 
from  the  two  other  classes.  They  are  viewed  on  the  thrones  at 
once,  because  they  are  already  changed  into  the  likeness  of 
Christ's  glorious  body.  But  the  others  are  merely  seen,  up  to 
this  moment,  as  souls,  and  of  course  not  glorified.  We  hear  of 
glorified  bodies,  but  never  of  glorified  souls  in  scripture.  The 
soul  of  the  believer  goes  to  be  with  Christ  after  death,  but  it 
has  to  be  reunited  with  the  body,  before  it  can  be  spoken  of  as 
in  a  glorified  condition.  The  only  perfect  state  is,  when  we  shall 
bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly ;  when  we  shall  be  raised  or 
changed  into  His  likeness. 

If  we  look  at  1  Cor.  xv.,  we  shall  see  that  quite  plainly.  It  is 
said  there,  "  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy ;  the  second 
man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven.  As  is  the  earthy,  such  are  they 
also  that  are  earthy ;  and  as  is  the  heavenly,  such  are  they  also 
that  are  heavenly.  And  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the 
earthy,  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly.  Now  this 
I  say,  brethren,  that  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom 
of  God ;  neither  doth  corruption  inherit  incorruption.  Behold,  I 
shew  you  a  mystery  ;  We  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be 
changed  ....  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible,  and 
we  shall  be  changed.  For  this  corruptible,  must,"  not  merely 
put  off  corruption,  but  "put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal" 
must  not  merely  slip  off  this  mortal  coil,  as  men  say,  but  "  put 
on  immortality.    So  when  this  corruptible  shall  have  put  on 


426  WHY   "THE   FIRST   RESURRECTION"   HERE. 

incorruption,  and  this  mortal  shall  have  put  on  immortality" — 
evidently  the  glorified  state — "then  shall  be  brought  to  pass 
the  saying  that  is  written,  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory." 
Death  is  not  swallowed  up  in  victory  when  a  Christian  dies 
and  goes  to  be  with  Christ ;  but  when  He  comes,  and  the  dead 
are  raised,  and  the  living  changed.  What  was  done  individually 
in  the  case  of  Enoch  and  Elijah,  will  be  done  on  a  grand  scale 
at  His  coming.  All  the  living  saints  then  will  be  changed,  and 
will  go  to  be  with  the  Lord,  without  passing  through  death. 
These,  risen  or  changed,  having  been  taken  up  to  heaven,  will 
come  thence  with  Christ,  and  are  here  seen  on  thrones. 

But  what  next  is  the  history  of  those  saints  on  earth,  who 
are  called  after  the  previous  saints  have  been  removed  to  meet 
the  Lord  ?  The  Kevelation  shews  us  their  sufferings  for  righteous- 
ness' sake  and  their  death.  What  becomes  of  them  afterwards  ? 
The  church  had  been  already  raised  and  glorified,  and  these 
sufferers  are  slain  before  the  reign  of  Christ  commences.  Are 
these  then,  who  have  so  suffered,  not  to  reign  ?  Are  they  to  forfeit 
their  blessings,  because  they  have  resisted  unto  blood,  striving 
a^rainst  sin  ?  This  could  never  be.  "  I  saw  the  souls  of  them 
that  were  beheaded  ....  and  they  lived  and  reigned  with 
Christ  a  thousand  years."  They  too  are  raised  from  the  dead  ; 
they  join  the  others  already  glorified,  and  all  reign  together  with 
Christ  in  "  the  kingdom." 

I  apprehend,  but  I  only  give  it  as  an  opinion,  that  their  re- 
surrection takes  place  at  or  about  this  time.  The  beast  and 
the  false  prophet  have  been  put  down ;  Satan  has  been  cast 
into  the  abyss,  and  the  millennial  reign  of  Christ  and  His  risen 
saints  is  now  about  to  commence.  The  Lord  waits,  as  it  were, 
for  the  very  last  moment.  He  wants  not  a  soul  of  His  holy 
sufferers  to  be  left  out  of  this  their  special  reward.  The  beast 
had  persecuted  up  to  the  last,  and  God  delays  till  that  moment, 
that  every  one  who  has  suffered  with  Christ  be  included  in  the 
privilege  of  being  glorified  together.  If  the  account  of  the 
resurrection  had  been  given  when  the  previously-risen  saints 
were  translated  to  heaven  (i.e.,  before  Kev.  iv.),  there  might  have 
been  doubt  and  anxiety  as  to  the  fate  of  those  who  suffer  after 
the  church  was  taken  up.     One  can  understand  why  this  notice 


"THE    REST   OF   THE   DEAD."  427 

of  resurrection  is  put  here.  It  was  the  special  object  of  God  to 
comfort  those  who  subsequently  had  to  suffer  and  die  for  Christ, 
and  to  shew  that  they  would  not  be  forgotten  by  Him.  They 
are  now  raised  to  join  the  saints  already  risen  ;  "  and  they  lived 
and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years."  God  puts  off  their 
resurrection  till  just  before  Christ's  reign,  and  then  those  that 
had  meanwhile  suffered  for  Him  are  raised  up. 

"  But  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  till  the  thousand  years 
were  finished.  This  is  the  first  resurrection."  "  The  rest  of  the 
dead  : " — who  were  they  ?  The  beginning  of  verse  4  includes, 
as  I  conceive,  not  only  the  church,  but  the  Old  Testament  saints; 
that  is,  all  the  heavenly  saints  taken  up  to  be  with  Christ,  when 
He  will  have  come  to  receive  them  unto  Himself  in  the  air. 
Next,  we  had  the  first  band  of  sufferers  before  the  beast  came  to 
the  height  of  his  power ;  and  then  the  last  band  that  suffer 
because  they  will  refuse  to  worship  him.  These  were  the  three 
classes  of  saints  now  alike  living  and  reigning  with  Christ. 
"  The  rest  of  the  dead "  must  then  be  the  wicked  dead,  because 
the  first  resurrection  includes  all  the  righteous  dead. 

It  answers,  in  fact,  to  what  our  Lord  called  "  the  resurrection 
of  the  just"  (Luke  xiv.  14),  save  that  it  is  more  detailed,  if  not 
more  comprehensive.  Clearly  there  is  a  special  resurrection 
that  belongs  to  the  just,  and  this  without  a  word  about  the 
unjust.  There  is  a  resurrection  of  the  unjust ;  and  when  the 
apostle  Paul  spoke  in  Acts  xxiv.  before  Felix,  he  testified  to 
his  belief  in  the  resurrection  both  of  just  and  unjust.  But 
when  the  Lord  Jesus  was  raising  the  consciences  of  his  disciples 
to  what  was  good  and  of  value  before  God,  He  set  forth  the 
resurrection  of  the  just  alone. 

But  this  is  not'  all.  There  were  men  trying  to  bring  the 
doctrine  of  the  resurrection  into  ridicule. 

We  find  on  another  occasion  that  certain  of  the  Sadducees 
came  to  Him,  putting  a  difficulty,  because  of  a  woman  supposed 
to  be  married  to  seven  brethren.  In  the  case  reasoned  on  these 
seven  successively  died,  and  last  of  all  the  woman  died  also. 
In  the  resurrection  then,  they  ask,  whose  wife  should  she  be  of 
the  seven  ?  The  Lord  at  once  points  out  that  the  difficulty  was 
founded  on  ignorance  of  scripture  or  of  the  power  of  God.     In 


428  OUR  LORD  ON  THE  RESURRECTION. 

the  resurrection  they  shall  neither  marry,  nor  be  given  in 
marriage,  but  shall  be  like  the  angels;  that  is,  like  them  in 
that  respect,  not  in  all  things,  for  they  will  judge  angels ;  but 
like  them  in  so  far  as  this,  that  there  will  be  no  distinction  of 
sex — neither  marrying  nor  given  in  marriage.  "  Neither  can 
they  die  any  more."  But  He  adds,  "They  which  shall  be 
accounted  worthy  to  obtain  that  world,  [or  rather  'dispensa- 
tion'] and  the  resurrection  from  the  dead,"  &c.  This  would  be 
an  extraordinary  expression,  if  all  were  raised  at  the  same  time, 
"They  that  shall  be  counted  worthy  to  obtain  that  age;"  for 
the  last  word  does  not  refer  to  the  material  world,  but  to  a 
special  dispensation  or  age,  which  the  unworthy  do  not  obtain. 
"Weigh  tlie  force  of  the  phrase.  The  resurrection  of  the  saints 
is  in  an  age  peculiar  to  themselves.  "  They  which  shall  be 
accounted  worthy  to  obtain  that  age  (the  other  dead  are  only 
raised  after  it),  and  the  resurrection  from  the  dead."  The  resur- 
rection of  Christ  was  not  merely  a  resurrection  of  the  dead,  but 
out  of  the  dead.  He  left  them  undisturbed  in  their  tombs. 
There  were  certain  saints  who  rose  with  Him,  or  rather  came 
out  of  their  graves  after  His  resurrection ;  but  the  great  mass 
of  the  dead  were  so  far  unaffected  by  Christ's  resurrection.  And 
so  is  it  with  the  saints  in  principle.  Theirs  is  to  be  a  resur- 
rection from  among  the  dead.  The  rest  of  the  dead  must  rise 
at  anotlier  time ;  but  they  who  shall  be  accounted  worthy  shall 
obtain  that  age,  and  the  resurrection  from  the  dead.  They  shall 
not  die  any  more.  Could  God  shew  more  strongly,  than  by 
this  language,  a  distinct  and  prior  resurrection  of  the  saints  of 
God? 

Hear  also  the  language  of  Paul  in  Phil.  iii.  11  :  "  If  by  any 
means  I  might  attain  unto  the  resurrection  from  the  dead."  In 
common  Bibles,  no  doubt,  it  is  "  the  resurrection  of  the  dead ;" 
but  I  have  no  hesitation  iti  saying  that  this  is  a  complete  mistake. 
The  true  and  only  meaning  of  the  verse,  according  to  the  best 
authorities,  is,  "  if  by  any  means  I  might  attain  to  the  resur- 
rection out  of  (or  from  among)  the  dead."  It  may  seem  to  some 
but  a  slight  change  ;  but  if  we  want  to  know  the  mind  of  God, 
it  makes  a  weighty  difference ;  because,  if  it  is  "  resurrection 
from  the  dead,"  it  implies  that  while  the  rest  of  the  dead  remain 


KESUERECTION  FROM  THE  DEAD.  429 

in  their  graves,  there  is  a  resurrection  not  common  to  all 
mankind,  bad  and  good,  but  belonging  only  to  those  that  are 
dear  to  God.  The  apostle  considered  this  resurrection  to  be  so 
bright  and  blessed,  that  he  says  in  effect,  I  care  not  what  the 
sufferings  and  trouble  may  be,  let  the  road  be  what  it  may — if 
I  am  but  there ;  this  is  what  I  wait  for  and  desire  at  all  cost. 
For  when  he  said,  "if  by  any  means  I  might  attain,"  not  a 
shade  of  doubt  is  implied  as  to  his  having  part  in  the  first 
resurrection ;  but  rather  that  he  so  valued  the  prize  as  to 
mind  not  what  the  path  of  suffering  might  be  that  led  to  the 
goal. 

Now  let  us  carry  the  light  of  this  back  to  the  Eevelation. 
The  reference  in  "the  rest  of  the  dead"  is  to  the  wicked  dead. 
A  resurrection  was  shewn  of  all  the  departed  saints  up  to  the 
display  of  the  kingdom,  "But  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not 
again  until  the  thousand  years  were  finished"  (verse  5).  There 
is  no  difficulty  really  in  the  passage ;  but  men  have  their  own 
thoughts  and  opinions,  and  cannot  make  scripture  square  with 
them,  whereas  all  is  as  plain  as  God  could  make  it.  "  This  is 
the  first  resurrection.  Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part  in 
the  first  resurrection"  (verse  6).  How  beautifully  this  answers 
to  what  the  Lord  had  said  to  the  Sadducees,  "  They  that  are 
accounted  worthy  to  obtain  that  age,  and  the  resurrection  from 
the  dead!"  So  again  St.  Paul:  "If  by  any  means  I  might 
attain  to  the  resurrection  from  the  dead." 

"  On  such  the  second  death  hath  no  power."  Mark  once 
more  the  force  of  the  Lord's  words  in  the  gospel :  "  Neither 
can  they  die  any  more."  As  for  the  persons  left  to  be  raised 
after  the  thousand  years  are  over,  they  are  to  die  another  and 
most  woeful  death — the  second  death.  By  it  all  those  who  had 
not  part  in  the  first  resurrection  are  to  die.  Theirs  shall  be  the 
second  death — meaning  that  extinction  of  all  hopes  of  blessing 
when  all  else  is  blessed  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  they  per- 
petually abide  under  the  wrath  of  God.  They  are  cast  into  the 
lake  of  fire.  As  for  those  who  have  part  in  the  first  resurrection, 
"  they  shall  be  priests  of  God  and  of  Christ,  and  shall  reign  with 
him  a  thousand  years ; "  and  afterwards  shall  they  reign  in  life 
by  Him  for  ever  and  ever. 


430  THE   REIGN  OVER  THE   EARTH. 

The  last  three  verses  that  we  looked  at  form  a  kind  of  paren- 
thesis in  the  chapter,  something  like  what  we  saw  in  chapter  xii. 
There  the  war  in  heaven  and  the  consequent  casting  down  of 
Satan  came  in,  and  then  the  history  which  had  been  alluded  to 
before  (verse  6)  was  resumed  in  verse  13,  Here  is  something 
similar,  for  the  seventh  verse  continues  the  history  that  had 
been  already  begun  just  at  tlie  close  of  the  third  verse.  We  find 
there  Satan  bound  for  a  thousand  years,  and  consequently  his 
power  of  seducing  the  nations  into  rebellion  against  God  inter- 
cepted for  a  time.  After  these  things,  we  are  told,  he  must 
be  loosed  for  a  little  season.  The  seventh  verse  anticipates  his 
loosing  and  its  effects.  "  When  the  thousand  years  are  expired, 
Satan  shall  be  loosed  out  of  his  prison,  and  shall  go  out  to 
deceive  the  nations  which  are  in  the  four  corners  of  the  earth, 
Gog  and  Magog,  to  gather  them  together  unto  the  war :  the 
number  of  whom  is  as  the  sand  of  the  sea"  (verse  8).  Evidently 
therefore  verses  4^6  form  a  parenthesis — important,  no  doubt, 
but  still  a  parenthesis,  and  not  a  part  of  the  regular  history 
found  here.  One  reason  why  it  is  given  here  may  be  to  shew 
that,  during  this  same  period  when  Satan  is  bound,  there  is  the 
blessed  side — not  only  the  evil  one  restrained,  bu£  Christ  and 
His  saints  reigning  over  the  earth.  It  is  never  said  that  we  shall 
reign  on  the  earth. 

In  Revelation  v.  10,  I  have  already  shewn  that  the  common 
version  of  that  verse  which  conveys  this  is  somewhat  inaccurate, 
and  that  the  true  thought  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is  not  the  place 
where  the  saints  of  God  then  dwell,  but  the  sphere  of  their 
reign.  "  They  shall  reign  over  the  earth."  The  importance  of 
the  change  is  not  so  much  as  an  isolated  fact,  but  because  it  is 
connected  with  the  whole  scheme  of  truth ;  and  it  is  a  part  of 
this  scheme  that  the  heavenly  saints  are  never  to  be  mingled 
with  people  on  the  earth.  The  promise  of  the  first  place  of 
earthly  blessing  belongs  to  Israel,  and  therefore  it  would  make 
the  utmost  confusion,  if  the  heavenly,  glorified  saints  were 
jumbled  with  men  in  their  natural  bodies  in  this  world.  In 
fact,  one  of  the  strongest  objections  that  many  Christians  urge 
to  the  reign  of  Christ  over  the  earth  is  founded  on  the  notion 
that  premillennialism  supposes  the  glorified  saints  to  be  mixed 


HEAVENLY  AND   EARTHLY  THINGS.  431 

up  with  the  people  then  alive  here  below.     But  this  is  a  great 
mistake. 

The  church  will  have  its  own  proper  glory  ;  but  withal  there 
will  be  two  orders  or  spheres  of  blessing,  and  one  of  a  higher 
character  than  the  other.  All  things  in  heaven  will  be  gathered 
under  the  headship  of  Christ ;  but,  beside  this,  all  things  on 
earth  wall  be  at  the  same  time  under  the  same  government. 
Such  is  the  peculiarity  of  the  millennium.  There  will  be  the 
heavenly  portion  above,  and  the  earthly  one  below,  connected 
together,  but  not  confounded.  This  is  distinctly  taught  in 
Eph.  i.  10,  where  the  apostle  says  that  the  mystery  of  God's 
will  has  been  made  known  "according  to  his  good  pleasure 
which  he  hath  purposed  in  himself  for  the  administration  of 
the  fulness  of  times,  to  gather  together  in  one  all  things  in 
Christ,  both  which  are  in  heaven  and  which  are  on  earth,  even 
in  him."  I  am  aware  there  are  many  who  suppose  that  it 
speaks  of  the  gospel  dispensation  now  going  on.  But  this  is 
unfounded.  The  church  is  not  a  gathering  of  all  nations,  but 
on  the  contrary  an  elect  body  out  of  them  all.  It  never  was 
and  never  will  be  a  gathering  of  all  nations,  peoples,  and 
kindreds,  and  tongues,  into  one.  Besides,  the  verse  speaks  of 
a  gathering  of  all  things.  There  is  a  gathering  together  of  the 
children  of  God  ;  for  Christ  died  that  He  should  gather  together 
in  one  the  children  of  God  that  were  scattered  abroad.  But 
here  it  is  a  question  not  of  persons,  but  things.  When  the 
glorious  administration  takes  place  of  which  the  apostle  speaks, 
all  things  are  to  be  put  under  Christ's  headship.  He  has  all 
under  His  headship  now  in  title,  but  not  as  an  actual  displayed 
fact. 

Daniel  does  not  say  that  all  was  to  be  put  under  the  Son  of 
man,  nor  does  the  Holy  Ghost  reveal  that  secret  of  God's  will 
in  the  Old  Testament.  There  was  the  greatness  of  the  kingdom 
under  the  whole  heaven.  But  the  New  Testament  shews  us 
more ;  it  teaches  us  that,  at  the  very  same  time  when  all  things 
on  earth  will  be  put  under  His  government,  all  things  in  heaven 
will  be  put  under  Him  too.  Nor  this  merely  in  a  providential 
way  as  now,  but  directly  and  personally.  The  Lord,  of  course, 
is  above  Satan,  the  god  and  prince  of  the  world  that  now  is. 


432  THE   MILLENNIUM. 

He  does  act  providentially  now ;  and,  beside  that,  He  has  the 
full  personal  title  to  exercise  all  glory,  heavenly  and  earthly. 
But  tlie  time  when  He  enforces  the  title,  and  takes  all  things 
under  His  hand,  is  future.  If  He  had  taken  it  now  in  an  im- 
mediate way,  all  wickedness  would  be  put  down.  None  could 
sin  without  judgment ;  neither  would  there  be  such  a  thing  as 
righteousness  suffering,  or  iniquity  exalted.  All  this  is  a  proof 
that,  in  the  full  actual  sense,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  not  yet 
reigning,  however  true  it  may  be  to  faith.  Look,  for  instance, 
at  Psalm  xcvii.  :  "  The  Lord  reigneth."  People  quote  this,  as  if 
applied  when  the  Holy  Ghost  wrote,  or  now  at  any  rate.  But 
the  next  words  refute  this ;  because,  when  the  Lord  does  reign 
as  here  meant,  the  earth  will  rejoice,  &c.  Whereas,  it  is  plain 
from  Eomans  viii.,  not  to  speak  of  every  day's  experience,  that 
the  earth  is  groaning  in  misery,  and  that  the  whole  creation 
travails  in  pain  until  now,  which  is  the  very  reverse  of  rejoicing. 
But  when  the  Psalms  meet  their  full  accomplishment,  all 
creation  will  be  delivered  and  will  rejoice  under  the  reign  of 
Jehovah.  Faith  can  say  that  the  Lord  reigns  now :  but  He  is 
not  yet  exerting  royal  power  over  the  earth. 

When  Christ  comes  in  His  kingdom  every  opponent  will 
have  to  be  put  down,  and  consequently  there  must  be  judgment. 
The  beast  and  the  false  prophet  were  set  aside,  as  we  see  in 
chapter  xix.,  and  then  comes  the  reign.  And  although  everyone 
is  not  to  be  converted,  no  open  sin  will  be  permitted.  It  may 
be  a  "feigned  obedience"  that  is  rendered  by  a  large  part  of 
the  people  \ipon  the  earth,  but  still  in  some  sort  it  will  be 
obedience,  even  from  "  the  sons  of  the  stranger."  That  is  the 
true  thought  of  the  millennial  reign.  It  means  a  time,  not  when 
there  will  be  no  evil,  but  when  evil  will  be  suppressed  by  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  ;  when  the  heavenly  glory  will  be  in 
immediate  connexion  with  the  delivered  and  gladsome  earth  ; 
when  the  earthly  people  will  be  restored  to  their  own  land, 
converted,  and  owning  that  blessed  One  whom  their  fathers 
crucified ;  for  in  Zech.  xii.-xiv.  we  see  the  very  circumstances, 
at  least  as  to  the  earth,  that  I  allude  to.  In  the  last  chapter  the 
Lord  is  "  king  over  all  the  earth :  in  that  day  shall  there  be  one 
Lord  and  his  name  one."   This  is  precisely  the  millennium.    All 


CHKIST   HEAD   OVER   ALL  THINGS.  433 

nations  are  seen  coming  up  to  own  the  Lord:  if  any  refuse, 
they  are  to  be  chastised.  The  Spirit  of  God  particularly  notices 
the  punishment,  viz.,  the  withdrawal  of  rain  from  such  nations 
as  should  not  come  up  to  keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  In 
Egypt,  where  such  a  want  would  not  be  felt,  the  land  having 
other  sources  of  fertility,  there  should  be  another  punishment, 
"the  plague  wherewith  the  Lord  will  smite  the  heathen,"  &c. 
Plainly,  then,  the  prophecy  shews  us  the  earthly  glory  under 
the  reign  of  the  Lord. 

But  Ephesians  i.  points  us  not  merely  to  the  heavenly  glory, 
but  to  the  union  under  Christ  of  the  heavenlies  and  the  earthlies 
— of  all  things  both  which  are  in  the  heavens  and  which  are  on 
the  earth.  It  is  not  that  all  are  to  be  reduced  to  the  same  level, 
but  that  all  mvist  be  gathered  in  one  united  system,  as  having 
one  head  over  all,  even  Christ.  But  the  church  is  not  included 
in  any  of  these  things.  We  are  not  confounded  with  either  ;  on 
the  contrary,  we  are  spoken  of  as  those  who  have  obtained  an 
inheritance  in  Christ  over  all.  The  church  is  not  to  be  a  glorious 
people  only,  over  which  Christ  is  to  reign.  We  are  heirs  of  God 
and  joint-heirs  with  Christ — not  merely  heirs  under  Christ,  but 
with  Him — according  to  the  blessed  type  given  at  the  very 
beginning  of  man's  history,  where,  while  Adam  had  the  glory  of 
being  head  over  this  lower  world,  his  wife  shares  the  dominion 
in  virtue  of  her  union  with  him.  The  church  is  the  spiritual 
Eve  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  bride  of  the  last  Adam.  This  may 
somewhat  explain  the  force  of  the  words  in  Ephesians  i.  10,  23, 
and  it  shews  us  the  importance  of  the  day  we  are  looking  at  in 
Eevelation  xx.  Eor  "  the  thousand  years"  answer  to  this  very 
period,  when  the  administration  will  be  in  the  hands  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  the  exalted  and  manifested  Head  over  all  things, 
and  the  church  will  share  all  along  with  Him. 

There  is  another  remark  that  I  would  make.  It  is  the  New 
Testament  alone  that  gives  us  the  statement  of  the  period  of  the 
reign.  It  is  there  that  we  find  its  duration  of  a  thousand  years 
defined.  Almost  all  prophecy  refers  to  it,  but  here  its  bounds  are 
assigned,  and  its  relation  to  the  eternal  state  which  succeeds. 

In  one  sense  Christ  will  reign,  and  the  saints  also,  for  ever 
and  ever.     So  it  is  laid  down  doctrinally,  apart  from  time,  as  in 

2  F 


434  REIGNING   IN   LIFE. 

Romans  v.  17,  where  it  is  said,  "they  shall  reign  in  life  by  one, 
Jesus  Christ."  This  does  not  refer  to  the  millennial  reign  par- 
ticularly, which  is  only  a  part  of  the  reigning  in  life  by  Christ 
Jesus.  Our  life  in  Christ,  being  an  everlasting  one,  involves  to 
my  mind  that  in  a  certain  real  and  important  sense  there  will 
be  a  reigning  blessedly  and  gloriously  with  Christ  for  ever  and 
ever.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  where  we  hear  of  a  kingdom 
given  to  Christ,  which  He  surrenders  before  the  end  to  God 
even  the  Father,  this  special  reign  for  a  limited  time  has  also  a 
bearing  on  the  heavenly  saints.  Of  course  the  proper  divine 
glory  of  Christ  is  distinct  from  these  glories  and  can  be  com- 
municated to  none.  But  God  spoke  of  a  special  reward — the 
reward  of  suffering  for  Christ.  "  If  we  suSer,  we  shall  also  reign 
with  him."  "  If  so  be  that  we  suffer  with  him,  that  we  may  be 
also  glorified  together."  All  this  bears  on  the  millennial  reign. 
Christ  will  be  then  publicly  exalted  in  the  world — in  the  very 
place  where  He  was  despised  and  rejected.  And  the  saints  will 
be  publicly  exalted  with  Christ  in  the  place  of  their  shame  and 
sorrow,  where  they  have  followed  Christ  with  feeble  and  falter- 
ing steps,  but  where  they  clave  to  the  name  of  Jesus,  in  spite 
of  loss  and  reproach.  But  besides  these  special  rewards,  there  is 
the  glory,  blessedness,  and  joy  which  will  never  pass  away. 

The  millennium  will  be  a  time  when  many  saints  are  to  be 
brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  It  will  be  the  great 
harvest  of  blessing — the  time  celebrated  with  such  rapture  in 
the  Psalms  and  Prophets,  when  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall 
cover  the  earth,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.  This  does  not 
imply  necessarily  that  every  person  who  knows  the  glory  of 
Jehovah  will  know  His  grace,  and  be  converted.  Nevertheless, 
many  will  be  brought  to  the  Lord.  But  there  will  also  be  a  true 
and  real  knowledge  of  God  given  at  that  very  time.  For  the 
Holy  Ghost  will  be  poured  out  from  on  high  in  a  special  manner, 
of  which  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  in  comparison  only  like  the 
former  rain,  wliile  that  will  be  as  the  latter  rain.  It  was  the 
foreshadowing  of  future  fulness  of  blessing — greater  at  least  in 
extent — which  will  be  realised  in  the  millennium. 

Now  the  saints  of  "  that  day"  will  never  suffer  as  a  privilege, 
never  know  what  it  is  to  follow  Christ  in  reproach,  and  to  be 


SENSES   OF   "FOll    EVER  AND   EVEE."  435 

cast  out  with  Him.  Consequently  they  will  not  reign  in  the 
kingdom.  All  saints  from  the  beginning,  and  up  to  the  millen- 
nium, will  have  suffered  with  Christ  more  or  less.  But  the 
church  having  pre-eminently  known  the  fellowship  of  His 
sufferings,  will  have  special  glory.  And  those  saints  who  will 
be  brought  in  after  the  millennium  has  commenced,  and  who 
have  never  known  His  sufferings,  will  not  so  share  the  kingdom. 
Those  before  it  will  be  brought  into  the  scene  of  glory,  and 
changed,  because  corruption  never  can  inherit  incorruption. 
Therefore,  when  they  are  brought  in  where  God  makes  all  things 
new,  there  can  be  no  question  of  their  bearing  the  likeness  of 
Christ,  because  they  are  part  of  the  family  of  the  last  Adam, 
and  as  being  in  connexion  with  Christ,  and  having  His  life,  that 
life  will  have  all  its  way  as  to  both  body  and  soul :  they  will 
be  changed  into  His  likeness.  It  is  true  that  we  have  no  positive 
statement  as  to  the  millennial  saints,  when  this  change  will 
take  place.  But  we  may  gather,  I  think,  from  general  principles, 
that  it  wiU  be  in  the  interval  after  the  millennium  is  over,  and 
before  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth  appear  with  their  blessed 
inhabitants.  But  this  silence  of  scripture  has  left  room  for  some 
to  be  beguiled  into  the  strange  notion  that  the  millennial  saints 
will  remain  in  their  natural  bodies,  marrying  and  giving  in 
marriage,  throughout  all  eternity !  Such  a  notion  as  this  has  no 
warrant  whatever  in  the  word  of  God.  It  resulted  from  always 
interpreting  the  expression  "for  ever  and  ever,"  as  if  it  must 
mean  eternity  necessarily  and  in  every  case;  whereas  in  some 
places  it  does,  in  others  not. 

Supposing  that  God's  word  speaks  of  an  earthly  state  of  things, 
and  uses  the  expression,  "reigning  for  ever  and  ever,"  as  in 
Daniel  vii.  and  Luke  i.,  it  cannot  be  understood  absolutely. 
The  words  must  be  limited  by  the  subject-matter  of  which  God 
is  speaking.  Thus  in  human  things,  if  a  man  buys  a  house  "for 
ever,"  it  does  not  mean  throughout  eternity,  but  as  long  as  the 
world  goes  on  in  its  present  form  and  way;  his  right  holds  good 
while  the  earth  subsists  as  left  in  the  hands  of  man.  So  God 
uses  the  phrase,  "  for  ever  and  ever,"  when  treating  of  earthly 
things  and  people.  Only  the  case  is  far  stronger  than  in  ordinary 
human  transactions :  for  a  revolution  may  despise  and  destroy 

2  F  2 


436  THR  EVERLASTING  KINGDOM. 

every  such  deed  of  conveyance.  But  the  kingdom  of  Christ, 
before  which  all  opposing  authority  must  bow  aud  become  null, 
will  assuredly  secure  Israel  in  all  the  promises  of  God.  Thus 
"reigning  over  the  house  of  Jacob"  cannot  but  be  modified  by 
this — as  long  as  the  house  of  Jacob  exists  as  such.  But  when 
the  expression  is  in  connexion  with  the  new  heavens  and  earth 
in  the  full  sense,  Israel  is  no  longer  found  nationally :  such 
earthly  distinctions  disappear,  when  men  are  raised  from  the  dead 
or  changed.  When  eternal  life  or  eternal  punishment  is  spoken 
of,  we  must  take  the  expression  in  the  largest  sense,  because 
these  things  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  earth  ;  they  belong  to 
the  resurrection-state.  If  applied  to  earthly  things,  it  must  be 
taken  in  a  limited  sense,  but  when  applied  to  things  outside 
this  world,  it  must  be  taken  absolutely  in  all  its  extent.  So 
in  Daniel  vii.  27  "the  kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven,"  which 
is  given  to  the  people  of  the  saints  of  the  high  places,  is  said  to 
be  an  everlasting  kingdom.  This,  I  apprehend,  is  the  same 
period  that  is  called  here  the  thousand  years. 

The  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  New  Testament,  gives  us  the  winding 
up  of  all  the  ways  of  God,  and  shews  us  that  what  may  have  ap- 
peared to  the  Old  Testament  saints  to  be  an  absolutely  everlasting 
condition,  is  limited  and  qualified  by  further  revelations,  which 
make  known  to  us  two  stages,  as  it  were,  instead  of  one.  Thus 
the  earthly  kingdom  spoken  of  in  Daniel  is  to  be  "everlasting" 
in  this  sense,  that  it  will  never  pass  out  of  the  dominion  of 
Christ — never  be  taken  out  of  His  hands  and  given  to  another 
(as  previous  empires  had  been  taken  from  their  respective 
rulers),  but  it  will  remain  as  long  as  God  has  an  earthly  king- 
dom at  all  in  His  hands,  and  in  the  hands  of  the  saints  of  the 
high  places.  When  the  earthly  state  ceases,  and  that  kingdom 
is  given  up,  Christ  reigns  everlastingly,  though  in  another  way. 
For  in  the  eternal  state  it  will  evidently  not  be  a  question  of 
all  people,  nations,  and  languages  serving  Him. 

This  chapter  passes  cursorily  over  the  millennial  state,  as  far 
as  men  on  earth  are  concerned.  If  persons  wish  to  look  at  the 
eartlily  part  of  the  thousand  years,  they  must  search  into  the  Old 
Testament.  There  it  is  spoken  of  constantly  as  "that  day" — 
when  the  Gentiles  will  be  brouiiht  in  and  blessed — when  God's 


FIGUEES   OF  THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.  437 

name  will  be  exalted — when  there  will  be  a  suspension  of  all 
warfare  and  strife.  It  is  the  day  when  the  wilderness  shall 
rejoice  and  blossom  like  the  garden  of  Eden,  and  when  the 
ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  come  to  Zion  with  songs  and  ever- 
lasting joy  upon  their  heads— and  all  sorrow  and  sighing  shall 
flee  away.  These  words  are  descriptions  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
gives  of  this  blessed  period  in  the  kingdom.  Many  have  been 
disposed  to  take  the  prophetic  accounts  of  the  millennium 
figuratively;  but  they  must  allow  that  these  figures  may  be 
much  more  fully  accomplished  than  they  suppose.  In  other 
words,  I  take  the  glowing  accounts  given  of  the  millennium  in 
the  Old  Testament  prophecies  as  emblems  of  real  and  abundant 
blessings  on  earth.  These  figures  may  have  a  sort  of  spiritual 
meaning  too.  But,  allowing  this,  we  do  not  take  away  the 
simple  and  natural  meaning  of  the  phrase.  For  instance, 
scripture  speaks  of  the  wolf  and  the  lamb,  and  other  animals 
that  now  devour  one  another,  living  together  in  union  and 
peace.  They  may  be  applied  as  figures  to  describe  what  will  be 
morally  true  of  men,  though  I  do  not  myself  believe  that  this  is 
the  real  intent. 

For  why  should  not  God  bring  back  the  creatures  that  He 
has  made,  and  about  which  He  takes  a  far  greater  interest  than 
men  suppose,  to  a  state  at  least  as  good  as  that  in  which  they 
were  created  ?  Why  should  not  God  root  out  all  the  evil  con- 
sequences that  sin  has  brought  in,  physically  as  well  as  morally  ? 
Because  the  sin  of  Adam  had  effects  far  beyond  his  own  race : 
all  that  was  put  under  his  dominion  got  into  ruin  and  disorder. 
And  this  is  not  a  mere  imaginative  notion  of  ruin,  nor  a  fanciful 
exposition  of  Old  Testament  prophecy.  It  is  the  doctrine  plainly 
and  positively  laid  down  in  Eom.  viii.  It  is  written  there  that 
"  the  creature  was  made  subject  to  vanity,  not  willingly,  but  by 
reason  of  him  that  had  subjected  the  same,"  in  plain  allusion  to 
the  fall  of  him  that  was  over  the  creature.  He  fell;  and  creation, 
being  under  the  headship  of  Adam,  fell  along  with  him.  It  was 
he  who  made  it  subject  to  vanity ;  misery  and  death  came  in 
through  him.  For  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  death 
would  have  reigned  with  regard  to  the  brute  creation  of  tlie 
Adamic  world,  any  more  than  with  regard  to  man,  if  sin  had 


438  THE   NEW   TESTAMENT   DOCTRINE. 

not  entered.  I  am  aware  that  the  wise  men  of  this  world  often 
speak  of  fossil  remains  which  sliew  tlie  death  of  animals  before 
man  was  created.  Into  such  disquisitions  I  do  not  enter,  but 
would  only  say  that  there  was  not  the  same  state  of  things  under 
Adam.  Supposing  now  the  facts  and  inferences  of  geologists  to  be 
sound — whatever  living  creatures  may  have  been  made  and  de- 
stroyed in  the  earth  before  Adam  was  created,  scripture  is  entirely 
silent  about  them;  and  so  I  desire  to  be  in  expounding  it.  They 
are  questions  of  no  moral  importance,  and  therefore  a  Christian 
need  not  meddle  with  them.  I  add  that  these  theories,  if  true, 
do  not  contradict  scripture  in  the  slightest  degree.  For  there 
is  no  trace  of  man  connected  with  that  state  of  things  which 
preceded  Adam  ;  and  scripture  passes  over  it,  hastening  to  what 
is  immediately  connected  with  him.  When  the  human  race 
begins  upon  the  earth,  the  moral  dealings  of  God  are  gradually 
developed.  But  man  quickly  fell,  and  then  creation  was  de- 
graded through  its  fallen  head.  Death,  as  far  as  regards  the 
Adamic  world,  entered  through  the  disobedience  of  Adam — 
death  directly  as  to  men,  and,  as  a  consequence,  its  ravages 
spread  throughout  all  the  lower  living  creation. 

When  the  Second  Man,  exalted  above  the  heavens,  shall 
come  again.  He  will  not  merely  have  such  a  dominion  as  the 
first  Adam  had,  when  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth  shall  be 
put  under  His  glorious  sway.  There  is  not  a  single  spot  or 
creature  of  God's  universe  but  what  will  feel  the  effects  of  His 
glorious  power,  whereby  He  is  able  to  subdue  all  things  unto 
Himself.  Thus,  if  once  man  fell,  bringing  in  sin  and  death  and 
misery,  and  if  all  the  attempts  of  the  race  to  remedy  the  mis- 
chief, outward  and  inward,  have  been  but  expedients  and  no  real 
cure,  the  Lord  Jesus  will  be  the  good  and  sovereign  and  almighty 
Healer  of  every  evil  and  sorrow  of  creation.  And  God  will  liave 
such  joy — His  own  joy — in  relieving  all  the  wretchedness  that 
sin  had  brouglit  about  according  to  His  estimate  of  the  worth 
of  His  Son.  And  if  all  up  to  this  time  will  have  been  but 
the  filling  up  of  man's  cup  of  woe,  how  blessed  will  be  the 
time  when  God  reverses  the  history,  and  when  His  own  Son, 
no  longer  rejected  and  despised,  shall  fill  the  throne  of  His 
earthly  and  heavenly  glory  !    When  all  wickedness  shall  be  put 


FUTURE   POSITION   OF   ISRAEL.  459 

down,  and  righteousness  for  ever  exalted,  not  by  bare  power  and 
glory,  but  by  the  One  who  in  grace  had  borne  all  the  sorrow 
first,  and  suffered  the  consequences  of  all  the  wickedness,  accord- 
ing to  the  full  holiness  of  God,  upon  the  cross  !  And  how  sweet 
to  think  that  God  will  there  shew  that  there  is  not  an  evil,  nor 
a  degradation,  nor  a  pang  for  wliich  He  has  not  some  suited  and 
glorious  answer  in  and  through  His  Son  !  For  He  will  then  put 
forth  all  His  might  to  glorify  His  own  Son  in  the  presence  of  all 
flesh,  even  of  tliose  who  sent  the  message  after  Him,  "  We  will 
not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us."  But  when  the  blessed  One 
returns,  having  received  the  kingdom,  and  will  reign  as  the  risen 
exalted  Son  of  man,  all  creation  will  feel  the  gladdening  effects 
of  the  Saviour's  headship  and  rule. 

The  Lord  will  exalt  Israel  on  earth  and  make  them,  who  have 
been  so  peculiarly  His  bitter  enemies,  to  lead  the  song  of  praise 
with  their  once  rejected  Messiah,  now  in  the  midst  of  the  con- 
gregation. Then  it  is  that  they  will  take  up  Psalm  c,  the  psalm 
of  thanksgiving,  and  will  invite  all  lands  to  come  and  praise  the 
Lord ;  yea,  to  enter  His  courts  with  praise.  What  a  contrast  to 
all  that  has  gone  on,  or  is  going  on  still !  How  different  from 
the  hatred  which  the  Jews  have  ever  shewn  against  the  mere 
sound  of  grace  going  out  to  the  Gentiles !  For  when  Paul  tells 
them  how  the  Lord  had  said  to  him  as  he  prayed  in  the  temple 
at  Jerusalem,  "  Depart,  for  I  will  send  thee  far  hence  unto  the 
Gentiles,"  they  heard  him  to  that  word ;  but  it  was  more  than 
their  proud  hearts  could  brook,  and  so  they  lifted  up  their 
voices  and  said,  "  Away  with  such  a  fellow  from  the  earth :  it 
is  not  fit  that  he  should  live."  But  how  will  grace  have  changed 
and  enlarged  the  narrow  hearts  of  Israel,  when  they  will  them- 
selves go  forth  with  the  invitations  of  mercy  to  the  Gentiles 
who  had  insulted  them  in  all  their  weary  wanderings  over  the 
face  of  the  earth,  and  who  had  trodden  down  Jerusalem  during 
their  appointed  times  ! 

The  Jews,  like  Cain,  have  the  mark  of  the  Lord  on  them,  that 
they  shall  not  be  utterly  extinguished,  in  spite  of  their  blood- 
guiltiness.  But  the  Lord  will  give  them  repentance  in  the  latter 
day,  and  thenceforward  they  will  be  the  suited  and  blessed  heralds 
of  His  grace  to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth. 


440  HOW  THE   MILLENNIUM   IS  TO   COME   IN. 

This  time  of  blessedness  under  the  Messiah  is  what  is  found 
so  often  and  so  fully  in  the  Old  Testament  scriptures.  The 
gospels,  too,  open  with  similar  expectations  on  the  part  of  the 
Jewish  saints.  But  further  light  begins  to  dawn  as  the  rejection 
of  Christ  becomes  more  decided,  till  at  length,  redemption  being 
accomplished,  the  Holy  Ghost  was  sent  down  from  heaven,  and 
He  brought  out  the  full  mind  of  God.  Then  it  was  that  the 
distinction  between  the  kingdom  and  the  eternal  state  was  made 
plain.  (1  Cor.  xv.  24-28.)  It  was  shewn  that  the  earthly  reign 
of  Christ,  which  in  the  Old  Testament  might  have  appeared 
unlimited,  will  in  reality  come  to  a  close  when  He  shall  have 
put  down  all  rule,  and  all  authority,  and  power. 

There  are  many  who  think  that  the  millennial  state  of  things 
is  to  be  gradually  brought  in  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel, 
and  other  agencies  that  are  now  in  operation.  No  doubt  they 
look  for  God  to  bless  them  in  a  still  greater  degree;  for  no 
Christian,  perhaps,  would  say  that  present  appearances  warrant 
such  expectations.  But  they  think  that  if,  instead  of  the  few, 
there  were  many  servants  of  God,  and  that  if  it  pleased  God  to 
bless  the  word  to  the  conversion  of  multitudes  everywhere,  and 
if  a  spirit  of  greater  love  and  union  and  devotedness  prevailed 
among  those  that  love  the  name  of  Christ  generally,  there  and 
then  would  be  the  reign  of  Christ  on  tlie  earth. 

Now,  I  would  ask.  How  do  we  know  that  there  is  to  be  a 
millennium  at  all  ?  You  answer,  From  the  word  of  God.  But 
how  is  the  millennium  to  be  brought  about  ?  Humility  would 
answer,  we  must  learn  this  too  from  the  word  of  God.  We  all 
acknowledge  that  the  earth  is  to  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of 
Jehovah,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.  How  is  this  to  be  effected  ? 
It  is  remarkable  that  in  the  very  scripture  (Isaiah  xi.  9)  where 
these  words  occur,  the  Holy  Ghost  intimates  that  judgment 
must  precede  this  time  of  blessing.  (See  verse  4.)  In  that 
passage  the  universal  spread  of  the  knowledge  of  Jehovah  is 
made  to  follow  His  smiting  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  His 
mouth,  and  His  slaying  the  wicked  with  the  breath  of  His  lips 
— the  very  scripture  that  the  apostle  Paul  applies  in  2  Thess. 
ii.  8  to  the  destruction  of  antichrist,  the  man  of  sin.  The 
Lord  Jesus  shall  consume  him  witli  tlie  spirit  of  His  mouth,  and 


CONTEAST   WITH   THE   GOSPEL   MISSION,  441 

shall  destroy  him  with  the  brightness  or  manifestation  of  His 
coming. 

It  is  perfectly  true  then  and  agreed,  that  there  is  to  be  a 
millennial  time  of  blessing  on  the  earth ;  and  the  answer  to  the 
question  how  it  is  to  be  introduced  is  this :  the  same  scripture 
which  reveals  that  blessed  change  tells  us  that  it  is  to  be  brought 
in  by  the  Lord's  coming  and  smiting  the  wicked  one ;  in  other 
words  by  judgment,  and  not  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel. 
The  gospel  is  of  all  importance  for  calKng  souls  from  earth  to 
heaven;  but  it  is  not  the  means  of  dealing  with  the  whole 
world,  and  filling  it  with  blessing.  It  is  the  means  of  gathering 
the  church  out  of  the  world  to  Christ.  When  judgment  has 
had  its  full  course,  then  the  Lord  will  send  out  His  servants. 
The  Lord  will  give  the  word,  and  great  will  be  the  company 
of  those  that  publish  it.  "  Out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law, 
and  the  word  of  Jehovah  from  Jerusalem."  The  present  dis- 
pensation is  one  of  gathering  out  in  separation  from  the  world. 
The  gospel  ought  to  be  preached  to  all,  but  not  with  the  vain 
hope  that  all  are  ever  to  believe  it.  Thus  the  Lord,  in  Mark 
xvi.,  while  bidding  His  disciples  to  go  into  all  the  world  and 
preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,  takes  pains  to  add,  "He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved ;  but  he  that 
believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  He  prepares  them  for  an 
individual  and  partial  reception  of  it.  Thus  they  would  not 
be  cast  down,  if  they  found  but  a  few  here  and  there  who 
received  the  word  of  life.  It  might  be  but  a  Dionysius  the 
Areopagite,  and  a  woman  named  Damaris,  and  others  with 
them.  And  what  were  they  to  the  crowds  who  listened  to  the 
apostle  on  Mars'  hill  ?  It  was  a  matter  of  joy  and  thankfulness 
to  hear  of  any  who  believed  to  eternal  life,  for  it  is  thus  that 
God  preserves  His  servants  from  being  cast  down.  It  is  well 
to  know  that  all  are  not  going  to  receive  the  gospel,  but  that 
God  is  accomplishing  His  own  purposes.  Therefore,  when  the 
Lord  blesses  the  word  and  awakens  the  conscience  of  a  poor 
sinner  here  and  there,  it  is  a  cause  of  rejoicing. 

But  we  know  that  as  a  whole  evil  will  increase,  and  "  evil 
men  and  seducers  wax  worse  and  worse,  deceiving  and  being 
deceived."     How  can  that  be,  if  the  millennial  blessing  is  to  be 


442  THE   ABSENCE   OF  SATAN. 

the  result  of  the  present  or  such  like  efforts  of  Christians  in 
the  gospel  ?  But  the  Lord  is  to  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of 
His  mouth,  and  to  slay  the  wicked  with  the  breath  of  His  lips, 
which  is  said  to  be  like  a  stream  of  brimstone.  (Isaiah  xxx.  33.) 
Is  that  like  the  gospel?  It  is  the  exact  opposite — a  figure  of 
destructive  judgment.  The  gospel  delivers  from  Tophet,  but 
the  judgment  of  the  Lord  casts  into  it  irrevocably.  Clearly 
then  it  is  a  judgment  from  the  hand  of  God  Himself,  and  not 
one  which  man,  much  less  the  church,  will  execute.  It  is  not 
the  business  of  the  church  to  cast  into  Tophet.  No  power  but 
God's  can  consign  to  hell. 

But  there  is  another  thing  that  characterizes  the  millennium 
— the  binding  of  Satan  in  the  abyss.  Can  the  church  bind 
Satan  ?  Will  anyone  tell  me  that  Satan  can  be  absolutely 
hindered  from  deceiving  the  world  by  men  ?  But  there  can  be 
no  universal  blessing  for  the  world  till  he  is  bound ;  and  every 
Christian  must  acknowledge  that  God  alone  can  either  bind  or 
crush  Satan.  He  may  employ  an  angel,  or  associate  the  saints 
with  Himself,  as  it  is  said  in  Eom.  xvi.  20,  "  The  God  of  peace 
shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet  shortly."  The  church  is 
united  to  Christ,  and  then  will  be  actually  with  Him  who,  as 
the  woman's  seed,  is  to  bruise  the  serpent's  head ;  but  the  power 
is  in  Christ,  and  not  in  the  church.  He  will  put  down  all 
adversaries  when  that  day  of  judgment  comes  ;  as  it  is  said, 
"  He  will  smite  the  nations,  and  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron." 
(Kev.  xix.)  And  we  shall  do  the  same  in  virtue  of  our  asso- 
ciation with  Christ.  (Eev.  ii.)  In  the  reign  of  peace  (Rev.  xx. 
4,  6)  we  shall  still  be  associated  with  Him.  It  is  by  the  church 
in  its  heavenly  condition,  not  while  we  are  on  the  earth,  that 
Satan  will  be  thus  bruised. 

But  it  is  perfectly  clear,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  mil- 
lennium is  not  exclusively  the  reign  of  the  glorified  saints ; 
the  earth  as  sucli,  with  its  inhabitants,  will  be  brought  into 
deliverance  and  blessing.  This  we  saw  in  Eph.  i.  10,  where 
the  true  key  to  its  character  appears — the  union  of  heavenly 
and  earthly  glory  under  one  and  the  same  Head,  in  whom  also 
we,  the  body,  have  obtained  an  inheritance.  There  will  be  Jews 
and  Gentiles,  blessed  as  such  in  their  natural  bodies  ou  the 


THE   WORLD   TO   BE   BLESSED.  443 

earth,  the  subjects  of  the  kingdom;  while  the  glorified  saints 
will  be  the  instruments  of  blessing  to  the  earth. 

Now  the  earth  is  made  miserable,  and  men  hardly  know  how 
far  they  are  gone  in  rebellion  through  sin.  This  is  not  all ;  for 
there  is  an  unseen  enemy,  a  dark  and  untiring  adversary  of  God 
and  man,  who  has  his  hosts  of  wicked  angels  subject  to  himself 
(Kev.  xii.),  and  uses  them  as  the  instruments  of  his  seduction.  All 
this  will  pass  away;  and  those  very  scenes  which  are  now  filled 
by  wicked  spirits,  the  heavenly  places  (not  of  course  the  place 
where  God  dwells  in  His  unapproachable  glory,  but  the  lower 
heavens  that  are  connected  with  the  earth)  will  be  a  part  of  the 
dominion  of  the  church  in  glory,  and  the  heavenly  saints  will 
be  as  much  used  to  be  the  means  of  joy  and  blessing  to  the 
world  as  the  wicked  spirits  are  now  the  chief  agents  of  all  its 
misery.  They  may  for  a  little  season  emerge  from  their  prison 
after  the  millennium,  to  lead  the  distant  nations  of  the  earth 
into  a  last  conspiracy  against  the  Lord ;  but  they  will  never 
regain  their  former  access  to  the  heavenly  places,  where  their 
influence  was  the  more  subtle  and  dangerous. 

Then  will  dawn  the  day  of  the  greatest  glory  for  the  world. 
Of  course,  I  am  not  speaking  of  the  cross ;  for  there  is  no 
exaltation  Christ  will  ever  have  given  Him  that  can  be  com- 
pared with  the  real,  deep  glory  of  His  death.  It  has  as  it  were 
put  it  into  the  power  of  God  to  shew  mercy  according  to  His 
own  heart ;  and  therefore  there  is  not  a  single  joy  of  the  mil- 
lennium but  what  will  flow  from  the  cross  of  Jesus.  Nay,  it 
has  eternal  consequences,  and  not  for  the  millennium  only. 
But  the  age  to  come,  or  millennium,  while  very  important,  and 
a  time  of  wonderful  blessing,  will  be  imperfect.  And  for  this 
reason :  there  will  be  men  still  in  their  natural  bodies  upon  the 
earth,  many  of  whom  will  be  unconverted.  Accordingly,  this 
chapter  shews  us  that,  after  the  termination  of  the  thousand 
years,  "Satan  will  be  loosed  out  of  his  prison,  and  shall  go  out  to 
deceive  the  nations  which  are  in  the  four  corners  of  the  earth, 
Gog  and  Magog,  to  gather  them  together  unto  the  war;  the 
number  of  whom  is  as  the  sand  of  the  sea  "  (verses  7,  8).  We 
do  not  read  this  in  the  Old  Testament ;  for  as  it  does  not  inti- 
mate the  close  of  the  reign,  so  neither  does  it  shew  us  the  epoch 


444  SCENES   OF  JUDGMENT. 

when  Satan  will  be  let  loose.  The  terms  in  which  the  judgment 
upon  the  evil  one  is  spoken  of  there  might  be  construed  into  a 
single  stroke,  which  made  an  end  of  the  matter. 

From  Isaiah  xxiv.  we  learn  that  the  scene  of  the  punishment 
of  the  high  ones  is  to  be  on  high,  as  the  kings  of  the  earth  will 
be  punished  on  the  earth.  It  is  evident  that  by  the  host  of 
the  high  ones  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not  refer  to  exalted  men 
on  the  earth  (for  they  are  in  contrast  with  the  kings  of  the 
earth),  but  to  the  powers  of  evil  in  the  heavenly  places.  (Com- 
pare Eph.  vi.  12.)  This  is  exactly  what  we  find,  though  with 
fuller  detail,  in  Rev.  xii.  xix.  xx.  The  kings  of  the  earth  meet 
with  their  punishment  on  the  earth,  while  Satan  and  his  minions 
suffer,  the  host  of  the  high  ones,  on  high.  Satan  is  cast  out  to 
the  earth,  and  his  angels  are  cast  out  with  him.  Their  place  is 
found  no  more  in  heaven.  The  particulars  are  not  given  till  the 
Revelation.  That  day  will  see  the  judgment  of  all  foes  above  or 
below,     For  that  this  is  the  millennial  day  requires  no  proof. 

Next  in  Isaiah  xxv.  6  it  is  said,  "  And  in  this  mountain  shall 
Jehovah  of  hosts  make  unto  all  people  a  feast  of  fat  things,  a 
feast  of  wines  on  the  lees,  of  fat  things  full  of  marrow,  of  wines 
on  the  lees  well  refined."  It  is  a  time  of  blessedness  never  known 
before.  Nor  is  it  confined  to  a  certain  number  gathered  out  as 
now,  but  "  in  this  mountain  shall  Jehovah  of  hosts  make  unto 
all  people  a  feast,"  &c.  "This  mountain"  is  said  of  the  land  of 
Palestine,  because  it  will  be  to  the  whole  earth  the  spot  where 
Jehovah  will  be  exalted.  Of  course  this  is  to  be  understood 
morally,  not  physically.  Remark  what  we  have  in  the  next 
verse.  "  And  he  will  destroy  in  this  mountain  the  face  of  the 
covering  cast  over  all  people."  The  Lord  will  destroy  the  dark- 
ness that  is  over  the  face  of  all  nations  now,  "  and  the  vail  that 
is  spread  over  all  nations."  But  this  era  will  be  also  characterized 
by  the  resurrection.  "  He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory," 
evidently  referring  to  the  first  resurrection  spoken  of  in  the 
Revelation.  Then  only  is  the  victory  complete.  (Comp.  1  Cor. 
XV.)  "  And  the  Lord  Jehovah  will  wipe  away  tears  from  off  all 
faces;  and  the  rebuke  of  his  people  shall  he  take  away  from 
off  all  the  earth  :  for  Jehovah  hath  spoken  it."  It  is  the  time 
of  blessing  for  the  Jewish  people,  "  And  it  shall  be  said  in  that 


OLD   TESTAMENT  PKOPHECIES.  445 

day,  Lo,  this  is  our  God  ;  we  have  waited  for  him,  and  he  will 
save  us."  Here  beyond  a  doubt  it  is  persons  upon  earth  that 
need  to  be  saved.  The  church  is  saved  already,  and  we  do  not 
wait  for  "that  day"  to  come  that  our  God  should  save  us.  They 
will  be  saved  in  the  day  of  glory ;  we  are  saved  in  the  day  of 
grace.  "  This  is  our  God  :  we  have  waited  for  him,  we  will  be 
glad  and  rejoice  in  his  salvation.  For  in  this  mountain  shall 
the  hand  of  Jehovah  rest,  and  Moab  shall  be  trodden  down 
under  him,  even  as  straw  is  trodden  down  for  the  dunghill." 
There  we  have  one  of  the  neighbouring  enemies  of  Israel  trodden 
down ;  for  it  is  to  be  a  day  of  judgment  as  well  as  blessing. 

In  chapter  xxvi.  it  is  written,  "  In  that  day  shall  this  song 
be  sung  in  the  land  of  Judah ;  We  have  a  strong  city,"  &c.  In 
the  latter  part  of  it,  which  I  would  refer  to  because  of  its  im- 
portance, Israel  says,  "  We  have  been  with  child,  we  have  been 
in  pain  ....  we  have  not  wrought  any  deliverance  in  the  earth," 
&c.  "Thy  dead  men  shall  live"  (the  words  "together  with" 
having  no  kind  of  business  there),  "my  dead  body  shall  they 
arise."  "Thy  dead  men,"  that  is  the  Jewish  people,  who  are 
regarded  in  a  figure  as  being  dead ;  just  as  in  Ezekiel,  where 
they  are  represented  as  not  only  dead  but  in  their  graves.  But 
as  the  Lord  causes  His  wind  to  pass  over  those  dry  bones,  and 
they  live ;  so  here,  "  Thy  dead  men  shall  live,  my  dead  body 
shall  they  arise."  Not  merely  thy  dead  body,  but  mine.  I  own 
them — they  belong  to  me.  Jehovah  appropriates  them  as  His, 
dead  though  they  may  be.  But  they  are  to  be  so  no  longer; 
they  shall  "  arise."  "  Awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell  in  dust : 
for  thy  dew  is  as  the  dew  of  herbs,  and  the  earth  shall  cast  out 
the  dead.  Come,  my  people,  enter  thou  into  thy  chambers,  and 
shut  thy  doors  about  thee."  This  is  not  like  the  church.  The 
heavenly  saints  do  not  enter  into  their  chambers  on  earth,  but 
are  taken  away  to  be  in  the  Father's  house  in  heaven.  But  here 
is  a  question  of  the  Jewish  people.  They  are  comforted,  and 
are  told  to  arise  out  of  their  degradation ;  "  for  thy  dew  is  as  the 
dew  of  herbs."  "  Come,  my  people,  ....  hide  thyself  as  it 
were  for  a  little  moment,  until  the  indignation  be  overpast." 
The  indignation  that  God  had  so  long  against  His  people  will 
be  turned  now  into  indignation  against  their  enemies.     The 


446  PUNISHMENT   OF  SATAN. 

Assyrian,  used  heretofore  as  God's  rod  for  chastening  Israel, 
must  now  meet  with  his  own  final  doom.  "  For,  behold,  Jeho- 
vah Cometh  out  of  his  place  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  the 
earth  for  their  iniquity :  the  earth  also  shall  disclose  her  blood, 
and  shall  no  more  cover  her  slain."  And  yet  this  is  manifestly 
the  time  when  He  introduces  the  millennium,  not  after  it  is 
over.  Jehovah  comes  out  of  His  place  to  punish  the  inhabitants 
of  the  earth.  Is  this  like  the  gospel,  where  instead  of  proclaim- 
ing the  remission  of  their  sins  He  comes  to  punish  them  ?  Not 
at  all.  Further,  "  In  that  day  Jehovah,  with  his  sore  and  great 
and  strong  sword,  shall  punish  leviathan  the  piercing  serpent, 
even  leviathan  that  crooked  serpent :  and  he  shall  slay  the 
dragon  that  is  in  the  sea."  Doubtless  there  is  a  general  refer- 
ence to  the  wicked  one,  Satan  the  ancient  serpent.  Only  here 
he  is  not  viewed  as  having  a  place  on  high,  but  defeated  and 
rejected  here  below.  He  is  not  spoken  of  with  the  same  minute- 
ness as  in  the  Kevelation,  which  gives  us  the  full  light  of  God 
on  the  subject  and  the  details. 

Moreover  we  find  that  at  the  end  of  the  millennium  God  will 
shew  that  the  day  of  glory  (the  thousand  years,  which  form  the 
part  of  the  day  of  Jehovah,  when  Satan  is  bound  and  the  Lord 
Jesus  reigns  manifestly)  will  no  more  convert  souls  of  itself 
than  the  day  of  grace  and  the  publishing  of  the  gospel  to  the 
ends  of  the  earth.  For  if  the  day  of  grace  requires  the  imme- 
diate power  of  God  to  save  an  individual  soul,  of  course  the 
same  power  will  be  requisite  here  below  in  the  day  of  glory. 
Whilst  the  Lord  is  there,  evil  will  be  kept  down ;  there  will  be 
no  leader  of  man  in  his  evil.  But  the  moment  Satan  is  allowed 
to  come  out  of  his  place,  and  again  exercises  his  power,  we  have 
plain  proof  that  the  heart  of  man  is  unchanged.  He  goes  out  to 
the  four  corners  of  the  earth  to  deceive  the  nations,  and  gathers 
them  together  for  destruction. 

These  nations  are  called  by  a  symbolic  name,  which  is  a  sort 
of  allusion  to  the  enemies  of  Israel  spoken  of  in  Ezek.  x.vxviii. 
xxxix.  But  they  are  not  the  same,  and  must  be  carefully  dis- 
tinguished. For  in  Ezekiel  Gog  is  literally  an  individual  person 
— the  prince  of  the  vast  north-eastern  territories  and  peoples, 
known  in  our  time  as  the  empire  of  liussia.     Gog  is  to  be  the 


GOG,   PKINCE   OF   liOSH.  447 

then  leader  of  that  country,  which  is  called  in  scripture  "the 
land  of  Magog."  Indeed  this  is  the  positive  meaning  of  the 
words  rendered  in  our  Bibles  "chief  prince."  It  ought  to  be 
"  prince  of  Rosh."  But  when  the  scriptures  were  translated  into 
Latin,  which  had  a  great  influence  on  succeeding  versions, 
the  Russian  empire  did  not  exist,  and  could  not  be  known  by 
that  name.  For  the  north  of  Europe  and  Asia  was  then  merely 
inhabited  by  hordes  of  wandering  barbarians,  called  Sarmatians, 
Scythians,  &c.  So  when  the  corrector  of  the  old  Latin,  Jerome, 
came  to  the  Hebrew  "  Rosh,"  he  thought  it  must  be  taken  not  as 
the  name  of  a  people,  but  as  a  common  noun,  meaning  "head" 
or  "chief;"  just  as  the  Franks,  besides  giving  their  name  to  a 
neighbouring  country  which  they  conquered,  also  meant  "  free 
men."  Hence  probably  in  our  version  "Eosh"  was  translated  chief, 
which  the  Hebrew  word  might  equally  well  bear,  if  a  proper 
name  were  not  required  by  the  context ;  for  "  prince  of  chief, 
Meshech  and  Tubal"  makes  no  good  sense.  Therefore,  I  suppose 
the  translators,  not  knowing  what  better  to  make  of  it,  put  the 
clause  down  vaguely  as  "  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and  Tubal." 
However,  it  is  well  known  that  learned  persons  who  had  no 
light,  or  a  very  partial  one,  on  prophecy — scholars  who  examined 
the  subject  a  hundred  years  ago — concluded  that  Russia  was 
meant.  But  what  is  much  more  important,  the  Greek  version, 
or  Septuagint,  made  nearly  two  centuries  before  Christ,  left 
it  as  'Pcor.  They  did  not  know  what  place  or  race  was  meant ; 
but  seeing  that  Meshech  and  Tubal  were  given  as  proper  names, 
they  understood  the  preceding  word  similarly.  Thus  Gog  is 
really  to  be  "  the  prince  of  Rosh,  Meshech,  and  Tubal,"  which 
wiU  all  be  found  in  the  Russian  empire.  *     Ezekiel  then  shews 

*  So  even  Gesenius  in  the  later  results  of  his  researches.  It  has  been 
objected  on  the  authority  of  Luitprand's  Chronicle,  &c.,  that  the  only  people 
then  called  Kussians  by  way  of  distinction  were  the  dynasty  of  Norsemen, 
who  under  Euric  acquired  the  throne  of  Muscovy.  "  Gens  quaedam  est  sub 
Aquilonis  parte  constituta,  quam  a  qualitate  corporis  Graeci  vocant  Russos ;  nos 
vero  a  positione  loci  vocamus  Nordmannos."  {Be  Rebus  Impp.  et  Regg.  v.  6, 
p.  95,  ed.  Antverpiae,  1640.)  But  I  do  not  see  the  force  of  the  argument.  If 
Ezekiel  predicts  that  the  prince  of  Rosh,  Meshech  and  Tubal  shall  come  up  to 
Palestine  in  the  latter  day,  what  has  the  mediaeval  history  of  the  people  Rosh 
to  do  with  it  ?  If  Cush  or  Phut  is  to  suffer  in  Egypt  or  in  the  lower  Euphrates, 
it  matters  little  from  what  point  they  first  migrated.     The  prince  of  Rosh  may 


448  GOG  AND   MAGOG. 

that,  when  God  restores  Israel  and  plants  them  in  their  own 
land,  Eussia  is  to  be  the  last  great  enemy  that  comes  up  to 
attack  them,  and  meets  with  its  own  demolition  from  the  hands 
of  God  on  the  mountains  of  Israel.  His  prophecy,  I  think,  does 
not  bear  on  recent  events,  save  as  these  may  lead  on  to  it ;  much 
less  is  it  to  confounded  with  the  gathering  of  Gog  and  Magog 
described  in  verses  8,  9.  It  cannot  mean  the  same  as  these ; 
for  the  Jewish  prophet  speaks  of  a  vast  confederacy  before  tlie 
millennium,  or  at  least  at  the  very  beginning  of  it;  while  in  the 
Revelation  it  is  after  the  thousand  years  are  past. 

Gog  and  Magog  here  are  symbolical  expressions,  founded,  it 
is  true,  upon  the  prophet  of  the  Chebar,  but  entirely  distinct. 
The  word  by  Ezekiel  has  its  accomplishment  when  Israel  is 
restored.  (See  chapters  xxxvi.  xxxvii.)  Gog  comes  up  when 
they  are  dwelling  in  their  unwalled  villages,  and  thinks  to  make 
them  an  easy  prey;  but  the  Lord  interferes.  Gog  is  put  down, 
and  Israel  live  and  flourish  quietly  in  their  land.  Here  they 
are  symbols  borrowed  from  Old  Testament  circumstances,  but 
applied  to  a  time  long  subsequent.  The  last  enemy  which 
Israel  had  to  encounter  before  the  millennium  was  the  literal 
Gog;  the  last  rebellion  after  it  derives  its  name  from  that  well- 
remembered  effort  of  the  outside  nations.  Countless  swarms 
from  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth,  under  the  guidance  of  Satan, 
will  repeat  (never  to  be  repeated  again)  what  the  Russian  chief 
will  have  done  before  them.  They  will  go  up  on  the  breadth  of 
the  earth,  and  compass  the  camp  of  the  saints  about,  and  the 
beloved  city.  Of  course  the  earthly  people  and  city  are  meant ; 
for  Israel  will  then  be  a  body  of  saints,  a  holy  people,  and  Jeru- 
salem will  be  the  beloved  city,  not  in  mere  name,  but  then  in 

have  sprung  from  the  Northmen,  and  acquired  sway  over  the  descendants  of 
Meshech  and  Tubal :  how  does  the  coming  of  the  Russi  from  Scandinavia 
hinder  this  ?  Besides  there  is  no  doubt  of  the  emigration  of  a  large  part  at 
least  of  the  Northerns  from  the  East.  The  Cushites,  Goths,  Scyths,  are  pretty 
nearly  at  bottom  the  same  people,  as  the  Druidical  religion  is  of  an  Oriental 
source,  the  north  of  India  having  been  one  great  settlement.  It  is  too  much  to 
assume  that  this  ecclesiastic  nicely  distinguished  the  men  of  the  noz'th  who 
were  beginning  to  make  themselves  felt  and  feared  at  Constantinople.  The  plain 
fact  is  before  us  that  the  Seventy  translate  this,  dpxovra  'Pu>g,  Mtaox  ««« 
OofSeX.  Now  'P<1)Q  is  the  designation  the  later  Greeks  use  for  the  Russians,  as 
we  800  in  the  Byzantine  historians. 


THE    GEEAT   WHITE   THRONE.  449 

truth  the  city  of  the  great  King.  These  nations  come  up  and 
surround  them,  and  God  will,  if  I  may  say  so,  be  compelled 
to  destroy  them  for  ever.  "Fire  came  down  from  God  out  of 
heaven  and  devoured  them"  (verse  9).  Fire  is  always  the  figure 
of  God's  judgment.  Thus  do  they  perish.  Their  leader  is  not 
touched  by  this  judgment :  a  worse  fate  is  reserved  for  him. 
"And  the  devil  that  deceiveth  them  was  cast  into  the  lake  of 
fire  and  brimstone,  where  also  [are]  the  beast  and  the  false 
prophet;  and  they  shall  be  tormented  day  and  night  for  ever 
and  ever."  His  followers  are  destroyed  by  a  divine  judgment 
upon  earth,  but  the  devil  who  had  led  them  by  his  deceits  is 
cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone. 

But  there  is  another  scene  that  follows — the  most  solemn  for 
man  where  all  indeed  is  solemn.  "And  I  saw  a  great  white 
throne,  and  him  that  sitteth  on  it,  from  whose  face  fled  the 
earth  and  the  heaven;  and  there  was  found  no  place  for  them" 
(verse  11).  Mark  it  well.  There  are  many  persons  who  suppose 
this  to  be  the  time  of  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  who  conse- 
quently put  the  millennium  before  His  coming.  But  this  will 
not  bear  the  light  of  scripture.  Without  going  to  proofs  outside 
the  chapter,  I  would  just  take  another  ground,  which  is  short 
and  simple,  and  to  my  mind  perfectly  conclusive  of  the  question. 
When  the  Lord  Jesus  comes.  He  comes  to  the  earth  from  heaven. 
This  is  the  universal  belief,  as  far  as  I  know,  of  all  persons  who 
have  any  defined  thoughts  about  the  matter.  But  such  is  not 
the  case  here.  For  the  Lord  sits  on  a  great  white  throne,  and 
instead  of  His  coming  from  heaven  to  earth,  both  earth  and 
heaven  are  all  gone.  It  cannot  be  His  coming  to  the  earth,  for 
there  is  no  earth  to  come  to.  The  entire  system  of  earth  and 
heaven,  as  they  now  are,  will  have  vanished  out  of  the  scene — 
not  annihilated  but  destroyed;  for  there  is  a  great  difference 
between  those  two  thoughts.  However,  the  earth  is  no  longer 
found  filling  its  own  place ;  it  has  disappeared.  The  great  white 
throne  is  not  therefore  on  the  earth  at  all ;  for  from  the  face  of 
Him  that  sat  on  it  the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled  away,  and  there 
was  found  no  place  for  them.  Lest  it  should  be  thought  that 
their  fleeing  away  was  a  mere  figure  of  speech,  it  is  added  that 

2  G 


450  Christ's  advent  long  before, 

"  there  was  found  no  place  for  them."  And  it  is  said  in  2  Peter 
iii.  they  shall  be  dissolved  and  their  elements  melt  with  fervent 
heat.  Observe  then  that,  when  Christ  is  seen  seated  on  the 
great  white  throne,  the  earth  and  the  heaven  are  fled  away. 
What  are  we  to  draw  from  it  ?  Either  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
must  have  come  before  this,  or  He  will  never  come  to  the  earth 
at  all ;  for  it  would  not  be  the  same  thing  to  suppose  that  He 
merely  comes  to  the  new  earth  after  all  judgment — even  of  the 
wicked  dead — is  over.  Now  we  know  that  "  the  Father  judgeth 
no  man,  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son" — 
"ordained  of  God  to  be  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead."  The 
general  faith  of  Christians  is  that  He  will  come  back  to  this 
earth.  His  feet  shall  stand  in  a  day  yet  future  on  the  mount 
of  Olives,  which  is  before  Jerusalem  on  the  east,  and  which 
thenceforward  is  to  be  not  destroyed,  but  divided  in  the  midst 
as  a  witness  of  it.  These  circumstances  cannot  apply  to  what 
St.  John  calls  the  new  heaven  and  new  earth,  but  before  the 
last  physical  change.  When  the  great  white  throne  is  found 
the  earth  is  gone,  and  therefore  the  coming  of  Christ  to  the 
earth  must  have  been  before  that  final  scene  of  judgment.  In 
point  of  fact,  too,  we  have  had  the  coming  of  Christ  already 
described  in  chapter  xix.,  and  His  reign  in  the  early  part  of 
chapter  xx.  This  gives  distinctness  to  the  character  of  the  great 
white  throne.*  Nothing  can  be  more  simple,  if  you  take  it  in 
the  order  in  which  God  arranges  it.  But  man  is  ever  perverse ; 
and  so  he  blots  out  the  coming   of  Christ  from  chapter  xix. 

*  Most  extraordinary  is  the  error  for  which  the  later  editions  of  the  Horae  Apoc, 
vol.  iv.  pp.  210-218,  are  distinguished  from  their  predecessors:  the  great  white 
throne  is  now  supposed  to  have  been  in  exercise  at  the  opening  as  well  as  at 
the  close  of  the  thousand  years.  The  late  Duke  of  Manchester  and  a  few  others 
had  endorsed  the  same  fancy.  If  Mr.  E.  "  does  not  see  anything  in  St.  John's 
description"  of  the  blessed  reign  over  the  earth,  in  contrast  with  the  fleeing 
away  of  heaven  and  earth  in  the  subsequent  picture,  to  negative  the  idea, 
reasoning,  I  fear,  would  be  vain.  The  omission  of  a  detailed  account  of  the 
Lord's  throne  in  the  previous  verses  is  no  real  difficulty.  His  reign,  and  that 
of  the  glorified  saints  generally,  we  have  seen  to  be  distinctly  implied  in  verse 
4  :  they  had  been  amply  promised  and  predicted  elsewhere.  The  needed  reve- 
lation in  this  place  is  exactly  what  God  provides— the  comfortable  assurance  that 
those  called  to  testify  and  suffer,  after  the  translation  of  the  Old  Testament  saints 
and  the  church,  would  equally  reign  with  II  im  during  the  thousand  years,  not 
to  speak  of  eternal  blessedness,  which  was  a  matter  of  course. 


NO   GENERAL  RESUKRECTION.  451 

where  it  is  given,  and  imagines  it  in  chapter  xx.  11,  where  it  is 
not  and  cannot  be. 

Observe  also  that  the  judgment  of  the  great  white  throne  is 
not  a  general  judgment,  any  more  than  the  resurrection  spoken 
of  here  is  a  general  resurrection.  The  idea  of  mixture  then  is 
mere  imagination.  I  hold  that  every  soul  of  man  (i.e.,  of  those 
that  have  died)  must  be  in  one  or  other  resurrection.  But 
scripture  shews  us  that  the  resurrection  of  the  just  is  a  totally 
different  thing  and  at  a  different  time  from  the  resurrection  of 
the  unjust:  they  have  nothing  in  common,  save  that  in  both 
cases  soul  and  body  must  be  reunited  for  ever.  There  is  no 
scripture  for  an  indiscriminate  rising  of  all.  A  few  passages 
are  used  to  make  out  a  shew  of  proof  The  Lord  says  in  John  v. 
28,  "  The  hour  is  coming,  in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves 
shall  hear  his  voice,  *  and  shall  come  forth ;  they  that  have  done 
good,  unto  the  resurrection  of  life ;  and  they  that  have  done  evil, 
unto  the  resurrection  of  judgment."  But  this  does  not  shew 
that  they  will  rise  at  the  same  time.  The  hour  is  coming  in 
which  both  these  classes  shall  rise  ;  but  instead  of  saying  that 
they  are  all  to  rise  in  one  common  or  indiscriminate  resurrec- 
tion. He  takes  pains  to  state  that  they  that  have  done  good  are 
to  come  forth  from  their  graves  for  a  life-resurrection,  and  they 
that  have  done  evil  for  a  judgment-resurrection.  There  are  two 
resurrections,  then,  not  a  common  one.  The  very  passage  that 
men  cite  to  prove  a  general  resurrection  teaches  in  fact  the 
reverse.  St.  John's  Gospel  shews  their  distinctness  in  character; 
his  Eevelation  shews  their  distinctness  in  time. 

»  Not  a  syllable  intimates  that  there  will  be  one  majestic  uttered  summons, 
as  Dr.  Brown  assumes.  {Christ's  Second  Coming,  4th  ed.,  pp.  193,  194.)  Nor  is 
the  last  trump,  or  the  trump  of  God,  connected  with  any  save  the  righteous. 
This  trumpet-sound,  we  know  from  scripture,  is  one.  The  voice  of  the  Son  of 
God,  scripture  with  equal  distinctness  informs  us,  is  to  call  from  the  grave  both 
those  that  have  practised  good  and  those  that  have  done  evil ;  but  the  passage 
itself  indicates  two  contrasted  resurrections,  which  are  separated  by  a  distinction 
far  deeper  than,  though  confirmed  by,  the  difference  of  their  respective  epochs. 
The  question  whether  His  voice  is  to  be  kept  up  through  a  thousand  years  is  a 
mere  cavil.  There  is  nothing  to  forbid,  but  on  the  contrary  everything,  in  my 
opinion,  to  strengthen  the  thought  that  the  Lord  will  cause  His  glorious  voice 
to  be  heard  in  closing  judgment  after  the  millennium,  as  in  crowning  grace 
before  it. 

2  G  2 


452  IN  "THE  hour"  two  kesuurections. 

Persons  may  say,  "the  hour  is  coming"  implies  that  all  are  to 
be  raised  much  about  the  same  time.  But  the  word  "hour"  is 
often  used  in  scripture  (and  indeed  everywhere  else)  in  a  large 
sense.  It  might  comprehend  a  thousand  years  or  more  ;  so  that 
if  one  resurrection  took  place  at  the  beginning  of  the  millen- 
nium and  the  other  at  the  end  of  it,  it  might  still  be  the  same 
"  hour."  "  The  hour  is  coming,  and  now  is,  when  the  dead  shall 
hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God ;  and  they  that  hear  it  shall 
live."  (John  v.  25.)  This  refers  to  what  has  been  going  on  ever 
since  Christ  was  on  earth  up  to  this  very  moment.  "  The  hour" 
there  takes  in  nearly  two  thousand  years ;  and  surely  it  is  not 
too  much  to  infer  that  "the  hour"  in  verse  28  might  embrace, 
if  necessary,  a  period  equally  long.  Scripture  decides  it.  The 
same  John  who  shews  us  the  rise  of  all  flesh  from  the  grave, 
divided  into  two  contrasted  resurrections  of  men  characterized 
by  opposite  moral  qualities,  shews  us  with  no  less  plainness  and 
certainty  the  interval  between  these  resurrections.  The  chapter 
that  we  are  now  examining  in  the  Revelation  is  the  answer  to 
the  question,  and  proves  that  there  will  be  an  interval  of  at  least 
a  thousand  years  between  the  two. 

But  this  is  not  all.  There  is  a  deep  fundamental  difference  in 
the  nature  of  the  resurrections,  as  well  as  a  distinction  of  time. 
In  the  gospel  of  John,  the  first  is  said  to  be  a  resurrection  of 
life,  the  second  is  one  of  judgment.  In  the  former  are  the 
righteous ;  all  who  are  judged  in  the  latter  are  the  evil.  Our 
translators  call  it  the  resurrection  of  "  damnation"  though  the 
real  meaning  of  the  word  is  "  judgment."  It  is  the  same  word 
that  is  used  in  a  verse  or  two  before  (verses  21-27).  "  The 
Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto 
the  Son and  hath  given  him  authority  to  execute  judg- 
ment also,  because  he  is  the  Son  of  man."  And  it  is  necessary 
to  bear  this  in  mind,  that  Christ,  while  as  the  Son  of  God  He 
gives  life,  as  Son  of  man  comes  to  execute  judgment  in  His 
kingdom.  He  gives  life  to  the  believer,  and  executes  judgment 
on  the  unbeliever.  So  there  are  two  resurrections  answering  to 
these  titles.  There  is  the  resurrection  of  life  or  the  resurrection 
of  the  believer.  It  is  the  application  to  his  body  of  that  power 
of  life  which  he  has  already  in  his  soul.     But  those  who  have 


LIFE   AND   JUDGMENT   CONTEASTED.  453 

refused  Christ,  what  will  they  have  ?  The  resurrection  of  judg- 
ment. They  have  despised  Christ  now ;  they  cannot  escape  the 
resurrection  of  judgment  then. 

Looking  then  at  Eevelation  xx.,  is  not  this  what  we  have  here  ? 
First  there  was  the  resurrection  of  life,  of  "  those  that  have  done 
good,"  "  Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  re- 
surrection." What  was  said  about  them  ?  They  lived  and  reigned 
with  Christ  a  thousand  years.  It  is  a  life-resurrection.  But  look 
at  the  others,  the  wicked — "  they  that  have  done  evil."  "  The 
rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  again  till  the  thousand  years  were 
finished."  What  have  you  here  ?  "  The  rest  of  the  dead  lived 
not  again  till,"  &c.  So  they  do  rise.  "  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and 
great,  stand  before  the  throne."  None  but  dead  are  there,  and 
how  differently  do  they  appear  before  the  throne !  "  And  the 
books  were  opened  ;  and  another  book  was  opened,  which  is  the 
book  of  life:  and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things  which 
were  written  in  the  books,  according  to  their  works"  (ver.  12). 

Now  I  fully  believe  that  the  saints  of  God  will  have  all  their 
works  examined :  what  they  have  done  in  the  body  will  come 
out.  We  shall  have  praise  or  censure  according  to  our  faithful- 
ness or  unfaithfulness,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  takes  His  place  on 
the  judgment-seat,  and  we  stand  before  Him  and  are  manifested 
there.    It  is  St.  Paul  that  tells  us  this.  (Eom.  xiv. ;  2  Cor.  v.) 

But  the  Holy  Ghost's  object  by  St.  John  is  to  contrast  the  two 
resurrections.  Therefore  not  a  word  is  said  in  the  account  of 
the  first  resurrection  about  our  appearing  before  Him,  that  each 
may  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body,  whether  good  or  bad ; 
but  we  are  represented  as  judging  others.  Such  is  the  way  in 
which  the  life-resurrection  is  described.  "I  saw  thrones,  and  they 
sat  upon  them,  and  judgment  was  given  unto  them."  They  do', 
of  course,  give  an  account  of  tliemselves  to  the  Lord,  and  receive 
accordingly ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  has  His  own  wise  reasons  for 
omitting  all  allusion  to  it  here.  It  is  a  resurrection  of  life  in  the 
gospel ;  and  so  it  is  in  the  Revelation.  But  when  we  come  to 
the  rest  of  the  dead  who  have  not  done  good,  when  they  are 
raised  and  stand  before  the  throne,  what  a  contrast  to  a  life- 
resurrection  !  They  have  only  done  evil ;  and  when  the  book  of 
life  is  opened,  no  name  is  to  be  found  there ;  for  this  is  not  a 


454         THE  BOOKS,  AND  THE  BOOK  OF  LIFE. 

resurrection  of  life  but  of  judgment.  They  are  to  be  judged 
according  to  their  works,  written  in  these  other  books;  but  their 
works  are  calling  aloud  for  judgment.  Their  works  being  only 
and  always  evil,  they  are  judged  according  to  them  ;  and  what 
is  the  result  ?  There  might  be  a  difference  among  them  in  some 
respects :  there  were  great  and  small.  But  they  were  all  alike 
in  this — they  were  not  found  written  in  the  book  of  life ;  and 
whosoever  was  not  found  written  there,  "  was  cast  into  the  lake 
of  fire."  Not  a  word  is  said  or  hinted  that  they  were  written 
there.  This  is  a  resurrection  of  those  who  have  no  part  in  that 
book,  and  they  are  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  It  is,  as  if  God  were 
saying,  The  books  of  their  works  call  for  judgment :  is  there 
nothing  to  be  said  in  defence  of  these  wretched  men  ?  The  book 
of  life  is  accordingly  opened  ;  but  they  are  not  found  there  :  the 
last  hope  is  gone ;  and  if  "  any  one  was  not  found  written  in  the 
book  of  life,  he  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire"  (verse  15).  It  is 
the  resurrection  of  judgment.  There  is  no  life,  no  mercy  there. 
Those  that  had  their  part  in  the  life-resurrection  had  been  raised 
long  before,  and  never  come  into  judgment  at  all ;  for  it  is  said 
(John  V.  24),  "  He  that  heareth  my  word,  and  believeth  on  him 
that  sent  me,  hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come  into 
judgment  [the  same  word  as  in  verses  22,  27,  29] ;  but  is  passed 
from  death  unto  life." 

Nothing  then  can  be  more  certain  than  that  this  is  a  separate 
resurrection,  distinct  in  character,  and  long  severed  in  time. 
The  resurrection  of  life  had  taken  place  long  ago,  and  now  comes 
the  resurrection  of  judgment.  "  And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead 
which  were  in  it."  The  depths  which  man  could  but  imper- 
fectly explore  cannot  hide  for  a  moment  longer.  Nay,  the  unseen 
world,  over  which  he  has  no  control,  is  also  forced  to  give  up  its 
miserable  inmates.  "  Death  and  Hades  delivered  up  the  dead 
tliat  were  in  them :  and  they  were  judged  each  according  to 
their  works"  (verse  13).  And  their  works  condemn  them.  Not 
a  word  is  said  about  them  in  the  book  of  life,  and  they  are  cast 
into  the  lake  of  fire.  This  is  the  second  death,  the  lake  of  fire. 
They  are  raised  from  their  first  death  to  be  cast  for  ever  into 
that  place  of  torment,  whence  there  is  no  escape. 

The  other  scripture  of  most  weight,  often  used  for  the  purpose 


FIGUKES  OF  EESUEEECTION.  455 

of  proving  a  general  resurrection,  is  the  one  in  Daniel.  What 
do  we  find  there  ?  It  is  written  in  chapter  xii.  1 :  "  And  at  that 
time  shall  Michael  stand  up,  the  great  prince  which  standeth  for 
the  children  of  thy  people  [meaning  Daniel's  people,  the  Jews] ; 
and  there  shall  be  a  time  of  trouble,  such  as  never  was  since 
there  was  a  nation  even  to  that  same  time."  Evidently,  this  is 
not  the  millennium.  "And  at  that  time  thy  people  shall  be 
delivered,  every  one  that  shall  be  found  written  in  the  book." 
This  is  not  the  time  when  the  church  is  delivered ;  for  we  have 
been  delivered  long  ago  through  the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  But  since  the  cross  of  Christ,  the  Jewish  people  have 
only  been  in  misery :  that  cross  was  their  guilt.  They  cried, 
"  His  blood  be  on  us  and  on  our  children."  The  time  of  their 
greatest  suffering  is  to  be  immediately  before  the  hour  of  their 
deliverance.  (Jer.  xxx.  7.)  Our  deliverance,  as  theirs,  is  through 
the  sufferings  of  Another ;  but  what  we  suffer  is  after  our 
deliverance.  For  the  Jews  it  is  a  different  destiny.  They  have 
a  tremendous  tribulation  to  go  through  yet ;  and  it  is  to  be  the 
worst  they  will  have  ever  had.  But  immediately  after  this  their 
final  deliverance  comes — "At  that  time  thy  people  shall  be 
delivered,"  &c.  They  will  not  only  be  delivered  as  a  people, 
but  they  will  be  saved  and  converted  individually,  according  to 
God's  purpose — "every  one  that  shall  be  found  written  in  the 
book."  "  And  many  of  them  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth 
shall  awake,  some  to  everlasting  life,  and  some  to  shame  and 
everlasting  contempt." 

This  is  commonly  applied  to  the  resurrection;  but  I  am 
persuaded  that  it  does  not  apply  to  the  rising  of  the  body.  It 
is  a  figure  which  is  taken  from  it  indeed,  and  which  supposes 
that  great  truth  to  be  known.  But  it  is  the  same  kind  of 
expression,  and  applied  to  a  similar  subject  and  end,  that  I  have 
referred  to  in  Isa.  xxvi.  19,  where  Israel  was  described  as  "my 
dead  body,"  and  was  called  on,  as  one  dwelling  in  the  dust,  to 
awake  and  sing.  So  here  it  is  said,  "  Many  of  them  that  sleep 
in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake,  some  to  everlasting  life, 
and  some  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt."  This  does  not 
suit  any  scheme  of  interpretation,  if  it  be  applied  to  a  literal 
bodily  resurrection  of  good  and  bad  at  the  same  moment.     You 


456  DANIEL   AND   EZEKIEL    SPEAK   OF   ISRAEL. 

will  observe  that  this  is  before  the  millennium.  It  is  evidently 
before  the  time  of  deliverance  and  blessing.  There  is  a  time 
of  trouble  immediately  after  which  Daniel's  people  are  de- 
livered, and  those  who  might  have  been  forgotten  (sleeping  as 
it  were  among  the  Gentiles),  reappear,  but  not  all  for  the 
same  end — some  to  shame,  and  some  to  everlasting  life.  (Com- 
pare also  Isaiah  Ixvi.  20,  24.)  This  does  not  answer  the  pur- 
pose of  those  who  quote  the  text.  For  their  idea  is,  that  there 
is  the  millennium  first,  and  then  the  resurrection  of  good  and 
bad.  This  resurrection,  literal  or  figurative,  is  before  the  mil- 
lennium, and  after  it  is  a  time  of  greater  trouble  than  Israel 
ever  knew. 

My  conviction  therefore  is  that  Dan.  xii.  refers  to  the  Jews. 
First,  in  verse  1,  those  who  are  to  be  delivered  are  spoken  of  in 
connexion  with  the  land  of  Palestine.  Then  it  is  shewn  that  many 
of  them  who  have  been  sleeping  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  will 
come  out  of  their  degradation,  will  awake,  some  to  everlasting 
life,  &c.  Some  of  those  Jews  that  are  to  come  forward  out  of 
their  hiding-places  all  over  the  earth  would  prove  to  be  rebels 
and  be  treated  accordingly ;  while  others  will  learn  that  the  Lord 
has  wrought  with  them  for  His  name's  sake.  We  may  compare 
this  with  Ezekiel  xxxvii.,  where  the  dry  bones  set  forth  the  house 
of  Israel.  No  doubt  can  be  left  on  any  serious  mind  as  to  that 
passage ;  for  the  Lord  Himself  has  interpreted  it  as  the  figure 
of  the  future  resurrection  of  Israel.  "  Behold,  0  my  people,  I 
will  open  your  graves,  and  cause  you  to  come  up  out  of  your 
graves."  And  if  in  Daniel  it  is  said  that  some  are  to  have 
everlasting  life,  Ezekiel  says  that  the  Lord  will  put  His  Spirit 
in  them.  It  is  a  spiritual  as  well  as  a  national  restoration.  So 
the  passage  in  Daniel  refers  to  a  figurative  resurrection  of 
Israel,  when  some  will  awake  out  of  their  moral  death. 

We  may  now  come  back  to  Eev.  xx.  with  the  increased  con- 
viction that  the  doctrine  of  one  general  resurrection  is  a  total 
mistake,  and  that  God's  word  teaches  a  resurrection  of  the  just 
and  another  of  the  unjust.  This  which  is  spoken  of  at  the  close 
of  our  chapter  is  solely  of  the  wicked  dead ;  it  is  a  resurrection  of 
judgment.  I  appeal  to  you  whether  you  coidd  rest  the  salvation 
of  your  souls  on  your  works.     I  admit  that  our  works  will  be 


ALL   MANIFEST;   UNBELIEVERS  JUDGED,  457 

examined,  and  that  we  shall  receive  accordingly;  but  this  is  not 
the  same  thing  as  being  judged  according  to  them.  In  the  one 
case  the  person  is  accepted,  but  his  works  are  reviewed  for  praise 
or  blame  ;  in  the  other,  the  person  is  judged  according  to  works 
that  are  not  mingled,  but  altogether  bad  and  only  such.  For  a 
natural  or  unconverted  man  has  no  life  towards  God ;  therefore 
he  can  have  nothing  but  evil  works  to  be  judged  for.  Not  so 
with  the  believer.  No  doubt  there  are  works  sometimes  mingled, 
sometimes  even  worse  in  him :  but  he  has  a  standing  beyond  all 
that  he  is;  else  salvation  were  impossible  righteously  and  in 
peace.  He  has  the  new  nature  that  God  has  given  and  will  not 
take  away;  he  has  also  redemption,  the  forgiveness  of  sins  — 
both  in  Christ.  His  works  will  be  examined,  and  they  have  a 
most  important  bearing  on  the  position  that  the  Lord  will  assign 
him  in  His  kingdom.  To  be  saved  or  lost  is  never  a  question 
of  reward,  but  of  the  grace  and  power  of  Christ.  When  we 
talk  of  reward,  it  is  a  debt  due  for  work  done;  but  when  of 
salvation,  it  is  never  spoken  of  in  scripture  as  a  reward  of  works. 
It  is  the  grace  of  Christ — the  fruit  of  His  work  and  suffering, 
which  God  has  given  us  in  sovereign  love. 

And  when  we  stand  before  Christ,  it  will  not  be  to  take  our 
trial  for  condemnation  or  acquittal :  this  would  be  to  deny  our 
justification  and  the  value  of  His  own  work.  All  our  ways 
will  be  manifested  in  God's  light,  and  the  Lord  will  bring  us 
triumphantly  through ;  but  He  will  not  pass  over  a  single  deed, 
word,  or  thought  that  has  been  against  Him.  And  as  a  Christian 
now  can  before  God  examine  his  ways,  pass  judgment  upon 
them,  and  thank  God  for  His  faithful  discipline ;  so  it  will  be 
in  a  still  brighter  and  more  blessed  and  perfect  way  before  the 
judgment-seat  of  Christ.  It  will  then  be  no  question  of  being 
saved  only,  but  of  vindicating  the  Lord's  glory  and  goodness. 
Solemn  certainly;  but  is  it  a  thing  that  we  ought  to  dread? 
We  shall  have  to  be  thankful  for  it  through  all  eternity.  For 
self-judgment  even  now  is  no  small  blessing — next  perhaps  in 
value  to  the  joy  of  grace  which  leads  to  our  worshipping  God 
and  serving  Him  faithfully  in  the  Spirit.  We  shall  not  have  a 
word  to  say  in  justification  of  any  fault ;  but  the  Lord  will  have 
much  to  say  for  us.     He  will  bring  out  all  that  we  have  done, 


458  DESTRUCTION,   NOT   ANNIHILATION. 

and  we  shall  receive  according  to  it.  For  evil  we  shall  suffer 
loss  ;  for  good  He  will  give  us  reward. 

But  what  a  difference  is  here !  The  dead  now  stand  before 
the  throne  :  what  an  end  !  Not  annihilation,  but  incomparably 
worse — destruction.  They  have  no  life — nothing  but  dead  works. 
They  refused  Christ;  they  rejected  whatever  testimony  God  tried 
them  by  ;  and  what  do  their  works  deserve  ?  They  are  cast  into 
the  lake  of  fire.  Death  and  Hades  are  now  no  longer  needed ; 
they  are  personified  as  the  enemies  of  God  and  man,  and  as  such 
are  in  the  vision  (verse  14)  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  also.* 

We  hear  of  none  but  unbelievers  here.  Only  such  indeed 
come  into  judgment,  as  we  know  from  Him  who  assures  us  that 
believers  do  not  come  there ;  and  none  with  whom  God  enters 
into  judgment  are  or  can  be  justified.  It  is  the  judgment  of  the 
dead  after  all  the  righteous  who  slept  in  Christ  had  been  raised 
to  reign  with  Him  long  before.  The  saints  who  lived  do  not 
enter  this  judgment,  though  no  doubt  they,  like  ourselves,  shall 
render  an  account  of  all  to  God. 

*  Some  will  be  startled  to  hear  that  Mr.  E.  [E.  A.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  197-204) 
applies  Matt.  xxv.  31,  &c.,  to  the  rapture  of  the  living  saints,  the  dead  having 
been  immediately  before  raised  and  caught  up.  Then  follows,  as  he  conceives, 
the  catastrophe  of  an  unprecedented  disruption  of  the  earth's  crust,  as  far  as 
the  Roman  world  is  concerned,  the  risen  saints  being  perhaps  (!)  the  attendants 
of  the  Lord's  coming  and  judgment.  In  a  note  to  page  291  it  is  said  that, 
though  there  may  be  a  primary  reference  to  the  judgment  of  the  living  at 
Christ's  coming,  yet  secondarily  a  more  extensive  judgment  of  the  dead  too 
may  be  included.  The  truth  is  that  all  is  confusion.  In  fact  the  sheep  are 
distinguished  from  the  King's  brethren,  as  well  as  contrasted  with  the  goats. 
Not  a  word  implies  resurrection  or  rapture  to  heaven.  It  is  a  glorious  scene  on 
earth,  subsequent  to  Christ's  appearing,  and  therefore  to  the  removal  of  the 
heavenly  saints,  and  a  judicial  dealing  not  with  the  dead  but  the  living;  and 
not  with  all  the  living,  but  all  the  nations  or  Gentiles  who  are  disposed  of  on 
the  ground  of  their  behaviour  to  the  King,  as  presented  by  His  brethren  who 
had  announced  the  kingdom  {cf.  chapter  xxiv.  14)  before  the  end  came.  There 
is  not  a  trace  of  resemblance  to  the  scene  of  the  great  white  throne,  nor  any 
judgment  of  the  dead.  There  is  no  issue  beyond  the  solemn  and  final  one,  for 
those  concerned,  of  honouring  or  despising  the  King  in  His  messengers.  Be- 
sides, the  insuperable  difficulty  for  Mr.  E  and  for  most  expositors  is  the  place 
which  the  revelation  of  the  first  resurrection  occupies,  viz.,  after  the  destruction 
of  the  beast.  The  non-recognition  of  a  previous  rapture  of  saints,  to  whom  the 
Apocalyptic  sufferers  are  added  just  before  the  millennium,  is  the  occasion  of 
these  errors,  the  denial  of  the  true  and  proper  character  of  the  church  being 
probably  the  grand  source  of  all. 


THE   lllGHT  DIVISION.  459 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

It  would  have  been  a  happier  division  of  these  chapters  if 
chapter  xxi.  1-8  had  been  made  a  part  of  the  same  series  of 
events  which  was  given  in  chapter  xx.,  following  it  in  unbroken 
succession.  There  is  a  very  decided  termination  of  the  chain 
at  the  close  of  the  eighth  verse  of  this  chapter.  Thence  to  the 
end,  and  taking  in  the  first  five  verses  of  chapter  xxii.,  we  have 
another  connected  portion.  The  first  eight  verses  refer  to  a 
totally  different  time  from  what  follows.  From  chapter  xxi.  9 
we  have  to  go  back  again  to  the  millennium ;  whereas  the 
previous  verses  of  the  chapter  are  the  fullest  account  that  the 
word  of  God  furnishes  of  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth,  in  the 
proper  sense  of  the  words.  This  is  subsequent  to  the  thousand 
years'  reign,  to  the  great  white  throne,  and  of  course  to  the 
complete  dissolution  of  the  heavens  and  earth  that  now  are, 
which  were  found  when  that  throne  was  set  up.  Then,  when 
this  account  of  the  eternal  state  is  closed,  the  Spirit  of  God 
supplies  a  very  important  appendix,  if  I  may  be  allowed  the 
expression,  on  the  state  of  things  during  the  millennium,  which 
was  not  given  when  that  epoch  was  noticed  in  the  historical 
sequence  of  Eev.  xix.  xx.  xxi.  1-8. 

But  perhaps  it  may  be  asked  by  some  objectors,  What  is  the 
authority  for  dividing  the  chapters  thus  ?  Why  not  take  the 
whole  of  chapter  xxi.  (as  it  was  probably  understood  by  those 
who  made  the  division)  as  one  and  the  same  time  ?  Why  not 
suppose  that  the  account  of  the  New  Jerusalem  in  verse  10 
refers  to  the  same  date  as  the  mention  of  it  in  verse  2  ?  The 
answer  is  simple.  In  the  eternal  state  God  has  to  do  with  men. 
All  time  distinctions  are  at  an  end.     There  is  no  such  thing 


460  RETROSPECT. 

then  as  kings  and  nations.  Accordingly,  this  we  do  find  in  the 
fi.rst  eight  verses.  Take  for  example  the  third  verse:  "And  I 
heard  a  loud  voice  out  of  heaven  [or  the  throne],  saying,  Behold 
the  tabernacle  of  God  [is]  with  men,  and  he  shall  dwell  with 
them,  and  they  shall  be  his  people,  and  God  himself  shall  be 
with  them,  their  God."  Whereas,  if  we  look  at  the  latter  part 
of  the  chapter,  we  have  again  to  do  with  nations  and  earthly 
kings.  "And  the  nations  shall  walk  by  means  of  its  light;  and 
the  kings  of  the  earth  do  bring  their  glory,"  &c.  When  eternity 
begins,  God  has  done  dealing  with  things  according  to  the  order 
of  the  world — kings  and  nations,  and  the  like  provisions  of  a 
temporal  nature.  All  this  implies  government,  as  government 
supposes  that  there  is  evil  which  requires  suppression.  Conse- 
quently, in  the  latter  part  of  our  chapter  it  is  not  the  eternal 
condition  which  we  have,  but  a  previous  state,  the  early  verses 
(1-5)  of  chapter  xxii.  being  the  continuation  of  this  description. 
There  a  tree  is  described,  "  and  the  leaves  of  the  tree  [are]  for 
healing  of  the  nations."  That  is,  at  the  time  of  which  the  verse 
speaks  not  only  are  there  nations,  but  they  are  not  removed 
from  the  need  of  liealing,  and  God  supplies  what  they  want. 
This  must  convince  any  unprejudiced  mind  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  in  chapter  xxii.  does  not  refer  to  what  follows  the  last 
judgment,  when  all  that  is  connected  with  the  world  is  entirely 
closed,  but  that  He  goes  back  to  a  previous  state  when  God  is 
still  governing.  It  will  be  observed  also  that  in  the  portion 
relative  to  the  millennium  (that  is,  from  verse  9  of  chap,  xxi.) 
we  have  dispensational  names,  such  as  the  Lord  God  Almighty 
and  the  Lamb  ;  not  so  in  chapter  xxi.  1-8,  which  discloses  eter- 
nity, where  God  shall  be  all  in  all. 

But  it  may  help  souls  still  further  to  remark,  that  it  is  the 
manner  of  God  in  this  book  to  take  a  retrospect.  I  say  this  to 
shew  that  I  am  not  at  all  arguing  for  something  without  pre- 
cedent, in  the  order  in  which,  as  I  conceive,  these  events  are 
arranged.  Take,  for  instance,  chapter  xiv.  There  we  had  seen  a 
regular  sevenfold  series  of  events,  in  the  course  of  which  the 
faU  of  Babylon  occupies  the  third  place.  After  that  comes  the 
judgment  on  tlie  worshippers  of  the  beast;  next  the  Holy  Ghost 
pronounces  the  blessedness  of  those  that  die  in  the  Lord ;  then 


ANALOGY.  461 

the  Lord's  coming  in  judgment,  presented  in  two  ways,  as  reap- 
ing the  harvest,  and  as  trampling  the  winepress  (the  harvest,  a 
judgment  of  discrimination,  and  the  vintage  one  of  pure  ven- 
geance). Babylon  there  has  got  its  place  assigned  very  clearly. 
But  long  after  this  iii  the  prophecy,  when  the  Spirit  of  God  has 
given  us  the  seven  vials  of  God's  wrath,  we  have  Babylon  again. 
The  fall  of  Babylon  is  under  the  seventh  vial.  And  this  is 
important :  for  the  Holy  Ghost  then  proceeds  to  describe  the 
character  and  conduct  of  Babylon,  that  required  such  a  fearful 
visitation  from  the  hand  of  God.  In  this  case  the  Holy  Ghost 
has  carried  us  down  in  chapter  xiv.  to  events  subsequent  to 
Babylon's  fall,  and  even  to  the  Lord's  coming  in  judgment ;  and 
then  He  returns  to  shew  us  details  about  Babylon  and  her 
connexion  with  the  beast,  and  the  kings  of  the  earth,  in  chapters 
xvii.-xviii. 

Now  it  appears  to  me  that  this  exactly  answers  to  the  order 
of  the  events  in  chapter  xxi.  There  is  a  striking  analogy  in  the 
way  in  which  Babylon  and  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  are  intro- 
duced, and  though,  of  course,  there  is  the  strongest  and  most 
marked  contrast  between  the  two  objects  themselves,  still  there 
is  enough  to  make  it  manifest  that  the  Holy  Ghost  had  them 
together  in  His  mind,  as  it  seems  to  me.  Thus,  in  Eev.  xvii.  1, 
it  is  said,  "There  came  one  of  the  seven  angels  that  had  the 
seven  vials  full  of  the  seven  last  plagues,  and  talked  with  me, 
saying.  Come  hither;  I  will  shew  thee  the  judgment  of  the  great 
harlot  that  sits  by  the  many  waters."  Such  is  the  announcement, 
where  the  vision  goes  back  to  describe  Babylon  and  her  doom. 
Just  so  are  we  introduced  to  the  counterpart  of  this  vision  in 
chap,  xxi.,  which  looks  back  at  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife.  "And 
there  came  one  of  the  seven  angels  that  had  the  seven  vials  full 
of  the  seven  last  plagues,  and  talked  with  me,  saying,  Come 
hither,  I  will  shew  thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife."  As  Babylon 
had  had  its  place  defined  in  the  historic  line  of  events,  and  then 
that  line  being  completed,  the  Holy  Ghost  stopped  to  disclose, 
retrospectively  and  at  full,  those  moral  ways  which  had  forced 
God,  so  to  speak,  to  judge  her ;  so  exactly  the  Lamb's  wife,  the 
New  Jerusalem,  had  been  seen  in  both  capacities,  in  the  final 
sketch  of  the  history  up  to  the  very  end.     And  now  the  Holy 


462  RETROGRESSIVE   DESCRIPTION. 

Ghost  goes  back  to  describe  the  same  New  Jerusalem,  with 
reference  to  the  millennial  reign,  and  the  kings  and  nations 
then  to  be  on  earth.  We  have  seen  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife, 
that  had  made  herself  ready,  in  chapter  xix.  7.  We  have  had  in 
chapter  xxi.  2  the  New  Jerusalem  spoken  of  as  coming  down 
from  God  out  of  heaven,  still  fresh  in  bridal  beauty,  after  more 
than  a  thousand  years  have  passed  away.  But  now  in  xxi.  9 
the  very  important  fact  comes  out,  that  the  bride,  the  Lamb's 
wife,  is  the  holy  city  Jerusalem.  "  There  came  unto  me  one  of 
the  seven  angels  ,  .  .  and  talked  with  me,  saying.  Come  hither, 
I  will  shew  thee  the  bride,  the  liamb's  wife.  And  he  carried  me 
away  in  the  Spirit  to  a  mountain  great  and  high,  and  shewed 
me  [not  that  great  city,  but]  the  holy  city  Jerusalem,  descending 
out  of  heaven  from  God."  John  was  called  to  see  the  bride,  and 
looking,  he  saw  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  Thus,  if  we  had  the 
bride  in  relation  to  the  Lamb  in  chapter  xix.,  and  as  the  holy 
city,  New  Jerusalem,  in  relation  to  the  eternal  state,  verse  9  and 
the  following  verses  of  this  chapter  shew  us  that,  during  the 
interval  between  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb,  and  the  new  heaven 
and  earth  in  the  eternal  state,  she  has  a  very  blessed  place  in 
the  eyes  of  God  and  man.  It  is  the  church's  millennial  display. 
These  few  prefatory  remarks  may  clear  the  way,  and  prove 
that  I  am  not  assuming  more  than  can  be  demonstrated  in  taking 
the  first  eight  verses  as  the  proper  sequel  of  the  series  of  events 
found  in  chapters  xix.-xx.,  and  the  rest  of  this  chapter  from  verse 
9,  as  a  retrogressive  description  of  the  millennial  state.  There 
are  evidently  the  strongest  reasons  for  it,  and  indeed,  any  other 
interpretation  is,  I  conceive,  out  of  the  question,  if  the  context 
be  duly  weighed.  It  is  impossible  for  an  unbiassed  and  instructed 
person,  who  carefully  considers  the  circumstances  here  described, 
to  suppose  that  what  follows  the  9th  verse  can  synchronize  with 
the  section  which  immediately  precedes.  They  are,  as  already 
remarked,  two  irreconcileable  states  of  things.  * 

*  Had  Mr.  Elliott  sufficiently  weighed  these  considerations,  I  cannot  think 
that  he  would  have  loft  the  readers  of  the  Ilorae  Apoc.  (vol.  iv.  pp.  210-218)  in 
such  perplexity  as  to  the  chronological  place  of  these  visions  of  the  New  Jeru- 
salem. The  reason  why  "  such  strong  arguments,"  as  he  confesses,  "  press 
antagonistically"  for  the  millennial  and  the  post-millennial  reference  is,  because 
each  side  has  a  measure  of  truth  left  out  of  the  account  by  the  other.     On  the 


SENSES   OF   NEW   HEAVEN   AND   EARTH.  463 

What  is  it  that  the  Holy  Ghost  shews  the  apostle,  after  the 
old  heaven  and  earth  had  disappeared  and  the  last  judgment  ? 
"And  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth:  for  the  first  heaven 
and  the  first  earth  were  passed  away;  and  the  sea  was  no  more." 
These  words  are  not  to  be  taken  in  a  mere  preparatory  and  moral 
sense.  The  prophet  Isaiah  had  spoken  in  that  way.  In  Isaiah 
Ixv.  a  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth  were  announced :  but  how 
differently  !  There  the  language  must  be  taken  in  a  very  qualified 
sense  indeed.  "For,  behold  (verse  17),  I  create  new  heavens 
and  a  new  earth ;  and  the  former  shall  not  be  remembered  nor 
come  into  mind.  But  be  ye  glad  and  rejoice  for  ever  in  that 
which  I  create :  for,  behold,  I  create  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,  and 
her  people  a  joy.  And  I  will  rejoice  in  Jerusalem,  and  joy  in 
my  people ;  and  the  voice  of  weeping  shall  be  no  more  heard  in 
her,  nor  the  voice  of  crying.  There  shall  be  no  more  thence  an 
infant  of  days,  nor  an  old  man  that  hath  not  filled  his  days  :  for 
the  child  shall  die  an  hundred  years  old,  but  the  sinner  being 
an  hundred  years  old  shall  be  accursed."  Clearly  this  is  a 
very  bright  change,  but  it  is  an  earthly  condition.  There  are 
infants  and  old  men  here;  and  though  the  description  is  pur- 
posely contrasted  with  anything  the  world  has  yet  seen,  still  it 
is  a  time-state  of  blessedness,  and  not  of  eternity.  The  apostle 
John  shews  us  in  the  Eevelation  the  new  heaven  and  the  new 
earth,  not  in  a  relative  sense  but  in  the  most  absolute.  In  the 
Old  Testament  they  are  limited,  because  connected  with  Israel 
upon  the  earth.  So  it  is  said  of  the  Lord,  "  He  shall  reign  over 
the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever,  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be 
no  end."  This  is  an  Old  Testament  hope,  though  said  in  the 
New,  and  it  means  of  course  that  He  shall  reign  over  the  house 
of  Jacob  as  long  as  it  exists  as  such  upon  the  earth.  When  the 
earth  disappears  and  Israel  is  no  longer  seen  as  a  nation,  they 
will  be  blessed,  no  doubt,  in  another  and  better  way ;  but  there 
will  be  no  reign  of  Christ  over  them  as  an  earthly  people  here 

one  hand,  it  is  not  only  the  cursory  but  the  most  careful  reader  who  is  compelled 
to  allow  that  chapter  xxi.  1-8,  fairly  interpreted,  is  post-millennial.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  internal  evidence  from  verse  9  is  equally  conclusive  that,  with 
this  new  vision  of  the  Seer,  we  begin  a  retrospective  glance  at  the  same  city 
during  the  millennium,  though  of  course  its  own  intrinsic  blessedness  and  glory 
win  abide  for  ever. 


464  MILLENNIAL   APPLICATION. 

below ;  so  that  this  kingdom,  while  it  has  no  end  as  long  as  the 
earth  subsists,  must  necessarily  be  limited  by  the  earth's  con- 
tinuance. It  is  thus  tliat  I  understand  the  new  heavens  and  the 
new  earth  spoken  of  in  Isaiah.  The  New  Testament  uses  the 
phrase  fully  and  absolutely,  as  an  unending  state ;  but  in  the 
Old  Testament  it  is  tied  down  to  the  earthly  relations  of  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  was  then  speaking. 

What  makes  it  still  clearer  is  that  the  next  verse  (Isaiah  Ixv. 
21)  goes  on  to  say,  "And  they  shall  build  houses  and  inhabit 
them ;  and  they  shall  plant  vineyards  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them. 
They  shall  not  build  and  another  inhabit  ....  mine  elect  shall 
long  enjoy  the  work  of  their  hands.  They  shall  not  labour  in 
vain,  nor  bring  forth  for  trouble ;  for  they  are  the  seed  of  the 
blessed  of  the  Lord,"  &c.  Now  all  this  is  most  cheering.  So  again, 
"  The  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  feed  together  ....  They  shall 
not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain,  saith  the  Lord." 
Glowing  and  beautiful  as  this  picture  is  of  what  the  Lord  can 
accomplish,  it  is  in  connexion  with  the  earth  and  an  earthly 
people.  It  is  not  the  eternal  state,  but  an  exceedingly  glorious 
day,  when  death  will  be  the  exception  and  life  the  rule.  I  say 
that  death  will  be  thus  rare,  at  least  in  the  Holy  Land,  because 
of  that  verse,  "  The  child  shall  die  an  hundred  years  old,  but  the 
sinner  being  an  hundred  years  old  shall  be  accursed."  The 
meaning  is,  that  if  a  person  dies  at  a  hundred  years  old,  he  will 
still  be  comparatively  a  child ;  and  that  even  when  death  occurs 
at  that  age,  it  is  only  as  the  result  of  an  express  curse  of  God. 
Thus  will  it  be  during  the  millennium. 

And  this  seems  to  answer  a  question  often  asked :  What  will 
become  of  all  the  righteous  people  during  that  wonderful  reign  ? 
If  the  first  resurrection  is  then  past,  and  in  the  second  resur- 
rection none  but  the  wicked  dead  are  raised,  what  can  be  the 
destiny  of  the  righteous  who  live  during  the  millennium  ?  The 
truth  is,  there  is  no  scripture  proof  that  such  die  during  the 
thousand  years.  What  is  said  supposes  the  contrary.  Therefore, 
if  they  die  not  during  the  millennium,  there  are  no  righteous  to 
be  raised  at  the  end  of  it.  The  resurrection  at  the  end  remains 
consequently  for  the  wicked  dead  solely.  The  righteous  will  be 
raised  before  the  millennium,  the  wicked  after  it.   The  just  who 


DIFFERENCE   FEOM   ETERNITY.  465 

live  during  the  reign  of  Christ  are  not  called  to  die  at  all,  as  far 
as  scripture  informs  us.  We  may  be  sure  that  these  millennial 
saints  will  be  changed  into  the  likeness  of  Christ ;  they  will  be 
transplanted  into  the  new  heavens  and  earth.  We  are  not  called 
upon  to  conjecture  how  this  will  be.  It  is  sufficient  for  us  to 
know  that,  though  they  are  not  described  as  dying  during  the 
millennium,  and  therefore  do  not  need  to  be  raised ;  yet  when 
the  new  earth  appears  men  are  found  upon  it  quite  distinct 
from  the  New  Jerusalem  {i.e.,  the  symbol  of  the  glorified  heavenly 
saints).  I  believe  that  verse  3  warrants  this  statement.  "  Be- 
hold, the  tabernacle  of  God  [or  the  city  that  descends]  is  with 
men,"  &c. 

Another  proof  that  Isaiah  does  not  speak  of  the  eternal  state 
described  here  is  this :  When  the  new  heavens  and  earth  are 
seen  by  the  New  Testament  prophet,  the  old  are  said  to  be 
passed  away,  and  the  sea  no  longer  exists.  Not  so  in  Isaiah's 
prophecy.  There  it  was  rather  the  spirit  or  pledge  of  the  new 
that  came  into  the  old ;  a  shadow  of  what  was  to  be,  and  not 
the  very  image  or  accomplishment  of  the  thing.  They  are  said 
prophetically  to  be  "  new,"  because  of  the  great  joy  and  blessing 
that  God  will  give  to  His  people  Israel  in  their  land.  In  the 
Eevelation  "there  was  no  more  sea."  In  the  Old  Testament, 
on  the  contrary,  "the  abundance  of  the  sea  (it  is  said)  shall  be 
converted  unto  thee  ....  Surely  the  isles  shall  wait  for  me,  and 
the  ships  of  Tarshish  first."  (Isaiah  Ix.)  There  can  be  no  just 
doubt  that  this  chapter  speaks  of  the  same  time  as  chapter  Ixv. 
"  For  thy  light  is  come,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon 
thee."  This  and  other  passages  prove  that  there  is  still  to  be  sea 
at  the  time  spoken  of  by  Isaiah :  the  isles  and  ships  necessarily 
suppose  it ;  and  "  the  isles  afar  off"  are  introduced  between  the 
two  statements  of  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth  in  Isaiah  Ixv. 
and  Ixvi. 

Here  in  Eevelation  not  merely  the  present  dispensation  but 
the  present  heaven  and  earth  have  passed  away,  and  give  place 
to  "  all  things  made  new."  Doubtless  the  new  heaven  and  earth 
wiU  be  made  out  of  the  old.  Just  as  the  resurrection-body  will 
be  formed  out  of  the  present  body  of  humiliation  by  the  power 
of  God,  so  are  the  present  earth  and  heavens  destined  to  a 

2  H 


466  PERFECT   STATE,   FIRST   RELATIVE, 

kindred  transformation.  After  the  dissolution  tliey  will  reap- 
pear in  the  form  of  the  new  heavens  and  earth.  "  No  more  sea" 
would  be  impossible  without  a  miracle,  as  long  as  life  in  its 
present  condition  has  to  be  maintained.  The  sea,  as  my  reader 
knows,  is  absolutely  necessary  to  animated  nature  as  it  is.  Man 
could  not  exist  without  it ;  and  so  with  regard  to  every  animal 
and  even  vegetable  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  not  to  speak  of 
the  vast  world  of  waters.  But  when  time  is  done — when  there 
is  no  longer  the  natural  life  that  is  sustained  by  God — when 
the  millennium  shall  have  yielded  the  brightest  witness  to  this 
as  well  as  to  every  other  fruit  of  His  wisdom  and  goodness  and 
power — a  new  state  of  things  altogether  will  ensue,  and  this 
perfect  and  everlasting.  There  will  be  new  heavens  and  a  new 
earth ;  for  the  first  heavens  and  first  earth  are  passed  away  ;  and 
there  is  no  more  sea.     Perfection  is  come  for  the  universe. 

But  that  is  not  all.  Into  this  dwelling-place  and  scene  of  order 
that  God  will  have  made,  so  remarkably  distinguished  from 
all  that  has  been  before,  and  even  from  that  which  accompanies 
the  reign  of  His  own  Messiah,  John  sees  "  the  holy  city.  New 
Jerusalem  coming  down  out  of  heaven  from  God,  prepared  as 
a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband.  And  I  heard  a  loud  voice  out 
of  heaven,  saying.  Behold  the  tabernacle  of  God  [is]  with  men, 
and  he  shall  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  his  people,  and 
God  himself  shall  be  with  them,  their  God"  (verses  2,  3),  I 
appreliend  that  the  New  Jerusalem  is  the  tabernacle  of  God.  It 
is  where  He  abides  in  a  very  special  sense.  And  this  tabernacle 
of  God  descends  out  of  heaven  to  be  with  men.  The  heavenly 
saints  compose  the  tabernacle  of  God ;  while  those  that  are 
found  upon  the  new  earth  are  simply  described  as  "  men."  They 
are  no  longer  Jews  and  Gentiles  then,  as  in  the  millennium ; 
this  will  have  all  passed  away  with  "the  first  or  former  things." 
Every  distinction  which  had  to  do  with  time  is  at  an  end. 
When  a  saint  is  risen  or  changed,  he  is  no  longer  a  Jew  or  a 
Greek ;  he  is  a  man,  though  bearing  the  image  of  the  heavenly. 
So  here  God  has  to  do  with  men,  and  "  lie  shall  dwell  with  them 
and  they  shall  be  his  people;  and  God  himself  shall  be  with 
them,  their  God."  Instead  of  regarding  it  from  a  distance,  God 
will  not  merely  come  to  visit  the  scene  that  His  hand  has  made 


THEN   ABSOLUTE.  467 

for  man  as  of  old  in  the  garden  of  Eden ;  but  He  will  dwell 
eternally  in  their  midst.  "  And  God  shall  wipe  away  every  tear 
from  their  eyes ;  and  death  shall  be  no  more ;  and  no  sorrow, 
nor  crying,  nor  pain,  shall  any  more  be  ;  for  the  first  things  are 
passed  away"  (verse  4).  Unquestionably  the  figures  that  are 
used  to  describe  tliis  state  of  things  are  derived  from  Isaiah — 
figures  which  the  Spirit  of  God  had  applied  primarily  to  millen- 
nial blessedness.  Isaiah  predicts  a  glorious  but  earthly  condition, 
which  God  will  make  true  of  the  just  during  the  millennium. 
Blessedness  will  then  be  the  rule,  sorrow  the  exception.  Similar 
terms,  but  with  striking  differences,  the  Holy  Ghost  now  takes 
up  and  applies  in  a  far  deeper  and  really  unqualified  sense. 

And  if  we  look  for  a  moment  at  2  Peter  iii.  we  shall  find,  I 
think,  a  link  between  Isaiah  and  Eevelation.  It  is  written  in 
2  Peter  iii.  10,  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the 
night,  in  the  which  the  heavens  shall  pass  away  with  a  great 
noise,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat.  The  earth 
also  and  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned  up.  .  .  .  The 
heavens  being  on  fire  shall  be  dissolved,  and  the  elements  shall 
melt  with  fervent  heat."  Now  it  appears  to  me  plain  that  this 
is  what  takes  place  at  the  epoch  of  the  great  white  throne.  Por 
the  moment  the  Lord  is  on  that  throne,  the  earth  and  heaven 
flee  from  before  His  face,  and  there  is  found  no  place  for  them. 
It  is  a  part  of  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  ;"  which  day  comprehends 
the  whole  time  from  the  Lord's  interference  to  judge  the  world, 
taking  His  great  power  and  reigning,  until  He  delivers  up  the 
kingdom,  after  the  millennium  and  the  subsequent  judgments 
are  over.  *  "  Seeing  then  that  all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved, 
what  manner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation 
and  godliness ;  looking  for  and  hasting  unto  the  coming  of  the 
day  of  God,  wherein  the  heavens  being  on  fire  shall  be  dissolved, 

*  My  friend  Dr.  Brown  will  forgive  me  for  thinking  that  the  argument,  even 
in  its  amended  shape  [Second  Advent,  p.  289),  which  he  "believes  it  to  be  im- 
possible to  answer,"  is  a  complete  and  obvious  fallacy.  I  deny  that  the  day  of 
the  Lord,  as  St.  Peter  uses  it,  is  the  mere  epoch  of  the  Lord's  coming,  but  rather 
the  entire  period  covered  by  His  reign  and  judgment.  Hence  the  millennium, 
as  well  as  the  final  dissolution  of  the  actual  heaven  and  earth,  may  and  do  occur 
within  the  compass  of  His  day,  while  His  coming  may  precede  them  both.  His 
mistake  lies  in  identifying  the  day  with  the  coming  of  the  Lord. 

2  H  2 


468  THE   LINK   IN   ST.   PETER. 

and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat  ?  Nevertheless 
we,  according  to  his  promise,  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new 
earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness." 

Now  this  is  the  state  described,  with  fuller  details  of  time 
and  character,  by  the  apostle  John.  The  new  heaven  and  earth 
are  what  we  find  in  the  beginning  of  chapter  xxi.  These  are 
the  new  heavens  and  earth,  "  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness." 
Eighteousness  is  at  home  there,  because  there  God  dwells,  and 
this  can  only  be  because  righteousness  is  the  pervading  feature. 
It  is  plain  that  the  Holy  Spirit  in  St.  Peter  refers  to  the  passage 
of  Isaiah,  as  it  is  said,  "We  according  to  his  promise."  But 
still  He  gives  it  a  larger  and  deeper  meaning.  And  St.  John, 
the  last  of  the  New  Testament  writers,  takes  up  the  same 
thought,  and  puts  each  truth  in  its  place.  He  shews  us  that 
while  the  millennium  may  be  a  partial  fulfilment  of  it,  the  full 
force  of  the  expression  will  not  appear  till  the  millennium  is 
over;  and  then,  when  all  is  according  to  divine  thought  and 
purpose,  God  will  rest,  and  men — not  Israel  only,  but  redeemed 
and  glorified  men — shall  be  His  people,  and  He  their  God. 

To  one  other  scripture  I  must  refer,  in  order  to  connect  the 
various  passages  which  bear  on  the  eternal  state.  In  1  Cor.  xv. 
23  we  read  that  every  one  is  to  be  raised  in  his  own  order: 
"  Christ  the  first-fruits  [who  is  raised  already] ;  afterward  they 
that  are  Christ's  at  His  coming.  Then  cometh  the  end,  when 
he  delivers  up  [which  is  the  true  reading]  the  kingdom  to  God, 
even  the  Father,  when  he  shall  put  down  atl  rule  and  all 
authority  and  power."  This  is  the  task  of  Christ  during  the 
millennium :  He  will  abolish  all  opposing  rule,  subjecting  to 
Himself  every  adversary  and  all  things  unto  the  glory  of  God 
the  Father ;  for  such  is  the  ultunate  object  of  His  exaltation,  as 
we  see  from  Phil.  ii.  "  For  he  must  reign,  till  he  hath  put  all 
enemies  under  his  feet.  The  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed 
is  death."  This  exactly  harmonizes  with  Rev.  xx.-xxi.,  where 
we  find,  first  the  reign  of  Christ,  then  death  destroyed,  and  after 
that  the  new  heaven  and  earth,  which  is  the  time  when  Christ 
is  said  in  1  Cor.  xv.  24  to  deliver  up  the  kingdom  to  God,  even 
the  Father.  Not  that  Christ  will  cease  to  reign  divinely  :  but 
the  special  human  reign  of  Christ  will  terminate — that  is  His 


GOD   ALL   IN  ALL.  469 

reigning  for  a  given  period  over  an  earthly  people,  and  the  world 
at  large,  which  the  heavenly  saints  in  glory  will  share  along 
with  Him.  This  will  end.  All  the  righteous  will  at  last  be  in 
a  risen  or  changed  condition,  all  the  wicked  dead  cast  into  the 
lake  of  fire,  and  the  kingdom  closes.  Its  surrender  to  God  the 
Father  in  no  way  touches  the  personal  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
The  kingdom  that  Christ  has  during  the  millennium  is  not 
what  He  has  as  God,  but  as  the  risen  man — as  the  One  who 
was  humbled,  but  has  been  exalted.  This  He  delivers  up  to 
God,  even  the  Father  (Himself  also  as  man  taking  the  place  of 
subjection  in  glory,  as  of  old  He  did  in  grace  on  the  earth),  that 
God — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost — may  be  all  in  all — God 
as  such  having  the  place  of  supremacy  throughout  eternity. 
But  although  the  human  or  mediatorial  kingdom  of  Christ  will 
terminate,  not  so  the  divine  kingdom ;  and  therefore  we,  being 
made  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,  are  said  to  reign  for  ever 
and  ever.  (Eev.  xxii.)  So  in  Eomans  v.  it  is  said,  "We  shall 
reign  in  life  by  one,  Jesus  Christ."  Of  course,  partaking  of  the 
divine  nature  does  not  touch  the  incommunicable  glory  of  the 
Godhead.  But  it  remains  true  that  we  have  an  eternal  life,  and 
that  its  endless  character  flows  from  the  fact  that  it  is  given  to 
us  by  One  who,  though  truly  man,  is  a  divine  person,  by  Him 
who  is  the  living  One  and  was  dead,  and,  behold,  is  alive  for 
evermore.  "We  shall  reign  in  life  by  One,  Jesus  Christ" — a 
reign  which  is  not  limited  in  time  any  more  than  sphere. 

You  will  observe  that  it  is  God  who  is  prominent  through 
this  portion,  exactly  answering  to  what  we  saw  in  1  Cor.  xv.  28. 
"And  he  that  sat  upon  the  throne  said,  Behold,  I  make  all 
things  new.  And  he  saith  [to  me],  Write  ;  for  these  words  are 
true  and  faithful"  (verse  5).  He  speaks  tliat  sits  on  the  throne. 
We  do  not  get  the  Lamb  mentioned.  It  is  the  glory  of  God 
in  the  fullest  possible  sense  that  we  liave  here.  "  And  he  said 
to  me.  They  are  done.  I  am  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the 
beginning  and  the  end."  No  doubt  Christ  is  the  Alpha  and 
the  Omega  too,  as  we  find  in  chapter  xxii.  13 ;  but  it  is  not  the 
Lord  as  such  that  acts  and  speaks  here,  but  God.  "  I  will  give 
him  that  is  athirst  of  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life  freely. 
He  that  overcometh  shall  inherit  these  things;  and  I  will  be 


470  THE   LAKE   OF  FIKE  EVERLASTING. 

a  God  to  him,  and  he  shall  be  a  son  to  me"  (verses  6,  7). 
Nothing  can  be  plainer  than  that  it  is  God  as  such  who  is 
speaking  all  through.  "  But  for  the  cowardly,  and  unbelievers, 
and  abominable,  and  murderers,  and  whoremongers,  and  sor- 
cerers, and  idolaters,  and  all  the  false,  their  part  [shall  be]  in 
the  lake  that  burnetii  with  fire  and  brimstone,  which  is  the 
second  death"  (verse  8).  A  most  awful  word  of  warning,  and 
especially  as  used  here !  For  mark  the  force  of  it.  It  is  then 
God  shall  be  all  in  all  —  God  who  is  love.  But  He  is  not 
merely  love,  which  is  a  false  and  infidel  thought;  He  is  light  as 
well  as  love.  It  as  much  appertains  to  God  to  be  holy  as  to  be 
gracious ;  and  the  very  same  portion  of  His  word  teaches  us 
both  these  truths.  And  here  is  the  final  proof  of  it.  In  love  He 
comes  down  to  be  with  His  people.  They  may  be  men,  but 
they  are  no  longer  in  weakness  and  sorrow ;  for  God  HimseK 
has  wiped  away  every  tear  from  their  eyes.  But  He  is  light, 
and  therefore  in  presence  of  all  things  new,  where  righteousness 
dwells  in  peace,  when  there  is  no  evil  or  sin,  but  separation 
from  it  for  ever  by  the  power  of  God;  even  then  the  portion 
of  the  wicked  is  in  the  lake  burning  with  fire  and  brimstone. 
Note  well  that  this  is  the  eternal  state.  Eemember  that  in  the 
eternal  state  there  is  the  doom,  the  never-ending  doom,  of  those 
who  have  rejected  Christ  and  taken  their  stand  on  their  own 
miserable  self.  Here  is  the  aw^ard  from  God  Himself.  Their 
part  is  the  second  death,  where  their  worm  dieth  not  and  the 
fire  is  not  quenched,  as  the  Lord  Jesus  so  touchingly  expresses 
it.  No  declaration  can  be  more  solemn  than  that  of  Eev.  xxi.  8, 
not  only  because  of  its  character,  but  because  of  its  place.  When 
God  will  have  rest  in  the  new  heavens  and  earth — when  He 
will  come  down  to  abide  among  men,  because  there  will  no 
longer  be  any  evil  to  check  His  dwelling  with  them — then  it 
is  that  the  awful  scene  presents  itself  of  evil  and  its  hopeless 
unending  torment.  This  is  what  God  teaches  us  in  His  picture 
of  the  eternal  world.  There  is  not  only  the  bright  side,  but 
none  the  less  the  lake  of  fire,  which  has  its  course ;  nor  does  a 
word  intimate  that  its  horrors  will  ever  come  to  an  end. 

But  now  the  Holy  Gliost,  liaving  brought  us  to  "  the  end"  in 
the  most  absolute  sense,  leads  us  back  again.     We  have  seen 


THE   GLORY   OF   GOD.  471 

the  New  Jerusalem  coming  down  out  of  heaven  from  God, 
prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband,  when  this  eternal 
condition  begins.  But  what  is  its  relation  to  the  millennial 
earth  ?  If  we  had  only  the  previous  revelations,  we  could  not 
have  answered  this  clearly.  The  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  has  had 
her  joy  consummated  in  heaven  ;  then  as  the  New  Jerusalem, 
after  the  millennium,  she  has  taken  her  place  as  regards  the 
new  heavens  and  earth ;  but  what  is  her  relation  to  those  here 
below  during  the  millennium  ?  This  is  now  made  plain.  "  There 
came  one  of  the  seven  angels  that  had,  &c.  .  .  .  and  talked  to 
me,  saying.  Come  hither,  I  will  shew  thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb's 
wife.  And  he  carried  me  away  in  the  Spirit  to  a  great  and  high 
mountain,  and  shewed  me  the  holy  city  Jerusalem,  descending 
out  of  heaven  from  God,  having  the  glory  of  God.  Its  lustre 
[was]  like  a  stone  most  precious,  as  a  jasper  stone  crystal-clear." 
It  appears  to  me  that  this  account  of  the  city's  bright  lustre 
like  a  jasper  has  a  very  close  connexion  with  what  had  just 
before  been  said  of  it,  as  having  the  "glory  of  God."  For 
when  God  Himself  was  seen  on  the  throne  in  chapter  iv..  He 
was  in  appearance  like  a  jasper  and  a  sardis.  Here  the  New 
Jerusalem  has  God's  glory,  and  its  lustre  is  jasper-like.  But 
this  is  not  all,  "  It  had  a  wall  great  and  high,"  and  after  this 
we  are  told  in  the  18th  verse  that  "the  building  of  its  wall  was 
of  jasper."  Hence  it  is  plain  that  this  is  peculiarly  the  stone 
which  is  used  to  describe  the  glory  of  God,  as  far  as  it  can  be 
seen  by  a  creature — not  the  glory  of  God  which  the  creature 
cannot  see.  For  God  has  a  glory  which  no  man  can  approach 
unto.  But  He  is  pleased  also  to  display  His  glory  suitably  to 
the  capacity  of  a  creature ;  and  the  precious  stone  used  to  set 
this  forth  is  in  the  book  of  Eevelation  the  jasper. 

Besides  this,  we  are  told  it  had  "  twelve  gates,  and  at  the  gates 
twelve  angels,  and  names  inscribed,  which  are  the  names  of  the 
twelve  tribes  of  the  sons  of  Israel."  The  number  "  twelve  "  is 
particularly  mentioned  throughout  the  account  of  the  New 
Jerusalem.  It  was  just  before  said  that  the  city  had  the  glory 
of  God,  in  the  hope  of  which  we  rejoice.  (Rom.  v.  2.)  Here  we 
find  that  this  hope,  for  which  we  wait  and  in  which  we  rejoice, 
is  enjoyed.     But  God  is  pleased  to  remember  that  He  is  dealing 


472  THE  TWELVE   FOUNDATIONS. 

with  people  on  the  earth,  and  the  New  Jerusalem  has  a  very 

special  relation  to  men  during  the  millennium.  Accordingly, 
there  are  twelve  gates  with  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of 
Israel  written  upon  them.  At  the  gates  stand  twelve  angels, 
shewing  their  subordination.  In  this  day  of  glory  the  angel  is 
happy  to  be  a  porter  at  the  gate  of  the  heavenly  city — happy, 
if  he  do  not  enter,  to  have  his  work  and  mission  outside.  "Unto 
the  angels  hath  he  not  put  in  subjection  the  world  to  come, 
whereof  we  speak."  (Heb.  ii.)  "  Do  ye  not  know  that  the  saints 
shall  judge  the  world  ?  .  .  .  .  Know  ye  not  that  we  shall  judge 
angels?"  (1  Cor.  vi.)  "And  the  wall  of  the  city  hath  twelve 
foundations,  and  on  them  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of 
the  Lamb  "  (verse  14).  Eph.  ii.  20  gives  us,  I  think,  the  force 
of  the  symbol.  "  Now  therefore  ye  are  no  more  strangers  and 
foreigners,  but  fellow-citizens  with  the  saints  ....  and  are  built 
upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ 
himself  being  the  chief  corner  stone."  No  doubt  the  whole 
building  is  growing  up  into  an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord.  But  we 
are  built  upon  "  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets," 
both  of  the  New  Testament.  If  Old  Testament  prophets  had 
been  meant,  they  would  naturally,  to  avoid  mistake,  have  been 
set  before  apostles ;  but  the  expression  as  it  stands  seems  pur- 
posely framed  to  guard  against  such  a  misconception.  The 
prophets  of  the  Old  Testament  were  the  filling  up  of  the  law, 
besides  testifying  future  things,  judgments,  tlie  new  covenant, 
&c.  The  law  and  the  prophets,  as  it  is  said,  were  until  John. 
(See  also  Matt.  v.  17.)  Their  authority  never  can  be  destroyed. 
But  when  Messiah  was  rejected  by  Israel,  and  redemption  was 
accomplished  on  the  cross,  there  was  a  new  foundation  laid  for 
a  new  work  of  God,  entirely  distinct  from  what  the  law  or  the 
prophets,  or  even  John  the  Baptist,  contemplated.  It  is  the 
foundation  of  the  [New  Testament]  apostles  and  prophets,  and 
it  is  upon  this  that  the  New  Jerusalem  is  built.  Now  God  has 
brought  out  His  full  mind  as  a  foundation  of  truth. 

Certain  things  were  yet  reserved  in  Old  Testament  times. 
Look  at  Deuteronomy  (chapter  xxix.  29).  "  The  secret  things," 
says  Moses  there,  "  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God :  but  those 
things  which  are  revealed  belong  unto  us,  and  to  our  children 


THE  MYSTERY  REVEALED.  473 

for  ever,  that  we  may  do  all  the  works  of  this  law."  Eevealed 
things  here  have  to  do  with  the  law  and  its  consequences,  for 
the  purpose  of  enforcing  obedience.  But  the  secret  things,  which 
then  belonged  to  God,  are  themselves  now  revealed — the  re- 
sources of  grace,  when  all  was  ruin  under  the  law.  And  this  is 
what  the  apostle  Paul  lays  such  stress  on,  while  he  tells  us  how 
that  by  revelation  God  made  known  to  him  the  mystery  or 
secret,  "  whereby,  when  ye  read,  ye  may  understand  my  know- 
ledge in  the  mystery  of  Christ;  which  in  other  ages  was  not 
made  known  unto  the  sons  of  men,  as  it  is  now  revealed  unto 
his  holy  apostles  and  prophets  by  the  Spirit."  And  so  Col.  i.  26. 
The  Holy  Ghost  had  brought  out  what  had  been  a  secret  thing 
in  the  days  of  old.  The  mystery  is  revealed.  This  full  revela- 
tion of  truth  appears  to  be  called  the  foundation  of  the  apostles 
and  prophets  on  which  the  Church  is  built.  Therefore  it  is  said 
in  1  Tim.  iii.  13,  that  the  Church  is  "the  pillar  and  ground  of 
the  truth."  The  truth  has  come  out,  and  God  has  as  it  were 
no  secrets  now.  All  that  He  chose  to  reveal,  all  that  would  be 
of  service  to  the  creature,  and  to  the  glory  of  His  own  Son,  God 
has  brought  out;  so  that,  in  this  sense  and  in  every  other,  it 
may  be  said,  that  "  the  darkness  passeth,  and  the  true  light  now 
shineth."  So  then  upon  this  broad  and  deep  foundation — where 
not  merely  the  dealings  of  God  with  individuals,  or  a  people 
connected  with  His  promises  or  His  government  are  shewn  out; 
but  where  all  that  can  be  known  of  God  by  the  creature  has 
been  revealed  in  His  Son — upon  this  foundation  the  Church  is 
built.  And  this  is  now  made  manifest  to  His  saints,  which  was 
hidden  but  is  now  revealed.  "  The  wall  of  the  city  had  twelve 
foundations,  and  on  them  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of 
the  Lamb."     They  were  the  instruments  of  this  revelation. 

"  And  he  that  talked  with  me  had  a  golden  reed  as  a  measure, 
that  he  might  measure  the  city,  and  the  gates  thereof,  and  the 
wall  thereof.  And  the  city  lieth  quadrangular,  and  the  length 
is  as  great  as  the  breadth.  .  .  .  The  length  and  the  breadth 
and  the  height  of  it  are  equal"  (verses  15, 17).  It  was  the  image 
of  the  perfection  of  a  city  "  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God." 
I  do  not  mean  that  this  description  is  to  be  taken  as  if  it  were 
of  a  literal  city.     I  conceive  that  it  is  a  purely  symbolical  pic- 


474  THE   CITY   A   CUBE. 

ture  as  to  certain  relations  of  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife.  The 
scripture  itself  most  positively  says  that  it  is  (not  the  dwelling- 
place  of  the  redeemed,  but)  the  bride  herself  described  as  a  city. 
Just  as  the  apostate  church,  the  vast  idolatrous  ecclesiastical 
system  so  often  spoken  of  in  this  book,  was  symbolized  as  the 
great  city  Babylon ;  so  here  the  glorified  Church  is  characterized 
as  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  in  contrast  with  the  great  harlot, 
and  as  the  holy  city  descending  out  of  heaven  from  God,  in 
contrast  with  the  great  city  which  rules  over  the  rulers  of  the 
earth.  When  we  read,  then,  of  the  city  forming  a  quadrangle, 
of  equal  length,  breadth,  and  height,  it  is  simply  to  be  under- 
stood as  figurative  of  its  perfectness.  At  the  same  time  these 
symbols  must  not  be  run  into  one  another.  For  immediately 
after  it  is  said,  "he  measured  the  wall  thereof,  of  an  hundred  and 
forty-four  cubits, — a  man's  measure,  that  is,  of  an  angel"  (verse 
17).  Now  the  city's  height  was  previously  given  as  equal  to  the 
length  and  breadth,  i.e.,  twelve  thousand  furlongs.  This  of  course 
is  enormously  greater  than  a  hundred  and  forty-four  cubits, 
which  is  expressly  made  to  refer  to  the  height  of  the  wall. 
First,  we  have  the  general  idea  of  a  city  which  is  every  way 
square,  a  cube  in  fact ;  then,  when  we  come  to  the  details  of 
the  wall,  a  height  is  given  which  shews  that  Ave  are  not  to  look 
for  mere  literal  consistency  as  if  it  were  a  portrait.  The 
number  twelve  keeps  up  the  idea  of  a  perfection  in  reference 
to  man. 

"  And  the  building  of  its  wall  was  of  jasper ;  and  the  city 
[was]  pure  gold,  like  clear  glass"  (verse  18).  We  have  already 
found  the  meaning  of  these  two  figures,  the  gold  and  the  glass, 
in  an  earlier  part  of  the  book.  The  Lord  counselled  the  Laodi- 
cean church  in  its  fallen  state  to  buy  of  Ilim  "  gold  tried  in  the 
fire."  It  is  invariably  the  figure  of  divine  righteousness  —  of 
righteousness  that  can  sttiiul  the  searching  fire  of  God's  judgment. 
Human  righteousness  could  not  bear  it,  and  so  is  never  repre- 
sented by  gold,  but  rather  by  white  linen.  God  could  cleanse 
this  and  leave  it  without  spot  or  stain.  But  fire  would  be  de- 
struction to  it ;  wlicreas,  with  regard  to  the  gold,  it  would  only 
bring  out  its  perfection.  Accordingly  this  city  is  of  pure  gold, 
"  like  clear  glass."     Holiness,  now  fixed  and  without  fiaw,  also 


GOLD   LIKE   CLEAR   GLASS.  475 

marks  the  city.  With  regard  to  our  need  of  holiness,  the  means 
of  it  are  represented  under  the  figure  of  water,  because  it  is  a 
question  of  cleansing  from  defilement  in  a  practical  way.  In  the 
Kevelation  this  is  not  the  case  ;  for  from  the  fourth  chapter  the 
saints  who  are  put  in  connexion  with  holiness  are  risen  saints, 
and  consequently  are  beyond  the  means  of  cleansing.  They  are 
therefore  represented,  as  also  in  the  case  of  that  Ijody  of  saints 
mentioned  in  chapter  xv.,  as  on  a  sea  of  glass,  because  it  is  purity 
and  this  m  a  fixed  unalterable  condition.  Their  state  is  no 
longer  that  which  might  need  to  be  cleansed.  It  is  holiness  that 
repels  everything  defiling.  So  here  the  city  is  of  pure  gold,  like 
unto  clear  glass.  In  Eev.  xv.  it  is  remarkable  that  the  sea  of 
glass  is  said  to  be  mingled  with  fire,  which  was  not  the  case  in 
Eev.  iv. ;  and  this  because  the  saints  spoken  of  there  had  not 
only  gone  through  this  complete  purging,  and  were  now  in  a 
state  of  unalterable  purity,  but  they  had  gone  through  the  last 
terrible  tribulation,  of  which  fire  is  the  known  figure.  From 
this  tribulation  the  raptured  saints  of  Eev.  iv.  had  been  exempt. 
Thus  then  we  have  the  city  of  pure  gold,  like  clear  glass ;  that 
is,  divine  righteousness  has  its  full  way  now,  and  holiness  be- 
yond nature  that  nothing  can  touch. 

"  And  the  foundations  of  the  wall  of  the  city  were  garnished 
with  all  manner  o'f  precious  stones  :  the  first  foundation  jasper, 

&c And  the  twelve  gates  were  twelve  pearls ;  each  one 

severally  of  the  gates  was  out  of  one  pearl:*  and  the  street  of 
the  city  was  pure  gold,  as  transparent  glass"  (verse  19-21). 
Without  pretending  to  give  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  various 

*  Some  readers  will  be  astonished  to  hear  that  a  man  of  Michaelis'  reputation 
should  adduce  this  as  an  instance  of  "false  translation."  {^Int.  N.  T.,  vol.  iv.  p. 
507.)  It  is  not  uninstructive  to  mark  the  process  of  mind  it  betrays — the 
very  same  which  leads  many  to  reject  the  Bible,  and  this  writer  himself  to  as- 
perse the  Apocalypse.  "A  pearl,  whether  we  consider  the  rotundity  of  the  figure, 
or  the  softness  of  its  mass,  is  very  Hi-qualified  to  become  the  gate  of  a  citj%  even 
if  that  city  exists  only  in  poetical  description.' '  But  what  if  it  be  morally  didactic 
in  a  symbolic  prophecy  F  "  The  word  used  in  the  Greek  is  fiapyapiTt]^,  and  that 
ought  to  be  rendered  precious  stone !  for  this  is  the  meaning  ascribed  to  the  word 
in  Chaldee  ...  M.  is  used  perhaps  in  the  same  sense,  Matt.  xiii.  45,  46."  To 
refute  this  seems  to  me  quite  needless.  Every  one  can  see  how  definite  is  the 
Seer's  description  of  the  various  precious  stones,  and  the  spiritual  man  wiU  feel 
the  blank  created  by  the  absence  of  the  "  pearl." 


476  EACH  GATE  OF  ONE  PEARL. 

precious  stones,  we  may  learn  thence  that  iu  every  variety  of 
beauty  will  God  array  His  people  in  that  day  of  glory.  There 
will  be  different  rays  of  His  glory  reflected  through  them,  set 
forth  by  these  different  precious  stones.  In  God's  own  case  it  is 
not  so.  His  essential  glory  is  not  described  after  this  fashion. 
It  is  full  concentrated  light.  It  is  not  what  is  broken  up  into 
a  variety  of  hues,  if  we  may  so  say,  as  iu  the  case  of  the  glory 
He  confers  on  the  church.  God  is  light,  and  He  dwells  in  light 
which  no  man  can  approach  unto.  The  rainbow  of  many  colours 
was  the  sign  by  which  God  shewed  His  covenant  with  creation, 
and  His  various  ways  with  poor  man.  But  when  it  is  the  lustre 
of  the  saints  in  heavenly  glory,  and  the  way  in  which  God  will 
display  the  beauty  of  His  people, — for  He  does  see  beauty  in 
them, — these  precious  stones  are  the  emblems  employed. 

"And  the  twelve  gates  were  twelve  pearls;  each  one  severally 
of  the  gates  was  of  one  pearl."  Such  they  appeared  to  men  out- 
side :  something  quite  beyond  nature.  It  is  a  description  that 
alludes  to  the  earthly  Jerusalem ;  but  in  the  latter  city,  what  is 
really  found  existing  in  nature  will  be  brought  to  adorn  it. 
Here  the  beauty  of  the  church  is  set  forth  by  a  supernatural 
imagery :  each  one  of  the  gates  was  made  out  of  one  pearl. 
They  are  symbols  which  set  forth  the  perfect  and  divine  beauty 
that  God  will  put  upon  His  people.  This  is  already  true  of  them 
in  Christ,  but  actually  and  personally  will  they  thus  shine  in 
that  day.  Each  gate  being  of  one  pearl  would  shew,  I  suppose, 
the  special  likeness  of  Christ  and  fellowship  with  Christ,  which 
God  will  grant  to  His  people — to  the  church.  In  Matthew  xiii. 
wehave,  as  I  conceive,  the  Lord  Jesus  as  a  merchantman  in 
quest  of  goodly  pearls ;  who,  wlien  He  had  found  one  pearl  of 
great  price,  went  and  sold  all  that  He  had  and  bought  it.  It  is 
the  beauty  of  the  church,  as  viewed  in  God's  mind,  which  if  one 
may  say  it,  fascinated  the  Lord  Jesus,  so  that  He  parted  with 
all  His  earthly  glory  to  get  that  pearl  :  a  strong  expression 
indeed,  but  not  too  strong  to  convey  His  appreciation  of  the 
church.  But  we  know  that  if  the  Lord  saw  any  beauty  in  the 
church,  it  was  all  derived  from  Himself.  He  saw  the  church  as 
she  was  in  the  mind  and  purpose  of  God,  and  sells  all  that  He 
might  purchase  this  pearl  of  great  price,  wliich  after  all  is  but 


NO   TEMPLE   SEEN.  477 

the  reflection  of  His  own  beauty.  So  here,  the  spotless  pearl, 
the  perfection  of  moral  beauty  that  had  been  so  precious  in  the 
eyes  of  Christ,  is  the  figure  of  what,  even  at  the  entrance,  will 
appear  in  the  eyes  of  men  and  angels. 

"  And  I  saw  no  temple  therein :  for  the  Lord  God,  the  Almighty, 
is  its  temple,  and  the  Lamb"  (verse  22).  This  is  very  important. 
For  perhaps  some  one  may  say.  What  has  all  this  to  do  with 
the  saint  now  ?  I  answer,  The  world  must  wait  for  the  day  of 
glory  to  see  the  beauty  of  the  church.  And  we,  like  the  world, 
are  so  often  unbelieving,  that  we  are  apt  to  see  only  the  dark 
painful  circumstances  of  the  church,  if  we  escape  the  delusive 
dream  of  an  improving  Christendom.  Which  of  us  carries 
habitually  constantly  in  our  hearts  the  delight  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
in  opening  out  what  the  church  is  going  to  be — nay,  what  it  is 
in  His  eye  and  to  His  heart?  Our  unbelief  as  to  this  is  one 
main  secret  source  of  our  murmuring  and  rebellious  spirit.  I  do 
not  say  that  we  ought  not  to  feel  tlie  failure  of  God's  church  as 
things  are  on  earth  :  God  forbid  such  a  thought !  But  we  might 
feel  it  more  lovingly  and  more  keenly  too  had  we  a  deeper  sense 
of  its  nearness  to  Christ  and  the  glory  it  is  soon  to  shine  in.  A 
good  deal  of  what  we  feel,  when  evil  is  seen  in  the  children  of 
God,  is  because  self  is  touched.  We  are  all  inclined  to  deal 
hardly  enough  with  a  person's  vanity,  pride,  or  things  of  the 
kind.  Why  ?  Is  it  not  too  frequently  because  it  wounds  us  ? 
We  have  possibly  not  had  the  share  of  respect  and  importance 
to  which  we  fancied  ourselves  entitled,  and  we  are  readily  sore 
about  it.  But  this  is  not  according  to  Christ.  Not  that  we  should 
be  insensible  to  the  ways  of  the  flesh  and  the  world,  but  we 
should  feel  all  with  Christ  and  not  for  ourselves.  What  can 
enable  us  ?  Nothing  but  the  heart  filled  with  Christ  and  the 
exceedingly  blessed  place  in  which  He  puts  us.  We  are  called 
to  exhibit  the  Lord  Jesus  now.  It  is  not  merely  that  we  are  to 
be  members  of  His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones,  but  that  so  we  are 
now ;  and  therefore  love  and  desire  for  God's  glory  would  lead 
us  to  seek  ways  answering  to  this  in  the  church  and  before  men. 
What  God  will  shew  to  the  whole  universe  by  and  by.  He  would 
have  us  to  look  for  in  His  people  now. 

When  that  day  comes  there  will  be  no  hindrances ;  but  the 


478  POWER   OF  FAITH   NOW. 

action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  to  make  good  in  us  what  will  be 
perfectly  manifest  then,  and  what  is  true  in  principle  now.  If 
there  is  a  spot  upon  another  who  is  to  shine  along  with  Christ 
then,  this  stirs  up  our  affections  that  the  evil  may  be  removed  in 
God's  way  and  for  His  glory.  And  this  it  is  which  so  increases 
our  sense  of  shame  that  such  blots  should  be  upon  ourselves. 
It  is  evident  to  me  that  the  Holy  Ghost  reveals  the  description 
of  the  divine  glory  that  is  to  be  in  the  church,  in  order  to  act 
with  great  practical  power  on  our  souls  now,  the  word  being 
mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  hear  it.  The  real  reason  why  it 
so  little  profits  us  is  that  we  are  such  unbelieving  believers. 
We  are  believers ;  but  is  it  not  humiliating  that  we  can  pass 
over  such  precious  fruits  of  Christ's  love,  such  bright  visions  of 
assured  glory,  as  if  we  did  not  need  them  now,  or  as  if  they  were 
not  the  faitliful  and  true  words  of  God  ?  We  shall  be  in  glory 
by  and  by,  and  know  as  we  are  known ;  but  it  is  revealed  to 
those  who  are  not  in  it  yet,  that  their  souls  may  be  full  of  the 
joy  of  it  now,  and  that  the  effects  of  it  may  be  manifest  even  to 
the  world  that  despises  them.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  earnest  of 
the  inheritance,  as  well  as  the  seal  of  redemption. 

But  this  is  true  not  of  the  beauty  only  in  which  the  church 
is  to  shine  then ;  there  is  another  thing,  which  ought  to  have  a 
mighty  influence  upon  us  now.  There  is  an  immediate  relation 
to  God  in  the  way  of  worship :  and  what  then  ?  The  symbol 
here  used  is  that  of  a  city,  and  therefore  we  are  not  described 
as  priests.  If  we  were  spoken  of  as  persons,  we  should  be 
described  as  brought  near  to  God,  that  is,  as  priests ;  and  so  we 
are  in  chap.  xx.  6.  But  here  it  is  a  city — and  a  city  in  which 
there  is  no  temple :  not  because  there  was  no  special  seat  of 
the  presence  of  God  there,  but  because  His  presence  filled  it  all 
and  equally.  The  access  to  God  is  immediate.  But  this  also 
is  a  truth  applicable  now.  (Hebrews  x.)  Here  below  there  is 
no  temple  nor  priests  now  between  us  and  God.  Undoubtedly 
we  have  above  the  great  and  faithful  High  Priest — a  minister 
of  the  sanctuary,  and  of  the  true  tabernacle,  which  the  Lord 
pitched,  and  not  man.  But  there  will  be  below,  during  the 
future  kingdom,  for  those  on  earth  that  need  Him,  when  "  He 
shall  sit  as  a  Priest  upon  his  throne."     Thus,  to  the  Christian, 


GLOKY   GIVEN   TO   US.  479 

there  is  neither  temple  nor  priest  on  earth  now.  We  stand,  as 
to  our  faith,  in  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  with  His  perfect 
favour  shining  on  us.  If  persons  do  not  feel  this,  it  is  because 
they  do  not  believe  it.  We  must  always  believe  a  thing  on 
God's  word  first;  and  the  more  simply  we  believe,  the  more 
shall  we  enjoy  the  comfort,  strength,  and  fruits  of  the  truth. 

"  And  I  saw  no  temple  therein :  for  the  Lord  God,  the 
Almighty,  is  the  temple,  and  the  Lamb.  And  the  city  hath  no 
need  of  the  sun,  nor  of  the  moon,  that  they  should  shine  on  it." 
No  earthly  nor  even  heavenly  lights  of  the  old  creation  are 
wanted  there.  "For  the  glory  of  God  lightened  it,  and  the  light 
[literally,  lamp]  thereof  is  the  Lamb "  (verse  23).  How 
wonderfully  all  this  description  falls  in  with  a  few  words  in 
John  xvii.,  to  which  I  must  refer  before  going  farther. 

In  His  astonishing  prayer  (if  we  can  call  that  a  prayer,  which 
is  more  like  the  Son  unbosoming  Himself  to  the  Father)  the 
Lord  says,  "The  glory  which  thou  gavest  me,  I  have  given 
them."  It  was  divine,  but  not  His  Godhead  glory,  for  this 
never  can  be  given,  belonging  to  God,  and  none  else.  The  Lord 
Jesus  had  Godhead  glory,  but  not  given  to  Him,  because  He 
had  it  essentially ;  He  had  it  in  His  own  right,  as  being  God, 
from  all  eternity.  But  what  the  Father  gave  to  Him  as  man. 
He  gave  to  His  disciples :  "  that  they  may  be  one,  even  as  we 
are  one ;  I  in  them,  and  thou  in  me,  that  they'  may  be  made 
perfect  in  one ;  and  that  the  world  may  know  that  thou  hast 
sent  me,  and  hast  loved  them,  as  thou  hast  loved  me."  Now 
this  exactly  corresponds  with  what  we  have  in  the  Eevelation, 
for  the  holy  city  is  seen  there  descending  out  of  heaven  from 
God :  and  the  Lamb  is  in  it,  and  the  Lord  God  makes  Himself 
known,  so  to  speak,  specially  in  Him;  for  the  Lamb  is  not 
merely  the  light,  but  the  vessel  of  it,  or  light-bearer.  We  may 
consider  the  light  diffused,  as  it  is  said,  "  the  glory  of  God  had 
lightened  it ; "  but  if  we  want  to  see  the  light  concentrated, 
where  are  we  to  look  ?  The  Lamb  is  that  light.  •  Thus  does 
God  make  Himself  to  shine  through  all  the  glorious  city :  the 
Lamb  is  the  great  concentrating  object,  diffusing  light  over  the 
whole  scene.  This,  then,  is  the  order  of  it — "  I  in  them,  and 
thou  in  me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one ;  and  that  the 


480  THE  NATIONS   TIIKN, 

world  may  know,"*  &c.  The  Lamb  makes  God  known  to  them, 
as  they  make  Him  known  to  all  others.  This  is  what  appears 
in  the  Revelation.  "  The  nations  shall  walk  by  means  of  its 
light,"  not  in  tlie  li^lit  of  the  Liimb  immediately,  but  by  means 
of  the  light  of  the  heavenly  city :  i)recisely  what  we  find  in 
John  xvii.;  "that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one;  that  the 
world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent  me,  and  hast  loved  them  as 
thou  hast  loved  me."  There  is,  I  apprehend,  what  answers  to 
the  nations  walkiiij^  by  uuuuis  of  the  light  of  the  city.  Througli 
tlu^s(^  nations  thc!  ehurch  had  passed  in  ilu;  days  of  her  pilgrim- 
age, and  been  des])ised  because  of  her  I'ellowshij)  with  Christ. 
(1  John  iii,  1.)  For,  as  He  had  betMi  there  and  unknown, 
"  th(U(^l'oro  the  world  knoweth  us  not."  But  now,  when  the 
bright  day  shines,  when  Jesus,  long  absent  and  rejected,  the 

•  H  in  v(>ry  dviddnt  tlmt  Ui(»  author  of  tlio  //.  ^i.  (vol.  iv.  pp.  184,  19G) 
docm  Tiot  niulorHliind  tliia  pnHHiif^o,  which  ho  juHtly  ooncoivos  to  bo  too  often  mia- 
uppnihoiuhul  and  iniHappliod,  Kor  whilo  ho  rightly  alHrniH  that  voi'hoh  22,  23, 
apply  to  tlio  tiiiio  of  glorilication,  tho  only  tinio  of  perfect  and  displayed  nnity, 
it  iH  a  niiHtako  to  conloiind  this  with  tho  unity  prayod  for  in  vithus  20,  21,  wliich 
is  aH  dearly  a  ipniHtion  of  graced  and  toHtiinonj'  to  tho  worlil,  a.s  tho  othor  will  bo 
of  K''"'y  '""'  ^''"  world's  knowlodf^o.  'I'lio  truth  is  that  unity  is  aHJuid  for  in 
throo  forms.  Thoro  is,  first,  that  which  is  ahsoluto  and  in  tho  twelve  a]>oHtles, 
in  verso  11,  "that  they  may  he  t)no,  as  we."  Secondly,  thoro  is  that  which  Hhould 
omhraco  those  who  wore  to  helievo  throufj^h  the  aposth's'  word,  "that  they  all" 
(wlictlior  Jow  or  tlontilo,  bond  or  free)  "  sliould  he  oiu) "  (not  by  virtue  of  tho 
law  of  Jehovah  and  tho  enforced  rites  and  ordinances  of  the  Lovitical  Hystoni, 
but  by  tho  revelation  of  tho  Fathor  and  tho  Son) ;  "  as  thou.  Father,  art  in  n»o, 
und  I  in  theo,  that  thoy  also  may  bo  ono  in  uu;  that  thu  world  may  Mieve"  (not 
yet  know,  but  boliovo)  "that  thou  hast  sent  mo."  Such  a  tostiniony  tho 
f!;atherod  saints  were  whilo  thoy  walked  in  hoavoTily  iinity  hero  below.  Thon 
(U)moM  the  tliird  and  crowning?  form,  which  it  is  impossible  for  tho  world  to  dony, 
wiion  thoy  heliold  tlio  saints  appearinf<  in  tlie  sanio  glory  with  Christ;  and 
thoroforo  it  is  added,  "  that  tho  world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent  mo,"  but 
this  is  not  all,  "and  hast  loved  tiiem  as  thou  hast  loved  mo."  How  piinsay  it, 
wlien  C'hrist  and  tlio  (diurch  burst  upon  their  astonished  t<}'os  in  a  connnunity  of 
fjlory  Y  Hut  this  doi»s  not  interfere  with  the  i)roceding  truth,  which  ouj^ht  not 
to  bo  woaken(id,  that  tho  Lord  desired  the  ]ircsent  unity  of  ail  Ilis  disciples,  ns 
a  moans  and  jiowerful  witness  to  tho  world  that  thoy  mi^rht  btdieve  in  His 
mission  from  tho  Father.  In  fact,  this  abides  an  im])ort<int  part  of  practical 
responsibility,  and  it  is  not  wiso  to  turn  from  it,  because  it  is  f;;rossly  perverted 
to  purjuisos  of  earthly  power  and  \)v'nU)  by  tho  world-church  in  all  its  variotios. 
In  tho  Acts  of  tho  Apostlos  wo  nru  shown  thu  facts,  while  thu  Epistlus  domuiistrulo 
tho  importancu  of  the  dudrinu. 


AND    'I'llKli;    KINdS.  IMl 

bl(\ssiHl  iiiul  I'xalled  man,  (,Iii>  Lonl  IVom  lu'a.V(Mi,  ('(miics  in  ITis 
fjjlory,  lliniself  tho  fiiithrul  witness  and  iiC('oni])lishnu'.nt  of  tlio 
glory  ol"  (J()(l,  as  indcod  Mv  is  tho  briLjlitnciss  of  it,  No  will  not 
be  seen  apart  from  His  bridn. 

"  Wo.  shall  apiHMU'  with  ilini  in  glory  ;"  and  thi^  nations  shall 
walk  by  moans  of  tho  light  ol"  the  gloriliod  whom  tiioy  had  so 
long  oast  out.  Kvon  tluur  kings  bi-ing  tluMr  glory  to  it.*  It  is 
nl'(•.l^ssary  l^o  sta.to  this,  lost  poi'sons  should  iniagino  (liai  thoro 
was  a,  oomniunication  of  a.  diroot  kind  botwoon  (ho  inhabitants 
ol"  (ho  oardi  and  th(>.  hoavonly  city.  ihi(.  though  tho  city  was 
S(HM>  to  oomo  down  iVoni  hoa,von,  it  is  not  hero  said  to  oonio 
down  to  tho  oar(.h,  so  as  to  bo  with  mon,  as  it  doos  whon  tho 
now  hoavon  and  oartli  aro  oomo.  Iloro  its  glory  is  over  tho 
earth  ;  accordingly  tho  kings  and  tho  nations  bring  thoir  glory 
and  honour  unto  i(,,  in  (ho  way  ol"  homago,  I  suppos(\  io  IFini 
who  dwolls  thor(!.  "  And  tlu^  gaXos  of  it  shall  not  bo  shut  at  all 
by  day  ;  tor  thoro  shall  bo  n(»  night  tlu^'o."  No  danger  threatens 
the  city;  on  tho  oontrnry,  "They  shall  bring  tho  glory  and  th(5 
honour  of  tho-  nations  to  it."  Of  oourso,  it^  is  in  tho  sanui  sense 
as  in  verse  24.  "And  thiu'o  shall  in  no  wisc^  (Mitcr  into  it  any- 
thing uiu'loau,  or  oik^  tliali  works  abomination  and  a,  lio:  but 
thos(!  that  aro  written  in  tho  Landi's  book  of  life."  'fhus,  tho 
fullest  sco])e  is  given  to  tlui  holinciss  of  (Jod,  and  the  impure 
and  abouiinablo  and  false  excluded  from  His  prcvsenco,  as  indeed 
they  are  niora,lly  aiul  altogether  unlit  for  it;  but  withal  l[is 
sov(>.r(u'gnty  is  maintained  intact.  Non(>.  ent(>r  there,  except 
those  (uirollod  in  the  book  ol"  lif(5  of  tlio  Lamb. 

it  has  b(!on  already  rt!iua,rkod  tha,t  the  lirst  liv(i  voi'sos  of 
(ihap.  xxii.  are  nooossary  (,o  couiph^to  tho  vision:  but  I  thiidv  it 
bett(U'  to  rosoi'vo  tlirin  for  my  next  looturo,  whon  the  oonolusion 
of  tlui  book  will  also  bo  shown  in  duo  ordtu'. 

*  Not  into,  liiit  Kii/o,  i'or  wliicli  in  Orndk  (,linr(^  iH  l)iit  (tun  woril,  itf. 


2  I 


482  INTERLACINGS   OF   SCKIPTUEE. 


CHAPTEE  XXII. 

It  is  one  of  the  interesting  features  of  this  book,  that  it  can 
only  be  properly  understood  when  taken  in  connexion  with  all 
the  rest  of  the  word  of  God.  And,  singular  to  say  too,  God  has 
linked  together,  in  a  very  remarkable  manner,  the  last  book  of 
the  scripture  and  the  very  first.  For  example,  here  we  fall  upon 
images  which  the  Holy  Ghost  uses  to  describe  the  blessedness 
of  the  heavenly  city  in  its  relation  to  the  earth  during  the 
millennium ;  and  whence  are  these  images  derived  ?  I  must  go 
to  the  beginning  of  the  book  of  God,  to  Genesis — nay,  to  the 
very  beginning  of  Genesis  itself.  There  I  find  a  tree  of  life, 
rivers,  &c.,  to  which  evidently  the  Holy  Ghost  refers  in  the 
passage  before  us. 

Now  this  seems  to  me  to  be  a  striking  indication  of  God's 
object,  so  dovetailing  His  whole  word  together,  that  in  order  to 
acquire  the  full  meaning  of  any  part,  I  must  take  it  in  connexion 
with  the  whole.  And  this  is  all  the  more  important,  inasmuch 
as  that  same  word  of  God  shews  us  different  states  and  dispen- 
sations in  total  contrast  with  one  another.  There  was  the  time 
of  innocence ;  there  was  the  time  when  there  was  nothing  but 
sin,  as  far  as  man  was  concerned — evil  without  a  check,  until 
the  judgment  of  God  came  in  the  flood  and  destroyed  all,  save 
the  few  in  the  ark.  Then  was  given  the  law,  and  then  the  gospel, 
each  having  a  wholly  different  object.  And  now  we  await  the 
great  closing  scene  of  this  age,  when  all  that  God  has  wrought 
on  the  earth,  all  that  revelation  has  brought  out  of  His  mind, 
but  corrupted  by  man,  will  have  been  manifested  in  its  results. 
In  order  to  understand  what  the  Holy  Ghost  tells  me  about 
these  results,  I  must  begin  at  the  very  beginning.  Now,  looking 


THE  CONTRASTS  OF  GLOKY.  483 

at  Genesis  we  find  that,  though  there  is  a  sort  of  analogy  in 
the  time  of  innocence  when  God  was  dealing  with  the  creature 
responsible  of  course  to  maintain  his  place  of  innocence,  yet 
there  is  a  most  blessed  contrast  in  the  future,  which  brings  out 
still  more  conspicuously  the  depths  of  grace  which  God  will 
shew  in  this  holy  city. 

Let  us  look  then  a  little  at  the  differences.  In  Genesis  we 
find  that  there  were  four  rivers;  and  of  these  rivers,  although 
we  know  little  or  nothing  of  the  two  first,  at  any  rate  it  is  clear 
that  the  two  last,  the  Euphrates  and  Hiddekel  or  Tigris,  were 
connected  with  some  of  the  most  painful  passages  in  the  history 
of  God's  earthly  people  at  a  later  day.  On  these  rivers  were  built 
the  two  most  famous  cities  of  antiquity ;  the  Tigris  on  which 
Nineveh  stood,  and  the  Euphrates  on  which  Babylon  was  built. 
I  speak  now,  of  course,  of  a  time  long  subsequent  to  Adam,  or 
even  the  deluge.  And  though  the  flood  may  have  effaced,  as  it 
doubtless  did,  many  other  features  of  the  antediluvian  earth, 
still  we  find  these  two  rivers  again.  As  for  Paradise,  it  was 
gone,  but  these  rivers  were  to  play  an  important  part  in  the 
history  of  man,  and  especially  of  that  which  acquires  a  moment 
greater  than  its  own,  from  being  mingled  with  the  vicissitudes 
and  the  chastenings  of  God's  people  Israel.  These  two  rivers 
were  identified  with  the  powers  that  were  to  be  the  ruin  of 
Israel  and  Judah  respectively.  Nineveh  was  the  capital  of 
Assyria,  which  carried  the  great  mass  of  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel 
into  captivity.  Babylon  was  the  power  afterwards  used  of  God 
for  the  captivity  of  that  which  seemed  to  stand  firm  for  God,  no 
less  than  for  David's  house,  but  which  ere  long  fell  into  greater 
unfaithfulness  than  backsliding  Israel.  Thus  these  rivers,  which 
had  been  at  first  connected  with  Paradise,  became  afterwards 
the  representatives  of  the  powers  of  men  that  were  used  to 
scourge  the  guilty  people  of  God. 

Then  again  there  were  two  trees  in  the  garden  of  Eden :  one 
of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  and  the  other  of  life.  Now 
whatever  might  have  been  the  blessing  vouchsafed  to  man  in 
the  tree  of  life,  it  was  wholly  useless  to  him,  because  the  other 
tree  put  him  to  a  test  which  man  could  not  stand.  He  broke 
down  ;  he  listened  to  the  voice  of  his  wife  who  had  herself 

2  I  2 


484  KIVEK   AND   TREE. 

listened  to  the  serpent,  and  he  became  rebellious.  The  conse- 
quence was  that  the  tree  of  life  was  no  longer  available  for  his 
use :  had  it  been  so  it  would  only  have  perpetuated  a  life  of  sin 
and  misery.  So  that  while  there  was  judgment  in  the  act  of 
God  that  placed  the  cherubim  with  the  flaming  sword  to  shut 
out  man  from  the  tree  of  life,  mercy  was  mingled  with  it.  God 
had  reserved  for  man  a  better  thing — the  tree  of  grace,  if  we 
may  so  say.  Thus  when  we  come  to  the  closing  account,  we 
have  neither  the  various  rivers  of  Eden  nor  a  tree  to  test  man 
on  God's  part.  There  is  but  one  river  and  one  tree.  All  that 
was  connected  with  man's  weakness  and  sin,  and  the  chastening 
of  God's  people  is  gone.  The  relics  of  shame  and  the  discipline 
of  sorrow  are  needed  no  longer.  The  paradise  of  man  had  failed, 
Israel  had  failed,  the  church  had  failed.  Now  it  is  the  paradise, 
the  people,  and  the  city  of  God,  who  is  shewing  Himself  and 
His  glory  there  ;  and  therefore  all  that  was  merely  for  the 
testing  or  the  discipline  of  man  completely  disappears  ;  and 
now  shine  out  God's  love,  His  heavenly  grace,  His  faithfulness 
to  Israel,  His  sovereign  mercy  to  the  Gentiles,  His  righteous 
and  beneficent  rule.  The  Lord  and  Saviour  had  come  in;  He 
had  by  Himself  borne  the  effects  of  what  God's  people  deserved, 
and  had  made  it  possible  for  Him  righteously  to  shew  them 
nothing  but  love,  giving  them  life  and  atonement  and  cleansing 
through  Himself,  His  Son. 

"  He  shewed  me  a  river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal, 
proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb.  In  the 
midst  of  the  street  of  it,  and  of  the  river  on  this  side  and  on 
that  side  [was]  the  tree  of  life,  bearing  twelve  [manner  of]  fruits, 
each  month  yielding  its  fruits ;  and  the  leaves  of  the  tree  [are] 
for  healing  of  the  nations"  (verses  1,  2).  Now  here  it  is  evident 
that  we  have  pure  grace  reigning  through  righteousness,  as  far 
as  the  tree  and  the  river  are  concerned.  There  is  nothing  liable 
to  be  corrupted  by  the  power  of  Satan.  Neither  is  there  any- 
thing like  the  cherubim,  jealous  in  keeping  away  man,  alas  ! 
sinful.  Quite  the  contrary.  This  tree  of  life  brings  fortli  fruit 
every  month.  Of  course  it  is  a  figure.  There  will  be  no  mere 
literal  tree  or  river ;  but  as  the  river  of  life's  water  symbolizes 
the  abundant  life  and  blessing  which  will  flow  through  the  city 


HEAVENLY   AND    EARTHLY   CITIES.  485 

(that  is,  the  Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife),  so  here  follows  the  benignant 
provision  for  healing  the  nations.  There  is  a  reserve  as  to  the 
twelve  fruits,  which  may  set  forth  a  far  higher  and  more  various 
supply  for  the  constant  refreshment  of  the  heavenly  saints ;  but 
the  leaves  are  expressly  said  to  be  for  the  healing  of  the  nations. 

This  is  the  more  remarkable,  for  it  must  be  familiar  to  us 
that,  even  in  the  coming  day  of  glory,  the  earthly  Jerusalem, 
though  in  some  respects  figures  are  borrowed  thence,  furnishes 
in  others  a  very  different  picture  in  the  prophets.  Take,  for 
instance,  the  description  in  Isaiah  Ix.  It  had  been  said  in 
chapter  lix.  that  the  Eedeemer  should  come  to  Zion,  and  then 
in  chapter  Ix.  we  have  the  description  of  the  city.  "  Therefore 
thy  gates  shall  be  open  continually :  they  shall  not  be  shut  day 
nor  night,"  &c.  But  what  is  the  principle  of  the  earthly  Jeru- 
salem's relation  to  the  nations  ?  "  The  nation  and  kingdom  that 
will  not  serve  thee  shall  perish  ;  yea,  those  nations  shall  be 
utterly  wasted."  It  is  unsparing  righteousness  and  judgment 
which  govern.  God  compels  honour  to  be  paid  to  His  people 
who  had  been  despised  and  trampled  down  among  the  nations. 
For  we  know  how  the  Jews,  even  now  in  Christendom,  are  looked 
on  with  contempt  and  scorn :  and  if  from  their  wealth,  or  other 
causes  they  get  into  favour  with  the  world,  it  is  considered  a 
wonderful  piece  of  liberality.  Men  give  themselves  a  good  deal 
of  credit  for  it,  and  in  general  act  thus  on  most  mistaken  ground, 
either  sceptical  or  pseudo-Christian.  They  have  been  so  habitu- 
ated to  despise  them  that  these  concessions  are  only  wrung  out, 
and  often  through  such  false  principles  as  the  rights  of  men,  &c. 
Of  course  I  am  merely  referring  to  facts  well  known  in  the 
history  of  the  world ;  as  Christians,  we  have  nothing  to  do  with 
such  questions,  though  we  may  judge  them.  For  a  Christian  is 
set  here  for  one  purpose  only — to  witness  for  Christ,  rejected  by 
the  world  but  exalted  in  heaven ;  to  act  in  accordance  with  the 
grace  and  glory  of  a  Christ  wlio  is  now  at  the  right  hand  of 
God.  When  this  is  lost  sight  of,  he  is  salt  without  savour.  A 
person  may  be  philanthropic  and  essay  to  do  much  good  in  the 
world ;  but  God  has  a  higher  object  for  us  than  any  plans  of 
ours. 

And  this  brief  digression  flows  out  of  our  present  theme.   For 


486  GRACE   FOR   US   NOT   LOST   IN   GLORY. 

whether  it  be  the  church  before  glory,  or  when  glory  comes,  as 
here,  the  only  becoming  thing  for  us  is  the  manifestation  of  grace. 
It  is  the  character  of  grace  that  always  gives  the  truth  of  God 
about  the  cliurch  ;  it  is  the  manifestation  of  Himself,  as  He  has 
displayed  Himself  and  still  does  in  Christ.  This  the  apostle 
brings  out  in  Ephesians  v.,  where  it  is  said,  "  Be  ye  therefore 
followers  [imitators]  of  God."  And  how  ?  "  As  dear  children, 
and  walk  in  love."  In  what  way  ?  In  the  chapter  before  he 
had  spoken  of  Christ  as  the  offering  through  which  God  could 
forgive  sin  (verse  32),  and  therefore  we  ought  to  forgive  one 
another,  "even  as  God  in  Christ  hath  forgiven  you."  But  in 
chapter  v.  he  goes  much  farther.  "  Walk  in  love,  as  Christ  also 
hath  loved  us,  and  hath  given  himself  for  us,  an  offering  and  a 
sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet  smelling  savour."  There  is  the  full 
character  of  grace  at  once,  which  gives  him  who  knows  and 
walks  in  it  the  power  of  Christ  in  going  forth  among  men.  If 
I  see  my  brother  here  or  there,  his  mind  fdled  with  erroneous 
thoughts  and  hopes,  and  himself  without  conscience  or  with 
feeble  qualms  doing  things  contrary  to  the  Lord,  how  would  God 
stir  my  affections  towards  him  ?  I  must  always  act  out  of  the 
grace  in  which  God  deals  towards  the  saint,  and  I  must  lift  up 
his  soul,  if  I  can,  to  know  what  God  feels  towards  him  and  His 
will  about  him.  If  he  perceives  the  grace  in  which  God  has 
acted,  he  will  be  prepared  to  learn  wliat  he  owes  to  Him.  Thus 
the  apostle  always  speaks.  Look  again  at  the  Ephesians.  What 
had  St.  Paul  been  doing  from  the  beginning  of  the  epistle  to 
chapter  v.  ?  He  liad  shewn  the  perfect  love  of  God  towards 
them,  and  the  place  of  oneness  with  Christ  in  which  He  has  set 
them :  and  now  he  as  it  were  says.  Walk  you  in  the  love  Christ 
has  shewn  you. 

We  find  the  same  thing  here.  It  is  not  now  the  thunders, 
and  liglitnings,  and  voices  out  of  God's  presence.  All  this  lias 
completely  disappeared.  In  Eev.  iv.  such  were  the  sights  and 
sounds  which  emanated  from  the  throne.  They  were  suited 
then,  and  necessary  to  upliold  and  express  the  liolincss  of  Him 
who  sat  there.  They  were  the  witness  of  His  feeling  when,  the 
church  being  removed  to  heaven,  man  was  left  to  exalt  himself, 
only  checked  liy  providential  judgments.    Here  there  is  nothing 


JUDICIAL   RIGHTEOUSNESS   IN  JERUSALEM.  487 

of  the  sort.  The  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  is  seen ;  and 
what  issues  from  it  ?  A  river  of  water  of  life,  bright  as  crystal. 
And  why  is  this  ?  Because  the  throne  here  is  set  in  connexion 
with  the  heavenly  city,  and  this  city  being  the  symbol  of  the 
glorified  saints,  the  church's  habitual  character  even  in  glory  is 
grace.  Not  only  was  it  a  river  of  life,  not  of  death,  but  tlie 
leaves  of  the  tree  were  for  the  healing  (not  destruction)  of  the 
nations. 

Jerusalem  here  below  is  the  city  of  earthly  righteousness — 
the  place  where  God  will  have  brought  the  Jews  through  ex- 
ceeding trouble.  They  must  undergo  a  terrible  tribulation  first 
— the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble,  but  he  will  be  delivered  out  of  it. 
It  will  be  a  righteously  measured  chastening,  because  of  their 
sins.  They  will  pass  through  all  that  sorrow  which  God  Him- 
self is  judicially  to  inflict ;  but  the  indignation  is  to  cease,  and 
this  with  the  destruction  of  those  who  were  its  instruments. 
"  For  yet  a  very  little  while  and  the  indignation  shall  cease,  and 
mine  anger  in  their  destruction."  God  will  take  up  the  cause 
of  His  people,  and  the  calling  of  Israel  in  the  millennium  will 
savour  of  that  righteousness  which  has  marked  the  dealings  of 
God  towards  them  publicly,  whatever  may  liave  been  the  hidden 
spring  of  grace.  All  the  nations  shall  go  up  to  Jerusalem  when 
the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  established  in  the  top 
of  the  mountains.  And  "out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law, 
and  the  word  of  Jehovah  from  Jerusalem."  The  law  is  the  rule 
of  righteousness ;  grace  is  another  thing  altogether.  It  is  not  a 
rule  of  righteousness,  with  death  tlie  inevitable  penalty.  It  is 
true  that  grace  reigns  through  righteousness,  but  then  it  is  the 
righteousness  of  God,  not  of  man;  and  this,  under  His  gracious 
culture,  fills  the  saint  with  tlie  fruit  of  righteousness,  which  is 
through  Jesus  Christ  to  His  own  glory  and  praise. 

Here  we  have  then  a  scene  of  perfect  grace.  Nothing  could 
exceed  the  blessing  in  relation  to  man.  The  number  twelve  is 
always  used  in  reference  to  the  dealings  of  God  with  man  by 
means  of  human  administration.  Seven  is  the  number  of 
perfection  in  relation  to  the  things  of  God,  or  rather  to  the 
spiritual  side,  whetlier  good  or  evil — twelve  in  relation  to  the 
human  side.     Thus,  wlien  God  chose  the  patriarchs,  there  were 


488  now   FAll   ETERNAL, 

twelve :  they  had  a  reference,  I  suj^pose,  not  only  to  the  tribes 
which  sprang  from  them,  but  to  the  rest  of  mankind  generally. 
And  again,  when  the  apostles  were  called,  there  were  twelve, 
answering  to  the  twelve  ti'iljes  of  Israel.  The  moment  we  have 
the  apostle  who  was  specially  entrusted  witli  the  gr6at  work  of 
putting  the  chuich  on  its  firm  and  heavenly  foundations, 
irrespective  of  earthly  arrangement,  the  number  twelve  is 
broken,  and  apostles  independent  of  the  twelve  appear.  (Acts 
xiv.  4,  14;  Eph.  iv.)  This  may  explain  a  little  further  what  I 
meant  by  saying  that  the  twelve  gates,  twelve  foundations,  &c., 
which  we  saw  in  chap,  xxi.,  set  forth  the  aspect  of  this  city 
towards  man.  It  is  viewed  in  its  public  governmental  character. 
.So  in  the  tree  too.  IJy  its  bearing  twelve  manner  of  fruits,  and 
yielding  its  fruit  every  month  is  shewn  the  aspect  of  it  towards 
man.  Accordingly  we  are  told  next  that  "  the  leaves  of  the 
tree  were  for  healing  of  the  nations." 

Another  thing  is  clear,  that  this  scene  refers  not  to  the 
eternal,  but  to  the  millennial  state.  For  in  eternity  nations 
will  not  exist  as  such ;  neither  will  any  need  healing  then. 
(Jarefully  bear  this  in  mind,  however,  that  if  we  look  at  the 
heavenly  city  itself,  it  is  eternal.  It  will  make  little  difference 
to  the  city  whether  s(!en  in  the  milhrnnium,  or  in  the  eternal 
state  that  succeeds.  'I'lic.re  were  two  descents  of  the  city  in 
chap.  xxi. — on(!  at  the  l)n;^iiiiiiiig  of  Uk;  inillc^nniuiii,  and  the 
other  at  tht;  coiumenccimeut  of  thii  eternal  state.  The  second 
verse  of  tliat  cliaptctr  gives  us  its  descent  when  the  eternal  state 
is  come,  and  the.  t(!nth  visrse  its  (hiscciit  for  the  laillcnuiiiin. 
The  reason,  1  think,  is  that  at  the  end  of  tlie  millennium  the 
old  heaven  and  (sarth  ])ass  away ;  and  naturally  the  city  would 
disapjjear  from  the  scene  of  the  convulsion.  Then,  wlum  tiie 
new  earth  dawns  on  our  view,  the  heavenly  city  again  comes 
down,  and  takes  its  place  permanently  in  the  new  heavens  and 
earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.  This  is  necessary  to 
i-en)ark ;  because,  while,  at  the  end  of  the  thousand  years  all 
will  be  changed,  .still  the  heavenly  city  will  abide  for  ever. 
"  Unto  him  Ix;  glory  in  the  church  by  Christ  Jesus  throughout 
all  ages,  world  without  end.  Amen."  There  will  be  certain 
oHices  whi(;h  the  glorified  church  will  cease  to  discharge  towards 


AND    HOW    FAU   MILLENNIAL.  489 

tlie  earth  after  the  millennium  is  over :  but  its  intrinsic 
blessedness  remains  the  same.  Consequently,  it  is  said  here, 
"  There  shall  be  no  more  curse."  Thenceforth  this  is  as  true 
evermore  for  the  heavenly  city,  as  it  can  be  for  the  new  heaven 
and  earth  afterwards. 

"  And  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  in  it :  and 
his  servants  shall  servo  him  :  and  they  shall  sec  his  face,  and 
his  name  [shall  be]  on  their  foreheads.  And  there  shall  be  no 
ni^dit  tlicre,  [or  more,]  and  they  shall  have  no  need  of  lamp  and 
light  [of  the  sun]" — the  one  representing  the  light  of  man's 
making,  and  the  other  of  God:  but  all  that  suited  this  world  is 
])ast  for  the  city.  "  For  the  Lord  God  shall  shed  light  upon 
them :  and  they  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever "  (verse  3-5). 
The  expression  "  to  the  ages  of  the  ages,"  I  apprehend,  must  be 
taken  in  the  strongest  sense  here.  It  does  not  refer  only  to  what 
is  called  "  the  kingdom,"  though  of  course  the  reigning  begins 
then.  In  1  Cor.  xv.  24  it  is  a  kingdom  which  Christ  delivers 
up  at  a  definite  point  called  "  the  end."  "  The  end"  implies  that 
the  thousand  years  and  the  judgment  of  the  dead  have  taken 
place;  for  this  judgment  is  part  of  Christ's  "kingdom" — its 
great  closing  act,  we  may  say.  All  this  forms  a  part  of  the 
kingdom ;  and  when  it  is  over,  and  death,  the  last  eniuny,  has 
l)een  destroyed,  then  tlie  J^ord  Jesus  delivers  up  the  kingdom  to 
God. 

The  object  of  the  kingdom  is  to  reduce  every  enemy  to 
subjection ;  and  this  being  accomplished,  that  special  human 
kingdom  terminates.  IJut  if  there  will  then  bo  a  great  change 
as  regards  the  earthly  saints  in  their  natural  bodies  below,  not 
so  with  those  who  are  in  the  heaveidy  places,  already  glorified. 
They  will  reign  for  ever  and  ever :  it  will  be  true  throughout 
all  eternity.  These  words  seem  here  to  be  used  without  re- 
striction. All  the  account,  from  the  i)th  verse  of  chap.  xxi.  to 
verse  5,  inclusively,  of  cha]x  xxii.,  presents  tlie  relation  of  the 
heavenly  city  to  the  earth  during  the  millennium.  But  there 
are  certain  features  in  it  which  are  true  everlastingly.  One  of 
these  characteristics,  besides  its  unchangeable  intrinsic  glory,  is, 
that  the  service  of  the  saints  will  be  for  ever  and  ever.  So  as 
to  the  reigning.     The  mode  of  the  reign,  as  of  the  service,  may 


490        THREEFOLD  CONNEXION  OF  THE  ADVENT. 

be  changed  after  the  earthly  kingdom  is  closed ;  but,  in  tliem- 
selves,  they  will,  I  apprehend,  endure  for  ever  and  ever. 

Now  we  are  come  to  the  closing  comments  of  the  prophet,  and 
the  conversation  that  takes  place  between  him  and  the  angel  in 
reference  to  the  prophecy,  as  well  as  the  final  message  from  the 
Lord  Jesus  Himself.  Strictly  speaking,  the  fifth  verse  ends  the 
prophecy.  But  just  as  we  have  a  prefatory  charge  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  book,  so  here  we  have  a  sort  of  formal  conclusion. 

You  will  observe  that  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  re- 
ferred to  no  less  than  three  times,  and  that  each  has  a  different 
connexion  in  these  farewell  words  of  the  Lord.  The  first  time 
is  in  the  7th  verse,  evidently  in  dependence  on  verse  6.  "  And 
he  said  unto  me,  These  words  are  faithful  and  true :  and  the 
Lord,  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  the  prophets,  sent  his  angel  to 
shew  to  his  servants  the  things  which  must  come  to  pass 
shortly.  And,  behold,  I  come  quickly :  blessed  is  he  that 
keepeth  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book  "  (verses  6,  7). 
The  Lord  Jesus  here  links  His  coming  with  the  blessing  of  the 
man  who  attends  to  the  words  of  the  prophecy.  In  strict 
connexion  with  this,  the  Holy  Ghost  solemnly  commends  the 
prophecy  which  was  now  brought  to  a  close.  The  Lord  Jesus, 
no  doubt,  foresaw  the  measure  of  slight  which  would  be  put 
upon  this  book,  and  the  efforts  of  men  to  put  it  aside. 

I  do  not  like  to  refer  to  particular  religious  societies;  but 
allow  me  to  say  a  word  about  one  which  is  a  reformed  body 
and  well  known.  And  yet,  extraordinary  to  say,  in  that  which 
is  arranged  for  the  express  purpose  of  giving  the  entire  word  of 
God  to  the  people  in  daily  portions,  how  is  it  that  the  book  of 
Kevelation  is  given  ?  Why,  it  is  only  used,  a  little  bit  at  a 
time,  on  one  or  two  special  occasions,  and  at  other  seasons  not 
at  all,  while  even  part  of  the  Apocrypha  is  read  !  It  appears  to 
me  that  the  Lord  was  here  guarding  His  people  against  all  such 
disrespect,  open  or  more  subtle,  to  the  book  of  the  Kevelation.* 

*  I  have  hardly  spoken  more  plainly  hero  than  the  Dean  of  Canterbury  does 
on  chap.  i.  3.  "  If  the  words  are  to  be  understood  as  above,  they  form  at  least 
a  solemn  rebuke  to  the  practice  of  the  Church  of  England,  which  omits  with 
one  or  two  exceptions  the  whole  of  this  book  from  her  public  readings.  Not  one 
word  of  the  precious  messages  of  the  Spirit  to  the  Churches  is  ever  heard  in  the 
puldic  services  of  a  Church  never  weary  of  appealing  to  her  Scriptural  liturgies." 


BLESSING   OF   THE   BOOK.  491 

Nor  is  it  merely  where  these  lessons  are  fixed,  that  there  is  a 
slight  put  upon  it :  let  not  others,  differently  situated,  suppose 
themselves  to  be  guiltless.  Take  those  who  have  no  formal 
division  of  the  scriptures  day  by  day :  do  you  find  this  book 
honoured  by  them  as  the  Lord  enjoins  ?  You  will  learn  that  in 
general,  though  God's  children  have  not  agreed  to  dishonour  it, 
yet,  as  a  practical  fact,  this  book  has  been  pushed  aside,  save 
for  controversial,  historical,  or  imaginative  purposes.  There  is 
hardly  an  attempt  to  expound  it  simply  and  practically.  Few 
servants,  indeed,  deal  it  out  in  due  season,  so  as  to  make  it  a 
part  of  the  household  bread  of  the  family  of  God.  Even  when 
interpretations  of  it  are  ventured  on,  are  they  not  in  general 
most  crude — the  far-fetched  notions  of  an  antiquarian,  or 
degrading  comparisons  with  an  infidel  historian  or  a  daily 
newspaper  ? 

What  a  solemn  thing  it  is  to  depart  from  God's  word !  The 
Lord  Jesus  puts  the  book  before  His  people  as  a  light  shining 
in  a  dark  place — not  at  all  as  a  mere  exercise  for  men  of  learning 
in  a  speculative  mood.  It  was  meant  for  all  the  children  of 
God,  for  their  souls'  profit,  and  to  help  their  communion  with 
God.  He  wanted  them  not  only  to  know  His  grace,  but  the 
judgments  that  were  coming  upon  the  world.  He  desired  them 
to  understand  that  the  book,  which  shews  the  world's  course 
and  doom,  equally  indicates  their  deliverance  out  of  the  judg- 
ment, for  the  Eevelation  makes  it  plain,  that,  before  there  is  a 
word  of  the  judgment,  the  church  is  seen  in  the  presence  of 
God  :  from  the  beginning  of  chapter  iv.  we  see  her  above.  How 
plain  it  is  that  the  words  of  the  prophecy  are  all  of  the  greatest 
importance  to  God's  people !  He  desires  they  should  be  happy 
in  the  fellowship  He  gives  them  with  Himself  before  these 
things  come  to  pass.  "  Blessed  is  he  that  keepeth  the  w^ords  of 
the  prophecy  of  this  book."  And  why  has  it  been  comparatively 
so  valueless  as  to  its  practical  bearing  ?  Because  the  prophecy 
has  been  severed  from  the  promise.  The  word  of  grace, 
"  Behold,  I  come  quickly,"  has  not  been  distinguished  from  "  the 
sayings  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book."  And  hence  the  church's 
portion  has  been  confounded  with  the  judgments  of  the  world. 
The  Eevelation  supposes  that  God's  children  are  waiting  for  the 


492  JOHN'S   PROSTRATION   BEFORE   THE   ANGEL, 

coming  of  Christ,  which  ought  indeed  to  be  their  bright  hope 
from  day  to  day.  Where  this  is  not  the  case,  I  believe  that  it 
is  morally  impossible  to  enter  into  or  enjoy  its  disclosures. 
"  Blessed  is  he  that  keepeth  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this 
book."  The  Lord  is  coming  quickly.  But  if  we  are  not  looking 
for  Him  with  hearts  at  rest  through  His  grace,  we  are  sure  to 
pervert  His  sayings,  instead  of  turning  them  to  profit. 

When  John  heard  and  saw  these  things,  he  fell  down  to 
worship  before  the  feet  of  the  angel  that  shewed  them.  He  had 
done  so  previously  (chapter  xix.  10).*  Possibly  the  grandeur 
of  the  vision  may  have  led  him  to  suppose  that  it  was  Christ 
Himself  taking  that  form.  But  he  is  immediately  corrected. 
The  angel  says  to  him,  "1  am  thy  fellow-servant,"  or  rather, 
"the  fellow-servant"  of  thee,  and  of  thy  brethren  the  prophets." 
As  it  stands  in  our  Bible,  the  statement  is  somewhat  ambiguous. 
It  might  seem,  as  it  stands,  to  convey  that  the  angel  was  one  of 
his  brethren,  the  prophets.  Of  course  this  is  not  the  meaning ; 
but  instead  of  being  the  Lord,  and  an  object  of  worship,  the 
angel  was  the  fellow-servant  of  John,  and  of  John's  brethren 
the  prophets.  "  See  thou  do  it  not ;  for  I  am  the  fellow-servant 
of  thee,  and  of  thy  brethren  the  prophets,  and  of  them  which 
keep  the  sayings  of  this  book  :  worship  God." 

But  he  adds  more,  and  a  very  important  thought  it  is,  prac- 
tically, for  God's  children.  You  may  remember  in  the  last 
chapter  of  Daniel  it  is  written  (verse  4),  "But  thou,  O 
Daniel,  shut  up  the  words,  and  seal  the  book,  even  to  the  time 
of  the  end  :  many  shall  run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge  shall  be 
increased."  Now  mark  in  what  a  wonderful  place  God  has  put 
His  church,  as  we  gather  from  comparing  Revelation  xxii. 

He  was  sending  His  word  to  the  most  favoured  man  that 
could  be  found  among  all   the   favoured  prophets  of  the  Old 

*  It  may  be  as  well  to  observe  hero,  that,  in  the  reciprocal  proposition,  so 
often  vaguely  applied  or  misapplied,  "  the  spirit  of  propliecy  is  the  testimony  of 
Jesus,"  we  are  not  to  understand  a  testimony  to  Jesus,  but  that  which  lie  gave, 
and,  in  general  throughout  the  Apocalypse,  His  prophetic  testimony,  whether 
committed  to  an  angel  or  to  His  servants.  It  is  incorrect  therefore  to  say  that 
this  means  to  Jesus ;  which  is  regularly  expressed  either  by  the  dative,  or  if  a 
genitive  be  used,  with  irtpl.  The  angelic  communicator  was  but  a  fellow-servant 
of  John's :  God  was  to  be  worshipped. 


DANIEL'S   WORDS   SEALED,   JOHN'S   NOT.  493 

Testament — "  a  man  greatly  beloved."  But  although  there  had 
been  given  him  so  plain  and  distinct  a  prophecy  of  Christ's 
coming  and  death,  other  words  were  added,  as  to  which  it  was 
said,  "  But  thou,  0  Daniel,  shut  up  the  words,  and  seal  the  book 
even  to  the  time  of  the  end."  Here  the  same  Spirit  addresses 
John,  and  says  to  him,  "  Seal  not  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of 
this  book  :  for  the  time  is  at  hand"  (verse  10).  How  comes  this 
to  pass  ?  The  whole  calling  of  the  church  is  at  the  time  of  the 
end.  From  the  day  that  the  church  began  its  actual  existence 
here  below,  it  was  the  time  of  the  end ;  and  all  through  her 
history,  still  it  is  the  time  of  the  end.  Of  course  I  do  not  mean 
that  it  is  distinctively  the  time  of  the  end  for  the  Jews,  who 
must  wait  for  the  development  of  all  on  the  platform  of  literal 
facts;  but  therein  lies  the  peculiarity  of  the  church's  calling. 
She  is  above  times  and  seasons,  though  she  knows  them  ;  she 
has  nothing  to  do  with  dates,  or  signs,  or  outward  events,  any 
more  than  with  the  world,  of  whose  history  they  are  the  natural 
and  necessary  accompaniment.  The  church  is  lifted  up  above 
such  a  scene ;  she  is  heavenly.  Such  is  the  place  where  we  are 
put  by  the  grace  of  God,  entirely  outside  all  the  computations 
which  refer  to  the  government  of  this  world. 

As  for  the  Jew,  of  whom  Daniel  was  the  type,  he  must  wait 
till  the  time  of  the  end  is  historically  come,  till  the  knowledge 
is  given  by  God  to  those  who  have  understanding  then.  Until 
that  time  all  is  sealed  up  for  Israel.  This  is  not  the  case  with 
the  church  represented  by  John.  To  him  it  is  said,  "  Seal  not 
the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book." 

But  here  is  the  error  made  by  many  excellent  persons.  Sir 
Isaac  Newton,  a  man  of  the  highest  reputation  in  human  science, 
applied  this  sliutting  up  and  sealing  of  the  book  in  Daniel  to 
the  church.  The  consequence  was  that  he  gave  it  up  as  a  thing 
that  could  not  be  understood  till  the  time  of  the  end.  Had  he 
compared  the  passage  in  Daniel  with  the  closing  words  of  St. 
John's  Revelation,  he  would  have  learnt  that  the  very  words 
that  were  hidden  from  the  Jewish  prophet  are  expressly  opened 
to  the  Christian.  If  Daniel  was  to  seal,  John  is  expressly  told 
not  to  seal.  And  why  ?  Because  Christ  had  come,  and  is  gone 
into  heaven,  and  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  ready  to  judge 


494  '!'<»    I'H   'I'lIK   'I'IMK    ALWAYS    AT    HAND. 

quick  ;iii(l  dciul;  lie  wus  rejected,  and  from  Unit,  iiiomt'iit  it  is 
inonilly  tho  tiiius  <»!'  tho  ciul.  And  ho  ilio  Nnvv  'rc.staiiKiiii  writera 
spoak.  Tlio  apoatlo  .John  says,  "  Little  cliildrcn,  it  is  the  last 
time. ;"  Pciter  writes,  "  The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand  ;"  James, 
•'The  .)udg(i  standcth  before  the  door."  So  wrote  St.  Paul: 
"  Now  all  tlitise  things  happoncd  unto  them  as  ensamples :  and 
they  are  written  for  our  admonition,  upon  whom  the  ends  of 
the  worhl  are  come"  [or  (mds  ol'  the  ages  are  metj.  And  so 
llel>.  ix.  2(5.  Thus  you  hiive  snhslantially  the  same  great  truth 
from  the  l^'.pistles  of  Paid,  of  I'eter,  and  oi'  .James,  down  to  the 
Kevolation. 

T'his  it  is,  I  conceive,  that  is  supposed,  when  John  is  tohl  not 
to  shut  up  the  wonls  of  tlui  propliecy  of  this  book.  It  is  to  bfi 
used  and  unilerstood  now  in  virtue  of  the  knowledge  of  (Jhrist 
and  with  the  Holy  (Jhost  given  by  (Jhrist  as  an  unction  whereby 
we  know  all  things.  To  us  the  time  is  iilways  at  hand.  The 
words  of  tlii.s  book  are  not  sidled  to  us;  so  lliat.  it  is  uidielief, 
if  inst>ead  of  taking  the  book  as  it  wcwi  to  (lirisl,  who  is  the 
light,  to  reveal  this  as  all  else,  we  submit  it  to  the  woild  and  its 
wisdom  which  can  but  darktui.  'i'liis,  I  doubt.  n(tt.,  is  the  root, 
and  reason  of  the  mistakes  and  dillicidties  so  prcivakuit  with 
regard  to  the  intdi-jiretiation  of  the  book.  In  order  to  understand 
this  anil  every  other  part  of  scrii)lui'e,  1  must,  see  what  (Jod  is 
doing  for  the  glory  of  His  iSon.  As  a  Christian  1  am  encouraged 
to  read  the  pro])heoy :  its  sayings  are  not  sealed  to  those  who 
have  \\w  mind  of  (/hrist.  If  T  were  a  Jew,  1  should  have  to 
wait  till  the  tinu'.  of  the  end  arrive  in  the  full  ])rophetic  sense, 
i.e.,  the  end  of  the  agi\  Then  \\w  wise  among  the  Jews  shall 
undcirstand  ;  they  are  the  godly  intelligent  rcMunant.  With  such 
a  remnant,  in  principle  (called,  it  is  true,  into  better  hopes)  the 
church  began. 

lUit  some  nuiy  say.  There  were  certain  things  in  J)anii',l 
which  were  to  be  sealeil,  and  others  which  wi'rc  not :  why  may 
not  these  last  (not  the  lirst)  have  been  the  thiugsJohn  was  there 
told  not  to  seal  ?  1  rci)ly  that  the  Reviilation  supposes  all  the 
truth  we  liud  in  Daniel  anil  a  great  deal  more.  //  could  not  bo 
understood,  if  Daniel  were  not;  while  there  are  nuiny  truths 
ad«led  in  the  Revelation  which  were  not  given  to  Daniel.     Such 


TlIK    SI'IIM'I',    NOT    IllMTOltY,    TIIK    IN'I'KKI'KK'I'KK'.  ^^^^) 

11  plcii  is  ilionironi  imaviiiliii;^'.  'l'\\r  fiict  i,s  iJiat.  Daniel  s|)(iiil\H 
ill  llio  iiKtst,  <;(Ui(Miil  U'.nus,  luid  is  told  to  shut  up  tlio  words  jiiid 
scid  tlu!  hook  -iiol  nic.rc.ly  cei'tiuii  pjirts  of  it.  Tho  h'('.V()la,tion 
<;o(is  over  tlic.  siiiiio  ground  as  Daniel  with  respeel  to  the  hist 
empire,  givin«f  many  l-hini;s  of  a.  still  wider  seojie  and  far  morii 
profoundly  thin<^^s  which  j^rew  out  of  the  (Ihristian  a.postaey, 
in  addition  lo  tlui  previous  rtiin  of  Israel  and  the  lutiire  wicked- 
ness l)oth  of  them  and  the  (JiMitih^H.  'riKirefori',,  if  there  was 
any  hook  in  tlu^  New  'I'esi.amenl  wliieh  one  mij^lit  naturally 
ox])(K;t  to  he  sealed  up,  it  is  the  K'evelid  ion  ;  Cor  as  it  is  the  last, 
HO  it  is  tlio  most  dirtuiult,  ahstriise,  and  conii)rehensive  of  a,ll  tlui 
books  of  the  I»ihl(^  Therefoi-o  when  the  Holy  (lliost  Ha,ys, 
"Seal  not  tlu!  words  ol"  tla^  prophecy  ol'  this  hook,"  I  conceive 
t/hat  W(i  have  implic^l  a  clear  intimation  of  tlio  peculiar  privileges 
of  the  (Jhristian.  It  supjioses  him  to  stand  in  the  full  light  of 
(Jod;  and  thus  what,  ma,y  liavo  l)oen  liiddc^i  b((fore  is  now  fully 
r.ivoah'd,  seeing  that  Christ  has  come  and  made  us  memhei-s  of 
His  body,  and  giv(iii  us  the  Holy  (Jhost  who  s(!;ucli(ts  all  things, 
yea,  the  dcH!))  things  of  (Jod.  This,  to  niy  mind,  is  lJi(<  rciason 
why  it  is  said,  "  S(;al  not,  the  words  of  tJi(i  jti-ophccy  of  1\\\h 
l)ool<."      It  is  ii.  conse(pi(^nc(!  of  redempl/ion. 

it  is  imjiortant  in  another  wa.y  not  always  seen.  The  event,s 
signilied  hy  tli(!  ])ropliet.ic  visions  of  thi;  Revehition  n(!V(!r  enahhs 
one  to  underst'iind  the  hook  it,s(;lf.  Jf  they  were  to  t,ake  i)lace, 
t,o-diiy,  t,his  would  not  of  it,self  give  int,ellig(Mice  a,s  t,o  the 
lv*,evela,l-ion.  The  sole  key  to  |)ropli(M'y  is  the  Holy  (Jhost,  who 
is  the  only  Olio  that  can  nia,k(i  known  it,s  relation  to  (Jhrist; 
and,  without  seeing  tliis  relation,  we  never  undcirstatid  it.  Take 
one  of  the  clearest  and  most  dolliiod  of  proidiocies — tliat  of  tlui 
seventy  wcicks  in  Da,niel.  i'ersons  generally  allow  that  it  has 
l)eeii  accomplislied.  lint  ask  of  thcim  its  reid  mciining;  and 
thoy  will  sluiw  how  litth;  it  is  under.stood.  'I'hey  have  a  vague 
idea  that  it  is  accomplished,  and  little  more,  it  is  not  therefore 
the  events  tluMuselvciS  wliich  explain  the  word:  wo  need  the 
t(!a(;hing  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  as  no(!essary  to  interpret  projjluicy 
as  any  other  part  of  the  scripturcis.  Invents  may  ho  the  ac- 
com|)lislimonts  of  ])articular  i)rophe(;y  and  a  witness  of  its  truth 
to  those  who  doubt ;  but  they  never  oi'  themselves  allbrd  tlie 


496  FIXED   CONDITION. 

just  interpretation  of  the  prophecy.  They  undoubtedly  cor- 
roborate it  when  accomplished,  and  may  be  useful  to  stop  the 
mouth  of  a  gainsayer.  But  (as  it  has  been  long  ago  remarked 
by  another)  you  must  understand  the  prophecy  itself,  before  you 
can  apply  it  to  the  events ;  and  when  you  do  understand  it,  you 
have  what  God  desired  to  give  your  faith,  independently  of  the 
events.  In  fact,  to  refute  such  a  notion  we  have  only  to  weigh 
what  is  said  here,  as  everywhere  else  in  it :  "  Seal  not  the  words 
of  the  prophecy  of  this  book ;  for  the  time  is  at  hand."  The 
value  to  us,  to  the  church,  is  leforehand,  whatever  may  be  the 
use  for  those  who  shall  be  in  the  scene  when  the  events  arrive. 

But  now  listen  to  a  most  solemn  truth.  When  the  time  is 
actually  come  of  which  the  prophecy  treats,  what  is  the  condition 
of  men  ?  It  is  fixed,  for  ever  fixed  for  all — hopelessly  for  some. 
"  He  that  is  unjust,  let  him  be  unjust  still ;  and  he  that  is  filthy, 
let  him  be  filthy  still ;  and  he  that  is  righteous,  let  him  work 
righteousness  still ;  and  he  that  is  holy,  let  him  be  holy  still " 
(verse  11).  That  is,  it  is  not  the  time  when  there  can  be  moral 
change  ;  not  a  time  when  there  can  be  the  conversion  of  sinners 
— when  a  man  who  is  under  the  power  of  Satan  can  be  delivered 
from  it  and  translated  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son.  All 
this  is  at  an  end.  Then  he  that  is  unjust  must  remain  unjust, 
and  he  that  is  filthy  remains  filthy  still.  Men  are  solemnly 
settled  in  the  condition  in  which  they  are  found.  The  day  of 
grace  is  over,  the  day  of  judgment  will  be  come,  and  the  door 
will  then  be  shut. 

"  Behold,  I  am  coming  quickly,  and  my  reward  is  with  me,  to 
give  each  as  his  work  is"  (verse  12).  Evidently  this  confirms 
what  has  been  remarked.  When  that  day  comes,  it  is  the  judg- 
ment of  the  living.  It  is  the  Lord's  coming,  not  here  spoken  of 
as  an  encouragement  to  him  who  hears  and  keeps  the  words 
of  the  prophecy  of  the  book,  but  rather  in  the  way  of  dis- 
criminating judgment.  "  I  [am]  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the 
first  and  the  last,  the  beginning  and  the  end"  (verse  13).  That 
is,  the  Lord  Jesus,  beside  what  is  peculiar  to  Himself,  takes  the 
same  title  here  that  God  Himself  did  in  chap.  xxi.  6.  As  God 
was  the  sum  and  substance  of  all  revelation,  being,  or  action,  so 
was  Christ.     "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time :  the  only- 


THE   MORNING   STAR.  497 

begotten^  Son,  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath 
declared  Him."  "  Blessed  [are]  they  that  do  his  commandments 
[or  wash  their  robes],  that  they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of 
life,  and  may  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the  city.  Without 
[are]  the  dogs,  and  the  sorcerers,  and  the  whoremongers,  and  the 
murderers,  and  tlie  idolaters,  and  every  one  loving  a,nd  practising 
a  lie  "  (verses  14,  15). 

But  next  we  have  another  thing.  It  is  not  the  Lord's  coming 
now,  as  an  encouragement  to  those  who  should  keep  the  sayings 
of  the  prophecy  of  this  book ;  nor  yet  His  coming  as  dealing 
with  every  man,  His  advent  in  the  way  of  judgment  and  His 
reward  with  Him  to  give  each  individual  as  his  work  is.  We 
have  seen  the  holy  and  the  righteous  having  their  portion,  and 
the  filthy  and  unrighteous  their  judgment.  .But  the  Lord  has 
His  own  proper  and  full  relation  to  the  church.  Consequently 
His  voice  is  now  heard  with  marked  emphasis  here  :  "  I,  Jesus, 
have  sent  mine  angel  to  testify  unto  you  these  things  in  the 
churches.  I  am  the  Eoot  and  the  Offspring  of  David  "  (verse 
16).  That  is,  He  refers  to  His  divine  and  His  human  character. 
But  beside  this  He  has  a  special  relationship  to  us — "  the  bright 
[and]  the  morning  star." 

When  the  Lord  comes  in  His  glory  to  the  world,  it  is  as  the 
Sun  of  righteousness  with  healing  in  His  wings,  for  those  that 
have  been  broken,  and  scattered,  and  peeled, — a  people  terrible 
from  their  beginning  hitherto.  But  then  He  appears  in  terror 
to  tread  down  those  that  have  despised  Him  under  His  feet. 
Not  so  does  He  present  Himself  to  us.  It  is  not  for  us  the 
image  of  the  sun,  when  man  should  sleep  no  longer.  When 
the  Sun  of  righteousness  calls  man  up,  not  then  to  work  as  he 
works  now  ;  it  summons  him  that  he  may  bow  to  Him  whom  he 
had  long  slighted,  and  in  due  time  hear  his  doom  pronounced 
by  the  Lord  of  glory,  whom  he  can  despise  no  longer.  Thus 
will  He  appear  to  the  world,  and  "all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all 
that  do  wickedly  shall  be  stubble.  And  the  day  that  cometh 
shall  burn  them  up,  saith  Jehovah  of  Hosts,  that  it  shall  leave 
them  neither  root  nor  branch." 

But  for  those  who  watch  during  the  night  of  man's  day  before 
the  Lord  appears  in  His  glory,  for  those  who  watch  with  bridal 

2  K 


498  "  COME." 

affections,  not  sleeping  as  do  others — how  does  He  speak  to 
such ?  How  is  He  made  known  to  them  ?  "I  am  the  bright, 
the  morning  star."  Blessed  star  of  morn  before  the  day  comes  ! 
We  watch  not  for  the  day,  but  for  Him  during  the  night,  and 
He  will  give  us  the  morning  star,  the  harbinger  of  the  dawn. 
A  blessed  place  it  is — the  place  of  our  love  and  hope :  it  will 
never  be  disappointed  of  its  joy,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will 
surely  come,  as  the  bright  and  morning  star  to  us.  He  cheers 
us  while  we  wait,  and  will  quickly  come  for  us  Himself  We 
may  have  to  tarry  somewhat ;  at  least  it  may  seem  long  to  us. 
For  those  who  waste  their  time  in  slumber,  it  will  be  alas !  too 
short ;  but  for  those  that  wait  for  Him  and  yearn  to  see  Him, 
the  hope  might  seem  to  be  long  deferred.  Instead  of  growing 
weary  and  sick,  may  our  hearts,  on  the  contrary,  be  filled  with 
the  joy  and  constancy  of  assurance  that  the  Lord  is  coming 
soon  !     He  is  the  bright  and  morning  star. 

But  more  :  "And  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Come."  What 
a  blessed  thought  for  us  that  the  Holy  Ghost  Himself  is  the 
One  who  takes  up  the  word  and  says,  "Come!"  He  groans 
with  us,  entering  into  our  sorrows,  now  that  He  is  come  down. 
He  is  not  the  less  divine,  I  need  not  say ;  but  withal  He  has 
condescended  to  identify  Himself,  as  it  were,  with  our  hearts, 
and  be  the  sharer  of  our  feelings.  But  it  is  not  groans  that  we 
have  now ;  not  such  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,  when  He  thinks 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  coming  for  us.  There  is  the  calm  and  peace- 
ful earnestness  of  desire.  "  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Come." 
It  is  most  strengthening  to  know  that  it  is  the  voice  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  Himself  which  says  to  the  Lord  Jesus  "Come." 
It  would  not  have  been  nearly  so  blessed,  had  only  the  bride 
said,  "  Come."  But  it  is  "  the  Spirit  and  the  bride."  She  had 
done  many  tilings  wrong,  had  made  many  mistakes  in  thought 
and  feeling  and  ways.  But  now  it  is  the  Spirit,  the  Holy  Ghost 
Himself  who  says,  Come.  He  it  h  who  leads  the  heart  to  desire 
the  coming  of  Jesus  ;  ITe  is  the  energy  of  the  church  in  bidding 
Jesus  welcome.  "  The  Spirit  and  the  bride,  say,  Come."  It  is 
in  looking  up  to  Jesus  that  the  cliurch  or  the  Christian  says, 
Come ;  not  looking  down  to  the  poor  sinner  and  telling  him  to 
come.     The  Holy  Ghost  leads  and  inspires  the  heart  of  the 


"HE   THAT   HEAKETH."  499 

bride  thus  to  cry,  not  ouly  in  sympathy  of  sorrow,  but  iu  com- 
munion with  the  joy  with  which  she  looks  up  in  the  hope  of 
the  Bridegroom's  return. 

And  not  only  so,  but  "let  him  that  heareth  say,  Come."  If 
I  have  only  heard  the  voice  of  Jesus,  I  am  entitled  to  say, 
Come.  Perhaps  there  are  some  who  say,  0  that  I  could  be 
happy  in  asking  the  Lord  to  come !  How  can  I  say.  Come, 
when  I  am  so  unworthy  ?  The  Lord  warrants  you  to  say.  Come. 
It  is  not  merely  the  bride  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  that  says. 
Come — entering  into  her  full  privileges;  but  "let  him  that 
heareth  say.  Come."  Have  you  heard  His  voice,  and  tasted  that 
He  is  gracious  ?  Do  you  not  know  that  He  is  the  good  Shep- 
herd ?  I  might  be  the  very  feeblest  and  weakest  one,  shrinking 
through  ignorance  "from  the  Lord's  coming  at  once;  yet  here  I 
have  the  Holy  Ghost  inviting  me  to  take  up  the  very  same  word 
that  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  take  up.  "  Let  him  that  heareth 
say,  Come." 

Most  evident  it  is  also  here  that  the  going  out  of  the  first 
affections  of  the  heart  towards  Christ  and  His  coming  does  not 
harden  the  heart  towards  the  poor  world,  nor  make  us  indifferent 
to  the  conversion  of  the  lost ;  but  the  very  contrary.  Whatever 
estimate  man  may  form  of  their  own  efforts,  my  conviction  is, 
that  the  people  who  most  desire  the  conversion  of  sinners  are, 
cadcris  ijarihus,  those  who  most  desire  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  I  do  not  believe  that  the  men  that  want  to  put  Him  off 
are  those  that  pray  and  labour  most  for  the  conversion  of  souls. 
What  is  it  leads  such  to  desire  it  ?  They  labour  for  it  because 
they  see  souls  perishing  everlastingly,  and  they  justly  feel  that  all 
are  miserable  without  Christ.  But  they  have  these  feelings  only 
in  common  with  all  their  brethren.  We  all  believe  that  men 
will  be  cast  into  hell  if  they  do  not  receive  the  gospel,  and  it 
grieves  us  to  see  them  rejecting  the  Saviour ;  we  have  these 
feelings  as  well  as  they.  But  we  have  another  spring  which  they 
have  not.  It  is  indeed  the  Lord's  way,  and  this  is  better  than 
theirs.  He  understands  what  is  good  for  poor  sinners  and  poor 
saints  incomparably  better  than  His  servants  do.  Now  He 
shews  here  that  it  is  the  same  Spirit  who  looks  up  to  Jesus  and 
says,  Come,  who  also  can  turn  us  round  to  lost  sinners  with  the 


500  SOULS   WELCOMED. 

invitation,  "  Let  him  that  is  athirst  come."  It  is  there  we  have 
the  other  side.  It  is  not  here  the  Spirit  directing  the  church  in 
looking  up  to  the  Lord  and  saying,  Come ;  but  the  heart  is  now 
directed  to  the  world  and  saying,  "  Let  him  that  is  athirst  come  ; 
whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely"  (verse  17). 

The  sinner  is  not  told  to  say,  Come.  Observe  the  great  and 
plain  difference  in  the  latter  part  of  the  verse.  In  the  first  two 
clauses  they  say,  Come ;  but  in  the  latter  part  they  do  not  bid 
Jesus  come,  but  are  invited  to  come  themselves  :  "  Let  him  that 
is  athirst  come,"  &c. 

Thus  God  shews  that  the  first  thought  of  my  heart  should  be 
towards  Jesus.  If  true  to  Him,  I  shall  desire  His  coming. 
The  Spirit  prompts  and  sanctions  this  desire.  And  what  is  the 
effect  on  my  feelings  towards  the  world  ?  It  will  give  me  a 
heavenly  reason  for  desiring  the  conversion  of  sinners.  I  shall 
have  the  same  moral  motives,  and  the  same  affections,  which 
act  on  my  brethren  who  put  off  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  And 
I  shall  have  besides  all  the  impetus  whicli  the  hope  of  Christ's 
speedy  coming  can  give  me,  and  the  sense  of  the  danger  of  those 
to  whom  His  coming  can  be  nothing  but  certain  judgment,  even 
in  this  world.  The  more  a  Christian  looks  for  Christ's  coming 
at  any  moment,  the  more  ardent  must  be  his  desire,  and  the 
more  earnest  his  importuning,  that  souls  should  come  and  take 
the  water  of  life. 

In  this  verse  17  then  God  unfolds  our  twofold  relation.  He 
shews  me  my  relation  to  Christ,  which  ought  to  be  the  first 
thought  of  my  heart — not  merely  that  my  soul  should  be  at 
peace  if  He  came,  but  filled  with  the  earnestness  of  affection 
that  desires  His  coming.  And  He  shews  me  that,  when  I  am 
right  there,  I  shall  turn  round  with  quickened  zeal  in  the  sense 
of  the  grace  of  Christ,  and  shall  say  to  every  one  that  is  athirst, 
Come.  More  than  that.  If  I  see  a  soul  that  may  not  perhaps 
thirst  deeply,  but  who  is  willing  to  come,  I  shall  not  tell  him  to 
wait  till  he  is  very  thirsty.  I  shall  bid  him  come  at  once,  and 
welcome;  for  the  word  is,  "whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water 
of  life  freely."  If  there  is  only  the  desire  of  the  heart,  it  comes 
from  God,  and  no  one  rightly  says.  You  must  wait  till  you  have 
gone  through  this  or  that  experience.     If  a  man  has  not  got  so 


ADDING   OR   TAKING   AWAY.  501 

far  in  realizing  his  state,  I  am  not  to  keep  him  away.  The 
water  of  life  is  for  whosoever  will.  He  is  directed  to  come  and 
drink  of  it  freely.  What  fulness  of  grace  fills  the  scene  when 
the  Lord  brings  our  place  before  us ! 

"  I  testify  to  every  one  that  heareth  the  words  of  the  prophecy 
of  this  book,  If  any  man  shall  add  to  these  things,  God  shall 
add  to  him  the  plagues  that  are  written  in  this  book  :  and  if  any 
one  shall  take  away  from  the  words  of  the  book  of  this 
prophecy,  God  shall  take  away  his  part  from  the  tree  of  life, 
and  out  of  the  holy  city,  that  are  written  in  this  book"  (verses 
18,  19).  You  will  observe  that  the  tree  and  the  city  mentioned 
here  answer  to  what  we  found  in  verse  14  Those  that  do  His 
commandments  (or  rather,  according  to  the  critical  text,  "  those 
that  wash  their  robes")  are  blessed,  and  have  a  title  to  the  tree 
of  life,  and  entrance  by  the  gates  into  the  city.  But  as  for 
such  as  take  away  from  the  words  of  this  book,  God  shall  take 
away  their  portion  from  both  the  tree  and  the  city  which  are 
written  of  in  this  book.     They  shall  have  no  access  thereto. 

The  Lord  had  said  if  any  man  would  add  to  or  take  away 
from  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book,  in  either  way 
dishonouring  it,  He  would  assuredly  know  and  feel  and  resent  it. 
But  He  could  not  close  with  such  words  as  these.  He  has 
reserved,  as  it  were,  the  best  wine  to  the  last.  He  had  already 
spoken  of  His  coming  in  the  way  of  judgment,  and  of  His 
coming  for  the  church,  in  full  grace ;  and  now  He  could  not 
leave  us  with  a  note  of  sorrow.  He  must  bring  back  our  hearts 
to  gladness  and  joy  at  the  thought  of  His  coming  again;  and 
so  He  says,  "  He  that  testifieth  these  things  saith.  Surely,  I 
come  quickly.  Amen."  Immediately  John  as  representing  the 
church  answers,  "  Come,  Lord  Jesus."  It  is  the  ready  reply  of 
his  heart  to  the  Lord. 

And  if  it  is  our  privilege  to  look  to  Christ  and  hear  His 
voice ;  if  we  have  known  some  little  of  the  joy  of  being  even 
now  in  imion  with  Himself,  made  members  of  His  body,  of 
His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones  ;  if  we  are  waiting  as  those  conscious 
of  our  bridal  relationship  to  Christ,  and  assured  that  we  shall 
have  the  bride's  portion,  in  presence  of  the  Lamb  for  evermore, 
the  Lord  grant  that  this  may  be  the  answer  of  our  hearts  and 


502  AMEN:    COME,    LOKD   JESUS. 

lips — "Amen.  Come,  Lord  Jesus.  May  we  not  cherish  high 
thoucrhts  for  ourselves,  nor  for  the  church,  much  less  for  the 
world !  It  is  a  blinding  delusion  to  look  for  better  days  while 
Jesus  is  away.  There  are  good  days  in  store,  even  for  this  poor 
world — days  of  heaven  upon  the  earth ;  but  the  Lord  must 
come  before  them — and  He  must  have  us  for  Himself  first  of  all. 
The  Lord  will  never  have  a  time  of  real  abiding  joy  for  the 
world  as  a  whole,  till  He  has  had  the  Church  with  Himself. 
For,  as  we  see  in  Eomans  viii.,  "  the  earnest  expectation  of  the 
creature  waiteth  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God."  The 
manifestation  spoken  of  there  will  be  in  glory.  St.  Paul  had 
been  speaking  before  of  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us, 
when  our  bodies  shall  be  changed,  and  made  like  the  glorious 
body  of  Christ.  We  are  not  like  the  Son  of  God  now,  as 
regards  our  bodies.  Too  well  we  know  that  we  bear  the  image 
of  the  earthly  still :  but  we  shall  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly. 
And  then,  when  God  sees  us  shining  in  the  likeness  of  His  own 
Son,  He  will  have  no  reason  to  be  ashamed  of  us.  He  will  not 
present  us  before  the  universe,  till  our  bodies  are  as  worthy  of 
Him  as  is  the  new  life  that  He  has  given  to  our  souls.  When 
the  sons  of  God  are  manifested,  then  creation  will  cease  to  groan, 
and  the  earth  and  heavens,  filled  with  blessedness,  will  declare 
both  the  glory  and  the  goodness  of  God.  "  The  floods  will  clap 
their  hands,  and  the  hills  be  joyful  together  before  Jehovah." 
Then  it  will  be  found  that  the  blessed  hope,  and  the  appearing 
of  the  glory  that  the  Lord  has  set  before  us,  will  issue  in  praises 
of  joy  and  gladness,  which  will  reach  the  most  distant  parts  of 
earth,  and  the  utmost  bounds  of  creation. 

jNIay  the  Lord  grant  that  we  may  say,  "Amen.  Come,  Lord 
Jesus ;"  that  we  may  say  it  for  ourselves,  as  for  all  the  church, 
and,  in  a  sense  for  all  creation  too,  the  blessing  of  which  depends 
on  our  being  manifested  along  with  Christ !  jSIeanwliile,  the 
grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  be  with  all  the  saints  ! 


W.  Brendon  &  Son,  Printers. 


BY  TEE  SAME  AUTHOR. 


LECTURES   INTRODUCTORY   TO   THE    STUDY   OF   THE   PENTATEUCH, 
Price  7s.  6d. 

liECTURES    INTRODUCTORY  TO  THE    STUDY  OF  THE  MINOR  PROPHETS, 


LECTURES  INTRODUCTORY  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  THE  GOSPELS. 
Price  7s.  6d. 

LECTURES  INTRODUCTORY  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  THE  EPISTLES  OF  PAUL 
THE  APOSTLE. 

Price  7s.  6d. 

LECTURES  INTRODUCTORY  TO  THE  ACTS,  THE  CATHOLIC  EPISTLES,  AND  THE 

REVELATION. 

Price  7s.  6d. 

LECTURES   ON   FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   CONNECTED   "WITH   THE 

CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

Price  3s. 

LECTURES    ON    THE    SECOND    COMING   AND    KINGDOM    OF   THE    LORD   JESUS 

CHRIST. 
Price  4s, 

LECTURES  ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT, 

Price  5s. 

NOTES  ON  DANIEL. 
Price  Is.  6d. 

LECTURES  ON  THE  REVELATION,  WITH  A  NEW  TRANSLATION. 

New  Edition.    Price  6s.  6d. 

LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 
Price  6s.  6d. 

LECTURES    ON    THE    EPISTLE    TO    THE    GALATIANS. 
Price  Is.  6d. 

LECTURES  ON  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EPHESIANS. 

Price  2s.  6d. 

LECTURES   ON  THE  EPISTLES   TO   THE   PHILIPPIANS   AND   COLOSSIANS. 

Price  2s. 


LONDON : 
W.    H.    BROOM,    PATERNOSTER   ROW. 


BS2825.K295  1871 

Lectures  on  the  Book  of  Revelation 

Princeton  Theological  Semmary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  00069  9431 


DATE  DUE 

'^ 

^^    iCJif 

"^ 

W0^ 

— APf^« 

^ 

■^1996 

T^   !■- 

r^      ..r.--^'. 

MP'"* 

ft]'— 

r<. 

\ 

HIGHSMITH  #. 

45230 

Printed 

musA 

