. 

- 

LIBRARY 

OF   THE 

T  h  eo 

logical    Seminary, 

PRINCETON,     N.    J. 

G(Si: 

Shelf 
Book 

1 
Division             

Section               

No, • 

I^v-'  L  y  k^\ 


^ 

^i^.'^^ 


LECTURES 


BOOK   OF  REVELATION. 


BY    WILLIAM    KELLY. 


WILLIAMS    AND    NORGATE, 

14,   HENRIETTA   STREET,   COVENT   GARDEN,   LONDON  5 

AND 

20,   SOUTH   FREDERICK   STREET,   EDINBURaH. 
1861. 


GUERNSEY: 
MACKKNZIE  &  rAHKIXGTON,   PIUNTERS. 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  work  before  the  reader  consists  of  lectures  delivered  in  the 
ordinary  course  of  ministry,  taken  in  short  hand,  and  now 
published  for  the  second  time.  Much  matter  of  a  practical 
nature,  due  to  the  wants  of  the  souls  addressed,  has  been 
omitted  ;  for  which  were  substituted  remarks  of  a  more  critical 
character,  a  few  when  the  exposition  was  first  printed,  and  now 
with  considerably  greater  fulness  and  frequency. 

Mr.  Elliott  will  find  that  his  observations  are  subjected  to  an 
examination,  always,  I  trust,  friendly,  but  sometimes  searching. 
He  is  not   the    man,   however,  to    complain,    because    I    have 
endeavoured,  chapter  by  chapter,  to  bear  in   mind  the  capital 
points  of  the  Historical  system,  which,  through  his  able  pen,  has 
attained  its  neatest  shape,  with  the  most  elaborate  apparatus  of 
evidence  and  argument  in  its  favour.     Of  his  zeal  for  truth,  no 
less  than  of  his  general  learning  and  minute  research,  specially 
in  history  and  antiquities,  it  is  hardly  needful  to  say  that  any 
estimate  of  mine  differs  not  from  that  shared  by  almost  all  who 
know  himself  and  the  Horee  Apocalypticae.     If  I   have  spoken 
with  plainness  and  decision,  in  matters  which  involve  an  ade- 
quate knowledge  of  the  balance  of  testimony  for  and  against 
disputed  readings,  or  an  accurate  and  comprehensive  grasp  of 
Scripture,  in  particular  of  prophecy,  it  is  because  I  believe  that 
these  are  his  weaker  points,    and    that  his  just  reputation  in 
some  things  might  expose  less  instructed  and  indiscriuiinating 
admirers  to  be  misled  in  others.     Whether  1  have  shown  suffi- 
cient grounds  for  rejecting  Historicalism,  not  as  a  partial  accom- 
plishment, but  as  the  complete  and  exclusive  fulfilment  of  the 
Apocalypse,  it  is  not  for  me  to  say.     I  am  pretty  confident  that 


IV  INTRODUCTION. 

Mr.  E.  is  too  candid  to  deny,  that  even  his  latest  edition  fails 
often  in  its  statements,  and  its  conclusions. 

I  am  aware  of  some  objections  he  has  urged  still  more  re- 
cently, in  a  periodical,  against  the  idea  (which  I  hold  in  com- 
mon with  the  author  of  "  Plain  Papers  on  Prophetic  and  other 
Subjects,"  and  many  others)  that  the  Church's  state  is  pictured 
in  the  seven  epistles  of  Rev.  ii.  iii.  It  seems  to  Mr.  E.  incon- 
sistent with  the  analogy  of  Scripture  prophecy  and  with  plain 
fact.  But  it  is  in  vain  to  appeal  to  Dan.  ii.  vii.  xi.  or  other 
similar  prophecies,  which  have  no  analogy  with  addresses  to 
Christian  assemblies.  These  are  manifestly  sui  generis  and  have 
no  connexion  with  the  fortunes  of  the  world,  or  the  successive 
risings  and  settings  of  its  powers.  Supposing  such  quasi-pro- 
phetic sketches  to  have  been  intended  of  God,  the  intermingling 
of  the  chief  mutations  of  civil  government  among  men  would 
be,  to  my  mind,  an  incongruous  intrusion,  instead  of  being  a 
necessary  element  of  consistency. 

Next,  it  is  said  to  be  contrary  to  plain  fact ;  because,  in  more 
than  one  of  the  epistles,  the  prominent  characteristics  of  the 
Church  addressed  disagree  utterly  from  the  state  of  the  Chris- 
tian church  at  the  assigned  era.  So,  for  example,  very  specially 
in  that  to  Thyatira,  where  nothing  less  than  unintentional  muti- 
lation is  charged  on  the  effort  to  make  out  a  case  at  all  plausible 
for  applying  it  to  the  dominion  of  Popery  in  the  dark  ages, 
the  eye  being  fixed  on  the  exception  Jezebel,  not  on  the  Church 
in  Thyatira.  Whereas,  instead  of  prevalent  irreligion  and  the 
almost  complete  extinction  of  testimony  for  Christ,  the  epistle 
depicts  a  high  state  of  piety  in  the  general  professing  body 
there  ;  and  with  the  power  in  their  hands,  which  it  was  their 
grand  fault  not  duly  to  exercise,  of  interdicting  and  stopping  the 
teaching  of  the  woman  Jezebel. 

Such  is  a  full  statement  of  this  objection  ;  but  it  has  no  real 
force.  For  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  our  hypothesis 
assumes  a  two-fold  application,  and  therefore  necessarily  shuts 
out  a  rigid  fac-simile,  which  supposes  a  single  set  of  circumstances 
wherein  it  can  be  verified.  The  churches  are  addressed  as  such, 
i.e.  as  standing  on   the  footing   on   which   Christ   had    set  the 


INTRODUCTION.  V 

Church,  though  the  evils  that  were  come  or  coming  in  are 
notified  to  these  churches  as  thus  responsible.  The  address  is 
not  to  Balaam  or  Jezebel,  but  to  assemblies  where  the  germs  of 
these  symbolic  forms  of  iniquity  were  found,  and  therein  to 
those  who  had  ears  to  hear.  That  is,  the  word  is  to  the  Church 
in  character,  and  in  fact  to  those  who  had  the  consciousness  of 
the  responsibility  of  the  Christian  profession.  Plainly,  there- 
fore, it  is  the  character,  not  necessarily  the  extent  of  the  evil, 
(or  of  the  state,  whatever  it  might  be,)  which  is  or  could  be 
noticed  here.  If  it  was  general  deadness,  such  is  the  state 
indicated,  and  that,  in  a  particular  order  ;  if  the  seductions  of 
false  teachers  were  aimed  at,  this  is  also  found,  but  in  no  case 
is  there  an  attempt  to  define  the  extent  of  the  sphere  which 
might  be  thus  leavened. 

Hence,  I  do  not  see  in  Thyatira  a  broken  centre  in  the  array 
of  evidence,  but  rather  an  unmistakeably  strong  and  conspi- 
cuous front.  The  solemn  principle  that  appears  there  is,  that 
even  then  the  Church  was  the  birth-place  of  children  born  to 
Jezebel  in  adultery.  The  point  is  not  the  number  of  her 
children  ;  but  that,  up  to  the  Lord's  warning,  true  saints 
accepted  this  condition  of  things.  There  might  be  seen  ever  so 
abundant  works  and  service,  faith  and  love.  Still  the  evil  of 
Jezebel  was  allowed.  The  good  was  no  doubt  far  more  pre- 
dominant in  the  primitive  Asiatic  assembly,  the  evil  no  longer 
an  exception  winked  at  but  infinitely  more  developed  and 
systematized  in  medieval  Christendom ;  though  I  am  far  from 
thinking  that,  in  these  dark  ages,  there  may  not  have  been  an 
amount  of  loving  though  unintelligent  devotedness,  of  which  it 
becomes  not  men  of  the  present  hour  to  speak  too  lightly.  In 
short,  the  epistle  applied  literally  to  Thyatira  in  St.  John's  days, 
while,  for  him  who  has  ears  to  hear,  there  is  much  to  intimate  a 
further  reference  to  a  time  when  Jezebel  and  her  children  might 
have  the  upper  hand,  a  faithful  remnant  defined  most  strikingly, 
and  faith  called  to  look  onward  to  the  Lord's  coming  as  the 
only  solace. 

It  is  quite  a  mistake  that  this  view  implies  that  Protestants 
are  "  the  synagogue  of  Satan."     For  I  agree  with  many,  living 


"Vi  INTRODUCTION. 

as  well  as  dead,  that  Protestantism  is  set  forth  by  Sardis.  The 
other  most  sweeping  sentence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  prefigures 
those  who  insist  on  a  traditional  religion  of  sacramental  ism  and 
succession,  the  modern  Judaizers,  who  have  put  forth  such 
painfully  successful  efforts  to  revive  a  system  of  doctrine  and 
rites,  which,  nipped  in  the  bud  by  apostolic  vigilance,  especially 
by  St.  Paul,  aftei'wards  expanded  into  gigantic  proportions  in 
the  catholic  days  of  early  Christendom,  even  before  the  empire 
had  renounced  Paganism,  and  of  course  long  before  the  full- 
blown Popery  of  Rome.  (Compare  Rev.  ii.  9  with  chap.  iii.  9.) 
Can  any  thing  more  exactly  descril>e  them,  though  good  men, 
like  a  Barnabas  of  old,  may  ]ye  ensnared  in  it  for  a  while  ? 

The  argument  drawn  from  the  agreement  or  the  discord  of 
commentators,  Mr,  E.  probably  knows  I  do  not  consider 
entitled  to  much  attention.  But  from  the  days  of  the  Abbot 
Joachim  till  our  own,  it  is  impossible  to  deny  that  some  of  the 
most  thoughtful  students  of  the  book  have  embraced  the  view 
of  a  prophetic,  as  well  as  historical,  sense  of  these  epistles. 
Brightman,  Forbes,  Mede,  More,  Gill,  Sir  Isaac  Newton, 
Vitringa,  and  Cuninghame  are  among  the  names  of  departed 
writers,  who  might  well  claim  respectful  attention,  especially 
from  their  fellows  of  the  Protestant  school.  Shades  of  differ- 
ence there  are  between  these  and  others ;  but  all  agree  in  the 
common  principle  of  a  continuous,  periodistic  force  appertaining 
to  the  seven  epistles.  And  so  far  is  this  from  being  a  peculiarity 
of  those  who  look  for  a  future  personal  Antichrist,  that,  on  the 
contrary,  mere  Futurism  is  as  decidedly  opposed  to  it  as 
Praeterism . 

Next,  the  magnificent  vision  in  Rev.  iv.  v.  claims  the  more 
careful  consideration,  because  its  broad  prophetic  significance  is 
in  general  either  overlooked,  or  wholly    mistaken.*      In  the 

*  Take  the  following,  as  a  specimen,  from  one  of  the  ablest  Historical  interpre- 
ters. "  As  the  twenty-four  elders  are  the  heads  of  the  Christian  Church,  and 
represent  all  the  Christian  princes,  who  have  the  rest  under  them,   to  rule  them 

with  the  same  right  as  the  patriarchs,   &c so  this  sea  represents  the  whole 

multitude  of  Christian  people,  even  all  the  faithful,  like  the  Commons  of  God's 
realm  at  the  bar  before  His  throne,  ready  to  receive  the  lightnings  and  thunder* 


INTRODUCTION.  Vll 

body  of  my  book,  details  will  be  given  in  their  place.  But  in 
passing,  it  may  here  be  asked,  What  satisfactory  reason  can 
Historicalists  offer  for  the  occurrence  of  such  scenes  at  this 
point  ?  It  is  easy  to  make  remarks  on  the  heavenly  company 
and  the  Apocalyptic  scenery,  i.e.  particular  points  in  tiie  vision  ; 
but  why  and  how  have  we  such  a  vision  here  at  all  ?  There  is  no 
serious  attempt,  that  I  know,  at  accounting  for  the  disappearance 
of  churches  on  earth  thenceforward,  nor  foi-  the  fact  that  the 
full  company  of  the  royal  priesthood,  or  at  least  the  re[)resen- 
tative  heads  of  all  the  courses,  are  then  seen  in  heaven.  What 
event  was  there,  on  Mr.  E.'s  view,  immediately  before  the 
reign  of  Nerva,  which  could  call  out  the  special  joy  and  worship 
of  heaven  J  or  the  new  action  with  which  God  and  the  Lamb 
begin  to  occupy  themselves  ?  If  that  wondrous  change,  the 
removal  to  heaven  of  the  saints  now  glorified,  be  supposed  to 
have  taken  place,  all  is  explained.  A  turning  point  is  reached 
in  the  application  of  the  ways  of  God,  who,  having  gathered  to 
Himself  His  heavenly  redeemed  from  the  beginning  to  that 
epoch,  then  proceeds  to  reveal  the  process  of  His  providence  for 
accomplishing  His  eartlily  purposes  to  His  own  glory  and  that 
of  Christ :  that  is,  His  future  dealings,  not  as  now  with  the  one 
body  wherein  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,  but  expressly  with 
Israel  and  the  nations,  remnants  of  whom  will  be  raised  up  to 
bear  a  testimony  to  the  plans  which  God  will  have  in  hand. 
Not  that  He  will  not  have  His  saints  and  witnesses  among 
them  both  ;  but  they  are  so  foreshown  in  the  character  of  their 
experience  Godward  and  manward,  and  the  attitude  of  God 
Himself  toward  them  and  men  generally  is  so  described,  as  to 

of  His  oracles,  and  to  give  due  obedience  for  the  sake  of  their  justice  and  holiness, 
and  through  fear  of  the  fire  of  His  dreadful  judgment.  As  the  sea  is  a  tempestuou& 
and  disturbed  element  ;  so  are  they  by  the  winds  or  wars  brought  against  it  by 
the  malice  of  the  devil  and  his  agents.  And  as  the  heads,  or  presbyters,  arc  elad 
in  white  to  show  their  purity  and  holiness  ;  so  the  clearness  of  this  crystal  shows, 
that  all  the  rest  of  the  faithful  come  up  even  with  them,  in  the  same.  And  as 
the  heads  have  crowns  of  gold  to  show  their  power,  and  the  permanency  thereof, 
whilst  they  are  before  the  throne  ;  so  the  brittleness  of  this  glass,  that  the  sea  or 
multitude  of  Christians  shall  be  always  in  that  unstable,  corruptible  state  ;  but 
that  the  sea  shall  be  removed,  and  they  shall  dwell  iu  the  New  Jerusalem  built  of 
gold  and  precious  stones."  (Daubuz,  Terp.  Comment.,  p.  182.)  Others  are  not 
a  whit  more  satisfactory.  Nor  do  the  Futurists  understand  it.  Now  this  perverts 
the  view  taken  of  almost  all  that  follows,  up  to  chap.  xix.  at   any  rate. 


VIU       '  INTRODUCTION. 

evince  a  condition  essentially  different  from  that  which  subsists 
now  ;  and  all  most  confirmatory  of  the  idea  that  the  rapture  of 
the  saints  will  then  be  an  accomplished  fact.  Nothing  simpler, 
if  the  Church-state,  "the  things  which  are,"  continue  no  longer, 
the  risen  saints  be  gone  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  the  eve 
of  the  great  crisis  for  the  earth  come.  Not  a  hint  is  dropt  that 
the  crowned  and  enthroned  elders  are  disembodied  spirits,  but 
the  contrary  is  implied  in  all  that  is  said  of  them.  When  souls 
are  meant,  they  are  so  specified,  as  in  Rev.  vi.  and  xx.  More- 
over, the  elders  are  a  complete  symbol.  Whatever  the  special 
portion  in  glory  assigned  to  subsequent  sufferers,  the  elders 
remain  a  definite  company,  from  chap.  iv.  to  xix.,  and  receive 
no  addition  to  their  number.  Their  complement  is  made  up 
from  the  first  presentation  above,  and  that  figure  only  vanishes 
when  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and  a  new  symbol  is 
needed  to  convey  the  new  circumstances  of  the  saints  already 
transfigured  and  taken  to  heaven. 

On  the  protracted  Protestant  scheme,  which  I  believe  to  have 
a  certain  measure  of  truth,  the  vision  may  be  regarded  vaguely 
as  a  sort  of  pictured  pledge,  or  perhaps  anticipation,  of  the 
Church's  heavenly  glory,  while  the  providential  actings  of  God 
toward  the  world  are  afterwards  unfolded.  But  when  we  raise 
the  question  of  exact  and  full  interpretation,  I  see  no  reason  to 
doubt  that  these  chapters  reveal  the  position  of  the  glorified 
saints  above,  after  churches  are  no  longer  spoken  of  on  earth, 
and  before  the  Lord  and  His  armies  emerge  from  heaven  for 
the  war  with  the  Beast  and  the  reign  over  the  earth.  It  is 
properly  a  scene  in  heaven  after  the  actual  ecclesiastical  state  is 
closed,  and  before  the  millennium  commences  —  a  scene  which 
inaugurates  the  very  momentous  interval  between  the  two, 
when  it  becomes  a  question  of  judicial  inflictions  from  God, 
and  new  classes  of  saints,  invested  with  a  testimony  most  appre- 
ciably distinct  from  that  of  the  Church,  are  called  to  glorify 
Him  in  the  midst  of  the  fires. 

As  to  the  seal«,  trumpets  and  vials,  I  must  refer  to  the  chap- 
ters which  treat  of  them.  That  the  members  of  each  series 
follow  regularly  as  revealed,  and    that   the  trumpets  are   the 


INTRODUCTION.  IX 

evolution  of  the  seventh  seal,  appears  to  me  very  plain.  There 
are  peculiarities  in  the  case  of  the  vials,  which  render  the  appli- 
cation of  the  same  rule  to  these  last  more  than  doubtful.  Of 
course,  the  year-day  theory  entirely  depends  on  the  way  in 
which  the  book  as  a  whole  is  viewed.  For  my  part,  taking  it 
on  both  the  protracted  and  the  crisis  schemes,  I  see  no  difficulty 
in  admitting  the  dates  symbolically  in  the  one  and  literally  in 
the  other. 

In  the  closing  visions  of  the  book.  I  cannot  but  urge  on 
Mr.  E.  to  reconsider  the  entire  subject  of  the  true  place  and 
character  of  the  great  white  throne  and  of  the  new  heaven  and 
earth.  To  make  them,  in  part  at  least,  millennial,  is  in  my 
judgment  to  introduce  great  confusion. 

It  may  be  well  to  observe,  that  the  usual  objections  to  Futur- 
ism do  not  apply  to  the  Apocalyptic  scheme  here  offered. 
1 .  An  instant  plunge  into  the  distant  future  of  the  consumma- 
tion is  not  maintained,  any  more  than  in  the  Horse  Apoc. 
What  fills  up  the  vacuum  between  St.  John  and  that  day,  in 
the  way  of  direct  reference  to  notable  varying  phases  of  Chris- 
tendom, may  not  be  seen  by  Mr.  E.  as  I  see  it ;  but  I  agree 
with  him  in  the  general  outline  that  God  intended  His  people 
to  gather  light  from  the  book,  in  its  bearing  upon  the  course  of 
the  Western  and  Eastern  empire  :  first  in  its  hostile  pagan 
state  ;  next,  in  its  outwardly  Christian  profession  ;  and,  lastly, 
in  its  revolt  against  God,  opposing  Christ  in  His  priesthood,  as, 
in  the  crisis  view,  it  will  to  the  last  extretuity,  when  it  becomes 
a  question  of  His  rights  as  King.  The  main  difference,  then, 
is  that  we  see  a  large  amount  of  positive  distinct  Christian 
instruction  in  the  seven  Churches  which  they  overlook.  That 
is,  we  see  more  filling  up  the  vacuum  than  they  do,  besides  the 
grave  error  of  depriving  the  crisis  of  its  full,  special  character 
which  characterizes  their  system.  2.  Neither  does  the  identi- 
fication of  the  seals  with  the  early  part  of  Matt.  xxiv.  attach  to 
the  view  before  the  reader.  3.  The  literal  constniclion  of 
Israel  in  Rev.  vii.  (fee,  is  not  at  all  confined  to  Futurists,  but 
shared  by  many  of  the  most  zealous  Protestants.  Even  Mr. 
Birks,  in  the  keenest  attack  ever  made  on  that  party,  admits 


INTRODUCTION. 


that  it  can  neither  be  reasonable  nor  improbable  that  the  Jews 
should  be  a  direct  object  of  the  prophecy,  and,  since  no  more 
appropriate  symbol  could  be  found  for  them,  that  they  should 
be,  so  to  speak,  their  own  symbol.  "  Those  who  view  tlie  book 
in  general  as  symbolical,  may,  therefore,  without  inconsistency 
conceive  literal  Jews  to  be  designed."  Thus,  indeed,  it  must 
be  evident,  to  an  unbiassed  mind  ;  but  I  preferred  citing  the 
candid  admission  of  Mr.  B.  as  a  doubly  conclusive  answer  to 
Mr.  E.  The  argument  founded  on  the  symbols  and  figurative 
phrases  of  Rev.  i.  ii.  iii.  is  invalid,  because  they  appear  in  that 
part  of  the  Apocalypse  which  treats  of  the  vision  of  Christ, 
and  in  "  the  things  which  are,"  (that  is,  of  confessedly  Christian 
affairs,)  not  in  the  wholly  different  condition,  as  we  allege,  that 
follows.  So,  the  city  in  Rev.  xxi.  is  beyond  controversy  the 
Church,  coming  down  out  of  heaven  from  God,  and  designated 
the  Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife.  But  this  decides  nothing  as  to  the 
people  in  chap.  vii.  or  the  city  in  chap.  xi.  These  questions 
must  be  settled  by  the  judgment  we  form  respecting  all  the 
central  or  transitional  portion  of  the  prophecy  and  of  the  debated 
chapters  in  particular.  4.  As  to  Anti-Christ,  I  agree  with 
Mr.  E.  that  bare  infidelity  is  a  meagre  conception  of  his  cha- 
racter, position  and  doings.  In  fact,  our  chief  difference  is  that 
he  makes  him  to  be  rather  the  secular  or  sea  Beast,  I  the  false 
prophet  or  second  Beast  from  the  earth. 

And  T  must  here  observe,  that  whatever  may  be  our  estimate 
of  the  early  Christian  wTiters,  it  is  useless  to  deny  that  in  the 
main  they  held  Futurist  views,  as  distinguished  from  Prseterism 
or  from  Protestant  Historicalism.  They  looked  for  a  personal 
Anti-Christ  just  before  the  close,  not  a  succession  of  people  for 
ages.  Tiiey  believed  he  would  give  himself  out  to  be  God,  not  a 
hypocritical  servant  of  His  servants — to  be  Christ,  not  His  vicar. 
They  interpreted  his  complete  final  power  as  1260  days  lite- 
rally, not  so  many  yea)-s.  They  judged  Jerusalem  to  be  the 
scene,  though  they  also  saw,  as  intelligent  moderns  do,  a  very 
positive  connexion  with  the  great  western  metropolis,  Rome. 
They,  till  tl>e  allegorizing  system  came  in,  took  the  house  of 
God  as  the  literal  future  temple  in  Jerusalem.      In  all  these 


INTRODUCTION.  XI 

points,  and  they  are  of  essential  importance,  their  thoughts 
agree  with  tliose  of  the  Futurists,  not  with  their  adversaries. 
So  that  it  is  wholly  unfair  to  attribute  that  system,  whatever 
may  be  its  value,  to  Ribera  as  its  source.  It  is  certainly  the 
most  ancient  interpretation  extant. 

It  was  not  till  the  printer  had  reached  Chap.  xix.  or  xx.  in 
my  lectures,  that  the  last  part  (Vol.  iv.  ii.)  of  Dean  Alford's 
Greek  Testament  appeared.  He  holds  a  premillennial  advent 
of  our  Lord  and  an  immediately  consequent  resurrection  of 
the  righteous,  who  reign  with  Him  a  thousand  years  before 
the  rest  of  the  dead  rise.  Otherwise,  his  thoughts  are  much 
influenced  and,  in  ray  opinion,  injured  by  German  vagueness. 
He  is  somewhat  eclectic,  and  seems  to  flatter  himself  that  he 
reaps  the  good,  and  eschews  the  evil,  of  the  three  main  systems 
of  interpretation.  "  It  seems  to  me  indisputable  (says  he)  that 
the  book  does  speak  of  things  past,  present  and  future  ;  that 
some  of  his  prophecies  are  already  fulfilled,  some  are  now 
fulfilling,  and  others  await  their  fulfilment  in  the  yet  unknown 
future."  (Prolegomena,  ch.  viii.,  §.  v.  16.)  Now,  even  Futur- 
ism does  not  dispute  the  fact  that  Babylon  and  the  kingdoms 
out  of  the  broken  empire  are  objects  already  in  the  field, 
recognizes  fully  that  the  Beast  was  and  is  not,  though  it  has 
not  yet  reappeared,  and  therefore  can  allow  that  the  Revelation 
is  in  part  fulfilled  or  fulfilling.  But  when  we  examine  that 
which  Dean  A.  means,  what  can  be  more  disappointing?  He 
charges  upon  the  historical  school  such  a  wresting  of  the  text  as 
inspires  him  with  disgust;  he  adopts  the  ultra-futurist  connexion 
of  the  seals  with  Matt.  xxiv.  as  "  the  anchor  of  Apocalyptic 
interpretation  ;"  and  yet  he  contends  for  such  a  view  of  the  very 
first  seal  as  strongly  reminds  me  of  the  idea  recently  put  forth 
by  a  Free-Church  Professor — victory  for  God's  church,  and 
people.  Thus,  under  the  plea  of  avoiding  a  preconceived 
scheme.  Dr.  Alford  allows  himself  unheard  of  latitude,  and 
adopts  such  a  mass  of  heterogeneous  elements  as  perhaps  never 
met  before  in  the  same  exposition  ;  and  this  in  disorder  so 
obvious  as  to  evince,  that,  if  the  book  has  a  methodical  structure. 


XU  INTRODUCTION. 

its  principle  is  wholly  unknown  to  him.  There  are  true  ideas 
here  and  there  ;  but  any  thing  like  a  clue  to  the  labyrinth  does 
not  appear. 

Even  his  landmarks,  of  which  he  speaks  witli  the  utmost 
confidence,  as  giving  rise  to  canons  of  interpretation,  cannot  be 
relied  on.  I  have  already  alluded  to  the  connexion,  which  he, 
with  Futurists  in  general,  conceives  to  bind  the  seals  with 
Matt.  xxiv.  There  are  undoubtedly  general  features  of  resem- 
blance, and  in  the  crisis  there  may  be  more  or  less  of  coinci- 
dence. But  a  close  inspection  dissipates  not  a  little  of  its  force 
as  a  canon.  For  example,  the  gospel  times,  such  as  we  speak 
of  them  now,  are  left  out  of  the  prophetic  discourse  on  the 
Mount  of  Olives.  It  does  not  begin  with  any  prediction 
resembling  in  the  faintest  way  the  white  horse  and  its  victorious 
rider  in  Rev,  vi.  For  even  if  "  this  gospel  of  the  kingdom, 
preached  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness  unto  all  nations,"  were 
adduced,  can  it  be  pretended  to  harmonize  in  its  order?  But, 
nay  :  Dr.  A.  will  have  it  that  there  is  no  order  of  consecution  ! 
that,  though  the  seals  are  so  carefully  numbered,  first,  second, 
third,  and  so  on,  it  is  a  mistake  to  interpret  them  as  succeeding 
one  another  in  time !  all  are  co-ordinate,  all  are  correlative ! 
The  student,  who  is  ever  so  little  familiar  with  the  system 
disclosed  in  this  most  admirably  arranged  of  all  the  prophecies, 
will  feel  better  than  I  can  describe,  the  havoc  which  such  a 
notion  necessarily  introduces.  But  those  who  do  adhere  to 
the  natural  order  will  feel  the  force  of  what  I  insist  on,  that 
the  preaching  in  Matt.  xxiv.  is  a  mission  just  before  the  end 
comes,  and  the  last  thing  named  in  the  general  outline,  before 
the  Lord  begins  the  details  in  ver.  15  and  seq.,  which  undoubt- 
edly have  for  their  object  the  position  and  sore  trial  of  the 
godly  Jewish  remnant  in  Palestine.  Again,  a  sower  going 
forth  to  sow  is  the  true  Scri})tural  figure  for  the  work  of 
disseminating  tiie  gospel,  not  a  comiueror  on  a  war-horse  ;  and 
this  is  confirmed  by  the  instances  of  Ps.  xlv.,  Isa.  xl.  32,  Hab. 
iii.  9,  Zech.  ix,  13,  not  one  of  which  passiiges  refers  to  the 
mission  of  grace  but  of  judgment.  Indeed,  our  Lord  is  so  far 
from  promising  in  this  dispensation  an  uninterrupted   triumph 


INTRODUCTION.  XIU 

for  the  word,  that,  according  to  His  own  figure  of  His  own 
work,  out  of  three  casts  but  one  is  successful,  and  even  this 
more  or  less  marred  in  its  full  effects  by  the  influence  of  the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil. 

The  Dean  also  dwells  with  considerable  satisfaction  on  the 
novel  idea  that  the  fourfold  ^pxov  (Come),  which  introduces 
respectively  the  four  earlier  seals,  ties  their  reference  to  the 
coming  of  Christ — "  the  sighs  of  creation  for  the  Lord's  coming  !'* 
A  most  singular  fancy  this ;  for,  in  the  vision,  it  is  distinctly 
the  summons,  from  each  of  the  living-beings  to  the  providential 
instruments  of  the  preliminary  judgments,  to  come  ;  and  they 
do  come. 

His  second  fixed  point  is  the  application  of  the  sixth  seal  to 
the  close  approach  of  the  day  of  the  Lord.  This  is  connected 
with  the  third  point,  i.e.  his  taking  the  seals,  like  the  trumpets 
and  vials,  as  alike  running  on  to  the  time  close  upon  the  end. 
My  lectures  fully  explain  why  I  think  both  must  be  rejected. 
To  the  fourth  landmark,  that  the  man-child  in  Rev.  xii.  is  the 
Lord,  I  agree,  though  thinking  that  others  may  mystically  be 
included  in  the  symbol.  His  fifth  point,  that  none  but  an 
angelic  being  is  meant  by  &yyexos  (even  in  Rev.  i.-iii.),  betrays 
lack  of  acquaintance  with  the  distinctive  character  of  Rev.  vii.- 
xi.  Under  the  trumpets,  even  Christ  is  so  represented.  Such, 
then,  are  the  canons,  all  I  conceive  mistaken  wholly  or  in  part, 
which  are  imagined  to  convict  of  error  any  system  that  does 
not  recognize  them. 

Many  will  be  surprised  to  learn  that  the  Dean  understands 
Rev.  i.  19  thus  :  "  write  therefore  the  things  which  thou  sawest, 
and  ichai  things  they  signify,  and  the  things  which  are  about 
to  happen  after  these,"  i.e.  after  the  vision  of  Christ  in  the  midst 
of  the  candlesticks.  He  is  misled  (by  De  Wette,  I  presume) 
in  saying  that  Aretius  takes  this  view,  which  was  that  of  Alcazar 
and  a  few  unsatisfactory  Germans ;  for  the  former  hesitates 
which  to  prefer.  The  reasons  which  decide  Dr.  Alford  against 
the  Auth.  v.,  are,  first,  the  use  of  the  plural  eiViV  in  contrast  with 
ixfWii  in  the  next  clause,  and  the  double  repetition  of  e»VtV  (ver. 
20),  both  times  unquestionably  with  this  meaning.     Hard,  cer- 


XlV  INTRODUCTION. 

tainly,  has  been  the  fate  of  ver.  19,  one  after  another  departing 
from  its  plain  sense  and  introducing  some  suggestion  to  be 
overthrown  by  his  successor.  Thus,  Brightman  attempted  to 
draw  from  it  some  support  for  the  double  application  of  the 
epistles,  and  understood  it  to  teach  that  the  same  things  were 
both  present  and  future.  Hammond  properly  replied  that  the 
Greek  ought  in  this  case  to  be  &  Kai  elaiv  Hal  fx.  y.  His  own  notion 
was  only  a  shade  better — that  the  visions  include  both  the  things 
that  are  and  those  which  shall  be.  That  is,  instead  of  seeing 
three  divisions  of  the  book,  he  made  but  one,  distributed  into 
present  and  future.  But  the  view  preferred  by  Dean  A,  fails 
in  every  way.  His  objections  have  no  value.  The  plural  of  the 
verb  does  not  depend  on  the  difference  of  translation  ("  are  "  or 
"  signify  ")  but  on  the  design  of  specifying  the  individuality  or 
the  plurality  of  the  parts.  Either  meaning  would  consist 
equally  with  this.  The  singular  and  plural  are  used,  because 
the  future  is  seen  en  masse,  present  things  in  detail ;  or,  as  we 
might  say,  "  the  things  which  are,  and  what  is  going  to  be  after 
these."  But  the  N.  T.  Greek  will  not  even  bear  the  sense  desired. 
Had  such  a  meaning  been  intended,  the  regular  word  there  is  rlva, 
not  a.*  Again,  it  overlooks  and  destroys  the  natural  opposition 
between  present  things  and  future.  Next,  by  connecting 
Koi  &  eifflv  with  the  first  clause  and  with  this  alone,  it  yields  the 
strange  result,  that  only  the  things  which  John  already  saw,  are 
expressly  explained,  not  things  future  ;  though  we  know  expla- 

*  A  learned  friend,  whose  independent  judgment  will  be  valued  by  others  also, 
writes  thus  :— "  In  perfect  strictness,  A.'s  rendering  would  require,  in  the  Greek, 
arivd  flffi.  But  this  strictness  is  not  kept  even  iu  the  be^t  form  of  the  language, 
inasmuch  as  rls  is  there  constantly  used  for  oans  in  such  cases.  Besides  this,  the 
employment  of  the  bare  relative  os  for  a  like  purpose  is  common  enough,  as 
regards  the  language  in  general.  [I  admit  this  in  Herodotus  and  the  Attics,  but 
am  aware  of  no  instance  in  the  Greek  of  the  New  Testament,  where,  on  the  other 
hand,  ris  regularly  occurs.]  It  is  of  this  latter  usage  that  A.  has  taken  advantage. 
His  rendering,  then,  is  not  wrong  in  itself;  that  is  to  say,  it  cannot  be  summarily 
condemned  on  grammatical  grounds.  Still,  the  rendering  of  the  Auth.  V.  seems 
to  me  the  only  one  that  would  be  thought  of  by  a  reader  who  had  no  special 
object  in  view  ;  which,  I  presume,  the  Dean  has.  The  plural  verb,  if  used  design- 
edly—as the  singular  in  the  next  clause  seems  to  indicate — would  be  appropriate 
to  a  subject  of  a  miscellaneous  character,  such  as  is  furnished  by  the  variety  of 
condition  in  the  seven  churches. — The  view  which  I  take  of  the  matter  is  this. 
By  &  elSfs  is  meant  the  vision  now  closing  ;  by  a  eiVi,  the  circumstances  set  forth 
in  the  seven  epistles,  as  then  existent  ;  and  by  &  ,u.  y.,  the  futurities  symbolized 
iu  the  remainder  of  the  book." 


INTRODUCTION.  XV 

nations  of  these  manifestly  and  often  occur,  as  in  chap.  xvii. 
Even  if  Kai  a  elcriy  had  been  the  legitimate  phrase  for  "  and  what 
they  signify,"  its  place  ought  to  have  been  at  the  close,  so  as  to 
take  in  both  the  things  seen  and  the  future,  the  signification  of 
which  the  Seer  was  to  write.  Finally,  such  a  view  involves  the 
crowning  awkwardness,  that  the  command  was  not  obeyed, 
unless  any  one  is  satisfied  with  De  Wette's  weak  answer  that 
the  signification  is  given  in  the  last  clause  of  ver.  20.  Espe- 
cially also,  as,  on  this  hypothesis,  chaps,  ii.,  iii.,  are  made  an 
useless  incumbrance,  instead  of  being,  according  to  the  common 
and  true  view,  the  precise  form  which  presented  "  the  things 
which  are,"  ver,  20  being  the  mere  transition  between  them 
and  the  things  which  John  had  already  seen. 

Of  course,  the  Dean  of  Canterbury  does  not  see  the  pro- 
tracted and  successive  mystical  bearing  of  Rev.  ii,  and  iii.,  nor 
does  he  catch  the  drift  of  chaps,  iv.,  v.  Nothing  further  calls 
for  particular  remark.  Those  who  read  the  remarks  in  these 
lectures,  will  see  why  I  believe  that  the  Holy  Spirit  designed  a 
prolonged  view  of  the  Apocalyptic  epistles,  with  a  brief  future 
application,  to  the  crisis,  of  the  things  which  must  come  to  pass 
after  them ;  as  well  as  a  brief  past  application  of  the  seven 
churches,  with  a  gradual  accomplishment,  since  St.  John,  of 
that  which  follows.* 

*  Tischendorf  thus  gives  the  close  of  the  Cod.  Sinaitieus  (Notitia,  p.  39)  .- 
avTov  atro  rov  |iiA.ou  rr\s  Qairis  Kai  €k  ttjs  noKeojs  T7]s  ayias  rmu  yeypafj-fievaiv  ev  to> 
fii^Kiai  TOVTU  Xfyi  o  jxaprvpcav  ravTa  eivai  (corr.  om.)  vai  epxa/iai  Ta^w  epX""  '^  ^^ 
(corr.  add.  x?)  V  X"P'*  '''o^  f^"  'i"  M*'''"  ''''*"'  wT'wj'  afir)v  : 

aTroKa\v\l/eis  luiavvov. 

I  add  the  following  from  p.  21 :  Rev.  i.  1,  iwavfi  (a  pr.  m.)  4.  iu3avr]s.  .  .  airo  o 
wv  .  .  T.  fTTTa  -KV.  T(t>v.  5.  TO)  (a  pr.  decst)  ayatroivTi  rj/xas  Kat  Kvcravri  eic  (ex 
emend.  Tj^uas  e/c)  rwv.  6.  kui  efrot.  rifias  ^aaiXeiav  (ex  emend,  add.  Kai)  lepeis  rui. 
fis  Tov  atuva  (ex  emend,  tovs  aiiovas)  ruv  aiuivoiv  a/A.r]v.  ii,  1.  toii/  XP^ffuy.  2.  rou 
Koirov  (TOV.  .  .om.  a  pr.  etuai.  3.  Kai  virofi.  €x«  Kai  d\i\pis  nacras  (corr.  haec  impro- 
bavit)  Kat  e^acTTaaas  Sia  to  ov.  fxov  Kat  ovk  iKOTziacras.  4.  aK\a  ex^-  •  •a(p7]Kes  a  pr. 
5.  TrenrwKfs  .  .  epxofiai  croi  Kai.  7.  vikwvti.  8.  ttjs  (v  (/xvpvrj.  9.  ra  epya  Kai 
rrfv  QKo\/iv.  10.  ixrjSev.  13.  oi5a  irov  KaroiKeis.  .  .  avrnras  (ex  emend,  sed  posteriore 
avrenras).  14.  os  ediSaffKev  (ex  emend,  additur  rov  /SaAa/c)  0a\eiv  (ex  emend. 
^aWdj/).  18.  TOVS  o<pQ.  avTov.  20.  oti  atpeis  (ex  emend.  acprjKas)  t.  yvv.  la^a^eX 
(ex  emend,  ie^a/3.)  rj  Aeyovara  (ex  emend,  ttjj/  Keyova-av)  avTr]v.  25.  axpi  ov.  In 
chap.  xxii.  eiri  Tais  fKK\T)ffiais.  .  .  .  irposivos.  This  information  was  too  late  for 
insertion  in  its  proper  place,  but  may  be  acceptable  to  many  even  here.  Other 
readings  are  given  in  notes  to  the  lectures  on  chaps,  ix.  x. 


REMARKS 

ON   THE 

IU)0K   OF   REVELATION 

CHAPTER    I. 

Every  Christian  of  spiritual  intelligence  must  have  felt  more  or 
less  fully  the  peculiar  character  of  the  book  on  which  we  are 
now  entering',  "  The  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  which  God  gave 
unto  him,"  It  is  evident  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  viewed  here, 
not  in  His  place  of  intimacy  as  the  only-begotten  Son  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Father,  but  in  one  of  comparative  distance.  It  is 
His  revelation,  but  yet  it  is  the  revelation  which  God  gave 
Him,  Somewhat  similar  is  that  remarkable  expression  which 
has  perplexed  so  many,  in  the  gospel  of  Mark,  chap.  xiii.  32, 
"  But  of  that  day  and  that  hour  knoweth  no  man  :  no,  not  the 
angels  which  are  in  heaven,  neither  the  Son,  but  the  Father." 
He  is  the  servant-Son  of  God  all  through  that  gospel ;  and  it  is 
the  perfection  of  a  servant  not  to  know  what  his  lord  doeth — to 
know,  if  we  may  so  say,  only  what  he  is  told.  Here,  Christ 
receives  a  revelation  from  God  ;  for,  however  exalted,  it  is  the 
position  He  took  as  man  which  comes  out  conspicuously  in  the 
Revelation,  And  what  makes  this  the  more  stinking  is,  that  of 
all  the  inspired  writers  of  the  New  Testament,  none  dwells  with 
such  fulness  upon  His  supreme  and  divine  glory  as  John  in  his 
gospel.  In  the  Revelation,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  very  same 
John  who  Ijrings  out  with  the  greatest  det.ail  His  human  glory. 
In  keeping  with  this,  the  Revelation  is  "  to  show  unto  his  ser- 
vants things  which  must  shortly  come  to  pass,"  How  different 
from  this  is  the  tone  of  John  xv,  15,  "  Henceforth  I  call  you  not 
servants ;"  and  also  of  John  xvi,  speaking  of  the  Spirit,  "  He 
shall  glorify  me,  for  he  shall  receive  of  mine  and  shall  show  it 
unto  you.  All  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  mine  ;  therefore 
said  I  that  he  shall  take  of  mine  and  shall  show  it  unto  you," 
So  we  see  through  the  gospel  from  first  to  last,  that  the  design 

2 


2  THE    TITLE, 

of  the  Spirit  is  to  give  the  disciples  the  title  and  consciousness  of 
their  souship  with  and  tln-oiigh  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God  in  the 
highest  sense.  Thus  in  chap.  i.  11,  12,  "  He  came  unto  his  own 
and  his  own  [people]  received  him  not.  But  as  many  as  re- 
ceived him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God." 
And  again,  after  His  death  and  resurrection,  the  Lord  says, 
chap.  XX.  17,  "  Go  to  my  brethren  and  say  unto  them,  I  ascend 
unto  my  Father  and  your  Father  ;  unto  my  God  and  youi-  God." 
Of  course  they  were  servants  also,  and  there  is  not  a  shade  of 
incongruity.  Still,  the  difference  of  the  relationships  is  im- 
mense ;  and  the  Revelation  clearly  is  addressed  to  the  lower  of 
these  relations.  The  reason,  I  presume,  is,  partly  because  God  is 
therein  making  known  a  certain  course  of  earthly  events  with 
which  the  lower  position  is  most  in  harmony  ;  (the  higher  one 
of  sons  being  more  suitable  to  communion  with  the  Father  and 
with  His  Son  ;)  and  partly  because  God  seems  to  be  here  pre- 
paring the  way  for  dealing  with  His  people  in  the  latter  day, 
when  their  position  as  His  servants  will  be  more  or  less  mani- 
fested, but  not  the  enjoyment  of  nearness  as  sons :  I  allude  to 
the  interval  after  the  removal  of  the  Church. 

The  next  words  greatly  confirm  this ;  for  the  Lord  "  sent  and 
signified  [it]  hy  Fits  angel  unto  His  servant  John."  That  is,  the 
proplietic  communication  is  made,  not  directly,  but  through  the 
intervention  of  an  angel ;  and  John  is  no  longer  spoken  of  as 
"  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  which  also  leaned  upon  his 
breast  at  supper,"  but  as  "  his  servant,"  "  who  bare  record  of 
the  word  of  God,  and  of  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,  [and]  of 
all  things  that  he  saw."  It  has  to  be  remarked  here,  that  the 
last  "  and  "  ought  to  disapjiear,  which  makes  no  small  difference 
in  the  sense.  For  "  all  things  that  he  saw  "  must  not  be  I'e- 
garded  as  a  third  and  additional  division,  but  rather  as  explaining 
and  limiting  the  word  of  God,  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ. 
The  visions  of  John  constituted  the  word  and  testimony  spoken 
of  here.  The  true  rendering  is,  "  Who  bare  record  of  (or  tes- 
tified) the  word  of  God  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ  — 
whatsoever  things  he  saw."     Compare  cli.  xxii.  8. 

\e\-y  different,  again,  is  the  revelation  of  God  here  and  the 
testimony  which  Jesus  bears  in  this  book,  from  what  we  find  in 
John's  gosjiel.  The  Word  of  (^od  there  is  the  Lord  Jesus 
Himself,  who,  in  the  beginning  was  with  God  and  was  God  : 
the  full  and  personal  expression  of  God,  and  that  not  merely  as 
the  Creator  of  all  things,  but  in  perfect  grace.  "  Li  him  was 
life,  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men."  "  And  the  Word  was 
nuule  flesh,  and  dwelt  amoiiii,-  us,  and  we  ])ehel<l  his  glory,  (the 


THE    TITLE.  3 

glory  as  of  the  only-begotten  of  the  Father,)  full  of  grace  and 
truth."  In  the  Revelation,  on  the  contrary,  even  when  He  is 
spoken  of  as  the  Word  of  God,  it  is  as  the  expression  of  divine 
judgment,  because  the  whole  book  is  eminently  judicial.  "  He 
was  clothed  witli  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood  ;  and  his  name  is 
called  the  Word  of  God."  (Rev.  xix.  13.)  So  too,  in  the  gospel, 
the  testimony  that  Jesus  renders  is  to  the  Father,  as  it  is 
throughout  the  Father's  joy  to  ])ear  witness  of  the  Son.  Indeed, 
the  Son  Himself  towards  the  close  of  His  ministry,  sums  up  the 
pith  and  character  of  the  testimony  there  in  these  lew  words, 
"  He  that  hath  seen  me,  hath  seen  the  Father."  (John  xiv.  9.) 
All  this  makes  the  distinctive  features  of  the  Revelation  to  stand 
out  in  l)roader  contrast.  For  throughout  the  book,  the  very_ 
name  of  the  Fatlier  occurs  but  rarely,  and  even  whei'e  it  does, 
the  object  Vs  in  no  way  the  revelation  of  His  love  as  Father  to 
His  family.  In  Rev.  i.  iii.  and  xiv..  He  is  spoken  of  as  such  in 
relation  to  Jesus  only.  The  grand  subject  is,  God  manifested  in 
His  judgments  here  below,  with  a  view  to  the  manifestation  of 
tlie  Lord  Jesus,  "  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords." 

"  Blessed  [is]  he  that  readeth,  and  tiiey  that  hear  the  words  of 
this  prophecy,  and  keep  those  tilings  which  are  written  therein  : 
for  the  time  [is]  at  hand."  What  a  serious  mistake  in  the  face  of 
such  words  as  these,  for  Chi'istians  to  think  that  this  book  or 
any  part  of  it  is  unprofitable,  and  that  it  may  be  safely  set  aside 
either  as  too  difficult  to  understand,  or  if  understood,  as  having 
no  practical  bearing  upon  the  soul !  It  is  remarkable  indeed 
with  what  special  care  the  Lord  has  commended  it,  not  only 
here  at  the  commencement,  but  at  the  close,  where  we  read, 
"  These  sayings  [are]  faithful  and  true,  and  the  Lord  God  of  the 
spirits  of  the  prophets  sent  His  angel  to  show  His  servants  the 
things  which  must  shortly  come  to  pass.  Behold  I  come  quickly; 
blessed  [is]  he  which  keepeth  the  sayings  of  the  pro|)hecy  of  this 
book."  It  would  seem  that  the  Lord's  prescient  eye  anticipated 
in  such  warnings  the  neglect  with  which  this  book  would  be 
treated  by  His  servants,  and  that  He  was  thus  solemnly  guard- 
ing them  against  it  by  commending  the  book  emphatically  to  their 
study  and  use.  It  is  a  little  remarkable,  by  the  way,  that  a 
somewhat  similar  admonition  occurs  in  the  close  of  1  Thess., 
which  Avas  the  first  of  Paul's  epistles,  and  the  one  which  above 
all  others  develops  the  grand  truth  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord. 
(1  Thess.  V.  27.)  In  Rev.  i.  3,  the  Lord  takes  pains  to  encou- 
rage every  possible  class  of  peo])le  v/ho  might  come  in  contact 
with  the  book.  Not  only  the  individual  who  reads  is  pro- 
nounced  blessed,  l)ut  those   who  hccv    its  words  nnd   keep  (or 


4  THE   TITLE. 

observe)  what  is  written  therein.  And  certain  I  am  that  the 
Lord  does  not  fail  to  encourage  His  saints  who  count  upon  His 
assured  faithfuhiess  and  blessing.  He  has  never  turned  aside 
from  using  it  for  good,  and  especially  in  times  of  danger,  spite 
of  all  contempt  or  perversion. 

I  am  persuaded  that  the  objection  to  the  study  of  prophecy 
arises  from  a  root,  sometimes  deeply  hidden,  of  unbelief,  which 
supposes  all  blessing  to  depend  upon  the  measure  in  which  a 
sulDJect  bears  immediately  upon  one's  self  or  one's  circumstances. 
Thus  when  some  cry  out  that  is  not  essential,  I  would  ask, 
"  essential  to  what  ? "  If  they  mean  essential  to  salvation,  we 
agree.  But  then  on  Avhat  a  ground  do  such  objectors  stand  ! 
The  anxiety  to  examine  only  what  they  deem  indispensable  to 
salvation,  shows  that  they  have  no  consciousness  of  salvation 
themselves,  shows  that  this  need  of  their  souls  is  the  only  thing 
they  are  alive  to.  Now  all  hold  that  not  prophecy  but  the 
o-ospel  should  be  put  before  the  unconverted.  The  coming  of 
Christ  in  glory,  which  is  the  centre  of  unfulfilled  prophecy, 
ought  to  be  terror  to  their  hearts,  instead  of  a  mere  question  for 
interesting  discussion.  To  tlie  believer,  indeed,  His  coming  is 
"  that  blessed  hope."  We  wait  for  the  Son  of  God  from  heaven, 
and  we  await  Him  not  only  without  anxiety  but  with  joy, 
because  we  know  Him  to  be  "  Jesus  which  delivered  us  from 
the  wrath  to  come."  But  for  any  man,  who  has  not  peace 
through  faith  in  His  blood,  to  occupy  his  mind  either  with  this, 
the  Church's  hope,  or  with  the  events  of  which  propliecy  treats, 
is  but  a  diversion  of  which  the  enemy  can  make  fearful  use, 
if  it  be  not  a  proof  of  utter  deadness  of  conscience  as  to  his  own 
condition  before  God, — though  I  am  far  from  saying,  that  God 
may  not  make  use  of  that  truth  to  arouse  it.  On  the  other 
hand,  prophecy  is  essential  to  our  due  appreciation  of  Christ's 
p-lory  and  of  the  glory  that  is  to  be  revealed.  To  slight  pro- 
r)hecy,  therefore,  is  to  despise  unwittingly  that  glory  and  the 
grace  which  has  made  it  knoAvn  to  us.  It  is  the  plainest  evi- 
dence of  the  selfishness  of  our  hearts,  which  wants  every  word 
of  God  to  be  directly  about  ourselves,  and  not  about  Christ. 

God  takes  for  granted  that  His  children  love  to  hear  what- 
ever will  exalt  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  result,  too,  is  strik- 
ino"  and  serious  :  where  Christ  is  the  object  of  our  hearts,  all  is 
peace  ;  where  our  own  happiness  is  the  first  thought,  there  is 
disai)pointmont  and  uncertainty. 

Another  form  in  which  this  egoism  meets  us,  and  must  be 
watched  against,  among  those  who  do  hear  the  words  of  this 
prophecy,  is  the  assumption  that  its  visions  are  aljout  the  Church 


THE    SALUTATION.  O 

— that  the  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials,  for  instance,  are  of  chief 
value  and  interest,  because  they  concern  ourselves  (i.e.  the 
Church)  either  in  the  past  or  in  the  future.  But  this  is  a  fun- 
damental mistake,  as  we  may  gather  even  from  the  words  of  the 
verse  before  us.  For  the  ground  alleged  for  the  importance  of 
taking  heed  to  this  book  lies  not  in  the  time  being  come,  or  our 
being  in  the  circumstances  described,  but  in  their  being  near ; 
"  for  the  time  is  at  hand."  If  it  could  profit  the  saints  of  God 
in  the  apostle's  days,  who  were  not  personally  concerned  in  the 
judgments,  equally  at  least  may  it  avail  for  us.  The  Lord  grant 
that  we  may  increasingly  value  the  place  in  which  He  has  set 
us,  peacefully  "  knowing  these  things  before." 

Ver.  4 — 6.  "  John  to  the  seven  churches  which  are  in  Asia."* 
Even  the  three  verses  already  looked  at  give  us  a  certain 
measure  of  insight  into  the  peculiar  features  of  this  book,  which 
are  obviously  distinct  from  the  other  parts  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment. God  reverts  a  great  deal  to  the  principles  on  which  He 
had  acted  in  Old  Testament  times.  One  can  see  that  the  posi- 
tive edification  of  the  Church  is  not  the  subject,  nor  the  unfold- 
ing of  God's  special  dealings  in  mercy.  But  we  have  judgment 
of  evil,  whether  in  the  Churches  or  in  the  world.  In  perfect 
harmony  with  this  we  have  God  introducing  Himself  to  His 
people  by  a  different  style  and  title.  "  Grace  unto  you  and 
peace  from  Him.  ivhich  is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to  come." 
It  is  exactly  what  answers  in  the  New  Testament  to  Jehovah  in 
the  Old.  God  was  then  revealing  Himself  to  Israel  as  One 
unchangeable,  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever." 
But  now  God  is  speaking  in  the  language  of  the  Gentiles,  and, 
by  these  words  "  Him  which  is,  a  ;J  which  was,  and  which  is  to 
come,"  translates  as  it  were  that  name  of  Jehovah,  never  before 
so  communicated  to  them.  He  is  going  to  return  to  His  ancient 
people  Israel ;  but  before  He  does  so,  there  must  necessarily  be 

*  By  Asia  is  meant  not  even  Asia  Minor,  but  that  part  of  its  western  coast 
which  constituted  the  Roman  proconsular  province.  The  kingdom  of  Pergamus 
had  that  title  given  to  it,  just  as  part  of  the  Carthaginian  territory  was  called  the 
province  of  Libya  or  Africa. — Some  account  for  the  absence  of  allusion  to  Colosse 
and  Ilierapolis  by  the  circumstance  that  they  were  destroyed  by  an  earthquake 
soon  after  St.  Paul's  epistle  to  the  former.  If  Eusebius  and  Tacitus  refer  to  the 
same  fact  (for  their  dates  dificr),  it  seems  that  Laodicea,  though  involved  in  the 
catasLroplie,  was  rebuilt  before  the  reign  of  Domitian.  But  adopting  the  earlier 
date  of  the  Roman  historian  (A.D.  61),  how  can  this  consist  with  the  usual  refe- 
rence of  the  Colossian  epistle  to  A.D.  61? — May  I  also  express  my  surprise  that 
the  st-ange  notion  of  Theodoret,  that  St.  Paul  foiinded  the  churches  of  Colosse, 
Laodicea  and  Ilierapolis,  should  be  held  by  any  unbiassed  person  ?  I  am  aware 
of  Larduer's  elaborate  effort.  But  Col.  ii.,  if  rightly  understood,  includes  the  Co- 
lossians  and  Laodiccans  among  those  who  had  not  seei#the  apostle  in  the  flesh. 


6  THE    SALUTATION. 

a  sweeping  judgineiit,  upon  tlie  ])rofessing-  mass  that  calls  itself 
by  the  name  of  the  Church.  But  when  God  has  set  Christendom 
aside,  He  will  bring  in  Israel  again — no  longer  on  the  ground  of 
law,  but  of  grace.  The  law  executed  death  upon  sinful  man, 
but  the  grace  of  God  executed  it  upon  the  person  of  tlie  Son  of 
God.  In  Heb.  ii.  9  we  have  it  said  "  that  He,  hy  tlie  grace  of 
God,  should  taste  death  for  every  man."  As  God,  in  the  death 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  has  given  a  stronger  expression  of  His 
hatred  of  sin  than  in  any  other  thing,  so  in  proportion,  and  as  an 
answer  to  that  death,  does  grace  now  flow  out  to  the  very  worst. 
In  that  day  Israel  will  know  this  for  themselves. 

The  style  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  is  here  introduced  is  as 
strikingly  characteristic  of  the  book  as  the  way  in  which  the 
Lord  Jesus  Himself  was  sj^oken  of.  "  Grace  [be]  unto  you  and 
peace  ....  from  the  seven  S])irits  which  are  before  His  throne." 
Of  course,  the  same  Holy  Ghost,  known  as  the  "  One  Spirit" 
in  other  parts  of  God's  word,  is  here  mentioned  as  "  the  seven 
Spirits  which  are  before  His  throne."  He  is  spoken  of  as  the 
"  One  Spirit,"  where  it  is  a  question  of  the  one  body,  the 
Church,  as  in  Eph.  iv.  4.  But  here  it  is  the  "  seven  Spirits," 
because,  when  Grod  has  finished  His  great  work  in  the  Church, 
He  will  infallibly  cut  off  the  faithless  Gentile,  and  will  no  longer 
gather  Jews  and  Gentiles  into  one  body  upon  the  earth.  On 
the  contrary,  Israel  is  to  be  put  above  the  Gentiles,  It  will  be 
a  diiferent  state  of  things  altogether,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  there- 
fore, is  regarded  in  His  variety  of  operations,  (as  He  is  in 
connexion  with  Messiah  in  Isaiah  xi.,)  and  not  in  His  heavenly 
unity.  It  is  added,  "  which  are  before  His  throne,''  because  the 
great  subject  of  this  book  is  the  government  of  God. 

In  general,  when  we  have  "  grace  be  unto  you  and  peace,"  it 
is  "  from  God  the  Father,  and  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
But  in  this  place  the  order  is  different :  first,  it  is  "  from  Him 
which  is,  which  was,  and  which  is  to  come,"  i.e.,  from  Jehovah ; 
then  "  from  the  seven  Spirits,"  &c. ;  and,  lastly,  "  from  Jesus 
Christ,"  &;c.  I  think  this  de])arture  from  the  usual  order  is 
because  Jesus  is  here  spoken  of,  not  so  much  as  our  Lord,  nei- 
ther in  His  divine  glory  as  Son  of  God,  Ijut  in  special  reference 
to  the  earth  and  His  rightful  claims  over  the  world.  He  is  "  the 
faithful  witness."  All  other  witnesses  had  been  unfaithful :  He 
alone  had  been  the  faithful  witness  for  God  upon  this  earth. 
But  besides  that.  He  was  "  the  first-begotten  of  the  dead  " — the 
first  person  that  liad  entered  into  resurrection-life  in  that  won- 
derful way,  so  that  corruption  can  never  touch  it.  "  Being  raised 
from  the  dead.  He  dieth  no  more ;  death  hath  no  more  domi- 


THE    SONG.  / 

uion  over  Hiiu."  Moreover,  He  is  "the  priiu-e  <»t'  the  kin^s  of 
the  earth."  Yet  all  these  things  are  coimeetod  with  wliat  He 
was,  is,  and  will  be  as  man.  It  is  Jesas  viewed  in  His  earthly 
connexions.  But  mark  how  beautiful  is  what  follows.  The 
moment  Jesus  is  pi-esented  to  the  Church,  and  is  announced 
as  "  the  faithful  witness,  the  fij'st-bei»\)tten  of  the  dead,  and  the 
prince  of  the  kings  of  the  eartli,"  she  can  contain  herself  no 
longer.  The  saints,  interrupt,  if  \\e  may  so  say,  the  message 
of  John,  and  break  forth  into  a  song  of  praise  — "  Unto  Him 
that  loved  us  and  washed  from  our  sins  in  His  ovvii  blood,  and 
hath  made  us  kings  and  ])riests  unto  God  and  His  Father ;  to 
Him  be  glory  and  dominion,  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen."  There 
is  a  little  alteration  that  should  be  made  in  this  verse,  that  to  my 
mind  greatly  adds  to  the  sweetness  of  it.  In  the  correct  text  it 
is  "  Unto  Him  that  locelh  us,"  not  "  that  loved  us."  It  is  quite 
true  that  Christ  loved  the  Church  and  gave  Himself  for  it ;  Eph. 
V.  shows  us  that ;  equally  true  that  He  loved  me  and  gave  Him- 
self for  me,  as  in  Gal.  ii.  But  the  first  of  Revelation  shows  us 
the  present  love  of  Jesus.  It  is  not  that  He  is  always  waslmixj 
us  from  our  sins :  He  has  washed  us  with  His  own  blood  once 
for  all  and  does  not  so  require  to  wash  us  again.  There  is  also, 
of  course,  the  practical  cleansing  day  by  day  —  the  washing  of 
water  by  the  word ;  but  that  is  not  what  is  s]:)(,)ken  of  here.  It 
is  a  finished  work,  and  one  tluit  lasts  all  through  to  His  praise. 
But  how  blessed  is  it  to  know  that  while  this  is  the  very  book 
that  unfolds  to  us  the  ways  and  means  by  Avliich  God  was  about 
to  put  aside  His  unftiithful  people,  and  to  judge  the  evil  of  the 
world, — that  in  the  midst  of  all  this,  we  can  look  up  in  the  full 
confidence  of  His  present  abiding  love,  and  say, — "  Unto  Him 
that  loveth  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood, 
....  to  Him  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen." 

Verse  7.  After  the  salutation,  "  Grace  be  unto  you  and 
peace,"  &c,,  we  had  an  interruption.  It  was  the  voice  of  the 
heavenly  saints  breaking  forth  into  a  strain  of  praise.  Now  Ave 
have  (ver.  7)  those  solemn  but  blessed  vv^ords,  "  Behold,  he 
conieth  with  clouds ;  and  every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  they  also 
which  pierced  him  :  and  all  kindreds  of  the  eai'th  siiall  wail 
because  of  liim.  Even  so,  Amen."  This  is  not  a  part  of  tlie 
song,  but  a  testimony  quite  distinct  from  it.  And  we  often  find 
these  two  things  :  that  which  forms  the  communion  of  a  saint  of 
God,  and  also  that  which  is  or  should  be  his  testimony. 

The  communion  of  each  other  is  a  happy  thing;  but  it  is  the 
presentation  of  Christ  and  the  knowledge  of  our  portion  in  Him 
which  calls  out  worship.     Besides  this,  the  believer  is  acquainted 


8  THE    TESTIMONY. 

by  God  with  what  is  coming-  upon  the  world.  And  this  is  a  part 
of'  our  testimony,  but  not  the  thing  with  which  the  heart  should 
be  most  filled.  A  person  who  merely  dwells  upon  projjhecy, 
you  will  never  find  much  fellowship  with.  It  would  be  a  very 
bad  thing  to  despise  prophecy,  and  he  who  does  will  be  sure  to 
get  into  some  snare  or  other.  But  if  a  person  is  always  occupied 
with  the  details  of  prophecy,  there  never  will  be  power  for 
heavenly  worship  ;  and  it  does  not  necessarily  deliver  a  man 
from  the  ways  of  the  world.  A  person  may  be  able  to  talk 
very  well  about  the  Jews,  about  the  judgments  upon  the  beast, 
&c.,  and  yet  may  go  on  walking  with  the  world.  But  when 
the  heart  is  occupied  w^ith  Christ  and  these  things  come  in  as  a 
sort  of  background,  then  we  shall  find  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
will  show  us  "  things  to  come."  So,  in  2  Peter,  i.  \9,  it  is  said, 
speaking  of  the  word  of  prophecy,  "  Whereunto  ye  do  well  that 
ye  take  heed."  It  is  very  imj)ortant  that  I  should  see  what 
is  coming,  and  that  I  should  not  be  allowing  myself  an  easy 
path  here  below.  It  ought  never  to  be  a  comfort  to  those  who 
are  going  on  with  the  current  of  the  world,  to  know  that  the 
Lord  is  coming  to  judge  it.  But  there  is  something  more  that 
should  be  the  delight  of  the  soul.  There  is  the  day-light  dawn- 
ing and  the  arising  of  the  day-star  in  oui*  hearts.  Peter  is  not 
here  speaking  of  the  day  coming  upon  the  world,  but  is  proving 
that  the  word  of  prophecy  is  an  admirable  lamp  until  you  get 
heavenly  light,  and  the  day-star  arising  i7i  your  hearts — the 
hope  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  the  Church's  proper 
jiortion.  This  is  never  presented  in  scripture  as  a  mere  pro- 
phetic event.  Christ  waited  for  and  known  as  one  who  may 
come  at  any  time  to  gather  us  together  to  Himself — such  is 
our  blessed  hope.  It  is  the  apostle  Paul  who  specially  brings 
out  the  hope  of  the  Church.  John,  too,  looks  at  Christ  as 
the  Bridegroom  —at  what  He  is  for  the  heart.  When  the 
Lord  comes  to  receive  us.  He  is  not  said  to  come  "  with  the 
clouds."  When  He  ascended,  a  cloud  received  Him.  Even  so 
will  it  be  with  us :  we  shall  be  caught  np  together  in  clouds  to 
meet  Him.  But  here  He  is  manifested  for  judgment  of  the  world, 
and  especially  the  Jews.  "  Behold,  he  cometh  with  the  clouds." 
That  is  a  revelation  known  and  testified  by  the  heavenly  saints, 
but  not  their  own  joy  in  communion.     "  Even  so.  Amen." 

In  Colossians  we  have  the  association  of  the  saints  with 
Christ  very  fully  brought  out.  (Chap.  ii.  iii.)  He  is  my  life, 
and  I  am  one  with  Him.  Thus,  the  moment  t  find  Christ 
my  Saviour  is  dead  to  the  woi'ld,  I  become  dead  to  the  world 
also.     I  find  not  only  my  treasure  there,  but  the  very  religion  of 


THE    TESTIMONY.  9 

tlie  world  judged,  because  Christ  was  cast  out  by  the  worlds' 
religion.  When  He  conies  with  clouds,  every  eye  shall  see 
Him.  But  this  will  not  be  the  case  when  He  conies  to  fetch 
His  Church.  God  is  gathering  the  friends  of  Christ  round  the 
name  of  Christ  now.  The  Church  is  a  body  that  is  called 
while  Christ  is  not  seen,  and  the  Christian,  having  his  portion  in 
Him  now,  is  hidden  with  Him.  "  Your  life  is  hid  with  Christ 
in  God." 

In  this  verse,  then,  it  is  not  the  Lord  coming  to  meet  His 
own  and  gather  them  to  Himself  in  the  air  ;  but  "  every  eye 
shall  see  him  ....  and  all  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail 
because  of  him,"  When  the  Lord  comes  to  take  the  Church, 
it  will  be  far  otherwise.  God  has  joined  us  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  heaven,  according  to  all  the  efficacy  of  His  death  and 
resiuTection.  As  far  as  the  spirit  is  concerned,  this  is  true  now, 
and  it  will  be  true  of  the  body  itself  when  Christ  comes.  The 
resurrection  of  Christ  calls  me  to  live  thoroughly  unto  God, 
as  the  death  of  Christ  makes  me  as  truly  dead  in  principle 
to  the  world  as  if  I  were  already  buried.  In  practice,  alas  !  we 
have  to  own  sad  falling  short.  Still,  says  the  apostle,  "  your 
life  is  hid,"  &c.  It  is  the  life  of  Christ  you  have  got  in  you. 
As  long  as  Christ  is  hidden,  you  are  hidden  also.  But  the  time 
is  coming  when  that  will  no  longer  be  the  case.  "  When 
Christ  who  is  our  life  shall  ai)pear,  then  shall  ye  also  aj)pear 
with  Him  in  glory."  When  Christ  comes  to  receive  the  Church, 
no  eye  Avill  see  Him  but  those  whom  Christ  comes  for.  When 
the  world  sees  Christ,  it  will  be  when  He  comes  in  glory, 
bringing  his  saints  with  Him  —  revealed  from  heaven  with 
the  angels  of  His  power,  in  flaming  Are  taking  vengeance  on 
them  that  know  not  God,  (the  Gentiles,)  and  on  them  that 
obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Loixl  Jesus  Christ  (the  Jews.) 
If  the  world  were  to  see  Christ  coming  alone  in  glory  before 
the  Church  is  caught  up  to  Him,  it  would  not  be  true  that 
"  when  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  also 
appear  with  Him  in  glory."  The  world  can  never  see  Christ 
coming  to  receive  the  saints,  because  then  they  must  have  seen 
Him  without  them  and  before  them ;  whereas,  the  very  first 
moment  of  His  appearing  is  to  be  the  moment  of  our  appear- 
ing with  Him.  And  this  does  not  merely  rest  upon  a  word  : 
it  is  the  doctrine  of  the  whole  passage  ;  and  the  same  thing 
is  shown  and  confirmed  by  other  proofs  throughout  the  New 
Testament. 

In  Christ's  death  we  are  dead  to  the  world  ;  in  His  resur- 
rection we  are  risen,  and  are  therefore  to  have  our  hearts  set 


10  THE    TESTIMONY. 

upon  lieiivenly  things  before  we  see  tlieui.  And  more  than 
that.  Christ  is  not  always  to  be  hidden  :  He  is  about  to  be 
manifested,  and  when  He  is,  we  shall  be  manifested  also,  along 
with  Him.  It  is  j)lain  that  Christ  and  the  Church  must  have 
been  together  before  they  ai-e  manifested  to  the  world,  if  they 
are  to  appear  together.  In  Rev.  xix.  11  we  have  this  taught 
beyond  all  doubt.  "■  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  behold  a  white 
horse,  and  He  that  sat  on  him  was  called  Faithful  and  Ti'ue," 
&c.  "And  the  armies  which  were  in  heaven  followed  Him 
upon  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and  clean." 
The  horse  is  an  emblem  of  power,  the  white  horse  of  pros- 
perous, victorious  power.  It  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  coming 
in  judgment,  which  will  be  the  time  when  He  comes  in  the 
clouds  of  heaven.  These  armies  that  are  seen  following  Him 
out  of  heaven,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  are  not  angels.  The  text 
says  that  the  fine  linen  (^vo-a-ipou)  is  the  righteousness  of  saints. 
And  the  remarkable  thing  is  that,  although  angels  are  des- 
cribed in  chap.  xv.  as  being  "  clothed  in  pure  and  white  linen,'' 
a  different  word  (xivov)  is  used.  It  is  the  heavenly  saints  who 
are  thus  spoken  of  in  chapter  xix.  as  the  armies  of  heaven, 
&c.  They  were  in  heaven,  therefore,  before  the  way  was  oj)ened 
for  Christ  to  come  out  in  judgment ;  and  they  follow  Him  from 
heaven  when  He  comes.  I  doubt  not  that  angels  are  in  His 
train  also,  as  appears  from  other  texts;  but  they  do  not  seem 
spoken  of  here. 

There  are  thus  two  important  and  different  stages  of  the 
Lord's  second  coming.  There  is  the  coming  of  Christ  to 
receive  His  people  to  Himself,  and  that  is  what  the  Church 
ought  always  to  be  waiting  for;  and  there  is  Christ's  coming 
to  judge  the  world,  when  He  has  already  taken  up  the  hea- 
venly saints,  and  wickedness  thereafter  comes  to  its  head. 
Then,  suddenly,  the  heavens  will  open,  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  will  couje  and  the  Chui-ch  with  Him,  appearing  to- 
gether in  the  clouds  of  heaven  with  power  and  great  glory. 
Is  it  asked  hotc?  Israel  was  not  told  how  they  were  to  be 
delivered  out  of  Egypt.  The  Lord  urns  going  to  deliver 
them,  but  He  did  not  explain  it  before  it  came  to  pass.  And 
the  Lord  is  going  to  bring  the  Church  to  heaven  by  His  coming. 
Besides  that.  He  will  judge  the  wickedness  of  the  world,  and 
then  the  Church  will  come  with  Him. 

Ver.  8.  Hero,  it  seems  to  me,  that  we  have  God,  as  such, 
rather  than  the  Lord  Jesus,*  uttering  the  titles  of  His  various 

*  At  the  close  of  the  book  (ch.  ixii.  12)  the  Lord  takes  similar  titles  ;  for  if 


JOHN    IN    PATMOS.  1  1 

glory,  as  a  sort  of  seal  of  the  foregoing  and  an  introductory 
basis  for  what  follows.  "  I  am  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  saith 
the  Lord  God,  that  is,  and  that  was,  and  that  is  to  come,  the 
Almighty,"  The  first  is  evidently  a  name  most  suited  to  the 
book  which  so  admirably  closes  the  written  communications  of 
God  ;  that  and  all  the  rest  of  His  characters  here  announced 
would  be  deeply  necessary  for  the  saints  to  remend)er,  whether 
for  us,  before  the  trial,  or  for  those  who  shall  be  called  on  to 
pass  through  it. 

Verse  9  is  not  very  correctly  given.  "  I,  John,  who  also  am 
your  brother  and  companion  in  tribulation."  The  word  "also" 
is  left  out  in  the  best  copies.  And  what  follows  should  be  read 
thus :  "  your  brother  and  companion  in  ti'ibulation,  and  the 
kingdom,  and  patience  in  Christ,"  They  all  went  together.  He 
purposely  speaks  of  himself,  not  as  a  member  of  the  body  of 
Christ,  but  as  their  brother  and  companion  in  tribulation,  perhaps 
because,  after  the  Church  is  taken  away,  there  will  still  be 
saints  on  earth  and  our  brethren,  John  puts  himself  along  with 
them.  The  Holy  Ghost  loves  us,  whatever  specialties  of  privi- 
lege may  come  in,  as  much  as  possible  to  take  our  place  along 
with  the  saints  of  God  at  all  times.  The  book  of  Revelation 
was  written  for  the  Cluu'ch,  just  when  it  was  drifting  into  a 
state  of  ruin.  In  chap.  vi.  we  have  some  of  these  companions 
in  tribulation.  But  what  they  say  proves  that  they  do  not 
belong  to  the  Church.  "  How  long,  O  Lord,  holy  and  true, 
dost  thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood  ....?"  We  find 
proper  Christian  appealing  to  God  in  the  case  of  Stephen — 
"  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  The  Christian  is 
always  called  to  suffer  in  the  world.  These  Apocalyptic  saints 
will  understand  that  the  Lord  is  about  to  judge,  and  they  will 
ask  Him  to  do  so.  It  would  be  wrong  now  to  ask  this,  for  it  is 
the  day  of  grace  still.  Faith  habitually  takes  its  language  from 
what  God  is  doing,  and  God  is  dealing  in  grace  and  not  in 
judgment  now.  We  are  called  to  retire  from  the  way  of  the 
world,  and  our  hearts  should  be  connected  with  all  that  is 
glorious  and  heavenly,  for  that  is  the  })resent  object  of  Christ. 
The  white  robes  given  to  these  sufferers,  in  chapter  vi.,  are 
an  evident   mark   of  God's  approbation.      They   were   to   rest 

He  were  the  exalted  mau  and  is  to  come  and  to  judge  a^  siieli,  lie  was  mueh  moiv, 
and  no  designation  of  the  Eternal  God  could  exceed  the  dignity  oi'  Ilia  person. 
But  the  words  of  the  common  text  in  verse  11  ("  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the 
first  and  the  last,  and")  aic  an  interpolation  there,  and  mar  the  sjnuuetry  of  thi' 
context.  All  the  best  mss.,  Tcrsious,  &c.  reject  them,  and  require  "God"  in 
vei'se  8. 


12  THE    KINGDOM, 

till  their  brethren  that  should  be  killed  as  they  were,  should  be 
fulfilled.     Judgment  must  then  take  its  course. 

"  In  tribulation  and  the  kingdom  and  patience."  It  will  be  the 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  in  jjower  when  the  tribulation  and 
patience  are  all  over.  But  now  the  circumstances  of  that 
kingdom  involve  tribulation.  The  kingdom  of  heaven,  as  pre- 
sented in  Daniel,  &c.,  was  not  a  mystery.  It  means  the  reign 
of  heaven  upon  or  over  the  earth.  Christ,  instead  of  getting 
His  rightful  place  as  Messiah  when  He  came,  was  rejected,  and 
went  up  to  heaven,  and  thus  it  is  that  the  mysteries  of  the 
kingdom  come  in.  Hence  it  is  that  there  should  be  suffering 
and  endurance  even  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  When  Christ 
appears  in  glory,  all  this  will  be  at  an  end.  Then  will  come 
the  kingdom  and  power.  (See  Rev.  xii.)  It  is  the  "  kingdom 
and  patience  in  Christ"  now.  That  word  "  patience"  is  a  remark- 
able one.  We  have  communion  with  Jesus  in  this  patient  expec- 
tation :  we  wait  for  what  He  waits.  A  man  that  is  born  anew 
now  is  not  in  the  kingdom  and  power,  but  in  the  kingdom  and 
patience  in  Christ  Jesus.  Hence  suffering  here  below  naturally 
follows.  So  here  the  apostle  John  was  thrown  into  the  isle  of 
Patmos  for  the  word  of  God  and  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus. 

Thus,  the  ground  on  which  John  addi-esses  the  churches,  is  not 
expressly  as  an  apostle,  but  as  their  brother  and  companion  in 
tribulation,  and  the  kingdom  and  patience  in  Christ  Jesus.  One 
remarkable  thing  which  Christianity  has  brought  out  is,  that  God 
has  opened  to  us  another  kingdom  of  an  order  differing  from 
the  earthly  or  Jewish  one — a  kingdom  in  which  there  is  tribula- 
tion, as  far  as  natural  circumstances  are  concerned,  and  patient 
hope  the  great  corresponding  and  distinguishing  grace.  But 
the  Church  has  slipped  out  of  its  place  of  suffering  and  endurance; 
it  has  sought  and  taken  the  place  of  power  in  the  world  —  the 
place  that  had  belonged  only  to  the  Jews  of  right,  and  to  the 
Gentile  empires  in  divine  sovereignty,  because  of  Israel's  sins. 
In  the  presence  of  failure  and  of  evil,  it  becomes  no  one  to  speak 
highly ;  where  there  is  real  separation  from  evil,  there  will  not 
be  this.  Wherever  it  is  a  question  of  ceasing  to  do  evil,  there 
is  great  need  of  looking  to  the  Lord,  lest  one  should  say,  "  this 
is  what  I  have  done,  and  what  others  have  not  done."  Say  rather 
it  is  all  of  the  Lord's  grace.  But  those  Christians  who  desire  to 
stand  aloof  from  the  evil  around  them,  are  in  great  danger  of 
giviug  themselves  a  little  bit  of  credit  for  doing  something  that 
other  j)eople  are  not  doing.  In  the  jiresonce  of  evil  that  we 
have  left,  and  that  we  have  still  got  to  judge  in  ourselves,  it  is 
not  a  time  to  be  thinking  great  things  of  ourselves.     When  God 


AS    IT    NOW    IS.  13 

is  putting  forth  power  towards  the  earth,  His  people  will  have 
fellowship  with  what  He  is  doing,  as  in  tiie  land  of  Egypt,  in 
the  wilderness,  and  in  Canaan.  But  when  we  look  at  Christi- 
anity, it  is  not  a  question  of  power  in  the  earth,  but  of  Jesus 
crucified  through  weakness,  and  of  power  put  forth  to  raise  Him 
again  from  the  dead.  There  will  be  again  a  tremendous  putting 
forth  of  God's  power  when  He  will  judge  not  only  the  living  but 
the  dead.  But  for  us  the  fire  of  God's  wrath  has  fallen  upon 
Christ;  His  judgment  was  upon  the  head  of  His  beloved  !Son. 
And  now  God  is  imprinting  upon  the  hearts  of  His  people  hea- 
venly glory.  He  is  forming  their  character  by  these  two  great 
things  that  we  find  in  Christ ;  the  one  is  the  cross  and  the  other  is 
the  glory  into  which  He  is  now  taken.  What  God  has  been  doing 
in  Christ  is  what  He  wants  us  to  have  communion  with.  As 
thoroughly  as  the  law  Avas  engraven  upon  stones,  so  thoroughly 
should  Christ  be  written  upon  our  hearts  and  ways.  The  life  of 
a  creature  may  be  lost,  but  what  the  believer  has  is  the  life  of 
Christ  —  and  can  the  life  qf  Christ  ever  perish  .''  Christ  went 
through  death  in  order  that  He  might  give  a  character  of  life 
that  death  could  not  touch.  When  tlie  Lord  God  made  man, 
He  made  him  out  of  the  dust  of  the  field,  but  He  breathed  into 
his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life ;  and  therefore  is  it  that  the  soul  is 
immortal.  He  got  this  life  direct  from  the  breath  of  the  Lord 
God.  Sin,  however,  may  touch  it,  and  the  second  death — eternal 
misery  in  the  lake  of  fire  for  soul  and  body.  But  the  life  which 
Christ  breathed  after  He  rose  from  the  dead  (John  xx.  22)  was  a 
life  that  death  never  could  conquer,  nor  even  assail  more,  over 
which  nothing  had  a  claim  ;  and  that  is  the  hfe  of  every  believer. 
And  yet  there  are  those  who  fancy  that  the  life  of  a  believer 
may  be  lost !  I  can  only  say  that  God  does  not  deal  with  those 
who  so  think  according  to  their  thoughts  of  Him.  The  life  is 
as  strong  in  the  Arminian  as  in  the  Calvin ist,  because  it  is  the 
life  of  Christ.  When  a  man  is  conscious  that  he  has  failed  and 
sinned  against  God,  he  is  in  great  danger  of  thinking  that  his 
blessing  is  gone.  But  no ;  you  have  gone  against  the  life,  and 
against  Him  who  is  the  source  of  it ;  but  the  life  itself  is  there 
still,  and  cannot  be  touched  ;  it  is  eternal.  Again,  where  a  person 
is  occupied  in  looking  at  the  spiritual  life  within  him,  he  will 
never  have  comfort.  The  proof  that  I  am  a  Christian  is,  that  I 
have  received  the  testimony  of  God's  love  to  me  in  Jesus. 

Ver.  10.  "I  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day."  The  "Lord's 
day"  is  not  at  all  the  same  thing  as  the  "  day  of  the  Lord."  The 
same  expression  {kvpmms)  was  used  with  regai-d  to  the  Lord's 


14  VISION    OP    CHRIST. 

supper,  because  it  was  not  a  common  meal,  but  a  lioly  and 
divinely  instituted  memorial  of  tbe  Lord.  So  the  Lord's  day  is 
not  a  common  day,  but  one  specially  set  apart,  not  as  a  com- 
mand, but  as  the  expression  of  the  highest  privilege,  for  the 
worship  of  the  Lord.  The  sabbath  was  the  last  day  which 
Jehovah  claimed  out  of  man's  week ;  the  Lord's  day  is  the  first 
day  of  God's  week,  and  in  a  sense,  we  may  say,  of  God's 
eternity.  The  Chi'istian  begins  with  the  Lord's  day,  that  this 
may,  as  it  were,  give  a  character  to  all  the  days  of  the  week. 
Li  spirit,  the  Christian  is  risen,  and  every  day  belongs  to  the 
Lord  ;  therefore  is  he  to  bring  up  the  standard  of  each  day  that 
follows  in  the  week  to  that  blessed  beginning,  the  Lord's  day. 
To  bring  down  the  Lord's  day  to  the  level  of  another  day  only 
shows  how  gladly  the  heart  drinks  in  anything  that  takes  away 
somewhat  from  Christ.  The  man  who  only  obeys  Christ  because 
he  must  do  so,  has  not  got  the  spirit  of  obedience  at  all.  We 
are  sanctified  not  only  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling  but  to  the  obe- 
dience of  Jesus  Christ — to  the  obedience  of  sons  under  grace, 
not  to  that  of  mere  servants  under  law.  The  lawlessness  that 
despises  the  Lord's  day  is  hateful ;  but  that  is  no  reasou  why 
Christians  should  destroy  its  character,  by  confounding  the  Lord's 
day,  the  new  creation-day,  with  the  sabbath  of  nature  or  of  the 
law. 

On  that  day,  then,  bright  visions  of  glory  passed  before  the 
prophet's  eye.  First,  John  tells  us  what  he  saw  on  that  occa- 
sion :  this  is  what  we  have  in  the  rest  of  the  hrst  chapter.  (Verses 
12-20.)  It  was  the  vision  of  the  glory  of  Christ's  person,  in  the 
midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks.  "  The  things  which  are  " 
(verse  19)  we  have  in  chapters  ii.  and  iii.,  which  describe  the 
condition  of  the  churches  at  that  time.  The  third  division  of  the 
Revelation  is  "  the  things  which  shall  be  after  these."  The  word 
"  hereafter"  is  very  vague,  for  it  might  mean  thousands  of  years 
after.  "After  these''  expresses  the  sense  of  the  phrase  much 
better.  It  means  the  things  that  shall  follovv  immediately  after 
"  the  things  which  are"  now  —  i.e.  after  the  Church-condition. 
These  we  have  from  chapter  iv.  to  the  end  of  the  book.  The 
"  things  which  are"  continue  still  (in  the  most  important  appli- 
cation of  the  book).  And  what  will  follow i*  "The  things 
which  shall  be  after  these  things,"  when  the  Church  has  ceased 
to  subsist  on  enrth. 

Let  us  look  a  little  at  what  the  apostle  saw.  First  of  all,  he 
hoars  behind  him  "a  loud  voice,  as  of  a  trumjiet,  saying.  What 
tliou  seest,  write  in  a  book,  (or  roll,)  and  send  to  the  seven 
churches:  unto  Ephesus,"  Sec.  (Ver.  1 1 .)  "And  I  turned  to  seethe 


VISION    OF    CHRIST.  15 

voice  that  was  speaking-  with  me.  And  being;  turned  I  saw 
seven  golden  candlesticks"  (or  lanij)-stands).  These  were  evi- 
dently derived  from  the  light  of  the  tabernacle.  Only  in  this 
case  the  lamp-stands  were  separate,  so  that  the  Lord  could 
walk  between  them.  In  the  midst  of  the  seven  candlesticks 
he  sees  "  one  like  unto  the  Son  of  man."  From  John  v. 
we  shall  learn  the  force  of  this  and  why  it  is,  in  this  instance, 
Son  of  man,  and  not  Son  of  God.  The  Son  of  God  is  the 
one  who  quickens,  because  He  is  a  divine  person  ;  He  quickens 
in  communion  with  tlie  Father.  Thus,  giving  life.  He  is  called 
the  Son  of  God  ;  but  as  Son  of  man,  He  executes  judgment, 
because  God  will  have  Him  honoured  in  the  very  nature  in 
which  man  outraged  Him,  This  at  once  shows  us  the  hear- 
ing of  what  we  have  in  the  Revelation.  It  is  as  Son  of 
man  upon  the  earth  that  Christ  is  liere  presented,  and  as  such 
He  is  about  to  execute  judgment  upon  the  seven  churches,  as 
well  as,  by  and  by,  u])on  the  world.  The  "  gariuent  down  to  the 
foot,"  with  which  He  was  clothed,  does  not  show  activity  of 
work,  but  rather  dignified  priestly  judgment.  The  "gold"  of 
the  girdle  was  the  symbol  of  divine  righteousness,  as  linen  is  the 
symbol  of  human  righteousiiess=  Verse  14,  as  I  suppose,  ought 
to  open  thus,  '■'■  J^ut  his  head  and  his  hairs  were  white  as  white 
wool,  as  snow."  So  that,  besides  being  the  Son  of  man,  and 
being  seen  in  the  garl)  and  place  of  priestly  discrimination,  there 
are  the  emblems,  too,  of  divine  glory,  as  appears  by  comparing 
this  passage  with  Daniel  vii.  What  is  said  of  the  Ancient  of 
days  by  Daniel  is  applied  to  the  Son  of  man  by  John  —  the 
Ancient  of  days  being  the  eternal  God.  John  sees  here  that  the 
Son  of  man  is  Himself  the  Ancient  of  days.  The  same  who 
wrote  "The  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God,"  and 
"the  Word  was  made  flesh,"  Sec,  sees  also  now  in  prophetic 
vision  the  combination  of  humanity  with  the  emblems  proper  to 
Deity,  in  the  person  of  the  Son  of  man.  The  head  and  hairs 
being  "white  as  white  wool,  as  snow,"  show  fulness  of  divine 
wisdom,  "  His  eyes  like  a  flame  of  fire,"  set  forth  the  penetra- 
tion that  marked  Him.  "  His  feet  are  like  brass,"  &c.  They 
could  not  contract  any  defilement,  and  are  unbending  injudicial 
strength.  (Verses  12-15.) 

Such  He  is  personally.  Relative  description  follows  in  verse 
16.  "  And  He  had  in  His  right  hand  seven  stars,"  the  emblem  of 
the  angels,  or  representative  rulers,  of  the  seven  churches.  The 
word  of  judgment  went  out  of  His  njouth  ;  because  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  to  speak  the  word  is  at  once  to  strike  the  blow. 
"He  spake  and  it   was  done."     "His  countenance  was  as  the 


16  VISION    OP    CHRIST. 

sun  shineth  in  his  strength."  The  churches'  angels  were  repre- 
sented as  "  stars  "  only,  as  being,  of  course,  subordinate  to  the 
Lord.  We  have  supreme  authority  in  the  Lord,  which  is  uni- 
versal in  its  range ;  as  the  stars  are  His  administrative  lights  in 
the  churches,  which  He  maintains  by  His  power.  He  judges 
by  His  word  those  Avho  have  it  or  refuse  it. 

When  John  sees  this  wonderful  vision  of  the  Son  of  man,  he 
falls  at  His  feet  as  dead.  But  the  Lord  puts  His  right  hand  of 
sustaining  power  upon  the  poor  one  who  lay  trembling,  nay,  as 
dead,  before  Him,  and  says,  "  Fear  not ;  I  am  the  first  and  the  last 
and  the  living  One ;  and  I  was  dead,  and,  behold,  I  am  alive  for 
evermore."*  If  tiie  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  not  died,  we  should 
not  have  known  Him  in  the  blessed  character  and  energy  of  life 
that  He  has  proved  novv — life  more  abundantly.  Christianity 
presents  Christ  as  having  passed  through  death,  and  as  risen 
in  triumph  for  God  and  His  people.  John  is  going  to  hear 
about  judgments ;  but  the  knowledge  that  the  right  hand  of 
Him  who  was  alive  for  evermore  had  been  upon  him,  and  the 
words  of  His  mouth  v/ould  give  him  strength  and  courage  for 
everything  to  come.  And  this  is  the  spirit  in  which  the  book 
was  written  and  should  be  read.  "Behold,  I  am  alive  for 
evermore,  and  have  the  keys  of  hades  and  of  death."  The  succes- 
sion of  these  words  in  the  common  text  is  a  mistake.  Hades 
follows  death,  and  does  not  go  before  it.  (Rev.  vi.)  See  also 
chap.  XX.  where  we  have  "death  and  hell"  mentioned  several 
times  in  their  regular  order.  And  so  in  the  best  authorities  it 
is  here.  When  the  Lord  says  that  He  has  the  keys  of  death 
and  of  hades,  He  intimates  that  He  is  the  absolute  master  of  all 
that  appertains  to  life,  either  for  the  body  or  the  soul.  Accord- 
ingly, also,  in  verse  19,  a  little  word  ought  to  be  put  in  which 
adds  to  the  force  and  connexion  somewhat.  "  Write  therefore 
tlie  things  which  thou  hast  seen,"  &c.  Because  I  am  risen  from 
the  dead  and  am  alive  for  evermore,  and  the  sole  ruler  of  death 
and  hades,  write  therefore. — He  who  had  bid  John  write  (verses 
11,19)  was  the  Son  of  man,  with  the  characteristics  of  the  Ancient 
of  days  ;  but  He  was  also  the  living,  risen  Lord,  the  security 
against  terror  and  death,  the  strengthener  of  His  servants  in 
presence  of  glory.  "  Write  therefore  the  things  which  thou  hast 
seen,  and  the  things  which  are,  and  the  things  which  shall  be 
after  these."  Human  nature  might  well  be  confounded  by  the 
sight ;  but  He  who  was  revealed  to  John,  characterised  Himself 

*  The  "Atncn,"  though  read  by  B.  and  most  of  the  cursives,  seems  due  to  the 
copyists  making  the  phrase  a  doxology,  either  through  unconscious  habit,  or 
designedly  adding  OjUt/j/  as  a  corrcclion. 


THE    MYSTERY    OF   THE    STARS.  17 

both  as  God,  and  as  the  man  who  had  passed  through  death  and 
destroyed  its  power  for  His  own.  And  this  was  to  be  written, 
this  revelation  of  Jesus  as  seen  of  Jolni,  as  well  as  the  existing 
church-state,  and  the  things  which  should  follow.  (Verses  17-19.) 
Verse  20  explains  the  mystery  of  the  stars  and  candlesticks, 
as  already  indicated.  It  is  the  connecting  link  between  the 
vision  of  Christ  and  the  judgment  of  the  Church,  or  house  of 
God  on  earth  (Rev.  ii.  iii.),  as  long  as  its  existence  there  is 
recognized  as  the  object  of  His  government.  After  that,  it  is 
the  judgment  of  the  world  from  God's  throne  in  heaven,  and 
Jews  and  Gentiles  are  variously  dealt  with,  but  churches  never, 
in  that  part  of  the  book.  All  this,  and  the  reasons  for  it,  will 
appear  more  distinctly  as  we  proceed. 


18  THE    SEVEN    CHURCHES. 


CHAPTER    II. 

EPHESUS. 

Ver.  1 — 7,  The  last  chapter  closed  with  these  words  :  "  The 
seven  stars  are  the  angels  of  the  seven  churches,  and  the  seven 
candlesticks  are  the  seven  churches."  It  is  phiin,  from  chap, 
i.  4,  11,  and  from  what  follows,  that  seven  actually  existing 
churches  of  provincial  Asia  were  primarily  meant.  But  while 
it  is  true  that  there  were  special  reasons  for  addressing  those 
particular  churches,  it  does  not,  to  my  own  mind,  admit  of  a 
doubt  that  they  were  selected  with  the  further  and  larger  design 
of  presenting  successive  pictures  of  the  Church  in  general,  from 
the  apostolic  days  to  the  close  of  its  existence  on  earth.  Hence 
it  was  that  there  were  seven  golden  candlesticks,  seven  being 
the  well-known  symbol  of  spiritual  completeness.  There  might 
have  been  other  churches  as  well  or  better  known,  and  one  of 
these  seven  had  been  already  addressed  formally  by  the  great 
apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  But  Ephesus  is  again  taken  up,  and 
six  other  churches  are  associated,  so  as  to  make  up  a  mystical 
and  perfect  sketch  of  the  more  important  moral  features  which 
then  existed,  and  which,  at  the  same  time,  would  successively  be 
developed  in  the  after  history  of  the  professing  body  upon  the 
earth.*     Many  things  that  might  seem   most  important  in  the 

*  Every  believer  in  the  inspiration  of  the  Apocalypse  of  course  admits  the  uni- 
versal a2yplication  of  the  moral  pictures  set  forth  in  Rev.  ii.,  iii.,  as  is  true  of 
the  Acts  in  the  New  Testament,  or  of  the  histories  in  the  Old  Testament.  But 
the  idea  that  the  seven  churches  represent  all  churches,  or  the  general  state  and 
character  in  John's  day,  appears  to  be  mere  confusion.  The  truth  is  that  each 
represents  a  distinct  moral  state,  in  which  the  professing  body,  wholly  or  iu  part, 
might  be  at  some  given  time.  In  a  word,  that  the  local  assemblies  then  exhibited 
the  special  features  described  is  true;  but  they  could  not  all  characterize  the  then 
existing  state  of  the  Church  in  general,  because  they  set  forth  different  and  even 
opposed  moral  conditions.  If  we  admit,  then,  as  we  must,  an  enlarged  application, 
beyond  that  to  the  actual  assemblies  or  to  mere  individual  conduct,  the  natural 
reference  is  to  successive  phases  of  spiritual  condition,  good  or  bad,  iu  the  history 
of  the  Christian  profession.  Perhaps  the  extreme  partisans  of  the  Protestant 
school  of  interpretation  are  not  generally  aware  that  their  learned  leader,  Mede, 
thus  expresses  liimsclf  in  his  maturer  "Short  Observations  on  the  Apocalypse" 
(Works,  p.  905)  :  —  "  If  we  consider  their  number  being  seven,  which  is  a  number 
of  revolution  of  time,  and  therefore  iu  this  book  the  seals  and  trumpets  and  vials 
also  are  seven  ;  and  if  we  consider  the  choice  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  that  He 
taketh  neither  all,  no,  nor  the  most  famous  cluirch  in  the  world,  as  Antioch,  &c.. 


THE    SEVEN    CHURCHES.  19 

eyes  of  men  and  even  of  Christians,  are  passed  by,  for  the  Lord 
sees  not  as  man  sees. 

But  it  will  be  found,  I  think,  that  He  has  here  given  promi- 
nence to   those   features,  whether  good  or  bad,  which  should 
reappear,  and  most  aptly  set  forth  what  He  foresaw  to  be  of  the 
deepest  moment  for  him  who  might  have  an  ear  to  hear  till  He 
comes   again.      And    this   extensive    application   seems   to    me 
strongly  confirmed  by  that  clause  of  the  threefold  division  in 
chap.  i.  19,  which  bears  on  these  churches.     They  are  charac- 
terized as  "  the  things  ichich  are."     No  doubt  they  existed  then, 
in  the  time  of  John  ;    but  if  they  continued  to  exist,  and  if  seeds 
that  were  then  sown  germinated  yet  more  in  after  days  and  thus 
imparted  a  graver  significance  to  the  words  and  warnings  of  our 
Lord,  that  subsisting  state  of  the  Church  on  earth  would  still  be 
fitly  designated    "  the    things  which  are."      Thus,   Ephesus  is 
the  first  great  sample  of  decline  through  a  relaxation  or  abandon- 
ment  of   first  love.      But  was  not  this   the  notorious  fact  in 
Christendom,  as  a  whole,  before  the  last  apostle  departed  to  be 
with  the  Lord  .^     If  in  those  days  and  yet  more  in  the  times  which 
followed,  there  was  a  similar  moral  state,  what  moi'e  apt  and 
natural  than  to  treat  the  moral  circumstances  so  as  to  convey 
the  general  lesson?     Again,  without  questioning  that  the  mes- 
sage  to   Smyrna  fully   applied  at  that  time,   it  is  easy  to  see 
that   the   great    and    repeated    persecutions    which    broke   out 
upon   Christians   from    the    heathen,    are    admirably    set   forth 
by  it.     So  again,  the    Balaam  element  would  naturally  come 
into   great   distinctness,  when  the  Avorld  patronized  instead    of 
persecuting.      Then,  fuither,  Jezebel  is  an    immense  advance 
in  evil,  and  though  there  was,  no  doubt,  that  which   furnished 
occasion  for  these  references  at  the  time  when  the  Apocalypse 
was  given,   can  it  be  denied  that  the  outline  was  filled  up  in  a 
most  striking  way,  after  the   throne   of  the  world   established 
Christianity  by  its  edicts,  and  when,  at  a  later  epoch  still,   the 
professing  church  formed  a  guilty  union  with  virtual  heathenism 
and  enmity  to  the  truth  of  God  ?     This  glance,  rapid  as  it  is, 
over  chap.  ii.  will  show  why  I  conceive  that  these  churches  are 

and  such  no  doubt  had  need  of  instruction,  as  well  as  those  here  named; — if  these 
things  be  well  considered,  may  it  not  seem  that  these  seven  churches,  besides  this 
literal  respect,  were  intended  to  be  as  patterns  and  types  of  the  several  ages  of  the 
catholic  Church  a  principio  ad  Jiiiem,  that  so  these  seven  churches  should  pro- 
phetically sample  unto  us  a  sevenfold  successive  temper  and  condition  of  the  whole 
visible  Church,  according  to  the  several  ages  tliereof,  answering  to  the  pattern  of 
the  seven  churches  here  ?  And  if  this  be  granted,  viz.,  that  they  were  intended 
to  be  so  many  patterns  of  so  many  states  of  the  Church,  succeeding  in  the  like 
order  the  churches  are  named,  then  surely  the  first  church  (viz.,  the  Ephesiau 
state)  must  be  first,  and  the  last  be  the  last,"  &c. 


20  THE    SEVEN    CHURCHES. 

to  be  viewed  as  having  a  real,  if  indirect,  prophetic  bearing  upon 
the  subsequent  states  of  the  Church  as  they  presented  them- 
selves to  the  Lord's  all-searching  judgment.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  clear  that  to  have  made  this  bearing  so  marked  as 
to  be  apparent  from  the  first ;  to  have  given  a  distinct  and 
chronological  history,  if  one  may  so  say,  would  have  falsified 
the  true  posture  of  the  Church  in  habitually  waiting  for  the 
Lord  from  heaven.  For  the  Lord  has  nowhere  else  so  spoken 
to  or  about  the  Church,  as  to  keep  it  necessarily  waiting  for 
ages  upon  the  earth.  The  Lord  knew  that  it  would  be  so,  of 
course,  but  He  revealed  nothing  that  would  interfere  with  the 
full  enjoyment  of  the  blessed  hope  of  the  Lord's  return  as  an 
immediate  thing.     And  so  it  is  here. 

Some  have  taken  advantage  of  this  indistinctness  to  deny  that 
these  seven  churches  have  the  successive  and  protracted  charac- 
ter which  I  have  alluded  to  ;  but  the  evidence  will  appear  more 
fully,  as  Ave  look  at  each  church  severally.  Another  considera- 
tion which  ought  to  weigh  much,  is,  that  after  these  two  chap- 
ters, churches  are  nowhere  referred  to  as  existing  longer  on 
the  earth.  In  the  concluding  remarks  of  the  book,  (chap.  xxii. 
16,)  the  Lord  says  that  He  has  sent  His  angel  to  testify  these 
thinos  in  the  churches.  But  throughout  the  entire  course  of 
the  visions  and  in  all  that  is  intimated  of  the  condition  of  men 
here  below,  after  Rev.  iii.  and  onward,  there  is  the  most  unac- 
countable silence  as  to  the  Church  on  earth,  if  the  Church  be 
really  there.  Nothing  more  simple,  if  that  state  of  things  be 
closed.  And  this  quite  agrees  with  chap.  i.  19:  "The  things 
which  are,  and  the  things  which  shall  come  to  pass  after  theseT 
After  the  churches  are  done  with  and  no  longer  seen  as  such 
upon  the  earth,  the  directly  prophetic  portion  of  the  book  begins 
to  have  its  course.  Further,  it  seems  that  the  introduction  of  a 
new  state  of  things  does  not  necessarily  imply  the  reparation  of 
wdiat  had  been  before  it.  In  a  word,  after  the  new  condition 
appears,  there  may  be  still  the  co-existence  of  the  older  ones, 
and  each  may  run  on  in  its  own  sphere.  Thus  much  for  the 
churches  as  a  whole.  Responsibility  on  earth  is  the  question  : 
not  the  privileges  of  the  Church  or  the  saints  in  Christ,  but  the 
obligation  of  the  Churches  to  represent  Him,  and  His  estimate 
of  their  state. 

We  will  now,  after  this  short  preface,  look  at  Ephesus  more 
particularly.  First,  let  us  observe  that  John  is  told  to  write  to 
the  angel  of  the  church  there.  The  address  is  no  longer  to 
"  the  saints  which  are  at  Ephesus,  and  to  the  faithful  in  Christ 


THE  ANGEL  OF  THE  CHURCH.  21 

Jesus."  Nor  is  it  to  the  saints  with  the  bishops  and  deacons,  as 
the  word  was  to  the  Philippian  church.  Why  is  this?  The 
Lord's  ways  are  always  full  of  grace  ;  but  they  are  righteous 
withal,  and  the  Chui'ch  was  a  fallen  and  falling  thing,  so  that 
He  could  no  longer  address  them  in  His  familiar  love  as  for- 
merly. So,  as  there  was  departure  of  the  most  serious  kind 
from  Himself,  John  is  dii'ected  to  address,  not  the  Church,  but 
its  angel  or  representative.  The  angels  spoken  of  in  these  epis- 
tles were  men,  and  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  class  of 
spiritual  beings  called  angels.*  The  apostle  John  is  employed 
by  the  Lord  to  send  a  message  to  them,  and  it  would  be  con- 
trary to  all  the  ways  of  God  to  use  man  as  a  messenger  to 
angels  in  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word.  Angels  often 
acted  between  God  and  man,  but  not  men  between  Him  and 
angels.  But  further,  I  believe  that  the  angel  here  addressed, 
though  a  man,  is  not  in  such  an  official  place  necessarily  as  a 
bishop,  &:c.  He  might  be  a  bishop,  or  he  might  not.  The 
angel  always  gives  the  thought  of  representation.  In  the  Old 
Testament  we  have  the  angel  of  Jehovah,  of  the  covenant,  &:c., 
and  in  Daniel  we  read  of  angels  who  were  identified  with 
Israel,  &c.  In  the  New  Testament  we  have  the  angels  of  the 
little  children  always  beholding  the  face  of  their  Father  in  hea- 
ven, which  clearly  means  their  repi'esentatives.  So  of  Peter  in 
Acts  xii. — they  said  it  was  his  angel.  I  gather  then  that  the 
angel  here,  though  a  man,  is,  in  some  way  or  another,  the 
representative  of  an  assembly.  Hence,  it  could  be  said,  "  I  will 
take  away  thy  candlestick,"  &c.  It  Avould  be  extremely  objec- 
tionable to  make  this  a  defined  official  place,  as  it  would  intro- 
duce not  merely  a  novelty,  but  one  that  clashes  with  all  that  is 
elsewhere  taught  in  scripture  as  to  the  assembly.  But  I  do 
not  doubt  that  in  assemblies  we  find,  as  a  fact,  a  particular 
person  whom  the  Lord  specially  links  with  the  assembly  as 
characterizing  it :  he  is  morally  identified  with  it,  and  receives 
from  the  Lord  either  praise  or  condemnation,  according  to  the 
state  of  the  assembly.  Here  the  angel  is  directly  charged  with 
the  state  of  the  assembly.     The  address  being  to  him,  and  not 

*  Origen  and  Andreas  adopted  the  latter  meaning,  but  Epipbaniiis  and  others 
expressly  reject  it.     Many  moderns  suppose  that  the  term  is  derived  from  the 

synagogue  and  that  it  answers  to  the  "n2''iJ  Xl'h'^  and  JIDJ^H  ITll.  But  if 
tills  be  so,  the  angel  of  the  church  cannot  mean  even  a  presbyter,  much  less  the 
president  or  chief  of  the  presbyters,  as  Vitringa  argues,  but  rather  what  is  called 
clerk  or  sexton.  The  New  Testament  term  for  this  chazan  or  angel  of  the  syna- 
gogue seems  to  be  i)-K-r)piT-r\s,  who  had  the  care  of  the  books,  &c.  (Luke  iv.  20). 
The  ruler,  or  apx'-'^vva.yoiyos,  was  quite  distinct ;  and  of  these  there  were  several 
(Acts  xiii.  15).     Compare  Lightfoot  (Op.  II.  pp.  279,  310). 


22  CHRIST    WALKING    AMONG    THE    CANDLESTICKS. 

to  the  assembly,  put  them,  as  it  were,  at  farther  distance  fronj 
the  Lord.  What  a  tale  this  tells  of  the  dreadful  condition  into 
which  the  Church  had  got !  He  could  no  longer  address  these 
assemblies  immediately.  He  had  spoken  directly  to  the  Corin- 
thians even  ;  for,  guilty  as  they  were,  they  had  not  so  turned 
their  back  upon  Him.  But  here  the  message  is,  ''Thou  hast 
left  thy  iirst  love."  Yet,  if  He  had  not  a  faithful  Church,  He 
Lad,  at  least,  a  faithful  servant  in  John  :  and  he  it  is  who  in  the 
first  instance  is  spoken  to.  And  be  it  ever  remembered  that 
the  Church  has  never  since  recovered  from  that  failure  and 
place  of  com])arative  distance.  The  Church,  the  house  of  God, 
is  a  complete  ruin  here  below.  And  in  ruin  the  first  thing  that 
becomes  us  is  that  we  feel  it. 

This  in  no  way  touches  eternal  salvation  ;  but  the  certainty  of 
salvation  is  abused  when  employed  to  lessen  what  is  due  to  God. 
In  fact,  there  is  never  a  deep  sense  of  sin  before  conversion  ;  for 
if  it  could  be  then,  it  would  be  accompanied  with  absolute 
despair.  But  after  we  have  remission  and  are  in  perfect  peace, 
we  can  bear  to  look  at  our  sin,  and  we  can  afford  to  judge  it 
thoroughly.  A  holy  angel  does  not  know  God  as  we  ought  to 
do — I  do  not  say  as  we  do,  though  that  be  true  also.  An  angel 
enters  into  the  wonders  of  God's  power,  "  hearkening  unto  the 
voice  of  His  word."  But  the  depths  of  God  come  out,  mar- 
vellous to  say,  about  our  sin,  and  in  His  only-begotten,  "seen 
of  angels'  indeed,  but  in  living  relationship  with  us. 

Here  the  Lord  presents  Himself  as  the  One  '•  that  holds  the 
seven  stars  in  his  right  hand,  that  walks  in  the  midst  of  the  seven 
golden  candlesticks."  (Ver.  1.)  He  is  come  to  investigate,  to 
judge, — not  yet,  of  course,  the  ungodly  world,  but  the  assembly  in 
Ephesus.  What  a  difference  between  such  a  sight  as  this,  and 
the  view  we  have  of  Him  and  of  the  Church  too  in  Eph.  i.  ii. ! 
There  He  is  seated  at  God's  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places, 
and  there  too  God  has  made  us  sit  together  in  heavenly  places 
in  Christ  Jesus.  Here  He  is  walking  in  the  midst  of  the  can- 
dlesticks. His  hand  is  needed,  for  none  but  He  could  meet  the 
difficulties.  But  is  it  not  solemn  that  He  is  so  presented  to 
that  very  Church,  to  whom  Paul  had  opened  out  the  fulness  of 
His  heavenly  grace,  the  fulness  of  their  own  blessing  in  Him  ? 
And  now  He  is  obliged,  as  it  were,  to  walk  and  vindicate  His 
authority,  not  among  those  who  have  not  known  Him,  but 
where  His  love  Lad  once  been  so  well  known  —  alas!  now  for- 
gotten and  dishonoured. 

"  I  know  thy  works,  and  thy  labour,  and  thy  patience,  and 
that  thou  canst  not  bear  evil  men  :    and  thou  hast  tried  those 


FIRST    LOVE    AND    FIRST    WORKS.  23 

that  call  themselves  apostles  and  are  not,  and  hast  found  them 
liars  :  and  thou  hast  patience,  and  hast  borne  for  my  name's 
sake  and  art  not  wearied."  (Verses  2,  3.)*  Thus  there  were 
many  things  to  praise.  There  was  jDatience,  and  that  is  the  first 
sign,  if  not  the  greatest,  that  Paul  gives  of  his  own  apostleship. 
More  than  this  :  there  is  nothing  more  easy  to  break  down  than 
patience,  after  it  has  stood  many  a  trial.  But  here,  at  Ephesus, 
there  was  endurance.  (Compare  ver.  2,  3.)  Again,  where  there 
is  patience,  there  might  be  the  tendency  to  pass  over  evil,  or  at 
least  evil  men.  But  it  was  not  so  here.  They  had  borne  for 
His  name's  sake,  but  they  could  nor,  bear  evil  persons,  and  they 
had  tried  those  that  pretended  to  the  highest  place,  to  be  apos- 
tles, and  had  found  them  liars.  And  thus  they  had  gone  on, 
and  were  not  weary.  How  sweet  of  the  Lord  (in  His  sorrow 
and,  if  we  may  so  say.  His  disappointed  love)  thus  to  begin  with 
all  that  was  good  !  But  though  there  was  what  He  could 
praise,  He  had  against  them,  that  they  had  left  their  first  love. 
They  had  let  slip  the  consciousness  of  the  Lord's  love  to  them, 
and  hence  their  own  love  to  Him  had  waned.  What  produced 
love  in  them  was  their  appreciation  of  the  Lord's  love. 

May  I  just  remark  that  the  word  "  somewhat,"  in  ver.  4, 
seems  to  weaken  the  sense?  It  might  convey  the  idea  that  the 
Lord  had  but  little  against  them  ;  whereas,  in  truth,  He  was 
exceedingly  grieved.  Not  to  feel  His  love,  not  to  return  it 
consequently,  was  the  deepest  failure,  especially  where  that  love 
had  once  been  enjoyed.  But  now  it  was  faded,  and  what  would 
not  follow  in  time  ?  "  Remember,  therefore,  whence  thou  art 
fallen,  and  repent  and  do  the  first  works  ;  or  else  I  am  coming 
unto  thee,  and  I  will  remove  thy  candlestick  out  of  its  place, 
except  thou  repent."  It  is  a  much  easier  thing  to  be  zealous  in 
doing,  than  in  repenting.  But  even  this  would  not  satisfy  His 
heart,  unless  they  got  back  to  that  first  love  which  had  produced 
their  first  works  ;  otherwise  the  candlestick  must  be  removed. 
I  doubt,  on  both  external  and  internal  grounds,  that  "  quickly" 
should  be  in  ver.  5.     For  when  He  thus  comes  to  judge  the 

*  The  common  text,  followed  by  the  Authorized  Yersion,  is  in  some  respects 
corrupted. — Their  toil  was  known,  and  endurance  they  were  not  only  eminent  for, 
but  they  had  it  still.  They  had  proved  intolerant  of  evil  persons  and  especially  of 
false  claimants  of  high  ecclesiastical  authority;  whilst  they  had  manifested  their 
willingness  to  bear  wrongs  or  afflictions  for  Christ's  sake,  and  iu  all  this  they 
were  not  weary.  Such  is  tlie  sense  of  the  right  readings  and  the  true  order.  For 
oil  KfKOTriaKas  (or  ovk  eKOTriaaas),  Erasmus  adopted,  from  his  copy  which  had  got 
mixed  up  with  the  comment  of  Andreas,  KeKoni.  ical  oh  KeKij.7]Kas.  A  few  mss.,  (16. 
37.  38.  69.,)  and  Vv.  drop  ov  before  KeKoiriaKas,  perhaps  to  seem  verbally  consistent 
with  KUTTov  in  the  verse  before  ;  but  the  evidence  for  the  meaning  I  have  given  is 
overwhelming. 


24  THE    DEEDS    OF    THE    NICOLAITANES.  « 

ways  of  His  own  people,  can  it  be  so  said  ?  Doubtless,  when 
He  comes,  whether  to  fight  with  the  Nicolaitanes,  or  to  take  us 
to  Himself,  it  is  quickly,  (Rev.  ii.  16  ;  iii.  11  ;  xxii.  7,  12,  20.) 
But  the  Lord  gives  space  for  repentance,  even  if  it  were  to 
Jezebel,  and  how  much  more  to  his  beloved  Ephesians  ? 

The  removal  of  the  candlestick  does  not  imply  that  the 
church  might  not  go  on  apparently  as  before  ;  but  that  it  lost 
its  place  as  a  trustworthy  witness  for  tbe  Lord.  Nothing  makes 
up  for  distance  between  His  people  (or  between  the  soul)  and 
Christ.  And  such  was  the  case,  not  merely  with  the  assembly 
in  Ephesus,  but  with  the  Church  generally,  I  think  we  may  say, 
even  then.  Outward  testimony  might  go  on,  but  that  is  not 
what  the  Lord  most  values  ;  though  value  it  He  does,  as  far  as 
it  is  simple,  genuine,  and  faithful.  Still,  He  cannot  bat  prize 
most  of  all  hearts  devoted  to  Himself,  the  fruit  of  His  own 
personal,  self-sacrificing,  perfect  love.  He  has  a  spouse  upon 
earth,  whom  He  desires  to  see  with  no  object  but  Himself,  kept 
pure  for  Him  from  the  world  and  its  ways.  God  has  called  us 
for  this  :  not  only  for  salvation,  and  for  a  witness  to  Himself  in 
godliness,  though  this  is  most  true  and  important,  but,  beyond 
all,  for  Christ — a  bride  for  His  Son  !  Surely  this  should  be  our 
first  and  last  and  constant  and  dearest  thought ;  for  we  are 
affianced  to  Christ,  and  He  at  least  has  proved  the  fulness  and 
faithfulness  of  His  love  to  us.     But  what  of  ours  ? 

The  effect  of  looking  at  Christ  is  that  the  Church  is  kept  in 
the  dust,  and  yet  always  rejoicing  in  the  Lord.  And  the  sense 
of  failure  in  ourselves  and  others  would  be  oppressive,  but  that 
we  are  entitled  to  find  our  joy  in  One  who  has  never  failed,  and 
who,  notwithstanding,  loves  us  who  have  given  such  a  feeble, 
faithless,  witness  for  Him.  It  is  the  going  to  Him,  even  in 
sorrowful  confession,  which  lets  us  not  part  without  blessing 
and  strength.  It  is  due  to  Him  to  own  and  feel  our  sin  ;  but  to 
be  occupied  merely  with  our  sin  never  gives  power.  Christ 
must  have  the  glory.  And  assuredly  He  who  has  delivered  us 
from  the  wrath  to  come,  He  who  can  save  fi'om  hell,  can  deliver 
from  every  ditch  on  earth  :  for  a  Christian  to  confess  his  sin, 
cleaving  to  Jesus,  is  to  vindicate  His  name,  who  comes  to  his 
succour,  and  theu  the  victory  is  sure. 

But  Avhat  a  comfort  and  how  reassuring  to  find  that  after  His 
censure,  the  Lord  again  speaks  of  what  He  can  commend. 
"  But  this  thou  hast,  that  thou  hatest  the  deeds  of  the  Nicolai- 
tanes  which  I  also  hate."  (Ver.  6.)  The  essence  of  Nicolaitanism 
seems  to  have  been  the  abuse  of  grace.  The  Ephesian  saints  had 
failed  in  cleaving  to  that  which  is  good,  but  they  had  fellowship 


THE    PARADISE    OF    MY    GOD.  25 

with  the  Lord  in  abhorring  what  is  evil.  People  often  say, 
"There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  perfect  church  upon  earth,"  I 
would  ask  such,  "  What  do  you  mean  by  a  perfect  church  ? " 
Will  any  Christian  man  tell  me  that  we  are  not  to  aim  at  every- 
thing consistent  with  the  holiness  of  God  ?  I  claim  for  the 
Church  just  Avhat  must  be  allowed  for  every  individual  Chris- 
tian. As  there  are  sure  to  be  faults  in  the  individual,  so  there 
will  be  in  the  Church.  But  then  there  is  this  blessedness,  that, 
as  there  is  One  who  dwells  in  the  individual  to  guide  and  bless 
him,  so  the  same  Spirit  dwells  in  the  Church,  and  Christ  cleanses 
it  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word.  In  an  assembly,  as 
in  an  individual,  there  are  two  things  —  the  Holy  Ghost  who  is 
the  power  of  good,  and  the  flesh  which  lusts  against  Him.  Just 
as,  in  a  man,  the  soul  may  be  said  to  pervade  the  whole  body, 
animating  it  in  every  part ;  so  is  it  with  the  Spirit  in  the  Church 
of  God.  When  persons  maintain  that  unholiness  may  be  tole- 
rated because  no  man  is  free  from  sin,  it  is  antinomianism  ;  and 
I  believe  it  to  be  the  very  principle  of  the  Nicolaitanes.  As  the 
individual  is  bound  to  be  ready  to  meet  the  Lord,  having  nothing 
left  to  be  wound  up  when  He  comes  ;  so  the  Lord  looks  for  the 
same  thing  from  the  assembly,  because  there  is  a  divine  power 
against  evil  in  the  Church  of  God. 

Then  comes  the  promise,  with  the  word  of  admonition  before 
it.  "  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith 
unto  the  churches  ;  to  him  that  overcometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of 
the  tree  of  life,  which  is  in  the  paradise  of  my  God."  (Ver.  7.) 

There  had  been  the  paradise  of  creation,  and  man  was  put  in 
it  and  tried  ;  but  he  fell.  The  churches  had  broken  down  too. 
But  now  a  new  scene  is  opened.  It  is  no  longer  the  garden 
of  Eden,  but  the  paradise  of  God — "  of  my  God,"  says  the  Lord 
Jesus.  And  therein  is  no  tree  that  could  bring  in  sorrow  and 
death.  The  tree  of  life  alone  is  there.  The  church  in  Ephesus 
had  fallen,  it  is  true,  from  their  first  love  :  but  if  there  was  but 
one  who  felt  deeply  and  aright  the  wrong  that  was  done  to  the 
Lord's  grace  —  if  there  was  but  one  who  overcame,  to  him  was 
this  promise  given  to  comfort  and  cheer  his  soul.  And  the 
Lord's  grace  is  just  as  full  now.  May  there  be  none  here  who 
have  not  ears  to  hear :  if  there  are  any  who  have,  may  they 
hear  and  overcome ! 

SMYRNA. 

Ver.  8 — IL  In  Ephesus  we  have  seen  departure  from  first 
standing.  The  next  state  is  a  difierent  one.  We  have  the  church 
at  Smyrna  in  trouble  ;    the  saints  of  God  are  suffering.     They 


26  THE    FIRST    AND    THE    LAST. 

may  have  thought  the  fiery  trial  some  strange  thing  that  had 
happened  to  them.  But,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  more  true  that  the 
Lord  is  grieved  with  a  Christian  when  He  leaves  him  without 
trouble  for  His  name's  sake.  The  Lord  had  Himself  known 
tribulation  to  the  utmost ;  but  in  Him  it  was  only  the  trial  of 
the  good  that  was  within,  and  the  bringing  out  of  His  perfec- 
tion. And  poor  as  we  are,  we  too  may  know  trial  apart  from 
our  evil.  The  Lord  has  two  objects  in  view  when  He  lays  His 
hand  upon  a  Christian  in  the  way  of  chastening.  It  may  come 
either  because  there  has  been  something  wrong,  or  because 
there  is  a  danger  of  it  little  felt  by  him.  When  David  was  out 
of  his  tribulation,  he  falls  into  a  snare.  When  his  circumstances 
were  full  of  trouble,  then  it  was  that  he,  inspired,  of  course,  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  poured  out  those  sweet  strains  that  we  read 
with  joy  to  this  day.  The  desire  to  get  out  of  trial  is  a  danger- 
ous thing  for  the  soul.  The  trial  may  be  sent  to  show  us  what 
we  really  are,  or,  what  is  better,  to  prove  what  God  is  for  us 
and  to  us  :  but  it  is  also  sent  to  prevent  us  from  falling  into  sin. 
The  Lord,  in  His  love,  thus  often  averts  the  evil,  which  He  sees 
and  we  do  not.  I  do  not  doubt  that  there  is  another  and  a 
deeper  character  of  suffering,  even  fellowship  with  the  sufferings 
of  Christ,  which  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  Lord's  faith- 
ful discipline,  though,  sometimes,  I  suppose,  the  two  things  may 
be  in  a  measure  combined. 

In  Smyrna  the  Lord  appears  to  have  been  meeting  the  de- 
clension from  first  love  that  had  set  in,  and  in  order  to  do  this, 
He  sent  tribulation.  It  is  no  uncommon  case,  thanks  to  His 
name,  for  He  is  good  and  faithful.  In  what  capacity  does  He 
speak  to  them  ?  "  These  things  saith  the  first  and  the  last, 
which  was  dead  and  is  alive."  His  title,  first  of  all,  is  that  of 
a  divine  person.  The  Spirit  claims  for  Jesus  here,  what  Isaiah 
had  before  challenged  for  Jehovah.  (Isaiah  xli.  4.)  And  what 
was  there  that  could  not  be  claimed  for  Him  ?  He  "  which  was 
dead  and  is  alive."  What  a  comfort  for  those  who  were  in 
trial !  Who  is  it  that  speaks  to  them  in  their  tribulation  ?  The 
One  who  had  been  in  the  deepest  of  sorrow  and  had  gone 
through  death  itself.  He  who  was  the  First  and  the  Last,  and 
who  had  formed  all, — He  was  the  One  that  had  died  and  was 
alive  again.  And  this  is  the  very  One  that  I  have  to  flee  to  in 
my  trial.  You  will  see  thereby  what  a  connexion  there  is 
between  the  quickening  of  the  dead,  and  the  comfort  of  those 
who  are  in  trial.  (Compare  2  Cor.  i-v.)  Jesus  was  God,  but 
He  was  man  also.  Pie  was  the  suffering  man,  and  He  was 
the  triumjihant  man  ;  and  as  such  He  was  able  to  comfort  them 
in  their  tribulation. 


THE    PATIENCE    OF    JOB.  27 

"  I  know  [thy  works  and]  tribulation,  and  poverty,  (but  thou 
art  rich,)  and  I  know  the  blasphemy  of  them  which  say  they 
are  Jews  and  are  not,  but  [are]  the  synagog-ue  of  Satan."  (Ver. 
9.)  The  word  "  Jews"  here  is  used  symbolically.  It  was  a 
name  given  to  the  nation  that  was  known  as  God's  people, 
above  all  others,  in  old  time  ;  and  these  symbols  were  taken 
from  the  Old  Testament.  It  seems  to  mean  persons  who  taking 
the  place  of  being  children  of  God,  went  back  to  hereditary 
religion.  On  the  one  hand,  there  was  this  outward  trouble, 
which  the  Lord  allowed  for  their  blessing,  and,  on  the  other, 
there  were  those  who  were  jirofessing  Jewish  principles.  (Phil, 
iii.  2.)  But  the  Lord  says,  "  Fear  not  those  things  which  thou 
shalt  suffer."  Do  not  mind  what  persons  say,  or  things  done 
against  you.  "  Behold  the  devil  shalt  cast  [some]  of  you  into 
prison,  that  ye  may  be  tried."  Thus,  by  God's  grace,  the 
enemy  himself  is  used  as  an  instrument  for  the  good  of  God's 
people  in  the  persecutions  which  he  stirs  up  against  them. 
There  is  nothing,  on  the  other  hand,  whereby  Satan  more 
effectually  draws  them  aside  than  through  a  sort  of  quiet, 
easy-going,  half-and-half  Christianity.  God  grant  that  His 
children  may  be  preserved  from  having  two  faces  or  characters 
— that  the  Christian  may  never  be  worldly  with  worldly  people, 
and  then  put  on  the  ways  and  words  of  a  saint  with  his  brethren. 

It  is  no  new  thing  for  the  Lord  thus  to  allow  the  efforts  and 
enmity  of  Satan  for  the  blessing  of  His  saints.  In  the  case  of 
Job  we  see  the  same  thing  :  indeed  the  Lord  probed  His  ser- 
vant there  far  more  deeply.  At  each  successive  trial  from 
Satan,  Job  retained  his  integrity,  and  blessed  the  Lord  ;  but  the 
Lord  showed  Job  himself —  the  very  thing  he  needed  for  the 
full  blessedness  of  turning  away  from  self  to  the  Lord.  Then 
He  showed  him  God,  and  Job's  comfort  at  last  was  as  deep  as 
his  self-abasement. 

Job  had  no  idea  that  he  thought  too  much  of  himself;  but 
that  M^as  just  what  God  had  to  show  him  he  did.  He  loved  to 
recall  the  time  when  the  fruits  of  godliness  in  him  drew  forth 
the  respect  and  esteem  of  men.  But  God  showed  him  how 
evil  a  thing  it  is  to  be  looking  at  the  effects  of  grace  in  himself 
or  upon  others.  What  the  enemy  of  God  and  man  could  not 
do,  Job's  friends  did.  He  could  stand  against  the  temptations 
of  Satan,  but  he  was  provoked  to  folly  by  his  friends  coming- 
to  condole  with  him,  and  giving  their  misdirected  opinions.  When 
a  person  talks  much  about  grace,  there  is  not  very  much  to  be 
found  of  it  there,  we  may  be  sure.  Even  Job  had  to  be  put  in 
the  furnace  to  find  out  that  there  was  a  great  deal  more  beside 


28  THE    CROWN    OF    LIFE    AND    THE    SECOND    DEATH. 

grace  in  him.  But  though  Satan  might  tempt  without  success, 
and  his  friends  only  provoke,  when  the  Lord  Himself  comes  in, 
then  at  once  Job  is  thoroughly  humbled.  He  sees  himself  in 
the  light  of  the  presence  of  God,  and  exclaims,  "  Mine  eye 
seeth  thee.  Wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and 
ashes."  But  the  end  of  the  Lord  is  as  good  at  least  as  His 
beginning.  He  is  ever  pitiful,  and  of  tender  mercy.  And  it  is 
when  Job  thinks  nothing  of  himself  that  the  true  stream  of 
grace  flows  out,  and  he  prays  for  his  fiiends.  "  And  the  Lord 
turned  the  captivity  of  Job  when  he  prayed  for  his  friends." 

The  case  of  Smyrna  follows  that  of  Ephesus.  As  already 
hinted,  I  should  apply  the  church  of  Smyrna  to  the  time  when 
the  church  was  called  to  pass  through  the  tribulation  that  fol- 
lowed the  era  of  the  apostles — the  persecutions  that  were  in- 
flicted on  the  Christians  by  the  Roman  emperors,  Szc.  "  Behold 
the  devil  shall  cast  [some]  of  you  into  prison,  that  ye  may  be 
tried  ;  and  ye  shall  have  tribulation  ten  days."  (Ver.  10.)  The 
sufferings,  death  for  Chi'ist's  sake,  &c.,  of  the  Christians,  are 
the  few  bright  spots  and  manifestations  of  life  in  the  second  and 
bea'innino-  of  the  third  centuries. 

"  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  crown 
of  life."  (Ver.  10.)  The  distinction  of  God's  servants  in  glory  is 
an  important  doctrine.  For  while  it  is  essential  to  maintain  that 
the  very  same  grace  which  pardoned  the  thief  on  the  cross  is  the 
grace  which  saved  Paul  of  Tarsus,  yet  it  would  be  a  grand 
mistake  to  suppose  that  the  thief  will  have  the  same  reward  in 
the  glory.  Nevertheless,  Ave  must  not  be  afraid  when  the  Lord 
says  to  us,  "  I  know  thy  works."  For  though  the  vessels  that 
are  to  contain  the  blessing  may  not  be  equally  large,  the  little 
cup  will  be  as  full  as  the  big  one  ;  and  full,  if  I  may  so  say,  of 
the  same  materials  of  joy  and  blessing.  In  a  glorified  state 
there  will  be  no  such  thing,  of  course,  as  a  person  being  tried — 
no  question  of  being  faithful  or  unfaithful.  But  befoi-e  we  get 
there,  spiritual  differences  exist  ;  and  when  we  are  there,  the 
distinctions  of  Christ's  kingdom  will  answer  to  the  character 
and  measure  of  service  here  below,  though  the  sovereignty  of 
God  must  be  maintained  also. 

There  was  this  suited  word  of  comfort  to  the  faithfid  in 
Smyi'na — "  He  that  overcometh  shall  not  be  hurt  of  the  second 
death."  (Ver.  11.)  Do  not  fear  the  first  death:  it  is  only  a 
servant  to  usher  you  into  the  presence  of  God.  The  second 
death  will  not  touch  you.  The  Lord  is  like  that  tree  of  old 
which  was  cast  into  the  waters  of  Marah.  He  went  into  the 
bitterest  waters  of  death,  which  have  thus  been  changed  into 
sweetness  and  refreshing  for  us. 


THE    WORLD-CHURCH.  29 


PERGAMOS. 


Ver.  12 — 18.  The  Lord  here  announces  Himself  to  the 
angel  of  the  church  m  Pergamos  as  One  who  was  armed  with 
all-searching  power  by  the  word  of  God,  the  word  of  judg- 
ment. In  the  book  of  Revelation,  the  sharp  sword  is  at  the 
command  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  the  instrument  of  judgment. 
What  the  sword  does  in  the  hand  of  man,  the  word  of  searching 
judgment  does  which  the  Lord  applies  in  the  power;  it  decides 
all  questions  that  have  to  do  with  Him.  There  is  always  a  great 
and  beautiful  connexion  between  the  way  or  title  in  which  He 
presents  Himself  and  the  state  of  the  church  which  He  is 
addressing.  It  was  because  the  word  was  no  longer  that  which 
had  living,  judging  energy  in  the  Church,  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
takes  care  to  show  that  it  had  never  lost  its  power  in  His 
hands.  As  the  first  church  shows  us  declension  set  in,  even  in 
the  days  of  the  apostle  John,  and  Smyrna  the  time  of  persecu- 
tion from  the  heathen,  so  here  we  have  a  totally  different  state 
of  things.  Pergamos  is  the  scene  of  Satan's  flattering  power  or 
seduction,  which  was  just  what  he  used  after  the  violence  of 
persecution  had  spent  itself.  It  was  a  more  dangerous  device 
than  the  second  ;  for  when  our  hearts  are  set  on  anything  that 
is  wrong,  there  is  no  one  thing  more  shows  that  God  is  against 
our  ways  than  His  giving  us  up  to  our  own  will.  "  Ephraim  is 
joined  unto  idols  :  let  him  alone.'"  In  the  case  of  Smyrna  it  was 
the  contrary  of  this  ;  it  was  the  Lord  intercepting  the  power  of 
Satan  through  persecution  from  without,  which  was  used  of 
God  to  hinder  the  growing  corruption  within. 

After  that,  the  god  of  this  world  promised  Christians  evei-y 
worldly  advantage.  The  emperor  himself  offered  to  become  a 
Christian,  though  he  put  off  baptism  till  his  death-bed.  There 
was  no  plainer  proof  how  completely  the  Church  was  fallen  and 
had  departed  from  the  Lord's  name,  than  when  it  accepted  the 
emperor's  terms  and  the  patronage  of  the  world.  Even  those 
who  were  saved  had  entirely  lost  sight  of  what  the  Church  was, 
as  not  belonging  to  the  world,  but  of  heaven.  The  Roman 
empire  was  essentially  the  world's  power.  The  Church  had 
been  called  out  to  be  the  standing  witness  of  two  great  things : 
first,  of  God's  love  ;  and  secondly,  of  the  world's  ruin.  But  when 
we  see  the  Church  shaking  hands  with  the  woi-ld,  all  is  gone, 
and  the  Church  falls  right  down  into  the  mind  of  this  age. 
If  the  world  gains  in  some  respects,  the  Church  loses  in  evei-y- 
thing ;  and  no  wonder,  because  it  is  at  the  cost  of  the  will  and 
glory  of  Christ.     Satan's  "  throne  "  is  the  sense.     It  is  the  same 


30  DOCTRINE    OF    BALAAM, 

word  as  is  used  for  "  seat,"  as  well  as  "  throne  "  in  other  parts 
of  this  very  book ;  but  here  it  is  properly  a  "  throne,"  because 
Satan  is  spoken  of  in  respect  of  authority.  It  is  obvious  that 
all  this  exactly  describes  the  state  of  things  in  Constantine's 
time.  Instead  of  being  at  the  stake  and  suffering  for  Christ's 
sake,  the  Church  was  now  yoked  with  the  world  in  a  mere 
profession  of  Christianity  ;  for  as  the  world  did  not  really  rise 
to  it,  it  must  needs  sink  to  the  world's  level.  No  wonder  the 
Lord  says  thereon,  "  Thou  dwellest  where  Satan's  throne  is." 
Yet  He  allows  all  that  He  can,  even  where  there  was  this  mise- 
rable association  —  His  assembly  dwelling  where  Satan's  throne 
was.  They  maintained  still  His  name,  and  did  not  deny  the 
faith  which  had  saved  their  souls  ;  but  that  was  all.  They  had 
just  come  out  of  the  great  persecution  in  which  Antipas  was 
slain.  But  now  the  church  at  Pergamos,  instead  of  suffering, 
was  dwelling  quietly  in  the  world.  Like  Lot,  they  too  had  their 
righteous  souls  vexed  with  the  ungodliness  of  those  around. 

The  Lord,  accordingly,  brings  forward  the  things  that  He  had 
to  warn  them  of.  "  Thou  hast  there  them  that  hold  the  doctrine 
of  Balaam."  (Ver.  14.)  What  was  the  leading  feature  that 
we  see  in  Balaam?  He  was  led  by  his  covetousness  to  try 
and  serve  the  bad  king  of  Moab  by  cursing  the  people  of  God. 
When  God  gave  him  an  answer,  he  still  goes  to  God  a  second 
time,  because  his  heart  wanted  its  own  way.  And  it  is  solemn 
to  learn  that  if  God  gives  you  up,  you  may  get  what  you  want. 
Balaam  afterwards  falls  into  even  worse  evil.  He  was  indeed  a 
man  whose  heart  was  not  with  God.  He  said  some  true  things, 
but  his  spirit  was  not  there.  He  always  speaks  as  it  were  from 
without,  as  a  miserable  man,  afar  from  the  blessing  which  he 
saw.  "  I  shall  see  him,  but  not  now ;  I  shall  behold  him,  but 
not  nigh,"  &c.  He  goes  on,  step  by  step,  until  he  lends  himself 
to  be  the  corrupter,  through  the  world,  even  of  God's  chosen 
people.  And  so  it  was  with  the  Church.  Even  the  philoso- 
phers began  to  take  up  Christian  truth,  and  in  the  writings  of 
the  fathers  we  find  pretty  much  what  we  have  here.  What 
fornication  is  in  moral  things,  such  was  their  illicit  commerce 
with  the  world  in  the  things  of  God.  There  were,  I  doubt 
not,  witnesses  who  were  made  very  little  account  of,  save  in 
heaven  ;  but  one  of  the  men  who  had  the  largest  and  most 
lasting  influence  of  all,  Augustine,  was  a  true  saint  of  God, 
and,  though  that  is  not  saying  much,  the  greatest  light  of  the 
western  church.  He  had  held  the  name  of  Christ  and  had  not 
denied  His  faith.  All  agree  that  these  epistles  applied  primarily 
to  the  churches  to  wliich  John  wrote  :  but  many  do  not  see  that 


NICOLAITANISM,  31 

they  also  apply  to  different  stages  of  the  Church,  and  describe 
its  various  states  successively. 

The  doctrine  of  the  Nicolaitanes*  seems  an  evil  from  loithin, 
as  that  of  Balaam  was  rather  from  without.  Sucli  it  was  in 
principle  and  doctrine  now.  We  read  of  their  deeds  in  Ephesus, 
but  this  went  farther  and  deeper.  It  was  a  corruption  of  grace, 
a  turning  it  to  licentiousness.  Nothing  more  terrible  than  that 
where  there  is  grace  talked  of,  grace  should  be  abused.  If  we 
search  our  own  hearts  and  ways,  we  shall  find  that  it  is  the  very 
thing  we  all  tend  to  do.  The  Lord  has  set  us  completely  free 
through  the  death  of  His  Son,  and  what  claim  has  not  this  love 
upon  our  hearts?  Do  we  not  often  treat  God's  grace  to  us  in 
the  very  same  way  that  our  children  in  their  most  hardened 
state  treat  us?  They  take  all  as  a  matter  of  right.  Though 
creation  has  been  brought  under  subjection  to  vanity  on  account 
of  Adam's  sin,  yet  there  is  no  moral  evil  connected  with  the 
beasts,  &c.  But  in  man's  case  it  is  not  so.  Knowing  the  evil, 
he  yet  goes  on  in  it.  And  even  when  we  have  got  the  certainty 
of  deliverance,  if  the  joy  of  it  have  passed  away  in  a  measure, 
we  begin  to  use  the  Lord's  grace  just  to  serve  ourselves.  This, 
carried  out  without  conscience,  is  Nicolaitanism.  God's  grace 
was  meant  to  bind  us  thoroughly  to  Himself.  We  might  see  a 
person  fall  into  evil,  and  this,  of  course,  is  sorrowful  indeed,  in  a 
Christian  ;  but  there  is  a  great  deal  more  of  evil  that  others  do 
not  see.  God  gives  us  the  opportunity  of  judging  ourselves 
when  no  one  else,  perhaps,  knows  anything  about  it.  If  we  do 
not  judge  it,  then  the  end  here  below  is  that  the  judgment  of  the 
world  comes  ;  and  we  may  be  sure  what  a  vast  amount  of  evil 
must  have  been  going  on  i^  secret,  when  God  allows  us  to  fall 
so  that  even  the  world  judges  our  course  as  evil.  But  we  must 
not  be  discouraged.  It  is  just  where  the  truth  is  most  preached 
and  held,  that  Satan  will  invariably  try  to  bring  in  the  worst  of 
heresies,  in  order  to  bring  shame  upon  the  testimony  of  God. 
When  a  man  slips  from  the  highest  pinnacle,  of  course  he  will 
have  a  more  teiTible  fall ;  as  also  it  will  be  much  more  manifest 
to  the  world  than  if  he  had  merely  upset  on  the  plain. 

The  Lord  does  not  say,  "  I  will  fight  against  thee  with  the 
sword  of  my  mouth,"  but  "  against  them"  (Ver.  16.)  The  sword 
of  judgment  may,  it  is  true,  act  in  taking  them  away  by  death,  as 
in  the  case  of  tlie  Corinthian  saints,  who  were  judged  of  the  Lord 
here  below  that  they  might  not  afterwards  be  condemned  with 

*  The  true  reading  of  verse  15  is  "  likewise,"  instead  of  "  which  thing  I  hate," 
■which  was  probably  copied  from  ii.  6.  The  sense  is,  that  there  were  such  as  held 
the  Nicolaitan  doctrine,  as  well  as  those  who  held  that  of  Balaam. 


32  THE    WHITE    STONE. 

the  world.  Christian  discipUne  does  not  mean  putting  away 
those  who  are  not  Christians  from  those  who  are  ;  rather  it 
contemplates  the  purging  out  of  Christians  who  are  walking 
wrongly,  in  order  to  maintain  the  honour  and  holiness  of  the 
Lord  in  their  midst.  Mercy  is  the  great  motive  of  discipline, 
next  to  the  maintaining  of  Christ's  character  in  the  Church.  It 
is  at  the  bottom  of  the  Loi'd's  ways  with  us,  and  surely  it  should 
be  so  for  us  with  others. 

The  fact  of  the  Church's  getting  into  the  world  isolated 
at  once  the  faithful  Christian.  The  Church  only  became  invi- 
sible through  sin.  It  was  not  God's  intention — not  according 
to  His  heart — that  it  should  ever  be  so,  though  I  beUeve  that  all 
was  permitted  and  ordered  wisely.  God  did  not  make  a  light 
to  be  hid,  but  to  be  set  on  a  candlestick.  Such  was  the  fact 
now  :  Catholicism  reigned,  if  you  take  tlie  protracted  view,  which 
soon  paved  the  way  for  Popery.  To  a  true-hearted  saint, 
amid  all  this  ruin  and  confusion.  He  says,  "  I  will  give  to  eat 
of  the  hidden  manna."  (Ver.  17.)  The  manna  represents  Christ 
Himself  as  He  came  down  from  heaven  and  took  a  place  of 
abasement  in  the  world.  Those  who  were  slipping  away  into 
the  world  are  reminded  of  the  place  which  Christ  took  down 
here.  The  hidden  manna  refers  to  the  use  which  was  made  of 
the  manna  for  the  ark  :  a  certain  portion  of  it  was  taken  into 
the  holy  place  as  a  memorial  before  God. 

It  is  not  merely  that  we  shall  share  in  and  enjoy  with  Christ 
all  His  glory  as  exalted  on  high  and  as  displayed  before  the 
world  ;  but  God  will  give  us  special  communion  with  Christ  as 
He  was  here  below.  The  sweet  thing  in  the  glory  will  be  that 
the  blessed  One,  who  has  brought  us  into  all  the  enjoyment  and 
peace  of  heaven,  is  the  same  One  we  have  known  in  all  His 
path  of  sorrow  and  rejection  in  this  world,  with  whom  we  have 
shared  it  ever  so  feebly  here,  feeding  upon  Him  as  our  portion 
even  now.  The  white  stone  was  a  mark  of  entire  acquittal. 
May  we  be  thus  looking  forward  to  Christ  and  may  God  give 
us  to  taste  His  own  delight  in  His  Son  as  He  was  here  below  in 
His  outcast  position  !  May  we  have,  besides,  the  white  stone, 
the  portion  of  the  faithful  in  a  state  of  things  like  that  of 
Pergamos  when  the  Church  and  the  world  were  enjoying  them- 
selves together  !  When  in  the  glory  such  will  enjoy  the  same 
food  that  sustains  them  now.  Christ  will  still  be  your  food  even 
in  the  glory,  and  you  will  have  the  wliite  stone,  "  and  on  the 
stone  a  new  name  written,  which  no  one  knoweth  save  he  that 
receiveth  it,"  i.e.  the  expression  of  Christ's  own  heart's  satisfaction 
in  the  way  in  which  you  have  suffered  for  Him  and  served  Him 


PLACE    OF    THE    CALL    TO    HEAR    CHANGED,  33 

below.  Assuredly  the  heart  will  most  prize  what  Christ  will 
give  between  Himself  and  it  alone — what  none  will  know  but 
ourselves  and  Himself.  The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  have 
tokens  of  love  for  Him,  even  though  none  should  know  them 
but  Himself  now. 

THYATIRA. 

Ver.  18.  There  is  an  important  change  that  occurs  in  this 
chapter,  beginning  with  the  epistle  to  Thyatira.  In  the  first 
three  churches  the  warning  word  ("  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him 
hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto  the  churches  ")  comes  before  the 
promise  ;  but  all  the  four  concluding  churches  have  the  promise 
before  the  call  to  hear. 

Now  there  must  be  a  reason  for  it :  a  wise  and  sufficient 
reason  why  the  Holy  Ghost  should  uniformly  adopt  one  arrange- 
ment in  the  three  earlier  epistles,  and  as  uniformly  depart  from 
this  and  adopt  another  arrangement  in  the  four  last.  There  is 
nothing  hap-hazard  in  the  word  of  God.  As  everything  He  has 
done  in  His  dealings  with  man,  as  all  that  He  has  made  even  in 
creation,  has  its  purpose  impressed  by  Him,  so  much  more  is  it 
with  that  word  which  developes  His  ways  and  displays  His 
moral  glory.  And  this  is  of  vast  practical  moment  to  us.  For 
remember,  the  secret  of  strength  is  in  a  Spirit-taught  knowledge 
of  God  and  His  ways  in  Christ.  To  enter  into  and  enjoy  the 
thoughts  and  feelings  of  God  as  manifested  in  what  He  does 
and  says,  in  His  own  revelation  of  Himself,  is  that  which  wins 
and  keeps,  purifies  and  strengthens  the  heart  of  the  believer. 
Israel  did  not  understand  His  ways,  and,  therefore,  never 
knowing  His  heart,  they  erred  in  their  own  ;  as  it  is  said,  "  they 
do  alway  err  in  their  heart,  for  they  have  not  known  my  ways." 
Moses,  on  the  other  hand,  did  appreciate  the  heart  of  God,  and 
accordingly  of  him  it  is  written  that  "  the  Lord  made  known  his 
ways  unto  Moses." 

In  the  first  three  churches,  then,  the  call  to  hear  is  addi-essed 
formally  to  the  whole  assembly  concerned  ;  but  in  the  last  four, 
the  change  of  situation  appears  to  mark  greater  reserve  :  the 
Lord  no  longer,  as  it  were,  expects  any  to  hear  but  him  who 
overcomes,  and  that  class  is  thenceforth,  in  a  manner,  singled 
out  from  the  rest.  Evil  had  now  set  in  over  the  professing  body, 
so  that  the  promise  is  not,  and  could  no  longer  be,  held  out  in 
the  old  indiscriminate  way.  From  this  distinction  we  gather 
that  a  remnant  begins  to  be  more  and  more  clearly  indicated. 

Something  analogous  to  this  appears  elsewhere.  Thus,  in  the 
seven  parables  of  Matt.  xiii.  the  last  three  were  unquestionably 

4 


34  THE    SON    OF    GOD, 

marked  off  from  their  predecessors,  and  were  addressed  to  a 
higher  degree  of  spirituahty.  The  first  four  were  uttered  outside 
to  the  multitude,  the  last  four  to  the  disciples  only  within  the 
house.  Wherever  we  find  in  the  Bible  a  series  of  parables, 
prophetic  visions,  or  the  like,  grouped  together  as  these  are, 
there  is  commonly,  not  to  say  invariably,  some  such  line  drawn 
between  those  which  commence  with  a  general  bearing,  and 
those  which  become  more  special  and  narrow  as  we  approach 
the  goal.  This  is  strikingly  true  of  these  Apocalyptic  epistles, 
the  last  four  of  which  sever  the  overcomers  from  the  unfaithful 
surrounding  mass.  In  short,  the  formation  of  a  faithful  remnant, 
who  were  at  first,  I  suppose,  only  morally  separate  from  the 
body  which  bore  the  Lord's  name,  now,  alas  !  untruly,  becomes 
increasingly  distinct.  In  the  case  of  Thyatira  the  Spirit  of  God 
seems  to  make  the  principle  plain  and  patent,  as  will  appear 
presently. 

The  Lord  Jesus  introduces  Himself  here  in  His  character  of 
Son  of  God,  followed  by  a  description  borrowed  in  the  main 
from  the  vision  which  the  apostle  had  seen  in  chap.  i.  "  And 
unto  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Thyatira  write,  These  things 
saith  the  Son  of  God  that  hath  his  eyes  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  his 
feet  [are]  like  fine  brass."  (Ver.  18.) 

If  we  trace  what  the  scriptures  say  of  the  Lord  Jesus  viewed 
thus,  two  things  more  particularly  are  seen.  As  Son  of  God, 
He  is  the  source  and  sovereign  giver  of  life.  (John  v.)  The 
life  which  we  by  faith  derive  (for  he  that  believeth  halh  ever- 
lasting life)  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  life  in  such  power, 
that  even  the  bodies  of  such  as  possess  it  in  Him,  will  rise  from 
the  graves  to  a  life-resurrection  ;  while  others  who  have  it  not, 
must  rise  to  a  judgment-resurrection.  (John  v.  28,  29.)  In 
the  I'esurrection  of  judgment  none  can  be  saved.  J\o  Christian 
will  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ  as  a  criminal  to 
be  tried.  All  Christians  will  appear  before  it,  (as  must  all  men,) 
but  the  result  before  the  world  will  be,  in  spite  of  loss  of  reward 
in  certain  cases,  their  glorious  manifestation  as  justified  men. 
But  if  you  or  I  had  to  appear  to  see  whether  we  were  righteous, 
and  so  could  escape  condemnation,  could  there  be  one  ray  of 
hope  for  us?  Notwithstanding,  there  never  can  be,  or  at  least 
there  never  ought  to  be,  a  doubt  as  to  the  absolute  salvation  of 
those  who  have  life  in  and  from  the  Son  of  God.  The  judgment- 
seat  of  Christ  will  clearly  display  them  as  justified  persons;  but 
we  need  not  and  should  not  wait  for  the  judgment-seat  to  know 
that  we  are  justified  :  we  are  dishonouring  God's  grace  and  His 


SOURCE    OF    LIFE    AND    LIBERTY.  35 

Son's  work  not  to  know  it  now,  "  whereof  the  Holy  Ghost  also 
is  a  witness  to  us."  Faith  is  entitled  by  divine  warrant  to  a  full 
justification,  now  and  here  below,  according  to  the  worth  and 
acceptance  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  God's  sight. 

And  this  leads  me  to  the  second  of  the  things  I  had  alluded 
to,  as  connected  with  the  "  Son  of  God."  He  gives  liberty  as 
well  as  life.  "  If  the  Son,  therefore,  shall  make  you  free,  ye 
shall  be  free  indeed."  (John  viii.  36.)  These  are  the  two  great 
aspects  of  blessing  which  characterize  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God. 
He  imparts  not  only  life,  but  liberty  too.  Not  that  they  have 
always  or  necessarily  gone  together.  For  a  man  might  have 
spiritual  life  and  yet  be  in  grievous  bondage,  as  one  observes  too 
often.  This  is  also  what  we  may  read  of  in  Rom.  vii.  A  person 
who  is  converted  has  life,  but  may  be  withal  the  most  miserable 
of  men  as  regards  his  own  experience.  "  O  wretched  man  that 
I  am  !  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  In 
chap.  viii.  we  have  the  answer  of  grace.  "  For  the  law  of  the 
Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me  free,  or  delivered  me, 
from  the  law  of  sin  and  death."  Liberty  now  goes  with  the  life 
of  the  Son  of  God,  for  He  is  the  risen  Lord  who  died  for  me  and 
discharged  me  from  all  the  claims  of  law  and  of  every  other 
thing  or  one  which  might  else  arrest  my  blessing.  The  servant 
does  not  abide  ever  in  the  house  ;  he  might  have  notice  to  quit ; 
but  there  is  no  such  thing  as  the  son's  leaving  the  house.  And 
it  is  thus,  as  sons,  God  puts  us  in  His  house,  in  the  place  of  full 
and  holy  liberty. 

What  a  searching  but  blessed  title  this  was  for  the  Lord  Jesus 
to  take,  especially  if  He  was  not  only  providing  for  the  then  need 
of  the  assembly  in  Thyatira,  but  picturing  besides  that  state  of 
departure  from  truth,  and  even  the  depths  of  Satan,  which 
characterized  the  middle  ages !  In  Ephesus,  when  almost  all 
the  apostles  had  disappeared  from  the  world,  there  was  decay  of 
first  love  ;  in  Smyrna,  persecution  from  the  heathen  powers; 
then  in  Pergamos,  the  allusion  is  plain  to  the  era  when  Christ- 
ianity gained  the  ascendant  in  the  world,  and  when  consequently 
the  Church  consummated  and  sealed  the  loss  of  her  sacred  and 
heavenly  separateness  upon  the  earth.  The  power  of  the  world 
never  gained  a  greater  victory  than  when  it  was  externally 
vanquished  by  the  cross;  when  by  merely  professing  Christ's 
name  in  baptism,  all  the  Roman  world  was  treated  as  born  of 
God — in  sliort,  when  apparently  heathenism,  but  really  Christ- 
ianity, succumbed  before  the  rising  sun  of  Christendom.  In 
many  respects  it  may  have  been  a  mercy  for  mankind,  as  it 
certainly  was  the  gravest  event  in  the  government  of  the  world 


3G  THAT    WOMAN    JEZEBEL. 

since  the  flood  ;  but  who  can  estimate  the  loss  of  the  saints,  and 
the  dishonour  of  their  Lord,  when  the  Christian  body  exchanged 
their  place  of  suffering  now  in  grace,  hoping  for  glory  with  Christ 
at  His  coming,  for  present  autliority  in,  yea  over,  the  world  ?  In 
Thyatira  we  arrive  at  a  period  darker  still — the  natural  conse- 
quence of  those  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season.  When  the  empire 
professed  the  cross  and  arrayed  it  with  gold,  it  was  not  only  that 
God's  children  were  favoured  and  caressed,  instead  of  having  to 
wander  in  sheep  skins  and  goat  skins,  or  to  hide  in  dens  and 
caves  of  the  earth,  but  inevitably  their  enemies  were  attracted, 
and  the  Balaam-state  became  developed  and  man  ran  greedily 
after  error  for  reward.  But  the  Jezebel-state  is  worse  even  than 
that,  and  most  significant  of  the  bloody  and  idolatrous  prophetess 
who  sought  to  be  universal  mistress  in  the  so-called  dark  ages, 
and  dark  indeed  they  were  !  Of  this  I  believe  the  church  in 
Thyatira  to  be  the  remarkable  foreshadowing. 

But  the  Lord  loves  to  praise  what  He  can,  and  it  is  in  a  dreary 
time  that  He  is  glad  to  be  able  to  approve  of  anything.  "  I 
know  thy  works,  and  love,  and  faith,  and  service,  (for  this  is  the 
true  order,)  and  thy  patience,  and  thy  last  works  [to  be]  more 
than  the  first."  (Ver.  19.)  "And  thy  works,"  ought  to  be  left 
out,  and  the  clause  following  should  be,  "  and  thy  last  works," 
&c.,  on  ample  authority,  which  the  sense,  I  think,  fully  confirms 
to  a  spiritual  mind.  "  But  I  have  against  thee  that  thou 
sufferest  the  woman  [or  thy  wife]  Jezebel  that  calleth  herself  a 
prophetess  ;  and  she  teacheth  and  deceiveth  my  servants  to 
commit  fornication  and  to  eat  things  sacrificed  to  idols."  Thus 
there  was  much  energy  and  devoted  service,  but  withal  the 
gravest  evil  threatened  them  and  was  at  work  then. 

When  Jezebel  sat  as  a  queen  in  Israel,  all  was  ruin  and 
confusion,  but  the  Lord  did  not  fail  to  raise  up  a  suited  witness 
for  Himself.  It  was  then  that  we  find  an  Elijah  and  an  Elisha, 
and  even  another  where  naturally  one  might  least  expect — in 
the  very  house  where  evil  was  paramount.  There  was  he  who 
gave  refuge  and  food  to  the  persecuted  prophets  of  the  Lord. 
Just  as  in  the  New  Testament  we  hear  of  saints  chiefly  to  be 
saluted  who  were  of  Cesar's  household,  so  of  old  there  was  an 
Obadiah,  who  feared  the  Lord  greatly,  over  the  house  of  Ahab 
"  which  did  sell  himself  to  M'ork  wickedness  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,  whom  Jezebel  his  wife  stirred  up."  It  was  then  too  was 
found  the  remnant  of  7000,  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee  to 
Baal.  I  think  the  Lord  would  have  said  of  that  remnant  what 
we  have  in  the  epistle  to  Thyatira — "  thy  last  works  more  than 
the  first."     The  wickedness  of  those  who  surrounded  them  made 


SUITABILITY    OF    CHRIST's    TITLE.  37 

their  faithfulness  more  precious  to  the  Lord ;  and  He  praises 
them  more,  perhaps,  we  may  add,  than  if  they  had  lived  in  a 
day  less  trying ;  just  as,  on  the  other  hand,  He  cannot  but  deal 
more  sternly  with  evil,  which  is  done  in  a  day  of  special  light 
and  mercy.  How  many  Ananiases  and  Sapphiras  have  there 
been  since  Pentecostal  times,  who  have  not  been  visited  in  the 
same  open,  unsparing  way  as  when  great  grace  was  upon  all ! 
This  is  an  encouraging  thought  to  us  who  know  ourselves  to  be 
exposed,  not  indeed  to  a  storm  of  persecution,  but  to  a  season 
far  more  perilous.  There  never  was  a  time  when  man  thought 
better  of  himself,  and  that  is  so  much  the  graver  sin,  inasmuch 
as  the  testimony  of  God's  truth  to  the  contrary  has  been  widely 
spread  abroad.  I  do  not  deny  that  it  is  a  day  of  no  small  effort 
among  Christians.  But  "  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and 
to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams  ;"  and  never  has  there  been  less 
subjection  to  the  will  of  God  than  at  this  moment.  There  is 
much  association,  which  sounds  well, — much  taking  counsel 
together ;  but  confederacy  is  one  thing,  endeavouring  to  keep 
the  unity  of  the  Spirit  is  another  and  widely  different  thing. 
But  the  Lord  says,  "  to  this  man  will  I  look,  even  to  him  that  is 
poor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit  and  trembleth  at  my  word."  The 
matter  of  real  weight  is  not  getting  Christians  together,  even  if 
they  were  all  Christians,  but  together  in  the  Lord's  way  and  for 
the  Lord's  glory  as  their  object — the  "  one  thing"  they  have  to 
do.  If  but  two  or  three  are  thus  gathered  unto  His  name,  we 
have  His  own  assurance  that  His  power  and  blessing  will  be 
ihere,  spite  of  all  appearances  to  the  contrary.  Had  we  two  or 
three  thousand  together,  but  not  in  immediate  subjection  to  the 
Lord  Jesus,  we  should  have  only  shame  and  sorrow  in  the  end, 
however  it  might  look  for  awhile.  If  we  are  seeking  to  please 
men,  we  cannot  so  far  be  the  servants  of  Christ. 

It  was,  then,  it  seems  to  me,  when  the  Lord  has  before  His 
eye  the  state  of  a  church  which  might  well  jjrefigure  the  dark 
development  of  an  after-day,  (when  the  saints  should  be  in  great 
bondage,  and  that  which  was  altogether  alien  should  be  in  the 
midst,  persecuting  them,  and  His  own  authority  null  in  practice,) 
that  He  brings  out  His  title  of  "  Son  of  God,"  whose  eyes  were 
as  a  flame  of  fire  and  his  feet  like  burnished  brass.  Peter  of  old 
had  confessed  Him  to  be  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God  ; 
and  thereon  the  Lord,  immediately  after  pronouncing  him 
blessed  and  emphatically  naming  him  by  the  new  name  He  had 
given,  adds,  "  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  church."  Now, 
alas,  the  Lord  anticipates  that  the  professing  church  would  lose 
its  balance  and  set  itself  up  virtually  in  His  own  place,  giving 


38  DEGREES  OF  EVIL  CONNEXION. 

out  that  she,  the  lady,  was  to  be  heard  in  matters  of  faith,  not 
He,  the  Lord.  Here  then  we  have  the  assertion  of  His  personal 
glory  and  the  attributes  of  His  all-searching  and  unbending 
judgment — a  serious  but  comforting  thought  for  His  own  people, 
who  might  be  in  the  midst  of  this  sad  confusion,  and  the  perfect 
provision  of  His  wisdom  to  deliver  them  from  what  was  setting 
or  set  in.  So  too  His  promise  (26,  27)  ought  to  guard  them 
from  seeking  a  present  kingdom,  a  so-called  sjiiritual  millennium 
without  Christ,  where  they  should  be  either  free  to  enjoy  the 
world  or  entitled  to  govern  it  as  yet. 

In  the  Church  at  Thyatira  there  were  faithful  persons,  loving, 
and  earnest,  especially  in  good  works ;  but  there  was  this 
terrible  blot  also — the  sufferance  of  "  that  woman  Jezebel." 
Jezebel,  as  we  are  told  here,  was  a  false  prophetess,  who  M'as 
teaching  and  deceiving  Chiist's  servants  to  commit  fornication 
and  eat  idol  sacrifices.  This  was  worse  than  the  iniquity  of  him 
who  loved  the  wages  of  unrighteousness,  a  step  further  even  in 
Balaam's  line.  "  And  I  gave  her  space  to  repent  and  she  is  not 
willing  to  repent  of  her  fornication.  Behold,  I  cast  her  into  a 
bed,  and  those  that  commit  adultery  with  her  into  great  tribula- 
tion, except  they  repent  of  her  works.  And  I  will  kill  her 
children  with  death,  and  all  the  churches  will  know  that  I  am 
he  that  searcheth  the  reins  and  hearts,  and  I  will  give  to  you, 
every  one,  according  to  your  ivorks."  (Verses  21-23») 

What  could  be  more  shocking  than  the  evil  here  foreshown  ! 
Jezebel,  as  all  knew,  was  one  who  added  violence  to  corruption, 
the  counsellor  of  blood,  the  active  hater  of  all  God's  witnesses, 
the  protector  in  private  and  public  of  the  idolatrous  priests  and 
prophets  of  Baal.  And  now,  in  Thyatira,  there  was  that  which 
intimated  to  the  Lord's  eye  the  dark  and  cruel  idolatry  which 
was  to  be  formally  taught  and  imposed  by  a  pretended  infallible 
authority  within  the  bosom  of  the  professing  church.  Even  now 
the  actual  germ  could  not  be  hid  from  Him  whose  eyes  were  as 
a  flame  of  fire.  Jezebel  was  there  and  "  her  children''  too.  It 
was  a  deep  and  lasting  source  of  evil.  But  the  judgment  of  her 
and  of  all  that  sprang  from  her  was  severe,  however  it  might 
seem  to  linger.  The  Lord  discerns  different  degrees  of  con- 
nexion  ;  but  none  should  go  unpunished. 

The  words,  "  a  few  things,"  in  verse  20,  must  disappear.  It 
was  not  a  little  complaint,  but  one  of  unusual  gravity  and  com- 
plication. The  phrase  crept  in,  I  conceive,  from  verse  14,  as 
there  is  otherwise  reseml)lance  enou"-h  to  suo-o-est  such  an  assi- 
milation  to  a  copyist.  But  on  a  closer  inspection  the  difference, 
as  we  have  seon,  is  great,  especially  if  we  are  to  read  "  thy  loife 


THE  REMNANT  IN  THYATIRA.  39 

Jezebel."  The  sin  of  fornication  or  adultery  here  is  symbohcal 
of  that  wicked  commerce  with  tlie  world,  which  is  in  the  same- 
relation  to  the  Christian  or  the  Church,  as  intermarriage  with  a 
Canaanite  would  have  been  to  an  Israelite.  The  eating-  idol- 
sacrifices  sets  forth  communion  with  what  had  a  direct  link  with 
the  power  of  Satan,  for  "  the  things  which  the  Gentiles  sacrifice 
they  sacrifice  to  devils,  and  not  to  God  "  ;  and  it  is  an  easy  thing, 
little  as  men  may  think  it,  or  Christians  may  estimate  aright  its 
enormity,  to  have  fellowship  with  devils. 

Besides  the  leading  corruptress  and  fountain-head  of  the 
mischief,  we  have  two  classes  of  persons  mentioned  who  were 
guilty  in  a  positive  way.  There  were  Christ's  servants  whom 
she  deceived  to  illicit  commerce  with  the  world,  and  there  were 
others  who  were  the  immediate  offsjiring  of  Jezebel,  "  her  chil- 
dren." With  every  one  the  Lord  would  deal  according  to  his 
works.  He  was  the  righteous  Judge,  and  man,  as  such,  must 
be  judged,  and  all,  saints  or  sinners,  must  be  manifested  before 
His  judgment- seat.  Yet  it  is  remarkable  how  the  Lords  avoids 
saying  that  the  saints  will  be  judged.  "  I  will  give,"  says  he, 
"  to  you,  every  one  according  to  your  works."  And  so  in  chap, 
xxii.  12,  and  many  similar  scriptures.  On  the  one  hand  we  are 
positively  told  that  the  believer  shall  not  come  into  judgment 
(for  John  v.  24  means  judgment,  and  not  "  condemnation," 
however  certainly  that  is  the  result  of  it).  On  the  other  hand, 
we  know  from  Rev.  xx.  12,  13,  that  the  wicked  are  to  stand 
before  the  throne,  and  to  be  judged,  every  one  according  to 
their  works.  Then*  resurrection  is  one  oi'  judgment,  (and  in 
effect,  of  condemnation,)  contrasted  with  that  of  the  righteous, 
which  is  a  life-resurrection.  Thus,  it  is  certain  that,  if  put  on 
my  trial  for  salvation  or  perdition,  according  as  my  works 
deserve,  I  must  be  lost,  for  1  have  sinned  and  have  sin  ;  yet  is  it 
equally  sure  that  the  Lord  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  the  work 
and  labour  of  love,  and  so  He  will  give  to  every  one  according 
to  his  works.  Christ  Himself,  Christ's  love,  is  the  only  right 
motive  for  a  Christian  in  anything  ;  but  there  are  rewards  for 
those  who  have  sufl'ered  for  Christ,  and  been  cast  out  for  righ- 
teousness' or  for  His  name's  sake. 

The  remnant  comes  out  with  great  clearness  in  the  next  vei'se. 
"  But  unto  you  I  say,  the  rest  (or  "  remnant,"  omitting  the 
words  "  and  unto,"  which  have  no  right  to  be  here)  in  Tliya- 
tira."  (Ver.  24.)  Here  we  have  a  faithful  few,  who  are  called 
"  the  rest,"  distinguished  from  the  mass  in  Thyatira.  The  Lord 
had  been  speaking  of  His  servants  who  had  been  seduced  to 
dally  with  the  evil  of  Jezebel,  and  her  own  children,  for  which 


40 


THE    HOPE. 


last  class  there  was  to  be  no  mercy  from  Him,  Then  another 
class  is  addressed,  the  remnant,  or  "  you  that  remain."  The 
corrupt  exterior  body  goes  on,  and  there  is  a  remnant  that  the 
Lord  now  had  specially  in  view.  He  supposes  them  to  he  igno- 
rant, it  may  be,  and  only  says,  "  whosoever  have  not  this  doc- 
trine, who  have  not  known  the  depths  of  Satan,  (as  they  speak,) 
I  put  upon  you  no  other  burden,  but  that  which  you  have,  hold 
fast  till  I  come."  (Verses  24,  25.)  It  might  be  but  negative, 
but  they  had  kept  clear  of  this  evil,  and  holding  their  little  fast, 
they  would  surely  have  their  reward  when  the  Lord  comes. 
There  were  those  who  suffered  much  for  Christ,  who  witnessed 
for  Him  in  these  dark  ages.  Such  were  the  Albigenses  and 
Waldenses ;  and  "  you  the  rest  in  Thyatira,"  I  take  to  refer  to 
these  persecuted  companies,  who  held  tenaciously  what  they 
had  from  God,  They  did  not  know  much,  but  they  were  a 
remnant  separated  and  suffering  from  the  evil  around  them, 
from  Jezebel.  Their  comfort  lies  in  no  promise  of  amendment 
in  the  Church,  but  in  a  hope  outside  all  on  earth,  even  the 
coming  of  Christ  in  person. 

There  could  not  be  a  more  admirable  sketch  in  a  few  words 
than  what  we  have  here.  And  it  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that 
the  book  of  the  Revelation  was  much  prized  by  these  saints. 
Indeed,  this  has  always  been  more  or  less  the  case  in  times  of 
persecution — not  that  it  is  the  best  motive,  for  the  book  is  valued 
most  when  the  Lord  leads  His  people  to  wait  for  His  return. 
But  His  tenderness  to  His  sufferers  in  a  dark  day  is  most  sweet ; 
and  what  a  promise  ! — "  And  he  that  overcometh,  and  he  that 
keepeth  my  works  until  the  end,  I  will  give  him  authority  over 
the  nations,"  &c.  (Verses  26,  27.)  What  the  mediaeval  church 
arrogantly  and  wickedly  sought,  the  saints  she  persecuted  or 
despised  are  yet  to  jDOSsess  in  the  coming  and  kingdom  of  their 
Lord,  and  these  accordingly  are  here  brought  in  as  the  suited 
object  of  hope.  The  guilty  church  was  not  more  cruel  towards  the 
true  saints  than  ambitious  of  power  over  the  world.  But  it  is  good 
to  wait  for  the  Lord's  way  and  time.  When  the  earthly  power  has 
been  put  aside  and  judged,  those  who  have  suffered  with  Christ 
shall  reign  with  Him.  But  He  adds  more  than  authority  over 
the  nations,  and  ruling  them  with  a  rod  of  iron  ....  as  Christ 
also  received  of  His  Father.  "  And  I  will  give  him  the  morn- 
ing star."  (Ver,  28.)  This  is  most  blessed  :  not  merely  associa- 
tion with  Christ  in  the  day  of  His  power,  when  the  stronghold 
of  men  shall  be  broken  to  shivers,  like  the  vessels  of  a  potter, 
but  "  gathering  together  unto  Him  "  before  that  day. 

The  sun,  when  it  rises,  summons  man  to  his  busy  toil,  but  the 


THE    HOPE.  41 

morning-star  shines  for  those  only  who  sleep  not  as  do  others — 
for  those  who  watch  as  children  of  light  and  of  the  day.  We 
shall  be  with  Christ  doubtless  when  the  day  of  glory  dawns 
upon  the  world ;  but  the  morning-star  is  before  the  day,  and 
Christ  not  only  says  "/«m  ....  the  bright  and  morning-star,"  but, 
"  I  will  give  ....  the  morning-star."  He  will  come  and  receive 
His  heavenly  ones  before  they  appear  with  Him  in  glory.  May 
we  be  true  to  Him  in  the  refusal  of  present  ease,  and  honour, 
and  power  !  May  we  follow  Him  taking  up  our  cross  and  deny- 
ing ourselves  daily !  He  will  not  forget  us  in  His  day,  and  He 
will  give  us,  ere  that  comes,  the  morning-star. 


42  A    NEW    ORDER,    OR    RECOMMENCEMENT. 


CHAPTER    III. 


SARDIS. 


Ver.  1 — 6.  I  think  that  any  discerning  reader  must  perceive 
that  we  are  entering  upon  an  entirely  new  order  of  things  in  this 
chapter,  or,  at  least,  a  sort  of  fresh  start.  It  is  quite  true  that 
what  we  have  been  looking  at,  in  the  former  chajoter,  may  still 
exist  and  be  verified  at  the  same  time  with  the  new  features  that 
are  brought  out  here.  For  instance,  the  Ephesian  state,  declen- 
sion from  first  love,  may  be  still  going  on.  And,  again,  wher- 
ever there  is  persecution  from  the  powers  of  the  world,  the 
epistle  to  Smyrna  may  apply.  So,  also,  wlierever  Satan  is 
trying  to  bribe  the  Church  by  a  desire  of  gain,  you  have 
Pergamos  ;  where  the  still  more  corrupt  evils  of  idolatry  and 
inward  persecution  are,  is  Thyatira.  While  all  these  features  may 
be  found  at  one  time  or  another  and  still  going  on  at  the  same 
moment,  yet  we  find  in  Sardis  another  condition,  and  one  which 
answers  to  the  general  state  of  Protestantism  after  the  Tleforma- 
tion.  We  have  not  so  much  open  evil,  like  idolatry  and  the 
other  horrors  that  have  been  described  before  ;  but  now  we 
have  a  more  correct  outward  form  and  orthodox  aspect  of 
things.  As  the  four  churches  in  the  second  chapter  follow 
on  consecutively,  and  describe  the  state  of  things  before  the  rise 
of  Luther,  &c.,  so  Sardis  describes  what  followed  the  Reforma- 
tion, when  the  glow  and  fervour  of  truth  and  the  first  flush  of 
blessing  had  passed  away,  and  a  cold  formalism  had  set  in. 
The  way  in  which  the  Lord  ])resents  Himself  is  wonderfully 
suitable.  "  These  things  saith  He  that  hatli  the  seven  Spirits  of 
God  and  the  seven  stars."  (Ver.  1 .)  The  seven  Spirits  of  God 
refer  to  the  Spirit  of  God's  fulness  of  power,  viewed  in  His 
various  perfections  and  the  ways  in  which  He  works  ;  and  this 
not  only  in  the  Church,  but  towards  the  world.  In  chap,  v., 
when  the  churches  are  done  with,  the  Lord  Jesus  is  described 
symbolically  as  a  lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,  having  seven  horns 
and  seven  eyes,  which  are  the  seven  S])irits  of  God  sent  forth 
into  all  the  earth  —  the  Holy  Ghost  as  acting  with  a  view  to  the 
government  of  the  earth.  It  is  not  the  Holy  Ghost  in  all  the 
fulness  of  the  blessing  into  which  He  brought  the  Church  in  its 


PROTESTANTISM    ECCLESIASTICALLY    WRONG.  43 

unity.  But  whatever  uiight  be  the  condition  of  the  Church,  the 
Lord  Jesus  was  the  One  who  had  all  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  and  He  only  is  the  One  who  has  at  the  same  time  full 
outward  authority.  There  were  no  two  things  more  separated 
than  these  at  the  time  of  the  Reformation.  There  was  then  a 
large  body  calling  itself  the  Church,  which  claimed  the  power 
of  settling  everything,  as  being  the  spouse  of  Christ ;  and  then 
the  claim  of  infallibility  was  strongly  advanced,  because,  of 
course,  those  who  assume  unresponsible  authority  as  Christ's  vicar 
to  settle  the  affairs  of  the  Church,  to  define  doctrine,  &c.,  ought 
to  be  infalUble.  This  body  had  wrought  for  ages,  gathering- 
power  for  itself,  and  at  last  the  struggle  came,  and  it  was  proved 
that  it  was  a  mass  of  the  greatest  evil  against  God  and  His  Son 
that  had  ever  been  congregated  upon  the  earth.  There  might 
have  been  true  saints  of  God  in  it  at  its  worst  of  times,  and  I 
think  that  some,  such  as  Cyprian,  had  even  helped  to  give  it 
this  false  place  of  authority.  For  instance,  St.  Bernard  sanc- 
tioned the  persecutions  of  the  Waldenses.  But  it  is  well  to 
bear  in  mind  that  there  cannot  be  a  greater  fallacy  than  to  abide 
in  what  is  wrong,  merely  because  we  find  true  saints  of  God 
there  ;  for  the  great  aim  of  Satan  is  to  try  and  get  good  people  to 
do  bad  tilings.  When  at  last  the  crisis  arrived,  and  men  rose 
up  in  a  certain  part  of  the  world  against  this  frightful  evil,  there 
was  the  sej^aration  of  these  two  thoughts  of  ecclesiastical  autho- 
rity and  spiritual  power.  Instead  of  its  being  a  body  that 
claimed  both,  everything  ran  into  disorder,  and  men  fell  back 
upon  the  power  of  the  world,  in  order  to  gain  freedom  from  the 
dominion  of  the  pojDe. 

Thus  Protestantism  was  always  wrong,  ecclesiastically,  from 
the  very  beginning,  because  it  looked  up  to  the  civil  ruler  as  the 
one  in  whose  hands  ecclesiastical  authority  was  vested  ;  so  that 
if  the  Church  had  been  under  popery  the  ruler  of  the  world,  the 
world  now  became,  in  Protestantism,  the  ruler  of  the  Church. 
It  is  not  a  question  of  church  and  state — that  is  a  great  deal  too 
narrow  and  low  a  question  for  a  Christian  to  be  discussing. 
The  great  thing  is  to  be  in  the  path  of  Christ,  giving  honour  to 
Him.  "  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou 
livest,  and  art  dead."  This  describes  the  formal,  outward  ways 
of  religion  that  were  the  effect  of  the  Reformation  among  those 
that  were  not  really  Christians.  The  Lord  Jesus  shows  what 
He  disapproves  of  in  Protestantism. 

In  Protestant  lands,  there  has  always  been  a  measure  of 
liberty  of  conscience.  But  the  object  of  God  is  not  merely  to 
deliver  either  from  gross  evils,  or  from  little  details,  but  that  the 


44    CHRIST    HAS    COMPLETENESS    OF   AUTHORITY    AND    POWER, 

soul  should  be  right  with  God,  and  should  allow  the  Lord  to 
have  His  way  and  glory  —  liberty  for  the  Lord  to  work  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  according  to  His  will.  When  He  is  allowed  His 
right  place,  there  is  the  blessed  fruit  of  it  in  love  and  holy 
liberty.  It  is  not  a  human  liberty  derived  from  the  power  of 
the  world  that  we  want,  (though  God  forbid  that  we  should 
speak  a  word  against  the  powers  that  be,  in  their  sphere,)  but 
the  liberty  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  the  sin  of  Christians  to 
have  put  the  powers  that  be  in  a  false  position.  The  Lord  Jesus 
touches  the  root  of  the  whole  matter  in  the  way  in  which  He 
presents  Himself  to  the  church  of  Sardis.  Whether  it  is  spiri- 
tual power  or  the  outward  authority  flowing  from  it,  the  Lord 
claims  it  all  as  belonging  to  Him.  In  Ephesus  it  was  said  that 
He  held  the  seven  stars  in  His  right  hand,  but  here  are  united 
the  two  things,  inward  spiritual  power,  and  outward  authority. 
He  hath  the  Spirits  of  God  and  the  stars.  It  is  not  said  here 
that  He  holds  the  stars  in  His  right  hand,  but  that  they  are 
His,  as  well  as  the  fulness  of  spiritual  competency. 

In  the  great  mass  of  Protestant  churches  they  gave  up,  as  it 
were,  the  seven  stars  into  the  hands  of  the  powers  that  be.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  persons  who  revolted  from  that  fell  into  the 
sad  evil  of  making  the  Church  to  be  the  one  who  had  the  seven 
stars  in  its  own  keeping.  There  is  not  such  a  doctrine  in  the 
whole  scripture  as  either  the  world  or  the  Church  having  this 
kind  of  authority  in  its  own  hands.  But  the  Lord  Jesus  has 
still  all  under  Himself.  He  has  not  given  it  up  ;  and  it  only 
requires  the  Church  to  own  what  He  is,  and  He  will  act  accord- 
ingly. When  there  is  faith  to  own  Him  in  His  place  as  Head 
of  the  Church,  He  will  assuredly  supply  every  need.  If  He 
listens  to  the  simplest  cry  of  His  lamb,  does  He  not  enter  into 
the  deeper  need  of  the  Church,  which  is  always  His  most  beloved 
object  ?  He  took  His  Headship  of  the  Church  only  in  heavenly 
glory,  and  He  is  there  not  merely  to  he,  but  to  act  as  the  Head. 
What  is  His  function  as  He.id  of  the  Church  ?  He  exercises 
authority,  having  persons  to  act  under  Him  here  below,  and  the 
existence  of  rule  and  gift  in  the  Church  of  God  is  the  result : 
these  are  not  touched  by  the  ruin  of  the  Church.  The  Lord, 
anticipating  the  time  when  there  would  be  a  revolt  from  under 
the  spurious  authority  of  the  body  calling  itself  the  Church,  and 
foreseeing  all  the  confusion  that  would  be  the  result,  presents 
Himself  as  the  One  who  is  superior  to  it  all.  Whatever  may 
be  the  condition  of  things  here,  strength  is  in  Christ ;  and  we 
shall  not  find  strength  in  looking  at  the  condition  of  the  Church, 
but  at  Christ. 


AND    NEVER    GIVES    UP    HIS    STANDARD.  45 

When  the  apostles  were  here  below,  they  were  empowered 
to  act  for  Christ  in  a  very  special  way  ;  but  when  they  were 
taken  away,  the  real  source  of  power  in  which  they  had  acted, 
subordinately  to  Christ,  was  not  dried  up  ;  the  Lord  Jesus 
has  it  all  in  His  own  keeping  still.  There  was  a  name  to  live, 
but  real  death.  Me  was  speaking  of  their  condition  as  a  body, 
and  not  as  individuals.  "  Be  watchful,  and  strengthen  the 
things  that  remain,  which  were  about  to  die  :  for  I  have  not 
found  thy  works  perfect  [filled  up]  before  my  God."  Here  we 
have  again  a  very  striking  feature  of  what  took  place  in  Pro- 
testantism. In  the  desire  to  escape  from  the  abuse  of  works  by 
the  Romish  system,  it  is  evident  that  works  lost  their  due  place 
in  the  minds  of  Christians — their  place  for  those  who  have  been 
brought  nigh  to  God,  for  God  does  look  for  a  very  separate  and 
distinct  path  to  be  taken  by  His  people  ;  and  He  finds  fault 
with  Sardis  because  of  their  failure  in  this.  The  saints  of  God, 
even  in  Thyatira,  were  commended  of  God  for  their  earnestness, 
in  spite  of  all  the  evil.  Their  last  works  were  more  than  the 
first.  Protestantism  has  weakened  the  idea  of  obedience,  under 
the  plea  of  "  no  perfection,"  either  in  the  Church  or  in  the 
individual.  Thus  there  has  been  a  great  lowering  of  the  stand- 
ard wherever  Protestantism  has  prevailed  :  but  our  God  looks 
for  perfection  as  the  standard  His  children  should  judge  them- 
selves by — I  do  not  say  attain.  He  has  grace  to  meet  failures, 
but  it  is  quite  another  thing  for  persons  to  settle  down  into 
departure,  from  not  having  the  divine  standard  before  their 
eyes.     The  Lord  always  goes  back  to  this. 

It  is  better,  in  seeking  to  have  that  standard  before  us,  to  fail 
in  carrying  it  out,  than  to  succeed  ever  so  much,  if  we  gave  it 
up.  For  what  does  the  Lord  most  value  ?  The  heart  that 
wants  to  please  Him.  The  child  may  come  to  its  father  and 
say,  "  See  what  a  pretty  thing  I  have  been  making ;"  but  if 
the  parent  had  told  him  to  do  something  else,  he  would  ask  the 
child,  "  Is  that  what  I  desired  you  to  do  ?  "  The  Lord  has  His 
will,  and  it  is  that  which  meets  us  in  our  first  need,  and  is 
the  source  of  our  very  salvation.  But  it  is  far  from  the  natural 
thought  of  the  heart,  which  does  not  like  subjection  to  another's 
will.  It  is  but  part  of  the  lie  of  the  enemy.  The  will  of  God 
was  evidently  that  which  accomplished  our  sanctification,  through 
Him  who  said,  "  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will."  In  Rom.  x.  tJie 
apostle  puts  our  part  of  the  matter  in  contrast  with  Jewish  feeling. 
They  thought,  if  they  accomplished  as  much  of  the  law  as 
they  could,  that  God  was  merciful,  and  would  make  up  the 
rest :    but  the  apostle  shows  that  subjection  to  the  righteousness 


46  NEITHER    THE    AVORLD,    NOR    THE    CHURCH, 

of  God  is  salvation.  God's  will  is  the  very  spring  and  power 
of  our  blessing,  not  only  in  the  matter  of  forgiveness,  but 
all  the  way  through.  Take  God's  ways  in  the  Church.  These 
were  subjects  that  were  particularly  neglected  at  the  Refor- 
mation. Individual  truth,  such  as  justification  by  faith,  was 
brought  out  forcibly  and  over  a  large  field.  But  this  was  made 
the  great  point  and  aim  of  everything,  and  the  consequence 
was,  that  people  never  knew  they  were  justified  thoroughly. 
The  moment  I  make  my  own  blessing  the  one  or  chief  thing  I 
am  looking  for  in  the  Bible,  I  shall  never  know  anything  aright ; 
but  when  God's  thoughts  and  objects  become  my  aim,  I  shall 
know  directly  that  I  am  saved  and  blessed  indeed.  I  cannot 
look  at  the  cross  of  Christ  without  seeing,  at  the  same  time, 
my  utter  ruin,  and  my  complete  deliverance.  If  a  man  is 
doubting  or  hesitating,  as  to  whether  he  is  so  very  bad  as  God 
declares,  he  has  to  wait  before  he  enjoys  the  riches  of  His  grace  ; 
but  if  I  trust  myself  unhesitatingly  in  God's  hands,  there  is  not 
a  blessing  that  does  not  flow  out  to  me.  We  find  ourselves  to 
be  as  bad  or  worse  than  Israel,  and  then  we  are  brought  inside 
a  circle  of  goodness  and  mercy,  superior  to  any  thing  they  ever 
possessed. 

At  the  Reformation,  all  this  was  comparatively  lost  sight  of; 
and  in  escaping  from  the  fearful  net  of  Popery,  they  fell  into 
the  sin  of  putting  church  power  into  the  hand  of  the  civil  magis- 
trate. Others,  again,  who  avoided  this  evil,  made  what  they 
considered  a  true  church  to  be  the  depository  of  this  power  ; 
whereas  it  is  Christ  Himself  still  working  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
that  maintains  His  own  lordship,  a  truth  which  is  taught,  at 
large,  in  the  epistles.  Supposing  a  person  labours  as  a  pastor 
or  a  teacher,  from  what  authority  is  he  to  act  ?  While  there 
was  human  appointment  of  those  who  had  to  do  with  local 
matters,  yet  wherever  it  was  a  question  of  spiritual  ministry, 
there  never  was  such  a  thing  from  the  very  first.  Even  in  the 
case  of  choosing  a  successor  to  the  vacant  seat  of  Judas,  the 
apostles  did  not  themselves  elect,  but  threw  it  out  of  their  own 
hands  into  those  of  the  Lord.  (Acts  i.)  And  when  the  Lord 
afterwards  chose  another  apostle,  we  find  "  one  Ananias,"  in- 
deed, sent  to  baptize  him,  but  there  was  no  such  thing  as  that 
disciple,  or  any  one  else,  making  him  an  apostle.  In  what  we 
have  afterwards  (Acts  xiii.)  i.e.  the  case  of  hands  being  laid  on 
the  apostles  Paul  and  Barnabas,  it  was  not  a  bestowing  of  any 
orders  or  mission,  for  it  was  done  by  men  inferior  to  themselves 
in  point  of  spiritual  gift  and  power,  but  was  simply  their  brethren 
commending  them  to  the  Lord  before  they  set  out  on  a  parti- 


BUT    CHRIST    IS    THE    HEAD.  47 

cular  missionary  tour  to  the  Gentiles.  We  have  a  right  to  look 
for  the  Lord  to  maintain  His  anthoi'ity  in  the  Church.  In  all 
ages,  we  find  He  was  helping  His  blessed  people,  and  doing 
His  work  by  His  servants.  If  a  person  wants  to  preach,  he 
naturally  thinks  he  must  have  the  warrant  of  some  authority  ; 
but  if  we  seek  an  authority  at  all,  we  should  have  a  competent 
one.  Although  there  may  be  more  respectability  in  the  world, 
where  there  are  these  outward  credentials,  the  question  rises, 
Has  the  Lord  required  authority  to  validate  a  person's  preach- 
ing the  gospel  ?  The  apostles  did  appoint  elders  and  deacons  ; 
but  these  might  be  preachers  and  teachers,  or  they  might  not : 
their  being  deacons  was  another  thing  altogether.  Philip  was 
a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  but  that  depended  upon  his  having  a 
gift  from  the  Christ  as  the  head  of  the  Church,  and  not  upon 
his  being  one  of  "  the  seven."  Men  have  slijjped  into  habitual 
departure  from  God's  principles  ;  and  this  is  called  "  order," 
because  it  is  the  most  prevalent  custom  now  in  the  professing 
church.  And  thus  when  we  give  up  true  principles,  we  get 
into  wrong  ])ractice.  The  Lord  attaches  great  importance  to 
our  owning  Him  as  the  One  who  has  all  power  and  authority 
in  His  own  hands.  The  moment  I  own  this,  it  becomes  binding 
on  my  conscience.  If  I  know  a  thing  to  be  wrong,  my  con- 
science is  held  to  it ;  I  may  not  be  able  to  see  at  once  what  is 
the  right  path  to  take,  but  to  cease  from  what  is  evil  is  evidently 
the  first  step,  and  it  is  imperative. 

The  connexion  between  the  end  of  the  2nd  verse  ("  I  have 
not  found  thy  works  perfect  before  God")  and  what  follows 
("Remember,  therefore,  how  thou  hast  received  and  heard," &c.) 
is  very  sweet.  He  I'ecalls  them  to  what  they  had  received  from 
God  Himself  at  the  first.  No  such  thought  is  allowed  as  that 
because  things  are  not  as  they  were  then,  therefore  every  church 
has  a  rio'ht  to  form  its  own  laws.  If  it  would  be  downrioht 
rebellion  to  say,  because  the  Queen  does  not  live  in  Ireland, 
that  therefore  the  Irish  people  were  at  liberty  to  make  what 
laws  they  pleased,  it  is  as  bad  or  worse  if  we  think  that,  because 
things  are  changed,  the  apostles  gone,  and  confusion  come  into 
the  Church,  men  are  left  free  to  desert  the  word  of  Christ  and 
do  their  own  wills  :  the  Lord  has  left  us  His.  The  very  word 
of  Ciod  that  tells  me  what  I  once  was,  but  that  I  am  washed, 
sanctified,  and  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  by 
the  Spirit  of  our  God,  this  same  portion  enters  into  all  questions 
of  the  assembly,  and  the  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  it  by 
whom  He  will.  (1  Cor.)  There  may  be  no  tongues,  or  gifts  of 
miracles,  and  healings  ;    but  is  the  Holy  Ghost  here  ?     What 


48  THE  lord's  coming  as  a  thief. 

He  continues  to  do  is  according*  to  the  same  principle  and  pre- 
sence as  at  first,  though  in  a  very  different  measure  of  power. 

Remark,  also,  that  the  Lord's  coming  is  spoken  of  in  the  way 
in  which  it  was  threatened  on  the  world.  "  If,  therefore,  thou 
shalt  not  watch,  I  will  come  on  thee  as  a  thief,"  &c.  (Ver.  3.) 
He  would  come  upon  them  when  they  were  not  aware — suddenly 
and  unwelcome.  They  had  got  into  the  world,  and  they  should 
have  to  beware  of  the  portion  of  the  world.  If  you  have  taken 
the  world's  ease,  you  must  needs  dread  the  world's  judgment. 
That  is  not  the  way  in  which  the  Lord  speaks  of  His  coming  to 
the  Church.  In  reality  and  all  the  extent  of  the  words,  it  will 
be  upon  the  professing  mass,  and  not  upon  real  believers,  that 
the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief.  "  But  thou  hast  a  few  names  in 
Sardis,  which  have  not  defiled  their  garments  ;  and  they  shall 
walk  with  me  in  white  :  for  they  are  worthy.  He  that  over- 
cometh,  the  same  shall  be  clothed  in  white  raiment."  (Verses 
4,  5.)  The  Lord  brings  in  this  sweet  comfort,  that  as  they  had 
sought  to  act  faithfully  on  earth,  they  should  walk  with  Him 
in  white.  As  they  had  walked  in  purity  here  below,  they 
should  appear  in  full  justification  of  their  ways  before  God  above. 
But  this  is  spoken  of  individually  :  the  state  of  the  Church  as  a 
whole  was  evidently  bad.  The  moment  a  person  ascertains  that 
his  association  is  contrary  to  the  word,  he  should  feel  it,  and 
consider  what  is  due  to  the  Lord.  It  might  seem  incredible, 
if  one  did  not  know  the  fact,  that  there  have  been  and  are  men 
of  God,  guides  of  the  flock,  who  not  only  abide  in  evil  which 
they  know,  but  seek  to  find  a  palliative  in  the  circumstances  of 
a  righteous  Asa  or  a  godly  Jehoshaphat,  who  nevertheless  did 
not  remove  the  high  places.  Alas !  that  the  solemn  revelations 
of  God  should  be  thus  perverted  so  as  to  serve  the  ends  of  the 
enemy,  and  that  a  repeated  warning  should  be  tortured  into  a 
justification  of  sin.  "  The  light  of  body  is  the  eye :  therefore 
when  thine  eye  is  single,  thy  whole  body  also  is  full  of  light ; 
but  when  thy  eye  is  evil,  thy  body  also  is  full  of  darkness.  Take 
heed,  therefore,  that  the  light  which  is  in  thee  be  not  darkness." 
It  is  not  enough  to  correct  thoughts,  and  rest  there  ;  but  if  the 
Lord  has  given  a  judgment,  is  it  not  in  order  that  the  walk  may 
be  correspondent?  Satan  contrives  to  make  the  path  of  the 
Lord  appear  very  sad ;  as  he  clothes  a  worldly  course  with  the 
semblance  of  humility,  order,  and  the  like.  But  the  word 
makes  all  plain  now,  as  power  will  by  and  by,  even  to  the  world. 

May  we  walk  with  the  Lord  now,  and  surely  we  shall  walk 
with  Him  in  white  hereafter  !  Instead  of  a  blotted  name,  ours 
He  will  confess  before  His  Father  ^nd  the  holy  angels. 


THE    lord's    person    APPRECIATED.  49 


PHILADELPHIA. 


The  tone  of  the  epistle  to  Philadelphia  must  I  think  confirm 
the  idea  presented  as  to  Sardis,  that  in  this  portion  (Rev.  iii.)  we 
have  not  so  much  the  early  church,  or  that  of  the  middle  ages, 
but  what  is  found,  or  is  developed,  in  modern  times.  Sardis  is 
the  beginning  of  this :  a  state  of  things  not  marked  by  flagrant 
evil,  but  by  one  sad  and  fatal  cliaracteristic  —  it  is  negative. 
Any  fair  persons,  who  have  thought  deeply  on  what  is  called 
Protestantism,  must  know  that  this  is  the  sorrowful  thing  which 
we,  who  have  been  Protestants,  and  thus  share  its  shame,  have 
to  acknowledge.  Men  stand  up  too  much,  at  least  too  self- 
complacently,  for  certain  controversial  points,  which  hide,  in  a 
great  measure,  their  own  wants  and  failures  ;  they  pride  them- 
selves on  keeping  apart  from  certain  evils,  such  as  the  supre- 
macy of  the  jDope,  the  infallible  authority  of  the  church,  the 
worsiiip  of  the  Virgin,  saints,  and  angels,  the  doctrine  of  the 
mass,  purgatory,  &c.  Supposing  that  there  were  all  ortho- 
doxy as  to  these,  there  might  be  a  thousand  evils  of  another 
character  ;  and  together  with  outward  correctness,  the  heart  be 
thoroughly  away  from  the  love  and  honour  of  the  Lord.  This 
is  precisely  what  we  saw  in  Sardis — a  name  to  live,  but  yet 
dead.  As  in  Israel,  when  the  Lord  Avas  on  earth,  the  old  ido- 
latry had  passed  away,  the  unclean  spirit  had  left  the  house, 
and  had  not  returned  ;  so  the  swept  and  garnished  condition  of 
the  house  answers  to  that  which  follows  the  Reformation.  But 
we  must  distinguish  between  that  and  the  work  which  God 
gave  the  Reformers  to  do.  Let  none  speak  disparagingly  of 
these  men,  whether  Luther  or  others ;  but  while  God  was  work- 
ing in  that  great  movement,  it  would  have  been  better  and  holier 
if  they  had  left  earthly  governments  to  their  own  proper  functions. 
No  doubt,  their  patrons  spared  them  persecutions  and  secured 
them  honours,  which,  instead  of  helping  God's  work  on,  proved 
a  great  hindrance.  And  so,  when  the  fervour  of  first  zeal  had 
passed  away,  the  state  of  things  answers  to  Sardis. 

In  Philadelphia,  we  have  something  totally  different.  The 
first  thing  that  strikes  us  is  not  what  the  Lord  does  or  has,  but 
what  the  Lord  is  Himself.  If  there  is  anything  that  delivers 
from  mere  dogma,  with  all  its  chilling  influences,  it  is,  I  appre- 
hend, the  person  of  the  Lord  appreciated  in  any  special  way. 
And  this  I  see  in  the  epistle  to  Philadelphia.  The  Lord  here 
presents  Himself  more  personally  than  in  any  other  of  these 
epistles.  It  is  true  He  is  said  to  have  the  key  of  David  ;  but 
before  anything  appears  about  this.  He  says  that  He  is  the  Holy 


50  CHARACTER    OF    THE    GOSPEL    OF    JOHN. 

One,  and  the  True.  In  the  other  epistles  we  do  not  find  the 
character  of  the  Lord  in  the  same  moral  point  of  view.  This  is, 
in  my  opinion,  what  the  Lord  has  been  working  in  the  Church 
during  late  years.  The  impulse  given  to  evangelization  by  the 
spread  of  Bibles,  and  missionary  effort,  has  marked  it  outwardly  ; 
but  inwardly  the  sense  of  ruin  has  been  used  of  the  Spirit  to 
lead  the  saints  to  the  word,  and  hence  to  a  fuller  appreciation 
of  the  person  of  Christ  —  the  only  object  in  which  we  can  rest, 
through  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  He  was  God  the  Father's  when  He 
walked  on  earth. 

There  is  something  very  beautiful  in  the  way  in  which  the 
Lord  makes  Himself  thus  known,  after  the  epistle  to  Sardis, 
which  was  in  a  dead  worldly  state.  Christ  made  Himself  known, 
and  He  is  the  resurrection  and  the  life.  And  what  can  give 
new  life,  put  the  Church  in  its  proper  attitude,  or  bring  a  rem- 
nant to  the  walk  and  sentiments  which  become  a  time  of  ruin, 
but  the  Lord  presenting  Himself  personally  ?  This  is  charac- 
teristic of  John's  gospel ;  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
Himself,  not  only  in  His  own  rights,  but  as  baptizing  with  the 
Holy  Ghost,  in  the  activity  of  gracious  power,  which  is  suitable 
to  His  glory.  The  first  portion  of  it  brings  His  person  before 
us  ;  the  second,  the  other  Comforter,  whom  the  absent  Lord 
was  to  send  down  from  heaven.  It  is  beautiful  thus  to  see  the 
place  that  John's  gospel  has  in  the  scriptures  of  God.  It  was 
written  very  late,  the  last  of  all  the  gospels,  and  suited  to  a  day 
of  declension.  There  is  no  question  of  Jerusalem  or  of  the 
Jews,  as  the  immediate  object  of  God,  even  in  the  way  of  testi- 
mony. They  are  noticed  as  a  people  outside,  whom  God  has 
nothing  to  do  with  for  the  time.  Hence  the  Lord  speaks  of  the 
passover  as  a  "  feast  of  the  Jews,"  &c.  In  Matthew,  on  the 
contrary,  there  is  the  recognition  of  Israel  for  the  truth  of  God. 
The  boar  out  of  the  wood  may  waste,  and  the  beast  devour,  but 
it  is  Israel's  land  still ;  and  Jerusalem  is  called  the  holy  city, 
even  in  connexion  with  Christ's  death  and  resurrection.  In 
John  all  that  is  at  an  end.  Not  only  had  Jerusalem  and  the 
Jews  forfeited  all  claim  upon  God,  having  departed  from  Him 
as  Jehovah,  and  the  law  and  the  prophets,  but  they  had  rejected 
Christ ;  yea,  and  when  the  Holy  Ghost  came,  they  rejected 
Him  too,  and  would  not  listen  to  Him  any  more  ;  so  that  there 
was  no  resource.  God  had  manifested  Himself  in  every  possible 
way.  No  manifestation  of  God,  where  man  was  under  law, 
could  do  any  good.  Individuals  laid  hold  of  God's  grace  all 
through,  but  the  nation  was  under  law.  The  gospel  of  John 
.starts  from  this  point,  that  all  was  darkness,  and  there  the  True 


fHE    LORD    THE    FIRST    OBJECT.  ^1 

Light  shines,  though  the  darkness  comprehends  it  not.  In  Him 
was  Hfe.  This  ever  remains  true,  though  He  may  deal  judi- 
cially here. 

But  to  return  to  these  churches.  There  had  been  declension 
from  first  love,  suffering  from  heathen  power,  Satan  tempting 
through  the  power  of  the  world,  Jezebel  seducing  to  idolatry, 
and,  in  short,  every  kind  of  evil  commerce  with  the  world,  with 
persecution.  But  now  we  find  a  modern  state  —  outward  clean- 
ness, but  the  heart  given  up  to  itself.  (See  2  Tim.  iii.)  Sardis 
gives  us  this  picture  :  some  walking  purely,  but  there  was  no 
such  thing  as  the  heart  thoroughly  subjected  to  the  Lord.  But 
will  He  be  content  with  this  ?  The  Lord  must  raise  up  a  wit- 
ness for  Himself;  and  the  only  way  whereby  He  can  make  a 
person  an  adequate  witness  for  Himself  is,  by  presenting  Himself 
to  the  affections.  The  moment  we  see  the  Lord  Himself,  there 
is  strength  to  serve  Him,  with  gladness. 

Here  the  Lord,  disgusted  with  the  state  of  Sardis,  comes,  as 
it  were,  saying,  "I  want  to  have  the  heart  —  I  must  have  it." 
He  removes  the  veil,  brought  in  through  the  sin  of  the  profess- 
ing Church.  When  they  see  that  blessed  One,  so  to  speak,  a 
little  nearer,  there  is  a  state  that  answers  (but  Oh  !  how  feebly)  to 
His  desires  for  their  heart,  and  it  will  be  made  good  without 
fail,  when  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is. 

"  Thou  hast  a  little  strength."  It  is  not  the  way  of  God  to 
produce  great  strength  at  a  time  of  general  ruin.  At  the  era 
of  the  return  from  the  Babylonish  captivity,  the  Lord  wrought 
in  great  grace.  There  was  no  outward  power  ;  on  the  contrary, 
they  were  so  apparently  contemptible,  that  it  was  the  taunt  of 
their  enemies,  that  a  fox  could  jump  over  their  wall.  But  we 
find  the  same  sort  of  spirit  as  in  I'hiladelphia.  They  build  no 
fortification  to  keep  out  the  Samaritans,  (the  Lord  was  a  wall 
of  fire  round  about  them,)  but  the  first  thing  they  erect  is  an 
altar  to  Him.  The  Lord  was  the  first  object  of  their  hearts. 
If  He  was  their  wall,  they  could  afford  to  wait  before  building 
another.  There  was  no  such  thing  as  the  angel  smiting  the  first- 
born, no  miracle  wrought  on  their  behalf,  not  a  word  about 
plagues  on  their  enemies  ;  but  "  my  Spirit  remaineth  among 
you,  fear  ye  not."  Whenever  Israel  were  afraid  of  their  adver- 
saries, they  had  no  strength  ;  but  in  looking  to  the  Lord,  they 
forgot  enemies.  When  we  lean  on  Him  now,  it  strikes  more 
terror  into  the  hearts  of  those  who  are  against  Him  than  any- 
thing else.  When  the  heart  is  true  to  the  Lord,  that  tells  upon 
the  conscience  of  others.  What  joy  that  the  Lord's  heart  was 
towards  them  !     It  is  this  which  produces  proper  feelings  to- 


52  CHRIST    KNOWN    MORALLY. 

wards  Him  and  towards  one  another.  The  very  name  of  this 
Church  is  significant  of  the  relationship  which  He  liad  esta- 
bhshed.  It  is  very  important  to  remember  that  it  is  a  holy 
relationship  we  bear  to  one  another.  While  it  is  certain  that 
those  who  care  for  one  another's  heavenly  interest  will  not  be 
careless  otherwise,  still  the  Church  is  not  a  club,  where  men 
may  be  ready  to  help  on  each  other,  right  or  wrong.  This 
would  be  Chartism,  &c.,  and  not  the  brotherhood  of  the  Lord. 

The  first  words  are  the  key  to  the  whole.  "  He  that  is  holy. 
He  that  is  true  (ver.  7)."  Look  at  the  first  epistle  of  John.  The 
expression  is  not  often  used  about  the  Lord,  but  we  find  it  there. 
In  the  second  chapter  of  that  epistle,  speaking  to  the  little 
ones  of  the  family  of  God,  it  is  written,  "  Ye  have  an  unction 
from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye  know  all  things."  He  that  is  holy. 
He  that  is  true,  has  all  for  them.  There  might  be  weakness,  but 
He  has  the  key  of  David.  In  the  genealogy  of  our  Lord  in 
Matthew,  we  find  the  expression,  "  David,  the  king,''  not 
Solomon  the  king,  or  any  other ;  because  David  is  the  person 
who  first  charactei-ized  royalty  in  Israel.  He  was  the  man  ac- 
cording to  God's  own  heart.  And  as  for  David  walking  in 
faith,  no  difficulties  could  stand  in  his  way.  True,  the  type  was 
imperfect — no  type  is  perfect,  because  it  is  not  Christ,  though  it 
may  be  a  witness  of  Him.  We  see  the  failui-e  of  the  man  ; 
but  where  the  power  of  God  wrought  in  David  what  was  bright, 
and  blessed,  and  good,  we  have  the  germ,  as  it  were,  of  that 
which  we  see  fully  in  the  Lord.  The  "key  of  David"  repre- 
sents his  power,  the  means  of  access  to  whatever  he  possessed. 
Thus  it  is  said,  (Isa.  xxii.)  "  the  key  of  the  house  of  David  will  I 
lay  upon  his  shoulder  ;  so  he  shall  open  and  none  shall  shut," 
&c.  This  was  the  consequence,  he  had  all  things  under  his 
hand  ;  it  was  his  business  to  take  care  of  everything. 

The  Lord  presents  Himself  as  having  the  key  of  David. 
Therefore  they  ought  not  to  look  to  the  power  of  the  world,  nor 
to  man  ;  for  if  He  had  the  key,  it  was  the  very  thing  they 
wanted.  There  might  be  the  energy  of  man  working  around, 
Jezebel,  false  prophets,  &c.,  but  there  was  this  Blessed  One,  the 
holy  and  the  true  ;  and  so  much  the  moi'e  needed,  because  they 
were  weak.  They  had  so  little  strength  that,  perhaps,  they 
could  not  even  open  the  door,  but  He  says  that  He  had  opened 
it  for  them  ;  He  had  brought  them  into  a  large  place,  where 
there  was  no  such  thing  as  bondage,  or  constraint.  It  is  plain 
that  the  Lord  is  here  marked  accoi'ding  to  what  He  is  person- 
ally and  morally  ;  not  only  as  the  great  source  of  holiness  and 
truth,  but  as  the  Holy  One  and  the  True.     We  find  both  in  the 


THE    NAME    OF    THE    LORD.  53 

first  epistle  of  John,  "  We  are  in  him  that  is  true,  even  in  his 
Son  Jesus  Christ ; "  but  there  it  goes  further  still,  "  this  is  the  true 
God  and  eternal  life"  Now,  then,  we  have  the  Lord's  person 
brought  before  them  :  it  was  what  they  coveted.  They  valued 
Christ.  They  wished  to  know  more  of  Him  ;  and  He  knew 
their  heart.  So  it  is  said,  "  If  thine  eye  be  single,  thy  whole 
body  shall  be  full  of  light."  They  were  tired  of  a  mere  form 
of  godliness  ;  they  knew  it  was  as  possible  to  be  lost  or  to  dis- 
honour the  Lord  in  orthodoxy  as  in  the  world.  They  turn  to 
the  Lord,  and  He  presents  Himself  as  the  Holy  One  and  the 
True  ;  not  as  against  them,  but  full  of  tenderness  and  grace, 
putting  before  them  an  open  door,  and  giving  them  the  cer- 
tainty that  no  man  could  shut  it. 

"  Thou  hast  a  little  strength,  and  hast  kept  my  word,  and 
hast  not  denied  my  name  (ver.  8)."  Here  we  have  three  expres- 
sions concerning  them.  They  are  in  a  state  not  marked  by  outward 
note,  or  strength.  Like  Himself,  they  are  unknown  to  the 
world,  but  they  had  kept  His  word  ;  and  more  than  this,  they 
had  not  denied  His  name.  Consider  lohat  it  is  to  keep  Christ's 
word.  It  is  evident  that  there  had  been  a  departure  from  His 
word.  It  might  have  been  circulated  ;  but  had  it  been  che- 
rished ?  Had  it  been  loved,  sought  into,  as  for  hid  treasure  ? 
Was  it  for  this  thing  that  men  met  together  to  pray  and  read, 
that  they  might  understand  it  better  ?  This  is  a  movement  in 
the  Church,  where  the  Lord's  person  becomes  more  than  ever 
the  object,  and  the  word  as  His  word.  It  is  not  mere  evangeli- 
sation, blessed  as  that  is  in  its  place,  and  in  its  effects  on  the 
world.  But  here  it  is  the  inner  circle  of  the  saints  who  love, 
serve,  adore  Christ  for  Himself. 

In  this  epistle  we  also  find  the  great  value  of  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  In  1  Cor.  i.  the  address  is  not  to  the  Corin- 
thians alone,  but  "to  all  who  in  every  place  call  upon"  that 
name.  In  other  words,  the  first  epistle  to  the  Corinthians  is 
in  no  way,  more  than  the  second,  of  private  application,  but  for 
all  Christians  everywhere.  In  fact,  the  generalizing  address  is 
not  put  so  strongly  in  any  other ;  and  this,  perhaps,  because  the 
Spirit  of  God  foresaw  that,  more  than  any  other,  it  would  be 
set  aside.  In  these  days,  when  there  is  no  extraordinary  mani- 
festation of  power,  men  might  say.  It  is  not  for  us,  it  belongs  to 
a  day  that  is  bygone.  True,  there  is  no  use  to  be  regulating 
tongues,  if  you  have  not  got  them.  But  we  have  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and,  blessed  be  God !  the  Church  will  never  know  the 
day  when  she  will  be  without  the  Holy  Ghost.  Look  at  its 
darkest   hour — the   middle   ages,  Romanism,  (fee.     The    Holy 


64  THE    NAME    OF   THE    LORD,  v 

Ghost  was  always  there,  not,  indeed,  justifying  evil,  or  putting 
His  seal  upon  disobedience,  but  He  was  there  for  the  certainty 
of  faith,  according  to  the  Lord's  word,  "  He  shall  abide  with 
you  for  ever."  The  idea  of  looking  for  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be 
poured  out  again  on  us  is  utterly  wrong  :  this  is  the  Jewish  hope. 
For  the  Church  to  make  such  a  petition  is,  in  effect,  to  deny 
that  she  is  the  Church.  It  may  be  well  for  her  to  throw 
herself  down  before  the  Lord,  and  own  that  she  has  acted  as 
though  she  had  it  not.  But  let  us  bless  God  that  we  have  the 
Spirit,  not  only  dwelling  in  individuals,  but  binding  us  together 
for  an  habitation  of  God.  The  manifestation  of  this  is  broken, 
it  is  true,  but  the  fact  remains  ;  just  as  we  say  of  a  man  whose 
circumstances  are  bad,  that  he. is  a  ruined  man,  while  the  man 
still  exists.  This  gives  us  ground  for  humbling  ourselves  the 
more,  that  the  Church  had  the  Spirit  and  yet  went  wrong. 
Men  might  say,  If  we  had  a  Pentecost  now,  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
sent  down  again,  we  should  go  right ;  but  the  fact  is,  that  when 
they  had  the  Holy  Ghost  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  they  declined 
and  fell.  What  God  calls  upon  us  to  do  is,  not  now  to  wait  for 
fresh  gifts  of  power,  but  to  humble  ourselves  before  Him, 
because  we  have  gone,  even  as  Christians,  in  the  saddest  oppo- 
sition to  His  will ;  and  that,  though  having  the  Holy  Ghost,  one 
golden  calf  after  another  has  been  set  up,  till  there  is  as  much  sin 
as  was  in  Israel.  This  is  what  the  Lord  calls  us  to  feel.  The 
sympathies  of  Philadelphia  were  with  Him. 

Clearly,  then,  what  the  Spirit  presents  is  a  despised  com- 
pany, but  the  word  of  Christ  specially  prized,  and  the  Lord's 
name  maintained.  We  have  learned  that  the  Church  is  never 
bound  to  go  on  in  sin.  "  Let  him  that  nameth  the  name  of 
Christ  depart  from  iniquity."  There  may  be  moral  iniquity 
and  worldly  lusts ;  and  what  is  there  so  bad  as  church  ini- 
quity, except  that  which  is  against  the  person  of  Christ  Himself? 
If  a  man  goes  on  with  things  against  the  outward  order  of  the 
Church,  it  is  evil,  but  not  to  be  compared  with  sin  against  the 
person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  always  the  worst,  and 
the  test  of  souls.  The  first  of  all  duties  is  that  the  heart  should 
be  true  to  Christ.     God  looks  for  it. 

Here,  then,  we  see  Christ  bringing  Himself  out  personally  to 
the  Church,  and  this  not  with  a  general  expression  of  love,  but 
manifesting  a  special  attachment  of  His  heart  to  them.  Hence 
it  is  said,  "  I  have  loved  them."  The  Lord  loves  all  His  people, 
but  it  is  equally  true  that  He  has  special  affections.  There  may 
be  a  peculiar  link  between  Him  and  saints  at  particular  times 
of  danger  and  trial.     His  grace  removes  the  hindrances  and 


ITS    VARIOUS    USES.  55 

makes  it  to  be  enjoyed  in  its  strength.  They  know  His  place 
in  glory,  but  that  which  touches  their  hearts  is  that  He  loves 
them,  in  all  that  glory  ;  His  love  the  great  basis  and  spring 
of  their  love. 

"  Thou  hast  a  little  strength."  I  know  you  are  weak  ;  but 
you  have  "  kept  my  word  and  not  denied  my  name."  See 
here  the  personal  link — '•'■my  word,"  '■'•my  name."  The  name 
of  Christ,  apprehended  by  the  soul,  is  salvation.  When  the 
heart  is  brought  down  to  submit  to  His  judgment  about  its  sin, 
He  Himself  brings  before  that  soul  Christ's  name  ;  when  it  finds 
that  it  has  no  name  in  which  to  stand  before  God,  He  says, 
Here  is  a  name,  my  Son's  name.  Faith  supposes  a  man  giving 
himself  up  as  good  for  nothing,  and  saying,  "  God  has  been 
good  to  me,  when  I  have  been  bad  for  Him."  God  has  laid 
down  this  name  as  a  foundation-stone  for  the  poor  sinner.  It 
looks  weak ;  it  is  called  a  "  stumbling-stone,"  as  it  is  to  unbelief; 
but  I  ought  to  believe  in  it.  If  I  merely  look  at  the  gospel,  I 
am  lost,  )3ecause  then  I  reason  about  it ;  but  if  I  believe  it,  I  am 
saved.  What  did  Abraham  do  ?  He  did  not  reason  ;  he  consi- 
dered not  his  own  body  which  was  dead,  but  he  gave  glory  to 
God.  If  he  had  felt  strong,  he  might  have  given  glory  to 
himself.  This  is  one  great  thing  that  God  works  for,  that  we 
may  know  our  own  nothingness. 

But  is  this  the  only  use  of  Christ's  name  ?  No  :  He  assembles 
round  Himself.  Jesus  is  the  great  object  and  attractive  point 
to  which  the  Holy  Ghost  gathers.  Suppose  it  were  the  ques- 
tion of  a  person  coming  in,  who  holds  what  people  call  Calvi- 
nistic  views,  or  Arminian,  never  having  learnt  fully  the  ruin  of 
man  ;  you  may  say,  "  I  don't  like  to  be  troubled."  But  the 
test  is,  what  does  Christ  say  ?  Has  He  no  power  to  judge  that 
question  1  Has  He  delegated  it  to  our  discretion  ?  Christ  has 
named  His  name  over  that  saint,  and  I  am  therefore  to  receive 
him.  Another  comes  and  says,  "  I  hear  you  receive  all  Chris- 
tians ;  but  I  do  not  believe  that  Christ  was  exempt  from  the 
fall,  either  in  His  nature  or  His  relation  to  God."  "  No," 
I  reply,  "  you  cannot  use  the  name  of  Christian  to  dishonour 
Christ."  But  wherever  a  man  is  found  humbly  confessing  the 
name  of  Christ,  (whether  he  be  churchman  or  dissenter,  that  is 
not  the  point,)  we  are  bound  to  receive  him.  It  is  sorrowful 
that  the  Church  should  have  all  these  names  of  variance  :  they 
will  all  be  at  an  end  by  and  by.  But  we  must  not  gainsay  the 
name  of  Christ  now.  The  Lord's  name  is  there,  and  that  is  a  pass-' 
port  all  over  the  Church.  It  is  no  question  of  joining  us; 
indeed,  he  is  joined  to  us  if  joined  to  Christ.     True,  the  Lord 


56  THE    NAME    OF    CHRIST,    NOT    A    CHOICE    OF    EVILS. 

has  His  servants,  but  we  do  not  acknowledge  any  one  as  a 
centre  in  the  Church  but  Christ. 

A  further  use  of  the  name  of  Christ  is  in  discipline.  What 
is  the  object  of  discipline  ?  Not  to  keep  up  our  character,  but 
that  Christ's  name  should  have  its  just  place  and  honour,  keep- 
ing that  bright,  even  where  Satan's  throne  is.  In  the  very 
camp  of  the  enemy  there  is  a  name  that  cannot  be  put  down. 
The  Holy  Ghost  is  there,  not  merely  to  give  us  comfort,  but 
having  delivered  us  from  anxiety  about  our  own  sins.  He  leaves 
us  free  to  care  for  Christ,  and  to  serve  Him.  The  question  in 
the  maintenance  of  discipline  is,  Is  there  departure  from  ini- 
quity ?  The  Lord  never  acknowledges  anything  as  the  Church 
where  iniquity  is  sanctioned.  There  is  a  difference  between  sin 
being  there,  and  sin  being  sanctioned.  Any  iniquity  may  break 
out :  it  did  in  the  apostolic  churches.  The  man  was  put  away 
at  Corinth  because  he  was  a  Christian  ;  as  it  is  said,  "  that  the 
spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  It  might  be 
thought,  from  the  terrible  nature  of  his  sin,  that  he  could  not 
have  been  one.  The  Holy  Ghost  shows  us  thereby  that  if  a 
Christian  gets  away  from  Christ,  he  is  capable  of  anything, 
except  positively  going  against  Christ  Himself.  From  this  I 
think  the  Holy  Ghost  would  always  keep.  As  in  the  case  of 
Solomon's  judgment,  the  false  woman  was  determined  at  all 
events  to  have  her  half  of  the  child,  while  the  real  mother  would 
rather  yield  it  than  let  its  life  be  touched.  But  a  Christian  may 
fall  into  a  bad  state  of  feeling  about  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
(unnatural  as  this  is ;)  and  when  in  this  state,  so  as  not  to  have  a 
just  sense  of  the  name  of  Christ,  what  good  can  be  got  out  of 
him  ?  It  was  not  so  with  the  Pliiladelpliian  saints.  They  did 
not  deny  His  name  ;  and  the  Lord  uses  the  tenderest  expressions 
of  love  towards  them.  All  ecclesiastical  pretension,  it  has  been 
well  said,  was  against  them.  They  were  looked  down  upon  by 
those  who  said  they  were  Jews.  But  He  says  of  them,  "  I  will 
make  them  come  and  worship  before  thy  feet,"  &c.  (Ver.  9). 
They  were  in  the  midst  of  a  great  deal  of  profession  that  was 
hollow.  Well,  the  Lord  promises  to  vindicate  them  by  His  own 
power.  What  comfort  there  is  in  not  seeking  to  vindicate 
ourselves,  but  in  going  on  with  the  Lord ! 

It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  see  that  the  name  of  Christ 
will  never  obHge  a  man  to  choose  between  two  evils  ;  and  this 
is,  in  my  judgment,  what  God  has  been  pressing  of  late.  There 
is  a  path  without  evil.  Not  that  the  flesh  of  man  may  not  bring 
in  evil ;  but  if  a  man  persists  in  any  sin,  you  say  he  is  not  walk- 
ing as  a  Christian  :  he  cannot  be  oioned  as  a  Christian,  though 


THE    WORD    OF    CHRISt's    PATIENCE.  57 

we  may  pray  for  hiin,  &c.  Again,  take  a  company  of  Christians. 
Evil  comes  in.  I  cannot  say,  '  these  are  not  Christians.'  No, 
but  bring  in  the  authority  of  Christ's  name  to  put  the  evil  away. 
He  having  absolute  authority,  it  is  ours  to  take  the  place  of  full 
subjection  to  Him.  The  Church  belongs  to  God.  If  it  were 
ours,  we  might  make  our  own  rules ;  but  woe  be  to  the  man 
that  meddles  with  the  Church  of  God,  bringing  in  his  own 
regulations  !  This  was,  it  would  seem,  what  was  felt  by  these 
Philadelphians.  They  valued  the  authority  of  the  name  of 
Christ.  They  avowed  that  they  were  weak,  but  they  knew  that 
the  power  of  Christ  was  strong  enough  to  keep  them.  Why 
should  they  be  afraid  ?  When  Christians  own  His  name  to 
gather  to,  it  is  not  saying  that  no  evil  will  come  in  ;  but  looking 
to  the  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  His  Spirit,  we  do  not  mean 
to  sanction  evil.  Let  us  only  leave  the  door  open  for  the  Lord 
to  come  in.  There  may  be  much  to  try  our  patience,  but  what 
we  have  to  do  is  to  wait  on  the  Lord.  This  is  wdiat  the  Lord 
seeks,  that  we  should  have  confidence  in  what  He  is  and  has, 
taking  the  place  of  weakness  and  dependence  in  prayer,  though 
it  may  be  trying. 

"  Thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  my  patience,"  &c.  (Ver.  10),  In 
these  churches  the  Lord  evidently  looks  forward  to  a  state  of  things 
up  to  the  very  close.  It  is  plain  that,  as  the  hour  of  temptation 
is  still  future,  room  is  left  for  the  application  of  this  promise  to 
the  end.  "  Thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  my  patience."  Christ 
is  coming  to  receive  His  Church,  and  afterwards  to  be  the  Judge 
of  all  the  earth.  But  we  are  not  looking  for  signs.  God  will 
graciously  give  signs  to  the  Jews,  but  the  Church  was  never 
called  to  be  guided  in  her  thoughts  by  what  she  saw  (like 
Thomas).  "  Blessed  are  they  that  have  not  seen  and  yet  have 
believed,"  It  was  when  the  Lord  was  no  longer  seen  that  the 
Church  was  born  into  the  world  ;  and  since  then  she  has  been 
waiting,  but  was  never  meant  to  depend  on  outward  tokens.  It 
was  when  He  took  His  place  above  as  Head,  that  His  body,  the 
Church,  was  formed  ;  for  there  could  not  be  a  body,  except  there 
were  first  a  head,  God  wants  the  Church  to  be  waiting  not  for 
signs,  but  for  Christ  Himself,     He  v/ill  cause  His  voice  to  be 

heard,  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise and  so  shall  w^e 

ever  be  with  the  Lord,  Christ  is  waiting  for  this,  patiently.  As 
far  as  I  have  noticed,  the  Lord  does  not  speak  about  His  coming 
as  if  there  were  any  haste  connected  with  it.  He  waits  patiently 
for  it.  He  lingers  in  His  love,  that  there  may  ho  a  lengthening 
of  mercy  to  the  world,  and  that  souls  may  be  brought  to  Him, 
The  Church  knows  that  He  is  waiting,  and  is  calletl  to  the  same 
jDfttience,  to  have  fellowship  with  Him  in  His  patience. 


68  Christ's  coming,  our  crown. 

"  I  will  keep  thee  from  the  hour  of  temptation  (ver.  10)."  This 
is  not  the  portion  of  the  Jews.  To  them,  when  the  time  of  trial 
comes,  God  says,  "  Come,  my  people,  enter  into  thy  chamber," 
&c.  Ours  is  the  place  of  Abraham.  He  had  not  to  fly  to  a  little 
Zoar,  like  Lot  who  was  saved  indeed  out  of  the  judgment,  but 
not  much  to  his  honour.  The  Lord  had  a  heavenly-minded 
saint,  as  well  as  an  earthly-minded  one.  Abraham  was  never  in 
that  hour  of  temptation  at  all.  So  the  Church  will  be  kept 
from  the  coming  hour.  That  is  our  confidence — not  mei'ely 
preserved  in  or  through  it,  but  from  it.  Take  another  figure — 
that  of  the  deluge.  Enoch  had  been  preserved  out  of  it  altoge- 
ther, while  Noah  was  carried  through  the  waters  of  the  flood. 
Thus  God  gives  us  blessed  witnesses  from  the  beginning  of  this 
two-fold  preservation,  like  Enoch  and  Abraham  in  spirit  on  the 
one  hand,  and  on  the  other  like  Noah  and  Lot.  These  last  were 
in  the  circumstances  of  the  trial ;  and  that  will  be  the  case  with 
the  converted  remnant  of  Israel  during  the  time  of  the  dreadful 
judgments.  The  Christian's  hope  is  to  be  with  the  Lord  in 
heaven,  and  the  Church  ought  to  be  looking  for  it.  And  surely 
the  cry  is  now  going  forth,  "  Behold  the  Bridegroom  cometh, 
go  ye  out  to  meet  him."  I  ask  you,  have  you  gone  out?  There 
were  those  who  not  only  believed  when  they  heard  the  cry,  but 
went  out.  Have  you  left  everything  that  is  contrary  to  Him? — 
what  you  know — not  what  /  know — to  be  contrary  to  Him  ?  I 
ask  whether  you  are  ready  to  meet  Him  ?  If  so,  you  need  not 
be  afraid.  Be  assured  that  anything  your  poor  will  wants  to 
keep  is  not  worth  keeping.  It  is  gain  to  go  out  from  all  to 
meet  Him  ;  it  is  joy  to  be  in  the  path  of  the  Lord.  Has  that  cry 
filled  your  heart  ?  Do  not  be  content  with  saying,  '  I  have  got 
oil  in  my  vessel,  and  it  does  not  much  matter  where  I  am.'  This 
is  selfish  and  unholy.  The  Lord  grant  that  such  may  not  be 
your  feeling  !  He  has  saved  me  that  I  may  think  of  Him.  He 
wishes  me  to  go  out  to  meet  Him, — to  value  the  precious 
thought  of  His  coming.  Now,  are  you  keeping  His  word  ?  You 
know.  This  is  a  question  between  your  own  conscience  and  the 
Lord.  When  you  have  kept  what  you  do  know,  you  will  learn 
more,  and  find  it  joy  and  hberty  to  be  serving  Him. 

"  I  am  coming-  quickly  :  hold  that  fast  which  thou  hast,  that  no 
one  take  thy  crown  (ver.  11)."  This  is  a  precious  word.  The  Lord 
does  speak  of  coming  like  a  thief,  as  to  Sardis,  which  had  taken 
the  world  as  its  mistress  :  the  unpurged  world  was  allowed  the 
place  of  the  Lord.  Here  He  comes  as  one  that  has  a  crown  to 
give.  The  Lord  Himself  coming  to  meet  us  is  the  jewel  He  has 
given  us  to  keep.     The  Lord  grant  us  to  hold  that  fast,  that  it 


CONTRAST    OF    LAODICEA   WITH    PHILADELPHIA.  59 

may  not  be  taken  away  from  us  !  We  are  weak  now,  but  the 
Lord  says,  "If  you  are  content  to  be  weak  now,  I  will  make 
you  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God."  A  pillar  is  the  emblem 
of  strength,  that  which  supported  the  temple,  contrasted  with 
weakness.  It  is  a  hard  thing  to  be  content  to  be  weak.  To 
flesh  it  is  comfortable  to  feel  the  world's  strength  under  one.  But 
if  willing  to  look  weak  now,  the  Lord  tells  us  what  He  will  do 
for  us  then  :  "  I  will  make  you  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my 
God  (ver.  12)."  As  I  have  known  My  God,  I  will  bring  you  into 
fellowship  with  Me.  You  were  content  to  wait  for  My  coming, 
and  none  shall  take  your  crown.  For  those  who  have  thought 
of  Christ  now,  Christ  will  think  of  all  the  joy  He  can  give  them 
then.  The  Lord  grant  that  this  may  be  our  comfort  while  we 
wait  for  Him ! 

LAODICEA. 

Ver.  14 — 22.  We  have  seen  the  strong  contrast  between 
the  state  of  Sardis  and  the  previous  order  of  things.  Gross  cor- 
ruption, open  evil,  persecution,  hatred  of  the  holiness  and  truth 
of  God,  had  reigned  in  Thyatira,  as  false  prophets,  &c.,  though 
there  was  a  remnant  found  there,  and  a  faithful  remnant.  If 
Thyatira  represents  the  dark  ages,  when  the  Lord  had  His 
faithful  saints  hidden  away  in  nooks  and  corners  of  the  world, 
in  Sardis  we  have  a  correct  appearance  of  things  —  a  name  to 
live,  and  death  almost  universal  ;  yet  even  in  Sardis  there  were 
those  who  had  not  defiled  their  garments.  If  there  is  so  marked 
a  distinction  between  Sardis  and  Thyatira,  there  is  an  equally 
strong  line  of  demarcation  between  Philadelphia  and  Laodicea. 
"  Unto  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Laodicea,"  not  "  of  the 
Laodiceans."  (So  as  to  Ephesus,  it  should  be  "  the  church  in 
Ephesus."    Rev.  ii.  1.) 

Let  us  look  at  the  character  that  God  gives  of  this  church, 
and  what  He  brings  to  light  of  its  condition.  If  there  are  two 
churches  that  stand  in  more  pointed  contrast  to  one  another,  it 
is  just  these  last  two.  The  reason,  I  think,  is  this;  that  when 
God  works  in  any  special  way,  when  He  puts  forth  His  grace 
in  some  new  form  and  light,  it  always,  since  the  falling  away  of 
Christendom,  draws  in  its  train  a  peculiarly  dark  shadow.  So 
here,  Philadelphia  was  a  bright  picture.  They  were  weak,  but 
they  were  to  be  quite  peaceful,  for  the  Lord  had  opened  the 
door,  and  He  would  keep  it  open.  But  when  we  come  to  look 
at  Laodicea,  what  a  difference  we  find  !  There  is  no  such  thing 
as  the  Lord  waiting  upon  their  need,  having  the  key  of  David, 
and  presenting  Himself  as  the  object  of  their  affections  —  as  the 


60  CONTRAST    OF    LAODICEA 

holy  and  true  One,  in  His  moral  grandeur,  which  called  out  all 
the  heart  to  worship  Him.  But  now.  He  speaks  in  another 
way  :  "  These  things,  saith  the  Amen,  the  faithful  and  true 
witness,"  &c.  There  was  an  end  of  proud  profession  at  hand.  He 
was  the  "  Amen,"  the  only  one  to  be  leaned  upon,  the  solitary 
"  faithful  and  true  witness,"  when  all  else  had  failed.  This 
presentation  of  Himself  as  the  faithful  and  true  witness,  sup- 
poses that  those  to  whom  He  was  writing  were  not  faithful. 
This  was  not  implied  of  Philadelphia.  Poor  as  these  were, 
they  took  the  place  of  weakness  ;  and  as  they  had  thought  of 
His  word  and  of  His  name,  the  Lord  says.  When  I  have  you 
in  my  temple,  I  will  write  upon  you  "  my  new  name,"  and  will 
make  you  a  pillar  "  in  the  temple  of  my  God."  He  does  not 
say  the  throne,  which  would  be  the  expression  of  power,  but  the 
temple,  which  is  a  deeper  thought  than  the  throne.  The  temple 
is  the  place  of  worship,  where  God  is  exalted  in  the  beauty  of 
holiness.  Just  as  when  it  was  a  question  of  the  worship  of  God, 
David  wears  an  ephod.  His  own  wife  despised  him  (she  was 
thinking  of  him  as  the  son-in-law  of  her  father  Saul,  the  king) 
because  he  did  not  come  out  in  some  robe  suitable  to  royalty  : 
but  David  had  the  thought  of  God  before  him,  and  in  his  eyes 
it  was  his  greatest  possible  exaltation  to  wear  the  ephod,  and  so 
to  draw  near  to  the  Lord.  So  in  Philadelphia,  they  were  spe- 
cially those  who  understood  worship,  because  they  appreciated 
the  person  and  character  of  the  Son  of  God.  It  is  this  that 
draws  out  the  heart.  Thus  when  Jesus  revealed  Himself  as  the 
Son  of  God,  (John  ix.)  the  blind  man  worshipped  Him.  This  is 
very  little  entered  into,  even  by  real  children  of  God.  A  man 
might  receive  favour  from  God,  and  give  thanks  to  God  for  it, 
but  might  know  little  of  real  worship.  That  is  a  higher  step 
and  nearer  to  the  Lord.  It  does  not  merely  aj^preciate  tlie 
favours  that  come  down  to  us  from  God,  but  what  the  God  is 
that  gives  them.  Real  worship  is  always  that.  The  Father 
seeks  worshippers,  but  it  is  to  draw  them  back  to  the  source 
from  which  the  grace  has  flowed.  Not  that  the  word  worship  is 
used  in  the  address  to  Philadelphia  (except  in  ver.  9,  where  it  is 
in  quite  a  different  sense,  merely  signifying  that  the  men,  who 
were  now  scorners,  would  have  to  humble  themselves  and  give 
honour  to  those  whom  they  had  despised).  Worship  is  the 
drawing  near  to  God  in  the  appreciation  not  only  of  what  He 
does,  but  of  what  He  is.  There  is  this  that  always  prepares  the 
way  for  worship — the  full,  simple  knowledge  of  our  being 
brought  near  to  God,  of  the  work  of  Christ  and  its  blessed 
results  for  us. 


WITH    PHILADELPHIA.  61 

Job  was  not  in  the  presence  of  God  when  he  was  thinking  so 
much  about  himself.  ("  When  the  ear  heard  me  and  the  eye 
saw  ?we,"  &c.)  We  may  say  he  was  in  the  presence  of  himself 
and  not  of  God.  It  is  always  a  poor  sign  if  we  see  a  man  stop 
to  look  at  himself,  whether  his  good  or  his  bad  self.  The  Lord 
does  not  want  us  to  be  dwelling  on  the  change  in  ourselves.  This  is 
not  forgetting  the  things  that  are  behind,  which  does  not  mean, 
by  the  way,  forgetting  our  sins,  but  forgetting  our  progress.  If 
the  Lord  has  given  us  to  take  a  step  forward,  it  is  that  we  may 
get  nearer  to  Himself,  and  increase  in  the  knowledge  of  God. 
Along  with  this  there  will  always  be  increase  in  the  knowledge 
of  ourselves,  but  never  in  the  way  of  self-admiration.  As 
belonging  to  Christ,  He  is  the  object  that  happily  keeps  us  low. 
When  Job  was  really  brought  at  the  close  into  the  presence  of 
God,  he  was  in  the  dust.  He  did  not  know  what  it  was  to  be 
thoroughly  worshipping  God  until  he  was  brought  there,  when 
his  eye  saw  God.  Before,  he  had  been  looking  more  at  what 
God  had  produced  in  him,  but  now  he  saw  himself  to  be  nothing. 
After  this  we  find  him  even  praying  for  his  friends,  and  we  have 
burnt-offerings,  &c.  This  was  the  spirit  of  intercession,  and 
worship  too.  It  appears  to  me  that  such  was  the  spirit  into 
which  the  Philadelphian  church  had  been  brought.  They  un- 
derstood worship,  because  they,  in  their  measure,  knew  Him 
that  was  from  the  beginning.  The  Lord  loves  us  to  be  strong 
in  Christ,  to  be  growing  up  into  Him.  In  Laodicea  there  was 
no  such  thought — nothing  like  entering  into  the  riches  of  the 
Lord's  grace.  There  is  nothing  we  ought  to  feel  our  lack  in  so 
much  as  in  worship,  just  because  we  do  value  it.  It  is  spiritual 
feeling,  though  feeble  indeed,  that  makes  us  alive  to  our  little 
power  for  worship.  Be  assured  that  the  spirit  of  worship  is  our 
true  power  for  service.  Thus  in  John  x,  the  Lord  says,  "  I  am 
the  door  :  by  me,  if  any  man  enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved,  and 
shall  go  in  and  out  and  find  pasture,"  It  is  no  longer  the  Jewish 
sheepfold  and  the  bondage  of  the  law,  but  perfect  liberty,  going 
in  for  worship,  and  out  for  service,  everywhere  finding  food  and 
blessing.  How  sweet  to  think  that  the  time  is  coming  when  we 
shall  go  in,  never  to  come  out  again !  It  will  be  always  service 
in  immediate  connexion  with  the  Lord  Himself — enjoyment  of 
the  presence  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  —  eternal  worship  ! 

For  whom  would  this  be  a  welcome  and  happy  promise?  For 
those  who  had  valued  and  enjoyed  worship  here  below.  As  in 
Ps.  Ixxxiv,  "  They  shall  be  still  praising  thee."  The  place  where 
the  Lord  dwelt  was  graven  even  in  the  hearts  of  those  going 
there,  "  In  whose  heart  are  the  ways."     They  must  get  to  the 


62  LATITUDINARIANISM. 

place  where  God  was,  and  dwell  there.  The  Lord  does  not 
reveal  Himself  in  the  same  personal  way,  but  it  is  rather  certain 
qualities  and  titles  belonging  to  Him  that  are  taken  up.  He 
was  "•  the  Amen."  They  had  failed  in  everything — they  had 
been  an  unfaithful  witness,  and  He  as  good  as  says  to  them, 
"  You  have  not  met  a  single  thought  of  My  heart.  I  will  now 
present  Myself  to  you  as  all  you  should  be."  He  was  also  "  the 
beginning  of  the  creation  of  God."  (Ver.  14.)  Christendom  is 
a  rejected  witness.  Christ  is  in  relationship  with  the  new  crea- 
tion. "  I  know  thy  works  that  thou  art  neither  cold  nor  hot." 
(Ver.  15.)  This  is  latitudinarianism.  It  is  not  ignorance  that 
makes  a  person  latitudinarian,  but  the  heart  that  remains 
indifferent  to  the  truth,  after  the  truth  has  been  brought  before 
it ;  that  does  not  want  the  truth,  because  it  feels  the  sacrifice 
and  the  separation  from  the  world,  which  must  ensue  if  the 
truth  be  followed.  We  ought  to  bear,  wherever  there  is  honest, 
simple-hearted  ignorance  ;  but  indifference  to  truth  is  quite 
another  thing,  and  hateful  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord. 

Thus  latitudinarianism  is  never  the  condition  of  souls  that  are 
simple  and  true,  but  of  those  by  whom  the  truth  has  been  heard 
and  who  are  not  prepared  for  the  cross.  God's  truth  must  put 
people's  hearts  to  the  test.  It  is  not  merely  something  I  have  to 
learn,  but  it  proves  me.  If  the  sheep  is  in  a  healthy  condition,  it 
will  hear  the  Shepherd's  voice,  and  not  even  know  the  voice  of 
strangers ;  but  if  the  sheep  does  not  like  the  sound  of  the  Shep- 
herd's voice,  and  departs  after  others,  it  becomes  so  confounded 
that  it  can  scarce  distinguish  the  one  from  the  other.  This 
arises  in  Laodicea,  and,  as  it  appears  to  me,  from  despising  the 
testimony  given  in  the  former  church.  Laodicea  is  the  fruit  of 
the  rejection  of  the  testimony  that  formed  Philadelphia,  There 
He  showed  Himself,  and  to  the  heart  that  received  Him  He 
said,  "  As  My  name  has  been  everything  to  you  upon  the  earth, 
so  I  will  give  to  you  My  new  name  in  the  time  of  glory.  Every 
affection  that  has  been  true  and  blessed,  that  I  have  wrought  in 
your  hearts,  shall  come  out  more  brightly  in  the  glory."  To 
Laodicea  He  says,  "  Thou  art  neither  cold  nor  hot."  They 
must  have  had  something  to  warm  them  a  little,  as  it  was  not 
absolute  cold.  They  were  dishonest.  Laodicea  is  just  the  last 
state  of  things,  which  the  Lord  could  not  allow  to  go  on  any 
longer — a  time  when  persons  have  had  a  great  deal  of  truth 
in  a  certain  fashion,  but  their  hearts  not  touched  by  it.  If  the 
heart  had  been  in  ever  so  little  a  measure  true,  however  igno- 
rant, it  would  have  enjoyed  what  had  come  from  the  Lord.  In 
1  John  ii.  the  persons  who  are  said  to  have  an  unction  from  the 


SELF-COMPLACENCY.  63 

Holy  One  and  to  know  all  things,  are  not  the  "fathers"  but 
"  the  babes."  The  ability  to  judge  what  is  not  of  Christ 
depends  upon  the  heart  being  true  to  Him.  Hence  the  young- 
est saint,  if  single-eyed,  can  discern  with  certainty,  where  the 
theologian  is  lost  in  endless  genealogies. 

Every  spirit  that  lowers  and  denies  Christ  (the  Christ  of  God) 
is  of  antichrist.  There  were,  there  are  now  many  antichrists,  and 
the  place  to  look  for  them  is  where  He  has  been  named.  If 
Christ  had  not  been  known,  there  could  not  have  been  an  anti- 
christ, which  was  the  dark  shadow  that  followed  the  truth.  If 
we  have  the  Lord  at  work  in  this  gracious  way,  we  have  Satan 
working  too.  To  be  "lukewarm"  was  to  be  false,  with  the 
pretension  of  the  truth  ;  and  the  Lord  says,  "  I  will  spue  thee 
out  of  my  mouth."  There  is  not  such  a  contemptuous  expres- 
sion used  by  Him  anywhere  else  that  I  know.  Is  this  the  way 
that  we  measure  things  ?  We  should  have  said  probably  that 
Jezebel  was  to  be  felt  most  about ;  but  would  it  have  struck  us 
that  to  be  lukewarm  was  the  worst  of  all?  But  that  was  what 
drew  forth  all  the  Lord's  indignation,  and  He  only  is  wise. 
*'  Because  thou  sayest  I  am  rich  and  increased  with  goods,"  &c. 
(Ver.  16.)  Here  is  a  plain  proof  that  they  had  heard  a  great 
deal  about  the  truth.  They  thought  themselves  rich.  The 
spread  of  the  outward  knowledge  of  God  is  what  hastens  on  the 
last  crisis — God's  final  judgment  and  setting  aside  of  all  that 
bears  His  name  falsely  and  self-complacently. 

Ver.  17.  "  And  knowest  not  that  thou  art  the  wretched,  and 
the  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,"  &c.  This  was  because 
they  had  rejected  the  testimony  of  God.  His  testimony  always 
produces  the  sense  of  being  nothing,  but  it  never  weakens 
confidence  in  Him.  There  may  be  tests, — the  epistles  of  John 
are  full  of  them, — but  there  never  is  such  a  thing  as  the  Spirit 
of  God  leading  a  person  to  doubt  God's  being  for  him.  He  may 
and  surely  will  work  in  a  person  who  is  slipping  aside  fj-om  the 
Lord,  to  bring  him  back ;  He  may  make  us  feel  our  weakness  ; 
but  it  is  not  at  all  His  way  to  produce  a  doubt  in  the  soul,  and 
it  is  ever  a  sign  of  the  flesh  being  at  work,  "  lusting  against  the 
Spirit,"  when  we  give  way  to  distrust.  The  Spirit  of  God 
always,  wherever  He  is,  aims  at  making  a  man  thoroughly 
humble  himself,  and  judge  and  renounce  the  folly  of  the  flesh. 
There  is,  and  must  be,  reality,  and  earnestness,  and  truthfulness 
in  the  presence  of  God.  "  I  am  rich,  and  am  become  rich,  and 
have  need  of  nothing."  But  we  have  the  Spirit  of  God  pro- 
nouncing this  to  be  carnal  presumption,  the  heart  knowing  not 
its   need,   and    refusing   grace.       Tliere  had   been    momentary 


64  LAODICEA  IS  CALLED  TO  REPENT. 

warmth,  which  made  it  so  hateful  to  God.  But  this  is  just  what 
men  are  doing  who  talk  about  the  Church  of  the  future.  The 
early  times  they  call  the  infancy  of  the  Church  ;  afterwards  the 
Church  became  a  great  naughty  child  ;  and  now  they  are  look- 
ing for  a  Church  of  the  future,  when  man  will  be  no  longer  a 
subject,  but  will  act  for  himself — will  act  like  a  man.  Alas  ! 
where  will  not  these  aspirations  end  ?  for  God  will  be  left  out  of 
the  so-called  Church  altogether,  and  His  authority  got  rid  of. 
This  is  working  now  extensively.  And  are  God's  children  luke- 
warm about  it?  about  God's  truth  being  shutout?  Remember 
what  the  Lord  here  says,  "  I  will  spue  thee  out  of  my  mouth." 
It  would  be  a  gross  mistake  to  suppose  that  there  were  no 
Christians  among  them.  But  it  is  not  a  question  of  individuals, 
but  of  the  assembly,  and  as  such  the  Lord  said  He  would 
spue  them  out  of  His  mouth.  People  cannot  congregate  in 
large  masses  without  Laodiceanism  as  the  result,  if  it  be  not  also 
the  spring.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  great  power  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  gathering  people  together  at  the  present  time.  The 
Lord  be  thanked  if  there  are  a  few  gathered  out  to  His 
name !  Let  God's  children  remember  that  they  must  answer 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whether  they  are  represented  by 
Laodicea  or  not ;  whether  they  are  standing  for  Christ,  or  for 
what  merely  bears  the  name  of  Christ,  as  a  veil  over  indiffer- 
entism.  Yet  the  Lord  does  not  give  them  up.  He  says,  "  I 
counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in  the  fire,"  &;c.  (Ver. 
18.)  Gold  is  generally  used  as  the  symbol  of  what  is  divine,  of 
divine  righteousness ;  and  white  raiment,  or  linen,  stands  for  the 
righteousness  of  saints,  as  sve  see  from  chap.  xix.  Divine  right- 
eousness had  slipped  from  their  thoughts.  They  were  neither 
appreciating  the  righteousness  of  God,  which  a  Christian  is  made 
in  Christ,  nor  the  practical  righteousness  which  the  Spirit  leads 
in.  So  He  counsels  them  to  buy  of  Him  the  true  gold,  and 
white  raiment,  that  there  might  be  the  holiness  that  became 
them  before  others.  "  Anoint  thine  eye  with  eyesalve,  that  thou 
mayest  see."  There  was  the  secret.  They  did  not  see  anything 
properly  ;  not  even  their  need  of  divine  righteousness.  "  As 
many  as  I  love  I  rebuke  and  chasten ;  be  zealous,  therefore, 
and  repent."  (Ver.  19.)  Depend  upon  it  that  this  is  the  Lord's 
voice  for  the  present  moment.  Here,  alas !  it  was  what  the 
Laodiceans  needed.  The  Lord  is  dealing  with  His  people  :  He 
is  constantly  putting  before  them  something  to  humble  them  in 
their  thoughts  of  themselves  :  not  telling  them  to  do  something 
or  try  something  new,  but  calling  them  "  to  repent."  He  does 
not  ask  them  to  stretch  their  wings  for  some  greater  flight  in  the 
future,  but  to  see  where  they  are  and  to  I'epent. 


THE    PROMISE    OF    CHRIST's    THRONE.  65 

If  is  a  far  higher  thing-  to  suffer  for  Christ  and  with  Christ, 
than  to  be  doing  something.  When  the  Apostle  Paul  asks, 
"  What  shall  I  do?"  the  Lord  answers,  "  I  shall  show  thee  what 
great  things  thou  must  suffer,"  &c.  This  is  what  the  Lord  spe- 
cially prizes — not  our  sufferings  as  men,  but  suffering  for  Christ. 

Here  they  were  persons,  as  sunken  as  they  were  proud,  called 
upon  to  be  zealous  and  repent ;  to  humble  themselves  before  God 
on  account  of  their  condition.  The  Lord  brings  out  a  gracious 
word  too,  "  Behold  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock."  (Ver.  20.) 
Yet  is  it  a  solemn  thing  that  the  Lord  should  be  there,  thus 
taking  the  place  of  one  outside.  Nevertheless,  He  was  ready  to 
come  in  where  He  found  a  soul  true  to  him.  "  If  any  man  hear 
my  voice  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,"  &c.  Need 
it  be  said  that  this  is  not  an  address  to  the  world  for  them  to  be 
saved?  In  John  x.  the  Lord  presents  Himself  in  full  grace, 
saying,  "  I  am  the  door,  by  me  if  any  man  enter  in,  he  shall  be 
saved,"  &c.  But  here  He  speaks  to  the  Church.  He  was  One 
that  had  no  sympathy  with  their  self-satisfaction.  He  stood 
outside,  knocking  at  the  door,  if  perchance  there  should  be  a 
heart  within,  not  too  much  occupied  with  the  things  and  the 
persons  around,  that  would  open  to  Him.  To  such  He  says,  "  I 
will  come  in  to  him  and  sup  with  him  and  he  with  me."  But  it 
is  all  individual.  If  we  saw  a  complete  departure,  are  we  to  say, 
"  there  is  no  hope?"  Not  at  all ;  there  is  the  Lord  standing  at 
the  door  and  knocking.  Tiiere  may  not  be  many  to  answer 
His  call,  but  some  will ;  and  the  promise  is  "  to  him  that  over- 
cometh,  will  I  grant  to  sit  with  me  in  my  throne ;  even  as  I  also 
overcame,  and  am  set  down  with  my  Father  in  his  throne."  It  is 
a  mistake  to  suppose  that  this  is  comparatively  a  glorious  promise  : 
we  are  apt  to  think  so,  because  we  naturally  value  display.  But 
God  does  not  estimate  power  the  most.  His  holy  love,  proving 
itself  divine  most  of  all  when  Christ  humbled  Himself,  incoming 
down  to  man  and  dying  for  him  —  that  is  the  standard  of  value, 
rather  than  power  or  glory.  He  could  make  a  thousand  worlds 
with  far  more  ease  than  He  gave  His  Son  to  suffer.  I  do  not 
question  the  grace  of  such  a  word,  spite  of  such  evil ;  but  our  shar- 
ing the  kingdom  with  Christ  is  not  the  most  blessed  thing  we  shall 
enjoy.  And  the  promise  here  does  not  go  farther.  What  we 
shall  have  with  and  in  Christ  Himself  is  much  more  precious. 
In  John  xvii.  23,  the  Lord  shows  that  the  display  of  glory  is  for 
the  vindication  of  Himself  before  the  world.  All  this  disclosed 
glory  in  the  future  will  be  the  proof  to  the  world,  that  they 
might  know  that  the  Father  loves  us  as  He  loved  His  Son. 
But  we  are  entitled  to  know  it  by  the  Holy  Ghost  noiv.  We  do 
6 


66  CONCLUSION    OF   THE    CHURCHES. 

not  wait  till  tlien  to  know  the  love  that  has  given  us  the  glory — 
a  deeper  thing  than  the  appearing  to  the  world,  or  thrones  in  the 
kingdom.  The  personal  affection  of  the  Lord  to  His  people 
is  a  better  portion  than  anything  displayed  before  men  or  angels. 

Here  the  Lord  closes  the  churches.  He  had  got  to  the  last 
phase.  The  wisdom  of  God  has  provided  in  these  chapters  what 
does  not  require  any  great  amount  of  intelligence  to  understand. 
What  is  needed  is  the  eye  fixed  on  Christ.  Besides  these  epistles 
being  messages  to  local  churches  in  the  timeof  St.  John,  we  have 
seen  in  them  a  sketch  of  the  whole  history  of  the  Church  till  the 
Lord  comes.  For  properly  speaking,  not  the  Lord's  addresses, 
but  the  churches  themselves  and  their  angels  constitute  "  the 
things  which  are,''  i.e.,  the  actual  state  in  John's  day.  The 
addresses,  while  primarily  connected  with  the  facts  then  existing, 
go  far  beyond  them,  and  reach  out  into  a  prolonged  moral 
application,  till  there  is  no  longer  any  recognized  assembly,  the 
last  (though  with  mercy  to  individuals)  having  been  summarily 
rejected  as  a  public  witness  by  the  Lord.  After  that,  we  never 
hear  of  the  churches  any  more  upon  the  earth.  '  On  the  con- 
trary, the  curtain  drops,  and  we  have  a  new  scene  altogether. 
The  seer  no  longer  turns  round  to  see  who  spoke  behind  him 
on  earth,*  but  hears  the  same  voice  above,  whither  he  is  now 
invited  to  ascend.  The  government  of  the  world  from  the 
throne  in  heaven,  its  accompaniments  and  consequences,  are 
the  things  which  follow,  when  the  Church's  time-state  is  closed. 
We  have  individual  saints  both  among  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel 
and  out  of  all  nations  mentioned  as  such,  but  this  only  makes 
the  contrast  more  striking.  Henceforward,  if  specified  at  all, 
they  are  named  as  Jews  and  Gentiles,  because  there  was  no 
longer  any  Church  upon  earth ;  for  the  very  meaning  and 
essence  of  the  Church  is,  that  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile, 
because  all  are  one  in  Christ.  I  believe  that,  in  the  detail  of 
these  seven  epistles,  there  is  the  greatest  practical  instruction. 
It  is  true,  that  the  Spirit  addressed  them  to  the  churches ;  but 
"  he  that  hath  an  ear  "  is  expressly  enjoined  to  give  heed  ;  and 
this,  to  the  challenges  of  the  Lord  sent  to  them  all. 


*  The  chief  opponent  of  the  future,  or  rather  protracted  application  of  the 
Apocalyptic  epistles,  draws  from  the  local  direction  of  the  voice  that,  according  to 
a  mode  of  interpretation  then  prevalent,  the  visions  about  to  be  shown  would 
refer  to  events  yet  future  and  behind,  in  the  course  of  time.  (Horte  Apocalypticse, 
4th  Edition,  vol.  i.,  pages  66,  67.)  If  there  bo  any  truth  in  that  interpretation, 
it  strongly  confirms  the  future  hearing  of  the  seven  addressrs.  But  it  is  certain 
from  Rev.  iv.  1,  that  when  the  purely  prophetic  visions  arc  about  to  begin,  the 
speaker's  voice  is  above,  not  behind. 


APPENDIX.  67 

It  may  be  well,  now  that  we  have  gone  over  the  ground  of  the 
Apocalyptic  epistles,  to  notice  the  objections  urged  against  the 
larger  view  of  their  meaning  by  Bp.  Newton,  "  Many  contend, 
and  among  them  such  learned  men  as  More  and  Vitringa,  that 
the  seven  epistles  are  prophetical  of  so  many  successive  periods 
and  states  of  the  church,  from  the  beginning  to  the  conclusion  of 
all.  But  it  doth  not  appear  that  there  are,  or  were  to  be,  seven 
periods  of  the  church,  neither  more  nor  less ;  and  no  two  men 
can  agree  in  assigning  the  same  periods.  There  are,  likewise, 
in  these  epistles,  several  innate  characters  which  were  peculiar 
to  the  church  of  that  age,  and  cannot  be  so  well  applied  to  the 
church  of  any  other  age.  Besides  other  arguments,  there  is  also 
this  plain  reason ;  the  last  state  of  the  church  is  described  in  this 
very  book  as  the  most  glorious  of  all,  but  in  the  last  state  in 
these  epistles,  that  of  Laodicea,  the  church  is  represented  as 
'  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked.'  " 
(Newton's  Works,  Vol.  I.,  p.  549,  Ed.  1782.) 

Now  it  is  clear  that  "  it  doth  not  appear  "  is  rather  an  assump- 
tion than  a  proof.  Whi/  does  it  not  appear  ?  Another  might 
urge  the  same  objection,  and  perhaps  with  quite  as  much 
weight,  against  the  seven  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials.  God  has 
been  pleased  to  specify  in  each  of  these  instances  seven  salient 
points,  so  to  speak,  as  His  complete  account  of  each.  "  The 
main  subjects  of  this  book,"  the  Bishop  had  just  before  remarked, 
"  are  comprised  of  sevens,  seven  churches,  seven  seals,  seven 
trumpets,  and  seven  vials;  as  seven  was  also  a  mystical  number 
throughout  the  Old  Testament."  If  this  answer  satisfy  as  to 
the  seven  vials,  why  not  as  to  the  seven  epistles  ?  Doubtless, 
more  spirituality  may  be  required  for  right  discernment  in  the 
latter  than  in  the  former  case  ;  because  one  series  relates  to 
external  judgments  in  the  world,  whereas  the  other  series  takes 
cognizance  of  such  remarkable  sjnritual  conditions,  good  and 
bad,  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  as  it  seemed  good  to  the  Lord 
to  notice.  Hence,  a  jjriori,  one  might  be  prepared  for  a  greater 
divergence  of  judgment  among  Christians  in  their  adaptation  of 
Rev.  ii.,  iii.,  than  in  their  views  of  any  other  parts  of  the  book. 
If  there  had  been,  thei-efore,  a  considerable  measure  of  truth  in 
what  he  says,  the  general  principle  would  still  remain  undis- 
turbed. But  this  is  not  the  case.  There  is  a  striking  agreement 
as  regards  the  first  three  or  four  churches.  This,  of  course,  is  not 
urged  as  in  the  least  degree  authoritative,  but  as  a  sufficient 
answer  to  the  charge  of  hopeless  discrepancy  preferred  by  Bp. 
Newton.  Retort  would  be  easy  on  the  discordant  schemes  of 
interpreting  the  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials.     It  is  singular,  how- 


68  APPENDIX. 

ever,  that  the  Bishop  bears  testimony  in  the  next  page  to  the 
mystical  meaning  of  the  epistle  to  Smyrna.  For  the  "  tribula- 
tion ten  days"  is  there  explained  of  the  greatest  persecution 
that  the  primitive  church  ever  endured,  Diocletian's  persecution, 
which  lasted  ten  years,  and  grievously  afflicted  all  the  Eastern 
churches.  Conscious  that  such  an  application,  not  in  the  pro- 
mises attached,  but  in  the  body  of  the  epistle,  is  fatal  to  his  own 
exclusively  literal  application,  the  Bishop  thereon  allows  that 
the  "  promissory  or  threatening  part  foretels  something  of  their 
future  condition,"  and  asserts  that  "  in  this  sense,  and  in  no 
other,  can  these  epistles  be  said  to  be  prophetical"  (p.  550). 
But  how  stop  here,  once  you  own,  as  he  does  in  the  Smyrnean 
epistle,  a  bearing  beyond  the  bare  single  church  in  or  near  that 
age,  once  you  extend  its  scope  to  all  the  East,  and  its  date  to 
the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century  ?  Indeed,  that  fierce  perse- 
cution was  not  confined  to  the  East ;  foi-  all  the  empire,  not 
excepting  Spain  and  Britain,  was  stained  with  Christian  blood. 
If  the  principle  is  true  in  one  epistle,  why  not  in  all  ?  And,  in 
fact,  is  not  general  declension  as  clearly  marked  in  Ephesus,  as 
persecution  is  in  Smyrna?  and  does  not  Pergamos  portray  the  cor- 
rupting influences  of  worldly  exaltation,  as  palpably  as  Thyatira 
sets  forth  the  pi'oud  unrelenting  false  prophetess  of  Popery  ? 
No  doubt,  the  unsatisfactory  character  attached  by  our  Lord  to 
Sardis  must  be  painful  and  startling  to  those  whose  eye  is  filled 
with  ordinary  Protestantism  and  its  decent  orthodoxy.  And, 
perhaps,  yet  more  distasteful  is  the  sight  of  another  and  a  subse- 
quent testimony,  which  sets  those  who  bear  it  in  weakness  and 
scorn  outside  the  religious  world,  with  the  coming  of  Christ  their 
blessed  and  animating  hope.  But  it  is  plain  that  the  picture  of 
the  last  assembly,  in  its  deplorable  lukewarmness,  and  the  Lord's 
rejection  of  it,  was  the  great  difficulty  to  Bp.  N.,  because  of  its 
inconsistency  with  his  theory  of  the  last  state  of  the  Church, 
"  described  in  this  very  book,  as  the  most  glorious  of  all."  But 
this  is  a  total  mistake.  The  Revelation  never  describes  the 
Church  on  earth  after  Laodicea.  The  glorious  description,  to 
which  the  Bishop  refers,  is  probably  in  Rev.  xix.-xxi,,  where  the 
entire  Church  is  glorified  above.  In  a  word,  this  reason  is  plainly 
invalid.  The  bride  of  the  Lamb  is  to  reign,  but  this  does  not 
contradict  the  solemn  testimony  of  the  Laodicean  epistle,  that 
the  last  state  of  Christendom  here  below  is  to  be  like  that  of 
Israel  before  it,  "worse  than  the  first."  The  general  testimony 
of  the  New  Testament  entirely  confirms  the  witness  borne  by 
this  particular  jiart,  as  appears  from  Luke  xvii.  26-37 ;  2  Thess. 
ii.  1-12;  2Tim.iii.  1-5;  2  Peterii.  iii.;  IJohnii.  18;  Jude  1 1-19. 


A    DOOR    OPENED    IN    HEAVEN. 


69 


CHAPTER    IV. 

We  are  now  come  to  the  strictly  prophetic  part  of  the  book 
of  Revelation.  The  seven  churches  formed  together  what  the 
Holy  Ghost  calls  "  the  things  which  are."  And  the  Son  of 
man  was  seen  judging-  the  house  of  God  on  earth,  represented 
by  the  Asiatic  churches.  They  existed  in  the  time  of  St.  John, 
and  in  a  mystic  sort  at  least,  they  have  an  existence  continuous 
and,  to  a  certain  extent,  successive,  as  long  as  there  is  any  testi- 
mony rendered  by  the  professing  body  on  the  earth.  If  the 
literal  application  is  past,  the  protracted  representative  bearing 
still  goes  on.  In  chap.  i.  19,  we  were  told  that,  besides  "  the 
things  which  thou  hast  seen,"  and  "  the  things  which  are," 
there  was  a  third  division,  "  the  things  which  shall  be  hereafter." 
The  word  "  hereafter"  is  vague,  whereas  the  sense  intended 
appears  to  be  precise  :  it  should  be  read,  "  the  things  which 
shall  be  after  these"  meaning  what  is  to  follow  after  the  Church 
has  come  to  an  end  on  the  earth.  Its  present  history  closes 
here,  though  it  will  have  a  better  existence  in  heaven,  and  it 
will  reign  over  the  earth,  too,  in  the  day  of  millennial  glory. 
We  then  arrive  at  this  wholly  prophetical  portion.  Chaps,  iv. 
and  V.  are  a  kind  of  preface  to  "  the  things  which  shall  be  after 
these."  Their  great  object  is  to  show  us  not  events  occurring 
upon  the  earth,  but  the  attitude  or  aspect  in  which  God  appears, 
and  the  place  of  those  who  are  nearest  to  Him,  during  the 
occurrence  of  these  future  events,  i.e.  the  crisis  of  the  present 
age.     I  must  here  dwell  a  little  on  the  first  of  these  chapters. 

"  After  these  things  I  looked  and  behold  a  door  open  in 
heaven,  and  the  first  voice  which  I  heard  [was]  as  it  were  of  a 
trumpet,  talking  with  me,"  &c.  (Ver.  1.)  The  "first  voice" 
here  does  not  mean  the  first  of  the  voices  that  were  about  to 
speak,  as  some  have  strangely  thought,  but  the  voice  that  John 
had  already  heard  in  chap.  i. —  the  voice  of  Him  who  had  been 
in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks.  It  still  addresses 
him  like  a  trumpet,  but  now  not  from  earth,  but  from  heaven. 
There  was  a  door  there,  and  the  voice  spake  from  thence,  so 
that  this  portion  of  the  book  supposes  the  earth  done  with,  for 
the  moment,  and  the  scene  lies  above.  It  is  not  merely  that 
saints  render  testimony  upon  earth,  but  the  voice  speaks  from 


70  THE    GLORY    OF    GOD. 

heaven,  showing  the  things  that  should  follow  the  Church-con- 
dition on  earth,  now  concluded.  "  Come  up  hither,  and  I  will 
show  thee  the  things  which  must  happen  after  these  things." 
John  is  said  to  be  immediately  in  the  Spirit  (ver.  2) ;  i.e.  by  the 
Holy  Ghost's  power  he  was  characterized,  so  as  to  enter  into  the 
new  scenes  he  was  now  to  behold. 

"  Behold,  a  throne  was  set  in  heaven,  and  one  sat  on  the 
throne.  And  he  that  sat,"  &c.  God  is  not  named  as  such  in 
this  account,  save  as  "  He  that  sat  upon  the  throne."  He  is 
about  to  show  us  what  the  aspect  seemed  of  the  One  who  sits 
upon  the  throne,  while  there  is  that  in  God  which  no  man  hath 
seen,  or  can  see.  This  is  a  representation,  in  a  symbolical  way, 
of  the  glory  of  God.  He  may  assume  any  appearance  that 
pleases  Him,  but  as  far  as  He  permitted  it  to  be  displayed  here, 
it  was  what  could  be  compared  to  these  precious  stones.  In 
chap.  xxi.  the  bride,  the  New  Jerusalem,  comes  down  "  out  of 
heaven  from  God,  having  the  glory  of  God  ;  her  light  [was] 
like  a  stone  most  precious,  as  a  jasjDer  stone,"  &c.  It  is  quite 
evident  that  this  cannot  be  the  essential  glory  of  God.  It 
rather  means,  I  think,  that  it  was  not  a  human  but  a  divine 
glory.  There  is  in  God  that  which  He  can  confer  upon  the 
creature,  and  there  is  that  which  is  incommunicable.  Here 
divine  glory  is  meant  in  contrast  with  creature  glory  ;  not  that 
which  would  derogate  from  His  majesty,  but  be  a  reflection  of 
it.  Her  light  was  like  a  jasper  stone  ;  the  wall  also  was  of 
jasper,  (ver.  18,)  and  the  first  foundation,  (ver.  19.)*  The 
general  appearance  of  the  city  was  as  it  were  of  jasper.  This  a 
little  answers,  I  think,  to  the  view  we  have  in  chap.  iv.  of  Avhat 
John  enjoyed  of  the  sight  of  Him  that  sat  upon  the  throne. 
In  Rom.  V.  2,  it  is  said,  not  only  that  we  have  access  to  the 
grace  of  God  in  which  we  stand,  but  that  we  rejoice  in  hope  of 
the  glory  of  God.  That  glory  of  Him  who  sat  on  the  throne, 
as  far  as  it  could  be  viewed  by  the  creature,  was  presented  under 
the  figure  of  jasper  and  sardius  (ver.  3)  ;  and  when  the  Church 
comes  forth  in  the  glory  of  God,  her  light  will  be  jasper-like. 

*  The  application  of  the  jasper,  in  the  account  of  the  heavenly  city,  seems  deci- 
sively to  set  aside  the  notion  that  the  colour  of  this  stone  was  intended  to  convey 
something  in  the  appearance  very  awful  as  well  as  glorious.  It  is  utterly  out  of 
the  question  to  attribute  such  a  feature  to  the  New  Jerusalem,  of  which  the  figure 
is  used  still  more  emphatically.  I  cannot  but  think,  therefore,  that  we  must 
search  for  a  meaning  in  keeping  with  both,  and  that  the  idea  of  glory  and  splen- 
dour best  meets  all  requirements.  Far  more  untenable  is  the  view  that  the  jasper 
sets  forth  the  incarnation.  It  appears  to  me  to  fall  in  with  not  a  single  occur- 
rence of  the  figure;  it  sets  Rev.  iv.  hopelessly  at  variance  with  chap,  v.,  and  it 
would  involve,  I  fear,  serious  aberration  from  sound  doctrine,  if  carried  out  in 
chap.  xxi. 


A    RAINBOW    ROUND    THE    THRONE.  71 

That  is,  the  thought  of  God's  glory,  not  man's,  is  the  thing  con- 
veyed to  the  mind.  Even  in  the  "  eternal  day,"  there  will  be  no 
such  thing  as  God  abandoning  or  lowering  the  dignity  of  His 
own  proper  Godhead  ;  for  there  will  always  be  an  infinite  chasm 
between  God  and  the  most  exalted  of  His  creatures.  Still,  there 
is  a  resemblance  between  the  glory  of  God,  as  seen  by  man, 
and  the  Church's  glory  by  and  by.  And  this  answers  exactly 
to  the  words  of  our  Lord  in  the  gospel  of  John  (xvii.  22,  23) : 
"  The  glory  which  thou  gavest  me  I  have  given  them ;  that 
they  may  be  one,  even  as  we  are  one :  I  in  them,  and  thou  in 
me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one  ;  and  that  the  world 
may  know  that  thou  hast  sent  me,  and  hast  loved  them,  as  thou 
hast  loved  me." 

But  besides  the  appearance  of  divine  glory,  there  was  a  rain- 
bow round  about  the  throne.  This  evidently  carries  our  thoughts 
back  to  the  covenant  that  God  made,  not  with  His  people  Israel, 
but  with  the  earth  at  large.  The  covenant  with  His  jjeople  is 
noticed  for  the  first  time  in  chap.  xi.  of  this  book,  where  we 
have  heaven  opened  and  the  ark  of  His  testament  seen  in  His 
temple.  It  is  not  the  new  covenant  itself;  for  when  that  is 
brought  out,  there  will  be  no  earthquakes,  and  lightnings,  and 
thunders,  &;c.,  but  the  day  of  peace  and  blessing  for  Israel. 
But  at  the  time  to  which  that  vision  refers,  God  will  show  that 
He  has  respect  to  His  covenant.  Here  the  rainbow  is  God's 
remembrance  of  His  covenant  with  the  earth.  The  ark  spoken 
of  in  chap.  xi.  is  God's  remembrance  of  His  covenant  with  His 
people.  God  is  going  to  pour  forth  judgments  upon  the  earth 
and  upon  those  who  had  the  responsibility  of  being  His  people. 
But  He  takes  pains  to  show  that,  before  a  single  judgment 
falls,  there  is  mercy  in  store.  Before  He  touches  creation, 
there  is  the  sign  of  His  covenant  with  the  earth  ;  just  as  when 
He  is  forced  to  pour  down  plagues  upon  His  people  Israel,  the 
ark  of  His  covenant  is  seen.  The  rainbow  was  the  witness  that 
God  had  not  forgotten  His  ancient  word  —  He  could  not  forget. 
The  rainbow  is  the  sign  of  mercy.  It  spans  the  heavens,  and 
takes  in  earth,  and  sea,  the  whole  compass  of  that  blessed  secu- 
rity of  which  God  had  hung  out  the  token  on  high.  But  now 
we  have  the  rainbow  not  merely  over  the  world,  but  round 
about  the  throne  in  heaven.  This  is  not  its  usual  place,  but  it 
was  a  sweet  sight  for  John  to  see  in  the  midst  of  all  that  bright 
glory,  God  wishing  to  fill  his  heart  with  confidence.  He 
had  not  merely  the  vision  of  what  was  coming  on  the  earth,  but 
in  the  circle  of  the  divine  manifestation  and  power  above,  the 
rainbow  is  seen.     God  shows  us  His  own  glory,  and,  at  the 


72  EVENTS  MUST  BE  SEEN  FROM  HEAVEN. 

same  time,  the  rainbow  would  tell  us  that  God  was  true — that 
He  was  purposely  putting  man  in  mind  of  His  pledg-e,  given 
after  the  great  judgment  of  old,  and  the  rather  as  now  He  set  it 
in  this  i^eculiar  place,  where  a  rainbow  had  never  been  seen 
before,  in  order  to  assure  our  hearts.  But  though  peculiar, 
what  could  be  more  in  character.^  For  it  is  the  throne  of  God, 
the  Almighty,  the  Creator  and  Supreme  Lord  of  all  things. 
Perhaps  it  is  needless  to  remark  that,  of  course,  no  such  things 
will  happen  literally  ;  but  the  vision  was  like  a  panorama,  put- 
ting all  before  the  eyes  of  the  prophet — a  most  lively  and 
admirable  way  of  conveying  what  God  meant  to  teach.  When 
persons  have  got  thoroughly  founded  in  God's  grace,  nothing 
is  more  important  than  the  study  of  this  book.  But  it  may  be 
injurious  to  souls  who  have  not  been  so  established,  to  get 
absorbed  in  the  Revelation. 

First,  then,  we  have  the  throne  of  One  who  is  the  centre  and 
source  of  all  the  action,  God's  glory  and  majesty  being  set  forth  by 
the  symbol  of  the  jasper  and  sardine  ;  and  next  there  is  the 
rainbow,  the  familiar  emblem  of  God's  faithfulness  to  creation. 
The  rainbow  was  of  a  particular  kind,  "  in  appearance  like  an 
emerald  "  (ver.  3).  We  could  scarcely  have  colours  more  op- 
posed than  those  which  represented  the  divine  majesty,  and 
the  emerald,  so  refreshing  for  the  eye  to  look  upon.  The  Holy 
Ghost  gives  us  a  vivid  impression  by  these  simple  symbols. 
For  this  book  was  not  written  for  great  scholars  ;  it  was  in- 
tended for  suffering  saints.  Even  by  men  of  the  world  it  has 
been  noticed,  that  the  Revelation  was  specially  the  book  sought 
into  by  persecuted  Christians,  and  it  appears  to  me  that,  while 
those  who  make  it  a  field  for  human  research  and  speculation, 
go  wrong  here  and  everywhei'e  else,  there  is  a  general  bright 
idea  that  would  present  itself  to  the  mind  of  an  unlettered  believer, 
who  looks  up  to  God,  and  desires  the  glory  of  His  Son. 

The  first  thought  suggested  to  me  by  the  chapter  is,  that  the 
only  true  place  from  which  to  look  at  the  things  that  were 
coming  to  pass  after  the  churches,  was  heaven.  It  is  not  upon 
and  from  the  earth  that  we  can  rightly  judge  of  these  events. 
It  must  be  from  above  we  must  learn  and  look.  If  we  are 
earthly-minded,  we  shall  never  understand  them.  If  I  am 
merely  on  the  level  of  the  scene  upon  which  the  judgments  are 
passing,  I  shall  endeavour  to  make  the  best  of  everything  and 
to  put  off  the  judgments  :  I  am  not  entering  in  by  the  door 
opened  in  heaven.  A  heavenly  standing  must  be  taken  as  the 
ground,  and  the  only  ground,  upon  which  these  visions  can  be 
rightly  estimated. 


FOUR-AND-TWENTY    ELDERS.  73 

The  next  thing  is  God  seen  and  His  throne  —  His  power 
ruling-  in  providence.  The  throne  is  not  in  itself  connected 
with  priesthood,  but  with  power,  whence  divine  government 
proceeds.  God  would  establish  souls  in  the  thought  that  He 
governs,  even  in  the  niidst  of  all  the  wickedness  that  was  to  be 
developed  in  the  time  of  the  beasts,  or  the  final  apostacy.  The 
thing  seen  is  the  throne  of  One  who  did  not  need  to  be  named, 
but  who  permits  His  glory  to  be  seen,  as  far  as  it  can  be  by  the 
creature.  From  His  throne  above  He  is  deahng  with  the 
world.  Then,  we  have  His  throne  surrounded  by  the  remem- 
brancer of  His  covenant  with  creation.  Next,  in  the  4th  verse, 
the  prophet  sees  that,  round  about  the  central  throne  of  God, 
there  are  other  thrones.  The  reason  why  thrones  here  are  prefer- 
able to  "  seats,"  is,  that  it  is  part  of  the  essence  of  the  vision  to 
show  that  the  persons  seated  there  were  persons  of  kingly  dig- 
nity. The  same  word  means  a  throne  and  a  seat,  and  the 
choice  is  only  determined  by  the  connexion  in  which  it  stands. 
We  should  not  say  of  a  person  in  humble  life  that  he  was  sit- 
ting upon  a  throne,  nor  of  the  sovereign  when  in  state,  that  he 
was  upon  a  seat.     We  can  judge  by  the  subject-matter. 

Around  the  throne  of  God,  then,  in  the  scene  of  such  glory  as 
man,  perhaps,  never  saw  before,  there  are  other  thrones,  with 
elders  seated  on  them,  persons  who  were  endowed  with  wisdom 
from  on  high,  who  entered  into  the  thoughts  and  counsels  of 
God.  They  are  clothed  in  white  raiment,  answering  to  their 
priestly,  as  their  crowns  do  to  their  kingly,  dignity.  They  are 
clearly  saints,  and  they  are  seen  in  heaven,  around  the  great 
central  throne  before  the  world's  judgment  begins.  The  num- 
ber of  these  is  twenty-four,  corresponding  with  the  twenty-four 
courses  of  priesthood  in  Israel.  When  the  forerunner  of  the 
Lord  was  to  be  born,  his  father  Zacharias  was  a  priest  of  the 
course  or  order  of  Abia.  In  1  Chron.  xxiv.  we  must  look  to 
see  what  these  divisions  were,  and  we  find  the  eighth  was  that 
of  Abijah.  The  priesthood  was  divided  into  these  courses  in 
order  that  each  in  succession  might  take  up  the  work  of  the 
priesthood,  every  course  having  its  own  chief  priest.  The  High 
Priest  is  not  named  here  :  we  all  know  who  He  is  ;  but  we 
have  the  twenty-four  elders  answering  to  these  twenty-four 
courses  of  priesthood,  or  rather  to  the  chiefs  Avho  represented 
them.  (Ver.  4.) 

But  a  deeply  interesting  enquiry  arises.  If  these  crowned 
and  enthroned  elders  represent  the  heavenly  saints,  as  few  will 
deny,  when  and  to  what  condition  does  the  vision  apply  t  (i.) 
Does  it  speak  of  those  who  have  departed  to  be  with  Christ  ? 


74  WHO,    OR    WHAT   THE    ELDERS    ARE. 

Or  (ii.)  does  it  foreshadow  the  manifested  kingdom  of  Christ  and 
his  saints  during-  the  millennium  ?  Now,  I  think  it  certain  that 
both  these  questions  must  be  answered  in  the  negative,  and  that 
the  time  of  this  chapter  iv.  and  therefore  the  interval  during 
which  the  elders  are  thus  engaged  on  high,  is  after  the  separate 
state  is  over,  as  far  as  they  are  concerned,  and  before  the  mil- 
lennial reign  begins.  For  (i.)  it  is  obvious  that  the  symbol  of 
the  twenty-four  elders  implies  the  sum  of  the  heads  of  the  hea- 
venly priesthood — not  a  part,  however  large,  but  the  whole. 
There  were  just  so  many  courses,  and  no  more.  In  the  vision, 
they  are  complete  ;  and  in  the  reality,  which  it  symbolizes,  this 
can  never  be  the  case,  while  the  saints  are  absent  from  the  body 
and  thus  present  with  the  Lord.  During  that  state  of  tilings, 
there  will  always  be  members  of  the  Church  on  the  earth.  For 
"  we  shall  not  all  sleep."  And  when,  at  the  Lord's  return,  the 
dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first,  "  we  which  are  alive  and  remain 
shall  be  caught  up  together  with  them  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the 
air  ;  and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  That  is  to  say, 
the  symbol,  understood  and  interpreted  aright,  requires  that  all 
the  members  of  Christ  should  be  together  and  in  the  same  con- 
dition ;  and  as  this  will  never  be  true  of  the  separate  spirits,  it 
necessarily  follows  that  the  vision  will  be  realized  only  when 
"  we  shall  all  be  changed,"  and  with  the  Lord.  But  (ii.)  it  is 
clear  that,  whatever  may  be  anticipatively  presented  in  the 
songs  of  the  elders,  or  of  others  who  catch  up,  as  it  were,  the 
chorus  of  their  strains,  both  the  actions  of  the  elders,  and  the 
entire  heavenly  scenery,  in  which  they  take  so  prominent  a  part, 
from  Rev.  iv.  to  chap,  xix.,  suppose  that  the  reigning  over  the 
earth  does  not  arrive  as  a  literal  fact  till  Christ  and  His  saints 
have  left  heaven  for  the  judgment  of  His  enemies.  But  the 
full  complement  of  the  elders  is  made  up  a  considerable  time 
previously  :  none  can  deny  they  are  in  heaven  before  and  dur- 
ing the  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials.  The  inference  is  plain.  The 
saints  represented  by  them  must  be,  as  a  whole,  in  heaven  before 
these  judgments  begin  to  be  fulfilled.  The  millennium  does 
not  come  till  Rev.  xx.  ;  the  elders,  shadowing  the  glorified 
saints,  are  with  the  Lord  in  their  changed  bodies  long  before. 
When  He  comes  from  heaven,  to  the  destruction  of  the  beast, 
they  follow,  and  with  Him  they  subsequently  reign  for  a  thou- 
sand years.  Others,  I  doubt  not,  will  be  joined  with  them  in 
that  reign  :  these  will  not  be  glorified  in  their  bodies  till  Rev. 
XX.,  having  suffered,  after  the  rapture  of  the  Church,  under  the 
beast,  &c.  But  Rev.  iv.  intimates,  that  that  rapture  will  then 
have  taken  place,  and  that  the  saints  caught  up  are  viewed  as  a 


THE    FOUR    LIVING    CREATURES.  75 

royal  priesthood,  interested,  as  having  the  mind  of  Christ,  in  the 
trials,  sufferings,  testimony,  and  hopes  of  those  who  succeed 
themselves,  as  witnesses  for  God,  during  the  hour  of  temptation 
which  will  then  come  upon  all  the  world  to  try  those  that  dwell 
on  the  earth.  Even  for  the  raptured  saints  on  high,  it  is  not 
yet  the  time  for  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  ;  and  therefore,  as 
well  as  for  other  reasons,  they  are  here  regarded,  not  as  the 
body  or  bride,  but  as  kings  and  priests  worshipping,  and  as  yet 
waiting  for  their  manifestation  in  glory  when  they  shall  judge 
the  world. 

There  is  a  solemn  connexion  with  this  in  Ezekiel,  where  we 
have  twenty-jive  men  named  ;  (Ezek.  viii.  16 ;)  and  to  my  own 
mind  it  appears,  that  they  were  the  whole  of  the  heads  of  the 
priesthood  —  the  twenty-four  chiefs  and  the  high  priest  besides. 
But  where  were  they  now  ?  Alas  !  they  were  the  very  heads  of 
idolatry  and  of  wickedness  perpetrated  in  the  temple  of  Jehovah. 
They  were  there,  not  as  those  whose  raiment  told  of  the  blood 
that  cleanses,  but  the  corrupters  of  God's  holy  standard  and  the 
defilers  of  Israel,  leading  them  on  to  apostacy  ;  so  that  if  judg- 
ment is  to  be  inflicted,  it  must  begin  with  the  house  of  God. 
There  is  a  sort  of  contrast  between  the  scene  here  described 
and  that  in  Ezekiel.  There  we  had  the  living  creatures  first, 
the  symbol  of  the  executive  judgments  of  God,  of  His  judicial 
power  putting  down  evil.  The  earthly  result  of  the  action  of 
these  living  creatures,  as  seen  in  Ezekiel,  might  be  the  destruc- 
tion of  Jerusalem  ;    but  that  was  only  what  man  saw. 

The  cherubim  and  the  living  creatures  (Z,Coa)  are  the  same 
thing  ;  they  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  the  beasts 
{9r]f}ia)  we  read  of  afterwards.  The  first  mention  of  the  cheru- 
bim is  in  the  early  part  of  the  book  of  Genesis,  chap.  iii.  When 
sin  entered  the  world,  immediately  we  find  them.  They  were 
the  beings  to  whom  the  work  of  judgment  was  entrusted.  "  He 
placed  at  the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden  cherubim  and  a  flaming 
sword,  to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life."  The  emblem  of 
their  power  was  this  flaming  sword.  Again,  if  we  look  at  the 
second  book  of  Moses,  we  find  the  cherubim  there  in  a  most 
blessed  way.  Where  were  they  looking  ?  Within.  Had  they 
been  looking  outwards,  they  would  have  seen  sinners  ;  had  they 
looked  under,  into  the  ark,  there  they  would  have  seen  the  law  ; 
but  they  were  looking  within,  upon  the  mercy-seat,  upon  the 
blood  that  was  sprinkled  there.  There  was  the  blood  that 
spoke  of  the  perfect  mercy  of  God,  that  had  met  and  triumphed 
over  sin  ;  and  there  was  the  power  of  God  :  both  combined  in 
preserving  the  glory  of  God,  and  both  working  for  man  instead 


76  DIFFERENCE    IN    EZEKIEL. 

of  against  him.  If  we  look  at  them  again  in  the  time  of  Solo- 
mon, we  find  a  remarkable  difference.  The  position  of  the 
cherubim  completely  changes,  and  instead  of  looking  within, 
they  are  looking  out,  because  Solomon's  day  typifies  the  time  of 
glory,  when  the  true  Man  and  Prince  of  Peace  shall  rule.  And 
why  should  they  not  look  out  then  ?  Sin  will  have  been  judged, 
and  instead  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  falling  as  it  were  in 
drops  here  and  there,  the  Lord  shall  come  down  like  rain  upon 
the  mown  grass  ;  as  showers  that  water  the  earth,  and  the 
whole  earth  shall  be  filled  with  His  glory  —  the  just  answer  to 
the  glory  of  David's  Son.  When  mercy  will  have  had  its  full 
way,  and  judgment  has  been  executed,  there  will  be  nothing  to 
hinder  the  cherubim  from  proclaiming  the  goodness  of  the  Lord. 
But  in  Ezekiel  a  terrible  crisis  came.  The  mercy-seat  had 
been  despised,  and  Solomon's  glory  had  faded  away.  Israel 
was  sinning  with  a  high  hand,  and  now  the  very  temple  itself 
was  the  spot  where  the  greatest  dishonour  was  done  to  God, 
and  there  the  cherubim  again  as  good  as  say,  "  God  can  have 
nothing  to  do  with  this  wicked  people  ;  judgment  must  have  its 
course."  Accordingly  they  leave  Israel,  though  they  bring 
judgment  upon  them.  They  are  only  seen  again  as  giving  the 
signal  for  judgment,  and  putting  it  in  force  by  the  hand  of 
Nebuchadnezzar. 

We  have  the  same  thing  in  Revelation,  with  this  difference, 
that  in  Ezekiel  the  living  creatures  are  seen  more  in  connexion 
with  the  earth,  and  this  is  the  reason  why  they  are  said  to  have 
wheels  as  well  as  wings.  In  Revelation,  the  earthly  people 
being  dropped  for  a  season,  and  a  heavenly  people  called,  they 
are  simply  seen  with  the  wings,  suited  for  heaven,  and  not  the 
wheels,  suited  for  earth.  From  this  omission  it  is  sweet  to  see 
that  even  if  God  is  going  to  speak  about  judgment,  the  very 
form  that  the  executor  of  God's  judgment  takes,  tells  us  that  a 
heavenly  interruption  has  come  in,  ere  the  world's  history  is 
resumed.  It  is  of  immense  importance,  if  we  are  to  view  these 
things  aright,  to  get  a  firm  footing  on  the  ground  on  which  the 
apostle  stood  —  to  enter  in,  as  it  were,  by  the  door  ojaened  in 
heaven. 

But  besides  this,  "  Out  of  the  throne  proceeded  lightnings, 
and  voices,  and  thunders,"  &c.  (Ver.  5.)  Evidently,  this  is  not 
the  throne  that  we  draw  near  to  ;  for  ours  is  a  throne  of  grace, 
and  this  is  a  throne  of  judgment.  Its  aspect  described  here 
has  nothing  in  the  world  to  do  with  grace.  What  proceeds 
from  the  throne  is  not  a  stream,  clear  as  crystal,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  throne  mentioned  in  chap,  xxii.,  but  "  lightnings,  and 


TRANSITIONAL    EPOCH    OF   THE    APOCALYPTIC    VISIONS.       77 

voices,  and  thunders,"  &c.,  which  are  expressive  of  God's  terrors. 
Even  the  symbohcal  Hkeness  given  here  of  God's  Spirit  is  in 
keeping  with  it.  "  There  were  seven  lamps  of  fire  burning 
before  the  throne,  which  are  the  seven  Spirits  of  God."  The 
Holy  Ghost  does  not  take  the  symbol  of  lamps  of  fire,  when 
expressing  God's  grace  to  the  Church.  No  doubt,  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost,  we  have  the  tongues  of  fire,  a  beautiful  emblem  of 
what  God  was  then  about  to  do  ;  for  it  was  divine  force  that 
gave  those  unlettered  men  to  speak  in  every  tongue.  On  the 
Lord  Jesus  He  descended  in  the  form  of  a  dove  ;  but  that  Avas 
quite  a  different  thing  from  what  we  have  in  Revelation.  Here 
it  is  the  consumiiig  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Fire  is  the 
well  known  emblem  of  the  searching  holiness  of  God.  The 
Holy  Ghost  in  full  perfection  as  light,  and  as  a  fire  that  con- 
sumes, is  the  representation  that  the  Spirit  gives  of  His  own 
relation  to  this  time.  It  is  plain  that  this  does  not  refer  to  the 
millennial  kingdom,  for  then  a  stream,  clear  as  crystal,  is  to 
proceed  out  of  the  throne  of  God  ;  still  less  would  such  a  sym- 
bol apply  to  His  action  in  the  body  of  Christ  during  the  present 
time.  Nor  is  God's  throne  now  one  from  which  proceed  light- 
nings and  thunders,  &c.  To  what  period,  then,  is  the  refer- 
ence ?  To  a  short  space  between  the  two,  when  God  has  done 
His  present  Church-work,  and  before  the  millennial  glory  begins. 
The  present  is  the  time  when  God  is  gathering  out  His  heirs, 
joint-heirs  with  Christ,  and  forming  the  bride  :  and  now  there  is 
a  throne  of  grace,  and  we  find  grace  and  mercy  in  every  time  of 
need.  Here,  on  the  contrary.  His  judgments  issue  out  from 
the  throne.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  Spirit  of  judgment  and 
burning  here,  just  as  much  as  the  throne  is  judicial  and  the 
source  of  terrors  for  the  earth.  Thus,  then,  it  is  neither  the 
peaceful  era  of  the  millennial  glory,  nor  the  present  display  of 
unbounded  grace,  but  a  time  between  the  two.  It  is  not  con- 
ceivable for  a  person  to  have  just  light  upon  this  book  who  does 
not  see  that  the  Revelation  fills  up  the  interval  afier  the  Lord 
has  taken  the  Church,  and  before  He  comes  out  of  heaven  and 
the  Church  along  with  Him.  (Chap,  xix.)  I  speak,  of  course, 
of  the  prophetic  visions  which  fill  the  body  of  tlie  book,  and  not 
of  the  three  introductory  chapters,  nor  of  the  close,  when  the 
Lord  is  about  to  appear.  There  the  whole  scene  is  changed  ; 
the  heavens  are  opened  to  send  forth  the  Lord  Jesus,  for  the 
purpose  of  putting  the  last  stroke  of  judgment  to  man's  inicpiity, 
and  Satan's  power,  and  then  we  have  the  full  flow  of  blessing 
far  and  wide.  Here  we  have  the  time  that  precedes  it  —  an 
interval  of  most  solemn  character  for  the  world,  when  the  hea- 
venly saints  have  been  caught  up. 


78    MEANING    AND    APPLICATION    OF    THE    LIVING    CREATURES. 

"  And  before  the  throne  there  was  a  sea  of  glass,"  &c.  (Ver.  6.) 
Not  a  sea  of  water,  where  persons  could  bathe,  but  a  sea  of  glass. 
Now  the  Holy  Ghost  uses  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word 
for  the  purpose  of  purging  defilement.  There  was  no  longer 
need  for  this  in  those  who  were  here.  In  chap.  xv.  there  is 
another  class  mentioned  as  standing  njjon  a  sea  of  glass,  show- 
ing that  it  is  not  then  a  question  of  the  Spirit's  power  in  dealing 
with  what  is  contrary  to  God,  but  the  victory  is  over.  All 
question  of  the  trial  of  the  heavenly  saints  is  over.  The  scene 
where  the  Church  had  been  in  trial  is  now  peacefully  closed,  in 
Rev.  iv.,  and  they  are  seated  round  God's  own  throne. 

There,  too,  are  the  four  living  creatures,  full  of  eyes  before 
and  behind,  which  are  the  symbol  of  discernment ;  for  though 
it  is  judgment  they  have  to  execute,  it  is  not,  we  need  hardly 
say,  blind  judgment.  "  The  first  living  creature  was  like  a 
lion,  the  second  like  a  calf,  the  third  had  the  face  as  of  a  man, 
and  the  fourth  was  like  a  flying  eagle  (ver.  7)."  The  various  sym- 
bols are  taken  from  the  heads  of  God's  creation  here  below,  and 
represent  different  qualities  of  His  judgments  :  the  lion  as  the 
head  of  wild  beasts,  the  ox  or  calf  the  head  of  cattle,  man  of 
intelligent  beings,  and  the  eagle  of  birds.  The  lion  conveys  the 
idea  of  strength  or  majestic  power,  the  ox  of  patient  endurance, 
the  man  of  intelligence,  and  the  eagle  of  rapidity.  God  shows 
us  the  strength,  patience,  intelligence,  and  rapidity  with  which 
His  judgments  should  be  executed.  The  four  living  creatures, 
having  each  of  them  six  wings,  denoted  supernatural  rapidity, 
and  the  eyes  within  intrinsic  discernment  (ver.  8).  Some  have 
supposed,  chiefly  from  the  nearness  of  the  living  creatures  to  the 
supreme  throne,  that  they,  rather  than  the  elders,  must  set  forth 
the  Church.*  But  this  is  quite  a  misconception.  The  reason,  as  I 
think,  why  the  Hving  creatures  are  thus  near,  is  because  they 
are  the  judicial  executive,  and  providential  judgments  will  then 
be  in  progress.     Tliey  characterize  the  action  of  the  throne. 

*  All  admit  that  the  cherubim  are  invariably  attendants  on  the  throne  of  God, 
and  that  thej  were,  therefore,  in  the  most  holy  place,  made  of  the  same  piece  of 
gold  as  the  ark  itself  on  which  Jehovah  sat.  But  it  is  argued  that,  though  in  all 
the  Old  Testament  instances  they  were  angelic,  because  the  law  had  been  ordained 
by  angels  (Gral.  iii.  17),  they  might  become  human  in  the  Apocalypse,  because  the 
world  to  come  is  to  be  made  subject  to  man  (Hebrews  ii.  5).  Thus  the  cherubim 
and  the  elders  would  represent  the  saints  in  a  twofold  aspect,  active  and  contem- 
plative. And  certainly  it  is  a  notable  fact,  as  another  has  remarked,  that  before  the 
Lamb  appears  and  takes  the  book,  there  are  no  angels  mentioned  who  praise,  and 
the  cherubim  or  living  creatures  only  express  or  celebrate  the  holy  character  of 
God,  but  are  not  associated  with  intelligent  worship.  Whereas,  when  the  Lamb 
is  in  the  scene,  the  elders  and  cherubim  join  in  intelligent  worship,  and  the  angels 
are  expressly  distinguished.     But  more  may  be  said  vrhen  we  treat  of  chap.  v. 


INTELLIGENT    WORSHIP    OF    THE    ELDERS.  79 

"  And  they  have  no  rest  day  and  night,  saying,  "  Holy,  holy, 
holy  Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come." 
This  is  a  remarkable  word.  It  is  not  occupation  with  evil ;  but 
when  God  shows  us  the  means  or  agencies  by  which  He  exe- 
cutes judgment,  we  have  one  unceasing  cry  as  regards  Him  — 
"  Holy,  holy,  holy."_ 

One  of  the  most  important  features  of  this  scene  for  the  soul 
is  this  :  the  elders  symbolize  the  heavenly  saints  in  glory,  the 
heads  of  the  heavenly  priesthood,  found  in  their  blessed  employ 
above.  But  observe  that,  when  they  are  seen  there  first,  they 
are  perfectly  familiar  with  the  scene  ;  there  is  no  hurry  and  no 
anxiety.  They  are  peacefully  seated  upon  the  thrones.  There 
is  no  trembling,  even  in  the  presence  of  God.  These  thunders, 
and  lightnings,  and  judgments,  might  proceed  from  His  throne, 
but  still  they  sit  peacefully  upon  their  thrones — not  a  single 
movement  is  produced.  And  what  is  it  that  does  move  them  ? 
They  were  entirely  undisturbed  by  terror  :  judgment  does  not 
shake  them  from  the  thrones  ;  but  when  those  living  creatures 
shall  give  glory,  and  honour,  and  thanks  to  Him  that  sat  on  the 
throne,  &c.,  the  four-and-twenty  elders  shall  fall  down,  Sec. 
Directly  honour  is  given  by  the  executors  of  judgment  to  Him 
that  sat  upon  the  throne,  the  elders  worship.  What  satisfaction 
in  God — what  certainty  that  sin  was  at  an  end  does  this  show ! 
He  may  be  going  to  judge,  but  He  will  not  judge  those  who 
are  made  His  righteousness  in  Christ.  They  are  in  sympathy 
with  Him ;  and  when  the  living  creatures  address  God  and 
ascribe  glory,  and  honour,  and  thanks  to  Him,  then  it  is  that 
they  rise  from  their  thrones  and  are  found  prostrate  before  Him. 
More  than  that,  they  worship  and  cast  their  crowns  before  the 
throne,  saying,  "  Thou  art  worthy,  O  Lord,  to  receive  the  glory, 
and  the  honour,  and  the  power  :  for  thou  hast  created  all  things, 
and  for  thy  will  they  were,  and  were  created."  They  enter  into 
His  personal  worthiness  in  a  way  that  the  living  creatures  do 
not,  and  with  greater  spiritual  intelligence.  They  are  elders : 
they  understand  here  the  creatorial  and  providential  glory  of 
God,  just  as  in  chap.  v.  we  see  that  they  enter  into  the  worthi- 
ness and  work  of  the  Lamb.  "  For  thou  didst  create  all  things," 
&c. — not,  "  are  created  and  were  created  ;  "  but  for  His  will,  or 
pleasure,  they  were  sustained  in  existence,  even  as  they  were 
originated  at  first.  (Verses  10,  IL)  Thus,  their  praise  em- 
braces the  two  great  thoughts  in  the  chapter — the  creation 
glory  and  the  governmental  glory  of  God.  "They  were,"  i.e., 
they  existed  now  in  the  care  and  the  government  of  God,  "  and 
they  were  created,"  i.e.,  to  Him  they  owed  their  origination. 


80  THE    WORSHIP    OF    GOD    NOWi 

It  is  not  merely  what  we  shall  feel  then,  that  God  reveals  to  us  ; 
but  He  desires  us  to  enter  now  into  what  we  shall  have  then. 
This  glory  is  given  us  already.  Assuredly  we  shall  not  have  such 
a  place  then,  if  we  have  not  got  its  title  upon  earth.  It  is  ours 
now  by  faith,  though  then  we  shall  have  it  in  its  fulness.  What 
enables  the  elders  to  be  so  calm  in  the  midst  of  judgment  ? 
That  which  God  has  done  for  them  through  the  cross  of  Jesus. 
But  God  has  done  that  now.  In  Christ  was  wrought  as  perfect 
a  work  upon  earth  as  there  could  be  in  heaven.  He  will  not  do 
another  or  a  better  work  there,  though  it  may  be  enjoyed  more 
above.  But  God  has  revealed  this  scene  to  His  own  that  they  may 
enter  into  it  now  intelligently,  and  may  be  worshippers  according 
to  its  spirit,  even  upon  earth,  seeing  the  glory  that  will  be  theirs  in 
heaven.  Worship  is  a  more  serious  thing  than  is  supposed  by 
many.  Anything  that  does  not  suit  the  presence  of  God  in 
heaven,  is  unfit  for  the  presence  of  God  upon  earth.  Even  in 
outward  things  He  looks  for  our  hearts  to  be  exercised.  It  is 
a  bad  sign  when  the  children  of  God  allow  themselves  in 
anything  that  is  inconsistent  with  His  presence.  We  are  res- 
ponsible that  the  worship  of  God  should  be  conducted  in  a  way 
worthy  of  Him — in  solemnity,  but  in  liberty.  We  should  be 
careful  that  we  do  not  distract,  but  rather  help  one  another  to 
enjoy  the  Lord  better. 

The  Lord  grant  that,  walking  in  holy  liberty,  and  remember- 
ing that  it  is  not  the  order  of  the  flesh  or  of  forms  that  we  have 
to  keep  up,  we  may  be  preserved  from  thinking  that  His  order 
is  less  reverent  than  man's  !  May  He  vouchsafe  us  to  seek 
what  becomes  the  presence  of  Him  whom  we  come  together  to 
exalt !  He  has  given  us  the  place  of  worshippers  :  may  we 
worship  Llira  in  spirit  and  in  truth  ! 


THE    LAMB    IN    HEAVEN.  81 


CHAPTER    V. 

We  have  had,  in  the  preceding  chapter,  a  sight  of  the  greatest 
significance  and  interest :  God  unfokling  the  interior,  so  to 
speak,  of  heaven — its  thoughts  and  its  employment,  before  the 
fall  of  a  single  blow  of  judgment  upon  the  earth  comes  before 
us.  But  the  picture  would  have  been  incomplete,  if  the  Holy 
Ghost  had  not  added  the  scene  which  we  have  revealed  to  us  in 
this  chapter.  For,  if  there  was  a  divine  manifestation  and  the 
elders  entered  with  spiritual  intelligence  into  the  worship  of  God, 
acknowledging  His  glory  in  creation  and  in  providential  govern- 
ment, yet  they  had  no  song  there,  much  less  did  they  sing  "the 
new  song."  Now  it  is  the  great  object  of  the  chapter  before  us 
to  show  this  other  and  fuller  way  in  which  the  elders  are  found 
prostrating  themselves  before  the  Lamb  and  worshipping  Him. 
The  Holy  Ghost  takes  particular  pains  to  point  out  that  God, 
as  He  discloses  Plimself,  must  be  the  object,  spring,  and  founda- 
tion of  all  the  adoration  from  the  creature  that  follows.  It  is 
not  an  image  conceived  by  the  mind  of  man  ;  that  would  be  an 
idol.  We  must  have  a  divine  revelation  ta  have  divine  truth 
and  acceptable  worship.  The  images  of  chap.  iv.  left  God  in  a 
sort  of  mysterious  grandeur  and  majesty.  Accordingly,  the 
worship  of  the  elders  did  not  go  beyond  the  thought  that  God 
had  created  and  sustained  all  things.  It  was  His  glory  in 
creation  and  in  providence,  and  theirs  was  suited,  intelligent 
praise. 

In  this  chapter  we  have  a  sweeter  scene.  And  why?  Be- 
cause we  have  the  Lamb.  What  blessing  does  He  not  bring  ! 
He  has  blotted  out  sin — has_  removed  the  sting  of  death — has 
brought  us  nigh  to  God,  and  has  put  a  song  in  our  mouth  fit  for 
the  presence  of  God,  In  this  blessed  portion  of  the  word  we 
have,  as  the  great  subject  of  it,  the  bearing  of  redemption  on  the 
occupation  or  worship  of  heaven,  and  the  connexion  of  it  with 
the  counsels  and  ways  of  God  on  the  earth.  As  long  as  it  was 
only  the  creation-glory  of  God,  we  had  no  book  at  all.  But 
now  the  prophet  looks,  and  he  sees  in  the  right  hand  of  Him 
that  sat  on  the  throne  a  book  written  within  and  on  the  back 
side,  sealed  up  with  seven  seals.  (Ver.  1 .)  In  ancient  times  a  book 
was  a  manuscript  roll,  written  only  in  the  inside  in  ordinary 
7 


82  CHRIST  THE  KEY  OF  THE  CHURCH, 

cases.  But  here  there  is  a  fuhiess  of  revelation.  It  flows  over, 
as  it  were,  and  is  inscribed  on  the  back  as  well  as  within,  and 
altogether  is  secured  hj  seven  seals.  But  observe,  that  if  God 
is  seen  with  this  book  in  His  hand,  it  is  only  the  Lamb  who 
opens,  and  in  connexion  with  the  Lamb  that  the  contents  of  the 
book  appear.  How  plain  that  there  never  can  be  any  opening-  out 
of  God's  mind  as  regards  things  to  come,  without  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  and  of  His  glory  in  respect  of  them  !  Every  Christian 
knows  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  being  saved  without  Christ, 
but  many  do  not  perceive  that  there  is  no  understanding  of 
prophecy  without  Christ,  nor  any  right  knowledge  of  what  the 
Church  is. 

Thus  it  is  that  men  make  religious  societies  and  call  them 
churches.  But  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  it  is  easier  to  make 
heaven  and  earth  than  to  make  the  Church  of  God.  But  man's 
presumption  has  risen  to  such  a  height  that  the  highest  and 
holiest  things  of  God  are  made  the  work  (not  to  say  the  sport) 
of  Christian  men,  because  they  have  practically  divorced  the 
Church  from  Christ.  They  treat  the  subject  as  optional  and 
external,  instead  of  owning  that  it  is  the  especial  held  of  the 
deepest  ])urest  operations  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  dearest  ol)ject 
of  the  afiections,  and  the  witness  of  the  chief  glories  of  Christ. 
The  ordering  of  the  Church  and  the  ways  of  God  therein  bring 
out  the  very  depths  and  heights  of  divine  wisdom  and  grace. 
One  main  difficulty  now,  as  ever,  is  that  those  whom  the  Holy 
Ghost  brings  together  round  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
carry  with  them  a  load  of  notions  out  of  the  country  from 
whence  they  come — the  long-cherished  thoughts  and  habits 
which  they  have  got  to  unlearn.  They  have  also  the  same  flesh 
as  others — the  same  vanity,  haste,  conceit,  &c.  We  must 
remember  that  what  other  people  have  done,  we  are  in  no  less 
danger  of  doing  ourselves.  If  the  Church  fell  away  so  soon 
after  God  had  brought  out  His  new  and  blessed  counsels  of 
heavenly  grace  here  below,  it  is  much  more  easy  now,  when 
Christendom  has  forsaken  and  well-nigh  forgotten  its  best 
privileges,  to  fall  again  into  the  same  error  and  unfaithfulness. 
The  great  root  of  the  mischief  is  the  tendency  to  look  at  the 
Church  as  ours,  not  Christ's.  You  never  get  the  full  truth  about 
anything  that  concerns  either  God  or  ourselves,  apart  from 
Christ.  It  remains  always  true  that  "  the  law  was  given  by 
Moses,"  (and  he  was  a  most  honoured  servant  of  God,)  but 
"  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ." 

It  is  the  same  with  prophetical  interpretations.  If  I  connect 
prophecy  with  myself  or  with  my  country,  I  may  find  the  last 


PROPHECY,  AND  ALL  THE  MIND  OF  GOD.         83 

French  Revolution,  or  tlie  potatoe  disease,  or  the  Asiatic  cholera, 
or  something-  of  the  kind,  in  the  seventh  vial.  I  may  read  the 
land  "  bordering  with  wings  "  of  Great  Britain,  and  her  ships  ;  I 
may  interpret  the  vessels  of  bulrushes  (Isa.  xviii.)  of  her  iron 
steamers.  Do  you  think  this  too  absurd  ?  Christian  men  have 
done  so,  and  this  because  they  connect  things  with  themselves 
instead  of  with  Christ.  The  moment,  on  the  other  hand,  any- 
thing is  viewed  in  relation  to  Christ,  He  is  the  light,  and  we  get 
deliverance  from  these  thoughts  of  men.  For  what  is  our 
country  or  our  time  ?  Neither  one  nor  other  is  Christ.  If  I 
seek  communion  with  Him,  I  shall  at  once  be  fiee  from  the 
desire  to  make  something  connected  with  myself  the  centre  of 
my  system.  If  people  look  with  an  historical  eye  at  the  dark 
ages,  or  at  the  previous  invasions  of  the  barbarians,  they  think  it 
all  very  interesting;,  and  assume  that  God  could  not  have  left 
that  out  of  His  book,  that  He  must  have  said  something  about  a 
transition  so  important.  Thus  even  the  invention  of  gunpowder 
has  been  conceived  to  be  anticipated  in  Rev.  ix.,  the  discovery 
of  America  in  chap,  x.,  and  the  political  importance  of  Protes- 
tantism in  chap.  xi.  In  short,  nothing  too  wild  for  men  to  think 
they  have  not  found  out  in  the  Apocalypse.  And  these  things 
are  put  forth  even  by  godly  men.  Is  not  God  warning  us  by 
all  this  ?  May  we  be  preserved  from  the  same  snare  which  has 
led  away  persons  naturally  as  sober  (or  as  weak)  as  we  are  !  He 
shows  us  that  no  amount  of  information,  learning,  or  ingenuity 
■ — nay,  that  not  even  piety  will  enable  us  to  understand  God, 
or  His  Word.     What  then  will  ?     Christ  only. 

The  Lamb  is  the  key  to  the  things  of  God,  and  not  our  own 
minds.  There  are  many  who  think  that,  the  Church  being  the 
peculiar  object  of  God's  love,  all  prophecy  must  refer  to  it.  Most 
erroneous  idea  !  The  reverse  is  true.  In  fact :  it  would  be  more 
true  to  say  the  Church  is  never  the  subject  about  which  prophecy 
occupies  itself.  Its  proper  province  is  to  treat  of  earth  It/  events, 
but  the  Church  has  its  place  in  heavenly  glory.  When  we  come 
really  to  discern  this  book,  we  find  that  judgment  is  the  subject 
of  it ;  and  the  express  object  of  these  two  chapters  is  to  show 
that  before  one  of  the  judgments  comes  from  the  throne,  the 
Church  is  taken  out  of  the  scene  and  is  housed,  we  may  say,  in 
heavenly  glory.  The  joint-heirs  being  then  with  Christ,  God 
prepares  to  introduce  the  First-born  Heir  into  the  world.  Un- 
less this  is  seen,  the  Revelation  as  a  whole  cannot  be  understood. 
A  person  might  derive  comfort  from  a  particular  part,  but  this 
is  not  comprehending  the  book.  To  understand  the  scope  of 
the  prophecy,  I  must  make  Christ  the  object  and  not  the  Church  ; 


84  THE    SEALED    BOOK. 

otherwise  I  am  out  of  the  hne  of  vision  in  whicli  tlie  Spirit  wrote 
it.  JNot  the  Church,  but  Christ,  is  the  centre  of  God's  kingdom. 
Astronome)"s  used  to  think  that  the  earth  was  the  centre  round 
which  the  other  heavenly  bodies  revolved,  judging  superlicially 
by  what  presented  itself  to  their  senses.  Christ  is  tlie  true  sun 
and  centre  of  God's  system.  Here  we  find  God  about  to  unveil 
what  man's  mind  could  not  possibly  discover.  "A  strong  angel 
proclaims  with  a  loud  voice,"  &c.  ( Ver.  2.)  Angels  are  those  that 
"  excel  in  strength  " — not  in  intelligence.  We  cannot  suppose  that 
they  possess  the  same  kind  of  intelligence  as  those  who  are  mem- 
bers of  the  body  of  Christ.  The  angels  are  never  said,  nor  could 
they  be  said,  to  be  sealed  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  He  it  is  Avit- 
nessing  to  Christ,  that  is  the  power  of  intelligence  in  the  feeblest 
child  of  God.  If  I  want  to  know  the  true  place  of  the  Church, 
the  body,  I  must  look  at  the  place  of  Christ  the  Head  ;  and  if  I 
desire  to  learn  what  God  is  going  to  do  with  the  earth,  I  must 
examine  God's  account  of  Christ  as  Son  of  David  and  as  Son  of 
man.  If  I  am  (unwittingly,  no  doubt)  putting  the  Church  in 
His  stead,  I  shall  get  all  wrong.  It  is  most  true  that  God  loves 
His  saints  and  intends  that  they  shall  share  with  Christ  the  rule 
over  all  the  earth.  Man  draws  from  this  the  conclusion  that  the 
Church  must  go  on  and  prosper  here  below ;  but  when  the 
divine  revelations  touching  Christ  are  weighed  more  fully,  I 
learn  another  truth, — that  Christ  is  coming  in  the  way  of  judg- 
ment. This,  of  course,  supposes  that  the  professing  body  has 
not  fulfilled  its  mission  ;  for  if  it  had,  wdio  would  there  be  in 
Christendom  for  God  to  pour  out  His  judgment  upon  ?  "  That 
servant  who  knew  his  lord's  will,  and  prepared  not  himself, 
neither  did  according  to  his  will,  shall  be  beaten  with  many 
stripes." 

Look  at  the  truth  God  brings  before  us  here.  First,  there  is 
the  book,  that  is  to  say,  the  revelation  of  the  counsels  of  God  as 
to  the  earth.  Not  a  creature  was  found  worthy  to  open  the 
book,  neither  to  look  thereon.  The  prophet  weeps  because  of  this. 
(Ver.  3,  4.)  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  this  book  the 
apostle  John  is  not  presented  in  his  full  place  as  an  apostle  of  the 
Church,  but  rather  as  a  prophet.  He  was,  it  is  true,  a  most 
honoured  member  of  the  body  of  Christ ;  but  the  object  of  this 
book  is  not  to  show  our  nearness  to  God  in  that  relationship  :  it 
is  as  a  prophet  of  intermediate  judgment  and  of  final  glory  he  is 
seen.  He  is  not  viewed  as  having  perfect  comuitinion  with 
what  was  passing  ai'ound  him.  But  this  is  very  much  the  cha- 
racteristic of  what  is  described  of  the  Old  Testament  saints ;  as 
it  is  said  in  1  Peter  i.,   "Of  which  salvation  the  prophets  have 


THE    LION    OF    JUDAH,    THE    ROOT    OF    DAVID.  85 

enquired,"  &c.  It  may  be  also  that  the  prophet  John  is  here 
found  in  this  position  in  tlie  main,  because  the  book  of  the 
Apocalypse  was  not  merely  intended  for  the  Church  which  was 
going-  to  be  in  heaven  and  was  even  seen  in  heaven ;  but  the 
book  was  also  meant  for  a  body  of  witnesses  found  on  earth 
after  the  Church  is  removed,  who  will  go  through  tremendous 
suffering  in  the  last  times.  He  is  a  representative  man,  but 
rather,  as  it  seems,  of  those  who  are  to  enjoy  the  spirit  of 
prophecy  here  below  in  Israel,  after  the  removal  of  the  Church 
to  heaven,  than  of  those  who,  as  sons,  are  entitled  by  grace  to 
communion  with  their  Father's  heart. 

The  elders  show  us  the  true  place  that  belongs  to  the  heavenly 
saints;  and  accordingly  when  John  was  weeping  much,  one  of 
the  elders,  who  thoroughly  understood  the  mattei',  says  to  him, 
"  Weep  not,  behold  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  root  of 
David,  had  prevailed  to  open  the  book  and  the  seven  seals 
thereof."  (Ver.  5.)  There  at  once  we  find  the  Lord  Jesus  intro- 
duced. His  person  is  brought  out,  but  it  is  in  connexion  with 
the  earthly  purposes  of  God.  He  is  called  "  the  root  of  David." 
David  is  the  one  whom  the  Lord  elected  king  of  Israel.  (Ps. 
Ixxvhi.)  He  was  emphatically  David  "  the  king."  This  title 
therefore  expresses  the  purposes  of  God  about  Christ,  as  far  as 
t;ie  earth  is  concerned.  You  have  Judah  chosen  out  to  be  the 
grand  tribe  connected  with  the  Christ  or  Messiah.  This  was  the 
style  and  character  in  which  the  elders  announced  the  only  One 
who  could  open  this  book — "  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  " 
Majesty  and  power  among  wild  beasts  upon  earth,  are  conveyed 
by  the  thought  of  the  lion,  Jacob  compared  Judah  to  a  lion. 
One  great  chain  runs  through  all  scripture.  The  Holy  Ghost 
that  spake  by  Jacob  on  his  death-bed,  speaks  now  through  John, 
and  reveals  that,  rejected  as  He  may  be  on  earth,  the  Lion  of 
the  tribe  of  Judah  is  owned  on  high,  the  One  in  whom  God's 
purposes  all  centre.  He  was  the  "root  of  David."  This 
implies  more  than  being  David's  Son.  He  was  David's  Lord. 
He  might  come  out  of  David,  but  He  was  David's  root,  the 
real  though  secret  source  of  all  His  titles  and  promises  ;  just  as 
John  the  Baptist  said.  He  came  after  him,  though  He  really 
was  before  him.  But  there  is  another  I'emarkable  intimation. 
It  is  not  mei-ely  said  that  He  was  worthy,  but  that  "  He  hath 
prevailed."  That  little  word  "prevailed"  (concjuered,  over- 
came) is  connected  with  the  whole  subject  of  the  chapter.  It  is 
the  I'edemption-victory  of  Jesus.  The  Lord  Jesus  had  personal 
worthiness  at  any  time  to  take  the  book,  but  if  He  had  received 
and  opened  it  upon  the  ground  of  His  own  worthiness  alone^ 


86  A    LAMB    AS    IT    HAD    BEEN    SLAIN. 

what  would  that  have  availed  for  us?  It  must  have  been  sealed 
to  us  still.  Therefore  the  Lord  not  only  proved  that  He  had 
personal  worthiness  to  open  the  book  which  contained  these 
future  counsels  of  God,  but  He  prevailed,  and  by  virtue  of  that 
prevailing  we  are  entitled  to  listen  and  understand. 

"  And  I  saw  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  and  of  the  four  living 
creatures,  and  in  the  midst  of  tlie  elders,  a  Lamb  standing  as  it 
had  been  slain,"  &c.  (Ver.  6.)  John  had  heard  of  a  lion,  but  now 
that  he  came  to  look,  it  was  a  Lamb,  When  he  expected  to  see 
the  symbol  of  power,  there  stood  before  all  the  picture  of  most 
holy  suffering  and  rejection.  And  this  was  the  emblem  of  Christ 
as  seen  even  on  the  throne  in  all  the  glory  of  heaven  :  a  smitten 
One,  guileless  and  unresisting  ;  "  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain," 
He  is  clothed  with  perfection  of  power  ;  the  seven  horns,  no 
doubt,  mean  as  much.  The  seven  eyes  are  the  symbol  of  per- 
fect intelligence  —  the  fulness  of  tlie  Spirit,  here  in  respect  of 
earth  and  its  governtuent.  But  the  One  who  is  seen  with  all 
this  power  and  wisdom  is  the  Lamh.  The  basis,  I  believe,  of  all 
our  blessing  stands  in  that  blessed  truth.  The  Lord  of  glory 
has  become  a  Lamb,  and  as  such  must  be  known,  if  we  are  to 
profit  by  the  revelations  that  follow.  The  Lamb  is  what  an- 
swers to  the  idea  of  redemption.  Even  with  the  Jews,  when 
the  lamb  was  offered  up  morning  and  evening,  God  was  show- 
ino"  them  that  if  a  poor  sinful  people  had  anything  to  do  with 
Him,  and  if  He  could  go  on  with  them,  it  was  because  of  the 
lamb,  and  those  who  understood  looked  forward,  however  ob- 
scurely, to  a  better  Lamb.  God's  Son  was  to  become  God's 
Lamb.  And  now  that  He  is  sent  away  from  the  world.  He  is 
the  rejected  One,  and  though  glorified  in  heaven.  He  still  bears 
there  the  marks  of  the  sufferer.  He  is  seen  in  the  midst  of  the 
throne,  a  Land)  as  it  had  been  slain.  The  sacrifice  of  the  Lamb 
is  not  alone  the  subject  of  the  Holy  Ghost  here,  but  His  being 
the  holy  sufferer,  accepted  above.  Only  foundation  for  the 
sinner.  He  is  also  the  pattern  and  the  source  of  the  hopes  of 
His  own,  and  for  this  reason,  that  if  we  suffer  we  shall  also 
reign  with  Him.  Here,  then,  as  everywhere,  we  find  that  the 
King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  was  the  greatest  of  sufferers, 
God  brings  these  two  thoughts  into  connexion  in  chap,  xvii,  : 
the  suffering  and  rejected  Lamb,  and  the  King  of  kings.  Why  ? 
Because  God  would  show  us  all  glory  resting  upon  Christ,  the 
earth -rejected  and  despised  One,  The  very  tiling  that  seemed 
to  be  the  death-blow  of  all  hopes  for  Israel,  opens  the  way  for 
better  thoughts  and  higher  counsels  of  glory  than  ever.  If  Ave 
looked  at  the  cross  in  itself,  it  might  have  appeared  that  all  was 


DAVID,  THE  ANOINTED  OF  THE  LORD,  AN  OUTCAST.    O/ 

at  an  end,  and  hope  itself  for  ever  laid  in  the  grave  ;  for  there 
was  the  One  who  might  have  blessed  them,  and  vanquished 
Satan,  and  terminated  human  misery  and  sin,  Himself  cast  out 
and  crucified  !  All  seemed  to  be  nipped  in  the  bud,  and  pre- 
maturely closed  in  the  death  of  Christ ;  and  yet  such  was  the 
very  way  God  took  that  He  mig-ht  readily  and  eternally  bless 
according-  to  His  own  heart.  What  seemed  for  the  time  to  be 
the  victory  of  Satan,  was  really  the  triumph  of  God  for  ever 
over  him  and  his  works. 

Observe,  it  is  as  the  Lamb  that  the  Lord  Jesus  takes  His 
place  in  heaven.  What  is  the  practical  effect  of  this  upon  our 
souls  ?  The  more  a  man  enters  into  it,  the  less  does  he  look  for 
a  place  of  honour  and  esteem  in  the  world.  He  knows  well 
that,  while  Satan  is  god  of  this  world,  and  Christ  hid  in  God, 
truth  must  be  despised  here  below  ;  and  consequently  he  is  not 
surprised,  if  he  sees  prosperity  crowning  that  which  is  evil.  He 
will  be  prepared  for  all  that,  because  it  is  just  the  history  of 
Christ.  The  slain  Lamb  brings  before  us  the  whole  moral 
course  of  the  world.  But  one  more  thing  let  me  ask,  Does 
the  slain  Lamb  bring  before  your  soul  your  history  ?  Do  you 
know  what  it  is  to  be  cast  out  because  of  Christ  ?  Not  because 
you  deserve  to  be  rejected  (though,  in  another  sense,  that  is 
true,)  but  because  you  desire  to  stand  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
at  all  cost  ? 

But  there  is  another  side  :  Christ  is  glorified  now — not  in- 
deed as  yet  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  But  heaven  is  opened  to 
our  view,  and  we  find  that  He  who  was  most  despised  here  is 
exalted  in  heaven,  and  we  learn  that  God  has  gathered,  round 
the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  others  into  association  with  Him.  I 
ask,  Has  He  gathered  you  ?  Has  He  given  you  the  portion 
of  the  slain  Lamb  upon  the  earth  ?  If  you  are  a  Christian,  you 
ought  not  to  be  happy  without  knowing  something  of  this.  A 
saint  ought  to  be  pained  if  he  finds  that,  instead  of  realizing  it, 
he  does  not  even  know  what  such  language  means.  God 
desires  that  we  should  know  it,  not  only  about  Christ,  but  as 
our  own  portion  here  on  earth. 

In  the  time  of  David,  though  he  was  God's  anointed  king, 
yet  was  he  rejected,  and  another  king  had  the  power  for  the 
time.  So  now,  though  the  power  of  the  beast  is  not  yet  fully 
developed,  yet  the  world  gets  ready  for  him  to  come  and 
govern.  David  was  cast  out,  despised,  insulted  —  thought,  or  at 
least  insinuated,  to  be  some  sort  of  a  run-away  from  his  master 
by  Nabal ;  and  certainly  appearances  looked  very  unpromising, 
surrounded  as  he  was  in  the  cave  of  Adullam  by  a  band  of  the 


88  THE    NECESSITY 

distressed,  and  indebted,  and  discontented  in  Israel.  There 
were  many  of  those  individuals,  who,  as  far  as  nature  was  con- 
cerned, may  have  justly  deserved  to  be  thought  lightly  of. 
But  what  a  change  grace  makes  !  David  was  the  special  per- 
son whom  God's  heart  rested  on,  and  they  knew  it,  and  gathered 
round  the  object  of  God's  love.  There  was  a  dignity  that  now 
accrued  to  them  because  of  their  companionship  with  David. 
We  can  hardly  be  more  miserable  and  weak  than  we  are,  but 
as  that  one  person  gave  all  the  value  to  the  inmates  of  the  cave 
of  Adullam,  so  it  is  from  association  with  Christ  that  all  our 
blessing  flows.  The  priests  of  God  were  even  drawn  there  by 
David.  And  now  there  is  a  greater  than  David,  and  God  has 
sent  down  the  Holy  Ghost  that  we  may  know  that  the  despised 
One  is  now  in  glory.  And  the  Lord  grant  that  we  may  have 
more  practical  acquaintance  with  His  place  of  rejection  here 
below,  and  not  want  to  escape  or  deny  it  !  There  is  nothing 
the  flesh  dislikes  so  much  as  to  be  despised.  It  is  compara- 
tively easy  to  buckle  up  one's  strength  to  meet  persecution  or 
determined  opposition,  but  it  is  another  thing  to  be  content  in 
being  nothing  at  all.  In  us,  worms  as  we  are,  this  touches  the 
will  most ;  yet  this  is  exactly  what  the  Lord  of  glory,  Jesus, 
condescended  to  be  ;  and  the  enmity  that  despised  Him,  rose  to 
its  climax  at  the  cross.  In  spite  of  all  the  pretended  enlighten- 
ment and  liberalism  of  the  present  day,  the  spirit  of  the  world  is 
not  really  changed.  I  would  not  trust  for  a  single  moment 
that  which  arises  from  mere  indifference  to  God,  or  from  glori- 
fying the  rights  of  man.  Men  count  truth  and  error  all  as  one, 
have  no  conscience  toAvard  God,  and  preach  respect  for  each 
other.  The  spirit  of  the  age  that  now  looks  and  speaks  so  fair, 
might  at  any  moment  rise  up  fiercely  against  God,  and  then  we 
should  learn  the  truth  in  our  experience,  that  it  is  a  slain  Lamb 
whom  we  know  and  worship  on  high.  We  should  discover  the 
reality  of  it,  and  of  fellowship  with  Him,  and  it  would  arouse 
many  a  saint  of  God  from  the  slumber  in  which  he  is  now,  for 
even  the  wise  virgins  may  sleep.  "Awake  !  thou  that  sleepest," 
is  said  to  Christians.  If  you  have  been  asleep  among  dead 
things  and  persons,  the  Lord  grant  that  you  may  not  remain  in 
this  condition  —  that  you  may  arise  from  them,  "  and  Christ  shall 
give  you  light !" 

It  is  the  slain  Lamb  that  is  evidently  the  great  centre  of 
heavenly  worship.  Now  that  sin  is  come  into  the  world,  the 
creative  glory  of  God  is  not  enough,  nor  even  His  providential 
government.  If  He  is  to  be  glorified,  save  in  pure  judgment  of 
His  adversaries,  if  there  are  to  be  displays  of  merciful  goodness 


AND    EFFECT    OF    REDEMPTION.  89 

in  such  a  world  as  this,  if  there  is  to  be  a  new  song  in  heaven, 
there  must  be  redemption,  and  this,  not  by  power  only,  but  by 
suffering-  and  blood.  Hence,  as  the  central  throne  in  tlie  pre- 
ceding chapter  was  filled  by  the  Lord  God  the  Ahuighty,  so 
here  the  central  object  on  whom  all  blessing  for  the  creature 
depends,  to  whom  equally  with  Him  who  sat  on  the  throne 
worship  is  offered,  is  the  Lamb.  All  heaven  honours  Him  as 
the  Father  is  honoured.  He  is  the  First-born,  the  Heir,  not 
only  by  rights  of  creation  and  intrinsic  personal  glory,  but  by 
redemption,  the  divinely  appointed  "  Heir  of  all  things."  God 
destines  the  wide  universe  for  His  sceptre.  But  how  and  on 
what  plea  would  Christ  take  the  inheritance?  By  power? 
Surely,  all  power  was  His.  In  the  day  of  His  humiliation,  the 
devils  were  subject  to  the  least  of  His  servants  through  His 
name.  So  that  He  could  say,  "  I  beheld  Satan  as  lightning  fall 
from  heaven" — (the  then  energy  of  the  seventy  in  casting  out 
demons,  being  to  His  spirit,  I  apprehend,  the  sign  and  earnest  of 
complete  victory  in  due  time.)  "  Behold  I  give  unto  you  power 
to  tread  on  serpents  and  scorpions,  and  over  all  the  power  of  the 
enemy."  Why  not  take  the  inheritance  then  and  there  ?  After 
the  evidence  of  such  triumphs  over  the  usurper,  why  go  down 
unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross?  "  Because  the  foolish- 
ness of  God  is  wiser  than  men ;  and  the  weakness  of  God  is 
stronger  than  men."  Because  God  must  be  vindicated  in  His 
majesty,  love,  wisdom,  and  righteousness.  Because  Christ  could 
not  accept  a  defiled  inheritance.  (Compare  Col.  i.  20  and  Heb. 
ix.  21-23.)  Because  He  would  not  reign  alone,  and  in  this  He 
and  His  Father  were  one.  In  His  grace.  He  would  have  joint- 
heirs,  the  sharers  of  His  glory.  Such  a  reconciliation  was  only 
possible  through  death,  even  if  the  offering  Avere  the  body  of 
His  flesh,  all  spotless  flesh  as  it  was.  Peace  could  not  be  made 
stably  and  divinely  save  through  the  blood  of  His  cross.  There- 
fore, is  it  that  He  is  here  seen  and  sung  as  the  Lamb.  God 
means  assuredly  to  bring  the  First-begotten  into  the  habitable 
world,  and  the  book  in  His  right  hand,  describes,  I  suppose, 
the  process  whereby  the  inheritance  is  to  be  put  into  His  hands ; 
but  redemption,  blessed  be  His  name,  is  the  ground  on  which  all 
is  taken.  When  He  receives  the  book,  all  is  in  motion. 
As  in  chap,  iv.,  when  the  living  creatures  pay  honour  to  God, 
the  twenty-four  elders  fall  down  and  worship,  so  here,  when  the 
Lamb  takes  the  book  out  of  the  right  hand  of  Him  that  sat  on 
the  throne,  the  four  living  creatures  and  the  twenty-four  elders 
are  prostrate  before  Him.  Though  it  might  be  opened  for  the 
purpose  of  striking  some  blow,  there  was  no  apprehension,  no 


90  THE    PRAYERS    OF    SAINTS. 

trouble,  no  concern  about  themselves  in  particular :  they  fell 
down  before  the  Lamh.  It  was  not  merely  receiving  something 
from  God,  but  it  was  exalting  God.  Far  from  taking  away 
anything  from  God,  on  the  contrary,  in  the  very  presence  of 
the  throne  and  of  Him  that  sat  on  it,  the  Lamb  is  the  object 
of  worship,  and  the  source  of  its  purest,  deepest  strains.  God 
is  best  glorified  when  the  Lamb  has  His  meed  of  praise. 

They  had  "  each  a  harp  and  golden  bowls'*  full  of  odours, 
which  are  the  prayers  of  saints."  In  the  tabernacle  service  of 
the  wilderness,  silver  trumpets  were  used  for  holy  purposes  by 
the  priests.  David  first  introduced  the  harp,  separating  the  sons 
of  Ai^aph,  Heman,  and  Jeduthun,  for  song  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  with  cymbals,  psalteries,  and  harps.  These,  like  the 
priests,  were  divided  into  twenty-four  classes  ;  so  that  the  allu- 
sion is  obvious,  with  that  measui'e  of  difterence  which  is  charac- 
teristic of  the  Apocalypse.  Priestly  and  choral  services  are  here 
blended  in  perfection.  Does  not  this  also  serve  to  show  that 
the  elders  only  are  here  said  to  have  harps,  and  basons  of  in- 
cense ?  In  chap.  XV.  the  four  living  creatures  give  the  angels 
the  seven  golden  bowls  full  of  divine  wrath.  Thus,  all  is  in 
keeping :  the  elders  being  the  heads  of  royal  priesthood,  as  the 
cherubim  wait  on  the  execution  of  God's  judgments,  though 
both  unite  (ch.  v.)  in  the  fullest  homage  to  the  Lamb.  But  who 
are  these  "  saints"  that  pray  ?  The  elders,  or  the  Church,  were  in 
lieaven,  and  in  full  choir  of  praise.  Whose  prayers  then  are 
these  ?  They  come  from  saints  who  will  sufier  when  the  Church 
is  above.  The  elders  are  those  heavenly  saints  who  have  been 
removed  previously,  including,  perhaps,  the  O.ld  Testament  saints. 
They  are  in  the  phice  of  adoration  and  praise,  whereas  prayer 
implies  need.  If  they  have  to  do  with  prayers,  it  is  the  prayers 
of  others,  not  their  own.  More  than  that,  they  sing  a  new  song, 
the  redemption-song,  of  the  Lamb,  saying,  "Thou  art  worthy, 
for  thou  wast  slain,"  &c.  A  very  important  change  occurs  in 
this  verse,  well  known  to  every  person  tolerably  acquainted  with 
the  original  scriptures.  Persons  who  have  studied  the  most 
ancient  manuscripts  and  other  witnesses  of  this  book,  all  agree 
that  it  is,  "  and  hast  made  them  unto  our  God  kings  (or  a  king- 

*  The  reviewer  in  "  Evangelical  Christendom "  (Aug.,  1860,  p.  451)  objects, 
among  other  departures  from  "  the  time-honoured  expressions  of  our  venerable 
Saxon  Bible,"  that  I  have  given  "  bowls  "  instead  of  "  vials."  But  surely  be 
must  be  aware  that  "a  suiall  bottle"  is  not  intended  bj  ^.  here,  or  anywhere  else 
in  the  Apocalypse,  but  ratlier  a  bioad,  open  vessel  or  bason.  Compare  in  the 
LXX,  Exod.  xxvii.  3;  xxxiii.  3  ;  Num.  vii.,  passim:  also  answering  to  otiier 
Hebrew  words,  Num.  iv.  14;  2  Chron.  iv.  16,  &c.  We  ought  not  to  sacrifice 
the  sense  to  sound.  The  English  word  "  vial,"  though  derived  from  the  Greek, 
really  misleads.  _Habit  or  the  ear  may  account  for  such  a  preference. 


KINGS    AND    PRIESTS.  91 

dom)  and  priests."  (ver.  10.)  Who  are  those  that  are  meant 
by  "  ^/«em"  and  are  made  kings  and  priests"  to  our  God  ?  " 
They  do  not  speak  of  themselves. 

Indeed,  I  am  prepared  to  g-o  further,  and  am  bound  to  state 
my  impression  that  in  the  9th  verse  the  word  "  us"  was  put  in 
by  copyists  who  supposed  that  the  elders  were  celebrating  their 
own  blessing.*  But  the  elders  are  so  perfectly  at  rest  about 
themselves,   that  they  are   occupied  about  others.      I   believe, 

*  It  caunot  be  denied  that  the  true  readings  of  Rev.  v.  9, 10,  are,  some  of  them, 
unusually  hard  to  be  decided.  Out  of  four  there  are  but  three  uncial  MSS.  avail- 
able, one  of  the  oldest  being  deficient  from  Rev.  iii.  19,  to  v.  16.  The  versions 
too  are  conflicting,  and  so  are  the  editors.  There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  we 
are  obliged  to  read  avrovs,  them  (and  not  iifias,  us)  in  verse  10,  on  the  authority  of 
the  three  uncials,  forty  other  MSS.  and  many  ancient  versions.  13ut  evidently 
that  substitution,  true  and  certain  as  it  is,  of  tkem  for  "  us,"  in  verse  10,  obscures 
or  destroys  the  connexion  with  the  preceding  verse,  if  "  us  "  is  supposed  to  hold 
its  ground  in  verse  9.  And  this  is  the  more  noticeable,  as  both  clauses  form  part 
of  the  same  song  in  the  mouth  of  the  same  personages.  For  what  more  incon- 
gruous than  "  redeemed  ?«i and  made  them,"   when  no  other  class  has  been 

referred  to  between  the  clauses  ?  Hence  the  strangest  solutions  of  the  ditliculty 
have  been  proposed.  Thus  Prof.  M.  Stuart,  who  takes  for  granted  the  correctness 
of  the  text  of  Grriesbach  and  Scholz,  refers  the  aiirovs  of  verse  10  to  (pvXyis, 
yX(ia<rt)s  k.t.A.  i.e.  "  thou  hast  made  every  tribe,"  &c.  "  to  be  kings  and  priests." 
Now,  limit  this  as  you  may,  it  is  a  construction  awkward  in  the  extreme,  and 
without  parallel  in  St.  John,  or  perhaps  in  any  author.  Besides,  it  ignores, 
instead  of  solving,  the  enigma.  For  r;^as  e/c  is  left  out  of  the  result,  and  the 
question  is,  if  the  same  party  is  intended  (as  Prof.  S.  thinks),  why  should  "  us  " 
be  used  in  verse  9,  and  "them"  in  verse  10?  The  alternative  to  which  the 
Professor  is  reduced,  of  portioning  out  this  short  song  between  the  living  crea- 
tures and  the  elders,  and  thus  accounting  for  the  change  in  the  pronouns,  strikes 
one  rather  as  an  evidence  of  the  difliculty,  than  of  its  removal.  Singular  to  say, 
the  true  key,  as  it  seems  to  mc,  is  alluded  to  as  if  it  had  no  authority  beyond  tlie 
conjecture  of  an  eccentric  German.  The  truth  is  that  T]/j.as  in  verse  9  does  not 
appear  in  the  two  best  manuscripts  (A  and  the  Codex  Sinaiticus,  or  X)  which 
contain  the  passage;  nor  is  any  equivalent  given  in  one  of  the  oldest  extant 
versions, — the  JEthiopic  of  the  fourth  century.  It  is  also  wanting  in  a  cursive 
MS.  known  as  Codex  Borgiae.  I  admit  that  before  the  Sinaitic  MS.  was  known, 
the  amount  of  testimony  was  small.  Nevertheless,  the  omission  seemed  probable 
to  Griesbach  ;  and  in  fact  it  is  dropped  in  three  of  the  latest  and  best  editions  of 
the  Greek  Q'estament,  which  appeal  to  ancient  authority.  Tischendorf  omitteil  it 
from  the  first,  as  he  docs  still ;  Lachmann  had  it  in  his  earlier  manual,  but  erased 
it  in  his  second  and  more  correct  edition  ;  and  the  younger  Buttmann  has  it  not 
in  his  recent  manual  Greek  Testament  (Leipsic,  1856).  These  critics  have 
arrived  at  that  conclusion  on  independent  principles,  and  on  purely  external 
grounds.  If  it  be  sound,  the  construction  is  elliptical,  but  frequent,  especially  in 
the  writings  of  St.  John.  (Compare  John  xvi.  17  ;  2  John  4  ;  Rev.  ii.  10  ;  iii.  9  ; 
xi.  9.)  There  can  be  no  objection,  therefore,  on  the  score  of  phraseology,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  the  sentence  runs  quite  in  his  style  without  ■>ifxas.  Some  scribe, 
ignorant  of  this,  and  supposing  that  the  saints  in  heaven  must  needs  sing  there  of 
their  own  redemption,  as  they  had  done  on  earth,  (chap.  i.  5,  6,)  may  have 
inserted  the  first  Tjyuas.  This,  in  turn,  producing  a  jar  with  the  avrovs  in  the 
following  verse,  would  naturally  require  the  further  demand  of  taking  its  place 
there ;  and  that  again,  would  lead  to  the  change  in  the  person  of  the  verb  in  the 
last  clause.     The  internal  considerations  I  believe  to  be  very  weighty  in  favour  of 


92  SAINTS    ON    EARTH    AFTER    THE    CHURCH. 

accordingly,  that  the  true  sense  is  this  :  "  Thou  art  worthy  to 
take  the  book,  &c.,  for  thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  to 
God  by  thy  blood,  out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  jaeople, 
and  nation  ;  and  hast  made  them  unto  our  God  kings  and 
priests,  and  they  shall  reign  over  the  earth."  They  are  speak- 
ing about  the  saints  whose  prayers  they  were  offering.  As  they 
were  occupied  with  their  prayers,  so  here  they  were  praising  the 
Lord  for  His  goodness  to  the  saints  still  on  earth.  They  intimate 
that  in  taking  up  above  tlie  heavenly  saints.  He  had  not  done 
with  His  redeeming  mercy  ;  that,  even  in  the  midst  of  His 
judgments.  He  would  have  a  redeemed  people,  who  were  to 
share  the  glory  of  the  kingdom,  as  a  royal  priesthood,  instead  of 
being  swallowed  up  in  the  delusions  of  antichrist.  These  anti- 
cipated companions  are  the  same  probably  that  are  seen  in  chap, 
vi.  as  "  souls  under  the  altar,  slain  for  the  word  of  God,"  &c.  ; 
and  in  chap.  xiv.  "  Blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord 
from  henceforth,"  &c. ;  and  in  chap.  xv.  "  Them  that  had  gotten 
the  victory  over  the  beast,"  &c.  There  are  other  allusions  also, 
in  the  body  of  the  book,  to  the  righteous.  Clearly  they  were 
saints  of  God  upon  the  earth,  in  conflict  or  tribulation,  after 
the  elders  (who,  as  we  saw,  represented  the  Church  or  the  hea- 
venly saints)  were  raptured  to  heaven.  As  to  the  saints  who 
won  the  victory  over  the  beast,  "  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses, 
the  servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb."  Observe  the 
mingled  character  of  the  scene.  True,  it  was  the  song  of  the 
Lamb  ;  but  it  was  the  song  of  Moses  too  :  it  was  partly  earthly 
and  partly  heavenly.  Again,  in  chap.  xx.  4,  it  is  said,  "  And 
I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  them."  These  are  the  elders, 
already  risen  or  changed,  seated  upon  the  thrones.  "  And  I 
saw  the  souls  of  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of 
Jesus,  and  for  the  word  of  God,"  i.e.  the  people  whose  souls  he 
had  seen  in  chap.  vi.  ;  and,  again,  those  "  which  had  not  wor- 
shipped the  beast,  neither  his  image,  neither  had  received  his  mark 
upon  their  foreheads."  The  last  were  the  persons  that  had 
sung  the  song  of  victory  in  chap.  xv.  These  two  classes  that 
had  suffered,  after  the  rapture  of  the  Church,  are  at  length 
united  with  the  rest  in  glory,  and  all  reign  together  with  Christ. 
It  will  be  remarked  how  thoroughly  the  whole  agrees  with 

the  omission  ;  but  these  have  been,  perliaps,  siilTiciciitly  given  above  in  the  text. 
The  readings  r/ydpatras  rai  6eq>  rjfxSov  (as  in  Co()d.  Sin.  and  4'4.)  I  believe  to  be  the 
original  text.  The  Alexandrian  MS.,  vFhich  is  the  nearest  among  those  that 
diverge,  followed  pretty  closely  by  the  ^Ethiopic,  omits  i)ixSiv\\\  verse  9  and  ry  6e^ 
rifxwv  ill  verse  10.  But  these  words  are  unquestionably  genuine,  and  add  much  to 
the  proof  that  the  elders  praised  the  Lamb  lor  His  redemption  of  others,  distinct 
from  themselves. 


THE  ELDERS  PRAISE  ABOVE,  THESE  SAINTS  PRAY  BELOW.      93 

the  song  in  chap.  v.  The  elders  are  in  heaven,  in  the  enjoy- 
ment of"  God  and  the  Lamb  ;  but  there  are  saints  on  earth 
who  are  praying,  and  the  elders  above  are  occupied  about  their 
prayers,  and  celebrate  the  worthiness  and  work  of  the  Lamb  in 
behalf  of  others,  who  should  reign  over  the  earth  as  well  as 
themselves.*  Instead  of  that  taking  a  single  fraction  away  from 
us,  it  adds  indirectly,  if  not  in  itself,  to  the  place  of  glory  in 
which  the  Church  is  seen  in  heaven.  They  are  so  fully  blest 
that  they  can  heartily  rejoice  in  the  good  of  others.  There  are 
some  who  ai-e  apt  to  be  restless  if  they  are  not  always  listening 
to  the  gospel  for  themselves  —  not  because  they  value  it  more 
than  others,  but  because  they  are  not  thoroughly  established  in 
grace.  When  our  hearts  are  quite  satisfied,  we  need  not  be 
anxiously  picking  and  choosing  in  the  Scriptures,  but  we  want 
the  Lord  to  choose  for  us,  and  are  thankful,  because  it  may  be 
something  to  His  praise  that  we  perhaps  have  not  known  before, 
or  a  weapon  we  may  need  in  our  next  conflict  with  the 
enemy.  Whatever  exalts  Christ  and  glorifies  Him,  is  that 
which  we  should  delight  in.  Whatever  detects  the  deceitfiil- 
ness  of  our  hearts  is  most  salutary  to  us.  When  the  elders 
are  found  thanking  God,  they  take  up  His  goodness  to  those 
who  are  suffering  upon  the  earth,  and  they  bless  the  Lamb 
because  He  had  been  slain  and  had  redeemed  these  also  to  their 
God.  It  was  delight  to  them  to  think  that,  even  in  this  dark 
day,  the  Lord  was  about  to  have  witnesses,  who  should  share  the 
kingdom  along  with  them. 

*  I  canuot  but  think  Mr.  E.'s  remarks  and  notes  on  this  (Horfe  Apoc.  I,  pp. 
81-90)  confused  and  unsatisfactory.  He  reasons  from  vulgar  readings  which  no 
competent  (tritic,  whatever  may  be  his  bias,  can  entertain.  It  is  easy  to  convert 
a  preconceived  opinion  into  a  decision  that  our  own  view  is  much  more  simple. 
It  is  also  a  serious  mistake  to  say  that  the  sense  is  "  substantially  the  same," 
whether  we  have  vs  or  the^  in  verse  10.  Again,  the  Codex  Sinaitious  turns  the 
scale  in  favour  of  the  twenty-two  cursives,  and  the  better  ancient  versions  which 
support  ^affiKiiaovffiv  against  AB.  eighteen  cursives,  &c.,  exhibiting  tlie  pre- 
sent tense.  But  ?;/.t«s  and  ^acnXevao/xev  are  indefensible  and  manifestly  the  work 
of  a  meddling  corrector.  It  is  strange  too  that  the  question  of  the  ellipse  in  verse 
9  is  passed  over  in  silence,  seeing  that  "us"  thei'e  is,  to  say  the  least,  very  doubt- 
ful ;  and  if  spurious,  removes  the  main  reason  for  viewing  the  ^wa  as  redeemed.  Mr. 
E.  treats  this  as  "unquestionable,"  of  which  there  is  really  no  proof  whatever.  It  is 
evident,  further,  that  there  is  much  embarrassment  as  to  the  condition  of  the 
elders,  in  one  page  referring  their  insignia  to  the  resurrection-state,  and  in  tlie 
next  concluding  that  it  is  the  division  of  the  Church  consisting  of  t/ie  departed  in 
paradise  especially,  that  we  must  suppose  depicted  here.  Finally,  it  is  erroneous 
to  speak  of  "  the  general  assembly  of  the  church  ;"  for  irayriyvpei  belongs  to  the 
clause  about  the  angels.  But  letting  this  pass,  (as  the  Auth.  V.  misleads  many 
there,)  what  is  meant  by  the  apparent  distinction,  in  p.  89,  between  the  Church  of 
the  first-boi'n,  and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect  ?  I  quite  allow  this,  but 
I  do  not  see  its  consistency  with  Mr.  E.'s  statement  about  the  elders  and  che- 
rubim. 


94  PRAISE    OF    THE    ANGELS, 

The  ang-els  take  up,  not  the  thanksgiving  about  redemption,  but 
the  worthiness  of  the  Lamb  to  receive  power,  and  riches,  and 
wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  blessing. 
Loudly  do  they  proclaim  His  worthiness  and  title  to  dominion 
whom  man  despised  and  slew.  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was 
slain."  (Ver.  11,  12.)  They  do  not  sing  of  redemption,  because 
they  were  not  redeemed ;  they  have  not  to  do  with  it,  though 
they  are  sustained  by  the  power  of  God  ;  but  those  who  have 
known  their  need  as  poor  sinners  can  well  sing  the  new  song. 
The  angels  sing  of  His  person  and  His  powei%  but  they  do  not 
take  up  the  deep  and  joyous  note  of  redemption.  If  I  look  at 
the  gift  and  person  of  Christ,  I  can  see  how  God's  character  comes 
out,  and  His  love  is  manifested.  If  I  look  at  the  redemption  of 
Christ,  and  the  place  I  have  in  and  with  Him  on  high,  I  can  see 
how  the  love  of  God  with  us  is  perfected.  But  there  is  not  any- 
thing in  the  glory  of  heaven  that  shines  so  much  as  the  cross  of 
Chi'ist.  We  may  follow  Jesus  on  the  earth  and  see  the  holiness 
of  God.  We  may  glance  above  and  see  how  He  delights  in  having 
us  happy  around  Him,  We  may  look  again  at  Jesus  in  His  path 
on  earth,  seeking  out  the  lost,  the  miserable,  and  laying  His  hands 
on  babes,  even  touching  the  leper.  But  whether  we  think  of  the 
holiness  or  the  love  of  God,  of  His  righteousness  or  His  grace, 
it  is  in  the  cross  where  all  is  found  and  displayed  to  faith,  as  we 
can  get  it  nowhere  else. 

"  And  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and  on  the  earth, 
and  under  the  earth,*  and  such  as  are  on  the  sea,  and  all  things 
in  them,  heard  I  saying.  Blessing,  &c.,  to  him  that  sitteth  on  the 
throne,  and  to  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever."  (Ver.  13.)  The 
chord  is  touched,  the  keynote  sounded,  and  heard  at  least  in 
heaven.  If  the  Lamb  takes  the  book,  not  a  creature  but  responds 
in  joy  to  the  ear  of  the  seer ;  as  now  the  Avhole  of  the  lower 
universe  groans  in  sorrow  because  of  Adam's  sin.  Why  should 
they  not  rejoice  if  God  and  the  Lamb  unite  to  deliver?  Doubt- 
less, it  is  but  the  opening  out  of  the  Lamb's  title-deed  ;  and 
much  remains  to  be  done  in  destroying  the  works  of  the  devil 

*  Every  creature  "under  the  earth,"  viroKdroi  rfjs  yrts,  must  be  carefully  distin- 
guished, notwithstanding  Beugel,  from  the  KaraxBovicov  in  Phil.  ii.  10.  The 
former,  I  suppose,  means  the  things,  animate  or  iuaniaiate,  beneath  the  earth's 
surface,  which  anticipate,  in  the  vision,  their  deliverance  from  corruption  into  the 
liberty  of  the  glon/  of  the  children  of  God.  They  cannot  of  course  share  the 
liberty  of  grace  which  we  enjoy  ;  but  when  ue  are  in  the  glory,  it  will  be  the 
pledge  of  their  glorious  change  speedily  to  follow.  The  latter  in  Phil,  means  the 
infernal  beings,  who  must  bow  with  every  knee  elsewhere,  at  or  in  the  name  of 
Jesus.  I  am  aware  that  Dean  Alford,  with  Theodoret,  &c.,  takes  Ka-rax-  as  the  dead  ; 
but  this,  though  a  classical  usage  of  the  word,  seems  to  be  far  from  the  scope  of 
the  passage. 


AND    OF    EVERY    CREATURE.  95 

and  those  that  destroy  the  earth.     Still  this  is  the  sure  signal, 
and  before  God  every  creature  is  in  sympathy. 

All  bow  down  before  the  Lamb.  The  myriads  of  angels 
join  in  acknowledgment  of  His  worth  ;  but  it  is  the  place  of 
the  heavenly  saints  to  enter  into  the  secret  of  redemption,  yea, 
and  into  the  deep  joy  —  God's  joy  —  in  the  blessing  of  others, 
and  not  merely  their  own.  The  four  living  creatures  set  to  it 
their  seal,  and  say,  "  Amen  ;"  but  the  elders  fall  down  and  wor- 
ship. They  did  not  merely  yield  their  assent  to  all,  but  their 
hearts  went  along  with  it.  Such  was  their  place.  I  do  feel  it  is 
exactly  such  a  subject  as  this  which  leaves  one  infinitely  behind. 
We  must  be  living  very  much  in  its  depths  in  order  to  feel  it 
aright,  or  to  give  it  an  adequate  expression.  But  if  I  have 
directed  attention  to  the  blessedness  of  Christ  as  the  slain  Lamb, 
and  shown  that  God  makes  Him  to  be  the  key  for  under- 
standing His  otherwise  hidden  purposes,  I  shall  be  thankful. 
Even  to  understand  God's  purposes  about  the  earth,  we  must 
see  the  Lamb.  It  is  only  in  communion  with  Him  that  we 
can  enter  into  them.  To  appreciate  what  follows,  we  must  be 
subject  to  God's  thoughts  of  Christ  —  we  must  go  back  to  what 
God  begins  with  —  we  must  see  and  hear  the  Lamb.  The  Lord 
grant  that  such  may  be  our  better  portion  !  We  shall  be  near 
that  blessed  One,  in  whose  person  and  work  shines  all  that  is 
gracious  and  blessed  in  God. 


96    THE  saints'  translation  and  manifestation  distinct. 


CHAPTER    VI. 

From  the  two  preceding  chapters  the  lessons  are  apparent, 
and  I  do  not  doubt,  should  be  learned  :  1st,  God  sits  on  the 
throne,  whence  proceeds  lightnings,  voices,  and  thunders  ;  2nd, 
all  things  are  given  into  the  hands  of  the  Lamb,  who  unfolds 
all ;  3rd,  the  perfect  security  and  the  blessed  employment  of  the 
heavenly  saints,  then  removed  from  the  scene  of  trial ;  and  this 
long  before  the  day  of  the  Lord,  when  their  blessing  will  be 
manifested  fully  to  the  world.  The  moment  the  soul  and  the 
body,  or  both,  (the  soul  now,  the  soul  and  body  united  at  the 
coming  of  Christ,)  leave  this  world,  there  is  for  the  saints,  I 
believe,  immediate  enjoyment  of  the  Lord.  Is  that  a  scriptural 
thought  in  a  hymn  that  we  sometimes  sing,  about  "  soaring  to 
worlds  unknown?"  Does  scripture  intimate  anything  at  all 
like  a  soul  journeying  on  a  voyage  of  discovery  ?  On  the  con- 
trary, is  not  the  truth  peaceful  and  innnediate  entrance  into  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  ?  When  heaven  is  allowed  to  burst  for  a 
moment  upon  men  on  the  earth,  (as,  for  instance,  at  the  birth 
and  the  transfiguration,  and  in  the  cases  of  Stephen,  Paul,  &c.) 
it  appears  that  there  is  no  such  great  distance  between  them. 
Of  course,  it  is  not  a  question  of  mere  physical  space.  But 
there  is  a  divine  power  which  at  once  brings  a  person  out  of  the 
present  state  of  existence  into  the  enjoyed  presence  of  the  Lord. 
So  when  He  Himself  was  s])eaking  to  tiie  poor  dying  thief,  it 
was  "  to-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise,"  —  that  very 
day.  There  is  nothing  to  my  mind  like  the  poetical  sentiment 
of  soaring  to  worlds  unknown. 

But  while  it  is  perfectly  true  that  the  soul  goes  at  once  into  the 
presence  of  the  Lord,  in  the  case  of  death,  while  it  is  equally 
true  that  "  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,"  the  saints 
will  be  caught  up  at  the  coming  of  Christ,  yet  we  must  remem- 
ber that  their  manifestation  will  be  a  ditfei'ent  tiling.  Now,  we 
should  not  be  able  so  plainly  to  gather  from  other  scriptures  the 
considerable  interval  between  their  gathering  to  the  Lord  and 
tlieir  manifestation  to  the  world.  These  chapters  of  the  Reve- 
lation make  that  clear.  God  has  a  very  important  purpose  to 
fulfil  during  the  interval.  He  has  to  put  the  earth  into  a  con- 
dition to  receive  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  is  going  to  put  Him,  the 


JUDGMENTS    ON    CHRISTENDOM.  97 

great  Heir,  into  possession  of  the  inheritance.  But  further,  He 
purposes  to  bring-  the  joint-heirs  along  with  Him.  Accordingly 
this  interval  is  filled  up  with  the  preparations  for  all  this.  To 
accomplish  it,  there  must  be  judgments  upon  the  world's 
wickedness;  but  parallel  with  these  judgments,  we  have  some 
signal  acts  of  tlie  mercy  of  God.  When  the  great  and  terrible 
day  of  the  Lord  comes,  there  will  be  mercy  no  longer  ;  "  the 
door  is  shut."  But  all  this  intervening  time,  there  will  be 
mercy,  except  for  those  who  have  heard  the  gospel  now,  and 
have  rejected  it.  I  do  not  see  the  smallest  ground  to  believe 
that  there  will  be  any  hope  for  despisers.  There  will  be  an  in- 
terval of  some  years,  in  which  God  will  work  in  judgment  and 
in  mercy — judgments  increasing  in  severity  on  these  favoured 
hinds  where  the  gospel  has  been  preached  ;  but  I  doubt  any  such 
thing  as  the  grace  that  now  is.  The  sad  reverse  will  appear. 
God  will  give  up  to  blind  hardness  those  who  have  now  refused 
His  mercy.  He  will,  as  it  were,  retire  from  these  countries  to  save 
outside  them  ;  and  from  those  who  have  been  talking  so  self-com- 
placently  about  the  light  with  which  they  are  favoured,  God  will 
then,  if  I  read  prophecy  aright,  turn  to  such  as  are  now  far 
away  from  the  gospel.  But  it  is  a  solemn  thought  that,  where 
the  light  of  Christendom  is  now  most  found,  there  will  be  the 
greatest  darkness  of  apostacy.  What  Scripture  shows  is,  that 
that  which  now  is  the  scene  of  God's  mercy,  where  He  is  now 
at  work,  and  His  word  is  most  circulated,  is  destined  to  fall 
back  into  the  most  frightful  and  fatal  idolatry  —  into  the  union 
of  infidelity  along  with  it  —  into  antichristianism.  Such  a  thing 
may  be  thought  to  be  the  gloomy  dream  of  a  fevei'ish  mind. 
But  this  is  because  men  prefer  to  believe  their  own  thoughts 
and  fancies,  and  do  not  take  the  trouble  of  searching  into  God's 
word  to  see  what  is  there,  if  they  do  not  even  make  it  a  butt 
for  their  ridicule.  Will  it  be  believed  that  men  pride  themselves 
upon  their  ignorance  of  a  great  part  of  scripture  ?  Is  it  con- 
ceivable that  it  should  be  held  as  an  axiom  that  j)rophecy  was 
not  given  to  show  us  what  is  coming,  but  only,  when  the  events 
are  past,  to  ])rove  that  God  has  foreknown  them  ?  But  the 
Christian  does  not  want  that.  Prophecy  is  given  that  the 
believer  should  know  how  God  opens  to  us  His  secrets  about 
what  He  is  going  to  do  on  the  earth.  We  have  the  word  and 
the  Spirit  to  make  us  understand  it.  But  if  Christians  have  not 
faith  in  the  prophetic  word,  it  cannot  profit  them  ;  for,  like  all 
other  scriptiii-e,  that  word  must  be  mixed  with  faith  in  them 
that  hear  it. 

One  important  thing,  then,  we  have  seen  to  be  assumed:   the 
8 


98  THE    CROWNED    ELDERS, 

removal  of  the  heavenly  saints  from  the  earth.  In  chaps,  iv.  v., 
and  throughout  the  body  of  the  book,  they  are  no  longer 
found  thei'e.  They  are  glorified  in  heaven,  and  yet  it  is  not  until 
chap.  xix.  that  they  are  manifested,  when  they  come  out  of 
heaven.  Between  these  two  pomts  we  have,  evidently,  a  long- 
series  of  events.  We  have  seven  seals,  seven  trumpets,  seven 
vials,  with  various  episodes  of  great  interest  and  importance. 
These  three  different  series  of  judgments  are  not  executed  by 
the  Lord  in  person.  It  is  manifest  that  they  must  occur  after 
the  Lord  has  come  to  receive  His  Church,  but  before  He  exe- 
cutes His  grand  personal  judgment  in  chap.  xix.  For  it  is 
self-evident  that,  before  the  saints  are  taken  to  the  Lord  and 
so  can  come  with  Him,  He  must  have  come  for  them.  How 
did  the  four  and  twenty  elders  get  to  heaven  ?  It  may  be 
said,  they  might  have  been  taken  individually  through  death, 
i.e.  their  souls  might  be  there.  But  there  is  no  such  thought 
in  scripture,  as  the  souls  of  the  saints  being  seated  upon  thrones 
and  having  crowns  upon  their  heads.  Neither  do  the  souls  of 
the  saints  form  the  complete  headship  of  heavenly  priests,  as 
taught  us  by  the  four  and  twenty  elders,  in  allusion  to  the 
twenty-four  orders  of  the  priesthood,  set  up  by  king  David. 
Now  Christ  is  at  that  time  about  to  take  the  place  of  king  ; 
and  just  as  before  the  kingdom  of  Solomon  was  established, 
David  divided  the  priesthood  into  twenty-four  courses,  so  we 
find  that  before  the  true  Solomon,  the  Lord  Jesus,  comes  out  in 
all  His  glory,  we  have  the  antitypical  courses  as  a  whole  again. 
The  heavenly  priesthood  is  seen  complete.  It  might  be  asked, 
Why  is  it  only  the  heads  that  are  seen,  and  not  the  body  of  the 
priesthood  ?  It  appears  probable,  but  I  only  offer  it  as  a  sug- 
gestion, that  those  that  are  taken  up  when  the  Lord  comes,  will 
form  the  heads  of  the  priesthood,  and  that  those  who  suffer  after 
and  join  them  may  be  the  subordinate  body.  Twenty-four  is 
necessarily  the  complete  sum  of  the  courses,  i.e.  of  the  chiefs. 
Now,  the  souls  in  heaven  can  never  be  even  that  completed  ; 
because  till  Christ  comes,  there  will  always  be  a  part  of  the 
Church  remaining  upon  the  earth.  (1  Thess.  iv.)  I  conceive, 
therefore,  that  by  the  full  priestly  number,  twenty-four,  sur- 
rounding the  throne,  God  intends  to  show  that  they  are  not  tliat 
portion  which  consists  of  the  souls  in  paradise  ;  for  it  requires 
the  addition  of  us  who  are  alive  and  remain,  in  order  to  make 
up  the  church  of  the  firstborn,  or  the  then  complete  sum  of  the 
risen  and  changed  saints.  The  heavenly  saints  up  to  that  time 
are,  necessarily,  removed.  How  and  when  did  this  take  place? 
There   is  no   real   difficulty  about  it,  because   they   never  can 


OR    GLOHIFIED    SAINTS    IN    HEAVEN.  99 

be  removed  as  a  complete  body  and  changed,  till  the  Lord 
Jesus  comes  Himself;  as  He  said,  "  If  I  go  and  prepare  a  place 
for  you,  1  will  come  again,  and  receive  you  unto  myself."  And 
this  evidently  is  not  sending  angels  for  them.  We  find  angels 
sent  to  gather  in  elect  Jews,  or  Israel,  from  the  four  quarters  of 
heaven  (Matt,  xxiv.) ;  but  to  gather  in  His  Church  He  comes 
Himself.  And  this  falls  in  with  what  we  said  elsewhere.  The 
saints  in  Thessalonica  wei'e  told  to  wait  for  God's  Son  from 
heaven  (1  Thess.  i.) ;  and  as  to  those  who  were  gone,  they  were 
not  to  sorrow  as  those  who  had  no  hope.  For  the  Lord  Him- 
self,—  not  merely  by  angelic  or  providential  intervention,  but 
the  Lord  Himself, — would  descend  from  heaven  with  a  shout, 
with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God. 
There  might  be  angels,  but  there  is  not  a  word  said  about  them 
here.  When  the  Lord  is  revealed,  executing  vengeance,  there 
will  be  angels ;  but  here,  at  the  descent  of  the  Lord  Himself, 
"the  dead  in  Christ  rise  first,"  forming  one  portion  of  the 
heavenly  saints.  Then  "  we  which  are  alive  and  remain"  shall 
be  caught  up  together  with  them.  There  and  then,  as  it  seems 
to  me,  we  have  tlie  twenty-four  elders,  evidently  the  whole  of 
the  priestly  heads.  Those  bodies  of  saints  that  are  in  their 
graves  are  raised  first,  then  the  surviving  saints  are  changed, 
by  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  There  is  but  the  barest  interval 
of  a  moment  between  these  two  momentous  eifects  of  the  voice 
of  the  Son  of  God.  And  so  shall  we,  caught  up  together,  ever 
be  with  the  Lord. 

This  most  solemn  and  blessed  event  must  occur  therefore 
between  chapters  iii.  and  iv,  of  this  book.  It  is  not  described, 
because  the  object  of  the  Revelation  is  not  to  show  the  Lord's 
coming  in  the  way  of  grace,  though  there  are  of  course  allusions 
to  it.  There  is  an  entire  passing  over  of  His  coming  to  meet  His 
heavenly  saints  in  the  prophetic  visions  of  the  Revelation,  but 
there  is  a  full  description  of  His  coming  icit/i  them  in  chap.  xix. 
This  last  is  what  is  styled  elsewhere  the  appearing  or  day  of  the 
Lord,  when  He  punishes  with  everlasting  destruction  from  His 
presence,  and  from  the  glory  of  His  power.  All  this  interval 
the  heavenly  saints  are  with  the  Lord  above  ;  all  the  members 
of  the  Church  are  there,  and  in  their  bodies  of  glory.  The  first 
mention  of  them  is  in  the  fourth  chapter,  where  we  find  not 
angels,  but  redeemed  men  —  persons  whose  very  vesture  of 
white,  and  thrones,  and  crowns  of  gold,  are  all  connected  with 
redemption  —  persons  who  are  evidently  exercising  their  priest- 
hood before  God  in  chap.  v.  These  are  the  elders.  How  did 
they  get  there?     The  Lord  must  have  come  and  have  gathered 


100  PECULIAR    TITLES    OF    GOD. 

them  to  Himself  in  *he  air,  and  so  have  accomplished  His  pro- 
mise to  them.  "  In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions,"  &c. 
"  I  will  come  again  and  receive  you  unto  myself,  that  where  I 
am,  ye  may  be  also."  So  now,  in  this  future  scene,  having 
prepared  the  place,  He  has  come  for  them  and  taken  them  to 
the  Father's  house.  But  it  is  remarkable,  as  showing  the  cha- 
racter of  this  book,  that  although  we  do  see  them  in  the  presence 
of  God,  it  is  not  called  the  house  of  the  Father.  On  the  con- 
traiy,  it  is  a  throne  that  is  seen  ;  and  so,  too,  when  He  who  sits 
thereon  is  named,  it  is  not  as  the  Father,  but  as  the  Lord  God 
Almighty.  When  we  speak  of  God  as  "  the  Father,"  it  is  to 
express  the  nearest  place  of  affection  into  which  God  has  brought 
us  ;  and  when  we  hear  of  God  as  "  the  Lord  God  Almighty," 
it  is  connected  with  the  putting  forth  of  divine  power  and 
government.  "  God,"  as  such,  is  the  most  general  and  abstract 
name,  and  implies  no  relationship  with  another  being.  But  to 
be  called  "  the  Fathei',"  necessarily  implies  the  closest  relation- 
ship of  love,  whether  spoken,  in  the  highest  and  intrinsic  and 
eternal  sense,  of  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  the  Father,  or  subordi- 
nately  of  those  whom  He  has  taken  into  the  adoption  of  sons, 
loved  with  the  same  love.  (John  xvii.  and  1  John  iii.) 

In  Gen,  i.  creation  is  the  subject,  and  God  is  spoken  of  as  the 
One  who  originates.  In  the  next  chapter  of  Genesis,  He  is 
called  the  "  Lord  (or  Jehovah)  God,"  because  He  is  there  en- 
tering into  I'elation  with  His  creatures,  and  Adam  is  put  in  the 
place  of  responsibility  to  God  as  the  Lord  God,  i.e.,  the  God  of 
creation  in  moral  relationship.  How  perfect  is  every  word  of 
God  !  Infidels,  instead  of  seeing  the  perfeetness  of  God's  word, 
have  only  reasoned  fi-om  their  own  ignorance  and  impotence, 
and  have  endeavoured  to  prove  that  these  chapters  must  have 
been  written  by  two  different  persons,  because  of  the  different 
titles  given  to  God.  But,  instead  of  being  the  mistakes  of 
men,  it  is  the  wisdom  of  God  that  we  discover  in  these  distinc- 
tions. When  the  relationship  of  authority  occurs,  and  man  is  put 
under  the  test  of  obedience,  the  Lord  God  is  used  ;  but  when 
in  the  New  Testament  He  enters  into  relationship  with  sons,  it 
is  "  the  Father."  He  did  not  bring  out  the  name  of  Father 
fully  until  the  Son  came,  who  opened,  so  to  speak,  the  sluice, 
that  all  God's  grace  might  flow  out.  But  between  these  two 
points  of  the  trial  of  the  creature  in  Eden  and  the  accomplish- 
ment of  redemption,  God  brought  out,  first,  the  name  of 
Almighty,  and  next  that  of  Jehovah.  Abraham  was  called  to 
leave  his  own  country  and  kindred,  called  to  be  a  pilgrim, 
having  none  but  God  to  look  to,  and  so  God  most  suitably 


THE    SAINTS*    TRANSLATION    NOT    DESCRIBED.  101 

reveals  Himself  to  him  as  the  Ahnighty.  (Gen.  xvii.  1.)  Sub- 
sequently He  makes  Himself  known  to  Israel  by  His  name 
Jehovah.  Here  the  Lord  constantly  brings  out  these  names, 
but  not  that  of  Father,  or  at  least  not  of  our  Father,  Just  as 
the  scene  is  not  the  Father's  house  but  the  throne,  so  the  title 
taken  by  God  is  not  that  of  Father.  The  centi-e  of  this  hea- 
venly scene  is  the  throne  of  God,  and  the  saints  are  not  alluded 
to  as  enjoying"  mansions  with  the  Son  in  the  Father's  house,  but 
are  seen  enthroned.  God  is  no  longer  gathering  the  Church 
upon  earth  ;  the  Church  is  gone.  When  the  Church  was  the 
object  of  God's  cai'e  upon  the  earth,  they,  even  here  below, 
called  him  Father;  but  when  He  is  going  to  execute  judgment 
upon  the  earth,  they,  already  raptured  and  in  heaven,  under- 
stand it  and  address  Him  accoixlingly. 

The  Lord's  coming,  then,  to  receive  the  Church  must  have 
been  before  the  facts  which  answer  to  the  vision  of  the  twenty- 
four  enthroned  elders.  Some  people  may  be  slow  to  believe 
that  the  prophecy  would  pass  over  such  an  impoitant  event  in 
silence.  But  it  is  forgotten  that,  whenever  and  wherever  you 
put  it,  there  is  silence  as  to  the  act  of  the  saints'  rapture  in  the 
book  of  Revelation.  The  only  question  is.  Where,  according 
to  our  best  light  from  Scripture,  is  it  to  be  understood  here  i 
It  must,  in  my  judgment,  be  put  before  we  find  the  heavenly 
saints  as  a  complete  body  above,  which  is  in  chap.  iv.  The 
Lord  will  then  have  come  and  received  the  glorified  saints  and 
given  them  their  place  in  the  presence  of  God,  before  any  of 
the  judgments  come  upon  the  world.  Terrible  tilings  in  righ- 
teousness are  going  to  be  enacted,  but  the  saints  will  be  above 
them  all.  The  seals,  and  vials,  and  trumpets,  have  no  terrors 
for  them.  They  call  out  not  trembling,  but  only  worship. 
Nay,  these  risen  ones  will  be  occupied,  too,  about  their  brethren 
who  are  still  in  the  midst  of  trial ;  for  we  shall  have  brethren 
after  the  present  work  of  God  in  forming  the  Church  is  done 
with,  brethren  who  will  suffer  on  the  earth  after  we  are  gone. 
Again,  there  will  be  godly  persons  when  the  King  comes  to  sit 
on  the  throne  of  His  glory,  and  all  nations  are  gathered  before 
Him,  whom  He  will  call  "my  brethren;"  and  the  living  Gen- 
tiles, or  nations,  will  be  treated  then  according  to  the  way  in 
which  they  have  behaved  to  these  messengers  of  the  King.  The 
sheep  will  have  proved  themselves  to  have  faith  in  the  King, 
because  they  received  His  servants.  The  conduct  of  the  goats 
will  have  shown  the  contrary.  When  all  the  preliminary 
warnings,  given  to  those  on  the  earth,  are  over  ;  when  the 
judgments   that    proceed  fj-oin    the  throne  in  rapid  succession 


102  THE    LORD    MAY    COME    AT    ANY    TIME. 

have  been  proved  to  be  in  vain,  and  tl)e  rebellious  hearts  of  men 
are  only  rising  higher  against  God,  the  Lord  says,  as  it  were, 
"  I  will  send  them  no  more  chastenings,  I  will  wait  no  longer 
for  a  repentance  which  is  refused,  but  I  will  come  myself  and 
sweep  them  away  to  destruction."  Accordingly,  this  we  have 
in  chap.  xix.  And  the  interval,  from  chaps,  iv.  and  v.  to  chap. 
xix.,  is  filled  by  new  dealings  of  God  in  providential  judgments, 
by  intermingled  mercy  to  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  by  glances  at 
the  heavenly  saints  in  the  presence  of  God.  No  doubt,  the 
souls  of  dying  saints  go  to  God  during  the  interval,  but  what- 
ever may  be  the  blessedness  reserved  for  such,  (Rev.  xiv.  13.) 
the  saints  who  are  already  changed  remain  there  through  the 
whole  period.  The  heavenly  saints,  including  those  that  are 
true  Christians  now,  those  that  have  been  such  before,  and  the 
Old  Testament  saints,  may  be  caught  up  at  any  time  to  be  with 
the  Lord.  I  know  no  scriptural  ground  which  entitles  a  believer 
to  say.  He  will  not  come  to-morrow.  None  can  say,  with  divine 
authority,  "There  must  be  something  yet  to  be  done  before  — 
there  must  be  a  delay."  No  doubt,  there  may  he  more  or  less 
time  to  intervene,  but  scripture  never  puts  the  delay  between 
us  and  Christ's  coming,  but  before  His  day.  As  a  servant  with 
his  hand  upon  the  door,  and  on  the  stretch,  as  it  were,  for  his 
Master's  arrival,  so  as  to  be  able  when  He  comes  to  open  unto 
Him  immediately  ;  such  is  the  true  attitude  of  the  child  of  God 
now.  So  says  our  Lord  Himself.  He  would  have,  if  so  we 
may  speak,  everything  settled  up.  He  looks  for  practical  rea- 
diness at  all  times.  Not  as  though  we  could  do  anything,  by 
way  of  preparation.  Thanks  be  to  God,  He  has  made  us  meet 
through  the  grace  of  Christ.  But  there  may  be  things  in  our 
ways  and  walk,  in  what  we  are  doing,  that  will  not  stand  the 
light  of  His  presence.  Whatever  we  do,  we  should  seek  to 
enter  upon  nothing  that  renders  the  thought  of  the  Lord's  com- 
ing unwelcome.  We  should  beware  of  speculations  or  plans 
which  suppose  us  to  have  a  long  time  before  us.  The  Lord 
desires  us  to  be  as  travellers  passing  through  a  foreign  land, 
and  withal  going  out  to  meet  Him  who  is  speedily  coming  for 
us.  The  Lord  may  be  a  little  longer  than  we  think  ;  but  He  is 
coming,  and  this,  too,  at  an  hour  when  men  think  not.  His 
coming  will  immediately  act  on  all  the  heavenly  saints  :  raising 
the  dead,  changing  the  living,  and  removing  both  to  Himself 
above.  Then  follow  the  scenes  of  Rev.  iv.  and  v.,  which  let 
us  see  the  interest  of  the  glorified  saints  in  the  righteous,  who 
suffer  on  the  earth,  after  the  others  are  gone  to  heaven.  They 
cannot  apply  fully,  either  while  only  a  part  of  the  Church  is 


THE    FIRST    SIiAL.  103 

above  and  in  the  separate  state  ;  or  when  the  millennial  reign  is 
arrived.  They  suppose  an  interval  between  these  two  things, 
when  the  Lord  will  have  come  and  changed  them  into  His  risen 
likeness,  and  before  they  accompany  Him  from  heaven  in  order 
to  judge  and  reign.* 

Next,  we  come  to  the  earthly  course  of  "  the  things  that  must 
be  after  these."  The  seals  are  not  judgments  executed  by  the 
Lord,  but  of  a  providential  nature.  Some  have  thought  that 
the  first  seal  applied  to  Christ,  because  of  the  white  horse.  On 
the  face  of  it,  what  more  strange  than  to  conceive  Him  so  repre- 
sented, seeing  that  He  it  is  who,  as  the  Lamb,  is  opening  the 
seals  successively,  and  when  clearly  alluded  to  under  the  contents 
of  the  sixth  seal,  still  preserves  the  name  of  the  Lamb !  And 
yet  stranger  that  He  should  noio  enter  on  a  course  of  conquest, 
at  the  very  time,  if  you  take  it  historically,  when  all  Asia  has 
turned  away  from  Paul,  when  Timothy  has  the  sad  and  sure 
foreboding  of  evil  men  and  seducers  waxing  worse  and  worse, 
when  John  himself  had  written  or  was  about  to  write,  "  Little 
children,  it  is  the  last  time :  and  as  ye  have  heard  that  antichrist 
shall  come,  even  now  are  there  many  antichrists ;  whereby  we 
know  that  it  is  the  last  time."  Nevertheless,  most  of  the  ancients 
and  not  a  few  moderns  begin  their  comments  with  this  false 
start,  some  referring  it  to  the  second  advent ;  but  this  quite 
upsets  the  order  of  the  seals,  fixed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
indeed  the  order  of  all  the  book. 

It  is  true  that  in  chap,  xix,  where  the  Lord  comes  judicially  and 
in  person.  He  is  represented  as  riding  upon  a  white  horse.  But 
there  is  all  the  difference  possible  between  that  vision  of  the 
white  horse  and  the  one  here.  This  horse  does  not  issue  from 
heaven,  as  that  in  chap.  xix.  does.     Then  there  is  not  a  word 

*  It  will  be  observed  that  this,  if  well  founded,  decides  the  question  of  the  true 
and  proper  application  of  the  rest  of  the  book.  For  what  more  weighty  than  to 
know  whether  it  speaks,  throughout  its  central  visions,  of  the  time  during  which 
the  Church  is  still  on  earth,  or  of  the  days  which  follow — the  great  crisis  m  hen  the 
Church  is  not  here  but  risen,  and  God  is  dealing  with  the  earth  after  another 
pattern  ?  To  say  that  it  is  given  to  us  to  know  these  visions  proves  nothing. 
All  scripture  is  given  to  us  and  is  good  for  us,  but  it  is  certainly  not  all  abotit  us ; 
and  we  are  most  profited,  not  by  the  fancy  that  God  is  always  thinking  of  us,  but 
by  really  understanding  its  objects,  scope  and  end.  Had  Abraham  imagined  that 
he  was  to  be  involved  in  the  impending  catastrophe  of  Sodom  because  the  Lord 
graciously  revealed  it  to  him  before  it  came  to  pass,  such  a  delusion  would  have 
done  him  harm.  It  was  not  to  Lot  who  was  there,  but  to  Abraham  who  was  not, 
that  the  fullest  communication  was  made.  And  so  it  will  be,  I  doubt  not.  A  rem- 
nant is  to  be  saved — saved  as  through  fire.  May  our  place  be  above  it  all — above 
the  world  in  spirit  now  and  looking  down  upon  its  plans  and  progress  with  the 
abiding  consciousness  of  a  judgment  that  hastens — destined  to  be  actually  above 
when  that  judgment  comes. 


104  THE  HORSE  AND  THE  THRONE. 

in  chap.  vi.  about  the  rider,  which  necessarily  means  Christ ; 
whereas  in  chap.  xix.  He  is  called  Faithful  and  True,  and  said 
to  judge  and  make  war  in  righteousness.  Of  whom  could  this 
be  said  save  of  One  ?  His  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire.  His 
written  name  none  knew  but  Himself.  The  Word  of  God  —King 
of  Kings,  Lord  of  Lords — can  be  the  titles  of  none  but  Jesus. 
Not  to  speak  of  the  blood-dipt  vesture,  the  sword  proceeding  out 
of  the  mouth,  the  iron  rod  wherewith  to  rule,  and  the  treading 
the  wine-press  of  divine  wrath,  are  descriptions  in  chap.  xix.  to 
which  nothing  answers  in  the  riders  of  chap.  vi.  No  armies  fol- 
lowed here,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  &c.  And  though  the  rider  is 
said  to  have  a  croion  given  to  him,  the  word  is  quite  different 
from  that  employed  in  chap,  xix.,  which  signifies  kingly  diadems, 
the  crown  of  royalty.  The  Romans  were  fond  of  a  sort  of  chaplet, 
which  did  not  to  their  mind,  like  the  imperial  diadem,  convey 
the  idea  of  absolute  authority,  and  that  is  the  crown  men- 
tioned in  chap.  vi. 

Furthermore,  there  are  two  frequent  figures  or  symbols 
used  in  scripture  to  express  power  ;  the  one  is  the  throne,  and 
the  other  is  the  horse.  Thus  we  have  already  seen  the  supreme 
throne  above,  and  now  we  have  the  horse  with  the  rider  on 
earth.  The  same  thing  is  seen  in  chaps,  xix.  and  xx.  There 
you  have  horses  in  the  one  chapter  and  tlirones  in  the  other. 
The  difference  between  these  symbols  is  this  :  when  power  is 
meant  for  the  putting  down  of  rival  or  opposing  authority  on 
earth,  "  the  horse  "  is  taken,  from  its  use  in  war  ;  it  is  intended 
to  subdue.  But  when  the  victory  is  won,  and  it  is  a  question 
not  of  subjugation,  but  of  governing  and  judging,  "  the  throne" 
is  used,  as  being  the  fit  emblem  oi'  rule  over  those  who  have 
been  thus  subdued.  When  Christ  is  going  to  put  down  His 
enemies,  He  is  seen  in  the  vision  of  chap.  xix.  on  the  horse,  used 
to  represent  the  reality  of  His  power  to  subdue  ;  when  the  sub- 
sequent sway  is  meant,  thrones  ajjpear  in  chap,  xx.  It  would 
be  quite  weak,  of  course,  for  persons  to  confound  this  symbolic 
use  with  a  material  horse,  or  throne.  The  idea  of  the  former  is 
power  to  subdue,  and  of  the  latter  is  dominion  after  the  victory 
has  been  gained.  The  throne  may  also  be  used,  as  it  is  after- 
wards, for  the  solemn  and  eternal  judgment  of  the  dead  —  a 
throne  of  stainless  holiness. 

Of  course  we  cannot  ajiply  the  four  horses  and  their  riders  to 
the  great  empires,  three  of  which  had  long  disappeared.  Equally 
untenable  at  least Js  the  notion  that  four  successive  religions  are 
intended,  especially  when  one  hears  it  gravely  laid  down  that 
Infidelity  closes   the  list,   which  primitive    Christianity  opens, 


THE    HORSE    NO    SPECIAL    SIGN    OF    ROME.  105 

followed  by  Mahoramedanism  and  Popery.  It  is  bard  to  say 
wbetber  sucb  tbouglits  are  most  o])posed  to  time  or  place,  to 
congruity  or  context.  Again,  it  is  agreed  tbat  it  is  barsb  in  tbe 
extreme,  and  in  almost  every  point  of  view,  to  understand  tbe 
first  seal  of  Clirist  or  tbe  Cburcb  in  early  gospel  triumpbs,  and 
tben  tbe  tbree  subsequent  ones  of  tbe  Roman  empire  or  em- 
perors. But  it  is  more  important  to  notice  tbat  tliere  is  positive 
ground  from  tbe  Apocalypse  itself  to  deny  tbe  assumption  tbat 
tbe  borse  means  tbe  Roman  empire.  I  do  not  refer  to  passages 
like  cba])ter  ix.  17,  where  literal  cavalry  appear  ;  but  chap, 
xix.  furnishes  an  example  of  its  symbolic  use.  Does  the  Lord 
on  the  white  horse  mean  His  direction  of  the  Roman  empire  ? 
Or  tbe  white  horses  of  the  linen-clad  hosts,  do  they  imply  impe- 
rial powers?  Surely  we  must  look  for  an  interpretation  more  in 
keeping  with  its  usage  elsewhere.  It  means,  in  my  judgment,  a 
militant  aggressive  agency  towards  tbe  earth,  though  it  may  be 
from  heaven.  Hence,  as  in  Zecb.  i.,  it  may  apply  to  tbe  Lord, 
or  to  the  various  imperial  powers  which  succeeded  Babylon. 
And  so  tbe  chariots,  with  tbe  horses  of  various  colours,  in  Zecb. 
vi.  But  as  distinguished  from  tbe  horns  (ch.  i.  1 9),  tbe  former 
symbol  rather  refers  to  the  providential  instruments  behind  tbe 
scene,  and  connected  especially  with  these  empires,  than  to  tbe 
rulers  themselves  or  their  realms.  Plainly,  therefore,  there  is 
no  ground,  from  the  book  itself  or  from  Zecbariab  to  which  tbe 
allusion  is  obvious,  to  interpret  tbe  boi'se  simply  of  the  Roman 
empire.  Nor  is  there  better  ground  in  profane  history  to  main- 
tain tbat  tbe  borse  is  the  special  sign  of  that  people  and  power. 
And  no  wonder.  For  tbe  Roman  infantry  was  more  character- 
istic of  their  military  power  than  their  cavalry.  No  doubt  the 
horse  abounds  on  their  medals,  but  not  more  comparatively  than 
among  other  warlike  nations,  particularly  in  the  east,  who  so  set 
forth  their  victories.  It  bad  formerly  been  one  of  tbe  Roman 
standards  of  war,  but  for  two  centuries  before  Domitian  all  tbe 
varieties  had  given  way  to  tbe  eagle.  Abstractly,  then,  tbe 
borse  cannot  be  regarded  as  tbe  necessary  national  badge  of 
Rome,  or  emblem  of  the  Roman  empire.  Wbetber  it  be  referred 
here,  must  depend  on  contextual  considerations.  And  here  it 
aj>pears  to  me  that  tbe  fourth  seal  rises  up  conclusively  against 
sucb  a  view,  the  four  seals  being  providential  judgments,  homo- 
geneous in  character  but  differing  in  form.  The  Roman  earth 
may  be  tbe  sphere,  but  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  symbolic 
force  of  tbe  borse  in  tbe  passage. 

Without  further  discussion  let  me  state  my  own  view.     We 
have  a  regular  series  of  providential  judgments.     Tbe  first  is 


106'  COMPARISON    OF    THE    FIRST    AND    SECOND    SEALS. 

the  white  horse,  the  symbol  of  triumphant  and  prosperous  power. 
"  He  that  ^sat  on  him  had  a  bow."  (Ver.  2.)  The  bow  is  the 
symbol  of  distant  warfare.*  His  course  is  evidently  that  of 
unchecked  victory.  The  moment  he  appears,  he  conquers.  The 
battle  is  won  without  a  struggle,  and  apparently  without  the 
carnage  of  the  second  judgment,  where  the  sword,  the  symbol 
of  close  hand-to-hand  fighting,  is  used.  But  this  first  conqueror 
is  some  mighty  one  who  sweeps  over  the  earth,  and  gains  vic- 
tory after  victory  by  the  prestige  of  his  name  and  reputation. 
There  is  no  intimation  of  much  slaughter  here,  but  the  second 
judgment  is  of  a  more  appalling  character.  There  went  out  a 
horse  that  was  red,  and  the  one  who  sits  upon  him  is  not  the 
proud  conqueror  to  whom  people  tamely  submit,  but  one  who, 
if  he  wins,  waves  his  standard  over  heaps  of  slain.  Accordingly, 
he  has  a  blood-red  horse  —  the  symbol  of  power  connected  with 
frightful  carnage.  The  result  of  the  first  seal,  i.e.  of  the  victo- 
rious career  of  the  white-horsed  rider,  may  have  been  peace 
and  comparatively  bloodless  changes ;  but  all  is  sanguinary  under 
the  second  seal.  (Ver.  4.)  The  fiery-red  horse,  the  peace  taken 
from  the  earth,  the  mutual  slaughter,  the  great  sword,  are 
tokens  too  plain  to  be  misunderstood.  The  third  horse  is  black, 
i.e.,  the  hue  of  mourning.  It  is  a  colour  chosen  to  show  that 
there  were  to  be  peculiar  sorrows,  caused  not  now  by  bloodshed, 
but  by  scarcity,  and  perha])s,  we  may  add,  to  man's  feeling,  a 
most  capricious  famine. f     Here  we  have  the  voice  proclaiming, 

*  The  ingenuity  of  Mr.  E.'s  attempt  to  make  out,  in  the  bow,  an  allusion  to 
tlie  Cretan  origin  of  Ncrva's  ancestry,  is  undeniable.  Yet,  even  if  one  admitted 
a  more  precise  reference  to  past  history  than  I  conceive  to  be  intended,  I  am  con- 
vinced that  the  meaning  of  the  symbols  is  not  to  be  sought  in  recondite  points  of 
antiquarian  research,  but  rather  on  the  surface,  or  at  least  in  the  broad  and 
natural  features  of  the  portrait. 

t  It  is  almost  incredible  the  amount  of  discussion,  if  not  of  careful  research, 
which  has  been  expended  on  this  verse,  and  especially  on  the  impoi't  of  "  a  mea- 
sure of  wheat  for  a  penny."  (i.e.  a  choeuix,  or  about  l^  pints  English,  for  a  dena- 
rius, or  about  8d.  of  our  money.)  Is  a  time  of  scarcity  or  abundance  indicated  ?  Or 
does  the  verse  proclaim  an  authoritative  adjustment  of  a  due  average  price  ?  It 
appears  to  me  that  (1)  occurring  as  the  third  seal  does  in  a  series  of  providential 
judgments,  such  a  question  ought  not  to  have  been  raised  by  the  least  enlightened 
reader  ;  for,  in  such  a  connexion,  how  incongruous  the  idea  of  plenty  or  a  fair  price  ! 
And  (2)  are  not  these  thoughts  particularly  contradicted  by  the  details  of  the 
seal  in  question,  as  e.g.  by  the  black  or  mourning  colour  of  the  horse,  and  by  (he 
balances  in  the  hand  of  the  rider  ?  (Compare,  with  the  last,  Lev.  xxvi.  26.)  The 
facts  of  the  case  are,  on  the  whole,  plain  and  decisive.  Thus,  from  Cicero's  Oi'a- 
tions,  we  learn  that  the  Senate  estimated  wheat  at  four  serterees  (=  a  denarius) 
the  modius,  (=8  times  the  choenix,)  and  what  is  more  important,  that  the  then 
market  price  in  Sicily  was  two  serterees,  or  at  most   three.     "  Hoc   reprehendo, 

quod,  cum  in  Sicilia,  H  S  11  tritici  modius  esset summum  H  S  ternis 

turn  iste  pro  tritici  modiis  singulis  ternos  ab  aratoribus  denarios  exegit."     (In 


THE    THIRD    SEAL.  107 

"  A  choenix  of  wheat  for  a  denarius,"  (fee.  The  penny  in  our 
country  would  give  the  idea  of  something  insignificant  in  value, 
but,  in  those  times  and  lands,  a  choenix  of  wheat  for  a  denarius 
was  very  costly,  for  not  long  before  men  could  procure  seven  or 

Verr.  Act  ii.  lib.  iii.  81.)     The  inference  is  that  the  scale  of  Verres'  extortion  was 
to  the  Apocalyptic  price  as  3  to  8.     Again,   it  is  allowed  that  the  ordinary   price 
under  the  Emperor  Julian  and  his  successors,   i.e.  long  after  St.  John,  was  mode- 
rate.    From  the  Misopogon  it  seems  that  the  price  of  the  raodius  was  then  about 
12d.  of  our  money,  and  therefore  the  choenix  =  lid.  or  less  than  a  fifth  of  the  Apo- 
calyptic rate.     But  it  is  argued  from  a  passage  in  the  Natural  History  of  the  elder 
Pliny  (lib.  xviii.  10),   that,  in  his   time,  which  was  a  little  before  the  Apocalypse 
was  written,  the  medium  price  of  wheat  was  about  the  same  as  in  the  text.     This 
would  be  the  more  extraordinary,   not  only  as  opposed  to  Roman  experience  both 
before  and  after,   but  also  because  that  laborious  compiler  does  not,   as  far  as  I 
know,  speak  of  the  prices  then   current  as  extravagant.     Having  examined  the 
matter  a  little  for  myself,   I  may  say   that  several  elements  more  or  less  mistaken 
have  concurred  to  falsify  the  deductions  of  a  recent  and  elaborate  commentator. 
"  The  comparison  of  ancient  and  modern  prices  of  corn  is  a  difficult  subject,  and  the 
results  hitherto  obtained  are  unsatisfactory."      (English   Cyclopaedia,   Arts  and 
Sciences,  Vol.  Ill,  col.  251.)     It  is   well  known   that  Dr.  Arbuthnot's  tables  no 
longer  carry  their  former  authority,   and  that  modern  scholars  reject   some  of  his 
premises  and  most  of  his  conclusions.     Now  it  was  on  his  computations  chiefly 
that  the  author   of  the  Horae  Apoc.  depended.     But  (1)   if  I  understand  Pliny, 
he  speaks  in  the  passage  cited,  not  of  the  price  of  bread,  but  of  flour,  which  then 
cost  forty  Asses  the  modius.      But  it  would  appear  that  the  similago  or  flour 
spoken  of  was  by  no  means  coarse,  though  there  might  be  finer,  for  there  was  out 
of  a  peck  of  wheat  but  a  half  peck  of  this  flour,  with  a  large  residue  of  pollen, 
coarse  meal,    and  bran.     (2)  There  is  no   evidence   that   I   am   aware  of  in   St. 
John's  time  to  set  aside  the  common  Attic  choenix,  which  was  the  eighth   (not 
the  fourth)    part    of  a  modius   or  peck.     The   verses  of  Fannius  Rhemnius  are 
not  forgotten  ;    but   why   were  they   cited  for  another   and   later    Roman  sort, 
seeing  that  he  lived  a   considerable  time  after  not  St.  John  only,   but  even   the 
epoch  to  wliich  the  Protestant  historical  school   would  refer  the  accomplishment 
of  the  third  seal  ?     (3)   The   denarius,  no  doubt,   in  very  early  times  equalled  ten 
Asses,    whence    the    name  was    derived  ;    but    it    is    notorious    that    about    the 
second  Punic  war,   B.C.  214,  it  was  by  law   made  equivalent  to  sixteen  Asses, 
save    in  military  pay,  fines,  &c.,    which    were    reckoned    by    the    old   standard. 
Who  or  what  will  the  reader  suppose  is  our  authority  for  this  ?     The  very  same 
work   of  Pliny,   (lib.  xxxiii.  3.)     Nay,  more,    in    the    same    chapter    we    are    in- 
formed that,  forty  years  later,  the   Papyrian  law  reduced  the  As  one  half.     It  is 
absolutely  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  these  extensive  changes  in  order  to  avoid  the 
astounding   results  in  which  Dr.  A.  lands  his  followers.     The  true  inference,   it 
seems  to  me,  is  that  the  price  in  the  Revelation   shows  decided  and  painful  scar- 
city, as  it  exceeds  that  of  the   Cassian  law  eight  times,-  and  the  actual  Sicilian 
market  price  of  Cicero's  day  no  less  than  sixteen  times  ;    and  I  strongly  suspect 
that  if  Pliny's  rate  of  flour  were  accurately  examined,  and  due  allowance  made 
for  the  drawbacks  he  states,   it  would  be  found  to  strengthen  this  general  con- 
clusion.    It  seems  about  as  fair  to  cite  on  the  one  side  the  starvation  price  related 
by  Cffisar    (De  Bell.  Civ.  i.  52),  as  the  poetical   license   of  Martial  on  the  other. 
There  is  hardly  a  siege  or  a  lengthened  campaign,   even  now,   without  raising  the 
price  to  a  degree  that  would  be  fabulous  under  other  circumstances. — The  adulte- 
ration of  the  denarius  under  the  second  Severus  to  a  third  of  its  original  value  is 
deemed  by  Mr.  E.  to  set  right  his  great  difficulty  in  the  price  of  the  wheat.     But 
the  question  is  as  to  its  value  in  exchange.     Wheat  must  be  excessively  dear,   if  a 
man  could  not  do  more   than    procure  a  quart   for  his   day's  labour.     Nor  would 
there  be  any  disposition  to  employ  labourers,  if  t  lie  prices  of  provisions  were  such 


108  THE    FOURTH    SEAL. 

eight  choenixes  for  the  money:  sometimes,  it  would  seem,  twice  as 
much.  A  denarius  was  given  for  the  daily  wage,  and  was  barely 
enough  for  a  man's  daily  food ;  for  the  choenix  of  wheat  appears 
to  have  been  a  minimum,  being  the  allowance  given  to  a  slave. 
But  while  there  should  be  this  scarcity  of  the  very  staff  of  life, 
there  was  a  command  not  to  touch  the  luxuries  of  life,  the  oil 
and  the  wine.  What  the  rich,  then,  require  was  not  to  be 
touched,  but  only  what  people  want  of  the  prime  necessaries 
of  life.     God  is  laying  His  hand  upon  the  world. 

Yet  such  events  as  these  might  happen  in  ordinary  times. 
There  might  be  some  great  conqueror,  such  as  Julius  Csesar  or 
Napoleon,  appearing  on  the  stage  at  any  time,  or  there  might 
be  famine,  &c.  And  in  the  fourth  seal  we  have  God's  four  sore 
plagues  let  loose  together,  the  sword,  famine,  death  and  pesti- 
lence, and  the  wild  beasts  of  the  eartli,  but  here  limited  to  a 
fourth  part.  They  are  but  preparatory  chastisements  as  yet. 
"  And  behold,  a  pale  horse,  and  his  name  that  sat  on  him  was 
Death,  and  Hades  followed  with  him."  (Ver.  8.)  In  Ezek. 
xiv.  you  will  find  that  these  four  same  things  are  men- 
tioned together  in  connexion  with  Israel.  In  these  first  judg- 
ments, God  does  not  proceed  to  any  very  extraordinary  mea- 
sures. A  conqueror  is  no  rare  thing  in  the  earth  :  a  bloody 
and  perhaps  civil  war  not  uncommon.  These  might  be  followed 
by  a  famine,  and  that  naturally  enough  might  breed  pestilence, 
&c.  Thus  man  would  account  for  these  things,  and  the  wise 
are  caught  in  their  own  craftiness.  But  we  know  before,  through 
God's  word,  that  there  is  a  time  of  conquest  coming  —  then  of 
bloody  warfare — next  of  dearth — and  lastly  of  the  outpouring 
of  God's  sore  plagues.  The  heavenly  saints  must  be  set  in 
rest  and  peace  in  the  presence  of  God  —  the  Church  must  be 
safely  sheltered,  before  these  judgments  begin. 

The  next  scene,  under  the  fifth  seal,  is  a  remarkable  one. 
The  living  creatures  drop  their  cry  of  "  Come,"  *    which  was 

that  a  man's  daily  wages  were  swallowed  up  in  buying  five  oi"  six  lbs.  of  barley. 
The  ratio  of  the  barley  to  the  wheat  is,  I  admit,  singular,  as  it  was  and  is  usually 
one-half,  instead  of  a  third.  In  Rome,  however,  wheat  was  tlie  food  of  men, 
barley  of  horses.  It  was  a  military  penalty  to  use  barley. — I  have  only  to  add 
that  Jerome's  interpretation  of  Eusebius'  Chronicou  distinctly  puts  the  modius  at 
six  drachma;  or  denarii,  during  the  famine  in  Grreece  in  the  ninth  year  of  the  Em- 
peror Cladius.  Syncellus  doubles  this,  which  Scaliger  prefers,  and  Mr.  E.  gives 
jt  as  if  there  were  no  question  about  the  matter. 

*  It  may  be  well  to  mention  in  this  note  my  opinion  that  the  words  "  and 
see,"  which  according  to  the  common  text  and  the  authorized  version,  follow 
"  Come"  in  the  call  of  the  four  living  creatures,  appear  to  be  au  interpolation. 
In  the  case  of  the  second  (verse  3)  there  ia  no  difference  of  judgment  among 
critical  editors  of  the  least  note,  but,  strange  to  say,  Griesbach  and  Scholz  retain 


THE    FIFTH    SEAL.  109 

connected  only  with  external  judgments  in  providence.  But 
now  we  have  a  series  of  events  somewhat  different.  The  fifth 
seal  discloses  that  God  has  a  people  upon  earth  still.  Who  are 
these  that  are  suffering  now  i'  The  prophet  sees  their  souls 
under  the  altai',  where  they  were  as  holocausts  offered  up. 
Thougli  dead,  they  yet  speak.  They  were  slain  because  of  the 
word  of  God,  and  because  of  their  testimony.  After  that,  man 
has  no  more  than  he  can  do.  They  call  for  retribution  ;  'for  after 
the  Lord  has  taken  home  His  heavenly  saints,  He  will  begin 
to  call  earthly  ones.  They  will  not  of  course  be  regenerate 
by  a  different  Spirit,  but  they  will  be  called  to  a  different 
route,  and  will  not  know  God  in  the  same  full  and  near  way 
wherein  He  reveals  Himself  to  us  now,  and  as  we  ought  to 
know  Him.  These  saints  will  have  "  the  Spirit  of  prophecy." 
Such  was  the  mode  the  Holy  Ghost  wrought  in  the  Old 
Testament  saints.  The  effect  of  the  Spirit  of  prophecy  was 
that  they  were  waiting  for  Christ  to  come,  for  tlie  accom- 
plishment of  promise  and  prophecy  ;  and  so  these  saints  will 
wait  for  Christ  to  come  in  glory.  All  their  hopes  hang  on 
Him  who  is  to  be  their  Deliverer  from  circumstances  of  such 
excessive  sorrow.  This  is  not  the  way  in  which  we  should  be 
expecting  Christ.  We  have  rest  in  Him  now.  Though  we 
are  looking  for  Christ  to  come,  we  have  present  communion 
with  Him  in  peace,  and  the  title,  whether  slain  or  not,  always 
to  rejoice  in  Him.  It  is  not  the  thing  for  Christians  now  to  say  in 
a  trying  time,  "  How  long,  O  Lord,  holy  and  true,  dost  thou  not 
judge  and  avenge  our  blood  .'*"  &c.  These  saints  will  not  be 
put  into  the  same  connexion  with  Christ,  as  far  as  communion 
is  concerned,  as  we  are.  They  will  be  appealing  to  the  Lord  to 
judge  and  avenge.  We  ought  to  pray  to  the  Lord  to  forgive. 
So  Stephen  "  cried  with  a  loud  voice.  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to 
their  charge."  Such  also  is  the  only  right  and  suitable  prayer 
for  the  saints  of  the  heavenly  calling.  But  here  they  are  on 
different  ground.  They  take  up  the  positio-n  and  express  the 
sentiments  described  in  the  Psalms.  When  people  think  that 
the  Psalms  are  intended  to  convey  our  place  and  proper  feelings 

the  ordinary  sense  in  the  last  two,  and,  in  the  first  case  of  all,  Kuapp  along  with 
them.  Buttmann,  Hahn,  Lachmanu,  Tischendorf,  and  Tregelles  omit  the  words 
uniformly,  and,  as  I  think,  with  reason.  The  ditference  as  to  interpretation 
would  be  this  :  as  the  text.  rec.  stands,  it  is  a  call  from  each  living  creature 
to  John;  but  if  they  merely  cry  "  Come,"  it  would  seem  to  be  a  direct  address 
to  the  riders  on  the  several  horses,  who  accordingly  come  forth  at  their  bidding. 
The  connection  of  the  living  creatures  with  the  action  of  the  horsemen  in  provi- 
dence is  made  clearer  and  stronger  by  this  little  change.  Besides,  it  entirely  pre- 
cludes such  remarks  as  those  of  Mr.  A.  Jeuour  iu  his  "  Rationale  Apocalypticum," 
Vol.  I.,  pp.  214-217. 


110  THE    WHITE    ROBE    GIVEN. 

as  Christians,  the}-  find  a  great  difficulty  in  understanding  the 
language  of  vengeance  and  imprecation  that  is  used  in  them. 
But  when  the  Church  is  removed,  God,  from  His  place  on  the 
thi'one,  will  be  pouring  out  these  Apocalyptic  judgments  ;  and 
then  it  is  that  these  Psalms  fully  apply.  God  is  showing  mercy 
now  ;  then  it  will  be  earthly  judgment.  When  these  visions 
are  really  accomplishing,  God  will  show  not,  as  now,  the  exceeding 
riches  of  His  grace,  but  the  exceeding  terrors  of  His  righteous 
wrath  :  and  so,  when  that  day  comes  and  men  are  yet  heedless, 
the  saints  living  or  dying  say,  "  How  long,  O  Lord,"  Sec. 

"  And  a  white  robe  was  given  unto  every  one  of  them."  (Ver. 
11.)  That  is,  vindication  has  been  accorded  them,  though  they  do 
not  take  their  place  upon  thrones  till  chap.  xx.  Disembodied  spirits 
are  never  said  to  sit  there.  We  do  not  read  of  spirits  being 
gloi'ified,  but  of  bodies,  and  then  they  enter  upon  their  destined 
glory.  They  will  reign  with  Christ.  Thus,  after  the  Church 
is  gone,  thei'e  will  be  persons  who  witness  for  God  here  below, 
but  taking  up  totally  different  language  —  the  claim  of  retribu- 
tion, and  not  long-suffering  grace.  It  was  a  holy  thing  once  to 
exterminate  the  Canaanites.  It  would  not  be  a  Christian  thing 
now.  How  unbecoming  for  us  if  God  is  shewing  mercy  ! 
But  when  He  is  iudoiny:,  that  conduct  will  be  rio-ht  and  suitable 
which  would  not  now  be  in  season.  If  God  sees  that  the  earth 
is  in  such  a  state  that  it  requires  to  be  chastised  and  judged,  it 
will  be  a  holy  thing  to  take  part  in  it.  But  if  I  were  to  be  judg- 
ing bad  people  upon  the  earth  now,  I  should  be  doing  what  the 
Lord  is  not  doing  —  nay,  tlie  very  reverse  of  what  engages  Him. 
The  Lord  is  now  at  work  in  marvels  of  grace,  and  thus  all  who 
understand  Him,  will  be  acting  in  the  same  spirit.  The  tre- 
mendous convulsion  (ver.  12)  of  the  sixth  seal  comes,  apparently, 
in  answer  to  the  prayer  of  the  saints  who  are  concerned,  and 
shows,  that  the  powers  of  the  persecuting  world  received  an 
earnest  of  their  doom,  as  truly  as  the  slain  ones,  in  the  seal  before, 
have  their  recognition  in  part,  before  they  inherit  the  kingdom. 
Their  blood,  we  may  say,  cried  to  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth.  They 
lived  unto  God  and  shall  surely  rise  again  ;  but  they  must  wait. 
Another  class  of  martyi's  must  yet  be  made  up.  "  It  was  said  to 
them  that  they  shoulil  rest  yet  a  little  space,  until  their  fellow- 
servants  also  and  their  brethren,  that  should  be  killed  even  as 
they,  should  be  completed."  No  account  of  the  killing  of  these 
saints  appears  hei'e :  we  must  seek  for  this  in  other  and  subse- 
quent parts  of  the  book.  The  earlier  sufferers  meanwhile  enjoy 
the  result  of  righteousness  and  are  owned  of  God  ;  but  they  are 
to  await  the  filling  up  of  a  new  and  distinct  band  of  martyred 


RIGHTEOUS    SUFFERERS    AFIER     THE    RAPTURE.  Ill 

brethren  who  are  to  sutler  up  to  the  close.  Then  retribution 
will  come.  Iniquity  must  reach  its  height  and  do  its  worst  ere 
the  hour  of  full  divine  judgment.  Another  and  fina^  outburst  of 
persecution  must  precede.  But  mark  here  also:  no  such  hope 
is  hekl  out  to  a  single  individual,  as  the  Lord's  translating  them 
without  passing-  through  death. 

We  have  stated  that  the  heavenly  saints,  (i.e.  the  dead  in  Christ, 
and  we  who  remain  to  the  coming  of  the  Lord,)  have  already 
been  taken  from  the  earth,  as  chapter  iv.  had  shown,  the 
fifth  chapter  adding  another  thing-,  that  while  they  are  above, 
there  are  righteous  persons  on  earth  in  whose  prayers  the  risen 
saints  are  interested.  That  is  to  say,  those  above  are  found  in 
the  place  of  intercession  ;  and  there  is  nothing  sweeter  than  that 
place  —  nothing  in  which  we  are  practically  brought  nearer  to 
Christ,  save  in  our  immediate  relationship  to  Himself.  The 
Church  is  destined  to  have  that  privilege  in  glory,  as  we  have  it 
now  in  grace  for  all  men  (1  Tim.  ii.)  —  the  privilege  of  interces- 
sion for  others  still  in  trial  upon  the  earth.  The  Church  will 
take  the  deepest  concern  in  their  sorrows,  blessings,  and  hopes. 

But  who  are  these  sufferers  on  earth  ?  Li  chap.  vi.  9,  as  we 
have  seen,  there  was  a  dreadful  slaughter  of  the  saints.  They 
cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  we  are  permitted,  with  and  through 
St.  John,  to  hear  their  cry.  They  were  appealing  to  God  as 
the  Sovereign  of  everything.  "  How  long,  O  Lord,  the  holy 
and  true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood  on  them 
that  dwell  on  the  earth?"  Evidently  this  is  not  a  Christian 
cry  :  I  do  not  say  it  will  not  be  a  believing-  one,  but  suited 
to  their  circumstances  and  to  the  then  dealings  of  God. 
People  are  so  narrow  that  they  think  a  person  can  never  be 
a  believer  without  being  a  Christian.  It  is  quite  true  that 
now  a  believer  is,  of  course,  a  Christian.  Even  the  babes 
know  the  Father.  "  Whosoever  denieth  the  Son,  the  same 
hath  not  the  Father  :  he  that  acknowledaeth  the  Son  hath  the 
Father  also."  But  we  ought  always  to  gather  our  thoughts 
and  our  language  from  Scripture  and  not  from  our  own  imagi- 
nation. Now,  though  Abraham  and  all  the  Old  Testament 
saints  were  born  of  the  Spirit,  yet  they  were  not  Christians  in  a 
proper  New  Testament  sense.  For  a  Christian  is  not  only  one 
who  has  faith  in  Christ,  but  one  to  whose  faith  Christ  dead  and 
risen  has  been  presented  by  God,  and  who  has,  consequently, 
the  Holy  Ghost  uniting  him  to  Christ  in  heaven.  But  that  was 
not  and  could  not  be  till  Christ  had  come  and  finished  the  work 
of  redemption.  They  were  regenerate  no  doubt,  for  to  be  born 
again  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  the   work  of  atonement 


112        THE  CRY  FOR  VENGEANCE  IS  NOT  GRACE. 

has  been  previously  accomplished  ;  but  still  there  is  a  difference 
of  position  into  M'hich  ihe  accomplished  work,  and  the  conse- 
quent pres^ce  of  the  Spirit  during  Christ's  absence  in  heaven, 
has  brought  us. 

From  those  under  the  altsr,  then,  we  do  not  hear  Christian  ac- 
cents, but  that  which  reminds  us  of  the  state  and  feelings  revealed 
of  old.  Fi'om  the  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came  into 
the  world,  and  went  up  on  Iiigh,  as  the  rejei^ted  One,  now  glori- 
fied,—  from  that  lime  fhe  sufferings  of  Christ,  as  the  I'ighteous 
witness  for  God,  and  in  perfect  grace  to  man,  become,  so  to 
speak,  reproduced  in  His  people.  The  Holy  Ghost  pufs  them 
in  sympathy  with  Christ.  What  was  in  a  measure  true  before 
was  now  the  ajipoinled  portion  for  the  saints.  None  but  Christ 
could  possibly  know  snffe'ving  from  God  for  bearing  sin.  But 
part  of  the  suffering,  even  of  the  cross,  was,  because  Christ  was 
put  there  through  vhe  wickedness  of  men  :  another  and  a  far 
deeper  part  was,  that  He  was  put  there  by  the  grace  of  God 
for  the  vindication  of  His  holiness,  and  tlie  deliverance  of  the 
sinner.  In  the  last  He  suffered  for  us;  in  the  first  we  may 
and  should  suffer  with  Him.  Hence,  the  apostle  Paul  did  not 
hesitate  to  say,  "  That  I  may  know  him  ....  and  the  fellow- 
ship of  his  sufferings,  being  made  confo!"mable  unto  his  death." 
A  Christian  might  share  the  sufferings  of  Christ  in  the  sense  of 
being  cast  out,  even  unto  death.  The  apostle  himself  had  it 
often  literally  before  him  in  this  way.  (See  2  Cor.  i.  iv.)  He 
knew  the  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings  ;  Stephen  knew  the 
same.  Such  is  not  at  all  the  s])iiit  of  this  cry.  Here  the  suf- 
ferers were  under  the  deep  feeling  of  the  wrong  that  was  done 
to  them,  and  they  called  only  for  the  judgment  of  God.  How 
differejit  the  state  of  things  when  persons,  instead  of  shrinking 
from  prison  and  from  judgment,  thanked  Ciod,  and  went  away 
full  of  joy,  because  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame 
for  the  name  of  Jesus  !  Is  that  what  we  get  here  ?  No  doubt, 
there  is  the  world  acting  unrighteously  ;  but  there  is  something 
more  blessed  now,  than  appeals  to  God  to  deal  with  the  world 
as  the  world  has  dealt  with  us.  That  was  the  state  of  things 
when  men  had  to  do  with  t!ie  law  ;  as  the  principle  of  righteous 
retribution  will  ajipear  again  in  the  millennial  day,  when  they 
will  have  the  law  written  on  their  hearts.  As  far  as  the  moral 
blessedness  {^iKaiiDfxa)  of  the  laAV  is  concerned,  God  makes  that 
good  in  His  people  now.  But  there  is  another  principle  which 
is  being  displayed  now  in  every  form  ;  for  GocVs  grace  is  going- 
out  to  the  lost.  Christ's  death  is  the  greatest  manifestation  of 
that  grace,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  works  the  spirit  of  grace  into 


THE    SPIRIT   AND    THE    BRIDE    SAY,    COME.  113 

the  heart  of  His  people.  But  the  cry  under  the  iifth  seal  is 
that  sin  may  be  laid  to  the  charge  of  their  oppressors,  and  ven- 
geance taken  accordingly.  This  is  righteousness,  but  not  grace. 
Let  us  bear  in  mind,  however,  that  God  does  not  allow  us  to 
take  up  a  righteous  or  a  gracious  cry  just  when  we  like.  We 
are  always  wrong  when,  under  suffering  from  the  world,  a 
gracious  cry  is  not  brought  out  by  the  blow.  When  we  have 
to  do  with  one  another,  as  Christians,  we  are  entitled,  of  course, 
to  look  for  godly  and  righteous  ways  :  indeed,  it  is  part  of  the 
character  of  a  Christian  to  feel  what  is  wrong,  as  well  as  to  value 
what  is  right.  (Rom.  xii.)  But  there  should  always  be  power 
to  rise  above  the  evil,  and  to  bring  out  Christ  to  meet  it,  whe- 
ther it  be  in  the  way  of  discipline  for  those  within,  or  of  inter- 
cession for  those  that  are  without.  God  is  dealing  in  perfect 
grace,  and  so  should  we,  when  we  have  to  do  with  the  world. 
Here,  in  the  Revelation,  it  is  another  thing  :  God  is  judging  in 
a  preparatory  way,  and  so,  for  His  people,  it  is  another  kind  of 
relationship,  not  that  in  which  He  has  set  us  till  the  Lord 
receives  us  to  Himself.  Accordingly,  it  is  the  Jewish  expectation 
of  deliverance  through  God's  destruction  of  the  adversaries,  not 
the  Christian's  hope  of  removal  out  of  the  scene  to  heaven. 
Righteous  vengeance  is  invoked  on  those  that  dw^ell  on  the 
earth.  Not  that  vindictiveness  is  implied,  but  assuredly  it  is  not 
practical  grace.  They  look  therefore  for  God  to  judge,  instead 
of  longing,  as  we  should  do,  for  Christ  to  come  and  take  us  to 
Himself.  "  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Come,  and  let  him 
that  heareth  say.  Come." 

Remark,  that  the  word  used  here  for  "  Lord,"  is  not  the  one 
that  is  generally  employed,  but  the  same  term  occurs  in  Luke 
ii.  29  ;  Acts  iv.  24  ;  Jude  4.  It  means  the  Lord,  as  "  sovereign 
master."  It  is  also  used  in  2  Peter  ii.  1,  "Even  denying  the 
Lord  that  bought  them."  We  have  not  here  the  nearness  in 
which  we  know  Him  as  "  our  Lord,"  but  the  general  authori- 
tative relation  in  which  the  Lord  is  the  Master  of  the  whole 
world  —  of  all  men,  whether  bad  or  good.  It  is  never  said  that 
those  who  know  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  can 
deny  the  Lord  who  bought  them. 

However  that  may  be,  the  appeal  is  answered  by  tlie  throes 
of  nature  universally,  presenting,  in  symbols  to  the  prophet's  eye, 
what  was  coming.  "  And  I  beheld  when  he  opened  the  sixth 
seal,  and  there  was  a  great  earthquake  ;  and  the  sun  became 
black  as  sackcloth  of  hair,  and  the  whole  moon  became  as 
blood;  and  the  stars  of  heaven  fell  unto  the  earth,  even  us  a 
9 


114  THE    SIXTH    SEAL, 

fig  tree  castetli  its  untimely  figs,  when  it  is  shaken  by  a  mighty 
wind.  And  the  heaven  departed  as  a  scroll  when  it  is  rolled 
together;  and  every  mountain  and  island  were  moved  out  of 
their  places."  (Ver,  12-14.)  The  heavens  are  convulsed  from 
one  end  to  the  other ;  the  stars  fall,  &c.,  evidently,  as  it  seems 
to  me,  in  the  vision  only.  "  And  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and 
the  great  men,  and  the  chieftains,  and  the  rich,  and  the 
mighty,  and  every  bondman  and  free  man,  hid  themselves 
in  the  dens  and  in  the  rocks  of  the  mountains  ;  and  they  say 
to  the  mountains  and  rocks.  Fall  on  us,  and  "hide  us  from  the 
face  of  him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath  of 
the  Lamb  :  for  the  great  day  of  his*  wrath  is  come ;  and  who 
is  able  to  stand?"  (Ver.  15-17.)  Every  class  of  men  is  in 
agitation  through  these  impending  judgments.  It  is  not  really 
the  great  day  of  the  Lamb's  wrath,  yet  people  think  that  it  is. 
They  fear  that  the  last  day  is  already  come.  An  idea  has  pre- 
vailed with  many  that  this  seal  represents  the  epiphany  of  the 
Lord  in  judgment  at  the  end  of  the  age.  This  has  disposed  them 
to  understand  the  description  as  a  literal  account  of  the  heavenly 
and  earthly  changes  which  accompany  that  great  event.  But 
there  is  no  solid  foundation  for  such  thoughts.  In  the  first  place, 
the  seventh  seal  is  not  yet  opened,  so  that  the  end  it  cannot  be, 

*  The  Vulgate,  with  good  authority  of  MSS.  (C,  &c.,)  has  "  their"  wrath  (ipso- 
ruin,  not  ipsius).  I  take  this  opportunity  of  saying,  that,  invaluable  as  the  best 
Latin  copies  are,  as  a  support  of  ancient  and  excellent  readings,  it  seems  a  perilous 
thing  to  throw  aside  all  the  MSS.  and  every  other  version,  and  all  the  early  writers 
save  those  who  merely  eclio  the  Vulgate,  as  Mr.  E.  does  in  following  its  "quattuor 
partes"  (ver.  8).  There  is  really  no  ground  but  the  exigencies  of  his  system.  To 
square  with  facts,  according  to  his  application,  it  should  have  been,  not  the  fourth, 
but  the  whole,  of  the  Roman  empire.  Hence  Jerome's  manifest  oversight  is 
adopted,  and  it  is  argued  that  he  must  have  had  ancient  witnesses  now  lost !  But 
this  is  most  unreasonable  when  we  see  that  Jerome  is  often  loose.  To  take  this 
chapter  alone,  is  it  pretended  that  "  vocem,"  in  verse  1,  the  omission  of  "et,"  in 
verse  2,  "  singulae,"  in  verse  9,  "  iusulae,"  in  verse  14,  rest  on  original  authority  ? 
Are  they  not  evidently  due  to  mere  laxity  of  rendering  ?  And  why  impute  "  quat- 
tuor  partes  "  to  a  higher  source  ?  The  wonder  is  that  we  have  not  some  of  the 
later  Greek  manuscripts  influenced  by  the  Latin  in  verse  8.  as  perhaps  26.  was  in 
verses  1  and  2.  Wo  know  there  are  stu]iendous  blunders  occasionally  iu  the  best 
copies  of  the  Vulgate,  as  in  1  Cor.  xv.  51 ;  Ileb.  xi.  21.  Why  give  it  a  place  in 
this  verse,  which  is  not  claimed  for  it  in  any  other  verse  of  Old  or  New  Testa- 
ment ?  Besides,  is  it  according  to  the  analogy  of  this  book,  or  of  any  other  book, 
to  speak  of  "  four  parts,"  if  the  entire  empire  were  intended  ?  The  attempted 
historical  answer  of  quadripartition  seems  to  me  extremely  meagre.  This,  of 
course,  is  matter  of  opinion.  But  it  is  serious  when  tlic  author  is  so  enamoured 
of  his  tlieory  as  to  bid  his  readers  "  well  mark  that  if  the  prophecy  here  difier  from 
tlie  history,  it  differs  from,  and  is  inconsistent  with,  itself  also  :  seeing  that  the 
whole  horse  is  depicted  with  the  pale  death-like  hue,  not  Us  fourth  jjurt  only."  H. 
A.  I.  p.  186.  This  is  bolder  than  man  ought  to  be  with  God's  word,  unless 
there  were  infinitely  graver  grounds  against  the  text.  The  inference  from  the 
horse  I  have,  I  think,  shown  to  be  unsound. 


NOT  THE  DAY  OF  THE  LORD,  115 

even  if  one  adopted  the  system  which  supposes  the  trumpets  to  be 
a  rehearsal  from  another  point  of  view.  Again,  not  a  word  occurs 
alluding  to  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  Thei'e  is  a  great  earth- 
quake, but  the  appearing  of  Jesus  is  incomparably  more  serious 
than  any  possible  commotion  in  the  world.  The  difference  is 
manifest,  if  we  compare  these  verses  with  chap.  xix.  11-21  of 
this  book,  and  with  1  Thess.  v.  ;  2  Thess.  i,  ;  Luke  xvii.  24-37, 
&c.  Not  to  speak  of  the  sixth  trumpet,  under  the  seventh  vial 
(which  must  surely  be  owned  as  at  least  not  earlier  than  the  sixth 
seal)  there  is  an  earthquake,  of  which  the  Holy  Ghost  speaks 
in  still  stronger  terms.  Yet  we  know  that  this  is  before  the  day 
of  the  Lord  ;  for  all  admit  that  the  vials  are  poured  out  before  He 
comes  as  a  thief.  And  a  fortiori  why  not  the  sixth  seal  ?  Had 
these  convulsions  been  given  under  the  seventh  seal,  there  might 
have  seemed  more  tenable  ground  :  as  it  is,  there  is  really  none. 

There  is  also  this  marked  difference  between  our  seal  and  the 
passages  in  Matthew  xxiv,,  Mark  xiii.,  and  Luke  xxi.,  with 
which  some  would  connect  it,  that  in  the  latter  the  Son  of 
man  is  expressly  said  to  be  seen  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven 
with  power  and  great  glory,  in  the  former,  as  has  been  remarked, 
there  is  not  a  trace  of  it.  It  is  repi'esented,  under  the  seal,  that 
all  men  in  their  teiTor  say  to  the  mountains  and  rocks  (is  this 
literal,  after  they  had  been  moved  out  of  their  places?)  "  Fall  on 
us  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne 
and  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  :  for  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  is 
come  ;  and  who  is  able  to  stand  ?"  But  it  is  a  revelation,  not  of 
that  which  God  declares  about  the  time  or  circumstances,  but  of 
men's  alarm  and  its  effect  in  their  consciences.  To  take  what 
John  saw  in  the  vision  as  so  many  physical  realities,  to  be  then 
verified  in  the  literal  sun,  moon,  stars  and  heaven,  is,  I  think,  an 
opinion  adopted  without  due  consideration.  Would  there,  could 
there,  be  need  for  any  to  invoke  the  fall  of  the  mountains  and 
rocks,  if  the  stars  really  fell  unto  the  earth  ?  Could  men  or  the 
globe  sui'vive  such  a  shock  ?  Besides,  it  is  plain  that  the  des- 
cription alludes,  at  any  rate,  to  passages  in  the  Old  Testament, 
such  as  Isa.  xiii.,  xxxiv.  ;  Ezek.  xxxii.  7,  8,  and  Joel  ii.  Now 
the  last  distinctly  states  that  the  signs  therein  predicted  are  before 
the  great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Loj'd  come,  and  the  first  had  its 
accomplishment  in  the  past  fall  of  Babylon,  though  there  be  also 
types  of  a  more  solemn  and  universal  catastrophe  at  the  close. 

All  this  is,  to  my  mind,  decisive  that  the  sixth  seal,  according  to 
its  natural  place  in  the  prophecy,  in  no  way  means  the  great  day 
of  the  Lord,  but  sets  forth,  first  in  figures  and  then  in  simple 
language,  an  overwhelming  revolution  which  overthrows  existing 


116  OPEN    REBELLION    THEN. 

institutions  and  governmental  order.  The  authorities,  supreme, 
dependent  and  subordinate,  cease  their  functions.  The  shock  is 
universal.  They  think  the  last  reckoning  is  come.  Not  the 
Lord,  but  their  affrighted  conscience  calls  it  the  day  of  His 
wrath.  But  when  that  day  does  come  (as  in  chap,  xix.), 
they  are  bold  as  lions.  The  very  frequency  of  divine  judg- 
ment acts  upon  the  hard  hearts  of  men,  and  so,  though  the 
trumpets  have  yet  to  blow,  and  the  judgments  become 
more  and  more  intense,  yet  when  the  Lord  comes  in  person, 
instead  of  calling  upon  the  mountains  to  cover  them,  they  are 
found  fighting  against  Himself.  When  their  consciences 
were  not  so  hardened,  they  were  alarmed,  but  when  the  great 
day  arrives,  they  are  in  open  rebellion  against  Christ.  What 
a  thing  is  the  heart  of  man  !  and  what  an  infinite  mercy  that 
the  Lord  has  brought  us,  not  in  the  thought  of  His  wrath — 
though  the  Lord  grant  that  this  may  be  used  to  awaken  some 
souls  —  but  what  a  mercy  to  think  that  He  has  brought  us  into 
peace,  and  that  He  will  have  us  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  our 
heavenly  blessings,  even  when  all  these  jutlgments  are  passing 
beneath  us  !  To  be  in  the  heavenly  presence  of  Him  who  will 
then  execute  these  judgments — this  is  our  portion.  The  Lord 
grant  that  we  may  walk  in  His  grace  now,  not  dragged  down 
into  the  spirit  of  the  world,  nor  standing  for  our  own  rights  I 
The  moment  sinful  men  begin  to  talk  about  rights,  in  the  sight 
of  God  the  only  thing  they  have  a  right  to,  is  to  be  lost  and 
judged.  If  He  dealt  with  us  on  that  ground,  Avlien  —  how  could 
we  be  saved  i*  But  He  has  forgiven  us  all  our  wrongs,  and  has 
given  us  the  joy  of  standing  for  His  rights.  The  Lord  grant 
that  we  may  l3e  true  to  Him  and  to  His  cross ! 


THE    PARENTHESIS    IN    THE    SEALS.  117 


CHAPTER    VII. 

The  careful  reader  of  the  Revelation  will  have  noticed  that 
this  chapter  does  not  form  any  part,  properly  speaking-,  of  the 
course  of  events.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  neither  one  of  the  seals, 
nor  of  the  trumpets,  nor  of  the  vials.  We  have  not  finished  the 
seals  yet.  In  the  sixth  chapter  we  have  had  six  seals,  and  there 
is  a  seventh  that  comes  before  us  in  chap.  viii.  What  then  is 
the  meaning  of  chap.  vii.  ?  It  is  an  interval  —  a  sort  of  paren- 
thesis in  these  events — that  occurs  between  the  sixth  and  seventh 
seals.  Under  the  sixth  seal  there  is  a  frightful  catastrophe 
among'  kings  and  subjects,  high  and  low,  calling  to  the  rocks 
and  mountains  to  fall  on  them  and  hide  them  from  the  wrath 
of  the  Lamb.     To  their  minds,  His  day  was  come. 

On  the  other  hand,  when  He  opens  the  seventh  seal  (chap, 
viii.),  there  is  silence  in  heaven  about  the  space  of  half-an-hour  : 
so  that  the  whole  of  chap.  vii.  is  no  link  in  the  regular  chain  of 
the  history  foreseen.  Yet  this  apparent  interruption  of  hi^^toric 
sequence  is  just  as  orderly  as  the  formally-numbered  series  of 
the  judgments,  because  all  that  God  does  is  perfect :  every 
detail  is  fixed  with  the  greatest  care  and  nicety.  What  con- 
firms this  is,  that  when  we  come  to  the  seven  trumpets,  the 
sixth  trumpet  is  given  in  chap.  ix.  and  the  seventh  does  not 
appear  till  chap.  xi.  1.5  ;  so  that  the  whole  of  x.  and  the  larger 
part  of  chap.  xi.  form  a  great  parenthetic  revelation  of  events, 
similar  to  what  we  have  in  the  chapter  before  us.  Indeed,  to 
me,  it  is  still  more  remarkable  in  the  trumpets  ;  for  you  will 
observe  in  chap.  ix.  12  it  is  said,  "  One  woe  is  past,  and  behold 
thei'e  come  two  woes,"  &c.,  and  then  we  ha\  e  the  sixth  angel 
sounding  and  the  description  of  the  Euphratean  horsemen. 
But  it  is  not  till  chap.  xi.  14  that  we  have  "the  second  woe  is 
past,"  evidently  referring  to  the  Euphratean  horsemen  men- 
tioned before  in  chap.  ix.  So  that  the  whole  scene  of  the  mighty 
angel  coming  down  from  heaven,  of  the  little  book  that  was  to 
be  taken  and  eaten  by  the  seei',  of  the  temple  and  worshippers 
measured,  and  the  court  and  city  abandoned  for  forty -two 
months,  of  the  two  witnesses,  their  testimony,  death,  resurrec- 
tion, and  ascension,  &c. ;  —  all  this  forms  part  of  the  striking 
episode .     Thus,  as  there  is  a  pai-enthesis  between  the  sixth  and 


118  ANALOGY    IN    THE   TRUMPETS    AND    VIALS. 

seventh  seals,  there  is  an  exactly  corresponding  one  between  the 
sixth  and  seventh  trumpets,  and  not  only  so,  but  we  have  some- 
thing analogous  in  the  vials.  If  you  look  at  the  sixth  vial, 
(chap.  xvi.  12,)  you  will  find  there  is  an  interruption  between  it 
and  the  seventh.  First,  the  water  of  the  great  river  Euphrates 
is  dried  up,  that  the  way  of  the  kings  from  the  East  might  be 
prepared.  And  then  we  have  a  totally  different  subject,  "  I 
saw  three  unclean  spirits/'  &c. — "  they  are  the  spirits  of  devils  ;" 
and  then,  distinct  again  from  this,  "  Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief. 
Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth,"  &c.  This  is  a  brief  but  singular 
parenthesis,  containing  both  the  account  of  the  evil  and  the 
Lord's  coming  in  judgment  on  it.  I  only  refer  to  it  now  for  the 
purpose  of  showing  that  there  is  nothing  but  what  is  laid  down 
with  the  most  astonishing  precision  of  purpose  in  God's  word, 
and  in  this  book,  it  may  be  added,  conspicuously. 

If  you  take  up  the  Revelation,  it  may  appear,  at  first  sight, 
all  a  maze  ;  but  this  is  not  so  at  all,  and  the  impression  arises 
from  ignorant  haste  or  fi-om  incajiacity  to  discern.  The  fact  is, 
that  people  bring  certain  feelings  or  wishes  with  them  to  the 
book,  instead  of  waiting  in  the  desire  to  know  what  God  thinks 
and  speaks  to  them  in  it.  But  we  take  the  highest  ground  for 
the  word  of  God,  and  maintain  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  only 
power  for  understanding  any  part  of  that  word.  Now,  whether 
for  a  man's  soul,  for  his  salvation  and  hopes,  for  his  practical 
guidance,  either  individually  or  corporately,  for  his  ways  in  the 
Church  or  in  the  world,  for  his  instruction  as  to  the  worship 
and  the  service  of  God,  or  even  as  to  his  relative  duties  on  earth, 
whatever  it  be,  there  is  divine  light  for  every  step  of  the  way, 
and  the  only  reason  why  we  do  not  all  see  it,  is  because  we 
have  not  the  single  eye  which  fiiitli  produces.  It  is  faith  that 
gets  the  blessing,  and  I  believe  that,  as  it  is  ever  true  that 
"  according  to  thy  faith  so  be  it  unto  thee,"  it  will  also  be  blind- 
ness according  to  the  measure  of  unbelief.  The  Lord  always 
gives  what  faith  counts  upon  from  Himself;  unbelief  inevitably 
finds  the  barrenness  that  it  deserves. 

To  return.  It  had  long  been  a  difficulty  to  me  how  we  could 
get  the  sealing  of  a  body  of  elect  Jews  and  the  vision  of  an 
innumerable  company  of  saved  Gentiles,  when  their  blessing- 
only  comes  at  a  later  part  of  the  book.*     But  the  moment  I 

*  Not  many  of  my  readers  will  be  more  disposed  than  myself  to  accept  Mr.  E.'s 
way  of  accounting  for  the  occurrence  of  the  sealing  and  palmbearing  visions  at 
this  particular  time  :  Augustine,  the  celebrated  Bishop  of  Hippo,  flourished  at 
the  date  to  whicli  he  applies  the  sixth  seal  or  rather  its  consequences !  Mr.  E, 
has  culled  from  his  copious  writings  whatever  might  be  supposed  to  strengthen 
this  far-fetched  idea,  and  certainly  it  would  bo  strange  if  in  so  large  a  field  he  did 


ELECTION    OUT   OF    ISRAEL,   AND    THE   GENTILES.  119 

learnt  that  it  was  all  a  parenthesis,  and  that  the  actiuil  time 
when  the  sealed  remnant  of  Israel  and  the  saved  Gentiles  come 
into  public  action  and  take  their  place  upon  the  stage,  is  another 
thing  altogether,  that  difficulty  was  at  an  end.  God,  for  our 
comfort,  while  the  judgments  are  going  on,  allows  the  curtain 
to  part  for  a  little  moment,  and  we  see  that  they  are  all  safe 
under  His  eye  and  ready  to  be  manifested  in  due  time.  But 
when  they  come  publicly  into  view  is  another  question.  In 
chap.  xiv.  there  is  a  body  spoken  of,  144,000,  of  whom  the 
Lamb  is  the  centre,  and  these  stand  with  Him  on  mount  Zion, 
having  His  name  and  His  Father's  name  written  on  their  fore- 
heads. That  body  is  evidently  similar  to,  though  not  the  same 
as,  the  144,000  that  we  have  here ;  and  perhaps  also  we  may 
compare,  but  not  identify,  the  "  nations"  in  Rev.  xxi.  24-26  with 
the  countless  host  of  Gentiles  here.  Still  more  striking  is  the 
resemblance  to  the  sheep  of  Matt.  x.  xv.,  because  these  are  not 
merely  the  blessed  Gentiles  of  the  millennial  day,  but  had  stood 
the  test  during  the  interval  of  grievous  trial  which  preceded  it. 
And  observe  that  the  sheep  in  that  passage  are  distinguished 
from  the  King's  brethren  who  have  a  position  yet  nearer  to 
Himself — Jewish  saints,  who,  after  the  Church  is  taken  to  heaven, 
will  be  entrusted  with  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  which  is  to  be 
preached  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness  to  all  nations  befoi'e  the 
end  comes.  Thus,  in  Matt.  xxv.  31-46,  Israelitish  brethren  of 
the  King,  just  before  the  close,  test  the  Gentiles,  who,  at  His 
appearing,  are  summoned  before  His  throne  and  discriminated  as 
blessed  or  cursed,  their  faith  or  unbelief  being  proved  by  the 
way  they  had  carried  themselves  towards  the  messengers  of  the 
coining  kingdom  in  the  time  of  their  sorrowful  testimony.  Mil- 
lions of  the  nations  will  be  born  during  the  peaceful  millennial 
reign,  for  whom  the  loosing  of  Satan  at  its  close  will  be  fatal. 

In  this  chapter,  then,  we  have  simply  two  striking  scenes,  con- 
nected in  sense  if  not  as  to  epoch,  outside  the  regular  march  of 
things.  The  Spirit  of  God,  who  laid  down  the  historical  order 
of  the  divine  judgments,  leaves  that  for  the  moment  and  shows 
us  that  God  has  mercy  in  store  even  in  the  coming  day  of  dis- 
tress.    Israel  will   be  in  frightful  circumstances  :    "  Jerusalem 

not  find  abundance  to  his  hand.  But  when  Mr.  E.  begs  "the  reader  to  pause  and 
consider  with  himself,  whether  he  can  possibly  imagine  any  two  symbolic  figura- 
tions that  would  more  exactly  symbolize  the  doctrinal  revelations  made  to  Augus- 
tine than  those  that  were  exhibited  at  the  exactly  correspondent  epoch  in  tho 
Patmos  visions,  to  the  representative  man  St.  John,"  I  must  answer  that  I  thiuk  if 
the  vision  of  the  holy  city  Jerusalem  had  been  inserted  after  the  sealing  and  instead 
of  the  palmbearers,  Mr.  E.  would  have  sung  yet  louder  in  praise  of  so  marvellous 
a  foreshadowing  of  Augustine's  great  work  De  Civitate  Dei.  Let  the  candid 
reader  judge. 


120  THE    SEALING    ANGEL,    NOT    CHRIST. 

shall  receive  of  the  Lord's  hand  double  for  all  her  sins."  As 
she  had  been  strong  in  her  hatred  against  the  Lord,  so  will  He 
reckon  that  His  vengeance  has  been  doubly  poured  forth  upon 
the  guilty  city.  We  have  had  judgments,  first  beginning  with 
comparatively  ordinary  events,  such  as  a  great  conqueror  going 
forth,  bloodshed,  famine,  God's  sore  plagues  ;  (death  referring 
to  the  body  and  hades  to  the  soul ;)  then  a  remorseless  outburst 
of  persecution  upon  God's  people  ;  next  a  universal  and  dread- 
ful convulsion  before  the  eyes  of  the  seer,  affecting  heaven, 
earth,  and  sea,  the  greatest  alarm  and  bewilderment  among 
men,  who  think  that  the  day  of  the  Lamb's  wrath  is  come.  But 
that  day  was  not  come  then.  When  it  does  arrive,  the  Lord 
will  execute  judgment  in  person  upon  the  dead  and  the  living. 
But  now  it  is  a  panic  which  leads  men  to  dread  judgment-day. 
And  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  the  nobles,  and  the  chieftains, 
and  the  rich,  and  the  mighty,  and  every  one,  bond  and  free,  were 
in  the  utmost  consternation. 

But  here  we  find  that  the  Lord  stops  and  draws  us  aside  for 
a  season  to  show  us  what  His  mercy  is  going  to  do.  "  [And] 
after  this  I  saw  four  ano-els  ....  holdino-  the  four  winds  of  the 
earth. '  They  are  kept  in  check  for  the  moment.  "  And  I  saw 
another  angel  ascending  from  the  east,  having  the  seal  of  the 
living  God  :  and  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  the  four  angels, 
to  whom  it  was  given  to  hurt  the  earth  and  the  sea,  saying,  Hurt 
not  the  earth,  neither  the  sea,  nor  the  trees,  till  we  have  sealed 
the  servants  of  our  God  on  their  foreheads."  (Ver.  2,  3.)  Some 
have  conceived  that  the  sealing  angel  is  Christ,  partly  because  it 
is  assumed  that  the  work  done  is  communicating  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  promise,  the  seal  of  redemption.  To  me  all  this  is  more  than 
doubtful.  It  is  not  till  we  reach  the  trumpet  series  that  our 
Lord  ever  assumes  the  angelic  form  and  title.  Whether  we  look 
■  at  the  seals,  or  at  the  parenthesis  between  the  two  last.  He  is 
invariably,  where  the  reference  is  certain,  spoken  of  as  the 
Lamb.  Again,  this  angel  rises  vp  from  the  sun's  rising.  I  can 
readily  apply  such  a  movement  to  angels  subject  to  the  Son  of 
man,  ascending  and  descending  to  do  His  pleasure.  But  when 
the  Lord  appears  in  angelic  garb,  He  either  ministers  as  High- 
priest  with  the  golden  censer,  or  He  comes  down  with  unmistake- 
able  tokens  and  proclamation  of  His  dominion  and  j)Ower.  In  the 
present  scene  nothing  is  said  which  unequivocally  reveals  His 
own  glory.  Much  has  been  made  of  the  phrase  "  till  we  have 
sealed,"  as  if  it  corresponded  with  the  allusion  to  the  persons  in 
the  Godhead,  as  in  Gen.  i.  26.  I  am  surprised  that  tiie  rest  of  the 
sentence  was  not  observed  to  be  incompatible  with  such  a  mean- 


THE    NUMBER    TWELVE    AS    A    SYMBOL.  12] 

ing.  Would  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost  (which  in  that  case 
would  be  the  sense)  say  "  till  we  have  the  sealed  the  servants  of 
our  God?''  The  idea  is  utterly  unfounded.  Nor  even  if  our 
Lord  exclusively  could  be  imagined  so  to  speak,  does  it  seem  to 
be  consistent  with  His  dignity.  He  teaches  His  disciples  to  say 
"  our  Father,"  but  does  not  say  it  with  them.  When  He  does  as- 
sociate them  with  Himself  risen  from  the  dead,  it  is  even  then 
"ilfy  Father  and  your  Father,  My  God  and  your  God" — never 
"  our  God." 

The  meaning,  then,  is,  that  before  the  various  judgments 
are  poured  out  upon  creation,  God  will  have  appropriated  a  cer- 
tain people  for  Himself.  They  are  sealed  with  the  seal  of  the 
living-  God — that  is,  a  character  is  put  upon  them  as  set  apart  to 
God.  Cain  had  a  very  different  mark  put  upon  him  by  Je- 
hovah :  that  was  to  screen  him  fi-om  man's  judgment.  Here 
also  protection  may  be  involved.  At  any  rate,  they  are  sealed 
on  their  foreheads,  which,  of  course,  means  no  physical  mark, 
but  God's  setting  them  apart  for  Himself,  and,  I  suppose,  publicly. 
Who  are  the  sealed  ones  ?  A  measured  remnant  from  His 
ancient  people. 

Thus,  the  angels  are  seen  restraining  the  judgments  that  are 
about  to  fall  on  all  creation,  and  we  have  the  seal  of  God  upon  a 
certain  chosen  number  out  of  Israel.  He  will  have  an  election 
from  that  people,  but  it  will  be  a  personal  and  individual  elec- 
tion—  not  a  merely  national  one,  as  of  old.  When  David 
attempted  to  number  the  people,  it  was  a  presumptuous  sin, 
but  here  it  is  the  grace  of  God  appropriating  a  complement  of 
the  tribes  of  Israel  to  Himself.  The  number  144,000  is  a 
regular  and  complete  number,  though  it  is  a  mystical  one,  us  I 
suppose,  with  a  view  to  God's  use  of  the  favoured  nation  here 
below.  The  number  twelve  always  has  a  reference  to  what  is 
perfect  for  God's  accomplishment  of  His  work,  administered  by 
man.  This  may  be  seen  in  the  tv>'elve  tribes  of  Israel,  twelve 
patriarchs,  twelve  apostles,  and  even  the  twelve  gates,  and 
twelve  foundations  of  the  New  Jerusalem.  It  is  a  perfect  num- 
ber where  human  administration  comes  in.  Hence,  vdien  the 
nation  of  Israel  are  to  be  brought  in  again,  it  is  the  multiple  of 
twelve  that  we  have,  and  this  expressed  in  thousands  ;  the  full 
result,  as  far  as  Israel  is  concerned,  of  the  administration  that 
God  will  commit  to  man. 

An  important  question  has  been  raised  here,  whether  the  tribes 
of  Israel  are  to  be  interpreted  literally  or  mystically.  For  the 
latter  sense  it  is  argued,  that  the  very  first  vision  of  the  seven 
candlesticks,  borrowed  from  the  Jewish  sanctuary,  and  the  alln- 


122  ARE   THE   TWELVE   TRIBES 

sions  in  the  seven  epistles  that  follow,  but  more  particularly  in 
chap.  iii.  12  compared  with  chap.  xxi.  12,  sustain  the  Christian 
meaning  throughout  the  book.  But  does  not  such  reasoning 
overlook  the  fact  that  the  application  of  Jewish  emblems  to  the 
churches,  while  they  are  expressly  spoken  of  here  below,  and  of 
others  to  the  Church,  either  glorified  above  or  following  Christ 
out  of  heaven  in  the  day  of  the  Lord,  is  totally  distinct  from  the 
question  whether  certain  symbols,  taken  from  Israel,  may  not 
also  apply  to  a  different  class  of  witnesses  on  earth  between  those 
two  points?  The  real  question  is  about  the  interval,  when 
churches  are  no  longer  spoken  of  and  before  the  bride  appears 
with  the  Bridegroom  in  glory.  To  state  the  question  aright  is 
enough  to  show  the  inconclusiveness  of  the  argument,  as  applied, 
not  to  Rev.  i.,  ii.,  iii.,  nor  in  Rev.  xxi.  12,  where  in  the  main  we 
all  agree,  but  to  the  prophetic  visions  from  chap.  vi.  onward. 

Besides,  it  is  allowed  by  the  more  intelligent  of  the  historical 
school  that,  about  the  close  of  the  age,  the  Jews  will  be  con- 
verted and  take  the  lead  in  the  earthly  song  of  praise  on  the 
occasion.  This  may  be  put  too  late  in  the  book  and  founded  on 
the  feeble  evidence  of  the  occurrence  of  the  Hebreiv  word  "  Hal- 
lelujah" in  Rev.  xix.  3.  Still  the  fact  is  admitted — an  Apoca- 
lyptic prophecy  of  that  which  is  to  happen  before  the  appearing 
of  the  Lord.  What  is  more,  a  large  part  of  the  same  school,* 
represented  by  one  of  their  most  popular  books,  (Bp.  Newton's 
Dissertationson  the  Prophecies,  Works  1.,  pp.  578,  579,)  under- 
stand the  tribes  of  Israel  to  be  meant  in  their  natural  historical 
import  and  apply  the  prophecy  to  the  vast  influx  of  converted 
Jews  in  the  reign  of  Constantine.  In  fact,  the  earliest  Christian 
writer  who  alludes  to  the  chapter,  Irenaeus,  the  pious  Bishop  of 
Lyons,  unhesitatingly  solves  the  omission  of  Dan  so  as  to  prove 
that  he  considered  the  actual  tribes  of  Israel  to  be  meant.  So 
also  speaks  Victorinus,  in  one  passage  at  least  of  the  earliest 
extant  commentary  on  the  book.  Others  soon  began  to  veer 
towards  the  allegorizing  method,  till  at  length  the  anti-Judaic 
theory  became  much  the  more  general  view. 

But  it  may  be  well  to  notice  briefly  the  reasons  alleged  by 
one   of  the   ablest   advocates  of  the  mystical   class — Vitringa. 

*  Mr.  Birks  widely  differs  from  Mr.  Elliott,  and  this  too,  in  perhaps  the  most 
acrimonious  attack  ever  made  on  futuro-literalism.  Even  Mr.  B.  confesses  that 
"in  the  abstract,  it  can  neither  be  unreasonable  nor  improbable  that  they  should  be 
a  direct  object  of  the  prophecy,  and,  since  no  more  appropriate  symbol  could  bo 
found  for  them,  that  they  should  be,  so  to  speak,  their  own  emblem.  Those  who 
view  the  book  in  general  as  symbolical,  may,  therefore,  without  inconsistency,  con- 
ceive literal  Jews  to  be  designed."  (Elements  of  Prophecy,  pp.  256,  257,  the 
"masterly  work"  in  which,  according  to  Mr.  E.,  the  writer  has  shown  himself  the 
martel  and  hamme)'  of  truth  against  the  reveries  of  the  futurists.) 


MYSTICAL   OR    LITERAL?  123 

First,  he  argues  that  if  the  names  were  to  be  taken  in  the  letter, 
so  must  the  number.  But  does  this  follow  ?  And  if  it  were  a 
necessity,  what  is  to  hinder  ?  He  who  reserved  7,000  in  Elijah's 
day  may  seal  144,000  of  Israel  at  a  future  epoch.  But  I  see  no 
need  for  this.  The  people  might  be  literal,  the  number  symboli- 
cal, without  difficulty  save  to  one  fascinated  by  the  love  of 
excessive  simplification.  It  is  not  denied  that  symbols  exist,  nor 
that  they  yield  a  determinate  sense  ;  but  to  look  for  a  sort  of 
pictorial  consistency  in  all  the  parts  is  contrary  to  the  facts  every 
where.  Moreover,  what  could  be  the  meaning  of  a  mystical 
Reuben,  Gad,  Asher,  &c  ?  Nobody  that  I  know  pretends  to 
assign  a  distinctive  signification,  unless  persons  in  the  last  degree 
fanciful.  Yet,  if  they  are  to  be  so  taken,  one  might  expect  each 
to  have  a  meaning,  which  is  looked  for  in  vain  in  those  who 
plead  strenuously  for  the  general  idea.  Next,  it  is  urged  that  by 
the  sealed  must  be  understood  God's  elect,  who  are  to  be  pre- 
served from  an  otherwise  universal  calamity  ;  and  who  can  assert 
these  to  be  Jews  only  ?  But  who  affirms  that  none  are  elect 
save  these?  We  shall  see  presently  that  the  scope  of  the 
prophecy  and  the  connexion  of  the  passage  intimate  the  contrary. 
The  false  assumption  therefore  is,  not  that  the  sealed  thousands 
are  out  of  the  actual  tribes  of  Israel  only,  but  that  there  will  be 
no  other  saints  but  these.  Thirdly,  the  omission  of  Dan  seems 
to  be  at  least  as  great  a  difficulty  on  the  mystical  as  on  the  literal 
hypothesis.  In  the  blessing  of  Moses  (Deut.  xxxiii.)  Simeon  is 
left  out.  Is  this  list  of  the  tribes,  then,  to  be  taken  allegorically  ? 
Fourthly,  the  alleged  parallel  text,  Rev.  xiv.  1,  by  no  means 
proves  that  the  tribes  are  not  literally  of  Israel.  The  144,000  in 
chap.  xiv.  are  saints  on  earth,  not  long  before  the  final  catas- 
trophe, and  in  contrast  with  those  defiled  by  Babylon  and 
enslaved  by  the  Beast.  But  that  they  are  the  Church,  rather 
than  a  godly  remnant  of  Israelites,  associated  in  the  Spirit's  mind 
with  the  suffering  but  now  exalted  Christ,  is  what  writers  of  this 
stamp  have  never  even  fairly  weighed,  much  less  have  they 
decided  one  way  or  the  other. 

On  the  other  hand,  I  conceive  that  the  specification  of  the 
tribes  is  inconsistent  with  any  sense  but  the  literal.  Then,  again, 
the  contradistinction  is  as  plain  and  positive  as  words  can  make 
it,  between  the  sealed  numbers  out  of  Israel  and  the  innumerable 
multitude  from  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people  and  tongues. 
So  that  the  mystical  theory,  when  closely  examined,  cannot 
escape  the  charge  of  absurdity  ;  for  it  identifies  the  sealed 
Israelites  with  the  palm-bearing  Gentiles,  spite  of  the  evident 
and  express  contrast  on  the  face  of  the  chapter.     This  results 


124  THE    INNUMERABLE    GENTILE    MULTITUDE 

from  trying  to  make  out  that  tlie  Gentile  crowd  consists  of  all 
the  aggregaled  generations  of  the  elect  from  the  tribes.  As  to 
the  sealed  ones,  not  a  hint  appears  of  a  succession  :  indeed,  the 
command  to  suspend  the  action  of  the  four  winds,  till  after  the 
sealing,  implies  the  contrary.  It  was  a  precise  limited  hour,  as 
it  was  a  special  class.  But  what  clenches  the  matter  is  that  the 
palm-bearing  Gentiles  (i.e.  according  to  some,  the  Christian 
Church  in  its  hecwenhj  completeness)  are  all  described  as  coming 
out  o^  the  great  tribulation — a  tribuhition  which  even  they  view  as 
following  the  days  of  Constantino.  Thus,  to  my  mind,  all  is 
strong  and  conclusive  tliat  the  sealed  here  are  literal  Israelites — 
not  only  of  Israel,  but  Israel,  the  Israel  of  God  ;  as  the  mystical 
reading  of  the  first  part  of  the  cha])ter,  with  the  literal  under- 
standing of  the  rest,  involves  its  advocates  in  consequences  the 
more  gross  where  it  is  most  systematically  pursued. 

With  regard  to  the  tribes  mentioned,  there  is  a  certain  pecu- 
liarity, on  which  I  can  say  little.  There  are  the  sons  of  the 
various  wives  of  Jacob  :  first,  the  two  sons  of  Leah,  Judah  and 
Reuben;  then  of  Zil[)ah,  Leah's  maid,  Gad  and  Asher ;  then 
Napthali,  tlie  son  of  the  maid  Bilhah,  and  instead  of  Dan,  her 
other  son,  Manasseh,  Joseph's  firstborn,  is  substituted.  Then 
there  are  the  four  sons  of  Leah,  Simeon,  Levi,  Issachar,  and 
Zebulun  ;  and  finally,  the  sons  of  Rachel,  Joseph  and  Benjamin. 
Clearly  we  have  the  sons  arranged  according  to  the  different 
mothers,  the  offspi'ing  of  the  bond-women  being  intermingled 
with  that  of  the  free.  Dan,  who  had  been  the  most  conspicu- 
ous for  idolatry,  is  left  out,  and  instead  of  Ephraim,  the  younger 
son  of  JosepJi,  Joseph  himself  appears.  We  find  here  the 
called  of  Israel,  but  the  tribiis  numbered  and  arranged  in  a  sin- 
gular manner.  They  are  no  longer  merely  taken  up  in  a  natural 
way,  according  to  the  order  of  birth,  but  God  seems  to  intimate 
that  He  would  make  them  a  spiritual  people  also,  stamped 
with  His  seal.  They  will  then  be  Israelites  indeed,  in  whom 
is  no  guile.    Nor  is  Dan,  at  last,  disinherited.  (Ezek.  xlviii.  1,  32.) 

Nor  this  only  ;  He  is  also  going  to  save  a  multitude  of  Gen- 
tiles, and  here  there  is  no  numbering.  That  is  a  most  refreshing 
thouoht  from  its  lar<>eness.  For  thoujih  from  them  God  is 
now  gathering  a  people  to  His  name,  yet  when  we  think  of  the 
multitudes  that  are  immersed  in  darkness,  the  myriads  on 
myriads  of  men  in  heathen  countries,  a  handful  —  yea,  perhaps 
but  one — among  them,  here  and  there,  having  the  knowdedge 
of  God,  it  is  an  afflicting  and  humbling  reflection.  But  is  it  not 
remarkable  that  when  God  is  to  show  us  the  increasing  wicked- 
ness of  both  Jew  and  Gentile,  and   when  His  judgments   are 


DISTINCT    FROM    THE    CHURCH.  125 

about  to  fall,  we  find  thei'e  is  this  multitude  of  Israel  numbered 
with  the  greatest  care,  and  God  not  forgetful  of  the  poor  Gen- 
tiles? They  may  not  be  pat  in  the  same  high  place  as  the 
Jews,  but  God  will  Ijless  them  wonderfully,  notwithstanding. 
But  the  prophet  who  had  just  known  the  election  of  Israel 
sealed  and  had  heard  the  number  of  them,  has  to  turn  to  one 
of  the  elders  in  order  to  learn  who  the  countless  company  are. 
They  were  to  John  a  nevv  unknown  crowd  among  the  blessed. 
If  they  were  sealed  on  their  foreheads,  is  it  reasonable  that  they 
should  just  after  seem  so  sti-ange  ? 

The  multitude  spoken  of  here  is  distinct  from,  if  not  in  con- 
trast with,  the  Church  ;  and  it  is  thus  that  we  know  this 
clearly.  The  elders  represent  the  heavenly  saints  as  the  heads 
of  priesthood.  Now,  God  might  use  two  different  symbols  to 
mean  the  same  body  ;  as,  for  instance,  the  wise  virgins  and  the 
good  and  faithful  servants  in  Matt,  xxv.,  are  successive  repre- 
sentatives of  the  heavenly  saints.  But  here  we  have  the  Gentile 
multitude  and  the  elders  given  as  distinct  parties  in  the  same 
scene.  Again,  you  have  the  elders  doing  one  thing  and  the 
multitude  doing  another.  Above  all,  note  that  the  way  in 
which  God  speaks  of  this  multitude  totally  separates  them 
both  from  the  Church  of  God  and  from  the  Old  Testament 
saints.  This  cannot  be  so  clearly  seen  in  our  authorized  trans- 
lation, but  the  right  version  in  verse  14  is  this  :  "  These  are 
they  which  come  out  of  the  great  tribulation."  I  could  under- 
stand, of  course,  that  as  a  figure  the  whole  of  this  dispensation 
might  be  called  a  time  of  tribulation,  or  even  of  great  tribula- 
tion. But  here  it  is  not  merely  said,  "These  are  they  which 
came  out  of  great  tribulation,"  but  "out  of  the  great  tribula- 
tion." It  is  not  possible  to  make  ^^  the  great  tribulation'  extend 
over  all  the  time  between  the  first  and  second  comings  of  Christ. 
Even  the  vague  Protestant  interpreters  make  it  specific,  but 
apply  it,  as  is  natural  in  them,  to  the  fierce  persecutions  of  the 
Papacy — "  the  great  predicted  tribulation  of  the  coming  apostacy 
and  Antichrist."  The  phrase  means  a  special  time  of  trouble, 
and  we  gather  from  elsewhere,  that  it  is  yet  to  come  ;  and 
it  is  exactly  this  time  that  the  central  part  of  the  Revelation 
includes,  and  chiefly  covers.  In  the  epistle  to  Thyatira  it  was 
said,  "  Behold  I  will  cast  her  into  a  bed,  and  them  that  commit 
adultery  with  her  into  great  tribulation,  except  they  repent  of 
their  deeds."  I  have  a  strong  suspicion  that  this  gi-eat  tribula- 
tion is  to  l)e  fulfilled  now.  The  scene  of  the  Church  is  closed,  the 
great  tribulation  comes  on  apace,  and  those  who  had  professed 
Christianity,   but  who  had   gone  back  into  idolatry,  would   be 


126  THE    GREAT    TRIBULATION 

cast  into  it  with  others.  Thus,  what  God  shows  us  here  is  a  mul- 
titude of  saved  Gentiles :  not  the  Jews,  for  we  have  had  them 
just  before ;  and  not  Christians,  for  these  will  then  be  in  heaven. 
Those  are  a  Gentile  body,  called  after  the  Church  is  taken  up  ; 
they  are  to  be  in  the  great  tribulation,  but  shall  be  preserved 
through  it. 

We  shall  find  the  great  tribulation  spoken  of  in  several  parts 
of  the  word  of  God.  In  Jeremiah,  it  is  named  in  connexion  with 
the  Jews.  (Jer.  xxx.  6.)  "  Alas  !  for  that  day  is  great,  so  that 
that  none  is  like  it ;  it  is  even  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble,  but 
he  shall  be  saved  out  of  it."  There  is  to  be  a  time  of  excessive 
anguish,  which  closes  Avith  the  day  of  the  Lord,  and  Jacob  is  to 
be  saved  out  of  it ;  so  that  there  you  have  the  Jew  in  trouble, 
and  the  Jew  delivered  out  of  it.  But  in  Daniel  it  is  still  more 
explicit.  (Dan.  xii.)  The  angel  speaks  of  Daniel's  otvn  people, 
the  Jews,  "  At  that  time  ....  there  shall  be  a  time  of  trouble, 
such  as  never  was  since  there  was  a  nation,  even  to  that  same 
time  :  and  at  that  time  thy  people  shall  be  delivered,  every  one 
that  shall  be  found  written  in  the  book."  This  is  "  the  time  of 
Jacob's  trouble,  but  he  shall  be  saved  out  of  it."  It  is,  evi- 
dently, a  plain  counterpart  of  the  words  of  Jeremiah.  I  draw 
from  this  that  there  is  to  be  a  future  time  of  "  trouble"  "  such 
as  never  was"— -the  immediate  precursor  of  deliverance  for  Jacob's 
people,  as  spoken  of  in  these  projjhecies. 

In  Matthew  xxiv.  the  Lord  Himself  refers  to  it  :  "  For  then 
shall  be  great  tribulation,  such  as  was  not  since  the  beginning  of 
the  world  to  this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be."  Evidently  there 
we  have  the  same  time,  the  Lord  quoting  the  ver}^  passage  in 
Daniel.  It  is  quite  plain  that  He  is  speaking  only  of  Jews, 
because  they  are  supposed  to  be  connected  with  the  temple,  and 
they  are  told  to  pray  that  their  flight  be  not  on  the  sabbath  day, 
in  which  case  they  could  not  go  beyond  a  sabbath  day's  journey, 
nor  in  winter.  In  either  case,  there  would  be  a  hindrance  to 
their  flight,  whether  on  God's  part,  or  in  the  circumstances  of 
the  season.  We  have  the  same  thing  referred  to  in  Mark,  but 
Luke  seems  to  speak  in  a  more  general  way.  What  parties, 
then,  are  to  be  in  the  scene  of  the  tribulation  ?  First,  a  Jewish 
one,  spoken  of  in  the  prophets  and  the  gospels,  the  object  of 
God's  care,  who  will  deal  tenderly  with  a  remnant  of  Israel, 
and  deliver  him  out  of  his  distresses.  Then  in  Rev.  vii.  9,  we 
hear  of  a  Gentile  multitude.     But  neither  party  is  the  Church. 

Never  have  we  God  dealing  thus  with  the  Jew  and  with  the 
Gentile  as  such,  and  forming  the  Church  at  the  same  time  ;  for 
then  God  would  have  at  least  two,  if  not  three,  objects, — not 


FOR    ISRAEL   AND    THE   GENTILES.  127 

various  only,  but  opposite  objects, —  of  special  affection  on  the 
earth,  at  the  same  time,  with  quite  diiferent  modes  and  aims  of 
action.  Suppose  there  were  two  persons,  whom  the  Lord  w^as 
bringing  near  to  Himself.  If  He  were  dealing  with  the  Jew, 
He  would  acknowledge  an  earthly  temple,  priesthood  and  wor- 
ship. The  Lord  acknowledged  the  Jews,  as  such,  when  He 
was  upon  earth,  and  He  will  do  so,  in  a  still  more  blessed  way, 
in  the  day  that  is  coming.  But  as  long  as  the  Lord  is  occupied 
with  forming  the  Church,  Jewish  order  ceases  to  have  any  claim. 
Thus,  then,  supposing  that  God  were  blessing  the  Jews  as  Jews, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  forming  the  Church  on  earth,  if  two 
persons  were  converted,  the  one  might  say,  I  must  still  have  my 
priest  and  go  to  the  temple  ;  while  another  would  exclaim. 
There  is  no  priest  but  Christ,  and  the  temple  is  in  heaven.  See 
the  confusion  that  would  spring  from  God's  owning  an  earthly 
and  a  heavenly  people  at  the  same  time  here  below.  In  this 
time  of  tribulation,  when  the  Lord  will  recognize  the  Jew  (i.e. 
the  godly  remnant)  in  a  certain  sense,  the  Church  will  not  be 
in  the  scene.  The  objects  of  deliverance  will  be  elect  Jews  and 
elect  Gentiles,  each  distinct  from  the  other,  and  not  the  Church 
of  God,  where  both  are  united  and  all  distinctions  disappear.  We 
have  seen  direct  proof  of  the  removal  of  the  Church  in  chaps, 
iv.  V.  Here  there  is  indirect  evidence,  because  we  have  Jews 
sealed  and  Gentiles  saved,  and  the  latter  expressly  distinguished 
from  the  elders  or  heavenly  saints.  The  sealing  of  the  Jews 
included  the  .election  from  the  whole  twelve  tribes  of  Israel, 
except  where  there  was  a  special  brand  of  evil,  as  in  the  case  of 
Dan.  But  the  moment  we  find  the  Jew,  we  have  God  looking 
also,  though  separately,  at  the  nations  ;  because,  having  once 
visited  the  Gentile  with  His  mercy.  He  will  never  take  it  back. 
Thus,  when  here  He  speaks  of  mercy  to  a  complement  of  Israel, 
there  is  also  salvation  to  a  multitude  out  of  every  nation,  and 
kindred,  and  people,  and  tongue. 

We  saAv  that  if  the  guilty  Christian  professors  went  on  in 
their  sin  with  Jezebel,  they  would  be  given  up,  and  would  be  left 
to  go  through  great  tribulation.  Here  we  find  the  great  tribu- 
lation come,  and  not  only  are  Israelites  sealed,  but  a  multitude 
of  Gentiles  are  delivered  out  of  it.  The  Old  Testament  does 
not  speak  of  Gentiles  being  delivered  out  of  it,  but  Jews. 
Meantime,  God  has  been  sending  salvation  to  the  Gentiles. 
Hence,  in  the  New  Testament  prophecy  Gentile  deliverance  is 
as  prominent,  as  Jewish  deliverance  is  in  the  Old  Testament. 
God  shows  that,  in  the  last  days.  He  is  going  to  save  a  vast 
throng  of  Gentiles.     But  will  it  be  so  in  these  countries  where 


128  BEFORE    THE    THRONE WHAT? 

the  light  of  the  gospel  has  shone  and  has  been  despised  ?  "  They 
received  not  the  love  of  the  truth,  that  they  might  be  saved. 
And  for  this  cause  God  shall  send  them  sti'ong  delusion,  that 
they  should  believe  a  lie  :  that  they  all  might  be  damned  who 
believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  unrighteousness." 
(2  Thess.  ii.  10-12.)  God  will  visit  those  who  have  not 
enjoyed  this  testimony,  the  extern  peoples  who  have  not  had 
Christ  rightly  presented  to  theni.  The  Church  has  completely 
failed  in  what  God  looks  for  from  us.  He  called  upon  the 
Church  to  take  up  the  cross  and  to  follow  Christ ;  but  the 
Church  has,  in  practice,  given  up  the  cross  and  followed  the 
world.  All  this  has  hardened  the  heathen,  who  find  that  the 
Church  does  not  brino-  forth  the  fruits  that  are  suitable  to  the 
grace  and  truth  which  we  profess  to  have  found  in  Christ,  But 
God,  in  His  fulness  of  mercy,  will  go  to  those  outside.  Thus, 
I  believe  that  these  very  countries  which  have  set  themselves 
up  as  the  centre  from  whence  the  light  emanates,  will  then  be 
in  antichristian  idolatry,  while  those  which  have  been  in  darkness 
will  come  out  into  light.  It  will  only  be  the  tale  of  Galilee  of 
the  nations  again,  when  Jerusalem  despised  and  lost  the  Son  of 
God — alas  !  how  long. 

Here  we  see  the  blessed  result.  There  will  be  this  innumer- 
able multitude  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  peoples,  and 
tongues,  who  stand  before  the  throne*  and  before  the  Lamb. 
Theirs  are  the  robes  of  righteousness,t  and  their  palms  are  the 

*  John's  vision  of  them  there  does  not  imply  that  they  are  to  be  in  heaven, 
rather  than  on  the  earth,  when  the  kingdom  comes.  "  Before  the  throne  and 
before  the  Lamb  "  is  moral  rather  than  local.  (Compare  Rev.  xii.  1  ;  xiv.  3.)  It 
merely  expresses  where  the  prophet  beholds  them  in  the  mind  of  Grod.  The  des- 
cription with  which  the  chapter  closes  conveys  the  idea  of  people  delivered  from 
bitter  sorrow,  and  sheltered  for  ever.  No  doubt,  this  will  be  inexpressible  com- 
fort to  them:  but  nothing  they  say  rises  to  the  height  of  the  joy  and  intelligence 
which  are  seen  in  the  elders,  nor  is  anything  said  of  them  which  at  all  sets  them 
on  equal  ground  with  these.  They  are  never  presented  with  crowns  nor  seated 
on  thrones  like  the  twenty-four.  They  are  in  relationship  with  God  when  He  is  no 
longer  viewed  as  seated  on  a  throne  of  grace,  such  as  we  know  now,  but  as  on  a 
throne  whence  judgments  proceed.  All  harmonizes  with  the  interval  of  introduc- 
tory government  which  precedes  the  millennium. 

t  It  has  been  sought  to  draw  out  the  contrast  between  these  Gentiles  in  Rev. 
vii.  and  our  own  position  in  Rsv.  i.  5,  6,  bj^  dwelling  on  the  different  statements, 
that  they  washed  tlieir  robes,  and  that  lie  washed  us.  But  such  comparisons 
often  lead  to  grave  misconception,  as  indeed  this  has  done.  I  wish,  therefore, 
explicitly  to  state  my  own  convictions,  (in  which,  doubtless,  the  writer  referred 
to  would  cordially  join,)  that  the  salvation  of  all  the  saved  at  all  times  depends 
on  the  work  of  Christ,  and  that  the  Spirit  is  the  only  efficacious  applier  of  it  to 
any  soul.  The  real  question  is  as  to  the  various  dealings  of  God  and  His  sove- 
reign arrangements  among  the  saved.  Scripture,  in  my  opinion,  is  quite  clear  aa 
to  all  this,  if  men  would  but  give  up  preconceived  notions  and  wait  on  God  for 
the  answer. 


AND    WHO  ?  129 

palms  of  victory  ;  but  they  do  not  sing  the  new  song.  There  is 
nothing  hke  the  high  and  exulting  tone  of  chap,  v.,  no  interces- 
sion for  others,  nay,  not  a  word  of  being  made  kings  and  priests 
to  God.  They  cry  with  a  loud  voice,  "  Salvation  unto  our  God 
who  sitteth  upon  the  throne  and  unto  the  Lamb."  They  are 
saved  persons,  but  the  ascription  is  limited  to  the  title  that  He 
takes  upon  the  throne  and  to  the  Lamb.  God  is  not  now  sitting 
upon  the  throne  that  is  described  here :  at  least  it  is  not  thus 
He  revenls  Himself  while  the  Church  is  on  eai'th.  He  will  by  and 
by  take  His  place  there  as  One  issuing  judgments  ;  and  the  great 
point  seems  to  be,  that,  although  it  is  a  time  of  preparatory  wrath 
and  judicial  action,  yet  God  is  showing  signal  mercy,  even  to 
Gentiles.  In  verse  13,  we  have  the  elders  looking  upon  the 
scene.  How  could  they  be  looking  upon  themselves  t  Yet 
this  must  be  the  case,  if  the  elders  and  the  innumerable  multitude 
are  both  supposed  to  set  forth  the  Church.  We  have  t\vo  dis- 
tinct parties.  If  the  elders  are  the  Church,  the  multitude  is  not; 
and  if  the  multitude  is,  then  the  elders  cannot  be.  I  well  under- 
stand a  man  having  a  picture  taken  of  himself  in  one  suit  of 
clothing  at  one  time  and  in  a  different  suit  at  another.  But  we 
could  not  possibly  have  a  portrait  of  a  man  taken  at  the  same 
moment  Mdth  two  different  sets  of  robes  upon  him,  so  as  to 
display  distinct  characters,  and  fulfil  opposite  functions  together. 

In  the  Church  of  God  which  is  being  called  now,  there  is 
neither  Jew  nor  Gentile.  The  moment  you  find  the  distinction 
kept  up  between  them,  there  cannot  be  the  Church.  Whenever 
you  separate  the  Jew  from  the  Gentile,  you  are  off  Church 
ground.  Before  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  God  was 
not  forming  Jew  and  Gentile  into  one  body.  Thus,  even  when 
the  Lord  Jesus  was  upon  earth,  He  forbade  His  disciples  to  go 
to  the  Gentiles,  or  so  much  as  to  enter  the  Samai-itan  cities. 
But  when  He,  the  beginning,  the  firstborn  from  the  dead,  was 
about  to  form  the  Church,  He  charged  them  to  go  everywhere 
and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,  instead  of  merely  seeking 
out  him  that  was  worthy  in  Israel.  Thus,  a  complete  change 
was  evinced  in  the  ways  of  God,  not  as  if  He  knew  not  the  end 
from  the  beginning,  but  with  a  view  to  fresh  displays  of  His 
glory  in  His  Son.  So,  too,  when  the  present  calling  closes.  His 
mercy  will  flow  out  in  fresh  channels,  as  we  have  seen. 

I  trust,  then,  it  has  been  shown  plainly  that  the  subject  of  this 
chapter  is  not  the  Church,  but  Israel  and  the  Gentiles  blessed 
as  such.  Indeed,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say,  that,  if  any  person 
supposed  Rev.  vii.  treated  of  the  Church,  it  would  argue  that 
he  had  no  true  idea  of  its  nature  and  calling — that  he  had  no 
10 


130  THE    CHURCH    OF    GOD — WHAT  ? 

conception  of  what  the  Holy  Ghost  connects  with  the  body  of 
Christ  here  below.*     The  Church  of  God  is  essentially  a  heavenly 

*  The  following  extract  from  Dr.  John  Owen's  Prelim.  Dissert,  to  his  Comment, 
on  the  Hebrews  (Exer.  ri.)  is  endorsed  with  strong  commendation  by  a  living 
Professor  of  Theology,  and  may  serve  as  evidence  of  the  darkness  that  reigns  on 
the  subject.  "  At  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  there  was  not  one  church  taken 
away,  and  another  set  up  in  its  room  ;  but  the  Church  continued  the  same,  in 
those  that  were  the  children  of  Abraham  according  to  the  faith.  The  Christian 
church  is  not  another  church,  but  the  very  same  that  was  before  the  coming  of 
Christ,  having  the  same  faith  with  it,  and  interested  in  the  same  covenant.  The 
olive  tree  was  the  same  ;  only  some  branches  were  broken  and  others  grafted  into 
it :  the  Jews  fell,  and  the  Gentiles  came  in  their  room.  And  this  doth  and  must 
determine  the  difierence  between  the  Jews  and  Christians  about  the  promises  of 
the  Old  Testament.  They  are  all  made  unto  the  Church.  No  individual  hath  any 
interest  in  them,  but  by  virtue  of  his  membership  with  the  Church.  This  church 
is,  and  always  was,  one  and  the  same.  With  whomsoever  it  remains,  the  pro- 
mises are  theirs  ;  and  that,  not  by  application  or  analogy,  but  directly  and 
properly.  They  belong  as  immediately  at  this  day,  either  to  Jews  (?)  or  Christians, 
as  tliey  did  of  old  to  any.  The  question  is  with  whom  is  this  church,  which  is 
founded  on  the  promised  seed  in  the  covenant ;  for  where  it  is,  there  is  Zion, 
Jerusalem,  Israel,  Jacob,  the  temple  of  God."  There  is  not  a  clause  that  is  not 
an  error  ;  for  even  where  there  is  a  certain  substratum  of  truth,  the  use  is  falla- 
cious. The  Judaising  of  the  church  on  this  scheme  is  complete.  The  truth  is 
that  Dr.  O.  confounds  the  calling  of  the  church,  according  to  the  mystery  hid 
from  ages  and  generations,  with  the  earthly  order  in  which  the  promises  are 
administered.  Thus,  the  doctrine  of  Ephesians,  Colossians,  and  other  such  scrip- 
tures, is  left  out  and  unknown  ;  that  is,  the  doctrine  of  a  body  united  to  Christ 
its  glorified  head,  and  manifested  on  earth  by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from 
heaven.  Such  a  state  of  things  did  not  exist  before  Christ's  first  advent,  nor  can 
it  be  alter  His  second.  As  to  the  inheritance  of  the  promises,  we  share  this 
with  the  saints  of  old,  but  it  is  not  our  peculiar  place  of  blessing.  The  church, 
as  such,  is  quite  a  distinct  thing,  though  the  members  of  it  are,  with  others,  heirs 
through  Christ.  So  with  the  olive  tree  ;  doubtless  the  Gentiles  are  now  graffed 
in  but  is  it  possible  a  spiritual  man  could  confound  this  with  the  body  of  Christ  ? 
The  Jews  were  natural  branches,  the  olive  was  their  own  olive  tree  :  even  the 
unbelieving  branches  formed  part  of  it,  though  at  length  broken  off  to  let  Gentiles 
in.  Does  one  word  of  this  bring  out  the  church  as  shown  in  Ephes.  i.  ii.  ?  Is 
not  all  above  nature  here  ?  In  that  one  body,  it  is  not  Jews  making  way  for 
Gentiles,  but  the  believers,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  brought  out  of  their  old 
previous  condition,  reconciled  in  one  by  the  cross,  and  builded  together  for  an 
habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit.  All  this  is  neutralised  by  Dr.  Owen's 
theory. — At  least,  as  regards  the  future,  Mr.  Elliott  renounces  it.  "The  Church 
of  the  firstborn,  the  bride,  may  be  complete  ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  none 
afterwards  can  be  saved.  What  is  said  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  walking  in  the 
light  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  seems  to  me  to  imply  an  enjoyment  of  the  bless- 
ing by  other  parties,  beside  tliose  that  constitute  Christ's  bride,  the  New  Jeru- 
salem. '  The  very  statement  of  Christ's  being  a  priest  upon  his  throne  (if  appli- 
cable, as  I  think  it  is,  to  the  millennial  era)  implies  Christ's  still  exercising  his 
intercessory  and  other  priestly  functions.  And  if  I  am  correct  in  my  view  of 
John  xvii.  21,  23,  it  was  a  marked  point  in  his  earliest  intercessory  prayer  that 
the  world's  believing  on  him,  generally,  might  be  the  result  of  the  distinctive 
manifestation  in  glory  of  the  Church  of  his  disciples  of  the  present  dispensation; 

that  manifestation  which,   as   all   agree,   will   be  only  at  his   second  coming." 

(H.  A.  IV.,  p.  187.)  Every  one  must  allow  that  in  the  millennium  the  olive-tree 
will  flourish  more  than  over,  and  the  Abrahamic  promises  bo  fulfilled  to  the  letter. 
If,  then,  the  Church,   Christ's  bride,  is  distinct  from  the  millennial  saints,  albeit 


THE    JEW,    THE    GENTILE,    AND    THE    CHURCH    OF    GOD.      131 

body  that  entirely  sets  aside  all  distinction  of  Jew  and  Gentile. 
The  scope,  if  not  object,  of  this  chapter  shows  that  these  dis- 
tinctions reappear  at  the  time  that  is  refen-ed  to.  We  have  first 
a  numbered  company  of  Israel,  then  an  innumerable  crowd  out 
of  the  Gentiles.  Besides  these,  that  class  of  the  redeemed  formed 
out  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  long-  familiar  to  us  in  this  book, 
namely,  the  crowned  elders,  are  seen  as  a  distinct  body  altogether. 
Thus  we  have,  in  this  chapter,  "  the  Jew,  the  Gentile,  and  the 
Church  of  God" — sealed  Jews  and  saved  Gentiles,  for  the  earth, 
as  I  suppose,  and  the  Church  with  the  Old  Testament  saints 
preserved  for  heavenly  glory.  While  the  elect  of  the  twelve 
tribes  are  said  to  have  great  mercy  shown  them,  and  the  Gen- 
tiles too,  who  might  have  been  thought  to  be  forgotten  then 
(ver.  14-17) ;  yet  it  is  not  the  same  exalted  privilege  that  we 
shall  enjoy.  "They,"  i.e.,  these  spared  Gentiles,  "serve  day 
and  night  in  his  temple."  But  when  the  Holy  Ghost  is  showing 
us  our  special  place  of  blessing,  the  prophet  says,  "  I  saw  no 
temple  therein."  In  chap,  xxi.,  where  he  describes  the  bride  or 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  it  is  a  state  of  things  totally  different  from 
what  we  have  here.  Though  it  was  the  city,  where  you  might 
above  all,  expect  to  find  a  sanctuary,  he  says,  "  I  saw  no  temple 
therein."  Why  is  this  ?  Because  that  city  is  the  symbol  of  the 
bride,  and  when  God  brings  out  the  blessedness  and  glory  of 
the  Church,  He  speaks  of  it  as  drawing  near  to  Himself,  so  that 
there  shall  be  none  but  Christ  between  Him  and  them,  if  we 
can  call  that  hetiveev,  where  Christ  Himself  is  the  image  of  the 
invisible  God,  the  One  who  reveals  God  to  us  and  who  is  God. 
It  excludes  the  idea  of  the  temple.  Here,  on  the  contrary,  we 
have  the  temple.  One  of  their  greatest  privileges  spoken  of  is 
that  they  serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His  temple,  and  "  He  that 
sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell  among  them."  There  might 
seem  to  be  a  difficulty  in  this,  but  there  really  is  a  careful  guard 
against  the  thought  that  might  be  drawn  from  the  words, 
"  dwell  among  them."  The  true  meaning  is,  God  having  His 
tabernacle  over  them,  not  among  them.  In  chap.  xxi.  we  find 
God  dwelling  among  men.  It  is  not  the  same  phrase  at  all. 
Similar  in  Englisli,  it  is  totally  different  in  the  Greek.  In  chap, 
vii.  the  idea  is  that  the  presence  of  God  overshadows  the  Gentiles, 

these  last  inherit  the  promises  and  are  branches  in  the  olive-tree,  the  principle  is 
evidently  given  up.  The  same  thing,  then,  may  be  true  of  the  Old  Testament 
saints.  It  becomes  a  question  of  the  testimony  of  scripture.  Now  this,  we  have 
seen,  pronounces  clearly  that  the  Church  of  God,  Christ's  body,  depends  on  the 
gift  and  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  consequent  on  the  death,  resurrection,  and 
glorification  of  the  Saviour.  (Matt.  xvi.  18  ;  John  vii.  39  ;  xiv-xvi ;  Acts  i.,  ii.  j 
1  Cor.  xii.,  &c.) 


132  OUR    PRESENT    PRIVILEGES. 

but  there  is  no  such  thing-  intended  as  God's  taking  His  place 
among  them.  They  are  blessed  of  God,  overshadowed  and 
protected  as  Israel  of  old  under  the  cloud  of  His  presence.  Like 
them,  too,  in  the  future  (Isa.  xlix.),  they  shall  not  hunger  nor 
thirst,  neither  shall  the  heat  nor  sun  smite  them  ;  blessed  expres- 
sions, but  rather  conveying  an  earthly  position  than  a  heavenly 
one.  We  have  the  Lamb  Himself  to  feed  us  now.  Even  here 
He  gives  us  to  have  in  us  wells  of  water  springing  up  into  ever- 
lastins:  life,  and  out  of  us  flow  rivers  of  liviup-  water. 

I  have  been  endeavouring  to  prove,  then,  that  Gods  purposes 
are  not  limited  by  what  He  is  doing  now.  Besides  forming  the 
heavenly  body,  the  Church,  and  conferring  uj)on  it  the  highest 
privileges  even  He  can  give,  God  is  going  to  visit  the  Gentiles 
by  and  by.  They  will  be  remembered,  and  this  will  be  done  in 
the  midst  of  the  most  appalling  judgments  which  precede  the 
great  day.  And  God  makes  plain  our  own  position  amidst  it  all ; 
for  we  see  the  elders  distinct,  and  they  have  the  mind  of  Christ. 
This  last  is  the  portion  of  the  Church  even  upon  earth,  even  as 
Joseph  was,  in  his  time,  the  depository  of  God's  wisdom.  Whe- 
ther in  prison  or  out  of  prison,  he  entered  into  the  thoughts  of 
God  and  was  able  to  explain  them  to  others.  That  is  the  place 
that  God's  goodness  puts  us  in  —  alas  !  how  little  it  is  prized  or 
acted  on.  It  is  one  of  the  most  precious  privileges  that  belongs 
to  the  Church  of  God,  save  the  position  in  which  God  sets  us  as 
brought  nigh  in  Christ  to  Himself.  There  ought  to  be  the 
power  of  announcing  the  revealed  thoughts  of  God  by  the 
Holy  Ghost! 


THE    SEVENTH    SEAL.  133 


CHAPTER    VIII. 

To  me  it  is  manifest  that  the  seventh  seal  is  followed  by  a  short 
but  solemn  pause,  which  again  is  introductory  to  a  new  course 
of  divine  inflictions.*     "  And  when  he  opened  the  seventh  seal, 

*  Strange  as  it  may  seem  that  so  simple  a  matter  should  give  rise  to  long  doubt 
and  interminable  discussion,  such  is  the  fact.  Perhaps  the  earliest  interpretation 
on  record,  that  of  Victorious,  (a  martyr  in  Diocletian's  persecution),  applies  the 
half-hour's  silence  to  the  beginning  of  eternal  rest.  And  this  remains  the  resource 
still  of  most  who  understand  the  seven  seals  to  embrace  the  outline  of  events  in 
providence,  down  to  the  second  advent  of  the  Lord,  save  that  some  would  rather 
style  the  seventh  seal  a  pause  at  His  return.  It  is  plain  that  the  view  rests  mainly 
upon  the  assumption  that  the  sixth  seal  introduced  the  day  of  the  Lord,  with  its 
dependent  sealing  and  palm-bearing  visions  representing  the  consummated  glory 
of  the  blessed.  Nobody  can  conceive  that  silence  in  heaven  for  half-an-hour  would 
have  been  so  viewed,  unless  the  seal  before  had  necessitated,  to  their  minds,  some 
such  reference.  And  yet  it  is  evidently  unnatural  ;  for  if  we  had  the  rest,  be  it 
millennial  or  eternal,  described  fully  in  the  close  of  chap,  vii,,  why  did  it  need  a 
fresh  seal  to  inaugurate  or  continue  it  in  the  commencement  of  chap.  viii.  ?  And 
with  what  propriety,  either  as  to  time  or  character,  is  it  conveyed  in  the  seventh 
seal  ?  This  has  led  others  to  adopt  the  still  stranger  idea  that  the  sixth  seal  closes 
the  sequence  of  events,  the  seventh  being  merely  indicative  of  a  separation  between 
this  scries  and  the  parallel  one  of  the  trumpets.  And  the  very  curious  circum- 
stance is,  that  some  who  receive  this  anomalous  arrangement  have  persuaded  them- 
selves that  theirs  is  the  only  perfect  clew  to  the  order  of  the  book,  whereas  it  is 
nothing  but  hopeless  confusion.  That  I  may  not  be  charged  with  injustice,  let 
me  give  the  following  statement  from  "  Three  Letters  on  the  Prophecies,"  pp.  2, 
3,  byJ.H.  Frere,  reprinted  in  1S59.  "  Every  commentator  who  has  hitherto 
written  on  the  Apocalypse,  by  erroneously  understanding  the  mention  of  the 
seventh  seal  having  been  opened,  which  occurs  at  chap.  viii.  1,  to  be  an  introduc- 
tion of  the  events  of  that  seal,  has  committed  the  greatest  possible  chronological 
error:  embracing  in  the  midst  of  the  seals,  and  therefore  amidst  the  events  of 
time,  the  eternal  state  of  the  glorified  Church,  represented  by  the  vision  of  the 
palm-bearing  multitude  before  the  throne,  of  tlie  preceding  chapter  (vii.  9-17)  :  so 
that  uo  chronological  arrangement  of  the  Apocalypse  has  as  yet  even  been  pro- 
posed, seeing  that  eternity  has  thus  been  universally  introduced  between  tlie  sixth 
and  seventh  seals.  The  Apocalypse,  however,  will  be  found  really  to  consist  of 
these  chronological  histories,  viz.  :  the  seven  seals,  contained  in  chap.  vi.  and  vii., 
concluding  with  the  vision  of  the  eternal  state ;  the  seven  trumpets,  consisting 
of  chap.  viii.  to  x.  7,  concluding  (like  the  prophecy  of  Daniel,  chap.  xii.  7)  with 
the  vision  of  Clirist  assuring  his  Church,  by  the  solemnity  of  an  oath,  that  he 
regards  their  sufl'erings  and  sets  bounds  to  their  duration  ;  and  the  little  opened 
book  (Rev.  x.  8  to  xiv.),  concluding  with  the  great  judgment  of  the  treading  of 
the  wine  press  of  Armageddon."  It  is  manil'est  that  tliis  unheard  of  and  systema- 
tic disorder  is  due  to  the  groat  primary  error  that  llev.  vi.  17  is  a  prophecy  of  the 
wrath  of  the  Lamb,  instead  of  being  the  predicted  expression  of  men's  apprehen- 
sion at  that  early  epoch  of  judgment.  The  seventh  seal  is  rendered  meaningless, 
the  sixth  seal  being  virtually  made  the  seventh,  and  the  contents  of  it  and  of  tho 
parenthetical  chap.  vii.  entirely  misunderstood.     Etpially  are  the  trumpets  mii- 


134  THE   TRUMPETS    IN    GENERAL. 

there  was  silence  in  heaven  about  the  space  of  half  an  hour. 
And  I  saw  the  seven  angels  who  stand  before  God  ;  and  to 
them  were  given  seven  trumpets."  Now  these  judgments  that 
come  before  us  under  the  trumpets  are  of  a  somewhat  different 
character  from  what  we  have  seen  in  the  seals.  In  the  first 
place,  the  seals  in  general  appear  to  have  a  larger  extent,  but 
the  blows  were  not  so  severe.  It  is  true  we  had  in  Rev.  vi.  8 
a  certain  limitation,  (viz.  the  fourth  part,)  used  with  regard  to 
the  extent  of  the  blow  then  to  be  struck.  But  in  the  other 
instances  there  was  no  such  restraint ;  whereas,  in  most  of  the 
trumpets  it  is  the  third  part,  with  some  slight  exceptions.  The 
trumpets,  then,  may  be  less  extensive  in  their  range,  but  it  will 
by  and  by  appear  that  they  are  more  intensely  judicial  than 
the  seals. 

Further,  we  find  that  the  very  name  indicates  a  difference. 
The  trumpet  sets  forth  a  loud  and  solemn  call  of  God.  It  is 
God  summoning  men,  for,  if  they  have  rejected  His  grace,  they 
must  hear,  even  if  they  forget,  these  sharp  warnings  of  His 
judgment.  The  seals  might  not  so  readily  have  been  regarded 
as  divine  interferences,  unless  God  had  beforehand  told  us  that 
such  they  were,  with  their  nature  and  their  order.  In  them- 
selves, and  especially  in  the  first  four,  they  ushered  in  disastrous 
but  not  unprecedented  occurrences.  But  when  we  come  to  the 
trumpets  it  is  not  so  requisite  to  announce  that  they  are  heaven- 
sent judgments.  Their  sound  or  summons  is  quite  plain  and 
urgent.     They  appeal  far  more  unmistakeably  to  men. 

But  there  is  another  remarkable  difference  and  of  a  more 
sjDiritual  nature.  The  Lamb  disappears  under  these  new  scenes. 
The  Lord  Jesus  is  not  spoken  of  in  that  point  of  view  while 
these  destructive  judgments  run  their  course.  This  supposes 
and  marks  a  great  change,  and  we  have  to  enquire  what  God 
would  have  us  to  gather  from  it.  If  the  Lord  Jesus  is  intro- 
duced at  all,  it  is  in  another  guise  or  aspect,  and  not  as  the  Lamb. 
It  is  not  the  Lamb  that  takes  the  golden  censer,  but  an  angel. 
I  do  not  deny  that  Christ  is  referred  to,  but  it  is  in  His  angelic 
connexion,  or  at  least  in  an  angelic  form.  He  is  presented  in 
a  more  distant  way  than  ever  the  Church  or  the  Christian,  as 
such,  knows  Him  in.     In  Heb.  ii.  we  find  that  the  Holy  Ghost 

taken.  They  do  not  conclude  with  Christ's  oath,  any  more  than  the  preceding 
series  concluded  with  the  vision  of  the  eternal  state.  Neither  does  the  little  open 
book  conclude  with  Armageddon.  Like  the  sealing  and  palm-bearing  visions,  it 
is  a  parenthesis  revealed  within  the  limits  of  the  sixLh  trumpet,  instead  of  follow- 
ing the  seventh  trumpet.  The  reader  will,  therefore,  see  the  immense  importance 
of  steadily  resisting  the  too  common  error  as  to  the  sixth  seal,  and  will  understand 
why  I  have  run  the  risk  of  repeating  its  confutation  too  frequently. 


THE    LORD    SEEN    IN    ANGELIC    GLORY.  J  35 

reasons  upon  the  fact  of  Christ's  having  taken  the  phice  of  man. 
"  For  verily  He  took  not  on  Him  [the  nature  of]  angels,"  (fee. 
In  our  version  the  expression  is  too  strong  and  the  italics  a 
mistake.  The  meaning  is  that  He  did  not  take  up  the  angels  : 
they  were  not  the  object  of  God's  calling  nor  of  His  redemption. 
Jesus  took  hold  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  (as  it  is  given  correctly 
in  the  margin,)  and  because  of  this,  "  Forasmuch  as  the  children 
are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  hkewise  took 
part  of  the  same."  He  did  not  undertake  the  cause  of  angels. 
He  stands  in  no  such  relationship  towards  them.  Still  there  is 
nothing,  as  it  seems  to  me,  to  contradict  the  idea  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  may  be  and  is  intended  in  our  chapter  viii.  as  the  officiating 
angel  at  the  altar ;  for,  indeed,  He  is  the  Head  of  everything, 
the  Head  of  all  principality  and  power.  Why,  then,  might  He 
not  be  viewed  here  in  exalted,  angelic  glory  ?  The  personage 
spoken  of  acts  as  the  angel-priesl.  Undoubtedly  it  is  not  thus 
that  He  has  to  do  with  the  heavenly  saints  and  that  He  minis- 
ters before  God  for  us.  But  then  the  Lord,  at  the  point  of  time 
to  which  we  are  come  in  the  pro]ihecy,  has  entirely  done  \vith 
His  ministrations  for  the  partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling,  at 
least  so  far  as  provision  for  their  failure  is  concerned  ;  but  we 
learn  His  interest  in  another  class  of  saints — in  "  all  the  saints" 
of  course  —  who  will  be  upon  the  earth  when  the  Church  has 
been  taken  up  to  heaven. 

There  is  less  introduction  here  of  the  suffering  saints  of  God 
than  anywhere  else.  The  judgments  fall  almost  entirely-upon 
the  world,  upon  men  in  their  circumstances  and  persons,  and, 
finally,  upon  men  in  their  responsible  relationship  to  God. 
Outwardly,  the  saints  would  seem  to  be  mixed  up  with  them. 
This  accounts  for  the  absence  of  the  Lamb  ;  for  wherever  He 
appears  as  such  in  the  book  of  Revelation,  it  is  Christ  in  His 
character  of  the  holy  and  earth-rejected  sufferer.  Accordingly, 
the  Lamb  is  peculiarly  brought  out  where  there  are  sufferers 
mentioned.  For  that  word  remains  always  true,  that  "  when 
he  putteth  forth  his  own  sheep,  he  goeth  before  them."  He 
never  puts  them  in  a  path  of  which  He  has  not  tasted  the  bit- 
terest sorrow  before  them,  tiere  He  retires,  as  it  were,  and  is 
only  seen  in  comparatively  distant,  angelic  glory. 

Remark,  also,  how  full  of  symbols  the  chapter  is,  and,  from 
the  first  trumpet,  of  how  exteinal  a  kind.  Everywhere  myste- 
riousness  prevails.  It  is  not  God  opening  out  His  heart  of  com- 
placency in  those  He  loves.  Whenever  this  is  the  subject,  He 
speaks  as  it  were  face  to  face.  He  is  simple  and  explicit. 
Without  leaving  this  book,  take,  for  instance,  chap.  xiv.     There 


136  TUB    ALTAR 

He  is  going  to  speak  of  persons  who  were,  or  were  to  be,  ex- 
posed to  all  sorts  of  trials,  because  of  association  with  Jesus  ; 
and  the  first  thing  that  we  see  on  the  mount  Sion  is  the  Lamb, 
and  the  portion  of  the  wicked  follows  in  the  most  distinct  manner. 
So,  again,  in  chap.  xii.  "they  overcame  him  (the  dragon-accu- 
ser) by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  and  by  the  word  of  their  testi- 
mony ;  and  they  loved  not  their  lives  unto  death."  But  here 
we  have  God's  dealings  with  the  world,  and  the  scantiest  notice 
of  His  own  people  as  a  separate  class ;  and  as  the  world  has  no 
claim  on  God,  whatever  His  mercy  to  it,  as  the  world  has  no  tie 
with  Him  and  only  despises  His  love,  so  God  speaks  but  of  His 
earthly  judgments  in  forms  more  and  more  awful.  He  does  not 
bring  jjersons  so  distinctly  forward  as  in  other  scenes  ;  and  thus, 
as  I  conceive,  even  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  therefore  not 
set  forth  evidently.  For  here,  as  elsewhere,  we  find  that  there  is 
the  most  surprising  harmony  governing  all  Scripture,  when  once 
the  key  to  it  is  seen. 

First  of  all,  there  are  the  angels  standing  before  God  and  they 
take  their  trumpets,  the  seventh  seal  being  a  sort  of  preparation, 
or  a  signal,  for  a  renewed  course  and  another  class  of  judgment. 
But  before  this  begins,  we  have  an  angel-priest.  There  are 
those  to  whom  God  is  faithful,  for  His  eyes  are  over  the  righ- 
teous and  His  ears  open  to  their  prayers  ;  but  the  face  of  the 
Lord  is  against  them  tliat  do  evil.  Though  there  may  be  but  a 
passing  glimpse  at  the  saints,  yet  God  would  never  have  us  to 
forget  that  even  at  this  time  there  are  objects  of  His  care  upon 
the  earth.  "  And  another  angel  came  and  stood  at  the  altar, 
having  a  golden  censer;  and  there  was  given  him  much  incense." 
Wherever  the  altar  occurs  without  qualification,  it  invariably 
means,  I  believe,  the  brazen  altar  —  the  first  means  or  point  of 
contact  between  God  and  men  on  earth.  There  the  holocaust 
was  burnt,  and  the  other  offerings  of  sweet  savour  ;  thence  was 
the  fire  taken,  in  order  to  cause  the  incense  to  ascend  from  its 
appropriate  altar  in  the  holy  place.  And  this,  as  it  flows  from 
or  agrees  with  the  rest  of  scripture,  so  it  is  in  perfect  accord  with 
its  uses  in  the  Revelation  (chap.  vi.  9  ;  xi.  1  ;  xiv.  18  ;  xvi.  7.) 
Where  the  altar  of  incense  is  in  question,  it  is  characterized  as 
"  the  golden  altar"  before  the  throne,  or  before  God  (chap.  viii. 
3  ;  ix.  13).  Both  are  referred  to  here.  Had  the  same  altar 
been  intended  in  the  beginning  as  in  the  end  of  verse  3,  the  full 
description  would  surely  have  been  furnished  at  the  first  mention 
rather  than  at  the  second.  Nor  is  there  more  ditficulty  as  to 
seeing  the  great  altar  in  the  heavenly  vision  here,  than  the  sea 
or  laver  in  chap,  iv.,  for  according  to  the  Jewish  type  they  were 


AND   THfl    GOLDEN   ALTAR.  137 

equally  in  the  court.  At  this  altar,  then,  which  connected  the 
fire  with  the  offering  and  acceptance  of  Christ,  the  angel  stood 
with  the  golden  censer  pertaining  to  the  holy  of  holies.  The 
very  phrase  conveys  to  my  mind  that  it  was  not  his  usual  place  : 
he  came  and  stood  there.  In  the  Autli.  Version  it  is  said  of  the 
incense  "that  he  should  offer  it  with  the  prayers,"  &c.  But  if 
we  take  the  phrase  as  it  is  given  in  chap,  xi.,  the  sense  becomes 
plainer  and  more  just.  There  we  read,  (ver.  -3,)  "  I  will  give 
poioer  unto  my  two  witnesses."  Now  it  is  exactly  the  same  form 
of  expression  here,  and  means  that  He  should  give  poiver  to  the 
prayers  or  render  them  efficacious.  "  And  the  smoke  of  the 
incense  which  came  with  the  prayers  of  the  saints  ascended  up 
before  God,"  &c.  (Ver.  4.)  What  is  the  effect  of  the  prayers 
and  the  incense  ?  All  would  feel  that  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not 
lead  persons  to  pray  for  what  is  contrary  to  the  mind  of  God, 
though  when  a  mistaken  prayer  is  offered,  He  will  listen  in  His 
long-suffering  and  knows  how  to  teach  His  children  the  foolish- 
ness of  such  requests.  But  none  can  say  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
ever  suggested  or  sustained  a  prayer  which  was  not  according 
to  God's  purpose.  Observe,  also,  that  incense  out  of  the  angel's 
hand  accompanies  these  prayers  of  the  saints,  and  they  are 
offered  up  to  God. 

But  the  fifth  verse  records  a  new  action.  "  And  the  angel 
took  the  censer  and  filled  it  with  fire  of  the  altar."  Surely 
this  is  the  brazen  altar,  whez'e  not  the  incense  but  the  fire  was 
burning.  The  result  is,  not  that  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  work 
comes  up  before  God  in  more  and  more  sweetness,  (as  we  see 
in  the  case  of  the  offerings  put  on  the  brazen  altar  in  Levi- 
ticus,) but  that  here  the  fire  was  cast  into  the  earth,  and  imme- 
diately followed  "  thunderings,  and  lightnings,  and  voices,  and 
an  earthquake."  So  that  thus  you  have  evidently  prayer  of 
another  character  and  with  a  different  effect  produced  —  nay, 
the  very  priest  himself  viewed  in  another  manner,  as  compared 
with  what  is  going  on  now.  For  us  Jesus  the  Son  of  God 
has  passed  through  the  heavens,  a  High  Priest  who  was  in  all 
points  tempted  like  us,  apart  from  sin.  He  died  for  our  sins. 
He  can  sympathize  with  our  infirmities,  having  suffered  to  the 
utmost  both  in  temptation  and  atonement.  Our  God  also  is  on 
a  throne  of  grace,  whence  mercy  and  grace  come  forth  to  help 
in  time  of  need.  (Heb.  iv.)  Again,  our  attitude  towards  those 
without  is  akin,  and  hence  supplications,  prayers,  intercessions, 
and  giving  of  thanks,  are  and  ought  to  be  made  for  all  men. 
But  here  it  is  not  mercy  but  judgment ;  for  though  there  may  be 
the  incense  and  the  prayers  of  saints,  the  immediate  issue  is 


138  THE    TRUMPETS    NOT    LITERAL 

that  the  symbols  of  God's  judgments  are  seen  passing  through 
the  earth.  There  is  perfect  congruity  in  all  the  scenes  that  are 
pourtrayed  here.  Although  a  priest,  and  an  altar  (both  altars, 
as  it  seems  to  me),  and  saints,  and  incense,  and  the  censer,  and 
the  lire  are  all  found  in  due  order,  yet  it  is  in  communion  with 
God  chastising  the  earth.  Hence,  too,  the  place  of  comparative 
distance  already  noticed.  If  the  Lord  is  brought  out  at  all,  it 
is  as  an  angel,  and  not  in  His  full  dignity  as  the  Son  of  God, 
consecrated  for  evermore.  Of  course.  He  is  always  the  Son  of 
God,  but  He  has  other  dignities  beside,  and  here  the  prophetic 
vision  presents  Him  in  a  totally  different  title  and  glory. 

Again,  it  is,  I  must  say,  an  unintelligent  inference,  be  it  made 
by  Historicalist  or  by  Futurist,  that  "all  the  saints"  is  a  phrase 
which  necessarily  involves  the  conclusion  that  the  Church  of  God 
is  meant.  The  question  must  be  judged  by  the  convictions  we 
have  as  to  the  bearing  of  all  this  part  of  the  book.  And  I  have 
abundantly  shown,  that,  ever  since  chap.  iv.  began,  the  Church  is 
viewed  as  already  and  wholly  glorified  in  heaven.  Hence  the 
Church  is  really  out  of  the  question  here,  and  these  are  all  the 
saints  on  earth  subsequently,  for  whom  deliverance  is  prepared. 
The  angel  offers  their  prayers,  and  judgment  on  earth  for  their 
deliverance  is  the  reply.  The  ordinary  reasoning  is  therefore 
beside  the  mark.  All  the  saints  are  of  course  the  Lord's  people, 
a  converted  class,  Jewish  or  Gentile.  That  this  is  what  Scrip- 
ture calls  Christians  or  tJte  Church  is  another  matter,  which  the 
objectors  would  do  well  to  inquire  into. 

"  And  the  seven  angels  that  had  the  seven  trumpets  prepared 
themselves  to  sound.  And  the  first  sounded,  and  tliere  followed 
hail  and  fire  mingled  with  blood,"  &c.  The  general  bearing  of  this 
is  apparent.  These  things  are  not  to  be  taken  in  their  mere 
obvious  or  physical  drift.  Supposing  one  looks  at  such  a  thing 
literally  as  a  mountain  falling  into  the  sea,  (ver.  8,)  would  it  ever 
turn  the  water  into  blood  ?  Nothing  of  the  sort.  The  fact  is 
that  these  were  pictures  that  passed  before  the  eyes  of  the  pro- 
phet. What  the  figures  meant,  we  have  to  gather  from  the 
general  tenor  of  the  word,  by  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit.  I 
presume  that  even  the  prophet  himself  had  to  learn  their  mean- 
ing from  other  Scriptures.  For  here  we  have  St.  John,  not  in 
the  place  of  one  before  whom  all  was  naked  and  open  and  at 
once  understood,  but  rather  simply  as  a  Seer.  He  is  not  neces- 
sarily able,  as  a  matter  of  course,  to  enter  fidly  into  all  that  is 
passing  before  him,  but  has  need  to  mark,  learn,  and  in- 
wardly  digest.     We  come  in  the  Apocalypse  to  the  ground  of 


BUT    FIGURATIVE.  139 

prophecy,  and  this  is  a  different  region  from  that  in  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  opens  out  to  us  the  things  of  Christ  in  the  way  of 
communion.  Indeed,  what  is  told  us  of  the  prophet  John  him- 
self throughout  the  book  shows  that  he  did  not  always  nor  of 
necessity  appreciate  the  meaning  of  that  which  he  beheld  in  the 
Spirit.  In  other  words,  he  saw  a  sort  of  panorama,  and  recorded 
the  visions  just  as  they  appeared  to  himself;  and  we  have  to  use 
the  Word  of  God  by  the  Spirit  to  know  what  the  symbols  imply. 
We  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  event  itself  will  be  a  mere 
formal  repetition  of  what  the  prehguration  was,  but  a  reality 
answering  to  the  foreseen  shadow.* 

*  The  excessive  faucifulness  and  uncertainty  of  the  schemes  of  interpreting  the 
trumpets,  especially  of  those  who  deny  that  they  follow  the  seals  and  attempt  to 
deduce  a  stream  parallel  to  them,  may  be  gleaned  from  the  subjoined  sketch  drawn 
up  by  one  of  the  ablest  of  themselves.  "  It  will  be  enough  to  select  nine  or  ten 
commentators,  of  considerable  eminence  and  reputation,  that  the  diversity  of  their 
views,  in  detail,  may  be  seen  ;  while  there  is  uniform  agreement  in  the  main  idea, 
that  these  trumpets  denote  political  judgments  which  fell,  in  the  early  ages,  on  the 
Roman  empire.  Let  us  compare  Mede,  Cressener,  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  Whiston, 
and  Lowman ;  and  of  living  authors,  Mr.  Faber,  Mr.  Cuninghame,  Mr.  Frere,  and 
Dr.  Keith,  with  the  last  of  whom  Mr.  Elliott  nearly  agrees  in  the  arrangement  of 
this  part  of  the  prophecy.  The  first  trumpet  begins,  according  to  Lowman,  in  the 
time  of  Constantine ;  according  to  Mr.  Cuninghame  and  Mr.  Frere,  with  the  death 
of  Valentinian,  a.d.  376,  and  ends  with  the  death  of  Theodosius,  a.d.  395.  But 
Mede,  Newton,  Dr.  Keith,  and  Mr.  Elliott,  make  it  begin  with  the  death  of  Theo- 
dosius, and  reach  to  the  death  of  Alaric,  a.d.  410.  Cressener  and  Whiston  include 
in  it  both  periods.  Mr.  Faber  agrees  with  Mede  and  Newton  in  its  commence- 
ment, but  continues  it  fort  ij  gears  after  Alaric' s  death,  a.d.  395-450.  The  second, 
according  to  Lowman,  Mr.  Cuninghame,  and  Mr.  Frere,  reaches  from  Theodosius 
to  Alaric,  the  exact  interval  which  Mede,  Newton,  Dr.  Keith,  and  Mr.  Elliott 
assign  to  the  first.  Mede  refers  it  to  [he  fall  of  the  Roman  sovereignty,  a.d.  410- 
455  ;  Cressener,  to  the  Transalpine  invasions,  a.d.  410-448;  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  to 
the  Visigoths  and  J'andals,  407-427  ;  Whiston,  Mr.  Faber,  and  Dr.  Keith  to  the 
Vandals  only,  but  within  different  limits,  a.d.  406-450,  439-477,  and  429-477 
respectively.  The  third  trumpet,  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  is  applied  to  the  Vandals, 
A.D.  427-430 ;  by  Whiston,  Mr.  Cuninghame,  and  Dr.  Keith,  to  At.tila  and  the 
Huns,  A.D.  441-452  ;  by  Mede,  Cressener,  and  Lowman,  to  the  troubles  of  Italy, 
or  setting  of  the  Western  CcBsar,  a.d.  450-176  ;  by  Mr.  Faber,  to  the  same  within 
narrower  limits,  a.d.  462-476  ;  and  by  Mr.  Frere  to  the  ISestorian  heresy.  Lastly, 
the  fourth  is  I'eferred  by  Mr.  Cuninghame  to  the  fall  of  the  empire,  a.d.  455-476 ; 
by  W^histon,  to  the  extinction  itself,  a.d.  476 ;  by  Mede,  Cressener,  Lowman,  and 
Dr.  Keith,  to  the  subsequent  eclipse  of  Rome,  a.d.  476-540  ;  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton, 
to  the  tears  of  Belisarius,  a.d.  535-552  ;  by  Mr.  Faber  and  Mr.  Frere,  to  the 
reign  of  Phocas  and  the  Persian  invasion  of  the  East,  A.D.  602-610.  The  remark 
of  Mr.  Faber  on  these  differences,  in  earlier  writers,  is  very  natural  and  just. 
'While  they  agree  that  the  downfal  of  the  Roman  power  in  the  West  is  at  least 
the  most  prominent  object  of  the  prophecy,  scarcely  any  two  expositors  concur  as 
to  the  division  of  that  subject  among  the  several  trumpets,  that  are  supposed  to 
relate  to  it.  The  general  result  brought  out  is  the  subvc^rsion  of  the  Western 
empire,  but  the  particular  steps  are  as  multifarious  and  discordant  as  can  well  be 
imagined.  So  curious  a  circumstance  may  well  be  deemed  the  opprobrium  of 
Apocalyptic  interpretation,  and  may  naturally  lead  us  to  suspect  that  the  true  key 
to  the  distinct  application  of  the  four  first  trumpets  has  never  yet  been  found,  or. 


140  THE    FIRST   TRUMPET. 

Thus,  when  the  first  blast  is  sounded,  we  have  a  violent  tem- 
pest of  hail  and  fire  mingled  with  blood  —  the  blood  distinguish- 
ing- it  from  all  previous  storms,  as  being  beyond  nature.  This 
betokened  or  ushered  in  a  furious,  sanguinary  and  destructive 
outburst  that  would  agitate  and  rage  over  its  sphere.  "  And  the 
third  *  of  the  earth  was  burnt  up,  and  the  third  of  the  trees  was 
burnt  up,  and  all  green  grass  was  burnt  up."  (Verse  7.)  This 
evidently  does  not  refer  to  the  literal  earth,  trees,  or  herbage.  In 
Scripture,  grass  is  the  symbol  that  is  used  to  denote  man  in  his 
weakness,  his  very  glory  being  like  the  flower  of  grass.  Human 
prosperity  then  would  be  set  forth  by  green  grass.  Here  we 
have  a  judgment  of  God  upon  it  :  not  a  certain  part  only,  how- 
ever large,  but  the  whole  of  it  is  destroyed.  The  trees  represent 
such  as  are  high  and  exalted  among  men.  It  is  a  very  com- 
mon symbol  in  the  word  of  God  to  express  those  that  are  deeply 
rooted  with  a  lofty  bearing  and  extensive  influence  here  below. 
(Look,  for  instance,  at  Ezek.  xxxi.  3  ;  Dan.  iv.,  &c.)  Thus, 
then,  a  blow  is  struck  at  a  defined  part  of  the  scene  of  God's 
moral  dealings  ;  and  both  the  low  universally  and  the  higher 
classes,  to  a  large  extent,  feel  the  ruinous  effects. 

if  foimd,  lias  never  jet  been  satisfactorily  used.'  The  natural  inference  from  this 
strange  variety  of  opinion  amangthe  best  expositors  is,  that  the  historical  divisions 
they  have  adopted  or  assumed  are  dim  and  vague,  when  compared  with  the  dis- 
tinctness of  the  emblems  in  the  four  trumpets." — Blrks'  Mysteri)  of  Providence, 
pp.  103,  104.  I  mxist  add,  however,  that  few  have  exceeded  Mr.  B.  in  the  loose 
reins  he  has  allowed  himself  in  applying  this  chapter.  Verses  2-4  are  called  the 
season  of  iutercessiou  and  are  applied  to  the  time  from  Nerva  till  after  Aurelius 
(a.d.  86-180) — why  then,  more  than  any  other  epoch,  does  not  clearly  appear. 
Then  verses  5,  6,  are  the  warning  and  preparation  (a.d.  181-248)  ;  next,  verse  7, 
the  first  trumpet  (a.d.  250-2G8),  with  an  imaginary  pause  of  judgment  (a.d.  270- 
365)  ;  verses  8,  9,  the  second  (a.d.  365-476)  ;  verses  10,  11,  the  third  (a.d.  431- 
565)  ;  ver.  12,  the  fourth  (a.d.  540-622).  Verse  13  might  be  thought  to  denote  at 
least  as  much  as  the  invisible  pause  of  judgment  between  verses  7  and  8,  but  it  is 
passed  by  without  chronological  notice.  Indeed  the  first  woe  is  made  to  trench 
even  upon  the  fourth  trumpet,  being  dated  a.d.  609-1063,  as  the  second  A.D. 
1037-1453.  But  I  have  reason  to  believe  the  author  has  abandoned  it,  and  now, 
in  the  main,  coalesces  with  Mr.  Elliott. 

*  "The  third"  is  an  expression  often  occurring  in  the  first  four  trumpets.  It 
refers,  as  I  conceive,  to  the  Western  part  of  the  Roman  empire.  In  chap.  ix.  we 
lind  it  again  in  a  dilTercnt  connexion  where  it  must  be  modified  in  meaning  ;  for 
there  can  be  no  doubt,  I  think,  that  the  first  two  woe-trumpets  (whatever  maybe 
thought  of  the  last)  find  their  local  application  in  the  East.  In  fact,  this  is  so 
clear  that  one  writer  of  our  day  would  rule  the  use  of  the  phrase  iu  chap.  viii.  by 
its  undoubted  oriental  (or  as  he  perhaps  would  call  it,  Clreek)  reference  iu  the 
following  chap.  But  this  is  obviously  illegitimate,  and  the  ordinal  allusion  to  the 
third  emblem  of  Daniel  is  an  error.  In  itself  "the  third  "  defines  nothing  save 
that  there  is  a  tri-partite  division.  It  is  equally  applicable  to  any  of  the  three 
parts  :  to  ascertain  lohich  particularly  is  meant,  wo  must  take  the  surrounding 
context  into  the  account. 


THE    SECOND    TRUMPET.  141 

The  second  blow  supposes  a  great  change  ;  it  falls  on  the 
sea  and  so  refers  not  to  that  sphere  which  is  under  special  and 
settled  government,  but  to  wliat  is  or  will  then  be  in  a  state  of 
confusion  and  anarchy.  The  iiations  which  are  in  this  condition 
do  not  remain  scatheless.  "  And  the  second  angel  sounded ; 
and  as  it  were  a  great  mountain,  burning  with  fire,  was  cast 
into  the  sea  ;  and  the  third  of  the  sea  became  blood  ;  and  the 
third  of  the  creatures  which  were  in  the  sea,  tliat  had  life,  died ; 
and  the  third  of  the  ships  were  destroyed."  If  Jeremiah  be 
consulted,  you  will  see  that  I  am  not  explaining  these  things  ar- 
bitrarily or  out  of  my  own  imagination.  As  this  is  not  so 
common  a  judgment,  I  think  we  have  God  furnishing  us  with 
another  example  ;  for  just  where  we  should  be  likely  to  make 
mistakes,  there  God  comes  in  with  light  and  instruction.  The 
"  mountain  burning  with  fire,"  represents  a  system  of  power, 
itself  under  the  judgment  of  God  and  the  occasion  of  judgment 
to  others.  In  Jer.  li.  25,  it  is  said,  "  Behold,  I  am  against  thee, 
O  destroying  mountain,  saith  the  Lord,  which  destroyest  all  the 
earth  ;  and  I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  thee,  and  roll 
thee  down  from  the  rocks,  and  will  make  thee  a  burnt  moun- 
tain." There  we  have  what  answers,  in  some  measure,  to 
what  we  have  here.  Babylon,  in  Jei"emiah,  was  to  be  "  a  burnt 
mountain,"  hurled  down  from  its  place  of  eminence.  Here  the 
mountain  is  said  to  be  "  burning."  Babylon  was  itself  to  be  as 
a  consumed  or  destroyed  mountain.  Here  the  mountain  is  the 
means  of  destroying  others,  as  in  the  Jewish  prophet  :  "  O  des- 
troying mountain,  (saith  the  Lord,)  which  destroyest  all  the 
earth."  The  mountain  is  regularly  the  symbol  of  settled  and 
exalted  power  ;  but  here  it  is  cast  into  the  sea,  because  it  is 
made  the  means  of  judgment  to  others,  and  not  merely  the 
object  of  judgment  itself.  The  Lord  Jesus  Himself  uses  a  part 
of  the  figure  with  regard  to  Israel.  Seeing  a  fig-tree  with 
nothing  but  leaves,  He  pronounced  thereupon  that  no  fruit 
should  be  grown  on  it  henceforward  for  ever.  He  had  come 
and  found  no  fruit  upon  it,  only  abundance  of  leaves,  and  pre- 
sently the  fig-tree  withered  away.  Now  almost  every  pei'son 
who  has  read  the  word  of  God  with  care  has  viewed  that  fig- 
tree  as  the  symbol  of  Israel,  responsible  to  bear  fruit  unto  God, 
but  completely  faiUng  to  do  so.  The  fig-tree  was  figurative 
of  "  that  generation,"  and,  in  connexion  with  this,  the  Lord  says 
to  His  disciples,  "  Ye  shall  not  only  do  this  ....  but  also  if  ye 
shall  say  unto  this  mountain,  Be  thou  removed  and  be  thou 
cast  into  the  sea,  it  shall  be  done."  And  so  it  was  done  ;  for  no 
sooner  had  the   apostles'   testimony   gone   out   to    Israel,  and 


142  THE   THIRD    TRUMPET. 

Israel  had  utterly  rejected  Avliat  the  Holy  Ghost  preached  to 
them  therein,  than  judgment  came  upon  them.  It  was  not 
merely  that  they  bore  no  fruit,  but  there  was  a  positive  judg- 
ment and  an  uprooting  from  where  they  were.  The  mountain 
was  cast  into  the  sea  ;  the  place  and  nation  of  Israel  completely 
disappeared  in  the  mass  of  the  Gentiles.  This  was  much  more 
than  their  merely  ceasing  to  protluce  fruit.  Their  polity  was 
broken  up  and  comj)letely  vanished,  just  as  much  as  a  mountain 
would  be  that  was  torn  up  from  its  base  and  cast  into  the  sea. 
So  here  a  great  power,  that  seemed  to  be  settled,  is  removed 
from  its  place,  and  that  poM^er  is  not  so  much  shattered  itself,  as  it 
is  made  the  means  of  suffering  to  others.  It  is  burning  with 
fire,  and  the  consequence  is  destruction  to  the  third  of  living 
creatures  and  sliij^s  in  the  sea,  the  whole  being  a  figure  taken 
from  what  would  be  the  effect  of  a  volcano  cast  into  the  sea. 
It  is  thus  that  the  Lord  fills  up  the  picture  of  destruction  by  a 
great  consuming  power  that  falls  upon  confused  masses  of  people 
with  human  carnage  and  political  anarchy,  as  the  result.  There 
may  be  some  more  precise  meaning,  but  I  am  only  presenting 
what  little  I  see  of  the  symbols,  independent  of  their  application 
to  a  particular  time,  place  or  people. 

The  third  judgment  in  the  series  of  the  trumpets  is  of  another 
kind.  "  The  third  angel  sounded,  and  there  fell  a  great  star 
from  heaven,  burning  as  it  were  a  torch,  and  it  fell  upon  the 
third  of  the  rivers,  and  upon  the  fountains  of  the  waters  ;  and 
the  name  of  the  star  is  called  Wormwood  :  and  the  third  of  the 
waters  became  wormwood  ;  and  many  of  the  men  died  of  the 
waters,  because  they  were  made  bitter."  Now  a  star,  as  we 
have  seen  in  an  earlier  chapter,  though  in  another  connexion, 
(chap.  i.  20,)  is  the  figure  of  one  who  holds  a  place  of  subordi- 
nate authority — one  who  may  give  light  to  others — subject  him- 
self to  anotliei',  but  still  ruling.  Heie  it  is  a  degraded  ruler, 
a  dignitary  fallen  from  his  place  of  authority.  Waters  are  the 
symbol  of  people  unformed,  fountains  ai-e  the  sources  of  their 
refreshment,  and  a  river  that  which  characterizes  their  course. 
A  certain  pro|)ortion  is  tainted  by  the  fall  of  this  star  or  ruler, 
which  embitters  whatever  it  touches,  and  many  die  because  of 
the  waters  being  made  bitter.  Here  the  infliction  seems  not  so 
much  of  a  political  kind  as  the  previous  judgment ;  it  is  rather 
the  poisoning  of  all  that  ought  to  be  the  means  of  blessing  to 
man  and  that  concerns  his  ordinary  life. 

Under  the  fourth  trumpet  we  have  something  higher.     The 


THE    FOURTH    TRUMPET. — APPLICATION.  143 

waters  were  poisoned  before  ;  but  now  we  find  that  the  highest 
authorities  vveie  touched.  It  is  not  a  star  tliat  falls  from  heaven, 
but  the  third  of  the  sun,  and  the  third  of  the  moon,  and  the 
third  of  the  stars  are  smitten ;  "  that  the  third  of  them  might  be 
darkened,  and  the  day  should  not  shine  for  the  third  thereof, 
and  the  night  likewise."  I  aj)prehend  that  this  is  a  judgment 
of  God  upon  the  supreme  as  well  as  the  inferior  authorities 
of  the  world  within  the  ti,iven  range,  which  ai"e  all,  to  a  certain 
extent,  extinguished,  or  at  least  eclipsed. 

An  important  question  now  arises — the  proper  fulfilment  of 
these  trumpet  judgments.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  the 
answer  must  depend  on  the  still  larger  issue  of  the  time  and 
condition  to  which  the  prophetic  visions,  in  general,  apply. 
For  this  is  no  matter  of  detail,  but  of  broad  principle,  and  it  is 
not  for  me  to  deny  the  immense  practical  consequences  of  the 
true  application,  on  the  one  hand,  or  of  views  which  mislead  on 
the  other.  Believing  that  the  seven  epistles  had  an  immediate 
literal  bearing  upon  the  actual  Asiatic  assemblies  of  St.  John's 
day,  I  for  one  cannot  doubt  that  the  seals  prefigured  the  course 
of  the  Roman  empire  fj-om  that  ej)ocli  onwtird,  and  that  they 
have  thus  had  an  application  by  no  means  immaterial,  substan- 
tially as  the  ordinary  historical  system  insists,  down  to  the 
overthrow  of  paganism  and  the  nominal  supremacy  of  Chris- 
tianity, with  the  natural  result  of  vast  accessions  of  souls  from 
Israel  in  a  measure  but  far  more  from  the  Gentiles  in  that 
sphere  and  day.  According  to  this  idea,  the  early  trumpets 
appear  to  me  almost  of  necessity  to  refer  :  first,  to  the  Gothic 
invasions  of  Alaric,  Rhadagaisus,  &c.  ;  secondly,  to  the  depre- 
dations of  Genseric  and  his  Vandals  ;  thirdly,  to  the  "  scourge 
of  God,"  as  Attila  the  Hun  was  pleased  to  entitle  himself; 
and  fourthly,  to  the  memorable  era  signalised  by  the  extinction 
of  the  Roman  empire  in  the  west. 

But  fully  allowing  these  intimations  to  be  contained  within 
the  scope  of  the  visions  thus  far,  it  is  to  my  own  mind  manifest 
that  the  seven  epistles  are  stamped  with  the  most  comprehensive 
aims,  and  from  strong  internal  marks  imply  the  varying  phases 
which  the  house  of  God,  in  its  protracted  existence  here 
below,  would  assume,  till  the  Lord  removes  the  faithful  to 
heaven,  keeping  them  out  of  the  hour  of  temptation  which 
awaits  the  earthly-minded,  and  spueing  out  of  his  mouth  the 
self-complacent  mass  of  Christendom.  In  harmony  with  this 
continuous  and  successive  view  of  the  churches,  which  in  one 
shape  or  another  has  commended  itself  to  godly  and  discerning 
enquirers  of  different  ages,   the  most  simple  interpretation    of 


144  THE    PROPER    OBJECTS    OF    THE    PROPHECY 

chaps,  iv.  and  v.  is,  that  they  suppose  the  rapture  and  g-lorifica- 
tion  of  the  church  of  the  firstborn  to  have  taken  place  ;  and 
that  chaps,  vi.  et  seq.  begin  to  receive  their  grand  fulfilment 
subsequent  to  that  event.  It  is  easy  for  an  ingenious  mind 
to  conjure  up  difficulties  and  to  muster  objections  in  foi'midable 
array :  no  part  of  Scripture,  nor  truth  revealed  in  it,  is  exempt 
from  exposure  to  attacks  exactly  similar.  But  nobody  can 
deny  that,  going  only  by  the  sacred  text  itself,  this  is  the  most 
natural  way  of  taking  chaps,  iv.  v.,  or  that  the  common  theory 
leaves  these  admirable  Scriptures  without  adequate  adaptation  to 
the  then  circumstances,  whether  we  look  at  the  scene  as  a  whole 
or  at  the  particular  figures  therein  exhibited.  Their  occurrence 
here,  on  the  ordinary  view,  is  an  enormous,  unexplained  and 
perhaps,  it  may  be  added,  inexplicable  difficulty ;  but  with  the 
rapture  of  the  saints,  then  an  accomplished  fact,  as  the  key,  they 
are  a  beautiful  and  needed  preface  to  all  that  follows. 

Nor  this  only.  Rev.  vi.,  and  the  chapters  that  succeed, 
raise  the  fundamental  question,  whether  churches  or  Christians, 
in  the  proper  sense  of  the  terms,  are  any  longer  involved  in 
the  scenes  they  depict  on  earth,  when  their  full,  and  not  merely 
their  inchoate,  accomplishment  is  in  progress.  Why  should 
writers  on  prophecy,  without  anything  like  reasonable  show 
of  evidence,  assume  the  affirmative?  Why  not  prove  it,  if  they 
can .''  The  more  indispensable  the  point  may  be  to  the  popular 
system,  the  less  satisfactory  to  unbiassed  persons  it  seems  to 
find  its  advocates  preserving  a  silence  so  absolute,  not  indeed 
as  regards  reiterating  and  reasoning  from  that  assumption,  but 
as  to  attempting  a  demonstration.  AVho  can  allege  that  the 
proposition  is  self-evident?  Who  does  not  know  that  there 
are  many  intelligent  students  of  the  prophetic  word  who  believe 
that  not  the  Church  but  a  godly  Jewish  remnant,  with  Gentiles 
converted  but  separate,  are  the  parties  contemplated  and 
directly  concerned  in  the  struggles  of  the  latter-day  ?  Is  it 
not  worth  discussing?  What  prophetic  question  moj'e  vital, 
or  more  comprehensive?  It  would  not  be  charitalde  to  impute 
this  singular  reticence  to  a  feeling  of  contem))t  for  their 
brethren ;  neither  would  it  be  fair  to  insinuate  that  they  are 
conscious  of  their  own  inability  to  give  some  appearance  of 
Scriptural  proof  in  favour  of  their  sentiments.  We  deny  that 
these  prophecies,  precious  as  they  are  for  our  ))rofit,  are  fully, 
much  less  exclusively,  about  the  Church  :  if  any  assert  that 
such  is  the  case,  on  them  lies  the  burden  of  proving  it.  It 
is  simjily  taken  for  granted.  Would  it  not  be  better  to  gather 
up  and  present,  as  forcibly  as  may  be,  the  evidence  which  strikes 


JEWS    AND    GENTILES.  145 

their  own  minds.  We  appeal  to  the  very  Scriptures  in  debate, 
some  as  clearly  evincing-  a  glorified  condition  of  the  Christian 
body  in  heaven,  before  the  earthly  judicial  events  transpire, 
others  as  clear  that  Jews  and  Gentiles,  distinct  from  each  other 
and  not  associated  in  one  body  like  the  Church,  are  thenceafter 
seen  on  earth,  and  that  they  are  the  real  objects  in  the  crisis  of 
the  close.  If  we  are  right,  a  vast  amount  of  the  differences, 
among  those  who  study  the  subject,  Avould  be  decided  without 
further  contest.  Why  then  waste  time  in  the  shallow  fields 
of  Germanising  Praeterists  or  of  Romanising  Futurists  ?  Why 
not  grapple  with  the  evidence  produced  by  Christians  who  are, 
through  God's  mercy,  at  least  as  far  removed  from  Babylon  as 
the  most  zealous  of  Protestants  can  pretend  to  be?  If  this,  as 
I  am  sure,  is  the  sound  and  satisfactory  interpretation,  we  are 
not  compelled  to  bend  the  past  into  a  reluctant  and  far- 
fetched accomplishment,  nor  are  we  at  liberty  to  explain  away 
the  frequent  and  obvious  indices  of  the  future.  It  satisfies  all 
just  requirement  that  there  be  an  unforced,  general  resemblance, 
sufficient  to  show  the  direct  finger  of  God,  yet  not  such  as  to 
exhaust  the  prediction  but  rather  to  leave  room  for  a  still  closer, 
final  application  when  the  saints,  body  and  soul,  are  above. 

"And  I  beheld,  and  heard  an  eagle*  flying  through  mid- 
heaven,  saying  with  a  loud  voice,  Woe,  woe,  woe  to  the  dwell- 
ers on  the  earth  by  reason  of  the  other  voices  of  the  trumpet  of 
the  three  angels  which  are  yet  to  sound  (ver.  13),"  It  was  an  eagle, 
I  believe,  which  John  saw  here,  an  angel  in  Rev.  xiv.  6,  to  which 
our  verse  may  have  been  assimilated,  if  the  two  words  were  not 
confounded  by  mere  carelessness.  The  eagle's  flight  in  mid- 
heaven  was  the  dark  and  most  suited  harbinger  of  coming  woes. 
Nor  is  there  any  real  difficulty  in  its  loud  utterance,  for  the 
altar  itself  is,  in  the  true  text,  made  to  speak  in  chap.  xvi.  7. 

We  have  had  the  preliminary  judgments  ushered  in  by  the 
first  four  trumpets.  They  dealt,  to  a  certain  extent,  with  man's 
prosperity  in  high  and  low  —  first,  in  the  settled  ordered  system, 
and  next  in  a  state  of  confusion  ;  then  the  blow  fell  on  the 
means  of  human  enjoyment,  turned  into  bitterness  and  destruc- 
tion ;  and,  lastly,  the  whole  fabric  of  political  rule,  supreme  and 

*  Mr.  E.  refers  after  Zullig  to  "  the  learned  critic  "  Wolf's  preference  of  the 
common  text.  I  doubt  that  he  would  have  cited  such  au  auxiliary,  if  he  had  been 
aware  that  the  main  object  of  the  Curae  Philol.  seems  to  be  the  maintenance  of  the 
received  readings,  against  the  best  authorities,  and  especially  in  opposition  to 
Bengel.  Besides,  he  is  far  from  positive  in  this,  though  greatly  suspecting  airov. 
"  Quod  si  tanicn  aquilae  mentio  facta  censeri  debeat,  malim  omnino  cum  Seideliano 
codice  et  Primasio  legere  d.yyeXov  a>s  aerov  TreToj/ifVoy."  (C.  P.,  V^ol.  V.,  p.  514). 
11 


146  THE    DWELLERS 

subordinate,  has  to  suffer  a  notable  eclipse.*  Thus,  it  was  a 
judgment  of  circumstances,  rather  than  a  personal  visitation. 
But  we  also  see  a  closing  intimation  of  still  deeper  inflictions, 
marked  off  in  the  most  definite  way  from  the  series  that  pre- 
ceded :  "  Woe,  woe,  woe,  to  those  that  dwell  on  the  earth,"  &c. 
The  unsealed  do  not  escape  in  the  first,  the  third  of  men  are 
killed  in  the  second.  Under  the  last  we  come,  in  a  general  way, 
to  the  end  of  all. 

"  The  dwellers  on  earth"  may  have  a  local  significance,  espe- 
cially during  the  great  final  crisis.  But  it  appears  to  me  that  a 
survey  of  the  various  occurrences  of  the  phrase  warrants  the 
conclusion  that  a  moral  force  is  the  chief  and  most  prominent 
intention  of  the  Spirit.  Twice  has  it  been  seen  in  the  Apoca- 
lypse before  this,  and  it  plays  an  increasingly  grave  part,  as  we 
draw  near  the  close.  First,  it  is  found  in  the  epistle  to  the 
angel  of  the  church  in  Philadelphia,  where  the  Lord  promises 
to  keep  those  who  kept  the  word  of  His  patience,  from  the  hour 

*  I  tnow  but  must  demur  to  the  reasoning  of  Mr.  E.  in  behalf  of  the  supposi- 
tion that  the  literal  and  the  symbolic  are  mingled  in  these  trumpets.  The  (general 
examples  of  figure  and  fact,  from  Ps.  sxii.,  prove  nothing  for  such  a  book  as  the 
Apocalypse.  The  real  question,  as  he  feels  himself,  is  one  of  admitting  literal 
geograpln/  into  obviously  symbolical  prophecies.  So,  again,  an  incidental  allusion, 
as  in  Ezek.  xxvii.  26 ;  xxxii.  6,  7  ;  Ps.  Ixxx.  8,  11  ;  Jer.  iii.  6,  is  not  fairly  to  be 
compared  with  an  elaborate  orderly  series  of  symbolic  images,  as  in  our  prophecy, 
where  earth  and  sea  have  a  definite  meaning,  quite  independent  of  literal  locality  ; 
the  former  referring  to  the  scene  of  settled  government,  and  the  latter  to  a  state  of 
anarchy  (cf.  Rev.  xii.  12;  xiii.  1,  11).  Indeed,  the  instances  of  Eev.  xiii.  are 
admitted  on  all  hands.  It  is  most  natural,  therefore,  to  adhere  to  the  same  sense 
of  the  prophetic  language  in  our  chapter.  The  meaning  alForded,  also,  seems  simple 
and  excellent,  without  the  iucongrnous  mixture  contended  for.  And  as  we  saw 
under  the  seals,  so  here  in  the  trumpet  series,  the  fourth,  not  to  speak  of  the  third, 
presents  an  insuperable  barrier.  For,  surely,  we  must  take  the  heavenly  lumi- 
naries in  a  homogeneous  sense  ;  and  how  then  can  these  be  understood  literally  ? 
The  occurrence  of  the  figure  in  the  woe-trumpets  would  not  have  been  so  conclu- 
sive ;  for  a  diiference  there  is,  when  we  enter  on  the  fifth  trumpet.  But  it  is  in 
the  fourth,  that  we  have  sun,  moon,  and  stars  smitten.  If  these,  then,  are  con- 
fessedly symbolical,  why  cut  the  thread  of  consistency  ?  why  not  interpret  the 
three  preceding  trumpets,  as  to  land,  sea,  river  and  founraius,  in  a  kindred  spirit? 
The  sole  reason  I  can  conceive  for  t  he  opposite  course  is  tlie  difficulty  that  is  found 
in  adapting  the  successive  inroads  of  the  Barbarians,  in  a  sufficiently  definite  form, 
to  the  various  trumpet  blasts.  But  even  so,  what  inetTectual  eflbrt  and  uncer- 
tainty after  all!  If  I  understand  the  Horae  A.  I.  p.  352,  "  the  burning  of  trees  and 
herbage"  is  viewed  physically  by  one  who  is  generally  the  intrepid  antagonist  of 
literalism  in  the  mouths  of  his  Futurist  friends.  Why  not  expound  the  burning 
of  the  third  of  the  earth!  which  critics  admit  must  be  received  into  the  text  ? 
Taken  figuratively,  all  is  easy  and  plain,  as  well  as  harmonious.  Again,  if  the 
thunders,  lightnings,  voices  and  cartliquake  in  chap.  viii.  5,  are  answered  by  the 
primary  insurrection  of  the  Goths  under  Alaric,  immediately  after  the  death  of 
Theodosius  the  Great,  what  is  the  analogous  reference  of  the  lightnings,  voices 
and  thunders  of  chap.  iv.  5  ?  Mr.  Birks  has  urged  repeated  instances  where  the 
prefiguration  ill  accords  with  Mr.  E.'s  alleged  fulfilment  in  history  ;  but  I  am  not 
careful  to  insist  on  such  points. 


ON    EARTH.  147 

of  temptation,  which  is  to  come  upon  all  the  habitable  world,  to 
try  them  that  dicell  on  the  earth.  (Rev.  iii.  10.)  The  reason, 
I  suppose,  why  the  earthly-minded  are  brought  out  so  distinctly 
there  is,  because  the  church  in  question  supposes  an  nnusual 
apprehension  of  Christ,  and  this  in  a  heavenly  way,  both  as  to 
present  enjoyment  of  Him,  and  as  to  the  hope  of  His  return. 
Hence  the  contrast  of  the  portion  of  those  whose  hearts  were 
here  below.  They  shall  eat  the  bitter  fruit  of  their  choice  when 
the  great  tribulation  comes,  as  those  whose  affections  are  set  on 
heavenly  things  will  then  actually  be  where  they  dwell  now  in 
spirit.  Next,  under  the  fifth  seal,  (Rev.  vi.  10,)  the  souls  of  the 
early  Apocalyptic  sufferers  are  represented  as  calling  upon  the 
Sovereign  Lord  to  judge  and  avenge  their  blood  on  "them  that 
dwell  on  the  earth."  These  will  then  have  broken  out  into 
relentless,  deadly  persecution  against  the  witnesses,  whom  God 
will  have  on  earth,  when  the  seals  are  being  fulfilled.  Now, 
under  the  woe-trumpets,  we  find  them  to  be  the  special  objects. 
Further  details  we  must  defer  till  we  come  to  the  chapters  that 
treat  of  them  more  particularly. 


148  THE    FIFTH    TRUMPET 


CHAPTER    IX. 

A  prefatory  remark  I  may  be  permitted  to  make  is,  that  our 
chapter  furnishes  an  incidental  proof  that  the  trumpets  are  not 
coincident  with  the  seals.  For  the  sealing-  was  given  in  the 
large  parenthesis  (Rev.  vii.)  which  followed  the  sixth  seal, 
whereas  it  is  referred  to,  not  after  the  sixth  trumpet,  but  before 
it.  This  could  not  be  if  the  two  series  of  judgments  ran  parallel 
to  each  other.  The  natural,  and  I  believe,  true  inference,  is, 
that  the  seals  had  finished  their  course  before  the  trumpets 
begin,  so  that  when  the  fifth  trumpet  sounds  the  first  "woe," 
the  men  of  the  earth  fall  under  its  predicted  torment,  those  who 
were  sealed  being  referred  to  as  in  the  scene,  but  exempted 
from  the  scourge.  How  could  there  be  a  commission  to  hurt 
nothing  but  those  men  who  have  not  the  seal  of  God,  if  there 
had  been  no  sealing  yet?  If  the  sealing  had  already  taken 
place,  parallelism  there  is  not  between  the  respective  seals  and 
trumpets,  nor  can  they  even  harmonize  in  point  of  time.  They 
are  consecutive,  and  not  concurrent,  and  the  last  seal,  as  we 
have  seen,  is  the  mere  prelude  of  silence  for  the  new  series  of 
divine  plagues  to  commence.  How  could  that  be  if  they  were 
to  be  accomplished  side  by  side  ?  For  if  the  first  six  seals  con- 
fessedly follow  in  regular  order,  the  seventh  must  be  the  last  in 
accomplishment,  as  well  as  in  revelation  ;  but  the  seventh,  in- 
stead of  shadowing  some  additional  dealing  in  providence,  like 
its  predecessors,  is  only  a  brief  pause  in  heaven  ushering  in 
another  and  more  severe  class  of  decreed  judgments.  And  of 
these  trumpets  we  must  now  enter  upon  the  fifth  and  sixth,  to 
which  chap.  ix.  is  devoted,  i.e.  the  first  two  woes. 

"  And  the  fifth  angel  sounded,  and  I  saw  a  star  fallen  from 
heaven  unto  the  eai'th ;  and  to  him  was  given  the  key  of  the 
pit  of  the  abyss.  And  lie  opened  the  pit  of  the  abyss  ;  and 
there-  arose  a  smoke  out  of  the  pit  as  the  smoke  of  a  great  fur- 
nace ;  and  the  sun  and  the  air  were  darkened  by  reason  of  the 
smoke  of  the  pit.  And  out  of  the  smoke  came  locusts  unto  the 
earth,  and  to  them  was  given  power  as  the  scorpions  of  the 
eMrth  have  power.  And  it  was  commanded  them  that  they 
should  not  hurt  the  grass  of  the  earth,  neither  any  green  thing, 
nor  any  tree,  but  the  men  who  have  not  the  seal  of  God  upon 
their  foreheads."  (Ver.  1-4). 


OR    FIRST    WOE.  149 

The  star  fallen  from  heaven  to  earth  is  a  dignitary  in  an 
apostate  state  ;  for  a  real  personage  is  intended,  as  the  next 
words  show,  "  to  him  was  given  the  key  of  the  pit  of  the  abyss." 
The  allusion  seems  evident  to  Isa.  xiv.  12,  where  the  king  of 
Babylon  is  taunted  with  "  How  art  thou  fallen,  O  Lucifer,  [i.e. 
day-star,]  son  of  the  morning  !  .  .  .  .  Yet  thou  shalt  be  brought 
down  to  hell,  to  the  sides  of  the  pit."  Here  it  is  not  his  doom, 
but  the  authority  he  was  permitted  to  exercise  over  the  abyss, 
which  is  the  expression  of  the  source  of  Satanic  evil  and  misery. 
"  He  opened  the  pit  of  the  abyss,  and  there  arose  a  smoke  out 
of  it,  as  the  smoke  of  a  great  furnace," — the  symbol  of  a  delu- 
sion which  darkens  the  mind  of  man.  "  The  sun  and  the  air 
were  darkened  by  reason  of  the  smoke  of  the  pit."  The  su- 
preme power  and  all  healthful  and  social  intlaence  suffer  pre- 
eminently from  its  blinding  effects.  Nor  was  this  the  sole 
result.  "  Out  of  the  smoke  came  locusts,"  the  figure  of  the 
aggressive  instruments  of  rapine,  and  these  clothed  with  a  sin- 
gular power  of  torment,  "  as  the  scorpions  of  the  earth  have 
power."  Tiie  command  given  shows,  I  think,  very  plainly,  the 
error  of  such  as  apply  the  locusts  in  a  literal  way.  They  were 
not  to  hurt  the  grass  of  the  earth,  &c.,  that  is,  their  natural 
food,  if  real  locusts  were  meant.  Men  were  to  be  the  objects  of 
these  symbolic  depredators — men,  siive  God's  sealed  ones.  And 
yet  it  was  the  destiny  of  these  marauders  not  to  kill  but  to 
torment  men  five  months.  (Ver.  5.)  "  And  their  torment  [was] 
as  the  torment  of  a  scorpion  when  it  striketh  a  man.  And  in 
those  days  shall  men  seek  death  and  shall  not  find  it ;  and  shall 
desire  to  die,  and  death  fleeth  from  them."  (Ver.  6.)  Nothing 
on  earth  can  exceed  the  agony  of  conscience  which  vvill  be 
inflicted  on  their  victims.  It  is  a  yet  stronger  colouring  of 
wretchedness,  than  that  in  which  Jeremiah  (chap,  viii.  3)  depicts 
the  desolated  and  dispersed  Jews  in  all  the  places  whither  they 
should  be  driven  in  the  Lord's  sore  displeasure. 

But  there  is  a  further  description.  "  And  the  likenesses  of 
the  locusts  [were]  like  unto  horses  prepared  for  battle  j  and 
[there  were]  on  their  heads  as  it  were  crowns  of  gold  ;  and  their 
faces  [were]  as  the  faces  of  men.  And  they  had  hair  as  the 
hair  of  women's  and  their  teeth  were  as  [the  teeth]  of  lions. 
And  they  had  breastplates  as  it  were  iron  breastplates,  and  the 
sound  of  their  wings  [was]  as  the  sound  of  chariots  of  many 
horses  running  to  battle.  And  they  have  tails  like  unto  scor- 
pions, and  stings  ;*    and  their  power  [was]  in  their  tails  to  hurt 

*  Tlio  common  reading  is  followed  by  the  Authorized  Version,  "and  there 
were  stings  ;  and  their  power  was  to  hurt  men  five  months." 


150  THE    SIXTH    TRUMPET 

men  five  months.  They  have  as  king  over  them  the  angel  of 
the  abyss  ;  his  name  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  [is]  Abaddon  ;  and 
in  the  Greek  tongue  lie  hath  the  name  Apollyon."  (Ver.  7-11.) 
They  were  not  mere  plunderei's,  but  there  was  warlike  energy  ; 
and  they  claimed  for  their  victorious  career  the  righteous  sanction 
of  God,  whose  image  and  glory  they  bore  outwardly,  whereas  in 
truth  they  were  thoroughly  subject  to  man  and  Satan  too.  Fe- 
rocity is  theirs,  and  hearts  steeled  against  every  emotion  of  pity 
in  their  swift  career.  But  their  worst  power  was  the  venom  of 
falsehood  which  followed.  It  was  the  energy  of  false  doctrine, 
represented  by  the  scorpion  sting  in  the  tail.  And  we  know 
from  elsewhere,  "  the  prophet  that  speaketh  lies,  he  is  the  tail." 
Finally,  the  king  is  the  angel  of  the  abyss,  the  same,  perhaps, 
as  the  fallen  star,  who  had  the  key  of  the  pit.  If  so,  it  is  a 
Satanic  destroyer,  though  not  Satan.  It  is  in  this  world  that 
the  devil  is  so  exalted,  its  prince ;  he  is  ruler  also  of  the  power 
of  the  air  and  the  god  of  this  age.  In  the  abyss  he  will  be  bound 
as  a  prisoner  for  a  long  season  ;  in  hell,  he  will  be  tormented 
for  ever  and  ever,  the  most  miserable  object  there,  and  in  no 
wise  the  angel  or  king  either  of  the  one  or  the  other.  So  poets 
dream  ;  but  not  so  saith  the  Scripture. 

"  And  the  sixtli  angel  sounded,  and  I  heard  a  voice  from  the 
four  horns  of  the  golden  altai*  which  is  before  God,  saying  to  the 
sixth  angel  which  had  the  trumpet.  Loose  the  four  angels  that 
are  bound  at  the  great  river  Euphrates.  And  the  four  angels 
were  loosed,  that  were  prepared  for*  the  hour  and  day  and 
month  and  year,  for  to  slay  the  third  of  men.  And  the  number 
of  the  army  of  the  horsemen  [was]  twof   myriads  of  myriads  : 

*  Mr.  E.  seems  singularly  unfortunate  in  his  remarks  on  the  G-reek  text.  Thus,  in 
verse  15,  he  contends  for  the  strangest  pos.^ible  version  of  els,  as  =  after,  or  at  the 
expiration  of,  the  aggregated  period  in  question  ;  and  he  twice  in  p.  490  speaks  of 
airoKTeivai,  a  form  and  import  different  from  Iva  airoKTelvuffii',  the  true  phrase 
bej'ond  all  doubt,  as  he  gives  it  in  p.  4-92.  It  needs  no  reasoning  to  see  that  the 
action  is  not  momentary  but  continuous,  and  that  the  preposition  therefore  has 
its  ordinary  sense,  as  Mr.  Birks  has  properly  remarked. 

t  Mr.  E.  is  quite  wrong  (11.  A.  I.,  p.  453,  note)  in  supposing  that  Oriesbach 
prefers  altogether  to  reject  the  Svo.  Michaolis  considers  it  "  a  very  improbable 
reading"  in  the  ill-considered  and  imsound  last  chap,  of  his  Introd.  No  such 
doubt  is  expressed,  but,  on  the  contrary,  5i!io  is  the  reading  preferred,  both  in 
Griesbach's  own  second  edition  (1805)  and  in  the  London  reprint  of  1818.  This 
odd  mistake  is  repeated  in  yet  stronger  terms  in  note  2  to  p.  477,  where  it  is  said 
that  Griesbach,  on  external  evidence,  prefers  the  more  simple  reading  fx.  fi.  "  which 
eeems  to  me  preferable  on  internal  also."  The  common  text,  read  by  many  cur- 
sives, turns  out  to  be  that  of  the  Sinai  MS.,  and  its  equivalent  in  sense  appears  in 
the  Alexandrian  and  a  few  good  later  copies.  B.  and  very  many  others,  supported 
by  the  Arabic  of  the  Polyglotts  and  a  Slav,  ms.,  but  contrary  to  all  other  ancient 
versions,  omit  5vo.  Matthaei  follows  them  iu  that  reading,  which  is  the  easier 
of  the  two. 


OB    SECOND    WOE. 


151 


I  heard  the  number  of  them.  And  thus  I  saw  the  horses  hi  the 
vision,  and  those  that  sat  on  them,  having-  breast-plates  fiery 
and  hyacinthine  and  brimstone-like  ;  and  the  heads  of  the  horses 
[were]  as  the  heads  of  hons  ;  and  out  of  their  mouths  issued  fire 
and  smoke  and  brimstone.  By  these  three  plagues  was  the 
third  of  men  killed,  by  the  fire,  and  the  smoke,  and  tlie  brim- 
stone, which  issued  out  of  their  mouths.  For  the  power  of  the 
horses  is  in  their  mouth,  and  in  their  tails  :  for  their  tails  were 
like  unto  serpents,  and  had  heads,  and  with  them  they  do  hurt. 
And  the  rest  of  the  men  who  were  not  killed  by  these  plagues, 
repented  not  of  the  works  of  their  hands,  that  they  should  not 
worship  demons,  and  idols  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass,  and 
stone,  and  wood  :  which  can  neither  see,  nor  hear,  nor  walk. 
Neither  repented  they  of  their  murders,  nor  of  their  sorceries, 
nor  of  their  fornication,  nor  of  their  thefts."  (Ver.  13-21.) 

It  is  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  no  doubt,  which  is  heard  from 
the  horns  of  the  golden  altar.  But  what  a  solemn  sound  is 
this — above  all,  issuing  thence?  For  ordinarily  that  altar  is  the 
special  witness  of  His  all-prevailing  intercession.  Thence  the 
incense  rose  up  before  God.  It  was  the  horns  of  the  brazen 
altar  merely  which  received  the  blood  of  the  sin-offering,  when 
an  individual  sinned,  whether  a  ruler,  or  one  of  the  common 
people.  But  when  the  whole  congregation  were  guilty,  the 
priest  was  commanded  to  put  some  of  the  victim's  blood  upon 
the  horns  of  the  golden  altar  ;  for  the  communion  of  the  people, 
as  a  whole,  was  interrupted,  and  needed  to  be  restored.  Here 
how  different !  One  voice  from  the  four  horns  of  the  golden  altar 
orders  the  angel  of  the  sixth  trumpet  to  loose  the  four  angels 
that  were  up  to  that  time  bound  at  (or  by)  the  Euphrates. 
There  they  had  been  prepared  for  (not  "an,"  but)  the  hour 
and  day  and  month  and  year  to  slay  the  third  of  men.  They 
were  prepared,  not  during  that  time,  much  less  when  it  was 
expired,  but  with  a  view  to  it:  when  that  hour  and  day  and 
month  and  year  arrived,  or  rather,  until  the  term  was  over, 
they  were  I'eady  to  accomplish  their  prescribed  slaughter. 

Still,  if  it  be  terrible  to  hear  such  a  signal  from  the  altar  of 
incense,  how  comforting  to  think  that  all  in  the  judgment  is 
so  minutely  ordered  and  fore-ordained  of  the  Lord !  He  it 
is  who  first  gives  the  word,  and  gives  it  to  the  holy  angel. 
The  angel  again  looses  the  four  bound  at  the  Euphrates.  The 
evil  can  only  act  when  and  as  far  as  is  allowed  of  the  good, 
and  the  good,  however  they  may  excel  in  strength,  only  do 
His  commandments,  hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  His  word. 
The  notion  that  we  are  to  identify  the  four  here  with  the  angels. 


152  DIFFilRENCE    OF    THE    TWO    WOES. 

who  restrained  the  winds  in  chap,  vii.,  is  strange,  seeing  that 
contrast  is  marked,  not  resemblance.  Here  they  are  not  res- 
training, but  restrained,  which  is  nowhere  said  of  holy  angels. 
There  they  stood  at  the  four  corners  of  the  earth,  as  separate  as 
they  could  be ;  here  all  are  bound  in  the  same  spot. 

As  to  the  character  of  the  second  woe  itself,  it  is  not  torment 
like  the  lirst,  but  destruction  of  life.  Not  that  there  is  no  ele- 
ment of  false  prophecy  here,  as  there  was  there ;  "  for  the  power* 
of  the  horses,"  it  is  said,  "  is  in  their  mouth  and  in  their  tails  :  for 
their  tails  were  like  serpents,  and  had  heads  ;  and  with  them 
they  do  hurt."  That  is,  venomous  error  they  did  propagate 
and  leave  behind  them,  and  this  with  more  settled  plan  than  in 
the  locust-woe.  The  locusts,  in  the  first  woe,  had  scorpion-like 
tails  and  stings  :  the  horses,  in  the  second,  had  ser|)ent-like 
tails,  which  had  heads.  But  they  had  power  in  their  mouth 
also.  "  And  thus  I  saw  the  horses  in  the  vision,  and  those 
that  sat  on  them,  having  breastplates  of  fire  and  jacinth,  and 
like  brimstone  :  and  the  heads  of  the  horses  were  as  the  heads 
of  lions  ;  and  out  of  their  mouths  proceeded  fire  and  smoke, 
and  brimstone."  It  is  the  judicial  power  of  Satan,  as  far  as 
God  permits  that.  Besides,  it  far  surpasses  in  energy  and 
aggressive  destructive  warfare  the  preceding  woe.  That  was 
spiritual — evilly  spiritual,  of  course  ;  this  is  more  secular, 
though  in  its  train  follows  the  injury  of  the  enemy's  delusion 
and  falsehood.  It  seems  also  more  varied  as  far  as  leaders 
go  :  for  the  other  had  but  one,  this  had  four  angelic  agents, 
at  their  head. 

"  And  the  rest  of  the  men  who  were  not  killed  by  these 
plagues,  repented  not,"  &c.  Humbling  lesson,  and  most  need- 
ful to  remember !  God  has  been  sending  judgment  upon 
judgment,  first  on  men's  circumstances,  and  then  on  themselves, 
and  in  this  last  case  torment,  and  finally,  death  itself  But  it 
is  in  vain.  Such  is  man,  after  all  this,  that  he  repents  not 
of  his  evil,  either  religiously  or  morally. 

The  reader  will  perceive  that  I  am  merely  anxious  to  present 
the  leading  feature  of  each  woe.  as  far  as  I  am  enabled,  so 
as,  in  some  measure,  to  help  souls  to  the  understanding  of  the 

*  In  note  2  to  p.  485  of  the  Horae  A.,  Vol.  I.,  it  is  said,  "  Mill  reads  at  e^ovffiai 
avTuv,  *  their  aufhorittes  arc  in  their  tails.'  A  notable  reading  !  The  word  is 
used  in  the  plural,  Luke  sii.  11  ;  Rom.  xiii.  1,  &c."  How  strange  is  the  effect  of 
a  system!  The  truth  is  that  the  plural  here  is  due  to  Erasmus,  whom  E.Stephens 
followed  ;  and  Mill's  text  is  merely  his  third  edition  with  some  errata  corrected. 
It  is  clear  from  Mill'y  text  that  the  evidence  is  entirely  adverse.  There  is  not  a 
shadow  of  doubt  that  the  singular  is  right ;  and  very  probably  al  yap  oiipal  led  to 
ai  yap  flovffiat. 


THEIR    APPLICATION.  153 

prophecy.  This,  he  will  remember,  is  a  very  distinct,  thing- 
from  the  application  of  a  prophecy.  The  question  of  the 
persons,  or  places,  or  times  alluded  to,  may  be  deeply  interest- 
ing, but  it  is  subordinate  to  the  understanding  of  the  book. 

For  my  own  part,  I  do  not  doubt  that  the  common  applica- 
tion of  the  locusts  to  the  Saracens  and  of  the  Euphratean 
horsemen  to  the  Turks  is  well  founded.  But  we  have  seen 
repeatedly  that  the  fulfilment  of  the  Revelation  cannot,  pro- 
perly, be  before  the  heavenly  saints  are  caught  up,  and  the 
earthly  people  are  once  more  the  objects  of  God's  dealings 
on  the  earth  and  in  their  own  land,  though  by  no  means  to 
the  exclusion  of  divine  testimony  and  its  blessed  effects  among 
the  Gentiles.  According  to  this  later  and  final  accomplish- 
ment, the  second  woe  would  be  fulfilled,  I  suppose,  in  the  early 
ravages  of  the  north-eastern  (or  Assyrian)  armies,  as  the  first 
might  be  Antichrist's  delusive  agency  in  the  land  of  Palestine. 
I  conceive  that  when  the  prophecy  will  be  realised  in  all  its 
precision,  the  scene  where  these  mysterious  locusts  are  to  enact 
their  bitter  but  transitory  torment,  will  be  the  land,  where  at  that 
time  the  Jews  will  have  largely  gathered,  but,  as  regards  the  mass, 
in  unbehef.  The  unsealed  naturally  points  to  them  and  most 
probably  to  their  land.  For  it  will  be  noticed  that  there  is  no 
"  third  "  under  this  trumpet  to  intimate  the  direction  of  the  woe, 
nor  anything  that  I  observe  save  the  exemption  of  the  sealed. 
The  rest  of  the  Jews  were  still  in  judicial  blindness,  and  are  the 
implied  objects  of  this  judgment.  If  they  are  the  preparatory 
movements  of  these  two  powers,  each  is  as  decidedly  opposed  to 
the  other  as  both  are  to  the  Lord  Jesus :  they  are  to  be  suc- 
cessively judged  and  destroyed  when  He  comes  in  power  and 
glory.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the  same  chap.  xiv.  of 
Isaiah,  which  I  referred  to  in  illustration  of  the  star  fallen  from 
heaven,  (i.e.,  the  chief  personage  under  the  first  woe,)  treats  also 
of  the  Assyrian  enemy,  which  I  judge  to  be  the  full  meaning 
of  those  who  figure  under  the  second  woe.  "  The  Lord  of  hosts 
hath  sworn,  saying.  Surely  as  I  have  thought,  so  shall  it  come 
to  pass;  and  as  I  have  purposed,  so  shall  it  stand  ;  that  I  will 
break  the  Assyrian  in  my  land,  and  upon  my  mountains  tread 
him  under  foot:  then  shall  his  yoke  depart  from  off  them,  and 
his  burden  depart  from  off  their  shoulders.  This  is  the  purpose 
that  is  purposed  upon  the  whole  earth  :  and  this  is  the  hand 
that  is  stretched  out  upon  all  the  nations.  For  the  Lord  of 
hosts  hath  purposed,  and  who  shall  disannul  it?  and  his  hand 
is  stretched  out,  and  who  shall  turn  it  back?"  (Ver.  24 — 27.) 


154  THEIR    FULFILMENT. 

The  difference  is  that  Isaiah  gives  us  the  end  of  their  career 
for  the  dehverance  of  Israel,  while  St.  John  shows  us  rather  its 
beginning-  and  course,  as  a  scourge  upon  apostate  Judaism  and 
Christendom.  It  would  be  a  mistake  to  limit  Isaiah  to  the 
bygone  history,  or  to  take  the  past  as  more  than  a  type  of  the 
future,  however  important  in  its  day.  For,  in  the  history,  the 
Assyrian  fell  first,  and  Babylon's  doom  was  long  after.  In  the 
prophecy  it  is  the  last  representative  of  Babylon,  (i.e.,  the 
Beast  of  the  crisis,)  who  is  destroyed  first,  and  then  he  who 
answers  to  the  great  Assyrian  leader  of  the  nations,  shall  come 
to  his  end  and  none  shall  help  him.  So  it  is  written  in  Isaiah 
X.  12,  "Wherefore  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  when  the  Lord 
hath  performed  his  whole  work  upon  mount  Zion  and  on 
Jerusalem,  I  will  punish  the  fruit  of  the  stout  heart  of  the  king 
of  Assyria,  and  the  glory  of  his  high  looks,"  &c.  Our  chapter 
of  the  Revelation  gives  us  some  of  the  earlier  policy  of  the 
Assyrian,  if  not  of  Antichrist,  or  of  their  respective  parties.* 

According  to  the  more  vague  and  protracted  historical  appli- 
cation, which  I  conceive  to  have  been  comprehended  in  the 
divine  purpose  of  these  visions,  it  may  be  asked  how  this  chapter 
is  to  be  understood.  I  have  already  briefly  shown  how  the 
earlier  trumpets  brought  us  down  to  the  extinction  of  the 
Western  Roman  empire.     Pursuing  the  same  thread,  the  fifth 

*  It  may  interest  some  readers  to  learn  a  few  more  particulars  of  the  readings 
wherein  the  Sinai  MS.  (K)  either  differs  from  or  confirms  the  other  known  wit- 
nesses. This  I  am  enabled  to  furnish  from  Rev.  ix.  5  to  chap.  x.  8,  out  of  Tis- 
chendorf's  "  Notitia  Editionis  Codicis  Bibliorum  Siuaitici"  (Lipsiae,  1860)  p.  38, 
IX.  5.  For  Traia-p  (or  ttXtj^t!)  TretrTj  (an  evident  erratum.  Indeed,  the  manuscript 
vacillates  as  to  orthograpliy.  Thus,  in  this  chap,  only  we  have  in  17  Bvcoei.  and 
6ioy,  and  in  IS  Onov).  6.  evptjaovaiv  with  B.  &c.  against  A.  &c.  |  (pvyr)  by  error 
for  (pevyei.  7.  o/xoiot  err.  for  ofiota.  \  ofj-otoi  xpyc'^  with  A.,  &c.,  instead  of  XP""'"^ 
with  B.,  &c.  8.  eiX"'')  ^^  A.  10.  ofjLoiois  err.  from  following  word.  |  Kevrpa  /cat 
omitting  Kai  after  avrwv  with  AB.  &c.  11.  exovffiv  eavroiv  rov  ^aatXea  Toy  ay.  t. 
ajS.  a>  ov.  avTCt)  ejS.  afi.  Kai  ev  ttj  eW-i]viSi  e.  ov.  aic.  12.  on.  fi.  air.  i5.  ^px^Tai  €.  5. 
ov.  (A  corrector,  who  is  assigned  by  Tisch.  to  the  end  of  the  sixth  or  to  the 
seventh  century,  gives  rj  /x.  and  epxovTai.)  13.  It  is  uncertain  whetlier  the  scribe 
meant  to  connect  yuera  ravra  with  the  end  of  last  verse  or  the  beginning  of  this,  par- 
ticularly as  Kai  does  not  appear  before  6  e/croy.  Certainly  he  reads  cficoyijy  rov  9.  omit- 
ting fxiav  eK  Tcov  reaffcipaiy  icepdrcoy.     (The  same  corrector  has  (pwyrjs  e/c  rccy  Keparuv.) 

14.  Aiyoyra  witli   A.   (but  the  same  corr.  Keyovarnjs.)  \  o  ex-  '^^t  reaa-apfs  by  err. 

15.  omits  ol  before  -/jroi.  ]  ttji/  wp.  k.  /jl.  omitting  k.  •);/x€.  as  in  the  Complutensian 
edition.  Then,  after  iVa,  it  adds  fi-q.  16.  Svo  ixvpiaioiy  /xvptaSa^  rjK.  17.  eiraycc 
avTwy.  I  dvaiSeis.  18.  omits  rpiwy.  I'J.  ex^fcas  (by  err.  from  next  word).  The 
writer  himself  seems  to  have  subsequently  inserted  i  a  little  above.  20.  reads  Tr\. 
avTOjy  Tav.  \  ovSe  with  B.  14.  &c.,  and  not  ov  with  C.  and  more  than  thirty-five 
cursives,  nor  the  received  ovre  with  A.  and  many  manuscripts.  |  TrpotxKvyriffovffiy 
with  AC.  &c.,  against  B.  and  most.  |  XP"^"""'"-  |  x*^''^'''  I  ''•  '''•  ?•  ''•  '''■  ^'^-  ^l- 
(pio.  (err.  for  f6.)  |  <papjxaKwy  with  C.  and  many  cursives,  against  A  B.  &c.  | 
irovripias  (a  later  corr.  tropvias). 


LOCAL    OR    NATIONAL    SIGNIFICANCE    OF    EMBLEMS.  165 

trumpet  has  a  distinct  bearing  upon  the  Saracenic  infliction,  as 
the  sixth  refers  to  the  furious  onset  of  the  Turks,  Hence  one  is 
quite  wilHng  to  allow  the  general  reference  of  the  fallen  star  to 
Mohammed,  who  was  the  instrument  of  Satan  in  opening  on  the 
world  the  delusion  of  the  abyss,  with  all  its  darkening  effects. 
Certainly  the  description  suits,  in  many  of  its  characteristic 
features,  not  the  gradual  growth  and  spread  of  the  doctrinal 
and  moral  pravities  of  Christendom,  but  that  host  of  marauders 
who,  embracing  with  ardour  the  hell-inspired  creed  of  the  Ara- 
bian false  prophet,  sprang  forth  on  their  ambitious  and  fanatical 
career.  Not  that  I  can  accept  without  serious  drawback  much 
that  has  been  made  of  the  local  or  national  significance  of  the 
locusts  and  the  scorpions,  the  horses  and  the  lions,  the  faces  of 
men,  the  hair  of  women,  and  the  breast-plates  of  iron.  For 
instance,  it  is  plain,  that  the  nation,  whose  rapid  devastation  of 
Palestine  is  portrayed  in  Joel  ii.,  (the  prototype  of  the  Apoca- 
lyptic locusts,)  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  Saracens  or  Arabia,  but 
is  rather  the  northern  army,  "  the  Assyrian,"  of  which  the  Jew- 
ish prophets  so  often  speak.  Compare  also  Nahum  iii.  17,  the 
reference  of  which  confirms  the  same  thing.  An  exactly  similar 
argument  applies  to  the  use  of  "  scorpions,"  as  in  Ezek.  ii.  6, 
where  it  is  used  figuratively  as  here,  but  with  not  the  most 
distant  glance  at  the  robbers  of  the  desert.  As  to  the  "  horses," 
the  very  next  vision  of  the  Euphratean  warriors  refutes  the 
notion  of  a  geographical  reference ;  for  the  Turks  are  a  totally 
distinct  race  and  emerged  from  a  different  quarter ;  and  yet 
horses  are  just  as  prominent  here,  as  in  the  prophecy  of  their 
precursors.*  Also,  in  the  one  we  have  the  heads,  in  the  other 
the  teeth,  of  "  lions."  This,  therefore,  destroys  anything  like  an 
exclusively  distinct  usage,  not  to  speak  of  the  manifold  applica- 
tion which  other  Scriptures  indicate.  The  truth  is  that  the 
Spirit  is  making  up  an  apt  and  complete  symbolic  picture,  and 
in  no  way  ties  Himself  to  the  animals,  &c.,  peculiar  to  the 
country. 

To  my  mind  the  intention  is  moral,  not  geographical,  and  this 
kind  of  teaching  detracts  from  the  real  force  of  Scripture,  occu- 
pying the  mind  with  that  which  may  be  partially  true  in  a  natural 
way,  but  not  I  believe  the  object  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Hence 
does  it  not  seem  almost  trifling  to  exti-act  from  the  faces  of  men, 
the  hair  of  women,  and  crowns  like  gold,  an  allusion  to  beard 

*  Compare  also  what  some  of  these  very  writers  fouud  upon  the  horses  of 
Rev.  vi.  Egypt  is  the  first  power  historically  celebrated  for  its  horses  (Esod. 
XV.)  So  it  was  the  great  market  in  Solomon's  day,  (1  Kings  x.  28,)  as  Togarmah 
was  for  Tyre  (Ezek.  xxvii.  14).  See  Isaiah  xxxi.  1,  3.  In  Zechariah  they  sym- 
bolize the  various  imperial  powers. 


156  DIFFICULTIES    IN    THE   WAY 

or  moustache,  coupled  with  literal  flowing  hair  surmounted  by  a 
turban  ?  Taken  as  emblems  of  character,  the  dignity  of  the 
divine  word  is  vindicated  and  felt.  The  locusts  naturally  point 
to  countless  swarms,  devouring  in  specified  limits,  but  yet  more 
distinguished  by  the  tormenting  sting  of  false  doctrine.  The 
unsealed,  the  men  of  the  earth,  were  the  victims  of  the  scourge, 
but  the  object  was  a  conquering  proi)agandism  :  not  the  ex- 
tinction of  prosperity,  but  rather  the  maintenance  of  it,  at  the 
expense  of  the  truth,  and  this  for  a  limited  period.  The  resem- 
blance to  horses  prepared  for  battle  is  the  expression  of  their 
aggressive  attitude,  and  the  crowns  like  gold  seem  to  intimate 
their  vaunted  confidence  in  a  divinely  righteous  mission  of  victory. 
Their  faces  as  of  men,  but  with  the  hair  of  women,  may  denote 
that,  with  all  their  claim  to  act  authoritatively  in  the  name  of  God, 
they  were  nevertheless  subject  to  the  merest  human  authority, 
and  not  to  God  after  all.  The  iron  breast  plates,  the  lion-teeth, 
the  sounding  wings,  I  regard  as  the  figure  of  the  unflinching  cou- 
rage of  fanaticism,  their  strongest  armour,  and  the  ferocious 
depredations  that  accompanied  their  wonderfully  rapid  warfare. 
The  Hebrew  name  of  their  king  confirms,  in  my  opinion,  the  full 
reference  to  the  special  wasting  of  the  Jews,  as  also  a  connexion 
with  the  Eastern  Empire  may  be  implied  in  the  Greek.  I  have 
thus  rehearsed  the  spiritual  significance  of  the  first  Avoe's  emissa- 
ries, stating  particularly  what  might  be  supposed  to  prefigure  the 
past  accomphshment,  according  to  which  the  five  months,  of 
course,  must  be  taken  as  months  of  years.  But  I  protest  against 
the  arbitrariness  of  interpreting  one  part  of  the  account  literally 
and  the  other  figuratively.  Again,  if  we  examine  it  closely,  the 
utmost  allowable  is  some  such  partial  incipient  accomjilishment. 
For  it  is  plain  that  the  prophet  of  Mecca  was  more  like  a  rising 
star,  than  a  fallen  dignitary  ;  insomuch  that  Mede,  with  the 
earlier  writers  in  general,  applies  it  to  Satan,  as  others  to  the 
Pope,  &c.  Again,  the  command  not  to  kill  is  very  hard  to 
reconcile  with  the  exterminating  policy  of  the  Saracenic  incur- 
sions ;  and  the  term  of  150  years  has  been  doubled  by  some  of 
great  weight,  because  of  a  repeated  mention,  (but  compare  Rev. 
XX.,)  in  order  to  eke  out  a  more  plausible  solution.  Even  this 
improbable  inference  from  the  twofold  statement  of  the  five 
months  labours  under  its  own  difliculties,  as  others  have  suflEi- 
ciently  shown. 

As  regards  the  second  woe,  the  first  difficulty  which  the  pro- 
tracted view  has  to  encountei-  is  the  meaning  of  the  four  angels 
that  were  bound  by  the  Euphrates.  Most  of  the  Protestant 
school  apply  them  to  four  Mussulman  powers,  either  successive 


OF    THE    PAST    PROTRACTED    ACCOMPLISHMENT.  157 

or  contemporaneous.  But  says  Mr.  Elliott  (Horae  A.  I.,  pp. 
461,462)  "  the  interpretations  are  found  on  examination  to  be, 
one  and  all,  inadmissible.  As  the  commissioning  and  loosening 
of  the  four  angels  in  vision  was  but  a  single  act,  so  the  agencies 
symbolized  must  necessarily  have  been  at  one  and  the  same  time 
loosed  or  commissioned :  by  which  consideration  alone  all  such 
successions  of  destroying  agencies  seem  excluded,  as  Vitringa, 
and  after  him,  Woodhouse,  have  suggested  in  explanation.  And 
as  to  cote7n]Jorary  Turkman  dynasties,  whether  we  refer  to  the 
list  given  by  Mede,  and  by  Newton  after  him,  or  that  by  Faber 
and  by  Keith,  from  Mills  and  Gibbon,  there  is  no  quaternion  of 
them  that  can  be  shown  either  to  have  combined  together  in  the 
destruction  of  the  Greek  empire, —  to  have  been  all  locally 
situated  by  the  Euphrates, — to  have  had  existence  at  the  time 
asserted  to  be  that  of  the  commissioning  of  the  four  angels, —  or 
to  have  continued  in  existence  up  to  the  time  of  the  completion 
of  the  commission  given,  in  the  destruction  of  the  Greek  empire. 
In  short,  the  manifest  inconsistency  with  historic  fact  of  every 
such  attempted  solution,  has  been  hitherto,  in  the  minds  of  the 
more  thoughtful  and  learned  piophetic  students,  like  as  it  were 
a  millstone  about  the  neck  of  the  whole  Turkish  theory  of  inter- 
pretation." This,  at  least,  is  a  candid  confession,  especially  when 
we  consider  that  it  is  about  a  prophecy,  which  has  been  accpiiesced 
in  more  generally  than  any  other,  perhaps,  in  the  Apocalypse. 
But  what  is  the  view  suggested  that  is  to  leave  the  general 
application  unencumbered  ?  The  resource  oi superhuman  angelic 
intelligences  directing  the  subordinate  human  agencies,  and  this 
without  reference  to  the  number  of  earthly  instruments  em- 
ployed. In  fact,  Mr.  E.  identifies  these  angels  at  the  Euphrates 
with  the  angels  parenthetically  introduced  in  the  sixth  seal  (chap, 
vii),  and  reasons  from  the  assumption  that  the  judgments  of  the 
preceding  trumpets  were  the  piobable  results  of  their  actings. 
But  this,  it  is  clear,  does  not  hang  well  together  with  the  scheme 
which  insists  that  the  fallen  star  of  the  first  woe  was  not  an 
angelic  being,  but  Mohammed.  Consistency  would  demand, 
one  would  think,  that  if  the  angel  of  the  abyss  in  the  preceding 
trumpet  sets  forth  a  man,  these  four  must  represent  similar 
leaders.  Certainly  these  are  in  contrast  with  the  angels  whose 
office  it  was  rather  to  restrain  the  winds  than  to  urge  on  their 
devastating  blasts.  All  the  accessory  circumstances  strengthen 
their  distinction.  Again,  the  use  made  of  the  fire  and  smoke 
and  brimstone  which  issued  out  of  the  horses'  mouths,  as  if  they 
prefigured  the  Turkish  artillery,  of  the  breast  plates  of  fire  and 
jacinth   and  brimstone,  as  an  allusion  to  the  Ottoman  warlike 


158  THE  FUTURE  WILL  COMPLETE  ALL. 

apparel  of  scarlet,  blue  and  yellow,  and  of  the  serpent-like  horse- 
tails, having  heads,  as  the  emblem  of  Turkish  pashas,  seems  to 
me  both  inconsistent  with  other  parts  of  the  Apocalypse,  and 
(shall  I  say  ?)  grotesque  in  itself.  I  deny  not  the  application  of 
the  horsemen  and  horses  to  the  past  inroads  of  the  Turks,  as 
distinguished  from  their  Saracen  predecessors,  devoting  them- 
selves to  their  destructive  task  in  the  Eastern  Roman  or  Greek 
empire,  with  far  more  of  system  and  Avith  more  permanent 
results.  In  their  fierce  career,  they  breathed  out,  in  no  slight 
measure,  along  with  the  old  diabolical  delusion,  an  infernal  spirit 
of  judgment ;  and  as  were  their  weapons,  such  was  their  armour. 
It  was  this  peculiarly  Satanic  power,  not  like  the  scorpion  now, 
but  the  serpent,  to  which  the  Holy  Ghost  draws  attention  as  the 
grand  source  of  mischief.  The  moral,  false-prophet  action  is 
there,  and  this  too  invested  with  authority,  for  the  tails  had  heads, 
and  with  them  they  do  hurt.  Throuuhoiit  the  permitted  sphere, 
the  result  was  the  utter  extinction  of  Christian  profession,  while 
the  rest  alas !  heeded  not  the  warning.  But  these  features,  in 
my  judgment,  involve  elements  still  more  terrible  than  anything 
yet  seen  on  earth  ;  so  that  all  confirms  me  in  the  conviction  that 
we  must  look  for  another  and  final  answer  to  the  imagery,  in 
the  last  scourge  for  the  corrupt  and  idolatrous  East.* 

*  While  writing  the  above,  Mr.  D.  M'Causland's  "  Latter  Days  of  Jerusalem 
aufl  Rome  "  has  come  into  iny  hands.  He  regards  (pp.  212,  213)  the  flood's  pre- 
vailing 150  days  upon  the  earth  as  the  type  of  the  fifth  trumpet  visitation,  but 
why  the  destruction  of  all  flesh  should  typify  the  torment,  not  the  death,  of  the 
future  victims,  does  not  appear.  The  sixth  trumpet,  he  thinks,  coufirms  this, 
because  the  time  prescribed  there  (391  days  and  an  hour)  carries  us  down,  if  reck- 
oned on  the  scale  of  a  day  for  a  year,  from  the  deluge  to  the  epoch  of  the  judgment 
on  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  Now,  supposing  there  were  no  chronological  objections, 
where  is  the  cougruity  of  taking  the  five  months  literally  in  the  first  woe,  and  the 
hour  and  day  and  month  and  year  symbolically  in  the  second  ?  Besides,  here 
again,  the  destruction  in  the  type  exceeds  the  proportion  of  the  antitype ;  and, 
what  is  more  material,  our  Lord  applies  both  the  deluge  and  the  destruction  of 
Sodom  to  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  the  day  when  He  is  revealed.  These 
would  answer  to  Rev.  xix.,  not  to  ch.  ix.,  which  'discloses  preliminary  chastise- 
ments. Still  less  can  I  accept  the  singular  idea  that  the  four  angels  or  their 
chivalrj'  set  forth  Israel  and  Ephraim  flying  on  the  shoulders  of  the  Philistines 
towards  the  west,  and  purging  away  the  filth  of  Jerusalem.  For  "the  men"  he 
conceives  to  be  the  unsealed,  svho  were  to  be  tormented  but  not  killed  by  the  Anti- 
christian  locusts  :   the  horsemen  of  Israel  finish  the  work. 

The  same  friend,  who  directed  Mr.  E.'s  attention  to  Griesbach's  citation  of 
aff/xovs  and  &ve/xoi  from  30.  (Cod.  Guelph.  of  the  fourteenth  century)  for  ayy.  in 
ver.  14,  15,  recalls  this  variation  to  me.  It  is  also  supported  by  98.  (Cod.  Bodl. 
Can.  of  the  sixteenth  century.)  But  I  agree  with  the  editors  in  general  that  it  is 
barely  worth  a  notice. 


SIXTH    TRUMPET    PARENTHESIS.  159 


CHAPTER    X. 

Some  will  remember  a  resemblance  already  pointed  oat 
between  the  two  orders  of  seals  and  trumpets.  When  we  come 
to  the  sixth  in  each  series,  there  is  an  interruption  of  a  most 
interesting  kind.  We  saw  that  after  the  sixth  seal  there  was 
such  an  episode,  not  of  judgment  but  of  mercy — God  interfering 
on  behalf  of  man,  after  the  most  signal  convulsion  among  men 
and  things  on  the  earth  ;  and  not  only  so,  but  the  powers  of  the 
heavens  also  shaken.  Then  we  found  God  showing  us  that  in 
the  midst  of  judgment  He  remembers  mercy.  For  there  was 
the  sealing  of  a  full  complement  out  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel, 
and  there  was  besides  clear  and  affecting  proof  furnished  that 
the  poor  Gentiles  were  not  forgotten.  Thus,  when  the  prophet 
looks  he  sees  a  countless  multitude,  out  of  all  nations,  and 
kindreds,  and  peoples,  and  tongues.  They  were  evidently 
delivered  by  the  great  goodness  of  God,  and  came  out  of  that 
terrible  tribulation  that  is  yet  to  be.  Now  in  chap  ix.  we  have 
had  the  sixth  trumpet,  and,  answering  to  what  we  have  seen  in 
the  seals,  there  is  an  interruption  between  it  and  the  seventh 
trumpet,  which  is  only  announced  in  chap  xi.  15.  There  is  a 
vision  described  of  a  very  marked,  and,  considering  the  visions 
that  accompanied  all  the  trumpets,  of  an  extraordinary  charac- 
ter. A  mighty  angel  comes  down  from  heaven,  who  appears  to 
be  the  Lord  Himself  So  we  saw  in  a  previous  chapter  the 
angel  priest  at  the  golden  altar,  putting  incense  to  the  prayers 
of  the  saints  which  He  offered  up  to  God.  And  I  suppose 
few  would  imagine  that  God  could  commit  this  service  of  the 
heavenly  sanctuary  to  any  mere  created  being.  In  the  Old 
Testament  Jehovah  had  occasionally  assumed  an  angelic  form ; 
and  as  this  book  brings  us  back  to  a  great  deal  which  is  akin  to 
the  Jewish  Scriptures,  herein  may  be  one  reason  why  we  have 
Christ  thus  taking  the  form  of  an  angel.  As  before  the  trumpets 
were  blown,  the  angel,  who  gave  the  signal  for  all,  was  seen  in  a 
priestly  point  of  view,  here  it  is  in  power,  preparing  the  way 
of  the  kingdom.  Accordingly  there  is  every  circumstance  of 
majesty  surrounding  him. 

"  And  I  saw  another  mighty  angel  coming  down  from  heaven, 
clothed  with  a  cloud,"     The  cloud,  as  any  one  will  recollect  who 


160  CHRIST    THE    DESCENDING    ANGEL. 

is  conversant  with  Scripture  idea  and  phrase,  was  the  well-known 
badge  of  Jeliovah's  presence.  When  the  Lamb's  blood  had  been 
shed  and  Israel  were  being  led  out  of  the  land  of  their  bondage, 
God  Himself  went  before  them  as  the  angel  of  the  covenant, 
and  the  cloud  was  the  visible  form  or  token  of  it.  (Exod.  xiii. 
21  ;  xxiii.  20,  23;  xl.  36,  38;  Numb,  i.)  In  the  angel  that  we 
have  here,  there  is  much  that  seems  to  indicate  the  presence  of 
the  Lord  Himself,  laying  claim  to  the  possession  of  the  world  at 
large.  You  may  remember  one  remarkable  sample  even  in  the 
New  Testament,  at  the  time  when  there  was  a  little  foreshadow- 
ing given  of  the  coming  kingdom.  Now  what  was  it  that 
testified  to  the  immediate  presence  of  God  ?  and  what  made 
Peter  and  John  tremble,  accustomed  though  they  were  to  the 
company  of  Jesus  and  to  the  most  marvellous  effects  of  His 
power  ?  "  They  feared  as  they  entered  into  the  cloud,"  because 
the  cloud  was  the  known  and  peculiar  mark  of  Jehovah's  pre- 
sence. Here,  then,  I  think  it  was  no  mere  creature,  but  the 
Creator  Himself  who  took  the  form  of  an  angel.  It  may  be  too 
the  Lord  retreating,  if  one  may  so  say,  from  all  that  would  have 
linked  Him  manifestly  and  directly  with  His  people,  and  this 
for  a  very  solemn  reason.  His  people  during  the  trumpets  are 
supposed  to  have,  only  not  wholly,  lost  their  distinctive  separa- 
tion and  to  be  sunk  down  into  the  world,  so  that  God,  morally, 
could  not  own  in  a  public  way  His  connexion  with  them.  In 
Hebrews  xi,  it  is  said  of  certain  believers  that  God  was  not 
ashamed  to  be  called  their  God.  Alas  !  there  are  saintg  of 
whom  God  icoidd  be  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God.  It  was 
not  so  with  the  early  patriarchs,  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob:  God  was  their  God.  But  He  never  calls  Himself  the 
God  of  Lot.  That  is  a  serious  matter  for  thought,  and  our 
hearts  ought  to  watch  against  anything  that  could  make  Him 
ashamed  to  be  called  our  God.  This  has  been  alluded  to  before, 
when  we  noticed  that  the  Lord  is  never  s})oken  of  in  this  series 
as  the  Lamb,  because  the  people  of  God  will  have  got  so  much 
mixed  up  with  unbelievers.  When  these  judgments  fall,  the 
saints  will  be  painfully  merged  in  the  world,  so  that  much  of  the 
chastisement  will  come  upon  both. '  Remember  also  that  the 
Lord  tells  us  the  slips  of  His  people  that  we  may  be  warned  by 
them.  How  sad  to  use  the  prophecy  of  unfaithfulness  in  order 
to  justify  it,  and  to  attribute  the  effects  of  our  unbelief  to  the 
providence  of  God  ! 

At  the  time  of  the  trumpets,  there  is  an  ominous  silence  as  to 
the  people  of  God.  There  is  just  an  allusion  to  their  exemp- 
tion from  the  toi  ment  of  the  apostates  in  chap.  ix.  4 ;    but  that 


HIS    CHARACTERISTICS.  161 

is  the  only  distinct  reference  till  the  parenthesis  of  chaps,  x.  and 
xi.  If  you  apply  the  seals  and  trumpets  to  the  past  history 
of  the  world,  the  meaning  is  so  plain  that  most  thoughtful 
Christians  have  agreed  in  the  main.  Constantine  brought  in 
Christianity  by  the  force  of  arms.  The  consequence  of  that  was 
the  great  downfall  of  Paganism,  with  intimations  of  mercy  by 
the  by,  and  the  seventh  seal  was  followed  by  silence  in  heaven 
for  about  half  an  hour.  There  was  no  false  expectation  there. 
God  knew  that,  so  far  from  the  world  being  made  really  better 
by  that  astonishing  change,  all  would  end  in  the  frightful  conse- 
quences of  grace  abused,  corrupted,  and  despised.  The  vast 
body  which  had  given  up  idolatry  for  the  profession  of  Christ- 
ianity would  ripen  for  judgment.  The  immediate  result  here 
is  the  coming  in  of  these  trumpets.  And  what  then  ?  God  was 
ashamed  of  Christendom ;  heaven  was  silent  now,  and  yet  we 
know  there  is  joy  there  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth.  It  was, 
externally  at  least,  a  swamp  of  forms,  and  where  was  the  Rock  of 
salvation?  Alas!  He  is  once  more  lightly  esteemed.  Connected 
with  this,  I  think,  the  Lord  Jesus  is  no  longer  spoken  of  as  the 
Son  of  man,  much  less  as  the  Lamb  :  if  seen  here.  He  is  in  angelic 
guise.  And  as  before,  in  order  to  distinguish  Him  particularly 
from  all  others,  He  was  engaged  with  the  incense  at  the  golden 
altar;  so  here  we  find.  He  was  "  clothed  with  a  cloud  " — the 
badge  of  Jehovah's  glory;  "  and  the  rainbow  [was]  over  his  head," 
that  is,  the  pledge  of  God's  unchanging  covenant  with  creation. 
"  His  face  [was]  as  it  were  the  sun."  The  sun  is  ever  the  symbol 
of  supreme  glory  in  rule,  and  the  face  of  this  angel  is  said  to  be 
like  the  sun.  So  it  was  on  the  holy  mount  (Matt.  xvii.  2),  and 
when  John  saw  his  Lord  again  at  Patmos  (Rev.  i.  16).  "His 
feet  as  pillars  of  fire"  united,  it  would  seem,  the  solidity  of  the 
"pillar"  and  the  thorough,  final  judgment  that  is  so  constantly 
conveyed  by  "  fire."  He  plants  the  left  on  the  sea,  meaning  the 
unformed  masses  of  the  outside  world,  and  the  right  on  the 
earth,  i.e.,  that  part  of  the  world  which  is  favoured  with  divine 
testimony  and  government.  In  other  words,  it  is  the  Lord's 
universal  claim  over  men,  over  the  world.  It  is  a  public  decla- 
ration of  His  right,  not  in  respect  of  the  Church  but  of  the  earth  : 
not  yet  His  actual  investiture  as  Son  of  man,  but  a  dealing  of 
providential  character,  which  involves  a  recommencing  of  testi- 
mony preparatory  to  His  speedy  assumption  of  universal  do- 
minion. 

But  a  further  step  has  to  be  taken  now.  It  is  not,  as  in 
chap,  v.,  God  seated  upon  His  throne  with  the  sealed  book  in 
His  right  hand,  and  then  the  Lamb  opening  the  book  as  the 

12 


162  THE    LITTLE    OPEN    BOOK. 

One  who  had  prevailed  to  do  so.  And  how  prevailed?  Through 
death.  It  is  not  by  creature-strength  that  the  man  of  God 
conquers.  The  victories  that  will  shine  most  and  bi'ightest  are 
always  those  cast,  so  to  speak,  in  the  mould  of  the  death  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  In  poor  man's  case  it  is  life  first  and  then  death, 
hecause  we  are  by  nature  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,;  but 
in  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus  it  is  death  first  and  then  resurrec- 
tion-hfe  :  and  such  is  the  j^attern  for  the  Christian's  faith  to 
realize.  Our  whole  life,  as  believers,  should  fiow  according  to 
the  same  cross  that  has  wrought  our  salvation  ;  for  the  cross  is 
God's  power  for  us  all  the  way  through.  (Gal.  vi.)  It  is  God 
who  has  given  us  to  suffer,  and  then  comes  power  practically  ; 
but  this  is,  perhaps  always,  after  there  has  been  more  or  less  a 
realization  of  weakness  and  suffering.  (2  Cor.  xii.  xiii.  4.)  A 
man  cannot  win  Christian  victories  until  he  is  bare  and  low 
before  God.  He  must  be  bi'oken  down  in  one  way  or  another, 
and  blessed  it  is  if  we  are  bi'oken  down  in  the  presence  of  Christ ; 
for  if  it  be  not  there,  we  must  be  broken  down,  if  one  may  so, 
in  our  own  presence,  and  haply  too  in  that  of  others.  In  chap, 
v.,  however,  Christ  opens  the  book  that  was  unintelligible  to  all 
the  mind  of  man,  and  He  shows  us  from  the  seals  certain  judg- 
ments of  God,  so  little  removed  from  ordinary  events  in  provi- 
dence that  we  should  scarce  have  known  them  to  be  judgments, 
save  by  that  divine  unveiling.  But  the  Lamb  unfolds  all,  and 
we  find  that  God  is  at  work  to  introduce  the  kingdom  of  the 
First-begotten,  to  put  the  Heir  in  actual  possession  of  the 
inheritance. 

In  the  chapter  before  us  there  is  a  difference.  It  is  not 
a  sealed  book  that  we  have,  but  an  open  one  :  and  it  is 
also  emphatically  a  little  book.  There  is  nothing  mysterious 
about  the  matter.  We  come  here  to  a  grand  change  in  the 
Revelation.  Instead  of  its  being,  as  hithei'to,  events  that  were 
the  secret  working  of  God's  unseen  hand,  there  is  a  manifesta- 
tion of  His  power  and  purpose  with  regard  to  His  people.  All 
becomes  quite  plain.  We  have  no  longer  symbolical  locusts, 
having  a  king  (cf.  Prov.  xxx.  27),  or  strange  and  strangely  nume- 
rous horses  and  horsemen,  &c.  It  is  now  God's  open,  brief, 
and  decisive  actings.  That  I  apprehend  to  be  the  difference 
between  the  two  books.  The  first  was  in  the  hand  of  God  and 
sealed,  so  that  none  could  open  it,  save  the  blessed  One  who 
suff'ered  all  for  the  glory  of  God.  Here  it  is  an  open  book, 
which  the  prophet  takes  from  the  angel's  hand  ;  and  immediately 
we  have  no  longer  the  more  secret  or  enigmatical  appearances 
of  earlier  visions,  but  the  temple,  the  holy   city,  the  Gentiles 


PROCLAMATION    OF    THE    RIGHTS    OF    CHRIST.  163 

treading  it  under  foot  —  all  an  obvious  manifestation  that  God 
is  acting-  on  the  Jews.  We  have  before  had  the  sealing  a  certain 
number  out  of  the  tribes  of  Israel,  scattered,  as  I  suppose,  through- 
out the  whole  world.  But  here  (chap,  xi.)  we  come  to  a  smaller 
scale,  where  God's  dealings  are  concentrated  on  Jerusalem,  the 
sanctuary,  altar,  worshippers,  two  witnesses,  Sec,  and  where  they 
are  also  brought  out  so  phunly  that  there  need  be  no  mistake  as 
to  what  God  means  thereby.  The  Beast  as  such  also  appears 
here  in  undisguised  and  tremendous  opposition  against  God  and 
His  servants.  And  evidently  the  Lord  Jesus  is  showing  that 
the  time  approaches  when  He  must  take  all  into  His  own 
hands.  This,  then,  is  an  open  book,  because  all  it  contains 
is  perfectly  plain  ;  and  it  is  a  very  little  book,  because  there  is 
contemplated  but  a  short  time  and  a  narrow  compass. 

"  And  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  as  when  a  lion  roareth,  and 
when  he  had  cried,  the  seven  thunders  uttered  their  own  voices. 
And  when  the  seven  thunders  had  uttered  [them],  I  was  about  to 
write  :  and  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying,  Seal  the  things 
which  the  seven  thunders  uttered  and  write  them  not."  *  (Ver. 
3, 4.)  "  Will  a  lion  roar  in  the  forest,  when  he  hath  no  prey  ?  will 
a  young  lion  cry  out  of  his  den,  if  he  have  taken  notliing  ?  .  .  . 
shall  a  trumpet  be  blown  in  the  city,  and  the  people  not  be  afraid  ? 
shall  there  be  evil  in  a  city,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it.'* 
Surely  the  Lord  God  will  do  nothing,  but  He  revealeth  his 
secret  unto  his  servants  the  prophets.  The  lion  hath  roared, 
who  will  not  fear?  The  Lord  God  hath  spoken,  who  can  but 
prophesy?"  (Amos  iii.)  1  cannot  but  regard  this  passage  of  the 
Jewish  prophet  as  in  various  elements  illustrative  of  the  vision 
we  are  examining.     Again,  thunder,  in  the  Old  Testament,  was 

*  lu  the  first  clause  of  verse  4,  the  uncial  MSS.  ABC,  the  majority  of  cursives, 
aud  almost  all  the  ancient  versions,  besides  Greek  and  Latin  fathers,  omit  ras 
(pwvas  kavToiv,  and  the  rendering  would  then  be,  "  And  when  the  seven  thunders 
had  spoken,"  for  English  hardly  admits  of  the  absolute  "had  uttered."  I  suppose 
that  the  phrase  was  assimilated  to  the  close  of  verse  3,  whereas  the  true  form  is 
corrobated  by  the  latter  clauses  of  verse  4.  Tlie  difference  in  sense  would  be  that 
these  thunders  not  only  emitted  their  own  proper  sounds,  but  conveyed  something 
intelligible  to  the  prophet.  At  the  end  of  verse  4,  yu-Jj  clvto.  ypdxprjs  is  supported  by 
the  overwhelming  preponderance  of  manuscripts.  The  common  text  has  tuvto. 
with  a  few  cursives,  most  of  which,  with  the  old  Cappadocian  commentator  An- 
dreas, read  fierd  for  ix-f).  This  last,  I  presume,  was  the  mere  blunder  of  a  scribe, 
who  probably  confounded  a  contraction  of  the  former  with  the  latter,  and  this 
might  be  the  more  readily,  inasmuch  as  juera  ravra  ("  after  these  things")  is  a 
frequent  formula  in  Revelation.  It  is  curious  that  this  obvious  mistake,  yielding 
a  sense  totally  different  from,  and  nearly  opposite  to,  the  one  intended,  has  been 
followed  in  more  than  one  of  the  old  foreign  editions,  beginning,  if  I  mistake  not, 
with  the  Complutensian,  though  the  fact  is  not  stated  by  Trcgelles,  &c.  There 
are  also  discrepancies  as  to  the  form  of  the  last  word,  but  there  is  the  less  reason 
to  record  them,  as  that  which  some  authorities  give  is  not  even  sense. 


164  NO     MORE    DELAY. 

constantly  the  expression  of  God's  authority  in  the  way  of  judg- 
ment. We  are  summoned  to  hear  this  awful  announcement  of 
God's  judgments.  John  was  about  to  write,  but  a  voice  from 
heaven  forbids  it.  He  was  not  to  communicate  the  details  of 
what  God  was  going  to  do  now.  But  the  angel  "  lifted  up  his 
right  hand  to  heaven  and  sware  by  him  that  liveth  for  ever  and 
ever,  who  created  heaven.  .  .  .  that  there  should  be  no  more  space, 
[or  delay,]  but  in  the  days  of  the  voice  of  the  seventh  angel,  when 
he  should  sound,  the  mystery  of  God  also  should  be  finished,  as 
he  announced  to  his  servants  the  prophets."  *  (Ver.  5-7.) 

I  apprehend  that  people  often  gather  an  extremely  vague  notion 
from  those  words,  "  there  shall  be  time  no  longer."  Many 
imagine  that  it  means — there  was  then  to  be  an  end  of  time  and 
eternity  was  to  begin.  But  that  is  not  at  all  the  sense,  and 
the  case  shows  the  importance  of  seeking  lig/it  from  God.  The 
meaning  is,  that  God  would  no  longer  allow  time  to  run  on, 
before  He  interfered  with  the  course  of  this  world.  It  is  not 
that  eternity  was  at  once  to  begin,  but  that  there  should  be 
no  longer  any  lapse  of  time  before  His  last  summons  to  the 
world  and  the  introduction  of  a  new  dispensation,  in  which  He 
will  deal  in  an  open  manner  with  men  upon  the  earth.  Since 
the  rejection  and  ascension  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  men  — 
"  His  citizens" — have  sent  a  message  after  Him,  saying,  at  least 
in  their  hearts,  "  We  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us." 
Such  has  been  the  voice  of  the  world  ever  since  He  went  into 
the  far  country.     The  real  desire  of  man  is  to  be  rid  of  Christ ; 

*  The  right  readings  here,  I  believe,  are  xp^vos  oiiKeri  ecrrai  ....  koI  ireKeffdr). 
The  former  coufirms  the  sense  given  iu  the  text  and  evidently  means  that  there 
should  be  no  longer  space,  or  delay,  but  in  the  days,  &c.  "The  time  should  not 
be  yet "  would  require  6  Kaip6s  iustead  of  xpt^t-oj,  and  ovwcc  rather  than  ovKirt, 
which,  iu  constructions  like  the  present,  means  "  no  more."  Others  take  it  as  "  a 
(mystical)  time;"  but  this  also  in  Scripture  is  always  KaipSs. — The  meaning  which 
results  from  the  latter  very  accurately  falls  in  with  the  sentiment,  for  Urap  fieWtj 
(ra\irl^€iv  avoids  the  iudefiniteness  of  the  mere  future,  and  intimates  that,  when 
the  seventh  angel  should  just  sound,  the  mystery  of  God  should  also  be  finished, 
or  literally  "  was  finished,"  the  Grcc-k  aorist  being  employed  to  express  the  sum- 
mariness  of  its  completion — its  coincidence,  as  it  were,  with  that  seventh  blast. 
Ep.  Middleton  (and  before  him,  it  seems,  Piscator  and  Vitringa)  suggested  a  He- 
braism as  the  source  of  this  peculiar  use  of  the  aorist ;  for  the  Hebrew  preterite 
very  frequently  stands  for  the  future  when  that  tense  goes  before  and  is  joined  by 
the  conjunction.  Indeed,  as  Gescnius  remarks  (Rodiger's  ed.,  §  12f.  6),  the 
Pret.  with  Van  conversive  relates  to  futurity,  also  when  it  is  not  preceded  bj'  a 
future  tense  but  by  some  other  indication  of  futurity,  and  even  where  none  such 
appears.  This  solution,  if  it  be  true  here,  confirms  kuI  ireKiaOi].  Here,  again, 
Te\fad-l)<reTai  would  leave  a  vague  future  open,  and  another  form  is  employed, 
which  may  appear  harsli  at  first,  but  the  propriety  of  which  becomes  apparent, 
the  more  the  requirements  of  the  passage  are  understood.  TeXeaBi]  is  good  iu 
sense,  and  fairly  supported;  but  it  is  easier  than  fVeAeV^Tj  and  may  have  been 
the  correction  of  a  copyist.     The  converse  appears  to  me  improbable. 


THE    MYSTERY    OF    GOD.  165 

and,  in  general,  he  thinks  he  is.  And  no  wonder  he  dislikes  to 
hear  of  His  return  in  power  and  g'lory  ;  for  the  Scriptures 
declare  expressly  that  Christ  is  to  judge  man,  and  man  does  not 
like  to  stand  before  his  judge.  Hence  he  puts  off  as  long  as 
possible  the  thought  of  Christ's  coming  to  judge  sin  and  sinners. 
The  Lord  intima,tes  here  that  there  is  to  be,  ere  long,  a  close 
put  to  the  present  delay.  All  the  time  that  Christ  is  away  at 
the  right  hand  of  God,  there  is  a  suspense  of  judgment.  But 
God  feels  deeply  for  His  people's  suffering,  as  they  must  during 
the  interval  of  Christ's  rejection  ;  and  now  He  is  not  going  to 
allow  such  a  state  of  things  to  continue  any  longer,  and  there 
are  the  evident  signs  and  tokens  of  the  Loi'd's  coming  to  deal 
with  His  enemies. 

The  mighty  angel  swears  that  there  should  be  no  further 
delay,  not  before  eternity,  but  before  the  day  of  the  Lord.  The 
space,  or  delay,  spoken  of  here  is  man's  day,  and,  when  that  ends, 
the  day  of  the  Lord  begins,  which  latter  is  never  in  Scripture 
confounded  with  eternity,  because  that  day  has  an  end,  whereas, 
of  course,  eternity  never  can  terminate.  Viewed  from  every  side, 
the  real  force,  then,  is,  "  that  there  should  be  no  longer  delay."* 
And  remark  the  words  in  the  following  verse — "  But  in  the  dmjs 
of  the  voice  of  the  seventh  angel,  when  he  should  soon  sound, 
the  mystery  of  God  should  be  tinished,"  &c.  That  would  at  once 
contradict  the  thought  that  eternity  was  to  follow  immediately. 
On  the  contrary,  after  this  the  whole  of  the  millennium  comes 
in ;  after  that,  a  little  season,  and  then  eternity.  Souls  are  some- 
times hindered  from  entering  into  the  truth  of  God  by  one  little 
word,  and  so,  I  believe,  it  has  been  with  this  passage.  'Often 
when  a  slight  thing  is  cleared  up,  heaps  of  ditliculties  disappear. 

God  will  put  a  stop  to  the  present  delay  :  "  the  mystery  of  God" 
will  then  be  finished.  This  I  take  to  mean  the  secret  of  His 
allowing  Satan  to  have  his  own  way,  and  man  too  ;  that  is  to  say, 
the  wonder  of  evil  prospering  and  of  good  being  trodden  under 

*  i^  gives  etTTij/  i.e.  that  there  is  no  more  delay.  I  take  this  opportunity  of  pre- 
senting its  readings,  as  far  as  they  are  Icuowu,  in  this  chapter  X.  1.  aKKov  with 
AC,  &c.,  omitted  by  B.,  &c.  |  dpii,  (ancient  corr.  ipis,)  2.  -nveuyfievov  with  C, 
&c.  (the  same  corr.  has  inserted  Ai  above  the  second  syllable  of  ^i^KapiSiov.)  3. 
ws  (Ka.  (TTTa  (puvai.  rais  eav.  (poiuais  (the  same  corr.  has  blotted  out  oi?,  inserted  ai 
before  eirra,  and  changed  <().  into  Ppovrai,  but  left  rais  e.  (pwvats  unchanged).  4. 
For  ore  i^  reads  ocra.  \  e/xeAAor.  |  omits  fioi.  |  oaa  eAa.  |  avra.  \  yparprts.  5.  adds  ttjj/ 
Sf^iav  with  BC,  &c.,  contrary  to  A.,  &c.  6.  Omits  ey  with  B.  and  many  cursives, 
(which  a  later  corr.  has  added,  and  so  AC.  aud  the  majority  of  manuscripts).  | 
Omits,  but  the  aucient  corr.  adds,  ttji/  daKaa-aai'  kui  ra  (v  avr-q,  as  do  A.  30.  31.  32. 
38.  40.  4y.  f  8.  Arm.,  &c.  (A.  12.  Er.  Cop.,  &c.,  omit  also  Kal  tV  yvv  koL  to.  ip 
aiiTTJ).  \  i(TTiv  but  the  old  corr.  gives  eo-Tai.  7.  tov  ayye\ov  tov  effS.  orav  jxeAKri 
craKir.  Kai  eTcAecr^Tj  ro  (i.  t.  d.  oos  euriy.  rovs  iau.  Sov.  Kai  rovs  npocfi. 


166  THE    MYSTERY    OF    HIS    WILL 

foot.  God  checks,  no  doubt,  the  evil  m  a  measure,  partly 
through  human  government  and  partly  through  His  own  provi- 
dential dealings.  And  indeed  it  is  an  immense  iiiercy  that  there 
are  such  restraints  upon  the  evil  of  this  world.  For  what  would 
it  be  without  them,  when,  even  in  the  midst  of  God's  providential 
checks,  wickedness  is  often  so  triumphant,  and  godliness  thrown 
to  the  ground?  Still  there  is  an  iniiuence  for  evil  that  no 
government  can  root  out,  and  good  th:rt  is  belied  and  so  has 
little  influence,  if  at  all.  That  is  what  seems  so  mysterious  a 
thing  to  us,  Mdien  we  know  God  and  how  He  hates  evil.  But 
it  is  soon  coming  to  an  end.  God  is  about  to  touch  all  that  is 
contrary  to  Himself,  to  bring  in  ail  that  has  been  promised  from 
of  old,  and  to  give  credit  for  all  that  has  been  done  according  to 
Himself  And  He  is  going  to  do  this  by  His  Son.  The  One 
whom  man  despised  and  rejected,  is  the  vei'y  person  wdiom  God 
will  send  to  reduce  all  into  holy  order  and  beauty  out  of  the 
existing  mass  of  confusion. 

The  "  mystery  of  God"  must  not  be  confounded  with  the 
mystery  of  His  will  in  Eph.  i.  9.  This  last  is  what  has  always 
been  near  to  His  heart,  for  it  involves  the  glory  not  of  the 
Church  only  but  of  Christ.  It  is  "  according  to  His  good  plea- 
sure which  He  hath  purposed  in  Himself"  There  was  no  one 
that  suggested  it.  It  Avas  His  own  will.  And  w^hat  is  the 
mystery  of  His  will  ?  "  That  in  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness 
of  times,  He  might  gather  together  in  one  all  things  in  Christ, 
both  which  are  in  heaven  and  which  are  on  earth,  even  in  Him." 
All  these  things  that  Satan  has  scattered  now  will  be  reunited 
in  one  under  Christ.  Mercy  and  truth  Avill  then  meet  together, 
righteousness  and  peace  kiss  each  other.  This  is  true  even  now 
of  the  believer,  as  far  as  his  own  reconciliation  to  God  is  con- 
cerned. Satan  may  challenge  : — How  can  you  have  it  in  the 
presence  of  so  much  evil  within  ?  This  is  one  thing  that  cuts 
right  into  the  conscience  of  the  man  that  doubts  God,  and  even 
of  the  one  that  believes  God,  if  he  is  looking  at  himself  AVhen 
I  am  looking  at  myself,  these  doubts  may  well  arise,  but  not  if 
I  am  looking  at  Christ.  Christ  alone  is  entitled  to  give  me  rest 
before  God.  It  is  Christ  alone  who  can  dissipate  the  waves  and 
winds.  Satan  has  set  man  agahist  God  in  every  way,  even 
against  goodness  coming  down  from  Him  ;  but  God  is  not  going 
to  allow  that  to  pass  a  certain  limit.  Though  Satan's  opposition 
is  allowed  to  frustrate  God's  plans  for  the  present,  yet  every  one 
of  the  ways  in  which  He  has  been  at  work  in  the  earth  fi'om  the 
first,  is  destined  to  triumph  and  to  triumph  together  in  the  end. 
(Hosea  ii.  21,  23.)     There  was  a  man  set  up  in  Adam  ;  there 


IS    A    DISTINCT   THING.  167 

was  government  put  into  the  hands  of  Noah ;  there  was  God's 
calhng-  given  to  Abraham  ;  there  was  the  long,  patient  test  of  the 
law  ;  and  finally,  there  was  the  mission  of  His  Son  and  of  His 
Spirit.  All  these  things,  so  to  speak,  have  been  streams  from 
God  flowing  through  this  earth.  They  have  been  corrupted, 
or  refused  by  man  from  the  first,  and  through  the  enemy's  power 
men  will  abuse  these  very  dealings  of  God  to  bring  in  the  most 
daring  and  deadly  conspiracy  tliat  the  world  has  ever  seen — 
Satan  and  man  combined  against  God,  who  will  allow  all  this 
evil  to  come  out  and  will  then  put  an  end  to  it  by  judgment. 
This  is  the  finishing  of  the  mystery. 

But  that  which  is  called  "  the  mystery  of  His  will,"  is  not  the 
subject  of  prophecy.  Christ  will  be  the  Head  of  all  blessing 
and  He  will  gather  all  thirigs  in  united  blessing  under  His  OAvn 
headship  —  all  that  Satan  had  contrived  to  spoil.  What  God 
made  originally  was  merely  in  a  condition  of  innocence  ;  but 
what  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  v^ill  accomplish  in  the  end,  the 
reconciliation  of  all  things,  will  be  what  Satan  cannot  touch. 
All  will  be  gathered  together  in  one,  even  in  Christ,  their  chief. 
And  another  thing  allow  me  to  state.  In  this  mystery  of  God's 
will  we  are  not  merely  to  be  blest  under  Christ,  but,  in  order  to 
get  the  full  character  of  the  blessing,  we  are  blest  with  Him. 
And  this  is  what  we  have  here  in  Ephesians.  Not  that  we  will 
be  a  sort  of  inheritance  for  Christ,  but  we  are  joint-heirs  with 
Him.  In  that  great  mystery  of  God  in  Christ,  there  are  two 
thoughts— Christ's  universal  headship,  and  the  Church's  union  to 
Him.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  our  being  united  under  Christ's 
power  ;  but  all  tilings  that  ever  have  been  made  are  to  be  united 
under  His  headship  ;  and,  wonderful  thought !  the  Church  is  to 
share  all  that  glory  along  with  Him.  It  is  not  what  belongs 
to  Christ  as  a  divine  person,  but  what  He  takes  as  the  reward 
of  redemption.  But  that  very  work  gives  Him  a  title  to  bestow 
it  on  whom  God  will.  The  Church  is  united  as  the  body  and 
bride  of  Him  who  is  the  Lord  of  all.  She  is  the  Eve  of  the 
second  Adam.  In  Eph.  v.  St.  Paul  takes  up  more  particularly 
the  latter  part  of  the  subject.  Christ  is  to  present  it  to  Himself 
a  glorious  Church,  not  having  sjiot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such 
thing.  The  great  mystery,  brought  out  there,  is  tlie  nearness, 
the  love,  the  intimacy  of  bridal  relationship  between  Christ  and 
His  Church. 

In  the  e})istle  to  the  Colossians  you  have  the  same  thing  re- 
ferred to  :  (chap.  ii.  2  :)  "  To  the  acknowledgment  of  the  mys- 
tery of  God,  [and  of  the  Father,  and  of  Christ."]  These  last 
words  are  inserted  without  authority,  and  when  persons  try  to 


168  CHRIST    AND   THE    CHURCH. 

mend  Scripture,  they  only  damage  it.  There  is  a  certain  great 
mystery  spoken  of  in  Colossians  i.  (ver.  26.)  The  meaning 
of  the  word  mystery  is  a  secret.  It  may  not  be  a  secret  now,  but 
it  means  a  thing  that  ivas  a  secret.  Where  there  is  anything 
that  people  cannot  understand,  they  are  apt  to  say,  "  It  is  a 
mystery."  But  in  Scripture  it  means  a  truth  that  God  kept  hid, 
but  that  is  so  no  longer  —  something  they  did  not  know  as  men 
or  Jews,  but  that  Christ  was  to  teach  them  as  Christians.  Here 
comes  another  great  mystery:  (ver.  27:)  "To  whom  God 
would  make  known  what  is  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  this  mys- 
tery among  the  Gentiles,  which  is,  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of 
glory."  If  we  take  the  prediction  of  Christ  in  the  Old  Testament, 
it  is  a  mistake  to  call  that  a  mystery  —  enough  was  quite  plain. 
What  the  Jewish  prophets  proclaimed  was,  a  Messiah  com- 
ing who  was  to  reign  over  them,  and  who  would  unite  sal- 
vation with  being  "  the  great  King."  What  they  did  not  under- 
stand, though  revealed,  was  His  humiliation  and  death.  They 
stumbled  over  Him.  But  "  the  mystery"  is  a  term  never 
applied  to  Christ's  death  and  resurrection.  That  was  not  a 
secret  at  all,  but,  on  the  contrary,  is  very  plainly  predicted  in 
Isaiah  liii..  Psalm  xvi.,  xxii.,lxix.,  cvi.,  and  many  other  passages. 
The  mystery  was  this,  that,  when  Christ  was  rejected  by  His 
people,  and  during  the  time  of  His  exaltation  in  heaven,  God 
would  make  Him  to  be  the  Head  of  a  heavenly  body,  chosen 
by  His  grace  out  of  all  —  Jews  or  Gentiles.  That  was  not 
treated  of  in  the  Old  Testament.  There  were  certain  things  that 
we  can  now  show  to  be  types  of  it,  but  they  never  would  have 
yielded  the  least  light  upon  it,  if  this  mystery  had  not  been 
brought  out.  There  was  no  such  thing  then,  nor  even  any 
such  thing  predicted,  as  Jew  and  Gentile  being  blessed  together 
in  one  body  ;  and  that  is  the  reason  why  it  is  called  "the  mys- 
tery hidden  from  ages  and  from  generations."  It  was  a  secret 
hid  in  God  that  the  prophets  did  not  touch  upon.  When  the 
Jews  have  their  Messiah,  it  will  not  be  as  the  hope  of  glory,  but 
as  the  One  who  Himself  brings  in  the  glory.  When  the  time 
comes  for  the  blessing  they  are  looking  for,  there  will  be  no 
doubt  about  it,  for  all  will  be  nianifested,  whether  for  friends  or 
foes  ;  neither  will  it  be  a  hope,  but  the  actual  accomplishment  of 
glory  in  their  midst.  But  now  there  is  an  extraordinary  state 
of  things  that  God  is  effecting  among  the  Gentiles  while  the  Jews 
are  cast  off.  The  Gentiles  have  Christ  now,  not  as  bringing  in 
glory  visibly  u|)on  the  earth,  as  it  will  be  among  the  Jews  by 
and  by,  but  they  have  Him  in  them,  the  hope  of  glory  by 
and  by,  and  in  heaven. 


GENERAL  REFERENCE  TO  THE  REFORMATION.       169 

The  term  "  mystery  of  God"  may  be  used  in  our  chapter, 
because  it  was  specially  during  the  time  of  God's  non-interven- 
tion with  the  world,  that  He  had  been  working  out  this  wonder- 
ful secret  of  Christ  and  the  Church.  Now  that  was  done  with. 
Still  the  mystery  of  evil's  being  permitted  to  prosper  goes  on 
for  a  time  longer — that  passiveness  of  God,  whereby  He  does 
not  hinder  evil  from  having  the  upper  hand,  and  good  from 
being  trampled  down.  This  should  close,  as  He  declared  the 
glad  tidings  to  His  servants  the  prophets.  The  voice  speaks 
again  and  says,  "  Go,  take  the  little  book  which  is  open  in  the 
hand  of  the  angel,"  &c.  (Ver.  8.)  Accordingly  John  takes  the 
book,  and  finds  it,  when  he  has  eaten,  in  his  mouth  sweet  as  honey, 
but  when  he  ponders  its  contents,  and  digests  its  results,  how 
bitter  within  !  So  it  is  and  will  be.  When  we  see  how  God 
will  accomph'sh  all,  it  must  be  pain  to  think  what  is  reserved 
for  man,  as  indeed  it  is  to  know  how  perseveringly  he  rebels 
against  God,  and  forsakes  his  own  mercies. 

The  Lord  grant  that  what  has  been  of  God  for  the  clearing  of 
our  standing  from  earthly  principles,  and  awakening  a  just  feel- 
ing of  the  exceeding  dignity  of  the  place  in  which  God  has  put 
us,  may  be  impressed  upon  our  hearts  !  None  are  in  so  respon- 
sible a  jalace  as  those  who  are  occupied  with  heavenly  things. 
And  let  us  not  suppose  that  position,  or  even  truth,  will  of  itself 
keep  a  soul  :  nothing  but  the  Spirit  of  God  can.  And  He 
never  will,  where  there  is  not  dependence  and  self-judgment. 
He  is  come  to  glorify  Christ.  The  Lord  grant  that  we  may 
watch  and  pray  !  For  while  the  truth  is  calculated  to  separate 
from  the  world,  yet  where  it  is  abused  and  merely  becomes  that 
knowledge  which  puffs  up,  one  is  prejiared  for  the  worst  results. 

It  remains  to  add  a  few  words  as  usual  on  the  past  measure 
of  accomplishment  which  this  parenthetical  vision  has  re- 
ceived. I  am  not  disposed  to  question  its  general  application 
to  that  wonderful  divine  intervention,  the  Reformation.  The 
Eastern  empire  had  for  some  time  succumbed  to  the  furious 
onset  of  the  Turks  ;  the  West  was  not  a  whit  less  steeped  and 
impenitent  than  before  in  abominable  idolatry  and  imposture, 
when  that  sudden  light  from  on  high  shone  upon  astonished 
Europe.  Not  that  the  grace  of  Christ  was  deeply  realized,  or 
reflected  in  the  Reformation.  The  testimony  of  their  leading 
spirit,  Luther,  expressed  itself  in  a  way  more  akin  to  the 
lightnings  and  thunders  of  Sinai,  and  savoured  too  often  of  earth 
rather  than  of  heaven.  In  fact,  it  is  this  comparative  earthli- 
ness  of  character,  which  enables  the  Historicalists  to  find  so 


170        THE  PARTICULARS  DO  NOT  CORRESPOND. 

many  apparent  coincidences  between  that  g-reat  work  and  the 
vision  before  us.  It  is  just  because  Luther  so  much  ap- 
proximated, not  to  St.  Paul's  line  of  ministry,  but  to  the 
prophetic  testimony  of  Jesus  which  is  yet  to  be  borne  by  the 
latter-day  witnesses,  that  there  seems  so  much  in  common 
between  the  tenor  of  his  life  and  tendency  of  his  labours,  and 
the  predictions  of  what  they  are  to  teach  and  do  and  suti'er  by 
and  by.  The  idea  of  comparing  it  with  the  original  sending 
out  of  the  gospel  and  formation  of  the  Church  at  Pentecost,  is, 
I  cannot  but  feel,  a  very  gross  misconception. 

Besides,  is  it  true  that  there  is  not  a  particular  in  the  vision 
to  which  the  Reformation  does  not  exactly  answer  ?  Does  the 
blaze  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  intimate  the  republication 
of  His  gospel?  I  do  not  doubt  that  the  full  meaning  of  the 
vision  involves  a  public  testimony  to  the  coming  of  "  the  day  ;  " 
but  for  this  reason  the  gospel  is  excluded,  as  any  spiritual 
person  may  see  who  dispassionately  weighs  Mai.  iv.  For 
the  essence  of  the  gospel  is  that  therein  God  justifies  the 
ungodly  and  saves  the  lost ;  whereas  it  is  "  unto  you  (the  godly 
remnant  of  the  Jews)  that  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arises 
with  healing  on  his  wings  ;  and  ye  shall  go  forth  and  grow 
up  as  calves  of  the  stall.  And  ye  shall  tread  down  the  wicked  ; 
for  they  shall  be  ashes  under  the  soles  of  your  feet  in  the  day 
that  I  shall  do  this,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.  Remember  ye  the 
law  of  Moses  my  servant."  There  may  be  a  measure  of 
resemblance  between  this  and  the  aims  and  course  (though  not 
the  issue)  of  the  more  warlike  Reformers  ;  but,  in  that  very  pro- 
portion, it  is  tlie  reverse  of  the  gosj)el,or  of  the  practical  conduct 
which  flows  from  and  is  suitable  to  it. 

Again,  the  cloud  recalls  the  deliverance  of  Israel,  as  the 
rainbow  does  the  covenant  with  the  earth,  when  government 
was  instituted  ;  the  pillars  of  fire  represent  judicial  firmness, 
and  the  loud  lion-like  voice  is  the  terror-striking  assei'tion  of 
His  rights,  preceded  by  the  significant  claim  laid  to  the  whole 
world,  and  followed  by  the  complete  utterance  of  God's  power: 
these,  with  the  little  open  book  (i.e.,  it  would  appear,  known  pro- 
phecy relative  to  the  city  and  temple)  are  all  of  them  features 
entirely  agreeing  with  the  approaching  resumption  of  the  Lord's 
relations  with  Jerusalem  and  the  Jews,  and  the  world  in  general, 
but  not  one  of  them,  as  it  seems  to  me,  in  its  full  import  like  the 
gospel  of  God's  grace.  Heaven  and  the  Church  are  entirely 
unseen  :  it  is  a  question  of  an  earthly  people,  and  hence  of  kings 
and  nations;  it  is  the  recommencement  not  of  evangelizing, 
much  less  of  edifying  the  body  of  Christ,  but  of  the  prophetic 


THE    SEVEN    THUNDERS.  171 

testimony  here  below.  The  decree  is  declared.  Jehovah's 
anointed  King-  is  about  to  take  Zion,  His  hill  of  holiness,  nay 
the  nations,  for  His  inheritance  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
earth  for  His  possession.  He  is  no  longer  to  ask  the  Father  for 
the  heavenly  sons,  but  for  the  world  itself;  no  longer  to  set 
apart  by  the  truth  for  association  with  Himself  above,  but 
to  reduce  people  with  a  rod  of  iron  and  dash  them  in  pieces 
like  a  potter's  vessel.  "Be  wise  now,  therefore,  O  ye  kings: 
be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the  earth."  Such  is  the  obvious 
connexion  of  the  scene  before  us.  In  view  of  this,  it  is  a  pre- 
liminary interference.  Had  the  Reformers  understood  the  high 
calling  of  the  saints,  or  the  nature,  character  and  conse- 
quences of  our  union  with  Chi'ist  in  heavenly  places,  there 
would  have  been  a  contrast,  not  an  analogy.  In  truth,  it  was 
I  repeat  the  effect  of  their  lack  of  spiritual  intelligence  as 
Christians,  [and  their  approximation  to  godly  Jews,  which  im- 
printed on  their  movement  whatever  assimilation  there  is  to  the 
scene  we  are  reviewing. 

Further,  the  attempt  to  make  it  the  complete  answer  involves 
at  least  the  ordinary  amount  of  strain,  and,  I  might  almost  add, 
of  the  absurd.  For,  in  his  haste  to  apply  the  principle  of  allusive 
reference,  as  it  has  been  called,  the  author  of  the  Horae  Apoc, 
does  not  even  glance  at  the  connexion  of  the  seven  thunders 
with  Christ.  It  was  too  good  an  opportunity  to  lose  for  an 
allusion  to  the  thunders  of  the  Vatican.  But  here,  strange 
to  say,  and  in  opposition,  as  it  appears  to  me,  to  the  very  princi- 
ple invoked,  Mr.  E.  wrests  these  thunders  from  Him  who  is  the 
primary  figure  in  the  vision,  and  applies  them  exclusively  to  the 
Pope  !  The  reasoning  that  is  offered  in  support  of  the  proposi- 
tion, so  monstrous  to  any  mind  not  under  the  overwhelming  bias 
of  a  system,  appears  to  me  wholly  groundless,  though  not 
unworthy  of  Mr.  E.'s  well-known  ingenuity.  1.  The  vocnllty 
of  the  thunders  is  not  altogether  unprecedented  in  this  book 
(chap.  vi.  1 .),  and,  besides,  the  trumpets  are  said  to  have  the  same 
(chap.  viii.  13).  Compare  also  Rev.  xvi.  7,  for  the  altar.  The 
supposed  parallel  in  John  xii.  28  is  certainly  not  in  favour  of 
papal  oracles.  2.  The  reflective  pronoun  no  doubt  implies  that 
the  voices  were  their  own,  the  sounds  proper  to  the  thunders 
spoken  of;  but  that  they  were  in  op]josition  to  the  angel's 
crying  as  with  lion's  roar  is  the  most  unnatural  of  inferences. 
Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  theory  of  an  allusion  to 
Leo  X.,  even  so  the  analogy  of  every  other  vision  is  in  favour  of 
the  thought  that  the  direct  reference  is  the  full  expression  of 
divine  power,  as  God's  seal  upon  the  angel's  assertion  of  title. 


172  THE  angel's  oath 

3.  It  seems  to  me  almost  aioful  to  lay  it  down  that  the  pro- 
position, "  write  them  not,"  implies  that  the  voices  were  "  not 
the  true  sayings  of  God,  but  instead  thereof  false  and  an 
imposture."  (H.  A.  Vol.  II.  p.  105.)  The  real  reason  is  very 
simple.  The  general  fact,  that  "  the  voice  of  Jehovah  "  echoes 
the  claims  of  Christ  to  the  possession  of  the  world,  is  given  ;  the 
details  are  not  to  be  written.  The  apostle  Paul  was  caught  up 
into  paradise  and  heard  secrets  {dppriTa  p-nfiara)  which  it  is  not 
allowed  for  man  to  utter.  The  prophet  John  was  about  to 
write  what  the  thunders  divulged,  but  the  voice  from  heaven 
commands  the  things  to  be  sealed,  not  written — a  mode  of 
dealing  most  extraordinary,  if  the  utterances  are  supposed  to 
be  the  false  decrees  of  Rome,  but  well  harmonizing  with  the 
conclusion  that  other  things  were  yet  to  be  revealed,  before  the 
power  of  God  was  enforced  and  the  earthly  rights  of  Christ 
are  made  good  by  judgment.  4.  Hence,  I  utterly  reject,  as  a 
mere  corollary  of  the  last  error,  the  idea  of  reference  here  to 
the  seven  hills  of  Rome.  Hitherto  the  septenary  usage  of  the 
Revelation  has  been  entirely  independentof  that  local  sign,  which 
occurs  only  in  chap,  xvii.,  where  the  context  proves  that  Rome 
is  in  question.  Here,  for  the  same  reason  of  the  context,  the 
Roman  hills  are  an  intrusion,  while  the  idea  of  completeness  is 
the  natural  sense.  5.  This,  also,  accounts  for  the  prefixed 
article,  as  in  the  case  of  the  seven  angels  (chap,  viii.)  who,  I 
presume,  ?have  no  special  connexion  with  that  city.  As  to  the 
opinion  that  there  is  nothing  but  the  Papal  bulls  to  which  the 
seven  Apocalyptic  thunders  ever  have  been  made  to  answer,  it  is 
natural  in  the  quarter  whence  it  flows;  but  when  the  writer 
adds  "  or  can  6e,"  he  passes,  I  humbly  think,  beyond  the  bounds 
of  wisdom  and  modesty.  None  of  us  is  the  measure  of  divine 
knowledge  nor  of  what  the  Lord  may  bestow.  Further,  I  for 
one  confess  my  inability  to  discern,  even  with  the  special  pleading 
of  the  Horae,  the  peculiar  suitability  of  the  angel's  oath  to 
the  prevalent  convictions  of  the  Refoi-ming  fathers  or  their  Pro- 
testant children.  Savonarola  and  others  before  him  seem  to 
have  been  rather  more  full  of  the  nearness  of  Christ's  kingdom, 
than  Luther  and  his  coadjutors.  What  the  great  German 
expected  was  rather  the  destruction  of  the  Pope's  kingdom  by 
the  word  alone,  and  this  founded  on  his  construction  of  Daniel 
quite  as  much  as  St.  Paul :  i.e.  it  seems  to  me,  in  contrast  with 
the  open  book  and  the  angels  most  solemn  announcement.  Nor 
did  Melancthon  improve  on  Luther,  when  he  assigned  Dan.  vii. 
to  Mohammedanism  and  Dan.  viii.  to  the  Papacy.  Neither  can  I 
admit  that  j)rophesying,  as  addressed  to  John,  and  predicated  of 


LOOKS    ON    TO    THE    FUTURE.  173 

the  two  witnesses,  or  indeed  ever,  is  the  mere  function  of  expound- 
ing the  Scriptures  and  exhorting  from  them,  as  fulfilled  in  every 
faithful  gospel-minister.  The  notion,  too,  that  in  the  word,  "  Go 
take  the  little  hook,"  and  "  thou  must  prophesy  again,"  we  are  to 
read  (not  now  of  course,  an  allusive  reference,  but)  a  sort  of  pre- 
figuration  of  the  deacons  ordination  to  preach  the  gospel  or 
Christian  ministry,  and  of  the  taking  in  hand  the  New  Testament 
to  translate  it  into  the  vernacular  tongue  ;  and'yet  more,  that  St. 
John's  being  made  representative  of  the  faithful  ministers  of  the 
Reformation  at  this  epoch  intimates  that  they  were  all  in  the 
line  of  Apostolical  succession,  is  to  me  more  like  playing  with 
feelings  than  a  grave  exposition  of  this  chapter.  It  is  the 
attempt  to  apply  the  details  to  the  past,  which  betrays  the  unsa- 
tisfactoriness  of  the  exclusive  Protestant  scheme  :  a  bearing  on 
it,  definite  enough  to  show  that  such  a  work  as  the  Reformation 
was  not  overlooked  of  God,  in  the  protracted  application  of  the 
book,  I  have  already  admitted.  The  full  literal  carrying  out  of 
every  word  aw  aits  the  end  of  the  age. 


174  JERUSALEM, 


CHAPTER  XL 

From  the  moment  that  God  begins  to  deal  with  the  earth 
in  an  open  manner,  Israel  natnrally  comes  forward  and  also 
the  Gentiles  as  connected  with  them.  (Deut.  xxxii.  8,  9.)  We 
have  had  the  twelve  ti'ibes  scattered  abroad  and  a  measured 
number  sealed  :  but  the  land  of  Judea  and  Jerusalem  is  the 
great  foreground  of  the  picture  that  we  see  here.  "  Rise," 
it  is  said  to  the  prophet,  "  and  measure  the  temple  of  God, 
and  the  altar,  and  them  that  worship  therein."  The  altar,  I 
think,  clearly  refers  to  the  brazen  altar,  for  the  golden  altar  was 
included  in  the  temple.  "They  that  worship  therein,"  are 
persons  who  are  characterized  l)y  nearness  to  God.  The  altar 
was  the  expression  of  true  approach  to  God,  and  they  have 
drawn  near  Him.  It  was  the  place  of  the  burnt-offering, 
which  marked  the  acceptance  of  the  person.  Now  this  shows 
us  that  here  we  have  God  owning  a  certain  number  of  people 
on  the  earth,  as  capable  of  drawing  near  to  Him.  "  Measure 
the  temple,"  kc,  meant,  I  suppose,  that  God  appropriated  thus 
far  Himself.*  (Ver.  1.) 

"  And  the  court  which  is  without  the  temple  leave  out  and 
measure  it  not ;  for  it  is  given  unto  the  Gentiles ;  and  the  holy 
city  shall  they  tread  underfoot  forty  and  two  months."  (Ver. 2.) 
The  Jew  is  owned  to  a  certain  extent  by  God  ;  and  consequently 
their  city  is  spoken  of  as  the  holy  city,  and  the  Gentiles  as  those 
who  were  defiling  and  treading  it  under  foot.  But  it  is  im- 
portant, before  we  go  any  farther,  to  enquire  whether  there  is  any 
reference,  in  other  Scriptures,  to  this  same  period,  spoken 
of  here   as  forty  and    two  munths.     It  will   not  be  doubted  that 

*  The  received  text  gives  Ka\  6  a-yyeXos  eia-rriK^i,  (he  Comphiteusian,  following 
several  mss.,  has  the  same  words  thus — iccu  elcrr.  6  ayy.  Erasmus  aud  R.  Stephens 
had  more  rightlj  left  them  out,  as  do  the  Alexaudriau  MS.,  more  than  thirty 
cursives,  and  all  tlie  ancient  versions,  save  the  Arm.  and  Syr.,  whicli  in  the  Apo- 
calypse are  not  seldom  encumbered  with  i^losses.  The  present  addition  was 
probably  drawn  from  Zech.  iii.  3,  through  the  scholiast  Andreas.  The  elliptical 
construction  perplexed  people  and  disposed  them  to  adopt  some  such  interpola- 
tion. Beza  was  the  first,  after  the  Complutensian  editors,  who  sanctioned  the 
clause  in  the  common  printed  copies,  aud  tliis  to  avoid  the  absurdity  of  the  reed's 
seeming  to  speak.  But  there  is  no  necessity,  as  he  himself  admits,  for  such  a 
meaning,  if  we  do  adhere  to  the  best  antliorities.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  a  mis- 
take to  say  that  the  words  are  wanting  in  all  the  most  aucicnt  Greek  MSS.,  for  A. 
omits  and  B.  has  them,  while  C.  is  deficient  and  therefore  caunot  be  cited. 


NOT    ROME.  175 

there  is  in  Daniel — the  book  whicli  most  nearly  answers  in  the 
Old  Testament  to  the  Apocalypse  in  the  New.  We  find  there 
a  period  mentioned  of  three  years  and  a  half,  called  in  mystical 
language  "a  time,  times  and  a  half."  Let  us  turn  to  Dan. 
vii.  There  we  find  the  Gentile  powers  rejiresented  as  wild 
beasts,  having  in  part  some  resemblances  in  nature.  There  was 
the  lion  ;  and  the  bear ;  and  the  leopard  was  presented  as  four- 
Avinged,  to  show  the  swiftness  of  conquest  men  would  see  in 
the  ])ower  represented  by  that  beast;  and  every  one  knows 
there  never  was  an  empire  in  antiquity  like  the  Grecian  under 
Alexander  for  spreading  itself  by  rapid  conquest ;  and  not  only 
this,  but  it  had  its  roots  dee[),  so  that  even  to  this  day  the 
remains  of  the  Grecian  empire  are  seen  ;  and  these,  not 
exhumed  as  it  were,  but  in  living  effects.  The  fourth  beast  was 
of  a  composite  character,  uidike  anything  that  had  been  before. 
Upon  its  head  were  ten  horns,  and  aftei"  them,  in  their  midst, 
another  little  horn  was  seen  by  the  prophet  to  emerge.  This 
last  takes  the  place  of  three  others,  and  becomes  the  great 
object  with  which  the  Spirit  of  God  is  occupied,  not  of  course 
because  of  anything  good  connected  with  it,  but  because  of  its 
deadly  hostility  to  God  and  His  people.  Daniel  looks  at  him 
more  particulaj-ly  in  his  political,  and  the  Revelation  in  his 
politico-religious  character.  It  is  with  this  fourth  Gentile  em- 
pire, the  Roman  beast,  and  in  relation  to  the  Jews,  that  the 
period  is  given. 

It  does  seem  no  slight  hallucination  of  mind  to  divert  these 
Scriptures  from  Judea,  and  to  transport  Rome  into  them.  But 
the  cause  is  apparent.  Men  had  been  so  occupied  with  the 
conti-oversies  between  Protestantism  and  Popery,  that  they 
naturally  looked  through  the  Scriptures  to  find  something 
about  the  pope ;  and  finding  there  was  one  person  more  wicked 
than  any  other,  (the  antichrist,)  they  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  antichiist  and  the  pope  were  the  same  thing.  Now,  it  is 
true  that  they  both  do  similar  things  to  a  certain  extent ; 
but  when  you  look  into  the  Scriptures,  antichrist  finds  his  place 
in  Judea,  and  in  connection  with  the  Jewish  people,  in  a  way 
the  pope  has  never  done.  I  do  not  say  the  pope  may  not  do  so  : 
but  it  is  impossible  to  apply,  fully  and  exclusively,  what  is  said 
about  the  antichrist  to  the  pope  as  such.  There  is  a  future  system 
of  lawlessness,  and  a  future  person  at  its  head,  who  Avill  rise  up 
against  Christ  in  His  Jewish  rights  and  glory,  uniting  political 
power  with  religious  pretension,  and  this  in  the  city  of  the  great 
king.  There  are  many  anticln-ists,  it  is  true,  and  the  pope  may 
truthfully  be  regarded  as  one  of  them  ;  but  not  as  the  antichrist 


176  THE    TIMES    OF    DANIEL. 

who  is  to  come.  That  is  reserved  for  the  time  immediately 
preceding  Chi*ist's  appearing  from  heaven.  He  will  personally 
affect  and  oppose  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  will  by  Him  personally 
be  put  down.  People  ought  to  be  prepared  for  this;  but  they, 
on  the  contrary,  imagine  that  popery  is  the  last  antichrist ;  and 
that  it  is  getting  so  decrepid,  as  to  be  well-nigh  sinking  into  its 
grave.  But  the  Bible  is  clear  that  the  most  hateful  develop- 
ment of  lawlessness  is  yet  to  come  ;  and  that  when  it  does  come, 
it  will  carry  away,  not  Popish  countries  only,  but  Protestant  ones, 
and  the  Jews  themselves,  in  its  fatal  delusions. 

In  Daniel  vii.  the  little  horn  is  said  to  speak  great  words 
against  the  Most  High,  "  and  shall  wear  out  the  saints  of  the 
Most  High,  and  think  to  change  times  and  laws;  and  they 
shall  be  given  into  his  hands,  until  a  time,  and  times,  and  the 
dividing  of  time."  Now  it  appears  to  me  perfectly  certain  that 
the  "  times  and  laws,"  in  question  here,  are  those  the  prophet 
Daniel  was  familiar  with.  The  times  had  to  do  with  Israel's 
festivals,  and  the  laws  with  the  Jewish  polity  or  ritual.  The  saints 
of  the  Most  High  were  those  whom  the  prophet  knew  and  was 
interested  in  ;  just  as  in  chap.  xii.  "  the  children  of  thy  people," 
i.e.  Daniel's  people,  are  intended.  This  shows  that  a  special 
enemy  of  God's  people  in  Judea,  who  will  arise  in  that  day,  is 
here  spoken  of.  He  meddles  with  the  Jews  when  they  have 
begun  to  be  owned  in  a  measure  by  God.  This  iniquitous 
power  wears  out  the  saints  of  the  Most  High  and  thinks  to 
change  times  and  laws  ;  and  they  shall  be  given  into  his  hand. 
Not  that  the  saints  should  be  given,  for  God  never  relinquishes 
them  to  the  enemy  :  He  may  permit  saints  to  be  worried  for  a 
time,  but  He  never  gives  them  up.  It  is  the  times  and  laws 
that  are  thus  given  for  a  season,  because  the  nation  is  not  owned 
thoroughly  till  the  Messiah  comes,  and  it  is  only  a  partial 
recognition  of  their  worship.  These  are  then  to  be  abandoned 
to  him  "  for  a  time,  and  times,  and  the  dividing  of  time." 
You  have  this  same  period  referred  to  in  the  forty-two  months, 
which  is  exactly  the  same  length  of  time,  taking  "  a  time'  as 
meaning  a  year. 

In  Daniel,  chapter  ix.,  you  have  another  note  of  time,  the 
famous  seventy  weeks,  (ver.  26.)  "  And  after  threescore  and 
two  (or  rather,  after  the  threescore,  in  addition  to  the  previous 
seven)  weeks  shall  Messiah  be  cut  off  and  (margin)  shall  have 
nothing  ;"  i.e.,  after  sixty-nine  of  the  seventy  weeks  Messiah 
is  cut  off.  Then  an  interruption  follows  on  account  of  this  : 
all  the  weeks  do  not  expire.  There  remains  one,  the  last,  to 
be  fulfilled,   which  is  kept  separate,  like  a  link  wrenched  off 


THE    SEVENTIETH    WEEK.  177 

from  the  preceding  chain.  You  will  observe  that  after  the 
death  of  Messiah  the  Prince,  another  prince  is  alluded  to  as 
yet  to  come  ;  and  he  is  evidently  an  antagonistic  prince,  a  prince 
of  the  Roman  people.  The  grave  mistake  is  made  by  many,  that 
this  prince  was  Titus,  who  came  and  took  the  city  of  Jeru- 
salem ;  but  it  is  not  so.  The  verse  does  not  state  that  the 
prince  should  destroy,  &:c. ;  but  "  the  people  of  the  prince  that 
shall  come  shall  destroy  the  city  and  sanctuary,"  and  so  they 
did.  The  Romans  came  under  that  general.  But  when  it  is 
said,  "  the  people  of  the  in-ince  thcit  shall  come,"  it  is  a  plain 
intimation  to  my  mind  that  thei'e  was  a  certain  great  prince  to 
follow — a  prince  connected  with  the  Roman  empire.  His  people 
were  to  come  fiist,  whicli  they  did  under  Titus  ;  afterwards  the 
prince  comes  himself,  which  I  believe  to  be  still  future.  For 
mark  well,  that  the  past  destruction  of  the  city  and  sanctuary 
is  not  included  in  the  course  of  the  seventy  weeks  at  all.  It  is 
after  the  sixty-ninth,  and  before  the  seventieth  begins.  There 
was  a  chain,  so  to  speak,  of  sixty-nine  weeks  of  years  up  to  the 
death  of  Christ;  then  it  was  broken.  There  was  an  important 
link,  the  seventieth  week,  remaining.  What  becomes  of  it  ? 
The  last  verse  takes  it  up,  and  is  clear  enough  that  this  seven- 
tieth week  has  to  do  (not  witli  Christ  but)  with  antichrist,  who  is 
to  have  a  manifest  connexion  with  the  Roman  people,  and  also 
with  the  Jews.  Observe  that,  in  the  26th  verse,  after  the  three- 
score and  two  weeks  in  addition  to  the  seven,  when  the 
Messiah  is  cut  oif,  there  is  no  mention  of  the  weeks.  In  what 
comes  after,  we  have  no  date,  till  we  enter  upon  verse  27 ; 
showing  that  what  intervenes  is  not  counted  as  a  part  of  the 
continuous  line  of  the  weeks.  "  The  end  thereof  shall  be  with 
a  flood,  and  unto  the  end  thereof  desolations  are  determined." 
The  city  and  sanctuary  were  destroyed  long  since,  but  the 
desolations  are  "  unto  the  end  ;"  and  they  are  still  going  on. 

Till  lately,  of  all  jieople  of  the  earth  a  iew  had  the  greatest 
difficulty  to  get  into  the  land.  There  is  a  change  coming  over 
the  spirit  of  the  nations  towards  Israel,  I  admit.  Some  of 
the  Gentiles  seem  to  forget  that  the  Jew  is  under  a  peculiar 
judgment  of  God.  This  is  no  excuse  for  dealing  harshly,  of 
course,  but  it  is  a  grave  reason  why  men  should  not  meddle  with 
them  politically.  For  the  Jew  to  be  so  mixed  up  with  the  Gentiles 
is  a  sort  of  apostacy,  and  for  the  Gentile  it  is  to  despise  God's 
judgment  and  eventually  to  incur  it.  It  will  be  found  that  God 
cannot  be  with  such  a  union.  When  the  Gentiles  have  given 
up  every  thought  of  jieculiarity  about  the  Jew,  I  believe  that 
the  hand  of  God  will  confound  their  schemes  and  that  He  will 
13 


178  CHANGES    OF    GENTILE    FEELING    TOWARDS    JEWS, 

interfere  to  bring  ont  His  people  distinctly  and  separately  from 
all  others,  first  for  judgment  and  then  for  blessing.  When  all 
seems  to  be  quiet  and  prospering,  God  will  spoil  what  man 
thinks  he  is  doing,  for  He  has  not  finally  cast  off  Israel,  The 
Jew  may  have  given  up  God  and  have  amalgamated  with 
the  Gentile  ;  but  God  will  never  forget  that  He  chose  the  fathers 
and  made  promises  as  to  the  children.  True,  the  Jew  undertook 
to  be  His  people  and  miserably  failed  in  fulfilling  his  obligation  ; 
but  God  will  not  fail  to  accomplish  His  purpose.  When  the 
Gentile  mariners  had  got  Jonah  in  their  ship,  God  was  deter- 
mined to  have'  him  out.  If  they  did  not  cast  him  forth  into  the 
sea,  God  would  break  their  ship  to  get  His  prophet  out  of  it  to 
be  with  Himself  and  His  work.  So  it  will  be  in  the  day  that 
speedily  approaches.  If  we  look  at  Isaiah  xviii.  we  find  that 
thei'e  is  to  be  a  partial  restoration  of  Israel  by  Gentile  power, 
chiefly  through  the  influence  of  a  certain  maritime  power,  "  that 
sendeth  ambassadors  by  the  sea,"  &c.  They  may  bring  some  of 
the  Jews  back  to  their  own  land,  but  the  Jews  will  still  be 
rebellious  and  unbelieving.  All  seems  to  flourish,  but  suddenly 
there  comes  a  blight  from  God ;  and  more  than  that :  He  allows 
the  ancient  enmity  to  break  out  among  the  Gentiles  against  the 
Jews.  "The  fowls,"  as  it  is  said,  "  shall  summer  upon  them  ; 
and  all  the  beasts  of  the  earth  shall  winter  upon  them  ;"  i,e., 
every  kind  of  unrelenting  hatred  is  shown  them.  They  are  the 
dead  body,  and  where  the  carcase  is,  there  will  the  eagles  be 
gathered  together.  The  Gentiles  who  seemed  to  be  so  kind  will 
again  stand  aloof  from  them,  and  once  more  unite  for  the  purpose 
of  crushing  them.  And  what  will  be  the  end?  Tlie  Gentiles 
having  relapsed  into  their  old  hatred  against  Israel,  God  will 
espouse  the  cause  of  His  people.  He  refrains  while  man  is 
meddling,  but  when  an  immense  host  comes  up  against  them,  in 
that  very  day  "  shall  the  present  be  brought  unto  the  Lord  of 
hosts  of  a  people  scattered  and  peeled,  and  from  a  people  terrible 
from  their  beginning  hitherto."  God  will,  if  I  may  so  say,  bring 
a  present  to  Himself  of  His  long-scattered  and  persecuted  Israel. 
That  will  show  how  naturally  in  the  Revelation  we  have  a  re- 
organization of  the  Jewish  polity  and  worshi]),  after  the  Church 
has  been  caught  up  to  heaven  and  before  the  appearing  of  Christ. 
We  see  a  little  remnant,  in  the  midst  of  the  mass  which  were  to 
be  given  over  to  the  Gentiles.  For  forty-two  months,  the  holy 
city  is  to  be  trodden  under  foot.  The  Lord  allows  a  certain 
period  to  go  on  as  fai-  as  the  many  were  concerned,  but  He  mea- 
sures the  temple,  and  the  altar,  and  them  that  worship  therein 
for  Himself.      This  remnant  might  be  killed,    but   He  values 


THE    BREAK    IN    THE    SEVENTY    WEEKS.  179 

them.  When  some  of  the  Jews  are  thus  in  their  own  land,  but 
Israel  as  a  whole  is  not  yet  thorou*ihly  brought  in  by  God,  the 
predictefl  Roman  prince  will  come,  who  will  "  conlirm  a  (not 
the)  covenant  with  (the)  many  for  one  week."  I  am  aware  that 
some  apply  this  to  Christ.  But  the  Lord  never  made  a  covenant 
for  a  week  or  for  seven  A^ears.  It  is  impossible  rightly  to  refer 
the  words  to  any  covenant  the  Lord  ever  made,  mucli  less  to  a 
covenant  made  since  His  death.  "  The  everlasting-  covenant  " 
is  obviously  the  contrast,  and  not  the  accomplishment,  of  this 
covenant  made  for  a  week.  Many  apply  it  thus  ;  bnt  those  who 
so  interpret  Dan.  ix.  27,  have  forgotten  that  Christ  had  been 
looked  at  as  "  cut  off"  in  the  previous  verse., 

"  In  the  midst  of  the  week  he  shall  cause  the  sacrifice  and  the 
oblation  to  cease,  and  for  the  overspreading'  of  abominations  he 
shall  make  it  desolate,"  &c.  Here  we  have  subsequent  events 
of  a  totally  different  nature.  How  and  when,  it  will  be  asked, 
are  we  to  suppose  this  arrest  of  sacrifice  and  oblation  ?  Who 
and  whence  is  the  personage  who  causes  them  to  cease?  Mes- 
siah, the  Prince,  and  "  the  prince  that  shall  come" — are  they 
the  same  person  or  different  individuals  ?  The  history  ends  as 
to  the  Messiah  with  verse  26.  "  The  people'  of  that  coming 
prince  were  the  enemies  of  Israel,  suljject  to  an  opposed  power, 
and  not  Messiah's  people.  In  verse  27  the  prince,  whose  coming- 
was  announced  in  verse  26,  is  himself  come;  and  he  it  is  who 
confirms  a  covenant  with  "  the  many,"  or  mass  of  the  Jews,  for 
one  week  ;  but  in  the  midst  of  the  week  he  shall  cause  the 
sacrifice  and  the  oblation  to  cease,  and  for  the  overspreading  of 
abominations,  &c.  The  language  may  be  somewhat  obscure, 
but  at  least  it  is  quite  plain,  that  there  is  to  be  a  certain  prince 
after  the  death  of  Christ  —  a  Roman  prince  —  whose  people  first 
come  for  a  desolation  long  accomplished,  and  at  length  /becomes. 
The  moment  he  appears  upon  the  stage,  the  last  week  of  Daniel 
begins.  This  interruption  between  the  sixty -ninth  and  seventieth 
weeks  may  seem  sti-ange,  and  people  may  ask.  How  can  there 
be  such  a  gap  ?  But  it  is  not  without  precedent.  The  same 
thing  in  principle  occurs  in  Luke  iv.,  when  the  Lord  was  reading 
in  Isaiah.  The  portion  read  was  the  description  of  His  own 
ministry,  in  Isa.  Ixi.  1,  2,  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me. 

....  He  hath  sent  me  to  heal  the  broken-hearted to 

preach  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord."  "  And  he  closed  the 
book."  He  did  not  finish  the  sentence.  Why  ?  Because,  if 
one  may  reverentially  answer,  the  prophecy  went  on  with  "  the 
day  of  vengeance  of  our  God."  Proclaiming  the  acceptable 
year  of  the  Lord  was  what  Christ  did  at  His  first  coming,  but  it 


180  THE  PRINCE  THAT  SHALL  COME. 

was  not  then  the  day  of  the  Lord's  vengeance;  so  that  the  whole 
of  Christianity  and  the  calhng  of  the  Church  came  in  between 
the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  and  the  day  of  vengeance. 
When  Christ  came  in  humiliation  and  love,  it  was  the  acceptable 
year  of  the  Lord,  and  therefore  He  closed  the  book ;  but  the 
day  of  vengeance  is  deferred  till  the  Lord  comes  again  in  glory. 

So  here  in  Daniel,  the  sixty-nine  weeks  run  on  till  Messiah  is 
cut  off,  and  then  we  have  an  evident  gap.  The  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  is  not  included  in  the  course  of  the  sixty-nine  weeks, 
and  as  evidently  does  not  t;ike  place  in  the  seventieth  week. 
For  if  you  interpret  the  last  week  as  commencing  from  the 
death  of  the  Messiah,  that  would  only  give  seven  years,  whereas 
Jerusalem  was  not  taken  till  forty  years  after  the  death  of 
Christ.*  The  seventieth  week  had  nothing  to  say  to  that  siege, 
and  in  point  of  fact,  the  wars  and  desolations  were  given  before 
we  arrive  at  the  seventieth  week,  which  is  not  named  till  the 
last  verse. 

In  the  last  or  ^Tth  verse,  a  covenant  is  made.  Did  Titus,  did 
any  Roman  prince,  make  a  covenant  with  the  Jews  for  one 
week?  And,  further,  it  is  said,  "  Tn  the  midst  of  the  week,  he 
shall  cause  the  sacrifice  and  the  oblation  to  cease."  This  shows 
that  there  is  to  be  a  renewal  of  religious  service  by  the  Jews  at 
Jerusalem,  in  the  latter  day.  Sacrifice  and  oblation  will  have 
been  restored,  and  this  prince,  in  spite  of  the  covenant  made  with 
them,  puts  an  end  to  all.  And  what  then  ?  Abominations, 
which  means  idolatry,  are  publicly  set  up  and  protected.  They 
are  to  be  brought  into  the  sanctuary  itself,  wliich  was  not  the 
case  at  the  past  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  Then  there  was  much 
appalling  wickedness  —  every  other  kind  of  crime  and  madness, 
but  not  idolatry.  Here,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  supposed  to 
be  the  open  support  of  idolatry  in  the  temple.  This  does  not 
answer  to  the  capture  by  Titus,  nor  to  the  death  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  ;  for  at  that  time  the  unclean  spirit  of  idolatry  had 
departed  out  of  the  nation,  which  from  the  time  of  the  Baby- 

*  If,  with  Usher,  the  death  of  Clirist  be  put  in  the  midst  of  the  seventieth 
week,  it  appeal's  to  me  that  the  confusion  is  only  increased.  For,  in  all  fairness 
of  interpretation,  the  last  week  does  not  begin  to  be  accomplished  until  the  city 
and  the  sanctuary  have  been  destroyed  by  the  TJouians,  not  to  speak  of  a  course 
of  subsequent  desolation.  So  that  the  Usherian  view  of  verse  27  really  puts  the 
death  ot  Christ  at  least  three  and  a  half  years  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem, 
if  the  latter  part  of  verse  26  is  duly  considered.  The  truth  is,  the  right  under- 
standing of  the  prophecy  itself  leaves  room  for,  and  supposes,  a  gap  of  vitdefined 
length  alter  the  Messiah  is  cut  off,  before  the  last  week  commences.  It  is  certain 
tlu'it  the  Roman  invasion  and  the  Jewish  sorrows  that  follow,  exclusive  of  the 
closing  dealings  of  the  coming  Prince,  are  not  in  the  sixty-nine  weeks  any  more 
Hum  in  the  seventieth.     The  text  itself,  therefore,  proves  this  long  interval. 


FINAL    IDOLATRY    OF    THE    JEWS.  181 

lonish  captivity,  excepting  the  defilement  of  Antioclms,  had 
kept  clear  of  such  abominations,  and  in  that  sense  was  "emp- 
ty, swept,  and  garnished,"  But,  we  know,  that  unclean 
spirit  is  to  return  in  greater  foi-ee  than  evei'.  (Matt.  xii.  45.) 
Christendom  and  Judaism  will  each  contj'ibute  to  the  last  form 
of  evil — antichristianism.  You  may  remember  that  the  Pha- 
risees charged  the  Lord,  when  He  was  upon  earth,  with  doing 
His  miracles  by  Satanic  power,  and  the  meaning  of  the  parable 
then  given  to  them  is  really  the  history  of  Israel  itself.  The 
old  unclean  spirit  had  gone  away.  The  people  or  their  leaders 
were  full  of  zeal  for  their  ordinances.  But  what  does  the  Lord 
say  ?  That  the  old  and  long-departed  unclean  spirit  was  to 
return.  And  when  it  does,  it  will  bring  with  it  seven  other 
spirits  worse  than  itself  The  JeAvs  are  to  fall  into  idolatry,  in 
union  with  antichristianism,  and  their  last  state  will  be  worse 
than  the  first.     Compare  also  Isa.  Ixv.  Ixvi. 

But  let  us  now  go  back  to  the  Revelation.  There  is  this 
state  of  things  in  Israel — a  measure  of  recognition  on  Gods 
part,  and  worship  going  on,  though  the  outward  profession  is 
given  over  to  Gentile  oppression.  And  remark,  that  the  Lord 
says,  "  I  will  give  jiower  unto  my  two  witnesses,  and  they  shall 
prophesy  a  thousand,  two  hundred,  and  three-score  days,  clothed 
in  sackcloth."  (Ver.  3.)  The  Lord  mentions  them  as  so  many 
days  here,  rather  than  as  foi-ty-two  months,  it  would  seem  to  mark 
His  value  for  their  testimony.  He  makes,  so  to  speak,  as  much 
of  it  as  He  can.  He  does  not  sum  it  together,  as  when  speaking 
of  the  beast,  (chap.  xiii.  5.)  Lovingly,  He  speaks  of  the  time 
as  days,  as  though  He  were  counting  them  all  out.  "  They 
shall  testify  a  thousand,  two  hundred,  and  three-scoi"e  days, 
clothed  in  sackcloth" — a  testimony  borne  in  sorrow.  It  is  not 
Christianity,  nor  is  it  the  state  of  things  that  will  subsist  after 
Messiah  has  appeared  in  glory.  But  it  is  the  time  of  transition 
after  the  Churcli  has  been  taken  away,  and  before  it  comes  out 
of  heaven  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  —  the  time  when  man  has 
brought  in  God's  people  to  their  land,  and  the  mass  of  them  ai'e 
thoroughly  unfit  to  be  in  relation  with  God.  There  is  a  little 
remnant  of  believing  ones,  there  is  worship,  and  besides  a  pro- 
phetic testimony,  but  evidently  Jewish  in  its  character.  In 
Zechariah,  though  there  are  the  two  olive  trees  mentioned, 
there  is  only  one  candlestick  ;  here  there  are  two,  because  they 
are  the  two  ivitnesses,  who  prophesy  of  the  coming  earthly  glory, 
but  who  do  not  bring  it  in  personally.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  not 
the  regular  order  of  God,  but  a  proof  that  His  eye  is  upon  His 
people  for  good,  before  full  blessing  conies. 


182  THE  WITNESSES  JEWISH,  AND  NOT  PROPERLY  CHRISTIAN. 

"And  if  any  man  will  hurt  them,  fire  proceedeth  out  of  their 
mouth,  and  devoureth  their  enemies  :  and  if  any  man  will  hurt 
them,  he  must  in  this  manner  be  killed."  (Ver.  5.)  This  shows 
that  it  was  not  proper  Christian  testimony,  nor  the  coi'responding 
practical  fruits.  It  was  the  very  thing  the  Son  would  not  do 
when  He  was  upon  earth,  (save,  of  course,  in  the  figurative 
sense  of  Luke  xii.  49,)  and  that  He  rebuked  James  and  John 
for  desiring.  (Luke  ix.  54,  55.)  Here,  on  the  contrary,  fire 
proceeds  out  of  their  mouth,  and  devours  their  enemies  —  a 
perfectly  right  thing  when  God  is  about  to  take  the  ])lace  of 
Judge  on  earth.  But  the  Lord  does  not  take  that  place  now. 
He  is  saving  sinners,  and  otherwise  displaying  full  grace  ;  and 
as  long  as  He  so  acts,  He  does  not  desire  His  people  to  be  the 
depositaries  of  earthly  power.  Thus,  the  miracles  of  His  ser- 
vants, during  this  time  of  the  display  of  His  grace,  have  not 
been  of  a  destroying  nature.  The  Lord  might  deal  with  a  per- 
son now,  because  of  some  sin,  as  with  the  Corinthian  saints  :  I 
do  not  see  why  He  should  not  at  any  time.  But  it  would  be 
foreign  to  Christianity  and  contrary  to  all  that  it  breathes,  if  a 
saint,  because  another  was  evilly  opposed  to  him,  wished  his 
death  or  injury.  Christianity  shows  that  the  victory  grace  gives 
us,  is  to  show  love  and  kindness  to  one's  enemy.  It  may  be 
heaping  coals  of  fire  upon  his  head  ;  but  that  is  the  Lord's  way, 
overcoming  evil  with  good.  Yet  it  is  the  Lord  who  here  sanc- 
tions this  destructive  power  which  accompanies  the  testimony 
of  His  Jewish  witnesses  ;    for  He  says,    "  I  will  give  power  to 

my  two  witnesses And  if  any  man  will  hurt  them,  he 

must  in  this  manner  be  killed."  It  is  what  He  meant  them  to 
do  —  what  evidently  was  done  according  to  the  thought  of  God. 
It  indicates  another  condition,  and  not  the  Christian  called  to 
suffer  unresistingly.  It  is  the  close  of  the  age  when  Christianity 
will  have  done  its  work,  and  the  Lord  will  again  begin  to  act 
upon  the  Jews.  Besides,  their  ministry  and  miracles  are  of  the 
same  character  as  that  which  is  attached  to  those  of  Moses  and 
Elias.  Thus  they  "  have  power  over  waters  to  turn  them  to 
blood,  and  to  smite  the  earth  with  all  plagues,"  as  in  the  time 
of  Moses  ;  and  "  they  have  power  to  shut  heaven  that  it  rain 
not  in  the  days  of  their  prophecy,"  as  in  the  time  of  Elias.  (Ver.  6.) 
And  in  fact  what  will  be  found  in  these  times,  answers  much  to 
what  you  have  in  Moses  and  Elijah.  There  was  idolatry  in  Israel 
then,  and  a  remarkable  testimony  of  Elijah  against  it.  God 
Himself  chastised  His  people  —  the  heavens  were  as  brass  to- 
wards them.  So  will  it  be  found  again.  The  person  that  then 
sways  the  destinies  of  Israel  will  be  an  apostate  who  admits  and 


THE    BEAST. 


183 


enforces  idolatry.  Again,  Israel  will  be  found  in  subjection  to  Gen- 
tile authority,  as  they  were  in  the  days  of  Moses  ;  yet  there  will 
be  a  little  remnant  set  apart  for  God.  But  althougli  these  two 
witnesses  are  guarded  for  a  certain  time  by  miracles,  yet  the 
moment  the  days  are  over,  they  have  no  power,  so  to  speak. 
The  beast  that  ascendeth  out  of  the  bottomless  pit  makes  war 
with  them,  and  they  are  killed  like  any  other  men.  "  And  their 
dead  bodies  [shall  be]  on  the  street  of  the  great  city,  which  spiri- 
tually is  called  Sodom  and  Egypt,  where  also  their  Lord  was 
crucified."  (Ver.  8.)  It  is  perfectly  plain  that  this  is  Jeiusalem. 
Many  think  it  is  Rome,  because,  as  I  have  said  before,  Protes- 
tants are  absorbed  in,  and  biassed  by,  their  controversies  with 
Popery.  God  attaches  the  greatest  possible  interest  to  His  people 
Israel,  when  His  rights  as  to  the  earth  are  in  question.  But  why 
is  there  not  more  said  about  Popery  in  the  Scrij^tures  ?  Because 
God  never  acknowledges  His  Ciuirch  as  an  earthly  people. 
The  politics,  pursuits,  interests  of  this  world  are  well  enough  for 
those  who  have  nothing  but  an  earthly  portion  and  want  no 
earthly  intruder.  But  to  strive  with  the  potsherds  of  the  earth 
is  beneath  those  of  heavenly  birth. 

We  have  now  come  down  in  this  chapter  to  Jerusalem,  the 
centre  of  God's  dealings  and  testimony,  and  of  the  opposition 
from  the  abyss.  Their  great  antagonist  is  plainly  mentioned 
here,  for  the  first  time  in  the  Revelation,  as  "  tl/e  Beast,''  just  as 
if  you  had  known  all  about  him  before.  It  is  a  remarkable 
power,  not  merely  arising,  as  in  chap,  xiii.,  out  of  the  sea,  but 
here,  as  in  chap,  xvii.,  said  to  ascend  "  out  of  the  bottomless 
pit."  This  empire  does  not  arise  out  of  the  earth,  the  symbol 
of  a  state  of  settled  government,  as  the  second  beast  in  chap, 
xiii.  11,  nor  only  out  of  the  sea,  which  sets  forth  an  unsettled 
revolutionary  condition.  There  is  the  extraordinary  and  awful 
feature  added  in  this  passage,  that  it  rises  out  of  the  abyss. 
Satan  has  to  do  with  its  last  state.  It  has  been  a  darling  project 
of  men  from  time  to  time  to  form  a  vast  universal  empire. 
Charlemagne  tried  it,  but  he  failed.  He  never  got  the  old 
Roman  earth  under  his  hand.  And  some  can  remember  another 
who  had  the  same  thing  near  his  heart,  but  he  too  failed  and 
died  a  miserable  exile.  But  the  time  hastens  when  that  very 
scheme  will  be  realized.  In  other  empires  there  has  always 
been  the  providence  of  God  overruling.  There  was  God  above 
them,  God  calling  upon  His  j)eople  to  show  allegiance  to  the 
powers  that  be,  no  matter  how  they  were  formed,  Tlie  Christian 
was  not  to  meddle  with  them,  but  to  acknowledge  them  and  to 
pay  tribute.     But  there  is  an  empire  about  to  be  formed,  that 


184  RESTORATION    OF    THE    ROMAN    ICMPIRE. 

will  be  as  thoroughly  under  the  immedicite  power  of  Satan,  as 
all  past  empires  have  been  under  the  providence  of  God  ;  and 
God  will  withdraw  that  care  and  check  that  He  has  hitheito 
kept  over  the  kingdoms  of  tiie  world,  and  will  allow  ail  to  ripen 
to  a  head  under  Satan.  Justly,  therefore,  is  this  empire  said  to 
arise  out  of  the  bottomless  pit. 

This  corresponds  with  what  we  have  in  Daniel.     The  person 
that  would  specially   meddle  wath  the  Jews   (chap.  vii.  25  ;  ix. 
27,)  is  the  Roman  beast,  the  leader  of  that  vei*y  empire,  which, 
in  its  last  state,  God  does  not  own.     When  Jesus  was  born,  the 
fourth  or  Roman  empire  was  there,  and  God  took  advantage  of 
its  decrees  to  bring  the  heir  of  David  to  Bethlehem.     It  was 
"  the  beast"  that  was  there.      In  Rev.  xvii.  it  is  written,   "the 
beast  that  was,  and  is  not,  and  shall  ascend  out  of  the  bottomless 
pit."  (Ver.  8.)     But  observe  a  notable  feature  that  Daniel  does 
not  furnish,  and   that  John  does.      He  gives   three  successive 
stages  of  the  Roman  empire.     It  was  existing  in  John's  time — 
than  it  was  to  cease — and  last  of  all   it  should  arise  out  of  the 
bottomless  pit,  special  Satanic  influence  being  connected  with 
its  final  state.     The  beast  "  that  is  not"  describes  exactly  its 
present  condition  of  non-existence.     Th^   Goths   and  Vandals 
came  down  upon  it,  and   the  old    Roman  empire  came  to  ruin. 
Since  then,  men  have  never  been  able  to  re-organize  it,  because 
God  has  another  thought.     He  has  laid  it  down  in  his  word 
that  it  is  to  be  re-organized,  not  by  man,  but  by  Satan's  power. 
Its  sources  will  be  from  beneath.     How  remarkable  is  all  this  ! 
We  have  had  the   decline  and  fall  of  the  Roman  empire,  but 
there  is  one  thing  that  no  historian  could  trace,  that  prophecy 
alone  could   and  does  give,  viz.,  the  restoration  of  the  Roman 
empire.     May  we  see  it,  not  as  being  upon  earth,  but  as  looking 
upon  it  from  heaven !     I    believe   that    those    who  reject    the 
gospel  now,  will,  if  then  alive,  be  carried  away  by  the  dreadful 
delusions  of  that  day.     They  will  receive  the  mark  of  the  beast 
in  their  right  hand  or  in  their  foi'eheads  :  they  will  worship  his 
image — and  it  is  written  by  God  that  those  who  do,  shall  be  tor- 
mented in  everlasting  fire.     The  world  may  fancy,  from  all  the 
increase  of  grandeur  and  prosperity  and   luxury  which  will  be 
brought  in  then  or  previously,  that  the  millennium  is  come ;  but 
it  will  be  Satan's  millennium.     That  it  is  the  fate  reserved  for 
these   countries  ;    for  it  is  part  of  the  righteous  judgment    of 
God,  that  where  the  gospel   has   been  preached,  and  the  world 
has  trifled  with  it,  even  allowing  idolatry  for  political  purposes, 
He    will  withdraw   the  light  and   send  them   strong  delusion. 
And  then  Satan  will  bring  out  the  man  of  sin.     There  is  im- 


THEY    THAT    DWELL    ON    THE    EARTH.  185 

mense  practical  importance  in  all  this.  People  may  ask, 
"  What  is  the  good  of  this  to  us,  as  Christians,  if  we  are  to  be 
taken  away  before  !"'  Such  a  way  of  speaking  slights  what  God 
has  been  pleused  to  reveal  to  us.  When  God  spoke  beforehand 
about  the  destruction  of  Sodom,  did  Abraham  say,  What  has 
that  to  do  with  me  ?  God  would  have  our  hearts  to  be  drawn 
out  in  praise  and  thanksgiving  for  His  grace  and  His  love  to 
our  own  souls,  but  He  tells  us  also  the  sad  doom  which  awaits 
the  world,  and  awakens  the  spirit  of  interception  for  unfaithful 
saints,  who  may  be  mixed  up  with  it. 

I  would  just  remark,  as  to  the  two  witnesses,  that  there  is  no 
necessity  to  take  them  as  two  persons :  they  might  be  two 
hundied.  They  are  here  viev^ed  as  two  witnesses,  (whether 
literally  so  or  not,)  because  it  is  a  divine  principle  that  "  out  of 
the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses  every  word  shall  be  esta- 
blished." God  was  giving  a  sufficient  testimony.  These*  main- 
tained Christ's  title  to  the  earth,  that  He  was  "  the  Lord  of  the 
earth  ;"  and  this  excited  enmity.  "  The  beast"  might  not  so 
much  have  cared  if  they  had  said,  "the  Lord  of  heaven;"  but 
they  claimed  the  earth,  not  for  themselves,  but  for  Him,  and 
men  will  not  bear  it.  Unbelief  likes  present  enjoyment,  and 
anything  which  interferes  with  this  and  makes  conscience  uneasy, 
is  hateful  and  unwelcome.  And  so,  when  the  testimony  is 
finished,  and  the  witnesses  are  overthrown,  not  only  the  beast 
but  two  great  parties  of  mankind  are  affected  by  their  fall. 
And  some  of  the  peoples,  and  kindreds,  and  tongues,  and  nations, 
"  see  their  dead  bodies  three  days  and  an  half,  and  do  not 
suffer  their  dead  bodies  to  be  put  into  a  grave  ;  and  they  that 
dwell  on  the  earth  rejoice  over  them.  . .  and  shall  send,"  &c.  (Ver. 
9,  10.)  It  is  not  the  first  or  the  only  time  that  we  have  this  distinc- 
tion drawn  between  "  peoples,  and  kindreds,  and  tongue>^,  and 
nations,"  and  "  those  that  dwell  on  the  earth."  The  latter  does  not 
mean  men  on  earth  merely,  it  carries  a  moral  force  with  it  and 
means  those  who  are  essentially  earthly-minded,  who  do  not  in 
heart  and  ways  rise  above  the  earth.  The  dead  bodies  of  the 
witnesses  are  on  the  street  of  the  great  city,  and  they  of  the 
people,  and  kindred,  and  nations  see  them  there  three  days  and 
an  half,  and  do  not  suffer  them  to  be  put  in  graves.  That  was 
bad  eiiough  —  being  the  malice  of  man  against  those  who 
witnessed  for  God.     But  "  they   that  dwell  on  the  earth"  go 

*  The  received  reading  eiov  is  not  without  the  support  of  some  cursives,  Aeth. 
(Slav.,  &c.  But  all  the  Uncials  and  most  cursives,  versions  and  fathers  read  Kvplov. 
The  former  was  probably  due  to  the  tempting  antithesis,  rcf  dfif  rov  ovpavov,  in 
verse  13. 


186  THE    CLOUD. 

much  further.  For  in  their  case,  there  is  positive  rejoicing  and 
makir)g  merry,  and  sending  gifts  one  to  another.  And  why 
was  all  this?  Because  it  is  said,  "these  two  prophets  tor- 
mented them  that  dwelt  on  the  earth." 

This  is  not  a  mere  imaginary  distinction,  nor  only  founded 
upon  one  "passage.  If  you  look  elsewhere  you  will  find  the 
same  thing.  Thus,  in  chap.  xiv.  6,  "  And  I  saw  another  angel 
fly  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  having  the  everlasting  gospel  to 
preach  unto  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  and  to  every  nation, 
and  kindred  and  tongue,  and  people,"  there  is  the  converse 
of  what  we  have  here.  We  first  find  the  mass  of  the  Gentile 
people,  who  show  out  their  evil  against  the  two  witnesses, 
by  not  allowing  their  dead  bodies  to  be  buried.  But  the 
special  rejoicing  is  on  the  part  of  the  dwellers  on  the  earth,  or 
the  earthly-minded.  But  in  chap.  xiv.  we  find  God  sends 
a  solemn  message,  the  everlasting  gospel.  And  with  whom 
does  He  begin  i*  With  the  worst — "  them  that  dwell  on  the 
earth,"  rohs  KaOrj/n^vovs,  literally  "  that  sit,"  which  seems  stronger 
thanjoi/s  KaTotKowras — and  then  the  message  is  extended  to  men 
generally.  And  on  examination  you  will  find  this  thoroughly 
confirmed  by  other  passages.  In  other  words,  to  "  dwell  on 
the  earth"  is  not  a  mere  vague  description  of  men,  but  it 
expresses  a  moral  condition. 

But  to.  return — God  interferes.  "  And  after  three  days  and 
an  half,  the  or  a  spirit  of  life  from  God  entered  into  them  and 
they  stood  upon  their  feet;  and  great  fear  fell  upon  them. 
And  they*  heard  a  loud  voice  from  heaven  saying  unto  them, 
Come  up  hither.  And  they  ascended  up  to  heaven  in  the 
cloud;  and  their  enemies  beheld  them."  (Ver.  11,  12.)  It  is  not 
merely  in  a  cloud,  (as  in  the  authorised  version,)  but  in  the  cloud. 
I  sujjpose  it  was  the  cloud  seen  in  the  beginning  of  chap. 
X.,  which  encircled  the  mighty  angel.  The  cloud,  the  known 
especial  emblem  of  Jehovah's  presence,  was  that  which  received 
the  witnesses  and  proved  that  their  Lord,  the  Lord  of  heaven  as 
well  as  earth,  was  for  them.  They  ascended  up  to  heaven 
in  the  very  face  of  their  enemies.  "  And  in  the  same  hour, 
was  there  a  great  earthquake,  and  the  tenth  part  of  the  city 
fell,  and  in  the  earthquake  were  slain  of  men  seven  thousand : 
and  the  remnant   were  affrighted  and   gave  glory  to  the  God 

*  The  two  most  ancient  uncials  that  are  known  as  yet,  AC,  with  Tcry  many 
cursives  confirm  the  received  reading,  which  is  rather  strengthened,  it  seems  to 
me,  by  the  fact  that  elsewhere  the  book  lias  riKouaa.  For  assimilation,  under  sueli 
circumstances,  whether  by  accident  or  design,  is  far  more  probable  than  the  intro- 
duction of  a  diiFerenee.  If  tliis  be  so,  the  sense  is  that  the  witnesses  had  a  public 
and  glorious  viudication  in  the  sight  and  hearing  of  their  enemies. 


THE    GOD    OF    HEAVEN.  187 

of  heaven."  One  word  I  would  say  before  going  further, 
on  a  remarkable  distinction  that  occurs  in  this  same  verse. 
The  witnesses  testified  for  the  Lord  of  the  earth ;  but  the 
people  that  were  affrighted  when  they  saw  how  the  cause 
of  His  martyred  servants  was  vindicated,  gave  glory  to  the 
God  of  heaven.  It  will  be  then  an  easier  thing  for  men  to 
acknowledge  God  tdjove  in  a  vague  soi't  of  way,  than  to  own 
Him  as  the  Loi'd  of  the  earth,  concerning  Himself  about 
what  men  do  here  below.  The  former  might  be  merely  to 
regard  Him  as  One  seen  in  the  distance ;  though,  in  a  higher 
sense,  I  may  know  Him  as  One  that  comes  down  to  give 
me  a  portion  with  Himself  above.  Thus  God  in  ^heaven  is 
either  exceedingly  near  to  His  people,  or  far  off"  to  those 
who  are  merely  acted  upon  by  transient  terror.  The  worldly 
man  can  well  allow  the  thought  of  God  afar  from  himself;  and 
this  is  just  what  we  have  here.  They  were  alarmed  by  what 
was  near.  But  there  was  no  reception  of  the  testimony,  no 
conversion.  They  should  have  bowed  to  the  Lord  of  the  earth. 
They  gave  glory  to  the  God  of  heaven.  But  it  is  too  late. 
There  were  slain  in  the  earthquake  "  seven  thousand  ^names 
of  men,"  as  the  margin  gives  it  literally. 

First  of  all,  we  have  seen  the  priestly  remnant  occupied  in 
the  worship  of  God — His  holy  remnant  in  the  midst  of  the 
Jews  in  the  latter  day.  After  this,  we  have  the  witnesses,  who 
did  not  bring  out  on  God's  part  what  He  is  manifesting  now, 
but  asserted  His  rights  with  regard  to  the  future,  as  prophecy 
naturally  implies.  Another  remark  I  may  here  make.  In  the 
Revelation  an  expression  occurs  that  has  often  been  misunder- 
stood. "  The  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy." 
The  meaning  is  not  that  all  prophecy  refers  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  (which  in  a  certain  sense  may  be  true,)  but  that  the  wit- 
ness of  Jesus  which  this  book  contains  —  what  Jesus  testifies  in 
this  book  —  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  It  is  the  Holy  Spirit  as 
He  is  shown  us  throughout  the  book  ;  not  bringing  into  present 
communion  with  the  Lord  Jesus  in  heaven,  but  communicating 
what  He  is  to  do  by  and  by.  They,  the  witnesses,  asserted  the 
title  of  Christ  to  the  earth.  Whatever  men  might  say,  the 
Lord  was  the  one  to  whom  it  belonged,  and  He  would  soon 
come  and  make  good  their  record. 

There  is  a  third  thing  that  the  end  of  the  chapter  contains. 
Besides  a  ))riestly  place,  and  then  a  prophetical  testimony,  there 
comes  the  kingdom.  The  trumpet  sounds.  And  now  it  is  not, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  witnesses,  a  proclauuition  fenced  by  mira- 
culous powei- ;    that  has  come  to  a  close  —  their  own  blood  has 


188  THE    WORLD-KINGDOM    OF    OUR    LORD, 

sealed  tlieir  work.  But  if  it  looked  as  if  the  Beast  had  played 
an  easy  part  in  their  death,  God  points  to  another  thing  :  "  The 
seventh  angel  sounded,  and  there  were  loud  voices  in  heaven," 
&c.  There  is  the  announcement  of  a  kingdom,  heard  not  uj^on 
earth,  but  in  heaven,  and,  therefore,  as  soon  as  it  is  made,  those 
that  had  the  mind  of  Clirist,  "  the  twenty  -four  elders,  who  sit 
before  God  on  their  thrones,  fell  upon  their  faces  and  worshipped 
God."  A  little  word  I  would  desire  to  say  upon  this  verse  15. 
As  it  stands  now,  it  has  a  very  weakened  turn  given  to  it :  "  The 
kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord 
and  of  his  Christ."  The  true  force  is  :  "The  world-kingdom  of 
our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ  is  come."  This  gi-ves,  in  my  opinion,  a 
very  different  and  a  weightier  meaning  to  the  verse.  It  is  the 
ivorjd-kingdom ,  and  why  ?  Because  this  book  has  shown  us 
from  the  very  beginning  that  there  Avas  another  order  of  king- 
dom altogether.  In  chap.  i.  John  spoke  of  himself  as  a  "  brother 
and  companion  in  tribulation,  and  in  the  kingdom  and  patience 
in  Christ."  Thus  the  kingdom  of  Chi'ist  is  there,  and  yet 
characterized,  or  at  least  accom]>anied,  by  tribulation  and  pa- 
tience !  But  the  angel  heralds  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Lord  and 
of  His  Christ,  as  to  this  world.  Previously  it  had  been  one  only 
known  to  faith  and  calHng  for  patience  —  a  thing,  consequently, 
that  the  world  would  not  believe.  Talk  to  them  of  a  kingdom 
where  people  suffer,  and  where  Clirist  allows  them  to  suffer, 
instead  of  maintaining  His  rights  !  And  this  is  exactly  what 
God's  children  have  been  called  to  go  through,  from  that  day  to 
this. 

But  allow  me  to  say  that  this  shows  the  extreme  error  of 
many  good  people  who  think  it  quite  right  to  use  earthly  power 
in  seeking  to  establish  the  cause  of  Christ.  For,  not  to  speak  of 
Romanism  but  to  look  at  Puritanism,  they  completely  forgot 
that  the  kingdom  of  Christ  now  is  the  kingdom  of  patience,  and 
not  of  power.  They  judged  because  theirs  was  the  right  as 
they  believed,  therefore  they  ought  not  to  suffer ;  whereas  the 
very  thing  that  God  insists  on  is,  that  because  the  world  is 
wrong,  and  they  right,  therefore  His  children  must  suffer.  Hence 
Peter  testifies,  "  If,  when  ye  do  well,  and  suffer  for  it,  ye  take  it 
patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with  Cirod."  There,  evidently,  you 
have  the  great  moral  consequence  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  practi- 
cal things :  a  Christian  is  not  buffeted  because  he  is  wrong, 
but  because  he  does  well.  There  is  such  a  thing,  even  among 
God's  people,  as  the  being  buffeted  because  they  have  gone 
astray.  What  was  the  trial  of  Lot?  And  what  that  of  Abra- 
ham ?  It  was  to  prove  that  the  latter  was  faithful ;  but  Lot's  was 


SUFFERING    NOW,    REIGNING    THEN.  189 

because  lie  was  unfaithful.     Not  tlic>t  Abraham  was  always  true 

to  God  ;   but  unfaithfulness  Avith  him  was  the  exception,  Avhereas 

I  am  afraid  it  was  too  often  the  case  with  poor  Lot.     No  doubt. 

Lot  was  more  happy  in  his  outward  circumstances.     He  was  in 

the  gate  of  the  city,  as  we  are  told  —  sitting;  where  he  ought  not, 

though  where  the  flesh  would  like  to  be.     We  are  not  to  suppose 

that  he  was  drawn  into  the  ungodliness  of  the  community  wherein 

he  dwelt.     No  doubt,  he  coidd  expostulate  very  well,  as  to  the 

evil  they  were   doing  ;    but,  evidently,  he   was   in  the  place  of 

dishonour,   as  far  as    God  was    concerned,    though  not  in   the 

commission  of  open  sin,  if  we   only  think   of  moral  conduct. 

He  was   delivered,   through  God's  mercy,    but   ignominiously. 

His  sons-in-law  remained    behind  ;  his  wife  was  made  a  lasting 

monument  of  her  folly  and  sin.     Abraham   knew  another  kind 

of  sorrow,  the  sorrow  of  a  man   that  knew  God,   and  that  had 

come  out  at  His  word.     We  do  find  failure  in  Abraham,  as  for 

instance  in   Gen.   xii.  and  xx.      But  though  there   were  slips, 

still,  looking  at  his  spirit  and  walk  as  a  whole,  Abraham  was  a 

most  blessed  man  of   God,  and   a  sample  of   faith  to   all,    as 

God  Himself  puts  him  before  us  in  Heb.  xi.  and    elsewhere. 

He  knew  trial,  because  he  was  true  to  God  and  to  his  calling. 

Lot  knew  it,  because  he  was  grasping  after  some  present  thing, 

a   place   in    the  world.      And  what  was  the  issue  .^      A   blow 

comes  upon   the   world,  and  Lot  was  carried  away  by  it ;  and 

all   that   he   had  set  his  affections  upon,  was  swept  away,  and 

only  restored   to   him  through    Abraham's   timely   succour,   to 

be  lost  for  ever    when   the   judgment   of   Sodom    came.      At 

the   close  a  dark  spot  of  shame  fastens  upon   that  man,  and 

he  had  bitterly  to   learn   that  for  the   believer  a  worldly  path 

is  one  of  frequent  pain  and  disapjiointment,  which  if  persevered 

in,  ensures    present  sorrow,   and  leaves  behind   it    alike    seeds 

of  misery  and  fruits  of  shame.     VVe  must  have  one  or  other 

kind   of  suffering,  if  we  are    children  of  God   at   all  ;    either 

the  suffering   that  comes   upon    the   world,   if  we   are  faithful 

to  God,  or  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  because  we  confess  Him. 

Thus  the  seventh  angel  gives  the  signal  that  the  mysterious 
form  of  the  kingdom  is  at  an  end.  Heavenly  voices  proclaim 
that  this  world's  kingdom  is  become  that  of  the  Lord  and 
His  Christ.  Instead  of  merely  having  a  kingdom  open  to  faith, 
and  that  none  but  believers  value — a  kingdom  whose  earthly 
portion  is  tribulation  and  waiting  for  the  Lord,  the  only  place 
that  hope  can  take  now — instead  of  this  we  have  an  entire 
change.  God  will  no  longer  allow  the  world  to  be  the  camp, 
and  parade,  and  sport  of  Satan ;  and  when  the  seventh  trumpet 


190  NOT    THE    JEWS    BUT    CHRISTIANS 

sounds,  it  is  announced  that  this  world's  kingdom  of  the  Lord 
is  come.  If  it  be  objected  that  the  Lord  Himself,  in  John  xviii., 
declares  that  His  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,  I  reply  that  this 
is  beside  the  mark.  This  world  is  never  the  source  of  His 
kingdom,  but  is  it  not  destined  to  be  its  sphere  ?  It  wq,s  not 
His  kingdom  then,  but  that  does  not  prove  that  it  is  not  to 
be  His  kingdom  at  some  future  time,  when  He  will  fight  and 
His  servants  too,  though  in  a  new  way.  Here  you  have  the 
positive  word  of  God  that  the  world-kingdom  of  our  Lord  and 
of  His  Christ  is  come.  The  sovereignty  of  the  universe  is  trans- 
ferred to  the  Lord  Jesus  :  "  And  he  shall  reign  for  ever 
and  ever."  Of  course  the  ])hrase,  "  for  ever  and  ever,"  must  be 
taken  in  connexion  with  the  whole  subject.  When  eternity  is 
spoken  of,  it  must  be  taken  in  its  full  and  unlimited  extent ;  but 
here  it  can  only  mean  "  for  ever  "  in  the  sense  of  as  long  as  the 
world  lasts.  And  I  feel,  though  it  is  not  the  brightest  thought 
which  our  souls  can  enjoy  in  connexion  with  the  future,  yet  that 
the  Lord  Jesus  is  to  take  the  throne  of  the  world,  is  a  very  great 
rest  to  the  heart  in  all  the  present  confusion.  It  lifts  one  out  of 
the  spirit  of  the  present ;  because,  if  I  know  that  this  is  not  the 
place  of  the  Church,  but  that  I  am  now  in  the  Jiingdotn  and 
patience  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  shall  not  be  wanting  honour  or  power 
in  this  world.  We  are  to  have  a  much  better  place  in  heaven, 
and  the  saints  who  will  be  on  earth  when  the  Lord  appears  and 
we  are  with  Him  in  glory,  will  be  in  the  place  of  subjects.  But 
what  is  the  place  of  those  who  are  in  the  kingdom  and  patience 
in  Christ  Jesus?  We  shall  not  be  subjects  meiely  of  Christ 
when  He  thus  comes,  but  kings,  reigning  with  Him.  Ev^en 
now  those  who  are  rejected  for  Christ,  are  rejected  kings.  They 
do  not  merely  sing,  "  He  loveth  us,"  but  "  hath  made  us  kings 
and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father,"  &c. 

The  Lord  will  have  a  kingdom  suited  to  the  earth  ;  but  the 
Jews  are  not  destined  to  be  kings.  They  will  have  on  earth  a 
very  honoured  place  ;  but  even  when  the  nation  is  converted  to 
Him,  they  will  never  have  the  nearness  that  belongs  to  every 
soul,  Jew  or  Gentile,  who  believes  in  Christ  now.  Our  portion 
may  seem  to  unbelief  to  be  a  most  trying  one,  and  trying  it  is 
noiv.  But  the  Lord  Jesus  has  trodden  the  path  before,  and 
known  suffering  such  as  none  other  could.  He  has  gone  through 
it  all,  and  when  He  comes  and  takes  the  kingdom,  He  will 
assign  His  sufferers  their  place.  They  will  be  like  the  near 
companions  of  David  when  he  came  to  the  throne.  There  was 
David  in  tiie  cave  of  Adullam,  and  David  hunted  about  upon 
the  mountains  by  Saul ;    but  it  was   David's   faith,  as  a  means. 


ARE    CALLED    TO    REIGN.  191 

that  had  kindled  the  Hame  in  their  hearts.  Tliey  caught  the 
tone  of  David's  soul ;  and,  though  they  had  a  time  of  sorrow,  and 
there  were  many  foolish  men  like  Nabal,  who  could  taunt  him 
with  being  some  runaway  servant,  yet  while  David  was  rather 
quick  to  feel  and  too  ready  to  gird  his  sword  to  his  tliigh,  he 
takes  a  word  from  even  a  weaker  vessel,  and  retreats  into  the 
better  place  of  grace  —  the  place  of  doing  well,  suffering-  for  it 
and  taking  it  patiently.  And  soon  came  the  throne.  What 
then  ?  The  poor  ones  that  had  known  his  path  of  suffering  and 
had  shared  his  sorrows  in  the  day  of  his  rejection  were  now  to 
share  his  honours.  Where  was  Jonathan  in  that  day  ?  It  is 
true  that  his  heart  clung  to  David,  but  his  faith  was  not  equal  to 
the  trial.  And  what  was  the  consequence.'*  He  fell  on  the 
mountains  of  Gilboa  with  his  miserable  father  ;  and  he  whose 
heart  would  willingly  have  given  the  first  place  to  David,  and 
who  had  already  stripped  himself  for  David's  sake,  now  falls 
with  the  world  with  which  he  had  outwardly  remained  to  the  last. 
Thus  M'hatever  may  be  our  affection  for  Christ,  if  I  remain  in 
a  false  v/orldly  position,  it  will  never  be  to  my  honour  in  the  day 
of  Christ,  when  they  that  suffer  shall  reign  with  Him.  May 
we  wait  for  that  kingdom  with  hearts  exercised  by  the  truth ! 

You  will  find  that  there  are  many  persons  who  hear  restlessly 
about  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  professing  always  to  like  something- 
touching  more  upon  the  immediate  need  of  the  soul.  But,  does 
not  God  know  what  we  want?  That  is  what  we  most  need  — 
not  to  trust  ourselves,  but  the  living  God.  Always  giving  the 
first  and  last  place  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  may  we  not  forget 
that  His  kingdom  is  coming.  Though  the  cross  is  the  only 
resting-place  for  the  sinner,  the  kingdom  is  what  cheers  and 
encourages  the  saint  in  his  path  of  faith  and  patience.  There 
were  those  that  followed  David  in  his  sufferings  —  separated, 
wherever  they  went,  from  all  around.  They  were  gatheied 
from  all  conditions  and  out  of  all  parts  ;  but  it  was  being  round 
David  and  sharing  God's  thoughts  and  purposes  about  him, 
whicli  sustained  them.  Though  God  has  anointed  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  for  it,  still  He  has  not  yet  taken  the  kingdom  in 
the  sense  of  the  world-kingdom  that  I  have  been  speaking  of. 
Having  been  rejected  and  crucified,  He  is  gone  above  and  we 
wait  for  Him,  suffering  meanwhile.  But  the  day  fast  comes 
when  it  will  no  longer  be  tribulation  and  patience,  but  power 
and  glory.  All  will  be  brought  under  subjection  to  Christ  and 
He  will  reign  for  ever  and  ever. 

When  this  is  heard  in  heaven,  the  twenty-four  elders  rise  from 
their  thrones.  (Ver.  16.)    How  sweet  is  this  !   Before,  when  glory 


192  OMISSION  OF  "and  art  to  come." 

was  ascribed  to  God  or  the  Lamb  appeared,  they  rose  and  cast 
themselves  down  before  Him.  They  Avere  ready  for  everything 
that  exalted  the  Godhead.  If  it  is  as  the  Creator,  (chap,  iv.,) 
they  prostrate  themselves  before  Him  that  sat  on  the  throne,  or  if 
they  hear  of  the  slain  Lamb  who  is  about  to  unveil  the  secrets  of 
futurity,  (chap,  v.,)  they  fall  down  before  Him  and  proclaim 
Him  worthy. 

So  here  now  the  last  trumpet  sounds,  "  the  world-kingdom  of 
our  Lord  and  of  his  Christ "  is  announced,  and  forthwith  the 
twenty-four  elders  are  on  their  faces,  giving  Cxod  thanks,  because 
He  had  taken  to  Him  His  great  power  and  had  reigned.  It  is 
true  that  it  must  be  through  much  sorrow  for  guilty  men.  For 
the  sword  of  judgment  has  to  clear  the  way,  that  the  sceptre  of 
righteousness  may  have  free  course.  "  The  nations  were  angry, 
and  thy  wrath  is  come,"  &:c.  But  they  know  well  that,  though 
man  must  come  down  with  a  crash,  he  will  be  exalted  in  the 
only  true  and  enduring  way  in  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  of 
His  Anointed.  And  so  they  give  thanks  to  the  Lord  God 
Almighty,  "that  art,  and  wast,  [and  art  to  couie.]"  (Ver.  17.)  I 
beg  leave  to  omit  the  last  clause,  "  and  art  to  come  " — not  as  a 
conjecture,  (for  conjecture  on  Scripture  is  presumption,)  but  be- 
cause of  what  the  best  witnesses  for  the  word  of  God  really 
maintain.  The  clause,  "  and  art  to  come,"  was  put  in  to  make 
it  square  with  other  passages  which  contain  a  similar  phrase. 

In  the  first  chapter,  you  may  remember  that  the  salutation 
was,  "  Grace  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  him  which  is,  and  which 
was,  and  which  is  to  come."  All  these  three  clauses  are  from 
God.  They  assert  that  He  is  Jehovah,  the  One  that  is,  and  was, 
and  is  to  come ;  in  short,  they  are  a  translation  into  the  Greek 
of  the  name  Jehovah  —  One  who  is  always  the  same.  The 
same  thing  is  repeated,  chap.  i.  8  :  only  there  it  is  not  John's 
salutation  to  the  churches,  but  the  direct  word  of  God  Himself: 
"  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  saith  the  Lord  God,  which  is,  and 
which  was,  and  Avhich  is  to  come,  the  Almighty" — evidently, 
pointing  to  the  unchanging  continuity  of  His  being.  In  chap.  iv. 
there  is  a  little  departure  from  the  order  given  in  the  previous  pas- 
sages, and  quite  rightly  :  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  Almighty, 
which  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come  ;"  not,  "  which  is,  and  was," 
&c.,  but  here,  "  which  was  and  is."  It  may  seem  a  slight  change, 
but  it  is  not  without  meaning.  The  emphasis  in  cha|).  i.  is  thrown 
upon  the  words,  "  which  is,""  because  God  is  presenting  Himself 
as  the  ever  existing  One.  "  Which  was,"  seems  put  first  in  chap, 
iv.,  because  the  living  creatures,  (who  had  been  the  instruments  of 
God's  judgments  in   past  dispensations,  as  they  will   be  in  the 


THE    REFORMATION. 


193 


future,)  look  back  upon  the  past,  and  therefore  do  not  lay  stress 
upon  "  which  is,"  but  begin  with  what  God  had  been  all  through 
the  past.  They  had  been  seen  first  at  tiie  garden  of  Eden  ;  next, 
they  formed  a  sort  of  representation  of  tlie  judicial  power  of  God, 
in  the  tabernacle  and  in  the  temple  ;  and  then,  finally,  they  were 
active  when  Jerusalem  was  swept  away,  and  judgment  came  upon 
Israel.  Now,  here,  these  living  creatures,  which  had  been  the 
witnesses  of  God's  ways  all  through,  begin  with  what  God  tvas, 
the  perfection  of  His  being,  as,  if  one  may  so  say,  it  had  been 
historically  unfolding.  In  chap.  xi.  there  is  the  omission  of 
the  words,  "  and  art  to  come,"  because  the  arrival  of  the  world- 
kingdom  of  the  Lord  is  here  celebrated,  so  that  there  was  no 
need  to  add  anything.  Before  He  came  in  His  kingdom,  it 
was  appropriate  ;  but  it  would  be  hardly  suitable  here.  As  I 
find  that  the  best  authorities  reject  the  words,  it  is  perfectly 
legitimate  to  show  how  the  better  reading  harmonizes  with  the 
truth  of  God  in  the  passage  itself. 

The  general  meaning  of  the  next  verse  (18)  is  plain.  "The 
nations  were  wroth,  and  thy  wrath  is  come,  and  the  time  of  the 
dead,  that  they  should  be  judged,"  &c.,  all  which  was  to  be 
executed  afterwards.  It  is  a  sort  of  comprehensive  view  of  what 
would  take  place  from  the  beginning  of  the  kingdom,  when  the 
various  corruptions  should  be  judged,  and  during  the  millennium 
up  to  "the  end,"  when  all  judgment  should  be  closed.  The  three 
great  thoughts,  then,  of  this  chapter,  as  we  have  seen,  are 
priestly  worship  ;  next,  a  prophetic  testimony  ;  and,  finally,  the 
kingdom  announced  in  heaven  as  come.  The  Lord  grant  that 
our  hearts,  brought  into  the  enjoyment  of  such  privileges,  may 
be  with  Christ,  not  merely  because  of  the  blessing,  but  for  His 
own  sake!  Christ  is  better  than  all  the  blessings  that  come  even 
from  Him ;  and  we  shall  never  enjoy  what  He  gives,  except  in 
proportion  as  we  enjoy  Himself. 

That  the  greater  part  of  the  chapter  refers  to  the  antipapal 
witnesses,  crowned  by  the  Reformation,  tliough  urged  with  con- 
fidence and  with  no  lack  of  ingenuity,  I  cannot  but  regard  as  a 
total  failure,  involving  in  some  places  a  sense  not  only  different 
from,  but  the  reverse  of,  the  express  language  of  the  prophecy. 
Thus,  the  giving  of  a  reed  like  a  rod  to  John  is  supposed  to 
denote  the  royal  authorization  of  the  Reformer,  whom  the  pro- 
phet here  impei'sonated.  This  is  said  to  be  fulfilled  after  the 
death  of  Frederic,  the  Elector  of  Saxony,  Avhen  his  brother  and 
successor,  John,  assumed  to  himself  supremacy  in  ecclesiastical 
matters,  and  exercised  it  resolutely  by  forming  new  ecclesiastical 

14 


194  THE    WITNESSES    PROPHESY, 

constitutions,  modelled  on  the  principles  of  Luther,  the  example 
being  followed  elsewhere  in  Germany,  Denmark,  Sweden,  and 
afterwards  England.  How  singular  that  men  of  God  should  be 
so  prepossessed  Avith  Protestantism,  and  so  enamoured  even  of 
its  blots,  as  to  turn  the  word  of  God  into  a  sanction  of  the  very 
things  in  which  the  Reformers  departed  from  Scripture  as 
widely,  perhaps,  as  they  did  from  Rome  !  I  am  aware  that  the 
application  of  the  rod  in  this  passage  to  the  intervention  of  civil 
authority  is,  at  least,  as  old  as  Brightman,  but  this  ought  to  have 
given  time  for  considering  and  rejecting  so  unworthy  a  notion. 
Nothing  can  be  simpler,  it  seems  to  me,  than  the  truth  intended. 
In  ])rospect  of  the  approaching  divine  government  of  the  earth, 
Israel  and  their  land  become,  as  ever,  the  central  object.  The 
Lord,  therefore,  takes  special  cognizance  of  them,  marking  what 
He  owns,  and  what  He  leaves  out.  The  outside  multitude  are 
disowned ;  account  is  taken  only  of  those  who  worshipped 
within — a  distinction  far  indeed  from  being  true  of  Protestants 
in  contrast  with  Papists.  The  reed  was  the  instrument  of  mea- 
surement, not  of  gold  (as  for  the  heavenly  Jerusalem),  but  "  like 
a  rod."  There  appears  to  be  an  allusion  to  Zech.  ii.  (and  Ezek. 
xl.  3),  with  just  such  differences  as  there  are  in  the  reference  of 
verse  4  to  Zech.  iv.  There  it  is  a  measuring  line  (crxoiviov 
je(i)i.iiTpiK(Jv),  and  the  entire  city  is  to  be  measured.  Here  it  is 
but  a  special  part,  measured  by  that  which  was  not  longer  than  a 
staff,  which  the  Lord  reserved  as  His  portion  during  the  crisis, 
the  rest  being  profaned  by  the  Gentiles  for  forty-two  months. 
It  is  very  far  from  being  the  due  re-esta])lishment  of  Jerusalem, 
but  it  is  the  little  pledge  of  all  that  is  to  follow.  A  similar 
remark  applies  here  as  before.  Precisely  so  far  as  the  Reformers 
sli])ped  into  Jewish  ideas  and  ordei",  instead  of  falling  back  upon 
the  true  and  heavenly  peculiarities  of  the  Church  of  God,  is 
there  an  appearance  of  definite  fulfilment.  Had  they  walked  in 
separation  from  the  world,  the  author  of  Horae  Apoc.  must 
have  lost  a  large  proportion  of  his  apparent  identifications. 

In  the  two  witnesses,  which  is  the  next  subject  of  importance, 
this  comes  out  very  clearly.  Their  earlier  history  is  supposed  to 
be  retrospectively  given,  along  with  what  remained  to  be  fulfilled. 
As  to  their  personality,  we  are  agreed :  they  are  not  things  or 
books,  but  persons  who  testify.  But  the  testimony  of  Jesus,  it 
is  Avell  to  note,  means  not  merely  fo?-  Him,  but  the  spirit  of 
projihecy  proper  to  this  book.  The  gospel  is  not  the  subject. 
Further,  the  two  olive-trees  and  the  two  candlesticks  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  churches  (or  &  eitriy).  That  theme  is  com- 
pletely closed,  as  we  have  seen  repeatedly  ;  and  we  are  here 


AND    DO    NOT    EVANGELIZE. 


195 


avowedly  in  presence  of  the  proclamation  of  Christ's  title  to  land 
and  sea.  Hence,  as  it  is  added,  these  stand  "  before  the  Lord 
cf  the  earth."  In  a  Avord,  the  connexion  is  not  with  the  Church- 
state,  which  then  will  have  been  long-  past,  but  with  the  order 
predicted  in  Zech.  iv.,  which  undoubtedly  refers  to  the  millennial 
provision  for  the  light  of  God  in  the  midst  of  Israel.  Doubtless, 
there  are  points  of  distinction  ;  for  our  chapter  belongs,  in  its 
full  meaning,  to  the  interval  after  the  rapture  of  the  saints  and 
before  the  thousand  years.  There  is  one  candlestick,  all  of  gold, 
in  Zechariah,  with  its  bowl,  its  seven  lamps,  its  seven  pipes,  and 
an  olive-tree  on  either  side :  perfect  unity  and  perfect  develop- 
ment. AVhatever  may  have  been  the  then  historical  accom- 
plishment in  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua,  the  two  anointed  ones  of 
the  Jewish  prophet  point,  in  their  fulness,  to  the  kingly  and 
priestly  offices  of  Christ,  the  grand  means  of  dispensing  and 
maintaining  divine  light  in  " the  world  to  come."  Here  it  is 
only  a  testimony  to  these  things,  and  therefore,  as  the  least  suffi- 
cient testimony  according  to  the  law,  there  were  ttco  witnesses. 
The  oil  here  is  associated,  not  with  joy,  but  with  mouz'ning ;  and 
the  witnesses  are  clothed,  not  with  the  garment  of  praise,  but 
with  the  sackcloth  of  affliction.  Avenging  power  is  theirs,  like 
that  of  Moses  and  Elijah.  How  vain  to  bend  all  this  to  the 
witnessing  Christians,  Western  or  Eastern,  earlier  or  later ! 
Their  calHng  practically  was  to  resist  not  evil,  to  love  their 
enemies,  to  bless  those  who  cursed  them,  to  do  good  to  such  as 
hated  them,  to  pray  for  their  persecutors  ;  and  this,  as  the  Lord 
expressly  illustrated  it,  after  the  pattern  of  their  heavenly  Father, 
who,  instead  of  sliutting  heaven  that  it  rain  not,  contrariwise 
sends  rain  in  indiscriminate  mercy  on  just  and  unjust.  Of 
course,  on  the  historical  view  (which,  in  a  general  way,  I  allow), 
the  days  of  their  prophecy  are  years,  and  the  judgments  must 
be  taken  figuratively.  But  hoic,  if  it  be  pretended  that  this  is 
all  fulfilled  i*  Had  the  Paulicians  and  the  Waldenses,  supposing 
them  to  be  true  witnesses  untainted  by  hei'esy,  authority  to  Avith- 
hold  the  dew  of  grace  all  their  days,  or  to  smite  with  plagues  as 
often  as  they  would?  To  curse  the  earth  with  -a spiritual  drought 
is  still  more  ti^emendous  than  if  it  were  in  a  physical  sense,  even 
though  their  power  embraced  heaven,  earth,  the  waters,  and 
their  enemies.  I  perceive,  however,  that  an  effort  is  made  to 
escape  the  difficulty  of  the  devouring  fire  that  issues  from  them, 
by  referring  to  the  final  fiery  judgment  on  the  adversaries  (H. 
A.  II.  pp.  208,  394);  but  wliat  can  be  lamer  than  such  shifts? 
Present  judicial  power,  continuous  or  occasional,  against  all 
opposers,  is  the  true  and  full  meaning  :  like  Elijah's  in  the  midst 


196  THEY    FINISH    THEIR    TESTIMONY. 

of  an  apostate  people,  and  like  Moses'  in  the  midst  of  a  people 
oppressed  and  enslaved  by  tlie  Gentiles.  But  as  their  testimony 
is  jjrophetic  and  not  the  gospel,  so  it  is  armed  with  judgment 
instead  of  breathing  grace.  Righteous  vengeance  guards  the 
claims  of  the  Lord  of  the  earth.  Heaven  is  the  source,  centre, 
and  home  of  grace.  It  is  in  the  vaguest  conceivable  way  that  a 
delineation  like  this  can  be  made  to  suit  proper  Christian  wit- 
nesses ;  and  it  is  chiefly  the  mixture  of  Jewish  feeling  and 
conduct,  found,  alas  !  too  often,  and  especially  in  dark  times, 
which  lends  a  colour  to  such  applications.  I  hardly  like  to 
notice  the  fancied  coincidence  of  the  black  goatskin  of  the 
Vaudois  and  the  sackcloth,  or  of  the  motto  of  the  Counts  of 
Lucerna  ("  lux  lucet  in  tenebris  ")  and  the  candlestick. 

But  now  comes  another  obvious  and  grave  objection  to  the 
scheme  of  the  Horae  Apoc.  The  natural  meaning  of  verse  7  of 
course  is,  that  when  their  1260  days  of  testimony  have  expired, 
the  Beast  kills  the  witnesses.  But  this  does  not  fit  in  with  past 
fax'ts.  Criticism  is  therefore  summoned  to  substitute  an  ambi- 
guous word,  so  as  to  convey  that  after  their  death  many  of  the 
days  might  yet  remain  to  run  out.  Difficulties  are  pressed,  but 
they  are  not  insuperable.  For  the  witnesses  have  an  exceptional 
})lace,  and  therefore  might  be  miraculously  maintained  for  their 
allotted  period,  while  saints  generally  were  suffering  and  sJain. 
And  the  Beast's  42  mouths  might  coincide  with  the  1260  days 
of  the  witnesses,  consistently  with  the  brief  interval  of  3^  days' 
exposure  and  their  rise  and  ascent  to  heaven,  the  earthquake,  &:c. 
For  what  act  against  God  or  His  people  is  attj'ibuted  to  him 
afterwards  ?  I  know  of  none.  So  that  it  might  still  be  true 
that  their  testimony  and  his  "  practising"  close  together,  Avhile  a 
short  space  might  intervene  before  the  execution  of  God's  judg- 
ment on  the  Beast  in  the  height  of  his  triumph.  In  other  words, 
the  42  mouths  do  not  define  the  epoch  of  the  Beast's  destruc- 
tion, but  of  liis  being  permitted  "to  work."  Daniel  entirely 
strengthens  this  conclusion,  for  we  find,  in  chap,  xii.,  an  interval 
of  some  length  after  the  3g  years,  before  full  blessing  comes. 
It  is  extraordinary  that  a  learned  person  should  cite  Gal.  v.  16 
and  Heb.  ix.  6,  as  if  parallel  with  Rev.  xi.  7.  For  it  is  plain,  that 
from  the  absence  of  the  article,  the  first  j^assage  goes  no  further 
than  fulfilling  flesh's  lust.  That  is,  it  could  not  mean  the  termi- 
nation of  the  whole  career  of  lust.  The  anarthious  usage  here 
is,  in  fact,  the  strong  and  needed  assurance  that  walking  in  the 
Spirit  is  the  divine  safeguard  against  fulfilling  any  thing  of  the 
sort.  In  our  text,  it  is  a  definite  testimony,  of  Avhich  the  lengtli 
had    been    carefully    specified  ;    and    whethei-   you    li-anslate  it 


JERUSALEM    IS    THE    SCENE.  197 

finished  or  completed,  the  full  time  is,  it  seems  to  me,  necessarily 
involved.  The  passage  in  Hebrews  ix.,  every  scholar  must 
know,  has  no  bearing-  on  the  case,  because  the  tense  implies  a 
continued  or  habitually  repeated  action  ;  while  the  tense  in  Rev. 
X.  implies  an  action  complete  or  concluded.  Indeed,  it  is  plain 
that  to  the  interpreters  in  general  this  word  has  proved  an 
insuperable  difficulty.  Hence  the  rendering  of  Mede,  "  when- 
they  shall  be  about  finishing,"  and  so  Bp.  Newton.  Equally 
offensive  to  mere  grammar  is  that  of  Daubuz,  "  whilst  they 
shall  perform  their  testimony ; "  or  the  earlier  view  of  Mr. 
Elliott,*  "  when  the  witnesses  s/tall  have  been  fulfiHing."  The 
truth  is  that,  interpreted  with  simjjlicity,  according  to  the  i-egular 
meaning  of  the  word  and  in  harmony  vvith  the  context,  the 
witnesses  are  divinely  protected  the  1260  days  of  their  testimony. 
Then,  their  mission  having  been  completed,  and  not  before,  God 
permits  that  the  Beast  should  fight,  overcome,  and  slay  them. 
But  this,  applied  strictly  on  the  year-day  scale,  completely 
destroys  Mr.  E.'s  interpretation  in  particular,  if  not  the  Pro- 
testant school  generally,  save  that  some  of  them  refer  a  part,  as 
being  yet  unfulfilled,  to  the  future. 

It  is  plain  that  the  previous  dislocation  of  the  prophecy  leads 
to  the  next  error,  that  "  the  great  street  of  the  city,"  or  "  the 
street  of  the  great  city,"  (verse  81,)  refe]-s  to  Rome  and  not 
Jerusalem.  Now,  I  am  not  disposed  to  deny  that,  on  the  pro- 
longed view,  such  an  application  is  left  room  for,  especially 
considering  the  peculiar  way  in  which  the  city  is  here  alluded  to. 
But  this  is  the  utmost  which  can  be  fairly  granted,  and  it  not  at 
all  excludes  the  closing  fulfilment  in  the  actual  city  wherein  the 
Lord  of  the  witnesses  was  crucified.  The  context  seems  to  me 
quite  decisive  that  Jerusalem  is  intended  ;  for  nobody  doubts 
tliat,  whether  literally  or  figuratively  understood,  the  holy  city 
of  the  opening  verses,  the  centre  of  the  testimony,  though  in  the 
face  of  profaning  Gentiles,  is  not  Rome  but  Jerusalem.  It  is 
agreed  that  the  Beast  is  Roman,  but  this  in  no  way  strengthens 
the  theory  that  Rome  is  the  city  here  intended.  His  making 
war  upon  the  witnesses  is,  on  the  contrary,  much  more  naturally 
aj^plicable  to  a  locality  not  under  his  own  immediate  jurisdiction. 
No  doubt  Babylon  is  the  symbolic  designation  of  Rome  in  chap, 
xvii.,  where  Rome  is  confessedly  the  great  city,  and  so,  of  course, 
in  chap,  xiv.,  xvi.  But  Babylon  has  not  been  named  as  yet, 
and  there  is  no  reason  why  Jerusalem  also  should  not  be    so 

*  Is  it  right  to  refer  to  Hippolytus,  as  if  he  agreed  with  Mr.  E.'s  idea  of  the 
witnesses  making  complete. their  testimony,  long  before  the  whole  period  assigned, 
or  their  own  death  ?     The  very  reverse  was  his  belief. 


198  THEIR    DEATH,    RESURRECTION, 

styled,  especially  as  the  figurative  terms,  Sodom  and  Egypt, 
conjoined,  are  nowhere  else  connected  with  Rome,  and  the  fact 
which  winds  up  the  description,  ("  where  also  their  Lord  was 
crucified  "),  points  to  Jerusalem.*  If  it  were  said  IkXiiOt}  histori- 
cally, (or  (clKArjrat,  the  present  result  of  the  past,)  there  might 
have  been  more  difficulty  ;  for,  thougli  Scripttire  had  already 
likened  Jerusalem  of  old  to  Sodom,  it  had  not  to  Egypt.  But 
the  reference  is  to  the  moral  features  of  Jerusalem,  as  it  is  to  be 
in  the  days  of  the  witnesses,  and  so  /caXfTrai  is  strictly  correct. 
And  certainly,  if  Nineveh  had  the  title  as  M^ell  as  the  Chaldean 
Babylon  in  the  O.  T.,  it  is  hard  to  see  why,  in  the  Apocalypse, 
Jerusalem  might  not  have  it  as  well  as  Rome,  supposing  that 
the  context  looks  that  way.  Thus,  the  question  to  what  city  our 
chapter  refers,  must  be  judged  by  the  conclusion  to  which  we 
come,  as  to  all  this  part  of  the  Revelation,  and  as  to  chaps,  x. 
and  xi.  in  particular.  The  grand  point  is  that  the  things  which 
come  to  pass  after  the  things  that  are,  do  not  belong  (save 
in  the  general  moral  bearing  already  and  so  often  acknowledged) 
to  the  present  order  of  things,  but  to  the  transitional  epoch  Avhen 
God  is  about  to  bring  the  First-born  into  the  inhabited  earth. 
Therefore  He  will  then  be  busied  with  tlie  j^rovisional  govern- 
ment of  the  world,  and  hence  specially  with  the  Jews,  who  are 
the  prominent  object  and  direct  instrument  of  His  earthly  rule. 
Accordingly,  the  witnesses,  as  we  have  remarked  before,  are 
said  to  stand  before  the  Lord  of  "  the  earth,"  for  that  is  in 
question,  not  His  ways  with  the  Church. 

Hence,  whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  coincidence  in  mystic 
reckoning  between  the  not  very  truthful  speech  at  the  Fifth 
Lateran  Council  ("Jam  nemo  reclamat,  nullus  obsistit"),  which 
in  the  skilful  hands  of  Mr.  E.  is  made  to  denote  the  extinction 
of  the  witnesses,  and  Luther's  posting  up  his  theses  at  Witten- 
berg three  and  a  half  years  afterwards,  which  denotes  their 
resurrection,  cannot  but  regard  the  interpretation  as  forced  and 
unnatural.  The  only  unbiassed  way  of  taking  the  account  is 
that  the  1260  days  were  fulfilled  when  the  prophets  were  slain. 
What  more  absurd  than  to  imply  that,  spite  of  their  deatli,  they 
are  still  safe  and  sound  for  centuries  afterwards,  and  that  the 
sackcloth  testimony  on  earth  can  co-existf  with  their  ascent  to 
heaven,  understand  heaven  as  one  may  ?     But  once  the  Protes- 

*  Were  the  reading  such  as  Mr.  E.  repeatedly  represents  it  (of  course  through 
oversight),  irKareia  ttjs  tt.  tt/s  /j..  (H.  A.,  Vol.  II.,  p.  396,  note  4,  and  yet  more 
iufiorrectly  iu  Vol.  IV.,  p.  543,  note  2),  there  had  been  no  room  for  this  rendering, 
which  some  very  conipeteut  judges  prefer. 

■\  The  alleged  case  of  Rev.  xii.  1,  2,  has  nothing,  to  my  miud,  in  common. 


AND    ASCENSION. 


199 


tant  scheme  is  made  the  exclusive  fulfihiient,  can  one  be  surprised 
that  the  marvellous  explanations  given  to  the  earlier  part  of  the 
chapter  are  only  surpassed  by  increasing-  wonders  in  the  latter 
portion?  Certainly,  few  councils  had  less  claim  to  be  considered 
made  up  of  delegates  from  the  peoples,  and  kimh^eds,  and 
tongues,  and  nations,  than  that  almost  exclusively  Italian  assem- 
bly. Dean  Waddington,  who  did  not  write  for  the  purpose  of 
illustrating  Rev.  xi.,  records  that  the  Bohemian  heresy  "was 
again  rising  into  formidable  attention  "  at  this  very  time.  Who 
can  think  that  the  breath  of  the  orator  slew  them  ?  If  they 
refused  to  answer  the  summons  to  Rome,  John  Huss  had  done 
the  same  before  them,  and  Luther  did  so  after  them.  It  may 
have  been  want  of  courage  ;  but  Prague,  Augslnirg,  and  Worms 
were  not  the  same  thing  as  such  a  council  held  in  Rome.  I 
need  not  dwell  on  the  enactment  refusing  Christian  burial  to 
heretics,  the  Pope's  extraordinary  donation  of —  not  the  golden 
rose  only,  but — the  sovereignty  of  half  the  Eastern  world  to  the 
King  of  Portugal,  the  grant  of  a  plenary  papal  indulgence,  the 
singing  of  the  Te  Deum,  or  the  splendour  of  the  dinners  and 
fetes  given  on  the  triumphant  close  of  the  Council. 

But  the  deductions  from  verses  12,  13,  must  not  be  passed 
over.  The  call  to  the  witnesses  is  made  a  summons  from  the 
highest  authorities  to  ascend  "  the  heaven  of  political  elevation 
and  dignity,"  and  was  fulfilled  fii'st  by  the  pacification  of  Nurem- 
berg, (1532,)  and  yet  more  by  the  Peace  of  Passau,  twenty  years 
after.  The  cloud  is  conceived  to  imply  that  these  political 
triumphs  were  the  terminating  result  of  Christ's  sj)eciul  hiterven- 
tion,  and  to  identify  the  cause  of  the  witnesses  with  the  Refor- 
mation. The  effects  of  this  mighty  revolution  in  the  overthrow 
of  the  tenth  part  of  the  city,  and  the  slaying  of  seven  chiliads,* 

*  Some  readers  will  be  curious  to  learu  by  what  process  of  legerdemaiu  these 
slain  chiliads  can  be  metamorphosed  into  the  Protestant  Dutch  provinces  which 
threw  olf  the  Spanish  yoke.  Cocceius  threw  out  the  notion  first,  but  it  was 
rejected  by  Vitringa  and  the  more  sober  commentators,  till  Mr.  E.  re-asserted  it. 
It  is  said  that  the  Hebrew  equivalent,  ^7i^,  was  used  in  the  course  of  Jewish  his- 
tory for  a  tribual  subdivision,  without  reference  to  that  number,  and  even  for  the 
district  in  question.  On  this  very  slender  basis,  in  conjunction  with  the  old  error 
of  the  Christian  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  all  is  founded.  The  fact  is,  that  x'Atas  in 
the  Apocalypse  aud  the  New  Testament  generally,  is  used  in  no  such  contradis- 
tinction to  the  numeral  adjective.  It  is  applied,  in  the  simplest  possible  way,  to 
soldiers,  believers,  and  Israelites.  It  is  said  of  angels,  of  men,  aud  of  a  measure. 
Nor  is  there  in  the  Scptuagint  tlie  least  real  ground  that  I  can  see  for  taking 
X-,  in  even  one  instance,  as  a  province,  or  territorial  subdivision.  Yet  tlie  sub- 
stantive occurs  more  commonly  than  the  adjective.  The  truth  is  that,  according 
to  the  meaning  of  tlie  verse,  the  seven  thousands  (or  complete  body  devoted  to 
death)  fell  with  the  tenth  part  of  the  city,  not  those  there,  and  this  liere.  And 
the  affrighted  remnant  consists  of  the  oijler  inhabitants  of  the  guilty  city,  in  con- 
trast with  the  complement  of  the  slaiu  in  the  sphere  of  the  earthquake's  ravages. 


200       THE  OPENED  TEMPLE  OF  GOD  IN  HEAVEN 

are  set  forth  as  the  fall  of  papal  dominion  in  England,  and  in 
the  seven  Dutch  United  Provinces.  And  the  ascendant  Protes- 
tants gave  glory  to  the  God  of  heaven,  as  on  Mary's  death, 
Elizabeth's  accession,  the  destruction  of  the  Armada,  and  the 
reign  of  William  III.  Thus,  commercial  and  maritime  and 
colonial  power  crowning  Protestant  England  and  Holland,  it 
began  to  appear  why  the  Covenant  angel  planted  his  riglit  foot 
on  the  sea,  his  left  only  on  'the  mainland.  Insular,  missionary 
England  was  to  be  the  principal  instrument  of  asserting  Christ's 
claims  to  universal  dominion  and  gospel  truth,  against  papal 
usurpation  and  lies.  Could  one  ask  for  more  palpable  evidence 
of  the  absurd  and  mischievous  effects  of  a  wrong  system.''  To 
refute  such  trifling  with  the  word  of  God  appears  to  me  hardly 
called  for.  And  what  can  we  say  to  the  delusion  that  the  loud 
voices  in  heaven,  under  the  seventh  trumpet  (ver.  15),  jDroceeded 
from  "  the  religious  world  of  the  great  Protestant  powers?"  Or 
that  its  general  indications  coincide  with  the  more  prominent 
characteristics  and  concomitants  of  the  past  French  Revolution  ? 
(Vol.  Ill,  pp.  299-322.)  We  must  impute  these  extravagancies 
to  the  necessity  of  the  case  ;  for  the  text  requires  that  the  last 
woe  should  follow  quickly  after  that  of  the  Turks  (ver.  14). 
Hence  the  desire  to  make  out  something  in  the  seventeenth  cen- 
tury, besides  the  great  Reformation  of  the  sixteenth,  so  as  to  fill 
up  the  grewt  gap  that  follows.  It  is  the  more  strange,  as  Mr.  E. 
had  already  (Vol.  II,  p.  276)  made  the  seventh  trumpet  to 
include  not  the  events  alone,  that  are  preparations  to  Christ's 
reign,  but  the  millennium  itself,  and  even  all  other  revealed 
events  beyond  it. 

Ver.  19.  I  think  that  the  opening  of  the  temple  in  heaven 
marks  a  new  portion  of  the  book,  and  that  it  is  therefore  con- 
nected, not  so  much  with  what  went  before,  as  with  what  fol- 
lows ;  for  it  is  clear  that  the  verses  before  (15-18)  gave  the 
sounding  of  the  last  trumpet,  and  the  announcement  of  the 
consequences  of  God's  taking  to  Him  His  great  power  and 
reigning  —  not  the  mere  sway  of  man,  but  the  power  of  God 
put  forth  in  an  altogether  new  way.  There  was  a  sample  of 
His  power,  but  not  in  connexion  with  Christ,  at  the  time  when 
He  fought  the  battles  of  His  people  and  put  down  the  Canaan- 
ites.  But  then  it  was  exercised  within  failing,  guilty  Israel, 
without  their  Messiah,  and  consequently  that  power  was  often 
obliged  to  be  j)ut  forth  against  themselves  and  not  against  their 
enemies  only,  because  God  never  can  have  alliance  with  sin. 
But  now,  under  the  last  trumpet,  it  was  the  kingdom  of  God 


USHERS    IN    A    NEW    VISION.  201 

and  of  His  Christ  that  was  come,  and  this  is  what  the  earth 
looks  for,  and  the  Lord  Himself  too,  for  He  is  waiting-  "  till  His 
enemies  be  made  His  footstool."  Tlien  the  whole  scene  here 
below  will  be  changed.  He  will  come  and  execnte  wrath  as 
terrible  as  His  patience  has  been  divine,  and  the  effects  will  be 
that,  "  when  His  judgments  are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of 
the  woi'ld  will  learn  righteonsness."  There  will  be  the  presence 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  the  absence  of  Satan  ;  there  will  be,  not 
only  the  execution  of  wrath  upon  the  living,  but  finally  also  the 
judgment  of  the  dead.  And  these  things  seem  to  be  brought 
together  under  the  same  trumpet.  All  is  anticipated  from  the 
beginning  of  the  kingdom  to  the  end  of  it — all  the  main  displays 
of  divine  glory  in  the  government  of  both  quick  and  dead.  And 
there,  evidently,  that  subject  closes  ;  for  the  opening  of  the  tem- 
ple of  God  in  heaven  (ver.  19)  ushers  in  another  and  wholly 
different  vision,  which  has  not  so  much  to  do  with  God  in  His 
kingdom,  but  rather,  first  of  all,  it  is  the  temple  that  comes 
before  us. 


202  THE    CHURCH    IS    PASSED    OVER. 


CHAPTER    XII. 

Under  the  seventh  trumpet  the  elders  anticipated  the  effects 
of  the  throne  s  being  actually  established  over  the  earth.      But 
now  the  teniple  is  again  seen,  so  that  we  go  back  here,  for  we 
have  God's  purposes  in  connexion  with  the  Lord  Jesus  from  the 
very  beginning — jthe  man-child  who  was  to  rule  all  the  nations 
with  a  rod  of  iron,  being  clearly,  as  I  think,  Christ  Himself     It 
is  God  reverting  to  his  purpose  in  Christ,  born  as  the  heir  of 
the  world  —  not  in  relation  to  the  calling  of  the  Church,  but  as 
the  man  of  might,  destined  to  govern  all  and  with  no  feeble 
hand.     It  appears  to  me  that  this  accounts  for  another  remark- 
able feature  of  the  vision.     Christ's  death  and  resurrection  are 
not  alluded  to,  but  His  birth  and  His  rapture  (not  His  death) 
are  given  in  a  summary  manner.     We  have  the  woman  in  pain 
to  be  delivered ;  and  the  man-child  is  born  ;  aud  then  we  have 
Him  taken  away  to  the  throne  of  God  above.     Of  course  this 
is  not  given  as  history.     The  Lord  Jesus  had  been  born  and  had 
died  long  ago ;    and   if  it  had   been  history.  His  all-important 
death  would  not,  could  not,  have  been  passed  over  in  silence. 
Here  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost  connecting  the  birth  of  Christ  and 
His  rapture  to  the  throne  of  God  in  heaven  with  Israel,  and  the 
purposes  of  God  about  them.     The  birth  of  Christ  is  of  special 
importance  to  Israel.     The  genealogy  of  the  Messiah  is  therefore 
carefully  given  in  Matt,  i.,  and  in  chap.  ii.  we  find  all  Jerusalem 
was  troubled  at  His  birth.     This  was  the  working  of  the  dragon. 
Herod  was  a  sort  of  expression   of  the  dragon's  power,   who 
would  gladly  have  devoured  the  child,  as  soon  as  it  was  born, 
through  that  evil  king  as  his  instrument.     The  child  was  deli- 
vered, but  in  the  history,  instead  of  being  taken  up  to  the  throne 
of  God,  He  was  carried  down  into  Egypt.     So  that  our  chap- 
ter  cannot    be   regarded    as    historical,    in    the   early    part    at 
least ;  and  even  where  historical  facts  are  alluded  to,  they  are  not 
arranged  historically  at  all,  but  simply  linked  with  God's  thoughts 
about  Israel.     The  Church,  as  such,  is  passed  over.     It  may  be 
involved  mystically  in  the  person  and  destiny  of  the  man-child, 
but  there  is  no  gradual  unfolding  of  the  thoughts  of  God  as  to 
His  having  a  heavenly   bride   for  His   Son.      Nothing  is  said 
about  a  bride  for  the  man-child.     We  have  the  mother  but  not 


CHRIST    BORN    OF    ISRAEL.  203 

the  Lamb's  wife  here.  Israel  was  the  mother  of  Christ.  It 
was  of  them,  as  concerning  the  flesh,  that  the  Chi'ist  was  born. 
That  is  the  great  point  Avhich  the  Apostle  Paul  urges  upon  the 
Jews  in  Rom.  ix,,  because  the  Jews  thought  he  made  light  of 
their  privileges,  and  was  against  them,  in  consequence  of  the 
strong  way  in  which  he  brought  out  God's  mercy  to  the  Gentiles. 
But  it  was  not  so  at  all.  He  demonstrates,  in  fact,  that  they 
overlooked  their  highest  privileges.  To  them  were  given  the 
adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,  and  the  giving  of 
the  law,  and  the  service  of  God,  and  the  promises.  They  had 
the  fathers  too,  and  last  of  all,  to  them  was  given  a  Son,  the 
man-child,  whom  they  knew  not — the  Christ ;  for  of  them,  as  to 
the  flesh.  He  came,  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever.  Far 
from  lessening  the  just  glory  of  Israel,  the  Apostle  had  a  much 
more  exalted  view  of  it  than  themselves.  And  as  in  Rom.  ix. 
he  does  not  go  on  to  speak  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  so  it  is  here.  Accordingly,  you  find  these  two 
thoughts  connected  in  Rev.  xii.  The  man-child  is  bi'ought 
forth,  but  leaves  the  scene  where  the  dragon  was  opposed  to 
Him,  and  takes  His  place  upon  the  throne  of  God,  which  none 
but  a  divine  person  was  entitled  to  do.  By  and  by  He  will  sit 
upon  His  ovvn  throne,  but  that  will  be  when  He  governs  the 
earth  in  a  direct  and  public  way  ;  for  God  will  never  give  up 
the  right  and  title  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  the  earth  as  well 
as  to  the  heavens.  He  has  acquired  a  title  by  redemption, 
besides  His  essential  one  as  Creator.  But  then  He  is  going  to 
do  much  better  than  to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron,  or 
even  bless  His  earthly  people.  His  heart  is  to  be  shown.  He 
must  have  a  free  course  and  a  due  object  for  all  His  love.  Christ 
wants  to  have  those  that  deserve  nothing  but  judgment  as  the 
sharers  of  His  glory  above.  What  is  done  by  Christ  and  for 
Christ,  whilst  He  is  upon  the  throne  of  God,  is  not  alluded  to 
here.  Israel  is  in  question.  These  few  thoughts  may  be  helpful 
to  understand  the  proper  place  and  bearing  of  this  new  vision. 
The  temple  of  God,  then,  is  opened  in  heaven,*  and  there  was 

*  The  true  reading  is  probably  6  eV  tw  ohpavcf  (i.e.  which  is  in  heaven).  At  any 
rate,  so  the  Alexandrian,  and  the  Paris  rescript,  the  Leicester,  a  Vatican  cursive 
(579),  the  Middlehill,  the  Mortfort  and  one  of  the  Parham  (17.)  manuscripts  say, 
not  to  speak  of  the  Cod.  Coisliu.  of  Andreas  and  Victorinus.  Mr.  E.  is  also  quite 
wrong  in  saying  that  "  according  to  Tregelles  this  is  a  mistake."  It  is  true  that, 
in  his  first  edition,  he  omits  this  various  reading,  though  long  before  noted  by 
Walton,  Mill,  Beugel,  (Wetsteiu  probably),  and  even  adopted  without  question 
in  the  text,  not  of  Wordsworth  only,  but  of  Lachmann  and  Tiseheudorf,  as  it 
appears  to  be  by  Tregelles,  judging  from  the  new  edition  of  1859.  How  it  was 
that  Mr.  E.  did  not  find  it  in  the  critical  editions  of  Griesbach  and  of  Scholz,  it  is 
not  for  me  to  say  :  but  there  it  unquestionably  may  be  found  by  any  who  ex- 
amine them.     lu  Habn's  manual  one  could  not  rightly  expect  such  a  thing. 


204  THE  TEMPLE 

seen  in  it  the  ark  of  His  covenant,  the  pledge  of  His  faitl)fuhiess 
to  His  peoj)le.  For,  as  we  have  observed  in  the  hist  chapter, 
there  was  a  certain  measured  remnant  tliat  drew  near  to  God  in 
the  way  of  worship,  and  to  these  witnesses  were  given  a  testi- 
mony to  the  Lord's  rights  over  the  earth,  as  finally  there  was 
the  announcement  of  the  kingdom.  Now,  we  have  another 
train  of  idea.  There  was  the  throne,  and  a  rainbow  round 
about  it  in  Rev.  iv.  Here  there  is  the  temple,  and  the  ark  of 
God's  covenant  seen  in  it.  This  may  prepare  the  way  for  the 
difference  between  the  two  subjects.  There  it  was  God's  power 
over  creation.  Providential  judgments  were  about  to  fall  upon 
the  earth,  and  the  rainbow  was  to  show,  before  a  judgment  was 
experienced,  that  even  then  God  would  remember  mercy.  The 
rainbow  round  the  throne  in  chap,  iv.,  and  round  the  head  of  the 
mighty  angel  in  chap.  x.  before  the  sounding  of  this  last  trum- 
pet, guaranteed  that  God  was  working,  not  for  the  destruction 
but  for  the  deliverance  of  the  earth.  But  now  we  come  to  a 
further  point ;  for  blessed  as  the  throne  is,  it  does  not  bring  us 
into  such  depths  of  God's  character,  as  do  the  associations  of  the 
temple  and  the  ark.  Dis))]ays  of  divine  power  are  not  so  much 
what  draw  out  our  hearts  in  worship,  as  when  we  draw  near  to 
the  dwelling-place  and  home  of  God  Himself;  for,  though  there 
is  no  one  thing  we  have  so  truly  to  be  ashamed  of  as  our  poor 
and  inadequate  answer  to  His  holiness,  yet  it  is  just  there  God 
has  met  us  in  His  grace. 

Now,  He  is  going  to  show  us  not  merely  creation  and  mankind 
smitten,  but  Satan  s  connexion  with  the  final  apostacy  of  this 
age.  There  had  been  a  figurative  allusion  to  his  influence  in 
chap.  ix.  2,  where  smoke  issues  out  of  the  abyss  or  bottomless 
pit ;  then,  in  chap.  xi.  7,  the  Beast  ascends  out  of  that  pit ;  but 
here  the  evil  source  is  thoroughly  disclosed.  And  is  it  not 
precious  to  find  that,  before  God  discovers  to  us  the  tide  of  full 
evil,  and  shows  us  not  merely  the  development  and  the  instru- 
ments among  men,  but  the  great  hidden  spring  of  it  all,  and  the 
person  of  him  who  puts  himself  at  its  head,  and  who  is  yet  to 
work  out  this  tremendous  conspiracy  against  God — to  find  that, 
before  all  this,  the  temjile  of  God  in  heaven  was  opened,  and 
there  was  seen  hi  His  temple  the  ark  of  His  covenant  ?  *     For 

*  Mr.  E.  asks,  Vol.  lit,  p.  300,  note  4,  "  Ought  not  this  word  to  have  been 
always  translated  covenant,  not  testament ;  especially  in  Heb.  ix.  ?"  I  answer  in 
every  place,  except  in  Heb.  ix.  16,  17,  where  the  reference  is  clearly  to  the  "  inhe- 
ritance" just  named  ill  verse  15.  Tliis,  it  seems  to  me,  furnishes  occasion  to  the 
inspired  writer  to  found  a  fresh  illustration  of  the  all-important  death  of  Christ 
upon  the  idea  of  a  will  or  testament,  which  comes  into  efTect  only  on  the  demise  of 
the  testator,  rov  Stadeixfvou.     The   latter  word   never   means  covenanting  victim, 


AND    THE    ARK.  205 

the  heart  under  such  circumstances  wants  not  the  manifestation 
of  God's  power  merely,  but  to  know  that  His  hohness  is  secured, 
and  that,  in  virtue  of  it,  His  people  stand.  Accordingly  we  find 
that  when  the  temple  is  opened  above,  it  is  not  a  rainbow  that  is 
seen,  but  God's  connexion  with  His  people  is  set  forth  in  the 
ark  which  now  appears ;  foi'  the  ai'k  was  always  nearest  to  God, 
and  what  faith  therefore  most  clave  to.  Israel  showed  them- 
selves to  be  dead  to  all  right  and  g'odly  feeling,  when  they  were 
willing  even  to  expose  it  in  the  hope  of  dehverance  from  the 
Philistines.  The  dying  grief  of  Eli,  and  the  living  transports  of 
David,  alike  sliow  what  the  ark  was  in  the  eyes  of  the  true- 
hearted.  Here  it  is  the  ark  of  God's  covenant  in  heaven  ;  not 
merely  that  of  Israel  which  might  be  taken  away.  Even  the 
wise  king  did  not  adequately  value  the  ark  of  old.  And  this 
shows  the  superiority  of  David  ;  for  faith  is  always,  if  I  may  so 
say,  wiser  than  wisdom.  If  we  had  the  largest  human  intelli- 
gence, and  even  the  highest  natural  wisdom  that  God  can  con- 
fer, it  never  rises  up  to  the  height  of  simple  faith.  Solomon 
appears  before  the  great  altar.  It  was  a  magnificent  thing.  He 
Avas  an  august  king,  and  brought  suited  offerings.  But  David 
showed  his  faith  in  this,  that  it  was  not' the  altar  merely  which 
he  prized,  but  the  ark  most  of  all.  The  ark  was  a  hidden 
thing  ;  not  even  the  high  priest  could  see  it,  save  wrappet!  in 
clouds  of  incense.  One  had  to  walk  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight, 
in  order  to  appreciate  the  ark  of  God.  Therefore  David  could 
not  rest  until  the  ark  had  a  settled  ])lace  in  Israel  ;  and  he  never 
had  deeper  joy  than  when  the  ark  came  back  to  Jerusalem.  It 
is  true  that  the  ark  brought  judgment  upon  all  who  despised  it, 
and  even  David's  heart  was  afraid  for  a  time,  and  the  ark  rested 
in  the  house  of  Obed-Edom  the  Gittite.  But  David  regained 
the  spring  of  confidence  in  God,  which  generally  so  marked  his 
career  ;  for  we  find  him  afterwards  rejoicing  more  when  the 
ark  was  welcomed  back,  than  ever  he  did  in  all  his  victories  put 
together. 

Here,  it  is  not  the  ark  of  man's  covenant  at  all,  but  of 
God's  covenant ;  the  temple  of  God  in  heaven  is  opened,  not  on 
earth  yet  (i.e.  it  is  only  the  purpose  of  God  about  it)  ;  and, 
associated  with  this,  the  ark  of  His  covenant  is  seen,  the  sure 
pledge  of  mercy,  and  sign  of  His  faithfulness  to  His  people.  But 
still  the  circumstances  were  such  as  called  for  judgment  ;  and 
accoidingly    " there  were  lightnings,  and  voices,  and   thunder- 

iior  do  I  believe  it  possible  tbat  it  should.  It  was  teehnieally  used  for  such  dis- 
posing of  property.  If  these  two  verses  are  read  parcnthutieally  aud  with  this 
sense,  all  is  clear.  I  have  no  wish  to  s|>eak  dogmatically  on  a  point  so  nice  ;  but 
such  is  the  view,  which  commends  itself  most  to  me. 


206  THE    MAN-CHILD. 

ings,  and  an  earthquake,  and  great  hail,"*  all  which  were  the 
tokens  of  God's  jiulgment.  The  day  of  peace  and  glory  was  yet 
to  come.  Thus  you  get  these  two  things  united  :  first,  the 
pledges  of  God's  interest  in,  and  triumph  for.  His  people;  and 
then  the  signs  of  His  judgment  upon  the  evil  that  must  be 
set  aside  before  the  time  of  full  blessing. 

"  And  there  appeared  a  great  sign  in  heaven ;  a  woman 
clothed  with  the  sun,  and  the  moon  under  her  feet,  and  on  her 
head  a  crown  of  twelve  stars."  (Ver.  1.)  I  think  it  probable 
there  may  be  an  allusion  here  to  the  well-known  dream  that 
Joseph  had  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  explained  by  himself 
as  alluding  to  his  parents  and  brethren.  Here  the  symbols  are 
more  general,  and  naturally  refer  —  the  sun  to  supreme  glory, 
the  moon  to  that  which  is  derived,  and  the  stars  to  inferior  or 
subordinate  authority.  All  this  is  seen  in  connexion  with  Israel ; 
for  God  intends,  as  far  as  this  world  is  concerned,  all  power 
and  glory  to  circle  round  Israel.  As  for  the  Church,  she  will 
have  all  in  perfection  with  Christ,  and  in  Christ ;  but  as  far  as 
the  earth  is  concerned,  Israel  will  be  the  centre.  The  woman  is 
the  symbol  of  God's  purpose  as  bound  up  with  Israel. 

In  the  next  verse,  we  have  another  thing ;  it  is  the  man  by 
the  woman.  And  so  we  find  that  "  being  with  child,  she  crieth, 
travailing  in  birth,  and  pained  to  bring  forth,"  and  a  little  after 
we  read  (ver.  5)  that  "  she  brought  forth  a  man-child,  who  is  to 
rule  all  the  nations,"  &c.  Thus,  we  see  it  was  not  the  woman 
who  was  of  such  importance  for  her  own  sake,  though  clothed 
with  all  these  symbols  of  glorious  power ;  but  the  reason  is, 
because  from  her  comes  the  man-child.  And  we  shall  find  this 
thought  is  not  at  all  foreign  to  scripture.  Take,  for  instance,  the 
Psalms,  where  the  same  thing  is  alluded  to  in  a  mystical  way. 
Thus  in  Psalm  Ixxxvii.  the  Avord  is  that  the  Lord  is  exalted  ;  His 
foundation  is  in  the  holy  mountains.  He  is  challenging  the  world 
to  compare  their  best  with  what  He  can  produce.  "The  Lord 
loveth  the  gates  of  Zion,"  &:c.  He  chose  Zion  out  of  all  the  cities 
of  Israel,  because  God's  sovereign  choice  must  be  carried  out,  even 
among    His   people.      "  I   will  make    mention   of  Rahab   and 

*  It  is  amazing  that  the  true  relation  of  this  verse  escaped  the  notice  of  so 
many  able  Christian  men,  owing,  T  suppose,  to  the  mere  fact  of  its  being  unfortu- 
nately taukcd  to  the  end  of  chap,  xi.,  instead  of  opening  the  new  division  com- 
mencing with  chap.  xii.  If  Mr.  E.  had  only  observed  it,  he  might  have  been  spared 
much  trouble  ;  but  then  he  would  have  lost  the  coincidence  of  the  "  gre^it  hail"  with 
the  storm  in  July,  1788  !  !  and  the  "earthquake"  of  the  French  Eevolution  in  1789. 
But  the  hailstorm  he  had  hitherto  interpreted  as  au  invasion  from  the  cold  north- 
east. Where  is  the  consistency  of  this  vaunted  scheme?  And  what  had  the  open- 
ing of  the  temple  of  God,  or  the  sight  of  the  ark  of  His  covenant  there,  to  do  with 
the  French  democrats  ? 


THE    BIRTH    IN    MICAH.  207 

Babylon  to  them  that  know  me."  Rahab  was  the  figurative 
name  for  Egypt,  and  Egypt  and  Babylon  were  the  most  famous 
nations  in  the  Psalmist's  time.  Philistia,  with  Tyre  and  Ethio- 
pia, were,  no  doubt,  powers,  inferior  indeed,  but  extremely  cele- 
brated for  their  trade,  commerce,  skill,  &c.  Of  them  it  shall  be 
said,  "  This  man  was  born  there."  And  of  Zion,  "  This  and 
that  man  was  born  in  her,  and  the  Highest  Himself  shall  esta- 
blish her.  The  Lord  shall  count,"  &c.  I  believe  there  is  a  dim 
allusion  to  the  birth  of  the  Christ,  where  God  and  His  people 
glory,  so  to  speak,  whatever  other  man  may  have  been,  that 
thifi  man  was  born  there.  The  reference  is,  I  think,  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  chiefly,  if  not  alone.  Let  others  boast  of  their  great  men, 
but  "  the  Lord  shall  count  when  he  writeth  up  the  people,  that 
THIS  man  was  born  there."  When  He  writeth  up  the  people, 
of  whom  does  He  think  ?  Why,  of  Christ ;  of  the  One  that  was 
born  of  the  woman,  born  of  Israel,  and  now  caught  up  to  heaven. 
When'  we  are  on  the  look  out  for  Christ,  passages  will  be  found 
to  bear  upon  Him,  more  or  less,  distinctly,  all  through  scripture  ; 
for  He  who  wrote  the  Scriptures  had  Christ  ever  in  view.  It  is 
not  the  death  of  Christ  we  have  in  this  Psalm,  because  that 
would  have  brought  the  sin  of  the  Jews  prominently  before 
them.  But  it  is  His  birth,  which  was  or  should  have  been  un- 
mingled  joy.  And,  therefore,  when  Jesus  was  born,  the  heavenly 
hosts  broke  forth  in  praises,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and 
on  earth  peace,  good-will  in  men."  There  was  no  trouble  among 
them,  whatever  might  be  the  feelings  of  Herod  and  all  Jeru- 
salem. Their  gi-eat  joy  was  what  Christ  would  be  for  God  and 
men,  and  specially  for  the  city  of  David  :  in  other  words,  just 
the  suited  feelings  of  those  heavenly  ones,  that  were  not  occupied 
with  themselves,  permitted  to  see  the  counsels  of  God  as  to  His 
people. 

There  is  another  scripture  or  two  I  would  briefly  refer  to, 
where  we  may  get  help  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  woman  and 
her  child,  not  merely  as  to  the  fact  of  the  birth,  but  in  its  con- 
nexion with  prophecy.  In  Micah  v.  there  is  a  passage  that 
both  acquires  and  gives  light  when  compared  with  Rev.  xii. 
"  Now  gather  thyself  in  troops,  O  daughter  of  troops  ;  he  hath 
laid  siege  against  us  ;  they  shall  smite  the  Judge  of  Israel  with 
a  rod  upon  the  cheek."  Now,  there  evidently  is  here,  what  we 
have  not  in  the  Revelation,  the  rejection  of  Christ  and  the 
dishonour  done  to  Him  by  His  own  jieople.  Then  the  Holy 
Ghost  interrupts  the  course  of  the  chapter  by  a  parenthesis,  for 
such  is  the  whole  of  vei'se  2.  "  But  thou,  Bethlehem  Ephratah, 
though  thou  be  little  among  the  thousands  of  Judah,  yet  out  of 


208  THE    BIRTH    IN    ISAIAH. 

thee  shall  He  come  forth  unto  me  that  is  to  be  the  ruler  in  Israel, 
whose  goings  forth  have  been  of  old,  from  everlasting."  It  is 
Clirist,  after  the  flesh,  who  is  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever. 
There  you  have  the  two  points  of  the  glory  of  Christ ;  His  glory 
as  a  man,  as  Messiah,  and,  withal,  the  One  whose  goings  forth 
have  been  from  of  old,  from  everlasting.  Then  having  shown 
who  this  was,  (the  man  to  be  smitten,  but  a  divine  person,  which 
had  made  the  sin  of  smiting  Him  unpardonable,  if  it  had  not 
been  for  infinite  mercy,)  He  takes  up  again  what  we  had  in 
the  first  verse.  "  They  shall  smite  the  Judge  of  Israel  with  a 
rod  upon  the  cheek  ....  Therefore  will  He  give  them  up, 
until  the  time  that  she  which  travaileth  hath  brought  forth  ; 
then  the  remnant  of  His  brethren  shall  return  unto  the  children 
of  Israel."  Mark  the  term  of  their  being  given  up  by  God  — 
"  until  the  time  that  she  which  travaileth,"  &;c.  This  shows  that 
we  are  not  to  take  the  allusion  to  the  birth  of  the  man-child  as  a 
mere  literal  reference  to  Christ's  birth  into  the  world,  but  Tather 
in  conjunction  with  the  accomplishment  of  the  purposes  of  God 
respecting  Israel.  Christ  was  born  :  (Micah  v.  2  :)  then  comes 
His  rejection,  and,  as  it  were  measuring  His  rejection  on  earth 
and  His  exaltation  in  heaven,  the  calling  of  the  Ciiurch.  But 
the  prophecy  here  passes  by  all  that  has  to  do  with  the  Cliurch 
and  takes  up  Christ's  birth  figuratively,  connecting  it  with  the 
unfolding  of  the  divine  purposes,  which  is  itself  symbolized  by  a 
birth.  The  Judge  of  Israel  is  smitten  with  a  rod  upon  the 
cheek,  and  therefore  Israel  is  given  up  until  the  time  when,  to 
use  the  language  of  Jeremiah,  Jacob's  trouble  is  come,  but  he 
shall  be  saved  out  of  it.  Here  it  is  put  figuratively,  as  Zion 
travailing  till  the  birth  of  this  great  purpose  of  God  touching 
Israel.  "  Then  the  remnant  of  His  brethren  shall  return  unto 
the  children  of  Israel."  All  the  time  the  Church  is  being  called, 
the  remnant  of  the  Jews  ("  those  who  should  be  saved")  are 
taken  out  of  Israel,  cease  to  look  for  Jewish  hopes  as  their  por- 
tion, and  are  absorbed  into  the  Church.  But  when  God's 
earthly  purpose  begins  to  take  effect  in  the  hitter  day,  the  rem- 
nant of  that  day  wUl  form  part  of  Israel  and  will  resume  their 
ancient  Jewish  place.  The  natural  branches  shall  be  gratfed 
into  their  own  olive-tree. 

Another  scripture  speaks  of  Zion's  bi-ingiug  forth  ;  but  it  is 
of  a  very  different  kind.  In  the  last  chapter  of  Isaiah  the  allu- 
sion is  to  a  birth,  but  there  it  is  said  to  be  in  one  day.  "  A 
voice  of  noise  from  the  city,  a  voice  from  the  temple,  a  voice  of 
the  Lord  that  rendereth  recompense  to  his  enemies.  Before 
she  travailed,  she  brought  forth  ;    before  her  pain  came,  she  was 


THE  GREAT  RED  DRAGON.  209 

delivered  of  a  man-cliild.  Who  hath  heard  such  a  thing-  ?  who 
hath  seen  such  things  ?  Shall  the  earth  be  made  to  bring  forth 
in  one  day  ?  or  shall  a  nation  be  born  at  once  ?  for  as  soon  as 
Zion  travailed,  she  brought  forth  her  children.  Shall  I  bring  to 
the  birth  and  not  cause  to  bring  forth,  saith  the  Lord ;  shall  I 
cause  to  bring  forth,  and  shut  the  womb,  saith  thy  God.  Rejoice 
ye  with  Jerusalem,  and  be  glad  with  her,  all  ye  that  love  her," 
&c.  It  is  evidently  not  the  time  spoken  of  in  Rev.  xii.  So  that 
it  is  plain  that  there  are  tln-ee  great  critical  points  connected 
with  Israel's  history.  First,  there  is  the  birth  of  the  Messiah  ; 
secondly,  the  passage  in  Micah,  the  ripening  and  effect  of  God's 
counsels  regarding  Israel,  which  is  to  be  connected  with  Rev.  xii. 
where  God  brings  out  His  purpose  concerning  Israel,  before 
antichrist  shows  himself  fully  ;  and,  thirdly,  there  is  this  passage 
in  Isaiah  Ixvi.  which  is  a  sort  of  contrast  to  the  others,  the  cir- 
cumstances mentioned  being  the  express  reverse  of  those  that 
accompany  natural  birth  and  of  the  figure  used  in  our  chapter. 
The  three  passages  may  be  put  together  thus:  —  first,  Micah  v. 
shows  us  the  birth  of  Christ  and  Israel  given  up  till  the  result 
of  God's  counsels  as  to  them  shall  appear  by  and  by  ;  next, 
Rev.  xii.  unfolds  the  time  of  sorrow*  just  before  the  last  tribu- 
lation, when  Satan,  losing  his  old  seats,  attempts  new  plans  in 
order  to  frustrate  God's  design  to  bless  and  magnify  Israel ;  and 
then,  lastly,  Isaiah  Ixvi.  is  the  time  when  ail  sorrow  is  past,  and 
when  before  Zion  travailed,  she  brought  forth  —  Israel's  full  and 
sudden  blessing  after  the  Lord  has  appeared.  All  pi'evious 
sorrow  flees  away  by  reason  of  the  joy  that  fills  the  city  of  Zion, 
or  is  only  remembered  to  enhance  it. 

But  now,  going  back  to  our  chapter,  we  find  that  besides  the 
woman  and  the  man-child,  there  is  another  sign  ;  a  great  anta- 
gonist of  God  appears — not  the  beast,  but  a  much  more  serious 
power — "a  great  red  dragon."  And  there  is  this  remarkable 
circumstance  —  the  same  description  which  is  applied  to  the  beast 
is  used  of  the  dragon.  How  comes  this  ?  That  Satan  is  the  great 
red  dragon  there  can  be  no  doubt :  this  very  chapter  tells  us  so 
in  verse  9  ;  and  yet  he  is  described  with  the  various  charac- 
teristics that  we  find  in  the  Roman  empire,  (chap.  xiii.  1,) 
"  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and  upon  his  horns  ten 
crowns."  I  believe  the  reason  is  this,  that  Satan  is  viewed  in 
connexion  with  earthly  power.      Just  as  the  woman  was  seen 

*  Some,  shrinking  from  the  hypothesis  that  the  birth  of  Christ  is  here  alluded, 
as  being  at  variance  with  the  exclusively  future  bearing  of  the  Apocalypse,  incline 
to  the  view  that  the  parturition  of  the  vFoman  means,  in  symbol,  the  formal  ion  of 
Christ  in  the  hearts  of  Israel,  or  a  certain  part  of  them,  before  the  final  crisis. 
Compare  Gal.  iv.  19. 
15 


210  THE    dragon's    tail. 

invested  with  symbols  of  power  from  above  which  God  has 
given  her,  so  here  Satan  is  clothed  with  the  fulness  of  earthly 
authority.  He  has  seven  heads,  the  symbol  of  deliberative 
power,  that  which  rules  and  guides,  and  ten  horns,  the  symbol 
of  kings  or  kingly  dignities.  He  is  the  prince  of  tlie  world,  who 
surrounds  himself  with  all  power  connected  with  the  earth. 
The  Roman  empire  is  the  grand  representative  of  the  [)0wer  of 
Satan.  But  when  you  look  at  that  empire  in  chap.  xiii.  there  is 
this  difference.  The  crowns  were  upon  the  heads  of  the  dragon, 
but  upon  the  horns  of  the  beast.  That  is,  in  the  Roman  empire 
you  have  the  exercise  of  the  power  represented  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  but  in  Satan's  case  merely  as  a  matter  of  principle  or  the 
roots  of  the  thing.  Satan  is  the  great  moving  spring,  though 
unseen.     It  is  a  question  of  source  and  character,  not  history. 

First,  then,  we  have  had  the  thought  and  plan  of  God  in 
respect  to  Israel  and  Christ.  And  it  is  plain  that  it  is  the  des- 
tiny of  the  man-child,  not  as  yet  the  exercise  of  His  dominion 
over  all  the  nations  ;  for  if  it  were  the  latter,  the  woman  would 
not  have  to  flee  to  the  wilderness,  nor  would  the  dragon  be  per- 
mitted to  make  war  on  her  and  the  rest  of  her  seed.  To  apply 
this  historically  is  to  entirely  miss  the  teaching  of  God,  who  is 
here  showing  out  His  purpose  and  no  more  as  yet.  Then  the 
dragon  appears,  the  one  that  God  looks  at  as  the  ruler  of  this 
world,  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  clothed  with  the  same 
symbols  of  earthly  power  as  we  find  later  on  in  the  Roman 
empire,  save  that  in  this  last  the  crowns  are  upon  the  horns  or 
those  actually  swaying  the  power.  (Rev.  xiii.)  "  And  his  tail 
draweth  the  third  of  the  stars  of  heaven."  (Ver.  4.)  This 
seems  to  be  his  malignant  power  in  the  way  of  false  teaching 
and  prophesying.  In  Isaiah  ix.  we  are  told  that  "  the  prophet 
that  teacheth  lies,  he  is  the  tail."  The  tail  of  the  dragon  does 
not  set  forth  his  earthly  power,  but  his  influence,  through  false 
teaching,  in  misleading  souls,  and  specially  those  that  were  in 
the  place  of  rule  and  authority  —  "  the  stars  of  heaven."  "  And 
the  dragon  stood  before  the  woman  that  was  about  to  bring 
forth,  that  when  she  brought  forth  he  might  devour  her  child." 
How  wonderfully  all  scripture  hangs  together !  For  if  you 
begin  with  the  very  first  portion  of  scripture  that  speaks  of 
the  serpent,  the  woman  and  that  subtle  foe  are  seen  face  to 
face ;  and  more  than  this,  God  appears  upon  the  scene  where 
Satan  had  apparently  gained  a  great  triumph,  and  \\^i\  it  is  that 
He  gives  the  blessed  revelation  that  "  the  seed  of  the  woman 
should  bruise  the  serpent's  head."  Here,  at  the  close  of  scrip- 
ture, the  same  parties  reappear,  but  with  marked  differences. 


THE    ORDER    IS    NOT    CONSECUTIVE.  211 

In  the  garden  of  Eden  it  was  the  serpent's  success,  but  here  the 
certain  triumph  of  God  ;  there  it  was  the  devil's  craft,  but  here 
it  is  God's  power,  lon^  displayed  in  patience,  but  all-glorious  in 
the  end.  God  penniis  the  dragon  to  stand  before  the  woman, 
ready  to  devour  her  child  as  soon  as  it  was  born.  The  dragon 
shows  out  his  spite  and  wickedness  to  the  last  degree  and  in  the 
next  chap,  his  plans.  Meanwhile,  God  turns  even  the  suffering 
into  more  positive  blessing  for  the  faithful.  The  very  certainty 
that  He  could  crush  the  dragon,  gives  Him  patience  to  wait, 
and  He  wants  His  people  to  be  like  Himself. 

I  would  just  observe  that  we  must  not  take  the  chapter  as  if 
it  were  all  consecutive.  Verse  7  begins  a  new  division.  And  a 
proof  that  all  does  not  follow  in  immediate  order  is  this  :  the 
casting  out  of  the  dragon  from  heaven  unto  the  earth  precedes 
the  woman's  flight  into  the  wilderness,  and  is,  in  point  of  fact, 
the  reason  of  it,  (see  ver.  13,)  though  only  stated  afterwards. 
The  truth  is,  that  the  first  six  verses  give  us  the  complete  pic- 
ture. In  the  divine  purpose,  there  is  the  woman  clothed  with 
the  heavenly  orbs,  setting  forth  the  power  which  God  alone  can 
confer.  But  there  is  another  side  of  the  picture.  When  the 
man-child  is  brought  forth,  the  mother  is  seen  in  weakness,  and 
is  obliged  to  fly  for  her  life  into  the  wilderness,  where  she  had  a 
place  prepared  of  God.*  Gods  thinks  so  much  of  the  time  she 
spends  there,  that  He  does  not  call  it  "a  time,  times,  and  a 
half,"  but  counts  up,  so  to  speak,  every  day  she  is  there,  "  that 
they  should  feed  her  there  a  thousand,  two  hundred,  and  three- 
score days."  Then  comes  a  new  scene  in  verse  7.  It  is  no 
longer  what  takes  place  on  earth,  but  in  heaven,  and  to  many,  a 
new  thing,  and  startling.  A  war  is  intimated  on  high.  How  is 
that  ?  A  war  in  heaven  !  It  is  an  easy  thing  to  imagine  the 
enemy  of  souls  upon  the  earth,  and  a  war  with  him  there.  But 
the  war  begins  elsewhere.  "  And  there  was  war  in  heaven  : 
Michael  and  his  angels  fought  against  the  dragon  ;  and  the 
dragon  fought  and  his  angels,  and  prevailed  not ;  neither  was 
their  place  found  any  more  in  heaven."  If  the  Bible  is  impli- 
citly believed,  its  intimation  is  distinct  that  Satan  has  power  to 
draw  near,  and  to  accuse  the  saints  before  God.     People  may 

*  It  is  true  that  els  may  be  translated  unto  or  toivards,  no  less  than  into  :  to 
decide  which  is  meant,  we  must  carefully  examine  the  nature  of  the  case,  and  the 
context.  But  Luke  ix.  56,  57,  in  no  wise  proves  that  the  woman  was  fleeing 
merely  toivards  the  wilderness  ;  because  we  have  various  occurrences  related  im- 
mediately after  the  evangelist  says  that  they  proceeded  unto  another  village — 
occurrences  expressly  said  to  be  tvkile  they  were  on  their  way.  So  with  Acts  viii. 
25  ;  xviii.  18,  &c.  The  two  wings  of  the  great  eagle  convey  the  very  reverse  of  a 
gradual  movement  thither.  TTor  does  the  parenthetic  account  of  the  war  in  hea- 
ven confirm  the  notion  of  progressive  stages. 


212  THE    CO>fFLICT    OF    ISRAEL, 

be  staggered,  and  say,  it  cannot  be ;  but  it  is  better  to  be  guided 
by  the  word  of  God,  than  b}'  the  notions  of  men.  The  book  of 
Job  shows  it;  1  Kings  xxii.  also,  and  perhaps  Zech.  iii.  You 
may  say  that  these  are  visions  ;  but  I  take  the  epistle  to  the 
Ephesians,  and  there  1  am  told  by  St.  T*aul  that  our  conflict  is 
not  like  that  of  Israel,  who  fought  with  the  Canaanites.  "  For 
we  wrestle  not  against  blood  and  flesh,  but  against  principalities, 
against  powers,  against  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world, 
(or  the  world-rulers  of  this  darkness,)  against  spiritual  [powers] 
of  wickedness  in  heavenly  places."  Some  use  this  verse  in  order 
to  justify  Chiistian  persons  resisting  the  powers  of  this  world, 
in  plain  contradiction  of  Rom.  xiii.  and  other  passages.  But 
the  principalities  and  powers  in  high  places,  in  Eph.  vi.  12,  do 
not  mean  men  at  all.  They  are  evil  spirits,  in  contrast  with 
men.  The  conflict  of  Israel  was  with  living  men  on  earth, 
while  that  of  Christians  is  with  wicked  spirits  in  heavenly 
places.  Of  course,  Satan  cannot  draw  near  into  the  immediate 
presence  of  God,  into  that  light  wherein  God  dwells,  which 
none  can  approach  unto  ;  but  he  can  draw  near  enough  to 
accuse  God's  people  before  God  Himself.  The  heavenly  places 
here  mean  the  heavens  in  general,  and  not  merely  what  is  called 
the  third  or  highest  heaven.  As  far  as  the  lower  heavens 
extend,  Satan  has  access  ;  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  is  prince 
of  the  power  of  the  air. 

Israel  had  to  fight  in  order  to  acquire  possession  of  their  inhe- 
ritance. The  land  was  given  to  them  in  title,  and  before  Moses 
was  taken  away  from  this  life,  the  Lord  Himself  took  him  to 
the  mountain  top,  and  showed  him  all  the  land  of  Gilead  unto 
Dan,  calling  the  districts  by  the  names  of  the  tribes  of  Israel,  as 
if  tbey  had  been  already  there.  But  in  order  to  enjoy  their 
possessions,  they  had  to  fight  for  them,  and  so  have  we  now. 
There  is  no  such  thing  as  enjoying  the  heavenly  portion  of  the 
Church  without  conflict  with  the  enemy,  and  that  is  the  reason 
why  so  many  do  not  enjoy  it.  If  the  Christian  does  not  enter 
into  his  full  heavenly  portion  here  below,  it  is  because  he  is 
occupied  either  with  himself  or  with  the  world,  or  some  other 
idol  of  the  enemy,  and  then  he  cannot  enjoy  it.  Tlie  great 
object  of  Satan  is  to  hinder  our  enjoying,  tasting,  and  living  on 
our  heavenly  blessings  in  Christ ;  and  in  the  same  proportion 
that  the  world  or  the  flesh  is  allowed,  and  so  the  door  is  left 
open  to  Satan  to  darken  our  eyes,  we  cannot  see  the  goodly 
land.  There  must  be  victory  over  Satan  before  we  can  enter  in. 
The  adversary  has  not  merely  power  through  men's  lusts  below, 
but  specially  in  connexion  with  the  heavenly  places — power  of 


AND    THAT    OP    THE    CHRISTIAN.  213 

hindering  Christians  from  appreciating  their  portion  there.     But 
there  is  an  end  coming  to  tliat,  though  not  without  a  struggle. 
God  will  put   a  stop  to  all  Satan's  means  of  access  to  heaven. 
There  is  a  text  that  has  been  found  obscure  that  I  cannot  but 
connect  with  this.     In  Hebrews  ix,  where  the  various  appHca- 
tions  of  the  death  of  Christ  are  spoken  of,  there  is  the  following 
allusion  to  the  heavenly  places  :    "  It  was  therefore  necessary 
that  the  patterns  of  things  in  the   heavens  should  be  purified 
with    these ;    but  the    heavenly    things  tliemselves    with   better 
sacrifices  than  these."     One  reason,  I  suppose,  is,  because  Satan 
was  allowed  so  long  to  have  access  there,  as  an  accuser.     God 
would  long  since  have  shown  His  own  sense  of  the  defilement 
produced  there  by  Satan,  if  it  were  not  for  the  death  of  Christ. 
But  as  He  bears  with  the  rebellion  of  the  world,  so  does  He 
also  with  another  rebellion,  the  audacity  of  Satan,  who  ventures 
to  intrude  himself  even  into    His  own   presence,  to  carry  the 
accusations  of  His  people  before  Him.     But  let  us  not  forget 
that  if  there  be  one  who  loves  to  accuse,  there  is  another  to 
intercede,  the  Advocate,  who  never  slumbers  nor  sleeps.     There 
may  be  the  devil  against  the  saints,  but  there  is  Christ  for  them, 
who  ever  lives  to  make  intercession.     By  and  by  God  will  not 
allow  Satan  any  longer  to  taint  the  air  of  heaven.     He  is  forcibly 
cast  down  thence,   and  has  only  power  to  deal  with  mankind  in 
an  earthly  way.   "  Woe  to  the  earth  and  to  the  sea  !  fur  the  devil 
is  come  down  to  you,"  (ver.  12)  &c. — that  is,  to  those  nations  who 
are  in  a  settled  or  in  an  unsettled  condition.     Satan  is  henceforth 
entirely  prevented  from  usurping  his  higher  place,  as  prince  of  the 
power  of  the   air.     The  heavens  are  eternally  cleared  of  him 
and  his  angels,   never  to  regain    their  place   above.     He  may 
come  out  on  the  earth  again  for  a  little  season,  after  he  has  been 
bound,  but  he  will  never  more  appear  in  heaven  as  the  accuser 
of  the  brethren  before  God.     The  momentous  difference  in  the 
ways  of  God  with  His  people  is  very  marked  here.     All  through 
the  present  time,  there  is  the  accuser  in  heaven,  but  at  the 
predicted  epoch  he  is  cast  out,  and  his  place  is  not  found  any 
more  there.     Now,  you  will  observe  that  this   naturally,  not  to 
say  necessarily,  supposes  the  removal  of  the  Church  to  heaven 
before  the  change  takes  place  ;    and  for  this  reason,  that  if  we 
suppose  the  Church  to  be  still  on  earth,  when  the  devil  and  his 
angels  are  cast  out  of  heaven,  it  would  no  longer  be  true  of  us 
that  we  wrestle  with  wicked  spirits  in  heavenly  places.     Such 
will  not  be  the  condition  of  the  saints,  either  during  the  millen- 
nium or  in  the  great  tribulation  that  precedes  it. 

Three  years  and  a  half  roll  on  their  course,  after  Satan  is  cast 


214  THE    FLIGHT    OF    THE    WOMAN. 

down  to  the  earth,  during  which  the  woman  and  her  seed,  i.e. 
Israel,  are  the  objects  of  his  persecution.  "  And  the  great 
dragon  was  cast  [out,]  the  old  serpent  that  is  called  the  devil  and 
Satan,  which  deceiveth  the  whole  world  ;  he  was  cast  unto 
the  earth,  and  his  angels  were  cast  with  him.  And  I  heard 
a  loud  voice  in  heaven  saying.  Now  is  come  the  salvation,  and 
the  power,  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God  and  the  authority  of 
His  Christ :  for  the  accuser  of  our  brethren  is  cast  [out]  that 
accused  them  before  our  God  day  and  night.  And  they  over- 
came him  because  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  because  of  the 
word  of  their  testimony  ;  and  they  loved  not  their  life  unto  death." 
(Ver.  9-11.)  "  The  blood  of  the  Lamb," — that  was  what  kept 
their  conscience  good,  and  gave  them  confidence  before  God. 
Their  conscience  was  purged  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and,  besides 
that,  they  had  their  testimony  for  God.  He  gave  them  the  blood 
of  the  Lamb  as  well  as  the  word  of  their  testimony,  and  they  over- 
came by  both.  The  one  strengthened  them  before  God,  and 
the  other  before  men.  "  Therefore  rejoice,  ye  heavens,  and  ye 
that  dwell  in  them."  There,  you  see,  are  the  dwellers  in  heaven, 
and  they  are  to  rejoice  because  Satan  is  cast  down  from  heaven. 
The  Church  is  there  at  the  time  of  which  this  speaks ;  the  saints 
are  already  taken  away  from  the  earth.  "  And  when  the  dragon 
saw  that  he  was  cast  unto  the  earth,  he  persecuted  the  woman 
who  brought  forth  the  man-child.  And  to  the  woman  were 
given  two  wings  of  the  great  eagle,  that  she  might  fly  into  the 
wilderness,  into  her  place,  where  she  is  nourished  for  a  time,  and 
times,  and  half  a  time,  from  the  face  of  the  serpent."  (Ver.  13, 

Now,  it  is  plain  that  this  brings  us  back  to  verse  6.  The 
important  link  given  us  in  ver.  7-13  was  needed,  and  after  that 
we  have  consecutive  order.  We  are  brought  down  to  the  fact 
of  the  dragon's  persecuting  the  woman  and  her  child,  and  the 
woman's  flight  into  the  desert ;  and  then  the  Spirit  of  God  goes 
back  to  show  us  the  deeper  reasons,  and  higher  source  of  all. 
Satan  will  have  to  leave  his  place  in  heaven,  and  now  in  a  rage, 
"  knowing  that  he  has  but  a  short  time,"  he  comes  doAvn  to  the 
earth  to  do  his  worst.  He  hates  the  woman,  well  knowing  her 
seed  is  to  crush  him  ;  so  that  all  his  long-cherished  enmity  is 
concentrated  upon  the  woman  and  her  seed.  This  is  what  leads 
the  woman  to  flee  into  the  wilderness.  The  enmity  of  Satan, 
not  merely  because  she  has  brought  forth  a  child  destined  to 
rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron,  but  because  Satan  is  cast 
down  to  earth.  Satan  was  once  innocent,  but  he  departed  from 
the  place  of  a  creature,  admiring  himself,  and  setting  himself  up 


THE    HELP    OF   THE    EARTH.  215 

against  God.  Now  when  Satan  is  cast  clown  from  lieaven,  he 
shows  out  all  his  evil  feeling  against  God,  by  persecuting  the 
woman  and  her  seed. 

"  To  the  woman  were  given  two  wings  of  the  great  eagle,"  &:c. 
Observe  the  difference  here,  (analogous  to  Rev.  xi.,)  "  wliere  she 
is  nourished  for  a  time,  and  times,  and  half  a  time."  In  a  former 
verse  there  is  a  making  the  time,  as  it  were,  as  long  as  possible, 
because,  as  I  conceive,  God's  care  for  her  was  then  the  grand 
point.  She  had  a  place  prepared  for  her  of  God,  and  when  His 
care  and  preparation  are  in  question.  He  lengthens  out  the  time 
as  much  as  possible  ;  but  where  it  is  a  question  of  the  devil's 
power,  He  foreshortens  it.  It  is  the  same  period,  I  believe,  only 
put  in  a  different  way.* 

The  serpent,  so  spoken  of  because  of  his  subtle  enmity,  now 
adopts  a  new  device.  He  "  cast  out  of  his  mouth  water  as  a 
flood,  after  the  woman,  that  he  might  cause  her  to  be  carried 
away  of  the  flood.  And  the  earth  helped  the  woman,"  &c.  (Ver. 
15,  16.  This  sets  forth  some  providential  means  used  of  God 
to  deliver  His  earthly  people  and  purpose  from  the  instruments 
of  the  enemy,  then  put  into  a  state  of  great  commotion.  These 
last  are  represented  by  the  waters  issuing  as  a  river  from  the 
dragon's  mouth,  (people  that  are  under  an  immediate  influence 
of  the  devil,)  while,  evidently,  the  earth  helping  the  woman 
means  the  more  settled  parts  of  the  world,  used  providentially 
to  resist  the  efforts  of  Satan  to  overwhelm  the  Jews.  "  The 
earth"  in  this  book  may  have  morally  a  guilty  character  ;  but 
God  can  create  a  diversion  where  He  sees  fit,  and  so  bring  to 
nought  that  which  is  calculated  to  overwhelm  His  people. 
"  And  the  dragon  was  wroth  with  the  woman,  and  went  away 
to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her  seed,  that  keep  the 
commandments  of  God,  and  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus." 
(Ver.  17.)  It  might  be  a  difficulty  to  some  that  a  Jewish 
remnant  should  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus.  But  if  you 
have  followed  me  in  former  chapters,  it  will  not  be  insuper- 
able ;  because  "  the  testimony  of  Jesus,"  in  the  book  of  Reve- 
lation, is  always  of  Jesus  coming  back  again  as  the  Heir  of  the 
world,  and  not  of  His  relations  in  full,  heavenly  grace  that  we 
have  now.     The  Jewish  remnant  will  not  enjoy  the  same  com- 

*  Mr.  M'^Causland  (Latter  Days  of  Jerusalem  and  Eome,  pp.  314,  326)  con- 
ceives that  the  1260  days,  42  months,  or  3|  times,  are  but  abstract  indices  of  the 
indefinite  period  of  the  present  dispensation,  during  which  the  Jewish  body  conti- 
nues, like  its  type  Elijah,  in  the  wilderness,  unvisited  by  the  dew  of  the  Spirit. 
Primasius  in  early  days  contended  for  a  somewhat  similar  view  ;  but  while  he 
thought  that  the  dates  were  intended  to  include  the  period  of  the  Christian  dis- 
pensation, he  also  allowed  their  literal  application  to  the  final  tribulation. 


216  THE  GODLY  JEWISH  REMNANT. 

in  union  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that  the  Church  now  pos- 
sesses ;  but  they  will  stand  in  faith,  and  they  will  have  the  testi- 
naony  which  Jesus  is  rendei-ing-  in  the  Apocalypse.  In  chap.  i. 
we  read,  "  The  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  which  God  gave  unto 
him,  to  show  unto  his  servants  things  which  must  shortly  come 
to  pass,"  &c.  It  is,  as  we  have  often  seen,  a  certain  revelation 
which  God  gave  to  Jesus,  connected  with  events  that  were 
shortly  to  come  to  pass.  This,  in  the  next  verse,  is  called  "  the 
word  of  God  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ."  So  in  Rev. 
xix.  10,  "the  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy," 
which  shows  clearly  that  it  is  a  prophetic  knowledge  of  Jesus. 
Thus  the  testimony  rendered  in  this  book,  though  equally  divine, 
differs  from  the  blessed  way  in  which  God  unfolds  Christ  now 
to  the  Church  which  is  His  body.  The  remnant  will  have  such 
a  knowledge  as  the  saints  in  the  Old  Testament  times  possessed 
— greater  probably  in  amount,  but  similar,  it  seems  to  me,  in 
kind.  They  will  be  waiting  for  Jesus  to  come.  They  will  say, 
with  penitent  hearts,  "  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of 
Jehovah."  They  will  plead,  "  How  long,  O  Lord,  holy  and 
true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood?"  I  do  not 
deny  that  they  may  have  the  New  Testament  before  their  eyes ; 
but  there  will  be  no  power  to  ai)ply  the  New  Testament  facts  to 
their  own  souls,  as  far,  at  least,  as  present  peace  and  communion 
are  concerned.  What  a  proof  that  not  merely  the  word  is 
required,  but  the  Holy  Ghost  to  open  it  out,  for  the  rest  and 
enjoyment  of  the  soul  !  Some  of  us,  even  as  Christians,  have 
had  no  light  as  to  certain  truths,  until,  in  the  grace  of  God,  He 
was  pleased  to  remove  the  film  from  our  eyes.  And  God  does 
this  ordinarily  by  specific  means  ;  for  it  is  not  His  way  to  enable 
persons  to  take  up  the  Bible  and  understand  it,  independently 
of  His  provision  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints.  God  teaches 
His  children,  but  in  general  it  is  through  those  He  has  given 
for  the  good  of  the  Church,  and,  though  never  tied  down  to  that 
order.  He  does  not  set  aside  the  wise  and  gracious  arrangement 
that  He  has  formed  and  will  perpetuate  as  long  as  the  Church 
endures.  Nourishment  is  ministered  by  joints  and  bands,  and 
thus  all  the  body,  knit  together,  increaseth  with  the  increase  of 
God.  That  which  would  enable  us  to  do  without  one  another 
is  a  thing  that  God  never  gives  or  sanctions.  Supposing  a  per- 
son were  cast  upon  a  desert  island,  God  would  bless  him  in  his 
solitary  reading  of  the  word  with  prayer  ;  but  where  there  are 
other  means  and  opportunities,  such  as  assembling  ourselves 
together  for  instruction,  for  reading  the  Scriptures,  for  public 
preaching,  exhortation,  &c.,  to  neglect  or  despise  them  is  the 
will  of  man  and  not  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 


THK    HISTORICAL    HYPOTHESIS.  217 

These  saints,  like  those  of  old,  will  fear  Jehovah,  and  obey  the 
voice  of  His  servant,  but  withal  must  walk  in  darkness,  and 
have  no  light,  till  the  Lord  returns  in  glory.  Our  place  is  iden- 
tified with  that  of  Christ  Himself,  risen  and  glorified.  Compare 
Isa.  1.  8,  9,  with  Rom.  viii.  33,  34,  for  the  latter,  and  Isa.  1.  10, 
11,  for  the  former.  Christians  may  not  always  act  according  to 
the  light,  but  they  walk  in  the  light,  as  He  is  in  the  light.  "  He 
that  followeth  me,"  says  our  Lord,  "  shall  not  walk  in  darkness, 
but  shall  have  the  light  of  life."  The  remnant  of  that  day  will 
trust  in  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and  stay  upon  their  God,  but 
it  will  be  after  another  sort.  Thomas  in  John  xx.,  as  compared 
with  the  other  disciples,  may  illustrate  this. 

And  now  let  us  briefly  notice  the  historical  theory,  as  stated 
by  one  of  the  latest  and  ablest  of  its  advocates.  The  woman  is, 
of  course,  the  Christian  Church,  which  is  actually  said  to  be  not 
merely  united  as  one,  but  morally  bright  and  beautiful  in  the 
days  of  Constantine  !  ascendant,  for  the  first  time,  in  the  political 
heaven ;  with  the  sunshine  of  the  highest  (Constantine)  of  the 
three  imperial  dignities,  and  the  light  of  the  second  (Licinius) ; 
and  with  the  chief  bishops  as  a  starry  coronal,  the  heads,  now 
imperially  recognized,  of  the  SwdeKacpvXov  of  the  Christian  Israel. 
(Horae  A{X)c.  HI.  pp.  17,  18.)  Three  pages  after,  the  civil 
authorities  are  viewed  as  the  moon,  perhaps  because  of  Licinius' 
apostacy  and  subsequent  death.  And  the  great  red  dragon 
with  seven  heads  and  ten  horns  is  the  old  Roman  paganism, 
concentrated  for  the  time  in  Maximin's  prohibiting  the  Chris- 
tian assemblies,  and  even  killing  their  bishops  in  his  third  of  the 
empire.  Again,  Constantine  reappears  as  the  man-child,  —  a 
baptized  (?)  emperor,  the  son  of  Christ's  faithful  Church,  ele- 
vated over  the  whole  empire  to  an  avowedly  Christian  throne, 
that  might  be  called  the  throne  of  God  like  Solomon's.  And 
the  ruling  with  iron  rod  means  the  discountenance  of  pagans 
iucreasing  almost  to  oppression,  till  at  length,  under  Theodosius, 
all  toleration  ended,  and  their  worship  was  interdicted  under  the 
severest  penalties.  But  Mr.  E.,  apparently  not  quite  satisfied 
with  this  exposition,  offers  us  the  alternative  of  Mr.  Biley,  who 
thinks  that  the  question  here  was  one  of  fundamental  orthodoxy, 
rather  than  of  political  eminence,  and  that  the  birth  and  exalta- 
tion of  the  man-child  refer  to  the  solemn  public  profession  of 
Christ's  divinity,  and  its  dogmatic  estabhshment  in  the  general 
Council  of  Nice. 

Where  is  one  to  begin,  where  end,  in  unravelling  this  tangled 
web !      Almost   the   only   thing  consistent  is   the   melancholy 


218  THE   DAYS   ARE    NOT   CLEARLY    DEFINED, 

result  (God  forbid  that  I  should  say  intention)  of  degrading  the 
living  word  of  God.  If  something  like  tlie  real  point  of  the 
chapter  is  glanced  at,  it  is  to  discard  it  summarily.  Thus,  it 
was  too  plain  to  be  quite  overlooked,  that  Christ  is  destined  to 
rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron  (Ps.  ii.),  and  that  this  is  made 
part  of  the  promises  to  the  Christians  who  overcome.  (Rev.  ii.) 
But  all  such  reference  Mr.  E.  considers  excluded  by  the  context. 
For,  argues  he,  the  woman  is  shown  immediately  after  to  be 
persecuted  by  the  dragon,  and  then  to  spend  1260  days  in  the 
wilderness.  But  how  does  this  set  aside  the  other — the  figure  of 
Christ,  take  it  personally  or  mystically,  as  the  destined  governor 
of  all  the  nations?  On  this  view,  what  can  be  clearer?  The 
woman  is  Israel,  first  seen  in  heaven  in  the  glorious  purpose  of 
God,  and  hence  arrayed  with  that  supreme  power  which  is  to 
rule  the  day,  with  the  moon  —  which,  from  the  context,  may 
here  be  a  symbol  of  legal  ordinances  —  under  her  feet,  and  the 
perfection  of  administrative  authority  as  her  crown  of  glory.  It 
is  not  a  question  of  historical  fact  but  of  divine  counsels.  Accord- 
ingly, in  spite  of  such  a  view  on  God's  part,  the  woman  is  seen 
the  object  of  Satan's  enmity  in  the  Roman  empire,  who,  foiled 
in  his  wishes  against  the  raptured  Man  of  might,  directs  his 
efforts  against  the  woman,  or  Israel,  fled  into  the  wilderness, 
desolate  but  preserved  of  God  for  her  destined  time  of  sorrow. 
I  do  not  deny  here,  more  than  elsewhere,  a  vague  analogy  to  the 
imperial  overthrow  of  the  power  of  the  enemy  in  idolatry.  All 
I  insist  on  is,  that  the  past  accomplishment  in  no  wise  meets  all 
the  features  of  the  case,  and  that  the  system  which  sees  nothing 
else,  really  makes  God  Himself  the  author  of  that  Judaizing  of 
the  Church,  which,  kept  in  check  by  apostolic  power,  soon 
became  doctrinally  rampant  in  the  writings  of  the  early  fathers, 
and,  from  the  time  of  Constantine,  was  the  established  mould  in 
which  the  Christian  profession  was  cast.  Hence,  historically, 
the  date  does  not  at  all  answer.  Mr.  E.  seems  to  be  shy  of 
defining  the  1260  years  of  the  woman's  place  in  the  wilderness. 
He  considers  the  time  soon  after  Constantine,  when  the  trne 
orthodox  Church  became  insulated,  invisible  in  respect  of  its 
public  worship,  and  more  and  more  straitened  for  spiritual  sus- 
tenance :  the  latter  a  most  unusual  effect  of  persecution  ;  the 
former  an  unaccountable  result,  if  the  eldest  son  of  the  true 
Church  had  the  chief  power  in  the  empire,  and  the  old  paganism 
of  Rome  showed  itself — not  in  a  thousand  years  and  more  of 
persecution,  but — in  the  mere  transient  efforts  of  Maxirain  and 
Licinius  first,  and  of  Julian  somewhat  later. 

And  if  heathenism  and  Arianism  are  strangely  put  together  to 


THE    DRAGON    WITH    SEVEN    HEADS    AND   TEN    HORNS.       219 

make  out  the  war  of  the  dragon  and  his  angels  in  heaven,  what 
can  serious  Christians  think  of  the  notion  that  Eusebius'  extrava- 
gant flattery  of  Constantino,  and  the  unwarranted  joy  and 
expectations  of  the  dominant  party  of  that  day,  are  the  exact 
echo  of  the  prefigurative  voice  heard  saying,  "  Now  hath  come 
the  salvation,  and  the  poiver,  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and 
the  authority  of  his  Christ  ?"  Certainly  I  do  not  wonder  that 
the  eye  which  can  see  in  Zech.  iii.,  compared  with  Ezra  iv.,  a 
reference  to  the  accusation  of  the  Jews  before  the  Persian 
king's  court  by  their  Samaritan  foes,  should  read  the  fulfilment 
of  "  Rejoice,  heavens,  and  ye  that  dwell  in  them,"  in  the  impe- 
rial edict  which  proclaimed  liberty  to  those  who  had  been 
enslaved  or  condemned  to  the  mines.  (Horae  Apoc.  III.  pp. 
29-32.)  Of  similar  character  is  the  criticism,  borrowed  from 
Daubuz,  that  the  use  of  the  uncommon  plural  form  heavens, 
instead  of  heaven,  indicates  the  then  union  of  elevation  in  heart 
to  the  spiritual  heaven,  and  elevation  in  dignity  to  the  heaven  of 
worldly  rank. 

Then,  again,  when  we  turn  from  the  parenthetic  heavenly 
war,  and  its  consequences,  (verses  7-12,)  to  the  dragon's  doings 
on  earth,  we  are  told  that  the  two  wings  of  the  great  eagle  were 
fulfilled  in  Theodosius  the  Great,  whose  lot  it  was  to  unite  the 
Eastern  and  Western  divisions  of  the  empire  under  his  own 
sway,  and  use  all  his  power  as  a  protector  and  nursing  father  to 
the  orthodox  Church.  Under  those  wings  Augustine's  ministry 
is  said  not  only  to  have  furnished  present  food,  but  nourishment 
for  its  long  long  sojourn  in  the  wilderness.  How  the  dragon, 
or  old  Roman  pagan  power,  should  now  have  the  seven  heads 
and  teii  horns,  from  Constantino  to  Theodosius,  does  not  appear. 
It  is,  to  the  historicalist,  an  obviously  insuperable  difficulty,  as 
to  which  I  see  not  a  word  of  explanation,  even  in  the  most 
voluminous  commentary  that  defends  the  view.  And  supposing 
e.g.  that  Theodosius  could  be  the  sun,  the  male  child,  and  the 
great  eagle's  wings  all  at  once,  it  is  hard  to  connect  the  dragon 
with  the  governing  power  of  the  Roman  empire  in  that  day. 
Does  "  the  pagan  remnant "  answer  to  the  persecuting  dragon, 
as  our  chapter  describes  him  ?  I  do  not  wonder  also  that  it  is 
found  convenient  to  combine  all  possible  ideas  of  the  flood  from 
the  serpent's  mouth,  and  to  make  that  a  mixture  of  foreign  in- 
vaders and  heresies,  of  physical  force  and  doctrinal  error,  employed 
to  overwhelm  the  true  church,  so  as  to  pass  off  a  hazy  applica- 
tion to  the  hordes  of  Goths,  Vandals,  &c,,  who  inundated  the 
empire  after  the  death  of  Theodosius.  But  "  the  earth  helped 
the  woman,"  i.e.  according  to  Mr.  E.,  the  Roman  population, 


220  THE    CRISIS-VIEW    CLEAR    AND    CONSISTENT. 

superstitious  and  earthly  as  they  are  confessed  to  have  been,  did 
service  to  Christ's  Church  ;  and,  in  their  bloody  wars,  the  barba- 
rians were  so  thinned,  that  their  incorporation  with  the  conquered 
followed,  and  their  religion  passed  through  Arianisni  into  ortho- 
doxy. The  flood  was  thus  swallowed  up !  If  some  very  few 
stood  forth  as  witnesses,  like  Vigilantius,  &c.,  against  such  the 
dragon  proceeded  to  plot,  and  so  procure  their  destruction.  To 
state  the  scheme  is,  in  my  judgment,  a  sufficieut  refutation. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  fulfilment  in  the  crisis  is  sufl^iciently 
intelligible,  whatever  measure  of  partial  resemblance  there  may 
have  been  in  past  events.  The  seventh  trumpet  has  brought  us 
down  in  a  general  way  to  the  very  end.  From  Rev.  xi.  19  we 
begin  an  entirely  new  subject,  of  which  that  verse  is  as  it  were 
the  preface.  The  ark  of  His  covenant  is  seen  in  His  temple 
above :  it  is  not  yet  the  actual  bringing  of  the  house  of  Israel 
and  the  house  of  .Tudah  under  the  efficacy  of  the  new  covenant, 
but  it  is  its  pledge.  The  soui'ces  of  all,  whether  on  God's  part 
or  the  enemy's  are  disclosed  ;  and  hence,  hs  there  confessedly  is 
retrogression,  so  I  think  there  is  nothing  harsh  in  the  supposition 
that  the  birth  and  rapture  to  heaven  of  Israel's  Messiah  may  be 
shown,  the  especial  object  of  Satan's  hatred,  and  the  occasion 
of  his  intensest  and  ever-increasing  hatred  to  the  Jews  and  to 
God's  counsels  about  them.  I  can  also  undei'stand  that  the 
raptui-e  of  the  man-child  may  include  that  of  the  Church — like 
a  binary  star,  the  two-foldness  of  which  appears  on  adequate 
inspection.  It  is  thus  certainly  that  we  find  the  Church  in- 
volved, so  to  speak,  in  Christ.  The  first  great  act  of  our  Lord's 
kingdom  will  be,  I  believe,  the  dejection  of  Satan  and  the  wicked 
spirits,  from  the  heavenly  places  (cf.  Eph.  vi.  12,  and  Rev.  xii. 
7-12).  On  earth  the  question  of  Israel,  God's  chosen  people,  is 
raised  at  once ;  and  whether  as  dragon  or  serpent,  all  his 
resources  are  put  in  requisition  against  Ciod's  purpose  in  that 
people  yet  in  abeyance,  and  against  the  godly  remnant  M'ho 
have  the  testimony  (prophetically,  I  conceive)  of  Jesus,  as  the 
man  of  God's  right  hand,  the  Son  of  man  whom  He  made  strong 
for  Himself.  The  development  of  his  plans  we  find  in  the 
chapter  which  follows. 


THE    WAR    IN    HEAVEN.  221 


CHAPTER   XIII. 

We  have  seen  that  chap,  xii,  goes  back  as  well  as  forward 
and  connects  the  purpose  of  God  which  is  to  be  brought  out  in 
the  latter  day  Avith  the  Messiah  and  even  with  His  birth.  Thus, 
while  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is,  to  my  mind,  clearly  referred  to 
as  the  man-child,  yet  it  is  not  His  birth  merely  or  historically, 
but  His  birth  as  it  is  linked  with  this  future  plan  of  God,  which 
the  book  reveals  here.  The  moment  Christ  is  thus  referred  to, 
(that  is,  Christ  evidently  viewed  as  the  Head,  not  of  the  Church, 
but  of  Israel,  ruling  "  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron,"  and  taking 
the  government  of  the  world  into  His  own  hands,)  Satan  appears 
in  personal  opposition.  It  is  no  other  than  might  be  looked 
for  ;  for  God  Himself  had  said  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  He 
would  put  enmity  between  the  serpent  and  the  woman,  between 
his  seed  and  Iier  seed.  That  was  revealed  at  the  beginning,  and 
here  we  have  it  fulfilled  at  the  very  close.  Without  telling  us 
the  least  about  His  humiliation,  the  man-child  was  caught  up  to 
God  and  to  His  throne.  Thus  it  is  clear  that  it  is  not  a  bare 
statement  of  the  Lord's  life,  but  such  facts  are  referred  to  —  the 
two  great  cardinal  ones  of  His  birth  and  of  His  rapture  to  the 
presence  and  throne  of  God  —  in  order  to  furnish  connecting- 
links  with  what  God  has  to  do  by  and  by  with  Israel.  All  the 
intermediate  workings  of  God  in  the  Church  are  left  entirely 
out,  except  as  we  may  suppose  the  Church  to  be  involved  in  the 
destiny  of  the  man-child,  who  is  now  hid  with  God,  but  is  yet  to 
reign.  Just  as  what  is  said  about  Christ  in  the  Old  Testament 
is  applied  to  the  Church  or  the  Christian  in  the  New  Testament ; 
but  still,  most  true  and  blessed  as  that  is,  it  is  an  indirect  use. 
Here,  then,  we  have  the  Messiah  in  relation  to  the  future  pur- 
pose of  God  as  regards  Israel. 

Then  followed  the  vision  of  a  war  in  heaven.  Not  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  but  angelic  power  is  seen  used  of  God  to  put  down 
the  rebel  angels,  Satan  and  his  host.  And,  from  that  moment 
Satan  loses  his  power  above,  that  is  to  say,  the  most  important 
part  of  it,  the  most  serious  in  itself,  the  most  dishonouring  to 
God,  the  most  dangerous  to  the  people  of  God  :  his  power  in 
heavenly  places,  which  is  referred  to  in  Eph.  vi.  and  other 
passages.     Accordingly,  when  Satan  loses  that  place,  there  is  joy 


222  Satan's  fall  was  then  future, 

in  heaven,  and  a  voice  proclaims  that  "  Now  is  come  salvation, 
and  strength,  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the  authority  of 
his  Christ."  But  yet,  as  far  as  the  earth  was  concerned,  the 
kingdom  was  not  actually  come  ;  only  Satan  had  lost  his  place  in 
heaven.  Now  we  find,  a  little  answering  to  this,  that  our  Lord 
alludes  to  Satan's  fall  from  heaven  in  the  gospel ;  and  I  notice  it 
because  some  have  thence  supposed  that  Satan  had  been  ex- 
pelled from  the  heavens  long  ago.  It  is  in  Luke  x.,  when  the 
disciples  return  to  the  Lord,  full  of  joy  because  the  devils  even 
were  subject  to  them.  The  Lord  answers  that  He  "beheld 
Satan,  as  lightning,  fall  from  heaven."  Now  a  person  might 
set  the  words  in  the  evangelist  against  the  fall  of  Satan  that  is 
described  in  the  Apocalypse  as  still  future.  But,  evidently, 
that  would  be  a  misuse  of  Scripture.  We  may  always  rest 
assured  that  the  Bible  agrees  with  itself.  It  is  ignorance  and 
unbelief  to  set  one  part  of  God's  word  against  another.  To  an 
unbiassed  mind,  I  think,  it  is  certain  that  the  fall  of  Satan  in  the 
prophecy  is  described  as  a  prospective  event,  which  is  to  take 
place  three  years  and  a  half  (however  that  may  be  taken)  before 
the  destruction  of  the  beast  and  the  binding  of  Satan  himself. 
Consequently  it  is  a  fall  that,  in  St.  John's  time  at  least,  was  yet 
future.  The  immediate  effect  was  to  be  a  dreadful  persecution 
against  the  woman  and  her  seed.  Again,  I  have  endeavoured 
to  set  forth  a  variety  of  considerations  from  which  it  is  clear  to 
me  that  before  this  event  the  Church  must  have  been  taken  to 
heaven.  Such,  the  reader  will  remember,  has  been  the  uniform 
deduction  I  have  drawn  all  through  our  former  chapters ; 
(iv.-xi.  ;)  so  that  the  fall  of  Satan,  intimated  here,  must  be  an 
event  subsequent  to  the  removal  of  the  glorified  saints  to  heaven. 
What  then  does  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  mean  when  He  says, 
"  I  beheld  Satan,  as  lightning,  fall  from  heaven  ?  "  When  He 
sees  and  hears  the  effects  of  the  disciples'  service  in  His  name, 
then  the  vision  of  Satan's  catastrophe  passes  before  His  eyes, 
and  the  full  consequences  of  His  power  are  hailed  in  this,  the 
earnest  of  it.  He  looks  on  to  the  final  crisis  and  the  downfall 
of  the  Evil  One,  when  the  disciples  announced  so  notable  a 
sample  of  "  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come."  It  was  the  first 
great  blow  struck  by  men  at  Satan's  power  ;  and  therefore  He 
anticipates  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and,  so  to  speak,  in  a 
sort  of  musing,  contemplative  vision,  He  beheld  the  adversary 
fallen  from  the  highest  scene  of  his  usurpation. 

Nor  is  this  an  uncommon  thing  in  Scripture.  In  another 
gospel,  when  the  Greeks  come  up  to  the  feast,  desiring  to  see 
Jesus,  what  does  He  say  ?     "  The  hour  is  come,  that  the  Son  of 


THOUGH    ALREADY    TRUE    TO    FAITH.  223 

man  should  be  glorified,"  He  was  going  to  the  cross  and  to 
death,  yet  He  declares  that  the  hour  was  come  that  He  should 
be  glorified.  How  was  this?  If  you  take  it  in  a  mere  literal 
way,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  force  of  the  passage  is  lost.  Jesus 
sees  in  the  Greeks  that  were  before  Him  a  sample  of  the  in- 
gathering of  the  Gentiles  ;  and  the  Lord  perfectly  well  knew 
that  the  only  thing  that  would  draw  the  Gentiles,  must  be  His 
own  cross  and  His  glory  in  heaven.  So  that  He  looks  through 
all  the  intervening  scene  that  was  before  Him,  for  He  had  to 
accomplish  redemption  and  to  ascend  on  high.  But  from  this 
little  sample,  He  connects  all  with  His  glorification,  and  speaks 
of  it  as  of  a  present  fact.  Again,  when  Judas  goes  out,  and  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  repeats  similar  words,  it  is,  I  presume,  on  the 
same  principle.  (John  xiii.  3L)  In  Rev.  v.  13,  there  was  some- 
thing analogous.  A  remarkable  movement  was  seen  in  the 
vision  affecting  the  universe,  when  the  sealed  book  was  taken  in 
hand  by  the  Lamb.  It  is  not  merely  that  we  had  the  living 
creatures  prostrate,  and  the  elders  taking  up  the  new  song,  and 
the  myriads  of  angels  with  their  loud  voice  of  praise  ;  but  there 
is  a  chorus  in  which  the  whole  creation  joined.  "  And  every 
creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and  on  the  earth,  and  under  the 
earth,  and  such  as  are  on  the  sea,  and  all  that  are  in  them,  heard 
I,  saying,  Blessing  and  honour  and  glory  and  power,  be  unto 
him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  for  ever 
and  ever."  It  was  like  striking  a  key-note  that  would  never 
cease  to  vibrate,  till  the  remotest  bounds  of  creation  would  be 
filled  with  the  glory  of  God  and  the  Lamb.  But  the  time  of 
full  blessing  was  here  anticipated  ;  it  was,  in  fact,  the  Lamb's 
receiving  the  book  of  the  inheritance  which  called  forth  these 
overflowings  of  worship  and  joy.  After  this  followed  the  open- 
ing of  the  seals,  which  was  but  the  prelude  of  the  latter-day 
judgments  ;  and  these  would  go  on  increasing  in  severity  till 
Christ  Himself  comes  executing  wrath.  (Rev.  xix.)  Not  till 
then  would  the  glory  appear,  and  these  anticipations  be  realized. 
(Chap.  xxi.  xxii.)  From  the  first  event,  however,  that  was  a 
link  in  the  chain,  the  end  is  welcomed.  This  is  the  mind  of 
Christ ;  and  so  it  is  in  Luke  x.  The  Lord  does  not  there  refer 
to  Satan's  fall  as  a  fact  actually  accomplished  then  ;  but  He 
looks  on,  through  what  was  true  at  that  time,  to  his  future  and 
more  complete  humihation,  which  we  see  here.  And  even  this 
fall  of  Satan  is  by  no  means  the  last  exertion  of  the  power  of 
God  against  the  enemy.  For  until  then  Satan  had  scarcely 
been  touched,  save  to  faith.  It  is  true  that  in  the  cross  of  Christ 
he  had  been  judged  in  principle  ;  (John  xii.  31 ;)  but,  as  a  literal 


224  THE    BEAST    RISES    OUT    OF    THE    SEA. 

fact,  he  was  not  yet  shaken  from  his  throne  of  the  world. 
Doubtless,  in  the  cross,  the  great  work  of  God  in  virtue  of  which 
he  is  to  be  cast  out  from  heaven  was  arcomphshed,  so  that  it 
only  remains  a  question  of  time  and  of  the  will  of  God.  And 
first  of  all,  he  loses  the  heavenly  part  of  the  power  which  he  has 
usurped.  Then  he  comes  down  to  the  earth  in  a  rage,  knowing 
that  he  has  but  a  short  time.  This  brings  us  to  chap.  xiii. ;  for 
there  we  get  the  detail  of  the  doings  of  Satan  here  below,  i.e., 
upon  the  sea  and  the  earth  ;  the  sea,  as  we  have  before  seen, 
symbolizing  what  was  not  under  regular  government,  and  the 
earth  that  part  of  the  world  which  enjoys  a  state  of  order.  The 
two  together  make  up  the  world  as  a  whole,  or  a  given  sphere 
of  it,  under  whatever  condition. 

The  prophet,*  it  is  said,  was  set  or  stood  upon  the  sand  of  the 
sea.  In  a  later  chapter  (chap,  xvii.)  he  is  carried  in  the  Spirit 
into  the  wilderness  :  and  afterwards  (chap,  xxi.)  to  a  great  and 
high  mountain.  Here,  as  everywhere,  all  is  in  keeping  with 
the  scene.  "  I  stood  uj)on  the  sand  of  the  sea."  The  reason  is 
manifest.  John  is  about  to  see  a  great  beast  emerging  out  of 
the  sea,  and  accordingly  he  takes  in  the  vision  a  suited  place. 
"  And  I  saw  a  beast  rising  up  out  of  the  sea."  You  must 
remember  that  all  these  visions  were  like  a  great  panorama  that 
passed  before  the  eye  of  the  prophet.  What  is  the  meaning  of 
the  symbols  used,  we  have  to  find  out  by  the  teaching  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  sea  sets  forth  the  unformed  mass  of  the 
people  under  a  troubled  state  of  the  world  ;  people  in  great 
ao-itation,  like  the  restless  waves  of  the  deep.  It  is  that  which 
represents  a  revolutionary  condition  among  men.  And  it  is  out 
of  that  mass  of  anarchy  and  confusion  that  an  imperial  power 
rises.  This  power  is  called  "  the  Beast."  The  same  thing 
appears  in  Dan.  vii.  ;  but  with  this  difference.  The  Jewish 
prophet  sees  successively  four  beasts  emerge  from  the  sea  ;  not 
one  merely,  as  we  have  in  the  beginning  of  Rev.  xiii.  There 
was  the  first  beast  like  a  lion,  the  second  like  a  bear,  the  third 

*  The  reader  should  know  that  this  is  one  of  the  most  contested  readings  in 
the  book.  Tlie  difference  in  Greek  is  but  a  letter  more  or  less  ;  but  in  the  one 
case  John  is  meant,  in  the  other  the  dragon.  The  Alexandrian  and  Paris  uncials, 
with  the  Middlchill  and  Montf.  mss.,are  confirmed  by  most  of  the  ancient  versions 
and  two  old  Latin  commentators  in  the  latter  sense  ;  and  all  other  known  MSS., 
including  the  Sinai  and  Vatican  uncials,  with  the  Coptic,  &e.,  and  the  Greek 
commentators,  give  the  former.  Modern  editors  and  commentators  are  not  less 
divided.  The  comparison  of  our  text  with  Rev.  x.  5-10  will  perhaps  suffice  to 
show  that  there  is  no  internal  incongruity  in  assigning  such  a  position  to  John, 
Dan.  X.  4,  5,  xii.  5,  ought  to  be  borne  in  mind.  On  the  other  hand,  if  it  be  "  he 
stood,"  I  do  not  see  that  it  attributes  providential  power  to  Satan,  which  would 
bo  very  objectionable. 


IT    IS    THE    ROMAN    EMPIRE.  225 

like  a  leopard,  and  a  fourth  beast  of  a  peculiar  kind.     And  then 
before  the  explanation  is  given,  one  in  the  form  of  the  Son  of 
man   comes    with   the  clouds  of  heaven,   in   contrast   with  the 
powers  that  came  up  from  a  tumultuous  sea.     It  was  a  kingdom 
heavenly  in  its  source,   and  a  king  who  was  to  use  the  power  of 
God  which  is  to  be  established  over  the  earth  in  the  person   of 
the  Lord  as  Son  of  man,  instead  of  being  left  in  God's  sove- 
reignty   to  those    successive   and    ferocious  beasts.     The  rising 
of  the  beasts  out  of  the  sea,  upon  which  the  four  winds  of  heaven 
strove,  portrays,   probably,  the  vast  commotion  of  peoples  that 
preceded  the  formation  of  the  four  great  empires.     And  it  is  an 
interesting  fact,  that  the  foundations  of  those  states  which  after- 
wards became  possessed  of  the  imperial  power,   were   all   laid 
about  the  same  time.     They  emerged  from   obscurity  and   poli- 
tical chaos    pretty  nearly   together.     God,  in  His  sovereignty, 
gave  power  to  each  in  succession.     First,  there  was  the  Baby- 
lonian, then  the  Medo-Persian,  then  the  Greek  or  Macedonian, 
and,  lastly,  tlie  Roman.     In  this  case  John  sees  but  one  beast 
rise.     There  is  the  sea,  setting  forth  a  troubled  state  of  nations, 
and  there  is  the  fourth  and  last  beast  mentioned  by  Daniel,  which 
the  prophet  John  sees  coming  out  of  it.     The  first  three  beasts 
had  had  their  day,  and  they  were  gone.     The  fourth  or  Roman 
empire  had  followed,  and  was  then  in  being  and  power.     It  was 
the  authority  of  the  Roman  Beast,  which  had,  at  this  very  time, 
cast  John  into  Patnios.     It  seems  to  be  its  final   rise,  previous 
to  its  destruction  which  John  sees   here,  but  what  was  to  take 
place   between  its  first  appearance  as  an  empire  and  this  reap- 
pearance, is  not  yet  described.     There  can  be  no  doubt,  from 
the  description  given,  that  it  is  the  Roman  empire.     It  is  said  to 
have    "  seven   heads    and   ten   horns,  and  upon  his    horns   ten 
crowns;"    the  same  things  that  we  saw  in  Satan,  (chap.  xii.  3,) 
where  he  was  regai-ded  as  the  possessor  of  the  jjower  of  the 
world,  and  specially  that  of  Rome.     We  all  may  remember  how 
he  said  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  when  showing  Him  all  the  kingdoms 
of  the  world,  "  All  this  power  will  I  give  thee,  and  the  glory  of 
them  ;    for  that  is  delivered   unto  me,  and  to  whomsoever  I  will 
I  give  it."     Now  here  he  gives  it  to  the  Roman  Beast.     Satan 
was,  of  course,  an  usurper  ;    but  still  he  was  the  prince  of  the 
world  in  fact,  and  as  such  he  has  seven  heads  and  ten   horns. 
But  as  Satan,  he  does  not  present   himself  openly  before  men. 
He  must  have  some  representative  or  agent.     He  must  disguise 
himself,  and  work  through  another,  and  take  a  human  form  and 
instrumentality  ;    even  as  God   was   pleased  to  do  the  same  to 
accomplish  His  blessed  purposes  of  grace.     And  so  does  Satan 
16 


226  THE    FINAL    STATE. 

— awful  counterpart  in  malice  of  God's  goodness  in  Christ ! 
The  agent  described,  through  whom  he  works,  is  the  Roman 
empire  in  its  last  phase.  He  took  advantage  of  men's  lust  for 
power,  because  that  Avhicli  is  the  object  of  ambition  in  the  world 
is  power.  And  here  you  have  a  vast  imperial  power,  which 
was  at  first  owned  of  God.  As  far  as  rising  out  of  the  sea  was 
concerned,  God  could  still  have  owned  it ;  but  when  it  is  said 
to  arise  out  of  the  bottomless  pit,  the  source  is  in  no  way  provi- 
dential, but  expressly  of  the  enemy. 

But  besides  these  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  there  were  upon 
the  latter  ten  crowns.  Let  me  just  say  that  I  have  no  doubt 
the  ten  horns  ought  to  be  mentioned  before  the  heads  :  "  having 
ten  horns  and  seven  heads,  and  upon  his  horns  ten  crowns,  and 
upon  his  heads  names  of  blasphemy."  (Ver.  1 .)  Not  that  one 
would  attach  undue  importance  to  the  order,  save  that  we  ought 
always  to  be  right,  but  the  two  clauses  of  the  verse  agree  in 
putting  the  horns  first,  perhaps  because  the  beast  is  regarded 
here  as  having  these  powers  in  actual  exercise,  whereas  Satan 
had  them  virtually  only.  Blasphemy,  not  mere  heathenism, 
characterizes  his  heads. 

"And  the  beast  which  I  saw  was  like  a  leopard."  That  was 
the  general  resemblance  of  its  body,  and  it  refers  to  the  Mace- 
donian empire,  so  notoriously  marked  by  its  swiftness  of  con- 
quest. "  His  feet  were  as  the  feet  of  a  bear,"  which  refers  to 
the  Persian  and  implies  great  tenacity  of  grasp :  "  and  his 
mouth  as  the  mouth  of  a  lion,"  denoting  its  voraciousness,  as  in 
Nebuchadnezzar's  career  and  kingdom.  Thus  the  Roman  em- 
pire, in  its  last  stage  at  least,  would  unite  in  itself  the  several 
characteristics  of  the  former  empires.  And  indeed  such  was 
the  ordinary  policy  of  the  Romans.  They  did  not  interfere 
M'ith  what  they  found  in  the  various  nations  they  conquered. 
They  endeavoured  to  incorporate  into  their  own  system  what- 
ever had  helped  on  the  power  of  those  nations.  They  did  not 
force  their  own  customs  upon  others,  but  cultivated  whatever 
they  found  advantageous,  and  turned  it  to  their  own  use.  So 
this  Beast,  as  we  see  here,  was  made  up  of  the  diverse  qualities 
of  power  that  had  given  weight  to  its  imperial  predecessors. 

But  there  is  one  remarkable  difference  from  all  of  them,  and 
even  from  its  own  original  condition.  "  The  dragon  gave  him 
his  power,  and  his  throne,  and  great  authority."  (Ver.  2.)  This 
notable  distinction  is  subsequent  to  Satan's  fall  from  heaven. 
He  wants  to  have  a  medium  for  acting  universally  upon  men,  in 
tlie  centre  of  the  world's  civilization  and  activity,  for  the  short 
time  that  he  is  allowed  to  do  as  he  pleases  upon  earth.     Accord- 


ITS    DIVISIONS.  227 

ingly,  to  the  Roman  Beast  which  had  imperial  authority  provi- 
dentially from  God,  he  gives  his  oven  peculiar  dragon  power. 
This  is  a  thing  that  has  never  yet  been  seen  on  the  earth  in  the 
full  sense  of  the  word  —  this  union  of  the  imperial  authority  with 
the  positive  impartation  of  Satanic  energy.  But  the  prophet 
sees  more  than  this,  connected  with  the  Beast's  investiture  by 
the  dragon.  "  And  I  saw  one  of  his  heads,  as  it  were,  slain  to 
death  ;  and  his  deadly  wound  was  healed  :  and  the  whole  earth 
wondered  after  the  beast."  (Ver.  3.)  I  am  inclined  to  think 
that  the  wounded  head  was  the  imperial  form  of  government. 
(Comp.  chap.  xvii.  10.)  The  heads  that  were,  as  we  have  seen, 
connected  with  the  dragon  (cliap.  xii.  3)  as  well  as  with  the 
Beast,  represent  the  different  forms  of  power  which  had  existed 
successively.  Of  these,  one  was  to  be  lost,  as  it  were  wounded 
to  death,  but  at  this  time  was  to  be  revived  again  through  Satanic 
agency.  All  the  world  is  surprised,  and  no  wonder.  They  will 
be  seized  with  extreme  astonishment  at  the  revival  of  the  Roman 
empire,  with  more  than  its  ancient  splendour. 

And  now,  if  we  look  at  Daniel,  we  find  a  remarkable  fact 
introduced  there,  connected  with  its  divided  state  at  the  close,  and 
of  course  also  with  its  previous  divisions  after  it  had  ceased  to 
exist  as  an  empire.  The  image  in  Dan.  ii.  has  got  feet,  "  part 
of  iron  and  part  of  clay."  There  is  weakness  consequently. 
That  metal  represents  the  original  Roman  element  in  its  strength, 
while  the  clay  was  a  foreign  ingredient,  which  brought  in  weak- 
ness when  it  sought  to  coalesce  with  the  iron.*  "  And  whereas 
thou  sawest  iron  mixed  with  miry  clay,  they  shall  mingle  them- 
selves with  the  seed  of  men  ;  but  they  shall  not  cleave  one  to 
another,  even  as  iron  is  not  mixed  with  clay."  (Ver.  43.)  This 
exactly  accounts  for  the  state  of  things  found  in  Western  Europe. 
The  history  of  this  part  of  the  world  was  completely  changed  by 
the  inroads  of  the  barbarians  about  the  fifth  century  after  Christ. 
There  was  a  time  when  one  vast  consolidated  power  had  univer- 
sal, undisputed  sway  —  the  iron  power  of  Rome.  But  at  the 
epoch  named,  swarms  of  barbarians,  near  about  the  same  time  and 
from  the  north  and  east,  came  down  upon  the  empire  and 
assailed  it  at  almost  every  point.  It  fell.  But  mighty  as  these 
barbarians  were  in  overthrowing,  they  could  oidy  establish  little 
separate  kingdoms,  and  since  then  no  hand  has  been  able  to 
gather  up  the  broken  fragments  and  put  them  firmly  together 
again.     It  has  not  been  for  want  of  the  disposition  to  do  so,  for, 

*  Mr.  M'-Causland  (Latter  Days  of  Jerusalem  and  Rome,  pp.  336,  353)  inter- 
prets the  miry  clay  of  the  spiritual  power  exercised  by  the  Papacy,  and  the  iron  of 
the  temporal  power  of  Rome ;  but  this  is,  to  my  mind,  wholly  untenable  for 
obvious  and  conclusive  reasons. 


228  ITS    RE-ORGANISATION. 

on  the  contrary,  all  sorts  of  expedients  have  been  tried  —  some- 
times the  sword,  sometimes  policy,  sometimes  intermarriage — 
but  in  vain.  And  so  it  has  remained  under  the  providence  of 
God.  There  has  been  no  unity,  so  that  the  prevailing  and 
favourite  expression  of  modern  policy  has  been  and  is  "  the 
balance  of  power."  It  means  really  keeping  a  respectful  dis- 
tance among  the  scattered  members  of  what  was  once  a  united 
body.  Mutual  jealousies  and  the  spirit  of  independence  in  each 
have  ever  effectually  hindered  re-union.  The  ordinary  aim  has 
been,  by  the  formation  of  parties  among  the  powers,  to  check 
and  prevent  the  preponderance  of  any  one.  But  though  that 
wound  seemed  to  be  unto  death,  it  was  healed  notwithstanding. 
"  I  saw  one  of  his  heads  as  it  were  wounded  to  death  ;  and  his 
deadly  wound  was  healed."  That  is,  at  the  period  of  which  the 
vision  speaks,  the  Roman  power  is  to  be  consolidated  afresh  : 
not  as  formerly,  with  God's  good  hand  over  it  and  controlling 
all,  whatever  might  have  been  the  ways  of  individual  emperors  ; 
but  all  is  abandoned  to  the  will  of  the  Beast  as  the  immediate 
instrument  of  Satan.  Satan  can  no  longer  accuse  the  saints 
before  God,  but  now  he  is  at  work  on  the  earth  to  produce  open 
blasphemy  against  God.  And  this  is  first  done  by  means  of 
political  influence.  There  is  the  Roman  empire  reorganised,  the 
imperial  power  revived,  and  a  head  over  it  that  gathers  every- 
thing under  his  own  control,  so  that  all  the  world  wonders  after 
the  Beast  to  whom  the  dragon  had  given  his  power,  and  throne, 
and  great  authority.  In  the  next  verse  we  have  not  merely  this, 
but  "  they  worshipped  the  dragon  because  he  gave  power  unto 
the  Beast :  and  they  worshipped  the  beast  saying,  Who  is  like 
the  Beast?  and  who  is  able  to  make  war  with  him?"  (Ver.  4). 

What  a  fickle  thing  is  man  !  No  doubt  there  had  just  before 
been  a  state  of  anarchy  and  confusion,  and  thence  the  beast  arose 
and  becomes  an  object  of  wonder  and  worship  to  men  weary  of 
all  their  previous  turmoil,  and  strife,  and  insecurity.  Something 
like  it  was  seen  in  a  neighbouring  country.  Men  were  convulsed 
by  a  revolution  which  tore  up  all  the  landmarks  and  filled  their 
minds  with  anxiety  and  restlessness.  And  Avhat  came  out  of 
that?  A  strong  hand  takes  the  reins,  a  military  despotism,  a 
quasi-imperial  power.  And  what  M\as  enacted  on  a  small  scale, 
because  in  one  country  only,  will  prevail  in  all  the  western  powers 
of  Europe,  So  that  instead  of  men  having  things  to  themselves, 
some  vigorous  chief  will  take  the  rule ;  but  it  will  not  be  the 
hand  of  man  merely,  but  the  dragon's  power.  God  will  permit 
him  to  have  his  own  way,  and  so,  for  a  short  time,  he  is  allowed 
to  do  his  very  worst.     Then,   beside   distinct  governments  and 


"he  who  now  letteth."  229 

rulers,  each  over  his  own  country,  there  will  be  an  imperial  unity 
under  one  great  head,  who  will  wield  their  power  and  preside 
over  all.  Thus  will  be  accomplished  those  desires  of  men  that 
have  hitherto  proved  but  idle  dreams,  or,  at  most,  abortive  efforts. 
There  is  a  passage,  I  would  briefly  notice,  in  an  eai'ly  epistle 
which  refers  to  what  has  hindered,  and  hinders  still,  the  deve- 
lopment of  this  and  other  allied  wickedness.  It  is  in  2  Thess.  ii. 
6,  7,  "  And  now  ye  know  what  withholdeth,  that  he  might  be 
revealed  in  his  time.  For  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  doth 
already  work  :  only  he  who  now  letteth  [will  let]  until  he  be  taken 
out  of  the  way.  And  then  shall  that  lawless  one  be  revealed," 
&c.  There  is  a  restraint  that  God  puts  upon  the  lawlessness  of 
the  world  ;  and  I  conceive  the  Holy  Ghost  that  acts  here  below 
is  the  One  spoken  of  here,  as  "  he  who  now  letteth"  or  hindereth. 
Still,  after  the  Church  has  been  taken  away,  God  will  carry  on 
a  testimony,  though  of  another  sort,  and  Satan  will  be  kept  in 
check  for  a  season  at  least.  This  restraint  will  be  maintained 
by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  a  providential  way. 
When  this  dealing  of  God  ceases,  the  Holy  Ghost  will  no 
longer  "  let,"  as  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  sent  forth  into  all  the 
earth  ;  that  is,  the  power  which  the  Holy  Ghost  exerts  over  the 
world,  and  not  merely  in  the  Church,  will  no  longer  be  put 
forth,  as  now,  to  keep  Satan  under.  "  He  who  now  letteth"  will 
"  be  taken  out  of  the  way."  People  do  not  know  how  much  they 
owe  to  this  restraint  of  Satan  from  doing  his  worst.  But  the 
time  will  come  when  God  Avill  cease  to  hinder,  and  then  Satan 
will  for  a  season  carry  all  before  him  on  the  earth.  He  raises 
up  a  person  as  head,  and  men  are  charmed  with  the  grandeur  of 
his  energy,  exercised  as  it  will  be  v/ithout  conscience  towards 
God,  charmed  with  the  comparative  ease  that  will  result — from 
having  one  person  supreme  over  all.  In  short,  they  will  have 
in  many  ways  what  is  suited  to  meet  the  idolatry  and  pride  of 
the  heart.  For  men  are,  like  children,  constantly  disappointed 
with  their  own  schemes  and  even  successes.  Besides,  having 
refused  the  love  of  the  truth,  they  will  readily  fall  into  whatever 
snare  Satan  may  put  before  them.  So  that  after  a  previous 
storm  of  revolutions,  they  will  gladly  fall  down  and  worship  the 
Beast  and  the  dragon  that  gave  him  his  power.  But  further, 
the  Beast's  worship  in  the  day  that  is  coming  will  be  of  a  different 
character  from  common  idolatry.  They  will  not  merely  be 
adorers  of  him,  along  with  gods  many  and  lords  many,  as  the 
heathen  of  old.  There  will  be  an  utter  denial  of  any  god  above 
the  one  who  is  adored  as  such  on  earth.  This  miserable  being 
whom  Satan  fills,  will  be  the  object  of  their  worship  and  the 
dragon  shares  it. 


230  DIFFERENCE    OF    DANIEL    AND    JOHN  — 

"  And  there  was  given  unto  him  a  mouth,  speaking  great 
things  and  blasphemy  :  and  power  was  given  unto  him  to 
practise  (or  continue)  *  forty-two  months."  (Ver.  5.)  Nobody 
doubts,  I  suppose,  that  this  is  connected  with  Dan.  vii.  The 
same  kind  of  language  is  heard,  applying  to  and  for  the  same 
time.  If  we  examine  that  chapter,  some  of  the  thoughts  I  have 
uttered  will  be  found  to  be  confirmed.  It  is  said  (Dan.  vii.  7,) 
that  the  fourth  beast  differs  from  all  its  predecessors.  "  It 
had  ten  horns,  I  considered  the  horns,  and  behold,  there  came 
up  another  little  horn."  (Ver.  8.)  There  is  nothing  of  that  in 
the  Revelation.  The  little  horn,  i.e.  as  such,  is  not  mentioned 
there.  But  this  is  not  all.  Before  him  "  were  three  of  the  first 
horns  plucked  up  by  the  roots."  He  takes  possession  of  the 
territory  of  three  of  the  horns,  so  that  but  seven  remain  out  of 
the  ten.  "  In  this  horn  were  eyes  like  the  eyes  of  man," —  the 
symbol  of  intelligence, — "and  a  mouth  speaking  great  things;" 
the  utterance  of  pride,  and  blasphemy  against  God.  (Comp. 
ver.  25.)  This  is  what  brings  on  judgment  from  God  :  not,  of 
course,  the  white-throne  judgment  of  the  dead,  but  the  judgment 
of  the  quick,  and  of  the  habitable  world.  And  so  it  is  written 
in  the  11th  verse  :  "  I  beheld,  then,  because  of  the  voice  of  the 
great  words  wiiicli  the  horn  spake ;  I  beheld  even  till  the  beast 
was  slain,  and  his  body  destroyed  and  given  to  the  burning 
flame."  Now  observe  that  there  is  this  difference  between 
Daniel's  prophecy  and  John's — what  Daniel  says  about  the 
little  horn,  John  says  about  the  beast.  (Comp.  Rev.  xiii.  5,  6, 
with  Dan.  vii.  8,  25.)  The  reason  is  this.  John  gives  us  the 
character  or  principle,  and  Daniel  the  detail  of  historical  facts. 

*  Grammatically  speaking  the  Authorized  version  is  good.  Compare  Acts 
XV.  33 ;  xviii.  23 ;  xx.  3.  The  Hebraistic  absolute  sense  is  according  to  the 
analogy  of  Dan.  viii.  12,  24,  and  xi.  passim.  Bengel,  Griesbach,  and  others, 
doubted  as  to  the  word  in  any  sense,  and  considered  it  probably  an  interpolation 
from  verse  7.  I  believe,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  peculiarity  of  the  expression, 
to  those  who  did  not  bear  in  mind  the  phraseology  of  Daniel,  led  some  of  the  scribes 
to  insert  ir6\ijxov  before  or  after  Troiriffai.,  as  B.,  most  mss.,  (14.  iroXe/xrja-at,)  and  led 
other  authorities,  as  the  Armenian  version,  Ireoaeus,  &c.,  to  omit  Tror^trot.  Dio- 
nysius  Alex.  (ap.  Euseb.)  has  Koi  fxrives.  On  the  whole,  I  conceive  that  Erasmus 
and  R.  Stephens  rightly  read  iroirjcrat,  and  that  the  Complutensian  editors  and  the 
Elzevirs  wrongly  admitted  iroXf/uLov.  The  true  sense  appeal's  to  be  to  practise,  work, 
act,  or  do,  rather  than  merely  "continue."  The  ancient  versions  are  singularly 
vague,  but  to  my  mind  they  indicate  action  more  or  less  energetic  or  specific,  and 
not  bare  continuance ;  and  so,  it  seems  to  me,  the  great  majority  of  the  best 
modern  translators.  Mr.  M'-'Causland  (pp.  300,  361)  prefers  "  w  make  forty-two 
months,"  i.e.  to  drive  out  the  Jews  into  the  wilderness  for  that  period.  This  may 
be  a  "  literal"  version,  but  I  cannot  commend  its  "  propriety."  Is  it  not  plain  that 
the  acting  of  the  Beast  is  in  contradistinction  to  his  speaking  ?  He  blasphemes 
God  in  every  possible  way,  His  name.  His  tabernacle,  and  those  that  dwell  in  hea- 
ven ;  and  more  than  this,  licence  is  given  him  to  carry  all  out  practically  for 
forty-two  months. 


THE    LITTLE    HORN,    AND    THE    BEAST.  231 

The  fact  was  to  be,  that  in  the  Roman  empire  there  should  arise 
ten  kings,  three^  of  whom  disappear  before  the  force  or  fraud  of 
another  king,  the  Httle  horn — a  power  obscure  in  its  first  origin, 
but  acquiring  actual  possession  of  three  kingdoms,  and  then 
becoming  the  real  director  of  all  the  rest.  In  the  Revelation, 
where  of  course  it  is  assumed  that  what  had  been  disclosed  in 
Daniel  is  already  known,  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not  go  back  to 
the  historical  details,  but  speaks  as  if  the  emperor  and  the  empire 
were  one. 

I  am  bound  to  acknowledge  "  the  powers  that  be  ;"  but  when 
Satan  has  given  the  Beast  his  authority,  it  is  another  thing  alto- 
gether :  Ave  owe  no  allegiance  to  Satan.  In  point  of  fact,  he  is 
the  one  who  leads  on  the  Beast  into  all  his  own  depths  and 
heights  of  sin.  For  the  beast  "opened  his  mouth  in  blasphemy 
against  God,  to  blaspheme  his  name  and  his  tabernacle,  and  f 
them  that  dwell  in  heaven."  (Ver.  6.)  The  Roman  empire  is 
the  chariot,  so  to  speak,  in  which  this  furious  rider  is  driving. 

But  let  us  look  further  at  Dan.  vii.  "  I  beheld,  and  the  same 
horn  made  war  with  the  saints,  and  prevailed  against  them.   (ver. 

21.) And  he  shall  speak  great  words  against  the  Most 

High,  and  shall  wear  out  the  saints  of  the  Most  High,  and  shall 
think  to  change  times  and  laws  :  and  they  shall  be  given  into 
his  hands  until  a  time,  and  times,  and  the  dividing  of  times."  It 
is  the  same  period  of  forty-two  months  that  we  have  here  in 
Rev.  xiii. : — "  a  time,"  which  means  a  year ;  "  and  times,"  two 
years  ;  "  and  the  dividing  of  time,"  half  a  year.  I  have  no 
question  that  it  is  the  person  referred  to  in  Daniel,  under  the 
name  of  the  little  horn,  who  here  appears  under  that  of  the  Beast. 
There  he  is  the  "  horn,"  because  Daniel  gives  us  the  gradual 
succession  of  the  history,  and  adds  the  special  Jewish  past,  the 
gift  of  times  and  laws  into  his  hand ;  here,  because  he  is  viewed 

*  Even  Mr.  E.  gives  up  the  popular  notion,  sanctioned  by  Sir  I.  Hewton,  Bp. 
N.,  &c.,  that  this  was  fulfilled  in  the  subjection  of  Rome,  part  of  Lombai'dy,  and 
Ravenna,  to  the  Pope.  But  is  his  own  theory  much  better?  How  can  the  des- 
truction of  the  Vandals  in  Corsica  and  Sardinia,  or  of  the  Ostrogoths  in  Italy  by 
Justinian's  general  Belisarius,  and  of  the  Lombards,  long  after,  by  Pepin  and 
Charlemagne,  answer  to  the  little  honi's  subduing  three  kings  ?  Even  of  this 
petty  territory,  which  is  so  strangely  exaggerated  into  three  kingdoms,  the  Pope 
has  long  possessed  but  a  portion  :  if  all  the  parts  had  abode,  it  would  not  make 
one  real  kingdom.  The  little  horn,  on  the  contrary,  conquers  for  himself,  and  be- 
comes preeminently  great. 

t  It  is  not  correct  to  say,  with  the  author  of  Horae  Apocalypticae,  that  the 
conjunction  is  wanting  in  all  the  critical  editions,  for  Griesbach,  Knapp,  Scholz, 
Tischendorf,  &c.,  retain  it  with  the  Vatican  uncial,  a  good  many  other  MSS.,  and 
almost  all  the  ancient  versions,  save  the  Syriac.  Still  there  is  grave  authority 
(AC,  twenty-eight  cursives,  &c.)  against  Kai,  which  is  therefore  dropped  by  some 
excellent  editors,  as  Matthaei,  Lachmann,  &c.  I  have,  accordingly,  thought  it 
right  to  bracket  the  word,  though  my  opinion  is  in  favour  of  receiving  it. 


232  STRONG    DELUSION, 

as  having  all  the  power  and  authority  of  the  imperial  system,  he 
is  called  "  the  Beast."  He  opens  his  mouth  "in  blasphemy  against 
God,  to  blaspheme  His  name  and  His  tabernacle,  and  them  that 
tabernacle  in  heaven,"  For  that  was  the  great  object  of  Satan, 
who  uses  the  Beast  as  his  mouth-piece.  It  was  from  heaven  he 
had  been  cast  out,  and  God  in  heaven  and  those  whom  He  calls 
into  relationship  with  Himself  there,  are  peculiarly  odious  to 
Satan  and  to  this  self-exalting  Beast.  "  They  that  dwell  in  hea- 
ven" are  unbearable  to  them,  Thei'e  is  no  one  thing  that  stirs 
the  world  even  now  so  much  as  that.  It  does  not  always  dislike 
godliness  where  connected  with  things  on  the  earth  :  it  can 
appreciate  love  in  a  measure,  for  men  can  selfishly  profit  by  it. 
But  the  moment  there  is  a  godliness  that  cares  not  for  the  things 
of  the  earth — not  merely  that  refuses  the  evil  things,  for  they 
could  understand  that — but  a  godly  person  who  rejects  them 
when  men  are  doing  their  best,  i,e.,  seeking  to  be  religious  and 
to  honour  God  in  their  own  way,  nothing  so  excites  men's  hatred 
even  now ;  much  more  so  when  that  day  comes.  For  then  Satan 
has  lost  all  power  and  place  in  heaven,  and  has  only  the  earth  to 
work  in,  and  the  thought  of  blessedness  above  is  hateful  to  him. 
He  endeavours  to  make  men  think  that  the  Beast  is  God,  and 
takes  advantage,  I  suppose,  of  the  prophecies  in  Scripture  to 
make  them  believe  that  the  predicted  good  time  is  arrived,  that 
God  is  come  back  to  the  world,  that  men  have  nothing  to  do  but 
to  enjoy  all  the  blessings  of  the  earth  and  of  the  day  spoken  of 
when  God  was  to  scatter  His  enemies.  Satan  seeks  that  men 
should  antedate  this  under  himself  and  without  God.  He  will 
know  what  is  at  hand  and  his  own  torment  when  that  day  arrives. 
He  will  endeavour  to  turn  to  account  the  very  promises  of  God, 
for  cheating  the  world  into  the  belief  that  these  times  of  chiefest 
evil  are  the  days  of  heaven  upon  the  earth.  This  is  the  time 
described  here,  when  conscience  towards  God  will  be  completely 
null  and  void,  and  what  was  true  of  Pharoah  on  a  small  scale 
will  be  verified  of  entire  Christendom.  It  will  be  given  up  to 
judicial  hardening  and  then  destroyed.  It  is  just  what  the  Spirit 
shows  us  in  2  Thess.  ii.  11,  12,  when  God,  grieved  with  this 
world  because  of  their  rejection  of  the  truth,  will  allow  man  and 
Satan  to  do  their  worst  together.  "  For  this  cause  God  shall 
send  them  strong  delusion,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie  ;  that 
they  all  might  be  damned  who  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had 
pleasure  in  unrighteousness,"  And  I  most  fully  believe  that  not 
only  God  will  do  so  righteously,  but  that  the  righteousness  of  it 
will  be  appreliended  by  any  soul  who  is  subject  to  His  word. 
Here,  then,  we  have  the  means  by  which  Satan  accomplished 


SUBMISSION,  NOT  IlESISTi\NCE  TO  POWER,  THE  TRUE  PATH.  233 

his  purposes.  He  has  given  his  vast  power  to  the  Beast,  and 
now  he  makes  him  an  object  of  worship.  "  And  it  was  given 
unto  him  to  make  war  with  the  saints  and  to  overcome  them  :  and 
authority  was  given  him  over  every  tribe,  and  people,  and  tongue, 
and  nation.  And  all  that  dwell  upon  the  earth  shall  worship 
him  of  whom  the  name  is  not  written  in  the  book  of  life  of  the 
slain  Lamb,  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  (Ver.  7,  8.) 
Here  is  the  same  distinction  that  I  have  alluded  to  before.  "  All 
that  dwell  on  the  earth  "  are  a  woi'se  class  than  the  tribes,  peo- 
ples, tongues,  and  nations,  meaning  those  that  have  abandoned 
heaven  and  heavenly  hopes,  and  are  fully  committed  to  the  latter- 
day  delusions.  In  the  case  of  "  every  tribe,  and  people,  and 
tongue,  and  nation,"  authority  was  given  to  the  beast  over  them  ; 
but  as  to  "  those  that  dwell  on  the  earth,"  they  are  completely 
subject  to  him  and  to  his  malignant  influence.  "  All  that  dwell 
upon  the  earth  shall  worship  him."  That  is  not  said  about  the 
others,  but  these  are  completely  given  up.  When  it  says, 
"  Whose  names  are  not  written  in  the  book  of  life  of  the  Lamb 
slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  the  idea  is  not  that  the 
Lamb  was  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  though  people 
commonly  draw  from  it  the  inference,  as  in  1  Peter  i.  19,  20,  of 
the  purpose  of  God.  But  the  true  meaning  of  the  verse,  I  ap- 
prehend, is  that  their  names  were  not  written  from  the  foundation 
of  the  world,  in  the  book  of  the  slain  Lamb.  And  comparing 
this  with  Rev.  xvii.  8,  we  find  that  the  Spirit  has  left  out  a  por- 
tion, which  makes  all  clear  by  removing  any  doubt  of  the  true 
connexion.  "  And  they  that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall  wonder, 
whose  names  were  not  written  in  the  book  of  life  from  the  found- 
ation of  the  world."  The  Holy  Spirit  has  left  out  "  of  the  Lamb 
that  was  slain,"  and  puts  together  the  writing  in  the  book  of  life, 
and  "  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  The  language  of 
Peter,  &c.,  (1  Peter  i.  20,)  where  he  speaks  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
as  an  unblemished,  spotless  lamb,  "  who  verily  was  ordained 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  has  quite  another  bearing. 

Then  comes  a  solemn  word  of  warning,  on  which  I  need  not 
dwell  at  length.  "  If  any  man  have  an  ear,  let  him  hear.  If  any 
man  leadeth  into  captivity,  into  captivity  he  goeth :  if  any  killeth 
with  the  sword,  he  must  be  killed  with  the  sword.  Here  is  the 
patience  and  the  faith  of  the  saints."  (Ver.  9, 10.)  That  is  a  ge- 
neral maxim,  true  of  any  one  ;  true  even  for  the  Beast.  If  he  has 
been  leading  others  into  captivity,  he  is  to  go  into  that  or  worse 
himself:  if  he  has  killed  with  the  sword,  he  must  also  be  killed. 
But  it  is  specially  intended  for  the  guidance  of  the  saints,  who 
might  naturally  infer,  from  the  wickedness  of  the  beast  and  his 


234  THE    PATIENCE    AND    FAITH    OF    THE    SAINTS. 

league  with  the  dragon,  that  they  were  at  Hberty  to  resist  him. 
And  there  is,  I  believe,  the  reason  why  this  is  said,  lest  the  saint 
should  be  tempted  to  forget  his  place  or  God's  supremacy  and 
sure  judgment.  Their  place  was  not  to  take  the  sword  in  their 
own  defence.  If  they  did  so,  what  would  be  the  result  ?  Even 
then,  whatever  tiieir  character,  whatever  the  Beast's,  God  would 
hold  to  His  principles.  They  must  expect  what  they  sought  to 
inflict.  It  is  the  law  of  God's  retributive  government.  The 
Apostle  Paul,  in  Eph.  vi.,  does  not  scruple  to  use  the  voice  of 
the  law  as  to  the  honour  due  to  a  parent.  "  Honour  thy  father 
and  mother  ....  that  it  may  be  well  with  thee,  and  thou  mayest 
live  long  on  the  earth."  Of  course  he  does  not  mean  that  a 
Christian  should  look  forward  to  living  on  the  earth  as  a  reward 
for  honouring  parents.  But  it  was  a  principle  laid  down  by 
God,  and  the  Apostle,  referring  to  the  earthly  promise,  merely 
shows  that  even  under  the  law  there  was  a  special  blessing 
attached  to  it.  It  was  the  first  commandment  with  promise. 
So  here  the  Spirit  of  God  gives  a  general  principle,  true  at  all 
times,  applicable  alike  to  foes  and  friends.  "  1^  any  man,"  &c. — 
it  does  not  matter  who.  It  is  a  false  position  for  any  Christian 
to  assume  the  place  of  power  in  the  world.  What  makes  it  the 
more  striking  is  that  the  saints  spoken  of  here  are  Jewish,  who 
of  all  others  might  think  it  was  right  to  resist  with  all  their 
might.  If  the  Beast  blasphemed  and  persecuted  grievously, 
they  might  say,  "  Surely  we  are  entitled  to  stand  up  in  defence 
of  our  religion  and  our  lives."  "  No,"  says  the  Lord  ;  "  if  any 
man  have  an  ear,  let  him  hear  ....  he  that  killeth  with  the 
sword,  must  be  killed  by  the  sword."  If  He  lets  him  have  his  way 
for  a  season,  what  is  our  calling  ?  "  Here  is  the  patience  and 
the  faith  of  the  saints  ;" — faith  as  regards  God,  and  patience  as 
regards  the  enemy  :  thus  God  will  so  much  the  more  appear  on 
behalf  of  His  sufferers.  And  if  the  place  of  faith  and  patience 
belongs  to  those  Jewish  saints  who  have  a  comparatively  earthly 
position,  how  much  more  to  us  who  have  nothing  but  a  heavenly 
one?  (cf.  Matt.  xxvi.  52.) 

Our  great  business,  next  to  enjoying  Christ  and  delighting  in 
His  love,  should  be  to  cultivate  what  is  according  to  His  will : 
so  that  we  should  not  give  a  false  witness  to  what  He  is  and  has 
done  for  us.  We  are  not  of  the  world  ;  and  the  moment  we 
fall  back  upon  the  resources  of  nature,  upon  our  own  personal 
power,  influence,  or  authority,  we  have  deserted  Christian  ground. 
In  family  relationships,  to  act  according  to  our  place  of  authority 
is  a  perfectly  right  thing.  Nor  will  the  blessing  of  God  be  with 
those  who  do  not  maintain  the  relationships  that  God  has  placed 


THE    SECOND    BEAST.  235 

them  in  ;  as  of  a  father  or  child,  a  husband  or  wife,  &c.  The 
affections,  most  important  as  they  are,  are  not  everything.  God 
is  to  be  respected  in  the  order  that  He  estabhshes  and  sanctions. 
These  are  things  which  are  not  touched  by  our  heavenly  place  ; 
on  the  contrary,  that  gives  us  an  opportunity  of  showing  we 
have  got  in  Christ  a  fresh  power  for  every  legitimate  relation. 
But  to  take  our  part  as  having  an  interest  in  this  world,  is  quite 
another  thing,  and  not  the  place  of  the  Christian  ;  but  rather  to 
pass  lightly  over  it,  as  those  that  know  their  portion  with  God  in 
heaven.  Christ  is  coming  to  judge  the  world,  which  God 
regards  as  guilty  of  the  blood  of  His  Son,  and  only  ripening  for 
judgment.  This  truth  habitually  before  our  souls  would  pre- 
serve us  from  much  that  dishonours  the  Lord  in  us  as  Christians. 
May  all  we  learn  be  used  to  our  blessing  in  separating  us 
from  what  is  to  end  so  dismally  !  The  outward  effects  of  con- 
duct are  not  enough.  The  Church  is  regarded  as  having  the 
mind  of  Christ,  and  we  are  responsible  to  God  to  keep  out  of 
the  secret  snares  and  springs  by  which  Satan  is  bringing  about 
this  evil.  For  we  have  to  do  with  his  working  in  a  still  more 
subtle  way  than  his  acts  in  the  world.  May  we  not  forget  what 
God  is  to  us,  for  the  present  claims  of  His  glory  !  We  have  the 
most  blessed  opportunity  of  being  faithful  to  Christ  now.  It  is 
vain  to  look  wistfully  at  others,  and  to  imagine  what  we  could 
do  if  in  their  circumstances,  God  is  equal  to  all  the  difficulty 
of  our  own  position  and  time,  and  would  give  us  the  needed 
strength  if  we  waited  upon  Him.  The  only  reason  why  we  are 
apt  to  magnify  the  strangeness,  &:c.,  of  circumstances,  is  because 
our  eye  is  not  single  to  Christ,  When  we  see  Him  in  everything, 
the  danger,  difficulty,  temptation  are  all  at  an  end. 

Ver.  11-18.  The  rise  of  the  second  Beast  is  strongly  distin- 
guished from  that  of  the  one  already  noticed.  First,  there  was 
the  Beast  out  of  the  sea :  now  we  read,  •'  And  I  beheld  another 
Beast  coming  up  out  of  the  earth,"  The  earth  we  have  seen, 
all  through  the  Revelation,  to  be  the  symbol  of  that  which  poli- 
tically is  established  and  in  order — the  proper  scene  of  the  testi- 
mony and  ways  of  God  and  of  settled  human  government.  Its 
privileges  may  be  abused  ;  it  may  lapse  into  a  state  of  frightful 
moral  darkness  ;  for  it  is  just  where  there  is  any  blessing  from 
above  that  there  is  the  danger  of  corruption  and  apostacy.  The 
sea,  on  the  contrary,  is  a  loose,  disorganized  aspect  of  the  world. 
Chronologically,  too,  this  might  intimate  that  the  rise  of  the 
second  Beast  is  subsequent  to  that  of  the  first.  When  the  seven- 
headed  monster  rises,  all  is  in  a  state  of  agitation  ;    but  when 


236  A    PRETENDER    TO    CHRISTS    POWER. 

and  where  the  second  Beast  comes  up,  things  are  consolidated 
after  a  fashion.  The  land  now  is  spoken  of — no  longer  the 
waters,  the  sport  of  every  wind.  But  the  personage  described 
as  "  coming  up  out  of  the  earth"  is  not  a  mere  individual.  It 
is  a  political,  oppressing  power  that  acts  without  conscience  toward 
God — a  Beast.*  It  may  be,  and  I  doubt  not  is,  one  particular 
individual  that  exercises  the  power,  as  with  the  first  Beast.  But 
"  Beast,"  as  a  symbol,  does  not  mean  an  individual  as  such,  but  an 
imperial  power, sometimes  with  revolving  satellites  subject  to  itself. 
Next,  this  Beast  was  evidently  of  a  very  extraordinary  kind,  for  it 
is  characterized  by  an  imitation  of  Christ.  It  has  got  "  two  horns 
like  a  lamb."  The  Lord,  we  must  have  observed,  through  the 
Revelation,  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  "  Lamb."  While  seated  upon 
the  throne  of  God,  while  described  as  Himself  the  great  Sufferer, 
actively  sympathizing  with  the  suffering  people  of  God,  He  is 
seen  as  a  "  Lamb."  But  when  the  saints  shp  out  of  and  aban- 
don their  proper  lot  of  earthly  rejection,  the  Lord  ceases  to  be 
thus  symboUzed.  He  seems  ashamed  of  them  and  retreats  to  a 
distance,  and  is  seen  as  an  angel  and  not  any  longer  as  a  Lamb. 
The  extraordinary  thing  we  see  here  is  that  this  Beast  assumes  to 
be  like  Christ.  He  lias  two  horns  like  a  lamb.  He  makes  a 
sort  of  pretension  to  be  hke  Christ  in  official  power.  While  the 
horn  is  used  as  a  symbol  of  a  king,  it  may  also  mean  simply 
power.  It  was  so  used  when  speaking  of  David,  "  the  horn  of 
his  anointed,"  &c. ;  but  still  more  is  this  meaning  of  it  apparent 
if  we  look  at  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  is  seen  in  this  book  as  having 
seven  horns  and  seven  eyes.  Clearly  the  seven  horns  there 
cannot  be  seven  kings  ;|  so  that  the  horns  might,  according  to 
the  context,  either  means  kings  or  they  might  be  simply  power. 
In  the  former  beast  we  are  told  they  signify  kings  ;  but  per  se 
they  need  not,  and  here  they  seem  not  to  mean  more  than  power. 
It  is  not  the  perfection  of  power,  as  seen  in  the  Lamb,  but  only 
pretensions  to  it :  there  were  tioo  horns.  The  Spirit  of  God  has 
been  pleased  to  show  us  in  chap.  xvii.  of  this  book,  that  the  ten 
horns  of  the  first  beast  are  ten  kings,  (chap.  xvii.  12.)  So  far. 
then,  all  is  plain  about  this  second  beast.  It  is  a  corporate  power 
that  grows  up  when  all  was  formed  and  orderly,  and  consequently 

*  Mr.  Elliott  considers  the]^two-liorned  lamb-like  Beast  to  represent  the  Papal 
clergy,  secular  and  regular,  united  under  tlie  Pope,  as  the  Western  Patriarch,  and 
supporting  him  in  his  loftier  character  of  Christ's  Vicar,  or  Antichrist.  Matt, 
vii.  15,  he  thinks,  almost  precludes  the  possibility  of  error  in  thus  interpreting 
the  symbol  of  the  antichristiau  clerical  body.  But  does  not  a  "Beast,"  in  pro- 
phetic imagery,  always  imply  a  political  corporation  or  civil  power,  never  else- 
where a  priestly  class  however  organised  ?  Ought  such  au  element  to  be  left  out 
in  interpreting  the  chapter  ? 


THE    ANTICHRIST.  237 

arising  after  the  appearance  of  the  first  beast.  More  than  that. 
He  arrogates  to  himself  the  power  of  Christ :  he  has  two  horns 
Hke  a  lamb.  But  his  speech  betrays  him — he  speaks  as  a  dragon. 
Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart,  we  know,  the  mouth  speaks. 
Whatever  he  may  appear  to  be  outwardly,  when  he  does  give 
utterance  to  the  real  sentiments  of  his  heart,  it  is  the  voice  of 
the  dragon.  To  the  former  Beast  the  dragon  gave  his  power 
and  authority.  But  here  there  is  more  inward  resemblance  to 
the  dragon.  Of  this  the  draconic  voice  is  the  expression.  It  is 
the  great  active  power  of  evil  in  the  latter  day,  and  that  is  the 
difference  between  these  Beasts.  The  first  Beast  is  the  one  for 
show  ;  it  catches  the  profane  world  through  the  display  of  power 
and  glory.  The  second  Beast  is  much  the  more  energetic  of  the 
two.  It  is  the  one  that  most  takes  the  place  of  Christ — is  a  false 
Christ,  or  rather  is  Antichrist — i.e.,  the  very  expression  of  Satan 
in  his  direct  opposition  to  Christ.  Wiien  Satan  was  seen  (chap, 
xii.)  waiting  to  devour  the  man-child  as  soon  as  it  was  born,  he  is 
not  as  the  serpent,  but  as  the  dragon.  And  here,  in  order  to  the 
ripening  of  his  last  designs,  this  Beast  speaks  as  a  dragon. 

But  it  may  be  interesting  to  look  at  some  of  the  Scriptures 
that  apply  to  the  second  Beast — for  there  is  often  a  good  deal  of 
confusion  about  it ;  and  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  for  these  two 
Beasts  are  so  closely  bound  together  in  the  last  days,  that  it  is  a 
difficult  matter  to  determine  which  of  them  is  the  Antichrist. 
The  word  "  Antichrist"  is  only  found  in  the  epistles  of  John. 
And  there  we  must  look,  if  we  would  see  what  is  ini}>lied  in  that 
name.  In  1  John  ii.  the  Holy  Ghost  writes  as  to  this  to  the 
babes  of  God's  family.  For  it  is  not  at  all  a  true  principle  that 
the  young  in  Christ  are  only  to  know  Him  for  the  salvation  of 
their  own  souls.  The  reason,  I  suppose,  for  thus  writing  to  them 
"was,  because  they  were  in  special  danger  from  the  snares  and 
deceits  of  the  enemy  ;  and  the  Lord,  while  He  preserves,  does 
not  want  us  to  be  kept  blindfold.  Christian  guidance  is  not 
unintelligent.  It  is  not  the  blind  leading  the  blind,  nor  even  the 
seeing  leading  the  blind,  but  it  is  the  seeing  leading  the  seeing. 
God  does  give  help  and  instruction  ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  takes 
particular  pains  to  show  that  He  was  appealing,  not  to  their 
ignorance,  but  to  their  knowledge  of  the  truth.  "  Little  children, 
it  is  the  last  time  :  and  as  ye  have  heard  that  the  Antichrist  shall 
come,  even  now  are  there  many  antichrists ;  whereby  we  know 
that  it  is  the  last  time."  There  we  learn  with  certainty  what 
was  working  from  and  in  the  time  of  the  Apostle  John,  what 
has  been  increasing  ever  since,  and  bearing  a  terrible  harvest  up 
to  the  present  time,  though  the  fruit  of  it,   the  Antichrist,  may 


238  THE  DENIAL  OF  JESUS,  AND  OF  THE  FATHER  AND  THE  SON. 

not  yet  be  fully  ripe.  "  Even  now  are  there  many  antichrists, 
whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the  last  time."  That  was  the  proof 
— not  good,  as  men  think,  but  the  deep  evil  of  antichrist  spread- 
ing. "  They  went  out  from  us,  but  they  were  not  of  us  :  for  if 
they  had  been  of  us,  they  would  no  doubt  have  continued  with 
us :  but  they  went  out,  that  they  might  be  made  manifest  that 
they  were  not  all  of  us."  What  a  solemn  thing  !  The  persons 
displaying  the  spirit  of  antichrist,  were  individuals  that  had  once 
professed  the  name  of  Christ.  In  fact,  there  could  not  be  an 
antichrist  unless  there  had  been  some  previous  profession  of 
Christ.  There  must  necessarily  be  some  truth  ;  for  Satan  cannot 
invent.  He  can  imitate  ;  he  can  corrupt  God's  truth,  and  use  it 
for  his  own  purposes,  and  put  it  new  and  evil  forms,  so  as  to  give 
the  appearance  of  truth  to  what  is  positive  error — "  for  no  lie  is 
of  the  truth."  Thus  the  great  Antichrist  is  to  come  :  but  even 
then  were  there  many  antichrists.  These  persons,  solemn  to 
say,  had  once  been  in  the  family  of  God.  There  they  had  been, 
outwardly  in  the  place  of  children,  but  not  children  in  reality. 
Then  "  they  went  out  from  us,  but  they  were  not  of  us."  Next, 
he  says,  "Who  is  a  liar,  but  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ?"  But  he  goes  further.  To  deny  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ  is  the  first  feature.  But  there  are  greater  abominations. 
"  He  is  antichrist,  that  denieth  the  Father  and  the  Son." 
There  are  two  states  spoken  of  here.  First,  there  is  the  denial 
that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah,  the  last  degree  of  that  infidelity  which 
every  unbelieving  Jew  shows,  who  rejects  Christ  from  that  day 
to  this.  But  the  terrible  thhig  is,  that  it  is  found  in  those  who 
had  once  taken  their  place  in  confessing  Jesns  to  be  the  Christ. 
Of  him  who  will  finally  be  the  leader  in  giving  it  up  and  re- 
nouncing, it  is  said,  "  he  is  a  har."  But  more  than  that.  He 
is  not  only  a  liar,  but  an  antichrist  "  that  denieth  the  Father 
and  the  Son."  Jesus  was  the  Messiah,  and  much  more  :  the 
Father  was  displayed  in  Him.  If  I  look  at  the  Messiah  as 
such,  I  do  not  necessarily  and  fully  see  the  Father  there.  I 
may  get  the  truth  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  of  the  display  of 
His  power  and  faithfulness  to  His  people.  But  there  is  some- 
thing far  more  blessed  than  the  kingdom  ;  for  when  I  have  the 
thought  of  the  Father,  I  rise,  not  merely  into  the  region  of 
divine  power,  but  into  that  of  the  highest,  holiest,  most  intimate 
affections.  It  is  evident  that  what  we  know  in  the  presence  of 
God  now,  is  an  infinitely  nearer  thing  than  the  glory  that  He 
will  give  or  display  by  and  by.  This  will  tell  others  what  His 
feelings  are  toward  us,  proving  the  love  we  are  brought  into 
now.     We  do  not  wait  for  the  kingdom  to  know  this;  but  by 


THE    ANTICHRIST,    AND    ANTICHRISTS.  239 

the  Holy  Ghost  we  draw  near  to  God  now,  in  the  most  blessed 
way  in  which  He  can  reveal  Himself.  Of  course,  when  we  are 
in  heaven,  we  shall  have  a  more  unalloyed  knowledge  of  His 
love,  an  enjoyment  never  interrupted  by  the  workings  of  a 
carnal  mind  or  by  worldly  influences.  Every  hindrance  will  be 
removed — all  idols  will  vanish  —  for  every  present  thing,  which 
becomes  an  object  to  the  mind,  instead  of  Christ,  is  really  an  idol. 
We  shall  be  out  of  and  above  all  this,  when  we  are  taken  to  be 
with  the  Lord.  But  the  love  of  the  Father  is  just  as  true  and 
perfect  now,  and  we,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  privileged  to  enjoy 
it.  We  shall  enter  more  fully  into  the  love  then,  but  the  love 
itself  is  the  same  now. 

It  is  the  rejection,  then,  not  merely  of  the  Messiahship  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  but  of  His  divine  glory  as  the  Son,  that  brings  in 
antichrist.  All  the  love  of  the  Father  has  come  out  in  Christ, 
witnessed  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  That  involves,  not  merely  the 
Jewish  revelation,  but  the  Christian  ;  and  it  supposes  too  that 
Messiah  has  not  merely  come  and  been  rejected,  but  has  brought 
out  all  His  divine  and  heavenly  glory.  For  His  being  the  Son 
of  the  Father  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  earth.  His  eternal 
Sonship  is  evidently  a  thing  that  is  entirely  beyond  His  Messianic 
rights  and  position.  It  would  have  been  equally  true,  if  there 
had  been  no  earth  or  providential  dealings.  It  was  His  eternal 
relation  and  glory  :  and  therefore,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  wants 
to  bring  us  into  our  full  place  of  blessedness,  it  is  the  Father 
that  He  brings  out.  "  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  blessed  us  with  all  spiritual  bless- 
ings." Where?  Here?  Not  at  all.  "  In  heavenly  places  in 
Christ ;  according  as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him  before  the  foun- 
dation of  the  world."  So  that  the  seat  of  our  blessing  is  entirely 
outside  and  above  the  whole  scene  of  the  lower  creation.  And 
if  a  man  utterly  rejects  and  despises  that,  renouncing  His  glory 
whom  he  had  once  owned,  what  is  he  ?  An  antichrist.  What 
he  does  on  a  small  scale,  the  Antichrist  will  do  on  a  larger  one. 

I  refer  to  the  epistles  of  John,  because  there  we  have  the  Anti- 
christ mentioned,  not  as  a  Beast,  as  in  the  Revelation,  but  as  the 
end  and  chief  of  those  who  had  once  been  in  the  family  of  God 
outwardly,  had  gone  out  from  it,  abandoning  and  denying  the 
blessed  truth  about  the  Father,  and  the  Son,  which  they  seemed 
to  have  received.  "  He  is  antichrist  that  denieth  the  Father 
and  the  Son."  On  the  other  hand,  we  read,  "  Whosoever 
denieth  the  Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  Father."  God  always 
makes  the  utmost  account  of  His  Son.  If  you  deny  the  Son, 
everything  is  gone ;  whereas,  "  he  that  acknowledgeth  the  Son, 


240  THE    SPIRIT    OF    ANTICHRIST    EVER    AT    WORK. 

hath  the  Father  also."  When  I  have  got  the  Son  of  God 
and  my  heart  finds  satisfaction  in  Him,  I  know  the  Father. 
"  He  that  hath  seen  me,  hath  seen  the  Father  also." 

Then,  after  exhorting  them  to  let  that  abide  in  them  which 
they  had  heard  from  the  beginning,  that  so  they  might  continue 
in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father,  John  closes  the  matter  thus : 
"  These  things  have  I  written  unto  you  concerning  them  which 
seduce  you."  It  was  an  evil  that  was  at  work  from  the  very 
beginning  —  and  what  mercy  is  there  even  in  this?  As  the  evil 
did  exist,  and  must  be  manifested  at  some  time  or  another,  God 
allowed  it  to  break  out  then,  so  as  to  put  His  own  revealed 
sentence  upon  it.  We  should  never  have  dared  to  have  said 
such  strong  things  of  those  whom  we  had  even  known  as  friends 
or  as  brethren  so-called.  Call  them  liars  !  How  shocking  and 
uncharitable  !  men  would  say.  But  the  moment  that  any  men 
set  themselves  against,  or  rather  deny,  the  full  revelation  of  the 
Son  of  God,  the  Holy  Ghost  knows  no  quarter  ;  and  I  believe 
that  -we  ought  not.  If  the  heart  is  unprepared  for  this,  you  will 
find  another  thing  that  goes  along  with  it.  Wherever  there  is 
unbroken  self-love,  sensitiveness,  and  tenacity  about  what 
touches  ourselves,  there  is  but  little  care  for  the  Lord  Jesus. 
You  cannot  have  two  master-affections.  When  the  heart  is 
single  to  Christ,  He  lifts  us  above  personal  feelings  ;  but  where 
there  is  great  care  for  ourselves,  there  will  not  be  found  much 
devotedness  to  Him,  nor  jealousy  for  His  name. 

In  1  John  iv.  the  Ajiostle  refers  to  the  spirit  of  the  thing. 
"  Every  spirit  that  confesseth  not  Jesus  Christ  come  in  the 
flesh,  is  not  of  God  :  and  this  is  that  [spirit]  of  antichrist,  whereof 
ye  have  heard  that  it  should  come,  and  even  now  already  is  it 
in  the  world."  W^hy  does  the  Holy  Ghost  introduce  it  here  ? 
There  are  many  false  prophets,  as  had  been  said  in  the  first 
verse,  gone  out  into  the  world  :  and  so  I  believe  there  are  now. 
But  it  is  always  a  difficult  thing  to  realize  it  at  the  time  in  which 
we  live.  We  can  see  it  in  times  that  are  past,  but  the  great 
difficulty  is  the  discerning  of  what  is  at  work  now.  We  are  in 
the  very  same  circumstances  that  the  saints  were  in  then.  For 
as  surely  as  the  Holy  Ghost  continues  to  work,  so  surely  will 
the  subtle  power  of  Satan  be  there  to  oppose.     "  Every   spirit 

that  confesseth  not,  &:c This  is  that  [spirit]   of  antichrist 

whereof  ye  have  heard  that  it  should  come,  and  even  now 
already  is  it  in  the  world."  It  is  not  the  Antichrist  fully  deve- 
loped yet,  but  the  spirit  of  it  working  in  the  Church,  just  as 
much  as  the  Holy  Ghost  was  working  there.  The  earliest 
sphere  is  not  in  the  profane  world  :    it  must  begin   with  those 


THE    DECISIVE    TONE    OF    THE    HOLY    GHOST.  241 

who  had  once  borne  the  name  of  Christ.     Satan  could  not  forge 
such  a  rebelhon  against  God,  but  among  those  who  professed  to 
believe  the  ti-uth  and  love  of  Christ.     There  is  a  notice  of  this 
in   the  second   epistle   of  John,  whei'e  it  is  said  that    "  Many 
deceivers    are  entered   into   the   world,  who   confess  not  Jesus 
Christ  coming  in  the  tlesh.     This  is  a  deceiver  and  an  antichrist." 
It  is  no  longer  a  question   of  justification  by  faith  simply,   or  of 
the  law,  but  a  more  serious  thing  still.     It  is  Satan,  not  only 
attacking  the  work  of  Christ  and  seeking  to  get  persons  to  add 
something  and  so  to  take  away  from  its  glory,  but  depreciating 
and  denying  the  person  of  the  Son.     Important  as  the  work  of 
Christ  is  to  us,  the  person  of  Christ  is  the  centre  and  substance 
of  all  truth  and  glory.     In  presence  of  such  a  theme,   I  desire 
not  to  discuss  but  to  worship.     The  reason  why   persons  care 
more  for  the  woj'k  of  Christ,  is  because  they  rightly   feel  they 
cannot  be  saved   without  it ;    but  once  we  have  got   peace  of 
conscience,  Christ's   person  becomes  the  most  precious  object  of 
our  hearts.     He  is  God's  delight ;   and  what  is  most  precious  to 
Him,  we  shall  find  to  be  the  most  blessed,  and  full  of  blessing, 
for  us.     It  is  not  merely  he  that  denies  Jesus  Christ  come  in  the 
flesh,  but  he   that  does  not  confess  Jesus  Christ  coming  in  the 
flesh.     This  is  a  deceiver  and  an  antichrist.     The  Holy  CThost 
becomes,  if  we  may  so  say,  bolder  in  His  statements.     Does  He 
lower  the  standard,  because  Satan  apparently  gains  ground,  and 
becomes   more  and  more   audacious  against  Christ?     And  are 
we  to  say,  "  We  must  not  be  so  particular  now,  because  there  is 
so  much  evil  ; "    and  "  there  is  no  hope,  because  the  Church  is 
in  ruins  ?  "     On  the  contrary,   the   Spirit,  making   provision  for 
the  latest  time,  uses  stronger  language  than  ever.     He   says, 
(ver.  10,)    "  If  there  come  any  unto  you  and  bring  not  this  doc- 
trine, receive  him  not  into  your   house,  neither  bid  him   God 
speed."      We  are  to  have  nothing  to  say  to  him.     He  was  not 
only  not  to  be  received  into  the  Church,  the  house  of  the  living 
God,   but  not  even  into  a  Christians  house.     He  must  have  no 
sanction  nor  footing  among  the  saints;    for  the  Christian's  house 
ought  to  be  a  fortress  for  the  name  of  the  Lord,  a  reflection  of 
what   the  Lord   loves  and  produces  where  He   is  owned   and 
honoured.     No  matter  if  it  be  only  to  the  lady  that  he  is  writing 
— one  who  is  not  called  to  teach  or  to  rule.     But  when  it  is  a 
question  of  Christ,  it  is  in  vain  to  talk  about  her  being  a  woman, 
as  an   excuse  for  laxity.     She  wants  Christ  ;    she  owes  all  to 
Christ ;  and,  though  she  is  a   woman,  she  is  bound  to   make 
Christ  the  first  question,  the  object  of  her  soul.     Therefore,  if 
any  person  touches  Christ,  no  matter  who  or  what  she  may  be, 
17 


242  "  THE  king" 

her  allegiance  to  Christ  calls  for  promptness  and  decision.  That 
at  once  becomes  the  governing*  motive  to  faith,  and  the  one 
grand  responsibility  of  her  soul.  Whether  it  be  persons  who 
have  the  spirit  of  antichrist,  or  the  great  Antichrist  himself  that 
is  coming,  antagonism  to  Christ  is  there  ;  and  that  decides  all 
to  a  true  heart. 

In  the  Revelation,  Antichrist  is  described,  not  merely  as  a 
deceiver,  but  as  a  "  Beast,"  as  an  earthly  power  which  has  a 
subject  kingdom — an  imperial  system  in  fact,  rather  than  a  pure- 
ly spiritual  malignant  influence,  as  in  the  epistles  of  John.  If 
we  look  a  little  at  some  of  the  Jewish  prophets,  we  shall  find 
more  about  him.  I  refer  more  particularly  to  Daniel  xi.  To- 
wards the  close  (ver.  36)  we  read  these  words  :  "  The  king  shall 
do  according  to  his  will  ....  and  He  shall  exalt  himself  and 
magnify  himself  above  every  god,  and  shall  speak  marvellous 
things  against  the  God  of  gods."  Now  there  you  have  a  self- 
exalting  person,  in  the  land  of  Judea.  This  is  very  plain;  for 
lower  down  it  is  said  that  "  in  his  estate  shall  he  honour  the 
God  of  forces  :  a  God  whom  his  fathers  knew  not  shall  he 
honour  with  gold  and  silver,  and  with  precious  stones  and  plea- 
sant things.     Thus  shall  he  do  in  the  most  strongholds,  with  a 

strange  god,   &;c And  he  shall   cause  them  to  rule  over 

many,  and  shall  divide  the  land  for  gain,"  Now,  I  think  that 
wherever  the  Holy  Ghost  speaks  of  a  land  in  this  way,  as  the 
land,  it  refers  to  the  land  of  Israel :  He  speaks  of  it  as  the 
Lord's  own  land.  This  is  confirmed  a  verse  or  two  afterwards. 
(Ver.  41 .)  "  He  (the  king  of  the  north)  shall  enter  also  into  the 
glorious  land,  and  many  countries  shall  be  overthrown."  Thus 
a  great  northern  antagonist  is  to  come  against  the  king  (ver.  40) 
"  like  a  whirlwind,  with  chariots  and  with  horsemen,"  &c.  Most 
evidently,  then,  the  glorious  land  spoken  of  here  is  the  v'ery 
country  which  "  the  king"  had  been  distributing  to  his  favou- 
rites. In  short,  he  is  a  king  in  the  land  of  Judea,  and  it  is 
expressly  said,  that  the  period,  policy,  and  conflicts  described 
are  "  at  the  time  of  the  end."  Then  "  shall  the  king  of  the 
south  push  at  him,  (the  king  in  Judea),  and  the  king  of  the 
north  shall  come,"  &c.  If  this  be  so,  several  points  are  cleared 
in  these  verses.  First  of  all,  a  king,  who  does  according  to  his 
own  will,  establishes  himself  in  the  land  of  Palestine.  But 
while  you  may  find  the  moral  features  that  link  him  with  the 
"  Antichrist"  of  John,  he  is  viewed  here  as  an  earthly  power,  and 
is  thus  connected  with  one  of  the  Beasts  of  the  Revelation.  But 
more  than  that,  he  is  to  exalt  and  magnify  himself  above  every 
god.     That  was  a  novel  feature.     The   Roman  emperors  had 


REIGNS    IN    PALESTINE.  243 

honour  paid  to  them,  in  life  and  after  death,  as  divine  ;  yet 
never  above  every  god.  But  "the  king"  shall  magnify  himself 
supremely  ;  and  this  in  a  land  that  was  specially  the  Lord's 
above  all  others,  and  amongst  a  people  whom  God  had  called  out 
to  be  a  witness  against  all  idolatry  ;  and  yet  this  man  claims  a 
new  and  most  audacious  worship,  as  the  Most  High  in  God's  land 
and  temple,  (cf,  2  Thess.  ii.)  For  bad  as  Israel  had  been  of  old, 
en  flaming  themselves  "  with  idols  under  every  green  tree," 
here  we  have  the  sight,  hitherto  unknown,  of  a  man  setting  him- 
self up  as  the  supreme  God.  And  yet  he  has  an  object  of 
worship  himself:  for  man  must  have  an  object  which  enslaves 
him,  unless  he  be  truly  exalted,  as  alone  he  can  be  in  bowing 
down  before  the  true  God.  In  reality  he  is  most  elevated  when 
most  subject  to  God.  For  man,  unlike  God,  cannot  suffice  in 
and  for  himself  without  another.  He  must  either  raise  his  eyes 
to  the  true  God  or  degrade  them  on  a  false  one.  Even  the 
very  person  who  will  try  to  get  all  beneath  him,  as  supreme 
object  of  worship,  will  himself  have  something  that  he  is  subject 
to.  And  so  we  find  (ver.  37)  that,  while  he  does  not  regard  the 
God  of  his  fathers  (which  confirms  his  being  a  Jew),  nor  the 
desire  of  women,  which,  probably,  refers  to  the  Messiah,  nor 
regard  any  God,  for  he  shall  magnify  himself  above  all,  yet  the 
Spirit  of  God  shows  us  this  appai'ent  self-contradiction.  (Ver.  38.) 
"  In  his  estate  shall  he  honour  the  god  of  forces."  All  others 
are  to  honour  Idm^  but  he  has  got  this  false  god  whom  he  honours 
himself  "  with  gold  and  silver,  and  precious  stones  and  pleasant 
things.  Thus  shall  he  do  with  a  strange  god,  whom  he  shall 
acknowledge  and  increase  with  glory,"  &c.  "  And  at  the  time 
of  the  end  shall  the  king  of  the  south  push  at  him,  and  the  king 

of  the  north  shall  come  against  him He  shall  enter  also 

into  the  glorious  land,"  &:c. 

Now  here  plainly  we  have  Palestine.  The  kings  of  the  south 
and  north  are  so  called  with  reference  to  the  land  of  Judea. 
The  king  of  the  north,  described  as  coming  against  him  with  this 
large  force,  is  the  Assyrian,  (so  famihar  in  the  prophets.)  while 
the  king  of  the  south  is  the  then  sovereign  of  Egypt.  These 
two  powers  come  up  against  "  the  king,"  who,  I  apprehend,  is 
the  Antichrist  of  Scripture.  The  Holy  Ghost  does  not  here 
describe  his  rise.  There  was  no  need  to  say  who  he  was,  but  he 
is  brought  in  quite  abruptly.  For  if  verse  35  be  examined,  you 
will  find  that  it  speaks  of  some  who  had  understanding,  referring 
to  what  took  place  in  the  time  of  Maccabees,  when  there  was  a 
celebrated  and  most  wicked  prince,  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  that 
persecuted  the  Jews,  many  of  whom  then  came  out  in  a  remark- 


244  ALLUSIONS    OF    ISAIAH 

able  way.  There  inig"ht  have  been  a  good  deal  of  nature  and 
the  spirit  of  the  woild  in  their  feelings  and  actions ;  nevertheless 
they  resisted  all  efforts  to  turn  them  away  from  Jehovah  to  idols. 
Some  of  them  fell,  and  this  was,  as  the  prophet  says,  in  order  to 
try  others,  and  "  to  purge  and  to  make  them  white,  even  to  the 
time  of  the  end  :  because  it  is  yet  for  a  time  appointed."  There 
comes  in  the  space  where  the  Spirit  of  God  drops  the  past 
history.  He  first  gives  us  the  struggle  between  Antiochus  and 
his  adversaries,  followed  by  the  exploits  and  the  sufferings  of 
those  who  had  understanding  in  Israel.  The  history  of  Israel 
is  then  in  abeyance,  and  we  are  at  once  carried  on  to  "  the  time 
of  the  end."  Between  these  two  points  there  is  a  suspension  of 
their  history.  And  what  is  the  next  thing  ?  "  And  the  king 
shall  do  according  to  his  will."  We  are  not  here  told  anything 
about  his  origin  or  progress  ;  we  hear  nothing  whence  he  comes  ; 
we  have  only  that  peculiar  phrase,  "  the  king,"  as  if  this  would 
be  intimation  enough  who  was  intended.  Nor  is  it  the  only 
place  in  Scripture  where  "  the  king"  is  spoken  of.  Look  at  the 
close  of  Isaiah  xxx.  and  you  will  find  "the  king"  introduced 
there  in  no  less  singular  a  manner.  The  reason,  I  believe,  is 
this  ;  that  the  Jews,  while  they  were  looking  for  Christ,  were 
also  looking  for  Antichrist,  a  great  prince  who  should  trample 
down  the  godly  among  them  in  their  final  tribulation  :  it  was 
plain  in  prophecy  and  so  understood  by  them.  In  Isaiah  xxx. 
the  Spirit  of  God  describes  two  enemies  of  Israel.  First,  in 
verse  31  it  is  said,  "  For  through  the  voice  of  the  Lord  shall  the 
Assyrian  be  broken  down  which  smote  with  a  rod."  This  is 
the  king  of  the  north  that  figures  in  Daniel,  typified  in  the  early 
prophet  perhaps  by  Sennacherib,  who  was  the  Assyrian  of  that 
day,  but  of  course  only  a  foreshadow  of  the  great  northern 
enemy  at  the  close.  Then,  again,  it  is  said,  "  And  in  every 
place  where  the  grounded  staff  shall  pass,  which  the  Lord  shall 
lay  upon  him,  it  shall  be  with  tabrets  and  harps  ;  and  in  battles 
of  shaking  will  he  fight  with  it."  Thus,  although  there  will  be 
such  sorrow  and  trial,  there  will  be  joy  too  :  "  it  shall  be  with 
tabrets  and  harps."  "  For  Tophet  is  ordained  of  old  :  for  the 
king  also  it  is  prepared."  This  I  believe  to.be  the  force  of  it ; 
"  for  the  king  also."  Thus,  if  the  statement  made  be  correct, 
you  have,  at  the  closing  scene,  the  judgment  of  God  upon  these 
two  great  enemies  of  Israel  —  the  Assyrian,  and  "the  king" 
who  is  introduced  here  without  a  word  of  preparation.  If  we 
turn,  further,  to  Isaiah  Ivii.,  the  same  thing  appears.  I  refer  to  it 
the  more,  as  perhaps  some  might  argue  that  in  chap.  xxx.  "  the 
Assyrian"  and    "  the  king"  are  identical.     But  in  chap.  Ivii.  it 


TO    "the    king"    and    the    ASSYRIAN.  245 

would  be  impossible  to  maiutain  tbis.  Tbe  prophet  has  just 
been  describing  the  appalling  moral  evil  of  the  last  days  among 
the  Jews.  Then  suddenly  he  says,  (ver.  9,)  "  Thou  wenfest  to 
the  king  with  ointment,"  &c.  I  draw  from  this,  that  "  the 
king"  is  some  special  antagonist  of  God,  not  attacking  the  Jews 
from  without  like  the  Assyrian,  but  setting  himself  up  within  as 
king  over  the  people  of  God.  It  was  not  necessary  to  define  what 
king,  because  it  was  a  familiar  idea  to  Israel,  so  that  tlie  Holy 
Ghost  could  introduce  him  without  a  word  of  preface.  They 
knew  there  was  the  terrible  king  to  come — the  last  great  enemy 
of  God  and  the  Jews  in  the  land.  The  Assyrian  is  an  enemy 
of  God  and  of  Israel  too,  but  not  in  the  land  ;  for  he  tights 
against  "  the  king"  who  is  reigning  there.  The  last  wilful 
king  is  the  object  of  attack  to  the  last  mighty  Assyrian.  Outra- 
geously wicked  as  both  are  to  be,  they  do  not  at  all  agree  in 
their  wickedness.  They  stand  in  each  other's  way.  There 
never  can  be  lasting  peace  between  them,  and  this  is  exactly 
what  the  eleventh  chapter  of  Daniel  shows  us.  The  41st  verse 
is  not  at  all  a  description  of  "  the  king."  He  seems  to  be  lost 
to  view,  and  there  follows  the  account  of  the  proud  king  of 
Assyria.  The  Holy  Ghost  presses  on  to  the  end  of  the  Assy- 
rian's cai'eer,  leaving  that  of  "  the  king." 

Looking  now  at  the  New  Testament,  we  shall  find  some  new 
features  about  this  king.     In  2  Thess.  ii.*  we  have  the  fullest 

*  I  take  the  opportunity  of  stating  my  couviction,  which  I  have  reason  to  know 
Mr.  Birks  shares,  that  the  Auth.  V.  is  quite  justified  in  giving  "  bii  the  coming 
(or  presence)  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  rather  than  "  with  regard  to."  So  it  is 
in  the  Aethiopic  probably,  the  Arabic,  Gothic,  Syriac,  and  Vulgate.  Mr.  Elliott, 
and  the  commentators  he  follows,  have  overlooked  the  most  important  elements 
for  deciding  the  true  meaning.  It  is  not  a  question  of  v-rrip  only,  but  of  inrep  ivlth 
a  verb  of  entreating,  which  yields  regularly  the  sense  "  for  the  sake  of" — "  by  " 
(Matthiae's  Gr.  Gr.  Vol.  ii.  §.  582.  Jelf,  Vol.  ii.  §.  G30).  Mr.  EUicott  avoids  the 
error  of  Mr.  Elliott,  who  doubts  whether  \nrep  ever  bears  what  he  calls  this  "  ad- 
jurative  sense ;"  but,  while  admitting  that  it  is  "grammatically  tenable,"  he 
contends  that  it  is  by  no  means  "  exegetically  probable,"  and  tliat  it  is  without 
precedent  in  the  New  Testament.  But  the  latter  is  an  unreasonable  objection  ; 
because  there  is  no  other  instance  in  the  New  Testament,  that  I  know,  of  ipcoTaw, 
or  an  equivalent  word,  with  this  preposition  (save  2  Cor.  v.  20,  which  Wahl  takes 
as  ^  per,  but  I  waive  it  as  doubtful)  ;  and  therefore  we  must  be  regulated 
by  its  ordinary  force  in  such  constructions.  But  we  have  frequently  ip.  with  Trepi 
there,  which  carries  a  sense  entirely  different.  Again,  the  real  source  of  the 
difficulty  is  owing  to  the  exegetical  mistake  that  the  presence  of  the  Lord  is  the 
same  thing  as  His  day.  It  would  be  most  unnatural,  as  Dean  Alford  argues,  that 
the  apostle  should  conjure  them  by  that  concerning  which  he  was  about  to  teach 
them.  But  the  apostle  does  no  such  thing,  on  the  contrary,  he  entreats  them  by 
"  the  coming"  of  Christ  with  all  its  cheering  associations  and  its  bright  hope  — the 
gathering  of  the  saints  to  their  Lord,  that  they  should  not  be  agitated  by  the 
terrors  of  "  the  day,"  which  false  teachers  pretended  was  actually  present.  Both 
the  Dean  of  Caiiterbury  and  Mr.  EUicott  agree  with  me  that  ivi(TTr\Kiv  means  "  is 


246  THE    MAN    OF    SIN. 

account  of  him  thut  the  epistles  of  St.  Paul  afford,  la  verse  3 
it  is  said,  "  Let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any  means :  for  [that 
day  shall  not  come,]  except  there  come  the  falling-  j^away  first, 
and  that  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of  perdition."  There 
is  first,  the  falling  away,  that  is,  the  speml  apostacy.  The  man 
of  sin  is  another  and  a  subsecpient  thing.  The  apostacy  pre- 
pares the  way  for  the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin.  The  French 
revolution  e.g.  answers  to  the  apostacy  rather  than  Romanism, 
which  confesses  truths,  but  truths  all  put  out  of  their  right  place. 
There  will  be  a  further  and  more  terrible  development  of  the 
apostacy,  though  this  illustrates  it.  But  there  is  to  be  more  than 
that — the  man  of  sin.  Who  is  he?  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
was  the  man  of  righteousness.  This  is  the  antagonist — the  man 
of  sin — "  the  son  of  perdition,  who  opposeth  and  exalteth  himself 
above  all  that  is  called  God  or  that  is  worshipped."  Just  the 
same  sort  of  moral  features  that  we  get  in  Daniel  about  "  the 
king,"  we  have  in  this  man  of  sin.  "  So  that  he  sitteth 
in  the  temple  of  God,  showing  himself  that  he  is  God."  There 
we  have  another  point.  He  is  evidently  one  that  is  at  Jerusa- 
lem. He  sits  "  in  the  temple  of  God,"  which,  I  see  no  reason 
to  doubt,  means  the  literal  and  well-known  temple  there.*  At 
the  same  time,  if  anybody  likes  to  apply  the  principle  of  this 
Scripture  to  such  as  may   pervert  the  place  of  the  Church  and 

already  come,"  aud  not  merely  "  at  baud,"  as  very  faultily  represented  in  the 
English  Bible.  St.  Paul  had  already  taught  the  Thessaloniaus  their  hope  in  the 
first  epistle,  as  he  had  also  iu  his  oral  ministry  respecting  the  man  of  sin  and  the 
hindrance  wliich  actually  operated  against  his  manifestation.  He  now  puts  these 
truths  in  their  order,  aud  beseeches  them  by  Christ's  coming  as  a  known  motive, 
on  account  of  which  they  should  not  be  moved  by  the  false  alarm,  that  that  fami- 
liar aud  dreaded  day  of  trouble  was  arrived.  It  is  the  presence  (irapouaia)  of  the 
Lord  which  gathers  the  saints  to  meet  Him  above  ;  it  is  the  epiphany  or  shining 
forth  of  His  presence  which  destroys  the  lawless  one — a  manifestly  subsequent 
eveul,  spite  of  Bengel,  as  appears  beyond  doubt  from  comparing  Rev.  xix.  The 
saints  are  already  with  Christ  aud  follow  Him  out  of  heaven,  to  the  judgment  of  the 
Beast  and  the  false  prophet  and  their  adherents.  The  document  on  which  the 
errorists  rested  was  a  j^^'etended  letter  of  the  apostle's,  not  the  first  epistle  to  the 
Thessalouians,  as  some  wrongly  assert ;  aud  the  feeling  they  sought  to  excite  was 
not  the  hope  of  Christ's  comnig,  but  the  fear  of  His  day.  The  criticism  and  the 
doctrine  of  the  Horae  Apoc,  I  must  say,  as  to  this  arc  unfounded  and  misleading. 

*  The  allusion  is  obvious  and  undeniable  to  Dan.  xi.,  which  has  the  Jews  and 
their  land  iu  view,  not  the  Church.  This  I  consider  entirely  confirmed  by  Matt, 
xxiv.  15,  which  certainly  refers  to  a  thing  aud  time  subsequent  to  Christ's  rejectioa 
by  the  Jews  aud  His  rejection  of  them  ;  but  as  clearly,  to  my  mind,  looks  on  to  a 
time  when  He  will  again  have  a  godly  remnaiit,  in  the  midst  of  an  unbelieving 
generation  governed  by  a  false  king  under  Roman  influence.  If,  under  such  cir- 
cumstances, the  temple  can  be  called  the  "  holy  place,"  why  may  it  not  be  also 
"  the  temple  of  God  ?"  The  reasoniug  from  what  the  house  of  God  is  now,  while 
the  Church  abides  hero,  is  quite  nugatory.  Compare  also  "the  holy  city"  in  Matt, 
xxvii.  53.     God's  purpose  is  not  revoked,  spite  of  Israers  guilt. 


THE    HINDRANCE    TO    HIS    MANIFESTATION.  247 

make  it  an  engine  and  sphere  for  exalting"  himself  in  now,  I 
have  nothing  to  object,  t  dare  say  that  it  may  legitinuiteiy  be 
so  applied — at  least  in  part ;  but  I  think  that  it  looks  on  to  a 
person  who  arrogates  to  himself  the  honour  that  is  due  only  to 
God.  "Remember  ye  not,"  the  Apostle  says,  "that,  when  I 
was  yet  with  you,  I  told  you  these  things  ?  And  now  ye  know 
what  withholdeth  that  he  might  be  revealed  in  tiis  time.  For 
the  mystery  of  iniquity  doth  already  work,"  &c.  Just  as  the 
Apostle  John  says,  "Even  novv  are  there  many  antichrists;" 
so  here  the  mystery  of  iniquity  was  already  working,  only  there 
was  a  person  that  hindered.  "  He  who  now  letteth  [will  let]  until 
he  be  taken  out  of  the  way."  I  do  not  the  least  doubt  that  the 
hindering  thing  is  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  not  merely 
dwelling  in  the  Church,  but  acting  in  the  way  of  control  in  the 
world,  as  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  sent  forth  into  all  the  earth. 
If  it  were  sim[)ly  the  Holy  Ghost  dweUing  in  the  Church,  the 
moment  the  Church  was  taken  away,  the  man  of  sin  would  be 
revealed.  But  it  apj)ears  that  the  lawless  one  will  not  arrive  at 
his  full  stature  and  manifestation,  inunediately  upon  the  rapture 
of  the  saints.  There  will  be  an  interval  and  a  testimony  which 
God  will  give.  When  this  te-timony  disappears  or  is  put  down 
by  violence,  the  man  of  sin  comes  out  full-blown.  This  seems 
to  be  the  hour  when  the  Holy  Ghost  ceases  to  restrain.  He 
lets  men  show  out  then  just  what  they  are,  and  all  their  wicked- 
ness comes  forth.  The  Holy  Ghost  thus  no  longer  controlling 
the  earth,  Satan  will  be  allowed  to  mature  his  worst  plans  for  a 
little,  brief  moment.  This,  I  think,  is  the  time,  and  such  its 
character,  when  the  hinderer  or  hindrance  M'ill  be  taken  out  of 
the  way.  The  early  Christians  used  for  many  years  to  pray  for 
the  continuance  of  the  Roman  empire,  because  they  thought  it 
was  the  letting  thing  ;  that  gone,  they  expected  the  lawless  one 
to  be  revealed  forthwith.  And  as  its  diabolical  form  is  assuredly 
to  arise  after  a  previous  existence  and  extinction,  there  was  a 
certain  measure  of  truth  in  their  thought.  But  the  Roman 
empire  has  long  been  extinct,  and  yet  the  man  of  sin,  in  his  full 
development,  has  not  yet  been  revealed.  The  reappearance  of 
the  empire,  not  its  extinction,  is  the  critical  epoch  ;  and  that  will 
depend  on  the  Holy  Ghost's  ceasing  to  restrain.  When  it  does 
take  ])lace,  all  the  evil  of  man  and  of  Satan  comes  out  without 
measure  or  disguise.  "  He  who  now  letteth  [will  let,]  until  he 
be  taken  out  of  the  way.  And  then  shall  that  lawless  one  be 
revealed,  whom  tlie  Lord  shall  consume  with  the  spirit  of  his 
mouth,  and  shall  destroy  with  the  shining  forth  of  his  presence." 
Rev.  xix.  describes  this  destruction.      In  that  chapter,  (ver. 


248  WHICH    BEAST    IS    THE    ANTICHRIST  ? 

20,)  after  a  previous  description  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
in  judgment,  it  is  said,  "  The  beast  was  taken,  and  with  him 
the  false  prophet  that  wrought  miracles  hefore  him  ....  These 
both  were  cast  alive  into  the  lake  of  fire  burning  with  brim- 
stone." They  are,  without  doubt,  the  same  systems  or  persons 
already  characterized  as  the  Beasts  from  the  sea  and  the  earth 
in  Rev.  xiii.  Now,  it  is  plain  that  one  or  other  of  these  two 
Beasts  is  Antichrist.  The  question  still  remains,  which  of  them 
is  that  man  of  sin  ?  Is  it  the  great  power  of  the  world,  the  Beast 
that  rises  out  of  the  sea  ?  Or  is  it  the  other  energetic  Beast  that 
rises  out  of  the  earth,  imitating  Christ  in  royal  and  prophetic 
power  ?  I  am  disposed  to  think  it  is  the  latter  ;*  but  I  frankly 
allow  that  I  see  difficulties,  and  believe  it  is  not  a  thing  to  be 
dogmatized  upon.  Indeed  these  Beasts  are  so  closely  linked 
together  in  their  actions  and  objects,  and  also  in  their  final  doom, 
that  we  cannot  be  surprised  if  many  find  it  hard  to  decide,  or  if 
others  even  come  to  very  different  conclusions.  But  the  more 
that  I  weigh  what  is  said  in  St,  Paul  about  the  man  of  sin,  and 
in  John's  epistles  about  the  Antichrist,  my  mind  looks  out  for 
the  Beast  that  has  most  appearance  of  rivalling  and  opposing 
Christ.  This  I  find  emphatically  in  the  Beast  that  rises  out  of 
the  earth. 

Let  us  now  consider  a  little  what  the  chapter  further  gives  us, 
bringing  the  light  that  we  have  gathered  from  other  parts  of  the 
Scrij)ture  to  bear  upon  our  enquiry.  After  the  description  of 
the  Beast  in  verse  11,  we  read  of  the  exercise  of  his  power,  (ver. 
12).  "  He  exerciseth  all  the  authority  of  the  first  Beast  before 
him"  (i.e.  in  his  presence).  He  is  the  energetic  power,  the  one 
that  cares  much  more  for  real  influence  and  energy  than  for 
outward  show,  wdiich  was  what  the  first  Beast  most  vahied.  "  He 
caused  the  earth  and  those  that  dwell  therein  to  worship  the  first 
Beast,  whose  deadly  wound  was  healed,"  Observe  again  here 
that  those  that  dwell  on  the  earth  are  abandoned  to  his  delusive 
power. 

Some,  seeing  that  the  second  Beast  works  to  jirocure  worship 
for  the  first  beast,  have  conceived  that  2  Thess.  ii.  negatives  the 
idea  that  the  second  Beast  is  the  same  as  the  man  of  sin  ;  because 
there  he  is  represented  as  allowing  no  other  object  of  worship 
than  himself.     But  it  is  manifest  that  there  are  three  persons 

*  So  Hippolytus  Romanus,  a  martyr  under  Maximin  or  Decius,  and  said  by 
Photius  to  have  been  a  disciple  of  Irenaeus.  It  would  seem  from  Jerome  tbat  he 
wrote  formally  on  the  Apocalypse,  beside  the  short  treatise  still  extant  irepl  rov 
crcorfipos  tj/lluh^  'I.  X.  Koi  Trepl  rod  avrixp'^^Tov.  lu  this  last  (§.  49)  ho  thus  speaks 
of  the  second  Beast :  t^  /j-kv  odv  drjpiov  avafiaivov  in  rrjs  yrjs  r^v  BacriKelav  riiv  toD 
avTixpicTov  4<xo(Ji.4vijv  Keya. 


THE    SIGN    OF    THE    GOD    OF    ISRAEL.  249 

who  are  closely  connected  together  in  this  scene — the  dragon, 
the  world-power  or  first  Beast,  and  the  politico-religious  or  second 
Beast.  It  appears  from  Rev.  xiii.  4,  that  the  dragon  is  wor- 
shipped as  well  as  the  first  Beast ;  so  that  whether  we  suppose 
the  first  Beast,  or  the  second,  to  be  the  Antichrist  and  man  of  sin, 
the  difficulty  would  remain  nearly  the  same.  In  either  case, 
the  worship  is  shared  by  another.  In  point  of  fact,  they  are  the 
Anti-Trinity,  and  find  their  bond  in  the  unseen  power  of  Satan. 

The  second  Beast  is  very  important.  He  is  the  really  active 
power  in  the  Holy  Land.  The  Beast  out  of  the  sea  has  his 
dominion  over  the  west,  with  large  influence  beyond  it ;  but 
Palestine  or  Jerusalem  is  not  his  sphere,  save  that  he  destroys 
the  witnesses  and  falls  there.  It  is  the  second  Beast  that  is  the 
great  power  known  to  the  Holy  Land.  "  He  doeth  great  signs, 
so  that  he  maketh  even  fire  come  down  from  heaven  unto  the  earth 
in  the  sight  of  men  (ver.  13)."  What  imparts  such  deep  and  pain- 
ful interest  to  the  miracle  is  this  :  it  was  the  special  sign  whereby 
Elijah  confounded  the  false  prophets  of  Baal.  When  the  whole 
question  lay  between  God  and  Baal,  what  was  the  turning- 
point  that  decided  the  claims  of  Jehovah  against  the  false  god  ? 
It  was  this  very  thing — fire  coming  down  from  heaven.  It 
had  been  a  familiar  token  in  Israel,  and  one  that  they  might 
justly  connect  with  the  direct  approval  and  power  of  God.  For 
He  had  caused  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven  at  various  times, 
as  a  signal  proof  of  His  approbation.  Fire  came  out  from 
before  the  Lord  when  the  priests  were  consecrated  ;  the  same 
thing  too  when  the  temple  was  built  and  hallowed  by  Solomon. 
(2  Chron.  vii.)  "  Now  when  Solomon  had  made  an  end  of 
praying,  the  fire  came  down  from  heaven,  and  consumed  the 
burnt-offering  and  the  sacrifices  ;  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
filled  the  house."  It  was  the  crowning  evidence  of  Jeliovah's 
presence  connected  with  Israel— of  His  presence  filling  the 
scene  and  accepting  their  sacrifices. 

Hei-e,  then,  is  this  frightful  imitator  and  antagonist  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  who  sets  himself  up  to  be  the  God  of  Israel  as  well 
as  the  Christ.  The  true  Messiah  was  the  God  of  Israel,  and 
here  we  find  His  majesty  and  claims  and  power  emulated  ;  the 
Antichrist  too  must  cause  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven.  I 
do  not  say  fire  really  from  heaven,  but  the  appearance  of  it ;  in 
the  sio-ht  of  men  it  was  fire  comino-  from  heaven.  As  Satan 
could  imitate,  so  here  was  this  wicked  power,  whose  presence 
was  after  the  working  of  Satan,  doing  apparently  what  Elijah 
had  done.  The  same  proof  that  Elijah  had  given  for  Jehovah 
against  Baal,  is  the   one  that  he  offers  here  in  his  own  name. 


250       MIRACLES    AND    SIGNS    AND    WONDERS,    LIKE    CHRIST. 

It  is  an  awful  scene,  and  still  more  so  if  compared  with  the 
passage  in  2  Tliess,  ii.  9.  For,  sad  to  say,  the  very  same  words 
that  are  used  in  speaking  of  the  miracles  of  Christ,  in  Acts 
ii.  22,  are  applied  here  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  the  man  of  sin. 
"  Jesus  of  Nazareth,"  said  St.  Peter,  "  a  man  approved  of  God 
among  you,  by  miracles,  and  wonders,  and  signs."  So  in 
2  Thess.  the  lawless  man  is  one,  "  whose  coming  is  after  the 
working  of  Satan,  with  all  power,  and  signs,  and  lying  won- 
ders." The  peculiar  signs  of  Christ,  that  men  should  know  the 
truth,  are  imitated  by  this  impostor.  He  performs  for  falsehood 
similar  things,  and  men  are  completely  taken  in  and  deceived. 

What  prepares  the  way  for  such  an  end  is  the  dissatisfaction 
that  men  will  feel  with  Christendom  as  it  is.  I  acknowledge 
that  they  justly  speak  evil  against  the  state  into  which  Chris- 
tianity has  got.  When  it  loses  its  heavenly  separateness,  and  is 
mingled  with  worldly  principles,  confusion  is  the  result.  They 
forget  that  Satan  is  the  god  of  this  world.  Hence  he  has  blinded 
them  entirely  as  to  what  the  Church  of  God  is,  and  what  is  due 
to  the  name  of  His  Son  here  below.  Christ  is  plainly  left  out 
of  the  question,  and  even  the  truthfulness  is  wanting,  which 
would  be  required  by  men  in  the  commonest  things  of  this  life. 
It  is  not  that  one  would  desire  to  say  a  woi"d*against  others ; 
but  God  forbid  that  one  should  not  judge,  with  all  heart  and 
conscience,  a  thing  that  is  even  beneath  common  honesty  in  the 
things  of  this  life.  When  the  Church,  or  the  individual  Chris- 
tian, ceases  to  judge,  or  if  it  condemn  in  heart,  allows  in  prac- 
tice, in  the  holiest  things,  that  which  a  iicitural  man  does  not  in 
human  and  social  relations  ;  so  that  even  the  very  world  can 
see  that  what  clothes  itself  with  the  name  of  Christ  is  all  wrong 
— when  such  a  time  as  this  arrives,  can  God  longer  refrain  ? 
Judgment  is  coming  apace ;  and  what  a  mercy  it  is  that  God 
has  given  us  something  sweet  as  our  hope  and  happiness,  and 
not  the  perpetual  dark  foreboding  of  most  certain  judgment! 
Our  portion  is  outside  the  sphere  of  the  world.  Judgment 
there  must  be  before  the  world  can  be  fully  blest.  If  a  person 
M^ere  merely  to  dwell  upon  evil  and  its  judgment,  do  you  tliink 
it  would  give  power  to  act  for  good  ?  It  is  not  the  showing  up 
of  what  is  wrong,  but  bringing  grace  and  truth  to  act  upon  souls 
that  give  power;  otlierwise,  it  might  only  be  getting  out  of  one 
form  of  evil  to  fall  into  another.  The  only  real  security  is  the 
getting  near  to  Christ :  we  help  other  souls  just  so  far  as  we 
put  them  in  contact  with  Him. 

We  have  seen,  then,  that  this  great  enemy  of  God  will  be 
permitted  to  do  wonders  in  imitation  of  the  power  of  Christ,  and 


RETRIBUTIVE    DELUSION    OF    CHRISTENDOM.  251 

in  support  of  his  claim  to  be  Jehovah.  It  is  not  surprising  that 
he  deceives  those  that  dwell  on  the  earth.  And  what  rapidly 
prepares  the  way,  and  ripens  men  for  all,  is,  tiiat  they  are  now 
listening-  to  Satan,  who  has  been  dissolving  confidence  in  the 
miracles  of  Christ,  and  the  scriptures  which  relate  them.  Thus, 
when  men  not  only  review,  but  see,  the  horrors  of  what  has 
taken  place  in  Christendom  under  their  eyes,  and  when  they 
are  left  without  the  love  of  the  truth  in  their  hearts,  they  will  be 
at  the  mercy  of  Satan.  Then,  when  men's  desires  are  gratified 
without  conscience,  and  God  Himself,  in  righteous  retribution, 
sends  strong  delusion  that  they  should  believe  the  lie,  (saying  to 
them,  so  to  speak,  "You  have  refused  the  truth  that  you  might 
be  saved  ;  now,  then,  have  all  you  like,")  —  then  this  personage 
comes  forward,  and  these  wonders  are  done  that  affect  to  be 
signs  from  heaven.  Is  it  amazing  that  they  fall  down  and  wor- 
ship the  Beast  and  his  image  ?  It  is  Satan,  of  course,  who  is 
behind  the  scenes  ;  but  his  slave,  the  second  Beast,  "  deceiveth 
them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  by  means  of  those  miracles  which 
he  had  power  to  do  in  the  sight  of  the  Beast :  saying  to  them 
that  dwell  on  the  earth,*  that  they  should  make  an  image  to  the 
Beast  which  had  the  wound  by  a  sword  and  did  live.  And  he 
had  power  to  give  life  (or  breath)  &cc.,  that  the  image  of  the  Beast 
should  both  speak  and  cause-f  that  as  many  as  would  not  wor- 
ship the  image  of  the  Beast  should  be  killed."  (Verses  14,  15.) 
Observe,  by  the  way,  a  further  proof  that  this  second  Beast 

*  T  am  not  prepared  to  aiBrm  that  "  the  abomination  of  desolation,"  of  which 
our  Lord  speaks  in  Matt,  sxiv.,  referring  to  Daniel  xii.  11,  is  the  same  as  "  the 
image"  before  us.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  our  Lord  alluded  to  the  defile- 
ment of  the  temple  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  (Dan.  xi.  31.)  This  was  long  past ; 
whereas  He  is  warning  of  another  abomination  yet  future  and  final.  Hence,  too, 
it  may  be  observed  that  the  phrase  given  by  the  evangelist  answers  exactly  {7iot  to 
Dan.  xi.  31,  but  to)  chap.  xii.  11  in  the  LXX.  In  Dan.  viii.  13  it  is  another 
thing,  "the  transgression  of  desolation"  ;  and  in  Dan.  is.  27,  though  there  may  be  a 
link  of  connexion,  it  is,  I  think,  "  because  of  the  wing,  i.e.,  (the  protection)  of  abo- 
minations [thei-e  shall  be]  a  desolator" — a  very  distinct  statement,  even  if  it  be 
allowed  to  refer  to  the  same  time.  The  sense  is  that  Antichrist  sets  up  idolatry 
in  the  temple,  because  of  which  a  desolator  appears  in  the  person  of  the  great 
northern  enemy  of  Israel.  The  effort  to  apply  it  to  the  Romans  under  Titus,  or 
to  the  Pope,  is  utterly  vain.  The  former  is  probably  due  to  the  error  of  con- 
founding Matt.  xxiv.  15,  &c.,  with  Luke  xxi.  21.  It  is  the  latter  only  who  brings 
in  the  Roman  siege  and  captivity,  as  he  alone  treats  of  the  times  of  the  Gentiles. 
Matthew,  on  the  other  hand,  equally  inspired  of  God,  leaves  out  this  part  of  our 
Lord's  great  prophecy,  and  dwells  at  length  on  the  closing  crisis,  iu  answer  to  tho 
question  of  the  end  of  the  age,  which  Luke  accordingly  omits. 

t  It  is  possible  that  the  meaning  may  be,  "  that  the  imago  of  the  Beast  should 
both  speak  and  act  (or  practise) ;  in  order  that  as  many,"  &c.  If  so,  the  state- 
ment attributes  to  the  Beast's  image  the  same  things  which  cliaractcrize  the 
Beast  in  ycr.  5. 


252  THE    FALSE    PROPHET. 

is  after  the  final  rise  of  the  first  Beast ;  for  he  causes  an  image 
to  be  made  "  to  the  Beast  lohich  had  the  utound  by  a  sword  and 
did  live"  "And  he  caused  all,  both  small  and  great,  rich  and 
poor,  free  and  bond,  to  receive*  a  mark  on  their  right  hand  or  on 
their  forehead.  And  that  no  man  might  buy  or  sell,  save  he 
that  had  the  mark,  the  name  of  the  Beast,  or  the  number  of  his 
name."  (Verses  16, 17.)  That  mark  was  a  seal  of  subjection,  or 
slavery,  to  the  Beast. 

"  Here  is  wisdom.  Let  him  that  hath  understanding  count 
the  number  of  the  Beast,  for  it  is  the  number  of  a  man,  and  his 
number  [is]  QQQ  (ver.  18)."  I  do  not  pretend  to  solve  any  such 
question  as  this.  It  would  be  easy  to  repeat  what  others  have 
thought.  Some  of  the  early  Christians,  especially  the  pious  Bishop 
of  Lyons,  St.  Irenaeus,  supposed  that  it  was  "  the  Latin  man." 
Others  have  found  various  names,  in  accordance  with  their 
polemics  and  prejudices.  Romanists  discovered  in  it  the  enigma 
of  Luther  ;  Protestants,  the  name  of  more  than  one  Poj)e. 
Mahomet  in  ancient,  and  Napoleon  in  modern  times,  have  been 
imagined.  But  are  such  notions  better  than  conundrums?  It 
is  not  the  way  of  the  Spirit  to  occupy  God's  people  w^ith  reckon- 
ing letters  or  numbers  after  this  vague  fashion.  May  we  not  be 
satisfied  that  this  is  one  of  the  points  of  detail  left  for  "  the 
wise"  of  the  latter  day,  and  that  when  the  time  comes,  the  clue 
will  be  given,  and  all  the  light  that  will  be  required  ?  For  there 
is  in  the  ways  of  God  a  sort  of  economy,  at  least  when  we  come 
to  matters  of  detail  and  application  :  just  as  He  does  not  give  a 
saint  the  strength  to  bear  him  through  a  special  trial,  till  it  is  at 
the  doors,  so  the  Lord  may  only  vouchsafe  the  needed  instruc- 
tion about  this  number  when  the  man  himself  appears. 

The  application  of  the  prophecy  to  a  particular  person  will  be 
the  point  then.  It  seems  premature  and  useless  to  discuss  such 
a  question  till  the  parties  are  on  the  stage.  The  wise  shall 
understand  then,  and  all  will  be  as  clear  as  day  to  them,  but  not 
to  the  wicked.  (See  Dan.  xii.)  The  general  truth,  however,  is 
plain.  There  is  this  second  "  Beast,"  the  active,  energetic 
power  that  opposes  Christ ;  but  when  the  day  of  reckoning 
comes,  and  the  judgment  of  the  Lord  is  upon  him,  he  will  be  no 
longer  spoken  of  as  a  Beast,  but  as  the  "  false  prophet"  that 
wrought  miracles.  (Rev.  xix.  20.)  Supposing  the  second  Beast 
to  be  Antichrist,   I  am  inclined  to  think  that  there  is  a  spurious 

*  Literally,  "  that  they  should  give  them,"  i.e.  that  a  mark  should  bo  given 
them.  Compare  Rev.  x.  11,  "  they  say  to  me,"  i.e.  it  is  said.  (Sec  Luke  vi.  38  ; 
xii.  20  ;  xvi.  9,  for  a  similar  usage,  the  first  and  especially  the  last  of  which  are 
often  misunderstood.) 


DISCREPANCIES    AMONG    PROTESTANTS.  253 

imitation  of  Christ  in  his  causing  the  first  Beast  to  be  worshipped. 
The  Lord  Jesus  spake  and  wrought  for  the  purpose  of  exaUing 
God  the  Father,  while  the  Father  Himself  makes  Christ  the 
special  object.  "  Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  him,"  (the 
Son,)  and,  again,  "that  all  men  should  honour  the  Son,  even 
as  they  honour  the  Father."  So  is  it  with  this  Beast.  He  will 
help  to  exalt  the  great  world-power,  but  withal  he  equally,  and 
yet  more  in  spiritual  things,  exalts  himself.  He  has  horns  like 
a  lamb.  That  is,  he  pretends  to  the  power  of  Christ.  But  he 
speaks  as  a  dragon,  i.e.,  the  expression  of  his  mind  is  Satanic. 
Being  a  Beast,  it  is  intimated  that  he  is  invested  with  temporal 
authoi'ity ;  while  he  is  also  expressly  designated  a  false  prophet. 
Thus,  it  is  a  personal  antagonist  of  what  Christ  was  and  will  be, 
rather  than  of  what  He  is.  Popery — Anti-Christendom,  if  you 
will — is  a  travesty  of  Christ's  priesthood,  and  will  perish  with  all 
that  partakes  its  sin  in  the  gainsaying  of  Korah.  But  here,  when 
Christ,  having  closed  His  heavenly  work,  is  about  to  assume  His 
earthly  royal  dignity,  is  one  who  opposes  and  exalts  himself  in  the 
city  of  the  great  king.  For  it  is  the  Holy  Land  that  is  the 
central  seat  of  his  power  and  deceits.  He  is,  I  think,  the  person 
that  tlie  Lord  Jesus  referred  to  in  contrast  with  Himself,  in  a 
passage  just  quoted  in  part,  where  He  sums  up  all  in  a  few 
little  words  (John  v.  43) :  "  I  am  come  in  my  Father's  name, 
and  ye  receive  me  not ;  if  another  shall  come  in  his  oivn  name, 
him  ye  will  receive."  The  Jews  would  not  have  Him  who 
came  from  the  Father.  His  sent  One  and  servant,  though  His 
equal  in  honour  and  power,  had  so  come  and  been  refused. 
But  there  was  one  whom  they  are  to  receive,  one  who  will 
flatter  and  exalt  man  in  sin  ;  for  he  will  own  no  authority  higher 
than  his  own,  and  that  is  the  echo  of  man's  will.  This  I  believe 
to  be  the  personage  we  have  here  :  one  who,  as  to  actual 
territorial  dominion  and  external  splendour,  may  have  a  supe- 
i-ior,  but  who,  in  point  of  spiritual  energy  and  weight,  is  pre- 
eminent. 

Having  already  given  so  fully  that  which  seems  to  me  the  true 
view  of  the  very  important  chapter  which  has  just  occupied  us, 
I  need  not  say  much  of  counter-expositions,  many  grounds  of 
which  have  been  already  set  aside  by  anticipation.  Mr.  Elliott 
is  perhaps  more  than  usually  confident  in  his  hypothesis  that  the 
Beast  from  the  sea  represents  the  character  and  history  of  the 
Roman  Popes  and  Papal  Christendom,  and  the  two-horned 
Beast  the  Papal  clergy,  with  the  image  of  the  Beast  as  the 
Papal  councils.     It  is  impossible  to  call  this,  at  least,  the  Protes- 


254  THE    PAST    IS    BUT    PARTIAL. 

tant  interpretation.  For  even  Luther  made  the  first  Beast  to  be 
the  Latin  secular,  the  second  the  spiritual,  power ;  while  BuUin- 
ger  viewed  the  former  as  the  Pagan  Roman  empire,  as  did  Foxe, 
Brightman,  no  doubt,  was  even  more  zealous  than  Mr.  E.,  for 
he  makes  hoth  Beasts  to  set  forth  the  Popes.  But  what  is 
of  more  consequence,  the  learned  Joseph  Mede,  and,  as  far  as  I 
can  collect,  Dr.  Cressener,  Jurieu  and  Daubuz  certainly,  rejected 
these  notions,  regarding  the  first  Beast  as  the  Roman  secular 
empire,  and  the  second  as  the  ecclesiastical  Beast,  though  with 
characteristic  points  of  difference.  So,  in  the  main,  Sir  I. 
Newton.  If  we  enquire  of  their  successors  nearer  our  own  day, 
the  case  is  no  better  by  Mr.  E.'s  own  account.  "  The  explana- 
tion of  this  first  Beast  as  the  secular  Emperor  and  Empire  of 
Western  Christendom,  and  of  the  second  Beast  as  the  Pope  and 
Pontifical  Empire,  so  as  inost  of  our  modern  English  expositors 
have  taken  it,  (e.g.  Faber,  Cuninghame,  Bickersteth,  &c.,)  I 
conceive,  to  have  been  one  of  the  most  plain,  as  well  as  most 
fatal,  of  Protestant  expository  errors."  (Vol.  III.  p.  100,  note  1.) 
Surely,  then,  if  so  plain  and  fatal,  Mr.  E.'s  elaborate  array  of 
evidence,  and  acute  correction  of  the  Protestant  expository  error, 
have  been  successful  with  every  fair  mind!  Alas!  no.  Perhaps 
the  chief  independent  exposition,  since  the  Horae  Apoc,  is  the 
Rationale  Apocalypticum  of  Mr.  Alfred  Jenour  (2  vols.  8vo, 
1852) ;  and  there  I  read  that  the  wild  Beast  from  the  sea 
"must  symbolize  an  empire  about  to  rise  after  the  ancient  Hea- 
then empire  had  been  destroyed,  and  which  would  be,  as  it  were, 
that  empire  revived.  It  must  represent  too,  I  think,  obviously 
a  secular  empire,  not  a  spiritual  or  ecclesiastical  dominion. 
There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  it  partakes  in  any  degree  of  a 
spiritual  or  ecclesiastical  character.  And  I  cannot,  therefore, 
but  express  my  astonishment  that  so  many  commentators  should 
have  acquiesced  in  the  interpretation  which  makes  this  sea-born 
wild  beast  the  Papacy.  There  is  not  a  single  feature  in  the 
description  of  the  beast  itself  that  can  with  propriety  be  so 
applied.  It  is,  as  I  have  just  said,  a  secular  not  a  spiritual 
power  we  have  here  delineated."  (Vol.  II.  p.  75.) 

On  the  one  hand,  tlien,  I  agree  with  Mr.  Elliott  that  it  is 
impossible  fairly  to  interpret  the  Beast  from  the  sea  of  the 
empire  founded  by  Clovis  and  completed  by  Charlemagne. 
Neither  the  seven  heads  nor  the  ten  horns,  neither  the  dragon- 
character,  nor,  in  any  sense,  the  duration,  can  bear  a  reasonable 
application  to  it.  On  the  other  hand,  I  am  compelled  to  agree 
with  the  earliest  down  to  the  latest,  and  including  some  of  the  very 
ablest  of  Protestants,  that  not  the  Papacy  is  meant  but  the  secular 


FULFILMENT    IS    FUTURE. 


255 


Roman  empire.  The  conclusion  is  irresistible.  Allowing  an 
inclusive  accomplislunent  in  the  Papacy  and  its  clerical  supports, 
I  steadily  adhere  to  the  conviction  that  the  future  alone  can 
exhibit  the  fultilment  of  all  the  features  predicted,  without  con- 
straint and  in  all  their  strength. 

It  is  not  true  that  the  Papacy  has  the  command  of  the  Wes- 
tern powers  which  is  here  supposed,  still  less  practises  for  1260 
years  with  such  unlimited  dominion.  It  is  not  true  that  the 
Pope  has  authority  given  him  over  every  kindred  and  people 
and  tongue  and  nation,  even  if  you  confound  this  with,  instead  of 
distinguishing-  it  from,  the  dwellers  in  the  Roman  world.  It  is 
not  true  that  the  Pope  is  the  object  of  all  the  woi-ld's  Avonder, 
nor  that  the  confession  is  extorted,  "  Who  is  able  to  make  war 
with  him  ?"  Nor  do  all,  save  the  elect,  in  Western  Christendom 
worship  him.  Need  I  show  how  palpably  inapplicable  is  the 
second  Beast  to  those  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing,  the  Papal 
clergy?  Do  they  exercise  the  enormous  power,  all  the  power, 
of  the  first  Beast?  And  in  what  fair  sense  do  they  perform 
great  miracles  or  signs,  so  as  to  make  fire  come  down  from 
heaven  in  men's  sight?  Is  it  possible  that  any  person,  save 
blinded  by  system,  could  be  content  with  such  an  accomplish- 
ment as  the  wicked  and  idolatrous  figment  of  the  mass,  or  the 
lightnings  of  the  Vatican  ? 

The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  deny  ungodliness  and  worldly 
lusts,  and  this,  not  only  for  wrath  but  for  conscience  st  ':e  !  Yea, 
may  we  be  separated  to  Christ  in  a  spirit  of  heavenly  grace ! 
How  base  to  think  we  can  take  care  when  the  time  comes  ! 
Baser  still,  if  possible,  to  plead  that  the  Church  of  God  will  be 
previously  taken  out  of  the  way  to  heaven — that  because  all  will 
be  right  then,  we  can  afford  to  do  wrong  now  !  Remember, 
that  meanwhile,  as  the  Apostle  said,  are  there  many  antichrists, 
whereby  we  know  tliat  it  is  the  last  time.  Now,  if  you  are 
allowing  the  spirit  of  the  world,  or  are  trifling  with  any  of  the 
influences  of  antichrist  at  the  present  moment,  what  would  you 
do  if  exposed  to  all  the  fearful  persecutions  on  the  one  hand, 
and  to  all  the  temptations  on  the  other,  of  the  day  when  the 
man  of  sin  will  be  revealed  ?  God's  grace  might  strengthen 
me  to  face  all  danger,  and  to  refuse  every  blandishment,  rather 
than  abjure  the  true  and  worship  the  ftilse  God  and  Christ.  But 
is  it  not  most  solemn  and  humbling  if  I  join  (no  matter  what 
the  motive)  in  any  fellowship  with  known  evil  ? 

And  here  is  the  great,  moral,  present  value  of  prophecy.  I 
see  the  frightful  fall  at  the  end,  and  can  trace  the  stream  that  runs 


256  MORAL  VALUE  OF  PROPHECY. 

down  to  it.  Perhaj)s  the  way  is  long  and  winding,  and  the  river 
does  not  seem  so  perilous ;  but  look  a  little  lower  down,  where 
the  word  of  God  lifts  up  the  misty  veil  which  shrouds  the  future, 
and  behold  the  fatal  speed  with  which  all  who  float  there  are 
enguljjhed  to  their  utter  destruction  !  There  are  many  currents 
connected  with  the  world,  and  I  may  not  see,  in  their  sources 
and  first  flowing-s,  the  full  extent  of  the  evil  which  is  the  inevi- 
table result.  In  prophecy  God  graciously  shows  me  the  end 
from  the  beginning  ;  so  that  if  I  heed  it  not,  I  am  dishonouring 
the  warning  of  His  love,  who  w^ould  have  me  "  knowing  these 
things  before."  Let  us  also  beware  not  merely  of  one  evil,  but 
of  its  every  form  :  especially  let  us  not  meddle  with  it,  wherever 
it  assumes  a  Christlike  form  in  association  with  the  world.  Here 
we  have  the  end  of  the  open,  blasphemous  power,  as  well  as  of 
the  more  active  and  subtle  spiritual  evil  of  the  crisis.*  Men  will 
be  caught  in  one  or  other  of  these  snares — the  bold  infidelity  or 
the  religious  pravity  of  the  last  days.  However  they  may 
differ  in  appearance,  they  are  found  in  the  strictest,  saddest, 
most  fatal  union  at  the  close.  The  Lord  grant  that  our  hearts 
may  be  kept  looking  to  Christ  and  waiting  for  Him  from  heaven  ! 
There  is  no  full  comfort  or  blessing,  except  so  far  as  the  eye  is 
single  to  Him. 

*  It  is  not  surprising  that  those  who  are  greatly  occupied  with  present  things, 
feel  the  deepest  amazement  and  abhorrence,  not  at  the  Antichrist,  as  futurists 
depict  it,  bnt  at  Popery  as  it  has  been  and  is,  with  its  recognition  of  so  much 
revealed  truth,  and  withal  its  destructiou  of  the  efficacy  of  redemption  and  of  all 
immediate  relationship  with  God,  not  to  speak  of  its  hideous  idolatries  and  its 
systematic  persecution  of  those  who  do  not  bow  to  it,  let  them  be  saints  or  not.  But 
the  more  such  minds  bring  out  its  subtle  hypocrisy,  the  more  they  seem  to  prove 
that  Romanism  corresponds  with  the  mystery  of  iniquit}'.  Of  course,  its  working 
in  apostolic  days  was  but  a  germ  of  what  afterwards  went  on,  till  it  issued  in  that 
frightful  corruption,  which  Protestants  have  done  faithful  service  in  exposing  with 
unquestionable  vigour  and  earnestness.  Hence,  in  Rev,  xvii.,  it  is  the  corrupt 
woman,  (not  the  ravening  beast,)  wliose  name  is  '■'■  Mystery,  Babylon  the  great,  the 
mother  of  the  harlots  and  of  the  abominations  of  the  earth."  And  observe,  it  was 
the  sight  of  the  woman,  which  caused  John  to  wonder  so  exceedingly.  Still,  "the 
apostaey,"  as  I  read  Scripture,  implies  the  public  renunciation  of  Christian  truth, 
not  an  orthodox  maintenance  of  the  cardinal  facts,  at  any  rate,  of  the  gospel,  such 
as  Romanism  holds  up  ;  and  the  session  and  worship  oi'  the  man  of  sin  in  the 
temple  of  God  implies  a  defiance  of  Jehovah,  under  the  false  expectation  of  Israel, 
which  looks  onward  to  another  and  more  daring  form  of  Satan's  power. 


OBJECT    OF    THE    TWO    PRECEDING    CHAPTERS.  257 


CHAPTER    XIV. 

This  chapter  is  the  concluding  one  of  the  episode  that  sepa- 
rates the  trumpets  from  the  vials.  We  heard  the  events  under 
the  last  trumpet  announced  ;  but  the  details  and  the  means  of 
their  actual  accomplishment  were  not  revealed  to  us.  There 
were  songs  in  heaven,  celebrating  its  results  ;  but  the  immediate 
effect  of  the  last  trumpet  on  earth  was  only  spoken  of  in  a 
general  way  ;  and  this,  going  down  to  the  end  of  all,  including 
even  the  final  judgment  of  the  dead.* 

Then  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  we  have  seen,  in  chapters  xii. 
xiii.,  turns  aside  to  show  us  the  source,  character,  and  lead- 
ing instruments  of  the  last  outbreak  of  evil,  on  which  the  vials 
were  to  be  poured  out,  and  then  the  Lord  is  to  act  in  personal 
vengeance.  We  are  come,  let  us  suppose,  in  some  comprehen- 
sive history,  to  an  account  of  a  battle  which  decides  the  fate  of 
the  world  at  any  time.  The  author  stops  to  describe  the  pre- 
vious state  of  the  parties  and  the  causes  that  led  to  the  crisis. 
Exactly  so  with  what  we  have  here:  the  earnest  of  retribution, 
as  it  were,  is  given  us  under  the  vials.  Thus,  chaps,  xii.  and  xiii., 
not  to  speak  of  chap,  xiv.,  show  us  what  it  was  that  led  to  such 
a  dreadful  outpouring  of  God's  wrath.  So  that,  though  they 
may  appear  to  be  an  interruption,  it  was  necessary  for  impress- 
ing upon  us  adequately  the  horribleness  of  the  evil  the  Lord  was 
dealing  with.  We  saw  in  chap.  xii.  that  Satan  was  the  mighty 
and  subtle  one  behind  the  scene,  hating  and  opposing  Christ  and 
His  people  from  the  very  beginning.  Then  there  was  the  war 
in  heaven  between  Michael  and  the  dragon,  with  their  respective 

*  Hence  it  is  going  too  far,  and  indeed  not  only  without  proof  but  inaccurate, 
to  say  that  the  vials  are  the  evolution  of  the  seventh  trumpet.  It  is  of  no  weight 
to  allege  that  the  trumpets  are  the  development  of  the  last  seal.  This  I  doubt 
not,  because  there  is  absolutely  nothing  under  that  seal,  save  a  half-hour's  silence 
in  heaven,  and  then  the  trumpets  are  given  to  the  seven  angels,  &c.  But  there  is 
nothing  analogous  at  the  close  of  Rev.  xi.  For  on  the  face  of  the  matter,  chaps. 
xii.  xii.  xiv.  intervene,  the  last  of  which  contains  the  vision  of  a  scene  of  judgment 
by  the  Son  of  man,  which  is  unquestionably  subsequent  to  the  vials.  Again, 
what  more  fancifid  than  the  opistho-graphic  theory  (Horae  Apoc,  vol.  i.,  p.  99 ; 
iii.,  p.  4),  that  is,  the  notion  that  the  writing  ivithoid  and  within  answers  to  the 
two-fold  series  of  visions,  one  of  which,  relating  to  matter  chiefly  secular,  ends  in 
chap,  xi.,  and  the  other  of  which,  chiefly  ecclesiastical,  begins  after  that  ?  Cer- 
tainly, neither  Ezekiel  ii.  9,  10,  nor  Zech.  v.  1-3  lends  the  slightest  countenance 
to  it,  but  rather  the  contrary. 
18 


268  SPECIAL    POINT    OF    THIS    CHAPTER. 

angels  ;  and  finally,  the  conduct  of  Satan,  when  cast  down  unto 
the  earth,  was  traced  and  explained.  Again,  chap.  xiii.  shows 
us  that,  just  as  God  revealed  Himself  to  man,  not  only  in  tables 
of  stone,  but  in  the  person  of  His  Son,  in  order  that  men  might 
see  divine  grace  so  as  no  tables  of  stone  could  display,  (but 
rather  the  reverse,)  and  that  they  might  hear  it  in  their  own 
familiar  tones ;  so  Satan  finds  a  policy  suited  to  his  ends,  in 
taking  up  men  on  earth  and  making  them  the  instruments  and 
expression  of  his  will.  Accordingly  he  acts  by  the  two  Beasts 
which  represent  two  great  systems  or  their  leaders,  that  will  be 
at  work  during  the  short  season  of  our  adversary's  great  wrath 
on  earth.  The  violence  of  the  world  and  its  pride  and  blas- 
phemy are  set  forth  by  the  Beast  that  rises  out  of  the  sea.  The 
Beast  from  the  earth  is  as  much  suited  to  ensnare  men  who 
desire  a  religion  which  excludes  God  and  panders  to  man  and 
the  world,  as  the  other  intimidated  them  by  its  power  or  enticed 
them  by  its  appeals  to  their  ambition  and  love  of  outward  show. 

But  then  the  question  arises.  If  Satan  is  so  busy  himself  and 
his  instruments,  what  is  God  doing?  Is  He  inactive — indif- 
ferent He  could  not  be — all  this  time  ?  Chap.  xiv.  seems  to  me 
the  answer  to  that  question.  The  perversion  of  everything  God 
has  given  to  man,  and  all  that  Satan  can  devise,  will  come  to  a 
fearful  issue  then,  in  a  few  short  months  and  years.  Dreadful 
as  it  all  is,  and  though  God  will  have  seemingly  given  up  the 
world,  just  to  see  what  Satan  and  men  together  will  make  of  it, 
yet  none  the  less,  God  even  then  and  there  will  be  at  work. 
And,  first,  it  is  not  now  the  heavens,  nor  the  earth,  nor  the  sea  : 
none  of  these  is  the  ground  or  scene  of  what  is  brought  before 
us  in  the  early  verses  of  this  chapter.  There  is  a  new  spot 
introduced — one  not  mentioned  before,  yet  a  most  important 
one  and  full  of  significance.  "  And  I  looked,  and,  lo  !  the 
Lamb  stood  on  the  mount  Sion."  Now,  let  us  just  pause  for  a 
moment  and  enquire  what  are  the  ideas  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
conveys  by,  or  connects  with,  the  hill  of  Zion.  The  Apocalypse 
everywhere  supposes  an  acquaintance  with  the  other  parts  of  the 
word  of  God,  from  Genesis  even  to  the  close  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment. It  would  be  difficult  to  find  any  part  of  Scripture  that 
is  not  required  in  order  to  come  to  a  full  understanding  of  this 
wonderful  prophecy. 

Let  us  take  the  present  allusion  to  Zion  as  an  instance. 
If  I  do  not  know  what  God  teaches  elsewhere  by  mount  Zion, 
how  shall  I  understand  what  is  meant  by  this  opening  vision  of 
Rev.  xiv.  ?  The  first  occasion  where  Zion  comes  into  view  is 
in  the  history  of  David,  when  he  became  king  over  all  Israel. 


THE    PRINCIPLE    OF    ZION.  259 

(2  Sam.  V.)  And  what  was  the  state  of  the  people  then  ?  Israel 
had  previously  chosen  a  king  after  their  own  heart ;  one  that 
reflected  them,  that  could  go  at  their  head  and  fight  their  bat- 
tles. "  We  will  have  a  king  over  us,  that  we  also  may  be  like 
all  the  nations."  Saul  was  their  choice,  David  the  elect  of 
God.  Not  that  David  did  not  need  the  mercy  and  forgiveness 
of  God,  for  indeed  after  God's  favour  to  him,  he  fell,  grievously. 
Beyond  question,  however,  David  entered  into  and  responded 
to  the  thoughts  of  God  in  a  most  remarkable  way.  He  sinned, 
it  is  true,  but  who  felt  and  owned  his  sin  more  thoroughly  ? 
Who  more  than  he  vindicated  God  against  himself?  Neither, 
on  the  other  hand,  did  God  make  light  of  his  sin  because  He 
delighted  in  David.  The  deed  was  secret,  but  it  was  published 
upon  the  housetop.  He  had  dealt  treacherously  with  his  faith- 
ful servant  and  had  defiled  his  servant's  house.  And  what  a 
tale  of  sorrow  did  his  own  house  show  for  many  a  long  year 
afterwards  (2  Sam.  xii) !  It  was  then  under  David,  when 
Israel  had  been  in  confusion,  when  the  priests  had  corrupted 
them  and  the  king  had  wrought  no  deliverance  :  when  all  were 
in  rebellion  against  God  and  constantly  exposed  to  the  razzias 
and  tyranny  of  their  Philistine  neighbours.  All  was  in  ruin. 
The  sanctuary,  in  what  a  state  was  it !  The  very  tabernacle 
and  the  ark  of  God  were  severed.  Thus,  in  all  respects,  sacred 
and  political,  great  and  small,  public  and  private,  the  picture 
was  most  dismal.  And  it  was  then  that  God  began  to  work 
energetically  by  His  Spirit  in  the  people.  Justly  were  they 
suffering  under  the  law  which  they  had  undertaken  at  Sinai. 
True,  there  was  mercy  and  faithfulness,  too,  in  the  midst  of  all, 
on  God's  part  :  but  still  evil  was  fast  increasing,  and  in  Israel 
there  was  no  hope  and  no  resource.  And  what  then  ?  God 
calls  David  out  step  by  step,  and  Zion  acquires  a  most  marked 
place  in  his  history.  It  was  there  David's  city  was  built,  the 
seat  of  his  royalty.  It  may  not  be  thought  much  of  now  in  the 
world,  but  in  one  sense  all  the  blessing  of  this  world  as  such  is 
suspended  over  that  little  spot ;  and  never  will  there  be  rest  or 
glory  for  the  iearth  until  the  city,  which  was  a  stay  in  the  down- 
ward progress  of  Israel,  and  was  meant  to  be  a  resting-place  for 
faith,  shall  by  and  by  be  taken  up  by  God.  In  the  Psalms  and 
the  Prophets  it  constantly  reappears,  the  Spirit  of  Christ  ever 
leading  on  the  hearts  of  the  saints  to  anticipate  the  full  result 
which  the  early  type  promised,  as  it  were,  in  the  germ. 

In  Heb.  xii.  the  Holy  Ghost  refers  to  it,  though  perhaps  in  a 
different  way.  Still,  the  great  thought  is  the  intervention  of 
God's  grace.     The  passage  contrasts  the  position  of  Israel  with 


260  ROYALTY    IN    GRACE. 

that  of  the  Christian  ;  and  after  having  described  the  vision  of 
Sinai,  with  its  blackness,  and  darkness,  and  tempest  —  all  most 
terrible,  even  to  the  mediator — it  proceeds  : — "  But  ye  are  come 
unto  mount  Sion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  hea- 
venly Jerusalem,"  &c.  Now  there  I  see  just  the  same  great 
and  precious  principle.  Israel  had  come  to  Sinai  and  that  was 
the  mountain  that  characterized  their  whole  course  from  begin- 
ning to  end.  And  what  was  the  result  of  it  ?  As  it  began  with 
darkness  and  distance,  so  it  ended  with  misery  and  death.  As 
they  were  and  Sinai  was,  they  could  not  but  shrink  back  from 
God  ;  for  there  God  was  in  His  majesty  of  judgment — not  in 
the  love  that  comes  down  and  puts  itself  under  the  burden,  in 
order  to  take  it  away.  That  could  not  be  at  Sinai ;  for  there  it 
was  a  just  God  in  the  presence  of  sinners  only;  and  therefore 
He  could  but  overawe  and  fill  all  with  terror  and  the  forebod- 
ings of  judgment.  Bounds  must  be  set  round  the  mountain. 
If  even  an  unconscious  beast  touched  it,  death  was  the  penalty  ; 
and  that  was  Sinai.  "  But  ye  are  come,"  says  the  Spirit,  "  unto 
mount  Sion,"  the  mountain  of  God's  intervention  in  grace,  as 
Sinai  was  of  man's  responsibility  ;  and  with  Sinai,  what  could  be 
the  effect  for  the  sinner  ?  Only  to  press  his  conscience  with  the 
terror  of  death.  The  Israelite  was  as  good  as  a  dead  man, 
when  he  stood  there,  being  already  a  sinner ;  and  death  would 
be  as  surely  executed,  after  he  left  the  burning  mount.  The 
Apostle  shows  the  christian  ground  of  grace,  the  exact  opposite 
of  man  trembling  before  a  God  who  righteously  demanded  what 
the  flesh  could  not  do.  Now,  it  is  God  who  has  come  down,  it 
is  God  who  has  accomplished  His  work  of  love.  When  Zion 
first  appeared,  by  name,  it  was  when  Israel  —  people,  priests,  king 
— had  utterly  failed.  Then  God  entered  unsought,  established  the 
king  of  His  own  choice  in  Zion,  and  raised  him  and  his  son  to 
such  a  pitch  of  glory  as  never  was  or  will  be  in  Israel  again, 
till  the  true  David  comes  and  plants  His  royal  glory  on  Zion, 
never  more  to  be  moved. 

The  principle  involved  in  Zion,  then,  is  God's  activity  for  His 
people  in  the  way  of  grace,  when  all  was  lost  under  the  law. 
This  gives  the  mountain  of  Zion  its  true  force  in  Rev.  xiv.  It 
is  the  gracious  interference  of  God  on  behalf  of  those  who  side 
with  the  Holy  Sufferer — the  Lamb.  God  acts  for  His  Son, 
securing  His  glory  on  earth  and  gathering  round  Him  in  heart 
a  remnant,  not  merely  sealed  as  the  servants  of  God  (like  a  similar 
band  out  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  in  chap,  vii.),  but  brought 
into  association  with  the  Lamb  in  Zion,  i.e.,  with  God's  royal 
purposes  in  grace.     These  seem  to  me  sufferers  of  Judah,  who 


THE    lamb's    name    AND    HIS    FATHERS.  261 

pass  through  the  unequalled  tribulation  ;  which  it  is  not  said 
that  the  other  remnant  do.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  their  stand- 
ing with  the  Lamb  on  the  mount  Zion.  There  St.  John  saw  them. 
Of  course  I  do  not  mean  that  in  fact  they  will  be  on  Zion,  or 
that  they  will  necessarily  understand  what  this  symbol  sets  forth. 
The  question  is,  what  God  was  conveying  to  John's  mind  or  to 
any  who  desire  to  understand  the  sayings  of  this  book.  It  was, 
I  beheve,  God's  special  interference  on  behalf  of  His  people 
in  the  last  days.  He  will  associate  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
as  the  suffering  Messiah,  a  full,  numbered,  godly  remnant,  who 
will  be  brought  into  fellowship  with  Him.  There  stand  in  the 
vision  the  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand,  having  the  Lamb's 
name  and  His  Father's  name  written  on  their  foreheads.  It  is 
not  said  that  they  know  God  as  their  Father.  The  Revelation 
never  contemplates  us  in  the  position  of  children,  much  less  does  it 
so  present  the  Jewish  remnant.  Thus,  even  when  speaking  of 
the  Church,  we  are  said  to  be  made  kings  and  priests  unto  God 
and  His  Father,  rather  than  ours.  And  this  is  the  more  remark- 
able in  John,  because  no  other  evangelist  takes  so  much  pains 
to  show  the  relationship  of  children  in  which  God  has  put  us 
before  Himself  now.  Thus,  in  John  xx.,  directly  the  Lord  is 
risen  from  the  dead,  the  message  to  His  disciples  is,  "  Go  to 
my  brethren,  and  say  unto  them,  I  ascend  unto  my  Father  and 
your  Father,  and  to  my  God  and  your  God."  Nothing  of  that 
appears  here ;  because  the  Revelation  is  not  so  much  intended 
to  open  out  nearness  of  relationship  to  God,  as  our  Father,  but 
rather  His  judgment  and  glory,  though  with  mercy  for  a  rem- 
nant. I  speak  of  the  prophetic  and  earthly  portion  —  not,  of 
course,  of  that  which  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  things  above.  Thus, 
the  name  of  the  Lamb  and  the  name  of  His  Father  (for  so  it 
ought  to  be  read)  written  on  their  foreheads  is  in  contrast  with 
the  name  of  the  Beast  in  chap.  xiii.  The  Beast's  name  or  mark 
was  put  on  the  right  hand  or  forehead  of  his  followers.  The 
Lamb's  name  and  His  Father's  these  hundred  and  forty-four 
thousand  have  on  their  foreheads  —  not  in  their  hearts  only,  if 
we  may  so  speak  :  they  were  evidently  and  openly  the  Lamb's. 

"  And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  as  the  voice  of  many 
waters,  and  as  the  voice  of  loud  thunder  :*  and  the  voice  which  I 

*  "  A  voice,"  says  Mr.  E.  (H.  A.  vol.  iii.,  p.  286),  "  as  of  many  waters,  aad  of  a 
great  thunder, — that  is  of  people  and  princes, — uniting  to  swell  it.  There  can  bo 
no  question,  I  conceive,  as  to  some  happy  crisis  in  the  earthly  fortunes  of  Christ's 
saints  and  people  being  so  prefigured : — some  crisis  during  tlio  Papal  Beast's  reign, 
or  at  least  before  his  destruction."  And  this  he  goes  on  to  expound  of  the  Kefor- 
mation.  Let  the  reader  turn  to  Rev.  i.,  and  ask  himself  the  consistency  of  such 
an  interpretation  of  the  "  voice  as  the  sound  of  many  waters."  What  room  is  there 


262  VIRGINS. 

heard  [was]  as  it  were  of  harpers,  harping  with  their  harps.  And 
they  sing  [as  it  were]  a  new  song  before  the  throne,  and  before  the 
four  Hving  creatures  and  the  elders ;  and  none  could  learn  that  song 
but  the  hundred  forty,  [and]  four  thousand  that  were  redeemed 
from  the  earth.  These  are  they  which  were  not  defiled  with 
women  ;  for  they  are  virgins.  These  are  they  that  follow  the 
Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth.  These  were  redeemed  from 
among  men,  first  fruits  to  God  and  to  the  Lamb  (ver.  2-4)."  Thus 
they  are  characterized,  besides  learning  the  new  song  of  heaven, 
negatively  by  their  holy  separateness  from  all  the  various  kinds 
of  idolatry  which  will  then  prevail  on  earth,  and  positively  by 
their  faithful  allegiance  to  the  Lamb,  whatever  the  fiery  trial. 
Instead  of  becoming  the  slaves  of  the  Beast,  they  were  redeemed 
for  the  earth's  first  fruits  to  God  and  the  Lamb.  They  are  a 
very  peculiar  class,  a  link,  as  it  were,  between  heaven  and  the 
earth  from  which  they  were  redeemed.  They  were  untainted 
by  the  corrupt  influences  of  that  evil  day,  and  especially  are 
they  free  from  the  idolatries  that  will  be  one  of  its  most  grievous 
marks.  I  do  not  mean  idolatry  in  a  vague  or  virtual  sense,  as 
we  are  warned  against  covetousness,  which  is  such  morally,  but 
positive,  literal  idolatry.  Many  may  think  it  absurd  to  talk 
about  the  worship  of  idols  reappearing  in  lands  neither  popish 
nor  pagan,  but  that  would  only  show  how  little  man's  heart  is 
known  and  the  power  of  Satan.  The  word  of  God  is  perfectly 
explicit  that  the  last  days  will  be  characterized  by  the  grossest 
spirit  of  idolatry,  and  that  in  the  most  enlightened  parts  of 
Christendom,  yea,  in  Jerusalem  itself,  which  will  then  put  forth 
once  more  the  highest  pretensions.  It  is  an  apostacy  that  the 
heart  of  man  is  quite  capable  of,  and  to  which  Christendom  will 
be  given  up  by  God,  as  a  j  ust  retribution  for  refusing  the  love  of 
the  truth  that  they  might  be  saved.  "  And  for  this  cause  God 
shall  send  them  strong  delusion,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie." 
He  will  give  them  up  to  their  own  natural  lusts ;  and  the  heart 
prefers  any  and  every  thing  to  God. 

The  saints  associated,  to  the  prophet's  eye,  with  the  Lamb  on 
Zion,  are  said  not  to  be  defiled  with  women  ;  i.e.,  they  were  pre- 
served   from   the   corruptions    that   surrounded    them.      They 

for  dragging  in  "people"  here  ?  and  what  more  for  "  princes"  in  chap.  vi.  1,  where 
the  living  creature,  as  the  voice  of  thunder,  summons  the  rider  on  the  white  horse  ? 
No  reason,  indeed,  is  more  decisive  against  so  earthly  a  view,  than  that  which  is 
furnished  by  the  very  text  which  Mr.  E.  would  have  us  compare,  i.e.  Rev.  six.  6  ; 
for  surely  if  ever  there  can  be  conceived  a  moment  when  princes  and  people  are 
not  in  unison  with  heaven's  new  anthem  of  praise,  it  is  in  the  crisis  which  follows 
their  destruction  of  Babylon  and  precedes  their  own  still  more  awful  fate  in  the 
war  with  the  Lamb. 


WITHOUT    FAULT.  263 

walked  in  virgin  purity.  Neither  do  they  wonder  after  the  Beast. 
"  These  are  they  which  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he 
goeth."  "  They  were  redeemed  from  among  men,  first  fruits  to 
God  and  to  the  Lamb."  They  were  first  fruits :  the  harvest 
would  follow  in  due  course.  (See  ver.  14,  16.)  "  And  in  their 
mouth  was  found  no  guile,  (or  rather  no  lie,  xpevSo^,)  for  they 
are  without  fault."  It  is  added  in  our  common  Bible,  "  before 
the  throne  of  God  (ver.  5) ;"  *  but  these  last  words  ought  not  to  be 
there.  The  best  authorities  leave  them  out ;  and  a  slight  consi- 
deration will  show  how  wrongly  inserted  they  seem  to  be.  "  They 
are  without  fault,"  or  blameless,  that  is  true  ;  but  "  blameless  " 
here  refers,  I  think,  to  their  practical  conduct.  If  compared 
with  men  from  whom  they  were  redeemed,  such  they  were.  In 
their  presence  they  were  without  fault.  But  suppose  God  puts 
them  before  His  throne  to  search  into  what  they  have  been  here, 
measured  by  His  holiness— that  is  another  thing.  There  I  need 
forgiveness  :  there  I  need  to  stand,  not  in  my  own  blamelessness, 
but  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Christ.  If  I  stand  as  an 
individual,  viewed  not  in  Christ,  but  according  to  my  actual  ways, 
shall  I  say  that  I  am  blameless  here  ?  It  may  make  this  a  little 
clearer,  if  we  remember  1  John  i.  ;  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no 
sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us ;"  we  do 
not  know  the  truth  about  ourselves,  and  we  have  no  fellowship 
with  Christ  in  discerning  the  evil  that  is  there.  But  "  if  we  say 
that  we  have  not  sinned,"  we  make  God  a  liar,  which  is  far 
worse  than  deceiving  ourselves.  We  make  Kim  a  liar  and  His 
word  is  not  in  us,  for  He  has  declared  the  contrary  over  and 

*  It  is  curious  that  Mr.  Elliott,  (H.  A.  III.,  part  iv.  cli.  x.,)  though  he  rightly 
rejects  or  doubts  the  clause  ivdiirtov  tov  Op6vov  rov  Qeou,  nevertheless  repeatedly, 
both  in  Greek  and  English,  inserts  another  clause  which  has  absolutely  no  war- 
rant, as  far  as  I  know.  He  says  in  the  text  of  p.  285,  (and  also  in  p^  296,)  "they 
were  without  fault  before  God,"  and  then  in  the  foot-note  gives  a/nai/iioi  evanriov 
TOV  (tov)  @€ov.  He  adds,  "  Compai-e  my  observations  on  the  words  ei/coTrto;/ 
TOV  Orjpiov  said  in  Apoc.  xiii.  of  the  lamb-like  beast's  responsibility  to  the  beast 
Antichrist  as  his  supervisor."  !Now,  while  I  do  not  question  that  politically  the 
second  Beast  subserves  the  first,  I  demur  to  the  proof  drawn  from  this  phrase. 
Thus,  Rev.  i.  4 — the  first  occurrence  of  ivwniov  in  the  book — is  adverse.  Subor- 
dination is  not  the  idea.  As  little  does  the  next  occurrence,  Rev.  ii.  14,  bear  him 
out :  indeed  it  refutes  the  inference.  Balaam  taught  Balak  to  cast  a  stumbling- 
block  before  the  children  of  Israel,  certainly  not  under  their  cognizance  and  Judg- 
ment. Compare  also  Rev.  iii.  8,  9  ;  iv.  6  ;  xii.  4,  10.  Nay,  in  chap,  xiii.,  the 
verse  which  follows  the  one  on  which  Mr.  E.  dwells,  is,  in  my  judgment,  a  suiiicient 
answer.  For  while  verse  12,  if  justly  so  interpreted,  would  suit  the  papal  supre- 
macy, how  square  it  with  verse  13  ?  For  there  we  have  the  signs  or  miracles 
wrought  ivdiriof  Twi/  avOpwiruv,  before  men.  If  Mr.  E.'s  theory  of  what  is  "  pro- 
signified  by  this  little  word"  in  verse  12  be  applied  to  verse  13,  it  would  teach  the 
Protestant  principle  of  private  judgment,  quite  as  much  as  the  other  justifies 
"  Coram  Fefro."     The  truth  is  that  the  view  has  uo  foundation. 


264       "before  the  throne  of  gob"  interpolated. 

over.  But  in  chap.  iii.  of  the  same  epistle,  what  a  change  !  "  He 
that  committeth  sin  is  of  the  devil ;"  and  "  whosoever  is  born  of 
God  doth  not  commit  sin,  and  he  cannot  sin  because  he  is  born 
of  God.  In  this  the  children  of  God  are  manifest  and  the  child- 
ren of  the  devil."  How  can  we  reconcile  these  two  things? 
How  account  for  the  immense  difference  of  the  language  in 
chaps,  i.  and  iii.  ?  Most  simply.  In  chap.  i.  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  leading  the  Christian  to  view  himself  in  the  light  of  God's 
presence  :  he  is  before  the  Father  and  the  Son.  He  stands 
before  God,  if  I  may  so  say — not  exactly  before  the  throne — 
but  before  the  Father  and  the  Son.  And  what  will  a  man  say 
when  he  stands  there  ?  Will  he  say,  I  have  no  sin  ;  I  have 
not  sinned  ?  None  there  will  say  it.  Whoever  says  so  here, 
proves  that  the  truth  is  not  in  him  —  that  the  word  has  never 
searched  him.  But  when  God  compares  His  child  with  the 
world,  i.e.,  with  those  who  do  not  know  Himself,  He  says, 
"  he  doth  not  commit  sin,"  and  "  he  cannot  sin."  Look  at 
Numbers  also.  There  you  perceive  Israel  in  a  state  of  great  dis- 
order and  failure,  every  form  of  unbelief  and  unfaithfulness  in 
their  journeying.  But  the  moment  an  enemy  comes  forward, 
and  comes  to  curse  the  people  of  God — that  same  Israel  which 
had  tempted  and  provoked  Him  ten  times  and  more — what 
does  He  say  then  ?  Why,  that  He  has  not  beheld  iniquity  in 
Jacob,  neither  hath  He  seen  perverseness  in  Israel !  "  The 
Lord  His  God  is  with  him  and  the  shout  of  a  king  is  among 
them."  In  the  very  persons  with  whom  He  had  found  fault  so 
often,  when  speaking  to  themselves,  He  can  see  none  now. 
Let  Satan  and  the  world  take  in  hand  to  damage  His  people, 
and  all  His  heart  is  in  movement  on  their  behalf. 

As  this  verse  stands  now  in  the  common  text,  with  the  words 
"  before  the  throne  of  God"  added  to  it,  we  could  only  under- 
stand it  as  being  true  in  Christ ;  but  here  the  sense  requires,  if 
I  mistake  not,  that  it  be  practical  conduct.  God  looks  at  them 
as  undefiled  and  truthful,  because  they  have  been  kept  by  grace 
from  all  the  idols  of  Babylon  and  the  delusive  power  of  the 
Beast ;  and  thus  they  are  blameless.  I  only  notice  this  to  show 
that  many  of  these  little  changes  add  to  the  great  sum  of  chris- 
tian truth.  Every  blot  or  error  which  creeps  into  the  word  of 
God  will  be  found  to  impair  its  accuracy  and  its  perfect  beauty. 

The  second  thing  that  we  note  in  the  chapter,  is  an  angel  fly- 
ing in  the  midst  of  heaven,  having  everlasting  glad  tidings  to 
preach  unto  them  that  dwell  [or,  literally,  that  sit]  on  the 
earth,  and  to  every  nation,  and  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people. 


EVERLASTING    GOSPEL.  265 

I  am  aware  that  some  have  applied  this  to  the  great  spread  of 
evangelical  missions  to  the  heathen,  in  these  last  days.  But  is 
it  the  way  to  understand  prophecy  —  to  be  striving  to  find  some 
present  accomplishment  of  it  ?  We  must  look  at  it  as  a  whole. 
If  no  such  thing  be  admitted  now  as  a  new  group  of  suifering 
Jews,  connected  with  Christ  in  the  hope  of  the  kingdom  in 
Israel,  it  is  in  vain  to  look  for  the  angel  with  the  everlasting 
gospel  in  the  missionary  efforts  of  the  last  half  century.  Nor 
would  the  message  itself  in  any  way  suit  the  present  purposes  of 
God.  The  ground  on  which  the  angel  appeals  to  them  is, 
that  the  hour  of  God's  judgment  is  come.  Is  that  the  case 
now  ?  Evidently  not.  It  is  the  day  of  grace,  which  is  the 
contrast  of  the  hour  of  judgment.  It  is  still  true  that  "now  is 
the  accepted  time  ;  behold,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation."  As 
yet  the  door  is  open ;  so  that  it  would  not  be  true  to  say,  "  the 
hour  of  his  judgment  is  come."  But  when  the  time  for  the 
accomplishment  of  this  is  arrived,  it  will  be  the  word,  of  course, 
of  the  Lord  for  men.  For  then  the  closing  judgments  are  about 
to  be  executed  and  the  outpouring  of  God's  wrath  is  just  at 
hand.  Now  you  cannot  reconcile  all  this  with  the  day  of  blessing 
and  grace,  as  if  they  could  both  run  on  together.  And  yet 
there  are  those  who  say,  We  are  in  the  midst  of  the  vials  !  But 
that  (where  it  is  understood  not  partially,  but  in  full  and  finally) 
indicates  the  almost  total  eclipse  which  befals  the  truth  in  the 
minds  of  men,  when  they  can  suppose  that  the  day  of  God's 
grace  and  the  hour  of  His  judgment  are  the  same  thing,  or  at 
least  that  they  both  can  be  at  the  same  time.  And  when  we 
examine  the  message  itself,  we  find  that  it  has  altogether  ano- 
ther sound  from  the  glad  tidings  which  God  is  proclaiming  now. 
Does  it  call  souls  everywhere  to  repent,  because  God  has  raised 
up  a  man  from  the  dead  by  whom  He  will  judge  the  world  in 
righteousness  ?  (Acts  xvii.  31 .)  Thus  Paul  preached  in  his  day  ; 
and  thus  it  is  right  to  preach  now  a  Christ  dead,  risen,  and 
coming  again  to  judge  the  world.  It  speaks  of  the  hour  of 
divine  judgment,  but  there  is  not  a  word  about  a  risen  man — 
nothing  about  a  Saviour  or  His  redemption.  "  Fear  God  and 
give  glory  to  him  ;  for  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is  come  :  and 
worship  him  that  made  lieaven,  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  the 
fountains  of  waters  (ver.7)."  Now  I  ask,is  this  the  kind  of  message 
that  would  suit  to  go  about  the  country  with  ?  Telling  persons 
to  worship  God  that  made  heaven,  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and 
fountains  of  waters  ?  Everlastingly  true  as  it  is,  is  it  the  spe- 
cial message  now,  God  forbid  that  the  creation-glory  of  God 
should  be  denied  !     It  is  exceedingly  important ;    but  its  proper 


266  THE    HOUR    OF    HIS    JUDGMENT    COME. 

application  is  when  God  has  finished  the  work,  now  in  hand,  of 
saving  and  calhng  out  the  Church  (Christ's  body)  for  heavenly 
glory.  When  Satan  has  accomplished  his  great  purpose  of 
making  men  not  only  reject  the  true  God  when  He  came  as 
man,  but  worship  a  man  as  God  upon  earth,  what  will  not  be 
the  urgent  need  and  value  of  that  message  then  ?  It  will  be  the 
contradiction  given  to  everything  the  Beast  and  the  dragon  con- 
spire to  bring  in.  When  all  this  iniquitous  false  worship  is  going 
on,  it  will  require  positive  faith  in  the  one  living  and  true  God 
not  to  give  way  and  fall  under  the  power  of  the  delusion.  For 
Satan  will  have  made  it  to  be  at  the  peril  of  a  man's  life  and 
subsistence  not  to  yield. 

And  so  here  is  this  message  sent  :  "  Fear  God  and  give  glory 
to  him."  All  the  world  had  sunk  in  idolatry,  worshipping  the 
Beast  and  falling  down  before  him,  Satan  could  not  prevail  on 
the  Son  of  God  to  fall  down  and  worship  him  ;  but  he  will  have 
got  the  Beast  his  tool,  and  all  the  world  is  drawn  after  him.  "  Wor- 
ship him  that  made  heaven  and  earth,  and  the  sea  and  fountains 
of  waters."  These  are  the  claims  of  God  to  supreme  worship 
at  the  time  when  "  the  earth  "  will  be  completely  carried  away 
by  the  anti-christian  delusion. 

But  persons  may  ask,  "  Why  is  it  called  everlasting  glad 
tidings  or  gospel?"  Perhaps  because  it  is  always  true.  It 
has  been  so  from  the  beginning,  and  up  to  the  close  it  must  be 
unchanged.  "  Fear  God  and  give  glory  to  him,"  The  peculiar 
ground  on  which  it  is  put  here  (!'''  for  the  hour  of  his  judgment 
is  come")  could  not  always  apply.  But  still  the  word,  "  Fear 
God  .  ,  .  .  worship  him  that  made  heaven  and  earth,"  (that  is, 
the  glory  of  God  proved  or  witnessed  in  creation,)  is  of  course 
always  a  standing,  fundamental  truth.  But  it  will  be  empha- 
tically regarded  and  brought  out  when  Satan  has  gained  upon 
the  world  to  deny  the  true  God,  and  to  worship  a  creature  in- 
stead of  the  Creator.  I  think  that  the  general  bearing  of  this 
7th  verse  must  be  pretty  plain.  But  one  word  more  with  re- 
gard to  the  term  "  gospel."  It  is  used  in  Scripture  with  much 
more  latitude  than  men  are  now  accustomed  to.  The  glad 
tidings  to  Israel  in  the  wilderness  held  out  that  they  should  inherit 
the  land  of  promise.  It  was  glad  tidings  to  Abraham  that  in 
him  should  all  nations  be  blessed,  (Gal,  iii,  8.)  The  glad  tidings, 
in  the  time  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  preached  by  him,  meant  in 
substance  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  at  hand.  So  also  the 
Lord  Himself  preached  and  His  disciples  during  His  ministry 
on  earth.  But  the  people  would  not  have  Him  ;  and  the  con- 
sequence was,  that  though  the  kingdom  was  set  up,  it  was  so  in 


THE  FALL  OF  BABYLON  AND  JUDGMENT  OF  THE  BEAST.  267 

a  way  that  differed  emphatically  from  what  the  people  expected 
who  looked  for  it.  It  was  set  up  in  the  person  of  the  rejected 
king  in  heaven,  till  the  king  comes  again,  when  it  will  be  estab- 
lished manifestly  over  the  earth.  Thus,  you  have  different  mes- 
sages, different  glad  tidings,  according  to  the  various  subjects  or 
hopes  that  God  was  presenting  at  different  times.  But  the 
everlasting  gospel  necessarily  was  before  Abraham,  or  any 
other  of  these  special  glad  tidings.  It  has  always  been,  and  must 
be,  that  God  is  the  only  worthy  object  of  worship.  "  There  is 
none  good  but  one — God."  And  when  the  blessed  day  does 
dawn — when  the  King  comes  in  His  glory — when  the  kingdom 
prepared  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  will  be  enjoyed — 
when  God  will  have  His  blessed  ones  around  Him  from  the 
north  and  south,  from  the  east  and  from  the  west  (not  only  the 
risen  ones,  but  also  those  in  their  natural  bodies  who  will  be 
spared  and  be  blessed  upon  the  earth,  at  the  same  time  that  the 
risen  saints  will  enjoy  heavenly  glory  under  the  headship  of  the 
only  One  who  can  concentrate  all  in  blessing),  what  will  be  the 
due  and  needed  message  previously  ?  Why  this  :  "  Fear  God  and 
give  glory  to  him."  Evidently  then  it  is  called,  with  perfect 
reason,  "  the  everlasting  gospel."  You  will  observe  that  it  is 
sent  "  to  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth"  as  well  as  to  every  nation, 
and  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,"  thus  keeping  up  the  dis- 
tinction that  we  have  noticed  before.  They  will  both  hear  the 
testimony  ;  but  if  they  "  who  dwell  on  the  earth"  will  not  receive 
it,  through  the  mercy  of  God,  the  nations,  kindreds,  tongues, 
and  people  will  in  part  receive  it.  Compare  Ps.  xcvi.  and  Matt, 
xxiv.  14,  with  the  results  in  chap.  xxv.  31-46. 

After  this  comes  another  message — the  fall  of  Babylon.  I  do 
not  mean  to  dwell  on  it  just  now,  as  we  shall  find  a  great  deal 
about  that  great  city  in  other  chapters  of  this  book  ;  for  Babylon 
was  so  important  as  to  require  a  sjDecial  notice  to  itself.  But  as 
it  was  evidently  the  active  source  of  corruption,  intoxicating  men 
and  drawing  them  away  from  the  living  God,  so  now  He  sends 
this,  the  death-knell  of  Babylon.  The  object  here,  probably, 
was  to  give  its  place  in  the  order  of  God's  dealings  at  the  close 
of  the  dispensation,  its  relation  to  what  went  before  and  to  what 
follows  after.  (Ver.  8.) 

In  the  next  place,  we  have  the  solemn  warning  to  those  who 
worshipped  the  Beast  and  received  his  mark,  the  sure  and  ever- 
lasting torment  of  all  who  were  thus  carried  away  by  him.  There 
are  many  who  apply  these  prophecies  about  Babylon  and  the 


268  BLESSEDNESS    OF    THOSE    WHO    DIE    IN    THE    LORD. 

Beast  in  an  exclusive  way  to  Rome ;  but  while  the  seven-hilled 
city  has  many  of  the  principles  of  Babylon  and  the  Beast,  yet  it  is 
impossible  to  find  their  complete  and  united  fulfilment  in  Popery 
as  it  now  is  or  has  been.  Besides,  the  Beast  and  Babylon  are 
not  the  same  thing ;  for  the  Beast  destroys  Babylon.  And  will 
Rome  destroy  itself?  Certainly  the  elements  of  Babylon  are  to 
be  found  there  ;  but  if  the  matter  be  looked  at  more  closely,  all 
cannot  be  found  in  Rome.  For  my  own  part,  I  believe  that 
Rome,  more  than  any  other  system,  already  is,  in  a  very  true 
moral  sense,  Babylon,  and  that  it  will  yet  contain  and  manifest  all 
the  elements  of  that  vile  corruptress.  But  for  this  very  reason 
it  cannot  be  the  Beast ;  for  the  Beast  it  is  which  destroys  Babylon, 
and  after  that  the  Beast,  falling  into  its  own  worst  and  open  re- 
bellion against  God,  perishes.  The  worst  state  of  the  Beast  is 
after  Babylon  has  been  destroyed  ;  for  then  it  exalts  itself  to 
heaven,  only  to  be  cast  down  to  hell ;  but  we  shall  have  the  fall 
of  both  fully  by  and  by.  "  Here  is  the  patience  of  the  saints." 
(Ver.  9-12.) 

The  fifth  division  is  the  word  touching  the  saints  that  die  in 
the  Lord.  "  And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying.  Write, 
Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth  :  Yea, 
saith  the  Spirit,  tliat  they  may  rest  from  their  labours ;  and  their 
works  do  follow  with  them."  (Ver.  13.)  It  does  not  mean  those 
who  die  throughout  the  present  dispensation.  When  Christian 
people  die  now,  it  is  blessed ;  but  here  the  Spirit  speaks  of  a 
future  class,  all  of  whom  will  die.  You  must  take  these  things 
connected  together  as  a  whole — not  a  little  bit  that  suits  present 
circumstances,  leaving  out  the  rest  which  does  not.  What  is 
the  real  meaning  of  the  verse  ?  What  is  God's  mind  ?  It  is  the 
saints  who  die  in  that  day.  Many  will  be  killed  ;  the  blood  of 
the  saints  will  flow.  The  everlasting  glad  tidings  had  been 
announced;  the  hour  of  judgment  was  come,  as  the  angel  pro- 
claimed ;  and  it  might  seem  a  dreadful  thing  for  persons  to  have 
been  killed,  just  when  God  is  going  to  introduce  His  kingdom. 
But,  on  the  contrary,  the  voice  says,  "  Blessed  are  the  dead  which 
die  in  the  Lord /row  henceforth."  Do  not  be  alarmed  by  it.  They 
will  only  get  a  better  kind  of  glory.  What  will  be  the  portion 
of  those  that  die  in  the  Lord  then?  They  will  reign  with  Christ 
and  His  heavenly  saints.  Chap.  xx.  proves  that  those  who  die 
under  the  persecutions  of  the  Beast  will  be  raised  again  to  join 
the  heavenly  saints  that  will  have  been  taken  away  before. 
"  Blessed  are  the  dead,"  &c.,  cannot  in  strictness  apply  to  the 
Church,   because  all    belonging   to   the   Church   will   not   die. 


THE    HARVEST.  269 

Some  will  be  alive  and  remaining  to  the  coming  of  the  Lord, 
who  are  to  be  clianged  without  passing  through  death  ;  whereas 
these  are  persons  who  all  die,  as  a  class.  It  refers  exclusively 
to  those  who  die  in  the  Lord  at  that  time  ;  and  shows  that, 
instead  of  losing  their  place  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  they  will 
gain  an  advanced  position  of  blessing.  Their  company,  also,  is 
complete,  and  their  full  blessedness  just  coming  without  future 
waiting — blessed  from  henceforth,  (Ver.  13.) 

The  spirit  of  it  may  be  applied  now,  but  the  intention  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  seems  to  have  been  the  comfort  of  persons  who 
will  die  before  the  Beast  is  judged  and  the  heavenly  glory 
appears.  It  might  be  thought  that  they  had  lost  something. 
But  no.  The  voice  from  heaven  says,  "  Write,  Blessed  from 
henceforth  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord  :  yea,  saith  the  Spirit, 
that  they  may  rest  from  their  labours  ;  and  their  works  do 
follow  them."  The  Holy  Ghost  adds  his  "Yea"  of  sweet  sym- 
pathy, true  to  the  saints  in  joy  and  in  sorrow,  groaning  with  their 
infirmities,  and  rejoicing  with  their  speedy  triumph  and  reward. 

Then  follow  the  two  closing  scenes  of  this  chapter.  The  first 
is  the  vision  of  one  like  the  Son  of  man*  sitting  upon  a  white 
cloud,  "  having  on  his  head  a  golden  crown,  and  in  his  hand  a 
sharp  sickle."  It  is  a  vision  grounded  upon  the  idea  of  a  har- 
vest :  that  is,  it  is  a  separating  judgment.  (Ver.  14-16.)  There  is 
that  which  must  be  castaway,  and  that  which  will  be  gathered  in. 
Perhaps  with  this  we  may  compare  what  is  said  in  the  gospels  : 
"  one  shall  be  taken  and  the  other  left ;  so  shall  it  be  in  the  day 
when  the  Son  of  man  is  revealed."  (Luke  xvii.)  In  the  next  judg- 
ment, we  have  a  different  character  of  dealing.  It  is  the  vintage 
of  the  earth,  not  its  harvest.  There  is  no  good,  and  therefore 
no  separation  here.  In  the  harvest  there  was  ;  but  when  you 
come  to  the  vintage,  a  more  serious  thing  is  found.  It  is  not 
the  genuine  vine,  but  the  "  vine  of  the  earth."  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  only  true  vine  :  and  if  we  are  fruit-bearing  branches, 
we  must  be  abiding  in  Him.  But  here  it  is  "the  vine  of  the 
earth."  And  what  does  the  Lord  do  with  this  vine  of  the  earth 
and  its  clusters?  There  is  nothing  but  unmixed  judgment — no 
mercy  whatever  to  mitigate  it.  The  fruit  is  gathered  and  cast 
into  the  great  winepress  of  the  wrath  of  God.     There  follows 

*  Mr.  Jenour  revives  a  doubt  as  to  the  Son  of  man,  and  suggests  an  applica- 
tion, symbolically,  to  the  Jews  then  to  be  converted,  and  the  great  evangelists  of 
that  day  ;  just  as  Vitringa  long  ago  applied  it  to  those  princes,  &c.,  whom  God 
employed,  at  the  Reformation,  in  executing  his  dealings  in  providence.  But  there 
is  no  force  in  the  objection  that  St.  John  would  hardly  have  said  of  Christ  "  one 
like  to  the  Son  of  man."  For  it  is  exactly  what  he  does  say  in  chap,  i.,  where  bff- 
youd  controversy  our  Lord  alone  can  be  meant. 


270  THE    VINTAGE. 

the  image  of  unsparing  judgment.  "  The  winepress  was  trodden 
without  the  city,  and  blood  came  out  of  the  winepress,  even 
unto  the  horse-bridles,  by  the  space  of  a  thousand  and  six  hun- 
dred furlongs."*  It  is  an  awful  figure  of  carnage — blood  flowing 
in  a  deep  stream  for  about  200  miles.  This  is  not  to  be  taken 
in  a  mere  literal  way  ;  but  the  great  idea  which  God  presents, 
is  that  of  a  judgment  where  there  is  nothing  but  wrath,  to  the 
very  uttermost,  upon  the  apostates.  Who  ever  heard  of  such  a 
thing  in  any  history  of  human  events  ?  It  is  entirely  beyond 
all  that  man  could  execute.  When  the  reality  comes,  it  will  be 
still  more  terrible  than  the  figure,  which  passed  as  a  prophetic 
picture  before  the  eye  of  the  prophet.  (Ver.  17-20.)  The  bloodshed 
might  be  of  religious  apostates  from  all  parts  of  Christendom  ; 
but  it  appears  to  be  especially  Jewish,  as  the  scene  is  the  land. 
The  winepress  was  trodden  without  the  city  —  i.e.,  as  I  suppose, 
Jerusalem.     Compare  Joel  iii. 

In  Isa.  Ixiii.  we  have  the  Lord  treading  the  winepress,  but  it 
appears  to  be  a  more  distant  scene.  There  He  is  coming  from 
Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah.  Here  it  is  "  without  the 
city,"  and  vengeance  on  those  who  had  been  religiously  guilty 
in  connexion  with  it.  They  had  heard  of  mercy,  but  the  mercy 
had  been  despised  ;  and  now  the  judgment  is  come,  and  for 
them  there  is  nothing  else.  The  mercy  had  been  tasted  only 
to  be  abused  ;  and  what  is  there  that  God  so  feels  and  judges  ? 

In  this  chapter,  then,  we  have  the  full  outline  of  the  dealings 
of  God  in  the  latter-day  crisis.  There  are  seven  divisions  of  it. 
First,  there  is  the  full  remnant  of  godly  Jews  associated  with  the 
Lamb  on  Mount  Sion,  in  sympathy  with  His  sufferings  and 
waiting  for  the  kingdom.  Secondly,  a  testimony  to  the  Gentile 
nation  scattered  all  over  the  world,  as  well  as  to  those  seated  on 
the  prophetic  earth.  Thirdly,  the  fall  of  Babylon.  Fourthly, 
the  fearful  doom,  both  in  this  world  and  in  the  next,  of  such  as 
should  worship  the  beast  and  his  image,  or  receive  the  mark  of 
his  name.  Fifthly,  the  blessedness  from  that  time  of  those  that 
die  in  the  Lord.  Sixthly,  the  discriminating  process  of  the 
harvest.  And,  seventhly,  the  awful  infliction  of  vengeance  on 
religious  apostacy  —  the  first,  at  least,  of  these  two  last  acts  of 
judgment  being  executed  by  the  Son  of  man,  which  necessarily 
supposes  the  very  close  of  the  age  :  the  wrath,  not  of  God  only, 
but  of  the  Lamb. 

*  Jerome  remarked  the  coincidence  of  this  with  the  length  of  Palestine,  and 
Fuller,  Faber,  &c.,  apply  it  literally  to  that  laud,  as  the  great  future  Aceldama. 
Mede,  on  the  other  hand  (as  we  are  told  in  the  Horae  Apoc.),  suggests  the  fact  of 
a  similar  length  iu  the  States  of  the  Church  from  Rome  to  Verona. 


SUMMARY  —  HISTORICAL    VIEW.  271 

Thus  the  seven-fold  series  appears  in  this  sketch  of  the  final 
ways  of  God,  whether  of  mercy  or  of  judgment.  It  is  tho- 
roughly in  accordance  with  the  Revelation.  We  have  had 
seven  seals,  seven  trumpets,  and  there  are  seven  vials.  Here, 
too,  though  not  formally  numbered,  we  have  the  seven  dealings 
of  God  that  make  up  a  complete  account ;  but  the  details,  as 
they  are  given  afterwards,  may  come  before  us  another  time. 
Although  it  is  not  about  us,  yet  what  a  mercy  it  is  to  feel  that 
we  do  not  always  require  to  think  about  ourselves  when  reading 
the  Bible  !  Many  suppose  it  to  be  a  very  spiritual  thing  to  be 
asking,  What  is  there  for  me?  But  we  ought  to  desire  all 
the  blessing  God  can  give  us,  and  not  merely  a  little  Zoar. 
"  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it,  saith  the  Lord."  If 
I  desire  to  have  my  cup  running  over,  and  thus  to  be  strength- 
ened in  serving  Him,  I  shall  want  to  know  all  that  God  can 
tell  me  about  Christ.  And  is  it  not  something  and  good  for  me 
to  know  that  Christ  is  to  have  His  complete  remnant,  not 
merely  when  glory  comes,  but  associated  in  their  measure  with 
Him,  before  it  comes,  in  suffering — like  David  when  he  came 
to  Mount  Zion  ?  Then  who  was  it  that  shared  his  honours  ? 
Those  who  had  been  the  companions  of  his  rejection.  So  here 
with  these  144,000.-  They  will  not  have  the  same  heavenly 
glory  that  is  reserved  for  the  Church  of  the  first-born  ;  for 
either  we  have  the  very  best  blessings  now,  or  none.  All 
Christians  stand  now  in  the  most  glorious  privileges  which  it 
is  possible  for  children  of  God  to  enjoy.  Whatever  its  preten- 
sions, it  is  a  time  when  Christ  is  thoroughly  rejected  by  the 
world.  God  desires  that  I  should  find  treasure  enough  in 
Christ  to  despise  the  world  —  to  put  the  world  under  my  feet. 
The  hard  thing  is  to  take  the  place  of  the  rejection  of  Christ, 
and  to  be  happy  in  it. 

And  now  that  we  have  viewed  this  chapter  as  the  closing 
scene  of  the  earth,  the  end  of  the  age,  more  particularly  God's 
working  therein  with  reference  to  the  evil  of  that  day,  it  may 
be  well  to  glance  briefly  at  the  historical  application.  None 
could  learn  the  new  song,  it  is  allowed,  but  the  144,000  —  none 
but  those  converted  and  illuminated  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  a  com- 
pany elected  out  of  the  Protestant  nations  (as,  before,  out  of 
the  Christianized  nations  under  Constantine) ;  and  yet,  with 
singular  inconsistency,  the  voice  of  the  waters  and  great  thun- 
ders implied  "  the  uniting  of  both  nations  and  princes  in  the 
song."  (H.  Apoc.  Vol.  III.,  pp.  288,  289.)  Were  the  Protes- 
tant nations  ever  the  election  of  grace  ?     Mr.  Jenour,  not  unrea- 


272  THE    REFORMATION. 

sonably  dissatisfied  with  the  mere  repetition  of  a  similar  class  in 
Rev.  vii.  and  xiv.,  tries  to  vary  the  tune,  and  suggests  that  those 
in  the  former  chapter  are  a  Jewish  elect  remnant,  these  in  our 
chapter  a  Gentile  one.*  Now,  I  would  press  one  question  upon 
those  inclined  to  either  of  the  views  mentioned  :  how  could  a 
Christian  election,  either  under  Constantine  or  at  the  Reforma- 
tion, whether  an  election  out  of  Jews  or  Gentiles,  be  styled  first 
fruits  to  God  and  to  the  Lamb  ?  If  the  Church,  strictly  so 
called,  will  be  then  completed,  nothing  is  more  intelligible ;  but 
on  the  scheme  which  regards  the  testimony  and  the  body  formed 
thereby  as  the  same  continuously,  a  reasonable  explanation  does 
not  appear.  If  it  be  a  special  gathering  out  of  Judah,  associated 
with  a  suffering  Messiah,  and  anticipating  the  kingdom,  what 
clearer  ?  Hence,  there  is  no  need  for  interpolating  the  declen- 
sion of  the  eighteenth  century  into  the  prophecy,  no  room  for 
such  additions  to  the  words  of  this  book,  as  that  "  the  voice  of 
the  144,000  waxed  fainter  and  feebler,  and  the  tokens  of  their 
presence  more  obscure  in  all  the  coyitinental  Protestant  coun- 
tries and  churches"  (the  light  of  England  burning  brighter  !). 

Of  the  second  division — the  angel  with  everlasting  glad  tidings 
— I  have  said  enough  already  to  show  why  I  cannot  allow  any- 
thing save  a  general  reference  either  to  the  era  of  the  Reform- 
ers, or  to  that  of  recent  missionary  societies.  And  I  take  this 
opportunity  of  stating  my  conviction  that  the  Reformation, 
blessed  as  it  was  in  breaking  the  dominion  of  Popery,  in  spread- 
ing the  Bible  and  Bible-reading  far  and  wide,  and  in  asserting 
strongly,  if  not  clearly,  justification  by  faith,  did  not  bring  out 
the  light  of  God  even  as  to  regeneration,  and  maintained  sub- 
stantially the  same  clerical  system  as  before.  That  is.  Reformed 
doctrine  and  polity  fail  utterly,  as  a  confession  of  the  truth  of 
the  Holy  Ghost's  operations,  whether  in  regeneration  or  yet 
more  in  His  sovereign  action  in  the  Christian  assembly.  Jus- 
tification, as  then  understood,  did  not  necessarily  suppose  per- 
ception of  God's  mind  as  to  the  operations  of  the  Spirit.     It  is 

*  Mr.  M'=Causland  (Latter  Days  of  Jerusalem  and  Rome,  pp.  154-160,  398-400) 
falls  into  a  singular  cycle  of  errors  :  first,  that  the  same  company  are  intended  in  Eev. 
vii.  and  xiv. ;  secondly,  that  they  are  the  faitliful  Jews  before  Christ's  first  advent ; 
thirdly,  that  the  second  company  in  chap.  vii.  (ver.  9-11)  are  in  no  way  Gentile, 
but  a  yet  future  class  of  the  redeemed  of  Israel  to  be  taken  out  of  the  nations,  &e., 
whither  they  are  now  dispersed  ;  fourthly,  that  these  in  chap.  xiv.  have  the  name 
of  the  Father  upon  their  foreheads — not  the  name  of  Christ,  whereas  the  true  text 
(represented  by  all  the  known  uncials,  ABC,  upwards  of  forty  cursives,  nearly  all 
the  ancient  versions  with  the  Greek  and  Latin  fathers)  expressly  says  "  having  his 
(the  Lamb's)  name  and  his  Father's  name."  Besides,  the  insertion  of  ws,  "  as  it 
were,"  before  "the  new  song,"  is  by  no  means  certain.  It  is  omitted  by  the  Vatican 
uncial  and  nearly  forty  cursives,  most  versions,  Origen,  Methodius,  Arethas,  &«. 


FAILURE    OF    THE    HISTORICAL    SYSTEM.  273 

to  me  clear  and  certain  that  the  Reformed  national  bodies  have 
never  been  free  from  fundamental  error  on  these  subjects,  which 
are  of  capital  moment  both  to  individuals  and  to  the  Church. 

One  might  expect,  I  think,  that  if  the  proclamation  of  Baby- 
lon's fall  (ver.  8)  had  been  fulfilled,  those  who  so  think  would  have 
tried  to  make  out  some  show  of  facts  to  account  for  its  appear- 
ance here,  after  the  epoch  of  evangelic  missions.  It  may  be 
alleged  that  it  is  something  yet  future.  But  such  does  not  appear 
to  be  Mr.  E.'s  opinion,  because  he  joins  on  the  inessage  of  this 
angel,  with  hardly  a  shred  of  comment,  to  that  of  the  angel 
evangelist ;  and  distinctly  dwells  on  the  third  flying  angel  as  yet 
unfulfilled.  May  we  not  then  press  the  query  :  What  has  just 
taken  place  at  all  adequately  answering  to  the  second  angel's 
mission  ? 

As  to  the  third  flying  angel,  Mr.  E.  thinks  its  prefiguration 
requires,  among  other  things,  a  sufiiciently  general  agreement 
among  Christ's  faithful  Protestant  servants  as  to  what  is  meant 
both  by  the  Beast  and  the  Beast's  Image  to  give  weight  to  the 
judgment  denounced  against  their  worshippers.  That  is,  if  I 
understand  him,  that  there  is  to  be  a  general  acquiescence  in  the 
system  of  the  Horae  Apocalypticae,  an  abandonment  of  all 
reference  to  the  secular  Roman  empire,  and  an  adoption  of  the 
discovery  that  the  Beast's  image  means  the  general  councils  of 
Papal  Christendom,  especially  of  Trent.  I  am  assured  that  the 
impression  on  the  mind  of  most  intelligent  Christians  is  grow- 
ingly  opposed  to  such  theories,  and  that  the  absoluteness  of  the 
warning  as  to  any  individual  who  worships  the  Beast,  ifec,  cannot, 
save  by  a  violence  which  convinces  no  dispassionate  person,  be 
said  to  be  fulfilled  in  Popery,  abominable  as  the  system  is.  In 
the  crisis  of  Antichrist,  it  will  be  literally  true.  Compare  2 
Thess.  ii.  10-12. 

The  harvest  and  the  vintage  call  for  no  especial  remark,  as 
there  is  no  question  of  their  futurity,  and  Christ  is  admitted  to  be 
viewed  therein  as  the  initiator  and  completor  of  these  final  judg- 
ments. Why  they  should  not  indicate  the  time  of  His  great 
predicted  second  advent,  does  not  clearly  appear.  (H.  A.,  Vol. 
iv.,  p.  11.)  In  reality,  there  is  no  ground  to  doubt  it,  as  far  as 
I  see.  The  fact  of  a  distinct  subsequent  vision  of  the  conflict 
with  the  Beast  does  not  hinder  this.  They  may  all  well  be 
various  parts  or  acts  of  judgment  when  He  comes  in  the  clouds 
of  heaven. 


19 


274  ANOTHER    SIGN    IN    HBAVEN, 


CHAPTER    XV. 

We  are  now  come  to  a  new  division  of  the  book.  The  last 
three  chapters  (xii.  xiii.  xiv.)  formed  a  most  important  portion 
to  themselves  ;  they  gave  the  whole  history  of  the  closing  deal- 
ings of  God,  and  of  the  last  plans  of  Satan,  as  far  as  the  present 
dispensation  is  concerned.  And  not  only  that ;  but  before 
either  Satan's  ways  or  God's  dealings  were  brought  out,  there 
was  the  hidden  source  of  both  entered  into.  We  saw  in  chap, 
xii.  the  victorious  man-child  born,  and  the  dragon  and  his  angels 
cast  down  from  heaven.  Thus,  ^ye  have  the  two  great  parties 
in  the  scene  with  their  chiefs  face  to  face,  as  it  were.  Whatever 
might  have  been  the  instruments  of  Satan's  power  here  below, 
seen  in  chap,  xiii.,  and  whatever  the  ways  of  God  in  His  grace 
or  in  His  judgments  in  chap,  xiv.,  all  flowed  down  from  that 
man-child,  the  object  of  Satan's  fear  and  hatred.  Now  we 
come  to  a  new  subject.  There  was  a  great  wonder  or  sign 
spoken  of  in  chap.  xii.  1.  Here  it  is  said,  "  And  I  saAv  another 
sign  in  heaven,  great  and  marvellous,  seven  angels  having  the 
seven  last  plagues  ;  for  in  them  is  filled  up  the  wrath  of  God." 
We  are  resuming  once  more  the  course  of  historical  events. 
Under  the  last  trumpet  you  may  remember  the  word  was,  "the 
nations  were  wroth,  and  thy  wrath  is  come."  Now  I  think  it 
must  naturally  strike  any  one,  that  here  God's  wrath  is  come, 
and  the  nations  not  merely  angry,  but  blaspheming  to  the  last 
degree.  So  far  each  fresh  stroke  of  God,  instead  of  humbling 
man,  only  drew  out  this  intensity  of  enmity  against  the  Lord. 
The  seventh  trumpet  brought  lis  up  to  the  close,  in  a  general 
way  ;  and  here  we  have  some  of  the  details,  but  not  all.  There 
were  two  parties  described  under  the  vials  that  we  have  more 
particularly  afterwards.  Chap.  xvii.  refers  to  Babylon  and  the 
Beast  in  their  mutual  relations.  In  chap,  xviii.  we  have  the 
destruction  of  Babylon,  and  in  chap.  xix.  the  judgment  of  the 
Beast. 

There  is  another  remark  also  I  must  make.  Chap.  xiv.  gives 
us  these  events  all  together.  We  had  there  what  I  may  call  the 
religious  actings  of  God  :  God  dealing  with  man  on  the  earth, 
as  accountable  for  the  use  or  abuse  of  revealed  light  and  respon- 
sible to  own   and    worship   God    alone.     These   vials   take  up 


CHRONOLOGICAL  PLACE  OF  BABYLOn's  FALL,      275 

rather  the  outward  civil  history  or  secular  condition  of  man, 
though  the  same  thing*  may,  in  certain  cases,  have  both  a  reli- 
gious bearing  and  a  secular  one.  ^  For  instance,  Babylon  has : 
she  is  evidently  the  great  corrupt  and  corrupting  thing  in 
religion  ;  but  that  does  not  hinder  Babylon  from  meddling 
largely  in  the  things  of  the  world.  And,  in  ftict,  this  is  one  of 
the  evils  which  form  Babylon  —  the  bringing  in  of  the  things  of 
the  world  even  in  spiritual  things,  and  thus  producing  confusion, 
hateful  to  God  and  most  seductive  to  men.  Hence  we  get 
Babylon  in  chap.  xiv.  as  well  as  in  chap.  xvi.  Chapter  xiv. 
gives  us  a  summary  of  God's  dealings  at  the  end  of  the  age  in 
respect  of  religious  things,  whether  bright  or  dark  :  grace,  testi- 
mony, and  judgment.  It  thus  helps  us  a  good  deal  as  to  put- 
ting the  closing  events  in  the  order  in  which  they  come  to  pass. 
For  instance,  the  fall  of  Babylon  is  the  third  thing  brought 
before  us  in  the  series  of  chap,  xiv.  First,  there  is  the  complete 
remnant  of  godly  suffering  Jews  —  a  holy  remnant,  associated 
by  grace  with  the  Lamb,  i.e.,  on  Zion.  Tben  there  is  the  testi- 
mony of  everlasting  glad  tidings  to  the  earth  and  all  nations. 
And,  thirdly,  there  is  the  fall  of  Babylon.  On  the  other  hand, 
in  the  vials,  the  fall  of  Babylon  is  the  last  of  the  seven.  From 
this  we  gather,  that  the  judgments  set  forth  by  the  preceding 
six  vials  must  be  before  the  fall  of  Babylon.  That  is,  the  first 
six  vials  may  be  successively  accomplished  while  the  Jewish 
remnant  is  being  formed,  and  the  everlasting  gospel  is  going- 
out  to  the  Gentiles.  The  last  vial  involves  the  fall  of  Babylon, 
which  answers  to  and  is  the  third  link  in  the  chain  of  events 
given  us  in  chap.  xiv.  This  is  of  importance,  in  order  to  hinder 
confusion.  The  warning  touching  the  worship  of  the  beast,  the 
pronounced  blessedness  of  those  who  died  in  the  Lord,  the  har- 
vest, and  the  vintage  of  the  earth,  are  clearly  all  events  subse- 
quent to  Babylon's  fall. 

Having  had,  then,  the  general  and  orderly  view  of  God's 
ways  both  in  mercy  and  judgment,  now  we  learn  in  chap.  xvi. 
a  part  of  these  ways,  the  details  of  some  of  which  are  connected 
with  chap.  xiv.  8,  and  perhaps  simultaneous  with  what  precedes 
that  verse.  It  must  not  be  supposed,  therefore,  that  the  vials 
take  place  after  chap.  xiv. ;  the  earlier  ones  might  take  place 
while  the  remnant  spoken  of  there  is  being  formed,  and  the 
testimony  going  out.  Or  they  might  occur  rapidly  after  these, 
and  before  the  fall  of  Babylon.  But,  certainly,  the  last  vial 
includes  the  fall  of  Babylon,  and  its  fall  is,  as  clearly,  before  the 
very  solemn  events  which  follow  that  announcement  in  the 
latter  part  of  chap.  xiv. 


276  SEA    OF    GLASS    MINGLED    WITH    FIRE. 

But,  now,  let  us  look  a  little  at  the  scene  introductory  to  the 
vials.  "  I  saw,  as  it  were,  a  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire." 
This  is  a  type  borrowed,  though  with  changes,  from  the  temple.* 
The  tabernacle  had  the   laver,  the    temple  its  molten  sea — a 

*  Simple  as  this  may  appear,  the  force  of  tlie  sea  of  glass  has  been,  in  my 
judgment,  entirely  misunderstood  both  here  and  in  chap.  iv.  by  Mr.  Elliott  and 
others.  Thus,  in  the  Horae  Apoc.  i.  pp.  79,  80,  the  singular  error  of  Yitringa  is 
adopted,  which  confounds  it  with  the  firmament  like  the  terrible  crystal  of 
Ezekiel ;  and  in  a  note  it  is  objected  to  the  true  reference,  1.  that  John  is  describ- 
ing what  was  in  the  inner  sanctuary,  not  in  the  court  without;  2.  that  it  is 
represented  as  of  glass,  not  brazen  ;  and,  3.  that  there  is  no  allusion  to  the  laver 
in  any  of  llie  Apocalyptic  visions.  The  reply  is  obvious.  1.  The  Spirit  of  God 
distinctly  applies  the  position  of  souls  under  the  altar  in  chap.  vi.  to  the  souls  of 
martyrs  in  heaven.  Now,  the  altar  and  the  laver  were  equally  in  the  court.  Com- 
pare also  chap,  viii.,  where  both  altars  are  found  iu  the  same  heavenly  scene,  in 
contradistinction  to  the  earth.  2.  The  vessel  is  not  denied  to  be  made  of  glass  ; 
but  the  meaning  is  that  the  sea,  or  what  answered  to  it,  was  of  glass,  not  water. 
3.  The  last  is  not  a  reason,  but  an  assumption  of  the  very  question.  I  should  be 
disposed  to  put  the  converse,  and  to  ask,  whether  it  would  not  be  strange  in  the 
midst  of  temple-scenery  so  marked  to  have  nothing  answering  to  the  molten  sea. 
If  the  "sea"  here  be  the  counterpart  of  the  "  sea"  in  Kings  and  Clironicles,  then 
the  laver  is  alluded  to  in  these  visions. — Next,  it  is  argued  (H.  A.  iii.  pp.  436, 
437),  that  were  the  "sea"  in  Eev.  xv.  a  re-mention  of  that  in  chap,  iv.,  the  defi- 
nite article  ought  to  have  been  prefixed  ;  nay,  that  even  on  its  first  mention,  it 
was  entitled  to  the  article  because  of  its  notoriety.  Here  again,  the  answer  is 
manifest.  The  seven  golden  lamp-stands  of  Rev.  i.  nobody  doubts  to  be  an  allu- 
sion to  the  well  known  candlestick  of  the  Jewish  sanctuary,  and  yet  there  is 
no  article  on  their  first  occurrence.  If  the  reason  ot  its  omission  here,  as  distia- 
ffuished  from  the  altars  and  the  ark,  is  due  to  the  striking  diflerence  between  them, 
(the  Jewish  one  being  single  and  sev'n-branched,  the  Apocalyptic  consisting  of 
seven  separate  lamps,)  the  same  remark  applies  to  our  question;  for  w'ater  was 
the  point  in  the  Jewish  temple-sea,  glass  is  as  express  in  the  Apocalyptic — 
because  the  purifying  of  those  in  relation  with  it  was  complete.  So,  again,  it  is 
no  wonder  that  in  chap.  xv.  the  article  is  not  prefixed,  seeing  that  another  change 
appears  there.  It  is,  for  the  first  time,  a  sea  "  mingled  with  fire,"  emblematic  of 
the  excessively  severe  trial  through  which  the  victors  had  passed.  The  analogy 
of  Apocalyptic  usage  also  confirms  this  ;  for  the  "  Beast"  is  anarthrous  in  chaps, 
xiii.  1  xvii.  3,  though,  as  I  agree  with  Mr.  E.,  it  is  the  same  power  already 
mentioned  in  chap.  xi.  7.  And  what  is  offered  in  lieu  of  the  temple-sea  ?  The 
burnin"  lava  of  a  volcano,  or  overflow  of  French  revolutionary  fury  inundating 
tlie  Anti  Christian  territory  of  continental  Europe  ;  and,  naturally',  the  harpers 
represent  the  triumphs  of  living  revived  Protestantism  in  insular  England  under 
Wilberforce  now  (as  formerly  tlierc  had  been  for  others  under  Augustine  and 
Luther)  !  As  a  sea  of  lava  or  even  of  water  would  be  an  incongruous  place  whereon 
to  stand,  one  cannot  be  surprised  that  "on  the  sea"  has  been  changed  into  Jy, 
which  I  admit  the  preposition  will  bear.  On  my  view,  however,  its  more  ordi- 
nary meaning  holds  good.- -Mr.  E.  lays  stress  on  iK  tov  6.  k.  t.  A.  as  implying 
not' only  conquest  over,  but  sej^aration  from,  the  party  conquered.  Can  it  be, 
because  his  supposed  harpers  were  not  in  any  way  within  the  fiery  scene  of  tribula- 
tion? I  should  rather  infer  that  they  had  been  iu  the  furnace,  but  were  come 
victors  out  of  all.  Again,  the  reasoning  on  the  present  participle  is  unsound 
(H.  A.  iii.  pp.  433-435),  for  nothing  is  more  common,  when  accompanied  by  the 
article,  than  its  abstract  use.  Thus,  to  take  the  first  which  presents  itself,  iu 
Matt.  ii.  20,  ol  (riTovTes  certainly  does  not  imply  that  they  were  still  in  the  field. 
Compare  also  Rev.  vii.  14,  said  of  a  multitude  which  is  anticipatively  viewed  as 
already  in  the  rest  of  God.     It  is,  I  believe,  just  the  same  in  chap.  xv. 


"and  over  his  mark"  spurious.  277 

larger  vessel,  but  of  a  similar  nature,  in  which  the  priests  used 
to  wash  their  feet  and  hands  when  they  went  in  to  do  the  service 
of  the  Lord.  In  this  case,  it  is  a  sea  of  glass,  and  therefore  not 
used  for  purification.  It  was  not  a  sea  of  water,  but  was  solid. 
Its  being  of  glass  indicates  a  state  of  iirm  and  settled  purity. 
It  was  not  that  which  was  used  to  cleanse,  but  the  image  of 
purity  that  nothing  can  defile.  These  saints  are  no  longer  in  the 
circumstances  where  they  have  need  of  cleansing  through  the 
washing  of  water  by  the  word.  That  was  over.  Now  it  was 
"a  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire;"  showing  plainly  through 
what  circumstances  those  connected  with  that  sea  had  passed. 
They  had  experienced  fiery  tribulation,  they  had  glorified  God 
in  the  fires.  This  plainly  does  not  refer  to  the  Church.  "  In 
the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation  : "  that  is  true  of  us.  But 
this  refers  to  a  special  tribulation — '■'•the  tribulation"  of  which 
Scripture  frequently  speaks.  "  I  saw  as  it  were  a  sea  of  glass 
mingled  with  fire  :  and  them  that  had  gotten  the  victory  over 
the  Beast,  and  over  his  image,"  (clearly,  then,  they  are  contem- 
poraries of  the  Beast,)  "and  over  his  mark,  and  over  the  num- 
ber of  his  name,  stand  on  the  sea  of  glass,  having  the  harps  of 
God."  Thus,  what  is  referred  to  here  is  not  washing  in  the  sea, 
but  standing  on  it.  Their  earthly  circumstances  characterize 
them  ;  but  the  scene  of  conflict  is  now  past.  The  Spirit  of 
God  anticipates  all  which  marks  those  who  had  been  troubled 
by  the  beast,  but  who  are  viewed  as  victorious  over  him.  They 
were  persons  that  had  been  cleansed  already  ;  they  had  done  with 
the  present  scene,  and  were  now  out  of  it  all.  They  were 
standing  on  the  sea  of  glass.  Not  only  this,  but  they  had 
"  harps  of  God."  That  is,  they  are  occupied  with  perfect  joy 
and  praise — the  contrast  of  all  that  they  had  passed  through. 

I  would  just  observe,  though  it  is  a  slight  circumstance,  that 
there  is  a  little  clause  here  which  should  be  left  out.  It  is  said 
in  verse  2,  "  them  that  had  gotten  the  victory  over  the  Beast, 
and  over  his  image,  and  over  his  mark,  and  over  the  number  of 
his  name."  But  the  clause  "and  over  his  mark"  has  no  busi- 
ness here  whatever.  The  same  thing  occurs  in  chap,  xiii.  1 7  : 
"  that  no  man  might  buy  or  sell,  save  he  that  had  the  mark,  or 
the  name  of  the  Beast,  or  the  number  of  his  name."  Now  the 
truth  is  that  the  little  word  "  or,"  inserted  there  before  the 
clause  "  the  name  of  the  Beast"  ought  to  disappear.  The  ditfisr- 
ence  in  the  sense  is  that  "the  mark"  might  be  either  the  name 
of  the  Beast  or  the  number  of  his  name ;  not  some  third  thing- 
distinct  from  these  two,  as  the  ordinary  text  might  suggest. 
There  were  two  ways  in  which  the  Beast  marked  his  followers ;  one 


278  THE    SONG    OF    MOSES, 

was  by  his  name,  and  the  other  by  the  number  of  his  name : 
bat  there  would  be  no  sense  in  saying,  "  the  mark,  or  the  name 
of  the  Beast,  or  the  number  of  his  name."  The  number  was  his 
mark,  though  not  the  only  one  ;  there  was  the  name  besides — 
the  one,  I  suppose,  being  closer  and  more  appropriate  than  the 
other.  Here,  then,  were  those  (chap,  xv.)  who  had  gotten  the 
victory  over  the  Beast,  and  over  his  image,  and  over  the  number 
of  his  name.  Even  in  the  English  Bible,  the  word  "  and  over 
the  number"  is  printed  in  italics,  and  only  adds  to  the  confusion 
with  the  words,  "  over  his  mark."  I  refer  to  it  to  show  that 
wherever  there  is  even  such  a  little  word  as  "  or"  introduced  by 
man  into  the  Scripture,  the  sense  is  impaired.  In  the  language 
which  the  Spirit  uses,  it  is  but  a  letter  that  makes  the  differ- 
ence :  but  you  cannot  even  put  a  letter  into  the  word  of  God, 
without  so  far  injuj-ing  its  beauty  and  perfectness.  Through 
the  mercy  of  God,  His  children  may  get  little  harm  through 
such  blemishes  ;  but  it  is  in  part,  because  they  do  not  think 
enough  about  it.  If  they  were  to  work  a  system  out  of  them, 
they  might  fall  into  some  serious  mistake  in  certain  cases.  But 
happily  (that  is  the  way  God  mercifully  shields  them)  they  do 
not  really  receive  the  false  doctrine  ;  they  do  not  know  what  it 
means,  and  therefore  leave  it.  But  evidently  God  does  not 
intend  that  persons  should  merely  escape  error  because  they  do 
not  understand  it.  It  is  the  mercy  of  God  thus  to  preserve  His 
people  from  evil ;  but  it  is  rather  His  overruling  hand  than  the 
intelligent  guidance  of  the  Spirit.  The  Book  of  Revelation  has 
suffered  more  than  any  other  from  the  carelessness  of  man  ;  and 
as  we  are  looking  into  its  contents,  and  it  is  so  desirable  for 
God's  children  to  have  clear  thoughts  about  His  word,  I  thought 
it  better  to  notice  it,  however  small  a  matter  it  may  appear.  I 
remember  having  myself  been  perplexed  to  make  out  the  differ- 
ence between  the  mark  of  the  Beast  and  its  name  and  its  num- 
ber. But  having  examined  the  question  more  closely,  I  found 
that  there  was  really  nothing  to  decide  about.  A  little  fox  had 
slipped  in  and  spoiled  the  vine.  In  short,  the  mark  was  not 
something  different  from  the  name  or  its  number,  but  was  the 
general  term  for  both — the  name  expressing  probably  a  more 
intimate  and  entire  subjection  to  the  Beast  than  the  number  of 
his  name. 

We  find  that  those  who  had  won  the  victory  over  the  Beast, 
were  not  his  creatures  or  slaves  ;  they  were  the  servants  of  God. 
Here  they  were  seen  standing  in  conscious  victory,  outside  all 
the  scene  of  their  conflicts,  having  the  harps  of  God.  And  they 
sing  :  it  is  intelligent  praise.    "  They  sing  the  song  of  Moses,  the 


AND    THE    SONG    OF    THE    LAMB.  279 

servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb."  Thei'e  is  a  double 
character  in  their  praise,  quite  different  from  the  song  of  the 
elders.  It  is  very  blessed,  but  not  the  same  thing.  The  strain 
of  the  elders  was  far  deeper.  These  saints  are  not  here  spoken 
of  as  priests  of  God,  much  less  the  heads  of  heavenly  priesthood ; 
nor  have  they  the  emblems  of  royal  dignity.  They  sing  the 
song  of  Moses.  They  were  true  saints,  but  with  an  undoubtedly 
Jewish  character.  They  sing  the  song  of  the  Lamb  too.  If 
they  did  not  know  the  Saviour,  they  would  not  be  saints  at  all. 
But  withal  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses.  They  will  not  stand 
exactly  in  the  christian  position  that  we  now  enjoy.  They  will 
be  in  circumstances  of  trial,  when  the  Church  has  passed  out  of 
the  scene  into  heaven.  But  still  the  Lord  will  have  a  company 
of  saints  then  who  will  suffer  for  Him  even  unto  death  ;  for  the 
Beast  has  power  to  slay — and  it  may  be  thus,  that,  by  their  own 
blood,  as  well  as  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,*  they  gain  the  victory 
over  him.  So  here  they  are  seen  at  rest,  like  Israel  of  old,  on 
the  triumphant  side  of  the  Red  Sea,  to  which  there  seems  an  allu- 
sion ;  as  the  plagues  of  the  next  chapiter  clearly  refer  to  those 
that  fell  upon  the  land  of  Egypt.  "  They  sing  the  song  of 
Moses,  the  servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb,  saying. 
Great  and  marvellous  are  thy  works,  O  Lord  God,  the  Almighty  : 
just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  King  of  the  nations  (ver.  3)." 
Now  if  we  look  at  Psalm  ciii.  7,  we  lind  that  the  Holy  Ghost  brings 
into  prominence  these  two  things — the  ways  of  Jehovah  and  His 
acts.  "  He  made  known  his  ways  unto  Moses,  his  acts  unto 
the  children  of  Israel."  The  distinction  is  between  the  deep, 
hidden  ways  of  the  Lord  which  Moses  knew,  and  the  public 
acts  which  were  conspicuous  before  all  Israel.  Here  these 
saints  take  up,  not  His  ways  first,  but  His  displayed  works. 
"  Great  and  marvellous  are  thy  works,  O  Lord  God,  the  Al- 
mighty." And  then  they  rise  to  celebrate  His  ways.  "  Just 
and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  King  of  the  nations" — I  must  say 
so,  for  King  of  saints  is  a  thing  unknown  in  any  part  of  the 
Bible.  But  King  of  nations,  given  in  the  margin,  is  most  true. 
It  is  a  reference  to  Jeremiah  x. :  "  Thou  art  great,  (ver.  6,)  and 
thy  name  is  great  in  might.  Who  would  not  fear  thee,  O  King 
of  nations?"  Just  to  show  how  this  falls  in  with  the  general 
truth  of  Scripture,  I  would  observe  that,  while  Christ  is  King, 
yea  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  Lords,  and  while  it  is  our  joy  to 
acknowledge  it,  (for  Christians,  indeed,  are  the  only  persons 
now  who  rightly  know  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  be  King ;)  yet 

*  Of  course,  the  Lamb's  blood  alono  avails  for  siu  with  Grod. 


280  CHRIST    IS    OUR    HEAD,    OUR    BRIDEGROOM, 

it  is  remarkable  how  the  Holy  Ghost  avoids  calling  Him  King 
in  relation  to  the  Church.  I  am  aware  that  well-known  hymns 
may  speak  of  Him  as  "  Our  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King."  Scrip- 
ture often  calls  Him  King,  but  never  in  that  relation  to  us.*  Of 
course,  the  object  of  God's  word  is  not  to  weaken  our  subjection 
to  Christ.  Whatever  weakens  that,  comes  not  from  the  Spirit, 
but  from  Satan.  But,  is  it  not  plain,  that  the  relation  of  a  king 
and  people  is  not  so  close  and  binding,  neither  is  it  so  full  and 
all-embracing  in  its  authority,  nor  does  it  involve  such  elements 
of  affection  as  the  relationship  of  Bridegroom,  or  of  the  Head  ? 
And  this  is  the  way  in  which  Scripture  views  the  Church. 
There  is  the  deepest  and  most  constant  subjection,  but  it  is  that 
of  members  to  their  Head,  of  the  bride  to  the  Bridegroom. 
Thus  is  the  Church  subject  to  Christ.  It  is  true  that  we  are 
translated  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son,  but  in  what 
capacity  ?  He  has  made  us  Jiings  in  it.  So  we  are  represented 
as  singing,  in  the  first  chapter  of  this  very  prophecy,  "  Unto 
him  that  loveth  us  and  hath  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own 
blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  his 
Father."  While  it  is  perfectly  certain,  then,  that  we  are  in  the 
kingdom,  yet  are  we  there  not  as  subjects,  though  assuredly 
subject.  We  joyfully  own  Christ  as  our  Lord,  whose  grace  has 
made  us  kings  with  Him,  and  not  as  a  mere  people  at  a  distance 
under  Him.  That  in  no  way  lessens  our  responsibility  to  obey 
Him,  any  more  than  it  takes  from  His  glory.  It  puts  us  in 
the  place  of  showing  obedience  on  a  firmer  ground  and  from 
higher  motives  ;  it  is  not  the  weakness  of  flesh  under  law,  but 
the  heart  purified  by  faith  and  strengthened  by  grace.  He  fills 
us  with  a  sense  of  the  glory,  of  which  we  are  joint-heirs  with 
Himself.  He  raises  us  in  hope  to  the  throne  ;  but  the  effect  is 
that,  even  in  heaven,  we  shall  fall  down  and  cast  our  crowns 
before  Him.  He  loves  that  our  obedience  should  take,  as  it 
were,  the  form  of  worship.  So  we  see  how  the  Lord  preserves 
these  two  things  intact.  On  the  one  hand,  He  delights  that  we 
should  look  up  and  know  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  ever  immea- 
surably above  us ;  but  then,  on  the  other  hand,  Christ  has  set 
us  now  in  earnest  of  the  Spirit,  as  by  and  by  in  possession,  upon 
thrones,  that  He  may  show  that  it  is  not  merely  as  servants, 
nor  as  a  people,  that  we  are  subject,  but  as  those  whom  His 

*  Mr.  E.  hesitatingly  inclines  to  "  King  of  ages"  in  his  text  (H.  A.  iii.,  p.  440)  ; 
but  in  his  note  he  ventures  the  opinion  that  the  (undoubtedly  false)  vulgar  reading 
ayluv  seems  "  best  of  all  to  suit  the  context."  To  me  this  reluctance  to  bow  to 
the  best  reading  (supported  by  the  Alex,  and  Vat.  uncials,  forty-five  cursives,  the 
Aethiopic,  Arabic  of  the  Polyglotts,  Coptic,  Slav,  mss.,  Greek  and  some  Latin 
fathers,)  is  not  happy. 


AND    KING    OF    THE    NAX^ONS.  281 

perfect  and  divine  love  has  associated  with  Himself;  for  we  are 
one  with  Him.  He  will  put  us  on  thrones  around  Him  —  on 
His  own  throne  ;  but  even  then  subjection  to  Christ  can  never 
disappear.  Never  will  it  be  anything  else,  whether  in  the  king- 
dom or  in  the  eternal  state.  Wherever  you  look,  never  can 
the  Church  so  far  forg'et  what  she  owes  her  Lord  and  Bride- 
groom as  to  wish  it  otherwise.  It  were  to  abuse  His  grace,  to 
take  from  His  glory  ;  and  the  Church  must  and  ought  to  resent 
that.  If  the  elders,  at  the  sight  only  of  His  taking  the  book, 
fall  down  before  the  Lamb  and  worship,  much  more  should  the 
thought  of  any  indignity  offered  to  Him  call  forth  the  strongest 
feelings  of  indignation  and  horror.  The  Church  may  be  and  is 
loved  of  Christ :  but  in  anywise  to  take  equal  ground  with  Him, 
were  tQ  display  that  spirit  of  antichrist,  "  whereof  we  have 
heard  that  it  shall  come  and  even  now  already  is  it  in  the 
world." 

"  Just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  king  of  nations."  If  I 
apprehend  aright,  the  reason  why  "  nations"  are  introduced  here, 
is  that  these  vials  were  about  to  be  poured  out  very  particularly 
upon  the  Gentiles.  Under  the  trumpets,  and  in  chaps,  xii.-xiv., 
we  had  the  Jews,  or  at  least  the  Jewish  remnant,  in  an  especial 
way  the  object  of  covenant  mercy.  The  very  phrase  (chap,  xi.), 
"  the  ark  of  his  covenant,"  connects  itself  with  that  nation,  for 
the  covenant  was  made  with  them.  Therefore  we  saw,  too,  that 
the  woman  in  the  next  chapter  (chap,  xii.)  represented  Israel. 
Then  we  had  the  remnant  of  godly  Jews.  (chap,  xiv.)  But 
now  these  saints  are  celebrating  the  righteous  ways  of  God 
with  the  Gentiles,  or  nations.  He  is  King  of  nations  —  not 
merely  of  the  Jews.  Jewish  relationships  appear  in  both,  but 
they  are  distinct  visions,  opened  each  by  a  very  different  sign. 

"Who  shall  not  fear  thee,  O  Lord,  and  glorify  thy  name? 
for  thou  only  art  holy,  for  all  nations  shall  come  and  worship 
before  thee,  for  thy  judgments  were  made  manifest."  The  word 
used  for  "  holy"  here,  is  an  unusual  one.  It  is  the  same  that  is 
used  where  Scripture  speaks  of  the  mercies  of  David,  and  its 
Hebrew  counterpart  is  frequently  used  in  the  Psalms.  For 
there  are  two  words  used  in  both  languages  to  express  holiness. 
There  is  the  common  word  for  "  holy,"  which,  for  instance, 
occurs  in  Rev.  iv.  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  Almighty." 
That  always  implies  separation  from  evil — absolute  separation. 
The  holiness  spoken  of  here  implies  mercy,  which  is  exceedingly 
sweet.  We  are  about  to  hear  of  the  vials,  and  the  first  thought 
would  be,  "  how  dreadful ! "  God's  wrath  is  going  to  be  fulfilled. 
But  who  and  what  is  the  God  whose  wrath  is  about  to  be  con- 


282  THE  TEMPLE  OF  THE  TABERNACLE, 

suramated  ?  He  whose  holiness  is  full  of  mercy.  "  Thou  only 
art  holy."  It  is  the  holiness  of  mercy.  "  For  all  nations  shall 
come  and  worship  before  thee;  for  thy  judgments  were  made 
manifest."  They  look  through  the  judgments,  and  they  see  the 
end  of  the  Lord  ;  and  the  end  always  is  that  "  the  Lord  is  very 
pitiful  and  of  tender  mercy."  So  that,*  though  there  may  be 
this  storm  of  judgment  about  to  fall,  they  look  to  the  end  from 
the  beginning,  and  they  celebrate  accordingly  the  holiness  of 
the  One  who  in  judgment  remembers  mercy.  No  doubt  there 
must  be  wrath,  and  God  must  complete  it,  because  the  first  out- 
pouring of  it  will  only  make  men  the  more  hardened.  But, 
you  will  observe,  it  is  not  a  question  of  Christ ;  there  is  no  such 
thing  as  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  here,  not  even  in  men's  minds  ; 
it  is  the  wrath  of  God.  In  chap.  xiv.  he  who  reaps  the  harvest 
is  the  Son  of  Man,  But  here  God  acts  according  to  His  own 
mind,  before  Christ  comes  from  heaven  to  execute  wrath.  This 
evinces  that  the  vials  end  before  the  final  judgments  of  chap. 
xiv.  commence,  because  the  close  of  the  chapter  shows  us  the 
Son  of  Man  coming  Himself  to  execute  judgment. 

And  therefore  they  can  say,  as  they  look  up,  "  Who  shall  not 

fear  thee,  O   Lord  ? for  thou   only  art  holy  :    for  all 

nations  shall  come  and  worship  before  thee  ;  for  thy  judgments 
are  made  manifest."  (Ver.  4.)  Another  important  truth ;  for, 
as  we  are  told  in  Isaiah  xxvi.,  as  long  as  God  is  showing  mercy, 
what  does  man  ?  He  takes  advantage  of  it  and  refuses  to  learn 
righteousness.  But  the  time  comes  when  the  Lord  will  lift  up 
His  arm  in  judgment ;  and  what  then  ?  "  When  thy  judgments 
are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn  righteous- 
ness." So  here,  "  All  nations  shall  come  and  worship  before 
thee  ;  for  thy  judgments  were  made  manifest."  Such  would  be 
the  ultimate  result. 

The  prophet,  again,  looks,  "and  the  temple*  of  the  tabernacle 
of  the  testimony  in  heaven  was  opened."  (Ver.  5.)  Mark  the  dif- 
ference. In  ver.  19  of  chap.  xi.  (which  introduces  the  scene  of 
chaps,  xii.-xiv,  before  the  vials),  the  temple  was  opened  in  heaven, 
and  the  ark  of  His  covenant  seen,  but  no  ark  is  seen  now.  There 
it  was  the  fit  pledge  of  the  security  of  God's  faithfulness — of  His 

*  It  is  extraordinary  that  the  author  of  the  Horae  Apoc.  should  say  that  va6s, 
or  temple,  is  sometimes  used  more  largely  of  the  whole,  includiug  the  altar-court ; 
stranger  still  that  he  should  cite  Rev.  xi.  1,  2,  in  proof,  seeing  that  tbe  altar  and 
the  outer  court  are  so  expressly  distinguished  there,  as  I  believe  always.  There  is 
another  word  to  comprehend  all,  namely  lep6v,  which  is  never  used  in  the  Apoca- 
lypse, though  it  occurs  repeatedly  in  other  parts  of  the  New  Tcstamcut.  So,  also, 
the  door  of  the  tabernacle  and  the  hanging  at  the  court-gate  are  not  confounded  in 
Scripture. 


WHENCE    JUDGMENT    PROCEEDS.  283 

unchanging  purposes  towards  His  people  Israel.  But  here  His 
enemies  are  in  question,  rather  than  His  people  ;  and  there  is 
nothing  hut  the  tabernacle  of  the  testimony,  which  is  inaugu- 
rated, as  it  were,  in  judgments  on  the  men  of  the  earth.  It  is 
opened  for  wrath  as  yet,  not  for  gospel  triumphs.  It  is  God's  testi- 
mony judicially  to  the  condition  of  man.  Man  is  guilty  ;  what 
then  could  result?  "  The  seven  angels  came  out  of  the  temple." 
And  terrible  to  say,  they  come  out  of  that  in  which  no  ark  was 
now  seen.  And  what  would  be,  what  is,  the  effect?  Nothing  but 
wrath;  the  more  awful  because  it  flows  from  the  sanctuary. 
They  "  came  out  of  the  temple,  having  the  seven  plagues." 
This  was  all  that  God  could  do  for  man  now.  "  Clothed  in 
pure  and  white  linen,  and  having  their  breasts  girded  with  golden 
girdles.  And  one  of  the  four  living  creatures" — the  great  pre- 
siding executors  of  the  j^rovidential  judgments  of  God — "  gave 
unto  the  seven  angels  seven  golden  vials."  The  word  means 
howls,  or  cups,  and  is  taken  from  the  vessels  used  for  pouring 
out  drink-offerings,  &c.  before  the  Lord.  It  is  not  drink-offerings 
now,  but  wrath  coming  down  from  God  :  "  seven  goklen  vials 
full  of  the  wrath  of  God  who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever.  And  the 
temple  was  filled  with  smoke  from  the  glory  of  God,  and  from 
His  power  ;  and  no  one  was  able  to  enter  into  the  temple,  till 
the  seven  plagues  of  the  seven  angels  were  fulfilled."  Thus, 
neither  present  worship  of  God  nor  intercession  was  any  longer 
possible.  It  was  vain  for  any  one  to  attempt  entering  there  ;  the 
smoke  of  the  fire  of  God's  righteous  anger  filling  the  temple,  the 
smoke  proving  the  fire  that  was  there.  So  that  there  was  no 
possibility  for  any  one,  not  even  for  a  priest,  to  enter.  None 
could  draw  near  now  :  wrath,  the  smoke  of  judgment,  filled  it. 
Just  as  at  Sinai,  where  smoke  is  represented  as  going  up  from 
the  mountain  as  the  smoke  of  a  furnace  ;  and,  as  in  Psalm  xviii., 
"  There  went  up  a  smoke  out  of  His  nostrils,  and  fire  out  of  His 
mouth  devoured."  So  now,  there  is  the  image  of  God's  offended 
majesty  against  sin  ;  there  was  nothing  God  looked  upon  here 
below  that  called  for  mercy  on  their  behalf.  The  time  was  past 
for  intercession.  Accordingly  the  judgments  rolled  forth,  and 
the  wrath  of  God  is  finished.  (Ver.  6-8.) 


284  THE    FIRST    FOUR    VIALS. 


CHAPTER    XVI. 

Now  I  must  SHy  a  little  upon  the  details  of  God's  judgments 
in  chap.  xvi.  It  is  a  painful  subject  and  humbling,  when  we 
think  that  this  is  the  declared  end  of  man's  vaunted  progress.  I 
will  endeavour,  then,  briefly  to  glance  at  these  seven  plagues. 
"  And  I  heard  a  loud  voice  out  of  the  temple,  saying  to  the  seven 
angels,  Go  your  ways,  and  pour  out  the  vials  of  the  wrath  of 
God  unto  the  earth."  (Ver.  1 .)  Wrath  is  no  longer  restricted  to  the 
third  or  fourth  part,  but  the  whole  scene  is  given  up  to  judg- 
ment. There  is  not  only  an  increase  of  severity,  but  the  whole 
of  that  which  had  once  the  light  of  God,  and  had  far  and  wide 
enjoyed  outward  privileges,  is  in  complete  apostacy,  and  given  up 
to  His  wrath, 

"  And  the  first  went  away  and  poured  out  his  vial  unto  the 
earth  ;and  there  came  a  noisome  and  grievous  sore  upon  the  men 
which  had  the  mark  of  the  Beast,  and  them  which  worshipped 
his  image.     And  the  second  poured  out  his  vial  into  the  sea,"  &c. 

The  first  four  vials  resemble  the  trunijiets  in  this,  that  they 
both  fall  upon  the  earth  and  sea,  upon  the  rivers  and  fountains 
of  water,  and  finally  upon  the  sun.  There  may  be  certain  differ- 
ences ;  for  in  the  trumpet  it  was  the  thii-d  part  only  of  the  sun 
that  was  smitten.  Here  it  is  simply  said,  "the  sun,"  Still  it 
was  the  same  sort  of  sphere.  Further,  I  think  the  objects  of 
these  plagues,  the  earth,  sea,  &c.,  are  not  to  be  taken  in  a  mere 
literal  way.  The  language  is  symbolical.  Not  that  there  would 
be,  to  my  own  mind,  the  slightest  difficulty  in  believing  that 
God  could  do  these  things  in  a  literal  way,  if  this  were  His 
will.  He  has  done  so  before  now.  He  has  turned  the  waters 
of  Egypt  into  blood,  filled  a  kingdom  with  darkness,  and  in- 
flicted plagues  similar  to  what  we  have  here  :  so  that  there  is 
no  difficulty  in  conceiving  such  a  thing  again.  But  the  only 
question  is,  whether  this  is  what  we  are  to  gather  from  the 
chapter  before  us.  I  think  it  is  not,  and  that  God  here  alludes 
to  plagues  that  were  once  literal  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  but  that 
are  now  referred  to  symbolically,  representing  certain  judgments 
of  God.  First,  the  ordered  and  settled  parts  of  the  world  are 
smitten,  as  with  an  ulcerous  distemper,  where  men  were  branded 
with  subjection  to  the   apostate   civil   power  and   his  idolatry. 


"  I    HEARD    THE    ALTAR."  285 

Next,  there  is  a  judgment  upon  the  sea;  that  is,  on  the  outside 
regions,  where  profession  of  life  quite  died  out.  The  third,  I 
conceive,  represent?  by  rivers,  people  formed  into  a  separate 
condition  or  nationality,  like  waters  flowing  in  a  distinct  channel, 
under  special  local  influence ;  and  the  fountains,  rather  the 
springs  of  a  nation's  })rosperity.  All  the  active  principles  assume 
the  form  of  death.  The  third  judgment  comes  down  to  smaller 
details  than  the  former  ones.  The  fourth  is  on  the  public  supreme 
authority. 

In  verses  5-7  we  have  a  word  or  two,  which,  when  changed 
or  rightly  read,  adds  to  the  full  force  and  clearness  of  the  pas- 
sage :  "  Thou  art  righteous,  O  Lord,  which  art,  and  wast,"  &c. 
I  noted  (on  chap,  xi.)  that  the  words,  "  and  shalt  be,"  were  of 
no  force  at  all  here,  and  that  another  word  is  the  best  attested — 
"  the  Holy  One."  It  is  the  very  same  word  that  occurs  in  the 
fourth  verse  of  chap.  xv.  —  the  less  usual  one  for  "holy." 
Before  these  vials  are  poured  out,  God  is  celebrated  in  His 
merciful  holiness.  "  Thou  art  righteous."  That  was  plain,  for 
God  was  pouring  out  His  wrath  upon  men  in  their  iniquity, 
just  because  He  was  righteous.  But  more  than  that — "  Which 
art  and  wast,  the  Holy  One."  Before  the  vials  are  poured  out 
and  now  again,  while  they  are  in  course  of  pouring  out,  that 
remains  true.  The  angel  of  the  waters  attests  His  graciousness, 
even  while  He  was  judging  thus,  which  might  have  seemed  to 
contradict  it.  He,  too,  from  below,  answers  to  the  song  above. 
If  the  saints,  at  rest  on  the  sea  of  glass,  celebrate  Him  as  mer- 
ciful in  holiness,  the  angel  confirms  it. 

"  For  they  have  shed  the  blood  of  saints  and  prophets,  and  thou 
gavest  them  blood  to  drink  ;  they  are  worthy."  (Ver.  6.)  There 
was  righteous  retribution  —  they  were  worthy  in  an  awful  sense. 
"  And  I  heard,"  not  another  out  of  the  altar,  but  "  I  heard  the 
ultar  say."  (Ver.  7.)  It  may  seem  extraordinary  to  speak  of  "  the 
altar  saying,"  and  no  doubt  the  other  words  were  put  in  because 
people  thought  it  so  strange.  But  there  is  nothing  really  con- 
trary to  prophetic  usage  if  it  be  taken  in  a  symbolical  way. 
No  person  would  intentionally  foist  a  difficulty  into  Scripture  : 
but  it  is  too  common  to  try  and  remove  that  which  is  not  under- 
stood out  of  the  word,  thus  to  make  it  plain  according  to  ordi- 
nary modes  of  thought.  Besides,  you  have  what  might  prepare 
the  way  for  it  elsewhere.  In  chap.  ix.  13,  it  is  said,  "  I  heard 
a  voice  from  the  four  horns  of  the  golden  altar  which  is  before 
God."  Here  (chap,  xvi.)  the  figure  goes  further  :  the  voice  is 
said  to  be  that  of  the  altar  itself.  To  me  it  confirms  what  we 
have  had  various  occasions  to  remark — the  fact  and  impropriety 


286  THE    FIFTH    VIAL. 

of  men's  meddling  with  Scripture.  "  I  heard  the  altar  say"  has 
great  force  for  this  reason.  In  an  earlier  part  of  the  book,  the 
souls  of  those  that  were  "  slain  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for 
the  testimony  which  they  held,"  were  seen  under  the  altar. 
Now  here,  that  altar  which  had  witnessed  their  blood  is  said  to 
cry  out  to  God  and  to  own  that  His  judgments  are  true  and 
righteous.  In  the  first  book  of  the  Bible,  the  earth  is  spoken 
of  as  crying  out  to  God  about  the  blood  of  Abel :  much  more 
should  not  the  altar  about  the  blood  of  God's  martyred  saints  ? 
To  my  own  mind  it  is  uncommonly  pertinent.  If  it  had  been 
merely  an  angel,  that  would  have  been  a  comparatively  distant 
link  ;  for  an  angel,  though  ministering  for  them  who  shall  be 
heirs  of  salvation,  does  not  enter  so  directly  into  their  sufferings, 
and  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  immediate  sympathy  with 
them.  But  God  not  only  had  seen  the  bones  of  His  slaugh- 
tered saints  scattered  upon  the  cold  mountains,  as  poets  sing, 
but  regards  His  saints  as  so  many  burnt-offerings  rising  up 
before  Him,  whose  blood,  or  rather  the  altar  which  witnessed  it, 
calls  for  indignation  and  wrath.  The  Lord  may  seem  to  slum- 
ber for  a  season,  but  when  He  awakes,  as  one  out  of  sleep,  He 
will  surely  avenge  their  blood  on  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth. 
And  now  it  is  at  hand.  Great  Babylon  had  not  yet  come  into 
remembrance,  though,  from  the  beginning,  the  special  corrupt- 
ress  of  the  truth,  and  drunken  with  the  blood  of  the  saints. 
But  meanwhile  the  altar  could  not  hold  its  peace,  and  the  Lord 
listens  and  hears.  For  the  God  who  heeds  the  groans  of  the 
creature  will  surely  answer  the  altar's  cry  about  His  slain  ones. 

"  And  the  fourth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  sun  ; 
and  power  was  given  unto  him  to  scorch  men  with  fire."  (Ver.  8.) 
It  is  a  judgment  on  the  sun,  the  figure  of  supreme  government ; 
so  that  what  ought  to  have  been  the  means  of  light  and  comfort — • 
that  greater  light  which  rules  the  day — now  becomes  the  means 
of  scorching  men  with  fire.  The  effect  of  its  tyranny  is  into- 
lerable. "  And  men  were  scorched  with  great  heat,  and  blas- 
phemed the  name  of  God,  which  had  authority  over  these 
plagues  :  and  they  repented  not  to  give  him  glory."  (Ver.  9.) 

"  And  the  fifth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  throne  of 
the  Beast,"  &c.  (Ver.  10.)  We  are  now  entering  upon  a  some- 
what different  class  of  judgments ;  for  the  last  three  vials  differ 
from  the  first  four,  just  as  the  last  three  trumpets  had  a  different 
character  from  the  rest.  And  so  with  the  seals  also.  It  is  evident 
that  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  vials  are  apart  from  the  preced- 
ing four.     The  judgment  falls  upon  the  throne  of  the  Beast  and 


THB   8rXTH    VIAL. 


287 


upon  his  kingdom — not  upon  the  Beast  himself,  who  is  appa- 
rently untouched  by  these  vials.  He  is  reserved  for  the  judgment 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself  at  His  coming,  and  will  be  destroyed 
by  His  appearing.  Here  the  stroke  is  merely  upon  the  seat  of  his 
authority  ;  and  just  as  of  old,  king  Pharoah  was  hardened,  so 
here  men  blasphemed  the  God  of  heaven,  and  repented  not  of 
their  deeds  (ver,  11).  When  God  manifests  Himself  as  the  God 
of  the  earth,  that  will  not  be  possible. 

"And  the  sixth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  great  river 
Euphrates,  and  the  water  thereof  was  dried  up,  that  the  way  of 
the  kings" — not  exactly  of  the  east,  but — "that  are  from  the  east 
might  be  prepared."  (Ver.  12).  The  Euphrates  was  the  great 
eastern  boundary  of  the  Roman  empire :  it  was  the  regular  line 
to  which  they  carried  their  conquests.  So  that  the  drying  up  of 
the  Euphrates  would  seem  to  mean  that  this  side  of  the  empire 
would  be  left  open  as  a  way  for  the  eastern  powers  to  come  and 
mingle  with  those  of  the  west,  or  to  assault  them.  One  effect  of 
this  vial,  then,  would  be  the  removal  of  the  eastern  barrier,  and 
thus  the  way  of  the  kings  from  the  east  is  prepared,  j^robably  for 
the  great  closing  conflicts. 

But  there  is  more  than  this.  "  I  saw  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 
dragon,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Beast,  and  out  of  the  mouth 
of  the  false  prophet,  three  unclean  spirits  like  frogs."  *  (Ver. 
13.)  It  is  just  before  the  end.  These  murmuring  spirits  issued 
out  of  the  mouth  of  the  three  powers  which  we  have  seen  in  chap, 
xiii. :  out  of  the  dragon,  the  open  enemy  of  Christ;  out  of  the 
Beast,  the  revived  Roman  Empire  ;  and  out  of  the  false  prophet, 
the  ecclesiastical  Beast  that  had  lamb-like  horns,  imitating  Christ's 
power,  but  now  spoken  of  only  in  his  deceptive  religious  cha- 

*  Most  readers  of  tlie  Horae  Apoc  :  will  remember  that,  after  giving  evidence 
of  the  working  of  the  froglilie  unclean  spirits  in  England,  (the  draconic  spirit  of 
heathenlike  anti-social  infidelity,  tlie  Popish  spirit,  the  Tractariau  spirit,)  Mr.  B. 
recurs  to  the  hopeful  strain  of  a  bright  future  for  his  country,  and  conjectures  that 
France  may  be  the  country  called  to  the  bad  pre-eminence  of  being  the  chief  secu- 
lar power  employed  by  these  demons  to  gather  the  world's  powers  to  the  last  great 
war  of  Armageddon.  "  There  is  a  curious  heraldic  fact  (he  adds,  vol.  iii.  pp.  499, 
500)  accordant  with  this  view,  whicli  considering  how  frequently  such  national 
emblems  have  been  had  in  view  in  the  Apocalyptic  figurations,  I  cannot  permit 
myself  to  pass  over  in  silence,  though  I  wish  by  no  means  to  insist  much  on  it  : 
viz.  that,  as  the  three  spirits  do  each  and  all  most  assuredly  energize  in  the  French 
nation  and  priesthood,  so  their  Apocalyptic  symbol,  the  three  frogs,  are  the  old 
arms  of  France."  And  then  we  have  a  plate  in  illustration  of  the  alleged  fact, 
with  some  subjoined  annotations.  Now,  it  happens  that  natural  history  comes  in 
as  an  awkward  witness  here,  for  the  "  fact "  turns  out  that  Mr.  E.  confounds 
crapaud  with  grenouille ;  or,  as  the  Encyclopedia  Metropolitana  says,  tho  arms  of 
France,  as  some  affirm,  bear  three  toads  sable,  &c.  In  a  word,  in  order  to  convey 
correctly  such  a  reference,  the  Greek  should  have  been  ws  cppvvoi,  rather  than 
fidrpaxoi. 


288  THE    PARENTHESIS. 

racter.  "  For  they  are  the  spirits  of  demons,  working  signs,  who 
go  forth  unto  the  kings  of  the  whole  habitable  world,  to  gather 
them  unto  the  battle  of  [that]  great  day  of  God  the  Almighty." 
This  confirms  what  I  have  just  stated  about  the  Euphrates. 
It  is  a  general  collision  of  the  kings  of  all  the  habitable  world. 
Not  only  the  western  powers  are  arrayed  for  the  war,  but  the 
eastern  also.     It  is  the  great  day. 

But  now  comes  an  important  parenthesis.  As  was  shown 
under  the  sixth  seal  and  the  sixth  trumpet,  so  here  we  find  an 
interruption  also.  "  Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief.  Blessed  is  he 
that  watcheth  and  keepeth  his  garments,  lest  he  walk  naked  and 
they  see  his  shame."  (Ver.  15.)  It  is  the  Lord  coming,  but  then 
He  is  coming  in  judgment  to  surprise  the  earth  :  and  that  is  the 
reason  why  the  figure  is  used.  The  thief  comes  unexpected  and 
unwelcome  :  still  more  unpalatable  will  be  the  Lord's  coming  to 
the  earth.  But  there  will  be  saints  to  whom  it  will  be  welcome, 
to  whom  His  appearing  will  bring  deliverance,  by  the  judgment 
of  their  enemies.  And  they  are  enjoined  to  watch  closely  the 
daily  life.  "  Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief"  Not  so  the  Lord  pre- 
sents Himself  to  us,  save  as  telling  us  how  He  will  appear  to 
the  world  or  the  professing  mass  cast  into  it.  When  speaking 
to  us  He  says,  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly :  hold  fast  that  which 
thou  hast,  that  no  man  take  thy  crown."  Need  one  say  how 
much  more  blessed  is  this  word?  The  idea  of  coming  as  a  thief 
is  to  surprise.  To  us  He  will  come  as  a  gracious  One,  who  loves 
that  we  should  have  the  rest  of  our  affections  and  our  glory  in 
and  with  Himself:  this  is  our  own  proper  portion  and  hope. 
Here  it  is  not  rapture  to  heaven,  but  Jewish  deliverance  by  judg- 
ment. 

Then,  after  closing  the  parenthesis,  it  is  said,  "  And  he  ga- 
thered them  together  into  a  place,  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue, 
Armageddon,"  It  might  seem  strange  that  it  should  be  said, 
"  He  gathered  ;"  for  in  the  14th  verse  the  evil  spirits,  or  spirits 
of  demons,  were  those  that  went  forth  to  gather  the  kings  toge- 
ther. The  reason  is  this.  In  the  language  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
employed,  the  word  is  capable  of  meaning  either  he  or  they 
gathered.  There  ai-e  certain  cases  where,  in  that  language,  it  is 
doubtful  whether  "  they"  or  "  he"  be  meant,  and  this  is  one.  The 
word  "  demons  "  is  of  such  a  nature,  that  the  verb  which  has  it 
for  its  subject  might  be  either  singular  or  plural.  Here  the 
subject  is  not  expressed,  so  that  it  is  quite  optional  as  far  as  this 
is  concerned  :  all  depends  upon  the  sense  of  the  context.  If  it 
be  "  He  gathered,"  the  reference  of  course  is  to  God  Almighty, 
who   might  be  said  to  do  it  through   the  intervention  of  tliese 


ARMAGEDDON.  289 

unclean  spirits.  If  it  be  "  they  gathered,"  it  would  simply  mean 
that  the  sjsirits  of  demons  had  accomplished  the  purpose  for 
which  they  were  sent  forth.  In  verse  14,  they  proceed  to  gather 
the  kings,  and  in  verse  16,  the  kings  are  gathered  together. 

The  place  of  gathering  that  is  mentioned  here,  called  in 
Hebrew  Armageddon,  is,  I  think,  an  allusion  to  Judges  v.  19. 
"  The  liings  came  and  fought,  then  fought  the  kings  of  Canaan 
in  Taanach  by  the  waters  of  Megiddo."  It  was  not  that  Me- 
giddo  was  a  place  of  any  great  size  or  note  :  God  looks  to  the 
principle  at  issue.  Israel  was  in  a  low  state.  There  was  a  pro- 
phetess that  the  Lord  used  to  inspire  them  with  courage  :  and 
when  encouraged  by  her,  a  great  victory  they  won  over  their 
enemies.  The  same  place  is  referred  to  in  2  Chron.  xxxv.  22, 
when  Josiah  received  his  death-wound  in  battle  with  the  king 
of  Egypt.  But  I  doubt  that  this  is  the  incident  referred  to  by 
the  Spirit  of  God  here.  For  Megiddo  in  the  day  of  the  Judges 
was  a  memento  of  joy  and  triumph  to  Israel.  In  the  time  of 
Josiah  it  was  a  place  of  gloom  :  all  Judah  and  Jerusalem 
mourned  for  Josiah.  It  was  "  the  mourning  of  Hadadrimmon  in 
the  valley^'  of  Megiddon  "  (Zech.  xii.  11),  which  led,  historically, 
to  the  writing  of  the  book  of  Lamentations.  For  this  reason  I 
think  that  Armageddon  (i.e.,  the  mountain  of  Megiddo)  here 
refers,  not  to  the  sorrow  for  Judah  in  2  Chronicles,  but  to  the 
gathering  and  defeat  of  the  Gentile  kings  in  Judges.  For  here 
it  is  the  Lord  beating  down  the  nations.  He  had  been  acknow- 
ledged as  King  of  the  nations  in  Rev.  xv.  And  therefore,  to 
make  this  an  allusion  to  a  time  when  the  godly  Jewish  monarch 
was  slain  by  a  Gentile,  would  be  little  appropriate.  But  to 
derive  it  from  the  day  when  Israel  had  been  led  on  to  victory 
even  by  a  woman,  well  fits  into  the  scene  that  is  here  described, 
when  the  kings  of  the  whole  world  will  be  gathered,  only  for 
a  more  terrible  destruction. 

A  few  words  must  suffice  for  the  last  vial.  "  The  seventh 
angel  pour  out  his  vial  ujion  the  air  ;  and  there  came  forth  a 
loud  voice  from  the  temple  [of  heaven],  from  the  throne,  saying, 
It  is  done."  (Ver.  17.)  This  is  a  more  penetrating  judgment, 
and  one  more  affecting  men  and  their  very  life-breath  than  any 
we  have  yet  seen.  It  is  upon  the  air,  necessary  to  the  existence 
of  men.     Symbolically  it  represents  a  judgment  n^on  something 

*  A  mountain  of  course  implies  a  valley.  The  singular  variation  of  A.  (iroTa/x6i', 
river)  may  have  been  either  taken  from  the  waters  of  Megiddon  in  Judges  v.  9,  or 
more  probably  was  a  blunder  for  t6itov,  just  as  in  chap,  xv.,  AC.  three  cursives, 
not  to  speak  of  some  mss.  mentioned  by  Andreas,  Bede,  &c.,  support  \i6oi/  stone  ! 
for  \ivov.  The  Harleiau  cursive  of  the  eleventh  ceutury  (5537)  exhibits  the  still 
stranger  Kr)v6v. 

20 


290  THE    HAIL-STORM,    NOT    GOG's    JUDGMENT. 

that  is  as  essential  to  the  life  and  comfort  of  men  as  that  which 
we' breathe.     All  is  over  as  regards  God's  wrath  here  poured  out. 

"  And  there  were  lightnings  and  voices  and  thunders  ;  and 
there  was  a  great  earthquake,  such  as  was  not  seen  since  a  man 
was  on  the  earth,  so  mighty  an  earthquake  and  so  great. 
And  the  great  city  Avas  divided  into  three  parts,  and  the  cities 
of  the  nations  fell,"  &:c.  There  was  a  vast  and  unexampled 
convulsion  of  civil  associations  —  breaking  up,  not  only  what  is 
called  here  "  the  great  city,"  (which  means  all  that  was  esta- 
blished within  the  Roman  Empire,)  but  more  than  that,  the 
cities  of  the  nations  fell ;  that  is,  it  was  the  ruin  of  all  that  the 
nations,  outside  Rome,  had  built  up  politically.  And  further- 
more, Babylon  the  great — that  counterfeit  of  the  bride,  and  hi- 
therto successful  system  of  religious  evil,  the  mother  of  harlots 
and  abominations  of  the  earth  ;  Babylon  the  great  —  came  up  in 
remembrance  before  God,  to  receive  from  Him  the  cup  of  the 
wine  of  the  fierceness  of  His  wrath.  The  latter  term  Babylon 
the  great  refers  rather  to  moral  character  or  idolatry. 

"  And  every  island  fled  away,  and  the  mountains  were  not 
found.  And  thei'e  fell  upon  men  great  hail,  about  the  weight 
of  a  talent,  out  of  heaven,  and  men  blasphemed  God,"  &:c.  (Ver. 
20,  21.)  It  is  not  necessary  that  I  should  speak  particularly  of 
the  explanation  offered  by  the  leading  historicalists.  The  hail- 
storm Mr.  E.  used  to  apply  to  some  fearful  infliction  of  France, 
the  most  northerly  of  the  Papal  kingdoms,  much  as  he  had  sur- 
mised in  the  earlier  judgment'^,  as  he  Avould  say,  of  the  seventh 
trumpet.  And  so  it  yet  stands  in  the  text  of  the  Horae  Apoc. 
vol.  iv.,  p.  23.  But  in  a  note  he  observes  that  many  expositors 
prefer  to  explain  it  of  the  Russian  power.  "  And  in  revising  my 
work,  and  comparing  this  pjophecy  with  one  in  Ezekiel  xxxviii. 
xxxix.,  which  seems  to  point  to  Russia's  taking  part  in  the  great 
pre-millennial  conflict  as  will  be  noticed  in  the  end  of  my  next 
chapter,  I  cannot  but  incline  to  the  same  view.  I  observe  that 
the  great  hail  is  here  predicted  as  falling  after,  not  before,  the 
great  city's  tri-partition."  Having  already  expressed  my  opinion 
on  the  similar  case  of  Rev.  xi.  19,  and  shown  the  error  of  con- 
necting this  verse  with  the  seventh  trumpet,  which  is  the 
assumption  of  these  writers,  I  need  only  remark  that  the  refer- 
ence to  Ezekiel  is  peculiarly  unhappy,  because  the  scene  there  is 
Palestine,  not  the  Papal  empire  or  the  west;  that  the  issue  is 
not  the  infliction  of  a  plague  on  others,  and  God  blasphemed  in 
consequence,  but  the  utter  discomfiture  of  the  Prince  of  Rosh, 
Meshech  and  Tubal,  wifli  his  vast  company,  and  God  sanctified 
thereby.     "  And  I  will  plead  against  him  with  pestilence,  and 


MORAL    ACCOMPLISHMENT    OF    GOD's    PURPOSES.  291 

with  blood  ;  and  I  will  rain  upon  him,  and  upon  his  bands,  and 
upon  the  many  people  that  are  with  him,  an  overflowing  rain, 
and  great  hail-stones,  fire  and  brimstone."  Thus,  it  is  God  who 
plagues  the  invading  Russian  with  great  hail-stones,  not  they 
who  so  fall  on  others.  "  Thus  will  I  magnify  myself,  and  sanc- 
tify myself  (not  then  men  blaspheming  God  because  of  the 
plague  of  the  hail)  ;  and  I  will  be  known  in  the  eyes  of  many 
nations — and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  Indeed, 
the  reader  has  simply  to  examine  the  context  of  the  Jewish 
prophet  in  order  to  be  satisfied  of  the  absurdity  of  connecting 
that  scene  with  the  hail-storm  of  the  seventh  vial.  For  the 
Jews,  nay  Israel  as  a  whole,  are  supposed  to  be  at  that  time 
restored  and  united  in  their  own  land,  when  Gog  invades  it 
through  lust  of  conquest.  There  is  no  ground  to  think  that  such 
is  the  case  under  the  vials.  Neither  does  Mr.  E.  so  judge,  if  I 
understand  his  remarks  on  the  first  occurrence  of  "  Hallelujah  " 
in  Rev.  xix.,  which  he  views  as  an  indication  of  the  conversion  of 
the  Jews,  after  the  final  catastrophe  of  Babylon,  when  the  out- 
pouring of  the  vials  is  completed  and  has  marked  the  time  for  it. 

Before  God  establishes  His  purposes  in  power,  you  see  a 
moral  accomplishment  working  either  in  His  people  or  in  the 
world.  Thus,  if  God  is  to  bring  about  a  separation  of  His  peo- 
ple by  judgment,  which  we  had  in  chap,  xv.,  I  doubt  not  that 
His  people  are  even  now  being  separated  graciously  by  the 
Spirit  of  God.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  to  be  a  delusion 
over  men's  hearts,  so  that  even  the  judgments  of  God  will  only 
aggravate  the  evil  to  all  appearance,  something  analogous  is  at 
work  in  our  day.  Is  it  not  a  fearful  sign  that  Christians,  in  the 
face  of  such  words  as  these,  can  look  for  any  real  amelioration 
of  things  as  they  are  ?  Here  we  have  the  true  closing  scene 
disclosed  by  God  after  all  the  efforts  and  boasts  of  men.  The 
most  favoured  part  of  the  earth,  its  civilized  and  moral  centre, 
is  to  be  full  of  apostacy,  and  the  wrath  of  God  must  be  finished 
there.  This  must  be  ere  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  come  in 
glory  to  set  up  His  kingdom  :  for  He  it  is  in  person  who  shall 
deal  with  the  Beast.  Under  the  vials  it  is  God  chastizing  in 
wrath.  But  what  is  the  effect?  Men  blaspheme  God.  Instead 
of  repenting,  they  become  worse  and  worse  at  every  step. 

It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  see  this  evil  morally  spreading  over 
the  world  ;  but  the  Lord  is  also  separating,  by  faith  and  affec- 
tion, to  Himself.  May  we  hold  fast  grace  !  We  shall  need  it. 
It  is  the  only  place,  not  merely  of  privilege,  but  of  security. 
What  should  we  think  of  the  man  who  would  merely  go  as  far 
as  he  thinks  he  must,  not  to  be  lost — who  wants  to  be  saved. 


292  CHRIST    MUST    BE    OUR    GRAND    TESTIMONY. 

but  withal  to  be  allowed  to  sin  as  much  as,  in  his  opinion,  he 
may,  so  as  to  escape  at  last  ?  But  as  the  Lord  is  separating  by 
personal  affection  to  Himself,  where  there  is  faith,  so,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  opposite  of  it  we  find  where  faith  is  lacking  : 
God  gives  up  men  to  delusion,  and  all  tliut  He  does  in  the  way 
of  judgment  only  hardens  them.  Preparatorily  this  is  going 
on  now  :  men  are  yielding  to  and  choosing  their  own  delusions. 
The  full,  pure  truth  is  distasteful  and  dreaded.  So  that,  in 
spite  of  God's  Spirit  working  to  present  truth  with  all  simplicity 
to  His  people,  men  are  obstinately  comforting  themselves  with 
the  dream  that  things,  after  all,  are  not  so  bad  ;  that  if  there 
are  things  to  be  regretted,  the  remedy  is  at  hand.  For  now 
there  are  so  many  ways  of  helping  on  the  poor  —  such  delightful 
minglings  of  the  rich  with  them  —  such  promising  unions  which 
invite  all  men  to  come  together  and  join,  spite  of  their  little 
differences,  for  the  great  object  of  social  advancement,  the  im- 
provement of  Christendom,  and  the  regeneration  of  the  world. 
But  all  this  is  founded  on  the  miserable  delusion  which  ignores 
and  denies  that  God's  wrath  is  to  be  filled  up  and  poured  out 
upon  Christendom.  It  is  impossible  that  Christians,  who  realize 
that  such  judgments  are  near,  could  lend  themselves  to  schemes 
which  assume  the  very  reverse.  Suppose  a  person  going  to 
execution  —  what  would  be  thought  of  a  Christian  man  who, 
knowing  this,  would  occupy  the  criminal's  time  with  chemical 
experiments,  or  a  lecture  on  mechanics  ?  Much  less  would  one 
who  feels  the  solemn  truth  that  the  world  lies  under  such  a 
sentence  as  God's  word  declares.  Christ  alone  is  the  power  of 
God  to  set  things  right.  When  He  comes,  and  not  before,  the 
tide  of  evil  will  be  stemmed,  and  Satan  bound  :  but  not  even 
divine  judgments,    apart  from    Christ,  can  avail. 

May  we  be  earnest,  always  seeking  to  connect  Christ  with 
our  testimony !  That  is  the  great  practical  purport  of  all  this 
for  the  present  moment.  Sometimes  we  may  hinder  blessing 
by  presenting  the  truth,  but  not  in  Christ,  if  I  may  so  say. 
The  heart  must  be  sadly  departing,  if  it  refuses  that.  The 
Lord  grant  that  we  may  keep  these  two  things  before  our 
souls  —  thorough  separation  from  all  that  is  of  the  world,  and 
this  place  of  victory  held  with  joy,  our  hearts  taking  up  the 
song  of  which  the  Lamb  is  the  subject,  as  He  alone  gives  us 
poAver  to  sing  it.  May  we  ever  think  of  the  woi'ld  as  a  judged 
scene,  conscious  of  the  terrible  wrath  it  cannot  escape  !  This 
will  not  make  us  disti-ustf'ul  of  the  power  of  Christ  to  deliver 
individuals,  but  it  will  j)reserve  us  from  any  insensibility  as  to 
either  the  world's  evil,  or  the  divhie  judgment  which  awaits  it. 


RELATION  OF  THE  CHAPTER  TO  THE  PROPHECY.     293 


CHAPTER    XVII. 

The  Spirit  of  God  has  shown  us  the  destruction  of  B^ibylon 
under  the  last  vial.  We  are  now  to  learn  in  the  chapter  before 
us,  what  was  the  special  evil,  what  there  was  so  hateful  to  God 
in  Babylon  ;  not  only  what  her  own  conduct  was,  but  what 
there  was  in  her  connexion  with  others,  that  God  could  endure 
it  all  no  longer  —  why  it  was  that  He  singled  her  out  above 
others  for  His  vengeance.  And  this  is  not  a  thing  that  we  can 
put  aside  from  us,  as  perhaps  some  others  may  be  in  the  Apo- 
calypse, as  comparatively  foreign  or  distant.  For  thougli  there 
may  be,  and,  I  doubt  not,  will  be,  a  further  development  of 
Babylon,  yet  God  looks  at  it  as  a  moral  whole  ;  as  a  system  of 
corruption  that  has  been  at  work,  and  that  is  still  at  work. 
When  judgment  can  delay  no  longer,  it  may  have  taken  a 
peculiarly  aggravated  form  ;  but  the  evil  exists  and  is  active. 
Babylon  is  not  so  much  the  snare  of  a  profane  man,  as  it  is  that 
of  one  who,  having  a  certain  idea  of  religion,  seeks  to  reconcile 
it  with  the  world.  It  is  then  that  the  corrupting  influence 
becomes  a  source  of  chief  danger  to  the  soul. 

Now  we  shall  find  that  the  chapter  gives  us,  first  of  all,  the 
vision  which  the  Apostle  John  is  taken  to  see  ;  and  next  we 
have  a  certain  explanation  of  that  vision.  The  angel's  word 
commences  more  particularly  in  this  way  at  the  seventh  verse, 
while  the  first  six  verses  are  occupied  with  recounting  the  vision. 
One  other  remark  I  would  make  before  proceeding  further. 
This  chapter  does  not  carry  us  forward  as  a  matter  of  history. 
It  is  rather  the  Holy  Gliost  looking  back  upon  the  character, 
conduct,  and  relationshijjs  of  that  Babylon  which  had  been 
already  shown  as  the  object  of  the  judgment  of  God.  This  is 
worthy  of  note,  because,  if  not  seen,  there  is  inevitable  confusion 
in  our  thoughts  of  the  book.  In  chap.  xiv.  we  had  the  fall  of 
Babylon  in  connexion  with  the  evil  workings  of  Satan,  and  with 
the  dealings  of  God  in  goodness  or  power,  including  tlie  Son  of 
man's  judgment  at  the  close.  Now,  it  is  of  no  little  moment  to 
have  the  precise  niche  where  this  intervention  of  God  is  to  be 
looked  for,  and  that  we  had  in  the  next  place.  For  we  have 
seen  in  the  providential  judgments  of  God  —  by  which  I  mean 
those  which  are  executed  by  angels,   and  not  by  Christ  directly 


294  THE    HARLOT 

— Babylon  reserved  for  the  last  stroke  of  His  wrath  under  the 
seventh  vial.  It  is  God  acting — God  still  employing  angels. 
The  Lord  Jesus  is  thus  far  quiescent,  if  I  may  so  say  ;  not  act- 
ing yet  in  vengeance  personally  upon  the  earth. 

In  Rev.  xvii.  the  Holy  Ghost  stops  to  enter  into  the  details 
of  the  moral  cause  of  Babylon's  teiTible  fall.  "  There  came 
one  of  the  seven  angels  which  had  the  seven  vials,  and  talked 
with  me,  saying,  Come  hither;  I  will  show  unto  thee  the  judg- 
ment of  the  great  whore,  that  sitteth  on  [the]*  many  waters." 
(Ver.  1.)  It  is  described  as  a  harlot  here  ;  not  only  as  a  Avoman, 
but  as  a  corrupt,  licentious  one.  And  I  suppose  that  no  dispas- 
sionate person  would  doubt  that  this  term  is  used  in  special  refer- 
ence to  religious  corruption.  A  little  lower  down,  in  the  third 
verse,  Babylon  is  said  to  be  sitting  upon  the  beast ;  here  she  sits  by 
the  many  waters.  There  is  a  slight  difference  in  the  Greek.  Sit- 
ting by  the  many  waters  does  not  mean  that  she  was  literally  or 
locally  thereupon,  but  beside  them.  Thus,  you  may  say,  for 
instance,  that  London  is  seated  upon  the  Thames.  Now,  no 
one  of  common  understanding  would  suppose  the  meaning  to  be 
that  London  was  actually  situated  and  built  over  the  bed  of  the 
river,  but  that  the  Thames  is  the  stream  which  characterizes 
London.  So  here,  in  the  same  way,  you  have  the  whore  de- 
scribed as  seated  on,  i.e.  beside,  the  many  waters.  These  are 
explained  in  verse  1 9.  "  The  waters  which  thou  sawest,  where 
the  whore  sitteth,  are  peoples  and  multitudes  and  nations  and 
tongues."  The  figure  implies  the  wide-spread  influence  which 
this  abandoned  woman  exercises.  But  there  is  more  than  that. 
In  the  second  verse  it  is  said,  "  with  whom  the  kings  of  the 
earth  have  committed  fornication,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the 
earth  have  been  made  drunk  with  the  wine  of  her  fornication." 
This  is  something  more  than  her  seat  by  the  mass  of  waters.  It  is 
immediate  intercourse  of  an  evil  kind  carried  on  with  the  kings 
of  the  earth  —  her  power  in  drawing  away  and  seducing  the 
affections  from  Christ,  who  is  the  only  worthy  object  of  all  love 
and  worshij).  In  the  sphere  where  God's  light  had  been  dis- 
played, the  chiefs  or  leaders  are  led  away  by  the  corruptress, 
and  the  people  are  entirely  ruined  as  to  all  discernment  of  the 
mind  of  God. 

Nothing,  then,  can  be  plainer  than  the  general  bearing  of 

*  The  article  (twice)  is  omitted  bj  A.,  seven  cursives,  Hippolytus  and  An- 
dreas. I  have  therefore  bracketed  it  as  a  mark  of  doubt,  though  disposed  to  lean 
towards  its  reception,  spite  of  its  absence  iu  tlie  vSept.  Y.  of  Jer.  li.  13,  &c.  It  is 
strange  that  any  should  imagine  a  reference  in  Dan.  vii.  2,  or  Eev.  xiii.  1,  any 
more  than  here,  to  the  literal  Mediterranean.  Iu  Hebrew  (or  Chaldee)  "  the 
great  sea"  when  used  of  the  Mediterranean  is  a  totally  distinct  phrase. 


SEATED    BY    MANY    WATERS.  295 

these  few  verses.  We  have  the  vast  influence  of  Babylon  set 
forth  by  the  figure  of  a  woman  seated  beside  many  waters  ; 
next  we  have  the  great  leaders  of  Christendom,  the  kings  of  the 
earth,  who  have  committed  fornication  with  her  ;  and  then  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth  stupified  with  the  wine  of  her  fornica- 
tion. There  are  different  degrees  of  guilt,  but  all  were  the 
result  of  connexion  more  or  less  intimate  with  Babylon.  "So 
he  carried  me  away  in  the  Spirit  into  the  wilderness,"  (Ver.  3.) 
In  spite  of  all  her  pride  and  worldly  glory,  to  the  saint  of  God  the 
wilderness  is  the  only  place  where  the  Spirit  leads  him  to  behold 
her.  Had  John  gone  in  his  own  spirit,  (so  to  speak,)  it  might 
have  carried  him  to  look  at  Babylon,  not  in  the  wilderness,  but 
rather  in  the  mirage  of  some  gai'den  of  the  Loixl.  But  he  was 
carried  away  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  into  the  wilderness,  and 
there  he  sees  the  harlot  sitting  upon  a  scarlet-coloured  Beast : 
a  closer  thing,  and  of  more  ominous  imj)ort,  as  we  noticed,  than 
her  description  at  the  end  of  verse  1.  This  shows  us  the  actual 
position  of  the  woman.  She  has  supremacy  over  the  Roman 
empire.  For  there  can  be  no  legitimate  question  that  the  Beast 
here  brought  before  us  is  that  same  Roman  empire,  of  which 
we  have  heard  such  terrible  doings,  and  so  portentous  a  doom, 
in  previous  chapters.  It  is  the  Beast  that  is  full  of  the  names 
of  blasphemy,  as  his  heads  were  so  viewed  in  chap.  xiii.  1. 
Babylon  is  a  whore  or  corrupting  system  ;  but  blasphemy  is 
what  belongs  to  the  Beast.  It  is  a  more  open  and  audacious 
evil.  The  woman's  way  is  more  seductive,  and  one  that  lays 
hold  of  the  affections.  But  blasphemy  is  the  expression  of  a 
power  that  fears  neither  God  nor  man.  As  for  the  woman, 
though  seated  on  the  Beast,  glad  to  be  exalted  through  him, 
and  willing  to  use  him  for  her  own  purposes,  yet  is  she  distinc- 
tively the  religious  system  of  the  world.  She  is  "  arrayed  in 
purple  and  scarlet  colour,  and  decked  with  gold  and  precious 
stones  and  pearls:"  the  obvious  figures  of  all  that  the  world 
counts  great  and  glorious  and  beautifid  here  below.  But  she 
has  also  "  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand,  full  of  abominations  and 
filthiness  of  her  fornication."  (Ver.  4.)  In  spite  of  all  her  glitter- 
ing, gaudy  splendour,  how  the  Holy  Ghost  brings  out  together 
with  it,  what  is  most  nauseous  !  He  has  no  words  too  strong 
to  express  His  sense  of  what  He  sees  in  the  cup.  It  is  "  full  of 
abominations  and  the  filthiness  of  her  fornication."  By  "  abo- 
minations" in  Scripture  regularly  is  meant  idolatry.  This  is 
the  gravest  distinguishing  feature  in  Babylon.  As  the  Beast 
was  full  of  names  of  blasphemy,  so  was  the  harlot's  cup  full  of 
abominations.     But  besides  the  idols,   there  was  this  corrupting 


296  RELIGIOUS    CORRUPTION    AND    PERSECUTION. 

influence,  here  called  the  uncleanness  of  her  fornication.  They 
are  two  distinct  things.  There  might  be  the  depraving  influ- 
ence without  the  idols  ;  but  in  Babylon  both  are  actively 
at  work. 

In  the  Apocalyptic  churches,  you  will  observe  that  Pergamos 
brings  in  the  doctrine  of  Balaam,  which  taught,  among  other 
things,  to  commit  fornication.  When  we  came  to  Tbyatira, 
there  we  saw  Jezebel,  who  imposed  idolatry  by  force.  Here  in 
Babylon,  both  are  united.  The  evils  that  crept  into  Christen- 
dom in  those  earlier  days,  discerned  in  Pergamos  and  Thyatira, 
both  appear  concentrated  and  undisguised  in  the  cup  of  this 
wicked  woman  :  they  were  budding  then  ;  now  they  are  full- 
blown in  all  their  hatefulness  before  the  prophet.  They  may 
be  tricked  out  in  all  the  meretricious  tinsel  of  this  world  ;  but 
nothing  could  change  or  hide  their  real  character  before  God. 

"  And  upon  her  forehead  a  name  written,  Mystery,  Babylon 
the  great,  the  mother  of  the  harlots  and  of  the  abominations  of 
the  earth."  (Ver.  5.)  There  was  great  pretension  to  truth  —  a 
masterpiece  of  the  enemy  in  counterfeiting  the  revealed  ways  of 
God.  There  had  been  the  mystery  of  Christ  and  the  Church :  now 
there  is  the  mystery  of  this  anti-church  ;  not  the  mystery  of 
faith  and  godliness,  but  of  lawlessness ;  Babylon  the  great, 
seated  on  the  Beast,  the  awful  contrast  of  the  Church  which  is 
subject  unto  Christ.  Here  she  rules  the  Beast.  The  holy  city, 
Jerusalem,  comes  down  out  of  heaven  from  God,  having  the 
glory  of  God, — not  "  that  great  city,"  *  but  the  holy  city,  which 
is  the  true  way  in  which  God  characterizes  the  bride,  the  Lamb's 
wife,  the  glorified  Church.  This  rehgious  system,  on  the  con- 
trary, sprang  from  the  earth, —  not  to  say  more  than  that, — 
enticed  into  its  defiling  embrace  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and 
extended  its  malignant  influence  far  and  wide.  Such  was  Baby- 
lon, the  mother  of  harlots,  and  abominations  of  the  earth. 
Whatever  evil  thing  was  used  by  Satan  for  the  purpose  of 
ensnaring  the  afl^ections  from  Christ,  whatever  idolatrous  object 
took  His  place,  she  is  the  mother  of  them  all.  Babylon  is  the 
great  parent  of  all  the  worldly  systems,  and  of  the  idolatries 
used  by  the  enemy  to  draw  away  souls  entirely  from  the  Lord. 

But  there  is  another  thing  mentioned  in  the  vision  still  more 
extraordinary  to  the  prophet's  mind.  He  could  not  doubt  the 
religious  character  of  this  woman,  Babylon  the  great ;  he  sees 
her,  at  the  same  time,  drunken  with  the  blood  of  the  saints.  He 
could  well  understand  a  religious  system  becoming  corrupt, 
Jerusalem  itself  had,  alas  !  become  like  Sodom  and  Gomorrah, 
*  The  common  text  of  Rev.  xxi.  10  is  faulty. 


THE    BEAST    A    DISTINCT   SYSTEM. 


297 


at  first  for  guilt,  and  afterAvards  well-nigh  for  judgment.  But 
that  the  won) an  should  be  drunken  with  the  blood  of  the  saints, 
was  what  filled  even  John's  mind  with  great  astonishment. 
Bad  as  passion  is,  it  is  not  the  worst  thing  that  the  heart  of  man 
is  capable  of  The  deceivableness  of  false  religion  is  that  in 
which  Satan  displays  his  direct  power.  For  the  very  thing 
which  God  has  given  for  light  and  blessing,  to  win  the  heart 
and  to  bring  into  fellowship  with  Himself,  is  abused  by  the 
enemy  to  make  a  man  a  worse  man  than  ever  —  twofold  more 
the  child  of  hell  than  before. 

But  astonished  as  John  must  have  been  of  old  to  hear  such  a 
sentence  upon  beloved  but  guilty  Jerusalem,  here  he  has  to 
wonder  still  more  when  he  learns  that  the  woman  who  had 
assumed  the  place  of  the  Church,  should  not  only  end  in  the 
same  blood-guiltiness,  but  should  be  drunken  with  the  blood  of 
the  very  martyrs  of  Christ  Himself.  This  was  what  filled  his 
mind  with  amazement  indeed.  (Ver.  6.) 

But  we  now  come  to  the  explanation  which  the  angel  fur- 
nishes of  the  vision.  It  is  of  deep  importance  ;  for  you  will 
find  that  when  God  interprets,  He  not  merely  opens  to  us  that 
which  needed  solution,  but  He  gives  us  truth  more  abundantly. 
"  And  the  angel  said  unto  me,  Wherefore  didst  thou  marvel  ? 
I  will  tell  thee  the  mystery  of  the  woman,  and  of  the  beast  that 
carrieth  her,  which  hath  the  seven  heads  and  the  ten  horns."  (Ver. 
7.)  This  is,  in  fact,  the  main  subject  of  the  chapter  ;  it  is  a  des- 
cription of  the  woman  more  particularly,  and  of  her  connexions 
with  the  Beast,  the  Roman  empire.  For  manifestly  and  beyond 
denial,  the  woman  and  the  Beast  are  two  distinct  things.  For 
if  the  Beast  be  the  Roman  empire,  as  those  will  have  seen  who 
have  followed  me  through  this  book,  the  woman  cannot  be. 
She  may  be  seated  upon  the  Beast,  but  for  that  very  reason, 
she  is  not  the  same  thing.  And  not  only  the  woman  is  distinct 
from  the  Beast,  but,  as  we  find  afterwards,  the  Beast  turns 
against  the  woman  and  takes  his  part  in  destroying  her. 

Therefore  it  is  quite  evident,  that  it  is  impossible  to  suppose 
the  woman  and  the  Beast  to  be  the  same  thing.  In  the  end 
they  are  so  violently  opposed,  that  the  one  becomes  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  other.  So  that  the  woman  must  necessarily  be  some 
power  distinct  from  the  empire.  We  shall  find  more  reasons 
that  confirm  their  distinction. 

"The  Beast  that  thou  sawest  was,  and  is  not;  and  is  to 
ascend  out  of  the  bottomless  pit,  and  go  into  perdition  :  and 
they  that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall  wonder,  whose  names  were 
not  written  in  the  book  of  life  from  the  foundation  of  the  world, 


298  THE    SEVEN    MOUNTAINS.     * 

when  they  behold  the  Beast  that  was  and  is  not  and  shall  be 
present."  (Ver.  8.)  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  so  runs  the 
last  clause  of  the  verse.  This  would  not  be  questioned  by  those 
who  are  sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  subject  to  form  an 
opinion.  Persons  may  differ  in  the  explanation  of  the  verse  ; 
but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  such  is  the  true  reading.  The 
common  text  here  is  almost  contradictory  of  itself,  and  affords 
no  just  sense. 

Now  let  us  consider  a  little  what  is  taught  by  this  verse.  The 
Beast  is  the  Roman  empire,  as  we  have  before  seen.  But  we 
learn  here  that  that  empire  was  to  cease  to  be.  The  countries 
and  peoples  that  composed  it  would  remain  ;  but  its  imperial 
unity  would  cease  to  exist.  The  fractional  parts  would  be 
there,  each  nation  having  its  own  independent  government,  but 
there  would  be  no  corporate  bond.  Such  is  their  condition  in 
our  day,  as  it  has  been  for  more  than  a  thousand  years.  "  The 
Beast  which  thou  sawest  was  and  is  not,  and  shall  ascend  out 
of  the  bottomless  pit."  The  angel  characterizes  this  empire  as 
no  other  empire  ever  has  been  or  could  be.  It  was  first  found 
in  its  strength,  then  to  cease,  and  afterwards  to  rise  again.  But 
there  is  an  exceedingly  grave  feature  that  attaches  to  the  reap- 
pearance of  the  empire  ;  it  is  to  have  a  diabolical  character. 
And  as  it  comes  from  Satan,  so  must  it  end  with  Satan  :  it  shall 
"  go  into  perdition." 

These  things  could  not  be  said  in  the  same  sense  or  strictness 
of  any  other  empire.  None  that  has  appeared  yet  upon  earth, 
but  what  has  had  its  rise,  its  splendour  for  a  little  while  in  full 
power,  and  then  its  extinction,  sudden  or  gradual,  never  to  rise 
again.  I  am  not  aware  of  any  example  to  the  contrary.  Most 
peculiar  is  the  lot  of  that  empire  which  was  so  prominent  in  the 
Apostle  John's  mind.  It  existed  in  the  time  of  John  :  under  it 
indeed  he  was  personally  suffering.  But  it  was  to  terminate  its 
career  ;  and  then,  after  a  condition  of  non-existence, "  to  rise  out 
of  the  bottomless  pit."     "They  that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall 

wonder when  they  behold  the  Beast  that  was  and  is 

not,  and  shall  be  present."  When  this  Beast  reappears  in  its 
last  Satanic  phase,  men  would  be  carried  away  by  their  excessive 
admiration  of  it. 

"  Here  is  the  mind  which  hath  wisdom.  The  seven  heads  are 
seven  mountains,  on  which  the  woman  sitteth."  (Ver.  9.)  This  is 
a  material  point,  though  simple.  It  is  a  local  mark,  intended  to 
indicate  to  the  wise  mind,  where  this  woman  has  her  seat.  There 
ought  not  to  be  the  least  doubt,  that  it  is  a  reference  to  Rome. 
The  word  "  Babylon"  had  been  used,  it  is  true,  in  speaking  of  it, 


THE    BEAST    IS   THE    EIGHTH.  299 

as  Sodom  and  Egypt  were  figuratively  applied  to  Jerusalem  in 
chap.  xi.  ;  but  the  Chaldean  capital  had  nothing  to  do  with  the 
city  of  Rev.  xvii.  That  had  long  passed  away  as  an  imperial 
city,  whereas  in  verse  18,  it  is  said  of  this  Babylon  that  "  itreign- 
eth  over  the  kings  of  the  earth,"  More  than  that,  the  literal 
Babylon  in  Chaldea  was  built  upon  the  plain  of  Shinar.  This 
woman  was  seated  upon  seven  mountains,  and  all  the  world  is 
aware  that  such  is  the  well-known  characteristic  of  Rome.  In 
prose  or  in  poetry,  if  any  city  were  described  as  being  seated 
upon  seven  hills,  every  one  would  say.  That  must  be  Rome. 

But  we  have  an  additional  explanation  in  the  following  verse. 
"  There,  or  they  are  seven  kings  :  five  are  fallen,  and  one  is,  and 
the  other  is  not  yet  come  ;  and  when  he  cometh,  he  must  con- 
tinue a  short  space."  (Ver.  10.)  Here  the  Holy  Ghost,  without 
entei-ing  into  detail,  refers  to  the  various  forms  of  government 
which  had  succeeded  each  other  in  this  famous  city,  Rome.  There 
were  seven  heads  or  kings;  not  contemporary :  for  five,  as  it  is  said, 
were  fallen  ;  one  is,  and  the  other  is  not  yet  come.  That  implies 
succession.  Five  different  modes  of  government  had  already 
passed  away.  "  One  is,"  namely,  the  imperial  form  then  sub- 
sisting, when  the  apostle  lived,  the  line  of  Caesars.  Another  of 
the  seven  was  not  yet  come,  but  when  it  did,  it  must  continue  a 
short  space. 

"  And  the  Beast  that  was  and  is  not,  even  he  is  theleighth, 
and  is  of  the  seven,  and  goeth  into  perdition."  (Ver.  11.)  There  is 
this  peculiar  character  attributed  to  the  Beast  here,  that  in  one 
sense  he  would  be  of  the  seven,  and  in  another  he  would  form  an 
eighth  or  extraordinary  beast.  It  would,  in  certain  respects,  be 
a  new  form  of  power  altogether,  while  in  others,  it  would  be  but 
a  revival  of  Avhat  had  gone  before.  The  reason  is,  that  the 
Beast,  at  first,  might  be  like  any  other  empire.  It  might  owe 
its  rise  providentially  to  human  revolutions;  for  men,  when 
they  have  ti-ied  democracy,  are  apt  to  grow  weary  and  disap- 
pointed, and  then  some  vigorous  arm  takes  advantage  of  the 
reaction,  and  a  despotic  power  is  the  not  unnatural  result.  I 
have  no  doubt  that  will  be  the  history  of  the  west.  This  eighth 
head,  though  an  individual  ruler,  is  spoken  of  as  the  Beast  or 
empire,  because  he  is  morally  the  empire,  directing,  as  supreme, 
all  its  authority.  He  is  of  the  seven,  for  there  will  be  a  conti- 
nuance or  taking  up  of  some  such  form  of  power  as  before. 
But  he  will  be  the  eighth,  that  is,  there  will  be  something  so 
peculiar,  as  to  deserve  a  name  to  itself.  That  new  feature  may 
refer,  perhaps,  to  the  diabolical  powei'  that  stamps  the  Beast  in 
his  last  or  quasi-resurrection  state. 


300  ONE    HOUR 

"  And  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest  are  ten  kings,  which 
have  received  no  kingdom  as  yet ;  but  receive  power  as  kings 
one  hour  with  the  Beast.  These  have  one  mind,  and  shall  give 
their  power  and  authority  to  the  Beast."  It  is  not  that  we  are 
to  suppose  "  one  hour"  to  mean  mystically,  or  literally,  such  a 
brief  division  of  time,  as  it  has  been  the  vain  attempt  of  so 
many  persons  to  try  and  make  out.  But  the  meaning  is  that 
these  are  kings  who  receive  power  as  kings  for  one  and  the 
same  time*  with  the  Beast.     Abstractedly,  ever  so  many  years 

*  Quite  agreeing  with  Mr.  E.  that  the  notion  of  horal  brevity  is  untenable,  I 
must  utterly  reject  his  statement  (H.  A.  iii.  pp.  74,  75,  and  often  elsewhere)  that 
"  at  one  and  the  same  time"  is  either  the  most  natural  or  the  true  rendering.  It  is 
almost  past  comprehension  how  a  scholar  could  have  committed  himself  to  what 
he  says  in  his  notes  :  "  there  is  no  doubt  that  accusatives  of  time  may  (!)  signify 
duration  ;  but  seldom,  I  believe,  except  after  verbs  signifying  action  such  as  may 
imply  time,  not  often  after  verbs,  like  Xaixfiavui,  of  action  instantly  completed." 
The  truth  is,  as  every  person  of  learning  must  know,  that  as  a  rule  the  temporal 
accusative  distinctively  denotes  duration,  while  the  dative  is  just  as  notoriously 
used  for  a  point  of  time,  and  the  genitive  when  time  is  conceived  as  the  necessary 
condition  of  the  action,  and  therefore  antecedent  to  it.  Nor  is  this  confined  to 
certain  words  only.  "  All  verbs  imply  a  notion  of  time  (says  Jelf,  vol.  ii.  p.  377) 
over  which  the  action  extends,  coiuoident  and  coextensive  with  it ;  whence  all 
verbs  may  have  an  accusative  case  of  this  coincident  notion  of  time,  if  it  be 
required  definitely  to  express  it."  That  I  may  not  appear  to  have  drawn  the 
distinction  of  the  Greek  cases  for  controversial  purposes,  I  must  cite  further  from 
Jelf,  §.  606,  Obs.  2.  "The  genitive,  accusative,  and  dative,  therefore,  are  all  used 
to  express  relations  of  time,  and  they  difler  as  follows  :  the  time  is  represented  by 
the  genitive  as  the  antecedent  condition  of  the  action  ;  by  the  dative  as  the  space 
wherein  the  action  took  place  ;  while  the  accusative  expresses  the  duration  of  the 
action.  So  compare  TaiTT']s  rris  Ti/J.epas  ol  "EWTjves  iiJ.axiffo.vTO,  this  day  giving 
them  the  occasion,  with  ravrrj  rij  v/xepa  on  this  day,  and  Tavrr\v  tV  rifxepay, 
throughout  this  day.  These  general  priusiples  find  the  fullest  illustration  in  the 
Hellenistic  of  the  LXX.  and  the  New  Testament,  as  well  as  in  classical 
Greek.  See,  for  the  time  at  which,  (the  dative,)  Gen.  ii.  2,  3,  17  ;  iii.  5  j  v.  1,  2  ; 
vi.  4  ;  vii.  11,  13 ;  viii.  4,  5,  13,  14  ;  xiv.  4,  5 ;  xv.  16,  18  ;  xvii.  26  ;  xix.  33,  34, 
35  ;  xxi.  4,  8  ;  xxii.  3.,  &c.  But  why  thus  run  through  the  occurrences  ?  It  were 
to  cite  from  every  book  of  the  Bible,  wherein  epochs  are  spoken  of.  I  will  only 
therefore  refer  to  the  Apocalypse,  as  it  may  be  alleged  that  the  Greek  is  peculiar 
there  :  Eev.  i.  10  ;  ii.  13  ;  ix.  6 ;  x.  7  ;  xi.  13  ;  xviii.  8,  10,  16,  19.  On  the  con- 
trary, when  duration  is  intended,  the  accusative  is  employed  with  equal  regularity  : 
Gen.  iii.  14,  17  ;  v.  3,  4,  6,  7,  9,  10,  12,  13,  15,  16,  &c.,  passim  ;  vii.  4,  12,  17, 
24 ;  viii.  10,  12,  22  ;  ix.  28  ;  xi.  11-26— in  every  verse,  &c.  So,  in  Eev.  ii.  10  (in 
the  text  of  B.,  thirty-two  cursives,  and  apparently  the  ancient  versions,  Arothas, 
and  the  Catena,  while  AC.  many  cursives,  Andreas,  «&c.,  have  ri^iepwv)  ;  vi.  11  ; 
Tiii.  1 ;  ix.  5,  10  ;  xi.  2,  3,  6  (so  in  ABC.  most  cursives,  Ilippolytus,  Andreas — 
save  in  one  manuscript, — Arethas  and  the  Catena),  9  ;  xii.  6,  14  ;  xiii.  5  ;  xvii.  10 
(not  to  speak  of  12)  ;  xx.  2,  4,  6.  It  is  certain,  therefore,  that  the  most  natural 
rendering  of  ixiav  lljpav  is  not  at  but /or  one  hour.  (Compare  Dan.  iv.  9  ;  Matt. 
XX.  12  ;  xxvi.  40).  As  to  the  action  expressed  by  the  verb,  the  objection  is  futile. 
If  the  angel  bound  Satan  for  a  thousand  years,  the  ten  horns  may  assuredly  receive 
kingly  authority  for  one  and  the  same  time  with  the  Beast.  It  is  not  the  mere  act 
of  binding  or  receiving,  but  the  effect  which  spreads  over  the  given  time.  Is  it  de- 
nied then  that  the  point  of  time  is  ever  found  in  the  accusative?  Not  at  all ; 
"  but  this  only  (says  Jelf,  §.  571,  Obs.  1)  in  general   notions  of  time,   such  a8  sea- 


WITH    THE    BEAST.  ^  301 

miglit  be  meant,  or  only  a  short  period.  It  is  not  a  question  of 
what  an  "  hour"  means.  It  imphes  that  these  ten  horns  shouhl 
not  merely  have  their  period  of  power,  but  that  they  should 
receive  their  kingly  power  for  one  and  the  same  time  with  the 
Beast.  This  is  most  important  to  the  due  understanding  of  this 
verse.  It  overthrows  ail  the  pi-ophetical  systems  which  have 
attempted  to  make  out  that  this  chapter  has  been  exhausted  in 
the  past  or  present.  The  common  view  of  the  chapter  may 
have  a  certain  measui-e  of  truth  ;  because,  as  I  fully  believe,  the 
book  of  Revelation  was  intended  to  be  partially  accomphshed 
all  through  the  dispensation  :  but  the  complete  fulfilment  is  only 
at  the  close.  The  barbarian  hordes  came  down  from  the  north 
and  east  of  Europe  and  Asia,  about  the  fifth  century,  and  over- 
spread the  Roman  empire,  bursting  over  Europe  from  all  points, 
and  attacking  it  within  and  on  every  side,  so  that  the  empire, 
already  too  extended,  and  crumbling  under  its  own  weight, 
found  it  impossible  to  hold  up  against  these  vigorous  and  re- 
peated assaults  from  so  many  quarters.  By  degrees,  the  Goths 
and  Vandals,  &c.,  settled  themselves  in  the  various  parts  of  that 
which  was  once  united.  They  were  the  enemies  that  destroyed 
the  empire. 

sonably,  lastly,  where  the  accusative  stands  for  the  cognate  substantive."  Nobody 
can  pretend  that  such  is  the  case  in  the  disputed  clause  ;  and  in  my  opinion  it  is 
more  than  questionable  in  the  three  exceptions,  which  are  px-oduced  (as  if  they 
were  the  ordinary  construction  !)  from  the  New  Testament :  John  iv.  52  ;  Acts  x. 
3,  and  Rev.  iii.  3.  For  it  is  well  known  that  the  best  manuscripts,  the  Alexandrian, 
the  Vatican,  the  Palimpsest  of  Paris,  the  Laudian  of  Oxford,  not  to  speak  of  some 
twenty-five  juniors  and  other  good  authorities,  insert  Trepf,  as  all  do  in  ver.  9.  Aa 
to  John  iv.  52,  may  it  not  be  accounted  for  by  a  reference  to  the  question  of  the 
nobleman  ?  He  enquired  the  hour,  r7)v  S>pav,  fv  rj.  The  servants  answer,  Yester- 
day ePS6ixriv  wpav.  Then  he  knew  that  it  was  tV  iKfli/ri  rfj  Sipa.  in  which  Jesus  had 
spoken  the  word  of  healing  power.  So,  again,  I  think  Eev.  iii.  3  ia  perhaps  due 
to  a  sort  of  mixed  construction  dependent  on  yv<^s.  It  may  not  be  known  gene- 
rally that  this  is  one  of  the  instances  alleged  by  unfriendly  criticism  iji  evidence 
that  the  Apocalypse  employs  the  accusative  of  time  contrary  to  good  usage.  But 
this,  says  Professor  Stuart,  is  the  only  instance  of  the  kind  in  the  whole  book. 
He  explains  it  thus  :  "  That  time  which  is  at  the  ultimate  extent  of  his  coming  is 
here  the  prominent  idea,  and  therefore  the  accusative  is  allowable."  (Comment. 
Apoc.  p.  204).  Matt.  xxiv.  41,  42,  43,  44,  50  ;  Luke  xii.  39,  46,  show  plainly 
enough  the  usage  undisturbed  by  special  causes.  The  difBculty  is  merely  technical 
in  the  exceptional  cases,  which  entirely  dilTer  from  the  text  in  question.  As  to  it 
I  see  no  ground  for  a  doubt,  nor  have  I  any  theory  to  uphold  by  it ;  for  the  true 
rendering  implies  the  same  starting  point,  but  it  also  determines  the  equal  dura- 
tion of  the  Beast  and  the  ten  horns.  The  Aethiopic  and  Arabic  understood  the 
phrase  as  expressive  of  duration,  the  Syriac  and  Latin  as  a  point  of  time.  But 
why  attach  such  moment  to  the  Vulgate  on  a  nicety  like  this,  when  the  words 
which  conclude  the  verse  contain  the  gross  blunder  of  rendering  ixara  tov  6.  as  if 
it  were  fx.  rh  6.  ?  Some  copies  add  "  et "  also — "  [et]  post  bestiam."  Cyril  and 
Theodoret  do  not  touch  the  question.  Can  Mr.  E.  produce  a  single  instance  from 
any  correct  writer,  where  filau  ii>pav  or  rifxepav  by  itself  is  used  save  for  during  one 
hour  or  day  ? 


302  PAST    HISTORY    FAILS    TO    MEET    THE    CASE. 

But  that  is  not  what  is  shown  us  in  the  chapter.  It  tells  us 
that  these  kings  receive  power  for  one  hour  with  the  Beast. 
Supposing  that  these  barbarian  kingdoms  had  been  exactly  ten 
in  number,  even  this  does  not  answer  to  what  we  have  here  ; 
because  we  are  told  that  these  ten  kings  receive  power  for  one 
and  the  same  time  with  the  Beast.  They  only  received  their 
power  when  the  Beast  was  dead,  when  the  Roman  empire  had 
fallen.  They  destroyed  the  Beast  first,  and  then  erected  them- 
selves into  independent  kingdoms. 

Nothing  can  get  rid  of  the  sure,  simple  fact  that  these  powers 
were  not  kingdoms  in  the  empire  while  the  empire  lasted. 
They  had  not  power  loith  the  Beast,  much  less  did  they  give 
their  power  and  strength  to  the  Beast.  For  nothing  is  more 
certain  than  that  when  they  became  kingdoms,  it  was  at  the 
expense  of  the  empire.  When  it  was  gone,  they  took  up  the 
broken  fragments,  and  converted  them  into  separate  kingdoms, 
France,  Spain,  &c. —  but  the  empire  as  such  was  fallen.  The 
Beast  that  is  described  here  acquires  power  as  an  empire,  at  the 
same  time  that  these  kings  receive  their  power  as  kings.  In 
other  words,  they  are  contemporary  powers,  the  Beast  and  the 
horns,  and  not  that  which  we  find  in  history  at  all.  This  pro- 
phecy shows  us  that  the  empire  is  only  formed  as  such  again, 
at  the  same  time  that  these  ten  kingdoms  have  their  final  power. 
They  are  co-existing,  and  have  their  dominion  together  —  each 
of  these  several  kingdoms  working  to  a  common  end  under  the 
Beast. 

Thus,  in  the  facts  of  the  past,  first  of  all  there  was  a  united 
unbroken  power,  when  the  Roman  empire  governed  the  western 
world,*  and  did  not  admit  of  different  independent  kingdoms 
within  its  own  limits.  There  was  no  such  thing  then  as  the 
kings  of  Spain,  France,  Italy,  &c.  It  was  an  all-absorbing 
power,  and  would  never  have  allowed  such  separate  kingdoms 
to  cluster  round  the  imperial  city.  But  the  peculiarity  of  the 
future  revived  empire,  is  that  it  will  admit  of  distinct  kings. 
Two  things  will  be  united  which  never  were  before.  First, 
there  has  been  the  empire  without  kings — at  least,  so  it  was  in 
the  West,  which  is  the  question  here.  Then  there  were  kings 
without  the  empire.  The  new  feature  will  be  this  :  neither  the 
Beast  without  the  kings,  nor  the  kings  without  the  Beast ;  but 
both  the  Beast  and  the  kingdoms  going  on  together.  This  is  what 

*  That  is,  the  properly  Roman  part  only  of  the  empire,  as  we  gather  from  Dan. 
ii.  34,  35,  and  chap.  vii. — not  to  speak  of  l)an.  xi.  ;  from  all  which  it  is  plain  that 
the  iron-clay  kingdom  does  not  refer  to  what  was  once  under  the  Roman  sway 
outside  Europe,  but  to  the  westeru  part  which  never  belonged  to  Greece,  Persia, 
or  Babylon. 


THE    SAINTS    COME    WITH    CHRIST.  303 

never  has  existed  before.  So  that  the  chapter  gives  us  a  view 
of  the  Roman  empire  as  it  will  be  resuscitated  by  the  power  of 
Satan,  and  shows  that  then  it  is  destined  to  have  the  peculiar 
stamp  of  the  enemy  upon  it :  God  Himself  allowing-  him  to  have 
his  way  for  a  short  space,  and  to  perpetrate  all  his  wickedness 
before  the  end.  Just  as  Judas  was  filled  with  Satan  when  he 
was  about  to  betray  the  Lord  for  the  price  of  a  slave.  He  was 
under  the  influence  of  Satan  before  ;  but  it  is  said  then  that 
Satan  entered  into  him.  He  or  his  high-priest  was  the  son  of 
perdition,  and  that  is  the  very  name  that  is  given  to  the  future 
power  that  will  rise  up  against  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This 
empire  is  to  rise  up  out  of  the  bottomless  pit,  and  to  be  clothed 
with  a  diabolical  character  and  energy  ;  and  when  it  comes  up, 
there  are  to  be  ten  kingdoms  or  kings,  exercising  regal  power 
for  the  same  period  with  the  Beast. 

The  next  verse  (13)  shows  us  the  policy  common  to  them, 
"  These  have  one  mind,  and  shall  give  their  power  and  strength 
unto  the  Beast."  They  are  not  jealous  of  the  Beast ;  their  great 
object  is  to  exalt  him  and  to  aggrandize  his  power.  And  what 
is  the  issue  ?  what  the  use  they  make  of  their  combined  power  ? 
"  These  shall  make  war  with  the  Lamb,  and  the  Lamb  shall 
overcome  them  (for  he  is  Lord  of  lords  and  King  of  kings),  and 
they  that  are  with  him,  called  and  chosen  and  faithful."  (Ver.  14.) 
So  it  is  evident  from  this,  that  the  heavenly  saints  are  already  gone 
to  the  Lord.  It  is  not  that  the  Lord  receives  them  now  ;  they 
are  with  Him  in  the  conflict,  and  before  the  conflict  begins. 
And  this  is  confirmed  by  chap.  xix.  14.  "  And  the  armies  which 
were  in  heaven  followed  him  upon  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine 
linen,  clean  and  white."  Whence  did  they  follow  Him  ?  It  is 
a  heavenly  scene.  Christ  is  coming  to  attack  the  great  adver- 
sary upon  the  earth  whom  Satan  employs.  But  it  is  the  hea- 
vens that  open,  and  thence  not  only  Christ  comes,  but  "  they 
that  are  with  him,  called  and  chosen  and  faithful." 

It  is  not  a  description  of  angels  :  for  though  angels  may  be 
said  to  be  "chosen"  or  "elect,"  they  are  never  said  to  be 
"  called."  "  Called"  is  a  title  only  used  of  men,  and  supposes 
the  working  of  grace.  Angels  are  not,  and,  I  think,  could  not 
be,  "  called  ;"  for  if  an  angel  were  in  a  position  of  evil,  he  could 
not  be  delivei'ed  out  of  it  ;  and  if  he  were  in  a  holy  position,  he 
would  not  need  "  calling."  Calling  always  presumes  a  condi- 
tion out  of  which  the  called  are  brought.  The  believer  is  brought 
from  a  place  of  sin  and  misery,  into  one  of  salvation  and  bless- 
ing. This  is  true  of  man  alone.  He  is  the  only  creature  of 
God  that  is  called,  through  God's  grace,  out  of  a  state  of  ruin 


304  THE  TEN  HORNS  AND  THE  BEAST. 

into  the  blessedness  and  glory  of  redemption.  And  as  in  chap, 
xvii,  14,  there  is  this  expression  which  shows  us  positively  that 
saints  and  not  angels  are  spoken  of,  so  in  chap.  xix.  14, 
we  are  told  that  the  armies,  which  follow  the  Lamb  out  of 
heaven,  are  "  clotlied  in  fine  linen,  white  and  clean."  Now  it  is 
said  in  the  same  chapter  (ver.  8),  that  fine  linen  is  the  righteous- 
ness o£  saints.  People  may  ask,  are  not  angels  said  to  be  clothed 
in  linen  ?  Yes,  they  are  ;  but  it  is  not  the  same  term  that  is 
used  (e.  g.  in  Rev.  xv.  6).  The  Spirit  of  God  employs  a  different 
expression  to  describe  it,  never  confounding  the  two  things. 
The  plain  inference,  then,  is,  that  the  glorified  saints  are  in 
heaven,  with  the  Lord,  before  this  conflict  begins — not  merely 
with  the  Lord  in  the  air.  When  the  Loi'd  comes,  we  do  meet 
Him  in  the  air.  Then  it  is  that  He  may  take  us  to  heaven. 
But  when  He  comes  in  order  to  judge  and  make  war,  we  come 
with  Him  from  heaven.  How  long  a  time  may  have  expired 
while  we  are  in  heaven,  and  before  we  come  with  the  Lord,  we 
do  not  know  ;  but  the  coming  of  the  Lord  /or  the  saints  is  an 
event  that  takes  place  some  time  before  He  comes  with  them. 
When  He  comes  with  the  saints,  it  is  for  the  purpose  of  judging 
the  Beast,  and  his  adherents.  The  Church  will  come  with  Him 
then,  and  the  Old  Testament  saints  too,  for  they  will  have  been 
caught  up  to  the  Lord  at  the  same  time  that  we  are,  I  doubt 
not.     "  These  shall  make  war  with  the  Lamb" — but  the  victory 

is   sure — "  and  the  Lamb  shall  overcome  them, and 

they  that  are  with  Him,  called,  and  chosen,  and  faithful." 

"  And  he  saith  unto  me.  The  waters  which  thou  sawest,  where 
the  whore  sitteth,  are  peoples,  and  multitudes,  and  nations,  and 
tongues.  And  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest,  and  the  Beast, 
these  shall  hate  the  whore,  and  shall  make  her  desolate  and  naked, 
and  shall  eat  her  flesh  and  burn  her  with  fire."  (Ver.  15,  16.) 
This  is  another  verse  of  great  value  for  understanding  the  chapter. 
In  our  common  text  it  says,  "  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest 
upon*  the  Beast :"  but  it  ought  to  be  read,  "  the  ten  horns  which 

*  Here  is  another  flagrant  proof  of  Mr.  E.'s  proncuess  to  prefer  a  manifestly 
spurious  reading,  which  his  hypothesis  requires,  to  the  reading  which  has  the 
support  of  the  best  authorities  and  the  suffrages  of,  perhaps,  everj  critic  of 
weight.  "  I  think,  (he  says,)  with  Daubuz,  that  tliis  reading  (/cai)  is  most  unlikely. 
He  writes  thus  :  '  This  (kui)  is  the  reading  of  the  Complutensian  edition ;  but  the 
rest  have  ewt  to  Oripiov  instead  of  km  ro  dr^ptov.  This  last  is  not  consistent  with 
the  description,  or  distinction,  of  the  ten  horns  and  Beast ;  and  therefore  I  have 
received  the  other  in  my  translation.  For  the  Beast,  as  such,  can  never  (!)  be 
said  to  hate  the  whore  ;  but  the  horns  upon  the  Beast  may.'  p.  795.  Vitriuga 
too  adopts  the  reading  eiri,  '  decern  cornua  quae  vidisti  in  Bestia,'  without  even 
noticing  (!)  the  other.  It  is  the  reading  of  the  Vulgate  :  '  Decern,'  &c.  Bellar- 
mine  urges  the  reading  Kai,  in  defence  of  the  papacy  against  Protestants.     'For 


"  UPON    THE    beast"    IS    AN    ERROR.  305 

thou  sawest  and  the  Beast."  The  importance  of  the  change  is 
this  (and  there  is  positive  authority  for  it),  that  when  people 
read,  "  the  ten  horns  upon  the  Beast,"  they  might  have  imagined 
that  the  Roman  empire  was  gone,  and  that  these  ten  horns  took 
its  place.  This  would  very  well  have  suited  the  past  history. 
But,  as  we  have  seen  before,  that  the  ten  horns  receive  their 
kingdom  for  the  same  time  with  the  Beast,  so  here  the  Spirit  of 
God  says,  "  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest  and  the  Beast :" 
and  any  person  who  weighs  this  with  verse  12,  would  perceive 
how  mistaken  the  usual  thought  is.  "  The  ten  horns  which  thou 
sawest,  and  the  Beast,  these  shall  hate  the  whore,  and  shall  make 
her  desolate,"  &c.* 

how  can  Bishops  of  Rome  be  Antichrist,'  he  argues,  'when  Antichrist  is  to  join 
with  the  ten  kings  and  destroy  Rome  ?  '  But  the  infallible  Vulgate,  we  saw,  as 
well  as  his  brother  Romanists  Ribera,  a  Lapide,  Malvenda,  &c.,  are  here  against 
him.  The  prophetic  sword's  edge  cannot  be  so  averted  from  Rome.  Bellarmine 
admits  the  Beast  to  be  Antichrist,  and  the  zvoman  of  the  seven  hills  to  be  Rome. 
And  what  their  pictured  relation  to  each  other  in  the  vision,  but  that  of  the 
closest  intimacy  and  alliance  ?  If  Kai  be  read,  what  is  said  of  the  Beast's  hating 
the  woman,  &c.,  can  be  understood  only  of  the  city  of  Rome,  not  the  Church  of 
Rome.  For  the  Apostate  Church's  False  Prophet  continues  with  the  Beast  to 
the  end.  So  Apoc.  xix.  19.  Compare  what  is  said  of  treading  the  loineprest 
tvithout  the  city,  p.  15  supra."     (11.  A.  Vol.  iv.  p.  27,  note.) 

That  Daubuz,  (in  1720,)  should  have  laboured  under  a  mistake  as  to  the  com- 
parative claims  of  the  two  readings,  one  can  conceive  ;  that  Vitriuga,  spite  of  his 
historical  lore  and  general  ability  in  expounding,  should  have  ignored  the  best 
witnesses  then  known,  is  not  perhaps  very  wonderful.  But  it  is  passing  strange 
that  in  the  face  of  the  unanimity  of  critical  editors,  presenting  every  shade  of 
religious  prejudice  and  prepossession,  such  as  Bengel,  Grriesbach,  Lachmann,  Mat- 
thaei,  Scholz,  Tischendorf,  Tregelles,  Vater,  &c.,  who  had  no  preconceived  notions 
to  blind  their  judgment,  Mr.  E.  should  persist  in  an  opinion  so  unfounded.  It  is 
not  a  small  matter  to  slight  the  evidence  of  both  the  uncials,  forty  cursives  (some 
of  the  highest  character),  of  the  Aethiopic,  Arabic  of  the  Polyglotts,  Syriac,  &c. 
If  Wilkins  is  to  be  depended  on,  the  Coptic,  it  seems,  should  be  added.  As  to  the 
Vulgate,  Mr.  E.  is  misinformed.  The  common  printed  text,  no  doubt,  has  "  in 
bestia,"  but  the  very  ancient  and  best  copies  (including  the  Amiatine  in  the  Lau- 
rentian  Library  of  Florence,  Fuld.  Demidov.  Tol.  &c.)  read  "etbestiam."  What- 
ever may  be  the  inconsistency  of  Popish  apologists,  I  cannot  admire  Protestant 
special  pleading,  which  contends  for  a  reading  that  is  utterly  indefensible.  In  this 
instance,  at  least,  it  is  plain  which  of  the  two  is  most  open  to  the  charge  of  blunt- 
ing the  edge  of  the  prophetic  sword.  Rome  is  Babylon  ;  but  the  ten  horns  and 
the  Beast  (hardly  the  Pope  !)  are  yet  to  unite  in  destroying  her.  It  is  not  the 
first  intimacy  or  alliance  which  has  closed  in  hatred  and  violence.  The  false  pro- 
phet continues  with  the  Beast  to  the  end  ;  but  this  neither  proves  nor  disproves 
that  Babylon  is  the  Romish  church.  Why  may  there  not  be  a  new  form  of 
religious  wickedness  in  the  Holy  Land,  even  when  Rome,  city  and  church,  shall 
have  disappeared  ? 

*  The  attempt  of  Protestants  is  vain  to  reconcile  this  statement  with  their 
theory  that  the  woman  and  the  Beast  refer  to  the  Church  or  city  of  Rome,  and 
the  Papacy.  Thus,  it  has  been  recently  argued  that  the  woman  is  the  Roma  Dea, 
both  Pagan  and  Papal,  the  scene  representing  Rome  itself  in  the  latter  point  of 
Tiew,  the  angel's  explanation  including  also  the  previous  pagan  history.     Accord- 

21 


306  BABYLON    TRIUMPHS    BEFORE    HER    FALL. 

A  little  sample  of  this,  not  of  course  executed  by  the  Beast  or 
by  the  kings,  but  by  the  will  of  the  people,  appears  in  the  French 
revolution  of  the  last  century.  There  you  had  an  infuriate 
people  rising  up  against  the  woman  ;  the  ecclesiastical  poAver 
that  had  ruled  the  earth  being  completely  given  up  to  the  rage 
of  the  multitude,  and  men  enriching  themselves  at  her  expense. 
But  we  must  never  meet  one  wrong  by  being  guilty  of  another. 
The  Christian  way  to  deal  with  evil  is  ever  by  grace  lifting  us 
above  it.  Events  that  have  been  seen  on  a  small  scale  will  be 
then  realized  on  a  larger  one.  Good  men — men  worthy  of 
honour  and  in  other  respects  wise,  have  not  only  desired  to  get 
rid  of  Babylon,  but  have  been  too  apt  to  sanction  any  means 
with  that  aim.  I  say  not  that  saints  are  not  to  rejoice  in  her 
fall ;  but  that  they  ought  not  to  mix  themselves  up  with  the 
instruments  of  it,  nor  to  cherish  unfounded  hopes  of  blessing 
then  and  thence.  Home  will  always  be  the  central  city  of  this 
corrupt  system.  "The  woman  which  thou  sawest  is  the  great 
city  that  hath  sway  over  the  kings  of  the  earth."  (Ver.  18.) 
There  will,  no  doubt,  be  a  further  development  of  it  before 
the  close  ;  for  she  wljo  sits  as  queen  has  given  proof  even 
in  our  own  days,  that  she  can  invent  new  doctrines,  and  boast 
new  miracles,  developing  wickedness  without  conscience  and 
with  feeble  protest,  nay,  in  the  midst  of  willing  and  universal 
acclamations.  And  it  will  be  true,  I  conceive,  of  Rome,  as  in 
all  other  cases,  that  before  the  judgment  comes,  her  cup  will  be 
full.  It  was  so  with  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites,  when  God 
judged  them.     But  God  will  employ  the  powers  of  the  earth  to 

ingly,  the  idea  is  that  the  teu  horns  undiadenied  are  the  Gothic  powers  desolating 
Rome,  diademed  are  the  same  kingdoms  giving  their  power  to  the  Pope.  For 
certainly  the  barbarians  ravaged  the  empire  as  a  whole,  not  the  city  exclusively, 
and  out  of  the  dismembered  empire  formed  their  own  independent  kingdoms. 
That  is,  the  Beast  was  that  which  they  spoiled  and  destroyed  much  more  than  the 
Woman.  K  or  were  they  united  in  a  common  feeling  of  hatred  towards  Eome. 
Envy,  covetousness,  lust  of  eonqiiest  would  more  aptly  characterize  the  motives 
of  the  particular  barbarians  who  attacked  the  city,  ytill  less  can  it  be  said  that, 
diademed  or  not,  they  gave  their  power  to  the  Pope.  It  would  be  more  true  to 
say  that  they  derived  it  from  him,  as  their  ecclesiastical  and  spiritual  head.  For 
ray  part,  1  altogether  admit  the  principle  that  the  explanation  gives  us,  not 
merely  the  key  to  what  was  originally  seen,  but  additional  tnith.  Only,  as  I 
have  shown,  the  absurdity  is  in  supposing  that  the  fresh  information  is  something 
about  the  past  pagan  form  of  Borne.  On  the  contrary,  it  really  furnishes  the 
future  closing  aspect,  when  the  Beast  and  the  ten  horns  have  a  common  policy, 
first,  in  wreaking  their  hatred  and  indulging  their  avarice  on  the  whore,  and  then, 
in  mustering  their  forces  with  one  consent  for  the  final  conflict  with  the  Lamb. 
The  Beast  is  to  ascend  from  the  abyss,  and  the  Lord  of  lords  descends  from  the 
throne  of  God.  The  chapter  gives  us  character  and  description,  not  dates.  The 
history  is  resumed  in  chap,  six.,  first,  as  to  heaven,  and  next,  as  to  the  earth, 
xvii.  xviii.  forming  a  descriptive  episode. 


THEN    THE    BEAST    BECOMES    MORE    DARING.  307 

deal  with  Babylon.  No  doubt  the  kings  will  think  well  of 
themselves  for  getting  rid  of  such  a  thing  ;  but  then  the  means 
used  may  be  as  bad  as  that  evil  itself.  And  what  will  be  the 
issue?  The  millennium?  Quite  the  contrary  —  they  will  make 
war  with  the  Lamb.  They  will  not  only  have  got  rid  of  Baby- 
lon, but  will  combine  against  Christ,  in  the  most  direct  and 
deadly  way.  When  this  day  comes,  man,  instead  of  being  any 
the  better  for  having  turned  against  Babylon,  will  give  all  his 
power  to  the  Beast :  and,  bad  as  Babylon  is,  the  Beast  is  more 
openly  wicked.  Nothing  is  more  hateful  to  God  under  the  sun 
than  religion,  where  it  is  used  as  a  cover  for  corruption  ;  and  that 
is  Babylon.  But  it  is  the  Beast  and  the  false  prophet  who  will 
deny  God  altogether.  As  we  read  in  the  Psalms,  "  The  fool 
hath  said  in  his  heart,  There  is  no  God."  Babylon  is  not  that 
wilful,  rebellious  spirit.  Therefore,  after  having  destroyed 
Babylon  and  eaten  her  flesh  and  burnt  her  with  fire,  after 
having  enriched  themselves  at  her  expense,  and  having  destroyed 
her,  we  find  that  those  avenging  powers  will  go  to  fight  with 
the  Lamb ;  they  will  set  themselves  in  open  opposition  to  the 
One  of  God's  choice,  the  holy,  heavenly  Sufferer. 

"  For  God  hath  put  in  their  hearts  to  do  His  mind,  and  to  do 
one  mind,  and  give  their  kingdom  to  the  Beast,  until  the  words  of 
God  shall  be  finished  (ver.  17)."    How  remarkable  it  is  to  observe 
that  thus  it  is  man  accomplishing  the  words  of  God,  when  his 
only  thought  is  that  he,  in  hatred  to  God,  is  blotting  out  the  most 
corrupt  thing  from  the  face  of  the  earth  !     No  doubt  Babylon  will 
have  deserved  it ;    but  the  kings,  without  knowing  how,  are  but 
doing  servile  work  for  Him  whose  authority  they  disown.    They 
will  have  had,  in  vain,   all  God's  dealings  under  the  law  before 
their  eyes  ;  they  will  have  had  the  whole  Christian  revelation  of 
grace  and  holiness,  founded  on  and  shown  in  the  cross  of  Jesus, 
only  to  despise  it ;    they  will  have  heard  and  rejected  the  latter- 
day  testimony,  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  which  will  be  given 
by  other,  and  I  believe,   by  Jewish  witnesses,  after  the  Church 
has  been  taken  to  heaven.     Anything  pretending  to  be  a  new 
testimony,  while  the   Church  is  on  earth,  must  be  false.     But 
when  the  Church  is  gone,  God  will  take  up  His  people  Israel 
again,  and  will  give  a  testimony,  not  so  much  meeting  souls  so 
as  to  put  them  in  connexion  with  Christ  in  heaven,  which  He  is 
doing  now,  but  sending  out,  far  and  wide  through  the  habitable 
world  a^  a  witness  to  all  nations,  the  glad   tidings  that  God's 
King  is  coming  to  set  up  His  kingdom ;    "  and  then  shall  the 
end  come." 

It  is  fellowship  with  Christ  as  the  suffering  One  which  gives 


308  CHRISTIAN    OBEDIENCE. 

US  deliverance  from  the  spirit  of  the  Beast,  the  spirit  of  proud 
independence.  How  shall  we  overcome  with  the  Lamb  ?  We 
must  be  with  Him,  and  that  is  what  gives  the  victory  now. 
Our  strength,  in  whatever  comes  before  us,  is  to  ask.  How  does 
the  Lord  feel  touching  it  ?  Supposing  I  am  invited  to  go  to 
some  great  sight,  to  join  in  some  movement  that  may  be  very 
attractive  naturally,  the  question  is,  Does  the  Lord  sympathize 
with  it  ?  Is  He  there?  And  if  this  applies  to  all  other  ques- 
tions, still  more  does  it  decide  in  what  concerns  the  holiest 
things,  as,  for  instance,  worship.  What  does  the  Lord  sanction 
and  sympathize  with  ?  What  is  most  according  to  His  heart 
and  mind  ?  What  really,  and  intelligently,  and  obediently 
gives  Him  honour?  Such  is  the  sole  key  for  faith  in  this  world  ; 
it  unlocks  many  a  difficulty,  and  through  the  opened  door, 
there  is  a  plain  path  for  our  feet. 

The  Lord  grant  that  none  of  us  may  put  aside  these  solemn 
truths !  To  neglect  His  warning  is  the  very  thing  that  tends, 
so  far,  to  bring  about  the  state  of  things  of  which  we  have  been 
speaking.  That  which  carries  away  in  this  direction  now,  is 
slighting  the  words  of  Qod  ;  though  we  shall,  in  the  end,  be 
fulfilling  them  to  our  own  shame.  We  shall  be  proving  how 
little  we  have  known  of  real  heart-subjection  to  God  ;  how  little 
we  had  appreciated  the  grace  in  which  we  stand,  and  how  little 
rejoiced  in  the  hope  of  His  glory.  We  shall  be  proving  that 
we  have  not  counted  it  an  honour  to  boAv,  and  to  give  up  what 
we  may  like,  or  what  others  might  like  for  us,  where  it  has  been 
a  question  of  God's  will.  For  to  us  this  should  decide  all ; 
because  "  we  are  sanctified  unto  the  obedience  and  sprinkling 
of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,"  i.e.  to  the  same  character  of  obe- 
dience which  marked  the  Lord  Jesus  here  below.  We  ought 
not  to  be  obeying  merely  because  we  7nust  do  it.  He  never 
obeyed  thus.  If  a  man  only  does  a  thing  because,  if  he  does  it 
not,  he  knows  he  will  be  punished,  it  shows  plainly  that  his 
heart  is  not  in  it — he  does  not  want  to  do  it.  Christian  obedience 
is  the  desire  of  doing  a  thing  because  it  is  the  will  of  God,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  gives  us  power,  through  presenting  Christ  to 
our  affections.  Remember  that  to  this  we  are  sanctified.  Saved 
by  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  instead  of  its  being  a  menace  of  death, 
as  in  Exod.  xxiv.,  we  are  sanctified  unto  the  obedience  of  Jesus 
Christ.  We  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace,  and  led  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  May  we  enjoy  the  power  of  His  Spirit,  and 
the  fulness  of  His  salvation  !  J3ear  in  mind,  however,  that  we 
are  thus  saved,  not  for  ourselves,  but  to  obey  after  the  same 
pattern  and  measure  of  obedience  as  that  of  Jesus. 


god's    judgment    of    BABYLON.  309 


CHAPTER    XVIII. 

I  THINK  that  the  case  of  Babylon  ilhistrates  strikingly  how  a 
judgment  which  is  said  to  be  God's,  may,  at  the  same  time,  be 
executed  by  men.  In  cliap.  xvii.  we  saw  that  God  will  make 
use  of  the  ten  horns  or  kings,  into  whose  dominions  the  Roman 
earth,  at  the  close  of  this  dispensation,  will  be  divided,  and  will 
give  especial  prominence  to  what  is  called  "  the  Beast,"  i.e.,  the 
power  that  gives  a  bond  to  those  otherwise  broken  parts.  The 
great  imperial  chief,  and  the  various  separate  but  no  longer 
independent  powers,  his  vassals,  wall  be  the  instruments  that 
God  will  employ  for  inflicting  His  judgments  upon  Babylon. 

Now  in  chapter  xviii.  not  a  word  of  this  occurs ;  and  the 
difference  is  so  obvious  and  great  at  fipt  sight,  that  some  have 
laid  it  down  with  decision  that  the  judgment  in  chapter  xvii.  is 
previous  to  that  in  chapter  xviii.,  that  the  destruction  of  Babylon 
in  the  former  is  merely  a  human  one,  but  that  her  doom  in  the 
latter  is  subsequent  and  directly  from  God.  But  I  would  not 
dogmatize  as  to  that  explanation,  conceiving,  on  the  contrarj', 
that,  in  the  same  judgment,  you  may  have  God's  and  man's  side 
of  the  matter,  God  dealing  providentially,  and  men  as  His  means 
of  striking  the  blow.  If  there  be  a  real  distinction,  the  "  fall  " 
precedes  the  final  destruction  ;  a  total  degradation  of  her  state 
ensues  upon  the  assault  of  the  civil  powers,  followed  by  an 
urgent  call  to  God's  people  to  come  out ;  and  then  her  utter 
everlasting  destruction  on  the  part  of  God. 

If  we  look  at  Babylon  in  the  Old  Testament,  justly  did  the 
prophets  speak  of  its  destruction  as  the  day  of  the  Lord  upon  it. 
"  This  is  the  w^ork  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  in  the  land  of  the 
Chaldeans."  (Jer.  1.)  At  the  same  time  it  is  quite  certain  that 
the  medium  through  which  God  brought  about  the  ruin  of 
Babylon  was  the  celebrated  Cyrus,  the  leader  of  the  Medo- 
Persian  army.  In  the  same  way,  in  Rev.  xvii.  we  get  the  actual 
human  instruments.  The  influence  of  Babylon  extended  much 
beyond,  but  the  ten  horns  of  the  Roman  earth  w^ere  those  powers 
that  radiated  as  it  were  from  her  very  centre.  And  therefore  it 
may  be  that  God  mentions  in  that  chapter  that  these  powers 
which  seemed  to  be  so  linked  with  Babylon,  as  her  abject  slaves, 
(the  imperial  power  itself  having  been  but  a  beast  of  bui'den  ta 


310         PRESENT    AND    FUTURE    APPLICATION    OF    BABYLON. 

her,)  are  to  turn  round  at  a  certain  time  appointed  by  God,  and 
to  wreak  their  vengeance,  scorn,  and  hatred,  upon  her.  They 
have  human  objects  no  doubt,  but  they  are  accomplishing  this 
work  of  God's  righteous  retribution.  God  will  have  put  it  into 
their  hearts  to  agree  and  give  their  kingdom  to  the  Beast, 
until  His  words  be  consummated. 

But  in  chap,  xviii.  Iiuman  instruments  disappear,  and  when 
this  other  angel  comes  down  from  heaven,  he  says  not  a  word  of 
those  that  God  had  employed  as  the  means  of  the  fall  of  Baby- 
lon ;  they  are  left  out,  and  the  Lord  God  it  is  that  judges  her. 
God  could  just  as  easily  have  destroyed  Babylon  without  the 
ten  kings  as  with  them.  They  were  in  no  way  necessary.  But 
it  is  a  part  of  His  government  of  the  earth,  if  she  had  reigned 
over  kings  and  committed  fornication  with  them  before,  to 
employ  the  ten  horns  to  humble  her  at  the  end.  They  might  be 
bad  men  with  bad  objects.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  show 
the  saints  distinctly  that  God  is  against  Babylon.  Let  us  now 
consider  a  little  this  new  point  of  view,  in  which  we  have  only 
two  parties  presented  in  ^  the  scene.  There  is  Babylon  upon 
earth,  and  there  is  God  in  heaven — and  the  Lord  God  is  against 
the  proud  queenly  city  that  had  been  the  constant  enemy  of  God 
and  of  His  people — that  had  been  the  instrument  of  Satan  to 
entice  and  draw  away  her  victims  into  an  evil  alliance  and  into 
idolatry  :  this  is  the  way  Babylon  is  looked  at  here.  And  yet  this 
Babylon  is  the  one  that  arrogated  to  herself  the  place  and  function 
of  making  God  known .  For  the  great  city  is  not  a  heathen  power : 
not  like  the  Babylon  of  old,  a  stranger  outside,  and  used  of  God 
as  a  means  of  inflicting  chastisement  upon  His  people  Israel.  I 
conceive  that  the  Babylon  of  Revelation  is  most  clearly  a  refer- 
ence to  Old  Testament  Babylon,  but  applied  to  New  Testament 
subjects.  In  the  Old  Testament,  the  great  thought  of  God  was 
His  people  and  land  :  and  there  was  also  a  city  on  which  His 
eye  rested  with  special  affection.  For  not  only  He  loved  the 
people  but  was  interested  in  what  He  gave  the  people.  But 
that  has  entirely  passed  away  since  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was 
crucified.  From  tliat  moment  till  now,  there  has  been  no  one 
place  more  holy  than  another.  That  which  had  been  the  holy 
city,  was  now  the  very  field  that  became  stained  with  the  blood 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  God's  eye  saw  that  in  process 
of  time  there  should  arise  a  city  and  a  professing  people,  who 
would  take  advantage  of  His  own  revelation,  and  out  of  the 
corrupted  and  fallen  state  of  Christianity  would  make  a  system 
of  its  own  —  would  borrow  all  that  it  could  take  from  Judaism, 
and,  mingling  it  with  its  own  Gentile  evil,  would  thus  work  out 


BABEL   OF    OLD. 


311 


a  system  most  hateful  to  God,  and  seducing-  to  man.  I  have  no 
doubt,  therefore,  that  in  tliis  chapter  it  is  Rome  that  is  the  pecu- 
liar object  of  God's  judgment.  Not  that  Rome  is  all  that  is 
meant  by  Babylon,  but  that  Rome  is  the  centre  of  it;  because  it  is, 
of  all  others,  the  most  guilty  in  God's  sight.  Not  Rome  in  the 
pagan  form  ;  not  merely  Rome  in  our  own  days,  bad  as  it  is,  and, 
I  believe,  increasingly  wicked.  But  I  think  that  the  Babylon 
of  the  Apocalypse  is  not  merely  that  system  which  is  now 
opposed  to  Christianity,  but  Babylon  when  it  will  have  opposed 
the  last  testimony  that  God  will  send  —  God's  testimony  of  His 
own  kingdom  that  He  is  about  to  set  up  over  His  beloved 
people.  For  God  never  gives  up  His  purpose.  It  is  part  of 
the  character  of  God  never  to  repent  of  His  gifts  and  calling. 
Where  it  is  not  a  purpose  of  mercy,  but  a  threat,  God  may  and 
loves  to  bend.  That  He  does  so,  we  know  from  the  case  of 
Nineveh  (though  the  blow  was  then  struck  and  will  be  again  at 
some  future  time.)  He  will  allow  men  to  say  that  He  has 
changed  His  mind  when  it  is  a  que^ion  of  delaying  a  punish- 
ment for  sin  ;  but  wherever,  on  the  other  side,  it  is  God's  pur- 
pose to  bless  a  people.  He  never  gives  up  that.  This  is  worthy 
of  God.  He  is  full  of  mercy.  He  will  allow  His  prophecy 
against  Nineveh  sent  through  His  servant  Jonah  to  appear  to 
be  set  aside  ;  He  does  not  mind  what  men  say  about  that.  He 
is  quite  willing  for  them  to  think  that  He  has  in  mercy 
changed  His  mind,  and  that  the  sentence  of  destruction  has 
been  set  aside,  where  there  has  been  humbling  and  repentance 
before  God.  But  the  blessed  thing  we  find  is  this,  that,  though 
man's  failure,  the  Church's  failure  and  the  like  may  seem  to 
have  jeoparded  the  blessed  purpose  that  God  has  in  store  for  His 
people,  and  for  His  own  glory,  all  that  is  of  God  comes  out 
only  the  brighter  another  day. 

Let  us  look  at  Babylon  in  its  past  history,  and  consider  how 
that  name  was  suited  to  express  the  special  evil  that  was  to  grow 
up  out  of  the  corruption  of  Christianity.  In  Gen.  x.  we  have 
the  first  mention  of  Babel.  And  there  we  have  it  connected 
with  a  wilful  man,  who  had  first  shown  his  cunning  with  regard 
to  brute  beasts,  and  who  soon  began  to  turn  against  his  fellows 
all  the  craft  and  experience  he  had  acquired  in  a  lower  sphere. 
Nimrod  is  the  first  person  with  whom  you  have  Babel  asso- 
ciated. It  is  man  concentrating  power  in  himself.  But  in 
the  next  chapter  (Gen.  xi.)  we  have  another  idea.  It  is  not 
only  one  man  exalting  himself  and  others  subjected  to  him  by 
fraud  or  force,  but  a  grand  effort  of  men  gatheiing  themselves 
together  to  build  something  permanent  and  strong  and  high — 


312  USE    IN    THE    NEW    TESTAMENT, 

a  tower  that  would  reach  toward  heaven,  and  gain  them  a  name 
upon  the  earth.  Here,  then^  we  have  the  two  thoughts  that  are 
always  more  or  less  connected  with  Babylon.  It  may  take  the 
form  of  an  individual  who  exalts  himself,  or  of  men  combining 
for  some  notable  enterprise  ;  or  it  may  be  a  mixture  of  both 
principles.  Now  this  you  have  further  and  still  more  plainly 
developed,  when  you  come  down  to  the  history  of  the  Jewish 
nation.  God  called  them  out  as  a  people,  and  g^ave  them  special 
privileges  and  blessings.  They  fell  into  idolatry,  the  sin  which 
sprang  from  Babylon  as  its  great  and  primitive  source ;  and 
Babylon  becomes  the  chief  means  of  judgment  for  the  people  of 
God,  and  the  scene  of  Judah's  captivity.  There  again  you  have 
Nebuchadnezzar,  the  golden  head  of  the  image,  answering  to 
Nimrod,  and  the  great  city  that  he  built,  which  answers  to  the 
tower  of  Babel  —  the  two  ideas  being  united,  as  indeed  they 
soon  became  at  first,  for  Babel  was  the  beginning  of  Nimrod's 
kingdom.  The  natural  heart  covets  present  exaltation  for  man 
on  the  earth,  and  this  too  clothed  with  a  religious  sanction,  but 
with  an  idolatrous  intent. 

Now  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  New  Testament  takes  up  the 
term  "  Babylon"  and  applies  it  to  the  corruption  that  was  to 
issue  in  professing  Christendom.  When  God  saves  souls,  He 
does  not  allow  them  to  choose  their  own  path  in  the  world  ; 
still  less  can  He  own  their  choosing  their  own  path  in  the  Church. 
He  who  understands  his  place  as  belonging  to  God  has  his  will 
broken.  He  is  privileged  to  treat  his  nature  as  a  dead  and  evil 
thing  ;  not  on  the  ground  of  a  slave  working  for  something  and 
because  he  must,  but  in  the  liberty  of  a  son  of  God  —  of  one  who 
has  been  blessed  by  God,  and  who  has  the  interests  of  his  Father 
at  heart.  But  it  is  not  his  Father's  will  that,  at  the  present 
time,  he  should  meddle  with  the  world,  or  have  a  place  in  it. 
In  fact,  in  God's  mind,  the  world  is  not  good  enough  for  the 
Christian,  because  it  is  practically  under  the  power  of  the  enemy. 
There  is  a  time  coming  when  the  world  will  be  put  under  the 
children  of  God,  when  they  will  judge  the  world.  But  this  can 
never  be  until  Satan  is  set  aside,  and  Christ  pubhcly  exalted 
over  the  earth  as  well  as  in  heaven.  Meanwhile,  the  saints 
have  to  wait  in  faith  and  patience.  And  this  is  the  argument 
which  the  Apostle  urges  in  1  Cor.  vi.  why  brethren  in  Christ 
should  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  world's  judgments  now. 
It  was  beneath  their  dignity  as  children  of  God  to  carry  their 
differences  there  ;  it  was  vain  to  try  to  reform  the  world.  Such 
a  thought  never  entered  the  Apostle's  mind.  For  faith,  while  it 
delights  in  the  deliverance  of  poor  sinners,   looks  at  the  world 


BABYLON    THE    FALSE    WOMAN.  313 

with  God,  as  already  judged,  and  only  waiting  for  the  execution 
of  the  sentence  at  Christ's  coming. 

But  while  the  Apostle  exhorts  to  subjection  to  the  powers 
that  be,  he  never  says.  You  brethren,  that  have  posts  of  honour 
in  the  earth,  you  are  to  continue  there.  That  would  have  been 
to  defeat  the  object  of  God,  whose  children  are  not  of  the  world, 
even  as  Christ  is  not  of  the  world.  For  God  is  not  now  under- 
taking to  govern  the  world,  save  in  His  secret  providence  of 
course.  When  the  kingdom  of  this  world  as  a  fact  becomes 
His,  He  begins  by  judging  the  corrupters  of  the  earth,  and 
more  particularly  every  iniquity  done  under  the  name  of  Christ. 
This  is  not  what  God  is  doing  now  ;  but  rather  testing  the  souls 
of  His  people  in  a  place  of  temptation,  where  everything  is 
contrary  to  His  name.  If  they  are  faithful,  they  will  suffer 
persecution  ;  if  unfaithful,  they  may  be  made  much  of  by  the 
world  ;  they  may  have  its  ease  and  honour,  but  they  assuredly 
will  be  used  by  Satan  to  keep  all  quiet  —  for  nothing  gives  such 
a  sanction  to  evil  as  a  good  man  who  joins  the  world  and  gives 
it  countenance.  Remember  Lot.  He  was  in  the  gate  of  Sodom, 
the  place  where  justice  was  administered.  His  position  there 
was  as  dishonouring  to  God  as  it  was  miserable  to  himself.  He 
had  to  be  forced  out  of  it  at  last ;  but  even  before  he  was  taken 
out  of  Sodom,  the  well-watered  plains  had  lost  their  value  in 
his  eyes.  His  righteous  soul  was  vexed  with  their  unlawful 
deeds,  he  himself  was  the  object  of  their  taunts.  "  This  one 
fellow,"  said  they,  "  came  in  to  sojourn,  and  he  will  needs  be  a 
judge."  They  saw  the  incongruity  of  his  position,  as  worldly 
men  generally  are  quick  to  perceive  the  failures  of  the  believer. 
Alas  !  it  is  easy  to  understand  how  a  man  may  be  godly  in  the 
main,  and  yet  found  in  circumstances  where  a  Christian  ought 
not  to  be,  and  that  so  far  he  is  not  a  true  witness  for  God. 
Whether  I  look  at  the  individual  Christian  or  at  the  Church,  I 
see  that  God's  object  is  to  have  a  testimony  to  his  own  glory  in 
the  world  ;  to  have  those  who  are  for  Him,  not  in  the  way  of 
putting  down  the  world,  much  less  of  seeking  to  get  the  honour 
and  riches  of  the  world  ;  but  willing,  for  Christ's  sake,  to  aban- 
don what  they  like  best,  because  they  look  not  at  the  things 
which  are  seen,  but  at  the  unseen  and  eternal.  That  is  God's 
triumph,  and  so  far  as  it  is  true  of  us,  we  are  real  witnesses  for 
God.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  are  seeking  to  gain  or  retain 
the  world  with  Christ,  the  principle  of  Babylon  is  begun. 

No  doubt.  Rev.  xvii.  xviii.  go  much  further  than  this,  and 
show  that  a  vast  religiously  corrupting  system  is  meant.  This 
is  made  very  plain  by  comparing  chap.  xvii.  1,  2,  3,   with  chap. 


314  ROME    IS    ITS    CENTRE, 

xxi.  9,  10,  11.  In  chap.  xvii.  1,  it  is  said,  "  There  came  one  of 
the  seven  angels,  ....  and  talked  with  me,  saying.  Come  hither  ; 
I  will  shew  thee  the  judgment  <i.e.  sentence)  of  the  great  whore, 
that  sitteth  by  the  many  waters."  But  again,  in  chap.  xxi.  9,  we 
have  another  scene.  "  There  came  unto  me  one  of  the  seven 
angels,  ....  and  talked  with  me,  saying,  Come  hither,  I  will 
show  thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife."  Now  it  is  evident  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  uses  the  same  kind  of  introduction  for  these 
two  women,  for  the  purpose,  I  think,  of  our  connecting  them 
together.  The  same  guide,  one  of  the  seven-vial  angels,  takes 
John,  and  shows  him  in  the  wilderness  this  earthly  and  corrupt 
woman  ;  afterwards,  in  the  closing  scene,  he  takes  him  to  an 
exceedingly  high  mountain,  and  shows  him  a  heavenly  one. 
As  the  heavenly  woman  is  the  symbol  of  the  heavenly  Church, 
so  is  Babylon  of  a  corrupt  religious  body.  It  is  that  which 
takes  the  place  of  the  Church,  and  of  being  the  witness  for  God 
upon  earth,  while  it  carries  on  every  wicked  commerce  with 
those  who  are  exalted  here  below.  There  is  first,  as  usual,  the 
carnal  and  earthly,  then  the  spiritual  and  heavenly.  After  the 
false  system  of  man  and  Satan  disappears,  the  true  is  displayed 
in  the  glory  of  God. 

Now,  though  we  may  look  for  a  future  development  of  Baby- 
lon, as  opposing  God's  final  testimony  of  the  kingdom  to  all 
nations  before  the  end  come,  yet  I  think  that,  even  at  the  present 
moment,  there  need  be  no  difficulty  in  judging  where  the  features 
of  Babylon  are  found  most  fully.  It  is  a  religious  system  that 
governs  a  number  of  kings  ;  not  an  establishment  that  is  at  the 
mercy  of  the  secular  government.  This  is  sin,  but  it  is  not  the 
wickedness  spoken  of  here.  Babylon  is  an  incomparably  darker, 
deeper,  and  more  wide-spread  system  of  religious  corruption — 
arrogating  to  itself  the  name  of  the  Church  of  God  exclusively, 
setting  itself  above  kings,  intriguing  with  them,  but  at  the  same 
time  maintaining  its  supremacy  above  them  all ;  stupefying  the 
masses  with  the  poison  of  her  exciting  falsehoods  :  arrayed  in  all 
the  meretricious  sj)lendour  of  the  world  ;  the  fountain-head  of 
the  worst  idolatry  under  the  sun  ;  and,  finally,  manifesting  a 
spirit  of  blood-thirst}^  persecution  against  the  true  saints  and 
witnesses  of  Jesus,  under  the  awful  pretence  of  His  will  and 
authority.  There  is  one  that  does  claim  this  place  —  one  that 
takes  it  as  given  by  God  —  one  whose  seat  and  centre  are  found 
in  the  very  heart  of  what  was  once  the  Roman  empire  —  a  reli- 
gious system  that  affects  universal  dominion,  and  that,  in  order 
to  accomplish  it,  either  wins  by  every  enticing  art,  or  extin- 
guishes all  opposition  in  the  blood   of  heretics  so-called,  her 


NATIONALISM    DISTINCT. 


315 


victims.  "  By  thy  sorceries  were  all  nations  deceived.  And 
in  her  was  found  the  blood  of  prophets,  and  of  saints,  and  of 
all  that  were  slain  upon  the  earth."  (Verses  2-3,  24.)  For  any 
unprejudiced  person  who  reads  this  description  of  Babylon 
calmly,  and  asks  himself,  What  is  that  professing  Christian  body 
so  abounding  in  idols,  so  authoritative  over  the  kings  of  the  earth, 
so  indulgent  to  the  wicked,  and  so  cruel  to  the  righteous  ?  it  is 
impossible  not  to  see  and  answer.* 

As  to  the  Greek  and  Oriental  Churches,  as  to  the  English, 
Scotch,  and  other  reformed  national  establishments,  they  are, 
more  or  less,  thoroughly  subservient  to  the  government  which 
has  to  do  with  each  of  them.  That  may  be,  and  I  believe  is, 
evil.  But  there  are  two  ways  in  which  a  rehgious  system  may 
act  contrary  to  Christ :  either  by  a  guilty  subjection  to  the  world, 
or  by  a  still  more  guilty  supremacy  over  it — in  short,  by  being 
the  world's  slave  or  the  world's  mistress.  At  the  present  time 
there  is  only  one  religious  system  which  pretends  to  have  kings  at 
its  feet ;  and  this  is  the  Church  of  Rome,  which,  therefore, 
answers  to  Babylon.  It  is  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  we 
have  done  with  it,  or  that  its  day  is  over.  Rome  may  yet  have 
a  short-lived  triumph.  Its  emissaries  are  actively  abroad  all 
over  the  world,  and  the  foundations  of  Protestantism  are  being 
undermined  every  where.  Those  who  are  looking  for  Chris- 
tianity, as  things  are,  to  overthrow  all  its  adversaries  on  earth, 
are,  in  my  opinion,  in  great  danger  of  being  deceived,  through 
the  unscriptural  hope  of  getting  a  church  as  great  or  greater  in 
good  than  that  of  Rome  is  in  evil.  For  there  will  come  a  fear- 
ful struggle  yet,  and  Rome,  as  I  conceive,  will  acquire  universal 
influence,  and  will  put  down  every  contrary  voice,  except  the 
feeble  whisper  of  the  few  witnesses  spoken  of  here,  who  either 
die  by  her  or  come  out  of  her.  God  will  hear  them,  but  as  far 
as  all  open  or  public  testimony  for  Him  is  concerned,  that  will 
be  swamped  by  Babylon.  And  as  to  putting  Babylon  down,  it 
is  not  by  the  gospel,  or  by  the  force  of  truth  that  it  will  be  done, 
but  by  the  will  and  wrath  of  men.  Wherever  Romanism  gains 
the  day,  infidelity  is  the  necessary  consequence ;  and,  therefore, 

*  The  efifort  of  the  celebrated  and  subtle  Bossuet  to  turn  aside  the  application 
of  Babylon  in  Rev.  xvii.  and  xviii.  from  Christianised  or  Papal  Rome,  is  not  weak 
only,  but,  when  duly  sifted,  brings  out  the  truth  more  evidently.  His  argument 
is  that  the  Church  being  married  to  Christ,  the  guilty  Church  would  be  an  adul- 
teress rather  than  a  harlot.  The  answer  is,  not  merely  that  fornication  is  the 
generic  term,  as  every  one  may  see  in  both  Old  and  New  Testaments,  but  that, 
even  applied  with  the  utmost  rigour,  a  harlot  most  correctly  describes  the  present 
sin,  because  the  Church  is  now  espoused  to  Christ,  not  married.  The  marriage, 
according  to  the  Apocalypse,  is  only  consummated  after  Babylon's  final  judgment 
in  chap.  xix. 


316  PRESENT    TENDENCY. 

Babylon  always  prepares  the  way  for  the  last  effort  of  the  Beast 
against  the  Lamb.  But  before  the  close,  the  Beast  gets  tho- 
roughly the  upper  hand,  and  Babylon  becomes  food  for  him 
and  the  ten  horns. 

Is  this  what  is  introduced  to  us  here?  Man  is  left  out ;  the 
ten  horns  are  not  once  alluded  to  in  chap,  xviii.,  though  the 
kings  of  the  earth  are.  The  difference  is  this.  "  In  the  kings  of 
the  earth,"  I  apprehend,  are  embraced  all  those  rulers  of  Christ- 
endom with  whom  she  had  been  on  terms  of  bad  intimacy,  or  who 
had  had  evil  connexion  with  her.  The  ten  horns  are  the  chiefs 
of  the  final  divided  state  of  the  empire  and  the  active  instru- 
ments of  her  devastation,  as  we  were  told  in  chap.  xvii.  The 
kings  of  the  earth  are  her  mourners,  not  her  burners.  Here 
in  chap,  xviii.  her  hour  is  come,  and  it  is  the  Lord  God  that 
hath  judged  her. 

You  will  observe  the  voice  from  heaven  here  :  "  Come  out  of 
her,  my  people,  that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  sins,  and  that  ye 
receive  not  of  her  plagues."  (Ver.  4.)  The  receiving  of  her 
plagues  is  not  the  divine  motive  for  separation.  Men  would  be 
anxious  enough  about  that.  But  the  great  thing  that  God  looks 
for  from  His  people  is  this  —  that  they  should  not  be  partakers 
of  her  sins.  I  would  jnit  it  to  every  Chj-istian,  how  far  is  he  in 
sympathy  with  God's  mind,  touching  Babylon  and  its  sins  ? 
How  far  does  he  feel  the  evil  of  it,  and  judge  it  ? 

Babylon  does  not  seek  heaven,  but  the  earth  —  not  the  suffer- 
ings of  Christ  and  the  glories  that  should  follow  ;  but  to  sit  as  a 
queen  and  to  see  no  sorrow.  Babylon  is  content  with  worldly 
exaltation.  If  you  steer  clear  of  that,  Babylon  has  no  attrac- 
tions for  you ;  and  the  present  danger  of  every  soul  from  Baby- 
lon is  the  gradual  caring  for  and  allowance,  in  Christians,  of 
what  man  values  upon  the  earth.  Of  late  years  there  has  been 
no  little  change  in  the  thoughts  of  Christians,  as  to  the  present 
enjoyment  of  prosperity  and  pleasure  in  this  world.  But  there 
is  amazing  danger  in  it.  For  what  is  the  great  thought  of  it 
all?  Man  rising,  progressing,  exalting  himself — man  showing 
■what  he  can  do,  and  improve  ;  and  this  is  sought  to  be  con- 
nected with  the  name  and  sanction  of  Christ !  Alas  !  it  is 
Babylon  the  great.  (Ver.  9-19.)  In  her  we  see  the  end  of  the 
heart's  desire,  along  with  Christ,  to  enjoy  all  that  is  in  the 
world,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the 
pride  of  life.  I  do  not  wonder  at  an  unconverted  man  seek- 
ing to  make  the  world  pleasant :  Cain  did  it,  and  there  is 
such  a  thing  now  as  going  in  the  way  of  Cain.  There  are 
the  people  that  handle  all  sorts  of  musical   instruments,   and 


FUNDAMENTAL    MISTAKE    OF    POPERY.  317 

the  artificers  in  brass  and  iron.  It  is  true  that  these  things 
sprang"  up  in  a  very  early  hour  of  the  world,  but  still,  the  Spirit 
of  God  does  not  tell  us  for  nothing  that  they  were  in  the  family 
of  Cain,  not  in  the  family  of  Seth.  Every  child  of  man  stands 
responsible  to  God,  whether  converted  or  not,  to  own  his  outcast 
state  as  a  sinner  :  he  has  no  right  to  drown  his  conscience  in 
the  pleasures  and  glory  of  the  world.  But  bad  as  that  may  be, 
the  thing  that  God  most  hates,  and  that  He  will  judge  in  an 
awful  and  public  manner,  even  in  this  world,  is  the  tacking  on 
the  name  of  Christ  to  the  indulgence  of  worldly  lusts.  Is  it  not 
the  desire  even  of  many  Christians,  to  have  the  grandeur  and 
riches  of  the  world  at  their  back  ?  I  do  not  doubt  that  they 
heartily  wish  to  have  people  converted,  but  they  would  like  them 
to  bring  their  earthly  influence  along  with  them.  This  is  the 
spirit  of  Babylon.  What  the  Lord  looks  for  from  us,  is  doing 
the  will  of  God,  suffering  for  it,  and  taking  it  patiently.  Any 
of  these  things  which  the  heart  covets,  will  be  found  to  involve 
the  will  of  man.  There  is  not  a  single  position  of  distinction  or 
of  glory  in  the  world,  but  what  requires  a  man  to  give  up  a  good 
conscience  towards  God.  In  other  words,  you  cannot  be  a 
member  of  the  world,  and  act  faithfully  as  a  member  of  Christ. 
If  you  value  and  wish  to  follow  the  world,  you  will  make  all 
sorts  of  excuses,  and  argue  for  a  conijiromise  ;  but  that  only 
shows  how  far  the  leaven  of  Babylon  has  affected  your  soul. 

God  gathers  souls  round  Jesus — that  is,  Jesus  rejected,  and 
gone  up  to  heaven.  Therefore  the  Church  is  based  upon  these 
two  fundamental  ti'uths.  She  has  got  the  cross,  and  she  is 
united  to  Christ  in  heavenly  glory,  by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent 
down.  And  the  cross  and  heavenly  glory  will  not  mingle  with 
the  world.  There  is  the  very  thing  that  puts  my  heart  to  the 
test.  If  Christ  is  my  object,  I  shall  not  want  the  world  ;  I 
shall  be  looking  up,  it  may  be  feebly,  but  still  looking  up  to 
heaven  ;  and  there  will  be  the  one  object  that  God  uses  to 
strengthen  me  by,  giving  me  willingness  to  suffer,  in  the  con- 
sciousness of  having  Christ  in  the  glory.  Whenever  the  Church 
is  seeking  something  else,  as  the  esteem  and  honour  of  the  world, 
or  even  social  improvement,  she  is  denying  her  proper  glory. 

Popery  mistook  the  true  character  of  the  church,  and  followed 
the  Jewish  system,  and  thought  that  people  ought  to  bring  their 
gold  and  silver,  and  precious  stones  and  goodly  things  to  honour 
the  Lord  with.  (See  verses  12-14.)  But  God  w^as  wiser  than 
men,  and  shows  that  all  this  pretence  of  honouring  God  is  a 
mere  sham,  and  that  what  people  really  want  is  to  honour  them- 
selves.    They  are  seeking  what   attracts  and  makes  them  an 


318  DISSOLUTION    AND    UNION    OF    THE    DAY. 

object  of  attraction,  whilst  they  cover  up  their  real  object  under 
the  plea  of  the  name  of  Christ.  This  is  what  God  will  judge, 
and  what  will  infect  the  whole  of  Christendom  before  that  judg- 
ment comes.  You  may  ask  me  how  that  can  be  possible,  when 
there  are  so  many  societies  growing  up,  and  such  an  active 
energy,  religious  and  moral,  dealing  with  the  various  forms  of 
public  evil  throughout  the  world.  I  am  not  telling  you  what 
/  see,  but  what  God's  word  shows — the  all  but  universal  preva- 
lence, before  the  close,  of  a  corrupt  system,  which  plainly  has  its 
centre  in  Rome,  though  taking  a  larger  compass,  so  as  to  em- 
brace every  religious  institution*  which,  however  opposed  it  may 
seem  to  popery  now,  does  not  link  a  soul  with  heaven.  There 
is  no  safety  for  any  person  who  is  building  upon  the  earth.  The 
heavenly  saints  will  be  taken  away  before  the  judgment  falls 
upon  Babylon.  They  are  not  referred  to  in  that  word,  "  Come 
out  of  her,  my  people."  That  is  spoken  of  God's  earthly  people,-|- 
by  and  by.  But  at  the  same  time,  its  principle  fully  ap|)lies. 
For  the  essence  of  Babylon  is  the  union  of  the  world  with  the 
name  of  Christ.  "  Wherefore  come  out  from  among  them, 
and  be  ye  separate,  saith  the  Lord,  and  touch  not  the  unclean 
thing  ;  and  I  will  receive  you." 

The  Lord  will  not  hold  any  man  guiltless  who  has  a  conscience 
of  what  is  due  to  Christ  and  does  not  follow  it.  To  such,  I 
would  say,  this  is  where  you  will  be.  You  will  go  on  for  a  time 
and  be  troubled  with  the  truth,  for  it  will  condemn  you  ;  but, 
ere  long,  you  will  find  that  all  taste  for  it  is  lost ;  you  will 
tire  of  it  and  even  turn  against  it,  and  then  will  become  morally 
ripe  for  Babylon  when  it  comes  before  you.  If  I  am  guilty  of 
the  spirit  of  Babylon,  that  is  what  God  is  looking  at,  as  far  as  I 
am  concerned.  If  a  person  is  travelling  in  her  path,  he  is  a 
partaker  of  her  sin.  And  who  so  oppose  the  truth,  as  those  that 
corrupt  it?  Who  so  hate,  as  those  that  are  condemned  of  them- 
selves? 

There  is  a  great  work,  not  only  of  dissolving  and  breaking  up 
what  is  old,  but  of  uniting  and  amalgamating  for  various  pur- 
poses, going  on  now  ;    and  as  this  was  found  in  Babylon  at  the 

*  Babylon  is  not  only  herself  "  the  great  harlot,"  but  "  the  'mother  of  the 
harlots  and  the  abominations  of  the  earth."  There  are  more  of  kindred  corrup- 
tions in  religion,  though  Rome  is  pre-eminent,  "  the  mother  and  mistress,"  as  she 
claims,  of  others. 

t  Hence  there  is  no  need  to  adopt  Vitringa's  odd  notion,  that  verse  G  is  ad- 
dressed to  the  kings,  nor  to  destroy  the  distinctive  practical  calling  of  the  Church, 
by  supposing  that  she  is  to  be  the  avenger  of  Babylon's  wrongs.  God's  retribu- 
tive justice  will  send  its  more  fitting  appeal  to  His  people,  the  Jews,  who  are  to 
be  the  witnesses  of  His  righteous  government  here  below. 


THE    ONLY    SAFE-GUARD.  319 

very  beginning  (Gen.  xi.)  so,  in  the  long  run,  it  will  be  found 
to  serve  the  purpose  of  that  great  city  before  the  Lord  God  has 
for  ever  judged  her. 

There  will  be,  I  believe  from  various  Scriptures,  an  astonish- 
ing mixture  of  professing  Christianity  with  Judaism  ;  and  the 
latter,  as  judged  by  the  new  and  full  revelation  of  Christ  in  the 
New  Testament,  is  no  better  than  heathenism.  (Gal.  iv.)  We 
know  how  tender  the  Spirit  was  in  bearing  with  the  weakness, 
the  scruples,  the  attachment  to  old  religious  habits  in  such  of  the 
Christians  as  had  been  Jews  (Rom,  xiv.) ;  but  it  was  a  very 
different  thing  when  teachers  sought  to  impose  Jewish  ordin- 
ances on  the  Gentile  converts.  The  same  Spirit  treated  a  ritual 
borrowed  by  Gentiles  from  Jews  as  the  same  thing  in  principle 
as  old  and  open  pagan  idolatry.  "  But  now,  after  that  ye  have 
known  God,  or  rather  are  known  of  God,  how  turn  ye  again  to 
the  weak  and  beggarly  elements  of  the  world,  whereunto  ye 
desire  again  to  be  in  bondage?  Ye  observe  days,  and  months, 
and  times,  and  years."  Popery  is  the  most  salient  and  hateful 
exhibition  of  this  amalgam  now  ;  but  greater  abominations  shall 
appear.  Sacramentalism  and  Rationalism,  in  these  and  other 
Protestant  lands,  are  each  provoking  the  other  to  excesses  pre- 
viously unexampled.  When,  too,  was  ever  known  such  public 
indifference,  which  desires  leisure  for  commerce  abroad  and 
social  development  at  home  ?  The  result  will  appear  in  the  last 
stages  of  Babylon  and  the  Beast. 

In  the  scene  before  us,  we  have  had  the  lament  of  kings,  mer- 
chants, and  all  who  had  to  do  with  the  unholy  traffic  of  Babylon. 
Heaven,  and  especially  the  saints  (for  so  it  should  be  read)  and 
the  apostles  and  the  prophets,  are  called  to  rejoice  at  God's 
judgment,  "  God  hath  avenged  you,"  or  literally  judged  your 
judgment  "on  her,"  In  the  mighty  angel's  solemn  act  and 
word,  which  closes  the  chaj)ter  (ver.  21,  &:c,),  not  only  is  the 
violence  of  her  ruin,  and  its  totality  set  forth,  but  the  reason  of 
it  as  regards  the  nations — deceiving  them  all  by  her  sorceries. 
The  last  verse  adds  another  and  awful  cause — Babylon's  inheri- 
tance of  .Jerusalem's  blood-guiltiness.  "  And  in  her  was  found 
the  blood  of  prophets,  and  of  saints,  and  of  all  that  were  slain 
upon  the  earth." 

The  Lord  grant  that,  instead  of  merely  looking  without  and 
occupying  ourselves  with  condemning  others,  we  may  take  good 
care  that  our  own  souls  are  preserved  from  the  contaminations 
of  Babylon.  May  our  affections  be  kept  true  to  Himself — the 
only  real  guard  against  the  seductions  of  the  enemy  !  We  are 
espoused  as  a  chaste  virgin  to  Christ.  "  Little  children,  keep 
yourselves  from  idols." 


320  JOY    OVER    god's    judgment    of    BABYLON. 


CHAPTER   XIX. 

We  are  now  approaching  a  brighter  and  happier  portion  of 
the  book.  The  providential  judgments  of  God,  whether  more 
secret,  hke  the  seals,  more  loudly  summoning  men  to  repent, 
like  the  trumpets,  or  more  positive  and  distinct  wrath,  like  the 
vials,  have  had  their  full  course.  And  now,  when  Babylon  who 
had  set  herself  up  to  represent  God  in  His  grace  and  truth, 
arrogated  to  herself,  exclusively,  the  name  of  the  Church,  the 
spouse  of  Christ — when  she  was  set  aside  for  ever,  there  was  a 
burden  gone — a  heavy  burden  that  had  long  grieved  the  hea- 
vens and  corrupted  the  earth. 

There  was  freedom,  so  to  speak,  now  for  God  to  make  good 
the  precious  things  which  He  had  in  His  heart  for  poor  beguiled 
men  ;  and  that  too,  as  it  ought  to  be,  through,  and  to  the  praise 
of  the  Lamb.  Hence  you  have  two  things  connected  together 
at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter.  The  first  is  the  call  to  rejoice. 
"  The  great  whore  "  had  presented  an  obstinate  barrier  to  bless- 
ing ;  not  simply  because  she  was  evil,  but  because  her  profession 
had  been  all  that  was  holy  and  true,  while  in  effect  she  it  was 
who,  above  all,  had  been  active  in  corrupting  grace  and  truth  in 
the  very  sources;  she  utterly  and  systematically  denied  Christ  in 
effect,  though  parading  every  where  the  outward  symbol  of  His 
Cross.  In  vain  for  her  had  God's  character  shone  out  in  Christ. 
In  vain  had  God  pronounced  on  man  and  the  world  and  begun  a 
new  creation,  whose  Head  took  His  place  in  heavenly  glory. 
She  associated  Christ  with  the  flesh  and  the  earth,  and  there 
sought  and  laid  up  her  treasures.  In  vain  had  God  brought 
light  and  incorruptibility  to  light  by  the  gospel.  She  plunged 
men  into  deeper  uncertainty  and  more  positive  error  than  ever, 
teaching  them  that  every  gift  of  God,  and  even  salvation  may  be 
bought  with  money ;  cheating  souls  to  sleep  by  the  hope  that  all 
would  go  on  well,  and  that  the  Lord  was  not  yet  coming  in 
judgment.  Thus  had  she  shut  up,  as  far  as  could  be,  the  streams 
of  blessing  from  the  woi'ld,  but  now  the  true  and  righteous 
judgment  of  God  had  smitten  her,  and  there  is  rejoicing  in 
heaven. 

In  ch.  xviii.  there  was  universal  earthly  sorrow.  The  kings  of 
the  earth  who  had  committed  fornication  with  her,  lamented.  The 


THE     MARIUAGK    OF    THE    LAMB. 


321 


merchants  that  had  been  enriched  by  her,  were  waibng.  Indeed, 
there  was  no  class  free  from  her  snares,  and  now  all  that  had  had 
to  do  with  her,  were  full  of  sorrow  over  Babylon.  But  heaven 
was  called  to  rejoice,  and  here  we  have  the  answer  :  "  I  heard, 
as  it  were,  a  loud  voice  of  much  people  in  heaven,"  not  exactly, 
I  heard,  a  great  voice  of  much  people,  but  "  as  it  were  a  loud 
voice,"  &c.  The  words  "  as  it  were "  have  been  dropped,  but  I 
believe  they  ought  to  be  inserted  ;  just  as,  a  little  lower  down,  in 
the  6th  verse,  it  is  said,  "  I  heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  great 
multitude,  and  as  the  voice  of  many  waters,"  &c.  "  And  her 
smoke  rose  up  for  ever  and  ever."  As  far  as  Babylon  was  con- 
cerned, this  was  her  sad  amen,  if  I  may  so  say,  to  the  joy  of 
heaven. 

But  we  are  not  left  with  a  vague  rumour  of  praise  and  glad- 
ness, not  knowing  from  whom  exactly  it  comes.  There  appear 
the  twenty-four  elders,  who  had  understanding  of  the  mind  of 
Christ,  and  the  four  living  creatures,  that  had  been  from  the 
beginning  associated  with  the  providential  judgments  of  God,  or 
at  least  a  certain  jjart  of  them .  These  "  fell  down  and  wor- 
shipped God  that  sat  upon  the  throne,  saying.  Amen ;  Alleluia 
(ver.  4)."  It  is  not  Christ,  who  has  taken  His  place  upon  His  own 
throne  yet,  but  they  worship  "  God  that  sat  on  the  throne,"  &c. 
"And  a  voice  came  out  of  the  throne,"  for  all  must  speak  now, 
"  saying.  Praise  our  God,  all  ye  His  servants,  and  ye  that  fear 
him,  both  small  and  great.  And  I  heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a 
great  multitude  and  as  it  were  the  voice  of  many  waters,  and  as 
it  were  the  voice  of  mighty  thunders,  saying,  Alleluia ;  for  the 
Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth.  Let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice  and 
give  honour  to  him  ;  for  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come  and 
his  wife  hath  made  herself  ready."  (Ver.  5-7.) 

This  is  the  second  part.  Not  only  is  the  harlot's  day  over, 
but  the  consummation  of  the  Bride's  blessing  is  come.  It  is 
important  to  observe  that  this  is  not  the  moment  when  the  Lord 
comes  to  receive  the  heavenly  church.  It  is  a  scene  in  heaven, 
not  the  Lord  Jesus  meeting  His  saints  in  the  air.  A  few  verses 
lower  down  we  do  get  heaven  opened,  and  Christ  comes  out  of 
it,  and  the  saints  follow  Him,  Nothing,  thei'efore,  can  be  more 
simple  or  certain  than  the  inference  that  the  saints  were  already 
there.  They  must  have  been  in  heaven  before,  in  order  to 
follow  Christ  thence  when  He  comes  to  judge.  Now,  I  ask, 
how  did  they  get  there  ?  They  are  not  said  to  be  now  taken  up 
to  the  Father's  house.  We  have  the  old  familiar  parties  in 
heaven.  But  we  have  a  new  fact :  the  Bride  is  married  in 
heaven — the  one  for  whom  Christ  reserves  the  brightest  grace 

22 


322  THE    GUESTS, 

and  glory  —  she  gets  ready  ;  and  now  is  announced,  not  merely 
the  song  of  triumph,  because  of  the  judgment  of  evil,  but  the 
marriage  of  the  Lamb.  "  Let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice."  It  is 
not,  "  Let  her  be  glad  and  rejoice,"  but  "  let  us."  There  is 
grace  that  flows  out  to  others.  "  And  to  her  was  granted  that 
she  should  be  arrayed  in  flne  linen  clean  and  white."  As  for  the 
other  woman,  she  had,  somehow,  fine  linen  too,  with  her  pearls 
and  her  other  adornments.  (Chap,  xviii.  12.)  But  it  was  never 
said  of  Babylon  that  it  was  granted  her.  We  do  not  hear  how 
she  got  it.  But  to  the  Lamb's  wife,  to  her  it  was  granted  that 
she  should  be  arrayed  in  fine  linen.  The  fine  linen  is  the  right- 
eousness of  saints.  (Ver.  8.) 

"  And  he  saith  nnto  me,  Write,  Blessed  are  they  which  are 
called  unto  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb."  There  is  evi- 
dently a  peculiar  solemnity  in  winding  up  this  account.  We 
are  called  upon  to  pause  and  listen  and  weigh.  "  These  are  the 
true  sayings  of  God."  To  the  suffering  one,  the  one  that  had 
shared  the  Lamb's  path  of  sorrow  upon  earth,  to  her  was  now 
given  the  fullest  joy  above.  But  the  marriage-scene  of  the 
Lamb  is  only  intimated,  and  not  described  here.  The  purpose 
of  the  Revelation  is  not  to  show  us  the  Father's  house,  nor  its 
inner  scenes.  God  is  never  even  called  our  Father  in  this  book, 
because  it  opens  out,  not  the  intimacy  of  His  love  to  us,  but 
rather  the  righteous  ways  of  God  —  the  establishment  of  the 
kingdom  and  the  end,  when  He  is  all  in  all.  True,  there  must 
be  the  stern  unsparing  judgment  of  all  this  evil,  and  this  we 
have  had.  But  when  God's  part  comes,  and  the  full  blessed- 
ness of  the  Church,  there  is  but  an  announcement  of  it  —  the 
bride  has  made  herself  ready.  It  is  left  there,  comparatively 
hidden.  We  hear  the  sound  of  it,  but  that  is  all.  We  are  told 
of  the  invitations  to  it,  as  it  is  said  in  verse  9,  "  Blessed  are 
they  which  are  called  unto  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb." 

And  now  I  would  just  ask  you  to  pause  before  going  further. 
Is  it  too  much  to  suppose  that  the  Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  is  a 
different  symbol,  i.e.,  represents  a  class  of  saints  difierent  from 
these  blessed  ones  who  are  invited  to  her  marriage  ?  Who  is  it 
that  God  means  by  these  two  distinct  symbols  ?  As  to  the 
Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  few  would  have  the  least  difficulty. 
Almost  every  one  sees  in  her  the  Church  —  the  one  that  is  con- 
stantly presented  in  the  New  Testament  Scripture  as  the  hea- 
venly Bride  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  One  turns  to  Eph.  v., 
where  this  relationship  is  brought  out,  and  the  development  in 
her  behalf  of  the  fulness  of  Christ's  affections.  Observe,  by 
the  way,  that  there  it  is  not  merely  a  question  of  a  future  epoch, 


AND    THE   BRIDE.  323 

because  the  Holy  Ghost  shows  that  this  is  a  relationship  esta- 
blished now.  "  Christ  loved  the  church,  and  gave  Himself  for 
it."  It  is  true,  from  the  very  first  moment  when  God  began  to 
form  the  Church  on  earth  by  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
sent  down  from  heaven. 

The  Church  is  always  regarded  as  a  real  and  subsisting  body, 
because,  wherever  the  Holy  Ghost  is,  there  is  the  Church.    The 
Holy  Ghost  was  sent  down,  and  it  is  His  personal  presence  that 
forms  the  Church.     That  is  the  reason   why  those  saints  who 
depart  to  be  with  Christ,  are  not  directly  spoken  of  as  the  Church. 
Of  course,  individually,  they  are  members  of  the  Church,  but 
the  scriptures  which  speak  of  the  Church,  contemplate  its  exis- 
tence as  the  body  of  Christ  on  earth.     Ordinarily,   men  talk  of 
the  Church  visible  and  invisible,  militant  and  triumphant,  and 
think   that  if  Christians  depart  to  be   with  Christ,  there  more 
particularly,  and  in  the  truest  season,  is  the  Church.     Yet  the 
word  of  God  never  so  speaks,  but  predicates  the  Church  of  such 
as  are  called  even  here  below,  and  are   baptized  by  one  Spirit 
into  one  body.     No  doubt,  when  all  are  gathered  together,  as  a 
fact,  in  heaven,  that  is  the  Church,  and  is  so  spoken  of  in  Eph. 
V.  27,  and  perhaps  a  few  more  texts.     But  in  general  in  scrip- 
ture, where  the  Church  is  spoken  of,  it  means  the  actual  assem- 
bly of  God  upon  the  earth  at  any  given  time.     The  Holy  Ghost 
was  there,  and  wherever  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells.  He  knits  and  joins 
the  body  into  one.     This  is  a  weighty  truth,  and  involves  the 
most  imjjortant  consequences.     For  I  repeat,  we  are  put  into 
this  relationship  with  Christ  at  the  present  moment.     It  is  not 
that  we  have  the  hope  merely  of  being  made  the  bride  of  Christ 
by  and  by  :    we  are  espoused  to  Christ  now.     We  shall  have 
the  marriage  or  the  actual  consummation  by  and  by,  when  all 
the  members  are  brought  in.     But  the  great  and  blessed  and 
practical  thing  for  our  souls  is,  that  we  are  brought  into  this 
position  of  union  now.    It  is  not  only  that  the  affection  on  which 
the  marriage  is  grounded  is  true  now ;  but  more  than  this,  there 
is  the  Holy  Ghost  on  earth  uniting  the  saints  to  Christ  in  heaven, 
and  making  them  as  truly  one  with  Him  now  as  they  ever  will 
be.     When  Christ  comes,  there  will  be  the  removal  of  all  hin- 
drances—  the  putting  aside  of  what  Satan  employs  to  make  us 
forget  our  relationship  to  Christ,  and  the  changing  of  our  vile 
body  into  the  body  of  His  glory.    But  it  is  important  to  remem- 
ber that  our  oneness  with  Christ  as  His  body  depends  upon  the 
presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,   who  has  knit  us  up  with  Christ  in 
heaven.     We  are  one  with  Him  now. 

Here  then,  the  Holy  Ghost  seems  to  show  that  there  are  others 


324  THE    TRUE    SAYINGS    OP    GOD. 

to  be  there,  not  as  the  bride,  but  as  guests,  so  to  speak.  These 
are  the  called  to  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb.  You  may 
remember  John  the  Baptist  speaking  of"  himself  as  the  friend  of 
the  Bridegroom.  I  presume  that  those  who  are  here  said  to  be 
invited  to  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb  answer  somewhat  to 
the  friends  of  the  Bridegroom.  They  are  not  angels,  for  the 
word  "  called  unto  the  marriage"  would  not  be  said  of  angels. 
These  last  are  never  characterized  as  "  called,"  because  the  elect 
angels  have  always  abode  in  their  first  estate.  The  calling  of 
God  comes  to  those  who  are  in  a  lov/  place  to  deliver  them  out 
of  it.  We  have  all,  I  suppose,  been  in  the  habit  of  assuming 
that  if  a  man  is  a  saint  of  God,  he  necessarily  belongs  to  the 
Church,  and  that  there  is  only  one  common  blessing  for  all 
saints  of  all  times.  Here  you  find  the  contrary  laid  down 
plainly,  and  upon  the  face  of  scripture.  You  have  here  a  mar- 
riage-supper, and  one  singled  out  for  especial  joy,  called  the 
Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife  ;  composed,  it  may  be,  of  myriads  of 
people,  but  here  recognized  in  unity  of  blessing,  being  united 
under  one  term,  that  of  "  the  Bride,"  to  show  that  they  have  the 
same  portion  of  love  and  blessedness.  But  this  is  not  true  of 
all  saints,  for  there  are  others  who  are  not  in  this  position  ;  they 
are  present  as  guests  at  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb,  not 
as  His  bride. 

"  And  he  saith  unto  me,  These  are  the  true  sayings  of  God." 
What  strikes  me  is  the  remarkable  way  in  which  that  solemn  ap- 
peal comes  in,  anticipating,  it  seems,  that  man  would  depart  from 
it.     John  was  going  to  worship  the  angel !  the  other  extreme. 

We  had  a  similar  caution  in  the  beginning  of  the  book.  The 
Holy  Ghost  there  says,  "  Blessed  is  he  that  readeth,  and  they 
that  hear  the  words  of  this  prophecy,  and  keep  those  things 
which  are  written  therein."  He  knew  well  that  many  would 
treat  the  book  lightly  and,  not  understanding,  would  count  it 
dry  and  unprofitable.  Alas  !  for  such  as  say,  "  There  is  nothing 
for  my  soul  thei'e  !"  There  is  no  book  in  the  Bible  where  the 
Holy  Ghost  so  encourages  you,  at  the  very  threshold,  to  hear 
what  God  says  therein,  as  the  book  of  the  Revelation.  And 
what  makes  it  the  more  striking  is,  that  the  same  kind  of  admo- 
nition occurs  at  the  end,  when  we  have  been  brought  to  the  close 
of  all  the  dealings  of  God,  in  the  last  chapter.  "And  he  said  unto 
me.  These  things  are  faithful  and  true  ....  Behold,  I  come 
quickly  :  blessed  is  he  that  keepeth  the  sayings  of  the  prophecy 
of  this  book  : "  not  merely  that  keepeth  the  sayings  of  some 
particular  and  choice  parts  of  it,  but  of  the  book  as  a  whole. 
There  is  the  broadest  statement :  "  Blessed  is  lie  that  keepeth 


THE    CHURCH    OF    THE    FIRST-BORN.  325 

the  sayings  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book."     Thus  the  Holy 
Ghost  seems  to  have  taken  especial  pains  to  warn  us  against  the 
unbelief  of  our  hearts,  as  well  as  against  our  idolatry.  (Ver.  10.) 
In  the  particular  case,  (verse  9,)  it  would  seem  that  we  have  a 
guard  against  the  indiscriminate  notions  which  have  generally 
prevailed,  even  among  Christians.     "  Write,  blessed   are   they 
which  are  called  unto  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb.     And 
he  saith  unto  me,  these  are  the  true  sayings  of  God."     Besides 
the  Bride,  there  are  other  blessed  persons,  who  will  be  there. 
Now,   if  I  look  at  Heb.  xii.  I  find  that,  in  the  roll  of  blessing, 
there  are  other  classes  besides  the  church  of  the  first-born  ones. 
"  But  ye  are  come  unto  Mount  Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the 
living  God,   the   heavenly   Jerusalem,  and   to  an  innumerable 
company  of  angels,  the  general  assembly."     For  I  must  say, 
that   such  is  the   true   meaning   and    connection  of  the   verse. 
"  The  general  assembly"  does  not  belong  to  "  the  church  of  the 
first-born,"  but  to   "  the  innumerable  company  "  in  verse   22. 
What  will  make  it  plain  to  any  reader  is  this,  to  bear  in  mind 
that  the  word  "  and "  is  always  the  connecting  link,  which  in- 
troduces every  fresh  clause.     And  tliis  is  allowed  by  those  who 
have  no  pretension  to  what  is  called   dispensational   light — that 
is,  by  men  who  simply  give  their  opinion   upon   the  genuine 
structure  of  the  sentence.     This  being  admitted,   observe   what 
you  get  here  next :    "  Ye  are  come  ....  to  the  church  of  the 
first-lDorn  ones,  which  are  written  in  heaven,   and  to  God   the 
Judge  of  all,   and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect."     I 
am  aware  that  there  are  persons  who  say  that  all  this  means 
the  same  thing  ;  that  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  Mount  Zion, 
&c.,  and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  are  all  one  and 
the  same  thing  as  the  church  of  the  first-born.     But  just  look 
at  the  passage  again,  and  tell  me  if  such  a  thing  is  allowable  for 
a  moment.     God    Himself  is  spoken  of  here,   and  Jesus  the 
Mediator,  and  myriads  of  angels.     Does  any  man  mean  to  say, 
that  these  are  all  the  same  thing  ?    And  yet  this  might  as  well 
be  said,  if  the  other  objects  in  the  scene  are  not  expressly  distinct. 
Let  us  look  at  the  real  meaning  of  these  verses.     "  Ye  are 
come  unto  Mount  Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem."     When  Mount  Zion  was  referred   to,  a 
Jew  would  naturally  think  of  the  earthly  city  around  that  cele- 
brated mountaiu.     But  the  Holy  Ghost  says,  this  is  not  your 
portion.     You  are  come  to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  ;*  not  to 

*  It  is  not  seen  here  as  in  Rev.  where  it  is  the  symbol  of  the  glorified  church 
itself,  but  rather  as  the  blessed  and  ordered  home  of  the  heavenly  saints,  as  I 
think  it  is  in  Heb.  xi.  10,  16.  In  the  latter  the  glory  is  objective,  in  the  former 
subjective. 


326  THE    SPIRITS    OF    JUST    MEN    MADE    PERFECT. 

the  city  of  dying  David,  but  to  the  city  of  the  living  God. 
Then  we  have  "  an  innumerable  company  of  angels  ; "  and  this 
is  called  "  the  general  assembly." 

There,  then,  we  have  different  objects  of  millennial  glory  to 
which  the  saints  were  already  said  to  be  come  in  spirit.  There 
is  the  Mount  Zion.  There  is  the  heavenly  city,  the  image  of 
the  glory  that  is  coming  by  and  by — the  city  for  which  Abraham 
and  the  other  patriarchs  waited.  Next,  we  have  the  angelic 
host ;  and,  then,  the  church  of  the  first-born,  not  merely  the 
local  scene  of  heavenly  glory,  but  the  complete  assembly  of 
the  heirs  who  are  written  in  heaven,  in  contrast  with  the 
earthly  first-born,  Israel.  Next,  we  rise  up  to  God,  the  Judge 
of  all.  The  Spirit  has  led  us  up  from  the  Mount  Sion.  And 
now  we  are  brought  down  from  God  in  His  judicial  character, 
to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect.  It  is  a  very  remarkable 
position  in  which  these  are  put.  We  probably,  if  we  had  had 
to  do  with  it,  might  have  set  them  first ;  but  the  object  was  to 
correct  the  Jewish  tendencies  of  those  he  was  addressing,  and  to 
give  prominence  to  what  was  heavenly.  Then,  having  the  hea- 
venly seat  of  glory,  and  the  church  in  their  due  place,  we  get 
God  Himself  as  the  Judge  of  all,  and,  following  this,  those  saints 
who  had  known  God  as  so  acting  upon  the  earth.  Hence  they 
are  called  here  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect.  They  are, 
I  think,  clearly,  the  Old  Testament  saints,  (Compare  chap.  xi. 
39,  40.)  For  they,  and  not  the  church,  are  a  class  that  could 
be  most  aptly  described  as  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect. 
They  were  in  the  separate  condition  then,  and  are  so  still.  That 
will  never  be  true  of  the  church  as  a  whole.  When  the  moment 
comes  for  the  church  to  leave  the  world  and  meet  the  Lord, 
there  will  be  a  part  of  the  church  upon  the  earth,  not  in  the 
condition  of  spirits  at  all :  there  will  be  those  that  are  alive  and 
remain  to  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Of  the  church,  it  is  said, 
'■'■We  shall  not  all  sleep."  So  that  this  description  never  can 
apply  to  the  church  of  God  as  such. 

We  have  had  the  church  already  separate  and  distinct  from 
the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect.  It  is  not  more  certain 
that  these  are  saints,  than  that  they  are  not  the  church.  Carry 
the  light  of  this  back  to  Rev.  xix.  We  read  there  of  the  church 
having  made  herself  ready,  and  are  not  surprised  to  read  also,  as 
a  distinct  symbol  in  the  same  circle,  "  Blessed  are  they  that  are 
called  unto  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb  (ver.  9)."  Let 
me  not  be  misunderstood.  I  do  not  assert  that  the  guests  in 
our  chapter  are  the  Old  Testament  saints.  It  may  be  so ;  but  I 
wish  not  to  go  beyond  the  light  that  God  has  given  me.     For 


THE    WHITE    HORSE.  327 

it  is  possible  that  the  marriage-supper  may  extend  through  the 
millennium,  and  this  would  greatly  affect  the  character  of  those 
invited.  Still,  Heb.  xii.  shows  us  a  class  of  persons,  that  will  be 
blessed  in  the  risen  state,  yet  distinct  from  the  church.  And  here, 
in  Rev.  xix.  is  a  scene  in  heaven,  and  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife, 
is  there  ;  and  besides  that,  I  hear,  "  Blessed  are  they  that  are 
called  unto  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb."  Tliey  are 
blessed,  they  are  called.  Once  they  were  sinners,  but  they  have 
been  drawn  out  of  that  place  by  the  grace  of  God.  Are  they 
present,  as  guests,*  at  the  nuptials  of  the  Lamb  ? 

But  now  we  have  another  scene.  It  is  no  longer  what  is 
going  on  above,  but  heaven  is  open  :  "  And  behold,  a  white 
horse  ;  and  he  that  sat  upon  him  was  called  Faithful  and  True, 
and  in  righteousness  doth  he  judge  and  make  war."  It  is  not  a 
door  opened  in  heaven,  nor  the  prophet  caught  up  there,  as  we 
had  seen  in  chap.  iv.  Nor  is  it  anything  that  had  been  done 
then  or  there.  But  now  heaven  is  open,  and  there  is  the  symbol  of 
the  power  which  comes  to  subdue  the  earth,  and  that,  with  the 
signs  of  victory.  The  horse  is  always  tlie  symbol  of  power 
connected  with  the  earth  ;  and  it  has  the  colour  of  prosperity. 
It  is  a  white  horse.  None,  I  trust,  would  be  so  foolish  as  to 
imagine  that,  when  this  blessed  scene  really  comes,  it  will  be  a 
question  of  horses  literally.  It  is  the  symbol  that  passed  before 
the  eye  of  the  prophet,  employed  to  show  certain  realities 
that  will  take  place  by  and  by.     Heaven  is  seen  opened  for 

*  Mr.  E.  promises,  both  in  his  text  and  notes  (Vol.  iv.  p.  48),  to  consider  the 
question  whether  those  called  to  the  Lamb's  marriage-supper  were  a  class  the 
same  as,  or  distinct  from,  the  Bride  herself;  but  no  trace  appears,  that  I  can  see, 
either  in  chap.  iii.  following  or  anywhere  else. — I  am  sure  it  will  interest  many- 
readers  if  I  transcribe  the  note  of  Daubuz.  "  It  is  one  thing  to  be  married,  and 
another  to  be  invited  to  a  marriage  feast.  This  is  evident ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
distinguishes  very  well  the  different  states  of  these  two  sorts  of  persons.  The 
Bride,  to  whom  Bysse  [fine  linen]  is  given,  being  the  persons  to  whom  a  perfect 
justification  and  the  effects  of  it  are  awarded,  are  persons  in  a  state  of  resurrection, 
to  whom  Christ  has  performed  His  pre-contract.  But  they  who  are  only  invited 
to  the  feast  cannot  be  the  same  as  those  that  are  married.  They  who  are  glorified 
with  Bysse,  and  thereby  declared  fully  justified  and  holy,  must  of  course  be  happy ; 
but  this  happiness  is  pronounced  to  another  sort  of  persons.  Who  are  they  then  ? 
Even  the  converted  nations,  all  such  men  as,  having  not  yet  tasted  of  death  and 
appeared  before  God's  judgment-seat,  till  Death  and  Hades  are  removed,  are  still 
in  this  life  and  in  a  state  of  infirmity  as  to  their  flesh  ;  not  being  indeed  impecca- 
ble, but  assisted  very  much  by  very  great  and  extraordinary  effusions  of  grace. 
However,  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  not  pronounce  them  holy,  which  in  this  place 
would  be  taken  for  perfect  holiness,  but  barely  haiypy ;  whereas  those  who  have  a 
share  in  the  first  resurrection  are  blessed  and  holy  both.  This  blessing  and  hap- 
piness consists,  as  it  is  expressed  in  chap.  xxi.  21,  iu  this,  that  they  walk  in  the 
light  of  the  New  Jerusalem,"  &c.  (Perp.  Comm.  p.  869.)  B,eaders  may  differ  in 
the  measure  of  their  acquiescence  with  these  thoughts,  but  who  will  not  admit 
their  interest  and  acuteness  ? 


328  THE    GLORY    OF    CHRIST. 

the  purpose  of  victory  over  the  earth.  And  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  Himself  is  plainly  referred  to  as  the  rider  :  He  is  the 
one  who  directs  the  power — "  He  that  sitteth  on  him  [called] 
faithful  and  true,  and  in  righteousness  doth  he  judge  and  make 
war."'  (Ver.  11.)  This  is  the  subject  of  the  chapter.  In  the  next 
chapter  it  is  not  a  white  horse  that  is  seen,  but  a  throne,  which 
is  the  symbol  of  another  character  altogether.  The  throne  is 
for  rule,  not  conquest :  the  horse  is  for  conquest,  not  a  reign.  The 
Lord  Jesus  is  here  seen  putting  forth  His  power  to  put  down  His 
enemies  ;  as  in  chap.  xx.  we  have  the  picture  of  His  reign.  "His 
eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire."  That  is,  there  is  divine  dis- 
cernment in  judging.  "  And  on  his  head  were  many  diadems"  — 
or  royal  crowns.  "  And  he  had  a  name  written,  that  no  man 
knew  but  he  himself."  (Ver.  12.)  It  is  not  merely  in  a  cer- 
tain conferred  glory  that  He  comes  forth,  but  in  the  exercise  of 
His  own  divine  power.  It  is  quite  true  that  He  has  a  name 
given  to  Him,  as  we  see  in  Phil.  ii.  "  Wherefore  God  hath 
highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which  is  above  every 
name."  But  here  it  seems  not  to  be  that  name  of  Lord  which 
we  all  confess,  but  one  "  which  no  man  knew  but  he  himself." 
He  has  a  glory  that  is  essentially  His  own,  distinct  from  that 
which  was  His  reward  and  incapable  of  being  shared  with  others ; 
a  glory  which  He  has  in  His  own  right  as  a  divine  person.  The 
name  of  the  Lord  here  appears  to  express  this,  what  He  really 
is  in  His  own  nature.  So,  speaking  of  His  person,  it  is  said  in 
Matt,  xi.,  "  No  man  knoweth  the  Son  but  the  Father."  And 
it  is  remarkable  how  this  is  stated,  in  order  to  guard  against  the 
workings  of  our  minds.  Wherever  there  is  a  question  of  His 
Son,  God  is  ever  jealous  about  it.  When  speaking  about  the 
Father  it  is  added,  "  and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  will  reveal 
him  ;"  but  it  is  not  said  that  the  Father  reveals  the  Son  to  any 
one.  "  No  man  knoweth  the  Son,  but  the  Father" — and  there 
we  stop.  May  we  not  say  that  thus  God  guards  against  the 
familiarity  with  which  man  would  venture  to  analyze  the  person 
of  Christ  ?  There  is  nothing  so  offensive  to  God  as  this  irreve- 
rence. The  humanity  and  the  humiliation  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  are  brought  out  plainly  in  Scripture.  But  there  is  no 
person  in  the  Trinity  whose  divine  glory  is  more  strongly  main- 
tained than  the  Son's — perhaps  none  so  much.  It  is  remarkable 
that  while  the  same  sort  of  expression  is  used  about  God  as  such 
in  Rom.  i.  25,  and  about  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  2  Cor.  xi.  31,  as  about  Christ  in  Rom.  ix.  6,  yet  there 
is  a  further  expression  about  the  Lord  Jesus  that  is  not  used 
about  the  Father.     God  the  Father  is  said   to  be  blessed  for 


THE    ARMIES    WHICH    WERE    IN    HEAVEN.  329 

evermore,  and  Christ  "  God  over  all  blessed  for  evermore." 
The  Holy  Spirit  knew  that  man  was  prepared  to  outrage  the 
person  and  envy  the  glory  of  the  Son,  and  foresaw  that,  even 
where  they  professed  to  know  Him,  He  would  be  crucified  afresh 
and  put  to  open  shame.  Therefore  it  is  that  there  is  no  one 
thing  the  Holy  Ghost  more  insists  upon,  than  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  as  indeed  He  is  the  constant  object  of  the  enemy's 
attacks.  It  is  the  true  key  to  almost  every  question  of  doctrinal 
difficulty  one  meets  among  the  children  of  God.  Whenever  we 
get  our  souls  firndy  fixed  on  God's  thought  of  glorifying  Him, 
all  the  power  of  Satan  will  be  used  to  hinder  in  vain.  When 
Christ's  person  and  will  are  fully  seen,  difficulty,  whatever  it  may 
be,  is  at  an  end.  And  so  with  our  practical  dilemmas  also  :  the 
moment  we  catch  the  connexion  with  Christ,  the  difficulty  is 
clean  gone.  Satan  would  hinder  our  having  anything  to  do  with 
Christ  about  it.  He  shuts  out  the  glory  and  the  word  of  Christ 
from  our  eyes  ;  and  when  that  is  the  case,  we  are  ready  to  fall 
into  any  snare  :  for  the  same  blinding  power  that  destroys  a 
worldly  man,  darkens  and  hinders  the  Christian. 

But  to  return.  We  next  hear  that  the  Lord  "  was  clothed 
in  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood."  (Ver.  13.)  It  is  not  now  suffering, 
but  avenging.  He  is  coming  to  execute  righteousness  and  takes 
His  well-known  title  in  revealing  God  to  us.  "  The  Word  of 
God"  had  been  peculiarly  the  name  when  the  subject  was  the 
manifestation  of  grace  and  truth,  which  He  used  for  bringing  us 
round  Himself,  and  putting  us  in  His  own  position.  Here  He 
is  the  Word  of  God  as  manifesting  divine  judgment.  I  do  not 
think  the  Holy  Ghost  refers  to  that  name  in  the  verse  before. 
It  appears  to  me  that  the  name  written,  that  no  man  knew  but 
He  Himself,  is  purposely  left  in  obscurity,  that  we  may  not  forget 
the  perfect,  divine  and  essential  glory  of  the  Son  of  God. 

JNow  we  learn  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  did  not  come  alone. 
When  Christ  came  out  of  the  opened  heaven,  there  were  armies 
that  followed.  "  And  the  armies  which  were  in  heaven  followed 
him  upon  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and  clean." 
(Ver.  14.)  And  observe,  that  the  words,  "  which  were,"  though 
they  are  written  in  italics,  ought  to  be  there.  The  sense  would 
be  substantially  the  same  whether  you  read  it  with  those  words 
or  not;  and  therefoi-e  the  English  translators,  seeing  that  it 
ought  to  be  understood,  but  not  knowing  that  it  was  really  a 
part  of  the  text,  inserted  the  phrase  in  italics  ;  but  it  ought  to  be 
adopted.  "  The  armies  which  were  in  heaven  followed  him  upon 
white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and  clean."  I  have  no 
doubt   that  angels  will  be  in  the  train  of  Christ,  and  in  some 


330  SAINTS,    NOT    ANGELS. 

Other  parts  of  scripture  angels  are  mentioned  as  coming  with 
Him,  and  not  saints,  as  for  instance  in  2  Thess.  i.  7.  In  this 
passage  saints  are  mentioned  and  not  angels.  Such  is  the  way 
of  the  Lord.  He  does  not  state  things  as  man  does.  He  has 
always  a  moral  object  in  view,  and  therefore  just  brings  out  that 
part  of  the  truth  which  bears  upon  the  particular  subject  in 
hand.  Thus,  in  Matt,  xxv.,  where  the  Son  of  man  is  seen  seated 
upon  the  throne'of  His  glory,  all  the  holy  angels  are  mentioned 
as  being  with  Him.  And  why?  Because  the  angels  have  a 
special  connexion  with  Him  as  the  Head  of  human  glory.  (See 
Matt.  xiii.  41  ;  xvi.  27  ;  Luke  ix.  22.)  If  the  Queen  of  Eng- 
land were  setting  out  upon  some  great  political  occasion,  she 
would  be  accompanied  by  her  ministers  of  state.  But  if  she  were 
going  to  visit  her  army,  those  officials  need  not  be  there  ;  but 
she  would  require  the  presence  of  the  great  military  authorities. 
If  this  is  so  among  the  things  of  men,  much  more  is  there  a 
suitable  order  in  the  things  of  God.  The  Lord  is  called  Son  of 
man  in  reference  to  His  glory  as  connected  with  the  earth :  and 
when  He  takes  the  world  under  His  government.  He  has  got 
His  angels  whom  He  employs  as  the  messengers  of  His  power. 
But  He  is  not  called  here  "  Son  of  man,"  but  "  the  Word  of 
God,"  and  angels  are  not  mentioned  in  connexion  with  that 
name.  As  the  Word  of  God,  Christ  makes  Him  known.  Here 
He  expresses  God  in  the  way  of  judgment.  He  had  shown  Him 
in  the  way  of  grace  ;  as  we  have  it  in  the  gospel  of  John.  Thus 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  expression  of  all  God's  ways,  whe- 
ther in  perfect  grace  or  in  perfect  judgment. 

Here,  then,  the  armies  that  follow  Him  out  of  heaven  are 
saints.*     This  very  chapter  decides  the  question  it  seenas  to  me  ; 

*  It  is  difficult  to  say  how  Mr.  E.  understands  this.  He  asks,  parenthetically 
(Horae  Apoc.  vol.  iv.  p.  49),  "  were  they  not  His  saints,  '  the  called  and  chosen 
and  faithful  ?  '  "  But  in  what  condition  ?  Were  they  already  changed  ?  Or 
are  they  still  imagined  to  be  in  the  separate  state  ?  It  does  not  appear,  that  I 
can  perceive,  what  his  judgment,  as  to  this  important  question,  may  be.  We  know, 
from  p.  46,  he  infers  that  no  translation  of  the  living  saints,  or  resurrection  of 
the  saints  departed  this  life,  will  have  taken  place  up  to  the  time  figured  by  the 
chorus  of  song  at  the  beginning  of  our  chapter,  and  this  because  the  scenery  of 
the  inmost  temple,  with  its  throne  and  seated  Divinity,  and  the  elders  and  living 
creatures  attendant  near  it,  the  mi/stical  representative  of  the  expectant  Church  in 
Paradise,  remain  still  figured  in  vision  as  before.  That  is,  he  deduces  conse- 
quences from  that  most  unreasonable  assumption,  which  he  had  stated,  though 
hesitatingly,  in  commenting  on  chap.  iv.  v.,  that  the  crowned  and  enthroned  and 
complete  heads  of  heavenly  priesthood  mean  that  portion  of  Christians  who  are 
gone  to  be  with  Christ,  separate  spirits,  not  glorified  men.  This  error  arises 
from  denying  the  transitional  period,  filled  with  the  most  momentous  changes, 
which  spans  the  interval  between  the  coming  of  the  Lord  to  gather  His  saints  to 
Himself,  and  the  appearing  of  His  coming  which  destroys  the  Lawless  one  and 
all  that  company.  (Compare  2  Thess.  ii.  1  and  8.)     Is  it  meant,  I  ask,  that  when 


THE  SWORD    AND    ROD    OF    IBON.  331 

because  in  the  eighth  verse,  the  fine  linen  with  which  they  are 
clothed,  (and  it  is  the  same  word  that  is  used,)  is  said  to  be  the 
righteousness  of  saints.  Others  might  be  there,  but  could  not 
well  be  mentioned  where  the  Lord  is  described  as  the  Word  of 
God.  Whereas,  the  mention  of  the  hosts  of  heavenly  saints  is 
very  important ;  and  for  this  reason  :  the  chapter  gives  us  the 
deeper  connexion  of  the  saints  with  Christ.  You  have  the 
Bride  of  Christ,  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb,  and  the  consumma- 
tion of  the  Church's  joy  in  heaven.  As  far  as  the  world  is 
concerned,  no  stranger  intermeddles  with  that  joy. 

But  now  God  is  going  to  put  down  all  the  wickedness  of  man 
and  of  Satan  on  earth.  Hence  the  Word  of  God  comes  from 
heaven  ;  and  those  that  had  been  the  companions  of  His  rejec- 
tion, are  now  the  companions  of  His  judgment.  As  it  is  said  in 
chap.  xvii.  14 :  "  The  Lamb  shall  overcome  them  ....  and 
they  that  are  with  him,  called,  and  chosen,  and  faithful," 
There  was  the  announcement  that,  when  the  battle  came.  He 
would  not  be  alone,  but  that  the  saints  would  be  with  Him — 
called,  and  chosen,  and  faithful  ones  ;  and  accordingly  here  they 
are.  "The  armies  which  were  in  heaven  followed  Him — 
clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and  clean,"  They  will  not  be  all 
who  will  follow,  but  it  is  of  importance  to  see  that  these  are 
saints. 

The  description  proceeds  :  "  Out  of  his  mouth  goeth  a  sharp 
sword,  that  with  it  he  may  smite  the  nations  :  and  he  shall 
rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron  :  and  he  treadeth  the  winepress  of 
the  fierceness  of  the  wrath  of  Almighty  God,"  (Ver.  15,)  This 
is  a  simple  description  of  the  various  judgments  that  the  Lord  will 
execute  when  He  comes.  First,  thei'e  is  the  word  of  power  set 
forth  by  the  sharp  sword  going  out  of  His  mouth.  If  any  must 
be  destroyed,  it  is  enough  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  speak. 
"  He  spake  and  it  was  done."  The  judgment  was  executed. 
But  besides,  "  He  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron."  That  is 
the  judgment  which  is  referred  to  in  chap,  ii,,  where  there  is  a 
promise  to  those  of  Thyatira,  who  overcome,  that  they  should 
have  fellowship  with  Christ  in  this  judgment  of  the  nations, 

the  marriage  of  the  Lamb,  and  the  Lamb's  wife  had  made  herself  ready,  there 
was  no  more  than  spirits  separate  from  the  body  ?  To  me,  all  this  is  quite 
simple,  because  I  firmly  believe  that  what  is  properly  called  the  Church  had  been 
translated  and  in  the  glorified  state,  ever  since  chap.  iv.  But,  on  Mr.  E.'s  hypo- 
thesis, all  seems  inextricable  confusion.  If  I  catch  the  meaning  of  his  note  4, 
vol.  iv.  p.  194),  he  dissents  from  Daubuz,  who  contends,  from  the  dress  of  the 
hosts  that  followed  Christ,  that  they  were  the  risen  saints,  now  associated  with 
Christ  in  judgment  and  afterwards  in  reigning.  But  text  and  notes  of  Part  vi. 
chap.  iv.  present  hardly  any  thing  but  a  jumble  of  times,  places,  persons,  and 
dealings  of  God.  I  am  sorry  to  speak  in  such  strong  terms  ;  but  the  truth  should 
be  dearer  to  us  than  conciliation. 


332  THE    BEAST    AND    THE    FALSE    PROPHET. 

"  And  he  treadeth  the  winepress  of  the  fierceness  of  the  wrath  of 
Almighty  God."  This  is  the  unsparing  judgment  that  we  have 
seen  before  in  chap.  xiv.  It  is  vengeance  upon  religious  wick- 
edness, which  is  always  reserved  for  the  severest  stroke  that  God 
can  inflict.  "  And  he  hath  upon  his  vesture  and  upon  his  thigh 
a  name  written,  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords"  (ver.  16) — 
the  same  title  that  we  have  seen  in  chap.  xvii.  14. 

But  while  there  was  an  invitation  to  the  marriage-supper  of 
the  Lamb,  there  is  another  and  very  different  supper,  the  great 
supper  of  God.  Here  it  is  not  the  blessed  whom  God's  grace 
invites.  An  angel  speaks  obedient  to  His  word,  and  the  instru- 
ment of  His  power,  standing  in  the  sun — the  symbol  of  supreme 
power.  For  it  is  not  now  a  thing  done  in  a  corner.  There  are 
no  terms  of  forbearance  :  all  is  now  thoroughly  open.  Nor  is 
it  now  a  partial  but  a  complete  and  final  judgment.  "  And  he 
cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying  to  all  the  fowls  tiiat  fly  in  the 
midst  of  heaven,  Come  and  gather  yourselves  together  unto  the 
great  supper  of  God  (for  so  it  should  be  read)  ;  that  ye  may  eat 
the  flesh  of  kings,  and  the  flesh  of  captains,  and  the  flesh  of 
mighty  men,  and  the  flesh  of  horses  and  of  them  that  sit  on 
them,  and  the  flesh  of  all  men  both  free  and  bond,  both  small 
and  great."  (Ver.  17,  18.)  It  is  the  same  sort  of  contrast,  I  think, 
that  we  may  have  seen  in  Rev.  xiv.,  where  we  had  the  first-fruits 
at  the  beginning  of  the  chapter,  and  aftei'wards  the  harvest  before 
the  chapter  closes.  Here  you  have  the  supper  of  the  Lamb 
above  ;  and  the  great  supper  of  God,  that  He  will  make  for 
those  that  prey  on  the  dead. 

"  And  I  saw  the  Beast  and  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  their 
armies,  gathered  together  to  make  war  against  him  that  sat  on 
the  horse,  and  against  his  army.  And  the  beast  was  taken  and 
with  him  the  false  prophet,*  that  wrought  miracles  before  him, 

*  Mr.  Birks  seems  to  be,  I  will  not  say  accurate,  but  less  under  the  influence 
of  human  system  and  bias  than  most  of  the  Protestant  school.  Thus,  in  his 
"Two  Later  Visions  of  Daniel"  (p.  337),  he  admits  that  "  it  may  be  inferred,  from 
a  careful  comparison  of  several  Scriptures,  that  at  this  time  the  temple  described 
in  Ezekicl  will  have  been  built,  and  that  then  this  fierce  and  mighty  king  will 
seat  himself  ns  a  sovereign,  and  claim  to  be  the  object  of  a  Divine  adoration."  I 
doubt  as  to  the  identity  with  Ezekiel's  temple,  but  this  is  a  question  of  detail. 
Again,  in  the  following  page,  he  says,  "  The  Papacy,  denoted  by  the  wilful  king, 
in  its  last  hour  will  fill  up  the  measure  of  its  apostasy,  and  gather  to  itself  those 
partial  features  of  Antichrist,  which  are  now  to  be  seen  in  the  Mahometan  delu- 
sion, and  its  open  rejection  of  the  Son  of  God,  At  the  same  time,  a  leader  will 
arise,  the  last  personal  head  of  the  compound  system  of  evil,  and  the  heathen 
Antiochus,  the  Pope,  and  the  Turk  contribute  to  supply  the  features  of  his 
iniquity.  The  wilful  king,  in  this  last  stage  of  his  power,  and  represented  now 
by  this  leader,  will  gather  on  himself  the  predicted  character  of  a  king  of  the 
north,  and  then  come  down  like  a  wliirlwind  on  the  lan<.l  of  Israel."     Here  there 


CONTRAST    WITH    ENOCH    AND    ELIJAH.  333 

with  which  he  deceived  them  that  had  received  the  mark  of  the 
Beast,  and  them  that  worshipped  his  image."  (Ver.  19,  20.)  You 
will  observe  that  one  is  here  called  the  false  prophet.  He  has  ap- 
parently lost  his  world-power,  and  is  therefore  not  presented  now 
as  the  second  Beast  rising  from  the  earth  with  lamb-like  horns,  i.e. 
the  imitator  of  Christ's  power;  He  is  the  false  prophet  simply. 
Whatever  dominion  he  had  is  now  merged,  and  he  is  seen  in  his 
ecclesiastical  character,  as  a  teacher  of  lies  —  in  his  capacity  as 
opposing'  God's  truth.  Babylon  was  gone,  but  there  was  still 
this  wicked  ecclesiastical  powder  who  had  wrought  with  the  Beast, 
and  both  now  meet  with  the  same  tremendous  judgment  at  the 
hand  of  God.  "  These  both  were  cast  alive  into  the  lake  of 
fire  burning  with  brimstone." 

There  had  been  two  men  singled  out  from  all  others  for  special 
mercy  and  glory.  One  was  in  the  early  antediluvian  world, 
when  it  was  fast  coming  to  its  close.  ''  He  walked  with  God,  and 
was  not,  for  God  took  him."  And  when  the  world  had  grown 
older  in  sin,  and  God's  separated  people  had  far  departed  from 
Him,  God  did  interpose  again,  and  would  show  that  there  are 
no  times,  however  evil,  when  His  servants  may  not  walk  with 
Him.  Thus,  when  Israel  was  altogether  debased  in  sin,  and 
God  had  put  His  servant  in  the  midst  of  that  wicked  and  corrupt 
and  apostate  people,  Israel ;  then  and  there  it  was  that  Elijah 
gave  his  testimony,  and  he,  too,  without  dying,  was  chosen  of 
God  to  be  taken  up  to  heaven. 

And  here,  in  most  miserable  contrast,  we  find  two  singled  out 
from  all  others, — two  men  as  remarkable  for  Satan,  as  Enoch 
and  Elijah  had  been  for  God.  And  these  men,  the  heads  of 
their  respective  powers  of  wickedness,  (the  open  blaspheming 
power  of  the  Beast ;  and  the  more  intriguing,  corrupting  energy 
of  the  false  prophet,  who  had  specially  set  himself  against  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,)  are  found  together.  If  God  had  interposed 
to  show  signal  mercy,  in  bringing  alive  to  heaven,  so  now  God 
interposes  to  send  alive  down  to  hell.  They  had  been  leaders  in 
evil ;  they  had  worn  down  the  saints  and  overcome  them  before 
men.  Now  their  day  comes — "And  the  Beast  was  taken  and 
with  him  the  false  prophet,  that  wrought  miracles  before  him." 
"  These  both  were  cast  alive  into  the  lake  of  fire  burning  with 
brimstone." 

The  Lord  judges  their  followers  too,  but  not  with  so  terrible  a 

is  the  most  palpable  confusion  of  two  opposed  chiefs,  the  wilful  king  in  the  Holy 
Land,  and  the  northern  king  who  assails  him  there.  But  I  cite  the  passage  to 
show  that  fairminded  men,  spite  of  preconception,  are  obliged  to  admit  the  all- 
importance  of  the  future  crisis  in  Judea. 


334  APPROACHING    CRISIS. 

doom.  They  remain  to  be  judged  another  day — they  must  stand 
and  appear  before  God.  Meanwhile  they  "  are  slain  with  the 
sword  of  Him  that  sat  upon  the  horse,  and  all  the  fowls  were 
filled  with  their  flesh."  But  as  for  the  twain,  God  required,  as 
it  were,  nothing  more  :  they  were  the  worst  leaders  of  the  world's 
lawlessness,  and  therefore  judgment  takes  its  course  summarily 
and  for  ever.  I  know  of  no  judgment  so  tremendous  in  scrip- 
tures. To  think  that  these  men  should  be  cast  into  hell  before 
Satan  himself! 

And  solemn  thought !  the  time  is  fast  approaching.  It  is  diffi- 
cult to  realize  that  such  will  soon  be  the  doom  of  the  rulers  of 
these  western  lands.  They  will  be  found  gathered  for  battle 
near  Jerusalem.  For,  as  Christendom  began  with  Jerusalem,  so 
the  last  and  terrible  end  of  Christendom  will  be  there.  As  the 
Roman  empire  will  reappear,  so  there  will  be  found  a  chief  of  its 
political  power,  sustaining  and  sustained  by  the  religious  chief  of 
the  east.  Such  is  the  crisis  which,  as  God  shows  plainly  in  His 
word,  awaits  the  world.  And  I  have  the  firm  conviction,  without 
pretending  to  fix  the  time,  that  the  train  is  being  laid  even  now. 
Thus  we  see  the  remarkable  prominence  which,  in  our  day,  is 
given  to  the  east,  and  its  growing  connexion  with  the  west. 
These  are  facts  before  our  eyes ;  but  it  is  well  known  to  many 
readers  that  these  same  things  have  been  affirmed  years  before  any 
of  these  facts  had  taken  place.*  They  were  stated  with  the  same 
confidence,  and  to  some  of  those  who  read  these  pages.  Thus, 
what  is  going  on  in  the  world  comes  in  as  a  remarkable  confir- 
mation of  prophecy.  It  is  not  the  circumstance:*,  which  enable 
us  to  judge  aright ;  but  taking  the  word  of  God  alone,  we  may 
have  a  full  persuasion  in  our  souls.  For  whether  we  see  the 
events  or  not,  no  man  ever  believed  the  word  of  God  and  was 
ashamed.  "The  days  are  at  hand,  and  the  efiect  of  every 
vision." 

The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  remember  that  there  will  be  a 
power  of  deceit  in  the  world  that  will  carry  men  away !  Men 
may  fancy  that  they  will  discern  and  reject  the  Beast  and  the 
false  prophet.  That  only  shows  that  they  have  very  little  idea  of 
the  influence  and  working  of  Satan.  His  most  dangerous  power 
lies  now,  not  in  that  which  looks  outwardly  bad,  but  in  what 
seems  quiet  and  fair.  Thus  is  it  still,  and  it  was  when  Christ  was 
here.  The  man  possessed  with  a  legion  of  demons  received 
deliverance  and  blessing.  But  what  did  the  Gadarenes  do  ? 
They  besought  the  Lord  to  depart  out  of  their  coast. 

*  This  was  written  about  three  years  since.     I  need  hardly  add  what  fresh  and 
strong  evidence  ia  furnished  by  the  late  war  (and  peace)  in  Italy. 


DO    YOU    WELCOMJS   CHRIST  ?  335 

Let  me  ask  you,  do  you  not  prefer  something  to  Christ?  You 
may  not  be  showing  active  enmity  to  Christ.  You  may  hear  the 
gospel :  but,  have  you  received  it  ?  If  not,  where  are  you  ?  If 
I  hear  the  gospel,  and  do  not  receive  it,  I  am  rejecting  it.  God 
does  not  allow  me  to  say,  there  is  something  to  be  done  first. 
He  has  done  everything.  Therefore,  it  comes  to  be  a  question 
of  positive  rejection — bidding  Christ  depart.  The  Lord  grant 
that  such  may  not  be  your  present  guilt  and  eternal  misery  ! 


336  FIGURATIVE    LANGUAGE. 


CHAPTEJl    XX. 

The  first  three  verses  of  this  chapter  are  closely  connected 
with  the  one  that  goes  before.  For  there  we  had  the  judgment 
of  the  Beast  and  the  false  prophet,  and  of  their  adherents. 
Here  we  have  what  God  saw  fit  to  inflict  for  the  present  upon 
the  real,  unseen  leader  of  all  the  mischief — the  devil.  But  there 
is  this  difi'erence,  that  it  is  not  Christ  who  deals  with  Satan.  It 
was  the  shining  forth  of  His  coming  that  destroyed  the  Beast 
and  the  false  prophet.  They  were  taken  and  were  both  cast 
alive  into  the  lake  of  fire.  And  so  we  learn  in  chap.  xx.  10, 
when  Satan's  turn  came  for  being  cast  there  also  ;  it  is  into  that 
lake  where  the  Beast  and  the  false  prophet  already  were,  and 
where  they  shall  be  tormented  for  ever  and  ever.  But  it  was 
not  yet  the  time  for  the  last  and  most  terrible  judgment  of 
Satan.  God's  trial  of  the  world  was  not  quite  over,  and  there- 
fore, perhaps,  God  did  not  interfere  by  Christ  in  person,  but 
through  an  angel.  Before  Christ  inflicts  the  last  crushing  blow 
upon  Satan,  an  angel  is  employed  to  limit  his  power  and  liberty 
for  a  certain  period.  That  is  what  we  have  here.  Satan  is 
restrained  for  a  thousand  years.  Many  persons  have  raised 
difficulties  as  to  this  chapter,  as  indeed  in  all  the  rest  of  the 
book,  on  the  ground  of  the  figurative  language.  But  no  objec- 
tion could  be  less  reasonable ;  for  figurative  or  symbolic  lan- 
guage is  used  in  Scripture  from  the  first  book  to  the  last.  So 
that  if  you  neglect  one  part  of  God's  word  on  this  ground,  you 
are  in  danger  of  slighting  all.  It  is  the  commonest  thing  pos- 
sible. Take  the  language  of  God  Himself  in  Eden,  the  words 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  used  for  the  comfort  and  salvation  of 
souls  from  the  day  that  man  was  fallen  by  sin.  Even  there,  we 
find  that  God  used  highly  metaphorical  language.  But  if  a  soul 
was  needy,  and  through  grace  desired  to  understand  God,  there 
was  always  a  sure  way.  God  waited  j)atiently  and  taught  and 
led  on  His  children.  No  doubt  there  was  room  for  growth,  but 
then  there  was  room  for  unbelief  too,  and  the  evil  heart  could 
readily  find  difficulties  to  stumble  over.  But  faith  always  finds 
out  the  way  to  understand  God.  Not  but  what  there  are  things 
hard  to  such  as  we  are  ;  but  faith  pursues  its  narrow  path  through 
obstacles  and  dangers,  because  God  has  said,    "  they  shall  be  all 


CHRIST    IS   THE    OBJECT    OF   THE    SPIRIT    OF    GOD.  337 

taught  of  God."  Nevertheless,  the  language  in  which  God  was 
pleased  to  pronounce  judgment  on  the  enemy  and  to  intimate  a 
Redeemer,  was  so  figurative  that  an  unbelieving  Jew  like 
Josephus  could  pervert  it  and  apply  it  merely  to  the  natural  dis- 
like that  men  have  to  serpents  and  their  desire  to  get  rid  of 
them  wherever  found !  Of  course  such  a  notion  sprang  from 
not  understanding  the  mind  of  God,  and  the  Jewish  historian 
was  ignorant  of  Scripture  and  of  the  power  of  God.  And 
remember  that  I  do  not  use  the  word  "  ignorant"  here  to  describe 
the  lack  of  human  learning,  any  more  thau  Scripture  does,  when 
it  says  of  certain  persons  that  "  they  are  unlearned  and  unsta- 
ble." They  might  be  as  wise  as  Plato  and  prudent  as  Aristotle, 
but  they  were  not  learned  in  God's  will  and  in  the  knowledge 
of  His  mind.  This  is  the  learning  that  we  should  value  and 
cultivate  —  a  thing  that  never  can  be  gleaned  in  the  schools  of 
this  world.  On  the  contrary,  if  a  man  prosecutes  human  learn- 
ing as  a  means  of  understanding  the  things  of  God,  he  is  sure  to 
go  astray,  because  this  per  se  is  never  from  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Doubtless,  he  who  has  got  human  learning  may  make  use  of  it 
for  God.  But  the  great  point  is,  that  the  man  of  God  must 
make  learning  and  everything  that  is  of  man  to  be  his  servant ; 
whereas,  the  mind  of  man,  as  such,  makes  learning  his  master 
and  becomes  its  slave.  Hence  the  danger  of  all  such  things 
proving  positive  hindi'ances,  even  to  the  Christian,  save  so  far  as 
he  is  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  only  possible  way  of  under- 
standing God's  Word  is  by  subjection  to  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and 
the  test  is  Christ,  because  the  object  of  the  Spirit  is  to  exalt  Him. 
Therefore  it  is  that  you  never  can  separate  growth  in  the  things 
of  God  from  the  moral  state  of  the  soul.  It  is  true  that  a  man 
who  has  learned  a  great  deal  of  truth  may  slip  into  a  bad  state  of 
soul :  but,  in  general,  sound  knowledge  of  the  things  of  God  and 
a  wise,  gracious  application  of  the  truth  flow  from  communion 
with  God. 

I  have  made  these  few  remarks  not  doubting  that  many  of  my 
readers  know  them  to  be  true  from  their  own  experience  ;  but 
some  perhaps  may  learn  from  them,  why  they  make  small  pro- 
gress in  the  things  of  God.  The  true  way  is  to  seek  the  glory 
of  Christ :  where  a  man  is  bent  upon  that,  he  must  learn,  no 
doubt;  but  all  is  open  and  clear  before  him,  because  he  is  in  the 
current  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whose  office  is  to  take  of  the  things 
of  Jesus  and  to  show  them  unto  us.  "  When  He  is  come,  .... 
He  shall  glorify  me  :  for  He  shall  receive  of  mine  and  shall  show 
it  unto  you :"  for  Christ,  not  man,  is  the  aim  and  end  of  the 
Spirit. 

23 


338        FIGURES    EVERYWHERE,    BUT    NOT    UNINTELLIGIBLE. 

Well,  now,  in  the  earliest  book  of  the  Bible,  Genesis,  which 
all  will  acknowledge  to  be  a  perfect  model  of  simplicity — for  it  is 
the  most  simple  book,  containing-  profound  truth,  that  ever  was 
written — in  this  book  where  God  was  putting  us  in  His  nursery 
school — what  do  we  find  there  ?  Not  seldom  figurative  lan- 
guage ;  so  that  if  I  am  to  give  up  the  Scriptures  because  of 
figures,  I  must  give  them  up  from  Genesis  to  Revelation. 

The  revelation  of  the  woman's  seed  that  was  to  bruise  the 
serpent's  head  was  the  very  thing  on  which  salvation  hung ;  the 
blessed  truth  that  faith  laid  hold  of  at  all  times.  Take  a  case. 
Abel's  faith,  that  expressed  itselfin  the  offering  which  he  brought, 
was  grounded  upon  this  word.  He  believed  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
was  coming,  (though  he  might  not  know  that  name,)  who 
would  be  bruised  in  order  to  destroy  the  serpent — one  wdio  would 
suffer,  whose  heel  would  be  bruised,  though  eventually  He 
would  crush  the  bruiser. 

This  shows  that  faith  is  a  very  distinct  thing  from  the  ability 
to  explain  the  figures  of  a  passage,  the  general  sense  and  cer- 
tainty of  which  may  be  clearly  seen.  So  much  so,  that  even  now, 
if  you  were  to  take  a  Christian  and  ask  him  to  explain  all  the 
particulars  of  that  verse — what  was  meant  by  the  seed  of  the 
woman  and  of  the  serpent,  the  enmity  between  them,  and  the 
bruising  of  the  head  and  of  the  heel,  though  he  might  be  perfectly 
certain  that  it  speaks  of  Christ  and  might  understand  the  general 
meaning  of  it,  yet  he  would  find  a  great  deal  of  difficulty  in 
explaining  what  each  thing  meant.  But  there  is  the  blessedness 
of  God's  word,  that  people  are  not  saved  by  having  clear 
thoughts  on  the  obscure  ;  but  what  God  does  is  to  direct  every  soul 
that  is  saved  to  the  right  object.  Their  hearts  rest  upon  a  Christ 
who  has  suffered  for  them  and  completely  destroyed  the  destroyer. 
They  may  not  be  able  to  bring  out  their  thoughts  clearly  to 
others  ;  but  the  faith  of  the  taught  knows  the  truth  perhaps  as 
Avell  as  the  teacher,  though  the  latter  alone  can  develop  it  with 
convincing  plainness.  This  shows  that  even  where  God  employs 
these  figures,  the  general  thought  is  sufficiently  plain.  To  ex- 
pound them  by  words  might  by  an  insuperable  difficulty  to  the 
soul  that  has  no  question  of  the  general  sense. 

Here  an  angel  comes  down  out  of  heaven.  This  angel,  in  the 
prophetic  vision,  has  the  key  of  the  abyss  and  a  great  chain 
hanging  on  his  hand  (ver.  1).  He  is  seen  laying  hold  of  "the 
dragon,  the  ancient  serpent,  who  is  the  devil  and  Satan,"  the  well- 
known  enemy  of  God  and  man  ;  and  then  follows  the  use  of  the 
key  and  the  chain,  the  key  for  shutting  him  up  and  the  chain  for 
binding  him  fast.      Obviously  these  are  figures,  but  they  are 


THE    BINDING    OF    SATAN,  339 

familiar  to  the  simplest  mind.  There  are  none,  however  ignorant 
about  some  things,  who  need  misunderstand  what  is  meant.  The 
Spirit  of  God  takes  advantage  of  the  commonest  things  of  every- 
day hfe  to  describe  an  act  of  judgment  that  is  about  to  be 
accomplished  in  His  providence  by  and  by.  God  intends  to 
restrain  Satan,  and  will  not  suffer  his  going  about  to  deceive  the 
world  as  he  does  now  ;  but  it  will  be  only  for  a  season  (ver.  2, 3). 
He  is  not  thrown  into  tJie  lake  of  fire  at  once,  but  is  a  prisoner 
in  the  bottomless  pit,  which  is  the  expression  of  the  place,  under 
the  control  of  Satan  ordinarily,  that  will  then  be  made  the  place 
of  his  confinement.  (Compare  chaps,  ix.,  xi.,  and  xvii.) 

It  is  certain  from  God's  word  that  Satan  is  not  yet  shut  up ; 
on  the  contrary,  that  he  goes  about  now,  seeking  to  deceive  and 
to  destroy  souls.  The  New  Testament  always  supposes  this.  It 
is  perfectly  clear  that  Satan  is  an  enemy  still  at  large — that  he  is 
active  in  his  rebellion  against  God,  and  in  the  falsehood  that  he 
spreads  among  men,  and  in  the  death  and  ruin  that  he  causes 
everywhere.  But  this  is  to  close,  when,  for  a  certain  limited 
time,  the  earth  will  be  freed  from  his  deceits.  This  is  all  that  I 
need  to  draw  from  the  passage.  I  am  not  going  to  discuss 
whether  the  thousand  years  are  to  taken  literally  or  mj'stically, 
for  that  is  a  question  of  detail  and  degree  only.  But  beyond  a 
doubt  the  period  has  a  beginning  and  has  an  end ;  nor  can  it 
have  begun  yet,  because  Satan  is  not  bound.  The  New  Testa- 
ment epistles  suppose  that  Satan  carries  on  his  devices,  hinders 
the  work  of  God,  has  to  be  resisted,  and  is  going  about  as  a  roar- 
ing lion,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.  So  that  there  must  be  a 
vast  change  when  the  time  comes  for  his  restraint.  And  God  will 
have  to  cast  his  people  upon  other  parts  of  His  word,  which 
would  not  apply  to  the  past  or  the  present.  The  saints  then 
will  be  in  many  respects  in  a  totally  different  state.  In  that 
day  Christ  will  be  reigning  over  the  earth,  having  it  under 
His  direct  control ;  and  most  assuredly  the  change  will  be 
incalculable.  Satan,  too,  will  be  bound,  and  God's  people  then 
will  not  require  the  same  discipline  through  the  word  of  God,  as 
those  do  now  who  have  to  encounter  the  assaults  of  Satan  and  his 
accusations.  God  will  deal  with  them  according  to  the  condition 
in  which  they  will  be  placed,  and  for  which  His  word  provides. 

Allow  me  to  repeat  that  it  is  chiefly  the  influence  of  prejudice, 
with  which  persons  approach  the  book  of  the  Revelation,  that 
makes  it  appear  so  difficult.  People  say  that  so  many  good  men 
have  made  mistakes  in  interpreting  it,  and  that  there  is  no  way 
for  the  simple  to  take  it  up  profitably.  But  this  is  to  the 
dishonour  of  God  ;  for  He  has  given  this  book  to  be  understood 


340         '  "  I    SAW    THRONES, 

by  His  people  at  large,  peculiarly  commending  it  to  His  servants. 
Special  promises  of  blessing  He  attaches  to  such  as  read,  hear, 
and  keep  it,  foi'eseeing  the  delusion  abroad  with  regard  to  its 
obscurity.  But  why  is  it  the  devil's  object  to  hinder  people  from 
reading  this  book  ?  Why  is  it  that,  in  what  are  called  Christian 
churches,  every  other  part  of  the  Bible  is  read,  while  the  book  of 
the  Revelation  is  scarcely  looked  at?  Even  the  Apocrypha  is 
read  by  some,  while  of  the  "  true  sayings  of  God"  only  a  few  frag- 
ments here  and  there  are  used  for  public  services.  The  reason  is 
because  there  is  no  book  in.  the  Bible  that  Satan  fears  more,  and 
justly  too.  It  announces,  first,  his  sure  humiliation  by  angelic 
power,  and  then  his  destruction  afterwards.  Other  books  show  his 
partial  temporary  successes  ;  this  dwells  on  his  overthrow,  and 
therefore  must  he  dread  it.  Again,  if  you  have  here  the  account 
of  God's  putting  down  of  Satan,  you  have  also,  very  fully  brought 
out,  the  awful  height  of  power  to  which  he  rises  before  the  end. 
For  the  divine  principle  is  never  to  judge  evil,  until  it  has  rejected 
all  the  patience  of  God,  abused  His  goodness,  and  become  tho- 
roughly unbearable.  Had  Christians  felt  that  Satan's  object 
was  to  conceal  his  own  wiles,  and  power,  and  ruin,  by  leading 
them  to  neglect  this  book,  they  might  have  been  more  on  their 
guard.  But  that  is  the  last  thing  he  wants  people  to  suspect ; 
for  then  they  at  once  get  upon  the  ground  where  the  Spirit  of 
God  can  lead  them  on  ;  whereas,  if  they  assume  that  the  book 
is  so  dark  as  to  be  practically  unintelligible,  they  are,  so  far, 
exposed  to  his  delusion,  though  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not 
suffer  them  to  be  tempted  above  that  they  are  able. 

In  the  next  verse  we  get  another  thing,  the  portion  of  the 
blessed.  What  Avill  Christ  be  doing,  and  what  they  who  are 
with  Him,  now  that  the  victory  is  won  1  "  And  I  saw  thrones 
and  they  sat  upon  them,  and  judgment  was  given  unto  them." 
(Ver.  4.)  The  heads,  civil  and  ecclesiastical,  of  the  evil  in  the 
world,  had  been  summarily  judged  :  the  hidden  source  of  all 
was  next  set  aside,  "  till  the  thousand  years  should  be  finished." 
But  now  the  Lord  Jesus  has  taken  the  kingdom  of  the  world. 
Still  the  object  here  is  not  so  much  to  show  us  C/irist's  reign, 
because  that  was  a  faraihar  truth,  found  throughout  all  Scripture, 
and  one  that  was  well  known  to  the  Old  Testament  saints.  And 
so  habitually  were  they  waiting  for  the  Messiah,  and  so  prevalent 
was  the  expectation  of  His  kingdom,  even  in  the  mass  of  uncon- 
verted Israel,  that  Satan  took  advantage  of  it  to  make  men 
refuse  the  grace  of  Christ  coming  in  humiliation.  Here  His 
reigning  is  of  course  implied,  as  the  central  pivot  of  the  blessing; 
but  His  people,  or  at  least  His  sufferers,  are  specified  with  the 
utmost  clearness. 


AND   THEY    SAT    UPON    THEM."  341 

This,  then,  may  be  one  recason  why  prominence  is  here  given 
to  those  who  reign  with  Christ.  God  felt  deeply  for  His  saints. 
They  were  under  keen  trial  and  temptation.  He  takes  pains  to 
show  that  if  they  had  suffered,  they  were  also  to  reign  with 
Him.  And  therefore,  as  it  seems  to  me,  it  is  not  here  said, 
I  saw  a  great  throne,  but  "  I  saw  thrones."  *  As  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  Himself  had  said  to  the  disciples,  "  In  my  Father's  house 
are  many  mansions."  He  does  not  speak  of  one  peculiar  man- 
sion there  for  Himself,  but  He  says,  "  In  ray  Father's  house  are 
mayiy  mansions  :  if  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you.  I  go 
to  prepare  a  place  for  you."  Was  it  not  in  the  same  spirit  that 
the  prophet  here  had  the  vision  of  these  thrones  ?  And  they 
were  not  vacant.  "I  saw  thrones  and  they  sat  on  them,  and 
judgment  was  given  unto  them."  They  were  put  in  the  place 
of  exercising  judgment.  Evidently  that  is  an  accomplishment 
of  the  word  in  1  Cor.  vi.  The  apostle  there  addressing  the 
saints  at  Corinth,  says,  "  Do  ye  not  know  that  the  saints  sliall 
judge  the  world?"  Here  they  are,  judging  the  world.  But 
more  than  that.  The  Lord  had  said  to  the  twelve  apostles, 
"  Ye  shall  sit  upon  twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of 
Israel."  Many  persons  think  that  this  will  only  be  fulfilled  in 
heaven.  But  there  can  be  no  such  state  of  things  there.  The 
twelve  tribes  are  not  above.  They  are  only  known  as  such  upon 
earth.  Here  below  they  will  be  found  as  an  object  of  govern- 
ment, and  so  the  prophets  speak.  What  will  there  be  for  saints 
to  judge  in  heaven  ?  When  the  glorified  are  there,  there  will 
be  no  men  to  judge  above — all  will  be  blessed  there.  These  will 
have  passed  out  of  the  scene  of  judgment.  It  is  quite  plain 
therefore  that  this  scene  is  one  that  cannot  apply  to  heaven  ; 
and  that  it  supposes  the  earth  as  a  sphere  of  judgment.  Those 
in  question  reign  over  the  earth.  1  say,  "  over  the  earth,"  for 
there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  this  world  will  be  the  home  of 
the  risen  saints  of  God.  They  may  visit  it  from  time  to  time, 
as  we  know  the  Lord  Himself  will ;  but  their  proper  dwelling- 
place  will  not  be  the  earth.     Even  now  blessing  is  in  heavenly 

*  Daubuz  notices  another  distinction,  well  worthy  of  remark,  but  in  a  way 
which  needs  correction.  "These  thrones,  whose  number  is  not  deflned  [as  in 
chapter  iv.],  are  to  be  very  carefully  distinguished  from  the  twenty-four  thrones 
here  mentioned."  (Perp.  Comm.  p.  925.)  So  say  I,  but  when  he  goes  on  to  teach, 
that  the  state  of  the  Christian  Church,  and  its  primitive  and  militant  institution, 
were  signified  by  the  enthroned  elders,  I  reject  such  an  explanation,  as  do  almost 
all  Christians.  Yet  that  there  is  a  notable  difference  between  that  state  of  things 
and  the  millennial  one  before  us  now,  is  manifest.  The  only  satisfactory  solution, 
I  am  satisfied,  depends  on  the  rapture  of  the  heavenly  saints,  previous  to  the 
fulfilment  of  chap,  iv.,  and  the  interval  spent  before  they  appear  witli  Christ  in, 
glory,  as  wc  see  in  chaps,  xix.  xx. 


342  "THE    SOULS." 

places  in  Christ ;  much  more  evidently  will  it  be,  when  we  are 
glorified.  The  blessing  is  heavenly  in  its  source,  character,  and 
sphere.  But  while  we  shall  thus  have  blessing  in  heavenly 
places,  the  earth  will  be  the  lower  and  subject  province  —  full  of 
interest  and  glory  to  God,  but  a  comparatively  outside  domain. 
Just  as  a  man  who  owns  an  estate,  may  have  a  grand  family  seat 
in  it ;  but  that  does  not  hinder  his  having  property  outside,  which 
he  must  leave  his  house  in  order  to  see.  And  so  it  will  be 
hereafter.  The  glory  above  will  be  the  rest  and  centre  of  the 
heavenly  saints ;  but  besides  that,  they  will  judge  the  earth.*" 
According'ly  it  is  written  here,  "  I  saw  thrones  and  they  sat  on 
them,  and  judgment  was  given  unto  them."  They  were  the 
destined  assessors  of  the  Lord  in  judging  or  government. 

But  that  was  not  all.  "  And  [I  saw]  the  souls  of  them  that 
were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus,  and  for  the  word  of 
God."  Mark  the  words,  "  the  souls  of  them,"  &;c.  There  are 
many  who,  in  the  main,  agreeing  that  this  vision  represents  a 
judgment  exercised  by  heiivenly  saints  over  men  upon  earth, 
understand  the  "  souls"  spoken  of  here  to  mean  persons,  accord- 
ing to  a  common  usage  of  Scripture.  But  I  do  not  believe  that 
this  is  the  true  explanation.  Why  not  take  the  word  "  souls" 
here  as  meaning  those  who  were  in  the  separate  state  ?  Thus, 
the  Apostle  John  saw  in  the  vision,  first,  thrones  with  persons 
seated  upon  them  ;  secondly,  a  certain  number  of  disembodied 
people,  the  souls  of  them  that  had  been  beheaded  for  the  witness 
of  Jesus  and  for  the  word  of  God  ;  and,  besides,  thirdly,  a  class 
of  those  "the  which  had  not  worshipped  the  Beast,  nor  yet  his 
image,  and  had  not  received  his  mark  upon  their  forehead,  or 
in  their  hand."  Had  he  meant  persons  in  their  ordinary  state, 
he  might  have  said,  I  saw  the  souls  that  were  beheaded  for  the 

*  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  earliest  Christian  writers  show  that  a  personal 
millennial  reign  of  Christ  was  the  early  prevalent  doctrine.  But  truth  needs  no 
exaggeration.  It  is  painful  that  such  a  man  as  Mede  (Works,  book  III,  p.  533, 
4th  edition)  should  have  insisted  on  interpolating  a  negative  in  the  statement  of 
Justin  Martyr  (Dial,  cum  Tryph.  §.  80),  where  the  father,  after  confessing  the 
faith  of  himself  and  many  others  in  a  future  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem  and  the  literal 
reign  and  blessedness  of  risen  saiuts  with  Christ,  admits  on  the  other  hand  that 
there  are  many  holding  Ihe  true  and  godly  doctrine  of  Christians,  who  do  not 
acknowledge  it.  The  fact  is,  that  there  is  not  the  slightest  manuscript  authority 
for  the  insertion,  and  the  internal  evidence  is,  in  my  opinion,  decidedly  against  it. 
Thirlby  has  very  properly  pointed  out  that  Justin  distinguishes  between  two  sets 
of  the  orthodox,  as  may  be  seen  by  comparing  the  close  of  the  same  section  ;  one 
of  them,  in  all  respects  {Kara  irdfra)  right  minded,  had  no  doubt  about  the  millen- 
nial reign,  &c. ;  the  rest  were  sound  in  general,  but  opposed  to  chiliasm.  Never- 
theless, Mede's  ov  has  been  followed  by  many  in  England,  from  Tillotson  down  to 
Mr.  Bickersteth,  andDaille's  |U7]  (De  Poenis  et  Satisfact.  p.  493)  has  found  favour 
abroad  till  recently.  Even  Mr.  Jenour  (Rat.  Apoc.  Vol.  ii.  pp.  318,  319)  conti- 
nues to  cite  the  passage  in  its  corrupted  form,  and  without  remark. 


"  THEY    LIVED."  343 

witness  of  Jesus,  &c. ;  but  not,  "  I  saw  the  souls  of  them  that 
were  beheaded."  Just  as  it  was  said  of  Jacob,  "  AH  the  souls 
that  came  with  Jacob  into  Egypt  ....  all  the  souls  were  three- 
score and  six."  It  is  noi:  said  there,  "all  the  souls  of  them,"  or 
"  of  the  people  that  came,"  &c.  (Ct)mpare  Rev.  vi.  9.) 

Here,  then,  John  beheld  in  the  vision  some  that  were  already 
risen  from  the  dead  and  seated  upon  thrones.  "  I  saw  thrones 
and  they  sat  upon  them."  The  reference  seems  purposely 
general,  and  implies  "  the  armies  "  previously  described.  (Chap. 
xix.  14.)  Those  who  followed  the  Lord  from  heaven  to  war, 
are  now  His  companions  in  His  government  of  the  earth.  Next, 
he  saw  a  company  "  that  had  been  beheaded  for  the  witness  of 
Jesus,  and  for  the  word  of  God."  These  were  not  yet  raised 
from  the  dead,  but  were  still  in  the  condition  of  separate  spirits. 
But  there  was  a  third  class — persons  who  had  not  worshipped 
the  Beast,  nor  submitted  to  his  pretensions  in  any  form  or  degree. 
The  two  last  were  distinct  but  connected  classes  of  people,  who, 
when  first  seen,  were  in  the  separate  state.  "  And  they  lived, 
and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years."  That  is,  they  were 
reunited  to  their  bodies,  for  this  of  coui'se  is  what  is  meant  by 
"  they  lived."  It  might  have  been  thought  that  they  had  missed 
their  blessing,  or  at  least  the  privilege  of  reigning  with  Christ 
during  the  thousand  years.  There  were  thrones,  and  persons  in 
their  risen  bodies  who  already  occupied  them.  What  then  was 
to  become  of  those  who,  after  the  removal  of  the  former  to 
heaven,  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus  and  for  the  word 
of  God,  and  who  were  not  till  long  after  raised  from  the  dead  Z 
What  was  to  be  the  portion  not  only  of  them,  but  of  the  last 
class,  that  at  a  still  later  day  refused  to  worship  the  Beast  or 
receive  his  mark?  "They  lived."  They  are  now  seen,  just 
before  the  reign,  reunited  to  their  bodies,  and,  together  with 
those  that  had  been  previously  raised  and  already  seen  enthroned, 
they  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years.* 

*  "  I  cannot  consent  (says  Dean  Alford)  to  distort  the  words  from  tlieir  plain 
sense  and  chronological  place  in  tho  prophecy,  on  account  of  any  considerations 
of  difficulty,  or  any  risk  of  abuses  which  the  doctrine  of  the  millennium  may  bring, 
with  it.  Those  who  lived  next  to  the  Apostles,  and  the  whole  Church  for  300 
years,  understood  them  in  the  plain  literal  sense  ;  and  it  is  a  strange  sight  in 
these  days  to  see  expositors  who  are  among  the  first  in  reverence  of  antiquity, 
complacently  casting  aside  the  most  cogent  instance  of  consensus  which  primitive 
antiquity  presents.  As  regards  the  text  itself,  no  legitimate  treatment  of  it  will  ex- 
tort what  is  known  as  the  spiritual  interpretation  now  in  fashion.  If,  in  a  passage 
where  two  resurrections  are  mentioned,  where  certain  i//i/xai  e^riaav  at  the  first, 
and  the  rest  of  the  veKpol  i^vffav  only  at  the  end  of  a  specified  period  after  that 
first, — if,  in  such  a  passage,  the  first  resurrection  may  be  understood  to  mean 
spiritual  rising  with  Christ,   while  the  second  means   literal  rising   from   the 


344  REIGNING    WITH    CHRIST. 

Thus  we  have  a  bright  and  interesting  light  thrown  upon  the 
Revelation.  For  there  are  passages  in  it  wiiich  this  verse  heli3s 
to  clear  up  ;  while  they,  on  the  other  hand,  throw  light  back 
upon  a  verse  which  is  not  intelligible  unless  these  distinctions 
are  seen.  Let  us  consider,  yet  a  little  more,  the  different  classes 
here  spoken  of.  "  I  saw  thrones  and  they  sat  upon  them." 
Evidently  these  first  objects  are  introduced  most  abruptly.  We 
are  not  told  where  they  came  from,  nor  who  they  were  ;  pro- 
bably because  the  Holy  Ghost  takes  for  granted  that  we  know 
enough  about  them  through  the  pi^evious  statements  of  the 
book.  Just  before  they  had  come  out  of  the  opened  heaven. 
(Chap,  xix.)  When  the  rider  upon  the  white  horse,  the  Lord 
Jesus,  came  out  as  a  man  of  war,  the  armies  that  were  there 
followed  Him  upon  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white 
and  pure.  I  have  already  tried  to  prove  that  these  were  the 
saints  who  had  been  already  taken  up  to  heaven,  and  ever  and 
anon  shown  to  be  there  from  the  commencement  of  chap.  iv. 
They  were  seen  then  and  repeatedly  afterwards,  under  the  sym- 
bol of  the  twenty-four  crowned  elders.  It  will  hardly  be  disputed 
that  these  elders  represent  the  heavenly  saints.  I  do  not  pretend 
to  decide  whether  it  is  the  Church  exclusively  or  not.  Very 
likely  both  the  Church  and  the  Old  Testament  saints  are  in- 
cluded ;  but  one  thing  at  least  is  very  clear,  that  heavenly  saints 
are  meant.  They  follow  Christ  out  of  heaven  when  He  comes 
to  make  war  with  the  Beast,  &c. ;  and  now,  when  Christ  takes 
His  throne — when  He  is  not  merely  seen  upon  a  white  horse 
going  forth  to  conquer  and  subdue,  but  He  takes  the  throne  to 
reign  triumphantly — they  too  are  seen  on  thrones  along  with 
Him.  "  I  saw  thrones  and  they  sat  upon  them,  and  judgment 
was  given  unto  them." 

Every  believer  knows  that  in  some  sense  Christ  is  to  sit  on 
His  throne  and  to  judge  :  but  some  might  think  that  it  was  too 
high  a  place  for  Christians  to  be  upon  thrones  with  Him ;  while 
others,  who  have  etherealized  into  mist  the  direct  meaning  of 
the  mass  of  Scriptures,  that  treat  of  the  hopes  of  the  saints  and 

grave; — then  there  is  an  end  of  all  significance  in  language,  and  Scripture  is 
wiped  out  as  a  definite  testimony  to  anything.  If  the  first  resurrection  is  spiritual, 
then  so  is  the  second,  which  I  suppose  none  will  be  hardy  euough  to  maintain  ; 
but  it  the  second  is  literal,  so  is  the  first,  which,  in  common  with  the  whole  primi- 
tive Church  and  many  of  the  best  modern  expositors,  I  do  maintain,  aud  receive 
as  an  article  of  faith  aud  hope."  (Vol.  IV.,  pt.  ii.)  I  have  only  to  add,  as  to  "  chro- 
nological place,"  that  as  the  sitters  on  thrones,  or  first  group  in  this  vision,  are 
not  represented  as  souls,  so  they  are  not  meant  to  be  included  in  "  they  lived." 
Their  living  and  destiny  to  reign  with  Christ  was  plain  enough  from  their  session 
on  thrones.  Of  the  subsequent  martyrs,  aud  the  confessors  in  the  final  crisis,  it  is 
now  said.  These  join  the  others  ia  resurrection,  and  share  the  reign  just  beginning. 


PRACTICAL    BEARING    NOW.  345 

the  prospects  of  the  world,  imagine  that  they  will  be  merely  in 
the  vague  distance  of  heaven,  enjoying  everlasting  happiness 
with  Christ,  but  having  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  earth. 
For  my  own  part,  I  do  not  believe  that  governing  the  world  is 
by  any  means  the  highest  part  of  the  saint's  glory  ;  but  it  will 
be  an  important  element  of  Christ's  glory,  and  therefore  surely 
not  beneath  the  Church.  None  can  overlook  or  deny  this  without 
loss  to  their  souls.  When  rightly  held,  it  has  no  little  practical 
influence.  For  if  I  am  to  judge  the  world  then,  God  would  not 
have  me  meddling  with  the  world  now.  That  was  the  very 
argument  that  the  Apostle  Paul  used  when  blaming  the  Corin- 
thian believers,  because  they  went  before  the  judgment-seat  of 
men.  It  is  beneath  the  Christian  calling.  Of  course,  I  do  not 
mean  by  this  in  any  way  to  slight  the  powers  that  be.  A 
Christian  ought  to  be  ready  any  day  and  in  all  things  to  show 
them  respect.  He  can  afibrd  to  be  the  humblest  man  in  the 
world,  because  he  is  the  highest  one.  He  has  got  a  better 
exaltation,  that  will  shine  most  when  this  world  has  come  to 
nothing.  What  a  wonderful  thing  that  we  are  anointed  kings 
now,  before  the  actual  glory  dawns,  like  David,  who  was  con- 
secrated king  long  before,  as  a  fact,  he  was  exalted  to  the  king- 
dom !  The  holy,  royal  oil  was  upon  him,  even  when  he  was 
hunted  about  by  king  Saul  upon  the  mountains.  So,  in  a  yet 
higher  sense,  we  too  are  anointed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  this 
not  only  that  we  may  be  able  to  enter  into  the  things  of  God, 
but  made  kings  and  priests  to  God.  Hence  God  looks  for  us 
not  only  to  otter  worship  to  Him  as  priests  now,  but  under  all 
circumstances  to  preserve  the  sense  of  our  dignity  as  His  kings. 
(Comp.  1  Peter  ii.  5,  9.)  The  world  may  mock  and  call  us 
fanatics,  but  the  world  has  done  worse  to  God  Himself.  Alas  ! 
evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners,  and  Christians  have 
fallen  from  the  truth  that  is  according  to  godliness  as  to  this. 

They  have  sought  to  have  the  world  and  Christ  too.  People 
may  object  that  at  best  it  is  a  hope  so  purely  future  as  to  have 
no  present  bearing.  But  the  Spirit  of  God  addresses  us  as 
possessing  this  treasure  noic,  as  having,  in  principle,  all  that 
Christ  is  going  to  display  in  us  in  His  kingdom  by  and  by. 
Hence  we  are  responsible  to  God  to  walk  in  the  faith  of  it  now. 
It  was  so  in  the  highest  way  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He 
knew  that  He  was  a  king  ;  and  when  Satan  came  and  showed 
Him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  and  the  glory  of  them,  offer- 
ing to  give  them  to  Him  if  He  fell  down  and  worshipped  him, 
the  Lord  utterly  rejected  all.  But  Satan,  as  it  were,  repeated 
the  offer  to   the  Church,    and  she   at  length  accepted  it.     In 


346:  ROOM  FOR  growth. 

seeking  the  glory  of  the  world,  she  has  sought  honour  where 
Satan  is  the  prince.  Can  any  man  read  his  Bible  and  not  own 
the  truth  of  this?  What  did  the  Lord  Jesus  do  when  men 
wanted  to  make  Him  a  king  ?  He  departed  from  them.  When 
He  stood  before  Pilate,  He  admitted  that  He  was  a  king,  but 
said,  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  ....  Now  is  my  king- 
dom not  from  hence."  By  and  by  it  will  be.  "  The  kingdom 
of  the  world  shall  become  our  Lord's  and  his  Christ's."  And 
when  it  passes  into  His  hands,  the  reign  of  Christians  will  begin. 
His  people  will  share  the  kingdom  along  with  Him.  Hence  faith 
waits  for  this  :  and  meanwhile  we  are  put  to  the  test  now,  "  as 
having  nothing,  and  yet  possessing  all  things."  To  some  it  will 
appear  presumption  to  claim  such  a  glorious  privilege  now. 
But  not  so.  It  is  faith,  and  its  fruit  is  growing  separation  from 
the  world.  The  principle  is  the  thing  of  value.  For  if  a  man 
only  strive  for  the  simplest  thing  in  this  world  that  is  an  object 
to  him, — for  some  present,  even  if  it  be  a  petty,  distinction,  there 
is  the  trace  of  the  enemy's  work.  God  looks  for  holy  separate- 
ness  from  the  world  in  all  His  saints  :  they  are  not  of  the  world 
even  as  Christ  is  not  of  it. — Let  it  only  be  in  proportion  to  a 
man's  spirituality  and  intelligence.  Thus,  when  a  Christian 
begins  his  path  of  faith,  God  does  not  say  to  him  all  at  once. 
You  must  cut  off  this  and  renounce  that ;  He  leaves  room  for 
the  exercise  of  grace  and  progress  in  truth.  In  the  day  that 
salvation  came  to  the  house  of  Zaccheus,  the  Lord  said  not  a 
word  of  his  odious  position  in  the  world,  as  a  Jewish  tax-gatherer. 
Nor  are  we  told,  in  the  case  of  Cornelius,  that  he  must  forthwith 
give  up  his  place  as  a  centurion  of  the  Italian  band  ;  because 
the  whole  blessedness  of  God's  ways  would  be  destroyed  by 
laying  down  and  enforcing  rules  in  that  fashion.  The  Church 
is  not  governed  by  a  code  of  formalities.  She  is  led  on  by  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  according  to  His  word.  Just  as  with 
a  child  ;  when  of  tender  years  he  speaks  as  a  child,  understands 
as  a  child,  and  thinks  as  a  child.  One  could  not  wish  babes  to 
assume  the  ways  of  adults.  So  is  it  with  spiritual  children. 
The  Lord  does  not  look  for  such  to  be  taking  up  the  things  of 
men  and  fathers  in  Christ.  He  leaves  room  for  growth  in 
grace.  Now,  if  a  man  is  in  a  bad  state,  he  takes  advantage  of 
grace,  and  asks.  Is  there  any  harm  in  this  ?  is  there  any  com- 
mand for  that  ?  Sometimes  a  soul  only  refrains  from  evil  doings, 
in  the  thought  that  if  he  persists,  he  is  in  danger  of  being  lost.  But 
what  God  values,  is  simple,  hearty  obedience  ;  the  doing  God's 
will  because  it  is  His  will,  because  it  is  a  delight  to  do  His  will, 
and  it  glorifies  Him.     He  saves  us  by  His  grace,  and  saves  us 


THOSE    SITTING    ON    THE   THRONES   WERE    RISEN.  347 

SO  as  not  to  see  a  single  fault  in  us.  And  now  He  says,  If  I 
have  saved  you  and  put  you  in  such  sureness  and  perfection  of 
blessing  before  me,  the  thing  that  I  look  for  is  your  heart,  its 
confidence  in  my  love  and  wisdom,  its  worship  and  its  obedience. 

But  God  also  gives  us  the  knowledge  of  the  coming  kingdom, 
that  we  are  to  share  with  Christ  our  Lord.  It  is  well  to  remem- 
ber that  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not  bring  about  the  kingdom. 
Not  He,  but  the  Lord  Jesus  only  is  the  king.  Thus,  Christ's  pre- 
sence is  essential  to  the  kingdom,  at  least  in  the  full  manifested 
sense.  It  would  be  a  kingdom  without  a  king,  if  Cbrist  were 
not  personally  there  ;  and  therefore  it  is  said,  "  They  lived  and 
reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years."  Christ  Himself  was 
present,  and  He  is  the  centre  of  all  glory,  and  blessing,  and  joy. 
In  chap,  xix,  we  had  Christ  and  them  coming  out  of  heaven  in 
judgment,  and  thereon  in  chap,  xx.  the  kingdom  is  established 
in  peace  over  the  earth. 

This  may  answer  the  first  question,  as  to  who  they  are  whom 
John  first  saw  sitting  upon  the  thrones,  and  of  course  in  risen 
bodies.  They  are  heavenly  saints,  including,  if  not  exclusively, 
the  Church.  The  next  question  is,  Who  are  those  whose  souls 
were  seen  not  at  first  united  to  their  bodies  ?  The  answer  is 
plain.  If  Rev.  iv.  v.  show  us  glorified  saints  under  the  symbol 
of  the  twenty-four  elders,  and  corresponding  with  those  first 
mentioned  in  our  verse,  chap.  vi.  lets  us  into  another  scene.  It 
tells  us  that  there  will  be  saints  called  to  suffer  after  that, 
whose  souls  John  then  saw  under  the  altar.  They  had  been 
slain  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for  the  testimony  which  they 
held,  and  they  call  upon  God  to  judge  and  avenge  their  blood 
on  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth.  Who  are  these  saints  that 
appeal  to  God's  vengeance  ?  It  is  not  the  Church  there,  one 
can  answer  with  the  utmost  positiveness.  It  could  not  be,  in- 
deed, for  the  Church  had  been  already  removed  to  heaven. 
But,  besides,  is  the  Church  ever  said,  in  Scripture,  to  call  upon 
God  to  judge  and  avenge  the  blood  of  saints  shed  upon  the 
earth  ?  It  would  falsify  the  very  design  of  God  in  the  Church, 
and  in  the  individual  Christian  too.  We  are  the  epistle  of 
Christ,  called  expressly  to  show  out  His  glory  in  Christ,  and 
His  grace  towards  the  world  ever  since  the  cross.  And  as  God 
has  allowed  men  to  put  to  death  His  own  Son,  and,  so  far  from 
judging  the  guilt,  has  only  made  it  an  occasion  for  showing 
more  grace  still,  so  the  Church  is  called  to  suffer,  and,  if  need 
be,  to  allow  herself  to  be  put  to  death  for  His  name's  sake, 
without  such  a  thought  or  wish  as  calling  for  vengeance.  Take 
a  signal  example  of  this  in  Stephen.     He  was  most  grievously 


348  NEW    WITNESSES    FOLLOWED, 

trodden  down  :  they  cast  him  out  of  the  city  and  stoned  him. 
But  he  kneels  down  and  cries,  "  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their 
charge."  It  was  with  a  loud  voice,  too,  for  it  was  not  a  thing 
that  his  heart  did  not  feel  earnestly  ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost  desired 
that  those,  who  were  round  him,  should  know  his  heart's  desire 
about  them,  guilty  as  they  were  of  his  blood.  Was  that  calling 
upon  God  to  avenge  his  blood  ?  The  very  contrary  ;  and  so  all 
through.  Look  at  the  Apostles  Peter  and  John,  who,  when 
they  were  beaten,  depart  from  the  council,  rejoicing  that  they 
were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  the  name  of  Jesus. 
Look  again  at  the  first  epistle  of  Peter ;  and  what  do  you  find 
there  ?  This  is  the  principle  :  "  If  when  ye  do  well  and  suiFer 
for  it,  ye  take  it  patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with  God.  For 
even  hereunto  were  ye  called."  Mark  this,  "  If  ye  do  well  and 
suffer  for  it,"  &c.  Why,  the  world  could  not  go  on  for  a  day  on 
such  a  ground  as  this  ;  it  must  go  to  pieces,  if  evil  were  not  ta 
be  punished,  and  those  who  did  well  and  suffered  wrongfully 
were  merely  to  give  thanks.  But  such  exhortations  were  not 
intended  for  the  world.  And  there  is  the  mistake  so  often  made. 
Men  forget  that  the  Church  was  called  to  be  a  witness  of  hea- 
ven— was  meant  to  express  the  mind  and  grace  of  Christ,  while 
walking  upon  the  earth.  This  is  our  "one  thing,"  our  business  here 
below.  Of  course,  this  need  not  hinder  the  providing  things 
honest  in  the  sight  of  all  men.  It  is  right  for  the  Christian  to 
do  this,  but  let  him  weigh  Avell  how  he  does  it.  Our  behaviour 
in  the  most  ordinary  employment  should  be  a  testimony  to  this 
— that  we  are  not  of  the  world  ;  that  we  look  not  for  honour 
and  credit  hi  the  world,  but  to  glorify  Christ  in  heaven  ;  that 
instead  of  seeking  to  help  on  the  plans  of  men,  and  to  be  an 
ornament  in  the  world,  our  mission  is  to  make  Him  known  to 
it,   and  to  do  His   will  during  the  little  while  we  are  here. 

But  to  return.  We  have  seen  that  though  the  enthroned 
elders  are  in  heaven,  (Rev.  vi.  v.)  there  are  afterwards  saints  on 
earth,  new  witnesses  who  are  called  to  suffer  unto  death  for  the 
word  of  God  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus ;  but  who,  when  they 
die,  cry  for  God  to  avenge  their  blood  on  their  enemies.  Nor 
is  that  wrong  in  them  ;  though  it  would  be  foreign  to  us,  because 
it  is  not  the  will  of  God  concerning  us.  But  when  God  has 
formed  the  Church,  and,  after  it  has  been  taken  to  heaven,  has 
raised  up  fresh  witnesses  for  Himself  on  earth,  He  will  begin  to 
deal  with  the  world  judicially  Himself  And  therefore  when 
these  holy  sufferers  cry  to  God  against  their  adversaries,  they 
will  have  communion  with  Him  ;  and  this  is  what  faith  always 
seeks  —  communion  with  God  in  what  He  is  actuallv  doino-  or 


THE    EARLIER    AND    LATER    APOCALYPTIC    SUFFERERS.      349 

about  to  do.  God  does  not  tlius  interfere  to  judge  the  world 
now,  and  therefore  His  saints  should  not  ask  Him,  as  these  do, 
to  judge  and  avenge.  God  now  endures  in  perfect  patience  the 
wickedness  of  the  world,  and  therefore  a  Christian  should  rather 
ask  God  to  turn  His  long-suffering  into  salvation  for  souls. 
But  when  Rev.  vi.  is  being  fulfilled,  God  will  pour  down  judg- 
ment upon  judgment ;  and  the  witnesses  for  God  in  that  day- 
will  ask  God  to  judge,  and  rightly.  They  take  up  the  language 
of  the  Psalms,  in  general  so  misunderstood  and  misapplied  now, 
but  then  most  appropriate  and  prophetically  provided  of  God. 

This  shows,  then,  that  there  is  to  be  a  very  different  state  of 
things  after  the  Church  has  been  taken  away.  God  begins  then 
to  act  in  the  way  of  judgment,  and  those  whose  hearts  are  con- 
verted, and  desiring  His  glory,  will  be  in  great  darkness  com- 
pared with  the  Church.  Still,  their  godly  testimony  will  be 
intolerable  to  the  powers  of  the  world,  who  will  spill  their  blood 
like  water.  The  sufferers  will  cry  to  God  for  judgment,  and  He 
will  hear  them.  Look  at  verses  9,  10,  11,  of  chap.  vi. :  "And 
when  he  had  opened  the  fifth  seal,  I  saw  under  the  altar  the 
souls  of  them  that  had  been  slain  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for 
the  testimony  which  they  held."  Observe  how  this  agrees  with 
the  two  classes  mentioned  in  chap.  xx.  4  :  "I  saw  the  souls  of 
them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus,  and  for  the 
word  of  God."  For  mark  the  answer.  They  cry,  "  How  long, 
O  Lord,  holy  and  true,"  &c.  "  And  white  robes  were  given 
unto  every  one  of  them  ;  and  it  was  said  unto  them  that  they 
should  rest  yet  for  a  little  while,  until  their  fellow-servants  also 
and  their  brethren,  that  should  be  killed  as  they  were,  should  be 
fulfilled."  When  the  earlier  sufferers,  after  the  removal  of  the 
Church,  had  been  called  out  and  slain,  they  were  told  of  another 
and  subsequent  class  who  should  be  killed  as  they  had  been, 
before  the  full  judgment  comes. 

This  is  exactly  what  we  find  here.  First,  there  are  those  who 
sit  upon  the  thrones,  invested  with  royal  judgment.  Next,  there 
are  those  who  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus,  and  for 
the  word  of  God  ;  and,  thirdly,  their  brethren  who,  as  it  was 
said  in  chap,  vi.,  had  yet  to  be  completed.  These,  when  the  Beast 
brought  out  his  idolatry,  &c.,  and  it  was  a  question  of  l^eing  killed 
or  of  worshipping  him,  refused  :  they  were  faithful  unto  death. 
Well, here  they  are.  "I  saw  . . .  .and  those  who  hadnot  worshipped 
the  Beast,  nor  his  image,  and  had  not  received  his  mark  upon 
their  foreheads,  or  in  their  hands."  So  that  the  Revelation  gives 
us  the  full  answer,  as  to  these  three  classes.  The  twenty-four 
elders  correspond  with  those  who  sit  upon  the  thrones  ;  the  second 


350  GLORIFIED    BODIE8,    NOT    SOULS. 

class,  the  souls  of  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of 
Jesus,  &c.,  we  had  in  chap.  vi. ;  and  then  the  latter  part  of  the 
book  shows  us  "  their  brethren  that  should  be  killed  as  they 
themselves  were,"  and  for  whom  they  were  told  to  wait.  In 
Rev.  xiii.  7,  it  is  said  that  it  was  given  to  the  Beast  to  make 
war  with  the  saints,  and  to  overcome  them.  And  more  than 
that.  The  latter  half  of  the  chapter  suppHes  another  part  of 
the  description,  and  shows  us  how  these  saints  came  to  be  cha- 
racterized in  Rev.  xx.  as  those  who  had  not  worshipped  the 
Beast  nor  his  image,  neither  had  received  his  mark  upon  their 
forehead,  or  in  their  hand.  In  ver,  14  the  second  Beast  is 
said  (chap,  xiii.)  to  deceive  "  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  on 
account  of  those  miracles  which  he  had  power  to  do  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Beast ;  saying  to  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  that 
they  should  make  an  image  to  the  Beast,  which  had  the  wound 
by  a  sword  and  did  live.  And  he  had  power  to  give  breath  to 
the  image  of  the  Beast,  that  the  image  of  the  Beast  should  both 
speak  and  cause  that  as  many  as  would  not  worship  the  image 
of  the  Beast  should  be  killed."  Now  this  most  clearly  pertains 
to  the  last  or  third  class.  Those  referred  to  in  chap.  xiv.  12, 13, 
are  probably  the  same.  But,  again,  see  chap.  xv.  2 :  "  I  saw  as 
it  were  a  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire :  and  them  that  had 
gotten  the  victory  over  the  Beast,  and  over  his  image,  and  over 
the  number  of  his  name,  stand  on  the  sea  of  glass,  having  the 
harps  of  God."  Thus  the  Revelation  answers  fully  the  ques- 
tion, Who  are  these  saints  ?  It  shows  us,  first,  the  risen  saints, 
who  had  been  taken  up  to  heaven,  and  who  come  out  with 
Christ.  This  is  one  reason  why  they  are  seen  separate  from  the 
two  other  classes.  They  are  viewed  upon  the  thrones  at  once, 
because  they  are  already  changed  into  the  likeness  of  Christ's 
glorious  body.  But  the  others  are  merely  seen,  up  to  this 
moment,  as  souls,  and  of  course  not  glorified.  We  hear  of  glo- 
rified bodies,  but  never  of  glorified  souls  in  Scripture.  The  soul 
of  the  believer  goes  to  be  with  Christ  after  death,  but  it  has  to 
be  reunited  with  the  body,  before  it  can  be  spoken  of  as  in  a 
glorified  condition.  The  only  perfect  state  is,  when  we  shall 
bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly ;  when  we  shall  be  raised  or 
changed  into  His  likeness. 

If  we  look  at  1  Cor.  xv.  we  shall  see  that  quite  plainly.  It 
is  said  there,  "  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy  ;  the  second 
man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven.  As  is  the  earthy,  such  are  they 
also  that  are  earthy  ;  and  as  is  the  heavenly,  such  are  they  also 
that  are  heavenly.  And  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the 
earthy,  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly.     Now  this 


WHY    THE    FIRST    RESURRECTION    OCCURS    HERE.  351 

I  say,  brethren,  that  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom 
of  God  ;  neither  doth  corrujDtion  inherit  incorruption.  Behold, 
I  shew  you  a  mystery  :  we  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  be 
changed  ....  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible,  and  we 
shall  be  changed.  For  this  corruptible  must,"  not  merely  put 
off  corruption,  but  "  put  on  incorruption,"  "  and  this  mortal" 
must,  not  merely  slip  off  this  mortal  coil,  as  men  say,  but  "  put 
on  immortality."  "  So  when  this  corruptible  shall  have  put  on 
incorruption,  and  this  mortal  shall  have  put  on  immortality"  — 
evidently  the  glorified  state — "  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the 
saying  that  is  written,  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory." 
Death  is  not  swallowed  up  in  victory  when  a  Christian  dies,  and 
goes  to  be  with  Christ ;  but  when  He  comes,  and  the  dead  are 
raised,  and  the  living  changed.  What  was  done  individually  in 
the  case  of  Enoch  and  Elijah,  will  be  done  on  a  grand  scale  at 
His  coming.  All  the  living  saints  then  will  be  changed,  and 
will  go  to  be  with  the  Lord,  without  passing  through  death. 
These,  risen  or  changed,  are  they  who,  having  been  taken  up  to 
heaven,  will  come  thence  with  Christ,  and-  who  are  here  seen 
seated  upon  thrones.  But  what  becomes  of  those  saints  on 
earth,  who  are  called  after  the  previous  saints  have  been  removed 
to  meet  the  Lord  ?  The  Revelation  shews  us  their  sufferings 
for  righteousness'  sake,  and  their  death.  What  becomes  of  them 
afterwaids  ?  The  church  had  been  already  raised  and  glorified, 
and  these  sufferers  are  slain  before  the  reign  of  Christ  com- 
mences. Are  these,  then,  who  have  suffered,  not  to  reign  ? 
Are  they  to  forfeit  their  blessings,  because  they  have  resisted 
unto  blood,  striving  against  sin  ?  That  could  never  be.  "  I 
saw  the  souls  of  them  that  were  beheaded,  ....  and  they  lived 
and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years."  They,  too,  are 
raised  from  the  dead  ;  they  join  the  others  already  glorified,  and 
all  reign  together  with  Christ  in  "  the  kingdom." 

I  apprehend,  but  I  only  give  it  as  an  opinion,  that  their  resur- 
rection takes  place  at  or  about  this  time.  The  Beast  and  the 
false  prophet  have  been  put  down  ;  Satan  has  been  cast  into  the 
abyss,  and  the  millennial  reign  of  Christ  and  His  risen  saints 
is  now  about  to  commence.  The  Lord  waits,  as  it  were,  for  the 
very  last  moment.  He  wants  not  a  soul  of  His  holy  sufferers  to 
be  left  out  of  this  their  special  reward.  The  Beast  had  perse- 
cuted up  to  the  last,  and  God  delays  till  that  moment,  that  every 
one  who  has  suffered  with  Christ,  may  be  included  in  the  privi- 
lege of  being  glorified  together.  If  the  account  of  the  resurrec- 
tion had  been  given,  when  the  previously -risen  saints  were 
translated  to  heaven  (i.e.  before  Rev.  iv.),  there  might  have  been 


352  OUR    LORD*S    DOCTRINE. 

doubt  and  anxiety  as  to  the  fate  of  those  who  should  suffer  after 
the  church  was  taken  up.  One  can  understand  why  this  notice 
of  resurrection  is  put  here.  It  was  the  special  object  of  God  to 
comfort  those  who  subsequently  had  to  suffer  and  die  for  Christ, 
and  to  shew  that  they  would  not  be  forgotten  by  Him.  They 
are  now  raised  to  join  the  saints  already  risen  ;  "  and  they  lived 
and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years."  God  puts  off  their 
resurrection  till  just  before  Christ's  reign,  and  then  those  that 
had  meanwhile  suffered  for  Him,  are  raised  up. 

"  But  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  till  the  thousand  years 
were  finished.  This  is  the  first  resurrection."  "  The  rest  of 
the  dead  :" — who  were  they  ?  The  beginning  of  verse  4  in- 
cludes, as  I  conceive,  not  only  the  church,  but  the  Old  Testa- 
ment saints  ;  that  is,  all  the  heavenly  saints  taken  up  to  be  with 
Christ,  when  He  will  have  come  to  receive  them  unto  Himself 
in  the  air.  Next,  we  had  the  first  band  of  sufferers  before  the 
Beast  came  to  the  height  of  his  power  ;  and,  then,  the  last  band 
that  suffer  because  they  will  refuse  to  worship  him.  These 
were  the  three  classes  of  saints  now  alike  living  and  reigning 
with  Christ.  "  The  rest  of  the  dead"  must  then  be  wicked  dead, 
because  the  first  resurrection  included  all  the  righteous  dead, 
and  answers,  in  fact,  to  what  our  Lord  called  "  the  resurrection 
of  the  just,"  (Luke  xiv.  14,)  save  that  it^  is  more  detailed,  if 
not  more  comprehensive.  So,  then,  there  is  a  special  resur- 
rection that  belongs  to  the  just,  and  this  without  a  word  about 
the  unjust.  There  is  a  resurrection  of  the  unjust ;  and  when 
the  Apostle  Paul  sjDoke  in  Acts  xxiv.  before  Felix,  he  testified 
to  his  belief  in  the  resurrection  both  of  just  and  unjust.  But 
when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  raising  the  consciences  of  his 
disciples  to  what  was  good  and  of  value  befoi'e  God,  He  alluded 
to  the  resurrection  of  the  just  alone. 

But  this  is  not  all.  There  were  men  trying  to  bring  the  doc- 
trine of  the  resurrection  into  ridicule.  Accordingly  we  find,  on 
another  occasion,  that  certain  of  the  Sadducees  came  to  Him, 
putting  a  difficulty,  because  of  a  woman  supposed  to  be  married 
to  seven  brethren.  In  the  case  reasoned  on,  these  seven  succes- 
sively died,  and  last  of  all  the  woman  died  also.  In  the  resur- 
rection then,  they  ask,  whose  wife  should  she  be  of  the  seven  ? 
The  Lord  at  once  points  out  that  the  difficulty  was  founded  upon 
ignorance  of  scripture  or  of  the  power  of  God.  In  the  resur- 
rection they  shall  neither  marry,  nor  be  given  in  marriage  ;  but 
shall  be  like  the  angels  :  (that  is,  like  them  in  that  respect, 
not  in  all  things,  for  they  will  judge  angels  ;  but  like  them  in 
so  far  as  this,  that  there  will  be  no  distinction  of  sex  —  neither 


RESURRECTION    FROM    AMONG    THE    DEAD.  353 

marrying  nor  giving-  in  marriage.)  "  Neither  can  tliey  die  any 
more."  But  He  adds,  "  They  which  shall  be  accounted  worthy 
to  obtain  that  world  [or  rather  dispensation],  and  the  resurrec- 
tion from  the  dead,"  &c.  This  would  be  an  extraordinary 
expression,  if  all  were  raised  at  the  same  time  I  "  They  that  shall 
be  counted  xoorlliy  to  obtain  that  age,"  for  the  last  word  does 
not  refer  to  the  material  world,  but  to  a  special  dispensation  or 
age,  which  the  unworthy  do  not  obtain.  Weigh  the  force  of  the 
phrase.  The  I'esuiTection  of  the  saints  is  in  an  age  peculiar  to 
themselves.  "  They  which  shall  be  accounted  worthy  to  obtain 
that  age  (the  other  dead  are  only  raised  after  it),  and  the  resur- 
rection from  the  dead."  The  resurrection  of  Christ  was  not 
merely  a  resurrection  of  the  dead,  but  out  of  the  dead.  He 
left  them  undisturbed  in  their  tombs.  There  were  certain  saints 
who  ai'ose  with  Him,  or  rather  came  out  of  their  graves  after 
His  resurrection  ;  but  the  great  mass  of  the  dead  were  so  far 
unaffected  by  Christ's  resurrection.  And  so  is  it  with  the  saints 
in  principle.  Theirs  is  to  be  a  resurrection  from  among  the 
dead.  The  rest  of  the  dead  must  rise  at  another  time  :  but 
they  who  shall  be  accounted  worthy  shall  obtain  that  age,  and 
the  resurrection  from  the  dead.  They  shall  not  die  any  more. 
Could  God  show  more  strongly,  than  by  this  language,  a  distinct 
and  prior  resurrection  of  the  saints  of  God  ?  Compare,  also, 
the  language  of  St.  Paul,  in  Phil.  iii.  11  :  "  If  by  any  means  I 
might  attain  unto  the  resui'rection  from  the  dead."  In  our 
common  Bibles,  no  doubt  it  is  "  the  resurrection  of  the  dead ;  " 
but  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  this  is  a  complete  mis- 
take. The  true  and  only  meaning  of  the  verse,  according  to  the 
best  authorities,  is,  "  If  by  any  means  I  might  attain  to  the 
resurrection  out  of,  or  from  among,  the  dead."  It  may  seem  to 
some  but  a  slight  change  ;  but  if  we  want  to  know  the  mind  of 
God,  it  makes  a  weighty  ditference.  Because,  if  it  is  "•  resur- 
rection from  the  dead,"  it  implies  that  while  the  rest  of  the  dead 
remain  in  their  graves,  there  is  a  resurrection  not  common  to  all 
mankind,  bad  and  good,  but  belonging  only  to  those  that  are 
dear  to  God.  The  Apostle  considered  this  resurrection  to  be  so 
bright  and  blessed,  that  he  says,  in  effect,  I  care  not  what  the 
sufferings  and  trouble  may  be,  let  the  I'oad  be  what  it  may  —  if 
I  am  but  there ;  that  is  what  I  wait  for  and  desire  at  all  cost. 
For  when  he  said,  "  If  by  any  means  I  might  attain,"  not  a 
word  of  doubt  is  implied  as  to  his  having  part  in  the  first  resur- 
rection ;  but  rather  that  he  so  valued  the  prize,  as  to  mind  not 
what  the  path  of  suffering  might  be,  that  led  to  the  goal. 

Now  let  us  carry  the  light  of  this   back  to  the  Revelation. 
24 


354  THE    REIGN    WITH    CHRIST. 

The  reference  in  "  the  rest  of  the  dead,"  is  to  the  wicked  dead. 
A  resurrection  was  shown  of  all  the  departed  saints  up  to  the 
display  of  the  kingdom.  "  But  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not 
again,  until  the  thousand  years  were  finished."  (Ver.  5.)  There 
is  no  difficulty,  really,  in  the  passage  ;  but  men  have  their  own 
thoughts  and  opinions,  and  cannot  make  scripture  square  with 
them.  Whereas,  all  is  as  plain  as  God  could  make  it.  "  This 
is  the  first  resurrection.  Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part 
in  the  first  resurrection."  (Ver.  6.)  How  beautifully  this  answers 
to  what  the  Lord  had  said  to  the  Sadducees,  "  They  that  are 
accounted  worthy  to  obtain  that  age,  and  the  resurrection  from 
the  dead!"  So,  again,  St.  Paul:  "  If  by  any  means  I  might 
attain  to  the  resurrection  from  the  dead." 

"  On  such  the  second  death  hath  no  power."  Mark,  once 
more,  the  force  of  the  Lord's  words  in  the  gospel :  "  Neither 
can  they  die  any  more."  As  for  the  persons  left  to  be  raised 
after  the  thousand  years  are  over,  they  are  to  die  another  and 
most  wofal  death  —  the  second  death.  By  it  all  those  who  had 
not  part  in  the  first  resurrection  are  to  die.  Theirs  shall  be  the 
second  death — meaning  that  extinction  of  all  hopes  of  blessing, 
when  all  else  is  blessed  in  heaven  and  earth,  the  perpetual  abi- 
ding under  the  wrath  of  God.  They  are  cast  into  the  lake  of 
fire.  As  for  those  who  have  jiart  in  the  first  resurrection,  "  they 
shall  be  priests  of  God  and  of  Christ,  and  shall  reign  with  Him 
a  thousand  years ;"  and  afterwards  shall  they  reign  in  life  by 
Him  for  ever  and  ever. 

The  last  three  verses  that  we  looked  at,  form  a  kind  of  paren- 
thesis in  the  chapter,  something  like  what  we  saw  in  chap.  xii. 
There  the  war  in  heaven  and  the  consequent  casting  down  of 
Satan  came  in,  and  then  the  history  which  had  been  alluded  to 
before  (ver.  6)  was  resumed  in  ver.  13.  Here  there  is  some- 
thing similar,  for  the  7th  verse  continues  the  history  that  had 
been  already  begun  just  at  the  close  of  the  3rd  verse.  We  find 
there  Satan  bound  for  a  thousand  years,  and  consequently  his 
power  of  seducing  the  nations  into  rebellion  against  God  inter- 
cepted for  a  time.  After  these  things,  we  were  told,  he  must  be 
loosed  for  a  little  season.  The  7th  verse  anticipates  his  loosing 
and  its  effects.  "  When  the  thousand  years  are  expired,  Satan 
shall  be  loosed  out  of  his  prison,  and  shall  go  out  to  deceive  the 
nations  which  are  in  the  four  corners  of  the  earth,  Gog  and  Magog, 
to  gather  them  together  unto  the  war  :  the  number  of  whom 
is  as  the  sand  of  the  sea."  (Ver.  8.)  Evidently,  therefore,  verses 
4-6  form  a  parenthesis — important,  no  doubt,  but  still  a  paren- 
thesis, and  not  a  part  of  the  regular  history  found  here.     One 


HEAVENLY    AND    EARTHLY    THINGS.  355 

reason  why  it  is  given  here  may  be  to  show  that,  during  this  same 
period  when  Satan  is  bound,  there  is  the  blessed  side — not  only 
the  evil  one  restrained,  but  Christ  and  His  saints  reigning  over 
the  earth.   It  is  never  said  that  we  shall  reign  upon  the  earth.    In 
Rev.  V.  lOj   I  have  already  shown  that  the  common  version  of 
that  verse,  which  conveys  this,  is  somewhat  inaccurate,  and  that 
the  true  thought  of  tbe  Spirit  of  God  is,  not  the  place  where  the 
saints  of  God  will  then  dwell,  but  the  sphere  of  their  reign.  "  They 
shall  reign  over  the  earth."     The  importance  of  the  change  is 
not  so  much  as  an  isolated  fact,  but  because  it  is  connected  with 
the  whole  scheme  of  truth  ;  and  it  is  a  part  of  this  scheme  that 
the  heavenly  saints  are  never  to  be  mingled  with  people  upon 
the  earth.     The  promise  of  the  first  place  of  earthly   blessing 
belongs  to  Israel,  and  therefore  it  would  make  the  utmost  confu- 
sion, if  you  had  the  heavenly,  glorified  saints  jumbled  with  men 
in  their  natural  bodies  in  this  world.     In  flict,  one  of  the  strongest 
objections  that  many  Christians  urge,  to  the  reign  of  Christ  over 
the  earth,  is  founded  upon  the  notion  that  premillennialism  sup- 
poses the  glorified  saints  to  be  mixed  up  with  the  people  then 
alive  here  below.     But  this  is  a  great  mistake.     The  Church 
will  have  its  own  proper  glory ;    but  withal,  there   will  be  two 
orders  or  spheres  of  blessing,  and  one  of  a  higher  character  than 
the  other.      All  things  in  heaven  will  be  gathered  under  the 
headship  of  Christ,  but  beside  that,  all  things  on  earth  will  be 
at  the   same  time  under  the  same  government.      Such  is  the 
peculiarity  of  the  millennium.     There  will  be  the  heavenly  por- 
tion above,  and  the  earthly  one  below,  connected  together,  but 
not  confounded.     This  is  distinctly  taught  in  Eph.  i.  10,  where 
the  apostle  says  that  the  mystery  of  God's  will  has  been  made 
known  "  according  to  his  good  pleasure  which  he  hath  purposed 
in  himself,   for   the  administration  of  the  fulness  of  times,  to 
gather  together  in  one  all  things  in  Christ,  both  which  are  in 
heaven  and  which  are  on  earth,  even  in  him."     I  am  aware 
there  are  many  who  suppose  that  it  speaks  of  the  gospel  dispen- 
sation now  going  on.     But  this  is  unfounded.     The  Church  is 
not  a  gathering  of  all  nations,  but,  on  the  contrary,   an  elect 
body  out  of  them  all.     It  never  was  and  never  will  be  a  gather- 
ing of  all  nations,  peoples,  and  kindreds,  and  tongues,  into  one. 
Besides,  the  verse  speaks  of  a  gathering  of  all  things.     There  is 
a  gathering  together  of  the  children  of  God ;  for  Christ  died  that 
He  should  gather  together  in  one  the  children  of  God  that  were 
scattered  abroad.     But  here  it  is  a  question  not  of  persons,  but 
things.     When  the  glorious  administration  takes  place,  of  which 
the  Apostle  speaks,  all  things  are  to  be  put  under  Christ's  head- 


856  THE    MILLENNIUM. 

ship.      He  has  all  under  His  headship  now,   in  title,  but  not 
as  an  actual  displayed  fact. 

Daniel  does  not  say  that  all  was  to  be  put  under  the  Son  of 
man,  nor  does  the  Holy  Ghost  reveal  that  secret  of  God's  will 
in  the  Old  Testament,  There  was  the  greatness  of  the  king- 
dom under  the  whole  heaven.  But  the  New  Testament  shows 
us  more  ;  it  teaches  us  that,  at  the  very  same  time  when  all 
things  on  earth  will  be  put  under  His  government,  all  things  in 
heaven  will  be  put  under  Him  too.  Nor  this  merely  in  a  pro- 
vidential way  as  now,  but  directly  and  personally.  The  Lord, 
of  course,  is  above  Satan,  the  god  and  prince  of  the  world  that 
now  is.  He  does  act  providentially  now,  and,  beside  that,  He 
has  the  full  personal  title  to  exercise  all  glory,  heavenly  and 
earthly.  But  the  time  when  He  enforces  the  title,  and  takes 
all  things  under  His  hand,  is  future.  If  He  had  taken  it  now 
in  an  immediate  way,  all  wickedness  would  be  put  down.  None 
could  sin  without  judgment ;  neither  would  there  be  such  a 
thing  as  righteousness  suffering,  and  iniquity  exalted.  All  this 
is  a  proof  that,  in  the  full,  actual  sense,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
not  yet  reigning,  however  true  it  may  be  to  faith.  Look,  for 
instance,  at  Psalm  xcvii  :  "The  Lord  reigneth."  People  quote 
this,  as  if  applied  when  the  Holy  Ghost  wrote,  or  now  at  any 
rate.  But  the  next  words  refute  this  ;  because,  when  the  Lord 
does  reign,  as  here  meant,  the  earth  will  rejoice,  &c.  Whereas, 
it  is  plain  from  Rom.  viii,,  not  to  speak  of  every  day's  expe- 
rience, that  the  earth  is  groaning  in  misery,  and  that  the  whole 
creation  travails  in  pain  until  now,  which  is  the  very  reverse  of 
rejoicing.  But  when  the  Psalms  meet  their  full  accomplish- 
ment, all  creation  will  be  delivered  and  will  rejoice  under  the 
reign  of  Jehovah.  Faith  can  say  that  the  Lord  reigns  now  ; 
but  He  is  not  yet  exerting  His  royal  power  over  the  earth. 
When  He  begins  so  to  do,  every  opponent  will  have  to  be  put 
down,  and  consequently  there  must  be  judgment.  The  Beast 
and  the  false  prophet  were  set  aside,  as  we  see  in  chap,  xix.,  and 
then  comes  the  reign.  And  although  every  one  is  not  to  be 
converted,  no  open  sin  will  be  permitted.  It  may  be  a  "feigned 
obedience"  that  is  rendered  by  a  large  part  of  the  people  upon 
the  earth,  but  still,  in  some  sort,  it  will  be  obedience  even  from 
"  the  sons  of  the  stranger,"  That  is  the  true  thought  of  the 
millennial  reign.  It  means  a  time,  not  when  there  will  be  no 
evil,  but  when  evil  will  be  suppressed  by  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  ;  when  the  heavenly  glory  will  be  in  immediate  connexion 
with  the  delivered  and  gladsome  earth  ;  when  the  earthly  people 
will  be  restored  to  their  own  land,  converted,  and  owning  that 


THE    ETERNAL    STATE.  357 

blessed  One  whom  their  fathers  crucified,  for  in  Zech.  xii.-xiv. 
we  see  the  very  circumstances,  at  least  as  to  the  earth,  that  I 
allude  to.  In  the  last  chapter  the  Lord  is  "  king  over  all  the 
earth  :  in  that  day  shall  there  be  one  Lord  and  his  name  one." 
This  is  precisely  the  millennium.  You  have  all  nations  coming 
up  to  own  the  Lord  :  if  any  refuse,  they  are  to  be  chastised. 
The  Spirit  of  God  particularly  notices  the  punishment,  viz.  the 
withdrawal  of  rain  ti-om  such  nati(uis  as  should  not  come  up  to 
keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  In  Egypt,  where  such  a  want 
would  not  be  felt,  the  land  having  other  sources  of  fertility, 
there  should  be  another  punishment,  "  the  plague  whei'ewith 
the  Lord  will  smite  the  heathen,"  &c.  Plainly,  then,  the  pro- 
phecy shows  us  the  earthly  glory  under  the  reign  of  the  Lord. 
Ephes.  i.  showed  us  not  merely  the  heavenly  glory,  but  the 
union  under  Christ  of  the  heavenlies  and  the  earthlies,  of  all 
things  both  which  are  in  the  heavens  and  which  are  on  the 
earth.  It  is  not  that  all  are  to  be  reduced  to  the  same  level, 
but  that  all  must  be  gathered  in  one  united  system,  as  having 
one  head  over  all,  even  Christ.  But  the  Church  is  not  included 
in  any  of  these  things.  We  are  not  confounded  with  either  ;  on 
the  contrary,  we  are  spoken  of  as  those  who  have  obtained  an 
inheritance  in  Christ  over  all.  The  Church  is  not  to  be  a  glo- 
rious people  only,  over  which  Christ  is  to  reign.  We  are  heirs 
of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ  —  not  merely  heirs  under 
Christ,  but  with  Him  —  according  to  the  blessed  type  given  at 
the  very  beginning  of  man's  history,  where,  while  Adam  had 
the  glory  of  being  head  over  this  lower  world,  his  wife  shares 
the  dominion  in  virtue  of  her  union  with  him.  The  Church  is 
the  spiritual  Eve  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  bride  of  the  last  Adam. 
This  may  somewhat  explain  the  force  of  the  words,  in  Ej)h.  i. 
10,  23,  and  shows  us  the  importance  of  the  day  we  are  looking 
at  in  Rev.  xx.  For  "  the  thousand  years"  answer  to  this  very 
period,  when  the  administration  will  be  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  when  He  will  be  the  exalted  and  manifested  Head  over 
all  things,  and  the  Church  will  share  all  along  with  Him. 

There  is  another  remark  that  I  would  make.  It  is  the  New 
Testament  alone  that  gives  us  the  statement  of  the  period  of  the 
reign.  It  is  there  that  we  find  its  duration  of  a  thousand  years 
defined.  Almost  all  prophecy  refers  to  it,  but  here  its  bounds 
are  assigned,  and  its  relation  to  the  eternal  state  which  succeeds. 

In  one  sense  Christ  will  reign,  and  the  saints  also,  for  ever 
and  ever.  So  it  is  laid  down  doctrinally,  apart  from  time,  as 
in  Rom.  v.  17,  where  it  is  said,  "  they  shall  reign  in  hfe  by  one, 
Jesus  Christ."     That  does  not  refer  to  the  millennial  reign  pai:- 


358  CHARACTER    OF    "  THAT    DAY." 

ticularly,  which  is  only  a  part  of  the  reigning  in  Hfe  by  Christ 
Jesus.  Our  life  in  Christ,  being  an  everlasting  one,  involves,  to 
my  mind,  that,  in  a  certain  real  and  important  sense,  thej'e  will 
be  a  reigning  blessedly  and  gloriously  with  Christ  for  ever  and 
ever.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  where  we  hear  of  a  kingdom 
given  to  Christ,  which  Christ  surrenders  before  the  end  to  God 
even  the  Father,  this  special  reign  for  a  limited  time  has  also  a 
bearing  upon  the  heavenly  saints.  Of  course  the  proper  divine 
glory  of  Christ  is  distinct  from  these  glories  and  can  be  commu- 
nicated to  none.  But  God  spoke  of  a  special  reward — the  reward 
of  suffering  for  Christ.  "  If  we  suffer,  we  shall  also  reign  with 
him."  "  If  so  be  that  we  suffer  with  him,  that  we  may  be  also 
glorified  together."  All  this  bears  upon  the  millennial  reign. 
Christ  will  be  then  publicly  exalted  in  the  world,  in  the  very 
place  where  He  was  despised  and  rejected.  And  the  saints  will 
be  publicly  exalted  with  Christ  in  the  place  of  their  shame  and 
sorrow,  where  they  have  followed  Christ  with  feeble  and  faltering 
steps,  but  where  they  clave  to  the  name  of  Jesus,  in  spite  of 
loss  and  reproach.  But  besides  these  special  rewards,  there  is 
the  glory,  blessedness,  and  joy  which  will  never  pass  away. 

The  millennium  will  be  a  time  when  there  will  be  many  saints 
brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  It  will  be  the  great 
harvest  of  blessing :  the  time  celebrated  with  such  rapture  in  the 
Psalms  and  Prophets,  when  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall 
cover  the  earth,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.  This  does  not 
imply  necessarily  that  every  person  who  knows  the  glory  of 
Jehovah  will  know  His  grace,  and  be  converted.  Nevertheless, 
many  will  be  brought  to  the  Lord.  But  there  will  also  be  a  true 
and  real  knowledge  of  God  given  at  that  very  time.  For  the 
Holy  Ghost  will  be  poured  out  from  on  high  in  a  special  man- 
ner, of  which  the  day  of  Pentecost  was,  in  comparison,  only  like 
the  former  rain,  while  that  will  be  as  the  latter  rain.  It  was  the 
foreshadowing  of  the  future  fulness  of  blessing — greater  at  least 
in  extent — that  will  be  realized  in  the  millennium. 

Now  the  saints  of  "  that  day  "  will  never  suffer  as  a  privilege, 
— never  knows  what  it  is  to  follow  Christ  in  reproach,  and  to  be 
cast  out  with  Him,  Consequently  they  will  not  reign  in  the 
kingdom.  All  saints  from  the  beginning,  and  up  to  the  millen- 
nium, will  have  suffered  with  Christ  more  or  less.  But  the 
Church  having  pre-eminently  known  the  fellowship  of  His 
sufferings,  will  have  special  glory.  And  those  saints  who  will 
be  brought  in  after  the  millennium  has  commenced,  and  who 
have  never  known  His  sufferings,  will  not  so  share  the  kingdom. 
Those  before  it  will  be  brought  into  the  scene  of  glory,  and 


SEN8ES    OF    "  FOR    EVER   AND    EVER."  359 

changed,  because  corruption  never  can  inherit  incorruption. 
Therefore,  when  they  are  brought  in  where  God  makes  all 
things  new,  tliere  can  be  no  question  of  their  bearing  the  likeness 
of  Christ,  because  they  are  part  of  the  family  of  the  last  Adam, 
and  as  being  in  connexion  with  Christ,  and  having  Plis  life,  that 
life  will  have  all  its  way  as  to  both  body  and  soul :  they  will  be 
changed  into  His  likeness.  It  is  true  that  we  have  no  positive 
statement,  as  to  the  millennial  saints,  when  this  change  will  take 
place.  But  we  may  gather,  I  think,  from  general  priiicij^les, 
that  it  will  be  in  the  interval  after  the  milleuniiiui  is  over,  and 
before  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth  appear  with  their  blessed 
inhabitants.  But  this  silence  of  scripture  has  left  room  for  some 
to  be  beffuiled  into  the  strano-e  notion  that  the  millennial  saints 
will  remain  in  their  natural  bodies,  marrying  and  giving  in  mar- 
riage, throughout  all  eternity  !  Such  a  notion  as  this  has  no 
warrant  whatever  in  the  word  of  God.  It  resulted  from  always 
interpreting  the  expression,  "  for  ever  and  ever,"  as  if  it  must 
mean  eternity,  necessarily  and  in  every  case.  In  some  places 
it  does,  but  in  others  it  does  not.  Supposing  that  God  is  speak- 
ing of  an  earthly  state  of  things,  and  uses  the  expression,  "  reign- 
ing for  ever  and  ever,"  as  in  Dan.  vii.  and  Luke  i.,  it  cannot  be 
understood  absolutely.  The  words  must  be  limited  by  the 
subject-matter  of  which  God  is  speaking.  Thus,  in  human 
things,  if  a  man  buys  a  house  "  for  ever,"  it  does  not  mean 
throughout  eternity,  but  as  long  as  the  world  goes  on  in  its 
present  form  and  way  ;  his  right  holds  good  while  the  earth  sub- 
sists as  left  in  the  hands  of  man.  So  God  uses  the  phrase,  "  for 
ever  and  ever,"  when  speaking  of  earthly  things  and  people. 
Only  the  case  is  far  stronger  than  in  ordinary  human  transac- 
tions; for  a  revolution  may  despise  and  destroy  every  such  deed 
of  conveyance,  whereas  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  before  which  all 
oiDposing  authority  must  bow  and  become  null,  is  that  which 
secures  Israel,  &c.,  in  all  the  promises  of  God.  Thus,  "reign- 
ing over  the  house  of  Jacob,"  cannot  but  be  modified  by  this 
— as  long  as  the  house  of  Jacob  exists  as  such.  But  when 
the  expression  is  in  connexion  with  the  new  heavens  and  earth, 
in  the  full  sense,  Israel  is  no  longer  found  nationally  earthly  :  such 
distinctions  disappear,  when  men  are  raised  from  the  dead  or 
changed.  When  eternal  life  or  eternal  punishment  are  spoken 
of,  we  must  take  the  expression  in  the  largest  sense,  because 
these  things  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  earth  ;  they  belong  to 
the  resurrection-state.  If  applied  to  earthly  things,  it  must  be 
taken  in  a  limited  sense,  but  when  applied  to  things  outside  this 
world,  it  must  be  taken  absolutely  in  all  its  extent.     Now  in 


360  THE    FIGURES    OF    OLD    TESTAMENT    PROPHECY. 

Daniel  vii.  27,  "  the  kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven,"  which 
is  given  to  the  people  of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High,  is  said  to 
be  an  everlasting  kingdom.  This,  I  apprehend,  is  the  very  same 
period  that  is  called  here  the  thousand  years.  The  Holy  Ghost, 
in  the  New  Testament,  gives  us  the  winding  up  of  all  the  ways 
of  God,  and  shows  us  that  what  may  have  appeared  to  the  Old 
Testament  saints  to  be  an  absolutely  everlasting  condition,  is 
limited  and  qualified  by  further  revelations,  which  make  known 
to  us  two  stages,  as  it  were,  instead  of  one.  Thus,  the  earthly 
kingdom,  spoken  of  in  Daniel,  is  to  be  "  everlasting "  in  this 
sense,  that  it  will  never  pass  out  of  the  dominion  of  Christ — • 
never  be  taken  out  of  His  hands  and  given  to  another,  (as  pre- 
vious empires  had  been  taken  from  their  respective  rulers,)  but 
it  will  remain,  as  long  as  God  has  an  earthly  kingdom  at  all,  in 
His  hands,  and  in  the  hands  of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High, 
When  the  earthly  state  ceases,  and  that  kingdom  is  given  up, 
Clmst  reigns  everlastingly,  though  in  another  way.  For  in  the 
eternal  state,  it  will  evidently  not  be  a  question  of  all  people, 
nations,  and  languages  serving  Him. 

This  chapter  passes  cursorily  over  the  millennial  state,  as  far 
as  men  upon  the  earth  are  concerned.  If  persons  wish  to  look 
at  the  earthly  part  of  the  thousand  years,  they  must  search  into 
the  Old  Testament.  There  it  is  spoken  of  constantly  as  "  that 
day" — the  day  when  the  Gentiles  will  be  brought  in  and  blessed  ; 
when  God's  name  will  be  exalted  —  when  there  will  be  a  sus- 
pension of  all  warfare  and  strife  ;  the  day  when  the  wilderness 
shall  rejoice  and  blossom  like  the  garden  of  Eden,  and  when  the 
ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  come  to  Zion  with  songs  and  ever- 
lasting joy  upon  their  heads  —  when  sorrow  and  sighing  shall 
flee  away.  All  these  things  are  descriptions  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  gives  of  this  blessed  period  in  the  kingdom.  Many  have 
been  disposed  to  take  the  prophetic  accounts  of  the  millennium 
figuratively  :  but  they  must  allow  that  these  figures  may  be 
much  more  fully  accomplished  than  they  suppose.  In  other 
words,  I  take  the  glowing  accounts  given  of  the  millennium  in 
the  Old  Testament  prophecies  as  emblems  of  real  and  abundant 
blessing  on  earth.  These  figures  may  have  a  sort  of  spiritual 
meaning  too.  But,  allowing  that,  we  do  not  take  away  the  simple 
and  natural  meaning  of  the  phrase.  For  instance,  scripture 
speaks  of  the  wolf  and  the  lamb,  and  other  animals  that  now 
devour  one  another,  living  together  in  union  and  peace.  They 
may  be  applied  as  figures  to  describe  what  will  be  morally  true 
of  men — though  I  do  not  myself  believe  that  this  is  the  real 
intent.      For  why   should    not   God  bring  back  the    creatures 


DOCTRINE    OF    THE    NEW    TESTAMENT.  361 

that  He  has  made,  and  about  which  He  takes  a  far  greater  in- 
terest than  men  suppose,  to  a  state  at  least  as  good  as  that  in 
which  they  were  created  ?  Why  should  not  God.  root  out  all 
the  evil  consequences  that  sin  has  brought  in,  physically  as  well 
as  morally  ?  Because  the  sin  of  Adam  had  effects  far  beyond 
his  own  race:  all  that  was  put  under  his  dominion  got  into  ruin 
and  disorder.  And  that  is  not  a  mere  imaginative  notion  of  ruin, 
nor  a  fanciful  exposition  of  Old  Testament  prophecy.  It  is  the 
doctrine  plainly  and  positively  laid  down  in  Rom.  viii.  It  is 
written  there,  that  "  the  creature  was  made  subject  to  vanity, 
not  willingly,  but  by  reason  of  him  that  hath  subjected  the  same." 
There  you  have  the  fall  of  him  that  was  over  the  creature.  He 
fell ;  and  creation,  being  under  the  headship  of  Adam,  fell  along 
with  him.  It  was  he  who  made  it  subject  to  vanity  ;  misery  and 
death  came  in  through  him.  For  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  death  would  have  reio-ned  with  reg'ard  to  the  brute  creation 
of  the  Adamic  world,  any  more  than  with  regard  to  man,  if  sin 
had  not  entered.  I  am  aware  that  the  wise  men  of  this  world 
often  speak  of  fossil  remains  which  show  the  death  of  animals 
before  man  was  created.  Into  such  disquisitions  I  do  not  enter, 
but  would  only  say  that  there  was  not  the  same  state  of  things 
under  Adam.  Supposing,  now,  the  facts  and  inferences  of  geo- 
logists to  be  sound — whatever  living  creatures  may  have  been 
made  and  destroyed  in  the  earth,  before  Adam  was  created, 
scripture  is  entirely  silent  about,  and  so  I  desire  to  be  in  ex- 
pounding it.  They  are  questions  of  no  moral  importance,  and, 
therefore,  a  Christian  need  not  meddle  with  them.  I  add  that 
these  theories,  if  true,  do  not  contradict  scripture  in  the  slightest 
degree.  For  there  is  not  a  trace  of  man  connected  with  that 
state  of  things  which  preceded  Adam  ;  and  scripture  passes  over 
it,  hastening  to  what  is  immediately  connected  with  him.  When 
the  human  race  begins  upon  the  earth,  the  moral  dealings  of 
God  are  gradually  developed.  But  man  quickly  fell,  and  then 
creation  was  degraded  through  its  fallen  head.  Death,  as  far  as 
regards  the  Adamic  world,  entered  through  the  disobedience  of 
Adam — death,  directly  as  to  men,  and  as  a  consequence,  its 
ravages  spread  throughout  all  the  lower  living  creation. 

When  the  Second  Adam,  exalted  above  the  heavens,  shall 
come  again.  He  will  not  merely  have  such  a  dominion  as  the 
first  Adam  had,  when  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth  shall  be 
put  under  His  glorious  sway.  There  is  not  a  single  spot  nor 
creature  of  God's  universe  but  what  will  feel  the  effects  of  His 
glorious  power,  whereby  He  is  able  to  subdue  even  all  things 
unto  Himself.     Thus,  if  once  man  fell,  bringing  in  siu  and  death 


362  FUTURE    POSITION    OF    ISRAEL. 

and  misery,  and  if  all  the  attempts  of  the  race  to  remedy  the 
mischief,  outward  and  inward,  have  been  but  expedients  and  no 
real  cure,  the  Lord  Jesus  will  be  the  good  and  sovereign  and 
almighty  Healer  of  every  evil  and  sorrow  of  creation.  And 
God  will  have  such  joy — His  own  joy — in  relieving  all  the 
wretchedness  that  sin  had  brought  about,  according  to  His  esti- 
mate of  the  worth  of  His  Son.  And  if  all,  up  to  this  time,  will 
have  been  but  the  filling  up  of  man's  cup  of  woe,  how  blessed 
will  be  the  time  when  God  revei'ses  the  history,  and  when 
His  own  Son,  no  longer  rejected  and  despised,  shall  fill  the 
throne  of  His  earthly  and  heavenly  glory  !  When  all  wicked- 
ness shall  be  put  down,  and  righteousness  for  ever  exalted,  not 
by  bare  power  and  glory,  but  by  the  One  who  in  grace  had 
borne  all  the  sorrow  first,  and  suffered  the  consequences  of  all 
the  wickedness,  according  to  the  full  holiness  of  God,  upon  the 
cross  !  And  how  sweet  to  think  that  God  will  there  show  that 
there  is  not  an  evil,  nor  a  degradation,  nor  a  pang  for  which  He 
has  not  some  suited  and  glorious  answer  in  and  through  His 
Son  !  For  He  will  then  put  forth  all  His  might  to  glorify  His 
own  Son  in  the  presence  of  all  flesh,  even  of  those  who  sent  the 
message  after  Him,  "  We  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over 
us."  But  when  that  Blessed  One  returns,  having  received  the 
kingdom,  and  will  reign  as  the  risen,  exalted  Son  of  man,  all 
creation  will  feel  the  gladdening,  blessed  effects  of  the  Saviour's 
headship  and  rule. 

The  Lord  will  exalt  Israel  on  earth  and  make  them,  who  have 
been  so  peculiarly  His  bitter  enemies,  to  lead  the  song  of  praise 
with  their  once  rejected  Messiah,  now  in  the  midst  of  the  con- 
gregation. Then  it  is  that  they  will  take  up  Psalm  c,  the 
Psalm  of  thanksgiving,  and  will  invite  all  lands  to  come  and 
praise  the  Lord  ;  yea,  to  enter  His  courts  with  praise.  What  a 
contrast  to  all  that  has  gone  on,  or  is  going  on  still !  How 
different  from  the  hatred  which  the  Jews  have  ever  shown 
against  the  mere  sound  of  grace  going  out  to  the  Gentiles ! 
For  when  Paul  tells  them  how  the  Lord  had  said  to  him,  as  he 
prayed  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  "Depart,  for  I  will  send 
thee  far  hence  unto  the  Gentiles" — they  heard  him  to  that  word  ; 
but  it  was  more  than  their  proud  hearts  could  brook,  and  so 
they  lifted  up  their  voices  and  said,  "  Away  with  such  a  fellow 
from  the  earth  :  it  is  not  fit  that  he  should  live."  But  how  will 
grace  have  changed  and  enlarged  the  narrow  hearts  of  Israel, 
when  they  will  themselves  go  forth  with  the  invitations  of  mercy 
to  the  Gentiles,  who  had  insulted  them  in  all  their  weary  wan- 
derings over  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  who  had  trodden  down 
Jerusalem  during  their  appointed  times  ! 


HOW    THE    MILLENNIUM    IS    TO    COME    IN.  363 

Tlie  Jews,  like  Cain,  have  the  mark  of  the  Lord  upon  them, 
that  they  shall  not  be  utterly  extinguished,  in  spite  of  their  blood- 
guiltiness.  But  the  Lord  will  give  them  repentance  in  the 
latter  day,  and  thenceforward  they  will  be  the  suited  and  blessed 
heralds  of  His  grace,  to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth. 

This  time  of  blessedness  under  the  Messiah,  is  what  is  found 
so  often  and  so  fully  in  the  Old  Testament  scriptures.  The 
Gospels,  too,  open  with  similar  exjDOctations  on  the  part  of  the 
Jewish  saints.  But  further  light  begins  to  dawn,  as  the  rejec- 
tion of  Christ  becomes  more  decided,  till  at  length,  redemption 
being  accomplished,  the  Holy  Ghost  was  sent  down  from  hea- 
ven, and  Lie  brought  out  the  full  mind  of  God.  Then  it  was 
that  the  distinction  between  the  kingdom  and  the  eternal  state 
was  made  plain.  (1  Cor.  xv.  24-28.)  It  was  shown  that  the 
earthly  reign  of  Christ,  which  in  the  Old  Testament  might  have 
appeared  unlimited,  will,  in  reality,  come  to  a  close  when  He 
shall  have  put  down  all  rule,  and  all  authority,  and  power. 

There  are  many  who  think  that  the  millennial  state  of  things 
is  to  be  gradually  brought  in  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel, 
and  other  agencies  that  are  now  in  operation.  No  doubt  they 
look  for  God  to  bless  them  in  a  still  greater  degree  ;  for  no 
Christian,  perhaps,  would  say  that  present  appearances  warrant 
such  expectations.  But  they  think  that  if,  instead  of  the  few, 
there  were  many  servants  of  God,  and  that  if  it  pleased  God  to 
bless  the  word  to  the  conversion  of  multitudes  everywhere  ;  and 
if  a  spirit  of  greater  love  and  union  and  devotedness  prevailed 
among  those  that  love  the  name  of  Christ,  generally,  there  and 
then  would  be  the  reign  of  Christ  upon  the  earth. 

Now,  I  would  ask,  IIow  do  we  know  that  there  is  to  be  a 
millennium  at  all  ?  You  answer,  From  the  word  of  God. 
But,  how  is  the  millennium  to  be  brought  about  ?  Humility 
would  answer,  We  must  learn  this,  too,  from  the  word  of  God. 
We  all  acknowledge  that  the  earth  is  to  be  filled  with  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Lord  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea. — How  is  that  to 
be  effected  ?  It  is  remarkable  that  in  the  very  scripture  (Isa. 
xi.  9)  where  these  words  occur,  the  Holy  Ghost  intimates  that 
judgment  must  precede  this  time  of  blessing.  (See  v.  4.)  In 
that  passage  the  universal  spread  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord 
is  made  to  follow  Ilis  smiting  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  His 
mouth,  and  His  slaying  the  wicked  with  the  breath  of  His  lips — 
the  very  scripture  that  the  Apostle  Paul  applies  in  2Thess.  ii.  8, 
to  the  destruction  of  Antichrist,  the  man  of  sin.  The  Lord 
shall  consume  him  with  the  spirit  of  His  mouth,  and  shall 
destroy  him  with  the  brightness,  or  manifestation,  of  His  coming. 


364  CONTRAST    WITH    THB    GOSPEL    MISSION,  - 

It  is  perfectly  true,  then,  and  agreed,  that  there  is  to  be  a 
millennial  time  of  blessing  on  the  earth  ;  and  the  answer  to  the 
question,  how  it  i^  to  be  introduced,  is  this  :  the  same  scripture 
which  reveals  that  blessed  change,  tells  us  that  it  is  to  be  brought 
in  by  the  Lord's  coming  and  smiting  the  wicked  one  ;  in  other 
words,  by  judgment,  and  not  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel. 
The  gospel  is  of  all  importance,  for  calling  souls  from  earth  to 
heaven  ;  but  it  is  not  the  means  of  dealing  with  the  whole 
world,  and  filling  it  with  blessing.  It  is  the  means  of  gathering 
the  Church  out  of  the  world  to  Christ.  When  judgment  has 
had  its  full  course,  then  the  Lord  will  send  out  His  servants. 
The  Lord  will  give  the  word,  and  great  will  be  the  company  of 
those  that  publish  it.  "  Out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law,  and 
the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem."  The  present  dispensa- 
tion is  one  of  gathering  out  in  separation  from  the  world.  The 
gospel  ought  to  be  preached  to  all,  but  not  with  the  vain  hope 
that  all  are  ever  to  believe  it.  Thus  the  Lord,  in  Mark  xvi., 
while  bidding  His  disciples  to  go  into  all  the  world,  and  preach 
the  gospel  to  every  creature,  takes  pains  to  add,  "  He  that 
believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved,  but  he  that  believeth 
not  shall  be  damned."  He  prepares  them  for  an  individual  and 
partial  reception  of  it.  Thus  they  would  not  be  cast  down,  if 
they  found  but  a  few  here  and  there  who  received  the  word  of 
life.  It  might  be  but  a  Dionysius,  the  Areopagite,  and  a  woman 
named  Damaris,  and  others  with  them.  And  what  were  they 
to  the  crowds  who  listened  to  the  Apostle,  on  Mars'  hill  ?  It 
was  a  matter  of  joy  and  thankfulness  to  hear  of  any  who 
believed  to  eternal  life,  for  it  is  thus  that  God  preserves  His 
servants  from  being  cast  down.  It  is  well  to  know  that  all  are 
not  going  to  receive  the  gospel,  but  that  God  is  accomplishing 
His  own  purposes.  Therefore,  when  the  Lord  blesses  the  word 
and  awakens  the  conscience  of  a  poor  sinner  here  and  there,  it 
is  a  cause  of  rejoicing.  But  we  know  that  as  a  whole,  evil  will 
increase,  and  "  evil  men  and  seducers  wax  worse  and  worse, 
deceiving  and  being  deceived."  How  can  that  be,  if  the  millen- 
nial blessing  is  to  be  the  result  of  the  present  or  such-like  efforts 
of  Christians  in  the  gospel?  But  the  Lord  is  to  smite  the  earth 
with  the  rod  of  His  mouth,  and  to  slay  the  wicked  with  the 
breath  of  His  lijis,  which  is  said  to  be  like  a  stream  of  brim- 
stone ?  (Is.  XXX.  33.)  Is  t/mt  like  the  gospel?  It  is  the  exact 
opposite — a  figure  of  destructive  judgment.  The  gospel  delivers 
from  Tophet,  but  this  judgment  of  the  Lord  casts  into  it  irre- 
vocably. Clearly,  then,  it  is  a  judgment  from  the  hand  of  God 
Himself,  and  not  one  which  man,  much  less  the  Church,  will 


THE    ABSENCE    OF    SATAN.  365 

execute.      It  is  not  the  business  of  the  Church  to   cast   into 
Tophet.     No  power  but  God's  can  consign  to  hell. 

But  there  is  another  thing-  that  characterizes  the  millennium — 
the  binding  of  Satan  in  the  abyss.  Can  the  Church  bind  Satan  ? 
Will  any  one  tell  me  that  Satan  can  be  absolutely  hindered  from 
deceiving  the  world  now?  But  there  can  be  no  universal  bless- 
ing for  the  world  till  he  is  bound  ;  and  every  Christian  must 
acknowledge  that  God  alone  can  either  bind  or  crush  Satan.  He 
may  employ  an  angel,  or  associate  the  saints  with  Himself;  as  it 
is  said  in  Rom.  xvi.  20,  "  The  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan 
under  your  feet  shortly."  The  Church  is  united  to  Christ,  and 
then  will  be  actually  with  Him,  who,  as  the  woman's  seed,  is  to 
bruise  the  serpent's  head ;  but  the  power  is  in  Christ,  and  not  in 
the  Church.  He  will  put  down  all  adversaries  when  that  day 
of  judgment  comes  ;  as  it  is  said,  "  He  will  smite  the  nations,  and 
rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron."  (Rev.  xix.)  And  we  shall  do  the 
same  in  virtue  of  our  association  with  Christ.  (Rev.  ii.)  In  the 
reign  of  peace  (Kev.  xx.  4,  6)  we  shall  still  be  associated  with 
Him.  It  is  by  the  Church,  in  its  heavenly  condition,  not  while 
we  are  on  the  earth,  that  Satan  will  be  thus  bruised. 

But  it  is  perfectly  clear,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  millen- 
nium is  not  exclusively  the  reign  of  the  glorified  saints  :  the 
earth,  as  such,  with  its  inhabitants,  will  be  brought  into  deliver- 
ance and  blessing.  This  we  saw  in  Eph.  i.  10,  where  the  true 
key  to  its  character  appears — the  union  of  heavenly  and  earthly 
glory  under  one  and  the  same  Head,  in  whom  also  we,  the  body, 
have  obtained  an  inheritance.  There  will  be  Jews  and  Gentiles, 
blessed  as  such  in  their  natural  bodies  on  the  earth,  the  subjects 
of  the  kingdom  ;  while  the  glorified  saints  will  be  the  instruments 
of  blessing  to  the  earth. 

Now  the  earth  is  made  miserable,  and  men  hardly  know  how 
far  they  are  gone  in  rebellion  through  sin.  That  is  not  all ;  for 
there  is  an  unseen  enemy ;  a  dark  and  untiring  adversary  of 
God  and  man,  who  has  his  hosts  of  wicked  angels  subject  to 
himself  (Rev.  xii.),  and  they  are  the  instruments  of  his  seduc- 
tion. All  this  will  pass  away  ;  and  those  very  scenes  which  are 
now  filled  by  wicked  spirits,  the  heavenly  places  (not  of  course 
the  place  where  God  dwells  in  His  unapproachable  glory,  but 
the  lower  heavens  that  are  connected  with  the  earth)  will  be  a 
part  of  the  dominion  of  the  Church  in  glory,  and  the  heavenly 
saints  will  be  as  much  used  to  be  the  means  of  joy  and  blessing 
to  the  world,  as  the  wicked  spirits  are  now  the  chief  agents  of 
all  its  misery.  They  may  for  a  little  season  emerge  from  their 
prison,  after  the  millennium,  to  lead  the  distant  nations  of  the 


366  COMPARISON    OF    THE    APOCALYPTIC    ACCOUNT 

earth  into  a  last  conspiracy  against  the  Lord  ;  but  they  will 
never  regain  their  former  access  to  the  heavenly  places,  where 
their  influence  was  the  most  subtle  and  dangerous. 

Then  will  dawn  the  day  of  the  greatest  glory  for  the  world. 
Of  course  I  am  not  speaking  of  the  cross  ;  for  there  is  no  exalta- 
tion Christ  will  ever  have  given  Him,  that  can  be  compared  with 
the  real,  deep  glory  of  His  death.  It  has,  as  it  were,  put  it  into 
the  power  of  God  to  show  mercy  according  to  His  own  heart ; 
and,  therefore,  there  is  not  a  single  joy  of  the  millennium  but 
what  will  flow  from  the  cross  of  Jesus.  Nay,  it  has  eternal 
consequences,  and  not  for  the  millennium  only.  But  the  age  to 
come,  or  millennium,  while  very  important,  and  a  time  of  won- 
derful blessing,  will  still  be  imperfect.  And  for  this  reason. 
There  will  be  men  still  in  their  natural  bodies  upon  the  earth, 
many  of  whom  will  be  unconverted.  Accordingly,  this  very 
chapter  shows  us  that,  after  the  termination  of  the  thousand 
years,  "  Satan  shall  be  loosed  out  of  his  prison,  and  shall  go  out 
to  deceive  the  nations  which  are  in  the  four  corners  of  the  earth, 
Gog  and  Magog,  to  gather  them  together  unto  the  war  :  the  num- 
ber of  whom  is  as  the  sand  of  the  sea."  (Ver.  7,  8.)  We  do  not 
read  this  in  the  Old  Testament ;  for  as  it  does  not  intimate  the 
close  of  the  reign,  so  neither  does  it  show  us  the  period  when  Satan 
will  be  let  loose.  The  terms  in  which  the  judgment  upon  the  evil 
one  is  spoken  of  there,  might  be  construed  into  a  single  stroke, 
which  made  an  end  of  the  matter.  Froiii  Isa.  xxiv.  we  learn  that 
the  scene  of  the  punishment  of  the  high  ones  is  to  be  on  high,  as 
the  kings  of  the  earth  will  be  punished  on  the  earth.  It  is  evident 
that  by  the  host  of  the  high  ones,  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not  refer  to 
exalted  men  on  the  earth,  (for  they  are  in  contrast  with  the  kings 
of  the  earth,)  but  to  the  powers  of  evil  in  the  heavenly  places. 
(Compare  Eph.  vi.  12.)  That  is  exactly  what  we  find,  though 
with  fuller  detail,  in  Rev.  xii.,  xix.,  xx.  The  kings  of  the  earth 
meet  with  their  punishment  upon  the  earth,  while  Satan  and  his 
minions  suffer,  the  host  of  the  high  ones,  on  high.  Satan  is  cast 
out  unto  the  earth,  and  his  angels  are  cast  out  with  him.  Their 
place  is  found  no  more  in  heaven.  The  particulars  are  not  given 
till  the  Revelation.  That  day  will  see  the  judgment  of  all  foes 
above  or  below.  For  that  this  is  the  millennial  day  requires  no 
proof.  In  the  very  next  chajiter  (Is.  xxv.  6)  it  is  said,  "  And  in 
this  mountain  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  make  unto  all  people 
a  feast  of  fat  things,  a  feast  of  wines  on  the  lees,  of  fat  things 
full  of  marrow,  of  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined."  It  is  a  time 
of  blessedness  never  known  before.  Nor  is  it  confined  to  a 
certain  number  gathered  out  as  now,  but   "in  this  mountain 


WITH    THE    OLD    TESTAMENT    PROPHECIES.  367 

shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  make  unto  all  people  a  feast,"  &c. 
"  This  mountain"  is  said  of  the  land  of  Palestine,  because  it  will 
be  to  the  whole  earth  the  spot  where  the  Lord  will  be  exalted. 
Of  course,  this  is  to  be  understood  morally,  not  physically. 
Remark  what  we  have  in  the  next  verse.  "  And  he  will  destroy 
in  this  mountain  the  face  of  the  coverino^  cast  over  all  people." 
The  Lord  will  destroy  the  darkness  that  is  over  the  face  of  all 
nations  now,  "  and  the  veil  that  is  spread  over  all  nations." 
But  this  era  will  be  also  characterized  by  the  resurrection. 
"  He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory,"  evidently  referring  to 
the  first  resurrection  spoken  of  in  the  Revelation.  Then  only  is 
the  victory  complete.  (Compare  1  Cor.  xv.)  "  And  the  Lord  God 
will  wipe  away  tears  from  off  all  faces  ;  and  the  rebuke  of  his 
people  shall  he  take  away  from  off  all  the  earth  :  for  the  Lord, 
hath  spoken  it."  It  is  the  time  of  blessing-  for  the  Jewish  peo- 
ple. "  And  it  shall  be  said  in  that  day,  Lo,  this  is  our  God  ; 
we  have  waited  for  him,  and  he  will  save  us."  Here,  beyond  a 
doubt,  it  is  persons  upon  earth  that  need  to  be  saved.  The 
Church  is  saved  already,  and  we  do  not  wait  for  "  that  day"  to 
come  that  our  God  should  save  us.  They  will  be  saved  in  the  day 
of  glory  ;  we  are  saved  in  the  day  of  grace.  "  This  is  the 
Lord  :  we  have  waited  for  him,  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in 
his  salvation.  For  in  this  mountain  shall  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
rest,  and  Moab  shall  be  trodden  down  under  him,  even  as  straw 
is  trodden  down  for  the  dunghill."  There  we  have  one  of  the 
neighbouring  enemies  of  Israel  trodden  down  ;  for  it  is  to  be  a 
day  of  judgment  as  well  as  blessing.  In  the  next  chapter 
(xxvi.)  it  is  written,  "  In  that  day  shall  this  song  be  sung  in  the 
land  of  Judah.  We  have  a  strong  city,"  &c.  In  the  latter  part 
of  it,  which  I  would  refer  to  because  of  its  importance,  Israel 
says,  "  We  have  been  with  child,  we  have  been  in  pain  .... 
we  have  not  wrought  any  deliverance  in  the  earth,"  &;c.  "  Thy 
dead  men  shall  live,"  (the  words  "  together  with"  having  no 
kind  of  business  there,)  "  my  dead  body  shall  they  arise." 
"  Thy  dead  men,"  that  is,  the  Jewish  people,  who  are  regarded, 
in  a  figure,  as  being  dead ;  just  as  in  Ezekiel,  where  they  are 
represented  as  not  only  dead,  but  in  their  graves.  But  as  the 
Lord  causes  His  wind  to  pass  over  those  dry  bones,  and  they 
live  ;  so  here,  "  Thy  dead  men  shall  live,  my  dead  body  shall 
they  arise."  Not  merely  thy  dead  body,  but  Mine.  I  own  them 
— they  belong  to  Me.  Jehovah  appropriates  them  as  His,  dead 
though  they  may  have  been.  They  are  to  be  so  no  longer  ; 
they  shall  arise.  "  Awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell  in  dust :  for 
thy  dew  is  as  the  dew  of  herbs,  and  the  earth  shall  cast  out  the 


368  DISPLAY    OF    EVIL   AFTER   THE    MILLENNIUM. 

dead.  Come,  my  people,  enter  thou  into  thy  chambers,  and 
shut  thy  doors  about  thee."  This  is  not  Hke  the  Church.  The 
heavenly  saints  do  not  enter  into  their  chambers  upon  earth,  but 
are  taken  away,  to  be  in  the  Father's  house  in  heaven.  But 
here  it  is  a  question  of  the  Jewish  people.  They  are  comforted, 
and  are  told  to  arise  out  of  their  degradation,  "  for  thy  dew  is  as 

the  dew  of  herbs."     "  Come,  ray  people hide  thyself  as  it 

were  for  a  little  moment,  until  the  indignation  be  overpast." 
The  indignation  that  God  had  so  long  against  His  people  will 
be  turned  now  into  indignation  against  their  enemies.  The 
Assyrian  used  heretofore  as  God's  rod  for  chastening  Israel  must 
now  meet  with  his  own  final  doom.  "  For,  behold,  the  Lord 
Cometh  out  of  his  place  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth 
for  their  iniquity  :  the  earth  also  shall  disclose  her  blood,  and 
shall  no  more  cover  her  slain."  And  yet  this  is  manifestly  the 
time  when  He  introduces  the  millennium,  not  after  it  is  over. 
The  Lord  comes  out  of  His  place  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of 
the  earth.  Is  that  like  the  gospel,  where,  instead  of  proclaiming 
the  remission  of  their  sins.  He  comes  to  punish  them  ?  Not  at 
all.  Further,  "  In  that  day  the  Lord,  with  his  sore,  and  great, 
and  strong  sword,  shall  punish  leviathan  the  piercing  serpent, 
even  leviathan  that  crooked  serpent :  and  he  shall  slay  the  dra- 
gon that  is  in  the  sea."  Doubtless  there  is  a  general  reference 
to  the  wicked  one,  Satan,  the  ancient  serpent.  Only  here  he  is  not 
seen  as  one  that  had  a  place  on  high,  but  defeated  and  rejected 
here  below.  He  is  not  spoken  of  with  the  same  minuteness  as 
in  the  Revelation,  which  gives  us  the  full  light  of  God  upon  the 
subject  and  the  details. 

Moreover,  we  find  that,  at  the  end  of  the  millennium,  God 
will  show  that  the  day  of  glory  (the  thousand  years,  which 
form  a  part  of  the  day  of  the  Lord,  when  Satan  is  bound,  and 
the  Lord  Jesus  reigns  manifestly)  will  no  more  convert  souls  of 
itself,  than  the  day  of  grace  and  the  publishing  of  the  gospel  to 
the  ends  of  the  earth.  For  if  the  day  of  grace  requires  the 
immediate  power  of  God  to  save  an  individual  soul,  of  course 
the  same  power  will  be  requisite  here  below  in  the  day  of 
glory.  Whilst  the  Lord  is  there,  evil  will  be  kept  down  ;  there 
will  be  no  leader  of  man  in  his  evil.  But  the  moment  Satan 
is  allowed  to  come  out  of  his  place,  and  again  exercises  his 
power,  we  have  plain  proof  that  tlie  heart  of  man  is  unchanged. 
He  goes  out  to  the  four  corners  of  the  earth  to  deceive  the 
nations,  and  gathers  them  together  for  destruction. 

These  nations  are  called  by  a  symbolic  name,  which  is  a  sort 
of  allusion  to  the  enemies  of  Israel  spoken  of  in  Ezek.  xxxviii. 


GOG,    PRINCE    OF    ROSH.  369 

xxxix.  But  they  are  not  the  same,  and  must  be  carefully  dis- 
tinguished. For  in  Ezekiel  Gog  is  literally  an  individual  person 
— the  prince  of  the  vast  north-eastern  territories  and  peoples, 
known  in  our  time  as  the  empire  of  Russia.  Gog  is  to  be  the 
then  leader  of  that  country,  vi^hich  is  called  in  Scripture  "  the 
land  of  Magog."  Indeed  this  is  the  positive  meaning  of  the 
words  rendered  in  our  Bibles  "  chief  prince."  It  ought  to  be 
"  prince  of  Rosh."  But  when  the  Scriptures  were  translated 
into  Latin,  (which  had  a  great  influence  upon  succeeding  ver- 
sions,) the  Russian  empire  did  not  exist  and  could  not  be  known 
by  that  name.  For  the  north  of  Europe  and  Asia  was  then 
merely  inhabited  by  hordes  of  wandering  barbarians,  called 
Sarmatians,  Scythians,  &c.  So  when  the  corrector  of  the  old 
Latin,  Jerome,  came  to  the  Hebrew  "  Rosh,"  he  thought  it 
must  be  taken  not  as  the  name  of  a  people,  but  as  a  common 
name,  meaning  "head"  or  "chief,"  jnst  as  the  Franks,  besides 
giving  their  name  to  a  neighbouring  country  which  they  con- 
quered, also  meant  "  free  men."  Hence,  probably,  in  our  ver- 
sion, "  Rosh"  was  translated  chief,  which  the  Hebrew  word 
might  equally  well  bear,  if  a  proper  name  were  not  required  by 
the  context ;  for  "  prince  of  chief,  Meshech  and  Tubal"  makes 
no  good  sense.  Therefore,  I  suppose,  the  translators,  not  know- 
ing what  better  to  make  of  it,  put  the  clause  down  vaguely  as 
"  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and  Tubal."  However,  it  is  well 
known  that  learned  persons  who  had  no  light,  or  a  very  partial 
one,  upon  propliecy — scholars  who  examined  the  subject  a  hun- 
dred years  ago,  concluded  that  Russia  was  meant.  But  what  is 
much  more  important,  the  Greek  version,  or  Septuagint,  which 
was  made  two  centuries  before  Christ,  left  it  as  Ros  ;  they  did 
not  know  what  place  or  race  was  meant,  but  seeing  that 
Meshech  and  Tubal  were  given  as  proper  names,  they  understood 
the  preceding  word  similarly.  Thus,  Gog  is  really  to  be  "the 
prince  of  Rosh,  Meshech,  and  Tubal,"  which  will  all  be  found 
in  the  Russian  empire.*     Ezekiel  then  shows  that,  when  God 

*  So  even  Gesenius  in  the  later  results  of  his  researches.  It  has  been  objected 
on  the  authority  of  Luitpraud's  Chronicle,  that  the  only  people  then  called  Rus- 
sians by  way  of  distinction,  were  the  dynasty  of  Norsemeu,  who,  under  Ruric, 
acquired  the  throne  of  Muscovy.  But  I  do  not  see  the  force  of  the  argument.  If 
Ezekiel  predicts  that  the  prince  of  Rosh,  Meshech  and  Tubal  shall  come  up  to 
Palestine  in  the  latter  day,  what  has  the  origin  of  the  name,  Rosh,  to  do  with  it  ? 
If  Cush  or  Phut  is  to  suffer  in  Egypt,  or  in  the  lower  Euphrates,  it  matters  little 
from  what  point  they  first  migrated.  The  prince  of  Rosh  may  have  sprung  from 
the  Northmen,  and  acquired  sway  over  the  descendants  of  Meshech  and  Tubal. 
How  does  the  coming  of  the  Russi  from  Scandinavia  hinder  this  ?  Besides,  there 
is  no  doubt  of  the  emigration  of  a  largo  part  at  least  of  the  Northerns  from  the  East. 
The  Cushites,  Goths,  Scyths,  arc  pretty  nearlv  at  bottom  the  same  people,  as  the 
Druidical  religion  is  of  an  Oriental  source,  the  north  of  India  having  been  one 
great  settlement. 
25 


370  FINAL    PUNISHMENT    OF    THE    DEVIL. 

restores  Israel  and  plants  them  in  their  own  land,  Russia  is  to 
be  the  last  great  enemy  that  comes  up  to  attack  them,  and 
meets  with  its  own  demolition  from  the  hands  of  God  on  the 
mountains  of  Israel.  His  prophecy,  I  think,  does  not  bear  upon 
present  events,  save  as  these  may  lead  to  it ;  much  less  is  it  to 
be  confounded  with  the  gathering  of  Gog  and  Magog  described 
in  verses  8,  9.  That  cannot  mean  the  same  as  these  ;  for  the 
Jewish  prophet  speaks  of  a  vast  confederacy  before  the  millen- 
nium, or  at  least  at  the  very  beginning  of  it ;  while  in  the  Reve- 
lation it  is  after  the  thousand  years  are  past.  I  apprehend  that 
Gog  and  Magog  here  are  purely  symbolical  expressions,  founded, 
it  is  true,  upon  the  prophet  of  the  Chebar,  but  entirely  distinct. 
The  word  by  Ezekiel  has  its  accomplishment  when  Israel  is 
restored.  (See  chaps,  xxxvi.  xxxvii.)  Gog  comes  up  when 
they  are  dwelling  in  their  unwalled  villages,  and  thinks  to  make 
them  an  easy  prey  :  but  the  Lord  interferes.  Gog  is  put  down 
and  Israel  live  and  flourish  quietly  in  their  land.  Here  they 
are  symbols  borrowed  from  Old  Testament  circumstances,  but 
applied  to  a  time  long  subsequent.  The  last  enemy  which 
Israel  had  to  encounter  before  the  millennium  was  the  literal 
Gog  ;  the  last  rebellion  after  it  derives  its  name  from  that  well- 
remembered  effort  of  the  outside  nations.  Countless  swarms 
from  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth,  under  the  guidance  of  Satan, 
will  repeat  (never  to  be  repeated  again)  what  the  Russian  chief 
will  have  done  before  them.  They  will  go  up  on  the  breadth 
of  the  earth  and  compass  the  camp  of  the  saints  about  and  the 
beloved  city.  Of  course  the  earthly  people  and  city  are  meant ; 
for  Israel  will  then  be  a  body  of  saints,  a  holy  people,  and 
Jerusalem  will  be  the  beloved  city,  not  in  mere  name,  but  then, 
in  truth,  the  city  of  the  great  King.  These  nations  come  up 
and  suiTOund  them,  and  God  Mill,  if  I  may  so  sa}',  be  compelled 
to  destroy  them  for  ever.  "  Fire  came  down  from  God  out  of 
heaven  and  devoured  them,"  (Ver.  9.)  Fire  is  always  the  figure 
of  God's  judgment.  Thus  do  they  perish.  Their  leader  is  not 
touched  by  this  judgment :  a  worse  fate  is  reserved  for  him. 
"  And  the  devil  that  deceiveth  them  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire 
and  brimstone,  where  also  [are]  the  Beast  and  the  false  prophet ; 
and  they  shall  be  tormented  day  and  night  for  ever  and  ever." 
His  followers  are  destroyed  by  a  divine  judgment  upon  earth, 
but  tiie  devil,  who  had  led  them  by  his  deceits,  is  cast  into  the 
lake  of  fire  and  brimstone. 

But  there  is  another  scene  that  follows  —  the  most  solemn  for 
man  where  all  indeed  is  solemn.     "And  I  saw  a  great  white 


THE    GREAT    WHITE   THRONE.  371 

throne,  and  him  that  sitteth  on  it,  from  whose  face  fled  the  earth 
and  the  heaven  ;  and  there  was  found  no  place  for  them."  (Ver. 
11.)  Mark  that.  There  are  many  persons  who  suppose  this  to  be 
the  time  of  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  who  consequently  put  the 
millennium  before  His  coming.  But  this  will  not  bear  the 
light  of  Scripture.  Without  going  to  proofs  outside  the  chapter, 
I  would  just  take  another  ground,  which  is  short  and  simple, 
and,  to  my  mind,  perfectly  conclusive  of  the  question.  When 
the  Lord  Jesus  comes.  He  comes  to  the  earth  from  heaven. 
This  is  the  universal  belief,  as  far  as  I  know,  of  all  persons  who 
have  any  defined  thoughts  about  the  matter.  But  that  is  not  the 
case  here.  For  the  Lord  sits  upon  a  great  white  throne,  and 
instead  of  His  coming  from  heaven  to  earth,  both  earth  and 
heaven  are  all  gone.  It  cannot  be  His  coming  to  the  earth,  for 
there  is  no  earth  to  come  to.  The  entire  system  of  earth  and 
heaven,  as  they  now  are,  will  have  vanished  out  of  the  scene — 
not  annihilated  but  destroyed  ;  for  there  is  a  great  difference 
between  those  two  thoughts.  However,  the  earth  is  no  longer 
found  filling  its  own  place:  it  has  disappeared.  The  great 
white  throne  is  not  therefore  upon  tlie  earth  at  all ;  for,  from  the 
face  of  Him  that  sat  on  it,  the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled  away 
and  there  was  found  no  place  for  them.  Lest  it  should  be 
thought  that  their  fleeing  away  was  a  mere  figure  of  speech,  it 
is  added  that  there  was  found  no  place  for  them.  As  it  is  said 
in  2  Peter  iii.,  they  shall  be  dissolved  and  their  elements  melt 
with  fervent  heat.  Observe,  then,  that  when  Christ  is  seen 
seated  on  the  great  white  throne,  the  earth  and  the  heaven  are 
fled  away.  What  are  we  to  draw  from  that  ?  Either  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  must  have  come  before  this,  or  He  will  never  come 
to  the  earth  at  all ;  for  it  would  not  be  the  same  thing  to  suppose 
that  He  merely  comes  to  the  new  earth,  after  all  judgment, 
even  of  the  wicked  dead,  is  over.  Now  we  know  that  "  the 
Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto 
the  Son"  —  "ordained  of  God  to  be  the  Judge  of  quick  and 
dead."  The  general  faith  of  Christians  is  that  He  will  come 
back  to  this  earth.  His  feet  shall  stand  in  a  day  yet  future  upon 
the  Mount  of  Olives  which  is  before  Jerusalem  on  the  east,  and 
which  thenceforward  is  to  be,  not  destroyed,  but  divided  in  the 
midst  as  a  witness  of  it.  These  circumstances  cannot  apply  to 
what  St.  John  calls  the  new  heaven  and  new  earth,  but  before 
the  last  physical  change.  When  the  great  white  throne  is  found, 
the  earth  is  gone,  and  therefore  the  coming  of  Christ  to  the  earth 
must  have  been  before  that  final  scene  of  judgment.  In  point 
of  fact,  too,  we  have  had  the  coming  of  Christ  alreadv  described 


372  THERE    ARE    TWO    DISTINCT    RESURRECTIONS, 

ill  chap.  xix.  and  His  reign  in  the  early  part  of  chap.  xx.  This 
gives  distinctness  to  the  character  of  the  great  white  throne,* 
Nothing  can  be  more  simple,  if  you  take  it  in  the  order  in  which 
God  arranges  it.  But  man  is  ever  perverse  ;  and  so  he  blots 
out  the  coming  of  Christ  from  chap.  xix.  where  it  is  given,  and 
imagines  it  in  chap.  xx.  11,  where  it  is  not,  and  where  it  cannot  be. 
Observe,  also,  that  the  judgment  of  the  great  white  throne  is 
not  a  general  judgment,  any  more  than  the  resurrection  spoken 
of  here  is  a  general  I'esurrection.  In  fact,  the  mixed  idea  is 
mere  imagination.  I  hold  that  every  soul  of  man,  i.e.,  of 
those  that  have  died,  must  be  in  one  or  other  resurrection.  But 
Scripture  shows  us  that  the  resurrection  of  the  just  is  a  totally 
different  thing  and  at  a  different  time  from  the  resurrection  of 
the  unjust:  they  have  nothing  in  common  save  that  in  both  cases 
soul  and  body  must  be  reunited  for  ever.  There  is  no  Scripture 
for  an  indiscriminate  rising  of  all.  A  few  passages  are  used  to 
make  out  a  show  of  proof.  The  Lord  says  in  John  v.  28  :  "  The 
hour  is  coming,  in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall 
hear  his  voice, f  and  shall  come  forth,  they  that  have  done  good, 
unto  the  resurrection  of  life  ;  and  they  that  have  done  evil,  unto 
the  resurrection  of  judgment."  But  that  does  not  show  that 
they  will  rise  at  the  same  time.     The  hour  is  coming  in  which 

*  Most  extraordinary  is  the  error  for  which  the  4.th  edition  of  the  Horae  Apoc. 
(Vol.  iv.  pp.  206-208)  is  distinguished  from  its  predecessors  :  the  great  white 
throne  is  now  supposed  to  have  been  in  exercise  at  the  opening,  as  well  as  close,  of 
the  thousand  years.  The  late  Duke  of  Manchester  and  a  few  others  had  endorsed 
the  same  fancy.  If  ]\Ir.  E.  "  does  not  see  anything  in  St.  John's  description"  of 
the  blessed  reign  over  the  earth,  in  contrast  with  the  fleeing  away  of  heaven  and 
earth  in  the  subsequent  picture,  to  negative  the  idea,  reasoning,  I  fear,  would  be 
vain.  The  omission  of  a  detailed  account  of  the  Lord's  throne  in  the  previous 
verses,  is  no  real  difficulty.  His  reign,  and  that  of  the  glorified  saints  generally, 
we  have  seen  to  be  distinctly  implied  in  verse  4  :  they  had  been  amply  promised 
and  predicted  elsewhere.  The  needed  revelation  in  this  place  is  exactly  what  God 
provides — the  comfortable  assurance  that  those  called  to  testify  and  suffer,  after 
the  translation  of  the  Old  Testament  saints  and  the  Church,  would  equally  reign 
with  Him  during  the  thousand  years,  not  to  speak  of  eternal  blessedness,  which 
was  a  matter  of  course. 

t  Not  a  syllable  intimates,  that  there  will  be  one  majestic  uiiered  summons,  as 
Dr.  Brown  assumes  (Christ's  Second  Coming,  41h  ed.,  pp.  193,  191).  Nor  is  the 
last  trump,  or  the  trump  of  God,  connected  with  any  save  the  rigliteous.  This 
trumpet-sound,  we  know  from  Scripture,  is  one.  The  voice  of  the  Son  of  God, 
Scripture  with  equal  distinctness  informs  us,  is  to  call  from  the  grave  both  those 
that  have  practised  good  and  those  that  have  done  evil ;  but  the  passage  itself 
indieatcs  two  contrasted  resurrections,  which  are  separated  by  a  distinction  far 
deeper  than,  though  confirmed  by,  the  diflerence  of  their  respective  epochs.  The 
question  whether  His  voice  is  to  be  kept  up  through  a  thousand  years,  is  a  mere 
cavil.  There  is  nothing  to  forbid,  but  on  the  contrary  everything,  in  my  opinion, 
to  strengthen  the  thought,  that  the  Lord  will  cause  His  glorious  voice  to  be  heard 
in  closing  judgment  after  the  millennium,  as  in  crowning  grace  before  it. 


NOT  A  COMMON  OR  GENERAL  ONE.  373 

both  these  classes  shall  rise  ;  but,  instead  of  saying  that  they 
are  all  to  rise  in  one  common  or  indiscriminate  resurrection, 
He  takes  pains  to  show  that  they  that  have  done  good  are  to 
come  forth  from  their  graves  for  a  life-resurrection,  and  they 
that  have  done  evil  for  a  judgment-resurrection.  There  are  two 
resurrections  then,  not  a  common  one.  The  very  passage  that 
men  cite  to  prove  a  general  resurrection,  teaches,  in  fact,  the 
reverse.  St.  John's  gospel  shows  their  distinctness  in  character ; 
his  Revelation  shows  their  distinctness  in  time. 

Persons  may  say,  "  the  hour  is  coming"  implies  that  all  are 
to  be  raised  much  about  the  same  time.  But  the  word  "hour" 
is  used  in  Scripture  (and  indeed  everywhere  else)  in  a  very  large 
sense.  It  might  comprehend  a  thousand  years  or  more ;  so 
that  if  one  resui'rection  took  place  at  the  beginning  of  the  mil- 
lennium and  the  other  at  the  end  of  it,  it  might  still  be  the  same 
"  hour."  "  The  hour  is  coming  and  now  is,  wiien  the  dead  shall 
hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  they  that  hear  shall  live." 
(John  V.  25.)  That  refers  to  what  has  been  going  on  ever 
since  Christ  was  upon  earth  up  to  this  present  moment.  "  The 
hour"  there  takes  in  nearly  two  thousand  years;  and  surely  it 
is  not  too  much  to  infer  that  "  the  hour"  in  verse  '28  might 
embrace,  if  necessary,  a  period  equally  long.  Scripture  decides 
it.  The  same  John  who  shows  us  the  rise  of  all  flesh  from  the 
grave,  divided  into  two  contrasted  resurrections  of  men  charac- 
terized by  opposite  moral  qualities,  shows  us  with  no  less  plainness 
and  certainty  the  interval  between  these  resurrections.  The 
chapter  that  we  are  now  examining  in  the  Revelation  is  the 
answer  to  this  question,  and  proves  that  there  will  be  an  interval 
of  at  least  a  thousand  years  between  the  two.  But  this  is  not  all. 
There  is  a  deep  fundamental  difference  in  the  nature  of  the  resur- 
rections, as  well  as  a  distinction  of  time.  In  the  Gospel  of  John, 
the  first  is  said  to  be  a  resurrection  of  life,  the  second  is  one  of 
judgment.  In  the  former  are  the  righteous  ;  all  who  are  judged 
in  the  latter,  are  the  evil.  Our  translators  call  it  the  resurrection 
of  "  damnation,"  though  the  real  meaning  of  the  word  is  "judg- 
ment." It  is  the  same  word  that  is  used  in  a  verse  or  two  before. 
(Ver.  21,27.)  "The  Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  com- 
mitted all  judgment  unto  the  Son and  hath  given  him 

authority  to  execute  judgment  also,  because  he  is  the  Son  of  man." 
And  it  is  necessary  to  bear  this  in  mind,  that  Christ,  while  as  the 
Son  of  God  He  gives  life,  as  Son  of  man  comes  to  execute  judg- 
ment in  His  khigdom.  He  gives  life  to  the  believer,  and  executes 
judgment  on  tiie  unbelievei'.  So  thei'e  are  two  resuriecfions 
answering  to  these  titles.     There  is  the  resurrection  of  life  or  the 


374  1HE    BOOKS    OPENED, 

resurrection  of  the  believer.  It  is  the  application  to  his  body  of 
that  power  of  life  which  he  already  has  in  his  soul.  But  those 
who  have  refused  Christ,  what  will  they  have  ?  The  resurrec- 
tion of  judgment.  They  have  despised  Christ  now  ;  they  cannot 
escape  the  resurrection  of  judgment  then. 

Looking  then  at  Rev.  xx.,  is  not  this  what  we  have  here  ? 
First^  there  was  the  resurrection  of  life,  of  "  those  that  have  done 
good."  "  Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resur- 
rection." What  was  said  about  them  ?  They  lived  and  reigned 
with  Christ  a  thousand  years.  It  is  a  life-resurrection.  But 
look  at  the  others,  the  wicked,  "  they  that  have  done  evil." 
"  The  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  again  till  the  thousand  years 
were  finished."  What  have  you  here  ?  "  The  rest  of  the  dead 
lived  not  again  till,''  &c.  So  they  do  rise.  "  I  saw  the  dead, 
small  and  great,  stand  before  the  throne."  None  but  dead  are 
there — and  how  differently  do  they  appear  before  the  throne ! 
"  And  the  books  were  opened  :  and  another  book  was  opened, 
which  is  the  book  of  life:  and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those 
things  which  were  written  in  the  books,  according  to  their 
works."  (Ver.  12.)  Now  I  fully  believe  that  the  saints  of  God 
will  have  all  their  woi'ks  examined  :  what  they  have  done  in  the 
body  will  come  out.  We  shall  have  ])raise  or  censure  according  to 
our  faithfulness  or  unfaithfulness,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  takes  His 
place  on  the  judgment-seat,  and  we  stand  before  Him  and  are 
manifested  there.  It  is  St.  Paul  that  tells  us  this.  (Rom.  xiv. ;  2 
Cor.  V.)  But  the  object  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  St.  John,  is  to 
contrast  the  two  resurrections.  Therefore  not  a  word  is  said,  in 
the  account  of  the  first  resurrection,  about  our  appearing  before 
Him,  that  each  may  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body,  whether 
good  or  bad  ;  but  we  are  represented  as  judging  others.  Such 
is  the  way  in  which  the  life-resuri-ection  is  described.  "  I  saw 
thrones  and  they  sat  upon  them,  and  judgment  was  given  unto 
them."  They  do,  of  course,  give  an  account  of  themselves  to 
the  Lord,  and  receive  accordingly  ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  has  His 
own  wise  reasons  for  omitting  all  allusion  to  it  here.  It  is  a 
resurrection  of  life  in  the  Gospel,  and  of  life  in  the  Revelation. 
But  when  you  come  to  the  rest  of  the  dead  that  have  not  done 
good,  when  they  are  raised  and  stand  before  the  throne,  it  is  the 
very  opposite  of  a  life-resurrection.  They  have  only  done  evil, 
and  when  the  book  of  life  is  opened,  no  name  is  to  be  found 
there;  for  this  is  not  a  resurrection  of  life,  but  of  judgment. 
They  are  to  be  judged  according  to  their  works,  written  in 
these  other  books,  and  their  works  ai"e  calling  aloud  for  judg- 
ment.    Their  works  are  only  and  always  evil  ;  they  are  judged 


AND    THE    BOOK    OF    LIFE.  375 

according  to  them,  and  what  is  the  result  ?  There  might  be  a 
difference  among  them  in  some  respects  :  there  were  great  and 
small,  but  they  were  all  alike  in  this — they  were  not  found 
written  in  the  book  of  life  ;  and  whosoever  was  not  found  writ- 
ten there,  "  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire."  Not  a  word  is  said 
about  any  that  were  written  there.  This  is  a  resurrection  of  those 
who  have  no  part  in  that  book,  and  they  are  cast  into  the  lake 
of  fire.  It  is,  as  if  God  were  saying.  The  books  of  their 
works  call  for  judgment:  is  there  nothing  to  be  said  in  defence 
of  these  wretched  men  ?  The  book  of  life  accordingly  is  opened, 
but  they  are  not  found  there  :  the  last  hope  is  gone,  and  "  if  any 
one  was  not  found  written  in  the  book  of  life,  he  was  cast  into 
the  lake  of  fire."  (Ver.  15.)  It  is  the  resurrection  of  judgment; 
there  is  no  life,  no  mercy  there.  Those  that  had  had  part  in  the  life- 
resurrection  had  been  raised  long  befoi'e,  and  never  come  into 
judgment  at  all  ;  for  it  is  said  (John  v.  24),  "  He  that  hear- 
eth  my  word  and  belie veth  on  him  that  sent  me,  hath  everlasting- 
life,  and  shall  not  come  mio  judgment  (the  same  word  as  in  verses 
22,  27,  29),  but  is  passed  from  death  unto  life." 

Nothing  then  can  be  more  certain  than  that  this  is  a  separate 
resurrection,  distinct  in  character,  and  long  severed  in  time. 
The  resurrection  of  life  had  taken  place  long  ago,  and  now  comes 
the  resurrection  of  judgment.  "  And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead 
which  were  in  it."  The  depths  which  man  could  but  imper- 
fectly explore,  cannot  hide  for  a  moment  longer.  Nay,  the 
unseen  world,  over  which  he  has  no  control,  is  also  forced  to 
give  up  its  miserable  inmates.  "  Death  and  Hades  delivered  up 
the  dead  that  were  in  them,  and  they  were  judged  each  accord- 
ing to  their  works."  (Ver  13.)  And  their  works  condemn  them. 
Not  a  word  is  said  about  them  in  the  book  of  life,  and  they  are 
cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  This  is  the  second  death,  the  lake  of 
fire.  They  are  raised  from  their  first  death  to  be  cast  for  ever 
into  that  place  of  torment,  from  whence  there  is  no  escape. 

The  other  scripture,  of  most  weight,  often  used  for  tiie  pur- 
pose of  proving  a  general  resurrection,  is  the  one  in  DanieL 
What  do  we  find  there  ?  It  is  written  in  chap.  xii.  1  :  "  And  at 
that  time  shall  Michael  stand  up,  the  great  prince  which  standeth 
for  the  children  of  thy  people  (meaning  Daniel's  people,  the 
Jews) ;  and  there  shall  be  a  time  of  trouble,  such  as  never  was 
since  there  was  a  nation,  even  to  that  same  time."  Evidently, 
this  is  not  the  millennium.  "  And  at  that  time  thy  people  shall 
be  delivered,  every  one  that  shall  be  found  written  in  the  book." 
That  is  not  the  time  when  the  Church  is  delivered  ;  for  we  have 
been  delivered   long  ago  through  the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus 


376  FIGURE    OF    RESURRECTION    IN    DANIEL. 

Christ,  But  since  the  cross  of  Christ,  the  Jewish  people  have 
only  been  in  misery :  that  cross  was  their  guilt.  They  cried, 
"  His  blood  be  on  us  and  on  our  children."  The  time  of  their 
greatest  suffering  is  to  be  immediately  before  the  hour  of  their 
deliverance.  (Jer.  xxx.  7.)  Our  deliverance,  as  theirs,  is 
through  the  sufferings  of  another  ;  but  what  we  suffer  is  after 
our  deliverance.  For  the  Jews  it  is  a  different  thing.  They 
have  got  a  tremendous  tribulation  to  go  through  yet,  and  it  is  to 
be  the  worst  they  have  ever  had.  But  immediately  after  this 
their  final  deliverance  comes  — "  At  that  time  thy  people 
shall  be  delivered,"  &c.  They  will  not  only  be  delivered  as  a 
people,  but  they  will  be  saved  and  converted  individually,  ac- 
cording to  God's  purpose — "  every  one  that  shall  be  found 
written  in  the  book."  "  And  many  of  them  that  sleep  in  the 
dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake,  some  to  everlasting  life,  and  some 
to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt."  This  is  the  verse  that  has 
been  commonly  applied  to  the  resurrection  ;  but  I  am  per- 
suaded that  it  does  not  apply  to  the  rising  again  of  the  body. 
It  is  a  figure  which  is  taken  from  it  indeed,  and  which  supposes 
that  great  truth  to  be  known.  But  it  is  the  same  kind  of 
expression,  and  applied  to  a  similar  subject  and  end,  that  I  have 
referred  to,  in  Isa.  xxvi.  19,  where  Israel  was  described  as  "  my 
dead  body,"  and  was  called  on,  as  one  dwelling  in  the  dust,  to 
awake  and  sing.  So  here  it  is  said,  "  Many  of  them  that  sleep 
in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake,  some  to  everlasting  life,  and 
some  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt."  This  does  not  suit 
any  scheme  of  interpretation,  if  it  be  applied  to  a  literal  bodily 
resurrection  of  good  and  bad  at  the  same  moment.  You 
will  observe  that  this  is  before  the  millennium.  It  is  evidently 
before  the  time  of  deliverance  and  blessing.  There  is  a  time  of 
trouble,  immediately  after  which  Daniel's  people  are  delivered, 
and  those  who  might  have  been  forgotten,  (sleeping,  as  it  were, 
among  the  Gentiles,)  reappear,  but  not  all  for  the  same  end — 
some  to  shame,  and  some  to  everlasting  life.  (Compare,  also,  Isa. 
Ixvi.  20,  24.)  This  does  not  answer  the  purpose  of  those  who 
quote  the  text.  For  their  idea  is,  that  there  is  the  millennium 
first,  and  then  the  resurrection  of  good  and  bad.  This  resurrec- 
tion, literal  or  figurative,  is  before  the  millennium,  and  after  it  is 
a  time  of  greater  trouble  than  Israel  has  ever  known.  My  con- 
viction, therefore,  is  that  it  refers  to  the  Jews.  First,  in  ver.  1, 
those  who  are  to  be  delivered  are  spoken  of  in  connexion  with 
the  land  of  Palestine.  Then,  it  is  shown  that  many  of  them  who 
have  been  sleeping  in  the  dust  of  the  earth,  will  come  out  of 
their   degradation,    will   awake,   some    to   everlasting  life,    (fee. 


ALL    MANIFESTED  ;    UNBELIEVERS   JUDGED.  377 

Some  of  those  Jews,  that  are  to  come  forward  out  of  their 
hiding-places  all  over  the  earth,  would  prove  to  be  rebels,  and  be 
treated  accordingly  ;  while  others  will  learn  that  the  Lord  has 
wrought  with  them  fur  His  name's  sake.  We  may  compare 
this  with  Ezekiel  xxxvii.,  where  the  dry  bones  set  forth  the 
house  of  Israel.  No  doubt  can  be  left  on  any  serious  mind  as 
to  that  passage  ;  for  the  Lord  Himself  has  interpreted  it  as  the 
figure  of  the  future  resurrection  of  Israel.  "  Behold,  O  my  peo- 
ple, I  will  open  your  graves,  and  cause  you  to  come  up  out  of 
your  graves."  And,  if  in  Daniel  it  is  said  that  some  are  to  have 
everlasting  life,  Ezekiel  says  that  the  Lord  will  put  His  Spirit 
in  them.  It  is  a  spiritual  as  well  as  a  national  restoration.  So 
the  passage  in  Daniel  refers  to  a  figurative  resurrection  of  Israel, 
when  some  will  awake  out  of  their  moral  death. 

We  may  now  come  back  to  Rev.  xx.  with  the  increased  con- 
viction that  the  doctrine  of  one  general  resurrection  is  a  total 
mistake,  and  that  God's  word  teaches  a  resurrection  of  the  just, 
and  another  of  the  unjust.  That  which  is  spoken  of  at  the  close 
of  our  chapter,  is  solely  of  the  wicked  dead  ;  it  is  a  resurrection 
of  judgment.  I  appeal  to  you,  whether  you  could  rest  the 
salvation  of  your  souls  upon  your  works?  I  admit  that  our 
works  will  be  examined,  and  that  we  shall  receive  accordingly  ; 
but  this  is  not  the  same  thing  as  being  judged  according  to  our 
works.  In  the  one  case  the  person  is  accepted,  but  his  works 
are  reviewed  for  praise  or  blame  ;  in  the  other,  the  person  is 
judged  according  to  works  that  are  not  mingled  but  altogether 
bad.  For  a  natural,  unconverted  man  has  no  life  towards  God  ; 
therefore  he  can  have  nothing  but  evil  works  to  be  judged  for. 
Not  so  with  the  believer.  No  doubt  there  are  works  sometimes 
mingled,  sometimes  even  worse  in  him  ;  but  he  has  a  standing- 
bey  ond  all  that,  painful  as  it  is.  He  has  the  new  nature  that 
God  has  given  and  will  not  take  away.  His  works  will  be 
examined,  and  they  have  a  most  important  bearing  upon  the 
position  that  the  Lord  will  assign  him  in  His  kingdom.  To  be 
saved  or  lost  is  never  a  question  of  reward,  but  of  the  grace  and 
power  of  Christ.  When  you  talk  of  reward,  it  is  a  debt  due  for 
work  done  ;  but  when  of  salvation,  it  is  never  spoken  of  in 
Scripture  as  a  reward  of  works.  It  is  the  work  of  Christ — the 
fruit  of  another's  work  and  suffering,  which  God  has  given  to  us 
in  sovereign  love.  And  when  we  stand  before  Christ,  it  will 
not  be  to  take  our  trial  for  condemnation  or  acquittal :  this 
would  be  to  deny  our  justification  and  the  value  of  His  own 
work.  All  our  ways  will  be  manifested  in  God's  light,  and  the 
Lord  will  bring  us  triumphantly  through  ;   but  He  will  not  pass 


378  PRESENT   VALUE    OF    SELF-JUDGMENT. 

over  a  single  thing  that  has  been  done  against  Him,  And  as  a 
Christian  now  can,  before  God,  examine  his  ways,  pass  judgment 
upon  them,  and  thank  God  for  His  faithful  disciphne,  so  it  will 
be  in  a  still  brighter  and  more  blessed  and  perfect  way  before  the 
judgment-seat  of  Christ.  It  will  then  be  no  question  of  being 
saved  only,  but  of  vindicating  the  Lord's  glory  and  goodness. 
This  is  not  a  thing  that  we  ought  to  dread  :  it  is  what  we  shall 
have  to  be  thankful  for  throug-h  all  eternity.  For  self-judgment 
even  now  is  the  best  thing,  next  to  the  joy  of  worshipping 
God  and  serving  Him  faithfully  through  grace.  We  shall  not 
have  a  word  to  say  in  defence  of  ourselves,  but  the  Lord  will 
have  much  to  say  for  us.  He  will  bring  out  all  that  we  have 
done,  and  we  shall  receive  according  to  it.  For  evil  things  we 
shall  suffer  loss,  for  good  we  shall  get  reward.  But  here  what 
a  difference  !  The  dead  that  stand  before  the  throne  ;  they  have 
no  life — nothing  but  dead  woi-ks.  They  had  not  Christ,  and 
what  do  their  works  deserve  ?  They  are  cast  into  the  lake  of 
fire.  Death  and  Hades  are  now  no  longer  needed ;  they  are 
personified  as  the  enemies  of  God  and  man,  and  as  such  are,  in 
the  vision,  (ver.  14,)  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  also.* 

*  Some  will  be  startled  to  hear  that  Mr.  E.  (H.  A.,  Vol.  iv.,  pp.  188-195)  ap- 
plies Matt.  XXV.  3,  &c.,  to  the  rapture  of  the  living  saiutsi,  the  dead  having  beea 
immediately  before  raised  and  caught  up.  Then  follows,  as  he  conceives,  the 
catastrophe  of  an  unprecedented  disruption  of  the  earth's  crust,  as  far  as  the 
Koman  world  is  concerned,  the  risen  saints  being  perhaps  (!)  the  attendants  of  the 
Lord's  coming  and  judgment.  In  a  note  to  page  291,  it  is  said  that  though  there 
may  be  a  primary  reference  to  the  judgmeut  of  the  living  at  Christ's  coming,  yet 
secondarily  a  more  extensive  judgment  of  the  dead  too  may  be  included.  The 
truth  is,  that  all  is  confusion.  In  fact,  the  sheep  are  distinguished  from  the  King's 
brethren,  as  well  as  contrasted  with  the  goats.  Not  a  word  implies  resurrection 
or  rapture  to  heaven.  It  is  a  glorious  scene  on  earth,  subsequent  to  Christ's 
appearing,  and  therefore  to  the  removal  of  the  heavenly  saints,  aud  a  judicial 
dealing  not  with  the  dead,  but  the  living  ;  and  not  with  all  the  living,  but  aU  the 
nations  or  Gentiles,  who  are  disposed  of  on  the  ground  of  their  behaviour  to  the 
King,  as  represented  by  His  brethren  who  liad  announced  the  kingdom  (cf.  chap, 
xxiv.  14)  before  the  end  came.  There  is  not  a  trace  of  resemblance  to  the  scene 
of  the  great  white  throne,  nor  any  judgment  of  the  dead.  There  is  no  issue 
beyond  the  solemn  and  final  one,  for  those  concerned,  of  honouring  or  despising 
the  King  in  His  messengers.  Besides,  the  insuperable  difficulty  for  Mr.  E.  and 
for  most  expositors,  is  the  place  which  the  revelation  of  the  first  resurrection 
occupies  :  viz.,  after  the  destruction  of  the  Beast.  The  non-recognition  of  a  pre- 
vious rapture  of  saints,  to  whom  the  Apocalyptic  sufferers  are  added  just  before 
the  millennium,  is  the  occasion  of  these  errors,  the  denial  of  the  true  and  proper 
character  of  the  Church  being  probably  the  grand  source  of  all. 


THE    RIGHT    DIVISION    OF    THE    SUBJECT.  379 


CHAPTER    XXI. 

It  would  have  been  a  happier  division  of  these  chapters,  if 
chapter  xxi.  1-8  had  made  a  part  of  the  same  series  of  events 
which  was  given  in  chap,  xx.,  following  it  in  unbroken  succes- 
sion. There  is  a  very  decided  termination  of  the  chain,  at  the 
close  of  the  8th  verse  of  this  chapter.  Thence  to  the  end,  and 
taking  in  the  first  five  verses  of  chap,  xxii.,  we  have  another 
connected  portion.  The  first  eight  verses  refer  to  a  totally 
different  time  from  what  follows.  From  chap.  xxi.  9,  you  have 
to  go  back  again  to  the  millennium  ;  whereas  the  previous 
verses  of  the  chapter  are  the  fullest  account  that  the  word  of 
God  furnishes  of  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth  in  the  proper 
sense  of  the  words.  This  is  subsequent  to  the  thousand  years' 
reign,  to  the  great  white  throne,  and  of  course  to  the  complete 
dissolution  of  the  heavens  and  earth  that  now  are,  which  were 
found  when  that  throne  was  set  up.  Then,  when  this  account 
of  the  eternal  state  is  closed,  the  Spirit  of  God  supplies  a  very 
important  appendix,  if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expression,  on  the 
state  of  things  during  the  millennium,  which  was  not  given 
when  that  epoch  was  noticed  in  the  historical  sequence  of  lie  v. 
xix.,  XX.,  xxi.  1-8. 

But,  perhaps,  it  may  be  asked  by  some  objectors.  What 
is  the  authority  for  dividing  the  chapters  thus  ?  Why  not 
take  the  whole  of  chap,  xxi.,  (as  it  was  probably  understood  by 
those  who  made  the  division,)  as  one  and  the  same  time  ?  Why 
not  suppose  that  the  account  of  the  New  Jerusalem  in  verse  10 
refers  to  the  same  date  as  the  mention  of  it  in  verse  2  ?  The 
answer  is  simple.  In  the  eternal  state  God  has  to  do  with  men. 
All  time-distinctions  are  at  an  end.  There  is  no  such  thing  then 
as  kings  and  nations.  Accordingly,  this  we  do  find  in  the  first 
eight  verses.  Take,  for  example,  the  third  verse  :  "  And  I 
heard  a  loud  voice  out  of  heaven  [or  the  throne],  saying,  Behold 
the  tabernacle  of  God  [is]  with  men,  and  he  shall  dwell  with 
them,  and  they  shall  be  his  people,  and  God  himself  shall  be 
with  them,  their  God."  Whereas,  if  we  look  at  the  later  part 
of  the  chapter,  we  have  again  to  do  with  nations  and  earthly 
kings.  "  And  the  nations  shall  walk  by  means  of  its  light ;  and 
the  kings  of  the  earth  do  bring  their  glory,"  &c.     When  eternity 


380  RETROSPECT 

begins,  God  has  done  dealing  with  things  according  to  the  order 
of  the  world  —  kings,  and  nations,  and  the  like  provisions  of  a 
temporal  nature.  All  this  implies  government,  as  government 
supposes  that  there  is  evil  which  requires  suppression.  Conse- 
quently, in  the  latter  part  of  our  chapter,  it  is  not  the  eternal 
condition  which  we  have,  but  a  previous  state,  the  early  verses 
(1-5)  of  chap.  xxii.  being  the  continuation  of  this  description. 
There  a  tree  is  described,  '^  and  the  leaves  of  the  tree  [are]  for 
healing  of  the  nations."  That  is,  at  the  time  of  which  the 
verse  speaks,  not  only  are  there  nations,  but  they  are  not  re- 
moved from  the  need  of  healing,  and  God  supplies  what  they 
want.  This  must  convince  any  unprejudiced  mind  that  the 
Spirit  of  God,  in  chap,  xxii.,  does  not  refer  to  what  follows  the 
last  judgment,  when  all  that  is  connected  with  the  world  is 
entirely  closed,  but  that  He  goes  back  to  a  previous  state  when 
God  is  still  governing.  It  will  be  observed  also,  that  in  the 
portion  relative  to  the  millennium  (i.e.  from  ver.  9  of  chap,  xxi.) 
we  have  dispensational  names,  such  as  the  Lord  God  Almighty 
and  the  Lamb  ;  not  so  in  chap.  xxi.  1-8,  which  discloses  eternity, 
where  God  shall  be  all  in  all. 

But  it  may  help  souls  still  further  to  remark,  that  it  is  the 
manner  of  God,  in  this  book,  to  take  a  retrospect.  I  say  this 
to  show  that  I  am  not  at  all  arguing  for  something  without 
precedent,  in  the  order  in  which  I  conceive  these  events  are 
arranged.  Take,  for  instance,  chap.  xiv.  There  we  had  seen 
a  regular  seven-fold  series  of  events,  in  the  course  of  which  the 
fall  of  Babylon  occupies  the  third  place.  After  that  comes  the 
judgment  on  the  worshippers  of  the  Beast ;  next,  the  Holy 
Ghost  pronounces  the  blessedness  of  those  that  die  in  the  Lord  ; 
then,  the  Lord's  coming  in  judgment,  presented  in  two  ways,  as 
reaping  the  harvest,  and  as  trampling  the  winepress  :  the  har- 
vest, a  judgment  of  discrimination,  and  the  vintage  one  of  pure 
vengeance.  Babylon  there  has  got  its  place  assigned  very 
clearly.  But  long  after  this,  in  the  prophecy,  when  the  Spirit 
of  God  has  given  us  the  seven  vials  of  God's  wrath,  we  have 
Babylon  again.  The  fall  of  Babylon  is  under  the  seventh  vial. 
And  this  is  important :  for  the  Holy  Ghost  then  goes  back  to 
describe  the  character  and  conduct  of  Babylon,  that  required 
such  a  fearful  visitation  from  the  hand  of  God.  In  this  case 
the  Holy  Ghost  has  carried  us  down  in  chap,  xiv,  to  events  sub- 
sequent to  Babylon's  fall,  and  even  to  the  Lord's  coming  in 
judgment,  and  then  He  returns  to  show  us  details  about  Babylon 
and  her  connexion  with  the  Beast,  and  the  kings  of  the  earth,  &c. 

Now  it  appears  to  me  that  this  exactly  answers  to  the  order  of 


HERE,    AS    ELSEWHERE,  381 

the  events  in  chap.  xxi.  There  is  a  striking  analogy  in  the  way 
in  which  Babylon  and  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  are  introduced, 
and  though,  of  course,  there  is  the  strongest  and  most  marked 
contrast  between  the  two  things  themselves,  still  there  is  enough 
to  make  it  manifest  that  the  Holy  Ghost  had  them  together  in 
His  mind,  as  it  seems  to  me.  Thus,  in  Rev,  xvii.  1,  it  is  said, 
"  there  came  one  of  the  seven  angels  that  had  the  seven  vials 
and  talked  with  me,  saying.  Come  hither,  I  will  show  thee  the 
judgment  of  the  great  harlot  that  sits  by  the  many  waters." 
Such  is  the  announcement,  Avhere  the  vision  goes  back  to  des- 
cribe Babylon  and  her  doom.  Just  so  are  we  introduced  to  the 
counterpart  of  this  vision  in  chap,  xxi,,  which  looks  back  at  the 
bride,  the  Lamb's  wife  :  "  And  there  came  one  of  the  seven 
angels  that  had  the  seven  vials  full  of  the  seven  last  plagues, 
and  talked  with  me,  saying.  Come  hither,  I  will  show  thee  the 
bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,"  As  Babylon  had  had  its  place  defined 
in  the  historic  line  of  events,  and  then,  that  line  being  completed, 
the  Holy  Ghost  stopped  to  disclose,  retrospectively  and  at  full, 
those  moral  ways  which  had  forced  God,  so  to  speak,  to  judge 
her;  so  exactly  the  Lamb's  wife,  the  New  Jerusalem,  had  been 
seen  in  both  capacities,  in  the  final  sketch  of  the  history  up  to 
the  very  end.  And  now  the  Holy  Ghost  goes  back  to  describe 
the  same  New  Jerusalem,  with  reference  to  the  millennial  reign, 
and  the  kings  and  nations  then  to  be  on  earth.  We  have  seen 
the  bi"ide,  the  Landi's  wife,  that  had  made  herself  ready,  in  chap, 
xix.  7.  We  have  had,  in  chap,  xxi,  2,  the  New  Jerusalem 
spoken  of  as  coming  down  from  God  out  of  heaven,  still  fresh  in 
bridal  beauty,  after  more  than  a  thousand  years  have  passed 
away.  But  now,  in  xxi.  9,  the  very  important  fact  comes  out, 
that  the  bride,    the  Lamb's   wife,   is  the  holy  city  Jerusalem, 

"  There  came  unto  me  one  of  the  seven  angels and  talked 

with  me,  saying.  Come  hither,  I  will  shew  thee  the  bride,  the 
Lamb's  wife.  And  he  carried  me  away  in  the  Spirit  to  a  moun- 
tain great  and  high,  and  showed  me  [not  that  great  city,  but]  the 
holy  city  Jerusalem,  descending  out  of  heaven  from  God."  John 
was  called  to  see  the  bride,  and  looking,  he  saw  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem.  Thus,  if  we  had  the  bride  in  relation  to  the  Lamb, 
in  chap,  xix.,  and  as  the  holy  city,  New  Jerusalem,  in  relation 
to  the  eternal  state,  verse  9  and  the  following  verses  of  this 
chapter  show  us  that,  during  the  interval  between  the  marriage 
of  the  Lamb,  and  the  new  heaven  and  earth  in  the  eternal  state, 
she  has  a  very  blessed  place  in  the  eyes  of  God  and  man.  It  is 
the  Church's  millennial  display. 

These  few  prefatory  remarks  may  clear  the  way,  and  prove 


382  SENSES    OF    A    NEW    HEAVEN    AND    EARTH 

that  I  am  not  assuming  more  than  can  be  demonstrated  in  taking 
the  first  eight  verses  as  the  proper  sequel  of  the  series  of  events 
found  in  chaps,  xix.  xx.,  and  the  rest  of  this  chapter  from  verse 
9,  as  a  retrogressive  description  of  the  millennial  state.  There 
are,  evidently,  the  strongest  reasons  for  it,  and  indeed,  any  other 
interpretation,  is,  I  conceive,  out  of  the  question,  if  the  context 
be  duly  weighed.  It  is  impossible  for  an  unbiassed  and  instructed 
person,  who  carefully  considers  the  circumstances  here  described, 
to  suppose  that  what  follows  the  9th  verse  can  synchronize  with 
the  section  which  immediately  precedes.  They  are,*  as  already 
remarked,  two  irreconcileable  states  of  things.* 

What  is  it  that  the  Holy  Ghost  shows  the  Apostle,  after  the 
old  heaven  and  earth  had  disappeared  and  the  last  judgment? 
"And  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  :  for  the  first  heaven 
and  the  first  earth  were  passed  away  ;  and  the  sea  was  no  more." 
These  words  are  not  to  be  taken  in  a  mere  preparatory  and 
moral  sense.  The  prophet  Isaiah  had  spoken  in  that  way.  In 
Isa.  Ixv.  a  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth  were  announced :  but 
how  differently  !  There  the  language  must  be  taken  in  a  very 
qualified  sense  indeed.  "  For,  behold,  (ver.  17,)  I  create  new 
heavens  and  a  new  earth  ;  and  the  former  shall  not  be  remem- 
bered nor  come  into  mind.  But  be  ye  glad  and  rejoice  for  ever 
in  that  which  I  create :  for,  behold,  I  create  Jerusalem  a  rejoic- 
ing, and  her  people  a  joy.  And  I  will  rejoice  in  Jerusalem,  and 
joy  in  my  people ;  and  the  voice  of  weeping  shall  be  no  more 
heard  in  her,  nor  the  voice  of  crying.  There  shall  be  no  more 
thence  an  infant  of  days,  nor  an  old  man  that  hath  not  filled  his 
days :  for  the  child  shall  die  an  hundred  years  old ;  but  the 
sinner,  being  an  hundred  years  old,  shall  be  accursed."  Clearly 
this  is  a  very  bright  change,  but  it  is  an  earthly  condition.  There 
are  infants  and  old  men  here,  and  though  the  description  is 
purposely  contrasted  with  anything  the  world  has  yet  seen,  still 
it  is  a  time-state  of  blessedness  and  not  eternity.";^ The  Apostle 
John  shows  us,  in  the  Revelation,  the  new  heaven  and  the  new 
earth,  not  in  a  relative  sense  but  in  the  most  absolute.     In  the 

*  Had  Mr.  Elliott  sufficiently  weighed  these  considerations,  I  cannot  think  that 
he  would  have  left  the  readers  of  the  Horac  Apoc.  (Vol.  iv.,  pp.  201-208)  in  such 
perplexity  as  to  the  chronological  place  of  these  visions  of  the  New  Jerusalem. 
The  reason  why  "  such  strong  arguments,"  as  he  confesses,  "  press  antagonisti- 
cally" for  the  millennial  and  the  post-millennial  referewce,  is,  because  each  side 
has  a  measure  of  truth  left  out  of  the  account  by  the  other.  On  the  one  hand,  it 
is  not  only  the  cursory  but  the  most  careful  reader,  who  is  compelled  to  allow 
that  chap.  xxi.  1-8,  fairly  interpreted,  is  post-millennial.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
internal  evidence  from  verse  9  is  equally  conclusive  that,  with  this  new  vision  of 
the  Seer,  we  begin  a  retrospective  glance  at  the  same  city  during  the  millennium, 
though  of  course  its  own  intrinsic  blessedness  and  glory  will  abide  forever. 


IN    THE    OLD    AND    THE    NEW    TESTAMENTS.  383 

Old  Testament  they  are  limited,  because  connected  with  Israel 
upon  the  earth.  So  it  is  said  of  the  Lord,  that  "  He  shall  reign 
over  the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever,  and  of  His  kingdom  there  shall 
be  no  end."  This  is  an  Old  Testament  hope,  though  said  in  the 
New,  and  it  means,  of  course,  that  He  shall  reign  over  the  house 
of  Jacob  as  long  as  it  exists  as  such  upon  the  earth.  When  the 
earth  disappears  and  Israel  is  no  longer  seen  as  a  nation,  they 
will  be  blessed,  no  doubt,  in  another  and  better  way  ;  but  there 
will  be  no  reign  of  Christ  over  them  as  an  earthly  people  here 
below  ;  so  that  this  kingdom,  while  it  has  no  end  as  long;  as  the 
earth  subsists,  must  necessarily  be  limited  by  the  earth's  conti- 
nuance. It  is  thus  that  I  understand  the  new  heavens  and  the 
new  earth  spoken  of  in  Isaiah.  The  New  Testament  uses  the 
phrase  fully  and  absolutely,  as  an  unending  state ;  but  in  the 
Old  Testament  it  is  tied  down  to  the  earthly  relations  of  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  was  then  speaking.  What  makes  it  still  clearer 
is,  that  the  next  verse  (Isa.  Ixv.  21)  goes  on  to  say,  "And  they 
shall  build  houses  and  inhabit  them  ;  and  they  shall  plant  vine- 
yards and  eat  the  fruit  of  them.      They  shall   not   build  and 

another  inhabit mine  elect  shall   long  enjoy  the  work  of 

their  hands.  They  shall  not  labour  in  vain,  nor  bring  forth  for 
trouble ;  for  they  are  the  seed  of  the  blessed  of  the  Lord,"  &c. 
Now  all  this  is  most  cheering.     So  again,  "  The  wolf  and  the 

lamb  shall  feed  together They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy 

in  all  my  holy  mountain,  saith  the  Lord."  Glowing  and  beau- 
tiful as  this  picture  is  of  what  the  Lord  can  accomplish,  it  is  in 
connexion  with  the  earth  and  an  earthly  people.  It  is  not  the 
eternal  state,  but  an  exceedingly  glorious  day,  when  death  will 
be  the  exception  and  life  the  rule.  I  say  that  death  will  be  thus 
rare,  at  least  in  tlie  Holy  Land,  because  of  that  verse,  "  The 
child  shall  die  an  hundred  years  old  ;  but  the  sinner,  being  an 
hundred  years  old,  shall  be  accursed."  The  meaning  is,  that  if 
a  person  dies  at  a  hundred  years  old,  he  will  still  be  compara- 
tively a  child  ;  and  that  even  when  death  occurs  at  that  age,  it  is 
only  as  the  result  of  an  express  curse  of  God.  Thus  will  it  be 
during  the  millennium.  And  it  answers  a  question  often  asked  : 
What  will  become  of  all  the  righteous  people  during  that  won- 
derful reign  ?  If  the  first  resurrection  is  then  past,  and  in  the 
second  resurrection  none  but  the  wicked  dead  are  raised,  what 
can  be  the  destiny  of  the  righteous  who  live  during  the  millen- 
nium? The  truth  is,  there  is  no  Scripture-proof  that  such  die 
during  the  thousand  years.  What  is  said  supposes  the  contrary. 
Therefore,  if  they  die  not  during  the  millennium,  there  are  no 
righteous  to  be  raised  at  the  end  of  it.     The  resurrection  at  the 


384  RELATIVE    FIRST,    THEN    ABSOLUTE. 

end  remains,  consequently,  for  the  wicked  dead  solely.  The 
righteous  will  be  raised  before  the  millennium,  the  wicked  after 
it.  The  just  who  live  during  the  reign  of  Christ  are  not  called  to 
die  at  all,  as  far  as  Scripture  informs  us.  We  may  be  sure  that 
these  millennial  saints  will  be  changed  into  the  likeness  of  Christ. 
They  will  be  transplanted  into  the  new  heavens  and  earth.  We 
are  not  called  upon  to  conjecture  how  that  will  be.  It  is  suffi- 
cient for  us  to  know  that,  though  they  are  not  described  as  dying 
during  the  millennium,  and  therefore  do  not  need  to  be  raised, 
yet,  when  the  new  earth  appears,  men  are  found  upon  it,  quite 
distinct  from  the  New  Jerusalem,  i.e.,  the  symbol  of  the  glorified 
heavenly  saints.  I  believe  that  verse  3  warrants  this  statement. 
"  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  (or  the  city  that  descends)  is 
with  men^'  (fee. 

Another  proof  that  Isaiah  does  not  speak  of  the  eternal  state 
described  here  is  this.  When  the  new  heavens  and  earth  are 
seen  by  the  New  Testament  prophet,  the  old  are  said  to  be 
passed  away,  and  the  sea  no  longer  exists.  Not  so  in  Isaiah's 
prophecy.  There  it  was  rather  the  spirit  or  pledge  of  the  new 
that  came  into  the  old  ;  a  shadow  of  what  was  to  be,  and  not 
the  very  image  or  accomplishment  of  the  thing.  They  are  said 
prophetically  to  be  "new,"  because  of  the  great  joy  and  blessing 
that  God  will  give  to  His  people  Israel  and  their  land.  In  the 
Revelation  "there  was  no  more  sea."  In  the  Old  Testament, 
on  the  contrary,  "the  abundance  of  the  sea  (it  is  said)  shall  be 
converted  unto  thee  ....  Surely  the  isles  shall  wait  for  me, 
and  the  ships  of  Tarshisli  first."  (Is.  Ix.)  There  can  be  no  just 
doubt  that  this  chapter  speaks  of  the  same  time  as  chap.  Ixv. 
"  For  thy  light  is  come,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  risen 
upon  thee."  This  and  other  passages  prove  that  there  is  still  to 
be  sea  at  the  time  spoken  of  by  Isaiah  :  the  isles  and  ships 
necessarily  suppose  it ;  and  "  the  isles  afar  off"  are  introduced 
between  the  two  statements  of  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth 
in  Isa.  Ixv.  and  Ixvi. 

Here,  in  Revelation,  not  merely  the  present  dispensation,  but 
the  present  heaven  and  earth  have  passed  away,  and  give  place 
to  "  Jill  things  made  new."  Doubtless  the  new  heaven  and 
earth  will  be  made  out  of  the  old.  Just,  as  the  resurrection-body 
will  be  formed  out  of  the  present  body  of  humiliation  by  the 
power  of  God,  so  are  the  present  earth  and  heavens  destined  to 
a  kindred  transformation.  After  their  dissolution,  they  will 
I'eappear  in  the  form  of  the  new  heaven  and  earth.  "  No  more 
sea"  would  be  impossible  without  a  miracle,  as  long  as  life  in  its 
present  condition  has  to  be  maintained.     The  sea,  as  my  reader 


THE    TABERNACLE    OF    GOD.  385 

knows,  is  absolutely  necessary  to  animate  nature  as  it  is  ;  man 
could  not  exist  without  it.  And  so  with  regard  to  every  animal 
and  even  vegetable  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  not  to  speak  of 
the  vast  world  of  waters.  But  when  time  is  done  —  when  there 
is  no  longer  the  natural  life  that  is  sustained  by  God  —  w^hen  the 
millennium  shall  have  yielded  the  brightest  w"itness  to  this,  as 
well  as  to  every  other,  fruit  of  His  wisdom  and  goodness  and 
power — a  new  state  of  things  altogether  M'ill  ensue,  and  this 
perfect  and  everlasting.  There  will  be  new  heavens  and  a  new 
earth  ;  for  the  first  heavens  and  first  earth  are  passed  away,  and 
there  is  no  more  sea. 

But  that  is  not  all.  Into  this  dwelling-place  and  scene  of 
order  thnt  God  will  have  made,  so  remarkably  distinguished 
from  all  that  has  been  before,  and  even  from  that  which  accom- 
panies the  reign  of  His  own  Messiah,  John  sees  the  "  holy  city, 
New  Jerusalem,  coming  down  out  of  heaven  from  God,  prepared 
as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband.  And  I  heard  a  loud  voice 
out  of  heaven,  saying,  Behold  the  tabernacle  of  God  [is]  with 
men,  and  he  shall  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  His  people, 
and  God  Himself  shall  be  with  them,  their  God."  (Ver.  2,  3.) 
I  apprehend  that  the  New  Jerusalem  is  the  tabernacle  of  God. 
It  is  where  He  abides  in  a  very  special  sense.  And  this  taberna- 
cle of  God  descends  outof  heaven  to  be  with  men.  The  heavenly 
saints  compose  the  tabernacle  of  God,  while  those  that  are  found 
upon  the  new  earth  are  simply  described  as  "  men."  They  are 
no  longer  Jews  and  Gentiles  then,  as  in  the  millennium  ;  this  will 
have  all  passed  away,  with  "  the  first  or  former  things."  Every 
distinction  which  had  to  do  with  time  is  at  an  end.  When  a 
saint  is  risen  or  changed,  he  is  no  longer  a  Jew  or  a  Greek  :  he 
is  a  man,  though  bearing-  the  image  of  the  heavenly.  So  here 
God  has  to  do  wnth  men,  and  "  he  shall  dwell  with  them,  and 
they  shall  be  his  people  ;  and  God  himself  shall  be  with  them, 
their  God."  Instead  of  i-egarding  it  from  a  distance,  God  will 
not  merely  come  to  visit  the  scene  that  His  hand  has  made  for 
man,  as  of  old  in  the  garden  of  Eden  ;  but  He  will  dwell  eter- 
nally in  their  midst.  "  And  God  shall  wipe  away  every  tear 
from  their  eyes  ;  and  death  shall  be  no  more  ;  and  no  sorrow, 
nor  crying-,  nor  pain  shall  any  more  be  ;  for  the  first  things  are 
passed  away."  (Ver.  4.)  Unquestionably  the  figures  that  are 
used  to  describe  this  state  of  things  are  derived  from  Isaiah  — 
figures  which  the  Spirit  of  God  had  applied  primarily  to  millennial 
blessedness.  Isaiali  predicts  a  glorious  but  earthly  condition, 
which  God  will  make  true  of  the  just  during  the  millennium. 
Blessedness  will  be  the  rule,  sorrow  the  exception,  then.    Similar 

2(j 


386  THE    LINK    IN    ST.    PETER. 

terms,  but  with  striking  differences,  the  Holy  Ghost  now  takes 
up  and  applies  in  a  far  deeper  and  really  unqualified  sense. 
And  if  we  look  for  a  moment  at  2  Peter  iii.  we  shall  find, 

1  think,  a  link  between  Isaiah  and  Revelation.     It  is  written  in 

2  Pet.  iii.  10,  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the 
night,  in  the  which  the  heavens  shall  pass  away  with  a  great 
noise,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat.  The  earth, 
also,  and  the  works  that  are  therein,  shall  be  burnt  up  ...  . 
The  heavens  being  on  fire  shall  be  dissolved,  and  the  elements 
shall  melt  with  fervent  heat."  Now  it  appears  to  me  plain,  that 
this  is  what  takes  place  at  the  epoch  of  the  great  white  throne. 
For  the  moment  the  Lord  is  upon  that  throne,  the  earth  and 
heaven  flee  from  before  his  face,  and  there  is  found  no  place  for 
them.  It  is  a  part  of  "  the  day  of  tlie  Lord  ;"  which  day  com- 
prehends the  whole  time  from  the  Lord's  interference  to  judge 
the  world,  taking  His  great  power  and  reigning,  until  He  deli- 
vers up  the  kingdom,  after  the  millennium  and  the  subsequent 
judgments  are  over.*  "  Seeing  then  that  all  these  things  shall  be 
dissolved,  what  manner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy 
conversation  and  godliness ;  looking  for  and  hasting  unto  the 
coming  of  the  day  of  God,  wherein  the  heavens  being  on  fire 
shall  be  dissolved, and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat? 
Nev^ertheless  we,  according  to  his  promise,  look  for  new  heavens 
and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness." 

Now  this  is  the  state  of  things  described,  with  fuller  details 
of  time,  &c.,  by  the  Apostle  John.  The  new  heaven  and  earth 
are  what  we  find  in  the  beginning  of  chap.  xxi.  These  are  the 
new  heavens  and  earth,  "  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness." 
Righteousness  is  at  home  there,  because  there  God  dwells,  and 
this  can  only  be  because  righteousness  is  the  pervading  feature. 
It  is  plain  that  the  Holy  Spirit  in  St.  Peter  refers  to  the  passage 
of  Isaiah,  as  it  is  said,  "  We,  according  to  his  promise."  But 
still  He  gives  it  a  larger  and  deeper  meaning.  And  St.  John, 
the  last  of  the  New  Testament  writers,  takes  up  the  same 
thought,  and  puts  each  detail  in  its  place.  He  shows  us  that, 
while  the  millennium  may  be  a  partial  fulfilment  of  it,  the  full 
force  of  the  expression  will  not  come  out  till  the  millennium  is 

*  My  friend,  Dr.  Brown,  will  forgive  mo  for  thinking  that  the  argument,  even 
in  its  amended  shape,  (Second  Advent,  p.  289,)  which  he  "  believes  it  to  be  im- 
possible to  answer,"  is  a  complete  and  obvious  fallacy.  I  deny  that  the  day  of  the 
Lord,  as  St.  Peter  uses  it,  is  the  mere  epoch  of  (he  Lord's  coming,  but  rather  the 
entire  period  covered  by  His  reign  and  judgment.  Hence  the  millennium,  as  well 
as  the  final  dissolution  of  the  actual  heaven  and  earth,  may  and  do  occur  within 
the  compass  of  His  day,  while  His  comiug  may  precede  them  both.  His  mistake 
lies   in  idcMilifyiiig  tlie  day  with  the  fomhiij  of  the  Lord. 


GOD    ALL    IN    ALL.  387 

over,  and  then  when  all  is  according  to  divine  thought  and 
purpose,  God  will  rest,  and  men — not  Israel  only,  but  redeemed 
and  glorified  men — shall  be  His  people,  and  He  their  God. 

One  other  Scripture  I  must  refer  to,  in  order  to  connect  the 
various  passages  which  bear  upon  the  eternal  state.  In  1  Cor. 
XV.  23,  we  read  that  every  one  is  to  be  raised  in  his  own  order : 
"  Christ  the  first-fruits  ;  (who  is  raised  already  ;)  afterward  they 
that  are  Christ's,  at  His  coming.  Then  coraeth  the  end,  when 
He  dehvers  up  [which  is  the  true  reading]  the  kingdom  to  God, 
even  the  Father,  when  He  shall  have  put  down  all  rule  and  all 
authority  and  power."  That  is  the  task  of  Ciirist  during  the 
millennium  :  He  will  abolish  all  opposing  rule,  subjecting  to 
Himself  every  adversary  and  all  things  unto  the  glory  of  God 
the  Father,  for  this  is  the  ultimate  object  of  His  exaltation,  as 
we  see  from  Phil.  ii.  "  For  he  must  reign,  till  he  hath  put  all 
enemies  under  his  feet.  The  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed 
is  death."  This  exactly  harmonizes  with  Rev.  xx.,  xxi.,  where 
we  find,  first,  the  reign  of  Christ,  then  death  destroyed,  and  after 
that  the  new  heaven  and  earth,  which  is  the  time  when  Christ  is 
said  in  1  Cor.  xv.  24  to  deliver  up  the  kingdom  to  God,  even 
the  Father.  INot  that  Christ  will  cease  to  reign  divinely,  but 
the  special  human  reign  of  Christ  will  terminate  ;  that  is,  His 
reigning  for  a  given  period  over  an  earthly  people,  and  the  world 
at  large,  which  the  heavenly  saints,  in  glory,  will  share  along 
with  Him,  That  will  end.  All  the  righteous  will  at  last  be  in 
a  risen  or  changed  condition,  all  the  wicked  dead  cast  into  the 
lake  of  fire,  and  the  kingdom  closes.  Its  surrender  to  God  the 
Father  in  no  way  touches  the  personal  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
The  kingdom  that  Christ  has  during  the  millennium  is  not  what 
He  has  as  God,  but  as  the  risen  man — as  the  One  who  was  hum- 
bled, but  has  been  exalted.  This  He  delivers  up  to  God  even 
the  Father,  (Himself  also  as  man  taking  the  place  of  subjection 
in  glory,  as  of  old  He  did  in  grace  upon  the  earth,)  that  God — 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost — may  be  all  in  all  ;  i.e.,  God,  as 
such,  having  the  place  of  supremacy  throughout  eternity.  But 
although  the  human  and  mediatorial  kingdom  of  Christ  will 
terminate,  not  so  the  divine  kingdom  ;  and  therefore  we,  being- 
made  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,  are  said  to  reign  for  ever 
and  ever.  (Rev.  xxii.)  So,  in  Rom.  v.,  it  is  said,  "  We  shall 
reign  in  life  by  one,  Jesus  Christ."  Of  course,  partaking  of 
the  divine  nature  does  not  touch  the  incommunicable  glory  of 
the  Godhead.  But  it  remains  true,  that  we  have  an  eternal 
life,  and  that  its  endless  character  flows  from  the  fact  that  it  is 
given  to  us  by  One  who,  though  truly  man,  is  a  divine  person, 


388  THE    LAKE    OF    FIRE    EVERLASTING. 

by  Him  who  is  the  living  One  and  was  dead,  and,  behold,  is 
alive  for  evermore.  "  We  shall  reign  in  life  by  one,  Jesus 
Christ,"  a  reign  which  is  not  limited  in  time  any  more  than 
sphere. 

You  will  observe  that  it  is  God  who  is  prominent  through 
this  portion,  exactly  answering  to  what  we  saw  in  1  Cor.  xv.  28. 
"  And  he  that  sat  upon  the  throne  said.  Behold,  I  make  all 
things  new.  And  he  saith  [to  me,]  Write  ;  for  these  words  are 
true  and  faithful."  (Ver.  5.)  He  speaks  that  sitteth  on  the  throne. 
You  do  not  get  the  Lamb  mentioned.  It  is  the  glory  of  God  in 
the  fullest  possible  sense  that  we  have  here.  "  And  he  said  to 
me,  They  are  done.  I  am  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the  be- 
ghming  and  the  end."  No  doubt  Christ  is  the  Alpha  and 
the  Omega  too,  as  we  find  in  chap.  xxii.  13  ;  but  it  is  not  the 
Lord  as  such  that  acts  and  speaks  here,  but  God.  "  I  will  give 
him  that  is  athirst  of  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life  freely.  He 
that  overconieth  shall  inherit  these  things  ;  and  I  will  be  a  God  to 
him  and  he  shall  be  a  son  to  me."  (Ver.  G,  7.)  Nothing  can  be 
plainer  than  that  it  is  God  as  such  who  is  speaking  all  through. 
"  But  for  the  cowardly,  and  unbelievers,  and  abominable,  and 
murderers,  and  whoremongers,  and  sorcerers,  and  idolaters,  and 
all  the  false,  their  part  [shall  be]  in  the  lake  that  burnetii  with 
fire  and  brimstone,  which  is  the  second  death."  (Ver.  8.)  A  most 
awful  word  of  warning,  and  especially  as  used  here  !  For  mark 
the  force  of  it.  It  is  then  God  shall  be  all  in  all  —  God  who  is 
love.  But  He  is  not  merely  love,  which  is  a  false,  infidel  thought ; 
He  is  light,  as  well  as  love.  It  as  much  appertains  to  God  to  be 
holy  as  to  be  gracious  ;  and  it  is  the  very  same  portion  of  the  word 
which  teaches  us  both  truths.  And  here  is  the  final  proof  of  it. 
In  love  He  comes  down  to  be  with  His  people.  They  may  be 
men,  but  they  are  no  longer  in  weakness  and  sorrow,  for  God 
Himself  has  wiped  every  tear  from  their  eyes.  But  He  is 
light,  and  therefore  in  presence  of  all  things  new,  where  right- 
eousness dwells  in  peace,  when  there  is  no  evil  or  sin,  but  sepa- 
ration from  it  for  ever  by  the  power  of  God  ;  even  then  the 
portion  of  the  wicked  is  in  the  lake  burning  with  fire  and  brim- 
stone. Mark  well  that  this  is  the  eternal  state.  Remember 
that  in  the  eternal  state  there  is  the  doom,  the  never-ending- 
doom,  of  those  who  have  rejected  Christ  and  taken  their  stand 
upon  their  own  miserable  self.  Here  is  the  award  from  God 
Hitnself  Their  part  is  the  second  death,  where  their  worm 
dieth  not  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched,  as  the  Lord  Jesus  so 
touchingly  expresses  it.  No  declaration  more  solemn  than  that 
uf  Kev.  xxi.  8,  not  only  because  of  its  ciiaracter,  but  because  of 


THE    GLORY    OF    GOD.  389 

its  place.  When  God  will  have  rest  in  the  new  heavens  and 
earth — when  God  Avill  come  down  to  abide  among  men,  because 
there  will  no  longer  be  any  evil  to  check  His  dwelling-  with 
them — then  it  is  that  the  awful  scene  presents  itself  of  evil  and 
its  hopeless,  unending  torment.  This  is  wliat  God  teaches  us  in 
His  picture  of  the  eternal  world.  There  is  not  only  the  bright 
side,  but  there  is  the  lake  of  fire  which  has  its  course  ;  nor  is 
there  a  word  intimating  that  it  will  ever  come  to  an  end. 

But  now  the  Holy  Ghost,  having  brought  us  to  "  the  end" 
in  the  most  absolute  sense,  leads  us  back  again.  We  have  seen 
the  New  Jerusalem  coming  down  out  of  heaven  from  God, 
prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband,  when  this  eternal 
condition  begins.  But  what  is  its  relation  to  the  millennial 
earth  ?  If  we  had  only  the  pi'evious  revelations,  we  could  not 
have  answered  this  clearly.  The  bi'ide,  the  Lamb's  wife,  has 
had  her  joy  consummated  in  heaven ;  then  as  the  New  Jeru- 
salem after  the  millennium,  she  has  taken  her  place  as  regards 
the  new  heavens  and  earth  ;  but  what  is  her  relation  to  those 
here  below  during  the  millennium  i  This  is  now  made  plain. 
"  There  came  one  of  the  seven  angels  that  had,  &:c.  .  .  .  and  talked 
with  me,  saying.  Come  hither,  I  will  show  thee  the  bride,  the 
Lamb's  wife.  And  he  carried  me  away  in  the  Spirit  to  a  great 
and  high  mountain,  and  showed  me  the  holy  city  Jerusalem, 
descending  out  of  heaven  from  God,  having  the  glory  of  God. 
Its  lustre  [was]  like  a  stone  most  precious,  as  a  jasper  stone  crys- 
tal-clear." It  appears  1o  me  that  this  account  of  the  city's  bright 
lustre  like  a  jasper  has  a  very  close  connexion  with  what  had 
just  before  been  said  of  it,  as  having  "  the  glory  of  God."  For 
when  God  Himself  was  seen  upon  the  throne  in  chap,  iv.,  He 
was  in  appearance  like  a  jasper  and  a  sardius.  Here  the  New 
Jerusalem  has  God's  glory,  and  its  lustre  is  jasper-like.  But 
this  is  not  all.  "  It  had  a  wall  great  and  high,"  and  after  this 
it  is  told  us,  in  the  18th  verse,  that  "  the  building  of  its  wall  was 
of  jasper."  So  that  it  is  plain  that  this  is  peculiarly  the  stone 
which  is  used  to  describe  the  glory  of  God,  as  far  as  it  can  be 
seen  by  a  creature — not  that  glory  of  God  which  the  creature 
cannot  see.  For  God  has  a  gloi'y  which  no  man  can  approach 
unto.  But  He  is  pleased  also  to  display  His  glory,  suited  to 
the  capacity  of  a  creature  ;  and  the  precious  stone  used  to  set 
this  forth  is,  in  the  book  of  Revelation,  the  jasper. 

Beside  this,  we  are  told  it  had  "twelve  gates,  and  at  the 
gates  twelve  angels,  and  names  inscribed,  which  are  the  names 
of  the  twelve   tribes  of  the  sons    of    Israel."      The   number 


390  THE    TWELVE    FOUNDATIONS, 

"  twelve"  is  particularly  mentioned  throughout  the  account  of 
the  New  Jerusalem.  It  was  just  before  said  that  the  city  had 
the  glory  of  God,  in  the  hope  of  which  we  rejoice.  (Rom.  v.  2.) 
Here  we  find  that  this  hope,  for  which  we  wait  and  in  which  we 
rejoice,  is  enjoyed.  But  God  is  pleased  to  remember  that  He 
is  dealing  with  people  upon  the  earth,  and  the  New  Jerusalem 
has  a  very  special  relation  to  men  during  the  millennium.  Ac- 
cordingly, there  are  twelve  gates  with  the  names  of  the  twelve 
tribes  of  Israel  wi-itten  upon  them.  At  the  gates  stand  twelve 
angels,  showing  their  subordination.  In  this  day  of  glory  the 
angel  is  happy  to  be  a  porter  at  the  gate  of  the  heavenly  city  : 
happy,  if  he  do  not  enter,  to  have  his  work  and  mission  outside. 
"  Unto  the  angels  hath  he  not  put  in  subjection  the  world  to 
come,  whereof  we  speak."  (Heb.  ii.)  "  Do  ye  not  know  that 
the  saints  shall  judge  the  world  ?  .  .  .  .  Know  ye  not  that  we 
shall  judge  angels  ?  "  (1  Cor.  vi.) 

"  And  the  wall  of  the  city  has  twelve  foundations,  and  on 
tliem  the  names  of  the  twelve  Apostles  of  the  Lamb."  (Ver.  14.) 
Eph.  ii.  20  gives  us,  I  think,  the  force  of  that  symbol.  "  Now, 
therefore,  ye  are  no  more  strangers  and  foreigners,  but  fellow- 
citizens  with  the  saints  ....  and  are  built  upon  the  foundation  of 
the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Chi-ist  Himself  being  the  chief 
corner  stone."  No  doubt  the  whole  building  is  growing  up  unto 
an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord.  But  we  are  built  upon  "  the 
foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,"  both  of  the  New  Tes- 
tament. If  Old  Testament  prophets  had  been  meant,  tliey 
would,  naturally,  have  been  set  before  apostles,  to  avoid  mis- 
take ;  but  the  expression,  as  it  stands,  seems  purjDosely  fi'amed 
to  guard  against  such  a  misconception.  The  prophets  of  the 
Old  Testament  were  the  filling  up  of  the  law,  besides  testifying 
future  things,  judgments,  the  new  covenant,  &c.  The  law  and 
the  prophets,  as  it  is  said,  were  until  John.  (See  also  Matt.  v.  17.) 
Their  authority  never  can  be  destroyed.  But  when  Messiah 
w^as  rejected  by  Israel,  and  redemption  w^as  accomplished  on  the 
cross,  there  was  a  new  foundation  laid  for  a  new  work  of  God, 
entirely  distinct  from  what  the  law,  or  the  prophets,  or  even 
John  the  Baptist,  contemplated.  It  is  the  foundation  of  the 
[New  Testament]  apostles  and  prophets,  and  it  is  upon  this  that 
the  New  Jerusalem  is  built.  Now  God  has  brought  out  His 
full  mind  as  a  foundation  of  truth.  There  were  certain  things 
yet  reserved  in  Old  Testament  times.  Look  at  Deuteronomy, 
(chap,  xxix.  29).  "  The  secret  things,"  says  Moses  there, 
"  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God  :  but  those  things  which  are 
revealed  belong  unto  us,  and  to  our  children  for  ever,  that  we 


THK    CITY    A    CUBE.  391 

may  do  all  the  words  of  this  law."  Revealed  things  here  have 
to  do  with  the  law  and  its  consequences,  for  the  purpose  of 
enforcing"  obedience.  But  the  secret  thhigs,  which  then  belonged 
to  God,  are  themselves  now  revealed  —  the  resources  of  gj-ace, 
when  all  was  ruin  under  the  law.  And  this  is  what  the  Apostle 
Paul  lays  such  stress  upon,  where  he  tells  us,  how  that  by  reve- 
lation, God  made  known  to  him  the  mystery  or  secret,  "whereby, 
when  ye  read,  ye  may  understand  my  knowledge  in  the  mystery 
of  Christ ;  which,  in  other  ages,  was  not  made  known  unto  the 
sons  of  men,  as  it  is  now  revealed  unto  his  holy  apostles  and 
prophets  hy  the  Spirit."  And  so  Col.  i.  26.  The  Holy  Ghost 
had  brought  out  what  had  been  a  secret  thing  in  the  days  of 
old.  The  mystery  is  revealed.  This  full  revelation  of  truth 
appears  to  be  called  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets, 
upon  which  the  Church  is  built.  Therefore  it  is  said,  in  1  Tim. 
iii.  13,  that  the  Church  is  "  the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth." 
The  truth  has  come  out,  and  God  has,  as  it  were,  no  secrets  now. 
All  that  He  chose  to  reveal,  all  that  would  be  of  service  to  the 
creature,  and  to  the  glory  of  His  own  Son,  God  has  brought 
out ;  so  that,  in  this  sense  and  in  every  other,  it  may  be  said, 
that  "the  darkness  passeth,  and  the  true  light  now  shineth." 
So  then,  upon  this  broad  and  deep  foundation  —  where  not 
merely  the  dealings  of  God  with  individuals,  or  a  people,  not 
merely  His  promises  or  His  government,  are  shown  out ;  but 
where  all  that  can  be  known  of  God  by  the  creature  has  been 
revealed  in  His  Son — upon  this  foundation  the  Church  is  built. 
And  that  is  now  made  manifest  to  His  saints,  which  was  hidden, 
but  is  now  revealed.  "The  wall  of  the  city  had  twelve  founda- 
tions, and  on  them  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the 
Lamb."     They  were  the  instruments  of  this  revelation. 

"  And  he  that  talked  with  me  had  a  golden  reed  as  a  measure, 
that  he  might  measure  the  city,  and  the  gates  thereof,  and  the 
wall  thereof.  And  the  city  lietli  quadrangular,  and  the  length 
is  as  great  as  the  breadth.  .  .  .  The  length  and  the  breadth  and 
the  height  of  it  are  equal."  (Ver.  15,  16.)  It  was  the  image  of 
the  perfection  of  a  city  "  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God."  I 
do  not  mean  that  this  description  is  to  be  taken  as  if  it  were  of  a 
literal  city.  1  conceive  that  it  is  a  purely  symbolical  {)icture,  as 
to  certain  relations  of  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife.  The  scripture 
itself  most  positively  says  that  it  is  (not  the  dwelling-place  of  the 
redeemed,  but)  the  bride  herself  described  as  a  city.  Just  as 
the  apostate  church,  the  vast  idolatrous  ecclesiastical  system  so 
often  spoken  of  in  this  book,  was  symbolized  as  the  great  city, 
Babylon  ;    so  here  the  glorifie<l  Church  is  characterized  as  the 


392  GOLD,    THE    FIGURE    OF    DIVINE    RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  in  contrast  with  the  great  harlot,  and  as 
the  holy  city  descending  out  of  heaven  from  God,  in  contrast 
with  the  great  city  which  rules  over  the  rulers  of  the  earth. 
When  we  read,  then,  of  the  city  forming  a  quadrangle,  of  equal 
length,  breadth,  and  height,  it  is  simply  to  be  understood  as 
figurative  of  its  perfectness.  At  the  same  time  these  symbols 
must  not  be  run  into  one  another.  For  immediately  after  it  is 
said,  "  he  measured  the  wall  thereof,  of  an  hundred  and  forty- 
four  cubits, —  a  man's  measure,  that  is,  of  an  angel."  (Ver.  17.) 
Now  the  city's  height  was  previously  given  as  equal  to  the  length 
and  breadth,  i.e.,  twelve  thousand  furlongs.  This  of  course  is 
enormously  greater  than  144  cubits,  which  is  expressly  made  to 
refer  to  the  height  of  the  wall.  First  we  have  the  general  idea 
of  a  city  whicli  is  every  way  square,  a  cube,  in  fact ;  then  when 
we  come  to  the  details  of  the  wall,  a  height  is  given,  wdiich  shows 
that  we  are  not  to  look  for  mere  literal  consistency  as  if  it  were 
a  portrait.  The  number  twelve  keeps  up  the  idea  of  a  perfec- 
tion in  reference  to  man. 

•'  And  the  building  of  its  wall  was  of  jasper  ;  and  the  city 
[was]  pure  gold,  like  clear  glass."  (Ver.  18.)  We  have  already 
found  the  meaning  of  these  two  figures,  the  gold  and  the  glass,  in 
an  earlier  part  of  the  book.  The  Lord  counselled  the  Laodicean 
church  in  its  fallen  state  to  buy  of  Him  "  gold  tried  in  the  fire." 
It  is  invariably  the  figure  of  divine  righteousness  —  of  righteous- 
ness that  can  stand  the  searching  fire  of  God's  judgment.  Hu- 
man rjo-hteousness  could  not  bear  it,  and  so  is  never  represented 
by  o-old,  but  rather  by  white  linen.  God  could  cleanse  this  and 
leave  it  without  spot  or  stain.  But  fire  would  be  destruction  to 
it ;  whereas,  with  regard  to  the  gold,  it  would  only  bring  out 
its  perfection.  Accordingly  this  city  is  of  pure  gold.  If  it  had 
divine  glory,  divine  righteousness  characterizes  the  city.  But 
more  than  that.  It  is  of  pure  gold,  "  like  clear  glass."  Holi- 
ness, now  fixed  and  without  flaw,  also  marks  the  city.  With 
reo-ard  to  our  need  of  holiness,  the  means  of  it  are  represented 
under  the  figure  of  water,  because  it  is  a  question  of  cleansing 
from  defilement  in  a  practical  way.  In  the  Revelation  this  is 
not  the  case  ;  for  from  the  fourth  chapter  the  saints  who  are  put 
in  connexion  with  holiness  are  risen  saints,  and  consequently  are 
beyond  the  means  of  cleansing.  They  are  therefore  represented, 
as  also  in  the  case  of  that  body  of  saints  mentioned  in  chap,  xv., 
as  on  a  sea  of  glass,  because  it  is  purity  that  now  is  in  a  fixed, 
unalterable  condition.  Their  state  is  no  longer  that  which  might 
need  to  be  cleansed.  It  is  holiness  that  repels  everything  defil- 
ing.    So  here  the  city  is  of  pure  gold,  like  unto  clear  glass.     In 


EACH  GATE  OF  ONE  PEARL.  393 

Rev.  XV.  it  is  remarkable  that  the  sea  of  glass  is  said  to  be 
mingled  with  fire,  which  was  not  the  case  in  Rev.  iv.  ;  and  this 
because  the  saints,  spoken  of  there,  had  not  only  gone  through 
this  complete  purging,  and  were  now  in  a  state  of  unalterable 
purity,  but  they  had  gone  through  the  last  terrible  tribulation,  of 
which  the  fire  there  is  a  figure.  From  this  tribulation  the  rap- 
tured saints  of  Rev.  iv.  had  been  exempt.  Thus,  then,  we  have 
the  city  of  pure  gold,  like  clear  glass;  that  is,  there  is  divine 
righteousness  now,  and  holiness  that  nothing  can  touch. 

"  And  the  foundations  of  the  wall  of  the  city  were  garnished 
with  all  manner  of  precious  stones  :    the  first  foundation  jasper, 

(fee And  the  twelve  gates  were  twelve  pearls  ;    each  one 

severally  of  the  gates  was  out  of  one  pearl,*  and  the  street  of  the 
city  was  pure  gold,  as  transparent  glass."  (Ver.  19-21.)  Without 
pretending  to  give  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  various  piecious 
stones,  we  may  learn  thence  that  in  every  variety  of  beauty  will 
God  array  His  people  in  that  day  of  glory.  There  will  be  different 
rays  of  His  glory  reflected  through  them,  set  forth  by  these  differ- 
ent precious  stones.  In  God's  own  case  it  is  not  so.  His  essential 
glory  is  not  described  after  this  fashion.  It  is  full,  concentrated 
light.  It  is  not  what  is  broken  up  into  a  variety  of  hues,  if  we  may 
so  say,  as  in  the  case  of  the  glory  He  confers  on  the  Church.  God 
is  light,  and  He  dwells  in  light  which  no  man  can  approach  unto. 
The  rainbow  of  many  colours  was  the  sign  by  which  God  showed 
His  covenant  with  creation,  and  His  various  ways  with  poor 
man.  But  when  it  is  the  lustre  of  the  saints  in  heavenly  glory, 
and  the  way  in  which  God  will  display  the  beauty  of  His  people, 
— for  He  does  see  beauty  in  them, — these  precious  stones  are  the 
emblems  employed. 

"  And  the  twelve  gates  were  twelve  pearls  ;  each  one  severally 
of  the  gates  was  of  one  pearl."  Such  they  appeared  to  men 
outside  :  something  quite  beyond  nature.  It  is  a  description 
that  alludes  to  the  earthly   Jerusalem  ;    but  in  the  latter  city, 

*  Some  readers  will  be  astonished  to  hear  that  a  mau  of  Michaelis'  reputation 
should  adduce  this  as  an  instance  of  "false  translation."  (Int.  N.  T.,  Vol.  iv.,  p. 
507.)  It  is  not  uniustructive  to  mark  the  process  of  mind  it  betrays — the  very 
same  which  leads  many  to  reject  the  Bible,  and  this  writer  himself  to  asperse  the 
Apocalypse.  "A  pearl,  whether  we  consider  the  rotundity  of  the  figure,  or  the 
softness  of  its  mass,  is  very  ill-qualified  to  become  the  gate  of  a  city,  even  if  that 
city  exists  only  in  poetical  description."  But  what  if  it  be  morally  didactic  in  a 
symbolic  prophecy  ?  "The  word  used  in  the  Greek  is  /j.apyapiryjs,  and  that  ought 
to  be  rendered  precious  stone !  !  for  this  is  the  meaning  ascribed  to  the  word  iu 
Chaldee.  .  .  M.  is  used  perhaps  in  the  same  sense,  Matt.  xiii.  45,  46."  To  refute 
this  seems  to  me  quite  needless.  Every  one  can  see  how  definite  is  the  Seer's 
description  of  the  various  precious  stones,  and  the  spiritual  man  will  feel  the  blank 
created  by  the  abstuce  of  the  "  pearl." 


394  NO    TEMPLE  :  • 

what  is  really  found  existing  in  nature  will  be  brought  to  adorn 
it.  Here  the  beauty  of  the  Church  is  set  forth  by  supernatural 
imagery  :  each  one  of  the  gates  was  made  out  of  one  pearl.  They 
are  symbols  which  set  forth  the  perfect  and  divine  beauty  that 
God  will  put  upon  His  people.  This  is  ah-eady  true  of  them  in 
Christ,  but  actually  and  personally  will  they  thus  shine  in  that 
day.  Each  gate  being  of  one  pearl  would  show,  I  suppose,  the 
special  likeness  of  Christ  and  fellowship  with  Christ,  which  God 
will  grant  to  His  people — to  the  Church.  In  Matt.  xiii.  we 
have,  as  I  conceive,  the  Lord  Jesus  as  a  merchantman  in  quest 
of  goodly  pearls;  who,  when  He  had  found  one  pearl  of  great 
price,  went  and  sold  all  that  He  had  and  bought  it.  It  is  the 
beauty  of  the  Church,  as  viewed  in  God's  mind,  which,  if  one 
may  say  it,  fascinated  the  Lord  Jesus,  so  that  He  parted  with 
all  His  earthly  glory  to  get  that  pearl  :  a  strong  expression 
indeed,  but  not  too  strong  to  convey  His  appreciation  of  the 
Church.  But  we  know  that,  if  the  Lord  saw  any  beauty  in  the 
Church,  it  was  all  derived  from  Himself.  He  saw  the  Church 
as  she  was  in  the  mind  and  purpose  of  God,  and  sells  all,  that  He 
might  purchase  this  pearl  of  great  price,  which  after  all,  is  but 
the  reflection  of  His  own  beauty.  So  here,  the  spotless  pearl, 
the  perfection  of  moral  beauty,  that  had  been  so  precious  in  the 
eyes  of  Christ,  is  the  figure  of  what,  even  at  the  entrance,  will 
appear  in  the  eyes  of  men  and  angels. 

"  And  I  saw  no  temple  therein :  for  the  Lord  God,  the 
Almighty,  is  its  temple,  and  the  Lamb."  (Ver.  22.)  This  is  very 
important.  For  perhaps  some  one  may  say,  What  has  all  that  to 
do  with  the  saint  now  ?  I  answer.  The  world  must  wait  for  the 
day  of  glory  to  see  the  beauty  of  the  Church.  And  we,  like  the 
world,  are  so  often  unbeheving,  that  we  are  apt  to  see  only  the 
dark,  painful  circumstances  of  the  Church,  if  we  escape  the  de- 
lusive dream  of  an  improving  Christendom.  Which  of  us  carries 
habitually,  constantly,  in  our  hearts  the  delight  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
in  opening  out  wliat  the  Church  is  going  to  be — nay,  what  it  is 
in  His  eye  and  to  His  heart  ?  Our  unbelief  as  to  this  is  one 
main  secret  source  of  our  murmuring  and  rebellious  spirit.  I  do 
not  say  that  we  ought  not  to  feel  the  failure  of  God's  Church,  as 
things  are  on  earth  :  God  forbid  such  a  thought !  But  we 
should  feel  it  more  lovingly  and  more  keenly  too,  had  we  a 
deeper  sense  of  its  neainess  to  Christ  and  the  glory  it  is  soon  to 
shine  in.  A  good  deal  of  what  we  feel,  when  evil  is  seen  in  the 
children  of  God,  is  because  self  is  touched.  W^e  are  all  inclined 
to  deal  hardly  enough  with  a  person's  vanity,  pride,  or  things  of 
the  kind.     Why  ?     Is  it  not  too  frequently  because  it  wounds 


PRESENT    VALUE.  395 

US  ?  We  have  possibly  not  had  the  share  of  respect  and  import- 
ance to  which  we  fancied  ourselves  entitled,  and  we  are  readily 
sore  about  it.  But  this  is  not  according  to  Christ.  Not  that 
we  should  be  insensible  to  the  ways  of  the  flesh  and  the  world, 
but  we  should  feel  all  with  Christ  and  not  for  ourselves.  What 
can  enable  us  ?  Nothing  but  the  heart  filled  with  Christ  and 
the  exceedingly  blessed  place  in  which  He  puts  us.  We  are 
called  to  exhibit  the  Lord  Jesus  now.  It  is  not  merely  that  we 
are  to  be  members  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones, 
but  that  so  we  are  now  ;  and  therefore  love  and  desire  for  God's 
glory  would  lead  us  to  seek  ways  answering  to  this  in  the  Church 
and  before  men.  What  God  will  show  to  the  whole  universe 
by  and  by,  He  would  have  us  to  look  for  in  His  people  now. 
When  that  day  comes,  there  will  be  no  hindrances  ;  but  the 
action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  to  make  good  in  us  what  will  be 
perfectly  manifest  then,  and  what  is  true  in  principle  now.  If 
there  is  a  spot  upon  another  who  is  to  shine  along  with  Christ 
then,  this  stirs  up  our  affections  that  the  evil  may  be  removed 
in  God's  way  and  for  His  glory.  And  this  it  is  which  so  increases 
our  sense  of  shame,  that  such  blots  should  be  upon  ourselves.  It 
is  evident  to  me  that  the  Holy  Ghost  reveals  the  description 
of  the  divine  glory  that  is  to  be  in  the  Church,  in  order  to  act 
with  great  practical  power  on  our  souls  now,  the  word  being- 
mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  hear  it.  The  real  reason  why  it 
so  little  profits  us,  is  that  we  are  such  unbelieving  believers.  We 
are  believers ;  but  is  it  not  humiliating  that  we  can  pass  over 
such  precious  fruits  of  Christ's  love,  such  bright  visions  of  assured 
glory,  as  if  we  did  not  need  them  now,  or  as  if  they  were  not  the 
faithful  and  true  words  of  God  ?  We  shall  be  in  glory  by  and 
by,  and  know  as  we  are  known ;  but  it  is  revealed  to  those 
who  are  not  in  it  yet,  that  their  souls  may  be  full  of  the  joy  of  it 
now,  and  that  the  effects  of  it  should  be  manifest  even  to  the 
world  that  despises  them.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  earnest  of  the 
inheritance,  as  well  as  the  seal  of  redemption. 

But  this  is  true  not  of  the  beauty  only  in  which  the  Church  is 
to  shine  then :  there  is  another  thing,  which  ought  to  have  a 
mighty  influence  upon  us  now.  There  is  an  immediate  relation 
to  God  in  the  way  of  worship  :  and  what  then  ?  The  symbol 
here  used  is  of  a  city,  and  therefore  we  are  not  described  as 
priests.  If  we  were  spoken  of  as  persons,  we  should  be  described 
as  brought  near  to  God,  that  is,  as  priests,  and  so  we  are  in  chap. 
XX.  6.  But  here  it  is  a  city — and  a  city  in  which  there  is  no 
temple  :  not  because  there  was  no  special  seat  of  the  presence  of 
God  there,  but  because  His  presence  filled  it  all  and  equally, 


396  "  MADE    PERFECT    IN    ONE." 

The  access  to  God  is  immediate.  But  that  also  is  a  truth  appli- 
cable now.  (Hebrews  x.)  Here  below  there  is  no  temple,  nor 
priests  now  between  us  and  God.  Undoubtedly  we  have  above 
the  great  and  faithful  High  Priest — a  minister  of  the  sanctuary, 
and  of  the  true  tabernacle  which  the  Lord  pitched,  and  not  man. 
But  there  will  be  below,  during  the  future  kingdom,  for  those  on 
earth  that  need  Him,  when  "  He  shall  sit  as  a  Priest  upon  his 
throne."  Thus,  to  the  Christian,  there  is  neither  temple  nor 
priest  on  earth  now.  We  stand,  as  fo  our  faith,  in  the  imme- 
diate presence  of  God,  with  His  perfect  favour  shining  upon  us. 
If  persons  do  not  feel  this,  it  is  because  they  do  not  believe  it. 
We  must  always  believe  a  thing  on  God's  word  first ;  and  the 
more  simply  we  believe,  the  more  shall  we  enjoy  the  comfort, 
strength,  and  fruits  of  the  truth. 

"  And  I  saw  no  temple  therein :  for  the  Lord  God,  the  Al- 
mighty, is  the  temple,  and  the  Lamb.  And  the  city  hath  no 
need  of  the  sun,  nor  of  the  moon,  that  they  shoukl  shine  on  it." 
No  earthly  nor  even  heavenly  lights,  of  the  old  creation,  are 
wanted  there.  "  For  the  glory  of  God  lightened  it,  and  the  light 
[literally,  lamp]  thereof  is  the  Lamb."  (Ver.  23.)  How  wonder- 
fully all  this  desci'iption  falls  in  with  a  few  words  in  John  xvii., 
to  which  I  must  refer  before  going  further. 

In  His  astonishing  prayer  (if  we  can  call  that  a  prayer,  which 
is  more  like  the  Son  unbosoming  Himself  to  the  Father),  the 
Lord  says,  "  The  glory  which  thou  gavest  me,  I  have  given 
them."  It  was  divine,  but  not  His  Godhead  glory,  for  that 
never  can  be  given,  belonging  to  God,  and  none  else.  The  Lord 
Jesus  had  Godhead  gloiy,  but  not  given  to  Him,  because  He  hud 
it  essentially  ;  He  had  it  in  His  own  right,  as  being  God,  from 
all  eternity.  But  what  the  Father  gave  to  Him  as  man,  He 
gave  to  His  disciples  :  "  that  they  may  be  one  even  as  we  are 
one :  I  in  them,  and  thou  in  me,  that  they  may  be  made  pei'fect 
in  one  :  and  that  the  world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent  me, 
and  hast  loved  them,  as  thou  hast  loved  me."  Now  this  exactly 
corresj)onds  with  what  we  have  in  the  Revelation.  For  there 
was  this  holy  city,  descending  out  of  heaven  from  God  :  and  the 
Lamb  is  in  it,  and  the  Lord  God  making  Himself  known,  so  to 
speak,  specially  in  the  Lamb ;  for  the  Lamb  is  not  merely  the 
light,  but  the  vessel  of  it,  or  light-bearer.  We  may  consider  the 
light  diffused,  as  it  is  said,  "  the  glory  of  God  had  lightened  it ;" 
Ibut  if  we  want  to  see  the  light  concentrated,  M'here  are  we  to 
look?  The  Lamb  is  that  light.  Thus  does  God  make  Himself 
to  shine  through  all  this  glorious  city :  the  Lamb  is  the  great 
concentrating  object,  diffusing  light  over  the  whole  scene.     This, 


"  I    IN    THEM    AND    THOU    IN    ME."  397 

then,  is  the  order  of  it — "  I  in  them,  and  thou  In  me,  that  they 
may  be  made  perfect  in  one :  and  that  the  world  may  know,"* 
&c.  Tlie  Lamb  makes  God  known  to  them,  as  they  make  Him 
known  to  all  others.  This  is  what  appears  in  the  Revelation. 
"  The  nations  shall  walk  by  means  of  its  light,"  not  in  the  light 
of  the  Lamb  immediately,  but  by  means  of  the  light  of  the  hea- 
venly city  :  precisely  what  we  find  in  John  xvii.  ("  that  they 
may  be  made  perfect  in  one,  that  the  world  may  know  that  thou 
hast  sent  me,  and  hast  loved  them  as  thou  liast  loved  me.") 
There  is,  I  apprehend,  what  answers  to  the  nations  walking  by 
means  of  the  light  of  the  city.  Through  these  nations  the  church 
had  passed  in  the  days  of  her  pilgrimage,  and  been  despised 
because  of  her  fellowship  with  Christ.  (1  John  iii.  1.)  For,  as 
He  had  been  there,  and  unknown,  "  therefore  the  world  knoweth 
us  not."  But  now,  when  the  bright  day  comes,  vv^hen  Jesus, 
long  absent  and  rejected,  the  blessed  and  exalted  man,  the  Lord 
from  heaven,  comes  in  His  glory.  Himself  the  great  witness  and 
accomplishment  of  the  glory  of  God,  as  indeed  He  is  the  bright- 
ness of  it,  He  will  not  be  seen  apart  from  His  bride.  She  will 
appear  with  Him  in  glory,  and  the  nations  shall  walk  by  means 
of  the  light  of  the  glorified   whom  they  had  so  long  cast  out. 

*  It  is  very  evident  that  Mr.  E.  (H.  A.,  Vol.  iy.,  pp.  175,  176,  187)  docs  not 
understand  this  passage,  wliioh  he  justly  conceives  to  be  too  often  misapprehended 
and  misapplied.  For  while  he  rightly  affirms  that  verses  22,  23,  apply  to  the  time 
of  glorification,  the  only  time  of  perfect  and  displayed  unity,  it  is  a  mistake  to 
confound  this  with  the  unity  prayed  for  in  verses  20,  21,  which  is  as  clearly  a 
question  of  grace  and  testimony  to  the  world,  as  the  other  will  be  of  glory  and 
the  world's  knowledge.  The  truth  is,  that  unity  is  asked  for  in  three  forms. 
There  is,  first,  that  which  is  absolute  and  above  all  circumstances,  in  verse  11, 
"  that  they  may  be  one,  as  we."  Secondly,  there  is  that  which  should  embrace 
those  who  were  to  believe  through  the  Apostles'  word,  "  that  they  all"  (whether 
Jew  or  Gentile,  bond  or  free)  "  should  be  one,"  (not  by  virtue  of  the  law  of  Je- 
hovah and  the  enforced  rites  and  ordinances  of  the  Levitical  system,  but  by  the 
revelation  of  the  Father  and  the  Son)  "  as  thou,  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee, 
that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us,  that  the  world  may  helieve"  (not  yet  know,  but 
believe)  "that  thou  hast  sent  me."  Such  a  testimony  the  gathered  saints  were, 
while  they  walked  in  heavenly  unity  here  below.  Then  comes  the  third  and 
crowning  form,  which  it  is  impossible  for  the  world  to  deny,  when  they  behold  the 
saints  appearing  in  the  same  glory  with  Christ  ;  and  therefore  it  is  added  "  that 
the  world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent  me,"  but  this  not  all,  "  and  hast  loved 
them  as  thou  hast  loved  me."  How  gainsay,  when  Christ  and  the  Chui'ch  burst 
upon  their  astonished  eyes  in  a  community  of  glory  ?  But  this  does  not  interfere 
with  the  preceding  truth,  which  ought  not  to  be  weakmied,  that  the  Lord  desired 
the  present  unity  of  all  His  disciples,  as  a  means  and  powerful  witness  to  the  world 
that  they  might  believe  in  His  mission  from  the  Father.  In  fact,  this  is  an  im- 
portant part  of  our  practical  responsibility  and  it  is  not  wise  to  turn  from  it, 
because  it  is  grossly  perverted  to  purposes  of  earthly  power  and  pride  by  the  world- 
church  in  all  its  varieties.  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  show  the  facts,  the  epistles 
demonstrate  the  importance  of  the  doctrine. 


396  UNTO,    NOT    INTO,    THE    CITY. 

Even  their  kings  bring  their  glory  to  it,*  It  is  necessary  to 
state  this,  lest  persons  should  imagine  that  there  was  a  commu- 
nication of  a  direct  kind  between  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth 
and  the  heavenly  city.  But  though  the  city  was  seen  to  come 
down  from  heaven,  it  is  not  here  said  to  come  down  to  the  earth, 
so  as  to  be  with  men,  as  it  does  when  the  new  heaven  and  earth 
are  come.  Here  its  glory  is  over  the  earth  ;  accordingly  the 
kings  and  the  nations  bring  their  glory  and  honour  unto  it,  in 
the  way  of  homage,  I  suppose,  to  Him  who  dwells  there.  "And 
the  gates  of  it  shall  not  be  shut  at  all  by  day  ;  for  there  shall  be 
no  night  there."  No  danger  threatens  the  city  ;  on  the  contrary, 
"  They  shall  bring  the  glory  and  the  honour  of  the  nations  to  it." 
Of  course,  it  is  in  the  same  sense  as  in  verse  24.  "  And  there  shall 
in  nowise  enter  into  it  anything  unclean,  or  one  that  works 
abomination  and  a  lie  :  but  those  that  are  written  in  the  Lamb's 
book  of  life."  Thus,  the  fullest  scope  is  given  to  the  holiness  of 
God,  and  the  impure  and  abominable  and  false  excluded  from 
His  presence,  as  indeed  they  are  moi-ally  and  altogether  unfit  for 
it ;  but  withal  His  sovereignty  is  maintained  intact.  None 
enter  there,  except  those  enrolled  in  the  book  of  life  of  the 
Lamb.  It  has  been  remarked  that  the  first  five  verses  of 
chap.  xxii.  are  necessary  to  complete  the  vision  :  but  I  think  it 
better  to  reserve  them  for  my  next  lecture,  when  the  conclusion 
of  the  book  will  also  be  shown  in  due  order. 

*  Not  into,  but  unto,  for  which,  in  Greek,  there  is  but  one  word. 


INTERLACINGS    OF    SCRIPTURE.  399 


CHAPTER    XXII. 

It  is  one  of  the  interesting  features  of  this  book,  that  it  can 
only  be  properly  understood  when  taken  in  connexion  with  all 
the  rest  of  the  word  of  God.  And,  singular  to  say  too,  God 
has  linked  together,  in  a  very  remarkable  manner,  the  last  book 
of  the  Scripture  and  the  very  first.  For  example,  here  we  fall 
upon  images  which  the  Holy  Ghost  uses  to  describe  the  blessed- 
ness of  the  heavenly  city  in  its  relation  to  the  earth  during  the 
millennium  ;  and  whence  are  these  images  derived  ?  I  must  go 
to  the  beginning  of  the  Book  of  God,  to  Genesis  —  nay,  to  the 
very  beginning  of  Genesis  itself.  Thei'e  I  find  a  tree  of  life, 
rivers,  &:c.,  to  which  evidently  the  Holy  Ghost  refers  in  the 
passage  before  us.  Now  this  seems  to  me  to  be  a  striking  indi- 
cation of  God's  object,  so  dovetailing  His  whole  word  together, 
that,  in  order  to  acquii'e  the  full  meaning  of  any  part,  I  must 
take  it  in  connexion  with  the  whole.  And  this  is  all  the  more 
important,  inasmuch  as  that  same  word  of  God  shows  us  differ- 
ent states  and  dispensations  in  total  contrast  with  one  another. 
There  was  the  time  of  innocence  ;  there  was  the  time  when 
there  was  nothing  but  sin,  as  far  as  man  was  concerned — evil 
without  a  check,  until  the  judgment  of  God  came  in  the  flood 
and  destroyed  all,  save  the  i'ew  in  the  ark.  Then  there  was  the 
law,  and  then  the  gospel,  each  having  a  wholly  different  object : 
and  now  we  await  the  great  closing  scene  of  this  age,  when  all 
that  God  has  wrought  upon  the  earth,  all  that  revelation  has 
brought  out  of  His  mind,  but  corrupted  by  man,  will  have  been 
manifested  in  its  results.  In  order  to  undei'stand  what  the 
Holy  Ghost  tells  me  about  these  results,  I  must  begin  at  the 
very  beginning.  Now  if  we  look  at  Genesis,  we  find  that  though 
there  is  a  sort  of  analogy  in  the  time  of  innocence  when  God 
was  dealing  with  the  creature  in  responsibility  to  maintain  his 
place  of  innocence,  yet  there  is  a  most  blessed  contrast  in  the 
future,  which  brings  out  still  more  conspicuously  the  depths  of 
grace  which  God  will  show  in  this  holy  city.  Let  us  look  then 
a  little  at  the  differences.  In  Genesis  we  find  that  there  were 
four  rivers  ;  and  of  these  rivers,  although  we  know  little  or 
nothing  of  the  two  first,  at  any  rate  it  is  clear  that  the  two  last, 
the  Euphrates  and  Hiddekel,  or  Tigris,  were  connected   with 


400  THE  CONTRASTS  OF  GLORY, 

some  of  the  most  painful  passages  in  the  history  of  God's  earthly 
people  at  a  later  day.  On  these  rivers  were  built  the  two  most 
tamous  cities  of  antiquity  ;  the  Tigris,  on  which  Nineveh  stood, 
and  the  Euphrates  on  which  Babylon  was  built.  I  speak  now, 
of  course,  of  a  time  long  subsequent  to  Adam,  or  even  the 
deluge.  And  though  the  flood  may  have  effaced,  as  it  doubtless 
did,  many  other  features  of  the  antediluvian  earth,  still  we  find 
these  two  rivers  again.  As  for  Paradise,  it  was  gone,  but  these 
rivers  were  to  play  an  important  part  in  the  history  of  man,  and 
especially  of  that  which  acquires  a  moment  more  than  its  own, 
from  being  mingled  with  the  vicissitudes  and  chastenings  of 
God's  people  Israel.  These  two  rivers  were  identified  with  the 
powers  that  were  to  be  the  ruin  of  Israel  and  Judah  respec- 
tively. Nineveh  was  the  capital  of  Assyria,  which  carried  the 
great  mass  of  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel  into  captivity.  Babylon 
was  the  power  afterwards  used  of  God  for  the  captivity  of  that 
which  seemed  to  stand  firm  for  God,  no  less  than  for  David's 
house,  but  which  afterwards  fell  into  greater  unfaithfulness  than 
backsliding  Israel.  Thus  these  rivers  whicli  had  been  at  first 
connected  with  Paradise,  became  afterwards  the  representatives 
of  the  powers  of  men  that  were  used  to  scourge  tlie  guilty  people 
of  God. 

Then,  again,  there  were  two  trees  in  the  garden  of  Eden  : 
one  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  and  the  other  of  life. 
Now  whatever  might  have  been  the  blessing  vouchsafed  to  man 
in  the  tree  of  life,  it  was  wholly  useless  to  him,  because  the 
other  tree  put  him  to  a  test  which  man  could  not  stand.  He 
broke  down  ;  he  listened  to  the  voice  of  his  wife  who  had  herself 
listened  to  the  serpent,  and  he  became  rebellious.  The  conse- 
quence was  that  the  tree  of  life  was  no  longer  available  for  his 
use  :  had  it  been  so,  it  would  only  have  perpetuated  a  life  of 
sin  and  misery.  So  that  while  there  was  judgment  in  the  act 
of  God,  placing  the  cherubim  with  the  flaming  sword  to  shut 
out  man  from  the  tree  of  life,  mercy  was  mingled  with  it.  God 
had  reserved  for  man  a  better  thing  —  tlie  tree  of  grace,  if  I  may 
so  say.  Thus,  when  we  come  to  this  closing  account,  we  have 
neither  the  various  rivers  of  Eden  nor  a  tree  to  test  man  on 
God's  part.  There  is  but  one  river  and  one  tree.  All  that 
was  connected  with  man's  weakness  and  sin,  and  the  chastening 
of  God's  people  is  gone.  The  relics  of  shame  and  the  discipline 
of  sorrow  are  needed  no  longer.  The  paradise  of  man  had 
failed,  Israel  had  failed,  the  Church  had  failed.  Now  it  is  the 
paradise,  the  people,  and  the  city  of  God  ;  God  is  showing 
Himself  and  His  glory  there,  and  therefore  all  that  was  merely 


THE    HKAVENLY    AND    THE    EARTHL\    CITIES.  40l 

for  the  testing  or  the  discipHne  of  man  completely  disappears, 
and  now  shine  ouf.  God's  love,  His  heavenly  grace,  His  faith- 
fulness to  Israel,  His  sovereign  mercy  to  the  Gentiles,  His 
righteous  and  beneficent  rule.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had 
come  in  ;  He  bad  by  Himself  borne  the  effects  of  what  God's 
people  deserved,  and  had  made  it  possible  for  God  righteously 
to  show  tbeni  nothing  btft  love,  giving  them  life  and  atonement 
and  cleansing-  throuoh  His  Son. 

"  He  showed  me  a  river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal,  pro- 
ceeding out  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb.     In  the  midst 
of  the  street  of  it,  and  of  the  river,  on  this  side  and  on  that  side, 
[was]  the  tree  of  life,  bearing  twelve  [manner  of]  fruits,  each 
month  yielding  its  fruits  ;  and  the  leaves  of  the  tree  [are]  for 
healing  of  the  nations."  (Ver.  1,2.)     Now  there  it  is  evident  that 
we  have  pure  grace  reigning  through  righteousness,  as  far  as 
the  tree  and   the  river  are  concerned.     There  is  nothing  that 
couid  be  corrupted  by  the  power  of  Satan.     Neither  is  there 
anything  like  tiie  cherubim,  jealous  in  keeping  man,  now  sinful, 
away.     Quite  the  contrary.     This  tree  of  life  brings  forth  fruit 
every  month.     Of  course  it  is  a  figure.     There  will  be  no  mere 
literal  tree  or  river,  but  as  the  river  of  life's  water  symbolizes 
the  abundant  life  and  blessing  which  will  flow  through  the  city, 
i.e.,  the  Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife  ;    so  here   there  is  to  be  the 
benignant  means  of  healing  the  nations.     There  is  a  reserve  as 
to  the  twelve  fruits,  which  may  set  foi  th  a  far  higher  and  more 
various  provision  for  the  constant  refreshment  of  the  heavenly 
saints,  but  the  leaves  are  expressly  said  to  be  for  the  healing  of 
the  nations.     This  is  the  more  remarkable,  for  it  must  be  fami- 
liar to  us  that,  even  in  the  coming  day   of  glory,  the  earthly 
Jerusalem,  though  in  some  respects  figures  are  borrowed  thence, 
furnishes  in  others  a  very   different    picture   in    the    prophets. 
Take,  for  instance,  that  description  in  Isaiah  Ix.     It  had  been 
said  in  chap.  lix.  that  the  Redeemer  should   come  to  Zion,  and 
then  in  chap.  Ix.  we  have  the  description  of  the  city.     "  There- 
fore thy  gates  shall  be  open  continually  :    they  shall  not  be  shut 
day  nor  night,"  &c.     But  what  is  the  principle  of  the   earthly 
Jerusalem's  relation  to  the  nations  ?     "  The  nation  and  kingdom 
that  will  not  serve  thee  shall  perish  ;    yea,  those  nations  shall  be 
utterly  wasted."     It  is  unsparing   righteousness  and  judgment 
which  govern.     God  compels  honour  to  be  paid  to  His  people 
who  had  been  despised  and  trampled  down  among  the  nations. 
For  we  know  how  a  Jew,  even  now  in  Christendom,  is  looked 
upon  with   contempt  and  scorn  :    and  if  from  their  wealth  or 
other  causes  they  get  into  favour  with  the  world,  it  is  considered 
27 


402  EVERLASTING    CHARACTER    OF    GRACE    ABOVE, 

a  wonderful  piece  of  liberality.  Men  give  themselves  a  good 
deal  of  credit  for  it,  and  in  general  act  thus  on  most  mistaken 
ground,  either  sceptical  or  pseudo-Christian.  They  have  been 
so  habituated  to  despise  them  that  these  concessions  are  only 
wrung  out,  and  often  through  such  false  principles  as  the  rights 
of  men,  &c.  Of  course  I  am  merely  referring  to  facts  well 
known  in  the  history  of  the  world.  As  Christians  we  have 
nothing  to  do  with  such  questions,  though  we  may  judge  tliera. 
For  a  Christian  is  set  here  for  one  purpose  only  —  to  witness  for 
Christ  rejected  by  the  world,  but  exalted  in  heaven  ;  to  act  in 
accordance  with  the  grace  and  glory  of  a  Christ  who  is  now  at 
the  right  hand  of  God.  When  that  is  lost  sight  of,  he  is  salt 
without  savour.  A  person  may  be  philanthropic  and  may  try  to 
do  much  good  in  the  world,  but  God  has  a  higher  object  for  us 
than  any  plans  of  ours.  And  this  flows  out  of  our  present 
theme.  For  whether  it  be  the  Church  before  the  glory,  or 
when  it  comes,  as  here,  the  only  becoming  thing  for  us  is  the 
manifestation  of  grace.  It  is  the  character  of  grace  that  always 
gives  the  truth  of  God  about  the  Church  :  it  is  the  manifestation 
of  Himself,  as  He  has  displayed  Himself  and  still  does  in  Christ. 
This  the  apostle  brings  out  in  Eph.  v.,  where  it  is  said,  "  Be  ye 
therefore  followers  [imitators]  of  God."  And  how  ?  "  As  dear 
children,  and  walk  in  love."  In  what  way  ?  In  the  chapter 
before  he  had  spoken  of  Christ  as  the  offering  through  which 
God  could  forgive  sin,  (ver.  32,)  and  therefore  we  ought  to  for- 
give one  another,  "  even  as  God  in  Christ  hath  forgiven  you." 
But  in  chapter  v.  he  goes  much  further.  "  Walk  in  love, 
as  Christ  also  hath  loved  us,  and  hath  given  himself  for  us,  an 
ofterine"  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet-smellino-  savour." 
There  is  the  full  character  of  grace  at  once,  which  gives  him 
who  knows  and  walks  in  it  the  power  of  Christ  in  going  forth 
among  men.  If  I  see  my  brother  here  or  there,  his  mind  filled 
with  erroneous  thoughts  and  hopes,  and  himself  doing  things, 
without  conscience  or  with  feeble  qualms,  contrary  to  the  Lord, 
how  would  God  stir  my  affections  towards  him  ?  I  must  always 
act  out  of  the  grace  in  which  God  deals  towards  the  saint,  and  I 
must  lift  up  his  soul,  if  I  can,  to  know  what  God  feels  towards 
him  and  His  will  about  him.  If  he  perceives  the  grace  in  whicVi 
God  has  acted,  he  will  be  prepared  to  learn  what  he  owes  to  Him. 
Thus  the  apostle  always  speaks.  Look  again  at  Ephesians. 
What  had  St.  Paul  been  doing  from  the  beginning  of  the  epistle 
to  chap.  V.  ?  He  had  shown  the  perfect  love  of  God  towards 
them,  and  the  place  of  oneness  with  Christ  in  which  He  has  set 
them  ;  and  now  he,  as  it  were,  says,  Walk  you  in  the  love  Christ 


JUDICIAL    RIGHTEOUSNESS    BELOW.  403 

has  shown  towards  you.  We  find  the  same  thing  here.  It  is  not 
now  the  thunders,  and  lightnings,  and  voices  out  of  God's  pre- 
sence. All  that  has  completely  disappeared.  In  chap.  iv.  such 
were  the  sights  and  sounds  which  emanated  from  the  throne.  They 
were  suited  then,  and  necessary  to  uphold  and  express  the  holi- 
ness of  Him  who  sat  there.  They  were  the  witness  of  His  feel- 
ing, when,  the  Church  being  removed  to  heaven,  man  was  left 
to  exalt  himself,  only  checked  by  providential  judgments.  Here 
there  is  nothing  of  the  sort.  There  is  the  throne  of  God  and  of 
the  Lamb ;  and  what  issues  from  it  ?  A  river  of  water  of  life, 
bright  as  crystal.  And  why  is  this  ?  Because  the  throne  here 
is  set  in  connexion  with  the  heavenly  city,  and  this  city  being 
the  symbol  of  the  glorified  saints,  the  Church's  habitual  cha- 
racter, even  in  glory,  is  grace.  Not  only  was  it  a  river  of  life, 
not  of  death,  but  the  leaves  of  the  tree  were  for  the  healing,  not 
destruction,  of  the  nations. 

Jerusalem  here  below  is  the  city  of  earthly  righteousness  —  the 
place  where  God  will  have  brought  the  Jews  through  exceeding 
trouble.  They  must  undergo  a  terrible  tribulation  first ;  the 
time  of  Jacob's  trouble,  but  he  will  be  delivered  out  of  it.  It 
will  be  a  lighteously  measured  chastening,  because  of  their  sins. 
They  will  pass  through  all  that  sorrow  which  God  has  Himself 
judicially  inflicted ;  but  the  indignation  is  to  cease,  and  this  with 
the  destruction  of  those  who  were  its  instruments.  "  For  yet  a 
very  little  while  and  the  indignation  shall  cease,  and  mine  anger 
in  their  destruction."  God  will  take  up  the  cause  of  His  people, 
and  the  calling  of  Israel  in  the  millennium  will  savour  of  that 
righteousness  which  has  marked  the  dealings  of  God  towards 
them  publicly,  whatever  may  have  been  the  hidden  spring  of 
grace.  All  the  nations  shall  go  up  to  Jerusalem  when  the 
mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  established  in  the  top  of 
the  mountains.  And  "  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law,  and 
the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem."  The  law  is  the  rule  of 
righteousness ;  grace  is  another  thing  altogether.  It  is  not  a 
rule  of  righteousness,  with  death  the  inevitable  penalty.  It  is 
true  that  grace  reigns  through  righteousness,  but  then  it  is  the 
righteousness  of  God,  not  of  man  ;  and  this,  under  his  gracious 
culture,  fills  the  saint  with  the  fruit  of  righteousness,  which  is 
through  Jesus  Christ  unto  God's  glory  and  praise. 

Here  we  have  then  a  scene  of  perfect  grace.  Nothing  could 
exceed  the  blessing  in  relation  to  man.  The  number  twelve  is 
always  used  in  refei'ence  to  the  dealings  of  God  with  man,  by 
means  of  human  administration.  Seven  is  the  number  of  per- 
fection in  relation  to  the  things  of  God,  or  rather  to  the  spiritual 


404  HOW    FAR    ETERNAL, 

side,  whether  good  or  evil  —  twelve  in  relation  to  the  human 
side.  Thus,  when  God  chose  the  patriarchs,  there  were  twelve  : 
they  had  a  reference,  I  suppose,  not  only  to  the  tribes  which 
sprang  from  them,  hut  the  rest  of  mankind  generally.  And 
again,  when  the  apostles  were  called,  there  vi'ere  twelve,  answer- 
ing to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  The  moment  we  have  the 
apostle,  who  was  specially  entrusted  with  the  great  work  of  put- 
ting the  Church  upon  her  firm  and  heavenly  foundations,  irre- 
spective of  earthly  arrangement,  the  number  twelve  is  broken, 
and  apostles  independent  of  the  twelve  appear.  (Acts  xiv.  4,  14  ; 
Eph.  iv.)  This  may  explain  a  little  further  what  I  meant  by 
saying  that  the  twelve  gates,  twelve  foundations,  &c.,  which  we 
saw  in  chap,  xxi,,  set  forth  the  aspect  of  this  city  towards  man. 
It  is  viewed  in  its  public  governmental  character.  So  in  this 
tree.  By  its  bearing  twelve  manner  of  fruits,  and  yielding  its 
fruits  every  months  is  shown  the  aspect  of  it  towards  man.  Ac- 
cordingly we  are  told  next  that,  "  the  leaves  of  the  tree  were 
for  healing  of  the  nations." 

Another  thing  is  clear,  that  this  scene  refers  not  to  the  eternal 
state,  but  to  the  millennial.  For  in  eternity  nations  will  not 
exist  as  such  ;  neither  will  any  need  healing  then.  Carefully 
bear  this  in  mind,  however,  that  if  we  look  at  the  heavenly  city 
itself,  it  is  eternal.  It  will  make  little  difference  to  the  city 
whether  seen  in  the  millennium,  or  in  the  eternal  state  that 
succeeds.  There  were  two  descents  of  the  city  in  chap.  xxi. — 
one  at  tlie  beginning  of  tlie  millennium,  and  the  other  at  the 
commencement  of  tlie  eternal  state.  Tlie  second  verse  of  that 
chaptei'  gives  us  its  de-^cent  when  tlie  eternal  state  is  come,  and 
the  tenth  verse  its  descent  for  the  millennium.  The  reason,  I 
think,  is,  that  at  the  end  of  the  millennium  the  old  heaven  and 
earth  pass  away  ;  and  naturally  the  city  wonld  disapjiear  from 
the  scene  of  tlie  convulsion.  Then,  when  the  new  earth  dawns 
on  our  view,  tlie  heavenly  city  again  comes  down,  and  takes  its 
place  permanently  in  the  new  heavens  and  earth,  wherein  dwell- 
eth  righteousness.  This  is  necessary  to  remark  ;  because,  wliile 
at  the  end  of  tlie  thousand  years  all  will  be  changed,  still  the 
heavenly  city  will  abide  for  ever.  "  Unto  him  be  glory  in  the 
church  by  Christ  Jesus  throughout  all  ages,  world  without  end. 
Amen."  There  will  be  certain  offices  nliich  tb,e  glorified  Church 
will  cease  to  discharge  towards  the  earth  after  the  millennium 
is  over,  but  its  intrinsic  blessedness  renuiins  the  same.  Conse- 
quently, it  is  said  here,  "  There  shall  ]je  no  more  curse." 
Thenceforth  this  is  as  true  evermore  for  the  heavenly  city,  as  it 
can  be  for  the  new  heaven  and  earth  afterwards.  "  And  the  throne 


AND    HOW    FAR    MILLENNIAL?  405 

of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  in  it :  and  his  servants  shall 
serve  him  :  and  they  shall  see  his  face,  and  his  name  [shall  be] 
on  their  foreheads.  And  there  shall  be  no  night  there,  [or, 
more,]  and  they  shall  have  no  need  of  lamp  and  light  [of  the 
sun]" —the  one  rejjresenang  the  lig'it  of  maji's  making,  and  the 
other  of  God  :  but  all  iJiat  suited  this  world  is  past  for  the  city. 
"  For  the  Lord  God  shall  shed  light  upon  them  :  and  they  shall 
reign  for  ever  and  ever."  (Ver.  3-5.)  The  ex])ression  "  to  the 
ages  of  the  ages,"  I  a])prehend,  must  be  takeu  in  the  strongest 
sense  here.  It  does  not  refer  only  to  what  is  called  "  tlie  kingdom" 
— though  of  course  the  reigning  begins  then.  In  1  Cor.  xv.  24, 
it  is  a  kingdom  which  Christ  deliveis  up  at  a  definite  point  called 
"the  end."  "  Tiie  end"  implies  that  the  thousand  yeais  and  the 
judgment  of  the  dead  have  taken  place  ;  for  that  judgment  is 
part  of  Christ's  "kingdom"  —  its  great  closhig  act,  we  may  say. 
Ail  that  forms  a  i)art  of  the  kingdom  ;  and  v\  hen  it  i>  over,  and 
death,  the  last  enemy,  has  been  destroyed,  then  tlie  Lord  Jesus 
delivers  up  the  kingdom  to  God. 

The  object  of  the  kingdom  is  to  reduce  every  enemy  to  sub- 
jection ;  and  this  being  accomplished,  that  special  human  king- 
dom terminates.  But  if  there  will  then  be  a  great  change  as 
regards  the  earthly  saints  in  their  natuj'al  bodies  below,  not  so 
with  those  who  are  in  the  heavenly  places,  aheady  glorified. 
They  will  reigu  for  evei"  and  ever  :  it  will  be  true  throughout 
all  eternity.  These  words  seem  hej-e  to  be  used  without  restric- 
tion. All  the  account,  from  the  9th  verse  of  chap.  xxi.  to 
verse  5,  hiclusively,  of  chap,  xxii.,  presents  the  relation  of  the 
heavenly  city  to  the  earth  dunng  the  ntilicimium.  But  there 
are  certain  features  in  it  which  are  true  eternally.  One  of  these 
characteristics,  besides  its  unchangeable,  intrinsic  glory,  is,  that  the 
service  of  tlie  sainis  will  be  for  ever  and  ever.  So  as  to  the 
reigning.  The  mode  of  the  reign,  as  of  the  service,  may  be 
changetl  after  the  earthly  kingdom  is  closed ;  but,  in  themselves, 
they  will,  I  apprehend,  endure  for  ever  and  ever. 

Now  we  are  come  to  the  closing  comments  of  tlie  prophet, 
and  the  conversation  that  takes  place  between  him  and  the 
angel  in  reference  to  the  proi)hecy,  as  well  as  the  final  message 
from  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself.  Strictly  speaking,  the  fifth  verse 
ends  the  prophecy.  But  just  as  we  have  a  prefatory  charge  at 
the  beginning  of  the  book,  so  here  we  have  a  sort  of  formal 
conclusion. 

You  will  observe  that  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  referred 
to  no  less  than  three  times,  and  that  each  has  a  different  con-- 


406  BLESSING    OF    THE    BOOK, 

nexion  in  these  farewell  words  of  the  Lord.  The  first  time  is  in 
the  7th  verse,  evidently  in  dependence  on  verse  6.  "  And  he 
said  unto  nie,  These  words  are  faithful  and  true :  and  the  Lord, 
the  God  of  the  spirits  of  the  prophets  sent  his  angel  to  show  to 
his  servants  the  things  which  must  come  to  pass  shortly.  And 
behold,  I  come  quickly  :  blessed  is  he  that  keejjeth  the  words  of 
the  prophecy  of  this  book."  (Ver.  6,  7.)  The  Lord  Jesus  here 
links  His  coming  with  the  blessing  of  the  man  who  attends  to  the 
words  of  the  prophecy.  In  strict  connexion  with  this,  the  Holy 
Ghost  solemnly  commends  this  prophecy  which  was  now  brought 
to  a  close.  The  Lord  Jesus,  no  doubt,  foresaw  the  measure  of 
slight  which  would  be  put  upon  this  book,  and  the  efforts  of  men 
to  put  it  aside.  I  do  not  like  to  refer  to  particular  religious 
societies,  but  allow  me  to  say  a  word  about  one  which  is  a  re- 
formed body  and  well  known.  And  yet,  extraordinary  to  say, 
in  that  which  is  arranged  for  the  express  purpose  of  giving  the 
entire  word  of  God  to  the  people  in  daily  portions,  how  is  it  that 
the  book  of  Revelation  is  given  ?  Why,  it  is  only  used,  a  little 
bit  at  a  time,  on  one  or  two  special  occasions,  and  at  other  seasons 
not  at  all,  while  even  part  of  the  Apocrypha  is  read  !  It  appears 
to  me  that  the  Lord  was  here  guarding  His  people  against  all 
such  disresj^ect,  open  or  more  subtle,  to  the  book  of  the  Revela- 
tion.* Nor  is  it  merely  where  these  lessons  are  fixed,  that  there 
is  a  slight  put  upon  it :  let  not  others,  differently  situated,  suppose 
themselves  to  be  guiltless.  Take  those  who  have  no  formal 
division  of  the  Scriptures  day  by  day  :  do  you  find  this  book 
honoured  by  them  as  the  Lord  enjoins?  You  will  learn  that  in 
general,  though  God's  children  have  not  agreed  to  dishonour  it, 
yet,  as  a  practical  fact,  this  book  has  been  pushed  aside,  save  for 
controversial,  historical,  or  imaginative  purposes.  There  is 
hardly  an  attempt  to  expound  it  simply  and  practically.  Few 
servants,  indeed,  deal  it  out  in  due  season,  so  as  to  make  it  a  part 
of  the  household  bread  of  the  family  of  God.  Even  when  inter- 
pretations of  it  are  ventured  upon,  are  they  not  in  general  most 
crude  —  the  far-fetched  notions  of  an  antiquarian,  or  the  degrad- 
ing comparisons  with  an  infidel  historian  or  a  daily  newspaper  ? 
What  a  solemn  thing  it  is  to  depart  from  God's  word  !  He  puts 
the  book  before  His  people  as  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place — 
not  at  all  as  a  mere  exercise  for  men  of  learning  in  a  speculative 

*  I  have  hardly  spoken  more  plainly  here,  than  the  Dean  of  Canterbury  does 
on  chap.  i.  8.  "  If  the  words  are  to  be  understood  as  above,  they  form  at  least  a 
solemn  rebuke  to  the  practice  of  the  Church  of  England,  which  omits  with  one 
or  two  exceptions  the  whole  of  this  book  from  her  public  readings.  Not  one  word 
of  the  precious  messages  of  the  Spirit  to  the  Churches  is  ever  heard  in  the  public 
services  of  a  Church  never  weary  of  appealing  to  her  Scriptural  liturgies." 


John's  prostration  before  the  angel.  407 

uiood.  It  was  meant  for  all  the  children  of  God,  for  their 
souls'  profit,  and  to  help  their  communion  with  God.  He 
wanted  them  not  only  to  know  His  grace,  but  the  judgments 
that  were  coming  upon  the  world.  He  desired  them  to  under- 
stand that  the  book  which  shows  the  world's  course  and  doom, 
equally  indicates  their  deliverance  out  of  the  judgment.  For 
the  Revelation  makes  it  plain,  that,  before  there  is  a  word  of  the 
judgment,  tlie  Church  is  seen  in  the  presence  of  God  :  from  the 
beginning  of  chap.  iv.  we  see  her  above.  How  plain  it  is  that 
the  words  of  the  prophecy  are  all  of  the  greatest  importance  to 
God's  people  !  He  desires  they  should  be  happy  in  the  fellow- 
ship He  gives  Ihem  with  Himself  before  these  things  come  to 
pass.  "  Blessed  is  he  that  keepeth  the  words  of  the  prophecy 
of  this  book."  And  why  has  it  been  comparatively  so  valueless 
as  to  its  practical  bearing?  Because  the  prophecy  has  been 
severed  from  the  promise.  The  word  of  grace,  "  Behold  I  come 
quickly,"  has  not  been  distinguished  from  "  the  sayings  of  the 
prophecy  of  this  book."  And  hence  the  Church's  portion  has 
been  confounded  with  the  judgments  of  the  world.  The  Reve- 
lation supposes  that  God's  children  are  waiting  for  the  coming 
of  Christ,  which  ought  indeed  to  be  their  bright  hope  from  day 
to  day.  Where  this  is  not  the  case,  I  believe  that  it  is  morally 
impossible  to  enter  into  or  enjoy  its  disclosures.  "  Blessed  is  he 
that  keepeth  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book."  The 
Lord  is  coming  quickly.  But  if  we  are  not  looking  for  Him, 
with  hearts  at  rest  through  His  grace,  we  are  sure  to  pervert 
His  sayings,  instead  of  turning  them  to  profit. 

When  John  heard  and  saw  these  things,  he  fell  down  to 
worship  before  the  feet  of  the  angel  that  showed  them.  He  had 
done  so  previously.  (Chap,  xix,  10.)*  Possibly,  the  grandeur  of 
the  vision  may  have  led  him  to  suppose  that  it  was  Cin-ist  Him- 
self taking  that  form.  But  he  is  immediately  corrected.  The 
angel  says  to  him,  "I  am  thy  fellow-servant,"  or  rather,  "  the 
fellow-servant  of  thee  and  of  thy  brethren,  the  prophets."  As 
it  stands  in  our  Bible,  the  statement  is  somewhat  ambiguous.  It 
might  seem,  as  it  stands,  to  convey  that  the  angel  was  one  of  his 
brethren,   the  prophets.     Of  course,  that  is  not  the  meaning ; 

*  It  may  be  as  well  to  observe  here,  that,  in  the  reciprocal  proposition,  so  often 
vaguely  applied  or  misapplied,  "  the  spirit  of  prophecy  is  the  testimony  of  Jesus," 
we  are  not  to  understand  a  testimony  to  Jesus,  but  that  which  He  gave,  and,  in 
general  throughout  the  Apocalypse,  His  prophetic  testimony,  whether  committed 
to  an  angel  or  to  His  servants.  It  is  incorrect  therefore  to  say  tiiat  tlds  means 
to  Jesus  ;  which  is  regularly  expressed  either  by  the  dative,  or,  if  a  genitive  be 
used,  with  irtpi.  The  angelic  communicator  was  but  a  fellow-servant  of  John's  : 
God  was  to  be  worshipped. 


408  WHY  Daniel's  words  were  sealed, 

but  instead  of  being  the  Lord,  and  an  object  of  worship,  the 
angel  was  the  fellow-servant  of  John,  and  of  John's  brethren 
the  prophets.  "  See  thou  do  it  not,  for  I  am  the  fellow-servant 
of  thee  and  of  thy  brethren,  the  prophets,  and  of  them  which 
keep  the  sayings  of  this  book :  worship  God." 

But  he  adds  more,  and  a  very  important  thought  it  is,  practically, 
for  God's  children.  You  may  remember  in  the  last  chapter  of 
Daniel,  it  is  written  there  (ver.  4,)  "  Bat  thou,  O  Daniel,  shut 
up  the  words,  and  seal  the  book,  even  to  the  time  of  the  end  : 
many  shall  run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge  shall  be  increased." 
Now  mark,  in  what  a  wonderful  place  God  has  put  His  Church. 

He  Mas  sending  His  word  to  the  most  favoured  man  that 
could  be  found  among  all  the  favoured  prophets  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament— "a  man  greatly  beloved."  But,  although  there  had 
been  given  him  so  plain  and  distinct  a  prophecy  of  Christ's 
coming  and  death,  other  words  were  added,  as  to  which  it  was 
said,  "  but  thou,  O  Daniel,  shut  up  the  words,  and  seal  the  book 
even  to  the  time  of  the  end."  Here  the  same  Spirit  addres^^es 
John,  and  says  to  him,  "  Seal  not  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of 
this  book  :  for  the  time  is  at  hand."  (Ver.  10.)  How  comes  this 
to  pass?  The  whole  calling  of  the  Church  is  at  the  time  of  the 
end.  From  the  day  that  the  Church  began  its  actual  existence 
here  below,  it  was  the  time  of  the  end  ;  and  all  through  her  history, 
still  it  is  the  time  of  the  end.  Of  course,  I  do  not  mean  that  it  is 
distinctively  the  time  of  the  end  for  the  Jews,  who  must  wait  for 
the  development  of  all  on  the  j)latform  of  literal  facts  ;  but  therein 
lies  the  peculiarity  of  the  Church's  calling.  She  is  above  times 
and  seasons,  though  she  knows  them;  she  has  nothing  to  do 
with  dates,  or  signs,  or  outward  events,  any  more  than  with  the 
world,  of  whose  history  they  are  the  natural  and  necessary 
accompaniment.  The  Church  is  lifted  up  above  such  a  scene  ; 
she  is  heavenly.  Such  is  the  place  where  we  are  put  by  the 
grace  of  God,  entirely  outside  all  the  computations  which  refer 
to  the  government  of  this  world. 

As  for  the  Jew,  of  whom  Daniel  was  the  type,  he  must  wait 
till  the  time  of  the  end  is  historically  come,  till  the  knowledge  is 
given  by  God  to  those  who  have  understanding  then.  Until 
that  time  all  is  sealed  up  for  Israel.  This  is  not  the  case  with 
the  Church  represented  by  John.  To  him  it  is  said,  "  Seal  not 
the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  l)ook,"  &c. 

But  here  is  the  error  made  by  many  excellent  persons.  Sir 
Isaac  Newton,  a  man  of  the  highest  reputation  in  human  science, 
applied  this  shutting  up  and  sealing  of  the  book,  in  Daniel,  to 
the  Church.     The  consequence  was  that  he  gave  it  up  as  a  thing 


AND    WHY    THE    APOCALYPSE    IS    NOT.  409 

that  could  not  be  understood  till  the  time  of  the  end.  Had  he 
compared  the  passage  in  Daniel  with  the  closing;  words  of  St. 
John's  Revelation,  he  would  have  learnt  that  the  very  words 
that  were  hidden  from  the  Jewish  prophet,  are  expressly  opened 
to  the  Christian.  If  Daniel  was  to  seal,  John  is  expressly  told 
not  to  seal.  And  why  I  Because  Christ  had  come,  and  is  gone 
into  lieaven,  and  is  on  the  riglit  hand  of  God,  ready  to  judge 
quick  and  dead ;  He  is  rejected,  and  from  that  moment,  it  is 
morally  the  time  of  the  end.  And  so  the  New  Testament  writers 
speak.  The  Apostle  John  says,  "  Little  children,  it  is  tlie  last 
time ;"  Peter  writes,  "The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand  ;"  James, 
"  The  Judge  standeth  before  the  door."  So  wrote  St.  Paul. 
"  Now  all  these  things  happened  unto  them  as  ensamples :  and 
they  are  written  for  our  admonition,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the 
world  are  come,"  [or  ends  of  the  ages  are  met.]  And  so  Heb. 
ix.  26.  Thus  you  have,  substantially,  the  same  great  truth  from 
St.  Paul's,  St.  Peter's,  and  St.  James'  epistles  down  to  the 
Revelation.  This  it  is,  I  conceive,  that  is  supposed,  when  John 
is  told  not  to  shut  up  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book. 
It  is  to  be  used  and  understood  now,  in  virtue  of  the  knowledge 
of  Christ,  and  with  the  Holy  Ghost  given  by  Christ  as  an  unction 
whereby  we  know  all  things.  To  us  the  time  is  always  at  hand. 
The  words  of  this  book  are  not  sealed  to  us  ;  so  that  it  is  unbehef, 
if,  instead  of  taking  the  book  as  it  were  to  Christ,  who  is  the 
light  to  reveal  this  as  all  else,  we  submit  it  to  the  world  and  its 
wisdom  which  can  but  darken.  This,  I  doubt  not,  is  the  root 
and  reason  of  the  mistakes  and  difficulties  so  prevalent  with 
regard  to  the  interpretation  of  the  book.  In  order  to  understand 
this  and  every  other  part  of  Scripture,  I  must  see  what  God  is 
doing  for  the  glory  of  His  Son.  As  a  Christian  I  am  encou- 
raged to  read  the  prophecy  :  its  sayings  are  not  sealed  to  those 
who  have  the  mind  of  Christ.  If  I  were  a  Jew,  I  should  have 
to  wait  till  the  time  of  the  end  arrive  in  the  full  prophetic  sense, 
i.e.,  the  end  of  the  age.  Then  the  wise  among  the  Jews  shall 
understand ;  they  are  the  godly,  intelligent  remnant.  With 
such  a  remnant,  in  principle,  (called,  it  is  true,  into  better  hopes,) 
the  Church  bey-an. 

But  some  may  say.  There  were  certain  things  in  Daniel  which 
were  to  be  sealed,  and  others  Mhich  were  not :  why  may  not 
these  last  (not  the  first)  have  been  the  things  John  was  here  told 
not  to  seal  ?  I  reply  that  the  Revelation  supposes  all  the  truth 
we  find  in  Daniel  and  a  great  deal  more.  It  could  not  be  un- 
derstood, if  Daniel  were  not ;  while  there  aj'e  many  truths  added 
in  the  Revelation  which  were  not  given  in  Daniel.     Such  a  plea 


410        NOT    EVENTS,    BUT    THE    SPIRIT,    THE    INTERPRETER. 

is  therefore  unavailing.  The  fact  is  that  Daniel  speaks  in  the 
most  general  terms,  and  is  told  to  shut  up  the  words  and  seal  the 
book — not  merely  certain  j^arts  of  it.  The  Revelation  goes  over 
the  same  ground  as  Daniel  with  respect  to  the  last  empire, 
giving  many  things  of  a  still  wider  scope  and  far  more  pro- 
foundly— things  which  grew  out  of  the  Christian  apostacy,  in 
addition  to  the  previous  ruin  of  Israel  and  the  future  wickedness 
both  of  them  and  the  Gentiles.  Therefore,  if  there  was  any  book 
in  the  New  Testament  which  one  might  naturally  expect  to  be 
sealed  up,  it  is  the  Revelation  ;  for,  as  it  is  the  last,  so  is  it  the 
most  difficult,  abstruse,  and  comprehensive  of  all  the  books  of 
the  Bible.  Therefore  when  the  Holy  Ghost  says,  "  Seal  not  the 
words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book,"  I  conceive  that  we  have  im- 
plied a  clear  intimation  of  the  peculiar  privileges  of  the  Christian. 
It  supposes  him  to  stand  in  the  full  light  of  God  ;  so  that  what 
may  have  been  hidden  before,  is  now  fully  revealed,  seeing  that 
Christ  has  come  and  made  us  members  of  His  .body,  and  given 
us  the  Holy  Ghost  wlio  searches  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things 
of  God.  This,  to  my  mind,  is  the  reason  why  it  is  said,  "  Seal 
not  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book." 

It  is  important  in  another  way  not  always  seen.  The  events 
signified  by  the  prophetic  visions  of  the  Revelation  never  enable 
one  to  understand  the  book  itself.  If  they  were  to  take  place 
to-day,  that  would  not  of  itself  give  intelligence  as  to  the  Reve- 
lation. The  sole  key  to  prophecy  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  the 
only  One  that  can  make  known  its  relation  to  Christ,  and,  with- 
out seeing  that  relation,  we  never  understand  it.  Take  one  of 
the  clearest  and  most  defined  of  prophecies,  that  of  the  seventy 
weeks  in  Daniel.  Persons  generally  allow  that  it  has  been 
accomplished.  But  ask  of  them  its  real  meaning,  and  they  will 
show  how  little  it  is  understood  :  they  have  a  vague  idea  that  it 
is  accomplished,  and  little  more.  It  is  not  therefore  the  events 
themselves  which  explain  the  word  :  we  need  the  teaching  of 
the  Spirit,  which  is  as  necessary  to  interpret  prophecy  as  any 
other  part  of  the  Scriptures.  Events  may  be  tlie  accomplish- 
ments of  a  particular  prophecy  and  a  witness  of  its  truth  to  those 
who  doubt ;  but  they  never  of  themselves  aftbrd  the  just  inter- 
pretation of  the  prophecy.  They  undoubtedly  corroborate  it 
when  accomplished,  and  may  be  useful  to  stop  the  mouth  of  a 
gainsayer  ;  but  you  must  understand  the  prophecy  itself,  before 
you  can  apply  it  to  the  events,  and  when  you  do  understand, 
you  have  what  God  desired  to  give  your  faith,  independently  of 
the  events.  In  fact,  to  refute  such  a  notion  we  have  only  to 
weigh  what  is  said  here,  as  everywhere  else  in  it :  "  Seal  not  the 


VARIOUS    ASPECTS    OF    THE    LORd's    COMING.  411 

words  of  the  propliecy  of  this  book ;  for  the  time  is  at  hand." 
The  value  to  us,  to  the  Church,  is  beforehand,  whatever  may  be 
the  use  for  those  who  shall  be  in  the  scene  when  the  events 
arrive. 

But  now  listen  to  a  most  solemn  truth.  When  that  time  is 
actually  come,  of  which  the  prophecy  treats,  what  is  the  condi- 
tion of  men  ?  It  is  fixed,  for  ever  fixed  for  all — hopelessly  for 
some.  "  He  that  is  unjust,  let  him  be  unjust  still;  and  he  that 
is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still :  and  he  that  is  righteous,  let  him 
work  righteousness  still  ;  and  he  that  is  holy,  let  him  be  holy 
still."  (Ver.  11.)  That  is,  it  is  not  the  time  when  there  can  be  moral 
change ;  not  a  time  when  there  can  be  the  conversion  of  sinners — 
when  a  man  who  is  under  the  power  of  Satan  can  be  delivered 
from  it  and  translated  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son.  All 
this  is  at  an  end.  Then  he  that  is  unjust  must  remain  unjust,  and 
he  that  is  filthy  remains  filthy  still.  Men  are  solemnly  settled  in 
the  condition  in  which  they  are  found.  The  day  of  grace  is  over, 
the  day  of  judgment  will  be  come,  and  the  door  will  then  be 
shut. 

"  Behold,  I  am  coming  quickly,  and  my  reward  is  with  me,  to 
give  each  as  his  work  is."  (Ver.  12.)  Evidently  this  confirms  what 
has  been  remarked.  When  that  day  comes,  it  is  the  judgment 
of  the  living.  It  is  the  Lord's  coming  here,  not  spoken  of  as  an 
encouragement  to  him  who  hears  and  keeps  the  words  of  the 
prophecy  of  the  book ;  but  rather  in  the  way  of  discriminating 
judgment.  "  I  [am]  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the  first  and  the 
last,  the  beginning  and  the  end."  (Ver.  13.)  That  is,  the  Lord 
Jesus,  beside  what  is  peculiar  to  Himself,  takes  the  same  title  here 
that  God  Himself  did  in  chap.  xxi.  6.  As  God  was  the  sum  and 
substance  of  all  revelation  being  in  action,  so  was  Christ.  "  No 
man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time :  the  only-begotten  Son  who  is 
in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared  Him."  "  Blessed 
4^ are]  they  that  do  his  commandments,  [or  wash  their  robes,]  that 
they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter  in  through 
the  gates  into  the  city.  Without  [are]  the  dogs,  and  the  sorcerers, 
and  the  whoremongers,  and  the  murderers,  and  the  idolaters,  and 
every  one  loving  and  practising  a  lie."  (Ver.  14,  15.) 

But  next  we  have  another  thing.  It  is  not  the  Lord's  coming 
now,  as  an  encouragement  to  those  who  should  keep  the  sayings 
of  the  prophecy  of  this  book  ;  nor  yet  His  coming  as  judging 
every  man.  His  advent  in  the  way  of  judgment  and  His  reward 
with  Him  to  give  each  individual  as  his  work  is.  We  have  seen 
the  holy  and  the  righteous  having  their  portion,  and  the  filthy 
and  unrighteous  their  judgment.     But  the  Lord  has  His  own 


412  THE    MORNING    STAR. 

proper  and  full  relation  to  the  Church.  Consequently,  His  voice 
is  now  heard  with  marked  emphasis  here.  "  I,  Jesus,  have  sent 
mine  angel  to  testify  unto  you  these  things  in  the  churches.  I 
am  the  Root  and  the  Offspring  of  David."  (Ver.  16.)  That  is. 
He  refers  to  His  divine  and  His  human  character.  But,  beside 
this.  He  has  a  special  relationship  to  us — "  the  bright  [and]  the 
morning  star."  When  the  Lord  comes  in  His  glory  to  the  world, 
it  is  as  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  with  heahng  in  His  wing-s,  for 
those  that  have  been  broken,  and  scattered,  and  peeled, — a  people 
terrible  from  their  beginning  hitherto.  But  then  He  appears  in 
terror  to  tread  down  those  that  have  despised  Him,  under  His 
feet.  Not  so  does  He  present  Himself  to  us.  It  is  not  for  us 
the  image  of  the  sun,  when  man  should  sleep  no  longer.  When 
the  Sun  of  Righteousness  calls  man  up,  not  then  to  work  as  he 
works  now,  it  summons  him  that  he  may  be  judged  forever,  that 
he  may  hear  his  doom  eternally  pronounced  by  the  Lord  of 
glory,  whom  he  can  despise  no  longer.  Thus  will  he  appear  to 
the  world,  and  "  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that  do  wickedly 
shall  be  stubble.  And  the  day  that  cometh  shall  burn  them  up, 
saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  that  it  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor 
branch."  But  for  those  who  watch  during  the  night  of  man's 
day,  before  the  Lord  Jesus  ajjpears  in  His  glory,  for  those  who 
watch  with  bridal  afi'ections,  not  sleeping  as  do  others — how  does 
He  speak  to  such?  How  is  He  made  known  to  them  ?  "I  am 
the  blight,  the  morning  star."  Blessed  star  of  morn  before  the 
day  comes  !  We  watch  not  for  the  day,  but  for  Him  during  the 
night,  and  He  will  give  us  the  Morning  Star,  the  harbinger  of 
the  dawn.  A  blessed  ])lace  it  is — the  place  of  our  love  aud  hope  : 
it  will  never  be  disappointed  of  its  joy,  aud  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  will  surely  come,  as  the  bright,  the  morning  star  to  us. 
He  cheers  us  while  we  wait,  and  will  quickly  come  for  us  Him- 
self. We  may  have  to  tarry  somewhat ;  at  least  it  may  seem 
long  to  us.  For  those  who  waste  their  time  in  slumber,  it  will 
be,  alas  !  too  short ;  but  for  those  that  wait  for  Him  and  yearn 
to  see  Him,  the  hope  might  seem  to  be  long  deferred.  Instead 
of  growing  weary  and  sick,  may  our  hearts,  on  the  contrary, 
be  filled  with  the  joy  and  constancy  of  assurance  that  the  Lord 
is  coming  soon  !     He  is  the  bright  and  Morning  Star. 

But  more :  "  And  the  Spii'it  and  the  bride  say.  Come." 
What  a  blessed  thought  for  us  that  the  Holy  Ghost  Himself  is 
the  One  who  takes  up  the  word  and  says,  "  Come  !"  He  groans 
with  us,  entering  into  our  sorrows,  now  He  has  come  down. 
He  is  not  the  less  divine,  I  need  not  say,  but  withal  He  has 
condescended  to  identifv  Himself,  as  it  were,  with  our  hearts,  and 


"  COME."  413 

be  the  sharer  of  our  feelings.  But  it  is  not  groans  that  we  have 
now;  not  such  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,  when  He  thinks  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  coming-  for  us.  There  is  the  cahn  and  peaceful 
earnestness  of  desii"e.  "  The  Spirit  and  the  bi'ide  say,  Come.' 
It  is  most  strengthening  to  know  that  it  is  the  voice  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  Him?elf  which  says  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  Come."  It 
would  not  have  been  nearly  so  blessed,  had  the  bride  only  said, 
"  Come."  But  it  is  "  the  Spirit  and  the  hrider  She  had  done 
many  things  wrong,  had  made  many  mistakes  in  thought  and 
feeling,  and  ways.  But  now  it  is  the  Spirit,  the  Lloly  Ghost 
Himself,  who  says,  Come,  He  it  is  who  leads  the  heart  to 
desire  the  coming  of  Jesus  ;  He  is  the  energy  of  the  Church  in 
bidding  Jesus  welcome.  "The  Spirit  and  ihe  bride  say,  Come." 
It  is  in  looking  up  to  Jesus  that  the  Church  or  the  Christian 
says,  Come  ;  not  looking  down  to  the  poor  sinner  and  telling 
him  to  come.  The  Holy  Ghost  leads  and  inspires  the  heart 
of  the  bride  thus  to  cry,  not  only  in  sympathy  of  sorrow, 
but  in  communion  with  the  joy  wath  which  she  looks  up  in  the 
liope  of  the  Bridegroom's  return. 

And  not  only  so,  but  "  let  him  that  heareth  say.  Come."  If 
I  have  only  heard  the  voice  of  Jesus,  I  am  entitled  to  say,  Come. 
Perhaps  there  are  some  who  say,  O  that  I  could  be  happy  in 
asking  the  Lord  to  come  !  How  can  I  say,  Come,  when  1  am 
so  unworthy  ?  The  Lord  warrants  you  to  say.  Come.  It  is 
not  merely  the  bride  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  that  says.  Come 
— entering  into  her  full  privileges  ;  but  "  let  him  that  heareth 
say.  Come."  Have  you  heard  His  voice,  and  tasted  that  He  is 
gracious  ?  Do  you  not  know  that  He  is  the  good  Shepherd  ? 
I  might  be  the  very  feeblest  and  weakest  one,  shrinking  through 
ignorance  from  the  Lord's  coming  at  once  ;  yet  hei'e  I  have  the 
Holy  Ghost  inviting  me  to  take  up  the  very  same  word  that 
the  Spirit  and  the  bride  take  up.  "  Let  him  that  heareth  say, 
Come."  Most  evident  it  is,  also,  that  this  going  out  of  the  first 
affections  of  the  heart  towards  Christ  and  His  coming,  does  not 
harden  the  heart  towards  the  poor  world,  nor  make  us  indif- 
ferent to  the  conversion  of  the  lost ;  but  the  very  contrary. 
Whatever  estimate  men  may  form  of  their  own  efforts,  my  con- 
viction is,  tliat  the  people  who  most  desire  the  conversion  of 
sinners,  are,  cceteris  paribus,  those  who  most  desire  the  coming 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  I  do  not  believe  that  the  njen  that  want  to 
put  Him  off,  are  those  that  pray  and  labour  most  for  the  con- 
version of  souls.  What  is  it  leads  such  to  desire  it  ?  They 
labour  for  it  because  they  see  souls  perishing  everlastingly,  and 
they  justly   feel  that   all  are  miserable  without  Christ.      But 


414  Christ's  coming  a  fresh  motive  in  evangelizing. 

they  have  these  feelings  only  in  common  with  all  their  brethren. 
We  all  believe  that  men  will  be  cast  into  hell  if  they  do  not 
receive  the  gospel,  and  it  grieves  us  to  see  them  rejecting  the 
Saviour  ;  we  have  these  feelings  as  well  as  they.  But  we  have 
another  thing  which  they  have  not.  It  is  indeed  the  Lord's 
way,  and  that  is  better  than  theirs.  He  understands  what  is 
good  for  poor  sinners  and  poor  saints,  incomparably  better  than 
His  servants  do.  Now  He  shows  here  that  it  is  the  same  Spirit 
who  looks  up  to  Jesus  and  says.  Come,  who  also  can  turn  us 
round  to  lost  sinners  with  the  invitation,  "  Let  him  that  is  athirst 
come."  It  is  there  you  have  the  other  side.  It  is  not  here  the 
Spirit  directing  the  Church  in  looking  up  to  the  Lord  and  say- 
ing, Come,  but  it  is  the  heart  now  directed  to  the  world  and 
saying,  "  Let  him  that  is  athirst  come  ;  whosoever  will,  let  him 
take  the  water  of  life  freely."  (Ver.  17.)  The  sinner  is  not  told  to 
say,  Come.  Observe  that  there  is  a  great  difference  in  the  latter 
part  of  the  verse.  In  the  first  two  clauses  they  say.  Come ; 
but  in  the  latter  part  they  do  not  bid  Jesus  come,  but  are  invited 
to  come  themselves  :  "  Let  him  that  is  athirst  come"  &c. 

Thus  God  shows  that  the  first  thought  of  my  heart  should  be 
towards  Jesus.  If  true  to  Him,  I  shall  desire  His  coming. 
The  Spirit  prompts  and  sanctions  this  desire.  And  what  is  the 
effect  on  my  feelings  towards  the  world  ?  It  will  give  me  a 
heavenly  reason  for  desiring  the  conversion  of  sinners.  I  shall 
have  the  same  moral  motives,  and  the  same  affections,  which  act 
on  my  brethren  who  put  off  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  And  I 
shall  have,  besides,  all  the  impetus  which  the  hope  of  Christ's 
speedy  coming  can  give  me,  and  the  sense  of  the  danger  of  those 
to  whom  His  coming  can  be  nothing  but  certain  judgment,  even 
in  this  world.  The  more  a  Christian  looks  for  Christ's  coming 
at  any  moment,  the  more  ardent  must  be  his  desire,  and  the 
more  earnest  his  importuning,  that  souls  should  come  and  take 
of  the  water  of  life. 

In  this  verse  17,  then,  God  unfolds  our  two-fold  relation.  He 
shows  me  my  relation  to  Christ,  which  ought  to  be  the  first 
thought  of  my  heart  —  not  merely  that  my  soul  should  be  at 
peace  if  He  came,  but  filled  with  the  earnestness  of  affection 
that  desires  His  coming.  And  He  shows  me  that,  when  I  am 
right  there,  I  shall  turn  round  with  quickened  zeal  in  the  sense 
of  the  grace  of  Christ,  and  shall  say  to  every  one  that  is  athirst, 
Come.  More  than  that.  If  I  see  a  soul  that  may  not  perhaps 
thirst  deeply,  but  who  is  willing  to  come,  I  shall  not  tell  him 
to  wait  till  he  is  very  thirsty.  I  shall  bid  him  come  at  once, 
and  welcome  ;    for  the  word  is,  "  he  that  will,  let  him  take  the 


"  YEA,    1    COME    QUICKLY."  415 

water  of  life  freely."  If  there  is  only  the  desire  of  the  heart,  it 
comes  from  God,  and  no  one  rightly  says,  You  must  wait  till 
you  have  gone  through  this  or  that  experience.  If  a  man  has 
not  got  so  far  in  realizing  his  state,  I  am  not  to  keep  him  away. 
The  water  of  life  is  for  whosoever  will.  He  is  directed  to 
come  and  drink  of  it  freely.  What  fulness  of  grace  is  in  the 
way  in  which  the  Lord  brings  our  place  before  us  ! 

"  I  testify  to  every  one  thatheareth  the  words  of  the  prophecy 
of  this  book.  If  any  man  shall  add  to  these  things,  God  shall 
add  to  him  the  plagues  that  are  written  in  this  book  :  and  if  any 
one  shall  take  away  from  the  words  of  the  book  of  this  prophecy, 
God  shall  take  away  his  part  from  the  tree  of  life,  and  out  of 
the  holy  city,  that  are  written  in  this  book."  (Ver.  18,  19.) 
You  will  observe  that  the  tree  and  the  city  mentioned  here 
answer  to  what  we  found  in  verse  14,  Those  that  do  His  com- 
mandments are  blessed,  and  have  a  title  to  the  tree  of  life,  and 
entrance  by  the  gates  into  the  city.  But  as  for  those  that  take 
away  from  the  words  of  this  book,  God  shall  take  away  their 
portion  from  both  the  tree  and  the  city  which  are  written  of  in 
this  book.     They  shall  have  no  access  thereto. 

The  Lord  had  said  if  there  were  men  that  should  take  away  from 
the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book,  and  that  would  disho- 
nour it,  He  would  assuredly  know  and  feel  and  resent  it.  But 
He  could  not  close  with  such  words  as  these.  He  has  reserved, 
as  it  were,  the  best  wine  to  the  last.  He  had  already  spoken  of 
His  coming  in  the  way  of  judgment,  and  of  His  coming  for  the 
Church,  in  full  grace  ;  and  now  He  could  not  leave  us  with  a 
note  of  sorrow.  He  must  bring  back  our  hearts  to  gladness 
and  joy  at  the  thought  of  His  coming  again ;  and  so  He  says, 
"  He  that  testifieth  these  things  saith.  Surely,  I  come  quickly. 
Amen."  Is  the  "Amen"  here  His  own  assuring  verity,  or  merely 
the  response  from  the  prophet's  heart?  If  His  own,  it  is  sweet 
indeed.  It  would  be  the  Lord  putting  His  own  seal  upon  the 
truth  of  the  word  He  had  said  before  :  "  Behold  I  come  quick- 
ly." Certain  it  is  that  immediately  John,  as  representing  the 
Church,  answers,  "  Come,  Lord  Jesus."  If  the  "  Amen"  be  his, 
it  is  the  ready  reply  of  his  heart  to  the  Lord. 

And  if  it  is  our  privilege  to  look  to  Christ,  and  hear  His 
voice  ;  if  we  have  known  some  little  of  the  joy  of  being,  even 
now,  in  union  with  Himself,  made  members  of  His  body,  of 
His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones  ;  if  we  are  waiting  as  those  conscious 
of  our  bridal  relationship  to  Christ,  and  assured  that  we  shall 
have  the  Bride's  portion,  in  presence  of  the  Lamb  for  evermore, 
the  Lord  grant  that  this  may  be  the  answer  of  our  hearts  and 


416  "amen,  come,  lord  jesus." 

lips — "Amen,  come,  Lord  Jesus."  May  it  not  be  icaiting 
for  a  something  for  ourselves,  nor  for  the  Church,  much  less  for 
the  world  !  It  is  a  blinding  delusion  to  look  for  better  days 
while  Jesus  is  away.  There  are  good  days  in  store,  even  for 
this  poor  world  —  days  of  heaven  upon  the  earth  ;  but  the  Lord 
must  come  before  then  —  and  He  must  have  us  for  Himself,  first 
of  all.  The  Lord  will  never  have  a  time  of  real  abiding  joy  for 
the  world,  as  a  whole,  till  He  has  had  the  Church  with  Himself. 
For,  as  we  see  in  Rom.  viii.,  "the  earnest  expectation  of  the 
creature  waiteth  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God."  The 
manifestation,  spoken  of  there,  will  be  in  glory.  St.  Paul  had 
been  speaking  before  of  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us, 
when  our  bodies  shall  be  changed,  and  made  like  the  glorious 
body  of  Christ.  We  are  not  like  the  Son  of  God  now,  as  regards 
our  bodies  :  too  well  we  know  that  we  bear  the  image  of  the 
earthly  still ;  but  we  shall  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly. 
And  then,  when  God  sees  us  shining  in  the  likeness  of  His  own 
Son,  He  will  have  no  reason  to  be  ashamed  of  us.  He  will  not 
present  us  before  the  universe,  till  our  bodies  are  as  worthy  of 
Him,  as  is  the  new  life  that  He  has  given  to  our  souls.  When 
the  sons  of  God  are  manifested,  then  creation  will  cease  to  groan, 
and  the  earth  and  heavens,  filled  with  blessedness,  will  declare 
both  the  glory  and  the  goodness  of  God  :  "  The  floods  will  clap 
their  hands,  and  the  hills  be  joyful  together  before  the  Lord." 
Then  it  will  be  found  that  the  blessed  hope,  and  the  appearing 
of  the  glory  that  the  Lord  has  set  before  us,  will  issue  in  praises 
of  joy  and  gladness,  which  will  reach  the  most  distant  parts  of 
earth,  and  the  utmost  bounds  of  creation. 

May  the  Lord  grant  that  we  may  say,  "  Amen,  come,  Lord 
Jesus,"  that  we  may  say  it  for  ourselves,  as  for  all  the  Church, 
and,  in  a  sense,  for  all  creation  too,  the  blessing  of  which  de- 
pends upon  our  being  manifested  along  with  Christ!  Mean- 
while, the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  be  with  all  the  saints  ! 


ERRATA. 

Page  34,  line  3,  for  "four,"  read  three. 
„  196,  lines  24,  32,  for  "mouths,"  read  months. 


Mackenzie  Sf  Carrington,  Printers,  New  Street,  Guernsey. 


''iMBM 

■  ■■  Hi 

■  '■:  ,,^ '  ,'■;■;'';';;••  vVv'^'p 

■;  ''•'':::;;.oi:S;i:'v^^ 

-'^lA 

iM.it; 


