^-o 


,^Vt«v:   .5;;  :, 


«(-,:"•.: 


LECTURES 


ON 


THE  GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 


^^!?/©^olSe\^ 


BY  WILLIAM  KELLY. 


LONDON: 
G.    MORRISH,    24,    WARWICK    LANE, 

PATERNOSTER  ROW,  E.  C. 
GLASGOW:  R.  L.  ALLAN,  75,  SAUCHIEHALL  STREET. 


PREFACE. 


The  book  here  offered  to  the  reader  consists  of  notes  of 
lectures  on  the  earliest  gospel.    It  has  already  appeared 
in  short  detached  portions.     Given  now  as  a  whole  and 
in  a  corrected  form,  the  author  trusts  that  the  volume 
may  prove  a  help  to  those  who  accept  Scripture  as  the 
word   of  God  and   have    confidence   in   the   gi^acious 
guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  sent  down  from 
heaven  to  glorify  our  Lord  Jesus.     Critical  questions 
have  been    sparingly  discussed   here :    elsewhere  they 
may  be  entered  into  more  fully ;  for  truth  has  nothing 
to  fear,  much  to  gain,  from  the  most  thorough  sifting, 
if  it  be  but  competent  and  candid.      On  the  present 
occasion,  however,  direct  interpretation  has  been  the 
aim,  and  the  practical  profit  of  souls, 
GuEUNSEY,  Feb.,  1868. 


INTRODUCTION. 


That  the  Spirit  of  God,  wlien  inspiring  Matthew,  had  in  view 
the  aspirations  and  wants  of  the  Jews,  the  evidence  of  the 
Messiahship  of  Jesus,  and  the  consequences  of  His  rejection  both 
for  them  and  the  Gentiles,  is  a  truth  which  has  forced  itself  on 
most  Christians  who  have  examined  the  gospels  with  any  dis- 
criminating care.  So  large  and  varied  are  the  internal  proofs 
of  such  a  design  that  the  only  wonder  is  how  an  intelligent 
mind  could  dispute  the  facts  or  the  inference.  Yet  we  are  told 
that,  had  a  Jewish  aim  been  steadily  kept  before  the  Evangelists, 
the  visit  of  the  Gentile  Magi  could  not  have  been  exclusively 
related  by  Matthew,  any  more  than  the  circumcision  of  Jesus 
and  His  frequenting  the  passovers  at  Jerusalem  could  have  been 
exclusively  related  by  Luke  if  he  had  written  for  Gentiles.  The 
objection  has  no  force,  when  it  is  seen  that  the  Spirit  meant  by 
Matthew  to  trace  the  alienation  of  the  Jews  from  such  a  Messiah 
as  their  own  Scriptures  portray,  not  alone  externally  glorious, 
but  first  as  a  divine  person  though  a  man,  intimating  in  His  very 
name  that  He  was  Jehovah,  coming  to  save  His  people  from 
their  sins  and  not  merely  from  their  enemies.  (Chap,  i.)  What 
a  picture  follows  in  chapter  ii.  !  Jerusalem  troubled  at  the 
tidings  of  His  birth,  and  distant  Gentile  Magi  from  the  East 


VI  INTKODUCTION. 

coming  up  to  do  Him  homage.  Is  this  the  refutation  of 
Matthew's  special  design?  What  more  beautiful  illustration 
of  it  could  be  looked  for?  And  if  Luke  gives  us  the  most 
charming  glimpses  at  the  godly  remnant  of  Israel,  and  the  Lord 
Jesus  presented  first  in  their  midst  with  the  most  exact  heed 
to  every  requirement  of  the  law,  how  does  this  set  aside  the 
testimony  of  a  gospel  which  teems  with  evidence  that  God  gives 
us  there  Christ  as  traced  up  to  "Adam,  which  was  the  son  of 
God,"  not  down  from  Abraham  and  David,  the  depositary  of 
promise  and  the  stock  of  the  kingdom  in  Israel  ?  Did  the 
objectors  forget  that  the  great  A2)ostle  of  the  Gentiles  regularly 
carried  out  the  principle  on  which  he  insists — "  to  the  Jew  first, 
and  also  to  the  Greek?"  Doubtless  in  either  case  the  inspired 
writers  reflected  the  richness  of  God's  ways  of  grace,  not  the 
technicality  of  a  human  routine. 

It  is  evident  also  that  the  apparent  discrepancies  in  the  con- 
current accounts  of  the  synoptic  gospels  must  spring,  either 
from  the  infirmity  of  the  human  instruments  or  from  the  far- 
reaching  wisdom  of  the  Spirit  who  impressed  on  each  a  special 
design,  and  so  inserted,  suppressed,  or  variously  presented  the 
same  substantial  fact  or  truth  in  pursuance  of  that  design,  never 
giving  anything  but  truth,  yet  only  thus  giving  the  whole  truth. 
Why  does  unbelief  affirm  that  such  a  diflference  of  design  is  an 
a  priori  theory  ?  The  habitual  testimony  of  each  gospel  must 
decide  this  question.  What  can  be  more  manifestly  a  priori, 
than  to  impute,  on  such  a  ground  as  this,  "  demonstrable  his- 
torical inaccuracies"  to  the  inspired  historians  of  the  weightiest 
matters  ever  given  to  man  to  record?  If  the  sole  method  of 
writing  a  life  were  that  of  simple  sequence,  there  might  be  some 
appearance  of  reason ;  but  some  of  the  most  famous  biographies 
among  men  depart  in  general  or  in  part  from  the  mere  order  of 
occurrence.     What  would  be  thought  of  assailing  their  credit 


INTRODUCTION.  Vll 

for  such  a  reason  as  this  ?  It  is  not  so  that  scholars  judge  of* 
Suetonius  compared  with  Tacitus.  The  fault  lies  in  those  who 
object,  not  in  Scripture. 

It  is  to  me  certain  that  Matthew  and  Luke  were  led  to  follow 
an  exact  order,  one  dispeusational,  the  other  moral ;  that  they 
are  far  more  profoundly  instructive  than  if  one  or  other  or  both 
had  adhered  to  the  very  elementary  manner  of  an  annalist ;  and 
that  it  is  a  mere  blunder  therefore  to  characterize  any  resulting 
difference  of  arrangement  (such  as  Matthew  viii.  28,  &c.,  com- 
pared with  Mark  v.  1,  &c.,  and  Luke  viii.  26,  &c.)  as  a  real 
discrepancy.  Let  such  defenders  of  the  faith  do  their  worst : 
the  Christian  has  nothing  to  fear,  but  only  to  believe,  and  he 
shall  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord  and  the  beauty  of  the  truth. 
Undoubtedly  a  different  arrangement  consists  with  and  sup- 
poses the  same  incident  variously  placed,  and  with  deliberate 
design,  so  as  to  bring  out  the  truth  more  fully ;  but  how  does 
it  prove  a  "rm^'  discrepancy? 

It  is  allowed  on  all  hands  that  the  Lord  may  have  repeated 
the  same  truth,  as  He  often  repeated  similar  miracles.  But  a 
difference  of  design  alone  accounts  for  all  the  phenomena  of  the 
gospels,  and  this  not  to  the  dishonour  of  the  writers,  but  to  the 
praise  of  their  true  and  divine  Author.  Eye-witness  and 
apostolicity  fail  to  meet  the  case ;  for  two  out  of  the  four 
Evangelists  were  neither.  The  foundation  of  the  new  building 
consists  of  prophets  as  well  as  apostles ;  and  though  God  did 
supply  eye-witnesses,  He  proved  His  supremacy  by  furnishing 
the  most  graphic  details  of  our  Lord's  ministry  by  the  very  two 
who  had  not  seen  what  they  describe  with  more  life-like  touches 
than  are  found  in  those  two  who  describe  what  they  saw.  So 
false  is  this  criterion  even  in  the  two  Apostles,  that  John  alone 
does  not  give  either  the  scene  of  the  agony  or  that  of  the  trans- 
figuration, yet  he  alone  of  the  Evangelists  was  among  the  nearest 


Vlll  INTKODUCTION. 

to  both.  He  alone  gives  the  fall  of  the  armed  band  to  the 
ground,  yet  Matthew  beheld  it  equally  with  himself.  And 
Matthew  gives  with  the  greatest  fulness  the  prophetic  discourse 
on  Olivet;  John  not  at  all,  though  he  is  the  only  Evangelist 
who  was  present  to  hear  it. 

The  Spirit's  purpose  is  the  true  and  only  key  in  every  in- 
stance. Thus,  as  to  the  inscription  on  the  cross,  nothing  is 
simpler  than  the  perfection  of  each  report  for  each  gospel, 
while  it  may  be  that  the  actual  writing  contained  John's  with 
the  addition  of  Matthew's  opening  words,  the  Holy  Spirit  ap- 
propriating each  form  to  His  aim  in  the  respective  gospels. 
Plenary  inspiration  in  no  way  excludes  special  design.  The 
true  question  is.  Are  we  to  attribute  their  differences  of  form  to 
the  wisdom  of  God  or  to  the  weakness  of  man  ?  Again,  dif- 
ference of  reading  is  a  question  of  human  copies,  not  of  the 
inspired  original.  Lastly,  the  apostle  insists  not  merely  that 
the  men  were  inspired,  but  that  the  book — yea  every  scripture 
— is  divinely  inspired. 

There  is  the  strongest  evidence  to  prove  that  the  Greek  of 
Matthew  is  the  original  and  not  a  version,  though  possibly  the 
Evangelist  may  have  also  written  it  in  Hebrew  for  the  early 
Church  in  Judea.  This  might  lapse,  and  what  was  perma- 
nently needed  abide. 


LECTURES 

ON 

THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 


CHAPTER  I. 

I  HAVE  thought  it  might  be  profitable  to  take  up  one  of  the 
Gospels,  and  to  trace,  as  simply  as  the  Lord  enables  me,  the 
general  outline  of  the  truth  revealed  there.  It  is  my  desire  to 
point  out  the  special  object  and  design  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  so 
as  to  furnish  those  who  value  God's  word,  with  such  hints  as 
may  tend  to  meet  some  of  the  difficulties  that  arise  in  the 
minds  of  many ;  and  also  to  put  in  a  clearer  light  great  truths 
that  are  apt  to  be  passed  lightly  over.  Here  I  may  assume, 
that  the  Spirit  of  God  has  not  given  us  these  accounts  of  our 
Lord  liable  to  the  mistakes  of  men,  but  that  He  has,  on  the 
contrary,  kept  His  mighty  unerring  hand  over  those  who  in 
themselves  were  men  of  like  passions  with  us.  Li  a  word,  the 
Holy  Ghost  has  inspired  these  accounts,  in  order  that  we  might 
have  full  certainty  that  He  is  their  author ;  and  thus  they  fire 
stamped  with  His  own  perfection.  As  He  has  been  pleased  to 
give  us  various  accounts,  so  He  has  had  a  divine  reason  for 
each  of  them.  In  short,  God  has  sought  His  own  glory  in  this, 
and  has  secured  it. 

Now  there  can  be  no  question,  to  any  one  who  reads  the 
Gospels  with  the  smallest  discernment,  that  the  first  is  most 
remarkably  adapted  to  meet  the  need  of  Jews  ;  and  that  it  brings 
out  the  Old  Testament  prophecies  and  other  scriptures,  which 
found  their  realization  in  Jesus.  Consequently  there  are  more 
B 


2  LECTUEES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OP  MATTHEW. 

citations  of  scripture,  as  applying  to  our  Lord's  life  and  death, 
in  this  gospel,  than  in  all  the  others  put  together.  All  this  was 
not  a  thing  left  to  Matthew's  discretion.  That  the  Holy  Ghost 
used  the  mind  of  man  in  carrying  out  His  own  design  is  clear ; 
but  that  He  was  pleased  perfectly  to  guard  and  guide  him  in 
what  he  was  to  give  out,  is  what  1  mean  in  saying  that  God 
inspired  Matthew  for  the  purpose. 

Besides  presenting  our  Lord  in  such  a  way  as  best  to  meet  the 
riffht  or  wronc^  thoughts  and  feelings  of  a  Jew  :  besides  furnishing 
the  proofs  more  particularly  wanted  to  satisfy  his  mind,  it  is 
evident,  from  the  character  of  the  discourses  and  parables,  that 
the  rejection  of  the  Messiah  by  Israel,  and  the  consequences  of 
it  to  the  Gentiles,  are  here  the  great  prominent  thoughts  in  the 
mind  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Hence  there  is  no  ascension  scene  in 
Matthew.  The  Jew,  if  he  had  understood  the  Old  Testament 
prophecies,  would  have  looked  for  a  Messiah  to  come,  suffer,  die, 
and  be  raised  again  "  according  to  the  scriptures."  In  Matthew 
Ave  have  His  death  and  resurrection,  but  there  He  is  left ;  and 
we  should  not  know,  from  the  facts  related  by  him  only,  that 
Christ  went  up  to  heaven  at  all.  We  should  know  it  was 
implied  in  some  of  the  words  that  Christ  spoke ;  but,  in  point  of 
fact,  Matthew  leaves  us  with  Christ  Himself  still  upon  the  earth. 
The  last  chapter  describes,  not  the  ascension  of  Christ,  nor  His 
session  at  God's  right  hand,  but  His  speaking  to  the  disciples 
here  below.  Such  a  presentation  of  Christ  was  peculiarly  that 
which  the  Jews  needed  to  know.  It  was  more  suitable  to  them 
than  to  any  other  people  on  the  earth. 

And  who  was  the  agent  employed,  and  with  what  fitness? 
One  of  the  twelve  who  companied  with  our  Lord  from  the 
beginning  of  His  ministry  till  He  was  taken  up  from  them. 
So  far,  of  course,  he  was  an  evidently  competent  witness 
for  the  Jew,  and  far  more  suitable  than  Mark  or  Luke  would 
have  been,  who  were  not,  as  far  as  we  know,  personal  companions 
of  the  Lord.  But  there  was  this  peculiarity — that  Matthew  was 
a  publican,  or  taxgatherer,  by  profession.  Although  a  Jew,  he 
was  in  the  employment  of  the  Gentiles,  which  posivion  would 
make  him  specially  odious  to  his  countrymen.     They  would  look 


CHAPTER   I.  6 

upon  him  Avith  more  suspicion  even  than  upon  a  stranger.  This 
might  make  it  appear,  at  first  sight,  the  more  extraordinary  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  should  employ  such  a  one  to  give  the  account  of 
Jesus  as  the  Messiah.  But  let  us  remember  that  there  is  another 
object  all  through  the  Grospel  of  Matthew;  that  it  is  not  only 
the  record  of  Jesus  as  the  true  Messiah  to  Israel,  but  that  it 
shews  us  His  rejection  by  Israel,  and  the  consequences  of  their 
fatal  imbelief:  —  all  the  barriers  which  had  hitherto  existed 
between  Jew  and  Gentile  thrown  down — the  mercy  of  God 
flowing  out  towards  those  who  were  despised,  and  blessing  the 
Gentile  as  readily  and  as  fully  as  the  Jew.  Thus  the  admirable 
propriety  of  employing  Matthew,  the  publican,  and  its  consist- 
ency with  the  scope  of  his  task,  are  apparent. 

These  few  remarks  may  help  to  evince  that  there  was  the 
utmost  fitness  in  the  employment  of  the  first  of  the  four  evan- 
gelists to  do  the  work  appointed  for  him.  If  it  were  our  object 
to  examine  the  rest,  it  could  just  as  easily  be  made  manifest  that 
each  had  exactly  the  right  work  to  do.  As  we  proceed  through 
this  gospel,  you  will  be  struck,  I  doubt  not,  by  the  Avisdom  which 
chose  such  a  one  to  give  the  account  of  the  rejected  Messiah, 
despised  by  His  guilty  brethren  after  the  flesh.  But  I  shall 
confine  myself  at  present  to  shewing  Avith  what  Avisdom  MatthcAv 
introduces  such  an  account  of  the  Messiah.  For  many  must 
haA^e  been  more  or  less  arrested  by  the  prefatory  record  of  names, 
and  may,  perhaps,  have  asked,  What  profit  is  there  to  be  had 
from  a  list  like  this  ?  But  let  us  never  pass  over  anything  in 
scripture  as  a  light  or  even  doubtful  matter.  There  is  a  depth 
of  blessed  meaning  in  the  account  MattheAv  giA'es  us  of  the  Lord's 
genealogy.  I  must,  therefore,  dAvell  a  little  on  the  perfectly 
beautiful  manner  in  Avhich  the  Spirit  of  God  has  here  traced  His 
lineage,  and  direct  attention  briefly  to  the  Avay  in  which  it 
harmonizes  Avith  the  divine  account  of  Jesus  for  the  Jew,  AA^ho 
Avould  be  constantly  raising  the  question,  Avhether  Jesus  Avas 
really  the  Messiah. 

It  Avill  be  observed  that  the-  genealogy  here  differs  totally  from 
what  we  have  in  Luke,  Avhere  it  is  not  given  at  the  beginning, 
but  at  the  end  of  chapter  iii.     Thus,  in  the  latter  gospel,  Ave 


4  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

loarn  a  great  deal  about  the  Lord  Jesus  before  His  genealogy' 
appears.  Why  was  this  ?  Luke  was  writing  to  the  Gentiles, 
who  could  not  be  supposed  to  be  equally,  or  in  the  same  way, 
interested  in  His  messianic  relations.  But  when  they  had  learnt 
in  some  degree  who  Jesus  was,  it  would  be  very  interesting  to 
see  what  was  His  lineage  as  man,  and  to  trace  Him  up  to  Adam, 
the  father  of  the  whole  human  family.  What  more  suitable 
than  to  link  Him  with  the  head  of  the  race,  if  the  object  were 
to  shew  the  grace  that  would  go  out  towards  all  mankind,  the 
salvation-bearing  grace  of  God  that  ajjpears  unto  all  men  ?  One 
might  put  that  word  in  Titus  ii.  as  a  sort  of  frontispiece  to  Luke's 
Gospel.  It  is  God's  grace  in  the  person  of  His  Son,  who  had 
become  a  man,  connected  as  to  humanity  with  the  whole  family 
of  man,  though  the  nature  in  Him  was  ever,  only,  and  alto- 
gether holy. 

But  here  we  find  ourselves  on  a  narrower  ground,  circum- 
scribed to  a  certain  family,  the  royal  seed  of  a  certain  nation, 
God's  chosen  people.  Abraham  and  DaA^d  are  mentioned  in  the 
very  first  verse.  "  The  book  of  the  generation  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  son  of  David,  the  son  of  Abraham."  (Ver.  1.)  Why  are  these 
two  names  thus  selected ;  and  why  put  together  here  in  this 
brief  summary  ?  Because  all  the  hopes  of  Israel  were  bomid  up 
with  what  was  revealed  to  these  two  j)ersons.  David  was  the 
great  head  of  the  kingdom,  the  one  in  whom  the  tiaie  line  of 
Messiah's  throne  was  fomided.  Saul  was  merely  the  fleshly  king 
Avhom  Israel  sought  passingly  for  themselves  out  of  their  own 
will.  David  was  the  king  God  chose,  and  he  is  here  mentioned 
as  the  forefiither  of  the  Lord's  Anointed — "  the  son  of  David." 
Abraham,  again,  was  the  one  in  whom  it  was  said  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth  should  be  blessed.  Thus  the  opening  words  prepare 
us  for  the  whole  of  the  gospel.  Christ  came  with  all  the  reality 
of  the  kingdom  promised  to  David's  son.  But  if  He  were 
refiised  as  the  son  of  David,  still,  as  the  son  of  Abraham,  there 
was  blessing  not  merely  for  the  Jew  but  for  the  Gentile.  He  is 
the  true  Messiah  ;  but  if  Israel  will  not  have  Him,  God  will, 
during  their  unbelief,  bring  the  nations,  in  many  respects  after 
an  exceptional  sort,  to  taste  of  His  mercy. 


CHAPTER   I.  5 

Having  given  us  this  general  view  we  come  to  particulars. 
We  begin  with  Abraham,  tracing  Jesus  not  up  to  him,  but 
down  from  him.  Every  Israelite  would  begin  with  Abraham, 
and  would  be  interested  to  folloAv  the  stages  of  the  line  from  him 
on  whom  they  all  hung.  "  Abraham  begat  Isaac,  and  Isaac 
begat  Jacob,  and  Jacob  begat  Judas  and  his  brethren."  (Ver.  2.) 
This  comprehensive  notice,  "Judas  and  his  brethren,"  seems  to 
be  of  importance,  and  in  more  ways  than  one.  It  does  not 
consist  with  the  notion  that  our  evangelist  in  this  part  of  the 
chapter  simply  copies  the  records  kept  by  the  Jews.  We  may 
be  sure  that  men  ncA^er  register  in  this  fashion.  Yet  it  is 
evidentl}'  in  the  strictest  harmony  with  this  gospel,  for  it  gives 
prominence  to  the  royal  tribe  of  whom  was  the  Messiah  (Gen. 
xlix.  10),  while  it  reminds  the  most  favoured  that  others  too 
long  out  of  sight  were  not  forgotten  of  God,  now  that  He  is 
giving  the  genealogy  of  His  Messiah. 

"And  Judas  begat  Phares  and  Zara  of  Thamar."  (Ver.  3.) 
What  is  the  reason  for  bringing  in  a  woman,  for  naming  Tamar 
here  ?  There  were  women  of  great  note  in  the  lineage  of  the 
Messiah — persons  whom  the  Jews  naturally  looked  up  to  as  holy 
and  honourable.  What  Jewish  heart  would  not  naturally  glow 
with  strong  feelings  of  respect  in  hearing  of  Sarah  and  Rebekah, 
and  the  other  holy  and  well-known  women  recorded  in  Old  Testa- 
ment history  ?  But  there  is  no  mention  of  them  here.  On  the 
other  hand,  Tamar  is  mentioned.  Why  is  it  so?  Grace  lay 
miderneath  this,  most  rebuking  to  the  flesh,  but  most  precious  in 
its  way.  There  are  four  women,  and  only  four,  who  appear  in 
the  line,  and  upon  every  one  of  them  there  was  a  blot.  It  is  not 
that  all  the  sources  of  reproach  or  shame  were  of  the  same  kind. 
But  to  a  proud  Jew,  with  all  these  women  there  was  connected 
what  was  humbling — something  that  he  would  have  kept  in  the 
dark.  0  wondrous  way  of  God  !  What  can  He  not  do  ?  How 
striking  that  the  Holy  Ghost  should  not  here  attract  attention  to 
those  who  would  have  brought  honour  in  the  eyes  of  Israel !  nay, 
that  He  should  single  out  these  that  a  carnal  Israelite  would 
have  held  in  contempt !  The  Messiah  was  to  spring  from  a  line 
in  which  there  had  been  dismal  sin.     And  where  all  that  is  in 


6  LECTURES    ON    THE    GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

man  would  try  to  hide  this  and  keep  it  back,  the  Spirit  of  God 
brings  it  plainly  out,  so  that  it  shall  stand  not  only  in  the  eternal 
records  of  the  Old  Testament  history,  but  here  rehearsed.  These^ 
on  whom  there  Avere  such  foul  blots  in  the  judgment  of  men,  are 
the  only  females  brought  specifically  before  us.  What  is  man  ? 
and  what  is  God  ?  What  is  man  that  such  things  should  ever 
have  taken  place  ?  And  what  is  God  that,  instead  of  being 
ashamed  of  it,  He  should  have  drawn  the  story  out  of  obscurity 
and  set  it  in  full  revealed  light,  emblazoned,  if  I  may  so  say,  on 
the  genealogy  of  His  own  Son  !  Not  at  all  as  if  the  sin  were 
not  exceeding  sinful ;  nor  as  if  God  thought  lightly  of  the 
privileges  of  His  people — still  less  of  the  glory  of  His  Son,  or 
what  is  due  to  Him.  But  God,  feeling  the  sin  of  His  own 
people  to  be  th^e  worst  of  all  sin,  yet  having  introduced  in  this 
very  Messiah  the  only  One  who  could  save  His  people  from  their 
sins,  does  not  hesitate  to  bring  their  sin  into  the  presence  of  the 
grace  that  could  and  would  pvit  it  all  away.  Did  the  Jew  think 
that  this  was  a  scandal  or  dishonour  done  to  the  Messiah  ?  From 
that  same  seed  their  Messiali  must  spring,  and  from  no  other 
line.  It  was  narrowed  to  the  house  of  David,  and  to  the  line  of 
Solomon,  and  they  were  in  the  direct  line  of  Judah's  son,  Phares, 
No  Jew  could  get  out  of  the  difficulty.  What  are  we  not 
taught  by  this  !  If  the  Messiah  deigns  to  link  Himself  with 
such  a  family — if  God  is  pleased  so  to  order  things,  that,  out  of 
that  stock,  as  concerning  the  flesh,  His  own  Son,  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel,  was  to  be  born — surely  there  could  be  none  too  bad  to 
be  received  of  Him.  He  came  to  "save  his  people  from  their 
sins,*'  not  to  find  a  people  that  had  no  sins.  He  came  with  all 
power  to  save  :  He  shewed  grace  by  the  very  family  whereof  He 
was  pleased  to  be  a — or  rather  the — Branch.  God  is  never 
confounded  ;  neither,  through  grace,  is  he  that  believes,  because 
he  rests  upon  what  God  is  to  him.  We  never  can  be  anything 
for  God  till  we  know  that  God  is  everything  for  us  and  to  us. 
But  when  we  know  such  a  God  and  Father  as  Jesus  reveals  to 
us,  on  one  side  full  of  goodness,  and  on  the  other,  no  darkness 
in  Him  at  all,  what  may  we  not  expect  from  Him  ?  Who 
iuie:ht  not  now  be  born  of  God  ?     Who  is  there  that  such  a  God 


CHAPTER    I.  i 

would  reject  ?  Such  a  hint  in  Matthew  I.  opens  the  way  for  the 
wonders  of  grace  which  appear  afterwards.  In  one  sense,  no 
man  has  such  a  position  of  ancient  privileges  as  the  Jew  ;  yet, 
even  as  to  the  Messiah,  this  is  the  account  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
gives  of  His  lineage.  No  flesh  shall  glory  in  the  presence  of 
the  Lord. 

But  that  is  not  all.  "  Phares  begat  Ezrom  ....  and  Salmon 
begat  Booz  of  Rachab."  (Ver.  3 — 5.)  And  who  and  what  was  she? 
A  Gentile,  and  once  a  harlot !  But  Rahab  is  taken  out  of  all  her 
belongings — separated  from  everything  that  was  her  portion  by 
natiu-e.  And  here  she  is,  in  this  gospel  of  Jesus  written  for  the 
Jew — for  the  very  people  who  despised  and  hated  Him  because 
He  would  look  upon  a  Gentile.  Rahab  was  named  for  heaven 
already,  and  no  Jew  could  deny  it.  She  was  visited  of  God ; 
she  was  delivered  outwardly  and  inwardly  by  His  miglity 
grace,  brought  into,  and  made  a  part  of,  Israel  on  earth — yea, 
by  sovereign  grace  part  of  the  royal  line  out  of  which  the 
Messiah  must  come,  and  out  of  which  in  point  of  fact  Jesus, 
wdio  is  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever,  was  born.  Oh,  Avhat 
marvels  of  grace  dawn  upon  us,  while  we  dwell  even  on  the  mere 
list  of  names  that  vmbelief  would  disparage  as  a  dry  if  not 
incorrect  appendage  to  the  word  of  God !  But  faith  says,  I 
cannot  do  without  the  wisdom  of  God.  Certainly  His  wisdom 
shines  in  all  that  He  has  written  here.  He  that  glories  must 
glory  in  the  Lord. 

Might  it  be  thought  that  Rahab  was  called  in  at  some  distant 
epoch  ?  But  no  :  "  Salmon  begat  Booz  of  Rachab,  and  Booz 
begat  Obed  of  Ruth,  and  Obed  begat  Jesse.  And  Jesse  begat 
David  the  king."  Ruth,  loving  as  she  was,  yet  to  a  Jew  was 
from  a  source  peculiarly  odious.  She  was  a  Moabitess,  and  thus 
forbidden  by  the  law  to  enter  the  congregation  of  the  Lord  to 
the  tenth  generation.  Even  the  Edomite  or  the  Egyptian  were 
held  in  less  abhorrence,  and  their  children  might  enter  in  the 
third  generation.  (Deut.  xxiii.  3 — 8.)  Thus  was  given  a  still 
deeper  testimony  that  grace  would  go  out  and  bless  the  very 
worst  of  the  Gentiles.  Whether  the  Jews  like  it  or  not,  God 
has  Rahab,  the  once  immoral   Gentile,  and   Ruth,  the   meek 


8  LECTUKES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

daughter  of  Moab,  brought,  not  only  into  the  nation,  but  into 
the  direct  line  from  which  the  Messiah  was  to  arise. 

"  And  Jesse  begat  David  the  king,  and  David  the  king  begat 
Solomon  of  her  [that  had  been  the  wife]  of  Urias."  (Ver.  6.) 
With  only  a  few  generations  intervening,  we  have  these  three 
women,  who  would,  for  one  reason  or  another,  moral  or  ceremonial, 
have  been  utterly  despised  and  excluded  by  the  same  spirit  which 
rejected  Jesus  and  the  grace  of  God.  It  was  then  no  new  thought 
— the  divine  mercy  that  was  reaching  out  to  gather  in  the  outcast 
of  the  Gentiles,  that  would  look  upon  the  vile  to  deliver  and  make 
them  holy.  It  was  God's  way  of  old.  They  could  not  read  the 
account  He  gives  of  their  own  Messiah's  stock  without  seeing 
that  it  was  so.  And  that  this  was  the  divinely  prescribed  channel 
no  Jew  could  deny.  They  must  all  own  that  the  Messiah  was 
to  come  in  no  other  line  than  that  of  Solomon.  Oh  !  the  grace  to 
us  who  know  what  we  have  been  as  poor  sinners  of  the  Gentiles, 
what  wretchedness  was  ours,  and  this  because  of  guilt  and  sin  I 
''  Such  were  some  of  you :  but  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are 
sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God." 

Hence  the  first  words  which  introduce  the  Messiah  give  the 
same  blessed  truth,  if  there  was  an  ear  to  hear,  or  an  eye  to  see, 
what  God  had  in  store  and  was  now  pointing  to  in  them.  In  the 
case  last  mentioned  there  was  something;  more  humblino-  than  in 
any  other.  For  though,  of  old,  Tamar's  story  had  been  wretched, 
yet  were  there  other  features,  false  and  lustful  and  violent,  which 
met  in  her  case  that  had  belonged  to  Uriah.  And  this  was  so 
much  the  more  dismal  because  the  chief  guilt  was  on  that  man's 
part  whom  God  had  delighted  to  honour,  even  "  David  the 
king."  Who  knows  not  that  it  has  drawn  out  the  deepest  and 
most  touching  personal  confession  of  sin  ever  inspired  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  ?  Yet  here  again  we  find  that  he  who  had  to  do 
with  this  tale  of  horrors,  and  whose  utterance  had  been  this  psalm 
of  sorrowful  confession,  was  the  direct  forefather  of  the  Messiah. 
So  that,  if  the  Jew  looked  to  those  from  whom  the  Messiah  had 
sprung,  such  must  He  be  according  to  His  earthly  ancestors. 
But  God  records  the  blessed  display  of  His  ways,  both  for  the 


CHAPTER   I.  9 

winning  of  the  hardest,  proudest,  and  most  sinful,  and  for  the 
unfailing  comfort  and  refreshment  of  those  Avho  love  Him. 

I  need  not  dwell  particularly  upon  the  names  that  follow.  We 
might  see  sin  upon  sin,  stain  upon  stain,  interwoven  into  their 
various  histories.  It  was  one  continuous  tissue  of  that  which 
would  cause  a  Jew  to  blusl> — what  a  man  never  would  of  himself 
have  dared  to  bring  out  about  a  king  that  he  honoured.  God, 
in  His  infinite  goodness,  would  not  permit  these  things  to  slum- 
ber. Not  a  word  is  said  of  Avomen  who  came  after  the  scripture 
record  terminated ;  but  what  Jew  could  gainsay  the  lively  oracles 
committed  to  them  ?  To  leave  out  what  a  Jew  gloried  in,  and 
to  bring  in  what  he  would  have  concealed  through  shame,  and 
all  in  tender  mercy  to  Israel,  to  sinners,  was  indeed  divine.  We 
may  see  from  this  that  the  mention  of  these  four  women  is 
particularly  instructive.  Man  could  not  have  originated  it :  our 
place  is  to  learn  and  adore.  Every  female  that  is  named  is  one 
that  nature  would  have  studiously  excluded  from  the  record,  but 
that  grace  has  made  most  prominent  in  it.  Thus  the  truth 
taught  thereby  ought  never  to  be  forgotten,  and  the  Jew  who 
wanted  to  know  the  claims  of  Jesus  to  be  the  Messiah  might 
learn  here  what  would  prepare  his  heart  and  conscience  for  such 
a  Messiah  as  Jesus  is.  He  is  a  Messiah  come  in  quest  of  sinners, 
who  would  despise  no  needy  one — not  even  a  poor  j^ublican  or  a 
harlot.  The  Messiah  so  thoroughly  reflected  what  God  is  in  His 
holy  love,  and  is  so  true  to  all  the  purposes  of  God,  so  perfect 
an  expression  of  the  grace  that  is  in  God,  that  there  never  was 
a  thought,  feeling,  word  of  grace  in  His  word,  but  what  the 
Messiah  was  come  now  to  make  it  good  in  His  dealings  with 
poor  souls,  and  first  of  all  with  the  Jew. 

This,  then,  is  the  genealogy  of  Christ  as  given  us  here. 
Tliere  are  certain  omissions  in  the  list,  and  persons  of  some 
learning  have  been  alike  weak  and  daring  enough  to  impute  a. 
mistake  to  St.  Matthew,  which  no  intelligent  Sunday  scholar 
would  have  made.  For  a  child  could  copy  what  was  clearly 
written  out  before  him  :  and  certainly  Matthew, could  easily  have 
taken  the  Old  Testament,  and  reproduced  the  list  of  names  and 


10  LECTURES    ON   THE    GOSPEL    OF    MATTHEW. 

generations  given  us  in  tlio  Chronicles  and  elsewhere.  But  there 
was  a  divine  reason  for  omitting  the  particular  names  of  Ahaziah, 
Joash,  and  Amaziah,  from  verse  8 — three  generations.  Why  is 
it,  we  may  be  permitted  to  ask,  that  the  Apostle  Matthew  drops, 
of  course  by  inspiration,  some  of  the  links  of  the  chain  ?  The 
Spirit  of  God  was  pleased  to  arrange  the  ancestry  of  our  Lord 
into  three  divisions  of  fourteen  generations  each.  Now,  as  there 
were  actually  more  than  fourteen  generations  between  David 
and  the  captivity,  it  was  a  matter  of  necessity  that  some  should 
be  discarded,  in  order  to  equalize  the  series,  and  fourteen  only 
are  therefore  recorded.  Indeed,  if  you  examine  the  Old  Testament 
scriptures,  you  will  find  that  it  is  not  at  all  uncommon  in 
genealogies  to  drop  some  of  the  links  of  the  chain.  More  than 
twice  as  many  as  in  our  verse  are  omitted  in  one  place.  (Ezra 
vii.  3.)  Now,  it  was  Ezra  himself  who  wrote  that  book ;  and, 
of  course,  he  knew  his  own  descent  far  more  familiarly  than  we 
do.  And  if  any  of  us,  by  comparison  with  other  parts,  can  find 
out  the  missing  links,  much  more  could  he.  And  yet,  in  giving 
his  own  genealogy  (chap,  vii.),  the  Spirit  of  God  is  pleased  by 
him  to  omit  no  less  than  seven  generations.  This  is  the  more 
remarkable,  as  no  one  could  exercise  his  rights  as  a  priest,  unless 
he  could  trace  his  line  up  to  Aaron  without  any  question  as  to 
the  succession.  I  have  no  doubt  that  there  were  special  reasons 
for  the  omission  elsewhere,  no  less  than  in  our  Gospel ;  but  the 
motives  for  it  are  a  very  different  question.  One  of  them  I  have 
named.  There  were  more  than  twice  seven  generations  in  at 
least  the  second  division ;  and  this  may  have  been  one  reason 
why  the  writer  should  omit  several  of  them.  But  why  these  in 
particular?  Athaliah,  the  daughter  of  Ahab,  king  of  Israel, 
and  wife  of  Jehoram,  had  thus  entered  by  marriage  the  royal 
house  of  David ;  and  a  sorrowful  hour  it  was,  indeed,  for  Judali. 
For  Athaliah,  enraged  at  the  premature  end  of  her  son,  king 
Ahaziah,  was  guilty  of  a  too  successful  attempt  to  destroy  the 
seed  royal.  But  it  could  not  be  complete  :  for  that  family  was 
selected  out  of  all  the  families  of  God's  people,  never  to  be  entirely 
extinguished  till  Shiloh  came.  There  was  but  a  single  youthful 
scion  whom  Jehoshabeath  saved  by  concealment  in  the  house  of 


CHAPTER    I.  11 

the  Lord.  The  light  was  covered  with  a  bushel  for  a  time ;  but 
it  was  not  put  out.  The  then  son  of  David  appeared.  It  was 
a  time  when  Judah  had  fallen  into  manifold  and  ever  deepening 
evil.  But  as  surely  as  that  yomig  Joash  was  brought  out  of  his 
darkness — as  truly  as  the  priest  was  there  to  anoint  the  king, 
and  the  union  of  the  two  things  accomplished  the  great  purpose 
of  Grod ;  so  it  will  be  when  the  years  of  man's  rebellion  against 
God  are  full.  He  will  come  forth  who  has  been  long  hidden 
and  forgotten,  and  all  the  enemies  shall  be  trampled  down ;  and 
then  will  Judah  flourish  indeed  under  the  King,  the  true  Son  of 
David.  For  all  this  was  the  type  of  the  reappearing  of  the 
true  Messiah  by  and  by.  But  my  design  is  not  so  much  to  dwell 
upon  that  now,  as  to  enquire  and  suggest  briefly  why  it  is  that 
we  have  these  few  kings  omitted.  The  answer  seems  to  be,  that 
they  sprang  from  Athaliah.  Hence  they  were  completely  passed 
over.  We  find  God  thus  marking  His  resentment  at  the  intro- 
duction of  that  wicked  and  idolatrous  stock  from  the  house  of 
Ahab.  Athaliah's  descendants  are  not  mentioned  even  to  the 
third  generation.  This  appears  to  be  the  moral  reason  why  we 
find  three  persons  left  out  at  this  particular  point.  Then  in 
verse  11  we  read,  "  And  Josias  begat  Jechonias  and  his  brethren 
at  the  time  of  the  removal  to  Babylon."  It  is  evident  that  the 
method  is  summary,  Jehoahaz  whom  the  people  made  and  who 
reigned  for  but  three  months  not  being  specified,  and  Jehoiakini 
being  often  called  by  the  same  name  as  his  son  Jechonias. 

But  I  will  not  dwell  upon  the  minuter  features  of  the  gene- 
alogy. The  word  of  God  is  infinite ;  and,  no  matter  what  we 
may  have  learned,  it  only  puts  us  in  a  position  to  find  out  our 
ignorance.  When  persons  are  altogether  in  the  dark,  they 
think  they  know  all  that  is  to  be  known.  But  as  we  make  real 
progress,  Ave  acquire  a  deeper  sense  of  how  little  we  knoAv  ;  and, 
at  the  same  time,  more  patience  with  others  who  may  know  a 
little  less — and,  very  possibly,  somewhat  more.  Spiritual  intel- 
ligence, instead  of  puffing  up  the  loving  heart,  produces  an 
increased  feeling  of  our  own  littleness.  Where  it  is  not  so,  we 
have  reason  to  fear  that  the  mind  outruns  the  conscience,  and 
that  both  are  far  from  being  subject  to  the  Holy  Ghost. 


TO 

LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

The  generations  are  divided  into  three  different  sections.  The 
first  is  from  Abraliam  to  David,  the  dawn  of  glory  for  the  Jews. 
When  David  "  the  king"  was  there,  it  was  noon-time  in  Israel — 
sadly  chequered,  it  is  true,  and  clouded  through  sin ;  but  still  it 
was  noon  of  man's  day  in  Israel.  The  second  division  is  from 
thence  till  the  carrying  away  to  Babylon.  The  third  is  from  that 
captivity  until  Christ.  This  last  was  clearly  the  evening  history 
of  Israel's  past.  But  that  evening  is  not  the  close.  It  ends  with 
the  brightest  light  of  all — type  of  the  day  when  at  evening  time 
there  shall  be  light.  Just  as  the  prophet  Haggai  speaks  of  the 
house  of  God,  as  it  then  was,  being  as  nothing  in  comparison  of 
its  first  glory,  and  says,  "  The  glory  of  this  latter  house  shall  be 
greater  than  of  the  former,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;"  so  a 
greater  than  Solomon  was  here.  Although  there  had  been  the 
decline  of  the  splendour  of  Israel,  and  Israel  was  now  broken 
and  subject  to  the  Gentiles,  the  recorded  decline  ends  in  the 
birth  of  the  true  Messiah.  Throughout  the  lingering  on  of 
the  captivity  no  persecution  could  destroy  that  chosen  family ; 
because  Jesus,  the  Messiah  of  God,  was  to  be  born  of  it.  The 
moment  that  Jesus  concludes  His  career  here  below,  the  chain 
may  seem  for  ever  broken  as  regards  the  earth,  but  it  is  only  to 
be  riveted  to  the  throne  of  God  in  heaven.  Jesus  is  there,  alive 
again  for  evermore.  And  Jesus  shall  come  again,  and  the  Jews 
shall  see  and  weep  ;  even  those  written  in  the  book :  and  Jehovah 
their  king,  even  Jesus,  shall  reap  in  joy  what  He  sowed  in  tears 
and  His  own  blood. 

But  let  us  look  for  a  little  at  the  remaining  view  given  us  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  in  this  chapter.  Joseph  is  made  very  prominent. 
The  genealogy  itself  is  that  of  Joseph,  not  of  Mary.  On  the 
other  hand,  Mary  is  the  principal  figure  of  the  two  in  Luke,  and 
there  it  is,  I  believe,  her  genealogy.  Why  is  this  ?  It  Avas  of 
necessity,  for  a  Jew,  that  Jesus  should  be  the  heir  of  Joseph. 
The  reason  is  that  Joseph  was  the  direct  lineal  descendant  of  the 
royal  branch  of  David's  house.  There  were  two  lines  that  came 
down  unbroken  to  these  days ;  the  house  of  Solomon  and  the 
house  of  Nathan.     Mary  was  the   representative   of  Nathan's 


CHAPTER    I.  13 

family,  as  Joseph  was  of  Solomon's.  If  Mary  had  been  men- 
tioned without  her  connection  with  her  husband,  there  would 
not  have  been  a  legal  right  to  the  tln'one  of  David.  It  was 
necessary  that  the  Messiah  should  be  born,  not  merely  of  a 
virgin,  nor  of  a  virgin  daughter  of  David,  but  of  one  legally 
united  to  Joseph,  i.e.,  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  really  his  wife. 
This  is  carefully  recorded  here  for  the  special  instruction  of 
Israel ;  for  an  intelligent  Jew  would  at  once  have  asked  that 
question  ;  and  everything  must  be  fenced  round  with  holy 
jealousy.  Let  people  calumniate  as  they  might,  Mary  must  be 
espoused  to  Joseph;  else  the  Lord  Jesus  would  not  have  a 
proper  title  to  the  throne  of  David;  and,  therefore,  the  stress 
here  is  not  laid  upon  Mary  but  upon  Joseph,  because  the  law 
would  have  always  maintained  the  claim  of  Joseph.  On  the 
other  hand,  had  Joseph  been  the  real  father,  there  could  have 
been  no  Saviour  at  all.  As  it  is,  the  wonder  of  divine  wisdom 
shines  most  conspicuously,  making  Him  legally  the  son  of 
Joseph,  reallv  the  son  of  Mary,  who,  in  the  truth  of  His  nature, 
is  the  Son  of  God.  And  all  three  met  and  mero^ed  in  the 
person  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  He  must  be  the  undisputed  heir 
of  Joseph,  according  to  the  law  ;  and  Joseph  was  espoused 
to  Mary.  The  child  must  be  born  before  Joseph  ever  lived 
with  Mary  as  his  wife,  and  this  we  are  carefully  shewn  here. 
"  Now  the  birth  of  Jesus  Christ*  was  on  this  wise :  when  as 

=<'=  The  true  reading  in  verse  18  is  a  matter  of  considerable  difficulty. 
Tow  5e  'Ifiaov  Xgi(TTov  is  not  only  in  the  Elzevir  or  Rec.  Text,  but  it  is  read  by 
the  Sinai,  Wolfenbuttel  (P),  and  Dublin  Rescript  MSS.,  not  to  speak  of  the 
mass  of  cui-sives.  The  Vatican  (1209)  gives  x.  before  'I.  But  Cod.  Bezse 
Cant,  (here  defective  in  the  Greek),  if  we  may  judge  fi-om  its  accompanying 
Latin  version,  must  have  read  X.,  and  so  the  Vulgate,  It.,  Sax.,  Curetonian 
SjT.,  &c.  Whatis  more,  Irenaeus  expressly  reasons  (contra  Haer.  iti.,  c.  xvi. 
§  2)  on  the  pliraseology  of  tliis  verse  against  the  Valentinian  doctrine  that 
Jesus  was  but  the  vessel  for  the  Christ,  who  at  His  baptism  was  imagined 
to  have  descended  into  that  human  body  bom  of  the  virgin.  This  false- 
hood, destructive  of  oiu*  Lord's  person,  the  good  bishop  of  Lyons  confronts 
with  the  words  of  our  gospel.  "  Non,  sicutipsi  dicunt,  Jesum  quidem  ipsum 
esse,  qui  ex  Maria  sit  natus,  Christum  vero  qui  desuper  descendit.  Cseterum 
potuerat  dicere  Matthaeus:   Jesu  vero  generatio  sic  erat,  sed  prEevidens 


14  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

his  mother  Mary  was  espoused  to  Joseph,  before  they  came 
together,  she  was  found  with  child  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Then 
Joseph  her    husband,    being    a  just  man,  and  not  willing  to 

Spiritus  Sanctus  depravatores  et  prfemuniens  contra  fraudulentiam  corum 
per  Matthaeum  dit :  Christi  autcm  gcneratio  sic  erat."  It  is  plain  then,  as 
the  Benedictine  note  says,  that  Irenseus  did  not  read  in  his  copy  'l-naov  as  in 
more  modern  manuscripts  ;  but  Massuet  is  mistaken  in  thinking  that 
"Jesus,"  if  added,  would  have  increased  the  force  of  the  argument.  The 
first  verse  of  the  chapter  had  coupled  them  together  already,  and  Irenaeus 
had  referred  to  this  in  the  beginning  of  the  section.  The  emphatic  fact  he 
urges  from  the  language  of  verse  18,  as  it  stood  in  liis  manuscript,  is  the 
generation  of  the  Christ  or  Messiah.  This  was  inconsistent  with,  and  de- 
structive of,  the  Gnostic  hypothesis. 

I  cannot  but  think  this  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  5  'I.  X.  is  nowhere  else 
found  in  genuine  scripture.  In  the  Received  Text  it  occurs  in  Acts  viii. 
12,  37 ;  Hebrews  x.  10 ;  1  John  iv.  3  ;  and  Revelation  xii.  17.  In  every 
instance  the  proof  fails.  Thus  few  even  of  the  less  important  copies  insert 
the  article  before  'I.  X.  in  the  first :  and  the  second  disappears  in  the  best 
authorities,  being  in  all  probability  a  mere  marginal  gloss,  though  it  crept  in 
at  a  very  early  epoch.  In  Hebrews  x.  10  the  article  has  no  good  authority 
whatever.  In  Joliii  iv.  3,  Christ  should  not  be  inserted  (in  the  preceding 
verse  'I.  X.  is  anarthrous,  as  it  is  regularly).  In  the  last  all  the  iincials  and 
most  others  give  simply  "  Jesus."  Thus  in  fact,  not  only  is  the  vulgar 
reading  in  Matthew  i.  18  unsupported  by  the  language  of  scripture  every- 
where else  (the  apparent  parallels  melting  away  when  looked  into),  but  it 
seems  to  me  that  it  is  not  even  Greek,  imless  the  object  were  to  assert  the 
generation  of  Jesus  as  Christ,  or  the  evangelist  treated  'L  X.  as  practically 
one  word. 

If  verse  18  refer  to  verse  17  where  the  phrase  is  unquestionably 
Tov  XptoTTov,  the  order  would  be  this.  First,  "  Jesus  Cluist"  is  naturally 
brought  before  us  in  verse  1,  which  winds  up  with  verse  16,  "  Jesus  that 
is  called  Christ,"  and  wdth  the  summary  that  follows,  wliich  gives  the  dis- 
tinctive title,  "  the  Christ"  or  Messiah.  Then  the  portion  that  next  com- 
mences unfolds  the  mysterious  birth  of  tliis  long-looked-for  Messiah,  whose 
name  when  born  is  Jesus  (chap.  i.  21,  25 ;  ii.  1).  Bengel  has  given  a  sumlar 
judgment,  and  Dr.  TregeUes  also. 

Tischendorf  omitted  'Itjo-oC  in  liis  seventh  and  as  far  as  I  can  trace  his 
previous  editions,  but  recurs  to  the  common  reading  in  liis  eighth  (now 
coming  out  in  parts),  moved  especially  by  the  Sinai  MS. 

That  Bloomfield  sees  notliing  to  remark  does  not  surprise  me,  but  it 
certainly  does  that  Alford  passes  it  over  sicco  pede,  even  in  the  margin  (save 
of  course  the  readings).     Kiilinol  and  Vater  are  equally  silent. 


CHAPTER   I.  15 

make  her  a  public  example,  was  minded  to  put  her  away  privily. 
But  while  he  thought  on  these  things,  behold,  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  appeared  unto  him  in  a  dream,"  &c.  (Ver.  18 — 20.)  Here 
the  angel  appears  to  Joseph  in  a  dream.  In  Luke  the  angel 
appears  to  Mary.  It  is  thus  in  Matthew,  because  Joseph 
was  the  important  person  in  the  eye  of  the  law  ;  and  yet 
the  Messiah  must  not  be,  in  point  of  fact,  the  son  of  Joseph. 
All  the  wit  of  man  could  not  have  understood  these  ways  before- 
hand ;  all  his  power  could  not  have  arranged  the  circumstances. 
If  the  law  demanded  that  Jesus  should  be  the  heir  of  Joseph, 
the  prophet  demanded  that  He  should  not  be  the  son  of  Joseph. 
God  humbling  Himself  was  the  need  of  man ;  man  exalted  was 
the  counsel  of  God.  How  was  this,  and  far  more,  to  be  united 
and  reconciled  in  one  person  ?  Jehovah  Jesus  is  the  answer. 
"  The  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him  in  a  dream,  saying, 
Joseph,  thou  son  of  David,  fear  not  to  take  unto  thee  Mary  thy 
wife ;  for  that  which  is  conceived  in  her  is  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
(Ver.  20.) 

God  meets  the  scruples  of  the  godly  Israelite ;  and  signifies 
that  most  distinguished  honour  which  He  had  put  upon  Mary, 
mider  a  guise  which  for  a  season  had  clouded  her  and  distressed 
her.  She  was  the  very  virgin  God  had  predicted  hundreds  of 
years  before — "  She  shall  bring  forth  a  son,  and  thou  shalt  call 
his  name  Jesus."  Here,  again,  Joseph  was  to  be  the  one  who 
publicly  acts ;  while  in  Luke  (chap.  i.  31)  Mary  names.  The 
difference  arises  from  the  point  of  view  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  us 
of  our  Lord's  person  in  the  two  gospels.  In  Luke  He  was 
proving  that  Jesus,  though  divine,  was  very  man  ;  a  partaker  of 
humanity,  apart  from  sin.  In  our  case,  it  is  sinful  human 
nature — in  His  case,  it  was  holy.  Therefore,  in  speaking  of 
Him  simply  as  man,  it  is  said  in  Luke,  "  Therefore  also  that 
holy  thing,  which  shall  be  born  of  thee,  shall  be  called  the  Son 
of  God."  So  He  was  most  truly  and  properly  a  man — the 
child  of  His  virgin  mother :  and  as  such,  too.  He  is  called  the 
Son  of  God.  In  that  gospel  one  great  point  was  to  prove  His 
holy  manhood  ;  to  shew  how  fully  and  fitly  He  could  be  a 
Saviour  of  men,  and  take  up  the  woes  and  wretchedness,  and  on 


16  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

the  cross  suffer  for  the  sinfulness,  of  others — Himself  the  Holy 
One.  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  who  had  actually  taken  human 
nature  into  His  own  person,  who  was  perfectly  and  really  a 
man  as  much  as  any  of  us  ;  but  a  man  without  sin,  yet  holy, 
and  not  merely  innocent.  Adam  was  innocent,  Jesus  was  holy. 
Holiness  does  not  mean  mere  absence  of  evil,  but  inward  power 
according  to  Grod,  and  so  power  to  withstand  evil.  When  Adam 
w'as  tempted,  he  fell.  Jesus  was  tried  by  every  temptation,  and 
Satan  exhausted  his  wiles  in  vain.  All  this,  however,  is  most 
suitable  to  the  Gospel  of  Luke,  where  it  is  accordingly  shewn 
that  the  proper  humanity  of  Jesus  flowed  from  His  birth  (i.e., 
from  His  mother) .  His  legal  right  to  the  throne  of  David  flowed 
from  Joseph,  and  Joseph  accordingly  is  the  prominent  personage 
in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew. 

But  He  had  a  title  greater  than  any  which  Joseph  could 
transmit  even  from  David  or  Abraham  ;  and  this  was  to  be  at- 
tested in  His  name.  His  despised  name  of  Jesus,  Jehovah,  the 
Saviour.  "  Thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus  :  for  he  shall  save 
his  people  from  their  sins."  Jehovah's  people  were  His  people ; 
and  He  should  save  them,  not  merely  from  their  enemies,  but 
from  their  sins.  What  a  testimony  to  Him  and  for  them  ! 
Blessed  for  any  sinful  soul  to  hear,  how  especially  needed  for  a 
people  then  inflated  with  boundless  hopes  of  earthly  aggrandise- 
ment in  their  expected  Messiah  ! 

Here,  too,  alone  in  any  part  of  the  Gospels,  it  is  that 
we  hear  of  Jesus  as  ''Emmanuel."  This  is  equally  instructive 
and  beautiful ;  because  the  Jew  was  apt  to  forget  it.  Did  he 
look  for  a  divine  Messiah — for  One  who  was  God  as  well  as  man  ? 
Very  far  from  it.  Comparatively  few  of  the  Jews  expected  any- 
thing so  astonishing  as  this.  They  craved  and  looked  for  a 
mighty  king  and  conqueror,  yet  still  a  mere  man.  But  here  we 
find  that  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  their  own  prophet,  Isaiah,  besides 
speaking  of  Him  as  man,  takes  care  to  shew  that  He  was  much 
more  than  man,  that  He  was  God.  (Ver.  22,  23.)  Matthew 
alone  brings  out  this  clear  testimony  of  the  great  evangehcal 
prophet — "  God  with  us."  So  perfectly  did  God  provide  for 
these  poor  Jew^s,  and  develop  the  neglected  seeds  of  their  pro- 


CHAPTER    I.  17 

lihecies,  and  reflect  light  on  the  obscnre  parts  of  their  law  ;  so 
that  if  a  Jew  rejected  the  Messiah,  he  did  it  to  his  own  eternal 
ruin.  Besides  being  the  son  of  David  and  Abraham,  then,  He 
Avas  God  until  us.  Such  Avas  the  true  Messiah,  and  such  the 
witness  produced  to  Israel.  Could  they  reject  Matthew's 
history,  if  they  received  Isaiah's  prophecy  ?  In  vain  they 
worshipped  God,  teaching  for  doctrines  the  commandments 
of  men. 

"  Then  Joseph  being  raised  from  sleep,  did  as  the  angel  of 
the  Lord  had  bidden  him,  and  took  unto  him  his  wife,  and  knew 
her  not  till  she  had  brought  forth  her  firstborn  son ;  and  he 
called  his  name  JESUS."  (Ver.  24,  25.)  Some  of  the  best 
authorities  (the  Sinai,  Vat.,  &c.),  omit  "her  firstborn,"  and  so 
present  simply  "  a  son."  But  there  is  no  doubt  that  these 
words  are  genuine  in  Luke  ii.  whence  they  mai/  have  been  in- 
troduced here.  The  shorter  form  appears  to  me  sufficient  for 
the  purpose  of  our  evangelist. 

We  have  been  tracing  what  would  have  been  of  peculiar 
interest  for  a  Jew  ;  but  may  we  also  find  the  blessing  of  these 
truths  for  our  own  soids  !  Whatever  exalts  Jesus,  whatever 
displays  the  grace  of  God  and  puts  down  the  pride  of  man,  is 
pregnant  with  blessing  for  us.  By  the  blessing  of  God,  pursu- 
ing these  lessons  still  farther,  we  shall  find  how  the  wisdom  of 
every  word  of  His  is  justified  as  we  wait  on  this  most  illustrious 
testimony  to  Jesus  the  Messiah,  to  His  rejection  by  Israel,  and 
to  the  blessings  Avhich  thence  flow  out  to  us  once  poor  Gentiles. 


-•o'.*;o*- 


CHAPTER  II. 

I  THINK  we  shall  find  in  the  chapter  before  us  abundant  confir- 
mation of  the  account  I  have  already  given  of  the  Holy  Ghost's 
special  design  by  St.  Matthew.  That  is,  we  shall  see  proofs  that 
there  is  a  most  careful  presentation  of  Jesus  as  the  true  Messiah 
of  God,  and  of  His  rejection  as  such  by  the  Jews ;  and  that 
God,  at  the  same  time,  takes  advantage  of  Israel's  fall  to  work 
out  larger  and  deeper  purposes. 

The  very  first  incident  in  the  chapter  illustrates  it.  Jesus  was 
born.  We  do  not  meet  with  the  same  interesting  facts  which 
are  given  us  in  Luke  of  the  very  early  days  of  our  Lord's  infancy  : 
all  are  passed  by,  save  that  we  have  Christ  presented  as  born  in 
Bethlehem  of  Judea,  the  worship  of  the  magi  from  the  east, 
and  the  flight  into  Egypt.  The  first  fact  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
gives  us  here  is  the  affecting  one  that  there  was  no  heart  for  the 
Messiah  in  Israel.  And  this  was  proved  by  the  most  significant 
circumstances.  "  Jesus  having  been  bom,  in  the  days  of  Herod 
the  king,  behold,  there  came  wise  men  from  the  east  to  Jerusalem, 
saying.  Where  is  he  that  is  born  King  of  the  Jews  ?  For  we 
have  seen  his  star  in  the  east,  and  are  come  to  worship  (or  de 
homage  to)  him."  We  are  not  told  how  soon  this  was  after  His 
birth.  No  doubt  a  considerable  time  had  elapsed.  People  are 
often  deceived  as  to  this  in  looking  at  the  scene  through  the 
notions  of  their  infancy.  We  have  all  seen  the  pictures  of  the 
Babe  in  the  manger,  and  "  the  three  kings"  coming  in  to  worship 
Him.  But  the  truth  is,  that  the  Lord  was  not  just  bom,  as  such 
associations  would  convey,  when  the  magi  arrived.  For  His 
earliest  condition  in  this  world  we  must  consult,  not  Matthew, 
but  Luke. 

Some  might,  it  is  true,  gather  a  wrong  impression  from  the 
Authorized  Version  of  verse  1 :  "  Now  when  Jesus  was  born  in 
Bethlehem  of  Judea,  in  the  days  of  Herod  the  king."  This 
does  not  intimate  that  the  visit  followed  immediately  upon  our 
Saviour's  birth,  but  leaves  room  for  a  time  more  or  less  con- 


CHAPTER   II.  19 

siderable  afterwards.  It  simply  means,  that  after  He  was  born 
these  easterns  came  :  many  months,  or  npwards  of  a  year,  miglit 
have  intervened.  What  confirms  this  is,  that  the  wise  men  had 
first  seen  the  star  in  the  east,  and  most  probably  at  the  time  of 
onr  Lord's  birth.  After  seeing  the  star,  they  had  of  course  many 
a  preparation  to  make  before  they  could  set  out,  and  then 
a  long  way  to  travel ;  and  travelling  in  those  days  was  a  hard 
and  tedious  matter  in  the  eastern  parts  of  the  world.  Even  when 
they  arrive  in  Judea,  they  go  up  first  to  Jerusalem  to  enquire 
there.  All  this  supposes  necessarily  the  lapse  of  no  little  time. 
Their  questions  are  answered  by  the  scribes.  Herod,  hearing  of 
it,  is  troubled,  and  all  Jerusalem  with  him.  He  gathers  together 
all  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  of  the  people,  and  demands  of 
them  wdiere  Christ  should  be  born.  They  tell  him  in  Bethlehem 
of  Judea,  upon  which  he  calls  the  wise  men  and  sends  them 
there.     All  this  took  place  before  the  scene  of  their  worship. 

Tliey,  when  they  had  heard  the  king,  dej^arted.  "  And  lo, 
the  star,  which  they  saw  in  the  east,  went  before  them,  till  it 
came  and  stood  over  where  the  young  child  was."  We  are  not 
to  imagine,  according  to  traditional  notions,  that  the  star  tracked 
the  way  before  them  to  Jerusalem.  They  saw  it  in  the  east,  and 
connected  the  sight  with  the  promised  Messiah ;  for  at  that  time 
the  prophecies  about  His  speedy  appearance  had  been  spread 
over  a  considerable  part  of  the  world.  Many  Gentiles  were 
expecting  Him,  especially  in  the  east.  And  the  greatest  and 
most  opposed  in  the  west  were  aware  of  such  hopes.  The  last 
man  that  was  known  in  the  east  as  a  prophet,  before  the  Gentiles 
were  broken  in  the  presence  of  Israel,  was  Balaam.  No  doubt, 
he  was  a  wicked  man :  but  God  took  advantao-e  of  him  to  utter 
the  most  remarkable  predictions  of  Israel's  coming  glory.  And 
that  very  prophecy  had  closed  with  a  reference  to  the  Star  that 
should  rise  out  of  Jacob.  And  now,  after  many  hundreds  of 
years  had  passed  away,  the  traces  of  this  prophecy  still  lingered 
among  the  children  of  the  east.  It  is  unlikely,  too,  that  Daniel's 
prophecies  in  Babylon,  especially  that  of  the  seventy  weeks,  &c., 
were  unknown,  considering  his  position  and  the  extraordinaiy 
events  of  his  day.     We  can  understand  that  these  prophecies 


20  LECTURES   ON   THE    GOSPEL    OF  MATTHEW. 

AvoukI  not  only  be  such  as  the  children  of  Israel  would  treasure 
up ;  hut  the  knowledge  of  them  might  spread,  especially  in 
those  lands.  Much  might  not  he  clearly  miderstood.  Still,  they 
looked  for  a  Avonderful  personage  to  arise — a  Star  out  of  Jacob, 
and  a  Sceptre  out  of  Israel. 

WJien  these  strangers,  then,  saw  the  star,  they  set  forward 
to  His  traditional  capital,  Jerusalem.  It  is  clear  that  the  star 
was  a  meteor  of  some  kind.  As  it  shone  in  the  east,  they  put 
the  fact  of  this  remarkable  phenomenon  along  with  the  expecta- 
tions of  the  coming  king.  And  this  the  more,  because  the 
easterns  were  great  observers  of  the  heavens,  and  were  therefore 
more  alive  to  any  uncommon  appearance.  It  may  have  recalled 
the  prophecy  of  Balaam.  Certain  it  is  that  they  soon  started 
for  Jerusalem,  where  universal  report  among  the  Gentiles  main- 
tained that  the  great  King  was  to  reign.  Having  got  there, 
God  meets  them,  and  it  is  remarkable  how  He  does  so.  It  is  by 
His  word,  and  His  word  interpreted  by  those  who  had  not  the 
smallest  interest  of  heart  in  the  Messiah.  They  were  quite  right 
in  their  interpretation  ;  they  knew  where  Messiah  was  to  be  born. 
The  magi  probably  thought  that  Jerusalem  was  to  be  the  spot ; 
but  they  were  told  by  the  scribes  that  Betlilehem  was  the  pre- 
dicted birthplace.  Alas  !  the  very  men  who  could  answer  so 
pertinently,  shewed  the  not  less  solemn  because  it  is  a  common 
fact,  that  it  is  possible  to  have  a  measure  of  clear  knowledge  of 
scripture,  and  at  the  same  time  to  have  no  love  for  Him  of 
Avhom  all  testifies.  As  to  the  magi,  ignorant  as  they  were,  and 
though  they  might  have  been  in  the  dark  as  to  other  things,  still 
their  desire  was  true,  and  God  overruled  all.  Through  these 
Gentiles,  indeed.  He  sent  a  testimony  to  Jerusalem  as  to  the 
birth  of  the  Messiah.  God  knew  how  to  accomplish  this  and  to 
rebuke,  through  their  testimony,  those  who  ought,  above  all,  to 
have  watched  for  and  hailed  their  o^\^nl  Messiah.  If  there  was 
a  queen  who  came  from  the  distant  parts  of  the  earth  to  see 
king  Solomon  and  to  hear  his  wisdom  who  was  the  type  of 
Christ,  so  was  it  now.  The  Holy  Ghost  wrought  on  and  for  these 
])ilgrims  from  a  far  country  to  bring  them  in  presence  of  the 
true  King.     The  scribes  could  answer  the  questions ;  but  there 


CHAPTER   II.  21 

was  no  care  for  the  Messiah,  and  it  was  for  Him  that  those  wise 
men  came.  This  at  once  detects  the  awful  state  that  Jerusalem 
WHS  in.  The  eifect  of  the  tidings  that  God's  King  was  born  is, 
tliat,  instead  of  seeking  the  promised  One,  instead  of  being- 
filled  with  jo}'  to  hear  of  One  whom  they  had  not  sought,  they 
were  all  troubled,  from  the  king  downwards.  More  particularly, 
as  we  learn  here,  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  are  those  whose 
state  demonstrates  the  utter  heartlessness  of  the  nation.  They 
had  enough  religious  knowledge  ;  they  had  the  key  in  their  hand, 
but  they  had  no  heart  to  enter  in. 

"  Then  Herod,  when  he  had  privily  called  the  wise  men, 
enquired  of  them  diligently  what  time  the  star  appeared." 
(Ver.  7.)  I  would  call  your  attention  to  that,  because  it  con- 
firms what  was  said  before.  It  was  after  the  diligent  enquiry  of 
the  king  from  the  wise  men,  that  he  had  settled  in  his  own  mind 
at  what  time  the  child  must  have  been  born.  "When  they, 
warned  of  God,  had  withdrawn  themselves  instead  of  returning 
to  Herod,  he  sent  forth  the  cruel  command  to  kill  the  children 
in  Bethlehem  and  all  the  coasts,  "  from  tico  years  old  and  under.'''' 
(Ver.  16.)  In  other  words,  he  naturally  inferred  that  there  had 
been  a  considerable  lapse  of  time  between  the  birth  of  Christ 
and  the  givino;  of  his  Avicked  order. 

If  we  turn  hence  to  the  Gospel  of  Luke,  we  shall  see  the 
importance  of  this.  We  have  there  our  Lord  bom,  and  born 
just  as  Matthew  shews,  in  the  city  of  David ;  but  we  are  told 
here  the  circumstances  that  account  for  this,  for  Bethlehem  was 
not  the  place  where  Mary  and  Joseph  ordinarily  dwelt.  It  was 
a  village  to  which  they  repaired  because  of  the  commandment  of 
the  Roman  emperor,  who  had  sent  forth  a  decree,  that  all  the 
%vorld  should  be  taxed  or  enrolled.  They,  being  of  the  royal 
fimiily  of  the  Jews,  go  to  Bethlehem,  which  was  the  city  of  David. 
Thus  God  brought  to  pass  the  accomplishment  of  the  prophecy 
of  Micah  through  the  decree  of  Caesar  Augustus.  Nothing  was 
farther  from  his  thoughts  than  the  result  which  his  decree,  in 
God's  providence,  was  to  subserve — the  birth  of  the  Messiah 
in  the  very  place  where  prophecy  demanded  it.  It  appears 
tliat  the   census  was   not   carried   out   then,   but   begun,    and 


22  LECTUEES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

tlien  stopped  for  some  time.  For  it  is  said  in  verse  2,  ''  And 
this  taxing  was  Jii'st  made  when  Cyrenius  was  governor  of 
Syria,"  which  was  several  years  after.  People,  not  under- 
standing this,  have  concluded  that  there  was  a  mistake  in  Luke. 
They  knew  that  Cyrenius's  government  of  Syria  was  subsequent 
to  Christ's  nativity,  and  too  hastily  inferred  that  our  evangelist 
laboured  under  the  impression  that  the  going  up  of  Joseph 
and  Mary  to  Bethlehem  took  place  in  his  time.  But  it  is  they 
who  err,  I  believe.  The  decree  of  Csesar  Augustus  did  not 
come  into  full  operation  or  effect  till  then.  It  was  just  suffi- 
ciently carried  out,  when  the  order  for  enrolment  was  given,  to 
induce  the  parents,  Joseph  and  Mary,  to  go  up  to  the  chief  city 
of  their  linsage;  and  that  was  enough.  God's  object  was 
accomplished.  Joseph  and  Mary  went  there,  and,  while  there, 
her  days  were  fulfilled,  and  she  brought  forth  her  firstborn  son, 
and  "  wrapped  him  in  swaddling  clothes,  and  laid  him  in  the 
manger."  There  we  have  a  scene  totally  different  from  what  we 
had  in  Matthew,  though  this  too  was  at  Bethlehem.  In  all 
probability  they  paid  more  than  one  visit  to  the  place. 

What  more  natural  to  suppose,  than  that  the  parents  should, 
after  such  a  miracle,  re-visit  the  birthplace  of  the  holy  and  royal 
habe?  It  was  not  far  from  Jerusalem,  and  we  know  that  they 
went  there  every  year  to  the  feast  of  the  passover.  I  see  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  the  visit  of  the  magi  took  place  at  another 
visit  on  the  part  of  the  parents  to  Bethlehem. 

Mai'k  how  the  circumstances  recorded  in  Matthevr  differ  from 
those  in  Luke. 

Li  ]\Iatthew,  Jerusalem  is  all  troubled  by  the  tidings  of  the 
Messiah's  birth,  while  strangers  from  afar  come  up  to  do  homage 
to  the  King  of  the  Jews.  They  had  seen  His  star ;  they  knew 
it  was  the  promised  King,  and  now  they  are  come  to  worship 
Him.  They  are  found  at  Jerusalem,  and  when  they  leave  it,  on 
their  Avay  to  Bethlehem,  they  are  again  encouraged  of  God, 
The  star  which  they  had  seen  before  in  the  east,  re-appeared  and 
Aveiit  before  them  till  it  came  and  stood  over  where  the  young 
child  was — plain  evidence  that  the  star  had  not  accompanied 
them  all   the  way.      And  we  shall   find  it  true  in  our  own 


CHAPTER    11.  23 

experience,  that  where  we  act  without  appearances,  we  find  all 
that  is  necessary.  God  always  takes  particular  care  of  those 
who  are  true  to  the  light,  even  though  it  be  ever  so  little ;  while 
nothing  is  more  abhorrent  to  Him  than  great  pretensions  to 
light,  without  any  heart  for  the  true  light,  which  is  Christ. 

We  may  observe  that,  of  the  reputed  parents,  Joseph  is  ever 
made  the  prominent  person  here,  as  in  chapter  i.  The  vision, 
given  us  in  verse  13,  was  to  Joseph.  Nevertheless,  the  magi, 
*'  when  they  were  come  into  the  house,  saw  the  young  child  with 
Mary  his  mother,  and  fell  down  and  worshipped  /wwi,"  not  her. 
Their  homage  was  to  Him.  "  And  when  they  had  opened  their 
treasures,  they  presented  unto  Mm  gifts ;  gold,  and  frankincense, 
and  myrrh."  They  acknowledged  Him,  as  poor  strangers 
whose  greatest  honour  was  to  be  owned  of  Him.  Jerusalem  is 
outside  all  this.  An  usurper  was  there ;  an  Edomite  ruled. 
And,  as  when  Christ  returns  again  to  the  earth,  there  will  be  a 
false  kino;  in  Jerusalem  under  the  influence  of  the  western 
powers,  and  in  conjunction  with  the  religious  heads  of  Israel, 
so  it  was  at  His  first  coming.  All  was  entirely  opposed  to  the 
recognition  of  Jesus. 

In  Luke  we  have  quite  another  order  of  things.  It  is  not  so 
much  one  acknowledged  as  a  king,  though  He  was  a  king ;  but 
He  is  seen  there  in  the  lowliest  possible  condition.  The  persons 
that  own  Him  are  Jewish  shepherds,  who  had  the  news  made 
known  to  them  from  heaven.  The  heavenly  hosts  sing — their 
hearts  delight  in  the  ways  of  God,  in  the  Saviour — for  as  such 
had  He  been  announced  to  them  :  "  Unto  you  is  born  this  day, 
in  the  city  of  David,  a  Saviour,  which  is  Christ  the  Lord.  And 
this  shall  be  the  sign  unto  you ;  ye  shall  find  a  babe  wrapped 
in  swaddling  clothes,  lying  in  the  manger."  This  was  the  very 
opening  of  our  blessed  Lord's  life  here  below,  evidently  taking 
place  immediately  after  His  birth.  The  incident  of  the  homage 
rendered  by  the  magi  was  long  subsequent.  There  is  not  the 
slightest  ground  for  confounding  the  two  occasions.  Each 
gospel  is  true  to  its  special  purpose.  It  is  a  question  of  His 
royal_rights  over  Israel  and  the  Gentiles  in  Matthew.  Li  Luke 
we  liave   the  perfect   lowliness,  from  His  very  birth,  of  the 


24  LECTURES    ON    THE    GOSPEL    OF    MATTHEW. 

Saviour-Son  of  man ;  the  interest  of  heaVen  in  the  birth  of  the 
earth-des])ised  Christ  the  Lord,  and  none  but  the  poor  of  the 
flock,  who  have  their  hearts  awakened  to  receive  this  blessed 
One,  ahke  the  expression,  and  the  means,  and  the  substance  of 
divine  grace.  "  Behold,  I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy, 
which  shall  be  to  all  people,"  or  rather,  "  to  all  the  people,"  for 
it  means  the  Jews.  A  much  wider  circle  appears  afterwards, 
but  it  does  not  go  beyond  the  Jews  yet.  The  message  was  sent 
to  them  in  the  first  instance — to  the  Jew  first,  to  apply  the 
words  of  St.  Paul. 

How  beautifully  these  various  accounts  harmonize  with  the 
gospels  in  which  they  are  found  !  In  the  one,  the  King,  born 
some  time  before,  is  seen  in  Bethlehem,  but  none  welcome  Him 
save  strangers  from  the  east.  From  Matthew,  we  should  not  be 
aware  of  the  slightest  recognition  of  the  Saviour  up  to  the  time 
of  their  coming.  On  the  contrary,  when  the  first  breath  of  these 
tidings  is  brought  to  Jerusalem,  consternation  was  the  result 
in  all.  The  king,  the  priests,  the  scribes,  all  are  in  a  state 
of  ferment.  Tliere  toas  no  hexirt  for  Jesus.  But  God  always 
will  have  a  testimony.  If  the  Jews  will  not  have  Him,  the 
Gentiles  come,  and  grace  it  is  that  effects  this.  Unbelieving 
Jews  tell  the  magi  where  the  King  should  be  born.  They  at 
once  act  upon  it,  and  the  Lord,  meeting  them  on  the  way,  puts 
them  in  presence  of  the  King,  to  whom  they  present  their  gifts. 
It  is  the  Messiah  of  Israel,  but  rejected  by  Israel  from  His  very 
birth.  Jerusalem  is  with  the  false  king,  and  cares  not  to  receive 
Him.  Those  who  were  despised  as  dogs,  whom  the  Jews  them- 
selves had  to  instruct  in  the  first  lessons  of  prophecy,  have  the 
glory  of  being  the  true  recognizers  of  the  claims  of  the  Messiah. 
Nothing  more  humbling.  It  is  the  Messiah  come,  and  owned 
by  the  ends  of  the  earth ;  but  the  Messiah  slighted  and  rejected 
of  His  own  nation.  "  He  came  to  his  own,  and  his  own 
received  him  not."  Of  this  we  have  proofs  from  the  very  first 
in  Matthew.  And  as  it  was  true,  so  it  was  important  that  Israel 
should  know  it.  Here  let  them  learn,  through  the  earliest 
of  the  evangelists,  that  it  does  not  arise  from  any  want  of 
evidence  on  His  part.     How  did  these  Gentiles  know  ?     And 


CHAPTER    11.  25 

where  were  the  Jews  that,  during  all  this  time,  they  had  not 
recognized  their  own  Messiah  ?  It  was  a  terrible  tale,  but  the 
truth  was  the  strangest  of  all  things  in  their  ears.  Such  is 
always  the  way  of  God.  He  does  give  a  testimony,  but  man 
dislikes  it  because  it  is  of  God.  To  recognize  the  person  of 
Christ  was  the  difficulty.  To  see  from  scripture  that  their  King 
was  to  be  born  in  Bethlehem  of  Judah,  was  an  easy  thing ;  it 
did  not  test  the  conscience,  nor  put  the  heart  to  the  proof.  But 
to  own  that  the  ignored  and  despised  One,  the  child  of  Mary 
and  the  heir  of  Joseph,  was  the  Messiah — this  was  indeed  hard 
to  the  flesh.  To  those  who  had  seen  the  sign  of  it  in  the 
heavens ;  to  those  who  had  looked  for  it  in  the  midst  of  great 
darkness,  but  who  had  their  eye  toward  it,  and  who  had  no  pre- 
occupations of  heart  to  hinder  them  from  bowing  before  His 
glory ;  all  was  simple,  and  they  hastened  to  do  Him  honour. 
Now  that  He  was  bom,  they  rejoiced  at  the  thought,  and  they 
came  from  far  to  have  the  joy  of  seeing  Him  and  offering  their 
gifts  at  His  feet. 

''  And  being  warned  of  God  in  a  dream,  that  they  should  not 
return  to  Herod,  they  departed  into  their  own  country  another 
way.  And  when  they  ^vere  departed,  behold,  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  appeareth  to  Joseph  in  a  dream,  saying.  Arise,  and  take 
the  young  child  and  his  mother,  and  flee  into  Egypt,  and  be 
thou  there  until  I  brino;  thee  word :  for  Herod  will  seek  the 
young  child  to  destroy  him."  (Ver.  12,  13.)  The  unbelief  that 
refused  the  word  of  God,  is  now  allowed  to  shew  out  how 
thoroughly  it  was  under  the  power  of  Satan,  who  proves  him- 
self, as  from  the  beginning,  to  be  a  liar  first  and  a  murderer 
afterwards.  But  the  purpose  of  Herod  was  revealed  of  God, 
and  Joseph,  in  obedience  to  His  word,  takes  the  young  child 
and  his  mother  by  night  and  departs  into  Egypt,  "  and  was 
there  until  the  death  of  Herod,  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which 
was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the  prophet,  saying,  Out  of  Egypt 
have  I  called  my  son." 

I  have  a  little  word  to  say  about  this  prophecy,  and  the 
application  of  it  to  our  Lord.  We  shall  have  to  take  into 
accomit  many  prophecies  cited  in  Matthew,  if  it  please  God. 


26  LECTURES    ON   THE    GOSPEL    OF    MATTHEW. 

But  the  present  quotation  has  evidently  a  remarkable  character 
attached  to  it.  It  may  have  been  said  in  the  letter  about  His 
people.  Israel  was  God's  son,  God's  firstborn  in  Egypt.  To 
them  pertained  the  adoption.  The  prophet  Hosea,  writing 
seven  hundred  years  after  their  departure  from  Egypt,  does 
not  hesitate  to  apply  this  word  to  Israel  ;  and  now  the 
same  portion  of  Hosea  is  used  of  Christ,  as  that  which  fully 
came  within  the  intent  of  the  inspiring  Spirit.  How  is  it,  that 
God's  having  taken  Israel  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  should  be 
so  illustrated  in  Christ's  history  ?  Because  Christ  is  the  object 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  scripture.  It  matters  not  what  may  be 
the  place  of  His  people  :  they  may  have  troubles  or  deliverances, 
but  Christ  must  enter  into  all.  There  is  no  kind  of  temptation 
(save,  of  course,  of  inward  evil)  that  He  has  not  known  ;  nor 
of  blessing  on  God's  behalf  that  He  has  not  proved.  Christ 
goes  through  the  history  of  His  people ;  and  on  that  principle  it 
is  that  such  scriptures  as  these  are  applied  to  Him.  Christ 
Himself  is  carried  into  the  very  place  that  had  been  the  furnace 
of  Israel.  There  it  is  that  He  finds  His  refuge  from  the  false 
king  of  Judea.  What  a  picture  !  Because  of  the  anti-king 
then  reigning  in  Jerusalem,  the  true  King  must  flee,  and  flee 
into  Egypt.     Christ  was  the  true  Israel.     Compare  Isaiah  xlix. 

We  see  from  this,  that  no  miraculous  power  is  put  forth  to 
preserve  Emmanuel.  It  was  accomplishing  the  prophecies — 
filling  up  the  outline  of  desolation  morally  and  nationally,  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  had  sketched  many  a  long  year  before.  God 
was  shewing  how  precious  to  Him  was  every  footstep  of  His 
Son.  It  might  seem  a  trifling  circumstance  in  itself  that  the 
Lord  was  carried  into  Egypt  and  came  out  of  it  another  day. 
But  whatever  was  the  place  of  Christ — and  His  place  was 
wherever  His  people  were  in  their  sorrow — He  will  not  permit 
them  to  feel  a  pang  without  His  sharing  in  it.  He  knows  what 
it  is  to  be  carried  into  Egypt,  and  that  too  in  a  far  more  j^ainful 
way  than  Israel  had  experienced.  For  the  bitterest  trouble 
of  Christ  was  from  His  own  people  ;  the  most  murderous  blow 
aimed  at  Him  was  by  the  king  then  sitting  on  the  throne  in 
their  midst.     Failing  in  this,  he  sends  forth  and  slays  all  the 


CHAPTER    II.  27 

cliildren  "  that  were  in  Betlileliem,  and  in  all  the  coasts  thereof, 
from  two  years  old  and  under,  according  to  the  time  which  he 
had  diligently  enquired  of  the  Avise  men.  Then  was  fulfilled 
that  which  was  spoken  by  Jeremy  the  prophet,  saying,  In 
Rama  was  the  voice  heard,  lamentation,  and  weeping,  and  great 
mourning,  Rachel  weeping  for  her  children,  and  would  not  be 
comforted,  because  they  are  not."  (Ver.  16 — 18.)  How  clearly 
we  find  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  here  providing  for  the  Jew  the 
proof  that  they  were  precious  in  His  sight ;  and  that,  if  Christ 
entered  into  their  sorrows,  they  must  not  wonder  if  His  presence 
will  bring  upon  themselves  the  bitterest  suffering  through  their 
rejection  of  Him.  If  Christ  has  the  smallest  connection  with 
Israel,  they  become  the  object  of  Satan's  animosity.  It  is 
Herod,  led  on  by  Satan,  who  issued  the  order  to  slay  their  little 
ones ; — but  the  Messiah  is  taken  away  from  the  scene  of 
his  rage.  In  Israel  they  have  weeping  and  great  mourning. 
Such  were  some  of  the  troubles  that  Israel  bring  upon  them- 
selves ;  and  this  is  but  a  little  picture  of  what  will  befall  them 
in  the  latter  day. 

"But  when  Herod  was  dead,  behold,  an  angel  of  the  Lord 
appeareth  in  a  dream  to  Joseph  in  Egypt,  saying.  Arise,  and 
take  the  young  child  and  his  mother,  and  go  into  the  land 
of  Israel ;  for  they  are  dead  which  sought  the  young  child's  life. 
And  he  arose  and  took  the  young  child  and  his  mother,  and 
came  into  the  land  of  Israel."  (Ver.  19 — 21.)  It  is  sweet  to 
find  "  the  land  of  IsraeV  occurring  here.  It  was  not  merely 
the  country,  as  known  among  men,  where  poor  Jews  lived  by 
the  permission  of  their  Gentile  lords.  How  few  look  on  it  as 
the  land  "  of  Israel'^  now !  But  God's  thoughts  are  towards 
His  people  in  connection  with  the  glory  of  His  Son.  If  Jesus 
had  His  earthly  tie  there — if  Emmanuel  were  now  born  of  the 
virgin,  why  should  not  the  land  be  called  the  land  of  Israel  ? 
It  was  the  divine  purpose  completely  to  expel  the  foot  of  the 
Gentile  that  was  now  treading  it  down.  If  the  people  would 
only  bow  and  receive  Him  to  take  His  place  as  their  King,  how 
blessed  their  lot !  But  would  Israel  receive  Jehovah-Jesus  now 
returning  from  Egypt  ?     There  was  no  readiness  for  Him  yet. 


28  LECTURES    ON   THE    GOSPEL    OF    MATTHEW. 

One  Herod  passed  away ;  another  followed.  Hence,  when  the 
youn^y  child  was  taken  back  into  the  land  of  Israel,  and  when 
Joseph  heard  "  that  Archelaus  did  reign  in  Judea  in  the  room  of 
his  father  Herod,  he  was  afraid  to  go  thither :  notwithstanding, 
being  warned  of  God  in  a  dream,  he  turned  aside  into  the  parts 
of  Galilee.  And  he  came  and  dwelt  in  a  city  called  Nazareth ; 
so  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  the  prophets, 
He  shall  be  called  a  Nazarene."  (Ver.  22,  23.) 

The  method  of  citation  is  worthy  of  note  here.  Take  note  of 
another  and  most  striking  turn  which  is  given  to  the  prophets  ; 
for  we  must  observe  that  it  is  not  one  particular  prophet,  but 
"  the  prophets."  And  by  that  we  are  to  gather,  not  that  any 
one  inspired  writer  said  these  words,  but  it  is  the  spirit  of  the 
prophets  who  do  speak  of  Him.  When  we  read  in  one  prophet, 
"  They  shall  smite  the  judge  of  Israel  with  a  rod  upon  the 
cheek;"  in  another,  "He  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men ;  a 
man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief;"  and  again,  what 
they  should  give  Him  for  meat,  and  in  His  thirst  for  drink,  and 
how  He  should  be  taunted  up  to  the  last — we  can  understand 
this  application  of  the  prophets.  Thus,  it  was  the  well-under- 
stood language  expressive  of  contempt  in  that  day :  He  should, 
in  other  words,  be  called  a  Nazarene.  Nazareth  was  the  mpst^ 
scorned  of  places.  Not  only  did  the  men  of  Judea  proper  look 
down  upon  Nazareth,  but  the  Galileans  themselves  despised  it, 
though  it  was  part  of  their  own  district.  Later  on  we  read  of  a 
guileless  Israelite,  who,  M'hen  he  heard  of  Jesus  being  there, 
exclaimed,  "Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth?" 
Thus,  if  one  spot  in  Palestine  more  than  another  would  accord 
with  the  rejection  that  w^as  the  portion  of  Christ,  it  was  Naza- 
reth. Can  there  be  a  more  wonderful  picture  than  this  of  One 
who,  while  He  was  the  true  King,  was  yet  refused  by  His  own 
people?  Gentiles  might  have  done  Him  reverence;  but  His 
own  nation  was  indifferent.  How  little  fruit  was  there  to  answer 
to  the  culture  that  God  had  bestowed  upon  them  !  But  here  was 
the  Blessed  One  who  pursues  His  path  of  obedience  unto  death, 
who  would  not  shew  His  glory  by  protecting  Himself  His 
people  went  down  into  Egypt :  He  goes  down  there  also.     He 


CHAPTER    IT.  29 

has  to  be  called  out  of  Egypt.  That  was  His  portion.  He  would 
not  screen  Himself  from  the  sorrows  of  His  people :  He  would 
share  them  all.  When  He  does  come  forth,  Israel  is  still  un- 
prepared for  Him.  His  parents  turn  to  Nazareth  once  more, 
Joseph  having  been  again  divinely  instructed  in  a  dream-  This 
is  the  last  mention  that  we  have  of  him  in  Matthew.  Luke 
gives  us  later  circumstances ;  but  Joseph  wholly  disappears 
before  our  Lord  entered  upon  His  ministry. 

When  He  is  called  out  of  Egypt,  He  cannot  go  to  Jerusalem, 
nor  to  Bethlehem  either.  He  was  to  be  despised  and  rejected  : 
the  prophets  had  said  so :  their  words  must  be  accomplished. 
Archelaus  reigned  in  Judea :  an  itsurper  was  still  there.  Joseph 
turns  aside  at  the  warning  of  God  to  Nazareth.  There  Jesus 
dwelt  with  them ;  that  the  word  of  the  prophets  might  be  ful- 
filled, in  our  Lord's  proving  to  the  full  Avhat  it  was  to  be  the 
most  despised  of  men.  He  laiew  it  pre-eminently  on  the  cross ; 
but  it  Avas  His  all  through.  And  this  is  the  way  that  God 
speaks  of  the  Messiah  to  Israel.  He  shews  what  their  hardness 
of  heart  and  unbelief  would  entail  —  even  if  it  were  to  the 
Messiah  Himself  coming,  according  to  all  that  God  had  declared, 
to  that  land  and  people.  What  a  picture  of  man,  and  especially 
of  Israel,  when  such  must  be  His  portion !  He  comes  and 
calls,  but  no  answer  greets  Him.  The  unbelief  of  man  hinders 
the  blessing  of  God.  It  was  the  sin  of  Israel  that  thus  com- 
plicated the  early  history  of  the  King.  But  future  chapters 
will  shew  that  God  would  turn  the  very  unbelief  of  Israel 
into  the  means  of  blessing  for  the  despised  Gentiles,  and 
that  if  the  Jews  rejected  the  counsel  of  God  to  their  own 
perdition,  the  Gentiles  would  hear  and  receive  all  blessing  in 
the  blessed   One. 

Thus,  we  find  from  the  beginning  of  this  Avonderful  book  the 
germs  of  all  that  the  end  will  display.  We  find  One  who  is 
really  the  Messiah,  ready  to  accomplish  the  promises  and  to 
take  the  throne,  but  the  people  in  no  way  ready  for  Him.  Israel 
were  steeped  in  sin — they  had  no  heart  for  Him.  They  were 
full  of  their  own  king,  their  own  ceremonies,  their  own  light. 
All  was  turned  to  the  exaltation  of  self.     Hence  Jesus  is  rejected 


30  LECTURES    ON    THE    GOSPEL    OF    MATTHEW. 

from  the  A^ery  first.  This  is  the  story  of  man.  Tlie  after 
chapters  will  shew  us  the  glorious  consequences  which  God, 
in  His  grace,  causes  to  flow  even  from  the  rejection  of  His 
own  Son.  Upon  that  happier  theme  we  may  dwell  on  other 
occasions. 


CHAPTEE  III. 

We  are  now  carried  forward,  from  the  return  of  our  Lord  into 
the  holy  land,  to  the  days  when  John  the  Baptist  came  insisting 
upon  the  grand  essential  truth  of  repentance.  But  here  John's 
ministry  is  viewed  entirely  in  connection  with  the  Lord's  relation 
to  Israel.  It  is  interesting  to  compare  the  different  ways  in 
which  the  gospels  present  John  himself,  as  illustrating  the 
manner  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  uses  His  own  divine  right  to 
shape  and  group  the  materials  of  our  Lord's  history  according 
to  the  exact  object  in  view.  A  casual  reader  might  scarcely 
recognize  that  John  the  Baptist  of  the  last  gospel  was  the 
Baptist  of  the  first.  The  manner  in  which  they  are  viewed,  and 
the  discourses  that  are  recorded,  take  their  form  from  the  par- 
ticular book  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  given  them.  This,  so 
far  from  being  imperfection,  is  a  part  of  that  admirable  method 
in  which  God  impresses  the  design  which  He  has  in  view,  and 
which  suits  the  place  which  each  portion  of  scripture  has  to  fill. 
And  what  can  be  of  deeper  interest  or  more  strengthening,  than 
to  find  that  the  very  passages  on  which  unbelief  puts  its  finger 
and  alleges  as  proofs  of  the  imperfection  of  scripture  (varieties  of 
statement  insuperable  to  the  mind  of  man),  on  the  contrary, 
when  viewed  as  part  of  God's  plan  for  commending  His  beloved 
Son,  all  assume  their  own  place  in  this  great  scheme,  which  is 
to  the  glory  of  Christ.  This  is  the  true  key  to  all  scripture  ;  and 
if  that  key  be  of  great  value  from  Genesis  to  Eevelation,  there 
is  no  place,  perhaps,  where  its  value  is  so  conspicuous  as  in  the 
Gospels.     In  finding  four  different  accounts  of  our  Lord,  each 


CHAPTER    III.  31 

presenting  things  in  a  different  manner,  the  first  thought  of 
man's  heart  is,  that  each  sncceeding  gospel  must  add  to  or 
correct  what  had  gone  before.  But  such  thoughts  only  prove 
either  that  the  truth  was  never  knoA\ai,  or  that  it  has  been  for- 
gotten. Is  it  adequately  borne  in  mind  that  God  is  the  author 
of  the  gospels  ?  Once  admit  that  simple  truth,  and  it  would 
be  evidently  blasphemous  to  suppose  that  He  makes  mistakes. 
Look  at  the  meanest  thing  that  God  has  made,  the  minutest 
insect  that  the  microscope  can  discover  upon  the  least  blade  of 
grass :  what  does  not  fill  the  particular  niche  for  which  God 
created  it  ?  I  do  not  deny  that  sin  has  brought  all  kinds  of 
derangements  into  the  natural  as  well  as  into  the  moral  world. 
I  admit  that  man's  infirmities  may  appear  even  in  the  word  of 
God :  first,  in  not  keeping  the  sacred  deposit  free  from  all  cor- 
ruption ;  and,  then,  in  interpreting  that  word  through  some 
feeble  medium  of  his  own ;  and  thus,  one  way  or  another, 
hindering  the  pure  revealed  light  of  God. 

I  have  made  these  few  remarks  because  all  readers  may  not 
be  equally  familiar  with  the  great  truth  of  the  difference  of 
design  in  the  Gospels,  and  therefore  I  do  not  scruple  to  draw 
attention  to  the  immense  help  it  furnishes  to  the  understanding 
of  scripture,  and  especially  of  its  apparent  discrepancies. 

Li  the  chapter  before  us,  John  the  Baptist  is  presented  as 
fulfilling  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah.  He  came  "  preaching  in  the 
wilderness  of  Judea,  and  saying,  Repent  ye :  for  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  at  hand.  For  this  is  he  that  was  spoken  of  by  the 
prophet  Esaias,  saying,  The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness, 
Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  his  paths  straight."  In 
Luke  you  will  find  that  the  prophecy  is  carried  farther  down. 
More  is  given  us  than  the  words  we  have  got  here.  "Every 
valley  shall  be  filled  and  every  mountain  and  hill  shall  be  brought 
low  ;  and  the  crooked  shall  be  made  straight,  and  the  rough 
ways  shall  be  made  smooth ;  and  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation 
of  God."  The  range  of  Luke  is  wider.  "  Every  valley 
shall  be  filled,"  &c.  "  All  flesh  shall  see,"  &c.  I  ask.  Why  is 
that  quotation  continued  farther  there  ?  It  is  the  more  remark- 
able because  usually  Luke  does  not  quote  much  from  the  Old 


32  LECTURES    ON   THE    GOSPEL    OF    MATTHEW. 

Testament,  as  compared  witli  Mattliew.  How  comes  it  that 
Luke  departs  in  this  particular  instance  from  his  habit?  The 
reason  is  obvious.  His  task  was  to  shew  the  grace  of  God  that 
brings  salvation  and  that  has  appeared  to  all  men.  The  Holy 
Ghost  leads  him  therefore  to  fasten  upon  these  words  that  dis- 
play the  universal  range  of  the  Lord's  goodness  to  man. 

But  there  is  another  expression  that  I  must  dwell  upon  for  a 
IJttle — "  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  We  are  all  familiar  with  it 
as  a  phrase  often  used  in  scripture ;  but  possibly  not  many  are 
equally  familiar  with  its  force.  Indeed,  it  is  understood  very 
vaguely  even  by  most  Christians.  To  many  it  conveys  the  idea 
of  the  Church,  sometimes  the  visible  and  sometimes  the  invisible 
church.  By  others  again  it  is  supposed  to  mean  something  tanta- 
mount to  the  gospel,  or  heaven  itself  at  the  end.  The  expression 
is  derived  from  the  Old  Testament,  and  that  is  the  reason  why  it 
appears  in  Matthew  only.  As  we  have  already  seen,  our  evan- 
o-elist  writes  with  a  view  to  Israel,  and  therefore  lays  hold  of  a 
phrase  which  is  suggested  by  the  Old  Testament,  and  taken  from 
the  prophecy  of  Daniel,  who  speaks  of  the  days  coming  when 
the  heavens  should  rule.  Before  that  (chap,  ii.),  we  hear  that 
the  God  of  heaven  is  to  set  up  a  kingdom  that  should  never  be 
destroyed — the  kingdom  of  heaven.  And,  again,  in  chapter  vii. 
we  are  told  of  the  Son  of  man's  coming,  and  of  a  universal 
kino-dom  which  is  given  Him.  Chapter  ii.  does  not  give  us  the 
person,  but  the  thing  itself :  so  that  there  might  still  have  been 
a  kino-dom  without  the  revelation  of  the  person  in  whose  hands 
it  was  held.  But  chapter  vii.  completes  the  circle,  and  shews  us 
that  it  is  not  merely  the  heavens  ruling  in  the  distance,  nor  a 
kino-dom  opening  with  judgment  on  earth  ;  but  besides  that, 
there  is  a  glorious  Man  to  whom  the  rule  of  heaven  will  be 
entrusted.  The  Son  of  man  will  not  simply  destroy  what  opposes 
God,  but  will  introduce  a  universal  kingdom. 

This  kino-dom  John  the  Baptist  came  preaching.  I  do  not 
believe  that  he  was  at  all  aware  of  the  particular  form  it  was  to 
take  first.  He  simply  preached  the  kingdom  of  heaven  as  at  hand, 
himself  the  public  and  immediate  forermmer  of  the  Shepherd  of 


CHAPTER   IIT.  33 

Israel,  with  the  thoughts  of  a  godly  Jew,  and  a  special  witness 
that  the  Messiah  was  there — that  He  was  about  to  be  manifested, 
who  would  execute  judgment  upon  tlie  evil,  and  introduce  good 
in  the  power  of  God,  and  bring  in  the  glory  promised  to  the 
fathers  ;  and  that  all  this  was  about  to  be  inaugurated  and 
established  in  the  person  of  Christ  here  below.  This,  I  believe, 
was  the  general  thought.  And  we  shall  find,  subsequently,  that, 
for  the  rejection  of  Jesus  by  the  Jews,  John  was  not  at  all 
prepared.  This,  too,  it  was  that  led  to  the  twofold  form  taken 
by  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  While  the  old  or  Jewish  view  of  a 
kingdom  established  by  power  and  glory,  as  a  visible  sovereignty 
over  the  earth,  is  postponed,  the  rejection  of  Jesus  on  earth,  and 
His  ascension  to  God's  right  hand  lead  to  the  introduction  of 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  a  mysterious  form — which  is,  in  point 
of  fact,  going  on  now.  Thus  it  has  two  sides.  When  Christ 
Avent  up  to  heaven  and  took  His  place  as  the  rejected  but 
glorified  One  there,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  began. 

This  is  a  view  of  the  kingdom  that  we  do  not  find  in  the  Old 
Testament.  To  it  pertain  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  that  were  only  opened  out  as  the  Lord  was  manifestly 
rejected  by  Israel.  Thus  we  see  in  Matthew  xi.  John  sends  two 
of  his  disciples  to  ask,  whether  Jesus  was  really  the  Messiah, 
or  were  they  to  look  for  another?  Whether  he  was  himself 
staggered,  or  his  disciples,  or  whether  both  were,  it  matters 
little — such  was  the  result.  It  sounds  like  an  unbelieving 
question  to  the  Lord.  He  might  well  be  astonished  that  Jesus 
did  not  deliver  the  Jews,  and  bring  in  the  glory  for  which 
patriarchs  had  waited,  and  which  prophets  had  predicted. 
Strange  that,  instead  of  this.  His  messenger  was  in  prison. 
Himself  and  His  disciples  despised !  Our  Lord  at  once  referred 
to  these  deeds  of  power  and  grace,  which  bespoke  the  presence 
of  God,  acting  in  a  new  way,  and  introducing  a  power  evidently 
in  grace — bringing  in  totally  new  thoughts,  above  the  habits  or 
hopes  of  the  most  godly  Jew.  These  they  were  to  report  to 
John.  But  He  goes  farther,  and  says,  "And  blessed  is  he 
whosoever  shall  not  be  offended  in  me."  This,  apparently, 
conveys  a  rebuke  to  John,  and  implies  that  he  had  been,  more  or 

D 


34         LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

less,  stumbled.  Yet  it  is  beautiful  to  see  how  at  once,  after  the 
departure  of  the  messengers,  our  Lord  vindicates  the  Baptist 
before  the  multitude.  But,  after  pronouncing  John  to  be  the 
most  blessed  among  those  born  of  women.  He  suddenly  intro- 
duces a  most  startling  truth,  namely,  that  great  as  John  was, 
the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  greater  than  he.  This 
does  not  refer  to  the  kingdom  coming  in  power  and  glory, 
because,  when  that  day  comes.  Old  and  New  Testament  saints 
must  all  be  raised  or  changed  to  have  their  part  in  it ;  as  it  is 
said  of  those  who  are  being  called  now,  that  they  shall  sit  "  with 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  What 
then  does  our  Lord  mean  ?  Does  He  not  refer  to  some  form  of  it 
that  John  had  not  spoken  of?  And  what  was  this  ?  He  goes  on 
farther  and  says,  "  From  the  days  of  John  the  Baptist  until 
now,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence,  and  the  violent 
take  it  by  force."  What  an  extraordinary  statement  must  this 
have  appeared  to  those  who  listened  to  it  then !  The  Lord  is 
contrasting  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  in  a  public  manifest  form, 
with  that  kingdom  as  opened  to  faith  only — more  blessed  as 
known  to  faith  than  to  sight.  As  the  Lord  afterwards  said  to 
Thomas,  "Because  thou  hast  seen  me,  thou  hast  believed: 
blessed  are  they  that  have  not  «een,  and  yet  have  believed." 
This  holds  good  in  every  dealing  of  God.  Abraham  was  more 
blessed  when,  though  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  he  possessed  it  not, 
than  if  it  had  all  been  actually  his  own.  He  gained  a  better 
place  in  the  ways  of  God  from  the  very  fact  of  his  not  having 
one  foot  of  the  land  in  possession.  So  with  David.  His  reign 
was  morally  far  more  glorious  than  that  of  Solomon.  His  heir 
had  the  place  of  power ;  but  David  had  that  which  was  unseen, 
yet  nearer  to  God.  We  never  find  that  Solomon  enters  into 
what  was  taught  by  the  ark,  whereas  it  was  always  the  great 
attraction  to  David's  heart.  Solomon  was  fomid  before  the 
great  altar  which  the  whole  world  could  see.  The  ark  was 
within  the  holiest,  where  God  sat.  It  was  the  throne  of  His 
majesty  in  the  midst  of  Israel.  To  it  the  heart  of  David  ever 
turned.  The  blessing  of  faith  is  always  better  than  the  blessing 
of  sight  here  below,  how  great  soever  this  may  be. 


CHAPTER   III.  35 

There  has  been  no  time  in  the  ways  of  God  so  blessed  for  a 
soul  as  the  ways  of  God  now.  To  be  born  in  the  millennium  is 
not  at  all  to  be  compared  with  it.  It  is  true  that  then  all  will 
be  in  subjection  to  Christ,  and  the  heart  might  say,  Would  that 
we  might  be  born  then  !  But  even  the  believers  found  in  that 
day  on  the  earth  will  not  know  what  it  is  to  enter  within  the  veil, 
or  to  have  the  fellowship  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  Neither 
will  they  know  in  the  full  sense  the  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  with 
the  privilege  of  being  cast  out  and  scorned  by  the  world  for 
Christ's  sake.  So  that,  both  in  the  matter  of  suflPering  and  the 
enjoyment  of  what  Christ  has  gone  through  for  us,  and  His 
present  glory  in  heaven,  our  present  place  is  far  beyond  it.  For 
those  who  suffer  now,  it  will  be  the  best  of  heavenly  blessings 
then.  But  the  peculiarity  of  the  present  time  is  this,  that  while 
we  are  on  earth,  we  are  consciously  dwellers  in  heaven.  We 
are  not  of  the  world,  as  Christ  is  not  of  the  world.  Our  life 
does  not  belong  to  it ;  our  blessing  does  not  spring  from  it ;  all 
our  portion  is  outside  this  world.  And  this  is  communicated  to 
us  while  we  are  in  the  world,  to  raise  us  above  the  world.  It  is 
not,  as  Avith  John  here,  going  into  the  wilderness,  a  most  sea- 
sonable and  beautiful  expression  of  what  God  thought  of  the 
city  of  holiness,  Jerusalem,  where  the  priests  themselves  minis- 
tered. John  retires  from  it  all.  He  is  outside  it  in  sympathy : 
the  A^ery  act  in  itself  declared  that  the  wilderness  is  better  than 
the  city,  even  though  it  contain  God's  temple.  But  what  a 
solemn  declaration  of  the  ruin,  not  only  of  the  world,  but  of 
the  favoured  people  who  were  the  great  link  between  God  and 
men  generally  ! 

Li  this  scene  behold  another  thing  altogether.  It  is  not  man 
blest,  and  the  earth  brought  also  into  blessedness  under  the 
personal  reign  of  Christ.  But  here  the  heavens  were  opened 
upon  the  Lord  Jesus.  Never  had  they  opened  before  upon  any 
one  on  earth,  except  as  a  sign  of  God's  judgment.  (Ezek.  i.) 
But  here,  first  of  all,  the  eye  of  heaven,  of  the  Father,  who  is  in 
heaven,  is  directed  upon  the  beloved  One.  By  and  by  He  takes 
up  His  place  in  heaven,  as  the  Man  who  had  suffered  for  sins 
and  brought  in  the  revealed  righteousness  of  God. 


36  LECTURES   ON  THE   GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 

The  kingdom  of  heaven  then  began.  From  the  time  that 
Jesus  goes  up  into  heaven,  till  He  comes  back  again,  the  New- 
Testament  view  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  runs  on,  and  in  that 
sense,  the  privilege  of  the  feeblest  soul  brought  to  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  now,  transcends  anything  that  ever  entered  into  the 
heart  or  mind  of  men,  or  even  of  saints,  before  the  Lord  died  and 
rose  again.  You  may  dwell  upon  the  blessed  walk  of  Enoch 
and  the  bright  faith  of  Abraham.  But  still  this  remains  true — 
"  Among  them  that  are  born  of  women  there  hath  not  risen  a 
greater  than  John  the  Baptist ;  notwithstanding  he  that  is  least 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater  than  he."  There  is  no  honest 
escape  fi'om  the  conclusion  that  has  been  drawn.  If  persons 
argue.  Is  a  little  child  believing  in  Jesus  now  more  holy  and 
righteous  than  the  blessed  saints  of  old  ?  I  answer,  That  is 
another  matter  altogether.  He  ought  to  be.  But  that  is  not 
what  is  said.  The  Lord  lays  down  that  "  the  least  in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  is  greater  than  he."  In  a  word,  it  is  not  a 
question  of  what  men  are ;  but  God  is  glorifying  Christ.  Upon 
Him  God  is  putting  honour  and  therefore  gives  such  privileges 
to  the  least  one  that  believes  in  Him.  Since  His  death  and 
resurrection,  the  worshippers  once  purged  have  no  more  con- 
science of  sins.  Think  of  what  such  a  thing  would  have  been 
to  an  Old  Testament  saint !  Was  there  one  that  knew  such  a 
place  as  this  ?  It  could  not  be.  They  might  look  forward  to  it, 
but  they  could  not  say  that  it  was  an  accomplished  fact.  It 
would  have  been  contrary  to  the  holiness  of  God,  and  positive 
presumption  for  man,  to  have  even  the  thought,  till  Christ  came 
and  wrought  the  work  that  blotted  sins  completely  out.  Now  it 
is  presumption  not  to  take  with  confidence  what  Christ  has  done. 
Remission  of  sins  never  was  or  could  be  thus  known  of  old. 
When  we  enter  into  the  position  in  which  we  are  set  by  the 
work  of  Christ,  it  is  not  merely  that  we  have  remission  :  we  are 
made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Christ ;  we  have  a  new  life, 
the  risen  life  of  Christ  Himself.  We  stand  in  the  relation  of 
sons  of  God,  and  are  entitled  by  Christ  Himself  to  say  that  His 
God  is  our  God,  His  Father  is  our  Father.  We  are  entitled  to 
know  that  we  are  ope  with  Christ,  and  that  there  is  not  a  single 


CHAPTER   III.  37 

blessing  or  glory  that  God  has  conferred  uj)on  His  beloved  Son, 
but  what  the  Son  shares  AA'ith  us.  But  glory  conferred,  I  say ; 
for  of  course  there  is  His  essential  divine  glory  in  which  none 
can  participate.  God  never  gave  Christ  to  be  God.  Deity  was 
His  own  right  from  all  eternity.  He  could  not  have  Godhead 
bestowed  upon  Him.  But  Christ  became  man,  and  as  man  He 
was  the  Son  of  God ;  He  was  not  merely  so  as  God.  He  was 
the  Son  of  God  as  born  into  this  world,  and  as  such  He  has 
been  raised  up  from  the  dead ;  marked  out  as  the  Son  of  God 
with  power,  by  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  in  virtue  of  which 
He  brings  us  into  the  same  place  before  God  that  He  Himself 
has  acquired.  He  has  entirely  delivered  us  from  the  place  into 
which  He  entered  for  us,  enduring  the  wrath  and  judgment  of 
God.  He  brings  us  into  the  place  to  which  He  is  not  only 
entitled  Himself,  but  has  acquired  a  title  for  us. 

But  John  had  no  conception  of  such  a  compass  of  blessing. 
To  draw  near  to  God,  to  hear  Jesus  saying  "  My  God  and 
your  God,  my  Father  and  your  Father,"  could  not  enter  into 
his  mind,  if  it  were  only  because  he  was  a  saint  in  association 
with  what  was  then  revealed.  Such  an  one  would  be  jealous  of 
going  beyond  the  word  of  God  before  Christ  uttered  it.  The 
Jews  looked  upon  the  kingdom  as  the  state  when  Israel  would  be 
blessed  of  God  as  a  nation ;  and  even  those  that  may  have  more 
fully  understood  still  looked  for  all  the  power  of  the  kingdom 
to  be  brought  in,  entirely  independent  of  anything  on  their  part. 
^'  But  the  kingdom  of  heaven  suifereth  violence,  and  the  violent 
take  it  by  force."  The  Lord  shews  that  there  is  an  action  of 
faith  needed  now ;  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  here  presented 
demands  the  rupture  of  natural  ties  and  the  giving  up  of  previous 
associations.  In  the  sense  of  power  and  glory  introduced  by  a 
personal  Messiah  upon  the  earth,  John  had  already  pressed  on 
consciences,  that  it  was  not  a  thing  of  mere  ordinance  or  privi- 
lege by  birth — that  God  would  not  be  content  except  with 
moral  realities.  And  allow  me  to  say,  that  it  is  a  very  solemn 
thing  indeed  to  claim  the  privileges  of  grace  for  that  which  is 
contrary  to  the  nature  of  God.  I  am  not  speaking  now  of  the 
lost  one  found  by  grace,  to  whom  God  gives  a  new  life  fresh 


38         LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

from  Himself.  But  the  effect  of  a  soul's  receiving  life  in  the 
person  of  Christ  is,  that  there  are  produced  feelings,  thoughts, 
judgments,  and  ways,  acceptable  to  God  and  akin  to  His  nature. 
If  a  person  is  a  child  of  God,  he  is  like  his  Father ;  he  has  a 
nature  suitable  to  God,  a  life  that  dislikes  sin  and  is  surely  pained 
by  what  is  iniquitous  in  others,  but  more  particularly  in  himself. 
Many  bad  men  are  strong  against  evil  in  others ;  they  are  weak  where 
it  might  touch  themselves.  But  a  Christian  always  begins  with 
self-judgment.  That  is  the  reason  why,  now  that  there  was  to 
be  a  moral  preparation  for  the  Messiah,  John  preaches  "  repent." 
Repentance  is  the  soul's  moral  judgment  of  itself  under  the  eye 
of  God,  the  soul's  acceptance  of  His  judgment  of  its  state 
before  Him  and  bowing  to  it.  John  called  upon  them  to  repent 
because  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  at  hand.  "  For  this  is  he 
that  Avas  spoken  of  by  the  prophet  Esaias,  saying,  The  voice 
of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness,  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the 
Lord,  make  his  paths  straight."  This  clearly  implied  two 
things — that  he  was  but  a  voice,  pretending  to  nothing,  and  that 
the  work  would  be  done  by  another.  Tlie  voice  only  was  on  his 
part,  but  the  other,  whose  way  he  was  preparing,  was  the  Lord, 
Jehovah  Himself.     "  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  Jehovah." 

Then  we  have  the  account  of  John  the  Baptist  himself 
"  The  same  John  had  his  raiment  of  camel's  hair,  and  a  leathern 
girdle  about  his  loins ;  and  his  meat  was  locusts  and  wild 
honey :"  all  perfectly  suitable  to  this  summons  to  repentance. 
As  yet  it  is  not  grace  introduced ;  this  belongs  to  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  when  it  is  fully  brought  in.  But  John  did  not  know 
it  thus.  He  knew  that  the  Messiah  was  coming,  a  Messiah  who 
would  introduce  the  power  of  God  and  deliver  His  peoi)le.  But 
the  deep  unfolding  of  grace,  the  mighty  victory  which  a  suffer- 
ing Messiah  would  accomplish  for  the  soul,  and  the  way  in 
which  God  would  be  magnified  most  of  all  by  the  putting  away 
of  sin  by  the  death  of  His  Son,  were  thoughts  that  must  wait 
for  another  season,  not  for  utterance  more  or  less,  but  for  ade- 
quate intelligence.  No  heart  could  be  in  sympathy  with  them 
till  the  work  was  done.  The  ark  of  the  Lord  must  stand  still  in 
the  waters  of  Jordan  first.      Not   a  foot  can  pass  that  way 


CHAPTER   III.  39 

scathless  till  the  ark  has  passed  in.  God  in  Christ  must  be 
before  man.  Most  fittingly,  therefore,  John  does  not  bring  out 
the  fulness  of  divine  grace,  but  the  moral  call  to  repentance.  It 
is  the  Spirit  of  God  producing  a  sense  of  what  we  are,  but  not 
yet  revealing  the  work  of  Christ  and  the  fulness  of  grace  there 
is  in  Him.  In  the  Gospel  of  John  we  do  find  the  Baptist 
speaking  so  as  to  imply  a  good  deal  more,  when  he  uttered  those 
sweet  and  memorable  words,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  which 
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  How  far  he  entered  into 
them,  I  cannot  say.  There  is  no  necessity  to  suppose  that  he 
comprehended  all  that  Avas  taught  by  them ;  many  a  child  of 
God  does  not  even  now.  God  might  make  use  of  them  with  great 
power  as  a  prophecy ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  His  action  in  Old 
Testament  times,  did  not  go  beyond  this  in  testimony.  The 
saints,  then,  had  the  Holy  Ghost  giving  them  faith  in  a  coming 
Messiah.  Some,  the  prophets,  were  the  Spirit's  vessels  in  pre- 
dictinof  Him.  But  as  to  the  personal  enjoyment  of  communion, 
such  as  results  from  the  accomplishment  of  all,  it  never  was,  nor 
could  be,  till  the  work  was  done. 

John,  accordingly,  is  found  outside  the  religion  of  man,  as 
well  as  outside  his  profanity.  He  was  not  in  Rome,  but  he 
was  also  away  from  Jerusalem ;  and  this,  in  the  predicted 
messenger  of  Jehovah,  Avas  a  most  solemn  featm-e.  "  Then  went 
out  to  him  Jerusalem,  and  all  Judea,  and  all  the  region  round 
about  Jordan,  and  were  baptized  of  him  in  Jordan,  confessing 
their  sins.  But  when  he  saw  many  of  the  Pharisees  and 
Sadducees  come  to  the  baptism,  he  said  unto  them,  0  generation 
of  vipers,  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come?"  Here  is  a  part  of  that  truth  which  is  exceedingly 
startling,  when  we  reflect  upon  it.  The  Pharisees  were  religi- 
ously the  most  influential  in  Israel.  The  Sadducees  were  the 
loose,  secular,  self-indulgent  class;  the  Pharisees,  those  who 
stood  very  firm  for  what  they  considered  the  truth.  Yet  when 
John  sees  them  both  coming  to  his  baptism,  he  says,  "  0  genera- 
tion of  vipers,  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come?  Bring  forth,  therefore,  fruits  meet  for  repentance" — 
fruits  of  a  kindred  character.     He  maintains  that  the  day  of 


40  LECTURES   ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

ceremonialism,  or  of  birthrights,  was  completely  past.  The 
Pharisee  might  rest  upon  his  religion ;  the  Sadducee  upon  the 
fact  that  he  was  a  child  of  Abraham.  The  desire  to  escape 
wrath  and  to  have  part  in  the  kingdom  might  be  no  more  than 
nature.  Humbled  souls  suit  the  kingdom.  Descent  from  the 
fathers,  the  law,  the  promises  even,  may  be  turned  into  a  right 
against  God,  who  will  not  allow  it,  and  can  raise  out  of  the 
stones  children  to  Abraham.  But  there  must  be,  if  they 
attempted  to  draw  near  to  God,  ways  of  a  nature  morally 
suitable  to  God.  "  Bring  forth,  therefore,"  he  says,  "  fruits 
meet  for  repentance."  He  is  not  explaining  here  how  a  sinner 
is  to  be  saved,  or  how  God  remits  sins ;  but  that  if  persons  take 
the  stand  of  having  to  do  with  God,  there  must  be  what  becomes 
His  presence.  So  the  Ajjostle  says  to  the  Hebrews,  "  Follow 
peace  and  holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." 
There  he  is  not  speaking  of  what  is  imputed,  but  of  holiness 
as  a  real  practical  thing.  This  is  written  to  Christians :  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  does  not  hesitate  to  insist  upon  it.  So  strong  is  the 
tendency  to  reaction  in  human  nature,  that  the  very  baptized 
Jews  who  were  pleading  for  the  law  might  fall  into  the  opposite 
extreme,  and  think  that  sin  is  compatible  with  the  salvation  that 
God  gives  through  grace.  But  God  never  allows  that  His  nature 
can  co-exist  with  sanctioned  iniquity. 

Here,  then,  was  evidently  a  stern  rebuke  for  the  leading  JewSi, 
But  more  than  that,  John  adds,  "  And  now  also  the  axe  is  laid 
to  the  root  of  the  trees ;"  that  is  to  say,  judgment  is  just  at  hand. 
(Yer.  10.)  "  Therefore  every  tree  which  bringeth  not  forth  good 
fruit  is  hewn  down,  and  cast  intt)  the  fire.  I  indeed  baptize  you 
with  water  unto  repentance."  He  does  not  go  beyond  this. 
The  remission  of  sins  that  he  might  speak  of  appears  to  me  to 
have  been  rather  a  question  of  the  government  of  God,  than  of 
that  complete  putting  away  of  sin  which  was  the  fruit  of  grace 
when  the  work  of  atonement  was  done.  But,  even  so,  it  was  in 
view  of  Messiah's  advent. 

''  I  indeed  baptize  you  with  water  unto  repentance ;  but  he 
that  Cometh  after  me  is  mightier  than  I,  whose  shoes  I  am  not 
worthy  to  bear :  he  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with 


CHAPTER   III.  41 

fire."  (Ver.  11.)  Tliere  he  brings  together  the  two  grand  features 
of  the  first  and  second  comings  of  Christ.  He  did  not  know  but 
that  both  would  go  on  together.  All  that  might  lie  between  the 
two  was  hidden  from  his  eyes.  The  Old  Testament  scriptures  did 
present  the  first  and  second  advent  of  the  Messiah,  but  not  in 
such  a  Avay  as  to  convey  the  thought  of  two  distinct  epochs. 
Even  after  the  Lord's  death  and  resurrection,  the  disciples  did  not 
understand  this.  So  John  mingles  these  two  things  together — 
the  baptizing  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire.  We  know 
that  the  baptizing  with  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  poM^er  of  God's 
blessing  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  as  it  now  is.  The  baptism  of 
fire  is  that  which  will  accompany  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  as  it 
will  be  when  Christ  comes  again.  There  is  no  such  thing  in 
the  word  of  God  as  the  baptism  of  fire  to  designate  what  took 
place  at  Pentecost.  Baptism  with  fire  is  the  application  of  the 
judgment  of  God  in  dealing  with  men.  Whereas  the  day  of 
Pentecost  was  the  outpouring  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  the 
giving  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  dwell  in  the  saints  of  God,  which 
merely  referred  to  the  j^ower  of  the  Holy  Ghost  going  forth  so 
as  to  bear  testimony  in  such  sort  as  would  not  bear  a  single  evil 
thiiio;  in  the  heart  of  men,  even  while  it  shewed  out  the  ffrace 
of  God.  This  is  Christianity — the  most  perfect  love  of  God 
shewn  to  a  man  that  has  no  claim  upon  it :  all  his  evil  con- 
demned by  the  grace  of  God  in  the  death  of  Christ !  And  thus 
it  is  that  a  man  is  made  honest  in  the  sight  of  God  and  men. 
He  can  afford  to  be  guileless  about  himself,  because  he  knows 
that  God  imputes  nothing  to  him.  When  we  read  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost  of  the  tongues  being  divided,  it  was  to  shew  the 
going  forth  of  the  testimony  of  God  to  the  Gentile  as  well  as  to 
the  Jew.  But  when  Matthew  iii.  speaks  of  our  Lord's  bap- 
tizing with  fire,  the  allusion  is  not  to  these  tongues  of  fire,  but 
to  the  execution  of  righteous  judgment  when  Christ  comes  again. 
This  appears  still  more  clearly  fi-om  what  follows  :  "  Whose  fan 
is  in  his  hand  ;  and  he  will  throughly  purge  his  floor,  and 
gather  his  wheat  into  the  garner ;  but  he  will  burn  up  the  chaff 
with  unquenchable  fire."  (Ver.  12.)  It  is  not  at  all  what  He  does 
in  saving  a  soul,  but  the  very  contrary.     It  refers  to  the  time 


42  LECTURES   ON   THE    GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

when,  men  having  refused  the  gospel,  nothing  remains  but  the 
cutpom-jng  of  vengeance  upon  them. 

"  Then  cometh  Jesus  from  Galilee  to  Jordan  unto  John,  to  be 
baptized  of  him."  (Ver.  13.)  What  a  cluster  of  wonders  !  Jesus 
coming  to  be  baptized  of  John,  who  was  avowedly  preaching  re- 
pentance and  remission  of  sins.  What  could  bring  tlie  Lord  Jesus 
there  ?  for  He  never  confessed  sins,  and  had  none  to  confess.  He 
challen(Tes  even  His  enemies  to  convince  Him  of  sin.  A  man 
without  sin — without  the  smallest  particle  of  self  in  any  form 
or  degree — the  lowliest  and  most  blessed  of  men — the  One  who 
judged  everything  according  to  God  :  and  yet  He  comes  to  be 
baptized !  John  at  once  felt  it — Jesus  coming  to  be  baptized 
of  him  !  To  be  baptized  at  all,  but  above  all  of  him  whose 
baptism  was  that  of  repentance !  What  is  the  clue  to  this  ? 
It  is  grace — the  source  and  the  channel  of  everything  in  Jesus. 
It  was  not  the  judgment  of  God  that  put  Him  there ;  it  was 
not  any  need  in  Himself  that  brought  Him  there — nothing  that 
He  had  to  acknowledge  or  confess ;  but  it  was  grace.  For  on 
whom  in  Israel  did  God's  eye  look  down  with  compassion  ? 
Upon  those  that  were  confessing  their  sins.  Upon  such  does 
His  eye  ever  rest.  For  the  next  best  thing  to  not  being  a 
sinner  at  all  is  to  confess  our  sins.  We  find  that  this  is  the 
first  great  movement  produced  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  a  sinner's 
soul — the  feeling  of  his  true  place  in  the  sight  of  God.  Here 
was  the  blessed  One ;  and  though  not  one  thing  naturally  could 
claim  His  presence,  yet  grace  led  Him  there.  And  when  John 
was  earnestly  hindering  Him,  saying,  "  I  have  need  to  be  bap- 
tized of  thee,  and  comest  thou  to  me  ?"  what  blessed  grace  and 
truth  does  not  our  Lord's  answer  unfold  !  "  SuflPer  it  now  ;  for 
thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all  righteousness."  It  is  all  ri^hte- 
ousness  now  to  be  fulfilled,  and  not  merelv  the  doinsi;  of  the 
law.  But  now  there  was  the  righteousness  of  acknowledging 
the  true  state  in  which  even  the  best  part  of  Israel  lay.  For  if 
there  were  any  in  Israel  that  shewed  a  feeling  for  God,  it  was 
those  who  were  baptized  of  John — those  who  repented  in  view 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  They  desired  God's  promises,  and 
thej?  wished  to  be  ready  for  the  King.     And  the  Lord's  heart 


CHAPTER   lil.  43 

was  there  at  once ;  the  sympathies  of  His  soul  were  with  those 
that  were  humbling  themselves  in  the  sense  of  their  sin  before 
God.  The  same  principle  is  true  of  us,  in  proportion  as  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  is  ungrieved  in  our  souls.  Wherever  even  it  is 
a  question  of  acknowledging  anything  to  man,  who  is  the  person 
you  can  most  open  your  heart  to  ?  The  most  spiritual  man : 
he  who  is  walkins  most  above  sin — his  is  the  bosom  to  which 
you  can  open  out  your  sin  more  fully  than  to  another.  "If  a 
man  be  overtaken  in  a  fault,  ye  xohich  are  spiritual  restore  such 
an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness."  It  was  exactly  the  perfection 
of  the  holiness  of  Christ  that  could  enable  Him  so  to  act : 
another  might  have  feared  appearances.  If  Christ  had  merely 
been  innocent,  instead  of  holy,  should  we  have  found  Him 
there?  Never.  Holiness  implies  divine  power  against  sin — 
innocence  merely  the  absence  of  sin.  Thus  we  find  our  Lord  in 
the  full  consciousness  of  His  own  perfect  holiness  coming  to  the 
baptism  of  John,  and  taking  His  place  with  those  in  Israel  who 
felt  aright  for  God.  Then  John  suffered  Him.  He  was  fulfil- 
ling all  righteousness,  not  confessing  sin ;  and  His  goodness 
could  associate  Jolm  in  it. 

"And  Jesus,  when  he  was  baptized,  went  up  straightway  out 
of  the  water :  and  lo,  the  heavens  were  opened  unto  him,  and 
he  saw  the  Spirit  of  God  descending  like  a  dove,  and  lighting 
upon  him ;  and  lo,  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying.  This  is  my 
beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  Does  it  not  seem  that 
this  wonderful  testimony  of  God  the  Father  was  the  consequence 
of  Christ's  fulfillino;  all  ricrhteousness  in  the  waters  of  Jordan  ? 
It  was  the  answer  of  God  to  the  place  that  Christ,  in  His 
grace,  had  taken.  It  was  God  jealous  for  the  glory  of  His  Son, 
who  would  not  permit  that  a  suspicion  should  rest  upon  this 
loveliest  and  lowliest  of  acts.  And,  therefore,  lest  the  full 
grace  of  it  should  not  be  felt,  how  quick  is  God  the  Father  to 
say,  "This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  lam  well  pleased !' ' 
Do  not  think  He  has  sin.  But  if  you  are  there,  He  is  with  you: 
if  the  sheep  are  in  the  waters,  the  shepherd  must  enter  them 
too.  The  Father  at  once  vindicates  His  Son ;  "  This  is  my 
beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."     It  is  not  that  He 


44        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

was  well  pleased  with  that  act  merely,  but  it  is  the  retrospective 
expression  of  God's  delight.  It  refutes  all  that  the  poor  mind 
of  man  might  have — has — gathered  out  of  this  transaction.  It 
is  always  thus  in  the  word  of  God.  If  there  be,  so  to  speak,  a 
locked  door,  the  key  is  always  behind  it.  If  there  is  a  heart 
that  counts  upon  God,  and  knows  the  perfection  of  His  cha- 
racter, and  is  jealous  over  the  honour  of  His  beloved  Son,  God 
is  always  with  such.  Man  has  endeavoured  to  take  advantage 
of  the  Lord's  grace,  thus  taking  His  place  with  the  godly  in 
Israel,  in  order  to  lower  His  person  and  His  position  even  in 
relation  to  God  Himself.  But  when  we  read  with  chastened 
spirits,  what  do  we  hear?  ^'  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom 
I  am  well  pleased."  We  shall  by  and  by  find  the  importance 
of  this  in  connection  with  what  follows ;  but  I  leave  the  subject 
for  the  present.  There  is  nothing  in  the  whole  compass  of  God's 
word,  so  full  of  blessing  to  the  believer,  as  the  person  of  Christ 
and  His  ways ;  but  it  requires  great  jealousy  over  self,  and  the 
special  guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  for  who  is  sufficient  for 
these  thinofs  ? 


oJ«<o 


CHAPTER   IV. 

There  are  two  things  that  we  may  notice  before  our  Lord  is 
tempted  of  the  devil.  The  first  is,  that  He  is  most  emphatically 
recognized  as  the  Son  of  God  by  His  Father ;  secondly,  that  He  is 
anointed  as  man  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Now  a  similar  thing  is  true 
of  the  believer,  of  course  in  an  inferior  Avay.  Still,  the  believer 
is  owned  as  a  son  of  God,  and  has  the  Spirit  of  God  given  to 
him  before  he  becomes  the  proper  object  of  the  enemy's  temp- 
tations. And  this  is  an  important  distinction  to  bear  in  mind. 
Strictly  speaking,  the  relation  which  the  sinner  bears  to  the 
enemy  is  not  as  subject  to  be  tempted.  He  is  a  captive  ;  he  is 
led  by  the  devil  at  his  will.     This  is  a  very  distinct  thing  from 


CHAPTER   IV.  45 

temptation  ;  for  it  supposes  a  person  thoroughlj  under  the 
power  of  Satan.  We  are  tempted,  when  we  are  out  of  the 
enemy's  power,  and  because  we  are  sons  of  God.  Thus  you  see 
all  men  have  to  do  with  Satan  in  one  way  or  another.  The 
mass  of  mankind  are  his  slaves  ;  but  those  delivered  by  the 
power  of  God,  those  who,  by  grace,  are  God's  children,  become 
the  objects  of  his  assault  in  the  way  of  temptation.  It  is  not  so 
much  his  power  that  such  have  to  dread  ;  for  when  the  soul  has 
received  Jesus,  Satan's  power  is  really  null  and  void  ;  it  is 
completely  broken  for  the  believer.  And  therefore  it  is  that  we 
are  warned  rather  against  his  wiles.  In  certain  cases  there 
may  be  the  suffering  from  his  fiery  darts ;  but  even  this  is  not 
his  power,  which  is  nothing  to  the  believer,  while  he  is  lookino- 
to  Christ :  he  has  only  to  resist,  and  the  devil  will  flee  from 
him.  If  he  had  really  power,  it  is  clear  that  Satan  would  not 
flee.  But  he  has  none.  He  has  lost  it  as  regards  the  soul  that 
has  received  Christ.  But  then,  while  to  faith  the  power  of 
Satan  is  a  thing  destroyed  in  the  cross  of  Jesus,  his  wiles  are  a 
very  serious  matter ;  and  we  ought  not  to  be  ignorant  of  his 
devices.  Now  God  has  been  graciously  pleased  to  give  us  his 
manner  of  dealing  with  our  blessed  Lord.  And  that  this  is 
intended  for  our  use,  and  the  great  pattern  and  principle  of  the 
temptations  of  Satan  at  any  time,  is  clear  from  many  obvious 
and  weighty  considerations. 

Besides,  we  know  from  the  Gospel  of  Luke  that,  in  the  case 
of  our  Lord,  there  was  a  very  long-continued  temptation  of 
Satan,  of  which  we  have  no  details.  We  are  only  told  the  fact 
that  Jesus  was  tempted  of  the  devil  during  forty  days.  But 
the  great  temptations,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  been  pleased 
to  record  for  us,  are  those  that  took  place  at  the  end  of  the 
forty  days.  May  we  not  gather  hence,  that  in  the  temptation 
of  our  Lord  there  were  two  parts — first,  that  not  common  to 
man,  but  peculiar  to  our  Lord?  For  we  are  subject  to  no  such 
circumstances  as  being  driven  into  the  wilderness  for  forty  days. 
But,  secondly,  we  are  exposed  to  such  as  are  given  us  at  the 
close.  The  Lord  seems  to  cast  a  veil  over  the  first,  and  dis- 
closes carefully  what,  in  principle,  every  child  of  God  may  be 


46  LECTURES   ON  THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

tempted  by  some  time  or  another.  We  shall  see  that  these 
three  temptations,  presented  by  Matthew  and  Luke  in  a  different 
order,  give  us  an  admirable  insight  into  the  ways  of  Satan 
when  he  thus  assails  the  children  of  God.  But  it  is  exceedingly 
sweet  to  see,  that,  before  Satan  is  allowed  to  tempt  at  all,  the 
blessedness  of  the  Son's  recognition  by  the  Father  is  most  fully 
brought  out.  And,  indeed,  it  is  something  akin  which  renders 
anyone  obnoxious  to  the  hatred  of  Satan.  The  enemy  is  well 
aware  when  God  converts  and  quickens  a  soul  hitherto  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins ;  and  at  once  he  is  prepared  with  his  temp- 
tations. They  need  not,  of  course,  come  in  the  same  order  as 
our  Lord's ;  but  they  seem  to  be,  more  or  less,  of  a  similar 
character  with  those  which  are  revealed. 

It  is  clear  that  the  first  temptation  grew  out  of  our  Lord's 
actual  circumstances.  He  had  been  all  this  time  in  the  wilder- 
ness without  food,  and  at  the  end  of  the  forty  days  he  was  an 
hungered.  When  Moses  was  without  food  on  the  mount  for 
the  same  time,  he  was  with  God  and  miraculously  sustained. 
But  the  wonderful  thing  here  is,  that  the  time  was  spent  with 
the  enemy.  None  had  ever  been  so,  or  will  be  so  again.  To  be 
all  that  while  in  presence  of  Satan,  dependent  on  God,  was  the 
greatest  moral  honour,  though  the  severest  trial,  that  man  had 
ever  passed  through.  Throughout  the  Lord  is  seen  as  Son  of 
man,  though  also  as  Son  of  God. 

The  introductory  notice  shews  us  that  temptation  was  going 
on  all  the  time  our  Lord  was  in  the  wilderness.  "  Then  was 
Jesus  led  up  of  the  Spirit  into  the  wilderness  to  be  tempted  of 
the  devil.  And  when  he  had  fasted  forty  days  and  forty  nights, 
he  was  afterward  an  hungered.  And  when  the  tempter  came 
to  him,  he  said,  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  command  that  these 
stones  be  made  bread."  Whatever  may  be  the  aim  of  Satan, 
this  is  one  main  part  of  his  tactics — he  insinuates  a  doubt,  a 
doubt  of  our  own  relationship  with  God.  "  If  thou  be  the  Son 
of  God."  Now,  search  the  word  of  God  as  you  may,  never 
will  you  find  His  Spirit  leading  a  soul  to  doubt.  Nor  can  any- 
thing, indeed,  be  more  opposed  to  His  way  than  sanctioning 
mistrust  of  God.     And  it  shews  the  exceeding  subtlety  of  Satan, 


CHAPTER   IV.  47 

that  he  has  actually  made  the  children  of  God  themselves  to  be 
his  instruments,  not  only  by  permitting  doubts  in  themselves, 
but  helping  to  raise  them  in  others,  often  on  the  mistaken  plea, 
that  not  to  be  confident  with  God  is  a  sign  of  humility,  and  of  a 
desire  to  be  lowly  !  But  faith  says,  "  We  are  always  con- 
fident." Not  that  we  are  to  shrink  from  self-examination  :  we 
do  find  this  pressed  in  scripture.  Thus,  in  1  Corinthians  xi. 
the  believers  are  evidently  exhorted  to  examine  themselves,  but 
not  with  any  idea  of  producing  doubt.  On  the  contrary — "  Let 
a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat ;"  for  the  question 
was  about  the  Lord's  Supper.  If  the  right  effect  were  hesita- 
tion, it  would  have  been  ''  let  him  not  eat,"  in  case  of  not  finding 
himself  as  he  ought  to  be.  But  supposing  he  finds  that  which  is 
wrong  within,  is  he  not  to  eat  ?  Surely  he  is  to  look  up  to  his 
Saviour,  and  cast  himself  upon  that  grace  which  never  can  fail. 
To  think  that  there  was  no  resource  would  be  indeed  to  dis- 
honour Christ,  and  to  deny  His  truth  and  love.  "  My  grace  is 
sufficient  for  thee  :  my  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness." 
Such  is  the  word  of  the  Lord.  On  the  strength  of  His  grace, 
the  believer  is  to  examine  himself  in  the  thought  of  going  to  the 
table  of  the  Lord.  It  is  not  a  question  whether  he  is  to  go  or 
stay  away  :  we  do  not  find  this  in  scripture.  Nor  do  I  find,  on 
the  other  hand,  that,  because  I  am  a  Christian,  it  is  no  matter 
what  state  I  may  be  in  spiritually.  But  a  man  is  to  examine 
himself,  and  so  to  eat.  He  is  sure  to  find  that  which  calls  for 
humiliation.  It  is  important  for  a  soul  to  draw  near  to  God, 
and  to  have  His  light  cast  upon  all  that  is  there.  This  wiU 
give  ground  for  humbling  oneself,  but  never  for  staying  away. 
Such  is  what  the  Spirit  of  God  lays  down  as  a  general  rule 
for  the  Lord's  Supper.  Of  course,  I  am  not  speaking  now 
of  cases  of  open  sin,  where  the  vindication  of  the  Lord's 
glory  is  required.  These  suppose  a  man's  practising  sin, 
and  not  examining  himself.  But  I  am  speaking  now  of  the 
ordinary  walk  of  the  child  of  God ;  and  what  we  read  there  is 
careful  enquiry  as  to  what  he  finds  within  himself,  but  "  so  let 
him  eaty 

"  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God."     Our  Lord  did  not  look  like 


48  LECTURES   ON  THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

it.  Tliere  was  nothing  of  such  a  character  outwardly  as  to 
carry  necessary  demonstration  and  bear  down  all  question.  If 
it  had  been  so,  there  would  have  been  no  room  left  for  faith  at 
all.  Satan  takes  advantage  of  the  lowliness  of  our  Lord  in  the 
place  that  He  took  as  man.  And,  indeed,  nothing  could  be 
more  singular  than  His  being  found  in  the  wilderness,  and,  as 
we  read  in  Mark,  with  the  wild  beasts.  If  He  was  really  the 
Son  of  God,  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth,  what  a  place  to  be  in 
and  led  there  by  the  Spirit,  after  the  Father  had  spoken  from 
heaven  and  acknowledged  Him  to  be  His  beloved  Son  !  But  so 
it  was.  And  so  it  is  now,  in  a  lower  sense,  with  the  children  of 
God.  For  no  matter  how  much  blessed  they  may  be  of  God, 
or  how  truly  owned  as  His  sons,  and  having  His  Spirit  dwelling 
within  them,  they  also  in  their  measure  have  their  wilderness. 
"  As  my  Father  hath  sent  me  into  the  world,  even  so  send  I  you 
into  the  world."  Not  into  some  pleasant  place  where  there  is 
no  room  for  trial,  but  the  very  contrary.  Because  we  belong  to 
God  and  to  heaven,  because  we  have  the  Holy  Ghost  sealing  us 
unto  the  day  of  redemption,  we  have  to  encounter  Satan,  but 
with  the  certainty  that  his  power  is  broken,  and  that  his  wiles 
are  what  we  have  to  resist.  This  questioning  the  relationship 
of  Christ  with  God  shews  how  truly  Satan  was  at  work.  But 
the  Lord  does  not  pronomice  him  to  be  Satan  until  open  rebel- 
lion is  manifested  against  God.  When  it  is  mere  subtlety.  He 
does  not  call  him  Satan.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  the 
enemy  is  described  in  scripture.  He  is  called  Satan  and  the 
devil.  The  latter  is  the  term  which  implies  his  accusing  cha- 
racter and  also  his  wiles  ;  the  former  refers  to  his  power  as 
adversary. 

We  must  wait,  even  when  we  suspect  it  is  the  power  of  evil 
at  work,  before  we  pronounce  it  absolutely.  For  if  there  is 
such  a  fact  as  the  devil  tempting,  God  also  puts  a  soul  to  the 
test,  and  this  may  be  very  sharp.  Moreover,  even  God  Himself 
does  not  act  till  a  thing  is  manifest.  He  shews  wonderful 
patience  and  most  contrary  to  the  haste  of  man.  He  comes  down 
to  see  whether  the  evil  is  so  great,  as  in  the  case  of  Adam,  yea, 
of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.     But   it  always  remains  true  that, 


CHAPTER   IV.  49 

whatever  God  may  be  in  other  things,  quick  as  He  is  to  hear 
the  cry  of  His  own  in  sorrow,  He  is  exceedingly  slow  to  judge; 
and  there  is  nothino;  that  more  marks  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
practically  and  the  effect  of  it  in  our  own  souls,  than  where  the 
same  thing  is  made  true  in  us.  Hastiness  to  judge  is  man's 
way  in  proportion  to  his  want  of  grace ;  and  patience  is  not  a 
question  of  knowledge  but  of  love  that  lingers  over  another, 
unwilling  to  pronounce  till  every  hope  is  gone.  There  might 
still  be  hesitation.  The  rising  in  the  flesh,  which  looked  so 
threatening,  might  turn  out  after  all  to  be  only  on  the  surface 
and  not  deep-seated.  So  here  we  see  patience  even  in  our  Lord's 
dealing  with  the  adversary.  It  is  only  when  he  thoroughly 
makes  manifest  what  he  is,  that  the  Lord  Himself  calls  him 
Satan.  Only  when  he  demands  the  worship  due  to  God  alone, 
does  our  Lord  say,  "  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan."  Then  the 
adversary  flees  instantly.  But  the  Lord  lets  him  thoroughly 
discover  himself  first.  This  is  divinely  wise.  Because,  although 
the  Lord  knew  him  to  be  Satan  all  the  time,  what  pattern  would 
this  be  for  us  ?  The  Lord  is  here  the  blessed  man  in  the  pre- 
sence of  Satan,  shewing  us  how  we  have  to  carry  ourselves  in 
the  temptations  that  come  upon  us  as  saints  of  God. 

And  allow  me  to  say  another  word  with  regard  to  temptation. 
Li  the  sense  we  have  it  here,  it  is  entirely  from  without.  Our 
Lord  never  knew  what  it  was  to  be  tempted  from  within.  He 
was  "  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are."  But  the  Holy 
Ghost  qualifies  this  by  adding,  "  Yet  without  sin."  It  was  not 
merely  that  He  did  not  yield  to  sin,  but  He  never  had  the  prin- 
ciple of  it — never  the  least  motion  of  any  thought  or  wish  contrary 
to  God.  He  never  kneio  sin.  It  is  there  that  we  so  differ. 
We  have  cause  of  deep  humiliation  sometimes,  because,  besides 
having  to  do  with  the  devil  without,  we  have  got  also  an  evil 
nature  within — what  scripture  calls  the  flesh  (i.e.,  self,  the  spring 
of  insubordination  and  of  enmity  against  God).  It  is  the  foun- 
tain of  unloving,  wilful,  ungodly  desires  in  us  ;  that  which 
naturally  never  seeks  God's  will,  save  only  in  a  spirit  of  fear ; 
that  which  says,  What  will  become  of  our  souls  if  we  do  it  not  ? 
but  never  seeks  it  as  that  which  is  loved  :  we  never  do  till  born 
£ 


50  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

of  God.  Even  afterwards  the  same  wicked  principle  is  still 
there ;  but  we  have  a  new  life  implanted  of  God  in  our  souls, 
which  delights  in  His  will. 

But  although  the  temptations  of  our  Lord,  which  we  have 
here,  were  from  without,  still  Satan  adapted  them  to  the  cir- 
cumstances in  which  our  Lord  then  stood.  He  had  been  for  forty 
days  without  food,  and  the  first  word,  therefore,  of  the  tempter 
is,  "  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  command  that  these  stones  be 
made  bread.  But  he  answered  and  said,  It  is  written,  Man 
shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth 
out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  (Ver.  3,  4.)  Our  Lord  refers  to  the 
chapter  of  Deuteronomy  that  alludes  to  the  manna,  the  daily 
food  of  Israel,  which  involved  dependence  upon  God,  and 
shewed  that  Israel  did  not  need  the  resources  of  the  world  to 
sustain  them.  They  did  not  require  some  rich  country  to 
supply  them  out  of  its  abundant  harvest ;  neither  did  they 
depend  upon  gold  and  silver.  Israel,  before  they  had  a  land  to 
cultivate  and  the  means  of  o-atherino-  from  it,  were  taug-ht  alone 
with  God.  In  the  wilderness,  where  He  had  brought  them  out 
as  His  first-born  son,  He  puts  them  to  the  proof;  and  the 
way  of  it  was,  whether  they  were  content  with  God  and 
with  the  fare  that  God  provided  for  them  day  by  day.  Alas  ! 
they  were  not. 

Here  the  scene  is  entirely  changed.  It  is  a  man  in  the 
wilderness,  but  Satan  is  there,  and  not  God.  In  spirit  He  ever 
dwelt  with  His  Father ;  for  even  when  on  earth  He  was  "  the 
Son  of  man  which  Is  in  heaven."  He  combined  thus  two  things 
in  His  own  person.  Day  by  day  there  He  was,  the  man  depen- 
dent upon  God  for  everything.  And  this  was  the  first  great 
temptation  of  the  devil — the  appeal  to  His  eartlily  natural  wants. 
It  was  no  sin  to  be  hungry ;  but  it  would  have  been  a  sin  to 
have  distrusted  God  because  of  thtj  desert  place.  Did  not  God 
know  that  there  was  no  bread  there  ?  and  was  it  not  His  Spirit 
who  had  led  Him  there  ?  Had  God  told  Him  to  leave  the 
wilderness,  or  to  make  the  stones  into  bread  ?  He  would  not 
use  His  own  power,  independently  of  the  word  of  God.  And  it 
is  the  constant  mark  of  the  way  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  ener- 


CHAPTER    TV.  51 

gizes  in  the  children  of  God,  that  they  do  not  use  miraculous 
power  for  themselves,  nor  for  their  friends.     If  we  look  at  it  in 
the  New  Testament,  we  find  Paul  Avorkiug  miracles  and  using 
the  power  of  God  to  heal  the  sick  around.     But  was  it  ever  used 
for  his  own  circle?     On  the  contrary,  Paul  leaves  Trophimus 
sick  at  Miletus,  and  displays  about  him  all  the  anxiety  of  one 
who  might  never  have  had  power  to  heal  the  body.     When 
Epaphroditus  was  sick,  we  see  the  exercise  of  a  faith  which 
knew  that  the  will  of  God,  with  acquiescence  in  it,  was  worth  a 
thousand  miracles.     Miracles  had  not  in  themselves  the  high 
character  of  exercising  the  soul  in  dependence  upon  God.     To 
obey  God,  to  submit  to   Him,  to  have  confidence  in   Him.  is 
that  of  which  human  nature  is  incapable.     Power  alone  never 
reaches  so  high.     Therefore,  in  the  case  of  our  Lord   Himself, 
we  never  find  that  He  puts  His  works  of  might  on  a  level  with 
obedience.     Nay,  He  even  speaks  of  His  disciples  as  those  who 
should  do  greater  works  than  He  Himself  had  done.     Great  as 
had  been  His  own  works,  He  makes  known  to  the  disciples 
themselves  that  they  were  to  do  greater.     But  obedience  was  what 
characterized  Christ :  this  never  was  found  in  a  mere  child  of 
Adam.     Here,  in  the  face  of  Satan,  our  Lord  finds  His  strength, 
not  in  doing  miracles,  or  in  any  provision  that  He  might  have 
made  for  Himself,   but   in  the  word  of  God.     Hunger  might 
have  legitimate  wants,  but  here  He  was,  tried  in  presence  of 
Satan,  and  He  will  not  step  out  of  the  trial  till  it  is  over ;  He 
will  not  shift  His  circumstances  or  lift  one  finger  for  Himself: 
He  waits  upon  God.     "  Man  shall  not  live,"  He  answers,  "by 
bread  alone,  but  by  every    word   that  proceedeth  out   of  the 
mouth    of  God."      God's   word  had   led    Him  there,   for   the 
Holy   Ghost  always    acts   by  the  word.     He  would  not  lea^e 
the  wilderness  till  God  Himself  intimated  as  much    to   Him. 
Tliis  completely  set  aside  Satan's  temptations.     But  more  :  it 
brought  out  the  real  secret  of  living  in  dependence  upon  God 
day  by  day.     For  it  is  not  a  question  here  of  imparting  div^ine 
life,  but  of  how  we  live  when  we  have  received  it ;  and  the  food 
of  the  new  life  is  the  word  of  God.     Of  what  immense  impor- 
tance does  not  this  shew  it  is  to  be  growing  in  the  knowledge  of 


52  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

the  written  word,  and  liaving  that  word  as  our  household  bread 
day  by  day,  not  merely  reading  it  as  a  task  or  formal  duty,  but, 
as  it  is  indeed  the  divinely  suitable  provision  for  the  child  of 
God !  It  is  good  for  every  one  to  study  it,  because  he  needs  it, 
because  it  is  in  every  way  for  the  good  of  the  soul  day  by  day 
to  read  it  intelligently,  heartily,  as  those  that  receive  it  from 
God  Himself.  And  God  does  not  give  that  which  the  heart  of 
man  cannot  take  in,  but  what  is  adapted  to  our  daily  wants. 
"  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that 
proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God." 

This,  then,  is  the  answer  of  our  Lord  to  the  first  temptation. 
Why  should  He  turn  the  stones  into  bread  ?  He  hung  upon 
God's  word  :  His  Father  had  not  told  Him  to  do  so.  He  could 
wait.  So  should  it  ever  be  with  us.  Where  we  have  no  clear 
expression  of  the  mind  of  God,  it  is  always  our  place  to  wait  till 
we  have.  Sometimes  it  may  shew  our  weakness  that  we  do  not 
know  the  mind  of  God,  and  this  is  distasteful  to  us.  Restless- 
ness would  like  to  go  somewhere  or  do  something,  but  this  is 
not  faith.  Faith  proves  itself  in  waiting  for  God  to  manifest 
His  will. 

The  next  temptation  was  not  a  personal  one,  but  connected 
with  religion,  as  the  first  had  been  in  respect  of  bodily  wants. 
We  shall  find  that  the  order  is  different  in  Luke.  But  here, 
in  the  second  temptation  mentioned,  is  what  I  may  call  the 
religious  temptation.  The  Lord  had  said  that  man  should 
' '  live  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of 
God."  The  devil  then  takes  Him  up  into  the  holy  city, 
sets  Him  upon  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  and  founds  his  temp- 
tation upon  that  very  point  in  our  Lord's  answer — the  word 
of  God.  He  says,  as  it  were.  Here  is  a  word  of  God  for  you : 
"  He  shall  give  his  angels  charge  concerning  thee,  and  in  their 
hands  they  shall  bear  thee  up,  lest  at  any  time  thou  dash  thy 
foot  against  a  stone."  Very  true.  It  was  God's  word,  and 
evidently  spoken  of  the  Messiah.  But  what  was  Satan  using  it 
for?  He  says,  "  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself  down  ; 
for  it  is  written,  &c."  This  was  making  a  move  without  God — 
doing  something  by  oneself     Scripture  did  not  say.  Cast  thyself 


CHAPTER   IV.  53 

down,  because  God  Has  given  His  angels  charge  concerning 
thee,  lest  thou  should  dash  thy  foot  against  a  stone.  The  Lord 
would  not  turn  aside  from  scripture,  because  Satan  had  misused 
it.  He  shews  us,  in  the  most  instructiAe  way,  that  Ave  are  not 
to  be  moved  from  our  stronghold  because  it  may  be  turned 
against  us.  Our  Lord  does  not  enter  into  nice  distinctions,  nor 
analyze  what  Satan  had  said,  but  He  has  given  us  that  which 
ought  to  be,  if  I  may  so  say,  the  standard  mode  of  dealing  for 
every  christian  man.  There  are  those  Avho  might  have  spiritual 
discrimination  to  see  that  Satan  was  perverting  the  scripture 
which  he  quoted ;  but  many  might  not.  The  Lord  takes  a 
broad  ground  in  dealing  with  the  adversary.  He  stands  upon 
what  each  Christian  should  knoAv  and  feel,  and  this  is,  "  It  is 
written  again,  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God."  He 
cites  a  plain  positive  word  of  God  which  Satan  was  destroyino- 
by  the  use  he  made  of  Psalm  xci.  Now  that  is  the  stronghold 
of  a  believer  who  may  have  to  do  with  one  that  reasons  subtly 
from  scripture — "  It  is  written  again."  He  can  appeal  to  that 
which  is  palpable  and  clear.  It  will  be  found  that,  where  a 
person  systematically  misapplies  scripture,  he  destroys  some 
fundamental  principle  of  the  word  of  God.  Whatever  is  false 
is  contrary  to  some  plain  passage  of  scripture.  Now  this  is  a 
great  mercy.  The  believer  holds  fast  to  what  is  sm-e ;  he  will 
not  quit  what  he  does  understand  for  something  that  he  does  not. 
He  may  be  perplexed  by  what  the  adversary  is  producing  and 
may  only  have  a  growing  suspicion  that  he  is  wrong.  But  he 
may  say  to  himself,  I  never  can  give  up  what  is  beyond  a  doubt 
for  that  which  I  do  not  knoAv.  In  other  words,  he  holds  the 
light  and  refuses  the  darkness. 

It  is  thus,  it  seems  to  me,  our  Lord  deals  Avith  Satan.  He 
could  at  once  have  set  him  aside  on  grounds  of  reasoning  and 
have  shcAvn  the  jierverted  end  to  which  Satan  was  applyino- 
.scripture ;  but  He  rather  deals  AAdth  him  on  moral  grounds 
which  every  Christian  is  capable  of  judging.  Do  I  find  a 
scrip tm-e  used  for  the  purpose  of  making  me  distrust  God  ?  At 
once  I  take  my  stand  on  "  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thj- 
God."     What  is  meant  by  this  ?     I  am  never  to  doubt  the  Lord 


54  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

will  be  for  me.  If  I  do  anything  to  prove  Him,  to  see  whether 
He  will  be  for  me,  this  is  at  once  unbelief  and  disobedience.  It 
is  an  allusion  to  Israel's  history  again  and  another  quotation  from 
the  book  of  Deuteronomy.  Indeed  our  Lord  quotes  every 
answer  to  the  temptations,  as  has  been  long  ago  remarked,  from 
the  book  of  Deuteronomy.  You  will  find  in  Exodus  xvii.,  that 
the  Israelites  tempted  the  Lord  by  asking,  Is  He  among  us  or 
not  ?  This  does  not  mean  that  they  provoked  Him  by  idolatry 
or  refusal  to  do  His  will.  It  is  not  a  question  there  of  open  sin^ 
but  of  unbelief  of  His  goodness  and  presence — unbelief,  in  a 
word,  of  God's  being  for  us.  This  is  exactly  what  our  Lord 
pleads.  Cast  Myself  down  in  order  to  find  that  the  scripture  is 
true  and  that  the  angels  will  bear  Me  up  !  I  do  not  need  to  do 
such  a  thing ;  I  am  very  certain  that,  if  I  were  cast  down,  the 
angels  would  be  there  to  sustain  Me. — If  you  have  a  person 
whom  you  suspect  of  dishonesty  on  your  premises,  you  may 
perhaps  be  disposed  to  test  him  in  some  way  or  other.  But  who 
would  think  of  testing  one  that  he  had  full  confidence  in  ?  Now 
that  is  exactly  the  import  of  our  Lord's  answer  :  "  Thou  shalt  not 
tempt  the  Lord  thy  Gfod."  His  soul  resented  the  idea  of  trying 
God,  to  see  whether  He  would  sustain  His  Son.  God  might 
try  Him ;  Satan  might  put  Him  to  the  test ;  but  as  to  His 
tempting  the  Lord,  as  if  the  Lord  His  God  required  to  be  put 
to  the  proof,  whether  He  would  be  true  to  His  word — away 
with  such  a  thought ! — He  would  not  hear  of  it  for  a  moment. 
The  Lord  still  insists  upon  this — perfect  confidence  in  God, 
Such  is  the  full  expression  of  His  plea. 

The  temptation  which  is  second  in  Matthew,  Luke  gives. 
as  the  third.  Why  is  this?  Surely  we  ought  not  to  read 
scripture  as  if  such  differences  were  not  intended  to  suggest 
enquiry.  We  have  to  take  care  that  we  do  not  misinterpret 
scripture ;  but  scripture  is  meant  to  be  understood.  I  say  of 
these  different  orders  in  which  the  temptations  are  put,  both  are 
right,  both  are  insj)ired  of  God.  If  they  were  both  intended 
to  report  the  temptation  exactly  as  it  took  place,  it  is  clear  they 
are  not  right,  but  God  had  a  much  higher  object.  God  wrote 
for  our  instruction,  and  God  has  been  pleased,  in  the  different 


CHAPTER   IV.  55 

gospels,  to  put  the  facts  in  the  way  that  is  most  instructive. 
Matthew  simply  gives  the  temptation  historically,  as  it  took 
place.  Therefore  in  Matthew  Ave  have  notes  of  time :  "  Then 
the  devil  taketh  him  up,"  &c.  In  Luke  there  is  no  such  thought; 
it  is  simply  ''  and  the  devil,"  &c.  This  word  at  once  prepares 
us  for  it.  It  is  clear,  there  were  these  different  temptations, 
but  Luke  puts  them  so  as  not  to  tell  us  the  order  in  which 
they  occurred. 

This  is  a  general  remark,  true  of  the  whole  gospel  of  Luke, 
that  he  habitually  departs  from  the  mere  order  of  fact,  to  give 
an  arrano-ement  suited  to  the  desio-n  which  he  had  in  view. 
As  a  whole,  the  Gospel  of  Luke  is  characterized  by  putting  the 
facts  of  our  Lord's  life  in  an  order  that  suited  the  doctrine  He 
was  teaching.  Thus  you  will  find  in  Luke,  that  even  the 
genealogy  of  our  Lord  is  not  given  in  its  regular  place ;  there  is 
a  departure  from  the  mere  natural  series,  and  there  is,  instead,  a 
moral  order.  Take  the  case  of  the  Lord's  prayer :  Luke  puts 
that  in  a  totally  different  place  from  Matthew,  who  gives  it  in 
the  wondrous  discourse  commonly  called  the  sermon  on  the 
mount ;  and,  as  prayer  formed  a  most  important  part  of  the  new 
principles  the  Lord  was  bringing  out,  so  it  formed  one  of  the 
main  subjects  of  the  Lord's  discourse.  Luke  reserves  that 
prayer  till  chapter  xi.,  because  our  Lord  is  pointing  out  there 
the  grand  means  of  spiritual  life,  how  it  is  to  be  kept  up  and 
sustained  in  the  soul.  And  this  he  shews  us  from  the  history  of 
Martha  and  Mary.  (Chap,  x.)  Why  was  it  that  Jesus  approved 
of  the  path  and  walk  of  Mary  rather  than  of  Martha  ?  It  is 
not  that  He  did  not  love  them  all,  nor  was  it  that  Martha  had 
not  a  real  personal  love  to  the  Saviour,  and  that  her  heart  was 
not  true  to  Him.  But  there  was  an  immense  difference  between 
them.  What  and  why  was  it?  Luke  gives  us  the  moral 
difference.  When  Martha  was  all  busied  with  what  she  could 
do  for  the  Lord,  to  shew  her  love  to  Him,  Mary  was  occupied 
with  the  Lord  Himself — seated  at  His  feet,  listening  to  His 
word.  The  one  was  full  of  what  she  could  do  for  Christ ;  the 
other,  full  of  Christ  Himself;  and  nothing  that  she  could  do  was 
of  the  smallest  consequence  in  her  eyes,  compared  with  Christ 


56         LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

Himself.  Thus  we  find,  in  another  instance,  Mary  breaking  the 
alabaster  box  to  anoint  the  feet  of  Jesus,  an  action  little  accounted 
of  by  others ;  yet  what  she  had  done,  should  be  recorded  through- 
out the  whole  world.  Our  Lord  brings  out  in  Luke  this  great 
point — the  word  of  God,  the  waiting  upon  Jesus,  being  the  first 
great  means  of  strengthening  the  new  and  spiritual  life ;  and, 
therefore,  immediately  after  this  accomit  of  these  sisters,  we  have 
the  request  of  the  disciples  to  be  taught  how  to  pray.  It  really 
took  place  long  before  ;  but  they  are  put  together  in  that  special 
form  by  St.  Luke  in  order  to  mark  the  connection  of  the  word  of 
God  with  prayer. 

So  in  the  temptation,  Luke  departs  from  the  order  of  fact  and 
gives  us  the  moral  sequence.  Matthew  simply  names  the  facts 
here  as  they  took  place.  Luke  puts  them  in  the  order  of  magni- 
tude, and  rises  from  the  natural  trial  to  the  worldly  one,  and  then 
to  the  religious  temptation.  For  it  is  perfectly  plain  that  the 
temptation  by  the  word  of  God  was  much  harder  for  one  who 
valued  His  word  above  everything,  than  that  which  lay  in 
an  appeal  to  natural  wants  or  to  worldly  ambition.  Therefore, 
Luke  keeps  this  temptation  to  the  last.  Li  Matthew  it  is  not 
so,  but  we  have,  in  the  third  place,  the  temj)tation  by  the  world. 
"  Ao-ain,  the  devil  taketh  him  up  into  an  exceeding  high  moun- 
tain, and  sheweth  him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the 
glory  of  them ;  and  saith  unto  him.  All  these  things  will  I  give 
thee,  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  worship  me."  (Ver.  8,  9.) 
Here  at  once  the  devil  was  manifest.  The  very  idea  of  j^resent- 
ing  any  object  of  obeisance  and  worship  between  the  soul  and 
God,  was  at  once  to  detect  that  he  was  either  the  devil  himself 
or  an  instrument  of  the  devil.  The  Lord,  therefore,  at  once 
pronounces  him  "  Satan."  "  Then  saith  Jesus  unto  him.  Get  thee 
hence,  Satan :  for  it  is  written,  That  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy 
God,  and  him  only  shalt  thou  serve."  (Ver.  10.)  If  it  had  been 
an  apostle,  it  would  have  been  just  the  same.  If  such  an  one 
had  been  so  completely  led  away  as  to  hint  such  a  thing,  the 
Lord  would  have  said  "  Satan"  all  the  same.  Is  not  this  most 
solemn  with  us  in  dealing  with  Christians  even,  who  may 
have  become  for  the  time  instruments  of  Satan  ?     The  Lord  did 


CHAPTER   IV.  57 

not  hesitate  on  one  occasion  to  say  "Satan"  to  Peter  himself, 
and  yet  he  was  the  chief  of  the  twelve,  the  first  in  dignity 
among  the  apostles  of  the  Lamb.  And  yet  our  Lord  Himself, 
after  He  had  put  signal  honour  upon  Peter  and  given  him  a 
new  name,  does  not  hesitate  to  say  "  Satan"  not  less  to  Peter 
than  to  the  enemy  himself.  All  this  brings  out  an  important 
])rinciple  for  our  own  ways  in  having  to  do  even  with  a 
child  of  God. 

Li  answering  the  third  and  last  temptation,  our  Lord  still 
confines  Himself  to  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy.  Why  ?  Because 
Deuteronomy  is  the  book  that  regards  Israel  after  they  had 
completely  failed  under  the  law,  and  when  Grod  brings  in  the 
ncAv  principle  of  grace,  and  shews  not  the  mere  righteousness 
of  the  law,  but  that  which  is  of  faith.  This  is  the  reason  why 
St.  Paul  also  quotes  fi'om  Deuteronomy  for  the  same  purpose. 
It  is  the  book  that  indicates  the  place  of  obedience,  when  it  is  no 
longer  a  mere  question  of  observance  under  the  law.  The  Lord 
Jesus  is  here  taking  that  very  place.  He  is  not  witnessing  what 
He  could  have  done  as  a  divine  person.  As  such.  He  would 
have  taken  ground  where  we  could  not  follow  Him.  But 
throughout  this  temptation  He  takes  the  posture  that  becomes 
us  and  all  that  desire  to  follow  Him.  The  only  thing  right 
and  becoming  for  a  godly  man,  in  meeting  temjitations,  is  the 
ground  of  the  obedience  of  faith  :  one  thus  stands  in  the  confi- 
dence of  what  God  is  in  His  goodness.  The  Lord  would  on  no 
account  swerve  from  what  was  the  due  and  comely  place  for  a 
servant  of  God  in  Israel.  If  a  person  was  godly,  his  place  was  to 
confess  and  to  be  baptized  with  the  baptism  of  repentance.  Our 
Lord  at  once  finds  Himself  with  such,  thouo-h  in  His  case  it  was 
the  fulfilling  of  righteousness  ;  while  with  us  it  is  the  acknow- 
ledgment of  sin.  He  who  alone  could  have  taken  His  stand 
upon  legal  righteousness,  takes  it  as  in  every  way  vindicating 
God,  not  upon  the  mere  righteousness  of  man.  Satan  may  put 
temptation  before  Him  in  every  form  ;  but  it  is  of  no  use.  His 
only  care  is  to  vindicate  God,  and  never  to  arrogate  anj'thing  to 
Himself  The  enemy  was  foiled,  to  God's  glory,  by  an  obedient 
and  dependent  man. 


58  LECTURES   ON   THE    GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

I  believe  that  the  principles  brought  before  us  in  this  chapter 
are  of  the  greatest  practical  importance  for  the  children  of  God. 
The  few  remarks  I  have  made  may  help  to  direct  souls  to  the 
value,  practically,  of  these  temptations  of  our  Lord  for  guidance 
in  our  own  path.  I  therefore  commend  the  whole  subject  to  the 
attention  of  the  reader,  as  one  that,  although  it  may  have  come 
before  us  many  a  time,  and  we  may  have  often  meditated  upon 
its  practical  value,  may  still  claim  our  thought,  as  it  will  surely 
repay  our  prayerful  study. 

It  may  be  instructive  to  compare  the  different  ways  in  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  introduces  our  Lord's  ministry  in  the  gospels. 
And  when  I  speak  of  His  ministry,  you  will  understand  that  I 
mean  His  public  service,  for  there  was  much  appertaining 
to  the  Lord — miracles  performed,  and  remarkable  discourses 
uttered — before  His  ministerial  course  was  formally  entered  on. 
What  I  would  desire  now,  with  the  blessing  of  God,  to  notice 
is  the  wisdom  with  which  He  has  given  us  a  distinct  view  of 
our  Lord  in  each  of  these  different  inspired  accounts.  We  may 
reverently  follow  Him  who  has  been  pleased  to  furnish  them  so 
variously — omitting  certain  statements  in  some,  and  presenting 
them  in  others,  alterino;  now  and  then  the  order  of  narratino; 
events,  to  accomplish  thus  His  purpose  more  perfectly.  In 
comparing  these  accounts  we  may  see  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
always  preserves  the  grand  design  of  each  gospel,  and  this  is  the 
basis  of  all  just  interpretation.  We  shall  find,  steadily  keeping 
in  view  what  He  is  aiming  at,  that  we  have  in  this  what  was 
really  the  principle  on  which  the  gospels  themselves  were 
w^ritten,  and  consequently  what  alone  will  enable  any  soul  to 
imderstand  them  aright. 

Now,  I  have  already  shewn,  to  commence  with  the  Gospel  of 
Matthew,  that,  throughout,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  setting  before  us 
the  Messiah  with  the  fullest  proofs  of  His  mission  from  God,  but, 
alas !  a  suffering  and  a  rejected  One,  and  this  specially  by  His 
own  people ;  and  among  them  rejected  most  of  all  by  such  as, 
humanly  speaking,  had  most  reason  to  receive  Him.  Were  any 
peculiarly  remarkable  for  their  righteousness  in  the  estimate  of 


CHAPTER   IV.  59 

the  nation  ?  If  Pharisees  were  so,  who  so  bitter  against  Him  ? 
Were  any  celebrated  for  their  knowledge  of  scripture?  The 
scribes  were  those  combined  with  the  Pharisees  against  Him. 
The  priests,  jealous  of  their  position,  would  naturally  oppose 
One  who  brought  out  the  reality  of  a  divine  power,  administered 
by  the  Son  of  man  upon  earth,  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  Now 
all  these  thincrs  come  out  with  striking  force  and  clearness  in 
the  Gospel  of  Matthew.  But  although  we  are  not  arrived  at 
tliese  details  as  yet,  still  the  main  design  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
discovers  itself  in  the  manner  in  which  our  Lord  is  presented  as 
entering  upon  His  public  ministry,  in  the  portion  that  is  now 
before  us. 

First  of  all,  no  notice  is  taken  in  Matthew  of  all  that  passed 
at  Jerusalem.  The  Holy  Ghost  knew  this  perfectly  well ;  He  had 
nothing  to  learn  about  it.  Humanly  speaking,  Matthew  was  as 
likely  to  have  known  and  enquired  into  the  earlier  circumstances 
of  our  Lord,  and  particularly  His  connection  with  that  city,  as  the 
beloved  disciple  John.  Yet  of  a  great  deal  given  in  John  not 
a  word  appears  in  Matthew.  Li  the  fourth  gospel  we  have  a 
deputation  from  Jerusalem  to  see  John  the  Baptist  first,  and 
then  our  Lord  is  acknowledged  as  Lamb  of  God  and  as  He  who 
baptizes  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  Then  we  have  our  Lord  mak- 
ino-  Himself  known  to  various  persons,  among  them  to  Simon 
Peter,  after  Andrew  his  brother  had  already  been  in  the  company 
of  the  wondrous  Stranger.  Tlien  Philip  is  called,  who  finds 
Nathanael ;  and  thus  the  work  of  the  Lord  spreads  from  one  soul 
to  another,  either  by  the  Lord  attracting  to  Himself  directly,  or 
through  the  intervention  of  those  already  called.  All  this  is 
entirely  omitted  here.  Then,  again,  in  John  ii.  is  given  the  first 
miracle  or  sign  in  which  Christ  set  forth  His  glory — the  turning 
of  water  into  wine ;  after  which  our  Lord  goes  up  to  Jei'u- 
salem  and  executes  judgment  upon  the  covetousness  that  then 
reigned  even  in  the  boasted  city  of  holiness.  We  have  also  a 
little  incidental  view  of  what  our  Lord  was  doing  during  this 
time  at  Jerusalem.  He  was  working  miractdous  signs  there, 
and  many  were  believing  on  Him,  though  in  a  natural  way. 
Jesus,  it  is  said,  "  did  not  commit  himself  unto  them,  because 


60  LECTURES    ON    THE    GOSPEL   OF    MATTHEW. 

he  knew  all  men ;"  but  He  does  open  the  great  doctrine  of 
the  new  birth,  and  brings  out  the  cross — Himself  to  be  made  sin 
thus,  as  the  serpent  had  been  lifted  up  by  Moses  in  the  wilder- 
ness, that  whosoever  believed  in  Him  "  should  not  perish,  but 
have  everlasting  life."  All  this  took  place  before  the  circum- 
stances recorded  by  Matthew.  When  this  is  seen,  it  must  strike 
any  observing  reader  of  the  word  of  God.  It  could  not  be  that 
these  things  were  unknown  to  Matthew :  they  could  not  fail  to 
be  named  and  dwelt  on,  if,  apart  from  inspiration,  you  look  at 
him  as  a  mere  disciple.  Andrew,  Peter,  and  John,  and  the 
rest  would  have  conversed  on  their  first  acquaintance  with  the 
Saviour  over  and  over  again.  Yet  Matthew  does  not  say  one  word 
about  it,  neither  does  Mark  or  Luke,  but  John  does.  Now, 
when  we  examine  the  gospels  themselves,  we  find  the  real 
solution.  It  is  not  the  ignorance  of  one  evangelist,  nor  the 
knowledge  of  another,  that  accounts  either  for  the  omissions  or 
for  the  insertions.  God  gives  such  an  account  of  Jesus  as  would 
perfectly  impress  the  lesson  He  M'as  teaching  in  each  gospel. 

Why  does  all  we  have  noticed  appear  appropriately  in  John  ? 
Clearly  because  it  falls  in  with  the  truth  that  is  taught  there. 
In  John  we  have  the  utter  ruin  of  man — of  the  world — from 
the  outset.  The  first  chapter  shews  us  the  practical  evidence  of 
what  Judaism  was — the  Lord  not  received  by  His  own,  however 
duly  coming,  and  thus  calling  His  oAvn  sheejD  by  name,  and 
leading  them  out.  For  the  testimony  of  John  Baptist  had  no 
abiding  effect  upon  the  mass ;  it  might  pass  from  mouth  to 
mouth,  but  it  fell  unheeded  upon  the  ears  of  those  that  had  no 
faith  :  "  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep,  as  I  said  unto  you."  Now  we 
have  the  sheep  individuallj'  called  by  name,  and  one  of  them 
receiving  a  new  name,  thoroughly  in  keeping  with  the  character 
of  St.  John's  gospel.  In  Matthew  we  have  none  of  these 
striking  incidents,  because  therein  the  Holy  Ghost  brings  before 
us  Jehovah-Jesus,  the  Messiah,  working  miracles,  accomplish- 
ing prophecy,  expounding  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  in 
want,  despised,  and  the  companion  of  such  in  Galilee ;  for  He 
is  not  seen  here  as  the  Son  of  God,  whether  from  everlasting  or 
as   born    into    the   Avorkl ;    but    He    Himself  takes  a  place  in 


CHAPTER   IV.  61 

separation,  to  make  good  the  great  oracle  that  the  prophet 
Isaiah  had  been  inspired  of  God  to  reveal  hundreds  of  years 
before.  For  you  will  remark  that  our  Lord's  leaving  Nazareth 
and  coming  to  dwell  in  Capernaum  is  brought  in  here  as  the 
fulfilment  of  that  which  was  spoken  by  Isaiah  the  prophet, 
saying,  "The  land  of  Zabulon,  and  the  land  of  Nephthalim,  by 
the  way  of  the  sea,  beyond  Jordan,  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles." 
It  was  outside  the  regular  allotment  of  Israel,  in  that  part  of 
it  Avhich  is  yet  to  belong  to  Israel,  which  certain  of  the  tribes 
had  taken  possession  of,  though,  strictly  speaking,  it  was  beyond 
the  proper  limits  of  the  promised  land.  The  Lord  goes  through 
Galilee  of  the  Gentiles ;  and  in  all  that  He  was  doing.  He  fulfilled 
the  prophecy.  The  Jews  ought  surely  to  have  known  it.  The 
people  which  sat  in  darkness  thus  "  saw  great  light ;  and  to 
them  which  sat  in  the  region  and  shadow  of  death  light  is 
sprung  up." 

Now,  if  we  turn  to  the  prophet  Isaiah,  we  shall  find  the 
importance  of  this  quotation  somewhat  more.  It  is  part  of 
a  grave  prophetic  strain,  in  which  the  Lord  lays  bare  the 
exceeding  rebelliousness  of  Israel,  and  the  judgments  fallino- 
upon  His  people,  because  they  would  not  hearken  to  His  voice. 
His  hand  was  stretched  out  against  them.  "  For  all  this  his 
anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  his  hand  is  stretched  out  still." 
(Isaiah  v.  25.)  In  the  midst  of  these  dealings  of  God  we  have 
in  Isaiah  vi.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  revealed.  God  is  acting  in 
His  own  glory.  Now  we  know  that  this  glory  is  in  the  person  of 
Christ,  as  John  xii.  declares.  The  Lord  announces  accordingly 
in  Isaiah  vii.  that  there  was  to  be  a  birth  wholly  above  nature. 
It  was  no  longer  nor  merely  a  glorious  One  sitting  upon  a  high 
throne,  removed  from  men,  yet  men  receiving  a  message  of 
mercy  from  Him  in  the  midst  of  judgment.  Chapter  vii.  reveals 
the  great  fact  of  the  incarnation.  The  King  of  glory,  Jehovah 
of  hosts,  was  to  become  a  Babe,  born  of  a  virgin.  The  next 
chapter  reveals  another  fact.  Israel  no  more  cared  for  the 
glorious  Child  of  the  virgin,  than  before  for  the  warnings  of  God. 
On  the  contrary,  they  despised  and  rejected  Him.  Consequently, 
chapter  viii.  supposes  a  godly  remnant  more  and  more  isolated 


62         LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

in  the  midst  of  a  fearful  state  of  things  in  Israel,  who  will  then 
be  joined  too  with  the  Gentiles,  saying,  A  confederacy.  There 
Israel  are  to  take  the  place  of  utter  unbelief;  the  inhabitants  of 
Judea  will  be  the  leaders  in  this  rebellion  against  God.  But  in 
the  midst  of  it  all,  what  is  He  doing  ?  ''  Bind  up  the  testimony, 
seal  the  law  among  my  disciples.  And  I  will  wait  upon  the 
Lord,  that  hideth  his  face  from  the  house  of  Jacob,  and  I  will 
look  for  him.  Behold,  I  and  the  children  whom  the  Lord  hath 
given  me  are  for  signs  and  wonders  in  Israel,  from  the  Lord  of 
hosts  which  dwelleth  in  Mount  Zion."  That  is,  there  is  a 
most  distinct  declaration  that  God  will  be  pleased  to  have 
only  a  little  remnant  in  the  midst  of  His  own  people.  When 
Israel  should  reject  the  Messiah,  a  separated  remnant  appears 
there,  and  the  blessing  would  come  at  last  in  all  the  fulness 
of  this  grace.  Still  it  would  be  a  small  despised  thing  in 
the  beginning ;  and  this  is  exactly  the  circumstance  that  our 
Lord  now  was  bringing  out  in  evidence.  "And  when  they 
shall  say  unto  you.  Seek  mito  them  that  have  familiar  spirits  .... 
Should  not  a  people  seek  unto  their  God  ?  for  the  living  to  the 
dead?  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony:  if  they  speak  not 
according  to  this  word,  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  them." 
And  accordingly  the  prophecy  goes  on,  ''Nevertheless,  the 
dimness  shall  not  be  such  as  was  in  her  vexation,  when  at 
the  first  he  lightly  afflicted  the  land  of  Zebulun,  and  the  land 
of  Naphtali,  and  afterward  did  more  grievously  afflict  her  by 
the  way  of  the  sea,  beyond  Jordan,  in  Galilee  of  the  nations. 
The  people  that  walked  in  darkness  have  seen  a  great  light 
[namely  the  Messiah]  :  they  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  upon  them  hath  the  light  shined."  He  shews 
afterwards  in  this  prophecy  that  (while  the  Gentile  affliction 
upon  the  nation  would  be  heavier  than  ever,  and  the  Roman 
oppression  far  exceed  the  Chaldean  of  old  yet),  the  Messiah 
would  be  there,  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  nay,  of  the  Jews, 
and  that  at  this  very  time,  when  thus  set  at  nought  by  the 
people  that  ought  to  have  known  His  glory,  great  light  would 
spring  up  in  the  most  despised  place,  in  Galilee  of  the  nations, 
among  the  poorest  of  the  Jews,  where  Gentiles  were  mixed  up 


CHAPTER    IV.  63 

with  them — people  who  could  not  even  speak  their  own  tongue 
properly.  There  should  this  bright  and  heavenly  light  spring- 
up  ;  there  the  Messiah  would  be  owned  and  received.  Thus  we 
can  see  how  thoroughly  this  prophecy  suits  the  gospel  we  are 
considering.  For  what  we  have  here  is  One  who  is  Jehovah- 
Messiali  in  the  truest  sense,  a  divine  king,  and  not  a  mere  human 
being ;  but  at  the  same  time  Messiah,  while  slighted  by  the  nation 
and  despised  by  the  leaders,  making  Himself  known  in  grace 
to  those  who  were  the  most  scorned  in  the  outskirts  as  you  go 
out  towards  the  Gentiles.  What  kings  had  looked  for  in  vain, 
what  prophets  had  desired  to  see,  it  was  for  their  eyes  to  look 
upon.  The  Lord  begins  to  separate  Himself  a  remnant  in  Israel 
in  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles.  This  completely  keeps  up  and  con- 
firms the  object  of  Matthew  from  the  first. 

But  there  is  more  than  this.     "  From  that  time  Jesus  began 
to  preach,  and  to  say,  Repent,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
hand."  (Ver.  17.)     Now  it  is  clear  that  this  be.crins  His  publip- 
preaching.     The  discourse  to  Nicodemus  was  entirely  different. 
Why  have  we  nothing  like  the  Samaritan  woman  in  Matthew  ? 
How  does  it  fit  in  with  the  Gospel  of  John  ?     In  Matthew  the 
subject   is   the   accomplishment   of    the   prophecies   about   the 
Messiah.     The  object  of  God  there  was  to  shew  that  there  was, 
on  His  part,  no   failure   of  testimony,  till  the  Baptist's  work 
closes.     Jesus  awaits  this  in  Matthew.     In  John  He  waits  for 
nothing.     He  gives  the  grandest  possible  testimony  about  the 
kingdom,  not  exactly  of  heaven,  but  of  God  ;  the  necessity  of 
a  life  that  man  has  not  naturally,  that  God  alone  can  give ;  and 
the  necessity  of  the  cross  as  the  expression  of  God's  judgment 
of  sin  in  grace  to  sinners — to  the  world.     So  that  the  discourse 
in  John  iii.  consists  of  these  two  parts — a  life  given  of  God,  that 
never  sins,  that  is  perfectly  holy  ;  and  Jesus  dying  in  atonement 
for  the  sins  of  the  old  life  which  never  could  enter  into  the  presence 
of  God.     And  though  believers  must  have  the  new  life,  yet  this 
cannot  blot  out  sin.     Death  is  needed  as  well  as  life,  and  the 
Saviour  provides  both.     He  is  the  source  of  life  as  the  Son  of  God, 
and  He  dies  as  the  Son  of  man.     And  this  is  what  He  brines  out 
most  profoundly  in  the  beginning  of  John's  gospel. 


fi4  LECTUKES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

In  Matthew,  as  I  have  said,  we  have  Jesus  waiting  till  the 
testimony  of  John  the  Baptist  is  closed,  and  then  He  enters 
upon  His  public  ministry.  These  things  are  perfectly  harmo- 
nious. If  our  Lord  had  been  said  to  preach  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  to  Nicodemus,  there  might  have  seemed  to  be  a  contra- 
diction ;  but  He  did  not.  He  shewed  the  necessity  of  a  new 
birth  for  any  who  would  see  the  kingdom  of  God.  But  in 
Matthew  He  is  looking  at  what,  though  from  a  heavenly  source, 
concerns  the  earth — the  kingdom  of  heaven  according  to  the 
prophecy  of  Daniel.  He  therefore  waits  till  His  earthly  fore- 
runner had  fully  done  his  task.  The  ministry  of  John  is  set 
forth  by  Elias ;  the  forerunner  must  have  done  his  work  before 
the  Lord  begins  His  own.  Hence  Matthew  leaves  out  all 
allusion  to  anything  public  about  Christ  before  John  is  cast  into 
prison.  He  presents  to  the  Jews  the  kingdom  of  heaven  as  that 
which  was  according  to  their  prophets. 

In  the  Grospel  of  Luke  let  us  see  how  our  Lord's  ministry  is 
opened.  Chapter  iv.  will  suffice  for  my  purpose.  The  Lord 
returns  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  into  Galilee,  "  and  there  went 
out  a  fame  of  him  through  all  the  region  round  about.  And  he 
taught  in  their  synagogues,  being  glorified  of  all.  And  he  came 
to  Nazareth  where  he  had  been  brought  up."  This  is  a  previous 
scene  ;  He  is  not  in  Capernaum  yet.  Matthew  leaves  it  all  out. 
This  is  the  more  striking  because  Luke  was  not  one  of  those 
personally  with  our  Lord,  while  Matthew  was.  But  unless  you 
believe  that  it  is  God  who  has  guided  the  hand  of  every  writer, 
and  put  His  own  seal  upon  it,  you  are  incapable  of  understanding 
scripture ;  you  will  add  your  own  thoughts,  instead  of  being 
subject  to  the  mind  of  God.  What  we  want  is  to  confide  in 
God,  who  is  she'dding  on  us  His  own  blessed  and  infinite  light. 
Why  does  God  give  us  this  incident  at  Nazareth  in  Luke  and 
nowhere  else  ?  Is  it  the  Messiah  ?  No  ;  such  is  not  the  object 
of  Luke.  Nor  is  it  His  ministry  in  the  order  in  which  it 
occurred  ;  this  you  will  find  in  Mark.  But  Luke,  as  well  as 
Matthew,  changes  the  order  of  events,  for  the  purpose  of  bring- 
ing out  the  moral  object  of  each  gospel.  Luke  gives  us  this 
circumstance  in  the  synagogue  ;  Matthew  does  not.     If  anyone 


CHAPTER   IV.  65 

has  read  the  Gospel  of  Luke  with  spiritual  intelligence,  what  is 
the  imiform  impression  conveyed  to  the  mind  ?  There  is  the 
blessed  Man  anointed  of  the  Holv  Ghost,  and  who  ffoes  about 
doing  good.  Indeed,  this  is  precisely  the  way  in  which  Peter 
sums  up  the  life  of  Jesus  in  the  Acts,  when  preaching  Him  to 
Cornelius — "  How  God  anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  with  power ;  who  went  about  doing  good  and 
healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  devil ;  for  God  was  with 
him."  And  then  he  gives  an  account  of  His  wonderful  work  in 
His  death  and  resurrection,  and  its  fruits  to  the  believer. 

Opening,  then,  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke,  what  is  the  first 
incident  of  our  Lord's  ministry  recorded  there  ?  At  Nazareth, 
the  most  despised  village  in  Galilee,  the  place  where  our  Lord 
was  sure  to  be  scorned — in  His  own  country,  where  He  had 
been  living  all  the  days  of  His  ^private  life  of  blessed  obedience 
rendered  to  man  and  of  dependence  upon  God — in  this  same 
place  He  entered  the  synagogue  on  the  Sabbath  day,  and  stood 
up  to  read  from  the  prophet  Isaiah,  where  it  was  written, 
^'  Tlie  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  because  he  hath  anointed 
me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor :  he  hath  sent  me  to  heal 

the   broken-hearted, to  preach  the  acceptable  year  of 

the  Lord.  And  he  closed  the  book."  He  stopped  in  the  very 
middle  of  a  sentence.  Why  so  ?  For  the  most  precious  reason. 
He  was  come  here  as  a  herald  of  grace,  the  minister  of  divine 
goodness  to  poor  miserable  men.  Tlicre  was  judgment  mingled 
with  mercy  in  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah.  The  Gospel  of  Matthew 
points  out  judgment  tfpon  the  Jews  and  mercy  to  despised  Galilee. 
But  here  it  is  a  larger  thing.  In  Luke  there  is  not  a  word 
about  judgment ;  nothing  appears  but  the  fulness  of  grace  that 
was  in  Christ.  He  was  come  with  all  power  and  willingness  to 
bless :  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  was  upon  Him  for  the  purpose. 
He  was  sent  to  preach  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord — and 
there  and  then  He  closed  the  book.  He  would  not  add  the  next 
words,  which  announced  "  the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God." 
He  most  significantly  stops  before  a  word  is  said  of  that  day. 
As  to  the  actual  errand  on  which  Jesus  was  come  from  Jieaven, 
it  was  not  to  execute  vengeance  :  this  was  only  what  man  would, 
F 


66  LECTURES    ON   THE   GOSPEL    OF    MATTHEW. 

hy  and  by,  compel  Him  to  do  by  refusing  grace.  But  He  came 
to  shew  divine  love,  flowing  in  a  perfect  unceasing  stream  from 
His  heart.  This  was  what  our  Lord  opened  out  here.  Where 
does  such  a  scene  as  this  suit  ?  Exactly  the  place  where  it 
occurs— the  Grospel  of  Luke  only.  You  could  not  transplant  it 
to  Matthew,  or  even  to  John.  There  is  a  character  about  it  that 
pertains  to  this  gospel  and  none  other.  Some  of  the  circum- 
stances of  our  Lord's  ministry  are  given  in  all  the  gospels,  but 
this  is  not ;  because  it  flows  in  the  current  of  St.  Luke :  and 
there  it  is  found,  and  there  alone. 

This  will  help  to  illustrate  the  characteristic  and  divinely- 
arranged  differences  of  the  gospels.  Harmonizing  is  the  attempt 
to  squeeze  into  one  mould  things  which  are  not  the  same.  Thus, 
if  I  may  add  a  few  words  on  the  account  in  Luke,  we  have  more 
in  corroboration.  While  they  hung  upon  His  lips  to  hear  the 
gracious  words,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  characterizes  them,  all  eyes 
fastened  upon  Him.  "  He  began  to  say  unto  them,  Tliis  day  is 
this  scripture  fiilfilled  in  your  ears.  And  they  said.  Is  not  this 
Joseph's  son  ?"  Such  was  their  mibelief  of  heart.  He  was  despised 
and  rejected  of  men ;  not  only  of  the  proud  men  of  Jerusalem, 
but  even  at  Nazareth.  This  is  Luke's  object,  who  demonstrates 
the  deeper  thought  still — that  it  was  not  only  men  wdio  might  be 
built  up  in  the  law,  but  that  the  heart  of  man  was  against  Him 
wherever  He  was.  Let  it  be  at  Nazareth,  and  let  Him  utter 
the  most  gracious  words  that  ever  fell  from  the  lips  of  man,  still 
scorn  followed.  "  And  he  said  unto  them.  Ye  will  surely  say 
unto  me  this  proverb.  Physician,  heal  thyself;  whatsoever  we 
have  heard  done  at  Capernaum,  do  also  here  in  thy  country." 
Evidently  we  learn,  too,  that  the  Lord  had  done  many  things 
there,  and  things  that  had  taken  place  previously  to  this :  but 
the  Spirit  of  God  records  this  first  at  length.  The  Lord  accord- 
ingly brings  in  another  thing  that  I  must  refer  to.  He  takes 
instances  from  Jewish  history  to  illustrate  the  unbelief  of  the 
Jews,  and  the  goodness  of  God  to  the  Gentiles.  "  I  tell  you  of 
a  truth,  many  widows  were  in  Israel  in  the  days  of  Elias,  when 

the  heaven  was  shut  up But  unto  none  of  them  was 

Elias  sent,  save  unto  Sarepta,"  &c.     That  is  to  say.  He  shews 


CHAPTER   IV.  67 

that,  in  the  unbelief  of  Israel,  God  turns  to  the  Grentiles,  and 
that  they  should  hear.  There  was  one  grand  point  in  Luke's 
gospel — not  only  the  display  of  the  fulness  of  grace  that  was  in 
Jesus,  but  God  going  out  to  the  Gentiles  and  this  in  mercy  to 
them.  The  first  recorded  discourse  of  our  Lord's  in  Luke  brings 
out  the  very  object  of  the  gospel.  Accordingly,  when  the  Lord 
uttered  these  words,  "  they  were  filled  with  wrath,  and  rose  up, 
and  thrust  him  out  of  the  city,  and  led  him  unto  the  brow  of 
the  hill  whereon  their  city  was  built,  that  they  might  cast  him 
down  headlong.  But  he,  passing  through  the  midst  of  them, 
went  his  way,  and  came  down  to  Capernaum."  And  then  we 
have  the  Lord  dealing  with  a  man  that  was  possessed  with  a 
devil.  This  is  the  first  miracle  detailed  here  ;  and  it  is  onl}^  in 
the  next  chapter  that  we  find  our  Lord  calling  Simon  Peter, 
Andrew,  and  the  rest  to  follow  Him  ;  all  which  is  given  with  the 
greatest  possible  care.    At  once  we  are  struck  with  the  difference. 

For  when  we  turn  back  to  Matthew,  there  is  not  a  word  about 
Nazareth,  or  the  casting  out  of  a  devil  from  a  man  possessed  ; 
but  simply  our  Lord,  when  He  began  to  preach,  was  walking  by 
the  sea  of  Galilee,  and  "  saw  two  brethren,  Simon,  called  Peter, 
and  Andrew;  his  brother,  casting  a  net  into  the  sea ;  for  they  were 
fishers.  And  he  saith  unto  them.  Follow  me,  and  I  will  make 
you  fishers  of  men."  (Ver.  18,  19.)  The  account  is  given  very 
succinctly.  The  particulars  are  not  found,  but  we  do  get  them 
in  Luke,  and,  I  presume,  for  this  reason,  that  his  is  specially 
the  gospel  where  we  see  the  moral  analysis  of  the  human  heart. 
There  are  two  things  specially  brought  out  in  Luke — what  God's 
heart  is  towards  man,  and  what  man's  heart  is  naturally  towards 
God ;  and,  besides  this,  what  he  becomes  through  the  grace  of 
God.  Take  the  parable  of  the  prodigal  for  instance.  Have  you 
not  there  God's  grace,  and  the  wickedness  of  man's  heart  fully 
brought  out ;  and  then  his  coming  to  himself,  and  being  lost  in 
the  goodness  of  God  towards  him  ?  This  is  just  the  Gospel  of 
Luke,  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  whole  book.  It  is  one 
reason  why  you  have  the  experience  of  Peter  when  first  called 
to  service ;  how  the  Lord  met  his  fears,  and  fitted  him  to  become 
a  fisher  of  men.     And  Peter  is  there  made  a  prominent  person  : 


68  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 

such  experience  is  worthless  except  in  an  individual.  Experi- 
ence must  be  a  thing  between  the  soul  and  Christ ;  and  the 
moment  it  becomes  vague  or  a  matter  of  public  notoriety,  all  is 
gone ;  it  becomes  then  rather  a  snare  for  the  conscience.  There 
is  the  danger  of  repeating  what  we  have  heard  from  others,  or 
of  keeping  back  Avhat  is  bad  as  to  our  own  souls.  It  must  be  a 
matter  of  individual  conscience  with  the  Lord.  Hence  Luke 
gives  us  one  individual  singled  out,  and  the  minute  account  of 
what  he  passes  through  with  the  Lord. 

This  is  not  Matthew's  point.  There  it  is  the  rejected  Messiah, 
now  that  His  forerunner  is  cast  into  prison,  who  will  Himself 
soon  find  that  there  is  worse  than  a  prison  in  store  for  Him.  But 
for  all  that,  the  Lord  will  accomplish  the  prophecies.  He  is,  in 
the  most  despised  place,  fulfilling  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah  that 
predicted  the  law  boimd  up  among  His  disciples,  at  the  very  time 
that  the  Lord  was  hiding  His  face  from  Israel.  Now  He  wants 
to  have  persons  who  are  suited  to  be  the  representatives  of  this 
godly  remnant  in  Israel.  Therefore  He  calls  first  two  brethren, 
Simon  called  Peter,  and  Andrew  his  brother.  It  would  be  a 
mistake  to  suppose  that  this  was  our  Lord's  first  acquaintance 
with  them.  They  knew  the  Lord  long  before.  'How  do  we 
know  this  ?  John  tells  us.  If  you  examine  the  point,  you  wiU 
find  that  all  the  incidents  in  the  first  four  chapters  of  St.  John's 
Gospel  occurred  before  this  scene.  The  circumstances  recorded 
of  our  Lord  in  Jerusalem,  in  Galilee,  and  with  the  woman  of 
Samaria  even,  all  took  place  before  Simon  and  Andrew  were 
called  away  from  their  work.  In  order  to  call  for  a  special 
line  of  service,  there  is  a  second  work  of  Christ  necessary. 

It  is  one  thing  for  Christ  to  reveal  Himself  to  a  soul,  it 
is  another  to  make  that  soul  a  fisher  of  men.  There  is  a 
special  faith  needed  in  order  to  act  upon  the  souls  of  others. 
The  simple,  saving  faith  that'  appropriates  Christ  for  one's  own 
soul  is  not  at  all  the  same  thing  as  understanding  the  call  of 
Christ  summoning  one  away  from  all  the  natural  objects  of  this 
life  to  do  His  work.  This  comes  out  here.  The  Lord,  in  His 
rejection,  calls,  and  causes  His  voice  to  be  heard  by  these  four 
men,  and  by  others  also.     They  had  already  believed  in  Him, 


CHAPTER   IV.  69 

and  had  everlasting  life  ;  but  to  have  everlasting  life  merely  ia 
(compatible  with  a  man's  following  a  good  deal  with  the  world, 
:md  being  occupied  with  what  contributes  to  his  own  ease  here 
below ;  he  remains  a  member  of  the  society  of  men.  Many  that 
are  godly  still  continue  mixed  up  with  the  world ;  but  in  order 
for  the  Lord  to  make  them  to  be  the  companions  of  His  own 
service,  and  to  fit  them  for  carrying  out  His  own  objects,  He 
must  call  them  away.  But  they  have  got  a  father :  what  is  to 
be  done  ?  No  matter ;  the  call  of  Christ  is  paramount  to  every 
other  claim.  They  were  casting  a  net  into  the  sea ;  and  He 
saith  unto  them,  "  Follow  me."  But  they  might  have  caught 
ever  so  much  fish :  what  of  that  ?  "  They  straightway  left 
their  nets  and  followed  him.  And  going  on  from  thence,  he 
saw  other  two  brethren,  James  the  son  of  Zebedee,  and  John 
his  brother,  in  a  ship  with  Zebedee  their  father,  mending  their 
nets;  and  he  called  them."  (Ver.  20,  21.)  No  doubt  it  was  a 
struggle.  They  were  mending  their  nets  with  their  father  when 
the  Lord  called  them  ;  but  they  immediately  left  their  nets  and 
their  father,  and  followed  Him.  And  for  this  reason  :  They 
now  knew  who  Christ  was,  that  He  was  the  Messiah,  the  blessed 
object  of  hope  that  God  had  from  the  beginning  promised  to  the 
fathers ;  and  now  the  children  had  it.  He  called  them.  Could 
they  not  trust  all  they  had  in  His  hands,  and  confide  in  His 
care  for  their  father  ?  Surely  they  could.  The  very  same  faith 
which  gave  them  to  follow  Jesus,  not  alone  as  a  giver  of  ever- 
lasting life,  but  as  One  to  whom  they  now  belonged  as  servants, 
could  enable  them  to  confide  all  that  they  had  pertaining  to 
them  in  this  world  into  His  keeping.  Surely,  if  the  Lord  called 
them.  His  call  must  be  superior  to  their  natural  obligations. 
This  was  an  extraordinary  case.  We  do  not  find  that  persons 
in  general  are  called  to  such  a  work  as  this ;  but,  it  may  be, 
there  are  occasions  where  the  Lord  has  those  that  He  summons 
to  serve  Him  in  this  special  way.  How  could  one  be  of  use  to 
the  souls  of  others,  unless  he  have  known  somewhat  of  this  trial 
for  his  own  soul  ?  The  Lord  is  presented  here  as  thus  form- 
ing this  godly  remnant  for  Himself  from  the  very  beginning. 
"  Behold,  I  and  the  children  whom  the  Lord  hath  given  me  are 


ro 


LECTUKES   ON    THE   GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 


for  signs  and  for  wonders  in  Israel."  This  was  what  the  Lord 
was  now  doing ;  but  it  is  not  all.  "  Jesus  went  about  all 
Galilee,  teaching  in  their  synagogues,  and  preaching  the  gospel 
of  the  kingdom,  and  healing  all  manner  of  sickness,  and  all 
manner  of  diseases  among  the  people.  And  his  fame  went 
throughout  all  Syria ;  and  they  brought  unto  him  all  manner  of 
sick  people,  that  were  taken  with  divers  diseases  and  torments, 
and  those  which  were  possessed  with  devils,  and  those  which 
were  lunatic,  and  those  which  had  the  palsy,  and  he  healed 
them."  (Ver.  23,  24.) 

Now,  mark,  there  is  nowhere,  except  in  Matthew,  such  a 
series  of  the  Lord's  works  and  teaching  compressed  into  a  couple 
of  verses.  Li  Matthew  they  are  crowded  into  a  cluster,  before 
we  have  the  teaching  commonly  called  the  sermon  on  the  mount. 
Why  is  it  that  the  ordinary  current  of  the  Lord's  ministry  is 
brought  before  us  here  in  this  comprehensive  form  ?  The  Gospel 
of  Matthew  is  intended  to  shew  that,  after  the  Lord  had  called 
these  disciples,  His  general  service  is  presented  for  the  purpose 
of  proving  the  universal  attention  that  was  drawn  to  His  doc- 
trine. The  Lord  had  been  giving  a  full  testimony  everywhere 
through  all  Syria.  Persons  had  been  attracted  from  all  quarters ; 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  then  gives  us  the  outline  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  in  its  objects  and  character.  The  circumstances  are 
so  arranged  by  the  Holy  Ghost  as  to  shew  the  universal  attention 
directed  to  it.  When  all  are  on  tip-toe  to  hear  Him,  then  the 
Lord  unfolds  the  character  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Matthew 
knew  perfectly  well  that  the  sermon  on  the  mount  was  really 
uttered  long;  after.  He  heard  it  himself  Yet  Matthew's  own 
call  is  not  given  till  chapter  ix.  It  was  subsequently  to  the  call 
of  the  twelve  disciples  that  our  Lord  took  His  place  upon  the 
mountain  ;  but  Matthew  records  it  long  before.  The  object  is  to 
mark,  not  the  time  when  our  Lord  uttered  this  discourse,  but  the 
change  announced.  There  were,  first,  all  these  mighty  deeds 
that  witnessed  to  His  being  the  true  Messiah ;  and  then  His 
doctrine  was  perfectly  brought  out.  The  sermon  on  the  mount 
need  not  be  considered,  historically,  as  one  continuous  discourse, 
but  may  have  been  divided  into  different  parts.     It  is  nowhere 


CHAPTER   V.  71 

said  that  it  Avas  all  uttered  in  strict  consecution.  "We  have  only 
the  general  fact  that  then  He  spoke  thus  on  the  mount,  and 
there  He  taught  the  people.  It  may  have  been  broken  up  into 
several  discourses,  with  the  circumstances  giving  rise  to  this 
part  or  that  omitted  in  Matthew.  The  human  mind  compares 
these  things  together,  and  finding  that  in  St.  Luke  dift'erent 
portions  of  it  are  given  to  us  in  a  different  connection,  while  in 
Matthew  all  are  given  together,  instead  of  confiding  in  the 
certainty  that  God  is  right,  jumps  at  once  to  the  conclusion  that 
there  is  confusion  in  these  scriptures.  There  is  really  perfection. 
It  is  the  Holy  Ghost  shaping  all  according  to  the  object  He  has 
before  Him. 

Another  time  I  hope,  if  the  Lord  will,  to  enter  carefull}^  into 
this  most  blessed  discourse  of  our  Lord's,  to  evince  its  grand 
importance  in  itself,  and  its  appropriateness  in  Matthew,  where 
alone  we  have  it  so  fully.  In  Mark  and  John  it  is  not  given  at 
all,  in  Luke  only  in  detached  fragments,  in  Matthew  as  a  whole. 
But  now  I  merely  commend  to  you  the  subject  we  have  been 
looking  at,  trusting  that  the  general  remarks  already  made  may 
prove  an  incentive  to  further  and  prayerful  examination.  May 
the  hints  thrown  out  help  some  to  a  more  profitable  reading  of 
God's  Avord,  and  more  intelligent  entrance  into  His  mind,  besides 
giving  a  key  to  difficulties  in  the  gospels. 


»oi«if>^ 


CHAPTER    V. 

It  has  been  already  explained,  though  briefly,  that  one  reason 
which  seems  to  have  guided  the  Spirit  of  God,  if  we  may 
reverently  venture  so  to  speak,  in  putting  the  sermon  on  the 
mount  out  of  its  historical  place  in  Matthew,  and  giving  it  to  us 
before  many  of  the  events  which,  in  point  of  fact,  took  place 
subsequently,  was  this :  that  the  whole  gospel  was  written  upon 


72  LECTURES   ON  THE  GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

the  principle  of  convincing  Jews,  first,  who  Jesus  was,  their 
Messiah — a  man,  but  Jehovah — the  Lord  God  of  Israel ;  that 
next,  the  fullest  proofs  were  given  what  He  really  was  as  their 
Messiah,  according  to  prophecy,  miracle,  moral  principles  and 
ways,  both  in  His  own  person  and  in  His  doctrine."^  In  order 
to  give  the  greater  weight  to  His  doctrine,  the  Spirit  of  God,  in 
my  opinion,  has  been  pleased,  first,  to  give  as  a  general  sketch 
the  deeds  of  miraculous  power  which  roused  universal  attention. 
The  report  w^ent  abroad  everywhere,  so  that  there  was  no  possible 
around  of  excuse  for  unbelief  to  argue  that  there  was  not 
sufficient  publicity ;  that  God  had  not  sounded  the  trumpet  loud 
enough  for  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  hear.  Far  from  that :  through- 
out all  Syria  His  fame  had  gone  forth,  and  great  multitudes 
followed  Him  from  Galilee,  and  Decapolis,  and  Jerusalem,  and 
Judea,  and  from  beyond  Jordan.  All  this  is  brought  forward 
here  and  grouped  together  at  the  end  of  chapter  iv. 

And  just  as  there  is  this  grouping  of  the  miracles  of  Christ, 
which  might  have  been  severed  from  one  another  by  a  long  space 
of  time,  so  I  apprehend  the  sermon  on  the  mount  was  not 
necessarily  a  continuous  discourse,  unbroken  by  time  or  circum- 
stances, but  that  the  Holy  Ghost  has  seen  fit  to  arrange  it  so  as 
to  give  the  whole  moral  unity  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ  as  to 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  specially  so  as  to  counteract  the 
earthly  views  of  the  people  of  Israel. 

St.  Luke,  on  the  contrary,  was  inspired  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
give  the  questions  that  originated  certain  portions  of  the  dis- 
course, and  the  circumstances  that  accompanied  it ;  and,  again, 
to  keep  certain  parts  of  that  discourse  back,  connecting  them 
with  facts  that  occurred  from  time  to  time  in  our  Lord's 
ministry,  the  actual  incidents  being  thus  interwoven  in  moral 
correspondence  with  any  particular  doctrine  of  our  Lord.  In 
some  places  of  Luke  the  Spirit  of  God  takes  the  liberty, 
according  to  His  sovereign  wisdom,  of  keeping  back  certain 

*  A  third  point,  I  may  add  here,  of  immense  moment  was  to  make 
evident  the  consequences  of  His  rejection  by  the  Jews,  not  only  to  them 
but  to  the  Gentiles — that  is,  the  change  of  economy  which  turned  on  that 
solemcQ  fact. 


CHAPTER   V.  73 

portions  and  bringing  in  a  part  here  and  there  according  to  the 
object  He  has  in  view.  The  great  feature  of  Luke's  gospel, 
which  runs  through  it  from  beginning  to  end,  being  its  moral 
aim,  we  can  perfectly  understand  how  suitable  it  was.  that,  if 
there  were  circumstances  in  Christ's  life  which  were  a  sort  of 
practical  comment  on  His  discourse,  there  you  should  have  the 
discourse  and  the  facts  put  together. 

Now,  as  to  the  discourse  itself,  the  Lord  here  clearly  speaks 
as  the  Messiah,  the  Prophet  King  of  the  Jews.  But  besides, 
all  through  you  will  find  that  the  discourse  supposes  the  rejec- 
tion of  the  King.  It  is  not  brought  clearly  out  yet,  but  this  is 
what  underlies  it  all.  The  King  has  the  sense  of  the  true  state 
of  the  people,  who  had  no  heart  for  Him.  Hence  there  is  a 
sweet  tino-e  of  sorrow  that  runs  throuo-li  it.  That  must  ever 
characterize  real  godliness  in  the  world  as  it  is  :  a  strange  thing 
for  Israel,  and  specially  strange  in  the  lips  of  the  King,  of  One, 
too,  possessed  of  such  power,  that  had  it  been  a  question  of 
using  His  resources.  He  could  have  changed  all  in  a  moment. 
The  miracles  which  accompanied  His  every  word,  proved  that 
there  was  nothing  beyond  His  reach,  if  Himself  only  were 
looked  at.  But  you  will  find  in  all  the  ways  of  God,  that  while 
He  always  makes  good  His  counsels,  so  that  if  He  predicts  a 
kingdom,  and  takes  in  hand  to  set  up  a  kingdom.  He  will 
certainly  accomplish  it,  since  He  never  gives  up  a  single  thought 
that  has  proceeded  from  His  heart.  Nevertheless,  He  first 
presents  the  thought  to  man,  to  Israel  because  they  were  the 
chosen  race  among  men.  Man  has  thus  the  responsibility  of 
receiving  or  rejecting  that  which  is  the  mind  of  God,  before 
grace  and  power  give  it  effect.  But  man  always  fails,  no  matter 
what  God's  purpose  may  be.  It  is  good,  it  is  holy,  it  is  true, 
it  is  that  which  exalts  Himself,  it  is  that  which  abases  the 
sinner :  this  is  enough  for  man.  He  feels  that  he  is  made 
nothing  of,  and  he  rejects  whatever  does  not  gratify  his  vanity. 
Man  invariably  sets  himself  against  the  thoughts  of  God  : 
consequently  there  is  pain  and  sorrow — rejection  of  God  Himself, 
And  the  wonderful  thing  that  the  history  of  this  world  exhibits 
is  God  submitting  to  be  rejected  and  insulted ;  allowing  poor 


74  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

weak  man,  a  worm,  to  repel  His  benign  advances  and  refuse  His 
goodness,  to  turn  everything  that  God  gives  and  promises  into 
the  display  of  his  own  pride  and  glory  against  the  majesty 
and  will  of  God.  You  will  find  that  all  this,  as  it  is  the  truth 
about  man,  so  the  tinge  of  it  runs  through  this  blessed  discourse 
of  our  Lord.  And  when  He  is  now  bringing  out  (which  is  the 
great  purport  of  the  early  part  of  this  chapter)  the  character  of 
the  people  who  would  suit  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  He  proclaims 
that  their  character  was  to  be  formed  by  His  own.  If  there 
was  men's  dislike  and  contempt  for  what  was  of  God,  He 
shews  that  those  who  really  belong  to  Him  must  have  a  spirit 
and  ways  flowing  from  knowledge  of,  and  sympathy  with.  His 
own.  I  only  say  sympathy  here,  because  you  will  find  that  the 
truth  of  a  divine  life  given  to  the  believer  is  not  spoken  of  in  this 
discourse.  Redemption  never  is  touched  upon,  as  it  is  not  the 
subject  of  the  sermon  on  the  mount.  If  a  person,  therefore, 
wanted  to  know  how  to  be  saved,  he  ought  not  to  look  here  with 
the  thought  of  finding  an  answer.  It  could  not  be  found  in  it, 
because  the  Lord  is  brino-ino;  out  the  kino-dom  of  heaven  and 
the  sort  of  people  that  are  suitable  to  that  kingdom.  It  is 
clear  that  He  is  speaking  of  His  own  disciples,  and  therefore 
is  not,  could  not  be,  shewing  how  one  that  did  not  belong  to  Him- 
self could  be  delivered  from  such  a  position.  He  is  speaking 
about  saints,  not  about  sinners.  He  could  lay  down  what  is  ac- 
cording to  His  heart ;  not  at  all  the  way  for  a  soul  consciously 
at  a  distance  from  God  to  be  brought  near.  The  sermon  on  the 
mount  treats  not  of  salvation,  but  of  the  character  and  conduct 
of  those  that  belong  to  Christ — the  true  jet  rejected  King. 
But  when  we  examine  these  beatitudes  closely,  we  shall  find  an 
astonishing  depth  in  them,  and  a  beautiful  order  too. 

The  first  blessedness,  then,  attaches  to  a  fundamental  trait  which 
is  inseparable  from  every  soul  that  is  brought  to  God,  and  that 
knows  God.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit."  Nothing  more 
contrary  to  man.  What  people  call  "  a  man  of  spirit,"  is  exactly 
the  opposite  of  being  poor  in  spirit.  A  man  of  spirit  is  one  who  is 
such  as  Cain  was — a  man  determined  not  to  be  beaten  :  a  soul 


CHAPTER   V.  75 

who  would  fight  it  out  with  God  Himself.  There  was  a  proud 
spirited  man  that  never  would  bend.  Now  he  who  is  "  poor  in 
spirit"  is  the  very  opposite  of  this.  It  is  a  person  who  is  broken, 
who  is  down,  who  feels  that  the  dust  is  his  right  place.  And  every 
soul  that  knows  God  must,  more  or  less,  be  there.  He  may  get 
out  of  this  place  ;  for  although  it  is  a  solemn  thing,  yet  it  is  easy 
enough,  to  rise  again,  to  forget  our  right  place  before  God ;  and 
it  is  even  a  danger  for  those  who  have  been  brought  into  the 
liberty  of  Christ.  When  there  is  earnestness  of  spirit,  a  man  is 
apt  to  be  low,  specially  if  not  quite  sure  that  all  is  clear  between 
his  soul  and  God.  But  when  full  relief  is  brought  to  his  spirit, 
when  he  knows  the  fulness  and  certainty  of  redemption  in  Christ 
Jesus,  if  then  he  look  away  from  Jesus  and  take  his  place 
among  men,  there  you  will  have  the  old  spirit  revived,  the  spirit 
of  man  in  its  worst  form  :  so  terrible  is  the  effect  of  a  departure 
from  God  in  order  to  mino-le  with  men.  The  first  in  order  the 
Lord  lays  down  as  a  sort  of  foundation,  as  being  inseparable 
from  a  soul  that  is  brought  to  God  : — he  may  not  even  know  what 
full  liberty  is,  but  there  is  this  stamp  that  never  can  be  absent 
where  the  Holy  Ghost  works  in  the  soul — and  that  is  poverty 
of  spirit.  It  may  be  encroached  on  by  others,  or  it  may  fade 
away  through  the  influence  of  false  doctrine,  or  worldly  thoughts 
and  practice,  but  still  there  it  was,  and  there,  in  the  midst  of  all 
the  rubbish,  it  is ;  and  God  knows  how  to  bring  a  man  down 
again,  if  he  has  forgotten  his  true  place.  ''  Blessed  are  the 
poor  in  spirit;  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  (Ver.  3.) 
If  He  is  speaking  about  the  kingdom,  He  forthwith  says  these  are 
the  people  to  whom  it  belongs.  By  the  "  kingdom  of  heaven" 
He  does  not  mean  heaven :  it  never  means  heaven,  but  always 
takes  in  the  earth  as  under  the  rule  of  heaven.  You  will  find 
that  many  persons  are  in  the  habit  of  confounding  these  things. 
"  Theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  they  think  means  "  theirs 
is  heaven."  Whereas  the  Lord  is  not  referring  to  heaven,  but 
to  the  rule  of  the  heavens  over  an  earthly  scene.  It  refers  to 
the  scene  of  the  ruling  Messiah — those  who  are  poor  in  spirit 
belong  to  that  system  of  which  He  is  the  Head.  He  does  not 
speak  of  the  Church  here.     There  might  have  been  the  kingdom 


76  LECTURES   ON  THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

of  heaven  and  no  Church  at  all.  It  is  not  till  the  sixteenth 
chapter  of  this  gospel  that  the  subject  of  the  Church  is  broached, 
and  then  it  is  a  thing  promised  and  expressly  distinguished  from 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  There  is  not  in  all  scripture  a  single 
passage  where  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  confounded  with  the 
Church,  or  vice  versa.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit  :  for 
theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  This  is  the  primary  founda- 
tion, the  broad  characteristic  feature  of  all  that  belong  to  Jesus. 

^'  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn "  is  the  second  feature. 
There  is  more  activity  of  life,  more  depth  of  feeling,  more 
entrance  into  the  condition  of  things  around  them.  To  be 
"poor  in  spirit"  would  be  true  if  there  were  not  a  single  other 
soul  in  the  world  ;  he  thus  feels  because  of  what  he  is  in 
himself;  it  is  a  question  between  him  and  God,  that  makes 
him  to  be  poor  in  spirit.  But  "  blessed  are  they  that  mourn"  is 
not  merely  Avhat  we  find  in  our  own  condition,  but  the  holy 
sorrow  that  a  saint  tastes  in  finding  himself  in  such  a  world  as 
this,  and,  oh,  how  little  able  to  maintain  the  glory  of  God !  So 
that  there  is  this  holy  sorrow  very  prominent  indeed  in  the 
second  part.  The  first  is  the  child  of  God  experiencing  the 
earliest  rudimeutal  feeling  of  holiness  in  his  soul ;  the  second 
is  the  sense  of  what  is  due  to  God — a  feeling  it  may  be  of  great 
weakness,  and  yet  of  what  becomes  the  honour  of  God,  and 
how  little  it  is  upheld  by  himself  or  others.  "  Blessed  are  they 
that  mourn:  for  they  shall  be  comforted."  (Ver.  4.)  There  is 
not  a  single  sigh  that  goes  up  to  God  but  He  treasures  and 
will  answer  it ;  "  ourselves  also,  which  have  the  firstfruits  of  the 
Spirit,  even  we  ourselves  groan  within  ourselves."  Here,  then, 
we  have  the  sorrowing  of  the  godly  soul. 

But  in  the  third  case  we  come  to  that  which  is  much  deeper 
and  more  chastened.  It  is  a  condition  of  soul  produced  by  a 
fuller  acquaintance  with  God,  and  is  especially  the  way  in  which 
God  elsewhere  describes  the  blessed  One  Himself.  He  was 
"  meek  and  lowly  in  heart ;"  and  this  was  what  the  Lord  said 
after  He  had  been  groaning  in  spirit,  for  He  knew  what  it  was 
to  have  a  deeper  sorrow  than  we  have  spoken  of,  over  the 
condition  of  men  and  the  rejection  of  God  that  He  witnessed 


CHAPTER   V.  77 

here  below.  He  could  only  say  "  Woe"  to  those  cities  in  which 
He  had  done  so  many  mighty  works;  and  then  Capernaum 
comes  in  for  the  deepest  condemnation,  because  the  mightiest 
works  of  all  were  done  there  in  vain.  And  what  could  Jesus 
do  but  groan  in  spirit  as  He  thought  of  such  utter  spurning  of 
God,  and  indifference  to  His  own  love?  But  at  the  same  hour 
we  find  He  rejoices  in  spirit,  and  says,  "  I  thank  thee,  0 
Father."  Such  is  the  blessed  proof  of  matchless  meekness  in 
Jesus.  The  same  hour  which  sees  the  depth  of  His  sorrow 
over  man  sees  also  His  perfect  bowing  to  God,  though  at  the 
cost  of  everything  to  Himself.  Conscious  of  this,  He  says, 
"  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden, 
and  I  will  give  you  rest.  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and 
learn  of  me :  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart :  and  ye  shall 
find  rest  unto  your  souls."  Now,  then,  I  think  I  may  be 
bold  to  say  that  this  meekness,  which  was  found  in  its 
absolute  perfectness  in  Jesus,  is  also  what  the  gradually 
deepening  knowledge  of  the  ways  of  God,  even  in  the  sense 
of  the  abounding  wickedness  of  this  world  and  of  the  failure 
of  what  bears  the  name  of  Christ,  produces  in  the  saint  of 
God.  For,  in  the  midst  of  all  that  he  sees  around  him,  there 
is  the  discerning  of  the  hidden  purpose  of  God  that  is  going  on 
in  spite  of  everything ;  so  that  the  heart,  instead  of  being 
fretted  by  the  evil  which  it  witnesses  and  which  it  cannot  set 
aside,  instead  of  the  least  feeling  of  envy  at  the  prosperity  of 
the  wicked,  finds  its  resource  in  God — "the  Lord  of  heaven  and 
earth"  —  an  expression  most  blessed  because  it  marks  the 
absolute  control  in  which  everything  is  held  by  God.  Jesus  is 
the  meek  One,  and  those  that  belong  to  Jesus  are  trained  to  this 
meekness  also.  "  Blessed  are  the  meek  :  for  they  shall  inherit 
the  earth."  (Ver.  5.)  The  earth — why  not  heaven?  The 
earth  is  the  scene  of  all  this  evil  that  had  given  occasion  to  such 
sorrow  and  mourning.  But  now,  having  better  learnt  God's 
ways,  they  can  commit  all  to  Him.  Meekness  is  not  merely 
to  have  a  sense  of  nothingness  in  ourselves,  or  to  be  filled  with 
sorrow  for  the  opposition  to  God  here  below ;  but  it  is  rather 
the  calmness  which  leaves  things  with  God,  and  bends  to  God, 


78         LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

and  thankfully  owns  the  -will  of  God,  even  where  naturally  it 
may  be  most  trying  to  ourselves. 

The  fourth  blessedness  is  much  more  active.  "  Blessed  are 
they  which  do  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness :  for  they 
shall  be  filled."  (Ver.  6.)  Perfect  soul-satisfaction  they  shall 
have.  Whatever  was  the  form  of  the  spiritual  feeling  of  the 
heart,  there  is  always  the  perfect  answer  to  it  on  God's  part.  If 
there  was  sorrow,  they  shall  be  comforted  ;  if  there  was  meekness, 
they  shall  inherit  the  earth,  the  very  place  of  their  trial  here. 
Now,  there  is  this  activity  of  spiritual  feeling,  the  going  out 
after  what  was  according  to  God,  and  what  maintained  the  will 
of  God,  specially  as  made  known  to  a  Jew  in  the  Old  Testament. 
Therefore  it  is  called  hungerino;  and  thirsting  after  righteousness. 
We  learn  deeper  principles  in  the  New  Testament  still,  which  had 
to  be  brought  out  when  the  disciples  were  able  to  bear  them. 

This  closes  what  we  may  call  the  first  section  of  the  beatitudes. 
You  will  find  that  they  are  divided,  as  the  series  of  scripture 
often  are,  into  four  and  three.  We  have  had  four  classes  of 
persons  pronounced  "  blessed."  All  the  traits  ought  to  be 
found  in  one  individual,  but  some  will  be  more  prominent  in  one 
than  another.  For  instance,  we  may  see  great  activity  in  one, 
astonishing  meekness  in  another.  The  principle  of  all  is  in 
every  soul  that  is  born  of  God.  In  verse  7  we  enter  upon  a 
rather  different  class :  and  it  will  be  found  that  the  last  three 
have  got  a  common  character,  as  the  first  four  have. 

"Blessed  are  the  merciful:  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy." 
(Ver.  7.)  As  righteousness  is  the  key  note  of  the  first  four, 
so  grace  is  that  which  lies  at  the  root  of  the  latter  three ;  and, 
therefore,  the  very  first  of  them  demonstrates  not  merely  that 
they  are  righteous,  and  that  they  feel  what  is  due  to  God,  but 
they  appreciate  the  love  of  God,  and  maintain  it  in  the  midst 
of  surroundino;  evil.  Yea,  there  is  somethino-  more  blessed 
still,  and  what  is  that?  "Blessed  are  the  merciful."  There 
is  nothing  on  which  God  more  takes  His  stand  (as  the  active 
principle  of  His   being  in  a  world   of  sin)   than    His   mercy. 


CHAPTER   V.  79 

Tlie  only  possibility  of  salvation  to  a  single  soul,  is  that  there 
is  mercy  in  God ;  that  He  is  rich  in  mercy,  that  there  is  no 
bound  to  His  mercy ;  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  heart  of  man, 
if  he  only  bows  to  His  Son,  which  can  hinder  His  constant 
flowing  spring  of  mercy.  "  Blessed,"  then,  "  are  the  merciful : 
for  they  shall  obtain  mercy."  It  is  not  merely  a  question  of 
the  forgiveness  of  their  sins,  but  of  mercy  in  everything.  It  is 
a  blessed  thing  to  hail  the  smallest  sign  of  mercy,  to  take  the 
little  and  look  for  much  more.  "  Blessed  are  the  merciful." 
They  will  find,  not  that  there  is  not  difficulty  and  trial,  but 
that  though  they  shall  know  the  cost  of  it,  they  shall  know  the 
sweetness  of  it ;  they  shall  taste  afresh  what  the  mercy  of  God 
is  towards  their  own  souls,  in  the  exercise  of  mercy  towards 
others.  Tliis  is  the  characteristic  feature  of  the  new  class  of 
blessing ;  just  as  poverty  of  spirit  was  the  introduction  to  the 
first  blessings,  so  mercy  is  to  these. 

The  next  is  the  consequence  of  this,  as  in  the  former  class. 
If  a  man  does  not  think  much  of  himself,  men  will  take 
advantage  of  him.  If  a  man  is  bold  and  boastful  and  self- 
exalting,  saints  may  suffer  it.  (2  Cor.  xi.)  If  he  does  well  to 
himself,  men  will  praise  him.  (Ps.  xlix.)  But  the  contrary  of 
all  this  is  what  God  works  in  the  saint.  No  matter  what  he  may 
be,  he  is  broken  down  before  God  :  he  learns  the  vanity  of  what 
man  is ;  he  is  content  to  be  nothing.  And  the  effect  is  that  he 
suffers.  Poverty  of  spirit  will  be  followed  by  mourning.  Then 
there  is  the  meekness,  as  there  is  deepening  acquaintance  with 
God,  and  withal  the  hungering  and  thirsting  after  righteousness. 

But  now  it  is  mercy  ;  and  the  effect  of  mercy  is  not  a  compro- 
mising of  the  holiness  of  God,  but  a  larger  and  deeper  standard 
of  it.  The  fuller  your  hold  of  grace  is,  the  higher  will  be 
your  maintenance  of  holiness.  If  you  only  regard  grace  as  a 
wretched  selfish  being,  trying  to  find  an  excuse  for  sin,  no  doubt 
it  will  be  perverted.  And  so  He  speaks  at  once  of  the  simple 
normal  effect  of  tasting  of  this  spring  of  mercy.  They  are 
''pure  in  heart."  This  is  the  next  class,  and  it  is,  I  believe,  the 
consequence  of  the  first — of  being  merciful.  "  Blessed  are  the 
pure  in  heart;    for  they  shall  see  God."     It  is  exactly  what  is 


80  LECTURES   ON   THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

proper  to  God ;  for  He  alone  is  pure  absolutelj.  Thus  also  He 
was  perfectly  reflected  in  His  beloved  Son.  For  not  a  single 
thought  or  feeling  ever  sullied  divine  perfectness  in  the  heart  of 
Jesus.  In  this  case  He  is  just  telling  out  what  He  himself  was. 
How  could  He  but  put  His  own  characteristics  before  those  who 
beloncred  to  Him  ?  For  indeed  He  is  their  life.  It  is  Christ  in 
us  that  produces  what  is  according  to  God  by  the  Holy  Ghost — 
that  blessed  One,  whose  very  coming  into  the  world  was  the 
witness  of  perfect  grace  and  mercy  on  God's  part ;  for  we  know 
God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only-begotten  Son 
for  it.  And  He  was  there,  a  man — the  faithfid  witness  of  the 
mercy  and  of  the  purity  of  God.  He,  when  He  came  with  His 
heart  full  of  mercy  towards  the  vilest,  was  yet  the  very  fulness 
and  pattern  of  the  purity  of  God  in  its  perfection.     "  He  that 

sent  me,"  He  could  say,  "  is  with  me ; for  I  do  always 

those  things  that  please  him."  The  only  way  of  doing  any- 
thing to  please  God  is  by  the  cherished  consciousness  of  being 
"in  the  presence  of  God ;  and  there  is  no  possibility  of  this, 
except  as  I  am  drawn  there  in  the  liberty  of  grace,  and  as 
knowing  that  what  Christ  was  to  God,  in  His  own  person,  is 
given  to  me,  as  far  as  it  could  be,  by  redemption.  Christ  had, 
of  course,  a  title  to  be  ever  there,  because  of  what  He  Himself 
is :  and  we  are  there  through  faith  of  Christ,  because  of  the 
nearness  that  is  given  us,  founded  on  the  blotting  out  of  our 
sins  through  His  blood.  But  this  is  not  revealed  here  ;  for  the 
Lord  is  rather  unfolding  the  moral  qualities  of  those  that  belong 
to  Him. 

The  third  and  closing  form  of  these  blessednesses  is,  "  Blessed 
are  the  peace-makers ;  for  they  shall  be  called  the  children  of 
God."  (Ver.  9.)  Here  we  have  the  active  side  again,  as  we 
saw  an  analogy  in  the  closing  one  of  the  first  four.  These  go 
out  making  peace.  If  there  is  the  smallest  possibility  of  the 
peace  of  God  being  brought  into  the  scene,  they  are  sure  to  find 
out  where  it  can  be  or  may  be ;  and  if  it  cannot  be,  they  are 
content  to  wait  on  God,  and  look  up  to  Him,  that  He  may 
make  this  peace  in  His  own  time.  And  as  this  peace-making 
can  belong  only  to  God  Himself,  so  these  saints  that  are  enriched 


CHAPTER   V.  81 

wth  these  blessed  qualities  of  tlie  grace  of  God  as  well  as 
His  righteousness,  with  His  active  mercy,  and  its  effects — are 
equally  found  now  characterized  as  peace-makers.  "  They  shall 
be  called  the  children  of  God."  Oh  I  this  is  a  sweet  title — 
sons  of  God !  Is  it  not  because  it  was  the  reflection  of  His  own 
nature — of  what  God  Himself  is?  They  bore  the  stamp  of  God 
upon  them.  There  is  no  one  thing  that  more  indicates  God 
manifested  in  His  children  than  peace-making.  Tliis  was 
what  God  was  doing,  what  His  heart  is  set  upon.  Here  are 
found  men  upon  the  earth  who  shall  be  called  the  sons  of 
God.  Wliat  belonged  to  them  naturally  is  merged ;  and  they 
have  a  new  title  from  God  Himself. 

Then  follow  two  blessings  of  exceeding  interest.  They  add 
much  to  the  beauty  of  the  scene,  and  complete  the  picture  in  a 
most  striking  way.  "  Blessed  are  thej'  which  are  persecuted 
for  righteousness'  sake ;  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven :" 
(Ver.  10.)  This  is  evidently  to  begin  over  again.  The  first 
blessedness  was,  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit ;  for  theirs  is  the 
kingdom  of  heaven ;"  and  the  next  three  were  all  marked  by 
righteousness.  It  is  the  first  thing  that  God  produces  in  a  new- 
born soul.  He  who  is  awakened  takes  up  God's  cause  against 
himself.  He  is,  in  measure,  broken  down,  poor  in  spirit ;  and 
God  looks  for  him  to  grow  in  poverty  of  spirit  to  the  last.  But 
here  it  is  not  so  much  what  they  were,  as  what  their  lot  was 
from  others.  The  last  two  blessednesses  speak  of  their  portion 
in  the  world  from  the  hands  of  other  people.  The  first  foiu- 
are  characterized  by  intrinsic  righteousness — the  last  tln*ee  by 
intrinsic  grace.  These  two,  then,  answer,  one  to  the  first  four, 
and  the  other  to  the  last  three.  *'  Blessed  are  they  which  are 
persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake;  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."  This  does  not  go  beyond  the  blessed  state  of  things 
that  the  power  of  God  will  bring  in  over  the  earth  in  connection 
with  the  Messiah.  Being  rejected,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
His,  only,  as  it  were,  with  a  stronger  and  deeper  title — certainly 
with  the  means  of  blessing  by  grace  for  the  lost.  A  suffering 
and  despised  Messiah  is  still  dearer  to  the  heart  of  God  than  if 
one  could  conceive  Him  received  all  at  once.     And  if  He  does 


82        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

not  lose  the  kingdom  because  He  Avas  persecuted,  neither  do 
they.  "Blessed  are  they  which  are  persecuted  for  righteous- 
ness' sake;  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Persecuted, 
not  merely  by  the  Gentiles  or  by  the  Jews,  but  for  righteous- 
ness' sake.  Do  not  be  looking  at  the  people  that  persecute  you, 
but  at  the  reason  why  you  are  persecuted.  If  it  is  because  you 
desire  to  be  found  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  blessed  are 
you.  You  fear  to  sin — you  suffer  for  it.  Blessed  are  they 
which  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake  :  they  will  have  their  por- 
tion under  the  Messiah  Himself. 

But  now  we  have,  finally,  another  blessedness.  And  mark 
the  change.  "  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you,  and 
persecute  you,  and  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you 
falsely  for  my  sake."  This  change  toyg  is  exceedingly  precious. 
It  is  not  merely  put  in  an  abstract  form — "  blessed  are  they ;" 
but  it  is  a  personal  thing.  He  looks  at  the  disciples  there, 
knows  what  they  were  to  go  through  for  His  sake,  and  gives 
them  the  highest  and  nearest  place  in  His  love.     "  Blessed  are 

ye  when  men  shall  revile  you,  and  persecute  you for  my 

sake."  It  is  not  now  for  righteousness'  sake,  but  "  for  my  sake." 
There  is  something  still  more  precious  than  righteousness,  and 
that  is  Christ.  And  when  you  have  Christ,  you  can  have  no- 
thing higher.  Blessed  indeed  to  be  persecuted  for  His  sake ! 
The  difference  is  just  this  :  when  a  man  suffers  for  righteous- 
ness' sake,  it  supposes  tliat  some  evil  has  been  put  before  him, 
which  he  refuses.  He  would  have  perhaps  to  subscribe  some- 
thing against  his  conscience,  and  he  cannot  do  it  nor  would  dare. 
He  is  offered  a  tempting  bait,  but  it  involves  that  which  he 
knows  is  contrary  to  God.  All  is  in  vain  :  the  tempter's  object 
is  seen.  Righteousness  prevails,  and  he  suffers.  He  not  only 
loses  what  is  offered,  but  he  is  evil  spoken  of  too.  Blessed  are 
they  who  suffer  thus  for  righteousness'  sake  !  But  for  Clu-ist's 
sake  is  a  totally  different  thing.  There  the  enemy  essays  great 
execution.  He  tempts  the  soul  with  such  questions  as  these  :  is 
there  any  reason  why  you  should  speak  about  Jesus  and  the 
gospel  ?  There  is  no  need  for  being  so  zealous  for  the  truth. 
Why  go  out  of  your  way  so  far  for  this  person  or  that  thing  ? 


CHAPTER  V.  83 

Now,  in  these  cases  it  is  not  a  question  of  a  sin,  open  or  covert. 
For  in  the  case  of  suffering-  for  Christ's  sake,  it  is  the  activity 
of  grace  that  goes  out  to  others.     It  is  not  a  question  of  righte- 
ousness, but  answers  to  the  last  three  of  the  seven  beatitudes. 
A  soul  that  is  filled  with  a  sense  of  mercy  cannot  refrain  his 
lips.     He  who  knows  what  God  is  could  not  be  silent  merely 
because  of  what  men  think  or  do.     Blessed  are  ye  who  thus 
suffer  for  the  sake   of  Christ's   name  !     The   power  of  grace 
prevails  there.     Too  often  alas  !  motives  of  prudence  come  in  : 
people  are  afraid  of  giving  offence  to  others — of  losing  influence 
for  self — of  spoiling  the  prospect  of  the  children,  &c.     But  the 
energy  of  grace  looks  at  all  this,  and  still  says,  Christ  is  worth 
infinitely  more ;   Christ  commands  my    soul    for   this :  I  must 
follow  Him.     In  suffering  for  righteousness'  sake,  a  soul  eschews 
evil,  earnestly  and  peremptorily,  committing  itself  at  all  cost  to 
what  is  right ;  but  in  the  other,  it  discerns  the  path  of  Christ — 
that  which  the  gospel,  the  worship,  or  the  will  of  the  Lord  calls 
to,  and  at  once  throws  itself  with  its  whole  heart  on  the  Lord's 
side.     Then  comes  in  the  comfort  of  that  sweet  word,  "  Blessed 
are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you,  and  persecute  you  ....  for  my 
sake."     For  the  Lord  could  not  refrain  the  expression  of  His 
soul's  delight  in  His  saints  :  "  Blessed  are  ye  .  .  .  Rejoice,  and  be 
exceeding  glad;  for  great  is  your  reward  in  heaven."     Observe 
it  is  not  now  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  "  in  heaven."     He 
identifies  these  with  a  higher  place  altogether.     It  is  not  only 
the  power  of  God  over  the  earth,  and  His  giving  them  a  portion 
here  ;  but  it  is  taking  them  out  of  the  eartlily  scene  to  be  with 
Himself  above.     "  For  so  persecuted  they  the  prophets  which 
were  before  you."     What  an  honour  to  follow^  in  earthly  rejec- 
tion and  scorn  those  who  preceded  us  in  special  communion 
with  God — the  heralds  of  Him  for  whom  we  suffer  now  !     We 
may  clearly,  then,  consider  that  these  two  final  blessednesses, 
the  persecutions  for  righteousness'  sake  and  for  Christ's  sake, 
answer   respectively   to   the    first    four    blessings   and   to    the 
last  three. 

In  Luke,  where  we  have  these  blessings  brought  before  us,  we 
have  none  for  righteousness'  sake — only  for  His  name's  sake. 


84  LECTUEES   ON  THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

Hence  in  all  the  cases  it  is,  "  Blessed  are  ?/g."  To  some  it  may 
seem  a  delicate  shade,  but  the  difference  is  characteristic  of  the 
two  gospels.  Matthew  takes  in  the  largest  view,  and  specially 
that  view  of  the  principles  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  which 
was  suited  to  the  understanding  of  a  Jew,  to  bring  him  out  of 
his  mere  Judaism,  or  to  shew  him  higher  principles.  Luke, 
whatever  the  principles  are,  gives  them  all  under  the  form  of 
grace,  and  treats  them  as  our  Lord's  direct  addresses  to  the  dis- 
ciples before  Him — "  Blessed  are  ye.''''  Even  if  he  takes  up  the 
subject  of  the  poor,  he  drops  the  abstract  form  of  Matthew,  and 
makes  it  all  personal.  Everything  is  connected  with  the  Lord 
Himself,  and  not  merely  with  righteousness.  This  is  exceed- 
ingly beautiftil.  And  if  we  pursue,  further,  the  next  few  verses 
which  give,  not  so  much  the  characteristics  of  the  people  as 
their  general  attitude  in  the  world — the  place  in  which  they  are 
set  in  the  earth  by  God,  we  have  it  in  a  very  few  words,  and 
strongly  confirming  the  distinction  which  has  been  drawn  between 
righteousness  and  Christ's  name's  sake.  Also,  if  you  examine 
the  First  Epistle  of  Peter,  you  will  find  this  remarkably  corro- 
borated there  also. 

"  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth."  Salt  is  the  only  thing  that 
cannot  be  salted,  because  it  is  the  preservative  principle  itself; 
but  if  this  is  gone,  it  cannot  be  replaced.  "  If  the  salt  have 
lost  his  savour,  wherewith  shall  it  be  salted?"  Tlie  salt  of  the 
earth  is  the  relation  of  the  disciples  here  to  that  which  already 
had  the  testimony  of  God,  and  therefore  the  expression  "  earth" 
or  "  land,"  which  was  specially  true  of  the  Jewish  land  then. 
If  you  speak  about  the  earth  now,  it  is  Christendom — the  place 
that  enjoys,  either  really  or  professedly,  the  light  of  God's  truth. 
Tliis  is  what  may  be  called  the  earth.  And  this  is  the  place 
which  will  finally  be  the  scene  of  the  greatest  apostasy ;  for 
such  evil  is  only  possible  where  light  has  been  enjoyed  and 
departed  from.  In  the  Revelation,  where  the  closing  results  of 
the  age  are  given,  the  earth  appears  in  a  most  solemn  manner ; 
and  then  we  have  the  peoples,  and  multitudes,  and  nations,  and 
tongues — what  we  should  call   heathen  lands.     But  the  earth 


CHAPTER  V.  85 

means  the  once-favoured  scene  of  professing  Christianity,  where 
there  have  been  all  the  energies  of  the  mind  of  men  at  Avork, 
the  scene  where  the  testimony  of  God  had  once  shed  its  light, 
then  alas  !  abandoned  to  utter  apostasy. 

"  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth."  They  were  the  real  preser- 
vative principle  there  :  all  the  rest,  the  Lord  intimates,  were 
good  for  nothing.  But  more  than  that.  He  gives  a  solemn 
warning  that  there  is  a  danger  that  the  salt  should  lose  its 
savour.  He  is  not  now  speaking  of  the  question  of  whether  a 
saint  can  fall  away  or  not.  People  go  with  their  own  questions 
to  scripture,  and  pervert  the  word  of  God  to  suit  their  previous 
thoughts.  The  Lord  is  not  raising  the  question  whether  life  is 
ever  lost ;  but  He  is  speaking  of  certain  persons  who  are  in  a 
given  position ;  and  among  them  there  might  be  persons  who 
had  taken  it  heedlessly  or  even  falsely,  and  then  there  would  be 
the  fading  away  of  all  that  they  had  once  possessed.  He  an- 
nomices  their  judgment — the  most  contemptuous  possible — to  be 
passed  upon  that  which  took  so  high  a  place  without  reality. 
And  so  it  will  be  still  more  evidently  yet. 

"  Ye  are  the  lieht  of  the  world."  This  is  another  thing. 
Bearing  in  mind  the  distinction  drawn  in  the  series  of  the 
beatitudes  and  of  the  persecutions,  we  have  the  key  to  these  two 
verses.  Tlie  salt  of  the  earth  represents  the  righteous  principle. 
This  evidently  involves  the  clinging  to  the  eternal  rights  of 
God  and  the  maintenance  before  the  world  of  what  is  due  to 
His  character ;  but  it  was  gone  when  what  bore  the  name  of 
God  fell  below  what  even  men  thought  proper.  You  can  hardly 
read  a  newspaper  now  but  what  you  find  scoffs  against  what  is 
called  religion.  All  respect  vanishes,  and  men  think  that  the 
condition  of  Christians  is  a  fair  subject  for  ridicule.  But  now, 
in  verse  14,  we  have  not  only  the  principle  of  righteousness,  but 
of  grace — the  outflowing  and  strength  of  grace.  And  hei'e  we 
find  a  new  title  given  to  the  disciples,  as  descriptive  of  their 
public  testimony  —  "the  light  of  the  world."  The  light  is 
clearly  that  which  diffuses  itself.  The  salt  is  what  ought  to  be 
inward,  but  the  light  is  that  which  scatters  itself  abroad.     "  A 


86  LECTUKES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

city  that  is  set  on  an  hill  cannot  be  hid."  There  was  a  diffusion ' 
of  its  testimony  everywhere.  Man  does  not  light  a  candle  to  put 
it  under  a  corn  measure,  but  on  a  candlestick,  "  and  it  giveth 
light  unto  all  that  are  in  the  house."  After  this  manner  let  your 
light  shine  before  men,  "  that  they  may  see  your  good  works 
and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven."     Mark  it  well. 

We  have  looked  at  these  two  striking  sketches  of  the 
testimony  of  believers  here  below,  as  the  salt  of  the  earth,  the 
preservative  energy  in  the  midst  of  profession  ;  and  as  the  light 
of  the  world  going  out  in  activity  and  love  towards  the  poor 
Avorld ;  and  the  danger  of  the  salt  losing  its  savour,  and  of  the 
light  being  put  under  a  bushel.  Now  we  find  the  great  object 
of  God  in  this  twofold  testimony.  It  is  not  merely  a  question 
of  the  blessing  of  souls,  for  there  is  not  a  word  about  evangeli- 
zation or  saving  sinners,  but  of  the  walk  of  saints.  There  is  a 
grave  question  that  God  raises  about  His  saints,  and  this  is 
about  their  own  ways  apart  from  other  people.  Calls  to  the 
unconverted  we  find  abundantly  elsewhere,  and  none  can  exag- 
gerate their  importance  for  the  world  ;  but  the  sermon  on  the 
mount  is  God's  call  to  the  converted.  It  is  their  character, 
their  position,  their  testimony  distinctively ;  and  if  others  are 
thought  of  throughout,  it  is  not  so  much  a  question  of  winning 
them,  as  of  the  saints  reflecting  what  comes  from  above.  This 
light  is  what  comes  from  Christ.  It  is  not,  let  your  good  works 
shine  before  men.  When  people  talk  about  this  verse,  they  are 
usually  thinking  about  their  own  works,  and  when  that  is  the 
case,  there  are  generally  no  good  works  at  all ;  but  even  if  there 
were,  works  are  not  light.  Light  is  that  which  comes  from  God 
directly  and  purely  without  admixture  of  man.  Good  works 
are  the  fruit  of  its  action  upon  the  soul ;  but  it  is  the  light  which 
is  to  shine  before  men.  It  is  the  disciple's  confession  of  Him- 
self; that  is  the  point  before  God.  Confess  Christ  in  everything. 
Let  this  be  the  aim  of  your  heart.  It  is  not  merely  certain 
things  to  be  done.  The  light  shining  is  the  great  object  here, 
though  doing  good  ought  to  flow  from  it.  If  I  make  doing 
good  everything,  it  is  a  lower  thought  than  that  which  is  before 
the   mind  of  God.     An  infidel  can  feel  that  a  shivering  man 


CHAPTER  V.  87 

needs  a  coat  or  a  blanket.  The  natural  man  may  be  fully  alive 
to  the  wants  of  others  ;  but  if  I  merely  take  these  works  and 
make  them  the  prominent  aim,  I  really  do  nothing  more  than 
an  unbeliever  might  The  moment  you  make  good  works  the 
object,  and  their  shining  before  men,  you  find  yourself  on 
common  ground  with  Jews  and  heathen.  God's  people  are  apt 
thus  to  destroy  their  testimony.  What  so  bad  in  the  way  of  a 
thing  done  professedly  for  God,  as  a  work  that  leaves  out  Christ, 
and  that  shews  a  man  who  loves  Christ  to  be  on  comfortable 
terms  with  those  that  hate  Him  ?  This  is  what  the  Lord  warns 
the  saints  against.  They  are  not  to  be  thinking  about  their 
works,  but  that  the  light  of  God  should  shine.  Works  will 
follow,  and  much  better  works  than  where  a  person  is  always 
occupied  Avith  them.  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that 
they  ma}'  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which 
is  in  heaven."  (Ver.  16.)  Let  your  confession  of  what  Grod  is 
in  His  nature  and  of  what  Christ  is  in  His  own  person  and  ways 
— let  your  acknowledgment  of  Him  be  the.  tiling  that  is  felt  by, 
and  brought  before,  men ;  and  then,  when  they  see  your  good 
works,  they  will  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  Li- 
stead  of  saying.  What  a  good  man  such  an  one  is,  they  will 
glorify  God  on  his  behalf.  If  your  light  shines,  men  then 
connect  what  you  do  with  your  confession  of  Christ. 

The  Lord  grant,  then,  that  this,  as  it  is  the  word  and  the 
will  of  Christ,  may  be  that  to  which  we  surrender  ourselves, 
and  which  we  desire,  above  all  things,  for  our  own  souls  and  for 
tliose  who  are  dear  to  us ;  and  if  we  see  the  forgetfulness  of  it 
in  any  saints  of  God,  may  we  remember  them  in  priayer,  and 
seek  to  help  them  by  the  testimony  of  His  truth  which,  if  it 
does  not  carry  the  heart  with  it,  may  at  least,  more  or  less,  reach 
the  conscience,  and  be  remembered  another  time  ! 

We  have  seen  our  Lord's  statement  of  the  character  and  then 
of  the  position  proper  to  the  heirs  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
We  have  found  Him  pronouncing  those  "blessed"  whom  man 
would  have  counted  it  folly  to  have  so  thought.  Our  Lord  has 
shewn  us  the  perfect  pattern  of  the  same  blessedness ;  for  what 


88  LECTUKES    ON   THE    GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

could  liave  sounded  more  unreasonable,  specially  to  a  Jew,  than 
to  hear  one  deliberately  and  emphatically  call  those  blessed  and 
happy,  who  were  despised,  scorned,  hated,  persecuted,  yea, 
thought  ill  of,  and  treated  as  malefactors?  No  doubt  it  was 
expressly  for  righteousness'  sake  and  Christ's  sake.  But  then, 
to  the  Jew,  the  coming  and  reception  of  the  Messiah  were  ever 
looked  forward  to  as  the  crown  of  his  joy — that  most  auspicious 
event  on  which  all  was  to  turn  for  Israel,  both  as  to  the  accom- 
plishment of  God's  promises  made  to  the  fathers,  and  the 
fulfilment  of  the  magnificent  predictions  which  involve  the 
overthrow  of  their  enemies,  and  the  humiliation  of  every  Gentile 
and  the  glory  of  Israel.  .  And,  therefore,  to  suppose  that  the 
receiving  of  Him  who  was  the  Messiah  would  now  entail 
inevitable  shame  and  suffering  in  the  world,  was,  indeed,  an 
enormous  shock  to  all  their  most  cherished  expectations.  But 
our  Lord  insists  upon  it,  declaring  such  and  such  only  to  be 
blessed — blessed  with  a  new  kind  of  blessedness  far  beyond  what 
a  Jew  could  conceive.  And  this  is  part  of  the  privileges  into 
which  we,  too,  are  brought  by  faith  of  Christ.  The  instruction 
of  our  Lord,  in  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  only  comes  out  in 
stronger  forms  now  that  He  has  taken  His  place  in  heaven.  The 
enmity  of  man  has  also  come  out  to  its  full  measure.  It  has 
not  been  merely  the  world's  enmity.  The  Jews  themselves  were 
the  bitterest  persecutors  of  the  children  of  God.  And  so  the 
last  book  of  the  New  Testament  shews  us  that  those  who  take 
the  name  of  Jews,  without  the  present  living  reality,  would 
remain  to  the  end  the  most  hostile  to  all  true  testimony  of  Christ 
on  the  earth. 

In  the  portion  that  follows,  we  enter  on  a  most  important 
subject.  If  there  was  this  new  and  amazing  kind  of  blessedness, 
so  foreign  to  the  thoughts  of  Israel  after  the  flesh,  what  was 
the  relation  to  the  law  of  Christ's  doctrine,  and  of  the  new  state 
of  things  about  to  be  introduced?  If  Messiah  came  from  God, 
did  not  the  law  ?  It  was  given  by  Moses,  indeed,  but  from  the 
same  source.  If  Christ  brought  in  that  which  was  so  unexpected 
even  by  the  disciples,  what  would  be  the  bearing  of  this  truth 
upon  that  which  they  had  previously  received  through  God's 


CHAPTER  V.  89 

inspired  servants,  and  for  which  they  liad  His  own  authority  ? 
Weaken  the  authority  of  the  law,  and  it  is  clear  that  you  destroy 
the  foundation  on  which  the  gospel  rests,  because  the  law  was  of 
God,  as  certainly  as  the  gospel.  Hence  came  in  a  most  weighty 
question,  especially  for  an  Israelite :  what  was  the  bearing  of 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ  respecting  it, 
upon  the  precepts  of  the  law  ?  The  Lord  opens  this  subject 
(from  verse  17  to  the  end  of  the  chapter  we  have  the  question 
entered  into)  with  these  words  :  "  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to 
destroy  the  law  or  the  prophets."  They  might  have  thought  so 
from  the  fact  of  His  havino;  introduced  something  not  mentioned 
in  either;  but  "think  not,"  He  says,  "that  I  am  come  to 
destroy  the  law  or  the  prophets ;  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but 
to  fulfil."  I  take  this  word  "fulfil"  in  its  largest  sense.  Li 
His  own  person  the  Lord  fulfilled  the  law  and  the  prophets,  in 
His  own  ways,  in  righteous  subjection  and  obedience.  His  life 
here  below  exhibited  its  beauty  for  the  first  time  without  flaw. 
His  death  was  the  most  solemn  sanction  which  the  law  ever  did 
or  could  receive ;  because  the  curse  it  pronounced  upon  the 
guilty  the  Saviour  took  upon  Himself.  Eather  than  God 
should  have  dishonour  there  was  nothing  the  Saviour  would  not 
undergo.  "  But,  besides,  our  Lord's  words  warrant,  I  think,  a 
further  application.  There  is  an  expansion  of  the  law,  or 
ciKaiwjxa,  giving  to  its  moral  element  the  largest  scope,  so  that  all 
Avhich  was  honouring  to  God  in  it  should  be  brought  out  in  its 
fullest  power  and  extent.  The  light  of  heaven  was  now  let  fall 
upon  the  law,  and  the  law  interpreted,  not  by  weak,  failing  men, 
but  by  one  who  had  no  reason  to  evade  one  jot  of  its  require- 
ments ;  whose  heart,  full  of  love,  only  thought  of  the  honour 
and  the  will  of  God ;  whose  zeal  for  His  Father's  house 
consumed  Him  ;  and  who  restored  that  which  He  took  not  away. 
Who  but  He  could  expound  the  law  thus,  not  as  the  scribes,  but 
in  the  heavenly  light?  For  the  commandment  of  God  is 
exceeding  broad,  whether  we  look  at  the  end  of  all  perfection  in 
man,  or  the  sum  of  it  in  Christ. 

Far   from   annulling   the  law,   the    Lord,   on    the  contrary, 
illustrated  it  more  brightly  than  ever,  and  gave  it  a  spiritual 


90  LECTURES    ON    THE    GOSPEL    OF    MATTHEW. 

application  that  man  was  entirely  unprepared  for  before  He  came. 
And  this  is  what  the  Lord  proceeds  to  do  in  part  of  the  wonderful 
discourse  that  follows.  After  havino;  said  "  Till  heaven  and 
earth  pass,  one  jot  or  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  fi'om  the  law, 
till  all  be  fulfilled,"  He  adds,  "  Whosoever  therefore  shall  break 
one  of  these  least  commandments,  and  shall  teach  men  so,  he 
shall  be  called  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven :  but  whosoever 
do  and  teach  them,  the  same  shall  be  called  ffreat  in  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  For  I  say  unto  you,  that  except  your  righteousness 
shall  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees, 
ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 
(Ver.  18 — 20.)  Our  Lord  is  going  to  expand  the  great  moral 
principles  of  the  law  into  commandments  that  flow  from  Himself, 
and  not  merely  from  Moses,  and  shews  that  this  would  be  the 
great  thing  whereby  persons  would  be  tested.  It  would  no 
longer  be  a  question  of  the  ten  words  spoken  on  Sinai  merely ; 
but  while  recognizing  their  full  value.  He  w^as  about  to  open  out 
the  mind  of  God  in  a  way  so  much  deeper  than  had  ever  been 
thought  of  before,  that  this  would  henceforth  be  the  great  test. 

Hence  He  says,  when  referring  to  the  practical  use  of  these 
commandments  of  His,  "  Except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed 
the  righteousness  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  in  no 
case  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven" — an  expression  that  has 
not  the  smallest  reference  to  justification,  but  to  the  practical 
appreciation  of  and  walking  in  the  right  relations  of  the 
believer  towards  God  and  towards  men.  The  righteousness 
spoken  of  here  is  entirely  of  a  practical  kind.  This  will  strike 
many  persons  rather  sharply.  They  may  be  somewhat  perplexed 
to  understand  how  practical  righteousness  is  made  to  be  the 
means  of  entering  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But  let  me 
repeat,  the  sermon  on  the  mount  never  shews  us  how  a  sinner  is 
to  be  saved.  If  there  were  the  smallest  allusion  to  practical 
righteousness  where  a  sinner's  justification  is  concerned,  there 
would  be  ground  to  be  startled ;  but  there  can  be  none 
whatever  for  the  saint  who  understands  and  is  subject  to  God's 
AviU.  God  insists  upon  godl'ness  in  His  people.  "Without 
holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."     There  can  be  no  question 


CHAPTER   V.  91 

that  the  Lord  shews  in  John  xv.  that  the  unfruitful  branches 
must  be  cut  off,  and  that  just  as  the  withered  branches  of  the 
natural  vine  are  cast  into  the  fire  to  be  burned,  so  fruitless  pro- 
fessors of  the  name  of  Christ  can  look  for  no  better  portion. 

Bearing  fruit  is  the  test  of  life.  These  things  are  stated  in  the 
strongest  terms  all  through  scripture.  In  John  v.  28,  29  it  is 
said,  "  The  hour  is  coming  in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves 
shall  hear  his  voice,  and  shall  come  forth  ;  they  that  have  done 
good  unto  the  resurrection  of  life  ;  and  tlioy  that  have  done  evil 
unto  the  resurrection  of  damnation,"  or  "judgment."  Clearly, 
there  is  no  disguising  the  solemn  truth  that  God  will  and  must 
have  that  which  is  good  and  holy  and  righteous  in  His  own 
people.  They  are  not  God's  people  at  all  who  are  not  charac- 
terized as  the  doers  of  that  which  is  acceptable  in  His  sight.  If 
this  were  put  before  a  sinner  as  a  means  of  reconciliation  with 
God,  or  of  having  sins  blotted  out  before  Him,  it  would  be  the 
denial  of  Christ  and  of  His  redemption.  But  only  hold  fast 
that  all  the  means  of  being  brought  nigh  to  God  are  found  in 
Christ — that  the  sole  way  by  which  a  sinner  is  connected  with 
the  blessing  of  Christ  is  by  faith,  without  the  works  of  the  law 
— only  maintain  this,  and  there  is  not  the  least  inconsistency 
nor  difficulty  in  understanding  that  the  same  God  who  gives  a 
soul  to  believe  in  Christ,  works  in  that  soul  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  produce  what  is  practically  according  to  Himself.  For  what 
does  He  give  him  the  life  of  Christ  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  if 
only  the  remission  of  the  sins  were  needed  ?  But  God  is  not 
satisfied  with  this.  He  imparts  the  life  of  Christ  to  a  soul,  and 
He  gives  that  soul  a  divine  joerson  to  dw^ell  in  him  ;  and  as  the 
Spirit  is  not  the  spring  of  weakness  or  of  fear  "  but  of  power, 
and  of  love,  and  of  a  sound  mind,"  God  looks  for  suited  ways 
and  for  the  exercise  of  spiritual  wisdom  and  judgment  in 
passing  through  the  present  trying  scene. 

While  they  looked  up  with  ignorant  eyes  to  the  righteousness 
of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  our  Lord  declares  that  this  sort 
of  righteousness  will  not  do.  The  righteousness  that  goes 
up  to  the  temple  every  day,  that  prides  itself  upon  long 
prayers,  large  alms,  and  broad  phylacteries,  will  not  stand  in 


92  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

the  sight  of  God.  There  must  be  something  far  deeper  and 
more  according  to  the  holj,  loving  nature  of  God.  Because 
with  all  that  appearance  of  outward  religion,  there  might  be 
always,  as  there  generally  was  in  fact,  no  sense  of  sin,  nor  of 
the  grace  of  God.  This  proves  the  all-importance  of  being 
right,  first ^  in  our  thoughts  about  God  ;  and  we  can  only  be  so  by 
receiving  the  testimony  of  God  about  His  Son.  In  the  case  of 
the  Pharisees  we  have  sinful  man  denying  his  sin,  and  utterly 
obscuring  and  denying  God's  true  character  as  the  God  of 
grace.  These  things  were  rejected  by  the  outward  religionists, 
and  their  righteousness  was  such  as  you  might  expect  from 
people  who  were  ignorant  of  themselves  and  of  God.  It  gained 
reputation  for  them,  but  there  it  all  ended ;  they  looked  for 
their  reward  now,  and  they  had  it.  But  our  Lord  says  to  the 
disciples,  "  Except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed  the  righte- 
ousness of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 

Allow  me  to  ask  the  question  here,  How  is  it  that  God 
accomplishes  this  in  regard  to  a  soul  that  believes  now? 
There  is  a  great  secret  that  does  not  come  out  in  this  sermon. 
First  of  all,  there  is  a  load  of  unrighteousness  on  the  sinner. 
How  is  that  to  be  dealt  with,  and  the  sinner  to  be  made  fit  for 
and  introduced  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ?  He  is  born 
ao-ain  ;  he  acquires  a  new  nature,  a  life  which  as  much  flows 
from  the  grace  of  God  as  the  bearing  of  his  sins  hung  upon  the 
cross  of  Christ.  There  is  the  foundation  of  practical  righteous- 
ness. The  true  beginning  of  all  moral  goodness  in  a  sinner, 
as  it  has  been  said  and  as  it  deserves  to  be  often  repeated,  is 
the  sense  and  confession  of  his  lack  of  it,  nay,  of  his  badness. 
Never  have  we  anything  right  with  God  in  a  man  till  he  gives 
himself  up  as  all  wrong.  When  he  is  brought  down  to  this,  he 
is  thrown  upon  God,  and  God  reveals  Christ  as  His  gift  to  the 
poor  sinner.  He  is  morally  broken  down,  feeling  and  owning  that 
he  is  lost,  unless  God  appears  for  him  ;  he  receives  Christ,  and 
what  then?  "  He  that  believeth  hath  everlasting  life."  What 
is  the  nature  of  that  life  ?  In  its  character  perfectly  righteous 
and  holy.     The  man  is  then  at  once  fitted  for  God's  kingdom. 


CHAPTER  V.  ■  93 

*'  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom 
of  God."  But  when  he  is  born  again,  he  does  enter  there. 
"  Tiiat  whicli  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  that  which  is  born 
of  the  Spirit  is  spirit."  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  were  only 
working  on  and  by  the  flesli ;  they  did  not  believe  that  they 
were  dead  in  the  sight  of  God ;  neither  do  men  now.  But  what 
the  believer  begins  with  is,  that  he  is  a  dead  man,  that  he 
requires  a  new  life,  and  that  the  new  life  which  he  receives  in 
Christ  is  suitable  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  is  upon  this 
new  nature  that  God  acts,  and  works  by  the  Spirit  this  practical 
righteousness;  so  that  it  remains  in  every  sense  true,  ''Except 
your  righteousness  shall  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  scribes 
and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  heaven." 

But  the  Lord  does  not  here  explain  how  this  would  be.  He 
declares  that  what  was  suitable  to  God's  nature  was  not  to  be 
found  in  human  Jewish  righteousness,  and  that  it  must  be  for 
the  kingdom. 

Now  He  takes  up  the  law  in  its  various  parts,  at  least  what 
has  to  do  with  men.  Here  He  does  not  enter  into  what  touches 
God  directly,  but  first  of  all  takes  up  that  which  flows  from  human 
violence,  and  after  this  the  great  flagrant  example  of  human 
corruption  ;  for  violence  and  corruption  are  the  two  standing 
forms  of  human  iniquity.  Before  the  flood  even  such  was  the 
condition  of  men  :  "  The  earth  was  corrupt  before  God,  and  the 
earth  was  filled  with  violence."  Here  then  in  verse  21  we  have 
the  light  of  the  kingdom  cast  on  the  command,  "  Thou  shalt 
not  kill:  and  whosoever  shall  kill  shall  be  in  danger  of  the 
judgment."  Tlie  law  took  cognizance  of  this  extreme  form 
of  violence ;  but  our  Lord  gives  length,  breadth,  height,  and 
depth  to  it.  "  But  I  say  unto  you,  that  whosoever  is  angry 
with  his  brother  without  a  cause  shall  be  in  danger  of  the 
judgment :  and  whosoever  shall  say  to  his  brother,  Raca,  shall 
be  in  danger  of  the  council :  but  whosoever  shall  say.  Thou 
fool,  shall  be  in  danger  of  hell  fire."  (Ver.  22.)  That  is,  our 
Lord  treats  as  now  coming  under  the  same  category  with 
murder  in  the  sight  of  God  every  kind  of  violence,  and  feelinw 


94  LECTURES   ON  THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

and  expression,  anything  of  contempt  and  hatred,  whatever 
expresses  the  ill-feeling  of  the  heart,  any  putting  down  of 
another,  the  will  to  annihilate  others  as  far  as  character  or 
influence  is  concerned  :  all  this  is  no  better  than  murder  in 
God's  searching  eye.  He  is  expanding  the  law  ;  He  is  shewing 
now  One  who  looks  at  and  iudsres  the  feelino-  of  the  heart. 
Therefore,  it  is  not  at  all  a  question  merely  of  the  conse- 
quences of  violence  to  a  man — for  there  might  be  no  very  bad 
effect  produced  by  these  words  of  anger,  but  they  proved  the 
state  of  the  heart ;  and  this  is  what  the  Lord  is  dealing  with 
here.  "  Therefore  if  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,  and  there 
rememberest  that  thy  brother  hath  aught  against  thee,  leave 
there  thy  gift  before  the  altar,  and  go  thy  way :  first  be 
reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and  then  come  and  offer  thy  gift." 
(Ver.  23,  24.)  He  is  not  yet  manifesting  the  Christian  in  his 
entire  separation  from  the  Jewish  system.  These  words  clearly 
shew  a  connection  with  Israel,  though  the  principle  of  a 
Christian ;  for  the  altar  has  no  reference  to  the  Lord's  table. 

"Agree  with  thine  adversary  quickly,  whilst  thou  art  in  the 
way  with  him ;  lest  at  any  time  the  adversary  deliver  thee  to 
the  judge,  and  the  judge  deliver  thee  to  the  officer,  and  thou  be 
cast  into  prison.  "  Verily,  I  say  unto  thee.  Thou  shalt  by  no 
means  come  out  thence,  till  thou  hast  paid  the  uttermost 
farthing."  (Ver.  25,  26.)  I  believe  that  Israel  were  guilty  of 
that  very  folly — Israel  as  a  people — that  they  did  not  agree  with 
the  adversary  quickly.  There  was  the  Messiah,  and  they,  being 
adversaries  of  Him,  treated  Him  as  their  adversary  and  com- 
pelled God  to  be  against  them  by  their  unbelief.  The  position 
of  Israel  morally,  in  the  sight  of  God,  was  very  much  the  one 
shewn  us  here.  There  was  a  murderous  feeling  in  their  heart 
against  Jesus.  Herod  was  the  expression  of  it  at  His  birth  and 
it  went  through  all  the  ministry  of  Christ ;  as  the  cross  proved 
how  utterly  there  was  that  unrelenting  hatred  in  the  heart 
of  the  Jews  against  their  own  Messiah.  They  did  not  agree 
with  their  adversary  quickly,  and  the  judge  could  only  deliver 
them  to  the  officer  to  be  cast  into  prison  ;  and  there  they 
remain  until  this  day.     The  Jewish  nation,  from  their  rejection 


CHAPTER  V.  95 

of  the  Messiah,  have  been  shut  out  from  all  the  promises  of  God  ; 
as  a  nation  they  have  teen  committed  to  prison,  and  there  they 
must  remain  till  the  uttermost  farthing  is  paid.  In  Isaf  ah  we  have 
the  Lord  speaking  comfortably  to  Jerusalem  :  "  Cry  unto  her 
that  her  warfare  is  accomplished,  that  her  iniquity  is  pardoned  • 
for  she  hath  received  of  the  Lord's  hand  double  for  all  her  sins." 
Thus,  while  we  come  into  His  favour  now,  while  we  through 
the  grace  of  God  receive  the  fulness  of  blessing  through  Christ 
Jesns  now,  yet  I  cannot  doubt  that  there  is  rich  blessing  in 
store  for  Jerusalem.  For  God  in  His  mercy  will  one  day  say  to 
her.  You  have  had  punishment  enough  :  I  do  not  mean  to  make 
you  any  longer  the  witness  of  My  vengeance  on  the  earth. 
And  why  is  Israel  not  permitted  to  this  day  to  amalgamate  with 
the  nations?  There  they  remain,  kept  apart  from  all  other 
people  by  God.     But    God   has  in  store  for  them  His  signal 

mercy.      "  Speak  ye  comfortably  to  Jerusalem for  she 

hath  received  at  the  Lord's  hand  double  for  all  her  sins."  Thig 
figure  we  find  elsewhere  beautifully  set  forth  in  the  case  of  the 
man  guilty  of  blood,  who  fled  to  the  city  of  refuge  provided  by 
God.  And  the  book  of  Numbers  teaches  that  there  the  man 
abode,  out  of  the  land  of  his  possession,  till  the  death,  not  of 
the  manslayer,  but  of  the  high  priest  that  is  anointed  with  oil. 
The  priesthood  of  our  Lord  is  referred  to  there.  When  the 
Lord  has  completed  His  heavenly  people  and  gathered  them  in 
where  they  do  not  need  the  activity  of  His  intercession ;  when 
we  are  in  the  full  results  of  all  that  Christ  has  wrought  for  us, 
the  High  Priest  sliall  then  take  His  place,  no  longer  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  but  us  the  Priest  on  His  own  throne.  Then  will 
be  the  termination  of  His  present  heavenly  priesthood,  and  blood- 
guilty  Israel  will  return  to  the  land  of  their  possession.  I  have 
no  doubt  that  this  is  the  just  application  of  that  beautiful  type. 
I  cannot  understand  what  proper  interpretation  there  could  be 
of  the  death  of  the  High  Priest  anointed  with  oil,  if  you  appro- 
priate it  to  a  Christian  now  ;  but  apply  it  to  the  Jew,  and 
nothing  is  plainer.  Christ  will  terminate  that  character  of 
priesthood  that  He  is  engaged  in  for  us  now  and  will  enter  on 
a  new  form  of  blessing;  for  Israel. 


96  LECTURES    ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

We  have  then  the  Lord  closing  this  subject  with  the  Hght  that 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  throws  upon  the  sin  of  kiUing,  and  the 
extension  of  the  sin  to  every  expression  of  the  heart's  anger. 
This  is  a  very  solemn  thing  when  we  know  how  little  importance 
we  attach  to  our  words,  and  how  apt  we  are  to  excuse  any 
explosion  of  strong  feeling.  They  are  clearly  here  shewn  in 
their  full  contrariety  to  the  nature  of  God. 

But  there  is  another  thing — the  corrupt  element  that  is  in  the 
heart  of  man — the  heart  lusting  for  that  which  it  has  not. 
This  is  taken  up  in  the  next  word  of  our  Lord:  "Ye  have 
heard  that  it  was  said  by  them  of  old  time,  Thou  shalt  not 
commit  adultery  :  but  1  say  unto  you,  that  whosoever  looketh 
on  a  woman  to  lust  after  her,  hath  committed  adultery  with  her 
already  in  his  heart.     And  if  thy  right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it 

out  and  cast  it  from  thee And  if  thy  right  hand  offend 

thee,  cut  it  off,  and  cast  it  from  thee  :  for  it  is  profitable  for  thee 
that  one  of  thy  members  should  perish,  and  not  that  thy  whole 
body  should  be  cast  into  hell.  (Ver.  27 — 30.)  That  is,  what- 
ever in  our  walk,  or  in  our  ways,  or  in  our  service,  whatever  it 
might  be  that  exposes  a  soul  to  the  danger  of  yielding  to  these 
unholy  feelings,  should  never  be  spared.  There  must  be  the 
excision  of  everything  that  is  hurtful  to  the  soul,  the  members 
of  the  body,  such  as  the  eye  and  the  hand  being  only  used  as 
shewing  the  various  ways  in  which  the  heart  might  be  entangled, 
Tlie  cutting  off  of  these  members  sets  forth  a  heart  thoroughly 
exercised  in  self -judgment ;  riot  prompted  to  excuse  itself  by 
saying  that  it  had  not  actually  committed  the  sin,  but  whatever 
exposed  to  it  must  be  given  up.  Following  this,  our  Lord 
denounces  the  easy  dissolution  of  the  tie  of  marriage  :  "  It  hath 
been  said.  Whosoever  shall  put  away  his  wife,  let  him  give  her 
a  writing  of  divorcement.  But  I  say  imto  you,  that  whosoever 
shall  put  away  his  wife,  saving  for  the  cause  of  fornication, 
causeth  her  to  commit  adultery  :  and  whosoever  shall  marry  her 
that  is  divorced  committeth  adultery."  (Ver.  31,  32.)  Thus, 
our  Lord  shews  that  though  there  might  be  the  most  serious 
difficulties,  still  this  human  relationship  receives  the  strongest 


CHAPTER   V.  97 

sanction  of  the  Lord.  Though  an  earthly  relationship,  the  light 
of  heaven  is  thrown  upon  it,  the  sanctity  of  marriage  held  up, 
and  the  possibility  of  allowing  anything  to  interfere  with  its 
holiness  entirely  put  down  by  Christ,  save  only  where  there  was 
that  which  interrupted  it  in  the  sight  of  God,  in  which  case  the 
act  of  separation  would  be  only  a  declaration  of  its  being  broken 
by  sin  in  the  sight  of  God  already. 

The  next  case  (ver  33 — 37)  brings  us  into  a  diflFerent  order  of 
things  :  it  is  the  use  of  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Here  the  refer- 
ence is  not  to  a  judicial  oath,  i.e.,  an  oath  administered  by  a 
magistrate.  Li  some  countries  this  might  savour  of  heathenism 
or  popery,  and  no  Christian  ought  to  take  such  an  oath.  But 
if  the  declaration  were  simply  the  authority  of  God  introduced 
by  the  magistrate  to  declare  the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and 
nothing  but  the  truth,  I  do  not  see  that  the  Lord  in  any  wise 
absolves  the  Christian  from  his  obligation  to  competent 
authority.  The  matter  here  is  expressly  private  communication 
between  man  and  man.  "  Swear  not  at  all  ;  neither  by  heaven, 
for  it  is  God's  throne  ;  nor  by  the  earth,  for  it  is  his  footstool ; 
neither  by  Jerusalem,  for  it  is  the  city  of  the  great  king. 
Neither  shalt  thou  swear  by  thy  head,  because  thou  canst  not 
make  one  hair  white  or  black."  None  of  these  was  a  judicial 
oath ;  they  were  the  asseverations  of  common  life  among  the 
Jews.  If  our  Lord  had  meant  to  forbid  the  Christian  from 
taking  judicial  oaths,  would  He  not  have  instanced  the  oath  that 
was  usual  in  the  courts  of  those  days  ?  But  it  was  not  so.  All 
the  oaths  that  He  brings  before  us  were  what  the  Jews  were  in 
the  habit  of  using  when  their  word  was  questioned  by  their 
fellow-men,  not  what  was  employed  before  the  magistrate.  For 
my  o^\^l  part,  so  far  from  thinking  that  a  Christian  is  doing- 
right  in  refusing  a  judicial  oath,  I  believe  that  he  is  doing  wrong 
not  to  take  it,  provided  the  magistrate  required  his  testimony, 
and  there  be  nothing  to  offend  conscience  in  the  form  of  the  oath. 
If  the  magistrate  does  not  acknowledge  God  in  the  oath,  still 
the  Christian  is  bound  to  acknowledge  God  in  the  magistrate. 
He  is  one  who   is,  to  the  Christian,  a  servant  of  God   in  the 


98-  LECTURES   ON   THE    GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

outward  things  of  this  world.  Even  the  Assyrian  was  the  rod 
of  God,  all  the  while  that  he  thought  only  of  carrying  out  his 
own  purposes  against  Israel.  Much  more  the  magistrate,  let 
him  be  who  or  what  he  may,  represents  the  truth  of  God's 
external  authority  in  the  world,  and  the  Christian  ought  to 
respect  this,  more  by  far  than  the  men  of  the  world,  and  therefore 
the  oath,  which  simply  demands  the  truth  on  the  ground  of  that 
authority,  is  a  holy  thing  and  not  to  be  refused.  The  Christian, 
doubtless,  has  no  business  with  prosecuting  another  himself. 
On  the  contrary,  he  owes  it  to  Christ  and  His  grace  to  let  the 
world,  if  it  will,  abuse  him ;  he  may  protest  by  word  against  it, 
and  then  leave  it  with  the  Lord.  When  our  Lord  Himself 
was  dealt  with  unrighteously.  He  convicts  the  person  of  it, 
and  there  it  ends,  as  man  would  think,  for  ever.  There  is  no 
such  thing  as  seeking  to  get  present  reparation  of  His  wrongs. 
So  should  it  be  with  Cliristians.  There  may  be  the  moral  con- 
viction of  those  that  do  the  wrong,  but  the  taking  it  patiently  is 
acceptable  with  God. 

There  is  no  way  in  which  the  Christian  so  shews  how  much 
he  is  above  the  world,  as  when  he  seeks  not  the  world's  vindica- 
tion in  anything.  If  we  belong  to  the  world,  we  ought  all  to  be 
volunteers.  If  the  world  is  our  home,  a  man  is  called  upon  to 
do  battle  for  it.  But  for  the  Christian  this  world  is  not  the 
scene  of  his  interests,  and  why  fight  for  what  does  not  belong  to 
him  ?  If  a  Christian  fight  in  and  with  the  world  (save  his  own 
spiritual  warfare),  he  is  a  mere  mercenary.  It  is  the  duty  of 
men,  as  such,  to  fight,  if  need  be,  and  repel  wrong ;  and  if  the 
Lord  uses  the  world  in  order  to  put  down  revolution  and  make 
,  peace,  the  Christian  may  well  look  up  and  give  thanks.  It  is  a 
great  mercy.  But  the  grand  truth  as  to  that,  which  the  believer 
has  to  get  firmly  settled  in  his  own  soul,  is  that  "  they  are  not 
of  the  world."  Up  to  what  measure  are  they  not  of  the  world  ? 
"They  are  not  of  the  world  even  as  /am  not  of  the  world.' 
In  John  xvii.,  where  our  Lord  repeats  this  wondrous  word,  He 
speaks  in  view  of  going  to  heaven,  as  if  He  no  longer  were  on 
earth  at  all.  Thus,  in  the  spirit  of  one  away  from  the  world. 
He  says,  ''  They  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the 


CHAPTER  V.  99 

world."  A  little  before  He  had  said,  "  Now  I  am  no  more  in 
the  world,"  His  going  up  to  heaven  is  what  gives  its  character 
to  the  Christian  and  to  the  Church.  A  Christian  is  not  merely 
a  believer,  but  a  believer  called  to  the  enjoyment  of  Christ  xohile 
He  is  in  heaven.  And,  as  Christ  our  Head  is  out  of  the  world, 
so  the  Christian  is  in  spirit  lifted  above  the  world,  and  his 
business  is  to  shew  the  streno;th  of  his  faith  as  above  his  mere 
natural  feeling.  Nothing  makes  a  man  look  so  foolish  as  having 
no  side  in  this  world.  Christians  do  not  like  to  be  nonentities  ; 
they  are  apt  to  wish  one  way  or  another  to  have  their  influence 
felt.  But  this  is  what  the  Lord  delivers  us  from.  It  is  natural 
in  men  who  are  desperately  clinging  to  the  only  scene  they 
possess  of  positive  enjoyment  or  of  real  hope. 

It  is  beloAv  our  calling,  then,  to  indulge  even  in  strong  state- 
ments. "  Let  your  communication  be,  Yea,  yea  ;  nay,  nay,  for 
whatsoever  is  more  than  these  cometh  of  evil."  (Ver.  37.)  It 
is  worthy  of  note,  as  a  practical  proof  of  the  distinction  here 
drawn,  how  our  Lord  acted  when  He  was  before  the  High 
Priest.  He  was  silent  till  the  high  priest  put  the  oath  to 
Him,  then  at  once  He  answers.  Who  can  doubt  that  He  shews 
us  the  right  pattern  there  ? 

But  He  comes  next  to  the  case  of  any  practical  injury  that 
may  be  done  us.  It  is  not  that  it  is  wrong  for  a  man  to  punish 
according  to  the  injury  that  ha'^  been  inflicted  upon  another. 
"  An  eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth  "  is  perfectly 
righteous ;  but  our  Lord  intimates  that  we  ouglit  to  be  much 
more  than  righteous,  we  ought  to  be  gracious  ;  and  He  presses  ^ 
this  as  the  climax  of  this  part  of  the  discourse.  First,  He  had 
strengthened  the  righteousness  of  the  law,  extended  its  depth, 
and  put  aside  its  license ;  but  now  He  goes  farther.  He  shews 
that  there  is  a  principle  in  His  own  ways  and  life  which  teaches 
the  Christian  that  he  is  not  to  seek  retaliation.  "  An  eye  for  an 
eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth  :  but  I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  resist 
not  evil :  but  whosoever  shall  smite  thee  on  thy  right  cheek,  turn 
to  him  the  other  also."  It  is  clear  the  Lord  has  no  reference 
here  to  what  governments  have  to  do.  The  New  Testament  is 
written  for  the  Christian,  for  that  which  has  a  separate  existence 


100  LECTURES   ON  THE   GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 

and  a  peculiar  calling  in  the  midst  of  earthly  systems  and  peoples. 
It  belongs  to  those  who  are  heavenly  while  they  are  walking 
through  the  earth.  We  become  such  by  the  reception  of  Christ 
now,  and  to  such  the  Lord  says,  "  Resist  not  evil ;  but  whoso- 
ever shall  smite  thee  on  thy  right  cheek,  turn  to  him  the  other 
also."  There  personal  injury  is  meant.  Perhaps  the  evil  to 
the  person  may  be  ever  so  intended  and  undeserved,  but  it  has  to 
be  overcome  with  good.  Shew  that  you  are  willing  to  take 
even  more  for  Christ's  sake.  "  And  if  any  man  will  sue  thee  at 
the  law,  and  take  away  thy  coat,  let  him  have  thy  cloak  also." 
There  the  law  is  evoked :  that  is,  a  man  lays  a  claim,  perhaps 
falsely,  to  one  part  of  your  clothing,  and  if  he  will  sue  thee  at 
the  law,  and  take  away  thy  coat,  "  let  him  have  thy  cloak  also." 
Here  it  seems  not  exactly  a  man  appealing  to  the  law,  but  the 
public  officers  themselves.  "  And  whosoever  shall  compel  thee 
to  go  a  mile,  go  with  him  twain."  The  great  principle  our  Lord 
marks  is  this — whether  it  is  human  violence,  or  the  law  applied 
ever  so  hardly  or  tryingly — that  while,  according  to  the  law,  you 
might  go  one  step,  according  to  the  gospel  you  would  go  two. 
Grace  does  twice  as  much  as  the  law,  whatever  may  be  the  point  in 
hand.  It  was  never  intended  in  any  wise  to  supplant  obligations 
or  to  lower  responsibilities,  but,  on  the  contrary,  to  give  power  and 
force  to  everything  that  is  righteous  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  law 
might  say,  "  an  eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth."  Here 
there  is  not  only  the  endurance  of  that  which  is  positively  wrong, 
but  grace  that  gives  more  than  is  asked.  "  The  law  was  given 
by  Moses;  but  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ."  And 
this  is  one  way  of  practically  shewing  how  far  we  value  grace. 
It  is  not  a  question  of  the  mere  letter  of  our  Lord's  words.  If 
you  were  to  limit  it  merely  to  a  blow  on  the  face,  it  would  be  a 
very  poor  thing ;  but  the  word  of  Christ  is  that  which  conveys 
to  me  the  spirit  that  pleases  God,  and  gives  me  the  reality  of 
grace.  And  grace  is  not  the  vindication  of  self,  nor  the  punish- 
ment of  a  wrong  that  is  done,  but  the  endurance  of  evil,  and 
the  triumph  of  good  over  it.  Christ  is  speaking  of  what  a 
Christian  has  to  put  up  with  from  the  world  through  which  he 
passes.     He  is  to  receive  tribulation  as  the  discipline  which  God 


CHAPTER   V.  101 

sees  to  be  good  for  his  soiil ;  the  great  spectacle  before  men  and 
angels — that  there  are  men  on  this  earth  who  are  allowed  and 
rejoice  to  sutler  for  Christ,  because  they  have  learned  to  give 
up  their  own  will,  to  sacrifice  their  own  rights,  and  to  suffer 
wrongfully,  looking  onward  to  the  day  when  the  Lord  will  own 
whatever  has  been  their  sorrow  for  His  sake,  and  when  all  evil 
shall  be  judged  most  solemnly  at  His  appearing  and  kingdom. 

Our  Lord  had  said,  in  verse  42,  "  Give  to  him  that  asketh 
thee,  and  from  him  that  would  borrow  of  thee,  turn  not  thou 
away."  It  is  merely  a  particular  example  of  a  great  general 
principle  that  the  Lord  is  insisting  upon  ;  and  as  He  had  laid 
bare  the  character  of  violence,  so  here  of  another  thing — the 
solicitation  that  addresses  itself  to  the  kindness  of  heart  of  a 
christian  man.  "  Give  to  him  that  asketh  thee."  Now,  no- 
thing can  be  more  certain  than  that  this  is  a  comely  and  a 
gracious  thing.  But  then  it  is  perfectly  plain  that  the  Lord 
had  not  the  least  idea  of  pressing  it  as  a  moral  principle  upon 
His  people,  that  the  thing  was  to  be  done  heedlessly,  and  as 
a  mere  gratification  of  their  feelings,  but  with  a  conscience 
towards  God.  Supposing  a  person  came  to  ask  you  for  some- 
thing, and  you  have  reason  to  think  that  he  would  spend  it 
improperly,  you  must  limit  it.  Why  not  ?  He  might  say  to 
you,  Did  not  the  Lord  enjoin,  "  Give  to  him  that  asketh  thee  ?" 
Certainly  ;  but  the  Lord  has  given  me  certain  other  words 
of  His,  by  which  I  judge  as  to  the  propriety  of  giving  in  each 
particular  case.  The  asker  might  be  going  to  do  that  which  I 
am  sure  would  be  absurd  or  wrong ;  am  I  still  to  give  ?  or  is 
there  not  at  once  introduced  another  principle,  namely,  due 
discrimination  ?  From  what  I  have  reason  to  believe,  perhaps 
from  what  he  that  asks  tells  me,  I  find  out  that  he  has  plans  of 
his  own  which  I  believe  to  be  worldly :  am  I  to  gratify  his 
worldliness  ?  It  is  clear  that  what  the  Lord  has  in  view  is  real 
need ;  and  as  there  was  wont  to  be  excessive  indifference  to  this 
among  the  Jews  more  particularly,  as  indeed  such  is  apt  to  be 
the  case  always  and  everyAvhere,  the  Lord  not  merely  insists 
upon  the  Christian  helping  his  brother,  but  takes  up  the  broadest 
grounds,  and  urges  the  habit  of  generous  giving,  not,  of  course, 


102        LECTUEES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

for  anything  we  may  get  by  it,  but  out  of  a  present  energetic 
love  according  to  God. 

"  Give  to  him  that  asketh  thee."  We  all  know  that  there 
are  those  who  would  impose.  This  shuts  up,  and  often  hinders, 
pity  ;  though  it  may  be  oftener  still  an  excuse  for  it.  The  Lord 
is  guarding  against  the  snare,  and  shews  the  great  moral  value, 
for  our  own  souls  and  for  the  glory  of  God,  of  habitual, 
considerate,  ungnidging,  kindness  towards  the  distressed  in  this 
world.  Not  that  I  am  always  to  give  what  a  person  asks,  for  he 
may  seek  something  foolish ;  but  still  "  Give  to  him  that  asketh 
thee,  and  from  him  that  would  borrow  of  thee  turn  not  thou 
away."  Do  you  count  up  how  often  you  have  been  deceived  ? 
Even  then  why  be  sore  ?  You  are  entitled,  at  the  word  of  Jesus, 
to  do  Avhat  you  do  to  your  Father.  The  recei\  er  of  3^our  bounty 
may  apply  it  to  a  bad  use  :  that  is  Ms  responsibility.  /  am 
bound  to  cultivate  unsuspicious  generosity,  and  this  quite 
independent  of  mere  friendship.  Even  the  publicans  and 
sinners  are  kind  to  those  who  are  kind  to  them  :  human  nature 
in  its  most  degraded  form  is  capable  of  this ;  but  what  ought  a 
Christian  to  be  ?  Christ  determines  the  position,  conduct,  and 
spirit  of  the  Christian.  As  He  was  a  sufferer,  they  are  not  to 
resist  evil.  If  there  was  need,  the  Lord's  heart  went  out  to  it. 
They  might  turn  His  love  against  Himself,  and  use  the  gifts  of 
His  grace  for  their  own  purposes,  like  the  man  who  was  healed, 
throwing  aside  the  Lord's  Avarning  and  the  sense  of  His  benefits. 
But  the  Lord,  perfectly  knowing  it  all,  goes  on  steadfastly  in 
His  path  of  doing  good,  not  in  the  mere  vague  thought  of 
benevolence  to  man,  but  in  holy  service  of  His  Father.  He  did 
His  Father's  will ;  this  was  His  meat  and  drink,  and  so  it  should 
be  ours.  That  is,  there  is  not  the  slightest  thought  of  binding 
persons  in  a  mere  legal  way,  so  that  in  every  case  absolutely  we 
are  to  giA^e  what  is  asked.  This  the  flesh  might  do  to  the 
uttermost  without  divine  love,  and  without  real  profit.  (1  Cor. 
xiii.  3.)  Spiritual  wisdom,  the  word  of  God,  must  be  used 
by  us  to  judge  of  each  case  on  its  own  merits,  and  as  be- 
fore God.  But  still  the  general  principle  is  to  be  taken  in 
its   fullest   extent.     We   are   to   cultivate   this  habit   and   the 


CHAPTER  V.  103 

spirit  of  mind  that  it  flows  from,  looking  up  to  its  heavenly 
pattern  and  its  source. 

But  now  a  word  as  to  what  follows.  It  is  most  weighty,  the 
very  pith  and  essence  of  that  which  concerns  our  relation 
towards  others  here  below ;  the  great  active  principle  from 
which  all  right  conduct  flows.  This  is  the  question  of  the  true 
character  and  limits  of  love.  "  Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been 
said,  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour,  and  hate  thine  enemy." 
(Ver.  43.)  This  was  the  expression  that  the  Jews  drew  from 
the  general  tenor  of  the  law.  There  had  been  the  sanction  of 
God  for  the  extermination  of  their  enemies  ;  and  from  that  they 
drew  the  principle,  ^'  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour,  and  hate 
thine  enemy.  But  I  say  unto  you.  Love  your  enemies,  bless 
them  that  curse  you,  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  and  pray 
for  them  which  despitefully  use  you,  and  persecute  you."  It 
was  not  a  question  merely  about  loving  the  neighbour,  which 
was  a  duty  of  common  righteousness ;  but  here  was  a  thing  that 
no  righteousness  would  ever  have  discovered,  because  it  goes 
beyond  the  law — it  is  grace.  In  a  thousand  practical  instances, 
the  question  is  not  whether  the  thing  is  rigid.  We  often  hear 
Christians  asking,  Is  such  a  thing  wrong  ?  But  this  is  not  the 
sole  question  for  the  Christian.  He  is  never  at  liberty  to  do 
what  is  wrong,  and  most  surely  he  does  the  thing  that  is  right. 
But  supposing  there  is  a  wrong  done  him,  what  is  to  be  his 
feeling  then  ?  If  there  is  enmity  to  him  in  another,  what  is  he 
to  cherish  in  his  own  heart?     "  Love  your  enemies  ....  do  good 

to  them  that  hate  you that  ye  may  be  the  children  of 

your  Father  which  is  in  heaven;"  thus  they  shew  that  they 
belonged  to  such  a  parentage  in  practical  ways,  "  for  he  maketh 
his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good,  and  sendetli  rain  on 

the  just  and  on  the  unjust Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  even 

as  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect."  (Ver.  44 — 48.) 

This  has  no  reference  to  the  question  of  whether  there  is 
sin  in  our  nature  or  not.  There  is  always  the  evil  principle  in 
a  man  as  long  as  he  lives  here  below.  But  what  the  Lord 
insists  on  is  this  :  Our  Father  is  the  perfect  pattern  in  His 
ways  with  His  enemies  now,  and  He  calls  upon  us  to  l^e  thorough 


104  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

in  that  same  grace  and  love  in  which  our  Father  deals.     It  is 
in  pointed  contrast  with  the  Jew,  or  with  anything  that  had 
ever  been  introduced  before.     Abraham  was  not  called  to  walk 
in  this  way.     He  was,  I  believe,  justified  in  arming  his  servants 
for  the  recovery  of  Lot ;  as  were  the  Israelites  in  taking  up  the 
sword  against  the  Canaanites.     But  we  are  never  so  to  feel  or 
act  under  any  circumstances.     We  are  called  on  (as  the  rule  of 
christian  life,  as  that  which  governs  our  thoughts  and  feelings 
and  ways,  and  supplies  us  with  true  feelings  for  our  guidance 
day  by  day)  to  walk  upon  the  principle  of  gracious  long-suffer- 
ing.    We  are  in  the  midst  of  the  enemies  of  Christ,  of  our 
enemies  too  because  of  Him.     It  may  not  come  out  at  once  nor 
always.     Persecution  may  pass  out  of  fashion,  but  the  enmity 
is  always  there ;  and  if  God  were  only  to  remove  certain  re- 
straints, the  old  hatred  would  burst  out  with  greater  violence 
than  ever.     Nevertheless,  there  is  only  one  course  open  to  the 
Christian  who  desires  to  walk  as  Christ  walked.     "  Love  your 
enemies,"  and  this  really,  not  by  a  show  of  smooth  ways  or 
words.     A  Christian  might  know  very  well  that,  in  certain  cases, 
to  go  and  speak  to  an  angry  person  would  only  draw  out  bitter- 
ness of  wrath,   and  there  the  right  course  would  be  to  keep 
away ;  but  under  all  circumstances  there  should  be  all  readiness 
to  seek  the  blessing  of  our  adversary.     To  do  real  kindness, 
even  if  it  should  never  be  known  by  a  creature  upon  earth, 
to  the  one  who  has  injiured  me,  is  the  only  thing  worthy  of  a 
christian  man  ;    and  this  we  are   called  upon  to  do,  specially 
towards  those  who  despise  and  persecute  us.     We  ought  to  ask 
the  Lord  to  give  us  the  opportunities  of  shewing  love  to  those 
that  hate  us.     When  the  provocation  occurs,  we  should  have  it 
settled  in  our  souls  that  the  Christian  is  here  for  the  purpose  of 
expressing  Christ ;  for,  indeed,  we  are  His  epistle,  known  and 
read  of  all  men.     We  ought  to  desire  to  reflect  what  Christ 
would  have  done  under  the  same  circumstances.     We  are  never 
at  liberty  to  indulge  in  anything  else. 

May  the  Lord  grant  that  this  may  be  true  of  our  own  souls, 
first  in  secret  feeling  with  Him,  and  then  as  manifested  lowlily 
and  unselfishly  towards  others.     Let  us  remember  that  there  is 


CHAPTER  VI.  105 

no  battle  for  us  that  is  ever  decisive  Avitli  others,  but  what  is  an 
outward  reflection  of  the  secret  victory  over  self  with  the  Lord. 
Begin  there,  and  it  is  surely  won  in  the  presence  of  men,  though 
we  may  have  to  wait  for  it. 


ii«=,o 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Now  we  come  to  another  thing.  Chapter  vi.  begins  with 
what  is  higher  even  than  what  we  have  had.  The  various 
exhortations  of  chapter  v.  brought  out  christian  principle,  in 
contradistinction  to  what  was  required  or  allowed  under  the  law. 
Henceforth  the  law  is  dropped  :  there  is  no  longer  any  allusion 
to  it  expressly  in  our  Lord's  discourse.  And  the  first  princij)le 
of  all  godliness  comes  out  now  in  its  sweetest  shape,  namely,  the 
having  to  do  with  our  Father  in  secret ;  who,  if  there  is  not 
another  soul  that  understands  us,  sees  all  that  is  passing  within 
and  around  us — hears  us  and  counsels  us,  as,  indeed.  He  takes 
the  deepest  interest  in  us.  Here  we  have  what  the  Lord  calls 
"our  righteousness."  It  is  not  merely  exhorting  the  saint 
against  the  evil  of  his  nature  in  every  form,  and  exhibiting  the 
holiness  that  the  Lord  introduces  now.  It  was  not  enouofh  to 
familiarize  the  soul  with  the  ways  of  love  even  in  its  outward 
dealings  with  the  worst  of  men.  Now  it  is  our  Father,  and  all 
takes  the  form  of  righteousness.  It  is  the  inner,  divine  relation- 
ship of  the  saint  that  comes  out  in  this  chapter — our  spiritual 
bonds  with  God  our  Father,  and  the  conduct  that  ought  to  flow 
from  them.  Hence  saj's  our  Lord,  ''  Take  heed  that  ye  do  not 
your  righteousness  before  men  to  be  seen  of  them."  I  take  the 
liberty  of  altering  the  word  "  alms"  into  "  righteousness" 
(ver.  1),  which  last  a  few  of  the  very  best  authorities  support. 
There  are,  of  course,  always  persons  that  difl^'er  here  as  elsewhere  ; 
but,  at  the  same  time,  internal  and  spiritual  reasons  confirm  the 
external  grounds.     Thus,  if  you  use  the  word  "  alms"  in  the 


106        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

first  verse,  is  there  not  a  mere  repetition  in  the  next  verse  ?  On 
the  other  hand,  take  the  word  as  "righteousness"  (so  the 
margin),  and  all  is  plain.  The  context  supports  it.  For  it 
will  be  observed,  in  the  following  verses,  our  Lord  divides 
righteousness  into  three  distinct  portions  :  first,  alms-giving  ; 
next,  prayer ;  thirdly,  fasting.  That  these  are  the  three  parts 
of  the  righteousness  of  the  saint,  as  viewed  by  our  Lord  in  this 
discourse,  is  evident.  (1.)  With  regard  to  alms,  which  was  a 
very  practical  thing,  the  principle  of  mercy  comes  in,  as  it 
might  not  in  all  cases  of  giving.  It  is  a  thing  done  seriously 
and  solemnly,  and  the  heart  is  drawn  out.  It  is  done  in  the 
sight  of  God.  The  universal  admonition  is  this:  "Take  heed 
that  ye  do  not  your  righteousness  before  men  to  be  seen  of  them, 
otherwise  ye  have  no  reward  of  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 
"  Therefore,"  founded  upon  this  exhortation,  "when  thou  doest 
thine  alms,"  which  was  one  branch  of  this  righteousness,  "  do 
not  sound  a  trumpet  before  thee  ;"  alluding  to  certain  ways 
of  notoriety  and  self-commendation  then  adopted  by  the  Jews, 
the  spirit  of  which  belongs  to  men  at  all  times.  There  are  few 
things  in  which  human  vanity  betrays  itself  more  glaringly  than 
the  desire  to  be  known  by  alms-giving.  And  what  is  it  that 
brings  the  true  deliverance  from  this  snare  of  nature?  "  When 
thou  doest  alms  (observe.  He  now  makes  it  entirely  individual), 
do  not  sound  a  trumpet  before  thee,  as  the  hypocrites  do  in  the 
synagogues,  and  in  the  streets,  that  they  may  have  glory  of  men. 
Verily  I  say  unto  you,  they  have  their  reward.  But  when  thou 
doest  alms,  let  not  thy  left  hand  know  what  thy  right  hand 
doeth  ;  that  thine  alms  may  be  in  secret ;  and  thy  Father  which 
seeth  in  secret,  himself  shall  reward  thee  openly."  (Ver.  2 — 4.) 
That  is,  it  is  not  merely  that  one  is  not  to  blazon  abroad  what  is 
done,  but  not  to  oneself  even.  Not  only  another's  left  hand  is 
not  to  know  what  your  right  hand  does,  but  7/our  own  left  hand 
ought  not.  Nothing  can  be  more  cutting  than  the  Lord's  words 
to  everything  like  self-gratulation.  Tlie  grand  point  is  this : 
that  all  be  done  to  our  Father.  It  is  not  a  question  of  duty 
simply  ;  but  our  Father's  love  has  been  brought  out,  and  this 
is  His  will  concerning  us.     He  knows  what  is  best,  and  we  are 


CHAPTER  VI.  107 

ignorant  of  it  We  might  think  to  supply  the  greatest  happi- 
ness by  surrounding  ourselves  with  what  we  most  like ;  but  the 
letting  slip  the  means  of  personal  enjoyment  will  open  to  us  fresh 
sources  of  blessing.  Besides,  what  we  ought  to  desire  is,  that 
the  alms  may  be  "  in  secret :  and  thy  Father  which  seeth  in 
secret,  himself  shall  reward  thee  openly."  We  shall  find  this 
repeated  at  every  point  of  what  is  here  called  our  "  righteous- 
ness." E-oom  is  ever  made  for  the  flesh  where  there  is  not  the 
cultivated  habit  of  what  is  done  being  between  our  Father  and 
ourselves.  Nay,  more,  our  Lord  would  have  us  dismiss  the  very 
thought  into  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  Avho  will  not  forget  it. 

(2.)  We  have  the  same  thing  as  to  prayer.  The  allusion  is, 
it  would  seem,  to  the  practice,  that  every  day,  when  a  particular 
hour  came  round,  people  were  found  praying  in  public  rather 
than  miss  the  moment.  It  is  clear  that  all  this  was,  at  best, 
most  legal,  and  opened  the  door  for  display  and  hypocrisy.  It 
utterly  overlooks  the  grand  truth  which  Christianity  brings  out 
so  fully,  that  to  do  things  for  testimony,  or  as  a  law,  or  in  any 
w^ay  for  others  to  see,  or  for  ourselves  to  think  of,  is  totally 
wrong.  We  have  to  do  with  our  Father,  and  our  Father  in 
secret.  Therefore  our  Lord  says,  ''  Thou,  when  thou  prayest, 
enter  into  thy  closet;  and,  when  thou  hast  shut  thy  door, 
pray  to  thy  Father  which  is  in  secret ;  and  thy  Father,  which 
seeth  in  secret,  shall  reward  thee  openly."  (Ver.  6.)  This  is  in 
no  way  denying  the  propriety  of  public  prayer  ;  but  united  sup- 
plication is  not  at  all  referred  to  here.  In  the  case  of  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  it  was  the  prayer  of  those  disciples  each  for  himself,  who 
knew  not  how  to  pray,  and  who  required  to  be  instructed  in  the 
very  first  principles  of  Christianity.  For  this  is  part  of  what 
the  apostle  calls  "  the  word  of  the  beginning  of  Christ"  when  he 
says,  "  Therefore,  leaving  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ 
let  us  go  on  unto  perfection ;  not  laying  again  the  foundation  of 
repentance  from  dead  works,  and  of  faith  toward  God,  of  the 
doctrine  of  baptisms,  and  of  laying  on  of  hands,  and  of  resur- 
rection of  the  dead,  and  of  eternal  judgment.  And  this  will  we 
do  if  God  permit."  The  apostle  allows  that  all  these  were  very 
important  truths  :  but  they  are  only  Jewish  principles  (i.e.,  they 


108       LECTUKES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

are  truths  that  a  person  ought  to  have  known  before  redemption 
was  accomplished)  and  these  did  not  bring  in  the  full  power  of 
Christianity.  They  were  quite  true,  and  will  ever  remain  true. 
There  never  can  be  anything  to  weaken  the  importance  of  re- 
pentance from  dead  works  and  faith  towards  God.  But  it  is  not 
even  said,  faith  in  Christ.  No  doubt  faith  Godward  always  abides ; 
but  still,  till  Christ  died  and  rose,  there  was  a  great  deal  of  truth 
that  even  the  disciples  were  not  able  to  bear.  Our  Lord  Himself 
says  so.  Therefore  the  apostle  tells  them,  "  Leaving  the  word  of 
the  beginning  of  Christ"  (that  which  Christ  here  below  brought 
out,  and  which  was  perfectly  suited  to  the  then  state  of  the 
disciples),  "let  us  go  on  unto  perfection."  There  is  no  such 
thought  as  giving  that  up  ;  but,  taking  it  as  a  truth  settled  and 
that  we  do  not  always  need  to  be  repeating,  assuming  that  as  a 
settled  truth,  let  us  go  on  to  the  understanding  of  Christ  as  He 
now  is,  which  is  the  meaning  here  of  the  word  "perfection."  It 
is  not  a  better  state  of  our  own  flesh ;  neither  does  it  refer  to  any- 
thing that  we  are  to  be  in  a  future  life  :  but  to  the  full  doctrine  of 
Christ,  as  He  now  is,  glorified  and  in  heaven.  I  have  not  the 
least  doubt  that  it  refers  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  as  brought  out 
in  this  epistle.  Christ  is  in  heaven — there  is  His  priesthood. 
He  has  entered  in  by  His  own  blood,  having  obtained  eternal 
redemption.  It  is  Christ  as  He  is  now  above ;  there  you  have 
this  perfection.  In  the  same  epistle  he  speaks  of  Christ  as  made 
perfect  through  sufferings.  Christ  was  always  perfect  as  a 
person  ;  He  never  could  be  anything  else.  Had  there  been  any 
flaw  in  Christ  on  earth.  He  must  have  been,  like  the  offering 
that  had  a  blemish  in  it,  incapable  of  being  offered  for  us.  In 
the  Jewish  sacrifices,  if  the  animal  died  of  itself,  it  could  not 
even  be  eaten.  So,  as  to  our  Lord,  had  there  been  the  principle 
of  death  in  Him  at  all,  if  He  were  not  the  living  stone  in  every 
sense,  without  the  smallest  tendency  to  death,  never  could  He 
be  God's  foundation,  nor  ours.  He  did,  no  doubt,  suffer  death, 
the  willing  victim  on  the  cross ;  but  this  was  just  because  death 
liad  no  hold  on  Him.  Every  son  of  Adam  has  mortality  at 
work  in  him.  The  Second  Man  could  say  even  here  below, 
"  I  am  the  resurrection  and  ilie  life."     Such  is  the  truth  as  to 


CHAPTER   VI.  109 

Christ  Himself.  Wliile  it  is  perfectly  true  that  Christ  was 
always  morally  perfect — perfect,  too,  not  only  in  His  divine 
nature,  but  in  His  humanity — absolutely  stainless  and  acceptable 
unto  God ;  yet,  for  all  that,  there  was  a  mountain  of  sin  that 
needed  to  be  removed  from  us,  and  a  new  condition  to  be 
entered,  in  which  He  could  associate  us  with  Himself. 

He  had  taken  upon  Him  human  nature  (not  in  its  liability  to 
death,  because  that  shews  a  connection  with  sin,  but)  in  its 
capacity  of  death,  though  incapable  of  sin ;  and  there  is  the  line 
that  separates  sound  doctrine,  as  to  Christ's  person,  from  that 
which  is  abominable  and  fatal.  Anything  that  admits  the 
smallest  thought  or  touch  of  evil  at  once  destroys  His  person. 
But  Christ  was  most  truly  a  man,  and  so  capable  of  dying  for 
us,  or  redemption  never  could  have  been  accomplished.  It  was 
through  death  that  He  was  to  annul  the  power  of  him  who  had 
the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil.  It  is  only  now  a  question 
of  the  will  of  God,  and  all  the  power  of  Satan  will  vanish  into 
smoke  ;  this  the  believer  knows — at  least  he  ought  to  know  it. 
It  is  the  wiles  of  Satan  that  we  have  to  guard  against;  his 
power  is  broken  to  faith  as  far  as  we  are  concerned.  The  means 
by  which  Satan  might  seek  to  ensnare  the  soul  must  be  watched 
against,  but  his  power,  we  know,  is  null.  But  this  M-as  not  true 
for  any,  till  Christ  had  passed  through  death  and  resurrection  ; 
there  was  still  that  which  was  short  of  the  full  purjjose  of  God. 
Clu-ist  was  not  yet  in  the  state  that  was  entirely  according  to  the 
heart  of  God.  He  designs  for  man,  for  the  saint,  a  condition 
that  death  cannot  touch,  and  we  shall  enter  it  risen  or  changed. 
What  God  calls  salvation  is  not  only  the  soul's  pardon,  but  the 
grace  that  sustains  afterwards  and  the  power  that  completes  all 
in  the  resurrection  state.  Even  Christ,  though  absolutely  sin- 
less, entered  this  state  after  death.  He  was  made  perfect 
through  suiferings  ;  He  passed  through  this  course  of  sufferings 
into  the  blessedness  in  which  He  stands  now  as  high  priest  before 
God.  And  while  all  that  Christ  taught  while  here  on  earth  is 
as  true  as  it  can  be,  because  it  was  uttered  by  Him  who  is  the 
truth,  yet  was  there  a  great  deal  that  the  disciples  were  not 
yet  able  to  appreciate  or  understand.     The  Lord  told  them  so. 


110  LECTUEES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 

Tills  was  one  of  these  things.     One  danger  afterwards  was,  that 
men  would  go  back  simply  to  what  they  had  heard  from  the 
Lord  while  He  was  upon  earth.     How  subtle  is  the  enemy, 
turning  the  pretended  honour  of  Christ  into  His  dishonour  and 
the  hurt  of  His  sheep  !     Satan's  aim  in  all  is  to  keep  their  thoughts 
still  earthly  and  hinder  them  from  apprehending  the  heavenly 
calling  and  position.     Hence  the  object  of  the  epistle  written 
to  Hebrew  Christians  was  for  the  purpose  of  leading  them  on 
from  what  they  clung  to  as  the  full  truth.     They   were    not 
to  give  it  up,  but  the  apostle  desired  to    lead   them   onward 
into  other  truth.     There  is  the  same  difficulty  now  in  the  minds 
of  many  children  of  God.     Among  a  large  portion  of  them, 
they  are  not  beyond  what  a  disciple  ought  to  have  been  or  to 
have  known  before  the  cross,  save  in  the  recognition  of  the  facts 
of  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension,  but  without  apprehension 
of  their  bearing   on  the  soul :  and  perhaps  they  w^ould  even 
think  it  presumption  to  suppose  that  they  could  advance,  or 
that  there  is  any  further  unfolding  of  God's  grace.     But  why 
have  we  got  other  truth  ?     We  have  not  one  word  in  the  Bible 
but  what  is  absolutely  necessary ;    and,  if  "  the  word  of  the 
beginning  of  Christ"  had  been  enough,  God,  with  that  economy 
that  marks  His  dealings,  would  not  surely  have  added  to  the 
bulk  of  the  book  He  has  graciously  put  into  our  hands :  yet  the 
Holy  Ghost  has  largely  revealed  further  truth,  accomplishing 
thus  the  promise  of  our  Lord,  "  He  shall  lead  yovi  into  all  truth." 
This  was  to  be  when  they  were  capacitated,  by  virtue  of  the  Holy 
Ghost's  presence   and   indwelling,  to  bear  and  enjoy  the  full 
bringing  out  of  the  divine  mind. 

Upon  the  subject  of  the  prayer  I  am  going  only  to  make  a 
few  remarks  now."^  But  again  I  would  notice  that  it  is  entirely 
individual.  Many  might  unite  in  saying,  "  Our  Father;"  but, 
although  it  was  a  soul  in  his  own  closet,  still  he  woidd  say  "  Our 
Father,"  because  he  thinks  of  others,  disciples,  elsewhere.  Yet 
it  is  plain  that  the  Lord  does  not  anticipate  the  use  of  this 

*  Those  who  desire  its  exposition  in  detail  may  be  referred  to  "  Thoughts 
on  the  Lord's  Prayer." 


CHAPTER   VI.  Ill 

prayer,  save  in  the  closet  and  for  the  condition  in  which  the 
disciples  were.  We  have  no  hint  that  it  was  employed  formally 
after  the  day  of  Pentecost.  There  were  other  wants  and  desires, 
other  ex])ressions  of  affection  toward  God,  brought  out  then, 
into  which  the  Holy  Ghost  would  lead  those  wdio  were  passed 
out  of  the  condition  of  nonage  by  having  Him  sent  into  their 
hearts,  Avhereby  they  could  cry,  "Abba,  Father."  Such  is  the 
key  to  the  change,  and  the  New  Testament  is  perfectly  clear 
upon  it.  (Compare  Gal.  iii.  23—26 ;  iv.  1 — 7.) 

However,  let  us  look  at  the  prayer  itself;  for  nothing  can  be 
more  blessed,  and  all  the  truth  of  it,  as  of  every  other  part  of 
the  w^ord  of  God,  abides  for  us.  "  When  ye  pray,  use  not  vain 
repetitions,  as  the  heathen  do,  for  they  think  that  they  shall  be 
heard  for  their  much  speaking."  (Ver.  7.)  Now  it  is  plain  that 
our  Lord  does  not  forbid  repetition,  but  vain  repetition.  We 
find  our  Lord  Himself,  when  He  was  in  an  agony  in  the 
garden,  repeating  the  same  words  three  times ;  on  certain  occa- 
sions it  may  be  most  suitable  for  us,  and  according  to  His  miiid. 
But  vain,  formal  repetition,  whether  of  words  read  out  of  a  book 
or  sentences  framed  extemporarily.  He  does  positively  forbid. 
Again,  let  me  press  the  plain  fact,  that  our  Lord  here  is  not 
providing  for  the  public  wants  of  the  Church ;  still  less  do  we 
hear  that  it  was  so  understood.  There  is  not  the  smallest  thought 
of  such  a  thing  after  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Avhen  the 
Church,  prof)erly  speaking,  was  formed  and  at  work  in  this 
world.  So  that  while  the  Lord's  Prayer  was  given  as  the  most 
perfect  model  of  prayer,  and  was  also  intended  to  be  used  as  it 
stands  by  the  disciples  previously  to  the  death  of  our  Lord  and 
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  yet  it  seems  plain  that  afterwards  it 
was  not  to  be  so.  The  New  Testament  is,  of  course,  the  only 
test  of  this.  When  we  come  to  tradition,  we  shall  find  all  sorts 
of  difficulty  on  this  as  on  other  subjects,  but  the  word  of  God  is 
not  obscure.  Li  no  way  does  it  leave  us  micertain  as  to  what 
God's  mind  is :  else  indeed  the  very  purpose  of  a  revelation 
would  be  defeated.  What  then  is  the  permanent  use  of  the 
prayer  ?  Why  is  it  given  in  scripture  ?  The  principle  always 
abides  true.     There  is  not  a  clause  of  that  prayer,  I  believe, 


112  LECTTTRES    ON   THE   GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

but  what  one  might  prefer  now,  even  to  "  forgive  us  our  debts  as 
we  forgive  our  debtors."  For  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  it 
puts  the  sinner  upon  the  ground  of  prayer  in  order  to  acquire 
forgiveness  of  his  sins.  Our  Lord  speaks  of  the  believer— the 
child  of  God.  Our  daily  faults  and  short-comings  we  need  to 
spread  before  our  God  and  Father,  as  He  encourages  us  to  do 
day  by  day.  It  is  a  question  of  His  government  who,  without 
respect  of  persons,  j  udges  according  to  the  work  of  each ;  and 
hence  He  will  not  own  the  petition  of  one  who  cherishes  an 
unforgiving  disposition  towards  others,  even  if  they  have  done 
us  ever  so  grievous  wrong. 

This  habit  of  self-searching;  and  confessing;  to  our  Father  is  a 
very  important  one  in  christian  experience ;  so  that  this  clause  I 
believe  to  be  as  true  and  applicable  at  the  present  time  as  it  was 
to  the  disciples  then.  When  the  poor  publican  said,  "  God  be 
merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"  there  we  have  another  thing  as  appro- 
priate in  his  case,  as  this  was  to  the  child  that  lisped  "  Our 
Father."  Again,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given,  and  the 
child  was  able  to  draw  near  to  the  Father  in  the  name  of  Christ, 
you  have  something  different  still.  The  Lord's  Prayer  does  not 
clothe  the  believer  with  the  name  of  Christ.  What  is  meant  by 
asking  the  Father  in  that  name  ?  Can  it  be  merely  saying  "  in 
His  name"  at  the  end  of  a  prayer?  When  Christ  died  and  rose 
again.  He  gave  the  believer  His  own  standing  before  God ;  and 
then  to  ask  the  Father  in  the  name  of  Christ  is  to  ask  in  the 
consciousness  that  my  Father  loves  me  as  He  loves  Christ ;  that 
my  Father  has  given  me  the  acceptance  of  Christ  Himself 
before  Him,  having  completely  blotted  out  all  my  evil,  so  as 
to  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Christ.  To  pray  in  the 
value  of  this  is  asking  in  His  name.  (Comp.  John  xvi.)  When 
the  soul  draws  near,  consciously  brought  nigh  to  God,  it  may 
be  said  to  ask  in  His  name.  There  is  not  a  soul  using  the  Lord's 
Prayer  as  a  form,  that  has  a  real  understanding  of  what  it  is  to 
ask  the  Father  in  the  name  of  Christ.  They  have  never  entered 
into  that  great  truth.  Hence  perhaps  in  their  very  next  petition 
they  take  the  place  of  miserable  sinners,  deprecating  the  wrath 
of  God,  and  still  under  law.    Is  it  possible  for  a  soul  that  knows 


CHAPTER   VI.  113 

what  it  Is  to  stand  before  God  as  Christ  is,  to  be  thus  syste- 
matically in  doubt  and  uncertainty  ?  It  was  the  case  with  the 
Jew  ;  but  if  I  am  anything-  at  all,  I  am  a  Christian ;  and,  as  such, 
my  place  is  in  Christ,  and  there  is  no  condemnation  :  otherwise 
there  cannot  be  the  spirit  of  adoption,  or  the  exercised  function 
of  priests  to  God.  We  are  made  priests  to  God  by  virtue  of  this 
blessed  standing ;  and  it  is  on  earth  that  the  testing  time  comes 
in.  The  conscience  is  brought  to  this — you  cannot  walk  with 
Christ  and  with  the  world.  Thus  the  question  of  heaven  or 
the  world  is  raised.  Now  the  Christian  is  properly  a  man  who 
enters  into  heavenly  thoughts  and  relationships  while  he  is 
Malking  tlu'ough  this  world.  This  is  the  vocation  wherewith  we 
are  called.  Whether  Christians  know  and  do  it  or  not,  nothing 
less  does  Christ  look  for  from  them.  "  They  are  not  of  the  world, 
even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world."  This  is  true  from  the  time  that 
we  receive  Christ.  From  that  moment  we  owe  it  to  Christ,  if 
we  would  be  true  soldiers  of  His,  to  take  our  place  as  those  who 
are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  He  is  not. 

This  will  suffice  to  shew  that,  while  the  Lord's  Prayer  always 
remains  inestimably  precious,  yet  was  it  given  to  meet  the 
individual  wants  of  the  disciples,  and  that  the  further  revelation 
of  divine  truth  modified  their  condition,  and  would  thus  lead 
into  another  strain  of  desires,  which,  in  fact,  were  not  then  given 
expression  to.  It  seems  to  me  a  happy  reflection  that  it  is  our  Lord 
Himself  who  tells  us  this.  "  Hitherto  have  ye  asked  nothing  in 
my  name."  What  do  I  gather  from  this?  That  one  may  use 
the  Lord's  Prayer  every  day,  and  never  have  asked  anything  in 
the  name  of  Christ.  "  Hitherto  have  ye  asked  nothing  in  my 
name  ;  ask,  and  je  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full.  At 
that  day  ye  shall  ash  in  iny  name.^^  What  day  does  this  mean? 
A  future  time  ?  No,  but  the  present ;  the  day  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  brought  in  when  He  came  down  from  heaven.  It  is  this 
which  is  connected  Avith  that  full  revelation  of  truth  which  is  so 
essential  to  Christian  joy  and  blessedness,  and  to  the  unworldly 
and  heavenly  walk  of  the  children  of  God  ;  and  where  the  one  is 
not  entered  into,  the  other  cannot  be.  There  may  be  vigour  of 
faith,  and  personal  love  to  Christ ;  but  for  all  that  a  soul  will  lie 
I 


114       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

found  to  savour  of  the  world  in  spirit  and  religious  position  till 
he  has  entered  into  this  blessed  place  that  the  Holy  Ghost  now 
gives  us  of  drawing  near  to  God  in  the  name  of  Christ. 

I  must  now  pass  on  to  one  of  the  most  important  practical 
exhortations  which  our  Saviour  gives  us  in  connection  with 
prayer — the  spirit  of  forgiveness.  He  has  known  little  of 
prayer  who  does  not  know  the  hindrances  which  austerity  of  spirit 
brings  with  it.  This  was  one  of  the  things  that  our  Lord  had 
specially  in  view.  "  For  if  ye  forgive  men  their  trespasses, 
your  heavenly  Father  will  also  forgive  you :  but  if  ye  forgive 
not  men  their  trespasses,  neither  will  your  Father  forgive  youi' 
trespasses."  (Ver.  14,  15.)  He  does  not  mean  that  the 
disciples  would  not  have  their  sins  forgiven  in  the  day  of  judg- 
ment, but  speaks  of  forgiving  trespasses  as  a  matter  of  the 
daily  care  and  training  of  God.  I  may  have  a  child  guilty  of 
something  that  is  wrong,  but  does  it  therefore  lose  its  relation- 
ship ?  It  is  my  child  still,  but  I  do  not  speak  to  it  in  the  same 
way  that  I  would  had  it  been  walking  in  obedience.  The  father 
waits  till  the  child  feels  its  sin.  In  the  case  of  earthly  parents, 
we  sometimes  do  not  take  sufficient  notice  of  what  is  wrong,  at 
other  times  we  may  deal  with  things  only  as  they  touch  ourselves. 
We  may  correct,  as  it  is  said  in  Hebrews,  ''  after  our  own 
pleasure,"  but  God  for  our  profit.  Our  Father  always  keeps  His 
eye  upon  what  is  most  blessed  for  us,  but  for  this  very  reason 
He  does  betimes  chasten  us.  ''  What  son  is  he  whom  the  father 
chasteneth  not?"  If  we  were  not  sons,  we  might  perhaps  get 
off;  but  as  surely  as  we  are,  the  Father's  rod  comes  upon  us  for 
our  wrongs,  though  we  may  think  them  little ;  but  though 
painful  for  the  present,  if  it  be  His  will,  we  may  be  assured  that 
He  will  make  the  things  that  may  seem  most  against  us  to  be 
unquestionably  for  us.  To  maintain  the  spirit  of  love,  and 
specially  of  love  towards  those  that  wrong  us,  costs  somewhat ; 
but  blessing  will  be  ours  in  the  end,  and  indeed  also  by  the  way. 

(3.)  We  now  come  to  the  subject  of  fasting.  I  believe  there 
is  a  real  value  in  fasting,  that  few  of  us  know  much  about.  If, 
on  particular  occasions  which  call  for  special  individual  prayer, 


CHAPTER   Vr.  115 

one  were  to  unite  fastino;  with  it,  I  have  no  doubt  the  blessing 
of  it  would  be  felt.  Here  there  is  humbling  of  spirit  expressed. 
There  are  prayers  which  are  most  suitably  accompanied  by 
standing,  others  by  kneeling.  Fasting  is  one  of  those  things  in 
which  the  body  shews  its  sympathy  with  what  the  spirit  is 
passing  through ;  it  is  a  means  of  expressing  our  desire  to  be 
low  before  God,  and  in  the  attitude  of  humiliation.  But  lest 
the  flesh  should  take  ad^-antage  of  even  what  is  for  the  morti- 
fying of  the  body,  the  Lord  enjoins  that  there  should  be  means 
taken  rather  not  to  appear  unto  men  to  fast  than  to  permit  any 
display.  For  although  a  true  Christian  would  shrink  from 
putting  on  false  appearances,  the  devil  woiald  cheat  him  into 
doing  it  unless  he  is  very  jealous  in  self- watchfulness  before  God. 
"  Thou,  when  thou  fastest,  anoint  thine  head  and  wash  thy  face ; 
that  thou  appear  not  unto  men  to  fast,  but  unto  thy  Father 
which  is  in  secret ;  and  thy  Father,  which  seeth  in  secret,  shall 
reward  thee  openly."  (Ver.  17,  18.) 

Then  follow  the  exhortations  with  regard  to  the  things  of 
this  life.  And,  first  of  all,  as  to  the  laying  up  of  treasures  upon 
earth,  the  Lord  brings  in  a  principle,  not  of  natural  interest,  but 
of  spiritual  wisdom  and  freedom  from  care,  which  the  soul  enjoys 
that  does  not  want  anything  here  below.  Supposing  there  is 
something  that  one  very  much  values  upon  earth,  there  is  pro- 
portionate fear  lest  the  thief,  or  some  corroding  thing,  should 
spoil  our  treasure.  Very  different  is  that  which  the  Lord 
enjoins  that  we  should  seek :  "  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves 
treasures  upon  earth,  where  moth  and  rust  doth  corrupt,  and 
where  thieves  break  through  and  steal :  but  lay  up  for  yourselves 
treasures  in  heaven,  where  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt, 
and  where  thieves  do  not  break  through  nor  steal"  (Ver.  19, 
20) — a  most  solemn  test  for  examining  ourselves  by.  "  For 
where  your  treasure  is,  there  will  your  heart  be  also."  (Ver  21.) 
We  may  detect  where  we  are  by  that  which  our  thoughts  chiefly 
rest  upon.  If  they  are  heavenward,  blessed  are  we ;  but  if 
earthward,  we  shall  find  that  those  very  things  upon  which  our 
hearts  are  set  will  prove  a  sorrow  one  day  or  another.     The 


116  LECTUKES   ON   THE   GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW, 

Lord  traces  all  this  to  one  grand  root — you  cannot  serve  two 
masters.  You  have  not  got  two  hearts,  but  one  ;  and  your 
heart  will  be  with  that  which  you  value  most.  Everything  is 
thus  followed  up  to  its  source:  God  on  the  one  hand,  and 
mammon  on  the  other.  Mammon  is  what  sums  up  the  lusts  of 
the  heart  of  man  as  to  all  things  here.  It  may  manifest  itself 
in  different  forms;  but  this  is  the  root — covetousness.  "Ye 
cannot  serve  God  and  mammon."  "  Therefore  I  say  unto  you, 
Take  no  thought  [be  not  anxious]  for  your  life,  what  ye  shall 
eat,  or  Avhat  ye  shall  drink ;  nor  yet  for  your  body,  what  ye  shall 
put  on."  The  great  point  is  indifference  to  present  things,  or, 
rather,  a  peaceful  trust  about  them  ;  not  because  we  do  not 
value  the  mercies  of  God,  but  because  we  have  confidence  in  our 
Father's  love  and  care  about  us.  So  the  Apostle  Paul  shews  us 
the  most  beautiful  expression  of  this  when  he  says,  "  I  have 
learned,  in  whatsoever  state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content." 
He  had  known  changes  of  circumstances — what  it  was  to  have 
nothing,  and  what  it  was  to  have  abundance ;  but  the  great 
point  was  his  thorough  content  with  God's  portion  for  him. 
Tliis  was  not  a  thing  that  he  passed  through  lightly,  but  he  had 
learned  it.  It  was  a  matter  of  attainment — of  judging  of  things 
in  the  light  of  God's  presence  and  love.  The  blessing  is,  to  be 
looking  onward  with  this  thouo-ht  —  our  Father  deals  with 
us  now  with  a  view  to  glory;  as  the  apostle  adds,  "  My  God 
shall  supply  all  your  need,  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by 
Christ  Jesus."  How  sweet  that  is!  ''My  God"— the  God 
that  I  have  proved,  whose  affection  I  have  tasted.  I  can  count 
upon  Him  for  you  as  well  as  for  me  ;  and  He  "  shall  supply  all 
your  need,"  not  merely  according  to  the  riches  of  His  grace, 
but  "  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus."  He  has 
taken  you  as  Christians  from  this  world  :  He  is  going  to  have 
you  the  companions  of  His  Son  above  ;  and  He  deals  with  you 
now  according  to  your  place  and  position  then.  Whatever  is 
suitable  to  this  great  plan  of  His  glory  and  love,  the  Lord  will 
give  us  to  prove  the  consequence  of  that. 

May  the  Lord  strengthen  us,  that  we  may  accept  this  with 
thankful  hearts,  knowing  that  we  are  not  our  own  masters !    The 


CHAPTER   VI.  ,  117 

Lord  will  preserve  us  fi-om  the  dangers,  the  snares,  the  pains, 
which  haste  or  wilfulness  on  our  part  as  to  outward  things  brings 
with  it.  He  shews  us  in  this  chapter  the  exceeding  follj  of  it, 
even  as  to  the  body.  He  takes  an  instance  from  the  outward 
world,  as  to  the  utter  uselessness  of  it ;  and  shews  how  God  may 
be  confided  in  to  accomplish  His  own  purposes  best.  And  more 
than  that :  He  reminds  us  that  these  outward  things,  on  which 
we  are  tempted  to  lay  such  great  stress,  are  only  the  objects  that 
the  Gentiles  seek  after.  A  Gentile  was  a  term  used  in  speaking 
of  a  man  without  God,  in  contrast  with  a  Jew  who  had  God  in 
an  outward  manner  in  this  world.  A  Christian  is  a  man  who 
has  God  in  heaven.  "  Your  heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  ye 
have  need  of  all  these  things."  Therefore,  as  our  Father  knows 
this,  why  should  we  doubt  Him  ?  We  do  not  distrust  our  earthly 
father ;  much  less  then  should  we  doubt  our  heavenly  Father. 
"  But  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness  ; 
and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you."  It  is  not  that 
we  are  to  seek  them — to  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  then 
these  things ;  but  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His 
righteousness,  and  all  the  rest  will  come.  There  is  no  seeking 
about  it,  except  of  what  pertains  to  God  and  to  His  righteous- 
ness. "  Take,  therefore,  no  thought  for  the  morrow ;  for  the 
morrow  shall  take  thought  for  the  things  of  itself."  That  is,  He 
prepares  us  for  this,  that  the  anxiety  which  dreads  an  evil  thing 
on  the  morrow  is  nothing  but  unbelief.  When  the  morrow  comes, 
the  evil  may  not  be  there  ;  if  it  comes,  God  will  be  there.  He 
may  allow  us  to  taste  what  it  is  to  indulge  in  our  own  wills ;  but 
if  our  souls  are  subject  to  Him,  how  often  the  evil  that  is 
dreaded  never  appears !  When  the  heart  bows  to  the  will  of 
God  about  some  sorrow  that  Ave  dread,  how  often  the  sorrow  is 
taken  away,  and  the  Lord  meets  us  Avitli  unexpected  kindness 
and  goodness !  He  is  able  to  make  even  the  sorrow  to  be  all 
blessing.  Whatever  be  His  will,  it  is  good.  "  Sufficient  unto 
the  da}'  is  the  evil  thereof." 


.  CHAPTER  VII. 

We  now  come  to  a  very  distinct  portion  of  our  Lord's  discourse. 
It  is  not  so  much  the  establishing  of  the  right  relations  of  a  soul 
with  God  our  Father — the  hidden  inner  life  of  the  Christian. 
But  now  we  have  the  mutual  relations  of  the  disciples  with  one 
another,  their  conduct  towards  men,  the  different  dangers  which 
they  have  to  dread,  and,  above  all  things,  the  sure  ruin  for  every 
soul  that  names  the  name  of  Christ,  if  hearing  and  not  doing 
His  sayings.  The  wise  man  hears  and  does.  And  so  the 
chapter  closes.  I  would  desire  to  dwell  a  little  upon  these 
various  points  of  instruction  which  our  Lord  brings  before  us. 
Of  course  it  will  not  be  possible  to  enter  thoroughly  into  all ; 
for,  I  need  not  say,  the  sayings  of  our  Lord  are  peculiarly 
pregnant  with  profoundness  of  thought.  There  is  no  portion  of 
God's  word  where  you  find  a  more  characteristic  depth  than  here. 
The  point  with  which  the  Lord  Jesus  opens  is  this.  He  had 
before  this  shewn  fully  that  we  are  to  act  in  grace  as  children  of 
our  Father;  but  that  was  more  particularly  with  the  world,  with 
our  enemies,  with  persons  that  wrong  us.  But  then  a  serious 
and  practical  difficulty  might  elsewhere  arise.  Supposing  that 
among  the  wrong-doers  were  some  that  bore  the  name  of  Christ, 
what  then  ?  How  are  we  to  feel  about  and  to  deal  with  them  ? 
No  doubt  there  is  a  difference,  and  a  very  weighty  one.  Still 
there  is  a  thing  that  we  have  to  take  care  of,  before  we  touch  the 
question  of  another's  conduct ;  and  that  is,  to  watch  against  the 
spirit  of  censoriousness  in  ourselves,  the  habit  or  tendency  to 
impute  evil  motives  in  that  which  we  do  not  know,  and  which 
does  not  meet  the  eye.  We  all  know  what  a  snare  this  is  to  the 
heart  of  man ;  and  that  it  is  more  particularl}'  the  danger  of 
some,  throuo;h  natural  character  and  unwatchfulness  as  to  the 
allowed  habit.  There  is  more  discernment  in  some  than  in 
others,  and  such  ought  peculiarly  to  watch  against  it.  It  is  not 
that  they  are  to  have  their  eyes  shut  to  what  is  evil ;  but  they 


CHAPTER   VII.  119 

are  not  to  suspect  what  is  not  uncovered,  nor  to  go  beyond  the 
evidence  God  gives.  This  is  a  most  important  practical  safe- 
guard, without  which  it  is  impossible  to  walk  together  according 
to  God.  People  may  be  together  as  so  many  separate  units, 
w^ithout  any  real  sympathy  or  power  to  enter  into  the  sorrows 
and  difficulties  and  trials,  and,  it  may  be,  the  evil  of  '^thers. 
All  that  has  a  claim  upon  the  heart  of  a  disciple.  Even  that 
which  is  wrong  calls  upon  love  to  find  out  God's  way  of  dealing 
with  what  is  contrary  to  God.  For  the  essence  of  love  is,  that 
it  seeks  the  good  of  the  object  that  is  beloved,  and  this  without 
reference  to  self.  It  may  have  the  bitterness  of  knowing  that  it 
is  not  loved  in  return,  as  the  Apostle  Paul  knew,  and  this  too  in 
early  days,  with  real  Christians,  yea,  with  persons  singularly 
endowed  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  And  yet  God  has  been  pleased 
to  give  us  these  solemn  lessons  of  what  the  heart  is,  even  in 
saints  of  God. 

Under  all  circumstances,  this  great  truth  is  obligatory  on  the 
conscience:  "  Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged."  (Ver.  1.)  No 
principle,  on  the  other  hand,  could  be  more  easily  abused  by  the 
selfishness  of  man.  Were  a  person  going  on  in  an  evil  course, 
and  using  this  passage  to  deny  the  title  of  brethren  to  judge  his 
conduct,  it  is  clear  that  he  betrays  a  want  of  conscience  and  of 
sijiritual  understanding.  His  eye  is  blinded  by  self,  and  he  is 
merely  turning  the  Lord's  W'Ords  into  an  excuse  for  sin.  The 
Lord  did  not,  in  any  wise,  mean  to  weaken  the  holy  judgment 
of  evil ;  on  the  contrary.  He,  in  due  time,  binds  this  solemnly 
upon  His  people:  "Do  npt  ye  judge  them  that  are  within?" 
It  was  the  fault  of  the  Corinthians  that  they  did  not  judge  those 
that  were  in  their  midst.  It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  there  is  a 
sense  in  which  I  am  to  judge,  and  another  in  which  I  am  not. 
There  are  cases  where  I  should  be  sinning  against  the  Lord  if 
I  did  not  judge;  and  there  are  cases  where  the  Lord  forbids  it, 
and  waras  me  that  to  do  so  is  to  bring  judgment  upon  myself. 
This  is  a  very  practical  question  for  the  Christian — where  to 
judge  and  where  not  to  judge.  Whatever  comes  out  plainly — 
what  God  presents  to  the  eye  of  His  people,  so  that  they  know 
it  for  themselves,  or  hear  of  it  on  testimony  which  they  cannot 


120        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

doubt — that  they  are  surely  bound  to  judge.  In  a  word,  we  are 
always  responsible  to  abhor  that  which  is  offensive  to  God, 
whether  known  directly  or  indirectly ;  for  "  God  is  not  mocked," 
and  the  children  of  God  ought  not  to  be  governed  by  mere 
technicalities,  of  which  the  cunning  craft  of  the  enemy  can 
easily  take  advantage. 

But  what  does  our  Lord  mean  here  :  "  Judge  not,  that  ye  be 
not  judged  ?"  He  refers  not  to  that  which  is  plain,  but  to  what 
is  concealed ;  to  that  whereof,  if  it  did  exist,  God  was  not 
pleased  to  lay  the  evidence  before  the  eyes  of  His  people.  We 
are  not  responsible  to  judge  what  we  do  not  know ;  on  the  con- 
trary, we  are  bound  to  watch  against  the  spirit  of  surmising 
evil.  It  may  be  that  there  is  evil,  and  of  the  gravest  character, 
as  in  the  case  of  Judas.  Our  Lord  said  of  him  :  "  one  of  you 
hath  a  devil ;"  and  purposely  kept  the  discij)les  in  the  dai^k 
about  the  particulars.  Just  remark,  by  the  way,  that  it  is  only 
the  Gospel  of  John  which  shews  us  that  our  Lord's  knowledge 
of  Judas  Iscariot  was  that  of  a  divine  person.  •  He  says  it  long 
before  anything  came  out.  In  the  other  gospels  all  is  reserved 
till  the  eve  of  His  betrayal ;  but  John  Avas  led  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  remember  how  the  Lord  had  told  them  it  was  so  from 
the  beginning  :  and  yet,  though  He  knew  it,  they  were  only  to 
confide  in  His  knowledge  of  it ;  for  if  the  Lord  bore  with  him, 
were  not  they  to  do  the  same?  If  He  did  not  give  them  direc- 
tions how  to  deal  with  the  evil,  they  were  to  wait.  That  is 
always  the  resource  of  faith,  which  never  hurries,  especially  in 
so  solemn  a  case.  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste." 
We  need  not  trouble  ourselves  about  that  which  is  not  certain. 
All  is  open  to  God,  all  is  in  His  hands  ;  and  we  can  confide  in 
Him.  Patience  is  the  word,  until  the  Lord's  time  for  dealing 
with  that  which  is  contrary  to  Him.  The  Lord  lets  Judas 
manifest  himself  thoroughly ;  and  then  it  was  no  question  of 
bearing  with  the  traitor.  While  there  are  certain  cases  of  evil 
that  we  are  to  judge,  there  are  questions  He  does  not  ask  the 
Church  to  solve.  The  worst  of  all  are  those  that  go  out,  not 
those  who  are  put  out.  What  more  condemns  a  man  than  that 
he  cannot  stay  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  even  on  earth?     Of 


CHAPTER   VII.  121 

course,  no  evil  can  consist  with  the  Lord's  presence  in  heaven ; 
nor  can  it,  in  the  long  run,  on  earth.  "  They  went  out  from  us, 
but  they  were  not  of  us ;  for  if  the}'-  had  been  of  us,  tho}^  would 
no  doubt  have  continued  with  us ;  but  they  went  out,  that  they 
might  be  made  manifest  that  they  were  not  all  of  us."  These 
are  characterized  as  being  antichrists.  It  was  not  merely  evil 
of  a  moral  sort,  but  against  Christ  personally,  and  thus  directly 
struck  at  the  foundation  of  everlasting  truth.  "They  w^ent 
out."  Thus,  wherever  there  is  that  which  is  decidedly  contrary 
to  Christ's  personal  glory.  He  deals  with  it.  There  may  be 
cases,  as  in  2  John,  which  it  becomes  the  saints  to  deal  with 
too ;  but  we  generally  find  that  such  go  out.  God  prefers,  if  I 
may  so  say,  that  Himself  should  dispose  of  them,  even  here 
below.  They  could  not  continue  in  the  Lord's  presence,  though 
it  were  simply  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  that  His  pre- 
sence was  made  known  upon  earth.  But  while  there  are  these 
cases  where  the  saints  judge,  and  where  the  Lord  judges,  still 
there  remains  the  word,  "  Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged." 
We  must  guard  against  imputing  motives,  or  pronouncing  upon 
the  absolute  state  of  a  person  before  God. 

We  have  to  take  care  that  we  go  not  before  God,  lest  we 
might  find  ourseh^es  in  detail,  if  not  in  the  main,  against  God. 
We  must  not  break  that  which  is  bruised,  by  yielding  to 
embittered  personal  or  party  feelings.  What  a  danger  this  is  ! 
The  inevitable  effect  of  a  judging  spirit  is  that  we  get  judged 
ourselves.  The  soul  whose  habit  is  censorious  is  universally  ill 
spoken  of.  "  With  what  judgment  ye  judge,  ye  shall  be  judged." 
Then  He  puts  a  particular  case  :  "  Why  beholdest  thou  the  mote 
that  is  in  thy  brother's  eye,  but  considerest  not  the  beam  that  is 
in  thine  own  eye?"  (Ver.  3.)  That  is,  that  whei'e  this  prone- 
ness  to  judge  is,  there  is  another  thing  found  still  more 
serious :  it  is  habitually  unjudged  evil  in  the  spirit  of  a  professor 
or  saint  of  God  which  makes  a  person  restless,  and  desirous  of 
proving  others  to  be  wrong  too.  "  Or  how  wilt  thou  say  to  thy 
brother,  Let  me  pull  out  the  mote  out  of  thine  eye  ;  and,  behold, 
a  beam  is  in  thine  own  eye?"  (Ver.  4.)  The  mote  of  course 
was  but  little,  but  it  was  made  a  great  deal  of,  and  the  beam,  an 


122  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

enormous  thing,  was  passed  by.  It  was  the  Lord  bringing  out, 
in  the  most  emphatic  way,  His  own  truth,  and  the  danger  of  a 
suspicious  judicial  spirit.  And  He  shews  that  the  way  to  deal 
rightly,  if  we  desire  the  good  of  His  people  and  their  deliverance 
from  evil,  is  to  begin  with  self-judgment.  If  we  really  wish 
to  have  the  mote  out  of  our  brother's  eye,  how  is  it  to  be  done  ? 
Let  us  begin  with  the  grave  faults  we  know  so  little  corrected 
and  confessed  in  ourselves  :  and  this  is  worthy  of  Christ.  What 
is  His  way  of  dealing  with  it  ?  Does  He  say  of  the  mote  in 
our  brother's  eye.  Bring  it  to  the  judges?  Not  at  all;  you 
must  probe  yourselves.  The  soul  is  to  begin  there.  When  I 
judge  the  evil  that  my  conscience  knows,  or  that,  if  my 
conscience  does  not  know  now,  it  may  learn  in  God's  presence 
— if  I  begin  with  this,  I  shall  then  see  clearly  what  concerns 
others ;  I  shall  have  a  heart  fitted  to  enter  into  their  circum- 
stances, an  eye  purged  from  that  which  makes  the  heart  oblique, 
and  which  unfits  the  heart  to  feel  with  God  about  it.  "  Thou 
hypocrite,  first  cast  out  the  beam  out  of  thine  own  eye ;  and 
then  shalt  thou  see  clearly  to  cast  out  the  mote  out  of  thy 
brother's  eye."  (Ver.  5.)  This  may  be  found  in  a  believer  in 
principle,  though  when  the  Lord  says,  ''  Thou  hypocrite,"  He 
alludes  to  the  evil  in  its  full  form ;  but  even  in  ourselves,  we 
know  it  in  measure,  and  what  can  be  more  opposed  to  simplicity 
and  godly  sincerity  ?  The  Lord  shews  that  this  very  thing  leads 
to  the  most  hateful  evil  that  can  be  found  under  the  name  of 
Christ — a  hypocrite — a  thing  that  even  the  natural  conscience 
writhes  under  and  rejects.  "  Thou  hypocrite,  first  cast  out  the 
beam  out  of  thine  own  eye ;  and  then  shalt  thou  see  clearly  to 
cast  out  the  mote  out  of  thy  brother's  eye."  Often  and  often 
have  we  found  that,  when  the  beam  is  gone,  the  mote  is  not 
to  be  seen,  having  already  disappeared.  This  is  a  great  comfort ; 
and  where  the  heart  is  set  upon  the  Lord,  would  we  be  sorry  to 
find  ourselves  mistaken  about  our  brother  ?  Should  I  not  rejoice 
to  find  the  grace  of  the  Lord  in  my  brother,  if  I  discover  in 
self-j  udgment  myself  only  to  be  wrong  ?  This  may  be  painful 
to  one,  but  the  love  of  Christ  in  the  believer's  heart  is  gratified 
to  know  that  Christ  is  spared  this  further  dishonour. 


CHAPTER   VII.  123 

Tills,  then,  is  the  first  great  principle  onr  Lord  here  enjoins. 
The  habit  of  judgment  is  to  be  watched  against  earnestly  ;  and 
this,  too,  because  it  brings  bitterness  upon  the  spirit  that 
indulges  it,  and  unfits  the  soul  for  being  able  to  deal  rightly 
with  another  :  for  we  are  set  in  the  body,  as  St.  Paul  shews, 
for  the  purpose  of  helping  one  another  ;  and  we  are  all 
members  one  of  another.  The  Lord  is  inculcating  the  spirit 
of  grace,  that  seeks  the  good  of  others  even  if  it  be  in  self- 
condemnation. 

But  there  is  another  thing.  In  watching  against  hasty  and 
liarsh  judgment,  there  might  be  the  abuse  of  grace.  And  the 
Lord  immediately  couples  this  with  the  former — "  Give  not  that 
which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs,  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  before 
swine,  lest  they  trample  them  under  their  feet,  and  turn  again 
and  rend  you."  We  must  carefully  remember  that  the  Lord  is 
not  here  speaking  about  the  gospel  going  out  to  sinners.  God 
forbid  that  we  should  not  carry  out  the  grace  of  God  to  every 
quarter  under  heaven,  because  nothing  less  than  this  ought  to 
be  the  desire  and  effort  of  every  saint  of  God.  All  ought  to  do 
it ;  that  is,  to  have  the  spirit  of  active  love  going  out  after, 
others,  energetic  desires  for  the  salvation  and  the  blessing  of 
souls :  for  it  were  a  sad  shortcoming,  if  it  went  not  beyond 
souls  being  brought  to  Christ.  The  only  thought  worthy  of  a 
Christian  is  the  glory  of  Christ ;  and  therefore  should  one  be 
seeking  to  grow  up  into  Christ  in  all  things,  to  know  and  to  do 
the  will  of  God.  In  this  verse,  the  Lord  is  not  taking  up  the 
question  of  the  gospel  going  out  indiscriminately  ;  for  we  know 
that,  if  there  be  a  diiference,  the  gospel  best  suits  those  who 
have  been  dogs  ;  which,  in  the  language  of  the  Jews,  was  a 
figure  of  all  that  is  abominable.  "  Such  were  some  of  you  ;  but 
ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified,  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God." 
The  apostle  had  been  speaking  just  before  about  thieves, 
drunkards,  extortioners,  &c.  It  might  have  been  asked,  Is  not 
the  wickedness  of  one  man  greater  than  that  of  another  ?  On 
an  earthly  platform,  one  might  say.  Much  every  way ;  but  God 
does  not,  in  saving  souls,  make  these  distinctions.     So,  speaking 


124        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

of  believers,  when  Jews,  St.  Paul  says,  they  were  ''children 
of  wrath,  even  as  others."  There  may  have  been  highly  moral 
characters  among  them.  Did  this  dispose  them  better  towards 
God's  grace?  Alas!  where  the  soul  finds  a  justification  of 
itself  in  what  it  is,  nothing  can  be  more  dangerous.  It  is  a 
hard  thing  for  a  man  who  feels  this  to  bow  to  the  truth  that  he 
can  only  enter  heaven  upon  the  ground  of  a  publican  and  a 
sinner.  But  so  it  must  be,  if  the  soul  is  to  receive  salvation 
from  God  through  the  faith  of  Jesus. 

The  Lord,  then,  is  not  in  any  wise  restraining  the  gospel  from 
going  out  to  every  quarter ;  but  He  speaks  of  the  relations  of 
His  own  people  with  those  that  are  walking  unholily.  The 
Christian  is  not  to  treat  the  worldly  man  on  common  ground ; 
he  is  not  to  bring  out  for  him  the  special  treasures  that  are  the 
Christian  portion.  The  gospel  is  to  be  lavished  ;  it  is  the  riches 
of  God's  grace  to  the  world.  But,  besides  the  gospel,  I  have  the 
special  affections  of  Christ  to  the  Church,  His  lordship  as  regards 
His  servants,  His  priesthood,  the  hope  of  His  coming  again,  &c. 

If  you  w'cre  to  talk  about  these  things,  which  we  may,  perhaps, 
call  the  pearls  of  the  saint,  with  those  wdio  are  evidently  not 
Christians,  you  are  on  wrong  ground.  If  you  were  to  insist 
upon  the  duties  of  the  faithful  in  worldly  company,  then  it  is 
giving  that  which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs.  There  is  blessed 
provision  for  the  dog :  there  is  that  which  the  Lord  intends  for 
it — the  crumbs  that  fall  from  the  master's  table.  And  such  is 
the  great  grace  of  God  toward  us,  that  the  crumbs  which  fall  to 
our  portion,  poor  dogs  of  the  Gentiles  as  we  were,  are  the  best. 
What  is  there  like  that  which  flows  from  the  Lord's  grace? 
Whatever  may  be  the  benefits  promised  to  the  Jew,  the  grace  of 
God  has  brought  out  in  the  gospel  fuller  blessing  than  ever  was 
promised  to  Israel.  What  can  Israel  ever  learn,  compared  to 
the  mighty  deliverance  of  God  that  we  know  now  ?  The  con- 
sciousness of  being  in  a  moment  completely  cleansed  from  all 
sin,  and  having  the  righteousness  of  God  for  ours  at  once  and 
for  ever  in  Christ ;  present  access  to  Him  as  Father  through 
a  rent  veil ;  and  made  His  temple  through  the  Holy  Ghost 
dwellino-  in  us.      As  the  Lord  Himself  said  to  the  woman  of 


CHAPTER   VII.  125 

Samaria,  ^'  If  thou  knewest  the  gift  of  God,  and  who  it  is  that 
saith  to  thee,  Give  me  to  drink ;  thou  wouldest  have  asked  of 
him,  and  he  would  have  given  thee  living  water."  Where 
Christ  is  received  now,  by  whomsoever  it  may  be,  there  is  this 
fulness  of  blessing.  We  have  not  even  to  go  to  the  well  now, 
for  the  well  is  within  the  believer.  "  The  water  that  I  shall 
give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water,  springing  up  into 
everlasting  life."  So  that  I  may  see  in  many  a  word  of  God 
how  wide  and  perfect  is  His  grace,  while  it  forbids  certain  things 
being  thrown  indiscriminately  among  worldly  persons,  as  not 
being  suited  objects.  Any  act  that  implies  fellowship  between  a 
believer  and  an  unbeliever  is  false.  Take,  for  instance,  the 
question  of  worship,  and  the  habit  of  calling  the  whole  round 
of  devotions  worship.  But  worship  supposes  communion  with 
the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  with  each  other  in  it.  There  is 
not,  nor  can  be,  real  communion  in  the  usual  forms  of  prayer. 
Indeed,  you  will  find  that  evangelical  people  do  not  generally 
care  for  the  prayers,  but  bear  with  them  for  the  sake  of  the 
sermon.  But  the  system  which,  founded  on  an  easy  rite  which 
pretends  to  regenerate  all,  unites  believers  and  unbelievers  in 
one  common  form  and  calls  it  worship,  is  casting  what  is  holy 
unto  dogs.  Is  it  not  a  thinly-disguised  attempt  to  put  the  sheep 
and  dogs  upon  the  same  ground  ?  In  vain  !  You  cannot  unite 
before  God  the  enemies  of  Christ,  and  those  that  belong  to  Him. 
You  cannot  mingle  as  one  people  those  that  have  got  life  and 
those  that  have  not.  The  attempt  to  do  so  is  sin,  and  always 
ends  in  failure  and  disappointment,  as  well  as  in  the  constant 
dishonour  of  the  Lord.  All  effort  to  have  a  worship  of  this 
mixed  character  is  going  in  the  very  teeth  of  the  sixth  verse. 
On  the  other  hand,  preaching  the  gospel,  where  it  is  kept  dis- 
tinct from  worship,  is  right  and  blessed.  When  the  day  of  judg- 
ment comes  upon  this  world,  where  does  the  worst  stroke  fall  ? 
Not  u]5on  the  openly  profane  world,  but  upon  Babylon,  because 
Babylon  is  the  confusion  of  what  is  of  Christ  with  evil — the 
attempt  to  make  communion  ])ossible  between  light  and  darkness. 
There  is  what  we  are  responsible  for,  as  the  apostle  says,  "  Come 
out  of  her,  my  people,  that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  sins,  and 


126  LECTUEES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

that  ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues."  It  is  the  being  partaker  of 
her  sins  that  is  the  grave  affair  with  God.  It  is  the  acceptance 
of  a  common  ground  upon  which  the  Church  and  the  world  can 
join  ;  when  the  very  ohject  of  God,  and  that  for  which  Christ 
died,  was  that  He  might  have  a  separate  people  unto  Himself; 
so  as  to  be,  by  their  very  consecration  unto  God,  a  light  in 
this  world  ;  not  a  witness  of  pride,  saying,  "  Stand  by,  I  am 
holier  than  thou;"  but  Christ's  epistle,  that  tells  the  world 
where  the  living  water  is  to  be  found,  and  bids  them  come  : 
"  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely." 
The  light  of  the  Church,  reflected  from  Christ,  shines  upon  the 
living  water  that  Christ  gives  to  him  that  will.  Where  we  do 
not  confound  the  religion  of  the  world  with  the  worship  that 
goes  up  to  God  from  His  people,  there  you  will  also  have  the 
true  line  of  demarcation — where  we  ought  to  judge  and  where 
we  ought  not.  There  will  be  active  service  towards  the  world 
with  the  gospel,  but  yet  the  careful  separation  of  the  Church 
from  the  world.  This  is  also  true  individually.  If  there  were 
only  a  single  saint  in  the  place,  he  is  not  to  cast  his  pearls  before 
swine ;  and  if  it  be  an  assembl}^,  they  have  to  guard  against  it 
corporately.  What  a  test  is  this  for  the  heart  I  Thus  persons 
take  advantage  of  the  word  of  God  that  says,  "  If  an  unbeliever 
bid  you  to  a  feast,  and  ye  be  disposed  to  go,"  &c.  ;  but  take 
care  how  you  go,  and  for  what.  If  you  go  self-confident,  you 
will  but  dishonour  Christ ;  if  to  please  yourself,  this  is  poor 
ground ;  if  to  please  other  people,  it  is  little  better ;  if  it  were 
really  to  serve  God  and  please  our  neighbour  for  his  good  to 
edification,  it  would  be  with  pain  to  oneself,  with  reverence,  I 
may  say,  and  godly  fear,  lest  one  might  forget  the  living  God, 
and  that  He  is  a  consuming  fire.  For  the  God  of  the  believer 
is  a  consuming  fire ;  He  is  such  in  His  dealings  with  us,  and  let 
us  thank  Him  for  it.  He  does  not  spare  our  evil  any  more 
than  He  wishes  us  to  spare  it.  There  may  be  occasions  when 
the  love  of  Christ  might  constrain  a  soul  to  go  and  bear  a  testi- 
mony to  His  love  in  a  worldly  company ;  yet  if  we  know  how 
easily  words  may  be  said,  and  things  done,  that  imply  commu- 
nion with  that  which  is  contrary  to  Christ,  there  would  be  fear 


CHAPTER   VII.  127 

and  trembling  ;  but  where  there  is  self-confidence,  there  never 
can  be  tlie  power  of  God. 

But  now  the  Lord,  having  finished  the  subject  of  the  abuse 
of  judgment  and  the  abuse  of  grace,  indicates  the  necessity  of 
intercourse  with  God  ;  and  this  is  very  particularly  in  connec- 
tion with  what  we  have  been  seeing.  "  Ask,  and  it  shall  be 
given  you ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be 
opened  unto  you."  (Ver.  7.)  Here  we  have  different  degrees, 
increasing  measures  of  earnestness  in  pleading  with  the  Lord : 
' '  For  every  one  that  asketh  receiveth ;  and  he  that  seeketh 
findeth ;  and  to  him  that  knocketh  it  shall  be  opened."  (Ver.  8.) 
And  then  He  gives  them  an  argument  to  encourage  them  in 
this :  "  What  man  is  there  of  you,  whom,  if  his  son  asked 
bread,  will  he  give  him  a  stone  ?  or  if  he  asks  a  fish,  will  he 
give  him  a  serpent  ?  If  ye,  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give 
good  gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much  more  shall  your 
Father  which  is  in  heaven  give  good  things  to  them  that  ask 
him  ?"  (Ver.  9 — 11.)  There  is  a  very  interesting  difference  in 
the  passage  that  answers  to  this  in  Luke  xi.,  where,  instead  of 
saying,  "give  good  things  to  them  that  ask  him,"  it  is  said, 
"  How  much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him  ?"  The  Holy  Spirit  was  not  yet 
given ;  it  was  not  that  He  did  not  act  in  the  world,  but  He 
was  not  yet  personally  imparted,  because  that  Jesus  was  not 
yet  glorified.  Scripture  says  this  expressly.  Thus,  until  the 
time  when  He  was  poured  out  from  heaven,  it  was  quite  right 
to  pray  for  the  Spirit  to  be  given :  and  the  Gentiles  in  particu- 
lar being  persons  that  were  ignorant  about  it,  this  is  expressly 
mentioned  in  the  Gospel  of  Luke,  which  especially  contemplates 
the  Gentiles.  For  who  can  read  that  gospel  without  having  the 
conviction  that  there  is  a  careful  eye  upon  those  that  have  a 
Gentile  origin  ?  It  was  written  by  a  Gentile  and  to  a  Gentile ; 
and  all  through  it  traces  the  Lord  as  Son  of  man,  a  title  which 
links  itself,  not  with  the  Jewish  nation  properly  and  peculiarly, 
but  with  all  men.  This  is  the  great  want  of  man — the  Holy 
Spirit  which  was  about  to  be  given,  and  He  is  the  great  power 
of  prayer,  as  it  is  said,  "  Praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost."     St. 


128  LECTURES   ON   THE    GOSPEL  OF   MATTHEW. 

Luke  was  led  to  specify  that  special  good  thing  which  those  that 
pray  would  need  in  order  to  give  them  energy  in  prayer. 

But  returning  to  Matthew,  we  have  the  whole  passage  wound 
up  by  this  word :  "  Therefore,  all  things  whatsoever  ye  would 
that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them  ;  for  this  is 
the  law  and  the  prophets."  (Ver.  12.)  This  is  in  no  way 
dealing  with  men  according  to  their  ways,  but  the  contrary.  It 
is  saying,  as  it  were,  "  You  who  know  the  heavenly  Father,  who 
know  what  His  grace  to  the  evil  is,  you  know  what  is  comely 
in  His  sight ;  always  act  upon  that.  Never  act  merely  according 
to  what  another  does  towards  you,  but  according  to  what  you 
would  that  another  should  do  to  you.  If  you  have  the  slightest 
love  in  your  heart,  you  would  desire  that  they  should  act  as 
children  of  your  Father."  Whatever  another  person  may  do, 
my  business  is  to  do  to  them  what  I  would  that  they  should 
do  to  me ;  namely,  to  act  in  a  way  becoming  the  child  of  a 
heavenly  Father.  "  This  is  the  law  and  the  prophets."  He  is 
giving  them  exceeding  breadth,  extracting  the  essence  of  all 
that  was  blessed  there.  There  was  this  which  was  clearly  the 
gracious  wish  of  a  soul  that  knew  God,  even  under  the  law  ;  and 
nothing  less  than  this  could  be  the  ground  of  action  before  God. 

But  now  we  come  to  dangers.  There  are  not  only  brethren 
that  try,  but  now  He  says,  "  Enter  ye  in  at  the  strait  gate :  for 
wide  is  the  gate  and  broad  is  the  way  that  leadeth  to  destruc- 
tion, and  many  there  be  which  go  in  thereat :  because  strait  is 
the  gate  and  narrow  is  the  way  which  leadeth  unto  life,  and  few 
there  be  that  find  it.  Beware  of  false  prophets,  which  come  to 
you  in  sheep's  clothing,  but  inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves." 
(Ver.  13 — 15.)  There  is  a  moral  connection  between  the  two 
things.  One  main  feature  of  that  which  is  false  is  the  attempt 
to  make  the  gate  large,  and  the  road  broad :  to  deny  the  special 
manner  in  which  God  calls  souls  to  the  knowledge  of  Himself. 
There  is  not  an  arrangement  in  the  religious  world  that  does  not 
interfere  with  this.  Take,  for  instance,  the  parcelling  out  of 
those  that  belonged  to  God  into  different  companies,  as  if  they 
were  the  sheep  of  man — what  people  do  not  scruple  to  call  '^  our 
church,"  or  "such  an  one's  flock."     God's  rights.  His  claims, 


CHAPTEK   VII.  129 

His  calling  a  soul  to  walk  in  responsibility  to  Himself,  are  all 
set  aside  by  such  a  state  of  feelino;.  We  never  find  even  an 
apostle  saying,  "ray  flock."  It  is  always  "tlie  flock  of  God," 
because  this  brings  in  responsibility  to  God.  If  they  are  His 
flock,  I  must  take  care  that  I  do  not  lead  them  astray.  It  must 
be  the  object  of  my  soul,  in  having  to  do  with  a  Christian,  to 
bring  his  soul  into  direct  connection  Avith  God  Himself,  to  say, 
This  is  one  of  God's  sheep.  What  a  change  would  this  make  in 
the  tone  and  ways  of  pastors,  if  it  were  viewed  as  the  flock  of 
God  !  It  is  the  business  of  the  true  servant  to  keep  them  in  the 
narrow  path  on  which  they  have  entered. 

But  there  is  also  the  broad-road-going  world,  who  think  that 
they  can  belong  to  God  by  profession  of  Christ  and  trying  to 
keep  the  commandments.  There  has  been  the  widening  of  the 
gate,  the  broadening  of  the  road,  in  connection  with  which  the 
Lord  says,  "  Beware  of  false  prophets,  which  come  to  you 
in  sheep's  clothing,  but  inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves." 
There  may  be  true  teachers  sent  from  God ;  but  they  suffer 
with  the  false  ones,  if  they  are  mixed  up  with  the  world.  Being 
all  bound  together  for  common  objects,  whether  they  belong  to 
God  or  not,  those  that  are  really  true  n>ce  often  drawn  of  the 
rest  into  what  they  know  to  be  wrong.  And  remember  another 
solemn  thing.  The  devil  never  would  be  able  to  accomplish  any 
plan  in  Christendom,  if  he  could  not  get  good  people  to  join  the 
bad  in  it.  Unbelief  constantly  uses  as  an  excuse,  "  such  a  good 
man  is  here ;"  "the  excellent  Mr.  —  does  that."  But  is  the  opinion 
and  conduct  of  a  Christian  to  be  the  criterion  by  which  I  judge? 
If  so,  there  is  nothing  I  may  not  fall  into :  for  what  evil  thing  is 
there  that  a  man,  and  even  a  believer,  has  not  done  ?  You  know 
what  David  had  to  confess  before  the  Lord.  There  is  nothing: 
too  bad ;  and  this  is  the  way  that  the  devil  takes  to  keep  other 
persons  quiet  in  evil.  Presumption  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
matter,  nor  is  it  enough  to  cite  good  men.  The  only  question 
for  the  Christian  is  the  will  of  the  Lord;  and  therefore  it  becomes  a 
matter  of  searching  into  scripture.  The  sole  standard  for  the  believer 
is  the  written  word  of  God;  and  this  is  the  special  security  in  these 
last  days.     When  Paul  Avas  leaving  the  Ephesian  saints,  it  was 

E 


130  LECTURES   ON  THE   GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

to  God  and  to  the  word  of  His  grace  that  he  commended  them. 
Grievous  wolves  might  enter  in  among  them,  not  sparing  the 
flock ;  and  of  their  own  selves  men  might  arise,  speaking 
perverse  things ;  but  the  sole  safeguard,  as  a  rule  of  faith  and 
conduct  for  the  saints,  is  God's  holy  writ. 

Mass  is  the  most  wicked  act  of  the  most  corrupt  thing  under 
the  sun ;  but  if  the  grace  of  God  could  enter  there,  and  work 
by  His  Spirit,  spite  of  the  elevated  host,  who  shall  put  limits  ? 
But  is  this  a  reason  why  I  should  go  to  a  Roman  Catholic  chapel, 
or  pray  to  the  virgin?  God,  in  His  sovereign  grace,  can  go  any- 
where ;  but  if  I  desire  to  walk  as  a  Christian,  how  am  I  to  do  it  ? 
There  is  but  one  standard — the  will  of  God ;  and  the  will  of  God 
can  only  be  learnt  through  the  scriptures.  I  cannot  reason  from 
any  amount  of  blessing  there,  nor  from  any  apparent  weakness 
here.  Persons  might  be  allowed  to  seem  very  weak,  for  the 
express  purpose  of  shewing  that  the  power  is  not  in  them,  but 
in  God.  Although  the  apostles  were  such  mighty  men,  they 
were  often  allowed  to  appear  feeble  indeed  in  the  eyes  of  others. 
It  was  that  which  exposed  Paul  to  be  thought  not  an  apostle  by 
the  Corinthians,  though  they,  of  all  men,  ought  to  have  known 
better.  All  this  shews  that  I  cannot  reason  either  from  blessing, 
that  God's  grace  may  work,  or  from  the  weakness  of  God's 
children.  What  we  want  is  that  which  has  no  fault  at  all,  and 
this  is  the  word  of  God.  I  need  it  for  my  rule  as  a  christian 
man,  and  as  walking  together  with  all  saints.  If  we  act  upon 
that  word,  and  nothing  else,  we  shall  find  God  with  us.  It  will 
be  called  bigotry  ;  but  this  is  part  of  the  reproach  of  Christ. 
Faith  will  always  appear  proud  to  those  who  have  none  ; 
but  it  wiU  be  proved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  to  be  the  only 
humility,  and  that  everything  which  is  not  faith  is  pride,  or  no 
better.  Faith  admits  that  he  who  has  it  is  nothing — that  he 
has  no  power  nor  wisdom  of  his  own  ;  and  he  looks  to  God. 
May  we  be  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to  Him. 

But,  again,  "Ye  shall  know  them  by  their  fruits.  Do  men 
gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or  figs  of  thistles  ?  Even  so  every 
good  tree  bringeth  forth  good  fruit ;  but  a  corrupt  tree  bringeth 
forth  evil  fruit."     The  Lord  does  not  here  speak  simply  of  men 


CHAPTER  Vir.  131 

being  known  by  their  fruits,  but  of  false  prophets.  (Ver.  15 — 
20.)  "  Ye  shall  know  them  by  their  fruits."  Where  grace  is 
denied,  the  holiness  is  hollow,  or,  at  best,  legal.  Wherever 
grace  is  really  held  and  preached,  you  will  find  two  things — 
much  greater  care  in  what  concerns  God,  than  where  it  is  not 
equally  known  ;  and  also  greater  tenderness,  forbearance,  and 
patience  in  what  merely  touches  man.  Winking  at  sin  is  one 
thing,  but  unscriptural  severity  is  very  far  from  divine  righte- 
ousness, and  may  co-exist  with  the  allowance  of  self  in  many  a 
form.  There  are  certain  sins  that  call  for  rebuke  ;  but  it  is  only 
in  the  ^ravest  cases  that  there  ought  to  be  extreme  measures. 
We  are  not  left  to  make  laws  about  evil  for  ourselves :  we  are 
under  responsibility  to  another,  even  to  our  Lord.  We  ought 
not  in  this  to  trust  ourselves,  but  to  learn  the  wisdom  of  God,  and 
confide  in  the  perfectness  of  His  word  ;  and  our  business  is  to 
carry  out  what  we  find  there.  Let  the  help  come  from  where  it 
may,  if  we  can  thus  but  follow  the  word  of  God  more  fully,  we 
ought  to  be  exceedingly  grateful. 

Solemn,  most  solemn,  are  the  words  that  follow,  as  the  Lord's 
eye  scans  the  field  of  profession.  "  Not  every  one  that  saith 
unto  me.  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven ; 
but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 
Many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day,  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  pro- 
phesied in  thy  name  ?  and  in  thy  name  have  cast  out  devils  ? 
and  in  thy  name  done  many  wonderful  works  ?  And  then 
will  I  profess  unto  them,  I  never  knew  you  :  depart  from  me, 
ye  that  work  iniquity."  (Ver.  21 — 23.)  The  Lord  shews  the 
stability  of  His  word,  for  the  obedient  heart,  from  the  figure  of 
a  man  building  upon  a  rock ;  He  shews  also,  as  none  but  He 
could,  the  end  of  every  one  who  hears  and  does  not  His  sayings  : 
but  I  must  not  enter  upon  this  now. 

The  Lord  grant  that  our  hearts  may  be  towards  Himself!  We 
shall  be  able  to  help  one  another,  and  we  shall  be  helped  of  His 
own  grace.  Weak  as  we  are,  we  shall  be  made  to  stand.  And 
if  through  unwatchfulness  we  have  slipped,  the  Lord  will 
graciously  set  us  upon  our  feet  again. 

May  He  grant  us  singleness  of  eye  ! 


CHAPTER  VIIL 

I  CAN  well  understand  a  man  who  received  and  revered  the  Bible 
as  the  word  of  the  living  God,  finding  himself  at  fault  when  he 
closely  examines  the  gospels,  which  recount  the  Lord's  ministry, 
A  casual  reader  might  find  no  difficulty  ;  but  at  first,  nothing 
would  be  more  probable  than  that  he  who  carefully  compared 
the  different  accounts  might  be  perplexed — I  will  not  say 
stumbled,  because  he  has  too  much  confidence  in  the  word 
of  God.  In  comparing  the  gospels,  he  finds  that  they  differ 
very  considerably  in  the  way  in  which  the  same  facts  are 
recorded  in  different  gospels.  He  finds  one  arrangement  in 
Matthew,  another  in  Mark,  and  a  third  in  Luke  ;  and  yet  all 
these  he  is  sure  are  right.  But  he  cannot  make  out  how,  if  the 
Spirit  of  God  really  inspired  the  different  evangelists  to  give  a 
perfect  history  of  Christ,  there  should  at  the  same  time  be  these 
apparent  discrepancies.  He  is  obliged  to  cast  himself  upon 
God,  and  to  enquire  whether  there  be  not  some  principle  which 
can  account  for  these  changes  of  position,  and  for  the  different 
mode  in  which  the  same  circumstances  are  displayed.  The 
moment  that  he  thus  approaches  these  gospels,  light  will  dawn 
upon  his  soul.  He  begins  to  see  that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not 
merely  giving  the  testimony  of  so  many  witnesses,  but  that 
while  they  thoroughly  agree  at  bottom,  the  Holy  Ghost  had 
assigned  a  special  office  to  each  of  them,  so  that  their  writings 
present  the  Lord  in  various  and  distinct  attitudes.  It  remains 
to  enquire  what  are  these  several  points  of  view,  and  how  they 
may  both  give  occasion  to  and  explain  the  variety  of  statement 
that  is  undoubtedly  to  be  found  therein. 

I  have  already  shewn  that  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew  the  Holy 
Ghost  has  been  depicting  Jesus  in  His  relationship  to  Israel, 
and  that  this  accounts  for  the  genealogy  given  us  in  chapter  i., 
which  quite  differs  from  what  we  have  in  the  Gospel  of  Luke. 
It  is  specially  His  genealogy  as  Messiah,  which  is,  of  course, 


■CHAI>TEII  Yin.  133 

mipoTtant  and  interesting  to  Israel,  who  looked  for  a  Ruler 
of  the  seed  of  David.  At  the  same  time  the  Holy  Ghost  took 
particular  care  to  correct  the  narrow  worldly  thoughts  of  the 
Jews ;  and  shews  that  while  He  was,  according  to  the  flesh, 
of  the  seed  of  Israel,  He  was  also  the  Lord  God  ;  and  if  Em- 
manuel and  Jehovah,  His  special  work,  as  a  divine  person,  was 
to  save  His  people  fi-om  their  sins.  He  may  go  out  far  beyond 
that  people,  and  bless  Gentiles  no  less  than  Jews  ;  but  saving 
from  sins  was  clearly  an  expectation  of  Christ  that  ought  to 
have  been  gathered  from  the  prophets.  The  Jews  expected 
that  when  Messiah  came,  it  would  be  to  be  exalted  over  them  as 
a  nation  ;  that  they  consequently  would  become  the  head,  and 
the  Gentiles  the  tail.  All  this  they  had  rightly  inferred  from 
the  prophetic  word,  but  there  vr^s  a  great  deal  more  that  they 
had  not  discerned.  Messiah  is  bent  upon  their  spiritual,  as  well 
as  their  natural,  blessing ;  and  all  present  hopes  must  fade  away 
before  the  question  of  sin,  yea,  their  sins.  Jesus  accepts  His 
rejection  from  them,  and  eifects  on  the  cross  for  them  that  very 
redemption  which  they  thought  so  little  about. 

How  thoroughly,  too,  it  falls  in  with  the  Gospel  of  Matthew, 
that  we  should  have  a  long  discourse  lik<e  that  of  the  sermon  on 
the  mount,  without  interruption  ;  the  whole  being  given  us  as  a 
continuous  word  from  our  Lord.  All  interruptions,  if  there 
were  any,  are  carefully  excluded ;  so  as  to  bring  Him  out  on  the 
mount  in  pointed  antithesis  to  Moses,  by  whom  God  was  bringing 
in  an  earthly  kingdom :  but  now  it  is  because  He  manifests  the 
heavenly  King,  contrary  to  everything  the  Jews  were  expecting. 

The  Holy  Ghost  proceeds  in  this  gospel  to  give  us  the  facts 
of  our  Lord's  life  still  in  connection  w^ith  this  great  thoughts 
The  Gospel  of  Matthew  is  the  presentation  to  Israel  of  Jesus  as 
their  divine  Messiah,  their  rejection  of  Him  in  that  character, 
and  what  God  would  do  in  consequence.  We  shall  see  whether 
the  facts  that  are  given  us  even  in  this  chapter  do  not  bear  upon 
this  special  aspect  of  our  Lord.  From  the  Gospel  of  Mark,  it 
would  be  impossible  to  collect  it  in  the  same  way.  In  Matthew, 
the  mere  order  of  history  is  here  neglected,  and  facts  are  brought 
together  that  took  place  months  apart.     It  is  not  at  all   the 


134  LECTUEES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 

object  of  the  Holy  Ghost  by  Matthew,  or  even  Luke,  to  give  the 
facts  in  the  order  in  which  they  haj^pened,  wliich  Mark  does. 
Those  that  examine  the  Gospel  of  Mark  with  care  will  find 
notes  of  time,  expressions  such  as  "immediately,"  &c.,  where, 
things  are  left  vague  in  the  other  gospels.  The  phrases  of  rapid, 
transition,  or  of  instant  sequence,  of  course  bind  together  the 
different  occurrences  thus  brought  into  juxtaposition.  Lii 
Matthew  this  is  entirel}'  disregarded ;  and  of  all  the  chapters  in 
the  gospel,  there  is  not  one,  perhaps,  that  so  entirely  sets  aside 
the  mere  succession  of  dates,  as  the  very  one  before  us.  But 
if  this  be  so,  to  what  are  we  to  attribute  it  ?  Why,  we  may 
reverently  ask,  does  the  Holy  Ghost  in  Matthew  disregard  the 
order  in  which  things  followed  one  another  ?  Was  it  that 
Matthew  did  not  know  the  time  in  which  they  occurred  ?  If  he 
had  been  only  a  man  writing  a  history  for  his  own  pleasure, 
could  he  not  have  ascertained  with  tolerable  certainty  when  it 
was  that  each  fact  occurred  ?  And  when  he  first  had  published 
his  statement,  would  anything  have  been  easier  than  for  the 
other  evangelists  to  follow,  and  give  their  accomits  in  accord- 
ance with  his  ? 

But  the  contrary  is  the  case.  Mark  takes  up  a  different  line 
of  things,  and  Luke  another,  while  John  has  a  character  to 
himself.  On  the  very  face  of  it  we  are  driven  to  one  of  two 
suppositions.  Either  the  evangelists  were  as  careless  men  as 
ever  wrote  accounts  of  their  Master,  giving  different  accounts  as 
if  to  perplex  the  reader  ;  or  it  was  the  Holy  Ghost  who  presented 
the  facts  in  various  ways,  so  as  to  illustrate  the  glory  of  Christ 
far  more  than  what  mere  repetition  would  have  accomplished. 
The  latter  I  believe  to  be  the  truth.  Any  other  supposition 
is  as  irrational  as  irreverent.  For,  even  supposing  that  tlie 
apostles  had  written  different  accounts  and  had  made  mistakes, 
they  could  very  easily  have  corrected  each  other's  mistakes : 
but  the  reason  why  no  such  correction  appears  was  not  human 
error  or  defect,  but  divine  perfection.  It  was  the  Holy  Ghost 
who  was  pleased  to  shape  these  gospels  in  the  particular  form 
most  calculated  to  bring  out  the  person,  mission,  or  various 
relations  of  Christ.     The  Gospel  of  Mark  proves  that  tlie  healing 


CHAPTER  VIII.  135 

of  the  leper  took  place  at  a  difFerent  time  from  what  you  might 
have  gathered  from  this  chapter — iu  fact,  long  before  the  sermon 
on  the  momit.  Li  chapter  i.  we  have  the  Lord  described  as 
preaching  in  their  synagogues  through  all  Galilee,  and  casting 
out  devils :  "  and  there  came  a  leper  to  him,  beseeching  him,  and 
kneeling  down  to  him,  and  saying  unto  him,  If  thou  wilt  thou 
canst  make  me  clean."  (Mark  i.  40 — 45.)  Now,  no  intelligent 
man  doubts  this  is  the  same  story  as  in  Matthew  viii.  But  if 
we  read  the  next  chapter  of  Mark,  what  is  the  first  thing  men- 
tioned after  this?  "Again  he  entered  into  Capernaum  after 
some  days,  and  it  was  noised  that  he  was  in  the  house  ....  and  . 
they  come  unto  him,  bringing  one  sick  of  the  palsy,  which  was 
borne  of  four."  Clearly  here  we  have  a  fact,  the  cure  of  the 
paralytic  man,  which  Matthew  does  not  give  us  till  chapter  ix., 
after  a  storm  which  Mark  describes  in  chapter  iv.,  and  after  the 
case  of  the  demoniac,  which  only  appears  in  chapter  v. ;  so  that 
it  is  perfectly  plain  that  one  of  the  two  evangelists  must  have 
departed  from  the  order  of  history ;  and  as  Mark,  by  his  strict 
notes  of  time,  evidences  that  he  does  not,  Matthew  must  be  con- 
cluded to  have  so  done.  In  Mark  iii.  we  have  our  Lord  goinc; 
up  the  mountain,  and  calling  the  disciples  to  Him ;  and  there 
is  the  place  accordingly  in  this  gospel  where  the  sermon  on  the 
mount  would,  if  inserted  at  all,  come  in.  Thus,  it  was  con- 
siderably after  what  took  place  in  Matthew  viii.  2 — 4  that  the 
sermon  on  the  momit  was  uttered :  but  Mark  does  not  give  us 
that  sermon,  because  his  great  object  was  the  gospel  ministry 
and  characteristic  works  of  Christ ;  and  therefore  the  doctrinal 
expositions  of  our  Lord  are  left  out.  Where  brief  words  of  our 
Lord  accompany  what  He  did,  they  are  given  ;  but  nothing  more. 
It  may  make  what  I  have  been  saying  still  plainer,  if  in  Mark 
i.  we  observe,  further,  the  actual  order,  Simon  and  Andrew 
are  called,  in  verse  16  ;  James  and  John,  verse  19  ;  and  straight- 
way, having  gone  to  Capernaum,  He  entered  on  the  sabbath  day 
into  the  synagogue,  and  taught.  There  we  have  the  man  with 
the  unclean  spirit :  the  fact  took  place  a  little  after  the  final  call  of 
Andrew  and  Simon,  of  James  and  John.  The  unclean  spirit  was 
cast  out ;  "  and  immediately  his  fame  spread  abroad  through- 


136       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

out  all  tlie  region  round  about  Galilee.     Am^  forthwith,  when 
thej  were  come  out  of  the  synagogue,   they  entered  into  the 
house  of    Simon  and  Andrew,  with   James    and   John.     But 
Simon's  wife's  mother  lay  sick  of  a  fever,  and  anon  they  tell 
him  of  her,"  &c.    Hence  we  have  positive  certainty,  from  God's 
own  word,  that  the  healing  of  Peter's  wife's  mother  took  place 
a  short  time  after  the  call  of  Peter  and  Andrew,  and  consider- 
ably before  the  healing  of  the  leper.     Carrying  this  back  to  our 
chapter  in  Matthew,  we  see  the  importance  of  it ;  for  here  the 
healing  of  Peter's  mother-in-law  only  appears  in  the  middle  of 
the  chapter.     The  cleansing  of  the  leper  is  given  first,  then  the 
healing  of  the  centurion's  servant,  and  after  that,   of  Peter's 
wife's  mother;  whereas,  from  Mark,  we  know  for  a  certainty 
that  Peter's  wife's   mother  was    healed  long  before  the  leper. 
Looking  at   Mark  again,  we  find  that,  on  the  evening  of  the 
same    sabbath,    after    He   had   healed    Peter's   wife's   mother, 
*'  they  brought  unto  him  all  that  were  diseased,  and  them  that 
were  possessed  with    devils.     And   all   the  city  was  gathered 
together  at  the  door.     And  he  healed  many  that  were  sick  of 
divers  diseases,  and  cast  out  many  devils.  .......  And  in  the 

morning,  rising  up  a  great  while  before  day,  he  went  out,  and 
departed  into  a  solitar)^  place,  and  there  prayed,"  which  is  clearly 
the  same  scene  alluded  to  in  Matthew  viii.,  and  would  come  in 
after  verse  17.  The  fact  of  His  going  to  the  desert  and  praying 
is  not  mentioned  here ;  but  it  took  place  at  the  same  time. 
Then,  in  Mark,  we  have  His  going  into  Galilee,  preaching  in 
their  synagogues  and  casting  out  devils  ;  and  after  that,  He 
heals  the  leper.  What  I  draw  from  this  is  that,  as  Mark  tells 
us  the  very  day  on  which  these  things  happened,  we  must  take 
him  for  a  witness  of  their  order  as  to  time.  When  I  go  back 
to  Matthew,  do  I  find  that  there  is  any  intimation  of  the  time 
in  which  these  events  took  place  ?  Not  a  word.  It  is  simply 
said,  "  When  he  was  come  down  from  the  mountain,  great  mul- 
titudes followed  him,"  (Ver.  1,)  and  then  we  have  the  healing 
of  the  leper.  There  is  nothing  to  prove  that  the  leper  came  at 
that  particular  time.  All  that  is  said  is,  "  And  behold,  there  came 
a  leper,"  &c, — an  Old  Testament  form  of  expression.     Whether 


CHAPTER   VIII.  137 

tiro  healing  of  the  leper  took  place  before  He  came  clown,  or 
after,  we  are  not  told  here.  From  Mark  we  infer  that  the  ser- 
mon on  the  mount  was  given  long  after ;  and  that  the  healing  of 
Peter's  wife's  mother  took  place  before  the  healing  of  the  leper. 

Whvj  let  us  ask,  would  it  not  have  suited  this  Gospel  of 
Matthew  to  put  the  healing  of  Peter's  wife's  mother  first,  then 
the  leper,  and  lastly  the  centurion  ?  For  you  will  find  that  in 
the  order  of  time  this  was  really  the  succession.  The  centurion 
came  up  after  the  sermon  was  over,  and  Christ  was  in  Caper- 
naum ;  the  leper  had  been  healed  a  considerable  time  before, 
and  Smion's  mother-in-law  earlier  yet. 

But  what  is  the  great  truth  taught  by  these  facts  as  they  are 
arranged  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew?  The  Lord  is  met  by  a 
leper.  You  know  what  a  loathsome  thing  leprosy  was.  Noto- 
riously, it  w^as  not  only  most  offensive,  but  hopeless,  as  far  as 
man  was  concerned.  It  is  true  that  in  Leviticus  we  have 
ceremonies  for  the  cleansing  of  a  leper,  but  who  could  give  a 
ceremony  for  the  cure  of  a  leper  ?  who  take  away  that  disease 
after  it  had  once  infected  a  man  ?  Luke,  the  beloved  physician, 
gives  us  the  notice  that  he  was  "  full  of  leprosy ;"  the  other 
evangelists  do  not  state  anything  but  the  simple  fact  that  he  was 
a  leper.  This  was  enough.  Because,  to  the  Jews,  the  question 
was  whether  there  was  any  leprosy  at  all :  if  such  it  was,  they 
could  have  nothing  to  say  to  him  till  he  was  cured  and 
cleansed.  The  Spirit  of  God  uses  leprosy  as  a  type  of  sin,  in 
all  the  loathsomeness  that  it  produces.  Palsy  brings  out  the 
thought  of  poAverlessness.  Both  are  true  of  the  sinner.  He  is 
without  strength,  and  he  is  unclean  in  the  presence  of  God. 
Jesus  heals  the  leper.  This  at  once  illustrates  the  power  of 
Jehovah-Jesus  upon  earth,  and  more  than  that ;  for  it  was  not 
merely  a  question  of  His  power,  but  of  His  grace.  His  love, 
His  willingness  to  put  forth  all  His  might  on  behalf  of  His 
people.  For  the  whole  people  of  Israel  were  like  that  leper. 
The  prophet  Isaiah  had  said  so  long  before ;  and  they  were  not 
better  now.  The  Lord  repeats  the  sentence  of  Isaiah :  "  Make 
the  heart  of  this  people  fat,  and  make  their  ears  heavy,"  &c., 
and  this  leper  was  a  type  of  the  moral  condition  of  Israel  in  the 


138        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

presence  of  the  Messiah.     But,  whether  few  or  many,  let  them 
only  present  themselves  in  all  their  vileness  before  the  Messiah, 
and  how  would  the  Messiah  deal  with  them  ?     The  Messiah  is 
there.     He  has  got  the  power ;  but  the  leper  is  not  sure  of  His 
will.      ''■  Lord,"  he  says,  "  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me 
clean."     We  may  remember  the  distress  of  the  king  of  Israel 
in  the  days  of  EHsha,  when  the  king  of  Syria  sent  Naaman  to 
him  that  he  might  be  recovered  of  his  leprosy — how,  when  he 
had  read  the  letter,  "  he  rent  his  clothes,  and  said.  Am  I  God, 
to  kill  and  to  make  alive,  that  this  man.  doth  send  unto  me  to 
recover  a  man  of  his  leprosy  ?"     Only  God  could  do  it :  every 
Jew  knew  this ;  and  this  is  what  the  Holy  Ghost  is  desirous  of 
shewing.     We  have  had  the  testimony  that  Jesus  was  a  man, 
and  yet  Jehovah — able  to  save  His  people  from  their  sins.     But 
here  comes  out  His  presentation  to  Israel  in  particular  cases, 
where  the  Holy  Ghost,  instead  of  giving  a  mere  general  and 
historical  outline,  as  in  chapter  iv.,  singles  out  special  instances, 
for  the  purpose  of  illustrating  the  Lord's  relation  to  Israel,  and 
the    manifested    effects    of   it.      The    leper    is    the    first   case, 
where  we  have,  as  it  were,  the  microscope  applied  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,  that  we  may  see  clearly  how  the  Lord  carried  Himself 
toward  Israel ;  what  ought  to  have  been  the  place  of  Israel ;  and 
what  was  their  real  conduct.     At  once,  when  the  leper  acknow- 
ledges His  power  and  confesses  His  person,  "  Lord,  if  thou  wilt, 
thou  canst  make  me  clean  ;"  when  it  was  merely  the  question  of 
His  will,  and  of  His  affections,  immediately  there  comes   the 
answer  of  divine  love  as  well  as  power :  ''  I  will ;  be  thou  clean ; 
and  immediately  his  leprosy  was  cleansed."     He  put  forth  His 
hand,  and  touched  him.     It  was  not  only  God,  but  God  manifest 
in  the  flesh — One  who  entered  fully  into  the  poor  leper's  anxiety, 
yet  proved  Himself  paramount  to  the  law.     His  touch — it  was 
that  of,  Jehovah.     He  was  God.     The  law  could  only  put  the 
leper  at  a  distance;  but  if  God  gives  a  law.  He  is  superior  in 
grace   to   the   law   that   He   gives.      Tlie   heart   of  this   leper 
trembled,  afraid  lest  the  blessed  Lord  should  be  unwilling  to 
bless  him  ;  but  He  puts  forth  His  hand,  He  touches  him  :  none 
else  could,  none  else  would.      The  Lord's   touch,  instead   of 


CHAPTER  VIII.  139 

contracting  defilement  to  Himself,  banishes  defilement  from  the 
leper.  Immediately  he  is  cleansed.  Jesus  then  says  to  liim, 
"  See  thou  tell  no  man ;  but  go  thy  way,  shew  thyself  to  the 
priest,  and  offer  the  gift  that  Moses  commanded  for  a  testimony 
imto  them."  There  was  no  desire  that  he  should  publish  what 
Jesus  was :  God  might  tell  His  works.  He  says,  "  See  thou 
tell  no  man  ;  but  go,  shew  thyself  to  the  priest,"  &c.  Nothing 
could  be  more  blessed.  It  was  not  yet  the  time  for  the  Lord  to 
be  set  aside.  Jesus  waits.  The  cross  must  come  in  before  the 
law  could  be  set  aside  in  any  way.  We  are  delivered  from  the 
law  by  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus.  This  is  the  great 
doctrine  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans — that  we  are  dead  to  the 
law,  of  course  in  His  death,  that  we  might  "  be  married  to 
another,  even  to  Him  who  is  raised  from  the  dead,  that  we  should 
bring  forth  fruit  unto  God."  Up  to  the  resui'rection  of  Christ 
from  the  dead,  there  is  the  most  careful  guarding  of  the  law. 
After  resurrection,  saints  passed  into  another  relationship  with 
Him  who  was  risen  from  the  dead.  Here  we  find  there  was 
a  sedulous  maintenance  of  the  claims  of  God's  law  ;  and  it 
always  was  so  until  the  cross.  Therefore  He  says,  "  Go,  shew 
thyself  to  the  priest."  Also,  had  the  man  gone  telling  it  to 
every  one  instead  of  to  the  priest,  the  great  enemy  might  have 
found  means  to  misrepresent  the  work,  to  deny  the  miracle,  to 
try  and  make  out  that  he  was  not  the  man  who,  had  been  a 
leper.  Alas  !  was  it  the  wish  of  man's  heart  to  shew  that  Jesus 
had  not  wrought  such  a  miracle  ?  But  Jesus  says,  "  Go,  shew 
thyself  to  the  priest."  Why?  Because  the  priest  would  just 
be  himself  the  authentic  witness  that  Jesus  was  Jehovah.  The 
priest  that  knew  the  man  was  a  leper  before,  that  had  pronounced 
him  unclean,  that  had  put  him  outside,  would  now  see  that  the 
man  was  cured.  Who  had  done  it  ?  None  but  God  could  heal 
the  leper.  Jesus,  then,  was  God ;  Jesus  was  Jehovah.  The 
God  of  Israel  was  in  the  land.  The  priest's  mouth  would  be 
obliged  to  confess  the  glory  of  Christ's  person.  "  Offer  the 
gift  tliat  Moses  commanded  for  a  testimony  unto  them."  When 
had  there  been  the  offering  of  that  gift  ?  They  had  no  power  to 
heal  the  leper,  and  thus  could  not  offer  the  gift.     So  that  Jesus 


140       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

had  bowed  to  the  obb'ijations  of  the  law,  and  yet  had  He  done 
what  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the 
flesh.  But  here  was  one  who  was  God,  and  "  God  sending  His 
own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh."  God  Himself,  and 
God's  own  Son  withal,  He  was  here  Avorking  this  mighty  work 
that  proved  His  dignity ;  and  He  made  the  priest  himself  to  be 
the  witness  of  it. 

But  now  we  are  to  hear  a  different  tale — Jesus  enters  into 
Capernaum.  When,  we  are  not  told.  It  had  no  connection 
with  the  story  of  the  leper ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  puts  them 
together,  because  it  brings  in  the  Gentiles.  We  have  had  the 
Jew  set  forth  in  the  history  of  the  leper  and  the  gift  Moses  com- 
manded for  a  testimony  to  Israel.  But  now  there  is  a  centurion 
that  comes  and  tells  about  his  servant ;  and  this  brings  in  a  new 
kind  of  confession  of  the  Lord  altogether.  Here  there  is  no 
touching — no  connection  with  Christ  after  the  flesh.  Hence  it 
is  rather  the  way  in  which  the  Gentile  knows  Christ.  The  Jew 
looked  for  a  Christ  that  would  put  forth  His  hand — a  Saviour 
personally  present  among  them — bringing  in  this  divine  power, 
and  healing  them  ;  as  the  scripture  had  said,  "  I  am  the  Lord 
God  that  healeth  thee."  And  here  He  was  come  ;  but  they  did 
not  know  Him  so.  And  the  next  witness,  that  we  have  brought 
together  in  Matthew  but  nowhere  else,  is  the  centurion  ;  because 
God  would  shew  that  the  natural  chiklren  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob  were  going  to  be  cut  off".  They  would  not  Avorship  Him 
as  the  poor  leper  did.  The  testimony  to  the  priest  would  be  disre- 
garded. They  become  more  and  more  opposed  to  His  claims.  God 
says,  as  it  were,  If  you  Jews  will  not  have  my  Son,  I  will  send 
a  testimony  to  the  Gentiles,  and  the  Gentiles  will  hear.  Upon 
the  rejection  of  Jesus  by  the  Jew,  upon  Israel's  refusal  of  Him 
who  had  proved  Himself  to  be  their  Jehovah-God  in  forgiving- 
all  their  iniquities  and  healing  all  their  diseases,  what  then 
follows  ?     The  door  of  faith  is  oi)ened  to  the  Gentiles. 

Thus,  we  have  the  story  of  the  centurion,  which  is  taken 
out  of  its  place  and  put  here  purposely.  And  even  in  the 
details  of  the  history  there  are  very  noticeable  differences.  You 
have   not   the    embassy   of  the   Jews   in   connection  with  the 


CHAPTER   Vlir.  141 

centurion.  This  is  left  out  in  Matthew,  but  inserted  in  Luke. 
Thus,  while  Matthew's  gospel  gi^'es  everything  that  might  be 
calculated  to  meet  the  conscience  of  Israel,  it  abstains  from 
giving  that  which  they  might  have  prided  themselves  on.  It  was 
wholesome  for  the  Gentiles  that  they  should  hear  of  the  embassy 
of  this  good  man.  He  was  like  the  Gentile  laying  his  hand 
upon  the  skirt  of  him  that  was  a  Jew,  taking  his  place  behind 
Israel.  But  his  faith  goes  beyond  this  j  for  we  find  that  he 
comes  and  beseeches  the  Lord,  and  brings  out  his  own  personal 
faith  in  the  most  blessed  manner.  When  Jesus  says  to  him, 
"  I  will  come  and  heal  him,"  at  once  his  heart  is  manifest.  He 
answers,  "  Lord,  I  am  not  worthy  that  thou  shouldest  come 
mider  my  roof."  For  just  as  he,  the  centurion,  could  say  to 
one,  "  Go,  and  he  goetli ;  to  another,  Come,  and  he  cometh  ; 
and  to  his  servant.  Do  this,  and  he  doeth  it,"  how  much  more 
could  the  Lord  "  speak  the  word  only,  and  my  servant  shall  be 
healed  ?"  Jesus  had  indeed  authority  over  all  diseases  ;  but 
was  it  merely  a  question  of  His  putting  His  hand  upon  the 
leper  ?  Not  at  all.  He  had  only  to  utter  the  word,  and  it  was 
done.  The  centurion  assumes  the  grand  truth  that  Jesus  was 
God  (not  merely  Messiah),  and  therefore  full  of  ability  to  heal. 
Li  short,  he  looks  at  Him  in  a  still  higher  way,  not  as  One 
whose  presence  must  be  connected  with  the  putting  forth 
of  power,  but  as  One  who  had  only  to  speak  the  word,  and  it  was 
done.  This  brings  in  the  character  of  the  word  of  God,  and 
the  absence  of  Jesus  from  those  who  now  profit  by  His  grace. 

Such  is  our  position.  Jesus  is  away  and  unseen.  We  hear 
His  word,  lay  hold  of  it,  and  are  saved.  This  is  the  beautiful 
way  in  which  we  are  here  given  the  different  bearing  of  the  Lord 
on  the  Jew  and  on  the  Gentile ;  but  we  learn,  moreover,  that  the 
blessing  would  be  refused  by  Israel,  and  the  Gentiles  would 
become  the  objects  of  mercy  ;  as  it  is  said  here,  "  Verily  I  say 
unto  you,  I  have  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not  in  Israel. 
And  I  say  unto  you,  that  many  shall  come  from  the  east  and 
west,  and  shall  sit  down  with  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven."  (Ver.  10,  11.)  That  is,  many  Gentiles 
shall   come :   neither   is   this  all :    "  But   the   children  of  the 


142  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

kingdom" — meaninor  the  natural  children,  of  course — those 
that  were  the  seed,  but  not  the  children  of  Abraham  in  a  strict 
sense — the  children  of  the  kingdom  that  were  so  by  birth, 
but  who  had  no  faith  at  all — these  should  be  "  cast  out  into 
outer  darkness ;  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth." 
The  Jews  as  a  nation  were  going  to  be  rejected.  There  would 
only  be  a  line  of  believing  ones  ;  but  the  mass  of  Israel  should 
be  rejected  until  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  should  be  come  in. 

Thus  we  have  here  a  wonderful  view  of  our  Lord,  and  this 
exactly  in  accordance  with  the  general  strain  of  the  Gospel 
of  Matthew.  We  have  Jesus  proving  Himself  to  be  Jehovah- 
Jesus,  ready  to  heal,  wherever  there  was  faith ;  but  where  was 
it  ?  The  leper  might  represent  the  godly  remnant ;  but  as  to 
the  mass  of  Israel,  we  have  their  doom  pronounced  here,  and 
that  too  in  the  very  same  incident  which  proves  that  the  grace 
of  God  which  Israel  refused  would  malce  a  larger  channel  for 
.itself  to  run  in.  The  Gentiles  should  partake  of  the  mercies 
which  the  Jews  rejected.  This  is  just  what  is  here  put  to- 
gether in  these  two  stories.  Jesus  gives  proof  to  Israel  that 
He  was  a  divine  Messiah.  If  they  scorned  it,  the  Gentiles 
would  hear.  But  then  there  is  another  thing  of  great  import- 
ance, and  which  shews  why  the  healing  of  Peter's  wife's  mother 
is  kept  in  this  gospel  till  after  these  events,  although  Mark 
gives  it  before.  Mark  furnishes  the  history  of  the  ministry 
of  Christ  as  it  happened.  Why  does  not  Matthew  the  same  ? 
Divine  wisdom  is  stamped  upon  this,  as  upon  everything  in  the 
word  of  God.  I  believe  it  is  reserved  by  Matthew  for  this 
place,  because  Israel  might  have  the  idea  that,  when  the  mercy 
of  God  flowed  out  to  tlie  Gentiles,  His  heart  might  be  turned 
away  from  them.  The  maid  was  not  dead,  but  sleeping :  this  is 
the  state  of  Israel  now.  And  as  surely  as  the  Lord  did  raise 
her  up,  so  surely  will  He  in  a  future  day  awaken  the  sleeping- 
daughter  of  Zion.  We  have  got  better  blessing  and  higher 
glory  now.  But  it  is  necessary  for  the  truth  of  God's  word  that 
Israel  should  be  blessed  too ;  because,  if  God  could  break  His 
word  to  Israel,  I  cannot  trust  His  word  to  me.  Now  God 
positively  promised  the  eventual  final  glory  of  Israel   on  the 


CHAPTER   VIII.  143 

earth.  Tlic  only  thing  needed  is  that  we  should  not  confound 
these  things ;  that  we  should  not  be  ignorant  either  of  the 
Scripture  or  of  the  power  of  God. 

In  this  case  we  have  an  incident  brought  before  us  which 
proves  tliat  (though  the  Lord  knew  the  unbelief  of  Israel  and 
predicted  it ;  and  though  He  knew  also  that  the  Gentiles  were 
to  come  in  now  by  faith)  His  heart  could  not  but  linger  over 
Israel.  Therefore,  as  I  think,  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  illustrate 
this,  brings  in  here  the  healing  of  Peter's  mother-in-law.  In 
this  third  incident,  the  healing  of  Peter's  wife's  mother,  He 
did  it,  I  think  we  may  infer,  for  Peter's  sake,  whatever  may 
have  been  the  other  reasons.  It  is  a  natural  relationship,  and 
you  will  find  that  the  great  scene  for  this  is  Israel.  Peter  was 
the  apostle  of  the  circumcision ;  so  that  I  have  not  a  question 
that  one  of  the  reasons  why  this  event  is  brought  in  here  is  to 
shew  that  the  unbelief  of  Israel  would  not  finally  alienate  the 
Lord's  heart.  There  He  was,  still  healing  all  their  diseases,  as 
was  witnessed  even  to  the  crowd  around  her  door,  "  that  it 
might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  Esaias  the  prophet, 
saying,  Himself  took  our  infirmities  and  bare  our  sicknesses." 
The  Lord,  when  He  wrought  a  miracle,  entered  in  spirit  into 
the  circumstances  of  him  whom  He  was  relieving.  If  the  miracle 
brought  out  His  divine  power,  there  was  also  the  divine  sym- 
pathy that  entered  into  the  depth  of  the  need  that  He  relieved. 

Afterwards  we  have  the  Lord  preparing  to  go  to  the  other 
side.  But  this  gi^es  occasion  for  certain  persons  to  be  brought 
out  in  their  true  cliaracter  and  ways,  and  for  the  Lord  to  mani- 
fest His  own.  Now  when  did  this  happen  ?  This  brings  out  a 
most  peculiar  feature  of  the  Gospel  of  Matthew,  and  shews  how 
entirely  the  Holy  Ghost  was  above  the  mere  routine  of  dates. 
Look  at  the  Gospel  of  Luke,  and  you  will  find  that  the  conver- 
sation with  these  men,  which  is  recorded  here,  took  place  after 
the  transfiguration.  In  Luke  ix.  we  are  told  that  after  the 
transfiguration  had  taken  place,  the  Lord  stedfastly  set  His  face 
to  go  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  then,  in  verse  57,  it  is  said,  "  It  came 
to  pass,  that,  as  they  went  in  the  way,  a  certain  man  said  unto 
him,  Lord,  I  will  follow  thee  whithersoever  thou  goest.     And 


144       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

Jesus  said  unto  him,  Foxes  have  holes,  and  birds  of  the  air  have 
nests,  but  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  w^here  to  lay  his  head. 
And  he  said  unto  another.  Follow  me.  But  he  said,  Lord, 
suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  father."  (Luke  ix.  57 — 62.) 
Now,  am  I  too  bold  in  thinking  that  this  was  the  same  incident 
that  we  have  recorded  in  Matthew  ?  It  would  not  be  reasonable 
to  suppose  that  our  Lord  should  have  the  same  things  repeated 
at  different  times ;  nor  could  we  fairly  conceive  of  two  distinct 
persons  copying  one  another  so  exactly.  But  mark  its  import- 
ance, if  this  be  so.  It  took  place  a  very  long  time  after,  and  yet 
it  is  put  in  here  by  Matthew.  Why  ?  Because  it  illustrates 
this — that  while  the  Lord  had  all  this  love  in  His  heart  toward 
Israel,  spite  of  their  unbelief,  there  was  no  heart  in  Israel 
toM^ards  Him.  What  was  His  condition  now?  He  had  not 
even  where  to  lay  His  head.  What  a  thing  for  the  Messiah  of 
Israel  to  be  obliged  to  say,  when  a  man  offered  to  follow  Him, 
"  The  foxes  have  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the  air  have  nests,  but 
the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay  his  head." 

This  is  the  first  time  where  He  uses  the  expression  "  Son  of 
man."  It  is  no  longer  "  Son  of  David."  "  Son  of  man"  is 
the  title  of  Christ  as  rejected  or  glorified.  There  is  no  ques- 
tion which  of  the  two  it  was  here.  Even  His  own  people  will 
not  have  Him.  And  He  is  going  away  to  the  other  side — He 
must  leave  them.  He  has  done  it  now,  as  we  know.  But  this 
man  proposes  to  follow  Him.  The  Lord  knew  all  that  was  in 
his  heart.  The  man  was  a  mere  carnal  Jew,  who  thought  by 
following  Jesus  to  get  a  good  place  with  the  Messiah.  The 
Lord  tells  him  He  had  no  place  to  give  him.  There  was  not 
even  a  nest  for  the  Messiah.  What  was  there  for  the  flesh, 
offering  to  follow  Christ,  to  find  ?  The  Lord  unveils  his  heart, 
proves  its  utter  corruption,  shews  it  to  be  the  more  dreadful 
because  the  Lord  Himself  had  not  even  the  meanest  spot  that 
even  the  meanest  and  most  mischievous  creature  He  had 
made  might  possess.  Had  not  the  foxes  their  holes,  and  the 
birds  of  the  air  their  nests  ?  But  the  Son  of  mau  had  not  even 
where  to  lay  His  head.  If  the  flesh  should  pretend  to  follow 
our  Lord,  it  only  meets  with  a  rebuke.     To  a  disciple  who  had 


CHAPTER   VIII.  145 

said,  "  Lord,  suffer  me  fii'st  to  go  and  bury  my  fatlier,"  the 
Lord  could  say  again,  ^'  Follow  me,  and  let  the  dead  bury  their 
dead."  (Ver.  21,  22.)  Mark  the  difference.  Where  the  call 
of  Christ  is,  there  may  be  great  reluctance,  trial  felt,  and  strug- 
gling on  the  part  of  nature  ;  still  the  word  is,  "  Follow  me." 
When  you  get  a  thoroughly  carnal  man  in  the  presence  of  the 
gospel,  thei'e  is  not  this  backwardness — none  of  this  trial.  He 
thinks  it  is  all  beautiful,  but  it  does  not  lay  hold  of  his  soul ; 
and  very  soon  circumstances  occur  to  draw  his  heart  away  to 
other  things,  and  at  last  the  man  sinks  down  again  to  his  own 
level.  But  where  the  Lord  does  say,  "  Follow  me,"  how  often 
the  soul,  before  or  at  the  time,  says,  "  Lord,  suffer  me  first  to  go 
and  bury  my  father !"  It  is  clear  there  was  this  natural  rela- 
tionship, which  had  a  very  serious  claim.  His  father  was  lying 
dead  :  he  must  go  and  bury  him.  One  could  hardly  think  of  a 
duty  more  peremptory  than  this.  People  might  say  that  a  man 
must  make  the  burying  of  his  father  so  urgent  that  everything 
must  give  way  to  it.  Not  at  all,  says  the  Lord,  Christ  ought  to 
be  stronger  still.  If  the  call  of  Christ  is  heard,  even  at  the 
very  moment  when  the  father  lies  dead,  waiting  for  burial,  we 
must  forego  even  this.  The  world  may  say,  Tliere  is  a  man  that 
talks  about  Christ,  and  yet  does  not  love  his  father;  but  we 
must  be  prepared  for  this :  and  if  we  are  not,  it  is  because  we 
do  not  understand  the  value  of  the  Christ  that  we  have  sot. 
You  will  find  that  natural  ties  and  duties  in  this  world  are 
always  apt  to  come  in  as  a  hindrance  between  Christ  and  the 
soul.  The  claims  of  nature  are  continually  pressed  upon  one. 
But  no  matter  whether  it  be  father  or  mother,  or  brother  or 
sister,  or  son  or  daughter,  where  the  call  of  Christ  is  clear,  take 
care  that  you  do  not  say.  Suffer  me  to  do  such  and  such  a  thing 
Jlrst.  The  word  of  Jesus  is,  "  Follow  me,  and  let  the  dead 
bury  their  dead." 

Then  the  Lord  goes.  We  find  Him  entering  into  a  ship,  and 
His  disciples  following  Him.  And  thereon  follows  the  history  of 
the  tempest,  and  of  the  miracle  that  Jesus  wrought  in  calming 
the  winds  and  the  sea.  Now  when  did  this  really  take  place  ? 
On  the  evening  of  the  day  when  the  seven  parables  of  Matthew 
L 


146        LECrUKES  ON  THE  GOSFEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

xiii.  were  uttered,  before  the  transfiguration,  but  long  after  tbe 
other  events  mentioned  in  this  chapter.  Mark  lets  us  know  this 
positively  in  the  chapter  that  records  the  parables  (Mark  iv.) — the 
very  same  that  are  given  us  in  Matthew  xiii.,  with  this  addition, 
"  With  many  such  parables  spake  he  the  word  unto  them,  as  they 
were  able  to  hear  it ;  but  without  a  parable  spake  he  not  unto 
them.  And  when  they  were  alone  [when  they  had  entered  into 
the  house,  as  it  is  given  us  in  Matthew] ,  he  expounded  all  things 
to  his  disciples.  And  tlie  same  day,  when  the  even  was  come, 
he  saith  unto  them,  Let  us  pass  over  unto  the  other  side."  Then 
follows  the  same  history  that  we  had  in  the  first  gospel ;  and 
after  they  come  to  the  other  side,  there  is  the  man  with  the 
legion  of  devils.  There  need  not  be  a  question  that  this  is  the 
same  scene  that  we  have  here,  in  verses  24  —  27,  followed 
by  the  healing  of  the  men  possessed  with  devils ;  but  brought 
out  in  an  entirely  different  connection.  It  did  not  really  occur 
till  a  considerable  time  after ;  as  the  account  of  the  conversation 
of  our  Lord  with  more  than  one  has  been  given  here,  though  it 
took  place  at  a  totally  different  part  of  the  life  and  ministry 
of  Christ. 

What  follows  from  this  ?  That  the  Holy  Ghost  in  Matthew 
only  gives  us  historical  order  where  it  falls  in  with  the  special 
object  of  the  gospel.  All  this  marks  the  perfect  wisdom  of 
God :  and  none  but  God  would  have  thought  of  such  a  thing. 
But  how  few  think  of  it,  or  even  understand  it  now !  Does  it 
not  shew  the  slowness  of  our  hearts  to  take  in  the  full  meaning 
of  the  word  of  God  ?  What  is  the  Lord  teaching  in  these  two 
scenes  ?  He  shews  us  here  Himself  alone  with  His  disciples. 
The  godly  part  of  Israel  are  now  separated  with  Himself  and 
exposed  to  all  that  the  enemies  of  God  could  do  against  them. 
But  it  only  serves  to  enlist  the  power  of  the  Lord  for  them. 
Everything  is  subdued  at  His  bidding.  So  is  it  in  our  own 
experience.  There  never  is  a  difficulty,  trial,  or  painful  circum- 
stance in  which  we  appear  to  be  utterly  overwhelmed  by  the 
power  of  Satan  in  this  world,  but  what,  if  our  eye  is  towards 
Christ,  and  we  appeal  to  Him,  we  shall  know  His  power  most 
truly  put  forth  on  our  behalf.     When  they  realize  whom  they  had 


CHAPTER  viir.  147 

in  the  same  boat  witli  tlicm  and  cry,  saying,  ''  Lord,  save  ns ; 
we  perish,"  He  arises  and  rebukes-the  wind  and  the  sea.  "  And 
tliere  was  a  great  cahn."  So  that  even  the  very  shipmen  mar- 
velled, saying,  "  What  manner  of  man  is  this,  that  even  the 
Avinds  and  the  sea  obey  Him?"  The  disciples  knew  it  in  a  still 
deeper  way,  but  the  others  were  astonished. 

But  this  is  not  all.  It  might  evince  what  Christ  is  for  the 
godly  who  were  with  Him.  But  there  were  two  men,  far  indeed 
from  the  Messiah,  for  they  were  among  the  tombs,  possessed  with 
devils,  exceeding  fierce,  so  that  no  man  might  pass  by  that  way 
— just  the  picture  of  the  most  desperate  power  of  Satan  in  the 
world.  One  of  them,  as  we  are  told  elsewhere,  went  by  the 
name  of  Legion,  because  many  devils  were  entered  into  him. 
You  could  not  have  worse  than  this.  The  power  of  Satan  was 
stronger  than  all  the  fetters  of  men. 

But  the  Lord  is  there.  The  devils  believe  and  tremble.  Tliey 
felt  His  presence.  But  the  day  was  not  come  for  Satan  to  be 
dispossessed  of  his  title  over  the  world.  As  yet  it  was  only  the 
time  of  the  proof  of  the  power  to  do  it :  but  the  full  exercise  of 
that  power  was  reserved  for  another  day.  I  doubt  not  that  our 
evanoelist  o-ives  the  casting:  out  of  the  demons  as  a  witness  of 
Christ's  power  to  deliver  the  Jewish  remnant ;  and  therefore  the 
Holy  Ghost,  here  only,  names  the  tioo  men :  as,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  possessed  herd  of  swine  seems  to  represent  tlie 
destruction  of  the  unclean  mass  of  Israel  in  the  latter  day. 

Then,  again,  the  history  brings  out  this  also — that  Satan  has 
power  in  a  twofold  way,  not  only  in  the  dreadful  excesses  of 
those  Avho  are  completely  under  his  influence,  but  in  the  quiet 
enmity  of  the  heart  that  could  lead  others  to  go  to  Jesus,  in 
order  to  beseech  Him  to  depart  out  of  their  coasts.  What  a 
solemn  thing  it  is  to  know  that  the  secret  influence  of  Satan 
over  the  heart,  that  creates  the  wish  to  get  rid  of  Jesus,  is  even 
more  fatal,  personally,  than  Avhen  Satan  makes  a  man  to  be  the 
witness  of  his  awful  power !  But  so  it  was  then,  and  so  it  is 
that  men  perish  now. 

That  is  the  history  of  the  men  that  wish  Jesus  to  depart  from 
them.     The  Lord  grant  there  may  be  that  happy  knowledge  of 


148        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

Jesus,  that  entering  into  what  He  is  to  us  now,  which  gives  the 
soul  calmness  and  rest  in  His  love,  and  the  certainty  that  there 
is  the  real  presence  of  Jesus  with  those  that  belong  to  Him ; 
"  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  consummation  of  the 
age."  May  we  know  what  it  is  to  have  Jesus  to  take  care  of  us, 
and  produce  a  great  calm,  whatever  may  be  the  effect  of  the 
stirring  up  of  Satan's  power  against  us  !  The  Lord  give  us  to 
look  at  Jesus.  If  it  be  fi-om  my  first  knowledge  of  what  sin  is 
to  my  last  trial  in  this  world,  it  is  all  a  question  of  whether  1 
trust  in  myself  or  in  Jesus. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Whoever  attentively  examines  this  chapter  with  the  follow- 
ing one  can  hardly  fail  to  see  that  the  proper  break  is  at  the 
end  of  verse  25,  the  last  three  verses  of  chapter  ix.  forming 
properly  the  introduction  to  chapter  x.  What  we  have  in 
chapter  ix.,  as  far  as  I  have  understood,  is  the  effect  of  the  pre- 
sence of  Jesus  upon  the  religious  leaders  of  Israel :  I  believe  this 
is  the  great  subject.  The  chapter  before  gave  us  the  outline 
of  the  Lord's  presence  in  Israel,  and  its  results.  That  is,  it  was 
a  general  picture  ;  and  therefore  we  saw  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
entirely  neglects  the  mere  historical  order,  putting  together 
passages  in  the  life  of  Christ  that  were  separated,  in  point  of 
fact,  by  months  or  even  a  year.  There  is  not  here  the  slightest 
attempt  on  the  part  of  the  Spirit  of  God  to  present  them  as 
they  happened ;  but  on  the  contrary,  the  Holy  Ghost  goes  out 
of  His  way  for  the  purpose  of  culling  from  different  times  and 
places  certain  grand  facts  that  illustrated  the  Messiah's  presence 
amidst  His  people.  His  rejection  by  Israel,  and  what  the  results 
of  this  rejection  would  be.  What  we  saw  was  that,  first  of  all, 
He  was  proved  to  be   God,  the  God  of  Israel — Jehovah;  to 


CHAPTER   IX.  149 

whom  tlie  cleansing  of  leprosy  was  merely  the  question  of  His 
will;  for  even  the  leper  did  not  donbt  Plis  poAver.  "If  thou 
wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  clean."  None  hut  God  could  do  this. 
Now  none  had  so  strong  a  feeling  about  this  loathsome  evil  as  a 
Jew ;  because  God  Himself  had  laid  down  so  carefully  the 
nature  and  proof  of  leprosy  in  His  law.  For  it  was  a  question 
of  hopeless  uncleanness — the  solemn  emphatic  lesson  of  how 
horrible  sin  is,  often  in  its  effects  and  in  itself.  God  can  cure 
and  God  can  cleanse :  nobody  else  can.  It  was  not  exactly  a 
case  of  forgiving,  but  of  cleansing  and  putting  away  defile- 
ment. The  Spirit  of  God  reserved  the  question  of  forgiveness 
(which  is  connected  with  the  rights  of  God  and  with  His  judicial 
character,  as  the  cleansing  of  leprosy  is  more  particularly  con- 
nected with  His  holiness)  till  the  chapter  we  are  about  to  look 
at  now.  In  the  first  of  these  chapters  there  was  the  broad 
feature  that  Messiah  was  there, — God  Himself  in  grace,  and 
not  acting  according  to  the  law,  which  would  have  banished  the 
Jeper  outside  dwelling-place  and  people  and  His  own  i:)resence. 
A  most  wonderful  fact  to  realize  on  earth  and  in  Israel  that  a 
person  was  there,  as  plainly  God  in  His  power  as  He  was  God 
in  His  love  !  The  law  merely  laid  down  that  which  was  right, 
"but  could  give  no  power,  save  to  condemn  the  unrighteous.  It 
must  make  the  case  of  a  sinner  hopeless ;  just  because  it  is 
God's  law,  which  law  can  iiever  mix  with  sin.  But  here  was 
One  who  had  given  the  law  and  yet  was  above  the  law.  Evi- 
dently indeed,  unless  there  be  some  principle  in  God  paramount 
to  the  law,  there  can  be  no  rescue  for  the  guilty.  But  grace  is 
that  principle.  And  here  was  one  who  shewed  in  His  acts  and 
words  that  He  was  in  nothing  more  manifestly  God  than  in  the 
fulness  of  His  grace.  He  touched  the  leper,  and  said,  "  I  will : 
be  thou  clean."  The  state  of  this  man  was  just  the  picture  of 
the  true  condition  of  Israel ;  and  what  the  Lord  did  for  the 
solitary  leper.  He  was  equally  willing  to  do  for  the  whole  nation  ; 
but  "  He  came  to  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him  not." 
Would  God  then  be  baffled  in  His  love  ?  If  the  Jew  refused 
Him,  what  of  the  Gentile?  They  should  hear;  and  therefore 
v>'e  have  immediately  following  the  centurion  and  his  servant. 


150  LECTURES   ON  THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

But  I  will  not  repeat  tlie  facts  of  chapter  viii.  In  the  chapter 
before  us  now,  we  have,  not  the  general  picture  of  God's  presence 
and  its  results  in  Israel,  but  its  special  bearings  upon  the 
religious  leaders  of  the  people. 

We  begin  again  with  the  Lord's  giving  a  remarkable  case  of 
healing ;  not  the  obvious  case  of  leprosy,  which  ought  to  have 
struck  any  Jew,  but  another  equally  illustrative.  "  He  entered 
into  a  ship,  and  passed  over,  and  came  into  his  own  city"  (ver.  1) 
— that  is,  Capernaum.  Thus  we  are  upon  narrower  ground  now. 
Capernaum  was  the  place  where  the  Lord  lived  and  wrought 
His  mightiest  miracles,  and  which  for  that  very  reason  after- 
wards comes  in  for  the  most  fearful  woe  that  He  could  pronounce. 
This  is  always  the  case;  and  a  most  solemn  principle  it  is. 
When  the  day  of  the  Lord  comes,  the  heaviest  blow  of  judgment 
will  fall,  not  upon  the  dark  parts  of  the  earth,  but  upon  the 
favoured  ones,  where  there  has  been  most  light,  but  alas  !  most 
unfaithfulness.  For  my  own  part,  I  do  not  doubt  our  own  land 
must  suffer  in  a  special  measure ;  but,  above  all,  Jerusalem,  and 
Rome  too,  to  which  latter  place  the  most  remarkable  of  all  the 
epistles  was  written  as  laying  down  the  foundations  of  Christi- 
anity, but  where  there  has  been  the  greatest  departure.  They 
will  come  under  the  judgment  of  God  in  a  most  emphatic  man- 
ner, not  only  religiously  but  civilly.  No  matter  who  reigns,  or 
who  may  be  put  down,  this  must  be  the  case  wherever,  in  spite 
of  the  special  favours  of  God  and  the  light  of  His  word  spread 
abroad,  persons  have  remained  unfaithful,  and  have  even  become 
more  lax  and  superstitious  or  sceptical.  The  Lord  will  remove 
those  that  are  His  before  the  judgment,  and  the  rest  will  remain 
to  suifer  His  just  displeasure.  "As  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah, 
so  shall  it  be  also  in  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man." 

In  this  scene  the  Lord  shews  the  moral  necessity  for  such  a 
judgment.  Nor  was  it  merely  in  the  land  of  the  Gergesenes,  or* 
of  Nazareth.  But  take  the  very  best — the  people  who  ought  to 
have  known  the  scriptures  more  than  others,  whose  very  profes- 
sion it  was  to  know  and  teach  them — what  was  their  estimato 
of  Jesus  ?  It  is  this  which  comes  out  in  our  chapter.  "  Behold, 
they  brought  to  him  a  man  sick  of  the  palsy,  lying  on  a  bed  ; 


CHAPTER   IX.  151 

and  Jesus  seeing  their  faith,  said  unto  the  sick  of  the  palsy,  Son, 
he  of  good  cheer :"  a  most  blessed  word,  meeting  the  Avhole 
case  of  the  man ;  a  word  to  touch  his  aflFections  and  meet  his 
conscience.  "  Son,  be  of  good  cheer ;  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee." 
There  was  somewhat  for  heart  and  conscience.  His  sins  ought 
to  have  laid  more  heavily  upon  his  heart  than  his  palsy  did  upon 
his  body;  but  this  word  met  all  his  need.  "And,  behold, 
certain  of  the  scribes  said  within  themselves,  This  man  blas- 
phemeth."  (Ver.  3.)  In  this  chapter,  it  is  not  the  scribe  in  his 
vain  fleshly  confidence,  professing  to  shew  honour  to  Jesus  ;  but 
the  scribes  are  judging  and  condemning  Him,  To  their  view 
Jesus  was  blaspheming,  when  He  said  "  Thy  sins  be  forgiven 
thee.'"  Awful  delusion  of  the  wickedness  of  man!  "This 
man  blasphemeth  !"  And  these  were  not  ignorant  people  ;  yet 
they  said  within  themselves,  "  This  man  blasphemeth !"  But 
*' Jesus,  knowing  their  thoughts,  said.  Wherefore  think  ye  evil 
in  your  hearts  ?  For  whether  is  easier,  to  say.  Thy  sins  be  for- 
given thee;  or  to  say,  Arise  and  walk?"  And  now  He  brings 
out  a  word  of  His  that  shewed  what  ought  at  once  to  have  told 
upon  a  scribe,  who  would  be  familiar  with  the  scriptures. 

This  is  not  the  experience  of  a  saint  now,  though  we  can  take 
it  up  in  a  most  blessed  sense.  But  when  we  come  to  such  a  verse 
as  that,  "  Who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities,  who  healeth  all  thy 
diseases,"  can  we  say  that  this  is  the  way  the  Lord  deals  now 
with  Christians?  Where  He  forgives  a  person's  iniquities,  does 
He  necessarily  heal  all  their  diseases?  Whereas  here  it  is 
evident  that  the  Lord  contemplated  the  union  of  the  cure  of 
bodily  diseases  with  the  forgiveness  of  sins  in  the  same  people 
and  at  the  same  time.  When  will  this  be?  When  God  takes 
the  p-overnment  of  the  world  into  His  own  hands.  When  the 
One  who  was  crucified  will  be  glorified — not  only  in  heaven,  but 
here  below ;  when  that  day  comes,  the  outward  world,  the  body 
of  man,  and  particularly  of  God's  own  people  Israel,  will  feel 
the  immediate  effect.  While  we  can  take  the  pith  and  spirit  of 
the  Psalms,  as  far  as  they  apply  to  our  condition  now,  let  us  not 
forget  that  there  is  much  more  in  the  Psalms  that  we  cannot 
adopt   as  applicable   to  ourselves.      We   cannot   honestly  say, 


152        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

"  Who  forgivetli  all  thine  iniquities ;  who  healeth  all  thy 
diseases."  The  diseases  there  do  not  mean  sin,  because  this  was 
just  spoken  of  separately.  We  have  the  forgiveness  of  iniquities, 
and  the  healing  of  bodily  distempers,  both  promised ;  and  so  the 
Lord  accomplishes  both  here.  He  shews  that,  in  His  person  and 
by  His  ministry  now  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  there  was  the  witness 
of  the  power  to  do  both.  That  they  might  know  that  the  Son 
of  man  had  "  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins  (then  saith  he  to 
the  sick  of  the  palsy),  Arise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and  go  unto  thine 
house.  And  he  arose  and  departed  to  his  house."  There  was  a 
proof  of  the  reality  of  the  forgiveness  in  the  fact  that  the 
disease  was  healed  before  their  eyes.  The  union  of  these  two 
things  ought  forcibly  to  have  struck  a  scribe.  God's  word  had 
united  them,  and  this  too  with  the  reign  of  Jehovah.  The  soul 
had  been  called  upon  to  bless  Jehovah,  who  should  forgive 
Israel's  iniquities  and  heal  their  diseases.  But  who  was  this  ? 
He  had  spoken  of  Himself  as  the  Son  of  man  in  the  chapter 
before  : — "^the  Son  of  man,"  He  had  said,  "  hath  not  where  to 
lay  his  head."  It  is  the  title  of  a  rejected  Messiah.  After- 
wards He  is  the  glorious  Son  of  man ;  but  He  is  the  sufferer 
before  He  enters  into  His  glory.  In  this  miracle  we  have  the 
strongest  testimony  of  what  the  glory  of  His  person  was.  He 
had  only  to  tell  the  palsied  man,  "Arise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and 
go  unto  thine  house;"  and  at  once  all  poAverlessness  vanished 
from  Him,  "  and  he  arose  and  departed  to  his  house." 

This  then  was  the  Lord's  answer  to  the  blasphemy  of  the  scribes 
who  charged  Him  with  blasphemy.  "But  when  the  multitudes 
saw  it,  they  marvelled,  and  glorified  God,  which  had  given  such 
power  unto  men."  (Ver.  8.)  Alas !  they  did  not  knoAv  that  it 
was  the  power  of  God  exercised  by  One  who  Himself  was  God. 
They  saw  that  He  was  the  vessel  of  the  j^ower  of  God,  and  this 
was  all ;  and  a  man  might  be  this,  and  not  be  God.  Tlie  Lord 
might  be  pleased  to  work  miracles  even  by  a  bad  man.  So  that, 
while  they  gave  glory  to  God  who  had  given  such  power  to  a 
man,  there  was  no  real  faith  in  the  person  of  Christ.  But  the 
great  object  of  the  miracle  is  the  bringing  out  of  the  true  state 
of  heart  in  the  ecclesiastical  chiefs  of  the  people.     A  solemn 


CHAPTER  IX.  153 

judgment  to  apply  any  time  begins  to  dawn  with  this  chapter; 
and  before  -we  have  done  with  it,  we  sliall  find  that  the  case  is 
closed,  as  far  as  they  are  concerned.  Jehovah- Jesus  was 
intolerable  to  Israel ;  but,  most  of  all,  to  those  who  had  the 
highest  reputation  for  learning  and  sanctity. 

Tlie  Lord  passes  from  this  scene,  and  sees  "  a  man  named 
Matthew,  sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom  :  and  he  saith  unto 
him,  Follow  me;  and  he  arose  and  followed  him."  If  we  com- 
pare the  gospels  of  Mark  and  Luke  we  find  that  both  the  palsied 
man's  case  and  the  call  of  Levi  took  place  long  before  many 
of  the  circumstances  that  we  have  already  had :  but  they  are 
reserved  for  two  special  purposes  in  Matthew's  account.  They 
are  given  at  the  beginning  of  Mark  ii.  as  they  happened  in 
order  of  time.  Mark  was  undoubtedly  led  thus  to  act  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  but  Matthew  puts  them  out  of  that  order  for  the 
purpose  of  giving  large  pictures,  after  a  dispensational  sort, 
of  our  Lord's  presence  upon  earth,  and  its  consequences  for 
Israel ;  and  all  the  facts  that  would  bear  upon  their  blindness 
for  a  time  and  future  restoration  are  grouped  together. 

But  here  we  see  the  effect  of  His  presence  upon  the  religious 
guides.  Matthew's  call  was  a  most  significant  one  ;  and  we  find 
that  the  Spirit  of  God  led  him  to  give  his  name  here — the  name 
by  which  he  was  afterwards  known  both  on  earth  and  in  heaven. 
Matthew  accordingly  shews  the  grace  of  the  Lord,  spite  of  the 
animosities  of  those  scribes  against  Him,  and  the  form  that  His 
grace  took  in  consequence  of  their  unbelief.  He  goes  out  and 
calls  Matthew  as  he  was  sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom.  Other 
people  had  brought  the  palsied  man  ;  but  Matthew  does  not 
seem  to  have  manifested  faith  before  the  summons  of  Jesus.  It 
was  not  Matthew  who  sought  Jesus,  but  Jesus  who  called 
Matthew.  Matthew  was  busied  only  about  the  tax,  of  which  he 
was  the  licensed  gatherer.  The  publicans  were  always  classed 
with  the  sinners,  and  the  Lord  goes  and  calls  the  publican 
Matthew  when  he  was  in  the  very  midst  of  the  performance 
of  his  office,  sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom.  Obedient  to  the 
Messiah,  Matthew  not  only  follows  Him  at  once,  but  invites  Jesus 


154  LECTUKES   ON  THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

to  sit  at  meat  in  the  house.  "  And,  behold,  many  publicans 
and  sinners  came  and  sat  down  with  him  and  his  disciples.  And 
when  the  Pharisees  saw  it,  they  said  unto  his  disciples.  Why 
eateth  your  Master  with  publicans  and  sinners  ?"  It  was  a 
positive  clear  subversion  of  all  propriety  and  order  in  the  eyes 
of  a  Jew.  To  sit  down  at  meat  without  the  least  feelino;  of 
contempt  for  these  publicans  and  sinners  was,  indeed,  strange  in 
the  eyes  of  the  Pharisees.  What  was  the  Lord  doing  ?  He 
was  displaying  God's  grace  increasingly,  the  more  unbelief  broke 
out  from  the  merely  outwardly-religious  people — persons  who 
had  thoughts  of  God,  but  not  founded  upon  His  word  (for  men 
may  be  ever  so  earnest  out  of  their  own  minds  and  hearts,  but 
without  the  faith  of  God's  elect).  On  the  one  hand,  these  men 
proved  their  total  unbelief  in  Jesus  and  His  glory  ;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  God,  in  tlie  person  of  Jesus,  was  going  farther 
in  His  grace  and  more  counter  to  the  thouo-hts  of  the  reliffious 
people  in  Israel.  He  calls  Matthew,  and  He  eats  with  these 
publicans  and  sinners^;  and  when  fault  is  found  with  it  by  the 
Pharisees  to  the  disciples,  the  Lord  at  once  produces  that 
blessed  word  from  the  Old  Testament,  "  I  will  have  mercy, 
and  not  sacrifice  ;  for  I  am  not  come  to  call  the  righteous,  but 
sinners  to  repentance."  He  vindicates  this  call,  and  maintains 
it,  not  as  an  exceptional  case,  but  as  a  principle. 

It  was  what  God  was  come  down  to  make  good  upon  earth. 
It  was  not  the  law,  but  grace  now.  This  gives  rise  to  something 
further,  and  a  very  instructive  word  from  the  Lord  is  brought 
before  us  here.  The  disciples  were  found  fault  with,  because 
they  did  not  fast,  like  the  disciples  of  John,  and  the  Pharisees. 
And  the  Lord  gives  this  reason  for  it :  "  Can  the  children  of  the 
bridechamber  mourn  as  long  as  the  bridegroom  is  with  them?" 
That  is.  He  shews  the  absurdity  of  fasting,  Mdien  the  source  of 
all  their  joy  was  there.  How  utterly  contrary  would  it  have 
been  to  their  faith  in  Him,  the  Messiah,  to  submit  to  this  mark 
of  sorrow  and  humiliation,  in  the  presence  of  the  spring  of  all 
their  joy  and  gladness !  But  there  was  something  deeper  than 
that  to  be  learned.  There  was  not  only  the  presence  of  One 
that  the  disciples   understood,  and  that  the  others  did  not,  but 


CHAPTER    IX.  155 

the  Lord  shews  that  you  cannot  mhiglc  the  prescriptions  that 
flow  from  the  law,  with  the  principles  and  power  of  divine  grace 
(a  most  important  principle,  and  the  very  one  that  Christendom 
has  practically  destroyed).  For  what  has  brought  about  the 
present  state  of  Christendom?  Christianity  is  the  system  of 
grace  in  Christ  maintained  in  holiness  by  the  Holy  Ghost  among 
those  that  believe.  Christendom  is  the  great  house  of  profession, 
where  there  are  unclean  vessels  mingled  Avith  those  that  are 
to  honour ;  where  principles  abound  and  reign  that  never  came 
from  Christ,  and  that  are  adopted,  some  of  them  from  Judaism, 
others  out  of  people's  own  wit  without  respect  to  the  Bible.  But 
what  the  Lord  shews  is,  that  even  if  you  take  what  God  once 
sanctioned  under  the  law  it  will  not  do  now.  The  same  God 
who  tried  Israel  by  the  law  has  sent  the  gospel ;  and  it  is  the 
gospel  that  He  is  sending  now,  and  not  the  law.  It  is  grace 
that  we  have  to  do  with.  It  is  Christ  risen  and  in  heaven  that  1 
am  in  relationship  with,  and  not  with  the  law.  I  am  dead  to  the 
law  if  I  am  a  Christian.  Christendom  has  forgotten  and 
departed  from  that;  and,  arguing  from  the  premises  that  the 
law  is  good,  and  the  gospel  also,  they  say.  Will  it  not  be  much 
surer  to  put  them  together?  The  result  of  this  has  been,  that 
what  our  Lord  said  could  not  be  done,  men  have  been  aiming  at 
with  the  utmost  diligence.  They  have  tried  to  put  the  new  wino 
into  old  bottles — that  is  to  say,  into  the  receptacles  of  legal 
principles  which  God  has  done  with.  He  has  brought  in  new 
wine,  and  He  wants  new  bottles. 

The  inner  virtue  and  power  of  Christianity  must  clothe  itself 
with  its  own  proper  forms.  The  new  garments  were  the  due 
manifestation  of  the  gospel,  which  totally  differs  from  ways 
framed  according  to  the  law.  Legalism  was  the  old  garb  ;  and 
it  was  despising  the  goochiess  of  God  to  merely  patch  up  the 
old  one.  And  after  all,  it  will  never  succeed.  The  attempt  will 
only  make  the  old  worse.  This  is  what  Christendom  has  done. 
It  has  tried  to  mend  the  old  garment  with  the  new  piece — to 
bring  a  certain  measure  of  christian  morals  into  the  old  garment, 
as  a  sort  of  improvement  upon  Judaism.  And  what  has  been 
the  result  ?     Besides,  there  is  the  pouring  of  the  new  wine  into 


156        LECTUEES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

old  bottles.  There  is  a  certain  measure  of  the  preaching  of 
Christ,  but  it  is  all  in  connection  with  the  old  bottles. 
These  verses  embrace  both  the  outward  development  and  the 
inward  power  ;  and  shew  that  Christianity  is  entirely  a  new 
thing,  and  one  that  cannot  be  mingled  with  the  law.  If  you 
find  a  man  who  thinks  he  has  got  some  righteousness  of  his  own, 
you  can  cut  him  down  by  the  lasv.  This  is  the  legitimate  use  of 
the  law.  He  is  really  migodly,  and  you  use  the  law  to  prove 
that  he  is  so.  But  in  the  Christian,  we  have  one  who  is  godly ; 
and  the  law,  as  St.  Paul  expressly  insists,  is  not  for  him.  I  am 
not  to  put  the  new  wine  into  old  bottles,  nor  the  old  into  new. 
This  leads  the  Lord  to  bring;  out  the  entire  newness  of  the  con- 
duct  and  principles  that  flow  from  Himself  and  from  His  grace. 
And  all  this  Avas  strongly  opposed  to  the  thoughts  and  prejudices 
of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  who  came  in  afterwards  with  their 
questions  about  fasts.  Not  that  fasting  is  not  a  christian  duty 
(we  already  looked  at  this  in  chapter  vi.)  ;  but,  then,  it  must  be 
on  christian  principles,  and  not  on  Jewish  ones. 

Now  we  come  to  an  incident  of  the  deepest  interest.  A  ruler 
of  the  synagogue  sends  for  our  Lord  to  heal  his  daughter,  then 
comes  and  Avorships  Him,  saying,  "  My  daughter  is  even  now 
dead  ;  but  come  and  lay  thy  hand  upon  her,  and  she  shall  live. 
And  Jesus  arose  and  followed  him,  and  so  did  his  disciples." 
(Ver.  18,  19.)  Tliat  was  exactly  an  illustration  of  the  Lord's 
attitude  towards  Israel.  He  was  there  with  life  in  Himself. 
Israel  w^as  like  the  'maid  that  needed  Him ;  she  had  no  life  in 
her:  such  was  Israel's  condition.  But  the  Lord  is  at  once 
roused,  and  goes  at  the  call  of  the  ruler.  He  owns  the  claim 
of  faith,  let  it  be  ever  so  feeble.  The  centurion  knew  that  a 
word  would  be  enough ;  but  this  Jewish  ruler,  with  the  natural 
thought  of  a  Jew,  wants  the  Lord  to  come  to  his  house  and  lay 
His  hand  upon  his  daughter  that  she  might  live.  He  connected 
the  Lord's  personal  presence  with  the  blessing  that  was  to  be 
conferred  upon  his  sick  child ;  whereas  we  Gentiles  walk  by 
faith,  and  not  by  sight.  We  believe  in,  and  love,  One  that  we 
do  not  see.     Tlie  Jews  look  for  One  whom  they  shall  see ;  and 


CHAPTER   IX.  157 

they  will  have  Him  in  this  way.  As  Tliomas,  after  eight  clays, 
was  allowed  to  see  the  Lord,  and  to  thrust  His  hand  into  His  side, 
and  see  in  His  hands  the  print  of  the  nails,  so  will  it  be  with 
Israel.  "  They  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced." 
Whereas  we  believe  in  Him  on  whom  we  have  not  looked.  So 
that  our  position  is  a  totally  different  one  from  that  of  Israel. 

Now  in  this  case  the  Lord  hears  the  summons,  and  goes 
at  once  to  raise  up  the  dead  daughter  of  the  Jewish  ruler. 
But  while  He  is  going,  a  woman  touches  Him.  While  tlie 
Lord's  errand  is  to  Israel — and  so  it  was,  and  it  only  remains 
suspended — while  He  is  on  the  way,  whoever  comes,  whoever 
touches,  gets  the  blessing.  No  unbelief  of  scribes,  no  self- 
righteousness  of  Pharisees,  ever  would  or  could  hinder  the  Lord 
in  His  mission  of  love.  He  was  about  to  bring  in  new  prin- 
ciples which  would  not  mix  with  the  law — grace  that  would  go 
out  to  all,  and  would  meet  the  worst ;  which  is  jDlainly  set  forth 
by  this  woman  who  comes  and  touches  Him.  But  first  of  all 
you  have  the  pledge  of  the  resurrection  of  Israel ;  for  we  have 
the  warrant  of  the  word  of  God  for  looking  at  the  condition 
of  Israel  as  one  of  death.  Look,  for  instance,  at  Ezekiel  xxxvii., 
where  Israel  is  compared  to  dry  bones.  "  Son  of  man,  these 
bones  are  the  whole  house  of  Israel :  behold,  they  say.  Our  bones 
are  dried,  and  our  hope  is  lost  ....  behold,  0  my  j^eople,  I  will 
open  yoiu'  graves  and  cause  you  to  come  up  out  of  your  graves 
....  and  ye  shall  live,  and  I  shall  place  you  in  your  own  land." 
So  I  believe  in  this  miracle.  It  represents,  not  merely  the  con- 
version of  dead  sinners,  but  the  raising  of  Israel  as  a  nation. 
The  Lord  was  refused  by  the  people  who  had  the  deepest 
responsibility  to  receive  Him ;  but  most  surely  as  He  raised  up 
that  yomig  woman  from  the  bed  of  death,  so  surely  will  He 
restore  Israel  in  a  day  that  is  coming.  But  meanwhile,  who- 
ever comes  gets  the  healing  and  the  blessing.  So  it  was  with 
this  poor  woman.  The  Lord  not  only  gives  her  the  conscious- 
ness that  she  is  healed,  but  lets  her  know  that  His  affections 
were  thoroughly  with  her.  "  Daughter,"  He  says  to  her,  "  be 
of  good  comfort ;  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole."  There  was 
at  once  the  word  of  assm'ance.     The  Lord  puts  His  seal  upon 


lob        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

■\vliat  her  faith  liad  done,  though  she  liad  done  it  tremhh'ngly. 
Then,  in  due  time,  we  have  the  raising  up  of  the  one  who  was 
dead,  in  whom  it  Avas  ]iot  a  question  of  faith,  but  of  the  power 
of  God,  and  of  His  faithfulness  to  His  own  promise. 

After  this  (ver.  27)  we  find  that  two  blind  men  follow  Him  : 
elsewhere  only  one  of  them  is  mentioned  ;  but  I  believe  that 
both  are  mentioned  here  for  the  same  reason  as  we  had  the  two 
demoniacs.  Tliey  cry  and  say  to  Him,  "  Thou  Son  of  David, 
have  mercy  on  us."  It  is  the  confession  of  Christ,  as  connected 
with  Israel.  Tliey  address  Him  as  Son  of  David.  The  Lord 
asked  them,  "  Believe  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this?  They  said  unto 
him.  Yea,  Lord.  Then  touched  he  their  eyes,  saying.  Accord- 
ing to  your  faith  be  it  mito  you.  And  their  eyes  were  opened." 
(Ver.  28 — 30.)  Then  came  the  dumb  man  possessed  with  a 
devil :  ''  and  when  the  devil  was  cast  out,  the  dumb  spake  ;  and 
the  multitudes  marvelled,  saying.  It  was  never  so  seen  in  Israel." 
(Ver.  33.)  I  believe  that  all  this  is  brought  together  for  the 
same  purpose.  The  Lord  was  giving  type  after  type,  and 
pledge  upon  pledge,  that  Israel  would  not  be  forgotten,  that 
Israel  would  be  raised  out  of  death  :  let  them  be  ever  so  blind, 
they  would  see  ;  ever  so  dumb,  they  would  speak.  Let  the  Pha- 
risees and  scribes  be  utterly  unbelieving  and  blasphemous,  and 
ready  to  turn  away  all  from  Christ — let  it  be  so  now ;  but  death 
would  give  way,  blindness  would  be  removed,  speech  would  be 
given  to  Israel,  in  a  day  that  was  coming.  The  very  confession 
of  the  multitude  was,  that  it  had  never  been  so  seen  in  Israel. 

Let  me  repeat  that,  in  thus  applying  these  miracles  of  our 
Lord,  I  am  not  at  all  denying  the  blessing  of  any  part  of  these 
for  a  soul  now.  But  this  is  no  reason  to  prove  that  the  Lord 
has  not  an  ulterior  view  which  we  ought  not  to  forget.  "  But 
the  Pharisees  said,  He  casteth  out  devils  through  the  prince  of 
the  devils."  (Ver.  34.)  What  could  be  worse  than  this?  Was 
it  not  in  principle  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Such 
is  the  form  which  that  sin  took  then.  There  was  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  which  wrought  in  Christ  and  through  Him  ;  and 
they  attributed  this  power  to  Satan.     Tliere  could  not  be  any- 


CHAPTER   IX.  159 

tiling  more  determined  than  sucli  hostility.  They  were  not  able 
to  deny  the  righteousness  of  the  man,  nor  the  facts  of  super- 
human energy  ;  but  they  might  attribute  the  power  that  was 
entirely  above  man,  not  to  God,  but  to  the  adversary :  and  they 
did  so.  Tlieir  ruin  was  complete  and  final.  What  more  ter- 
rible !  Nothing  could  convince  a  man,  where  all  these  evidences 
and  appeals  had  been  lavished  upon  him ;  and  the  end  of  it  all 
was  that,  not  the  ignorant  only,  but  the  wise,  the  religious,  and 
the  righteous  according  to  the  law,  the  Pharisees,  the  choicest 
part  to  man's  eye  of  the  chosen  nation — even  they  said,  ''  He 
casteth  out  devils  through  the  prince  of  the  devils." 

Nothing  more  is  needed.  The  Lord  might  send  out  a  testi- 
mony through  others ;  but  as  far  as  His  own  ministry  was 
concerned,  it  was  virtually  at  an  end.  He  sends  out  the  twelve 
immediately  after,  but  it  all  comes  to  the  same  thino-.  The 
Lord  is  utterly  rejected,  as  we  see  in  chapter  xi.  And  then 
chapter  xii.  gives  the  final  pronouncing  of  the  judgment  on  that 
generation.  That  sin  of  which  they  had  been  guilty  would 
ripen  into  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  could  not  be 
forgiven  them,  either  in  this  age  or  in  that  to  come.  The  con- 
sequence is  that  the  Lord  turns  from  the  unbelievino-  race  and 
introduces  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  in  connection  with  which  He 
gives  us  all  the  parables  in  chapter  xiii.  He  takes  the  place  of  a 
sower,  no  longer  looking  to  gather  fruit  from  Israel,  and  addresses 
Himself  to  the  new  work  in  this  world  that  He  was  about  to  un- 
dertake, which  He  still  carries  on  to  the  present  moment,  thouo-h 
now  through  the  instrumentality  of  others.  So  that  the  beauty 
of  all  this  arrangement  of  the  gospel  of  Matthew  cannot  be  sur- 
passed, though  the  other  gospels  are  for  their  own  objects  equally 
perfect.  Each  presents  the  facts  of  our  Lord's  history,  so  as  to 
give  a  distinct  view  of  Christ's  person  or  service,  with  the  effects 
of  its  display ;  and  we  ought  to  understand  them  all. 

May  the  Lord  grant  that  the  effect  of  looking  at  these  thin  erg 
may  be  not  only  that  we  may  know  the  scriptures  but  Jesus 
better !  This  is  what  we  have  most  of  all  to  cultivate — that  we 
may  understand  the  ways  of  God,  the  wonderful  ways  of  His 
love  in  Jesus. 


CHAPTER  X. 

At  the  close  of  the  chapter  before,  our  Lord,  in  lookiiifj  upon 
the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel,  speaks  of  them  in  deep 
pity,  as  sheep  without  a  shepherd.  He  was  now  feeling  what 
the  Pharisees  really  were  :  not  but  what  He  knew  it  before ;  but 
the  circumstances  of  their  entire  rejection  of  Himself,  and  their 
hatred,  coming  out  more  and  more  decidedly,  brought  up  before 
His  spirit  the  exposure  of  God's  sheep.  If  their  spirit  was 
implacable  against  Him  in  whom  there  was  no  sin,  who  was 
God's  own  Son,  the  Shepherd  of  Israel,  what  must  not  be  the 
sorrowful  lot  of  those  who  had  infirmities  and  failures  which 
laid  them  open  to  the  malice  of  those  who  cared  not  for  them 
for  God's  sake,  who  would  have  the  keenest  and  most  suspicious 
eye  for  everything  weak  and  foolish  about  them  !  Let  us  always 
remember  the  grace  of  the  Lord,  that  even  that  which  is  humili- 
atino-  in  us  draws  out  nothing  but  His  compassion.  I  am  not 
now  speaking  of  sin,  but  of  that  which  is  infirm :  for  infirmities 
and  sins  are  two  different  things.  We  do  not  want  the  Lord's 
svmpathy  with  evil.  The  Lord  has  suffered  and  died  for  our  sin. 
But  we  do  want  sympathy  with  us  in  our  weakness,  trembling, 
liability  to  anxieties,  cares,  troubles :  in  all  these  things  which 
make  us  suffer  here  we  do  want  sympathy ;  and  the  Lord  has 
it  fully  with  us.  This  Avas  also  the  case  with  Israel.  Uncon- 
scious of  their  miserable  condition,  Jesus  calls  upon  the  disciples^ 
in  the  love  of  His  own  heart,  to  pray  the  Lord  of  the  harvest 
that  He  would  send  forth  labourers  into  His  harvest.  It  was 
His  harvest,  and  His  labourers  alone  could  gather.  But  imme- 
diately after,  and  this  is  remarkable,  He  shews  that  He  is  the 
Lord  of  the  harvest  Himself ;  and  He  sends  forth  labourers. 
The  next  chapter  illustrates  this,  and  beautifully  evinces  the 
scope  of  Matthew,  who  portrays  Him  as  the  One  who  should  save 
His  people  from  their  sins — Emmanuel,  God  with  us.     Mark 


CHAPTER   X.  Ifil 

the  circumstances.  This  takes  place  upon  His  rejection  by  Israel. 
His  own  ministry,  full  of  grace  as  well  as  power,  we  have  seen 
fully  exhibited,  and  terminating  in  the  utter  indifference  of  Israel 
and  the  hatred  of  the  religious  leaders.  Chapter  viii.  gives  us 
the  people,  and  chapter  ix.  their  guides,  thus  severally  mani- 
festing themselves. 

Now,  chapter  x.  shews  that  Jesus,  as  Lord  of  the  harvest, 
sends  forth  labourers,  and  this  too  with  full  authority  and  power 
given  to  them.  Bat,  observe,  it  is  still  in  special  connection  with 
Israel :  and  the  Lord  is  conscious  froin  the  beginning  of  rejec- 
tion by  Israel.  Meanwhile  it  is  a  Jewish  mission  of  the  twelve 
Jewish  apostles  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel.  I  take 
this  quite  literally,  and  not  as  if  it  were  said  of  the  Church, 
which  is  never  spoken  of  as  lost  sheep  ;  but  the  sheep  of  Israel  in 
their  desolate  condition  are  most  aptly  so  described.  Before  the 
Church  is  gathered,  what  we  want  is  a  Saviour.  We  Gentiles 
were  not  sheep  at  all,  but  dogs,  in  our  evangelist's  point  of  view. 
(See  chap,  xv.)  And  after  we  have  been  brought  into  the 
Church,  we  are  not  and  cannot  be  lost  sheep.  Whereas,  these 
poor  of  the  flock  are  spoken  of  as  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of 
Israel.  For,  up  to  this  time,  the  work  was  not  done  by  which 
they  could  be  put  in  the  known  position  of  salvation. 

Again,  when  our  Lord  is  sending  them  forth,  it  is  said,  "  He 
called  unto  him  his  twelve  disciples,  and  gave  them  power 
against  unclean  spirits,  to  cast  them  out,  and  to  heal  all  manner 
of  disease,  and  all  manner  of  siclaiess."  (Ver.  1.)  This  was 
peculiarly  their  mission.  Not  a  word  is  said  about  preaching 
wdiat  we  call  the  gospel,  or  teaching  the  whole  counsel  of  God ; 
but  they  were  to  go  with  Messianic  power  against  Satan,  and 
against  bodily  diseases,  as  a  testimony  to  Israel.  No  doubt  they 
were  to  declare  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  ''As  ye  go,"  said  our 
Lord,  "  preach,  saying,  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand." 
(Ver.  7.)  But  the  great  characteristic  feature  of  the  mission, 
was  the  conferring  upon  them  power  against  demons  and  dis- 
eases. The  appropriateness  of  this,  in  connection  with  Israel, 
is  manifest.  It  Avas  a  bright  evidence  that  the  true  King, 
Jehovah,  was  there — One  who  was  able  Himself  not  only  to 
M 


162        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

cast  out  devils,  but  to  confer  that  power  upon  His  servants. 
Who  but  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  could  do  this  ?  It  was  a 
testimony  much  greater  than  if  the  power  had  been  confined  to 
His  own  person.  The  ability  to  impart  power  to  others  (which 
was  what  Simon  Magus,  hoping  to  profit  by  it,  so  earnestly 
coveted)  God  here  shews  to  be  in  His  own  Son.  Now,  the 
servants  were  to  be  sent  out,  and  that  in  due  order.  There  were 
twelve  of  them  in  relation  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  the  house  of 
Israel.  We  find  afterwards  the  promise  that  they  should  sit 
upon  twelve  thrones,  j  udging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  There 
need  be  no  question,  therefore,  that  this  was  a  Jewish  mission. 
When  the  Church  was  called,  God  broke  in  upon  the  mere 
Jewish  order,  by  calling  an  extraordinary  apostle,  with  a  special 
view  to  the  Gentiles — one  who  was  called  after  Christ,  dead  and 
risen,  had  taken  His  place  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  Then 
came  in  this  new  work  in  the  calling  of  the  Church,  and  the 
Apostle  Paul  became  the  characteristic  minister  of  the  Church, 
though  the  twelve  had  their  place  too.  But  in  this  case,  the 
twelve  apostles  were  (what  Paul  was  not)  the  ministers  of  the 
testimony  to  Israel  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  For,  observe,  the 
strictest  injunction  was  given  them  that  they  were  not  to  go 
outside  the  limits  of  Israel ;  not  even  to  visit  the  Samaritans, 
nor  to  enter  into  the  cities  of  the  Gentiles.  Their  business  was 
solely  with  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel :  the  most 
positive  proof  that  it  means  those  of  the  Jews  who  had  a  sense 
of  sin,  and  who  were  willing  to  receive  the  testimony  of  the  true 
Messiah.  With  them,  their  business  was  exclusively.  The 
calling  of  the  Church  was  not  referred  to.  This  one  thing  is 
diligently  kept  in  view  by  our  Lord.  It  is  the  more  remarkable, 
because  in  this  gospel  we  are  told  that,  after  He  had  died  and 
was  risen,  the  Lord  sent  them  out  to  the  Gentiles ;  but,  then,  it 
was  on  the  evident  ground  that  death  had  come  in.  "  I,  if  I  be 
lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  Christ  upon  the  cross 
becomes  the  attractive  centre  for  man,  as  well  as  the  foundation 
of  all  the  counsels  of  God.  Now  in  this  case  we  have  nothing 
of  the  sort.  The  Lord's  death  is  not  even  refeired  to.  His 
rejection  is  brought  out,  but  nothing  is  said  as  to  the  building  of 


CHAPTER    X.  1G3 

a  new  structure.    There  was  the  Avaiting  for  still  further  rejection 
before  this  could  be  disclosed,  as  in  chapter  xvi. 

But  here  the  Lord  Jesus  sends  forth  the  twelve,  and  com- 
mands them,  sajinoj,  "  Go  not  into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles, 
and  into  any  city  of  the  Samaritans  enter  ye  not :  but  go  rather 
to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel.  And  as  ye  go,  preach, 
saying,  The  kino;dom  of  heaven  is  at  hand.  Heal  the  sick, 
cleanse  the  lepers,  raise  the  dead,  cast  out  devils :  freely  ye  have 
received,  freely  give.  Provide  neither  gold,  nor  silver,  nor 
brass  in  your  purses  ;  nor  scrip  for  your  journey  ;  neither  two 
coats,  neither  shoes,  nor  yet  staves :  for  the  workman  is  worthy 
of  his  meat."  (Ver.  5 — 10.)  That  is,  they  were  to  go  just  as 
they  were,  with  the  coat  they  had  upon  them,  with  the  shoes 
they  had  then  on  their  feet.  They  were  not  to  provide  any- 
thing, or  to  lay  up  any  store  as  a  means  of  support  during  their 
mission.  This  is  not  a  universal  rule  for  the  servants  of  God  at 
all  times.  It  was  a  peculiar  mission,  for  a  special  time,  and 
with  reference  to  Israel  only.  It  was  not  the  gospel  of  God's 
grace,  but  of  the  kingdom  :  the  two  go  together  now ;  but 
then  it  was  not  so.  Israel  did  not  receive  the  testimony  of  the 
kingdom ;  an  entire  change  comes  in,  and  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  as  an  actual  fact,  remains  in  suspension.  The  whole 
calling  of  God,  going  out  now  to  the  Gentiles,  comes  in  as  a  vast 
parenthesis,  between  the  sending  out  of  this  message  and  its 
full  accomplishment  in  the  last  days.  Whatever  the  Lord  sends 
out  must  be  accomplished,  but  nothing  is  perfectly  fulfilled  till 
the  Lord  takes  all  in  hand  Himself. 

Everything  that  is  to  be  taken  up  by  Christ  in  power  and 
glory  by  and  by  is  first  committed  to  man.  Thus  man  fails, 
Israel  as  a  nation  breaks  down,  the  Church  has  become  worldly 
and  scattered.  All  will  yet  be  to  the  praise  of  Christ  Himself. 
Thus,  no  matter  what  you  look  at  in  the  ways  of  God,  there  is, 
as  a  rule,  the  first  presenting  of  the  thing  to  man,  when  it  is  made 
to  rest  upon  him,  to  see  if  he  can  bear  the  responsibility  and 
the  glorv :  and  he  cannot.  But  whatever  man  has  failed  in  is 
destined  to  rest  u])on  the  shoulders  of  Christ  in  the  day  of  glory, 
and  all  will  theii  come  to  perfection.     Not  one  of  these  things 


164        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

but  what  will   shine  out  in  far  more  than  pristine  brightness 
when  Jesus  appears  in  glorj. 

The  twelve  were  sent  out  on  this  mission,  and  instructed  that 
they  were  to  be  dependent  upon  Christ  alone.  He  would 
provide  for  them.  They  were  to  announce  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  ;  and  He,  the  King,  would  undertake  all  charges. 
They  were  to  go  with  the  fullest  confidence  in  Him.  Now, 
although  His  servants  are  not  to  look  to  the  world,  or  to  use 
human  means  of  acting  on  men  or  saints ;  and  although  they 
may  confidently  look  to  God  to  provide  for  them,  still  they 
are  not  put  in  the  same  circumstances  as  these  disciples.  The 
difference  is  strongly  shewn.  Let  us  take,  for  instance,  such  a 
command  as  this,  "  Into  whatsoever  city  or  town  ye  shall  enter, 
enquire  who  in  it  is  worthy,  and  there  abide  till  ye  go  thence." 
(Ver.  11.)  Think  of  a  man  going  out  with  the  gospel  now,  and 
asking,  Who  is  worthy?  He  wants  the  unworthy.  It  is  a 
totally  different  mission  from  that  which  followed  after  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus.  It  was  a  mission  to  Israel  : 
and  Jehovah  wanted  the  excellent  in  the  earth,  those  whose 
hearts  really  desired  the  Messiah.  Hence  they  were  to  ask  who, 
in  any  city,  were  worthy,  and  there  to  abide.  "  And  when  ye 
come  into  an  house,  salute  it;  and  if  the  house  be  worthy,  let 
your  peace  come  upon  it;  but  if  it  be  not  worthy,  let  your 
peace  return  to  you."  (Ver.  12,  13.)  This  is  not  at  all  the  wa}' 
in  which  the  gospel  goes  out  now.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  peace 
with  God  that  the  servant  of  Christ  is  entitled  to  proclaim  to 
His  enemies.  It  is  on  the  wretched,  the  outcast,  the  base,  the 
despised,  on  those  who  have  got  nothing  at  all,  and  whom  God 
brings  down  to  take  the  place  of  being  nothing,  that  His  peace 
now  descends.  The  direct  bearing  of  the  gospel  is  towards  those 
who  are  evidently  despicable,  and  vile,  and  forlorn :  because  the 
gospel  is  the  fulness  of  the  grace  of  God  where  man  has  nothing 
whatever  to  give  to  God.  Nothing  can  be  more  blessed.  , 
"Whether  old  or  young,  if  they  are  broken  down  to  feel  that 
they  are  utterly  unfit  for  God,  but  that  God  has  provided  such  a 
Saviour  as  His  word  declares  He  has,  then  I  cannot  trust  Him 
too  fully  or  too  simply.     The  essence  of  the  gospel  is  this  :  it  is 


CHAPTER   X.  1G5 

■what  God  gives  to  me,  not  what  I  owe  to  God.  It  is  the  gospel 
of  God — the  gospel  of  His  Son  :  but  here  it  is  the  gospel  of  the 
kingdom.  You  will  constantly  find  this  phrase  in  Matthew. 
This  gospel  goes  out  to  those  that  are  worthy.  If  the  house 
were  worthy,  the  peace  of  the  messenger  comes  upon  it ;  and 
if  not,  it  returns.  "And  whosoever  shall  not  receive  you,  nor 
hear  your  words,  when  ye  depart  out  of  that  house  or  city,  shake 
off  the  dust  of  your  feet."  (Ver.  14.)  There  was  a  spirit  of 
judgment  upon  them — "  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  It  shall  be  more 
tolerable  for  the  land  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrlia  in  the  day  of 
judgment,  than  for  that  city"  (ver.  15) :  just  because  they  had 
the  messengers  of  the  kingdom  coming  to  them  with  a  gracious 
message,  and  they  would  not  receive  them. 

From  verse  16  commences  the  Lord's  warning  of  the  cir- 
cumstances in  which  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  was  to  be 
preached.  "  Behold,  I  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of 
wolves  :  be  ye  therefore  wise  as  serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves." 
That  is,  He  calls  for  prudence,  heavenly  prudence,  that  God's 
power  would  make  safe — calls  them  to  be  wise  as  serpents,  but 
at  the  same  time  simple  as  doves.  There  was  to  be  the  most 
entire  holiness  in  the  object  and  character  of  the  prudence,  and 
that  also  which  ought  thoroughly  to  be  free  of  all  just  charge  of 
being  injurious  to  men.  "  But  beware  of  men ;"  do  not  suppose 
that,  although  you  go  forth  with  love  in  your  hearts,  you  will 
not  meet  with  wolves.  "Beware  of  men."  The  Jews  them- 
selves are  plainly  intimated.  "  Beware  of  men ;  for  they  will 
deliver  you  up  to  the  councils,  and  they  will  scourge  you  in 
their  synagogues ;  and  ye  shall  be  brought  before  governors  and 
kings."  (Ver.  17,  18.)  This  shews  their  degradation;  but 
although  they  were  under  the  yoke  of  the  Gentiles,  they  would 
scruple  at  nothing,  where  it  was  a  question  of  Christ's  apostles. 
They  would  be  quite  willing  to  invoke  Gentile  authority  where 
it  became  a  question  of  Christ's  followers.  They  themselves 
would  drag  them  before,  the  Gentile  kings  and  governors, 
abhorred  as  they  were.  But  our  Lord  adds  this  gracious  word 
— "  for  my  sake,  for  a  testimony  against  them  and  the  Gentiles." 
This  is  the  only  way  in  which  the   Gentiles  come  in.     Israel 


106        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

miorht  thus  summon  the  disciples  of  Christ  before  the  Gentiles, 
but  God  is  taking  care  that  this  should  turn  for  a  testimony  to 
them  and  the  Gentiles.  Thus  God  turns  the  weapons  of  the 
adversary  against  himself.  "  Surely  the  wrath  of  man  shall 
praise  Thee :  the  remainder  of  wrath  shalt  Thou  restrain."  One 
cannot  but  feel  that  such  a  truth  as  this,  though  it  has  special 
application  to  apostles  setting  out  on  this  mission,  most  surely 
remains  living  for  us.  The  pith  of  it  abides  eternally  true.  "  But 
when  they  deliver  you  up,  take  no  thought  how  or  what  ye  shall 
speak ;  for  it  shall  be  given  you  in  that  same  hour  what  ye  shall 
speak.  For  it  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  Spirit  of  your 
Father  which  speaketh  in  you."  (Ver.  19,  20.)  At  the  same 
time  He  prepares  them  for  the  most  heartless  conduct  on  the 
part  even  of  relatives.  The  brother  would  know  the  habits  of 
his  brother,  the  father  would  know  all  about  the  child,  and  the 
child  about  the  father :  all  this  would  be  turned  against  the 
servants  of  Christ.  "  Ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  men"  (it  was  uni- 
versal exposure)  "  for  my  name's  sake  ;  but  he  that  endureth  to 
the  end  shall  be  saved."  "  But  when  they  persecute  you  in  this 
city,  flee  ye  into  another :  for  verily  I  say  unto  you.  Ye  shall  not 
have  gone  over  the  cities  of  Israel,  till  the  Son  of  man  be  come" 
(Ver.  23) — a  very  remarkable  statement.  "Ye  shall  not  have 
gone  over,"  or,  as  the  margin  has  it,  finished — "  the  cities  of 
Israel,  till  the  Son  of  man  be  come."  That  exactly  recalls  the 
expression  that  I  made  use  of  before :  the  Church  is  a  great 
parenthesis.  The  mission  of  the  apostles  was  abruptly  ter- 
minated by  the  death  of  Christ.  They  stiU  carried  it  out 
afterwards  for  awhile,  but  it  was  terminated  completely  by  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem :  the  wdiole  thing  was  manifestly 
removed  for  the  time  being,  but  not  for  ever.  The  calling  of 
the  Church  was  the  only  thing  that  remained.  When  the  Lord 
has  taken  the  Church  out  of  the  woi'ld  to  heaven,  God  will  raise 
up  witnesses  to  the  Messiah  upon  earth.  The  earth  is  reserved 
for  the  Jew,  wdien  the  Jew  shall  be  converted ;  because  God  will 
never  break  His  promise.  God  has  declared  that  He  would  give 
His  land  to  His  people,  and  He  will  do  so.  God  must  give 
that  land  to  that  people,  for  His  gifts  and  calling  are  without 


CHAPTER   X.  1G7 

repentance.  It  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  God's  faithfulness, 
that  the  Jewish  people  are  yet  to  be  restored  to  their  own  land, 
■when  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  is  come  in.  The  calling  of  the 
fulness  of  the  Gentiles  is  the  parenthesis  that  is  going  on  now. 
When  this  is  over,  the  Lord  resumes  His  links  with  Israel.  They 
will  go  back  to  the  land  in  unbelief.  The  testimony  of  the  king- 
dom, which  was  begun  in  the  time  of  our  Lord  by  the  apostles, 
will  be  taken  up  in  Jerusalem ;  and  in  the  midst  of  their 
preaching,  the  Son  of  man  will  come,  and  then  there  will  be  a 
new  means  used :  "  He  will  send  forth  his  angels,  and  they  shall 
gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all  things  that  offend,  and  them  which 

do  iniquity  :  and  shall  cast  them  into  a  furnace  of  fire Then 

shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their 
Father."  The  Lord  will  accomplish  fully  in  that  day  what  was 
committed  to  man,  and  what  broke  down  through  man's  weak  or 
wicked  hand.  Then  everything  under  the  Branch  of  Israel  shall 
be  glorious.  This  is  what,  I  conceive,  goes  along  with  the  re- 
markable expression  that  they  should  not  have  gone  over  the  cities 
of  Israel,  till  the  Son  of  man  came.  The  whole  period  of  the 
Lord's  turning  aside  to  call  in  the  Gentiles  now  is  passed  over 
in  silence.  He  speaks  of  what  was  going  out  then,  and  of  what 
will  be  resumed  in  glory,  passing  over  what  is  being  done 
meanwhile. 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  chapter  He  gives  sweet  motives 
to  encourage  them.  "  The  disciple  is  not  above  his  master, 
nor  the  servant  above  his  lord.  It  is  enough  for  the  disciple 
that  he  be  as  his  master,  and  the  servant  as  his  lord  :  if 
they  have  called  the  master  of  the  house  Beelzebub,  how  much 
more  shall  they  call  them  of  his  household  ?"  (Ver.  24,  25.) 
He  was  proving  this  now,  and  they  would  have  to  feel  it  in  their 
turn.  "  Fear  them  not  therefore."  The  first  motive  for  not 
fearing  is,  I  have  traversed  the  same  path ;  My  path  is  the  only 
right  path  through  the  world;  do  not  be  afraid.  "Fear  them 
not ;  for  there  is  nothing  covered  that  shall  not  be  revealed,  and 
hid  that  shall  not  be  known."  You  will  understand  the  reasons 
and  motives  of  people's  unbelief  another  day,  if  not  now.  Every 
one  that  knows  the  truth,  and  does  not  follow  it,  must  have  a 


168        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTnE\7. 

dislike  to  those  who  do.  As  it  was  with  Me,  so  will  it  be  with 
you :  but  do  not  be  alarmed.  Be  full  of  good  courage,  and 
persist  in  the  testimony.  "  What  I  tell  you  in  darkness,  that 
speak  ye  in  light :  and  what  ye  hear  in  the  ear,  that  preach  ye 
upon  the  housetops."  (Ver.  27.)  He  encourages  them  to  the 
greatest  openness  and  boldness.  And  now  comes  in  a  second 
admonition  not  to  fear,  on  another  ground :  after  all,  wdiat  harm 
can  they  do  ?  They  cannot  touch  the  soul :  nor  can  they  even 
touch  the  body,  unless  your  heavenly  Father  allows  it.  "  Fear 
not  them  which  kill  the  body,  but  are  not  able  to  kill  the  soul." 
Tliey  cannot  injure  you.  There  is  nothing  which  a  believer  has 
to  dread,  except  grieving  and  sinning  against  God.  Therefore 
He  immediately  adds,  "  Rather  fear  him  which  is  able  to 
destroy  both  soul  and  body  in  hell."  You  may  know  your  own 
deliverance  ;  but  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  apprehend  wdiat  is  before 
God's  enemies — the  destruction  of  soul  and  body  m  hell ! 

"  Are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  a  farthing  ?  and  one  of  them 
shall  not  fall  on  the  ground  without  your  Father.  But  the  very 
hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered.  Fear  ye  not,  therefore  ; 
ve  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows."  (Ver.  29 — 31.) 
That  is,  the  special  care  of  our  Father  for  His  own  children  is 
drawn  from  this,  that  even  the  very  sparrow,  though  so  despised 
and  trivial  a  bird  among  men,  yet  cannot  fall  to  the  ground 
'' without  your  Father."  He  might  have  said.  Without  God  ; 
but  He  preferred  to  say,  Your  Father.  All  belongs  to  Him. 
It  is  all  measured  by  Him — everything  even  in  the  outward 
w^orld — by  our  Father. 

From  verse  32  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  w^e  have  the  im- 
portance of  the  confession  of  Christ  and  the  effects  of  it  in  this 
world.  The  first  great  principle  is  this  :  "  Whosoever  therefore 
shall  confess  me  before  men,  him  will  I  confess  also  before  my 
Father  which  is  in  heaven.  But  whosoever  shall  deny  me 
before  men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my  Father  which  is  in 
heaven."  (Ver.  32,  33.)  We  have  had  the  Father's  care ;  we 
have  now  the  Son's  confession  by  and  by.  The  Father's  care 
is  known  upon  earth,  whatever  may  be  the  trial.  The  Son's  con- 
fession of  us  will  bo  in  heaven,  when  all  the  scene  of  trial  is  over. 


CHAPTER    X.  1C)9 

Then  He  warns  tliem  that  they  must  not  be  surprised  if  they 
found  the  result  of  their  testimony  very  painful  —  households 
getting  into  confusion,  members  of  a  family  at  variance  one  with 
another.  Do  not  be  surprised.  ^'  Think  not,"  He  says,  "  that 
I  am  come  to  send  peace  on  earth."  We  know  that  the  Lord 
can  give  us  peace  always  by  all  means  :  but  He  is  speaking  here 
of  the  entrance  of  His  testimony,  through  His  disciples,  into  a 
world  that  hates  Him.  Inevitably,  then,  the  two  principles 
come  into  collision.  It  is  not  that  He  desires  confusion,  but  it 
is  the  natural  effect  of  the  knowledo;e  of  Christ  enterino;  a  house 
where  either  the  heads  or  the  inferior  members  of  it  reject 
Christ.  As  it  is  in  the  world,  so  in  the  house.  There  are  those 
that  believe  and  those  that  believe  not.  "  Think  not  that  I 
am  come  to  send  peace  on  earth  :  I  came  not  to  send  peace, 
but  a  sword."  (Ver.  34.)  Dream  not  that  everything  is  going 
to  be  triumphant.  The  day  is  coming  when  the  Lord  will  cause 
peace  to  flow  as  a  river ;  but  He  shews  that  such  is  not  the 
character  nor  the  effect  of  His  first  coming.  It  will  be  so  when 
He  comes  again.  But  meanwhile  it  is  not  peace,  but  a  sword. 
It  is  the  badge  of  war  now,  and  must  be  so  ;  because  of  the 
opposition  which  unbelief  always  creates  against  the  truth. 
"  For  I  am  come  to  set  a  man  at  variance  against  his  father, 
and  the  dauo-liter  against  her  mother,  and  the  daughter-in-law 
against  her  mother-in-law.  And  a  man's  foes  shall  be  they  of 
his  own  household."  (Ver.  35,  36.)  The  Lord  boldly  meets  the 
case.  I  am  come  to  bring  in  my  principle  ;  and  let  it  be  a 
child,  and  he  is  against  his  father.  Now  this  is  the  very  thing 
that  turns  out  one  of  our  severest  trials — the  effect  that  the 
testimony  of  God  has  upon  families.  People  speak  of  house- 
holds being  broken  up,  and  kindred  disunited.  The  Lord 
already  uses  the  same  words,  and  strengthens  us  not  to  mind  it. 
"  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy 
of  me ;  and  he  that  loveth  son  or  daughter  more  than  me, 
is  not  worthy  of  me.  And  he  that  taketh  not  his  cross  and 
followeth  after  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me.  He  that  findeth  his 
life  shall  lose  it ;  and  he  that  losetli  his  life  for  my  sake  shall 
find  it."  (Yer.  37 — 39.)     He   shews   that   He   had   come   for 


170  LECTURES    ON    THE    GOSPEL    OF    MATTHEW. 

anything  but  giving  us  a  path  of  ease  in  this  world.  On  the 
contrary,  we  must  have  trial,  rejection,  and  scorn  ;  we  must 
make  up  our  minds  to  suffer.  But  then  He  adds  the  other  side, 
"  He  that  receiveth  you,  receiveth  me ;  and  he  that  receiveth 
me,  receiveth  him  that  sent  me."  (Ver.  40.)  There  would  he 
those  that  would  receive,  as  well  as  those  that  would  reject. 
"  He  that  receiveth  a  prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet"  (that 
is,  as  a  prophet),  if  he  knew  he  was  a  servant  of  God,  and 
received  him  as  such,  in  the  face  of  shame  and  scorn,  he  should 
have  the  same  reward  as  a  prophet  himself.  "And  he  that 
receiveth  a  righteous  man  in  the  name  of  a  rio;hteous  man" — 
other  people  might  call  him  unrighteous,  but  he  receives 
him,  not  as  a  mere  man,  or  as  a  friend  or  relative, 
but  as  righteous,  and  he  "  shall  receive  a  righteous  man's 
reward."  He  proved  that  his  own  heart  was  right  with  God. 
We  always  shew  our  real  state  of  soul  by  the  opinion  we 
pronounce.  Supposing  I  speak  or  act  unwarrantably  against  a 
good  man  doing  his  duty,  I  shew  that  I  am  not  with  God  in 
that  particular  thing.  On  the  other  hand,  if  I  have  faith  to 
discern  what  is  of  God,  and  to  take  my  part  with  him  in  the 
face  of  general  desertion,  happy  am  I  indeed.  God  alone 
enables  a  man  to  do  so.  It  thus  remains  true  that  we  always 
betray  where  our  hearts  are,  by  our  judgments  of  and  conduct 
toward  others. 

"And  whosoever  shall  give  to  drink  unto  one  of  these  little 
ones  a  cup  of  cold  water  only  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  verily  I 
say  unto  you,  he  shall  in  no  wise  lose  his  reward."  (Ver.  42.) 
It  would  be  the  evidence  and  proof  that  the  Spirit  was  at  work 
in  his  !-;oul.  The  Lord  was  shewing  him  mercy,  and  his  own 
heart  was  drawn  out  in  the  path  of  mercy  and  of  sympathy 
with  those  who  are  of  God  in  this  world.  He  should  in  no 
Mdse  lose  his  reward.  It  is  the  outward  conduct  springing  from 
the  inward  principle.  In  all  these  cases  it  is  clearly  the  Jewish 
mission  of  these  disciples.  I  believe  that  we  thus  get  the  true 
character  of  the  chapter  and  the  place  it  occupies  in  the  gospel. 
The  point  is,  the  Lord,  as  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  not  only 
bidding    them    pray,    but    Himself    anticipating    the    prayer. 


en  AFTER    XT.  171 

"Before  they  eall,  I  will  answer."  The  Lord  is  acting  in  tlic 
very  spirit  of  that  which  will  be  fully  true  in  tlie  last  days. 
He  is  Himself  sending  forth  the  labourers.  In  Luke  we  are 
told  that  He  refers  to  this  very  mission,  and  asks,  "  When  I 
sent  you  without  purse,  and  scrip,  and  shoes,  lacked  ye  any- 
thing? and  they  said.  Nothing."  Then  the  Lord  tells  them 
they  were  to  provide  themselves  with  purse,  and  scrip,  and 
sword :  the  very  things  which  they  were  not  to  do  before,  they 
were  to  do  from  that  time.  The  Lord  abrogates  what  He  had 
here  enjoined,  as  far  as  the  special  circumstances  were  concerned. 
His  goodness  and  love  to  them,  and  their  walking  in  wisdom 
and  harmlessness,  would  abide ;  but  the  peculiar  character  of 
this  mission  terminated  at  the  death  of  Christ.  It  will,  I  con- 
ceive, be  taken  np  again  by  others  at  a  future  day :  but  the 
disciples  actually  sent  out  were  soon  to  be  called  to  a  new  work, 
founded  upon  redemption  and  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord. 


3:=©<o-^ 


CHAPTER  XL 

The  chapter  at  which  we  are  arrived  is  full  of  interest  and 
importance  ;  and  specially  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  kind  of  transition. 
And  that  which  gives  occasion  for  the  Spirit  of  God  to  bring 
out  and  to  illustrate  the  transition  from  the  testimony  to  Israel 
to  the  new  order  of  thincrs  that  our  Lord  was  about  to  introduce, 
is  the  fact  that  John  the  Baptist,  in  prison  because  of  his  own 
rejection,  is  now  found  in  the  exercise  of  his  personal  faith, 
responsibility,  and  patience.  When  he  was  simply  fulfilling  his 
prophetic  office,  none  could  be  more  unwavering  than  he  in  his 
testimony  to  Christ.  But  it  is  one  thing  fora  man  to  preach 
the  truth,  another  thing  for  him  to  enjoy  it.  And  even  if  he  feel 
the  preciousness  of  what  he  teaches,  there  may  be  moments  when 
faith  is  put  thoroughly  to  the  proof,  and  when  the  strongest  may 


172  LECTURES    ON    THE   GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

know  what  it  is  to  be  "  cast  clown,  though  not  destroyed/' 
Certainly  this  was  the  case  with  John  the  Baptist.  It  was  not 
merely  his  discijDles  that  were  stumbled  by  his  being  in  prison. 
Infidels  ask  now,  If  scripture  be  truth,  how  is  it  that  people  do 
not  receive  it  ?  Why  is  it  not  more  widely  spread  ?  I  do  not 
deny  that  the  bare  geographical  area  which  the  profession  of  the 
truth  covers  is  larger  now  than  it  once  was.  But  we  know  that 
'at  first  there  were  many  tens  of  thousands  that  followed  the  name 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  one  city  alone  ;  and  the  moral  weight  and 
power  was  incomparably  greater,  for  they  walked  in  superiority 
to  the  world.  Still  the  great  difficulty  comes  up  again,  and  we 
find  that  what  works  in  the  mind  of  a  sceptic  may  be  found 
more  or  less  disquieting  the  believer,  because  the  believer  has 
got  that  which  is  of  nature  in  him  still.  Doubtless  he  has  life 
everlasting  in  Christ,  but  he  has  also  in  him  what  scripture  calls 
the  flesh  ;  and  the  flesh  is  always  an  unbelieving  thing.  The 
natural  mind  of  man  never  has  confidence  in  Grod.  Hence  it 
came  to  pass  that,  blessed  as  John  the  Baptist  was,  yet  does  he 
send  his  disciples  with  the  query,  "  Art  thou  he  that  should 
come,  or  do  we  look  for  another?"  Here  we  find  the  great 
difference  between  the  boldness  of  lano;uao;e  that  a  man  might 
hold  in  his  office  as  a  prophet,  and  what  he  now  uses  when 
everything  is  dark  around  him.  I  do  not  mean  that  he  doubted 
thoroughly,  but  there  seems  to  have  been  a  question  that  passed 
through  his  mind,  and  a  confirmation  of  faith  was  wanted  ;  a 
most  instructive  instance  of  the  solemn  truth  that  there  is  no 
good  thing  in  man.  No  doubt  the  most  blessed  things  have 
been  wrought  by  man,  but  they  have  been  wrought  because  the 
J'  power  of  Christ  has  rested  upon  him.  But  here  we  have  this 
favoured  and  otherwise  faithful  man  putting  such  a  question, 
the  very  last  that  we  mighl  have  expected.  We  may  try  and 
make  excuses  for  it ;  but  it  remains  true  and  plain  that  John  the 
(  Baptist,  instead  of  answering  with  the  confidence  of  faith  the 
question  of  his  disciples,  if  it  was  such,  has  to  seiid  some  of  them 
to  Jesus,  saying,  "  Art  thou  he  that  should  come,  or  do  w^e  look 
for  another?"  The  Lord  replies,  "Go  and  shew  John  again 
those   things   which   ye   do   hear   and   see,    &c.     And   blessed 


CHAPTER   XL  173 

is  he  whosoever  shall  not  bo  ofFended  in  me."  (Ver.  4,  6.) 
Our  Lord's  answer  evinces  that  it  was  not  the  disciples 
merely,  but  himself  also  that  was  shaken.  These  are  the 
t'.vo  parts  of  Christ's  ministry — His  words  and  His  works, 
^'  those  things  which  ye  do  hear  and  see,"  the  word  always 
having  the  higher  place  of  the  two  ;  the  works  being  what  would 
appeal  rather  to  the  senses ;  whereas  the  word  of  Christ  is  that 
which  deals  with  the  heart  and  conscience  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 
Still  they  were  to  go  and  tell  John  what  they  heard  and  saw. 
And  therein  we  have  what  the  Old  Testament  had  predicted 
as  signs  and  effects  of  the  Messiah's  power.  We  have  not,  I 
believe,  one  case  of  curing  the  blind  before  Christ  came.  It  was 
a  miracle  which,  according  to  Jewish  tradition,  was  reserved  for 
the  Son  of  David.  He  it  was  who,  according  to  Isaiah  xxxv., 
was  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind.  The  Lord  puts  tbe  blind 
receivino;  their  sight  as  the  first  outward  miracle  to  indicate 
that  He  was  really  the  Christ  that  was  to  come.  And  what  the 
Lord  puts  last  of  all,  but  not  the  least  weighty,  is,  that  "  the 
poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them."  /  What  is  it  but  a 
testimony  of  the  exceeding  tender  mercy  of  God,  that  while  the 
gospel  is  intended  for  all,  it  is  more  especially,  if  there  be  any 
difference,  for  those  that  know  misery,  trial,  contempt,  in  a  selfish 
world?  The  Lord  adds,  "  Blessed  is  he  whosoever  shall  not 
be  ofFended  in  me."  A  remarkable  word.  It  was  easy  to  be 
stumbled  then.  What  a  word  of  warning !  A  man  sent  from 
God  for  a  witness,  that  all  might  believe  in  Christ;  and  here, 
when  this  very  man  is  put  thoroughly  to  the  test,  the  Lord  has 
to  bear  witness  to  him,  instead  of  his  bearing  witness  to  the 
Lord !  How  constantly  do  we  see  man  breaking  down  when  he 
is  thus  weighed ;  but  what  a  blessed  thing  that  we  have  such  a 
God  to  deal  with  man,  if  He  be  only  counted  on !  Unbelief  is 
the  only  key  to  so  extraordinary  a  state  of  things ;  and  this  it  is 
which  was  at  work  in  the  question  put  to  our  Lord  by  John. 

But  when  these  messengers  departed,  the  Lord  shews  His- 
tender  compassion  and  regard  for  him,  and  begins  to  vindicate  the 
same  John  who  had  shewn  his  feebleness  under  suffering  and 
protracted  hope.     He  asks  them,  "  What  went  ye  out  into  the 


174  LECTURES    ON    THE    GOSPEL    OF    MATTHEW. 

wilderness  to  see  ?"  A  hard  judgment  might  have  concluded  it 
was  but  "  a  reed  shaken  with  the  wind,"  when  John  sent  dis- 
ciples with  the  question  just  put.  But  no  ;  the  Lord  will  not 
allow  it.  He  maintains  the  honour  of  John.  He  has  given  a 
little  rebuke  to  John  privately  by  his  disciples  ;  but  before  the 
multitudes  He  clothes  him  with  honour.  "  But  what  went  ye 
out  for  to  see?  A  man  clothed  in  soft  raiment?"  It  is  in 
courts  that  you  look  for  the  grandeur  of  the  world.  ''  Behold, 
they  that  wear  soft  clothing  are  in  kings'  houses.  But  what 
went  ye  out  for  to  see  ?  A  prophet  ?  Yea,  I  say  unto  you, 
and  more  than  a  prophet"  (ver.  8,  9) ;  because  John  had  a 
peculiar  place  that  no  prophet  had  assigned  to  him — to  be  the 
immediate  forerunner  of  the  Lord,  a  cotemporary  herald  of  the 
Messiah  Himself.  John  not  only  was  a  prophet,  but  the  pro- 
phets prophesied  of  John  ;  and  the  Lord  says  of  him,  "  Verily  I 
say  unto  you.  Among  them  that  are  born  of  women  there  hath 
not  risen  a  greater  than  John  the  Baptist."  But  mark  the 
word,  for  it  is  one  of  the  most  striking  in  this  transitional 
chapter:  "  Notwithstanding,  he  that  is  least  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  greater  than  he."  (Ver.  11.)  What  is  the  meaning  ? 
Our  Lord  first  says  that  among  those  born  of  women  there  had 
not  risen  a  greater  than  John  the  Baptist,  of  course  Himself 
excepted.  Here,  then.  He  is  sj^eaking  of  John,  not  as  compared 
with  Himself,  but  with  others.  He  was  the  greatest  born  of 
women ;  "  notwithstanding  he  that  is  least  in  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  greater  than  he."  It  means  clearly  that  there  was 
a  new  order  of  things  commencing,  in  which  the  privileges  that 
God's  sovereign  grace  would  confer  (for  it  is  not  a  question 
of  man's  forming  his  own  scheme  about  these  things)  would  be 
so  great,  that  the  least  in  the  dispensation  about  to  open  would 
be  greater  than  the  greatest  in  all  the  past.  Of  course  this  is 
not  as  to  their  faith  or  as  to  anything  in  themselves ;  neither 
does  it  mean  that  a  weak  believer  now  is  greater  than  a  man 
of  mighty  faith  in  times  past;  nor  that  some  poor  soul,  anxious 
and  troubled  about  his  acceptance,  is  in  a  healthier  state  than 
those  who  could  rejoice,  like  Simeon,  in  God  their  Saviour. 
Yet  the  Lord  does  say  that  the  greatest  of  those  gone  by  is 


CHAPTER    XT.  175 

less  than  the  least  now.     "■  He  that  is  least  in  the  kino-dom 
of  heaven  is  greater  than  he,"  i.e.,  than  John  the  Baptist. 

"  The  kino-dom  of  heaven"  never  means  heaven :    they  are 
ditferent   ideas    as    well   as    expressions.       "  The   kino-dom    of 
heaven"  always  means  that  which,  while  it  has  its  source  in 
heaven,  has  its  sphere  over  the  eartli.     It  may  be  applied,  as  it 
often  is,  to  what  is  going  on  now  ;   or,  as  sometimes,  to  what 
will  go  on  when  the  Lord  comes  in  glory,  and  brings  His  rule 
in  a  manifested  form  to  bear  upon  the  earth.     But  the  kino-dom 
of  heaven   always  supposes  the   earth  as  the  scene  u])on  which 
the  privileges  of  heaven  are    made  known.     The   Lord  Jesus 
sees   Himself  rejected;  but  God,  in   His  grace,  turns  the  fact 
of  the  rejection  of  Jesus  to  the  discovery  and  introduction  of  far 
greater  blessing  than  if  Jesus  had  been  received.     Supposino- 
the  Lord  had  been  accepted  by  man  when  He  came.  He  would 
have  blessed  man,  and  kept  him  alive  upon  the  earth  :  He  would 
have  bound  the  devil,  and  brought  in  countless  mercies  for  the 
creature  in  general.     Still,  what  Avould  have  been  all  that  with- 
out the  vindication  of  God  in  the  matter  of  sin  ?     Neither  moral 
glory  nor  supreme  love  would  have  been  shewn  as  they  now  are. 
For  what  could  it  be  more  than  divine  energy  barring  out  the 
power  of  Satan?  —  a  mere  though    all-powerful  medicine,    or 
remedial  measure,   staying  the  power  of  evil  and  death  in  tlie 
Avorld?     But  the  death  of  Christ  is,  at  once,  the  depth  of  man's 
wickedness  and  the  height  of  God's  goodness ;   for  in  the  cross 
the  one  proved  his  utter  hatred   and  iniquity,  the  other   His 
perfect  holy  love.     It  was  man's  unrighteousness  that  put  Him 
there — it  was  God's  grace  that  brought  Him  there  ;  and  Christ 
risen  from  the  dead  takes  His  place  as  the  beginning,  the  Head 
of  a  new  creation,  and  displays  it  in  His  own  person  now,  as  a 
matter  of  faith  to  them  that  believe  ;  puts  them,  while  they  are 
still  in  this   world,  struggling  with   the  devil,  in  this  place  of 
blessing ;  sheds  the  joy  of  redemption  into  their  hearts,  and  fills 
them  with  the  certainty  that  they  are  born  of  God — their  sins 
being  all  forgiven — and  that  they  are  only  waiting  for  Him  to 
come  and  crown  the  work  of  His  love,  when  they  shall  be  raised 
from  the  dead  aiid  changed  into  His  glory.     It  is  true  to  faith 


176  LECTURES   ON   THE    GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

now,  and  will  be  true  to  sight  by  and  by  ;  but  it  is  true  always 
from  the  time  it  was  introduced.  It  began  with  Christ's  ascen- 
sion into  heaven,  and  it  will  terminate  by  Christ's  descent  from 
heaven,  when  He  will  bring  in  this  power  of  the  kingdom  over 
the  earth.  "What,  then,  has  the  least  believer  got  now?'  Look 
at  saints  of  old.  John  the  Baptist  was  resting  upon  promises. 
Even  he,  blessed  as  he  was,  could  not  say,  My  sins  are  blotted 
out,  my  iniquities  are  all  gone.  Before  the  death  and  resurrec- 
tion of  Christ,  saints  could  only,  but  with  joy,  look  forward  to 
this  certainty,  and  say.  It  will  be  blessed  indeed  !  They  might 
be  sure  that  it  was  God's  intention,  but  it  hung  upon  a  promise  ; 
it  was  not  an  accomplished  thing.  And,  after  all,  if  you  were 
in  prison,  you  would  know  the  diiference  between  a  promise  to 
bring  you  out  and  the  fact  of  your  liberty  when  fairly  out. 
This  is  just  the  diflPerence.  John  the  Baptist  could  not  say,  nor 
could  the  most  advanced  saint  say,  before  the  death  of  Christ, 
My  sins  are  all  gone ;  though  he  would  and  ought  to  say,  I  am 
quite  sure,  that,  when  Messiah  comes,  everlasting  righteousness 
will  be  brought  in,  and  an  end  of  sins  will  be  made.  But  here 
appears  the  wonderful  thing,  that  Messiah  is  come  and  has  done 
the  work.  The  atoning  work  is  done ;  and  the  consequence  is, 
that  all  who  believe  are  entitled  to  say,  I  have  no  longer  a  single 
particle  of  sin  upon  me  in  the  presence  of  God. 

This  is  not  true  of  some  Christians  in  j)articular.  I  say  it 
about  every  Christian,  and  I  want  every  Christian  to  say  it 
about  himself;  that  is,  that  every  Christian  should  take  the 
place  that  God  gives  him  in  Christ.  And  what  would  be  the 
effect  of  this  ?  Christians  could  not  walk  with  the  world  in  the 
way  they  do ;  nor  could  they  use  the  language  either  that  we 
so  constantly  hear  taken  up. 

What  I  find,  then,  in  the  word  of  God  is  this :  there  was  a 
new  dispensation  about  to  open,  in  which  the  very  least  is 
invested  with  privileges  that  the  greatest  could  not  and  ought 
not  to  possess  before.  And  this,  because  God  sets  infinite  value 
upon  the  death  of  His  Son.  It  is  not  only  that  there  is  the 
promise  of  it,  blessed  as  that  was ;  but  God  puts  the  greatest 
possible  honour  upon  the  death  of  Christ.     And,  therefore,  as 


CHAPTER  XI.  177 

with  an  earthly  sovereign  it  is  the  custom  to  put  particular 
honour  upon  an  epoch  of  special  joy  to  himself ;  if  man  can  do 
that  about  the  birth  of  a  child,  still  more  how  simple  and 
according  to  what  faith  may  expect  from  God  is  it  that  He  shoidd 
attach  peculiar  glory  to  that  work  of  Christ  by  which  redemption 
has  been  accomplished,  though  it  be  in  the  death  of  His  Son  ? 
Now,  everything  is  given ;  and  God  can  invite  souls  not  to  forget 
their  sins,  or  turn  away  their  eyes  from  them ;  but  looking  at 
them  fairly  and  fully,  before  the  cross  of  Christ,  He  can  call 
upon  them  to  say,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth 
from  all  sin."  This  is  the  foundation  of  Christianity.  KJnowing 
this,  we  must  see  how  entirely  evil  is  the  place  of  a  priest  now ; 
that  is,  of  one  particidar  mortal  man  put  in  a  position  to  draw 
near  to  God  for  others.  Every  Christian  is  a  priest — man, 
woman,  or  child,  it  does  not  matter.  All  Christians  are  not 
ministers.  This  is  another  thing.  Ministry  and  priesthood, 
though  so  often  confounded,  have  not  one  idea  in  common 
between  them.  God  gives  this  peculiar  privilege  now,  that 
every  believer  is  a  priest  of  God ;  that  is,  he  is  entitled  to  draw 
near  into  the  holiest  of  all,  with  all  sin  judged,  all  his  iniquities 
purged  away,  so  that  he  may  be  thoroughly  happy  in  the 
presence  of  God  while  he  is  upon  earth.  I  have  given  but  a 
small  part  of  the  privileges  of  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  now.  And  remember  this — all  the  grand  prerogatives 
of  Clu-istianity  are  common  privileges.  One  man  may  preach, 
and  another  may  not  ;  but  this  says  nothing  about  the 
privileges  of  the  kingdom.  There  was  something  that  belonged 
specially  to  Paul,  as  the  servant  of  God,  which  others  did  not 
possess :  but  any  gifted  one  might  preach,  and  there  might  not 
even  be  life  in  the  soul.  Caiaphas  might  testify,  and  Balaam 
too,  and  both  utter  true  things ;  and  Paul  is  willing  to  take  such 
a  place,  and  shews  that  he  might  preach  to  others,  and  yet,  if 
regardless  of  holiness,  be  himself  a  castaway.  Nothing  can  be 
more  simple.  But  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  blessings  I 
have  been  speaking  of  as  the  portion  of  believers  now. 

The  privileges  of  the  kingdom  are  now  the  miiversal  heritage 
of  the  family  of  faith ;  the  least  of  them  is  greater  even  than 
N 


178  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

John  the  Baptist.  Great  efforts  have  been  made  to  shake  the" 
meaning  of  this  verse.  It  has  been  taught  that  the  least  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  Jesus  Himself! — Jesus,  of  course,  in  His 
humiliation,  in  His  going  to  the  cross.  But  what  an  utter 
ignorance  of  the  mind  of  God  is  there  manifested  by  such  a 
remark !  For  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  not  yet  come.  It 
was  preached,  but  it  was  not  yet  actually  set  up.  And  Jesus, 
far  from  being  "the  least"  in  that  kingdom,  was  Himself  the 
king ;  so  that  it  would  be  derogatory  to  His  person  to  call  Him 
even  the  greatest,  not  to  speak  of  "  the  least,"  in  the  kingdom. 
It  would  be  want  of  reverence,  as  well  as  of  intelligence,  to  say 
that  He  was  in  the  kingdom  at  all :  and  perhaps  it  would  be 
more  true  to  say  that  the  kingdom  was  in  Him  ;  for  it  was 
morally,  and  as  far  as  divine  power  went,  in  the  person  of  our 
Lord.  "  If  I,"  says  He  to  the  Jews,  ''cast  out  devils  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  then  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  unto  you."  It 
was  arrived  in  His  person.  He  being  the  King,  and  having  the 
power  thereof,  it  was  there  in  Him.  But  if  you  look  at  "the 
kingdom  of  heaven"  as  a  state  of  things  introduced  into  this 
world,  Christ  had  to  go  up  to  heaven  first — a  rejected  king,  na 
doubt,  but  still  as  such  to  sit  on  the  ,right  hand  of  God — and 
thereon  the  kingdom  of  heaven  commenced.  The  kingdom  was 
not  actually  established  till  Jesus  went  up  on  high.  Then  it 
began,  first  spiritually,  as  by  and  by  it  will  shine  in  power  and 
glory.  Hence  it  is  clear  that  in  this  chapter  we  stand  upon  the 
confines  of  the  past  dispensation,  and  of  the  one  that  was  about  to 
open.  John  the  Baptist  is  on  the  scene,  as  the  last  and  greatest 
witness  of  that  which  was  closing.  Elijah  was  coming.  But 
Elijah  had  come  now  in  the  person  of  John  the  Baptist.  John 
was  doing  the  moral  work  that  was  associated  with  Elijah's 
mission ;  preparing  the  day  of  the  Lord,  and  making  the  way 
for  Himself.  I  do  not  say  that  Elijah  may  not  come  another 
day,  but  that  John  was  the  then  witness  of  Elijah's  service.  He 
was  come  "  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elias  :"  and,  as  our  Lord 
says  a  little  after,  ^^  If  ye  will  receive  it,  this  is  Elias,  which  was 
for  to  come."  Such  he  was  to  faith.  Like  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  now,  it   is  a  testimony  to  the   future   kingdom  when 


CHAPTER   XI.  179 

displayed  in  power  and  glory.  John  was  to  faith  then  what 
Elias  will  be  by  and  by.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  to  faith 
now  what  the  kingdom  of  heaven  will  be  to  sight  hereafter. 
The  Lord  intimates  that  a  dispensation  of  faith  is  coming  in, 
when  the  promises  were  not  to  be  accomplished  in  the  letter. 

But  just  as  John  the  Baptist  was  cast  into  prison — a  tremen- 
dous trial  for  a  Jew  who  looked  at  him  as  a  great  prophet  to 
usher  in  the  Messiah  in  visible  majesty,  so  he  says  here,  "  He 
that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear."  It  has  to  be  received  by 
the  attentive  ear  of  faith.  How  extraordinary  it  must  have 
appeared  to  Israel  that  the  forerunner  of  the  Messiah  should 
be  in  jDrison,  and  the  Messiah  Himself  afterwards  nailed  upon 
the  cross  !  But  before  the  outward  glory  comes,  there  must  be 
the  suffering — yea,  and  redemjDtion — effected.  Hence,  the  least 
now  who  has  this  blessing  of  faith,  who  enjoys  these  astonishing 
pri\aleges  which  the  Holy  Ghost  is  bringing  out  as  the  gift  of 
God's  sovereign  grace,  is  greater  than  John  the  Baptist.  For 
it  is  God's  doing  and  giving  and  ordering.  Judgment  is  His 
strange  work ;  but  grace  is  the  delight  of  God's  heart.  It  is  His 
joy  by  Christ  to  bless  the  man  that  has  not  the  smallest  claim 
upon  Him.  And  such  is  His  work  now.  But  what  would  be 
the  effect  of  this  among  the  Jews  ?  Our  Lord  compares  them 
to  caj^ricious  people,  who  would  neither  do  one  thing  nor 
another.  If  gladness  is  going  on,  they  have  no  sympathy  with 
it;  neither  have  they  with  sorrow.  John  the  Baptist  called 
them  to  mourn  :  they  had  no  heart  for  it.  Then  came  Jesus, 
bidding  them,  as  it  were,  to  rejoice  at  the  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy  :  but  they  heeded  Him  not.  They  liked  neither.  John  was 
too  strict,  and  the  Lord  too  gracious,  for  them.  They  could  not 
bear  either.  The  truth  is,  man  dislikes  God ;  and  there  is  no 
greater  proof  of  his  ignorance  of  himself  than  that  he  does  not 
believe  it.  Whatever  they  might  plead  in  the  way  of  abuse 
of  John  the  Baptist,  or  of  Himself,  "  Wisdom  is  justified  of 
her  children." 

Accordingly  He  shews  how  wisdom  was  justified,  positively 
and  negatively.  "  He  began  to  upbraid  the  cities  wherein  most 
of  his  mighty  works  were  done,  because  they  repented  not. 


180        LECTUEES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

Woe  unto  tliee,  Cliorazin  !  woe  mito  thee,  Betlisaicla ! 

And  tliou,  Capernaum,  which  art  exalted  unto  heaven,  shalt  be 
brought  doMT^i  to  hell :  for  if  the  mighty  works,"  &c.  (Ver.  20 — 
24.)  What  more  solemn  !  They  refuse  the  voice  of  heavenly 
wisdom ;  and  the  result  must  be,  a  judgment  more  unsparing 
than  that  which  had  of  old  made  Sodom  the  monument  of 
God's  vengeance.  Was  there  one  place,  one  city,  in  the  land 
more  favoured  than  another  ?  It  was  Capernaum,  where  most 
of  His  miracles  were  wrought :  and  yet  this  very  city  should  be 
brought  down  to  hell.  Even  Sodom,  the  most  notorious  and 
depraved  of  all  places,  had  not  come  under  so  fearfal  a  sentence. 
The  Lord  never  visits  in  judgment  till  He  has  exhausted  all 
means  to  see  whether  things  are  as  bad  as  they  looked.  But 
when  He  does  judge,  who  shall  be  able  to  stand  ?  Thus  should 
wisdom  be  justified,  if  I  may  venture  so  to  say,  by  those  that 
are  not  her  children. 

But  now  comes  the   positive  part.     "  At   that  time   Jesus 
answered  and  said,  I  thank  thee,  0  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and 
earth."     From  ''Woe,  woe,"  Jesus  could  turn  romid  and  say,. 
"  I  thank  thee,  0  Father."     Not  that  the  events  recorded  here 
took  place  together.     The  whole  scene  about  John  the  Baptist 
occurred  long  before  the  Lord  alluded  to  the  wise  and  prudent 
rejecting  Him  and  the  babes  receiving  Him.      The  gospel  of 
Luke  occasionally  gives  precise  marks  of  time,  and  shews  that 
the   Lord's   reception  of   Jolm's  messengers  was  at   an   early 
period  of  His  ministry,  very  shortly  after  the  healing  of  the 
centurion's   servant ;    whereas   His   thanking   the   Father  was 
after  the  return  of  the   seventy  disciples  who  were  sent  out 
on  the  final  testimony,  which  is  not  mentioned  in  Matthew 
at   all.     The  Holy  Ghost   in'  our  gospel   puts   aside,  in  gen- 
eral,  mere   successions    of   time,    and   welds   together    events 
separated    by  months    or    years,    provided   they  illustrate   the 
great  truth  that  it  was  His  object  here  to  bring  out,  viz.,  the 
true   Messiah,  presented  with   adequate   proofs   to  Israel,  but 
rejected ;  and  this  turned  of  God's  grace  to  be  the  occasion  of 
better  blessings  than  if  the  Lord  had  been  received. 

And  while  the  solemn  sight  is  before  us  of  man's  growing 


CHAPTER   XI.  181 

rejection  Jesus  says,  "  I  thank  thee,  0  Father,  Lord  of  heaven 
and  earth"  (it  is  not  now  any  hopes  limited  to  the  earth,  but 
He  is  looked  to  as  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth — the  sovereign 
disposer  of  all  things),  ''  because  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from 
the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them  unto  babes.  Even 
so,  Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight.  All  things  are 
delivered  unto  me  of  my  Father."  I  may  be  refused  the  throne 
of  Israel ;  the  Jews  may  reject,  the  leaders  despise  Me  :  all  this 
may  be,  but  what  is  the  result  ?  Not  merely  what  was  promised 
to  Da^■id  or  Solomon,  but  "  all  things  are  delivered  unto  me  of 
my  Father."  "Where,  when,  were  such  thoughts  as  these  divulged 
before  ?  Take  the  most  wonderful  prediction  in  the  Psalms  and 
prophets,  and  where  do  you  get  anything  like  them?  It  is 
clearly  the  rejected  Messiah  who,  when  man  refuses  Him, 
submits  to  it.  They  strip  Him  of  His  robes  of  Messianic  glory, 
and  what  comes  out  ?  He  is  the  Son  of  the  Father,  tlie  Son  of 
God  from  all  eternity,  the  blessed  divine  Person  who  could  look 
up  and  say,  "  Father."  Refuse  Him  in  His  earthly  dignity,  and 
He  only  shines  in  His  heavenly  one ;  despise  Him  as  a  man, 
and  He  is  manifestly  God. 

''And  no  man  knoweth  the  Son  but  the  Father:  neither 
knoweth  any  man  the  Father  save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whom- 
soever the  Son  will  reveal  him."  (Ver.  27.)  He  is  revealing 
the  Father  now.  It  is  not  merely  that  He  is  come  to  accomplish 
the  promises  of  God,  but  He  is  revealing  the  Father — bringing 
souls  into  a  deeper  knowledge  of  God  than  was  possible  before. 
"  Come  mito  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I 
will  give  you  rest."  (Ver.  28.)  It  is  perfect  grace  :  no  restric- 
tion ;  no  setting  the  Jew  in  the  foremost  seat  of  honour.  But 
"  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour."  Jew  or  Gentile,  it  matters 
not ;  do  you  labour  ?  Are  you  miserable  ?  Can  you  find  no 
comfort '  "  Come  mito  me,  all  ye  that  labour,  ....  and  I  will 
give  you  rest."  It  is  without  condition  or  qualification,  if  the 
needy  but  go  to  Him.  "  Come  unto  me."  This  is  the  proof  of 
the  Father's  drawing — that  I  go  to  Jesus.  "All  that  the 
Father  giveth  me  shall  come  to  me ;  and  him  that  cometh  unto 
me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."     It  is  the  Son  of  the  Father  in 


182  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

John;  and  Matthew  here  draws  near,  and  we  have  the  Hke 
freedom  of  grace.  For  grace  is  always  found  most  full  and  free 
where  the  Son  is  brought  out  in  all  His  glory.  "  Take  my  yoke 
upon  you,  and  learn  of  me ;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart, 
and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls.  For  my  yoke  is  easy, 
and  my  burden  is  light."  (Ver.  29,  30.)  Grace  does  not  leave 
men  to  do  as  they  list,  but  makes  its  object  desire  to  do  the  will 
of  God.  So,  immediately  after  saying,  "  I  will  give  you  rest," 
He,  our  Lord,  adds,  "  Take  my  yoke  upon  you"— not  the 
yoke  of  their  fathers,  but  that  of  Jesus.  God  now  reveals 
Christ,  and  the  Son  is  revealing  the  Father.  Therefore  He 
says,  ''  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me,  for  I  am 
meek  and  lowly  in  heart,  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls." 
Mark  the  difference.  In  verse  28,  it  is  "  Come  unto  me,  .... 
and  I  will  give  you  rest."    There  it  is  pure,  absolute  grace  ;  but, 

"  take  my  yoke  upon  you and  ye  shall  find  rest  to  your 

souls."  He  is  saying,  as  it  were.  Now  you  have  got  to  obey 
Me,  to  be  subject  to  Me,  and  the  effect  will  be  finding  rest  to 
your  souls.  When  the  sinner  goes  in  his  wretchedness  to  Jesus, 
the  Saviour  gives  him  rest — yea,  "without  money  and  without 
price."  But  if  that  soul  does  not  follow  on  in  the  ways  of 
Christ,  he  becomes  miserable,  and  loses  the  comfort  he  had  at 
first.  Why  ?  He  has  not  taken  Christ's  yoke  upon  him.  The 
terms  on  which  the  Lord  gives  rest  to  the  sinner  are,  "  Come 
unto  me,"  just  as  you  are,  "  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden."  The  terms  on  which  the  believer  finds  rest  are,  "Take 
my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me ;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly 
in  heart."  The  Lord  thus  secures  His  dignity,  and  keeps  up 
His  moral  government  over  His  people.  They  are  more  dis- 
turbed than  any,  if  not  subject  to  Christ ;  they  can  neither 
enjoy  Him  nor  the  world.  If  I  have  got  such  a  blessing  as 
Christ,  and  yet  am  not  bearing  His  yoke,  God  does  not  intend 
that  I  should  be  happy.  All  else  is  a  false  happiness.  The 
only  true  enjoyment  for  our  souls,  now  that  we  have  got  Christ, 
depends  on  taking  His  yoke  upon  us,  and  learning  of  Him, 
bound  to  Him  as  One  that  we  have  evermore  to  serve  and  to 
worship. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Chapter  xii.  completes  the  picture  of  the  transition  begun  in 
chapter  xi.  and  shews  that,  betore  God,  the  crisis  was  come. 
The  Lord  might  continue  to  become  the  object  of  still  deeper 
rejection,  but  the  spirit  that  crucified  Him  had  already  mani- 
fested itself  clearly.  In  the  centre  of  this  chapter  we  have  the 
warning  of  the  unpardonable  sin,  not  merely  against  the 
Messiah,  but  against  the  Holy  Ghost  bearing  His  testimony 
to  the  Messiah ;  and,  further,  the  fact  that  Israel,  as  a  nation, 
would  be  guilty  of  that  sin,  and  hence  be  given  up  to  the  power 
of  Satan,  beyond  example  in  all  their  sad  history.  So  that  the 
evil  for  which  God  had  allowed  them  to  be  carried  captive  to 
Babylon,  was  a  little  thing  in  comparison  of  the  iniquity  of 
which  they  were  now,  in  spirit,  guilty,  and  into  which  they 
were  about  to  sink.  This  thoroughly  closes  the  announcement 
of  the  crisis  ;  and  chapter  xiii.  introduces  a  new  thing — the 
kingdom  of  heaven  abou.t  to  be  set  up  in  its  present  mysterious 
form,  because  of  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah. 

I  must  now  proceed  to  shew  how  far  all  the  incidents  in  this 
chapter  strengthen  the  general  idea,  how  far  all  is  in  harmony 
with  the  leading  thought — the  grand  break  between  Christ  and 
Israel.  Therefore  it  is  that  the  Holy  Ghost  here  does  not 
confine  Himself  to  the  mere  order  of  time  in  which  the  events 
took  place.  "At  tliat  time  Jesus  went  on  the  sabbath-day 
through  the  corn,  and  his  disciples  were  an  hungered,  and  began 
to  pluck  the  ears  of  corn  and  to  eat."  (Ver.  1.)  We  are  not  to 
suppose  that  "at  that  time"  means  "at  that  exact  moment." 
It  is  a  general  term,  embracing  events  somewhat  connected, 
though  there  might  be  months  between  them.  It  is  not  like 
"  immediately,"  or  "  forthwith,"  or  "  the  week  after,"  &c. 
What  did  intervene  we  must  gather  from  other  gospels.  If  we 
compare  that  of  Mark,  we  find  that  the  scene  of  the  corn-fields 
took  place  early  in  our  Lord's  ministry.     Thus,  in  chapter  ii., 


184  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

on  the  sabbatli-day  following  the  call  of  Levi  and  the  discourse 
about  fasting,  we  are  told  that  "  He  went  through  the  corn- 
fields." Here  we  have  this  incident  taken  completely  out  of  its 
historical  connection.  Mark  adheres  rigorously  to  the  order  of 
events :  Matthew  departs  from  it  in  order  to  give  the  great 
change  consequent  on  the  Messiah's  rejection  by  Israel.  Our 
Lord's  word  of  woe  upon  Chorazin  and  Bethsaida,  and  of  their 
blessedness  who  received  Him,  was  spoken  by  no  means  early. 
Here  they  are  put  together,  because  the  object  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  the  first  gospel  is  to  shew  this  change.  Hence,  what 
would  prove  the  change  is  selected  and  reserved  for  this  place. 

Li  short,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  giving  us  an  historical  picture 
apart  from  the  mere  date  in  which  the  events  took  place ;  and 
the  events  and  discourses  that  illustrate  the  great  transition  are  all 
grouped  together.  The  disciples  passed  through  the  corn,  and 
began  to  pluck  the  ears  of  corn,  and  to  eat,  according  to  the 
liberty  allowed  them  in  the  law.  "  When  the  Pharisees  saw 
it,  they  said  unto  him.  Behold,  thy  disciples  do  that  which  is  not 
lawful  to  do  on  the  sabbath-day."  (Ver.  2.)  Our  Lord  then 
cites  two  incidents,  one  of  them  a  constantly-recurring  fact 
among  the  priests,  the  other  recorded  of  their  most  conspicuous 
king,  David :  both  proving  the  sin  and  utter  ruin  of  Israel. 
What  was  the  state  of  things  when  David  was  obliged  to  use 
the  shew -bread?  Was  it  not  because  the  true  king  was  a 
despised,  persecuted  man — because  the  king  of  their  own  hearts' 
choice  was  there?  It  was  the  same  thing  now.  The  sin  of 
Israel  profaned  the  holy  bread.  God  would  not  accept  aught 
as  holy  from  people  that  were  living  in  sin.  No  ceremonial  is 
worth  a  straw,  if  the  heart  does  not  honour  Christ.  Why  were 
the  disciples  reduced  to  j)luck  and  eat  the  ears  of  corn  ?  Why 
were  the  followers  of  the  true  King  reduced  to  hunger  ? 

Besides,  "  Have  ye  not  read  in  the  law,  how  that  on  the 
sabbath-days  the  priests  in  the  temple  profane  the  sabbath,  and 
are  blameless?"  (Ver.  5.)  Tlie  priests  did  a  very  important 
work  upon  that  day.  They  offered  sacrifices  then,  because 
there  was  sin ;  and  the  people's  sin  demands  what,  accord- 
ing to   the    letter   of   the    law,   would    seem    to   a   Pharisee 


CHAPTER   XII.  185 

to  be  a  breach  of  it.  It  does  not  matter  wliat  the  law 
may  ordinarily  claim,  if  you  have  sin  on  the  part  of  God's 
people,  sacrifice  cannot  be  deferred.  Thus,  whether  you  take 
the  particular  instance  of  the  Lord's  anointed  in  Saul's  day,  or 
the  constant  priestly  service  on  the  sabbath-day,  one  thing 
accounted  for  all  disorder,  whether  real  or  apparent — Israel  were 
sinners.  They  had  allowed  the  chosen  of  the  Lord  to  be  hunted 
upon  the  mountains  when  he  was  there ;  and  a  greater  than 
David  was  here.  And  so  as  to  the  priests  and  their  work.  There 
was  one  infinitely  greater  than  the  temple  there,  Messiah  Him- 
self: and  what  was  not  their  indifference,  nay,  their  enmity, 
towards  Him  ? 

But  not  only  this ;  there  was  another  sabbath-day  necessary 
to  complete  the  sketch.  And  now  Jesus  does  work  Himself; 
and  these  two  things  are  brought  together  here.  "  When  he 
was  departed  thence,  he  went  into  their  synagogue  ;  and  behold, 
there  was  a  man  which  had  his  hand  withered ;  and  they 
asked  him,  saying,  Is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  sabbath-days  ?  that 
they  might  accuse  him.''  The  Lord  accepted  the  challenge. 
"  He  said  unto  them.  What  man  shall  there  be  among  you  that 
shall  have  one  sheep,  and  if  it  fall  into  a  pit  on  the  sabbath-day, 
will  he  not  lay  hold  on  it  and  lift  it  out?"  (Ver.  11.)  Of 
course  they  would  deliver  the  poor  sheep  out  of  the  pit,  because 
it  was  their  own  sheep.  They  had  no  conscience  about  doing 
what  was  to  their  own  advantage  because  it  was  the  sabbath-dav. 
And  the  Lord  does  not  blame  them ;  but  He  presses  this  most 
pungent  conclusion  upon  them — "  How  much,  then,  is  a  man 
better  than  a  sheep  ?  Wherefore  it  is  lawful  to  do  well  on  the 
sabbath-days."  (Ver.  12.)  In  a  word,  He  shews  us  by  this 
second  case  that  not  only  was  Israel  a  guilty  people  respectino- 
the  true  Beloved,  but  besides  that,  they  were  a  people  who, 
if  they  knew  their  own  condition,  would  own  themselves  to  be 
like  the  man  with  the  withered  hand,  and  thus  be  willing  to 
receive  and  submit  to  Him.  He  was  there  in  grace  to  accom- 
plish all  necessary  healing.  The  Lord  pressed  upon  them  their 
dismal  condition.  The  whole  nation  before  God  was  morally 
as  withered  as  that  man's  hand  physically  :  not  willing,  alas  !  to 


186       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

be  healed  like  him  ;  but  as  far  as  utter  deadness  before  God  was 
concerned,  such  was  their  state.  "  Then  saith  he  to  the  man, 
Stretch  forth  thine  hand  ;  and  he  stretched  it  forth,  and  it  was 
restored  whole  as  the  other."  (Yer.  13,)  Why  is  this  recorded 
here  as  having  occurred  on  the  sabbath-day?  Why  especially 
in  connection  with  the  incident  of  the  corn-field  ?  In  the  first, 
the  Lord  proves  Israel's  guilt  in  contrast  with  the  sanctity  of 
the  sabbath  ;  and  in  the  second  He  declares  Himself  there  to 
work  restoration  even  on  the  sabbath.  It  is  an  account  of  all 
importance ;  because  the  Lord  is,  as  it  were,  tearing  in  pieces 
the  outward  letter  of  the  bond  between  Him  and  Israel,  of  which 
the  sabbath-day  was  a  special  sign. 

I  may  here  observe,  the  Lord's  day  differs  essentially  from 
the  sabbath-day  ;  and  in  the  early  Church  there  was  scrupulous 
care  taken  not  to  confound  the  two  things.  The  sabbath  and 
the  Lord's  day  are  signs  of  wholly  distinct  truths.  The  first 
owed  its  origin  to  God's  hallowing  His  rest  when  creation  was 
done ;  and  it  was  the  token  that,  when  God  would  finish  His 
works,  there  would  be  a  holy  rest  for  man.  Then  sin  came  in, 
and  all  was  ruined.  We  do  not  hear  a  word  about  it  (at  least, 
directly),  till  a  people  is  called  out  from  among  all  others  to 
serve  the  true  God,  as  His  chosen  nation.  We  have  seen,  in 
the  Old  Testament  as  well  as  the  New,  how  utterly  they  failed ; 
and  now  the  only  hope  of  having  a  true  sabbath  is  when  Christ 
Himself  shall  bring  it  in.  When  Adam  sinned,  death  passed 
upon  all,  and  the  rest  of  creation  was  broken.  Then  (after  the 
type  of  Christ  in  the  manna,  with  the  sabbath  following)  came 
in  the  law,  which  took  up  the  sabbath,  incorporated  it  in  the 
ten  words  and  the  statutes  of  Israel,  and  made  it  not  only  a 
hallowed  day,  but  a  daj'  of  command,  which  was  enjoined  upon 
them  like  the  other  nine  words ;  a  day  in  which  every  Israelite 
was  bound,  not  only  to  abstain  from  work  himself,  but  to  give  rest 
to  everything  that  was  his.  It  was  not  a  question  of  a  spiritual 
people.  All  Israel  were  bound  by  it,  and  they  shared  its  rest 
along  with  their  cattle.  The  Lord's  day,  on  the  other  hand, 
never  was  heard  of  till  Christ  rose  from  the  dead.  Thence  issued 
an  entirely  new  order  of  things.     Christ,  the  beginning,  the 


CHAPTER   XII.  187 

head  of  a  new  creation,  rose  from  the  dead  on  the  first  day  of 
the  week.     Thus,  while  the  okl  world  goes  on,  sin  still  at  work, 
and  Satan  not  yet  bound,  God  has  wrought  salvation,  which  He 
is  giving  to  every  soul  that  believes.    These  recognize  that  Christ 
risen  is  their  Saviour,  and  that  they  consequently  have  new  life 
in  Him.     This,  and  much  more  than  this,  they  come  together  to 
acknowledge  on  the  Lord's  day.     They  "  shew  the  Lord's  death 
till  he  come."      Nothing  can  be  plainer  in  scripture,    if  our 
desire   is  to   knoAV  and   follow  the  word  of  God.     It  was  no 
question  whether   people  were  Jews  or  Gentiles.     Were  they 
Christians  ?     Had  they  Christ  as  their  life  and  Lord  ?     If  they 
thankfully  confessed  Him,  the  Lord's-day  was  the  day  for  them. 
Such  of  the  Christians  as  had  been  Jews  continued  to  frequent 
the  synagogue  on  the  sabbath.     But  this  only  shews  the  more 
plainly  that  it  was  not  a  mere  change  of  day.     To  the  Roman 
saints,  the  apostle  insists  that  the  man  who  regarded  the  day,  to 
the  Lord  he  regarded  it ;  and  that  the  man  who  regarded  it  not, 
to  the  Lord  he  did  not  regard  it.     Was  this  the  Lord's  day  ? 
No  ;  but  Jewish  days  and  fasts.     The  apostle  would  never  treat 
the  Lord's-day  as  optionally  to  be  regarded  or  not.     Some  of 
these  believers  saw  that  they  were  delivered  from  the  law,  and 
did  not  observe  the  Jewish  feasts  or  fasts.     The  Gentiles,  of 
0010*86,  were  not  under  the  law  at  all.     But  some,  at  any  rate, 
of  the  Jewish  believers  still  had  a  conscience  about  the  ancient 
holydays,  and   of  them  the  apostle  speaks.     The    Lord's  day 
never  Avas   and  never  will  be  a  Jewish  day.     It  has  its  own 
proper  character  stamped  upon  it ;  and  Christians,  though  not 
under  the  law  as  Jews  with  the  sabbath,  are  yet  by  grace  called 
on  far  more  solemnly  to  use  it  for  the   Lord,   as  that  which 
summons  them  to  meet  together  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  in  sepa- 
ration from  this  world,  conscious  of  redemption  and  justification 
through    His   death   and   resurrection.     It  is  the  type  of  the 
blessing   that  the  Christian   has  got,  yet  to  be  manifested  in 
glory.     The  world  always  confounds  it,  as  do  many  Christians, 
with   the    sabbath.     One   hears  sometimes   real   believers,   but 
uninstructed,    talk   of    the    "  christian    sabbath :"    this    is,    of 
course,  because  they   do  not  see   their   deliverance   from   the 


188  LECTURES   ON  THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

law,  and  the  consequences  which  flow  from  their  belonging  to 
Him  who  is  risen  from  the  dead.  The  apostle  developes  these 
blessed  truths. 

Our  Lord  merely  deals  with  the  Jews  here.  He  shews  the  crisis 
then  in  progress.  His  disciples  were  not  hindered  from  pluck- 
ing the  ears  of  corn  on  one  sabbath ;  as  on  another  He  openly 
wrought  a  miracle  in  the  presence  of  all  (thus  giving  occasion 
for  the  Pharisees  who  sought  one  against  Him).  It  is  true  that 
the  works  were  works  of  mercy  and  goodness  ;  but  there  was  no 
manner  of  necessity  for  either,  had  there  not  been  a  purpose. 
He  could  have  spoken  without  doing  a  single  thing.  So  with 
the  blind  man  in  the  Gospel  of  John.  All  the  clay  in  the  world 
could  not  have  cured  him  but  for  the  power  of  our  Lord.  His 
word  would  have  been  enough ;  but  He  does  something  Himself, 
and  makes  the  man  do  something  else  upon  the  sabbath.  We 
are  told  expressly,  "  It  was  the  sabbath  day  when  Jesus  made 
the  clay  and  opened  his  eyes."  The  Lord  was  breaking  the 
seal  of  the  covenant  between  Jehovah  and  Israel.  The  sabbath 
sealed  that  bond,  and  was  in  Israel  now  worse  than  useless  in 
God's  sight ;  because  the  people  who  pretended  to  keep  the  sab- 
bath so  carefully  were  the  bitterest  enemies  of  His  Son.  It  was 
utterly  false  to  subject  Him  to  the  sabbath.  The  Son  of  man  was 
*'  Lord  even  of  the  sabbath  day."  He  takes  that  ground  boldly, 
as  we  are  here  told  (ver.  8),  and  the  following  sabbath  performs 
this  miracle.  The  Pharisees  felt  that  it  was  a  death-blow  to 
their  whole  system,  and  they,  gathering  together,  "  held  a 
council  against  him  how  they  might  destroy  him."  This  was 
the  first  conclave  for  the  purpose  of  putting  Him  to  death. 
Jesus,  knowing  it,  withdraws  Himself  from  thence,  "  and  great 
multitudes  followed  him,  and  he  healed  them  all :"  a  picture 
of  what  He  would  do  when  Israel  put  Him  to  death.  Thence- 
forth, the  great  work  was  to  be  among  the  Gentiles.  Tlie 
prophet  Isaiah  is  quoted  in  connection  with  this  occurrence,  to 
shew  what  our  Lord's  character  was :  "  Behold  my  servant, 
whom  I  have  chosen  ;  my  beloved,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased. 
I  will  put  my  Spirit  upon  him,  and  he  shall  shew  judg- 
ment to   the    Gentiles :    he   shall   not   strive  nor  cry,   neither 


CHAPTEE  XII.  189 

shall  any  man  hear  his  voice  in  the  streets :  a  bruised  reed 
shall  he  not  break,  and  smoking  flax  shall  he  not  quench,  till 
he  send  forth  judgment  unto  victory.  And  in  his  name  shall 
the  Gentiles  trust." 

The  Lord  was  departing  from  Israel ;  but  this  is  not  all. 
There  is  a  final  testimony  before  He  pronounces  sentence  upon 
Israel :  "  Then  was  brought  unto  him  one  possessed  with  a  devil, 
blind  and  dumb,  and  he  healed  him,  insomuch  that  the  blind 
and  dumb  both  spake  and  saw."  This  was  the  condition  in  Avhich 
Israel  was  about  to  be,  without  an  eye  or  a  voice  for  Jesus :  the 
apt  figure  of  the  nation's  condition,  the  Messiah  unseen  and  His 
praise  unuttered  in  their  midst.  And  here  is  the  solemn  thing. 
The  poor,  the  ignorant,  all  the  people,  might  cry,  "  Is  not  this 
the  Son  of  David  ?  But  when  the  Pharisees  heard  it,  they  said, 
This  fellow  doth  not  cast  out  devils  but  by  Beelzebub,  the  prince 
of  the  devils.  And  Jesus  knew  their  thoughts,  and  said  unto 
them.  Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself  is  brought  to 
desolation,  and  every  city  or  house  divided  against  itself  shall 
not  stand.  And  if  Satan  cast  out  Satan,  he  is  divided  against 
himself:  how  shall  then  his  kingdom  stand  ?  "  He  condescends 
to  reason  with  them :  "  And  if  I  by  Beelzebub  cast  out  devils, 
by  whom  do  your  children  cast  them  out  ?  therefore  they  shall 
be  your  judges.  But  if  I  cast  out  devils  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
then  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  unto  you."  (Ver.  27,  28.) 
But  they  were  dumb ;  they  were  blind.  The  man  that 
submitted  to  Jesus  was  healed ;  but  the  Pharisees  were 
consulting  to  slay  the  Son  of  David.  The  Lord  answers  them 
yet  more.  He  tells  them  that  now  it  was  come  to  a  point. 
"  He  that  is  not  ivith  me  is  against  me ;  and  he  that  gathereth 
not  with  me  scattereth  abroad."  (Ver.  30.)  All  depended  upon 
being  and  acting  with  Him;  wherefore  our  Lord  adds,  "All 
manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men ;  but 
the  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  not  be  forgiven 
unto  men."  (Ver.  31.)  Tlie  reason  of  it  was  this  :  not  only  the 
Son  of  man  was  working  these  miracles,  but  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  was  there  too.  Although  Jesus  might  submit  to 
humiliation,  He  could  not  but  assert  the  glory  of  God.     The 


190        LECTUKES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

Holy  Spirit,  who  was  putting  forth  these  mighty  deeds,  was 
going  to  be  poured  out  when  Jesus  should  go  away.  The 
unbelief  that  refused  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit,  when  Jesus 
was  there,  would  be  even  stronger  against  it  on  His  departru'e. 
The  children  of  Israel  would  prove  themselves  to  be  like  their 
fathers.  "  Ye  do  always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost :  as  your  fathers 
did,  so  do  ye."  And  what  the  consequence?  They  would  be 
guilty  of  the  unpardonable  sin,  of  rejecting  (not  only  Jesus 
Himself,  as  a  man  presented  here,  but)  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  whether  working  in  Him  then,  or  now  by  Him  and 
for  Him. 

It  is  the  final  rejection  of  the  Spirit's  testimony  to  Christ. 
It  was  true  when  the  Lord  was  here,  but  is  still  more  com- 
plete now  that  He  is  in  heaven.  They  refused  Christ  on 
earth,  and  after  He  went  up  to  heaven ;  when,  through  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  His  name  alone  caused  the  dead  to 
rise,  and  thus  proved  even  more  His  glory  than  what  He  had 
done  personally  when  here  below.  Those  who  resisted  such 
testimony  as  this  were  evidently  hopelessly  lost  in  mibelief  and 
scorn  of  God  in  the  person  of  His  Son.  Therefore  our  Lord 
pronounces  this  blasphemy  to  be  such  as  nothing  can  meet.  It 
is  not  ignorance  which  thus  rejects  Christ.  A  man  may,  in 
that  case,  only  want  the  light ;  and  when  it  comes,  he  may, 
through  grace,  be  enabled  to  received  Him.  But  he  who 
refuses  all  divine  testimony,  and  makes  the  displayed  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  the  occasion  of  shewing  his  spite  against 
Jesus,  is  evidently  lost  for  ever :  he  bears  the  unmistakable 
stamp  of  perdition  upon  his  brow.  This  was  exactly  the  sin 
into  which  Israel  were  fast  falling.  The  Holy  Ghost  might  be 
sent  down,  and  work  even  greater  acts  of  power  than  the  Lord 
Himself  had  done ;  it  made  no  change  in  their  heart.  The  mi- 
believing  race  of  Israel  shall  be  forgiven,  neither  in  this  "age," 
nor  in  that  which  is  to  come.  I  am  not  particular  about  the 
word  "  dispensation."  It  means  a  certain  course  of  time,  ruled 
by  particidar  principles ;  but  the  point  is,  that  neither  in  this 
alwv,  nor  in  that  which  is  to  come,  could  this  sin  be  forgiven.  The 
age  to  come  is  that  wherein  the  children  of  Israel  are  to  be  under 


CHAPTEK   XIL  191 

the  Messiah's  rule ;  as  now,  and  since  the  Babylonish  captivity^ 
they  have  been  under  the  rule  of  the  Gentiles.  This  sin  should 
be  forgiven  neither  now  nor  then.  As  to  all  other  iniquity, 
there  was  still  a  hope  that  what  was  not  forgiven  now  might 
be  when  the  Messiah  came.  Granted  that  there  is  unlimited 
forgiveness  for  every  soul  that  receives  Him.  But  they  refused 
Him.  They  attributed  the  Spirit's  power  working  in  His  person 
to  Beelzebub  ;  and  that  blasphemy  would  never  be  forgiven. 
Such  was  the  growing  danger  of  Israel.  Rejecting  the  Messiah 
thus,  they  are  doomed.  It  was  rejecting  the  Holy  Ghost's 
testimony ;  and  everything  is  made  to  turn  upon  this.  To  that 
the  Lord  proceeds,  as  shewing  the  awful  condition  of  Israel,  and 
the  necessity  for  the  coming  change.  A  new  work  of  God  must 
be  brought  in. 

Hence  the  Lord  pronounces  them  a  generation  of  vipers. 
"  The  tree,"  He  says,  "is  known  by  his  fruit."  It  was  a  bad 
tree,  and  He  did  not  expect  anything  but  bad  fruit  from  it. 
"  0  generation  of  vipers,"  He  adds,  "  how  can  ye,  being  evil, 
speak  good  things  ?  For  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart 
the  mouth  speaketh.  A  good  man,  out  of  the  good  trea- 
sure of  his  heart,  bringeth  forth  good  things ;  and  an  evil 
man,  out  of  the  evil  treasure  of  his  heart,  bringeth  forth  evil 
things.  But  I  say  unto  you,  that  every  idle  word  [that  is,  I 
suppose,  everything  betraying  contempt  for  God]  that  men  shall 
speak,  they  shall  give  account  thereof  in  the  day  of  judgment. 
For  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  justified,  and  by  thy  words 
thou  shalt  be  condemned."  (Ver.  34 — 37.)  What  proves  the 
idleness  of  the  word  ?  It  is  without  reverence  for  God  and  His 
Son.  What  God  insists  upon  is  testimony  to  Jesus.  These 
idle  words  betray  the  heart's  rejection  of  Jesus,  and  slight  the 
Holy  Ghost's  testimony  to  Him.  "  By  thy  words  thou  shalt  be 
justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  condemned."  It  is 
with  the  mouth  that  confession  is  made  unto  salvation  ;  and  the 
words  that  leave  out  Jesus  prove  that  the  heart  prefers  its  sin  to 
Him.  The  words  of  the  mouth  evidence  the  state  of  the  heart. 
They  are  the  outward  expression  of  the  feelings,  and  they  shew 
a  man  in  one  way  as  much  as  his  conduct  does  in  another.     If 


192       LECTUEES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

the  heart  is  evil,  the  M^ords  are  evil,  the  conduct  is  evil :  all 
therefore  comes  into  judgment. 

After  this,  the  Pharisees  ask  a  sign,  and  the  Lord  gives  them 
a  most  significant  one  :  but  before  that.  He  pronounces  His 
moral  sentence  on  the  nation :  "  An  evil  and  adulterous  gene- 
ration seeketh  after  a  sign,  and  there  shall  no  sign  be  given  to  it 
but  the  sign  of  the  prophet  Jonas."  (Ver.  39.)  What  was  the 
special  feature  of  Jonah  as  a  prophet  ?  To  whom  did  he  pro- 
phesy ?  He  was  sent  away  from  Israel  to  the  Gentiles  ;  and 
more  than  that :  before  Jonah  performed  his  message  aright,  he 
must  pass  through  the  figure  of  death  and  resurrection.  So 
obstinate  was  he  in  not  going  where  he  was  bidden,  that  the 
Lord  took  care  Jonah  should  be  pitched  out  of  the  ship ;  and 
then  He  dealt  with  him  as  a  dead  man,  and  -wrought  a  great 
work  in  his  soul.  Jonah,  having  passed  through  this  most 
remarkable  type  of  death  and  resurrection,  was  now  ready  for 
the  message  that  the  Lord  gives  him.  This  is  the  sign  which 
the  Lord  puts  before  the  Pharisees.  Such  was  the  state  of  the 
Jewish  nation,  that  He  must  leave  them  and  go  to  the  Gentiles  ; 
and  that,  too,  after  death  and  resurrection  in  reality,  and  when 
all  the  hopes  of  Israel  were  buried.  The  Lord  has  blessing  in 
store  for  His  people  by  and  by :  but  for  the  present  all  is  lost 
for  Israel.  They  had  rejected  their  Lord.  God  was  going 
now  to  occupy  Himself  with  the  Gentiles.  Hence  it  is  that 
the  instances  used  to  confirm  this  are,  first,  the  case  of  the 
men  of  Nineveh,  who  repented  at  the  preaching  of  Jonas ;  "  and 
behold,  a  greater  than  Jonas  is  here."  Then  the  Queen  of 
Sheba,  also  a  Gentile,  who  did  not  merely  repent  because  of 
sin,  but  shewed  an  energy  of  faith,  I  may  say,  worthy  of  all 
note,  without  even  a  message  sent  to  her.  Such  was  the 
ardour  of  her  heart,  and  her  desire  after  wisdom,  that,  hearing 
of  Solomon,  she  hastened  in  order  to  hear  it  from  his  own  lips. 
What  a  rebuke  for  Israel !  "A  greater  than  Solomon  is  here  ;" 
and  wisdom  as  much  beyond  Solomon's  as  the  person  of  Jesus 
was  above  that  of  Solomon.  But  they  were  an  evil  and 
adulterous  generation.  They  knew  not  that  their  Maker  was 
their  husband  :  they  despised  Him  ;  and,  adds  our  Lord,  "  The 


CHAPTER  xir.  193 

queen  of  the  south  shall  rise  up  in  the  judgment  Avith  this 
generation  and  sliall  condemn  it."  But  now  He  proclaims  what 
will  be  their  final  condition.  The  link  of  Israel  to  Himself  was 
broken  ;  and  for  this  blasphemous  contempt  of  the  Spirit's  tes- 
timony to  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  man,  they  should  be  judged. 

But  that  nation  was  also  destined  to  be  filled  with  the  power 
of  Satan.  This  is  what  the  Lord  now  shews.  "  When  the 
unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a  man,  he  walketh  through  dry 
places,  seeking  rest  and  findeth  none."  (Yer.  43.)  Every 
student  of  scripture  will  acknowledge  that  the  unclean  spirit 
means  idolatry.  Are  we  to  suppose  that  our  Lord  suddenly 
breaks  off  from  what  He  had  been  saying  of  the  nation  to  treat 
of  mere  individuals  ?  Clearly  it  is  about  Israel.  And  what  is 
the  thought  ?  Israel  never,  as  a  nation,  fell  into  idolatry  after 
the  return  from  Babylon  as  before.  Not  that  they  were  better 
men ;  but  the  unclean  spirit  of  idolatry  was  no  longer  their 
special  temptation.  There  were  new  ways  in  which  the  devil 
tempted  them  to  sin,  if  not  after  the  old  sort.  But  the  unclean 
spirit  is  to  go  back  to  his  hoTise,  and  finds  it  swept  and  garnished. 
Such  it  was  when  our  Lord  was  here  below.  Israel  had  laid 
aside  their  idolatrous  habits  ;  they  went  to  the  synagogue  everj 
sabbath-day ;  and  they  were  zealous  enough  to  compass  sea  and 
land  to  make  a  j^roselyte.  There  was  the  condition  of  the  house, 
empty,  swept,  and  garnished.  All  was  apparently  clean,  and 
nothing  outwardly  to  shock  the  eye  if  you  looked  at  it.  "  Then 
goeth  he  and  taketh  with  him  seven  other  spirits,  more  wicked 
than  himself,  and  they  enter  in  and  dwell  there ;  and  the  last 
state  of  that  man  is  worse  than  the  first.  Even  so  shall  it  be 
also  unto  tlds  loiched  generation.^''  The  unclean  spirit  is  to  return, 
and  not  as  before,  but  with  the  full  power  of  Satan,  with  ''  seven 
spirits  more  Avicked  than  himself."  More  wicked  than  idolatry ! 
What  can  that  be?  "And  they  enter  in  and  dwell  there."  It 
is  only  the  figure  of  a  man  used  to  illustrate  the  state  of  Israel. 
The  Avords  that  folloAv  leaA^e  this  without  a  doubt:  "  Ea'cu  so 
shall  it  be  also  to  this  wicked  generation."  The  Lord  takes  the 
instance  of  a  man,  but  He  applies  it  to  the  nation's  condition. 
The  unclean  spirit  of  idolatry  Avas  gone,  and  they  had  outAvardly 
o 


194  LECTURES   ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

purged  themselves ;  but  the  solemn  warning  is  given  that  the 
unclean  spirit  must  return,  and  bring  with  him  seven  spirits 
more  wicked  than  himself;  and  their  last  state  be  worse  than 
their  first.  And  when  is  that  to  be  ?  It  is  the  last  state ;  and 
I  believe  that  it  has  not  arrived,  but  is  reserved  for  the  Jews 
yet.  The  empty,  swept,  and  garnished  state  existing  then,  may 
be  still  going  on.  Humanly  speaking,  they  may  be  moral. 
They  may  not  abandon  the  books  of  Moses,  but  take  their  stand 
as  worshipping  none  but  the  true  God.  This  will  go  on  for  a 
certain  time,  but  not  for  ever ;  for  we  know  from  scripture  that 
God  has  kept  that  nation  for  special  purposes,  first  in  judgment^ 
and  then  in  mercy.  By  and  by  He  will  convert  them  and  bring 
them  in  and  make  them  a  holy,  as  they  are  the  lineal,  seed  of 
Abraham.  But  they  are  to  fill  up  the  cup  of  their  iniquity  first ; 
and  this  is  the  princi^^le  that  runs  through  all  the  ways  of 
God.  Not  first  what  is  spiritual,  but  what  is  natural,  and 
afterwards  that  which  is  spiritual ;  first  Adam,  and  then  Christ. 
So  in  the  case  before  us,  Israel  must  shew  the  last  results  of 
Satan's  power  over  their  souls,  before  God  can  convert  a 
remnant,  and  make  it  a  strong  nation.  The  last  state  spoken  of 
here  regards  the  wicked  generation  ;  the  Lord  will  create  a 
future  generation,  "  and  so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved." 

But  meanwhile,  what  was  He  going  to  do  ?  Was  He  merely 
pronouncing  judgment  on  Israel?  Far  from  it.  While  He  yet 
was  speaking  to  the  people,  one  came  and  told  Him,  "  Behold, 
thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  stand  without,  desiring  to  speak 
with  thee."  (Ver.  47.)  The  Lord  immediately  takes  this 
opportunity  to  shew  that  He  no  longer  acknowledged  mere 
relationships  according  to  the  flesh.  He  had  special  relationship 
with  Israel;  "of  whom  as  concerning  the  flesh  Christ  came." 
He  owns  it  no  longer.  They  would  not  have  Him.  He  had 
shewn  the  end  of  all  flesh.  They  become  the  tenement  for  the 
devil  in  all  his  power ;  their  last  state  is  worse  than  their  first. 
But,  says  the  Lord,  I  am  going  to  have  a  new  thing  now,  a 
people  according  to  My  own  heart.  And  so  He  stretches  forth 
His  hand  toward  His  discij)les  and  says,  "  Behold  my  mother 
and  my  bretlu-en."      His  only  true  relations  were  those  who 


CHAPTER  xiir.  195 

received  the  word  of  God  and  did  it.  "  Wliosoever  sliall  do 
the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven,  the  same  is  my 
brother,  and  sister,  and  mother."  In  a  word.  He  renounced  all 
earthly  connection  for  the  present  time — all  relationship  with 
nature.  The  only  tie  lie  acknowledges  now  is  relationship  to  a 
heavenly  Father,  formed  through  the  word  of  God  received  into 
the  soul. 

Thus  we  have  in  this  chapter  the  Lord  closing  with  Israel,  as 
far  as  testimony  is  concerned.  In  the  next  chapter  we  shall  find 
what  comes  dispensationally  of  those  new  relations  that  the 
Lord  was  about  to  unfold. 


CHAPTEK  XIIL 

At  the  close  of  the  chapter  before,  our  Lord  disowned  all  the 
natural  ties  which  bound  Him  to  Israel.  I  speak  now  simply 
of  His  bringing  it  out  as  a  matter  of  teaching ;  for  we  know 
that,  historically,  the  moment  for  really  and  finally  breaking 
with  them  was  the  cross.  But,  ministerially,  if  we  may  so  say, 
the  break  occurred  and  was  indicated  now.  He  took  advantage 
of  an  allusion  to  His  mother  and  brethren  to  say  who  His  real 
kindred  were — no  longer  those  who  were  connected  with  Him 
after  the  flesh :  the  only  family  He  could  own  now  were  such 
as  did  the  will  of  His  Father  in  heaven.  He  recognizes  nothing:: 
but  the  tie  formed  by  the  word  of  God  received  into  the  heart 
and  obeyed  accordingly.  The  Holy  Ghost  pursues  this  subject 
by  recording,  in  a  connected  form,  a  number  of  parables  which 
were  intended  to  shew  the  source,  the  character,  the  conduct, 
and  the  issues  of  this  new  family,  or  at  least  of  those  who  pro- 
fessed to  belong  to  it.  This  is  the  subject  of  Matthew  xiii.  A 
striking  instance  it  is,  how  manifestly  the  Holy  Ghost  has 
formed  the   materials   into  the  particular   shape  in   which  we 


196  LECTURES   ON   THE    GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

actually  hare  them :  for  we  know  that  our  Lord  spoke  more 
parables  than  are  here  given.  Comparing  it  with  the  gospel 
of  Mark,  we  find  a  parable  that  differs  materially  from  any 
which  appears  in  Matthew.  In  Mark  it  is  a  person  who  sows 
the  ground  and  sleeps  and  rises  night  and  day,  waiting  for  the 
germination  and  the  full  growth  and  the  ripening  of  the  corn, 
and  then  himself  gathers  it  in.  This  diverges  very  considerably 
from  all  the  parables  of  the  earlier  gospel ;  yet  we  know  from 
Mark  that  the  parable  in  question  was  uttered  on  the  same  day. 
"  With  many  such  parables  spake  he  the  word  unto  them,  as 
they  were  able  to  hear  it.     But  without  a  parable  spake  he  not 

unto  them And  the  same  day,  when  the  even  was  come, 

he  saith  unto  them.  Let  us  pass  over  unto  the  other  side." 

Just  as  the  Holy  Ghost  selects  certain  parables  in  Mark  which 
are  inserted,  while  others  are  left  out  (and  the  same  in  Luke),  so 
also  was  it  the  case  in  Matthew.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  conveying 
fully  God's  mind  about  the  new  testimony,  commonly  called 
Christianity  and  even  Christendom.  Accordingly,  the  very 
beginning  of  this  chapter  prepares  us  for  the  new  scene.  "  The 
same  day  went  Jesus  out  of  the  house,  and  sat  by  the  sea  side," 
(Ver.  1.)  Up  to  this  time  the  house  of  God  was  connected 
with  Israel.  There  (Ood  dwelt  as  far  as  this  could  be  said  of  the 
earth ;  He  counted  it  as  His  habitation.  But  Jesus  went  out 
of  the  house,  and  sat  by  the  sea  side.  We  all  know  that  the 
sea,  in  the  symbolic  language  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments, 
is  used  to  represent  masses  of  men,  roving  hither  and  thither 
outside,  and  not  under  the  settled  government  of  God.  "  And 
great  multitudes  Avere  gathered  together  unto  him,  so  that  he 
went  into  a  ship  and  sat."  From  thence  he  teaches  them : 
"  And  the  whole  multitude  stood  on  the  shore."  (Yer.  2.)  The 
very  action  of  our  Lord  indicated  that  there  was  to  be  a  very 
wide-spread  testimony.  The  parables  themselves  are  not  con- 
fined to  the  sphere  of  our  Lord's  previous  dealings,  but  take  in 
a  much  more  extensive  range  than  anything  which  He  had 
spoken  in  past  times.  ''  He  spake  many  things  to  them  in 
parables."  (Ver.  3.)  It  is  not  intimated  that  we  have  all  the 
parables  our  Lord  spoke ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  here  gives  us 


CHAPTER   XIII.  197 

seven  connected  parables,  all  brought  together  and  compacted 
into  a  consistent  system,  as  I  shall  endeavour  to  shew.  The 
Holy  Ghost  is  clearly  exercising  a  certain  authority  as  to  the 
parables  selected  here,  for  we  all  know  that  seven  is  the  scriptural 
number  for  that  which  is  complete :  whether  it  speak  of  good 
or  e\il  spirits — whether  in  one  form  or  another — seven  is  re- 
gularly the  number  used.  When  the  symbol  of  twelve  is  used, 
it  expresses  completeness,  not  spiritual,  but  as  to  what  has  to 
do  Avith  man.  Where  human  administration  is  brought  into 
prominence  for  carrying  out  the  purposes  of  God,  there  the 
number  twelve  appears.  Hence  we  have  the  twelve  apostles, 
who  had  a  peculiar  relation  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel ;  but 
Avhen  the  Church  is  to  be  presented,  we  hear  again  the  number 
seven — "  the  seven  churches."  However  that  may  be,  we  have 
seven  parables  here,  a  thing  ordered  of  God  for  the  purpose 
of  giving  a  complete  account  of  the  new  order  of  things  about 
to  begin — Christendom  and  Christianity,  the  true  as  well  as 
the  spurious. 

The  first  question,  then,  that  occurs  is,  How  comes  it  that  we 
have  this  series  of  parables  here  and  nowhere  else  ?  Certain  of 
them  are  in  Mark,  and  certain  in  Luke ;  but  nowhere,  except  in 
Matthew,  have  we  seven,  the  complete  list.  The  answer  is  this : 
Nothing  can  be  more  beautiful,  or  more  proper  than  that  they 
should  be  given  in  a  gospel  presenting  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  to 
Israel;  then,  on  His  rejection,  shewing  what  God  would  next 
bring  out.  To  the  disciples,  when  their  hopes  were  melting 
away,  what  could  be  of  deeper  interest  than  to  know  the  nature 
and  end  of  this  new  testimony  ?  If  the  Lord  should  send  out 
His  word  among  the  Gentiles,  what  would  be  the  result?  Ac- 
cordingly, Matthew's  gospel  is  the  only  one  that  gives  us  a 
complete  sketch  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  as  it  also  gives  us 
the  intimation  that  the  Lord  was  going  to  found  the  Church.  It 
is  only  in  Matthew  that  we  have  both  brought  out.  This, 
however,  I  reserve  for  another  day ;  but  I  must  observe  that  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  not  the  same  thing  as  the  Church,  but 
rather  the  scene  where  the  authority  of  Christ  is  owned,  at 
least  outwardly.     It  may  be  real  or  not,  but  every  professing 


198  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

Christian  (not  a  Turk,  or  a  Jew,  or  a  Pagan,  of  course)  is  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Every  person  who  has,  even  in  an 
external  rite,  confessed  Christ,  is  not  a  mere  Jew  or  Gentile, 
but  in  the  kingdom.  It  is  a  very  different  thing  from  a  man's 
being  born  again  and  being  baptized  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
into  the  body  of  Christ.  Whoso  bears  the  name  of  Christ 
belongs  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  may  be  that  he  is  only 
a  tare  there,  but  still  there  he  is.  This  is  a  very  solemn  thing. 
Wherever  Christ  is  outwardly  confessed,  there  is  a  respon- 
sibility beyond  that  which  attaches  to  the  rest  of  the  world. 

The  first  parable  clearly  was  true  when  our  Lord  was  on 
earth.  It  is  very  general,  and  would  apply  to  the  Lord  in 
person  or  in  spirit.  Hence  it  may  be  said  to  be  always  going 
on  ;  for  we  find  in  the  second  parable  the  Lord  presented  again, 
still  sowing  good  seed :  only  here  it  is  the  "  kingdom  of  heaven" 
that  is  said  to  be  like  to  a  man  who  sowed  good  seed  in  his 
field.  The  first  is  Christ's  work  in  publishing  the  word  among 
men,  while  He  was  here  below.  The  second  rather  applies  to 
our  Lord  sowing  by  means  of  His  servants ;  that  is,  the  Holy 
Ghost  working  in  them  according  to  the  will  of  the  Lord  while 
He  is  above,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  being  then  set  up.  This  at 
once  furnishes  an  important  key  to  the  whole  subject.  But 
inasmuch  as  the  matter  of  the  first  parable  is  very  general,  there 
is  a  great  deal  in  all  the  moral  teaching  of  it  which  applies  as 
truly  now  as  when  our  Lord  was  upon  earth.  "  A  sower  went 
forth  to  sow" — a  weighty  truth  indeed.  It  was  not  thus  that 
the  Jews  looked  for  their  Messiah.  The  prophets  bore  witness 
of  a  glorious  ruler,  who  would  establish  His  kingdom  in  their 
midst.  No  doubt  there  were  plain  predictions  of  His  suffering 
as  well  as  of  His  exaltation.  Our  parable  describes  neither 
suffering  nor  outward  glory ;  but  a  work  carried  on  by  the  Lord, 
of  a  distinct  character  from  anything  the  Jew  would  naturally 
draw  from  the  bulk  of  the  prophecies.  Nevertheless,  our  Lord, 
I  conceive,  was  alluding  to  Isaiah.  It  is  not  exactly  the  gospel 
of  grace  and  salvation  to  the  poor,  wretched,  and  guilty,  but  it 
is  One  who,  instead  of  coming  to  claim  the  fruits  of  the  vineyard 
set  up  in  Israel,  has  to  begin  an  entirely  new  work.     A  sower 


CHAPTER   XIII.  199 

going  forth  to  sow  marks  evidently  the  commencement  of  that 
which  did  not  exist  before.  The  Lord  is  beginning  a  work  not 
previously  known  in  this  world.  ''And  when  he  sowed,  some 
seeds  fell  by  the  wayside,  and  the  fowls  came  and  devoured  them 
up."  That  was  clearly  the  most  desperate  case  of  all.  It  was 
null  and  void,  not  because  of  any  fault  of  the  seed,  but  from 
the  destructive  agency  of  the  fowls  which  devoured  what  was 
sown.  Next  we  have,  "  Some  [that]  fell  upon  stony  places, 
where  they  had  not  much  earth,  and  forthwith  they  sprung  up, 
because  they  had  no  deepness  of  earth."  There  was  a  more 
hopeful  appearance  in  this  case.  The  word  was  received,  but  the 
ground  was  stony ;  there  was  no  depth  of  earth.  Appearances 
were  very  quick — "  forthwith  they  sprung  up."  It  is  a  serious 
thing  to  think  of  souls  who  go  forward  at  once.  Nature 
always  brings  to  maturity  in  a  very  short  time  whatever  it  can 
do  in  the  things  of  God.  There  is  little  or  no  sense  of  sin. 
All  is  taken  in  but  too  readily.  ''  The  plan  of  salvation"  may 
be  thought  to  be  excellent,  the  enlightenment  of  the  mind 
undeniable ;  but  such  an  one  has  never  measured  his  awful 
condition  in  God's  sight.  The  good  word  of  God  is  tasted, 
but  the  ground  is  stony.  Conscience  has  nothing  to  do  with 
it.  Whereas  in  a  real  work  of  heart,  conscience  is  the  soil 
in  which  the  word  of  God  takes  effect.  There  never  can  be  a 
real  work  of  God  without  a  sense  of  sin.  This  is  a  thing:  which 
souls,  drawn  and  attracted  by  the  gospel,  ought  to  weigh 
earnestly :  whether,  in  deed  and  in  truth,  they  have  really 
faced  the  blessed  God  who  is  speaking  to  them  about  their  ruin. 
Where  warm  feelings  are  excited  but  sin  is  slurred  over,  it 
is  the  case  spoken  of  here — the  word  received  at  once,  but 
the  ground  stony.  There  is  no  root  because  there  is  no  depth 
of  earth;  consequently,  "when  the  sun  was  up,  they  were 
scorched,  and  because  they  had  no  root  they  withered  away." 

But,  further,  "  Some  fell  among  thorns,  and  the  thorns  sprung 
up  and  choked  them."  This  is  another  case;  not  exactly  that 
wherein  the  heart  received  the  word  at  once.  And,  let  me 
repeat,  that  I  have  as  little  confidence  in  the  heart  as  in  the 
head.     The  flesh  differs  in  different  individuals.      Some  may 


200  L'ECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

have  more  mind,  and  some  more  feeling.  But  neither  can 
savingly  receive  the  word  of  God,  unless  the  Holy  Ghost  acts 
on  the  conscience  and  produces  the  sense  of  being  utterly  lost. 
Where  this  is  the  case,  it  is  a  real  work  of  God,  which  sorrows 
and  difficulties  will  only  deepen.  Those  that  received  the  seed 
among  thorns,  are  a  class  devoured  by  the  anxieties  of  this  age, 
and  led  away  by  the  deceitfulness  of  riches,  which  choke  the 
word,  so  that  no  fruit  comes  to  j^erfection. 

But  now  comes  the  good  ground.  "  Other  fell  into  good 
ground,  and  brought  forth  fruit,  some  an  hundredfold,  some 
sixtyfold,  some  thirtyfold.  Who  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him 
hear."  (Ver.  8,  9.)  The  sower  here  is  the  Lord  Himself,  yet 
out  of  four  casts  of  the  seed,  three  are  unsuccessful.  It  is  only 
the  last  case  where  the  seed  bears  ripe  fruit ;  and  even  there  the 
issue  is  chequered  and  hindered — "  some  an  hundredfold,  some 
sixtyfold,  some  thirtyfold."  What  a  tale  of  man's  heart  and 
the  world !  that  even  wdiere  the  heart  does  not  refuse,  but 
receives  the  truth,  it  abandons  just  as  quickly.  The  same  will 
that  makes  a  man  gladly  receive  the  gospel,  makes  him  drop  it 
in  the  face  of  difficulties.  But,  in  some  cases,  the  word  does 
produce  blessed  effects.  It  fell  upon  good  ground,  and  brought 
forth  fruit  in  different  degrees.  "  Who  hath  ears  to  hear,  let 
him  hear."  A  solemn  admonition  to  souls,  to  look  well  to  it 
whether  or  not  they  produce  according  to  the  truth  they  have 
received. 

The  Lord  explains  these  things.  But,  first  of  all,  the  disciples 
come  and  say  unto  Him,  "Why  speakest  thou  unto  them  in 
parables  ?  He  answered  and  said  unto  them.  Because  it  is  given 
to  you  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  to 
them  it  is  not  given."  The  same  parable  would  be  just  like  the 
cloud  of  Israel  in  a  former  day — full  of  light  to  those  within, 
full  of  obscurity  to  those  without.  Thus  it  is  with  the  sayings 
of  our  Lord.  So  solemn  was  the  crisis  now,  that  it  was  not  His 
intention  to  give  clearer  light.  Conscience  was  gone.  They  had 
the  Lord  in  their  midst,  bringing  in  full  light,  and  He  was 
refused,  specially  by  the  religious  leaders  of  the  nation.  He  had 
now  broken  with  them.    Here  was  the  clue  to  His  conduct :  "  To 


CHAPTEK   XIII.  201 

you  it  is  given  to  know,"  &c.  It  Avas  kept  from  the  multitude, 
and  this  because  they  had  already  rejected  the  clearest  possible 
proofs  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah  of  God.  But,  as  He  says 
here,  "  "Whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have 
more  abmidance."  Such  was  the  case  with  the  disciples.  They 
had  already  received  His  person,  and  now  the  Lord  would 
supply  with  truth  to  lead  them  on.  "  But  whosoever  hath  not," 
the  Christ-rejecting  Israel,  "  from  him  shall  be  taken  away 
even  that  he  hath."  The  Lord's  bodily  presence,  already  there, 
and  the  evidence  of  miracle,  Avould  soon  pass  away.  "  There- 
fore speak  I  to  them  in  parables  :  because  they  seeing,  see  not ; 
and  hearing,  they  hear  not ;  neither  do  they  understand." 
(Ver.  13.)  That  judicial  sentence  of  darkness  which  Isaiah 
had  pronounced  upon  them  hundreds  of  years  before,  was  now 
to  be  sealed,  though  the  Holy  Ghost  still  gives  them  a  fresh 
testimony.  And  this  very  passage  is  afterwards  quoted  to 
mark  that  it  is  a  finished  thing  with  Israel.  They  loved 
darkness  rather  than  light.  What  is  the  good  of  a  light  to 
one  that  shuts  his  eyes  ?  Therefore  would  the  light  be  taken 
away  too.  "  But  blessed  are  your  eyes,  for  they  see ;  and  your 
ears,  for  they  hear.  For  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  many 
proi^hets  and  righteous  men  have  desired  to  see  those  things 
which  ye  see,  and  have  not  seen  them  ;  and  to  hear  those  things 
which  ye  hear,  and  have  not  heard  them."  (Ver.  16,  17.) 

Then  follows  the  explanation  of  the  parable.  We  have  the 
meaning  of  "the  fowls  of  the  air"  given  us.  It  is  not  left  to 
any  conjecture  of  our  own.  "  When  any  one  heareth  the  word 
of  the  kingdom"  (this  was  being  preached  then.  It  is  not 
exactly  "  the  word  of  the  gospel,"  but  "  of  the  kingdom")  "and 
understandeth  it  not,"  &c.  In  Luke  it  is  not  called  "  the  word 
of  the  kingdom,"  nor  is  it  said,  "understandeth  it  not."  It  is 
intei'esting  to  observe  the  difference,  because  it  shews  the  way 
in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  acted  in  this  gospel.  Compare 
Luke  xiii.  We  find  some  of  these  parables  first  given  us  in 
chapter  viii.  11.  "  Now  the  parable  is  this.  The  seed  is  the 
word  of  GocV — not  the  word  of  the  kingdom,  but  "of  God." 
Tliere  is,  of  course,  a  great  deal  in  common  between  the  two ; 


202  UECTUEES   OS   THE  GOSPEL  OF   MATTHEW. 

bat  the  Spirit  hsul  a  wise  reason  for  using  the  different  expres- 
sions.    It  would  hare  been  rather  giving  an  opportunity  to  an 
enemv,  unless  there  had  been  some  good  grounds  for  it.     I 
iM>eat  that  it  is  **  the  word  of  the  kingdom"  in  Matthew,  and 
*'of  God"  in  Luke.     In  the  laner  we  hare  **  that  they  should 
ieUece^**  and  in  the  former  **  that   they  shotild   understand." 
"What  is  taught  by  the  difference?     It  is  manifest  that,  in 
Matthew,  the  Holy  Ghost  has  the  Jewish  people  particularly  in 
TTi>  mind,  although  the  word  is  going  out  to  the  Gentiles  in 
due  time:  whereas,  in  Luke,  the   Lord  had  particnJarly  the 
Gentiles  before  Him.     They  understood  that  there  was  a  great 
kingdom  which  God  was  about  to  establish,  and  destined  to 
swallow  up  all  their  kingdoms.   The  Jews  being  already  £unihar 
with  the  word   of  God,  their  great  point  was  tmderstanding 
what  God  taught.     Tbej  had  His  word  already,  though  super- 
stition and  self-righteousness  never  tmderstood  it.     Ton  might 
be  controverted,  had  you  said  to  a  Jew,  Ton  do  not  believe  what 
Isaiah  savs:  and  a  serious  question  came,  Do  you  understand 
a?     But  if  vou  looked  at  the  Gentiles — they  had  not  the  lively 
mrades,  so  that  among  them  the  question  was  beliermo  what  Grod 
said;    and  this  is  what  we  have  in  Luke.      The  point  for  a 
Gentile  was  that,  instead  of  setting  up  his  own  wisdom,  he 
shoold  bow  to  what  God  said-     Henc-e.  you  wiU  observe,  that, 
looking  at  people  who  had  not  the  word  of  Gk>d,  and  who  were 
to  be  tested  bv  the  gospel  going  out  to  them  in  due  time,  the 
qtiestion  was,  believing  something  that  had  not  been  brought  out 
to  them  before.     In  Matthew,  speaking  to  a  people  who  had 
the  word  already,  the  great  thing  was  to  imderstand  it.     This 
they  did  noL     The  Lord  shews  that,  if  they  heard  with  their 
ears,  they  did  not  understand  with  their  hearts.     So  that  this 
dife^nce,  when  connected  with  the  different  ideas  and  objects 
of  the  two  gospels,  is  alike  manifest,  interesting,  and  instructive. 
•*  When   any  one  heareth  the  word  of  the  kingdom,  and 
understandeth  it  not."     Another  solemn  truth  we  learn  from 
tl'i : — .le  jreat  thing  that  hinders  spiritual  understanding  is 
-      r  '-i::e.     The  Jews  were  charged  with  not  tmder- 
-       _.     I_r     were  not  idolaters,  or  open  infidels,  but  had 


CHAPTER  xnL  203 

a  system  of  religion  in  their  minds  in  which  thev  had  been 
trained  from  infancy,  which  darkened  their  intelligence  of  what 
the  Lord  was  bringing  out.  So  it  is  now.  But  if  among  the 
heathen,  though  jou  would  find  an  evil  state  morally,  yet  at 
least  there  woidd  be  that  kind  of  barren  waste  where  the  word 
of  Grod  might  be  freely  sown,  and,  by  grace,  be  bdiered.  That 
is  not  the  case  where  people  have  been  nurtured  in  ordinances 
and  superstition  :  there  the  difficulty  is  to  understand  the  word, 
"  Then  cometh  the  wicked  one,  and  catcheth  awav  that  which 
was  sown  in  his  heart."  The  answer  to  the  fowls,  in  the  first 
parable,  as  we  saw,  is  the  wicked  one  taking  awav  the  word  of 
the  kingdom  as  soon  as  it  is  sown.  *'  But  he  that  received  the 
seed  into  stony  places,  the  same  is  he  that  heareth  the  word, 
and  anon  with  joy  receiveth  it."  (Yer.  20.)  ThCTe  you  have 
the  heart,  moved  in  its  affections,  btit  without  exercise  of  con- 
science. Anon  with  joy  the  word  is  received.  There  is  great 
gladness  about  it,  but  there  all  ends.  It  is  only  the  Holy  Ghost 
acting  upon  conscience  that  gives  what  things  are  in  Grod's 
sight.  "Yet  hath  he  not  root  in  himself,  but  dureth  for  a 
while;  for  when  tribulation  or  persecution  ariseth  because  of 
the  word,  by  and  by  he  is  offended."  (Yer.  21.)  Then  we  hare 
the  thorny  ground :  '•  He  also  that  received  seed  among  the 
thorns  is  he  that  heareth  the  word ;  and  the  care  of  this  world 
and  the  deceitfiilness  of  riches,  choke  the  word,  and  he  becometh 
unfruitfuL"  (Yer.  22.)  There  is  a  case  that  might  have  seemed 
promising  for  a  time;  but  ansdety  about  this  world,  or  the 
flattering  ease  of  prosperity  here  below,  rendered  bim  tmfiTiitfiil 
and  all  is  over.  '*'  But  he  that  received  seed  into  the  i^ood 
ground  is  he  that  heareth  the  word,  and  understandeth  it ;"  (all 
through  it  is  spiritual  imderstanding :)  ••which  also  beareth 
fruit,  and  bringeth  forth,  some  an  himdred-fold,  some  sixty, 
some  thirty." 

Xow  we  come  to  the  first  of  the  similitudes  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  The  parable  of  the  sower  was  the  preparatory  work 
of  ora:  Lord  upon  earth.  "  Another  parable  put  he  forth  unto 
them,  saying,   T?ie  kingdom,  of  heaven  is  likened  imto  a  man 


204        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

which  sowed  good  seed  in  his  field ;  but  while  men  slept,  his 
enemy  came  and  sowed  tares  among  the  wheat,  and  went  his 
way"  (Ver.  24,  25) — exactly  M'hat  is  become  of  the  profession 
of  Christ.  There  are  two  things  necessary  for  the  inroad  of 
evil  among  Christians.  The  first  is,  the  unwatchfulness  of  the 
Christians  themselves.  They  get  into  a  careless  state,  they 
sleep  ;  and  the  enemy  comes  and  sows  tares.  This  began  at  an 
early  epoch  in  Christendom.  We  find  the  germs  even  in  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  still  more  in  the  epistles.  1  Thessa- 
lonians  is  the  first  inspired  epistle  that  the  apostle  Paul  wrote ; 
and  the  second  was  written  shortly  after.  And  yet  he  tells 
them  that  the  mystery  of  iniquity  was  already  at  work ;  that 
there  were  oUier  things  to  follow,  such  as  the  apostasy  and  the 
man  of  sin ;  and  that  when  the  lawlessness  should  be  fully 
manifest  (instead  of  working  secretly),  then  the  Lord  would 
put  an  end  to  the  lawless  one  and  all  concerned.  The  mystery 
of  iniquity  seems  akin  to  the  sowing  of  the  tares  spoken  of 
here.  Some  time  after,  "  when  the  blade  was  sprung  up,  and 
brought  forth  fruit" — when  Christianity  began  to  make  rapid 
strides  in  the  earth,  "then  appeared  the  tares  also."  But  it  is 
evident  that  the  tares  were  sown  almost  immediately  after  the 
good  seed.  No  matter  what  the  work  of  God  is,  Satan  is 
always  close  upon  its  heels.  When  man  was  made,  he  listened 
to  the  serpent,  and  fell.  When  God  gave  the  law,  it  was 
broken  even  before  it  was  committed  into  the  hands  of  Israel. 
Such  is  always  the  history  of  human  nature. 

So  the  mischief  is  done  in  the  field,  and  never  repaired.  The 
tares  are  not  for  the  2:»resent  taken  out  of  the  field :  there  is  no 
judgment  of  them.  Does  this  mean  that  we  are  to  have  tares 
in  the  Church  ?  If  the  hingdom  of  heaven  memd  the  Churchy 
tliere  ought  to  he  no  discipline  at  all :  you  ought  to  allow  unclean 
ness  of  flesh  or  spirit  there,  swearers,  drunkards,  adulterers, 
schismatics,  heretics,  antichrists,  as  much  as  the  rest.  Here  is 
the  importance  of  seeing  the  distinction  between  the  Church 
and  the  kingdom.  The  Lord  forbids  the  tares  to  be  taken  out 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven :  "  Let  both  grow  together  until 
the  harvest"  (ver.  30),  that  is,  till  the  Lord  come  in  judgment. 


CHAPTER  XIII.  205 

Were  the  kingdom  of  heaven  the  same  as  the  Church,  it  would, 
I  repeat,  amount  to  no  less  than  this  :  that  no  evil,  let  it  be  ever 
so  flagrant  or  plain,  is  to  be  put  out  of  the  Church  till  the  day 
of  judgment.  We  see,  then,  the  importance  of  making  these 
distinctions,  which  too  many  despise.  They  are  all-important 
for  truth  and  holiness ;  nor  is  there  a  single  word  of  God  that 
we  can  do  without. 

What,  then,  is  the  meaning  of  this  parable  ?  It  has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  question  of  Church  communion.  It  is  "  the 
kingdom  of  heaven"  that  is  spoken  of — the  scene  of  the  con- 
fession of  Christ,  whether  true  or  false.  Thus  Greeks,  Copts, 
Nestorians,  Roman  Catholics,  as  well  as  Protestants,  are  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  ;  not  believers  only,  but  also  bad  people 
professing  the  name  of  Christ.  A  man,  who  is  not  a  Jew  nor  a 
Pagan,  and  who  outwardly  professed  Christ's  name,  is  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  He  may  be  ever  so  immoral  or  heretical, 
but  he  is  not  to  be  put  out  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But 
would  it  be  right  to  receive  him  at  the  table  of  the  Lord? 
God  forbid!  The  Church  (i.e.,  the  assembly  of  God),  and  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  are  two  different  things.  If  a  person  falling- 
into  open  sin  were  in  the  Church,  he  ought  to  be  put  out  of  it ; 
but  you  ought  not  to  put  him  out  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  In 
fact,  this  could  only  be  done  by  taking  away  his  life  ;  for  that  is 
meant  by  the  rooting  up  of  the  tares.  And  this  is  what  worldly 
Christianity  did  fall  into,  in  no  very  long  space  of  time  after  the 
apostles  were  departed  from  the  earth.  Temporal  punishments 
were  brought  in  for  discipline ;  laws  were  made  for  the  pur])ose 
of  handing  over  the  refractory  to  the  subservient  civil  j)ower. 
If  they  did  not  honour  the  so-called  church,  they  were  not  to  be 
suffei'ed  to  live.  In  this  way,  the  very  evil  our  Lord  had  been 
guarding  the  disciples  against  came  to  pass :  and  the  emperor, 
Constantino,  used  the  sword  to  repress  ecclesiastical  offenders. 
He  and  his  successors  introduced  temporal  punishments  to  deal 
with  the  tares,  to  try  and  root  them  up.  Take  the  church  of 
Rome,  where  you  have  so  thoroughly  the  confusion  of  the  Church 
with  the  kingdom  of  heaven :  they  claim,  if  a  man  is  a  heretic, 
to  hand  him  over  to  the  courts  of  the  world  to  be  burnt ;  and 


206  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

tliey  never  confess  or  correct  the  wrong,  because  they  pretend  to 
be  infallible.  Supposing  that  their  victims  even  were  tares,  this 
is  to  put  them  out  of  the  kingdom.  If  you  root  a  tare  from  the 
field,  you  kill  it.  There  may  be  men  outside  profaning  the 
name  of  God  ;  but  we  must  leave  them  for  God  to  deal  with. 

This  does  not  destroy  christian  responsibility  towards  those 
who  surround  the  Lord's  table.  You  will  find  instructions  as  to 
all  this  in  what  is  written  about  the  Church.  "  The  field  is  the 
world  ;"  the  Church  only  embraces  those  believed  to  be  members 
of  Christ's  body.  Take  1  Corinthians,  where  we  have  the  Holy 
Ghost  shewing  the  true  nature  of  ecclesiastical  discipline. 
Supposing  there  are  professing  Christians,  guilty  of  any  sin  you 
please ;  such  persons  are  not  to  be  owned,  while  they  are  going 
on  in  that  sin,  as  members  of  Christ's  body.  A  real  saint  might 
fall  into  open  sin,  but  the  Church,  knowing  it,  is  bound  to 
intervene  for  the  purpose  of  expressing  God's  judgment  about 
the  sin.  Were  they  deliberately  to  allow  such  an  one  to  come 
to  the  Lord's  table,  they  would  in  effect  make  the  Lord  a  party 
to  that  sin.  The  question  is  not  whether  the  person  be  converted 
or  not.  If  unconverted,  men  have  no  business  in  the  Church ; 
if  converted,  sin  is  not  to  be  winked  at.  The  guilty  are  not  to 
be  put  out  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  they  are  to  be  put  out  of 
the  Church.  So  that  the  teaching  of  the  word  of  God  is  most 
plain  as  to  both  these  truths.  It  is  wrong  to  use  worldly 
punishments  to  deal  with  a  hypocrite,  even  when  he  is  detected. 
I  may  seek  the  good  of  his  soul,  but  this  is  no  reason  for 
punishing  him  thus.  But  if  a  Christian  is  guilty  of  sin,  the 
Church,  though  called  to  be  patient  in  judgment,  is  never  to 
suffer  it ;  but  we  are  to  leave  guilty  people,  who  are  unconverted, 
to  be  judged  by  the  Lord  at  His  appearing.  This  is  the  teaching 
of  the  parable  of  the  tares ;  and  it  gives  a  very  solemn  view  of 
Christianity.  As  sure  as  the  Son  of  man  sowed  good  seed,  His 
enemy  would  sow  bad,  which  would  spring  up  along  with  the 
rest :  and  this  evil  cannot  for  the  present  be  got  rid  of.  There 
is  a  remedy  for  evil  which  enters  the  Church,  but  not  yet  for 
evil  in  the  world. 

This  is  the  only  gospel  containing  the  parable  of  the  tares. 


CHAPTER  XIII.  207 

Luke  gives  the  leaven.  Matthew  has  the  tares  also.  It  particu- 
larly teaches  patience  for  the  present,  in  contrast  with  Jewish 
judicial  dealings,  as  well  as  with  their  just  expectation  of  a 
cleared  field  when  the  millennium  amves  under  the  reign  of 
Messiah.  The  Jews  would  say.  Why  should  we  allow  enemies, 
ungodly,  heretics  ?  Even  when  our  Lord  was  here  below,  and 
some  Samaritans  received  Him  not,  James  and  John  wished  to 
command  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven  to  consume  them. 
Theirs  was  the  natural  thought  of  dealing  with  the  tares  at  once, 
but  the  Lord  rebuked  them  for  it.  They  did  not  know  what 
manner  of  spirit  they  were  of;  "for,"  fie  added,  "the  Son  of 
man  is  not  come  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them."  This 
illustrates  our  Lord's  will  about  the  tares.  To  kill  them  is 
contrary  to  Christianity,  all  whose  real  power  is  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  not  mere  force. 

But  we  have  further  instruction.  "  Let  both  grow  together 
until  the  harvest ;  and  in  the  time  of  harvest  I  will  say  to  the 
reapers.  Gather  ye  together  first  the  tares  and  bind  them  in 
bundles  to  burn  them,  but  gather  the  wheat  into  my  barn." 
(Ver.  30.)  Thus  the  heavenly  saints  are  to  be  gathered  into  the 
Lord's  barn,  to  be  taken  out  of  the  earth  to  heaven.  But  "  the 
time  of  the  harshest"  implies  a  certain  period  occupied  with  the 
various  processes  of  ingathering.  In  that  scene  of  "  the 
harvest,"  the  Lord  "will  say  to  the  reapers,  Gather  ye  together 
first  the  tares,  and  bind  them  in  bundles  to  burn  them."  It  is 
not  said  that  the  wheat  is  to  be  bound  in  bundles  in  order  to  be 
taken  to  heaven.  There  is  no  intimation  that  there  is  to  be  any 
special  preparatory  work  about  the  saints  before  they  are  taken 
up.  But  there  is  such  a  dealing  of  God  with  the  tares.  The 
angels  are  to  arrange  them  in  special  ways,  before  the  Lord 
clears  them  out  of  the  field.  I  do  not  pretend  to  say  how  that 
will  be,  or  whether  the  sj^stems  of  associations  in  the  present  day 
may  not  pave  the  way  for  the  final  action  of  the  Lord  as  regards 
the  tares.  But  the  principle  of  worldly  association  is  growing 
apace.  When  the  time  approaches  for  the  judgment  of  the 
quick,  there  will  be  the  preliminary  work,  entrusted  to  the 
angels,  of  binding  the  wicked  in  bundles  to  burn  them.     How 


208  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL    OF   SIATTHEW. 

it  will  be  done  I  do  not  pretend  to  affirm,  merely  keeping  to 
what  is  said  in  the  chapter  before  me. 

The  parable  of  the  wheat-field  had  fully  shewn,  what  must 
have  been  an  miexpected  blow  to  the  thoughts  of  the  disciples, 
that  the  dispensation  just  opening  would  turn  out  as  complete  a 
failure,  as  regards  man's  maintaining  the  glory  of  God,  as  the 
past  one.  Israel  had  dishonoured  God ;  they  had  wrought,  not 
deliverance,  but  shame  and  confusion  in  the  earth ;  they  had 
failed  under  law,  and  would  reject  grace  so  thoroughly  that  the 
King  would  be  obliged  to  send  His  armies  to  destroy  those 
murderers,  and  burn  up  their  city.  But  it  might  not  have  been 
so  clearly  understood,  that  if  there  was  to  be  a  new  work  which 
was  to  take  the  form  of  gathering  disciples  to  the  name  of  Jesus 
by  the  word  preached  to  them,  it  was  by  no  means  so  clear  that 
this  new  work  v/ould  be  spoiled  in  the  hands  of  man.  As  far 
as  the  salvation  of  souls  is  concerned,  it  is  independent  of  the 
creature  at  any  time.  But  its  trial  by  God  turns  out  now,  as 
ever,  a  complete  failure.  Man  came  short  of  the  glory  of  God 
in  Paradise,  and  outside  he  corrupted  his  way  and  filled  the 
earth  with  violence.  Afterwards  God  chose  a  people  to  put  them 
to  the  test,  and  they  broke  down.  And  now  came  the  new  trial. 
What  would  become  of  the  disciples  who  professed  the  name  of 
Christ  ?  The  answer  has  been  given  :  "  While  men  slept,  the 
enemy  sowed  tares."  And  a  solemn  announcement  declares 
that  no  zeal  on  their  part  could  remedy  the  evil.  They  might 
be  faithful  and  earnest  themselves ;  but  the  evil  that  has  been 
done  by  the  introduction  of  the  tares — false  professors  of  Christ's 
name — will  never  be  eradicated.  The  Lord  evidently  speaks  of 
the  vast  field  of  christian  profession,  and  of  the  sad  fact  that 
evil  was  to  be  introduced  from  the  very  beginning ;  and,  once 
brought  in,  it  would  never  be  turned  out  till  the  Lord  Himself 
returns  to  judgment,  and  by  His  angels  gathers  the  tares  in 
bundles  to  burn  them,  while  the  wheat  is  gathered  into  the  barn. 
Thus  we  saw  tares  from  a  very  early  period  were  to  be  mingled 
with  the  wheat — not  necessarily  with  the  Church,  for  the  field  is 
not  the  Church,  but  the  world ;  and  the  meaning  is,  that  there 
might  be  those  bearing  the  name  of  Christ  who  Avere  clearly 


CHAPTER   XIII.  209 

wicked  persons.  We  know  that  such  people  have  managed  to 
get  and  even  to  keep  a  footing  within  a  great  deal  that  bears  the 
name  of  the  Lord;  but  the  field — mark  it  well — is  not  the 
assembly,  but  the  scene  of  outward  adhesion  to  Christ.  If  we 
only  think  about  the  Church  in  reading  Matthew  xiii.,  we  shall 
never  understand  the  chapter.  "  The  field  is  the  world,"  the 
sphere  where  the  name  of  the  Lord  is  professed,  and  extending 
much  beyond  what  could  be  called  the  Church.  There  might 
be,  there  are,  many  persons,  neither  Heathens,  nor  Jews,  nor 
Mahometans,  who  would  call  themselves  Christians,  and  yet 
shew  by  their  ways  that  there  was  no  real  faith  in  them.  These 
are  called  "  tares."  It  is  not  necessary  that  they  should  be 
conscious  hypocrites.  Tliey  might  or  might  not  be ;  but  they 
are  unregenerate  professors  of  the  "one  Lord,"  and  "one 
faith ;"  baptized  persons  who  have  no  appreciation  of  Christ,  no 
care  for  His  glory — destitute,  consequently,  of  life — not  born  of 
water  and  the  Spirit,  but  withal  bearing  the  name  of  Christ, 
and  zealous,  it  may  be,  for  the  faith  after  an  outward  sort.  These 
are  now  found  everywhere  in  the  western  world,  as  once  in  the 
east.  There  are  many,  whom  nobody  believes  to  be  born  of 
God,  who,  nevertheless,  would  be  shocked  if  they  were  regarded 
as  infidels.  They  acknowledge  Christ  as  the  Saviour  of  the 
world,  and  as  the  true  Messiah,  but  it  is  as  entirely  inoperative 
upon  their  souls,  as  theirs  was  who,  in  Jerusalem,  believed'  in 
Christ  when  they  saw  the  miracles  which  He  did.  (John  ii.) 
Jesus  does  not  commit  Himself  to  such  now  any  more  than  He 
did  then. 

The  next  parable  intimates  that  the  evil  would  not  be  merely 
the  intermingling  of  a  false  profession,  but  something  quite 
different  would  surely  follow.  It  might  be  connected  with  the 
tares  and  grow  out  of  them ;  but  another  parable  was  required 
in  order  to  set  it  forth.  Beginning  with  the  smallest  possible 
nucleus,  most  humble  as  regards  this  world,  there  was  to  be 
that  which  would  assume  vast  proportions  in  the  earth,  which 
would  strike  its  roots  deeply  among  the  institutions  of  men,  and 
rise  up  into  a  system  of  vast  power  and  earthly  influence.  This 
is  the  mustard-seed  springing  into  a  great  tree,  into  whose 
p 


210  LECTURES    ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

branches  the  birds  of  the  air  come  and  lodge.  These  last  the 
Lord  had  already  explained  as  the  wicked  one  or  his  emissaries. 
(Compare  ver.  4  and  19.)  We  must  never  depart  from  the 
meaning  of  a  sjanbol  in  a  chapter,  unless  there  be  some  fresh 
and  express  reason  for  it,  which  in  this  case  does  not  appear. 
Thus  we  have  the  smallest  of  all  seeds  that  grow  into  anything 
like  a  tree ;  and  from  this  exceedingly  petty  beginning  there 
comes  a  stem,  with  boughs  sufficiently  capacious  to  yield  a 
shelter  and  a  home  to  the  birds  of  the  air.  What  a  change 
for  the  christian  profession !  The  destroyer  is  now  housed  in 
its  bosom  ! 

Then  follows  the  third  parable,  and  again  of  a  different  nature. 
It  is  not  a  seed,  good  or  bad.  It  is  not  the  small  now  becoming 
lofty  and  large,  a  protective  power  in  the  earth,  and  for  what  ? 
But  here  we  find  that  there  would  be  the  spread  of  doctrine 
within,  assimilating  to  itself  whatever  came  in  its  way. 
"  Leaven"  is  used  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew,  as  well  as 
occasionally  elsewhere,  for  doctrine.  For  instance,  we  have 
''  the  doctrine  of  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,"  which  is  called 
"  leaven."  No  doubt,  there  the  Lord  speaks  of  hypocritical 
doctrine.  The  thought  here  is,  not  to  characterize  the  doctrine, 
whether  good  or  evil,  but  rather,  it  would  appear,  to  symbolize 
that  which  spreads  and  permeates  what  is  exposed  to  itself. 
*'  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  leaven,  which  a  woman 
took,  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal,  till  the  whole  was 
leavened."  (Ver.  33.)  The  three  measures  of  meal  are  not 
legitimately  assumed  to  mean  the  whole  world  ;  they  are,  I 
suppose,  a  certain  defined  space  that  was  devoted  to  the  action 
of  the  leavening  doctrine,  throughout  which  the  doctrine  spreads 
eflfectively.  Whether  the  result  is  a  good  or  a  bad  state  when 
the  whole  is  indoctrinated,  we  must  judge  by  the  word  of  God 
in  general,  and  not  merely  by  a  particular  figure  or  expression. 
It  is  not  usual  to  find  the  truth  make  such  way.  We  know 
what  the  heart  is,  and  we  may  infer  that  the  doctrine  which  is 
so  thoroughly  spread  under  the  name  of  Clu'ist  must  be  very 
far  departed  from  its  original  purity  when  it  becomes  welcome 
to  any  considerable  "  masses"  of  men.     We  have,  moreover, 


CHAPTER   XIII.  211 

seen  the  tares,  which  do  not  imply  anything  good,  mingled  with 
the  wheat.  We  have  had  the  mustard-seed  grown  into  a  tree, 
and  strangely  harbouring  the  birds  of  the  air,  which  erst  preyed 
on  the  seed  that  Christ  sowed.  Again,  whenever  "  leaven" 
occurs  symbolically  in  the  word  of  God,  it  is  never  employed 
save  to  characterize  corruption  which  tends  to  work  actively 
and  spread  :  so  that  the  point  here  must  not  be  assumed  to  be 
the  extension  of  the  gospel.  The  meaning,  I  doubt  not,  is  a 
system  of  doctrine  which  fills  and  gives  its  tone  to  a  certain 
given  mass  of  men.  What  sort  of  doctrine  it  is  must  be 
decided  by  other  considerations ;  but  leaven,  assuredly,  would 
be  an  unwonted  symbol  of  good.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
gospel  is  the  seed — the  incorruptible  seed — of  life,  as  being 
God's  testimony  to  Christ  and  His  work.  It  may  be  taken 
away,  or  trodden  down ;  but  wherever  the  gospel  is  lodged  in 
the  heart,  there  it  issues,  through  grace,  in  a  new  nature. 
Leaven  has  nowhere  and  nothing  to  do  with  Christ  or  giving 
life,  but  expressly  the  contrary.  Hence  there  is  not  the  smallest 
analogy  between  the  action  of  leaven  and  the  reception  of  life 
in  Christ  through  the  gospel.  I  believe  that  the  leaven  here 
sets  forth  the  propagandism  of  dogmas  and  decrees,  after  that 
Christendom  became  a  great  power  in  the  earth  (answering  to 
the  tree,  which  was  the  case,  historically,  in  the  time  of  Con- 
stantino the  Great).  We  know  that  the  result  of  this  was  an 
awful  departure  from  the  truth.  When  Christianity  grew  into 
respectability  in  the  world,  instead  of  being  persecuted  and  a 
reproach,  crowds  of  men  were  brought  in.  A  whole  army  was 
baptized  at  the  word  of  command.  Now  the  sword  was  used 
to  defend  or  enforce  Christianity;  more  frequently  earthly 
reward  and  imperial  favour  might  quicken  the  downfall  of 
heathenism.  All  this  was,  no  doubt,  that  which  prepared  the 
way  for  the  spreading  of  the  leaven  ;  but  not  for  the  sound 
truth  of  God  nor  for  His  grace. 

Observe,  too,  that  thus  the  interpretation  flows  on  harmoniously. 
We  have  parables  devoted  to  distinct  things,  which  may  have  a 
certain  measure  of  analogy  one  to  another,  and  yet  set  forth 
distinct  truths  in  an  order  which  cannot  but  commend  itself  to 


212  LECTUEES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 

a  spiritual,  unprejudiced  mind.  Much  depends  on  a  due  under- 
standing of  that  which  is  meant  by  the  "  kingdom  of  heaven." 
Let  us  not  forget  that  it  is  simply  the  authority  of  the  Lord  in 
heaven,  acknowledged  upon  the  earth.  Whoever  may  own  it^ 
whether  born  of  God  or  not,  they  are  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
Some  are  really  renewed,  while  others  have  merely  adopted 
Christianity  as  a  good  creed  and  a  sound  moral  code.  When  it 
becomes  a  thino;  the  world  takes  cognizance  of,  as  a  civilizing 
power  in  the  earth,  weighed  in  the  scale  of  man's  wisdom,  it  is 
no  longer  the  mere  field  sown  with  good  seed,  which  the  enemy 
may  spoil  with  bad,  but  the  towering  tree,  and  the  wide  and 
deeply  working  leaven ;  and  such  is  the  very  unexpected  disclo- 
sure which  our  Lord  makes — what  the  multitude  might  admire, 
but  the  wise  would  understand.  If  the  disciples  looked  for 
everything  going  on  according  to  the  mind  of  Christ,  they  were 
quite  mistaken.  They  were  informed  that  there  was  to  be  a 
state  of  things  wholly  different  from  what  they  expected  accord- 
ing to  the  prophets,  who  discoursed  in  glowing  strains  of  a  time 
when  there  would  be  universal  peace,  blessing,  and  glory  on 
the  earth.  Here  they  find  that,  although  the  Messiah  was  come, 
He  was  going  away ;  that,  while  He  should  be  in  the  heavens,, 
the  kingdom  would  be  introduced  in  patience,  not  power — 
mysteriousl}^,  and  not  yet  to  sight ;  and  that  therein,  conse- 
quently, the  devil  would  be  allowed  to  work  just  as  before,  only 
taking  his  usual  advantage  of  the  fresh  truth  revealed  of  God. 

So  far,  then,  these  parables  shew  the  gradual  growth  of  eviL 
First,  there  is  the  mingling  of  a  little  evil  with  a  great  deal  of 
good,  as  in  the  case  of  the  wheat  field.  Then  the  rising  up  of 
that  which  is  high  and  mighty  and  influential  from  the  lowly 
origin  of  early  Christianity.  Listead  of  having  in  the  world 
tribulation,  the  christian  body  becomes  a  patron  or  benefactor 
in  its  exercise  of  authority,  and  hence  the  place  to  which  the 
most  aspiring  of  the  world  betake  themselves  for  what  they 
want.  After  that  a  great  propagation  of  doctrine  follows,  when 
the  folly  of  Paganism  and  the  narrowness  of  Judaism  became 
so  much  the  more  apparent  to  men,  as  their  interests  carried 
them  there  also. 


CHAPTER  XIIT.  213 

Mark  a  cliange  now.  Tlie  Lord  ceases  to  address  Himself  to 
the  multitude.  Who  could  fail  to  see  that  the  Lord  was  Him- 
self sowing  the  wheat  ?  Who  could  not  perceive  the  growing 
up  of  the  mustard  tree,  and  the  spread  of  the  leaven,  when  the 
facts  Avere  there  and  the  application  made  ?  But  the  Lord  now 
turns  aside  from  the  multitude,  who  had  been  in  view  thus  far. 
As  it  is  said,  "  All  these  spake  Jesus  to  the  multitude :  and 
without  a  parable  spake  he  not  unto  them."  But  now  Jesus 
sends  the  multitude  away,  and  goes  into  the  house.  I  would 
call  your  attention  to  this,  because  it  divides  the  parables,  and 
inaugurates  a  distinct  set.  The  parables  which  follow  were  not 
such  as  man  could  see  or  enter  into.  Any  one  might  take  in 
the  others.  It  is  the  world's  wisdom,  that  Christianity  is  an 
institution  to  be  proud  of,  but  in  creed,  like  another,  involving 
no  moral  responsibility — a  leaven,  in  fact,  that  assimilates  to 
itself,  either  from  birth,  habits,  colonization,  &c.  But  although 
these  parables  represent  different  aspects  and  states,  the  preach- 
ing of  the  word  of  the  kingdom  might  be  going  on  all  the  time. 
This  has  a  place  to  itself;  just  as  among  the  Jews  there  are 
many  feasts,  but  the  sabbath  was  a  constantly  recurring  one, 
repeated  Aveek  after  week.  Here  we  come  to  a  great  distinction, 
and  there  is  a  like  analogy  in  those  feasts,  for  they,  too,  are 
divided.  After  the  passover,  and  the  unleavened  bread,  with 
the  feast  of  weeks,  following  one  another,  you  have  an  interrup- 
tion, after  which  come  the  feasts  of  trumpets,  of  atonement,  and, 
finally,  of  tabernacles.  Also,  as  the  apostle  teaches,  Christ  our 
passover  has  been  sacrificed  for  us ;  so  that  we  have  to  cele- 
brate the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  inseparably  connected  with 
it.  Nor  is  this  all.  We  read  in  Acts  ii.,  "  When  the  day  of 
Pentecost  was  fully  come."  There  you  have  the  feasts  that 
are  accomplished  in  us  Christians.  The  feast  of  trumpets,  the 
day  of  atonement,  and  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  it  would  be 
absurd  to  apply  to  the  Church ;  their  application  (save  what  we 
enjoy  in  the  way  of  earnest  by  the  Spirit)  is  to  the  Jews.  Thus, 
as  in  the  middle  of  Leviticus  xxiii.  the  break  indicates  a  new 
order  of  subjects,  so  in  this  chapter  there  is  another  just  as 
marked ;  and  while  the  first  parables  apply  to  the  outward  pro- 


214       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

fession  of  Christ's  name,  the  final  ones  pertain  especially  and 
intimately  to  what  concerns  real  Christians.  The  multitude 
could  not  enter  into  them.  They  were  the  secrets  of  the  family, 
and,  therefore,  the  Lord  calls  the  disciples  within,  and  there  He 
unfolds  all  to  them. 

But  before  He  enters  upon  the  new  ground.  He  gives  us 
further  information  touching  the  old.  The  disciples  ask  Him, 
"  Declare  unto  us  the  parable  of  the  tares  of  the  field."  (Ver. 
36.)  Ignorant  as  they  might  be,  still  they  had  confidence  in 
their  Lord,  and  that  what  He  had  spoken  He  was  willing  to 
explain.  ''  He  answered  and  said  unto  them,  He  that  soweth 
the  good  seed  is  the  Son  of  man  :  the  field  is  the  world ; 
the  good  seed  are  the  children  of  the  kingdom ;  but  the 
tares  are  the  children  of  the  wicked  one."  (Ver.  37,  38.)  The 
Son  of  man  and  the  wicked  one,  it  has  been  well  remarked,  are 
opposed  to  each  other.  As  in  the  Trinity,  we  know  there  is  a 
suited  part  which  each  blessed  Person  bears  in  their  work  of 
blessing,  so  the  sad  contrast  appears  in  evil  outside.  As  the 
Father  brings  out  specially  His  love,  and  separates  from  the 
world  through  the  revelation  of  it  in  Christ ;  as  you  have  the 
Holy  Ghost,  in  contrariety  to  the  flesh,  the  great  agent  of  all 
the  Father's  grace,  counsels,  and  ways ;  so  scripture  holds  forth 
Satan  always  acting  as  the  grand  personal  antagonist  of  the 
Son.  The  Son  of  God  is  come  that  He  might  destroy  the  works 
of  the  devil.  The  devil  makes  use  of  the  world  to  entangle 
people,  to  excite  the  flesh,  stirring  up  the  natural  liking  of  the 
heart  for  present  honour  and  ease.  In  opposition  to  all  this,  the 
Son  of  God  presents  the  glory  of  the  Father  as  the  object  for 
which  He  was  working  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Discrimination  runs  strongly  through  the  Lord's  explanation 
to  the  disciples  in  the  house.  In  the  first  of  the  parables,  the 
good  is  thoroughly  separate  irom  the  evil,  but  in  the  last  of  the 
three  all  is  merged  into  an  undistinguished  lump.  At  first, 
however,  all  was  plain.  On  the  one  hand,  there  is  the  Son 
of  man,  and  He  sows  the  good  seed,  and  the  result  is  the 
children  of  the  kingdom.      On  the   other  hand,  there  is  the 


CHAPTER   XIII.  215 

enemy,  and  he  is  sowing  his  bad  seed,  false  doctrines,  heresies, 
&c. ;  and  the  result  of  this  is  the  children  of  the  wicked  one. 
The  presence  of  Ciiristianity  in  the  world  has  given  the  devil  an 
opportunity  for  making  men  a  great  deal  worse  than  if  there 
never  had  been  any  fresh  and  heavenly  revelation.  The  infidel 
historian  has  put  the  result  in  an  awful  light — "  the  annals  of 
Christianity  are  the  annals  of  hell."  We  know  that  this  arises 
from  his  confounding  the  nominal  system,  which  is  Babylon, 
with  the  true  Church.  In  God's  sight,  that  which  bears  the 
name  of  Christ  is  a  more  wicked  thing  than  any  other  in  the 
world.  There  never,  elsewhere,  has  been  so  much  righteous 
blood  shed  as  at  the  hand  of  religion  so-called.  Is  not  this 
solemn?  What  we  have  had  in  popery  is  merely  the  full 
carrying  out  of  earthly  religion.  Every  religions  system  of  the 
world  tends  to  persecute  whatever  falls  not  in  with  it.  This  is 
seen  even  now,  where  there  is  a  measure  of  faithfulness  to 
Christ.  The  bitterness  and  opposition  towards  those  who  are 
seeking  to  follow  the  Lord  in  our  day  is  the  same  kind  of  thing 
that  broke  out  into  the  horrors  of  the  dark  ages,  and  lingers 
still  in  the  holy  office  of  the  inquisition,  when  and  where  ever  it 
holds  up  its  head. 

To  continue,  however — ''  The  harvest  is  the  end  of  the  world, 
and  the  reapers  are  the  angels."  (Yer.  39.)  "  The  world"  in 
verse  38  must  not  be  confounded  with  ^'  the  world"  in  verse  39. 
They  are  totally  distinct  words  and  things.  ^'  The  world"  in 
verse  39  means  the  age.  It  is  a  course  of  time,  and  not  a  geo- 
graphical sphere.  In  verse  38  the  sphere  is  intended,  wherein 
the  gospel  goes  forth ;  in  verse  39  it  is  the  space  of  time  in 
Avhich  the  gospel  is  either  advancing  or  hindered  by  the  enemy's 
power.  The  harvest  is  the  consummation  of  the  age,  that  is, 
of  the  present  dispensation  (i.e.,  the  time  while  the  Lord  is 
absent,  and  the  gospel  is  being  proclaimed  over  the  earth). 
Grace  is  actively  going  forth  now.  The  only  means  which  God 
employs  to  act  upon  souls  are  of  a  moral  or  spiritual  sort.  The 
angels  introduce  providential  judgment,  and  deal  with  wicked 
people  to  destroy   them,  while   the  gospel   lays  hold  of  poor 


216  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

sinners  to  save  them.  The  Lord  intimates  here  that  an  end  will 
be  put  to  the  present  sending  out  of  the  word  of  the  kingdom, 
and  a  day  when  the  effects  of  Satan's  working  must  be  fully 
developed  and  judged.  "The  reapers  are  the  angels."  We 
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  judicial  part,  only  with  the  spread 
of  the  good  ;  the  angels,  with  the  judgment  of  the  wicked.  "  As 
therefore  the  tares  are  gathered  and  burned  in  the  fire,  so  shall 
it  be  in  the  end  of  this  world."  (Yer.  40.)  The  same  word  is 
used  for  "  world"  in  verse  40  as  in  verse  29.  Unfortunately, 
our  version  gives  only  the  same  English  word  in  all. 

Many  scriptures  shew  a  state  of  things  to  come  at  a  future 
time  for  the  world,  totally  different  from  what  the  gospel 
contemplates.  I  will  refer  to  one  or  two  in  the  prophets.  Take 
Isaiah  xi.,  which  speaks  first  of  our  Lord  under  the  figure  of  a 
branch  out  of  the  roots  of  Jesse.  It  is  plain  that  this  is  true  of 
Clirist,  whether  at  His  first  or  second  advent.  He  was  born  an 
Israelite,  and  of  the  family  of  David.  And  again,  as  to  the 
Holy  Ghost  resting  upon  Him,  we  know  that  this  was  true  of 
Him  when  He  was  a  man  here  below  :  but  in  verse  4  we  find 
another  thing :  "  With  righteousness  shall  he  judge  the  poor,  and 
reprove  with  equity  for  the  meek  of  the  earth."  If  you  argue 
that  this  applies  now,  because  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  the 
Lord  acts  upon  the  souls  of  the  meek,  &c.,  I  ask  you  to  read  a 
few  words  more :  "  And  he  shall  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod 
of  his  mouth,  and  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  shall  he  slay  the 
wicked."  Is  the  Lord  doing  this  now?  Clearly  not.  Is  He 
not  sending  a  message  of  mercy  throughout  the  earth  ?  Instead 
of  slaying  the  wicked  with  the  breath  of  His  lips,  is  He  not 
converting  the  wicked  by  the  word  of  His  grace? — all  in  entire 
contrast  with  what  is  described  here.  The  breath  of  His  mouth 
is  sometimes  applied  to  the  gospel ;  but  let  us  see  how  this  suits 
Isaiah  xxx.  33:  "For  Tophet  is  ordained  of  old;  yea,  for  the 
king  it  is  prepared ;  he  hath  made  it  deep  and  large  :  the 
pile  thereof  is  fire  and  much  wood ;  the  breath  of  the  Lord, 
like  a  stream  of  brimstone,  doth  kindle  it."  I  find  there  a 
most  valuable  help  to  the  understanding  of  chapter  xi.     What 


CHAPTER   XIII.  217 

is  He  said  to  do  with  tlie  breath  of  His  mouth  there  ?  He  slays 
the  Avicked  one.  "  The  breath  of  the  Lord,"  as  interpreted  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  forces  us  to  the  conviction  that  it  means  the 
execution  of  the  Lord's  judgment  on  the  wicked.  The  Lord 
Jesus  came  to  save:  but  the  time  is  at  hand  when  He  shall 
come  to  destroy.  "  He  shall  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of 
his  mouth,  and  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  shall  he  slay  the 
wicked."  The  Revelation  also  gives  us  the  key,  where  He  is 
seen  with  a  sword  proceeding  out  of  His  mouth.  It  represents 
righteous  judgment  executed  by  the  bare  word  of  the  Lord. 
As  He  spoke  the  world  into  being,  He  will  speak  the  wicked 
into  perdition.  Taking  this  as  the  indubitable  meaning  of  the 
verse,  what  follows  ?  A  state  of  things  quite  unlike  what  we 
have  now  under  the  gospel :  "  Righteousness  shall  be  the  girdle 
of  his  loins,  and  faithfidness  the  girdle  of  his  reins.  The  wolf 
also  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb,  and  the  leopard  shall  lie  down 
with  the  kid ;  and  the  calf  and  the  young  lion,  and  the  fatling 
together ;  and  a  little  child  shall  lead  them.  And  the  cow  and 
the  bear  shall  feed :  their  young  ones  shall  lie  down  together ; 
and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox.  And  the  sucking 
child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp,  and  the  weaned  child 
shall  put  his  hand  on  the  cockatrice'  den.  They  shall  not  hurt 
nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain :  for  the  earth  shall  be  full 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea." 

All  this  is  not  contemplated  now ;  for  whether  we  look  at  the 
gospels  or  the  epistles,  Avhen  the  Holy  Ghost  is  speaking  about 
the  preaching  that  goes  on  now,  the  effect  we  have  to  anticipate 
is  this  —  some  believing,  but  the  great  majority  rejecting. 
Besides,  it  is  added,  that  in  the  latter  days  perilous  times  should 
come  ;  and  that  which  is  most  prevalent  in  the  last  time  is,  not 
the  truth  of  Christ,  but  the  lie  of  Antichrist  (1  John  ii.) ;  not 
the  triumph  of  the  good,  but  of  the  bad,  till  the  Lord  puts  to 
His  own  hand ;  and  this  is  what  is  reserved  for  His  appearing 
and  kingdom.  "He  shall  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  his 
mouth,  and  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  shall  he  slay  the  wicked." 
As  the  consequence  we  see  all  those  blessed  effects.  The  Lord 
is  not  smiting  the  earth  now.     He  has  opened  heaven — by  and 


218  LECTURES   ON  THE   GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

by  He  will  take  the  earth.  In  the  Revelation  you  have  the 
vision  of  the  mighty  angel,  with  his  right  foot  npon  the  sea,  and 
the  left  on  the  earth.  It  is  the  Lord  taking  the  whole  universe 
under  His  own  immediate  government.  Noio  the  mystery  of 
iniquity  is  left  unjudged.  Evil  is  allowed  to  go  on  rampant  in 
the  world.  But  this  will  not  be  for  ever.  The  mystery  of  God 
is  to  be  finished.  Then  will  begin  this  amazing  change,  "  the 
regeneration,"  as  our  Lord  styles  it,  when  the  Spirit  of  God 
shall  be  poured  out,  and  the  earth  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  Lord  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.  But  till  these  times  of 
refreshing  come  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  scripture  calls 
the  intervening  space  the  evil  age.  So  in  Galatians  i.  4,  not 
the  material  world  is  meant,  but  the  moral  course  of  things, 
that  is,  "  this  present  evil  age."  The  new  age,  on  the  contrary, 
will  be  glorious,  holy,  and  blessed. 

In  the  very  next  verse  of  Isaiah  xi.  we  have  the  restoration 
of  God's  ancient  people  foretold,  the  gathering  in  of  all  Israel 
as  well  as  of  Judah.  At  the  return  from  the  Babylonish  cap- 
tivity such  was  not  the  case.  A  very  inconsiderable  fraction  of 
Judah  and  Benjamin  came  back,  and  none  beyond  a  few  indi- 
viduals of  Israel.  The  ten  tribes  are  universally  called  the  lost 
tribes;  whereas,  "it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  the 
Lord  shall  set  his  hand  again  the  second  time  to  recover  the 
remnant  of  his  people  which  shall  be  left,  from  Assyria,  and 
from  Egypt,  and  from  Pathros,  and  from  Cush,  and  from  Elam, 
and  from  Shinar,  and  from  Hamath,  and  from  the  islands  of 
the  sea.  And  he  shall  set  up  an  ensign  for  the  nations,  and 
shall  assemble  the  outcasts  of  Israel,  and  gather  together  the 
dispersed  of  Judah  from  the  four  corners  of  the  earth.  The 
envy  also  of  Ephraim  shall  depart,  and  the  adversaries  of  Judah 
shall  be  cut  off:  Ephraim  shall  not  envy  Judah,  and  Judah 
shall  not  vex  Ephraim.  But  they  shall  fly  upon  the  shoulders 
of  the  Philistines  toward  the  west :  they  shall  spoil  them  of  the 
east  together ;  they  shall  lay  their  hand  upon  Edom  and  Moab, 
and  the  children  of  Ammon  shall  obey  them.  And  the  Lord 
shall  utterly  destroy  the  tongue  of  the  Egyptian  sea" — a  thing 
that  has  never  been  done,  nor  anything  like  it.     The  Egyptian 


CHAPTER  xiir.  219 

sea  exists  just  as  it  was ;  whereas,  there  would  be  outward 
marks  of  the  accompHshment  of  tliis  prophecy,  both  spiritually 
and  physically,  had  it  ever  taken  place.  "  And  with  his  mighty 
wind  shall  he  shake  his  hand  over  the  river,  and  shall  smite  it 
in  the  seven  streams,  and  make  men  go  over  dryshod.  And 
there  shall  be  an  highway  for  the  remnant  of  his  people  which 
shall  be  left  from  Assyria,  like  as  it  was  to  Israel  in  the  day 
that  he  came  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  Both  in  the 
Egyptian  sea  and  in  the  Nile  there  will  be  tliis  great  work  of 
God,  outstripping  what  He  did  when  He  brought  the  people 
out  the  first  time  by  Moses  and  Aaron.  This  Avill  be  the  age  to 
come  ;  but  as  to  the  present  age,  the  tares  and  the  wheat  are  to 
grow  together  till  the  harvest,  which  is  the  consummation  of 
this  age  ;  and  when  it  arrives,  the  Lord  sends  forth  His 
angels,  "  and  they  shall  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all  things 
that  offend,  and  them  which  do  iniquity."  The  severing  then 
takes  place :  the  tares  are  gathered  and  cast  into  a  furnace  of 
fire,  and  "  then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the 
kingdom  of  their  Father."  Mark  the  accuracy  of  the  expres- 
sion, "then  shall  they  slxine  fortli ;''"'  not  "then  shall  they  be 
caught  up."  I  believe  they  will  have  been  caught  up  before 
this  epoch.  "  When  Christ  who  is  our  life  shall  appear,  then 
shall  ye  also  appear  with  him  in  glory."  So  that  the  meaning 
is  as  plain  as  j3ossible.  It  will  be  a  new  age,  in  which  is  no 
minMino;  of  the  good  and  bad :  but  the  gatherino-  out  of  the 
wicked  for  judgment  closes  this  age,  in  order  that  the  good  may 
be  blessed  in  the  next.  The  righteous  here  spoken  of  shine 
forth  as  the  sun,  and  are  in  a  higher  sphere  ;  but  the  heavens 
and  earth  will  then  be  a  united  system,  though  there  be  no 
confusion  of  its  several  parts.  There  will  be  the  heaA^enly  and 
the  earthly  glories.  There  will  be  those  who  shine  above  and 
others  destined  to  rich  blessing  below.  It  will  be  all  one 
kingdom  ;  but  there  will  be  the  heavenly  and  the  earthly  things, 
as  the  Lord  distinguishes  in  John  iii. — "  If  I  have  told  you 
earthly  things,  and  ye  believe  not,  how  shall  ye  believe  if  I  tell 
you  of  heavenly  things  ?" 

So  here,  we  have  the  upper  region  called  the  kingdom  of  the 


220        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

Father,  and  the  lower  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  man.  "  The 
Son  of  man  shall  send  forth  his  angels,  and  they  shall  gather 
out  of  his  kingdom  all  things  that  offend,  and  them  which  do 
iniquity."  These  are  not  even  allowed  to  be  on  the  earth,  but 
are  cast  into  a  furnace  of  fire.  "  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine 
forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father."  Both  are 
"the  kingdom  of  God."  What  a  glorious  prospect!  Is  it  not 
a  sweet  thought  that  even  this  present  scene  of  ruin  and  con- 
fusion is  to  be  delivered  ?  that  God  is  to  have  the  joy  of  His 
heart,  not  only  in  filling  the  heavens  with  His  glory,  but  in  the 
Son  of  man  honoured  in  the  very  place  where  He  was  rejected  ? 

But  let  us  now  look  at  the  next  parable.  ''  The  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  like  unto  treasure  hid  in  a  field,  the  which,  when  a 
man  hath  found,  he  hideth,  and  for  joy  thereof  goeth  and 
selleth  all  that  he  hath,  and  buyeth  that  field."  (Ver.  44.)  This 
is  the  first  of  the  new  parables  within  the  house.  The  Lord  is 
there  shewing,  not  the  state  of  things  foinid  under  the  public 
profession  of  the  name  of  Christ,  but  the  hidden  things,  or  those 
which  require  discernment.  It  is  a  treasure  hid  in  a  field,  M'hich 
a  man  finds  and  hides,  and  for  joy  thereof  sells  all  that  he  hath 
and  buys  the  field.  I  am  aware  that  it  is  the  habit  of  persons 
to  apply  this  to  a  soul  finding  Christ.  But  what  does  the  man 
in  the  parable  do  ?  He  sells  all  that  he  has  to  buy  the  field. 
Is  this  the  way  for  a  man  to  be  saved?  If  so,  salvation  is  "to 
him  that  worketh."  It  becomes,  then,  a  question  not  of  faith, 
but  of  a  man  giving  up  everything  to  gain  Christ,  which  is  not 
grace,  but  the  law  carried  to  the  greatest  excess.  When  a  man 
has  Christ,  he  would  doubtless  give  up  everything  for  Him.  But 
these  are  not  the  terms  on  which  a  man  first  receives  Christ 
for  his  soul's  need.  But  this  is  not  all.  The  whole  field  is 
bought ;  what  do  you  make  of  that?  "  The  field  is  the  world." 
Am  I  to  buy  the  world  in  order  to  obtain  Christ  ?  This  only 
shews  the  difficulties  into  which  we  fall,  whenever  we  depart 
from  the  simplicity  of  scripture.  But  where  we  really  search 
and  try  the  scripture  by  scripture,  the  meaning  is  made  plain. 
The  Lord  Himself  confutes  such  an  interpretation.     He  shews 


CHAPTER   XIII.  221 

that  there  Is  One  Man,  and  one  only,  who  saw  this  treasure  in 
the  midst  of  the  confusion.  Who?  It  is  the  Lord — the  Lord 
who  gave  up  all  His  rights  in  order  that  He  might  have  sinners 
washed  in  His  blood  and  redeemed  to  God;  it  was  He  bought 
the  world  in  order  to  acquire  the  treasure  He  valued.  The  two 
things  are  distinctly  presented  in  John  xvii.  2,  "  As  thou  hast 
given  him  power  over  all  flesh,  that  he  should  give  eternal  life 
to  as  many  as  thou  hast  given  him."  There  is  the  treasure — 
"as  many  as  thou  hast  given  him."  But  "all  flesh"  is  no 
treasure  at  all.  It  is  the  outside  thing  that  goes  along  with 
the  bargain,  if  I  may  speak  thus  familiarly ;  but  it  is  not  the 
treasm^e  for  His  heart.  He  buys  the  whole,  the  outside  world, 
in  order  to  possess  this  hidden  treasure. 

But,  moreover,  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  mer- 
chantman seeking  goodly  pearls  ;  who,  when  he  had  found  one 
pearl  of  great  price,  went  and  sold  all  that  he  had,  and  bought 
it."  (Ver.  45,  46.)  The  parable  of  the  hid  treasure  did  not 
suflSciently  convey  what  the  saints  are  to  Christ.  For  the 
treasure  might  consist  of  a  hundred  thousand  pieces  of  gold 
and  silver.  And  how  would  this  mark  the  blessedness  and 
beauty  of  the  Church?  The  merchantman  finds  "  one  pearl  of 
great  price."  The  Lord  does  not  see  merely  the  preciousness 
of  the  saints,  but  the  unity  and  heavenly  beauty  of  the  assembly. 
Every  saint  is  precious  to  Christ;  but  "  He  loved  the  church, 
and  gave  himself  for  it."  That  is  what  is  seen  here — "  One  pearl 
of  great  price."  I  do  not  in  the  least  doubt  that  its  spirit  may 
be  applied  to  every  Christian  ;  but  I  believe  it  is  intended  to 
set  forth  the  loveliness  of  the  Church  in  the  eyes  of  Christ.  It 
could  not  be  fully  said  of  a  man  awaking  to  believe  the  gospel. 
If  we  consider  a  sinner  before  he  has  received  Christ,  is  he 
seeking  goodly  pearls  ?  Is  he  not  rather  feeding  on  husks  with 
the  swine?  Here  it  is  one  who  seeks  "goodly  pearls,"  which 
no  unconverted  man  ever  really  sought.  There  is  no  possibility 
of  applying  these  parables  except  to  the  Lord  Himself,  or  to 
the  working  of  His  Spirit  in  His  own  people.  How  blessed  it 
is  that,  in  the  midst  of  all  the  confusion  which  the  devil  has 


222  LECTURES   ON    THE    GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW/ 

wrought,  Christ  sees  the  treasure  of  His  saints,  and  the  beauty 
of  His  Church,  spite  of  all  infirmities  and  failure  ! 

Then  we  have  all  wound  up  by  the  parable  of  the  net,  which 
is  thrown  into  the  sea.  (Ver.  47 — 50.)  It  is  a  figure  used  to 
remind  us  that  our  energies  and  desires  must  be  directed  after 
those  who  are  floating  about  in  the  sea  of  the  world.  The  net 
is  cast  into  the  sea,  and  gathers  of  every  kind,  "  which,  when  it 
was  full  they  drew  to  shore,  and  sat  down  and  gathered  the 
good  into  vessels,  but  cast  the  bad  away."  Who  are  "  they?" 
Never  do  we  find  angels  gathering  the  good,  but  always  sever- 
ing the  wicked  for  judgment.  The  fishers  were  men,  like  the 
servants  in  the  first  parable.  But  it  is  not  only  the  gospel  that 
we  have  here.  The  net  gathers  in  of  every  kind ;  but  is  not 
the  putting  the  good  into  vessels  more  ?  is  it  not  gathering 
saints  according  to  God  ?  It  is  shewn  us  that  out  of  every 
class,  before  the  Lord  returns  in  judgment,  there  was  to  be  a 
mighty  operation  of  the  Spirit  through  the  fishers  of  men, 
gathering  saints  together  in  a  way  quite  unexampled.  May  not 
the  sj)irit  of  this  be  going  on  now  ?  The  gospel  is  going  out 
with  remarkable  power  over  all  lands.  But  there  is  another 
action — the  gathering  the  good  together  and  putting  them  into 
vessels.  This  is  not  what  takes  place  in  heaven.  The  bad  are 
cast  away  ;  but  this  is  not  the  end  of  them.  Another  thing  is 
reserved  for  them — the  furnace  of  fire.  But  we  have  this 
additional  information  in  the  next  verse,  "  The  angels  shall 
come  forth,  and  sever  the  wicked  from  among  the  just."  The 
angels'  business  is  always  with  the  wicked ;  the  servants'  with 
the  good.  The  severing  of  the  wicked  from  among  the  just  is 
not  the  fishermen's  work  at  all ;  and  their  casting  of  the  bad 
away  is  not  the  same  thing  as  the  furnace  of  fire. 

In  commenting  on  chapters  viii.  and  ix.  of  our  gospel,  some 
strikino"  instances  of  displacement  have  been  already  pointed 
out.  Thus  the  incidents  of  crossing  the  lake  in  the  storm 
rebuked  at  last,  of  the  cured  demoniacs,  of  the  raised  daughter 
of  Jairus,  and  of  the  woman  healed  on  the  way,  belong  as 


CHAPTER   XIV.  2*23 

matters  of  history  to  the  interval  between  the  parables  we  have 
been  lately  occupied  with  and  the  despising  of  our  blessed  Lord, 
which  our  evangelist  proceeds  to  set  down  next  in  order.  I 
then  sought  to  explain  the  principle  on  which,  as  I  believe,  the 
Holy  Spirit  Avas  pleased  to  act  in  thus  arranging  the  events,  so 
as  most  vividly  to  develop  our  Lord's  Messianic  ministry  in 
Israel  with  His  rejection  and  its  consequences.  Hence  it  is 
that,  the  intervening  facts  having  been  inserted  in  that  earlier 
portion,  the  unbelief  of  Israel  in  presence  of  His  teaching 
naturally  follows.  He  was  in  His  own  country  and  taught  them 
in  their  synagogues ;  but  the  result,  spite  of  astonishment  at 
His  wisdom  and  mighty  works,  is  the  scornful  inquiry,  "  Is  not 

this  the  carpenter's  son? And  they  were  offended  in 

him."  A  prophet  He  is,  but  without  honour  in  His  own 
country  and  in  His  own  house.  The  manifestation  of  glory 
is  not  denied ;  the  vessel  is  not  received  according  to  God's 
will,  but  judged  according  to  the  sight  and  apprehensions  of 
nature.  (Chap.  xiii.  54 — 58.) 


=>»io 


CHAPTER   XIV. 

Nor  is  this  the  whole  sad  truth.  About  this  time  the  twelve 
were  sent  forth.  This  we  have  had  in  chapter  x.,  forming  part 
of  the  special  series  of  events  transplanted  into  that  part  of  the 
gospel ;  but,  in  point  of  time,  it  followed  the  fleshly  judgment 
which  was  now  Messiah's  portion.  Their  mission  was  beautifully 
given  before  by  Matthew,  so  as  to  complete  the  picture  of  Christ's 
patient  persevering  grace  with  Israel,  as  well  as  to  testify  the 
rights  of  His  person  as  Jehovah,  the  Lord  of  the  harvest.  Here 
consequently  the  fact  is  omitted,  but  the  effect  appears.  "  At 
that  time  Herod  the  tetrarch  heard  of  the  fame  of  Jesus,  and 


224  LECTURES    ON    THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

said  unto  his  servants,  This  is  John  the  Baptist :  he  is  risen 
from  the  dead ;  and  therefore  mighty  works  do  shew  forth 
themselves  in  him."  (Chap.  xiv.  1,  2.) 

This  gives  occasion  to  the  Spirit  of  God  to  tell  the  tale 
(ver.  3 — 12)  of  the  extinction  of  John  the  Baptist's  testimony 
in  his  own  blood.  It  was  not  only  a  blinded  people,  but  in  their 
midst  ruled  a  false  and  reckless  king,  who  feared  not  first  to 
imprison,  and  finally  to  slay,  that  blessed  witness  of  God.  Not 
that  he  did  not  fear  the  multitude  (ver.  5)  ;  for  his  passions 
would  have  impelled  to  do  the  deed ;  not  that  he  had  not  sorrow 
and  qualms  when  it  came  to  the  point  (ver.  9)  ;  but  what  can 
these  restraints  avail,  in  presence  of  the  undiscerned  wiles  and 
the  unremoved  power  of  Satan  ?  Bad  as  Herod  was,  he  was 
not  without  conscience,  and  the  preaching  of  John  had  reached 
it,  so  far  at  least  as  to  render  him  uneasy.  But  the  issue  was 
what  he  might  expect  who  knows  that  an  enemy  is  behind  the 
scene,  hating  all  that  is  of  God,  and  goading  man  on  to  be  his 
own  slave  and  God's  foe,  in  the  gratification  of  lust  and  the 
maintenance  of  honour  worse  than  vanity.  What  an  insight 
into  the  world  and  the  heart  we  have  here  from  God !  And 
with  what  holy  simplicity  all  is  laid  bare  which  it  would  be 
proBtable  for  us  to  hear  and  weigh!  "Man  being  in  honour 
abideth  not ;  he  is  like  the  beasts  that  perish.  This  their  way  is 
their  folly;  yet  their  posterity  approve  their  sayings.  Like 
sheep  they  are  laid  in  the  grave ;  death  shall  feed  on  them  ;  and 
the  upright  shall  have  dominion  over  them  in  the  morning. ^^  So 
sang  the  Psalmist,  and  surely  it  was  right  and  of  God.  ''  And 
he  (the  king)  sent  and  beheaded  John  in  the  prison;  and  his 
head  was  brought  in  a  charger  and  given  to  the  damsel :  and  she 
brought  it  to  her  mother."  (Ver.  10,  11.)  Such  is  man,  and 
such  woman,  without  God. 

When  word  was  brought  to  the  Lord  about  John's  death.  He 
marks  His  sense  of  the  act  at  once — "  he  departed  thence  by 
ship  into  a  desert  place  apart :  and  when  the  people  had  heard 
thereof,  they  followed  him."  (Ver.  13.)  There  was  no  insensi- 
bility in  Him,  whatever  His  longsuff'ering  and  grace.  He  felt 
the  grievous  wrong  done  to  God  and  His  testimony  and  His 


CHAPTER   XIV.  225 

sen^ant.  It  was  the  harbinger  of  a  storm  still  more  violent  and 
a  deed  of  blood  darker  far — the  awful  sin  of  His  own  rejec- 
tion. He  would  not  hurrj  the  moment,  but  retires.  He  was  a 
sufferer,  a  perfect  sufferer,  as  well  as  sacrifice ;  and  while  His 
sufferings  rose  to  their  height  in  that  most  solemn  hour,  when 
He  bore  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree,  it  would  be  to 
ignore  much  if  we  limited  our  thoughts  and  feelings  of  His  love 
and  moral  glory  to  His  closing  agony.  The  Lord,  then,  so 
much  the  more  felt  the  evil,  because  of  His  unselfish  love  and 
unstained  holiness.  It  is  ever  felt  most  in  God's  presence, 
where  He  felt  everything.     The  work  of  rejection  goes  on. 

Did  this  deep  sense,  in  His  spirit,  of  the  growing  power 
of  evil  in  Israel  interrupt  the  course  of  His  love  ?  Far  from  it. 
''  And  Jesus  went  forth,  and  saw  a  great  multitude,  and  was 
moved  with  compassion  toward  them,  and  he  healed  their  sick." 
(Ver.  14.)  Let  murderous  unbelief  act  as  it  may.  He  was 
Jehovah,  and  present  here  below  in  humiliation,  but  in  divine 
power  and  grace. 

The  disciples  poorly  profit  by  His  grace,  and  leave  small 
space  for  the  display  of  His  beneficent  power.  So,  when  it  was 
evening,  they  "  came  to  him,  saying.  This  is  a  desert  place,  and 
the  time  is  now  past ;  send  the  multitude  away,  that  they  may 
go  into  the  villages  and  buy  themselves  victuals."  (Ver.  15.) 
"  Send  the  multitude  away !"  Away  from  Jesus  !  What  a 
proposal !  The  greatness  of  the  strait,  the  urgency  of  the  need, 
the  difficulty  of  the  circumstances,  which  to  unbelief  are  so 
many  reasons  for  men  to  do  what  they  can,  are  to  faith  just  so 
much  the  more  the  plea  and  occasion  for  the  Lord  to  shew  what 
He  is.  "  Jesus  said  to  them.  They  need  not  depart :  give  ye 
them  to  eat."  0  the  dulness  of  man  ! — the  folly  and  slowness 
of  heart  in  disciples  to  believe  all !  And  yet,  beloved  friends, 
have  we  not  seen  it  ?  Have  we  not  proved  the  self-same  thing 
in  ourselves  ?  What  lack  of  care  for  others  !  What  measuring 
of  their  wants,  in  the  forgetfulness  of  Him  who  has  all  power  in 
heaven  and  on  earth,  and  who,  in  the  same  breath  that  assures 
us  of  it,  has  sent  us  forth  to  meet  the  deepest  necessities  of  sin- 
darkened  souls ! 
Q 


226       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

"  And  they  say  unto  liim,  We  have  here  but  five  loaves  and 
two  fishes."  Ah  I  were  they,  are  we,  so  blind  as  to  overlook 
that  it  is  not  a  question  of  what  but  %ohom  we  have  ?  Jesus  is 
nothing  to  the  flesh  even  of  disciples. 

He  said,  "  Bring  them  hither  to  me."  Oh  !  for  more  sim- 
plicity in  thus  bringing  every  lack  and  every  scanty  supply  to 
Him  whose  it  is  to  provide,  not  for  us  only,  but  for  all  the 
exigencies  of  His  love ;  to  reckon  on  Him  more  habitually  as 
One  who  cannot  act  beneath  Himself. 

"  And  he  commanded  the  multitude  to  sit  down  on  the  grass  ; 
and  took  the  five  loaves  and  the  two  fishes,  and  looking  up  to 
heaven,  he  blessed  and  brake  ;  and  gave  the  loaves  to  his  dis- 
ciples, and  the  disciples  to  the  multitude.  And  they  did  all  eat 
and  were  filled :  and  they  took  up  of  the  fragments  that  remained 
twelve  baskets  full.  And  they  that  had  eaten  were  about  five 
thousand  men,  beside  women  and  children."  (Ver.  19 — 21.) 

How  blessed  the  scene,  and  how  the  perfectness  of  Christ 
shines  through  it  all !  In  nothing  does  He  depart  from  grace, 
spite  of  the  recent  display  of  murderous  hatred  in  Herod;  His 
very  retiring  apart  before  it  is  but  a  further  step  in  the  path 
of  His  sorrow  and  humiliation ;  and  yet  there,  in  the  desert,  to 
this  great  multitude,  drawai  out  by  their  wants,  comes  forth  this 
striking  testimony.  Should  they  not  have  assuredly  gathered 
who  and  what  He  was  ?  Jehovah  had  chosen  Zion — had  desired 
it  for  His  habitation — had  said.  This  is  my  rest  for  ever :  here 
will  I  dwell ;  for  I  have  desired  it.  But  now  an  Edomite  was 
there,  the  slave  of  a  ravening  Gentile ;  and  the  people  would 
have  it  so,  and  the  chief  priests  would  shortly  cry.  We  have  no 
king  but  Caesar.  Nevertheless,  the  rejected  One  spreads  a 
table  in  the  wilderness,  abundantly  blesses  Zion's  provision, 
and  satisfies  her  poor  with  bread.  The  miracle  may  not  be  the 
fulfilment  of  Psalm  cxxxii.  15,  but  it  is  the  witness  that  He  was 
there  who  could,  and  yet  will,  fulfil  it.  He  is  the  Messiah,  but 
the  rejected  Messiah,  as  ever  in  our  gospel.  He  satisfies  His 
poor  with  bread,  but  it  is  in  the  wilderness,  whither  He  had 
withdrawn  apart  from  the  unbelieving  nation  and  the  wilful 
apostate  king. 


CHAPTER   XIV.  227 

But  now  a  change  opens  on  our  view.  For  "  straightway 
Jesus  constrained  his  disciples  to  get  into  a  ship  and  go  before 
him  unto  the  other  side  while  he  sent  the  multitudes  away. 
And  when  he  had  sent  the  multitudes  away,  he  went  up  into  a 
mountain  apart  to  pray  :  and  when  the  evening  was  come,  he  was 
there  alone."  (Ver.  22,  23.)  The  crown  was  not  yet  to  flourish 
upon  Himself.  He  must  leave  His  ancient  people  because  of 
their  unbelief,  and  take  a  new  position  on  high,  and  call  out  a 
remnant  to  another  state  of  things  also.  Rejected  as  Messiah 
on  earth,  He  would  not  be  a  king  by  the  will  of  man  to  gratify 
the  worldly  lusts  of  any,  but  go  above  and  there  exercise  His 
priesthood  before  God.  It  is  an  exact  picture  of  what  the  Lord 
has  done.  Meanwhile,  if  the  masses  of  Israel  ("  the  great  con- 
gregation") are  dismissed,  His  elect  are  ushered  into  a  scene 
of  troubles  in  the  absence  of  their  Master  during  the  night 
of  man's  day.  ''  The  ship  was  now  in  the  midst  of  the  sea, 
tossed  with  waves  :  for  the  wind  was  contrary."  (Ver.  24.) 

Such  were  some  of  the  consequences  of  Christ's  rejection. 
Apart  on  high,  and  not  in  the  wilderness,  He  prays  for  His 
own ;  locally  severed  and  yet  in  truth  far  nearer.  He  prays  for 
the  disciples  left  alone  to  outward  ajDpearance.  They  are 
"  such  as  should  be  saved,"  the  chosen  ones,  companions  of  His 
own  humiliation,  while  the  nation  despised  Him. 

"  And  in  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night,  Jesus  went  unto 
them,  walking  on  the  sea.  And  when  the  disciples  saw  him 
walking  on  the  sea,  they  w^ere  troubled,  saying.  It  is  a  spirit ; 
and  they  cried  out  for  fear.  But  straightway  Jesus  spake  unto 
them,  saying.  Be  of  good  cheer  ;  it  is  I :  be  not  afraid.  And 
Peter  answered  him  and  said.  Lord,  if  it  be  thou,  bid  me  come 
unto  thee  on  the  water.  And  he  said.  Come.  And  when  Peter 
was  come  down  out  of  the  ship,  he  walked  on  the  water  to  go 
to  Jesus.  But  when  he  saw  the  wind  boisterous,  he  was  afraid ; 
and  beginning  to  sink,  he  cried,  saying.  Lord,  save  me.  And 
immediately  Jesus  stretched  forth  his  hand,  and  caught  him, 
and  said  unto  him,  0  thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst  thou 
doubt?"  (Ver.  25 — 31.)  "Without  dwelling  now  on  the  moral 
lesson,  with  which  we  are  all  more  or  less  familiar,  a  few  words 


228  LECTURES    ON    THE    GOSPEL    OF    MATTHEW. 

on  the  typical  instructions  conveyed   by  the  passage  may  be 
welcome. 

He  will  leave  His  intercessional  place  above  and  rejoin  His 
disciples  when  their  troubles  and  perplexity  are  deepest.  The 
mountain,  the  sea,  storm  and  calm,  darkness  and  light,  are  all, 
as  to  security,  alike  to  Christ ;  but  His  taking  part  in  the 
distress  is  the  terror  of  the  natural  mind.  At  first,  even  the 
disciples  ''  were  troubled,  saying.  It  is  a  spirit ;  and  they  cried 
out  for  fear,"  only  hushed  by  the  sign  of  His  speedy  presence. 
This  hardly  goes  beyond  the  circumstances  and  condition  of  the 
Jewish  remnant.  If  there  be  any  part  which  does,  it  is  set 
forth  in  Peter,  who,  on  the  word  of  Jesus,  quits  the  ship  (which 
presents  the  ordinary  state  of  the  remnant),  and  goes  to  meet 
the  Saviour,  outside  all  suj)port  of  nature.  It  is  our  part  to 
cross  the  world  by  divine  power  ;  for  we  walk  by  faith  and  not 
by  sight.  The  wind  was  not  hushed,  the  waves  as  threaten- 
ing as  ever.  But  had  not  Peter  heard  that  word  "  Come ;" 
and  was  it  not  enough  ?  It  was  ample  from  the  Lord  and 
God  of  all.  ''And  when  Peter  was  come  down  out  of  the 
ship,  he  walked  on  the  water  to  go  to  Jesus."  As  long  as 
Jesus  and  His  word  were  before  his  heart,  there  was  no  failure 
any  more  than  danger.  "  But  when  he  saw  the  wind  bois- 
terous, he  was  afraid  ;  and  beginning  to  sink,  he  cried,  saying, 
Lord,  save  me."  Peter  failed,  as  the  Church  has  failed,  to 
walk  towards  Christ  and  with  Christ ;  but,  as  in  his  case, 
so  in  ours,  Christ  has  been  faithful,  and  has  delivered  us 
from  so  great  a  death,  and  doth  deliver;  in  "whom  we  trust 
that  he  will  yet  deliver."  "And  when  they  were  come  into 
the  ship,  the  wind  ceased.  Then  they  that  were  in  the  ship 
came  and  worshipped  him,  saying,  Of  a  truth  thou  art  the  Son 
of  God."  (Ver.  32,  33.)  Jesus  now  rejoins  the  remnant,  and 
calm  immediately  follows,  and  He  is  owned  there  as  Son  of  God. 
Nor  this  only,  for  "  they  came  into  the  land  of  Gennesaret. 
And  when  the  men  of  that  place  had  knowledge  of  him,  they 
sent  out  into  all  that  country  round  about  and  brought  unto 
him  all  that  were  diseased  ;  and  besought  him  that  they  might 
only  touch  the  hem  of  his  garment ;  and  as  many  as  touched 


CHAPTEK   XV.  229 

were  made  perfectly  whole."  (Ver.  34 — 36.)  The  Lord  is  now 
joyfully  received  in  the  very  scene  where  before  He  had  been 
rejected.  It  is  the  blessing  and  healing  of  a  distressed  and 
groaning  world,  consequent  on  His  return  in  acknowledged 
power  and  glory. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

We  find  in  this  chapter  striking  evidence  of  the  great  change 
which  was  now  fast  coming  in  through  the  rejection  of  Jesus  by 
Israel.  For,  first,  we  have  certain  religious  guides,  "  Scribes 
and  Pharisees  which  were  of  Jerusalem,"  who  had  the  best 
spiritual  opportunities  of  their  nation,  and  who  came  clothed 
with  all  that  savoured  of  antiquity  and  outward  sanctity.  These 
men  put  the  question  to  our  Lord,  "  Why  do  thy  disciples 
transgress  the  tradition  of  the  elders  ?  for  they  wash  not  their 
hands  when  they  eat  bread."  The  Lord  proceeds  to  deal  with 
conscience.  He  does  not  enter  into  an  abstract  discussion 
about  tradition ;  nor  does  He  dispute  with  them  as  to  the 
authority  of  the  elders;  but  He  at  once  lays  hold  of  the 
plain  fact,  that,  in  their  zeal  for  the  tradition  of  the  elders, 
they  were  setting  themselves  point-blank  against  the  clear, 
positive  commandment  of  God.  This  I  believe  to  be  the 
invariable  effect  of  tradition,  no  matter  with  whom  it  may 
be  found.  If  we  take  up  the  history  of  Christendom  and 
consider  any  rule  that  ever  was  invented,  it  will  be  found  to 
carry  those  who  follow  it  in  opposition  to  the  mind  of  God.  It 
may  seem  to  be  the  most  natural  thing  possible,  and  growing 
out  of  the  new  circumstances  of  the  Church ;  but  we  are  never 
safe  in  departure  from  God's  word  for  any  other  standard. 

I  am  not  now  contending  for  the  bare  literal  interpretation 
of  scripture.     A  certain  course  that  the  word  of  God  binds  upon 


230       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

His  saints  in  dealing  with  one  evil  may  not  be  their  duty  at 
some  other  crisis.  New  circumstances  modify  the  path  the 
Church  ought  to  pursue.  Were  you  to  apply  the  directions 
given  forjudging  immorality  to  fatal  error  touching  our  Lord's 
person,  you  would  have  a  very  insufficient  measure  of  discipline. 
False  doctrine  does  not  touch  the  natural  conscience  as  gross 
conduct.  Nay,  you  may  too  often  find  a  believer  drawn  away 
by  his  affections  to  make  excuses  for  those  who  are  fundamen- 
tally heterodox.  All  sorts  of  difficulties  fill  the  mind  where  the 
eye  is  not  really  single.  Many  might  thus  be  involved  who  did 
not  themselves  hold  the  false  doctrine.  If  I  hold  the  principle 
of  dealing  with  none  but  him  who  brings  not  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,  it  will  not  do ;  for  there  may  be  others  entangled  with  it. 
What  is  any  individual,  what  is  the  Church  even,  in  comparison 
with  the  Saviour,  the  Son  of  the  Father  ?  Accordingly,  the 
rule  laid  down  by  the  Spirit  for  vindicating  Christ's  person  from 
blasphemous  assailants  or  their  partisans,  is  infinitely  more 
stringent  than  where  it  is  a  question  of  moral  corruption,  be  it 
ever  so  bad. 

Again,  there  is  a  strong  tendency  to  stereotype  our  own 
previous  practice,  and  when  some  fresh  evil  comes  in  to  insist 
on  what  was  done  before,  or  generally,  without  inquiring 
afresh  of  God,  and  searching  into  His  word  in  view  of  the 
actual  case  before  us  and  our  own  responsibility.  The  spirit  of 
dependence  is  needed  in  order  to  walk  rightly  with  God.  There 
is  in  the  written  word  of  God  that  which  will  meet  every  claim  ; 
but  each  case  should  be  a  renewed  occasion  for  consulting  that 
word  in  His  presence  who  gave  it.  People  like  to  be  consistent 
with  themselves,  and  to  hold  fast  former  opinions  and  practices. 

Our  Lord,  in  this  place,  asserts  that  deference  to  mere  human 
tradition  leads  into  direct  disobedience  of  God's  will.  Washing 
the  hands  might  have  seemed  to  be  a  most  proper  act.  Nobody 
could  pretend  that  scripture  forbade  it ;  and,  no  doubt,  the 
Jewish  doctors  could  press  its  great  significance.  They  might 
very  well  argue  how  calculated  it  was  to  keep  before  their  minds 
the  purity  God  insists  on,  and  especially  that  we  ought  never  to 
receive  anything  from  His  hand  without  putting  away  all  defile- 


CHAPTER   XV.  231' 

ment  ft*om  ours.  They  might  reason  thus  to  a  people  who  loved 
all  outward  routine.  At  all  events  they  might  say,  What  was 
the  harm  of  such  a  tradition  ?  What  mischief  could  it  do  for 
persons  to  wash  their  hands,  while  it  might  do  so  much  good  ? 
But  our  Lord  simply  comes  to  this  issue  :  "  Why  do  ye  also 
transgress  the  commandment  of  God  by  your  tradition?"  It 
was  not  in  spite  of,  but  by,  their  tradition  God  was  disobeyed. 

This  is  illustrated  by  a  very  important  relationship  in 
Israel.  The  Apostle  Paul,  in  writing  to  the  Ephesians,  shews 
us  that  the  command  to  honour  the  father  and  mother  was  the 
first  commandment  with  promise.  Other  commandments  had  the 
threat  of  death  annexed  to  them  ;  but  this  commandment  was 
one  that  God  singled  out  to  crown  with  long  life  on  the  earth. 
The  apostle's  reasoning  is,  that,  if  a  Jewish  child  was  not  only 
bound,  but  encouraged  by  such  a  promise,  to  venerate  his  parents, 
how  much  more  is  a  christian  child  now  ?  He  was  to  obey  them 
in  the  Lord — not  merely  in  the  law,  but  in  the  Lord.  This  is 
the  instance  here  also  taken  up,  "  God  commanded,  saying. 
Honour  thy  father  and  mother ;  and  he  that  curseth  father  or 
mother,  let  him  die  the  death."  That  is,  on  the  one  hand,  the 
honour  was  valued  by  God ;  on  the  other,  disrespect  was  deadly 
in  His  sight.  "  But  ye  say.  Whosoever  shall  say  to  his  father 
or  his  mother.  It  is  a  gift,  by  whatsoever  thou  mightest  be 
profited  by  me,  and  shall  not  honour  his  father  or  his  mother." 
The  Jews  had  brought  in  a  cheat  for  their  consciences  by  which 
they  might  free  themselves  from  the  obligation  to  meet  filial 
duties.  They  had  only  to  pronounce  the  word,  "  It  is  a  gift" 
(Corban),  and  a  parent  might  be  forgotten !  Doubtless,  it  was 
one  of  their  authorized  traditions,  and  for  the  priest's  profit,  but 
it  was  as  undoubtedly  an  unhallowed  act  in  God's  sight,  and  a 
direct  infringement  of  His  command.  "  Tims  have  ye  made 
the  commandment  of  God  of  none  effect  by  your  tradition." 
This  is  a  solemn  thing  to  be  remembered ;  for  it  is  not  merely 
applicable  to  this  class  of  human  relationships,  but  if  any  will 
take  the  trouble  of  examining  every  kind  of  religious  rule 
introduced,  not  only  in  popery,  but  in  protestantism,  they  will 
find  the  same  thing  invariably  true.     To  add  to  scripture  is 


232  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

ruinous  :  it  does  not  matter  by  whom  it  may  be  done,  nor  for 
the  hoh'est  motive  men  may  allege  ;  for  God  is  jealous  about  it, 
and  will  not  have  His  word  enlarged  or  amended.  Revelation  is 
complete,  and  our  simple  business  is  to  be  obedient  to  the  word 
of  God. 

Thus  it  matters  not  what  example  any  may  propose.  Take 
one  of  the  commonest  possible — the  choice  of  a  minister. 
People,  Christians,  say,  We  must  send  for  ministers,  and 
choose  between  them  who  is  to  be  ours.  I  am  willing  to  con- 
ceive care  and  conscience  in  exercising  their  judgment  without 
partiality  or  prejudice.  But  where  is  the  warrant  for  choosing 
any  one  whatever  to  preach  the  gospel,  or  to  teach  the  Church  ? 
Is  there  one  precept,  one  instance,  in  all  the  New  Testament  ? 
Did  God,  then,  not  foresee  the  difficulties  and  the  wants  of  con- 
gregations ?  Surely  He  did.  Why,  then,  is  there  absence  of 
all  such  directions  for  them  ?  Because  it  was  a  sin  to  do  it,  not 
only  not  His  mind  but  contrary  to  it.  There  is  not  a  single 
case,  nor  anything  like  it,  from  the  time  the  Holy  Ghost  was 
sent  down  at  Pentecost  till  the  canon  of  scripture  was  closed. 
And  yet  you  have  multitudes  of  churches  spoken  of  in  the 
scripture.  What,  then,  is  a  congregation  to  do  when  they 
want  a  minister  ?  Why  not  search  and  see  the  scripture  way 
of  meeting  such  a  dilemma  ?  The  difficulty  arises  from  their 
being  in  a  false  position  already.  The  central  truth  of  the 
Church  is  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  am  speaking  now 
of  the  Christian  assembly,  wherein  the  Spirit  is  personally 
present  to  act  according  to  His  own  will  in  the  midst  of  disciples 
there  gathered  for  the  purpose  of  glorifying  God  and  exalting 
Christ.  Where  the  meeting  is  thus  carried  on,  the  question  of 
choosing  a  minister  could  not  arise.  Where  there  are  but  three 
meeting  upon  God's  principles  (that  is,  church-ground),  it  is,  if 
I  may  so  say.  Church,  if  not  the  Church.  If  there  were  three 
thousand  real  saints  met,  but  not  on  God's  principles,  they  would 
not  be  the  Church  nor  Church  either,  though  all  members  of 
Christ.  So  that,  if  you  take  this  common  Protestant  tradition 
of  choosing  a  minister,  it  is  decisive.  It  puts  the  persons  who 
use  it  in  distinct  opposition  to  the  word  of  God.     It  might  be 


CHAPTER   XV.  233 

good  for  a  christian   assembly  to  feel  their  weakness.     There 
might  be  none  with  any  special  gift  among  them  :  some  might 
be  able  to  help  in  worship  and  prayer,  though  not  in  preaching 
or  teaching.     But  the  blessed  comfort  is  that,  even  if  there  were 
not  some  one  specially  gifted  in  the  word,  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
able  to  edify  the  saints  without  him.     If  the  assembly  could 
have  any  amount  of  gift,  and  have  it  in  a  wrong  way,  the  bless- 
ing would  be  impaired,  and  the  will  and  glory  of  God  so  far  set 
aside.     But  if  there  were  not  one  with  a  special  gift,  there 
might  be  real  blessing,  provided  the  eye  were  towards  the  Lord. 
The  object  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  to  put  the  souls  of  the  saints  in 
direct  connection  with  the  Lord.     God  in  His  wisdom  may  be 
pleased  to  raise  up  none  in  a  particular  assembly,  or  He  may 
send  there  two,  three,  or  more  to  minister.     I  do  not  believe 
that  any  one  man   has   sufficient  gifts  for  the  Church.      The 
notion  of  having  a  single  person  to  be  the  exclusive  organ  of  the 
communications  of  God  to  His  people  is  a  wrong  to  them,  and 
above  all,  to  the  Lord.     Li  every  respect  it  opposes  and  destroys 
the  will  of  God  about  His  Church.     There  might  seem  to  be  a 
great  many  good  reasons  why  people  should  choose  a  minister, 
but  never  listen  to  any  apology  for  that  which  you  do  not  find 
in  the  word  of  God.     We  are  bad  judges  of  what  would  be  best 
for  us.     Men  may  make  great  mistakes ;  but  faith  goes  upon 
the  gromid  that  God  can  make  none.     He  provides  for  every- 
thing in  His  word.     God  is  pressing  that  upon  us  at  this  very 
moment.     At  the  Reformation  the  point  was  to  get  the  Bible  at 
all,  so  that  there  might  be  the  possibility  of  poor  souls  learning 
Christ  for  their  salvation.     But  there  nearly  all  that  was  known 
of  the  truth  ended.     The  Reformation  never  touched  the  true 
question  of  the  Church.     The  Reformers  had  to  deal  with  a 
very  rough  enemy.     They  had  to  blow  up  the  masses  of  rock  in 
the  quarry ;  and  we  must  not  find  fault  if  they  could  not  fashion 
the  stones  nor  build  them  with  equal  skill.     But  we  ought  not 
to  stop  at  their  hewings. 

Tradition  ought  never  to  be  held  in  any  shape  whatever. 
Here  it  was  not  mere  following  one  another,  but  using  tradition 
to  indulge  hypocritical  selfishness.     "  Ye  hypocrites,"  says  our 


234  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

Lord,  ''well  did  Esaias  prophesy  of  you,  saying,  This  people 
draweth  niirh  unto  me  with  their  mouth,  and  honoureth  me  with 
their  lips,  but  their  heart  is  far  from  me."  Those  who  pretended 
such  zeal  for  the  law  were  destroying  its  very  foundations  all 
the  while.  The  father  and  mother  stand  at  the  head  of  the 
relative  precepts  which  have  to  do  with  men.  Thus,  by  their 
tradition,  which  allowed  their  dishonour,  God's  own  authority 
was  made  null  and  void — and  that,  too,  in  the  very  highest' 
earthly  relationships  in  Israel.  Isaiah  shews  that,  as  they  had 
got  rid  of  the  law  by  their  tradition,  so  the  prophets  condemned 
them.  "  In  vain  they  do  worship  me,  teaching  for  doctrines  the 
commandments  of  men." 

Having  despatched  this  matter.  He  calls  the  multitude,  and 
says  to  them,  "  Hear  and  understand :  not  that  which  goeth  into 
the  mouth  defileth  a  man^  but  that  which  cometh  out  of  the 
mouth,  this  defileth  a  man."  It  is  the  religious  leaders  chiefly 
that  occupy  themselves  with  tradition.  The  great  general  snare 
is  denying  the  evil  of  men.  The  constant  weapon  which  Satan 
uses  now  is  the  idea  that  man  is  not  so  bad  but  moral  culture 
may  improve  him.  The  progress  of  the  world  is  astonishing, 
they  say.  Thei'e  are  societies  for  promoting  every  philanthropic 
object,  even  down  to  preventing  cruelty  to  animals.  Here  is  a 
word  that  pronounces  on  these  efforts  of  men  in  the  gross. 
''  Not  that  which  goeth  into  the  mouth  defileth  a  man,  but  that 
which  cometh  out  of  the  mouth,  this  defileth  a  man."  The  real 
secret  of  man's  deplorable  condition  is  his  heart.  This  affects  all 
that  comes  out. 

It  is  not  in  any  wise  what  God  made.  Man  noAv  is  merely  a 
corrupt  creature,  whose  corruption  is  imparted  to  what  he  takes 
in.  Therefore  mere  restraining  of  the  flesh  is  entirely  useless  in 
God's  sight  and  essentially  false.  The  Lord  says  to  the  multitude, 
*'  Not  that  which  goeth  into  the  mouth  defileth  a  man,  but  that 
which  cometh  out  of  the  mouth,  this  defileth  a  man."  Observe, 
He  has  done  with  the  question  of  Jerusalem  and  of  tradition. 
He  speaks  of  what  touches  human  nature.  Man  is  lost.  But 
no  one  thoroughly  believes  this  about  himself,  till  he  has  found 
Christ.    He  may  believe  he  is  a  sinner,  but  does  he  believe  he  is 


CHAPTER   XV.  235 

SO  bad  that  no  good  caii  be  got  out  of  him  ?  Is  not  the  preva- 
lent theoiy  and  effort  to  better  man's  condition  ?  But  our  Lord 
declares  here  that  it  is  not  by  what  you  put  in,  or  what  you 
keep  from  man,  that  he  is  made  better.  The  heart  is  bad ;  and 
till  the  heart  is  reached,  all  else  is  vain.  "  But  the  word  is  nigh 
thee,  even  in  thy  mouth  and  in  thy  heart."  God's  way  of 
dealing  with  the  heart  ought  to  be  the  nearest  thing  to  a 
Christian.  What  so  simple,  so  blessed,  so  mighty,  as  the  gospel  ? 
Who  says  that  the  gospel  wants  a  handmaid  ?  The  handmaid 
has  lost  her  mission  and  is  discharged.  As  Hagar  was  sent  out 
of  the  house,  so  all  that  you  get  by  Hagar  is  merely  Ishmael — 
the  son  born  after  the  flesh,  that  mocks  the  child  of  promise. 
Man  is  not  now  in  a  state  of  probation.  The  trial  has  been 
made.  God  has  pronounced  upon  men  that  the  flesh  is  utterly 
worthless ;  and  yet  man  is  trying  the  question  again,  instead  of 
believing  God. 

The  disciples  came  to  speak  to  our  Lord  about  it.  They  did 
not  altogether  relish  what  He  had  been  saying.  They  came 
and  said  mito  Him,  "  Knowest  thou  that  the  Pharisees  were 
offended  after  they  heard  this  saying?"  They  might  not  be 
offended  themselves,  but  were  disposed  to  sympathize  with  the 
people  who  were.  We  might  have  thought  the  multitude  would 
be  most  offended.  But  no  ;  the  Pharisees,  standing  upon 
tradition,  have  no  more  notion  of  the  true  ruin  of  man's  nature 
in  the  sight  of  God  than  even  the  poor  multitude  in  all  their 
ignorance.  Nothing  so  blinds  the  mind  as  tradition.  The 
Pharisees,  then,  were  offended,  and  the  disciples  M^ere  trying  to 
act  as  mediators  between  them  and  our  Lord.  But  our  Lord 
answers  still  more  sternly,  "  Every  plant  which  my  heavenly 
Father  hath  not  planted  shall  be  rooted  up."  There  needs  a 
new  life  from  God,  not  an  improving  of  the  old  one.  A  plant 
must  be  planted,  then,  and  the  heavenly  Father  must  do 
it.  Every  other  plant  shall  be  rooted  up.  "  Let  them  alone  : 
they  be  blind  leaders  of  the  blind."  We  are  not  to  spend  our 
time  reasoning  with  these  Pharisees  :  it  is  altogether  vain.  They 
require  first  principles,  and  the  work  of  God  in  their  souls ;  and 
therefore  all  discussion  is  premature  and  thrown  away.     ''  Let 


236        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

them  alone :  they  be  blind  leaders  of  the  blind."  He  did  not 
apply  this  to  the  multitude,  but  to  the  leaders  that  were 
stumbled  by  the  doctrine  of  man's  total  corruption.  Such  are 
best  left  to  their  own  devices.  "  Let  them  alone."  And  if  the 
blind  lead  the  blind,  both  shall  fall  into  the  ditch. 

But  the  Lord  does  not  leave  the  disciples  where  they  were. 
Peter  answers  and  says  unto  Him,  Declare  unto  us  this  parable. 
This  is  evidently  instructive.  What  did  he  mean  by  calling  it 
a  parable  ?  He  did  not  understand  it  himself.  Here  was  one, 
the  very  chief  of  the  twelve  apostles,  and  he  cannot  understand 
what  our  Lord  means  when  He  tells  them  that  man  is  altogether 
wrong — his  heart  most  of  all ;  that  what  comes  out  of  him  is 
what  is  so  bad,  not  that  which  goes  in.  And  this  is  a  parable  ! 
The  difficulty  of  scripture  arises  less  from  difficult  language  than 
from  unpalatable  truth.  Truth  is  contrary  to  people's  wishes ; 
and  they  cannot  see  it,  because  they  do  not  like  to  receive  it.  A 
man  may  not  be  always  conscious  of  this  himself,  but  it  is  the 
real  secret  that  God  sees.  The  obstacle  consists  in  man's  dislike 
of  the  truth.  Peter  says,  "  Declare  unto  us  this  parable.  And 
Jesus  said.  Are  ye  also  yet  without  understanding?"  Think 
where  a  disciple  was  when  he  could  find  a  dark  saying  in  our 
Lord's  sentence  upon  man  as  utterly  bad  and  worthless !  Do 
ye  not  yet  understand,  that  whatsoever  entereth  in  at  the  mouth, 
goeth  into  the  belly,  and  is  cast  out  into  the  draught?  But 
those  things  that  proceed  out  of  the  heart,  they  defile  the  man. 
For  out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,  murders,  adulteries, 
fornications,  thefts,  false  witness,  blasphemies.  The  source  of 
man's  evil  is  from  within.  And,  therefore,  until  there  is  a  new 
life  brought  in — till  man  is  born  again,  of  water  and  of  the 
Spirit,  all  is  useless.  "  These  are  the  things  which  defile  a  man  : 
but  to  eat  with  unwashen  hands  defileth  not  a  man."  There 
closes  our  Lord's  most  blessed  and  weighty  instruction,  shewing 
that  the  day  of  outward  forms  was  past,  and  that  it  was  now  a 
question  of  the  reality  of  man's  state  in  the  sight  of  God.  And 
this  He  brings  out  with  the  greatest  possible  clearness  for  the 
disciples  who  could  not  miderstand :  all  very  suggestive  indeed 
to  us. 


CHAPTER   XV.  237 

But  now  we  find  our  Lord  turning  to  a  different  thought. 
He  goes  away  from  these  scribes  and  Pharisees  to  the  coasts 
of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  that  is,  to  the  very  extremity  of  the  Holy 
Land,  and  that  particular  quarter  of  the  borders  of  it  which  had 
been  expressly  the  scene  of  the  judgments  of  God.  In  chapter 
xi.  our  Lord  had  referred  to  them,  and  said,  that  it  would  be 
more  tolerable  for  Tyre  and  Sidon  at  the  day  of  judgment  than 
for  the  cities  where  His  mighty  works  had  been  done.  They 
were  proverbial  as  the  monuments  of  God's  vengeance  among 
the  Gentiles.  There  our  Lord  is  met  by  a  woman  of  Canaan 
coming  out  of  the  same  coasts.  If  there  was  one  race  in  all 
these  borders  more  particularly  under  God's  ban,  it  was  Canaan. 
"  Cursed,"  said  Noah,  "  be  Canaan."  Such  a  deep  character  of 
evil  had  come  in  by  the  youth  Canaan,  who  seems  to  have  been 
specially  the  leader  of  his  father  in  his  wickedness  against  his 
grandfather  Noah.  "  Cursed  be  Canaan.  A  servant  of  servants 
shall  he  be  unto  his  brethren."  And  so,  when  Israel  was  brought 
into  the  land,  the  Canaanites  were  to  be  exterminated  without 
mercy.  They  were  persons  whose  abominations  had  gone  up  to 
heaven  with  a  cry  for  vengeance  from  God.  Here  this  woman 
came  out  of  the  coasts  of  Canaan,  and  cries  unto  Him,  saying, 
"  Have  mercy  upon  me,  0  Lord,  thou  Son  of  David :  my 
daughter  is  grievously  vexed  with  a  devil."  (Ver.  22.)  If  we 
could  have  conceived  any  case  most  of  all  opposed  to  what  we  had 
before — scribes  and  Pharisees  of  Jerusalem,  full  of  learning  and 
outward  veneration  for  the  law — we  have  it  in  this  poor  woman 
of  Canaan. 

The  circumstances  too  were  dreadful.  Not  only  was  it  in 
Tyre  and  Sidon,  recalling  the  judgments  of  God,  but  the  devil 
had  taken  possession  of  her  daughter.  All  these  circumstances 
together  made  the  case  to  be  as  deplorable  a  one  as  could 
be  found.  How  was  the  Lord  going  to  deal  with  her?  The 
Lord  shews,  in  meeting  her  case,  a  great  change  in  His  waj-s. 
We  have  seen  the  Jews  pronounced  hypocrites ;  their  worship 
intolerable  to  God,  and  declared  such  through  their  own  pro- 
phets. For  if  the  Lord  pronounced  these  men  to  be  hypocrites, 
He  did  it  out  of  the  lips  of  their  own  prophet  Isaiah.     Now 


238  LECTURES   ON  THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

comes  one  that  had  not  the  smallest  tie  with  Israel.  In  former 
times,  the  obligation  of  Israel  had  been  to  kill  the  Canaanites. 
How  would  the  Messiah  deal  with  her  ?  She  cries  unto  the 
Lord,  saying,  "  Have  mercy  on  me,  0  Lord,  thou  Son  of  David  ; 
my  daughter  is  grievously  vexed  with  a  devil.  But  he  answered 
her  not  a  word."     Not  a  word  ! 

Why  was  this  ?  She  was  on  totally  wrong  ground.  What 
had  she  to  do  with  the  son  of  David  ?  If  the  Lord  had  acted  as 
the  Son  of  David,  what  could  He  have  done  with  her  except 
order  her  to  be  executed  ?  Had  the  Lord  merely  been  the  son 
of  David,  could  He  have  given  her  the  blessing  He  had  in  His 
heart  ?  She  appealed  to  Him  as  if  she  were  one  of  a  chosen 
people  who  had  claims  on  Him  as  their  Messiah.  Was  it  ever 
promised  that  Messiah  was  to  heal  the  Canaanites  ?  Not  a  word 
about  it.  When  the  Messiah  does  come  as  Son  of  David,  the 
Canaanites  will  not  be  there.  Look  at  Zgchariah  xiv..,  and  you 
will  find  that,  when  our  Lord  shall  be  king  over^aH  the  earth, 
*'  In  that  day  there  shall  be  no  more  the  Canaanite  in  the  house 
of  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  So  that  it  is  plain  that  the  judgments 
which  were  not  thoroughly  executed  by  Israel,  because  they 
were  unfaithful  to  the  trust  of  the  Lord,  are  to  be  executed  by 
and  by  when  the  Son  of  David  will  take  His  inheritance.  This 
woman  was  altogether  confused  about  it.  She  had  the  convic- 
tion that  He  was  much  more  than  the  Son  of  David,  but  she  did 
not  know  how  to  bring  it  out.  It  is,  I  think,  in  much  the  same 
way  that  many  persons  now,  anxious  about  their  sins,  have 
tried  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and  have  asked  the  Father  to  forgive 
them  their  sins  as  they  forgive  others.  They  go  to  God  as 
their  Father,  and  ask  of  Him  to  deal  with  them  as  children. 
But  this  is  the  very  thing  which  is  not  yet  settled.  Are  they 
children  ?  Can  they  say  that  God  is  their  Father  ?  They  would 
shrink  from  it.  It  is  that  which  they  chiefly  desire,  but  they 
fear  it  is  not  so ;  that  is,  they  have  no  right  to  draw  near  to  God 
on  the  footing  of  a  relationship  which  does  not  exist.  So  that 
when  persons  are  thus  confused,  they  never  get  thorough 
peace  to  their  souls.  Sometimes  they  are  hoping  they  are 
the  children  of  God,  sometimes  fearing  they  are  not,  cast  down 


CHAPTEK   XV.  239 

with  the  sense  of  the  evil  within  them.  The  fact  is,  they  do 
not  unclerstaud  the  matter  at  all.  Thcj  are  quite  right  in 
wishing  to  turn  to  God,  but  they  do  not  know  how  to  do  it. 
They  are  not  willing  to  go  to  God  in  all  that  they  are — just 
as  they  are — giving  up  all  thought  of  having  promises  or 
anything  else.  This  shews  the  "svrongness  of  an  anxious  soul 
seeking  after  God  on  the  ground  of  promises.  A  good  deal  is 
said  about  sinners  "  grasping  the  promises ;"  but  have  you  any 
real  title  to  grasp  the  promises  ?  Whom  were  they  for  ?  In  the 
Old  Testament  they  were  for  Israel ;  in  the  New,  for  Christians. 
But  you  are  neither  an  Israelite  nor  a  Christian.  A  soul  brought 
to  that  point  is  confounded. 

It  is  good  for  a  soul  to  be  brought  to  this  :  I  have  no  claim 
upon  God  for  anything ;  I  am  a  lost  sinner.  If  God  shakes  a 
person  from  what  they  have  no  right  to,  if  He  strips  them  of 
everything,  it  is  for  the  purpose  of  giving  them  a  blessing  that 
He  has  a  right  to  give  them.  People  forget  that  now  it  is  the 
righteousness  of  God  —  God's  right  to  bless  through  Christ 
Jesus,  according  to  all  that  is  in  His  heart.  It  is  no  right  of 
theirs  :  sin  has  destroyed  that.  The  cross  has  come  in.  Men  are 
lost.  But  they  are  afraid  to  confess  the  true  ruin  in  which 
they  are  found.  This  is  what  the  Lord  was  dealing  with  in 
the  poor  woman  of  Canaan.  He  was  bringing  her  down  to 
feel  that  she  had  no  right  to  the  promises.  As  Son  of  David 
He  had  promises.  He  was  to  do  all  kinds  of  things  for  Israel : 
but  where  were  any  promises  to  the  Canaanites?  Thus,  on 
the  ground  of  promise,  on  the  ground  of  His  being  the  Son  of 
David,  it  was  impossible  for  the  Lord  to  give  her  what  she 
asked.  She  did  not  understand  this.  She  thought  that  if  an 
Israelite  might  go  on  the  ground  of  promise,  she  might.  But 
it  is  a  mistake.  "All  the  promises  of  God  in  Him  are  yea, 
and  in  Him  Amen,  unto  the  glory  of  God  by  us."  But  wlio 
are  the  "  us  ?"  We  who  have  the  Lord  Jesus.  When  we 
have  got  Christ  without  a  promise,  then  we  have  a  Christ  in 
whom  all  the  promises  of  God  are  yea  and  amen.  We  go  to 
Him  as  sinners,  naked  and  bare,  without  the  smallest  help  even 
of  a  promise.     But  when  we  have  got  Christ  as  sinners,  then 


240  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

we  find  that  in  this  Blessed  One  all  the  promises  of  God  are 
found  ours.  But  we  find  Him  as  lost  sinners  first,  and  there 
are  no  such  things  as  promises  to  lost  sinners.  Not  a  soul  has 
a  right  to  a  promise  till  he  receives  Christ ;  and  when  we  have 
Christ,  we  have  in  Him  all  the  promises.  So  God  will  deal 
with  Israel  bj  and  by ;  not  on  any  claims  that  they  profess,  for 
He  has  allowed  them  to  forfeit  these  by  rejecting  Christ  now. 
"  For  God  hath  concluded  them  all  in  unbelief,  that  he  might 
have  mercy  upon  all.  0  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the 
wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God !" 

The  poor  woman  thus  made  it  meet  not  to  answer  her.  If 
the  Lord  had  spoken  to  her,  it  must  have  been  with  a  rebuke. 
It  was  grace  and  tenderness  that  led  Him  not  to  answer  her : 
He  remains  silent  till  she  drops  the  gromid  that  she  had  first 
taken.  But  the  disciples  were  not  silent ;  they  wanted  to  get  rid 
of  her  importunity ;  they  did  not  like  the  trouble  of  her.  "  They 
came  and  besought  him,  saying.  Send  her  away,  for  she  crieth 
after  us."  But  the  Lord  confirms  what  has  been  already  said  as 
to  the  wrongness  of  her  plea.  He  says,  as  it  were.  She  does  not 
belong  to  the  house  of  Israel :  I  cannot  give  her  a  blessing  on 
the  ground  she  takes,  but  I  will  not  send  her  away  without  a 
blessing.  He  stands  for  the  special  privilege  of  the  sheep  of 
the  house  of  Israel,  and  she  was  not  a  sheep.  She  could  not 
get  the  blessing  on  that  ground.  "  He  answered  and  said,  I  am 
not  sent  but  unto  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel."  Then 
the  poor  woman  "  came  and  worshipped  him,  saying.  Lord,  help 
me."  She  drops  the  words  "  Son  of  David."  She  no  longer 
uses  the  title  which  connects  Him  with  Israel,  but  acknowledges 
generally  His  authority.  Now  He  answers  her,  though  she 
is  not  yet  down  low  enough.  When  she  appeals  to  Him  as 
Lord,  which  was  a  suitable  title.  He  answers,  "  It  is  not  meet 
to  take  the  children's  bread  and  to  cast  it  to  dogs."  The 
moment  that  this  is  uttered,  all  the  secret  is  out.  "Truth, 
Lord,"  she  says,  "  yet  the  dogs  eat  of  the  crumbs  that  fall  from 
their  masters'  table."  She  takes  the  place  of  being  a  dog.  She 
acknowledges  that  Israel  was,  in  the  outward  ways  of  God,  the 
favoured  people,  as  children  eating  of  bread  upon  the  table ; 


CHAPTER   XV.  241 

whereas  the  Gentiles  were  but  the  dogs  imdernec'ith.  She 
acknowledges  it,  and  it  is  very  humbling.  People  do  not  like 
it  now.  But  she  is  brought  down  to  it.  The  Lord  may,  for  the 
purpose  of  leading  us  into  deeper  blessing,  break  us  down  to  the 
very  lowest  point  of  the  truth  about  ourselves.  But  was  there  no 
blessing  even  for  a  dog  ?  She  fills  back  upon  this  truth  :  Let  it 
be  that  I  am  a  dog,  has  not  God  some  blessing  for  me  ?  No  one 
could  fancy  that  there  ever  were  promises  for  dogs !  yet  this 
was  the  place  she  took.  When  she  is  brought  down  from  it,  the 
Lord  gives  her  the  full  blessing.  He  even  meets  her  with  the 
strongest  approbation  of  her  faith — "  0  woman,  great  is  thy 
faith:  be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt."  When  He  had 
pronounced  the  sentence  upon  the  nation  of  the  Jews  who  were 
only  hypocrites,  the  Lord  goes  out  to  the  Gentiles.  Faith  meets 
with  richest  merc}^  The  faith,  that  penetrates  through  outward 
circumstances,  and  bears  the  discovery  that  we  have  not  yet  got 
down  to  the  lowl}^  place  we  ought  to  take,  only  received 
blessing  deeper  and  more  enduring  than  ever.  The  poor  woman 
was  blessed  even  to  her  heart's  content.  "Be  it  unto  thee  even 
as  thou  wilt.  And  her  daughter  was  made  whole  from  that 
very  hour."  This  was  grace  ;  and  grace  dealing  with  the  most 
extreme  case  of  a  Gentile  under  special  curse  is  that  which 
occupies  the  Lord  on  His  turning  away  from  Israel. 

But  there  is  more  than  this.  It  is  not  the  Lord  retirino-  after 
He  has  fed  the  multitude,  but  the  Lord  coming  down  from  the 
momitain  in  sovereign  goodness.  "  Jesus  departed  from  thence, 
and  came  nigh  unto  the  sea  of  Galilee ;  and  went  up  into  a  moun- 
tain and  sat  down  there."  (Ver.  29.)  It  is  now  the  Lord,  who 
had  been  away  visiting  the  Gentiles,  when  the  multitude  can 
approach  Him.  "  Great  multitudes  came  unto  him,  having 
with  them  those  that  were  lame,  blind,  dumb,  maimed,  and 
many  others,  and  cast  them  down  at  Jesus'  feet,  and  he  healed 
them  :  insomuch  that  the  multitude  wondered  when  they  saw 
the  dumb  to  speak,  the  maimed  to  be  whole,  the  lame  to  walk, 
and  the  blind  to  see  :  and  they  glorified  the  God  of  Israel." 
(Ver.  30,  31.)  I  consider  that  this  is  a  picture  of  Israel  feeling 
their  real  condition.  They  are  coming  to  Jesus,  looking  to 
R 


242  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

Him,  and  saying,  as  it  were,  "  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord."  They  are  to  speak  thus  by  and  by ;  and 
the  Lord  declared  they  should  not  see  Him  till  they  should 
say,  Blessed  be  He  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
What  they  saw  in  Jesus  led  them  to  glorify  the  God  of  Israel. 
Thus  the  Lord  will  have  relations  with  Israel.  They  come,  not 
now  in  controversy,  but  as  a  poor,  maimed,  blind,  and  miserable 
multitude  ;  and  the  Lord  heals  them  all.  But  this  is  not  all. 
He  feeds  them  as  well  as  heals  them ;  and  we  have  the  beautiful 
miracle  of  the  loaves. 

But  mark  the  differences.  In  a  former  case,  the  disciples 
were  for  sending  the  multitudes  away ;  and  the  Lord  allowed 
them  to  shew  out  their  unbelief.  In  the  present  instance,  it  is 
Christ  Himself  who  thinks  of  them  and  purposes  to  bless  them. 
''  I  have  compassion,"  says  He,  "  on  the  multitude,  because  they 
continue  with  me  now  three  days,  and  have  nothing  to  eat :  and 
I  will  not  send  them  away  fasting,  lest  they  faint  in  the  way." 
(Ver.  32.)  You  may  remember  that  it  is  said  in  Hosea  vi., 
"After  two  days  will  he  revive  us,  and  the  third  day  he  will  raise 
us  up,  and  we  shall  live  in  his  sight."  It  is  the  adequate  time 
of  the  trial  of  the  peoj)le.  Literally,  it  was  the  time  our  Lord 
lay  in  the  grave.  But  it  is  connected  also  with  the  future 
blessing  of  Israel.  "  I  will  not  send  them  away  fasting  lest 
they  faint  by  the  way.  And  his  discii)les  say  unto  him. 
Whence  should  we  have  so  much  bread  in  the  wilderness,  as  to 
fill  so  great  a  multitude  ?"  How  slow  they  are  to  learn  the 
resources  of  Christ,  as  before  to  learn  the  worthlessness  of 
man!  "Jesus  saith  unto  them.  How  many  loaves  have  ye? 
And  they  said.  Seven,  and  a  few  fishes."  (Ver.  34.)  It  is  not 
now  five  loaves  and  twelve  baskets  full  left  ;  but  with  seven 
loaves  they  begin,  and  with  seven  baskets  full  they  end.  The 
reason  is  this :  seven  is  always  the  number  of  spiritual  com- 
pleteness in  scripture,  and  this  is  intended  to  shew  the 
fulness  with  which  the  Lord  makes  the  blessing  to  flow  to 
His  people — the  fulness  of  provision  that  they  have  in  Him. 
"  He  took  the  seven  loaves  and  the  fishes,  and  gave  thanks, 
and  brake  them,  and  gave  to  his  disciples,  and  the  disciples 


CHAPTER   XVI.  243 

to  the  multitude."  (Ver.  36.)  I  conceive  that  this  is  the 
picture  of  the  Lord  providing  amply  for  the  Jews — for  the 
beloved  people  of  His  choice,  whom  He  never  can  abandon,  to 
whom  He  must  accomplish  His  promises,  because  He  is  the 
faithful  God.  Here  the  Lord,  out  of  His  own  heart,  is  pro- 
viding for  their  refreshment  fully,  even  for  their  bodily  refresh- 
ment. This  will  be  the  character  of  the  millennial  day,  when 
not  only  the  soul  will  be  blessed,  but  when  every  kind  of  mercy 
will  abound,  God  vindicating  His  earth  from  the  hand  of 
Satan,  wdio  had  long  defiled  it.  Even  here  below,  there  will  be 
the  flowing  out  of  divine  compassion  toward  them,  and  giving 
them  all  they  need.  In  the  seven  loaves  before  they  ate,  and 
the  seven  baskets  of  fi'agments  taken  up  after  they  had 
eaten,  you  have  the  idea  of  completeness,  an  ample  store,  as  for 
the  present,  so  for  wants  to  come. 


CHAPTER  XVL 

In  the  last  chapter,  which  introduces  a  new  part  of  the  subject 
of  St.  Matthew,  we  saw  that  the  two  great  pictures  introduced 
were,  first,  the  hypocritical  disobedience  of  those  who  boasted 
of  the  law  completely  exposed  out  of  their  own  prophets,  as 
well  as  by  the  touchstone  of  the  Lord  Himself;  and,  secondly, 
the  true  nature  of  grace  shewn  to  one  whose  circumstances  de- 
manded nothing  but  sovereign  mercy  if  she  were  to  be  blessed 
at  all.  I  need  not  enter  more  into  a  chapter  already  looked  at; 
but  I  would  recall  also  the  particular  manifestation  at  the  close 
of  the  Lord's  patient  and  perfect  grace  towards  Israel,  spite  of 
the  condition  of  the  Jewish  leaders.  If  He  compassionated  the 
Gentiles,  His  heart  still  yearned  over  the  people,  and  He  shewed 
it  by  repeating  the  great  miracle  of  feeding  thousands  in  the 


244  LECTUKES   ON   THE   GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

wilderness,  though  this  was  not  intended  to  be  the  figure  of  His 
dispensational  retirement  from  earth,  which,  as  we  saw  (chap, 
xiv.),  followed  the  first  miracle  of  feeding  the  multitudes — the 
type  of  our  Lord's  occupation  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 

Now  we  have  another  picture  quite  distinct  from  the  last, 
thouo-h  akin  to  it.  It  is  not  the  flao;rant  disobedience  of  the  law 
through  human  tradition,  but  the  source  of  all  disobedience — 
unbelief.  Hence,  in  the  language  employed  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
there  is  only  a  shade  of  difference  between  the  words  unbelief 
and  disobedience.  The  former  is  the  root  of  which  the  latter  is 
the  fruit.  Having  shewn  us  the  gross  systematic  violation  of 
God's  law,  even  by  those  who  were  religious  leaders  in  Israel, 
and  having  convicted  them  of  it,  even  about  the  highest  earthly 
relationships  which  that  law  bound  and  encouraged  them  most 
of  all  to  honour,  a  deeper  principle  is  now  brought  out.  All  that 
disobedience  of  God  flowed  from  unbelief  of  Himself,  and,  con- 
sequently, misapprehension  of  their  own  moral  condition.  These 
two  things  always  go  together.  Ignorance  of  self  flows  from 
ignorance  of  God ;  and  ignorance  of  both  ourselves  and  God  is 
proved  by  despising  Jesus  ;  and  what  is  true  in  full  of  the 
worldly  man  or  the  unbeliever  partially  applies  to  Christians  who 
in  any  measure  slight  the  will  and  person  of  the  Lord.  All 
these  are  only  the  workings  of  that  heart  of  unbelief,  of  which 
the  apostle  warns  even  believers.  The  grand  provision  against 
this,  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  contrast  with  the 
working  of  the  natural  mind  of  man,  comes  out  here  plainly. 

"  The  Pharisees  also  with  the  Sadducees  came,  and  tempting, 
desired  that  he  would  shew  them  a  sign  from  heaven."  (Ver.  1.) 
They  were  beginning  the  same  story  over  again ;  but  now  it  is 
higher  up  the  source,  and,  of  course  thereforej  worse  in  principle. 
It  is  an  awful  thing  to  find  opposed  parties  with  one  only  thing 
that  unites  them  —  dislike  of  Jesus ;  persons  who  could  have 
torn  each  other  to  pieces  at  another  time,  but  this  is  their 
gathering  point — tempting  Jesus,  "The  Pharisees  also  with 
the  Sadducees  came,  and  tempting,"  &c.  There  was  nothing  in 
conflict  between  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  but  a  wide  chasm 
separated  the  Sadducees  and  Pharisees.     Those  were  the  free- 


CHAPTER   XVI.  245 

thinkers  of  the  day,  these  the  cliampions  who  stood  up  for 
ordinances  and  for  the  authority  of  the  law.  But  both  joined 
to  tempt  Jesus.  They  desired  a  sign  from  heaven.  The  most 
significant  token  that  God  ever  gave  man  was  before  them  in 
the  person  of  His  Son,  who  eclipsed  all  other  signs.  But  such 
is  unbelief,  that  it  can  go  into  the  presence  of  the  full  mani- 
festation of  God,  can  gaze  at  a  light  brighter  than  the  sun  at 
noondaj^,  and  there  and  then  ask  God  to  give  a  farthing  candle. 

But  Jesus  "  answered  and  said  unto  them.  When  it  is  evening, 
ye  say.  It  will  be  fair  weather,  for  the  sky  is  red.  And  in  the 
morning,  It  will  be  foul  weather  to-day,  for  the  sky  is  red  and 
lo wring.  0  ye  hypocrites,  ye  can  discern  the  face  of  the  sky  ; 
but  can  ye  not  discern  the  signs  of  the  times?"  (Ver.  2,  3.) 
Their  o'svn  moral  condition  was  the  sign  and  proof  that  judgment 
was  imminent.  Doubtless,  for  those  who  could  see,  there  was 
the  fair  weather,  the  day-spring  from  on  high  that  had  visited 
them  in  Jesus.  They  saw  it  not ;  but  could  they  not  discern  the 
foul  weather  ?  They  were  in  the  presence  of  the  Messiah,  and 
were  asking  Him  who  consummated  all  signs  in  His  person  to 
2:ive  them  a  sign  from  heaven  !  The  God  that  made  heaven  and 
earth  was  there,  but  the  darkness  comprehended  it  not.  "  He 
came  to  his  own  and  his  own  received  him  not."  Nothing  could 
be  more  awful,  but  they  were  utterly  blind ;  they  could  discern 
physical  changes,  but  they  had  no  perception  of  moral  and 
spiritual  features  actually  then  before  them. 

How  truly  "  a  wicked  and  adulterous  generation  seeketh 
after  a  sign ;  and  there  shall  no  sign  be  given  unto  it  but  the 
sign  of  the  prophet  Jonas.  And  he  left  them  and  departed." 
(Ver.  4.)  Such  was  His  word  to  them.  Men  constantly  err 
as  to  the  character  of  Jesus.  They  imagine  that  He  could  use 
no  strong  language  and  feel  no  anger ;  but  yet  there  it  is  in  the 
word,  written  in  the  light.  It  is  the  same  thing  now  as  ever. 
Unbelief  is  always  blind,  and  betrays  its  blindness  most  against 
Jesus.  The  same  kind  of  unbelief  that  could  not  then  discern 
who  and  what  Jesus  was  sees  not  now  Jesus  coming,  and  discerns 
not  the  signs  of  the  times  nor  of  their  own  impending  ruin. 
It  is  the  moral  condition  of  men,  no  matter  where  they  are,  only 


246        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

the  more  remarkably  manifested  where  the  h'ght  of  God  is.  If 
Eiiglaud  be  now  the  focus  where  God's  light  is  more  displayed 
than  in  any  other  place,  it  is  this  which  makes  all  the  more 
glar:«ng  the  unbelief  of  men,  who  perhaps  are  engaged  in  His 
work,  who  are  professing  to  help  it  on,  one  way  or  another,  and 
at  the  same  time  are  utterly  careless  as  to  whether  they  are 
walking  according  to  His  will  revealed  in  the  Bible.  Clearly  we 
have  no  right  merely  to  follow  the  word  of  God  in  what  suits  us, 
but  the  word  of  God  as  a  whole,  for  our  own  souls  first,  and  for 
all  the  children  of  God  next,  as  far  as  in  us  lies.  This  is  what 
we  have  gravely  to  consider.  If  we  cannot  act  upon  people's 
consciences,  at  least  let  us  keep  our  own  unsullied  ourselves. 
There  is  always  the  question  of  personal  allegiance  to  the 
Saviour,  and  this  is  what  puts  us  to  the  test  above  all.  Precept 
is  most  weighty  when  commended  by  our  own  example. 

Here  we  have  our  Lord  who  does  not  hesitate  to  touch  the 
evil  with  unsparing  hand.  He  was  the  perfect  fulness  of  love : 
but  do  men  remember  He  is  the  one  who  said,  "wicked  and 
adulterous  generation,"  "  generation  of  vipers,"  &c.  ?  It  flows 
from  true  love,  if  men  would  but  think  so,  and  bow  to  the  truth 
that  convicts  them.  To  submit,  at  God's  word,  to  the  truth  in 
this  world  is  to  be  saved ;  to  be  convicted  of  the  truth  only  in 
the  next  world  is  to  be  lost  for  ever.  Christ  was  the  Faithful 
Witness ;  He  brought  God  face  to  face  with  man,  and  caused 
His  perfect  light  to  shine  upon  them.  Why,  then,  could  not 
He  grant  them  a  sign  ?  God,  full  of  love  as  He  is,  never  does 
anything  to  the  disparagement  of  Him  who  made  Himself 
known.  Jesus  can  meet  a  soul  in  its  ruin  ;  He  may  eat  with 
publicans  to  shew  that  He  is  able  to  receive  sinners  and  forgive 
sins  to  the  uttermost ;  but  He  will  never  give  any  sign  to  satisfy 
the  unbelief  which  rejects  Jesus.  These  Pharisees  and  Saddu- 
cees  did  not  hear  His  voice  of  grace.  They  listened  only  with 
their  outward  ears ;  but  they  were  compelled  to  hear  their  own 
sentence  from  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  :  and  shall  not  He  do 
right?  "  A  wicked  and  adulterous  generation  seeketh  after  a 
sign."  Had  Jesus  not  been  there,  to  ask  for  a  sign  would  not 
have  been  so  wicked ;    but  His   presence   made   it   audacious 


CHAPTER   XVI.  247 

unbelief  and  frightful  hypocrisy.  It  was  flying  in  the  face 
of  what  God  had  already  vouchsafed,  and  asking  for  something 
altogether  inconsiderable  in  the  presence  of  His  best  gift.  So 
now,  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  is  preached  to  a  soul 
that  turns  aAvay  from  it.  He  says,  salvation  is  not  so  easy  a 
thing  as  all  that ;  /  must  do  something  myself.  It  is  asking 
a  sign,  and  this  not  even  from  heaven,  but  from  his  o^vn  heart. 
And  what  is  his  heart  ?  God  declares  that  from  his  heart  pro- 
ceeds everything  that  is  wicked.  Yet  he  still  clings  to  the  fatal 
delusion,  that  some  good  thing  must  be  got  out  of  that  which 
God  pronounces  only  and  always  evil :  and  so  he  turns  away 
from  Jesus  and  God's  righteousness  in  Him,  which  has  been 
perfectly  brought  out,  because  Jesus  is  risen  and  at  the  right 
hand  of  God.  When  you  find  very  high  religious  pretensions 
along  with  disparagement  of  Jesus,  what  can  be  more  offensive 
to  God?  "  A  wicked  and  adulterous  generation  seeketh  after  a 
sign ;  and  there  shall  no  sign  be  given  unto  it  but  the  sign  of 
the  prophet  Jonas."  And  what  was  this?  The  sign  of  one 
that  disappeared  from  the  earth,  that  passed  into  the  figure  of 
death  away  from  the  Jewish  people,  and  after  a  while  was  given 
back  to  them.  It  was  the  symbol  of  death  and  resurrection, 
and  our  Lord  immediately  acted  upon  it.  He  "  left  them  and 
departed."  He  would  pass  under  the  power  of  death ;  He 
would  rise  again,  and  would  carry  the  message,  which  Israel 
had  despised,  to  the  poor  Gentiles. 

But  there  are  other  forms  of  unbelief;  and  the  next  scene 
(ver.  5)  is  with  His  disciples :  so  true  is  it  that  what  you 
find  working  in  its  grossest  shape  in  an  unconverted  man 
may  be  traced,  in  another  way  perhaps,  in  believers.  "  Jesus 
said  unto  them.  Take  heed  and  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the 
Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees."  (Ver.  6.)  They  did  not 
imderstand  Him ;  they  reasoned  among  themselves  ;  and  when- 
ever Christians  begin  so  to  reason,  they  never  understand 
anything.  "  They  reasoned  among  themselves  saying.  It  is 
because  we  have  taken  no  bread."  (Ver.  7.)  There  is  such 
a  thing,  of  course,  as  sound  and  solid  deduction.  The  dif- 
ference is  that  wrong  reasoning  always  starts  from  man  and 


248        LECTUKES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

tries  to  rise  to  God,  while  right  reasoning  starts  from  God 
towards  man.  The  natural  mind  can  only  infer  from  the 
experience  of  men  what  they  think  or  feel,  and  thus  forms 
within  a  sort  of  image  of  what  God  must  be.  This  is  the  basis, 
the  aim,  and  the  character  of  human  speculation  in  divine 
things ;  whereas  God  is  the  source,  strength,  and  guide  of  the 
thoudits  of  ftiith.  How  do  I  know  God  ?  In  the  Bible,  which 
is  the  revelation  of  Christ  from  the  first  of  Genesis  to  the  end  of 
the  Apocalypse.  I  see  Him  there,  the  key-stone  of  the  arch, 
the  centre  of  all  scripture  speaks  of;  and  unless  the  connection 
of  Christ  with  everything  is  seen,  nothing  is  understood  aright. 
There  is  the  first  grand  fallacy,  the  leaving  out  of  God's 
revealing  Himself  in  His  Son.  It  is  not  the  light  behind  the 
veil  as  under  the  Jewish  system,  but  infinite  blessing  now  that 
God  has  come  to  man  and  man  is  brought  to  God.  In  the  life 
of  Christ  I  see  God  drawing  nigh  to  man,  and  in  His  death  man 
brought  nigh  to  God.  The  veil  is  rent ;  all  is  out,  of  man  on 
the  one  hand,  and  of  God  on  the  other,  as  far  as  God  is  pleased 
to  reveal  Himself  to  man  in  this  world.  All  stands  in  the 
boldest  relief  in  the  life  and  death  of  Christ.  But  disciples  are 
apt  to  be  very  dull  about  these  things  now  as  ever ;  and  so  when 
He  warned  them  about  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and 
Sadducees,  they  thought  that  He  was  merely  speaking  of 
something  for  daily  life — very  much  like  what  we  see  at 
the  present  time.  But  our  Lord  "  said  unto  them,  0  ye 
of  little  faith,  why  reason  ye  among  yourselves,  because 
ye  have  brought  no  bread?"  (Ver.  8.)  Why  did  they  not 
think  of  Christ  ?  Would  they  have  troubled  themselves  about 
loaves  if  they  had  thought  of  Him  ?  Impossible !  But  what 
may  there  not  be  in  a  believer's  heart,  even  before  Him 
in  whose  hands  is  the  earth  and  the  fulness  thereof?  They 
were  anxious,  or  thought  Him  so,  about  bread  !  "  Do  ye  not 
yet  understand,  neither  remember  the  five  loaves  of  the  five 
thousand,  and  how  many  baskets  ye  took  up  ?  Neither  the 
seven  loaves  of  the  four  thousand,  and  how  many  baskets  ye 
took  up  ?  How  is  it  that  ye  do  not  understand  that  I  spake  it 
not  to  you  concerning  bread,  that  ye  should  beware  of  the  leaven 


CHAPTER    XYI.  249 

of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Saddiicees  ?  Then  understood  they 
how  that  he  bade  them  not  beware  of  the  leaven  of  bread,  but 
of  the  doctrine  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees."  (Ver. 
0 — 12.)  And  this  is  what  disciples  even  now  often  misappre- 
hend. They  do  not  understand  the  hatefulness  of  unsound 
doctrine.  They  are  alive  to  moral  evil.  If  a  person  gets  drunk 
or  falls  into  any  other  gross  scandal,  they  know,  of  course,  it  is 
very  wicked ;  but  if  the  leaven  of  evil  doctrine  work,  they  do 
not  feel  it.  Why  is  it  that  disciples  are  more  careful  of  that 
■which  mere  natural  conscience  can  judge,  than  of  doctrine 
which  destroys  the  foundation  of  everything  both  for  this  world 
and  for  that  which  is  to  come  ?  What  a  serious  thing  that 
disciples  should  need  to  be  warned  of  this  by  the  Lord,  and 
even  then  not  understand !  He  had  to  explain  it  to  them. 
There  was  the  working  of  unbelief  among  the  disciples,  making 
the  body  the  great  aim,  and  not  seeing  the  all-importance  of 
these  corrupt  doctrines  which  menaced  souls  in  so  many  insidious 
forms  around  them. 

But  there  is  another  way  and  scene  in  which  unbelief  works. 
Tliis  chapter  is  the  dissection  of  the  root  of  many  a  form  of 
unbelief.  "  By  faith  we  understand,"  says  the  apostle  to  the 
Hebrews.  The  worldly  man  tries  to  understand  first  and  then 
to  believe ;  the  Christian  begins  with  the  feeblest  understanding, 
perhaps,  but  he  believes  God :  his  confidence  is  in  One  above 
himself;  and  thus  out  of  the  stone  there  is  raised  up  a  child 
unto  Abraham.  The  Lord  now  questions  the  disciples  as  to  the 
real  gist  of  all  the  matter,  whether  among  Pharisees,  Sadducees, 
or  disciples  themselves.  "  He  asked  his  disciples,  saying.  Whom 
do  men  say  that  I,  the  Son  of  man,  am?"  It  is  now  Christ's 
person  which  comes  out  ;  and  this,  I  need  hardly  say,  is 
deeper  than  all  other  doctrine.  "  Whom  do  men  say  that  I, 
the  Son  of  man,  am  ?  And  they  said.  Some  say  that  thou 
art  John  the  Baptist  ;  some,  Elias  ;  and  others,  Jeremias,  or 
one  of  the  prophets."  (Ver.  13,  14.)  There  are  so  many 
opinions  among  men,  unbelief  argues,  that  certainty  is  im- 
possible. Some  say  one  thing  and  some  another :  you  talk 
of  truth  and  scripture;  yet,  after  all,  it  is  only  your  view.     But 


250  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   I^IATTHEW. 

what  says  faith?  Certainty,  from  God,  is  our  portion,  the 
moment  that  we  see  who  Jesus  is.  He  is  the  only  remedy  that 
banishes  difficulty  and  doubt  from  the  mind  of  man.  ''  He 
saith  unto  them.  But  whom  say  ye  that  /  amV  (Ver.  15.) 
This  was  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  out  now  what  is  the  pivot 
of  man's  blessing  and  God's  glory,  and  becomes  the  turning 
point  of  the  chapter.  Among  these  very  disciples  we  are  to 
have  a  blessed  confession  from  one  of  them — the  power  of  God 
workins;  in  a  man  who  had  been  rebuked  for  his  want  of  faith 
before,  as  he  was  indeed  just  after.  When  we  are  really  broken 
down  before  God  about  our  little  faith,  the  Lord  can  reveal 
some  deeper  higher  view  of  Himself  than  we  ever  had  before. 
The  disciples  had  been  relating  the  various  opinions  of  men : 
one  said  He  was  Elias ;  another,  John  the  Baptist.  "  But 
whom  say  ye  that  I  am  ?  And  Simon  Peter  answered  and  said, 
Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God."  (Ver.  16.) 
Most  glorious  confession !  In  the  Psalms  He  is  spoken  of  as 
the  Son  of  God,  but  very  differently.  There  it  is  as  One 
dealing  with  the  kings  of  the  earth,  who  are  called  upon  to  take 
care  how  they  behave  themselves.  But  the  Son  of  the  living 
God !  The  Holy  Ghost  now  lifts  up  the  veil  to  shew  that  the 
Son  of  the  living  God  involves  depths  far  beyond  an  earthly 
dominion,  howsoever  glorious.  He  is  the  Son  of  that  living 
God  who  can  communicate  life  even  to  His  enemies.  "  Jesus 
answered  and  said  unto  him,  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  Bar-jona ; 
for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee,  but  my 
Father  which  is  in  heaven.     And  I  say  also  unto  thee,"  &c. 

First,  there  is  the  Father  revealing ;  and  the  moment  Christ 
hears  Himself  confessed  as  the  Son  of  the  living  God,  He  also 
sets  His  own  seal  and  honours  the  confessor.  It  is  the  assertion 
of  One  who  at  once  rises  up  to  His  own  intrinsic  dignity. 
"  And  I  also  say  unto  thee,  That  thou  art  Peter,  and  upon  this 
rock  I  will  build  my  church ;  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not 
prevail  against  it."  He  gives  Simon  a  new  name.  As  God 
had  given  to  Abraham,  Sarah,  &c.,  becau-e  of  some  fresh  mani- 
festation of  Himself,  so  does  the  Son  of  God.  It  had  been 
prophetically  announced  before ;  but  now  comes  out  for  the  first 


CHAPTER   XVI.  251 

time  the  reason  lohy  it  was  affixed  to  him.  ''  Thou  art  Peter, 
and  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  church."  What  rock?  The 
confession  Peter  had  made  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  the  living 
God.  On  this  the  Church  is  built.  Israel  was  governed  by  a 
law ;  the  Church  is  raised  on  a  solid  and  imperishable  and 
divine  foundation — on  the  pefson  of  the  Son  of  the  living  God. 
And  when  this  fuller  confession  breaks  from  the  lips  of  Peter, 
the  answer  comes,  Thou  art  Peter — thou  art  a  stone — a  man 
that  derivest  thy  name  from  this  rock  on  which  the  Church 
is  built. 

In  the  early  chapters  of  the  Acts,  Peter  always  speaks  of 
Jesus  as  the  holy  child  (or  servant)  Jesus.  He  speaks  of  Him 
as  a  man  who  went  about  doing  good ;  as  the  Messiah  slain  by 
the  wicked  hands  of  men,  whom  God  raised  up  from  the  dead. 
Whatever  Peter  might  know  Jesus  to  be,  yet  when  preaching  to 
the  Jews,  he  presents  Him  to  them  simply  as  the  Christ,  as  the 
predicted  Son  of  David,  who  had  walked  here  below,  whom  they 
had  crucified  and  God  had  raised  again.  Then,  at  Stephen's 
martyrdom,  a  new  term  is  used  about  the  Lord.  That  blessed 
witness  looks  up  and  says,  "  I  see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the 
Son  of  man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  It  is  not  now 
merely  Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  but  "  the  Son  of  man,"  which 
implies  His  rejection.  When  He  was  refused  as  the  Messiah, 
Stephen,  finding  that  this  testimony  was  rejected,  is  led  of  God 
to  testify  of  Jesus  as  the  exalted  Son  of  man  at  God's  right 
hand.  When  Paul  is  converted,  which  is  given  in  the  very 
next  chapter  but  one,  he  goes  straightway  and  preaches  "  Christ 
in  the  synagogues,  that  he  is  the  Son  of  GocV  He  did  not 
merely  confess  Him,  but  preached  Him  as  such.  And  to  Paul 
was  entrusted  the  great  work  of  bringing  out  the  truth  about 
"the  church  of  God." 

So  here,  when  the  Lord  hears  Peter's  confession.  He  says, 
"  Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  church."  You  understand  the 
glory  of  my  person ;  I  will  shew  you  the  work  I  am  going  to 
accomplish.  Mark  the  expression.  It  is  not,  I  have  been 
building ;  but  I  loill  build  my  Church.  He  had  not  built  it  yet, 
nor  begun  to  build  it :  it  was  altogether  new.     I  do  not  mean 


252        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

by  tin's  tliat  there  liad  not  before  been  souls  believing  in  Hini 
and  regenerate  of  the  Spirit ;  but  the  aggregate  of  the  individual 
saints  that  were  born  of  God  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of 
time  it  is  an  error  to  call  ''  the  Church."  It  is  a  common  notion 
which,  I  am  bold  to  say,  has  not  got  one  thread  of  scripture  to 
give  even  the  appearance  of  truth  to  it.  The  expression  in  Acts 
vii.  38,  ''  The  church  in  the  wilderness,"  means  the  whole 
congregation — the  mass  of  Israel — the  greater  part  of  w^hose 
carcases  fell  in  the  wilderness.  Can  you  call  that  "  the  church 
of  GodV  There  were  only  a  few  believers  among  them.  People 
are  deceived  in  this  by  the  sound.  The  word,  ''  Church  in  the 
wilderness,"  merely  means  the  congregation  there.  The  very 
same  word  is  applied  to  the  confused  assembly  in  Acts  xix., 
which  would  have  torn  Paul  to  pieces.  If  it  were  translated 
like  Acts  vii.,  it  would  be  the  "  Church  in  the  theatre,"  and 
the  blunder  is  obvious.  The  word  that  is  translated  "  church" 
simply  means  assemhly.  To  find  out  ivliat  is  the  nature  of  the 
assembly,  we  must  examine  the  scriptural  usage  and  the  object 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  For  you  might  have  a  good  or  bad 
assembly  :  an  assembly  of  Jews,  of  Gentiles,  or  of  God's 
assembly  distinct  from  either  and  contrasted  with  both,  as  can 
be  readily  and  undeniably  seen  in  1  Corinthians  x.  32.  Now  it 
is  this  last  alone  which  we  mean,  i.e.,  God's  assembly,  when  we 
speak  of  "  the  Church." 

What  then,  to  return,  does  our  Lord  intimate  when  He  says, 
"  Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  church?"  Clearly  something 
that  He  was  going  to  erect  upon  the  confession  that  He  was  the 
Son  of  the  living  God,  whom  death  could  not  conquer,  but  only 
give  occasion  to  the  shining  forth  of  His  glory  by  resurrection. 
"  Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  church,  and  the  gates  of 
hades" — the  power  of  death — "shall  not  prevail  against  it." 
This  last  does  not  mean  the  place  of  the  lost,  but  the  condition 
of  separate  spirits.  "  And  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  the 
kinffdom  of  heaven."  The  Church  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
are  not  the  same  thing.  It  is  never  said  that  Christ  gave  the 
keys  of  the  Church  to  Peter.  Had  the  keys  of  the  Church  or 
of  heaven  been  given  to  him,  I  do  not  wonder  that  the  people 


CHAPTEK   XVI.  253 

should  have  imagined  a  pope.  But  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven" 
means  the  new  dispensation  now  taking  place  on  earth.  God 
was  going  to  open  a  new  economy,  free  to  Jews  and  Gentiles, 
the  keys  of  which  He  committed  to  Peter.  One  of  these  keys 
was  used,  if  I  may  so  say,  at  Pentecost  when  he  preached  to 
the  Jews,  and  the  other  when  he  preached  to  the  Gentiles.  It 
was  the  opening  of  the  kingdom  to  people,  whether  Jews  or 
Gentiles.  "  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven ;  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound 
in  heaven  ;  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  loose  on  earth  shall  be 
loosed  in  heaven."  (Ver.  19.)  The  eternal  forgiveness  of  sins 
has  to  do  with  God  only,  though  there  is  a  sense  in  which  for- 
giving was  committed  to  Peter  and  the  other  apostles,  Avhich 
remains  true  now.  Whenever  the  Church  acts  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord  and  really  does  His  will,  the  stamp  of  God  is  upon 
their  deeds.  ^^  My  church,"  built  upon  this  rock,  is  His  body — 
the  temple  of  believers  built  upon  Himself.  But  ''  the  kingdom 
of  heaven"  embraces  every  one  that  confesses  the  name  of 
Christ.  This  was  begun  by  preaching  and  baptizing.  When  a 
man  is  baptized,  he  enters  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  even  if  he 
should  turn  out  a  hypocrite.  He  will  never  be  in  heaven,  of 
course,  if  he  is  an  unbeliever :  but  he  is  in  "  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."  He  may  either  be  a  tare  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
or  he  may  be  real  wheat ;  an  evil  or  a  faithful  servant ;  a  foolish 
virgin  or  a  wise  one.  The  kino-dom  of  heaven  takes  in  the 
whole  scene  of  christian  profession. 

But  we  have  seen,  when  Christ  speaks  of ''  My  church,"  it  is 
another  thing.  It  is  what  is  built  upon  the  recognition  and 
confession  of  His  person,  and  we  know  that  he  that  believes 
"  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of  God."  And  again,  "  He 
that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  overcometh  the 
world."  He  has  got  the  first  workings  of  life  in  him  if  he 
acknowledges  Jesus  as  Christ ;  but  there  is  a  deeper  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  acknowledging  Him  as  Son;  and  the  higher 
the  acknowledgment  of  Christ,  the  more  spiritual  energy  in  going 
through  this  world  and  overcomino-  it.  If  one  believer  is  more 
spiritual  than  another,  it  is  because  he  understands  the  person 


254        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

of  Christ  better.  All  power  depends  u])on  the  appreciation  of 
Christ.  Mark  our  Lord's  words  first :  "  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon 
Bar-jona  ;  for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  to  thee,  but 
my  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  Christ  must  be  found  outside 
the  Church  and  before  it ;  Christ  must  be  discerned  first  and 
foremost  by  the  individual  soul ;  Christ  and  what  He  is  must, 
before  and  above  all,  be  revealed  to  the  heart  by  the  Father. 
He  may  employ  persons  who  belong  to  the  Church  as  instru- 
ments, or  may  directly  use  His  own  word.  But,  whatever  the 
means  employed,  it  is  the  Father  revealing  the  glory  of  the 
Son  to  a  poor  sinful  man ;  and  when  this  is  settled  with  the 
individual,  Christ  says,  "  Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my 
church.^'  Faith  in  Christ  is  essentially  God's  order  and  way 
before  the  question  of  the  Church  comes  in.  This  is  one  great 
controversy  between  God  and  the  mystery  of  iniquity  which  is 
now  working  in  this  world.  The  aim  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  to 
glorify  Christ ;  whereas  that  of  the  other  is  to  glorify  self.  The 
Holy  Ghost  is  carrying  on  this  blessed  revelation  that  the  Father 
has  made  of  the  Son ;  and  when  the  individual  question  is 
settled,  then  comes  the  corporate  privilege  and  responsibility — 
the  Church. 

It  is  not,  therefore,  enough  to  say,  I  have  got  Christ,  infinitely 
blessed  as  that  is.  If  I  know  that  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  I 
ought  to  believe  also  that  He  is  building  His  Church.  Do  I 
know  my  place  there  ?  Am  I  found  walking  in  the  light  of 
Christ — a  living  stone  ever  in  my  place  in  that  which  He  is 
building — in  healthy  action  as  a  member  of  His  body,  of  His 
flesh,  and  of  His  bones  ?  The  building  of  the  Church  is  going 
on  here.  It  was  here  that  salvation  was  wrought,  and  here  it  is 
that  the  Church  is  being  built  upon  this  rock ;  and  the  gates  of 
hades,  the  invisible  state  or  separate  condition,  shall  not  prevail 
ao^ainst  it.  Death  may  come  in,  but  the  gates  of  hades  shall  not 
prevail  against  it.  The  Lord  says  in  the  Revelation,  that  He 
has  the  keys  of  death  and  hades.  The  death  of  the  believer,  the 
Christian,  is  in  the  hands  of  Christ :  all  is  changed  now.  And 
He  is  the  Lord  both  of  the  dead  and  of  the  living ;  death  is  not 
our  Lord,  but  Christ.    "  Whether  we  live,  we  live  unto  the  Lord  ; 


CHAPTER   XVI.  255 

and  whether  we  die,  we  die  unto  the  Lord  ;  whether,  therefore, 
we  live  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's."  The  Lord  has  absolute 
command  over  us :  and  therefore  death  is  robbed  of  all  that 
makes  it  so  terrible,  even  to  the  believer  who  is  lookin^^  at  it 
with  unbelieving  eyes.  The  Lord  here  says  that .  the  gates  of 
hades  shall  not  prevail  against  His  Church.  The  book  of  the 
Revelation  at  the  close  brino-s  us  its  blessed  licjlit.  That  book 
which  people  commonly  talk  about  as  the  most  obscure  in  the 
Bible  is  the  very  one  to  which  we  are  most  deeply  indebted  for 
light  upon  this  and  other  parts.  There  you  have  the  Lord  with 
the  keys  of  death  and  hades.  He  gave  the  keys  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  to  Peter,  because  he  it  was  who  was  to  preach  to  Jews 
and  Gentiles.  The  keys  did  their  office ;  the  door  was  flung 
open  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  first,  and  afterwards  yet  more 
widely  when  the  Gentiles  were  brought  in. 

But,  further,  we  have  internal  administration  committed  to 
Peter,  both  binding  and  loosing,  authority  vested  in  him  by 
Christ  to  act  publicly  here  below,  with  the  promise  of  ratifica- 
tion above.  "  Whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  on  earth  shall  be 
bound  in  heaven,  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  loose  on  earth 
shall  be  loosed  in  heaven."  That  is  first  said  to  Peter ;  and  I 
presume,  from  wdiat  we  have  in  Matthew  xviii.  18  ('■  Verily  I 
say  unto  you.  Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound 
in  heaven  :  and  whatsoever  ye  shall  loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed 
in  heaven")  that  the  binding  and  the  loosing  belong  to  the  other 
disciples  :  not,  unless  I  am  mistaken,  to  the  apostles  only,  but 
to  the  disciples  as  such.  Compare  also  the  charge  in  John  xx. 
19 — 23.  On  that  principle  people  are  received  into  the 
christian  Church,  and  on  that  principle  wicked  people  are  put 
away  till  restored  on  the  acceptance  of  their  repentance.  The 
Church  does  not  forgive  sins  as  a  matter  of  eternal  judgment,  of 
course,  which  God  alone  has  the  power  to  do.  But  it  is  called  of 
God  to  judge  a  person's  state  for  reception  into,  or  exclusion  from, 
the  circle  which  confesses  the  name  of  Christ  here  below.  Li 
Acts  V.  Peter  bound  their  sin  on  Ananias  and  Sapphira. 
This  does  not  necessarily  prove  that  they  were  lost ;  but  the  sin 
was  bound  upon  them  and  brought  present  judgment.     Peter 


256        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

was  not,  nor  Paul,  at  Corinth  ;  and  there  the  Lord  acts  Himself, 
laying  His  hand  upon  the  guilty :  some  were  weak  and  sickly, 
and  some  falling  asleep.  Their  sins  were  indeed  retained;  but 
this  does  not  decide  against  their  final  salvation — rather,  indeed, 
the  contrary.  When  they  were  judged  of  the  Lord,  they  were 
chastened,  that  they  should  not  be  condemned  with  the  world 
(that  is,  that  they  should  not  be  lost).  They  might  be  taken 
away  by  death,  and  yet  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord.  The 
Church  puts  away  a  wicked  person.  The  man  at  Corinth,  whom 
they  were  told  to  excommunicate,  was  guilty  of  appalling  sin ;  but 
he  was  not  lost.  He  was  delivered  unto  Satan  for  the  destruction 
of  the  flesh,  that  the  spirit  might  "  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the 
Lord  Jesus."  Li  the  next  epistle  we  find  this  person  so  over- 
whelmed with  sorrow  on  account  of  his  fall,  that  they  were 
charged  to  confirm  their  love  to  him.  Nothing  is  more  simple 
than  the  binding  and  loosing  which  people  often  make  so 
mysterious.  The  only  sins  that  the  Church  ought  to  judge  are 
those  that  come  out  so  palpably  as  to  demand  public  repudiation 
according  to  the  word  of  God.  The  Church  is  not  to  be  a  petty 
tribunal  of  judgment  for  everything.  We  ought  never  to  claim 
the  assembly's  intervention  except  about  the  evil  that  is  so  plain 
as  to  be  entitled  to  carry  the  consciences  of  all  along  with  it. 
This  I  take  to  be  the  meaning  of  binding  and  loosing.  The 
former  is  applied  when  a  soul  comes  under  public  discipline 
before  the  Church,  and  the  latter  when  he  humbles  himself  and 
is  formally  restored.  Eternal  forgiveness  of  sins  is  another 
thing  altogether.  Therein  popery  has  shewn  its  wickedness — 
confounding  remission  in  this  world  with  the  absolute  and 
eternal  forgiveness  which  God  reserves  in  His  own  power. 
Protestantism  has  thrown  away  the  other  truth — the  Church's 
bounden  duty  to  judge  sins  in  this  present  life. 

"  Then  charged  he  his  disciples  that  they  should  tell  no  man 
that  he  was*  the  Christ."  What  a  remarkable  chane-e  is  here  ! 
Peter  had  confessed  Him  to  be  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living 
God  :  now  the  Lord  charges  them  that  they  were  not  to  tell  any 

*  The  word  "  Jesus "  is  omitted  by  the  best  authorities,  which  internal 
considerations  evidently  confirm. 


CHAPTER  XVI.  257 

man  that  He  was  the  Christ — not  that  He  was  "  the  Son  of  the 
living  God."  What  is  the  meaning  of  this?  It  was  as  good 
as  saying,  It  is  too  late ;  I  am  rejected  as  the  Christ,  or  the 
Messiah,  the  Anointed  of  Jehovah.  He  is  refused  by  Israel,  and 
He  accepts  the  fact.  But  mark  another  thing:  "From  that 
time  forth  began  Jesus  to  shew  unto  his  disciples,  how  that  he 
must  go  unto  Jerusalem,  and  suffer  many  things  of  the  elders 
and  chief  priests  and  scribes,  and  be  killed,  and  be  raised  again 
the  third  day."  (Ver.  21.)  If  you  compare  it  with  Luke,  it 
comes  out  more  distinctly.  There  we  are  told  (chap.  ix.  20), 
"  He  said  unto  them.  But  whom  say  ye  that  I  am  ?  Peter 
answering  said.  The  Christ  of  God."  Is  not  this  striking? 
''  The  Christ  of  God."  "  The  Son  of  the  living  God"  is  not 
mentioned  in  Luke :  consequently,  nothing  is  said  about  the 
building  of  the  Church.  How  perfect  is  scripture !  The  two 
things  go  together.  But  in  Luke  it  is  said,  ''  He  straitly 
charged  them,  and  commanded  them  to  tell  no  man  that  thing 
(i.e.,  to  tell  no  man  that  He  was  the  Christ  of  God),  saying, 
The  Son  of  man  must  suffer  many  things,"  &c.  He  does  not 
forbid  them  to  tell  this.  There  is  a  great  distinction  between 
"the  Christ"  and  "the  Son  of  man."  The  latter  is  the  title 
of  Christ,  first  as  rejected,  and  then  as  exalted  in  heaven.  This 
is  the  turning  point  in  Christ's  ministry — where  He  forbids  the 
disciples  to  tell  that  He  was  the  Christ.  The  meaning  is  that 
Christ  drops  His  Jewish  title.  He  speaks  of  His  Church. 
Before  it  comes.  He  says,  "  Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my 
church."  From  that  time  He  begins  to  shew  unto  them  how 
that  He  must  "  go  unto  Jerusalem,  and  suffer  many  things  of 
the  elders  and  chief  priests  and  scribes,  and  be  killed,  and  be 
raised  again  the  third  day."  Luke  adds  that  "  He  must  Jirst 
suffer,"  &.C.  All  this  is  connected  with  the  building  of  the 
Church,  which  began  to  be  built  after  Christ  rose  from  the 
dead,  and  took  His  place  in  heaven.  In  Ephesians  the  Church 
is  not  even  named  till  after  Christ's  resurrection  and  His  taking 
a  new  place  in  heaven  have  been  brought  out.  We  had  God 
choosing  the  saints  in  Christ  Jesus,  but  not  the  Church.  Elec- 
tion is  an  individual  thing.     He  chose  us — you  and  me,  and  all 


258  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 

the  other  saints  of  God,  wherever  they  are.  He  chose  tis  thafc 
"  we  should  be  holy  and  without  blame  before  him  in  love." 
But  when  Paul  has  introduced  Christ's  death  and  resurrection, 
he  says  that  God  "gave  him  to  be  the  head  over  all  things  to 
the  church,  which  is  his  body,  the  fulness  of  him  that  filleth  all 
in  all."  Christ  was  not  so  given  till  He  was  at  the  right  hand 
of  God.  There  His  headship  commences.  His  Sonship  was  from 
everlasting  ;  He  was  a  man  in  this  world ;  and  He  was  made 
Head  of  the  Church,  after  having  accomplished  redemption. 
The  word  of  God  is  wiser  than  men  :  what  men  call  foolishness 
is  really  the  wisdom  of  God.  It  is  our  duty  to  give  up  our  own 
theories,  as  much  as  the  notions  of  other  men.  We  must  always 
bring  ourselves  up  to  the  standard  of  God's  word — not  be 
always  correcting  other  people,  but  ourselves.  The  word  of 
God  is  what  He  has  written  for  this  purpose :  it  is,  no  doubt, 
very  useful  for  others,  but  we  must  honestly  use  it  for  our 
hearts  first.  When  the  children  of  Israel  were  going  to  make 
war  with  the  Canaanites,  the  Lord  appears  and  lets  them  know 
that  they  must  take  the  knife  to  themselves  before  the  sword 
against  others. 

But  mark  the  solemn  fact  that  is  here  recorded.  Immediately 
after  Simon  had  made  this  glorious  confession  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
he  is  called,  not  Peter,  but  Satan !  How  could  this  be  ? 
Because  he  savoured  not  the  things  that  were  of  God,  but  those 
that  were  of  men.  He  had  not  said  one  improper  word 
according  to  human  judgment.  He  had  not  even  indulged  in 
haste,  as  was  often  his  wont.  The  Lord  never  called  mere 
excitement  ''  Satan ;"  but  He  so  called  Peter  because  he  sought 
to  turn  Himself  away  from  suffering  and  death.  The  secret 
was  this :  that  he  neither  fully  felt  what  sin  was  nor  what  the 
grace  of  God  was.  He  stood  in  the  way  of  the  Lord's  going  to 
the  cross.  Was  it  not  for  Peter  that  He  was  going  there  ?  Had 
Peter  thought  of  this,  would  he  have  said  "Be  it  far  from 
thee.  Lord?"  (Ver  22.)  It  was  man;  and  when  it  is  man 
thwarting  Christ,  He  pronomices  it  Satan.  "  He  turned  and 
said  unto  Peter,  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan  :  thou  art  an  offence 
unto  me :  for  thou  savourest  not  the  things  that  be  of  God,  but 


CHAPTER  xvr.  259 

tliose  that  be  of  men."  (Yer.  23.)  Peter  thus  feeling  and 
acting  is  the  true  foundation  of  the  mystery  of  iniquity ;  not 
Peter  confessing  what  was  taught  not  by  flesh  and  blood  but 
by  God. 

Our  Lord  turns  to  the  disciples  and  puts  before  them  that 
not  merely  is  He  going  to  the  cross,  but  they  must  be  prepared 
to  follow  Him  there.  If  I  am  to  be  in  the  true  path  of  Jesus, 
I  must  deny  myself  and  take  up  the  cross  and  follow — not  the 
disciples — not  this  church  or  that  church,  but — Jesus  Himself. 
I  must  go  in  the  very  teeth  of  what  is  pleasing  to  my  heart 
naturally.  I  must  be  found  compassed  by  shame  and  rejection 
in  this  present  evil  world.  If  not,  depend  upon  it,  I  am  not 
following  Jesus ;  and  remember,  it  is  a  dangerous  thing  to 
believe  in  Jesus  without  following  Him.  The  Lord  shews  that 
it  must  be  a  man  losing  his  life  as  it  were.  At  the  present  time 
much  confession  of  Christ  is  comparatively  an  easy  matter. 
There  is  little  opposition  or  persecution.  How  it  proves  what 
the  heart  is !  People  imagine  that  the  world  is  changed,  and 
they  talk  of  progress  and  enlightenment.  The  truth  is,  Christians 
are  changed :  the  world  is  but  restrained  in  the  display  of  its  evil. 
"  He  that  letteth  will  let,  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way." 
When  that  day  comes,  it  will  not  be  merely  the  usual  spirit  of 
hatred  that  animates  the  world,  but  God  sending  men  a  strong 
delusion  that  they  should  believe  falsehood,  and  should  thus  be 
ready  to  receive  the  antichrist,  the  man  after  their  own  hearts. 
I  am  not  foreboding  woes  and  troubles  of  my  own  imagination, 
but  what  we  find  in  the  word  of  God.  There  is  a  great  calm 
before  an  earthquake.  The  cry  is  of  peace  and  safety,  but  there 
approaches  fast  this  time  of  dissolution  of  all  that  men  count 
settled  and  secure.  That  we.  Christians,  shall  be  taken  up  to  be 
with  our  Saviour  before  that  day  comes,  I  have  no  doubt.  We 
must  look  at  the  bright  side — the  coming  of  Jesus  to  take  us  to 
be  in  the  Father's  house.  But  for  the  little  while  that  we  are 
here,  the  important  thing  to  remember  is,  that,  as  Jesus  must 
needs  go  to  the  cross  for  our  deliverance,  each  Christian  has  got 
his  cross  too.  Do  we  desire  this  to  be  true  of  ourselves  ?  If  so, 
we  shall  be  sure  to  find  it  out.     Let  us  ask  ourselves  whether 


2G0       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

we  desire  to  be  found  taking  up  our  cross  and  following  Jesus- 
"  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take 
up  his  cross  and  follow  me.  For  whosoever  will  save  his  life 
shall  lose  it ;  and  whosoever  will  lose  his  life  for  my  sake  shall 
find  it."  (Ver.  25.) 

What  lessons  for  our  souls !  Tlie  flesh  easily  arrogate^; 
superiority  over  the  Spirit ;  and  indulgence  to  the  path  of 
ease  comes  in  (though  of  Satan)  under  the  specious  plea  of  love 
and  kindness.  Is  the  cross  of  Christ  our  glory?  Are  we 
willing  to  suffer  in  doing  His  will  ?  What  a  delusion  is  present 
honour  and  enjoyment ! 


CHAPTER   XVII. 

The  chapter  we  have  been  last  looking  at,  has  shewn  ns 
Jesus  rejected  as  Christ  or  Messiah,  confessed  as  the  Son  of  the 
living  God,  and  about  to  return  in  glory  as  the  Son  of  man. 
But  along  with  the  glory  in  which  He  is  to  come  and  reward 
each  according  to  his  works,  we  have  His  suffering  :  not  merely 
rejection,  but  His  being  put  to  death — raised,  no  doubt,  the 
third  day,  but  still  the  suffering  Son  of  man,  and,  as  the  Son  of 
man,  returning  in  glory.  Following  up  the  subject  of  His 
Father's  glory,  in  which  He  declares  He  is  to  come  with  His 
angels  and  judge  in  His  kingdom,  we  have  now  a  picture  given 
on  the  holy  mount :  a  picture  most  striking,  and  this  in  a  two- 
fold point  of  view.  The  glory,  as  we  saw,  of  the  kingdom, 
depends  upon  His  being  the  Son  of  man,  the  exalted  man  who 
had  erst  suffered,  and  into  whose  hands  all  glory  is  committed — - 
who  had,  at  every  cost,  retrieved  the  honour  of  God,  and  is  to 
make  effectual  the  blessing  of  man :  who,  by  virtue  of  His 
suffering,  has  already  brought  to  nought  the  power  of  Satan 


CHAPTER  xvir.  261 

for  those  who  believe,  and  who  eventually,  whe^i  the  khigdom 
comes,  is  to  expel  Satan  altogether,  and  bring  in  that  for  which 
God  has  been  waiting — a  kingdom  prepared  from  the  foundation 
of  the  Avorld.  Accordingly,  "  After  six  days"  (type  of  the 
ordinary  term  of  work  here  below),  "  Jesus  taketh  Peter, 
James,  and  John  his  brother,  and  bringeth  them  up  into  an  high 
mountain  apart."  (Ver.  1.)  That  is,  He  takes  chosen  witnesses ; 
for  it  was  merely  a  testimony  to  the  kingdom — not  exactly  the 
kingdom,  but  the  sample  of  it  that  He  had  referred  to  when  He 
said,  "  There  be  some  standing  here,  which  shall  not  taste  of 
death,  till  they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  his  kingdom." 

The  point  there  is  the  Son  of  man  coming,  rather  than  the 
kingdom  itself;  and  what  follows  in  our  chapter  is  only  a  partial 
view  of  it,  as  illustrative  of  the  glory  of  the  rejected  Son  of 
man.  But  partial  though  it  be,  nothing  could  be  more  blessed, 
save  the  thing  itself;  and  faith  brings  us  into  a  very  real  present 
realizing  of  that  which  is  to  be.  It  is  "  the  substance  of  thiniis 
hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  The  kingdom,  of 
course,  of  which  our  Lord  spoke,  is  not  yet  arrived.  When  it 
is  said,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he 
cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God,"  He  appears  to  speak 
of  a  kingdom  which  we  do  enter  now.  For  St.  John  does 
not  present  it  as  a  thing  of  mere  outward  manifestation,  but 
gives  a  deeper  revelation  of  the  kingdom,  as  it  is  true  now, 
into  which  every  one  that  is  born  of  God  comes,  and  which  shall 
yet  be  displayed  with  its  heavenly  and  its  earthly  things.  But 
St.  Matthew,  who  takes  up  the  Jewish  part,  or  Old  Testament 
prediction  of  the  kingdom,  sketches  us  the  presentation  of  the 
Son  of  man  coming  in  His  kino-dom. 

The  Lord,  accordingly,  fulfilling  His  word,  takes  these 
disciples  "  up  into  an  high  mountain  apart,  and  was  trans- 
figured before  them.  And  his  face  did  shine  as  the  sun,  and 
his  raiment  was  white  as  the  light."  (Ver.  2.)  The  sun  is 
the  image  of  supreme  glory,  as  that  which  rules  the  day. 
"And  behold,  there  appeared  unto  them  Moses  and  Elias 
talking  with  him."  (Yer.  3.)  Moses  was  the  personage  by 
whom  the   law  was  given ;    Elias,   the    grand   sample   of  the 


2G2        LECTUEES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

prophets,  who*  recalled  tlie  people  to  a  broken  law.  Thej 
were  thus  the  pillars  of  the  Jewish  system,  to  whom  every  true 
Israelite  looked  back  with  the  deepest  feelings  of  reverence : 
one  of  them  singled  out  as  the  only  Jew  taken  to  heaven,  with- 
out passing  through  death  ;  the  other,  lest  he  should  become  an 
object  of  worship  after  his  death,  having  the  singular  honour  of 
being  buried  by  the  Lord.  These  two  appear  in  the  presence  of 
our  Lord.  They  were  known  to  be  Moses  and  Elias :  there 
seems  to  have  been  no  difficulty  in  recognizing  them.  So,  in 
the  resurrection-state,  the  distinction  of  persons  will  be  kept  up 
thoroughly.  There  will  be  no  such  thing  as  that  kind  of  same- 
ness wdiich  blots  out  the  peculiarities  of  each.  Though  there 
will  be  the  termination  of  earthly  relationships,  and  no  peculiar 
links  will  survive  in  heaven  which  connected  one  with  another^ 
no  matter  how  closely,  on  earth  ;  yet  each  will  retain  his  own 
individuality — with  this  mighty  difference,  of  course,  that  all 
saints  will  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly.  All  men  are  after 
the  pattern  of  the  earthly  now ;  for  we  all  in  the  body  resemble 
fallen  Adam  noAv,  yet  are  w^e  not  all  lost  in  one  common  undis- 
tinguishable  throng.  We  each  have  our  own  proper  character 
and  our  peculiar  conformation  of  body.  So  in  glory  each  will 
be  known  for  what  he  is,  Moses  and  Elias  are  seen  as  glorified, 
but  as  Moses  and  Elias  still ;  and  the  Lord  is  transfigured 
in  their  midst.  "  Then  answered  Peter,  and  said  unto  Jesus, 
Lord,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here.  If  thou  wilt,  let  us  make 
here  three  tabernacles,  one  for  thee,  one  for  Moses,  and  one  for 
Elias"  (ver.  4)  ;  shewing  that  he  perfectly  w^ell  knew  wdiich  was 
which.  "  While  he  yet  spake,  behold,  a  bright  cloud  over- 
shadowed them :  and,  behold,  a  voice  out  of  the  cloud  which 
said.  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  j)leased.  Hear 
ye  him."  (Ver.  5.) 

Herein,  I  conceive,  lies  the  depth  of  the  w^hole  passage. 
Peter,  meaning  to  do  honour  to  his  Master  but  in  a  human 
way — Peter,  still  savouring  in  a  measure  the  things  of 
men  and  not  of  God,  proposes  to  put  his  Master  on  common 
ground  with  the  heads  of  the  law  and  of  the  prophets.  But 
it  must   not   be.     The    Father   at   once  breaks   silence.     New 


CHAPTER   XVII.  2G3 

revelations  were  about  to  follow,  and  indeed  were  being  made. 
Whatever  might  be  the  value  of  Moses,  whatever  the  special 
charge  of  Elias,  who  were  they,  and  what,  in  presence  of  tlie 
Son  of  God?  The  Son  may  make  nothing  of  Himself;  but  the 
Father  loves  the  Son.  Peter  would  put  Him  on  a  level  with  the 
most  honoured  of  mankind  ;  but  the  Father's  purpose  is  that 
every  knee  shall  bow  to  Him — that  all  men  shall  honour  the 
Son,  even  as  they  honour  the  Father.  Man  never  does  this,  seeing 
simply  man  in  the  Son,  in  no  adequate  way  honouring  Him  with 
divine  homage.  Faith  does ;  for  it  sees  God  in  the  Son,  hears 
God  in  Him,  and  also  finds  Him  in  the  peculiarly  blessed 
relationship  of  Father,  For  if  Jesus  were  conceived  to  be  simply 
God,  and  not  the  Son,  it  would  be  an  incomparably  less  blessed 
revelation  than  that  which  we  actually  have.  If  such  a  thing 
could  be,  as  divine  nature  without  the  blessed  relationshij)  of 
sonship  before  the  Father,  we  should  lose  the  very  sweetest  part 
of  our  blessing.  For  it  is  not  barely  the  deity  of  Jesus  that  has 
to  be  owned — though  this  lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  truth  ;  but 
the  eternal  relationship  of  the  Son  with  the  Father.  Not  merely 
was  He  Son  in  this  world :  it  is  most  dangerous  to  limit  the 
Sonship  of  Christ  thus,  for  it  is  from  all  eternity.  People 
reason,  that  because  He  is  called  Son,  He  must  have  a  beginning 
in  time,  subsequently  to  the  Father.  All  such  argumentation 
ought  to  be  banished  from  the  soul  of  a  Christian.  The 
scripture  doctrine  has  no  reference  to  priority  of  time.  He  is 
called  Son  in  respect  of  affection  and  intimate  nearness  of  rela- 
tionship. It  is  the  pattern  of  the  blessed  place  into  Avhich  grace 
brings  us  through  miion  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  though  of 
course  there  be  ineffable  heights  and  depths  beyond  in  Him. 
But  if  we  are  simple  about  it,  we  gather  from  it  the  deepest  joy 
that  is  to  be  found  in  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God — and  that 
in  His  Son. 

The  Father,  then,  interrupts  the  word  of  Peter,  and  answers 
Himself.  The  bright  cloud  that  overshadowed  them,  Peter  well 
knew  to  be  the  cloud  of  Jehovah's  presence :  but  the  Father 
adds,  "This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased." 
It  is  not,  This  is  your  Messiah — though,  of  course,  He  was  so ; 


/ 


2G4  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

but  He  brings  out  the  grand  New  Testament  revelation  of 
Jesus.  He  reveals  Him  as  His  own  beloved  Son ;  and,  further, 
asserts  His  unqualified  delight  in  Him.  "  This  is  my  beloved 
Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased.  Hear  ye  Him'''' — this  last  also 
a  statement  of  all  importance.  What  was  Moses,  and  what  Elias 
now  ?  They  are  entirely  left  out  in  the  words  of  the  Father.  I 
need  not  say  that  every  one  who  heard  Jesus  was  the  Son  of 
God  would  be  very  far  from  despising  Moses  and  Elias.  They 
who  understand  grace  have  a  far  deeper  respect  for  the  law  than 
the  man  who  muddles  grace  and  law  together.  The  only  full 
way  to  value  anything  that  is  of  God  is  in  the  intelligence  of 
His  grace.  I  do  not  understand  myself  nor  God  till  I  know  His 
grace ;  and  I  cannot  know  His  grace,  except  as  I  see  it  in  the 
person  of  His  Son.  "The  law  was  given  by  Moses,  but  grace 
and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ."  He  was  full  of  grace  and 
truth. 

The  Father  therefore  directs  attention  to  Him.  He  says, 
"  Hear  ye  him."  It  is  no  longer.  Hear  Moses,  or  Hear  Elias, 
but  "  Hear  ye  /wm."  Could  anything  be  more  startling  to  a 
Jew  ?  All  must  give  place  to  the  Son.  The  dignity  of  the  others 
is  not  denied,  nor  their  due  position  slighted.  To  assert  the  glory 
of  the  sun  that  shines  every  day  is  in  no  way  to  despise  the  stars. 
God  made  Moses  to  be  what  he  was,  and  Elias  received  in  like 
manner  what  He  saw  fit ;  but  what  were  they  compared  with 
His  Son  ?  How  plain  and  sad  that  men  should  be  at  this  present 
moment  making  two  tabernacles — one  for  Moses  (if  not  for 
Elias),  and  one  for  the  Lord  Jesus  !  What  Peter  was  rebuked 
for  doing  is  what  men  have  continued  to  do.  They  talk  about 
God  being  the  michangeable  God.  But  He  who  ordained  the 
night  made  the  day ;  and  as  surely  as  He  once  spake  the  law, 
He  has  now  sent  the  gospel.  I  see  there  the  display  of  the 
glory  of  God,  shewing  out  now  one  part  of  His  character  and 
now  another.  This  is  not  changing.  God  gives  us  to  see  His 
different  attributes,  and  His  various  wisdom,  and  His  infinite 
glory ;  but  I  must  see  each  in  its  own  sphere,  and  understand 
the  intent  for  wdiich  God  has  given  each.  Moses  and  Elias  were 
the  two  great  cardinal  points  of  the  Jewish  system  ;  but  now 


CHAPTER   XTII,  265 

there  is  One  who  eclipses  all  that  system — Jesus,  the  Son  of 
God ;  and  in  presence  of  Him  not  even  the  representatives  of 
the  law  or  the  prophets  are  to  be  heard.  There  is  a  fulness  of 
truth  that  comes  out  in  the  Son  of  God ;  and  if  I  want  to 
understand  the  mind  of  God,  as  it  concerns  me  now,  I  must 
hear  Him.  This  was  most  difficult  for  a  Jew  to  enter  into  :  and, 
indeed,  it  was,  if  possible,  more  important  for  him  to  heed  the 
call  than  for  anyone  else ;  because  he  had  already  a  religion  based 
upon  the  law  and  the  prophets.  J^ow  the  beloved  Son  of  God, 
in  whom  the  Father  Himself  expresses  His  perfect  satisfaction, 
is  commended  to  all.  ^'  Hear  ye  him."  As  Jesus,  the  Son  of 
God,  is  the  object  of  the  Father's  infinite  love,  so  He  is  the 
means  of  that  same  love  reaching  even  to  us.  If  I  see  Him  to 
be  the  beloved  Son  of  the  Father,  my  soul  rests  upon  Him  and 
enters  into  communion  with  the  Father.  "  Truly  our  fellowship 
is  with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  What  is 
fellowship  ?  It  is  our  having  common  joy  in  a  common  object 
which  we  share  with  one  another.  Our  joy  now  we  share  with 
the  Father  and  with  the  Son.  The  Father  bids  me  hear  the 
Son,  and  the  Son  declares  the  Father.  We  have  fellowship  with 
the  Father  who  points  out  to  our  hearts  Him  in  whom  He 
Himself  delighted ;  we  have  fellowship  with  the  Sou,  inasmuch 
as  He  makes  known  to  us  the  Father.  How  shall  I  know  the 
Father  ? — how  know  His  feelings  ?  But  by  one  way.  I  look  at 
His  Son,  and  have  now  seen  the  Father.  The  Son  speaks,  and 
I  have  heard  His  voice  also.  I  know  how  He  acts — His  love 
can  go  out  to  the  very  vilest.  Such  Avas  Christ ;  and  now,  I  am 
sure,  such  is  the  Father  also.  I  know  what  God  the  Father  is 
when  I  follow  the  Son  and  listen  to  the  Son.  It  is  the  Father 
He  is  revealing,  not  Himself:  the  Son  came  to  make  known  what 
the  Father  is  in  a  world  that  knew  Him  not.  Even  those 
who  had  faith,  what  thoughts  had  they  about  the  Father  ?  We 
have  only  to  look  at  the  disciples,  to  see  that  there  was  no 
answer  to  the  Father's  heart,  and  no  sympathy  with  it. 
Although  they  were  born  of  God,  up  to  this  time  it  was  just 
what  Philip  said,  "  Shew  us  the  Father,  and  it  sufficeth  us." 
Not  that  he  did  not  divinely  know  Jesus  as  the  Messiah ;  but  he 


266       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

had  not  entered  into  the  blessedness  of  what  He  was  as  the  Son 
revealing  the  Father.  It  was  only  after  the  Holy  Ghost  came 
down  after  the  Son's  departure  to  heaven,  that  they  acquired 
the  consciousness  of  the  grace  wherein  they  stood.  So,  yet 
more,  the  Apostle  Paul  says,  "  Though  we  have  known  Christ 
after  the  flesh,  yet  now  henceforth  know  we  him  no  more."  To 
know  Christ  at  the  right  hand  of  God — to  appreciate  what  He 
is  there,  is  to  know  Him  far  better  than  if  we  had  heard  every 
discourse,  and  seen  every  miracle,  of  His  upon  earth.  The  Holy 
Ghost  brings  it  out  more  and  more  fully  through  His  word.  I 
am  not  saying  now  how  far  we  enter  practically  into  what  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  teaching,  because  this  must  after  all,  and 
rightly,  depend  on  the  measure  of  our  spirituality.  But  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  here  to  take  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  shew 
them  to  us — to  make  His  glory  known  and  His  sufferings,  as  it 
is  the  Father's  delight  that  He  should  be  known.  But  there 
were  many  things  that  they  could  not  then  bear.  When  the 
Holy  Ghost  was  come.  He  should  lead  them  into  all  truth. 

Such  is  the  object  of  the  Father.  He  takes  advantage  of  the 
very  glory  of  Jesus,  seen  as  Son  of  man,  to  shew  that  a  still 
deeper  glory  attaches  to  Him.  The  kingdom  of  Christ  by  no 
means  exhausts  the  glory  of  His  person :  and  it  is  as  connected 
with  His  deeper  glory  that  the  existence  of  the  Church  is  brought 
out.  So  the  confession  of  His  Sonship  elicited  the  word  "  Upon 
this  rock  will  I  build  my  church."  This  is  the  pith  of  the  New 
Testament  revelation — it  is  the  Father  revealing  His  Son,  and  the 
Spirit  enabling  us  to  receive  what  the  Son  is,  both  as  the  image 
of  the  invisible  God,  and  as  introducing  us  into  fellowship  with 
the  Father.  It  is  not  God  merely  known  as  such,  but  the  Father 
in  the  Son  made  known  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Hence  it  is,  then, 
that  here,  in  a  gospel  especially  written  for  Jewish  believers,  the 
Holy  Ghost  takes  particular  pains  to  mark  this.  (Compare  the 
close  of  chap,  xi.)  When  Peter  would  have  put  the  Son  of  God 
on  an  equal  ground  with  the  most  exalted  and  favoured  ser- 
vants of  God,  a  higher  object  is  brought  out.  When  before  Him, 
Moses  and  Elias  rejoice  to  take  the  place  of  servants  merely. 
The  Son  is  commended  of  God  to  us  as  the  One  whom  we  are 


CHAPTER   XVII.  267 

to  hoar.  This  is  a  truth  of  all  importance,  in  order  to  a  sonl's 
getting  thoroughly  settled  on  christian  ground.  Christians 
are  often  afraid  of  distinguishing  between  the  ways  of  God  and 
shrink  from  accepting  the  full  place  of  our  Lord.  But  to  give 
Jesus  His  rightful  glory  is  the  first  duty  of  the  soul ;  even  as 
the  Father  Himself  proclaims  it.  He  spoke  of  Jesus  as  God 
the  Father  speaking  of  God  the  Son.  We  Avant  more  singleness 
of  eye,  a  more  fervent  spirit,  and  greater  intelligence,  to  give 
increasing  honour  to  the  Son  of  God.  All  heresy  has  for  its  root 
the  slighting  of  Christ.  So,  one  man  makes  doing  good  his 
object,  another  the  gospel,  another  the  Church,  each  rising 
perhaps  above  the  other ;  but  he  is  practically  nearest  to  God 
who  makes  everything  a  question  of  Christ.  This  is  the  highest 
spirituality,  because  it  is  the  most  simple  reproduction  of  God's 
own  mind,  feelings,  and  word. 

The  disciples,  confounded  by  what  they  heard,  fall  on  their 
faces  and  are  sore  afraid.  There  was  no  communion  with 
it  yet.  For  the  present  they  enter  into  it  but  slightly,  though 
it  was  afterwards  recalled  to  them  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  "And 
Jesus  came  and  touched  them,  and  said.  Arise,  and  be  not 
afraid.  And  wdien  they  had  lifted  up  their  eyes,  they  saw  no 
man,  save  Jesus  only."  (Yer.  7,  8.)  The  heavenly  vision  had 
passed  away  for  a  time :  they  were  on  the  mount  alone  with 
Jesus.     What  a  joy  that,  if  it  vanish,  He  abides  ! 

Let  us  just  refer  briefly  to  the  account  of  this  scene  as  given 
in  the  other  gospels.  Li  Mark  ix.  we  have  this  same  vision  of 
glory,  and  it  is  opened  in  a  similar  manner.  I  am  not  now 
going  to  enter  into  all  the  points  of  difference,  for  there  are 
several.  But  what  was  chiefly  on  my  mind  was  this  :  Li  what 
the  Father  says  about  Christ,  the  words  "  in  whom  I  am  well 
pleased"  are  left  out.  The  emphatic  point,  forgotten  nowhere, 
is  that  He  was  the  Son ;  and  in  Mark,  as  in  Matthew,  He  is  the 
Son  (not  a  servant  only,  though  truly  such)  who  is  to  be  heard. 
But  the  Holy  Ghost  by  Matthew  adds  "  in  whom  I  am  well 
pleased."  The  satisfaction  of  the  Father  in  the  Son  is  given  as 
the  ground  why  He  should  be  heard,  as  the  full  expression  of 
His  mind.     Li  Luke  we  have  another  thing.     "  Behold,  there 


268  LECTURES   ON   THE    GOSPEL   OF   IIATTHEW. 

talked  with  him  two  men,  which  were  Moses  and  Ellas."  (Luke 
ix.  30.)  They  are  called  "  men"  here  in  a  distinct  manner, 
this  gospel  having  heen  written  more  particularly  in  view  of 
man  at  large.  These  men  "  appeared  in  glory,  and  spake  of  his 
decease  which  he  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem."  There  we 
liave  the  subject  of  their  conversation — a  thing  of  the  deepest 
interest  for  us  to  learn.  The  death  and  sufferings  of  Jesus  are 
the  great  theme  on  which  men  in  glory  converse  with  Himself, 
the  Son  of  God.  And  Jerusalem,  yea,  Jerusalem,  would  be 
the  place  of  His  death  instead  of  welcoming  Him  to  reign ! 
But  then  we  find  the  sad  traits  of  human  weakness  :  Peter  and 
they  that  were  with  him  were  heavy  with  sleep.  There  again 
we  find  the  Father's  affection  for  His  Son.  The  highest  glories 
of  Judaism  wane — the  Sou  is  to  be  heard.  The  moral  features 
are  prominent  throughout. 

Now  there  is  another  thing  to  be  observed.  John  leaves  out 
the  transfiguration  altogether ;  because  his  proper  work  was  to 
dwell,  not  upon  Christ's  outward  manifestation  to  the  world  as 
Son  of  man  in  His  kingdom,  but  on  His  eternal  glory  as  the 
only-begotten  Son  of  God  ;  or,  as  he  says  himself,  "  We  beheld 
his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only-begotten  of  the  Father." 

In  2  Peter  we  have  a  most  interesting  allusion  to  this  scene. 
It  is  said  there,  "  He  received  from  God  the  Father  honour  and 
glory"  (2  Peter  i.  17) — confirming  the  remark,  that  this  scene 
does  not  shew  us  so  much  His  essential  glory,  as  that  which 
He  received  from  God  the  Father — "  when  there  came  such  a 
voice  to  him  from  the  excellent  glory"  (or  the  cloud,  which  was 
the  known  external  symbol  of  Jehovah's  majesty),  "■  This  is  my 
beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  But,  mark,  "hear 
ye  him"  is  omitted  here.  This  is  very  striking.  In  the  three 
gospels,  not  one  of  them  omits  the  words  "  hear  ye  him."  In 
the  Second  Epistle  of  Peter  they  are  omitted.  Matthew  gives 
us  the  fullest  account.  All  that  God  the  Father  said,  "  This  is 
my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased;  hear  ye  him." 
But  the  others,  that  is,  Mark  and  Luke,  give  "  This  is  my 
beloved  Son :  hear  him ;"  while  Peter  himself,  who  Avas  an 
eye-witness  of  the  scene,  omits  the  words  ''hear  him."     Mat- 


CHAPTER  xvir.  269 

thew  shews  us  tlic  complacency  of  the  Father  in  Jesus,  for  the 
purpose  of  specially  raising  the  hearts  of  the  Jewish  disciples 
above  His  mere  place  as  Messiah  to  the  Father's  peculiar 
delight  in  Him  as  the  Son ;  and  this  as  a  gromid  for  valuing 
His  word  above  all.  Peter  leaves  out  "  hear  ye  him,"  because 
now  (the  revelation  of  Jesus  having  come  out)  the  point  that 
remains  is  the  Father's  delight  in  Jesus.  I  do  not  pretend  to 
say  how  far  the  inspired  Avriters  knew  all  the  mind  of  God  in 
such  a  thing :  they  wrote  as  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

There  are  two  ways,  I  would  observe,  of  looking  at  these 
differences  in  the  accounts  that  are  given  us  :  the  one  is  the 
infidel  view,  and  the  other  the  christian.  The  infidel  way  is  to 
suppose  that  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke  did  their  best  as  men ; 
but  that  they  sometimes  made  mistakes.  Now  infidelity  is  always 
the  most  foolish  thing  in  the  world.  It  is  not  only  unworthy 
of  God,  but,  I  repeat,  also  as  absurd  as  possible  when  the  facts 
are  quietly  looked  into.  How  came  it  to  pass  that  the  man  who 
wrote  the  first  gospel  gave  this  scene  the  most  fully  ?  If  he 
had  w^ritten  after  the  others,  I  could  conceive  his  rememberino; 
and  registering  what  the  others  had  forgotten  ;  but  Matthew 
gives  both  the  first  and  minutest  account.  Mark  and  Luke 
leave  out  some  parts,  and  Peter  leaves  out  what  they  had  all 
put  in — "hear  him."  Such  criticism,  therefore,  is  not  merely 
pride  of  heart,  but  it  is  the  folly  of  spoilt  children  against  the 
word  of  God. 

But,  again,  let  us  look  at  it  in  the  other  way.  We  are 
ignorant ;  we  know  nothing  as  we  ought  to  know.  Let  us 
believe  that  what  God  says  is  perfect — that  everything  He  has 
given  us  in  His  word  is  perfect ;  and  that  in  the  very  differ- 
ences there  is  a  divine  object.  Matthew,  writing  to  those  who 
were  under  Jewish  prejudices,  brings  out  the  Father's  good 
pleasure  in  Jesus  as  His  Son,  which  is  the  grand  means  of  lift- 
ing up  the  soul  from  earth.  And  as  it  was  the  Evangelists  who 
were  the  first  to  bring  out  this  new  and  blessed  truth,  they  all 
put  in  "hear  him."  But  Peter,  writing  long  after,  makes  the 
person  of  the  Son  to  be  the  prime  object,  and  not  His  revelation. 
What  does  Peter  mean  to  teach  us,  when  he  says  that  no  pro- 


270       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

phecy  of  the  scripture  is  of  any  private  interpretation  ?  You 
cannot  understand  prophecy  if  you  take  it  merely  piecemeal  and 
by  itself.  A  prophecy  confined  to  particular  circumstances  and 
persons  loses  its  chief  value.  Christ  is  the  substance  of  pro- 
phecy. It  is  His  glory  that  the  prophecies  bring  out.  They 
are  not  connected  merely  with  England  or  France  or  any  other 
country  you  may  choose ;  but  you  must  see  the  connection  of 
the  prophecies  with  Christ :  when  you  do,  you  have  a  sure  light. 
God  is  thinking  of  His  beloved  Son,  and  commending  His  Son 
to  us.  He  wants  to  have  our  hearts  filled  with  His  Son,  and 
not  with  thoughts  about  our  country  or  great  men.  The  Son 
of  God  is  the  object  of  the  Father.  This  is  what  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  insisting  upon  here.  He  shews  that  prophecy  is  a 
lamp  which  shines  in  a  dai'k  place,  but  not  when  it  is  severed 
from  the  object  of  God.  Take  it  in  connection  with  its  due 
aim,  and  all  is  bright ;  but  connect  it  with  self,  and  you  turn 
the  very  prophecy  of  God  into  a  false  light  which  will  lead  you 
astray.  Let  me,  therefore,  settle  it  in  my  heart,  that  I  am  to 
trust  in  every  word  of  God ;  to  lay  up  and  consider  each  word 
and  thought,  confiding  in  the  Holy  Ghost  to  lead  me  into  all 
truth.  I  must  wait  upon  God  to  see  what  the  particular  design 
and  object  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  :  "  God  is  faithful  who  has 
called  us  unto  the  fellowship  of  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord." 
And  if  He  has  called  us  into  fellowship  with  His  Son,  what  will 
He  not  tell  us  about  His  Son  ?  The  Son  is  before  Him ;  and 
the  Lord  grant  that  He  may  be  before  us  ! 

As  the  disciples  came  down  from  the  mount,  the  Lord  charges 
them,  saying,  "  Tell  the  vision  to  no  man,  until  the  Son  of  man 
be  risen  again  from  the  dead."  (Yer.  9.)  It  was  no  longer  a 
question  of  testifying  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  This  was 
rejected.  The  vision  was  for  the  disciples,  for  strengthening 
their  faith  in  Jesus.  The  Lord  was  occupying  Himself  with  the 
souls  of  believers,  not  with  the  world.  There  is  always  a  period 
when  testimony  of  an  outward  kind  may  close.  You  may 
remember  the  time  when  Paul  separates  the  disciples  that  were 
at  Ephesus  from  the  multitude  and  leads  them  into  what  more 
particularly  concerned  them.     Now  for  the  present  time  till  the 


CHAPTER  xvir.  271 

Holy  Ghost  was  given,  till  the  Lord  was  risen  fi'om  the  dead, 
and  jiower  came  from  on  high  to  make  these  things  a  fresh 
starting-point,  it  was  of  no  use  to  speak  of  them  any  farther. 
"  His  disciples  asked  him,  saying,  Why  then  say  the  scribes 
that  Elias  must  first  come  ?  And  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto 
them,  Elias  truly  shall  first  come  and  restore  all  thino-s ;  but  I 
say  unto  you  that  Elias  is  come  already,  and  they  knew  him 
not,  but  have  done  unto  him  whatsoever  they  listed."  (Ver. 
10 — 12.)  He  shews  that  to  faith  Elias  was  come.  If  the  nation 
had  received  the  word,  Elias  Avould  have  come  in  person,  accord- 
ing to  tlie  prophecy  in  Malachi ;  but  the  nation  refusing  Jesus, 
the  disciples  were  instructed  to  regard  the  testimony  of  John 
the  Baptist  as  being  virtually  that  of  Elias.  This  accords  with 
the  statement  that  we  have  in  chapter  xi.,  where  it  Avas  said 
"  If  ye  loill  receive  it,  this  is  Elias  which  was  for  to  come  •" 
shewing  that  it  was  not  Elias  actually  and  literally,  but  the 
spirit  and  power  of  Elias  in  the  person  of  John  the  Baptist. 
The  Messiah  is  coming  in  glory  by  and  by,  and  Elias  is  comincr 
too.  But  the  Messiah  was  come  in  weakness  now,  and  humilia- 
tion ;  and  His  forerunner  had  been  put  to  death.  It  was  Elias 
who  was  come  in  the  person  of  the  suffering  John  the  Baptist 
and  his  testimony  was  despised.  The  disciples  are  let  into  the 
secret  of  this :  "  Elias  is  come  already,  and  they  have  done 
unto  him  whatsoever  they  listed.  Likewise  shall  also  the  Son 
of  man  suffer  of  them.  Then  the  disciples  understood  that  he 
spake  unto  them  of  John  the  Baptist."  (Ver.  12,  13.) 

But  now  another  thing  is  noticed.  The  w^orking  of  Satan  is 
in  no  wise  put  aside  by  the  effect  of  the  glory  of  Jesus  beino- 
revealed  upon  the  mountain.  At  the  foot  of  that  same  moun- 
tain where  the  Lord  displayed  the  glory  of  the  kingdom,  Satan 
displayed  his  power.  It  Avas  not  broken  yet.  The  kino-dom 
Avas  only  a  matter  of  testimony.  The  disciples  failed  to  draAV 
on  the  resources  of  Christ  to  put  doAvn  the  power  of  the  enemy. 
It  came  out  thus :  A  man  comes  to  the  Lord,  kneelino-  down 
to  Him  and  saying,  "  Lord,  have  mercy  on  my  son,  for  he  is 
lunatic  and  sore  vexed  ;  for  ofttimes  he  falleth  into  the  fire,  and 
oft  into  the  Avater."  (Ver.  15.)     The  most  opposite  trials  were 


272  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL    OF   1VLA.TTHEW. 

thus  brouglit  together.  "  And  I  brought  him  to  thy  disciples, 
and  they  could  not  cure  him.  Then  Jesus  answered  and  said, 
0  faithless  and  per^^erse  generation,  how  long  shall  I  be  with 
you  ?  how  long  shall  I  suffer  you  ?  bring  him  hither  to  me. 
And  Jesus  rebuked  the  devil,  and  he  departed  out  of  him.  And 
the  child  was  cured  from  that  very  hour."  (Ver.  16 — 18.)  And 
when  the  disciples  wanted  to  know  how^  it  was  that  they  could 
not  cast  him  out,  He  tells  them  "  Because  of  your  unbelief." 
It  is  a  wonderful  thing,  but  nothing  can  bo  more  sure,  than  that 
unbelief  is  at  the  root  of  the  difficulties  Satan  foists  in.  He 
has  lost  his  power  over  those  that  have  faith.  A  believer  could 
never,  if  walking  with  the  Lord,  fall  under  anything  of  the  sort. 
We  must  distinguish  a  slip  into  sin  from  falling  into  the  power 
of  Satan ;  which  latter  I  believe  to  be  his  influence  in  sapping 
all  confidence  in  the  goodness  of  God.  Hence,  when  a  man  is 
put  away  from  the  Church,  he  is  delivered  unto  Satan  for  the 
destruction  of  the  flesh,  though  the  aim  be  that  the  spirit  may 
be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord.  Whenever  a  person  is  really 
and  rightly  put  away  from  the  table  of  the  Lord  (until  there  is 
a  restoration  of  spirit,  which  can  only  be  when  the  snare  of 
Satan  is  defeated),  exceeding  power  is  acquired  over  the  soul. 
But  here  we  have  it  as  to  the  body.  This  child  is  described  as 
a  lunatic  and  sore  vexed.  But  unbelief  entirely  misses  the 
power  of  God,  which  ought  to  have  been  at  the  command  of  the 
disciples.  "If  ye  have  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard-seed,  ye 
shall  say  unto  this  mountain,  Remove  hence  to  yonder  place." 
(Ver.  20.)  The  very  least  working  of  faith  in  the  soul  is  so  far 
available  for  present  difficulties.  The  power  of  the  world,  the 
settled  power  of  anything  here,  which  is  what  the  mountain 
sets  forth,  would  completely  disappear  before  the  faith  of  the 
disciples.  "  Howbeit  this  kind  goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer 
and  fasting."  (Ver.  21.)  There  must  be  dependence  in  the 
conflict  with  the  power  of  evil.  It  was  Christ's  moral  glory ;  it 
is  one  secret  of  strength.  The  assumption  of  power  because  of 
association  with  Jesus  simply  fails  and  turns  to  shame.  There 
must  also  be  self-emptiness,  and  self-denial,  that  God  may  act. 
When  Jesus  descends,  all  Satan's  power  is  broken  and  vanishes. 


CHAPTER  XVII.  273 

Then  comes  another  declaration  of  His  sufferings,  but  I  will 
not  dwell  upon  this  now,  beyond  remarking  that,  as  in  chapter 
xvi.  21,  we  had  His  suffering  through  the  Jews  (elders,  chief 
priests,  and  scribes),  so  here  it  is  rather  Gentile  rejection  :  "  The 
Son  of  man  shall  be  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  mm."  This 
follows  the  manifestation  of  His  glory  as  Son  of  man,  while  the 
other  followed  the  confession  of  His  still  deeper  glory  as  Son 
of  God. 

Li  conclusion,  let  us  look  at  the  beautiful  tale  of  the  piece  of 
money  demanded  for  the  temple.     Peter  there  answers  quickly 
according  to  his  usual  warmth  of  character.     When  the  tax- 
gatherer  came,  who  was  connected  with  the  temple,  and  the 
usual  fee  was  demanded,  Peter  answered  very  hastily,  that  of 
course  his  Master  would  pay  the  tribute.     His  mind  went  not 
beyond  their  Jewish  position.     But  our  Lord  anticipates  Peter 
when  they  come  to  the  house,  and  says  to  him,  "  What  thinkest 
thou,  Simon  ?  of  whom  do  the  kings  of  the  earth  take  custom 
or  tribute,  of  their  own  children  or  of  strangers?"     It  was  not 
that  any  king  of  the  earth  was  demanding  tribute  now  of  them ; 
here  the  payment  was  for  Jehovah's  temple.      Peter  answers 
truly  enough,  Of  strangers.     Then  Jesus  says  to  him,  "  Then 
are  the  children  free."     Nothing  can  be  more  beautiful.     For 
the  truth  taught  us  here  is  that,  whatever  be  the  glory  of  the 
kingdom  which  is  coming,  whatever  the  power  of  Satan  which 
disappears  before  the  word  of  Jesus,  whatever  the  faith  which 
can  remove  mountains,  nothing  can  take  the  Son  of  God  out  of 
the  place  of  grace.     It  may  be  that  there  is  no  claim,  no  right  to 
ask — the  children  are  free.    It  would  be  an  absurdity  to  suppose 
that  among  the  kings  of  the  earth,  the  children  would  come 
under  the  same  circumstances  as  strangers  in  the  payment  of 
tribute.     They  are  exempt.     Jesus  takes  that  place,  and  most 
sweetly  too  He  puts  it  in  a  general  form.     The  principle  of  it 
would  be  true  of  others,  as  well  as  of  Himself;  the  children 
were  to  be  free.     He  puts  it  in  the  broadest  form,  in  order  to 
give  an  idea  of  the  place  of  blessing  into  which  the  children 
of  the  kingdom  would  be   brought — the   cliildren  of  Him  in 
T 


274       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OP  MATTHEW. 

whose  name  this  demand  might  be  made.  "  Jesns  saith  unto 
him,  Then  are  the  children  free.  Notwithstanding,  lest  we 
should  offend  them,  go  thou  to  the  sea,  and  cast  an  hook,  and 
take  up  the  fish  that  first  cometh  up  ;  and  when  thou  hast 
opened  his  mouth,  thou  shalt  find  a  piece  of  money  ;  that  take, 
and  give  unto  them  for  me  and  thee."  (Ver.  27.)  This  is  the 
great  wonder  of  Christ,  and  the  practical  wonder  of  Christianity, 
that  while  we  have  the  consciousness  of  glory,  and  ought  to 
pass  through  this  world  as  sons  of  glory  as  well  as  sons  of  God, 
for  this  very  reason  the  Lord  calls  us  to  be  the  humblest  and 
meekest,  taking  no  place  upon  the  earth:  I  do  not  mean 
claiming  no  place  for  Christ.  It  is  our  business  to  live  for 
nothing  but  for  Christ  and  the  truth ;  but  where  it  is  a  question 
of  ourselves,  to  be  willing  to  be  trampled  on  and  counted  as 
the  filth  of  the  world  and  the  offscouring  of  all  things.  Flesh 
and  blood  cannot  like  it ;  but  it  is  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
raising  us  above  nature.  It  is  not  hastiness  of  feeling ;  still  less 
is  it  persons  talking  about  their  rights  or  anything  of  the  kind. 
Here  we  have  the  consciousness  that  the  children  were  free — • 
fulness  of  privilege  their  portion,  but  at  the  same  time,  '^est 
we  should  offend  them,  go  thou  to  the  sea  ....  thou  shalt  find 
a  piece  of  money :  that  take,  and  give  unto  them  for  me  and 
thee."  This  is  the  place  of  a  Christian:  not  contending  for 
anything  that  pertains  to  ourselves,  yet  earnest  for  what 
pertains  to  God  ;  but  in  what  concerns  ourselves,  the  willingness 
to  suffer.  See  the  manner  in  which  our  Lord  provides  for  all 
demands  for  this  tribute.  He  directs  Peter  how  to  find  the 
piece  of  money,  and  says,  "  That  take,  and  give  unto  them  for 
me  and  thee."  What  a  joy  to  think  that  Jesus  associates  us 
with  Himself,  and  Himself  provides  for  everything  if  we  would 
only  let  Him  ;  that  Jesus,  who  proves  Himself  in  this  very  thing 
to  be  God  the  Creator,  displayed  divine  knowledge,  having  the 
command  even  of  the  restless  deep ;  and  as  such  working  this 
most  extraordinary  miracle  (making  a  fish  to  provide  the  money 
needed  to  pay  the  tax  of  the  temple),  should  thus  give  us  a 
place  with  Himself,  and  undertake  for  all  our  need.  Nothing 
can  more  beautifully  shew  us  how,  with  the  consciousness  of 


CHAPTER   XVIII.  275 

glory,  our  place  slioukl  ever  be  that  of  tlie  bending  and  lowliness 
of  Christ.  HoAv  blessedly  the  Son  stooped  to  be  the  servant, 
and  leads  the  children  into  the  same  path  of  grace  ! 

The  Lord  grant  us  to  laiow  how  to  reconcile  these  two  things. 
We  can  only  do  it  so  far  as  our  eye  is  upon  Christ, 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

In  chapter  xvi.  we  had  two  subjects  connected  with  the  revela- 
tion of  the  Lord's  person  to  Simon  Peter :  one  of  them  entirely 
new,  or  for  the  first  time  divulged ;  the  other  the  familiar  subject 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  We  shall  find  in  the  chapter  before 
us  that  these  two  topics  are  again  brought  together,  but  of 
course  not  confounded  or  identified.  We  are  called  to  see  the 
kingdom  and  the  Church  in  their  practical  bearing.  We  heard 
already  that  the  Lord  was  to  build  the  Church  upon  the  rock  of 
the  confession  of  His  person — "  Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my 
Church."  Afterwards,  He  promised  to  give  the  keys  of  the 
kincrdom  of  heaven  to  Peter.  Now  we  find,  and  I  think  con- 
nected  with  our  Lord's  shewing  the  practical  principle  which 
actuated  Himself,  the  consciousness  of  glory,  and  of  the  abso- 
lute command  of  all  that  He  had  made  (for  He  was  the  Lord 
of  heaven  and  earth,  if  He  paid  the  tribute  of  the  temple)  :  it 
was  not  a  question  of  rights.  Had  it  been  a  mere  matter  of 
right,  the  cliildren  were  free :  He  was  the  Lord  of  the  temple,  so 
that  there  was  no  claim  possible  on  that  ground.  But  "  lest  loe 
should  of  end  tliem,''''  &c. 

It  is  plain,  then,  that  grace  gives  up  its  rights ;  at  least, 
it  does  not  seek  to  claim  and  exercise  them  for,  the  present. 
And  in  the  very  consciousness  of  the  possession  of  all  glory,  it 
can  bow  in  this  evil  world.  But,  then,  carefully  observe  that 
what  it  teaches  the  soul  that  mulerstands  it  is  never  to  yield 


276  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

God's  rights,  but  our  own.  We  must  be  as  unbending  as  a  flint 
wherever  God  is  in  question.  Grace  never  surrenders  the  true 
holiness,  the  claim  or  will  of  God ;  in  fact,  it  is  the  only  thing 
that,  as  far  as  man  is  concerned,  strengthens  any  soul  to  value 
them,  or  assert  them,  or  walk  in  them  :  and  grace  does  this.  It 
is  God's  own  way  from  the  gospel  upwards.  ^'  What  the  law 
could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  tlie  flesh,  God,  sending 
his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,  con- 
demned sin  in  the  flesh."  The  practical  lesson  follows — "  that 
the  righteousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk 
not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit."  That  which  the  law 
claimed,  but  never  produced,  is  accomplished  by  the  power  of 
grace  acting  upon  the  heart  of  man.  Christ  does  not  so  much 
demand  as  give  the  power.  It  is  all  of  His  goodness.  And 
grace  consists  not  merely  in  forgiving  sins,  but  in  giving  power 
to  be  and  to  do  that  which  is  entirely  contrary  to  nature  and 
.above  it.  The  law  never  even  sought  this.  The  law  addressed 
itself  to  man  as  he  was,  supposed  him  to  be  a  sinner,  to  have  evil 
lusts  and  passions,  and  forbade  them ;  but  what  more  could  it 
do?  It  claimed  the  heart  of  man,  the  very  last  thing  he  would 
or  could  give.  He  might  give  his  body  to  be  burned,  and  all  his 
goods  to  feed  the  poor,  but  never  his  heart  to  love  God.  I  am 
speaking  now  of  man  as  man.  When  you  speak  of  a  Christian, 
what  makes  him  a  Christian  ?  Not  the  law,  which  never  made 
a  Christian  since  the  world  began,  nor  ever  was  intended  so  to 
do.  It  condemns  a  man,  because  he  is  a  sinner  and  does  not 
■like  to  obey  God :  but  it  does  not  even  hold  out  what  a  Christian 
ought  to  be.  It  never  proclaims  that  a  man  should  forego  his 
rights,  and  be  willing  to  suffer :  a  Christian  is  one  who  does  this, 
being  called  to  go  far  beyond  what  the  law  asked ;  and  if  he  does 
•not,  he  is  not  walking  as  a  Christian.  So  that,  in  both  ways, 
looking  at  the  law,  whether  as  dealing  with  an  ungodly  man,  it 
cannot  save  him ;  and  in  dealing  with  a  godly  man,  it  never  puts 
before  him  the  full  character  of  the  holiness  Christ  enjoins. 
What,  then,  is  it  God  has  given  the  Christian  ?  If  he  is  not 
under  the  law,  under  what  is  he  ?  He  is  under  Christ,  under 
grace ;  under  Christ  as  the  very  fulness  of  grace  and  truth. 


CHAPTER  XVIII.  277 

Tliis  is  what  comes  out  here.  And  it  is  a  very  beautiful 
feature  of  the  chapter  we  are  about  to  look  at  just  now..  We 
find  the  grace  of  the  gospel  is  the  pattern  of  the  spirit  that  is  to 
actuate  the  Church  and  its  members  in  everj'-thing  that  merely 
concerns  ourselves.  There  is  often  a  great  practical  difficulty 
that  people  do  not  understand.  While  you  are  called  upon  to 
walk  in  nothing  but  grace,  as  to"  your  OAvn  relations  Avith  God, 
it  is  a  misuse  of  grace  to  suppose  it  to  be  an  allowance  of  evil  or 
indifference  to  it.  Grace,  on  the  contrary,  while  it  meets  a  man 
in  his  ruin,  and  forgives  him,  spite  of  his  sins,  imparts  a  power 
that  he  had  not  before,  because  it  reveals  Christ,  strengthens  the 
soul,  gives  a  new  life,  and  acts  upon  that  life  so  as  to  carry  him 
forward  in  the  obedience  as  well  as  in  the  enjoyment  of  Christ. 
Our  Lord  shews  that  this  ought  to  govern  everything.  But, 
first,  we  have  the  spirit  that  befits  us..  "At  the  same  time 
came  the  disciples  unto  Jesus,  saying,  Who  is  the  greatest  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  ?"  This  furnishes  opportunity  for  our 
Lord  to  indicate  the  spirit  that  becomes  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
"  Jesus  called  a  little  child  unto  him,  and  set  him  in  the  midst 
of  them,  and  said.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  except  ye  be  con- 
verted, and  become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven."  (Ver.  3.)  Now  this  is  what  is  wrought 
in  a  soul  when  it  is  converted :  there  is  a  new  life  given,  even 
Christ.  Hence  there  is  much  more  than  entire  change.  That 
would  be  very  far  short  of  the  truth  as  to  a  Christian.  Of 
course  the  Christian  is  a  changed  man,  but  then  the  change  is 
because  of  something  still  deeper.  A  Christian  is  a  man  born 
again,  possessing  a  life  now  that  he  possessed  not  before.  I 
do  not  mean  merely  that  he  lives  after  a  new  sort,  but  that 
he  has  a  new  life  given  to  him  that  he  had  not  as  a  man. 
It  is  in  this  way  that  he  becomes  a  little  child.  Then  this 
new  life  has  to  be  cultivated  and  strengthened.  Our  natural 
life  as  men  grows  up,  or  it  may  be  checked  and  hindered  by 
various  circumstances.  So  it  is  with  the  spiritual  life,  though 
it  be  external. 

Om'  Lord  shews  here  what  is  the  characteristic  moral  feature 
that  suits  the  kingdom  of  heaven  j  and  this  in  opposition  to 


278        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

Jewish  thoughts  of  greatness.  They  were  still  thinking  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  according  to  certain  Old  Testament  deline- 
ations of  it.  When  David  came  to  the  kingdom,  his  followers 
that  had  been  faithful  before  were  exalted  according  to  their 
previous  worth.  You  have  the  three  great  chiefs,  and  then 
thirty  other  warriors,  and  so  on ;  all  of  them  having  their  place 
determined  by  the  way  in  which  they  had  carried  themselves  in 
the  day  of  trial.  The  disciples  came  with  similar  thoughts  to 
our  Lord,  full  of  what  they  had  done  and  suifered.  Peter  gets 
rebuked  for  this  very  thing  afterwards.  The  same  spirit  broke 
out  on  many  occasions,  even  at  the  last  supper.  Our  Lord  here 
uses  it  for  shewing  that  the  spirit  He  loves  in  His  discii^les  is  to 
be  nothing — to  be  without  a  thought  of  self,  in  a  spirit  of  lowli- 
ness, dependence,  and  trust,  that  does  not  think  about  itself. 
This  is  the  natural  feeling  of  a  little  one.  It  may  be  spoilt ; 
but  naturally  it  looks  up  to  its  parents,  and  thinks  there  is 
nobody  like  them ;  and  as  long  as  the  child  is  unsophisticated, 
so  it  goes  on.  Li  the  spiritual  child,  this  self-forgetfulness  is 
exactly  the  right  feeling.  The  little  child  is  the  standing  witness 
of  true  o-reatness  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Li  our  Lord 
Himself  this  w^as  shewn  fully.  The  wonder  was  that  He  who 
knew  everything,  who  had  all  power  and  might,  could  take  the 
place  of  a  little  child ;  and  yet  He  did.  And  indeed  you  may 
be  sure  that  the  lowliness  of  a  child  is  in  no  wise  incompatible 
with  a  person  being  deeply  taught  in  the  things  of  God.  It  is 
not  a  lowliness  that  shews  itself  in  phrases  or  forms,  but  the 
reality  of  meekness  that  confides  not  in  itself  but  in  the  living 
God ;  and  this  has  the  respect  which  God  Himself  loves  there 
should  be  toward  those  around  it.  Perfect  humility  was  just  as 
much  a  feature  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  as  the  consciousness  of  His 
glory.  The  two  things  may  well  go  together ;  and  you  cannot 
have  becoming  christian  humility  unless  there  be  the  conscious- 
ness of  glory.  To  behave  ourselves  lowlily,  as  children  of  God, 
is  the  beautiful  thing  the  Lord  is  here  putting  before  us. 

"  Whosoever  therefore  shall  humble  himself  as  this  little  child, 
the  same  is  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  (Ver.  4.)  It 
is  not  merely  the  becoming  like  little  children,  as  begotten  of 


CHAPTER   XVIII.  270 

Go<:I,  and  brought  into  the  family,  but  there  is  here  the  practical 
work  of  humbling  ourselves.  But  then  comes  another  thing  : 
not  only  the  humbling  ourselves,  but  how  we  feel  towards 
others:  ''Whosoever  shall  receive  one  such  little  child  in  my 
name,  receiveth  me."  (Ver  5.)  Whatever  may  be  the  lowliness 
of  the  Christian,  he  should  be  viewed  with  all  the  glory  of 
Christ,  Avhich  is  meant  by  receiving  him  in  the  name  of  Christ. 
It  is  a  person  that  does  not  defend  his  rights,  nor  assert  his 
glory  in  any  way,  but  is  Avilling  to  bend  and  make  way  for  any 
one ;  and  yet  conscious  of  the  glory  that  rests  upon  him.  There 
may  be  the  very  opposite  of  this — "  Whoso  shall  offend  one  of 
these  little  ones  which  believe  in  me."  What  is  meant  b}'  this? 
Anything  calculated  to  sliake  their  confidence  in  Christ,  to  put 
a  stumbling-block  in  their  way.  It  does  not  mean  anything  said 
in  faithful  love  to  their  soul.  People  may  take  offence  at  this ; 
but  it  is  not  what  is  spoken  of  here.  It  is  what  tends  to  shake  the 
confidence  of  the  little  one  in  God  Himself.  "  Whoso  shall 
oflTend  one  of  these  little  ones  that  believe  in  me,  it  were  better 
for  him  that  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck,  and  that 
he  were  drowned  in  the  depth  of  the  sea."  (Ver  6.)  These 
things  are  constantly  occurring  in  the  world.  Therefore,  says 
the  Lord,  '^  Woe  unto  the  world  because  of  offences ;  for  it  must 
needs  be  that  offences  come ;  but  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the 
offence  cometh."  (Ver.  7.)  What  is  to  be  done?  The  Lord 
shews  in  two  forms  the  way  to  guard  against  these  stumbling- 
blocks.  The  first  is  this — I  must  begin  with  myself.  This  is 
the  most  important  means  of  not  stumbling  another.  "  Where- 
fore, if  thy  hand  or  thy  foot  offend  thee,  cut  them  off  and  cast 
them  from  thee."  It  may  be  in  one's  service,  or  in  one's  walk ; 
but  if  hand  or  foot  become  the  occasion  of  stumbling  (something 
in  which  the  enemy  takes  advantage  against  God),  deal  resolutely 
and  at  once  with  the  evil  thing.  "It  is  better  for  thee  to  enter 
into  life  halt  or  maimed,  rather  than  having  two  hands  or  two 
feet  to  be  cast  into  everlasting  fire."  (Ver.  8.) 

The  Lord  always  puts  the  full  result  of  evil  before  the  souL 
In  speaking  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  He  takes  into  account 
that  there  may  be  persons  in  it  false  as  well  as  true.     He  there- 


280       LECTUEES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

fore  speaks  generally.  He  does  not  pronounce  upon  them  and 
say,  If  you  really  belong  to  the  kingdom,  you  have  nothing  to 
fear.  But  He  looks  at  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  and  there  are 
persons  who  enter  that  kingdom,  some  of  whom  may  be  truly 
bom  of  God,  others  not.  The  Lord  solemnly  puts  before  them, 
that  such  as  are  indifferent  about  sin  are  not  bom  of  God  at  all. 
It  is  impossible  for  a  soul  to  be  regenerate,  and  habitually  care- 
less about  that  which  grieves  the  Holy  Ghost.  Therefore  He 
puts  before  them  the  certainty  of  such  being  cast  into  ever- 
lasting fire.  Of  no  one  who  is  bom  of  God  could  this  be 
said.  But  as  there  may  be  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  a  false 
profession  as  well  as  a  true,  so  a  grave  thing  for  the  believer  to 
look  well  to  is,  that  he  do  not  allow  sin  in  any  of  his  members. 
"  And  if  thine  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out,  and  cast  it  from 
thee  :  it  is  better  for  thee  to  enter  into  life  with  one  eye,  rather 
than  having  two  eyes  to  be  cast  into  hell -fire."  (Ver.  9.)  It 
may  cost  ever  so  much,  but  God  is  not  a  hard  master ;  none  is 
so  tender  and  loving.  And  yet  it  is  God  giving  us  His  full 
mind  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  shews  us  that  this  is  the  only  way 
of  dealing  with  that  which  may  become  an  occasion  of  sin. 
(Compare  Eph.  v.  5,  6.) 

The  first  great  source  of  offence  to  others,  and  which  must  be 
first  removed,  is  that  which  is  a  stumbling-block  to  our  own 
souls.  We  must  begin  with  self-judgment.  But  there  is  also 
the  despising  the  little  ones  that  belong  to  God.  ''  Take  heed,'* 
therefore  our  Lord  says,  "  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these  little 
ones  :  for  I  say  unto  you  that  in  heaven  their  angels  do  always 
behold  the  face  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  For  the  Son 
of  man  is  come  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  (Ver.  10,  11.)  A 
beautiful  word ;  specially  as  here  it  is  evidently  so  broadly  stated 
by  our  Lord,  as  to  take  in  a  real  literal  little  child  as  well  as 
the  little  ones  that  believe  in  Him.  I  believe  this  chapter  was 
meant  to  give  encouragement  touching  little  ones.  The  plea  on 
which  our  Lord  goes  is,  not  that  they  were  innocent,  which  is 
the  way  in  which  they  are  so  often  spoken  of  among  men,  but 
that  the  Son  of  man  came  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  It  sup- 
poses the  taint  of  sin,  but  that  the  Son  of  man  came  to  meet  it  t 


CHAPTER  XVIII.  281 

SO  that  we  are  entitled  to  have  confidence  in  the  Lord,  not  merely 
for  our  own  souls,  but  for  the  little  ones  too. 

But  our  Lord  goes  farther.  "  How  think  ye  ?  If  a  man  have 
an  hundred  sheep,  and  one  of  them  be  gone  astray,  doth  he  not 
leave  the  ninety  and  nine,  and  goeth  into  the  mountains,  and 
seeketh  that  which  is  gone  astray  ?  and  if  so  be  that  he  find  it, 
verily  I  say  unto  you,  He  rejoiceth  more  of  that  sheep  than  of 
the  ninety  and  nine  which  went  not  astray.  Even  so  it  is  not 
the  will  of  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven,  that  one  of  these 
little  ones  should  perish."  (Ver.  12 — 14.)  No  doubt  we  can 
embrace  all  those  that  are  saved  on  the  same  principle,  and  St. 
Luke  does  so  in  another  chapter.  The  Gospel  of  Luke  shews  us 
(chap.  XV.)  this  very  parable  applied  to  any  sinner.  But  here 
the  Lord  is  taking  it  up  in  connection  with  the  foregoing, 
namely,  right  feelings  for  one  who  belongs  to  the  kingdom 
of  heaA-en.  Starting  from  a  little  child,  whom  He  sets  in  the 
midst.  He  carries  the  thought  of  the  little  one  all  through  this 
part  of  His  discourse.  And  now  He  closes  with  the  proof,  in 
His  own  mission,  of  the  interest  which  the  Father  takes  in  these 
little  ones. 

But  more  than  this.  He  now  applies  it  to  our  practical  con- 
duct. Supposing  your  brother  does  you  wrong,  something  that 
may  be  very  hard  to  bear,  perhaps ;  an  evil  word,  or  an  unkind 
action  done  against  you — something  that  you  feel  deeply  as  a 
real  personal  trespass  against  you  :  the  man  has  done  it  delibe- 
rately, and  of  course  it  is  a  great  sin.  Nobody  knows  it  but 
himself  and  you.  What  are  you  to  do  ?  At  once  this  great 
principle  is  applied.  When  you  were  ruined  and  far  from  God, 
what  met  your  case  ?  Did  God  wait  till  you  put  away  your  sin  ? 
It  never  would  have  been  done  at  all.  God  sent  His  own  Son 
to  seek  you,  to  save  you.  "  The  Son  of  man  came  to  seek  and 
to  save  that  which  was  lost."  This  is  the  principle  for  you  to 
act  upon.  It  is  not  merely  that  this  is  the  way  in  which  God 
acted.  You  belong  to  God;  you  are  a  child  of  God.  Your 
brother  has  wronged  you  :  go  you  to  him,  and  seek  to  set  him 
right.  It  is  the  activity  of  love  which  the  Lord  Jesus  now 
presses  upon  His  disciples.     They  are  to  seek  the  deliverance,  in 


282  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   IIATTHEW. 

the  power  of  divine  love,  of  those  who  have  wandered  from  God. 
It  is  not  the  flesh  feeling  its  wrong,  and  resenting  what  has  been 
done  against  itself.  The  law  would  enable  even  a  Jew  to  judge 
this.  But  now  it  is  grace,  and  grace  does  not  shroud  itself  up 
in  its  own  dignity,  and  wait  till  the  offender  has  come  and 
humbled  himself  and  owned  the  wrono;.  The  law  executes 
punishment  upon  the  guilty.  If  I  have  to  do  with  the  law  at 
all,  I  am  a  lost  man.  But  now  another  has  come  in — not  the 
law,  but  the  Son  of  man,  the  Saviour  of  the  lost.  Nor  is  this 
all.  I  want  you.  He  says,  to  be  walking  after  the  same  prin- 
ciple, to  be  vessels  of  the  same  love.  As  you  have  received 
your  life  from  me,  so  I  want  your  walk  to  be  characterized  by 
grace,  going  out  after  that  which  has  sinned  against  God — grace  to 
seek  the  man  that  has  gone  astray.  This  is  a  great  difficulty, 
unless  the  soul  is  fresh  in  the  love  of  God,  and  enjoying  what 
God  is  for  him.  How  does  God  feel  about  the  child  that  has 
done  wrong  ?  It  is  the  loving  desire  to  have  him  right.  When 
the  child  is  near  enough  to  know  the  Father's  heart,  he  goes  out 
to  do  the  Father's  will.  It  may  have  been  a  wrong  done  against 
him,  but  he  does  not  think  about  that.  It  is  his  brother  who 
has  slipped  into  evil,  and  he  sorrows  over  him.  It  is  a  real 
desire  of  heart  to  have  the  person  righted  who  had  gone  astray ; 
and  this,  too,  not  in  order  to  vindicate  self,  but  that  his  soul 
may  be  restored  to  the  Lord. 

"  Moreover"  (says  the  Saviour)  ''if  thy  brother  shall  trespass 
against  thee,  go  and  tell  him  his  fault  between  thee  and  him 
alone."  (Ver.  15.)  He  could  not  bear  that  another  should  know  it. 
It  is  not  here  the  case  of  a  sin  known  to  a  great  many,  but  some 
personal  trespass  only  known  to  you  two.  Go,  then,  to  him, 
and  tell  him  his  fault  between  you  and  him  alone  : — a  thing,  no 
doubt,  very  contrary  to  the  flesh,  which  would  ever  demand  that 
the  offender  should  first  come  and  humble  himself,  or  which  would 
act  on  the  worldly  ground  of  not  troubling  itself  about  the  man, 
but  let  him  go  from  bad  to  worse.  Love  seeks  the  good  even 
of  the  one  that  has  done  ever  so  wrong.  "  If  he  shall  hear  thee, 
thou  hast  gained  thy  brother."  Love  is  bent  on  gaining  the 
brother.      It   is  always  so  to  him  that  understands  and  feels 


CHAPTER  xvnr.  283 

^vitl^  Christ.  It  is  not  the  offender,  but  thj  brother  that  is  the 
thought  before  the  heart.     "  Thou  hast  gained  thy  brother." 

"  But  if  he  -will  not  hear  thee,  then  take  with  thee  one  or  two 
more,  that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses  every  word 
may  be  established."  (Ver.  16.)  Is  it  possible  for  him  to  resist 
one  or  two  who  come  to  him,  witnesses  of  the  love  of  Christ? 
He  has  refused  Christ  pleading  by  one ;  can  he  refuse  Christ 
now  that  He  pleads  by  more?  He  is  sought  again.  Will 
he  refuse?  It  maybe,  alas!  that  he  will.  "And  if  he  shall 
neglect  to  hear  them,  tell  it  unto  the  church."  The  church 
means  the  assembly  of  God  in  the  place  to  which  these  all 
belonged.  "If  he  shall  neglect  to  hear  them,  tell  it  unto  the 
church  ;  but  if  he  neglect  to  hear  the  church,  let  him  be  unto 
thee  as  an  heathea  man  and  a  publican."  (Ver.  17.)  It  does 
not  mean  what  people  call  "a"  church  now ;  there  is  no  such 
thing  in  the  word  of  God.  Scripture  never  knows  anything  but 
God's  Church ;  the  churches  scripture  recognizes  were  simply 
His  assembly  in  each  city  or  analogous  place.  And  therefore 
all  the  terms  of  men  that  have  been  brought  in  through 
dej^arture  from  His  mind  are  entirely  unknown  in  scripture. 
"A  church,"  separate  from  others  and  independent,  has  no  war- 
rant except  in  the  will  of  man.  Every  christian  person  is  bound 
not  only  to  have  done  with  these  names,  but  with  the  thing 
itself,  because  God  is  looking  for  reality,  and  we  are  bound  to 
act  upon  the  truth  of  God.  His  will  is  that  we  should  not 
belong  to  a  church  of  the  world  or  a  voluntary  association  of  our 
own.  Nothing  is  more  simple  than  for  a  Christian  to  act  as  a 
Christian.  It  is  only  pleasing  the  flesh  whenever  w^e  depart  out 
of  the  path  of  God.  It  is  evident  that  this  passage  contemplates 
a  known  assembly  to  which  these  persons  belonged.  It  was 
tlK3  Church — the  only  assembly  Avliich  we  are  called  upon  to 
acknowdedge  in  the  place  we  live  in. 

The  assembly,  then,  are  told  of  the  guilty  person's  fault. 
Tlie  thing  has  been  solemnly  investigated  and  jDressed  home ; 
and  the  church  now  pronounces  upon  it.  The  church  warns 
and  entreats  this  man,  but  lie  refuses  to  hear ;  and  the  conse- 
quence is — "  Let  him  be  unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man  and  a 


284  LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW, 

publican."  A  most  solemn  issue  I  A  man  who  is  called  a 
brother  in  the  verse  before  is  to  me  as  an  heathen  man  and  a  pub- 
lican now.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  man  was  a  drunkard 
or  a  thief;  but  what  he  has  shewn  is  a  hardness  of  self-will  and 
:i  spirit  of  self-justification.  It  might  have  arisen  out  of  small 
circumstances ;  but  this  unbending  pride  about  himself  and  his 
own  fault  is  that  on  which  God  may  pronounce  him  to  be 
regarded  as  an  heathen  man  and  a  publican  :  that  is,  you  must 
no  more  acknowledge  him  in  his  impenitent  state  as  a  Christian, 
And  yet  it  may  sprihg  mainly  from  the  spirit  of  justifying 
ourselves  when  we  are  wrong.  In  the  case  of  drunkenness,  or 
anything  of  that  kind,  there  would  be  no  necessity  for  adopting 
any  such  mode  of  dealing  with  it.  If  there  were  not  the  least 
question  on  the  mind  of  any  one  as  to  the  sin,  the  duty  of  the 
church  is  clear :  the  person  is  put  away.  He  might  not  have 
been  seen  by  a  number  of  pexsons ;  there  is  no  absolute  need 
for  this.  Nor  would  there  be  reason  in  such  a  case  for  going 
one  at  a  time,  and  then  one  or  two  more.  This  is  only  where  it  is 
nnknown  to  any  one  but  the  individual  against  whom  the  tres- 
pass has  been  done.  But  the  Lord  shews  here  how,  out  of  a 
little  spark,  a  great  fire  may  be  kindled.  The  end  of  this 
personal  trespass  might  be  that  the  church  are  convinced  the 
man  displays  not  a  trace  of  christian  life  in  his  ways.  ''  Let 
him  be  unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man  and  a  publican."  "  Yerily 
I  say  unto  you,  Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on  earth  shall  be 
bound  in  heaven."  It  is  not  a  mere  question  of  agreement. 
What  gives  validity  is  that  it  is  done  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
(See  1  Cor.  v.  4.)  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on  the  earth  shall 
be  bound  in  heaven,  and  whatsoever  ye  shall  loose  on  the  earth 
shall  be  loosed  in  heaven.  Again  I  say  to  you,  that  if  two  of  you 
shall  agree  on  the  earth  as  touching  anything  that  they  shall 
ask,  it  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 
For  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  unto  my  name, 
there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them."  Whether  for  discipline  or 
for  making  requests  of  God,  the  Lord  lays  down  this  great  prin- 
ciple, that  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  unto  His 
namcj   He  is  in  the  midst  of  them.     Nothing  could  be  more 


CHAPTER  XVIIU  285 

sweet  and  encouraging.  And  I  am  persuaded  that  the  Lord 
had  in  view  the  present  ruin  of  the  Church,  when  there 
might  be  ever  so  few  gathered  aright  No  company  of  saints 
is  thus  gathered,  unless  it  assemble  in  obedience  to  the  word 
of  God  and  nothing  else — founded  and  carried  out  according 
to  the  will  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Any  sect  may  contain 
good  people  and  have  good  preaching ;  but  these  things  do  not 
make  it  to  be  the  Church.  Unless  it  be  upon  the  foundations 
of  the  word  of  God,  subject  to  the  Lord  by  the  energy  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  it  is  not  such. 

But  a  person  may  ask.  Do  you  mean  to  say  that  any  are  upon 
that  ground?  I  can  only  say  that  the  Christians  who  fall  back 
on  scrij^ture,  owning  the  faithful  presence  of  the  Spirit  in  the 
assembly  on  earth,  are  taking  an  immense  deal  of  trouble  for  a 
delusion  if  they  are  not.  They  are  very  foolish  in  acting  as  they 
do,  imless  they  are  sure  that  it  is  according  to  the  mind  of  God. 
Ought  you  to  have  more  doubt  how  Christians  should  meet  to- 
gether for  worship  or  mutual  edification,  and  that  you  are  doing 
so,  than  about  any  other  directions  in  the  word  of  God  ?  Not  being 
restrained  by  rules,  there  is  nothing  for  it  but  the  word  of  God; 
and  there  is  the  most  entire  liberty  to  carry  out  that  word. 
But  while  one  speaks  thus  confidently,  on  the  other  hand,  ought 
we  not  to  take  a  very  low  place  ?  When  members  of  Christ's 
body  are  scattered  here  and  there,  humiliation  alone  becomes 
us,  and  this  not  because  of  others'  ways  only  but  our  own. 
For  what  have  we  been  to  Christ  and  the  Church  ?  It  would  be 
very  wrong  to  call  ourselves  the  church ;  but  if  we  were  only 
two  or  three  meeting  in  the  name  of  Christ,  we  should  have  the 
same  sanction  and  blessing  as  if  we  had  the  twelve  apostles 
with  us.  If  through  unbelief  and  weakness  the  church  at  larsre 
were  broken  up  and  scattered,  and  if,  in  the  midst  of  all  this 
confusion,  there  were  only  two  or  three  who  had  faith  to  act 
upon  the  Lord's  will,  for  them  the  word  would  still  be  true, 
"  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  unto  my  name,  there 
am  I  in  the  midst  of  them."  The  whole  thing  is  wound  up 
with  this  grand  truth.  It  is  the  presence  of  Christ  that  gives 
sanction  to  their  acts.     If  the  church  has  fallen  into  ruin,  the 


286  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

business  of  those  who  feel  this  is  to  depart  from  known  evil : 
"  cease  to  do  evil ;  learn  to  do  well."  We  alwaj^s  come  to  first 
principles  when  things  get  astray.  This  is  the  obligation  -of  a 
christian  man.  He  is  never  to  go  on  doing  what  he  knows  is 
wrong.  Where  a  man  makes  up  his  mind  to  do  even  a  little  wrong, 
he  is  an  Antinomian.  If  people  think  they  may  sin  in  the  worship 
of  God,  they  deceive  themselves.     "  God  is  not  mocked." 

There  is  one  other  thing  that  I  must  close  with.  Peter  says 
to  our  Lord,  "  How  oft  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me,  and  I 
forgive  him  ?  till  seven  times  ?"  We  had  instruction  how  we 
were  to  act  in  the  case  of  a  personal  trespass.  But  Peter  raises 
another  question.  Supposing  my  brother  sins  against  me  over 
and  over,  how  often  am  I  to  forgive  him  ?  The  answer  is,  "I 
say  not  unto  thee.  Until  seven  times,  but  until  seventy  times 
seven."  In  the  kingdom  of  heaven — not  under  the  law  but 
under  the  rule  of  the  rejected  Christ — forgiveness  is  unlimited. 
How  wonderful !  to  think  that  holiness,  the  deeper  holiness  that 
Christianity  reveals,  is  at  the  same  time  that  which  feels  with 
the  deepest  possible  love,  and  which  goes  out  with  it  to  others. 
So  we  find  here.  ^'  I  say  not  unto  thee.  Until  seven  times," 
which  was  Peter's  idea  of  the  largest  grace,  "  but  until  seventy 
times  seven."  Our  Lord  insists  that  there  really  was  no  end  to 
forgiveness.  It  is  always  to  be  flowing  out.  But  remember 
this,  it  is  a  sin  against  you :  it  is  a  person  that  does  wrong  to 
you.  We  are  not  to  forgive  a  wrong  done  to  the  Lord  till  the 
Lord  has  forgiven  it ;  and  the  Lord  only  forgives  upon  con- 
fession of  sin.  I  am  not  now  speaking  of  the  grace  that 
meets  a  man  in  his  unconverted  state :  the  case  here  is  that  of  a 
brother.  When  a  man  is  converted,  he  has  to  confess  his  sins 
day  by  day.  It  shews  a  wretched  state  of  soul  if  a  person 
breaks  down  in  his  daily  path  without  confession  to  God.  But 
what  we  learn  here  is  that,  if  it  is  some  sin  done  against  you 
personally,  and  it  is  a  question  how  often  you  are  to  forgive, 
the  answer  is,  "  Till  seventy  times  seven."  God  will  never  be 
outdone  in  His  perfect  love ;  but  even  a  man  upon  earth  is 
called  to  forgive  after  this  truly  divine  pattern. 


CHAPTEK   XVIII.  287 

^'  Therefore  is  the  kmgdom  of  heaven  likened  mito  a  certain 
king  which  would  take  account  of  his  servants."  (Ver.  23.) 
And  then  we  have  two  servants  brouo;ht  before  us.  The  kine 
forgives  one  of  them  Avho  had  been  very  guilty  (who  owed  him 
ten  thousand  talents  :  practically,  *a  debt  that  never  could  be 
paid  by  a  servant).  The  king  forgives  him.  The  servant  goes 
out  from  the  presence  of  the  king  after  the  debt  was  remitted, 
and  he  meets  a  fellow-servant  who  owes  him  a  hundred  pence — 
a  small  sum  indeed  in  comparison  of  that  which  had  just  been 
forgiven  to  himself.  Yet  he  seizes  his  fellow-servant  by  the 
throat,  saying,  "  Pay  me  that  thou  owest."  But  the  king  hears 
of  it  through  the  sorrow  of  the  fellow-servants,  and  summons 
the  guilty  man  before  him.  What  is  taught  by  this  ?  It  is  a 
comparison  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven :  and  these  comparisons 
refer  to  a  state  of  things  established  here  below  by  God's  will. 
While  we  may  take  the  principle  to  ourselves,  much  more  is 
taught  than  this.  Taken  in  the  large  way,  the  servant  that 
owes  the  ten  thousand  talents  represents  the  Jew,  who  was  pecu- 
liarly favoured  of  God,  and  yet  had  contracted  the  enormous 
debt  that  he  never  could  pay.  When  the  Jews  had  completed 
this  debt  by  the  death  of  the  Messiah,  a  message  of  forgiveness 
was  sent  them — "  Eepent  ye  therefore,  and  be  converted,  that 
your  sins  may  be  blotted  out."  The  Holy  Ghost  presses  on 
them  a  message  of  repentance.  They  had  only  to  do  so,  and 
their  sins  would  be  blotted  out :  God  would  send  the  Messiah 
again,  and  bring  in  the  times  of  refreshing.  The  Holy  Ghost 
answered  the  prayer  of  our  Lord  upon  the  cross,  and  Peter 
was  entitled  to  tell  them  that  they  were  forgiven.  "  I  wot, 
brethren,"  he  says  to  them,  "  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  it^ 
as  did  also  your  rulers ;"  even  as  the  Lord  had  said,  "  Father, 
forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  That  does  not 
mean  a  personal  forgiveness,  but  a  national  one,  which  required 
their  faith  and  repentance.  Thus  the  servant  had  heard  the 
sound  of  forgiveness  to  himself,  but  he  had  no  understanding 
of  it.  He  goes  out  and  casts  a  fellow-servant  into  prison  for 
what  was  comparatively  a  very  small  debt.  This  is  the  way  in 
which  the  Jews  acted  towards  the  Gentiles.     After  rejecting  the 


288  LECTIJEES  ON  THE  GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 

message  of  mercy  for  themselves,  the  Jews  followed  the  Apostle 
Paul  wherever  he  went,  in  order  to  stir  up  hatred  against  him. 
When  the  apostle  told  them  he  was  sent  to  the  Gentiles,  the 
word  was,  "  Away  with  such  a  fellow  from  the  earth."  That 
answers  to  the  catching  of  the  fellow-servant  by  the  throat.  It 
was  the  hatred  of  the  Jew  toward  the  Gentile.  And  thus  all 
the  debt  that  God  had  forgiven  them  became  fastened  upon 
them.  The  lord  says  to  the  servant,  "  0  thou  wicked  servant, 
I  forgave  thee  all  that  debt  because  thou  desiredst  me  :  shouldest 
not  thou  also  have  had  compassion  on  thy  fellow-servant,  even 
as  I  had  pity  on  thee  ?  And  his  lord  was  wroth,  and  delivered 
him  to  the  tormentors,  till  he  should  pay  all  that  was  due  unto 
him."  (Ver.  32—34.) 

I  do  not  doubt  that  you  may  apply  this  to  an  individual 
who  has  heard  the  gospel,  and  who  does  not  act  according  to  it. 
The  principle  of  it  is  true  now  of  any  mere  professor  of  the 
gospel  in  these  days,  who  acts  like  a  worldly  man.  But  taking 
it  on  the  broader  historical  scale,  you  must  bring  in  the  dealings 
of  God  with  the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles.  The  Gentile  had  no 
doubt  treated  the  Jew  badly :  but  what  was  all  his  debt  com- 
pared with  that  which  God  had  forgiven  the  Jew  ?  The  Jew 
therefore  is  cast  into  prison ;  and  he  will  not  leave  it  until  he 
has  paid  all  that  was  due.  The  day  is  coming  when  the  Lord 
will  say  that  Jerusalem  has  received  of  His  hand  double  for  all 
her  sins.  Jehovah  in  His  grace  will  count  that  Jerusalem  has 
suffered  too  much.  He  will  apply  to  them  the  blood  of  Christ, 
which  can  outweigh  the  ten  thousand  talents  and  more.  But 
the  unbelieving  generation  of  Israel  are  cast  into  prison,  and 
will  never  come  out ;  the  remnant  will,  by  the  grace  of  God ; 
and  the  Lord  will  make  of  the  remnant  a  strong  nation. 

Meanwhile,  for  us  the  great  principle  of  forgiveness  is  most 
blessed,  and  a  thing  that  we  have  need  to  remember.  "We  have 
specially  to  remind  our  souls  in  the  case  of  anything  that  is 
against  ourselves.  May  we  at  once  look  steadfastly  at  what  om- 
God  and  Father  has  done  for  us !  If  we  can,  in  the  presence 
of  such  grace,  be  hard  for  some  trifling  thing  done  against 
ourselves,  let  us  bethink  ourselves  how  the  Lord  judges  here. 


CHAPTER  XIX.  289 

Sometimes  a  soul  goes  on  well  for  a  time.  But  if  there  is  not 
life  from  God,  a  slight  circumstance  happens  which  brings  out 
a  man's  true  state ;  and  then  you  have  such  a  turning  back 
from  Christ  as  proves  that  there  is  nothing  of  grace  in  the  man's 
soul.  For  where  there  is  life  and  a  heart  for  Christ,  taking  the 
place  of  self,  the  warning  of  God  is  heeded. 

May  the  Lord  grant  that  His  words  may  not  be  in  vain  for 
us,  that  we  may  seek  to  remember  the  exceeding  grace  that  has 
abounded  towards  our  souls,  and  what  God  looks  for  from  us ! 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

Thus  far  the  Holy  Ghost  was  pleased  to  give  us  the  Lord's 
announcement  of  the  Church  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  We 
have  seen  them,  not  only  as  distinct  though  connected  objects  in 
chapter  xvi.,  but  also  (in  chap,  xviii.)  the  practical  ways  which 
suit  them.  It  was  necessary  also  to  bring  out  the  relation  of 
the  kingdom  to  God's  order  in  nature.  There  are  certain 
relationships  which  God  has  established  entirely  apart  from  the 
new  creation,  some  of  which  may  be  carried  on  when  a  soul 
enters  the  new  creation.  The  believer  is  still  a  man  here  below, 
although  as  a  Christian  he  is  called  not  to  act  on  human  prin- 
ciples, but  to  do  the  will  of  God !  It  was  therefore  of  much 
importance  to  know  how  the  new  things  affect  the  recognition 
of  that  which  had  been  already  set  up  in  nature.  Accordingly, 
this  chapter  largely  reveals  the  mutual  relations  of  what  is  of 
grace  and  what  is  in  nature.  I  am  of  course  using  the  word 
"  nature"  now,  not  in  the  sense  of  "  the  flesh,"  i.e.,  as  expres- 
sive of  the  principle  and  exercise  of  self-will,  but  of  that  which 
God  ordained  in  this  world  before  sin  came  in — what  God, 
consequently,  would  have  to  survive  all  the  ruin  here  below. 
Now  the  man  that  understands  grace  alone  can  enter  into  and 
u 


290  LECTURES   ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF   MATTHEW. 

thoroughly  recognize  the  outward  natural  order  in  the  world. 
Grace  never  leads  a  person  to  slight  anything  God  has  introduced, 
it  matters  not  what  it  might  be.  Take  for  example  the  law,  and 
what  a  profound  error  to  suppose  that  the  gospel  weakens  or 
annuls  God's  law  !  On  the  contrary,  the  Apostle  Paul  teaches 
in  Romans  iii.,  "  By  faith  we  establish  the  law."  If  I  am  on 
legal  ground,  there  is  terror,  anxiety,  darkness ;  the  dread  of 
meeting  God  as  a  judge  :  the  law  keeps  up  all  these  thoughts  as 
long  as  I  am  there ;  and  very  properly.  If  I,  a  sinner,  am 
under  it,  I  reap  the  bitter  consequences  in  a  sense  of  condemna- 
tion and  ffuilt.  I  shall  not  know  what  confidence  in  God's  love 
to  my  soul  is.  I  may  have  hopes  betimes,  very  much  more 
frequently  fears ;  perhaps  a  sort  of  excitement  of  joy  overcoming 
one  for  awhile ;  but  this  soon  passes  away,  and  the  reaction  is 
greater  than  before.  Hence  it  is  only  the  man  who  knows  that 
he  is  saved  by  grace,  and  who  is  entirely  lifted  above  the  region 
to  which  the  law  applies  its  deathstroke,  who  can  gravely,  yet 
in  peace,  look  at  all,  because  he  is  in  Christ  before  God  and 
above  all  condemnation.  A  believer  can  do  it,  just  because  he 
is  not  under  law ;  if  he  were,  "  As  many  as  are  of  the  works  of 
the  law  are  under  the  curse."  That  is,  if  he  has  to  do  with  the 
law  himself  for  his  own  walk  and  communion,  and  not  only  his 
standing  before  God,  he  must  be  miserable,  the  more  so  in 
proportion  as  he  is  honest  in  referring  the  law  to  his  own  case. 
The  attempt  to  be  happy  under  the  law  is  a  most  painful  struggle, 
with  the  danger  too  of  deceiving  ourselves  and  others.  From 
all  this  grace  delivers  the  soul,  setting  it  on  a  new  ground,  out- 
side the  spirit  of  the  world,  the  ways  of  men,  and  nature  too 
even  in  its  best  estate.  But  it  is  not  at  all  as  if  the  believer  did 
not  honour  and  admire  all  God  has  laid  down.  He  can  look 
with  delight  and  see  the  wisdom  and  holiness  of  God  that  shine 
in  His  every  arrangement  and  all  His  moral  government.  Still 
it  is  very  plain  the  law  is  a  testimony  to  what  God  forbids  or 
wishes,  but  not  the  revelation  of  what  He  is.  This  you  cannot 
find  outside  Christ.  However  the  law  holds  up  the  standard  of 
that  which  God  demands  of  man.  It  shews  His  intolerance  of 
evil,  and  the  necessary  judgment  of  those  who  practise  it.     But 


CHAPTEK  XIX.  291 

we  slioukl  be  helplessly  and  hopelessly  miserable  if  this  were  all ; 
and  it  is  only  when  the  soul  has  laid  hold  of  the  grace  of  God 
that  it  can  take  pleasure  in  His  ways. 

This  chapter,  then,  surveys  the  relationships  of  nature  in  the 
light  of  the  kingdom.  The  first  and  most  fundamental  is  that 
of  marriage.  ''The  Pharisees  also  came  mito  him,  tempting 
him,  and  saying  unto  him,  Is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to  put  away  his 
wife  for  every  cause?"  (Ver.  3.)  There  you  have  the  conduct 
of  such  as  are  on  legal  ground.  There  is  really  no  respect  for 
God,  no  genuine  regard  for  His  law.  The  Lord  at  once  vindi- 
cates from  the  word  the  institution  and  the  sanctity  of  marriage : 
"  Have  ve  not  read  that  he  which  made  them  at  the  besinnins: 
made  them  male  and  female  ?"  (Ver.  4.)  That  is,  He  shews- 
that  it  is  not  a  mere  question  of  what  came  in  by  the  law,  but 
He  goes  to  the  sources.  God  had  first  established  it ;  and,  far^^ 
from  dissolving  the  tie  as  men  list.  He  made  a  single  pair,  and 
therefore  only  to  be  the  one  for  the  other.  All  other  relation- 
ships were  expressly  to  be  light  in  comparison  of  this  closest  tie. 
— even  union.  "  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  father  and 
mother,  and  shall  cleave  unto  his  wife  ;  and  they  twain  shall  be 
one  fieslu''  (Ver.  5.)  Next  to-  the  relationship  of  marriage  is 
the  tie  of  a  child  to  its  parents.  Still  it  is  said,  ''  For  this  causa 
shall  a  man  leave  father  and  mother,  and  shall  cleave  unto 
his  wife."  It  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of 
marriage  as  a  natural  institution.  Who  would  talk  of  a  child 
leaving  his  father  and  mother  for  any  cause  ?  The  Pharisees 
even  would  not  think  of  such  a  thing.  The  conclusion  is 
irresistible:  "  What  therefore  God  hath  joined  together,  let  not 
man  put  asunder."  (Ver.  6.)  They  were  ready  with  an  answer, 
of  course,  even  to  our,  Lord  Himself:  "Why  did  Moses  then 
command  to  give  a  writing  of ,  divorcement,  and  to  put  her 
away?"  (Ver.  7.)  There  was  really  no  such  command:  a 
divorce  was  simply  allowed. 

Thus,  even  where  men  boast  of  the  law  most  loudly,  it  is 
only  grace  that  gives  a  man  to  understand  it.  The  very  teachers 
of  the  law  never  understood  what  it  meant,  nor  whereof  they 
affirmed.     So  the  Apostle  Paul  reproaches  those  that  desired  to 


292       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

be  its  doctors  in  liis  day.  But  our  Lord  draws  the  distinction 
with  the  most  perfect  truthfulness.  Moses  suffered  certain  things 
not  according  to  the  original  archetypal  intention  of  God.  Nor 
should  this  be  matter  of  wonder ;  for  the  law  made  nothing 
perfect.  A  solemn  word  this :  which  says,  not  that  the  law 
was  anything  but  what  was  good,  but  that  it  made  nothing 
perfect.  It  was  good  in  itself,  but  it  could  not  impart  goodness. 
The  law  might  be  perfect  for  its  own  object,  but  it  perfected 
nothing,  nor  was  it  ever  the  intention  of  God  that  it  should. 
But  more  than  this — there  were  certain  concessions  contained 
in  the  law  which  did  not  at  all  express  the  divine  mind ;  for 
God  therein  was  dealing  with  a  people  after  the  flesh.  The  law 
does  not  contemplate  a  man  as  bom  of  God ;  Clu-istianity  does. 
So  far  as  there  were  men  of  faith  during  the  law,  they  were  of 
course  born  of  God.  But  the  law  itself  drew  no  line  between 
regenerate  and  unregenerate ;  at  least,  it  addressed  all  Israel, 
and  not  believers  only,  and  hence  suffered  certain  things  in  view 
of  the  hardness  of  their  hearts.  So  that  our  Lord,  while 
intimating  a  certain  consideration  of  Israel's  condition  in  the 
flesh,  at  the  same  time  vindicated  God's  law  from  the  corrupt 
deductions  of  these  selfish  Pharisees.  "  From  the  beginning  it 
was  not  so.  And  I  say  unto  you.  Whosoever  shall  put  away  his 
wife,  except  it  be  for  fornication,  and  shall  marry  another, 
committeth  adultery.  And  whoso  mameth  her  which  is  put 
away  doth  commit  adultery."  (Ver.  8,  9.)  There  our  Lord 
adds  what  was  not  in  the  law,  and  brings  out  the  full  mind  of 
God  touching  this  relationship.  There  is  but  one  just  cause  for 
which  it  may  be  dissolved;  or  rather,  marriage  must  be  dissolved 
morally  in  order  to  terminate  as  a  matter  of  fact.  In  case  of 
fornication,  the  tie  is  all  gone  before  God.  Such  a  union  is 
incompatible  with  that  sin ;  and  then  the  putting  away  of  the 
wife  merely  proclaims  before  others  what  has  already  taken  place 
in  His  sight.  All  is  made  perfectly  clear.  The  righteousness  of 
the  law  is  established  as  far  as  it  went,  but  it  stops  short  of 
perfection  by  admitting  in  certain  cases  a  less  evil  to  avoid  a 
greater.  And  then  we  have  our  Lord  supplying  the  needed 
truth — going  up  to  the  very  beginning,  and  on  to  the  end  also. 


CHAPTEE  XIX.  293 

Thus  it  is  that  Christ,  the  true  light,  alone  and  always  introduces 
the  perfect  mind  of  God,  supplying  all  deficiencies  and  making 
all  perfect.  This  is  the  aim,  work,  and  effect  of  grace.  Never- 
theless, "  His  disciples  say  unto  him.  If  the  case  of  the  man  he 
so  with  his  wife,  it  is  not  good  to  marry."  (Ver.  10.)  Alas  I 
the  selfishness  of  the  heart  even  in  disciples.  It  was  so  much 
the  custom  then  to  dismiss  the  wife  because  of  petty  dislike,  &c., 
that  it  shocked  them  to  hear  the  Lord  insisting  on  the  indisso- 
lubility of  the  marriage  tie. 

But,  says  the  Lord,  "  All  men  receive  not  this  saying,  save 
they  to  whom  it  is  given.  For  there  are  some  eunuchs  which 
were  so  born  fi'om  their  mother's  womb ;  and  there  are  some 
eunuchs  which  were  made  eunuchs  of  men  ;  and  there  be  eunuchs 
which  have  made  themselves  eunuchs  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's 
sake.  He  that  is  able  to  receive  it,  let  him  receive  it."  (Ver. 
12.)  There,  I  apprehend,  He  is  shewing  that  whatever  may  be 
the  sanctity  of  the  institution  of  marriage  naturally,  there  is  in 
the  last,  or  spiritual  instance,  a  power  of  God  that  can  raise 
people  above  it.  The  Apostle  Paul  was  acting  in  the  spirit  of 
this  verse,  when  he  gives  us  his  own  judgment  as  one  that  had 
obtained  mercy  of  the  Lord  to  be  faithful.  Doubtless  he  was 
called  to  a  remarkable  work,  which  would  have  made  due 
attention  to  family  relationship  out  of  the  question.  His 
business  lay  and  took  him  everywhere.  Wherever  there  were 
churches  to  take  care  of,  wherever  souls  cried.  Come  hither  and 
help  us,  nay,  far  beyond  the  calls  of  saints  or  men,  the  Holy 
Ghost  laid  it  on  his  devoted  heart.  A  work  which  might 
summon  him  at  a  moment's  notice  to  the  ends  of  the  earth 
would  hardly  have  consisted  with  the  care  that  devolves  upon  a 
husband  and  father.  Had  it  been  sought  to  unite  the  two, 
either  the  natural  relationships  must  have  been  neglected,  or  the 
work  of  the  Lord  could  not  have  been  so  thoi'oughly  done. 
Hence  the  wise  and  gracious  judgment  of  the  apostle,  not 
imposed  as  a  command,  but  left  to  weigh  on  the  spiritual  mind. 
The  last  of  the  three  classes  in  the  verse  is  figuratively  expressed  : 
it  means,  plainly,  the  living  unmarried  for  God's  glory.  But 
mark,  it  is  a  gift,  not  a  law,  much  less  a  caste.     Only  such 


294       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

receive  it  "to  whom  it  is  given."  It  is  put  as  a  privilege.  As 
the  apostle  presses  the  honourableiicss  of  marriage,  he  was  the 
last  to  lay  the  smallest  slur  on  such  a  tie ;  but  he  also  knew  that 
there  was  a  higher  and  all-absorbing  love,  an  entrance,  in  its 
measure,  into  the  affections  of  Christ  for  the  Church,  Still  this 
is  not  an  imposed  obligation,  but  a  special  call  and  gift  of  grace 
in  which  he  rejoiced  to  glorify  his  Master.  The  appreciation  of 
the  love  of  Christ  to  the  Church  had  formed  him  in  its  own 
pattern.  Observe  here,  it  is  "  made  themselves  eunuchs  for  the 
kingdom  of  heaven's  sake" — that  order  of  things  which  depends 
on  Christ  now  in  heaven.  And  hence,  strong  in  the  grace  that 
shines  in  Him  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  they  to  whom  it  is 
given  walk  above  the  natural  ties  of  life ;  not,  I  need  not  say, 
despising  them ;  honouring  and  calling  all  honour  to  them,  yet 
individually  surrendering  themselves  to  that  goodly  portion 
which  shall  not  be  taken  from  them. 

But  there  is  another  aspect  of  nature  that  comes  before  us — 
that  of  children ;  and  something  that  is  apt  to  be  despised. 
What  in  this  world  so  helpless,  such  a  picture  of  utter  weakness 
and  dependence,  as  a  babe?  "  Then  were  there  brought  unto 
him  little  children,  that  he  should  put  his  hands  on  them,  and 
pray."  (Ver.  13.)  The  disciples  thought  it  an  annoyance  or  a 
liberty,  and  "  rebuked  them.  But  Jesus  said.  Suffer  little 
children,  and  forbid  them  not,  to  come  unto  me;  for  of  such 
is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  And  he  laid  his  hands  on  them,  and 
departed  thence."  (Ver.  14,  15.)  So  completely  were  met  all 
the  demands  of  love,  even  where  the  desire  seemed  ever  so 
unseasonable.  For  why  should  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth 
occupy  Himself  with  putting  His  hands  upon  little  ones  ?  But 
the  Lord  would  hear  no  miscalled  reason  :  love  never  does,  being 
in  truth  above  all  reasons.  Charity,  it  is  written,  never  faileth : 
therefore  surely  not  His,  who,  if  appealed  to,  cannot  refuse  those 
who  confide  in  it.  He  laid  His  hands  on  them  and  blessed  them. 
The  unworthy  thoughts  of  the  disciples  were  set  aside,  who 
thought  babes  unworthy  of  His  notice.  Ah !  how  little  they 
knew  Him,  long  as  they  had  been  with  Him.      Was  it  not 


CHAPTER  XIX.  295 

worthy  of  Him  so  to  bless  the  very  least  in  man's  eyes  ?  The 
disciples,  because  their  own  hearts  feebly  entered  into  and 
enjoyed  the  grace  of  God,  disdained  the  act  of  those  who 
brought  their  babes  to  Jesus.  But  it  was  right :  they  knew 
enough  to  give  them  confidence  in  His  love.  They  were  quite 
sure  He  would  not  despise  the  little  ones,  nor  refuse  His  blessing ; 
nor  did  He.  How  important  a  lesson  for  our  souls  is  this  !  It 
need  not  be  one  connected  with  ourselves ;  it  might  be  another's 
child.  Do  we  claim  the  Lord  for  it  ?  What  is  His  feeling  ? 
He  is  great.  He  is  mighty ;  but  He  despiseth  not  any.  Before 
His  glory  there  is  not  so  much  difference  between  a  world  and 
a  worm.  The  world  is  a  mere  cipher,  if  God  measures  by 
Himself.  But  if  He  does,  then  He  may  look  upon  that  which 
is  a  worm  and  no  man ;  and  there  may  be  the  object  of  His 
deepest  love  and  care.  Our  Lord  looked  at  these  babes,  0  with 
what  interest !  What  w^as  the  globe  compared  with  the  destiny 
of  a  little  babe  blessed  of  Jesus  ?  Each  had  a  soul :  and  what 
was  its  value  ?  What  to  be  a  vessel  of  grace  in  this  w^orld,  and 
of  glory  in  the  bright  eternal  day  ?  The  disciples  did  not  enter 
into  these  thoughts ;  and  if  any  of  us  have  in  any  measure,  do 
we  not  often  forget  them  ?  How  little  our  souls  are  able  to 
interweave  the  coming  glory  with  the  scenes  of  present  misery 
in  daily  life,  and  to  act  unwaveringly  now  on  that  which  we 
believe  will  be  manifested  then  !  Can  we  take  pleasure  in  infir- 
mities as  well  as  distresses  for  Christ's  sake  ?  It  is  in  weakness 
that  His  strength  is  made  perfect.  We  must  be  made  nothing 
of,  if  we  are  indeed  to  be  strong.  Let  us  bear  the  same  thing 
in  mind  if  we  have  to  do  with  those  we  are  in  danger  of 
despising.  Jesus  not  only  blessed  the  babes,  but  rebuked  the 
disciples,  who  had  misrepresented  Him.  Had  they  not  given 
the  impression  of  a  Rabbi  ?  But  He  says,  ''  Suffer  little  children, 
and  forbid  them  not,  to  come  unto  me ;  for  of  such  is  the 
kingdom  of  heaven."  0  what  a  withering  word  for  the  pride  of 
religion !  Were  the  disciples  "  of  such"  at  that  moment,  or  at 
least  in  that  act  ?  Had  they  not  declared  themselves  practically 
outside  the  kingdom  by  the  spirit  shewn  towards  the  babes  and 
those  who  brought  them  ? 


296  LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

But  this  is  not  all.  A  yonng  man,  as  it  is  said,  "  came  and 
said  unto  him,  Good  Master,  what  good  thing  shall  I  do,  that  I 
may  have  eternal  life  ?"  It  is  not  now  a  question  of  marriage, 
or  of  a  babe ;  but  of  one  who  combined  in  his  person  every 
quality  that  was  estimable ;  and  in  his  circumstances  every 
advantage  that  the  natural  heart  could  desire  :  of  one  who  not 
only  had  all  that  men  think  productive  of  happiness  in  this 
world,  but  also  most  sincere  in  desiring  to  know  and  do  the  will 
of  God.  His  was  evidently  a  lovely  natural  character.  And, 
further,  he  was  attracted  by,  and  came  to,  Jesus.  What  did 
the  Lord  say  to  him  ?  From  another  Gospel,  Jesus,  we  know, 
loved  him ;  and  this,  not  because  he  believed  in  and  followed 
Jesus,  for  alas !  we  know  he  did  not.  There  are  various  forms 
of  divine  love,  beside  that  which  embraces  us  as  returned 
prodigals.  This  man  went  away  sorrowful  from  Jesus  :  no 
person  has  a  right  to  add  that  he  ever  came  back  glad  to  Jesus. 
I  do  not  say  that  he  did  not,  but  scripture  does  not  say  he  did ; 
and  scripture,  as  it  cannot  be  broken,  so  neither  must  it  be 
added  to.  While  we  have  a  special  love  for  the  children  of 
God,  and  ought  only  to  value  in  the  things  of  God  that  which 
is  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  does  not  follow  that  we  are  not  to 
admire  a  fine  mind  or  a  beautiful  character  naturally.  If  we  do 
not,  it  only  proves  that  we  do  not  understand  the  mind  of  God 
as  here  displayed  in  Jesus.  Even  as  to  creation,  am  I  to  look 
coldly,  or  not  at  all,  at  a  river  or  a  mountain,  the  sea,  the  sky, 
plains,  valleys,  forests,  trees,  flowers,  that  God  has  made?  It 
is  a  total  mistake  that  sj)irituality  renders  dull  to  His  outward 
works.  But  am  I  to  set  my  mind  upon  these  sights  ?  Are  we 
to  travel  far  and  wide  for  the  purpose  of  visiting  what  all  the 
world  counts  worthy  to  be  seen  ?  If  in  my  path  of  serving 
Christ  a  grand  or  beautiful  prospect  passes  before  me,  I  do  not 
think  that  He  whose  handiwork  it  is  calls  me  to  close  my  eyes 
or  mind.  The  Lord  Himself  draws  attention  to  the  lilies  of  the 
field  brighter  than  Solomon  in  all  his  glory.  Man  admires  that 
which  enables  him  to  indulge  his  self-love,  his  ambition,  in  this 
world.  That  is  merely  the  flesh.  But  as  to  the  beautiful, 
morally  or  in  nature,  grace,  instead  of  despising,  values  all  that 


CHAPTER  XIX.  297 

is  good  In  its  ovn\  sphere,  and  does  homage  to  the  God  who  thus 
displayed  His  wisdom  and  His  power.  Make  the  creature  the 
object,  and  there  is  the  flesh  abusing  the  truth  of  God.  To 
admire  when  they  are  brought  before  us  is  a  very  diflferent  thing 
from  making  them  our  pursuit  and  our  life.  Grace  despises 
neither  what  is  in  creation  nor  what  is  in  man.  If  I  see 
benevolence,  I  admire  it :  it  is  a  bad  thing  if  I  do  not.  This 
young  man  the  Lord  loved,  when  certainly  as  yet  there  was  no 
faith  at  all.  He  went  away  from  Jesus  in  sorrow :  what  believer 
ever  did  since  the  world  began  ?  His  sorrow  was  because  He 
was  not  prepared  for  the  path  of  faith.  Jesus  desired  him  to 
follow  Him,  but  not  as  a  rich  man.  He  would  have  been 
delighted  to  do  "  some  great  thing ;"  but  the  Lord  laid  bare 
self  in  his  heart.  He  knew  that  (spite  of  all  that  naturally,  and 
even  tested  by  the  law,  was  so  beautiful  in  him)  there  was,  if 
tested  by  Himself,  self-importance  at  the  bottom  —  the  flesh 
turning  these  very  advantages  into  a  reason  for  not  following 
Jesus.  But  self  must  be  brought  down.  As  nothing  at  all,  he 
must  follow  Jesus,  making  Him  to  be  his  all  in  all,  or  it  is  a 
mockery.  "  Good  Master,"  said  he,  "what  good  thing  shall  I 
do  that  I  may  have  eternal  life  ?"  He  had  not  learned  the  first 
lesson  a  Christian  knows — what  a  convicted  sinner  is  learning : 
that  he  is  lost.  He  had  no  such  idea  in  his  mind.  By  being 
with  Christians,  one  may  adopt  their  language  and  thoughts ; 
but  he  is  sure  before  long  to  bring  out  something  which  betrays 
that  he  has  no  real  understanding  of  the  matter.  The  youth 
shewed  that  he  had  never  felt  his  own  ruin.  He  assumed  that 
he  was  capable  of  doing  good.  The  sinner  is  like  the  leper  in 
Leviticus  xiii.,  who  could  not  bring  an  offering  to  God,  but  only 
remain  outside,  crying,  "  Unclean,  unclean."  The  young  man 
had  no  sense  of  sin.  His  word  is  not  "  What  must  I  do  to  be 
savedT''  but  "  What  good  thing  must  I  do  to  have  eternal  life?" 
He  regarded  eternal  life  as  the  result  of  a  man's  doing  good. 
He  had  been  doing  the  law ;  and,  as  far  as  he  knew,  he  never 
broke  it. 

Our  Lord  says  to  him,  '^  Why  callest  thou  me  good?     Tliere 
is  none  good  but  one  ;  that  is,  God.     But  if  thou  wilt  enter  into 


298       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

life,  keep  the  commandments."  He  may  take  him  up  on  that 
gromid.  This  man  had  no  idea  that  the  One  to  whom  he  was 
speaking  was  God  Himself.  He  merely  went  to  Him  as  a  good 
man.  Now,  on  this  footing  the  Lord  would  not  allow  Himself 
to  be  called  good.  As  far  as  the  man's  own  perception  of  His 
person  was  concerned,  He  was  no  more  than  man,  and  therefore 
not  entitled  to  be  called  good :  God  alone  is.  Had  he  known 
Christ  to  be  what  He  was  and  is — a  divine  person.  He  would 
not  ha's^e  refused,  I  conceive,  to  be  so  addressed.  But  in  such  a 
case,  would  the  young  man  have  put  the  question  at  all  ?  The 
Lord  therefore  first  simply  deals  with  him  on  his  own  ground. 
"  If  thou  wilt  enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments.  He 
saith  unto  him,  Which  ?  Jesus  said.  Thou  shalt  do  no  murder  ; 
thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery ;  thou  shalt  not  steal ;  thou  shalt 
not  bear  false  witness  ;  honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother ;  and 
thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  (Ver.  17 — 19.)  The 
Lord  quotes  the  commands  that  relate  to  human  affairs — the 
second  table  of  the  law,  as  it  is  called.  "  All  these,"  says  the 
young  man,  "  have  I  kept  from  my  youth  up :  what  lack  I 
yet  ?"  (Ver.  20.)  But  says  the  Lord,  "  If  thou  wilt  be  perfect, 
go  and  sell  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor,  and  thou  shalt 
have  treasure  in  heaven ;  and  come  and  follow  me."  (Ver.  21.) 
And  what  then  ?  "  When  the  young  man  heard  that  saying, 
he  went  away  sorrowful,  for  he  had  great  possessions."  (Ver.  22.) 
He  loved  his  possessions  better  than  he  loved  Jesus,  This  gave 
our  Lord  an  opportunity  for  unfolding  another  truth ;  and  one 
most  startling  to  a  Jew,  who  regarded  wealth  as  a  sign  of  the 
blessing  of  God.  It  was  in  a  similar  spirit  that  the  friends 
of  Job  also  acted,  though  they  were  Gentiles ;  for,  in  truth,  it  is 
the  judgment  of  fleshly  righteousness.  They  thought  that  God 
must  be  against  Job,  because  he  had  got  into  unheard-of  trial. 
The  Lord  brings  out,  in  view  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  the 
solemn  truth,  that  the  advantages  of  the  flesh  are  positive 
hindrances  to  the  Spirit. 

"  Then  said  Jesus  unto  his  disciples.  Verily  I  say  unto  you 
that  a  rich  man  shall  hardly"  (that  is,  with  difficulty;  not, 
he  cannot,  but  "  shall  hardly")  "  enter  into  the  kingdom   of 


CHAPTER  XIX.  299 

heaven."  (Ver.  23.)  Emphatically  He  repeats  it,  "Again  I 
say  unto  you,  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a 
needle"  (beyond  nature,  of  course)  "  than  for  a  rich  man  to 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  When  his  disciples  heard  it, 
they  were  exceedingly  amazed,  saying,  Who  then  can  be  saved  ?" 
(Ver.  24,  25.)  The  Lord's  answer  was  perfect.  "Jesus  beheld 
them,  and  said  unto  them.  With  men  this  is  impossible ;  but 
with  God  all  things  are  possible."  (Ver.  26.)  If  it  was  a 
question  of  man's  doing  anything  to  get  into  the  kingdom, 
riches  are  only  so  much  a  burden  that  hinders  him ;  for  vain 
man  would  carry  his  riches  with  him.  And  so  it  is  with  all 
else  counted  desirable.  Whatever  I  have  good  in  myself, 
Avhether  it  be  moral  ways,  position,  or  what  not — these  are 
but  impediments  as  far  as  concerns  the  kingdom,  and  make  it 
impossible,  yes,  utterly  impossible,  to  man.  But  with  God 
(and  we  may  bless  Him  for  it)  all  things  are  possible,  no  matter 
what  the  difficulty.  Therefore  God  chooses  in  His  grace  to  call 
all  sorts  and  conditions  of  people.  We  read  of  a  person  called 
out  of  Herod's  court ;  we  read  of  saints  in  Caesar's  household. 
A  great  company  of  the  priests  believed;  so  did  Barnabas,  the 
Levite,  with  his  houses  and  lands ;  nay,  above  all,  Saul  of 
Tarsus,  brought  up  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel.  All  these  diffi- 
culties only  gave  God  the  opportunity  to  assert  His  own  power 
and  grace. 

When  Peter  heard  how  hard  it  was  for  the  rich  to  be  saved, 
he  thought  it  time  for  him  to  speak  of  what  they  had  given  up 
for  the  Lord's  sake,  and  to  learn  what  they  should  get  for  it. 
"  Behold,  we  have  forsaken  all,  and  have  followed  thee.  What 
shall  we  have  therefore  ?"  How  painfully  natural  was  this  ! 
"  Jesus  said  unto  them.  Verily  I  say  unto  you  that  ye  which 
have  followed  me,  in  the  regeneration,  when  the  Son  of  man 
shall  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory,  ye  also  shall  sit  upon 
twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  And  every 
one  that  hath  forsaken  houses,  or  brethren,  or  sisters,  or  father, 
or  mother,  or  wife,  or  children,  or  lands,  for  my  name's  sake, 
shall  receive  an  hundredfold,  and  shall  inherit  everlasting  life." 
(Ver.  28,  29.)     There  is  nothing  the  believer  does  or  sufiers  but 


300       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

what  will  be  remembered  in  the  kingdom.  While  this  is  most 
blessed,  it  is  also  a  very  solemn  thought.  Our  ways  now, 
though  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  remission  of  our  sins, 
are  yet  of  all  consequence  as  a  testimoiiy  to  Christ,  and  will 
bear  very  decidedly  on  our  future  place  in  the  kingdom.  We 
must  not  use  the  doctrine  of  grace  to  deny  that  of  rewards ;  but, 
even  so,  Christ  is  the  sole  motive  for  the  saint.  We  shall  receive 
for  the  things  done  in  the  body  according  to  that  we  have  done, 
whether  it  be  good  or  bad,  as  the  Lord  shews  plainly  here.  The 
twelve  had  followed  the  rejected  Lord,  albeit  His  own  grace  had 
given  them  the  power.  It  was  not  they  who  had  chosen  Him, 
but  He  had  chosen  them.  They  are  now  cheered  by  the 
assurance  that  in  the  blessed  time  of  the  regeneration,  when  the 
Lord  will  work  a  grand  change  in  this  world  (for  as  He  makes  a 
sinner  regenerate  before  he  is  raised  from  the  dead,  so  He  will, 
as  it  were,  regenerate  the  world  before  the  new  heavens  and 
earth  are  fully  brought  in),  their  work  and  sufferings  will  not 
be  forgotten  of  Him. 

Remember  that  what  is  spoken  of  here  does  not  refer  to 
heaven :  there  is  still  better  work  in  heaven  than  judging  the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  Yet  is  it  a  glorious  destiny  reserved  for 
the  twelve  apostles  during  the  reign  of  Christ  over  the  earth.  A 
similar  glory  is  destined  for  other  saints  of  God,  as  we  read  in 
1  Corinthians  vi.  2,  "  KJnow  ye  not  that  the  saints  shall  judge 
the  world?"  There  it  is  used  to  shew  the  incongruity  of  a  saint 
seeking  the  world's  judgment  in  a  matter  between  himself  and 
another.  This  ought  always  to  be  the  uppermost  thing  in  the 
mind  of  the  Christian — to  keep  himself  entirely  apart  from  the 
world,  true  to  the  objects  for  which  Christ  has  called  him.  Still, 
judging  the  world  can  hardly  be  what  we  shall  do  in  heaven,  but 
what  we  shall  come  out  of  heaven  with  the  Lord  to  do  as  to  the 
earth.  You  never  can  lose  sight  of  a  single  truth  of  God  with- 
out loss  to  the  soul.  It  is  a  lower  truth,  but  we  cannot  do 
without  it.  We  must  always  draw  our  weapons  from  the  quiver 
of  the  Lord  and  may  be  sure  His  arrows  alone  are  effectual. 

As  to  all  the  natural  relationships  and  advantages  of  this  life, 
if  lost  for  His  name's  sake,  the  losers  shall  receive  an  hundred 


CHAPTER  XX.  301 

fold  and  inherit  everlastino;  life.  Tlie  Gospel  of  John  speaks  of 
everlasting  life  as  a  thing  that  we  possess  now ;  the  others  speak 
of  it  as  future.  We  have  got  the  principle  of  it  now  in  Christ, 
and  we  shall  have  its  fulness  in  glory  by  and  by.  "  But  many 
that  are  first  shall  be  last,  and  the  last  shall  be  first."  What  a 
hint  to  Peter  to  take  care !  A  self-righteous  claim  is  a  ready 
snare  and  soon  finds  its  level  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God. 
The  leaving  of  all,  if  valued,  lost  all  its  value.  Thus,  many  who 
began  to  run  well  turned  aside  from  grace  to  law ;  and  Peter 
himself  was  blamed  by  the  last  (but  first)  of  the  apostles,  as  we 
know  from  the  Galatians. 

The  Lord  make  His  grace  the  strength  of  our  hearts ;  and  if 
we  have  suffered  the  loss  of  any  or  of  all  things,  may  we  still 
count  them  dung  that  we  may  win  Him  I 


CHAPTER  XX. 

The  last  chapter  closed  with  the  important  doctrine  that  in  the 
kingdom  the  Lord  will  remember  all  suffering  and  service  here 
for  His  name's  sake.  But  it  is  evident  that,  though  this  be  an 
undoubted  truth  of  scripture,  referred  to  in  the  epistles  of  St. 
Paul,  and  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament,  it  is  one  which  the 
heart  would  be  ready  to  abuse  to  self-righteousness  ;  and  that  a 
person  might  soon  forget  that  all  is  of  grace,  and  might  be 
disposed  to  make  a  claim  upon  God  by  reason  of  anything 
which  He  had  enabled  a  soul  to  do.  Hence  a  parable  is  added 
which  brings  in  a  totally  different  principle,  where  the  promi- 
nent thought  is  the  sovereignty  of  God,  for  the  express  purpose, 
I  think,  of  guarding  against  such  effects.  For  God  is  not 
unrio;hteous  to  forget  our  work  and  labour  of  love  which  we 
may  have  shewed  toward  His  name.  But,  then,  there  will  be  a 
danger  in  our  remembering  it.     It  does  not  follow,  because  God 


302  LECTUKES   ON  THE  GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 

will  not  forget  what  His  people  do  for  Him,  that  His  people  are 
to  remember  it  themselves.  We  have  but  one  thing  to  think  of 
and  set  before  our  souls — Christ  Himself :  as  the  Apostle  Paul 
said,  "This  one  thing  I  do;  forgetting  those  things  that  are 
behind,  and  reaching  forth  unto  those  things  that  are  before" — 
not  forgetting  what  we  have  done  wrong :  the  very  reverse  of 
this  will  be  even  in  glory.  When  there  is  not  a  vestige  of 
humiliation  more,  we  shall  have  a  more  lively  sense  than  ever 
of  our  manifold  failures ;  but  not  as  producing  one  feeling 
of  doubt,  or  fear,  or  unhappiness.  Such  thoughts  would  be 
contrary  to  the  presence  of  God.  It  is  a  good  thing  for  the 
believer,  holding  fast  his  full  blessing,  to  think  of  what  he  is — 
to  humble  himself  day  by  day  in  the  sight  of  God ;  always 
remembering  that  true  humiliation  is  on  the  ground  of  our  being 
children  of  God.  If  we  take  the  place  of  being  still  in  our 
sins,  and  needing  to  start  afresh,  as  it  were,  over  and  over 
again,  there  never  can  be  proper  christian  experience  or  pro- 
gress. There  is  a  great  difference  between  the  humiliation  of 
a  sinner  and  that  of  a  saint,  who,  while  he  has  an  evil  nature, 
has  also  a  new  nature  in  Christ.  Humility  is  always  right ; 
but  when  we  draw  near  in  worship  to  God,  it  is  no  proof  of  this 
humility  to  be  speaking  about  ourselves  as  poor  sinners.  We 
come  together  to  enjoy  Christ,  to  set  forth  what  God  is ;  and 
after  all,  can  there  be  a  doubt  that  this,  involving  as  it  does  the 
consciousness  of  our  nothingness,  really  shews  the  deepest  and 
most  genuine  humility  ?  A  person  who  had  some  office  about 
the  queen,  and  who  had  proper  respect  for  her,  would  be  think- 
ing of  her,  not  of  himself.  How  much  more  when  we  are  in 
the  presence  of  God  !  Tliis  ought  to  fill  our  souls  with  joy  in 
the  worship  of  the  Lord.  What  is  comely  for  the  saint,  what 
is  most  acceptable  to  God,  is  not  the  constant  bringing  in  of  our- 
selves in  one  way  or  another,  right  as  this  may  be,  in  a  certain 
sense,  in  our  closet.  But  the  praise  of  God,  for  what  He  is, 
above  all,  in  the  knowledge  of  His  Son  and  of  His  work,  is  the 
great  end  of  all  the  dealings  of  God  with  His  children. 

This  will  be  a  test  for  the  soul.     Where  there  is  a  conscious- 
ness of  habitual  carelessness  and  lack  of  dependence,  with  their 


CHAPTER  XX.  303 

sad  results,  there  will  not  be  a  preparedness  of  heart  for  worship. 
In  such  circumstances  the  Spirit  makes  the  conscience  active, 
instead  of  drawing  out  the  heart.  What  does  not  the  Lord 
deserve  from  us  ?  When  we  go  to  praise  Him,  breaking  bread 
in  His  name,  it  is  not  because  we  can  take  comfort  from  any- 
thing but  Himself;  and  this  will  not  arrest,  but  strengthen,  our 
self-judgment.  What  is  the  word  of  God,  and  what  is  the  Holy 
Ghost  for  ?  Is  it  not  that  we  should  be  growing  up  into  Christ 
in  all  things  ?  The  proper  thought  connected  with  the  Lord's 
table  is  that  I  am  going  to  meet  with  Christ,  to  praise  Him, 
together  with  His  saints :  and  this  keeps  a  check  upon  our 
spirits,  and  brings  before  our  souls  what  a  thing  it  is  to  meet 
with  Christ,  and  to  be  found  in  His  presence.  Worship  is  the 
soul  finding  itself  in  the  presence  of  God  in  the  Spirit.  By 
and  by  we  shall  have  perfect  worship  in  heaven.  Now  we  have 
it  only  in  part,  even  as  we  know  but  in  part.  But  in  principle 
the  worship  of  the  believer  is  a  heavenly  thing,  even  while 
accomplished  on  the  earth,  as  we  ourselves  are  said  to  be 
"  heavenly"  also.  What  we  have  to  forget  is,  not  our  short- 
comings— to  be  indifferent  or  light  about  them ;  but  "  let  a 
man  discern  or  examine  himself:"  it  is  the  inward  discernment 
of  the  soul.  And  what  then?  ''So  let  him  eat."  That  is, 
the  Christian,  even  if  conscious  that  he  has  forgotten  the  Lord 
during  the  week,  is  not  to  distrust  Him.  What  is  he  to  do  ? 
To  go  to  the  Lord's  table  as  if  it  were  no  matter  at  all  ?  This 
would  be  sin.  Is  he,  then,  to  stay  away  ?  Neither  the  one  nor 
the  other.  What,  then,  can  he  do?  He  is  to  judge  himself,  to 
confess  his  fault,  to  humble  himself  before  God;  and  "so  let 
him  eat."  This  is  God's  way.  A  person  staying  away  does  not 
mend  matters.  I  am  as  good  as  saying  I  am  not  a  Christian 
at  all,  if  I  keep  away  from  the  Lord's  table;  or  I  have  been 
behaving  so  badly  that  others  would  consider  me  not  a  Christian 
if  they  knew  it.  Constantly  bringing  it  before  the  soul  is  one 
of  God's  ways  for  preserving  from  sin.  But  let  it  be  done  in 
the  spirit  of  self-judgment  at  home,  so  that  we  praise  when  we 
come  together  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

In  order  to  keep  up  this  sense  of  grace,  the  Spirit  of  God 


304       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OP  MATTHEW. 

recurs  in  this  chapter  to  the  sovereignty  of  God ;  the  counter- 
active to  the  self-righteousness  that  is  to  be  found  even  in  the 
heart  of  a  disciple.  Peter  might  say  "  We  have  left  all  and 
followed  thee,"  and  the  Lord  might  assure  him  that  it  would 
not  be  forgotten ;  but  He  immediately  adds  the  parable  of  the 
householder.  Here  you  find,  not  the  principle  of  rewards,  or 
God's  righteous  recognition  of  the  service  done  by  His  people, 
but  His  own  rights.  His  own  sovereignty.  Hence  there  are  no 
differences  here — no  one  is  specially  remembered  because  he  had 
won  souls  to  Christ,  or  left  all  for  Christ.  The  principle  is  this 
that,  while  God  will  infallibly  own  every  service  and  loss  for  the 
sake  of  Christ,  yet  He  maintains  His  own  title  to  do  as  He 
will.  There  might  be  some  poor  soul  brought  to  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  at  the  day  of  his  death.  Now,  God  the  Father  claims 
His  own  title  to  give  what  He  may  please ;  he  may  have  done 
no  work,  but  God's  title  is  reserved  to  give  to  those  who  have 
not  wrought  anything  at  all — as  you  may  think — just  what  is 
o-ood  in  His  own  eyes.  This  is  a  very  different  principle  from 
what  we  had  in  the  last  chapter,  and  exceedingly  counter  to  the 
mind  of  man.  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  man  that 
is  an  householder,  which  went  out  early  in  the  morning  to  hire 
labourers  into  his  vineyard.  And  when  he  had  agreed  with  the 
labourers  for  a  penny  a  day,  he  sent  them  into  his  vineyard." 
(Ver.  1,  2.) 

The  common  application  of  this  parable  to  the  salvation  of 
the  soul  is  a  mistake.  For  this  is  that  which  Christ  wrought 
for,  suffered  for,  and  lives  for,  independently  of  man.  The  poor 
sinner  has  just  to  give  himself  up  to  be  saved  by  Christ.  When 
brought  to  an  end  of  itself,  acknowledging  that  it  deserves 
nothing  but  hell,  how  sweet  that  God  brings  before  such  a  soul 
that  Jesus  Christ  (and  this  is  a  faithful  saying)  came  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners !  When  content  to  be  saved  as  nothing 
but  a  sinner,  and  by  nothing  but  Christ,  there  and  then  only  is 
true  rest  given  of  Him.  Wherever  we  have  to  contribute  our 
part,  it  will  be  only  uncertainty,  and  doubts,  and  difficulties. 
And  where  does  the  salvation  of  God  shine  forth?  Christ 
alone  is  salvation.     The  man  that  is  saved  contributes  nothing 


CHAPTER   XX.  305 

but  his  Bins.  But  God  is  delighted  (and  not  the  less  because  it 
is  the  fruit  of  His  grace)  to  hear  a  poor  sinner  acknowledge  that 
Jesus  is  worthy  to  bring  him,  freed  from  sin,  to  heaven.  But 
in  this  parable  the  question  is  not  this.  There  is  nothing  in  it 
about  believing  in  Christ  or  His  work.  It  is  positive  work  that 
is  done.  There  you  may  think,  Surely  the  Lord  will  reward  the 
work  accordincr  to  its  kind  and  degree.  This  we  have  seen  : 
but  there  is  another  principle  not  always  understood  —  God 
reserves  in  His  own  hand  the  right  to  do  as  He  pleases,  and  He 
never  makes  a  mistake.  It  may  seem  hard  that  a  man  should 
be  toiling  for  fifty  years,  and  that  another,  brought  in  just  at 
the  close  of  his  life,  should  be  honoured  in  heaven  as  much  as 
himself.  But  God  is  the  only  righteous,  the  only  wise,^  j"dge  of 
what  is  for  His  own  glory.  If  He  please.  He  will  put  all  upon 
an  equal  footing.  He  will  reward  the  work  that  is  done,  but 
He  will  give  as  He  will. 

"  When  he  had  agreed  with  the  labourers  for  a  penny  a  day, 
he  sent  them  into  his  vineyard.  And  he  went  out  about  the 
third  hour  and  saw  others  standing  idle  in  the  market-place ;  and 
said  unto  them,  Go  ye  also  into  the  vineyard,  and  whatsoever  is 
right  I  will  give  you.  And  they  went  their  way."  (Ver.  2 — 4.) 
It  is  not  grace  in  the  sense  of  salvation  here.  "  Whatsoever  is 
right  I  will  give  you."  It  is  God  that  judges  what  is  becoming. 
*' Again  he  went  out  about  the  sixth  and  ninth  hour,  and  did 
likewise."  And,  singular  to  say,  "  about  the  eleventh  hour  he 
went  out."  W^hat  a  heart  this  tells  !  What  infinite  goodness  ! 
that  God,  who  recognizes  every  service  and  suJBPering  done  for 
Himself,  yet  keeps  intact  the  prerogative  of  going  out  at  the 
last  moment  to  bring  in  souls,  and  occupy  them  with  what  might 
seem  to  be  a  little  service  !  But  He  can  give  grace  to  do  that 
little  well.  "  About  the  eleventh  hour  he  went  out  and  found 
others  standing  idle,  and  saith  unto  them.  Why  stand  ye  here  all 
the  day  idle  ?  They  say  unto  him.  Because  no  man  hath  hired 
us.  He  saith  unto  them.  Go  ye  also  into  the  vineyard,  and 
whatsoever  is  right,  that  shall  ye  receive.  So  when  even  was 
come,  the  lord  of  the  vineyard  saith  unto  his  steward.  Call  the 
labourers,  and  give  them  their  hire,  beginning  from  the  last  unto 
X 


306  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

tlie  first."   (Ver.   6 — 8.)      "  Beginning  from  the  last"  in  the 
jierfect  wisdom  of  God.     And  why  is  it  that   "the  last"  are 
made  so  much  of  in  this  parable  ?     What  makes  it  the  more 
striking  is  that,  in  the  close  of  the  preceding  chapter,  it  was 
not  so.     There,  "  many  that  are  first  shall  be  last,  and  the  last 
shall  be  first."    But  here  the  last  are  always  spoken  of  first.     So 
the  steward  is  told  to  begin  from  the  last  unto  the  first.     And 
again,  when  the  master  of  the  vineyard  has  to  speak  himself,  it 
is  the  same  thing:  "  the  last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first  last." 
It  is  the  sovereignty  of  grace  in  giving  as  He  pleases  ;  not  alone 
in  saving,   but  in  rewarding  in  the  time  of  glory ;  for  this  is 
what  is  spoken  of.      Of  course  the  last  received  their   wages 
thankfully.     But  when  the  first  heard  about  it,  they  began  to 
think  themselves  entitled  to   more — they  who  had   borne   the 
burden  and  heat  of  the  day.     But  the  master  reminds  them  that 
all  was  a  settled  thing  before  they  entered  upon  their  work.     In 
their  selfishness,  they  forgot  both  the  terms  and   the  righte- 
ousness of  him  with  whom  they  had  to  deal.     If,  out  of  the 
liberality  of  his   heart,   the  householder  was   pleased   to   give 
others,  who  had  worked  the  twelfth  part  of  what  they  had  done, 
as  much  as  he  gave  themselves,  what  was  that  to  them?     It 
was  his  affair  entirely.     God  maintains  His  own  rights.     And 
it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  for  our  souls  that  we  hold  to  the 
rights  of  God  in  everything.     Persons  will  argue  as  to  whether 
it  is  righteous  for  God  to  elect  this  person  or  that.     But  if  you 
go  upon  the  ground  of  righteousness,  all  are  lost,  and  lost  for 
ever.     Now,  if  God  is  pleased  to  use  His  mercy  according  to 
His  wisdom,  and  for  His  glory,  among  these  poor  lost  ones, 
who  is  to  dispute  with  Him  ?     "  Who  art  thou,  0  man,  that 
repliest  against  God  ?"     God  is  entitled  to    act   according   to 
what  is  in  His  heart :  and  "  shall  not  the  judge  of  all  the  earth 
do  right?"     Is  He  entitled  to  act  from  Himself ?     He  caimot 
act  from  man  on  the  grounds  of  righteousness.     There  is  no 
foundation  on  which  He  can  thus  deal ;  and  it  is  entirely    a 
question  of  His  own  good  pleasure.     And  we  must  remember 
that  there  is  not  a  man  that  is  lost  but  rejects  the  mercy  of  God, 
despises  it,  or  uses  it  for  his  own  selfish  purposes  in  this  world. 


CHAPTER   XX.  307 

The  man  that  is  saved  is  the  only  one  that  has  a  true  sense  of 
sin,  the  only  one  that  gives  himself  up  as  lost  really  unto  God ; 
but  then  he  falls  back  upon  His  infinite  mercy  in  Christ  to  save 
a  lost  sinner. 

In  the  case  we  have  here,  when  the  first  came  and  complained 
to  the  goodman  of  the  house,  he  answered  them,  "  Friend,  I  do 
thee  no  wrong.  Didst  not  thou  agree  with  me  for  a  penny  ? 
Take  that  thine  is,  and  go  thy  way ;  I  will  give  unto  this  last 
even  as  unto  thee.  Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  do  what  I  will 
with  mine  own?  Is  thine  eye  evil,  because  I  am  good?" 
(Ver.  13 — 15.)  There  comes  out  the  whole  secret.  Man,  yea, 
a  professing  disciple  of  the  Lord,  a  labourer  in  His  vineyard, 
may  be  disputing  because  he  is  to  have  no  more  than  another 
who,  in  his  opinion,  has  done  little  as  compared  with  himself. 
It  was  the  same  principle  that  made  the  Judaizers  so  jealous 
about  the  Gentiles  being  brought  in.  So,  says  the  Lord,  "  the 
last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first  last."  I  would  just  ask.  Why  in 
the  last  chapter  is  it  "  Many  that  are  first  shall  be  last,  and  the 
last  first,"  and  here  "  The  last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first  last?" 
In  speaking  about  rewards,  according  to  the  work  done,  the 
failure  of  man  is  intimated ;  for  indeed  weakness  soon  shews 
itself.  "  The  first  shall  be  last."  But  in  this  new  parable  is  the 
sovereignty  of  God  that  never  fails.  Consequently  here  "  The 
first  shall  be  last,  and  the  last  first."  "  Demas  hath  forsaken 
me,  having  loved  this  present  evil  world."  There  was  a  first, 
we  may  say,  who  became  last — a  labourer  for  the  Lord,  who  had 
not  given  up  Christianity,  but  grown  tired  of  the  path  of  unre- 
mitting service  for  Christ.  If,  instead  of  honour  now,  the 
thousands  of  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  service  of  Christ 
M'ere  to  receive  only  scorn  and  persecution,  there  would  be  no 
slight  thinning  of  their  ranks.  The  present  return  should  be 
shame  and  suffering.  This  must  be  looked  for  by  him  who 
intelligently  seeks  to  serve  faithfully  the  Lord  in  this  world. 
Demas  may  have  been  a  believer;  but  the  trial  and  reproach,  the 
love  of  ease  and  other  things  all  came  strongly  over  his  spirit,  and 
he  abandoned  the  service  of  the  Lord.  "  All  seek  their  own,  not 
the  things  that  are  Jesus  Christ's  :"  there  is  a  similar  principle. 


308        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

We  have  our  Lord  next  shewn  going  up  to  Jerusalem ;  and 
now  He  prepares  them  for  still  greater  trouble.  "  Behold,  we 
go  up  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  the  Son  of  man  shall  be  betrayed  unto 
the  chief  priests  and  the  scribes ;  and  they  shall  condemn  him 
to  death,  and  shall  deliver  him  to  the  Gentiles  to  mock,  and  to 
scourge,  and  to  crucify  him :  and  the  third  day  he  shall  rise 
again."  (Ver.  18,  19.)  And  yet  even  after  this,  so  selfish  is 
the  heart  of  man,  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  children  comes  to 
Him  with  her  sons,  who  were  among  the  apostles  themselves. 
She  pays  her  worship  to  Him  and  desires  a  certain  thing  of 
Him.  "And  he  said  unto  her.  What  wilt  thou?  She  saith 
unto  him,  Grant  that  these  my  two  sons  may  sit,  the  one  on  thy 
right  hand  and  the  other  on  the  left,  in  thy  kingdom."  (Ver. 
21.)  Now  comes  out  another  principle;  for,  indeed,  so  perfect 
is  the  humiliation  of  Christ,  such  the  self-abandonment  of  the 
only  One  who  had  a  perfect  knowledge  of  all  things  and  a  right 
to  everything  by  His  personal  glory,  that  He  says,  I  have  no 
place  to  give  you  in  My  kingdom.  It  is  not  Mine  to  give,  save 
as  my  Father  may  desire.  But  I  have  something  to  give  you 
now  :  and  what  is  it  ?  Suffering.  Yes,  suffering  is  what  Christ 
gives  His  servants  now,  and  this  as  the  highest  privilege.  When 
the  Apostle  Paul  was  converted,  he  asks  at  once,  "  What  wilt 
thou  have  me  to  do  V  The  Lord  tells  him  what  great  things  he 
should  suffer  for  His  name's  sake.  Suffering  all  is  better  than 
doing  anything.  It  is  the  best  portion  a  saint  can  have  in  this 
world.  The  highest  honour  we  can  have  here  is  suffering  with 
and  for  Christ.  This  our  Lord  lets  the  mother  of  Zebedee's 
children  know,  when  she  asks  for  a  place  for  her  sons  on  His 
right  hand  and  on  His  left  in  His  kingdom.  ' '  Jesus  answered 
and  said.  Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask.  Are  ye  able  to  drink  of 
the  cup  that  I  shall  drink  of,  and  to  be  baptized  with  the 
baptism  that  I  am  baptized  with  ?  They  say  unto  him,  We  are 
able."  (Ver.  22.)  He  took  in  two  different  kinds  of  suffering: 
the  cup,  which  is  inward  suffering;  and  the  baptism,  which 
expresses  what  we  are  immersed  into  outwardly.  The  two 
include  every  kind  of  trial,  inward  and  outward.  He  is  not 
here  speaking  about  the  cross  in  atonement,  for  there  can  be  no 


CHAPTER   XX.  ^  309 

fellowship  in  this.  But  there  might  be  the  cross  in  rejection, 
though  not  as  atonement.  There  may  be  the  sharing  of  what 
Christ  suffered  from  man,  but  not  of  what  He  suffered  from 
God.  When  He  was  suffering  for  sin  on  the  cross,  He  drops 
relationship,  and  bows  in  infinite  grace  to  the  place  of  judgment. 
He  is  made  sin.  He  realizes  what  it  is  to  be  forsaken  of  God, 
making  Himself  responsible  for  the  sins  of  men.  He  says 
therefore  in  that  terrible  moment  on  the  cross,  *'  My  God,  my 
God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?"  With  this  we  have  nothing 
to  do — no  rejection  because  of  sin.  God  forsook  Jesus  that  He 
might  not  forsake  us.  There  never  can  be  God  forsaking  a 
Christian,  or  even  hiding  Himself  from  him.  There  is  no  such 
thing  in  scripture  since  the  death  of  Christ  as  God  hiding 
Himself  from  a  believer.  We  have  not  a  promise  merely,  but 
the  accomplishment  of  it.  The  first  principle  and  present  point 
of  the  gospel  is  perfect  forgiveness  and  reconciliation.  We 
are  brought  nigh  unto  God  through  the  blood  of  Christ  and 
forgiven  all  trespasses. 

The  Lord  then  says  that  they  knew  not  what  they  were 
seeking,  and  asks  if  they  wore  able  to  drink  of  the  cup  that  He 
should  drink  of,  and  to  be  baptized  with  the  baptism  that  He  was 
baptized  with.  They  say  unto  Him,  We  are  able.  They  did 
not  know  what  they  said,  any  more  than  what  they  asked.  For 
after  this,  when  our  Lord  was  only  in  danger  of  death,  we  find 
that  they  all  forsook  Him  and  fled.  As  for  one  of  these  two  sons 
of  Zebedee,  if  he  did  venture  into  the  hall  of  judgment,  it  was 
merely,  as  it  were,  under  the  high  priest's  robe,  that  is,  on  the 
plea  of  being  known  to  him.  When  Peter  followed  on  his  own 
ground,  it  was  only  to  shew  his  utter  weakness.  In  presence  of 
such  a  cup  as  this,  and  such  a  baptism,  the  Lord  says,  "  Ye  shall 
indeed  drink  of  my  cup,  and  be  baptized  with  the  baptism  that  I 
am  baptized  with"  (not  Ye  are  able)  :  "  but  to  sit  on  my  right 
hand  and  on  my  left  is  not  mine  to  give,  but  it  shall  he  given  to 
them  for  whom  it  is  prepared  of  my  Father."  (Ver.  23.)  I 
would  just  remark  that  the  words  which  are  put  in  in  italics  mar 
the  sense  very  much.  They  are  inserted  without  warrant.  Leave 
them  out,  and  the  sense  is  better.     It  was  His  to  give  to  those 


310  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

only  to  whom  the  Father  destined  it.  Christ  is  the  adminis- 
trator of  the  rewards  of  the  kingdom.  He  says,  As  I  am  now 
the  servant  in  suffering,  so  I  shall  be  in  the  glory.  In  every- 
thing Christ  is  the  One  who  will  turn  all  things  to  the  glory  of 
God.  Every  knee  shall  bow  to  His  name,  and  every  tongue 
confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord ;  but  then  it  will  all  be  to  the 
glory  of  God  the  Father.  '■'  And  when  the  ten  heard  it,  they 
were  moved  with  indignation  against  the  two  brethren."  A 
good  deal  of  our  indignation  is  no  better  than  theirs.  Their  own 
pride  was  wounded.  No  doubt  it  seemed  a  very  right  thing  to 
put  down  these  two  brethren  who  were  so  full  of  themselves. 
But  why  were  they  thus  indignant  ?  Because  they  too  were  full 
of  themselves.  Christ  was  not  filled  with  indignation.  It  was 
a  sorrow  to  Him  :  but  they  were  moved  with  hot  feeling  against 
the  two  brethren.  We  have  to  take  care.  Often  where  we  seek 
to  pull  down  those  that  seek  to  exalt  themselves,  there  is  self  on 
our  part  too.  Supposing,  too,  we  take  one  who  has  fallen  into 
sin.  There  is  often  a  good  deal  of  strong  feeling  about  it :  but  is 
this  the  best  way  of  shewing  our  sense  of  sin  ?  Those  who  feel 
most  for  God  have  always  the  deepest  feeling  for  poor  sinners, 
and  for  saints  who  have  slipped  away  from  God.  "  If  a  man 
be  overtaken  in  a  fault,  ye  which  are  spiritual  restore  such  an 
one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness,  considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also 
be  tempted." 

"  But  Jesus  called  them  unto  him,  and  said.  Ye  know  that 
the  princes  of  the  Gentiles  exercise  dominion  over  them ;  and 
they  that  are  great  exercise  authority  upon  them."  (Ver.  25.) 
He  put  His  finger  upon  that  very  love  of  greatness  in  themselves. 
They  were  loud  in  condemning  it  in  James  and  John ;  but  the 
feeling  with  which  it  was  condemned  betrayed  that  they  had  the 
same  thought  in  their  own  hearts.  He  says,  "  It  shall  not  be  so 
among  you :  but  whosoever  will  be  great  among  you,  let  him  be 
your  minister ;  and  whosoever  will  be  chief  among  you,  let  him 
be  your  servant."  There  is  a  difference  between  the  two  words. 
The  word  translated  "  minister"  means  a  servant,  but  not 
necessarily  a  slave,  though  a  person  who  might  be  hired.  But 
in  verse  27  it  is  a  bondman  or  slave.     Do  you  want  to  be  really 


CHAPTER   XX,  311 

2;reat  according  to  the  principles  of  my  kingdom  ?  Go  down  as 
low  as  you  can.  Do  you  want  to  be  the  greatest  ?  Go  down 
the  lowest  of  all.  Whoever  has  least  of  self  is  greatest  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  For  "  the  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be 
ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom 
for  many."  (Ver.  28.)  He  took  the  lowest  place  of  all,  and 
gave  His  life  a  ransom  for  many.    Blessed  for  ever  be  His  name ! 

The  last  verses  properly  belong  to  the  next  chapter,  which  is 
the  approach  of  our  Lord  to  Jerusalem  from  the  way  of  Jericho. 
And  it  is  necessary  to  take  the  two  chapters  together,  to  have 
the  proper  connection  of  all  that  the  Holy  Ghost  has  given  us 
here.  But  I  cannot  close  even  this  part  of  the  subject  without 
recalling  attention  to  the  principles  of  the  kingdom  of  God  as 
shewn  us  by  Christ  Himself.  And  what  a  wonderful  call  it  is 
for  self-renouncing  service  !  What  a  joy  to  think  that  every- 
thing that  now  is  a  trial  will  be  found  as  a  joy  in  that  kingdom  I 
There  are  those  who  may  think  that  they  are  favoured  wuth  few 
opportunities  for  serving  the  Lord — who  are  shut  out  from  what 
their  hearts  would  desire.  Let  us  remember  that  He  who  knows 
everything  reserves  His  right  to  give  as  He  will  to  His  own  and 
of  His  own.  He  will  do  the  very  best  according  to  His  heart. 
Our  one  business  now  is  to  think  of  Him  who  came,  not  to  be 
ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  His  life  a  ransom 
for  many.  That  is  our  prime  call  and  need — to  be  Christ's 
servants  in  serving  each  other. 

In  the  transfiguration  we  had  a  picture  of  the  coming 
kingdom ;  Christ,  the  head  and  centre,  with  representatives 
of  its  heavenly  and  earthly  things  ;  on  one  side,  Moses  and 
Elias  glorified;  and  on  the  other,  the  three  disciples  in  their 
natural  bodies.  This  was  a  turning  point  in  the  history  of  our 
Lord's  course  which  John  passes  by,  but  it  is  given  fully  in  the 
other  three  gospels.  The  cross,  now  that  sin  exists,  is  the  founda- 
tion of  all  glory.  There  could  be  nothing  stable  or  holy  without 
it.  It  is  the  sole  channel  through  which  flows  to  us  all  our 
blessing ;  and  Christ's  decease,  we  know  from  Luke,  was  the 
theme  on  the  holy  mount.     But  John  gives  us  nothing  of  that 


312  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

scene.  Tlie  reason  is  because  he  is  occupied  with  Christ  as  the 
Son ;  we  find  there,  not  the  human  side,  but  the  deity  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  His  rejection  by  Israel,  and  Israel  conse- 
quently rejected  by  God,  are  assumed  from  the  beginning  of 
John's  gospel:  as  we  read,  "  He  came  to  his  own,  and  his  own 
received  him  not."  Now,  the  transfiguration  does  not  bring 
out  the  deity  of  Christ,  but  His  glory  as  exalted  Son  of  man, 
owned  withal  as  Son  of  God.  This  was  a  sample  of  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  in  His  future  kingdom,  with  the  types  of  some 
risen,  and  of  others  in  their  natural  state.  So  will  it  be  by  and 
by.  John  does  not  shew  us  the  mount,  but  the  Father's  house. 
This  is  for  the  Church.  The  world  may  see  the  glory,  more  or 
less,  as  foreshown  on  the  mount,  but  this  is  not  our  best  portion. 
We  look  for  that  blessed  hope  and  the  appearing  of  the  glory. 
Our  hope  is  Christ,  to  be  with  Him  in  the  many-mansioned 
Father's  house — a  hope  which  is  far  beyond  any  blessing  of  the 
kingdom.  Neither  will  it  be  displayed.  The  secrets  of  love 
and  communion  which  the  Church  will  have  with  Christ  in  the 
Father's  house  can  never  be  the  subject  of  manifestation  to  the 
world.  Who  now  could  or  would  publish  the  tenderest  feelings 
of  his  heart  ?  Doubtless  the  glory,  the  external  pomp,  and  the 
place  of  power  which  the  Church  will  possess  in  the  coming 
kingdom  will  be  displayed  ;  for  these  form  some  of  the  chief 
features  in  the  millennial  reign.  We  shall  reign  with  Christ, 
the  glory  of  the  Bridegroom  enveloping,  as  it  were,  the  Bride. 
If  we  discriminate  what  the  scriptures  distinguish,  we  may  find 
a  marked  distinction  between  the  proper  position  and  hopes  of 
the  Church,  and  "the  glories  of  the  kingdom,  however  real, 
which  all  the  glorified  share,  when  it  is  established  in  power. 
Thus  the  momit  of  transfiguration  holds  an  important  place  in 
the  three  synoptic  gospels,  as  shewing  Christ  in  the  capacity 
of  Messiah,  Servant,  and  Son  of  man.  As  such.  He  will  be 
displayed  after  the  pattern  in  the  mount,  and  accordingly,  the 
three  evangelists,  who  present  Christ  in  these  three  aspects,  give 
us  the  transfiguration.  Further,  the  thought  of  present  recep- 
tion by  the  Jews  had  been  entirely  given  up,  and  the  new  thing 
begins   to   be   announced  immediately  before  it.     Christ  must 


CHAPTER    XX.  313 

suffer  and  die  :  and  those  who  follow  Him  during  His  rejection 
will  be  in  the  kingdom,  but  not  as  subjects  ;  they  will  be  kings 
with  Him  when  He  reigns.  When  responsibility  and  even 
individual  privileges  come  in,  "  the  kingdom"  is  the  thought ; 
but  when  our  corporate  place  is  intended,  "  the  Church"  is 
spoken  of.  (Matt,  xvi.,  xviii.) 

Here,  in  this  chapter  (xxi.),  and  from  verse  30  of  chapter  xx., 
a  preface  to  it,  we  have  the  last  formal  presentation  of  the  king, 
though  not  with  the  thought  of  being  received  ;  but  in  order  to 
the  filling  up  of  man's  iniquity  and  the  accomplishment  of  the 
counsels  of  God,  He  presents  Himself  as  such.  We  find  first, 
that  He  is  on  His  way  to  Jerusalem  and  sees  two  blind  men 
who  cry  unto  Him,  "  Have  mercy  upon  us,  thou  Son  of 
David !"  If  they  knew  nothing  of  the  impending  crisis,  they 
notwithstanding  were  completely  in  the  spirit  of  the  scene. 
The  Holy  Ghost  was  acting  upon  them,  that  they  might  bear 
testimony  to  Jesus,  who  was  now  for  the  last  time  to  be  publicly 
presented  as  Heir  to  the  throne.  What  a  picture  !  The  seeing 
ones,  in  their  blind  hardness  of  heart,  rejecting  their  own 
Messiah,  though  owned  of  Gentiles  as  the  born  King  of  the 
Jews  ;  and  the  poor  blind  ones,  through  faith,  loudly  confessing 
Him  the  true  King.  Perhaps  their  principal — their  one — desire 
may  have  been  to  be  healed  of  their  blindness.  Be  it  so ;  but 
God  at  any  rate  gave  to  their  faith  the  proper  object  and  the 
just  confession  for  that  moment,  for  He  was  guiding  the  scene. 
His  hand  was  upon  the  spring ;  and  whatever  was  the  thought 
of  the  blind  men  in  crying  after  the  Lord,  God's  design  was 
that  there  should  be  a  suited  testimony  rendered  to  His  king, 
the  "  Son  of  David."  A  Jew  would  well  understand  all  that 
was  implied  in  the  title.  What  a  condemnation  of  Pharisees 
who  had  rejected  Christ !  The  highest  point  of  view  is  by  no 
means  always  that  which  is  most  proper ;  a  lower  one  is  some- 
times far  more  right.  Thus  the  confession  of  Christ  as  "  Son 
of  David"  was  more  in  keeping  here  than  if  they  had  said, 
"  Thou  Son  of  God."  This  may  sound  strange  where  the 
various  titles  have  not   been   weighed ;  but   in   hailing   Him 


314       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

according  to  His  Jewish  glory,  they  uttered  that  which  was  in 
unison  with  what  God  was  then  doing. 

And  now,  let  me  ask  reverently,  Why  should  the  resurrection 
of  Lazarus  be  omitted  in  the  first  three  gospels?     Man,  if  these 
accounts  had  been  his  work,   would  not  have  omitted  it :  he 
would  deem  the  insertion  of  it  in  each  gospel  as  necessary  for  a 
full  and  truthful  account.     Besides,  it  would  have  been  thought 
far  too  important  an  item  to  be  left  out  under  any  consideration. 
The  omission  of  so  stupendous  a  miracle,  in  Matthew,  Mark, 
and  Luke,  points  out  clearly  that  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God  who 
wrought  sovereignly  and  writes  by  each  with  a  special  purpose. 
If  so,  all  which  men  call  inconsistencies  and  imperfections  finds 
no  place  here,  unless  God  can  make  mistakes,  which  none  will 
say.     It  was  a  part  of  the  special  purpose  of  God  to  omit  the 
miracle ;  for  He  only  presents  those  facts  which  suit  His  design 
in  each  gospel.     Now  this  miracle  of  raising  Lazarus  does  not 
shew  us  Christ  as  the  Messiah,  or  the  Servant,  or  the  Son  of  man, 
but  as  the  Son  of  God,  who  gives  life  and  raises  the  dead — a 
grand  point  of  doctrine  in  John  v.  and  there  alone  found  in  the 
gospels.     There  were  other  miracles  of  raising  from  the  dead  in 
the  other  gospels;  but  the  truth  of  His  Sonship   and  present 
glory  in  communion  with  the  Father  is  not  in  these  others  the 
prominent  one.     It  is  not,  therefore,   as  Son  of  God  that  He 
appears  in  them.     Take  for  instance  the  raising  the  widow's  son 
at  Nain.     What  are  the  circumstances  brought  into  emphasis 
there  ?     He  was  the  only  son  of  his  mother,   and  she  was  a 
widow.     Luke,  or  rather  the  Spirit,  is  careful  to  note  this ;  for 
it  is  what  gives  point  to  the  touching  story.     ''  He  restored 
him  to  his  mother."     It  is  the   Lord's  human  sympathy,  the 
Lord  as  Son  of  man,  which  is  the  object  here.     True,  He  must 
have  been  Son  of  God,  or  He  could  not  have  thus  raised  the 
dead.     If  the  Godhead,  and  relation  to  the  Father,  of  Him  who 
was  made  flesh,  had  been  the  only  truth  to  shew,  the  attendant 
circumstances  need  not  have  been  narrated ;  the  Gospel  of  John 
might  have  sufficed,  as  it  does,  to  display  eminently  the  Lord 
Jesus  as  the  Son. 

All  this  manifests  the  extreme  perfectness  of  the  word  of  God 


CHAPTER   XX.  315 

in  these  gospels.  When  the  mind  is  subject  to  Him  this  is  seen, 
and  He  teaches  those  who  submit  themselves  and  confide  in 
Him.  There  is  a  blind  man  healed  in  John  ix. ;  but  it  is  not 
these  near  Jericho  who  appealed  to  Jesus ;  but  as  Jesus  passed 
by,  He  saw  a  man  blind  from  his  birth.  Rejected  of  men.  He 
was  going  about,  seeking  for  objects  on  whom  to  bestow  His 
blessing ;  the  Son  acting  in  grace  and  truth,  who,  unsought, 
saw  the  deep  need  and  dealt  accordingly.  It  was  an  opportunity 
of  working  the  works  of  God.  He  waits  for  nothing,  goes  to 
the  man,  and  the  work  is  done,  though  it  was  the  sabbath-day. 
How  could  the  Son  of  God  rest  in  the  presence  of  sin  and 
wretchedness,  whatever  religious  pride  might  feel  ?  The  Lord 
leaves  him  not  until  he  can  say  "  Son  of  God,"  and  worships. 
Moreover,  we  may  say,  John  never  mentions  a  miracle  simply 
for  the  display  of  power,  but  in  order  to  attest  the  divine  glory 
of  Christ.  In  Matthew  it  is  the  rejected  Messiah.  Here  (chap. 
XX.)  the  thought  is,  that,  being  despised  by  the  nation,  God  makes 
two  blind  men  bear  testimony  to  Him  as  Son  of  David ;  and  this, 
in  the  well-known  spot  of  Israel's  triumphant  power,  and  alas ! 
also  of  rebellious  unbelief  entailing  a  curse,  now  of  the  Messiah 
come  in  grace,  and  with  equal  ability  and  readiness  to  bless. 

The  place  (near  Jericho)  was  accursed.  But  if  Jesus  has 
come  as  Messiah,  although  the  Jews  reject  Him,  He  shews 
Himself  to  be  Jehovah — not  only  Messiah  under  the  law,  but 
Jehovah  above  it ;  and  so  He  blesses  them  even  at  Jericho,  and 
they  followed  Him.  This  was  the  place  that  Israel  should  have 
taken  :  they  ought  to  have  known  their  King.  The  two  blind 
men  were  a  witness  for  Him  and  against  them.  There  was  a 
competent  testimony — two  witnesses:  "In  the  mouth  of  two," 
&c.  Mark  and  Luke,  whose  object  was  not  to  bring  out  testi- 
mony valid  according  to  the  law,  mention  only  one.  There  is, 
of  course,  no  contradiction  in  this.  One  thing  is  certain,  that 
they  were  both  healed  in  the  journey  from  Jericho  to  Jerusalem. 
Luke  mentions  simply  the  vicinity  Jericho — not  as  He  was  come 
nigh,  but  as  He  was  nigh,  which  would  be  equally  true  when 
He  left  the  place.  The  Authorized  Version  has  increased  the 
difficulty  unwittingly. 


316        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

Jesus  ffoes  to  the  Mount  of  Olives.  The  Jews  well  knew 
what  was  prophesied  concerning  this  mountain ;  they  ought  to 
have  entered  into  the  spirit  of  what  the  Lord  was  doing. 

The  sending  for  the  colt  shews  the  Lord  as  Jehovah,  who  has 
a  perfect  right  to  all.  "  The  Lord  [Jehovah]  hath  need  of  him." 
What  more  thorough  than  His  knowledge  of  circumstances  in 
the  womb  of  the  future  ?  How  evident  His  control  over  the 
owner's  mind  and  feeling !  Meek  as  He  was,  sitting  upon  an 
ass,  the  King  of  Zion  according  to  the  prophet,  He  was  indeed 
as  surely  Jehovah  as  Messiah  coming  in  His  name — the  "  need" 
as  amazing  as  the  glory  of  His  person.  But  the  Lord  goes 
onward  to  Jerusalem.     And  the  multitude  cry,  "  Hosanna  to 

the  Son  of  David ! Behold,  thy  King  cometh."     They 

apply  Psalm  cxviii.  to  Messiah,  and  they  were  right.  They 
might  be  very  unintelligent,  and  perhaps  many  of  them  joined 
later  in  the  fearful  cry,  "  His  blood  be  upon  us,"  &c.  ;  but  here 
the  Lord  guides  the  scene.  He  comes  to  the  city  ;  but  He  is 
unknown:  His  own  citizens  know  Him  not.  They  ask,  "Who 
is  this?"  So  little  understanding  had  the  multitude,  M'ho  had 
just  been  saying  "  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David !"  that  they 
answer,  "  This  is  Jesus,  the  prophet  of  Nazareth  of  Galilee." 
But  though  they  only  see  Jesus  of  Galilee,  yet  He  shews  Him- 
self as  King,  and  takes  a  place  of  authority  and  power.  He 
enters  into  the  temple,  and  overthrows  the  tables  of  the  money- 
changers, &c.  This  may  certainly  be  looked  at  as  a  miraculous 
incident ;  for  it  was  astonishing  that  He  whom  they  knew  only 
as  the  prophet  of  Nazareth  should  so  boldly  enter  their  temple, 
and  drive  out  all  who  were  desecrating  it.  But  they  turn  not 
upon  Him.  The  power  of  the  God  of  the  temple  was  there, 
and  they  flee,  their  consciences  doubtless  echoing  the  Lord's 
words,  that  they  had  made  His  house  a  den  of  thieves.  But 
here  we  see,  not  only  the  testimony  of  the  crowd  to  the  kingship 
of  Jesus,  but  the  response  to  it,  as  it  were,  in  the  act  of  Jesus. 
As  if  He  had  said,  "  You  hail  me  as  King,  and  I  will  demonstrate 
that  I  am."  Accordingly,  He  reigns,  as  it  were,  in  righteous- 
ness, and  cleanses  the  defiled  temple.  Into  what  a  state  had  the 
Jews  not  fallen !     A  clear  testimony  it  was  to  them  what  Jesus 


CHAPTER   XXI.  317 

thought  about  them ;  for  what  more  severe  condemnation  than 
"ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  thieves?"  There  were  two  cleans- 
ings — one  before  our  Lord's  public  ministry,  and  the  other  at 
its  close.  John  records  the  first,  Matthew  the  last.  In  our 
gospel  it  is  an  act  of  Messianic  power,  where  He  cleanses  His 
own  house,  or,  at  least,  acts  for  God,  as  His  King.  In  John  it 
is  rather  zeal  for  the  injured  honour  of  His  Father's  house — 
"  Make  not  my  Father''s  house  an  house  of  merchandise."  A 
collateral  reason  why  John  tells  us  of  the  first  cleansing  in  the 
beginning  of  his  gospel  is,  that  he  assumes  the  rejection  of 
Israel  at  once.  Hence  their  rejection  by  Christ,  set  forth  in 
this  act,  was  the  inevitable  consequence  of  their  rejection  of 
Him  :  and  this  is  the  point  from  which  John  sets  out  when  he 
begins  with  the  ways  of  the  Lord  before  His  ministry. 

But  now  the  blind  and  the  lame  come  to  Him  to  be  healed. 
"  He  healed  their  diseases  and  forgave  their  iniquities."  Both 
these  classes  were  the  hated  of  David's  soul — the  eff*ect  of  the 
taunt  upon  David's  soul.  How  blessed  the  contrast  in  the  Son 
of  David  !  He  turns  out  the  selfish  religionists  from  the  temple, 
and  receives  there  the  poor,  blind,  and  lame,  and  heals  them — 
perfect  righteousness  and  perfect  grace. 

On  the  one  hand,  there  are  the  voices  of  the  children  crying, 
"  Hosanna,"  &c. — the  ascription  of  praise  to  Him  as  King,  the 
Son  of  David ;  on  the  other,  there  is  the  Lord  acting  as  King, 
and  doing  that  which  the  Jews  well  knew  had  been  prophesied 
of  their  King.  He  was  there  the  confessed  King ;  but  not  by 
the  chief  priests  and  scribes,  who  took  umbrage,  wilfully  and 
knowingly  rejecting  Him — "we  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign 
over  us."  Naturally,  therefore,  they  seek  to  stop  the  mouths  of 
the  children,  and  ask  Jesus  to  rebuke  them  :  "  Hearest  thou  not 
what  these  say  ?"  But  the  Lord  sanctions  their  praises  :  "  Have 
ye  never  heard,  Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes,"  &c.  (Ver.  16.) 
The  power  of  Jehovah  was  there,  and  there  was  a  mouth  to 
own  it,  though  only  in  babes  and  sucklings.  It  is  a  wondrous 
scene.  The  Lord  here  quotes  from  Psalm  viii.,  where  He  is  seen 
as  Son  of  man  after  His  rejection  as  Son  of  David  in  Psalm  ii. 
et  seq.     In  Psalm  viii.  we  have  the  suffering  and  exaltation  oi' 


318       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

the  Son  of  man.  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate,  the  Gentiles  and 
Israel,  gather,  and  do  their  worst.  Refused,  then,  as  the 
Messiah,  He  takes  the  higher  place  of  Son  of  man,  humbled 
first,  and  then  glorified.  The  blind  men  owned  Him  in  the 
first,  and  the  babes  in  the  last  and  deeper  way.  What  has  not 
God  wrought ! 

He  left  them — a  significant  and  solemn  act.  They  rejected 
Him,  and  He  abandons  them,  turning  His  back  upon  the 
beloved  city. 

As  to  the  fig-tree,  Mark  says  that  the  time  of  figs  was  not 
yet.  Many  have  been  perplexed  at  this,  thinking  that  the  Lord 
sought  figs  at  a  time  when  there  could  be  none.  The  meaning 
is,  that  the  time  was  not  come  for  the  gathering  of  figs ;  and 
consequently,  if  the  tree  had  been  in  bearing,  the  Lord  must 
have  found  figs  thereon,  for  the  time  to  gather  them — the  time 
of  figs — was  not  yet.  There  ought  to  have  been  a  show  of  fruit, 
but  there  was  no  appearance,  save  of  leaves — outward  profession. 
It  was  thoroughly  barren.  The  Lord  pronounces  a  curse  upon 
it,  and  presently  it  withered  away.  Looking  at  Mark  xi.  12, 
you  will  see  how  Matthew  disregards  time  ;  for  the  circumstance 
occupied  two  days,  which  he  puts  together  without  distinguish- 
ing. The  sentence  on  the  fig-tree  was  an  emblematic  curse 
upon  the  people,  inasmuch  as  it  w^as  the  national  tree.  The 
Lord  found  nothing  but  leaves,  and  the  word  is  that  henceforth 
no  fruit  shall  grow  upon  it  for  ever.  The  nation  had  failed  in 
fruit  to  God,  when  they  had  every  means  and  opportunity  for 
glorifying  and  serving  Him ;  and  now  all  their  advantages  are 
taken  away,  and  it  is  not  possible  for  them  as  the  old  stock. 
The  remnant  even  now  is  excepted  who  believe  in  Christ,  and  so 
is  "  the  generation  to  come."  The  disciples  wondered  ;  but  the 
Lord  says  to  them  further,  "  If  ye  shall  say  to  this  mountain  [the 
mountain  symbolizing  Israel's  political  place  among  the  nations, 
as  exalted  among  them],  Be  thou  cast  into  the  sea,"  &c.  This 
has  been  done.  Not  only  is  there  no  fruit  borne  for  God,  but 
Israel,  as  a  nation,  has  vanished — cast  into  the  sea — scattered, 
and  to  appearance  lost  in  the  mass  of  people — trodden  down  and 
oppressed  under  the  feet  of  the  Gentiles. 


CHAPTER  XXI.  319 

Here,  then,  in  these  miracles  and  scenes  is  a  remarkable 
witness  of  the  Lord's  last  presentation  to  the  Jews,  and  an 
equally  striking  picture  of  the  judgment  of  God  on  Jerusalem 
and  the  Jews  because  of  their  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  who, 
according  to  Daniel  ix.,  was  cut  off  and  had  nothing,  only  to 
have  all  things  by  and  by  far  more  gloriously ;  and  if  we  suffer, 
we  shall  also  reign  with  Him. 

To  the  question  about  His  authority,  our  Lord  answers  the 
chief  priests  and  the  elders  of  the  people  by  inquiring  their 
thought  of  John's  baptism.     He  appeals  neither  to  miracles  nor 
prophecy,  but  to  conscience.     How  evident  the  accomplishment 
of  the  ancient  oracles  in  His  person,  life,  ministry !     How  full 
the  testimony  of  signs  and  wonders  wrought  by  Him !      Yet 
their  question  proved  how  vain  all  had  been,  as  His  question 
proved  either  their  dishonesty  or  their  incompetency.     Li  either 
case,  who  were  they  to  judge?     Little  did  they  think  that  they 
and  every  other  class  in   Israel,   who   successively   sought   to 
canvass  the  Lord  of  glory,  were  in  truth  but  discovering  their 
own  distance  and  alienation  from   Grod.     So  indeed  it  ever  is. 
Our  judgments  of  others  and  of  all  things,  above  all  of  what 
concerns  Christ,  are  the  unfailing  gauge  of  our  own  condition ; 
and  equally  are  we  laid  bare,  whether  right  or  wrong,  by  our 
refusal  to  judge.     In  this  instance  (ver.  23 — 27)   the  want  of 
conscience  was  manifest — nowhere  so  fatal  as  in  religious  guides. 
"  They  reasoned  within  themselves,  saying.   If  we  shall  say. 
From  heaven ;  he  will  say  unto  us,  Why  did  ye  not  then  believe 
him  ?     But  if  we  shall  say.  Of  men  ;  we  fear  the  people  ;  for  all 
hold  John  as  a  prophet."      God  was  not  in  their  thoughts;  and 
thus  all  was  false  and  wrong.     And  if  God  be  not  the  object, 
self  is  the  idol,  and  what  more  debasing  ?     These  chief  priests 
were,  at  the  bottom  of  their  hearts,  the  abject  slaves  of  the 
people    over   whose   faith   or  superstition   they  had  dominion. 
"  We  fear  the  people."     This  at  least  was  true.     "And  they 
answered  Jesus  and  said.  We  cannot  tell."     This  was  as  clearly 
false,  the  merest  shift  of  men  Avho  preferred    to   allege  their 
incapacity  to  judge  in  their  own  sphere  rather  than  own  what 


320  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

they  knew  must  convict  them  of  fighting  against  God.  They 
could  tell,  but  would  not,  because  of  the  felt  consequences.  In 
the  hands  of  Satan  they  are  the  main  energy  of  evil  and  enemy 
of  good,  their  private  interests  being  always  opposed  to  the  real 
interests  of  God's  people.  Blind  guides  by  their  own  acknow- 
ledgment !  Infinitely  worse  the  blindness,  which,  governed  by 
no  motive  higher  than  present  advantage  and  self-importance, 
overlooked  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  and  threw  away,  as  incre- 
dulity ever  does,  riches  greater  by  far  than  the  treasures  in 
Egypt  !  To  such  as  these  the  Lord  with  ineffable  dignity 
declines  to  render  an  account  of  His  authority :  He  had  often 
borne  witness  to  it  before.  To  ask  it  of  Him,  now,  furnished  of 
itself  the  best  proof  that  an  answer  was  useless.  How  explain 
colour  to  men  who  never  saw  ?  to  men  who  would  not  see,  if 
they  could  ? 

But  our  Lord  does  more.  In  the  parable  of  the  two  sons 
commanded  to  work  in  the  vineyard  (ver.  22 — 32)  He  convicts 
these  religious  leaders  of  beino-  worse  before  God  than  the  most 
despised  classes  in  the  land.  "  Yerily  I  say  unto  you,  that  the 
publicans  and  the  harlots  go  into  the  kingdom  of  God  before 
you.  For  John  came  unto  you  in  the  way  of  righteousness,  and 
ye  believed  him  not,"  &c.  Decent  lip-homage  forms — "  I  go,  sir, 
and  went  not" —  such  was  the  religion  of  those  who  stood  highest 
in  the  world's  estimate  of  that  day.  Self-will  was  unbroken  and 
unjudged.  As  for  people  who  disgraced  the  decencies  of  society 
in  riotous  or  otherwise  disreputable  ways,  they  were  more 
accessible  to  the  stirring  searching  appeals  of  John.  Their  very 
open  and  unrestrained  evil  exposed  them  to  his  righteous  rebuke ; 
and  in  fact,  they,  not  the  respectable  devotees,  "believed  him." 
Such  as  made  a  fair  show  in  the  flesh  were  not  prepared  to 
withdraw  the  veil  of  a  fair  reputation  without  from  a  godless 
self-pleasing  course  and  character  within  ;  and  as  they  rejected 
the  counsel  of  God  against  themselves  at  John's  summons,  so 
they  would  not  follow  the  example  of  the  poor  outcasts  now 
repentant.  Deaf  to  the  call  of  righteousness,  they  were  just  as 
hardened  against  the  operations  of  God's  grace,  even  where  it 
was  most  conspicuous.    "  And  ye,  when  ye  had  seen  it,  repented 


CHAPTER   XXI.  ,  321 

not  afterward,  that  ye  might  believe  him."  Repentance  awakens 
the  sense  of  relationship  to  God  as  the  One  sinned  against.  The 
resolutions  of  nature  begin  and  end  in  ''  I  go,  sir."  The  Spirit 
of  God  produces  the  deep  and  overwhelming  conviction  that  all 
has  been  evil  against  Him,  with  neither  room  for,  nor  desire  of, 
excuse.  But  it  is  lost  for  worldly  religion,  which,  resisting 
alike  God's  testimony  and  the  evidence  of  conversion  in  others, 
sinks  into  increasing  darkness  and  hostility  to  God.  The 
ordained  Judge  of  living  and  dead  pronounces  these  proud  self- 
complacent  men  worse  than  those  they  deemed  the  worst.  They 
were  no  judges  now :  nay,  they  were  judged. 

But  next  the  Lord  sets  forth,  not  merely  man's  conduct  toward 
God,  but  God's  dealing  with  man,  and  this  in  a  two-fold  form : 
first,  in  view  of  human  responsibility  as  under  law ;  and  secondly, 
in  view  of  God's  grace  under  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The 
former  is  developed  in  the  parable  of  the  householder  (ver. 
33 — 41),  the  latter  in  that  of  the  king's  marriage-feast  for  his 
son.  (Chap.  xxii.  1 — 14.)     Of  these  let  us  now  look  at  the  first. 

"  Hear  another  parable :  There  was  a  certain  householder 
which  planted  a  vineyard,  and  hedged  it  round  about,  and 
digged  a  winepress  in  it,  and  built  a  tower,  and  let  it  out  to 
husbandmen,  and  went  into  a  far  country :  and  when  the  time 
of  the  fi'uit  drew  near,  he  sent  his  servants  to  the  husbandmen, 
that  they  might  receive  the  fruits  of  it."  (Ver.  33,  34.)  It  is  a 
picture  founded  on,  and  filling  up  the  sketch  in,  Isaiah  v. — a 
picture  of  God's  painstaking  dealings  in  Israel.  "  What  could 
have  been  done  more  to  my  vineyard  that  I  have  not  done  in 
it  ?"  Then  He  looked  for  fruit.  All  had  been  settled  by  His 
directions,  every  outward  advantage  afforded  by  His  goodness 
and  power  under  Moses,  Joshua,  &c.  There  was  definite 
arrangement,  abundant  blessing,  ample  protection,  and  adequate 
assertion  of  His  rights  by  the  prophets.  "  And  the  husband- 
men took  his  servants,  and  beat  one,  and  killed  another,  and 
stoned  another."  (Ver.  35.)  There  was  full  patience  too. 
"  Again,  he  sent  other  servants  more  than  the  first :  and  they 
did  unto  them  likewise."  (Ver.  36.)  Was  there  a  single  possi- 
bility that  remained,  a  hope  however  forlorn  ?     "  Last  of  all, 


322  LECTUKES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 

he  sent  unto  them  his  son,  saying,  They  will  reverence  my  son.*' 
(Ver.  37.)     Alas!  it  was  but  the  crowning  of  their  iniquity 
and  the  occasion  of  bringing  out  their  guilt  and  hopeless  ruin. 
For  "  when  the   husbandmen  saw  the  son,  they  said   among 
themselves.  This  is  the  heir :  come,  let  us  kill  him,  and  let  us 
seize  on  his  inheritance.     And  they  caught  him,  and  cast  him 
out  of  the  vineyard,  and  slew  him."    (Ver.  38,   39.)     They 
recognized  the  Messiah  then,  but  only  so  as  to  provoke  their 
malice  and  worldly  lusts.     "  Let  us  kill  him  and  let  us  seize  on 
his   inheritance."     It   was   not   only  lack  of  fruit,    persistent 
refusal  of  all  the  just  claims  of  God  and  robbing  Him  of  every 
due  return,  but  the  fullest  outbreak  of  rebellious  hatred,  when 
tested   by  the   presence   of  the   Son  of  God  in   their  midst. 
Probation  is  over;  the  question  of  man's  state  and  of  God's 
efforts  to  get  fruit  from  His  vineyard  is  at  an  end.     The  death 
of  the  rejected  Messiah  has  closed  this  book.     Man — the  Jew — 
ought  to  have  made  a  becoming  answer  to  God  for  the  benefits 
so  lavishly  showered  on  him ;  but  his  answer  was — the  cross. 
It  is  too  late  to  talk  of  what  men  should  be.     Tried  by  God 
under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,   they  betrayed   and 
shed  the  innocent  blood ;  they  killed  the  Heir  to  seize  on  His 
inheritance.      Hence  judgment  is  now  the   only  portion   man 
under  law  has  to  expect.     "  When  the  lord  therefore  of  the 
vineyard  cometh,  what  will  he  do  unto  those  husbandmen?" 
Seared  as  the  poor  Jews  were,  they  could  not  but  confess  the 
sad  truth  :  "  He  will  miserably  destroy  those  wicked  men,"  &c. 
(Ver.  41.)     The  wickedness  of  the  husbandmen  failed  to  achieve 
its  own  selfish  end,  as  surely  as  it  had  never  rendered  fruits 
meet  for  Him  whose  provident  care  left  men  without  excuse. 
But  the  rights  of  the  householder  were  intact ;  and  if  there  was 
still    "  the   lord  of  the  vineyard,"  was   He   indifferent   to  the 
accumulated  guilt  of  wronged  servants  and  of   His  outraged 
Son  ?      It   could   not    be.      He    must,   themselves   being    the 
witnesses,  avenge   the   more  summarily,  because  of  His  long 
patience   and   incomparable    love    so    shamefully   spurned   and 
defied.     Others   would   have   the   vineyard    let   to   them,  who 
should  render  Him  the  fruits  in  their  seasons. 


fe 


CHAPTER   XXI.  ,  323 

Thus  the  death  of  Christ  is  viewed  in  this  parable,  not  as  the 
groundwork  of  the  counsels  of  God,  but  as  the  climax  of  man's 
sin  and  the  closing  scene  of  his  responsibility.  Whether  law  or 
prophets  or  Christ  sought  fruit  for  God,  all  was  vain,  not  because 
God's  claim  was  not  righteous,  but  because  man — aye,  favoured 
man,  with  every  conceivable  help^ — was  incorrigible.  In  this 
aspect  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah  had  the  most  solemn 
meaning ;  for  it  demonstrated,  beyond  appeal,  that  man,  the 
Jew,  was  good  for  nothing  if  weighed  in  divine  scales.  It  was 
not  only  that  he  was  evil  and  unrighteous,  but  he  could  not 
endure  perfect  love  and  goodness  in  the  person  of  Christ.  Had 
there  been  a  single  particle  of  divine  light  or  love  in  men's 
heart,  they  would  have  reverenced  the  Son ;  but  now  the  full 
proof  stood  out,  that  human  nature  as  such  is  hopelessly  bad ; 
and  that  the  presence  of  a  divine  person,  who  deigned  in  love  to 
be  of  themselves  as  man,  gave  only  the  final  opportunity  to 
strike  the  most  malicious  and  insulting  blow  at  God  Himself. 
In  a  word,  man  was  now  shewn  and  pronounced  to  be  LOST. 
"  If  I  had  not  come  and  spoken  unto  them,  they  had  not  had 
sin :  but  now  they  have  no  cloke  for  their  sin.  He  that  hateth 
me  hateth  my  Father  also.  If  I  had  not  done  among  them  the 
works  which  none  other  man  did,  they  had  not  had  sin :  but  now 
have  they  both  seen  and  hated  both  me  and  my  Father." 
Christ's  death  was  the  grand  turning-point  in  the  ways  of  God  ; 
the  moral  history  of  man,  in  the  most  important  sense,  termi- 
nates there. 

"  Jesus  saith  unto  them.  Did  ye  never  read  in  the  scriptures, 
The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected,  the  same  is  become  the 
head  of  the  corner :  this  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous 
in  our  eyes  ?"  (Ver.  42.)  It  was  the  revealed  conduct  of  those 
who  took  the  lead  in  Israel — so  revealed  in  their  own  scriptures. 
Marvellous  doing  on  the  Lord's  part ! — in  manifest  reversal  of 
such  as  set  themselves  up,  and  were  accepted,  as  acting  in  His 
name :  yet  to  be  marvellous  in  Israel's  eyes,  when  the  now- 
hidden  but  exalted  Saviour  comes  forth,  the  joy  of  the  people, 
who  shall  then  welcome  and  for  ever  bless  their  once-rejected 
King :  for  truly  His  mercy  endures  for  ever.     Meanwhile  His 


^24  LECTURES  ON  THE   GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

lips  utter  the  sentence  of  sure  rejection  from  their  high  estate : 
*'  therefore  say  I  unto  you,  The  kingdom  of  God  [not  of  heaven, 
for  this  they  had  not]  shall  be  taken  from  you,  and  given  to  a 
nation  bringing  forth  the  fruits  thereof."  (Ver.  43.)  Nor  was 
this  all :  for  "  whosoever  shall  fall  on  this  stone  [Himself  in 
humiliation]  shall  be  broken ;  but  on  whomsoever  it  shall  fall 
[i.e.,  consequent  on  His  exaltation] ,  it  will  grind  him  to  powder." 
(Ver.  44.)  Thus,  He  sets  forth  the  then  ensuing  stumbles  of 
imbelief;  and  further,  the  positive  execution  of  destructive 
judgment,  whether  individual  or  national,  Jewish  or  Gentile,  at 
His  appearing  in  glory.  (Compare  Daniel  ii.) 

It  is  in  all  respects  a  notable  scene,  and  the  Lord,  now 
drawing  to  the  conclusion  of  His  testimony,  speaks  with  piercing 
decision.  So  that,  spiritually  impotent  and  dull  as  the  chief 
priests  and  Pharisees  might  be,  and  couched  as  His  words  were 
in  parables,  the  drift  and  aim  were  distinctly  felt.  And  yet, 
whatever  their  murderous  will,  they  could  do  nothing  till  His 
hour  was  come ;  for  the  people  in  a  measure  bowed  to  His  word, 
and  took  Him  for  a  prophet.  He  brought  God  in  presence  of 
their  conscience,  and  their  awe  feebly  answered  to  His  words 
of  comino;  woe. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

We  are  not  positively  informed  that  the  parable  of  the  marriage 
feast  was  uttered  at  this  time.  It  is  introduced  in  so  general  a 
manner  that  one  could  well  conceive  it  the  same  as  that  which 
Luke,  with  more  definite  marks  of  time,  presents  in  the  four- 
teenth chapter  of  his  gospel.  However  this  may  have  been, 
nothing  can  exceed  the  beautiful  propriety  of  its  occurrence 
here,  as  the  sequel  to  the  latter  part  of  Matthew  xxi.  For,  as 
the  vineyard  sets  forth  the  Lord's  righteous  claim  from  Israel 


CHAPTER   XXII.  325 

on  the  ground  of  what  He  had  entrusted  to  them,  so  tlie 
wedding  sets  forth  the  new  thing,  and  hence  is  a  comparison  of 
"  the  kingdom  of  heaven" — not  now  fruit  sought  as  a  debt  due 
to  God  from  man,  but  God  displaying  the  resources  of  His  own 
glory  and  love  in  honour  of  His  Son,  and  man  invited  to  share. 
We  have  nothing  properly  here  of  the  Church  or  assembly,  but 
the  kingdom.  Consequently,  though  the  parable  goes  beyond 
the  Jewish  economy,  so  elaborately  treated  in  the  preceding 
portion,  and  Christ's  own  personal  presence  on  earth,  it  does  not 
take  in  corporate  privilege,  but  individual  conduct,  as  variously 
aftected  by  God's  astonishing  mercy,  and  this  in  view  of  and 
flowing  from  the  place  of  Christ  as  glorified  on  high.  The 
characteristic  point  is  that  it  is  an  exposition,  not  of  Israel's 
ways  toward  the  Lord,  but  of  the  King's  ways  who  would 
magnify  His  Son ;  though  here,  as  before,  unbelief  and  rebel- 
lion never  fail  to  meet  their  just  recompense.  It  had  been 
proved  that  God  could  not  trust  man :  would  man  now  trust 
God,  and  come  at  His  word,  and  be  a  partaker  of  His  delight 
iu  His  Son? 

It  is  manifest  that  here  we  are  no  lono;er  on  Old  Testament 
ground,  with  its  solemn  prophetic  warnings.  "  The  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  certain  king,  which  made  a  marriage 
for  his  son,  and  sent  forth  his  servants  to  call  them  that  were 
bidden  to  the  wedding  ;  and  they  would  not  come/'  (Ver.  2,  3.) 
Our  Evangelist,  true  to  his  plan  and  the  design  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  presents  this  striking  picture  after  that  of  the  Messiah's 
rejection.  What  would  be  the  fresh  intervention  of  God  ?  and 
how  received  of  man,  especially  Israel?  Li  Luke,  I  may 
mention  by  the  way,  the  dispensational  connection  does  not 
appear ;  but  the  Spirit  gives  rather  a  view  of  what  God  is  to 
mankind  generally,  and  even  puts  it  as  "  a  certain  man"  making 
a  supper  with  unexampled  generosity,  not  the  ''  King"  acting 
for  the  glory  of  "  His  Son."  In  both  gospels  the  parable 
represents,  not  righteous  requirement  as  under  the  law,  but  the 
way  in  which  grace  goes  out  to  the  Jew  first  and  also  to  the 
Gentile.  He  "  sent  forth  his  servants  to  call  them  that  were 
bidden  [Israel],  but  they  would  not  come."     The  kingdom  was 


326        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

not  come,  but  announced,  wliile  the  Lord  was  here  below. 
*'  Again,  he  sent  forth  other  servants,  saying.  Tell  them  which 
are  bidden,  Behold,  I  have  prepared  my  dinner ;  my  oxen  and 
my  fatlings  are  killed,  and  all  things  are  ready :  come  unto  the 
marriage."  (Ver.  4.) 

Mark  the  difference.  On  the  first  mission  of  the  servants 
He  did  not  say  "  All  things  are  ready ;"  but  only  on  the 
second,  when  Christ  meanwhile  was  dead  and  risen,  and  the 
kingdom  was  actually  established  on  His  ascension.  It  is  the 
gospel  of  the  kingdom  after  His  work,  as  compared  with  this 
gospel  before  it.  Thus  the  two  messages  are  distinguished,  the 
rejection  of  Christ  and  His  death  by  the  grace  of  God  being 
the  turning-point.  Matthew  alone  gives  us  this  striking  differ- 
ence ;  Luke  at  once  begins,  with  equal  propriety  for  his  task, 
with  "  Come ;  for  all  things  are  now  ready,"  dwelling,  with  a 
detail  unknown  to  Matthew,  on  the  excuses  made  by  the  heart 
for  despising  the  gospel. 

The  King,  then,  was  active  and  His  honour  at  stake  in  having 
a  feast  worthy  of  His  Son.  Not  even  the  cross  of  His  Son 
turned  Him  aside  from  His  great  purpose  of  making  His  people 
happy  near  Himself.  On  the  contrary,  if  grace  works,  as  it 
does,  the  interrupted  message  is  renewed  with  new  and  infinitely 
more  urgent  appeals  to  the  invited ;  and  now  by  other  servants 
beyond  the  twelve  and  the  seventy.  So  we  have  in  the  begin- 
ning of  Acts  (ii. — vi.)  the  special  announcement  to  Israel  as 
the  children  of  the  covenant — "  to  them  that  were  bidden." 
The  first  sending  out,  then,  was  during  the  life  of  the  Messiah 
to  call  the  privileged  people ;  afterwards,  there  was  the  second 
and  specific  testimony  of  grace  to  the  same  people  when  the 
work  of  redemption  was  done. 

What  was  the  effect?  ''They  made  light  of  it,  and  went 
their  way,  one  to  his  farm,  another  to  his  merchandise." 
(Ver.  5.)  God  was  not  in  their  thoughts,  but  a  man's  own 
field  or  his  trade  ;  and,  alas !  as  God  increases  in  the  testimony 
of  His  grace,  man  grows  bolder  in  his  slight  and  opposition. 
"And  the  remnant  took  his  servants  and  entreated  them 
spitefully  and   slew  them."  (Ver.   6.)      This  is  what  you  find 


CHAPTER  XXII.  327 

in  measure  in  the  Acta  of  the  Apostles.  The  message  is  disre- 
garded in  the  earlier  chapters ;  in  chapters  vii.,  xii.,  the  servants 
are  outraged  and  slain.  The  issue  is  then  foreshewn — judgment 
on  the  Jews  and  Jerusalem.  "  When  the  king  heard  thereof  he 
was  wroth ;  and  he  sent  forth  his  armies  and  destroyed  those 
murderers,  and  burned  up  their  city."  (Ver.  7.)  Who  does 
not  see  there  the  fate  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  the  destruction 
of  their  city  ?  In  Luke  this  is  not  found  in  the  parable  :  how 
suitable  to  Matthew,  I  need  not  point  out. 

But  God  will  have  His  house  filled  with  guests,  and  if  those 
peculiarly  favoured  would  not  come,  and  even  incurred  wrath 
to  the  uttermost,  divine  grace  will  not  be  outdone  by  human 
wilfulness,  but  evil  must  be  overcome  of  good.  "  Then  saith  he 
to  his  servants.  The  wedding  is  ready ;  but  they  which  were 
bidden  were  not  worthy.  Gro  ye  therefore  into  the  highways, 
and  as  many  as  ye  shall  find  bid  to  the  marriage."  (Ver.  8,  9.) 
There  is  the  indiscriminate  dealing  with  any  and  every  soul 
under  the  gospel.  "  So  those  servants  went  out  into  the  high- 
ways, and  gathered  together  all,  as  many  as  they  found,  both 
bad  and  good  ;  and  the  wedding  was  furnished  with  guests." 
(Yer.  10.)  The  gospel  goes  out  to  men  as  they  are,  and,  wher- 
ever received,  produces  by  grace  that  which  is  according  to 
God,  instead  of  demanding  it.  Hence  all  are  welcome,  bad  and 
good,  a  dying  thief  or  a  woman  that  was  a  sinner,  a  Lydia  or  a 
Cornelius.  The  question  was  not  their  character,  but  the  feast 
for  the  King's  Son  ;  and  to  this  they  were  freely  called.  Grace, 
far  from  asking  or  finding,  gives  fitness  to  stand  before  Him 
in  peace. 

Yes,  there  is  produced  a  necessary  indispensable  fitness.  A 
wedding-garment  is  due  to  the  wedding-feast.  This  the  King, 
of  His  own  magnificent  bounty,  provided,  and  it  was  for  each 
guest  to  wear  it :  who  that  honoured  the  King  and  the  occasion 
would  not  ?  The  servants  did  not  look  for  such  garments  out- 
side :  they  were  not  worn  on  the  highways,  but  within  at  the 
wedding.  Nor  was  it  the  point  for  the  guests  to  appear  in 
their  best.  It  was  the  King's  affair  to  give.  Come  who  might, 
there  was  enough  and  to  spare  ;  ^^  all  things  were  ready." 


328        LECTUKES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

This  is  the  great  essential  truth  of  the  gospel.  So  far  from 
looking  for  anything  in  man  agreeable  to  God,  the  glad  tidings 
come  on  His  part  on  the  express  gromid  that  all  is  ruined, 
wretched,  guilty,  on  the  sinner's  part.  "  Let  him  that  is  athirst 
come ;  yea,  whosoever  will." 

But  where  the  heart  is  not  right  with  God,  it  never  submits 
to  His  righteousness ;  man,  in  this  case,  prefers  to  stand  on  his 
own  foundation.  Either  he  thinks  he  can  raise  a  claim  on  God 
by  being  or  doing  something,  or  he  ventures  within,  careless 
both  of  himself  and  God.  Such  was  the  man  who  was  found 
of  the  king  without  the  wedding-garment.  It  was  to  despise 
the  holiness  as  well  as  the  grace  of  God,  and  proved  that  he  was 
utterly  a  stranger  to  the  feast.  What  did  he  think  of,  or  care 
for,  the  feelings  of  the  King  bent  upon  the  glorifying  of  His 
Son  ?  For  this  is  the  true  and  real  secret :  God  lavishes  mercy 
on  sinners  for  the  sake  of  His  Son.  Opportunity  is  thus  given 
to  put  honour  on  His  name.  Does  my  soul  bow  to  it  and  Him  ? 
It  is  salvation.  Tlie  heart  may  go  through  much  exercise,  but 
the  only  key  to  His  astonishing  goodness  to  us  is  God's  feeling 
toward  His  Son.  If  I  may  venture  so  to  speak,  the  Lord  Jesus 
has  put  God  the  Father  under  obligation  to  Himself.  He  has  so 
lived  and  died  to  glorify  God  at  all  cost,  that  God  (I  say  it 
reverently)  is  bomid  to  shew  what  He  is  by  reason  of  His  Son. 
Hence  that  remarkable  expression  of  St.  Paul's  epistles,  "  the 
righteousness  of  God."  It  is  no  longer  man's  -righteousness 
sought  by  the  law,  but  God  being  righteous  in  Christ,  when 
man  has  been  proved  to  have  utterly  and  in  every  way  failed. 
Because  of  the  infinite  value  of  the  cross,  God  loves  to  put 
honour  on  Christ;  and  if  a  soul  do  but  plead  His  name,  it 
becomes  a  question  of  God's  righteousness  justifying  him  freely 
of  His  grace  through  the  redemption  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 

How  strikingly  was  the  truth  shewn  by  the  King's  dealing 
with  the  Christ-despising  intruder!  "And  when  the  king 
came  in  to  see  the  guests,  he  saw  there  a  man  which  had  not  on 
a  wedding-garment."  (Ver.  11.)  At  once  this  was  the  ground 
of  action.  No  question  was  started  of  what  the  man  had  been 
or  done.     The  servants  were  warranted  to  bring  in  bad  as  well 


CHAPTEB  XXII.  '  329 

as  good.  "  Such  were  some  of  you,"  says  the  apostle.  Indeed, 
this  man  may  have  been  the  most  correct,  moral,  and  religious 
of  the  company,  like  the  young  ruler  who  left  the  Lord  in 
sorrow.  But,  whether  he  were  a  hardened  sinner  or  a  self- 
righteous  soul,  one  thing  we  know  for  certain — he  had  not  on  a 
wedding-garment.  This  at  once  arrested  the  King's  eye.  He 
looked  at  the  simple  fact :  had  the  guests  on  a  wedding- 
garment  ?  This  man  had  not.  What  was  its  meaning  ?  It 
told  a  tale  the  most  damning  possible ;  it  was  setting  at  nought 
the  King's  grace — it  was  openly  dishonouring  His  Son. 

The  wedding-garment  is  Christ.  This  guest  therefore  came 
before  the  king  without  Christ.  He  did  not  put  on  Christ. 
There  might  be  ever  so  sincere  efforts  to  be  holy  and  righteous, 
but  it  was  all  and  only  himself,  not  Christ,  and  that  is  ever- 
lasting ruin  and  condemnation  to  a  sinner.  Whereas,  if  we 
suppose  the  very  chief  of  sinners  justifying  God  by  accepting 
Christ  as  the  sole  means  for  a  lost  soul  to  stand  before  Him,  this 
is  what  exalts  God  and  His  grace.  It  is  as  if  a  man  were 
broken  down  enough  in  his  thoughts  of  himself  by  God's  reve- 
lation of  what  He  is  in  Christ,  to  look  up  and  say,  I  cannot 
trust  myself,  I  cannot  trust  what  I  have  been  nor  even  what  I 
desire  to  be  to  Thee,  but  I  can  trust  fully  what  Thou  art  to  me 
in  the  gift  of  Thy  Son.  Such  confidence  in  God  produces  deep 
loathing  of  self,  real  uprightness  of  soul,  as  well  as  diligence  of 
heart  and  desire  to  do  the  will  of  God.  There  is  nothing  so 
humbling,  and  strengthening  withal,  as  the  heart's  rest  in  God's 
grace  toward  us  in  Christ. 

The  man  was  not  blamed  for  not  bringing  a  new  robe,  no 
matter  how  splendid,  of  his  own.  On  the  contrary,  what  made 
his  case  so  hopelessly  evil  was  his  indifference  to  the  munificent 
provision  of  the  king.  Why  should  not  his  own  robe  do  as  well 
as  the  king's  ?  He  knew  not,  believed  not,  that  nothing  from 
earth  suits  His  divine  presence — only  what  is  purchased  by  the 
precious  blood  of  Jesus.  He  had  no  sense  of  the  grace  which 
invited  him,  nor  of  the  holiness  that  befits  the  presence  of  God. 
The  king  accordingly  says  to  him  "  Friend,  how  earnest  thou  in 
hither,  not  having  a  wedding-garment  ?   And  he  was  speechless." 


330  LECTTJKES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

(Ver.  12.)  He  may  have  been  ever  so  well  attired,  he  may  have 
liked  the  feast  and  the  guests ;  but  he  thought  nothing  of  the  King 
nor  his  Son,  and  had  not  a  word  to  say  when  the  solemn  challenge 
came.  He  was  in  spirit  and  before  God  entirely  outside  the  feast ; 
else  he  would  have  felt  the  absolute  need  of  an  array  in  keeping 
with  the  King's  joy  and  the  Son's  bridals.  And  judgment  cast 
him  out  of  that  scene  for  which  he  had  no  heart,  where  the  un- 
believing, if  it  be  in  the  hopeless  wretchedness  of  remorse  and 
self-reproach,  must  honour  the  Son.  It  is  not  merely  govern- 
mental vengeance,  such  as  that  which  providentially  slew  the 
murderers  and  fired  their  city,  but  full  final  judgment  on  him 
who  abused  grace  by  presuming  to  draw  near  to  God  without 
putting  on  Christ — who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption.  This  man  shewed 
manifestly  that  he  had  no  part  nor  lot  in  the  matter ;  and  by 
and  by  judgment  will  simply  execute  by  power  what  is  according 
to  the  truth  now.  "  Then  said  the  king  to  the  servants  [or 
attendants,  not  the  bondmen  of  verses  3,  4,  6,  7,  8,  10],  Bind 
him  hand  and  foot,  and  take  him  away,  and  cast  him  into  the 
outer  darkness ;  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth." 
Was  this  most  solemn  sentence  rare  because  one  man  only  is 
here  instanced?  Nay,  verily;  "for  many  are  called,  but  few 
chosen."  (Ver.  13,  14.) 

Thus  terminated  the  double  trial  of  the  nation,  first,  on  the 
ground  of  their  responsibility  as  under  the  law,  and  next,  as 
tested  by  the  message  of  grace.  The  rest  of  the  chapter  judges 
in  detail  all  the  various  classes  in  Israel  who  successively  sought 
to  judge  and  ensnare  the  Lord,  bringing  into  relief  their  posi- 
tion and  winding  up  all  with  a  question  w^hich  they  could 
not  answer  without  understanding  His  position  and  withal  His 
glorious  person. 

"  Then  went  the  Pharisees  and  took  counsel  how  they  might 
entangle  him  in  his  talk.  And  they  sent  out  unto  him  their 
disciples  with  the  Herodians.''^  What  an  alliance  I  The  partisans 
of  strict  Judaism  and  the  law,  and  the  political  time-servers  of 
that  day  whom  the  former  hated  cordially,  join  in  flattering 
Jesus  to  ensnare  Him  by  the  question  of  Jewish  title  against  the 


CHAPTER  XXII.  331 

Gentile.  Would  He,  the  Messiah,  gainsay  the  hopes  and 
privileges  of  Israel  as  a  nation  ?  If  not,  how  escape  the  charge 
of  treason  against  Cffisar  ?  Diabolical  craft  was  there,  but  divine 
wisdom  brings  in  the  truth  as  to  God  and  man,  and  the  difficulty 
vanishes.  It  was  the  rebellion  of  the  Jews  against  Jehovah 
which  gave  occasion  to  His  subjecting  them  to  their  heathen 
lords :  their  wrong  made  nothing  wholly  right.  Were  they 
humbled  because  of  it  and  seeking  the  resources  of  God's  grace  ? 
Nay,  they  were  proud  and  boastful,  and  at  that  moment  in  deadly 
opposition,  mingled  with  malignant  craft,  plotting  against  their 
own — His — Messiah.  "  Tell  us,  therefore  :  what  thinkest  thou? 
Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  unto  Csesar  or  not  ?  But  Jesus 
perceived  their  wickedness  and  said.  Why  tempt  ye  me,  ye 
hypocrites?  Shew  me  the  tribute  money."  They  brought  a 
denarius,  owned  Csesar's  image  and  superscription,  and  heard  the 
unanswerable  sentence,  "  Render  therefore  unto  Csesar  the  things 
which  are  Csesar's,  and  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's." 
Had  the  Jews  honoured  Him,  they  had  never  been  in  bondage 
to  man ;  but  now,  being  so  through  their  own  sin  and  folly,  they 
were  bound  to  accept  their  humiliation.  Neither  Pharisee  nor 
Herodian  felt  the  sin  ;  and  if  one  felt  the  shame  which  the  other 
gloried  in,  the  Lord,  while  forcing  them  to  face  the  real  position 
to  which  their  iniquity  had  reduced  them,  pointed  out  that 
which,  if  made  good  in  their  souls,  would  be  the  speedy 
harbinger  of  a  divine  deliverance. 

"  The  same  day  came  to  him  the  Sadducees,  which  say  that 
there  is  no  resurrection  and  asked  him,  saying,  Moses  said,"  &c. 
(Ver.  23 — 33.)  Thus  unbelief  is  as  false  and  dishonest  as 
pretended  human  righteousness ;  and  if  one  could  be  in  league 
with  Herodians  and  affect  loyalty  to  Caesar,  so  could  the  other 
plead  Moses  as  if  the  inspired  word  had  plenary  authority  over 
their  conscience.  But  the  Lord,  as  He  laid  bare  the  hypocrisy 
of  those  who  stood  high  as  religionists,  equally  detected  what 
the  sceptic  never  suspects,  that  their  difficulties  flow  not  merely 
from  overlooking  the  power  of  God,  but  from  downright  igno- 
rance, whatever  may  be  their  self-complacency  and  conceit. 
*'  Ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the  scriptures^  nor  the  power  of  God." 


332        LECTUEES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

Faith,  on  the  contrary,  sees  clearly,  just  as  it  counts  on  God 
according  to  the  revelation  of  Himself  He  has  made  in  the  word. 
As  to  the  particular  point  in  question,  our  Lord,  not  content 
with  tracing  their  sophism  to  the  sheerest  misapprehension  of 
the  resurrection-state,  proves  (and  from  Moses  too,  without  going 
further)  that  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  is  an  essential  radical 
part  of  God's  scheme  and  truth.  Luke  was  inspired  to  convey 
an  additional  statement  as  to  the  intermediate  living  of  the 
separate  spirit.  But  in  our  gospel  the  one  point  is  that  the 
dead  rise,  because  God  declared  Himself  the  God  of  the  fathers 
after  their  death ;  and  confessedly  He  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead, 
but  of  the  living.  They  must  therefore  rise  to  live  again.  If 
He  were  their  God  in  their  state  when  He  spoke  to  Moses,  He 
must  be  the  God  of  the  dead,  which  the  Sadducee  had  been  the 
first  to  deny.  It  was  the  more  important  so  to  reveal  Himself 
to  Moses,  who  was  in  due  time  to  bring  in  the  conditional 
system  of  the  law,  with  its  visible  rewards  and  pmiishments  and 
the  sure  ruin  of  all  who  through  unbelief  clung  to  it  and  present 
things,  despising  the  promises  which  hang  on  "  the  Seed"  and 
resurrection.  Thus,  infidelity  is  made  miwittingly  to  bring  out 
from  Christ  with  divine  clearness  the  power  and  purpose  of  God 
revealed  in  scripture,  and  this  on  the  ground  chosen  to  create 
difficulty.  And  God's  purpose  to  bless  Israel  fully  in  resurrection- 
power  is  asserted,  after  He  had  shewn  the  necessary  dealing  with 
their  sin  in  subjecting  them  meanwhile  to  the  Gentile. 

But  if  the  Pharisees  retired  with  wonder,  they  were  far  from 
subdued ;  and  indeed  they  bestir  themselves  afresh  when  their 
sceptical  rivals  were  put  to  silence.  They  assemble  together, 
when  a  lawyer  "  tempts"  Him,  but  in  fact  only  elicits  a  perfect 
summary  of  practical  righteousness.  They  talked  and  tempted : 
Jesus  was  the  expression  of  all  the  perfectness  of  law  and 
prophets,  and  far,  far  more,  the  image  of  God  Himself  in  grace 
as  well  as  righteousness  here  below  :  not  as  Adam,  who  rebelled 
against  God — not  as  Cain,  who  loved  not  his  neighbour,  but 
slew  his  brother.  (Verses  34 — 40.) 

And  now,  finally,  it  was  the  Lord's  place  to  ask  them  the 
question  of  questions,  not  only  for  a  Pharisee,  but  for  any  soul ; 


CHAPTER  XXIII.  333 

"What  think  ye  of  Christ?  A^Hiose  Son  is  he?"  He  was 
David's  Son,  most  true ;  but  was  this  the  truth,  the  whole  truth? 
"  How,  then,  does  David  in  spirit  call  him  Lord,  saying, 
Jehovah  said  unto  my  Lord  ?"  &c.  How  was  He  both — David's 
Son  and  David's  Lord  ?  It  was  the  simple  truth,  the  key  to  all 
scripture,  the  way,  the  truth,  the  life,  the  explanation  of  His 
position,  the  only  hope  for  theirs.  But  they  were  dumb.  They 
knew  nothing,  and  could  answer  nothing.  "  Neither  durst  any 
man  from  that  day  forth  ask  him  any.  more  questions." 


CHAPTER  XXIIL 

The  last  chapter  had  silenced  those  who  pretended  to  most  light. 
Not  believing  in  Christ  they  were  destitute  of  the  only  key  to 
scripture,  and  Psalm  ex.,  bright  as  its  testimony  is  to  their  own 
Messiah,  was  a  thick  cloud,  not  only  to  Egyptians  now  as  of  old, 
but  to  Israel.  They  saw  not  His  glory,  and  were  therefore 
hopelessly  puzzled  how  to  understand  that  David,  speaking  by 
the  Spirit,  should  call  his  son  his  Lord. 

In  this  chapter  (xxiii.)  the  Lord  pronounces  the  doom  of  the 
nation,  and  most  of  all,  not  of  those  man  would  chiefly  denounce, 
not  of  the  openly  lawless,  licentious,  or  violent,  nay,  nor  of  the 
ease-loving  sceptical  Sadducees,  but  of  those  who  stood  highest 
in  general  esteem  for  their  religious  knowledge  and  sanctity. 
And  so  it  always  is  when  we  find  a  dealing  of  God  with  His 
people.  Conscience,  man,  the  very  world,  can  with  more  or  less 
exactness  judge  of  immoral  grossness.  God  sees  and  eschews 
what  looks  fair  to  human  eyes  and  is  withal  false  and  unholy. 
And  the  word  of  God  is  explicit  that  so  it  is  to  be.  The  heaviest 
woes  yet  in  store  for  this  world  are  not  for  heathen  darkness,  but, 
as  for  rebellious  Judaism,  so  for  corrupt  Christendom,  for  the 


334  LECTURES   ON  THE   GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 

spot  where  most  truth  is  known  and  the  highest  privileges 
conferred,  but  alas  !  their  power  despised  and  denied.  It  is  not 
that  God  when  He  arises  to  judge  will  leave  the  pagan  nations 
unpunished.  They  shall  not  go  without  punishment,  but  surely 
drink  of  the  cup.  Yet  "  hear  this  word  that  the  Lord  hath 
spoken  against  you,  0  children  of  Israel,  against  the  whole 
family  which  I  brought  up  from  the  land  of  Egypt,  saying,  You 
only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth :  therefore  I 
will  punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities."  Even  so  is  it  now  with 
the  professing  Gentile ;  and  the  fuller  the  light  bestowed,  and 
the  richer  the  grace  of  God  revealed  in  the  gospel,  they  are  only 
so  much  the  graver  reasons  for  unsparing  judgments  on  Christen- 
dom, when  the  knell  of  divine  vengeance  tolls  for  those  on  earth 
who  know  not  God  and  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  The  Lord  sees  not  as  man  seeth,  whether  in  grace  or 
in  judgment :  for  man  looks  on  the  outward  appearance,  but 
the  Lord  looks  on  the  heart.  JSTo  otherwise  did  Jesus  speak 
in  the  scene  before  us. 

It  is  remarkable,  however,  that  in  the  first  instance  He  spoke 
"  to  the  multitudes  and  to  his  disciples."  They  were  yet  to  a 
sreat  extent  viewed  together — this  till  the  death  and  resurrection 

O  CD 

of  Christ ;  and  even  then  the  Holy  Ghost  slowly  breaks  one  old 
tie  after  another,  and  only  utters  His  last  word  to  the  Jewish 
remnant  (then  Christian  of  course)  by  more  than  one  witness 
not  long  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  But  even  in 
principle  separation  there  was  not,  nor  could  be,  till  the  cross. 
Hence  the  fatal  error  of  some  who  argue  from  that  which  was 
done  in  Israel  before  the  death  of  Christ  to  neglect  and  overthrow 
the  holy  union,  apart  from  the  world,  to  which  believers  are 
called  since  that  momentous  day.  The  foundation  for  it  was  not 
even  laid,  the  middle  wall  of  partition  still  subsisted ;  and  though 
the  faith  that  pierced  through  to  the  deeper  glory  of  the  Lord's 
person  never  failed  to  reap  a  rich  reward  and  the  fullest  welcome, 
yet  would  it  have  been  premature,  and  indeed  contrary  to  God's 
order  as  yet,  to  have  led  the  Jews  outside  the  camp,  or  to  have 
gathered  them  and  the  Gentiles  into  one  body,  before  the  cross. 
The  more  solemn  the  sentence  of  God  pronounced  or  executed, 


CHAPTER  XXIII.  335 

the  greater  and  more  wondrous  is  the  display  of  His  long- 
suffering.  And  if  He  call  us  to  patience,  how  astonishing  is 
His  own !  How  truly  in  His  case  patience  has  its  perfect  work  ! 
But  what  shall  we  say  of  the  spirit  that  abuses  His  patience 
toward  that  which  He  is  going  to  judge,  to  a  denial  of  the  truth, 
equally  sure,  of  His  sensitive  love  and  jealous  care  over  such  as 
stand  in  Christ  in  the  most  intimate  nearness  of  relationship  to 
Himself?  He  does  speak  peace  to  His  saints ;  but  let  them  not 
turn  again  to  folly. 

It  was,  then,  part  of  our  Lord's  Jewish  mission  to  say  that 
"  the  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  sit  in  Moses'  seat :  all  therefore 
whatsoever  they  bid  you  observe,  that  observe  and  do."  (Ver. 
3,  4.)     But  there  was  the  careful  warning  against  making  the 
scribes  and  Pharisees  in  anywise  personal  standards  of  good  and 
evil.     "  Do  not  ye  after  their  works  ;  for  they  say  and  do  not." 
They  were  in  themselves  beacons,  patterns  of  wrong,  not  of 
right.   (Ver.  4 — 7.)     Still  not  only  are  the  disciples  classed  with 
the  multitude  ;  but  in  the  very  strongest  denunciations  of  these 
religious  guides,  they  are  bound  as  yet  by  the  Lord  to  acknow- 
ledge those  who  sat  in  Moses'  seat.     There  they  were  in  fact, 
and  the  Lord  maintains,  instead  of  dissolving,  the  obligation  to 
own  them  and  whatever  they  set  forth,  not  of  their  own  tradi- 
tions but  from  the  law.     This  was  to  honour  God  Himself,  spite 
of  the  hypocrites,  who  only  sought  man's  honour  for  themselves, 
and  it  affords  no  warrant  for  false  apostles  or  their  self-deceived 
successors  now.     For  the  apostles  had   no  seats   like  that   of 
Moses ;  and  Christianity  is  not  a  system  of  ordinance  or  formal 
observance  like   the  law,  but,  where  real,  is  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  through  life  in  Christ,  which  is  formed  and  fed  by  the 
word  of  God. 

It  has  been  urged,  confidently  enough  of  late  and  in  quarters 
where  one  might  have  hoped  for  better  things,  that,  as  the 
saints  in  Old  Testament  times  looked  for  Christ,  and  eternal  life 
was  theirs  by  faith,  though  they  were  under  the  law,  so  we  who 
now  believe  in  Christ  are  nevertheless  and  in  the  same  sense 
under  the  law  like  them,  though  like  them  we  are  justified  by 
faith.     Now,  plausible  and  even  fair  as  this  may  seem  to  some, 


S36        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

I  have  no  hesitation  in  pronouncing  it  extremely  evil.  It  is  a 
deliberate  putting  souls  back  into  the  condition  from  which  the 
work  of  Christ  has  extricated  us.  The  Jews  of  old  were  placed 
under  the  law  for  the  wise  purposes  of  God,  till  the  promised 
Seed  came  to  work  a  complete  deliverance ;  and  the  saints  in 
their  midst,  though  they  rose  above  that  position  by  faith,  were 
all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage  and  the  spirit  of  fear. 
Christ  has  set  us  free,  by  the  great  grace  of  God,  through  His  own 
death  and  resurrection  ;  and  we  have  thereon  received  the  Spirit 
of  sonship  whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father.  And  yet,  spite  ot 
the  plainest  testimony  of  God  to  the  momentous  change  brought 
about  by  the  coming  of  His  Son,  and  the  accomplishment  of 
His  work,  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  is  openly,  seri- 
ously proposed,  as  if  it  were  part  of  the  faith  once  delivered  to 
the  saints,  that  this  wondrous  working  and  display  of  divine 
grace  should  be  set  aside,  with  their  results  to  the  believer,  and 
that  the  soul  should  be  replaced  under  the  old  yoke  and  in  the 
old  condition  !  Doubtless  this  is  precisely  what  Satan  aims  at, 
an  effort  to  blot  out  all  that  is  distinctive  of  Christianity 
by  a  return  to  Judaism.  Only  one  may  be  amazed  to  find 
so  barefaced  an  avowal  of  the  matter  in  men  professing  evan- 
gelical light. 

The  true  answer,  then,  to  such  misunderstandings  of  Matthew 
xxiii.  and  misapplications  of  similar  portions  of  holy  writ,  is 
that  as  yet  our  Lord  was  adhering  (and  so  He  did  to  the  last 
moment)  to  His  proper  Messianic  mission ;  and  this  supposed 
and  maintained  the  nation  and  the  remnant  under  the  law,  and 
not  in  the  delivering  power  of  His  resurrection.  Which  of  the 
disciples  could  yet  say  "  Henceforth  know  we  no  man  after  the 
flesh :  yea,  though  we  have  known  Christ  after  the  flesh,  yet 
now  henceforth  know  we  him  no  more.  Therefore  if  any  man 
be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature :  old  things  have  passed  away ; 
behold,  all  things  are  become  new.  And  all  things  are  of  God, 
who  hath  reconciled  us  to  himself  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  hath 
given  to  us  the  ministry  of  reconciliation."  Now,  on  the  con- 
trary, this  is  the  normal  language  of  the  Christian.  It  is  not  a 
question  of  special  attainment  nor  of  extraordinary  faith,  but 


CHAPTER   XXIII.  337 

of  simple  present  subjection  to  the  full  christian  testimony  in 
the  New  Testament.  And  this  I  may  add,  that  what  the  law 
was  to  the  Jew,  the  word  of  God  in  all  its  extent  is  to  the 
Christian,  specially  that  part  which  was  founded  on  and  followed 
Christ  dead,  risen,  glorified,  and  sending  down  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Even  were  we  Jews,  the  old  tie  is  dissolved  by  death,  and  we 
are  married  to  another,  even  to  Christ  raised  from  the  dead. 
Thus  to  have  the  law  as  well  as  Christ  for  our  guide  and  rule  is 
like  having  two  husbands  at  one  time  and  is  a  sort  of  spiritual 
adultery.  Subject  even  to  one  another  in  grace,  we  are  to  heed 
no  authority  save  God's  in  the  things  of  God. 

Surely  also  we  can  and  ought  to  take  the  moral  profit  of  our 
Lord's  censure  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees :  for  what  is  the 
heart !  We  have  to  beware  of  imposing  on  others  that  which 
we  are  remiss  to  observe  ourselves.  We  have  to  watch  against 
doing  works  to  be  seen  of  men.  We  have  to  pray  against  the 
allowance  of  the  world's  spirit — the  love  of  pre-eminence,  both 
within  and  without.  (Ver.  4 — 7.) 

The  truth  is  that  here,  as  everywhere,  the  power  of  the  truth 
and  blessing  depends  on  a  hearty  acquiescence  in  Christ's  glory 
in  one  form  or  another,  and  our  participation  consequently  in 
His  thoughts  and  feelings.  Hence  the  word  is,  "  Be  not  ye 
called  Rabbi ;  for  one  is  your  Master,  even  Christ,  and  all  ye 
are  brethren.  And  call  no  one  your  father  upon  the  earth  :  for 
one  is  your  Father,  which  is  in  heaven.  Neither  be  ye  called 
masters;  for  one  is  your  Master,  even  Christ."  (Ver.  8 — 10.) 
The  question  here  is  not  of  the  various  gifts  which  the  Lord 
confers  by  the  Holy  Ghost  on  His  members  in  His  body  the 
Church,  but  of  religious  authority  in  the  world  and  a  certain 
status  and  respect  by  virtue  of  ecclesiastical  office  or  position. 
This  were  to  govern  divine  things  on  the  principle  of  men  and 
to  reward  the  fruit  of  God's  grace,  if  it  be  anything  real,  with 
that  which  appeals  to,  and  gratifies  the  base  selfishness  of,  the 
heart.  Thus,  wdiile  asserting  the  authority  of  the  law  in  the 
sphere  for  which  it  was  given,  there  is  gradually  increasing 
severity  in  the  exposure  of  the  moral  worthlessness  of  those  who 
turned  it  to  their  own  exaltation.  But  there  is  no  development 
z 


338       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

as  yet  of  the  blessed  provision  His  love  would  make,  when  He 
was  ascended,  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  for  the  work  of 
the  ministry,  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ.  But  the 
great  moral  principle  of  the  kingdom  (which  is  always  true,  I 
need  hardly  say)  is  enforced  here.  "  He  that  is  greatest  among 
you  shall  be  your  servant.  And  whosoever  shall  exalt  himself 
shall  be  abased  ;  and  he  that  shall  humble  himself  shall  be 
exalted."  (Ver.  11,  12.)  The  cross  and  the  heavenly  glory 
would  but  deepen  the  value  and  significance  of  these  words  of 
the  Saviour;  but  even  before  either  and  independently  of  the 
new  order  of  things  in  the  Church,  they  bore  His  stamp  and 
were  current  for  the  kingdom. 

In  marked  contrast  with  this  pattern  of  true  service  for  the 
disciples  were  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  on  whom  the  Lord 
next  proceeds  to  pronounce  eight  solenui  woes.  (Yer.  13 — 33.) 
What  else  could  He  say  of  men  who  not  only  entered  not  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  but  hindered  those  disposed  to  enter? 
What  else  could  be  due  to  those  who  sought  religious  influence 
over  the  weak  and  defenceless  for  gain  ?  Granted  that  their 
proselyting  zeal  was  untiring,  what  was  the  fruit  in  souls  before 
God  ?  Were  not  the  taught  as  usual  the  truest  index  of  such 
teachers,  as  being  more  simple  and  honest  after  the  flesh,  unre- 
served as  to  their  ways  and  aim  and  spirit  ?  Then  there  is  the 
laying  bare  the  nice  hair-splitting  as  to  outward  distinctions, 
which  really  overlooked  the  patent  authority  of  God ;  and  the 
insisting  on  the  pettiest  exactions  to  the  neglect  of  the  plainest 
everlasting  moral  truth.  Next  is  detected,  the  effort  after 
external  look,  whatever  might  be  the  impurity  within  ;  and  this 
both  in  their  labour  and  in  their  lives  and  persons,  which  were 
full  of  guile  and  self-will,  crowned  by  affected  great  veneration 
for  the  prophets  and  the  righteous  who  had  suffered  of  old,  and 
no  longer  acted  on  the  conscience.  This  last  gave  them  the 
more  credit.  There  is  no  cheaper,  nor,  in  the  world,  more 
successful  means  of  gaining  a  religious  reputation,  than  this 
show  of  honour  for  the  righteous  who  are  dead  and  gone, 
especially  if  they  connect  themselves  with  them  in  appearance, 
as  being  of  the  same  association.     The  succession  seems  natural, 


CHAPTER  XXIII^  339 

and  it  sounds  hard  to  charge  those  who  honour  the  dead  saints 
in  this  day  with  the  same  rebellious  spirit  which  persecuted  and 
slew  them  in  their  own  day.  But  the  Lord  would  put  them  to 
a  speedy  and  decisive  test,  and  prove  the  real  bent  and  spirit 
of  the  world's  religion.  ''Wherefore,  behold,  I  send  unto  you 
prophets,  and  wise  men,  and  scribes;  and  some  of  them  ye  shall 
kill  and  crucify ;  and  some  of  them  shall  ye  scourge  in  your 
sj'uagogues,  and  persecute  them  from  city  to  city ;  that  upon 
you  may  come  all  the  righteous  blood  shed  upon  the  earth,  from 
the  blood  of  righteous  Abel  to  the  blood  of  Zacharias  son  of 
Barachias,  whom  ye  sIcav  between  the  temple  and  the  altar." 
(Ver.  34,  35.)  It  was  morally  the  same  race  and  character  all 
through.  In  righteous  government  adds  the  Lord,  "  Verily  I 
say  unto  you,  All  these  things  shall  come  upon  this  generation." 
(Yer.  36.)  Thus  should  be  judged  the  full  measure,  begun  by 
their  fathers  and  completed  by  themselves.  Hypocrites  they 
were  on  all  the  counts  of  which  the  Lord  accused  them,  and  as 
guilty  as  the  worst  of  their  predecessors,  they  would  soon  prove 
themselves  in  the  very  point  of  their  self-complacency.  Ser- 
pents indeed  they  were — a  viper-brood.  How  could  such  escape 
the  judgment  of  hell  ? 

Yet  how  touching  here  is  the  Lord's  lament  over  the  guilty 
city.  His  own  city :  "  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  thou  that  killest 
the  prophets,"  &c.  (Ver.  37.)  His  glory  shines  out  more  than 
ever ;  the  rejected  Messiah  is  in.  truth  Jehovah.  He  would  have 
gathered  (and  how  often !)  but  they  would  not.  It  was  no 
longer  His  house  nor  His  Father's,  but  theirs,  and  it  is  left  unto 
them  desolate.  Nevertheless,  if  it  be  a  most  solemnly  judicial 
word,  there  is  hope  in  the  end.  "  For  I  say  unto  you.  Ye  shall 
not  see  me  henceforth,  till  ye  shall  say.  Blessed  is  he  that 
cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  (Ver.  39.)  Israel  are  yet  to 
see  their  king,  but  not  till  they,  at  least  a  goodly  remnant  of 
them,  are  converted  to  welcome  Him  in  Jehovah's  name. 


3j«<0 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

We  see  in  this  prophecy  of  our  Lord  a  remarkable  confirmation 
of  a  great  principle  of  God — that  He  never  opens  out  the  future, 
of  judgments  on  the  rebellious,  and  of  deliverance  for  His  own 
people,  till  sin  has  so  developed  itself  as  to  manifest  total  ruin. 
Take  the  very  first  instances  in  the  Bible.     When  was  it  said 
that  the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head  ? 
When  the  woman  was  beguiled,  and  the  man  in  transgression 
through  the  wiles  of  the  enemy ;  when  thus  sin  had  entered  the 
world,  and  death  by  sin.     Again,  the  prophecy  of  Enoch,  given 
ns  by  Jude,  was  uttered  when  the  term  of  God's  patience  with 
the  then  world  was  almost  closed,  and  the  flood  was  about  to 
bear  witness  of  His  judgment  on  man's  corruption  and  violence. 
Thus,  whether  we  look  at  the  first  prediction  of  Christ  before 
the  expulsion  from  Eden,  or  at    the  testimony  of  the  Lord's 
coming  to  judge  before  the  deluge,  prophecy  thus  far  evidently 
comes  in  when  man  has  wholly  broken  down.     So,  next,  we  find 
Noah,  when  there  was  confusion  and  failure  in  his  own  family 
and  in  himself  too,  led  of  the   Holy  Ghost    into  a  prophetic 
summary  of  the  whole  world's  history,  beginning  with  the  doom 
of  him  who  despised  his  father,  even  though  it  were  to  his  own 
shame,  and  proceeding  with  the  blessing  of  Shem  and  the  portion 
of  Japhet.     So,  later  on,  with  the  prophecies  of  Balaam  and  of 
Moses,  "yea,  and  all  the  prophets,  from  Samuel  and  those  that 
follow  after ;"  for  Samuel's  is  that  striking  epoch  which  the  New 
Testament  singles  out  as  the  commencement  of  the  great  line  of 
the  prophets.     And  why  ?     It  was  the  day  when   Israel  openly 
abandoned  God  as  their  king,  consummating  the  sin  which  their 
heart  conceived  in  the  desert,  when  they  sought  a  captain  in 
order  to  return  into  Egypt.     It  was  a  proud  crisis  in  Israel, 
whose   blessedness   lay  in  being  a  people  separated    from   all 
around  by  and  to  Jehovah  their  God,  who  would  surely  have 
provided   them  a  king  of   His  own  choice,  had   they  waited, 


CHAPTER   XXIV.  341 

instead  of  choosing  for  themselves,  to  His  dishonour  and  their 
own  sure  degradation  and  sorrow,  in  order  to  be  like  the  nations. 

The  same  principle  equally  and  conspicuously  applies  to  the 
time  when  the  great  prophetic  books  Avere  written — Isaiali,  Jere- 
miah, and  the  rest.  It  was  when  all  present  hope  had  fled,  and 
David's  sons  wrought  no  deliverance,  but  rather  at  last  a  deeper 
curse  through  their  towering  iniquity  and  profane  insults  of  the 
true  God,  who  was  thus  morally  forced  to  pronounce  the  nation 
Lo-ammi — "  not  my  people."  Before,  and  during,  and  after 
the  captivity,  the  Spirit  of  prophecy  laid  bare  the  sin  of  king, 
and  priests,  and  prophets,  and  people,  but  pointed  the  heart  to 
the  coming  Messiah  and  the  new  covenant.  And  Him  we  have 
seen,  in  our  Gospel,  actually  come,  but  growingly  and  utterly 
rejected  by  Israel,  and  all  their  own  promises  and  hopes  in  Him  ; 
and  now  in  the  near  prospect  of  His  own  death  at  their  hands, 
in  itself  their  worst  of  deaths,  He  takes  up  this  prophetic  strain. 

"  And  Jesus  went  out,  and  departed  from  the  temple."  For 
what  was  it  now?  A  corpse,  and  no  more.  "  Behold,  yoia- 
house  is  left  unto  you  desolate."  "And  his  disciples  came  to 
him  for  to  shew  him  the  buildings  of  the  temple.  And  Jesus 
said  unto  them.  See  ye  not  all  these  things  ?  Verily  I  say  unto 
you.  There  shall  not  be  left  here  one  stone  upon  another  which 
shall  not  be  thrown  down."  (Ver.  1,  2.)  The  hearts  of  believers 
then,  as  too  often  now,  were  occupied  with  present  appearances, 
and  the  great  show  of  grandeur  in  God's  service ;  the  halo  of 
associations  was  bright  before  their  eyes.  But  Jesus  passes 
sentence  on  all  that  even  they  admired  on  the  earth.  In  truth, 
when  He  left  the  temple,  all  was  gone  which  gave  it  value  in  the 
sight  of  God.  It  is  ever  thus.  Outside  Jesus,  what  is  there  in 
this  world  but  vain  show  or  worse  ?  And  how  does  the  Lord 
deliver  His  own  from  the  power  of  tradition  and  every  other 
source  of  attraction  for  the  heart?  He  opens  out  the  com- 
munications of  His  o\Aai  mind,  and  casts  the  light  of  the  future 
on  the  present.  How  often  Avorldliness  unjudged  in  a  Christian's 
heart  betrays  itself  by  want  of  relish  for  God's  unfolding  of  what 
He  is  going  to  do !  How  can  I  enjoy  the  coming  of  the  Lord  if 
it  is  to  throw  down  much  that  I  am  seeking  to  build  up  in  the 


342       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

world  ?  A  man,  for  instance,  may  be  trying  to  gain  or  keep  a 
status  by  his  ability,  and  hoping  that  his  sons  may  outstrip 
himself  by  the  superior  advantages  they  enjoy.  On  some  such 
idea  is  founded  all  human  greatness ;  it  is  "  the  world,"  in  fact. 
Christ's  coming  again  is  a  truth  which  demolishes  the  whole 
fabric ;  because,  if  wc  really  look  for  His  coming  as  that  which 
may  be  from  day  to  day — if  we  realize  that  we  are  set  like 
servants  at  the  door  with  the  handle  in  hand,  waiting  for  Him 
to  knock  (we  know  not  how  soon),  and  desiring  to  open  to  Him 
immediatelt/  ("blessed  are  those  servants!") — if  such  is  our 
attitude,  how  can  we  have  time  or  heart  for  that  which  occupies 
the  busy  Christ-foro-ettino:  world  ?  Moreover,  we  are  not  of  the 
world,  even  as  Christ  is  not ;  and  as  for  means  and  agents  to 
carry  on  its  plans  and  ends,  there  never  was  nor  will  be  a  lack 
of  men  to  do  its  work.  But  we  have  a  higher  business,  and  it  is 
beneath  us  to  seek  the  world's  honours.  Let  our  outward 
position  here  below  be  ever  so  menial  or  trying,  what  so  glorious 
as  in  it  to  serve  the  Lord  Christ  ?     And  He  is  coming. 

Li  the  cross  I  see  God  humbling  Himself — the  only  One  of 
all  greatness  making  nothing  of  Himself  for  my  soul — the  only 
One  who  commands  all  becoming  a  servant  of  the  very  vilest. 
A  person  cannot  receive  the  truth  of  the  cross  without  having 
in  measure  his  walk  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  it.  Yet 
saints  of  God  have  regarded  the  cross,  not  so  much  as  that 
power  by  which  the  world  is  crucified  unto  them  and  they  unto 
the  world,  but  rather  as  the  remedy  by  which  they  are  set  free 
from  all  anxiety,  in  order  to  make  themselves  a  comfortable 
place  in  the  world.  The  Christian  ought  to  be  the  happiest  of 
men  ;  but  his  happiness  consists  not  in  what  he  has  here,  but  in 
what  he  knows  that  he  will  have  with  Christ.  Meanwhile,  our 
service  and  obedience  are  to  be  formed  according  to  the  spirit 
of  the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Man's  evil  and  God's 
grace  thoroughly  came  out  in  the  cross ;  all  met  there :  and  it 
is  founded  upon  this  great  truth  that  it  is  said  so  often  in 
scripture,  "  The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand  ;"  because  all  was 
brought  out  in  moral  ways  and  in  dispensational  dealings  be- 
tween God  and  man. 


CHAPTER  XXIV.  343 

Connected  with  this,  our  Lord  does  not  as  yet  unfold  here 
the  portion  of  us  Christians,  but  takes  up  the  disciples  where 
they  "were.  They  were  believing  godly  Jews.  Their  associ- 
ations connected  Christ  and  the  temple  together.  They  knew 
that  He  was  the  Messiah  of  Israel,  and  they  expected  Him 
to  judge  the  Romans  and  gather  all  the  scattered  ones  of 
the  seed  of  Abraham  from  the  four  winds  of  heaven.  They 
looked  for  all  the  prophecies  about  the  land  and  the  city  to  be 
accomplished.  There  was  no  thought  in  the  minds  of  the 
disciples  at  this  time  of  Jesus  going  to  heaven  and  staying  there 
for  a  long  time — of  the  scattering  of  Israel,  and  the  Gentiles 
being  brought  in  to  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  Consequently 
this  great  prophecy  on  the  mount  of  Olives  starts  with  the 
disciples  and  with  their  condition.  Their  hearts  were  too  much 
occupied  with  the  buildings  of  the  temple.  But  the  Lord,  now 
rejected,  announces  that  "  there  shall  not  be  left  here  one  stone 
upon  another  that  shall  not  be  thrown  down."  (Ver.  2.)  This 
excited  greatly  the  desire  of  the  disciples  to  understand  how 
such  things  were  to  come  to  pass.  They  were  aware  fi'om  the 
prophecies  tlmt  there  was  a  time  of  dismal  sori'ow  for  Israel, 
and  they  did  not  know  how  to  put  this  together  with  their 
predicted  blessing.  They  ask  Him,  therefore,  "  When  shall 
these  things  be  ?  and  what  shall  be  the  sign  of  thy  coming  and 
of  the  end  of  the  world  ?"  (Ver.  3.) 

"  Thy  coming"  means  "  the  Lord's  presence  with  them  on 
earth;"  and  "the  end  of  the  a^e"  is  a  totally  different  word 
from  that  translated  "  world"  elsewhere  :  it  means  here  the  end 
of  the  time  during  which  our  Lord  should  be  absent  from  them. 
They  wished  to  know  the  sign  of  His  presence  with  them.  They 
knew  there  could  never  be  such  desolation  if  their  Messiah  was 
reigning  over  them.  They  wished  to  know  when  the  time  of 
sorrow  should  come,  and  what  should  be  the  sign  of  His  own 
presence  that  should  close  it  and  bring  in  unending  joy. 

"  And  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  them.  Take  heed  that  no 
man  deceive  you.  For  many  shall  come  in  my  name,  saying, 
I  am  Christ;  and  shall  deceive  many."  (Ver.  4,  5.)  In  the 
epistles  of  Paul  it  is  never  exactly  such  a  thought  as  warn- 


344  LECTURES   ON   THE    GOSPEL    OF  MATTHEW. 

ing  persons  against  false  Christs.  For  there  the  Holy  Ghost 
addresses  us  as  Christians  ;  and  a  Christian  could  not  be  de- 
ceived by  a  man's  pretensions  to  be  Christ.  It  is  most  appro- 
priate here,  because  the  disciples  are  viewed  in  this  chapter,  not 
as  the  representatives  of  us  Christians  now,  but  of  future  godly 
Jews.  We,  as  Christians,  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  temple ;  it  does  not  affect  us  in  any  way.  These 
disciples  were  regarded  as  the  godly  remnant  of  the  nation,  who 
were  looking  for  the  Messiah  to  bring  in  glory.  The  Lord, 
therefore,  warns  them  that  if  any  should  arise  among  them, 
saying,  I  am  Christ,  they  were  not  to  believe  them.  The  time 
was  come  when  the  true  Messiah  ought  to  appear.  And  He 
had  appeared,  but  Israel  had  rejected  Him ;  they  refused  to  bow 
to  Him,  hardening  themselves  in  the  lie  that  our  Lord  could  not 
be  the  promised  One.  But  Israel  had  not  given  up  the  hope 
of  the  Messiah  yet,  and  this  exposes  them  to  the  delusion  spoken 
of  here  (i.e.,  to  persons  saying,  I  am  Christ).  At  any  rate,  the 
rejection  of  the  true  Christ  lays  them  open  to  the  reception  of 
a  false  Christ.  Our  Lord  had  warned  them  of  this.  "  I  am 
come  in  my  Father's  name,  and  ye  receive  me  not.  If  another 
shall  come  in  his  own  name,  him  ye  will  receive."  If  a  messiah 
were  to  come  full  of  self  and  Satan,  the  nation  should  be  given 
up  to  receive  the  false,  as  a  just  retribution  for  having  rejected 
the  True.  The  disciples  were  the  representatives  of  godly  Jews, 
and  were  warned  of  what  should  befall  their  nation.  But  take 
the  epistles  of  John  and  what  have  you  there  ?  "  Beloved, 
believe  not  every  spirit."  Why  ?  Because  the  great  thing  that 
the  Church  is  distinguished  by  is  the  presence  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  and  the  deceit  which  we  have  to  watch  against  is  false 
spirits,  not  false  Christs,  though  there  are  many  antichrists. 

How  are  we  to  do  God's  will  ?  How  are  we  to  be  directed 
to  what  will  honour  Him  ?  The  Holy  Ghost  alone  can  guide 
us  in  a  right  path,  and  He  acts  by  the  word  of  God.  I  must 
find  myself  meeting,  according  to  the  scriptures,  where  Avhat  is 
of  man  is  disallowed,  and  what  is  of  God  is  freely  and  fully 
acknowledged.  We  are  bound  to  see  whether  all  that  we  are 
doing  will  bear  the  full  searchings  of  the  scriptures ;  if  not,  let 


CHAPTER   XXIV.  345 

US  stop  at  once.  Never  allow  a  single  thing  which  you  believe 
to  be  contrary  to  the  written  word.  "  Cease  to  do  evil."  "  To 
him  that  knoweth  to  do  good,  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin." 
Supposing  I  only  know  that  what  I  am  engaged  in  is  wrong,  but 
that  I  see  nothing  further,  I  must  stop.  God  gives  me  no  fresh 
light  before  me  if  I  am  doing  what  is  wrong.  I  may  have  to  re- 
main in  my  chamber,  and  not  see  what  next ;  but  wherever  I  see 
evil,  I  am  bound  by  it.  We  can  never  go  on  in  evil,  hoping  for 
more  light.  What  is  the  walk  of  faith  ?  A  believer  may  seem 
to  go  blindfold,  but  he  has  God  for  his  guide.  He  does  not  see 
before  him,  but  he  has  the  eye  and  heart  and  hand  of  One  who 
does.  It  is  God  who  guides.  He  shews  me  His  will  for 
that  one  step,  and  Avhen  I  have  taken  it,  He  will  shew 
me  the  next.  It  is  a  question  of  honouring  God.  When  we 
have  done  this  in  any  particular  step,  the  Lord  opens  a  further 
path  for  us. 

Our  Lord  does  not  warn  against  false  spirits  here,  because  He 
is  not  speaking  to  the  disciples  on  the  ground  of  Christianity.  By 
a  Christian,  I  mean  a  believer  since  the  Holy  Ghost  was  poured 
out  from  on  high.  He  is  not  a  bit  more  a  saint  than  a  man  called 
to  the  knowledge  of  God  before ;  but  he  has  special  privileges 
founded  on  accomplished  redemption,  and  also  enters  more  fully 
into  the  truth  of  God  as  revealed  in  Christ.  The  disciples  did  not 
know  this  blessing  yet ;  and  the  Lord  takes  them  as  examples 
of  a  believing  remnant  in  the  latter  day.  The  danger  of  Chris- 
tians is  grieving  the  Holy  Ghost — nay,  listening  to  ftilse  spirits. 
"  Believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits  whether  they  are 
of  God,  because  many  false  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the 
world."  These  are  persons  in  whom  an  evil  spirit  wrought. 
There  are  false  prophets  now,  and  evil  spirits  work  in  them. 
In  these  days,  faith  both  in  the  Holy  Ghost  and  in  Satan's 
power  is  very  much  weakened.  People  only  look  at  the  man ; 
whereas  scripture  makes  a  great  deal  of  God  and  of  Satan. 
What  gives  Satan  power  over  a  professor  of  the  name  of  Christ 
is  the  allowance  of  sin.  Satan  has  not  one  atom  of  power 
against  a  child  of  God  Avho  is  looking  to  Jesus  ;  but  where 
self  is  allowed,  Satan  can  come  and  make  a  resting-place  for  a 


346        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

season.  If  a  believer  could  not  be  a  false  prophet,  there 
might  be  a  temporary  power  of  the  enemy  over  his  soul. 

Here  it  is  a  question  of  false  Christs,  because  our  Lord  was 
going  to  speak  to  the  disciples  about  Jewish  circumstances  and 
hopes,  though  He  afterwards  turns  to  christian  subjects.  The 
prophecy  consists  of  three  great  parts.  The  Jewish  remnant 
have  their  history  thoroughly  described  ;  then  comes  the  portion 
of  Christians,  and  afterwards  that  of  the  Gentiles.  The  prophecy 
divides  itself  into  these  three  sections.  Why  are  the  Jews,  we 
may  ask,  first  brought  forward?  The  disciples  were  not  yet 
taken  out  of  their  Jewish  position  :  only  when  Christ  was 
crucified  was  the  wall  of  partition  broken  down.  Our  Lord's 
intention  was  to  take  up  a  Jewish  remnant  and  shew  that  there 
would  be  a  company  in  the  latter  day  on  the  same  ground  as 
these  disciples — the  Christian  would  come  in  between.  This  we 
have  described  in  the  latter  part  of  the  chapter,  and  in  the 
greater  part  of  chapter  xxv.  Then  we  have  the  Gentiles,  "  all 
nations,"  gathered  before  the  Son  of  man.  Such  is  the  thread 
of  connection  between  the  parts  of  this  great  discourse. 

"  Many  shall  come  in  my  name,  saying,  I  am  Christ ;  and 
shall  deceive  many.  And  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  rumours 
of  wars ;  see  that  ye  be  not  troubled,  for  all  these  things  must 
come  to  pass,  but  the  end  is  not  yet."  (Ver.  5,  6.)  Observe, 
there  are  two  great  moral  warnings  given  by  our  Lord.  First, 
they  were  to  beware  of  a  true  hope  falsely  applied.  He  guards 
them  against  the  attractions  of  false  Christs,  who  would  take 
advantage  of  the  fact  that  the  Jews  ought  to  be  looking  for 
Christ,  and  they  would  pretend  to  be  Christ.  But,  besides, 
there  is  the  fear  that  would  be  excited  by  the  enemy,  who 
knows  how  to  bring  in  a  new  deceit  suited  to  another  set 
of  circumstances.  Verse  6,  therefore,  guards  them  against 
alarms:  "  Ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  rumours  of  wars."  We 
have  nothing  to  do  with  these.  Where  do  you  find  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  warns  the  Christian  about  trouble  from  wars  and 
rumours  of  wars  ?  Do  we  find  anything  about  it  in  the  Epistles, 
where  the  Christian  Church  is  properly  brought  out  ?  Am  I 
then  denying  the  importance  of  the  Lord's  prophecy?      God 


CHAPTER   XXIV.  347 

forbid !  But  the  portion  we  are  looking  at  does  not  refer  to 
Christians  as  they  now  are,  but  to  the  Jewish  disciples  as  they 
then  were  and  as  they  will  be.  Our  calling  takes  place  after 
our  Lord  went  to  heaven  and  before  He  returns  in  glory , 
whereas  the  Jewish  remnant  will  be  found  in  the  latter  day  on 
similar  ground  and  with  hopes  like  those  the  disciples  had  whom 
our  Lord  was  here  addressing.  We  do  not  arrive  at  a  clear 
knowledge  of  anything  by  denying  the  great  landmarks  of  God. 
If  we  want  to  put  things  rightly  together  in  the  word  of  God, 
we  must  notice  wliat  and  to  whom  He  speaks.  If  I,  a  Gentile, 
take  up  the  language  of  a  Jew,  a  great  mistake  is  made ;  or  if  a 
Christian  adopt  the  language  of  either  Jew  or  Gentile,  there  is 
again  an  equal  mistake.  Therefore  it  is  that  such  stress  is  laid 
on  "rightly  dividing  the  word  of  truth."  We  find  various 
ways  of  God  according  to  His  sovereign  will  about  those  with 
whom  He  is  dealing,  and  we  must  take  care  to  apply  His  word 
aright.  Here  we  have  disciples  having  a  peculiar  calling  in  a 
particular  land,  the  land  of  Judea :  and  if  they  heard  of  wars 
and  rumours  of  wars,  they  were  not  to  be  troubled.  "  For  all 
these  things  must  come  to  pass  ;  but  the  end  is  not  yet." 
Mark  the  difference  in  the  language  of  scripture.  Do  we  ever 
find  the  apostles  saying.  The  end  is  not  yet,  for  us  ?  On  the 
contrary,  it  is  said  of  us  (1  Cor.  x.),  "  Upon  whom  the  ends  of 
the  world  are  come."  So  again,  speaking  about  the  cross  of 
Christ,  it  is  written  (Heb.  ix.  26),  "  Now  once,  in  the  end  of  the 
world ;"  whereas,  when  the  Lord  is  predicting  about  the  Jewish 
remnant,  "  the  end  is  not  yet."  And  this,  because  many  things 
must  yet  be  accomplished  before  the  Jews  can  come  into  their 
blessino;.  But  for  Christians,  all  things  even  now  are  ours  in 
Christ ;  the  blessing  is  never  put  off,  though  we  await  the  crown 
at  His  coming.  Again,  many  parts  of  scripture  speak  of  scenes 
of  anguish  before  the  Lord's  coming ;  others  make  Christians  to 
be  expecting  Christ  at  any  time.  These  scriptures  cannot  be 
broken  nor  contradict  one  another ;  and  yet  they  must  do  so,  if 
they  applied  to  the  same  people. 

Practically,  too,  the  difference  is  immensely  important ;  for 
the  Christian  is  not  of  the  world,  even  as  Christ  is  not,  which 


348        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

could  not  be  equally  said  of  the  Jewish  body  yet  to  be  called  in 
the  latter  day.  For  us  "  wars  and  rumours  of  wars"  ought  not 
to  be  a  source  of  trouble,  any  more  than  of  interest  on  either 
side  of  this  world's  combatants.  Surely  they  should  be  an 
occasion  of  holy  concern  and  intercession  in  the  spirit  of  grace, 
and  this  for  all  engaged.  The  Jewish  remnant,  on  the  contrary, 
will  not  be  separated  after  this  heavenly  manner  ;  and  the 
earthly  struggles  which  will  then  rage  in  and  round  the  land 
cannot  but  affect  them  nearly :  so  that  they  will  need  especially 
to  cherish  confidence  in  the  Saviour's  words,  and  not  be  troubled 
as  if  the  issue  were  a  doubtful  one,  or  themselves  forgotten  in 
that  dark  day.  They  must  wait  patiently;  "for  nation  shall 
rise  against  nation  and  kingdom  against  kingdom ;  and  there 
shall  be  famine,  and  pestilence,  and  earthquakes,  in  divers  places. 
All  these  are  the  beffinninp;  of  sorrows." 

It  is  evident  that  the  language  is  only  applicable  in  its  full 
force  to  Jews — believing  ones,  no  doubt^  but  still  Jews  in  the 
midst  of  a  nation  judicially  chastized  for  their  apostasy  from 
God  and  rejection  of  their  own  Messiah. 

Besides,  the  Lord  prepares  the  Jewish  disciples  or  remnant 
for  their  own  special  trials,  partially  true  after  His  own  departure 
till  Jerusalem  disappeared,  and  once  more  to  be  verified  before 
Jerusalem  is  fully  owned  after  the  destruction  of  the  Antichrist. 
"  Then  shall  they  deliver  you  up  to  be  afflicted,  and  shall  kill 
you ;  and  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  nations  [or  the  Gentiles]  for 
my  name's  sake.  And  then  shall  many  be  offended,  and  shall 
betray  one  another,  and  shall  hate  one  another."  (Ver.  9,  10.) 
There  should  be  false  profession  among  them,  and  hatred  of  the 
true  even  among  themselves ;  and  not  only  troubles  without : 
"  And  many  false  prophets  shall  rise  and  shall  deceive  many. 
And  because  iniquity  shall  abound,  the  love  of  many  shall  wax 
cold ;  but  he  that  shall  endure  unto  the  end,  the  same  shall  be 
saved."  Thus  there  is  a  certain  defined  period  of  endurance — 
an  end  to  come,  as  truly  as  there  w^as  a  beginning  of  sorrows. 
But  what  trial,  and  darkness,  and  suffering,  and  scandal  before 
that  end  come !  When  our  Lord  speaks,  as  in  the  Gospel  of 
John,  of  the  Christian's  lot.  He  never  names  either  a  beginning 


CHAPTER   XXIV.  349 

or  an  end,  but  rather  implies  that  tribulation  should  be  expected 
tliroughout  his  career.  "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation." 
And  such  is  the  constant  language  and  thought  in  the  epistles, 
where  beyond  question  our  calling  is  supposed. 

Then  follows  a  final  sign.  "  This  gospel  of  the  kingdom  shall 
be  preached  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness  unto  all  nations ; 
and  then  shall  the  end  come."  (Ver.  14.)  The  gospel  of  God's 
grace  is  not  the  same  as  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom.  Both 
should  be  preached — that  God  is  saving  souls  of  His  mere 
favour  now  through  Christ ;  and  that  there  is  a  kingdom  which 
He  is  going  to  establish  by  His  power  shortly,  which  is  to 
embrace  all  the  earth.  Before  the  end  come,  there  will  therefore 
be  a  special  testimony  of  this  coming  of  the  Lord,  as  He  here 
intimates.  So  in  Eevelation  xiv.  an  angel  is  seen  by  John  in 
the  prophetic  vision,  having  the  everlasting  gospel  to  preach  to 
the  dwellers  on  earth  and  to  every  nation,  and  saying  with  a 
loud  voice.  Fear  God  and  give  glory  to  Him  ;  for  the  hour 
of  His  judgment  is  come;  and  worship  Him  that  made  heaven, 
and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  the  fountains  of  waters."  Noiv  it 
cannot  be  so  said  that  the  hour  of  His  judgment  is  come  ;  for  it 
is,  on  the  contrary  and  expressly,  the  day  of  His  grace  and 
salvation.  Clearly,  therefore,  the  inference  is  that,  just  before 
the  close  of,  this  age,  there'  will  be  a  remarkable  energy  of  the 
Spirit  in  the  midst  of  the  Jews ;  and  from  that  very  people  who 
rejected  Jesus  of  old,  messengers  of  tlie  kingdom  shall  go  forth 
touched  by  His  grace  to  announce  the  speedy  fall  of  divine 
judgment  and  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  in 
power  and  glory.  Who  so  suited,  in  God's  mercy,  to  proclaim 
the  returning  Messiah,  as  some  of  the  very  nation  who  of  old 
had  nailed  Him  to  the  cross,  among  all  the  proud  Gentiles 
whose  then  representative  inscribed  it  with  "  This  is  Jesus,  the 
King  of  the  Jews  ?"  The  testimony  shall  go  forth  universally. 
How  humbling  for  Christendom  I  What  has  become  of  the 
East  ?  What  of  the  West  ?  Mahometanism  !  Popery  I  with 
Paganism  too  still  prevalent  over  vast  tracts  of  Asia  and  Africa. 
And  yet  christian  men  close  their  eyes  to  the  plainest  and  most 
solemn  facts  and  boast  of  the  triumphs  of  the  gospel !     JNo  :  the 


350       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

Gentiles  have  been  wise  in  their  own  conceits,  though  grace  has 
wrought  where  God  has  pleased,  spite  of  all ;  but  it  is  reserved 
for  other  witnesses,  when  the  falling  away  shall  have  been 
complete  in  Christendom  and  the  man  of  sin  revealed,  to  pro- 
claim the  coming  kingdom  in  all  the  habitable  earth. 

In  verse  15  the  Lord  goes  back  in  point  of  time  and  shews  us, 
not  general  tokens  of  the  approach  of  the  end  and  that  which 
should  distinguish  the  end  in  general  from  the  earlier  throes  of 
Israel ;  but  here  w^e  have  circumstances  of  the  most  definite 
character,  which  may  be  applied  perhaps  partially  to  what 
occurred  before  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  under  Titus,  but  which 
can  only  be  fulfilled  in  the  future  of  Israel  if  we  duly  heed  the 
peculiarity  of  the  scene,  the  connection  of  the  prophecy,  and, 
above  all,  the  consummation  in  wdiich  all  is  to  terminate. 

First,  then,  our  Lord  points  to  a  Jewish  prophet.  "  When 
ye  therefore  shall  see  the  abomination  of  desolation,  spoken 
of  by  Daniel  the  prophet,  stand  in  the  holy  place,  (whoso 
readeth,  let  him  understand,)"  &c.  (Ver.  15.)  The  parenthesis 
warns  that  the  prediction  might  be  misunderstood — at  any  rate 
demanded  attention.  Two  passages  of  the  prophecy  (chap.  xi. 
31  and  xii.  11)  speak  of  this  abomination;  but  I  have  no  hesi- 
tation in  affirming  that  the  former  was  a  foreshadowing  of  the 
doings  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes  centuries  before  Christ,  and  that 
the  latter  is  the  one  referred  to  here  and  still  unaccomj^lished. 
Entirely  distinct  from  the  epoch  of  Antiochus,  Daniel  xii.  speaks 
of  another  idol  which  brings  desolation  in  its  train,  and  this 
expressly  "  at  the  time  of  the  end."  "  Many  shall  be  purified, 
and  made  white,  and  tried ;  but  the  wicked  shall  do  wickedly  ; 
and  none  of  the  wicked  shall  understand ;  but  the  wise  shall 
understand."  In  this  we  have  another  link  of  connection 
with  our  Lord's  words — "  whoso  readeth,  let  him  understand." 
"And  from  the  time  that  the  daily  [sacrifice]  shall  be  taken 
away  and  the  abomination  that  maketh  desolate  set  up,  there 
shall  be  a  thousand,  two  hundred  and  ninety  days."  Thus, 
beside  the  idolatrous  evil  imposed  by  the  notorious  king  of  the 
north  long  before  the  Lord  appeared,  Daniel  looks  onward  to  a 


CHAPTEK   XXIV.  351 

similar  evil  at  the  close  of  Israel's  sorrows,  the  destruction  of 
which  immediately  precedes  their  final  deliverance.  "  Blessed 
is  he  that  waiteth."  As  to  this  last,  our  Lord  cites  the  Jewish 
prophet,  and  casts  further  light  on  the  selfsame  time  and  cir- 
cumstances, when  Daniel  himself  shall  re-appear  in  his  lot. 

The  conclusion  is  clear  and  certain :    our  Lord  in  verse  15 
of  Matthew  xxiv.   determines  the  allusion   to  be  to  that  part 
of  Daniel  which  is  yet  future,  not  to  what  was  history  when  He 
stood  on  the  mount  of  Olives.     I  am  aware  that   some   have 
confounded  the  matter  with  what  we  read  in  Daniel  viii.  and  ix. 
But  "  the  transgression  of  desolation"  is  not  the  same  as  'Hhe 
abomination  of  desolation ;"  nor  can  we  absolutely  identify  "  the 
last  end  of  the  indignation"  with  "  the  time  of  the  end."     (Com- 
pare Isaiah  x.)     The  distinctions  of  scripture  are  as  much  to  be 
noted  as  the  points  of  resemblance  and  of  contact.     The  last 
verse  of  Daniel  ix.  might  seem  to  have  stronger  claims.     There 
we  have  a  covenant  confirmed  for  one  week ;  and  then  in  the 
midst  of  the  week  sacrifice  and  oblation  are  made  to  cease ;  after 
which,  because  of  the  protection  given  to  abominations  or  idols, 
there  is  a  desolator  "  even  until  the  consummation  and  that 
determined  shall  be  poured  upon  the  desolate"  (i.e.,  Jerusalem). 
I  have  thus  given  what  I  conceive  to  be  the  true  sense  of  this 
important  passage,  because  when  it  is  stated  with  precision,  the 
supposed  resemblance  to  "the  abomination  of  desolation"  dis- 
appears.    A  desolator  who   comes   because  of  the  wing  (i.e., 
protection)  of  abominations  is  very  distinct  from  the  abomina- 
tion that  makes  desolate,  or  the  idol  which  is  yet  to  stand  in  the 
sanctuary.     "With  the  setting  up  of  this  abomination  the  date 
of  one  thousand  two  hundred   and  ninety  days  is  connected. 
Even  for  those  who  understand  this  of  so  many  years,   it  is 
impossible  to  apply  the  prophecy  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
or  its  temple  by  the  Romans.     Had  it  been  so,  the  period  of 
blessing  must  long  ere  this  have  arrived  for  Israel.     Has  the 
pro])hecy  then  failed  ?    No  ;  but  the  readers  have  failed  in  under- 
standing it.     We  must  correct,  not  the  language  of  scripture, 
but  our  interpretations :  we  must  go  back  to  God's  word  again 
and  again,  and  see  whether  we  have  not  mistaken  our  bearings. 


352  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL  OF   MATTHEW. 

The  trutli  is,  that  the  understanding  of  Daniel  xii.  is  of  all 
moment  for  reaping  due  profit  from  Matthew  xxiv.  In  its  first 
verse  we  have  a  plain  landmark :  "At  that  time  shall  Michael 
stand  up,  the  great  prince  which  standeth  for  the  children  of  thy 
people."  There  can  be  no  just  doubt  that  Daniel's  people  means 
the  Jews,  and  that  a  mighty  intervention  on  their  behalf  is 
intimated ;  but,  as  usual,  not  without  the  severest  trial  of  faith. 
For  "  there  shall  be  a  time  of  trouble,  such  as  never  was  since 
there  was  a  nation  even  to  that  same  time."  This  our  Lord  has 
unquestionably  in  view  in  verse  21 :  "  then  shall  be  great 
tribulation,  such  as  was  not  since  the  beginning  of  the  world  to 
this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be."  There  cannot  be  two  tribula- 
tions for  the  same  people,  each  of  which  is  greatest :  both 
statements  refer  to  the  same  trouble.  Now  Daniel  is  positive — 
that  "  a<  that  time  thy  people  (the  Jews)  shall  be  delivered." 
Who  can  pretend  that  Michael  stood  up  for  Israel  against  Titus 
any  more  than  Nebuchadnezzar?  Does  not  everybody  know 
that  at  that  time,  far  from  being  delivered,  they  were  completely 
vanquished  by  the  Romans,  and  that  those  who  escaped  the 
sword  were  sold  as  slaves  and  scattered  over  the  world  ?  God 
was  then  against,  not  for,  Israel ;  and,  as  the  king  in  the  parable, 
He  was  wroth,  sent  forth  His  armies,  destroyed  those  murderers 
and  fired  their  city.  Here,  on  the  contrary,  the  unequalled  hour 
of  sorrow  is  just  before  their  deliverance  on  God's  part,  not 
before  their  captivity. 

Carrying  this  back  to  our  chapter,  the  sight  of  the  desolating 
idol  in  the  holy  place  is  the  signal  for  flight.  "  Then  let  them 
which  be  in  Jud?ea  flee  into  the  mountains."  (Yer.  16.)  There 
is  no  thought  of  a  sign  to  Christians  as  such,  but  to  Jewish 
disciples  in  the  holy  land ;  and  this  that  they  may  instantly 
retire  from  the  scene  of  danger.  "  Let  him  which  is  on  the 
housetop  not  come  down  to  take  anything  out  of  his  house : 
neither  let  him  which  is  in  the  field  return  back  to  take  his 
clothes.  And  woe  unto  them  that  are  with  child,  and  to  them 
that  give  suck  in  those  days!"  (Ver.  17 — 19.)  It  has  J)een 
tried  to  find  in  this  the  warning  on  which  some  fled  to  Pella  in 
the  interval  after  the  Roman  lieutenant  surrounded  the  city,  and 


CHAPTER   XXIV.  353 

before  the  final  sack  under  the  victorious  commander.  But  this 
arises  from  confounding  Luke  xxi.  20 — 24,  with  Matthew  xxiv. 
15 — 21 ;  whereas  they  are  demonstrably  distinct,  spite  of  a 
measure  of  analogy  between  them.  It  perfectly  fell  within  the 
province  given  of  the  Spirit  to  the  gi-eat  Gentile  evangelist  to 
notice  the  past  Roman  siege,  as  well  as  the  present  supremac}'  of 
the  nations  which  tread  down  Jerusalem  till  their  times  are 
fulfilled.  Matthew,  however,  had  his  own  proper  task  in  giving 
the  grand  future  crisis,  at  least  from  verse  15.  And  it  is  evident 
that,  as  the  abomination  in  the  holy  place  differs  widely  from 
armies  compassing  Jerusalem,  so  there  was  ample  space  for  the 
most  leisurely  departure  from  the  menaced  city  (yes,  for  the 
most  impeded  and  infirm  of  either  sex  to  go)  after  Cestius  Gallus 
withdreM\  I  conclude  tlierefore,  that  by  Matthew  our  Lord 
gives  us  what  bears  on  the  time  of  the  end,  by  Luke  what 
refers  to  the  past,  and  the  present  too,  cursorily,  as  well  as  the 
future.  Matthew,  for  instance,  could  not  speak  like  Luke,  of 
Jerusalem  being  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles,  because  he  is 
here  occupied  only  with  the  horrors  which  immediately  precede 
Israel's  blessing  and  deliverance.  Luke  has  both  an  earlier  and 
a  later  time  of  trouble :  Matthew,  from  verse  15,  leaves  that  and 
confines  himself  to  this. 

"  But  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the  winter,  neither  on 
the  sabbath-day :  for  then  shall  be  great  tribulation  such  as  was 
not  since  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  this  time,  no,  nor  ever 
shall  be."  (Ver.  20,  21.)  How  considerate  the  Lord  is!  And 
how  surely  His  disciples  in  that  day  may  count  on  His  care, 
that  their  petitions  will  be  answered,  so  that,  urgent  as  their 
flight  must  be,  neither  the  inclement  season  nor  the  day  of 
Jewish  rest  shall  hinder !  Here  again  is  another  proof  that  not 
Christians  but  His  Jewish  followers  are  here  contemplated. 
Holy  as  is  the  Sabbath,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  the 
Lord's-day,  with  which  the  Church  has  to  do,  is  founded  on  a 
deeper  sanctity.  The  believer  has  now  to  beware,  on  the  one 
hand,  of  confounding  the  Sabbath  with  the  Lord's-day;  and,  on 
the  other,  of  supposing  that,  because  the  Lord's-day  is  not  the 
Sabbath,  it  may  therefore  be  turned  to  a  selfish  or  worldly 
AA 


354        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

.account.  The  Sabbath  is  the  holy  memorial  of  creation  and  of 
the  law ;  as  the  Lord's-day  is  of  grace  and  of  the  new  creation  in 
the  resurrection  of  the  Saviour.  As  Christians  we  are  neither 
of  the  old  creation  nor  under  the  law,  but  stand  on  the  totally 
diiferent  ground  of  Christ  dead  and  risen.  The  Sabbath  was 
for  man  and  the  Jew,  the  last  day  of  the  week,  and  one  simply 
of  rest  to  be  shared  with  the  ox  and  the  ass.  This  is  not  the 
Christian  idea,  which  begins  the  week  with  the  Lord,  gives  the 
best  to  Him  in  worship,  and  is  free  to  labour  for  Him  to  all 
lengths  in  the  midst  of  the  world's  sin  and  misery. 

Thus  we  hare,  at  every  step,  a  fresh  testimony  to  the  real 
bearing  of  the  prophecy.  For  us  the  holy  place  is  in  heaven, 
not  in  Jerusalem  ;  for  us  it  is  no  question  of  escaping  some 
unexampled  tribulation,  but  of  being  prepared  for  and  rejoicing 
in  it  always ;  for  us,  gathered  out  of  all  nations  and  tongues, 
the  mountains  round  Judea  are  no  suited  hiding-place ;  nor 
could  the  winter  or  the  Sabbath-day  be  a  just  source  of  alarm. 
Every  word  is  for  us  to  ponder  and  profit  by ;  but  the  evidence 
unmistakably  points  to  a  converted  body  of  Jews  in  the  latter 
day,  not  standing  in  Church  light  and  privilege,  but  having 
Jewish  hopes,  and,  while  awaiting  the  Messiah,  warned  how  to 
escape  the  deceits  and  overwhelming  trouble  of  that  day.  It  is 
a  question  of  flesh  being  saved  (ver.  22),  and  not  of  fellowship 
with  Christ's  sufferings  and  conformity  to  His  death,  so  as, 
whatever  the  cost,  to  have  part  in  the  resurrection  from  among 
the  dead.  Hence,  too,  there  is  no  thought  here  of  Christ's 
coming  to  receive  us  to  Himself  and  to  give  us  mansions  where 
He  is  in  the  Father's  house,  but  of  His  presence  in  glory  to 
destroy  enemies,  to  judge  what  was  dead  and  offensive  to  God, 
and  to  deliver  the  scattered  elect  of  Israel.  For  their  sake, 
those  days  of  terror  should  be  shortened.  With  this  agree  the 
warnings  in  verses  23 — 28  :  ''  Then  if  any  man  shall  say  unto 
you,  Lo,  here  is  Christ,  or  there;  believe  it  not.  For  there 
shall  arise  false  Christs,  and  false  prophets,  and  shall  shew  great 
signs  and  wonders,"  &c.  (Ver  23,  24.)  Coidd  such  a  delusion 
be  addressed  even  to  the  simplest  Christian  who  Avaits  for  the 
Son  of  God  from  heaven  ?     Yet  it  is  \ery  intelligible  if  we 


CHAPTER  XXIV.  355 

tlilnk  of  tliese  fiitiiro  Jewish  disciples,  wlio  might  expect  some- 
thing akin  from  <i  prediction  such  as  Zechariah  xiv.,  where  we 
"find  tliat  tlie  ]\Iount  of  Olives  is  the  appointed  spot  on  which 
Jehovah- Messiah  is  yet  to  stand.  We  can  well  conceive  rumonrs 
for  such  saints  that  Christ  was  in  the  desert  or  in  the  secret 
chambers :  thej  might  deceive  those  who  expected  to  meet  the 
Lord  on  earth,  not  those  who  know  that  they  are  to  join  Him 
smd  the  risen  ones  in  the  air.  (1  Thess.  iv. ;  2  Thess.  ii.)  The 
manner  of  His  presence  for  delivering  the  Jews  is  then  made 
known  as  the  guard  against  their  deceits  :  "  For  as  the 
lightning  cometh,"  &c.  The  figures  (ver.  27,  28),  which 
illustrate  the  presence  of  the  Son  of  man,  convey  the  thought 
of  sudden  terrible  manifestation,  and  of  rapid  inevitable  judg- 
ment on  what  is  then  but  a  lifeless  body  before  God,  whatever 
may  have  been  its  pretensions.  Nothing  similar  appears, 
wherever,  beyond  controversy,  scripture  describes  the  descent 
of  the  Lord  to  receive  His  risen  saints.  And  what  is  the  result 
of  thus  misapplying  these  verses  ?  The  revolting  interpretation 
that  "  the  carcase""  means  Christ,  and  "  the  eagles"  the  trans- 
figured saints,  or  the  converse,  calls  for  censure,  not  comment. 
Nor  is  it  needful  to  refute  the  claim  set  up  for  the  Roman 
standards.  Applied  to  Israel,  all  is  simple.  The  carcase  repre- 
sents the  apostate  part  of  that  nation  ;  the  eagles  or  vultures 
are  the  figure  of  the  judgments  that  fall  upon  it.  It  is  not 
only,  then,  that  there  will  be  the  lightning-like  display  of 
Christ  in  judgment ;  but  the  agents  of  His  wrath  shall  know 
where  and  how  to  deal  with  that  which  is  abominable  in  God's 
sight.     The  allusion  is  to  Job  xxxix.  30. 

''  Immediately  after  the  tribulation  of  those  days  shall  the 
sun  be  darkened,"  &c.  (Ver.  29—31.)  I  can  hardly  be  asked 
to  notice  the  old  effort  to  apply  these  verses  to  the  Roman 
triumph  over  Jerusalem.  On  the  face  of  it,  could  this  be  said 
to  be  "  immediately  after  the  tribulation?"  or  was  it  not  rather 
the  crowning  of  Jewish  sorrow,  not  the  glorious  reversal  of 
their  sufferings  by  a  divine  deliverance  ?  Whatever  prodigies 
Josephus  reports  were  rather  durimj  the  tribulation  he  records  ; 
whereas  the  signs  spoken  of  here,  literal  or  figurative,  are  to 


356        LECTUKES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

follow  "  the  tribulation  of  those  days"  (i.e.,  the  future  crisis  of 
Jerusalem).  No  ;  One  incomparably  greater  than  Titus  is 
here ;  and  an  event  is  announced  in  connection  with  that  poor 
people,  which  will  change  the  face  and  condition  of  all  nations. 
^'  Then  shall  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth  mourn,  and  they  shall 
see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  with  power 
and  great  glory.  And  he  shall  send  his  angels  with  a  great 
sound  of  a  trumpet ;  and  they  shall  gather  together  his  elect 
from  the  four  winds,  from  one  end  of  heaven  to  the  other." 
The  elect  throughout  are  the  chosen  seed  of  Israel.  (Ver.  22,  24, 
31.  Compare  Isaiah  Ixv.)  Others  elect  there  are,  no  doubt ; 
but  we  must  ever  interpret  by  the  context ;  and  this  in  the 
present  case  seems  to  me  clear  and  conclusive.  The  Son  of  man 
in  heaven,  and  seen  there,  is,  I  conceive,  the  sign  to  those  on 
earth.  This  fills  all  the  tribes  with  mourning ;  and  Christ 
visibly  comes  to  judgment.  Other  scriptures  shew  that  the 
heavenly  saints  have  been  already  translated,  and  are  then  to 
accompany  their  Lord  ;  but  here  nothing  of  this  appears.  It 
would  have  been  premature.  Besides,  the  object  of  this 
portion  of  the  prophecy  is  to  shew  His  coming  for  the  relief 
and  ingathering  of  His  elect  out  of  Israel.  Hence,  it  is  as  Son 
of  man  (that  is,  judicially,  see  John  v.  27)  that  He  is  present ; 
and,  hence,  too.  His  angels  He  sends  with  loud  trumpet-sound. 
'^  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  the  great  trumpet 
shall  be  blown,  and  they  shall  come  which  were  ready  to  perish 
in  the  land  of  Assyria,  and  the  outcasts  in  the  land  of  Egypt, 
and  shall  worship  the  Lord  in  the  holy  mount  at  Jerusalem." 
(Isaiah  xxvii.  13.)  It  is  the  proclamation,  not  alone  of  the 
acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,  but  of  the  day  of  God's  vengeance. 
"  And  ye  shall  be  gathered  one  by  one,  0  ye  children  of  Israel." 
The  four  winds  in  connection  with  Israel  are  no  difficulty, 
but  rather  the  contrary.  (See  Zech.  ii.  6.)  As  the  Lord  had 
scattered  and  spread  them  abroad  "as  the  four  winds  of  the 
heaven,"  so  now  are  His  chosen  ones  to  be  gathered  in. 

The  general  outline  and  the  special  view  of  the  Jewish  por- 
tion have  been  given  thus  far  in  chapter  xxiv.  This  is  next 
illustrated,  both  from  nature  (ver.  32 — 35)  and  from  scripture 


CHAPTER   XXIV.  357 

(ver.    34 — 3G),    and   closed   by   a   suitable   application.    (Ver. 
42—44.) 

"  From  the  fig-tree  learn  the  [or,  its]  parable."  (Ver.  32.) 
What  is  the  peculiar  significance  and  propriety  of  the  fig-tree 
here  ?  It  is  the  well-known  symbol  of  the  Jewish  nationality. 
Thus  we  saw  it,  in  chapter  xxi.  bearing  nothing  but  leaves — 
that  generation  given  up  to  the  curse  of  perpetual  fruitlessness, 
whatever  grace  may  do  for  the  generation  to  come.  In  Luke  xxi. 
the  Avord  is,  "  Behold  tiie  fig-tree  and  all  the  trees."  Why 
this  striking  change  ?  Because  the  Holy  Ghost  all  through, 
and  notably  in  that  chapter,  introduces  "the  Grentiles."  Luke 
takes  in  a  larger  scope  than  Matthew,  and  expressly  treats 
of  Jerusalem's  sorrows  in  connection  with  "  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles."  Hence  the  ditference  even  in  the  illustrative 
figures.  Here  it  is  the  tree,  not  withered  away,  but  with 
signs  of  vitality.  "  When  its  branch  has  now  become  tender 
and  the  leaves  are  shooting,  ye  know  that  summer  is  nigh ;  so 
likewise  ye,  when  ye  shall  see  all  these  things,  know  that  it  is 
nigh  by  the  doors"  (i.e.,  the  end  of  this  age,  and  the  beginning 
of  the  next  under  Messiah  and  the  new  covenant).  And  how 
solemnly  the  Saviour  warns  that  "this  generation,"  this  Christ- 
rejecting  race  in  Israel,  shall  not  pass  till  all  these  things  be 
fulfilled ! 

The  notion  that  all  teas  fulfilled  in  the  past  siege  of  Jeru- 
salem, founded  on  a  narrow  and  unscriptural  sense  of  that 
remarkable  phrase,  is  from  not  hearing  what  He  says  unto  the 
disciples.  In  a  genealogy  (as  Matt,  i.),  or  where  the  context 
requires  it  (as  Luke  i.)  a  life- time  might  be  meant ;  but  where 
is  it  so  used  in  the  prophetic  scriptures.  Psalms,  &c.  ?  The 
meaning  herein  is  rather  moral  than  chronological,  as  for 
instance  in  Psalm  xii.  7,  "  Thou  shalt  keep  them,  0  Lord,  thou 
shalt  preserve  them  from  this  generation  for  ever."  The  words 
"  for  ever"  prove  a  prolonged  force ;  and  accordingly  the  passage 
intimates  that  Jehovah  shall  preserve  the  godly  from  their  evil, 
vain,  flattering,  lawless,  oppressoi's  (ver.  2 — 5) — from  "  this 
generation"  for  ever.  It  is  the  distinct  and  conclusive  refuta- 
tion of  those  who  would  limit  the  phrase  to  a  short  epoch  or  a 


358  LECTURES   ON  THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

man's  lifetime.  So,  in  Deuteronomy  xxxii.  5,  20,  we  find 
generation  similarly  used,  not  to  convey  a  period,  but  to  express 
the  moral  characteristics  of  Israel.  Again,  in  the  Psalms  we 
have  not  only  ''  this  generation,"  but  "  the  generation  to 
come,"  and  neither  confined  to  a  mere  term  of  thirty  or  a 
Imndred  years.  (Compare  also  Pro  v.  xxx.)  But  what  may 
make  the  case  the  plainer  is  the  usage  in  the  synoptic  gospels. 
Thus,  in  Matthew  xi.  16,  "  Whereunto  shall  I  liken  this  gene- 
ration ?"  means  such  as  then  lived,  characterized  by  the  moral 
capriciousness  which  set  them  in  opposition  to  God's  testi- 
mony, whatever  it  might  be,  in  righteousness  or  in  grace.  But 
evidently,  though  people  then  alive  are  primarily  in  view,  the 
moral  identity  of  the  same  features  might  extend  indefinitely, 
and  so  from  age  to  age  it  would  still  be  "this  generation." 
Compare  Matthew  xii.  39,  41,  42,  45,  which  last  verse  shews 
the  unity  of  the  "generation"  in  its  final  judgment  (not  yet,  I 
believe,  exliausted)  with  that  which  emerged  from  the  Baby- 
lonish captivity.  Again,  note  chapter  xxiii.  36,  "  Verily  I  say 
unto  you.  All  these  things  shall  come  upon  this  generation.'* 
This  generation  shall  not  pass  till  all  the  predictions  of  judg- 
ment, &c.,  Clmst  uttered  shall  be  fulfilled.  (Chap.  xxiv.  34.) 
As  it  is  plain  from  what  has  been  already  shewn — indeed,  most 
of  all  from  the  plain  scripture  itself — that  much  remains  to  be 
accomplished  :  "  this  generation"  still  subsists  and  must  till  all 
is  over.  And  how  true  it  is  !  There  the  Jews  are,  the  wonder 
of  every  thoughtful  mind,  not  merely  a  broken,  scattered,  and 
withal  perpetuated  race,  not  only  distinct,  spite  of  mighty  effort 
from  without  to  blot  them  out,  and  from  within  to  amalgamate 
with  others,  but  with  the  same  unbelief,  rejection,  and  scorn 
of  Jesus,  their  own  Messiah,  as  on  the  day  He  pronounced  their 
doom.  All  these  things — He  warned  of  their  earlier  and  their 
latest  sorrows — must  come  to  pass,  before  that  wicked  genera- 
tion shall  disappear.  "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but 
my  words  shall  not  pass  away."  That  which  incredulity  counts 
most  stable,  the  scene  of  its  idolatry  or  of  its  self-exaltation , 
shall  vanish  ;  but  the  words  of  Christ,  let  them  be  alx»ut  Israel 
or  others,  shall  abide  for  ever. 


CHAPTER   XXIV.  359 

But  if  ail  be  thus  sure  and  unfailing,  the  Father  alone  knows 
the  day  and  hour.  (Yer.  3G.)  Am])le  and  distinct  signs  the 
Saviour  had  announced  already,  and  the  wise  shall  understand  ; 
*'  but  the  wicked  shall  do  wickedly,  and  none  of  the  wicked 
shall  understand."  "  But  as  the  days  of  Noah,  so  shall  the 
coming  of  the  Son  of  man  be.  For  as  in  the  days  that  were 
before  the  flood,  they  were  eating  and  drinking,  marrying  and 
giving  in  marriage,  until  the  day  that  Noah  entered  into  the 
ark,  and  knew  not  till  the  flood  came  and  took  them  all  away ; 
so  shall  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  be."  {Ver.  37 — 39.) 
Here  is  another  testimony  that  our  Lord  in  this  position  speaks 
■of  the  Jewish  disciples  of  the  latter  day  (represented  by  those 
who  then  surrounded  Him),  and  not  of  the  Church.  For  His 
illustration  is  taken  from  the  preservation  of  Noah  and  his  house 
through  the  waters  of  the  deluge.;  whereas  the  Holy  Ghost, 
through  Paul,  illustrates  our  hope  according  to  the  pattern  of 
Enoch,  caught  up  to  heaven,  entirely  apart  from  the  scenes  and 
circumstances  of  judgment  here  below. 

Moreover,  when  the  Son  of  man  thus  comes  in  judgment  of 
living  men  here  below,  it  vnll  not  be,  as  when  the  Romans  or 
others  took  Jerusalem,  indiscriminate  slaughter  or  captivity ; 
but  whether  in  the  open  country  or  the  duties  of  home,  whether 
men  or  women,  there  will  be  righteous  discernment  of  individuals. 
'■'■  Then  shall  two  be  in  the  field,  the  one  is  taken  and  the  other 
is  left ;  two  women  grinding  at  the  mill,  the  one  is  taken  and 
the  other  is  left"  (Ver.  40,  41.)  The  meaning  clearly  is,  that 
one  is  taken  away  judicially,  and  the  other  left  to  enjoy  the 
blessings  of  His  reign,  who  shall  judge  God's  people  with  righte- 
ousness and  His  poor  with  judgment.  It  is  the  converse  of  our 
change,  when  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first,  and  we,  the 
living  who  remain,  shall  be  caught  up  together  to  meet  the  Lord 
in  the  air ;  for  those  who  are  left  in  our  case  are  left  to  be 
punished  with  everlasting  destruction  from  His  presence.  But 
the  Lord  will  also  have  an  earthly  people.  He  waits  till  the 
heavenly  saints  are  gathered  to  Him  above,  and  then  begins  to 
sow,  if  I  may  thus  speak,  for  earthly  blessing,  in  which  case  His 
coming  as  Son  of  man  will  be  for  the  removal  of  the  wicked, 


360       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

leaving  the  righteous  undisturbed  in  peace.  "  There  shall  be  a 
handful  of  corn  in  the  earth,  upon  the  top  of  the  mountains ; 
the  fruit  thereof  shall  shake  like  Lebanon ;  and  they  of  the  city 
shall  flourish  like  grass  of  the  earth.  His  name  shall  endure 
for  ever :  his  name  shall  continue  as  long  as  the  sun  :  and  men 
shall  be  blessed  in  him :  all  nations  shall  call  him  blessed. 
Blessed  be  the  Lord  God,  the  God  of  Israel,  who  only  doeth  won- 
drous things.  And  blessed  be  his  glorious  name  for  ever  :  and 
let  the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  his  glory.    Amen,  and  Amen." 

"  Watch  therefore,  for  ye  know  not  in  what  hour  (or  day*) 
your  Lord  is  coming."  The  dealings  with  Israel,  ending  with 
the  rescue  of  the  just  in  their  midst,  involved,  we  saw,  the  judg- 
ment of  the  self-secure  unconscious  world.  Accordingly,  in 
these  transitional  verses  (42 — 44)  we  have  an  allusion  to  a  wider 
sphere  than  the  Jews  or  their  land,  in  which  the  godly  remnant 
would  be  found — protected,  but  still  there.  God  would  know 
how  to  deliver  the  godly  out  of  temptation.  There  they  are, 
however,  surrounded  by  snares  and  foes,  but  preserved  :  a  totally 
different  position  from  oiirs,  who  will  be  then  above  in  the 
sovereign  grace  and  wisdom  of  our  Saviour.  "  But  know  this, 
that  if  the  householder  had  known  in  what  watch  the  thief  was 
coming,  he  would  have  watched,  and  would  not  have  suffered 
his  house  to  be  broken  up.  Therefore  be  3'e  also  ready  :  for  in 
an  hour  when  ye  think  not  the  Son  of  man  is  coming."  I 
suppose  that  if  we  are  to  apply  "  the  goodman,"  or  proprietor, 
of  the  house  strictly,  the  enemy  is  meant  as  the  prince  of  this 
world,  who  will  be  surprised  by  the  sudden  day  of  the  Lord  as 
a  thief.  But  the  object  is  evidently  a  practical  warning  to  the 
godly  on  earth  to  be  ready.  They  had  been  comforted  in  view 
of  trouble  and  violence ;  they  had  been  set  on  their  guard 
against  the  religious  deceits  of  the  old  serpent ;  they  had  been 
solemnly  assured  of  the  stability  of  the  Lord's  words  in  the  very 
point  where  Gentile  conceit  has  misled  even  true  believers ;  they 

•  'Hfxtpa,  day  (instead  of  the  common  reading  S>pa,  "  lioui'"),  has  excellent 
authority.  Besides  the  external  evidence,  consider  the  chain  of  verses  42 
— 44,  day,  watch,  hour.  As  to  verse  44,  the  authorities  for  "  day"  in  verse 
42  agree  with  the  rest  in  reading  "  hoiu:." 


CHAPTER   XXIV.  361 

are  now  exhorted  to  vigilance  and  readiness  for  their  coming 
Lord,  that  they  might  not  only  escape  the  fowlers,  but  stand 
before  the  Son  of  man. 

From  verse  45  of  chapter  xxiv.  to  chapter  xxv.  30,  we  enter 
on  the  parables  which  pertain  to  Christendom  only,  and  not  to 
the  Jewish  remnant.  Hence  here  we  have  so  distinct  a  portrai- 
ture of  profession,  true  and  false.  Whenever  we  touch  what  is 
properly  christian,  God  we  find  dealing  with  the  heart  and 
conscience.  He  is  calling  out  and  forming  those  who  are  to  be 
the  companions  of  His  Son  in  heavenly  glory.  Therefore 
nothing  is  passed  by  ;  all  is  judged  of  God  in  its  real  light. 
Hence,  too,  there  is  no  limit  here  of  either  place  or  people. 
Christianity  is  above  time,  and  of  and  from  heaven,  though  it 
may  be  divulged  in  fact  on  earth  during  the  gap  in  the  dispen- 
sations of  God  made  by  the  rejection  of  Israel  for  a  season.  It 
is  a  revelation  of  grace  flowing  from  Him  who  now  speaks  not 
from  earth  but  heaven.  It  is  not,  I  need  hardly  insist,  that  evil 
is  slighted.  No  mistake  can  be  more  profound  or  fatal  than 
that  grace  implies  levity  about  sin.  On  the  contrary,  grace  is 
the  very  strongest  condemnation  of  all  evil,  as  it  is  indeed  not 
the  mere  claim  of  what  man  ought  to  be  toward  God,  but  the 
revelation  of  what  God  is  toward  man  in  the  judgment  of  his 
sin  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  Therefore  it  is  the  fullest  display 
of  divine  hatred  and  judgment  of  evil,  but  this  in  Christ,  so  as 
to  save  the  most  guilty  who  believe,  at  the  cost  of  His  own  Son, 
the  Saviour.  When  dealing  with  His  earthly  people  under  the 
law,  many  things  were  allowed  for  the  hardness  of  their  heart, 
which  never  had  His  sanction.  But  it  is  precisely  where  the 
complete  display  of  grace  shines,  as  it  does  now,  that  their  evil 
is  not  borne  with  but  judged.  Such  is  Christianity  in  principle 
and  in  fact.  And  hence  it  is  that,  for  the  true  Christian,  all 
the  time  for  his  earthly  sojourn  is  a  season  of  self-judgment ;  or 
if  he  fail  in  this,  the  assembly  is  bound  to  judge  his  ways ;  and 
if  they  fail,  the  Lord  judges  him  and  them,  holily  but  in  grace, 
that  they  should  not  be  condemned  with  the  world.  False  pro- 
fession He  may  expose  now  if  He  see  fit,  but  the  end  of  it  we 


M2  LECTURES    ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF    MATTHEW. 

see  here  in  all  these  three  parables.  Grace  never  winks  at  evil ; 
and  if  evil  takes  advantage  of  grace  for  its  own  purposes,  the 
issue  is  frightful,  and  will  be  manifestly  so  at  the  coming  of 
the  Lord. 

And  this  leads  me  to  remark  that  the  Lord's  comino-  has  a 
two-fold  character.  First  of  all,  there  is  His  comino;  in  full 
grace,  entirely  apart  from  all  question  of  our  service,  and  conse- 
quently of  special  rewards  in  the  kingdom  in  which  we  are  to  be 
manifested  along  with  Christ.  But  we  must  bear  in  mind  that 
this  manifestation  to  the  world  in  the  future  kingdom  is  far 
from  being  the  highest  part  of  His  glory  or  even  ours,  as  it  does 
not  elicit  the  deepest  exercise  of  His  grace.  In  receiving  us  to 
Himself,  on  the  other  hand,  all  is  purely  from  Himself.  It  is 
His  own  love  who  would  thus  have  us  with  and  as  Himself. 
Thus  we  find  St.  John  puts  the  coming  of  Christ  in  his  gospel 
(chapter  xiv.),  nor  am  I  aware  that  it  is  ever  treated  otherwise 
there.  In  the  Eevelation  we  find  both  ways.  In  the  first 
chapter  the  testimony  is,  "  Behold,  he  cometh  with  the  clouds," 
&c.  Plainly  there  is  no  trace  of  the  saints  caught  up  there,  but 
"  every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  they  also  which  pierced  him ;  and 
all  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of  him."  The  Bride 
nowhere  appears  in  the  scene,  but  rather  what  is  public  and 
affects  the  world  universally,  and  especially  the  blood-guilty 
Jew ;  and  all  are  mourning.  But  the  last  chapter  could  not 
close  without  letting  us  know  that  there  is,  spite  of  all  evil 
and  woe  and  judgment,  such  an  one  as  the  Bride  awaiting  her 
heavenly  Bridegroom.  No  sooner  does  He  announce  Himself 
the  root  and  offspring  of  David,  the  bright  and  morning  star, 
than  the  Spirit  and  the  Bride  say.  Come.  Here  we  have  the 
intimate  intercourse  of  heart  between  the  Lord  and  the  Church. 
It  is  impossible  for  any  one  not  born  of  God  to  say  "  Come," 
though  there  may  be  those  who  are  so  born  and  yet  ignorant  of 
their  full  privilege  of  union  with  Christ.  And  for  them,  I 
doubt  not,  gracious  provision  is  made  in  the  word  "  Let  M7n 
that  heareth  say,  Come."  But  in  no  case  can  the  world  or  an 
unforgiven  soul  take  up  such  a  call ;  to  such  it  would  indeed  be 
the  madness  of  presumption,  for  to  them  His  coming  must  be 


CHAPTER   XXIV.  oG3 

sure  and  endless  destruction.  Again,  it  is  not  merely  saving 
flesh,  or  deliverance  out  of  misery  and  danger  by  the  overthrow 
of  their  enemies  :  the  Holy  Ghost  never  puts  the  aspect  of  Christ's 
coming  for  us  in  any  such  light.  We  shall  have  rest,  and  those 
who  trouble  us  shall  have  tribulation  in  the  day  of  His  appearing; 
but  we  go  to  meet  the  Saviour,  and  to  be  with  Him  for  ever ; 
and  meanwhile,  it  is  our  sweet  earthly  privilege  to  suffer  for  His 
sake  now.  "VVe  are  left  for  awhile  in  a  world  where  everything 
is  against  us  because  against  Him,  and  we  belong  to  Him.  But 
we  know  that  He  waits  to  come  for  us,  and  we  wait  for  Him 
from  heaven  ;  and  while  the  waiting  lasts,  we  expect  nothing  but 
sutfering  from  the  world,  but  are  happy  in  it,  assured  that  glory 
in  heaven  and  the  cross  on  earth  go  together.  The  cup  of  trial, 
the  reproach  and  scorn  of  men,  may  be  less  at  one  time  than 
another.  This  is  for  our  Father  to  give  as  He  sees  fit.  But  if 
we  look  for  aught  else  as  our  natural  portion  here  as  Christians, 
we  are  faithless  to  our  calling.  Rejection  is  ours  because  we  are 
His :  "  therefore  the  world  knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew 
him  not." 

As  the  Bridegroom,  then,  the  Lord  has  nothing  but  love  in 
His  heart  to  the  Bride.  Nor  is  there  a  question  of  any  save  His 
own.  He  has  told  them  He  is  coming ;  and  the  greater  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul,  the  more  ardently  does  the 
Bride  say  "  Come."  How  incongruous  here  that  other  eyes 
should  see !  or  that  wailinor  throno-s  should  intrude  into  or 
witness  such  a  meeting  !    Scripture  does  not  so  speak. 

The  Jew,  the  world,  which  refused  the  true  Christ,  will 
receive  the  Antichrist.  This  is  what  men  wait  for  and  will  fall 
into ;  and  in  the  midst  of  their  delusion  and  apparent  triumph 
the  Lord  will  come  in  judgment.  But  when  He  thus  comes,  it 
will  not  be  alone.  Others,  His  saints,  appear  along  with  Him 
in  glory.  This  is  what  we  see  in  Revelation  xvii.,  and  with 
detail  in  chapter  xix.  Not  angels  only,  but  His  saints  follow 
Him  out  of  heaven,  clothed  in  white  linen,  and  on  white  horses, 
according  to  the  striking  figures  of  the  Apocalypse.  The  saints 
had  been  in  heaven  before  the  day  of  the  world's  judgment. 
They  must  have  been  removed  from  earth  to  heaven  before  this, 


364  LECTUEES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 

in  order  to  follow  Him  out  of  heaven  and  be  with  Him  when 
that  day  dawns.  And  this  could  only  have  been  through  His 
coming  to  receive  them  to  Himself.  Hence,  again,  it  appears 
that  His  coming  has  a  double  character,  according  to  the  object 
of  each  of  its  steps  or  stages.  He  comes  to  gather  above  His 
saints,  dead  or  living,  and  presents  them  in  the  Father's  house, 
that  where  He  is,  there  they  may  be  also.  In  due  time  after- 
wards He  brings  them  with  Him,  judging  the  beast  and  the 
false  prophet,  the  Jews,  and  the  Gentiles,  as  well  as  every  false 
profession  of  His  name.  This  is  still  His  coming,  or  state  of 
presence :  only  now  it  is  (what  the  former  act,  when  He  takes 
us  to  be  with  Him,  is  never  called)  His  appearing,  the  shining 
forth  of  His  coming  (2  Thess.  ii.  8),  His  revelation,  and  His  day. 

With  this  second  act  of  the  Lord's  coming,  or  His  day,  is 
connected  the  appraisal  of  our  service,  and  the  assigning  of 
reward  for  work  that  has  been  done.  For  all  must  be  mani- 
fested before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  and  each  must  receive 
the  things  done  in  the  body,  whether  good  or  bad.  Some  find  a 
difficulty  in  bowing  to  both  truths  ;  but  if  subject  to  the  word, 
we  shall  overlook  neither  the  common  blessedness  of  the  saints 
in  the  full  grace  of  the  Saviour  at  His  coming,  nor  the  recogni- 
tion of  individual  faithfulness,  or  the  lack  of  it,  in  the  rewards 
of  the  kingdom.  When  we  read  of  the  many  mansions,  we  are 
not  to  dream  of  one  being  more  glorious  than  another.  The 
truth  conveyed  is  that  we  are  to  be  as  near  and  dear  as  sons  can 
be  in  the  Father's  presence,  through  the  perfect  love  and  work 
of  the  Son.  In  this  point  of  view  I  see  no  difference  whatever. 
All  are  brought  absolutely  nigh,  all  loved  with  the  love  where- 
with Christ  was  loved,  and  having  His  portion  as  far  as  can  be 
for  the  creature.  But  am  I  therefore  to  deny  that  "  every  man 
shall  receive  his  own  reward  according  to  his  own  labour?"  or 
that  in  some  cases  the  work  will  abide,  as  in  others  it  will  be 
burnt  ?  or  that,  as  the  parable  teaches,  one  servant  may  receive 
ten  cities,  and  another  five  ? 

It  will  be  found  accordingly,  that  there  is  a  close  connection 
in  scripture  between  Christ's  day  or  appearing  and  present 
exhortations  to  fidelity.     Thus,  Timothy  is  exhorted  to  keep  the 


CHAPTER   XXIV.  3G5 

commandment  without  spot,  unrebukable  until  the  appearing 
of  our  Lord  Jesus.  So  the  apostle,  in  2  Tiniotiiy  iv.,  speaks 
of  the  "  crown  of  righteousness  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous 
Judge,  shall  give  me  at  that  day  :  and  not  to  me  only,  but  unto 
all  them  also  that  love  his  appearing.^''  The  results  of  faithful- 
ness, or  of  unfaithfulness,  are  only  manifest  then.  It  is  the  day 
of  display  before  the  world  ;  and  "  when  Christ,  who  is  our  life, 
shall  appear,  then  shall  we  also  appear  with  him  in  glory." 
Hence  it  is  as  awaiting  the  revelation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  that  the 
apostle  speaks  of  the  Corinthian  saints  as  coming  short  in  no 
gift,  and  at  once  brings  in  the  thought  of  His  day.  So  Christ's 
day  is  the  blessed  end  and  solemn  test  of  all  in  writing  to  the 
Philippians.  Of  the  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians  1  need  say 
the  less,  as  they  present  in  the  clearest  way  both  these  truths. 

Returning  now  to  the  first  of  the  three  parables  which  refer 
to  the  christian  profession,  I  would  make  the  general  remark 
fi'om  what  we  have  been  examining,  that  while  the  words 
"  apj)earing,"  "  day,"  &c.,  are  special  and  never  used,  I  think, 
except  where  responsibility  is  concerned,  the  word  "  coming"  is 
general,  and  though  applicable,  if  the  context  so  require  it,  to 
the  case  of  responsibility,  is  in  itself  of  wider  character  and  is 
used  therefore  to  express  our  Lord's  return  in  nothino-  but 
grace.  In  other  words,  the  appearing,  day,  or  revelation  of 
Christ  is  still  His  coming  or  presence ;  but  His  coming  does  not 
necessarily  mean  His  appearing,  revelation,  or  day.  He  may 
come  without  appearing,  and  I  believe  that  there  is  proof  from 
scripture  that  so  it  is  when  He  receives  us  to  Himself  on  hicrh  ; 
but  His  appearing  is  that  further  stage  of  His  coming  again, 
when  every  eye  shall  see  Him. 

*'  Who  then  is  a  faithful  and  wise  servant,  whom  his  lord 
hath  made  ruler  over  his  household  to  give  them  meat  in  due 
season  ?"  It  is  not  a  question  of  evangelizing  here,  but  of  care 
for  the  household.  The  principle  of  trading  outside  with  the 
Master's  gifts  will  come  by  and  by  (chap.  xxv.  14  et  seq.)  ; 
but  here  the  great  thing  is  that,  as  the  Lord  loves  His  saints 
("  whose  house  are  we")  so  He  makes  much  of  faithful  or 
faithless  service  within  that  sphere.     For  I  need  not  say  that 


366  LECTURES  ON  THE   GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 

faithfulness  to  the  Lord  involves  no  denial  of  ministry.  Ministry 
when  real  is  of  God ;  but  the  mode  in  which  it  is  exercised  is 
often  wrong  and  unscriptural.  Ministry  is  not  Jewish,  but 
characteristic  of  Christianity.  But  it  is  a  thing  very  apt  to  lose 
its  true  character.  Instead  of  being  Christ's  servants  in  His 
household,  many  sink  into  the  agents  of  a  particular  body.  In 
such  a  case  it  always  flows  from  the  church  or  denomination. 
Real  ministry  is  from  Christ  and  Him  alone.  Therefore  the 
apostle  sa,ys  he  was  the  servant  or  bondman  o^  Jesus  Christ, 
never  deriving  his  mission  from  the  Church  or  being  responsible 
for  his  work  to  it.  The  gospel  and  the  Church  were  the 
spheres  of  his  service  (Col.  i,),  but  its  giver  and  his  Lord  was 
Christ  Himself  exclusively.  It  appears  to  me  that  this  is 
necessary,  in  order  that  ministry  should  be  recognized  as 
divine  ;  and  nothing  but  divine  ministry  is  owned  in  scripture, 
nor  should  be  by  God's  people  now.  This,  then,  is  the  first 
thing  our  Lord  insists  on,  that  the  faithful  and  wise  servant 
whom  the  Lord  makes  ruler  over  His  household  be  found  doing 
His  work,  caring  for  what  is  so  near  to  Christ.  It  is  a  most 
painful  proof  of  the  low  estate  of  the  Church  in  these  days  that 
such  service  is  regarded  as  the  waste  of  precious  ointment.  So 
completely  have  even  God's  children  fallen  from  the  thought 
of  true  ministry  that  they  think  it  idleness  or  proselytism  to 
attend  to  those  that  are  within.  Why  not  preach  to  those 
without,  say  they,  and  seek  to  bring  such  to  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  ?  But  this  is  not  the  first  thing  our  Lord  presses. 
The  "  faithful  and  wise  servant"  had  to  do  with  those  within  : 
his  object  was  to  give  them  their  meat  in  due  season  ;  and  the 
Lord  pronounces  that  servant  blessed.  "  Blessed  is  that  servant 
whom  his  lord,  when  he  cometh,  shall  find  so  doing."  Others 
might  raise  questions  as  to  his  title ;  but  He  simply  says.  If  I 
find  you  "  so  doing,"  blessed  are  you.  The  great  point  is  to  be 
doing  His  will.  It  is  not  title  or  position,  but  doing  the  work 
which  the  Lord  wishes  to  be  done. 

But  now  comes  the  other  side  of  the  picture.  "  But  and  if 
that  evil  servant  shall  say  in  his  heart.  My  lord  delayeth  his 
coming ;  and  shall  begin  to  smite  his  fellow-servants  and  to  eat 


UHAPTER  XXIV.  367 

and  drink  with  the  drunken."  (Ver.  48,  49.)     There  you  have 
the  great  danger  of  the  professed   servants  of  Christ  in  this 
world.     First,   wronging   the   fellow-servants  by  assuming  an 
arbitrary  place.     Authority  is  right  where  it  is  exercised  under 
obedience  to  Christ.     No  change  of  circumstances  or  condition 
alters  the  truth  that  the  Lord  remains  Head  of  the  Church,  and 
raises  up  His  servants  at  all  times  to  carry  out  His  wishes  with 
authority.     But  here  it  is  man's  will,  where  the  servant  takes 
the  place  of  the  Master,  and  begins  to  smite  his  fellow-servants. 
Secondly,  along  with  that,  there  is  evil  communication  Avith  the 
world.     It  is  not  said  that  he  is  himself  drunken ;   but  there 
is  association  with  the  world.     "Evil  communications  corrupt 
good   manners."     Where   the   thought  of  the    Lord   is   gone, 
ministry  loses    its   true   character.      There  will   be   oppression 
towards  those  within,  and  evil  commerce  with  those  without. 
"The   lord   of  that    servant    shall    come  in    a   day  when   he 
looketh  not  for  him,  and  in  an  hour  that  he  is  not  aware  of,  and 
shall  cut  him  asunder,  and  appoint  him  his  portion  with  the 
hypocrites  :    there  shall   be  weeping   and   gnashing  of  teeth." 
(Ver.  50,  51.)     It  supposes  that  the  servant  still  pursues  the 
same   course,   and  is  found   there  when  the   Lord  comes — his 
heart  thoroughly  with  the  world.     He  began  by  saying  in  his 
heart.  My  Lord  delayeth  His  coming.     This  is  far  more  than 
wrong  thoughts  about  the  coming  of  the  Lord,   which  some 
saints  might  hold,  without   this    scripture   applying   to  them. 
If  there  were,  on  the  other  hand,  persons  professing  to  look 
for  the  Lord's  coming  and  acting  as  if  they  did  not  believe 
it,    they   are   much   more     like    the     servant    saying    in    his 
heart.  My  Lord  delayeth  His  coming.     What  the  Lord  judges 
is  not  a  mere  mistake  or  doctrinal  blunder ;  but  it  is  the  state 
of  the  heart — -content  that  Christ  should  stay  away.     If  we  are 
desiring  something  great  and  of  esteem  among  men,  how  can 
we  say,  "Come?"     His  coming  would  spoil  all  our  schemes. 
We  may  talk  about  the  Lord's  coming  and  be  learned  about 
prophecy;    but   the    Lord   looks    at   the  heart  and  not  at  the 
appearance.     He  sees  where,  let  the  profession  be  ever  so  loud 
or  high,  souls  cleave  to  the  world  and  do  not  want  Him. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

*'  Then  shall  the  kingdom  of  heaven  be  likened  unto  ten 
virgins."  We  have  here  the  general  aspect  of  those  who  bear 
the  name  of  Christ.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  here  implies  a 
certain  economy  at  a  given  point  of  time.  "  Then  shall  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  be  likened  unto  ten  virgins,  which  took 
their  lamps  and  went  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom."  (Ver.  1.) 
"  Their  lamps"  set  forth  the  light  of  profession.  They  were 
witnesses  for  the  Lord,  and  their  calling  was  to  meet  the  Saviour. 
That  was  to  be  the  attitude  of  the  Christian  from  the  first,  going 
fm'th  to  meet  the  Bridegroom.  .  Christianity  does  not  mean  that 
its  professors  remain  where  they  are  and  so  look  for  Christ,  but 
that  they  leave  everything  in  order  to  go  out  and  meet  the 
Bridegroom.  Some  of  the  early  believers  were  Jews,  and  some 
were  Gentiles;  but  they  abandoned  for  Christ  their  previous  con- 
nections, their  position  in  the  world,  and  all  that  they  hitherto 
valued.  They  had  a  new  object ;  they  knew  that  the  only 
blessed  one  in  the  sight  of  God  was  the  Saviour ;  they  were 
waiting  for  Him,  who  is  in  heaven,  and  they  go  out  to  meet 
Him  who  has  promised  to  come  again.  This  is  the  true  expec- 
tation of  the  Christian.  There  ought  to  be  no  fixing  of  dates, 
but  the  certain  hope  that  the  Lord  is  coming  we  know  not 
when.  The  stronger  such  a  hope  is  in  our  hearts,  the  more 
completely  separated  shall  we  be  from  the  plans  and  projects 
of  this  world. 

"And  five  of  them  were  wise  and  five  were  foolish."  (Yer. 
2.)  The  kingdom  of  heaven  becomes  a  thing  of  profession.  As 
in  the  case  of  the  servants,  there  was  an  evil  as  well  as  a  faithful 
servant,  so  here  we  have  five  wise  and  five  foolish  virgins. 
"  They  that  were  foolish  took  their  lamps  and  took  no  oil  with 
them."  They  were  persons  who  had  the  lamp  of  profession  but 
no  oil.  Some  haA^e  thought  that  they  were  Christians  who  failed 
in  lookiuo-  for  the  Lord  to  come.     But  I  believe  this  to  be  false. 


CHAPTER  XXV.  369 

because  the  foolish  proved  their  folly  in  this — that  they  took  no 
oil  in  their  lamps.  What  does  this  imply  ?  Oil  is  the  type  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  We  read  in  1  John  ii.  of  the  "  unction  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  Will  any  one  maintain  that  there  are  real  Chris- 
tians Avho  have  not  this  "  unction  ?"  The  wise  virgins  set  forth 
true  believers,  the  foolish  ones  mere  professors ;  these  took  the 
name  of  Christ,  but  there  was  nothing  that  could  fit  them  for 
the  presence  of  Christ.  Our  power  of  enjoying  Christ  is 
entirely  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  nature  of  man  may  admire 
Christ,  but  only  at  a  distance,  and  without  an  awakened  or  a 
purged  conscience.  There  is  no  living  link  of  relationship 
between  the  heart  of  man  and  Christ ;  and  therefore  man 
crucified  Him.  These  foolish  virgins,  having  no  oil  in  their 
lamps,  shewed  that  they  possessed  nothing  that  could  enable 
them  to  welcome  Christ.  The  Holy  Ghost  alone  can  fit  men  to 
stand  in  the  confession  of  His  name  to  do  His  work.  The  oil 
was  that  which  fed  the  lamp,  and  these  foolish  virgins  had  none. 
"  But  the  wise  took  oil  in  their  vessels  with  their  lamps.  While 
the  bridegroom  tarried,  they  all  slumbered  and  slept."  (Ver.  4, 
5.)  They  all  dropped  practically  the  hope  of  Christ's  coming: 
there  was  no  difference  in  that.  There  were  true  Christians 
and  false,  but  all  Avere  in  this  respect  asleep.  Thus,  while  the 
original  calling  of  Christians  was  to  wait  for  Christ's  return, 
united  by  the  "Holy  Ghost,  yet  was  there  to  be  a  universal  slumber 
as  to  expecting  Christ.  But  the  Lord  adds,  ''At  midnight 
there  was  a  cry  made.  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh,  go  ye 
out  to  meet  him."  (Ver.  6.)  Plainly,  that  cry  was  the  move- 
ment of  the  Holy  Ghost  Himself.  It  was  the  power  and  grace 
of  God  which  sent  it  out  by  the  means  that  He  saw  fitting.  We 
are  not  told  how,  but  it  plainly  reveals  a  general  movement 
among  christian  professors — a  revival  of  the  truth  of  the  coming 
of  the  Lord.  "  Then  all  those  virgins  arose  and  trimmed  their 
lamps."  (Ver.  7.)  The  cry  affected  even  those  who  had  not  the 
Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  them. 

But  now  comes  out  the  solemn  difference,  "  The  foolish  said 
unto  the  wise.  Give  us  of  your  oil,  for  our  lamps  are  gone  out," 
or  rather,  "are  goinr/  out."     They  had  lit  their  wicks,  but  there 

BB 


370  LECTUEES   ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

was  no  oil.  The  Uglit  of  natural  strength  bums  soon  and  rapidly^ 
but  there  is  nothing  that  implies  the  Spirit  of  God — they  had 
never  had  oil.  "  But  the  wise  answered,  saying,  Not  so ;  lest 
there  be  not  enough  for  us  and  you  ;  but  go  ye  rather  to  them 
that  sell  and  buy  for  yourselves."  I  need  not  say  that  the 
terms  on  which  God  sells  and  man  buys  the  Holy  Ghost  are 
*' without  money  and  without  price;"  but  the  great  point  is, 
that  eveiy  soul  must  have  to  do  with  God.  The  believer  listens 
and  bows  to  God  in  this  world ;  the  unbeliever  will  quail  before 
God  in  the  next  world.  Grace  compels  souls  to  come  in  and  to 
have  to  do  with  Him  now,  in  this  world ;  but  if  I  refuse  to 
face  God  about  my  sins  here  below,  I  am  lost  for  ever.  Woio 
is  the  day  of  salvation ;  and  it  is  only  a  delusion  of  the  devil  to 
persuade  the  heart  to  defer  it  to  a  more  convenient  season.  If  I 
go  to  God  about  my  sins,  and  because  I  believe  that  Jesus  is  a 
Saviour,  I  shall  find,  not  merely  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  but 
the  Holy  Ghost  given,  by  whom  I  shall  be  able  to  enjoy  the 
Saviour.  The  wise  had  this  oil,  and  they  could  await  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  in  peace.  But  the  foolish  ones  are  unac- 
quainted with  His  grace.  And  to  whom  do  they  go  ?  Not  to 
those  who  sell  without  money  and  without  price.  "  While  they 
went  to  buy,  the  bridegroom  came ;  and  they  that  were  ready 
went  in  with  him  to  the  marriage :  and  the  door  was  shut." 
Afterwards,  as  we  see  in  the  painful  picture  of  the  foolish 
virgins,  they  come,  saying,  "  Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us.  But  he 
answered  and  said.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  know  you  not. 
Watch  therefore,  for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour." 
The  words  "  wherein  the  Son  of  man  cometh"  have  no  sufficient 
claim  to  follow  in  the  verse.  This  is  no  particular  view  of  mine, 
but  it  is  the  judgment  of  every  competent  person  who  has 
examined  the  orio-inal  testimonies  to  the  word  of  God.  When 
the  Lord  is  coming  in  the  way  of  judgment.  He  is  spoken  of  as 
Son  of  man.  Here  He  is  introduced  as  the  Bridegroom,  and  if 
the  words  "  Son  of  man"  were  really  read  here,  it  would  be 
hard  indeed  to  account  for  them.  How  plain  that  you  cannot 
add  anything  to  scripture  without  spoiling  it !  Our  Lord  here 
appears  in  an  asj)ect  of  grace  towards  His  saints,  and  this  is  one 


CHAPTER  XXV.  371 

reason  why  you  have  no  description  of  the  juclgmeut  about  to 
fall  upon  the  foolish  virgins.  The  displayed  execution  of  divine 
vengeance  would  be  incongruous  with  His  title  of  Bridegroom, 
No  doubt,  even  here  the  door  is  shut ;  and  our  Lord  tells  the 
foolish  virgins  when  they  appeal  to  Him  to  open,  "  I  know  you 
not ;"  but  He  thereon  immediately  turns  the  fact  to  the  spiritual 
profit  of  His  disciples :  "  Watch,  therefore,  for  ye  know  neither 
the  day  nor  the  hour."  (Ver.  1 — 13.) 

Then  comes  another  parable.  "For  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
[or,  literally,  '  For  he,'  or,  '  it']  is  as  a  man  travelling  into  a  tar 
country,  who  called  his  own  servants,  and  delivered  unto  them 
his  goods.  And  unto  one  he  gave  five  talents,  to  another  two, 
and  to  another  one :  to  every  man  according  to  his  several 
ability;  and  straightway  took  his  journey."  (Ver.  14,  15.) 
There  our  Lord  is  represented  as  leaving  this  world  and  going 
to  a  far  country.  This  is  a  very  remarkable  way  in  which  our 
Lord  is  presented  here.  In  Matthew  His  home  is  supposed  to 
be  on  the  earth,  because  He  is  the  Messiah  who  came  to  His 
<3wn,  even  if  His  own  received  Him  not.  As  the  rejected 
Messiah  He  leaves  His  home,  and  goes,  the  suffering  but  glori- 
fied Son  of  man,  to  the  far  country,  which  is  clearly  heaven : 
and  while  He  is  gone  there.  He  has  His  servants  to  whom  He 
has  committed  certain  of  His  goods,  and  with  these  they  are  to 
labour.  "  Then  he  that  had  received  the  five  talents  went  and 
traded  with  the  same,  and  made  them  other  five  talents."  (Ver. 
16.)  Here  you  have  another  kind  of  ministry.  It  is  not 
serving  the  household  and  giving  them  meat  in  due  season.  It 
is  trading,  or  goino;  out  to  others.  This  also  is  a  characteristic 
of  Cliristianity.  In  Judaism  there  was  no  such  thing  as  the 
Lord  sending  His  servants  here  and  there  to  gain  souls  ;  but 
when  the  Lord  Jesus  left  this  world  and  went  up  to  heaven,  He 
thus  sent  them  out.  He  left  them  His  goods  to  trade  withal. 
It  is  the  activity  of  grace  that  goes  out  to  seek  sinners,  and 
spread  the  testimony  of  the  truth  of  God  among  saints.  This 
also  is  the  thing  to  which  our  Lord  calls  us,  according  to  our 
several  ability.  The  character  of  the  gift  put  at  our  disposal  is 
suited  in  the  Giver's  wisdom  to  the  object  and  vessel.     There  is 


372  LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL   OF  MATTHEW. 

sovereignty,  but  all  is  wisely  ordered.  How  could  it  be  other- 
wise, seeing  that  it  is  the  Loy^d  who  calls  ?  It  is  here,  too,  that 
Christendom  has  so  completely  failed.  Were  a  man  now  to> 
begin  to  preach  and  teach  without  some  human  sanction,  many 
would  regard  it  as  a  piece  of  assumption  if  not  presumption. 
Whereas,  in  truth,  if  I  look  for  authority  to  preach  from  the 
churches,  established  or  voluntary,  I  shall  be  sinning  against 
Christ.  Any  appointment  by  men  for  such  a  purpose  is  unau- 
thorized, and  opposed  to  the  mind  of  Christ ;  and  those  whom 
they  would  consider  acting  irregularly,  are,  in  reality,  in  the 
lowly  path  of  obedience,  and  will  find  their  vindication  in  the 
great  day.  It  is  entirely  a  question  between  Christ  and  His 
own  servants.  He  gives  one  to  be  a  prophet,  another  an  evan- 
gelist, another  a  pastor  and  teacher.  (Eph.  iv.)  But  there  are 
two  things  in  the  servant — both  of  them  of  importance.  He 
gave  them  gifts,  but  it  was  according  to  their  several  ability. 
The  Lord  does  not  call  any  one  to  be  His  servant  who  has  not 
an  ability  for  the  trust  belonging  to  himself.  The  servant  must 
have  certain  natural  and  acquired  qualifications,  beside  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  of  God.  He  gave  them  talents — to  one  five,  to 
another  tvv^o,  and  to  another  one.  Here  you  have  the  energy 
of  the  Holy  Ghost — the  power  that  the  Lord  gives  from  on 
high,  over  and  above  the  choice  of  each  man  "  according  to  his 
several  ability." 

It  is  plain  from  this  that  there  are  certain  qualities  in  the 
servant,  independent  of  the  gift  that  the  Lord  puts  into  him. 
His  natural  powers  are  the  vessel  that  contains  the  gift,  and 
wherein  the  gift  is  to  be  exercised.  If  the  Lord  calls  a  man  to 
be  a  preacher,  there  is  supposed  a  natural  aptitude  for  it.  Again^ 
the  gift  may  be  increased.  First,  there  is  the  ability  of  the  man 
before  and  when  he  is  converted ;  next,  the  Lord  gives  him  a 
gift  that  he  never  possessed  before ;  thirdly,  if  he  does  not  stir 
up  his  gift,  there  may  be  a  weakening,  if  not  loss.  He  may 
become  unfaithful,  and  may  lose  power.  But  if  a  man  waits 
upon  the  Lord,  there  may,  on  the  contrary,  be  increased  power 
given  to  him.  Many  think  that  the  one  qualification  of  the 
servant  of  God  is  that  of  the  Spirit.     This  is,  of  course,  essential, 


CHAPTER   XXV.  373 

and  most  blessed;  but  it  is  not  all.  Tlie  truth  of  God  is, 
that  Christ  gives  gifts ;  but  He  gives  them  "  according  to 
the  ability"  of  the  individual.  The  union  of  the  two  facts, 
the  ability  of  tlie  servant  and  the  sovereignly-bestowed  gift 
given  him  to  trade  with,  it  is  of  all-importanee  to  keep  dis- 
tinctly in  view. 

But  to  proceed  —  "After  a  long  time  the  lord  of  those 
servants  cometh  and  reckoneth  with  them.  And  so  he  that  had 
received  five  talents  came  and  brought  other  five  talents,  saying, 
Lord,  thou  deliveredst  unto  me  five  talents:  behold,  I  have 
gained  beside  them  five  talents  more.  His  lord  said  imto  him. 
Well  done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant."  (Ver  19 — 21.)  In 
chapter  xxiv.  it  was  the  "faithful  and  wise"  servant;  here, 
'^  thou  good  and  faithful  servant."  Both  are  called  faithful. 
But  where  it  was  a  question  of  the  household,  wisdom  was 
needecL  In  exercising  a  gift  outside  the  house,  it  was  a  question 
of  being  good.  What  is  meant  by  this  ?  What  is  the  source 
of  all  grace  in  the  servant  of  the  Lord  ?  The  appreciation  of 
God's  goodness.  This  comes  out  by  contrast  in  the  case  of  the 
slothful  servant.  An  unconverted  man  might  have  a  gift  from 
the  Lord.  The  slothful  servant  was  clearly  one  that  never  had 
life  from  God :  and  what  proved  it  was,  that  he  did  not  believe 
ia  the  goodness  of  the  Lord :  he  had  no  confidence  in  the  grace 
that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  I  ought  to  have  a  divine  sense  of  my 
sins.  I  cannot  have  too  deep  an  abhorrence  of  sin ;  but  this 
ought  never  to  make  me  limit  or  doubt  the  grace  of  God. 
*^' Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more  abound."  And 
what  is  true  at  first  remains  true  all  through  the  christian  path. 
I  may  become  sluggard — may  be  disappointed,  allowing  circum- 
stances to  hinder  me  ;  but  whatever  may  be  my  own  fault  or  the 
wrong  of  others,  this  is  no  reason  for  giving  up  confidence  in 
Christ.      There  is  no  trial  but  what  He  can  turn  to  p-reater 

O 

blessing  than  even  if  it  did  not  exist.  When  things  are  happy, 
we  can  trust  Him ;  but  if  they  are  miserable,  are  we  to  say, 
There  is  no  hope  ?  Never !  Tlie  Lord  says  to  us,  "  Overcome 
evil  with  good."  And  does  not  the  Lord  act  upon  this  Himself? 
Does  He  not  hold  to  it,  that  there  is  grace  enough  in  Him  to 


374  LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL    OF  MATTHETT. 

meet  any  case,  be  it  ever  so  bad  ?     It  is  the  secret  of  powery 
that  the  soul  holds  to  His  grace. 

It  was  in  the  clean  contrary  of  this  that  the  evil  servant 
shewed  what  he  was.  He  says  to  the  Saviour,  "  Lord,  I  knew 
thee  that  thou  art  an  hard  man,  reaping  where  thou  hast  not 
sown,  and  gathering  where  thou  hast  not  strawed.  And  I  was 
afraid,  and  went  and  hid  thy  talent  in  the  earth :  lo,  there  thou 
hast  that  is  thine.  His  lord  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Thou 
wicked  and  slothful  servant,  thou  knewest  that  I  reap  where 
I  sowed  not,  and  gather  where  I  have  not  sti-awed."  (Ver.  24 — 
20.)  Christ  takes  him  upon  his  own  ground:  for  with  the 
froward  He  can  shew  Himself  froward.  If  the  servant  judges 
Him  to  be  hard.  He  can  say.  On  your  oAvn  ground  you  ought  tO' 
have  done  Just  the  contrary :  why  did  you  not  make  the  best 
use  of  what  I  gave  you  ?  "  Thou  oughtest  therefore  to  have  put 
my  money  to  the  exchangers,  and  then  at  my  coming  I  shouM 
have  received  mine  own  with  usury."  (Ver.  27.)  According  to 
his  self-defence,  he  had  utterly  failed  :  and  so  it  is  always.  The- 
man  who  talks  about  the  justice  of  God  cannot,  for  an  instant^ 
stand  before  it,  while  he  who  casts  himself  humbly  upon  the 
grace  of  God  will  be  found  to  walk  soberly,  righteously,  godly^ 
m  this  present  evil  world.  The  denier  of  the  goodness  of  God 
IS  invariably  a  bad  man  himself.  The  Lord  grant  that  we  may 
make  no  excuses  for  ourselves,  but  feel  and  confess  that  He  is 
full  of  grace  and  truth  ?  He  cannot  allow  what  is  contrary  to 
His  nature ;  but  there  is  always  grace  in  Him  to  meet  the  soul 
that  goes  to  Him  about  its  sin,  and  spreads  it  before  God  in  the 
desire  of  being  delivered  from  it.  And  so,  in  the  matter  of  our 
service  also,  whether  we  have  two  talents  or  five,  and  use  them 
for  Him,  the  Lord  will  return  it  to  our  souls  again,  and  give  u& 
in  the  dav  that  is  coming  to  hear  those  blessed  words,  "  Well 
done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant;  thou  hast  been  faithful 
over  a  few  things.  I  will  make  thee  ruler  over  many  things  j 
enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  (Ver.  14 — 30.) 

We  now  approach  a  subject,  viewed,  I  apprehend,  with  much 
prejudice — perhaps  with  more  than  most  in  the  word  of  God. 


CHAPTER   XXV.  375 

It  has  been  perverted,  and,  I  grieve  to  add,  commonly  perverted, 
even  by  those  who  love  the  Saviour,  have  faith  in  the  value 
of  His  blood,  and  own  both  the  general  blessedness  of  those  that 
belong  to  Him  and  the  sure  doom  of  those  that  despise  Him. 
But  although  on  these  fundamental  truths  all  Christians  must 
be  in  the  main  agreed,  when  we  come  to  inquire  what  the  Lord 
intended  us  to  gather  from  His  taking  His  seat  upon  the  throne 
of  His  glory  ;  when  we  would  ascertain  who  the  parties  are  that 
the  Lord  has  before  Him  in  this  scene,  and  what  the  special 
destiny  of  the  blessed  is,  we  come  into  the  region,  not  of  uncer- 
tainty, but  of  the  most  various  opinions.  The  root  of  the 
difficulty  may  be  traced  generally  to  one  thought — the  anxiety, 
even  of  Christians,  to  find  that  which  bears  upon  their  own  lot. 
Not  being  thoroughly  at  rest  touching  their  accejDtance,  there  is 
ordinarily  a  disposition  to  warp  scripture,  partly  to  escape  what 
they  dread,  and  partly  in  order  to  gather  comfort  for  their 
troubled  souls.  The  greater  part  of  God's  children  are,  more  or 
less,  in  spirit,  imder  the  law :  and  wherever  such  are  honest  in 
this  condition,  they  must  be  miserable.  There  are  comj)aratively 
few  who  know  the  fulness  of  deliverance  in  Christ;  few  who 
know  what  it  is  to  be  dead  to  the  law  and  married  to  another, 
even  to  Him  who  is  risen  from  the  dead.  They  may  hear  and 
repeat  the  words  of  scripture,  thinking  they  mean  something 
good ;  but  the  riches  of  the  blessing  of  being  dead  to  the  law 
and  united  to  a  risen  Saviour,  very  few  appreciate.  This  is  the 
reason  why  so  many  are  not  in  a  state  to  understand  the  word 
of  God.  Not  enjoying  in  peace  their  own  position  in  Christ, 
they  are  hankering  after  what  may  console  or  secure  them. 
This  leads  them  to  seize  upon  every  promise,  with  small  regard 
to  the  objects  God  had  in  view ;  and  to  dwell  too  exclusively  on 
what  may  be  called  the  covenant  mercy  of  God,  without  heeding 
seriously  His  admonitions  and  His  warnings.  Their  desire 
is,  that  out  of  the  words  of  comfort  in  scripture  they  may  find 
some  solid  ground  of  assurance  for  their  own  souls.  When, 
therefore,  as  here,  the  Lord  speaks  of  certain  Gentiles  as 
"  sheep,"  they  think  it  means  us,  because  we  are  so  called 
elsewhere,  as  in  John  x.     They  find  these  are  blessed  of  the 


376  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEWi 

Father,  and  thence  conclude  that  it  can  be  no  other  than  our 
hope.  Again,  certain  are  here  spoken  of  as  "  brethren"  of  the 
Kinp;.  Who  can  these  be  but  ourselves — Christians  ?  For  all 
we,  unquestionably,  are  brethren,  and  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call 
us  brethren.  In  this  superficial  way  scripture  is  misunder- 
stood, and  the  very  comfort  that  souls  are  grasping  after  as 
surely  eludes  them.  Wherever  we  turn  aside  the  edge  of  the 
word  of  God,  and  appropriate  indiscriminately  what  is  said 
of  persons  in  a  wholly  different  position,  there  is  loss.  The 
sovereign  grace  of  God  has  so  arranged  everything  that  the  best 
portion  for  us  is  what  God  has  given.  We  cannot  mend  the 
counsels  of  God,  nor  add  to  the  riches  of  His  grace.  If  we 
know  the  love  that  God  has  to  us  in  Christ,  we  know  the  best 
thing  that  we  can  find  in  earth  or  heaven.  The  moment  we  lay 
hold  of  this,  and  see  how  greatly  we  are  blest,  we  cease  from  the 
anxiety  that  each  good  word  of  God  should  converge  on  ourselves ; 
we  see  His  infinitely  greater  object,  even  Christ,  and  we  can 
delio-ht  in  others  beino;  blest  even  in  what  we  have  not.  This  is 
most  important  practically — that  we  should  be  so  satisfied  with 
God's  love  to  us  and  the  portion  He  has  given  us  in  Christ,  as 
to  rejoice  in  all  that  He  is  pleased  to  give  to  others.  Are  we 
not  sure  our  Father  withholds  nothing  from  us  but  what  would 
interfere  with  our  blessing  ?  So  reading  this  parable  or  pro- 
phetic description,  we  are  under  no  constraint.  We  can  examine 
it  with  other  scriptures,  and  see  whom  the  Lord  has  in  view, 
and  inquire  what  their  portion  is  to  be. 

"  When  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  His  glory,  and  all  the 
holy  angels  with  him,  then  shall  he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his 
glory.  And  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations^  (Ver. 
31,  32.)  Here  are  proofs  enough  of  what  the  time  and  circum- 
stances are  of  which  our  Lord  speaks.  He  is  taking  His  seat 
npon  His  own  thi'one  as  the  Son  of  man.  He  is  gathering 
before  Him  all  the  nations.  When  will  this  be?  Here,  at 
least,  it  will  not  be  contended  that  something  past  is  in  question. 
The  Lord  Jesus  is  not  even  yet  seated  upon  His  own  throne. 
W^hen  on  earth  He  had  no  throne ;  when  He  went  to  heaven, 
He  sat  down  on  His  Father's  throne,  as  says  Revelation  iii.  21, 


OHAPTEK   XXV.  377 

"  To  him  that  overcometh  ■will  I  grant  to  sit  with  me  in  my 
throne,  even  as  I  also  overcame  and  am  set  clown  with  my 
Father  in  liis  throne."  According  to  this  promise  when  it  shall 
be  fulfilled,  He  must  have  left  His  Father's  throne  and  sat  down 
on  His  own  throne.  It  is  a  future  thing.  All  scripture  that 
touches  on  our  Lord's  actual  place,  shews  that  He  is  now  seated 
on  the  Father's  throne.  But  scripture  also  shews  that  He  is  to 
sit  on  His  own  throne,  and  this  is  what  we  have  here.  All 
things  in  heaven  and  in  earth  shall  be  put  under  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  will  be  the  head  of  all  glory, 
heavenly  and  earthly.  Of  which  does  this  portion  speak  ?  Are 
there  any  circumstances,  Avith  which  our  Lord  surrounds  His 
throne,  that  make  the  answer  plain  ?  "  Before  him  shall  be 
gathered  all  nations."  Are  nations  in  heaven?  Clearly  not. 
Who  can  imagine  so  gross  a  thing?  When  the  boundary  is 
crossed  that  separates  the  things  seen  from  the  unseen,  no  such 
earthly  sight  lowers  or  distracts  the  worship  above.  When 
men  are  risen  from  the  dead,  they  will  no  longer  be  known 
as  English  or  French ;  these  national  distinctions  for  them 
terminate.  Their  future  lot  is  decided  according  to  their  recep- 
tion or  rejection  of  Jesus  in  the  present  life.  This  future  throne 
of  the  Son  of  man  is  accordingly  connected  with  a  time-state  on 
the  earth.  The  more  every  word  is  weighed,  the  more  this  will 
be  evident  to  the  unbiassed. 

If  we  compare  it,  in  the  next  place,  with  a  resurrection  scene, 
their  distinctiveness  will  be  apparent.  In  Revelation  xx.  11,  "I 
saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  him  that  sat  on  it,  from  whose 
face  the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled  away  ;  and  there  was 
found  no  place  for  them."  There  can  be  no  question  about  this 
throne.  It  can  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  earth,  because  the 
text  itself  tells  us  that  the  earth  and  heaven  fled  away.  I  learn 
at  once  the  positive  contrast  between  Matthew  and  Revelation. 
In  the  latter  only  do  we  hear  a  word  about  heaven  and  earth 
fleeing  away ;  in  the  former  only  we  have  very  plain  indications 
that  the  Lord  is  taking  His  throne  in  the  government  of  the 
earth  and  of  men  living  on  it,  not  judging  the  dead  when  the 
kingdom  is  about  to  be  given  up.     Those  gathered  before  Him 


378       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

here  are  "  all  the  nations" — a  term  never  used  about  the  dead 
or  the  risen,  but  only  applied  to  men  while  still  going  on  here 
below,  and  indeed  applied  only  to  a  part  of  living  men — the 
Gentile  portion,  as  distinct  from  the  Jews.  For  we  have  already 
had  the  Jews  in  chapter  xxi v. ,  and  now  we  see  the  Gentiles ;  as 
between  the  two  were  the  Christians. 

Thus,  nothing  can  be  more  orderly  than  the  whole  connection 
of  this  prophecy  on  the  mount.  The  Jews  came  first,  as  indeed 
the  disciples  themselves  still  were  such ;  then  the  parables  of  the 
house  servant,  the  virgins,  and  the  talents,  which  describe  the 
christian  position,  soon  to  be  developed,  when  Jerusalem  should 
reject  the  Holy  Ghost.  Lastly,  another  section  closes  all : 
neither  Jews  nor  Christians,  but  "  all  the  nations,"  or  Gentiles, 
to  whom  the  testimony  of  the  kingdom  is  to  be  sent  out,  and 
among  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  will  work  (Satan  working  too, 
lest  they  should  be  brought  out  of  darkness  into  God's  mar- 
vellous light).  In  Revelation  xxii.  we  find  another  throne, 
unconnected  with  the  earth,  which,  indeed,  ere  this  will  have 
fled  away.  In  Matthew  we  had  nations,  but  in  the  Revelation 
they  too  have  disappeared.  Satan  had  previously  gone  out  to 
deceive  the  nations  which  are  in  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth ; 
and  fire  came  down  from  God  out  of  heaven  and  devoured  them. 
Hence,  though  there  were  nations  just  before  the  great  white 
throne,  they  had  been  completely  destroyed  by  a  divine  judg- 
ment. In  their  disappearance  from  the  earth  the  final  throne 
is  seen,  and  before  the  face  of  Him  who  sat  upon  it  earth  and 
heaven  fled  away.  Thus  time  was  done  with,  all  present  circum- 
stances were  closed,  the  wicked  men  of  the  earth  having  been 
killed  by  God's  judgment :  thereon  follows  the  great  white 
throne.  "And  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  ....  ." 
Thus  you  see  the  character  of  this  throne  at  once.  Not  a 
living  man  is  there  in  natural  life.  Every  one  before  it  had  been 
previously  dead.  I  am  not  speaking  now  of  those  that  had  been 
changed  or  raised  into  the  likeness  of  Christ  long  previously. 
Every  one  called  before  this  throne  had  been  dead  some  time  ago. 
The  nations  were  destroyed  by  the  judgment  of  God,  and  were, 
like  others  before  them,  but  dead  men :  these  are  now  raised 


CHAPTER   XX Y.  S79 

from  the  dead,  summoned  for  judgment  before  the  great  white 
throne.  Li  Matthew  xxv.  not  a  single  dead  man  is  spoken  of, 
in  Revelation  xx.  not  a  single  living  man.  In  Matthew  the 
persons  called  before  the  throne  are  "  all  the  Gentiles"  or 
nations,  in  Revelation  none  but  "  the  dead,  small  and  great." 
No  matter  what  they  might  have  been  before,  they  all  stand 
alike,  small  and  great,  before  the  throne.  "  And  the  books  were 
opened,  and  another  book  was  opened,  which  is  the  book  of  life  ; 
and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things  which  were  written 
in  the  books  accordino;  to  their  works."  When  we  come  to  look 
closely  into  Matthew  xxv.  the  principle  of  judgment  is  not 
according  to  works  generally,  but  only  a  particular  test  is  pressed 
upon  them  —  faithful  or  unfaithful  treatment  of  the  king's 
brethren.  "  And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead  which  were  in  it ; 
and  death  and  hell  delivered  up  the  dead  which  were  in  them ; 
and  they  were  judged  every  man  according  to  their  works." 
There  is  not  a  word  about  this  in  Matthew  xxv. ;  and  indeed  the 
expression  of  "  nations"  involves,  without  a  question,  the  in- 
ference that  there  was  not  a  dead  or  risen  man  among  those  so 
spoken  of.  It  is  the  judgment  of  those  commonly  called  "  the 
quick,"  and  they  are  dealt  with  according  to  the  very  special 
principle  of  their  behaviour  to  the  messengers  of  the  gospel  of 
the  kingdom.  This  will  shew  that  it  is  a  gi-and  error  to  suppose 
that  all  the  judgments  in  the  word  of  God  mean  one  and  the 
same  thing.  We  must  leave  room  for  differences  here  as  else- 
where. In  what  indeed  do  we  find  absolute  sameness  of  God's 
ways  ?  Who  says  that  there  will  be  sameness  in  heaven  ?  There 
is  certainly  nothing  like  it  on  earth.  God  shews  Himself 
capable,  according  to  His  love  and  insight  into  all  men,  to  enter 
into  and  meet  every  difficulty  and  to  bring  out  His  own  perfec- 
tions in  dealing  with  all  that  comes  before  Him. 

Gathering  up  the  contrast  of  Revelation  xx.,  let  us  turn  to 
the  closing  scene  in  Matthew  xxv.  The  title  "  Son  of  man" 
at  once  prepares  you  for  a  judgment  connected  with  the  earth 
and  Avith  persons  living  there.  No  doubt  the  Son  of  man  comes 
in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  but  He  comes  to  judge  the  world  and 
people  on  it.     It  may  be  even  said  of  churches  or  assemblies,  as 


380       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

in  Revelation  i.  ;  but  wliatever  the  objecjt  of  the  judgment,  it  is 
the  Lord  judging  persons  still  alive  upon  the  earth  and  not 
the  dead, 

"  And  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations :  and  he  shall 
separate  them  one  from  another,  as  a  shepherd  divideth  his  sheep 
from  the  goats."  It  is  a  careful  and  divine  discrimination — not 
a  mere  act  of  vengeance  which  deals  with  masses,  in  which  all 
might  be  overwhelmed  in  common  ruin.  He  separates  them 
one  from  another.  At  the  o-reat  white  throne  the  dead  stand  all 
together :  there  is  no  question  or  need  of  separating  them  there. 
But  here  there  is  a  mingled  company.  Such  a  mixture  is  never 
found  in  heaven  or  hell,  but  only  on  the  earth.  Thus  every 
clause  gives  proof  that  our  Lord  speaks  of  a  judgment  of  the 
living  on  the  earth.  He  separates  them  "  as  a  shepherd  divideth 
his  sheep  from  the  goats."  It  follows  that  the  persons  meant  by 
"  the  sheep"  and  "  the  goats"  are  respectively  the  righteous  and 
the  ungodly  among  the  nations  then  living  on  the  earth,  when 
our  Lord  comes  to  judge  in  His  quality  of  Son  of  man.  It  is 
not  now  what  we  have  seen  in  chapter  xxiv.,  where  He  shines 
suddenly  like  lightning.  Here  it  is  the  calm,  peaceful,  but  most 
solemn  judgment,  with  everlasting  results,  according  to  the 
discrimination  which  the  Lord  makes  between  individuals.  When " 
the  judgment  of  the  dead  takes  place  before  the  great  white 
throne,  the  heavens  and  earth  are  fled  away ;  so  that  before  then 
the  Lord  must  have  come,  or  He  never  can  come  to  the  earth 
as  it  is  now,  and  as  we  all  confess  He  shall  come.  The  eternal 
separation  will  have  taken  place  before  the  new  heavens 
and  earth. 

Our  Lord  is  here  found  separating  the  godly  from  among  the 
ungodly  of  these  living  nations ;  and  He  disposes  of  them 
according  to  the  manner  set  forth  by  His  own  lips.  ''  Then 
shall  the  king  say  unto  them  on  his  right  hand.  Come,  ye  blessed 
of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world."  (Ver.  34.)  However  blessed  they 
are.  He  does  not  describe  them  as  children  of  their  Father.  I 
do  not  deny  that  they  are  children  of  God ;  but  He  says, 
"  children  of  m^  Father."     No  doubt  the  words  said  to  them 


CHAPTER  XXV.  381 

are  very  precious ;  but  do  they  reach  up  to  the  height  of  the 
blessing  the  grace  of  God  has  given  us  in  Christ  now  ?  There 
is  nothing  here  about  being  chosen  in  Christ  before  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world — blessed  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly 
places  in  Christ  Jesus.  Here  they  are  called  to  inherit  the 
kingdom  prepared  for  them/ro?n  the  foundation  of  the  world. 
When  God  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth,  He  was  looking 
onward  to  this  blessed  time.  Satan's  getting  power  over  man 
was  only  a  fearful  interruption,  but  not  one  whose  consequences 
the  Lord  could  not  overmaster  and  purge  out :  He  means  to  do 
it.  He  means  to  have  this  world  the  scene  of  incomparably 
greater  blessedness  than  now  it  is  of  misery  through  Satan's 
misrule.  He  means  to  give  the  kingdom  of  this  world  to  His 
Son.  The  Lord  Jesus  will  have  a  higher  glory,  yea,  will  have 
the  whole  universe  put  under  Him.  And  His  blood  has  pur- 
chased us  for  His  bride.  He  had  a  right  in  His  own  glory  to 
everything ;  but  He  laid  down  His  life  that  there  might  be  a 
righteous  title  to  give  it  to  whom  the  Father  would. 

Again,  let  it  be  noted  that  there  is  not  a  word  about  His  bride 
here — nothing  that  supposes  such  a  position  in  these  blessed  ones 
of  the  Gentiles.  He  speaks  as  "  the  King,"  and  He  is  never 
spoken  of  as  such  in  His  relation  to  the  Church.  Li  Revela- 
tion XV.  the  expression  "King  of  saints"  should  be  "  Kino- 
of  nations,"  quoted  from  the  words  of  Jeremiah.  It  is  a  title 
we  can  rejoice  in,  but  it  is  not  His  relationship  to  us.  We  are 
called  by  grace  to  be  the  members  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh, 
and  of  His  bones.  Here,  in  His  capacity  of  King,  then,  the 
Lord  severs  the  righteous  Gentiles  of  his  day  from  their 
unrighteous  fellows — "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit 
the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundationof  the  world." 
(Ver.  34.)  When  Ephesians  i.  speaks  of  our  being  chosen 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  it  means  a  choice  indepen- 
dent of  the  scene  of  creation,  in  connection  Avith  which  these 
blessed  Gentiles  have  theif  portion.  Our  place  may  be  rather 
said  to  be  with  Him  who  created  all.  God  has  "  chosen  us  in 
Christ  before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  The  world  may 
disappear  ;  but  our  blessing  is  identified  with  Himself.     We  are 


382  LECTURES   ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

made  one  with  Him  who  spake  the  world  into  being.  The  thief 
on  the  cross  asked  of  our  Lord,  "  Remember  me  when  thou 
comest  in  thy  kingdom."  But  our  Lord  says,  "  To-day  shalt 
thou  be  with  me  in  paradise."  To  be  with  Christ — with  Christ 
at  once — with  Christ  in  paradise,  are  each  better  things  than 
the  kingdom  that  we,  too,  sliall  inherit.  Christ  Himself  is  far 
beyond  all  the  glory  displayed  in  and  to  the  world.  This  is 
what  our  Lord  gives  to  faith ;  and  confidence  in  His  love  ever 
receives  more  than  it  asks  from  Him. 

The  blessing,  on  the  other  hand,  given  to  these  godly  ones 
from  among  the  Gentiles,  is  the  inheritance  of  the  kingdom 
jDrepared  for  them  by  the  Father  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world.  The  Lord  gives  them  the  key  to  it  all — that  which 
shewed  they  were  possessors  of  eternal  life :  "I  was  an  hun- 
gered, and  ye  gave  me  meat :  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me 
drink :  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  in :  naked,  and  ye 
clothed  me :  I  was  sick,  and  ye  visited  me  :  I  was  in  prison,  and 
ye  came  unto  me."  (Ver.  35,  36.)  Observe  what  they  answer; 
**  Then  shall  the  righteous  answer  him,  saying,  Lord,  when  saw 
we  thee  an  hungered,  and  fed  thee  ?  or  thirsty,  and  gave  thee 
drink?"  (Ver.  37.)  And  could  a  Christian,  understanding  the 
membership  of  the  body  of  Christ,  say  such  a  thing  to  our 
Lord?  Above  all,  could  he  say  it  in  heaven,  where  we  shall 
know  even  as  we  are  known  ?  Lnpossible.  The  fact  is,  how- 
ever, that  the  scene  does  not  speak  about  saints  in  heaven  at  all. 
The  time  of  wondering  ignorance  will  be  past,  I  need  hardly 
say,  when  we  are  in  the  resurrection  state.  But  there  will  be 
godly  Gentiles  on  the  earth  then.  "  When  saw  we  thee  a 
stranger,  and  took  thee  in?  or  naked,  and  clothed  thee?  Or 
when  saw  we  thee  sick,  or  in  prison,  and  came  unto  thee?" 
(Ver.  38,  39.)  They  are  very  far  from  full  intelligence,  and 
evidently  in  their  natural  bodies  still.  And  the  Lord  is  instruct- 
ing them  even  after  He  appears  in  glory.  "When  He,  having 
come,  is  as  King  seated  upon  His  throne,  we,  raised  from  the 
dead,  shall  surely  still  cast  our  crowns  before  Him ;  but  there 
will  be  no  need  of  light  on  our  part  in  that  day.  It  is  undeni- 
able that  the  righteous  here  do  require  to  be  instructed.     Hence 


CHAPTER  XXV.  383 

there  Is  a  positive  contrast  between  the  heavenly  Church  and 
these  future  "  sheep"  of  the  Lord  from  among  the  nations. 
However  blessed  this  scene  may  be,  still  it  is  the  Lord  as  Son 
of  man  judging  all  nations  and  blessing  the  righteous  from 
among  them,  who  were  ignorant,  up  to  that  moment,  that  in 
shewing  acts  of  love  and  kindness  towards  Christ's  messengers, 
it  was  so  much  done  towards  Christ  Himself.  Their  last  lesson 
was  the  first  that  a  heavenly  saint  leamt — indeed,  even  then  but 
a  small  part  of  it,  as  I  conceive.  When  Paul  was  struck  down 
on  the  road  to  Damascus,  what  was  the  truth  that  startled  his 
soul?  "I  am  Jesus  whom  thou  persecutest."  Only  just 
awakened,  yet  that  was  made  known  to  him  which  these  Gen- 
tiles only  partially  hear  when  they  stand  before  the  throne  of 
the  Son  of  man.  Paul  was  taught  of  the  Lord  that  to  persecute 
the  saints  living  on  the  earth  was  to  persecute  Christ  in 
heaven  :  they  and  Christ  are  one.  It  is  evident  that  these 
Gentile  sheep  set  forth  men  still  in  the  condition  that  requires 
and  receives  instruction  from  Christ. 

But  this  is  not  all.  ''  The  king  shall  answer  and  say  unto 
them.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  Liasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto 
one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  me." 
(Ver.  40.)  Who  are  "  these  my  brethren  ?"  We  have  had  the 
sheep  and  goats — the  Gentiles  righteous  and  the  unrighteous ; 
but  who  are  the  Kino-'s  brethren  ?  Men  whom  the  Lord  will  send 
out  before  He  comes  in  the  glory  of  the  kingdom ;  men  sent  to 
announce  that  He  is  coming  in  His  kingdom.  The  sheep  shewed 
them  love — care — sympathy  in  their  sorrows.  So  that  these 
brethren  of  the  King  must  have  been  exposed  to  tribulation 
before  the  King  appears.  The  conclusion  is  obvious  that,  in  that 
day,  the  ground  on  which  He  will  deal  with  the  nations  will  be 
this — "  How  did  you  behave  to  my  messengers?"  The  King's 
messengers,  immediately  before  He  appears  in  glory,  Avill  go 
forth  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  everywhere ;  and 
when  the  King  takes  His  throne,  those  that  received  the  gospel 
of  the  kingdom  among  the  nations  are  recognized  as  "  sheej)," 
and  the  despisers  perish  as  "  goats."  Those  that  lionour  the 
message  treat  the  messengers  well — caring  for  them,  and  identi- 


384  LECTURES   ON  THE   GOSPEL  OF   MATTHEW. 

fying  themselves  with  them — "  companions  of  them  that  were  so 
used."  The  Lord  remembers  this,  and  counts  what  was  done  to 
His  messengers  as  done  to  Himself.  There  is  no  opening  of 
books  here  :  all  turns  on  this  simple  issue.  Thej  were  arrested 
bv  the  message  Avhen  summoned  to  receive  the  true  King  who 
was  coming.  Their  souls  were  wrought  upon  by  the  Spirit,  and 
thev  treated  the  messengers  with  love  and  honour.  The  Lord 
stakes  all  upon  this — if  you  have  honoured  My  messengers,  it 
proves  your  faith  in  Me.  It  will  be  as  truly  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  as  our  entrance  into  the  far  fuller  testimony  of  His 
love  now.  Their  astonishment  before  His  throne,  at  having  done 
anything  to  Him  in  the  person  of  His  brethren,  proves  that  they 
were  not  in  the  christian  position,  though  truly  believers. 

But  who  were  these  brethren  ?  From  general  principles  of 
scripture  and  the  special  teaching  of  this  prophetical  discourse 
I  have  little  doubt  that  the  king's  brethren  in  this  case  will  be 
godly  Israelites,  employed  by  the  Lord,  after  the  Church  has 
been  caught  up  to  heaven,  to  be  the  heralds  of  the  coming  King 
and  kingdom.  We  know  that  the  Church  is  to  be  taken  away 
before  the  time  of  the  last  great  tribulation.  "  Because  thou 
hast  kept  the  word  of  my  patience,  I  also  will  keep  thee  from 
the  hour  of  temptation,  which  shall  come  upon  all  the  world  to 
try  them  that  dwell  upon  the  earth."  But  here  there  are  saints 
found  on  the  earth — not  kept  from  the  hour  of  temptation,  but 
livino-  on  the  earth  during  it,  and  preaching  this  gospel  of  the 
kino-dom.  And  according  to  the  way  in  which  they  were 
received,  the  nations  will  be  cursed  or  blessed.  There  was 
no  gospel  of  the  kingdom  preached  before  or  after  the  flood, 
and  it  is  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  that  is,  in  general, 
beino-  preached  now.  The  gospel  of  the  kingdom  is  often  con- 
founded with  this. 

Here  we  find  the  King  upon  His  earthly  throne.  The  Church's 
portion  is  heavenly.  I  have  no  doubt,  therefore,  that  the  King's 
brethren  are  a  class  distinct  from  the  Church,  but  whom,  along 
with  the  Church,  Christ  owns  as  His  brethren.  There  are  some 
blessings  the  Jewish  saints  will  have  that  neither  you  nor  I  will 
possess ;  there  are  others  we  shall  have  that  they  will  not  enjoy. 


CHAPTER   XXV.  385 

All  depends  upon  this — What  does  God  say  ?     Whatever  He 
reveals  ought  to  have  absolute  authority  over  us. 

But  we  have  also  another  and  a  very  solemn  back-ground  to 
the  scene  to  glance  at:  "  Then  shall  he  say  also  unto  them  on 
the  left  hand,  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire, 
prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  (Ver.  41.)  Observe,  He 
does  not  say.  Cursed  of  my  Father,  answering  to  "  Blessed  of 
my  Father."  God  hates  putting  away.  So  when  the  awful 
moment  comes  for  the  curse  to  be  pronounced  on  these  wicked 
Gentiles,  it  is,  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed."  I  believe  it  is 
the  deepest  sorrow  to  God,  and  throws  all  the  onus  of  destruction 
on  those  whose  own  sin  it  was,  who  rejected  His  love  and 
holiness  and  glory  in  rejecting  His  Son.  "  Depart  from  me,  ye 
cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels."  In  the  other  case  the  kingdom  was  said  to  be  "  prepared 
foryoit;"  not  so  when  speaking  about  the  curse.  Hell  was  not 
prepared  for  poor  guilty  man.  He  deserves  it ;  but  it  was 
prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.  Where  the  souls  rejected 
the  testimony.  He  does  pronounce  them  cursed.  It  is  His  place. 
He  is  the  King,  the  Judge.  But  whether  it  be  the  great  white 
throne,  or  this  earthly  throne,  it  is  "  everlasting  fire,  prepared 
for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  There  was  no  hope  of  deliverance 
for  these  fallen  angels — no  redemption  for  them.  They  wilfully 
and  without  a  tempter  departed  from  God.  Man  was  tempted 
by  an  enemy ;  and  God  feels  for  guilty  man,  drawn  away  by  a 
mightier,  if  not  more  guilty,  rebel  than  himself.  How  solemn 
to  think  that  it  was  prepared  for  others,  and  that  men  share  it 
with  these  rebellious  spirits  I  It  was  not  in  the  heart  of  God  to 
make  a  hell  for  miserable  man :  it  was  prepared  for  the  devil 
and  his  angels.  But  there  were  those  who  preferred  the  devil 
to  God ;  and  to  such  He  says,  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into 
everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  The 
same  test  is  applied  to  them  as  to  the  godly  before.  For  good 
or  ill,  the  question  will  be  the  treatment  of  the  King  and  of 
His  messengers,  or  rather  of  Him  in  them. 

To  us,  although  the  same  principle  is  involved,  yet,  in  one 
way,  what   is  yet  deeper  comes  in.      All  turns  upon — Wind 
CO 


386        LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

think  ye  of  Christ  ?  Do  you  believe  on  the  Son  of  God  ?  "  He 
that  hath  the  Son  hath  hfe,  and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of 
God  hath  not  hfe."  (1  John  v.)  Tlie  sinner  is  obhged  to  face 
the  person  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  it  becomes  an  urgent,  all- 
absorbing,  eternal  question  that  must  be  decided  by  the  soul — 
Do  I  prefer  Christ  to  the  world  ?  Do  I  prefer  Christ  or  self? 
The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  be  wise,  and  know  how  to  find  in 
Christ  not  only  the  wisdom  but  the  power  of  God.  For  the 
same  blessed  One  who  gave  us  life  gives  us  power  for  every 
practical  difficulty.  "  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the 
world,  even  our  faith." 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

The  Lord  had  rendered  His  testimony,  as  the  Faithful  Witness, 
in  deeds  as  well  as  words.  He  had  finished  all  the  sayings  which 
proclaimed  Him  to  be  the  Prophet  like  unto  Moses,  but  incom- 
parably greater  withal,  who  was  henceforth  to  be  heard  on  peril 
of  eternal  ruin.  The  hour  approached,  the  solemn  hour  of  His 
sufferings ;  and  Jesus  passes  into  it  in  spirit,  with  a  calm  dignity 
found  only  in  Him.   (Ver.  2.) 

The  resolve  of  the  religious  guides  was  to  put  the  Lord  to 
death.  The  chief  priests,  the  scribes,  the  elders,  were  all  of  one 
mind :  they  assembled  at  the  'high-priest's  palace,  they  con- 
sulted, they  plotted ;  but  after  all,  as  usual,  if  they  consummated 
their  infamy,  they  did  unwittingly  the  will  of  God,  and  accom- 
plished the  words  of  Christ  to  His  disciples,  not  their  own- 
subtly  concocted  plan  of  wickedness.  Thei/  said  to  each  other, 
"  Not  on  the  feast-day,  lest  there  be  an  uproar  among  the 
people"  (ver.  5)  ;  but  He  said  to  His  disciples,  "  Ye  know  that 
after  two  days  is  the  feast  of  the  passover,  and  the  Son  of  man 
is  betrayed  to  be  crucified."  (Yer.  2.)  Did  they  wish  to  kill 
Him  ?     They  imist  do  it  then.     Man  has  his  wickedness,  and 


CHAPTER   XXVI.  387 

God  has  His  way.  But  little  did  either  the  friends  or  the  foes 
of  Jesus  know  how  the  determinate  counsel  of  God  was  to  be 
brought  to  pass.  A  traitor  from  Avithin  the  innermost  circle,  fit 
instrument  for  Satan's  scheming  malice,  must  lift  up  his  heel 
against  the  Saviour,  the  leader  of  that  adulterous  and  now 
apostate  generation  into  the  pit  of  perdition.  But  the  enemy 
loves  to  degrade  morally  his  victims ;  and  the  beautiful  offering 
of  love  (fruit  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  her  who  poured  the  very 
precious  ointment  from  the  alabaster  box  on  the  head  of  Jesus) 
gave  occasion  to  the  basest  motives  in  Judas,  and  the  final 
success  of  the  tempter  over  a  soul,  spite  of  the  constant  seeing 
and  hearing  of  Christ,  long  inured  to  secret  guilt.  (Ver.  6 — 16.) 
I  am  compelled  through  circumstances  to  glance  but  cursorily 
at  these  final  but  most  fertile  as  well  as  affecting  scenes.  Yet 
let  us  not  fail  to  observe,  first  for  our  warning,  how  easy  it  is 
for  eleven  good  men  to  be  led  astray  by  the  fair  pretences  of  one 
bad  man,  who  was  influenced  by  evil  feelings  miknown  to  them. 
Alas !  too,  the  flesh  in  all,  even  in  the  regenerate,  remains  ever 
the  same  hateful  and  hating  thing ;  and  there  is  no  good  for  the 
believer  save  where  Christ  is  the  object  and  the  means.  Next, 
for  our  joy,  how  sweet  to  find  that  love  to  Christ  is  surely  vindi- 
cated of  Him  and  has  the  Spirit's  guidance  in  the  weakest  one, 
spite  of  the  murmurs  of  those  who  seem  ever  so  high  and 
strong  !  Thirdly,  if  a  saint  manifested  her  estimate  of  Jesus  so 
lavishly  in  the  judgment  of  utilitarian  unbelief,  what  was  His 
value  in  the  eyes  of  the  bribing  priests  and  of  the  betrayer? 
''  And  they  covenanted  with  him  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver." 
(Yer.  15.)  A  slave's  price  was  enough  for  the  despised  Lord  of 
all !  (Compare  Exod.  xxi.  32 ;  Zech.  xi.  12,  13.) 

Still  the  Lord  pursues,  in  the  face  of  all.  His  path  of  love  and 
holy  calm :  and  when  the  disciples  enquire  His  pleasure  as  to 
the  place  for  eating  the  paschal  feast.  He  speaks  as  the  conscious 
Messiah,  let  Him  be  ever  so  rejected  :  "  Go  into  the  city  to  such 
a  man,  and  say  unto  him.  The  Master  saith,  My  time  is  at  hand  ; 
I  will  keep  the  passover  at  thy  house  with  my  disciples."  (Yer. 
17,  18.)     As  the  twelve  were  eating.  He  tells  out  the  grief  of 


388       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

His  heart :  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  one  of  you  shall 
betray  me"  (ver.  21) ;  which  fails  not  to  elicit  the  reality  of 
their  affections  and  their  deep  grief.  If  Judas  imitated  their 
enqjiiry  of  innocence,  fearful  that  his  own  silence  would  detect 
him,  and,  it  may  be,  counting  on  ignorance  because  of  the 
Lord's  generality  of  expression  ("  one  of  you"),  he  only  thereby 
hears  his  doom  brought  personally  home.  (Ver.  21 — 25.)  Pro- 
phecy was  accomplished,  but  woe  to  that  man  that  betrayed  the 
Son  of  man ! 

Nothing,  however,  arrests  the  flow  of  His  own  love.  "  And 
as  they  were  eating,  Jesus  took  bread  and  brake  it,  and  gave  it 
to  the  disciples,  and  said,  Take,  eat ;  this  is  my  body.  And  he 
took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks,  and  gave  it  to  them,  saying, 
Drink  ye  all  of  it :  for  this  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament, 
which  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins."  (Ver.  26 — 
28.)  The  bread,  but  especially  the  cup,  set  forth  the  Messiah, 
not  alive  on  earth,  but  rejected  and  slain.  The  broad  truth  is 
given  here,  as  by  Mark,  in  "  this  is  my  body,"  without  dwelling 
on  the  grace  which  gave  it ;  it  is  the  truth  in  itself,  without 
accessories  seen  elsewhere.  Stress  is  laid  on  "  my  blood  of  the 
new  covenant  that  was  shed  for  unany^''  because  the  refusal  of 
the  Messiah  by  Israel  and  His  death  opened  the  way  for  others 
outside — for  Gentiles ;  and  it  was  important  for  our  evangelist 
to  note  this.  Luke  has  it  "  shed  for  ^ow"  (i.e.,  for  the  believers 
in  Jesus);  Matthew  adds,  "for  the  remission  of  sins,"  in  con- 
trast with  the  blood  of  the  old  covenant,  which  held  forth  its 
penal  sanction.  This  they  were  also  here  called,  all  of  them 
emphatically,  to  drink.  The  blood  in  Exodus  xxiv.  sealed  on 
the  people  their  promise  of  obedience  to  the  law  under  menace 
of  death :  here  all  drink  the  witness,  in  the  Saviour's  blood,  of 
their  sins  blotted  out  and  gone.  "  But,"  adds  He,  "  I  say  unto 
you,  I  will  not  drink  henceforth  of  this  fruit  of  the  vine,  until 
that  day  when  I  drink  it  new  with  you  in  my  Father's  king- 
dom." (Ver.  29.)  He  is  henceforth  separated  from  joy  with 
them  till  the  Father's  kingdom  come :  then  He  will  resume  His 
association  with  delight  in  His  people  here  below.     The  godly 


CHAPTER  XXVI.  389 

have  to  drink  His  blood  with  thankful  praise  now :  by  and  by 
He  will  drink  the  wine  of  joy  new  with  us  in  the  Father's 
kingdom.  Till  then  He  is  the  heavenly  Nazarite ;  and  so  con- 
sequently should  we  be  in  spirit. 

After  partaking  of  the  supper,  they  sung  a  hymn  (how  blessed 
at  such  at  a  time !)  and  repaired  to  Olivet.  (Ver.  30.)  With 
the  ineiFable  grace  and  serenity  which  reign  throughout,  the 
Lord  lets  them  know  the  trial  which  should  befall  and  shake 
them  all  that  very  night,  and  this  according  to  the  written  word, 
even  as  that  which  He  had  shewn  of  Himself.  (Compare  ver. 
24  and  31.)  The  flesh  had  proved  its  worth  in  the  goodly 
price  it  set  on  Jesus  ;  it  now  proves  the  value  of  its  self- 
confidence  and  courage  on  His  behalf  ("  All  ye  shall  be  offended 
because  of  me,"  &c.) ;  and  he  proved  it  most  glaringly  for 
others  and  bitterly  for  himself  who  most  trusted  his  own  love 
for  the  Saviour.  (Ver.  32 — 35.)  Thus  the  end  of  the  trials 
would  be  to  confirm  their  faith  and  deepen  their  distrust  of  self, 
making  Christ  their  all  in  everything ;  and  He,  risen,  would  go 
before  them  into  Galilee,  resuming  in  resurrection-power  the 
relationship  which  He  had  with  them  there  in  the  days  of 
His  flesh.  \ 

The  next  scene  (ver.  36 — 46)  though  equally  perfect  in  its 
display  of  Jesus  and  equally  humbling' in  its  exhibition  of  the 
choicest  of  the  apostles,  shews  us  the  picture,  not  of  complete 
and  holy  calm  in  the  full  knowledge  of  all  that  awaited  Himself 
and  His  disciples,  but  of  anguish  to  the  uttermost  and  of  death 
realized  in  all  its  horrors  as  before  God.  What  an  insio-ht 
Gethsemane  gives  us  of  Him,  Jehovah-Messiah  though  He  was, 
as  the  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief!  Who  ever  saw 
affliction  as  He  ?  It  was  not  only  that  Jesus  knew  the  cross  in 
atonement  as  none  other  did  or  could,  tliat  He  alone  bowed  His 
head  under  the  full  unsparing  judgment  of  God  when  made  sin 
for  us ;  but  He  underwent,  beyond  all  others,  the  anticipative 
pressure  of  death  on  His  soul  as  the  power  of  Satan,  and  this 
perfectly,  but  only  the  more  painfully  for  all  that,  because  He 
took  it  from  His  Father's  and  not  from  the  enemy's  hand.     Yet 


390  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

it  is  the  very  reverse  of  insensibility — but  strong  crying  and 
tears  to  His  Father  now,  as  afterwards  to  God  as  such  when  it 
was  a  question  of  actual  sin-bearing  on  the  tree.  "  And  he 
took  with  him  Peter  and  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee,  and  began  to 
be  sorrowful  and  very  heavy.  Then  saith  he  unto  them,  My 
soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death ;  tarry  ye  here  and 
watch  with  me."  (Ver.  37,  38.)  When  the  cross  came,  there 
was  no  such  call  to  disciples  to  watch  with  Him.  He  was  alone, 
absolutely,  essentially,  for  us,  that  is,  for  our  sins,  with  none 
of  men  or  angels  in  any  way  or  measure  (morally  speaking)  near 
Him,  when  God  forsook  and  hid  His  face  from  Him  on  whose 
head  met  all  our  iniquities.  It  was  here,  on  the  other  hand, 
pleading  as  a  Son  with  His  Father,  when  "  he  went  a  little 
farther  and  fell  on  his  face  [prostrate  in  His  earnestness]  and 
prayed,  saying,  0  my  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass 
from  me :  nevertheless,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  (Ver.  39.) 
He  watched,  and  prayed,  and  entered  not  into  temptation,  though 
tempted  in  all  points  as  we  are.  But  He  finds  the  disciples 
asleep  :  they  could  not  watch  with  Him  one  hour.  "  The  spirit 
indeed  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak."  And  so  it  was  again 
and  again  with  them,  till  He  bade  them  sleep,  but  warned  them 
that  the  hour  was  at  hand,  as  was  the  traitor. 

But  the  same  flesh  which  drags  down  to  sleep,  when  the  Lord 
called  to  watch  and  pray,  is  zealous  enough  with  carnal  weapons, 
when  Judas  came  with  his  deceitful  kiss  and  a  multitude  fol- 
lowing (ver.  47  et  seq,),  though  it  preserved  not  from,  but 
rather  led  into,  either  forsaking  the  Master  or  denying  Him. 
Jesus,  thoroughly  suffering  before  His  Father,  is  all  dignity  and 
peace  before  man,  and  goes  forward  to  meet  His  will  at  their 
wicked  hands,  laying  bare  in  the  simplest  meekest  words  the 
base  evil  of  Judas,  the  rash  weakness  of  His  inconsiderate 
defender,  and  the  scriptural  key  to  His  approaching  death,  spite 
of  His  title  to  command  legions  of  angels,  and  in  face  of  an 
inconsistent  multitude.  He  was,  after  all,  a  prisoner  for  the  will 
of  God,  and  not  of  man. 

Before  Caiaphas  (ver.  57 — 75)  He  is  counted  guilty  of  death. 


CHAPTER  XXVII.  301 

but  this  not  because  the  falsehood  of  the  witnesses  succeeded,  but 
because  of  His  own  confession  of  the  truth.  He  was  the  Son  of 
God ;  but,  come  in  fuhiess  of  grace  and  truth  as  He  was,  hence- 
forth should  thej  see  Him,  the  Son  of  man,  sitting  on  the  right 
hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven — His  present 
position  and  His  manifestation  when  He  comes  in  power  and 
glory.  Yet  in  the  midst  of  His  rejection  and  contumely  at  the 
hands  of  high  and  low  among  His  own  outward  people,  Jesus 
causes  His  mighty  word  to  be  remembered  by  poor  Peter,  bold 
now  in  denying  Him — cursing  and  swearing  Peter.  "And  he 
went  out  and  wept  bitterly."  0  what  a  servant,  and  what  a 
Lord ! 


CHAPTER  XXYIL 

All  through  this  gospel  the  Holy  Ghost  bears  in  mind  very 
particularly  our  Lord's  relations  with  Israel.  Hence  in  the 
preceding  chapters,  where  we  had  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
foretold,  care  was  taken  to  bring  out  also  the  preservation  of  a 
godly  remnant  of  Israel,  as  a  fact  which  would  be  of  special 
comfort  to  His  own  people.  And,  just  as  we  have  seen  in  that 
prophetic  testimony,  so  in  the  narrative  of  the  crucifixion  what 
comes  out  peculiarly  in  Matthew's  gospel  is  the  part  which 
Israel  takes  in  the  w^ondrous  scene — their  accomplishment  of 
what  was  written  in  the  law  and  Psalms  and  prophets  touching 
their  rejection  of  their  own  Messiah.  Our  evangelist  wrote 
with  a  very  express  view  to  the  Jews,  and  hence  it  was  of  the 
greatest  importance  to  convince  them,  by  his  testimony,  that 
God  had  accomplished  the  promises  in  the  sending  of  the 
Messiah,  whom  Israel's  unbelief  had  refused  and  crucified  by 
Gentile  hands  on  the  tree.  What  would  be  the  special  value 
of  quoting  the  law  and  prophets  to  Gentiles  ?  The  Old  Testa- 
ment scriptures  formed  a  book  of  which  the  heathen  had  the 
scantiest  knowledge.  We  do  find  references  to  these  scriptures 
in  Luke,  just  enough   to  giv-e  a  link,  but  that   is   all.      But 


392       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

Matthew,  while  writing  for  all  souls,  has  Israel  in  full  view. 
Hence  the  Lord  is  so  distinctly  and  carefully  presented  as 
Messiah  in  this  gospel  ;  but,  at  the  very  first,  enough  is 
intimated  to  shew  His  rejection.  In  the  subsequent  details  we 
see  not  only  broad  predictions  accomplished,  but  the  way  in 
which  enmity  is  brought  out.  The  guilt  of  the  religious  leaders 
is  prominent.  In  this  world  religious  evil  works  the  part  that 
is  specially  oifensive  to  God.  The  devil  cannot  give  effect  to 
his  ends  here  below  unless  he  brings  in  the  name  of  God  to 
sanction  what  is  done  by  man. 

Hence  here  the  active  people  are  the  priests.  "  When  the 
morning  was  come" — they  rise  early  to  accomplish  their  design. 
And,  mark,  it  is  said,  "  all  the  chief  priests,"  &c.  This  shews 
the  utter  ruin  and  blindness  of  the  nation.  It  was  a  most 
startling  fact,  and  a  capital  one  for  a  Jew  to  understand  (for  a 
Jew  knew  that  the  priesthood  was  instituted  and  ordered  of 
God),  that  those  who  ought  to  have  been  the  sure  guides  of  the 
people  were  their  misleaders  in  the  greatest  of  all  sins.  Were 
not  the  sons  of  Aaron  divinely  chosen  ?  Was  not  the  succession 
duly  maintained?  Were  not  the  Jews  a  people  called  out  from 
the  rest  of  the  world  to  own  the  true  God  and  His  law  ?  Most 
true ;  but  what  were  they  and  their  heads  now  about  ?  Led 
or  leaders,  they  had  played  the  chief  part  in  crucifying  the 
Christ.  These  were  the  men  who  had  the  best  light  of  any 
nation  ;  but  all  the  use  man  made  of  the  light  was  to  become 
more  hardened  and  embittered  in  rejecting  the  Son  of  God. 
"And  when  they  had  bound  him,  they  led  him  away,  and 
delivered  him  to  Pontius  Pilate  the  governor."  (Ver.  2.) 
Whatever  we  find  the  Gentiles  doing  here,  God  takes  care  to 
point  out  that  the  Jews  were  not  only  the  secret  conspirators, 
but  openly  guilty  also. 

"Then  Judas,  which  had  betrayed  him,"  &c.  (Ver.  3.) 
"And  they  said,  What  is  that  to  us?  see  thou  to  that." 
(Ver.  4.)  Awful  picture  of  what  Satan  brings  about  in  a 
wretched  human  heart !  Only  the  farther  from  Jesus  morally, 
because  he  was  the  nearer  externally.  Most  of  all  guilty  are 
those  who  have  the  greatest  outward  privileges,  while  the  truth 


CHAPTER  XXVII.  393 

of  God  does  not  govern  the  soul.  We  see,  too,  the  mockery 
of  Satan — the  way  in  which  he  cheats  his  victims  even  in  this 
world.  Judas  did  not  expect  that  Jesus  would  die.  He  had 
known  the  Lord  in  imminent  peril  before  ;  he  had  seen  Him 
when  the  people  took  up  stones  to  cast  at  Him,  hiding  Himself, 
going  through  the  midst  of  them  and  passing  on  His  way.  He 
knew  how  Jesus  could  walk  on  the  sea — how  He  could  conquer 
all  the  obstacles  of  nature ;  and  why  not  the  raging  storm 
of  human  passion  and  violence  ?  But  Judas  was  deceived, 
whatever  his  calculations  may  have  been ;  he  yielded  to  covet- 
ousness ;  he  bargained  for  the  blood  of  Jesus — and  Jesus  came 
to  die.  To  his  horror  he  found  it  too  true.  And  Satan,  who 
had  led  him  on  by  his  love  of  money,  leaves  him  without  a 
single  hope  in  black  despair.  He  goes  to  the  priests;  but 
miserable  comforters  were  they  all  to  the  miserable  despairing 
soul.  Confession  of  sin,  without  giving  God  confidence  for 
His  grace,  is  worthless.  Cleave  to  God,  my  soul,  and  give 
Him  credit  for  what  He  is  in  Christ.  But  there  is  no  faith 
where  Jesus  is  not  loved  :  and  Judas  had  neither.  Jesus  was  a 
forgotten  object  before  His  soul,  and  this  proved  that  there  was 
no  life  in  him.  All  the  outward  nearness  he  had  enjoyed  before 
was  only  a  greater  weight  to  sink  him  into  perdition.  What  a 
thing  is  the  end  of  sin  even  in  this  world,  sin  against  Jesus ! 
Judas  brings  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver  to  the  chief  priests  and 
elders  with  the  confession,  "  I  have  sinned  in  that  I  have 
betrayed  the  innocent  bipod."  They  could  not  deny  the  truth 
of  this  ;  but  with  utter  heartlessness  they  say  "  What  is  that 
to  us  ?  see  thou  to  that.  And  he  cast  down  the  pieces  of 
silver  in  the  temple,  and  departed,  and  went  and  hanged 
himself."  (Ver.  4,  5.)  Many  an  one  sells  Jesus  virtually,  if  not 
literally.  Let  every  soul  look  to  it,  that  his  sin  be  not  in  some 
way  akin  to  that  of  Judas.  If  God  is  calling  sinners  to  a 
knowledge  of  His  Son,  it  is  an  awful  thing  to  reject  him  ;  it  is 
selling  Jesus  for  some  object  in  this  world,  which  either  we  seek 
to  attain,  or  love  too  well  to  part  with.  In  Judas,  tliis  came 
out  in  its  worst  form ;  but  perdition  is  not  confined  to  him  who 
is  the  son  of  perdition. 


394       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

''And  the  chief  priests  took  the  silver  pieces,"  &c.  Con- 
science would  have  told  them  that  theirs  was  the  guilt  of  bribing 
Judas  to  betray  Jesus.  But  another  thing  becomes  evident 
here.  Religion  without  Christ  only  gives  persons  the  means  of 
cheating  their  souls  into  the  belief  that  they  are  doing  God 
service.  They  said,  "It  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put  them  into 
the  treasury,  because  it  is  the  price  of  blood."  Here  was 
religion ;  but  where  was  conscience  in  giving  the  money  for 
Jesus  ?  "  And  they  took  counsel,  and  bought  with  them  the 
potter's  field  to  bury  strangers  in.  Wherefore  that  field  was 
called,  The  field  of  blood  unto  this  day."  (Ver.  7,  8.)  They  are 
obliged  thus  to  perpetuate  their  own  wickedness.  And  this  is 
exactly  a  picture  of  what  the  people,  once  holy,  had  now  become 
— the  chief  priests  the  pattern  of  what  the  nation  was.  A  field 
of  blood  that  land  remains  to  this  day,  a  field  "  to  bury  strangers 
in."  Israel  being  cast  out  of  their  own  land,  it  is  left  to  others, 
if  only  to  be  buried  there. 

But  it  is  not  now  the  chief  priests  and  elders,  nor  the  wretched 
condition  of  Judas,  nor  the  perpetuation  of  Israel's  wickedness, 
foretold  by  the  prophet,  that  occupies  us.  It  is  our  Lord  Himself, 
standing  before  the  governor.  He  acknowledges  the  power  of 
the  world,  when  Pilate  asks  Him,  ''  Art  thou  the  king  of  the 
Jews  ?"  To  the  chief  priests  and  elders  He  answers  nothing. 
Pilate,  struck  by  the  silence  and  moral  dignity  of  his  prisoner, 
desires  His  release,  sees  through  the  malice  of  the  people,  and 
proposes  to  them  a  choice,  such  as  was  the  governor's  custom. 
''  Whom  will  ye  that  I  release  mito  you?"  But  he  had  to  find 
out  the  hatred  with  which  men  regarded  Jesus :  there  is  no 
person  or  thing  the  malice  of  man  does  not  prefer  to  Him.  God 
takes  care,  too,  that  there  should  be  a  home  testimony  to  the 
conscience  of  the  governor.  His  wife  sent  a  message,  saying, 
"  Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  that  just  man ;  for  I  have  suffered 
many  things  this  day  in  a  dream  because  of  him."  (Ver.  19.) 
This,  which  is  recorded  only  in  Matthew,  disturbed  Pilate  the 
more.  All  of  it  God  ordered  that  man's  iniquity  in  rejecting 
Jesus  should  be  evident  and  without  excuse.  Then  observe  the 
solemn   lesson:    ''The  chief  priests   and  elders  j^ersuaded  the 


CHAPTER   XXVII.  395 

multitude  that  they  should  ask  Barabbas,  aud  destroy  Jesus." 
(Ver.  20.)  The  greater  the  moral  advantages,  where  there  is 
not  simple  faith  in  God,  the  greater  the  hatred  of  Jesus.  The 
reception  or  rejection  of  Jesus  now  is  the  same  thing  in  principle, 
though,  no  doubt,  the  circumstances  of  the  world  are  changed. 

Persons  may  know  just  enough  of  Jesus  for  their  souls'  salva- 
tion and  experience  little  of  the  world's  rejection  ;  but  if  I  really 
cling  to  a  crucified  but  now  glorious  Christ,  I  must  know  what 
it  is  to  have  the  scorn  and  hatred  of  the  world.  If  the  world 
rejected  Him,  I  must  be  prepared  for  the  same  thing.  We 
cannot  have  both  heaven  and  earth.  The  cross  and  the  glory  go 
together.  The  Lord  presented  hopes  of  blessing  on  earth  to 
Israel  if  they  had  received  Him ;  but  they  refused,  and  this 
brought  in  the  cross  of  Jesus.  God  knew  it  was  inevitable, 
and  this  because  of  man's  wickedness.  Then  God  brings  in 
heavenly  glory,  and  we  must  prepare  for  as  much  as  man  chooses 
to  do  in  the  present  state  of  society.  It  is  a  lie  of  Satan's 
that  man  is  altered  for  the  better  during  the  last  eighteen 
hundred  years ;  the  feeling  of  the  human  heart  is  always  the 
same,  though  there  may  be  times  when  it  comes  to  a  crisis. 
The  very  people,  who  "wondered  at  the  gracious  words  that 
proceeded  out  of  his  mouth,"  the  same  day  sought  to  cast  Jesus 
down  headlong.  And  what  was  it  that  brought  out  their  enmity  ? 
The  assertion  of  God's  true  grace.  Man  cannot  endure  it — 
the  thought  that  His  salvation  is  the  same  perfect  eternal 
salvation  for  the  worst  of  sinners  as  for  any.  "  Is  it  possible," 
he  says,  "  that  I,  who  have  tried  to  serve  God  for  so  many 
years,  should  be  treated  like  a  drunkard,  a  swindler,  or  a 
harlot?"  He  turns  round  on  God,  and  becomes  His  open 
enemy.  But,  after  all,  there  is  no  question  of  justice  to  man  in 
the  salvation  of  a  sinner.  It  must  be  grace,  if  God  saves  any, 
and  He  shews  this.  Nor  is  it  merely  a  partial  remedy,  for 
there  is  no  case  so  desperate  that  His  grace  cannot  reach. 

"  Pilate  saith  unto  them,  What  shall  I  do  then  with  Jesus 
who  is  called  Christ?     They  all  say  unto  him,   Let   him   be 


396       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

crucified."  (Ver.  22.)  Here  we  see  the  unrighteousness  of  these 
religious  men.  If  Pilate  seemed,  at  least,  too  sensible  to  act  thus, 
we  shall  see  what  his  righteousness  amounts  too.  He  asks, 
*'  Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done?  But  they  cried  out  the  more, 
saying.  Let  him  be  crucified.  When  Pilate  saw  that  he  could 
prevail  nothing,  but  that  rather  a  tumult  was  made,  he  took 
water,"  &c.  (Ver.  23,  24.)  There  we  see  what  the  world's 
righteousness  is.  We  have  seen  what  the  chief  priests  were  ; 
now  we  learn  the  unrighteousness  of  the  Roman.  There  can- 
not be  true  righteousness  unless  God  governs.  We  have  all 
failed — I  must  therefore  be  saved  by  another ;  for  God  shews  all 
measured,  weighed,  and  found  wanting.  One  person  alone  in 
this  scene  is  found  full  of  wisdom,  patience,  goodness — perfect 
in  every  way.  When  it  was  the  time  to  speak,  His  word  is 
spoken ;  when  it  was  the  time  to  be  silent,  He  holds  His  peace. 
He  was  God  upon  earth,  and  all  His  ways  perfect.  But  this 
is  not  the  great  point  here.  The  Gospel  of  John  specially 
developes  the  Deity  of  our  Lord,  as  that  of  Luke  His  humanity. 
In  Matthew  we  see  Him  as  Messiah  ;  therefore  Pilate  asks  Him 
here,  "  Art  thou  the  King  of  the  Jews  ?"  When  Pilate  had 
"  washed  his  hands  before  the  multitude,  saying,  I  am  innocent 
of  the  blood  of  this  just  person :  see  ye  to  it"  (as  if  that  could 
relieve  him  of  the  fearful  guilt  he  was  perpetrating) ;  all  the 
peojjle  answered  and  said,  ''  His  blood  be  on  us  and  on  our 
children."  And  there  the  dark  fatal  stain  abides  to  this  day. 
Others  are  guilty  too,  but  the  favoured  Jew  above  all.  "  When 
he  had  scourged  Jesus,  he  delivered  him  to  be  crucified."  See 
what  the  righteousness  of  the  judge  is  !  This  was  he  who  had 
just  before  called  Jesus  a  just  man.  And  now  come  the  soldiers. 
They  are,  and  must  all  be  proved,  guilty.  Not  a  class  or  con- 
dition of  man  but  evinces  its  hatred  of  God  in  the  person  of 
His  Son — failing  most,  too,  in  that  which  was  their  pride.  For 
what  base  cowardice  is  that  which  tramples  down  One  who 
suffers  unresistingly !  "  And  they  stripped  him,  and  put  on 
him  a  scarlet  robe.     And  when  they  had  platted  a  crown  of 

thorns,  they  put  it  on  his  head and  they  spit  upon  him, 

and  took  the  reed,  and  smote  him  on  the  head,"  &c  (Ver.  28 — 


CHAPTER  XX VII.  397 

31.)  But  this  was  not  all.  "As  they  came  out,  they  found  a 
man  of  Cyrene,  Simon  by  name ;  him  they  compelled  to  bear 
his  cross."  (Ver.  32.)  What  excesses  of  human  tyranny  follow 
the  rejection  of  Jesus  ! 

"  Tliey  gave  him  vinegar  to  drink  mingled  with  gall."  (Ver. 
34.)  We  must  not  confound  this  circumstance  with  that 
mentioned  in  John,  where  the  Lord  says,  "  I  thirst."  In 
Matthew's  narrative,  it  was  the  stupefying  draught  administered 
to  prisoners  before  they  suffered  ;  and  this  the  Lord  would  not 
drink.  Whereas,  in  John,  the  Lord,  while  on  the  cross, 
remembers,  as  it  were,  a  scripture  as  yet  unfulfilled.  Here 
then  He  is  regarded,  not  as  One  who  did  not  suffer,  but  withal 
as  the  absolute  Master  over  all  circumstances.  Alive  therefore 
to  the  honour  of  scripture,  and  a  word  which  had  not  received 
its  accomplishment.  He  says,  "  I  thirst."     "  And  they  filled  a 

sponge  with  vinegar and  put  it  to  his  mouth."     He 

did  drink  the  vinegar  then.  But  here,  on  the  contrary,  "  When 
he  had  tasted  thereof,  he  would  not  drink."  (Ver.  34.)  He 
wished  no  alleviation  from  man.  "  And  they  crucified  him, 
and  parted  his  garments,  casting  lots,"  &c.  (Ver.  35.) 

The  superscription  differs  in  the  various  gospels.  We  must 
remember  that  Pilate  wrote  it  in  three  different  lano-uages. 
One  gospel  (Mark)  does  not  profess  to  give  anything  but  the 
substance  of  what  was  written,  the  accusation  or  charge  against 
Him ;  in  the  others,  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  the  words.  And 
what  appropriateness  is  here  !  "  This  is  Jesus  the  King  of  the 
Jews."  (Ver.  37.)  The  great  thing  for  the  Jew  was  the  iden- 
tifying of  their  Messiah  and  King  with  Jesus.  Li  Luke  the 
word  "  Jesus"  ought  to  be  omitted,  as  in  the  best  authorities. 
It  is  really,  "  The  King  of  the  Jews,  this !"  and  means  "  this 
fellow,"  a  term  of  contempt,  the  point  there  being  "  He  is 
despised  and  rejected  of  men.  Here,  "  He  came  to  his  own, 
and  his  own  received  him  not;"  because,  though  the  Gentile 
shares  the  guilt,  it  is  the  Jew  who  leads  Pilate  to  condemn  Him 
to  death.  In  John,  we  have,  characteristically,  the  fullest  form 
of  all — "  Jesus  of  Nazareth  the  King  of  the  Jews."  The 
reason  is,  that  it  unites  two  things  in  our  Lord,  not  anywhere 


398       LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW. 

else  so  brought  into  juxtaposition — the  most  complete  humilia- 
tion and  the  highest  glory.  He  by  whom  all  things  were  made, 
God  Himself,  was  a  man  of  "  Nazareth."  The  beauty  of  this 
must  appear  to  any  spiritual  mind.  Throughout  John's  gospel 
the  Lord  is  both  higher  and  lower  than  anywhere  else. 

"  The  thieves  also,  which  were  crucified  with  him,  cast  the 
same  in  his  teeth."  (Ver.  44.)  They  found  time  to  revile  Jesus 
too,  venting  their  bodily  anguish  in  mockery  of  the  Son  of  God. 
Oh !  beloved  friends,  was  there  ever  such  a  scene  ?  We  have 
looked  at  man's  part,  but  what  was  God  doing  there?  "  About 
the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eli,  Eli, 
lama  sabachthani  ?  that  is  to  say.  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me?"  (Ver.  46.)  We  have  full  evidence  that  this 
was  not  the  exhaustion  of  nature.  "  And  when  he  had  cried 
again  with  a  loud  voice,  he  yielded  up  the  ghost."  (Ver.  50.) 
Our  Lord  died  a  willing  victim.  Man  might  will,  and  be  the 
instrument  of,  His  death.  A  man  He  became  that  as  a  man  He 
might  die :  but  He  marks  it  in  its  every  circumstance  so  as  to 
shew  that  He  was  there  who  could  as  easily  have  swept  away  a 
world  as  of  old  He  laid  down  by  a  word  the  foundations  of 
heaven  and  earth.  "  He  yielded  up  the  ghost ;  and,  behold,  the 
veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain,  from  the  top  to  the  bottom  ; 
and  the  earth  did  quake,  and  the  rocks  rent."  (Ver.  50,  51.) 
Nature  was  made  to  yield  its  testimony  above  and  below ;  and 
the  darkness  over  the  land  was  no  mere  eclipse.  The  Jewish 
system,  too,  yielded  its  solemn  witness  in  the  rent  veil.  Unrent, 
it  had  been  the  symbol  that  man  could  not  draw  near  to  God. 
Under  the  law  it  can  never  be.  God  dwelt  then  in  the  thick 
darkness.  But  in  the  death  of  Jesus  there  is  the  expression  of 
full  grace.  God  and  man  may  now  meet  face  to  face.  The 
blood  is  sprinkled  upon  and  before  the  mercy-seat,  and  man 
is  invited  to  draw  near  boldly.  Why  should  it  not  be?  It 
is  due  to  that  precious  blood.  God  in  Him  had  come  down 
from  heaven  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself.  For 
every  soul  that  believes,  it  is  done.  The  Jewish  system  might 
linger  on,  like  a  corpse  waiting  so  many  days  for  burial ;  but  the 
rending  of  the  veil  was  the  soul  severed  from  the  body.     Thus 


CHAPTER   XXYII.  399 

there  was  witness  on  every  hand — the  earth  and  the  heaven,  the 
law  and  the  unseen  world.  Jesus  has  the  keys  of  Hades  and  of 
death.  The  very  graves  were  unlocked  when  Jesus  died,  if  the 
bodies  of  the  saints  did  not  rise  till  after  His  resurrection.  He 
was  Himself  the  firstfruits,  and  the  power  of  life  was  brought  in 
through  His  resurrection.  What  testimony  could  be  more  com- 
plete? The  centurion  set  to  watch  (heathen  as,  no  doubt,  he 
was,)  "  feared  greatly,  saying.  Truly,  this  was  the  Son  of  God." 

"And  many  women  were  there  beholding  afar  off,"  «&;c.  But 
where  were  the  disciples  ?  Oh,  what  withering  condemnation 
of  all  boasted  strength !  They  had  forsaken  Jesus  and  fled ; 
but  here  were  these  women,  contrary  to  their  natural  timidity, 
"  out  of  weakness  made  strong,"  beholding,  even  though  afar 
off.  Li  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  we  see  a  man  who  had  a  great 
deal  to  lose :  a  rich  man  and  a  counsellor,  before  he  was  a 
secret  disciple  of  Jesus ;  but  now  God  brings  him  to  a  point 
when  you  might  least  expect  it.  With  the  death  of  Jesus 
before  his  eyes,  he  goes  to  Pilate,  begs  His  body,  and,  having 
laid  it  in  his  new  tomb,  rolls  a  great  stone  to  the  door  of  the 
sepulchre.  If  apostles  and  disciples  fled,  God  can,  and  does, 
raise  up  testimony  for  His  name's  sake. 

We  have  traced  the  history  of  self  in  this  chapter.  If  we 
had  all  the  riches,  the  learning,  the  power  of  this  world,  these 
could  not  make  us  happy.  But  Jesus  can.  Yet  let  us  remember 
that  we  are  in  an  enemy's  country,  which  has  shewn  its 
treachery  to  our  Master.  If  we  do  not  feel  that  we  are  passing 
thi'ough  the  camp  of  those  who  crucified  Jesus,  we  are  in  danger 
of  falling  into  some  ambuscade  of  the  enemy.  The  Lord  grant 
us  that  calmness  of  faith  which  is  not  occupied  with  itself,  but 
with  Him  who  His  o\\ai  self  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on 
the  tree! 


3j<Ko 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

The  special  purpose  of  this  gospel  appears  In  the  account  of  the 
Lord's  death  and  resurrection  as  plainly  as  elsewhere.  Hardly 
any  portion,  Indeed,  more  strikingly  illustrates  it  than  the  chapter 
before  us.  Thus,  on  the  face  of  it,  we  see  nothing  of  the  ascen- 
sion. If  we  had  only  Matthew  xxvIII.,  should  we  have  known 
as  a  fact  that  the  Lord  went  up  to  heaven  at  all  ?  It  is  im- 
possible, without  a  special  purpose,  that  the  apostle  could  have 
omitted  an  event  so  glorious  and  interesting.  Not  that  this 
omission  is  a  defect  In  Matthew's  narrative ;  on  the  contrary,  It 
is  a  part  and  proof  of  Its  perfection,  when  the  scope  is  under- 
stood. Were  the  ascension  scene  introduced  here,  it  would  be 
mere  patchwork,  and  out  of  keeping  with  the  history  that  closes 
in  our  chapter.  Yet  even  now  it  is  one  of  the  points  that 
learned  men  stumble  over.  Neglecting  the  evidence  of  design 
they  reason  a  priori,  and  consequently  cannot  understand  why 
such  an  event  should  be  left  out  by  our  evangelist.  Evidently 
they  do  not  believe,  in  any  full  sense,  that  God  wrote  these 
gospels ;  else  they  would  conclude  that  the  fault  lay  In  their 
ignorance  and  misreasonlng.  A  simple-hearted  believer  rests 
satisfied  that  the  omission  in  Matthew  is  as  perfect  as  the  inser- 
tion In  Luke ;  everything  Is  as  it  should  be  In  the  word  of  God, 
as  He  wrote  it.  And  the  notion  that  anything  Is  now  wanting 
which  Matthew  ever  wrote  as  a  conclusion  Is  contrary  to  all 
evidence,  external  and  internal. 

Before  closing,  I  shall  endeavour  to  shew  how  Its  presence 
here  would  be  incongruous,  and  detract  from  the  beauty  of  the 
picture  God  was  supplying ;  on  the  other  hand.  Its  presence 
where  It  does  occur  elsewhere  is,  I  need  hardly  add,  equally 
beautiful  and  necessary.  Events  are  selected  in  connection  with 
the  Immediate  subject.  Taking  the  chapter  as  It  comes,  we  see 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  here  confines  Himself  to  a  Messiah  risen 
from  the  dead,  who  meets  His  disciples  in  Galilee,  outside  the 


CHAPTER   XXVIII.      ^  401 

rebellious  city.  In  other  parts  of  this  gospel  the  ascension  is 
implied  or  assumed,  as  in  chapters  xiii.  41 ;  xvi.  27,  28  ;  xxii. 
44  ;  xxiv.,  XXV.,  and,  above  all,  xxvi.  64.  It  was,  therefore, 
not  omitted  iguorantly,  nor  has  any  accident  robbed  us  of  it  in 
the  original.  I  only  say  this  as  entirely  refuting  the  foolish 
and  irreverent  reasoning  of  men,  chiefly  moderns. 

"  In  the  end  of  the  Sabbath,  as  it  began  to  dawn,"  &c. 
(Ver,  1.)  This  was  not  the  morning  of  the  resurrection -day, 
but  the  evening  previous  to  it.  We,  with  our  western  notions 
of  time,  might  think  only  of  the  early  twilight,  but  it  means 
simply  that  the  week  was  drawing  to  its  close.  And  evening, 
we  must  remember,  to  a  Jewish  mind,  commenced  the  new  day. 
An  exactly  similar  phrase  occurs  in  Luke  xxiii.  54,  where  the 
Jewish  sense  cannot  be  doubted.  The  Holy  Ghost  does  not 
continue  the  description  of  this  visit  of  the  women  to  the 
sepulchre.  There  is  no  real  ground  for  connecting  the  circum- 
stances of  the  first  three  vei'ses  of  this  chapter.*  The  first 
merely  presents  the  devotedness  of  these  holy  women.  When 
the  disciples  had  gone  to  their  own  homes,  these  females,  spite 
of  natural  fears  at  such  a  place  and  time,  could  not  stay  away. 
They  had  prepared  spices  for  embalming  the  body,  but  rested 
the  sabbath-day  (as  we  read  in  Luke)  according  to  the  com- 
mandment. "  It  was  just  getting  dusk"  is  the  real  thought  here. 
It  was  the  twilight  after  the  sabbath.  Their  hearts  lingered 
round  the  grav^e,  bound  up  with  Jesus. 

''And,  behold,  there  was  a  great  earthquake,"  &c.  This 
occurred  afterwards  ;  how  long  is  not  said.  We  have  simply  a 
narrative  of  events,  without  defining  the  intervals  of  time,  but 
one  after  another,  in  these  early  verses.  We  must  not  confound 
the  visit  of  the  w-omen  here  (in  verse  1)  with  their  visit  on  the 
morning  of  the  first  day  mentioned  by  Mark  and  in  our  verse  5, 
&c.     The  Lord  was  not  on  this  last  occasion  in  the  sepulchre. 

*  Tliis  is  quite  in  keeping  with  what  we  have  found  in  Matthew  else- 
where. The  reader  can  compare  krI  iSoi  ('"and  hehold")  in  chapter  viii.  2 
with  the  same  in  chapter  xx^-iii.  2.  The  true  connection  is  in  the  ohject  of 
tlie  narrator,  not  in  mere  time.  There  is  no  gi'ound  to  suppose  the  women 
witnessed  the  earthquake :  the  soldiers,  I  believe,  alone  did. 
DD 


402  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSFEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

But  the  angel,  descending  and  rolling  away  the  stone,  had' 
nothing  directly  to  do  with  the  Lord's  rising.  No  such  inter- 
position was  in  any  way  necessary  to  Him.  God  raised  Him, 
and  He  Himself  rose.  Such  is  the  scriptural  doctrine  of  the 
resurrection.  This  angelic  action  was,  I  suppose,  to  call  the 
attention  of  men  to  what  God  had  done,  and  the  more  fully  to 
set  aside  the  deceits  or  the  reasonings  of  enemies.  So  the 
angel's  word  is  "  Come,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay." 

One  remarkable  consequence  of  the  resurrection  is  always 
pressed.  The  angel  says  "  Fear  not  ye."  That  mighty  act  of 
God  is  intended  for  ever  to  dispel  the  alarm  of  those  who 
believe  in  Jesus,  by  giving  them  the  certainty  of  His  inter- 
vention on  their  behalf.  Up  to  the  advent  and  resurrection  of 
Jesus  there  was  a  measure  of  darkness  and  uncertainty,  however 
great  the  kindness  and  mercy  shewn  by  God.  The  resurrection 
left  all  the  world  apparently  undisturbed ;  but  what  was  the 
great  resulting  truth  and  blessing  for  the  people  of  God  ?  To 
faith  it  is  the  triumph  of  God  over  the  last  efforts  of  sin  and  the 
power  of  Satan.  No  doubt  death  is  still  in  the  world,  pursuing 
its  ravages.  "What,  then,  is  the  resurrection  to  you?  says  the 
caviller.  Everytliing ^  if  Christ  is  my  life.  I  am  entitled  to 
have  the  comfort  of  it ;  my  soul  is  welcome  to  drink  into  the 
joy  of  it,  though  my  body  does  not  yet  share  the  deliverance. 
God  has  shewn  me  in  the  cross  of  Christ  the  perfect  witness  of 
suffering  for  sin.  Man  believes  not  that  He  is  the  Son,  and 
cannot  understand  how  God  could  allow  His  best  beloved  to 
suffer.  Others  too  had  cried  to  God,  and  spite  of  all  their 
faults,  they  had  been  heard ;  yet  in  the  extremity  of  Christ's 
sufferings,  and  spite  of  His  grace  and  glory  and  the  Father's 
love  to  Him,  He  cries  and  was  not  heard !  For  truly  He  was 
not,  till  all  the  billows  of  divine  wrath  closed  over  His  head — 
the  spotless  victim  wreathed  with  our  sins.  But  now  the  crisis 
is  come,  and  all  is  changed.  It  might  have  seemed  to  the  world 
that  all  was  over  with  the  claims  of  Jesus.  He  had  died  on  the 
cross,  and  by  His  own  confession  forsaken  of  God.  Was  all  as 
safe  as  man  or  the  devil  could  desire  ?  On  the  third  day  God 
interferes :  Jesus  rose  from  the  dead,  and  all  the  power  of  earth 


CHAPTER   XXVIII.  403 

find  hell  was  shaken  to  its  centre.  Resurrection  settled  every- 
thino-  in  peace  for  the  believer.  Every  cause  for  fear  and  selfish 
sorrow  was  buried  in  the  grave  of  Christ.  Every  blessing  over- 
flows in  Him  risen.  How  much  is  made  of  this  in  the  Epistles  ! 
Nothing  is  more  fundamental  or  more  insisted  on.  Yague 
thoughts  of  God's  faithfulness,  love,  &c.,  would  not  be  enough 
for  the  solid  comfort  of  God's  people.  Many  who  see  little 
more  have  only  glimpses  of  joy.  In  order  to  have  full  settled 
peace  they  must  be  founded  on  the  basis  to  which  God  points — 
the  death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus.  If  His  death  meets  all 
my  evil,  His  resurrection  is  the  spring  and  pattern  of  the  new 
life  and  acceptance,  above  sin  and  death  and  judgment,  which 
grace  has  given  me  in  Him. 

The  course  of  the  world  was  not  interrupted  by  the  Lord's 
resurrection.  Men  slept  as  usual,  and  rose  as  if  nothing  had 
happened.  Yet  was  it  the  greatest  work  of  power  that  God  had 
ever  wrought,  yea  (founded  on  the  deepest  suffering  that  ever 
was  endui-ed)  it  was  the  greatest  work  He  ever  will  do ;  and  I 
say  this  looking  on  to  the  day  when  everything  shall  be  made 
new  according  to  His  glory.  These  are  but  consequences  of 
Christ's  resurrection,  but  applications  of  the  power  put  forth 
therein.  And  if  the  world  was  indifferent  to  it,  what  should  it 
be  to  us  ?  Say  not  it  is  a  little  thing  because  it  is  as  yet  a 
matter  of  faith.  Into  the  midst  of  this  scene  of  weakness  and 
death  the  mighty  power  of  God  has  entered  and  been  here  put 
forth  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  God  does,  and  could  do,  no 
more  to  blot  out  sin :  it  has  been  put  away  by  the  sacrifice  of 
Christ.  But  one  thing  abiding  ought  to  make  the  soul  afraid  of 
God — even  sin.  Now  Jesus  was  treated  as  if  He  were  covered 
with  it,  and  it  were  all  His  own.  If  it  was  to  be  remoA^ed,  He 
must  bear  it  thoroughly :  He  did  so,  and  now  it  is  gone ;  and 
we  rest  upon  what  God  tells  us  of  Him  and  it.  This  is  what 
tests  the  soul's  confidence  in  God.  Am  I  willing  to  trust  God 
when  I  cannot  trust  myself?  Sin  brought  in  distrust  of  God ; 
but  the  gift,  death,  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  more  than  restore 
what  was  lost,  and  establish  the  soul  in  such  a  knowledge  of 
Gpd  as  no  angel   ever   did   or  can   possess.      What   my  soul 


404        LECTUKES  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW* 

wants  is,  not  that  God  should  be  too  merciful  to  destroy  me 
because  of  my  sins,  but  a  full  deliverance  with  a  full  judgment 
of  sin.  (Rom.  viii.  1,  3.)  We  cannot  have  fellowship  with  God 
except  on  the  ground  of  sin  being  taken  away  righteously. 
Jesus  crucified  has  abolished  sin  before  God  for  those  who  be- 
lieve. To  believe  God  about  the  death  of  His  Son  because  of 
sin,  our  sin,  is  to  take  God's  part  against  ourselves.  Before 
Him  to  acknowledge  ourselves  lost  sinners  is  repentance  toward 
God  and  inseparable  from  faith. 

Perfect  love  is  in  Himself,  and  comes  out  of  the  depth  of  Plis 
own  holy  being.  God  became  a  man  that  He  might  go  through 
the  whole  moral  question  of  sin :  that  done  in  Christ  is  the 
triumph  of  grace.  No  wonder  then  that  the  angel  could  saj-^, 
''  Fear  not  ye."  Tlie  resurrection  shews  every  hindrance  gone. 
The  angel  aclaiowledges  Him  as  Lord,  but  what  a  blessing  to  be 
able  to  say  our  Lord  !  What  a  joy  thus  to  own  that  risen  One 
who  was  crucified,  as  entitled  in  everything  to  command !  No 
doubt  what  made  His  work  of  value  was  that  He  was  God  Him- 
self— One  who,  while  He  was  a  man,  was  infinitely  above  man — 
a  daysman — One  who  could  lay  His  hand  upon  both.  The  angel 
intimates  this,  that  in  the  presence  of  a  risen  Saviour  there  was 
nothing  for  the  most  timid  believer  to  fear.  On  the  other  hand, 
Acts  xvii.  31  says,  "  He  [God]  hath  ajDpointed  a  day,  in  the 
which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness,  by  that  man 
whom  he  hath  ordained ;  whereof  he  hath  given  assurance  to  all 
men,  in  that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead."  If  I  do  not 
trust  to  a  risen  Saviour  for  the  deliverance  of  vaj  soul,  I  par- 
ticipate in  the  guilt  of  His  death.  If  I  have  not  fled  for  refuge 
to  Him,  I  belong  to  the  same  firm,  as  it  were,  that  crucified 
Him.  But  by  faith  in  His  blood  I  am  washed  from  this  guilt. 
How  just  that  the  provision  of  grace,  which  signs  the  believer's 
deliverance,  should,  if  despised,  become  the  dead  weight  that 
sinks  the  world !  If  I  believe  Him,  I  know  it  was  man  that 
crucified  Jesus ;  and  not  merely  profane  man — the  guilt  pervades 
all.  And  there  is  one  only  door  of  deliverance  for  any,  and  this 
is  Jesus  crucified.  "  Fear  not  ye."  There  is  no  need  of  alarm, 
for  He  is  risen.     God  was  waiting  for  this.     "  I  know  that  ye 


CHAPTER   XXYlir.  405 

seek  Jesus,"  &c.  It  "vvas  the  heart  set  upon  Jesus  that  was 
valued.  It  had  ever  been  in  the  mind  of  God  to  blot  out  sin  ; 
but  now  it  Avas  all  gone.  He  who  was  full  of  holy  love  in  giving 
Jesus  to  die,  now  raised  Him  up  from  the  dead,  and  gave  Him 
glorj,  that  our  faith  and  hope  might  be  in  God.  If  my  faith 
and  hope  are  in  God,  my  delight  is  in  Christ ;  if  in  myself, 
Christ  becomes  to  me  a  cipher,  and  I  justly  perish  for  ever.  If 
I  have  not  Clu'ist  for  my  rest  and  delight,  for  my  Saviour  and 
Lord  here,  I  must  by  and  by  quail  before  Him  as  my  Judge. 

And  now,  returning  to  the  women,  they  were  to  go  and  tell 
His  disciples  that  Jesus  was  risen  from  the  dead,  and  went 
before  them  into  Galilee.  In  Luke  there  is  no  notice  of  Galilee, 
but  He  joins  the  two  disciples  going  to  Emmaus ;  and  when 
they  returned  to  Jerusalem  the  same  evening,  they  "  found  the 

eleven  gathered  together saying.  The  Lord  is  risen  indeed, 

and  hath  appeared  to  Simon."  Jesus  Himself  appears  in  their 
midst.  All  circumstances  there  have  Jerusalem  as  their  centre. 
In  Matthew  the  great  point  pressed  is  the  meeting-place  assigned 
in  Galilee.  And  why  ?  Is  it  not  remarkable  on  the  face  of  it 
that  one  should  give  the  meeting  of  Jesus  with  His  disciples  in 
Jerusalem,  another  in  Galilee?  Has  not  God  some  truth  to 
teach  me  hereby  ?  We  are  apt  to  measure  the  importance  of  a 
truth  by  its  results  to  ourselves ;  but  the  true  standard  is  its 
bearing  on  the  glory  of  God.  The  way  in  which  God  gives  us 
His  truth  after  all,  too,  is  the  best  for  us.  Throughout  the 
Gospel  of  Matthew  Jesus  is  found  in  Galilee.  Jerusalem  refuses 
Him,  was  troubled  at  His  birth,  and  cast  Him  out  unto  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross.  ''  We  did  esteem  him  stricken, 
smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted,"  exactly  describes  their  feeling. 
They  looked  in  the  Messiah  for  something  suited  to  their  earthly 
idea ;  they  vented  their  disappointment  in  the  rejection  of  the 
Son  of  God.  In  accordance  with  this,  then,  Matthew  records 
that  the  scene  of  His  living  labours  and  Jewish  scorn  was 
where  He  manifested  Himself  as  risen,  after  the  house  of  Israel 
rejected  Him — Galilee.  He  shews  Himself  anew  in  despised 
Galilee  of  the  Gentiles,  when  all  power  is  given  to   Him  in 


40(>  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL    OF   MATTHEW. 

heaven  and  earth ;  and  there  He  gives  the  godly  remnant  from 
His  ancient  people  their  great  commission. 

"And  as  they  went  to  tell  his  disciples,  behold  Jesus  met 
them,"  &c.  In  John,  where  Mary  stretches  out  her  hand  to  the 
Lord,  He  says  "  Touch  me  not."  How  comes  it  that  here,  when 
the  women  came  and  held  Him  by  the  feet,  our  Lord  does  not 
forbid  it  ?  A  totally  different  truth  is  thus  set  forth  by  these 
acts.  The  great  hope  of  Israel  was  to  have  Christ  in  their 
midst.  But  to  us  the  absence  of  Christ  on  high,  while  we  go 
through  our  time  of  trial,  is  just  as  characteristic  as  His  presence 
will  be  to  them.  John  speaks  fully  of  our  Lord's  going  away  : 
another  scene  of  glory  entirely  distinct  from  this  world  is  brought 
out  there.  Hence  the  teaching  implied  is,  as  it  were.  You  may 
have  been  looking  as  Jews  for  a  scene  where  I  shall  be  personally 
present,  but  instead  of  this  I  tell  you  of  My  present  place  on 
high  and  the  many  mansions  that  I  go  to  prepare  for  you  in  My 
Father's  house.  He  reveals  to  them  a  heavenly  hope  totally 
distinct  from  His  reigning  over  His  people  in  this  world.  But 
in  Matthew  we  are  shewn  Jesus  rejected  by  Jerusalem,  yet 
found  in  Galilee,  even  after  His  resurrection.  Whatever  His 
power  and  glory  now,  and  the  comfort  and  blessing  to  His  own. 
He  is  still,  as  regards  the  Jews  and  Jerusalem,  the  rejected  and 
despised  Messiah.  Hence  it  is  that  on  this  occasion  He  confirms 
the  message  of  the  angel,  saying  to  the  women,  "  Be  not  afraid  : 
go  tell  my  brethren  that  they  go  into  Galilee,  and  there  shall 
they  see  me."  (Ver.  10.) 

The  governor  wielded  the  power  of  the  Roman  kingdom  :  but 
who  were  they  that  secretly  instigated  him  ?  The  false  re- 
ligionists of  their  day — the  priests,  utterly  blinded  of  the  devil. 
Always  without  simplicity  of  heart,  they  assembled  together 
with  the  elders  and  took  counsel ;  and  those  who  bribed  a 
treacherous  disciple  with  "thirty  pieces  of  silver"  to  put  Christ 
to  death,  gave  "  large  money"  now  to  deny  the  truth  of  His 
resurrection.  Such  is  man,  such  is  the  world ;  and,  solemn  to 
say,  such  is  its  highest  and  proudest  phase.  Such  it  was  then  :  is 
the  moral  complexion  altered  now  ?     If  we  read  the  Bible  aright, 


CHAPTER   XXVIII.  407 

>vo  shall  find  in  it  not  only  the  record  of  the  past,  but  the 
divine  lesson-book  of  the  present  and  the  future.  May  we 
read  it  for  our  own  souls !  Certain  it  is  that  the  Jcavs,  and 
especially  the  religious  chiefs,  took  the  lead  in  evil  and  in  opposi- 
tion to  God,  before  Christ's  death  (chap,  xxvi.,  xxvii.),  while  He 
lay  in  the  grave  (chap,  xxvii.  Q2 — GG),  and  after  He  rose  again. 
(Chap,  xxviii.  11 — 15.)  But  unbelief  is  after  all  as  weak  against 
God,  as  faith  is  mighty  with  and  by  Him.  Their  own  guard 
became  the  clearest,  most  unwitting,  and  least  suspected  witness 
of  the  resurrection.  What  a  testimony  was  the  alarm  of  the 
soldiers,  added  to  the  doubts  of  His  own  disciples  !  It  became 
more  than  unbelief  now ;  it  was  a  deliberate,  wilful  lie ;  and 
there  rest  the  Jews  ''  until  this  day."  Their  fears  raised  up, 
without  meaning  it,  a  sure  testimony  to  Jesus  ;  their  enmity 
leads  them  on  now  to  reject  what  they  knew  was  the  truth,  even 
if  they  perished  everlastingly. 

"  Then  the  eleven  disciples  went  away  into  Galilee,  into  a 
mountain  where  Jesus  had  appointed  them.  And  when  they 
saw  him,  they  worshipped  him;  but  some  doubted."  (Ver.  16, 
17.)  And  yet  these  doubters  were  disciples.  How  good  is  God  ! 
how  above  the  thoughts  of  nature !  Man  would  have  held 
back  the  fact.  Why  say  that  some  of  His  disciples  doubted  ? 
would  it  not  stumble  others?  But  it  is  profitable  to  know  the 
depth  of  our  unbelieving  hearts — to  see  that,  even  in  the  presence 
of  a  risen  Jesus,  "  some  doubted."  No  matter  what  His  love  to 
His  children,  God  never  hides  from  them,  nor  makes  light  of, 
their  sins. 

"  And  Jesus  came  and  spake  unto  them,  saying,  All  power  is 
given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth ;  and,  lo,  I  am  with  you 
alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  Now  it  appears  to 
me  that,  with  such  a  word  as  this,  the  ascension  scene  would  be 
incongruous.  What  more  unsuitable,  after  He  had  said,  "  Lo, 
I  am  with  you  alway,"  than  the  details  of  His  going  back  to 
heaven  ?  But  there  the  curtain  drops.  Otherwise  it  would  not 
have  left  the  unbroken  blessedness  of  this  promise  to  ring  on  the 
heart.  Thus,  the  keeping  out  of  view  His  departure  seems  to  me  to 
crown  the  beauty  of  the  parting  promise,  and  of  the  whole  gospel. 


408  LECTURES   ON   THE   GOSPEL   OF   MATTHEW. 

Why  not  here  "repentance  and  remission  of  sins?"  why  not 
^ '  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature  ?"  What  is  the  peculiar 
fitness  of  this  conclusion  of  Matthew  ?  The  Lord,  rejected  as 
the  Jewish  Messiah,  opens  out  fresh  dealings  of  God  with  men. 
Before,  they  were  not  to  go  even  to  Samaritans ;  but  here  an 
entirely  new  sphere  is  opened.  It  is  no  longer  God  having  His 
peculiar  dwelling-place  in  one  nation ;  it  is  now  this  larger 
thought — "  Go  ye,  therefore,  and  disciple  all  nations,  baptizing 
them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  (Ver.  19.)  Baptism  is  here  in  contrast  with 
circumcision,  and  the  fuller  revelation  of  the  Godhead  is  con- 
trasted with  the  name  Jehovah,  by  which  God  was  known  to 
Israel.  "  Teaching  them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  /have 
commanded  you."  This  falls  in  with  the  sermon  on  the  mount, 
where  the  Lord  says,  in  contrast  with  them  of  old  time,  "  But 
I  say  unto  you."  He  was  the  Prophet  like  unto  Moses  whom 
God  had  promised  to  raise  up,  and  to  whom  they  were  bound  to 
hearken.  What  special  guidance  is  this  for  Jewish  disciples ! 
They  were  to  teach  all  things  that  Jesus  had  commanded.  He 
was  the  beloved  Son  of  God  who  now  was  to  be  heard  pre- 
eminently. It  was  not  a  question  of  j)utting  the  Gentiles  under 
the  law,  which  has  been  the  ruin  of  Christendom,  the  denial  of 
Christianity,  and  the  deep  dishonour  of  Christ  Himself. 

And  here  all  closes.  The  disciples  were  about  to  enter  on  a 
troubled  scene ;  but  "  Lo,  I  [Jesus]  am  with  you  all  the  days, 
unto  the  consummation  of  the  ao;e."  And  this  was  and  is  enough 
for  faith.  The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  confide  our  souls,  both 
for  this  age  and  for  ever,  to  that  word  which  shall  stand  when 
heaven  and  earth  pass  away  ! 


-*o-i^o 


G.  Morrish,  J^nnter,  24,  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  How,  London. 


Date  Due 

P«»%i^gg^ 

i(^ 

11 

"mm 

fpf/^^^^^^' 

,  j5iifW«as!»*i^;^ 

«^-.Liii.<i'.%l> 

h 

(ii'^WfflW* 

'**HI-^ 

?^ 

IIM     W  ■!  W^"" 

v^^^mp^^^ 

*— ^ 

•1* 

■_,...j..ir^. 

h"**. 

9CvwT^ 

hk« 

f 

BS2575.K29 

Lectures  on  the  Gospel  of  Matthew 

IMIirilVl°"  ^^^°'°9'"'  Seminary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  00064  5251 


l~V;,l^,<| 


m 


