.^bftwp 


LECTURES    ON    ISAIAH. 


LECTURES 


BOOK     OF     ISAIAH 


WILLIAM     KELLY. 


LONDON: 
ROBERT     L.    ALLAN,     15     PATERNOSTER     ROW; 

AND   73   SAUCHIEHALL   STREET,   GLASGOW. 

DUBLIN:    TRACT    DEPOT,     13    WESTLAND     ROW. 

GUERNSEY:   J.   TUNLEY,   104  VICTORIA   ROAD. 

EDINBURGH:     TRACT     DEPOT,     52     COCKBURN     STREET. 

BOSTON,    U.  S.  :     F.   G.     BROWN,     3    TREMONT    ROW. 


1871. 


This  Book  may  also  be  had  at  thejollowing  places : — 

Aberdeen  :  Tract  Depot,  8  Crown  Street. 

Black-heath,  London,  S.E.  :  The  Gospel  Book  Store,  Tranquil  Vale. 

Brighton  :  The  Tract  Depot,  25  Grenville  Place,  Western  Road. 

Bristol  :  W.  Fryer,  2  Bridewell  Street. 

Manchester  :  W.  B.  Horner,  93  Bloomsbury,  Oxford  Road. 

Melbourne,  Victoria  :  John  Vance,  51  Post-Office  Place. 

Montreal  :  The  Tract  Depot,  St.  George's  Hall,  Great  George  Street. 

North  Shields  :  W.  H.  Brown,  83  Tyne  Street. 

Toronto,  Canada  :  F.  W.  Grant,  390  Yonge  Street. 

Wolverhamiton  :  R.  Tunley,  17  Gladstone  Terrace,  North  Road. 


PEEFACE 


The  book  here  presented  to  the  reader  consists  of 
notes  of  lectures  on  the  Prophecy  of  Isaiah,  taken  by 
a  young  friend,  and  corrected  with  considerable  addi- 
tions on  the  author's  part,  as  compared  with  the  shape 
in  which  they  were  originally  given  in  a  periodical. 
The  whole  is  still  far  short  of  what  he  desires  for  the 
exposition  of  so  precious  a  part  of  the  divine  word. 
Yet  he  is  not  without  hope  that  the  God  of  all  grace 
will  use  the  volume,  scanty  as  it  is,  for  the  more 
profitable  reading  and  the  enjoyment  of  many  souls, 
who,  like  the  treasurer  of  Queen  Candace,  feel  the 
need  of  a  guide  that  they  may  understand  what  they 
read.  That  the  Holy  Spirit  may  be  pleased  to  bless 
what  is  of  Himself,  and  that  every  word  not  of  Him 
may  be  forgiven  and  vanish  into  its  own  nothingness, 
is  the  prayer  of  the  author. 

Cheltenham,  July,  1871. 


CONTENTS 


Introduction,  

Chapter  L,         

II.— IV.,    

V.,  VI.,  

VIL,  

VIII., 

IX., 

X.,         

XL, 

XII.,     

XIIL,  XIV., 

XV.,  XVI.,     

XVIL,         

XVIIL,  

XIX.,  XX., 

XXL, 

XXIL,       

XXIIL,  

XXIV.,       

XXV., 

XXVI.,      

XXVIL,  

XXVIIL, 

XXIX.,  

XXX.,  XXXL,    ... 

XXXIL,  

XXXIIL, 

XXXIV.,  XXXV.,   ... 

XXXVI. ,  XXXVII. , 

XXXVIIL,  XXXIX., 


PAGE 

1 

12 

16 

26 

31 

41 

44 

48 

52 

60 

61 

74 

77 

83 

87 

94 

96 

98 

102 

106 

117 

126 

129 

140 

143 

155 

163 

170 

179 

184 


Vlll.  CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Chapter  XL.,  191 

XLL, 201 

XLIL,  XLIII., 207 

XLIV.,  XLV.,  210 

XLVI.— XLVIIL,  216 

XLIX., 219 

L., 223 

LL,  III.   12, 227 

LIL  13,  LIIL, 230 

LIV.,  LV.,      241 

LVL,  LVIL,        247 

LVIIL,  LIX.,  251 

LX.,  255 

LXL,  LXIL, 259 

LXIII.  1—6,        262 

LXIII.  7,  LXIV., 266 

LXV.,         270 

LXVL, ...         276 


LECTURES    ON    ISAIAH 


INTRODUCTION. 

It  is  proposed  in  the  following  work  to  communicate  some 
remarks  on  the  most  comprehensive  as  well  as  the  grandest  of 
all  the  prophets.  Even  if  they  contribute  scarcely  more  than  a 
copious  table  of  contents,  there  are  hearts  thankful  for  the  least 
real  help  to  the  better  understanding  of  the  word  of  God.  This 
object  will  be  gained  not  by  occupying  the  reader  with  the 
thoughts  of  man,  but  by  furnishing  suggestions  which  neces- 
sarily lead  back  to  holy  scripture,  and  derive  any  little  interesl 
or  value  they  may  possess  from  that  word  which  lives  and 
abides  for  ever. 

Of  the  manner  and  style  of  Isaiah  others  have  spoken 
largely.  If  little  be  said  of  this,  it  is  not  that  the  warmest 
expression  of  praise  seems  to  me  overcharged,  but  because  I 
consider  it  needless,  at  least  for  such  as  are  likely  to  read  these 
pages.  The  following  extract — cited  by  another  from  Ewald's 
Propheten  (i.  166 — 179) — suffices  to  prove  the  estimate  formed 
by  a  man  of  taste,  ability,  and  learning,  who  may  be  considered 
by  some  the  less  biassed  as  he  rejected  inspiration  in  its  scrip- 
tural sense : — 

"  In  Isaiah  we  see  prophetic  authorship  reaching  its  culmi- 
nating point.  Everything  conspired  to  raise  him  to  an  eleva- 
tion to  which  no  prophet  either  before  or  after  could  as  writer 
attain.  Among  the  other  prophets,  each  of  the  more  important 
ones  is  distinguished  by  some  one  particular  excellence,  and 


-  LECTURES   OX    ISAIAH. 

some  one  peculiar  talent :  in  Isaiah  all  kinds  of  talents  and  all 
beauties  of  prophetic  discourse  meet  together  so  as  mutually 
to  temper  and  qualify  each  other ;  it  is  not  so  much  any  single 
feature  that  distinguishes  him  as  the  symmetry  of  the  whole. 

"  "We  cannot  fail  to  assume,  as  the  first  condition  of  Isaiah's 
historical  greatness,  a  native  power  and  a  vivacity  of  spirit, 
which,  even  among  prophets,  is  seldom  to  be  met  with.  It  is 
but  rarely  that  we  see  combined  in  one  and  the  same  spirit  the 
three  several  characteristics  of,  first,  the  most  profound  pro- 
phetic excitement  and  the  purest  sentiment;  next,  the  most 
indefatigable  and  successful  practical  activity  amidst  all  per- 
plexities and  changes  of  outward  life;  and,  thirdly,  that 
facility  and  beauty  in  representing  thought  which  is  the  pre- 
rogative of  the  genuine  poet :  but  this  threefold  combination  we 
find  realized  in  Isaiah  as  in  no  other  prophet ;  and  from  the 
traces  which  we  can  perceive  of  the  unceasing  joint- working  of 
these  three  powers,  we  must  draw  our  conclusions  as  to  the 
original  greatness  of  his  genius.  Both  as  prophet  and  as  author, 
Isaiah  stands  upon  that  calm  sunny  height  Avhich  in  each 
several  branch  of  ancient  literature  one  eminently  favoured 
spirit  at  the  right  time  takes  possession  of;  which  seems,  as  it 
were,  to  have  been  waiting  for  him ;  and  which,  when  he  has 
come  and  mounted  the  ascent,  seems  to  keep  and  guard  him  to 
the  last  as  its  own  right  man.  In  the  sentiments  which  he 
expresses,  in  the  topics  of  his  discourses,  and  in  the  manner  of 
expression,  Isaiah  uniformly  reveals  himself  as  the  kingly 
prophet. 

"In  reference  to  the  last  named  point,  it  cannot  be  said' 
that  his  manner  of  representing  thought  is  elaborate  and  artifi- 
cial :  it  rather  shows  a  lofty  simplicity  and  an  unconcern  about 
external  attractiveness,  abandoning  itself  freely  to  the  leading 
and  requirement  of  each  several  thought;  but,  nevertheless,  it 
always  rolls  along  in  a  full  stream  which  overpowers  all  resist- 
ance, and  never  fails  at  the  right  place  to  accomplish  at  every 
turn  its  object  without  toil  or  effort. 

"The  progress  and  development  of  the  discourse  is  always 
majestic,  achieving  much  with  few  words,  which,  though  short, 


INTRODUCTION.  3 

are  yet  clear  and  transparent ;  an  overflowing,  swelling  fulness 
of  thought,  which  might  readily  lose  itself  in  the  vast  and  inde- 
finite, but  which  always  at  the  right  time  collects  and  tempers 
its  exuberance ;  to  the  bottom  exhausting  the  thought  and  com- 
pleting the  utterance,  and  yet  never  too  diffuse.  This  severe 
self-control  is  the  most  admirably  seen  in  those  shorter  utter- 
ances, which,  by  briefly  sketched  images  and  thoughts,  give  us  the 
vague  apprehension  of  something  infinite,  while  nevertheless 
they  stand  before  us  complete  in  themselves  and  clearly  delin- 
eated, e.g.  viii.  6,  ix.  6,  xiv.  29 — 32,  xviii.  1 — 7,  xxi.  11,  12 ; 
while  in  the  long  piece,  xxviii. — xxxi.,  if  the  composition  here 
and  there  for  a  moment  languishes,  it  is  only  to  lift  itself  up 
again  afresh  with  all  the  greater  might.  In  this  rich  and 
thickly  crowded  fulness  of  thought  and  word,  it  is  but  seldom 
that  the  simile  which  is  employed  appears  apart  to  set  forth 
and  complete  itself  (xxxi.  4,  5) ;  in  general,  it  crowds  into  the 
delineation  of  the  object  which  it  is  meant  to  illustrate,  and  is 
swallowed  up  in  it — aye,  and  frequently  simile  after  simile — 
and  yet  the  many  threads  of  the  discourse,  which  for  a  moment 
appeared  ravelled  together,  soon  disentangle  themselves  into 
perfect  clearness,  a  characteristic  which  belongs  to  this  prophet 
alone,  a  freedom  of  language  with  which  no  one  else  so  easily 
succeeds. 

"  The  versification  in  like  manner  is  always  full,  and  yet 
strongly  marked :  while,  however,  this  prophet  is  little  con- 
cerned about  anxiously  weighing  out  to  each  verse  its  proper 
number  of  words,  not  unfrequently  he  repeats  the  same  word 
in  two  members  (xxxi.  5,  xxxii.  17,  xi.  5,  xix.  13),  as  if,  with 
so  much  power  and  beauty  in  the  matter  within,  he  did  not  so 
much  require  a  painstaking  finish  in  the  outside.  The  struc- 
ture of  the  strophe  is  always  easy  and  beautifully  rounded. 

"  Still  the  main  point  lies  here — that  we  cannot  in  the  case 
of  Isaiah,  as  in  that  of  other  prophets,  specify  any  particular 
peculiarity,  or  any  favourite  colour  as  attaching  to  the  general 
'style.  He  is  not  the  especially  lyrical  prophet,  or  the  especially 
elegiacal  prophet,  or  the  especially  oratorical  and  hortatory  Jfro- 
phet,  as  we  should  describe  a  Joel,  a  Hosea,  a  Micah,  with 


4  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

whom  there  is  a  greater  prevalence  of  some  particular  colour ; 
but,  just  as  the  subject  requires,  he  has  readily  at  command 
every  several  kind  of  style  and  every  several  change  of  delinea- 
tion ;  and  it  is  precisely  this  that,  in  point  of  language,  estab- 
lishes his  greatness,  as  well  as  in  general  forms  one  of  his  most 
towering  points  of  excellence.  His  only  fundamental  peculi- 
arity is  the  lofty  majestic  calmness  of  his  style,  proceeding  out 
of  the  perfect  command  which  he  feels  he  possesses  over  his 
subject-matter.  This  calmness  however  no  way  demands  that 
the  strain  shall  not,  when  occasion  requires,  be  more  vehe- 
mently excited,  and  assail  the  hearer  with  mightier  blows ;  but 
even  the  extremest  excitement,  which  does  here  and  there 
intervene,  is  in  the  main  bridled  still  by  the  same  spirit  of 
calmness,  and,  not  overstepping  the  limits  which  that  spirit 
assigns,  it  soon  with  lofty  self-control  returns  back  to  its 
wonted  tone  of  equability  (ii.  10 ;  iii. ;  xxviii.  11 — 23 ;  xxix. 
9 — 14).  Neither  does  this  calmness  in  discourse  require  that 
the  subject  shall  always  be  treated  only  in  a  plain  level  way, 
without  any  variation  of  form;  rather  Isaiah  shows  himself 
master  in  just  that  variety  of  manner  which  suits  the  relation 
in  which  his  hearers  stand  to  the  matter  now  in  hand.  If  he 
wishes  to  bring  home  to  their  minds  a  distant  truth  which  they 
like  not  to  hear,  and  to  judge  them  by  a  sentence  pronounced 
by  their  own  mouth,  he  retreats  back  into  a  popular  statement 
of  a  case  drawn  from  ordinary  life  (v.  1 — 6 ;  xxviii.  23 — 29). 
If  he  will  draw  the  attention  of  the  over-wise  to  some  new 
truth,  or  to  some  future  prospect,  he  surprises  them  by  a  brief 
oracle  clothed  in  an  enigmatical  dress,  leaving  it  to  their  pene- 
tration to  discover  its  solution  (viii.  14 — 16;  xxix.  1 — 8). 
When  the  unhappy  temper  of  men's  minds,  which  nothing  can 
amend,  leads  to  loud  lamentation,  his  speech  becomes  for  a 
while  the  strain  of  elegy  and  lament  (i.  21 — 23 ;  xxii.  4,  5).  Do 
the  frivolous  leaders  of  the  people  mock  ? — he  outdoes  them  at 
their  own  weapons,  and  crushes  them  under  the  fearful  earnest 
of  divine  mockery  (xxviii.  10 — 13).  Even  a  single  ironical 
word  in  passing  will  drop  from  the  lofty  prophet  (xvii.  3,  glory). 
Tims  his  discourse  varies  into  every  complexion:  it  is  tender 


INTRODUCTION.  5 

and  stern,  didactic  and  threatening,  mourning,  and  again  exult- 
ing in  divine  joy,  mocking  and  earnest;  but  ever  at  the  right 
time  it  returns  back  to  its  original  elevation  and  repose,  and 
never  loses  the  clear  ground-colour  of  its  divine  seriousness." 

It  is  more  to  our  purpose  to  consider  briefly  the  general 
structure,  or,  at  any  rate,  the  chief  parts  and  divisions  of  this 
prophecy.  There  is  an  appearance  of  disorder  in  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  book  as  it  now  stands;  and  many  of  those  who 
have  commented  on  it  have  complained  and  suggested  their 
rectifications.  For  my  part  I  see  no  sufficient  reason  to  doubt 
that,  under  the  semblance  of  confusion  here  as  elsewhere  in 
scripture,  we  have  a  deeper  system  than  one  of  time  or  circum- 
stance. Thus,  in  the  Book  of  Exodus,  the  ritual  for  the  conse- 
cration of  the  priests  comes  in  abruptly  in  chapters  xxviii.  and 
xxix.,  after  the  Spirit  of  God  has  given  part  of  the  account  of 
the  sanctuary  and  its  vessels,  and  before  He  supplies  the  rest. 
And  yet  this  seeming  interruption  subserves,  as  nothing  else 
could,  the  moral  object  of  the  Spirit,  which  would  have  been 
frustrated  by  a  merely  obvious  and  mechanical  arrangement,  to 
which  most  minds  are  so  prone.  "The  foolishness  of  God  is 
wiser  than  men." 

So  in  the  earliest  division  of  our  prophet,  which  embraces 
the  first  twelve  chapters,  we  have  the  preface  of  chapter  i. 
followed  by  chapters  ii. — iv.,  which  dwell  on  "the  day  of 
Jehovah."  Then  comes  chapter  v.,  "the  song  of  my  beloved 
touching  his  vineyard."  Now  it  is  evident  that  this  strain 
(proving  by  repeated  instances  that,  for  all  yet  done,  Jehovah's 
anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  His  hand  is  stretched  out  still) 
is  interrupted  by  chapters  vi. — ix.  7 ;  after  which  episode  it  is 
resumed  till  we  have  the  close  in  the  destruction,  of  the 
Assyrian,  the  reign  of  Messiah,  and  Israel's  joy  and  praise 
(chap.  x. — xii.)  "  in  that  day  "  once  more. 

Now  we  have  no  date  to  this.  "  song,"  but  we  have  both 
to  chapter  vi.  and  also  to  chapters  vii.,  viii.  Chapter  vi.  may 
have  been  revealed  before  the  song,  as  many  suppose  it  to 
have  been  the  first  vision  the  prophet  ever  had.     This  I  neither 


6  LECTURES   OX   ISAIAH. 

affirm  nor  deny,  not  seeing  sufficient  evidence  in  the  word 
or  in  the  nature  of  the  case  to  warrant  either  conclusion. 
But  it  seems  plain  that  there  is  a  moral  order  of  divine  beauty 
in  the  collocation  as  the  chapters  now  stand.  Chapter  v.  is 
the  case  stated  between  Jehovah  and  His  vineyard,  and  shows 
Israel  tested  by  the  painstaking  care  God  had  all  through 
bestowed  upon  them.  "  What  could  have  been  done  more  to 
my  vineyard  that  I  have  not  done  in  it  ?"  He  can  only  thence- 
forward lay  it  waste,  though  His  vineyard  be  the  house  of 
Israel,  and  the  men  of  Judah  His  pleasant  plant.  Worse  woe 
follows  woe;  and  God  summons  the  nations  from  far  to  chasten 
His  people,  over  whose  land  hung  darkness  and  sorrow.  Then, 
before  the  conclusion  of  these  judgments  on  stricken  Israel 
given  in  chapter  x.,  we  have  Israel  tested  in  a  wholly  different 
way  in  chapter  vi.  For  we  have  there  the  glory  of  Jehovah- 
Messiah  manifested  (compare  John  xii.),  the  people  blinded 
judicially  for  their  unbelief,  and  an  elect  remnant  withal  which 
did  not  appear  in  the  preceding  chapter.  Thus,  if  chapter  v. 
convicts  Israel  on  the  count  of  their  ill-return  to  all  God's 
past  good  and  faithful  care,  chapter  vi.  condemns  them  yet 
more,  whatever  grace  may  do  spite  of  all,  by  the  manifestation 
of  Jehovah's  glory  in  the  person  of  Christ.  This  accordingly 
leads  to  a  lengthening  out  of  the  interruption,  which  shows 
us  Immanuel,  the  virgin's  child,  on  the  judgment  of  the 
Assyrian,  spite  of  desolation  inflicted  by  him  for  a  time,  and 
the  complete  deliverance  of  Israel  and  their  establishment 
under  the  Messiah  AFTER  the  day  when  He  was  a  stone  of 
stumbling  to  them  and  the  law  was  sealed  among  His  disciples. 
Then,  as  we  have  seen,  the  broken  links  of  chapter  v.  are 
taken  up  again  from  chapter  ix.  8,  and  the  general  history  of 
the  nation  renews  its  course,  after  we  have  had  from  first  to 
last  the  special  account  of  the  Messiah,  His  rejection  by  the 
Jews,  and  the  final  blessing  under  His  reign.  The  resumption. 
after  so  complete  and  weighty  an  episode,  is  made  most  evident, 
because  the  Spirit  of  God  goes  back  to  the  very  struggles  of 
the  prophet's  day  and  the  judgment  of  Israel.  In  chapter  x. 
the    indignation    of    Jehovah    against     Israel    ceases    in    the 


INTRODUCTION.  7 

destruction  of  their  last  foe,  the  Assyrian.  Lastly  in  chapter  xi. 
we  have  the  Messiah  again  shown,  first  in  His  moral  ways, 
and  then  in  His  kingdom,  followed  by  Israel's  song  of  praise, 
in  the  millennial  day  (chap.  xii.). 

The  second  great  division  comprehends  chapters  xiii. — xxvii. ; 
but,  like  the  first,  it  admits  of  various  sub-divisions  or  separate 
subjects  within  itself.  Thus  in  chapters  xiii.  xiv.  we  have 
the  fall  of  Babylon  and  the  overthrow  of  the  Assyrian,  with 
Palestina  dissolved,  terminating  in  mercy  to  Israel  and  the 
establishment  of  Zion.  This  clearly  indicates  that  the  last 
days  are  in  question  both  for  judgment  and  for  deliverance, 
whatever  preliminary  accomplishment  in  the  past  may  have 
borne  witness  to  the  truth  of  the  prophecy.  But  that  which 
has  been  falls  so  short  of  all  that  is  involved  as  to  evince  itself 
but  the  shadow  which  the  coming  events  cast  before  them.  Next 
follows  "the  burden  of  Moab"  in  chapters  xv.  xvi.  Then 
in  chapter  xvii.  comes  "  the  burden  of  Damascus ;"  but  just 
as  proud  Moab  must  stoop  before  Him  who  sits  on  the  throne  in 
the  tabernacle  of  David,  so  the  mighty  rushing  waters  of  the 
nations  shall  avail  as  little  to  sustain  Damascus  as  to  over- 
whelm Israel,  though  at  the  lowest  ebb,  when  they  look  to 
their  Jehovah  God,  and  He  rebukes  the  oppressor.  The  next 
chapter  (xviii.)  may  be  viewed  in  connexion  with  chap.  xvii. 
Nevertheless  it  has  its  own  special  place,  as  showing  us  Israel 
restored,  not  by  Jehovah  at  first,  but  by  the  influence  and 
intervention  of  a  maritime  power.  But  this  policy  and  its 
promising  fruit  come  all  to  nothing,  and  the  nations  plunder 
and  oppress  as  before,  and  Jehovah  takes  up  Israel,  and  works 
in  His  own  grace  and  might.  We  have  "  burdens  "  after  this, 
*  but  they  are  not  quite  similarly  presented  after  this  great 
gathering  of  nations  seen  at  the  end  of  chapter  xvii.  But 
first  in  chapters  xix.  and  xx.  Egypt  is  judged  (the  Assyrian 
being  the  instrument)  before  its  final  blessing.  Again  in 
chapter  xxi.,  we  have  the  "burden  of  the  desert  of  the  sea," 
by  which  is  set  forth  the  capture  of  Babylon;  "the  burden  of 
Dumah,"  and  that  upon  Arabia.  Then  in  chapter  xxii.  "the 
burden   of  the   vallev   of  vision,"   Jerusalem   itself   is  taken ; 


8  LECTUEES   ON   ISAIAH. 

and  Shebna  is  set  aside  for  Eliakim,  the  type  of  Antichrist 
overthrown,  and  the  government  of  David's  house  being  trans- 
ferred to  the  true  Christ.  In  chapter  xxiii.  Tyre's  burden 
conies  before  us.  Then  in  chapter  xxiv.  Jehovah  is  seen 
dealing  with  the  earth,  and  the  world  languishes  before  His 
mighty  hand.  There  is  more  than  this,  for  it  is  the  hour  of  His 
visitation  for  the  host  of  the  high  ones  on  high,  as  well  as  for 
the  kings  of  the  earth  on  the  earth :  indeed  the  day  is  come 
for  His  reign  in  Zion  and  Jerusalem.  Can  one  wonder  then 
that  chapters  xxv. — xxvii.  are  the  sequel  for  Israel's  songs  of 
victory,  celebrating  God  and  His  character,  and  their  deliverance 
and  its  character  also  ?  A  song  of  joy  closed  the  first  division, 
a  song  of  praise  closed  the  second ;  and  as  we  had  in  the  first 
part  the  sorrowful  song  of  the  beloved  to  His  vineyard, 
fruitful  only  in  sin  and  shame,  now  all  is  changed;  and  "in 
that  day  shag  ye  unto  her,  a  vineyard  of  red  wine :  I  Jehovah 
do  keep  it;  I  will  water  it  every  moment,  lest  any  hurt  it; 
I  will  keep  it  night  and  day." 

It  is  evident  that,  as  compared  with  the  first  division 
(i. — xii.),  the  second  (xiii. — xxvii.)  embraces  a  sphere  incom- 
parably larger:  the  first  being  occupied  mainly  with  Israel; 
the  second  beginning  with  the  great  power  that  ravaged  and 
ruled  Judah,  going  on  with  each  of  the  nations  that  had 
relations  with  Israel,  and  ending  with  the  judgment  of  all 
nations,  when  the  world  is  dealt  with  and  the  very  powers  of 
the  heavens  are  shaken  too,  but  when  Israel,  sifted  and 
chastened,  is  gathered  in  at  the  great  trumpet  blast  to  worship 
Jehovah  of  hosts  in  Jerusalem. 

The  third  division  is  occupied  with  the  details  of  that 
which  happens  to  Israel  at  the  end  of  the  age.  Chaps,  xxviii. 
and  xxix.  give  us  the  two  final  assaults  on  Jerusalem:  the 
first  of  these,  coming  from  the  north  and  overwhelming  Ephraim 
in  its  course,  is  successful  against  the  guilty  city,  spite  of 
(rather  because  of)  its  covenant  with  death ;  the  second,  when 
all  seems  lost,  suddenly  brings  Jehovah  of  hosts  to  their  rescue, 
and  the  multitude  of  the  hostile  strangers  of  all  nations  pass 
away  as  a  dream.     In  chaps,  xxx.  and  xxxi.  the  unbelief  that 


INTRODUCTION.  9 

sought  unto  Egypt  is  judged,  and  the  Assyrian,  its  scourge, 
the  mighty  leader  of  the  coalition  against  Israel,  falls  under 
God's  hand.  Then  in  chap,  xxxii.  Messiah  is  seen  reigning 
in  righteousness,  and  the  last  pre-millennial  effort  of  the  enemy 
(chap,  xxxiii.)  is  turned  to  his  own  destruction,  and  divine 
vengeance  takes  its  course  in  Edom  on  all  the  other  haters 
of  Israel  (chap,  xxxiv.).  Thereon  the  blessing  is  now  so 
rich  and  all  pervading,  that  the  wilderness  itself  rejoices  for 
Israel,  and  blossoms  as  the  rose :  sorrow  and  sighing  flee  away. 
God  is  come  with  a  recompense,  and  His  ransomed  ones  are 
come  to  Zion  with  songs,  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads. 
Such  is  the  fitting  conclusion  in  chap.  xxxv. 

The  fourth  division  consists  of  the  historical  matter  inter- 
calated between  what  may  be  called  the  first  and  second 
volumes  of  our  prophecy.  These  are  their  main  facts :  the 
historical  Assyrian  rebuked  of  God  before  Jerusalem  (chaps, 
xxxvi.,  xxxvii.) ;  the  raising  up  again  of  the  Son  of  David, 
who  was  sick  unto  death  (chap,  xxxviii.) ;  and  the  solemn 
intimation  of  the  Babylonish  captivity  (chap,  xxxix.). 

After  this  transitional  series  of  events,  and  founded  on 
their  weighty  moral  import,  we  have  the  remainder  of  the 
book  (chaps,  xl. — lxvi.)  parting  into  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh 
divisions.  The  two  great  controversies  of  God  with  His  people 
are  here  brought  to  issue  with  a  conclusion  to  the  entire  book. 

The  first  is  idolatry  (chaps,  xl. — xlviii.),  which  Cyrus  avenged 
in  the  overthrow  of  Babylon,  whither  the  guilty  Jews  had 
been  carried,  alas !  because  of  their  desertion  of  Jehovah  for 
idols  of  the  Gentiles.  But  providentially  raised  up  as  Cyrus 
was,  God  points  to  His  servant  who  shall  bring  forth  judgment 
to  the  Gentiles.  After  this  however  the  promised  Messiah  is 
dropped  for  the  present.  Israel  meanwhile  had  the  respon- 
sibility of  being  Jehovah's  servant,  but  Israel  was  blind. 
Therefore  had  He  given  them  up  for  a  prey;  but  now  they 
are  delivered,  the  fall  of  Babylon  being  the  pledge  of  a  still 
mightier  deliverance  yet  to  come.     This  closes  with  chap,  xlviii. 


10  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

In  chap.  xlix.  the  second  and  still  graver  controversy  opens 
— the  rejection  of  the  true  servant,  even  the  Messiah.  This 
makes  way  for  a  blessing  to  the  Gentiles  in  the  wisdom  and 
grace  of  God,  the  raising  up  of  Jacob  being  now  counted  a  light 
thing.  "  I  will  also  give  thee .  for  light  to  the  Gentiles." 
Zion  however  shall  never  be  forgotten,  but  be  restored.  This 
again  closes  with  chap.  lvii.  (Compare  its  last  verse  with  the 
last  verse  of  the  preceding  part,  namely  chap,  xlviii.  22.) 

Chapters  lviii. — lxvi.  are  the  conclusion.  This,  and  indeed 
the  whole  of  what  we  have  called  the  second  volume,  are  second 
to  no  other  part  in  magnificence,  interest,  and  practical  profit.* 
The  contents  of  the  last  part  may  be  thus  summed  up.  The 
Holy  Spirit  directs  Himself  (in  chaps,  lviii.,  lix.)  to  the 
conscience  of  Israel — reasons,  if  one  may  so  say,  of  righteousness, 

*  The  following  extract  from  the  same  rationalist  {Propheten  ii.  407 — 409), 
who  attributes  the  last  twenty-seven  chapters,  not  to  Isaiah,  but  to  what  he 
calls  "the  Great  Unnamed, "  may  not  be  without  interest : — "Creative  as  this 
prophet  is  in  his  views  and  thoughts,  he  is  not  less  peculiar  and  new  in  his 
language,  which  at  times  is  highly  ( !)  inspired,  and  carries  away  the  reader  with  a 
wonderful  power. 

"Although  after  the  general  manner  of  the  later  prophets,  the  discourse  is 
apt  to  be  too  diffuse  in  delineation ;  yet,  on  the  other  side,  it  often  moves 
confusedly  and  heavily,  owing  to  the  overgushing  fulness  of  fresh  thoughts 
continually  streaming  in.  But  whenever  it  rises  to  a  higher  strain,  as  e.g. 
xl. — xlii.  1 — 4,  it  then  attains  to  such  a  pure  luminous  sublimity,  and  carries  the 
hearer  away  with  such  a  wonderful  charm  of  diction,  that  one  might  be  ready 
to  fancy  he  was  listening  to  another  prophet  altogether,  if  other  grounds  did 
not  convince  us  that  it  is  one  and  the  same  prophet  speaking,  only  in  differ- 
ent moods  of  feeling. 

"In  no  prophet  does  the  record  in  the  composition  of  particular  passages  so 
much  vary,  as  throughout  the  three  several  sections  into  which  this  part  of  the 
book  is  divided ;  while  under  vehement  excitement,  the  prophet  pursues  the 
most  diverse  objects.  It  is  his  business  at  different  times  to  comfort,  to 
exhort,  to  shame,  to  chasten ;  to  show,  as  out  of  heaven,  the  heavenly  image 
of  the  Servant  of  the  Lord,  and,  in  contrast,  to  scourge  the  folly  and  base 
grovelling  of  image-worship  ;  to  teach  what  conduct  the  times  require,  and  to 
rebuke  those  who  linger  behind  the  occasion,  and  then  also  to  draw  them  along 
by  his  own  example — his  prayers,  confessions,  and  thanksgiving,  thus  smooth- 
ing for  them  the  approach  to  the  exalted  object  of  the  New  Time.  Thus  the 
complexion  of  the  style,  though  hardly  anywhere  passing  into  the  representa- 
tion of  visions  properly  so  called,  varies  in  a  constant  interchange  ;  and  rightly 
to  recognise  these  changes  is  the  great  problem  for  the  interpretation." 


INTRODUCTION.  11 

temperance,  and  judgment  to  come.  Their  hypocrisy  was  the 
hindrance  to  their  blessing,  and  their  sin  would  bring  on  their 
punishment.  Yet  when  all  hope  of  salvation  might  justly  be 
taken  away,  the  Redeemer  would  come  to  Zion  in  his  own 
sovereign  mercy,  and  His  Spirit  and  His  word  abide  with  Israel 
and  their  seed  for  ever.  Chapter  lx.  most  appropriately  reveals 
their  consequent  glory  and  righteous  condition.  Next  chapters 
lxi. — lxiii.  1 — 6  form  a  section  in  which  the  character  of  Jehovah- 
Messiah  is  traced  from  His  first  advent  in  grace  (with  the 
blessing  and  glory  He  was  ready  and  able  to  bestow  on  the 
people  and  their  land),  till  He  returns  from  the  scene  of  the 
judgment  executed  in  Edom,  "  the  day  of  vengeance  of  our 
God."  Then  from  chapter  lxiii.  7  to  the  end  of  lxi  v.  the  prophet 
goes  out  to  Jehovah  in  earnest  intercession  for  His  people, 
finding  an  only  hope  in  His  mercy  and  faithfulness.  The  last 
two  chapters  (lxv.,  lxvi.)  are  the  answer  of  Jehovah,  who  explains 
His  dealings  throughout;  His  grace  to  the  Gentiles,  His  long- 
suffering  toward  Israel  (rebellious  and  yet  to  return  to  their 
old  idolatry  and  worse) ;  His  sure  rejection  and  judgment  of  the 
mass,  but  with  an  elect  remnant  spared ;  the  introduction  of  His 
glory  in  the  new  creation,  of  which  Jerusalem  is  the  destined 
earthly  centre;  a  reiteration  of  His  sympathy  with  the  elect  and 
of  the  vengeance  He  must  take  on  the  abominations  of  the  latter 
day,  when,  if  He  suddenly  bless  Zion,  He  will  as  suddenly  come 
and  plead  by  fire  and  sword  with  all  flesh.  After  this  judgment 
of  the  quick,  the  spared  shall  go  forth  and  declare  (not  His  grace 
but)  His  glory,  and  all  the  dispersed  of  Israel  shall  be  brought 
back,  and  all  flesh  too  shall  worship  before  Jehovah,  with  the 
solemn  permanent  witness  before  their  eyes  of  the  doom  of 
apostates.  Such  is  the  general  scope,  such  the  special  divisional 
character,  of  Isaiah  the  prophet. 


CHAPTER  I. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Holy  Ghost  treats  of  Israel,  more 
particularly  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  throughout  the  visions  of 
Isaiah.  Often,  it  is  true,  we  hear  of  judgments  on  the  Gentiles, 
sometimes  of  divine  grace  toward  them;  and  this  last  not  merely 
when  Israel  shall  be  the  centre  of  blessing  for  the  earth,  but 
even  while,  as  now,  the  Jews  are  set  aside  for  a  season.  Still  it 
is  certain  from  the  express  language  of  the  prophet,  that  the 
book,  as  a  whole,  applies  to  God's  ancient  people,  and  not  to 
the  church  of  the  firstborn. 

Nevertheless,  all  scripture  being  alike  from  God,  we  shall 
find  the  most  precious  instruction  here  as  elsewhere,  humbling 
lessons  for  the  heart  of  man,  and  on  God's  part  unfailing 
mercy,  goodness,  and  patience,  but  withal  solemn  sure  judgment 
of  all  evil.  Everywhere  and  at  all  times  God's  glory  shines  out  to 
the  eye  of  faith,  as  it  will  to  "  every  eye"  in  a  day  which  hastens 
fast.  But  the  only  wise  God  has  been  pleased  to  bring  out  His 
mind  and  display  His  ways  in  a  variety  of  forms,  which  create  no 
small  perplexity  to  the  narrow  mind  and  unready  heart  of  man. 
Some  are  apt  to  forget  the  past,  as  if  the  revelation  of  present 
privilege  were  all ;  many  more  would  merge  the  actual  calling  of 
God  in  a  vague  amalgam  in  an  unintelligent  monotony,  which 
confounds  Israel  and  the  church,  law  and  gospel,  earth  and 
heaven,  grace  and  glory. 

Doubtless  now  that  the  Son  of  God  has  appeared,  it  is  meet 
that  we  should  hear  Him ;  and  it  is  vain  to  talk  of  knowing  the 
law  and  prophets,  Moses  or  Elias,  if  He  have  not  the  central 
and  supreme  place  in  our  hearts.  And  it  is  to  hear  Him,  if  we 
believe  that  the  Spirit  of  truth  is  come  to  guide  into  all  truth ; 
much  of  which  even  apostles  could  not  bear,  till  redemption  was 
accomplished  and  the  Son  of  man  ascended  where  He  was  before. 
It  is  due  therefore  to  the  New  Testament  that  we  should  look 
for  our  special  portion  there,  the  revelation  of  that  mystery 


CHAPTER   I.  13 

which  was  hid  from  ages  and  from  generations.  But  we  cannot 
forget,  without  dishonour  to  God  and  loss  to  our  souls,  that 
there  are  certain  moral  principles  which  never  change,  any 
more  than  God  can  act  or  speak  beneath  Himself,  whatever 
may  be  His  condescension  to  the  creature.  Thus  obedience  is 
always  the  right  pathway  for  the  faithful,  and  holiness  is 
inseparable  from  the  new  nature ;  but  then  the  character  of  the 
obedience  and  the  depth  of  the  holiness  necessarily  depend  on 
the  measure  of  light  given  of  God  and  the  power  of  the  motives 
He  reveals  for  working  on  the  heart.  What  was  allowed  in 
Levitical  time  and  order  is  largely  out  of  place  now,  if  we  heed 
the  Saviour's  authority.  And  this  is  at  least  as  strikingly  true 
of  the  public  worship  and  service  of  God  as  of  private  life  and 
duty.  In  many  measures  and  in  many  modes  He  spoke  in  the 
prophets  to  the  fathers ;  now  He  has  spoken  in  the  person  of 
His  Son.  Hence  unbelief  assumes  the  character  of  resistance 
to  the  fullest  love,  light,  authority,  and  grace,  revealed  in  Him 
who  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God — Himself  God  over  all, 
blessed  for  ever,  while  the  faith  which  has  bowed  to  Him  thus 
displayed,  loves  to  hear  the  earlier  oracles  and  to  reflect  the 
true  light  which  now  shines,  along  with  the  fainter  but  equally 
divine  luminaries  which  pierced  through  the  darkness  of  man's 
night ;  for  all  the  blessed  promises  of  God  are  now  verified  in 
Christ. 

In  the  prophecy  before  us  God  is  still  dealing  with  the 
people  as  a  body ;  and,  therefore,  He  pleads  with  them  because 
of  their  iniquities,  setting  forth  a  full,  searching,  and  even 
minute  portraiture  of  their  evil  ways.  For  if  prophecy  encoura- 
ges the  faithful  by  the  sure  word  of  coming  blessing  from  the 
Lord,  it  casts  a  steady,  convicting  light  on  the  actual  state  of 
those  who  bear  His  name ;  its  hopes  strengthen  those  who  bow 
to  its  holy  sentences.  Hence,  if  handled  in  a  godly  and  reverent 
manner,  it  never  can  be  popular,  though  notions  drawn  from  it 
and  used  excitingly  may  be  so.  But  the  Spirit  addresses  it  to 
the  conscience  in  God's  presence,  and  there  is  nothing  man 
more  shrinks  from.  Indeed  this  is  the  character  of  prophesy- 
ing (1  Cor.  xiv.)  in  a  measure,  as  well  as  of  prophetic  scripture ; 


14  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

and  the  Corinthian  preference  of  the  more  showy  sign-gifts  told 
the  tale  of  their  own  moral  condition. 

Need  it  be  pointed  out  particularly  how  chap.  i.  illustrates  the 
foregoing  remarks  ?  What  an  expostulation  on  the  part  of  God! 
Heaven  and  earth  are  summoned  to  hear  His  complaint  against 
His  guilty  people.  The  dullest  of  their  own  beasts  of  burden 
put  them  to  shame.  In  vain  had  the  largest  favours  been 
shown  them :  "  I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and 
they  have  rebelled  against  me."  Equally  vain  had  been  His 
chastisements.  (Ver.  5 — 9.)  Land,  cities,  inhabitants,  all  was 
in  the  prophet's  vision  a  waste  and  ruin  through  sin,  with  the 
merest  remnant  shielded  from  destruction. 

Has  not  this  a  voice  for  us  ?  It  is  not  only  that  the  church 
of  God  began  to  be  called  out  and  formed  when  all  was  a 
failure — man,  Israel,  the  world,  judged  morally  in  the  cross; 
but,  besides,  for  us,  the  house  of  God  is  in  disorder,  the  last 
time  of  many  antichrists  is  long  since  come.  The  Christian  wit- 
ness has  more  deeply  and  widely  departed  from  God  than  the 
Jewish  one,  and  in  spite  of  immensely  greater  privileges. 
What  remains  but  judgment  for  the  mass,  with  the  reserve  of 
grace  for  those  who  humble  themselves  under  God's  mighty 
hand  ?  Does  this  produce  hardness  of  feeling  ?  On  the  con- 
trary a  spirit  of  intercession  is  the  invariable  companion  of  a 
holy  heed  to  prophecy,  the  offspring,  both  of  them,  of  com- 
munion with  God.  He  loves  His  people  too  well  to  look  with 
indifference  on  their  sin,  of  all  men;  He  must  vindicate  His 
outraged  majesty ;  and  those  who  are  in  the  secret  of  His  mind 
cannot  but  go  forth  in  importunate  desire  for  the  good  of  souls 
and  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  But  real  love  has  no  fellowship 
with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness;  rather  does  it  reprove 
them.  Neither  does  that  love  which  is  of  God  measure  sin  as 
nature  does,  but  feels  first  and  most  of  all  that  which  slights 
the  Lord  Himself. 

As  to  Israel,  they  were  worse  than  the  heathen,  as  bad  as 
the  worst.  "  Hear  the  word  of  Jehovah,  ye  rulers  of  Sodom ; 
give  ear  unto  the  law  of  our  God,  ye  people  of  Gomorrah."     It 


CHAPTER    I.  15 

was  not  that  they  lacked  zeal  in  religion ;  it  was  not  that  they 
did  not  seek  a  remedy  for  the  evident  pravities  of  their  day. 
But  their  remedies  were  worse  than  useless.  (Ver.  10 — 15.)  If 
they  approach  the  doom  of  Sodom,  morally  they  were  Sodom, 
and  their  sacrifices,  feasts,  and  assemblies  odious  to  Jehovah, 
who  refused  to  hear  their  multiplied  prayers.  There  was  no  real 
repentance,  no  trembling  at  His  word. 

Yet  Jehovah  deigns  to  call  them  to  repentance,  and  the 
fruits  suited  to  it,  promising  to  help  them  if  they  were  broken 
down  and  obedient,  and  threatening  to  devour  them  by  the 
sword  if  they  refused.  The  universal  corruption  is  then  laid 
bare;  and,  finally,  the  Lord  shows  He  must  deal  with  His 
adversaries,  as  well  as  Himself  restore  Zion,  when  idols  and 
their  makers  perish  together  under  His  mighty  hand.  "  There- 
fore saith  the  Lord,  Jehovah  of  hosts,  the  Mighty  One  of  Israel, 
Ah,  I  will  be  relieved  of  my  adversaries,  and  take  vengeance  on 
my  enemies.  And  I  will  turn  my  hand  on  thee  and  purge 
away  as  with  lye  thy  dross,  and  take  away  all  thine  alloy. 
And  I  will  restore  all  thy  judges  as  at  the  first,  and  thy  coun- 
sellors as  at  the  beginning :  after  that  shalt  thou  be  called  the 
city  of  righteousness,  the  faithful  town.  Zion  shall  be  redeemed 
through  justice,  and  her  converts  through  righteousness.  But 
destruction  shall  come  on  transgressors  and  sinners  together; 
and  those  that  forsake  Jehovah  shall  perish.  For  they  shall  be 
ashamed  of  the  terebinths  which  ye  desired,  and  ye  shall  blush 
for  the  gardens  that  ye  had  chosen.  For  ye .  shall  be  as  a  tere- 
binth whose  leaves  wither,  and  as  a  garden  in  which  is  no  water. 
And  the  strong  man  shall  become  as  tow  and  his  work  as  a 
spark;  and  they  shall  both  burn  together,  and  no  one  shall 
quench  [them]."  The  promise  as  well  as  the  judgment  go  far 
beyond  the  circumstances  before  and  after  the  Babylonish 
captivity.  The  last  fiery  trial  of  Israel  is  in  view  which  grace 
will  use  for  spiritual  refining ;  and  then  will  follow  the  times  of 
restitution  of  all  things,  when  the  former  rule  shall  come  to 
Zion  (Micah  iv.),  the  kingdom  of  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem. 


CHAPTERS  II.— IV. 

We  have  already  seen  that,  though  the  people  are  assured  of 
the  blessing  of  God,  if  truly  repentant,  the  prophet  shows  that 
judgment  must  be  executed  first  on  the  wicked :  then  shall  Zion 
be  redeemed  of  the  Lord.  This  is  manifestly  distinct  from 
redemption  as  we  know  it  in  Christ.  Their  deliverance  shall  be 
accompanied  by  divine  judgments.  Chapter  ii.  follows  this  up 
and  predicts  thereon,  not  only  the  restoration  of  their  judges  as 
at  the  first,  and  Jerusalem,  called  the  city  of  righteousness, 
but  the  mountain  of  Jehovah's  house  exalted  and  all  nations 
flowing  unto  it;  "for  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law  and  the 
word  of  Jehovah  from  Jerusalem.  And  he  shall  judge  among 
the  nations  and  shall  rebuke  many  peoples ;  and  they  shall  beat 
their  swords  into  ploughshares  and  their  spears  into  pruning- 
hooks :  nation  shall  not  rise  against  nation,  neither  shall  they 
learn  war  any  more."     (Ver.  3,  4.) 

This  is  plain,  if  we  are  simple.  Abandon  the  context,  blot 
out,  if  you  will,  the  fact  that  this  portion  is  prefaced  as  "the 
word  that  Isaiah,  the  son  of  Amoz,  saw  concerning  Judah  and 
Jerusalem,"  and  all  is  confusion.  No  doubt  to  apply  these 
glorious  terms  to  the  feeble  remnant's  return  from  the  Baby- 
lonish captivity  refutes  itself.  But  the  views  of  many  Christians 
are  not  less  untenable.  What  for  instance  can  exceed  the 
poverty  of  Theodoret's  scheme  ?  He  tries  to  find  an  answer  in 
the  flourishing  unity  of  the  Roman  empire  when  our  Lord  first 
appeared,  and  the  conquered  races  that  composed  it  being  no 
longer  at  war  but  engaged  in  agriculture  and  in  the 
unhindered  diffusion  of  the  gospel  far  and  wide.  Yet  one 
knows  nothing  better  in  the  attempts  of  men  since,  unless  the 
Popish  interpretation  be  thought  more  homogeneous,  inasmuch 
as  it  is  all  supposed  to  be  verified  in  the  Catholic  church; 
certainly  the  interpretation  of  others  cannot  be  preferred,  which 
makes  it  all  mystical,  and  imagines  its  accomplishment  in  the 


CHAPTERS   II. — IV.  17 

unbroken  oneness  and  peace  of  all  believers,  in  their  perfect 
holiness,  and  their  entire  subjection  to  the  scriptures.  As  on  earth 
the  actual  state  is  far  different,  some  seek  consistency  with  truth, 
by  transferring  the  scene  to  heaven,  when  every  conflict  is  over. 

Ignorance  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  whether  in  its  manifest 
form  according  to  the  prophets,  when  the  Lord  returns  to  reign 
in  power  and  glory,  or  in  its  mysteries  as  now  running  its  course 
while  the  Lord  is  seated  on  the  Father's  throne  and  Christen- 
dom is  the  result — in  either  way  ignorance  of  the  kingdom — is 
the  common  and  fatal  fault  of  most  commentators.  Hence  they 
fall  into  the  further  error  of  confounding  the  kingdom  with  the 
church  or  assembly  of  God,  which  is  fraught  with  evil  conse- 
quences both  doctrinal  and  practical.  Of  this  fanatics  took 
advantage,  or  perhaps  by  it  fell  into  a  snare  on  the  other  side ; 
for  it  is  hard  to  say  which  were  most  astray,  persecutors  or  perse- 
cuted. In  fact,  to  take  an  instance  from  Protestants,  whether  one 
thinks  of  the  wild  Anabaptists,  who  tried  to  set  up  a  Zion  by  force 
of  arms,  or  of  their  more  sensible  if  not  more  spiritual  antagonists 
who  put  them  down  by  fire  and  sword,  both  went  on  the  mis- 
taken ground  of  the  servants  in  the  parable  of  the  wheat-field, 
who  would  root  up  the  tares  spite  of  the  Saviour's  interdict, 
instead  of  leaving  that  work  of  judgment  to  the  angels  at  the  end 
of  the  age.  Popery,  as  is  notorious,  has  always  acted  on  the  same 
error.  Others,  shocked  by  the  evident  departure  of  Papists  and 
Protestants  alike,  fell  into  the  opposite  extreme  of  denying  the 
responsibility  of  the  king  and  of  the  magistrate  in  using  the  sword. 
All  these  serious  aberrations  of  men  are  due  to  confounding 
what  ought  to  be  held  distinctly  but  firmly  and  without  confusion 
— God's  external  authority  in  civil  government,  and  God's  spirit- 
ual power  in  His  assembly,  where  the  Spirit  is  present  to  main- 
tain the  rights  of  the  Lord  according  to  the  written  word. 

Where  these  truths  are  seen,  it  is  not  merely  that  one 
stands  amazed  at  those  Calvin*  calls  "  madmen,"  who  torture  this 
passage  to  promote  anarchy,-  but  at  the  Genevese  chief  who 
chides  them  for  thinking  that  "it  took  away  from  the  church 


*  C.  Translation  Society  Series,  Isaiah  i.  101,   102. 
B 


18  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

entirely  the  right  to  use  the  sword,"  and  bringing  it  forward  for 
condemning  with  great  severity  every  kind  of  war.  Certainly 
those  Christians  were  inexcusably  wrong  who  dictated  to  the 
powers  that  be,  and  interfered  with  their  policy  either  domestic 
or  foreign.  But  Calvin  was  not  less  in  error  who  claimed  for 
the  church  the  right  to  use  the  sword.  Mischievous  idea! 
which  denies  in  principle  the  place  of  Christ,  the  place  of 
suffering  holiness  and  love  in  this  present  evil  world  (1  Pet.  ii. 
20,  21).  So  the  citation  by  Calvin  of  Luke  xxii.  36  in  this  con- 
nexion is  just  of  a  piece  with  that  which  we  see  in  Romish 
controversialists.  They  are  equally  mistaken,  from  not  seeing 
tjie  true  nature  and  calling  of  the  Christian ;  they  are  equally 
mistaken  in  thinking  that  it  is  a  question  of  acknowledging  the 
kingly  power  of  Christ  (for  He  has  not  yet  taken  His  own 
throne) ;  they  are  equally  mistaken  in  fancying  we  must  always 
think  of  making  progress,  and  so  gradually  bring  in  the  perfec- 
tion of  that  peaceful  reign.  Calvin  charges  it  on  the  revolution- 
aries as  excessive  folly  to  imagine  Christ's  kingdom  in  the  sense 
of  Isa.  ii.  consummated.  But  was  it  wise  in  himself  to  think 
that  it  was  even  beginning  ?  Equally  unintelligent  and  false  is 
his  conclusion  that  "  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  in  its  full 
extent  must  not  be  looked  for  on  earth ;"  for  it  is  plain  and 
certain  that  its  terms  refer  to  Christ's  future  kingdom  on  earth 
exclusively,  and  not  to  heaven.  How  important  to  distinguish 
difference  of  dispensation  and  relationship  ! 

Take  all  now  in  its  natural  import,*  and  difficulties  vanish. 

*  Those  who  have  access  to  La  Venida  del  Mesias  en  Gloria  y  Magestad, 
en  tres  tomos,  Londres,  1826,  or  the  English  translation,  in  two  vols.,  1827, 
will  read  with  pleasure  the  masterly  investigation  of  the  author,  a  pious  Roman 
Catholic,  in  which  he,  by  the  scripture,  sets  aside  the  views  which  had  so  long 
reigned  through  the  influence  of  Origen,  Jerome,  and  others.  The  Spanish 
reader  is  referred  to  Tom.  ii.,  pp.  478 — 511,  the  English  to  Vol.  ii.,  pp. 
174 — 190,  for  particular  remarks  on  this  very  chapter,  of  which  a  compressed 
sample  must  suffice  here.  "In  the  first  place  I  sincerely  agree  with  all  the 
doctors,  both  Christian  and  Jewish,  that  the  times  of  Messiah  are  manifestly 
the  times  spoken  of  in  these  prophecies.  'It  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last 
days  : '  that  is,  in  the  time  of  Messiah,  or  of  Christ.  But  this  is  very 
equivocal.  That  time,  according  to  all  ancient  and  modern  writers,  and 
according  to  the  fundamental  principles  of  Christianity,  is  not  one  only  but  two 


CHAPTERS   II. — IV.  19 

When  judgment  has  done  its  work,  Zion  shall  be  the  fountain 
of  divine  blessing  for  all  nations,  and  the  centre  to  which  they 
shall  gather,  when  universal  peace  prevails,  and  Jehovah  shall 

times  infinitely  diverse  from  each  other  :  one,  which  is  already  past  and  which 
continues  even  till  now  its  effects  assuredly  great  and  admirable;  another, 
which  has  not  yet  arrived,  but  which  is  believed  and  hoped  for  with  faith  and 
a  divine  confidence,  which  second  time  would  appear  to  be  more  grand  and 
admirable,  according  to  the  scriptures,  which  are  manifestly  directed  to  this  and 
terminate  in  it.  This  is  the  time  of  which  the  Prophets  have  said  so  much, 
'in  that  day,'  'at  that  time,'  &c.  This  is  the  time  of  which  S.  Peter  and  S. 
Paul  have  said  so  much  in  their  Epistles.  And  it  is  the  time  of  which  the 
Messiah  Himself  has  said  so  much  in  parables  and  without  them,  as  may  be 
seen  in  the  Gospels.  The  first  time  of  Messiah,  of  which  the  Prophets  speak, 
is  certainly  verified  already ;  and  the  world  has  enjoyed,  does  enjoy,  and 
may  to  its  satisfaction  enjoy,  its  admirable  effects  ;  and  yet  the  prophecies  have 
not  been  fully  verified,  for  they  embrace  not  only  the  first  time  of  Messiah, 
but  likewise  and  still  more  the  second  time,  which  is  yet  waited  for.  This 
is  so  evident  and  clear  that,  according  to  the  different  principles  or  systems, 
there  have  been  derived  two  different  conclusions ;  and  though  the  one  be 
more  deadly  than  the  other,  they  are  both  none  the  less  for  that  illegitimate 
and  false. 

' ' '  First,  Therefore  the  Messiah  is  not  come,  because  the  prophecies  have  not 
been  accomplished.' 

" '  Secondly,  Therefore  the  prophecies  cannot  be  understood  as  they  speak,  but 
in  another  better  sense — allegorical  or  spiritual,  in  which  sense  they  have  been 
and  are  being  verified  in  the  present  church. '     .     .     .     . 

'"But  is  it  very  difficult  to  discover  another  conclusion  conformed  to  Scrip- 
ture ?     That  is, 

' ' '  Thirdly,  Therefore  the  prophecies  of  which  we  speak,  and  many  others  like 
them,  which  have  not  been  verified,  nor  could  possibly  have  been  in  the  first 
time  of  the  Messiah,  may  very  well  and  must  needs  be  verified  in  the  second, 
which  time  is  not  less  of  divine  faith  than  the  first.' " 

After  meeting  the  Jewish  objections,  as  well  as  the  traditional  opposition 
of  Christendom,  the  author  replies  to  the  last,  which  only  sees  in  the  day  of 
His  second  coming  a  universal  judgment  of  the  dead.  "But  whence  was 
this  idea  taken?    From  the  holy  scriptures?     Certainly  not,  for  they  oppose 

and  contradict  it  at  every  step Therefore  we  may  well  hope 

without  any  fear  that  the  prophecies  spoken  of,  with  countless  others  like 
them,  will  be  fully  verified  according  to  the  letter  in  the  second  time  of 
Messiah,  since  in  the  first  they  could  not  be.  When  then  the  second  time, 
which  we  all  religiously  believe  and  expect,  is  arrived,  there  shall  be,  among 
other  things,  primary  or  principal,  the  elevation  of  Mount  Zion  above  all  the 
mountains  and  hills,  a  manifestly  figurative  expression,  yet  admirably  proper 
to  explain,  according  to  the  scriptures,  the  dignity,  honour,  and  glory,  to 
which  the  city  of  David  shall  be  lifted  up     ....     in  which  time  conse- 


20  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

be  king  over  all  the  earth.  The  contrast  of  all  this,  the  Lord 
predicted,  should  go  on  till  the  end  of  the  age.  "For  nation 
shall  rise  against  nation,  and  kingdom  against  kingdom."  Such 
too  are  the  evident  facts  now.  By  and  by,  when  the  new  age 
dawns  under  Messiah's  earthly  reign  (Rev.  xi.  15),  "nation 
shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  nation,  neither  shall  they  learn 
war  any  more."  It  will  be  an  order  of  things  of  which  the 
world  has  had  no  experience,  and  if  the  casting  away  of  Israel 
were  the  reconciling  of  the  world,  what  shall  the  receiving  of 
them  be  but  life  from  the  dead  ?  (Rom.  xi.)  The  flowing  of 
all  nations  unto  Zion  cannot  mean  the  gathering  out  of  them, 
which  scripture  speaks  of  as  the  church  of  God,  even  if  there 
were  not  a  divine  judgment  executed  on  all  (and  the  Jews 
especially)  before  that,  and  if  this  era  of  peace  and  blessing 
and  Messianic  rule  were  not  coincident  with  the  supremacy  of 
Israel,  which  supposes  a  condition  wholly  distinct  from  that  of 
the  church,  wherein  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,  but 
Christ  is  all  and  in  all. 

That  which  follows  strongly  confirms  the  reference  to  the 
future  blessing  and  glory  of  Israel  under  the  new  covenant, 
and  the  King  who  shall  reign  in  righteousness ;  for  the  prophet 
(chap.  ii.  5),  after  that  happy  picture,  invites  the  house  of 
Jacob  to  come  and  walk  in  the  light  of  Jehovah.  Then,  speak- 
ing directly  to  Him,  he  owns  why  He  had  forsaken  His  people, 
instead  of  setting  them  on  high,  even  because  they  were  replen- 
ished from  (or,  more  than)  the  east  with  all  that  man  covets 
and   worships.      (Ver.    6 — 8.)      Their   sin   was    unpardonable. 


quently  shall  the  nations  and  peoples  flow  toward  the  top  of  Mount  Zion. 
What  nations  and  peoples  ?  Without  doubt  those  who  shall  be  left  alive  after 
the  coming  of  the  Lord,  as  it  seems  most  clear  there  shall  be  such.  .  .  . 
How  is  He  to  judge  the  quick  if  there  be  none  ?  What  nations,  and  what 
peoples  ?    Without  doubt  those  which  shall  remain  alive  after  the  utter  ruin 

of  the  anti-Christ What  nations?     Without  doubt  those  who 

shall  remain  alive  after  the  stone  falls  on  the  statue,  and,  this  being  reduced 
to  powder,  another  kingdom  shall  be  formed  on  its  ruins,  incorruptible  and  ever- 
lasting, embracing  all  under  the  whole  heavens."  How  ominous  that  a 
priest,  spite  of  the  enormous  hindrances  around  him,  should  have  had  an 
insight  into  the  prophetic  word  so  much  beyond  most  Protestants  ! 


CHAPTERS   II. — IV.  21 

(Ver.  9.)  Lastly,  he  calls  on  them  to  hide  in  the  dust  because 
of  the  day  of  Jehovah,  which  undoubtedly  has  not  yet  fallen 
on  the  pride  and  idolatry  of  man.  (Ver.  10,  11.)  The  passage 
needs  only  to  be  read  in  a  believing  spirit  in  order  to  convince 
a  fair  mind,  that  neither  Nebuchadnezzar  nor  Titus,  nor  the 
gospel,  has  anything  to  do  with  accomplishing  the  all-embracing 
judgment  of  man  which  is  there  portrayed.  (Ver.  12 — 21.) 
Vain  then  would  it  be  to  invoke  the  aid  of  man.  His  day  will 
have  then  ended.  It  is  not  yet  eternity,  but  the  age  to  come 
when  Jehovah  alone  shall  be  exalted.  The  word,  therefore,  is 
"  Cease  ye  from  man,  whose  breath  is  in  his  nostrils,  for  wherein 
is  he  to  be  accounted  ?"  Man*  as  such  is  not  able  to  retain  his 
own  life-breath,  still  less  to  keep  others  in  that  day.  All  will 
manifestly  hang  on  the  sovereign  pleasure  of  Him  whose  glory 
will  be  no  longer  hidden,  and  whose  will  be  then  displayed  in 
righteousness. 

But  universal  as  the  prostration  of  human  pride  shall  be, 
chapter  iii.  indicates  that  most  crushingly  shall  the  blow  fall  on 
Jerusalem  and  Judah,  and  this  not  only  in  their  public  political 
life,  but  minutely  and  searchingly  on  the  daughters  of  Zion  in  all 
their  haughty  littleness  of  vain  show.  "  For  behold  the  Lord 
Jehovah  of  hosts  doth  take  away  from  Jerusalem  and  from 
Judah  the  stay  and  the  staff,  the  whole  stay  of  bread,  and  the 
whole  stay  of  water,  the  mighty  man,  and  the  man  of  war,  the 
judge,  and  the  prophet,  and  the  prudent,  and  the  ancient,  the 
captain  of  fifty,  and  the  honourable  man,  and  the  counsellor, 
and  the  cunning  artificer,  and  the  eloquent  orator.  And  I  will 
give  children  to  be  their  princes,  and  babes  shall  rule  over 
them.  And  the  people  shall  be  oppressed,  every  one  by  another, 
and  every  one  by  his  neighbour :  the  child  shall  behave  himself 
proudly  against  the  ancient,  and  the  base  against  the  honour- 
able. When  a  man  shall  take  hold  of  his  brother,  of  the  house 
of  his  father,  saying,  Thou  hast  clothing,  be  thou  our  ruler,  and 

*  The  notion  that  Christ  is  here  intended,  is  one  of  these  freaks  of  notable 
men  which  illustrates  the  passage  they  so  strangely  misapplied. 


22  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

let  this  ruin  be  under  thy  hand :  In  that  day  shall  he  swear, 
saying,  I  will  not  be  an  healer ;  for  in  my  house  is  neither  bread 
nor  clothing :  make  me  not  a  ruler  of  the  people."  (Ver.  1 — 7.) 
There  is  no  surer  sign  of  decay  and  of  imminent  dissolution,  than 
the  absence  of  all  power  among  those  who  have  the  authority, 
when  those  who  should  be  the  props  of  the  state  are  children, 
not  only  in  fact,  but  in  mind  and  purpose.  Respect  for  what  is 
officially  exalted  gives  place  to  universal  contempt,  and  oppres- 
sion, and  shameless  mal-practices  flaunt  without  check.  "  For 
Jerusalem  is  ruined,  and  Judah  is  fallen :  because  their  tongue 
and  their  doings  are  against  Jehovah,  to  provoke  the  eyes  of 
his  glory.  The  show  of  their  countenance  doth  witness  against 
them ;  and  they  declare  their  sin  as  Sodom,  they  hide  it  not. 
Woe  unto  their  soul  I  for  they  have  rewarded  evil  unto  them- 
selves."    (Ver.  8,  9.) 

Nevertheless,  the  evil  day  only  brings  out  the  faithful  care 

of  God  over  the  righteous,  as  surely  as  the  wicked  meet  with  the 

due  reward  of  their  deeds.     It  is,  however,  a  humiliating,  as 

well  as   sifting   time   for   God's   people;    though   the   prophet 

declares,  in  the  most  animated  terms,  how  Jehovah  espouses  the 

cause  of  the  poor  against  those  who  grind  down  their  faces. 

"  Say  ye  to  the  righteous,  that  it  shall  be  well  with  him;  for  they 

shall  eat  the  fruit  of  their  doings.     Woe  unto  the  wicked  !  it 

shall  be  ill  with  him ;  for  the  reward  of  his  hands  shall  be  given 

him.      As   for  my  people,  children  are   their  oppressors,  and 

women  rule  over  them.     0  my  people,  they  which  lead  thee 

•  cause    thee    to     err,    and     destroy    the    way    of    thy    paths. 

Jehovah   standeth   up   to   plead,   and   standeth   to  judge  the 

people.     Jehovah  will  enter  into  judgment  with  the  ancients  of 

his  people,  and  the  princes  thereof:  for  ye  have  eaten  up  the 

vineyard ;  the  spoil  of  the  poor  is  in  your  houses.     What  mean 

ye  that  ye  beat  my  people  to  pieces,  and  grind  the  faces  of  the 

poor  ?  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah  of  hosts."    (Ver.  10 — 15.)    Thus  far 

the  rulers  and  princes. 

Quite  as  sorrowful  is  the  pictures  of  domestic  life.  When 
women  live  for  display  in  apparel,  no  further  proof  is  needed  to 
bring  to  their  door  the  charge  that  the  sanctity  of  the  house  is 


CHAPTERS   IX. — IV.  23 

violated,  and  that  there  is  no  real  heart  for  the  relations  God 
has  set  up.  Such  finery  is  assuredly  not  for  a  husband  or  the 
family;  but  small  as  it  is,  it  escapes  not  "the  withering  notice  of 
the  Judge  of  all.  "Moreover  Jehovah  saith,  Because  the  daugh- 
ters of  Zion  are  haughty,  and  walk  with  stretched  forth  necks, 
and  wanton  eyes,  walking  and  mincing  as  they  go,  and  making  a 
tinkling  with  their  feet :  therefore  the  Lord  will  smite  with  a  scab 
the  crown  of  the  head  of  the  daughters  of  Zion,  and  Jehovah  will 
discover  their  secret  parts.  In  that  day  the  Lord  will  take  away 
the  bravery  of  their  tinkling  ornaments  about  their  feet,  and 
their  cauls,  and  their  round  tires  like  the  moon,  the  chains,  and 
the  bracelets,  and  the  mufflers,  the  bonnets,  and  the  ornaments 
of  the  legs,  and  the  head-bands,  and  the  tablets,  and  the  ear- 
rings, the  rings  and  nose  jewels,  the  changeable  suits  of  apparel, 
and  the  mantles,  and  the  wimples,  and  the  crisping  pins,  the 
glasses,  and  the  fine  linen,  and  the  hoods,  and  the  veils.  And  it 
shall  come  to  pass,  that  instead  of  sweet  smell  there  shall  be 
stink ;  and  instead  of  a  girdle  a  rent ;  and  instead  of  well-set 
hair  baldness;  and  instead  of  a  stomacher  a  girding  of  sackcloth; 
and  burning  instead  of  beauty.  Thy  men  shall  fall  by  the  sword, 
and  thy  mighty  in  the  war.  And  her  gates  shall  lament  and 
mourn;  and  she,  being  desolate,  shall  sit  upon  the  ground." 
(Ver.  16—26.) 

So  complete  would  be  the  desolation,  that  the  dearth  of  men 
is  described  as  exposing  women  to  a  boldness  contrary  to  female 
modesty.  "  And  in  that  day  seven  women  shall  take  hold  of  one 
man,  saying,  We  will  eat  our  own  bread,  and  wear  our  own 
apparel ;  only  let  us  be  called  by  thy  name,  to  take  away  our 
reproach."  (Chap,  iv  1.)  But  this  time  of  tribulation  is  fol- 
lowed by  an  outshining  of  beauty  and  glory,  and  abundant 
mercy  for  the  saved  and  holy  remnant.  "In  that  day  shall 
the  branch  of  Jehovah  be  beautiful  and  glorious,  and  the  fruit 
of  the  earth  shall  be  excellent  and  comely  for  them  that  are 
escaped  of  Israel.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  he  that  is  left 
in  Zion,  and  he  that  remaineth  in  Jerusalem,  shall  be  called 
holy,  even  every  one  that  is  written  among  the  living  in  Jeru- 
salem.    When  Jehovah  shall  have  washed  away  the  filth  of  the 


24  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

daughters  of  Zion,  and  shall  have  purged  the  blood  of  Jerusalem 
from  the  midst  thereof  by  the  spirit  of  judgment,  and  by  the 
spirit  of  burning."     (Verses  2 — 4.) 

Vitringa's  application  of  the  spirit  of  judgment,  and  that  of 
destruction,  to  the  Holy  Spirit  guiding  the  rulers  and  ministers 
of  the  church  in  the  discrimination,  is  the  old  source  of  endless 
error — the  turning  aside  of  Jewish  scripture  to  an  essentially 
Christian  object.  It  is  manifestly  the  day  of  righteous  judgment 
on  earth,  and  especially  in  its  metropolis,  Jerusalem.  First, 
purity  is  affected,  then  glory  shines  brightly  on  Zion.  "And 
Jehovah  will  create  upon  every  dwelling-place  of  mount  Zion, 
and  upon  her  assemblies,  a  cloud  and  smoke  by  day,  and  the 
shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by  night ;  for  upon  all  the  glory  shall 
be  a  defence.  And  there  shall  be  a  tabernacle  for  a  shadow  in 
the  day-time  from  the  heat,  and  for  a  place  of  refuge,  and  for  a 
covert  from  storm  and  from  rain."  (Ver.  5 — 6.)  Even  as  the 
cloudy  pillar  once  covered  the  tabernacle  of  the  divine  presence, 
so  Jehovah  will  create  on  every  dwelling-place  of  Mount  Zion, 
and  on  her  assemblies,  a  cloud  and  smoke  by  day,  and  the 
shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by  night;  for  upon  all  the  glory 
shall  be  a  defence.  To  attempt  to  refer  to  the  gospel  these 
revelations  of  coming  glory  for  Israel,  after  purging  trial,  is  in  the 
highest  degree  a  distortion  of  scripture.  During  the  present  dis- 
pensation they  are  enemies  for  our  sakes,  as  regards  the  gospel ; 
while,  as  regards  election,  they  are  beloved  for  the  sake  of  the 
fathers.  When  that  day  comes,  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  shall 
have  come  in,  and  so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved.  It  is  a  total  change 
from  this  day  of  grace  to  judgment-day,  whatever  the  mercy 
of  God  to  the  rescued  out  of  Israel  and  the  nations :  "  In  that 
day  shall  there  be  one  Jehovah  and  His  name  one."  It  is 
the  deliverance,  not  the  destruction  of  the  still  groaning 
creation.  "  All  the  land  shall  be  turned  as  a  plain  from  Geba 
to  Rimmon,  south  of  Jerusalem ;  and  it  shall  be  lifted  up  and 
inhabited  in  her  place,  from  Benjamin's  gate  unto  the  corner 
gate,  and  from  the  tower  of  Hananeel  unto  the  king's  wine- 
presses." It  is  not  the  past  nor  the  present;  it  is  not  the 
eternal  state,  but  the  millennium.    It  is  an  epoch  of  glory  when 


CHAPTERS   II. — IV.  25 

Jehovah  will  hear  the  heavens,  and  they  shall  hear  the  earth, 
and  the  earth  shall  hear  the  corn,  and  the  wine,  and  the  oil, 
and  they  shall  hear  Jezreel.  Divine  judgment  shall  have 
washed  away  the  guilt  of  Zion,  and  the  glory  shall  return  both 
more  blessedly  than  at  the  first  and  for  ever.  What  can  con- 
trast more  with  our  day  of  suffering  grace  ? 


CHAPTERS   V.,  VI. 

Chapter  v.  with  vi.  illustrates  most  strikingly  the  ways  of  God 
in  the  judgment  of  His  people.  They  are  quite  distinct. 
Indeed  chapter  vi.  comes  in  abruptly  in  outward  form,  itself 
distinct  from  what  follows  down  to  the  seventh  verse  inclusively 
of  chapter  ix.,  all  which  portion  forms  a  sort  of  peculiar  par- 
enthesis, but  a  parenthesis  of  profound  interest  and  instruction ; 
after  which  the  strain  of  woe,  begun  in  chapter  v.,  is  resumed 
in  the  thickening  disasters  of  Israel  and  the  land  up  to  their 
mighty  and  everlasting  deliverance,  which  yet  awaits  its  accom- 
plishment in  the  latter  day. 

But  if  chapters  v.  and  vi.  are  distinct  in  character  as  in 
time,  the  Spirit  of  God  has  been  pleased  to  set  them  in  imme- 
diate juxta-position  with  a  view  to  our  better  admonition.  In 
fact  they  are  the  two-fold  principle  or  standard  of  judgment 
which  God  is  wont  to  apply  to  His  people.  In  the  one  He 
looks  back,  in  the  other  He  looks  forward,  as  it  were;  in  the 
former  He  measures  by  all  He  has  done  for  them  what  they 
should  have  been  towards  Him ;  in  the  latter,  He  judges  them 
by  His  own  glory  manifested  in  their  midst.  The  one  answers 
to  the  law  by  which  is  the  knowledge  of  sin;  the  other  to 
the  glory  of  God,  from  which  every  soul  comes  short.  (Rom. 
iii.  20.) 

In  chapter  v.  the  prophet  sings  a  song  to  Jehovah,  his 
well-beloved,  touching  His  vineyard.  Moses  had  already 
(Deut.  xxxii.)  spoken  in  the  ears  of  Israel  a  song  which  cele- 
brates in  magnificent  language  the  sovereign  choice  and 
blessing  of  God,  the  sins  and  punishment  of  the  people*,  but 
withal  His  final  mercy  to  His  land  and  people,  with  whom 
the  spared  nations  are  to  rejoice.  Our  chapter  takes  in  a 
narrower  field  of  view. 

"My  well-beloved  hath  a  vineyard  in  a  very  fruitful  hill; 
and  he  fenced  it,  and  gathered   out  the  stones  thereof,  and 


CHAPTERS   V.,.VI.  27 

planted  it  with  the  choicest  vine,  and  built  a  tower  in  the 
midst  of  it,  and  also  made  a  winepress  therein ;  and  he  looked 
that  it  should  bring  forth  grapes,  and  it  brought  forth  wild 
grapes."  There  was  no  failure  on  God's  part.  He  had  estab- 
lished Israel  in  the  most  favourable  position,  separated  them 
to  Himself,  removed  stumbling-blocks,  crowned  them  with 
favours,  vouchsafed  not  only  protection  but  every  means  of 
blessing :  "  What'  could  have  been  done  more  to  my  vineyard 
that  I  have  not  done  in  it  ? "  Yet  was  all  in  vain.  The 
result  was  only  bad  fruit.  They,  like  Adam,  transgressed  the 
covenant.  It  was  the  same  story  over  again.  Human  respon- 
sibility ends  in  total  ruin.  Man  departs  from  God  and  corrupts 
His  way  on  the  earth.  "  And  now  go  to ;  I  will  tell  you  what  I 
will  do  to  my  vineyard ;  I  will  take  away  the  hedge  thereof,  and  it 
shall  be  eaten  up  ;  and  break  down  the  wall  thereof,  and  it  shall 
be  trodden  down:  and  I  will  lay  it  waste:  it  shall  not  be  pruned 
nor  digged :  but  there  shall  come  up  briers  and  thorns :  I  will 
also  command  the  clouds  that  they  rain  no  rain  upon  it.  For 
the  vineyard  of  Jehovah  of  hosts  is  the  house  of  Israel,  and  the 
men  of  Judah  his  pleasant  plant :  and  he  looked  for  judgment, 
but  behold  oppression ;  for  righteousness,  but  behold  a  cry." 
(Ver.  1—7.) 

Thus  the  nation,  as  a  whole,  is  weighed  in  the  divine 
balances,  and  found  wanting.  So  manifest  and  grievous  is  the 
case,  that  God  challenges  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  and  the 
men  of  Judah  (ver.  3)  to  judge  between  Him  and  His  vineyard, 
though  they  themselves  are  the  degenerate  trees  in  question. 
There  was  no  more  doubt  of  the  goodness  shown  to  Israel  than 
of  their  obligation  to  yield  fruit  for  God.  But  obligation  pro- 
duces no  fruit  meet  for  Him.  What  was  the  consequence  on 
such  a  ground  as  this  ?     Nothing  but  woe  after  wOe. 

The  truth  is  that,  on  the  footing  of  responsibility,  every 
creature  has  failed  save  One,  who  was  the  Creator,  whatever 
might  be  His  lowly  condescension  in  appearing  within  the  ranks 
of  men.  And  what  is  the  secret  of  victory  for  the  believer  now 
or  of  old  ?  We  must  be  above  mere  humanity  in  order  to  walk 
as  saints ;  yea,  in  a  sense,  be  above  our  duty  in  order  rightly  to 


28  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

accomplish  it.  As  of  old,  those  only  walked  blamelessly  accord- 
ing to  the  law,  who  looked  to  the  Messiah  in  living  faith :  so 
saints  now  can  glorify  God  in  a  holy,  righteous  walk,  as  they  are 
under  grace,  not  law.  The  sense  of  deliverance  and  perfect 
favour  in  the  sight  of  God  strengthens  greatly  where  there  is  the 
new  life. 

It  will  be  observed,  accordingly,  that  there  is  nothing  of 
Christ  here  as  the  means  and  channel  of  grace.     Consequently 
all  is  unrelieved  darkness  and  death ;  and  the  prophet  presses 
home  the  evidence  of  overwhelming  constant  evil  in  the  people 
of  God.     Not  a  ray  of  comfort  or  even  hope  breaks  through, 
but   only   their   sin    and    His    judgment    chime    continually. 
Detailed  sin  is  retributively  dealt  with.     There  is  a  woe  to  such 
as  joined  house  to  house  and  field  to  field,  reckless  of  all  but 
their   own   aggrandizement :    Jehovah   shall   desolate   so    that 
their  coveted  vineyards  and  lands  shall  yield  but  a  tithe  of 
what  they  put  in.     There  is  a  woe  to  the  luxurious  hunters  of 
social  pleasure :  captivity  shall  drain  them,  and  hell  itself  shall 
swallow  up   the   mean   and   the   mighty — multitudes   without 
measure.     And  as  for  the  bold  sinners  who  scoffingly  invited  the 
Lord  to  make  speed  that  they  might  see  His  work,  as  for  the 
moral  corrupt ors,  and  the  wise  in  their  own  eyes,  and  the  unjust 
friends  of  the  wicked,  and  foes  of  the  righteous,  there  is  woe  upon 
woe  ;  "  because  they  have  cast  away  the  law  of  Jehovah  of  hosts 
and  despised  the  word  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  therefore  is  the 
anger  of  Jehovah  kindled  against   this  people,  and   He  hath 
stretched  forth  his  hand  against  them,  and  hath  smitten  them." 
But  the  woes  are  not  exhausted.     "  For  all  this  his  anger  is  not 
turned  away,  but  his  hand  is  stretched  out  still."      Such  is  the 
sad  and  recurring  burden,  as  may  be  seen  in  chapters  ix.,  x. 
The  avenging  nations  may  be  far  away ;  but,  "  behold  they  shall 
come  with  speed  swiftly."    "And  if  one  look  unto  the  land,  behold 
darkness  and  sorrow,  and  the  light  is  darkened  in  the  heavens 
thereof."     Such  is  the  lot  of  man,  aye,  of  Israel,  where  Christ  is 
not. 

Chapter  vi.   opens  a  very  different  scene.      Not  that  the 
people  are  one  whit  better;  in  fact  it  was  only  when  Christ 


CHAPTERS   V.,  VI.  29 

appeared  that  man  fully  disclosed  what  he  was  and  is.  The 
law  proved  that  man  has  and  loves  sin;  Christ's  presence 
proved  that  he  hates  good,  hates  God  Himself  manifested  in 
all  the  purity  and  lowliness  and  grace  and  truth  of  Jesus. 
It  was  not  only,  then,  that  man  was  himself  failing  and  guilty ; 
but  when  an  object  was  there  in  every  way  worthy  of  love 
and  homage  and  worship,  the  perfect  display  of  man  to  God 
and  of  God  to  man,  He  was  a  light  odious  and  intolerable 
to  man,  and  man  could  not  rest  till  it  was  extinguished  as 
far  as  he  could  effect  it.  Still  we  are  on  ground  sensibly 
and  strikingly  distinct ;  and  this  because  the  manifestation  of 
Jehovah  is  in  question,  not  the  responsibility  of  Israel  merely. 
Both  chapters  show  the  people  judged,  but  the  principles  of 
judgment  are  wholly  different. 

It  was  not  in  Uzziah's  palmy  days  that  the  prophet  received 
this  solemn  commission,  but  in  the  year  when  the  once  pros- 
perous, but  now  smitten,  leprous  son  of  David  breathed  his 
last.  Then,  however,  Isaiah  saw  Jehovah  sitting  on  a  throne 
high  and  lifted  up,  and  the  mere  skirts  of  His  glory  filled 
the  temple.  No  vision  more  glorious  had  ever  burst  on  human 
eyes :  but  if  the  attendant  seraphs  embraced  the  fulness  of 
the  earth  as  the  scene,  His  holiness  was  their  first  care  and 
chiefest  cry. 

The  effect  was  immediate  on  the  prophet.  It  is  no  longer 
woe  unto  these  or  those,  but  "  woe  is  me."  He  is  profoundly 
touched  with  a  sense  of  sin  and  ruin — his  own  and  the  people's. 
But  it  is  uttered  in  His  presence  whose  grace  is  no  less  than 
His  glory  and  His  holiness,  and  the  remedy  is  at  once  applied. 
"  Then  said  I,  Woe  is  me  !  for  I  am  undone ;  because  I  am  a  man 
of  unclean  lips;  and  I  dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  people  of  unclean 
lips;  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  the  King,  Jehovah  of  hosts. 
Then  flew  one  of  the  seraphim  unto  me,  having  a  live  coal 
in  his  hand,  which  he  had  taken  with  the  tongs  from  off  the 
altar;  and  he  laid  it  upon  my  mouth  and  said,  Lo,  this  hath 
touched  thy  lips,  and  thine  iniquity  is  taken  away,  and  thy 
sin  purged."  Nor  this  only  :  for  thus  set  free  in  His  presence, 
he  becomes  the  ready  servant  of  His  will.     "  Also  I  heard  the 


30  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

voice  of  the  Lord,  saying,  Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  will  go 
for  me  ?  Then  said  I,  Here  am  I ;  send  me.  And  he  said,  Go 
and  tell  this  people,  Hear  ye  indeed,  but  understand  not ;  and 
see  ye  indeed,  but  perceive  not.  Make  the  heart  of  this  people 
fat,  and  make  their  ears  heavy,  and  shut  their  eyes:  lest  they 
see  with  their  eyes,  and  hear  with  their  ears,  and  understand 
with  their  heart,  and  convert,  and  be  healed."  Such  is  the 
charge,  and  we  know  how  surely  it  was  fulfilled  in  the  judicial 
blindness  which  fell  on  the  nation  when  they  confessed  not 
their  uncleanness  and  beheld  no  glory  nor  beauty  in  Christ 
present  in  their  midst,  and  refused  the  testimony  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  Him  risen  and  exalted  to  the  right  hand  of  God. 
Compare  John  xii.  and  Acts  xxviii.  But  the  Spirit  of  prophecy, 
if  it  pronounce  the  sentence  of  God  on  the  people's  unbelief,  is 
notwithstanding  a  spirit  of  intercession.  "  Then  said  I,  Lord, 
how  long  ?  And  he  answered,  Until  the  cities  be  wasted 
without  inhabitant,  and  the  houses  without  man,  and  the  land 
be  utterly  desolate,  and  Jehovah  have  removed  men  far  away, 
and  there  be  a  great  forsaking  in  the  midst  of  the  land ;  but 
yet  in  it  shall  be  a  tenth,  and  it  shall  return  for  burning;  yet  as 
the  terebinth  and  the  oak,  of  which  when  cut  down  there 
remains  a  stock ;  so  the  holy  seed  shall  be  its  stock."  (Verses 
11—13.) 

Thus,  a  remnant  is  clearly  indicated  here,  mercy  rejoicing 
against  judgment,  and  God  making  good  His  own  glory  in  both 
respects.  But  that  returned  remnant  must  be  thinned  under 
the  pruning  hand  of  Jehovah.  Still  the  holy  seed  shall  be 
there,  the  stock  of  the  nation,  when  judgment  has  done  its  work.* 

*  There  is  no  need  to  suppose  the  smallest  displacement  here,  nor  to  doubt 
that  the  prophet  had  already  exercised  his  office.  So  we  see,  in  the  apostle's 
case  (Acts  xiii.),  a  remarkable  separation  to  a  work  among  the  Gentiles  after  he 
had  been  labouring  in  the  gospel  for  some  time.  It  is  very  possible  that  there 
may  have  been  something  analogous  in  the  history  of  the  prophet. 


CHAPTER   VII. 

In  the  last  chapter  we  saw  the  glory  of  Christ  revealed,  and  the 
assurance  of  a  holy  seed  after  the  judgment  of  the  land  and 
people.  We  have  now  a  weighty  sequel  recounting  facts  which 
occurred,  not  in  the  year  King  Uzziah  died,  nor  even  in  the 
days  of  his  successor,  but  in  those  of  Ahaz.  It  could  not  other- 
wise have  been  clearly  gathered  how  the  glory  of  Christ  was 
actually  to  appear.  Our  chapter  solves  this  question,  and  con- 
nects His  revelation  with  His  rejection  and  His  final  and  ever- 
lasting triumph.  (Chap,  viii.,  ix.  1 — 7.)  The  first  part  alone 
comes  before  us  now. 

The  occasion  was  the  offensive  alliance  of  Rezin,  King  of 
Syria,  with  Pekah,  Remaliah's  son  and  King  of  Israel,  against 
Judah  and  Ahaz.  "  And  it  was  told  the  house  of  David,  saying, 
Syria  is  confederate  with  Ephraim;  and  his  heart  was  moved, 
and  the  heart  of  his  people,  as  the  trees  of  the  wood  are  moved 
with  the  wind."  There  were  they  in  great  fear,  where  no  fear 
was,  and  this  alas !  in  Jerusalem  and  David's  house ;  and  no 
wonder*,  for  the  heir  of  David's  throne  walked  not  like  David 
his  father,  but  in  the  ways  of  the  King  of  Israel  or  worse,  and 
made  Judah  naked  and  transgressed  sore  againt  Jehovah. 
Panic-stricken,  yet  in  no  way  driven  by  his  distress  to  God, 
Ahaz  is  met  by  tfye  prophet,  with  his  son  Shear-jashub,  who 
says  from  Jehovah,  "  Take  heed  and  be  quiet ;  fear  not,  neither 
be  faint-hearted  for  the  two  tails  of  these  smoking  firebrands, 
for  the  fierce  anger  of  Rezin  with  Syria,  and  of  the  son  of 
Remaliah.  Because  Syria,  Ephraim,  and  the  son  of  Remaliah, 
have  taken  evil  counsel  against  thee,  saying,  Let  us  go  up 
against  Judah,  and  vex  it,  and  let  us  make  a  breach  therein  for 
us,  and  set  a  king  in  the  midst  of  it,  even  the  son  of  Tabeal:" 
&c.     (Ver.  1—6.) 

How  foolish,  as  well  as  base,  is  unbelief!  It  is  joyous  and 
confident  when  a  labouring  volcano  is  about  to  burst ;  it  is  filled 


32  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

with  anguish,  when  God  is  going  to  deal  with  the  evils  it  dreads. 
In  this  case,  how  could  He  behold  in  peace  a  compact  between 
apostate  Israel  and  heathen  Syria?  It  was  not  merely  that 
their  enterprise,  if  successful,  must  vex  Judah,  but  set  aside 
David's  line.  It  was  a  blow  at  the  Messiah,  little  as  they  might 
have  thought  of  this ;  and  the  oath  and  honour  of  God  were 
thus  at  stake.  But  "  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  It  shall  not 
stand,  neither  shall  it  come  to  pass.  For  the  head  of  Syria  is 
Damascus,  and  the  head  of  Damascus  is  Rezin ;  and  within 
threescore  and  five  years  shall  Ephraim  be  broken,  that  it  be 
not  a  people.  And  the  head  of  Ephraim  is  Samaria,  and  the 
head  of  Samaria  is  Remaliah's  son.  If  ye  will  not  believe, 
surely  ye  shall  not  be  established."     (Ver.  7 — 9.) 

How  blessed  are  the  ways  of  God  !  The  effort  to  destroy, 
which  seemed  so  awful  to  its  objects,  especially  as  their  con- 
science was  bad,  led  at  once  to  the  revelation  of  the  doom  of  the 
destroyers.  The  Syrian  chief  would  not  avail  to  shield  more 
guilty  Ephraim ;  for  it  was  sentenced — yea  to  be  so  broken  as 
not  to  be  a  people  within  sixty-five  years ;  and  so  it  was  to  the 
letter.  (2  Kings  xvii.)  The  chief  of  Ephraim's  capital  is 
paraded  before  us  like  his  ally  in  due  form  and  title ;  but  who 
were  they  to  dispute  the  counsels  of  God  as  to  David's  royal 
line,  let  Ahaz  be  personally  unbelieving,  as  he  might  be  and 
was  ?  God  at  least  is  God,  and  His  word  shall  stand  for  ever, 
though  surely  the  infidel  shall  not  be  established. 

But  this  was  only  the  prelude  to  the  weightier  announce- 
ment that  follows:  "Moreover,  Jehovah  spake  again  unto  Ahaz, 
saying,  Ask  thee  a  sign  of  Jehovah  thy  God  :  ask  it  either  in 
the  depth  or  in  the  height  above.  But  Ahaz  said,  I  will  not 
ask,  neither  will  I  tempt  Jehovah."  (Ver.  10 — 12.)  Alas ! 
how  often  the  hypocrisy  of  unbelief  thus  essays  to  hide  its  con- 
tempt of  Jehovah;  and  thorough  presumption,  which  really 
despises  the  word  of  His  grace,  assumes  the  garb  of  superior 
reverence  and  humility.  The  prophet,  however,  sees  through 
the  cheat  put  forward  by  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief  and  calls  now 
on  the  house  of  David  to  hear,  not  alone  his  reproof,  but  the 
sign  which   Jehovah  Himself  was  to  give.     "Behold  a  [the] 


CHAPTER   VII.  33 

virgin  shall  conceive  and  bear  a  son  and  shall  call  his  name 
Immanuel."  Marvellous  grace  so  to  promise  to  such  a  man ! 
Yet,  in  truth,  grace  condemns  unbelief  and  all  other  sin  as  the 
law  never  did  or  could.  Had  Ahaz  asked  any  sign  within  his 
range  of  earth  and  heaven,  how  immeasurably  short  of  God's ! 
If  man  refuses  to  ask  through  unbelief,  God  fails  not  to  give 
a  sign  for  His  own  glory :  the  virgin's  Son,  the  woman's  Seed, 
Immanuel !  What  thoughts  and  feelings  cluster  here  together ! 
The  security  of  David's  royal  line  and  rights,  what  was  it  more 
than  the  predicted  ruin  of  plotting  Ephraim,  in  the  presence  of 
the  sign,  the  truth  of  truths — God  with  us  ?  Yet  was  it  the 
assurance,  if  its  grandeur  betokened  other  and  higher  glories, 
that  no  conspiracy  could  prosper  which  struck  at  the  Root  and 
Offspring  of  David. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  Jews  have  made  desperate  efforts 
to  evade  this  luminous  testimony  to  the  Incarnation  in  their  own 
prophet.  First  they  exaggerate  the  difference  between  rvhy  and 
rton?.  Confessedly  the  latter  is  the  more  common  word  for  virgin ; 
for  the  former  occurs  in  not  more  than  six  passages  beside  the 
one  before  us.  But  it  is  certain  that  in  Joel  i.  8  "  bethulah  "  is 
employed  for  a  young  married  woman,  which  is  never  the  case 
with  "almah."  For  the  argument  on  Pro  v.  xxx.  19,  20  is  quite 
invalid  to  prove  it  synonymous  with  an  adulterous  woman.  In 
the  present  instance  the  context  requires  the  sense  of  virgin 
with  the  utmost  precision ;  for  in  a  young  married  woman's 
bearing  a  son  there  is  no  wonder.  It  was  from  the  first  known 
that  the  Deliverer  of  man  from  the  serpent  enemy  of  the  race 
must  be  born  of  woman  in  some  distinctive  way ;  it  was  known 
that  He  must  be  also  son  of  Abraham,  in  the  line  of  Isaac, 
Jacob,  Judah,  and  David.  It  is  now  narrowed  to  a  virgin  of 
that  royal  house.  The  virgin  should  be  pregnant  and  bear 
Him ;  a  wonder  indeed !  in  one  sense  explained,  in  another 
enhanced,  by  the  capital  truth  that  He  should  be  a  divine 
person  as  truly  as  the  woman's  Seed,  the  virgin's  Son,  Immanuel, 
the  Lord  Jehovah,  whose  glory  the  prophet  had  seen  in  con- 
nexion with  the  preservation  of  a  holy  seed,  spite  of  their 
repeated  desolations.      Thus  the  person  of  the  Messiah,  and 

c 


34  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

specifically  the  solution  of  the  enigma  of  His  divine  character 
yet  in  association  with  the  family  of  David,  is  fully  cleared  up. 
Hence  the  Septuagint  very  properly  gives  here  (as  in  Gen. 
xxiv.  43),  v  TrapOevog,  whereas  Aquila  and  Symmachus  chose 
veavig.  But  it  is  plain  that  even  the  latter  cannot  get  rid  of  the 
truth  intended  in  the  context ;  and  the  wild  interpretations  of 
some  Jews  and  all  Rationalists  prove  how  hard  set  they  are  to 
evade  its  truth.  In  Solomon's  Song  (vi.  8),  where  the  Sep- 
tuagint translates  the  Hebrew  term  as  ve&vifeg,  the  strict 
meaning  of  virgins  is  certain ;  for  it  is  distinguished  from 
l3a(Ti\iff(Tai  and  iraXkaicai,  and,  like  our  word  "  maidens,"  can  only  be 
used  as  "  virgins,"  as  Rashi  seems  to  allow  in  his  comment  on 
ch.  i.  3.  Nor  can  there  well  be  a  more  glaring  instance  of  an 
offensive  prejudice  than  Gesenius'  abandonment  of  the  evident 
source  of  the  word  in  thy,  to  "hide,"*  in  order  to  justify  a 
more  vague  origin  from  an  Arabic  etymology. 

Again,  the  most  recent  Jewish  version  known  to  me,  that 
of  Isaac  Leeser,  renders  the  article  by  the  demonstrative.  This 
is  illegitimate.  The  object  clearly  is  to  refer  the  person  in 
question  to  a  young  person  then  present.  Nevertheless 
Mr.  Leeser  is  more  candid  in  his  rendering  of  rnn  than  some  of 
his  brethren  and  their  rationalistic  followers ;  for  he,  like  Rashi 
before  him,  correctly  renders  it  "  shall  conceive,"  not  "  is  with 
child."  Probably  the  latter  considered  the  prophet's  wifef  to  be 
in  question,  and  the  child  to  be  the  same  as  Maher-shalal-hash- 
baz.  Here  the  Rabbis  are  in  conflict ;  for  Kimchi  held  that  the 
young  woman  could  not  be  Isaiah's  wife  (for  she  must  then  have 
been  designated  the  prophetess,  as  in  chap.  viii.  3),  and,  there- 
fore, conceived  her  to  be  the  wife  of  Ahaz,  and  imagined  for 
them  an  unknown  son  named  Immanuel.  Aben  Ezra  is  at 
issue  with  both,  for  he  held  it  to  be  a  third  son  of  the  prophetess, 
and  so  rather  approached  Rashi,  but  with  Kimchi  held  the 
sign  to  be  the  child's  eating  cream  and  honey  as  soon  as  born. 


*  Even  Aquila  confirms  this,  the  only  true  derivation  of  the  word,  and  its 
kindred  form  for  the  other  sex,  by  giving  airoKpvtyoQ  in  Gen.  xxiv.  43. 

t  Gesenius,  who  thought  so  too,  tried  to  escape  the  difficulty  of  n°;^. 


CHAPTER  VII.  35 

No  more  words  are  needed  to  expose  such  views.  Even  Kimchi 
disposes  of  Isaiah  and  the  prophetess  by  asking  how  then  the 
land  could  be  called  Immanuel's  land.  It  is  plain  that  the 
Jews  do  not  agree,  save  in  opposing  the  only  interpretation 
which  carries  with  it  a  clear  and  noble  sense  yet  to  be  the 
joy  of  repentant  Israel.  The  notion  that  Hezekiah  was  the 
virgin's  son  is  wholly  untenable;  for  as  Ahaz  reigned  sixteen 
years,  and  he  himself  was  twenty-five  years  of  age  when  he 
began  to  reign,  he  must  have  been  a  boy  of  at  least  eight  years 
old  before  his  father's  reign  began;  and  hence  no  prediction 
of  his  birth  could  have  been  made  by  Isaiah  to  Ahaz  already 
on  the  throne.  There  is  not  a  hint  in  scripture  of  Ahaz  taking 
another  wife  after  his  accession  and  the  announcement;  still 
less  is  there  room  for  a  personage  so  wonderful,  to  say  the  least, 
as  the  Immanuel  to  be  born,  who  should  altogether  eclipse  Heze- 
kiah and  break  off  the  yoke  of  the  Assyrians  from  the  neck 
of  Israel,  and  bring  in  the  glorious  state  promised. 

It  is  as  plain  as  can  be  on  the  face  of  these  chapters  that 
Shear-jashub  (=  the  remnant  shall  return)  was  already  born, 
and  the  prophet's  companion,  as  we  see  at  the  beginning  of 
chap.  vii. ;  equally  so  is  it  that  Maher-shalal-hash-baz 
(=  Hasten  prey,  speed  spoil,  chap,  viii.)  was  to  be  born  of  the 
prophetess :  both  distinctly  setting  forth  the  great  events  of 
such  interest  to  Israel,  the  one  pledging  the  return  of  the  rem- 
nant, the  other  writing  of  the  Assyrian  attack  and  its  conse- 
quences. Why  trust  the  Assyrian  who  should  spoil  his  own 
land  ?  Why  dread  the  kings  who  were  so  soon  to  be  swept 
away  ?  But  between  the  two  comes  a  wholly  different  promise, 
the  virgin's  Son,  excluding  in  all  fairness  of  exposition  both  the 
king  and  the  prophet,  whose  name  Immanuel  (God  with  us), 
speaks  incomparably  better  things;  and  who  re-appears  after 
the  prophet's  second  son,  and  even  after  the  horrors  represented 
by  his  name,  when  devastation  had  done  its  worst.  But  woe 
to  him  who  meddles  with  thy  land,  0  Immanuel !  Israel, 
and  Judah  and  David's  house,  may  too  justly  bring  down  the 
chastening,  and  the  king  in  the  land  at  the  end  be  yet  worse 
than  the  unworthy  politician  who  then  held  the  sceptre;  the 


36  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

ruin  may  seem  complete,  deliverance  hopeless;  but  Immanuel 
and  God  is  with  them  !  Such  is  the  general  outline.  Further 
details  will  be  given  in  their  place.  We  shall  see  that  the 
following  chapters,  both  in  the  extent  and  nature  of  Israel's 
distress  and  evil,  the  changed  relation  of  God  to  His  people, 
and  above  all  the  glorious  interposition  of  Immanuel,  go  far 
beyond  any  present  or  proximate  encouragement  to  Israel 
(though  there  was  this  of  course),  and  look  on  to  days  still 
future  and  quite  distinct  from  anything  meanwhile  accomplished 
by  Christ  for  the  Christian. 

Nothing  can  be  more  apposite  than  "the  sign"  Jehovah 
gave,  little  as  the  feeble  and  self-willed  Ahab  might  appreciate 
it.  For  the  coalition  of  the  king  of  Israel  with  him  of  Syria 
was  to  depose  the  house  of  David  and  set  up  Ben  Tabeal  over 
Judah.  Man  would  have  counted  it  enough  to  promise  that 
his  son  Hezekiah,  and  his  son,  and  so  on,  should  succeed ;  and 
this  would  have  been  much  to  comfort  one  who  simply  confided 
in  a  promise  through  a  divinely  sent  prophet.  But  as  for 
all  promises  of  God,  in  Christ  is  the  Yea ;  through  Him  is  the 
Amen  for  glory  unto  God.  Hence  for  the  Jew  all  is  made  to 
centre  in  the  Messiah.  Not  merely  shall  a  remnant  return, 
but  the  Seed  of  promise,  the  virgin's  son,  be  born.  Put  this 
birth  as  far  off  as  you  please  from  the  time  of  Ahaz,  only 
thereby  do  you  render  conspicuous  the  sure  mercies  of  David. 
The  righteous  covenant  of  God  would  not  fail  to  judge  what 
an  Ahaz  and  a  Manasseh,  a  Jehoiakim  and  a  Jehoiachin  would 
sow,  spite  of  a  faithful  Hezekiah  or  a  godly  Josiah.  But 
Immanuel  was  an  indefectible  assurance  that  no  confederacy 
could  put  down  David's  house  finally.  Messiah,  Son  of 
David,  is  the  divine  guarantee.  The  virgin  must  necessarily 
be  of  that  stock;  the  Sod  must  neeessarily  be,  in  some  true 
though  mysterious  way,  God  Himself.  This  done,  all  is  sure 
and  clear. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary,  perhaps,  and  yet  for  some  readers  it 
may  be  a  help,  to  observe  that  the  "  son  "  Immanuel,  in  verse  14, 
is  not  "  the  child  "  of  verse  16,  which  last  refers  rather  to  Shear- 
jashub,  who  for  this  reason  seems  to  have  acompanied  the  prophet. 


CHAPTER  VII.  37 

"  For  before  the  child  shall  know  to  refuse  the  evil,  and  choose 
the  good,  the  land  that  thou  abhorrest  shall  be  forsaken  of  both 
her  kings."  It  will  be  noticed,  accordingly,  that  here  we  have 
Isaiah  turning  from  "the  house  of  David,"  "ye"  and  "you," 
to  "thou,"  &c,  that  is,  Ahaz.  Compare  verses  13,  14  with 
16,  17.  And  it  is  certain  that  the  prophet's  child  Shear-jashub 
had  the  character  of  a  "sign"  (see  chap  viii.  18),  though 
and  of  course  very  distinct  from  the  great  sign,  the  virgin's 
son.  From  verse  16  the  king  was  to  learn,  that  before 
the  child,  then  present,  arrived  at  years  of  discretion,  the 
allied  kings  must  disappear  from  the  scene.  And  so  they 
did :  for  three  years  more  scarce  passed  over  its  youthful 
head  before  the  kings  of  Israel  and  Syria  fell  before  the 
treachery  or  might  of  their  enemies. 

The  difficulty  urged  as  to  "  the  land  "  which  should  be  for- 
saken, whose  two  kings  were  an  object  of  dread  to  Ahaz,  is 
imaginary.  R??^  is  not  at  all  restricted  to  the  sense  of  a  single 
country.  It  is  a  word  susceptible  of  considerable  variety  of 
meaning,  as  the  context  may  require,  from  earth  or  ground,  in 
the  narrowest  sense,  to  an  entire  country  or  several  countries,  or 
even  the  superficial  world  at  large,  the  habitable  earth.  Thus 
"  all  the  families  of  the  earth  "  extend  its  force  comprehensively, 
and  here  the  two  kings  define  it  as  the  land,  not  of  one  only  but 
of  them  both.  Compare  as  to  this  chap.  viii.  4,  "  For  before  the 
child  [Maher-shalal-hash-baz]  shall  have  knowledge  to  cry,  My 
father  and  my  mother,  the  riches  of  Damascus  and  the  spoil  of 
Samaria  shall  be  taken  away  before  the  king  of  Assyria."  See 
also  2  Kings  xv.  29,  30 ;  xvi.  9.  The  "  two  kings  "  would  seem 
to  be,  therefore,  those  of  Syria  and  Samaria  or  Israel,  and  "  the 
land  "  that  pertaining  to  each.  The  Messianic  interpretation  of 
ver.  14  rests  on  an  irrefragable  basis;  but  it  is,  as  I  think, 
weakened,  rather  than  confirmed,  by  the  application  of  the  two 
kings  to  those  of  Israel  and  Judah,  and  the  child  of  ver.  16  to 
the  virgin's  son  of  ver.  14. 

The  efforts  of  Jews  and  rationalists  to  shake  this  grand  pro- 
phecy of  the  Messiah  are  not  violent  merely  but  pitiable.  Thus 
some  of  them   turn  it  thus  :    He,  whose   name  is  Wonderful 


38  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

Counsellor,  Mighty  God/  Father  of  Eternity,  shall  call  him 
(Hezekiah)  Prince  of  peace.  Even  here  the  witnesses  do  not 
agree :  for  the  Talmud,  who  applies  it  in  the  same  way,  boldly 
gives  all  eight  titles  to  the  son  of  Ahaz.  But  the  construction 
is  also,  as  Dr.  M'Caul  pointed  out,  contrary  to  Hebrew  idiom, 
which  requires  that  \af  f  referring  to  the  person  named,  should 
be  placed  between  the  names  and  the  person  or  thing  named  (see 
Gen.  xvi.  15,  xxi.  3,  xxii.  14;  Exod.  ii.  22;  Ruth  iv.  17;  1  Sam. 
i.  20;  2  Sam.  xii.  25).  The  Talmudical  application  of  all  to 
Hezekiah  is  too  exaggerated  if  not  impious  for  some  modern 
Jews  who  follow  Rashi.  But  even  their  attribute  of  Prince  of 
peace  to  that  pious  king  is  in  the  face  of  all  the  scriptural 
account  of  his  troubled  reign.  Others,  like  Mr.  Leeser,  translate 
it  "Counsellor  of  the  mighty  God,  of  the  everlasting  Father, 
prince  of  peace,"  and  think  it  important  to  note  that  it  alludes 
to  a  child  already  born,  contrary  to  his  own  version  of  chap, 
vii.  14,  and  forgetful  of  the  habit  of  the  prophets  to  speak  of 
things  that  are  not  as  though  they  were,  realising  them  in  pro- 
phetic vision,  but  giving  enough  in  the  context  to  prove  that 
they  are  future. 

But  the  Targum  supports  the  proper  Messianic  reference,  and 
proves  that  among  the  ancient  Jews  no  doubt  was  entertained 
that  the  prophet  spoke  only  of  the  Messiah.  The  desolation  of 
the  land  of  old  by  the  Assyrian  will  be  renewed  by  the  last 
representative  of  the  great  northern  and  eastern  power,  to  which 
the  prophets  really  look  onward.  How  vain  then  for  Ahaz  to 
seek  confederacy  with  the  Assyrian  of  his  day !  Confederacies 
there  were  of  old,  confederacies  pre-eminently  in  the  last  days ; 
but  the  people  of  God  must  not  trust  and  need  not  fear  them. 
Let  Jehovah  be  his  refuge  and  his  sanctuary :  the  godly  rem- 
nant, His  disciples,  will  need  it  for  the  awful  and  unexampled 
troubles  of  the  end  of  this  age.  Yet  the  light  of  Galilee  would 
be  for  them.    The  rejected  Immanuel,  because  of  whom  Jehovah 


*  Gesenius  would  like  to  translate  this  title  "the  Mighty  Hero,"  in  order 
to  get  rid  of  "God"  here.  But  IN  is  never  used  as  an  adjective  ;  and  even  so, 
if  it  were  Hero  only,  should  follow,  not  precede  "rua,  as  has  been  noticed. 


CHAPTER   VII.  39 

had  so  long  hidden  His  face  from  the  house  of  Jacob  (what 
a  comment  on  Jewish  history  since  Titus  took  Jerusalem,  yea 
since  the  cross  !),  will  cause  light  to  spring  up  among  the 
despised  but  godly  ones  of  the  people,  as  at  Christ's  first  coming ; 
and  then,  when  the  climax  of  trial  is  reached,  and  the  righteous 
seen  hopelessly  broken  by  the  pride  and  blasphemy  of  the 
apostate  mass  of  the  Jews  in  confederacy  with  the  apostate  head 
of  the  western  powers  to  hold  off  the  Assyrian,  Jehovah  of  Israel 
will  display  Himself  their  deliverer,  but  no  other  than  their  own 
crucified  Messiah  now  to  reign  over  them  in  power  and  glory 
and  peace  for  ever. 

The  reader  will  find  abundant  confirmation  of  all  this  in  the 
context,  by  a  careful  study  of  chaps,  x.,  xi.,  where  he  will  find 
the  Assyrian  once  more,  and  his  destruction  followed  by  the 
reign  of  the  victorious  Messiah.  Many  who  love  the  Lord  are, 
grievous  to  say,  to  be  censured  for  a  too  eager  conversion  of 
these  scriptures  to  their  own  relationship  with  the  Lord; 
whereas  the  Old  Testament  gives  us  but  the  common  divine 
principle  for  all  saints :  in  the  New  the  Hebrews  should  look 
for,  as  there  only  can  we  find,  specific  direction  and  instruction 
in  what  is  properly  Christian.  Their  evident  bias,  and  the  plain 
perversion  which  results,  do  incalculable  mischief  to  the  Jews, 
as  well  as  afford  ready  occasion  of  attack  to  unbelief  where  mind 
is  exercised  on  scripture.  In  such  interpretations  they  can 
easily  prove  the  popular  views  of  Christendom  erroneous,  and 
hence  harden  themselves  in  their  own  deadly  error  against  the 
truth  which  the  most  ignorant  Christian  knows  he  has  from  God. 

Should  guilty  Ahaz  and  Judah,  then,  go  unpunished  ?  In  no 
wise,  as  the  prophet  proceeds  to  let  him  know.  "  Jehovah  shall 
briog  upon  thee,  and  upon  thy  people,  and  upon  thy  father's 
house,  days  that  have  not  come,  from  the  day  that  Ephraim 
departed  from  Judah,  even  the  king  of  Assyria.  And  it  shall 
come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  Jehovah  shall  hiss  for  the  fly  that  is 
in  the  uttermost  part  of  the  rivers  of  Egypt,  and  for  the  bee  that 
is  in  the  land  of  Assyria.  And  they  shall  come,  and  shall  rest 
all  of  them  in  the  desolate  valleys,  and  in  the  holes  of  the  rocks, 
and  upon  all  thorns,  and  upon  all  bushes."    (Ver.  17 — 10.)     The 


40  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

faith  of  Hezekiah  might  stay  the  execution  of  Judah's  judgment, 
and  the  king  of  Assyria  was  rebuked  for  a  season.  But  even 
Josiah,  faithful  as  he  was,  suffered  for  his  rash  opposition  to 
"  the  fly  that  is  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  rivers  of  Egypt." 
and  "  the  bee  that  is  in  the  land  of  Assyria "  stung  yet  more 
fiercely  at  the  summons  of  Jehovah.  "In  the  same  day  shall 
Jehovah  shave  with  a  razor  that  is  hired,  namely,  by  them 
beyond  the  river,  by  the  king  of  Assyria,  the  head,  and  the 
hair  of  the  feet :  and  it  shall  also  consume  the  beard.  And  it 
shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  a  man  shall  nourish  a  young 
cow,  and  two  sheep.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  for  the  abun- 
dance of  milk  that  they  shall  give  he  shall  eat  butter:  for 
butter  and  honey  shall  every  one  eat  that  is  left  in  the  land. 
And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  every  place  shall  be, 
where  there  were  a  thousand  vines  at  a  thousand  silverlings,  it 
shall  even  be  for  briers  and  thorns.  With  arrows  and  with 
bows  shall  men  come  thither,  because  all  the  land. shall  become 
briers  and  thorns.  And  on  all  hills  that  shall  be  digged  with 
the  mattock,  there  shall  not  come  thither  the  fear  of  briers  and 
thorns :  but  it  shall  be  for  the  sending  forth  of  oxen,  and  for  the 
treading  of  lesser  cattle."  (Ver.  20 — 25.)  The  character  of 
Israel's  land  should  thus  be  wholly  changed ;  and  so  complete 
the  desolation  ensuing  that  the  owner  of  a  young  cow  and  two 
sheep  would  find  the  amplest  range  for  his  scanty  flock  in  the 
wilderness  that  succeeded  to  the  rich  cornfields  of  Palestine,  and 
himself  be  fed  on  the  nourishment  proper  to  wandering  hordes, 
not  on  the  food  of  cultivated  lands.  What  a  picture !  Yes,  and 
the  best  of  vineyards  (compare  Song  of  Sol.  viii.)  becomes  a 
bed  of  briers  and  thorns ;  and  men  cannot  pass  unprotected  by 
bows  and  arrows ;  and  the  carefully  tended  hills  are  turned  into 
a  place  for  oxen  and  lesser  cattle.  So  dark  as  well  as  minute 
are  the  lines  in  which  the  sorrowful  change  in  Judea  is  set 
before  her  king. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

We  have  already  the  two  great  parties  of  which  the  pro- 
phecy treats,  Immanuel  and  the  Assyrian.  The  virgin  should 
conceive  a  Son — Messiah,  Immanuel:  Jehovah  should  bring 
upon  the  faithless  son  of  David  the  ravaging  king  of  Assyria ; 
though  with  mercy  assured  to  a  remnant. 

In  the  chapter  before  us  now  we  have  fuller  and  other  infor- 
mation vouchsafed  of  Jehovah.  A  great  roll  has  to  be  taken 
and  written  concerning  another  son  of  the  prophet,  then  unborn, 
with  the  mystic  name  of  Maher-shalal-hash-baz.  This  is 
explained  to  and  by  Isaiah:  "For  before  the  child  shall  have 
knowledge  to  cry,  My  father  and  my  mother,  the  riches  of 
Damascus  and  the  spoil  of  Samaria  shall  be  taken  away  before 
the  king  of  Assyria."  (Ver.  4).  And  this,  the  inspired  history 
proves,  was  fulfilled  to  the  letter. 

But  there  is  more.  "Jehovah  spake  also  unto  me  again 
saying,  Forasmuch  as  this  people  refuseth  the  waters  of  Shiloah 
that  go  softly,  and  rejoice  in  Eezin  and  Remaliah's  son.  Now 
therefore,  behold,  Jehovah  bringeth  up  upon  them  the  waters  of 
the  river,  strong  and  many,  even  the  king  of  Assyria,  and  all  his 
glory :  and  he  shall  come  up  over  all  his  channels,  and  go  over 
all  his  banks:  and  he  shall  pass  through  Judah;  and  he  shall 
overflow  and  go  over,  he  shall  reach  even  to  the  neck ;  and  the 
stretching  out  of  his  wings  shall  fill  the  breadth  of  thy  land, 
0  Immanuel."  We  are  here  in  the  presence  of  the  scenes  of  the 
latter  day,  whatever  type  may  be  supposed  to  have  already  been. 
The  Assyrian  proudly  fills  the  land,  Immanuel's  land,  reaching 
even  "to  the  neck;"  yet  he  is  not  merely  checked  and  put  to 
shame,  but  utterly  and  for  ever  broken. 

The  people  here  had  no  faith,  any  more  than  the  king  in  the 
preceding  scene.  Both  of  them  despised  the  ways  and  the 
promises  of  God.  Their  confidence,  as  their  fear,  was  man.  If 
Ahaz  cowered  before  the  two  tails  of  the  smoking  firebrands,  as 


42  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

Jehovah  contemptuously  designated  the  fierce  anger  of  the  com- 
bined kings  of  Israel  and  Syria,  the  people  refused  the  softly- 
flowing  streams  of  Siloah.  Just  would  be  their  retribution. 
The  impetuous  river,  the  Assyrian,  should  rise  to  overflowing 
and  well-nigh  overwhelm  the  land. 

But  is  it  not  "thy  land,  0  Immanuel?"  Assuredly  it  is, 
and  whatever  be  the  king,  whatever  the  people,  whatever  the 
humbling  of  them  both,  will  not  God  avenge  the  insult  to  Him 
who,  when  reviled,  reviled  not  again  ?  He  is  not  deaf  to  the 
cry  of  His  elect.  How  does  He  not  feel  for  Immanuel !  Did 
the  people  associate  themselves  ?  They  might  spare  themselves 
the  trouble:  they  shall  be  broken.  Did  all  they  of  far  coun- 
tries gird  themselves  ?  Let  them  hear,  if  they  fear  not — let 
them  hear  their  sentence  of  Jehovah.  "Gird  yourselves,  and 
ye  shall  be  broken  in  pieces ;  gird  yourselves,  and  ye  shall  be 
broken  in  pieces.  Take  counsel  together,  and  it  shall  come  to 
nought ;  speak  the  word,  and  it  shall  not  stand ;  for  God  is  with 
us."     (Ver.  9—10.) 

This  opens  the  door  for  pointing  out  the  path  of  faith  for 
the  godly,  Jehovah  Himself  the  sole  and  sure  resource,  the  one 
object  of  reverence  and  fear  in  a  day  of  manifold  evil  and 
thickening  danger.  "For  Jehovah  spake  thus  to  me  with  a 
strong  hand,  and  instructed  me  that  I  should  not  walk  in  the 
way  of  this  people,  saying,  Say  ye  not,  A  confederacy,  to  all 
them  to  whom  this  people  shall  say,  A  confederacy;  neither  fear 
ye  their  fear,  nor  be  afraid.  Sanctify  Jehovah  of  hosts  himself ; 
and  let  Him  be  your  fear,  and  let  Him  be  your  dread.  And  He 
shall  be  for  a  sanctuary ;  but  for  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  for  a 
rock  of  offence  to  both  the  houses  of  Israel,  for  a  gin  and  for 
a  snare  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  And  many  among 
them  shall  stumble,  and  fall,  and  be  broken,  and  be  snared,  and 
be  taken.  Bind  up  the  testimony,  seal  the  law  among  my 
disciples.  And  I  will  wait  upon  Jehovah,  that  hideth  His  face 
from  the  house  of  Jacob,  and  I  will  look  for  Him.  Behold,  I 
and  the  children  whom  Jehovah  hath  given  me  are  for  signs 
and  for  wonders  in  Israel  from  Jehovah  of  hosts,  which  dwelleth 
in  mount  Zion."     (Ver.  11—18.) 


CHAPTER  VIII.  43 

In  truth,  to  be  thus  in  felt,  confessed  weakness  and  cast 
thereby  on  "Jehovah  of  hosts  Himself,"  is  really,  spite  of  all 
appearance  to  the  eyes  and  reasonings  of  men,  to  be  master  of 
the  situation.  Even  in  a  still  more  blessed  way  the  apostle 
could  take  pleasure  in  infirmities,  in  reproach,  in  necessities,  in 
persecution,  in  distresses  for  Christ's  sake.  "  Thus  gladly  (as  he 
had  said  before)  will  I  rather  glory  in  mine  infirmities  that  the 
power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon  me." 

This  brings  about  the  final,  triumphant  deliverance  of  Israel, 
though  connected  with  present  facts  and  looking  onward  through 
the  dreary  circumstances  of  the  desolate  remnant,  till  the  Lord 
rises  up  and  settles  all  in  the  destruction  of  every  foe.  The 
united  strength  of  their  enemies  should  be  vain.  What  those 
who  feared  Jehovah  needed  was  neither  a  confederacy  nor  alarm 
at  such  as  trusted  in  it,  but  to  sanctify  Jehovah,  and  make  Him 
their  sanctuary,  though  He  should  be  a  stone  of  stumbling,  even 
to  both  the  houses  of  Israel,  yea  a  gin  and  snare  to  Jerusalem  itself. 

It  is  clear,  then,  that  here  we  have  not  only  the  nations  who 
would  have  swallowed  up  Israel  doomed  to  a  total  overthrow, 
but  Israel,  too,  in  all  its  extent,  stumbling  at  the  stone  of 
stumbling — their  own  Jehovah-Messiah.  And  withal,  in  the 
midst  is  seen  a  feeble  few  cleaving  to  His  testimony,  and  owned 
as  His  disciples,  while  Jehovah  hid  His  face  from  the  people  as 
a  whole.  They  are  a  separate  remnant,  when  the  mass  stumble, 
fall,  and  are  broken,  snared  and  taken.  Hence,  in  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews,  the  Holy  Spirit  does  not  hesitate  to  cite  ver.  18 
with  other  scriptures  (Psalms  xvi.  and  xxii.),  to  prove  sanctified 
ones  with  Him,  not  only  the  dependent  man  but  the  Sanctifier, 
however  He  may  not  be  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren ;  and 
this,  now  in  Christianity,  as  by  and  bye  in  the  latter  day,  while 
the  nation  are  given  over  to  blindness  and  unbelief. 

The  closing  verses  (19 — 22)  show  their  exceeding  iniquity 
and  their  impious  recourse  to  the  powers  of  darkness,  in  their 
own  evident  want  of  light,  as  they  despised  and  departed  from 
the  law  and  the  testimony  of  Jehovah.  The  effect  is  intense 
misery,  audacious  rage  and  blasphemy  of  their  King  and  their 
God,  and  the  agony  of  despair. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

"  Nevertheless  the  dimness  shall  not  be  such  as  was  in  her 
vexation,  when  at  the  first  he  lightly  afflicted  the  land  of 
Zebulun  and  the  land  of  Naphtali,  and  afterwards  did  more 
grievously  afflict  her  by  the  way  of  the  sea,  beyond  Jordan,  in 
Galilee  of  the  nations.  The  people  that  walked  in  darkness 
have  seen  a  great  light:  they  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  upon  them  hath  the  light  shined."  (Verses 
1,  2.)  The  citation  of  this  in  Matthew  iv.  gives  much  light; 
there  the  fulfilment  may  extend  to  a  future  day,  and  in  a  form 
more  complete  in  some  respects,  as  far  as  the  people  are  con- 
cerned. Let  the  hand  of  oppression  be  yet  more  grievous  than 
had  ever  pressed  upon  them ;  yet  would  there  be  this  difference 
(and  how  verified  during  our  Lord's  first  appearing  in  their 
midst !),  that  among  the  darkest  and  most  despised  in  the  land 
should  spring  up  a  great  light.  It  was  in  Galilee,  not  Jerusalem, 
that  the  grace  of  Jesus  shone.  And  so  in  the  last  days:  the 
Galilean  character  attaches  to  the  future  remnant.  Jerusalem 
will  be  the  prey  of  the  worst  delusions  and  deadliest  error.  But 
the  darkest  and  coldest  night  precedes  a  dawn  of  joy  and  glory. 
And  so  it  will  be  for  Israel,  when  He  who  was  despised  and 
their  stumbling-block,  but  withal  Jehovah  the  shield  and 
sanctuary  of  the  weak  godly  remnant,  shall  rise  and  shine  in  all 
His  effulgence  on  His  people. 

"  Thou  hast  multiplied  the  nation,  and  not*  increased  the  joy: 
they  joy  before  thee  according  to  the  joy  in  harvest,  and  as  men 
rejoice  when  they  divide  the  spoil.  For  thou  hast  broken  the 
yoke  of  his  burden,  and  the  staff  of  his  shoulder,  the  rod  of  his 
oppressor,  as  in  the  day  of  Midian.  For  every  battle  of  the 
warrior  is  with  confused  noise,  and  garments  rolled  in  blood; 
but  this  shall  be  with  burning  and  fuel  of  fire.     For  unto  us  a 

*  Margin,  "to  him,"  or  it. 


CHAPTER  IX.  45 

child  is  born,  unto  us  a  son  is  given :  and  the  government  shall 
be  upon  his  shoulder :  and  his  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful, 
Counsellor,  The  mighty  God,  The  everlasting  Father,  The  Prince 
of  Peace.  Of  the  increase  of  his  government  and  peace  there 
shall  be  no  end,  upon  the  throne  of  David,  and  upon  his  king- 
dom, to  order  it,  and  to  establish  it  with  judgment  and  with 
justice  from  henceforth  even  for  ever.  The  zeal  of  Jehovah  of 
hosts  will  perform  this."  It  is  plain  that  "not  increased  the 
joy"  is  erroneous.  The  margin  is  right,  substantially,  as  the 
next  clause  might  prove  to  any  reader. 

The  hour  of  freedom  and  victory  is  come ;  and  Jehovah  it  is 
who  has  done  all.  But  it  is  not  as  in  ordinary  war,  with  noise 
of  human  conflict  and  bloodshed  :  burning  and  fuel  of  fire  distin- 
guish this  from  other  battles.  And  no  wonder,  when  He  stands 
out  their  Kinsman-Redeemer,  the  true,  but  once  rejected,  Son  of 
David,  who  is  their  boast  now,  with  every  name  of  power,  and 
peace  and  blessing,  with  an  endless  reign  before  Him,  estab- 
lished with  righteousness  and  judgment  from  henceforth  and  for 
ever.     Truly  "  the  zeal  of  Jehovah  of  hosts  will  perform  this." 

The  prophet  now  resumes  the  dirge  of  judgment  on  the 
nation  in  general,  begun  in  chapter  v.,  and  interrupted  by  the 
two-fold  episode  of  chapter  vi.  and  of  chapters  vii.,  viii.,  ix.  1 — 7. 
This  last  gave  us  the  special  development  of  Jehovah's  ways 
with  His  people ;  the  revelation  of  His  glory  in  Christ,  with  its 
effects  in  judgment  and  mercy ;  the  Incarnation,  or  Immanuel, 
the  virgin's  Son,  the  stay  of  David's  house  and  hope  of  Israel, 
spite  of  the  land  desolated  by  the  Assyrian ;  then  the  re-appear- 
ance of  the  Assyrian,  now  that  it  is  Immanuel's  land,  and  the 
overthrow  of  all  the  Gentiles  associated  with  him,  whatever  his 
temporary  but  great  successes  even  in  the  pleasant  land ;  next, 
an  inner  moral  view  of  the  people  when  (strange  to  say)  Jehovah 
should  be  for  a  stone  of  stumbling  to  both  the  houses  of  Israel 
but  a  sure  sanctuary  for  a  godly  remnant,  "  My  disciples,"  who 
would  be  for  signs  and  wonders  in  Israel  at  the  very  time 
Jehovah  hides  His  face,  as  He  is  clearly  doing  now,  from  the 
house  of  Jacob:  all  closing  in  darkness  and  trouble  such  as 
never  was  for  the  mass,  and  yet  with  light  for  the  despised 


46  LECTUKES   ON   ISAIAH. 

Galileans,  as  at  the  Lord's  first  advent,  so  just  before  the  nation 
is  multiplied,  the  oppression  is  broken,  the  victory  one  not  by 
human  sword  but  by  burning  and  fuel  of  fire ;  and  He  who  is 
not  more  surely  the  virgin's  Son,  the  woman's  Seed,  than  the 
mighty  God,  the  Prince  of  peace,  establishes  His  blessed  king- 
dom from  henceforth  even  for  ever. 

Here  we  take  up  again  (compare  chap.  v.  25)  the  general 
train,  but  with  allusion  to  some  of  the  instruction,  as  for  instance 
to  Rezin  and  the  Assyrian,  in  the  parenthetical  part.  Verses 
8 — 12  contain  the  renewed  announcement  of  divine  displeasure. 
"  The  Lord  sent  a  word  into  Jacob,  and  it  hath  lighted  upon 
Israel.  And  all  the  people  shall  know,  even  Ephraim  and  the 
inhabitant  of  Samaria,  that  say  in  the  pride  and  stoutness  of 
heart,  The  bricks  are  fallen  down,  but  we  will  build  with  hewn 
stones  :  the  sycamores  are  cut  down,  but  we  will  change  them 
into  cedars.  Therefore  Jehovah  shall  set  up  the  adversaries 
of  Rezin  against  him,  and  join  his  enemies  together ;  the  Syrians 
before  and  the  Philistines  behind ;  and  they  shall  devour  Israel 
with  open  mouth."  It  is  clear  that  as  yet  the  ten  rebellious 
tribes  are  the  object  of  judgment,  and  emphatically  their  pride 
of  heart  in  despising  the  Lord's  rebuke  and  confiding  in  their 
own  powers.  For  this  is  their  fond  hope  and  vain-glorious 
arrogance,  turning  their  breach  into  an  occasion  of  greater 
strength  and  display  than  ever.  "  The  bricks  are  fallen  down, 
but  we  will  build  with  hewn  stones :  the  sycamores  are  cut 
down,  but  we  will  change  them  into  cedars."  But  here  came 
the  retributive  dealing  of  God.  Had  Syria's  king,  Rezin,  joined, 
them  in  unholy  league  against  Judah?  "Therefore  Jehovah 
shall  set  up  the  adversaries  of  Rezin  against  him,  and  join  his 
enemies  together;  the  Syrians  before  and  the  Philistines  behind; 
and  they  shall  devour  Israel  with  open  mouth."  So  it  ever  is. 
The  unfaithful  people  seek  the  world's  alliance  against  those 
with  whom  God's  testimony  is,  but  prove  ere  long  that  the 
friendship  of  the  world  is  not  only  enmity  against  God  but 
destruction  to  themselves.  "  For  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned 
away,  but  his  hand  is  stretched  out  still." 

The  next  view  of  their  judgment  (ver.   13 — 17)  is  not  so 


CHAPTER   IX.  47 

much  judicial  retribution  from  .without,  but,  because  His 
chastening  was  slighted,  Jehovah's  giving  up  Israel  to  utter 
internal  demoralization.  "For  the  people  turneth  not  unto 
him  that  smiteth  them,  neither  do  they  seek  Jehovah  of  hosts. 
Therefore  Jehovah  will  cut  from  Israel  head  and  tail,  branch 
and  rush,  in  one  day.  The  ancient  and  honourable,  he  is  the 
head ;  and  the  prophet  that  teacheth  lies,  he  is  the  tail.  For  the 
leaders  of  this  people  cause  them  to  err ;  and  they  that  are  led 
of  them  are  destroyed."  The  ruin  is  universal  in  one  day  on  all 
classes,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  of  Israel,  "branch  and 
rush :"  all  plunged  into  common  destruction,  leaders  and  led. 
What  a  picture !  and  how  much  more  dismal  and  hopeless, 
when  the  righteous  Jehovah,  indignant  at  the  abounding  false- 
hood and  wrong  under  the  highest  pretensions  to  sanctity, 
"shall  have  no  joy  in  their  young  men,  neither  shall  have 
mercy  on  the  fatherless  and  widows."  Neither  youth  and 
vigour  are  pleasant  to  Him,  nor  can  orphanage  or  widowhood 
touch  His  heart  longer  in  a  people  so  depraved:  "For 
every  one  is  an  hypocrite  and  an  evil-doer,  and  every  mouth 
speaketh  folly.  For  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but 
his  hand  is  stretched  out  still." 

Then  follows  a  most  vivid  picture  (ver.  18,  19)  of  wickedness 
burning  like  fire;  of  Jehovah's  wrath  darkening  the  land;  and  of 
the  reckless  unsparing  violence  of  brother  against  brother.  "  And 
he  shall  snatch  on  the  right  hand,  and  be  hungry ;  and  he  shall 
eat  on  the  left  hand,  and  they  shall  not  be  satisfied :  they  shall 
eat  every  man  the  flesh  of  his  own  arm :  Manasseh,  Ephraim : 
and  Ephraim,  Manasseh;  and  they  together  shall  be  against 
Judah.  For  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  his  hand 
is  stretched  out  still."  The  nearest  of  the  ten  should  devour 
each  other,  and  both  Judah.  Nevertheless,  it  is  the  earthly 
judgment  of  God.  We  must  look  elsewhere  to  find  the  still 
more  awful  eternal  judgment  which  awaits  the  impenitent  and 
unbelieving  in  the  resurrection  of  judgment.  For  the  full 
revelation  of  this,  however,  we  must  turn  to  the  New  Testament. 


CHAPTER  X. 

The  last  of  these  disciplinary  inflictions  is  given  in  chapter  x. 
Here  (ver.  1 — 4)  it  is  the  unrighteousness  of  the  judges,  who  stood 
in  the  place  of  God  himself,  and  were  called  Elohim,  gods 
(Psalm  lxxxii.),  but  most  grievously  misrepresented  His  charac- 
ter and  wronged  His  people,  specially  the  defenceless.  "Woe 
unto  them  that  decree  unrighteous  decrees,  and  that  write 
grievousness  which  they  have  prescribed ;  to  turn  aside  the  needy 
from  judgment,  and  to  take  away  the  right  from  the  poor  of  my 
people,  that  widows  may  be  their  prey,  and  that  they  may  rob 
the  fatherless !  And  what  will  ye  do  in  the  day  of  visitation, 
and  in  the  desolation  which  shall  come  from  far  ?  to  whom  will 
ye  flee  for  help  ?  and  where  will  ye  leave  your  glory  ?"  And  this 
is  His  sentence  on  them :  "  Without  me  they  shall  bow  down 
under  the  prisoners,  and  they  shall  fall  under  the  slain."  The 
most  exalted  shall  be  most  abased ;  and  those  shall  fare  worst 
whom  it  least  became  to  turn  their  high  estate  and  large 
power  to  God-dishonouring  greed  and  oppression  of  the  weak 
and  wretched.  "  For  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but 
his  hand  is  stretched  out  still." 

But  now,  from  verse  5,  we  enter  on  a  most  weighty  change. 
The  Assyrian  desolator  comes  up  once  more.  It  is  his  final 
working  which  is  chiefly  in  the  mind  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  as 
indeed  this  is  the  grand  catastrophe  and  last  trouble  of  Jacob,  and 
in  contrast  with  the  previous  solemn  formula  of  still  continuing, 
unexhausted  wrath.  Now,  on  the  contrary,  we  have  in  this  proud 
enemy  of  Israel  the  rod  of  Jehovah's  anger.  "  The  day  of  visi- 
tation "  is  there,  the  "  desolation  from  far "  is  come.  The 
indignation  ceases  and  Jehovah's  anger  in  their  destruction. 
His  anger  now  is  turned  away  and  His  arm  stretched  out  no 
more.     The  rod  should  be  broken,  the  scourge  destroyed. 

Again,  it  is  of  great  moment  to  apprehend  clearly  that  the 
Antichrist,  or  man  of  sin,  is  a  totally  distinct  personage.     The 


CHAPTER   X.  49 

commentators,  from  Eusebius  to  Horsley,  who  confound  the  two, 
are  inexcusably  careless  of  the  scriptures;  for  it  is  very  clear  that 
there  will  be  a  wilful  king  in  the  city  and  land  who  will  set 
himself  up  as  Messiah  and  Jehovah  in  His  temple,  received  as 
such  by  the  apostate  Jews ;  and  that,  altogether  opposed  to  the 
Antichrist  in  Jerusalem  who  is  in  league  with  the  western 
power,  there  is  another  chief,  an  external  antagonist  of  the  Jews, 
who  is  the  Assyrian,  or  king  of  the  north,  so  often  occurring  in 
the  prophecies.     Of  him  Sennacherib  was  a  type. 

The  Assyrian  then  was  first  used  as  a  rod  to  chastise  Israel. 
"  I  will  send  him  against  an  hypocritical  nation,  and  against  the 
people  of  my  wrath  will  I  give  him  a  charge,  to  take  the  spoil, 
and  to  take  the  prey,  and  to  tread  them  down  like  the  mire  of 
the  streets.  Howbeit  he  meaneth  not  so,  neither  doth  his  heart 
think  so ;  but  it  is  in  his  heart  to  destroy  and  cut  off  nations  not 
a  few."  But  he  owned  not  God,  saying,  "  Are  not  my  princes 
altogether  kings  ?  Is  not  Calno  as  Carchemish  ?  is  not  Har- 
math  as  Arpad  ?  is  not  Samaria  as  Damascus  ?  As  my  hand 
hath  found  the  kingdoms  of  the  idols,  and  whose  graven  images 
did  excel  them  of  Jerusalem  and  of  Samaria ;  shall  I  not,  as  I 
have  done  unto  Samaria  and  her  idols,  so  do  to  Jerusalem  and 
her  idols  ? "  His  own  doom  is  therefore  sealed.  "  Wherefore  it 
shall  come  to  pass  that  when  the  Lord  hath  performed  his  whole 
work  upon  Mount  Zion  and  on  Jerusalem,  I  will  punish  the  fruit 
of  the  stout  heart  of  the  king  of  Assyria,  and  the  glory  of  his 
high  looks.  For  he  saith,  By  the  strength  of  my  hand  I  have 
done  it,  and  by  my  wisdom ;  for  I  am  prudent ;  and  I  have 
removed  the  bounds  of  the  people,  and  have  robbed  their  trea- 
sures, and  I  have  put  down  their  inhabitants  like  a  valiant  man  : 
and  my  hand  hath  found  as  a  nest  the  riches  of  the  people :  and 
as  one  gathereth  eggs  that  are  left,  have  I  gathered  all  the  earth ; 
and  there  was  none  that  moved  the  wing,  or  opened  the  mouth, 
or  peeped.  Shall  the  ax  boast  itself  against  him  that  heweth 
therewith  ?  or  shall  the  saw  magnify  itself  ?  as  if  the  rod  should 
shake  itself  against  them  that  lift  it  up,  or  as  if  the  staff  should 
lift  up  itself,  as  if  it  were  no  wood.  Therefore  shall  the  Lord, 
the  Lord  of  hosts  send  among  his  fat  ones  leanness;  and  under  his 


50  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

glory  he  shall  kindle  a  burning  like  the  burning  of  a  fire.  And 
the  light  of  Israel  shall  be  for  a  fire,  and  his  holy  one  for  a 
flame:  and  it  shall  burn  and  devour  his  thorns  and  his  briers 
in  one  day ;  and  shall  consume  the  glory  of  his  forest,  and  of  his 
fruitful  field,  both  soul  and  body :  and  they  shall  be  as  when  a 
standardbearer  fainted.  And  the  rest  of  the  trees  of  his  forest 
shall  be  few,  that  a  child  may  write  them."  It  is  the  closing 
scene.  The  Lord  has  not  even  yet  performed  His  whole  work  on 
Mount  Zion  and  on  Jerusalem.  Nay,  He  will  not  have  done  as 
long  as  the  Antichrist  will  be  there.  Having  disposed  of  him 
by  His  epiphany  from  heaven,  the  Assyrian  still  remains  to  be 
punished.  The  former  is  the  enemy  of  the  heavenly  rights 
and  glory  of  Christ,  and  will  be  destroyed  by  His  sudden 
shining  forth  from  heaven;  the  latter  is  more  opposed  to  His 
earthly  rights,  and  will  be  dealt  with  accordingly  when  He  is 
come  to  reign  over  the  earth.  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that 
day,  that  the  remnant  of  Israel,  and  such  as  are  escaped  of  the 
house  of  Jacob,  shall  no  more  again  stay  upon  him  that  smote 
them ;  but  shall  stay  upon  Jehovah  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  in 
truth.  The  remnant  shall  return,  even  the  remnant  of  Jacob, 
unto  the  mighty  God.  For  though  thy  people  Israel  be  as  the 
sand  of  the  sea,  yet  a  remnant  of  them  shall  return:*  the  con- 
sumption decreed  shall  overflow  with  righteousness.  For  the 
Lord  Jehovah  of  hosts  shall  make  a  consumption  even  deter- 
mined, in  the  midst  of  all  the  land."  Then  indeed  Israel's 
unbelief  shall  for  ever  pass  away :  Israel  shall  trust  no  more  in 
an  arm  of  flesh,  be  it  Egyptian,  Assyrian,  or  what  not.  The 
slaughter  of  Midian  and  the  manner  of  Egypt  give  the  charac- 
teristic patterns  of  the  future  deliverance.*!*     (Ver.  26.) 

*  The  Apostle  uses  these  words  in  Rom.  xi.  to  justify  from  the  Old  Testa- 
ment the  fact  which  is  assumed  throughout  the  New  Testament  that  only  a 
remnant  of  the  people  had  saving  relations  with  God.  So  it  is  now  under  the 
gospel,  as  it  was  after  Babylon  ;  and  so  it  will  be  when  the  last  crisis  comes, 
and  the  struggles  of  the  Antichrist  and  the  Assyrian  till  the  Messiah  decides  all 
and  displays  His  kingdom  in  power  here  below.  Compare  Dan.  viii.  19 — 25  ; 
ix.  26,  27  ;  xi.  36—45  ;  xii.  11. 

t  Dr.  R.  P.  Smith,  the  present  Dean  of  Canterbury,  says  well  (in  his 
"Authenticity  and  Messianic  Interpretation  of  Isaiah")  :  "Thus  the  Prophet 


CHAPTER   X.  51 

The  chapter  closes  with  a  most  animated  description  of  the 
Assyrian's  march  down  from  the  north  into  the  utmost  nearness 
to  Jerusalem.  "  He  is  come  to  Aiath,  he  is  passed  to  Migron  ; 
at  Michmash  he  hath  laid  up  his  carriages :  they  are  gone  over 
the  passage :  they  have  taken  up  their  lodging  at  Geba ;  Ramah 
is  afraid  ;  Gibeah  of  Saul  is  fled;  Lift  up  thy  voice,  0  daughter 
of  Gallim :  cause  it  to  be  heard  unto  Laish,  0  poor  Anathoth. 
Madmenah  is  removed ;  the  inhabitants  of  Gebim  gather  them- 
selves to  flee.  As  yet  shall  he  remain  at  Nob  that  day :  he  shall 
shake  his  hand  against  the  mount  of  the  daughter  of  Zion,  the 
hill  of  Jerusalem."  In  vain,  however :  he  shall  come  to  his  end, 
and  none  shall  help  him.  "  Behold  the  Lord,  Jehovah  of  hosts, 
shall  lop  the  bough  with  terror ;  and  the  high  ones  of  statures 
shall  be  hewn  down,  and  the  haughty  shall  be  humbled.  And 
he  shall  cut  down  the  thickets  of  the  forest  with  iron,  and  Leba- 
non shall  fall  by  a  mighty  one."  The  image  here  employed 
most  appropriately  prepares  the  way  for  the  introduction  in 
the  next  and  connected  chapter  of  Messiah,  the  slender  twig 
from  the  stump  of  Jesse,  and  the  fruitful  sprout  to  grow  from 
his  roots. 


at  once  marks  the  difference  between  the  two  kingdoms.  The  one  has  a  defi- 
nite place  in  the  Divine  economy ;  the  other  is  used  but  for  a  temporary  object. 
For  the  moment,  therefore,  it  may  triumph  ;  but  it  has  no  mission  of  its  own, 
no  settled  final  purpose  in  the  world,  and  therefore  no  special  providence  hems 
it  around.  But  Jerusalem,  however  unworthy,  was  the  actual  centre  of  the 
world's  history ;  and  in  spite  of  her  feebleness,  in  spite  of  her  comparative 
insignificance,  she  must  outlive  the  far  mightier  kingdoms  of  Nineveh  and 
Babylon,  of  Persia  and  Macedon  and  Antioch ;  for  on  her  existence  depended 
the  accomplishment  of  God's  unchanging  counsels."  It  would  have  added 
immensely  to  the  convictions  of  the  author  and  to  the  value  of  his  book,  had 
he  seen  that  the  purposes  of  God  as  to  the  earth,  which  roll  round  Israel  as 
their  centre,  are  only  suspended  for  a  season  because  of  their  rejection  of 
Messiah  and  the  gospel,  to  be  renewed  by  grace  at  the  end  of  this  age  in  order 
to  bring  in  the  new  age,  when  God  has  completed  His  present  gathering  out 
from  the  nations  for  heavenly  glory  with  Christ, 


CHAPTER   XI. 

In  contrast  with  the  destruction  of  the  high  and  haughty 
Assyrian  under  the  stroke  of  Jehovah,  we  have  in  the  eleventh 
chapter  a  remarkable  and  full  description  of  the  Messiah ;  first, 
in  a  moral  point  of  view;  and,  next,  in  His  kingdom,  its 
character  and  accompaniments. 

The  entire  strain  is  closed  with  a  suited  song  of  praise 
(chap,  xii.)  in  the  lips  of  Israel,  now  indeed  and  for  ever  blessed 
of  Jehovah,  their  Holy  One  in  their  midst. 

To  look  and  contend  for  a  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  in 
Hezekiah  or  Josiah  would  be  idle,  and  only  shows  the  straits  to 
which  the  rationalistic  enemies  of  revelation  are  reduced.  No 
king,  let  him  be  ever  so  pious  or  glorious,  that  followed  Ahaz,  no, 
nor  David  nor  Solomon  in  the  past,  even  approached  the  terms  of 
the  prediction  either  personally  or  in  the  circumstances  of  their 
reign.  Did  the  "  Spirit  of  Jehovah  "  rest  upon  the  better  of 
the  two  when  he  said,  "I  shall  now  perish  by  the  hand  of  Saul : 
there  is  nothing  better  for  me  than  that  I  should  speedily  escape 
into  the  land  of  the  Philistines?"  Was  it  "the  Spirit  of  wisdom 
and  understanding,"  when  he  feigned  himself  mad,  and  scrabbled 
on  the  doors  of  the  gate,  and  let  his  spittle  fall  down  upon  his 
beard  ?  Was  it  "  the  Spirit  of  counsel  and  might,"  when  David 
amused  his  credulous  host  of  Gath  with  his  fictitious  razzias 
against  the  south  of  Judah,  when  in  truth  he  was  invading  the 
Geshurites,  Amalekites,  &c,  without  leaving  a  human  being  to 
tell  the  tale?  Was  it  the  "Spirit  of  knowledge"  that  dealt  with 
Absalom  ?  Was  the  numbering  of  Israel  done  in  "  the  fear  of 
Jehovah  ?"  Was  the  matter  of  Uriah  a  proof  that  "righteous- 
ness" was  "the  girdle  of  his  loins,"  or  "faithfulness"  "of  his 
reins  ?"  When  was  the  earth  smitten  with  the  rod  of  any  king's 
mouth,  or  whose  lips  had  breathed  to  the  destruction  of  the 
wicked  ?  And  who  has  seen  that  wondrous  change,  depicted  in 
verses  6 — 9,  passing  over  the  fierce  beasts  and  the  most  timid, 


CHAPTER   XL  53 

and  man's  lordship  owned  at  length  by  all,  subject  and  har- 
monious, even  in  the  person  of  a  babe  ?  Equally  impossible,  at 
the  least,  is  it  to  say,  that  the  latter  part  of  the  chapter  was  met 
by  anything  resembling  its  predictions  in  any  era  of  Israel.  The 
idea  of  Zerubbabel  fulfilling  it  is  preposterous. 

Is  it  contended,  on  the  other  hand,  that  this  glowing  picture 
of  the  great  King  and  His  kingdom  is  realized  spiritually  in  the 
church  and  in  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  ?  Without  descending 
so  low  as  the  gross  pretensions  of  papal  ambition,  the  spiritual 
or  rather  mystical  interpretation  which  suits  worldly-minded 
Christendom  finds  its  expression  in  Theodoret  or  earlier  still. 
This  writer  sees  the  apostolic  doctrine  change  earth  into  heaven, 
and  the  picture  in  verses  6 — 8  accomplished  in  kings,  prefects, 
generals,  soldiers,  artisans,  servants,  and  beggars  partaking 
together  of  the  same  holy  talk  and  hearing  the  same  discourses  ! 
Paul  with  the  philosophers  at  Athens  illustrates,  according  to 
him,  the  weaned  child  putting  his  hand  on  the  cockatrice's  den; 
as  the  promise  to  Peter  (Matt.  xvi.  18)  answers  to  the  predicted 
absence  of  any  destructive  thing !  The  Lord's  holy  mountain 
he  explains  as  the  loftiness,  strength,  and  immutability  of  His 
divine  teaching.  Theodoret  justly  explodes  the  folly  of  applying 
such  a  prophecy  to  Zerubbabel,  who  was  only  governor  of  a  few 
Jews,  and  in  no  way  whatever  of  Gentiles;  but  he  offers  an 
alternative,  hardly  preferable,  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
specially  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles. 

This  kind  of  interpretation  is  not  only  false  in  fact  but 
injurious  and  corrupting  in  principle.  It  confounds  the  church 
with  Israel;  it  lowers  the  character  of  our  blessing  in  Christ 
from  heaven  to  earth ;  it  weakens  the  word  of  God  by  intro- 
ducing a  haziness  needful  to  the  existence  of  such  applications ; 
it  undermines  the  mercy  and  the  faithfulness  of  God,  because  it 
supposes  that  the  richest  and  most  unconditional  of  His  promises 
to  Israel  are  notwithstanding  taken  from  them  and  turned  into 
a  wholly  different  channel.  If  God  could  so  speak  and  act 
towards  Israel,  where  is  the  guarantee  for  the  Christian  or  the 
church?  The  apostle  can  and  does  quote  from  the  prophets, 
and  this  very  chapter  of  our  prophet,  to  vindicate  the  blessing 


54  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

of  the  Gentiles  and  their  glorifying  God  for  His  mercy ;  but  the 
self-same  apostle  maintains  that  there  is  now  the  revelation  of  a 
mystery  which  was  hid  from  ages  and  generations,  the  mystery 
of  Christ  and  the  church,  wherein  there  is  neither  Jew  nor 
Gentile. 

*  In  this  prophecy  however,  as  in  the  Old  Testament  gener- 
ally, we  see  the  distinctive  blessing  of  Israel,  though  there  is 
hope  for  the  Gentiles,  as  well  as  judgment  on  the  enemies. 
All  this  supposes  a  state  of  things  essentially  differing  from  God's 
ways  with  His  church,  during  which  Israel  ceases  to  be  the 
depositary  of  His  testimony  and  promise.  For  as  the  natural 
Jewish  branches  were  broken  off  from  the  olive-tree  and  the 
Gentile  wild  olive  was  grafted  in,  so  because  of  non-continuance 
in  God's  goodness  the  Gentile  will  be  broken  off  and  the  natural 
branches  grafted  in  again;  "And  so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved, 
as  it  is  written,  There  shall  come  out  of  Zion  the  Deliverer, 
and  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob ;  for  this  is  my 
covenant  unto  them,  when  I  shall  take  away  their  sins."  Mean- 
while blindness  in  part  is  happened  unto  Israel,  until  the  ful- 
ness of  the  Gentiles  be  come  in.  Then  they  will  hail  their 
rejected  Messiah,  and  the  universal  blessing  of  the  earth  will 
follow  His  destruction  of  their  foes  as  the  initiatory  act  of  His 
kingdom.  Of  this  (not  of  the  gospel,  as  regards  which  the  Jews 
are  enemies  on  our  account)  our  chapters  speak ;  and,  thus 
viewed,  all  flows  harmoniously  onward  both  as  a  whole  and  in 
the  smallest  detail. 

I  cannot  but  think  with  others  that  the  allusion  to  the  stem 
of  Jesse  is  significant.  Elsewhere  Messiah  is  viewed  as  David's 
son,  or  styled  David  himself;  here  He  is  a  scion  from  the  trunk  of 
Jesse  and  a  branch  or  shoot  from  his  roots,  for  the  purpose,  it 
would  seem,  of  drawing  attention  to  the  lowly  condition  into 
which  the  royal  race  should  have  sunk  at  the  birth  of  the  Christ. 
It  was  from  that  family,  when  of  no  account  in  Israel,  that  David 
was  anointed  for  the  throne.  The  prophet  designates  the  rise  of 
a  greater  than  David,  not  from  the  glory  that  had  been  conferred 
on  the  house,  but  in  a  way  readily  suggestive  of  obscurity. 
From  this  stock,  lowly  of  old,  lowly  once  more,  sprang  the  hope 


CHAPTER   XI.  55 

of  Israel  on  whom  the  Spirit  rested  without  measure;  or,  as 
Peter  preached,  God  anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  with  power. 

Here  however  it  is  not  in  the  activity  of  grace  among  the 
sorrows  of  men  and  the  oppressions  of  the  devil,  that  we  see 
Jesus,  but  in  view  of  His  government.  Thoroughly  subject  to 
Jehovah,  He  rules  not  according  to  appearance  but  righteously 
in  His  fear.  Such  is  the  effect  of  the  power  that  rested  on  Him. 
It  "  shall  make  him  of  quick  understanding  [or  scent],  in  the 
fear  of  Jehovah ;  he  shall  not  judge  after  the  sight  of  his  eyes, 
neither  reprove  after  the  hearing  of  his  ears;  but  with  righteous- 
ness shall  he  judge  the  poor,  and  reprove  with  equity  for  the 
meek  of  the  earth."  The  Holy  Spirit  portrays  the  Messiah's 
moral  fitness  for  His  earthly  reign.  I  say,  His  earthly  reign,  for 
so  it  evidently  is  throughout  for  every  reader  who  is  free  from 
prejudice  or  prepossession.  And  this  is  confirmed  by  the  latter 
part  of  verse  4 :  "  and  he  shall  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of 
his  mouth,  and  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  shall  he  slay  the 
wicked."  We  need  no  human  comment  here,  because  we  have 
already  divine  light  in  2  Thess.  ii.  8.  The  inspired  apostle 
applies  it  to  the  Lord's  future  destruction  of  the  lawless  one, 
the  man  of  sin,  the  issue  of  the  apostasy  of  Christendom,  the 
same  personage,  doubtless,  that  the  beloved  disciple  describes 
in  1  John  ii.  22:  "Who  is  a  liar  but  he  that  denieth  that 
Jesus  is  the  Christ  ?  He  is  antichrist,  that  denieth  the  Father 
and  the  Son."  This  latter  testimony  helps  to  link  all  together. 
2  Thess.  ii.  views  him  specially  as  the  result  yet  to  be  mani- 
fested of  that  mystery  of  lawlessness  which  was  even  then 
working  unseen.  Isaiah  shows  not  only  the  great  outside 
enemy,  the  Assyrian,  judged  in  chapter  x.,  but,  in  chapter  xi.  4, 
the  internal  enemy,  "  that  wicked,"  whom  the  apostates  will 
accept  as  their  Messiah,  destroyed  by  the  true  Messiah  appear- 
ing in  glory.  He  is  "the  lawless"  one,  such  is  the  form  of 
his  iniquity.  1  John  ii.  describes  him,  first,  as  the  denier  of 
the  Messianic  glory  of  Jesus ;  and  next,  in  his  full  character  of 
Antichrist  (as  well  as  liar)  in  denying  the  Father  and  the  Son, 
that  is,  the  glory  of  Christ  as  revealed  in  Christianity. 


56  LECTURES  ON   ISAIAH. 

Being  thus  shown  the  setting  aside  of  the  Antichrist  at  the 
end  of  this  age,  we  have  next  a  display  of  the  reign  of  the  true 
Christ  and  its  beneficent  effects.  "  And  righteousness  shall  be 
the  girdle  of  his  loins,  and  faithfulness  the  girdle  of  his  reins. 
The  wolf  also  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb,  and  the  leopard  shall 
lie  down  with  the  kid  ;  and  the  calf  and  the  young  lion  and  the 
fatling  together ;  and  a  little  child  shall  lead  them.  And  the 
cow  and  the  bear  shall  feed ;  their  young  ones  shall  lie  down 
together;  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox.  And  the 
sucking  child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp,  and  the  weaned 
child  shall  put  his  hand  on  the  basilisk's  den.  They  shall  not 
hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain :  for  the  earth  shall  be 
full  of  the  knowledge  of  Jehovah,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea." 
It  is  the  world  or  habitable  earth  to  come  whereof  we  speak 
(Heb.  ii.) — not  heaven  but  earth,  and  especially  the  land  of 
Israel  under  Him  whose  right  it  is.  What  ground  is  there  to 
doubt  its  plain  and  literal  accomplishment  ?  I  have  never  heard 
of  any  serious  objection,  save  for  Sadducean  minds  which  know 
neither  the  scriptures  nor  the  power  of  God.  Why  should  it  be 
thought  a  thing  incredible  that  God  should,  in  honour  of  the 
reign  of  Jesus,  change  not  the  face  only  but  the  habits  and  bent 
of  all  animated  nature,  delivering  the  creature  from  the  bondage 
of  corruption  under  which  it  now  groans  ?  The  Psalms  celebrate 
the  great  day  with  songs  of  joy ;  the  prophets  are  not  silent 
about  it;  the  apostle  Paul  repeatedly  treats  it  as  a  settled 
Christian  expectation,  only  awaiting  the  revelation  of  Christ  and 
the  sons  of  God  along  with  Him.  There  is  a  grievous  gap  in 
every  scheme  and  every  heart  which  does  not  look  for  the  world's 
jubilee :  without  it  the  earth  would  only  seem  made  to  be 
spoiled  of  Satan ;  whereas  to  one  taught  as  to  this  of  God,  if 
there  were  a  single  creature  not  put  manifestly  under  the  feet  of 
the  exalted  Son  of  man,  the  enemy  would  be  allowed  so  far  to 
defraud  Him  of  His  just  reward  and  supreme  rights.  In  that 
day  we  shall  see  (for  now  we  see  not  yet)  all  things  put  under 
Him :  divine  judgment  on  the  quick,  executed  by  Christ,  brings 
it  in,  as  we  have  gathered  from  verse  4  compared  with  2  Thess.  ii. 

It   is  either   forgotten   or   explained   away,   that   God  has 


CHAPTER   XL  57 

purposed  in  Himself  for  the  administration  of  the  fulness  of 
times  (that  is,  in  the  millennial  age,  or  the  day  of  His  mani- 
fested kingdom)  to  gather  together  in  one  all  things  in  Christ, 
both  those  in  heaven  and  those  on  earth  (Ephes.  i.  9, 10);  for  the 
reconciliation  will  embrace  not  only  those  who  believe,  but  all 
things  whether  in  earth  or  in  heaven  (Col.  i.  20,  21).  Creation 
itself  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the 
liberty  of  the  glory  of  the  children  of  God  (Rom.  viii.  21).  It  is 
strange  doctrine  to  deny  truth  so  clearly  revealed ;  it  is  strange 
logic  to  adduce  passages  from  the  Greek  and  Latin  classics,  from 
the  so-called  Sibylline  Oracles,  Ferdousi,  Ibn  Onein,  and  the 
Zendavesta,  as  rendering  improbable  the  direct  interpretation. 
For  it  is  certain  that  traditions  lingered  among  the  heathen  of  a 
golden  age  of  creation  to  return  another  day.  The  compliment- 
ary application  of  this  by  a  courtly  poet  is  in  no  way 
inconsistent  with  the  hope  of  a  full  fruition.  If  it  were  so,  what 
matters  heathen  thought,  since  scripture  is  clear  in  holding  out 
such  glorious  expectations  for  the  earth  under  the  Messsiah  ? 

But  this  is  not  all :  Israel  must  be  received  back  in  order 
that  the  world  may  thus  know  life  from  the  dead.  "In  that 
day  there  shall  be  a  root  of  Jesse  which  shall  stand  for  an 
ensign  of  the  people(s)  ;*  to  it  shall  the  Gentiles  seek :  and  his 
rest  shall  be  glorious.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day, 
that  Jehovah  shall  set  his  hand  again  the  second  time  to 
recover  the  remnant  of  his  people,  which  shall  be  left,  from 
Assyria,  and  from  Egypt,  and  from  Pathros,  and  from  Cush, 
and  from  Elam,  and  from  Shinar,  and  from  Hamath,  and  from 
the  islands  of  the  sea."  Those  do  the  enemy's  work  who  con- 
tend that  these  scriptures  are  fulfilled,  or  even  in  course  of 
fulfilment.  Save  the  general  principle  (which  is,  no  doubt, 
conspicuous  in  the  gospel) — that  Gentiles  seek  and  hope  for 
and  find  eternal  blessedness  in  Christ,  it  is  a  scene  wholly 
future.     The  person  of  the  Messiah  has  been  revealed :  and  we 


V 


*  I  do  not  think  that  the  reference  is  to  the  tribes  of  the  ancient  people  of 
od,  but  to  such  of  the  nations  as  shall  be  in  relationship  with  Jehovah,  as 
distinguished  from  other  Gentiles  who  are  not. 


58  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

know  how  truly  He  was  the  vessel  of  the  Spirit  on  earth,  and 
that  there  was  displayed  every  grace  which  became  man  towards 
God,  or  God  towards  man,  in  Christ  Jesus  Himself,  withal 
God  over  all,  blessed  for  evermore.  But  He  is  not  yet  seated 
on  His  own  throne  nor  exercising  His  public  kingdom  here 
below;  nor  are  the  remnant  of  His  people  yet  recovered  from 
north,  south,  east,  and  west.  Are  we  therefore  to  suppose  that 
His  arm  is  shortened  ?  or  that  He  has  abandoned  His  cherished 
purpose,  and  that  His  gifts  and  calling  are  subject  to  repent- 
ance? Such  is  not  our  God.  Is  He  ours  only  and  not  also 
of  the  Jews  ?  Yes,  theirs  also ;  "  And  he  shall  set  up  an  ensign 
for  the  nations,  and  shall  assemble  the  outcasts  of  Israel,  and 
gather  the  dispersed  of  Judah  from  the  four  corners  of  the  earth. 
The  envy  also  of  Ephraim,  and  the  adversaries  of  Judah  shall 
be  cut  off:  Ephraim  shall  not  envy  Judah,  and  Judah  shall  not 
vex  Ephraim."  It  is  a  pitifully  poor  fulfilment  of  this  exceeding 
great  and  precious  promise  to  suppose  all  fulfilled  in  the  feeble 
return  from  Babylon,  when  a  small  part  of  the  Jews  went  up  to 
Jerusalem  with  a  very  few  individuals  of  Ephraim;  and  their 
neighbours  sunk  lower  and  lower  under  the  various  imperial 
powers  till  Rome  ground  all  down  to  servitude.  No,  it  is  a 
bright  day  of  great  things,  not  for  man  only,  but  for  the  name  of 
Jehovah  on  earth.  It  is  not  the  heavenly  mystery  of  Qhris't  and 
the  church,  but  the  times  of  restitution  of  all  things  according  to 
prophecy.  The  moral  history  of  Israel  shall  be  reversed, 
as  decidedly  as  natural  history  must  be  taught  anew  for  the 
lower  creation.  Their  old  jealousies  and  mutual  enmities,  too 
well  known  after  Solomon,  fade  away  for  restored  Israel.  And 
as  for  their  plotting  neighbours,*  they  may  re-appear,  but  it  is  to 

*  The  remarks  of  Houbigant  may  be  helpful  to  some  on  this  head.  He  is 
objecting  to  the  popular  error  of  allegorizing  without  limit  :  "  Sed  enim  occur- 
rendum  est  difficultati,  quae  ex  eis  quae  mox  diximus,  nasci  potest.  Nam  quae- 
ritur,  quomodo  in  ultimo  reditu  Judaeorum  accidere  possit  ut  Judaei  excurrant 
in  terminos  Philistceorum,  Moabitarum,  Ammonitarum,  cum  regna  ilia  jam  dudum 
perierint.  Respondeo  eadem  regna  jam  periisse  turn,  "cum  Apostoli  gentes  Evan- 
gelio  subdiderunt ;  itaque  explicandum  esse  illis  etiam,  qui  hoc  Isaiae  caput  XI.  de 
conversione  gentium  per  Apostolos  facta  intelligunt,  quomodo  Apostoli  subdid- 
erint  gentes,  quae  eorum  aetate  jam  interierant.  Nos  responsionem  eorum  nostram 


CHAPTER   XI.  59 

be  put  down  for  ever.  "  They  shall  fly  upon  the  shoulders  of 
the  Philistines  towards  the  west ;  they  shall  spoil  them  of  the 
east  together ;  they  shall  lay  their  hand  upon  Edom  and  Moab ; 
and  the  children  of  Amnion  shall  obey  them."  From  the 
Assyrian,  the  towering  king  of  the  north,  Edom  and  Moab  and 
the  chief  of  the  children  of  Ammon  contrived  to  escape 
(Dan.  xi.) ;  but  not  so  from  the  hands  of  Israel  "  out  of  weak- 
ness made  strong."  Jehovah  shall  be  seen  over  the  sons  of 
Zion,  and  His  arrow  shall  go  forth  as  the  lightning;  and  the 
Lord  Jehovah  shall  blow  the  trumpet  and  shall  go  with  whirl- 
winds of  the  south. 

Then,  in  verses  15,  16,  we  have  Jehovah's  supernatural  deal- 
ing with  external  nature  on  behalf  of  His  people,  when  He 
utterly  destroys  the  tongue  of  the  Egyptian  sea,  and  smites 
the  river  into  seven  streams,  so  that  men  may  pass  dryshod,  and 
there  is  an  highway  for  the  remnant  from  Assyria,  as  of  old  from 
Egypt.  In  all  this  latter  portion  the  mystical  reading  is  at  utter 
fault ;  and  greater  wonders  than  in  the  destruction  of  Pharaoh's 
hosts  await  the  final  deliverance  of  Israel  from  Egypt  and  from 
Assyria  in  the  face  of  a  gainsaying  and  incredulous  age. 

f  aciemus ;  quae  quidem  sic  videtur  fieri  posse,  ut  credatur  Isaias  appellare  Judseo- 
rum  vicinas  gentes  nominibus  iis,  quae  turn  cognita  erant,  et  notari  eas  gentes, 
quae  illarum  veterum  regiones  occupaturae  olim  sunt,  forsan  etiam  idem  nomen 
habiturae :  quae  responsio  valere  etiam  potest  in  nominibus  propriis,  Assur,  JElam, 
Sennaar,  &c.  Judicabit  sapiens  Lector  an  hoc  sit  in  explicandis  Prophetis  aperte 
judaizare,  non  discedere  a  proprietate  verborum,  nisi  adest  magna  necessitas. 
Nos  quidem  earn  necessitatem  tantam  esse  credimus,  quanta  maxima  esse 
potest,  si  Prophetarum  verba  explicare  allegorice  nequeas,  nisi  intervertas 
Prophetae  sententiam,  ut  mox  Grotium  fecisse  vidimus ;  vel,  nisi,  ut  nunc 
Forerium  videmus,  mutes  personas  de  quibus  praedicitur,  et  pugnes,  vel  tecum, 
vel  cum  ipsa  vaticinatione,  quam  susceperis  explicandam." — Prolegomena  ad 
Prophetas,  p.  cclxviii. 


CHAPTER   XII. 

The  song  for  "  that  day  "  concludes  this  section  of  our  prophet, 
and  is  divided  into  two  parts:  the  first  of  which  (ver.  1 — 3) 
is  Israel's  praise  for  what  God  has  been  and  is  to  itself;  the  second 
(ver.  4 — 6)  is  the  spread  of  His  praise  in  all  the  earth,  though 
Zion  be  still  the  centre  where  God  dwells.  "  And  in  that  day 
thou  shalt  say,  I  will  praise  thee,  O  Jehovah.  Though  thou 
hast  been  angry  with  me,  thine  anger  is  turned  away,  and  thou 
comfortest  me,  Behold,  God  is  my  salvation :  I  will  trust  and 
not  be  afraid ;  for  Jah  Jehovah  is  my  glory  and  song ;  he  is 
become  my  salvation.  And  ye  shall  draw  water  with  joy  from  the 
fountains  of  salvation.*  And  in  that  day  ye  shall  say,  Praise 
Jehovah ;  celebrate  his  name ;  declare  his  doings  among  the 
peoples ;  proclaim  that  his  name  is  exalted.  Sing  unto 
Jehovah,  for  he  hath  done  a  splendid  deed :  it  is  declared 
in  all  the  earth,  Cry  out  and  shout,  0  inhabitants  of  Zion  ; 
for  great  in  the  midst  of  thee  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel." 
Certainly  it  is  not  a  temporal  deliverance  only,  however 
astonishing  and  complete,  but  there  are  blessings  for  the 
soul  also.  This  however  does  not  take  it  from  Israel  nor 
compel  us  to  interpret  it  of  the  Gentiles,  however  surely  we 
now  profit  during  the  gospel  by  the  same  grace  of  God.  But  it 
is  plain  that  as  a  whole  the  language  strictly  belongs  to  a  body 
once  forsaken  and  the  object  of  displeasure,  which  is  not  true 
of  the  church,  but  is  precisely  applicable  to  the  ancient  people 
in  the  day  when  Messiah  shall  be  manifested  to  them,  and  they 
shall  say  with  heart  and  mouth,  Blessed  is  He  that  comes  in 
the  name  of  Jehovah. 

*  This  verse  3  is  no  interruption  of  the  song,  but  a  connected  and  beauti- 
fully harmonious  part  of  it. 


CHAPTERS   XIII.,   XIV. 

We  begin  now  a  very  distinct  section  of  our  prophet,  which  is  not 
occupied  so  much  as  before  with  Israel,  though  of  course  we 
find  Israel  therein;  but  still  they  are  not  the  immediate  object 
of  the  prophecy,  but  rather  the  nations  and  their  judgment, 
running  down  from  circumstances  that  were  then  immediately 
imminent  to  the  very  "  end  of  the  age." 

As  to  the  expression  just  used,  which  occurs  so  often  in  the 
Gospel  of  Matthew,  its  application  is  to  that  condition  of  things 
during  which  Israel  are  found  under  the  law  and  without  their 
Messiah.  The  new  age,  on  the  contrary,  will  be  characterized 
by  their  being  under  the  new  covenant.  Their  Messiah  will 
then  reign  over  them  in  glory.  Their  Old  Testament  gives  us, 
not  only  these  ages,  but  the  times  before  them,  as  the  New 
Testament  unveils  the  eternity  that  is  to  follow  them.  Practi- 
cally, the  New  like  the  Old  speaks  of  these  two  ages  as 
connected  with  Israel :  the  age  that  was  going  on  when  Christ 
came  and  was  rejected,  and  that  which  is  to  come  when  He 
returns  in  glory.  "In  this  age"  there  is  a  mixture  of  good 
and  evil,  to  be  closed  by  an  awful  conflict  in  which  the  beast 
and  the  false  prophet  will  fall.  The.  age  to  come  will  see  Satan 
bound  and  the  Lord  Jesus  governing  the  earth  in  displayed 
power  and  glory. 

Thus  the  difference  of  the  ages  is  of  incalculable  importance. 
If  you  do  not  distinguish  the  present  from  the  age  to  come,  all 
must  be  confused,  not  for  thought  only,  but  for  practice  also. 
For  now  it  is  a  question  of  grace  and  faith,  evil  being  allowed 
outwardly  to  triumph,  as  we  see  in  the  cross.  In  the  world  to 
come  the  evil  will  be  externally  judged  and  kept  down,  and 
the  good  will  be  exalted  over  all  the  earth,  and  fill  the  whole 
world  with  the  knowledge  of  Jehovah  and  His  glory.  The  end 
of  the  age  therefore  is  evidently  future ;  and  so  scripture 
speaks.     Thus  for  us  it  is  "  this  present  evil  age,"  from  which 


62  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

Christ's  death  has  delivered  us ;  the  new  age  will  be  good,  not 
evil,  as  surely  as  it  is  a  future  thing.  Again,  if  we  think  not  of 
the  church,  but  of  Israel,  I  suppose  that  the  age  began  with 
their  being  under  the  law  in  the  absence  of  the  Messiah.  The 
new  age  will  be  when  Israel  have  their  Messiah  not  only  come, 
but  come  again  and  reigning ;  for  the  presence  of  the  Messiah 
in  humiliation  did  not  interrupt  the  age ;  and  still  less  did  their 
rejection  of  Him  bring  in  the  new  age.  Only  there  is  now 
another  mighty  work  of  God  in  process,  based  on  the  heavenly 
glory  of  Christ  and  the  personal  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
marked  here  below  by  the  church  of  God.  During  this  mercy 
is  flowing  out  to  the  Gentiles;  so  that  we  may  call  it  the 
Gentile  parenthesis  of  mercy.  Before,  and  quite  distinct  from 
this,  were  the  times  of  the  Gentiles,  when  God  in  His  provi- 
dence gave  Gentiles  to  take  the  government  of  the  world, 
beginning  with  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  golden  head  of  the  great 
image;  this  one  we  may  call  the  Gentile  parenthesis  of  judg- 
ment. They  are  both  of  them  within  the  limits  of  "  this  age," 
and  are  going  on  still.  The  new  age  will  be  brought  in  by  the 
Lord's  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven. 

Now  this  at  once  introduces  a  very  important  change, 
namely,  that  repentant  Israel  will  be  delivered,  and  the  nations 
come  up  for  the  judgment  of  the  quick  when  the  Son  of  man 
shall  have  entered  on  His  kingdom.  (Comp.  Matt.  xxv. ;  Rev. 
xi. — xx.)  The  first  part  of  Isaiah  we  saw  to  be  the  judgment  of 
Israel  and  then  their  final  blessing.  This  is  always  a  principle 
of  the  dealings  of  God :  when  He  judges,  He  begins  at  His  own 
house.  Hence  Peter  says,  "The  time  is  come  that  judgment 
must  begin  with  the  house  of  God,"  and  then  he  shows  that  if 
"  the  righteous  scarcely  (or  with  difficulty)  are  saved,  where  shall 
the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear  ?"  But  God  has  undertaken 
to  save  the  righteous,  although  it  be  with  difficulty  and  in  face 
of  an  amazing  mass  of  contradiction  and  trial,  and  of  their  own 
utter  weakness.  All  these  things  make  it  hard  indeed;  but 
what  is  insuperable  to  us  is  an  opening  for  the  glory  of  God ; 
and  He  has  got  over  the  great  difficulty,  and  that  was  our  sins. 
Is  sin — any,  all,  sin — any  longer  a  difficulty  for  Christ  ?    Has  He 


CHAPTERS   XIIL,    XIV.  63 

not  for  the  believer  put  sins  away  by  the  cross  ?  But  if  there  is 
no  difficulty  to  God,  there  are  many  to  us ;  and  the  word,  "  the 
righteous  scarcely  are  saved,"  is  in  relation  to  our  dangers  by 
the  way.  Now  if  that  be  so,  what  will  be  the  end  of  the 
ungodly?  The  apostle  Peter  applies  it  to  the  Christian,  and 
looks  at  the  world  as  coming  under  judgment  when  the  Lord 
shall  appear.  In  the  Old  Testament,  it  is  not  the  church  but 
Israel  that  are  in  question ;  but  God  invariably  begins  with  that 
which  is  nearest  to  Him.  Accordingly  all  the  first  twelve  chap- 
ters have  been  occupied  with  Israel  as  the  foreground  of  the 
picture,  whatever  incidental  notice  there  may  be  of  others. 

But  from  this  portion  onward,  through  a  dozen  chapters 
more,  we  have  the  Gentiles  prominent,  though  Jerusalem  too  is 
judged  in  their  midst,  ending  with  the  dissolution  of  the  earth 
and  with  the  higher  ones  punished  on  high.  He  had  shown  us 
the  judgment  of  His  own  house ;  now  He  deals  with  the  nations 
in  relationship  with  His  people,  one  after  another. 

First  of  all  Babylon  comes  up,  because  it  was  the  great 
Gentile  power  then  allowed  to  take  possession  of  Jerusalem ;  and 
God  shows  that,  while  He  may  use  the  stranger  to  chastise  His 
people,  He  will  turn  round  ere  long  and  deal  with  their  oppres- 
sive cruelty,  because  their  mind  was  to  destroy,  while  God 
employed  them  only  to  chasten.  And  inasmuch  as  there  was 
pride  of  power,  without  conscience  toward  God,  yea  also  the 
main  source  of  idolatry,  so  Babylon  cannot  escape,  but  is  the  first 
among  the  Gentiles  summoned  to  judgment.  Thus,  what  we 
are  now  entering  upon  is  not  the  divine  scrutiny  of  His  house  in 
Israel,  but  the  judgment  of  the  world  and  of  the  nations,  and 
hence  right  early  of  Babylon.  Observe,  however,  that  if  the 
Spirit  of  God  takes  notice  of  what  was  then  befalling  the  Jews 
(expressly  noticing  the  ruin  of  this  land  and  people  that  was 
imminent,  when  they  should  be  taken  captive  to  Babylon),  for 
all  that,  He  never  confines  Himself  to  any  blows,  however  grave, 
that  were  then  struck. 

This  indeed  is  just  a  characteristic  difference  between 
what  is  of  God  and  what  is  of  man.  If  man  speaks,  there 
are  necessary  limits  to  the  application  of  his  words.     In  what 


64  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

God  says  there  is  invariably  a  germinant  sense,  deepening 
farther  on,  evidencing  what  God  has  in  view  to  show  what  He 
is  and  to  glorify  Christ.  This,  I  think,  is  the  meaning  of  the 
scriptural  canon  in  2  Peter  i.  20:  "No  prophecy  is  of  any 
private  interpretation."  Apply  it  but  to  some  particular  event, 
and  you  overlook  the  purpose  of  God ;  while  it  may  doubtless 
include  such  an  event,  all  prophecy  looks  onward  to  the  counsels 
of  God  in  reference  to  the  glory  of  His  Son.  Hence  the  holy 
prophets  needed  inspiration  in  the  strictest  sense;  for  whose 
eye  could  look  onward  unerringly  and  speak  of  the  future 
according  to  God?  Such  therefore  is  the  aim  of  the  Spirit's 
testimony.  Indeed  this  is  true  of  all  scripture;  for  Christ  is 
the  object  of  God  in  giving  scripture  at  all ;  He  is  not  merely 
thinking  of  man,  or  of  his  salvation,  blessed  as  it  is;  nor 
of  Israel  only,  nor  of  the  church  only,  but  of  His  Son. 

God  thinks  of  Christ,  who  is  more  precious  to  Himself 
than  all  besides.  It  is  in  virtue  of  Christ  that  there  can  be 
a  purpose  brought  to  issue  in  or  out  of  such  a  world  as  this. 
For  it  is  not  possible  that  the  creature  itself  could  have  any 
intrinsic  value  in  the  sight  of  God.  That  which  merely  flows 
out  of  the  sovereign  will  and  almighty  hand  of  God  can  cease 
to  be.  He  that  made  can  destroy;  but  when  you  come  to 
Christ,  you  have  that  which  nothing  can,  we  may  reverently 
say,  destroy;  and  all  the  efforts  of  man  or  Satan  to  destroy 
and  dishonour  Him  have  been  only  turned,  in  the  mighty  and 
gracious  wisdom  of  God,  into  a  display  of -all-surpassing  glory. 
Thus  we  arrive  at  the  great  truth  for  our  every-day  walk. 
We  have  to  do  with  One  now,  whose  love  nothing  can  exhaust, 
whose  ways  too  are  perfect;  we  have  to  do  with  Him  day  by 
day,  to  wait  on  Him,  to  expect  from  Him,  to  trust  Him,  to 
make  sure  of  His  admirable  care  for  us.  Christ  is  worthy  that 
our  hearts  should  confide  in  Him,  and  He  cannot  be  confided  in 
without  blessing  flowing  out.  Thus  God  proves  Himself  greater 
than  all  that  can  be  against  us.  Apart  from  Christ  there  is 
nothing  even  that  He  Himself  made  but  what,  connected  with 
man  on  earth,  soon  has  a  cloud  over  it.  Nay,  it  is  wider  still. 
Angels  left  their  first  estate.     Look  at  any  creature-height  or 


CHAPTERS   XIII.,   XIV.  65 

beauty  apart  from  Christ,  and  what  is  the  security  ?  Is  not  the 
earth,  once  so  fair,  a  wilderness  ?  Is  not  man  a  mortal  wreck  ? 
Israel  were  brought  out  into  the  wilderness  to  keep  a  feast  to 
Jehovah ;  but  they  made  and  worshipped  a  golden  calf,  to  His 
deep  dishonour.  In  the  church  of  God,  called  to  the  unity  of 
the  Spirit  and  the  reflection  of  Christ's  heavenly  glory  here  below, 
what  breaches,  divisions,  sects,  heresies,  confusions,  and  every 
evil  work!  What  guilty  ignorance  of  the  Father,  what  bold 
denial  of  the  Son,  what  flagrant  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost ! 
and  all  this  going  on  at  an  aggravated,  accelerating  ratio,  as  the 
apostasy  draws  near  and  the  manifestation  of  the  man  of  sin  in 
its  final  form. 

We  look  as  it  were  on  the  closing  history  of  Christendom 
upon  the  eve  of  that  judgment  that  slumbers  not ;  but,  thank 
God,  we  await  first  of  all  our  Saviour  from  heaven — a  blessed 
hope  which  may  be  forgotten  by  worldliness  and  unbelief,  but 
will  never  fade,  because  it  is  not  founded  on  anything  short  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  He  is  coming ;  and  as  surely  as  He  does,  we 
have  the  turning-point  of  all  blessing  reached  for  our  bodies  and 
all  things,  even  as  now  by  faith  for  our  souls.  What  a  discovery 
it  has  been  to  some  of  us,  that  prophecy  has  the  self-same  centre 
that  the  rest  of  scripture  has,  and  that  its  centre  in  Christ  is  so 
much  the  more  conspicuous  as  it  cannot  content  itself  with  past 
accomplishment,  but  ever  looks  onward  to  the  grand  fulfilment  in 
the  future  !  No  matter  what  it  may  be,  all  acquires  importance 
because  God  is  thinking  of  His  beloved  Son.  And  His  Son  is  to 
strike  the  last  strokes  of  judgment ;  He  will  deal  with  man,  first 
by  providential  means,  then  in  person. 

From  the  chapter  now  before  us  we  may  gather  these  two 
things  plainly  enough — a  preparatory  application  to  the  times 
of  the  prophet  or  near  them,  but  the  only  adequate  fulfilment 
reserved  for  the  great  day,  which  is  still  future.  For  instance, 
in  verses  6 — 10,  one  cau  see  there  are  greater  signs  than  have 
ever  been  verified.  These  things  cannot  fairly  be  said  to  have 
literally  taken  place ;  yet  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not  hesitate  to 
connect  them  with  Babylon's  fall.  To  talk  of  Iryperbole  or 
exaggeration  is  to  prove  utter  ignorance  of  scripture  and  of  the 

E 


66  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

power  of  God.  I  could  understand  an  infidel  talking  such  lan- 
guage as  this ;  but  the  moment  you  begin  to  suppose  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  could  willingly  set  Himself  to  exaggerate,  the 
authority  of  the  whole  word  is  shaken.  If  He  magnifies  a  tem- 
poral judgment,  beyond  the  facts,  how  do  I  know  that  He  does 
not  exaggerate  grace  and  eternal  redemption  ?  And  where  is 
the  ground,  in  this  case,  for  solid  peace  with  God  ?  Is  it,  or  is 
it  not,  a  fixed  principle,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  always  speaks  the 
truth  ?  Then,  along  with  this,  we  must  take  care  that  we 
understand  its  application.  Thus,  to  restrain  this  scene  to  the 
past  judgment  of  Babylon,  is  to  limit  the  word  of  God,  and 
make  the  Spirit  seem  to  exaggerate.  But  this  is  merely  our 
misunderstanding  and  error.  How  momentous,  then,  it  is  that 
we  should  be  in  malice  children,  in  understanding  men !  We 
may  well  shrink  with  horror  from  a  pathway  that  leads  to  an 
end  so  dishonouring  to  the  word  of  God.  On  the  other  hand, 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  did  really  speak  inclusively  of  a  past 
accomplishment  I  hold  to  be  just  as  certain  as  that  He  was 
looking  onward  to  far  more  than  that. 

In  verses  15 — 17  it  is  a  temporal  judgment  that  is  spoken 
of;  a  description  not  of  what  will  be  when  Jehovah  judges, 
but  of  the  lawless  way  in  which  man  wreaks  his  wrath  upon 
his  fellow. 

Verses  18,  19  present  a  total  destruction.  Babylon  has 
been  judged.  An  almost  unprecedented  disaster  and  destruc- 
tion fell  on  that  proud  city ;  and  this,  we  know,  was  under  God 
effected  by  the  junction  of  the  Medes  and  Persians,  with  Cyrus 
for  their  leader. 

But  plainly  Jehovah  here  uses  the  strongest  language  to 
show  that  it  is  His  day.  In  reading  the  New  Testament  as 
well  as  the  Old,  it  is  of  the  utmost  moment  to  understand  "  the 
day  of  the  Lord  "  in  its  real  character  and  import.  It  is  not  the 
same  thing  as  the  Lord's  "coming"  to  receive  us.  When  He 
comes,  the  dead  saints  are  raised  and  the  living  ones  are  changed, 
which  is  not  "  the  day  of  the  Lord,"  nor  ever  so  called  in  scrip- 
ture. There  is  one  chapter  (2  Peter  iii.)  where  there  might 
seem  to  be  some  difficulty ;  but  the  difficulty  is  really  from  this 


CHAPTERS   XIII.,   XIV.  G7 

very  confusion;  for  when  you  distinguish  the  two  phrases  and 
thoughts  here  as  elsewhere,  all  is  plain.  What  the  scoffers  of 
the  last  days  say,  is  "Where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming"  &c. 
What  the  Spirit  of  God  replies  is,  that  the  day  of  the  Lord 
shall  come,  and  come  like  a  thief  in  the  night  to  judge  wicked- 
ness upon  the  earth.  They  make  light  of  the  Christians  who 
are  looking  for  this  bright  hope,  their  Master's  coming ;  but  the 
Holy  Ghost  threatens  them  with  the  terrible  day  of  the  Lord. 
The  Lord  is  never  represented  as  coming  like  a  thief  in  the 
night  except  when  judgment  is  distinctly  spoken  of,  as  in 
Sardis.  (Eev.  iii.)  In  1  Thessalonians  v.  the  Spirit  brings  in 
the  comparison  of  the  thief  when  He  speaks  of  the  day  of  the 
Lord  coming  upon  the  world,  not  in  relation  to  the  saints  who 
wait  for  Christ. 

The  real  truth  is  that  the  expression  "  coming  of  the  Lord  " 
may  apply  to  His  presence  before  He  is  manifested  to  every 
eye,  but  "  day  of  Jehovah  "  pertains  to  that  part  and  aspect  of 
His  action  which  inflicts  just  vengeance  upon  the  world,  and 
then  presents  Him  judging  in  righteousness.  Here  it  is  the 
day  of  Jehovah ;  and,  therefore,  of  darkness  and  destruction  to 
sinners;  there  is  not  a  word  about  the  righteous  dead  being- 
raised,  or  the  living  changed ;  all  that  which  is  proper  to  the 
New  Testament  you  find  there,  and  there  only.  In  the  Old 
Testament  you  have  the  dealing  of  the  Lord  with  Israel, 
judging  what  was  wrong,  but  finally  blessing,  and  patient 
longsuffering  with  the  Gentiles,  where  He  took  notice  of  them 
at  all,  till  the  day  of  visitation  come.  This  accounts  for  the 
language  of  Isaiah  xiii.  The  Spirit  of  God  has  in  His  view 
Jehovah's  judgment  of  the  whole  world;  and,  therefore,  it  is  called 
"the  day  of  Jehovah."  It  will  be  the  termination  of  all  the 
space  allowed  to  man's  will  and  self-exaltation.  It  will  be  the 
manifestation  of  God's  moral  ways  when  all  that  is  high  shall 
be  abased,  and  Jehovah  and  the  lowly  that  He  loves  shall  be 
exalted  for  ever.  But  while  the  Spirit  of  God  goes  onward 
to  that  day,  there  was  enough  to  mark  Babylon  devoted  to 
destruction  by  a  direct  intervention  of  God,  near  at  hand. 
The  truth  of  the  prophecy  was  thus  witnessed  by  a  special 


68  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

accomplishment  in  those  days.  Babylon  then  became  first 
like  Sodom  and  Gomorrha.  If  it  was  physically  not  so  mani- 
festly a  divine  judgment,  it  was  morally  a  stupendous  event 
which  changed  the  whole  course  of  the  world's  history.  The 
downfall  of  Persia  was  in  no  way  a  type  of  the  final  judgment 
of  the  world,  neither  was  the  fall  of  Greece  of  any  striking 
significance  in  this  respect.  The  judgment  of  Rome  will  be 
so,  of  course ;  but  this  is  yet  future.  It  has  been,  as  it  were 
shaken  repeatedly  and  brought  low;  but  then  it  has  revived. 
The  day  is  coming  when  Rome  will  rise  again  into  splendour 
and  amazing  power,  when  it  will  be  the  centre  of  a  revived 
empire.  But  it  will  then  rise  to  meet  its  final  doom  from 
the  hands  of  God.  The  past  ruin  of  Babylon  is  a  type  of 
this  destruction  of  Rome.  When  Babylon  fell,  the  children 
of  Israel  were  delivered ;  there  was  nothing  of  the  sort  when 
Persia  yielded  to  Greece,  or  Greece  to  Rome. 

Thus  the  fall  of  the  first  great  power  of  the  Gentiles  is 
a  type  of  the  doom  of  the  last,  when  Israel  will  have  been 
finally  set  free,  a  converted  people,  and  delivered  spiritually 
as  much  as  nationally,  thenceforward  made  to  express  the 
glory  of  Jehovah  upon  the  earth. 

So  in  the  next  chapter  (xiv.)  the  Spirit  of  God  goes  forward 
to  Israel's  deliverance.  The  connection  is  plain.  The  over- 
throw of  Babylon  involves  the  emancipation  of  Israel.  It  has 
thus  much  greater  importance  than  the  history  of  any  ordinary 
power;  and  the  past  Babylon  is  simply  a  type  of  the  fall  of 
that  vast  power,  its  final  heir,  which  is  to  the  last  the  enslaver 
of  the  Jews  and  the  master  of  the  holy  city.  Israel  are  yet 
to  have  as  their  servants  the  very  persons  who  formerly  enslaved 
them  themselves.  Expecting  this  glory  for  Israel,  and  this 
mighty  deliverance  for  the  people  of  the  Jews,  one  can  under- 
stand how  they  shall  "take  up  this  proverb  against  the  king 
of  Babylon."  For  he  sets  forth  no  other  than  the  last  head 
of  the  beast,  just  as  Nebuchadnezzar  was  the  first.  Although 
the  king  of  Babylon  typifies  the  person  who  will  finally  have 
the  Jews  as  his  captives,  it  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  suppose 
that  it  is  to  be  a  king  of  the  Babylon  of  Shinar.     I  refer  to 


CHAPTERS   XIII. ,   XIV.  69 

this  now,  merely  to  show  that  it  rests  upon  a  false  principle. 
Many  have  the  thought  that  there  will  be  a  re-establishment 
of  oriental  Babylon  in  the  last  days.  They  suppose  there  will 
be  a  literal  city  in  the  plain  of  Shinar.  This  I  believe  to  be 
fundamentally  false.  The  New  Testament  shows  us  by  evident 
remarks  what  the  future  one  will  be,  and  contrasts  the  Apoca- 
lyptic Babylon  with  that  of  the  Chaldees.  The  Babylon  of 
the  old  world  was  built  upon  a  plain;  the  future  Babylon  is 
characterized  by  the  seven  mountains  it  sits  on.  Thus  every 
one  of  common  information  would  understand  the  locality  of 
the  future  Babylon.  There  is  but  one  city  that  has  had  pro- 
verbially this  title  attached  to  it  among  Gentiles,  Jews,  and 
Christians.  Everywhere  it  has  acquired  a  designation  from  the 
circumstance ;  so  that  if  you  speak  of  the  seven-hill  city,  there 
is  hardly  an  educated  child  but  would  answer,  "  It  must  be  the 
famous  city  of  Rome."  This  is  the  city  which  is  to  occupy  in 
the  last  days  the  same  kind  of  importance  that  Babylon  had  in 
the  beginning  of  the  age.  It  began  with  Babylon  and  ends 
with  the  person  that  is  called,  in  the  Book  of  Revelation,  "  the 
Beast."  There  were  four  beasts  in  Daniel,  but  one  is  called 
"  the  Beast,"  as  indeed  but  the  last  existed  ;  and  if  it  became 
extinct,  it  was  to  rise  again  and  be  present  once  more  before 
its  judgment.  Now  God  makes  the  old  enemy  to  be  a  type  of 
the  new  one  that  menaces  them.  The  final  holder  of  the  power 
of  Babylon  thus  becomes  a  type  of  him  who  will  wield  the  same 
power  against  the  people  of  God  in  the  last  days.  In  Revelation 
xvii.  the  general  principle  is  exceeding  clear,  without  the  violent 
supposition  of  a  literal  metropolis  in  Chaldea;  where  man  would 
have  not  merely  to  build  the  city,  but,  first  of  all,  to  create  seven 
hills.  Another  thing  the  Spirit  of  God  speaks  of  is,  the  reigning 
of  the  city  over  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  not  of  the  control 
exercised  over  the  empire,  under  the  symbol  of  the  woman 
riding  the  beast. 

Finally  the  Apocalyptic  Babylon  will  shift  from  a  heathenish 
character  to  an  anti-Christian  one.  What  we  have  in  Isaiah 
furnishes  the  groundwork  for  that  which  meets  us  in  the 
Revelation.     Thus  the  strong  language  that  is  used  in  verses 


70  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

12 — 14,  could  scarcely  be  said  to  have  been  exhausted  in 
Nebuchadnezzar  or  Belshazzar.  There  was  pride  and  self- 
exaltation  in  the  one,  and  most  degrading  and  profane  luxury 
in  the  other ;  but  what  we  have  here  will  be  fully  verified  in 
the  last  days  and  not  before.  After  taking  this  place  of  power, 
the  lofty  one  is  to  be  abased  as  no  Babylonish  monarch  ever 
was.     (See  ver.  15.) 

I  do  not  enter  into  the  rest  of  the  chapter  further  than  to 
point  out  another  declaration  in  verses  24,  25.  Some  suppose 
that  the  king  of  Babylon  and  the  Assyrian  are  one  and  the 
same  person ;  it  is  a  common  mistake,  and  particularly  among 
men  of  learning.  But  it  is  clear  that  the  later  statement  is 
something  added  to  the  fall  of  him  of  Babylon  who  has  been 
already  judged.  Then  the  Assyrian  follows,  who  is  dealt  with 
summarily  in  Jehovah's  land.  This  agrees  perfectly  with  what 
may  be  gathered  from  other  parts  of  God's  word. 

Now,  if  you  look  at  the  past  history  of  Israel,  the  Assyrian 
came  up  first;  his  army  was  destroyed,  and  himself  sent  back 
into  his  own  land,  there  to  be  slain  by  his  rebellious  sons  in  the 
house  of  his  god.  The  astonishing  destruction  of  his  hosts  was 
typical  of  the  fall  of  "  the  Assyrian  "  in  the  last  days,  but  only 
a  type  of  it.  This  was  considerably  before  Babylon  was  allowed 
of  God  to  become  supreme.  It  was  after  the  disappearance  of 
Nineveh  that  Babylon  sprang  up  into  the  first  place.  The 
Assyrian  never  gained  the  supremacy  of  the  world,  but  Babylon 
did,  as  a  sovereign  grant  from  God,  after  the  royal  house  of 
David  had  become  the  helper  on  of  idolatry,  following  the 
people  of  God  in  their  love — the  abomination  of  the  heathen. 
God  told,  as  it  were,  the  king  of  Babylon  to  take  the  whole 
world  to  himself.  Babylon  was  always  most  conspicuous  for  its 
many  idols;  but  as  the  chosen  witness  had  become  idolatrous, 
the  worst  might  as  well  have  supremacy  as  the  best.  Babylon 
was  thus  exalted  to  the  empire  of  the  world.  Its  active  enmity 
and  idolatry  could  hardly  be  thought  a  claim  on  the  true  God  : 
on  the  other  hand,  it  was  not  allowed  to  hinder  its  rise  in  God's 
sovereignty  into  the  place  of  the  government  of  the  world.  This 
was,  in  fact,  subsequent  to  the  destruction  of  the  Assyrian,  which 


CHAPTERS   XIII.,   XIV.  71 

we  have  seen  before  in  other  chapters  (viii.,  x.).  Here,  on  the 
contrary,  Babylon  is  judged  first ;  then  the  Assyrian  comes  up 
and  is  smitten  in  the  land  of  God's  people.  Why  is  this? 
Because  the  Spirit  of  God  is  here  taking  the  circumstances  of 
the  Assyrian  as  well  as  the  king  of  Babylon,  not  as  a  history 
of  the  past,  but  as  looking  onward  to  the  last  days ;  and  in  the 
last  days  the  king  represented  by  Babylon  will  be  destroyed 
first,  and  then  the  power  of  the  Assyrian  will  be  broken  last 
of  all.  This  perfectly  agrees  with  the  scene  as  a  typical  or 
prophetic  picture  of  the  last  days.  Whereas,  if  you  confine  it 
to  the  past,  it  would  not  tally,  and  there  could  be  no  right 
understanding  of  it.  While  the  Spirit  of  God  speaks  of  the 
Assyrian  subsequently  to  Babylon,  it  is  certain  that  in  past 
history  the  Assyrian  fell  first  in  order  and  Babylon  afterwards. 
By  and  by  Babylon  will  be  smitten  in  the  last  holder  of  the 
Beast's  power,  and  this  in  connection  with  the  Jews  ;  while  the 
power  that  answers  to  the  king  of  Assyria  will  come  up  after 
that,  when  God  is  occupying  Himself  with  the  ten  tribes  of 
Israel.  The  Babylonian  despot  and  the  Assyrian  then  are  two 
distinct  enemies  of  the  Jews,  and  types  of  two  different  foes  in 
the  last  days,  the  one  before,  the  other  after,  they  are  in  recog- 
nized relationship  with  Jehovah. 

The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  be  enabled  to  profit  by  all 
scripture,  using  it  for  instruction  and  warning,  as  well  as 
refreshment  and  joy.  All  plans  for  worldly  ease  and  honour 
will  end  only  in  destruction  and  bitter  disappointment.  Our 
business  is  to  be  working  out  what  God  gives  us  to  do.  He  is 
saving  souls  to  be  the  companions  of  Christ  in  heaven.  Our 
responsibility  is  to  be  carrying  out  His  thoughts  of  mercy 
towards  sinners,  and  His  love  towards  those  that  cleave  to  the 
name  of  His  Son. 

The  division  of  chapters  is  singularly  unhappy  here ;  for  the 
last  five  verses  of  chapter  xiv.  form  a  section  to  themselves,  and 
the  two  following  chapters  are  but  one  subject.  What  adds  to 
the  confusion  is  the  insertion  of  the  sign  of  the  new  paragraph 
at  verse  29  of  chapter  xiv. ;  whereas  verse  28  really  pertains  to 


72  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

the  new  burden — not  to  Babylon  or  the  Assyrian,  but  to  God's 
judgment  on  the  Philistines. 

"In  the  year  that  king  Ahaz  died  was  this  burden.  Rejoice 
not  thou,  whole  Palestina,  because  the  rod  of  him  that  smote 
thee  is  broken  :  for  out  of  the  serpent's  root  shall  come  forth  a 
cockatrice,  and  his  fruit  shall  be  a  fiery  flying  serpent." 

The  death  of  Ahaz  might  naturally  excite  the  hopes  of  his 
neighbours,  the  Philistines,  who  had  been  put  down  by  the 
strong  hand  of  his  grandfather  Uzziah.  Of  him  it  is  written  in 
2  Chronicles  xxvi.  4,  that  "  he  did  that  which  was  right  in  the 
sight  of  Jehovah  according  to  all  that  his  father  Amaziah  did. 
And  he  sought  God  in  the  days  of  Zechariah,  who  had  under- 
standing in  the  visions  of  God :  and  as  long  as  he  sought 
Jehovah,  God  made  him  prosper.  And  he  went  forth  and 
warred  against  the  Philistines,  and  brake  down  the  wall  of 
Gath,  and  the  wall  of  Jabneh,  and  the  wall  of  Ashdod,  and  built 
cities  about  Ashdod,  and  among  the  Philistines.  And  God 
helped  him  against  the  Philistines,  and  against  the  Arabians 
that  dwelt  in  Gur-baal,  and  the  Mehunims.  And  the  Ammonites 
gave  gifts  to  Uzziah ;  and  his  name  spread  abroad  even  to  the 
entering  in  of  Egypt ;  for  he  strengthened  himself  exceedingly." 

And  now  not  only  Uzziah  but  Ahaz  were  gone;  "the  rod 
of  him  that  smote  "  the  land  of  the  Philistines  was  "  broken." 
The  enemy  had  learnt  to  despise  Judah  in  the  days  of  faithless 
Ahaz.  "For  Jehovah  brought  Judah  low  because  of  Ahaz, 
king  of  Israel :  for  he  made  Judah  naked  and  transgressed  sore 
against  Jehovah."  Who  was  his  son  that  they  should  fear 
him  ?  Let  them  not  rejoice  however ;  "  for  out  of  the  serpent's 
root  shall  come  forth  a  cockatrice,  and  his  fruit  shall  be  a  fiery 
flying  serpent."  The  primary  accomplishment  of  this  was  in 
the  reign  of  Hezekiah,  of  whom  it  is  recorded  (2  Kings  xviii.  8) 
that  "he  smote  the  Philistines,  even  unto  Gaza,  and  the  borders 
thereof,  from  the  tower  of  the  watchmen  to  the  fenced  city." 

But  I  see  no  reason  whatever  to  suppose  that  this  burden  is 
an  exception  to  the  rest;  especially  as  the  strength  of  the 
language  points  to  a  mightier  destruction  than  that  inflicted  by 
that    pious   king   of  Judah.      Its   proper   fulfilment   therefore 


CHAPTERS   XIII.,   XIV.  73 

awaits  the  latter  day.  And  then  to  the  full  will  be  seen  the 
two-fold  application  of  divine  power,  when,  on  the  one  hand, 
the  first-born  of  the  poor  shall  feed  and  the  needy  shall  lie 
down  in  safety;  and  on  the  other,  Jehovah  will  not  merely 
break  the  rod  but  kill  the  root  of  Philistia  with  famine  and  slay 
its  remnant.  In  the  next  verse  (31)  the  prophet  bursts  forth 
with  the  utmost  animation,  calling  on  the  gate  to  howl,  and  the 
city  to  cry  out.  "  Thou,  whole  Palestina,  art  dissolved  :  for  there 
shall  come  from  the  north  a  smoke,  and  none  shall  be  alone  in  his 
appointed  times  (or  hosts)."  Thus  an  overwhelming  and  vigor- 
ously-sustained force  is  threatened,  which  will  sweep  all  before 
itself,  as  far  as  the  Philistines  are  concerned.  Here  too  the 
end  is  deliverance  for  the  godly  Jews.  "  What  shall  one  then 
answer  the  messengers  of  the  nations  ?  That  Jehovah  hath 
founded  Zion,  and  the  poor  of  his  people  shall  trust  [or  find 
refuge]  in  it." 


CHAPTERS   XV.,   XVI. 

In  chapters  xv.,  xvi.,  we  have  the  burden  of  Moab.  What  a 
picture  of  desolation  and  woe;  and  so  much  the  more  felt, 
because  so  unexpected  and  sudden !  The  Philistines  were  not 
more  offensive  to  God  because  of  the  pleasure  they  took  in  the 
calamities  of  Israel,  than  the  Moabites  in  their  excessive  self- 
security  and  pride.  They  were  among  the  neighbouring  races 
which  were  allowed  to  harass  Israel  for  their  unfaithfulness 
during  the  Judges,  till  David  reduced  them.  Afterwards  they 
took  advantage  of  the  revolt  of  the  ten  tribes,  to  shake  off  their 
subjection,  first  to  Judah,  and  finally  to  Israel;  but  they,  like 
others,  fell  under  the  Babylonish  conqueror,  as  we  may  gather 
from  a  comparison  of  Jer.  xlviii.,  which  adopts  and  enlarges 
these  very  predictions  of  the  older  prophet,  and  serves  thus  to 
fix  the  epoch  of  their  application.  "  Because  in  the  night  Ar  of 
Moab  is  laid  waste,  he  [Moab]  is  undone ;  because  in  the  night 
Kir  of  Moab  is  laid  waste,  he  is  undone."*  (Chap.  xv.  1.)  Such 
seems  to  me  the  force  a  little  more  exactly.  Broken  thus  in 
their  strongholds,  one  after  another  surprised  to  their  dismay, 
the  people  are  supposed  to  go  to  their  places  to  weep,  with 
deep  and  universal  signs  of  mourning  in  public  and  in  private  ; 
and  this  to  the  extremities  of  their  land,  the  very  soldiers  crying 
out  like  the  weaker  sex.  (Ver.  2 — 4.)  The  prophet,  or  who- 
soever is  personated  by  him,  cannot  but  feel  for  the  disasters  of 
Moab ;  and  the  graphic  sketch  of  desolation  and  want  and 
carnage  is  continued  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  Even  the 
escaped  should  find  fresh  disaster  and  destruction  from  the 
Lord  (ver.  9).  Extreme  humiliation  is  the  chastening  of 
excessive  pride. 

*  Dr.  Henderson  prefers  to  render  it  thus  :  ''Assuredly  in  the  night  of 
assault  Ar-Moab  is  destroyed ;  assuredly  in  the  night  of  assault  Kir-Moab  is 
destroyed."  They  were  the  two  main  fortresses  of  Moab,  the  storming  of 
which  decided  the  fate  of  the  people. 


CHAPTERS    XV.,   XVI.  75 

Chapter  xvi.  opens  with  a  call  to  Moab  to  send  the  lamb  to 
the  ruler  of  the  land  from  Sela  in  the  wilderness  unto  the  mount 
of  the  daughter  of  Zion.  I  see  not  the  smallest  reason  to 
justify  the  notion  of  an  allusion  to  the  lamb  as  the  well- 
known  type  of  the  Messiah,  still  less  that  He  is  here  spoken 
of  as  the  Lamb,  the  ruler  of  the  earth,  as  if  we  were  reading 
the  Revelation.  This  appears  to  be  a  reference  to  their 
ancient  tribute.  They  were  subdued  by  David  of  old,  and 
sent  him  gifts.  "  And  he  smote  Moab  and  measured  them  with 
a  line,  casting  them  down  to  the  ground ;  even  with  two  lines 
measured  he  put  to  death,  and  with  one  full  line  to  keep  alive ; 
and  so  the  Moabites  became  David's  servants,  and  brought 
gifts."  (2  Sam.  viii.  12.)  Later  on  in  the  history,  we  find  that 
the  king  of  Moab  was  a  sheep  master,  and  used  to  render  to  the 
king  of  Israel  the  tribute  of  100,000  lambs,  and  as  many  rams 
with  the  wool.  The  prophet  seems  here  to  remind  Moab  of  its 
obligation ;  otherwise  their  daughters  must  prepare  for  still 
greater  calamities.  (Ver.  1,  2.)  "  Take  counsel,  execute  judg- 
ment; make  thy  shadow  as  the  night  in  the  midst  of  the 
noonday;  hide  the  outcasts;  bewray  not  him  that  wandereth. 
Let  mine  outcasts  dwell  with  thee,  Moab ;  be  thou  a  covert  to 
them  from  the  face  of  the  spoiler :  for  the  extortioner  is  at  an 
end,  the  spoiler  ceaseth,  the  oppressors  are  consumed  out  of  the 
land.  And  in  mercy  shall  the  throne  be  established ;  and  he 
shall  sit  upon  it  in  truth  in  the  tabernacle  of  David,  judging  and 
seeking  judgment,  and  hasting  righteousness."  (Ver.  3 — 5.) 
The  prophet,  in  his  second  counsel,  touches  on  the  dire  offence, 
in  Jehovah's  eyes,  of  Moab.  Had  he  sheltered  the  outcasts  of 
Israel  ?  or  had  he  taken  advantage  of  their  distressful  flight  to 
smite  and  betray  them  ?  The  prophetic  Spirit  looks  through 
Hezekiah  to  the  true  Son  of  David,  who  shall  reign  in  righteous- 
ness when  the  last  oppressive  spoiler  has  come  to  his  end. 

The  verses  that  follow  (6 — 12)  detail  once  more  the  pride  of 
Moab  and  his  most  humiliating  downfall,  when,  spite  of  his 
arrogance,  "  Moab  shall  howl  for  Moab  ;  every  one  shall  howl," 
and  the  country  shall  vie  with  the  towns  in  extent  of  devasta- 
tion ;  and  the  prophet  weeps  afresh  at  the  sight  of  the  wretched- 


76  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

ness  of  the  once  lofty  foe,  who  prays  in  his  sanctuary ;  *  but  he 
shall  not  prevail." 

The  last  verse  shows  that,  whatever  may  be  the  full  bearing 
of  this  burden  on  Moab,  "  within  three  years,  as  the  years  of  an 
hireling  [i.e.,  I  suppose,  exactly  measured  out,  as  would  be  the 
fact  in  such  a  case],  and  the  glory  of  Moab  shall  be  contemned, 
with  all  that  great  multitude ;  and  the  remnant  shall  be  very 
small  and  feeble."  That  this  was  accomplished  to  the  letter, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  to  the  believing  mind,  though  we  know 
not  the  instrumentality,  whether  the  king  of  Judah  or  the 
Assyrian. 

But  as  little  need  one  question  that  the  fulfilment  of  all  the 
terms  of  the  prophecy  will  be  in  the  grand  future  crisis ;  for  it 
is  certain  that  the  final  king  of  the  north  will  fail  to  reach 
Moab,  and  that  the  children  of  Israel  under  the  Messiah  are  to 
lay  their  hands  upon  him.  Compare  Isaiah  xi.  14  with  Daniel 
xi.  41.  Nothing  more  clearly  proves  that,  if  unknown  or  little 
known  now,  there  will  remain  representatives  of  that  nation  in 
the  end  of  the  age  to  take  their  part  in  that  catastrophe,  humi- 
liating to  man  but  to  the  glory  of  God,  when  the  chosen  people, 
in  their  totality,  shall  be  saved,  and  restored  by  divine  mercy  to 
the  land  of  their  inheritance  and  their  promised  supremacy.  It 
is  certain,  from  a  later  strain  of  our  prophet  (xxv.  10 — 12),  the 
epoch  of  which  is  the  day  of  Jehovah,  that  the  final  ruin  of 
Moab  will  only  be  at  the  time  when  He  exalts  Israel  to  their 
promised  place  of  everlasting  supremacy  on  the  earth. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

Assuming  that  these  prophecies,  whatever  past  accomplishment 
they  may  have  received,  have  for  their  centre  the  day  of 
the  Lord,  how  are  we  to  meet  the  difficulty  about  these  various 
peoples  and  cities  which  once  troubled  Israel  ?  How  are  we  to 
account  for  these  prophecies  looking  onward  to  a  future  day, 
seeing  that  they  no  longer,  or  very  feebly,  exist.  The  answer  is, 
that  the  very  same  difficulty  applies  to  Israel.  No  one  knows 
clearly  or  certainly  where  the  ten  tribes  are;  neither  does  it 
seem  any  one's  business  to  search  beforehand.  We  may  leave 
them  in  the  obscurity  that  God  has  put  them  in.  We  know,  if 
we  believe  His  word,  that  as  surely  as  He  has  preserved  the 
dispersed  remnant  of  the  two  tribes,  so  will  He  bring  out  of 
their  hiding-place  the  descendants  of  the  ten.  We  know  that 
not  only  the  Jews  proper  are  to  be  restored,  but  also  the  old 
nationality  of  Israel.  To  this  the  SudeicaQvXov  hope  to  come ;  the 
full  twelve  tribes  making  one  nation  in  the  land,  and  one  King 
shall  be  King  to  them  all.  "  And  they  shall  be  no  more  two 
nations,  neither  shall  they  be  divided  into  two  kingdoms  any 
more  at  all."  Every  letter  of  the  promises  will  be  accomplished. 
Scripture  cannot  be  broken. 

Even  if  we  saw  no  signs,  why  doubt?  Do  we  need  such 
tokens  ?  It  is  a  proof  of  feebleness  of  faith,  if  we  ask  a  sign. 
God's  word  is  the  best  assurance  ;  on  this  let  us  take  our  stand. 
If  God  has  said  that  so  it  shall  be,  we  have  a  right  to  expect 
that  He  will  bring  from  their  recesses  the  ten  tribes,  and  will 
save  them  out  of  all  their  dwelling-places  wherein  they  have 
sinned,  and  will  cleanse  them.  We  are  far  from  being  fully 
acquainted  even  with  the  little  world  on  which  we  live.  Long- 
ago,  there  were  parts  of  the  world  better  known  than  they  have 
been  till  of  late.  Thus  the  early  accounts  of  Africa  and  Central 
Asia,  for  instance,  have  been  largely  confirmed  by  recent 
researches.     God  may  have  the  ten  tribes  in  some  of  these  little 


78  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

explored  regions;  or  they  may  emerge  unexpectedly  out  of  a 
nation  with  which  they  have  long  been  confounded ;  but  we  are 
not  bound  to  show  where  they  are.  God  has  declared  that  He 
will  bring  them  into  their  own  land,  and  this  in  a  peculiar 
manner ;  for  they  are  to  pass  through  the  wilderness  again,  and 
there  be  purged  of  the  transgressors  in  their  midst,  who  thus 
never  reach  the  land,  instead  of  being  destroyed  in  it,  like  the 
apostate  Jews.  Thus,  there  is  a  totally  different  destiny  for  the 
ten  tribes  as  compared  with  the  two.  If  God  will  accomplish 
both,  nothing  will  be  easier  than  for  the  same  God  to  define  the 
descendants  of  their  old  Gentile  enemies,  whether  near  or 
farther  off.  The  truth  is,  it  is  the  very  same  principle  of  faith 
that  accepts  and  accounts  for  both ;  as  it  is  mere  incredulity 
which  finds  a  difficulty  in  either.  These  remarks  apply  to 
almost  all  these  chapters. 

Again,  some  strangely  misunderstand  the  bold  figures  of  the 
prophets,  as  if  employed  to  cast  their  subjects  into  an  enigmatic, 
if  not  ambiguous,  mould.  This  is  a  great  error.  For  they  are 
not  to  throw  a  cloud  over  things,  but  to  give  emphasis  and 
energy.  Many  whose  object  is  to  deter  Christians  from  reading 
the  prophecies,  talk  much  of  these  tropes,  as  if  their  presence 
was  evidence  enough  to  show  that  the  meaning  is  doubtful. 
Nothing  can  be  more  contrary  to  the  fact ;  for  in  the  inspired 
writings,  as  in  others,  figures  are  used,  by  a  kind  of  poetical 
license,  to  illustrate,  adorn,  and  enforce  the  sense,  and  in  no  case 
to  mystify.  Figures  are  quite  as  definite,  and  are  only  more 
forcible  than  plain,  literal  terms.  The  very  speech  of  ordinary 
life  abounds  in  metaphor  and  simile ;  but,  of  course,  the  poetical 
character  of  the  prophecies  gives  occasion  to  their  more  frequent 
use. 

Again,  the  difficulty  of  scripture  does  not  lie  so  much  in  its 
figurative  style  as  in  the  depth  of  its  thoughts.  In  the  word  of 
God  there  is  perhaps  nothing  more  profound  than  the  first 
chapter  of  John.  Yet  what  first  strikes  one  there  is  the  exceed- 
ing simplicity  of  this  scripture  as  a  matter  of  language.  It 
used  to  be  the  common  habit  of  those  who  taught  the  Greek 
language  in  some  parts  of  the  country  to  make  this  gospel  a 


CHAPTER   XVII.  79 

sort  of  initiatory  exercise.      Notwithstanding,  in  all  the  Bible 
you  can  find  no  revelation  or  handling  of  truth  more  full  of 
depths,  none  that  will  cause  the  really  spiritual  to  stand  more 
amazed,   however   attractive   the  grace   it  displays   in   Christ. 
This  will  show  how  entirely  unfounded  is  the  notion  of  such  as 
fancy  it  is  a  simple  question  of  words.      The  divine  truth  of 
scripture  is   the  difficulty,  not   its    obscure   language.      It   is 
difficult  because  of  our  darkness  morally,  because  of  our  want  of 
acquaintance  with  the  mind  of  God,  judging  appearance  by  the 
natural  senses  or  the  mind,  instead  of  receiving  things  from  God, 
reading  His  words  in  the  light  of  Christ.      So  far  from  the  pro- 
phetic scriptures  being  the  most  difficult  part,  they  are  much 
easier  than  is  commonly  imagined.     It  is  a  great  thing  to  begin 
with   believing   them;   intelligence   follows  and   grows   apace. 
If  we  may  compare  the  various  parts  of  scripture,  the  New 
Testament  is  without  doubt  the  deepest  of  God's  communica- 
tions ;  and  of  the  New  Testament  none  exceed  the  writings  of 
St.  John  for  penetration  into  the  knowledge  of  what  God  is ; 
and  of  the  writings  of  St.  John,  who  would  treat  the  epistles 
and  the  gospel  as  less  profound  than  the  Apocalypse  ?      None, 
I  am  persuaded,  but  such  as  are  too  superficially  acquainted 
with  any  of  them,  to  warrant  their  pronouncing  a  judgment. 

This  may  encourage  some  to  take  up  the  prophecies  with  a 
more  child-like  spirit,  always  bearing  in  mind  that  God  looks 
onward  to  the  future  crisis  that  ushers  in  "  the  day  of  the  Lord." 
He  thinks  of  His  beloved  Son ;  and  that  which  gives  importance 
to  the  prophecies  is  that  they  unfold  the  scene  of  His  interests. 
The  Jews  are  the  people  of  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  deigned  to  be 
born  as  to  the  flesh.  They  have  proved  what  they  were  to  Him, 
He  has  now  to  prove  what  He  will  be  to  them.  He  means  to 
have  an  earthly  people  (Israel),  as  well  as  a  heavenly  (the 
Church),  for  his  glory.  The  word  of  God  stops  not  short  of  this. 
If  it  is  not  fulfilled,  yet  it  is  sure  in  the  keeping  of  God,  who 
has  already  given  a  partial  accomplishment.  Hence  we  get  the 
principle  for  interpreting  all  prophecy ;  it  is  to  be  for  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  connexion  with  Israel,  and  the  nations 
upon  the  earth.     I  am  speaking  now  of  Old  Testament  pro- 


80  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

phecy.  The  New  Testament  takes  another  character — the  Lord 
Jesus  in  connection  with  Christendom,  also,  besides  confirming 
the  oracles  about  Israel.  This  may  show  why  Jehovah  attaches 
importance  to  a  little  place  or  people  on  the  prophetic  field. 
Israel  was  much  in  His  eyes,  because  of  the  Messiah ;  and  His 
own  counsels  are  not  dead  if  they  sleep.  Hence,  too,  when  God 
removes  the  vail  from  His  ancient  people  Israel,  their  old 
antagonists  will  begin  to  appear.  This  is,  to  my  mind,  full  of 
interest.  There  is  a  resurrection  of  every  individual.  The  body 
will  be  raised  for  the  manifestation  of  everything  that  was  done 
in  the  body,  for  it  is  by  the  body  that  the  soul  acts.  Even  so 
will  it  be  with  these  nations.  There  is  a  destiny  analogous; 
they  are  to  reappear  when  Israel  does,  and  God  will  distinguish 
them  according  to  their  original  names,  and  not  those  they  may 
bear  in  the  process  of  human  history.  Jehovah  will,  go  up  to 
the  sources  :  hence  we  have  their  judgment  connected  with  the 
last  days,  and  not  merely  that  which  fell  upon  them  long  ago. 
They  go  down  to  the  close.  Some  may  have  been  more  com- 
pletely accomplished  in  the  past  than  others;  but  with  this 
difference,  they  all  look  onward  to  the  future. 

The  last  generation  will  do  as  their  fathers ;  then  judgment 
will  fall.  Thus  it  is  that  God  will  deal  with  the  nations. 
They  will  manifest  the  same  hostility  to  Israel,  the  same  pride 
against  God,  as  formerly.  This  may  seem  a  hard  principle  to 
some,  but  it  is  most  righteous.  If  a  child  has  grown  up, 
knowing  his  father's  dishonour,  hearing  of  his  disgrace  and 
punishment,  would  not  that  sin  be  most  peculiarly  odious  in  his 
eyes,  if  any  right  feeling  existed  ?  The  public  example  of  his 
father's  evil  ways  would  be  ever  before  him.  But  if  the  son 
trifled  with  it,  and  used  it  as  an  encouragement  to  walk  in  the 
same  path,  is  it  not  just  that  there  should  be  a  still  more  severe 
punishment  exacted  of  that  son  ?  Besides  having  the  universal 
conscience  of  men,  he  had  special  witness  in  his  own  family, 
which  the  heart  of  a  child  ought  to  have  felt  and  pondered 
deeply. 

This  is  just  the  principle  of  God's  ways  in  government. 
Man  ought  to  take  the  more  earnest  heed  from  the  past ;  and 


CHAPTER   XVII.  81 

God,  who  deals  righteously,  will  judge  according  to  that  which 
man  ought  to  have  remembered.  He  ought  to  have  used  the 
witness  of  the  past  as  a  warning  for  the  future.  These  nations 
will  then  reappear,  and,  instead  of  recalling  their  fathers'  ways 
for  their  own  warning  and  profit,  they  take  exactly  the  same 
road,  and  once  more  will  endeavour  to  root  out  and  destroy  the 
people  of  God. 

So  it  is  in  Isaiah  xvii.  Damascus,  which  was  to  the  north  of 
the  Holy  Land,  was  the  very  ancient  and  celebrated  city  of 
Syria.  (See  Gen.  xv.)  It  was  to  be  made  a  heap  of  ruins — the 
cities  of  Aroer  a  place  for  flocks.  (Ver.  1,  2.)  And,  as  of  old, 
Syria  and  Ephraim  conspired  against  the  realm  of  David's  son  to 
their  own  discomfiture,  so  once  more  the  remarkable  feature 
of  this  judgment  is,  that  God  will  deal  with  His  people  as 
well  as  with  their  old  ally.  "  The  fortress  also  shall  cease  from 
Ephraim,  and  the  kingdom  from  Damascus,  and  the  remnant 
of  Syria:  they  shall  be  as  the  glory  of  the  children  of  Israel, 
saith  Jehovah  of  hosts.  And  in  that  day  it  shall  come  to  pass, 
that  the  glory  of  Jacob  shall  be  made  thin,  and  the  fatness 
of  his  flesh  shall  wax  lean.  And  it  shall  be  as  when  the  har- 
vestman  gathereth  the  corn,  and  reapeth  the  ears  with  his 
arm ;  and  it  shall  be  as  he  that  gathereth  ears  in  the  valley 
of  Rephaim."  He  will  gather  out  all  scandals  from  them  and 
punish  the  transgressors  ;  He  will  employ  their  enmity  to  purge 
that  threshing-floor  of  the  land  of  Israel;  He  will  deal  in  a 
judicial  manner  with  His  people.  The  nations  may  lure  them- 
selves and  each  other  on  with  the  hope  that  it  is  going  hard 
with  Israel ;  but  their  conspiracy  will  be  offensive  to  God,  how- 
ever He  may  use  it  for  Israel's  good.  This  is  here  described. 
"  Yet  gleaning  grapes  shall  be  left  in  it,  as  the  shaking  of  an 
olive  tree,  two  or  three  berries  in  the  top  of  the  uppermost 
bough,  four  or  five  in  the  outmost  fruitful  branches  thereof, 
saith  Jehovah,  God  of  Israel.  At  that  day  shall  a  man  look 
to  his  Maker,  and  his  eyes  shall  have  respect  to  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel.  And  he  shall  not  look  to  the  altars,  the  work  of  his 
hands,  neither  shall  respect  that  which  his  fingers  have  made, 
either  the  groves  or  the  images."     (Ver.  6 — 8.) 


82  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

Thus  it  is  plain  there  is,  at  this  time,  a  discriminating  judg- 
ment proceeding  in  the  land  of  Israel.  Compare  chapter  xxviii., 
where  the  course  of  the  overflowing  scourge  is  described.  "  In 
that  day  shall  his  strong  cities  be  as  a  forsaken  bough  ;  and  an 
uppermost  branch,  which  they  left  because  of  the  children  of 
Israel :  and  there  shall  be  desolation.  Because  thou  hast 
forgotten  the  God  of  thy  salvation,  and  hast  not  been  mindful  of 
the  rock  of  thy  strength,  therefore  shalt  thou  plant  pleasant 
plants,  and  shall  set  it  with  strange  slips :  in  the  day  shalt  thou 
make  thy  plant  to  grow,  and  in  the  morning  shalt  thou  make 
thy  seed  to  flourish :  but  the  harvest  shall  be  a  heap  in  the  day 
of  grief  and  of  desperate  sorrow."  (Ver.  9 — 11.)  But  now 
comes  the  retribution.  "  Woe  to  the  multitude  of  many 
people,  which  make  a  noise  like  the  noise  of  the  seas  ;  and  to 
the  rushing  of  nations,  that  make  a  rushing  like  the  rushing 
of  mighty  waters !  The  nations  shall  rush  like  the  rushing 
of  many  waters :  but  God  shall  rebuke  them,  and  they  shall  flee 
far  off,  and  shall  be  chased  as  the  chaff  of  the  mountains  before 
the  wind,  and  like  a  rolling  thing  before  the  whirlwind.  And 
behold  at  eveningtide  trouble;  and  before  the  morning  he  is 
not.  This  is  the  portion  of  them  that  spoil  us,  and  the  lot  of 
them  that  rob  us."  (Ver.  12 — 14.)  Let  the  nations  gather 
their  multitudes;  let  them  rush  on  like  mighty  waters.  But 
the  rebuke  comes;  and  they  flee  and  are  chased,  yea,  like 
thistle-down  before  the  whirlwind.  "And  behold  at  evening- 
time  trouble;  and  before  the  morning  he  is  not.  This  is  the 
portion  of  them  that  spoil  us,  and  the  lot  of  them  that  rob  us." 
When  was  all  this  accomplished  in  the  past,  from  the  day  that 
Isaiah  wrote  ?  When  was  there  the  gathering  of  all  these 
nations  and  their  complete  dispersion  ?  On  the  contrary,  Israel 
was  broken  and  scattered,  as  were  the  Jews  afterwards.  Here 
it  is  not  one  nation  triumphing  over  God's  people,  but  a  gather- 
ing of  all  nations,  who  seem  but  waiting  for  the  morning  to 
swallow  up  Israel ;  but  before  the  morning  they  are  not.  Surely 
it  shall  be ;  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  has  spoken  it. 


CHAPTER   XVIII. 

Our  chapter  is  connected  with  the  overthrow  of  the  nations, 
predicted  at  the  close  of  the  preceding  section,  and  yet  forms  a 
scene  sufficiently  distinct  to  be  treated  separately.  It  is  a 
deeply  interesting  appendix  to  it,  as  is  plain  from  its  being- 
no  new  burden,  which  opens  chapter  xix.  and  distinguishes  the 
judgment  of  Egypt  from  the  subject  before  us.  This  it  is  well 
to  notice,  because  some  Christians,  and  among  them  Yitringa, 
have  fallen  into  the  error  of  supposing  that  Egypt  is  the  "  land 
shadowing  with  wings,"  addressed  in  verse  1,  and  that  the 
Egyptians  are  the  people  to  whom  the  message  is  sent  in  verse 
2,  some  of  them  being  even  brought  to  the  grateful  worship  of 
God  in  verse  7.  The  reader  need  not  be  surprised  at  this  con- 
fusion in  a  commentator  so  learned  and  otherwise  eminent ;  for 
there  is  hardly  a  portion  of  Isaiah  which  has  given  rise  to 
greater  discord  and  more  evident  bewilderment  among  men 
of  note,  from  Eusebius  of  Caesarea  (who  saw  in  it  the  land 
of  Judea  in  apostolic  times,  sending  Christian  doctrine  to  all 
the  world,  an  interpretation  founded  on  the  aTrooreXKuv  .... 
emaToXag  /3i(3\ivag  of  the  LXX.)  down  to  Arias  Montanus,  who 
applied  it  to  America,  converted  to  Christ  by  the  preaching 
and  arms  of  the  Spaniards  ! 

The  right  understanding  of  the  chapter  depends  on  seeing 
that  the  Jewish  nation  are  those  intended  in  verses  2,  7,  and 
this,  not  in  the  days  of  Sennacherib,  but  in  the  future  crisis. 
A  few  expressions,  especially  in  verse  1,  may  be  obscure,  but  the 
general  scope  is  remarkably  plain,  and  of  exceeding  interest. 

It  is  true,  as  Henderson  says,  in  common  with  very  many,  that 
the  chapter  is  not  a  "woe,"  like  the  preceding,  but  an  appendage 
to  it,  with  a  call  summoning  attention — "Ho!" — to  the  land 
unnamed,  which  is  to  be  described.  The  connexion  seems  plain 
between  chap.  xvii.  12 — 14  and  xviii.  4 — 6.  One  nation  shall 
seek  to  befriend  the  Jews  in  the  time  and  way  spoken  of;  but 


84  LECTURES  ON   ISAIAH. 

that  this  is  Ethiopia  is  wholly  without  and  against  the  tests  of 
the  chapter.  According  to  this  the  Jews  would  send  swift 
messengers  to  acquaint  Tirhakah  of  the  destruction  of  Sen- 
nacherib's host,  when  it  seemed  on  the  point  of  taking  Jerusalem. 
But  this  dislocates  the  chapter,  makes  the  Ethiopians  the 
prominent  figure  instead  of  the  Jews,  and  terminates  most 
inaptly  with  a  present  offered  by  the  people  who  had  received 
the  message.  It  is  enough  to  compare  what  I  believe  to  be  the 
true  interpretation  with  this,  in  order  to  refute  its  pretensions. 

"Ho,  land  shadowing  (or,  whirring)  with  wings,  which  is 
beyond  the  rivers  of  Cush "  (i.e.,  beyond  the  Nile  and  the 
Euphrates),  means  a  country  outside  the  limits  of  those  nations 
which  up  to  the  prophet's  day  had  menaced  or  meddled  with 
Israel.  Egypt  and  Assyria  were  the  chief  of  those  powers  ;  for 
there  was  an  Asiatic  as  well  as  an  African  Cush.  The  land  in 
question  lay  (not  necessarily  contiguous  to,  but  it  might  be  far) 
beyond  either  of  these  countries.  This  comparatively  distant 
land  espouses  the  cause  of  Israel ;  but  the  protection  would  be 
ineffectual  in  result,  however  loud  the  proffer  and  the  prepara- 
tion. The  use  of  "wings"  to  convey  the  idea  of  a  cover  for  the 
oppressed  or  defenceless  is  too  common  to  need  proofs. 

The  second  verse  shows,  in  addition  to  the  previous  charac- 
teristics of  this  future  ally  of  the  Jews,  that  it  is  a  maritime 
power ;  for  it  sends  its  ambassadors  in  light  vessels  (literally  of 
"  bulrush  "  or  "  papyrus  ")  on  the  face  of  the  waters.  Israel  is 
the  object  of  their  anxiety.  "  Go,  ye  swift  messengers,  to  a 
nation  scattered  and  peeled,  to  a  people  terrible  from  their 
beginning  hitherto,  a  nation  meted  out  and  trodden  down,  whose 
land  the  rivers  have  spoiled."  The  attempt  to  apply  this 
description  to  the  Egyptians,  or  the  Ethiopians,  has  largely 
affected  the  view  taken  of  the  epithets  here  applied ;  but  I  see 
no  sufficient  reason  to  question  the  general  accuracy  of  our 
authorized  version,  which,  as  predicating  them  of  Israel,  yields 
a  clear  and  good  sense.  The  difference  between  the  land  in  the 
first  verse,  which  sends  out  its  messengers  and  ships,  and 
the  dispersed  people,  hitherto  so  formidable  but  of  late 
ravaged  by  their  impetuous  enemies,  stands  on  no  minute  points 


CHAPTER   XVIII.  85 

of  verbal  criticism,  but  on  the  general  bearing  of  the  context 
which  the  English-reading  Christian  is  quite  able  to  judge. 

Thus  far  we  have  seen  the  intervention  of  this  unnamed 
land,  described  as  the  would-be  protector  of  Israel,  actively 
engaging  with  their  swift  ships  it  would  seem  on  a  friendly 
mission  in  quest  of  that  scattered  people. 

But  another  enters  the  scene  who  puts  an  arrest  on  the  zeal 
of  man.  (Ver.  3,  4.)  Universal  attention  is  demanded.  Great 
events  tremble  in  the  balances.  Signs  are  given,  visibly  and 
audibly.  "  All  ye  inhabitants  of  the  world,  and  dwellers  on  the 
earth,  see  ye  when  he  lifteth  up  an  ensign  on  the  mountains; 
and  when  he  bloweth  a  trumpet,  hear  ye.  For  as  Jehovah  said 
unto  me,  I  will  take  my  rest,  I  will  consider  in  my  dwelling- 
place."  God  is  not  favouring  this  busy  enterprise.  Man  is 
active :  Jehovah,  as  it  were,  retires  and  watches.  It  is  like  the 
parching  heat  just  before  the  lightning,  as  the  dewy  cloud  in 
the  heat  of  harvest :  a  moment  of  deep  stillness  and  suspense, 
after  immense  efforts  to  gather  in  the  Jews  by  the  patronage  of 
the  maritime  nation  of  verses  1  and  2.  All  has  seemed  to 
flourish :  but  what  is  man  without  God  ?  "  For  afore  the 
harvest,  when  the  bud  is  perfect,  and  the  sour  grape  is  ripening 
in  the  flower,  he  shall  both  cut  off  the  springs  with  pruning 
hooks,  and  take  away  and  cut  down  the  branches."  Thus  total 
failure  of  the  whole  plan  ensues.  Everything  in  appearance 
betokened  a  speedy  ingathering  of  good  to  Israel,  and  their 
national  hopes  seemed  to  be  on  the  eve  of  being  realized,  when 
God  brings  all  to  nought,  and  lets  loose  the  old  passions  of  the 
Gentiles  against  His  people.  The  issue  is  that  "  they  shall  be 
left  together  unto  the  fowls  of  the  mountains  and  to  the  beasts 
of  the  earth  :  and  the  fowls  shall  summer  upon  them,  and  all 
the  beasts  of  the  earth  shall  winter  upon  them."     (Ver.  5.  6.) 

It  was  not  Jehovah's  time ;  and  yet  it  was.  For  "  in  that 
time  shall  the  present  be  brought  unto  Jehovah  of  Hosts  of 
a  people  scattered  and  peeled,  and  from  a  people  terrible  from 
their  beginning  hitherto :  a  nation  meted  out  and  trodden 
under  foot,  whose  land  the  rivers  have  spoiled,  to  the  place 
of  the  name  of  Jehovah    of  hosts,   the  mount   Zion."      Thus 


86  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

will  the  presumptuous  help  of  man  be  rebuked,  as  well  as 
the  renewed  wrath  of  the  nations  once  more  preying  on  the 
poor  but  loved  people  of  Jehovah.  For  as  surely  as  they 
turn  again  to  rend  Israel,  He  will  appear  in  the  midst  of 
the  desolation,  and  with  His  own  mighty  hand  accomplish 
that  which  man  as  vainly  seeks  to  effect  as  to  frustrate.  The 
Jewish  nation,  at  that  very  season,  shall  be  brought  a  present 
to  Jehovah;  and  they  shall  come  not  empty-handed,  but 
emptied  of  self,  with  lowly,  grateful  hearts  to  Jehovah  in 
mount  Zion,  after  their  final  escape  from  Gentile  fury,  in  His 
mercy  which  endures  for  ever. 


i 


CHAPTERS   XIX.,  XX. 

The  first  of  our  chapters  gives  "the  burden  of  Egypt,"  and 
is  followed,  in  the  second,  by  a  personal  sign  enjoined  on  the 
prophet,  as  a  token  of  the  degradation  soon  to  befall  Egypt 
and  Ethiopia,  The  general  drift  is  so  clear  as  to  render 
prolonged  remarks  altogether  needless. 

"  Behold,  Jehovah  rideth  upon  a  swift  cloud  and  shall  come 
into  Egypt."  The  prophet  thus  boldly  and  with  the  fullest 
moral  truth  sets  forth  that  sure  overthrow  of  the  great  realm  of 
the  old  world's  prudence,  and  debasing  idolatry,  and  abundant 
natural  riches.  What  availed  their  boasted  bulwarks  and  their 
watery  barriers,  if  Jehovah,  who  "rideth  upon  a  swift  cloud," 
dooms  Egypt  to  humiliation  and  decay  ?  Worse  than  idle  their 
appeal  to  their  false  gods :  for  their  idols  should  be  moved  at 
His  presence,  and  the  heart  of  Egypt  melt  in  its  midst.  Intes- 
tine division  and  civil  war  (ver.  2)  should  be  added  to  the 
overwhelming  assaults  from  without;  and  the  downfall  be 
consummated  by  infatuated  counsels  as  well  as  the  wasting 
away  of  all  national  spirit;  for  on  their  recourse  in  their 
distress  to  their  old  haunts  of  superstition  and  sorcery,  God 
would  shut  them  up  to  the  hard  bondage  of  cruel  lords  and  a 
fierce  king.     (Ver.  1 — 4.) 

But  the  hand  of  Jehovah  should  be  not  only  upon  the 
defences  of  the  country,  but  upon  its  internal  supports,  and  this 
in  all  that  was  their  glory  and  their  confidence.  For  is  not  this 
Ezekiel's  "great  dragon  that  lieth  in  the  midst  of  his  rivers, 
which  hath  said,  My  river  is  my  own,  and  I  have  made  it  for 
myself?"  Surely  it  is  the  same,  of  whom  Isaiah  here  predicts, 
"the  waters  shall  fail  from  the  sea,  and  the  rivers  shall  be 
wasted  and  dried  up.  And  they  shall  turn  the  rivers  far  away, 
and  the  brooks  of  defence  shall  be  emptied  and  dried  up: 
the  reeds  and  flags  shall  wither.  The  paper  reeds  by  the 
brooks,  by  the  mouth  of  the  brooks,  and  everything  sown  by 


88  LECTURES  ON   ISAIAH. 

the  brooks,  shall  wither,  be  driven  away,  and  be  no  more.  -  The 
fishers  also  shall  mourn,  and  all  they  that  cast  angle  into  the 
brooks  shall  lament,  and  they  that  spread  nets  upon  the  waters 
shall  languish.  Moreover  they  that  work  in  fine  flax,  and  they 
that  weave -networks,  shall  be  confounded.  And  they  shall  be 
broken  in  the  purposes  thereof,  all  that  make  sluices  and  ponds 
for  fish."     (Ver.  5—10.) 

The  prophet  next  (ver.  11)  proceeds  to  taunt  this  haughty 
power  in  that  for  which,  most  of  all,  it  stood  high  in  its  own 
conceit  and  the  reputation  of  men.  For  who  has  not  heard  of 
"the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians  ?"  Who  does  not  know  of  their 
science  and  civilization  while  the  most  renowned  lands  of  the 
west  which  earliest  aspired  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  world  had 
not  yet  emerged  from  their  condition  of  wild,  untutored  barbar- 
ism ?  "  Surely  the  princes  of  Zoan  are  fools,  the  counsel  of  the 
wise  counsellors  of  Pharaoh  is  become  brutish :  how  say  ye  unto 
Pharaoh,  I  am  the  son  of  the  wise,  the  son  of  ancient  kings  ? " 
"Where  are  they?  where  are  thy  wise  men?"  is  the  piercing 
challenge  of  the  prophet ;  "  and  let  them  tell  thee  now,  and  let 
them  know  what  Jehovah  of  hosts  hath  purposed  upon  Egypt." 

Alas !  how  many  now  are  wrapped  up  in  the  same  carnal 
security.  How  many  in  our  day,  like  the  wise  counsellors  of 
Egypt,  are  caught  in  their  own  craftiness,  too  wise  to  heed  the 
sure  and  solemn  words  of  divine  prophecy ;  not  wise  enough  to 
guard  themselves  from  foolish  superstition,  or  still  more  foolish 
incredulity !  Is  it  not  a  maxim  among  the  sages  of  Christen- 
dom, that  prophecy  cannot  be  known  till  the  event  accomplishes 
it  and  fixes  its  interpretation  ?  Than  which  notion,  I  dare  to 
say,  none  can  be  produced  less  reasonable  in  itself  or  more  flatly 
contrary  to  the  word  of  God.  Not  a  believer  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment but  protests  against  the  sinful  error ;  for  not  a  soul  then 
was  justified  who  did  not  look  onward,  trusting  his  soul  and 
spiritual  all  on  that  which  was  as  yet  necessarily  in  the  womb  of 
the  future — the  coming  of  the  woman's  Seed,  the  Messiah.  And 
are  believers  of  the  New  Testament  called  of  God  to  be  less 
trustful,  less  realizing  what  is  coming,  with  incomparably  more 
light  of  revelation  ?     What !  we,  to  whom  God  has  revealed  by 


CHAPTERS   XIX.,  XX.  89 

the  Spirit,  that  which,  the  brightest  of  old  was  compelled  to  say, 
"  eye  had  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  had  entered  into  man's 
heart  to  consider  "  ?  And  even  on  grounds  of  reason,  of  which 
some  are  so  vainglorious,  what  can  be  more  opposed  to  it ;  seeing 
that  God  has  beyond  controversy  given  His  people  prophetic 
revelation?  Is  this  alone,  of  all  scripture,  to  be  put  under 
human  ban  ?  Even  on  grounds  of  personal  danger,  the  suicidal 
folly  of  such  scepticism  as  this  is  most  apparent ;  for  as  the  great 
central  point  of  prophecy  is  the  nearness  of  the  day  of  the  Lord, 
which  is  to  judge  all  the  pride,  and  irreligion,  and  idolatry,  and 
rebellion  against  God  found  then  on  earth,  and  specially  in 
Christendom,  it  will  be  too  late  for  men,  before  they  believe,  to 
await  that  event  which  will  prove  the  truth  of  the  prophecies  in 
their  own  destruction.  In  short,  in  every  point  of  view,  the 
maxim  is  as  false  as  it  is  perilous.  It  really  amounts  to  blotting 
out  all  direct  use  of  prophecy  whatsoever :  for  it  refuses  to  hear 
its  warning  till  its  voice  is  wholly  changed.  Prophecy  accom- 
plished becomes  in  effect  history,  rather  than  prophecy;  no 
small  value  of  which  is  the  silencing  of  God's  enemies,  rather 
than,  while  unfulfilled,  the  admonition  and  comfort  of  His  people. 
But  to  return.  "  The  princes  of  Zoan  [the  ancient  royal  city 
of  Egypt,  named  Tanis  in  profane  authors]  are  become  fools,  the 
princes  of  Noph  [Moph,  or  Memphis,  Hosea  ix.  6]  are  deceived ; 
they  have  also  seduced  Egypt,  even  they  that  are  the  stay  of  the 
tribes  thereof.  The  Lord  hath  mingled  a  perverse  spirit  in  the 
midst  thereof :  and  they  have  caused  Egypt  to  err  in  every  work 
thereof,  as  a  drunken  man  staggereth  in  his  vomit.  Neither 
shall  there  be  any  work  for  Egypt,  which  the  head  or  tail, 
branch  or  rush,  may  do."  They  are  judicially  confounded  of 
God  in  their  policy. 

Now,  I  am  not  disposed  to  deny  a  measure  of  accomplish- 
ment in  the  time  of  the  prophet.  Only  let  not  this  be  allowed 
to  exclude  the  complete  fulfilment  which  yet  remains  to  be 
made  good.  This  germinant  inclusive  style,  we  have  seen,  is 
the  habit  of  Isaiah,  as  indeed  of  the  prophets.  Enough  was 
then  accomplished  for  a  stay  to  the  faithful ;   but  it  was  no 


90  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

more  than  a  testimony  to  that  full  and  punctual  payment 
which  God  will  yet  render,  in  honour  both  of  His  own  words, 
and  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  when  His  manifested  glory  dawns 
and  His  world-kingdom  comes.  (Rev.  xi.)  "  In  that  day 
shall  Egypt  be  like  unto  women:  and  it  shall  be  afraid  and 
fear  because  of  the  shaking  of  the  hand  of  Jehovah  of  hosts, 
which  he  shaketh  over  it.  And  the  land  of  Judah  shall  be  a 
terror  unto  Egypt,  every  one  that  maketh  mention  thereof 
shall  be  afraid  in  himself,  because  of  the  counsel  of  Jehovah  of 
hosts,  which  he  hath  determined  against  them."  Egypt  has  its 
part  to  play  in  the  tremendous  convulsions  which  precede 
Jehovah's  appearing;  and  to  this  our  chapter  looks  onward, 
with  which  compare  Daniel  xi.  40 — 43.  Out  of  that  land  shall 
He  gather  some  of  His  outcast  people  (Isaiah  xi.),  and  in  the 
process,  as  we  know,  destroy  the  tongue  of  the  Egyptian  sea, 
and  with  His  mighty  wind  shake  His  hand  over  the  river, 
smiting  it  in  its  seven  streams. 

But  mercy  shall  rejoice  over  judgment ;  and  at  the  very  time 
when  Egypt  shall  be  as  women  trembling  at  the  shaking  of 
Jehovah's  hand,  and  the  very  mention  of  the  land  of  Judah 
shall  strike  terror,  "  In  that  day  shall  five  cities  in  the  land  of 
Egypt  speak  the  language  of  Canaan,  and  swear  to  Jehovah  of 
hosts;  one  shall  be  called,  The  city  of  destruction.  In  that 
day  shall  there  be  an  altar  to  Jehovah  in  the  midst  of  the 
land  of  Egypt,  and  a  pillar  at  the  border  thereof  to  Jehovah. 
And  it  shall  be  for  a  sign  and  for  a  witness  unto  Jehovah  of 
hosts  in  the  land  of  Egypt:  for  they  shall  cry  unto  Jehovah 
because  of  the  oppressors,  and  he  shall  send  them  a  saviour,  and 
a  great  one,  and  he  shall  deliver  them.  And  Jehovah  shall  be 
known  to  Egypt,  and  the  Egyptians  shall  know  Jehovah  in 
that  day,  and  shall  do  sacrifice  and  oblation ;  yea,  they  shall 
vow  a  vow  unto  Jehovah,  and  perform  it.  And  Jehovah  shall 
smite  Egypt :  he  shall  smite  and  heal  it :  and  they  shall  return 
even  to  Jehovah,  and  shall  be  entreated  of  them,  and  shall  heal 
them."  Thus  evidently  shall  Jehovah  then  deliver  and  revive 
Egypt. 

The   efforts  of  interpreters  to  explain  these  verses  are  as 


CHAPTERS   XIX.,   XX.  91 

manifold  as  they  are  vain :  and  justly  are  they  doomed  to  dark- 
ness who  see  not  the  link  with  Christ,  and  with  Christ  the 
glory  of  His  people  Israel  then,  if  they  despise  Him  now. 
Origen,  Eusebius,  &c,  interpreted  it  of  the  flight  into  Egypt 
(Matt,  ii.),  and  of  the  overthrow  of  idolatry  and  spread  of 
Christianity  there  also ;  Jerome  embraces  along  with  this  an 
application  to  the  wasting  of  Egypt  by  Nebuchadnezzar. 
Moderns  generally  apply  it  in  substance  as  Jerome  did 
(partly  historically,  of  the  disasters  under  Sennacherib,  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, Psammetichus,  or  the  Romans;  and  partly  mysti- 
cally, of  the  triumphant  spread  of  the  gospel  past,  present,  or 
future).  These  speculations  do  not  seem  to  call  for  refutation  : 
to  state  them  is  to  condemn  them  sufficiently.  The  true 
reference  to  the  future  crisis  on  the  earth  is  yet  more  confirmed 
by  the  blessed  intimations  of  the  closing  verses.  "  In  that  day 
shall  there  be  a  highway  out  of  Egypt  to  Assyria,  and  the 
Assyrian  shall  come  into  Egypt,  and  the  Egyptian  into  Assyria, 
and  the  Egyptians  shall  serve  with  the  Assyrians.  In  that  day 
shall  Israel  be  the  third  with  Egypt  and  with  Assyria,  even  a 
blessing  in  the  midst  of  the  land ;  whom  Jehovah  of  hosts  shall 
bless,  saying,  Blessed  be  Egypt  my  people,  and  Assyria  the  work 
of  my  hands,  and  Israel  mine  inheritance."  It  is  not  a  heavenly 
scene,  but  earthly.  It  is  not  the  present  church  condition, 
where  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,  and  Christ  is  all  and  in 
all,  but  a  future  state  of  large  yet  graduated  blessing  of  nations. 
It  is  not  this  dispensation,  where  tares  are  mingled  with  the 
wheat,  but  the  coming  age  when  all  scandals  are  removed  from 
the  scene  where  the  Great  King  reigns  in  righteousness.  That 
nation,  so  proud  of  its  natural  wisdom,  the  old  oppressor  and 
frequent  snare  of  Israel,  shall  be  humbled  to  the  dust,  and  out  of 
the  dust  cry  to  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  who  shall  send  them  a 
mighty  deliverer,  and  they  shall  know  Him  and  worship  Him 
acceptably,  who  smote  them  but  will  heal  them  with  a  great 
salvation.  For  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  even  unto  the  going- 
down  of  the  same,  Jehovah's  name  will  be  great  among  the 
Gentiles;  and  in  every  place  incense  shall  be  offered  unto  it 
and  a  pure  offering;  for  His  name  shall  be  great  among  the 


92  LECTUKES   ON  ISAIAH. 

heathen.  No  wonder  therefore  that  there  shall  be  an  altar  to 
Jehovah  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  a  pillar  at  the  border  thereof 
to  Jehovah — a  sign  and  a  witness  unto  Jehovah  of  hosts  in  that 
land. 

And  what  of  that  later  oppressor  of  Israel  ?  Has  Jehovah 
but  one  blessing  for  the  stranger  foe  ?  Has  He  not  reserved  a 
blessing  for  the  Assyrian?  Yes,  for. the  Assyrian  also.  The 
haughty  rival  of  the  north  and  east  shall  be  brought  into  the 
rich  blessing  of  Jehovah.  "  In  that  day  shall  there  be  a  high- 
way out  of  Egypt  to  Assyria."  Old  jealousy  and  long-lasting 
animosity  shall  flee  apace  and  for  ever ;  intimacy  and  generous 
trust  and  mutual  love  shall  cement  the  alliance  that  is  founded 
on  Jehovah  truly  known.  "  And  the  Assyrian  shall  come  into 
Egypt,  and  the  Egyptian  into  Assyria ;  and  the  Egyptians  shall 
serve  with  the  Assyrians."  Happy,  though  none  then  be 
despised  and  poor  !  "  In  that  day  shall  Israel  be  the  third  with 
Egypt  and  with  Assyria."  That  is,  Israel  shall  form  one  of  the 
trio  here  specified  and  stamped  with  singular  favour  in  the 
millennial  day.  For  indeed  Jehovah  shall  bless  them,  "  Saying, 
Blessed  be  Egypt  my  people,  and  Assyria  the  work  of  my  hands, 
and  Israel  mine  inheritance."  Thus  again  is  Abraham's  blessing 
verified  and  manifested.  "  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation ; 
and  I  will  bless  thee,  and  make  thy  name  great ;  and  thou  shalt 
be  a  blessing.  And  I  will  bless  them  that  bless  thee,  and 
curse  him  that  curseth  thee ;  and  in  thee  shall  all  the  families 
of  the  earth  be  blessed."  But  even  here,  it  appears  to  me,  the 
due  place  of  Israel  is  maintained,  and  the  ranks  of  the  others 
nicely  distinguished  in  God's  wisdom,  however  large  His  good- 
ness to  the  rest;  for  Israel  has  the  glorious  title  of  Jehovah's 
inheritance,  if  Egypt  be  called  and  Assyria  created  for  His 
praise. 

From  chapter  xx.  we  learn  that  the  Assyrian  ravaged  Egypt 
(with  the  Ethiopians),  leading  his  captives  in  shame.  History, 
I  believe,  is  silent;*  but  not  so  prophecy,  which  declares  that 

*  The  Assyrian  inscriptions  remarkably  illustrate  the  accuracy  of  the  state- 
ment here.     For  it  is  now  known  that  the  conjectures  of  commentators,  which 


CHAPTERS   XIX.,   XX.  93 

the  land  of  Egypt  shall  not  escape  the  king  of  the  north,  or  last 
Assyrian,  at  the  time  of  the  end. 


identified  Sargon  with  Shalmaneser  on  the  one  side,  or  with  Sennacherib  or 
Esarhaddon  on  the  other,  are  unfounded  and  erroneous.  He  was  a  monarch  of 
no  common  energy ;  not  only  distinct  from  his  immediate  predecessor,  Shal- 
maneser, but  it  would  seem  of  a  distinct  family,  and  yet  not  Sennacherib  but 
his  father.  The  national  annals  indicate  no  allusion  to  his  own  father,  which 
has  been  explained  plausibly  enough  on  the  supposition  that  he  contrived  to 
substitute  himself  for  his  predecessor  absent  at  the  siege  of  Samaria,  the  con- 
quest of  which  he  claims  in  the  inscription.  And  it  is  certainly  worthy  of  note, 
as  has  been  remarked,  that  in  2  Kings  xviii.  9,  10,  though  Shalmaneser  is  said 
to  have  come  up  against  Samaria  and  besieged  it,  the  writer  avoids  saying  that 

he  took  it.     "And  at  the  end  of  three  years  they  took  it And 

the  ling  of  Assyria  did  carry  away  Israel  down  to  Assyria,"  &c.  Though  this 
had  been  done  by  two  of  the  preceding  monarchs,  it  is  known  that  Sargon 
minutely  details  the  settlement  of  27,280  families  from  Samaria  in  his  eastern 
dominions. 

It  may  also  be  mentioned,  that  it  is  more  than  doubtful  whether  Tartan  be 
a  proper  name.  It  means  more  probably  "general,"  both  here  and  in  2  Kings 
xviii.  16 ;  as  the  other  two  given  as  proper  names  are  appellatives  of  the  chief 
eunuch  and  the  chief  butler,  so  this  would  point  to  a  general  employed  by 
Sargon  in  taking  Ashdod,  as  another  was  later  by  Sennacherib  when  Jerusalem 
was  menaced.     So  Prof.  Rawlinson  in  Smith's  Dictionary. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

In  this  chapter,  and  not  a  long  one,  are  three  sentences  of 
judgment — on  Babylon  (ver.  1 — 10),  on  Dumah  (ver.  11, 12),  and 
on  Arabia  (ver.  13 — 17). 

"The  burden  of  the  desert  of  the  sea.  As  whirlwinds 
in  the  south  pass  through ;  so  it  cometh  from  the  desert,  from 
a  terrible  land.  A  grievous  vision  is  declared  unto  me;  the 
treacherous  dealer  dealeth  treacherously,  and  the  spoiler 
spoileth.  Go  up,  0  Elam:  besiege,  O  Media;  all  the  sighing 
thereof  have  I  made  to  cease."  There  can  be  no  doubt,  it 
appears  to  me,  that  the  great  Chaldean  capital  is  referred  to; 
the  command  to  the  Medes  and  Persians  to  go  up  and  besiege 
is  one  indication;  and  so  is  yet  more  the  graphic  description 
of  the  sudden  destruction,  in  verses  3 — 5,  which  turaed  the 
night  of  revelry  into  the  pangs  of  terror  and  death  for  the 
dissolute  king  and  his  court.  "Therefore  are  my  loins  filled 
with  pain:  pangs  have  taken  hold  upon  me,  as  the  pangs  of 
a  woman  that  travaileth;  I  was  bowed  down  at  the  hearing 
of  it;  I  was  dismayed  at  the  seeing  of  it.  My  heart  panted, 
fearfulness  affrighted  me :  the  night  of  my  pleasure  hath  he 
turned  into  fear  unto  me.  Prepare  the  table,  watch  in  the 
watch-tower,  eat,  drink :  arise,  ye  princes,  and  anoint  the 
shield."  The  ninth  verse  crowns  the  proof,  and  expressly 
names  Babylon's  fall  as  the  object  intended.  The  prophet 
personifies  the  city  or  its  people. 

Nevertheless  there  is  somewhat  to  be  noted  in  the  phrase . 
used  of  the  doomed  mistress  of  the  world ;  especially  as  there 
seems  to  be  an  evident  link  between  this  enigmatic  title, 
"the  burden  of  the  desert  of  the  sea,"  and  that  applied  to  Jeru- 
salem, "  the  burden  of  the  valley  of  vision,"  in  the  beginning  of 
chapter  xxii.  As  the  rise  and  glory  of  the  first  Gentile  empire 
was  only  permitted  sovereignly  of  God  in  consequence  of 
hopeless  idolatry  in  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  so  the  judgment  of 


CHAPTER   XXL  95 

Babylon  was  the  epoch  of  deliverance  for  the  Jewish  remnant, 
the  type  of  the  final  dealings  of  God  with  the  last  holder  of  the 
power  which  began  with  the  golden  head  of  the  great  image. 
There  is  thus  a  correlation  between  these  two  cities — Jerusalem 
and  Babylon — whether  historical  or  symbolic ;  and  the  latter  is 
designated  "  the  desert  of  the  sea,"  the  former  "  the  valley  of 
vision."  Jeremiah  in  his  vision  (chap.  li.  42)  beholds  the  sea 
come  up  upon  Babylon,  so  as  to  cover  her  with  the  multitude  of 
the  waves.  In  fact,  too,  we  know  to  what  a  waste  this  seat  of 
human  pride  sunk,  and  so  notoriously  it  remains  until  this  day. 
There  is,  in  verses  6 — 10,  set  forth  the  twofold  leadership  of 
the  coming  invasion,  and  the  twofold  nationality  of  the  armies 
that  followed.  The  watchman  in  the  vision  attests  his  vigilance, 
and  reports  what  he  saw;  which  is  followed  by  the  solemn 
tidings  of  Babylon's  fall,  and  the  prophet's  seal  of  the  truth  of 
the  announcement. 

Next  comes  "the  burden  of  Dumah"  (ver.  11,  12),  which, 
from  the  connection,  bordered  on,  if  it  did  not  belong  to  Idumea. 
w  He  calleth  to  me  out  of  Seir,  Watchman,  what  of  the  night  ? 
Watchman,  what  of  the  night  ?  The  watchman  said,  The  morn- 
ing cometh  and  also  the  night :  if  ye  will  enquire,  enquire  ye : 
return,  come."  The  Edomite  cry  is  one  of  proud  scorn  and 
self-security.  The  brief  answer  is  pregnant  with  serious  expos- 
tulation. Let  them  not  trust  to  hopes  of  the  bright  morn; 
for  the  dark  and  dangerous  night  would  be  there  also.  Never- 
theless, a  door  was  still  open  for  repentance.  Let  them  "  come 
again." 

As  for  "the  burden  upon  Arabia,"  little  remark  is  needed. 
The  forests  of  Arabia  would  be  no  more  an  effectual  hiding- 
place  from  the  storm  than  the  rocks  and  mountain  fastnesses 
of  Edom.  It  is  not  only  the  travelling  companies  or  caravans 
of  Dedan  which  are  cast  on  the  pity  and  care  of  the  men  of 
Tema;  but  utter  wasting  within  a  year  is  pronounced  on  the 
mighty  men  of  the  children  of  Kedar. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

Chapter  xxii.  consists  of  a  prophecy  wholly  directed  against 
Jerusalem.  There  may  have  been  some  anticipation  in  the 
prophet's  day,  but  it  was  partial.  So  much  so  was  this  the  case, 
that  Vitringa  can  only  eke  out  an  appearance  of  an  historical 
answer  by  piecing  together  the  invasion  of  the  city  by  the 
Assyrians  under  Sennacherib,  and  that  by  the  Chaldeans  under 
Nebuchadnezzar ;  and  even  this  by  the  strong  inversion  which 
places  the  Chaldean  movement  in  verses  1 — 5  (comp.  2  Kings 
xxv.  4,  5)  and  the  Assyrian  in  the  part  that  follows  (with  which 
2  Chron.  xxxii.  2 — 5  corresponds).  Granting  this  as  a  primary 
application,  it  affords  a  strong  presumption  that  this  chapter, 
like  the  last  and  all  we  have  seen,  points  to  the  great  day  when 
the  reckoning  of  nations  will  come  in  the  morning,  and  of  every 
individual  throughout  its  course,  even  to  the  judgments  of  the 
secrets  of  the  heart.  It  seems  strange  that  believers  should  rest 
satisfied  with  so  small  an  instalment  from  One  who  pays  to  the 
uttermost  farthing.  The  spirit  that  treats  as  an  illusion  the 
expectation  of  a  punctual  fulfilment  of  these  prophecies  as  a 
whole,  in  every  feature  save  those  expressly  limited  to  a  definite 
time  in  certain  particulars,  is  either  ignorance  or  scepticism,  or, 
what  is  common  enough,  a  mixture  of  both. 

The  city  is  shown  us  in  the  early  verses,  changed  from  its 
stir  and  tumultuous  joy  to  the  deepest  uneasiness  and  deadly 
fear,  the  slain  not  fallen  in  battle  but  ignominious  slaughter,  all 
the  rulers  fled,  but  taken  and  bound,  so  that  the  prophet  can 
but  turn  and  weep  alone  in  bitterness;  for  the  trouble  and 
perplexity  sprang  not  from  the  dust  but  were  by  Jehovah  of  hosts. 

The  central  verses  expose  the  utter  vanity  and  unpardonable 
sin  of  recourse  to  human  measures  by  the  people  of  God  when 
He  is  dealing  with  them  in  judgment.  Their  only  right  place 
at  such  a  time  is  to  bow  to  His  hand  and  accept  the  chastening 
He  is  pleased  to  inflict,  always  confident  that  mercy  rejoices 


CHAPTER   XXII.  97 

against  judgment  and  that  the^end  of  Jehovah  is  that  He  is 
exceeding  pitiful  and  of  tender  mercy.  Here  there  was  no 
humiliation  in  them,  no  recognition  of  Him  or  His  ways. 
"And  he  discovered  the  covering  of  Judah,  and  thou  didst  look 
in  that  day  to  the  armour  of  the  house  of  the  forest.  Ye  have 
seen  also  the  breaches  of  the  city  of  David,  that  they  are  many : 
and  ye  gathered  together  the  waters  of  the  lower  pool.  And 
ye  have  numbered  the  houses  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  houses 
have  ye  broken  down  to  fortify  the  wall.  Ye  made  also  a  ditch 
between  the  two  walls  for  the  water  of  the  old  pool :  but  ye 
have  not  looked  unto  the  maker  thereof,  neither  had  respect 
unto  him  that  fashioned  it  long  ago.  And  in  that  day  did 
Jehovah,  God  of  hosts,  call  to  weeping,  and  to  mourning,  and  to 
baldness,  and  to  girding  with  sackcloth:  and  behold  joy  and 
gladness,  slaying  oxen,  and  killing  sheep,  eating  flesh,  and 
drinking  wine:  let  us  eat  and  drink;  for  to-morrow  we  shall 
die.  And  it  was  revealed  in  mine  ears  by  Jehovah  of  hosts, 
Surely  this  iniquity  shall  not  be  purged  from  you  till  ye  die, 
saith  Jehovah,  God  of  hosts."  The  one  effort  was  to  escape  by 
policy — a  fatal  path  for  the  people  of  God,  which  speedily  falls 
into  open  licentious  Sadduceeism. 

The  close  of  the  chapter  sets  before  us  the  setting  aside 
of  the  unworthy  Shebna  who  had  crept  into  the  place  of  chief 
minister,  next  to  the  throne,  who  lived  only  for  self,  and  even 
after  death  still  sought  nothing  but  his  own  name  and  glory 
(ver.  15 — 19) ;  whereon  Jehovah's  servant  Eliakim  is  called 
to  take  the  reins  of  government  in  his  stead,  a  father  to  Jeru- 
salem and  Judah,  with  the  key  of  David's  house  laid  by 
Jehovah  on  his  shoulder,  with  full  authority  and  adequate  power. 
We  cannot  here  fail  to  recognize  the  type  of  Christ  displacing 
the  Antichrist;  and  the  very  fact  of  the  past  historical  cir- 
cumstances being  put  together  without  regard  to  mere  date, 
as  we  have  seen,  and  with  personages  introduced  who  officially 
were  not  the  highest,  yet  described  in  terms  which  open  out  to 
a  dominion  and  power  beyond  the  highest,  prepares  one  for  the 
magnificent  events  of  the  latter  day  in  the  Holy  Land,  as  the 
only  complete  fulfilment  of  the  scripture  before  us. 

G 


CHAPTER    XXIII. 

The  last  of  these  local  judgments  here  comes  before  us — "  the 
burden  of  Tyre."  This  city  is  the  type  of  the  world's  com- 
mercial glory;  wealthy,  corrupt,  and  self-confident,  but  taken 
though  not  destroyed,  after  a  long  siege,  by  Nebuchadnezzar. 
Such  historically  is  the  destruction  announced  not  here  only  but 
in  Ezekiel  xxvii. — xxviii.  Tyre  and  the  Tyrians  were  the 
centre  of  the  merchandise  of  the  ancient  world,  the  emporium 
of  all  the  commodities  and  the  luxuries  of  that  day,  the  link 
through  "the  ships  of  Tarshish"  between  the  west  and  the 
east.  Its  fall  therefore  could  not  but  affect  painfully  and 
universally  the  dwellers  on  the  earth ;  and  the  rather,  as 
trading  rivals  were  fewer  than  now.  Yet  how  would  not  in 
our  day  the  overthrow  of  the  proudest  seat  of  modern  com- 
merce make  itself  felt  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  \  We  know 
from  elsewhere  that  the  siege  was  prolonged  for  a  term  quite 
unusual,  thirteen  years:  indeed  we  need  not  travel  beyond 
the  prophetic  record  (Ezek.  xxix.)*  to  learn  how  severe  a  task 
it  was  for  the  Chaldean  conqueror;  but  so  much  the  greater 
was  the  moral  effect  of  its  fall.  So  that  Tyre  and  Sidon 
remained  the  proverbial  and  most  striking  warning  of  divine 
judgment,  as  may  be  gathered  from  our  Lord's  reference. 

"Howl,  ye  ships  of  Tarshish;  for  it  is  laid  waste,  so  that 
there  is  no  house,  no  entering  in :  from  the  land  of  Chittim  it  is 

*  Zechariah  ix.  alludes  rather,  it  seems  to  me,  to  the  Macedonian  chief, 
who  ravaged  the  sea-board  cities  of  Phoenicia  and  of  Palestine,  north  and 
south,  so  ruthlessly.  This  at  least  is  the  historic  occasion  ;  for  the  Holy  Ghost 
there,  as  everywhere,  has  the  closing  conflicts  in  His  eye,  and  the  future 
triumphs  of  Israel  under  the  Messiah.  Some,  it  may  be  added,  think  that 
Isa.  xxiii.  refers  to  Shalmaneser's  siege  of  Tyre  ;  but  this  seems  to  the  last  degree 
improbable,  as  the  city  is  seen  soon  after  in  an  opulent  and  powerful  state. 
Others  even  deny  its  capture  by  Xebuchadnezzar  ;  but  Ezek.  xxix.  18  teaches 
not  that  he  failed  to  take  it,  but  that  its  results  did  not  compensate  for  the 
time  and  toil,  the  Tyrian  ships  having  carried  off  the  treasures  elsewhere. 


CHAPTER   XXIII.  99 

revealed  to  them."  (Ver.  1.)  There  seems  to  be  no  need  for 
departing  from  the  ordinary  sense  of  Chittim,  either  here  or 
in  verse  12,  in  which  the  learned  Bochart  understands  the 
Cutheans  or  Babylonians  and  the  meaning  here  to  be  "  from  the 
land  of  the  Cutheans  doth  their  captivity  come."  Neither  is 
there  in  Chittim  any  necessity  to  refer  this  burden  to  the  sack 
of  new  or  insular  Tyre  by  Alexander  the  Great,  as  do  Luther 
and  others.  The  prophet  calls  the  far-famed  ships  of  Tarshish, 
first  and  repeatedly,  to  take  up  the  dirge  of  the  ruined  mart  for 
their  merchandise,  and  intimates  that  though  there  was  no 
house  to  receive  them,  nor  haven  for  their  ships  to  enter,  the  ill 
news  would  be  revealed  in  the  far  west.  "  Be  still,  ye  inhabi- 
tants of  the  isle ;  thou  whom  the  merchants  of  Zidon  that  pass 
over  the  sea  have  replenished.  And  by  great  waters  the  seed  of 
Sihor,  the  harvest  of  the  river,  is  her  revenue;  and  she  is  a 
mart  of  nations."  (Ver.  2,  3.)  What  a  change,  when  silence 
reigned  where  once  had  thronged  their  neighbours,  the 
merchants  of  Zidon,  where  the  treasures  of  the  enriching  Nile 
were  gathered,  "  a  mart  of  nations,"  now  a  waste !  "  Be  thou 
ashamed,  0  Zidon ;  for  the  sea  hath  spoken,  even  the  strength 
of  the  sea,  saying,  I  travail  not,  nor  bring  forth  children,  neither 
do  I  nourish  up  young  men,  nor  bring  up  virgins."  (Yer.  4.) 
Zidon  was  too  nearly  allied  to  Tyre,  too  intimately  bound  up 
with  it,  not  to  feel  and  suffer  keenly ;  and  as  Tyre  had  been  its 
boast  heretofore,  so  now  its  degradation  could  not  but  darken 
their  neighbours ;  since  the  very  sea  is  by  bold  but  happy  figure 
made  to  bewail  her  desolation  :  whom  had  she  pertaining  to  her 
lineage,  now  that  Tyre  was  no  more  ?  "  As  the  report  concerning 
Egypt,  so  shall  they  be  sorely  pained  at  the  report  of  Tyre." 
(Ver.  5.)  The  Zidonians,  though  directly  profited  by  Egypt 
more  than  all  other  foreign  nations,  would  nevertheless  grieve 
over  the  ruin  of  Tyre  as  much  as  over  their  great  southern 
source  of  wealth.  Verses  6,  7  finish  these  addresses  with  a 
direct  appeal  to  the  Tyrians  themselves,  taunting  their  haughty 
merchants  with  the  reverse  that  awaited  them,  the  just  recom- 
pense of  their  deeds.  "  Pass  ye  over  to  Tarshish :  howl  ye 
inhabitants  of  the  isle.    Is  this  your  joyous  city,  whose  antiquity 


100  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

is  of  ancient  days  ?  her  own  feet  shall  carry  her  afar  off  to 
sojourn."  Far  from  being  an  attraction  to  the  ships  of  Tarshish, 
they  must  go  and  howl  there  themselves,  they  the  men  of  that 
sea-girt  land,  whose  city  rang  with  gaiety,  and  whose  years 
of  proud  security  were  only  less  ancient  than  Zidon  and  yet 
more  prosperous  and  eminent !  Yes,  they  must  go,  and  trudge, 
sadly,  painfully,  in  quest  of  some  asylum  in  a  strange  land. 

And  why  was  this  ?  Who  would  smite  and  prostrate  the 
proud  city  of  Phoenicia  ?  "  Who  hath  taken  this  counsel  against 
Tyre,  the  crowning  city,  whose  merchants  are  princes,  whose 
traffickers  are  the  honourable  of  the  earth  ?"  (Ver.  8.)  The 
answer  follows  in  verse  9.  "  Jehovah  of  hosts  hath  purposed 
it,  to  stain  the  pride  of  all  glory,  and  to  bring  into  contempt  all 
the  honourable  of  the  earth.  Pass  through  thy  land  as  a  river* 
0  daughter  of  Tarshish :  there  is  no  more  strength.  He 
stretched  out  his  hand  over  the  sea,  he  shook  the  kingdoms : 
Jehovah  hath  given  a  commandment  against  the  merchant 
city,  to  destroy  the  strongholds  thereof.  And  he  said,  Thou 
shalt  no  more  rejoice,  O  thou  oppressed  virgin,  daughter  of 
Zidon :  arise,  pass  over  to  Chittim ;  there  also  shalt  thou  have 
no  rest."  (Yer.  9 — 12.)  Here  the  moral  reasons  are  not  given 
in  full :  we  must  search  other  prophets  for  all.  But  the  Lord's 
opposition  to  the  proud  is  stated,  His  scorn  for  the  glory  of 
man,  His  slight  of  all  trust  in  earthly  strongholds.  Even  in 
exile  the  Tyrians  should  find  no  rest.  In  the  next  verse  we 
have  the  instrumental  means  He  meant"  to  employ :  "  Behold 
the  land  of  the  Chaldeans ;  this  people  was  not,  till  the  Assyrian 
founded  it,  for  them  that  dwell  in  the  wilderness :  they  set  up 
the  towers  thereof,  they  raised  up  the  palaces  thereof;  and  he 
brought  it  to  ruin."  (Yer.  13.)  The  Chaldeans,  who,  in  con- 
trast with  old  Tyre,  were  nationally  a  people  but  of  yesterday, 
are  seen  by  the  prophet  bringing  Tyre  to  ruin.  Such  appears 
to  be  the  meaning,  which  is  confirmed  by  the  fresh  call  to  grief 
of  the  ships  of  Tarshish  in  verse  14. 

But  the  conqueror  himself  yields  to  an  avenger.  Babylon 
falls;  and  the  full  term  of  seventy  years,  which  beheld  the 
returning  remnant  of  Juda,  had  a  revival  in  store  for  Tyre,  but 


CHAPTER   XXIII.  101 

a  revival  of  her  meretricious  ways,  pandering  for  gainful  trade 
to  all  the  luxurious  habits  and  corruptions  of  the  nations. 
"  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  Tyre  shall  be  for- 
gotten seventy  years,  according  to  the  days  of  one  king :  after 
the  end  of  seventy  years  shall  Tyre  sing  as  an  harlot.  Take  an 
harp,  go  about  the  city,  thou  harlot  that  hast  been  forgotten; 
make  sweet  melody,  sing  many  songs,  that  thou  mayest  be 
remembered.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  after  the  end  of 
seventy  years,  that  Jehovah  will  visit  Tyre,  and  she  shall  turn 
to  her  hire,  and  shall  commit  fornication  with  all  the  kingdoms 
of  the  world  upon  the  face  of  the  earth."  (Ver.  15 — 17.) 
Nevertheless  the  last  verse  intimates  that  even  this  pro- 
phetic scene,  though  so  largely  accomplished  in  the  past,  is  not 
without  its  bright  side  in  the  day  of  joy  to  the  whole  earth. 
"  And  her  merchandise  and  her  hire  shall  be  holiness  to  Jeho- 
vah :  it  shall  not  be  treasured  nor  laid  up  [as  in  former  days, 
when  conscienceless  tricks  of  avarice  dictated  the  manner  and 
objects  of  her  trade] ;  for  her  merchandise  shall  be  for  them  that 
dwell  before  Jehovah,  to  eat  sufficiently,  and  for  durable 
clothing."  The  daughter  of  Tyre  shall  be  there  with  a  gift, 
when  the  King  shall  greatly  desire  the  beauty  of  His  earthly 
Bride.     (Psalm  xlv.) 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

The  prophet  now  launches  into  a  larger  theme.  Hitherto  we 
have  had  ten  "  burdens,"  the  burdens  of  the  nations  from  Baby- 
lon to  Tyre,  not  without  involving  Jerusalem  in  those  judgments 
which,  starting  from  local  circumstances,  sweep  on  to  the  "  end 
of  the  age,"  when  God  shall  put  down  the  rebellious  pride  of  the 
earth.  In  the  present  chapter  Isaiah  enlarges  the  scene,  with 
the  land  and  people  of  Israel  as  the  centre,  so  as  to  disclose  not 
the  great  white  throne  before  which  the  wicked  dead  stand  and 
are  judged,  but  the  hour  of  the  earth's  universal  retribution  from 
God,  "  the  day  of  Jehovah "  in  its  unrestricted  final  sense,  of 
which  previous  crises,  as  in  the  cases  of  Babylon  and  Egypt,  were 
but  the  shadow  and  the  earnest. 

"  Behold,  the  Lord  maketh  the  earth  empty,  and  maketh  it 
waste,  and  turneth  it  upside  down,  and  scattereth  abroad  the 
inhabitants  thereof.  And  it  shall  be,  as  with  the  people,  so 
with  the  priest ;  as  with  the  servant,  so  with  his  master ;  as 
with  the  maid,  so  with  her  mistress ;  as  with  the  buyer,  so  with 
the  seller ;  as  with  the  lender,  so  with  the  borrower ;  as  with  the 
taker  of  usury,  so  with  the  giver  of  usury  to  him."  There  are 
evidently  no  limits  here.  As  verse  1  shows  us  the  earth  wasted, 
confounded  and  prostrate  under  the  divine  dealing,  so  verse  2 
indicates  an  unsparing  overthrow  of  all  grades  among  its  inhabi- 
tants. "  The  land  shall  be  utterly  emptied  and  utterly  spoiled : 
for  Jehovah  hath  spoken  this  word."  If  it  is  hard  work  to  apply 
such  strong  and  comprehensive  terms  to  the  days  of  Antiochus 
Epiphanes,  as  some  conceive,  still  less  can  verse  4  be  evaded. 
"  The  earth  mourn eth  and  fadeth  away :  the  world  languisheth 
and  fadeth  away ;  the  haughty  people  of  the  earth  do  languish." 
How  carefully  too  the  Spirit  guards  against  the  too  common 
resource  of  unbelief — the  alleged  hyperbole  of  an  impassionate 
seer.     "  Jehovah  hath  spoken  this  word."     (Yer.  3.) 

Next,  we  have  the  moral  ground  on  which  God  judged  and 


CHAPTER  xxrv.  103 

uted  thus  sternly.  ,4  The  earth  also  is  defiled  under  the 
inhabitants  thereof,  because  they  have  transgressed  the  I 
changed  the  ordinances,  broken  the  eVerlasti  _  venant. 
Therefore  hath  the  curse  devoured  the  earth,  and  they  that  dwell 
therein  are  desolate :  therefore  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  are 
burned,  and  few  men  left."  It  is  no  mere  providential  judgment 
but  a  most  comprehensive  and  divine  infliction,  of  which  God 
has  spoken  almost  since  the  beginning.  Enoch  also,  the  seventh 
from  Adam,  prophesied  of  these.  The  oft-threatened  long-sus- 
pended blow  will  at  length  fall,  as  Isaiah  here  intimates,  and 
Jude  later  still 

"  The  new  wine  niourneth,  the  vine  languisheth,  aD  the 
merryhearted  do  sigh.  The  mirth  of  tabrets  ceaseth,  the  noise 
of  them  that  rejoice  endeth,  the  joy  of  the  harp  ceaseth.  They 
shall  not  drink  wine  with  a  song :  strong  drink  shall  be  bitter 
to  them  that  drink  it.      The  city  of  confusion  is  broken  down  : 

v  house  is  shut  up,  that  no  man  may  come  in.  There  is  a 
crying  for  wine  in  the  streets :  all  joy  is  darkened,  the  mirth  of 
the  land  is  gone.  In  the  city  is  left  desolation,  and  the  gate  is 
smitten  with  destruction."  Ver.  7 — 1-.)  Such  and  so  complete 
is  the  picture  of  woe.  Desolation  overspreads  the  country  and 
the  city  alike      N       rtheleas,  as  always,  God  reserves  a  remnant. 

:.en  thus  it  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  the  land,  among  the 
people,  there  shall  be  as  the  shaking  of  an  olive  tree,  and  as  the 
gleaning  grapes  when  the  vintage  is  done.  They  shall  lift  up 
their  voice,  they  shall  sing  for  the  majesty  of  the  Lord,  they 
shall  cry  aloud  from  the  sea.  Wherefore  glorify  ye  Jehovah  in 
the  fires,  even  the  name  of  Jehovah  God  of  Israel  in  the  isles  of 
the  sea,"  (Ver.  13 — 16.)  It  is  manifestl}*  a  description  of  the 
righteous  in  Israel,  who  shall  come  into  prominence  as  divine 
judgments  mow  down  their  proud  op} . 

rerthelesB  6  appears  to  show  how  deeply  the  pro- 

phet, foreshowing  the  exercised  godly  souls  of  that  day,  deplores 
the  low  condition  of  the  remnant,  and  the  fearful  defection  and 
ruin  of  the  mass  of  IsraeL  "  From  the  uttermost  part  of  the 
earth  have  we  heard  songs,  even  glory  to  the  righteous.  But  I 
said,  My  leanness,  my  leanness,  woe  unto  me !  the  treacherous 


104  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

dealers  have  dealt  treacherously;  yea,  the  treacherous  dealers 
have  dealt  very  treacherously.  Fear,  and  the  pit,  and  the  snare, 
are  upon  thee,  0  inhabitant  of  the  earth.  And  it  shall  come  to 
pass  that  he  who  fleeth  from  the  noise  of  the  fear  shall  fall  into  the 
pit ;  and  he  that  cometh  up  out  of  the  midst  of  the  pit  shall  be 
taken  in  the  snare ;  for  the  windows  from  on  high  are  opened, 
and  the  foundations  of  the  earth  do  shake.  The  earth  is  utterly 
broken  down,  the  earth  is  clean  dissolved,  the  earth  is  moved 
exceedingly.  The  earth  shall  reel  to  and  fro  like  a  drunkard, 
and  shall  be  removed  like  a  cottage;  and  the  transgression 
thereof  shall  be  heavy  upon  it ;  and  it  shall  fall,  and  not  rise 
again.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  the  Lord 
shall  punish  the  host  of  the  high  ones  that  are  on  high,  and  the 
kings  of  the  earth  upon  the  earth.  And  they  shall  be  gathered 
together,  as  prisoners  are  gathered  in  the  pit,  and  shall  be  shut 
up  in  the  prison,  and  after  many  days  shall  they  be  visited. 
Then  the  moon  shall  be  confounded,  and  the  sun  ashamed,  when 
Jehovah  of  hosts  shall  reign  in  Mount  Zion,  and  in  Jerusalem, 
and  before  his  ancients  gloriously."     (Ver.  16 — 23.) 

The  entire  chapter,  especially  the  closing  section  (ver. 
21 — 23),  brings  into  the  strongest  evidence  the  hopeless  diffi- 
culties of  those  who  confound  earthly  things  with  heavenly, 
and  refuse  to  see  the  portion  in  store  for  Israel  in  the  latter 
day,  when  judgment  has  fallen  on  the  habitable  earth.  Writers 
as  early  as  Theodoret  confess  the  ulterior  scope  of  the  prophecy, 
whatever  measure  of  accomplishment  they  might  consider  it  to 
have  had  in  the  past.  "  The  discourse  contains  a  double  pro- 
phecy; for  it  points  out  both  what  was  going  on  at  different 
times  among  the  enemies,  and  what  shall  be  in  the  consumma- 
tion of  the  present  age."  But  then,  immediately  after,  he 
makes  the  singularly  unintelligent  observation  that  the  second 
verse  describes  a  state  of  things  properly  and  truly  after  the 
resurrection.  The  judgment  of  the  quick  is  ignored.  There 
is  in  truth  not  a  word  here  about  the  dead  raised,  or  souls 
giving  an  account  of  their  deeds,  but  emphatically  and 
repeatedly  of  the  earth's  crisis,  and  of  the  world  smitten  and 
languishing    under   God's    mighty   hand.      The   language,   no 


CHAPTER   XXIV.  105 

doubt,  is  excessively  strong,  and  here  and  there  appears  to  look 
on  to  the  dissolution  of  all  things,  as  is  sufficiently  common  in 
prophetic  style,  where  the  prediction  of  the  signal  change  which 
ushers  in  the  millennium  contains  a  more  or  less  covert  allusion 
to  the  utter  passing  away  of  the  heavens  and  earth  that  now 
are,  and  the  coming  in  of  the  eternal  state.  But  the  conclusion 
of  the  chapter  makes  it  plain  that  the  grand  aim  of  the  Spirit 
here  is  to  portray  that  mighty  and  universal  catastrophe  which 
is  succeeded  by  the  times  of  refreshing  for  Israel  and  the  earth, 
of  which  God  has  spoken  by  His  holy  prophets  since  the  world 
began. 

So  profound  and  all-embracing  however  is  the  dealing  of 
God,  that  even  the  angelic  hosts  escape  no  more  than  the 
proudest  potentates  here  below.  "  It  shall  come  to  pass  in  that 
day  that  Jehovah  shall  punish  the  host  of  the  high  ones  on  high 
[not,  that  are  on  high],  and  the  kings  of  the  earth  upon  the 
earth."  These  spirits  of  evil  had  up  to  this  misled  man,  dis- 
honoured God,  sought  to  corrupt  every  mercy  almost  from  the 
source.  But  the  time  is  come  that  angels  should  be  judged  as 
well  as  living  men,  far  beyond  even  the  judgment  of  the  flood. 
The  power  of  the  heavens  shall  be  shaken — not  earth  only  but 
also  heaven.  But  far  from  its  being  as  yet  the  melting  away  of 
time  into  eternity, "  then  the  moon  shall  be  confounded,  and  the 
sun  ashamed,  when  Jehovah  shall  reign  in  mount  Zion  and  in 
Jerusalem,  and  before  his  ancients  gloriously."  It  is  the  day  of 
which  Zechariah  spoke  (chap,  xiv.),  long  after  the  return  from 
the  captivity,  when  Jehovah  shall  be  king  over  all  the  earth. 
"  In  that  day  shall  there  be  one  Jehovah,  and  his  name  one.  All 
the  land  shall  be  turned  as  a  plain  from  Geba  to  Bimmon, 
south  of  Jerusalem ;  and  it  shall  be  lifted  up,  and  inhabited  in 
her  place,  from  Benjamin's  gate  unto  the  place  of  the  first  gate, 
unto  the  corner  gate  and  from  the  tower  of  Hananeel  unto  the 
king's  winepresses."  Could  expressions  be  used  more  precisely 
to  exclude  the  mystical  interpretation,  or  more  calculated  to 
maintain  the  hopes  of  Israel,  then  to  be  built  on  the  Living 
Stone  over  which  they  have  till  yet  stumbled  ? 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

The  bearing  of  chapter  xxiv.  on  the  end  of  the  age  is  entirely 
confirmed  by  that  which  follows  and  is  now  before  us,  where  we 
have  the  prophet  personifying  the  people  raising  their  hearts  to 
the  Lord  in  praise.  They  are  celebrating  God  for  His  wonder- 
ful doings,  and  own  that  His  counsels  of  old  are  faithfulness  and 
truth.  *  O  Jehovah,  thou  art  my  God ;  I  will  exalt  thee,  I  will 
praise  thy  name;  for  thou  hast  done  wonderful  things;  thy 
counsels  of  old  are  faithfulness  and  truth.  For  thou  hast  made 
of  a  city  an  heap ;  of  a  defenced  city  a  ruin :  a  palace  of 
strangers  to  be  no  city ;  it  shall  never  be  built.  Therefore  shall 
the  strong  people  glorify  thee,  the  city  of  the  terrible  nations 
shall  fear  thee.  For  thou  hast  been  a  strength  to  the  poor,  a 
strength  to  the  needy  in  his  distress,  a  refuge  from  the  storm,  a 
shadow  from  the  heat,  when  the  blast  of  the  terrible  ones  is  as  a 
storm  against  the  wall.  Thou  shalt  bring  down  the  noise  of 
strangers,  as  the  heat  in  a  dry  place;  even  the  heat  with  the 
shadow  of  a  cloud :  the  branch  of  the  terrible  ones  shall  be 
brought  low."  (Ver.  1 — 5.)  The  execution  of  His  judgment 
takes  effect  on  the  strong  and  their  city.  It  is  the  habitable 
earth  which  comes  under  the  Lord's  hand,  as  certainly  as  the 
end  of  the  chapter  before  was  His  dealing  with  the  heavens  and 
the  earth.  The  eternal  state  does  not  enter  into  account.  On 
the  other  hand  there  is  no  ground  for  making  it  bear  on  present 
circumstances.  It  is  a  new  state  of  things  that  does  not  exist 
now;  for  if  there  is  one  place  in  the  earth  where,  less  than 
another,  the  Lord  has  the  appearance  of  reigning,  it  is  in  that 
very  Jerusalem  and  Mount  Zion.  The  chosen  land  of  Israel  is 
in  the  possession  of  the  Turk;  it  has  been  in  his  hands  for 
hundreds  of  years,  and  before  that  it  was  the  object  of  conten- 
tion for  the  kings  of  the  earth  and  equally  so  for  the  followers 
of  Mahomet ;  it  has  been  the  great  battle-ground  between  the 
east   and   the  west;    and   up   to   the   present   time   God   has 


CHAPTER   XXV.  107 

permitted  that  the  devotees  of  Mecca  should  appear  to  have 
gained  the  victory  there.  Ever  since  the  cross  of  the  Lord  God  is 
no  longer  maintaining  the  glory  of  His  Son  in  connection  with 
Mount  Zion.  The  Son  of  God  has  been  rejected  and  has  died 
upon  the  cross.  Since  then  all  connection  with  the  world  is 
broken,  every  link  with  the  Jew  is  gone,  and  no  man  has  ever 
seen  the  Lord  of  glory,  except  the  believer. 

He  was  witnessed  by  the  world  before,  seen  of  men — not 
merely  of  angels.  He  was  displayed  before  human  eyes,  God 
manifest  in  the  flesh.  But,  when  man  cast  Him  out,  all 
acknowledgment  of  the  world  as  such  was  terminated.  He  was 
no  more  seen  after  His  resurrection  by  any  unbeliever ;  none 
but  chosen  witnesses  were  permitted  to  behold  Him.  Taken 
soon  after  up  to  heaven,  He  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God ; 
and  thence  He  will  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead. 
A  great  mistake  it  is  to  confound  the  judgment  of  the  quick 
with  the  judgment  of  the  dead.  Scripture  shows  that  there  is 
a  long  interval  of  most  remarkable  character,  which  separates 
the  one  front  the  other.  Indeed  there  may  be,  in  a  certain 
sense,  a  judgment  of  the  quick  going  on  all  through  the  interval 
of  1000  years.  There  will  be  an  execution  of  judgment  before 
the  Lord  begins  to  reign,  and,  when  His  reign  terminates,  the 
judgment  of  the  dead  follows. 

While  the  judgment  of  the  dead  remains  perfectly  certain, 
while  it  is  a  truth  of  God  that  there  is  a  resurrection  both  of  the 
just  and  the  unjust,  the  other  truth  has  not  been  so  generally 
seen,  namely,  that  the  Lord  of  glory  is  about  to  revisit  this  world 
and  stop  the  whole  course  of  human  affairs,  and  interpose  with 
judgments  upon  the  guilt  of  man ;  not  yet  upon  the  dead,  which 
will  come  afterwards.  Before  the  judgment  of  the  dead,  divine 
judgment  will  fall  upon  living  men  from  the  highest  to  the 
lowest.  To  this  our  Lord  referred,  when  He  warned  his 
disciples  of  the  days  that  were  coming.  Thus  Matthew  xxiv. 
xxv.,  and  Luke  xvii.  xxi.  refer,  save  a  part  of  the  last  chapter, 
exclusively  to  this  time  and  to  these  circumstances.  Some 
scriptures  speak  only  of  the  judgment  of  the  dead,  others  both 
unfold  the  portion  of  the  risen  saints  to  enjoy  heavenly  glory 


108  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

with  Christ  and  tell  how  the  dead  are  to  be  judged  according  to 
their  works.  The  believer  is  saved  according  to  the  worth  of 
Christ's  work ;  he  who  is  judged  according  to  his  own  works  is 
lost  for  ever.  No  child  of  God,  if  judged  as  he  deserved,  could 
be  saved.  For,  if  judged  at  all,  God  must  judge  after  His  own 
justice  with  no  less  standard  than  Christ.  We  must  be  as 
spotless  as  His  Son  in  order  to  be  fit  companions  for  Him. 
But  on  that  ground  there  is  an  end  of  all  hope :  all  now  turns 
on  this,  that  Jesus  was  delivered  for  our  offences  and  was 
raised  again  for  our  justification,  not  our  judgment.  What  is 
the  value  in  God's  sight  of  the  work  He  has  done  ?  Is  it  only 
a  "partial  salvation  ?  or  for  some  believers  ?  If  it  be  not  a  full 
salvation  for  sinners,  yea,  for  the  worst  of  those  who  believe,  it 
is  not  what  God  commends  to  us,  nor  a  due  and  righteous 
answer  to  the  cross  of  Christ.  And  there  is  the  very  comfort 
of  the  salvation  that  Christ  has  effected.  It  is  a  perfect  salva- 
tion, it  delivers  from  all  sins,  it  places  the  chief  of  sinners  upon 
a  new  ground  as  Christians,  kings,  priests,  and  children  of  God. 
Thenceforward  our  business  is  to  trust  and  obey  Him,  labouring 
.for  and  suffering  with  Christ  and  for  Christ,  as  we  await  His 
return  from  heaven,  even  our  Deliverer,  Jesus,  who  will  judge 
His  adversaries. 

It  is  plain  that  there  are  two  classes  of  men  who  will  appear 
risen  from  the  dead :  I  do  not  say  risen  at  the  same  time.  No 
scripture  says  this.  It  is  said  that  "  the  hour  is  coming  when 
all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  come  forth,  they  that  have  done 
good  to  the  resurrection  of  life,  and  they  that  have  done  evil 
unto  the  resurrection  of  judgment."  *  All  this  is  quite  true, 
but  not  a  word  about  their  coming  forth  at  the  same  time. 
Other  scriptures  show  that  the  two  resurrections,  here  shown  to 
be  distinct  in  principle  and  issue,  will  not  take  place  simul- 
taneously. Hence,  while  both  might  be  said  to  be  the  rising 
of  the  dead,  that  of  the  righteous  alone  is  or  could  be  called 


*  "Damnation,"  though  the  effect  of  judgment,  is  not  the  sense  of  the 
expression.  It  is  an  instance  of  men  giving  their  own  strength  to  a  word 
and  really  weakening  the  passage  in  result. 


CHAPTER      XXV.  109 

a  rising  from  the  dead,  the  rest  being  left  as  yet  in  their  graves. 
From  Revelation  xx.,  again,  it  is  plain  that  a  thousand  years  at 
least  will  transpire  between  the  resurrection  of  the  just  and  that 
of  the  unjust.  Any  one  reading  the  Revelation  without  preju- 
dice could  not  fail  to  gather  that  the  righteous  dead  are  raised 
first  to  reign  with  Christ;  and  then,  after  the  earthly  reign, 
that  the  rest  of  the  dead  are  raised,  who  are  judged  according 
to  their  works,  and  of  them  it  is  said  that  whosoever  was  not 
found  written  in  the  book  of  life  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire. 
There  is  not  a  hint  of  any  who  were  found  written.  When 
God  judges  according  to  works,  nothing  can  follow  but  destruc- 
tion. Their  evil  works  abound  in  the  books ;  and  the  book  of 
life  has  none  of  their  names  in  it. 

This  strongly  links  itself  with  what  is  before  us.  Here  we 
have  the  Lord,  not  hidden  in  heaven,  but  appearing  from  heaven 
to  reign.  He  is  not  reigning  on  the  earth  now.  It  is  only 
among  idle  speculative  men  (of  learning  perhaps)  where  you 
find  any  dream  so  foolish.  You  are  aware  that  if  there  was  a 
period,  in  the  history  of  Christendom,  which  was  particularly 
dreary  as  to  outward  light,  it  is  from  Constantine  to  the  Refor- 
mation— the  dark  ages,  as  they  are  called.  Yet  learned  men 
are  not  wanting  who  maintain  that  this  is  the  very  time  when 
Christ  was  reigning;  that  it  began  in  the  year  320  and  ended 
1320 !  that  is,  the  most  unrelieved  reign  of  darkness  that 
Christendom  has  yet  seen  !  Augustine  made  this  reign  begin 
with  Christ  and  extend  all  through  Christianity.  This  was  bad ; 
the  other  is  worse,  though  maintained  by  H.  Grotius.  Both 
exercised  an  enormous  influence  in  the  world.  The  great 
Dutchman,  if  consulted  in  a  matter  of  erudition,  would  have 
probably  given  no  inconsiderable  help  to  most  men ;  but  when 
he  came  to  the  word  of  God,  he  was  as  much  at  sea  there 
as  St.  Peter  or  St.  John  would  have  been  in  that  which  was  his 
favourite  province.  In  divine  things  learning  is  of  no  value, 
except  as  a  drudge,  to  men  of  spiritual  judgment  and  lowly, 
for  the  meek  only  has  God  promised  to  guide  in  judgment.  The 
assumption  that,  because  a  man  is  a  profound  scholar,  even  if  a 
Christian  also,  he  is  a  safe  expositor  of  scripture,  is  mistaken. 


110  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

Let  my  reader,  if  he  know  it  not  already,  search  and  see 
whether  there  be  not  a  time  coming  when  that  Lord  who  is  now 
in  heaven  at  the  right  hand  of  God  will  leave  it  to  introduce 
His  reign  over  the  earth  with  the  chosen  city  as  His  earthly 
metropolis.  Do  you  ask  why  there  should  be  such  an  attraction 
to  that  spot  ?  Certainly  it  has  been  the  scene  of  sorrow  and  shame 
and  rivalry  between  the  east  and  west,  and  the  deepest  humilia- 
tion of  God's  ancient  people.  But  let  me  ask  you,  even  on  your 
ground,  where  there  is  a  spot  on  earth  so  full  of  grand  associa- 
tions, so  connected  with  all  that  is  dear  to  the  believer  ?  There 
the  Lord  of  glory  came.  There  He  died.  It  is  His  city,  the 
city  of  the  Great  King.  Why  should  He  not  then  come  and 
take  it  for  Himself?  Is  it  not  worthy  of  Him  to  pardon  and 
bless  and  sanctify  and  magnify  Jerusalem  before  the  world, 
overcoming  her  evil  with  His  good  ?  Most  plain  is  the  scrip- 
ture that  the  Lord  has  to  come  there,  and  to  establish  it  as 
the  capital  of  His  earthly  kingdom.  I  do  not  say  that  the 
Lord  will  dwell  literally  on  the  earth,  but  be  King  over  it. 
Yet  scripture  says  He  will  plant  His  foot  upon  the  Mount  of 
Olives.  It  is  only  necessary  for  the  truth  of  His  future  kingdom 
to  maintain  that  He  will  visibly  come  and  smite  the  earth  and 
establish  His  kingdom  there,  and  fill  the  world  with  the  blessed 
effects  of  His  glory.  Scripture  shows  that  He  will  be  present 
and  display  Himself;  but  for  how  long,  to  what  extent,  and 
how  often  during  that  reign,  it  is  not  for  me  at  least  to  pretend 
to  say:  for  I  am  not  aware  that  scripture  answers  those 
questions.  And  as  there  is  a  special  place,  so  there  is  a  people 
He  will  favour  most — Jerusalem  and  the  Jewish  people. 

But  what  is  to  become  of  Christians?  Are  they  and  the 
Jews  to  be  huddled  in  Jerusalem  together,  as  the  old  Chiliasts 
affirmed  ?  Is  this  the  Christian  hope  ?  Such  an  idea  is 
ignorance  and  monstrous.  The  Christian  is  even  now  in  title 
blessed  in  the  heavenly  places.  Thence  He  will  reign  over  the 
earth.  The  Jews  then  gathered  and  converted  will  be  in  their 
own  promised  land  and  city,  on  which  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  rest 
continually,  for  it  is  the  truth  of  God  that  He  never  withdraws 
a  gift,  and  never  repents  of  a  promise.     He  might  repent  of 


CHAPTER   XXV.  Ill 

creating  man :  this  was  not  a  promise ;  it  was  simply  an 
exertion  of  His  will.  But  if  God  chose  Israel  or  the  church, 
He  repented  of  neither,  though  both  have  been  unfaithful; 
for  He  means  to  bless,  He  does  bless,  and,  no  matter  what 
the  difficulty,  He  will  bless  for  ever.  This  we  have  to 
hold  fast :  the  purpose  of  God  shall  stand.  Changes  in  man  and 
the  earth  may  be,  but  the  counsel  of  God  must  yet  be  accom- 
plished. The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance. 
He  gave  the  land  of  Israel  to  their  fathers.  He  gave  the  promise 
to  make  their  seed  a  blessing.  He  connected  His  own  Son  with 
Israel  after  the  flesh,  that,  spite  of  their  sin  in  the  cross,  in 
virtue  of  His  grace  in  the  cross,  an  immoveable  basis  of  blessing 
might  be  laid,  when  they  shall  be  raised  to  such  a  pinnacle  of 
greatness  on  the  earth  as  is  reserved  for  no  other  people  here 
below.  When  the  Lord  will  come  to  reign,  He  will  have 
removed  to  the  Father's  house  the  heavenly  people.  He  will 
have  raised  the  dead  from  their  grave,  and  changed  the  living 
into  the  likeness  of  His  own  glory.  For  this  all  Christians 
should  be  looking,  as  their  expectation.  When  they  are  caught 
up  thus,  then  the  earth  is  clear  for  the  Holy  Ghost  to  work 
among  the  Jews.  The  Spirit  of  God  does  not  operate  to  two 
different  ends — a  heavenly  and  an  earthly — at  the  same  time. 
But  here  we  find  Him  at  work  among  the  Jews  who  are  not 
caught  up  to  heaven,  as  we  expect,  but  to  be  blessed  under  the 
Messiah  on  the  earth. 

Our  Lord  then  having  first  come  and  removed  'the  Chris- 
tians, dead  and  living,  to  be  with  Himself  above,  will  then 
begin  to  act  upon  the  Jews  and  prepare  them  as  His  people 
when  He  reigns.  This  is  what  is  in  question  here.  The 
earthly  centre  of  His  reign  is  Mount  Zion  and  Jerusalem.  This 
it  is  which  gives  to  the  reign  of  David  such  emphasis  in  the 
word  of  God.  He  was  the  chosen  type  of  the  Lord,  not  merely 
in  his  humiliation,  but  also  in  his  glory.  He  had  also  to  war 
and  put  down  his  enemies,  and  therefore  was  called  a  "  man  of 
blood."  Our  Lord  will  be  first  an  executor  of  judgment,  though 
not,  as  David,  allowing  anything  of  his  own  spirit  or  will  to 
interfere  and  spoil  the  work,  but,  in  the  holy  authority  of  God 


112  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

Himself,  in  the  pouring  out  of  divine  wrath  and  indignation, 
all  will  be  perfect  and  dealt  with  in  righteousness.  In  that  day 
the  Lord  will  convulse  the  whole  universe,  punishing  "  the  host 
of  the  high  ones  on  high,"  that  is,  in  the  scene  that  they  have 
defiled,  "and  the  kings  of  the  earth  on  the  earth."  The 
believing  Jews  of  that  day  will  utter  this  song  in  evident 
reference  to  their  experience  of  the  faithfulness  of  God.  They 
do  not  address  God  as  Father  in  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  for  they 
are  not  Christians ;  they  will  be  believers,  but  believing  Jews. 
It  is  gross  ignorance  to  talk  of  Abel,  Enoch,  Abraham,  David,  or 
Daniel  as  Christians.  They  were  all  saints,  but  not  Christians. 
Not  merely  was  it  after  Christ  came  that  the  disciples  were 
first  called  Christians,  but  the  place  into  which  believers  were 
then  brought  by  the  work  of  Christ  and  the  gift  of  the  Spirit 
differs  essentially.  There  is  hardly  a  worse  error  for  a  believer 
now ;  for  it  alike  tells  upon  the  present  and  the  future  and  the 
past,  merging  all  the  various  displays  of  God's  mind  in  confusion, 
which  blunts  the  edge  of  the  word,  hinders  the  full  blessing  and 
testimony  of  the  church,  and  mars  the  glory  of  God  as  much  as 
man  can. 

Now,  no  doubt,  in  presence  of  the  cross,  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
being  personally  on  earth,  the  old  distinctions  of  Jew  and  Gen- 
tile fade  before  their  common  ruin  in  sin  and  death  morally. 
But  when  the  Lord  comes,  He  will  prepare  the  Jewish  people 
to  receive  Him  according  to  the  prophets;  and  they  will  be 
made  the  witnesses  of  His  mercies  no  less  than  of  His  glory  here 
below;  as  now  they  are  the  most  obstinate  enemies  of  the 
gospel  and  of  His  grace  to  the  Gentiles. 

In  this  song  they  speak  the  proper  language  of  Jews.  If  a 
Christian  were  to  address  God  as  Jehovah,  it  is  of  course  in 
itself  true,  but  it  is  a  very  unintelligent  mode  for  a  Christian. 
To  us  there  is  one  God,  the  Father,  and  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Jehovah  is  the  name  of  God  looked  at  as  a  governor  that 
maintains  His  kingdom;  whereas  Father  is  that  name  which 
first  came  out  in  connexion  with  His  beloved  Son,  and  now,  by 
virtue  of  redemption,  is  true  of  us  who  believe  in  Him.  Hence, 
as  often  noticed,  the  moment  that  Christ  was  raised  from  the 


CHAPTER   XXV.  113 

dead,  He  says,  "  Go  to  my  brethren  and  say  unto  them,  I  ascend 
unto  my  Father  and  your  Father,  to  my  God  and  your  God." 
(John  xx.    17.)      Christ,   by  His  death   and  resurrection,  has 
brought  us  into  the  same  place  with  Himself.     This  the  Lord 
always  had  in   view  when  He   was  here,  so   that   He   never 
addressed  God  as  Jehovah,  because  the  New  Testament  presents 
Him  in  view  of  Christianity.     But  the  Old  Testament  shows 
that  the  Lord  will  have  a  people,  and  that  they  will  know  Him 
and   the   Father   as    Jehovah.     This   suffices   to   indicate   the 
difference ;  and  I  have  made  these  remarks  to  show  that  another 
class  of  people  are  here  spoken  of,  not  Christians,  but  Jews,  who 
recognize  God  in  that  title  which  God  gave  Himself  in  relation 
to  Israel  of  old.     When  God  chose  Moses,  He  bade  him  go  and 
make  Himself  known  to  them  as  Jehovah,  telling  them  that  He 
was  not  so  known  before.    Thus  was  it  chosen  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  public   dealings    of  God    with    His   people,  and 
throughout    their    national    history   it   was    as    Jehovah    He 
appeared.     It  was  not  that  the  name  did  not  previously  exist, 
but  He  never  took  it  before  for  His  recognized  title  as  the  God 
of  Israel.     It  is  the  prophet  who  speaks  in  behalf  of  Israel ;  he 
breaks  into  the  language  of  praise,  and  individualizes  it  in  behalf 
of  the  people  in  verse  1.    What  are  the  wonderful  things  ?    The 
death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  ?     Not  a  word  about  either. 
These  are  the  themes  we  should  speak  about.     Thus,  on  the 
Lord's-day  morning,  when  we  come  together,  what  occupies  our 
hearts  is  the  burden  of  His  praise.      We  have  the  still  more 
wonderful  works  of  God  in  Christ  and  the  new  creation,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven. 

Here  Israel  are  supposed  to  be  occupied  with  the  wonderful 
things  God  has  wrought  for  the  deliverance  of  their  nation.  (Ver. 
2,  3.)  For  God  will  have  interposed  and  put  forth  His  power  to 
deliver  His  ancient  people  in  the  judgment  of  their  mightiest 
enemies.  They  speak  of  the  ruin  God  has  inflicted  on  all  around 
them.  As  long  as  the  Jews  are  unbroken  for  their  sins  and 
indifferent  to  the  truth  of  God,  only  bent  on  making  money  and 
serving  as  the  world's  bankers,  people  will  be  content  to  use 
them  and  let  them  alone.      But  from  the  moment  that  God  calls 

H 


114  LECTURES    OX    ISAIAH. 

the  Jew  out  of  his  present  spiritual,  moral  degradation,  when  the 
dry  bones  are  gathered  together,  when  their  hearts  turn  to  the 
rejected  Messiah,  all  nations  will  turn  against  them,  and  once 
more  rend  them,  as  truly  as  ever.  How  do  we  know  this  ?  The 
Bible  delivers  the  believer  from  guess-work.  People  who  do 
not  study  the  prophetic  word  can  only  speculate  about  the 
future.  There  can  be  no  certainty  for  them ;  to  pretend  to  it 
would  be  presumptuous.  But  when  you  bow  to  and  believe  the 
Bible,  you  are  entitled  through  the  teaching  of  God's  Spirit  to 
have  the  certain  light  of  God.  It  is  entirely  our  own  unbelief 
if  we  do  not  enjoy  it. 

"And  in  this  mountain  shall  Jehovah  of  hosts  make  unto 
all  people  a  feast  of  fat  things,  a  feast  of  wines  on  the  lees,  of 
fat  things  full  of  marrow,  of  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined. 
And  he  will  destroy  in  this  mountain  the  face  of  the  covering 
cast  over  all  people,  and  the  vail  that  is  spread  over  all  nations, 
He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory ;  and  the  Lord  Jehovah  will 
wipe  away  tears  from  off  all  faces ;  and  the  rebuke  of  his  people 
shall  he  take  away  from  off  all  the  earth :  for  Jehovah  hath 
spoken  it."  (Yer.  6 — 8.)  The  Spirit  of  God  refers  to  resurrec- 
tion. So  the  apostle,  in  1  Corinthians  xv.  54,  applies  the 
beginning  of  verse  8  :  "When  this  corruptible  shall  have  put  on 
incorruption,  and  this  mortal  shall  have  put  on  immortality,  then 
shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  saying  that  is  written,  Death  is 
swallowed  up  in  victory."  The  resurrection  synchronizes  with 
the  deliverance  of  Israel,  which  itself  will  be  "life  to  the  dead" 
for  the  world.  (Rom.  xi.  15.)  Thus  the  first  great  stroke  at 
death  will  be  at  this  very  time.  Then  man's  career  will  cease, 
and  the  Lord  Jesus  will  receive  His  ancient  people,  coming  with 
His  risen  saints,  and  will  swallow  up  the  vail  that  is  spread  over 
all  nations.  For  there  is  no  deliverance  wrought  in  the  earth 
up  to  that  time. 

"  Jehovah  hath  spoken  it."  Why  does  He  say  so  here  ? 
Is  it  not  because  He  foresaw  man  would  be  incredulous  ?  The 
special  mark  of  the  Lord's  voice  is  here,  the  proud  heart  of  man 
being  well  known  to  Him,  and  all  the  delusions  of  wise  and 
unwise,  deceiving  and  being  deceived.     He  knew  how  people 


CHAPTEB    XXV.  115 

would  say,  when  they  came  to  predicted  judgments,  these  are 
for  the  Jews :  and  if  to  blessings,  those  are  for  themselves. 
They  have  all  the  good  things  for  the  church ;  they  have  left 
the  dark  things  for  Israel :  but  even  there  they  destroy  con- 
science by  the  lie  which  views  them  as  past  and  obsolete. 
"  And  it  shall  be  said  in  that  day,  Lo,  this  is  our  God ;  we  have 
waited  for  him,  and  he  will  save  us :  this  is  Jehovah :  we  have 
waited  for  him,  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  his  salvation 
For  in  this  mountain  shall  the  hand  of  Jehovah  rest,  and  Moab 
shall  be  trodden  down  under  him,  even  as  straw  is  trodden 
down  for  the  dunghill.  And  he  shall  spread  forth  his  hands  in 
the  midst  of  them,  as  he  that  swimmeth  spreadeth  forth  his 
hands  to  swim :  and  he  shall  bring  down  their  pride  together 
with  the  spoils  of  their  hands.  And  the  fortress  of  the  high 
fort  of  thy  walls  shall  he  bring  down,  lay  low,  and  bring  to  the 
ground,  even  to  the  dust."     (Ver.  9 — 12.) 

We  must  examine  of  whom  God  speaks;  there  are  judg- 
ments upon  Israel  and  upon  Christendom,  and  blessings  for 
Israel  and  for  the  church.  That  this  is  for  Israel  has  been 
already  shown ;  the  language  used  is  only  suited  to  them. 
They  speak  of  themselves,  not  as  we  do,  as  the  children  of  God, 
but  as  His  people,  and  of  judgments,  as  introducing  their  bless- 
ing. Were  all  the  earth  to  be  dissolved,  it  would  neither  lessen 
nor  increase  our  blessing.  When  Christ  comes,  He  will  simply 
remove  us  to  Himself,  changed  into  His  likeness,  out  of  the 
scene  of  weakness,  and  sin,  and  sorrow,  into  His  own  heavenly 
home.  Whereas  here,  "It  shall  be  said  in  that  day,  Lo,_  this 
is  our  God  ;  we  have  waited  for  him,  and  he  will  save  us.  This 
is  Jehovah ;  we  have  waited  for  him,  we  will  be  glad  and 
rejoice  in  his  salvation."  (Ver.  9.)  They  are  not  saved  yet. 
Such  is  not  our  case  now,  save  as  to  the  body.  Search  the  New 
Testament  and  you  will  see  that,  as  regards  the  soul,  we  must 
be  saved  now,  and  if  we  believe,  we  are.  It  is  plain  that  here 
is  another  class,  Jews  who  have  waited  in  shame  for  Jehovah, 
and  who  when  He  comes  in  glory,  say,  "  This  is  our  God,  we 
have  waited  for  him,  and  he  will  save  us."  (Ver.  10.)  Xot 
for  us  but  for  them  "  shall  the  hand  of  Jehovah  "  rest  in  "  this 


116  LECTURES   ON    ISAIAH. 

mountain."  Our  portion  is  in  heaven.  "This  mountain"  is  the 
lofty  centre  of  the  earthly  glory.  And,  accordingly  the  name  of 
a  proud  national  foe  of  Israel  follows,  as  doomed  to  humiliation. 
Is  the  Christian  looking  for  Moab  to  be  trodden  down  ?  The 
wholesale  christening  of  the  Jewish  prophets  tends  to  make 
scripture  ridiculous,  and  many  a  man  has  become  hardened  in 
his  infidelity  by  such  wild  applications  to  the  Christian  church. 
There  are  general  truths  and  principles  that  apply  to  us ;  for  all 
prophets  are  intended  for  the  use  of  the  Christian,  as  the  law 
also.  All  scripture  is  inspired  and  profitable ;  but  it  is  absurd 
thence  to  infer  that  all  is  about  ourselves.  "  The  law  is  lawful," 
says  St.  Paul,  "  if  a  man  use  it  lawfully ;"  and  so  are  the 
prophets ;  but  we  must  hear  them,  not  as  if  we  were  Jews,  but 
Christians. 

Here,  then,  is  a  plain  proof  that  not  Christians,  not  the 
church  of  God,  are  before  us,  but  Israel.  What  have  we  to  do 
with  Moab  as  an  enemy  ?  and  an  enemy  which  is  to  be  trodden 
down  ?  Do  we  look  to  tread  down  our  enemies,  if  it  were  even 
the  Roman  papacy  ?  It  is  scripture,  but  it  is  not  a  scripture 
prophecy  about  us ;  it  is  what  we  ought  to  profit  by  and  to  bless 
God  for ;  but  it  concerns  not  ourselves,  but  Israel.  They  on  the 
earth  will  see  their  former  enemies  trodden  under  them,  and 
Moab  is  one  of  them. 


CHAPTER    XXVI. 

Here  we  have  another  song  which  is  to  be  sung  in  the  land  of 
Judah.  That  in  the  last  chapter  is  not  so  called,  }^et  was  it  an 
outburst  of  praise  after  the  shaking  of  heaven  and  earth ;  in 
this  we  have  the  people  still  further  celebrating  what  God  has 
done  for  Judah. 

If  we  look  at  Israel  now,  the  contrast  with  what  they  are  to 
be  made  by  and  by  is  very  striking.  For  in  Romans  i.  18,  they 
are  thus  alluded  to :  "  For  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from 
heaven  against  all  ungodliness  [i.e.,  Gentile  wickedness  in 
general]  and  unrighteousness  of  men,  who  hold  the  truth  in 
unrighteousness  [that  of  Israel]."  Here,  on  the  contrary,  it  is 
said,  "  Open  ye  the  gates  that  the  righteous  nation  which  keep- 
eth  the  truth  may  pass  in."    (Ver.  2.) 

The  truth  will  have  been  abandoned  by  the  Jewish  people, 
or  the  larger  part  of  them,  in  the  last  days.  At  the  first  advent 
of  Christ  it  could  be  said  that  "  salvation  is  of  the  Jews ;"  they 
had  the  truth  but  held  it  in  unrighteousness.  They  had  the 
form  of  sound  doctrine  maintained  for  the  most  part,  save  among 
the  Sadducees.  But  before  the  Lord  comes  the  second  time,  the 
great  mass  of  the  nation  will  not  hold  the  truth  but  a  lie,  the 
great  deceit  of  the  last  days,  the  lie  of  Antichrist  instead  of  the 
truth  of  Christ.     The  unrighteousness  will  be  similar. 

Here  we  have  the  blessed  contrast  of  all  this  :  there  is  a 
remnant  whom  God  will  make  to  be  a  strong  nation,  and  they 
are  called,  "The  righteous  nation  which  keepeth  the  truth." 
(Ver.  2.)  In  verse  3  it  is  not  merely  that  there  is  a  general 
profession  of  the  nation,  but  there  will  be  individual  reality 
among  them.  In  the  past  they  were  called  "  the  holy  nation," 
this  was  the  name  that  belonged  to  them,  but  in  the  future  there 
is  this  comfort  for  our  souls  that  it  will  be  real,  and  that 
individually.  No  common  privileges  are  ever  to  make  us  less 
mindful  of  our  individual  need. 


118  LECTURES   ON    ISAIAH. 

For  many  years  the  common  joy  of  the  church  was  v en- 
little  entered  into,  because  of  the  worldliness,  legalism,  many 
divisions  and  innumerable  wrong  ways  that  had  crept  in.  But 
there  is  the  danger,  now  that  God  has  been  pleased  to  show  the 
importance  of  corporate  blessing,  of  our  forgetting  that  the 
individual  place  must  be  still  more  carefully  watched.  It  is  of 
primary  moment  to  know  the  standing  of  the  Christian  and  the 
position  of  the  church,  but  state  must  next  be  looked  to. 
Strength  depends  upon  what  passes  between  our  own  souls  and 
God,  who  in  His  gracious,  vigilant  care  watches  over  the  saints 
individually.  These  then  do  not  forget  the  public  blessings  of 
the  nation,  but  there  is  also  the  individual  saint's  walk,  staying 
upon  God,  caring  for  His  glory,  who,  on  His  part,  keeps  the  soul 
in  perfect  peace:  the  mind  is  stayed  upon  God  Himself.  For  no 
matter  what  the  blessings  are,  if  we  have  not  God  Himself  as 
the  object  of  our  hearts,  they  are  sure  to  be  misused  ;  therefore, 
it  is  said,  "  because  he  trusteth  in  thee."  It  is  not  merely  the 
perception  of  the  goodness  of  God  and  of  the  wonders  He  had 
wrought  for  them.  Now  they  know  Himself)  and  trust  Him- 
self; and  this  is  a  very  great  thing  for  our  souls — this  personal 
knowledge  of  God  and  trust  in  God.  I  need  not  say  it  is  what 
God  looks  for  now  in  a  still  more  intimate  way  than  even  then, 
though  all  that  ever  has  been  done  on  the  face  of  the  earth  will 
have  been  completely  eclipsed  with  but  one  exception  (and  this 
exception  is  Christ,  and  we  may  add  His  body  the  church). 
Nothing  can  surpass  the  last  Adam ;  nothing  compare  with 
Christ's  cross,  and  that  will  be  our  portion,  of  which  we  will 
joy  and  boast  even  in  glory. 

Remark  this  also  that,  in  all  these  statements  of  what  they 
are  to  share,  you  never  find  such  language  addressed  to  them  as 
supposes  them  to  enter  into  the  depths  of  God's  ways  in  the 
cross  as  is  expected  of  us  now.  What  can  be  sweeter  than  the 
way  in  which  they  count  on  their  deliverance,  and  confide  their 
souls  to  God !  But  you  never  find  such  words  as,  "  God  forbid 
that  I  should  glory  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
Yet  nothing  would  have  been  more  easy,  had  it  been  in  due 
keeping,  than  for  God  to  have  said  so  here.      We  are  called  into 


CHAPTER   XXVI.  119 

such  fellowship  with  God  about  His  Son  and  the  cross  as 
well  as  heaven  as  nobody  can  really  find  in  the  Old  Testament. 

When  a  person  starts  with  the  thought  that  the  theme  is  all 
one  and  the  same,  the  distinctive  value  of  scripture  is  lost.  For 
the  soul  too  the  least  possible  measure  of  blessing  is  the  result, 
(Yer.  4.)  Here  we  have  the  Lord  Jehovah  brought  in ;  and  the 
reason  why  they  speak  of  His  everlasting  strength  is,  because 
"  He  bringeth  down  them  that  are  on  high,"  &c.  (Ver.  5.)  It 
will  be  one  nation  whom  God  in  the  last  days  will  clothe 
with  such  honour,  after  they  have  been  put  down  in  every  way 
by  the  Gentiles.  Hence  they  are  singing;  for  not  a  single 
difficulty  remains  then  why  God  should  not  fully  bless  them.  It 
is  touching  to  see  how  God  insists  that  He  has  done  everything 
that  was  needed  for  their  deliverance  and  good.  But  there  is 
always  the  abasement  of  what  is  high  and  lofty,  referring  to 
Israel  themselves.  (Ver.  7.)  They  will  have  been  brought 
through  tremendous  trials,  and  have  borne  the  added  and  pain- 
ful reproach  of  being  a  most  abandoned  people. 

For  a  godly  few  of  the  Jews  will  entirely  gainsay  the  lie  of 
Satan  when  all  the  power  of  their  nation,  and  the  great  mass  of 
the  west,  will  have  given  way  to  Antichrist.  A  little  despised 
remnant  will  still  hold  out  for  the  Lord,  still  refuse  him  who 
puts  himself  forward  as  the  true  Messiah.  They  will  have  been 
faithful  in  the  face  of  death,  and  now  they  are  made  to  praise 
God  because  "  He  has  weighed  the  path  of  the  just."  (Ver.  7.) 
It  is  sweet  in  thinking  of  this,  that  their  triumph  will  not  be  by 
their  power  or  their  knowledge,  but  by  their  simple  trust  in 
Jehovah  and  faith  in  His  word.  But  a  scanty  glimpse  will  be 
theirs;  for  they  are  the  very  souls  referred  to,  in  Isaiah  1.,  as 
walking  in  darkness  and  having  no  light.  This  ought  never  to 
be  said  of  a  Christian,  though  he  may  slip  into  such  a  feeling ; 
for  he  has  seen  Christ,  the  light  of  life,  the  true  light.  He  may 
have  but  a  dim  perception  of  Christ,  but  still  Christ  is  before 
his  soul  and  always  shines ;  for  it  is  not  true,  that  where  the 
light  of  grace  has  once  shone,  God  takes  it  back  again.  The 
difference  is  on  the  part  of  the  Christian.  It  is  never  the  light 
that  is  gone ;  but  that  he  may  have  been  unfaithful  and  turned 


120  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

his  back  upon  it.  The  Holy  Ghost  has  come  down  to  abide 
with  the  Christian  for  ever.  He  may  not  always  walk  according 
to  the  light,  but  in  it  he  is,  as  a  believer,  and  cannot  but  be ; 
yea,  he  is  now  light  in  the  Lord.  The  Christian  walks  in  the 
light  as  long  as  he  professes  the  name  of  Christ.  He  never 
walks  in  darkness;  he  may  not  enjoy  the  light,  but  this  is 
another  thing. 

The  contrary  language  is  very  common  in  Christendom, 
because  they  confound  the  position  of  the  Christian  with  that  of 
the  Jewish  people,  who  must  go  through  darkness  by  and  by, 
before  their  light  is  come,  and  the  glory  of  Jehovah  is  risen  upon 
them.  Possibly  a  very  few  may  not  be  thus  walking  in  dark- 
ness ;  some  certainly  will  have  godliness  in  contrast  with  the 
many ;  they  are  "  the  wise."  But  the  beautiful  feature  of  the 
godly  is,  that  although  they  thus  walk  in  darkness,  yet  as  they 
have  been  touched  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  know  that  what  is 
of  God  can  never  have  alliance  with  sin,  so  they  will  refuse  to 
own  that  idols  and  Antichrist  can  be  of  God.  Thus  they  pass 
through  the  fires,  with  an  uncommonly  feeble  measure  of  know- 
ledge of  God  no  doubt,  but  still  they  will  be  true  to  what  they 
have  got,  and  will  be  brought  out  to  praise  God.  (Ver.  7.) 
They  are  entitled  to  be  spoken  of  as  "  the  just,"  So  now,  it  is  a 
great  snare  as  well  as  mistake  of  believers  not  to  take  the  place 
of  being  saints  of  God ;  for  if  they  decline  it,  they  feel  not 
responsibility  in  their  walk.  So  in  earthly  relations,  if  persons 
in  the  position  of  masters  or  servants  do  not  act  from  their  true 
position,  they  will  never  carry  themselves  in  practice  as  becomes 
them.  To  own  our  proper  relationship  is  not  pride,  but  a  duty 
and  wisdom.  If  you  are  occupied  therein  with  self,  no  doubt 
pride  comes  in,  but  it  is  all  right  and  important  to  acknowledge 
God  in  the  relationships  to  which  He  has  called  us. 

The  Spirit  of  God  leads  them  to  say,  "  Yea,  in  the  way  of 
thy  judgments,  O  Jehovah,  have  we  waited  for  thee,"  &c. 
(Ver.  8.)  That  is  what  they  had  been  wading  through.  They 
had  waited  for  Him  in  the  way  of  His  judgments,  we  follow 
Him  in  grace  and  look  to  appear  with  Him  in  glory.  "  With 
my  soul  have  I  desired  thee  in  the  night ;  yea,  with  my  spirit 


CHAPTER   XXVI.  121 

within  me  will  I  seek  thee  early:  for  when  thy  judgments 
are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn  right- 
eousness." (Ver.  9.)  Now  we  have  the  individual  again.  As 
far  as  the  world  is  concerned,  the  patience  of  God  will  have 
ended  in  the  most  fearful  departure  from  the  truth.  God  is 
now  suffering  the  ways  of  man.  He  has  not  left  them  to  their 
own  conjectures  or  darkness ;  but  He  has  caused  His  light  to 
shine  in  the  person  of  Christ,  leaving  man  to  himself,  save  work- 
ing by  His  word  and  Spirit.  •  Outwardly  God  seems  as  though 
He  did  not  notice  what  is  passing  here  below,  and  all  this  after 
the  full  light  of  God  has  shone  through  Christ  upon  this  world. 
Saving  grace  has  appeared  to  men.  Favour  has  been  shown  to 
the  wicked :  this  is  what  is  going  on  now.  "  Let  favour  be 
shown  unto  the  wicked,  yet  will  he  not  learn  righteousness." 
"  In  the  land  of  uprightness,"  it  is  added,  "  will  he  deal  unjust]y 
and  will  not  behold  the  majesty  of  Jehovah."  The  gospel  is 
but  for  a  witness ;  it  will  not,  cannot  govern  the  world.  When 
God's  judgments  are  here  below,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world 
will  learn  righteousness.  Hence  there  is  another  thing :  in 
verse  11  Jehovah,  with  uplifted  hand,  is  coming  in  the  way  of 
judgment.  Does  the  first  answer  declare  "they  will  not  see?" 
But,  says  He,  "  They  shall  see,  and  be  ashamed  for  their  envy 
at  the  people;  yea,  the  fire  of  thine  enemies  shall  devour  them." 
"Lord,  thou  wilt  ordain  peace  for  us:  for  thou  also  hast  wrought 
all  our  works  in  us.  O  Lord  our  God,  other  lords  beside  thee 
have  had  dominion  over  us  :  but  by  thee  only  will  we  make 
mention  of  thy  name."     (Ver.  11 — 13.) 

And  what  then  about  Israel  ?  "  They  are  dead,  they  shall 
not  live;  they  are  deceased,  they  shall  not  rise."  (Ver.  14.) 
This  is  of  course  highly  figurative  language.  If  we  look  at  the 
resurrection,  we  know  that  the  wicked  are  to  rise  as  well  as  the 
righteous ;  that  is,  there  is  a  resurrection  of  all  men,  just  and 
unjust.  These  Gentile  oppressors  of  Israel  must  rise  in  the 
resurrection  of  judgment.  They  will  rise  like  other  bad  men. 
Hence  when  it  is  said  here,  "  They  shall  not  rise,"  the  Spirit 
does  not  describe  the  literal  resurrection  of  the  body,  but  the 
complete  reversal  of  the  lot  of  the  Gentiles  and  Israel  in  this 


1-2  LECTURES   OX    ISAIAH. 

world.  These  old  lords  are  no  longer  to  live  or  rise  again  in 
this  world.  This  will  suffice  to  show  that  the  language  here  is 
figurative. 

In  chapter  xxv.  8  it  is  said,  "  He  will  swallow  up  death  in 
victory."  This,  we  know  from  God  Himself,  will  be  realized  in 
the  literal  resurrection  of  the  body,  when  the  saints  are  raised. 
But  in  chapter  xxvi.  that  allusion  to  resurrection  is  employed  as 
a  figure,  because  the  context  proves  that  it  cannot  refer  to  that 
literal  fact ;  for  if  it  did,  it  would  be  to  deny  that  the  unright- 
eous are  to  rise.  This  is  the  true  criterion  for  the  understanding 
of  any  passage  of  the  word.  If  a  person  bring  you  a  text 
against  what  you  know  to  be  tine,  always  examine  what  sur- 
rounds it,  what  God  is  treating  of.  Here  it  is  plain  that  it  is  a 
question  of  the  way  in  which  God  will  deal  in  that  day  with 
the  Gentiles  who  lorded  it  over  Israel.  But  is  it  not  the  fact, 
some  may  ask,  that  these  Gentiles  were  literally  dead  ?  Cer- 
tainly, I  answer;  but  it  is  not  true  that  they  shall  not  rise. 
Perhaps  this  would  not  be  worth  dwelling  on,  were  it  not  that 
many  apply  chapter  xxvi.  to  the  same  literal  resurrection  as 
xxv.  8.  We  must  never  force  but  bow  to  scripture.  The 
passages  that  do  refer  to  a  raising  of  bodies  we  must  hold  fast, 
but  it  is  dangerous  to  misapply  others  which  it  only  uses  as  a 
figure,  because  one  might  infer,  as  from  our  chapter,  that  some 
shall  never  rise.  In  truth,  as  we  know,  all  men  must  rise. 
"  The  hour  is  coming  in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves 
shall  hear  His  voice,  and  shall  come  forth."  (John  v.  28,  29.) 
There  we  have  the  most  decisive  proof  that  all  the  dead,  just 
and  unjust,  are  to  rise  and  reappear.  Here  contrariwise  the 
wicked  enemies  of  Israel  "  shall  not  rise."  John  clearly  teaches 
the  resurrection  of  all,  good  and  bad.  Isaiah  xxvi.  14  refers 
only  to  the  figure  of  rising  or  not  to  comfort  Israel  from  all  fears 
of  their  old  troublers.  "They  are  dead,  they  shall  not  live; 
they  are  deceased,  they  shall  not  rise:  therefore  hast  thou 
visited  and  destroyed  them,  and  made  all  their  memoiy  to 
perish."  (Ver.  14.)  But  what  has  been  done  for  the  nation  ? 
"  Thou  hast  increased  the  nation,  0  Jehovah,  thou  hast  increased 
the  nation :  thou  art  glorified :  thou  hadst  removed  it  far  unto 


CHAPTER   XXVI.  123 

all  the  ends  of  the  earth."  (Ver.  15.)  He  does  not  speak  of 
the  resurrection  of  the  body.  Clearly  when  that  takes  place  as 
described,  it  could  not  be  said  that  He  had  removed  the  risen 
saints  far  unto  all  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Take  it  of  Israel,  and 
how  true  it  is  ! 

So,  again,  verses  16 — 18.  "Lord,  in  trouble  have  they 
visited  thee,  they  poured  out  a  prayer  when  thy  chastening  was 
upon  them.  Like  as  a  woman  with  child,  that  draweth  near 
the  time  of  her  delivery,  is  in  pain,  and  crieth  out  in  her  pangs ; 
so  have  we  been  in  thy  sight,  0  Jehovah.  We  have  been  with 
child,  we  have  been  in  pain,  we  have  as  it  were  brought  forth 
wind ;  we  have  not  wrought  any  deliverance  in  the  earth ; 
neither  have  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  fallen."  They  will 
review  their  past  conduct,  and  see  that  they  have  not  accom- 
plished the  purpose  of  God.  They  had  brought  in  no  divine 
flow  of  blessing ;  they  had  learnt  the  bad  ways  of  the  Gentiles, 
and  brought  a  curse  on  themselves ;  the  name  of  the  Lord  was 
blasphemed  because  of  them.  But  now  it  is  said,  "  Thy  dead 
shall  live;  my  dead  body  shall  they  arise."  What  mighty 
words,  and  how  tender !  The  Lord  awakens  Israel,  and  even 
calls  them  His  dead  body.  It  is  no  question  of  bodily  death, 
but  of  national  revival.  The  daughter  awakes  from  her  long 
sleep,  and  the  Lord  speaks  of  the  Jews  (so  long  defunct  as  His 
people)  as  His  dead.  They,  for  their  part,  own  themselves  to  be 
just  as  bad  as  the  rest  of  the  nations,  but  the  difference  is  that 
the  Lord  claims  them  as  His  own.  "  Let  them  be  dead," 
He  says,  as  it  were,  "  still  they  are  mine."  It  is  the  Jewish 
nation  that  had  been  like  a  corpse  whom  the  Lord  is  graciously 
pleased  to  identify  as  His  dead  body,  bringing  them  out  again. 
So  Abraham  would  bury  his  dead  out  of  his  sight.  Here  God 
claims  them  to  fill  them  with  a  new  life.  "  My  dead  body  shall 
they  arise."  Some  may  think  this  a  questionable  interpretation 
of  the  passage ;  but  a  scripture  or  two  will  prove  its  soundness. 

In  Ezekiel  xxxvii.  the  terms  of  the  figure  are  quite  as  strong 
as  here ;  the  Spirit  of  God  shows  the  prophet  a  valley  of  dry 
bones.  "  They  were  very  dry."  "  Can  these  bones  live  ?"  was 
the  question.     (Ver.  3 — 5.)     "Behold    I  will  cause  breath  to 


124  LECTURES    ON    ISAIAH. 

enter  into  you."  (Ver.  6.)  Then  the  vision  is  realized,  the 
bones  come  together.  Next  there  was  flesh  on  them.  (Ver.  11.) 
Then  the  bones,  coming  forth  and  clothed  with  flesh,  answer  to 
the  dead  men  here  raised  out  of  their  graves.  But,  beyond  con- 
troversy, this  means  the  whole  house  of  Israel :  "  Thy  dead  shall 
live,"  says  Isaiah.  To  put  this  chapter  of  Ezekiel  along  with 
Isaiah  xxvi.  makes,  to  say  the  least,  a  strong  presumption  that  if 
the  figure  of  resurrection  is  used  to  show  the  fresh  start  of 
Israel  in  the  one,  so  it  may  be  in  the  other.  But  it  is  certainly 
so  intended  in  Ezekiel  xxxvii.,  for,  if  we  have  the  vision,  we 
have  also  the  inspired  interpretation.  We  are  not  therefore  at 
liberty  to  explain  the  vision  according  to  our  own  thoughts ;  the 
explanation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  express  and  conclusive.  Thus 
Ave  can  carry  divine  light  back  to  Isaiah  xxvi.,  where  the  very 
same  allusion  is  found. 

In  Hosea,  again,  there  is  a  similar  figure,  as  also  in  Daniel 
xii.  2,  "  Many  of  them  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall 
awake,  some  to  everlasting  life,  and  some  to  shame  and  ever- 
lasting contempt."  If  we  divert  this  to  a  resurrection  of  the 
body,  in  the  first  place  it  is  not  a  resurrection  of  all,  but  only  of 
many.  In  the  second  place,  it  is  of  some  to  everlasting  life  and 
of  some  to  shame  and  contempt  at  the  same  time.  We  must 
give  up  the  doctrine  of  the  first  resurrection,  separated  by  a 
thousand  years  and  more  from  the  second  death  (Rev.  xx.),  in 
order  to  found  on  this  a  literal  rising  from  the  graves.  All  is 
plain  and  just  if  it  apply  in  the  same  way  as  Ezekiel  and  Isaiah 
to  the  national  revival  of  Israel  (or  the  Jews),  whom  God  will 
bring  out  of  all  their  present  condition  of  shame,  though  some  of 
them  be  allowed  to  display  fatal  wickedness  and  pride.  But 
the  last  will  be  quickened  with  divine  life.  This  is  another 
confirmation  of  the  truth  of  the  interpretation. 

But  further  the  next  verse  (20)  is  explicit,  where  God  says, 
"  Enter  thou  into  thy  chamber  till  the  indignation  be  overpast." 
Those  who  interpret  the  context  of  a  literal  resurrection  are  led 
into  the  error,  that  the  risen  saints  (for  such  this  scheme  would 
suppose  to  be  here  meant)  would  be  here  on  earth  whilst  the 
divine  indignation  is  going  on  !     One  could  understand  their 


CHAPTER   XXVI.  125 

holding  that  some  are  to  pass  through  the  tribulation,  though 
it  is  not  the  same  thing  as  the  indignation.  But  it  is  clearly  a 
question  of  men  alive  here  below,  not  of  men  changed.  God  tells 
them  (the  Jews)  to  enter  into  their  chambers  until  He  has 
spent  all  His  wrath  upon  the  nations.  Is  this  what  we  look 
for  ?  Are  we  not  to  be  taken  out  of  this  earthly  scene  and  to 
enter  into  the  Father's  house  above  ?  We  are  not  an  earthly 
but  a  heavenly  people.  We  know  the  Lord  is  coming  who  will 
take  us  to  be  with  Himself  where  He  is,  and  when  He  has 
translated  the  Christians  above,  the  Jews  will  be  called  for  the 
earth.  The  little  remnant  will  be  grievously  tried,  and  the  vast 
body  of  the  nation  will  receive  the  Antichrist.  Then,  when 
the  judgment  of  the  quick  comes,  it  is  said,  "  enter  into  thy 
chambers."  He  will  not  provide  a  heavenly  abode  for  them,  but 
they  are  to  enter  into  their  chambers,  always  some  place  of 
refuge  and  earthly  security.  All  this  renders  plain  the  right 
interpretation  of  the  passage,  and  shows  that  He  is  not  speaking 
about  the  heavenly  saints,  but  refers  to  the  remnant  of  the 
Jews  in  the  last  days,  who  are  to  have  a  haven  of  refuge  pro- 
vided for  them.  It  is  not  like  Abraham :  this  is  our  place ; 
Israel's  will  be  much  more  like  Lot,  for  they  will  be  in  the 
midst  of  the  place  where  the  judgment  is  to  be  executed.  Lot 
entered  into  his  chambers  (that  is,  Zoar)  when  the  judgments 
came,  but  as  for  Abraham,  he  was  entirely  out  of  the  scene ;  and 
yet  before  it  came  to  pass,  he  knew  it  far  better  than  Lot.  His 
position,  communion,  and  experience  were  entirely  different 
from  those  of  his  nephew.  So  we  shall  be  taken  to  Christ  and 
brought  into  the  Father's  house  :  and  afterwards,  when  the  Lord 
comes  to  execute  judgment,  we  shall  come  along  with  Him. 


CHAPTER   XXVII. 

This  is  the  closing  portion  of  the  series  that  has  been  occupy- 
ing us.  It  is  "  in  that  day."  Chapter  xxviii.  manifestly  intro- 
duces a  new  part  of  the  prophecy. 

The  great  crisis  is  arrived.  Not  only  does  Jehovah  come 
out  of  His  place  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  for  their 
iniquity,  and  the  earth  is  compelled  to  disclose  her  deeds  of 
blood,  and  her  slain  shall  be  covered  no  more ;  but  there  are 
yet  greater  things.  For  "  in  that  day  Jehovah  with  his  sore  and 
great  and  strong  sword  shall  punish  leviathan,  the  piercing- 
serpent,  even  leviathan,  that  crooked  serpent;  and  shall  slay 
the  dragon  that  is  in  the  sea."  It  is  the  execution  of  divine 
judgment  on  the  power  of  Satan,  figuratively  set  forth  under 
forms  suited  to  describe  his  hostility  as  at  work  against  Israel 
among  the  Gentiles.  (Yer.  1.)  "The  day* of  Jehovah "  takes  in 
not  only  the  thousand  years,  but  a  little  more. 

Thence  the  Spirit  turns  to  the  Lord's  ways  with  His  own. 
"  In  that  day  sing  ye  unto  her,  A  vineyard  of  red  wine.  I  Jeho- 
vah do  keep  it;  I  will  water  it  every  moment:  lest  any  hurt 
it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and  day."  (Yer.  2,  3.)  His  care  never 
failed,  whatever  the  times  that  passed  over  His  land  and  people. 
When  earth  comes  once  more  into  His  view,  and  consequently 
Israel,  His  watchful  goodness  will  prove  itself  unremitting  on 
their  behalf.  "  Fury  is  not  in  me :  who  would  set  the  briers 
and  thorns  against  me  in  battle  ?  I  would  go  through  them,  I 
would  burn  them  together.  Or  let  him  take  hold  of  my 
strength,  that  he  may  make  peace  with  me ;  and  he  shall  make 
peace  with  me."  There  seems  not  a  little  obscurity  in  the 
language,  if  one  may  judge  from  the  discrepancies  of  expositors, 
and  the  difficulty  of  suggesting  such  a  sense  as  carries  the 
unbiassed  along  with  it.  But  assuming  that  the  substantial 
force  is  given  in  the  English  Bible,  the  Lord,  on  the  one  hand, 


CHAPTER    XXV IT.  127 

challenges  the  adversaries  and  warns  of  their  sure  destruction ; 
on  the  other  He  proffers  His  own  protection  as  the  only 
door  of  peace  and  safety.  The  next  verse  (6)  is  transparent : 
"  He  shall  cause  them  that  come  of  Jacob  to  take  root :  Israel 
shall  blossom  and  bud,  and  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  fruit." 
Such  is  the  purpose  of  the  Lord ;  and  it  shall  stand. 

It  was  not  mere  purpose,  however :  there  was  patient,  perse- 
vering discipline  in  His  ways  with  Israel.  "Hath  he  smitten 
him,  as  he  smote  those  that  smote  him  ?  or  is  he  slain  according 
to  the  slaughter  of  them  that  are  slain  by  him  ?  In  measure, 
when  it  shooteth  forth,  thou  wilt  debate  with  it :  he  stayeth  his 
rough  wind  in  the  day  of  the  east  wind.  By  this,  therefore, 
shall  the  iniquity  of  Jacob  be  purged  ;  and  this  is  all  the 
fruit  to  -take  away  his  sin;  when  he  maketh  all  the  stones 
of  the  altar  as  chalk-stones  that  are  beaten  in  sunder,  the 
groves  and  images  shall  not  stand  up.  Yet  the  defenced  city 
shall  be  desolate,  and  the  habitation  forsaken,  and  left  like  a 
wilderness :  there  shall  the  calf  feed,  and  there  shall  he  lie 
down,  and  consume  the  branches  thereof.  When  the  boughs 
thereof  are  withered,  they  shall  be  broken  off:  the  women  come, 
and  set  them  on  fire :  for  it  is  a  people  of  no  understanding : 
therefore  he  that  made  them  will  not  have  mercy  on  them,  and 
he  that  formed  them  will  show  them  no  favour."  (Ver.  7 — 11.) 
Thus,  there  was  indeed  a  mighty  difference  in  God's  ways  with 
Israel  and  their  enemies.  Faithfully  did  He  chastise  them  in 
their  pride,  and  rebelliousness,  and  unbelief;  but  it  was  not 
with  the  unsparing  judgment  which  uprooted  and  destroyed 
His  and  their  foes.  There  was  slaughter  too ;  but  what  was  it 
in  comparison  of  those  that  Israel  are  destined  to  slay  before 
this  day  of  retribution  arrives  ?  In  their  case,  judgment  was 
tempered  with  mercy;  His  dealing  was  measured.  In  His 
debate  or  controversy  with  Israel  He  deigned  to  plead;  and 
even  when  the  sorest  trial  came,  there  was  a  gracious  mitiga- 
tion and  arrest  in  favour  of  Israel ;  and  not  this  only,  but  also 
moral  profit,  when  every  trace  of  idolatry  should  be  ground  like 
chalkstone  to  powder.  They  must  not  be  surprised,  then,  if 
in  such  mighty  changes  the  works  of  the  men  of  the  earth 


128  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

passed  away,  the  defenced  city  was  desolated,  the  habitation 
forsaken  and  left  like  the  wilderness,  only  relieved  by  pasturage 
for  the  calf,  and  by  withered,  broken  firewood  for  women  to 
come  and  set  on  fire-;  for  oh  !  the  folly  of  the  people  and  the 
ruin  they  bring  justly,  necessarily,  on  themselves  ! 

Yet  here,  as  elsewhere,  great  tribulation  is  the  immediate 
precursor  of  a  greater  deliverance.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass 
in  that  day,  that  Jehovah  shall  beat  off  from  the  channel  of  the 
river  unto  the  stream  of  Egypt,  and  ye  shall  be  gathered  one  by 
one,  0  ye  children  of  Israel."  (Ver.  12.)  The  Judge  of  all  the 
earth  shall  do  right ;  but  He  shall  interpose  in  saving  and  sover- 
eign mercy.  He  shall  sift  out  and  gather  the  Israelites  one  by 
one.  Nay  more,  "  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  the 
great  trumpet  shall  be  blown,  and  they  shall  come  which  were 
ready  to  perish  in  the  land  of  Assyria,  and  the  outcasts  in  the  land 
of  Egypt,  and  shall  worship  Jehovah  in  the  holy  mount  at  Jerusa- 
lem." (Ver.  13.)  Those  who  have  accompanied  me  thus  far 
will  have  no  trouble  or  doubt  in  determining  the  true  applica- 
tion. It  is  the  trumpet  of  Matthew  xxiv.,  not  of  1  Thessalonians 
iv.  and  1  Corinthians  xv.  The  latter  pair  refers  to  the  divine 
summons  to  the  heavenly  saints;  our  chapter,  as  well  as  the 
passage  in  the  gospel,  describes  the  call  to  Israel  to  re-assemble, 
from  north  and  south,  to  worship  the  Lord  in  the  holy  mount  at 
Jerusalem. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

This  portion,  which  is  intimately  connected  with  chapter  xxix., 
gives  us  a  clear  detailed  view  of  the  ways  of  God  with  His 
people  and  His  land,  more  especially  with  Jerusalem,  in  the  last 
days.  Israel  is  to  fade  as  a  flower,  Jerusalem  to  be  in  sore  dis- 
pleasure, but  delivered  gloriously  and  for  ever.  I  trust  it  may 
be  seen  plainly  how  impossible  it  is  to  apply  what  the  Holy 
Ghost  announces  here  as  a  whole,  to  anything  that  has  yet  been 
accomplished.  We  must  leave  room  for  a  further  and  closer 
bearing  of  these  woes  of  the  prophet.  Now  simple  as  this  may 
be,  it  is  immensely  important.  For  even  many  Christians  are 
looking  onward  for  the  gradual  progress  (not  testimony  alone) 
of  the  gospel.  They  expect  that,  by  the  blessing  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  upon  the  preached  word,  the  nations  are  to  be  by  degrees 
brought  in;  moral  evil,  infidelity,  every  form  of  superstition, 
all  the  pride  and  worldliness  of  man,  to  be  slowly  broken  down, 
when  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  fill  men's  hearts  with 
righteousness  and  peace  and  joy,  and  thus  the  world  in  general 
be  the  reflection  of  the  will  and  ways  of  God.  To  such  persons 
the  assertion  seems  strange  that  there  is  to  be  a  total  change  of 
dispensation ;  that  God,  having  first  taken  us  away  to  be  with 
Christ  above,  is  going  to  restore  Israel  into  pre-eminence  in  their 
own  land,  not  to  convert  them  simply  and  bring  them  into  the 
Christian  church,  but  to  lead  them  to  repent  and  receive  their 
Messiah,  when  they  shall  have  their  own  distinctive  prom- 
ises and  the  new  covenant  made  good  to  them,  Jehovah's  glory 
shining  upon  Zion,  themselves  exalted  above  all  nations,  who 
then  take  a  place  of  conscious  willing  inferiority  to  Israel,  and 
vie  with  one  another  which  shall  pay  most  honour  to  the 
chosen  of  the  Lord.  All  this,  in  many  weighty  consequences, 
involves  such  a  mighty  revolution  in  people's  thoughts,  that 
those  more  accustomed  to  the  word  of  God  can  hardly  conceive 
what  an  immense  draft  it  makes  upon  the  faith  of  those  who  are 


130  LECTURES    OX    ISAIAH. 

unversed  in  the  prophetic  word ;  how  repugnant  it  is  to  all  that 
is  most  cherished  in  their  minds,  what  a  death-blow  it  gives  to 
what  they  had  considered  the  legitimate  hope  of  the  church. 

If  we  come  to  God's  word  as  the  only  source  of  truth  and 
sure  test  of  all  previous  thoughts,  nothing  can  be  plainer;  for 
here  we  have  clearly  a  vision  of  the  terrible  blow  that  is  to  fall 
upon  Ephraim,  which  is  not  only  the  name  of  a  particular  tribe, 
but  the  general  designation  of  the  ten  tribes  who  mustered  under 
that  leading  tribe.  Judah  and  Ephraim  are  the  two  chief 
titles  by  which  the  prophets  continualty  contrast  the  two  houses 
of  Israel.  What  the  prophet  communicates  here  is  the  woe 
that  is  to  fall  specially  on  Ephraim,  that  is,  on  those  we  call  the 
ten  tribes.  This  furnishes  us  with  means  for  judging  the  time 
and  circumstances  of  its  fulfilment,  because  no  such  judgment 
as  is  here  described  ever  historically  fell  upon  the  Jews.  The 
others  (i.e.,  Israel)  were  carried  away  into  captivity  in  Assyria, 
and  were  never  as  a  people  restored  to  the  land.  Isaiah  wrote 
when  this  dreadful  blow  was  fallen  upon  Israel,  and  goes 
onward  to  their  last  days,  even  to  the  days  when  Christ  Him- 
self, first  in  faith,  then  in  delivering  power  and  glory,  shall  be 
connected  with  the  remnant  of  Judah.  Looking  at  the  past 
history  of  the  people,  wTe  fail  to  see  any  such  connection  of  Christ 
with  Judah,  anything  that  answered  to  this  recourse  to  the 
tried  Stone,  save  in  those  disciples  who  left  the  synagogue  for 
the  church  at  a  later  epoch.  The  ten  tribes  were  carried  away 
at  an  early  day,  and  later  on  the  two  tribes  were  carried  to 
Babylon,  whence  emerged  only  an  inconsiderable  remnant  of 
Judah.  The  prophecy  therefore  has  not  yet  been  accom- 
plished ;  and  that  which  has  not  been  must  be  fulfilled.  Surely 
no  canon  of  interpretation  can  be  surer  or  plainer  than  this. 
Scripture  cannot  be  broken :  the  word  of  God  must  be  verified 
sooner  or  later.  The  end  of  this  age  is  the  ripe  season  for 
making  good  the  bulk  of  prophecy.  Therefore  the  one  question 
here  is  whether  anything  has  occurred  really  and  fully  cor- 
responding to  these  judgments  that  fell  on  the  ten  tribes  and 
Judah  with  Jerusalem  also.  That  there  never  has  been  an 
adequate  accomplishment  will  be  manifest  enough  as  we  pass  on. 


CHAPTER   XXVIII.  131 

"  Woe  to  the  crown  of  pride,  to  the  drunkards  of  Ephraim, 
whose  glorious  beauty  is  a  fading  flower,  which  are  on  the  head 
of  the  fat  valleys  of  them  that  are  overcome  with  wine.  Behold, 
Jehovah  hath  a  mighty  and  strong  one,  which  as  a  tempest  of 
hail  and  a  destroying  storm,  as  a  flood  of  mighty  waters  over- 
flowing, shall  cast  down  to  the  earth  with  the  hand."  I  do  not 
think  drunkenness  is  to  be  taken  in  its  merely  literal  accepta- 
tion. It  represents  their  dreadfully  excited,  stupified,  careless 
state,  given  up  to  their  own  pleasure  and  self-indulgence  to  the 
shame  of  the  true  God.  What  drunkenness  is  among  men 
with  its  frightful  natural  effects,  such  in  a  large  moral  sense 
will  be  the  condition  of  these  proud  insensate  men  of  Ephraim. 
Fulfilled  at  whatever  time  it  may  be,  plainly  it  will  be  in  Israel 
as  such. 

"  In  that  day  shall  Jehovah  of  hosts  be  for  a  crown  of  glory, 
and  for  a  diadem  of  beauty  unto  the  residue  of  his  people,  and 
for  a  spirit  of  judgment  to  him  that  sitteth  in  judgment,  and  for 
a  strength  to  them  that  turn  the  battle  to  the  gate."  But  was 
the  condition  of  Judah  better  ?  "  They  also  have  erred  through 
wine,  and  through  strong  drink  are  out  of  the  way ;  the  priest 
and  the  prophet  have  erred  through  strong  drink,  they  are 
swallowed  up  of  wine,  they  are  out  of  the  way  through  strong- 
drink;  they  err  in  vision,  they  stumble  in  judgment.  For  all 
tables  are  full  of  vomit  and  filthiness,  so  that  there  is  no  place 
clean."  In  vain  had  God  met  their  weakness,  and  fed  them 
with  infants'  food.  (Ver.  9,  10.)  Another  dealing  is  needed 
and  will  surely  follow.  "With  stammering  lips  and  another 
tongue  will  he  speak  to  this  people  " — not  with  that  child-like 
instruction  which  they  had  slighted,  but  with  the  foreign  tones 
of  enemies  who  would  scourge  them.  They  would  not  have  His 
words  of  rest  for  the  weary,  they  must  need  have  a  nation  they 
understood  not.     It  was  a  judgment  on  their  unbelief. 

Thus  the  Assyrian  is  first  represented  as  a  hail-storm  coming 
down  from  the  north  on  Ephraim,  "  a  mighty  and  strong  one," 
"  as  a  tempest  of  hail  and  a  destroying  storm,  as  a  flood  of 
mighty  waters  overflowing."  It  is  the  "  king  of  the  north,"  as 
he  is  described  in  Daniel  xi.     I  have  already  drawn  attention 


132  LECTURES   ON    ISAIAH. 

to  the  mistaken  supposition  that  the  lawless  one,  who  is  to  be 
manifested  as  "  the  king  "  in  Palestine,  is  the  only  danger  of 
the  Jews.  No  doubt  he,  though  their  king,  is  at  bottom  an 
enemy  of  the  worst  character.  For  what  can  be  more  afflicting 
or  disastrous  than  to  have  one  in  your  very  midst  whom  you 
have  embraced  as  a  friend,  and  who  turns  out  the  bitterest  foe  ? 
Such  will  be  the  case  when  the  Antichrist  appears  in  the  midst 
of  the  Jews  and  reigns,  accepted  by  them  as  the  Messiah.  The 
Antichrist  will  be  in  evil  and  in  false  pretensions  what  Christ  is 
in  deed  and  in  truth.  Though  Jesus  was  God,  yet,  wrhen  He 
came  as  man  among  men,  He  never  asserted  His  rights  as  God 
in  His  ordinary  path  here  below,  however  true  the  glory  of  His 
person  was  to  faith.  He  never  used  the  Godhead  to  avert  trials 
and  sufferings,  or  man's  contempt  of  Him.  He  waited  on  God 
and  trusted  in  Him.  His  obedience  as  man  contributed  only 
the  more,  because  of  His  divine  dignity,  to  show  that  He  was 
willing  to  encounter  all  shame  and  reproach,  yea,  the  death  of 
the  cross,  that  God  the  Father  might  be  glorified.  Antichrist 
will,  on  the  contrary,  use  all  that  Satan  gives  him  (and  Satan 
will  endue  him  with  such  energy  as  never  has  beeu  possessed 
before  by  man  upon  the  earth),  will  use  all  power  and  signs  and 
lying  wonders.  The  consequence  will  be  that  the  Jews,  who 
have  always  been  looking  out  for  external  tokens  and  prodigies, 
will  accept  and  worship  Him  as  the  Messiah  and  Jehovah  their 
God  in  Jerusalem.  This  is  the  person  the  Second  Epistle  to 
the  Thessalonians  warns  us  is  to  come.  Upon  him  first  of  all 
is  the  day  of  the  Lord  to  fall ;  though  that  day  will  take  in  the 
whole  course  of  judgments,  from  its  first  act  in  destroying  the 
Antichrist  till  the  end  of  the  thousand  years.  All  this  period 
will  be  not  only  for  the  display  of  divine  glory,  but  there  will  be 
also  the  execution  of  judgment  from  time  to  time  on  those  that 
oppose  themselves.  Thus,  of  the  other  enemies  of  Jehovah,  the 
chief  is  this  very  king  of  the  north,  the  Assyrian  scourge  that 
comes  down  upon  Ephraim.  Clearly  he  is  an  enemy  that  comes 
against  the  Holy  Land,  whereas  Antichrist  will  reign  in  the 
land,  being  there  received  by  the  Jews,  and  probably  a  Jew 
himself;  for  otherwise  he  could  hardly  hope  to  pass  himself  as 


CHAPTER    XXVIII.  L3S 

Messiah.  But  the  other  external  enemy,  though  he  may  set  up 
to  understand  dark  sentences  (Dan.  viii.),  will  rather  appear 
antagonistically,  as  a  fierce  king  and  mighty  man  of  craft. 

From  chapters  xxviii.,  xxix.,  we  hear  of  two  attacks  on  Jeru- 
salem. First  of  all  the  enemy  comes  on  Ephraim,  entering  the 
Holy  Land  from  the  north,  on  which  occasion  he  has  it  his  own 
way.  He  humbles  the  pride  of  Ephraim  (ver.  3),  and  is  allowed 
of  God  to  gain  a  partial  success  over  Jerusalem  also,  "Where- 
fore hear  the  word  of  Jehovah,  ye  scornful  men,  that  rule  this 
people  which  is  in  Jerusalem.  Because  ye  have  said,  We  have 
made  a  covenant  with  death,  and  with  hell  are  we  at  agree- 
ment :  when  the  overflowing  scourge  shall  pass  through,  it  shall 
not  come  unto  us  :  for  we  have  made  lies  our  refuge,  and  under 
falsehood  have  we  hid  ourselves :  therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah,  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation  a  stone,  a  tried 
stone,  a  precious  corner  stone,  a  sure  foundation:  he  that 
believeth  shall  not  make  haste.  Judgment  also  will  I  lay  to 
the  line,  and  righteousness  to  the  plummet :  and  the  hail  shall 
sweep  away  the  refuge  of  lies,  and  the  waters  shall  overflow  the 
hiding  place.  And  your  covenant  with  death  shall  be  dis- 
annulled, and  your  agreement  with  hell  shall  not  stand ;  when 
the  overflowing  scourge  shall  pass  through,  then  ye  shall  be 
trodden  down  by  it."  Was  this  the  case  in  past  history?  Sup- 
posing you  look  at  Sennacherib  and  his  army  (2  Kings  xviii.), 
what  is  there  like  it,  save  as  a  preparatory  type  ?  Was  not  his 
power  completely  humbled  before  the  Jews  ?  (Chap,  xix.) 
Was  it  not  a  godly  son  of  David  who  then  reigned  at  Jeru- 
salem ?  Had  not  Ephraim  been  swept  off  years  before  ?  It 
is  manifest  and  certain  that  Sennacherib  never  gained  an 
advantage  over  Jerusalem,  whereas  this  power  is  to  be  vic- 
torious in  the  first  instance,  and  even  in  the  second  to  reduce 
them  to  the  utmost.  Mark  the  language  of  the  prophet  here, 
"  Wherefore  hear  the  word  of  Jehovah,  ye  scornful  men,  that 
rule  this  people  which  is  in  Jerusalem."  (Ver.  14.)  The  fact 
is,  when  Sennacherib  came  against  Jerusalem  then,  the  pious 
king  Hezekiah  ruled  there,  who,  instead  of  making  a  covenant 
with  death,  implored  the  help  of  Jehovah  against  the  scornful 


134  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

king  of  Assyria.  "The  result  was  that  the  angel  of  Jehovah 
smote  the  host  of  Assyria,  so  that  there  fell  no  less  than 
185,000.  Save  that  the  Assyrian  will  once  more  oppose  the 
Jews,  there  is  scarce  a  feature  in  the  past  which  is  not  the 
reverse  of  what  we  have  here. 

Let  rationalists,  if  they  will,  conclude  that  the  book  (for  the 
Spirit  of  God  they  deny)  has  made  a  mistake ;  believers  may 
be  assured  that  it  mainly  looks  onward  to  the  judgments  of 
the  last  days.  Indolent  readers,  unintelligent  or  prejudiced 
commentators,  may  slur  over  the  distinctive  points  of  the  pro- 
phecy, turning  what  they  can  to  moral  profit.  But  if  a  man 
follows  out  the  matter  closely,  he  must  accept  the  truth  of  the 
future,  or  become  a  rationalist,  that  is,  an  infidel.  It  is  perfectly 
certain  that  nothing  which  approaches  the  prediction  has  yet 
occurred.  Therefore  the  only  legitimate  inference  to  be  drawn 
from  it  is  either  that  the  prophecy  is  yet  to  be  fulfilled,  or  that 
the  pseudo-prophet  was  guilty  of  a  lie  or  a  flourish.  The 
Christian  believes  on  the  contrary,  that  God  has  written 
nothing  in  vain,  and  that  every  word,  not  yet  accomplished,  must 
be  fulfilled  to  the  letter ;  among  the  rest  this  wonderful  dealing 
in  which  God  is  to  make  the  land  of  Israel  the  grave  of  man's 
pride  and  power. 

Then  God  will  appear  for  the  everlasting  deliverance  of  poor 
Israel.  And  that  very  people,  now  so  proverbial  for  their  obsti- 
nate rejection  of  Christ,  will  go  forth  zealously  spreading  the 
tidings  of  divine  mercy  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  What  an 
evident  contrast  with  that  which  exists  now !  Israel  will  be 
brought  into  their  own  land  and  blessed  there,  when  Jehovah 
of  hosts  shall  reign  in  mount  Zion.  Now  God  has  no  land  that 
is  more  particularly  holy.  The  Land,  holy  in  His  purpose,  is 
the  possession  of  the  Turk.  It  is  still  largely  a  barren  land, 
though  proofs  of  fertility  are  not  wanting  in  the  midst  of  bar- 
renness. How  is  so  vast  a  change  to  be  brought  about?  When 
consummated,  God  will  lead  Israel  to  build  a  magnificent 
temple.  The  priests,  the  sons  of  Zadok,  shall  minister  in  due 
order.  The  land  shall  be  divided  among  the  twelve  tribes  after 
a  new  fashion.     This  and  more  we  know  from  the  last  chapter 


CHAPTER   XXVIIL  1S5 

of  the  prophet  Ezekiel.  Indeed  abundant  proofs  are  manifest 
elsewhere  to  any  person  moderately  acquainted  with  the  pro- 
phecies. At  the  present  time  the  characteristic  facts  are — 
Israel  rejected,  the  Gentiles  called,  the  church  formed  in  union 
with  Christ  on  high  and  by  the  Holy  Ghost  here  below,  in 
which  church  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile.  Thus  .the  character 
of  blessing  for  man  is  entirely  altered.  Instead  of  outward 
honour  resting  upon  the  Jews,  they  are  cast  out  and  dispersed, 
and  have  yet  to  pass  through  a  fiery  tribulation  at  the  close.  We 
are  God's  people,  God's  children  now,  not  they.  Peace  in  Christ 
is  ours,  but  in  the  world  we  have  tribulation.  In  the  days  that 
are  coming  all  will  be  changed :  God,  instead  of  rejecting  the 
Jews,  will  again  choose  them  to  stand  forth  in  their  own  land, 
converting  them  to  Himself,  quenching  all  tendency  to  rest  on 
ordinances,  and  taking  idols  for  ever  away  ;  whereas  they  for- 
merly mixed  up  idols  with  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  and  rejected 
Christ.  Plainly  therefore  a  new  state  of  things  must  have  come 
in.  The  prophecies  may  take  us  down  to  the  change ;  but  how 
is  the  change  itself  to  be  brought  about  ?  By  more  tremendous 
judgments  on  Israel,  and  especially  on  their  enemies,  than  the 
world  has  ever  witnessed ;  not  only  a  great  nation,  but  the  east 
and  west,  their  old  enemies,  represented  in  their  descendants. 
All  nations  of  the  earth,  in  short,  will  have  their  representatives 
there  and  then.  The  result  will  be,  that  God  will  judge  all  the 
nations,  at  length  blessing  His  ancient  people,  according  to  the 
promises  He  had  ensured  to  the  fathers,  then  accomplished  to 
the  children.  In  order  to  bring  about  this  change,  not  only 
must  there  be  an  execution  of  judgment,  but  also  the  removal  of 
the  heavenly  saints  to  be  with  Jehovah  above ;  for  as  long  as 
the  church  goes  on  here  below,  it  is  impossible,  morally  speak- 
ing, that  God  could  accomplish  these  events  of  a  wholly 
contrasted  character.  For  it  is  contrary  to  all  analogy  that  God 
would  act  upon  two  opposite  principles  at  the  same  time.  For 
instance,  how  could  God  both  give  and  withhold  outward 
honour  for  a  Jew?  How  form  the  church  at  the  same  time 
that  He  restores  and  owns  Israel  ?  If  a  Jew  were  to  believe  now, 
he,  baptized  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  becomes  a  member  of  Christ's 


136  LECTURES    ON    ISAIAH. 

body ;  whereas  what  we  find  in  the  prophets  is,  that  a  godly 
Jew,  in  the  last  days,  remains  a  Jew.  The  Lord  will  quicken 
his  soul,  no  doubt ;  but  he  will  be  found  in  his  own  land,  and, 
instead  of  suffering,  he  will  be  blessed  in  earthly  things.  Thus 
it  is  an  altogether  different  state  of  things.  To  this  the  New 
Testament  supplies  the  key.  Before  Jehovah  begins  thus  to 
work  in  Israel,  He  removes  the  church  to  heaven. 

Hence  in  the  Revelation  the  great  first  lesson  is  this,  that 
when  "  the  things  that  are  "  or  the  seven  churches  terminate,  and 
those  that  are  true  believers  now  are  seen  glorified  with 
the  Lord  in  heaven,  then  (Rev.  vii.)  God  takes  up  a  new  work 
among  the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles,  who  will  be,  both  of  them, 
blessed,  but  even  so  distinct  from  each  other.  No  doubt  the 
Jews  will  return  to  their  land  in  unbelief,  and  Satan  will  get 
them  to  install  a  man  as  their  Messiah,  who  will  draw  them  by 
degrees  to  worship  himself  and  an  idol.  Some  might  think  it 
strange  to  assert,  that  these  civilized  Christianized  nations  which 
count  it  impossible  that  the  educated  could  worship  idols  or  the 
Antichrist  should  fall  into  that  very  snare.  But  scripture  is 
explicit,  that  it  is  those  who  now  boast  of  progress,  knowledge, 
and  religion  who  will  at  that  time  fall  into  the  anti-Christian 
pit  and  idolatry.  All  Western  Europe  will  be  drawn  into  the 
snare  with  the  mass  of  the  Jews.  God  will  have  previously 
removed  all  properly  called  Christians.  Then  the  apostacy 
will  take  place,  though  in  the  midst  of  this  fearful  evil  the 
Spirit  of  God  will  work  specially  among  certain  of  the  Jews, 
who  will  go  through  this  scene  faithful  to  God,  some  being 
killed  for  the  truth,  and  others  surviving  in  the  flesh — a  rem- 
nant God  will  reserve  to  Himself  to  make  of  it  as  it  were  a  new 
Israel.  He  will  come  in  the  midst  of  this  wickedness ;  He  will 
execute  judgment  upon  the  ungodly,  preserving  the  spared 
remnant  who  will  become  the  chosen  means  of  spreading  the 
truth  throughout  the  millennial  age. 

When  the  Holy  Ghost  says,  "  Because  ye  have  said,  we  have 
made  a  covenant  with  death  "  (ver.  15),  we  are  not  to  suppose 
that  this  is  to  be  taken  as  if  they  confessed  it.  God  is  rather 
exposing  their  true  evil  and  danger.     They  may  boast  of  their 


CHAPTER   XXVIII.  137 

covenant,  but  they  do  not  know  it  is  with  hell.  They  are 
deceived  to  accept  a  false  Messiah,  whose  power  will  turn  out  to 
be  of  Satan,  but  they  are  ignorant  of  the  cheat.  Men  would  not 
openly  say  that  they  had  entered  into  a  contract  with  the  devil : 
one  must  be  in  an  extraordinary  state  in  order  to  own  such  a 
thing.  Nor  does  the  word  of  God  at  all  limit  us  to  such  an 
interpretation.  I  suppose  .the  reference  is  to  those  that  enter 
into  a  covenant  to  save  themselves  from  the  king  of  the  north. 
It  appears  to  be  a  contract  entered  into  between  the  false  pro- 
phet and  the  beast.  The  power  that  scripture  designates  as  the 
Beast  is  the  emperor  of  the  west,  the  last  Roman  ruler  when 
that  empire  re-appears.  There  is  a  living  man  even  now,  who 
has  his  mind  set  upon  some  such  scheme :  it  is  a  notable  fact, 
that  within  the  last  few  years  the  project  has  entered  into  the 
brain  of  one  who  has  proved  that  an  idea  governs  him.  Nor  is 
it  absolutely  new,  this  yearning  after  the  reorganization  of  the 
empire,  with  Rome  for  its  capital..  The  plan  is  not  to  overthrow 
other  European  nations,  but  to  make  them  subject  kingdoms, 
each  having  its  king,  under  one  supreme  head.  That  this  is 
the  theory  of  a  living  monarch,  .there  can  be  no  more 
question  than  that  it  was  the  idea  of  another  before  him.  I 
may  add,  that  he,  too,  like  his  predecessor,  meddled  with  the 
affairs  of  the  Holy  Land,  and  that  both  have  sought  a  hold  of 
Rome.  Some  of  us  have  held  these  interpretations  of  the  pro- 
phecies long  before  the  war  of  the  holy  places  or  the  possession 
of  Rome.  They  were  thoughts  derived  not  from  political 
events  but  from  scripture.  Plainly  then  a  great  power  shall 
arise,  in  scripture  called  "the  Beast,"  or  the  revived  Roman 
empire,  with  this  peculiar  form,  that  instead  of  putting  aside 
the  various  kings  of  Europe,  it  will  allow  of  separate  kingdoms 
under  him,  nominally  independent,  but  really  dictated  to  by 
the  emperor,  who  accordingly  is  the  contracting  party  with  the 
apostate  Jews,  in  concert  with  their  king  the  Antichrist;  the 
emperor  of  the  west  being  the  political  head,  as  the  prophet 
king  will  be  the  spiritual  head  of  Christendom  (then  properly 
anti-Christendom).  Thus  Jerusalem,  which  has  been  the  cradle 
of  professing  Christendom,  will  be  its  grave.     As  to  the  par- 


138  LECTURES   OX   ISAIAH. 

ticular  person  who  will  effect  all  this  one  says  nothing.  He 
shall  be  revealed  in  his  own  time.  The  great  point  is  the 
manifestation  of  the  chiefs  at  Jerusalem  and  Rome.  Rome  will 
be  the  centre  of  an  earthly  empire,  with  separate  but  dependent 
kings  in  western  Europe,  each  having  their  kingdom  subject 
to  the  one  head.  This  is  one  feature.  The  other  is,  that  the 
Jews  will  be  in  their  own  land,  and  that  this  will  bring  them 
into  the  hands  not  of  Christ  but  of  Antichrist. 

When  the  Jews  are  there,  the  rest  of  the  great  drama  will 
follow ;  they  will  soon  have  its  predicted  leader.  Then  comes 
the  scene  spoken  of  here.  (Ver.  14, 15.)  In  order  to  strengthen 
themselves  against  the  great  northern  oppressor,  or  the  over- 
flowing scourge,  they  enter  into  a  covenant  with  the  "  Beast," 
In  vain  do  they  think  to  escape.  At  this  very  time  God  will 
raise  to  Himself  the  hearts  of  a  little  band  of  faithful  Jews, 
who  will  feel  assured  that  the  wicked  prince  cannot  be  their 
Messiah ;  that  the  true  God  is  a  holy  God ;  that  His  servant, 
their  promised  King,  must  be,  not  a  man  of  sin,  but  a  man 
of  righteousness.  The  false  Messiah  they  refuse,  their  hearts  in 
penitence  cry,  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of 
Jehovah.  These  are  here  individually  spoken  of  as  "he  that 
believeth."  (Ver.  16.)  The  rest  plot,  make  preparations, 
and  hope  to  be  saved  from  the  overflowing  scourge.  But  no ; 
God  will  permit  the  mass  to  be  trodden  down.  (Ver.  17 — 20.) 
They  shall  in  no  wise  escape.  The  first  attack  upon  Jerusalem 
is  to  be  successful.  In  the  next  chapter  we  see  a  very  different 
result,  when  the  people  in  the  city  have  been  purged  and 
Jehovah  interferes.     (Comp.  Zech.  xii. — xiv.) 

Thus  Jerusalem  is  the  great  battle-field  of  the  nations,  and 
the  main  platform  of  the  judgments  of  God.  I  am  not  speaking 
now  about  the  last  eternal  judgment — the  great  white  throne — 
for  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  earth.  Heaven  and  earth 
will  have  fled  away  before  that.  Remember  there  is  to  be  a 
judgment  of  the  habitable  earth,  not  only  a  judgment  of  the 
dead  but  also  and  previously  of  the  quick.  Every  baptized 
man  professes  that  Christ  is  coming  to  judge  the  quick  and  the 
dead.     How  many  understand  and  believe  it  ?     All  will  not 


CHAPTER    XXVIII.  139 

take  place  at  the  same  time.  The  judgment  of  the  quick  we 
speak  of  here.  The  reason  why  Jerusalem  becomes  the  scene 
of  God's  judgments  on  the  nations  is  that  Jerusalem,  Judah, 
and  the  people  of  Israel  are  the  chosen  centre  of  God  among 
the  nations.  In  the  latter  day  He  will  resume  His  former 
relations  with  Israel,  though  on  a  better  and  everlasting  ground. 
What  solemn  words  in  verses  14 — 29  for  the  scornful  men 
ruling  in  Jerusalem  !  In  vain  to  plead  past  favour  or  present 
privileges.  Jehovah  should  rise  up  to  do  His  work,  His  strange 
work,  and  accomplish  His  act,  His  strange  act.  He  loves  not 
vengeance  but  mercy.  But  mockers  are  odious :  most  of  all 
in  Zion.  A  consumption  therefore  is .  determined  upon  the 
whole  earth.  He  is  the  same  unchanging  God :  let  them  not 
presume  because  of  His  long-suffering.  Even  with  man  it  is 
not  always  ploughing,  nor  always  so  wing- time.  Threshing 
comes  at  last,  and  in  divers  modes  and  measures.  So  will  it  be 
in  God's  judgment  of  the  earth.  "This  also  cometh  from 
Jehovah  of  hosts,  which  is  wonderful  in  counsels  and  excellent 
in  working." 


CHAPTER    XXIX. 

As  the  present  chapter  was  to  some  extent  anticipated  in  the 
remarks  on  the  preceding  one,  one  may  speak  the  more  briefly 
now.  It  opens  with  the  final  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  "the 
Assyrian,"  so  familiar  in  the  prophecies.  "Woe  to  Ariel,  to 
Ariel,  the  city  where  David  dwelt !  add  ye  year  to  year ;  let 
them  kill  sacrifices.  Yet  I  will  distress  Ariel,  and  there  shall 
be  heaviness  and  sorrow;  and  it  shall  be  unto  me  as  Ariel.', 
By  Ariel,  the  lion  of  God,  is  meant  Jerusalem,  which  the  proud 
stranger  menaces  with  destruction.  Spite  of  great  names  and 
associations  of  the  past,  it  is  actually  brought  down  into  deep 
distress.  Delay  should  not  hinder  its  humiliation.  Feasts  or 
sacrifices  should  not  avert  the  storm.  God's  indignation  is  in 
question,  and  not  yet  ended :  still  it  abides  to  Him  as  Ariel, 
His  lion.  "  And  I  will  camp  against  thee  round  about,  and  will 
lay  siege  against  thee  with  a  mount,  and  I  will  raise  forts 
against  thee.  And  thou  shalt  be  brought  down,  and  shalt 
speak  out  of  the  ground,  and  thy  speech  shall  be  low  out  of  the 
dust,  and  thy  voice  shall  be  as  of  one  that  hath  a  familiar 
spirit,  and  thy  speech  shall  whisper  out  of  the  dust."  That  is, 
agony  of  terror  would  produce  effects  similar  to  the  tone  or 
language  affected  by  those  who  dealt  with  spirits.  "But  the 
multitude  of  thy  strangers  shall  be  like  small  dust,  and  the 
multitude  of  the  terrible  ones  shall  be  as  chaff  that  passeth 
away :  yea,  it  shall  be  at  an  instant  suddenly.  Thou  shalt  be 
visited  of  Jehovah  of  hosts  with  thunder  and  with  earthquake, 
and  great  noise,  with  storm  and  tempest,  and  the  flame  of 
devouring  fire."     (Ver.  1 — 6.) 

It  must  be  plain,  I  think,  how  entirely  all  this  falls  in  with 
and  confirms  the  reference  to  the  great  king  of  the  north  in  the 
time  of  the  end.  Sennacherib  was  but  a  type.  Hence  the 
commentators,  not  seeing  this,  stumble  in  hopeless  perplexity. 
Some,  applying  it  to  the  typical  enemy,  cannot  get  over  the 


CHAPTER   XXIX.  141 

fact  that  Isaiah  himself  expressly  predicts  (as  was  the  fact,  of 
course)  that  Sennacherib  should  not  come  into  the  city  of 
Jerusalem,  nor  shoot  an  arrow  there,  nor  come  before  it  with  a 
shield,  nor  cast  a  bank  against  it.  (Chap,  xxxvii.  33.)  Others, 
again,  suppose  the  Koman  siege  to  be  intended ;  but  this,  it  is 
evident,  is  still  more  flatly  contradicted  by  Jehovah's  interven- 
tion at  the  last  gasp  to  the  deliverance  of  Jerusalem  and  the 
utter  overthrow  of  their  enemies.  In  fact  it  is  the  future  siege 
at  the  close  of  this  age,  when  the  great  confederacy  of  the 
north-eastern  nations  shall  be  broken  after  a  previous  success 
against  the  Jews.  The  reader  can  compare  Zechariah  xii. — xiv., 
which  bear  on  the  same  events ;  also  Psalms  lxxxiii.,  ex.  2,  6 ; 
Micah  iv.  11,  v.  4 — 15.  The  next  verses,  7,  8,  strengthen  this 
conclusion :  "  And  the  multitude  of  all  the  nations  that  fight 
against  Ariel,  even  all  that  fight  against  her  and  her  munition, 
and  that  distress  her,  shall  be  as  a  dream  of  a  night  vision.  It 
shall  even  be  as  when  an  hungry  man  dreameth,  and,  behold, 
he  eateth ;  but  he  awaketh,  and  his  soul  is  empty :  or  as  when  a 
thirsty  man  dreameth,  and,  behold,  he  drinketh ;  but  he 
awaketh,  and,  behold,  he  is  faint,  and  his  soul  hath  appetite :  so 
shall  the  multitude  of  all  the  nations,  that  fight  against  mount 
Zion."  Calvin's  notion  that  they  were  the  various  garrisons 
which  the  Jews  brought  in  from  elsewhere  to  defend  their 
capital,  and  that  they  are  threatened  with  being  useless  refuse, 
is  quite  unworthy  of  his  reputation.  It  is  a  clear  prediction  of 
the  destruction  of  their  foes  at  the  last,  led  on  by  him  who  was 
prefigured  by  the  Assyrian.  They  shall  be  as  disappointed  of 
their  prey,  as  a  hungry  or  thirsty  man  who  wakes  up  from  his 
imaginary  feast. 

The  prophet  then  turns  (ver.  9 — 12)  to  describe  the  moral 
condition  of  the  Jews  themselves :  for  such  a  trial  as  God  thus 
brought  on  them  will  have  its  ground  in  their  evil  state,  what- 
ever may  be  His  mercy  and  its  rejoicing  against  judgment  in 
the  end.  "  Stay  yourselves,  and  wonder :  cry  ye  out,  and  cry : 
they  are  drunken,  but  not  with  wine:  they  stagger,  but  not 
with  strong  drink.  For  Jehovah  hath  poured  out  on  you  the 
spirit  of  deep  sleep,  and  hath   closed  your  eyes :    the  prophets 


14l>  LECTURES   ON    ISAIAH. 

and  your  rulers,  the  seers  hath  he  covered.  And  the  vision 
of  all  is  become  unto  you  as  the  words  of  a  book  that  is  sealed, 
which  men  deliver  to  one  that  is  learned,  saying,  Read  this, 
I  pray  thee :  and  he  saith,  I  cannot ;  for  it  is  sealed.  And  the 
book  is  delivered  to  him  that  is  not  learned,  saying,  Read  this, 
I  pray  thee :  and  he  saith,  I  am  not  learned."  Israel  were 
spiritually  blind  to  God's  lessons.  Judicial  sleep  oppressed  all : 
learned  or  simple  made  no  difference. 

Alas !  they  were  formalists,  hypocrites,  taught  by  the 
precept  of  men  as  certainly  as  they  avowed  their  ignorance  of 
God's  word.  Therefore  by  God's  sentence  their  wisdom  should 
perish.  (Ver.  13,  14.)  In  vain  their  efforts  to  hide  from 
Jehovah  or  be  independent  of  Him.  God,  after  all,  remains  God, 
and  man  is  but  as  clay  in  the  hand  of  the  potter.  (Ver.  15,  16.) 
If  this  is  solemnly  true,  it  is  full  of  blessed  comfort.  For  "  Is  it 
not  yet  a  very  little  while,  and  Lebanon  shall  be  turned  into  a 
fruitful  field,  and  the  fruitful  field  shall  be  esteemed  as  a  forest  ? 
And  in  that  day  shall  the  deaf  hear  the  words  of  the  book,  and 
the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  see  out  of  obscurity,  and  out  of  dark- 
ness. The  meek  also  shall  increase  their  joy  in  Jehovah,  and  the 
poor  among  men  shall  rejoice  in  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  For  the 
terrible  one  is  brought  to  nought,  and  the  scorner  is  consumed, 
and  all  that  watch  for  iniquity  are  cut  off,  that  make  a  man  an 
offender  for  a  word,  and  lay  a  snare  for  him  that  reproveth  in  the 
gate,  and  turn  aside  the  just  for  a  thing  of  nought."  (Ver.  17 — 21.) 
Soon  all  will  be  reversed  :  not  only  the  lofty  Assyrian  abased  and 
humbled,  Israel  exalted,  but  the  culpable  insensibility  of  the 
people  gives  places  to  spiritual  understanding  and  earnestness. 
Sweet  traits  of  the  Spirit  should  find  increase  of  blessing  and 
joy :  violence,  scorn,  and  iniquity  be  judged  and  vanish.  "  There- 
fore thus  saith  Jehovah,  who  redeemed  Abraham,  concerning  the 
house  of  Jacob,  Jacob  shall  not  now  be  ashamed,  neither  shall  his 
face  now  wax  pale.  But  when  he  seeth  his  children,  the  work 
of  mine  hands,  in  the  midst  of  him,  they  shall  sanctify  my  name, 
and  sanctify  the  Holy  One  of  Jacob,  and  shall  fear  the  God  of 
Israel.  They  also  that  erred  in  spirit  shall  come  to  understand- 
ing, and  they  that  murmured  shall  learn  doctrine."  (Ver.  22 — -4. 


CHAPTERS   XXX.,   XXXI. 

There  is  a  topic  on  which  the  Spirit  of  God  enlarges  much  here 
which  has  been  scantily  noticed  hitherto.  Inasmuch  as  it  comes 
before  us  in  the  first  of  these  chapters,  I  will  say  a  few  words  on 
it — the  moral  condition  of  Israel,  as  proved  and  brought  home 
to  them  by  the  revelation  of  God.  For  what  we  have  all  through- 
out this  section  is  not  merely  deliverance,  nor  this  in  His 
grace  only,  during  a  time  of  ruin,  but  also  the  righteous  Lord 
proving  that  He  loves  righteousness.  There  was  a  cause  for  the 
proof  that  the  condition  of  Israel  was  morally  unbearable  to  God. 
Blindness  was  there,  religious  and  finally  judicial  blindness. 
This  is  traced  by  the  Spirit  in  a  variety  of  ways.  We  will  look 
briefly  at  what  we  have  before  us  here. 

The  first  feature  of  their  evil  which  draws  out  the  indignation 
of  God,  is  that  His  people  should  go  down  into  Egypt ;  that  a 
people  blessed  of  God,  with  promises  of  still  better  blessings  than 
ever  they  tasted,  with  which  they  are  yet  to  be  blessed  by 
God's  own  grace  in  the  last  days — the  best  possible  blessings  for 
a  people  upon  earth — that  such  a  people  should  go  down  into 
Egypt  for  help,  was  not  only  debasing  to  themselves,  but  also 
peculiarly  dishonouring  to  God.  Hence  the  Holy  Ghost  now, 
having  shown  us  their  deliverance,  goes  back  and  indicates  from 
what  they  were  delivered.  God  brings  out  one  character  of  evil 
after  another,  and  shows  that  the  necessary  issue  of  it  was 
destruction.  Yet  He  brings  them  out  of  all  their  distresses,  and 
at  length  blesses  them  fully  as  His  own  people.  It  is  peculiarly 
comforting  to  read  of  the  ways  of  God,  how  He  is  not  only  a 
deliverer  from  dangers,  from  outward  enemies,  from  Satan,  but 
also  from  every  form  of  sin.  He  does  not  in  any  wise  gloss  over 
moral  evil,  but  chapter  after  chapter  brings  it  out,  though,  as 
the  effect  of  its  judgment,  Israel  seemed  ready  to  be  swallowed  up. 
But  as  the  dark  side  thus  appears,  so  on  the  other  God  is  seen 
interfering  in  grace,  plucking  their  feet  out  of  the  net,  setting 


144  LECTUKES   ON    ISAIAH. 

the  dispersed  in  their  own  land,  and  securing  the  triumph  of 
His  own  grace  as  well  as  righteousness.  For  this  cause  He 
says  (ver.  1),  "  Woe  to  the  rebellious  children,  that  take  counsel 
but  not  of  me."  It  is  a  solemn  thing  to  read  such  words  as 
these,  and  still  more  so  to  think  how  applicable  they  may  be  to 
ourselves.  Even  as  children  of  God,  the  proneness  of  our  hearts 
is  to  act  according  to  our  own  judgments,  for  the  flesh  in  the 
Christian  is  not  a  whit  better  than  in  any  other  man.  When- 
ever there  is  a  listening  to  ourselves,  we  may  be  sure  there  is 
the  same  character  of  evil  at  work  that  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah 
was  rebuking  in  Israel. 

What  to  Israel  was  going  down  into  Egypt  is  to  us  the 
taking  counsel  of  natural  wisdom  in  any  difficulty;  that  is  to 
say,  it  was  fleshly  wisdom  which  Israel  sought,  and  of  which 
Egypt  is  the  symbol  in  the  ancient  world.  There  was  no 
country  in  the  early  history  of  men  so  distinguished  for  the 
wisdom  of  nature  as  Egypt.  In  later  days  Greece  and  Eome 
sprang  up,  but  that  was  long  after  the  the  time  to  which  this 
vision  applied  as  an  historical  fact.  They  were  at  first  little 
more  than  a  number  of  barbarous  hordes.  There  was  no  wisdom 
found  anywhere  to  the  same  extent  as  in  Egypt.  The  great 
Assyrian  who  invaded  Israel  was  characterized  not  so  much  by 
wisdom  as  by  vast  resources,  and  appliances  in  the  way  of 
strength.  Egypt  depended  mainly  on  good  counsel,  as  if  there 
were  no  wise  God — on  the  counsel  of  man  sharpened  by  long 
experience,  for  it  was  one  of  the  oldest  powers  that  attained 
eminence.  Accordingly,  as  they  had  been  versed  in  the  state- 
craft of  the  ancient  world,  they  had  an  immense  reputation  for 
their  knowledge  of  means  of  dealing  with  national  difficulties, 
peace,  plenty,  &c. 

Israel,  when  threatened  by  the  Assyrian,  sought  the  help  of 
Egypt:  I  am  speaking  now  of  the  literal  fact  when  this  pro- 
phecy first  applied.  Though  it  did  bear  on  the  days  of  Isaiah, 
yet  the  character  of  the  prophecy  shows  that  it  cannot  be 
limited  to  that  time :  only  a  very  small  part  was  accomplished 
then.  But  between  the  two  terms  of  Israel's  past  and  future 
unfaithfulness,  seeking  to  the  wisdom  of  the  world  in  their 


CHAPTERS    XXX.,   XXXI.  145 

troubles,  there  is  a  serious  lesson  for  us  in  the  pressure  of  any 
trial  that  concerns  the  testimony  of  God ;  there  is  an  immense 
tendency  to  meet  a  worldly  trial  in  a  worldly  way.  That  you 
cannot  meet  the  world's  efforts  against  you  by  spiritual  means  is 
what  one  is  apt  to  think ;  so  there  is  the  danger  of  recourse  to 
earthly  means  for  the  purpose  of  escape.  What  is  this  but  the 
same  thing  that  we  find  here  ?  And  yet  who  that  feels  for  the 
children  of  God  and  for  the  truth,  but  knows  the  danger  of  this  ? 
I  am  sure  if  we  do  not  feel  the  danger,  it  is  because  we  are  our- 
selves under  the  world's  influence.  The  feeling  of  the  danger, 
the  dread  of  our  own  spirits,  the  fear  lest  we  should  meet  flesh 
by  flesh,  is  what  God  uses  to  make  us  look  to  Himself.  God 
will  never  put  His  seal  on  self-dependence ;  on  the  contrary,  the 
great  lesson  the  whole  life  of  Christ  teaches  is  the  very  reverse. 
He  lived  by  the  Father ;  so  "  he  that  eateth  Him  shall  live  by 
Him."  That  is  to  say,  it  is  in  dependence  upon  another,  even 
Christ,  that  the  joy  and  strength  and  wisdom  of  the  Christian 
are  found.  This  we  gather  before  the  difficulty  comes.  Then 
"  I  can  do  all  things  through  Him  who  strengtheneth  me." 

Where  we  often  fail  is  through  acting  from  impulse.  If  we 
think  to  plan,  instead  of  praying  in  real  subjection  to  God,  we 
need  to  fear  for  ourselves.  Is  it  not  an  outrage  upon  the  God 
that  has  opened  His  ear  to  us  ?  And  yet  who  does  not  know 
that  this  is  the  very  thing  to  which  perhaps,  more  than  any 
other,  we  are  prone  ? 

In  this  way  I  take  it,  that  the  moral  lesson  of  this  chapter  is 
to  be  seen ; — it  is  taking  counsel,  but  not  of  the  Lord.  Hence 
(ver.  1 — 7)  God  caused  the  land  of  Egypt  to  become  the  means 
of  deeply  aggravating  their  evil.  If  we  examine  the  New 
Testament  for  our  guidance  in  these  difficulties  we  shall  find 
just  the  same  truth.  If  the  apostle  is  speaking  merely  about 
the  ordinary  tribulations,  we  have  the  very  same  lesson  in  other 
words.  Thus  he  tells  us  we  are  to  let  our  moderation  be  known 
unto  all  men,  the  Lord  being  at  hand :  that  instead  of  caring  or 
being  anxious  about  anything  (not  that  we  are  to  be  careless, 
but  not  to  be  careful  in  the  sense  of  anxiety),  our  requests 
should  be  made  known  unto  God  with  thanksgiving. 

K 


146  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

Our  strength,  it  is  said  here,  is  to  sit  still ;  we  have  a  right 
to  expect  our  God  to  appear  for  us,  He  has  entitled  us  to  expect 
it.  We  may  be  perfectly  sure,  it  matters  not  what  the  circum- 
stances are,  even  supposing  there  has  been  something  to  judge 
in  ourselves,  if  I  tell  it  out  to  God,  will  not  He  listen  ?  He 
cannot  deny  Himself.  He  must  deny  him  that  bears  the  name 
of  Christ.  Where  He  now  puts  to  shame,  it  is  an  erring  child 
of  God;  but  so  far  from  His  putting  such  to  shame  being  a 
proof  that  He  does  not  love  them,  it  is  precisely  the  proof  that 
He  does.  But  at  the  same  time,  let  men  venture  to  go  beyond 
what  God  sees  good  for  the  discipline  of  His  child,  He  soon 
takes  up  the  rod ;  and  there  can  be  nothing  more  terrible  than 
when  the  adversary  exceeds  the  chastening  that  is  just,  grati- 
fying his  own  hatred  to  them.  For  God  will  rise  up  in  His 
indignation,  and  deal  with  them  according  to  His  own  majesty ; 
even  the  grace  of  the  Gospel  does  not  set  aside  that.  For 
instance,  see  the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy.  If  persons  bearing 
the  name  of  Christ  are  carried  away  by  their  fleshly  zeal,  and 
fight  against  the  truth  of  God  or  those  charged  with  the  procla- 
mation of  that  truth,  God  may  use  them  for  dealing  with  faults 
in  His  people.  God  knows  how  to  bring  down  His  people 
where  their  looks  are  high  because  of  anything  in  themselves, 
or  that  grace  has  conferred  upon  them.  But  when  the  limit  of 
right  rebuke  is  exceeded,  woe  be  to  those  that  fight  against 
them,  covering  their  own  vindictiveness  or  envy  under  God's 
name.  It  is  evident  that  the  very  grace  of  the  gospel  makes  it 
to  be  so  much  the  more  conspicuous ;  for  it  sounds  so  much  the 
more  tremendous  that  God  should  thus  deal  in  the  midst  of  all 
that  speaks  so  loudly  of  His  love. 

The  Gospels  also  bring  out,  in  the  words  of  our  Lord  Him- 
self, the  wickedness  of  fighting  against  what  God  is  doing  even 
by  poor  weak  disciples.  This  is  the  great  lesson  for  us ;  we  are 
not  to  consult  our  own  heart  or  have  recourse  to  the  strength  of 
man.  When  we  flee  to  the  various  resources  of  the  flesh,  we 
slip  out  of  our  proper  Christian  path.  Whereas  the  strength  of 
God  has  indeed  shone  in  that  foundation  pattern  in  which  all 
the  blessing  of  grace  to  sinners  is  contained;    and  it  always 


_J 


CHAPTERS   XXX.,   XXXI.  147 

takes  this  form  for  a  Christian,  and  that  is,  death  and 
resurrection.  There  will,  apparently,  be  a  great  pressure  of 
trial;  there  will  be  an  apparent  sinking  down  under  it;  but 
as  surely  as  there  is  the  semblance  of  death,  there  will  be  the 
reality  of  resurrection  by  and  by.  Let  no  one  be  disheartened. 
The  cross  is  the  right  channel  of  the  blessing  for  the  children  of 
God.  When  we  were  brought  to  God,  it  was  just  after  the 
same  sort.  We  knew  what  it  was  to  have  the  horrors  of  the 
conviction  of  sin,  for  God  was  going  to  bring  us  for  the  first 
time  into  a  place  of  special  blessing.  It  has  always  been  so. 
We  find  it  in  the  case  of  Abraham,  and  in  proportion  to  the 
greatness  of  blessing  is  the  force  of  sorrow  that  precedes  it. 
Isaac  was  given  when  Abraham  was  a  hundred  years  old,  and 
Sarah  as  good  as  dead.  There  was  death,  as  it  were,  and  he 
had  to  wait  for  a  son.  Even  after  the  birth  and  growth  of  the 
child  of  promise,  he  had  to  surrender  him,  to  offer  up  his  only 
son  to  God.  Directly  that  the  singleness  and  truth  of  his  heart 
was  proved,  and  that  the  sacrifice  was  in  principle  offered  up, 
the  angel  of  the  Lord  arrests  his  hand.  How  much  sweeter 
now,  when  Isaac  was,  as  it  were,  the  child  of  resurrection  !  And 
so  it  is  with  all  our  blessings,  it  matters  not  what  they  may  be. 
There  must  be  the  breaking  down  of  our  feelings,  the  crucifixion 
of  self  in  a  practical  way,  if  we  are  to  know  what  God  is  in 
blessing :  our  blessings  must  be  cast  in  the  mould  of  death  and 
resurrection. 

The  way  by  which  come  all  our  blessings,  is  in  Him  who  is 
dead  and  risen.  To  be  blessed  practically  we  must  morally  go 
through  the  same  process.  There  must  be  the  frustration  of  all 
natural  hopes,  the  blasting  of  all  the  objects  we  desire.  When 
God  visits  us  in  His  faithfulness  with  trial,  the  first  thing  man 
seeks  is  to  escape.  Israel  goes  down  into  Egypt,  instead  of 
sitting  still  in  the  confidence  that  God  is  the  highest  wisdom 
and  only  power.  They  go  down  to  the  land  of  human  wisdom 
and  ability.  Were  there  no  God,  were  they  not  His  people,  it 
would  have  been  intelligible ;  but  as  it  is,  what  folly  ?  Yet  is  it 
the  folly  of  our  own  hearts.  Are  we  not  conscious  of  it  ?  Beware 
lest  it  be,  because  we  are  so  accustomed  to  act  thus,  that  we  do 


148  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

not  realize  the  humbling  truth.  We  need  to  consider  it  more 
deeply  to  profit  by  this  lesson.  Their  strength  is  to  sit  still 
instead  of  hurrying  down  into  Egypt.  "  For  ever  and  ever " 
(ver.  8)  it  was  to  be  noted  in  a  book  that  they  were  "  children  that 
will  not  hear  the  law  of  Jehovah."  (Ver.  9.)  That  was  even 
the  worst  of  all;  rebellion  could  be  forgiven,  lying  children 
could  be  made  ashamed  of  their  lies.  "  Prophesy  not  unto  us 
right  things  "  (ver.  10),  that  is,  things  according  to  God.  We 
are  not  to  suppose  that  they  actually  said  these  words.  We 
often  read  in  the  Gospels,  that  Jesus  answered  in  many  cases 
where  not  a  single  question  was  put  to  Him.  Why  does  the 
Spirit  of  God  say  Jesus  answered,  when  He  was  not  asked  ? 
Because  He  knew  the  thoughts  of  their  hearts.  He  answered 
not  what  they  said,  for  they  said  nothing ;  but  what  He  knew 
they  would  say  if  they  dared,  what  He  knew  was  at  work 
within.  So  here,  they  may  not  say  it  in  so  many  words,  but  it 
is  what  God  saw  and  knew  to  be  the  truth  of  what  they  were 
feeling  and  doing.  They  did  not  like  the  truth  which  brought 
before  them  their  rebellion  and  lies;  they  endeavoured  to  get 
out  of  the  way  and  reach  of  the  truth.  This  is  precisely  what 
showed  it.  "  Why  not  use  the  best  resources  of  men,  now  that 
God  did  not  work  miracles  for  them?"  This  was^  in  truth, 
what  God  had  called  out  Israel  forJ==to_be  the  manifestation 
of  a  people  whose  strength  jvvasjn,  Jehovah  ;  tojbejbhe  witness 
^fJiowLblessed  it  is  thus  nationally  to_trust  the  living  Godf  in 
all  their  public__dealings,  in^_ their  domestic  life.  All  was  to 
be  regulated  by  the  law  of  Jehovah  (which  is  the  technical 
term  for  the  Old  Testament).  They  were  to  be  the  practical 
exemplification  of  the  blessedness  of  such  a  people  and  land. 
To  go  down  into  Egypt  was  to  give  up  God  for  man :  if  they 
had  asked  counsel,  they  well  knew  God  would  never  send  them 
down  to  Egypt,  out  of  which  He  had  brought  them.  But  they 
do  not  seek  counsel,  they  act  before  they  ask ;  they  may  have 
then  prayed  about  it.  But  what  is  it  to  pray  for  Goo^_to__bl£Ss 
what  we  are  doing  in  self-will  ?  Let  us  ask  Him  what  He 
would  have  us  to  do  before  we  act.  It  may  be  that  God  would 
have~~us  do  nothing,  or  possibly  give  us  counsel  through  one. 


CHAPTERS    XXX.,   XXXI.  149 

of  His  children.  For  God  does  not  intend  us  to  be  so  many- 
independent  lines.  He  works  by  one  another;  He  purposes 
to  make  us  feel  that  we  are  members  one  of  another ;  but  what- 
ever may  be  the  value  of  any  one's  counsel,  each  must  be 
responsible  to  God.  The  danger  is  of  ptitting  another  in  the 
place  of  God.  Men  do  not  value  a  man  more  for  this,  because 
when  we  are  self-willed  and  our  counsellor  firm  for  good,  the 
speedy  consequence  will  be  that  he  who  stood  in  the  place  of 
God  one  day,  may  be  almost  in  the  place  of  the  devil  the  next. 
This  is  the  flesh — apt  to  deify  the  creature  one  day,  and  to 
demonize  it  the  next. 

What  we  have  to  seek  then  is  to  look  up  to  God ;  and  this 
is  just  what  is  here  the  first  word,  "the  sitting  still."  But 
there  was  more  besides.  In  the  chapter  before,  the  point  was  the 
word  of  God,  which  the  flesh  treated  as  a  sealed  book ;  but  God 
must  be  waited  on  as  well  as  His  word.  He  never  intended 
scripture  to  be  taken  apart  from  Himself;  over  and  above 
the  Bible  is  God  Himself.  Not  that  God  can  ever  be  against 
His  word,  but  He  is  the  only  power  of  entering  into  the  applica- 
tion of  it.  For  the  Bible  is  not  only  for  me  to  look  down  into ; 
I  must  look  up  to  God.  I  am  not  intended  to  read  it  merely  as 
a  book  of  true  stories  or  good  sermons,  but  as  the  voice  of  the 
living  God  to  my  soul.  When  one  reads  it  thus,  in  subjection 
to  Him,  the  relation  and  attitude  of  the  soul  is  totally  changed ; 
you  are  delivered  from  the  danger  of  bending  the  word  of  God 
to  your  own  mind  and  will.  Whereas,  when  the  word  leads  you 
out  in  prayer  to  God,  then  it  is  neither  the  word  without  prayer, 
nor  prayer  without  the  word,  both  of  which  are  exceedingly 
dangerous,  one  leading  to  fanaticism,  as  the  other  does  to 
rationalism.  Hence,  says  the  apostle,  "  I  commend  you  to  God 
and  to  the  word  of  his  grace,"  We  need  to  look  up  to  God  that 
we  may  gather  profit  from  His  word,  and  to  look  back  to  Him 
from  His  word  that  we  may  with  simplicity  and  faithfulness 
carry  it  out.  Here  Israel  had  failed,  as  we  see  in  chapter  xxix. 
So  now  in  chapter  xxx.,  they  flee  down  to  the  nearest  neighbour 
that  could  help  by  human  prudence,  slighting  God's  wisdom  and 
the  grace  which  entitled  them  to  cast  themselves  on  Him  for  it. 


150  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

"  Wherefore  thus  saith  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  Because  ye  des- 
pise this  word,  and  trust  in  oppression  and  perverseness,  and  stay 
thereon:  therefore  this  iniquity  shall  be  to  you  as  a  breach  ready 
to  fall,  swelling  out  in  a  high  wall,  whose  breaking  cometh 
suddenly  at  an  instant.  And  he  shall  break  it  as  the  breaking 
of  the  potters  vessel  that  is  broken  in  pieces ;  he  shall  not  spare : 
so  that  there  shall  not  be  found  in  the  bursting  of  it  a  sherd  to 
take  fire  from  the  hearth,  or  to  take  water  withal  out  of  the 
pit."  (Ver.  12 — 14.)  Such  was  Egypt.  The  flesh  is  habitu- 
ally fraudulent  and  perverse.  But  God  judges  it  in  His  own. 
It  is  ever  restless  and  pretends  to  something.  It  may  look 
imposing,  but  it  is  ready  to  crumble  from  top  to  bottom,  and  is 
doomed  of  God.  "  In  returning  and  rest  shall  ye  be  saved ;  in 
quietness  and  in  confidence  shall  be  your  strength ;  and  ye 
would  not.  But  ye  said,  No;  for  we  will  flee  upon  horses; 
therefore  shall  ye  flee :  and,  We  will  ride  upon  the  swift 
[Egypt's  resources  of  common  sense] ;  therefore  shall  they  that 
pursue  you  be  swift."  (Ver.  15,  16.)  God  would  make  them 
a  signal  example,  and  show  that  the  resources  they  trusted 
were  only  so  many  nets  in  which  they  were  to  be  snared.  Had 
they  sought  to  flee  ?  They  should  flee  in  terror.  Had  they 
sought  help  in  swift  escape  ?  Swift  should  be  the  vengeance 
of  their  foes.  God  constantly  makes  the  earthly  object  to  be 
the  rod  for  the  fool's  back. 

What  is  the  answer  of  the  Lord  when  He  comes  to  this  ? 
Nothing  can  be  stronger  than  His  condemnation.  But  if  He 
deals  sternly  with  His  faulty  people  here,  is  it  not  always  for 
blessing  in  the  end  ?  If  He  exposes  His  children,  pulls  them 
down  from  the  seat  of  pride,  brings  them  into  trouble  from  those 
they  prefer  to  Himself  in  some  extremity,  it  is  the  Lord  acting 
in  His  great  grace.  To  return  to  Him  even  with  broken  bones 
is  blessed.  How  magnificent  is  the  burst  of  the  prophet ! 
"  And  therefore  will  Jehovah  wait,  that  he  may  be  gracious  unto 
you,  and  therefore  will  he  be  exalted  [not  to  cut  off  Israel,  but] 
that  he  may  have  mercy  upon  you  :  for  Jehovah  is  a  God  of 
judgment:  blessed  are  all  they  that  wait  for  him.  For  the 
people  shall  dwell  in  Zion  at  Jerusalem :   thou  shalt  weep  no 


CHAPTERS   XXX.,   XXXI.  15 1 

more :  he  will  be  very  gracious  unto  thee  at  the  voice  of  thy 
cry :  when  he  shall  hear  it,  he  will  answer  thee.  And  though 
Jehovah  give  you  the  bread  of  adversity,  and  the  water  of 
affliction,  yet  shall  not  thy  teachers  be  removed  into  a  corner 
any  more,  but  thine  eyes  shall  see  thy  teachers :  and  thine  ears 
shall  hear  a  word  behind  thee,  saying,  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye 
in  it,  when  ye  turn  to  the  right  hand,  and  when  ye  turn  to  the 
left."  (Ver.  18—21.)  He  had  let  all  this  trouble  fall  upon 
His  people ;  He  had  Himself  waited  and  been  exalted ;  and 
why  ?  That  He  might  be  gracious.  The  enemy  might  prove 
his  malice,  and  they  their  weak  and  guilty  preference  of  flesh 
to  Himself,  and  He  allowed  it  all  to  take  place  that  He  might 
have  nothing  to  do  but  to  take  them  out  of  the  pit  into  which 
they  had  fallen,  and  bless  them  as  they  had  never  been  blessed 
before,  at  length  without  hindrance  to  the  outflow  of  all  His 
love.  He  waits  for  them,  and  though  He  seem  to  tarry,  it  is  to 
bless  them  with  a  still  greater  blessing.  (Ver.  19 — 22.)  They 
should  be  morally  restored,  too,  and  take  vengeance  on  what  had 
seduced  their  hearts  in  previous  times.  "  Ye  shall  defile  also  the 
covering  of  thy  graven  images  of  silver,  and  the  ornament  of 
thy  molten  images  of  gold ;  thou  shalt  cast  them  away  as  a  men- 
struous  cloth ;  thou  shalt  say  unto  it,  Get  thee  hence."    (Ver.  22.) 

Outward  happiness  follows,  and  inward  blessing  and  glory 
from  above. 

"  Then  shall  he  give  the  rain  of  thy  seed,  that  thou  shalt 
sow  the  ground  withal ;  and  bread  of  the  increase  of  the  earth, 
and  it  shall  be  fat  and  plenteous ;  in  that  day  shall  thy  cattle 
feed  in  large  pastures.  The  oxen  likewise  and  the  young  asses 
that  ear  the  ground  shall  eat  clean  provender,  which  hath  been 
winnowed  with  the  shovel  and  the  fan.  And  there  shall  be 
upon  every  high  mountain,  and  upon  every  high  hill,  rivers  and 
streams  of  water  in  the  day  of  the  great  slaughter,  when  the 
towers  fall.  Moreover,  the  light  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  the 
light  of  the  sun,  and  the  light  of  the  sun  shall  be  sevenfold,  as 
the  light  of  seven  days,  in  the  day  that  Jehovah  bindeth  up  the 
breach  of  his  people,  and  healeth  the  stroke  of  their  wound." 
(Ver.  23—26.) 


152  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

Such  is  the  deliverance  which  God  will  work  for  Israel ;  but 
what  about  the  Assyrian  ?  Israel  are  blessed,  but  not  yet  the 
Assyrian  judged ;  Israel  had  been  wrong,  but  the  Assyrian  had 
been  merciless.  God  had  dealt  with  Israel ;  now  He  must  deal 
with  their  foes,  as  we  are  told  in  Isaiah  x.  "  When  the  Lord 
hath  performed  His  whole  work  on  mount  Zion,"  then  will  He 
bring  down  the  Assyrian.  (Ver.  27,  28.)  The  foe  will  not  know 
that  it  is  God  who  is  guiding  them  to  the  Holy  Land,  but  think 
they  are  going  to  have  the  land  and  the  people  an  easy  prey ; 
God,  on  the  contrary,  is  going  to  meet  them  there,  and  avenge 
His  people.  (Ver.  29.)  This  is  even  more  than  there  had  been 
when  Egypt  was  judged  ;  Israel  could  then  eat  the  lamb,  but  with 
bitter  herbs.  Not  so  in  the  day  which  is  coming ;  it  is  not  that 
part  of  the  passover  that  this  is  compared  to,  but  the  song  of 
their  holy  festival.  (Ver.  30.)  It  is  not  a  mere  providential 
judgment — God  from  a  distance  acting  and  merely  raising  up 
one  people  to  destroy  another.  The  intervention  of  God 
shall  be  manifested.  There  is  to  be  a  display  of  divine 
judgment.  (Ver.  30 — 32.)  It  is  the  staff  of  God's  correction, 
which  shall  deal  to  the  bitter  end  with  the  Assyrian.  For. 
Israel  such  joy  and  gladness  shall  follow  as  never  had  been 
tasted  heretofore.  So  manifestly  is  God  espousing  their  cause, 
that  it  will  be  with  the  loftiest  music  of  praise  and  every  sign  of 
confidence  in  God.  Has  this  ever,  since  Isaiah,  been  accom- 
plished in  Palestine  ?  Was  it  heard  there  even  at  the  time 
of  Sennacherib  ?  Israel  was  already  in  captivity,  and  Judah 
was  soon  swept  away  by  the  king  of  Babylon.  Here  we  have 
triumph,  peace,  blessing,  and  glory.  The  mighty  power  of  God 
will  have  destroyed  their  enemies  for  ever.  There  must  then 
be  a  fuller  accomplishment  than  the  prophecy  has  yet  received. 

But  it  is  not  to  be  a  mere  devastation.  (Ver.  33.)  Tophet  is 
ordained ;  this  shows  clearly  when  and  how  it  will  be.  Tophet 
is  the  figure  of  the  judgment  on  God's  part  that  is  coming.  It 
should  be  "for  the  king  also,"  not  "yea,  for  the  king."  That 
little  change  has  done  much  mischief  in  confounding  two  impor- 
tant personages.  I  do  not  deny  that  the  word  translated  yea 
may  apparently  be  rightly  so  in  certain  cases ;  but  the  natural 


CHAPTERS   XXX.,   XXXI.  153 

meaning  of  it  is  either  and  or  also,  and  this  is  just  what  is 
meant  here.  The  declaration  is,  that  Tophet  is  ordained  not  for 
"the  Assyrian"  only  but  also  for  "the  king."  The  king  and 
the  Assyrian  are  so  totally  different  and  opposed  that  it  was 
needful  to  reveal  the  same  doom  for  both.  The  mistranslation 
was  because  our  translators  did  not  know  the  difference,  but 
fancied  the  king  and  the  Assyrian  one  and  the  same.  "  The 
king  "  is  that  false  Messiah  who  will  be  found  with  the  Jews  in 
the  last  days.  Received  in  his  own  name,  he  will  be  accepted 
as  the  true  Anointed,  but  he  is  the  devil's  Messiah.  And  the 
consequence  is  that  hell-fire  or  Tophet  is  prepared  for  him.  The 
point  is  that  God  will  prepare  the  same  fire  for  both  of  them ; 
not  only  for  the  Assyrian,  but  for  the  leader  of  Israel's  wicked- 
ness, "  the  king."  For  him  the  fire  of  Tophet  is  prepared  as  well 
as  for  his  enemy,  the  Assyrian.  God  in  this  marvellous  manner 
will  cast  him  direct  into  hell,  not  waiting  for  the  day  of  judg- 
ment, even  before  the  devil  himself.  Lest  we  might  think 
that  he  is  the  only  one,  it  is  said,  "  for  the  king  also ;"  the  other 
personage,  who  will  reign  over  the  Jews,  will  also  be  singled  out 
of  Gt)d  to  be  dealt  with  in  the  same  way.  Figurative  expressions 
are  used,  but  the  figures  of  a  terrible  reality. 

.  The  chapter  that  follows  (xxxi.)  is  a  brief  moral  comment,  and 
compressed  rehearsal  of  chapter  xxx.  How  touchingly  the  pro- 
phet warns  of  the  danger  of  Egypt  as  defection  from  Jehovah. 
?  Yet  he  also  is  wise,  and  will  bring  evil,  and  will  not  call  back 
his  words  [which  Israel  vainly  would  escape],  but  will  arise 
against  the  house  of  the  evildoers  [Israelitish  or  not]  and 
against  the  help  of  them  that  work  iniquity."  Jehovah's 
protection  over  the  righteous  would  be  proved  in  the  day  when 
He  judged  the  helpers  and  the  holpen.  From  Zion,  not  heaven  * 
only,  He  will  deal.  "  For  thus  hath  Jehovah  spoken  unto  me, 
like  as  the  lion  and  the  young  lion  roaring  on  his  prey,  when  a 
multitude  of  shepherds  is  called  forth  against  him,  he  will  not 
be  afraid  of  their  voice,  nor  abase  himself  for  the  noise  of  them  : 
so-  shall  Jehovah  of  hosts  come  down  to  fight  for  mount  Zion, 
and  for  the  line  thereof.     As  birds  flying,  so  will  Jehovah  of 


154  LECTURES   ON    ISAIAH. 

hosts  defend  Jerusalem :  defending  also  he  will  deliver  it ;  and 
passing  over  he  will  preserve  it.  Turn  ye  unto  him  from  whom 
the  children  of  Israel  have  deeply  revolted.  For  in  that  day 
every  man  shall  cast  away  his  idols  of  silver,  and  his  idols  of 
gold,  which  your  own  hands  have  made  unto  you  for  a  sin.  Then 
shall  the  Assyrian  fall  with  the  sword,  not  of  a  mighty  man ;  and 
the  sword,  not  of  a  mean  man,  shall  devour  him ;  but  he  shall  flee 
from  the  sword,  and  his  young  men  shall  be  discomfited.  And 
he  shall  pass  over  to  his  strong  hold  for  fear,  and  his  princes 
shall  be  afraid  of  the  ensign,  saith  Jehovah,  whose  fire  is  in  Zion, 
and  his  furnace  in  Jerusalem."  The  commentators  naturally 
are  perplexed  who  look  not  beyond  Sennacherib,  for  though  his 
host  was  smitten  by  the  angel  of  Jehovah,  and  this  might  in 
some  measure  meet  the  prediction,  there  are  strong  expressions 
which  can  never  be  satisfied,  short  of  the  great  enemy  at  the 
close.  Then  only  will  be  felt  the  force  of  Tophet;  then  only 
will  be  seen  the  ensign  of  the  Divine  presence  and  power  which 
protects  Jerusalem. 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

The  whole  work  being  now  finished  at  Jerusalem,  Jehovah  is 
then  shown  us  reigning,  for  He  and  no  other  is  the  personage 
spoken  of  here.  "  Behold  a  king  shall  reign  in  righteousness," 
&c.  This  is  a'  totally  different  state  of  things  from  what  pre- 
vails at  present;  for  it  is  grace  that  now  reigns  through 
righteousness  unto  eternal  life,  not  (so  to  speak)  righteousness 
through  glory  in  the  government  of  the  world.  In  the  day  that 
this  chapter  contemplates,  the  Lord  Jesus  will  righteously  take 
in  hand  the  sceptre  of  the  earth,  and  especially  of  the  land  of 
Israel.  All  the  nations  will  come  indirectly  under  His  reign, 
because  there  will  be  one  king  over  all  the  earth,  not  to  the 
setting  aside  of  others,  as  we  know,  but  one  supreme  central 
government  maintained.  Other  kings  will  be  obliged  to  submit 
to  the  sway  of  the  Lord,  which  will  continue  throughout  the 
whole  unbroken  period  of  the  millennium.  It  is  called,  there- 
fore, "the  everlasting  kingdom,"  not  being  transferred  to 
another,  and  lasting  as  long  as  the  earth  endures.  At  the  end  of 
the  thousand  years  there  will  be  an  awful  proof  of  man's  radically 
unchanged  condition,  for  the  nations  will  then  gather  together 
against  "the  beloved  city,"  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  compassing 
about  the  camp  of  saints.  This  will  be  allowed  for  the  express 
purpose  of  proving  the  solemn  truth  that  glory  no  more 
ameliorates  the  heart  than  does  the  present  longsuffering 
patience  of  God.  If  judgment  against  evil  works  is  not  exe- 
cuted, men's  hearts  are  hardened  in  wickedness;  when  God's 
judgments  are  in  the  earth,  the  world  will  learn  righteousnesss, 
but  alas !  the  lesson  is  soon  forgotten. 

Jehovah  will  reign  in  righteousness,  and  there  will  be  the 
exercise  then  of  beneficent  government  all  through  His  day; 
but  it  will  be  proved  once  more  that  the  heart  is  no  more 
changed  thereby  than  under  the  gospel  now,  unless  received  in 
conscience  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit.     There  must  be  the 


156  ,  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

possession  of  a  new  nature.  Man  must  be  born  again  to  see  or 
enter  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  will  then  be  evident  that  the  new 
birth  is  requisite  not  merely  for  the  heavenly  part,  but  even  for  the 
earthly  things  of  that  kingdom.  (John  iii.)  It  is  in  reference  to 
the  earthly  part  that  we  hear  of  a  king  reigning  in  righteousness. 
Revelation  xx.  shows  the  total  failure  of  this  display  of  glory  to 
make  the  heart  of  man  one  whit  better.  In  a  higher  point  of 
view,  far  from  failure,  there  will  be  during  this  time  an  amazing 
exhibition  of  that  which  will  bring  praise  to  God  Himself,  and 
to  this  we  have  a  reference  here.  And  what  a  proof  of  the 
selfishness  of  our  hearts,  that  we  do  not  think  much  about  this 
blessed  time  that  is  coming !  Not  that  it  is  not  believed  in ; 
but  God  give  us  to  think  yet  more  not  only  of  a  world  set  free, 
but  what  it  is  to  see  Christ  where  He  is  in  heavenly  blessedness. 
It  is  blind  too.  For,  to  love,  what  is  so  much  our  own  portion 
as  His  ?  Besides  we  are  too  apt  to  slight  the  deliverance  of 
creation,  now  travailing  in  pain,  during  the  thousand  years,  and 
this  because  we  are  so  little  identified  with  the  interests  of 
Christ.  Whatever  glorifies  Him  ought  to  be  very  dear  to  us. 
Again  we  shall  be  connected  with  the  earth,  though  our  home 
will  be  heavenly.  We  shall  indeed  reign  with  Christ  over  it. 
God  will  make  the  risen  saints  to  be  the  intermediary  vessels  of 
His  glory,  and  the  fruitful  channels  of  His  goodness  in  that 
bright  day.  Does  it  not  then  show  the  insensate  selfishness  of 
the  heart  that  we  are  so  little  filled  with  the  thoughts  and 
feelings  suitable  to  such  expectations  ?  It  is  freely  granted 
that  there  is  a  far  sweeter  hope,  even  to  be  with  Christ  Himself 
in  the  Father's  house.  To  see  His  glory  there  is  more  blessed 
than  any  inheritance  we  shall  share  anywhere.  But  if  we  look 
around  and  see  all  the  sins,  miseries,  sufferings,  and  sorrows  of  a 
world  far  from  God,  what  a  cheering  truth  it  is  that  the  day  is 
so  near  when  we  will  be  able  to  say  even  of  the  yet  unbelieving 
Jews,  "  Their  iniquities  are  forgiven,  their  sin  is  covered." 
Will  not  God  be  magnified  ?  A  remnant  of  Israel  suffices  not : 
all  will  be  saved.  Further,  the  miracles  of  Christ  are  called  the 
powers  of  the  world  to  come,  because  it  was  the  sample  of  that 
divine  energy  in  man  which  will  never  be  revoked,  though  it 


CHAPTER   XXXII.  157 

may  be  suspended.  But  it  is  always  in  Christ,  though  the 
church  may  not  know  how  to  count  upon  Him  for  it,  or  apply  it 
to  a  needy  creation.  But  we  ought  to  know  it  is  in  Christ  for 
faith  to  draw  on,  and  God  has  rebuked  our  low  state  by  withhold- 
ing the  display  of  these  outward  ornaments.  It  is  good  however 
to  remember  that  it  is  always  in  Christ,  and  that  He  is  coming, 
and  that  the  end  of  this  age  will  witness  the  exercise  of  the 
glorious  power  of  that  exalted  man,  the  church  too  being  asso- 
ciated with  Him,  and  every  blessing  brought  in  to  the  exclusion 
of  all  evil.     This  is  what  the  chapter  before  us  anticipates. 

As  long  as  God  does  not  put  evil  down,  grace  reigns ;  and 
now  it  is  only  grace  that  can  deliver.  But  when  the  power  of 
evil  is  smitten  (and  the  Lord  will  smite  before  the  millennium), 
the  king  shall  rule.  It  is  the  kingdom  of  God  administered  by 
the  exalted  man,  Christ ;  and  a  blessed  thought  it  is  that  God 
has  always  had  it  in  His  view  to  exalt  Him.  Adam's  sin  was 
not  the  fall  of  man  only,  but  of  all  the  lower  creation  too ;  for 
the  whole  structure  was  ruined  when  he  departed  from  God. 
Adam  was  not  a  mere  individual  but  a  head.  All  thence- 
forward depends  on  the  coming  in  of  another  man,  the  Lord 
Jesus,  who  has  won  a  title,  not  for  Himself  to  stand,  which  He 
did  not  need,  but  for  us  to  have  a  standing  in  virtue  of.  His 
blood,  and  death,  and  resurrection.  The  consequence  is  that 
for  the  believer  the  glory  of  Christ  is  saving,  not  destructive. 
But  much  of  its  brightness  is  practically  lost  for  those  who  do 
not  dwell  upon  this  scene  of  glory.  The  distinctive  mark  is 
Jehovah  reigning  in  righteousness ;  and  moreover,  it  is  a  man 
who  thus  reigns  over  the  earth,  not  only  a  divine  person.  God 
will  put  all  things  under  the  man  that  died  and  rose  in 
delivering  power,  as  truly  as  Adam  drew  down  in  his  fall  the 
race  and  creation.  The  world  became  a  wilderness  of  thorns 
and  briers;  it  was  the  consequence  of  man's  fall.  Do  you 
believe  it  ?  Belie've  also  that  the  Second  Man  would  be 
defrauded  of  no  small  part  of  His  heritage  if  He  did  not  deliver, 
not  believing  man  only,  but  creation,  and  govern  it  in  power 
and  glory.  This  future  reign  is  necessary  to  vindicate  the 
faithfulness  of  God,  to  manifest  the  worth  of  Christ  and  the 


158  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

results  of  what  He  has  done,  to  display  His  bride  along  with 
Him.  It  is  good  therefore  to  look  onward  to  the  scene  where 
this  blessed  man  shall  thus  reign  in  righteousness.  This  would 
be  true  apart  from  our  own  share  with  Him,  for  which  we  must 
turn  to  the  New  Testament.  The  prophet's  subject  is  earth; 
we  belong  to  heaven.  Hence  it  is  the  province  of  the  New 
Testament  to  reveal  the  Father's  house  and  heaven,  no  longer 
shut  but  opened,  first  upon  Christ  and  consequently  upon  us, 
that  we  may  look  in  peace  and  joy  into  the  presence  of  God. 
What  a  totally  different  theme  from  the  Old  Testament,  which 
brings  the  earth  into  prominence,  as  the  scene  of  the  reign 
in  righteousness.  In  the  earth  it  is  judicial  power  that  governs. 
A  rod  of  iron,  a  sceptre  of  righteousness  is  that  by  which  the 
Lord  is  to  break  down  the  pride  of  the  world. 

But  there  are  intimations  of  peace  and  comfort  too.  The 
Lord  is  here  viewed  "  as  an  hiding  place  from  the  wind,  and  a 
covert  from  the  tempest ;  as  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place,  as  the 
shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land."  (Ver.  2.)  The  world 
had  long  been  weary  of  the  effects  of  sin,  if  not  of  sin  itself. 
Now  the  blessing  is  come.  "And  the  eyes  of  them  that  see 
shall  not  be  dim,  and  the  ears  of  them  that  hear  shall  hearken. 
The  heart  also  of  the  rash  shall  understand  knowledge,  and  the 
tongue  of  the  stammerers  shall  be  ready  to  speak  plainly. 
The  vile  person  shall  no  more  be  called  liberal,  nor  the  churl 
said  to  be  bountiful.  For  the  vile  person  will  speak  villainy,  and 
his  heart  will  work  iniquity,  to  practise  hypocrisy,  and  to  utter 
error  against  Jehovah,  to  make  empty  the  soul  of  the  hungry, 
and  he  will  cause  the  drink  of  the  thirsty  to  fail.  The  instru- 
ments also  of  the  churl  are  evil :  he  devise th  wicked  devices  to 
destroy  the  poor  with  lying  words,  even  when  the  needy 
speaketh  right.  But  the  liberal  deviseth  liberal  things ;  and  by 
liberal  things  shall  he  stand."  (Ver.  3 — 8.)  It  is  not  as  you 
see  now,  men  who  appear  to  have  every  good  natural  quality, 
and  yet  when  tested  have  no  heart  for  divine  things,  love  not 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  care  not  for  His  glory.  Here  it 
will  not  be  so.  Blessing  will  flow,  evil  be  judged,  shame  will 
vanish  away.     Things  and  persons  will  be  manifest  and  bear 


CHAPTER   XXXII.  159 

their  true  character.  Man  will  be  accomplishing  for  the  first 
time  on  the  earth  that  for  which  he  was  made.  It  is  in  contrast 
with  all  the  deceitfulness  of  unrighteousness  that  has  gone  and 
still  goes  on  here  below.  We  know  the  uncertainty  of  human 
judgment,  we  know  how  men  cling  to  and  keep  up  appearances. 
There  will  be  no  vain  show  then.  Good  fruits  will  spring  out  of 
the  rich  resources  of  divine  mercy,  and,  in  the  light  of  God  then 
shining,  there  will  also  be  the  detection  of  everything  that  is 
false.  If  wickedness  appear,  the  judgment  of  the  Lord  will  fall 
upon  it.  For  during  the  millennium  there  will  be  cases 
demanding  vengeance;  and  God  will  not  fail  to  deal  with 
wickedness  in  a  summary  manner.  There  will  be  a  solemn 
public  sight  of  the  execution  of  His  wrath  continually  before 
men's  eyes  (Isaiah  lxvi.) — the  more  stern  in  that  day,  because 
there  will  be  no  temptation  to  evil.  Accordingly  these  that  are 
the  objects  of  God's  curse  will  be  immediately  visited,  so  as  to 
keep  up  a  wholesome  horror  of  iniquity  in  the  hearts  of  men. 

This  leads  the  Spirit  of  God  to  give  a  warning,  which  will 
be  needed,  especially  as  the  blessing  of  Israel  will  not  be 
brought  about  in  a  single  day.  There  will  be  a  time  of  sifting. 
As  we  know  there  will  be  for  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  so  in 
Jerusalem  too  there  will  be  another  mode  of  dealing  with 
the  Jews  proper.  Even  when  the  Lord  appears  for  their 
deliverance,  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  all  is  complete  at 
once.  The  Lord  will  gradually  put  down  the  enemies  round 
about  the  Holy  Land,  and-  will  use  Israel  as  the  instrument  of 
these  judgments.  (Isaiah  xi.,  lxiii.,  Micah  v.,  Zech.  ix.,  x.)  He 
will  send  forth  His  armies  and  deal  with  the  nations  in  various 
ways.  In  His  appearing  from  heaven  He  does  work  by  His 
own  power.  The  Jews  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  judg- 
ment of  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet ;  but  He  will  employ 
Israel  to  put  down  the  then  representatives  of  their  old  neigh- 
bours, who  rise  up  once  more  in  envy  against  them.  He  will 
remember  what  their  forefathers  did,  and  will  then  definitely 
deal  with  them,  seeing  that  they  retain  and  shew  the  same 
spirit  to  the  last.  Thus  the  Lord  will  act  thoroughly  in 
righteousness,  and  Israel  will  need  a  warning  previous  to  this ; 


160  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

so  I  suppose  this  will  be  the  bearing  of  it.  "  Rise  up,  ye  women 
that  are  at  ease ;  hear  my  voice,  ye  careless  daughters ;  give  ear 
unto  my  speech.  Many  days  and  years  shall  ye  be  troubled,  ye 
careless  women :  for  the  vintage  shall  fail,  the  gathering  shall 
not  come.  Tremble,  ye  women  that  are  at  ease  ;  be  troubled,  ye 
careless  one  :  strip  you,  and  make  you  bare,  and  gird  sackcloth 
upon  your  loins.  They  shall  lament  for  the  teats,  for  the 
pleasant  fields,  for  the  fruitful  vine.  Upon  the  land  of  my 
people  shall  come  up  thorns  and  briers :  yea,  upon  all  the  houses 
of  joy  in  the  joyous  city:  because  the  palaces  shall  be  forsaken  ; 
the  multitude  of  the  city  shall  be  left;  the  forts  and  towers 
shall  be  dens  for  ever,  a  joy  of  wild  asses,  a  pasture  of  flocks ; 
until  the  Spirit  be  poured  upon  us  from  on  high,  and  the  wil- 
derness be  a  fruitful  field,  and  the  fruitful  field  be  counted  for  a 
forest.  Then  judgment  shall  dwell  in  the  wilderness,  and  right- 
eousness remain  in  the  fruitful  field."  (Ver.  9 — 16.)  The 
allusion  is  to  what  precedes  the  Lord  taking  His  place  and 
reigning  in  the  land.  And  all  the  sorrow  is  to  be  until  the 
Spirit  is  poured  down  upon  them.  (Ver.  15.)  Then  comes  the 
great  change  in  Israel.  There  is  not  of  course  the  same  dwelling 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  any  sense  in  the  believer  as  now,  for  that 
He  has  a  special  dwelling  in  the  church  also  is  manifest.  But 
there  will  be  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  in  that  day  as  truly  as 
now.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  Lord's  reigning  is 
incompatible  with  the  Spirit's  being  thus  poured  out.  He  will 
be  poured  out  very  largely  then.  Noiv  it  is  more  in  depth — if 
we  may  so  speak  of  a  divine  person — than  in  extensiveness.  What 
is  not  now  in  breadth  is  made  up  in  depth.  The  Holy  Spirit 
now  baptizes  into  union  with  Christ  on  high.  Then  will  be  the 
day  for  a  wide  diffusion  over  all  flesh.  Now  this  is  only  true  in 
principle ;  and  so  it  is  applied  from  Joel  ii.  in  Acts  ii.,  not  as  if 
it  were  the  full  result. 

The  present  time  on  earth  is  the  reverse  of  a  manifestation  of 
righteousness.  The  righteous  One  was  rejected  of  men.  GocVs 
righteousness  set  Him  risen  at  His  right  hand  and  justifies 
those  who  believe  on  Him.  Then  it  will  be  the  king,  coming 
and  sitting  upon  His  own  throne  (not  a  rejected  king  exalted  on 


CHAPTER   XXXII.  161 

His  Father's) :  everything  will  be  righteous.  As  a  matter  of 
grace  our  Lord  Jesus  puts  aside  for  the  time  His  earthly  Jewish 
titles,  and  the  heavenly  counsels  are  accomplished  and  revealed 
while  He  is  above.  The  Father  has  seated  Him  at  His  right 
hand  and  said,  as  it  were,  "  You  shall  reign ;  only,  till  you  are 
seated  on  your  own  throne,  come  and  sit  with  me  upon  mine." 
Before  Christ  comes  from  heaven,  the  Jews  (at  least  a  remnant 
of  them)  will  have  welcomed  Him  in  their  hearts.  Then  He 
will  come,  where  they  are,  to  bless  them  in  the  earth,  to  govern 
them,  and  accomplish  in  the  children  the  promises  that  were 
made  to  their  fathers.  Accordingly,  when  the  Christians  are 
taken  from  this  world  at  Christ's  coming,  the  Jews  will  in  due 
time  be  converted,  so  as  to  be  the  earthly  people  of  Jehovah, 
who  will  make  good  in  their  midst  earthly  glory  according  to 
the  prophets ;  and  not  this  only,  but  the  Holy  Ghost  will  be 
poured  out  upon  them.  This  great  earthly  change  is  consequent 
on  the  effusion  of  the  Spirit  from  on  high.  Isaiah  speaks 
of  thorns  and  briers  until  the  Spirit  be  poured  upon  Israel. 
(Ver.  15.)  Instead  of  all  being  in  its  appropriate  order,  every- 
thing will  need  to  be  restored  round  the  only  due  centre.  All 
as  regards  the  earth  and  the  Jews  is  now  in  confusion  and 
misrule ;  but  the  Spirit  shall  be  poured  out  from  on  high,  and 
then  what  a  change  !  Thus  there  are  two  things  necessary  to 
bring  in  this  time  of  blessing — the  king  reigning  in  righteous- 
ness, and  the  outpouring  of  spiritual  power,  specially  among  the 
Jews,  but  also  on  the  Gentiles.  In  nothing  will  God  fail. 
Then  shall  "  the  wilderness  be  a  fruitful  field,  and  the  fruitful 
field  be  counted  for  a  forest."  "  Then  judgment  shall  dwell  in 
the  wilderness:"  instead  of  its  being  the  resort  of  robbers, 
judgment  shall  dwell  there.  Instead  of  covetousness  hankering 
after  the  fruitful  field,  righteousness  should  remain  there. 
Thus  the  work  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace,  and  its  effect 
quietness  and  assurance  for  ever.  Ends  and  ways  shall  be 
righteous :  all  is  governed  with  blessing.  "  And  my  people 
shall  dwell  in  a  peaceable  habitation,  and  in  sure  dwellings, 
and  in  quiet  resting-places,  when  it  shall  hail,  coming  down  on 
the   forest;  and  the  city   shall  be  low  in  a  low   place."     The 

L 


162  LECTURES   OX    ISAIAH. 

proud  organisation  of  human  order,  wit,  and  power,  shall  be 
utterly  abased  in  that  day.  Nevertheless  then  as  now  there  is 
every  incentive,  there  is  the  best  encouragement  to  earnest  and 
free  dispersion  of  the  good  seed ;  and  grace  will  bless  and  use 
what  was  once  common  or  unclean.  "  Blessed  are  ye  that  sow 
beside  all  waters,  that  send  forth  thither  the  feet  of  the  ox 
and  the  ass."  (Ver.  18 — 20.)  God's  people  shall  be  sheltered 
and  prosper  in  peace,  whatever  befall  His  enemies.  For  them 
assured  blessing  takes  the  place  of  fear  and  evil. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII 

The  Spirit  of  God,  having  given  us  a  blessed  picture  of  the 
King  Messiah  reigning  in  righteousness,  here  contrasts  with 
it  a  certain  spoiler  who  is  not  expressly  named  by  our  prophet. 
But  we  need  not  find  much  difficulty  in  identifying  him,  if 
we  remember  the  last  prophecy  of  Ezekiel  that  describes  a 
hostile  Gentile  power.  It  is  remarkable  that  he  there  describes 
Gog  as  one  who  had  been  predicted  before.  Hence  it  is 
certain  that  this  marauding  power  is  not  peculiar  to  the  later 
prophet,  who  tells  us  in  chapter  xxxviii.  8 — 13,  "  After  many 
days  thou  shalt  be  visited  ....  at  the  same  time  shall 
things  come  into  thy  mind,  and  thou  shalt  think  an  evil 
thought,  and  thou  shalt  say,  I  will  go  up  to  the  land  of  unwalled 
villages ;  I  will  go  to  them  that  are  at  rest,  that  dwell  safely, 
all  of  them  dwelling  without  walls,  and  having  neither  bars 
nor  gates,  to  take  a  spoil,  and  to  take  a  prey ;  to  turn  thine 
hand  upon  the  desolate  places  that  are  now  inhabited,  and 
upon  the  people  that  are  gathered  out  of  the  nations,  which 
have  gotten  cattle  and  goods,  that  dwell  in  the  midst  of  the 
land.  Sheba,  and  Dedan,  and  the  merchants  of  Tarshish, 
with  all  the  young  lions  thereof,  shall  say  unto  thee,  Art  thou 
come  to  take  a  spoil  ?  hast  thou  gathered  thy  company  to 
take  a  prey  ?  to  carry  away  silver  and  gold,  to  take  away 
cattle  and  goods,  to  take  a  great  spoil  ?"  The  next  chapter 
comes  in  to  show  in  detail  that  if  there  be  that  which  might 
seem  inconsistent  with  their  security,  if  God  permits  that 
there  should  be  a  dark  cloud  gathering  for  a  while  over 
Palestine,  it  at  length  falls  on  their  foes  themselves;  not  on 
Israel.  This  appears  to  be  the  same  enemy  which  is  here 
introduced.  It  is  the  last  effort  of  the  great  coalition  against 
Israel,  which  led  to  the  overwhelming  destruction  of  the 
assembled  nations,  especially  of  the  East,  when  Israel  will  have 
to  help  themselves  to  their  arms,  and  their  mere  burial  will 


164  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

occupy  the  conquerors,  and  still  more  the  spoiling  of  their  arms 
and  appurtenances. 

I  do  not  doubt  that  the  Assyrian,  or  king  of  the  north,  in 
the  end  is  thus  described.  Gog  will,  as  I  suppose,  have  then 
accomplished  his  long-cherished  designs  on  Constantinople  and 
the  Turkish  empire  in  its  chief  dominions.  Now  "the  Assy- 
rian "  is  a  familiar  subject  of  prophecy.  This  may  account  for 
the  statement  that  they  were  known  before.  There  must 
clearly  have  been  predictions  of  him  previously  to  Ezekiel's 
time,  though  some  may  have  prophesied  things  not  committed 
to  writing. — By  the  way  some  have  been  too  anxious  to  shew 
that  the  apostles  never  wrote  anything  but  what  we  have  got. 
It  is  quite  enough  to  know  that  all  intended  to  be  of  permanent 
use  to  the  church  and  for  God's  glory  is  preserved.  It  is  certain 
apostles  taught  (2  Thess.  ii.),  and  quite  possible  they  may  have 
written  things  which  were  not  meant  of  God  to  be  preserved  as 
part  of  the  scriptures.  But  there  is  a  character  of  perfectness 
about  what  we  have,  which  to  my  mind  precludes  more.  That 
this  is  not  at  all  an  exhorbitant  idea  is  evident  from  the  fact 
that  the  apostles  preached  many  discourses  that  are  not  recorded 
in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Of  course  we  have  only  a  very 
small  part  of  what  the  apostles  preached,  as  the  evangelists 
were  led  to  select  only  from  what  our  Lord  did.  To  have  added 
more  would  have  been  rather  to  encumber  scripture.  Had 
more  communications  even  of  the  apostles  been  added,  it  would 
have  marred  the  perfectness  of  God's  written  word.  We  must 
have  confidence  in  Him.  He  manifested  His  will  in  that  all 
which  He  designed  for  the  permanent  instruction  of  the 
church  was  kept  by  His  power  in  the  midst  of  thousands  and 
thousands  of  enemies  who  would  have  gladly  destroyed  the 
scriptures  if  they  could.  Never  more  in  Christendom  has  this 
dislike  of  the  word  of  God  betrayed  itself  than  now.  But  the 
efforts  of  the  enemy  only  bring  out  God's  power,  wisdom,  and 
goodness  for  all  who  love  Him,  as  they  will  to  the  ruin  of  those 
who  hate  and  despise  Him. 

To  return,  however:  it  is  only  Isaiah  xxxiii.  which  plainly 
connects  itself  in  character  with  the  northern  leader  of  Ezekiel, 


CHAPTER   XXXIII.  165 

unless  we  identify  the  Assyrian  also  with  that  power,  which 
seems  to  me  within  certain  limits  to  be  true  at  the  close.  How- 
ever that  may  be,  the  moral  traits  of  this  foe  are  sufficiently 
plain.  "  Woe  to  thee  that  spoilest,  and  thou  wast  not  spoiled ; 
and  dealest  treacherously,  and  they  dealt  not  treacherously  with 
thee  !  when  thou  shalt  cease  to  spoil,  thou  shalt  be  spoiled ;  and 
when  thou  shalt  make  an  end  to  deal  treacherously,  they  shall 
deal  treacherously  with  thee."  (Ver.  1.)  This  covetous  foe 
appears  to  be  the  last  which  comes  up,  and  so  far  distinct  from 
"  the  king  of  the  north,"  which  title  is  not  limited  to  the  end. 
But  assuredly  it  is  a  ruler  of  the  same  sort,  insatiable  and 
treacherous.  The  Spirit  now  draws  out  the  prophet,  as  personi- 
fying the  godly  in  Israel,  to  cry  to  Jehovah,  aO  Lord,  be 
gracious  unto  us ;  we  have  waited  for  thee :  be  thou  their  arm 
every  morning,  our  salvation  also  in  the  time  of  trouble.  At 
the  noise  of  the  tumult  the  people  fled;  at  the  lifting  up  of 
thyself  the  nations  were  scattered.  And  your  spoil  shall  be 
gathered  like  the  gathering  of  the  caterpillar. :  as  the  running  to 
and  fro  of  locusts  shall  he  run  upon  them."  (Ver.  2 — 4.)  How 
blessed  to  have  Jehovah  as  the  arm  to  lean  on  and  do  valiantly 
for  us  !  How  complete  the  reversal  when  the  proud  and  count- 
less foes  yield  their  spoil  to  be  gathered  like  that  of  the 
caterpillars  or  locusts  !  It  is  Jehovah's  doing,  and  may  well  be 
marvellous  in  our  eyes.  "Jehovah  is  exalted;  for  he  dwelleth 
on  high  :  he  hath  filled  Zion  with  judgment  and  righteousness. 
And  wisdom  and  knowledge  shall  be  the  stability  of  thy  times, 
and  strength  of  salvation :  the  fear  of  Jehovah  is  his  treasure." 
(Ver.  6,  7.)  Thus  Jehovah  Himself  has  taken  them  in  hand, 
and  all  becomes  a  spoil  for  Israel,  and  their  proud  hopes  are 
blasted  for  ever.  Note  that  at  this  very  time  Zion  shall  be 
filled  with  righteousness  and  judgment.  The  doom  which 
swallowed  up  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet,  and  the  chivalry 
of  Europe,  is  a  lesson  heard  in  vain.  Blinded  by  superstition 
as  well  as  the  lust  of  universal  empire,  Gog  dreams  of  destroying- 
Israel,  not  believing  in  the  presence  of  Christ,  or  thinking  Him 
a  mere  human  king.  Thus  they  too  will  come  to  their  own 
destruction. 


166  LECTURES   OX   ISAIAH. 

The  next  verses  portray  the  straits  of  the  people  of  God  and 
their  despair  before  deliverance  appears;  nor  is  danger  ever 
apt  to  be  more  felt  than  when  blessing,  that  seemed  to  be  ours, 
is  once  more  in  jeopardy.  "  Behold,  their  valiant  ones  shall  cry 
without :  the  ambassadors  of  peace  shall  weep  bitterly.  The 
highways  lie  waste,  the  wayfaring  man  ceaseth :  he  hath  broken 
the  covenant,  he  hath  despised  the  cities,  he  regardeth  no  man. 
The  earth  mourneth  and  languisheth  :  Lebanon  is  ashamed  and 
hewn  down :  Sharon  is  like  a  wilderness ;  and  Bashan  and 
Carmel  shake  off  their  fruits."  (Ver.  7 — 9.)  But  man's 
extremity  is  God's  opportunity,  as  they  say;  and  so  will  the 
Jews  then  prove.  "  Now  will  I  arise,  saith  Jehovah ;  novj  will 
I  be  exalted ;  now  will  I  lift  up  myself."  Had  He  chastened 
His  people  sore,  and  should  the  insolent  foe  be  unpunished  ? 
a  Ye  shall  conceive  chaff,  ye  shall  bring  forth  stubble ;  your 
breath  as  fire  shall  devour  [not  Israel,  but]  you,  and  the  peoples 
shall  be  as  the  burnings  of  lime ;  as  thorns  cut  up  shall  they  be 
burned  in  the  fire."  (Yer.  10 — 12.)  It  is  Jehovah  who  under- 
takes to  dispose  of  their  enemies  and  thus  addresses  them. 
Lime  may  be  hard,  but  fire  ere  long  reduces  it  to  powder ;  and 
thorns,  let  them  be  ever  so  troublesome  to  those  with  whom 
they  come  into  collision,  are  notorious  when  cut  up  for  burning 
with  singular  rapidity. 

Next,  attention  is  drawn  (ver.  13)  to  the  notable  display  of 
God's  ways,  as  well  as  to  the  effects  of  these  trials  in  showing 
out  the  true  character  of  men  even  in  Zion.  "  Hear  ye  that  are 
far  off,  what  I  have  done ;  and  ye  that  are  near,  acknowledge 
my  right,"  followed  by  the  most  animated  description  of  the 
alarm  of  the  ungodly,  and  of  the  divine  assurances  to  those  that 
fear  His  name  and  walk  in  righteousness.  "The  sinners  in 
Zion  are  afraid ;  fearfulness  hath  surprised  the  hypocrites. 
Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  the  devouring  fire  ?  who  among 
us  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings  ?  He  that  walketh 
righteously,  and  speaketh  uprightly ;  he  that  despiseth  the  gain 
of  oppressions,  that  shaketh  his  hands  from  holding  of  bribes, 
that  stoppeth  his  ears  from  hearing  of  blood,  and  shutteth  his 
eyes  from  seeing  evil ;  he  shall  dwell  on  high :  his  place  of 


CHAPTER   XXXIII.  1G7 

defence  shall  be  the  munitions  of  rocks :  bread  shall  be  given 
him ;  his  waters  shall  be  sure."     (Ver.  14 — 16.) 

Then  follows  (ver.  17 — 19)  a  sublime  picture  of  Israel  in 
their  conscious  blessedness.  They  .should  behold  the  King  in 
His  beauty,  no  longer  cooped  up  within  the  beleaguered  city, 
but  free  to  look  at  the  most  distant  part  of  the  land  or  the 
earth.  Their  hearts  should  meditate  terror,  now  happily  and 
for  ever  past ;  but  then  it  is  the  more  sweet  to  look  back  and 
think  of  the  never-to-be-forgotten  rescue,  when  the  wisest  were 
at  fault — at  fault  in  counting  up  human  resources,  as  if  they 
could  avail — at  fault  in  overlooking  the  only  sure  Deliverer, 
though  He  be  not  far  from  every  one  of  us.  On  the  other 
hand  they  should  see  no  more,  hear  no  more  the  foeign  foe,  but 
look  upon  Zion,  the  Mount  Zion  which  Jehovah  loved.  "  Look 
upon  Zion,  the  city  of  our  solemnities  :  thine  eyes  shall  see 
Jerusalem  a  quiet  habitation,  a  tabernacle  that  shall  not  be 
taken  down ;  not  one  of  the  stakes  thereof  shall  ever  be 
removed,  neither  shall  any  of  the  cords  thereof  be  broken.  But 
there  the  glorious  Jehovah  will  be  unto  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers 
and  streams ;  wherein  shall  go  no  galley  with  oars,  neither  shall 
gallant  ships  pass  thereby.  For  Jehovah  is  our  judge, 
Jehovah  is  our  lawgiver,  Jehovah  is  our  king ;  he  will  save  us." 
(Ver.  20—22.) 

Is  it  not  utterly  vain  to  apply  words  like  these  to  the  days 
of  Hezekiah  with  some  ancients,  or  of  the  Maccabees  with 
others,  or  to  gospel  times  with  thoughtless  moderns?  Even 
supposing  that  the  rest  of  the  circumstances  of  the  Jews  at 
either  of  these  epochs  approached  the  strength  of  the  prophet's 
language,  which  is  not  at  all  admitted,  who,  in  the  face  of 
approaching  captivity,  of  a  continual  servitude  to  the  Gentile 
powers,  of  a  still  more  calamitous  dispersion  under  the  Romans, 
the  effects  of  which  last  to  this  day — who,  I  say,  can  affirm  that 
Jerusalem  has  been  seen  a  quiet  habitation,  a  tabernacle  that 
shall  not  be  taken  down  ?  How  can  one  hitherto  apply  to  that 
city,  yet  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles,  the  precise  and  most 
precious  declaration,  "  Not  one  of  the  stakes  thereof  shall  ever 
be  removed,  neither  shall  the  cords  thereof  be  broken  ?"    Let  in 


168  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

• 

the  light  of  the  future  for  that  people  and  place,  and  all  is 
changed ;  the  difficulty  is  at  an  end,  and  no  wonder ;  for  there 
"  the  glorious  Jehovah  is  unto  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers  and 
streams."  And  thus  there  is  not  the  smallest  necessity  for 
dislocating  the  prophecy  from  all  connection  with  its  historic 
basis,  or  diverting  its  consolations  from  those  whose  sorrows  it 
was  given  to  assuage  and  dispel  in  proportion  to  their  simplicity 
or  strength  of  faith.  No,  whatever  of  comfort  we  may  glean, 
whatever  hopes  of  future  triumph  from  its  bright  anticipations 
we  may  gather,  let  us  rejoice  that  God  is  here  speaking  of 
afflicted  tempest-tost  Israel,  who  in  that  day  will  find  in  Jesus 
of  Nazareth  their  long-estranged  Lord,  Jehovah  of  hosts,  who 
will  prove  Himself  to  be  a  better  safeguard  than  those  broad 
rivers,  of  which  Babylon  or  Nineveh  might  boast  against 
Jerusalem.  But  a  broad  river  has  its  dangers  as  well  as  its 
beauty,  facilities,  and  sources  of  protection :  so  both  these  cities 
proved  in  opposite  ways  to  their  cost.  Jerusalem  has  all  these 
privileges  without  the  perils,  and  incomparably  more,  in  Jehovah. 
What  if  no  galley  with  oars  went  there,  what  if  no  gallant 
ship  passed  by,  will  not  Jehovah  be  their  judge,  Jehovah  their 
lawgiver,  Jehovah  their  king,  and  so  save  them  pre-eminently 
of  all  nations  on  the  earth  ?  And  why  should  we  weaken  their 
claim  to  advance  our  own — we  who  are  called  into  heavenly 
seats  of  glory,  the  object  of  the  Saviours  love  as  His  Bride 
on  high  ? 

To  Jerusalem  the  King  then  will  be  their  delight,  and 
boast,  and  tower  of  strength.  Had  not  the  mightiest  of  old 
been  broken  when  but  a  typical  Son  of  David  was  there,  looking 
onward  to  Him  who  will  surely  reign  there  ere  long  ?  And 
what  will  it  be  when  the  Assyrian  in  his  last  phase — when 
Gog — essays  to  take  Zion  at  the  close  of  this  age  ?  "  Thy 
tacklings  are  loosed ;  they  could  not  well  strengthen  their 
mast;  they  could  not  spread  the  sail;  then  is  the  prey  of  a 
great  spoil  divided :  the  lame  take  the  prey."  The  triumph  of 
Israel  is  complete,  and  the  more  so  because  it  will  be 
Jehovah's  hand  for  them,  not  their  own.  "  And  the  inhabitant 
shall   not    say,   I    am    sick;    the    people   that    dwell    therein 


CHAPTER   XXXIII.  169 

shall  be  forgiven  their  iniquity."  Happy  is  that  people 
that  is  in  such  a  case :  yea,  happy  is  that  people,  whose 
God  is  Jehovah.  Thrice  happy  they  who  now  can  rejoice 
in  Israel's  prospect,  conscious  themselves  of  a  still  better 
portion  in  Christ,  and  in  a  still  better  country,  that  is,  an 
heavenly.  May  we  be  content  meanwhile  to  share  His  rejec- 
tion, wearing  His  cross,  not  without  as  an  idol  or  vanity,  but  by 
faith  graven  on  our  hearts,  and  therefore  proving  it  by  the 
Spirit  in  our  ways,  crucified  to  the  world  and  the  world  crucified 
to  us !  For  if  we  be  dead  with  Him,  we  shall  also  live  with 
Him ;  if  we  suffer,  we  shall  also  reign  with  Him. 


CHAPTERS  XXXIV.,  XXXV. 

The  Spirit  of  God  has  here  brought  together  the  earthly 
extremes  of  unsparing  judgment  and  of  unmingled  mercy;  these 
things  in  two  races  naturally  akin,  but  so  much  the  more  mani- 
festing this  divergence  and  the  divine  dealing  with  each  from 
beginning  to  end.  These  nations,  so  judged  and  so  blessed, 
sprang  from  the  same  stock,  from  the  same  father,  from  the 
same  mother,  and  branched  out  into  twin  brothers,  Esau  on  the 
one  hand  and  Jacob  on  the  other.  The  land  of  Idumea  is  the 
centre  of  the  one  picture,  as  of  the  other  is  Zion.  The  proud 
elder  must  serve  the  younger.  There  was  from  their  birth,  and 
before  it,  we  may  say,  in  antecedent  revelation,  much  to  strike 
the  mind  in  these  sons  of  Isaac  and  Rebecca,  much  that  would 
cleave  to  their  posterity  till  His  coming  who  will  not  only  judge 
righteously  the  past  but  impress  the  future  with  the  signs  and 
substance  of  His  own  glorious  presence. 

Yet  the  early  history  seemed  little  to  answer  either  to  pro- 
phecy or  to  its  fulfilment.  "Duke  Teman,  duke  Omar,  duke 
Kenaz,"  and  their  successors,  flourished  in  the  land  of  Edom, 
while  the  sons  of  Israel  were  strangers  in  a  land  that  was  not 
theirs,  and  ere  long  proving  it  a  furnace  of  affliction  in  bitter 
bondage.  But  so  it  ever  is :  M  that  was  not  first  which  is 
spiritual,  but  that  which  is  natural ;  and  afterward  that  which 
is  spiritual."  If  God's  people  hope  for  that  they  see  not,  they 
must  "  with  patience  wait  for  it."  He  who  is  sovereign  allows 
that  the  flesh  should  show  its  character  to  the  utmost,  save 
where  special  mercy  interferes  to  arrest  and  restrain  because  of 
other  wise  and  gracious  purposes.  But  His  mercy  it  is,  shown 
of  His  own  good  pleasure,  which  roused  to  madness  the  unbend- 
ing arrogance  of  Edom,  who  never  looked  to  God  with  a  broken 
spirit  even  in  his  deepest  need.  On  the  other  hand  it  was  no 
small  moral  test  for  the  sons  of  Israel,  that,  spite  of  the  divine 
promises  to  them,  Esau's  descendants  should  be  long  settled  in 


CHAPTERS   XXXIV.,   XXXV.  171 

peaceful  enjoyment  as  lords  of  their  soil,  while  Jacob  and  his 
seed  were  sojourners  on  sufferance,  soon  to  be  slaves — and  slaves 
for  a  long  while — in  the  land  of  Ham.  Half  the  space  that 
separated  the  promise  from  their  triumphant  exodus  saw  them 
a  mere  family  group;  and  if  they  afterwards  shot  up  rapidly 
into  a  people,  it  was  in  circumstances  of  increasing  oppression 
and  degradation.  This  was  no  small  trial  of  faith,  whether 
they  looked  on  this  side  of  the  picture  or  on  that.  Esau  had 
been  long  established  in  power  and  peace  and  plenty,  while 
Israel  lay  among  the  pots  of  Egypt,  and  the  accursed  race  of 
Canaan  ruled  in  their  land.  And  the  Bible  contains,  in  the 
same  books,  the  promise  and  the  trial  which  early  appearances 
made  for  faith,  and  presents  all  calmly  as  the  word  of  One  who 
sees  the  end  from  the  beginning,  which  therefore  needs  no 
apologies,  puts  forward  no  explanations,  but  claims  the  confi- 
dence of  His  children  who  know  Him  whom  they  have  believed 
and  are  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  against  that  day 
that  which  they  have  entrusted  to  Him.  The  Bible  does  not  in 
a  demonstrative  way  force  the  truth  of  God  upon  His  people ; 
on  the  contrary  great  simplicity  of  faith  is  demanded  that  we 
receive  it  unhesitatingly,  trusting  God  spite  of  appearances  for 
the  present  and  delays  for  the  future. 

Had  you  looked  more  closely  and  spiritually  into  Jacob's 
life,  you  might  have  expected  long  discipline,  even  as  he,  their 
father,  was  seen  lying  on  his  pillow  of  stone,  Jehovah  holding 
out  the  vision  of  glory  before  him.  This  might  have  prepared 
for  the  thought  of  trial  first,  then  of  gracious  blessing.  So,  later, 
there  was  first  the  crushing  of  all  natural  hopes,  and  then  the 
name  of  victory  conferred.  (Gen.  xxxii.)  Thus  what  we  have 
in  Jacob's  early  history  prepares  one  for  the  vicissitudes  of  his 
sons.  He  was  a  poor  trembling  man,  with  plenty  of  faults, 
shrinking  from  the  presence  of  his  brother,  in  whom  might 
appear  much  that  was  attractive  naturally.  But  God  saw  under 
it  all  that  the  flesh  is  a  false  and  proud  thing — enmity  with  God, 
who  allowed  that  the  flesh  should  show  out  in  him,  the  despiser 
of  his  birthright,  its  real  character.  Present  things  were  his 
life;  hence  profane  unbelief  and  slight  of  the  things  of  God. 


172  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

All  this  and  more  came  out  prominently  in  Esau,  as  they  were 
to  be  verified  in  his  race.  If  Gentiles,  at  any  rate  they  had 
a  blood  relation  with  the  people  of  God,  But  their  very  con- 
nection with  them,  though  a  sort  of  transition  between  Israel 
and  the  nations  around,  was  the  occasion  of  envious  enmity  and 
ruin.  They  were  to  prove  that  it  was  not  only  an  Egypt  and  a 
Pharaoh  who  were  raised  up  for  God  to  manifest  His  judgment 
upon,  but  that  God  would  do  just  the  same  to  the  sons  of  Esau, 
and  that  Esau's  flesh  would  betray  the  bitterest  defiance  of  God 
and  His  people. 

The  great  northern  enemy  of  chapter  xxxiii.  seems  to  be  his- 
torically latest ;  but  Trior  ally,  the  account  of  Edom's  judgment  is 
kept  for  the  last,  perhaps  as  being  so  near  to  Israel  by  nature. 
After  that  great  enemy  the  Assyrian  is  destroyed,  we  hear  of 
Edom's  doom  decided.  When  God  was  dealing  with  Israel  in 
blessing  or  chastisement  we  have  Edom  disputing  the  right  of 
God  to  bless  His  people,  and  taking  delight  in  their  shame  and 
sorrow.  God  resents  such  spite.  And  was  it  not  in  his  race  that 
despised  the  birthright  ?  This,  no  doubt,  accomplished  the  pur- 
pose of  God ;  but  then  He  admirably  makes  His  end  to  agree 
with  His  word  and  means.  Though  a  question  of  His  own 
sovereignty,  yet  this  goes  hand  in  hand  with  His  righteous  ways. 
Jacob  was  chosen  and  Esau  rejected,  yet  God  brought  out  at  the 
critical  time  that  there  was  also  the  seal  of  righteousness.  Cer- 
tainly Esau  deserved  to  be  cast  off  by  God,  though  Jacob  justly 
traces  everything  to  His  mercy  and  grace.  Thus  the  transgression 
of  selling  his  birthright  confirms  what  God  had  already  given  out 
as  a  question  of  His  own  disposal.  Esau  showed  that  he  did  not 
value  his  birthright,  present  existence  being  dearer  to  him  than 
any  blessing  of  God.  Jacob  was  utterly  wrong  in  following  his 
mother's  deceitful  plan  to  hinder  Isaac's  wish  and  secure  the 
promise.  He  ought  to  have  waited  in  peace  and  confidence, 
expecting  God  to  make  good  His  own  word.  But  weak  as  he 
was,  and  wrong  more  than  once,  yet  one  thing  you  do  find  in 
Jacob,  not  in  Esau — a  heart  for  God,  a  faith  that  valued  the 
promises  of  God.  He  might  be  apt  to  drop  into  his  old  ways, 
and  to  form  plans  for  himself,  for  he  was  indeed  "that  worm 


CHAPTERS   XXXIV.,   XXXV.  173 

Jacob,"  as  scripture  calls  him ;  but  still  at  bottom  there  was  a 
heart  that  clave  to  God  and  His  word.  So  when  the  struggle 
came,  when  God  wrestled  with  His  servant,  there  was  nature 
that  needed  to  be  withered  up,  lest  he  should  suppose  that 
because  of  any  vigour  of  his  own  he  prevailed.  Still  on  blessing 
from  God  he  was  set,  and  would  not  desist  till  he  had  the  assur- 
ance of  it.  If  flesh  was  there  to  be  judged,  surely  divine  faith 
was  very  manifest.  Hence  Jacob  becomes  brighter  towards  the 
close,  when  the  flesh  was  practically  set  aside. 

So  with  Israel.  Though  there  will  be  the  judgment  of  their 
unfaithfulness,  yet  the  day  will  come  when  the  nations  too  will 
be  judged,  not  borne  with ;  and  how  will  it  then  fare  with 
Edom  ?  When  Israel  was  in  the  wilderness,  Esau  stopped  their 
way.  The  power  of  God  could  have  smitten  him  down  (as  He 
had  determined  long  before) ;  but  the  time  was  not  yet  come. 
So  Israel  struck  not  a  blow  upon  their  guilty  brother,  but 
rather  turned  back  like  a  rebuked  child.  Ah  !  it  was  the  token 
in  its  patience  that  a  still  more  tremendous  judgment  was  in 
store  for  Edom;  for  there  is  nothing  so  ominous  as  when  God 
takes  patiently  the  iniquity  of  men.  If  there  be  remonstrance, 
it  shows  there  is,  as  it  were,  a  hope ;  but  if  all  is  borne  .silently, 
it  is  the  solemn  sign  of  judgment  that  will  fall  as  surely  as  it 
lingers.  Blessed  as  it  is  for  those  who  walk  in  grace,  there  is 
nothing  that  is  so  evident  a  token  of  perdition  to  the  world  as 
the  saints  passing  through  it  without  lifting  a  finger  in  their 
own  defence,  or  on  God's  behalf.  Alas  !  we  know  that  the 
church  has  failed  in  this,  as  Israel  after  their  sort.  But  their 
path  through  the  wilderness  was  a  type  of  the  journey  of  faith, 
in  grace,  the  earthly  people  and  things  being  the  shadow  of  the 
heavenly. 

Possibly  there  may  have  been  a  preliminary  judgment  at 
the  time  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  onslaught  on  the  Jews.  I  should 
judge  from  the  Psalms  (see  especially  Psalm  cxxxvii.,  "  Remem- 
ber, 0  Jehovah,  the  children  of  Edom  ")  that  there  is  a  connection 
between  that  and  Edom :  that  is,  this  may  have  had  a  partial 
accomplishment  in  the  days  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  For  though 
on  his  coming  up  against  Jerusalem,  the  Edomites  helped  him 


174  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

to  destroy  the  Jews  more  effectually,  they  themselves  were  not 
spared  by  the  conquerors.  In  Psalm  lxxxiii.  we  find  Edom  con- 
nected with  the  Assyrian,  the  great  enemy  of  the  ten  tribes. 
As  we  have  seen   with   Babylon,  the   conqueror   of  the   two. 

"  Keep  not  thou  silence,  0  God They  have  taken 

crafty  counsel  against  thy  people Let  us  cut  them 

off."  All  confirms  what  has  been  already  remarked.  In  the 
confederacy  against  Israel  figure  "  the  tabernacles  of  Edom."  It 
is  the  first  power  mentioned,  of  course  not  as  the  mightiest,  but 
as  setting  on  the  others  to  Israel's  ruin.  Being  neighbours, 
they  would  have  a  better  knowledge  of  the  people  and  their 
land,  and  so  be  the  more  dangerous,  besides  the  moral  bearing 
of  the  case.  There  are  also  the  Philistines,  Tyre,  and  the 
various  peoples  that  lived  near  the  sea  coast,  as  well  as  round 
about  Idumea  and  the  contiguous  regions.  Then  we  find  the 
great  power  of  Assur  mentioned  as  having  joined  them.  So  the 
Spirit  of  God  classes  Edom  with  Israel's  final  adversaries,  as  He 
had  done  already  by  Moses  and  Joshua  with  their  earliest. 
There  is  an  evident  connection  between  their  rise  and  the 
gradual  course  of  their  history  through  scripture.  Now  at  the 
close  we  find  distinct  prophecies  applying  to  Edom.  "  They  are 
confederated  against  thee."  (Ver.  5.)  All  their  confederacies 
God  will  break  up,  before  the  judgment  falls  upon  Esau.  They 
will  have  joined  themselves  unto  Assur,  but  that  great  power, 
like  the  lesser  ones,  will  be  directed  against  God's  people  in 
vain,  great  and  small  alike  hostile,  joining  to  aim  a  more  effec- 
tual blow  upon  Israel,  but  to  the  destruction  of  themselves. 

God,  we  may  see,  always  goes  back  to  the  beginning  when 
He  judges.  In  the  time  of  the  Babylonish  captivity,  why  did 
He  judge  Israel  ?  He  looks  at  what  they  did  in  the  wilderness. 
It  was  because  of  Moloch  and  Chiun.  (Amos  v.  26.)  They  had 
learnt  to  worship  their  images  in  the  wilderness,  and  therefore 
should  be  carried  captive  beyond  Damascus.  God,  when  the  time 
of  judgment  comes,  traces  up  to  the  root  of  evil.  So  our  wisdom 
as  Christians  when  we  fail,  is  to  go  back  to  our  first  departure. 
We  never  get  right  by  merely  judging  this  or  that  outbreak, 
but   should   always   search  out   the   cause.      We    do   not  else 


CHAPTERS   XXXIV.,   XXXV.  175 

gather  needed  strength,  nor  is  any  sin  rightly  judged  by  merely 
judging  the  manifested  effects,  but  we  must  probe  into  the 
hidden  sources  of  the  mischief.  It  is  not  enough  to  judge  our 
acts;  judging  self  is  a  very  different  process.  We  need  to  dis- 
cern the  springs  within  ourselves.  If  we  discerned  ourselves, 
we  should  not  be  judged.  It  does  not  mean  pronouncing  judg- 
ment upon  any  particular  fault,  but  judging  their  real  cause 
and  not  occasions  merely.  Such  is  the  Christian  way  of  judging. 
It  is  not  occupation  with  the  surface,  but  with  that  which  is 
underneath,  the  hardly  seen  roots  of  the  acts. 

But  I  must  return  to  my  subject.  With  unerring  wisdom 
God  goes  back  to  what  Esau  did  from  the  beginning  of  his 
history.  He  had  waited  long  and  patiently,  nearly  a  thousand 
years,  and  now  shews  His  perfect  knowledge  of  the  course  and 
end ;  but  when  the  end  does  come,  God  invariably  traces  all  up 
to  the  beginning. 

I  need  not  dwell  on  all  the  dark  account.  The  full  stroke 
of  judgment  comes  upon  them  at  the  day  of  Jehovah.  Here, 
though  the  scene  is  laid  in  Idumea,  it  is  a  question  of  all  the 
heathen.  This  is  referred  to  here.  "  Come  near,  ye  nations,  to 
hear ;  and  hearken,  ye  people :  let  the  earth  hear,  and  all  that 
is  therein :  the  world,  and  all  things  that  come  forth  of  it.  For 
the  indignation  of  Jehovah  is  upon  all  nations,  and  his  fury 
upon  all  their  armies ;  he  hath  utterly  destroyed  them,  he  hath 
delivered  them  to  the  slaughter.  Their  slain  also  shall  be  cast 
out,  and  their  stink  shall  come  up  out  of  their  carcases,  and  the 
mountains  shall  be  melted  with  their  blood.  And  all  the  host 
of  heaven  shall  be  dissolved,  and  the  heavens  shall  be  rolled 
together  as  a  scroll :  and  all  their  host  shall  fall  down,  as  the 
leaf  falleth  off  from  the  vine,  and  as  a  falling  fig  from  the  fig 
tree.  For  my  sword  shall  be  bathed  in  heaven :  behold,  it 
shall  come  down  upon  Idumea,  and  upon  the  people  of  my 
curse,  to  judgment.  The  sword  of  Jehovah  is  filled  with  blood, 
it  is  made  fat  with  fatness,  and  with  the  blood  of  lambs  and 
goats,  with  the  fat  of  the  kidneys  of  rams :  for  Jehovah  hath  a 
sacrifice  in  Bozrah,  and  a  great  slaughter  in  the  land  of 
Idumea."    (Ver.  1 — 6.)     The  day  of  the  calamity  of  His  people! 


17-  LBCTTBES  OS  ISAIAH. 

If  there  is  anything  He  repeats  over  and  over  again,  it  is  the  day 
of  their  calamity.  (Compare  Obadiah  11 — 14)  He  means  bless- 
ing, and  there  is  nothing  that  more  rouses  His  judgment  than 
when  there  is  anything  sorrowful  and  that  strikes  their  hearts — 
that  men  should  take  advantage  of  this  to  behave  themselves 
proudly  against  them.  There  was  never  a  truer  picture  of  the 
spirit  of  man  than  at  this  very  time.  It  is  just  the  feeling  of 
Christendom  towards  those  who  are  seeking  to  walk  in  the  way 
that  is  pleasing  to  God.  If  failure  is  known  that  fills  them 
with  shame,  it  is  used  to  wrong  them,  or  to  speak  evil  against 
them.  This  is  the  present  feeling ;  so  that  we  may  see  how  true 
these  principles  of  God  are,  and  how  solemn  it  is  for  us  to  realize 
the  duty  that  becomes  us  at  the  present  time. 

There  will  be  such  slaughter  that  it  might  seem  as  if  the 
mountains  themselves  had  melted  into  blood  (ver.  7).  There  will 
be  one  destruction  upon  the  mountains  of  Israel,  but  another 
special  carnage  in  Edom.  It  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that 
this  is  a  future  judgment  (ver.  8 — 17):  if  any  one  were  to  apply  it 
rigorously  and  in  all  its  extent  to  the  times  of  Nebuchadnezzar, 
confusion  must  result,  perverting  either  scripture  or  the  facts. 
The  contrary  indeed  was  seen  then.  The  nations  had  it  all 
their  own  way.  There  was  no  such  thing  as  God  having  a 
great  sacrifice  of  all  nations,  though  treacherous  Edom  suffered. 
The  real  fulfilment  will  be  at  the  end  of  the  age,  though  even 
then  will  be  merely  a  tremendous  convulsion  of  nature:  the 
total  dissolution  of  heaven  and  earth  will  be  at  the  end  of  the 
»iilWnimii     The  Spirit  of  God  puts  the  scenes  together  here. 

In  most  singular  conjunction  with  this  terrible  picture  of 
the  vast  solitude  for  man,  created  as  it  were  only  for  ravenous 
beasts,  and  birds  of  prey,  and  reptiles,  God  turns  and  shows 
that  the  day  that  beholds  this  desolation  for  Edom  inaugurated 
Israel's  blessing.  Nor  is  it  only  Israel  rejoices,  but  God  will 
form  a  large  and  enlarging  scene  for  His  own  glory,  where  erst 
uid  barrenness.  ttThe  wilderness  and  the  solitary 
place  shall  be  glad  for  them ;  and  the  desert  shall  rejoice,  and 
blossom  as  the  rose.     It  shall  blossom  abundantly,  and  rejoice 


CHAPTERS    XXXIV.,    XXXV.  177 

even  with  joy  and  singing :  the  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  be  given 
unto  it,  the  excellency  of  Carmel  and  Sharon,  they  shall  see  the 
glory  of  Jehovah,  and  the  excellency  of  our  God."     (Ver.  1,  2.) 
Not  merely  fertility,  but  there  will  be  every  joy,  fruitfulness, 
beauty.     And  assuredly  man's  deeper  wants  are  not  forgotten. 
"  Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands,  and  confirm  the  feeble  knees. 
Say  to  them  that  are  of  a  fearful  heart,  Be  strong,  fear  not : 
behold,  your  God  will  come  with  vengeance,  even  God  with  a 
recompence ;  he  will  come  and  save  you.     Then  the  eyes  of  the 
blind  shall  be  opened,  and  the  ears  of  the  deaf  shall  be  un- 
stopped.    Then  shall  the  lame  man  leap  as  an  hart,  and  the 
tongue  of  the  dumb  sing:   for  in  the  wilderness  shall  waters 
break  out,  and  streams  in  the  desert.     And  the  parched  ground 
shall  become  a  pool,  and  the  thirsty  land  springs  of  water :  in 
the  habitation  of  dragons,  where  each  lay,  shall  be  grass  with 
reeds  and  rushes.     And  an  highway  shall  be  there,  and  a  way, 
and  it  shall  be  called  The  way  of  holiness ;  the  unclean  shall 
not  pass  over  it ;  but  it  shall  be  for  those :  the  wayfaring  men, 
though  fools,  shall  not  err  therein.     No  lion  shall  be  there,  nor 
any  ravenous  beast  shall  go  up  thereon,  it  shall  not  be  found 
there ;  but  the  redeemed  shall  walk  there :  and  the  ransomed 
of  Jehovah  shall  return,  and  come  to  Zion  with  songs  and  ever- 
lasting joy  upon  their  heads  :  they  shall  obtain  joy  and  gladness, 
and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away."     (Ver.  3 — 10.) 

God  will  then  and  thus  show  that,  whatever  Satan  had 
brought  of  sin  and  woe  into  this  world,  goodness  and  mercy 
are  His  own  delight.  Such  is  the  time  that  is  coming  for 
the  earth,  though  an  awful  storm  ushers  it  in.  While  all  evil 
came  through  sin,  and  there  is  not  an  atom  of  the  lower  crea- 
tion that  does  not  bear  some  trace  of  Adam's  fall,  there  will 
surely  come  the  day  of  Christ,  the  last  Adam.  It  seems  to  me 
however,  that  in  the  world  to  come  judgment  will  leave  its 
effectual  mark.  On  the  land  of  Edom  the  destruction  will  be 
unsparing,  and  the  land  will  be  left  as  a  scar  upon  the  face 
of  the  earth.  I  do  not  say  that  Edom  will  be  the  only  one, 
for  Rome  also  will  be  proved  to  be  the  vile  corruptress,  as  in 
Paganism,  so  in   Christendom  and  in   antichristendom.      But 

M 


178  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

when  the  proud  lie  of  the  eternal  city  is  punished  for  ever,  then 
the  poor  and  despised  Jew  comes  forward,  as  it  is  said  here : 
"  Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands,  and  confirm  the  feeble  knees. 
Say  to  them  that  are  of  a  fearful  heart,  Be  strong,  fear  not: 
behold,  your  God  will  come  with  vengeance,  even  God  with  a 
recompence ;  he  will  come  and  save  you."  (Ver.  3,  4.)  Ven- 
geance accompanies  their  salvation.  Take  all  its  fulness  of 
meaning.  It  will  be  accomplished  to  the  letter.  God  will  prove 
that  not  a  word  of  His  mercy  to  Israel  and  their  land  can  fall  to 
the  ground.  "  Then  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened,  and 
the  ears  of  the  deaf  shall  be  unstopped.  Then  shall  the  lame 
man  leap  as  an  hart,  and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  sing:  for 
in  the  wilderness  shall  waters  break  out,  and  streams  in  the 
desert.  And  the  parched  ground  shall  become  a  pool,  and  the 
thirsty  land  springs  of  water:  in  the  habitation  of  dragons, 
where  each  lay,  shall  be  grass  with  reeds  and  rushes.  And  an 
highway  shall  be  there,  and  a  way,  and  it  shall  be  called  The 
way  of  holiness ;  the  unclean  shall  not  pass  over  it ;  but  it 
shall  be  for  those :  the  wayfaring  men,  though  fools,  shall  not 
err  therein.  No  lion  shall  be  there,  nor  any  ravenous  beast 
shall  go  up  thereon,  it  shall  not  be  found  there;  but  the 
redeemed  shall  walk  there:  and  the  ransomed  of  Jehovah 
shall  return,  and  come  to  Zion  with  songs  and  everlasting  joy 
upon  their  heads :  they  shall  obtain  joy  and  gladness,  and 
sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away."     (Ver.  5 — 10.) 

Thus  fitly  does   Isaiah  close  the  first  main  division  of  his 
magnificent  prophecy. 


CHAPTERS    XXXVI,   XXXVII. 

These  chapters  form  the  first  portion  of  the  historical  episode 
which  severs  the  earlier  half  of  the  prophecy  from  its  latter 
half.  They  are  of  importance  not  only  for  the  weighty  facts 
they  present  (for  this  is  sufficiently  done  and  in  a  two-fold 
point  of  view  in  2  Kings  and  2  Chronicles),  but  for  their  con- 
nexion with  the  two  sections  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah.  No  doubt, 
the  incidents  had  their  value,  and  so  also  the  record  of  them,  as 
the  most  conspicuous  seal  which  could  then  be  affixed  on  the 
prophet's  character ;  for  the  danger  was  extreme,  the  distress  of 
the  people  intense,  the  antecedents  of  the  King  in  opposition  to 
the  Assyrian  by  no  means  reassuring,  the  confidence  of  the 
enemy  boundless.  Yet  was  the  word  of  Isaiah  distinct  and 
soon  most  punctually  verified. 

But  there  are  deeper  grounds  for  the  introduction  of  this 
historical  matter  into  the  midst  of  the  prophecy.  It  was  of 
moment  that  the  believer  should  have  the  inspired  and  therefore 
sure  means  of  discriminating  between  the  part  which  was  thus 
accomplished  and  the  part  which  yet  awaits  its  fulfilment.  We 
can  now  readily  see  that  the  Shalmanesers  and  the  Sennacheribs 
of  the  past  have  not  exhausted  the  terms  and  scope  of  the  pro- 
phecy ;  we  can  understand  that  enough  has  been  done  to  form  an 
adequate  type,  an  historical  basis,  for  that  which  is  to  come  and 
to  make  good  every  word  that  proceeds  from  Jehovah.  Any 
mind  can  judge  that  the  overthrow  of  the  Assyrian — as  the  pre- 
cursor of  Babylon's  supremacy,  the  captivity  of  Judah  and  the 
long  times  of  the  Gentiles — widely  differs  from  the  final  judg- 
ment of  the  Assyrian,  when  Babylon  in  its  last  phase  is  itself 
destroyed,  and  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  close  in  the  glory  of 
Jerusalem  and  Israel  under  David  the  beloved,  their  king,  and 
the  new  covenant  in  the  pleasant  land. 

No  king  had  shown  such  trust  in  Jehovah  since  the  days  of 
David  as  Hezekiah.     But  his  faith  was  tried.     With  alacrity  of 


180  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

heart  he  had  made  Jehovah  his  object,  from  the  day  he 
ascended  the  throne.  "  He  in  the  first  year  of  his  reign,  in  the 
first  month,  opened  the  doors  of  the  house  of  Jehovah  and 
repaired  them."  (2  Chron.  xxix.  3.)  He  inspired  the  Levites 
and  priests  with  somewhat  of  his  own  desire  to  renounce  long 
indifference  for  loyalty  to  Jehovah.  "  Now  they  began  on  the 
first  day  of  the  first  month  to  sanctify,  and  on  the  eighth  day 
of  the  month  came  they  to  the  porch  of  Jehovah:  so  they 
sanctified  the  house  of  Jehovah  in  eight  days,  and  in  the  six- 
teenth day  of  the  first  month  they  made  an  end."  The  vessels 
which  were  cast  away  in  king  Ahaz's  reign  were  once  more 
prepared.  "  The  king  rose  early  and  gathered  the  rulers  of  the 
city,  and  went  up  to  the  house  of  Jehovah.  Atonement  was 
made  for  all  Israel,  for  the  king  commanded  that  the  burnt- 
offering  and  the  sin-offering  should  be  made  for  all  Israel." 
What  governed  all  was  "  the  commandment  of  Jehovah  by  His 
prophets."  He  Avas  the  first  king,  since  the  rent  of  Ephraim 
under  Rehoboam,  whose  heart  sought  that  all  Israel  should 
come  to  the  house  of  Jehovah  at  Jerusalem  to  keep  the  pass- 
over  unto  Jehovah  God  of  Israel.  Godly  predecessors  felt  it  too 
little — thought  not  of  it — certainly  did  nothing  toward  it ; 
ungodly  predecessors  would  have  desired  nothing  less,  however 
much  they  would  have  seen  all  Israel  re-united  under  their  own 
sceptre.  Hezekiah  clave  to  Jehovah  and  sought  for  all  Israel 
the  same  thing.  And  though  his  overtures  were  laughed  to 
scorn  and  mocked  by  most,  "  divers  of  Asher,  and  Manasseh, 
and  of  Zebulon,  humbled  themselves  and  came  to  Jerusalem. 
Also  in  Judah  the  hand  of  God  was  to  give  them  one  heart 
to  do  the  commandment  of  the  king  and  of  the  princes, 
by  the  word  of  Jehovah."  The  old  altars  to  their  false  gods,  at 
any  rate  unhallowed,  unauthorised  altars  were  taken  away 
and  cast  into  the  brook  Kidron,  the  images  were  broken,  the 
groves  were  cut  down,  the  high  places  disappeared.  The  due 
honour  of  the  house  and  servants  and  service  of  Jehovah  was 
provided  for  as  written  in  His  law.  "  And  in  every  work  that 
he  began  ....  to  seek  his  God,  he  did  it  with  all  his 
heart,  and  prospered." 


CHAPTI  I XX  VII.  IS] 

and  the  merit  th  -    .nacherib  king 

I  had  entered  ir  ncaniped  against  the 

fenced  cities,  and  thought  to  win  them  for  him-  ra8  it 

not  strange  !     A  great  work  had  been  wrought  in  restoring 

defaced  lineaments  ^A  the  worship  of  the  true  God  throughout 
ih ;  yet  this  was  no  sooner  done,  than  the  enemy  came  to 
swallow  them  up !     These  who  judged  not  by  scripture  but  by 
providence  would  at  once  be  stumbled-     V  rhat 

■kiah    had    done  wrong-  in    r  jectmg  1  -     f  bit 

fathers  !     Was  n  _     im  and  them  for  his 

rash  reformation  I     Had  he  not  lifted  up  Legions  hand 

to  destroy  the  brazen  serpent  that  Moses  made,  treating 
contempt  as  a  piece  of  brass  the  venerable  sign  of  divine  grace 
to  their  perishing  fathers  in  the  desert,  to  which  the  children  of 
Israel  had  till  bis  irned  incen-  ras  the  Assyrian  a 

judgment 

Moreover  the    pious   king   <!  he   could    to    fortify 

himself,  sent  the  Lowliest  message  to  .an,  gave 

him  all  the  silver  in  Jehovah  pped  off  for  him 

the  gold  from  it-  nd  pillars;   but  in  vain.     There  was 

little  of  the  simplicif  _  :i  in  all  this: 

no  wonder  that  the  blessing  tb  him  t: 

and  that  the  enemy  was  emboldened  -  % 

sent  from  Lachish  to  insult  king  Hezekiah.  to  U 
God  of  Israel,  and  seduce  the  people  to  surrender  at  discrt 
to  his  master.     Along  with  this,  truth  is  mingled;   for  there 
were  those  (not    Hezekiah;  who   did  loo-  pt  for  help. 

But  the  aim  of  all  was  to  reduce  the  Jews  to  despair,  and  to 
accomplish  the  del  a  ria.     Hence  the  very  pic- 

king, his  zeal  for  Jehovah  in  throwing  down  the  altars  of  false 
gods,  is  cunningly  perverted  into  a  robbing  Jehovah 

of  His  honour,  from  whom  (he  pretended'  his  master  had 
received  his  charge  to  come  up  against  Hezekiah.  Thus  the 
enemy  knows  how  to  give  a  a  I  gloss  i  his  own  wicked 
devi  he  can  blacken  the  most  faithful 

servants.  What  a  mercy  to  have  the  unerring  standard  I  Bis 
word  to  test  and  be  tested  by ! 


182  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

The  entreaties  of  Eliakim  (ver.  11),  that  Aramean  should  be 
spoken  rather  than  the  Jewish  tongue  only  drew  out  further 
and  audacious  insolence ;  for  Rabshakeh  stood  and  cried  in  that 
very  tongue  to  the  people  on  the  walls,  warning  them  against 
their  king  and  commending  to  them  the  hard  terms  of  deporta- 
tion to  the  east,  in  the  face  of  the  overthrow  of  the  nations 
already  broken  by  the  Assyrian.  Little  did  the  blasphemer 
think  that  there  listened  to  his  taunting  demand  whether 
Jehovah  should  deliver  Jerusalem,  not  Eliakim,  Shebna,  and 
Joah  only,  nor  the  men  on  the  wall  only,  but  Jehovah  Himself. 
It  was  now  His  affair ;  and  then  at  length  the  faith  of  Hezekiah 
begins  to  shine  once  more,  whose  commandment  it  was  to 
answer  him  not. 

Chap,  xxxvii.  His  clothes  rent,  the  king  covered  in  sack- 
cloth repairs  to  the  house  of  Jehovah,  and  enquires  of  the 
prophet,  who  returns  Jehovah's  answer  that  they  were  not  to 
fear  the  words  of  blasphemy ;  for  Jehovah  would  undertake  the 
matter  and  send  back  the  Assyrian  to  perish  in  his  own  land. 
(Ver.  1—7.) 

Still  confident,  Sennacherib  from  Libnah  sends  a  letter  of 
similar  import  to  Hezekiah,  who  spreads  it  before  Jehovah  with 
earnest  prayer  for  His  intervention.     (Ver.  8 — 20.) 

Isaiah  again  returns  the  answer  of  Jehovah  God  of  Israel : 
"  Whereas  thou  hast  prayed  to  me  against  Sennacherib  king  of 
Assyria :  this  is  the  word  which  Jehovah  hath  spoken  concern- 
ing him ;  the  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Zion,  hath  despised  thee, 
and  laughed  thee  to  scorn;  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem  hath 
shaken  her  head  at  thee.  Whom  hast  thou  reproached  and 
blasphemed  ?  and  against  whom  hast  thou  exalted  thy  voice, 
and  lifted  up  thine  eyes  on  high  ?  even  against  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel.  By  thy  servants  hast  thou  reproached  Jehovah,  and 
hast  said,  By  the  multitude  of  my  chariots  am  I  come  up  to  the 
height  of  the  mountains,  to  the  sides  of  Lebanon;  and  I  will 
cut  down  the  tall  cedars  thereof,  and  the  choice  fir  trees  thereof: 
and  I  will  enter  into  the  height  of  his  border,  and  the  forest  of 
his  Carmel.    I  have  digged,  and  drunk  water ;  and  with  the  sole 


CHAPTERS   XXXVI.,   XXXVII.  183 

of  my  feet  have  I  dried  up  all  the  rivers  of  the  besieged  places." 
(Ver.  22 — 25.)  Insult  as  he  might,  himself  or  his  servants,  the 
Assyrian  must  learn  that  God  knew  all  about  him,  making  him 
but  the  instrument  of  His  own  dealing  with  the  nations.  This 
work  done,  he  must  go  back  humbled  and  smitten,  for  he  had 
exceeded  his  commission;  and  would  God  sanction  his  rage 
against  Himself?  (Ver.  26 — 29.)  After  a  sign  of  coming  to 
Judah  (ver.  30 — 32),  Jehovah  pronounces  His  decree.  (Ver. 
33 — 35.)  "  Then  the  angel  of  Jehovah  went  forth,  and  smote 
in  the  camp  of  the  Assyrians  a  hundred  and  fourscore  and  five 
thousand :  and  when  they  arose  early  in  the  morning,  behold, 
they  were  all  dead  corpses.  So  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria 
departed,  and  went  and  returned,  and  dwelt  at  Nineveh.  And 
it  came  to  pass,  as  he  was  worshipping  in  the  house  of  Nisroch 
his  god,  that  Adrammelech  and  Sharezer  his  sons  smote  him 
with  the  sword ;  and  they  escaped  into  the  land  of  Armenia : 
and  Esar-haddon  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead."  (Ver.  36 — 38.) 
The  total  fall  of  his  kingdom  followed  a  few  years  after.  Those 
that  walk  in  pride  God  is  able  to  abase.  How  blessed  to  hear 
His  voice  and  know  His  love !  Real  as  it  was  however,  it  was 
no  more  than  a  shadow  of  the  great  chief  of  the  nations  of 
the  east  in  the  latter  day;  even  as  Judah's  deliverance  and 
blessedness  under  the  son  of  David  of  that  day  was  but  the 
witness  of  a  brighter  day  and  a  more  enduring  glory,  when 
Jehovah  shall  exalt  him  that  was  low  and  abase  the  high  one. 
"  I  will  overturn,  overturn,  overturn :  and  it  shall  be  no  more, 
until  he  come  whose  right  it  [the  diadem]  is ;  and  I  will  give  it 
him." 


CHAPTERS   XXXVIII.,  XXXIX. 

The  history  we  have  seen  in  the  preceding  chapters  is  but  a 
testimony  to  the  total  destruction  which  awaits  the  final 
Assyrian,  as  well  as  his  hosts,  in  the  latter  day,  and  upon  the 
mountains  of  Israel.  This  will  be  the  more  striking  because  he 
will,  first  of  all,  be  allowed  to  capture  Jerusalem,  and  slay  a 
portion  of  the  men  and  treat  with  indignity  some  of  their 
women.  Jerusalem  must  pay  the  penalty  of  its  sins.  The 
Assyrian,  or  king  of  the  north  of  Daniel,  will  then  retire  -south- 
wards for  other  projects  of  ambition;  and  coming  up  again, 
when  Jehovah  meanwhile  has  owned  His  people  Israel,  he  will 
be  for  ever  put  down  and  destroyed. 

This  being  so,  it  is  evident  that  the  mention  of  these  histori- 
cal circumstances,  and  no  other,  in  the  midst  of  our  prophecy,  is 
a  remarkable  sign,  not  only  that  their  character  is  typical,  but 
also  that  God  would  make  plain  to  His  people  how  far  the  pro- 
phecies already  given  had  been  accomplished.  They  might  thus 
be  encouraged  to  take  what  was  already  verified  as  an  earnest 
of  what  was  to  come  in  full  delivering  power  and  glory. 
Nothing  since  that  day  has  in  the  slightest  degree  resembled 
these  intimations  of  the  prophets.  The  past  Assyrian,  after 
having  lost  an  immense  part  of  his  army,  returned  to  his  own 
land,  and  there  was  killed  by  his  sons.  The  future  Assyrian, 
after  a  partial  success,  is  to  come  up  a  second  time,  and  there 
and  then  be  overwhelmed.  The  difference  is  made  particularly 
manifest  by  the  introduction  of  the  past  history  here,  typical  of 
yet  greater  things,  as  we  know  from  direct  prophecy  in  chapters 
xxviii.,  xxix.,  not  to  speak  of  other  scriptures. 

But  now  in  chapter  xxxviii.  we  see  another  thing :  Hezekiah 
is  sick,  and  apparently  unto  death.  The  king  in  this  shadows 
forth  the  spiritual  work  God  will  by  and  by  accomplish  in  His 
people.  For  Israel  is  destined  in  that  day  not  only  to  furnish 
a  grand  external  display  of  His  power,  but  to  experience  a  deep 


CHAPTERS    XXXVIII.,   XXXIX.  185 

internal  change — the  great  practical  lesson  of  death  and  resur- 
rection. This  we  learn  not  in  our  souls  alone,  but  still  more 
profoundly  according  to  the  full  scope  of  grace  and  truth  in  our 
Lord  Jesus  Himself. 

We  find  then  Hezekiah  given  up  to  die;  but  he  humbles 
himself  before  Jehovah,  who  sends  word  by  the  prophet  that  he 
was  to  live.  And  here  we  have  exercise  of  spirit ;  at  first, 
exceeding  sorrow,  not  unmingled  with  fear,  with  regrets  at 
leaving  the  land  of  the  living,  and  a  certain  shrinking  from 
God.  Is  it  possible  that  any  professing  to  know  and  teach 
the  truth,  do  not  perceive  that  this  is  not  life  and  incorruption 
brought  to  light  by  the  gospel — not  what  we  should  look  for  in 
a  Christian  now,  though  Hezekiah  was  as  truly  a  saint  of 
God  as  any  Christian  ?  The  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
a  godly  Jew  was  necessarily  modified,  deepened,  heightened  for 
the  Christian  because  of  accomplished  redemption.  When 
believers,  Jews  or  Gentiles  after  the  flesh,  are  brought  to  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  now,  they  are  entitled  to  the  same  high 
privileges.  If  they  see  or  enjoy  them  not,  it  is  because  the 
flesh  is  not  judged ;  they  are  merely  following  in  this  respect 
their  own  thoughts  instead  of  entering  into  the  new  revelations 
of  God  founded  on  a  dead,  risen,  and  ascended  Christ,  made 
known  by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven.  The 
natural  thought  and  hope  even  of  a  converted  Jew  then  was  to 
live  long  upon  the  earth.  He  could  not  say  "  to  depart  and  be 
with  Christ  is  far  better."  It  was  in  the  land  of  the  living  he 
desired  to  praise  God ;  as  he  said,  "  the  living,  the  living  shall 
praise  thee."  They  looked  not  within  the  veil;  they  saw  not 
the  Forerunner  for  them  entered  in.  No  such  precious  sights 
were  revealed  to  their  faith,  though  they  did  most  truly  expect, 
by  God's  teaching,  a  coming  Messiah  to  deliver  and  bless  them. 
But  they  could  not  yet  know  death  vanquished,  nor  raise  the 
song  of  resurrection,  nor  look  on  a  known  Saviour  there  through 
the  opened  heavens.  Hezekiah  goes  through  the  sign  of  death  ; 
he  was  sentenced  however  to  it,  and  shrank  from  it :  earnestly 
pleading,  he  hears  the  sentence  reprieved.  This  is  the  token  of 
the  spiritual  work  God  will  effect  in  Israel — not  only  deliver- 


186  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

ance  from  foes  without,  but  deliverance  from  the  power  of 
death  working  in  them.  But  the  millennial  kingdom  will  not 
furnish  to  Israel,  or  any  other  on  earth,  the  faith  or  experience 
of  the  Christian,  properly  speaking;  nor  will  they  be  raised 
from  the  dead  or  changed  to  go  through  that  reign,  but  after  it 
for  eternity.  The  valley  of  dry  bones  is  merely  the  symbol  of 
their  resurrection  from  death,  when  they  are  as  a  nation  caused 
once  more  to  live,  though  I  doubt  not  there  will  be  a  real 
spiritual  work  within  ;  but  still  it  will  be  a  very  different  thing 
from  our  portion  either  now  or  when  we  are  caught  up  to 
meet  the  Lord. 

"The  writing  of  Hezekiah,  king  of  Judah,  when  he  had 

been  sick I  said,  I  shall  go  to  the  gates  of  the 

grave."  (Chap,  xxxviii.  9,  10.)  That  was  to  him  the  most 
terrible  of  all  things.  What  can  more  pointedly  differ  from 
this  than  the  triumphant  language  of  2  Corinthians  v.,  for 
instance  ?  There  the  apostle  says,  "  In  this  we  groan,  earnestly 
desiring  to  be  clothed  upon."  "We  are  always  confident, 
willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the  body  [the  very  thing  good 
Hezekiah  was  not]  and  to  be  present  with  the  Lord." 
Living  here,  "we  are  absent  from  the  Lord."  You,  no 
doubt,  find  the  king  turning  his  face  to  the  wall;  but  who 
could  imagine  such  a  thing  of  dying  Stephen  ?  If  a  Christian 
were  simply  looking  at  Christ,  it  could  not  be  so.  It  is  not  for 
any  of  us  to  say  what  chastening  might  fall  on  self-confidence, 
or  negligence  of  walk,  or  anything  else  unjudged :  God  might 
smite  the  pride  of  heart  which  looked  down  upon  a  person  thus 
tried.  In  Old  Testament  times  there  could  not  be  the  rest  and 
peace  and  joy  of  heart  created  by  the  revelation  of  Christ's 
work  and  glorified  person. 

In  Hezekiah's  case  God  took  him,  as  thus  manifesting  the 
feelings  of  a  godly  Jew,  to  be  the  sign  of  the  quickening  of  the 
Jews,  who  will  by  and  by  go  through  a  spiritual  process  which 
is  likened  to  death  and  resurrection.  In  the  future  however,  I 
gather  from  other  scriptures  that  their  outward  and  inward 
deliverances  will  be  in  the  inverse  order  of  that  which  appears 
in  the  history  given  here.     The  quickening  of  at  least  the  rem- 


• 


CHAPTERS    XXXVIII.,   XXXIX.  187 

nant  will  precede  their  external  triumph.  Ere  the  antitypical 
Babylon  has  been  smitten,  the  Jew  will  go  through  no  small 
spiritual  sifting  with  God,  and  then  the  mighty  outward  deliver- 
ance will  follow  when  the  last  Assyrian  is  broken  and  disappears. 
Thus  distinctly  is  the  future  marked  off  from  that  which  has 
been  already  accomplished.  God  will  work  in  them  first,  and 
then  display  His  power  in  their  behalf.  He  gives  us  now  in 
Christ  that  in  which  we  shall  be  displayed  at  His  appearing. 
Thus  we  know  death  and  resurrection,  because  we  are  taught 
everything  in  Christ.  Therefore  being  dead  with  Christ,  "  why 
as  though  living  in  the  world,  are  ye  subject  to  ordinances?" 
They  will  be  like  men  living  in  the  world;  and  so  they  will 
have  their  splendid  temple,  and  their  venerable  priesthood,  and 
their  imposing  ordinances,  "  touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not." 
The  seventh  or  sabbath-day  will  be  resumed.  In  the  millennium 
it  will  not  be  the  Lord's  day  but  the  sabbath-day.  God  will 
renew  His  sabbaths  instead  of  continuing  the  first  day  of  the 
week,  the  Christian's  memorial  of  redemption.  The  sabbath-day 
occurs  once  more  beyond  doubt  in  the  prophecy  of  Ezekiel. 

Thus  God  will  have  prepared  His  people  Israel  for  their 
future  glory,  not  by  what  we  know  now  in  the  gospel,  but  by 
what  we  have  seen  represented  by  Hezekiah's  sickness.  He 
prays  that  he  may  not  be  brought  to  the  gates  of  hell.  "  I  said 
I  shall  not  see  Jehovah."  (Ver.  11.)  To  see  the  Lord  in  the 
heavenly  country  is  far  better  than  to  see  Him  in  the  land  of 
Israel.  Our  joy  is  that  we  are  to  be  with  Him  in  heavenly 
blessing,  as  we  know  ourselves  in  Him  in  heavenly  places  even 
now.  Such  thoughts  never  enter  the  king's  mind  according  to 
these  words.  He  desired  as  a  Jew  that  his  life  might  be  pro- 
longed to  see  Jehovah's  glory  here.  So  Israel  will  see  the 
Messiah  in  the  land  of  the  living,  and  be  themselves  brought 
under  the  shadow  of  His  wing,  spite  of  all  their  mighty  foes. 
The  pure  in  heart  shall  see  God.  We  shall  be  with  the  Saviour 
and  see  Him  as  He  is  (not  as  He  was,  but  as  He  is),  and  be 
with  Himself  above  in  the  Father's  house,  in  the  presence  of 
God.  But  here,  on  the  contrary,  the  king  mourns  over  his 
failing  strength.     "  Mine  age  is  departed."     "  He  will  cut  me  off 


188  LECTURES   ON    ISAIAH. 

with  pining  sickness" — "as  a  lion,  so  will  He  break  all  my 
bones."  He  repines  at  God's  will,  not  having  a  dead  and  risen 
Christ  to  interpret  all  by.  He  views  death  in  itself,  or  its 
bearing  on  himself,  here.  How  deeply  even  saints  needed  a 
revealed  Saviour  and  a  known  redemption  !  "  Like  a  crane  or  a 
swallow,  so  did  I  chatter."  Then  in  verse  15,  "What  shall  I 
say  ?  He  hath  both  spoken  to  me,  and  himself  hath  done  it," 
Now  light  begins  to  dawn  somewhat  more.  He  has  asked 
Jehovah  to  undertake  for  him :  "  He  that  hath  spoken  to  me," 
&c.  He  began  to  appreciate  better  the  blessed  truth  that  it  is 
not  what  we  say  to  Jehovah  which  is  the  great  matter,  but  what 
Jehovah  says  to  us,  and,  more  than  that,  what  Jehovah  does  for 
us.  "I  shall  go  softly  all  my  years."  (Ver.  15,  16.)  All  this 
trial  was  just  the  needed  discipline,  and  good  for  him.  "  So 
wilt  thou  recover  me."  He  anticipates  his  sure  deliverance. 
"  For  thou  hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  thy  back."  Israel  will 
know  this  in  that  day,  and  surely  be  brought  out  of  their 
distresses.     (Ver.  18,  19.) 

However  blessed  it  all  may  be,  as  showing  us  the  working  of 
God  in  the  heart  of  a  real  saint  of  old  and  the  type  of  the  future 
ways  of  God  to  be  made  good  in  the  hearts  of  the  Jewish 
remnant,  need  I  repeat  that  God  does  not  give  this  as  the  full 
standard  we  ought  to  apply  now  ?  It  is  a  serious  thing  this 
misappropriation  of  scripture,  through  attempting  to  lump 
together  all  its  testimonies,  old  and  new,  as  if  all  must  be  about 
one  and  the  same  thing.  Thus  what  is  of  earth  for  the  Jew  is 
jumbled  up  with  what  is  of  heaven  for  the  Christian :  the  result 
is  a  mere  waste  of  uncertainty.  Of  course  the  Spirit  of  God 
never  allows  the  real  children  of  God  to  suffer  all  the  conse- 
quences of  their  folly.  There  is  a  merciful  preservative  from 
going  through  with  their  mistakes.  But  still  the  loss  is  great 
indeed.  How  much  we  have  to  desire,  that  we  may  be  enabled 
to  feel,  serve,  walk,  and  worship  as  Christians  entering  into  all 
the  will  of  Jehovah  concerning  us,  not  as  fools  but  as  wise ! 
All  depends  on  a  better  knowledge  of  Christ,  for  this  is  the 
only  sure  and  holy  way.  God's  will  as  regards  His  people  on 
the  earth  depends  on  His  counsels  and  ways  at  any  given  time 


CHAPTERS   XX  XVIII. ,    XXXIX. 


189 


in  His  Son.  Where  is  Christ  now?  He  is  at  the  right  hand 
of  God,  cast  out  of  the  earth,  as  He  said,  "  I  go  to  my  Father." 
That  is,  He  has  total  rejection  here  but  all  glory  there,  as  may 
be  seen  in  John  xiii. — xvii.  He  is  thus  separated  to  heaven,  as 
He  says,  "For  their  sakes  I  sanctify  myself,  that  they  also 
might  be  sanctified  through  the  truth."  Not  of  course  that 
there  ever  was  anything  impure  in  or  of  Him :  such  a  thought 
of  Christ  would  be  blasphemy.  It  was  taking  a  separate  place 
from  the  earth,  setting  Himself  apart  from  all  here  below  as 
the  heavenly  Model-man,  so  to  speak.  This  is  the  key  to 
Christianity.  It  is  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  working  in  the 
hearts  of  God's  children  upon  earth  and  forming  them  after  the 
fashion  of  Christ  in  heaven,  on  the  basis  of  His  death  and 
resurrection  which  has  justified  them  by  faith.  Thus  it  neces- 
sarily supposes  Christ's  cross,  resurrection,  and  ascension,  and 
that  we  know  ourselves  in  Him  there.  (John  xiv.  20.)  We 
become  heavenly  because  we  know  Him  there.  "As  is  the 
heavenly,  such  are  they  also  who  are  heavenly."  When  Christ 
comes  in  glory  by  and  by,  and  takes  the  earth  under  His 
government,  and  in  the  truest  sense  fills  the  throne  of  Jehovah 
over  it,  the  saints  here  below  (not  those  risen  and  glorified)  will 
be  earthly.  They  will  be  born  anew;  but  it  will  be  for  the 
earthly  things  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  So  the  Lord  says,  "  If  I 
have  told  you  earthly  things,"  &c.  (John  iii.)  There  is  the 
earthly  department  of  His  kingdom  no  less  than  the  heavenly. 
To  confound  them,  or  the  scriptures  that  relate  to  them,  is 
to  ruin  the  distinctness  of  revealed  truth,  and  to  sink  into  half- 
Jews,  half-Christians.  The  new  age,  or  dispensation,  will  accord- 
ingly, as  far  as  earth  is  concerned,  be  the  forming  man  here 
below,  according  to  the  character  in  which  Christ  will  be  dis- 
played and  will  deal.  It  will  be  no  longer  the  Spirit  making  us 
heavenly,  because  of  uniting  us  to  the  Head  on  high.  Christ 
will  then  govern  the  earth  and  its  inhabitants  as  King,  instead 
of  gathering  out  from  the  world  into  one  as  His  body.  This 
may  serve  to  show  what  a  wonderful  place  is  ours :  in  the  midst 
of  all  the  ruin  of  the  outward  framework  of  Christendom  there 
is  one  body  and  one  Spirit. 


190  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

Chapter  xxxix.,  I  apprehend,  owes  its  place  here  chiefly  as  a 
basis  for  the  very  weighty  place  which  Babylon  (whither  Judah 
was  going  into  captivity)  holds  in  the  controversy  which  Jehovah 
has  with  His  people.  Hezekiah  had  not  walked  softly  when  the 
ambassadors  of  Merodach-Baladan  came  to  congratulate  him, 
but  sunk  to  their  level.  Wherefore  Jehovah  sent  the  threat  of 
sure  judgment.  All  David's  son  had  vainly  spread  before  the 
eyes  of  the  strangers  should  be  swept  into  the  city  of  confusion, 
the  chastiser  of  Jerusalem's  idolatry :  only  it  should  not  fall  in 
the  days  of  the  pious  king. 


CHAPTER  XL. 

A  SENSIBLY  different  portion  of  the  prophecy  now  opens  on  us. 
No  longer  is  the  overthrow  of  kings  and  peoples  in  the  fore- 
ground ;  nor  are  we  occupied  as  before  with  the  various  Gentile 
enemies  that  long  beset  and  troubled  Israel.  Hence,  most 
appropriately  introducing  it,  stands  a  touching  controversy 
between  God  and  His  own  people.  We  are  evidently  not 
looking  here  on  God's  dealings  without;  we  enter  within. 
Thus  judgment  begins  as  ever  at  the  house  of  God :  and  more 
closely  and  thoroughly  than  the  same  process  in  the  preface 
of  our  prophecy.  (Chap,  i.)  More  was  wanted  than  ways  and 
judgments  in  providence.  There  are  moral  wants  and  spiritual 
wrongs  which  must  be  taken  up  if  the  people  are  to  be  blessed 
according  to  God ;  and  what  makes  the  distinction  so  much  the 
more  striking  is  the  fact  that  we  shall  find  Babylon  again  in  a 
totally  different  aspect  from  that  which  had  been  seen  as  yet, 
not  so  much  in  her  aspect  of  worldly  magnificence  and  power, 
but  in  her  sad  notoriety  as  the  source  and  bulwark  of  idolatry 
on  earth.  Evidently  this  accords  with  God's  pleading  with  His 
people,  and  His  distinct  unfolding  of  the  chastening  that  He 
caused  to  light  upon  them  because  of  their  idolatry,  and  even 
worse  spiritual  sins,  as  we  shall  see.  Thus  not  political  but 
spiritual  wickedness  is  here  before  us;  into  which  they  had 
been  drawn  by  the  enemy  to  set  them  into  opposition  to  God 
Himself.  And  this  gives  rise  to  an  altogether  different 
character  of  revelation  and  even  style  of  address,  "  Comfort  ye, 
comfort  ye  my  people,"  graciously  lets  us  see  the  end  of  all.  In 
the  beginning  of  the  book  the  Spirit  of  God  appealed  to  Israel 
as  the  people  then  were,  showing  us  God's  judgment  of  their 
wickedness  and  the  bringing  in  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  Here 
too  the  same  Israel  are  guilty,  and  the  glory  of  Jehovah  is 
to  be  established  surely;  but  before  we  behold  the  distressing 
picture  of  what  they  really  were  in  His  eyes,  He  begins  with 


192  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

sure  words  of  comfort,  so  that  the  heart  of  every  saint  would  be 
strengthened  at  the  very  outset  with  the  assurance  that  they 
were  the  object  of  divine  mercy,  and  thus  would  the  better 
bear  to  hear  what  the  Lord  must  tell  them  of  their  grievous 
faults. 

The  chapter  before  formed  a  kind  of  link  with  what  follows ; 
for  there  we  had  the  prediction  of  their  captivity  to  Babylon  ; 
which,  as  has  been  often  remarked,  holds  a  peculiar  place. 
Babylon  being  the  beginning  of  the  great  image  of  Daniel, 
becomes  also  the  type  of  the  last.  The  head  of  gold  received 
supremacy  from  God  in  a  more  direct  form  than  any  of  the 
other  powers,  which  were  only  successors  in  the  line.  The 
grant  of  imperial  power  was  immediate  from  the  God  of  heaven 
to  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  thus  typified  in  a  certain  sense  the 
image  from  first  to  last.  More  particularly  the  fall  of  Babylon 
prefigured  the  overthrow  of  the  world-power  in  the  earth,  and 
represented  the  final  judgment  of  that  system  of  universal 
supremacy  then  begun,  and,  if  not  still  going  on,  only  sus- 
pended; for  the  image-power  has  not  yet  been  struck  by  the 
stone,  and  is  awaiting  its  reorganization  before  it  is  dissolved 
for  ever.  Its  components  are  at  present  in  a  broken  state,  but 
by  and  by  they  will  again' coalesce  with  an  appearance  of  amaz- 
ing and  renewed  strength,  which  its  last  head  will  use  directly 
to  oppose  the  Lord  of  lords  and  King  of  kings.  This  Kevelation 
xvii.  clearly  shows  us;  for  the  judgment  of  Babylon  and  the 
beast  as  there  set  forth  is  not  yet  accomplished. 

Babylon  has  thus  a  special  place  as  being  the  power  of  all 
others  that  was  allowed  to  enslave  Jerusalem,  and  the  house  of 
David,  from  whom  the  Deliverer  of  Israel  was  to  spring.  Now 
we  know  that  the  Son  of  David  is  actually  come,  that  He  was 
presented  to  Israel  and  rejected  by  them,  that  He  suffered 
death  on  the  cross,  and  is  gone  up  to  heaven,  where  He  has 
taken  His  place,  not  as  Son  of  David,  but  as  the  rejected  Son  of 
man  who  is  the  Son  of  God.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  there,  the 
great  high  Priest  of  God  as  well  as  Head  of  the  church,  seated 
at  the  right  hand  of  God,  where  and  whence  He  acts  in  power 
and  love,  sending  down  whatever  is  needful  for  the  good  of  the 


CHAPTER   XL.  193 

saints  and  for  the  testimony  of  God  here  below.  That  is  what 
Christ  is  now  doing,  not  at  all  as  yet  fulfilling  the  prophecies  of 
the  Son  of  David  as  such.  Hence  any  one  who  takes  up  the 
Old  Testament  to  find  the  full  and  clear  announcement  of  what 
occupies  Christ  now  must  either  give  up  these  prophecies  as 
dark  and  unintelligible,  or  he  must  put  a  false  gloss  and  violent 
strain  on  them  to  eke  out  such  an  application  as  their  full  scope. 
In  truth  they  refer  to  the  future,  not  to  the  present;  and  to 
Israel,  God's  earthly  people ;  not  to  the  heavenly  church,  save 
in  certain  general  principles  or  special  allusions  to  the  Gentile 
parenthesis,  which  the  provident  wisdom  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
took  care  to  furnish  in  order  to  confound  God's  adversaries. 
Then  there  are  displays  of  God  in  moral  ways  from  which, 
though  about  Israel  rather  than  ourselves,  we  can  and  ought  to 
extract  for  our  own  souls  that  which  is  most  helpful  and  cheer- 
ing. For  God  is  good  and  full  of  tender  mercy  to  Israel ;  and 
He  is  surely  not  less  full  of  grace  to  us.  If  He  is  love  to  the 
people  He  will  govern,  can  He  love  less  the  children  He  now 
adopts  to  Himself  by  Jesus  Christ  ?  There  are  no  doubt  great 
differences  between  the  saints  He  calls  now,  and  those  who  are 
to  be  blessed  in  the  age  to  come.  Now  it  is  His  church, 
Christ's  body,  the  children  He  is  bringing  into  the  place  of 
heirs  of  God  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ.  Israel  will  inherit 
the  promises  made  to  the  fathers ;  but  we,  if  Christ's  now,  are 
heirs  with  the  firstborn,  not  merely  of  "  the  fathers,"  but  of  God 
the  Father. 

When  we  take  up  the  prophecies  thus,  not  biassed  with  the 
foregone  conclusion  of  finding  ourselves  in  them,  but  simple 
and  free  to  understand  them  as  they  are  written,  and  the 
proper  objects  God  was  speaking  of,  nothing  can  be  clearer  or 
more  certain.  Here  for  instance  He  calls  to  comfort  His 
people.  The  ground  He  puts  it  on  is,  that  the  warfare  of  Israel 
is  over.  The  Lord  now  interposes.  Bad  as  Jerusalem's  sins 
were,  she  had  to  His  reckoning  of  love  suffered  double  what 
her  sins  deserved.  He  is  not  looking  at  the  sins  of  Jerusalem 
apart  from  Christ,  but  as  it  were  through  Him.  If  there  were 
no  suffering  Messiah  connected  with  Jerusalem,  nothing  would 

N 


194  LECTURES   ON    ISAIAH. 

remain  but  her  sins  and  their  judgment.  But  God  always  looks 
at  Christ  for  them  and  can  thus  say,  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye." 
Next  we  have  the  manner  in  which  the  comfort  will  be 
brought  home  to  them.  Here  we  have  a  grave  and  interesting 
insight  into  God's  ways.  "  The  voice  of  him  that  crieth  in  the 
wilderness."  The  allusion  is  evident  to  John  the  Baptist,  who 
was  "  sent  from  God  "  to  bear  witness  of  the  true  light  and  pre- 
pare a  way  for  the  Messiah.  In  the  midst  of  his  testimony  he 
was  slain.  Messiah  too  came,  and  in  the  midst  of  His  testi- 
mony He  was  slain.  Master  and  servant,  they  were  both  cut 
off  by  wicked  hands.  Thus  God's  work  was,  as  far  as  man 
could  see,  nipt  in  the  bud ;  and  hence  the  world  is  yet  in  mis- 
rule, confusion,  in  sin  and  misery.  When  God  really  fulfils  for 
the  earth  what  He  has  at  heart,  there  will  be  the  manifest  power 
of  blessing  to  His  glory.  But  look  up,  not  down,  and  read  in  the 
risen  and  glorified  Christ  the  proof  to  faith  that  the  cross,  the 
very  thing  that  seemed  the  total  ruin  of  all  the  counsels  of  God, 
is  in  truth  their  eternal  basis  and  justification,  by  which  He  is 
and  will  be  for  ever  glorified ;  the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the 
triumph  of  grace,  as  the  resurrection  and  ascension  are  its 
righteous  answer;  but  it  is  a  triumph  known  only  to  faith. 
The  world  sees  not  heaven  opened  nor  Him  who  is  there — saw 
in  the  cross  One  who  suffered  to  death.  In  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  man's  rejection  of  Christ  is  constantly  contrasted  with 
God's  raising  Him  from  the  dead.  Thus  we  see  that  man  and 
God  are  in  complete  opposition.  The  cross  is  not  thus  looked  at 
in  the  light  of  God's  purposes,  but  of  man's  wickedness.  In  the 
epistles  the  truth  chiefly  insisted  on  is  the  cross,  not  so  much  as 
the  crowning  point  of  all  man  has  done  against  God,  but  as  the 
deepest  exercise  of  the  grace  that  God  feels  towards  guilty  man. 
Not  that  grace  was  created  by  the  cross ;  it  was  in  God  before 
the  coming  of  Christ,  and  because  of  it  He  sent  His  Son.  The 
propitiation  is  the  fruit  of  God's  grace,  not  its  cause.  Propitia- 
tion vindicates  it,  judges  and  puts  aside  all  the  sin  on  man's 
part  that  otherwise  would  have  proved  an  insurmountable 
barrier.  But  the  love  was  on  God's  part  from  everlasting. 
We  must  bear  this  in  mind  in  looking  at  propitiation,  which 


CHAPTER   XL.  195 

indeed  is  the  strongest  possible  proof  of  His  love,  while  it 
equally  proves  His  holiness  and  necessary  judgment  of  our  sins. 
John's  testimony  was  a  call  to  repentance  in  view  of  Messiah's 
advent;  his  baptism  therefore  was  a  confession  both  of  sins  and 
of  Him  who  should  come  after  himself.  It  was  the  "  voice  of 
him  that  crieth  in  the  wilderness/'  not  the  person  nor  the  work 
of  Israel's  hope.  But  Israel  as  a  whole  was  blind  and  deaf; 
the  testimony  was  interrupted,  the  Messiah  refused.  There  was 
therefore  a  twofold  accomplishment,  the  people's  unbelief  thus 
intercepting  and  breaking  off  the  thread  of  God's  ways,  while 
His  counsels  abide  irrefragable  and  accomplished,  through  their 
unbelief,  in  the  cross  as  they  never  else  could  have  been.  The 
way  of  Jehovah  was  not  yet  prepared,  nor  was  there  a  straight 
highway  in  the  desert  for  God.  Man  was  put  on  his  responsibility 
and  heard  the  cry  only  to  sin ;  by  and  by  God  will  make  all  good 
in  grace  by  His  own'  power.  But  every  valley  shall  be  exalted  ; 
every  mountain  and  hill  shall  be  made  low,  and  the  crooked 
shall  be  made  straight,  and  the  rough  places  plain;  and  the 
glory  of  Jehovah  shall  be  revealed  and  all  flesh  (not  Israel  only) 
shall  see  it  together ;  for  the  mouth  of  Jehovah  hath  spoken  it. 
(Yer.  3—5.) 

Thus  plainly  you  have,  as  far  as  its  scope  goes,  the  sure  pur- 
pose of  God.  Every  difficulty,  depths,  heights,  rough  or  smooth, 
all  must  disappear :  for  God  yet  means  to  make  this  earth  the 
scene  of  His  glory.  A  most  blessed  prospect  it  is,  that  the  sin, 
misery,  and  weakness  of  man,  the  groaning  of  all  creation  around, 
the  wiles  and  power  and  presence  of  Satan  must  vanish  and 
give  place  not  to  the  revealed  grace  of  God  in  Christ,  which  has 
shone  we  know  in  the  despised  Nazarene,  but  to  the  revealed 
glory  of  Jehovah,  when  all  flesh  shall  see  it  together.  It  cannot 
refer  to  the  day  of  the  judgment  of  the  dead  because  it  will  not 
be  "all  flesh"  nor  any  flesh  whatever,  but  the  dead  raised 
before  the  great  white  throne.  But  here  it  is  a  question  of  man 
living  in  his  natural  body  on  the  earth.  The  Jew  was  apt  to 
overlook  the  judgment  of  the  dead  at  the  end  of  all  dispen- 
sations ;  the  Gentile  is  just  as  negligent  as  to  the  judgment  of 
the  quick,  though  it  be  confessed  in  the  commonest  symbols  of 


196  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

Christendom.  As  infidelity  increases,  the  rejection  of  this  truth 
is  perhaps  more  complete  now  than  ever  since  the  gospel  was 
preached  to  the  Gentiles. 

In  the  dark  ages  people  at  least  believed  enough  to  be 
panic-struck  from  time  to  time ;  but  now  Christians  are 
accounted  fanatics  if  they  testify  of  these  coming  judgments. 
But  none  the  less  will  God  cut  short  the  course  of  this  world, 
and  the  glory  of  Jehovah  be  revealed,  so  that  all  flesh  shall  see 
it  together.  This  John  the  Baptist  had  to  announce :  only  the 
first  word  committed  to  him,  and  already  accomplished  in  its 
measure/  was  the  preparing  the  way  of  Jehovah.  Hence  I 
think  that  the  third  verse  does  not  solely  refer  to  the  mighty 
changes  of  the  new  age,  but  includes  also  such  a  moral  prepa- 
ration as  befitted  the  coming  of  the  Lord  in  humiliation.  Thus, 
for  the  time,  it  went  no  farther  than  God's  working  in  the 
hearts  of  a  remnant,  whose  souls  were  made  to  be  in  a  measure 
prepared  for  the  Messiah.  We  know  that  such  was  the  fact. 
See  John's  disciples  leaving  him  to  follow  Jesus,  and  John 
delighting  in  it.  "He  must  increase,  but  I  must  decrease." 
Hence  says  our  Lord  in  Matthew  xi.,  "  If  ye  will  receive  it,  this 
was  Elias  that  was  for  to  come,"  clearly  showing  that  to  faith, 
John  the  Baptist  was  Elias  (compare  Mark  ix.  11 — 13) ;  but,  as 
a  matter  of  fact,  the  full  predicted  circumstances  are  postponed 
till  the  great  day  that  is  coming  (compare  Malachi  iv.).  Thus 
he  is  to  come,  not  before  the  Lord  takes  up  the  church,  with 
which  he  has  nothing  to  do ;  but  before  the  proper  blessing  of 
Israel,  with  whom  he  has  a  close  connexion.  John  the  Baptist 
went  before  Jehovah- Jesus  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elias ; 
but  Elias  himself  publicly  vindicated  the  true  God  in  opposition 
to  the  apostacy  of  Israel  and  to  the  discomfiture  of  the  priests 
of  Baal.  He  will  return  by  and  by,  and  resume  a  work  of  the 
most  solemn  character  before  the  great  and  terrible  day  of  the 
Lord.  John  Baptist  anticipated  this  in  the  way  of  preparing  a 
remnant  for  receiving  Him  who  should  and  did  come. 

Next,  the  "  Voice  said,  Cry.  And  he  said,  What  shall  I 
cry?"  Here  follows  the  substance  of  John  the  Baptist's  testi- 
mony, though  it  may  be  still  more  manifest  in  the  end  of  this 


CHAPTER   XL.  197 

age.  "  All  flesh  is  grass."  It  is  man  morally  and  universally. 
"And  all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field." 
Could  a  man  use  this  to  think  well  of  himself?  Verse  7  cuts 
down  all  boasting — "The  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth: 
because  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  bloweth  upon  it."  It  is  not  its 
beauty  but  its  frailty  God  refers  to.  The  moment  you  have 
God  testing  its  character,  if  it  were  only  by  the  breath  of  His 
nostrils,  all  flesh  comes  to  nothing ;  and  this,  too,  in  Israel,  not 
in  Gentiles  only :  "  surely  the  people  is  grass."  Nor  is  this  all ; 
He  utters  its  sentence  again  and  again.  The  reason  for  the  first 
repetition  seems  to  be  the  emphatic  judgment  of  " the  people" 
that  is,  the  Jews.  The  second  case  is  particularly  connected 
with  the  resource  for  faith.  "  The  grass  withereth,  the  flower 
fadeth,  but  the  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever."  These 
two  truths  are  of  no  less  importance  at  the  present  moment,  as 
we  know  how  Peter  used  them  for  the  Christian  Jews  from  the 
first.  They  will  be  urgently  needed  when  God  begins  to  work 
in  the  Jews  once  more,  when  they  painfully  learn,  feel,  and 
prove  the  utter  worthlessness  of  man  as  he  is  in  divine  things. 
Even  now  the  men  of  the  world  are  making  no  small  strides ; 
but  they  will  do  greater  things ;  and  the  devil  will  mature  and 
display  his  plans  as  they  have  never  been  witnessed  in  the 
world  before ;  and  what  will  be  their  security  ?  "  The  word  of 
our  God  shall  stand  for  ever." 

But  as  the  church  really  came  to  view,  as  the  heavenly 
mystery  of  Christ,  or  rather  part  of  it,  when  all  hopes  of  the 
earth  and  man  for  the  present  (and  always  as  far  as  they  are 
concerned)  were  buried  in  Christ's  grave,  so  I  believe,  as  the 
end  draws  nearer,  we  do  greatly  need  with  simplicity  to  rest 
upon  God's  word.  We  may,  as  only  knowing  in  part,  under- 
stand but  little,  but  it  is  a  poor  feeling  and  unworthy  to  be 
called  faith  only  to  believe  His  word  when  understood.  Not 
that  it  is  not  sweet  and  cheering  when  we  consciously  enter 
into  any  of  its  depths ;  but  intelligence  of  the  word  is  the  gift 
of  grace  and  product  of  faith,  not  the  ground  why  I  believe. 
God  sends  me  His  testimony  and  my  soul  bows  to  it,  setting  to 
my  seal  that  God  is  true.     Am  I  a  sinner  without  peace  or  even 


198  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

hope,  or  any  real  anxiety  before  God  ?  That  word  comes  and 
pronounces  to  my  conscience  that  all  flesh  is  grass.  My  soul  is 
laid  bare.  If  I  do  not  believe  God,  all  my  life  and  death  will 
be  just  the  proof  of  my  folly  and  sin.  But  if  I  submit  to  the 
humbling  yet  gracious  testimony  of  God,  while  proving  its 
truth  in  what  I  am,  I  enter  into  the  comfort  and  strength  of 
His  own  word,  and  I  too  am  made  to  stand  through  that  same 
word.  "The  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever."  Our 
experience  follows,  and  confirms  of  course  the  truth  of  the 
word  in  breaking  me  down.  Thus  God's  word  is  the  only  standing 
ground.  Yet  outwardly  the  word  of  God  is  just  like  the  cross 
of  Christ.  There  may  well  be  difficulties  to  such  as*  we  are, 
and  it  seems  a  weak  thing  to  confide  in  for  eternity;  but,  in 
truth,  it  is  more  stable  than  heaven  and  earth.  So  in  2  Timo- 
thy the  apostle,  anticipating  the  ruin  of  Christendom,  casts  the 
man  of  God  on  this  unfailing  resource. 

But  we  turn  in  the  next  verse  to  the  special  earthly  object 
of  God's  affection — Zion.  It  is  the  symbol  of  the  grace  of  God 
working  in  Israel,  also  the  centre  of  the  royal  glory  that  is  about 
to  be  revealed  in  Israel.  "  0  Zion  that  bringest  good  tidings," 
&c.  (Ver.  9 — 11.)  There  can  be  no  doubt,  the  person  who  came 
of  old  and  will  come  by  and  by  is  Christ ;  in  a  word,  the  same 
Jesus  is  not  only  Christ  but  Jehovah.  He  is  here  spoken  of  as 
the  God  of  Israel,  Jehovah,  whose  reward  is  with  Him  and  His 
work  before  Him.  First  of  all  is  His  coming  in  power ;  next, 
with  all  tenderness  of  heart,  as  One  taking  compassion  on  them, 
because  of  their  defenceless  and  exposed  condition.  Then  (ver. 
12  et  seq.)  when  we  come  to  inquire  who  this  great  and  loving 
Deliverer  is,  He  is  no  such  mean  conqueror  as  Babbis  dreamed 
of  and  the  carnal  desires  of  Israel  so  long  clung  to ;  He  is  the 
Creator.  Even  then  it  was  God's  warning  of  His  judgment  on  the 
idolatry  of  Israel,  which  is  the  first  great  question  in  this  part  of 
Isaiah's  prophecy.  The  people  would  follow  the  Gentiles  in  their 
following  after  idols.  But  before  the  Spirit  of  God  deals  with 
this  iniquity,  He  first  of  all  identifies  the  Messiah  with  God,  and 
how  and  what  He  is  as  the  eternal  and  only  wise  Creator  and 
Governor  of  all  things.     This  accordingly  gives  an  occasion  for 


CHAPTER   XL.  199 

a  glorious  description  of  God.  "  Who  hath  directed  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord,  or  being  his  counsellor  hath  taught  him  ?  With 
whom  took  he  counsel,  and  who  instructed  him,  and  taught  him 
in  the  path  of  judgment,  and  taught  him  knowledge,  and  shewed 
to  him  the  way  of  understanding  ?  Behold,  the  nations  are  as  a 
drop  of  a  bucket,  and  are  counted  as  the  small  dust  of  the 
balance :  behold,  he  taketh  up  the  isles  as  a  very  little  thing. 
And  Lebanon  is  not  sufficient  to  burn,  nor  the  beasts  thereof 
sufficient  for  a  burnt  offering.  All  nations  before  him  are  as 
nothing;  and  they  are  counted  to  him  less  than  nothing,  and 
vanity."  (Ver.  13 — 17.)  Then  He  challenges  the  folly  of  those 
that  set  up  graven  images  as  His  likeness.  "  To  whom  then  will 
ye  liken  God  ?or  what  likeness  will  ye  compare  unto  him  ?  The 
workman  melteth  a  graven  image,  and  the  goldsmith  spreadeth 
it  over  with  gold,  and  casteth  silver  chains.  He  that  is  so 
impoverished  that  he  hath  no  oblation  chooseth  a  tree  that  will 
not  rot ;  he  seeketh  unto  him  a  cunning  workman  to  prepare  a 
graven  image  that  shall  not  be  moved.  Have  ye  not  known  ? 
have  ye  not  heard  ?  hath  it  not  been  told  you  from  the  begin- 
ning ?  have  ye  not  understood  from  the  foundations  of  the 
earth  ?  It  is  he  that  sitteth  upon  the  circle  of  the  earth,  and 
the  inhabitants  thereof  are  as  grasshoppers ;  that  stretcheth  out 
the  heavens  as  a  curtain,  and  spreadeth  them  out  as  a  tent 
to  dwell  in:  that  bringeth  the  princes  to  nothing;  he  maketh 
the  judges  of  the  earth  as  vanity.  Yea,  they  shall  not  be 
planted ;  yea,  they  shall  not  be  sown ;  yea,  their  stock  shall  not 
take  root  in  the  earth :  and  he  shall  also  blow  upon  them, 
and  they  shall  wither,  and  the  whirlwind  shall  take  them  away 
as  stubble.  To  whom  then  will  ye  liken  me,  or  shall  I  be 
equal  ?  saith  the  Holy  One.  Lift  up  your  eyes  on  high,  and 
behold  who  hath  created  these  things,  that  bringeth  out  their 
host  by  number :  he  calleth  them  all  by  names  by  the  greatness 
of  his  might,  for  that  he  is  strong  in  power;  not  one  faileth." 
(Ver.  18 — 26.)  Lastly  He  falls  back  on  what  He  has  been 
to  His  own  from  the  beginning.  "Why  sayest  thou,  0  Jacob, 
and  speakest,  0  Israel,  My  way  is  hid  from  Jehovah,  and  my 
judgment  is  passed  over  from  my  God  ?     Hast  thou  not  known? 


200  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

hast  thou  not  heard,  that  the  everlasting  God,  Jehovah,  the 
Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth,  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary  ? 
there  is  no  searching  of  his  understanding.  He  giveth  power  to 
the  faint;  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  he  increaseth 
strength.  Even  the  youths  shall  faint  and  be  weary,  and  the 
young  men  shall  utterly  fall :  but  they  that  wait  upon  Jehovah 
shall  renew  their  strength ;  they  shalt  mount  up  with  wings  as 
eagles ;  they  shall  run,  and  not  be  weary ;  and  they  shall  walk, 
and  not  faint."  (Yer.  27—31.)  He  cannot  deny  Himself,  nor 
fail  to  strengthen  the  weakest  that  wait  on  Him. 


CHAPTER    XLI. 

This  chapter,  if  it  be  not  a  second  part  with  the  preceding  one 
as  the  first,  is  a  most  appropriate  sequel.  For  Jehovah,  having 
opened  His  counsels  as  to  Jerusalem  and  its  comfort  (after 
many  vicissitudes  and  troubles)  at  His  coming  in  power  and 
glory,  turns  now  to  the  Gentiles,  challenging  them  to  meet  Him 
in  judgment.  He  had  there  been  displayed  in  His  shepherd 
care  over  Israel,  in  His  might  and  wisdom  over  all,  needing  no 
counsellor,  and  the  nations  counted  less  than  nothing  and 
vanity,  so  that  comparison  or  image  was  futile,  and  Israel's 
unbelief  was  the  more  deplorable  because  of  His  special  good- 
ness to  all  amongst  them  who  waited  on  Him.  Now  He  says 
(ver.  1),  "  Keep  silence  before  me,  0  islands,  and  let  the 
people[s]  renew  their  strength :  let  them  come  near,  then  let 
them  speak  ;  let  us  come  near  together  to  judgment." 

Cyrus  is  the  text.  It  is  no  question  of  a  past  name  of 
renown,  but  of  a  future  deliverer,  of  whom  God  knew  all ;  man 
and  his  idols  could  say  nothing.  Before  the  prescient  eye  of 
the  prophet  stands  the  mighty  conqueror  of  Babylon.  None 
but  the  true  God,  who  made  him  the  instrument  of  His  designs 
in  providence,  had  anticipated  his  rise.  Jehovah  here  describes 
him,  but  typically  (in  the  manner  of  the  prophetic  Spirit)  as 
the  shadow  of  a  greater  than  Cyrus,  who  should  for  ever  over- 
turn the  idols  of  the  nations,  judge  their  pride,  and  deliver  the 
people  of  Israel  from  all  their  captivities.  "  Who  raised  up  the 
righteous  man  from  the  east,  called  him  to  his  foot,  gave  the 
nations  before  him,  and  made  him  rule  over  kings  ?  He  gave 
them  as  the  dust  to  his  sword,  and  as  driven  stubble  to  his  bow. 
He  pursued  them  and  passed  safely,  even  by  the  way  that  he 
had  not  gone  with  his  feet.  Who  hath  wrought  and  done  it, 
calling  the  generations  from  the  beginning  ?  I  Jehovah,  the 
first,  and  with  the  last ;  I  am  he."     (Ver.  3,  4.) 

It  is  as  vain  to  drag  in  the  gospel  of  Christ  here  as  to  inter- 


202  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

pret  Jacob  and  Israel  in  chapter  xl.  of  Christendom.  Nor  is 
the  plea  at  all  valid  that  the  Jews  will  never  more  meddle  with 
idols.  Matthew  xii.  43,  xxiv.  15,  not  to  speak  of  the  Revela- 
tion, are  clear  evidence  confirmatory  of  Isaiah  lxv.,  lxvi.,  and  of 
other  passages  in  the  Old  Testament,  which  prove  that  the  end 
of  the  age  will  see  a  fatal  revival  of  idolatry,  the  return  of  the 
unclean  spirit  with  the  full  antichristian  power  of  Satan,  which 
will  bring' down  the  Assyrian  scourge  on  the  Jews  and  also  the 
Lord's  coming  in  vengeance.  The  last  state  of  that  generation 
then  which  rejected  Christ  will  be  characterised  both  by  idol- 
worship  and  the  Antichrist :  so  that,  on  this  score,  there  is  no 
pretence  for  turning  aside  the  expostulation  to  the  Gentiles 
that  are  now  baptized,  or  for  interpreting  Jacob  and  Israel  of 
Christendom  as  some  have  done  who  ought  to  have  known 
better.  Again,  it  is  absurd  to  say  that  the  gospel  could  be 
foreshown  by  the  first  one  raised  up  from  the  east ;  for,  among 
the  Jews,  the  east  was  always  reckoned  from  Palestine,  never 
Palestine  itself.  The  Rabbinical  idea  (strange  to  say,  espoused 
by  Calvin)  was  not  so  unreasonable :  the  allusion,  they  thought, 
was  to  Abraham,  who  was  a  righteous  man  called  out  of  Meso- 
potamia. But  all  else  fails.  For  who  could  think  that  his 
exceptional  sally  against  the  kings  of  the  east  who  were  return- 
ing after  their  successful  raid  into  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  or 
the  incidents  of  Pharaoh  and  Abimelech,  duly  answer  to  the 
giving  up  of  nations  and  subduing  kings,  making  his  sword  as  a 
column  of  dust  and  as  the  driven  stubble  his  bow  in  resistless 
progress  ?  Still  less  does  it  suit  the  testimony  of  Christ  in  the 
gospel.  The  comparison  of  chapter  xlv.  1,  13  may  convince  any 
thoughtful  mind  that  Cyrus  is  really  in  view,  but  of  course  ulti- 
mately as  foreshadowing  the  triumph  when  Christ  comes  in  His 
kingdom,  putting  all  enemies  under  His  feet,  instead  of  gather- 
ing souls  out  of  the  world  in  one  body  for  heaven  as  He  is  now 
doing  by  the  Holy  Ghost's  power  through  the  gospel.  (Comp. 
also  Ezra  i.  1—3.)  If  the  Babylonish  captivity  of  Judah  was 
the  divine  chastening  of  their  idolatry  by  means  of  the  chief 
patron  of  idols  on  earth,  the  fall  of  Babylon  was  a  tremendous 
blow  on  its  own  idolatry,  predicted  as  it  was  by  the  Jewish 


CHAPTER   XLI.  203 

prophet  long  before  either  event.  These  were  among  the 
reasons  which  made  the  first  success  and  the  final  ruin  of  Baby- 
lon so  important  in  scripture.  They  were  bound  up  with  God's 
ways  in  His  people.  And  hence  the  answer  to  the  infidel  sneer 
touching  the  silence  of  prophecy  respecting  America.  What 
has  the  discovery  or  growth  of  the  new  world  of  the  far  west  to 
do  with  Israel?  From  the  New  Testament  again  all  such 
matters  are  excluded,  because  the  rejected  Messiah  involves  not 
only  the  disappearance  of  Israel  and  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth 
from  the  foreground,  but  the  calling  of  the  church  for  glory  in 
the  heavenly  places  as  the  body  and  bride  of  Christ,  at  least 
until  the  corruption  of  Christendom  becomes  morally  unbear- 
able and  the  age  ends  in  the  judgment  of  apostate  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  under  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet,  when  Christ 
and  His  glorified  saints  appear  from  heaven,  and  the  godly 
remnant  of  Jews  here  below  become  a  strong  nation,  the  earthly 
centre  of  His  kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven. 

Hence  the  suitability  here  of  confronting  in  this  very  con- 
nection "Jehovah,  the  first,  and  with  the  last,"  the  One  who 
had  wrought  and  spoken.  Why  were  the  gods  of  the  nations 
silent  and  powerless  ?  why  were  the  boasted  oracles  dumb  ?  If 
the  fall  of  Judah,  moral  necessity  as  it  was  (unless  Jehovah 
must  sanction  His  own  dishonour  in  the  midst  of  His  people 
and  sustain  them  to  give  His  glory  to  a  graven  image),  made 
His  power  questionable  in  a  Gentile's  eyes,  let  them  learn  in  the 
downfall  of  Babylon,  which  the  Jews  alone  knew  generations 
beforehand,  even  to  the  name  and  race  of  him  who  was  its 
instrument,  that  His  righteousness  and  wisdom  were  no  less 
than  His  power,  and  that  the  chastised  Jews  were  the  people  of 
His  choice.  "  The  isles  saw  it,  and  feared ;  the  ends  of  the 
earth  were  afraid,  drew  near,  and  came.  They  helped  every 
one  his  neighbour ;  and  every  one  said  to  his  brother,  Be  of 
good  courage.  So  the  carpenter  encouraged  the  goldsmith,  and 
he  that  smootheth  with  the  hammer  him  that  smote  the  anvil, 
saying,  It  is  ready  for  the  soldering :  and  he  fastened  it  with 
nails,  that  it  should  not  be  moved.  But  thou,  Israel,  art  my 
servant,  Jacob  whom  I  have  chosen,  the  seed  of  Abraham  my 


204  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

friend.  Thou  whom  I  have  taken  from  the  ends  of  the  earth, 
and  called  thee  from  the  chief  men  thereof,  and  said  unto  thee, 
Thou  art  my  servant;  I  have  chosen  thee,  and  not  cast  thee 
away."     (Ver.  5—9.) 

The  honour  to  which  Cyrus  was  called  by  the  way  was  no 
change  in  His  purposes  or  affections  respecting  Israel.  Not 
Cyrus  but  Israel  was  His  servant.  (See  ver.  8,  9.)  "  Fear  thou 
not ;  for  I  am  with  thee :  be  not  dismayed ;  for  I  am  thy  God  : 
I  will  strengthen  thee :  yea,  I  will  help  thee ;  yea,  I  will  uphold 
thee  with  the  right  hand  of  my  righteousness.  Behold,  all  they 
that  were  .incensed  against  thee  shall  be  ashamed  and  con- 
founded :  they  shall  be  as  nothing,  and  they  that  strive  with  thee 
shall  perish.  Thou  shalt  seek  them,  and  shalt  not  find  them, 
even  them  that  contended  with  thee :  they  that  war  against  thee 
shall  be  as  nothing,  and  as  a  thing  of  nought.  For  I  Jehovah 
thy  God  will  hold  thy  right  hand,  saying  unto  thee,  Fear  not ;  I 
will  help  thee.  Fear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob,  and  ye  men  of  Israel ; 
I  will  help  thee,  saith  Jehovah,  and  thy  redeemer,  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel.  Behold,  I  will  make  thee  a  new  sharp  threshing 
instrument  having  teeth  :  thou  shalt  thresh  the  mountains,  and 
beat  them  small,  and  shalt  make  the  hills  as  chaff.  Thou  shalt 
fan  them,  and  the  wind  shall  carry  them  away,  and  the  whirl- 
wind shall  scatter  them :  and  thou  shalt  rejoice  in  Jehovah,  and 
shalt  glory  in  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."  (Yer.  10—16.)  These 
last  words,  however,  render  it  beyond  just  doubt  that  the 
prophet  carries  his  eye  far  beyond  the  immediate  occasion,  and 
presents  not  the  condition  of  the  Jews  under  their  Persian  or 
other  Gentile  lords,  but  days  still  future  when  Israel  shall  take 
them  captive  whose  captives  they  were,  and  shall  rule  over  their 
oppressors.  It  is  impossible  to  apply  to  the  same  period 
Nehemiah's  language  (chap,  ix.)  and  the  prophetic  description 
here.  "  Behold,  we  are  servants  this  day,  and  for  the  land  that 
thou  gavest  unto  our  fathers  to  eat  the  fruit  thereof  and  the 
good  thereof,  behold,  we  are  servants  in  it ;  and  it  yieldeth  much 
increase  unto  the  kings  whom  thou  hast  set  over  us  because  of 
our  sins :  also  they  have  dominion  over  our  bodies,  and  over  our 
cattle,  at  their  pleasure,  and  we  are  in  great  distress."     (Ver. 


CHAPTER   XLI.  205 

36,  37.)     Here  the  word   is  in  manifest  contrast:  "Behold,  I 


will  make  thee  a  new  sharp  threshing  instrument  having  teeth : 
thou  shalt  thresh  the  mountains  and  beat  them  small,"  &c. : 
figurative  language,  no  doubt,  but  figures  neither  of  servitude, 
nor  of  the  grace  of  the  gospel,  but  of  triumph  when  the 
true  Sun  of  Righteousness  shall  arise  with  healing  in  His 
wings,  and  Israel  shall  flourish  and  tread  down  the  wicked  in 
the  day  that  shall  burn  all  the  proud  and  lawless  as  an  oven. 
The  Maccabean  and  Apostolic  triumphs  of  Vitringa  and  others 
are  a  burlesque  on  a  sound  interpretation.  Not  only  must  we 
leave  room  for  the  future,  but  for  a  total  change  from  the  char- 
acter of  God's  actual  working  in  and  by  the  church.  Now  it  is 
grace  building  living  stones  on  the  foundation  of  the  apostles 
and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  Himself  being  the  chief  corner-stone; 
then  it  will  be  the  awful  descent  of  the  Stone  cut  without  hands 
on  the  statue  of  Gentile  empire  in  its  last  phase,  which  corre- 
sponds with  the  judicial  functions  of  Israel  there  described  in 
that  great  day. 

Not  that  refreshment  will  fail  from  Jehovah  for  Israel. 
"  When  the  poor  and  needy  seek  water,  and  there  is  none,  and 
their  tongue  faileth  for  thirst,  I  Jehovah  will  hear  them,  I  the 
God  of  Israel  will  not  forsake  them.  I  will  open  rivers  in  high 
places,  and  fountains  in  the  midst  of  the  valleys  :  I  will  make 
the  wilderness  a  pool  of  water,  and  the  dry  land  springs  of 
water.  I  will  plant  in  the  wilderness  the  cedar,  the  shittah 
tree,  and  the  myrtle,  and  the  oil  tree ;  I  will  set  in  the  desert 
the  fir  tree,  and  the  pine,  and  the  box  tree  together :  that  they 
may  see,  and  know,  and  consider,  and  understand  together,  that 
the  hand  of  Jehovah  hath  done  this,  and  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel  hath  created  it."     (Ver.  17—20.) 

The  Lord  then  recurs  to  a  renewal  of  His  challenge  to  the 
Gentiles  and  their  idols,  but  in  terms  of  justly  increased  con- 
tempt for  their  trust  in  a  thing  of  nought,  again  grounding  His 
appeal  on  their  ignorance  of  the  scourge  of  idolatry  who  would 
come  from  the  north  and  east.  "  Produce  your  faith,  saith 
Jehovah;  bring  forth  your  strong  reasons,  saith  the  King  of 
Jacob.     Let  them  bring  them  forth  and  show  us  what  shall 


206  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

happen:  let  thein  shew  the  former  things,  what  they  be,  that 
we  may  consider  them,  and  know  the  latter  end  of  them;  or 
declare  us  things  for  to  come.  Shew  the  things  that  are  to 
come  hereafter,  that  we  may  know  that  ye  are  gods:  yea,  do 
good,  or  do  evil,  that  we  may  be  dismayed,  and  behold  it 
together.  Behold,  ye  are  of  nothing,  and  your  work  of  nought : 
an  abomination  is  he  that  chooseth  you.  I  have  raised  up  one 
from  the  north,  and  he  shall  come :  from  the  rising  of  the  sun 
shall  he  call  upon  my  name :  and  he  shall  come  upon  princes  as 
upon  mortar,  and  as  the  potter  treadeth  clay.  Who  hath 
declared  from  the  beginning,  that  we  may  know?  and  before- 
time,  that  we  may  say,  He  is  righteous  ?  yea,  there  is  none  that 
sheweth,  yea,  there  is  none  that  declareth,  yea,  there  is  none 
that  heareth  your  words.  The  first  shall  say  to  Zion,  Behold, 
behold  them :  and  I  will  give  to  Jerusalem  one  that  bringeth 
good  tidings.  For  I  beheld,  and  there  was  no  man;  even 
among  them,  and  there  was  no  counsellor,  that,  when  I  asked  of 
them,  could  answer  a  word."  (Ver.  21 — 28.)  There  was  not 
even  reason — nothing  but  insensate  folly  in  men  owning  as  gods 
things  which  could  neither  speak  nor  hear.  "  Behold,  they  are 
all  vanity ;  their  works  are  nothing :  their  molten  images  are 
wind  and  confusion."  (Ver.  29.)  Human  helps  to  devotion  are 
the  death-bed  of  faith. 


CHAPTERS   XLIL,  XLIII. 

Distinguished  as  the  place  of  Cyrus  might  be  as  the  righteous 
man  from  the  east,  whom  God  employed  to  break  the  pride  of 
Babylon  and  set  the  captives  free  to  return  to  the  land  of 
Israel,  a  greater  is  here.  "  Behold,  my  servant,  whom  I  uphold ; 
mine  elect,  in  whom  my  soul  delighteth ;  I  have  put  my  spirit 
upon  him  :  he  shall  bring  forth  judgment  to  the  Gentiles.  He 
shall  not  cry,  nor  lift  up,  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be  heard  in  the 
street.  A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and  the  smoking 
flax  shall  he  not  quench :  he  shall  bring  forth  judgment  unto 
truth.  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged  till  he  have  set 
judgment  in  the  earth :  and  the  isles  shall  wait  for  his  law." 
(Ver.  1 — 4.)  We  know  that  Christ  is  intended  (the  typical,  as  I 
suppose,  giving  occasion  to*  the  introduction  of  the  Antitype). 
It  is  the  more  remarkable  as  being  lost  after  this  brief  moment, 
when  the  prophetic  strain  resumes  its  previous  course,  and  the 
servant  of  Jehovah  elsewhere  in  this  chapter  and  to  the  end  of 
chapter  xlviii.  is  unequivocally  not  Christ,  but  Israel. 

Here  however  it  is  the  Lord,  the  object  of  Jehovah's 
delight  as  of  His  choice,  the  vessel  of  the  power  of  the  Spirit, 
and  the  manifester  of  judgment  to  the  nations,  compared  with 
whom  the  Gentile  avenger  of  God's  honour  on  the  source  and 
patron  of  all  idols  was  little  indeed.  Yet  He  whose  glory  was 
thus  beyond  all  competition  displayed  it  first  in  perfect  unob- 
trusive lowliness.  Might  of  far-reaching  testimony  even  was 
not  what  characterized  Him  thus,  meek  retirement  rather,  not 
only  in  presence  of  murderous  hatred,  but  away  from  the  multi- 
tudes that  followed  Him  and  the  admiration  of  the  healed  who 
would  have  spread  His  fame.  He  "charged  them  that  they 
should  not  make  him  known,  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which 
was  spoken  by  Esaias  the  prophet,  saying,  Behold  my  servant," 
&c.  (Matt.  xii.  14 — 21.)  This  state  of  things  is  seen  here 
terminated  by  the  victory  of  His  second  advent,  when  He  shall 


208  LECTURES  ON   ISAIAH. 

set  judgment  in  the  earth  and  the  isles  shall  wait  for  His  law. 
The  intervening  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  here  below,  while  He 
is  exalted  on  high,  does  not  enter  into  account. 

This  leads  Jehovah  in  magnificent  terms  to  speak  of  what 
He  will  accomplish  through  His  own  name  and  glory,  in  contrast 
with  graven  images.  (Ver.  5 — 16.)  Then,  in  verses  17  et  seq., 
the  utter  shame  of  such  as  trust  in  these  lying  vanities  is 
insisted  on,  so  as  to  touch  the  conscience  of  the  guilty  Jew. 
"Hear,  ye  deaf;  and  look,  ye  blind,  that  ye  may  see.  Who  is 
blind  but  my  servant  ?  or  deaf  as  my  messenger  that  I  sent  ? 
who  is  blind  as  he  that  is  perfect  and  blind  as  Jehovah's 
servant  ?  Seeing  many  things,  but  thou  observest  not ;  opening 
the  ears,  but  he  heareth  not."  (Ver.  18 — 20.)  It  is  Israel 
who  are  in  view.  Such  were  their  privileges,  such  their  respon- 
sibility, and  such  their  woeful  failure.  Jehovah  contrariwise  is 
right  in  all  His  ways.  "Jehovah  is  well  pleased  for  his 
righteousness'  sake ;  he  will  magnify  the  law,  and  make  it 
honourable.  But  this  is  a  people  robbed  and  spoiled ;  they  are 
all  of  them  snared  in  holes,  and  they  are  hid  in  prison-houses : 
they  are  for  a  prey,  and  none  delivereth ;  for  a  spoil,  and  none 
saith,  Restore.  Who  among  you  will  give  ear  to  this  ?  who  will 
hearken  and  hear  for  the  time  to  come  ?  Who  gave  Jacob  for  a 
spoil  and  Israel  to  the  robbers  ?  did  not  Jehovah,  he  against  whom 
we  have  sinned  ?  for  they  would  not  walk  in  his  ways,  neither 
were  they  obedient  unto  his  law.  Therefore  he  hath  poured 
upon  him  the  fury  of  his  anger,  and  the  strength  of  battle : 
and  it  hath  set  him  on  fire  round  about,  yet  he  knew  not ;  and 
it  burned  him,  yet  he  laid  it  not  to  heant."     (Ver.  22 — 25.) 

After  all  their  faithlessness  to  His  name,  which  entailed  on 
Israel  the  fury  of  Jehovah  (yet  misunderstood  and  unfelt 
through  the  blinding  influence  of  idolatry)  in  chapter  xliii., 
He  proclaims  His  faithfulness  who  had  called  Israel  by  their 
name  and  made  them  His  own.  "  When  thou  passest  through 
the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee :  and  through  the  rivers,  they 
shall  not  overflow  thee:  when  thou  walkest  through  the  fire, 
thou  shalt  not  be  burned,  neither  shall  the  flame  kindle  upon 
thee.     For  I  am  Jehovah  thy  God,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  thy 


CHAPTERS    XLIL,    XLI1I.  209 

Saviour ;  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy  ransom,  Ethiopia  and  Sheba  for 
thee.  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  my  sight,  thou  hast  been 
honourable,  and  I  have  loved  thee :  therefore  will  I  give  men 
for  thee,  and  people  for  thy  life.  Fear  not :  for  I  am  with  thee  : 
I  will  bring  thy  seed  from  the  east  and  gather  thee  from  the 
west ;  I  will  say  to  the  north,  Give  up ;  and  to  the  south,  Keep 
not  back :  bring  my  sons  from  far,  and  my  daughters  from  the 
ends  of  the  earth ;  even  every  one  that  is  called  by  my  name ; 
for  I  have  created  him  for  my  glory.  I  have  formed  him ;  yea, 
I  have  made  him.  Bring  forth  the  blind  people  that  have  eyes 
and  the  deaf  that  have  ears.  Let  all  the  nations  be  gathered 
together,  and  let  the  people  be  assembled :  who  among  them 
can  declare  this  and  shew  us  former  things  ?  let  them  bring 
forth  their  witnesses  that  they  may  be  justified :  or  let  them 
hear  and  say,  It  is  truth.  Ye  are  my  witnesses,  saith  the  Lord, 
and  my  servant  whom  I  have  chosen :  that  ye  may  know  and 
believe  me,  and  understand  that  I  am  he :  before  me  there  was 
no  God  formed,  neither  shall  there  be  after  me."  (Ver.  2 — 10.) 
This  renders  the  subject  (namely  Israel  as  God's  servant)  as 
plain  as  His  own  mercy  in  the  last  days.  The  Jews  by  their 
idol-loving  were  the  blind  people  that  had  eyes  and  the  deaf 
that  had  ears.  Yet  were  they  alone  of  all  nations  Jehovah's 
witness  and  His  servant.  They  will  yet  know,  believe,  and 
understand.  It  was  because  of  Him  whom  they  rebelled  against 
that  they  have  been  so  spoiled ;  it  is  because  of  Him  that  they 
will  be  delivered,  pardoned,  and  blessed ;  for  as  He,  Jehovah,  is 
the  only  God,  so  is  He  equally  the  sole  Saviour.  It  was  for 
Israel's  sake  that  He  had  sent  to  Babylon  and  brought  down 
their  pride;  and  new  things  should  cause  the  old  wonders  to  be 
forgotten  when  God  gives  water  in  the  wilderness  and  rivers 
in  the  desert  for  His  chosen  people,  formed  for  Himself  to  show 
forth  His  praise.  It  was  God  who  once,  for  their  sins,  profaned 
the  princes  and  people  of  Israel ;  it  is  He  who  for  His  own  sake 
will  blot  out  their  transgressions  and  justify  themselves.  Before 
that  day  dawn,  we  know  (what  is  to  them  still  a  secret)  the  great 
salvation  by  His  grace,  whereby  alone  He  can  thus  righteously 
deal  with  the  guilty :  Christ,  the  cross,  is  the  only  key. 

o 


CHAPTERS  XLIV.,  XLV. 

The  opening  verses  (1 — 5)  seem  to  be  the  proper  conclusion  of 
the  foregoing  chapter.  The  salvation  of  God  is  worthy  of 
Himself,  even  as  it  springs  from  His  own  grace,  and  can  have 
no  end  short  of  His  own  glory.  Hence  it  is  that  not  only 
God  blots  out  His  people's  transgressions  for  His  Son's  sake, 
and  will  not  remember  their  sins,  but  that  He  would  banish 
their  fear  and  fill  them  to  overflowing  with  His  blessing.  "  Yet 
now  hear,  O  Jacob  my  servant;  and  Israel  whom  I  have 
chosen:  Thus  saith  Jehovah  that  made  thee,  and  formed  thee 
from  the  womb,  which  will  help  thee;  Fear  not,  O  Jacob, 
my  servant;  and  thou,  Jesurun,  whom  I  have  chosen.  For 
I  will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty,  and  floods  upon  the 
dry  ground ;  I  will  pour  my  Spirit  upon  thy  seed,  and  my 
blessing  upon  thine  offspring:  and  they  shall  spring  up  as 
among  the  grass,  as  willows  by  the  watercourses.  One  shall 
say,  I  am  Jehovah's ;  and  another  shall  subscribe  himself  with 
his  hand  unto  Jehovah,  and  surname  himself  by  the  name  of 
Israel."  (Ver.  1 — 5.)  There  is  not  the  slightest  need,  nay, 
nor  even  room,  for  diverting  these  exceeding  precious  promises 
from  Israel  to  the  Gentile.  It  is  quite  true  of  course  that  the 
wild  olive  graft  enjoys  all  this  too;  but  the  word  of  Jehovah  is 
pledged  and  sure  to  Jacob  His  servant.  The  express  object 
is  banishing  the  dread  of  the  conscience-stricken  Jews  after  their 
long  departure  from  the  true  God.  Elsewhere  express  allusions 
to  the  call  of  the  Gentiles  during  that  interval  appear  as 
notably  in  Isaiah  lxv. ;  but  the  point  here  is  the  consolation 
of  the  ancient  people  when  grace  is  at  work  on  their  behalf. 

Some,  like  Fry,  from  whose  general  teaching  better  might 
have  been  expected,  were  led  into  this  misconception  by  not 
understanding  how  the  next  section  (ver.  6 — 20)  could  have 
any  just  bearing  on  the  future  ways  or  dangers  of  the  Jew. 
But  this  is  to  overlook  a  large  part  of  scripture,  and  a  solemn 


CHAPTERS    XLIV.,   XLV.  211 

portion  of  that  wonderful  people's  destiny.  For  two  thousand 
years  idolatry  has  not  been  their  snare,  but  other  characters 
of  evil,  leading  to  and  consequent  on  the  rejection  of  their 
Messiah.  This,  as  we  shall  find,  has  its  place  in  our  prophecy 
from  chapter  xlix.  to  lvii. ;  as  the  general  picture  is  portrayed 
with  signal  precision  in  Hosea  iii.  4.  But  it  is  certain,  both 
from  the  Old  and  the  New  Testament,  that  in  the  latter  day 
they  will  fall  once  more  into  their  old  love  of  idols,  along 
with  the  acceptance  of  the  Antichrist,  thus  finally  reproducing 
together  the  two  sins  of  the  past  which  had,  each  of  them, 
brought  on  them  such  stern  judgment  providentially,  from 
God's  vengeance :  and  "  there  shall  be  great  tribulation,  such  as 
was  not  since  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  this  time,  no, 
nor  ever  shall  be."  (Comp.  Matt.  xxiv.  15,  with  verse  21.) 
There  is  thus  no  ground  for  turning  aside  these  plain  predic- 
tions of  Isaiah  from  the  literal  Israel  of  whom  he  speaks  so 
often  and  emphatically  to  the  apostate  churches  of  Christendom. 
Idol-worship  is  here,  no  doubt,  and  will  surely  not  go 
unpunished;  but  the  mass  of  the  Jews  in  future  days  will 
fall  for  the  last  time  into  that  besetment  and  worse.  Hence, 
while  the  remonstrance  of  the  prophet  bore  on  the  evil  of 
his  own  days,  there  need  be  no  question  of  its  being  requisite 
for  the  Jew  up  to  the  end. 

And  who  can  assert  the  glory  of  the  true  God  ?  who  expose 
the  folly  of  false  gods,  like  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  "  Thus  saith  Jeho- 
vah, the  King  of  Israel,  and  his  redeemer  Jehovah  of  hosts ;  I 
am  the  first,  and  I  am  the  last ;  and  beside  me  there  is  no  God. 
And  who,  as  I,  shall  call,  and  shall  declare  it,  and  set  it  in 
order  for  me,  since  I  appointed  the  ancient  people  ?  and  the 
things  that  are  coming,  and  shall  come,  let  them  show  unto 
them.  Fear  ye  not,  neither  be  afraid :  have  not  I  told  thee 
from  that  time,  and  have  declared  it  ?  ye  are  even  my  witnesses. 
Is  there  a  God  beside  me  ?  yea,  there  is  no  God ;  I  know  not 
any.  They  that  make  a  graven  image  are  all  of  them  vanity ; 
and  their  delectable  things  shall  not  profit ;  and  they  are  their 
own  witnesses ;  they  see  not,  nor ,  know ;  that  they  may  be 
ashamed.     Who  hath  formed  a  god,  or  molten  a  graven  image 


212  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

that  is  profitable  for  nothing  ?  Behold,  all  his  fellows  shall  be 
ashamed :  and  the  workmen,  they  are  of  men ;  let  them  all 
be  gathered  together,  let  them  stand  up;  yet  they  shall  fear, 
and  they  shall  be  ashamed  together.  The  smith  with  the 
tongs  both  worketh  in  the  coals,  and  fashioneth  it  with 
hammers,  and  worketh  it  with  the  strength  of  his  arms :  yea,  he 
is  hungry  and  his  strength  faileth :  he  drinketh  no  water,  and  is 
faint.  The  carpenter  stretcheth  out  his  rule ;  he  marketh  it  out 
with  a  line;  he  fitteth  it  with  planes,  and  he  marketh  it  out 
with  the  compass,  and  maketh  it  after  the  figure  of  a  man 
according  to  the  beauty  of  a  man;  that  it  may  remain  in  the 
house.  He  heweth  him  down  cedars,  and  taketh  the  cypress 
and  the  oak,  which  he  strengtheneth  for  himself  among  the 
trees  of  the  forest:  he  planteth  an  ash,  and  the  rain  doth 
nourish  it.  Then  shall  it  be  for  a  man  to  burn:  for  he  will 
take  thereof,  and  warm  himself;  yea,  he  kindleth  it,  and  baketh 
bread ;  yea,  he  maketh  a  god,  and  worshippeth  it ;  he  maketh  it 
a  graven  image,  and  faileth  down  thereto.  He  burneth  part 
thereof  in  the  fire ;  with  part  thereof  he  eateth  flesh ;  he 
roasteth  roast,  and  is  satisfied:  yea,  he  warmeth  himself,  and 
saith,  Aha,  I  am  warm,  I  have  seen  the  fire.  And  the  residue 
thereof  he  maketh  a  god,  even  his  graven  image:  he  faileth 
down  unto  it,  and  worshippeth  it,  and  prayeth  unto  it,  and 
saith,  Deliver  me ;  for  thou  art  my  god.  They  have  not  known 
nor  understood :  for  he  hath  shut  their  eyes,  that  they  cannot 
see  ;  and  their  hearts  that  they  cannot  understand.  And  none 
considereth  in  his  heart,  neither  is  there  knowledge  nor  under- 
standing to  say,  I  have  burned  part  of  it  in  the  fire ;  yea,  also  I 
have  baked  bread  upon  the  coals  thereof;  I  have  roasted  flesh, 
and  eaten  it:  and  shall  I  make  the  residue  thereof  an  abomi- 
nation ?  shall  I  fall  down  to  the  stock  of  a  tree  ?  He  feedeth  on 
ashes :  a  deceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside,  that  he  cannot 
deliver  his  soul,  nor  say,  Is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand  ?" 
(Ver.  6 — 20.)  The  sarcastic  shafts  of  classic  poets  are  poor 
in  comparison  for  beauty  or  power,  not  to  speak  of  their 
worthlessness  morally ;  for  mere  ridicule,  which  ends  in 
leaving   the  satirist  at  the  shrine  of  his   despised   divinities, 


CHAPTERS   XLIV.,   XLV.  213 

is  the  mirth  of  a  fool  which  ends  in  sorrow  and  shame 
without  end. 

Not  so  Isaiah :  "  Remember  these,  0  Jacob  and  Israel ;  for 
thou  art  my  servant :  I  have  formed  thee ;  thou  art  my  servant ; 
0  Israel,  thou  shalt  not  be  forgotten  of  me.  I  have  blotted  out, 
as  a  thick  cloud,  thy  transgressions,  and,  as  a  cloud,  thy  sins; 
return  unto  me,  for  I  have  redeemed  thee.  Sing,  0  ye 
heavens ;  for  Jehovah  hath  done  it :  shout,  ye  lower  parts  of  the 
earth :  break  forth  into  singing,  ye  mountains,  O  forest,  and 
every  tree  therein :  for  Jehovah  hath  redeemed  Jacob,  and 
glorified  himself  in  Israel.  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  thy  redeemer, 
and  he  that  formed  thee  from  the  womb,  I  am  Jehovah  that 
maketh  all  things ;  that  stretcheth  forth  the  heavens  alone ;  that 
spreadeth  abroad  the  earth  by  myself;  that  frustrateth  the 
tokens  of  the  liars,  and  maketh  diviners  mad ;  that  turneth  wise 
men  backward,  and  maketh  their  knowledge  foolish ;  that  con- 
firmeth  the  word  of  his  servant,  and  performeth  the  counsel  of 
his  messengers  ;  that  saith  to  Jerusalem,  Thou  shalt  be  inhabi- 
ted; and  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  Ye  shall  be  built,  and  I  will 
raise  up  the  decayed  places  thereof:  that  saith  to  the  deep,  Be 
dry,  and  I  will  dry  up  thy  rivers :  that  saith  of  Cyrus,  He  is  my 
shepherd,  and  shall  perform  all  my  pleasure  :  even  saying  to 
Jerusalem,  Thou  shalt  be  built ;  and  to  the  temple,  Thy  foun- 
dation shall  be  laid.  Thus  saith  Jehovah  to  his  anointed,  to 
Cyrus,  whose  right  hand  I  have  holden,  to  subdue  nations 
before  him ;  and  I  will  loose  the  loins  of  kings,  to  open  before 
him  the  two  leaved  gates;  and  the  gates  shall  not  be  shut;  I 
will  go  before  thee,  and  make  the  crooked  places  straight ;  I 
will  break  in  pieces  the  gates  of  brass,  and  cut  in  sunder  the 
bars  of  iron  ;  and  I  will  give  thee  the  treasures  of  darkness,  and 
hidden  riches  of  secret  places,  that  thou  may  est  know  that  I, 
Jehovah,  which  call  thee  by  thy  name,  am  the  God  of  Israel. 
For  Jacob  my  servant's  sake,  and  Israel  mine  elect,  I  have  even 
called  thee  by  thy  name ;  I  have  surnamed  thee,  though  thou 
hast  not  known  me."     (Ver.  21 ;  chap.  xlv.  1 — 4.) 

The  challenge  of  Jehovah  which  begins  with  verse  5  does 
not  appear  to  me  a  mere  repetition  of  that  in  chapter  xliv.  6, 


214  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

et  seq.,  but  in  a  very  interesting  way  meets  the  special  evil  into 
which  those  fell  who  under  Cyrus  overthrew  Babylon  and  its 
idolatrous  vanities.  For  the  Persians  were  famous  for  their 
dualistic  scheme  of  good  and  evil,  light  and  darkness,  Ormusd 
and  Ahriman.  What  can  be  more  pointed  in  view  of  the  awful 
confusion  of  this  scheme  than  the  words  that  follow  ? — "  I  am 
Jehovah,  and  there  is  none  else,  there  is  no  God  beside  me : 
I  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known  me :  that  they  may 
know  from  the  rising  of  the  sun,  and  from  the  west,  that  there 
is  none  beside  me.  I  am  Jehovah,  and  there  is  none  else.  I 
form  the-  light,  and  create  darkness :  I  make  peace,  and  create 
evil :  I  Jehovah  do  all  these  things.  Drop  down,  ye  heavens, 
from  above,  and  let  the  skies  pour  down  righteousness :  let  the 
earth  open,  and  let  them  bring  forth  salvation,  and  let 
righteousness  spring  up  together;  I  Jehovah  have  created  it. 
Woe  unto  him  that  striveth  with  his  Maker !  Let  the  potsherd 
strive  with  the  potsherds  of  the  earth.  Shall  the  clay  say  to 
him  that  fashioneth  it,  What  makest  thou  ?  or  thy  work,  He 
hath  no  hands.  Woe  unto  him  that  saith  unto  his  father,  What 
begettest  thou  ?  or  to  the  woman,  What  hast  thou  brought 
forth?"     (Yer.  5—10.) 

If  Jehovah  reprove  with  woe  upon  woe  all  striving  with 
Himself  and  fault-finding  with  His  ways,  how  graciously  He 
calls  on  His  people  in  the  very  next  verse  to  ask  Him  of  things 
to  come  about  His  sons  and  to  command  Him  unto  the  work  of 
His  hands?  (Ver.  11.)  He  who  made  heaven  and  its  host, 
earth  and  man  upon  it,  was  the  raiser  up  of  Cyrus  to  build  His 
city  and  liberate  His  captives,  "  not  for  price  nor  reward,  saith 
Jehovah  of  hosts."  The  haughtiest  of  the  Gentiles  should  yet 
own  God  to  be  in  Israel,  as  strangers  once  owned  the  power  of 
the  Spirit  in  the  church.  Then  when  the  last  idol-makers  shall 
go  to  confusion,  Israel  shall  be  saved  in  Jehovah  with  an  ever- 
lasting salvation.  (Yer.  14 — 17.)  Jehovah,  the  Creator,  had 
not  spoken  in  secret  nor  bid  the  seed  of  Jacob  seek  Him  in 
vain :  He  speaks  righteousness.  The  closing  appeal  is  exceed- 
ingly urgent,  grand,  and  triumphant:  "Assemble  yourselves 
and   come;   draw  near   together,  ye  that  are   escaped   of  the 


CHAPTERS   XLIV.,   XLV.  215 

nations :  they  have  no  knowledge  that  set  up  the  wood  of  their 
graven  image,  and  pray  unto  a  god  that  cannot  save.  Tell  ye, 
and  bring  them  near ;  yea,  let  them  take  counsel  together : 
who  hath  declared  this  from  ancient  time  ?  who  hath  told  it 
from  that  time  ?  have  not  I  the  Lord  ?  and  there  is  no  God 
else  beside  me ;  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour ;  there  is  none  beside 
me.  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  : 
for  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  else.  I  have  sworn  by  myself, 
the  word  is  gone  out  of  my  mouth  in  righteousness,  and  shall  not 
return,  That  unto  me  every  knee  shall  bow,  every  tongue  shall 
swear.  Surely,  shall  one  say,  In  the  Lord  have  I  righteousness 
and  strength :  even  to  him  shall  men  come ;  and  all  that  are 
incensed  against  him  shall  be  ashamed.  In  the  Lord  shall 
all  the  seed  of  Israel  be  justified,  and  shall  glory."  (Yer. 
20 — 25.)  The  commentators  clash  as  to  the  "escaped  of  the 
nations."  But  the  conjecture  of  Mede  is  far  from  the  mark : 
for  he  puts  the  expression  along  with  Revelation  xxi.  24.  He 
ought  to  have  known  that  "  the  nations  of  them  that  are  saved " 
would  be  the  converse  of  Isaiah's  phrase,  rather  than  a  parallel. 
But  it  is  a  bad  reading,  probably  from  a  scholium  of  Andreas, 
and  contrary  to  every  authority  of  value,  all  of  which  have 
simply  the  "nations."  Our  prophet  widens  the  salvation  in 
these  concluding  verses :  "  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved, 
all  the  ends  of  the  earth."  So  in  the  next  verse,  "unto  me 
every  knee  shall  bow,  every  tongue  shall  swear."  This  extends 
beyond  "  all  the  seed  of  Israel  who  shall  be  justified  and  glory 
in  Jehovah."  It  is  clearly  applied  to  the  Lord  Jesus  by  the 
Apostle  Paul,  in  the  largest  extent,  and  with  the  utmost  depth 
of  its  meaning.     (Rom.  xiv.,  Phil,  ii.) 


CHAPTERS   XLVL— XLVIII. 

These  three  chapters  close  this  section  of  the  prophecy,  the 
discussion  of  Israel's  guilty  love  of  idols  in  presence  of  the  doom 
of  Babylon,  the  patron  of  idolatry  and  the  instrument  of  the 
punishment  of  the  Jews  for  that  sin. 

Chapter  xlvi.  in  the  most  spirited  way  contrasts  the  fall  of 
the  helpless  objects  of  Babylonish  worship  with  God's  gracious 
care  over  Israel.  "  Bel  [  their  chief  god  answering  to  the  Zeus 
of  the  Greeks]  boweth  down,  Nebo  [answering  to  the  Greek 
Hermes  ]  stoopeth  :  their  idols  were  upon  the  beasts,  and  upon 
the  cattle  :  your  carriages  were  heavy  laden :  they  are  a  burden 
to  the  weary  beasts.  They  stoop,  they  bow  down  together, 
they  could  not  deliver  the  burden,  but  themselves  are  gone  into 
captivity."  (Ver.  1,  2.)  Thus,  chief  or  subordinate,  these  false 
deities  could  do  nothing  for  their  votaries,  and  could  not  deliver 
themselves.  The  victorious  foe  carries  them  off  as  part  of  the 
spoil. 

On  the  other  hand,  Jehovah  had  carried  Israel  from  their 
national  birth  to  their  old  age :  "  Hearken  unto  me,  0  house 
of  Jacob,  and  all  the  remnant  of  the  house  of  Israel,  which  are 
borne  by  me  from  the  belly,  which  are  carried  from  the  womb  : 
and  even  to  your  old  age  I  am  he :  and  even  to  hoar  hairs  will 
I  carry  you:  I  have  made  and  I  will  bear;  even  I  will  carry 
and  will  deliver  you."     (Yer.  3,  4.) 

Next  follows  the  challenge  to  whom  they  would  liken  the 
God  of  Israel.  As  for  the  Chaldean  gods,  it  was  but  a  question 
of  gold  and  silver,  which  the  goldsmith  made  up,  and  the  people 
fell  down  and  worshipped.  (Ver.  5,  6.)  "  They  bear  him  upon 
the  shoulder,  they  carry  him,  and  set  him  in  his  place,  and  he 
standeth,  from  his  place  shall  he  not  remove :  yea,  one  shall 
cry  unto  him,  yet  can  he  not  answer,  nor  save  him  out  of  his 
trouble.     Remember  this  and  shew  yourselves  men;   bring  it 


CHAPTERS    XLVI. — XLVIII.  217 

again  to  mind,  0  ye  transgressors."  Nor  is  this  the  only- 
appeal.  It  was  well  to  bethink  them  that  the  gods  of  the 
nations  were  beneath  those  that  adored  them :  but  the  prophet 
adds  (ver.  9),  "  Remember  the  former  things  of  old :  for  I  am 
God,  and  there  is  none  else ;  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  like 
me,  declaring  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  from  ancient 
times  the  things  that  are  not  yet  done,  saying,  My  counsel  shall 
stand,  and  I  will  do  all  my  pleasure:  calling  a  ravenous  bird 
from  the  east,  the  man  that  executeth  my  counsel  from  a  far 
country :  yea,  I  have  spoken  it,  I  will  also  bring  it  to  pass ;  I 
have  purposed  it,  I  will  also  do  it."  Cyrus  is  here  again  cited 
as  a  striking  proof  of  the  reality  of  God's  dealings  with  His 
people,  and  this  both  in  foreknowledge,  in  declared  purpose, 
and  in  providential  ways.  This  leads  to  the  concluding  call : 
"  Hearken  unto  me,  ye  stouthearted,  that  are  far  from  righteous- 
ness :  I  bring  near  my  righteousness ;  it  shall  not  be  far  off,  and 
my  salvation  shall  not  tarry ;  and  I  will  place  salvation  in  Zion 
for  Israel  my  glory."     (Ver.  12,  13.)     Such  is  the  end. 

Chapter  xlvii.  shews  us  the  degradation  of  Babylon  itself,  as 
in  the  preceding  chapter  we  had  judgment  executed  against  its 
gods. 

"Come  down,  and  sit  in  the  dust,  O  virgin  daughter  of 
Babylon,  sit  on  the  ground :  there  is  no  throne,  0  daughter 
of  the  Chaldeans :  for  thou  shalt  no  more  be  called  tender  and 
delicate.  Take  the  millstones,  and  grind  meal:  uncover  thy 
locks,  make  bare  the  leg,  uncover  the  thigh,  pass  over  the  rivers. 
Thy  nakedness  shall  be  uncovered,  yea,  thy  shame  shall  be 
seen :  I  will  take  vengeance,  and  I  will  not  meet  thee  as  a  man. 
As  for  our  redeemer,  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name,  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel.  Sit  thou  silent,  and  get  thee  into  darkness,  O 
daughter  of  the  Chaldeans :  for  thou  shalt  no  more  be  called 
The  lady  of  kingdoms."  (Ver.  1 — 5.)  The  anger  of  God  at 
His  people  was  no  justification  of  their  merciless  behaviour 
(ver.  6),  and  their  confidence  in  the  stability  of  their  resources 
would  be  the  precursor  of  ruin.  (Ver.  7 — 10.)  "Therefore 
shall  evil  come  upon  thee;  thou  shalt  not  know  from  whence 


218  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

it  riseth ;  and  mischief  shall  fall  upon  thee  ;  thou  shalt  not  be 
able  to  put  it  off;  and  desolation  shall  come  upon  thee  sud- 
denly, which  thou  shalt  not  know."  What  made  the  taunt  the 
more  cutting  was  Babylon's  boast  in  their  sorceries  and  enchant- 
ments ;  but  even  so,  they  could  not  profit  nor  prevail.  (Yer. 
11 — 15.)     As  they  could  not  predict,  still  less  could  they  save. 

Chapter  xlviii.  is  a  more  direct  and  exclusive  appeal  to 
Israel,  to  those  that  come  forth  "  out  of  the  waters  of  Judah." 
It  is  a  beautiful  homily  to  His  people  (ver.  1,  2),  explaining 
why  God  had  long  foretold,  and  then  suddenly  acted.  They 
could  not  thus  defraud  Him  of  His  praise.     (Ver.  3 — 8.) 

In  verse  9  Jehovah  tells  them  why  He  had  not  cut  them 
off.  "  For  my  name's  sake,  will  I  defer  mine  anger,  and  for  my 
praise  will  I  refrain  for  thee,  that  I  cut  thee  not  off.  Behold,  I 
have  refined  thee,  but  not  with  silver ;  I  have  chosen  thee  in 
the  furnace  of  affliction.  For  mine  own  sake,  even  for  mine 
own  sake,  will  I  do  it :  for  how  should  my  name  be  polluted  ? 
and  I  will  not  give  my  glory  unto  another."     (Yer.  9 — 11.) 

Then  (ver.  12  et  seq.)  comes  a  tender  expostulation,  accom- 
plished in  measure  at  the  return  from  captivity,  but  to  be  ful- 
filled by  and  by  more  fully.  Cyrus  had  not  acted  without  the 
God  who  had  called  him  by  name.  Xor  was  it  (save  judicially) 
he  who  had  ordered  things  for  Israel.  The  word  is,  "  Jehovah 
hath  redeemed  his  servant  Jacob."  The  moral  is,  "  There  is  no 
peace,  saith  the  Lord,  unto  the  wicked."  It  is  a  misconception 
of  Israel's  future  to  imagine  that  no  future  question  arises 
between  God  and  them  as  to  graven  images. 


CHAPTER  XLIX. 

A  NEW  division  of  Isaiah  opens  here.  It  is  no  longer  Babylon 
and  idolatry  and  a  destruction  viewed  as  the  overthrow  of 
image  worship  in  the  earth.  Here  it  is  the  far  deeper  question 
of  Christ  Himself  and  His  rejection  by  the  Jews.  We  shall 
find  that  this  portion,  from  chapter  xlix.,  runs  down  to  the  end 
of  chapter  lvii.  where,  as  the  former  said,  "  There  is  no  peace, 
saith  Jehovah,  unto  the  wicked,"  so  the  latter  ends  with  "  There 
is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked ;"  "  Jehovah  "  being  in 
contrast  with  idols,  and  "my  God"  connected  with  the  still 
deeper  badness  of  the  people  in  refusing  the  true  God  and 
eternal  life,  even  the  Lord  Jesus  their  anointed  King.  They 
were  wicked  in  both  respects ;  wicked  in  going  after  false  gods 
of  the  Gentiles;  wicked  yet  more  in  rejecting  their  divine  Messiah. 

The  chapter  opens  with  a  call  to  the  isles  to  listen. 
"Listen,  O  isles,  unto  me;  and  hearken,  ye  people  from  far;" 
because  Jehovah  had  called  Israel  from  the  womb,  and  made 
mention  of  his  name  from  the  bowels  of  his  mother.  There 
was  a  great  providential  preparation.  "  He  hath  made  my 
mouth  like  a  sharp  sword ;  in  the  shadow  of  his  hand  hath  he 
hid  me,  and  made  me  a  polished  shaft;  in  his  quiver  hath  he 
hid  me  "  (there  was  thus  protection  also),  "  and  said  unto  me, 
Thou  art  my  servant,  O  Israel,  in  whom  I  will  be  glorified." 
Such  was  the  purpose  of  God  about  Israel. 

"  Then  I  said  (says  Christ)  I  have  laboured  in  vain,  I  have 
spent  my  strength  for  nought."  Christ  substitutes  Himself  for 
Israel.  They  had  been  the  servant  nominally  and  responsibly ; 
Christ  becomes  the  true  Israel  and  servant  of  God,  when  the 
other  proved  false.  Nevertheless,  even  in  Christ  all  comes  to 
nothing  at  first.  "  I  have  laboured  in  vain,  I  have  spent  my 
strength  for  nought,  and  in  vain :  yet  surely  my  judgment  is 
with  Jehovah,  and  my  work  with  my  God."  The  failure, 
apparently,  of  the  purposes  of  God  in  the  first  instance  from 


220  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

man's  wickedness  enly  leads  into  a  better  establishment  of 
them  and  to  a  more  glorious  form  and  display  in  result.  "  And 
now,  saith  Jehovah  that  formed  me  from  the  womb,  to  be  his 
servant,  to  bring  Jacob  again  to  him,  Though  Israel  be  not 
gathered,  ye  shall  I  be  glorious  in  the  eyes  of  Jehovah,  and  my 
God  shall  be  my  strength."  This  is  the  comfort  of  Christ,  that 
although  the  work  was  not  done,  and  Israel  would  not  be 
gathered  (how  often  would  He  have  gathered  her !)  yet  would 
He  be  glorious.  "  And  he  said,  It  is  a  light  thing  that  thou 
shouldest  be  my  servant  to  raise  up  the  tribes  of  Jacob,  and  to 
restore  the  preserved  of  Israel :  I  will  also  give  thee  for  a  light 
to  the  Gentiles,  that  thou  mayest  be  my  salvation  unto  the  end 
of  the  earth." 

The  original  thought  was  to  gather  Israel,  but  Israel  would 
not  be  gathered.  Then,  says  God,  That  is  a  light  thing,  I  will 
gather  the  Gentiles  also.  But  He  is  first  given  as  a  light  to 
the  Gentiles.  It  is  rather  going  out  than  gathering  in :  at  any 
rate  that  is  the  turn  given  to  the  passage  now,  under  Christi- 
anity. While  Israel  is  not  yet  gathered,  Christ  becomes  a  light 
to  the  Gentiles.  But  God's  purpose  never  fails,  and  so  we  find, 
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  Redeemer  of  Israel,  to  him  whom 
man  despiseth,  to  him  whom  the  nation  abhorreth  "  (it  is  clear 
that  Christ  is  now  viewed  as  a  rejected  person,  the  cross  being 
the  great  expression  of  that  rejection),  "to  a  servant  of  rulers, 
kings  shall  see  and  arise,  princes  also  shall  worship,  because  of 
the  Lord  that  is  faithful  and  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  and  he 
shall  choose  thee.  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  In  an  acceptable  time 
have  I  heard  thee,  and  in  a  day  of  salvation  have  I  helped 
thee :  and  I  will  preserve  thee  and  give  thee  for  a  covenant  of 
the  people  (that  is,  of  Israel)  to  establish  the  earth,  to  cause  to 
inherit  the  desolate  heritages."  It  is  evident  that  this  supposes 
that  all  is  in  ruin,  but  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  destined 
repairer  of  all  the  breaches.  "  They  shall  not  hunger  nor  thirst; 
neither  shall  the  heat  nor  sun  smite  them :  for  he  that  hath 
mercy  on  them  shall  lead  them,  even  by  the  springs  of  water 
shall  he  guide  them.  And  I  will  make  all  my  mountains  a 
way,  and  my  highways  shall  be  exalted.     Behold,  these  shall 


CHAPTER   XLIX.  221 

come  from  far :  and  lo,  these  from  the  north  and  from  the  west ; 
and  these  from  the  land  of  Sinim."  (Ver.  10,  11,  12.)  It  is  the 
return  of  Israel  that  is  here  predicted  from  all  parts  of  the  earth 
but  a  return  after  they  have  been  dispersed  there ;  so  that  not 
only  from  the  north  and  south,  but  even  from  the  land  of  Sinim — 
that  is,  from  China — they  finally  emerge  and  gather  in  Palestine. 
Then  we  find  a  call  to  not  merely  the  isles,  but  heaven  and 
earth.  "  Sing,  0  heavens ;  and  be  joyful,  O  earth  ;  and  break 
forth  into  singing,  0  mountains."  This  is  in  view  of  the  Lord's 
comforting  His  people  and  showing  mercy  to  His  afflicted.  It 
is  the  last  days  and  the  Lord  reviewing  His  goodness  and  call- 
ing upon  all  the  universe  to  be  joyful.  "  But  Zion  said,  Jeho- 
vah hath  forsaken  me,  and  my  Lord  hath  forgotten  me."  But 
Jehovah  pleads  with  Zion's  reproach  and  says,  "  Can  a  woman 
forget  her  sucking  child,  that  she  should  not  have  compassion 
on  the  son  of  her  womb?  yea,  they  may  forget,  yet  will  I  not 
forget  thee.  Behold,  I  have  graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of  my 
hands:  thy  walls  are  continually  before  me.  Thy  children  shall 
make  haste;  thy  destroyers  and  they  that  made  thee  waste 
shall  go  forth  of  thee."  (Ver.  15 — 17.)  The  enemies  of  Israel 
disappear,  and  Israel  comes  forward,  long  forgotten  apparently, 
but  now  to  be  established  for  ever.  And  so  God  calls  upon 
them  to  lift  up  their  eyes,  "Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about,  and 
behold:  all  these  gather  themselves  together,  and  come  to  thee. 
As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  thou  shalt  surely  clothe  thee  with 
them  all,  as  with  an  ornament,  and  bind  them  on  thee,  as  a 
bride  doeth.  For  thy  waste  and  thy  desolate  places,  and  the 
land  of  thy  destruction,  shall  even  now  be  too  narrow  by  reason 
of  the  inhabitants,  and  they  that  swallowed  thee  up  shall  be  far 
away.  The  children  which  thou  shalt  have,  after  thou  hast  lost 
the  other,  shall  say  again  in  thine  ears,  The  place  is  too  strait 
for  me:  give  place  to  me  that  I  may  dwell."  (Ver.  18 — 20.) 
It  is  the  harvest  of  joy  after  the  long  sowing  in  tears.  And 
now  there  seems  no  room  to  stow  away  the  children.  "Then 
shalt  thou  say  in  thine  heart,  Who  hath  begotten  me  these, 
seeing  I  have  lost  my  children,  and  am  desolate,  a  captive, 
and  removing  to  and  fro  ?  and  who  hath  brought  up  these  ? 


222  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

Behold,  I  was  left  alone ;  these,  where  had  they  been."  (Ver. 
21.)  It  is  the  joining  together  of  the  dispersed  of  all  Israel, 
those  who  had  been  forgotten.  At  the  present  time  the  Jews 
are  the  only  ones  known  of  Israel,  but  those  will  be  the  ten 
tribes.  The  Jews  will  have  the  certainty  that  they  are  Jews 
and  yet  will  not  know  them.  They  have  been  hidden  away. 
But  now  Jehovah  has  lifted  up  His  hand  to  the  Gentiles,  and 
He  says,  speaking  of  the  Gentiles,  "  They  shall  bring  thy  sons 
in  their  arms."  The  very  kings  and  queens  would  be  their 
nursing  fathers  and  mothers,  and  would  bow  down  before  them. 
"  And  thou  shalt  know  that  I  am  Jehovah ;  for  they  shall  not 
be  ashamed  that  wait  for  me."  Such  will  be  the  moral  state  of 
Israel  in  that  day.  They  shall  wait  upon  Jehovah  and  shall 
not  be  ashamed. 

But  further :  they  will  have  no  reason  to  fear  their  enemies. 
The  last  verse  shews  that  the  same  God  who  shews  such  incom- 
parable mercy  to  Israel,  shall  beat  down  all  those  who  had 
plundered  them.  "  But  thus  saith  Jehovah,  Even  the  captive 
of  the  mighty  shall  be  taken  away,  and  the  prey  of  the  terrible 
shall  be  delivered  :  for  I  will  contend  with  him  that  contendeth 
with  thee,  and  I  will  save  thy  children.  And  I  will  feed  them 
that  oppress  thee  with  their  own  flesh;  and  they  shall  be 
drunken  with  their  own  blood,  as  with  sweet  wine :  and  all 
flesh  shall  know  that  I  Jehovah  am  thy  Saviour  and  thy 
Redeemer,  the  mighty  One  of  Jacob."  (Ver.  25,  26.)  It  is 
the  condign  vengeance  of  God  upon  the  enemies  of  Israel. 
Such  is  the  future  that  Jehovah  guarantees  to  Israel  after 
the  rejection  of  the  Messiah.  It  is  impossible,  therefore,  to 
apply  this  chapter  to  the  return  from  the  Babylonish  captivity ; 
it  speaks  of  the  far  more  complete  ingathering  at  the  end  of 
this  age.  It  is  the  new  subject  of  Christ's  rejection  by  His 
people,  and  of  their  gathering  in  after  He  has  been  made  a 
light  to  the  end  of  the  earth.  But  when  Zion  might  have 
thought  herself  entirely  forgotten,  Jehovah  turns  His  hand  upon 
these  little  ones,  and  puts  down  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and 
either  their  kings  and  queens  become  the  servants  of  Israel,  or 
He  makes  an  example  of  them  in  divine  judgment. 


CHAPTER  L. 

Our  last  chapter  set  forth,  the  vast  change  which  turns  bn 
the  substitution  of  Christ,  the  true  servant  of  God,  for  Israel 
His  servant  publicly  and  responsibly  but  in  truth  the  slave 
of  His  enemy.  The  new  sin  of  the  people  ensued  thereon,  not 
idolatry,  but  rejection  of  the  Messiah  by  the  Jews,  only  con- 
sistent in  their  unbelief  and  opposition  to  God.  They  would 
none  of  Him  or  His  law ;  they  had  followed  heathen  gods ;  they 
now  refuse  His  anointed  servant.  But  this  leads  in  the 
wisdom  of  God  to  the  immediate  blessing  of  the  Gentiles  in 
the  day  of  grace,  as  it  also  becomes  in  result  the  basis  of  the 
ultimate  restoration  of  Israel  and  the  joy  of  all  the  earth  in 
the  day  of  glory.  The  chapter  accordingly  sketches  the  whole 
sweep  of  God's  ways  from  the  rejection  of  Christ  to  the 
triumphs  of  the  last  days. 

In  chapter  1.  we  are  in  presence  of  little  more  than  a  single 
point  in  that  great  circle  of  events;  but  is  it  not  the  centre 
and  pivot  of  all?  The  humiliation  of  Jesus,  the  servant  of 
Jehovah,  but  withal  Jehovah  Himself,  their  own  Messiah, 
despised  not  of  strangers  merely,  but  of  His  own  people ! 
Deliverance  and  glory  were  sure  in  the  end.  But  so  was  the 
shameful  divorce  of  Israel  meanwhile ;  so  was  the  sale  moreover 
of  Israel.  How  was  this  ?  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  Where  is  the 
bill  of  your  mother's  divorcement,  whom  I  have  put  away  ?  or 
which  of  my  creditors  is  it  to  whom  I  have  sold  you  ?  Behold, 
for  your  iniquities  have  ye  sold  yourselves,  and  for  your  trans- 
gressions is  your  mother  put  away."  (Ver.  1.)  It  was  no  churl 
who  found  his  wretched  pleasure  in  putting  away  the  wife  who 
displeased  him;  it  was  no  selfish  parent  who  relieved  his  own 
necessities  at  the  expense  of  his  children.  And  the  proof  of 
their  rebellion  appears  in  verses  2,  3 :  "  Wherefore,  when  I 
came,  was  there  no  man  ?  when  I  called,  was  there  none  to 
answer  ?     Is  my  hand  shortened  at  all,  that  it  cannot  redeem  ? 


224  LECTURES   OX    ISAIAH. 

or  have  I  no  power  to  deliver  ?  behold,  at  my  rebuke  I  dry  up 
the  sea,  I  make  the  rivers  a  wilderness :  their  fish  stinketh, 
because  there  is  no  water,  and  dieth  for  thirst.  I  clothe  the 
heavens  with  blackness,  and  I  make  sackcloth  their  covering." 
His  coming.  His  call  was  unheeded,  though  He  had  already 
since  the  days  of  Pharaoh  proved  what  He  was  in  the  behalf  of 
His  people. 

Did  the  Jews  question  this  ?  Did  they  say  to  Jehovah,  as 
the  Gentiles  by  and  by  will  to  the  King  coming  in  glory, 
"  When  saw  we  thee,"  &c  \  Here  is  His  answer  by  anticipation: 
"Jehovah  God  hath  given  me  the  tongue  of  the  learned 
that  I  should  know  how  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to  him  that 
is  weary :  he  wakeneth  morning  by  morning,  he  wakeneth  mine 
ear  to  hear  as  the  learned."  Xor  this  only :  "  Jehovah  God 
hath  opened  mine  ear,  and  I  was  not  rebellious,  neither  turned 
away  back."  Jehovah  had  deigned  to  become  a  man  on  earth, 
and  here  to  walk  in  obedience,  owning  God ;  and  this  Christi- 
anity alone  fully  explains ;  for  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost 
were  most  truly  and  equally  Jehovah.  And  He  who  came  thus 
to  do  the  will  of  God  as  man  here  below,  was,  as  we  know,  the 
Son,  who,  Himself  God  and  Jehovah,  could  look  up  and  say, 
"  Jehovah  God  hath  opened  mine  ear,"  Sec 

It  is  not  the  same  truth  here  as  in  Exodus  xxi,  where  the 
Hebrew  servant  might  have  gone  out  free,  but  says,  I  love  my 
master,  my  wife,  and  my  children;  I  will  not  go  out  free — 
and  is  brought  to  the  door-post  before  the  judges  and  has  his 
ear  bored  through  in  sign  of  perpetual  service.  So  did  Christ 
the  true  servant  and  Lord  of  all :  He  too  has  pledged  Himself 
to  serve  eternally.  Again,  it  is  not  the  same  as  Psalm  xl, 
where  u  mine  ears  hast  thou  digged  "  is  cited  from  the  LXX.  (so 
in  Hebrews  x.),  as  "a  body  hast  thou  prepared  me."  The 
boring  of  the  ear  found  its  answer  in  the  Lord's  willing  subjec- 
tion to  death,  in  which  He  identified  Himself  with  the  need  and 
interests  of  master,  wife,  and  children.  The  digging  of  the  ear 
was  not  after  He  became  a  servant  but  rather  in  order  to  it. 
Thus  was  He  formed  as  it  were  to  be  a  servant,  a  body  fitted  in 
which,  though  He  were  a  Son,  He  learned  obedience  by  the 


CHAPTER   L.  225 

things  which  He  suffered.  For  indeed  He  did  become  a  man 
and  a  servant  in  this  world.  Isaiah  looks  at  a  time  intermediate 
— neither  incarnation,  nor  death,  but  His  path  in  life,  wherein 
the  opened  ear  marks  lowly  intelligent  attention  to  His  Father's 
will,  as  the  closed  ear  is  significant  of  disobedience  or  indiffer- 
ence to  the  communications  of  God. 

But  obedience  (especially  public  service)  in  such  a  world  as 
this  could  only  be,  to  such  a  One  as  He,  continual,  and  to  us 
hardly  conceivable,  suffering.  Hence  the  issue  at  once  follows  : 
"  I  gave  my  back  to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that 
plucked  off  the  hair ;  I  hid  not  my  face  from  shame  and  spit- 
ting." How  solemn  the  thought ;  and  what  a  picture  of  God  in 
the  presence  of  man ;  His  humiliation  (which  should  have  made 
Him  infinitely  more  precious,  as  being  the  incomparable  proof  of 
His  love)  gave  the  desired  occasion  to  man  under  Satan's  lead- 
ing to  insult  Him  to  the  uttermost. 

But  still  He  goes  on — yea,  to  death,  the  death  of  the  cross. 
"  For  the  Lord  Jehovah  will  help  me ;  therefore  shall  I  not  be 
confounded;  therefore  have  I  set  my  face  like  a  flint,  and  I  know 
that  I  shall  not  be  ashamed.  He  is  near  that  justifieth  me, 
who  will  contend  with  me  ?  let  us  stand  together :  who  is  mine 
adversary?  let  him  come  near  to  me.  Behold,  the  Lord  Jehovah 
will  help  me ;  who  is  he  that  shall  condemn  me  ?  lo,  they  all 
shall  wax  old  as  a  garment ;  the  moth  shall  eat  them  up."  (Ver. 
7—9.) 

Thus  the  Lord  challenges  His  foes  and  sees  their  ruin  sealed 
in  their  momentary  triumph  over  Him  whom,  if  man  slew,  God 
raised  again  from  the  dead.  Notice  here  what  has  been  often 
pointed  out,  that  the  apostle  Paul  cites  this  passage  in  the  close 
of  Romans  viii.,  and  applies  to  the  Christian  what  the  Spirit 
here  applies  to  Christ.  It  would  be  childish  to  deny  its  applica- 
tion to  the  Lord  because  of  this ;  but  it  is  hardly  less  childish  to 
overlook  the  precious  intimation  that  the  same  Spirit  applies 
to  us  now  what  He  uttered  then  of  God's  vindication  of  Christ 
rejected.  Such  is  the  Christian's  blessed  and  present  privilege 
— association  with  Christ  risen  after  God  undertakes  to  glorify 
Him  whom  the  Jews  (and  Gentiles)  cast  out. 

P 


— — ^M 


226  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

The  closing  verses  make  this  yet  plainer  and  prove  its  impor- 
tance. "  Who  is  among  you  that  feareth  Jehovah,  that  obeyeth 
the  voice  of  his  servant,  that  walketh  in  darkness,  and  hath  no 
light  ?  let  him  trust  in  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and  stay  upon  his 
God  "  (ver.  10),  for  thus  we  have  distinguished  most  definitely 
the  Christian  from  the  future  Jewish  remnant.  The  mystery  was 
yet  hid  in  God.  Christ  magnified  and  delivered  was  revealed ; 
our  place,  not  then  revealed,  is  now  seen  in  Him  risen  and 
glorified.  They  on  the  contrary,  walking  in  darkness  and  want- 
ing light,  will  be  called  to  trust  in  the  Lord  and  stay  on  their 
God,  when  there  is  nothing  else  to  lean  on.  But  they  will  find 
a  glorious  deliverance  when  He  appears.  We  are  children  of 
light  now,  children  of  day  before  it  dawns  upon  the  earth  ;  we 
follow  Him  in  spirit  where  He  is,  yea  are  brought  to  God  and 
free  of  the  holiest  while  here. 

As  for  the  apostate  mass  of  the  Jews,  their  portion  plainly 
follows.  "  Behold  all  ye  that  kindle  a  fire,  that  compass  your- 
selves about  with  sparks :  walk  in  the  light  of  your  fire,  and  in 
the  sparks  that  ye  have  kindled.  This  shall  ye  have  of  mine 
hand ;  ye  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow."  (Ver.  11.) 


CHAPTERS  LI,   LII.   12. 

In  chapter  1.  we  have  seen  the  divine  Messiah  in  the  depths  of 
humiliation,  but  the  Lord  Jehovah  helping  and  justifying  Him. 
In  chapter  liii.  (which  really  begins  at  Hi.  13)  we  shall  see  Him 
"wounded  for  our  transgressions,  bruised  for  our  iniquities," 
when  Jehovah  "  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  (Compare 
Psalms  lxix.,  xxii.)  Between  these  everlasting  foundations  of 
blessing  for  Israel  (or  for  any),  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  us  awaken- 
ing appeals  of  the  utmost  force,  interest,  and  beauty.  It  is  a 
complete  whole,  consisting  of  seven  distinct  parts  (chap.  li.  1 — 3; 
4—6  ;  7,  8 ;  then,  9—16  ;  17—23 ;  lii.  1—10 ;  lastly,  11,  12),  and 
tracing  the  gradations  of  the  godly  Jewish  remnant  from  their 
deep  distress,  fearing  Jehovah  and  obeying  the  voice  of  His 
servant,  though  in  darkness  as  yet,  and  having  no  light,  but 
gradually  advancing  till  they  stand  in  the  full  glory  that  was 
promised  them. 

The  first  remark  to  be  made  is  one  of  no  small  importance 
as  affecting  the  interpretation  or  rather  application  of  this 
prophetic  strain.  It  is  not  under  the  head  of  Babylon,  but  of  a 
rejected  Messiah.  And  in  fact  the  attempt  to  apply  to  their 
state  after  the  return  from  Babylon  either  the  calls  of  righteous- 
ness to  them,  or  the  calls  of  the  Spirit  in  them,  or  the  final 
word  as  a  priest  to  Jehovah  abandoning  their  old  seats  of 
impurity,  is  not  worth  a  refutation— hardly  a  notice.  Chapter 
xlviii.  closed  that  part  of  the  subject.  Chapter  xlix.  opened 
the  new  complaint  and  ground  of  judgment  God  lays  against 
His  people — not  idolatry  judged  by  the  captivity  in  Babylon, 
but  the  refusal  of  Christ,  the  ground  of  their  dispersion  and 
distresses  under  the  fourth  empire.  Therefore  was  Israel 
divorced  from  Jehovah ;  but  a  remnant,  poor  in  spirit,  by  grace 
obey  the  voice  of  His  humbled  servant.  Their  moral  restora- 
tion and  final  triumph  are  here  brought  before  us  in  as  orderly 
a  way  as  is  compatible  with  the  sublimest  of  prophets. 


228  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

The  first  appeal  to  hear  (ver.  1 — 3)  is  to  them  as  following 
after  righteousness  and  seeking  Jehovah.  Such  will  be  few 
indeed  at  first.  They  may  feel  themselves  alone,  the  mass  of 
Israel  being  apostate  like  the  Gentiles.  But  they  are  exhorted 
to  look  to  Abraham  and  Sarah.  "  For  I  called  him  alone,  and 
blessed  him,  and  increased  him."  Then  faith  must  count  on  no 
less  but  more  manifest  blessing,  after  all  their  sorrow  now  at  its 
worst.  "  For  Jehovah  shall  comfort  Zion :  he  will  comfort  all 
her  waste  places ;  and  he  will  make  her  wilderness  like  Eden, 
and  her  desert  like  the  garden  of  Jehovah ;  joy  and  gladness 
shall  be  found  therein,  thanksgiving  and  the  voice  of  melody." 
(Ver.  3.) 

The  next  (ver.  4 — 6)  goes  farther  and  calls  them  Jehovah's 
people  and  His  nation :  "  Hearken,"  &c.  [the  word  is  a  different 
one  from  that  more  general  term  in  ver.  1,  7,  and  implies 
attention.]  It  is  a  total  mistake  in  Bishop  Lowth  to  think 
the  address  in  this  case  is  made  not  to  the  Jews  but  to  the 
Gentiles,  "  as  in  all  reason  it  ought  to  be ! "  It  was  the  more 
required  as  a  comfort  for  the  Jews,  because  they  have  been 
so  long  called  Lo-ammi.  (Compare  Hosea  i.,  ii.)  The  peoples 
are  distinguished,  for  whose  light  His  judgments  should  rest, 
as  His  arms  should  judge  them,  while  His  righteousness  and 
salvation  established  for  ever  should  be  the  portion  of  Israel. 

The  third  (ver.  7,  8)  calls  them  to  hear,  as  knowing  right- 
eousness and  having  Jehovah's  law  in  their  hearts.  Why 
should  such  fear  the  reproach  and  revilings  of  men  whom  the 
moth  and  the  worm,  little  and  feeble  as  they  are,  should 
devour  ? 

Similarly  the  Spirit  now  answers,  as  it  were  in  the  remnant. 
First  (ver.  9 — 16)  they  call  for  the  power  of  Jehovah  to  assert 
itself  against  their  mighty  foes,  as  of  old  against  proud  Egypt. 
"  Awake,  awake,  put  on  strength,  0  arm  of  Jehovah ;  awake, 
as  in  the  ancient  days,  in  the  generations  of  old.  Art  thou 
not  it  that  hath  cut  Rahab,  and  wounded  the  dragon?  Art 
thou  not  it  which  hath  dried  the  sea,  the  waters  of  the  great 
deep;  that  hath  made  the  depths  of  the  sea  a  way  for  the 
ransomed  to  pass  over?"      (Ver.   9,  10.)     They  predict  their 


CHAPTERS   LI.,    LII.  229 

deliverance  in  verse  11,  and  Jehovah's  reply  to  their  trembling 
hearts  in  terms  as  full  of  pathos  as  of  grandeur  in  verses  12 — 16. 

Next  (ver.  17 — 23),  the  Spirit  of  God  summons  Jerusalem 
to  arise  and  stand  up,  with  a  most  vivid  description  of  her 
reeling  under  Jehovah's  judgment  without  one  of  her  sons 
to  guide  or  help,  and  of  His  taking  the  cup  from  her  hand, 
not  here  to  drink  it  Himself,  but  to  put  it  into  the  hands  of 
their  oppressors. 

Then,  thirdly  (chap.  Hi.  1 — 10),  Zion  is  called  to  awake 
and  put  on  strength :  "  Put  on  thy  beautiful  garments,  O 
Jerusalem,  the  holy  city."  The  days  of  Egypt  and  of  Assyria 
should  never  return :  no  more  should  the  uncircumcised  and 
the  unclean  come  there.  Beautiful  then  in  their  eyes,  as  in 
His,  are  the  feet  of  him  that  brings  good  tidings  and  publishes 
peace.  Before  (chap,  xl.),  the  cities  of  Judah  were  told, 
"Behold  your  God."  Now  Zion  hears,  "Thy  God  reigneth!" 
The  watchmen  lift  up  their  voice,  singing,  not  warning ;  the 
very  wastes  of  Jerusalem,  so  long  forsaken,  sing  together  in 
their  irrepressible  joy.  "For  Jehovah  hath  comforted  his 
people,  he  hath  redeemed  Jerusalem.  Jehovah  hath  made 
bare  his  holy  arm  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  nations  ;  and  all  the 
ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  the  salvation  of  our  God."  (Ver. 
9,  10.) 

Lastly,  the  strain  closes  with  the  peremptory  call  to  act 
consistently  with  the  holiness  of  Jehovah  and  of  His  sanctuary. 
"  Depart  ye,  depart  ye,  go  ye  out  from  thence,  touch  no  unclean 
, thing ;  go  ye  out  of  the  midst  of  her ;  be  ye  clean,  that  bear 
the  vessels  of  Jehovah."  It  should  not  be,  as  of  old,  in  hurry 
and  anxiety,  however  guided  and  delivered  even  then.  But 
the  greatest  triumphs  of  their  fathers  fade  in  the  glorious 
intervention  of  Jehovah  which  the  children  now  know.  "  For 
ye  shall  not  go  out  with  haste,  nor  go  by  flight :  for  Jehovah 
will  go  before  you;  and  the  God  of  Israel  will  be  your  rere- 
ward."  (Ver.  12.)  It  is  in  truth  and  in  its  fullest  display 
the  day  of  the  Lord  when  Israel  for  ever  leave  the  unclean 
Gentiles,  henceforth  to  be  a  richer  blessing  to  them  than  their 
evils  had  been  a  snare  and  ruin  to  Israel. 


CHAPTERS   LIL  13,  LIII. 

This  section  is  complete  in  itself,  though  it  assumes  the  truth 
already  before  us  in  chapter  1.,  pursues  it  farther  and  more 
profoundly,  and  thus  completes  the  foundation  of  all  that  follows. 

The  elder  Jewish  interpreters  did  not  contest  the  applica- 
tion to  the  Messiah.  Thus  Jonathan  Ben  Uzziel  expressly 
speaks  to  this  effect  in  the  Chaldee  paraphrase  (given  in  the 
Antwerp,  Paris,  and  London  Polyglotts).  So  the  Talmud 
Babyl.  (in  Tr.  Sanhedrim,  cap.  helek,  fol.  98)  applies  to  the 
Messiah  in  liii.  4.  Again,  the  book  of  Zohar  confirms  this  in 
the  comment  on  Exodus  (fol.  95,  col.  3),  and  the  Mechilta 
(according  to  the  Jalkut  Shimoni,  part  ii.  fol.  90,  col.  1)  is  no 
less  distinct,  as  even  Aben  Ezra,  Abarbanel,  and  other  distin- 
guished men  among  their  later  authors  confess.  I  am  indebted 
to  another  who  has  supplied  some  of  these  references  for  the 
striking  fact  that  even  now,  in  the  prayers  of  the  synagogue 
used  universally,  there  is  the  clearest  witness  to  the  same  truth. 
For  instance,  at  the  Passover  they  pray  in  these  terms:  "Hasten 
and  cause  the  shadows  to  flee  away.  Let  him  be  exalted  and 
extolled  and  be  high,  who  is  now  despised.  Let  him  deal 
prudently  and  reprove  and  sprinkle  many  nations."  Again,  in 
the  prayers  for  the  day  of  Atonement,  there  is  as  plain  an  allu- 
sion to  the  righteous  Anointed  bearing  the  yoke  of  iniquities 
and  transgression,  wounded  because  of  it,  and  men  (or  Israel  at 
least)  healed  by  His  wound.  The  translator  (D.  Levi)  tries  to 
turn  part  of  the  prayer  aside  to  Josiah,  as  do  some  of  the 
Rabbis ;  but  the  prayer  expressly  alludes  to  the  Messiah  in  one 
of  these  references  to  Isaiah  liii.  just  cited  even  according  to 
the  same  person. 

The  more  modern  writers,  who  dread  the  ancient  application 
of  their  fathers,  have  invented  a  double  means  of  escape,  either 
by  some  distinguished  man  like  Josiah  or  Jeremiah,  or  by  the 
Jewish  people  elsewhere  styled  "  my  servant "  in  the  prophecy. 


CHAPTERS   LII.,   LIII.  231 

But  in  vain.  This  section  is  so  punctually  and  exclusively 
applicable  to  our  Lord  that  these  efforts  only  prove  the  will  of 
unbelief  and  its  failure.  We  have  seen  already  in  the  begin- 
ning of  chapter  xlix.  Christ,  the  servant,  substituted  for  Israel 
who  had  been  altogether  wanting.  We  have  seen  in  chapter  1. 
that  the  godly  Jews  are  exhorted  to  obey  the  voice  of  this  ser- 
vant of  Jehovah,  humbled  though  He  has  been  among  men, 
but  vindicated  of  God. 

The  three  closing  verses  of  lii.  open  the  new  and  full  view 
of  Messiah  suffering  and  exalted  in  connection  with  Israel ;  for 
this  last  qualification  needs  to  be  borne  in  mind  lest  man 
should  look  for  that  which  it  is  no  part  of  the  Spirit's  work  here 
to  reveal.  The  union  of  Jew  and  Gentile  in  one  body,  as  well 
as  Christ  head  over  all  things  to  it,  His  church,  is,  as  the 
apostle  tells  us,  a  mystery,  that  is,  a  secret  not  revealed  in  Old 
Testament  times.  Many  points  true  of  the  church  and  the 
Christian  are  revealed  in  this  prophecy  as  in  others;  but  that 
heavenly  union  nowhere  until  His  rejection,  and  not  fully  till 
the  apostle  was  entrusted  with  the  administration  of  it. 

The  exalted  Messiah  of  Israel  is  then  before  us,  who  erst 
was  covered  with  shame  and  bent  to  such  humiliation  as  was 
never  before  nor  since  the  portion  of  the  sons  of  men.  Hence 
many  were  dumb  through  astonishment,  or  rather  perhaps 
abhorrence — "  shocked  "  at  Him :  they  had  looked  for  Messiah 
far  otherwise.  His  lowly  mien  and  surroundings  of  life  and 
labours  first  disappointed ;  His  meek  acceptance  of  insult  and 
suffering  drew  out  all  their  malice  and  aversion.  "  So  shall  he 
sprinkle  many  nations."  The  Septuagint  translates,  "  So  shall 
many  nations  regard  him  with  admiration,"  that  is,  it  would 
seem,  in  contrast  with  Jewish  vexation  and  hatred;  but  this 
supposes  a  different  verb  in  their  Hebrew  copies,  though  differ- 
ing only  very  slightly  in  form.  Some  of  the  ablest  Jewish 
critics  take  it  as  meaning  that  He  will  drop  the  word,  and  so 
teach  if  not  refresh  many  Gentiles.  Certainly  what  is  said  of 
kings  implies  a  reverent  and  subject  silence  before  Him. 
Thus  I  consider  that  verse  15  stands  in  antithesis  to  verse  14 : 
the  one  presenting  the  bitter  unbelieving  disappointment  of 


232  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

the  chosen,  the  other  the  beneficent  dealing  with  the  Gentiles, 
so  that  their  kings  are  mute  with  awe  in  His  presence,  which 
accordingly  cannot,  save  generally,  apply  at  this  time,  but  joins 
on  the  effects  of  His  advent  in  glory,  in  contrast  with  the  days 
of  His  flesh,  in  verse  14,  and  in  unison  with  the  opening  words 
of  verse  13.  The  apostle  only  uses  the  principle  of  the  last 
words  for  his  own,  going  out  with  the  gospel  where  no  other  had 
preceded,  and  no  sound  of  Christ  might  have  yet  reached ;  but 
he  in  no  way  treats  this  as  the  fulfilment  of  that  oracle. 

"  Behold  "  (says  God  now  through  His  prophet),  "  my  ser- 
vant shall  deal  prudently  [rather  prosper],  he  shall  be  exalted 
and  extolled  and  be  very  high.  As  many  were  astonished  at 
thee :  his  visage  was  so  marred  more  than  any  man,  and  his 
form  more  than  the  sons  of  men:  so  shall  he  sprinkle*  many 
nations;  the  kings  shall  shut  their  mouths  at  him:  for  that 
which  had  not  been  told  them  shall  they  see ;  and  that  which 
they  had  not  heard  shall  they  consider."  (Ver.  13 — 15.)  What 
can  be  less  congruous  than  the  facts  of  Josiah,  Jeremiah,  or  the 
Jewish  people  ?  Neither  the  king  nor  the  prophet  had  any 
such  destiny  as  could  be  fairly  brought  into  this  remarkable 
contrast  of,  first,  deep  shame,  then  wide  and  lofty  glory  before 
subject  nations  and  kings.  And  though  it  is  true,  as  we  have 
often  noticed,  that  "  my  servant "  sometimes  applies  to  Israel  in 
this  prophet,  there  are  always  definite  contextual  marks  which 
render  the  decision  by  no  means  difficult  or  doubtful.  This  is 
made  evident  and  certain  from  chapter  liii.,  where  there  is  the 
most  obvious  distinction  between  the  individual  in  question 
and  the  people  who  esteemed  Him  not,  though  He  bore  their 
griefs  and  carried  their  sorrows,  yea,  was  wounded  for  their 
transgressions,  and  brought   healing  to  them  by   His  stripes 


*  This  phrase  has  tormented  the  critics.  The  Fathers  in  general  apply  it 
to  the  spiritual  work  of  Christianity ;  the  ancient  Jews  for  the  most  part  to 
the  judicial  effect  of  Messiah's  kingdom  in  dispersing  or  casting  away  the 
Gentiles.  Some  of  the  old  versions  took  the  word  as  expressive  of  amazement. 
Gesenius  (in  his  Thes. )  comes  pretty  much  to  the  same  thing,  considering  the 
word  to  mean  the  effect  in  starting  from  their  seats  those  who  suddenly  see 
some  great  personage  when  it  was  least  expected. 


CHAPTERS   LIL,   LIU.  233 

when  bruised  for  their  iniquities.  To  identify  this  suffering 
One  with  the  people  from  whom  and  for  whom  He  thus 
suffered,  and  to  whom  He  afterwards  brings  such  signal  blessing, 
is  the  grossest  confusion  on  the  face  of  the  matter. 

But  let  us  turn  to  the  wondrous  words  of  our  God  from  these 
strange  vagaries  of  men.  Chapter  liii.  opens  with  the  confession 
and  implied  complaint  of  the  unbelief  of  men,  yea,  of  their  own 
unbelief;  for  Israel,  now  broken  down  in  sense  of  sin,  acknow- 
ledge that  it  was  not  merely  those  without  who  heeded  little  the 
report  of  the  Messiah,  but  that  they  too  themselves  had  been 
hard  and  rebellious  against  Him.  "Who  hath  believed  our 
report  ?  and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  Jehovah  revealed  ?  For  he 
shall  grow  up  before  him  as  a  tender  plant,  and  as  a  root  out  of 
a  dry  ground :  he  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness ;  and  when  we 
shall  see  him,  there  is  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire  him. 
He  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men;  a  man  of  sorrows,  and 
acquainted  with  grief:  and  we  hid,  as  it  were,  our  faces  from 
him;  he  was  despised,  and  we  esteemed  him  not.  Surely  he 
hath  borne  our  griefs  and  carried  our  sorrows :  yet  we  did 
esteem  him  stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted.  But  he  was 
wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for  our  iniqui- 
ties: the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him;  and  with 
his  stripes  we  are  healed.  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray ; 
we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way ;  and  Jehovah  hath 
laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."     (Ver.  1 — 6.) 

The  close  of  the  last  chapter  (ver.  13 — 15)  gave  us  Jehovah's 
contemplation  of  His  Anointed,  once  put  to  shame,  and  now  on 
the  summit  of  glory  before  every  eye.  Then  His  people  trace, 
in  view  of  Him,  their  past  and  most  guilty  blindness,  as  they 
think  of  His  wondrous  humiliation,  their  misjudgment  of  His 
life  and  death,  and  their  present  perception  of  its  cause  in  their 
sin  and  misery  from  which  He  had  come  to  save  them.  When 
they  had  of  old  beheld  His  path  of  shame  and  sufferings  from 
first  to  last,  they  understood  neither  the  grace  which  brought 
Him  down  so  low  nor  the  glories  that  should  follow. 

But  now  (verses  4 — 6)  they  are  taught  of  God,  and  avow 
before  Him  and  men  that  underneath  all  that  humiliation,  and, 


234  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

as  they  wrongly  thought,  personal  obnoxiousness  to  His  judgment, 
a  deeper  work  was  being  done :  first,  the  deepest  identification 
of  their  burden  on  His  own  heart,  as  He  went  up  and  down 
the  land  of  sorrow  (ver.  3),  and  finally  atonement.  "  But  he  was 
wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities: 
the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him  ;  and  with  his 
stripes  we  are  healed.  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray;  we 
have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way ;  and  Jehovah  hath  laid 
on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  (Ver.  5,  6.)  They  had  regarded 
Him,  on  the  contrary,  as  an  object  of  God's  displeasure,  and  justly 
cast  out  and  trampled  on.  (Yer.  3.)  But  it  was  a  misconception 
of  all  His  marvellous  grace,  and  an  oversight  of  their  own  deep 
necessities,  both  in  the  life  that  now  is,  and  yet  more  for  that 
which  is  to  come.  Hence  Matt.  viii.  17  justly  applies  the  first 
part  of  ver.  4  to  the  Lord,  as  He  relieved  the  afflictions  of  the 
Jews,  and  healed  their  diseases  in  His  ministry,  never  merely 
bringing  in  bare  power,  but  bearing  all  in  spirit  before  God, 
while  He  cured  them ;  as  1  Peter  ii.  24,  25  applies  verse  5  to 
His  work  for  our  sins  on  the  cross.  This  opens  the  mouth  in 
lowly  confession  of  sin ;  as  the  heart  can  then  feel  its  past  evil 
way,  and  each  judges  himself  before  God. 

In  verses  7 — 9  Jehovah  expresses  His  delight  in  the  moral 
beauty  which  shone  in  the  suffering  One,  affirms  on  His  part  the 
explanation  of  the  enigma  of  the  cross,  though  up  to  His  death 
and  burial  man  was  allowed  his  way  in  disposing  of  Jesus. 
"  He  was  oppressed,  and  he  was  afflicted,  yet  he  opened  not  his 
mouth ;  he  is  brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep 
before  her  shearers  is  dumb,  so  he  openeth  not  his  mouth.  He 
was  taken  from  prison  and  from  judgment :  and  who  shall 
declare  his  generation  ?  for  he  was  cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the 
living:  for  the  transgression  of  my  people  was  he  stricken. 
And  he  made  his  grave  with  the  wicked,  and  with  the  rich  in 
his  death  :*  because  he  had  done  no  violence,  neither  was  any 

*  The  phrase  used  here  is  most  expressive,  pniDaj  and  points  to  the 
intensive  and  exceptional  death  of  the  Holy  Sufferer,  as  concentrating  many 
— countless — deaths  in  that  one.  Henderson  takes  the  phrase  to  mean  "  after 
his  death." 


CHAPTERS   LI1.,   LIII.  235 

deceit  in  his  mouth."  (Ver.  7 — 9.)  The  plague-stroke  was 
upon  Him  for  the  transgression  of  the  people  of  Jehovah.  It 
was  not  the  outward  fact  simply  of  a  rejected  Messiah  to  which 
He  was  pleased  to  submit,  the  awful  proof  of  man's  and  Israel's 
moral  state ;  but  there  is  this  divine  key,  and  the  far  more  won- 
drous meeting  of  a  more  hidden  and  a  deeper  need,  even 
expiation. 

Israel  then  reiterate  the  blessed  truth  with  their  Amen,  pur- 
suing the  glorious  consequences  as  far  as  it  is  theirs  to  see  them. 
"Yet  it  pleased  Jehovah  to  bruise  him;  he  hath  put  him  to 
grief:  when  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  he  shall 
see  his  seed,  he  shall  prolong  his  days,  and  the  pleasure  of 
Jehovah  shall  prosper  in  his  hand."  (Ver.  10.)  Here  it  is  the 
atoning  work,  and  the  suffering  of  the  Lord  is  dwelt  on,  and  its 
aspect  as  the  all-efficacious  offering  for  sin.  It  is  blessedly  true 
that  the  death  and  blood-shedding  of  the  Saviour  must  be  for 
propitiation ;  but  it  is  as  false  a  thought  as  the  enemy  of  souls 
ever  insinuated  that  this  propitiation  or  atonement  is  or  could 
be  according  to  God  and  His  word  without  His  sufferings  speci- 
fically, yea  that  suffering  which  was  the  deepest  expression  of 
God's  judgment  of  our  iniquities  when  He  who  knew  no  sin 
was  made  sin  for  us  and  forsaken  of  God.  His  blood  and  death 
when  viewed  as  expiatory  and  not  as  the  evidence  simply  of 
man's  wickedness,  are  the  blood  and  death  of  Him  who  really 
bore  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree,  and  endured  the  to 
us  unfathomable  judgment  of  God,  when  not  the  Jews  only  but 
God  hid  His  face  from  Him.  Can  a  Christian  slight  this  divine 
abandonment  of  Him  who  suffered,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  to 
bring  us  to  God  ?  He  may,  but  only  as  he  may  be  guilty  of 
grievous,  not  to  say  fatal  error.* 

*  I  am  aware  that  Jesuit  preachers  are  wont  to  draw  moving  pictures,  as  of 
the  physical  torments  of  the  lost,  so  of  the  external  sufferings  of  our  blessed 
Lord  (i.e.,  the  human  rather  than  divine  side).  Nor  do  I  deny  the  substantial 
truth  of  what  they  allege,  but  only  their  use  of  it  to  the  exclusion  of  other 
truths,  yet  more  weighty.  Their  reason  is  obvious.  Unspiritual  themselves, 
they  appeal  to  that  which  strikes  the  senses  and  can  excite  the  feelings  or  the 
fears  of  their  least  spiritual  auditors.  But  men  of  a  different  stamp  have 
always  recognised  that  the  word  of  God  reveals  a  far  deeper  truth,  not  of  what 


236  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

The  chapter  closes  with  Jehovah's  confirmation,  repeating 
the  glorious  results  of  both  grace  and  government,  and  in  each 
case  connecting  them  with  the  work  of  salvation.  "  From  the 
trouble  of  his  soul  shall  he  see  and  be  satisfied :  through  his 
knowledge    shall    my    righteous     servant    instruct    many    in 

was  before  the  eye  or  by  the  hand  of  man  merely,  but  of  what  passed  unseen 
between  God  and  Christ  in  that  awful  hour.  So,  to  take  an  instance  from  one 
of  the  better  sort,  Archbishop  Leighton  rightly  distinguishes  this  :  "In  that 
outside  of  His  suffering,  the  visible  kind  of  death  inflicted  on  Him,  that  it  was 
hanging  on  the  tree  of  the  cross,  there  was  an  analogy  with  the  end  and  main 
work  which  was  ordered  by  the  Lord  with  regard  unto  that,  being  a  death 
declared  accursed  by  the  law,  as  the  Apostle  Paul  observes,  and  so 
declaring  Him  that  was  God  blessed  for  ever  to  have  been  made  a  curse,  that 
is,  accounted  as  accursed  for  us,  that  we  might  be  blessed  in  Him,  '  in  whom, ' 
according  to  the  promise,  '  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  are  blessed. ' 

' '  But  that  wherein  lay  the  strength  and  main  stress  of  His  sufferings  was 
this  invisible  weight  that  none  could  see  that  gazed  on  Him ;  but  He  felt  more 
than  all  the  rest.  In  this  are  three  things.  1.  The  weight  of  sin.  2.  The 
transferring  of  it  upon  Christ.     3.  His  bearing  of  it, 

"1.  He  bare  sin  as  a  heavy  burden  :  so  the  word  of  bearing  in  general, 
dvr]veyK£v,  and  those  two  words,  particularly  used  by  the  prophet  to  which 
these  allude,  mvj  hsb  are  the  bearing  of  some  great  mass  or  load,  and  that 
sin  is.  For  it  hath  the  wrath  of  an  offended  God  hanging  on  it,  indissolubly 
tied  to  it  ;  of  which  who  can  bear  the  least":  ....  Yea.  to  consider  in 
the  present  subject  where  we  may  best  read  what  it  is,  it  was  a  heavy  load  to 
Christ,  where  the  psalmist,  speaking  in  the  person  of  Christ,  complains  heavily, 
'  Innumerable  evils  have  compassed  me  about.  Mine  iniquities  '  (not  His,  as 
done  by  Him,  but  yet  His  by  His  undertaking  to  pay  for  them)  they  '  have 
taken  hold  of  me,  so  that  I  am  not  able  to  look  up  ;  they  are  more  than  the 
hairs  of  my  head :  therefore  my  heart  faileth  me.'  And  sure  that  which  pressed 
Him  so  sore,  who  upholds  heaven  and  earth,  no  other  in  heaven  or  earth  could 
have  sustained  or  surmounted,  but  would  have  sunk  or  perished  -under  it. 
Was  it,  think  you,  th^^oicof  that  common  outside  of  His  death,  though  very 
painful,  that  drew  such  a  word  from  Him,  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me  ?  Or  was  it  the  fear  of  it  beforehand,  that  pressed  a  sweat  of  blood 
from  Him?  Xo,  i£ was  this  burden. of  sin,  the  first  of  which  was  committed  in 
the  garden  of  Eden,  that  then  began  to  be  laid  upon  Him,  and  fastened  upon  His 
shoulders  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  ten  thousand  times  heavier  than  the  cross 
which  He  was  caused  to  bear :  that  might  be  for  a  while  turned  over  to  another, 
hut  this  could  not.  This  was  the  cup  He  trembled  more  at.  than  that  gall 
and  vinegar  after  to  be  offered  Him  by  His  cruciflers,  or  any  other  part  of  His 
external  sufferings.  It  was  +-*1*  Ji^ftT  SUP  ftf  WTi#l  fll7ft.it,n  sin  tnat  His  Father 
put  into  His  hand  and  caused  Him  to  drink,  the  very  same  thing  that  is  here 
called  the  'bearing  our  sins  in  his  body.'     .     .     .     Jesus  Christ  is  both  the 


CHAPTERS   LIL,   LIII.  237 

righteousness ;  and  he  shall  bear  their  iniquities."  Such  seems 
the  simple,  true,  and  exact  sense  of  the  verse  which  has  been 
lost  sight  of  very  often  by  translators,  and  still  more  by 
preachers,  as  well  as  through  a  different  influence  by  Jews. 
There  is  no  need  of  imparting  an  evangelical  phrase,  which 
really  misleads  "  by  the  knowledge  of  himself."*  The  broad 
facts  in  the  Lord's  history  are  before  us:  His  ministry,  when 
through  His  knowledge  He  instructed  many  in  righteousness; 
His  death, -when  He  bore  their  iniquities  on  the  tree.  The  order 
is  quite  clear  and  sound ;  and  there  is  no  need  for  taking  the 
copulative  in  a  causal  sense,  or  in  any  other  than  its  own  strict 
meaning.  It  was  thus  the  Lord  taught  on  the  mount  as  well 
as  in  other  places  and  times  during  His  sojourn  on  earth. 
Then  came  another  and  mightier  work  which  could  be  shared 
by  none.  Others  might  suffer  in  love  or  in  righteousness ;  He 
not  merely  in  both,  but  He  alone  for  the  sins  of  others  at  God's 


great  high,  priest  and  the  great  sacrifice  in  one.  And  this  seems  to  be  here 
implied  in  these  words,  '  Himself  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body ; '  which  the 
legal  priest  did  not  :  so  'He  made  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin.'  He  offered  up 
Himself,  His  whole  self.  In  the  history  of  the  gospel,  it  is  said,  His  soul  was 
heavy  and  chiefly  suffered  ;  but  the  bearing  in  His  body  and  offering  it,  that  is 
oftenest  mentioned  as  the  visible  part  of  the  sacrifice^  and  in  His  way  of  offer- 
ing it,  not  excluding  the  other.  Thus  we  are  exhorted  to  give  our  bodies  in 
opposition  to  the  bodies  of  beasts,  and  they  are  therefore  called  a  living 
sacrifice,  which  they  are  not  without  the  soul.  Thus  His  bearing  in  His  body 
imports  the  bearing  in  His  soul  too/' — The  Works  of  R.  Leighton,  Jerment's 
edition,  1805.     Vol.  i.,  pp.  370—376. 

I  may  add  that  this  was  a  point  of  objection  by  Cardinal  Bellarmine  to 
Calvin,  who  maintained  the  same  doctrine  as  is  carped  at  now-a-days,  and  not 
merely  by  rationalist  speculators,  such  as  Mr.  Maurice  and  his  friends.  It 
seems  to  me  a  peculiar  mind  which  could  cite  1  Peter  iii.  18  in  a  paragraph 
designed  to  prove  that  reconciliation  or  atonement  is  never  in  connection  with 
Christ's  sufferings  specifically.  It  is  false  that  the  statement  they  oppose 
separates  His  sufferings  from  His  blood  and  death  :  on  the  contrary,  while 
distinguishing  for  other  points,  the  object  was  to  insist  on  the  inseparableness 
of  His  sufferings  with  His  blood  and  death  for  atonement.  The  admission 
that  they  are  not  separated  in  the  Spirit's  mind  for  atonement  is  my  thesis, 
which  is  yielded;  but  it  is  wrong  to  say,  "the  two  are  never  separated." 
It  is  merely  inattention  to  scripture  and  claims  no  answer. 

*  Even  Dr.  Henderson,  who  is  often  free  enough  from  popular  prejudice, 
gives  this. 


238  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

hand,  as  we  were  expressly  told  in  the  verse  before.  But  the 
Spirit  never  tires  of  the  wondrous  fact,  and  loves  To"  present  it 
on  all  sides,  from  God  to  man,  and  from  man  to  God.  Dan. 
xii.  3  proves  irrefutably  that  the  Hebrew  will  bear  the  sense  of 
instruct  in  righteousness  as  well  as  justify:  which  of  the  two 
depends  on  the  contextual  necessity.  There  indeed  it  must 
mean  the  former;  for,  first,  teachers  cannot  "justify"  in  the 
forensic  sense  (which  is  the  true  doctrinal  force  of  the  word, 
when  thus  employed  as  to  the  soul  of  a  believer) ;  and,  secondly, 
as  it  is  there  a  question  of  the  many  (the  apostate  mass  of  the 
Jews,  which  is  the  technical  value  of  D\nn  in  Daniel),  it 
must  mean  "instruct  in"  rather  than  "bring  to  righteousness,"  for 
they  do  not  bring  them.  Hence  I  doubt  not  it  means  similarly  in 
this  place,  though  it  be  here  "many,"  not  "the  many,"  as 
there.  But  souls  need  more  than  instruction,  were  it  ever  so 
perfect,  as  the  Lord's  surely  must  be.  Hence  it  is  added,  "  And 
he  shall  bear  their  iniquities."  He  suffers  for  them  according 
to  the  scriptures.  "  Therefore  will  I  divide  him  a  portion  with 
the  great,  and  he  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the  strong ;  because 
he  hath  poured  out  his  soul  unto  death :  and  he  was  numbered 
with  the  transgressors ;  and  he  bare  the  sin  of  many,  and  made 
intercession  for  the  transgressors." 

The  notion  of  the  later  Jews,  represented  by  Dr.  Philippson 
for  instance,  that  it  is  Jacob  as  a  whole,  is  a  mere  subterfuge 
that  Israel's  sufferings  conduce  to  the  happiness  of  the  nations. 
"  They  are  become  the  martyrs  of  the  acknowledgment  of 
the  ONE,  and  by  their  exaltation  the  nations  will  be  directed 
with  the  strength  of  conviction  to  the  sole  and  only  God.     This 

view  of  the  prophet  is  truly  sublime The  doubts, 

therefore,  which  the  Jewish  commentators  (Redak  and 
Abarbanel)  have  raised  here,  that  this  procedure  would  be 
opposed  to  the  justice  of  God,  which  must  allow  every  one  to 
bear  the  punishment  of  what  he  has  himself  committed,  can 
only  be  applied  to  individuals,  while  the  prophet  had  in  view 
the  whole  development  of  mankind."  Now  the  fact  is  admitted, 
even  by  the  Rabbis  who  brought  in  this  idea,  that  the  ancient 
Jews  referred  the  suffering  but  righteous  servant  of  this  passage 


CHAPTERS   LIL,   LIII.  239 

to  the  Messiah,  and  this  not  of  some  but  of  the  elders  with  one 
mouth.  However  I  do  not  cite  any  such  confessions  as  authori- 
ties in  the  least,  but  scripture  only.  Here  all  is  light.  The 
"  we  "  of  this  section,  as  elsewhere,  is  unquestionably  Jewish,  not 
Gentile ;  as  unquestionably  distinct  from  the  One  whose 
position  and  relation  to  God  they  confess  they  had  so  fatally  mis- 
conceived. To  understand  the  "we"  of  the  Gentiles  is  an 
impossibility ;  to  take  both  "  we "  and  "  he "  as  Israel,  or  the 
prophetic  body,  is  too  absurd  and  self-contradictory.  "  He  "  is  a 
real  individual  who  suffers  from  Israel,  instead  of  being  the  same. 
The  interchange  of  tenses  is  no  more  difficult  here  than  else- 
where. It  is  habitual  with  the  prophets,  and  with  Isaiah  no  less 
than  others.  That  Israel  was  viewed  as  the  servant  is  true ;  and 
Israel  failed  as  such ;  then  comes  Messiah  the  Servant,  who 
glorifies  God,  yet  suffers  and  dies,  but,  as  here  we  learn,  it  was  for 
Israel,  though  not  for  Israel  only;  and  then  Israel  sifted  and 
repentant,  and  believing  in  Him,  are  viewed  in  consequence  as 
servants  for  His  glory  by  and  by.  Such  is  the  scope  of  these 
later  chapters  of  Isaiah. 

But  the  idea  of  Israel  being  here  meant  by  the  suffering 
One  is  false  morally  as  exegetically.  For  it  supposes  that  the 
Gentiles  will  yet  acknowledge  that  Israel  had  to  bear  this  hard 
fate  solely  for  their  redemption  out  of  their  sinful  state  (4 — 6), 
so  that  Israel  through  the  patience  which  they  exhibit  notwith- 
standing all  their  sufferings,  since  they  never  departed  from  the 
only  God,  shall  be  placed  on  a  yet  higher  eminence  (7 — 9). 
Assuredly  the  Gentiles  will  yet  confess  their  sins,  not  only  their 
sins  against  God,  but  their  cruel  persecution  and  jealousy  and  envy 
of  Israel.  Assuredly  they  will  yet  trust  with  the  trust  that  is 
alas  !  yet  to  be,  but  is  not  yet,  Israel's.  But  a  more  flagrant 
mistake  was  never  made  than  that  Israel  can  take  the  ground 
of  unswerving  righteousness  like  the  suffering  Messiah  here. 
Take  alone  the  very  first  chapter  of  Isaiah:  is  not  this  Israel 
suffering;  but  is  it  for  righteousness  ?  Is  it  not  for  their  own 
appalling  sins  ?  And  if  it  be  said  that  such  they  were  of  old, 
but  that  all  is  changed  when  we  arrive  at  a  later  day,  such  as 
Isa.  liii.,  I  answer  let  them  see  their  divinely  painted  portrait  in 


240  LECTUKES   ON   ISAIAH. 

its  neighbourhood,  in  Isa.  lvii. — lix.,  and  let  them  say  where  is  the 
conscience  which  can  so  trifle  with  the  word  of  God  and  the 
facts  of  their  own  hearts  and  ways. 

No :  reading  Isa.  liii.  we  find  ourselves  in  the  midst  of  sacrifi- 
cial imagery,  of  atonement  for  sin,  of  intercession  for  sinners;  arid 
these  sins  are  pre-eminently  Israel's,  as  will  be  the  blessedness. 
I  heartily  admit  this  last,  and  rejoice  and  give  God  thanks  for 
the  grace  He  will  yet  extend  to  His  ancient  people.  But  that 
grace  will  partly  prove  its  genuineness  by  the  confession  of  their 
own  sins,  above  all  against  their  own  'Messiah,  not  in  self- 
righteousness  pretending  to  have  been  a  suffering  Messiah  themT 
selves  for  the  Gentiles.  There  is  indeed  vicarious  suffering  here, 
a  holy  substitute  atoning  for  the  guilty  before  God ;  but  it  is 
Messiah  for  Israel  expressly,  though,  not  exclusively ;  not  in  the 
most  distant  hint  of  it  Israel  suffering  for  the  Gentiles.  They 
suffered  from  them  far,  far  too  much;  but  they  will  never  suffer 
for  them ;  but  the  only  spotless  .Lamb  oi'  God,  Immanuel,  died 
for  that  nation,  for  Israel,  though — thanks  be  to  God — for  us 
also.  Worthily  therefore  is  He  now  exalted,  and  we  are  in  living 
union  with  Him  who  sits  on  the  throne  of  God.  This  how- 
ever is  not  the  point  here,  but  His  exaltation  over  the  earth 
and  the  nations  when  Israel  come  to  own  their  sins  in  the  recog- 
nition of  their  suffering  but  then  glorified  Messiah. 


CHAPTERS  LIV,  LV. 

How  beautifully  seasonable  is  the  voice  of  the  Spirit  calling  on 
Jerusalem  to  sing,  after  His  own  clear  and  full  prediction  of 
Messiah  rejected  of  Israel  and  bruised  of  Jehovah  in  atonement! 
Indeed  the  last  section  of  the  prophecy  gave  us  a  most  striking 
and  instructive  rehearsal  or  dialogue  between  God  and  His 
people,  about  Messiah,  His  sufferings  and  the  glories  that  should 
follow.  Fitly  therefore  follows  the  invitation  to  her  who  had 
sorrowed  so  long  and  so  justly  now  to  rejoice  because  of  her  new 
blessing  in  His  grace. 

"  Sing,  0  barren,  thou  that  didst  not  bear ;  break  forth  into 
singing,  and  cry  aloud,  thou  that  didst  not  travail  with  child : 
for  more  are  the  children  of  the  desolate  than  the  children  of  the 
married  wife,  saith  Jehovah."     (Ver.  1.) 

Never  ought  it  to  have  been  a  question  who  is  meant.  As 
usual,  however,  the  commentators  have  confused  what  is  plain 
and  agreed  in  scarce  anything  but  departure  from  the  true 
sense  and  aim.  The  occasion  of  stumbling  they  have  in  general 
found,  partly  in  their  habit  of  excluding  the  Jews  from  the 
prophets  and  so  judaising  the  Christians  -(limiting  themselves  to 
the  past  and  present,  without  taking  in  the  future),  partly  from 
a  misunderstanding  of  Galatians  iv.  27,  through  mixing  it  up 
with  the  "  allegory  "  of  Sarah  and  Hagar.  But  who  does  not  see 
that  the  citation  of  the  prophet  connects  itself  rather  with  Jer- 
usalem which  is  above,  in  contrast  with  Jerusalem  which  then 
was  ?  When  the  prophecy  is  fulfilled  in  the  millennial  day,  God 
will  count  those  who  now  believe  to  be  Jerusalem's  children,  as 
well  as  the  race  to  come  in  that  day.  Doubly  thus  it  will  be 
verified  that  more  are  the  children  of  the  desolate  than  the 
children  of  the  married  wife.  For  what  fruit  of  the  most 
flourishing  times,  say  under  David  or  Solomon,  could  compare 
with  the  gathering  in  of  the  Christian  saints  since  the  Jews  lost 
their  place  as  the  recognized  witness  and  wife  of  Jehovah,  or, 

Q 


'24:2  LECTURES   UN    ISAIAH. 

again,  with  the  vast  progeny  which  Jehovah  will  give  her  after 
her  long  desolation,  when  His  reign  shall  be  displayed  over  the 
earth  ?     Consult  chapters  xlix.  13—23 ;  lx.  8,  9. 

It  is  important  to  see,  on  the  one  hand,  that  though  it  is 
according  to  scripture  to  regard  Christians  mystically  as  the 
children  of  desolate  Jerusalem  far  outnumbering  those  of  her 
married  estate  of  old,  the  church,  on  the  other  hand,  is  not  yet 
presented  by  God's  word  as  in  the  relationship  of  the  wife  either 
desolate  or  married. 

The  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  will  not  have  made  herself  ready 
till  she  has  been  caught  up  to  heaven  glorified,  and  the  harlot 
Babylon,  the  anti-church,  has  been  judged  of  Jehovah  God. 
The  real  position  of  the  church  meanwhile  is  that  of  one 
espoused ;  her  responsibility  is  to  keep  herself  as  a  chaste  virgin 
for  Christ.  The  marriage  will  be  in  heaven,  just  before  the 
Lord  and  His  glorified  saints  appear  for  the  destruction  of  the 
Antichrist  and  all  his  allies.     (Comp.  Rev.  xix.) 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  undeniable  that  the  Jews,  or  Zion  if 
you  will,  had  the  place  of  nearness  to  Jehovah,  which  is  repre- 
sented under  the  figure  of  the  marriage-tie,  that  she  had  been 
faithless  and  played  the  whore  with  many  lovers  (even  the  idols 
of  the  Gentiles),  and  that  in  consequence  she  was  divorced,  she 
became  a  widow  and  desolate  under  the  righteous  dealing  of 
God.  Xo  one  in  the  least  familiar  with  the  prophets  can  have 
failed  to  notice  this  and  more  said  of  Israel.  Then  it  was  she 
became  barren  and  did  not  bear.  Praise  is  still  silent  for  God 
in  Zion ;  but  the  vow  shall  yet  be  performed  to  Him ;  and  the 
barren  one  shall  sing  and  be  no  more  barren  but  bear,  astonished 
to  find  during  those  clays  of  literal  barrenness  such  an  abundant 
offspring  in  the  saints  glorified  on  high,  whom  grace  has  been  the 
while  actively  bringing  in. 

Xor  is  this  all.  "  Enlarge  the  place  of  thy  tent,  and  let 
them  stretch  forth  the  curtains  of  thine  habitations ;  spare  not, 
lengthen  thy  cords,  and  strengthen  thy  stakes ;  for  thou  shalt 
break  forth  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left;  and  thy  seed 
shall  inherit  the  Gentiles,  and  make  the  desolate  cities  to  be 
inhabited/'     (Ver.  2,  3.)     The  land,  the  earth,  must  be  filled 


CHAPTERS   LIV.,    LV.  243 

with  a  suited  seed ;  for  Jehovah  shall  be  king  over  all  the  earth  : 
in  that  day  shall  there  be  one  Jehovah  and  His  name  one. 
Yea,  Jehovah  deigns  to  be  the  husband  of  Zion,  not  now  a 
testimony  and  display  of  responsibility  of  man  under  law,  but  in 
the  efficacy  of  grace  when  glorying  is  no  more  in  the  flesh  but 
in  Jehovah.  "  Fear  not ;  for  thou  shalt  not  be  ashamed  :  neither 
be  thou  confounded ;  for  thou  shalt  not  be  put  to  shame :  for 
thou  shalt  forget  the  shame  of  thy  youth,  and  shalt  not  remem- 
ber the  reproach  of  thy  widowhood  any  more.  For  thy  Maker 
is  thine  husband;  Jehovah  of  hosts  is  His  name;  and  thy 
Redeemer  the  Holy  One  of  Israel ;  the  God  of  the  whole  earth 
shall  he  be  called.  For  Jehovah  hath  called  thee  as  a  woman 
forsaken  and  grieved  in  spirit,  and  a  wife  of  youth,  when  thou 
wast  refused,  saith  thy  God."     (Ver.  4 — 6.) 

Thus,  and  thus  only,  our  chapter  flows  in  its  own  proper 
channel :  the  exclusion  of  Israel  by  and  by,  and  the  appropria- 
tion of  it  to  the  church  as  its  intended  scope,  produce  nothing  but 
violence  and  confusion.  It  is  not  true  that  God  has  forsaken 
the  church  .even  for  a  small  moment,  nor  that  in  a  little  wrath 
He  hides  His  face  for  an  instant  from  the  Christian.  Of  the 
Jew  as  such  it  is  precisely  the  fact:  as  surely  will  He  gather 
His  ancient  people  in  His  mercy  for  ever.  "For  a  small 
moment  have  I  forsaken  thee ;  but  with  great  mercies  will  I 
gather  thee.  In  a  little  wrath  I  hid  my  face  from  thee  for  a 
moment;  but  with  everlasting  kindness  will  I  have  mercy  on 
thee,  saith  Jehovah  thy  Redeemer.  For  this  is  as  the  waters  of 
Noah  unto  me:  for  as  I  have  sworn  that  the  waters  of  Noah 
should  no  more  go  over  the  earth :  so  have  I  sworn  that  I  would 
not  be  wroth  with  thee,  nor  rebuke  thee.  For  the  mountains 
shall  depart,  and  the  hills  be  removed ;  but  my  kindness  shall 
not  depart  from  thee,  neither  shall  the  covenant  of  my  peace  be 
removed,  saith  Jehovah  that  hath  mercy  on  thee."    (Ver.  7 — 10.) 

No  doubt  the  application  to  the  Maccabean  epoch  falls 
infinitely  'short  of  the  terms  of  blessing,  and  indeed  casts  no 
small  slight  on  the  character  of  the  word  of  God.  But  this  is 
the  fault,  not  of  scripture,  but  of  its  misreaders.  A  people  are 
in  question  who,   having  once  stood  in  full  favour   and   near 


244  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

relationship  to  Jehovah,  forfeited  it  for  a  season,  and  finally  are 
restored  more  than  ever  and  for  ever.  There  is  but  one  such 
people :  impossible  that  God  should  fail  to  have  mercy  on  Israel. 
"  0  thou  afflicted,  tossed  with  tempest,  and  not  comforted, 
behold,  I  will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair  colours,  and  lay  thy  found- 
ations with  sapphires.  And  I  will  make  thy  windows  of 
agates,  and  thy  gates  of  carbuncles,  and  all  thy  borders  of 
pleasant  stones.  And  all  thy  children  shall  be  taught  of 
Jehovah ;  and  great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  children.  In 
righteousness  shalt  thou  be  established :  thou  shalt  be  far  from 
oppression ;  for  thou  shalt  not  fear :  and  from  terror ;  for  it  shall 
not  come  near  thee.  Behold,  they  shall  surely  gather  together, 
but  not  by  me :  whosoever  shall  gather  together  against  thee 
shall  fall  for  thy  sake.  Behold,  I  have  created  the  smith  that 
bloweth  the  coals  in  the  fire,  and  that  bringeth  forth  an  instru- 
ment for  his  work ;  and  I  have  created  the  waster  to  destroy. 
No  weapon  that  is  formed  against  thee  shall  prosper ;  and  every 
tongue  that  shall  rise  against  thee  in  judgment  thou  shalt 
condemn.  This  is  the  heritage  of  the  servants  of  Jehovah,  and 
their  righteousness  is  of  me,  saith  Jehovah."  (Ver.  11 — 17.) 
Thus  it  is  not  everlasting  mercy  alone  reinstating  the  ancient 
people,  but  along  with  it  images  of  beauty  and  glory  with 
which  Jehovah  will  adorn  them.  Truth  will  be  theirs,  for  they 
all  shall  be  taught  of  Jehovah ;  peace  too,  great  peace,  shall  be 
enjoyed ;  and,  established  in  righteousness,  they  shall  be  far  from 
oppression  and  fear,  though  not  from  hostile  intention  (as  we 
know  from  Ezekiel  xxxviii.  xxxix.)  at  the  beginning  of  the 
millennium  and  (from  Revelation  xx.  7 — 9)  at  the  end.  But 
Israel  will  have  hoped  in  Jehovah,  and  not  in  vain :  for  with 
Jehovah  is  mercy,  and  with  Him  plenteous  redemption. 

Chapter  lv.  does  not,  after  these  remarks,  call  for  many 
words.  Its  connection  with  what  goes  before  is  plain  and  makes 
its  own  bearing  evident.  The  call  is  to  Israel,  but  in  such  large- 
ness of  language  as  to  warrant  an  aspect  to  the  Gentiles.  "  Ho, 
every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  he  that 
hath  no  money;    come  ye,  buy  and  eat;  yea  come,  buy  wine 


CHAPTERS   LIV.,   LV.  245 

and  milk,  without  money  and  without  price.  Wherefore  do 
ye  spend  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread  ?  and  your  labour 
for  that  which  satisfieth  not  ?  Hearken  diligently  unto  me,  and 
eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in 
fatness.  Incline  your  ear  and  come  unto  me :  hear,  and  your 
soul  shall  live ;  and  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with 
you,  even  the  sure  mercies  of  David.  Behold,  I  have  given  him 
for  a  witness  to  the  people,  a  leader  and  commander  to  the 
people."  (Ver.  1 — 4.)  Here  plainly  some  outstanding  One  is 
referred  to,  as  to  whom  no  believer  need  hesitate.  It  is  the 
Lord  Jesus,  but  in  relation  to  Israel  (ver.  3),  and  withal  a 
witness  and  commander  to  the  nations  (ver.  4).  The  thought- 
ful mind — at  least  taught  of  God — will  not  overlook  the  divine 
application  of  verse  3  to  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord,  contra- 
distinguished from  the  use  of  Psalm  ii.  7,  in  Acts  xiii.  33,  34. 
His  resurrection  is  both  the  security  for  the  accomplishment  of 
what  was  promised  to  Israel  and  the  occasion  for  the  outflow  of 
the  grace  which  calls  and  shall  yet  call  Gentiles  into  a  share  of 
God's  blessing  and  of  the  knowledge  of  Himself.  Before  death 
and  resurrection,  though  He  could  never  deny  His  deeper  glory 
or  His  grace  to  the  faith  that  saw  either,  He  was  not  sent  save  to 
the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel.  Crucified  and  risen,  He  is 
the  attractive  object  for  all  indiscriminately.  And  the  spirit 
of  this  wide  grace  breathes  fragrantly  through  this  chapter: 
"  Behold,  thou  shalt  call  a  nation  that  thou  knowest  not,  and 
nations  that  knew  not  thee  shall  run  unto  thee  because  of 
Jehovah  thy  God,  and  for  the  Holy  One  of  Israel ;  for  he  hath 
glorified  thee.  Seek  ye  Jehovah  while  he  may  be  found,  call 
ye  upon  him  while  he  is  near :  let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way 
and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts;  and  let  him  return 
unto  Jehovah,  and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him;  and  to  our 
God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon.  For  my  thoughts  are  not 
your  thoughts,  neither  are  your  ways  my  ways,  saith  Jehovah. 
For  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are  my  ways 
higher  than  your  ways,  and  my  thoughts  than  your  thoughts. 
For  as  the  rain  cometh  down,  and  the  snow  from  heaven,  and 
returneth   not  thither,  but  watereth    the   earth,  and   maketh 


246  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

it  bring  forth  and  bud,  that  it  may  give  seed  to  the  sower,  and 
bread  to  the  eater :  so  shall  my  word  be  that  goeth  forth  out  of 
my  mouth  :  it  shall  not  return  unto  me  void,  but  it  shall 
accomplish  that  which  I  please,  and  it  shall  prosper  in  the 
thing  whereto  I  sent  it.  For  ye  shall  go  out  with  joy,  and  be 
led  forth  with  peace :  the  mountains  and  the  hills  shall  break 
forth  before  you  into  singing,  and  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall 
clap  their  hands.  Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  the  fir 
tree,  and  instead  of  the  brier  shall  come  up  the  myrtle  tree : 
and  it  shall  be  to  Jehovah  for  a  name,  for  an  everlasting  sign 
that  shall  not  be  cut  off."     (Ver.  5—13.) 


— ~n 


CHAPTERS   LVL,   LVII. 

The  two  chapters  before  us  carry  on  the  same  line  of  truth 
we  have  seen  since  the  rejection  and  atoning  death  of  Christ 
came  distinctly  into  view,  and  pursue  the  consequences  of  that 
infinite  fact.  As  far  as  a  natural  division  goes,  I  should  be  dis- 
posed to  close  the  first  subject  treated  in  them  with  verse  8  of 
chapter  lvi.,  and  then  to  take  from  verse  9  to  the  end  of  chapter 
lvii.  as  completing  not  the  second  only  but  the  entire  section, 
which  began  with  chapter  xlix.  According  to  this  we  should 
have  here,  first,  the  ways  of  Jehovah  founded  on  the  Messiah's 
death  for  sin  in  respect  of  the  godly,  even  outside  Israel;  and, 
secondly,  His  ways,  when  He  was  displeased  with  the  ungodly,  not 
merely  outside  but  in  the  midst  of  Israel.  For  they  are  not  all 
Israel  who  are  of  Israel. 

Some  have  drawn  from  the  Lord's  citation  of  a  clause  of 
this  section,  that  He  intimates  its  then  approaching  accomplish- 
ment in  the  Christian  church.  Now  I  do  not  deny  that  we  have 
broad  moral  principles,  as  of  grace  on  God's  part  in  Isaiah  lv,  so 
in  its  flowing  out  to  the  Gentiles  in  Isaiah  lvi.,  which  are  now 
realized  in  the  gospel  and  the  church,  even  more  fully  than  any- 
thing here  developed.  But  we  ought  not  to  overlook  the  fact 
that  neither  in  Matthew  nor  in  Luke  is  the  Lord  represented  as 
quoting  the  reference  to  all  the  nations :  an  omission  the  more 
notable  inasmuch  as  in  both  these  Gospels,  above  all  others 
though  in  each  for  a  special  reason,  we  have  more  respecting 
the  change  of  dispensation  then  at  hand,  and  the  call  of  grace 
o-oing  out  to  the  Gentiles  than  anywhere  else.  I  cannot  but 
gather  thence,  that,  though  in  fact  as  the  full  citation  in  Mark 
shows,  the  Lord  did  quote  the  words  of  our  prophet  without 
abridgment,  yet  this  marked  exclusion  of  "  all  nations  "  in  the 
two  Gospels  which  most  insist  on  the  change  from  Israel  to  the 
Gentiles,  is  meant  to  intimate  that  no  such  application  was  then 
in  His  mind,  but  simply  the  gross  perversion  of  Jehovah's  house 


248  LECTURES    OX    ISAIAH. 

of  prayer  into  a  den  of  robbers  before  His  eyes,  even  as  Jeremiah 
reproached  the  Jews  of  his  day.  There  is  nothing  therefore,  if 
this  be  correct,  to  turn  aside  the  fulfilment  of  this  blessed  fruit 
of  the  cross  from  the  future,  however  large  the  terms  may  be, 
and  this  not  without  purpose  on  God's  part. 

The  chapter  then  opens  not  with  a  call  to  sinners,  as  such, 
to  repent  and  believe  the  gospel ;  but  to  the  people  of  God  to 
keep  judgment  and  do  justice,  though  the  reason  assigned  is  in 
no  way  the  law  given  by  Moses,  but  "  my  salvation  is  near  to 
come,  and  my  righteousness  to  be  revealed."  When  the  apostle 
unfolds  the  glad  tidings,  he  says  that  God's  righteousness  is 
being  revealed  in  the  gospel ;  that  it  is  manifested  apart  from 
law.  Clearly  this  goes  farther.  Salvation  is  come,  as  we  find 
in  Ephesians  ii.,  "For  by  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith;" 
though,  in  view  of  our  resurrection  and  glory,  we  as  truly  say 
that  it  is  nearer  than  when  we  believed.  For  we  through  the 
Spirit  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by  faith.  The  right- 
ousness  is  established  and  we  are  justified  in  virtue  of  this 
already ;  but  we  await  through  the  Spirit  the  hope,  the  glorious 
issue,  proper  to  that  righteousness,  when  even  in  the  body  we 
shall  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  God's  Son :  "  whom  he 
justified,  them  he  also  glorified."  But  this  is  the  language  of 
the  New  Testament  apostle,  not  of  our  Old  Testament  prophet, 
who  is  occupied  with  the  earthly  people  and  their  hopes,  but  in 
God-given  terms  of  such  comprehensiveness  as  to  justify  the 
largest  ways  of  grace.  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  doeth  this,  and 
the  son  of  man  that  layeth  hold  on  it,"  &c.  The  following  verse 
(3)  is  even  more  express :  the  most  distant,  "  the  son  of  the 
stranger,"  and  the  most  desperate,  "  the  eunuch,"  were  not 
beyond  the  reach  of  God's  merciful  and  mighty  blessing.  And 
this  is  repeated  in  the  most  forcible  language  as  to  both  classes 
in  the  subsequent  verses  4 — 7,  concluding  with  the  expression 
of  Jehovah's  mind  to  be  known  and  read  of  all  men,  that  His 
"  house  should  be  called  an  house  of  prayer  for  all  people." 
"  Jehovah  God  which  gathereth  the  outcasts  of  Israel  saith, 
Yet  will  I  gather  others  to  him,  besides  those  that  are  gathered 
unto  him."     (Ver.  8.) 


CHAPTERS    LVI.,   LVIT.  2V.) 

The  second  part  (from  lvi.  9  to  lvii.  21)  stands  out  in 
startling  contrast  at  first  sight,  but  it  flows,  I  doubt  not,  from 
the  same  principle.  The  grace  which  goes  forth  ever  so  actively 
to  the  most  miserable  is  of  all  things  the  most  intolerant  of 
evil;  and  its  dealing  is  ever  most  delicate  and  jealous  with 
those  that  are  near  enough  to  be  so  much  the  more  responsible 
to  reflect  Jehovah  brightly. 

The  Gentile  oppressors  are  first  invited  to  lay  waste. 
(Ver.  9.)  Those  who  ought  to  have  watched  and  tended  the 
beautiful  flock  of  Jehovah  not  only  slept,  but  they  awoke  to 
their  own  greed  of  gain  and  love  of  present  ease,  as  indifferent 
about  God  as  about  His  people.  (Yer.  10 — 12.)  On  the  other 
hand  the  Shepherd  of  Israel  neither  slumbered  nor  slept,  and 
if  the  righteous  perished  without  a  soul's  laying  it  to  heart, 
it  was  but  His  hand  after  all  taking  the  righteous  away  from 
the  evil  to  come.     (Chap.  lvii.  1,  2.) 

Next,  the  prophet  under  various  figures  of  uncleanness 
arraigns  the  idolatrous  Jews.  (Yer.  3  et  seqq.)  The  sketch  is 
most  energetic,  and  the  general  scope  is  plain.  The  only 
allusion  which  strikes  me  as  calling  for  particular  notice  is 
found  in  verse  9,  "And  thou  wentest  to  the  king  with  oint- 
ment." This  will  be  the  climax  of  their  heartless  desertion  of 
Jehovah,  and  rejection  of  the  Messiah.  They  received  not  Him 
who  came  in  His  Father's  name ;  they  will  receive  another  who 
is  to  come  in  his  own  name.  The  spirit  of  this  has  been  often 
verified,  doubtless ;  but  it  awaits  its  full  final  signature  in  the 
Antichrist  of  the  last  days.  He  is  "  the  king,"  as  abruptly  (but 
so  much  the  more  strikingly)  brought  in  here  as  in  Daniel  xi. 
36 — 40.  Unbelief  as  blindly  acquiesces  in  the  false  and  evil,  as  it 
ignores  the  truth  and  hates  righteousness  and  grace.  "  The  king  " 
is  not  "  the  woman,"  "  the  great  whore,"  but  rather  what  works 
the  destruction  of  Babylon,  though  only  the  more  audaciously 
opposed  to  God  and  the  Lamb.  The  Jew  will  play  a  solemn  part 
during  this  last  struggle  in  the  end  of  the  age.  The  king  will  be 
in  the  land  and  city  destined  for  the  Messiah  ;  the  centre  of  the 
Babylonish  system  is  the  great  city  of  the  west,  Rome:  but 
God  will  destroy  the  one,  and  the  Lamb  vanquish  the  other. 


2.50  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

In  the  midst  of  this  harrowing  description  of  coming  wicked- 
ness and  woe,  Jehovah  contrasts  with  the  hopeless  destruction 
of  the  apostate  Jews  him  that  trusts  in  Himself  as  destined  to 
possess  the  land  (so  long  the  prey  of  one  usurping  stranger  after 
another)  and  to  inherit  His  holy  mountain  (even  to  this  day 
the  boasted  spoil  of  the  infidel).  "  Cast  ye  up,  cast  ye  up, 
prepare  the  way,  take  up  the  stumbling-block  out  of  the  way  of 
my  people.  For  thus  saith  the  high  and  lofty  One  that 
inhabiteth  eternity,  whose  name  is  holy ;  I  dwell  in  the  high 
and  holy  place,  with  him  also  that  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble 
spirit,  to  revive  the  spirit  of  the  humble,  and  to  revive  the 
heart  of  the  contrite  ones.  For  I  will  not  contend  for  ever, 
neither  will  I  be  always  wroth  ;  for  the  spirit  should  fail  before 
me,  and  the  souls  which  I  have  made.  For  the  iniquity  of  his 
covetousness  was  I  wroth,  and  smote  him :  I  hid  me,  and  was 
wroth,  and  he  went  on  frowardly  in  the  way  of  his  heart.  I 
have  seen  his  ways  and  will  heal  him."  (Ver.  14 — 18.)  "Except 
those  days  should  be  shortened,  no  flesh  should  be  saved :  but 
for  the  elect's  sake  they  shall  be  shortened."  Yea,  Jehovah 
will  heal,  lead,  and  comfort.  He  creates  thankful  praise. 
Peace  is  His  word,  peace  to  him  that  is  far  off  and  to  him  that 
is  near ;  but  as  for  the  wicked,  like  the  troubled  sea  that  casts 
up  mire  and  dirt,  "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the 
wicked."  Let  the  Jew  take  heed.  Certainly  the  wicked  of 
that  people  shall  not  escape. 


CHAPTERS   LVIIL,   LIX. 

To  these  chapters  one  might  add  chapter  lx.  as  completing 
this  series.  It  is  the  opening  of  the  last  section  of  the  prophecy. 
(Chap,  lviii. — lxvi.)  The  Spirit  had  closed  both  His  counts 
against  God's  ancient  people,  their  idolatry,  and  their  rejection 
of  the  Messiah,  with  the  consequences  in  the  certainty  of 
judgment,  and  not  peace,  for  the  wicked  on  either  side.  We  have 
now  a  sort  of  appendix,  consisting  of  moral  argument  and 
appeal  to  the  people,  with  a  positive  revelation  of  Jehovah's 
intervention  and  their  establishment  in  glory  and  blessing.  For 
no  prophecy  of  scripture  is  of  isolated  interpretation,  but  links 
itself  with  the  kingdom  of  Jehovah  in  the  last  days,  however  it 
may  apply  to  lesser  and  passing  circumstances  in  the  prophetic 
days,  or  the  times  that  succeeded.  Prophetic  scripture  does  not 
interpret  itself  apart  from  that  grand  system;  though  verified 
from  day  to  day,  it  looks  onward  to  the  final  scenes  connecting 
what  wrought  in  the  past  with  the  state  of  things  which  will 
necessitate  Jehovah's  appearance  on  the  scene  to  introduce  His 
own  day. 

The  notion  of  some*  that  Protestantism  is  in  question  is  as 
unfounded  as  the  unbelief  of  an  older  day  which  turned  aside 
the  prophecy  from  Israel,  because  no  part  of  the  blessing  has  as 
yet  been  accomplished  in  them  as  a  nation.  The  quotation  of 
the  prophecy,  as  employed  by  the  apostle  in  Romans  xi.,  appears 
to  me  to  refute  both,  by  giving  us  as  the  divine  key  the  future 
salvation  of  that  Israel  which  is  now  for  the  most  blinded  and 
has  stumbled  at  the  stumbling  stone.  The  time  too  is  rendered 
certain ;  it  is  unquestionably  not  present  any  more  than  past, 
but  future.  For,  as  the  Spirit  there  interprets  the  prophecy, 
we  are  not  to  look  for  its  fulfilment  in  the  salvation  of  all  Israel 
(chap.  lix.  12),  till  after  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  is  come  in, 

*  Vitringa,  Horsley,  and  Fry  in  modern  times. 


252  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

whereas  this  is  only  going  on  now  and  not  therefore  complete. 
Hence  the  moment  is  not  arrived  even  for  commencing  to  apply 
to  Israel. 

Jehovah  then  deals  with  the  exceeding  hypocrisy  of  this 
people  in  their  holy  things.  It  was  not  that  they  did  not 
approach  His  temple,  not  only  professing  delight  in  His  ordi- 
nances, but  fasting  and  afflicting  their  souls.  In  vain  !  "  Behold 
in  the  day  of  your  fast  ye  find  pleasure  and  exact  all  your 
labours.  Behold  ye  fast  for  strife  and  debate,  and  to  smite  with 
the  fist  of  wickedness."  (Ver.  1 — 4.)  Nothing  of  the  kind 
could  be  acceptable  to  Jehovah,  who  will  have  truth  in  the 
inward  parts,  and  things  fair  and  good  in  the  sight  of  all  men. 
Hollow  and  sterile  religiousness  is  abominable  in  His  eyes ;  for 
such  religiousness  compromises  His  name  and  compels  Him  to 
judge  themselves  if  He  cannot  sanction  their  sin.  Hence  the 
expostulation  in  verses  5 — 7.  Were  there  a  response  to  His 
own  goodness,  in  the  practice  of  mercy  which  became  the 
people  of  Jehovah  to  the  oppressed  and  destitute,  how  would 
He  not  bless  them !  Were  they  to  heed  the  sabbath, 
calling  it  a  delight,  and  honouring  Jehovah,  how  should  they 
not  delight  themselves  in  Him,  riding  in  the  high  places  of 
the  earth,  and  fed  with  the  heritage  of  their  father  Jacob ! 
(Ver.  8—14.) 

For  Jehovah's  hand  was  not  short,  nor  His  ear  heavy ;  it  was 
their  iniquities  and  sins  which  caused  the  breach.  (Chap, 
lix.  1,  2.)  And  what  a  picture  follows  in  verses  3 — 15  !  Hands 
and  fingers,  lips  and  tongues,  all  polluted  and  perverse ;  justice 
not  called  for;  truth  unpleaded ;  vanities  and  lies,  mischief  and 
iniquities ;  subtlety  of  evil  and  ever-increasing  virulence ;  active 
but  vain  corruption  and  violence.  What  sanguinary  feet !  what 
iniquitous  thoughts  !  What  wasting  and  destruction  in  the 
crooked  paths  where  peace  is  unknown  !  Hence,  without  judg- 
ment, they  walk  in  darkness,  grope  like  the  blind,  and  are  in 
desolate  places  as  dead  men,  whether  raging  as  bears  or 
mourning  as  doves,  salvation  is  far  off,  because  of  multi- 
plied transgressions  and  departure  from  God,  with  truth 
fallen   in   the    street,   and    equity   unable   to   enter,   and   the 


CHAPTERS   LVIII.,   LIX.  253 

godly  a  prey,  so  that  Jehovah  was  displeased  that  there  was  no 
judgment. 

But  such  utter  moral  chaos,  hopeless  for  man,  was  the  call 
for  Jehovah.  "And  he  saw  that  there  was  no  man,  and 
wondered  that  there  was  no  intercessor:  therefore  his  arm 
brought  salvation  unto  him ;  and  his  righteousness,  it  sustained 
him.  For  he  put  on  righteousness  as  a  breastplate,  and  an 
helmet  of  salvation  upon  his  head ;  and  he  put  on  the  garments 
of  vengeance  for  clothing,  and  was  clad  with  zeal  as  a  cloke. 
According  to  their  deeds,  accordingly  he  will  repay,  fury  to  his 
adversaries,  recompence  to  his  enemies;  to  the  islands  he  will 
repay  recompence."  (Yer.  16 — 18.)  It  is  the  picture  of  the 
mighty  intervention  of  God  for  His  people  in  the  last  days, 
though  not  at  all  resembling  what  He  will  do  for  the  heavenly 
saints.  These  He  will  remove  from  the  scene  of  their  pilgrim- 
age to  heaven ;  His  people  He  will  deliver  from  their  enemies 
by  judgment.  "According  to  their  deeds,  accordingly  he  will 
repay,  fury  to  his  adversaries,  recompence  to  his  enemies  ;  to  the 
islands  he  will  repay  recompence."  Thereby  He  will  teach  the 
nations  wisdom,  or  at  least  the  beginning  of  it.  "  So  shall  they 
fear  the  name  of  Jehovah  from  the  west,  and  his  glory  from  the 
rising  of  the  sun.  When  the  enemy  shall  come  in  like  a  flood, 
the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  shall  lift  up  a  standard  against  him." 

It  is  not,  on  the  one  hand,  a  mere  outward  interference,  but 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  will  accompany  it.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
is  not  the  action  of  the  Spirit  in  the  absence  of  Jehovah,  as  now 
in  Christianity ;  for  "  the  redeemer  shall  come  to  Zion,  and  unto 
them  that  turn  from  transgression  in  Jacob,  saith  Jehovah." 
The  apostle  (Rom.  xi.  26)  cites  it,  with  the  Seventy,  as  His 
coming  out  of  Zion.  Doubtless  both  are  true  and  each  appro- 
priate in  its  place.  He  must  come  to  that  mountain  of  royalty 
in  the  Holy  Land  in  order  to  come  out  thence ;  and  He  will 
come  to  the  righteous  remnant,  the  Israel  of  God,  even  to  such 
as  turn  from  transgression  in  Jacob,  as  He  will  also  turn  away 
ungodliness  from  Jacob.  There  will  be  conversion  of  heart 
before  Jehovah  appears  in  the  extremity  of  their  distress  and  to 
the  destruction  of  their  foes ;  but  that  appearing  will  deepen  all 


254  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

their  feelings  toward  Himself  and  bring  them  into  peace  and 
blessing  fully  and  for  ever.  "  As  for  me,  this  is  my  covenant 
with  them,  saith  Jehovah  ;  My  spirit  that  is  upon  thee,  and  my 
words  which  I  have  put  in  thy  mouth,  shall  not  depart  out  of 
thy  mouth,  nor  out  of  the  mouth  of  thy  seed,  nor  out  of  the 
mouth  of  thy  seed's  seed,  saith  Jehovah,  from  henceforth  and 
for  ever."     (Ver.  21.) 


CHAPTER  LX. 

As  we  have  had  the  failure  and  guilt  of  Israel  in  idolatry  and 
the  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  traced  down  to  their  reception  of 
"  the  king "  as  well  as  idols  in  the  last  days,  so  now  we  have 
not  a  pledge  or  promise  of  covenanted  blessing  under  the 
Redeemer-King,  but  the  scene  of  joy  and  blessing  and  honour 
for  Zion  when  the  hour  arrives  for  His  glory  to  be  revealed 
here  below.  There  is  no  ground  for  doubting  that,  as  before 
we  had  the  dark  picture  of  God's  earthly  people,  so  here  we  are 
permitted  to  behold  the  sure  anticipation  of  the  brightness  in 
store  for  them. 

"  Arise,  shine ;  for  thy  light  is  come,  and  the  glory  of  Jeho- 
vah is  risen  upon  thee.  For,  behold,  the  darkness  shall  cover 
the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  people  :  but  Jehovah  shall 
arise  upon  thee,  and  his  glory  shall  be  seen  upon  thee.  And 
the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thy  light,  and  kings  to  the  brightness 
of  thy  rising.  Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about,  and  see:  all  they 
gather  themselves  together,  they  come  to  thee:  thy  sons  shall 
come  from  far,  and  thy  daughters  shall  be  nursed  at  thy  side. 
Then  thou  shalt  see,  and  flow  together,  and  thine  heart  shall 
fear,  and  be  enlarged ;  because  the  abundance  of  the  sea  shall 
be  converted  unto  thee,  the  forces  of  the  Gentiles  shall  come 
unto  thee.  The  multitude  of  camels  shall  cover  thee,  the  drome- 
daries of  Midian  and  Ephah ;  all  they  from  Sheba  shall  come : 
they  shall  bring  gold  and  incense ;  and  they  shall  shew  forth 
the  praises  of  Jehovah.  All  the  flocks  of  Kedar  shall  be 
gathered  together  unto  thee,  the  rams  of  Nebaioth  shall 
minister  unto  thee :  they  shall  come  up  with  acceptance  on 
mine  altar,  and  I  will  glorify  the  house  of  my  glory.  Who  are 
these  that  fly  as  a  cloud,  and  as  a  dove  to  their  windows  ? 
Surely  the  isles  shall  wait  for  me,  and  the  ships  of  Tarshish 
first,  to  bring  thy  sons  from  far,  their  silver  and  their  gold 
with  them,  unto  the  name  of  Jehovah  thy  God,  and   to  the 


25G  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

Holy  One  of  Israel,  because  he  hath  glorified  thee."     (Ver. 
1-9.) 

There  is  no  question  here  of  God's  glory  revealed  in  the  face 
of  Christ  on  high  and  made  known  by  the  Spirit  to  the  heart; 
the  earth  itself  is  the  theatre  of  this  divine  display.  Another 
point  to  be  noticed  is,  that,  immediately  before  the  time  arrives, 
darkness  shall  cover  the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  peoples. 
Plainly  therefore  it  is  a  false  interpretation  of  prophecy  that 
light  is  to  be  diffused  universally  when  the  time  of  earthly  glory 
for  Israel,  as  well  as  heavenly  glory  for  the  church,  dawns  on 
the  world.  Zion  is  to  be  visited  in  the  mercy  of  God,  when  the 
Gentile  lands  are  enveloped  in  the  grossest  ignorance  of  God. 
(Verses  1,  2.) 

Again,  there  is  a  point  of  striking  contradistinction  to  the 
present  dealings  of  God  in  verse  3.  For  now  the  fall  of  the 
Jews  has  been  the  riches  of  the  world,  and  the  diminishing  of 
them  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles ;  but  here  all  is  in  contrast,  as 
indeed  Romans  xi.  also  teaches  us  that  their  reception  shall  be 
to  the  world  life  from  the  dead.  So  here,  when  Jehovah's  glory 
shall  be  seen  on  Zion,  Gentiles  shall  come  to  that  light  and 
kings  to  the  brightness  of  its  rising. 

The  gospel  goes  out,  its  light  is  diffused  far  and  wide, 
though  only  as  a  testimony ;  for  it  admits  not  of  the  power 
which  binds  Satan  and  changes  the  face  of  creation.  But  in 
our  chapter  Jerusalem  has  its  proper  central  place,  as  the 
metropolis  of  the  earth  when  all  shall  be  settled  and  governed 
according  to  God.  (Ver.  4.)  Nor  is  it  only  sons  and  daughters 
that  thus  come  to  Zion  from  far,  but  strangers  too.  For  there  is 
then  to  be  no  such  state  of  things  on  earth  as  the  church  of 
God,  one  body,  Christ's  body.  On  the  contrary,  Gentiles  and 
Israel,  though  blessed  by  Jehovah,  will  be  distinct  and  kept  so, 
however  harmonious.  So,  too,  it  is  the  day  when  outward  things 
are  to  be  no  unmeet  offering  to  Jehovah :  camels  and  drome- 
daries, flocks  and  herds,  land  and  sea,  shall  pour  their  tribute 
before  His  feet.  To  think  of  serving  God  thus  now  would  be 
to  go  back  to  beggarly  elements  from  the  revelation  of  heavenly 
and  eternal  things  in  Christ ;  whereas  gold  and  incense  will  be 


CHAPTER   LX.  257 

in  season,  and  sacrifices  will  be  then  acceptable  for  His  altar 
and  the  house  of  His  glory.  But  no  such  joy  shall  be  for  tin- 
isles  and  the  nations  and  creation  generally  till  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel  glorifies  Zion,  rescuing  her  from  the  stranger  that  now 
treads  her  down  to  her  sorrow  and  their  own  loss.  But  He 
shall  arise  and  have  mercy  on  that  royal  hill,  and  His  servants 
take  pleasure  in  her  stones  and  favour  her  dust.  Not  till  then 
shall  the  heathen  fear  His  name,  and  the  kings  of  the  earth  His 
glory. 

But  when  Jehovah  builds  up  Zion,  all  shall  be  turned. 
"And  the  sons  of  the  strangers  shall  build  up  the  walls,  and 
their  kings  shall  minister  unto  thee :  for  in  my  wrath  I  smote 
thee,  but  in  my  favour  have  I  had  mercy  on  thee."  (Ver.  10.) 
God  will  make  this  felt  universally  in  due  time,  after  punishing 
those  who  think  to  gain  all  by  the  overthrow  of  His  people. 
"  Therefore  thy  gates  shall  be  open  continually ;  they  shall  not 
be  shut  day  nor  night ;  that  men  may  bring  unto  thee  the  forces 
of  the  Gentiles,  and  that  their  kings  may  be  brought.  For  the 
nation  and  kingdom  that  will  not  serve  thee  shall  perish ;  yea, 
those  nations  shall  be  utterly  wasted.  The  glory  of  Lebanon 
shall  come  unto  thee,  the  fir  tree,  the  pine  tree,  and  the  box 
together,  to  beautify  the  place  of  my  sanctuary ;  and  I  will  make 
the  place  of  my  feet  glorious.  The  sons  also  of  them  that 
afflicted  thee  shall  come  bending  unto  thee ;  and  all  they  that 
despised  thee  shall  bow  themselves  down  at  the  soles  of  thy 
feet ;  and  they  shall  call  thee,  The  city  of  Jehovah,  The  Zion  of 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  Whereas  thou  hast  been  forsaken  and 
hated,  so  that  no  man  went  through  thee,  I  will  make  thee  an 
eternal  excellency,  a  joy  of  many  generations.  Thou  shalt  also 
suck  the  milk  of  the  Gentiles,  and  shalt  suck  the  breast  of 
kings :  and  thou  shalt  know  that  I  Jehovah  am  thy  Saviour  and 
thy  Redeemer,  the  mighty  one  of  Jacob.  For  brass  I  will  bring 
gold,  and  for  iron  I  will  bring  silver,  and  for  wood  brass,  and  for 
stones  iron :  I  will  also  make  thy  officers  peace,  and  thine 
exactors  righteousness.  Violence  shall  no  more  be  heard  in  thy 
land,  wasting  nor  destruction  within  thy  borders ;  but  thou  shalt 
call  thy  walls  Salvation,  and  thy  gates  Praise.     The  sun  shall  be 


25b  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

no  more  thy  light  by  day;  neither  for  brightness  shall  the  moon 
give  light  unto  thee ;  but  Jehovah  shall  be  unto  thee  an  ever- 
lasting light,  and  thy  God  thy  glory.  Thy  sun  shall  no  more  go 
down ;  neither  shall  thy  moon  withdraw  itself:  for  Jehovah  shall 
be  thine  everlasting  light,  and  the  days  of  thy  mourning  shall 
be  ended."     (Ver.  11—20.) 

Here  is  evidence  overwhelming,  were  more  wanted,  that  the 
church  on  earth  or  in  heaven  is  not  in  question,  but  the  ancient 
people  of  God  blessed  according  to  His  promise  and  prophecy. 
For  righteousness  dealing  according  to  an  earthly  measure  is  the 
rule ;  and  it  is  the  day  also  not  for  an  elect  witness,  but  "  thy 
people  shall  be  all  righteousness,"  and  this  in  prosperous  power, 
instead  of  knowing  the  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings,  being 
made  conformable  to  His  death.  "  They  shall  inherit  the  land 
for  ever,  the  branch  of  my  planting,  the  work  of  my  hands,  that 
I  may  be  glorified.  A  little  one  shall  become  a  thousand,  and 
a  small  one  a  strong  nation :  I  Jehovah  will  hasten  it  in  his 
time."     (Ver.  21,  22.) 


CHAPTERS   LXL,  LXII. 

This  forms  the  beginning  of  a  section  (chaps,  lxi. — lxiii.  1 — 6) 
which  embraces  Jehovah-Messiah  in  His  first  advent  as  well  as 
His  second  for  the  blessing  and  glory  of  Israel  and  the 
destruction  of  their  enemies.  We  have  the  Lord's  own 
warrant  in  Luke  iv.  for  declaring  that  the  early  portion  He 
read  applies  to  His  then  presence  in  grace  here  below.  It  has 
been  often  and  justly  observed  how  He  stopped  after  the 
first  clause  of  verse  2,  closing  the  book,  and  in  due  time  saying, 
This  day  is  this  scripture  fulfilled  in  your  ears.  He  cites  what 
portrays  His  character  as  it  was  (or  about  to  be)  displayed  on 
earth  at  that  time  in  ways  of  divine  mercy,  but  forbears  even 
to  close  the  sentence  where  the  part  following  alludes  to  His 
exercise  of  judicial  wrath.  Such  was  in  no  way  the  object 
of  His  first  coming :  and  so,  if  strange  in  appearance,  with 
divine  wisdom  He  read  no  more.  "  The  day  of  vengeance  of 
our  God"  awaits  the  epoch  of  His  appearing  in  power  and 
glory. 

It  is  not  that  mercy  will  not  then  be  the  spring  of  God's  way 
with  Israel.  For  Jehovah  while  He  executes  earthly  judgment, 
will  comfort  those  that  mourn,  especially  mourners  in  Zion, 
giving  them  beauty  for  ashes,  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning, 
the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness,  "that  they 
might  be  called  trees  of  righteousness,  the  planting  of  Jeho- 
vah, that  he  might  be  glorified."  (Ver.  3.)  Restoration  of 
past  decayed  places  shall  go  forward  (ver.  4) ;  strangers  shall 
serve  Israel  (ver.  5),  who  shall  themselves  be  named  the 
priests  of  Jehovah.  (Ver.  6.)  For  their  shame  they  should 
have  not  merely  reinstatement  of  what  had  lapsed  but  double, 
like  Job;  and  Jehovah  who  loves  judgment  will  make  an 
everlasting  covenant  with  them;  so  that  all  who  see  acknow- 
ledge that  they  are  indeed  the  blessed  of  Jehovah.  (Ver. 
7 — 9.)      Nay  more,  Jehovah    Himself  becomes  the  centre  of 


260  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

all  joy   and   the   giver  of    all   beauty,   causing   righteousness 
and  praise  to  spring  forth  before  all  the  nations.     (Yer.   10, 

no 

The  Spirit  of  Christ  is  importunate  in  intercession  for  Zion, 
as  we  see  in  the  beginning  of  chapter  lxii.  "  For  Zion's  sake  will 
I  not  hold  my  peace,  and  for  Jerusalem's  sake  I  will  not  rest, 
until  the  righteousness  thereof  go  forth  as  brightness,  and  the 
salvation  thereof  as  a  lamp  that  burneth.  And  the  Gentiles 
shall  see  thy  righteousness,  and  all  kings  thy  glory :  and  thou 
shalt  be  called  by  a  new  name,  which  the  mouth  of  Jehovah 
shall  name.  Thou  shalt  also  be  a  crown  of  glory  in  the  hand  of 
Jehovah,  and  a  royal  diadem  in  the  hand  of  thy  God.  Thou 
shalt  no  more  be  termed  Forsaken  ;  neither  shall  thy  land  any 
more  be  termed  Desolate :  but  thou  shalt  be  called  Hephzibah, 
and  thy  land  Beulah  :  for  Jehovah  delighteth  in  thee,  and  thy 
land  shall  be  married."  (Yer.  1 — 4.)  Land  and  people  are 
bound  up  in  the  plans  and  affections  of  Jehovah.  And  this 
will  prove  a  divine  ground  of  patriotism  for  Israel.  "  For  as  a 
young  man  marrieth  a  virgin,  so  shall  thy  sons  marry  thee :  and 
as  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth  over  the  bride,  so  shall  thy  God 
rejoice  over  thee."  (Yer.  o.)  And  as  the  Spirit  of  Christ  work- 
ing in  the  prophet  bears  witness  of  the  unceasing  cry  to  Jehovah 
to  effect  His  glorious  counsels  as  to  Jerusalem  (ver.  6,  7) ;  so 
Jehovah  on  His  part  "  hath  sworn  by  his  right  hand,  and  by 
the  arm  of  his  strength,  Surely  I  will  no  more  give  thy  corn  to 
be  meat  for  thine  enemies ;  and  the  sons  of  the  stranger  shall 
not  drink  thy  wine,  for  the  which  thou  hast  laboured  :  but  they 
that  have  gathered  it  shall  eat  it,  and  praise  Jehovah;  and 
they  that  have  brought  it  together  shall  drink  it  in  the  courts 
of  my  holiness."     (Yer.  8,  9.) 

Hence  the  animation  of  verse  10 :  "Go  through,  go  through 
the  gates ;  prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  people ;  cast  up,  cast  up 
the  highway ;  gather  out  the  stones ;  lift  up  a  standard  for  the 
people."  The  day  of  Jehovah  is  there;  He  the  Messiah  is 
there,  the  salvation  of  Zion's  daughter — His  reward  with  Him, 
and  His  work  before  Him.     So  Jehovah  proclaims  to  the  end  of 


CHAPTERS   LXL,   LXII.  261 

the  world  as  His  message  to  her.  (Ver.  11.)  On  the  other 
hand,  "  they  shall  call  them,  The  holy  people,  The  redeemed  of 
Jehovah :  and  thou  shalt  be  called,  Sought  out,  A  city  not 
forsaken."     (Ver.  12.) 

"  Happy  people  that  is  in  such  a  case ;  happy  people  whose 
God  is  Jehovah." 


CHAPTER  LXIIL   1—6. 

These  verses  connect  themselves  with  the  close  of  chapter  lxii., 
following  up  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  as  the  Deliverer  of 
Zion,  no  longer  forsaken  but  sought  out,  and  all  her  dispersed 
children  now  gathered  in  with  a  most  vivid  sight,  as  it  were,  of 
His  return  from  executing  vengeance  on  their  Gentile  foes. 
The  scene  of  the  slaughter  is  laid  in  the  land  of  Edom  and  the 
City  of  Bozrah.  Horsley  I  consider  quite  wrong  in  denying  any 
mention  of  these  places  here,  while  admitting  them  in  chapter 
xxxiv.  He  would  translate  the  proper  names  as  appellatives 
thus :  "  Who  is  this  that  approacheth  all  in  scarlet,  with  gar- 
ments stained  from  the  vintage  ?  This  that  is  glorious,"  &c. 
But  this  able  man  had  overlooked  the  chapter  just  referred  to, 
where  the  scene  demands  the  proper  names.  This  considera- 
tion, in  my  judgment,  gives  conclusive  support  to  the  ordinary 
translation. 

But  commentators  in  general  contradict  each  other  without 
being  able  to  strike  out  divine  light  from  the  words  of  the 
prophet.  Thus  Origen,  Theodoret,  Tertullian,  and  Jerome,  may 
illustrate  views  which  have  too  long  prevailed,  so  far  as  to  lead 
the  compilers  of  the  English  Common  Prayer  to  read  it  for  the 
Epistle  on  the  Monday  before  Easter.  They  actually  regard  the 
scene  as  prophetic  of  the  Saviour  suffering  for  our  sins,  instead 
of  seeing  in  it  the  Avenger  of  His  long-oppressed  Israel ;  as  a 
pledge  of  mercy,  not  as  a  threat  of  judgment.  Hence  the  good 
Bishop  of  Cyprus  thinks  the  prophet  here  points  out  Jehovah's 
ascent  to  heaven,  lays  stress  on  Edom  as  the  red  land,  connects 
the  pierced  side  and  blood  and  water  with  the  blood-stained 
garments ;  and  sees  the  destruction  of  the  devil  and  all  his  host 
in  the  treading  of  the  winepress.  Calvin  justly  objects  to  such 
a  perversion  of  the  prophecy ;  but  he  is  quite  as  far  from  the 
true  mark  as  any  when  he  proceeds  to  apply  it  not  to  Christ, 
but  simply  to  God  Himself  as  such  in  His  dealings  of  old  with 


CHAPTER   LXIII.    1 — 6.  263 

the  Edomites,  and  other  enemies  of  His  people,  when  He  broke 
them  by  the  Assyrians  of  old.  This  is  to  make  the  word  of 
private,  isolated,  interpretation,  dislocating  it  from  its  true  aim 
and  scope  in  the  illustration  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  not 
at  His  first  advent,  but  when  He  comes  again.  Luther's  notion 
is  strange  enough :  he  regards  it  as  a  prediction  of  the  punish- 
ment of  the  Jews  or  Synagogue,  not  an  infliction  on  their 
enemies  for  their  rescue  in  the  latter  day.  The  Jew,  as  is 
commonly  known,  conceives  that  the  divine,  wrath  which 
impends  over  Rome,  as  the  full  meaning  of  the  enemy  here 
named  Edom,  is  the  real  thought.  Bishop  Lowth  rightly 
combats  Grotius'  hypothesis  that  Judas  Maccabseus  and  his 
victories  make  the  subject  of  it;  or  the  subsequent  exploits  of 
John  Hyrcanus,  his  brother  Simon's  son.  "It  may  be  asked 
[he  adds],  to  whom,  and  to  what  event  does  it  relate  ?  I  can 
only  answer,  that  I  know  of  no  event  in  history  to  which,  from 
its  importance  and  circumstances,  it  can  be  applied,  unless 
perhaps  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  Jewish  polity ; 
which  in  the  Gospel  is  called  the  coming  of  Christ  and  the  days 
of  vengeance.  Matt.  xvi.  28;  Luke  xxi.  22."  This  suffices  to 
prove  the  bewilderment  of  Christian  writers  down  to  our  times, 
which  is  yet  more  confessed  by  some,  like  the  last,  owning  that 
"there  is  no  necessity  of  supposing  that  it  has  been  already 
accomplished."  Vitringa,  as  usual,  is  more  sober  than  the 
mass ;  but  there  seems  to  be  no  good  reason  for  treating,  as  he 
does,  the  local  references  as  mystical;  for  when  this  great  day 
arrives,  the  world  will  behold  a  wonderful  reappearance,  not  of 
Israel  only,  but  of  their  ancient  rivals  and  enemies,  which,  like 
the  ten  tribes,  men  of  the  world  assume  to  be  for  ever  extinct. 
It  will  be  the  day  of  reckoning  for  the  nations,  and  the  end  will 
righteously  answer  to  the  beginning.  At  any  ra'te  there  is 
nothing  valid  enough  to  set  aside  the  plain  mention  of  these 
localities,  nor  the  fact  of  an  utter  overthrow  of  the  Gentile 
enemies  of  Israel  there. 

But  the  great  truth  which  is  overlooked  by  almost  all  is, 
that  it  is  no  question  of  the  heavenly  church,  but  of  the  earthly 
people,  Israel.     The  church  is  removed  from  the  scene  by  grace 


264  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

to  meet  the  Lord,  and  be  with  Him  in  the  Father's  house, 
though  surely  also  to  appear  with  Him  in  glory  and  to  reign 
with  Him  over  the  earth.  But  not  such  is  the  character  of  the 
deliverance  of  Israel;  and  of  this  Isaiah  treats,  like  the  Old 
Testament  in  general.  It  is  -by  the  execution  on  earth  of  judg- 
ments, which  have  for  their  object  the  salvation  of  the  Jews  and 
the  destruction  of  their  enemies.  This  accordingly  accounts  for 
terms,  which  are  hard  indeed  to  be  explained  when  men  think 
of  the  church  in  these  verses.  Believe  that  Israel  is  there,  and 
what  more  proper  than  such  a  description  of  their  Deliverer,  as 
•  I  that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save,"  or  "  The  day  of 
vengeance  is  in  my  heart?"  Is  this  the  way  we  think  of  His 
love  to  us  or  His  attitude  even  to  the  world  while  we  are  passing 
through  ?  How  can  verses  o,  6  apply  to  Him  as  Head  of  the 
church  ?  Bring  in  the  question  of  Israel  delivered  for  His 
kingdom  here  below,  and  all  is  consistent  and  clear. 

It  is  then  the  Lord,  Jehovah-Messiah,  who  is  here  seen,  in 
the  prophetic  vision,  returning  victorious  from  the  spot  which 
more  than  one  prophecy  declares  to  be  the  theatre  of  the  wrath 
which  shall  be  poured  out  unsparingly  on  the  foes  of  His 
people.  "  Who  is  this,"  asks  the  prophet,  identifying  himself 
with  the  people,  "  that  cometh  from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments 
from  Bozrah  ?  this  that  is  glorious  in  his  apparel,  travelling  in 
the  greatness  of  his  strength  ?"  His  answer  (for  it  assumes  the 
form  of  a  dialogue)  is,  "  I  that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to 
save."  "Wherefore,"  asks  Isaiah  again,  "art  thou  red  in  thine 
apparel,  and  thy  garments  like  him  that  treadeth  in  the  wine- 
tat  ?"  "I  have  trodden,"  answers  He,  "the  wine-press  alone: 
and  of  the  people[s]  there  was  none  with  me ;  for  I  will  tread 
them  in  mine  anger,  and  trample  them  in  my  fury;  and  their 
blood  shall  be  sprinkled  upon  my  garments,  and  I  will  stain  all 
my  raiment.  For  the  day  of  vengeance  is  in  mine  heart,  and 
the  year  of  my  redeemed  is  come.  And  I  looked,  and  there  was 
none  to  help ;  and  I  wondered  that  there  was  none  to  uphold : 
therefore  mine  own  arm  brought  salvation  unto  me ;  and  my 
fury,  it  upheld  me.  And  I  will  tread  down  the  people  in  mine 
anger,  and  make  them  drunk  in  mv  fury,  and  I  will  bring  down 


CHAPTER   LXIIT.    1 — 6.  265 

their  strength  to  the  earth."  Manifestly  it  is  no  picture  of 
Christ  forsaken  of  God  nor  even  rejected  of  man,  but  of  His 
treading  down  the  opposed  nations,  as  grapes  in  a  wine-press. 
It  is  not  infinite  love  suffering  infinitely  that  sin  might  be 
judged,  and  God  glorified  about  it,  and  thence  able  to  justify 
the  believer  from  all  things.  It  is  One  trampling  down  in  fury, 
and  the  blood  of  His  enemies  sprinkling  His  garments,  not  His 
blood  washing  them  in  divine  grace.  It  is  not  the  day  of  grace 
but  of  vengeance,  though  along  with  it  the  year  of  His  redeemed 
is  come  when  the  scattered  and  peeled  people  shall  be  brought 
to  Zion  with  everlasting  joy  on  their  heads.  Now  it  is  the  day 
of  salvation  for  the  Gentiles,  who  believe,  while  wrath  to  the 
uttermost  is  come  on  the  Jews  who  believe  not. 


CHAPTERS   LXIII.   7— LXIV. 

The  last  section  brought  together  at  its  beginning  the  Lord's 
first  advent,  at  its  end  His  second  advent,  with  Jerusalem  as 
the  special  object  here  contemplated  in  His  earthly  plans. 
We  now  enter  on  the  closing  part  of  this  great  and  varied 
prophecy.  There  are  two  divisions  in  it.  The  first,  that  which 
affords  us  our  present  theme  (from  ver.  7  of  chap,  lxiii.  to 
the  end  of  chap,  lxiv.),  consists  of  a  most  urgent  intercession  by 
the  Spirit  in  the  mouth  of  the  prophet  on  behalf  of  Israel 
with  Jehovah.  The  second  is  His  answer,  which  carries  us 
to  the  end  of  the  book. 

Even  the  least  enlightened  of  modern  commentators  admits 
that  we  open  with  what  seems  designed  as  a  formulary  of 
humiliation  for  the  Israelites  in  order  to  their  restoration. 
"I  will  mention  the  lovingkindnesses  of  Jehovah,  and  the 
praises  of  Jehovah,  according  to  all  that  Jehovah  hath 
bestowed  on  us,  and  the  great  goodness  toward  the  house  of 
Israel,  which  he  hath  bestowed  on  them  according  to  his 
mercies,  and  according  to  the  multitude  of  his  lovingkindnesses. 
For  he  said,  Surely  they  are  my  people,  children  that  will 
not  lie :  so  he  was  their  Saviour.  In  all  their  affliction  he 
was  afflicted,  and  the  angel  of  his  presence  saved  them :  in  his 
love  and  in  his  pity  he  redeemed  them ;  and  he  bare  them,  and 
carried  them  all  the  days  of  old."     (Ver.  7 — 9.) 

Nothing  is  more  suitable  than  this  exordium,  whether  one 
thinks  of  the  Lord  first  or  His  people  next.  Mercies  acknow- 
ledged lead  to  fresh  mercy.  He  was  not  changed  in  His 
lovingkindness,  nor  they  in  their  deep  need  of  it,  as  only  He 
could  show  it  to  them.  Hitherto  His  love  had  received  no 
return,  nothing  but  bitter  disappointment,*      Yet  what  could 


•  It  may  be  well  to  remark  that  verse  9  is  by  no  means  certain  for  the 
reading  or  sense.     Our  translation  followed  the  Keri,  others  (as  the  Vulgate, 


CHAPTERS   LXIII.    7 — LXIV.  267 

exceed  His  tender  care?  "But  they  rebelled  and  vexed  his 
holy  Spirit:  therefore  he  was  turned  to  be  their  enemy,  and 
he  fought  against  them.  Then  he  remembered  the  days  of  old, 
Moses,  and  his  people,  saying,  Where  is  he  that  brought  them 
up  out  of  the  sea  with  the  shepherd  of  his  flock  ?  where  is 
he  that  put  his  holy  Spirit  within  him?  That  led  them 
by  the  hand  of  Moses  with  his  glorious  arm,  dividing  the  water 
before  them,  to  make  himself  an  everlasting  name?  That 
led  them  through  the  deep,  as  an  horse  in  the  wilderness,  that 
they  should  not  stumble?  As  a  beast  goeth  down  into  the 
valley,  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  caused  him  to  rest :  so  didst  thou 
lead  thy  people,  to  make  thyself  a  glorious  name."  (Ver. 
10—14.) 

It  is  evident  then  that  God  will  work  morally  in  Israel. 
No  external  deliverances  for  themselves  nor  execution  of 
vengeance  on  His  and  their  foes  will  suffice  for  His  great 
purposes,  any  more  than  for  His  own  glory  or  their  real  good. 
Hence  the  Spirit  will  exercise  them  in  confession  and  in 
supplication  before  Him.  As  the  verses  already  looked  at  set 
out  their  ingratitude  and  selfwill  in  presence  of  His  unmerited 
goodness,  so  the  next  takes  the  form  of  prayer.  "  Look  down 
from  heaven,  and  behold  from  the  habitation  of  thy  holiness  and 
of  thy  glory :  where  is  thy  zeal  and  thy  strength,  the  sounding 
of  thy  bowels  and  of  thy  mercies  toward  me  ?  are  they 
restrained  ?  Doubtless  thou  art  our  father,  though  Abraham  be 
ignorant  of  us,  and  Israel  acknowledge  us  not:  thou,  0  Jehovah 
art  our  father,  our  redeemer ;  thy  name  is  from  everlasting. 
0  Jehovah,  why  hast  thou  made  us  to  err  from  thy  ways,  and 
hardened  our  heart  from  thy  fear  ?  Return  for  thy  servants' 
sake,  the  tribes  of  thine  inheritance.  The  people  of  thy 
holiness  have  possessed  it  but  a  little  while :  our  adversaries 
have  trodden  down  thy  sanctuary.     We  are  thine :  thou  never 

the  Syriac,  the  Targum  of  Jonathan,  &c,  and  of  moderns,  Houbigant, 
Rosenmiiller,  Horsley,  De  Wette,  &c.)  follow  the  Ketib.  This  would  give 
properly,  I  suppose,  "in  all  their  straits  he  was  not  straitened."  The 
Septuagint,  followed  by  the  Arabic,  contrasts  His  personal  interest  and  action. 
"  It  was  not  an  ambassador  nor  an  angel,  but  He  Himself  saved  them,"  &c. 


268  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

barest  rule  over  them;  they  were  not  called  by  thy  name." 
(Ver.  15—19.) 

They  are  broken  in  heart  and  turn  in  affiance  of  spirit  to 
Jehovah.  Had  He  of  old  said,  Surely  they  are  My  people, 
children  that  will  not  lie  ?  Now  they  say,  Surely  thou  art  our 
father,  though  Abraham  be  ignorant  of  us,  and  Israel  acknow- 
ledge us  not.  Yet  do  they  own  that  there  had  been  judicial 
hardening  over  them,  erst  over  Pharaoh  and  his  people.  How 
deep  and  persevering  the  sins  that  could  turn  Jehovah  against 
His  own  people  as  against  their  enemies  of  old !  and  this  too  so 
long !  for  Israel  had  enjoyed  their  inheritance  but  a  little 
while :  long,  long  had  their  adversaries  trodden  down  Jehovah's 
sanctuary,  and  Israel  had  been  as  those  on  whom  His  name 
was  not  called. 

This  leads  out  the  heart  in  still  more  earnestness.  "  Look 
down  from  heaven  "  suffices  no  more.  "  Oh  that  thou  wouldest 
rend  the  heavens,  that  thou  wouldest  come  down,  that  the 
mountains  might  flow  down  at  thy  presence,  as  when  the  melt- 
ing fire  burneth,  the  fire  causeth  the  waters  to  boil,  to  make 
thy  name  known  to  thine  adversaries,  that  the  nations  may 
tremble  at  thy  presence  !  when  thou  didst  terrible  things  which 
we  looked  not  for,  thou  earnest  down,  the  mountains  flowed 
down  at  thy  presence.  For  since  the  beginning  of  the  world 
men  have  not  heard,  nor  perceived  by  the  ear,  neither  hath  the 
eye  seen,  O  God,  beside  thee,  what  he  hath  prepared  for  him 
that  waiteth  for  him."     (Ver.  1 — 4.) 

It  is  interesting  here  to  note  the  great  difference  for  which 
the  accomplishment  of  redemption  gives  occasion  by  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Compare  1  Corinthians  ii.  We  see  that  God 
now  does  reveal  the  things  He  has  prepared  for  them  that  love 
Him.  We  do  not  wait  for  the  emergence  of  the  great  High 
Priest  to  know  our  blessedness;  for  while  He  is  still  in  the 
holiest,  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  the  apostle  teaches,  has  come  out 
and  given  us  to  enter  in  as  anointed  of  Him  and  made  free 
to  go  boldly  within  the  veil.  Indeed  for  us  the  veil  is  rent,  and 
all  things  hidden  are  revealed.  But  Israel  (and  the  prophet 
speaks  of  Israel)   must   wait    till  they  see    Him    whom   their 


CHAPTERS   LXIII.   7 — LXIV.  2G9 

fathers  so  guiltily  pierced,  though  I  doubt  not  their  heart  will 
be  truly  converted  to  Jehovah,  born  again  but  not  in  peace  till 
they  actually  behold  Him. 

Hence  we  have  in  what  follows  the  language  of  true  repent- 
ance. "Thou  meetest  him  that  rejoiceth  and  worketh  right- 
eousness, those  that  remember  thee  in  thy  ways  :  behold,  thou 
art  wroth ;  for  we  have  sinned :  in  those  is  continuance,  and  we 
shall  be  saved.  But  we  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing,  and  all  our 
righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  rags ;  and  we  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf ; 
and  our '  iniquities,  like  the  wind,  have  taken  us  away.  And 
there  is  none  that  calleth  upon  thy  name,  that  stirreth  up  him- 
self to  take  hold  of  thee :  for  thou  hast  hid  thy  face  from  us, 
and  hast  consumed  us,  because  of  our  iniquities.  But  now,  0 
Jehovah,  thou  art  our  father;  we  are  the  clay,  and  thou  our 
potter ;  and  we  all  are  the  work  of  thy  hand.  Be  not  wroth 
very  sore,  0  Jehovah,  neither  remember  iniquity  for  ever : 
behold,  see,  we  beseech  thee,  we  are  all  thy  people.  Thy  holy 
cities  are  a  wilderness,  Zion  is  a  wilderness,  Jerusalem  a  desola- 
tion. Our  holy  and  our  beautiful  house,  where  our  fathers 
praised  thee,  is  burned  up  with  fire :  and  all  our  pleasant  things 
are  laid  waste.  Wilt  thou  refrain  thyself  for  these  things,  0 
Jehovah  ?  wilt  thou  hold  thy  peace,  and  afflict  us  very  sore  ?" 
(Ver.  5—12.) 


CHAPTER  LXV. 

This  chapter  begins  the  answer  of  Jehovah  to  the  appeal  of  His 
people,  in  which  He  explains  not  only  what  is  now  an  accom- 
plished fact,  but  also  what  is  still  going  on.  ,  "  I  am  sought  of 
them  that  asked  not  for  me ;  I  am  found  of  them  that  sought 
me  not :  I  said,  Behold  me,  behold  me,  unto  a  nation  that  was 
not  called  by  my  name.  I  have  spread  out  my  hands  all  the 
day  unto  a  rebellious  people,  which  walketh  in  a  way  that  was 
not  good,  after  their  own  thoughts."  (Ver.  1,  2.)  The  last  two 
verses  of  Romans  x.  leave  no  ground  for  hesitation  as  to  their 
bearing.  They  furnish  an  inspired  comment  on  our  opening 
verses,  and  prove  beyond  controversy  that  the  first  intimates 
the  call  of  the  Gentiles  which  is  now  proceeding,  as  the  second 
is  the  aggrieved  witness  on  God's  part  of  that  which  gave  occa- 
sion to  their  call — the  rebelliousness  of  His  ancient  people 
Israel.  It  is  an  enemy's  work  to  slight  the  New  Testament  use 
of  the  passage,  as  is  done  by  rationalists  in  order  to  limit  the 
prophecy  to  the  Jews  of  the  times  before  and  after  the 
Babylonish  captivity.  Besides,  what  can  be  more  inconsistent 
with  the  evident  contrast  at  the  same  epoch  between  verses  1 
and  2  ?  The  inspired  application  we  might  never,  unaided,  have 
discovered ;  but,  once  made,  it  approves  itself  to  the  spiritual 
understanding  at  once  as  exactly  tallying  with  notorious  facts. 
Grace  is  sovereign  and  goes  out  now  to  those  who  never  so 
much  as  looked  for  it — to  the  ungodly  Gentiles  who  had  till 
now  stood  in  no  recognized  relationship  with  God.  But  in 
turning  from  Israel,  God  was  entirely  justified  by  their  iniqui- 
ties :  after  all  their  advantages,  His  name  had  been  blasphemed 
among  the  Gentiles  through  the  chosen  people.  Most  gracious 
was  He  then  in  calling  from  among  the  Gentiles;  most  righteous 
in  discarding  the  Jew.  This  Jehovah  proceeds  to  prove  by  a 
detail  of  Israel's  insulting  wickedness  in  verses  3 — 5:  "A  people 
that  provoketh  me  to  anger  continually  to  my  face ;  that  sacri- 


CHAPTER  LXV.  271 

ficeth  in  gardens,  and  burneth  incense  upon  altars  of  brick; 
which  remain  among  the  graves,  and  lodge  in  the  monuments, 
which  eat  swine's  flesh,  and  broth  of  abominable  things  is  in 
their  vessels;  which  say,  Stand  by  thyself,  come  not  near  to 
me ;  for  I  am  holier  than  thou.  These  are  a  smoke  in  my  nose, 
a  fire  that  burneth  all  the  day." 

It  has  been  objected  by  some  that  these  idolatries  and 
superstitions,  covered  over  with  hypocritical  affectation  of  holi- 
ness, did  not  occur  after  the  return  from  Babylon.  But  we 
must  not  forget  that  the  Holy  Ghost  in  prophecy  deals  with 
the  evils  then  existing  or  in  progress,  the  judgment  of  which  is 
not  met  by  providential  chastisement,  such  as  the  conquest  of 
Nebuchadnezzar.  Just  as  the  idolatry  of  the  wilderness  was 
only  checked  from  time  to  time,  but  not  judged  fully  till  the 
nation  was  carried  into  captivity  beyond  Damascus  (Amos  v.) ; 
so  these  evil  ways  which  Isaiah  describes  did  not  meet  with 
adequate  condemnation  till  God  turned  the  stream  of  His  calling 
into  other  channels.  The  principle  indeed  is  fully  confirmed 
by  the  use  our  Lord  (John  xii.)  and  the  Spirit  (Acts  xxviii.) 
make  of  Isaiah  vi.  The  judicial  sentence  so  long  suspended  from 
the  days  of  the  prophet  only  fell  in  the  gospel  times.  It  is  just 
so  here.  But  we  must  bear  in  mind  what  we  have  seen  already, 
that  idolatry  is  to  revive  in  the  latter  days,  when  the  Jews  settle 
themselves  in  their  land  before  the  Lord  comes,  judging  the 
evil  and  establishing  the  good  in  order  to  His  millennial  reign. 

I  cannot  but  think  too  that  the  closing  words  of  this  divine 
censure  intimate  the  long  patience  of  God ;  so  that,  flatter 
themselves  as  they  might  that  He  did  not  heed  the  character 
of  their  misdeeds  like  themselves,  judgment  would  at  length 
demonstrate,  that,  however  loath  to  break  silence,  He  will 
recompense  the  iniquities  of  both  fathers  and  children.  "Behold, 
it  is  written  before  me :  I  will  not  keep  silence,  but  will  recom- 
pense, even  recompense  into  their  bosom,  your  iniquities,  and 
the  iniquities  of  your  fathers  together,  saith  Jehovah,  which 
have  burned  incense  upon  the  mountains,  and  blasphemed  me 
upon  the  hills :  therefore  will  I  measure  their  former  work  into 
their  bosom."     (Ver.  6,  7.) 


272  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

This  might  seem  to  threaten  total  and  hopeless  ruin  to  the 
ancient  people.  But  no :  God  had  promised  ;  and  the  unfaith- 
fulness of  the  people,  however  surely  judged,  cannot  make  void 
the  promises  of  grace.  Hence  in  verses  8 — 10  God  proceeds  to 
make  known,  not  the  bringing  in  of  the  Gentiles  during  Israel's 
temporary  excision  from  the  olive  tree  of  promise  and  testimony 
on  earth,  but  the  reservation  of  a  portion,  the  germ  of  a  nation, 
blessed  and  a  blessing,  from  Jacob  and  Judah,  according  to  His 
early  pledges  to  their  fathers.  "Thus  saith  Jehovah,  As  the 
new  wine  is  found  in  the  cluster,  and  one  saith,  Destroy  it  not ; 
for  a  blessing  is  in  it :  so  will  I  do  for  my  servants'  sakes,  that  I 
may  not  destroy  them, all.  And  I  will  bring  forth  a  seed  out  of 
Jacob,  and  out  of  Judah  an  inheritor  of  my  mountains :  and 
mine  elect  shall  inherit  it,  and  my  servants  shall  dwell  there. 
And  Sharon  shall  be  a  fold  of  flocks,  and  the  valley  of  Achor  a 
place  for  the  herds  to  lie  down  in,  for  my  people  that  have 
sought  me." 

Then  in  verses  11 — 16  Jehovah  contrasts  the  apostates  and 
the  elect  of  the  people,  the  idol-worshippers  and  His  own  ser- 
vants, with  their  respective  destinies.  "  But  ye  are  they  that 
forsake  Jehovah,  that  forget  my  holy  mountain,  that  prepare  a 
table  for  that  troop,  and  that  furnish  the  drink-offering  unto 
that  number.  Therefore  will  I  number  you  to  the  sword,  and 
ye  shall  all  bow  down  to  the  slaughter :  because  when  I  called, 
ye  did  not  answer ;  when  I  spake,  ye  did  not  hear ;  but  did  evil 
before  mine  eyes,  and  did  choose  that  wherein  I  delighted  not. 
Therefore  thus  saith  Jehovah  God,  Behold,  my  servants  shall 
eat,  but  ye  shall  be  hungry :  behold,  my  servants  shall  drink, 
but  ye  shall  be  thirsty :  behold,  my  servants  shall  rejoice,  but 
ye  shall  be  ashamed:  behold,  my  servants  shall  sing  for  joy  of 
heart,  but  ye  shall  cry  for  sorrow  of  heart,  and  shall  howl  for 
vexation  of  spirit.  And  ye  shall  leave  your  name  for  a  curse 
unto  my  chosen :  for  Jehovah  God  shall  slay  thee,  and  call  his 
servants  by  another  name  :  that  he  who  blesseth  himself  in  the 
earth  shall  bless  himself  in  the  God  of  truth;  and  he  that 
sweareth  in  the  earth  shall  swear  by  the  God  of  truth ;  because 
the  former  troubles  are  forgotten,  and  because  they  are  hid  from 


CHAPTER  LXV.  !>73 

mine  eyes."  The  old  evil  will  be  judged  at  the  close ;  just  as 
inquisition  for  all  righteous  blood  will  then  be  made.  It  is  a 
time  of  judgment  which  ushers  in  days  of  unparallelled  enjoy- 
ment for  this  earth :  that  is,  it  is  the  end  of  this  age,  and  the 
dawn  of  a  new  one  when  former  troubles  are  forgotten. 

"  For,  behold,  I  create  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth :  and 
the  former  shall  not  be  remembered,  nor  come  into  mind.  But 
be  ye  glad  and  rejoice  for  ever  in  that  which  I  create :  for, 
behold,  I  create  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,  and  her  people  a  joy. 
And  I  will  rejoice  in  Jerusalem,  and  joy  in  my  people :  and  the 
voice  of  weeping  shall  be  no  more  heard  in  her,  nor  the  voice  of 
crying."  (Ver.  17 — 19.)  The  true  key  to  this  is  that  the 
predicted  change  from  present  things  begins  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  day  of  the  Lord  and  is  only  complete  before  that 
day  gives  place  to  eternity.  This  alone,  as  it  seems  to  me,  will 
be  found  to  reconcile  all  the  scriptures  which  treat  of  the  subject. 
So  in  Christ  the  Christian  can  even  now  say  that  "  old  things 
are  passed  away:  behold  all  things  are  become  new;"  while  in 
fact  this  will  only  be  literally  verified  when  he  is  changed  into 
His  image  at  His  coming.  Just  so  the  beginning  of  the  day  of 
the  Lord  will  be  an  incipient  accomplishment  of  "  new  heavens 
and  a  new  earth,"  when  Jehovah  creates  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing, 
and  her  people  a  joy;  but  the  absolute  fulfilment  awaits  the 
close  of  the  millennial  day,  when  to  the  letter  all  things  shall  be 
made  new,  the  earth  and  heavens  that  now  are  being  not  shaken 
only  but  dissolved,  the  sea  for  ever  gone,  and  a  new  heaven  and 
a  new  earth  appearing,  wherein  righteousness  shall  dwell,  and 
God  shall  be  all  in  all.  The  New  Testament  naturally  dwells 
on  the  full  issue  ultimately  involved  in  the  prophecy,  as  we  may 
see  in  2  Peter  iii.  and  in  Revelation  xxi.  1 — 8.  But  the  Jewish 
prophet,  as  naturally,  was  led  of  the  Spirit  to  dwell  on  the 
earliest  pledge  of  this  blessing  in  its  dawn  on  the  land  and 
capital  and  people  of  Israel. 

That  Isaiah  does  embrace  this  earlier  phase  as  bearing  on 
the  Jews  and  Jerusalem  will  be  manifest  to  every  attentive 
reader.  For  the  entire  description  here  suits  the  millennium 
rather  than  eternity.     I  have  already  pointed  out  the  special 


274  LECTUKES   UN    ISAIAH. 

place  of  Jerusalem  and  her  people.  Now  this  of  itself  suffices 
to  prove  it ;  for  though  the  new  Jerusalem  possesses  an  eternal 
character  of  special  glory,  the  New  Testament  is  explicit  that 
on  the  new  earth  all  such  distinctions  as  an  earthly  city  or 
people  melt  away  for  eternity. 

Next,  verse  20  is  decisive  against  the  notion.  For  death  is 
not  wholly  extinct  in  the  state  of  things  prominently  before  our 
prophet.  It  is  exceptional,  but  still  exists  as  an  instrument  of 
judicial  infliction.  Man  will  then  fill  his  days,  which  he  has 
never  yet  done — not  even  before  the  flood — no,  not  even 
Methuselah  himself.  Not  one  as  yet  has  stretched  across  ten 
centuries.  This  will  be  the  rule  for  the  righteous  who  are  found 
alive  on  earth  when  the  Lord  reigns  for  the  thousand  years.  So 
thoroughly  will  death  be  not  the  rule  but  the  exception  that 
one  dying  a  hundred  years  old  will  be  but  a  child ;  and  even  so 
he  that  dies  at  a  hundred  years  will  be  a  sinner  under  some 
express  curse.     In  eternity  death  will  not  exist. 

Again,  it  is  written  here  that  "  they  shall  build  houses,  and 
inhabit  them ;  and  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruit 
of  them.  They  shall  not  build,  and  another  inhabit ;  they  shall 
not  plant,  and  another  eat :  for  as  the  days  of  a  tree  are  the 
days  of  my  people,  and  mine  elect  shall  long  enjoy  the  work  of 
their  hands.  They  shall  not  labour  in  vain,  nor  bring  forth  for 
trouble ;  for  they  are  the  seed  of  the  blessed  of  Jehovah,  and 
their  offspring  with  them.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that 
before  they  call,  I  will  answer ;  and  while  they  are  yet  speaking, 
I  will  hear.  The  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  feed  together,  and 
the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  bullock :  and  dust  shall  be  the 
serpent's  meat.  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy 
mountain,  saith  Jehovah."  (Ver.  21 — 25.)  Now,  sweet  and 
worthy  of  God  as  all  this  is,  it  is  not  heavenly  nor  eternal  in 
the  full  sense,  though  an  earnest  of  final  blessedness.  It  is 
God's  vindication  of  His  character  on  earth  and  of  His  faithful 
promises  to  Israel  there,  when  power  shall  be  on  the  side  of 
righteousness,  and  the  works  of  the  devil  shall  be  manifestly 
destroyed  here  below.  Not  even  disappointment  shall  be 
known,  for  before  men  call  Jehovah  will  answer  and  will  hear 


CHAPTER    LXV.  275 

while  they  speak.  And  the  long-groaning  earth,  freed  from  its 
travail,  shall  yield  her  increase.  The  very  beasts  shall  share 
the  general  joy,  with  one  solemn  and  marked  exception.  Did 
the  enemy  of  God  and  man  choose  one  animal  to  be  the  vehicle 
of  his  temptation  with  the  mother  of  all  men  ?  Even  in  the 
otherwise  universal  joy  God  cannot  forget  this,  and  would  have 
men  also  to  remember  it  when  that  active  spirit  of  evil  is 
debarred  from  his  ravages.  So  if  "the  wolf  and  the  lamb 
shall  feed  together,"  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox, 
none  the  less  shall  dust  be  the  serpent's  meat.  "They  shall 
not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain,  saith  Jehovah." 


CHAPTER   LXVI. 

The  concluding  chapter  of  our  prophet  pursues  what  was  begun 
in  chapter  lxv. — the  answer  of  Jehovah  to  the  supplication 
which  precedes  them  both. 

"  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  The  heaven  is  my  throne,  and  the  earth 
is  my  footstool :  where  is  the  house  that  ye  build  unto  me  ?  and 
where  is  the  place  of  my  rest  ?  For  all  those  things  hath  my 
hand  made."  (Ver.  1,  2.)  It  is  not  that  God  did  not  accept 
the  house  which  king  David  desired,  and  his  son  Solomon  was 
given  to  erect  for  His  glory.  It  is  not  that  He  will  not  have  a 
sanctuary  in  the  midst  of  Israel  in  the  glorious  land ;  for  He  has 
revealed  it  minutely,  with  the  feasts,  sacrifices,  and  appurtenances, 
by  Ezekiel.  (Chaps,  xl. — xlvi.)  But  it  is  another  thing  when  His 
people  rest  in  the  sanctuary,  as  of  old  in  the  ark  to  their  own 
shame  and  discomfiture  before  their  enemies.  So  it  was  when 
the  Lord  left  the  temple — no  longer  God's  but  their  house,  and 
left  to  them  desolate,  Himself  its  true  glory  being  despised 
and  rejected.  So  Stephen  charged  home  on  them  these  very 
words.  (Acts  vii.  48 — 50.)  It  was  not  he,  nor  Luke,  but  Isaiah 
who  declared  that  the  Most  High  dwells  not  in  temples  made 
with  hands :  and  this  in  full  view  of  the  exceeding  magnifical 
temple  which  Solomon  built.  Heaven  is  His  throne,  earth  is  His 
footstool.  What  can  man  do  worthily  for  Him  to  rest  in  ?  He 
needs  nothing  from  man's  resources !  His  own  hand  has  made 
all  these  things,  in  comparison  with  which  man's  greatest 
exertions  are  puny  indeed.  Once  more  among  the  Jews  at  the 
end  of  the  ag-e  shall  be  the  state  of  things  which  draws  out  this 
rebuke  of  their  own  prophet.  Trusting  in  the  house  that  they 
are  at  length  allowed  to  build  in  Jerusalem,  they  must  prove 
afresh  that  an  unbelieving  idolatrous  heart  desecrates  a  temple, 
and  that  not  thus  can  sin  be  settled  between  God  and  the 
sinner.  Earthly  splendour  in  such  circumstances  is  but  gilding 
over  iniquity.     It  is  real  hypocrisy. 


CHAPTER   LXVT.  277 

"  And  all  those  things  have  been,  saith  Jehovah  :  but  to 
this  man  will  I  look,  even  to  him  that  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite 
spirit,  and  trembleth  at  my  word."  (Ver.  2.)  Thus  the  line  is 
drawn  here  as  before  between  a  godly  remnant,  and  the  people 
apostate  as  a  whole.  Hence  their  oblations  are  vain.  "He 
that  killeth  an  ox  is  as  if  he  slew  a  man ;  he  that  sacrificeth  a 
lamb,  as  if  he  cut  off  a  dog's  neck :  he  that  offereth  an  oblation 
as  if  he  offered  swine's  blood :  he  that  burneth  incense,  as  if  he 
blessed  an  idol.  Yea,  they  have  chosen  their  own  ways,  and 
their  soul  delighteth  in  their  abominations."  (Ver.  3.)  The 
English  Bible  follows  the  Septuagint,  Syriac,  Vulgate,  and 
Arabic,  as  well  as  the  Chaldee  paraphrase.  Houbigant,  Bishop 
Lowth,  Horsley,  De  Wette,  &c,  omit  the  terms  of  comparison 
(inserted  in  italics  in  the  A.  V.),  which  in  their  judgment  mar 
the  true  sense.  Their  translation  makes  the  verse  to  intimate 
the  combination  of  ritual  observance  with  open  wickedness  and 
Gentile  abominations.  Otherwise  the  statement  is  that  their 
impiety  made  their  acts  of  worship  to  be  so  many  horrors. 

In  either  view  they  had  chosen  their  own  path  of  self-will 
and  disregard  of  God  for  the  evils  they  loved ;  but  God's  retri- 
bution would  not  be  wanting.  (See  ver.  4.)  "I  also  will  choose 
their  delusions,  and  will  bring  their  fears  upon  them ;  because 
when  I  called,  none  did  answer ;  when  I  spake,  they  did  not 
hear :  but  they  did  evil  before  mine  eyes,  and  chose  that  in 
which  I  delighted  not."  No  delusions  among  the  nations  were 
more  complete  than  Israel's  have  been  and  are  yet  to  be ; 
and  the  evils  they  dreaded,  and  sacrificed  all  to  avoid,  were 
just  what  befel  them,  and  must  till  the  end  come.  Did  they 
refuse  the  Messiah?  They  have  been  a  prey  to  false  Messiahs, 
and  shall  yet  bow  down  to  the  Antichrist.  Did  they  own  no 
king  but  Caesar  ?  In  Caesar  they  found  a  destroyer.  Did  they 
fear  the  Komans  would  come  and  take  away  their  place  and 
nation  ?  All  the  world  knows  how  punctually  their  fear  was 
accomplished ;  and  yet  the  end  is  not.  Greater  abominations 
shall  be  seen  in  them;  greater  delusions,  greater  fears,  and 
a  greater  fulfilment.  The  abomination  of  desolation  of  which 
the  Saviour  spoke  (citing  not  Daniel  xi.  31,  which  was  then 


278  LECTURES   OX    ISAIAH. 

past,  but  Daniel  xii.  11,  which  is  still  future)  must  yet  be  set 
where  it  ought  not,  in  the  sanctuary  at  Jerusalem ;  and  then 
shall  be  great  tribulation,  such  as  was  not  since  the  beginning 
of  the  world  to  this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be. 

It  is  impossible  to  interpret  either  Matthew  xxiv.,  or  Daniel 
xii.,  or  our  chapter,  of  the  Roman  siege :  but  the  days  are  at 
hand,  and  the  effect  of  every  vision.  "  Hear  the  word  of 
Jehovah,  ye  that  tremble  at  his  word  :  Your  brethren  that  hated 
you,  that  cast  you  out  for  my  name's  sake,  said,  Let  Jehovah  be 
glorified :  but  he  shall  appear  to  your  joy,  and  they  shall  be 
ashamed.  A  voice  of  noise  from  the  city,  a  voice  from  the 
temple,  a  voice  of  Jehovah  that  rendereth  recompense  to  his 
enemies.  Before  she  travailed,  she  brought  forth;  before  her 
pain  came,  she  was  delivered  of  a  man  child.  Who  hath  heard 
such  a  thing  ?  who  hath  seen  such  things  ?  Shall  the  earth  be 
made  to  bring  forth  in  one  day  ?  or  shall  a  nation  be  born  at 
once  ?  for  as  soon  as  Zion  travailed,  she  brought  forth  her 
children.  Shall  I  bring  to  the  birth,  and  not  cause  to  bring 
forth  ?  saith  Jehovah  :  shall  I  cause  to  bring  forth,  and  shut  the 
womb  ?  saith  thy  God.  Rejoice  ye  with  Jerusalem,  and  be  glad 
with  her,  all  ye  that  love  her :  rejoice  for  joy  with  her,  all  ye 
that  mourn  for  her :  that  ye  may  suck,  and  be  satisfied  with 
the  breasts  of  her  consolations ;  that  ye  may  milk  out,  and  be 
delighted  with  the  abundance  of  her  glory.  For  thus  saith 
Jehovah,  Behold,  I  will  extend  peace  to  her  like  a  river,  and  the 
glory  of  the  Gentiles  like  a  flowing  stream :  then  shall  ye  suck, 
ye  shall  be  borne  upon  her  sides,  and  be  dandled  upon  her 
knees.  As  one  whom  his  mother  comfort eth,  so  will  I  comfort 
you ;  and  ye  shall  be  comforted  in  Jerusalem.  And  when  ye 
see  this,  your  heart  shall  rejoice,  and  your  bones  shall  flourish 
like  an  herb  :  and  the  hand  of  Jehovah  shall  be  known  toward 
his  servants,  and  his  indignation  toward  his  enemies."  (Ver. 
.5—14.) 

Thus  no  longer  by  testimony  to  the  heart,  but  by  manifest 
judgment  will  Jehovah  decide  between  cattle  and  cattle.  The 
infidel  scoff,  which  so  long  harassed  the  heavenly  people,  will 
then  be  put  to  shame  among  the  poor  in  spirit  of  the  earthly 


CHAPTER   LXVI.  279 

people.  Jehovah  will  be  glorified  to  the  joy  of  such  as 
trembled  at  His  word  before  He  appears,  to  the  eternal  infamy 
of  those  who  knew  Him  not  and  doubted  His  interest  in  His 
despised  confessors  here  below.  For  Christ  and  for  the  church, 
they  were  raised  or  changed  and  taken  on  high,  leaving  the 
world  without  a  blow  or  even  a  notice.  But  it  will  not  be  so 
for  the  Jew  by  and  by  :  "A  voice  of  noise  from  the  city,  a  voice 
from  the  temple,  a  voice  of  Jehovah  that  rendereth  recompense 
to  his  enemies."  The  Roman  destruction  is  no  adequate  fulfil- 
ment of  this :  but  it  shall  be  fulfilled  to  the  letter  of  many 
prophecies.  (Compare  Isaiah  xviii.  3 — 7 ;  ix.  3 — 5 ;  xxix. ; 
Zech.  xiv.  1 — 4.)  And  then  shall  follow  the  new  birth  or 
ingathering  of  Zion's  children,  no  longer  to  be  Abraham's  seed 
alone  but  his  children  in  deed  and  in  truth.  As  nothing  of 
the  kind  followed  the  capture  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  no  more  did 
it  ensue  when  Titus  took  Jerusalem.  No  outpouring  of  ven- 
geance on  the  guilty  city,  followed  by  blessing  unexampled  for 
fulness  and  without  sorrow,  has  as  yet  appeared  to  satisfy  the 
terms  of  the  prediction.  Sudden  as  it  will  be,  it  will  also  be 
permanent.  It  will  be  the  day  of  Jehovah  when  man's  and 
Israel's  sad  history  is  to  be  reversed ;  and  those  who  loved  and 
mourned  for  Jerusalem  shall  rejoice  for  her  and  share  the  rich 
results  of  her  blessedness.  Yet  is  it  in  no  way  the  character  of 
gospel  joy  which  blends  inward  comfort  by  the  Spirit's  power 
with  shame  and  sorrow  and  rejection  in  the  world.  Here 
contrariwise,  "when  ye  see  this,  your  heart  shall  rejoice,  and 
your  bones  shall  flourish  like  an  herb,  and  the  hand  of  Jehovah 
shall  be  known  toward  his  servants,  and  his  indignation 
toward  his  enemies"  It  is  the  future  day,  not  of  grace  and 
salvation  only,  as  it  is  to-day,  but  of  vengeance  also,  when 
Jehovah  will  not  stop  the  words  as  once  He  did  on  earth. 
Then  He  was  proclaiming  the  acceptable  year  of  Jehovah  and 
this  only.  By  and  by  He  will  proclaim  and  accomplish  both 
that  year  and  the  day  of  vengeance.  For  this  is  in  His  heart, 
and  the  year  of  His  redeemed  is  come.  Both  will  be  fulfilled 
then  without  let  or  delay.  It  will  be  the  introduction  of  His 
day,  and  of  the  millennial  reign. 


280  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

"  For,  behold,  Jehovah  will  come  with  fire,  and  with  his 
chariots  like  a  whirlwind,  to  render  his  anger  with  fury,  and  his 
rebuke  with  flames  of  fire.  For  by  fire  and  by  his  sword  will 
Jehovah  plead  with  all  flesh  :  and  the  slain  of  Jehovah  shall  be 
many.  They  that  sanctify  themselves,  and  purify  themselves  in 
the  gardens  behind  one  tree  in  the  midst,  eating  swine's  flesh 
and  the  abomination,  and  the  mouse,  shall  be  consumed 
together,  saith  Jehovah.  For  I  know  their  works  and  their 
thoughts:  it  shall  come,  that  I  will  gather  all  nations  and 
tongues ;  and  they  shall  come,  and  see  my  glory."  (Ver.  15 — 18.) 
The  efforts  of  ancient  and  modern  commentators  to  apply  this 
passage,  like  the  rest,  to  gospel  times,  are  desperate  but  vain. 
It  is  unequivocally  a  day  of  judgment,  not  the  glad  tidings  of 
salvation  by  His  grace;  it  is  His  revelation  from  heaven  in 
flaming  fire  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and 
on  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel.  It  is  evident  that  the  Jews 
in  that  day  will  not  only  set  up  their  ritual  again,  but  be 
addicted  to  heathen  abominations.  It  is  the  day  of  divine 
recompense,  when  old  evils  will  revive  and  amalgamate  with 
novel  iniquities,  that  all  may  come  before  Jehovah  in  judgment, 
and  a  new  era  dawn  on  both  Jew  and  Gentile  over  the  earth 
now  purged.  It  will  be  a  question  then  not  of  believing  the 
grace  of  God,  but  of  seeing  the  glory  of  Jehovah  that  is  to  be 
revealed. 

"  And  I  will  set  a  sign  among  them,  and  I  will  send  those 
that  escape  of  them  unto  the  nations,  to  Tarshish,  Pul,  and 
Lud,  that  draw  the  bow,  to  Tubal,  and  Javan,  to  the  isles  afar 
off,  that  have  not  heard  my  fame,  neither  have  seen  my  glory ; 
and  they  shall  declare  my  glory  among  the  Gentiles.  And  they 
shall  bring  all  your  brethren  for  an  offering  unto  Jehovah  out 
of  all  nations  upon  horses,  and  in  chariots,  and  in  litters,  and 
upon  mules,  and  upon  swift  beasts,  to  my  holy  mountain  Jeru- 
salem, saith  Jehovah,  as  the  children  of  Israel  bring  an  offering 
in  a  clean  vessel  into  the  house  of  Jehovah."  (Ver.  19,  20.) 
Yitringa's  argument  on  verse  19,  that  no  future  call  of  Gentiles 
can  be  here  intended,  because  those  named  have  long  since 
known  the  God  of  Israel,  seems  to  me  of  no  real  force.     For 


CHAPTER    LXVI.  281 

even  Christendom  will  then  be  in  a  state  of  apostasy 
(2  Thess.  ii.) ;  and,  besides,  the  hearing  of  Jehovah's  fame  and 
seeing  His  glory  refers  to  the  manifestation  of  Himself  that  will 
then  be  made  here  below. 

Thus  an  unsparing  divine  judgment  will  be  executed  on  all 
the  gathered  nations  when  the  Jews  are  dealt  with  in  their  pol- 
lutions ;  and  those  that  escape  of  them  will  be  sent  of  God  to 
the  distant  nations  ignorant  of  what  He  has  wrought.  Gentiles 
bring  back  all  the  Jews  remaining  outside  the  Holy  Land.  It 
is,  I  suppose,  the  detail  of  the  prediction  in  chapter  xviii.  7. 
From  all  nations  shall  this  offering  to  Jehovah  be  brought,  and 
by  every  means  of  conveyance.  Before  this  it  will  have  been 
only  the  Jews  and  not  all  Israel. 

All  this  seems  to  me  not  the  same  as  the  gospel  or  its  effects, 
but  in  the  most  certain  and  evident  contrast  with  it.  The  offer- 
ing now  is  characteristically  of  the  Gentiles,  as  we  see  in  Eomans 
xv.  16,  and  as  experience  shews.  Jews  are  no  doubt  now  as  ever 
converted,  but  they  are  comparatively  rare.  The  prophet  con- 
templates the  day  when  all  Israel  shall  be  saved,  when  the 
apostates  have  been  surprised  by  the  divine  judgment.  And  as  to 
any  supposed  difficulty  of  reconciling  with  John  iv.  21  Jerusalem 
as  a  centre  for  all  nations,  it  is  imaginary,  or  rather  depends  on 
the  confusion  of  the  hour  that  now  is  with  the  day  that  shall  be. 
Our  Lord  was  contemplating  the  time  of  His  rejection  and  His 
approaching  absence  in  heaven ;  the  prophet  had  in  view  the 
day  of  His  glory  for  the  earth.  .  Distinguish  the  times,  and  the 
objection  vanishes.  Jerusalem  has  no  place  in  the  Christian 
system;  in  the  coming  day  of  Jehovah  it  will  have  a  greater  and 
holier  place  than  it  ever  had  of  old. 

Hence  it  is  obvious  that  the  ordinary  strain  of  argument 
and  interpretation,  popular  from  the  days  of  Origen  and  Jerome 
down  to  the  present,  is  founded  on  a  total  confusion  of  things 
that  differ.  Christianity  no  doubt  is  very  distinct ;  but  that 
the  new  age  must  be  a  repetition  of  the  same  aims,  principles, 
and  ways,  is  an  error  quite  as  great  as  that  which  fancies  the 
gospel  to  be  only  a  continuation  of  the  law.  Israel  shall  be 
established  for  ever  before  the  Lord.     "  For  as  the  new  heavens 

T 


282  LECTURES   ON   ISAIAH. 

and  the  new  earth,  which  I  will  make,  shall  remain  before  me, 
saith  Jehovah,  so  shall  your  seed  and  your  name  remain.  And 
it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  from  one  new  moon  to  another,  and 
from  one  sabbath  to  another,  shall  all  flesh  come  to  worship 
before  me,  saith  Jehovah."  (Ver.  22,  23.)  There  is  no  solid 
reason  for  doubting  the  literal  bearing  of  the  prediction.  New 
moons  and  sabbaths  shall  once  more  figure  in  the  worship  of 
Jehovah ;  but  it  will  be  no  more  so  contracted  as  of  old,  for 
"  all  flesh  "  shall  share  in  it,  though  (from  other  scriptures  we 
may  gather)  on  no  such  exalted  ground  or  such  nearness  to  the 
King  as  His  chosen  people.  His  house  shall  be  literally  a  house 
of  prayer  for  all  people,  which  will  in  no  way  hinder  the  great- 
ness of  His  name  among  the  Gentiles,  or  the  offering  of  incense 
to  it,  or  a  pure  offering  in  every  place. 

And  as  His  honour  is  thus  maintained,  so  is  His  fear.  Not 
only  shall  there  be  an  awful  outpouring  of  wrath  on  His  adver- 
saries at  the  end  of  this  age,  but  Jehovah  will  keep  up  a  salu- 
tary warning  nigh  the  very  spot  where  His  glory  dwells.  *  And 
they  shall  go  forth,  and  look  upon  the  carcases  of  the  men  that 
have  transgressed  against  me :  for  their  worm  shall  not  die, 
neither  shall  their  fire  be  quenched  ;  and  they  shall  be  an 
abhorring  unto  all  flesh."  (Ver.  24.)  There  is  nothing  really 
obscure  in  this,  save  to  those  who  regard  the  passage  from  a 
Christian  point  of  view.  In  its  own  connection  it  is  most  simple, 
solemn,  and  expressive. 


MAY  BE  HAD  OF  THE  SAME  PUBLISHER. 


BY    J.    N.    D. 

Practical  Reflections  on  the  Psalms.     Crown  8 vo.     Price  4s.,  Cloth. 
Lectures  on  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ.     Price  is.  6d.,  and  in  Cloth,  gilt,  2s. 
Notes  on  the  Gospel  of  Luke.     Price  2s.,  Cloth. 
A  Series  of  Ten  Papers  on  the  Eternity  of  Punishment  and  the  Immortality  of 

the  Soul.     With  a  Preface  by  the  Author.     Price  is.  9d.,  Cloth. 
The  different  Papers  may  also  be  had  separately  for  distribution. 
Notes  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.     Price  is.  6d.,  Cloth. 
Notes  on  Scripture.     Price  is.,  Cloth,  Post  Free. 
Notes   on   the   Epistle   to   the  Romans.      Price   9d.,    Cloth   Limp  ;     and   in 

Paper  Covers,  Price  4d. 
Notes  of  Addresses  on  the  Ways  of  God.     By  J.  N.  D.  and  G.  V.  W.    Price 

9d.,  Cloth  Limp. 
Thoughts  on  Psalm  cxix.     Cloth,  6d.     2  Copies  Postage  Free. 
The  Sabbath  :  Is  the  Law  Dead,  or  am  I?     New  Edition.     Price  6d. 
Meditations  on  the  16th  and  17th  Psalms.     Price  6d.,  Cloth. 
Christ's  Work  and  its  Consequences.     Price  4d. 
A  Few  Hymns  and  Spiritual  Songs.     New  Edition.     Cloth  Limp,  6d.,  and  in 

French  Morocco  Limp,  gilt  edges,  for  presents,  is.  6d.     Post  Free. 
Adresses  to  his  Roman  Catholic  Brethren.     Price  3d . 
On  the  Government  of  God  and  His  Counsels  in  Grace  ;  being  Notes  of  an 

Address.     Revised  by  the  Author.     Price  3d. 
Brief  Thoughts  on  the  Apocalypse.     Price  2d. 

The  Faithfulness  of  Godr  as  seen  in  His  ways  with  Balaam.  Price  2d. 
The  Red  Sea  and  the  Wilderness.  Price  id.  12  Copies  Postage  Free. 
Brief  Notes  of  Addresses,  delivered  in  Dublin,  on  Phil.  iii.     Price  id. 


BY    W.    KELLY. 

Re-issue  of  the  Bible  Treasury.     Vols.  I.  to  IV.  may  now   be  had.     Price 

7s.  6d.  each,  Postage  Free. 
Lectures  on  the  Book  of  Revelation.     A  new  and  revised  Edition.    Price  5s. 

Also  the  same,  with  a  New  Translation,  &c,     Price  6s.  6d. 
Christ  and  the  Seven  Churches.     Cloth,  is.  6d.,  Post  Free. 
The  Second  Advent  of  Christ  Pre-Millennial.     Price  is.  3d.,  Cloth. 
The  Revelation,   translated  from   a  text  drawn  from   the  best   Manuscripts. 

Price  4d. 
Teetotalism  and  the  Testimony  of  the  Bible.     Price  6d.     (New  Edition.) 
Notes  on  Matthew  xiii.  :  being  a  Short    Exposition  of  the  Seven  Parables. 

Price  6d.  in  Cloth,  and  in  Paper  Covers  4d. 
The  Salvation  of  God,  as  Typified  by  the  Red  Sea  and  the  Jordan.  Price  3d. 
Thoughts  on  Matthew  xxv.     Price  3d.     4  Copies  Postage  Free. 
Thoughts  Introductory  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians.     Price  2d. 


ADVERTISEMENTS. 


Thoughts  on  the  Lord's  Prayer.    A  New  Edition.    Price  2d.    6  copies  Post  Free. 

The  Rest  that  Remaineth.     Price  id. 

On  Romans  viii.     Price  id. 

Thoughts  on  1st  Corinthians,  chap.  xv. 

Presbyterianism  Tested  by  the  Word  of  God  ;  a  letter  to  the  Editor  of  the 

"British  Herald."     Price  id. 
Christ  the  Last  Adam  and  Second  Man.     Price  id.     12  Copies  Postage  Free. 


BY    J.    G.     BELLETT. 

Miscellaneous  Papers.     Price  3s.,  Cloth. 

The  Minor  Prophets.     Price  2s. 

Short  Meditations.     Price  3s.  6d. 

On   the    Return   of  the    Lord   Jesus  Christ  to  meet  His  Saints   in   the    Air. 

Price  o,d.     A  Cheap  Edition  in  Paper  Covers,  Price  4d. 
The  Confederacies  of  Men  and  the  Judgments  of  God.     Price  2d. 
An  Introduction  to  Isaiah.     Price  4d.     3  Copies  Post  Free. 
The  Church  at  Thessalonica.     Price  3d. 
Convicted  yet  Confiding.     Price  id. 
Waiting  for  the  Son  from  Heaven.     Price  id. 
A  Few  Words  on  St.  Paul's  General  Epistles.     Price  id. 


BY     F.     G.     PATTERSON. 

Scripture  Notes  and  Queries.  Price  is.  4d.  Also  a  Cheap  Edition,  in  Cloth 
Limp,  is. 

The  Blackrock  Lectures  on  the  Church  of  God,  &c.  1 .  The  Body  of  Christ. 
2.  The  House  of  God.  3.  Christ  among  the  Candlesticks.  4.  Overcom- 
ing. 5.  Our  Present  Condition  and  our  Hope.  6.  The  Church  of  God  in 
the  Glory.  Price  is.  9d.  Cloth,  Bevelled  Boards.  Also  a  Cheap  Edition, 
Price  is.  3d.,  Cloth  Limp. 

The  Ways  of  God.  A  brief  outline  of  Gcd's  dealings  with  Israel,  the  Nations 
and  the  Church,  and  His  purposes  for  the  Glory  of  Christ.     Price  2s. 

"Words  of  Truth,"  Edited  by  F.  G.  P.,  Vols.  I  to  5,  Price  is.  6d.  each. 

The  New  Birth  :  What  is  it?    Price  6d.,  Cloth  ;  Paper  Covers,  4d. 

"There  is  one  Body  and  one  Spirit,"  and  "The  Unity  of  the  Spirit." 
Price  3d. 

The  Remnant  Testimony.     Price  2d. 

"  The  Church  which  is  His  Body."     Price  l£d. 

God's  Sovereignty  and  Man's  Responsibility.     Price  id. 

The  Eternity  of  Punishment  and  Immortality  of  the  Soul.  By  J.  N.  D. 
Edited  by  F.  G.  Patterson.     Cheap  Edition.     Price  is.  3d.,  Cloth  Limp. 

R.   L.   ALLAN,   15  Paternoster  Row,  London;  and   73  Sauchiehall 
Street,  Glasgow. 


