LIBRARY  j 

!  PRINCETON.    S.  J 

I    No.Case,.^Wv-v:::v::';:; 

'     No.  Shell;  -&e(:.LocA..._JJal 


No.  Book, 


NoT.:: 


^5  2.(^.85 
.8,  KZQ 


LECTURES 


THE   EPISTLE   OF   PxVUL,   THE   APOSTLE, 


THE  GALATIANS, 


A   NEW    TKANSLATION. 


BY  WILLLVM^^ELLY. 


LONDON: 
G.    MORPvISH,    24,   WARWICK    LANE, 

PATERNOSTER  EOW,  E.  C. 
GLASGOW:  SCOTT  &  ALLAX,  164,  SAUCHIEHALL  STREET. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS: 

A  NEW  TRANSLATION. 


I.  Patjl,  apostle,  not  from  men  nor  by  man,  but  by 
Jesus  Christ  and  Grod  the  Father  that  raised  him  out 
of  the  dead,  -and  all  the  brethren  with  me,  to  the  as- 
semblies of  Galatia.  ^  Grace  to  you  and  peace  from 
God  the  Father  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  *  that  gave 
himself  for  our  sins,  so  that  he  might  deliver  us  out 
of  the  present  evil  age  according  to  the  vrill  of  our 
God  and  Father,  ^  to  whom  [be]  the  glory  unto  the 
ages  of  the  ages.  Amen. 

^.I  wonder  that  thus  quickly  ye  are  being  removed 
from  him  that  called  you  in  Christ's  grace  to  a 
different  gospel  7  which  is  not  another,  but  *  there 
are  some  that  trouble  you  and  desire  to  pervert 
the  gospel  of  Christ.  ^But  even  if  we  or  an  angel 
out  of  heaven  preach  to  you  contrary  to  what  we 
preached  to  you,  accursed  let  him  be.  9  As  we  have 
said  before,  now  also  again  I  say,  if  one  is  preaching 
to  you  contrary  to  what  ye  received,  accursed  let  him 
be.  ^^For  am  I  now  conciliating  men  or  God  ?  or  do 
I  seek  to  please  men?  [For]  if  any  longer  I  were 
pleasing  men,  Christ's  bondservant  I  should  not  be. 

^'But  I  let  you  know,  brethren,  that  the  gospel 
that  was  preached  by  me  is  not  according  to  man. 
^2  For  neither  received  I  it  from  man  nor  was  I  taught    | 
[it]  but  by  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  "  Yot  ye  heard    | 
of  my  conversation  formerly  in  Judaism,  that  I  was    \ 
excessively    persecuting  the   assembly   of  God  and 
ravaging  it ;  ^*and  I  was  advancing  in  Judaism  beyond 
many  contemporaries  in  my  nation,  being  very  ex- 
ceedingly zealous  for  the  traditions  of  my  fathers. 
15  But  when  it  pleased  God,t  that  set  me  apart  out  of 
my  mother's  womb  and  called  me  by  his  grace,  ^^  to 

♦  Or,  •  another  gospel,  which  is  nothing  else  than,'  &c. 
t  Or, 'him.' 


IV  GALATIA^S. 

reveal  his  Son  in  me,  that  I  should  preach  him  am.ong 
the  nations,  immediately  I  took  not  counsel  with 
flesh  and  blood,  ^^  uor  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to  those 
that  were  apostles  before  me ;  but  I  went  unto  Arabia 
and  again  returned  unto  Damascus.  ^^  Then  after  three 
years  I  went  up  unto  Jerusalem  to  make  the  acquaint- 
ance of  Cephas,  and  I  remained  with  him  fifteen  days ; 
^9  but  no  other  of  the  apostles  I  saw,  save  James  the 
brother  of  the  Lord.  ^^  jv^qw  what  I  write  to  you, 
behold,  before  God,  I  lie  not.  -^  Then  I  came  into 
the  regions  of  Syria  and  Cilicia ;  ^^  but  I  was  unknown 
personally  to  the  assemblies  of  Judea  that  are  in 
Christ:  ^^only  they  were  hearing  that  our  former  per- 
secutor now  preacheth  the  faith  which  formerly  he  was 
ravaging,  -•*  and  they  glorified  Grod  in  me. 

II.  Then  after  fourteen  years  I  again  went  up  unto 
Jerusalem  with  Barnabas,  taking  Titus  also  with  [me] ; 
-  and  I  went  up  according  to  revelation,  and  laid  be- 
fore them  the  gospel  which  I  preach  among  the  nations, 
but  in  private  to  those  in  repute,  lest  by  any  means 
I  should  be  running  or  had  run  in  vain ;  ^  (but  neither 
was  Titus,  that  was  with  me,  being  a  G-reek,  compelled 
to  be  circumcised;)  *and  [this]  on  account  of  the 
false  brethren  brought  in  stealthily,  who  came  in 
stealthily  to  spy  out  our  liberty  which  we  have  in 
Christ  Jesus,  that  they  might  bring  into  bondage, 
*to  whom  we  yielded  in  subjection,  not  for  an  hour, 
that  the  truth  of  the  gospel  might  abide  with  you. 
6  But  from  those  reputed  to  be  something,  whatsoever 
they  were  maketh  no  diff"erence  to  me — God  accepteth 
no  man's  person — for  to  me  those  in  repute  imparted 
nothing ;  7  but,  on  the  contrary,  having  seen  that  I  was 
entrusted  with  the  gospel  of  the  uncivcumcision,  even 
as  Peter  [with  that]  of  the  circumcision  ^  (for  he  that 
wrought  in  Peter  for  the  apostleship  of  the  circum- 
cision, wrought  in  me  also  toward  the  nations),  yand 
having  known  the  grace  given  to  me,  James  and 
Cephas  and  John,  that  were  reputed  to  be  pillars, 
gave  to  me  and  Barnabas  the  right-hands  of  fellowship, 
that  we  [should  go]  unto  the  nations,  and  they  unto 


A  KEW  TIIA5TSLATI02^".  V 

tlie  circumcision,  i^only  that  we  should  remember  the 
poor,  which  very  thing  also  I  have  been  diligent  to  do. 

^1  But  when  Cephas  came  unto  Antioch,  I  withstood 
him  to  the  face,  because  he  was  self-condemned  ;*  ^^for 
before  that  certain  came  from  James,  he  ate  with  the 
nations;  but  when  they  came,  he  was  withdrawing 
and  separating  himself,  being  afraid  of  those  of  the 
circumcision;  ^^and  the  rest  of  the  Jews  also  dis- 
sembled with  him,  so  that  even  Barnabas  was  carried 
away  by  their  dissimulation.  ^'^  But  when  I  saw  that 
they  walls:  not  uprightly  according  to  the  truth  of 
the  gospel,  I  said  to  Cephas  before  all.  If  thou,  being 
a  Jew,  livest  nationally  and  not  Jewishly,  how  forcesfc 
thou  the  nations  to  judaize  ? 

^^We,  Jews  by  nature  and  not  sinners  of  the 
nations,  and  ^^  knowing  that  no  man  is  justified  by 
works  of  law,  but  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  even  wo 
believed  on  Christ  Jesus,  that  we  miglit  be  justified 
by  faith  of  Christ  and  not  by  works  of  law  ;  because 
by  works  of  law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified.  '7  But  if, 
while  seeking  to  be  justified  in  Christ,  ourselves  also 
were  found  sinners,  then  is  Christ  minister  of  sin. 
Let  it  not  be.  ^^For  if  the  things  which  I  pulled 
down,  these  I  again  build,  I  constitute  myself  a  trans- 
gressor. 19  For  I,  by  law,  died  to  law  that  I  may 
live  to  God.  ^o  With  Christ  I  am  crucified,  yet  I 
live,  no  longer  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me ;  but  that 
which  I  now  live  in  flesh,  I  live  in  the  faith  of  the 
Son  of  Grod  that  loved  me  and  gave  himself  up  for  me. 
21 1  do  not  set  aside  the  grace  of  Grod ;  for  if  righteous- 
ness is  by  law,  then  Christ  died  gratuitously. 

III.  O  senseless  Galatians!  who  bewitched  you, 
before  whose  eyes  Jesus  Christ  was  portrayed  among 
you  as  crucified  ?  ^  This  only  I  wish  to  learn  from 
you ;  received  ye  the  Spirit  by  works  of  law,  or  by 
the  report  of  faith  ?  -"^  Are  ye  so  senseless  ?  Havinpj 
begun  in  Spirit,  are  ye  now  being  perfected  in  flesh  ? 
*  Suffered  ye  so  many  things  in  vain,  if  indeed  in  vain  ? 
5  He  therefore  that  ministereth  to  you  the  Spirit  and 
*  Or,  'liad  been  blamed.* 


Tl  GALATIAlfS. 

worketb  miracles  among  you,  [doetli  he  it]  by  works 
of  law  or  by  the  hearing  of  faith  ?  ^Eveu  as  Abraham 
believed  God,  and  it  was  counted  to  him  for  righteous- 
ness. 7  Know  then  that  they  who  are  of  faith,  these 
are  sons  of  Abraham.  ^And  the  scripture  fore- 
seeing that  God  would  justify  the  nations  by  faith, 
announced  beforehand  to  Abraham  :  "  In  thee  shall  all 
the  nations  be  blessed."  9  So  that  they  that  are  of 
faith  are  blessed  with  the  faithful  Abraham.  ^^  For  as 
many  as  are  of  works  of  law  are  under  curse  ;  for  it  is 
written,  "  Cursed  is  every  one  who  doth  not  continue 
in  all  things  that  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law,  to 
do  them ;"  i'  but  that  in  virtue  of  law  none  is  justified 
with  God  [is]  evident,  for  "tbe  just  by  faith  shall 
^2  live;"  but  the  law  is  not  of  faith,  but  he  who  hath  done 
them  shall  live  in  virtue  of  them,  ^^c^inst  bought 
us  out  of  the  curse  of  the  law,  having  become  a  curse 
for  us,  (for  it  is  written,  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that 
hangeth  on  a  tree,")  i-*  that  unto  the  nations  the  bless- 
ing of  Abraham  might  come  in  Christ  Jesus,  that  we 
might  receive  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  through  faith. 
1^  Brethren,  I  speak  according  to  man :  a  ratified 
covenant,  though  man's,  no  one  setteth  aside  or  supple- 
nienteth.  ^^  But  to  Abraham  were  addressed  the 
promises,  and  to  his  seed ;  he  doth  not  say  "  and  to 
seeds"  as  of  many,  but  as  of  one  "and  to  thy  seed," 
which  is  Christ.  ^7  Now  tliis  I  say :  the  covenant 
ratified  beforehand  by  God,  the  law,  which  took  place 
four  hundred  and  thirty  years  after,  doth  not  annul  so 
as  to  make  the  promise  void.  ^^  For  if  the  inheritance 
is  of  law,  it  is  no  more  of  promise ;  but  to  iV.braham 
by  promise  God  graciously  gave  [it].  ^9  Why  then 
the  law?  For  the  sake  of  transgressions  it  was 
added,  until  the  seed  came  to  whom  the  promise  was 
made,  being  ordained  by  means  of  angels  in  a  me- 
diator's hand.  -^But  the  mediator  is  not  of  one,  but 
God  is  one.  ^i  j^jgj  therefore  the  law  against  the 
promises  of  God  ?  Let  it  not  be.  For  if  there  had 
been  given  a  law  which  could  quicken,  in  very  truth 
by  law  would  have  been  righteousness.    ^^Bnt  the 


A  KEW  TKANSLATION.  Vll 

scripture  hath  shut  up  all  things  under  sin,  that  the 
promise  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  might  be  given  to 
those  that  believe.  ^3  But  before  faith  came,  we  were 
guarded  under  law,  shut  up  unto  the  faith  about  to 
be  revealed.  ^4  go  that  the  law  hath  been  our  tutor 
unto  Christ,  that  we  might  be  justified  by  faith. 
25  But  faith  having  come,  we  are  no  longer  under  a 
tutor;  2t5for  ye  all  are  sons  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ 
Jesus.  ^'^  For  as  many  of  you  as  were  baptized  unto 
Christ,  put  on  Christ.  28  There  is  no  Jew  nor  Greek, 
there  is  no  bondservant  nor  freeman,  there  is  no  male 
and  female ;  for  all  ye  are  one  in  Christ  Jesus.  ^9  ^nd 
if  ye  [be]  Christ's,  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed,  heirs 
according  to  promise. 

IV.  But  I  say,  as  long  as  the  heir  is  an  infant,  he 
diftereth  nothing  from  a  bondservant,  though  he  be  lord 
ot*  all ;  2  but  is  under  guardians  and  stewards  until 
the  time  fore-appointed  by  the  father.  ^  go  also  we, 
when  we  were  infants,  were  held  in  bondage  under 
the  principles  of  the  world ;  *  but  when  the  fulness  of 
the  time  came,  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  born  of  woman, 
born  under  law,  ^that  he  might  buy  those  under  law, 
that  we  might  receive  our  sonship.  ^B\it  because  ye 
are  sons,  God  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into 
our  hearts,  crying,  Abba  Father.  7  So  that  thou  art 
no  longer  a  bondservant  but  a  son ;  and  if  a  son,  an 
heir  afso  of  God  through  Christ.  ^But  then,  not 
knowing  God,  ye  were  in  bondage  to  those  who  by 
nature  are  not  gods ;  9  but  now  having  known  God, 
yea  rather  being  known  by  God,  how  turn  ye  again  to 
the  weak  and  beggarly  principles  to  which  ye  wish 
again  afresh  to  be  in  bondage  ?  ^^  Ye  observe  days, 
and  months,  and  times,  and  years.  ^^  I  am  afraid  of 
you,  lest  somehow  1  have  laboured  in  vain  as  to  you. 

1-  Be  as  I,  for  I  also  [am]  as  ye,  brethren,  I  beseech 
you ;  ye  have  in  nothing  wronged  me ;  ^^  but  ye  know 
that  in  weakness  of  the  flesh  I  preached  to  you  the 
first  time;  i*and  my  temptation  which  was  in  my 
flesh  ye  slighted  not  nor  loathed,  but  as  an  angel  of 
God  ye  received  me— as  Christ  Jesus.    ^*  What  then 


VUl  GALATIAIfS. 

was  your  blessedness  ?  For  I  bear  you  witness  that, 
if  possible,  plucking  out  your  eyes,  ye  would  have 
given  them  to  me.  ^^So  that  have  I  become  your 
enemy  by  being  truthful  to  you  ?  ^7  They  are  zealous 
about  you,  not  rightly  ;  but  wish  to  shut  you  out,  that 
ye  may  be  zealous  about  them.  ^^But  [it  is]  right  to 
be  zealous  iu  a  right  thing  always,  and  not  only  when 
I  am  present  with  you.  ^9  My  children,  with  whom  I 
again  travail,  until  Christ  shall  have  been  formed  iu 
you,  "^yea,  I  could  wish  to  be  present  with  you  now 
and  change  my  voice,  for  I  am  perplexed  about  you. 
21  Tell  me,  ye  who  wish  to  be  under  law,  do  ye  noC 
hear  the  law  ?  22  ^oc  it  is  written  that  Abraham  had 
two  sons,  one  of  the  maidservant  and  one  of  the  free- 
woman.  "2  But  he  that  was  of  the  maidservant  was 
born  according  to  flesh,  and  he  that  was  of  the  free- 
woman  through  the  promise.  ^^AVhich  things  are 
given  allegorically,  for  these  are  two  covenants,  one 
from  Mount  Sina,  gendering  unto  bondage,  which  is 
Agar.  2^  For  Agar  is  Mount  Sina  in  Arabia,  but  corres- 
pondeth  with  the  existing  Jerusalem,  for  she  is  in  bond- 
age with  her  children.  26g^t  ^\^q  Jerusalem  above  is 
free,  which  is  our  mother,  -'^for  it  is  written,  "Eejoice, 
thou  barren  that  bearest  not ;  break  out  and  cry,  thou 
that  travailest  not ;  for  the  children  of  the  desolate 
are  many  more  than  of  her  that  hath  the  husband." 

28  But  we,  brethren,  like  Isaac,  are  children  of  promise. 

29  But  as  then  he  that  was  born  according  to  flesh 
persecuted  him  that  was  according  to  Spirit,  so  now. 

30  But  what  saith  the  scripture  ?  "  Cast  out  the  maid- 
servant and  her  son.  For  in  no  wise  shall  the  son  of 
the  maidservant  inherit  with  the  son  of  the  free- 
woman."  31  Therefore,  brethren,  we  are  not  children  of 
a  maidservant,  but  of  the  freewoman. 

V.  Stand  fast  in  the  freedom  with  which  Christ 
hath  freed  us,  and  be  not  again  held  in  a  yoke  of  bond- 
age. 2  Behold,  I  Paul  say  to  you,  that  if  ye  are  cir- 
cumcised, Christ  shall  profit  you  nothing!  •'^And  I 
witness  again  to  every  man  if  circumcised,  that  he  is  a 
debtor  to  do  the  whole  law.    ^  Ye  have  derived  no 


A.  NEW  TRAlSrSLATION.  IX 

effect  from  Christ,  whoever  are  being  justified  by  law ; 
ye  have  fallen  from  grace.  ^For  we  in  the  Spirit 
await  by  faith  the  hope  of  righteousness.  ^For  in 
Christ  Jesus  neither  circumcision  hath  any  force  nor 
uncircumcision,  but  faith  working  by  love.  7  Ye  were 
running  well :  who  stopped  you  that  ye  should  not 
obey  the  truth  ?  ^The  persuasion  [is]  not  of  him  that 
calleth  you.  9  A  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump. 
^•^1  have  confidence  as  to  you  in  the  Lord  that  ye  will 
be  of  no  other  mind;  but  he  that  troubleth  you  shall 
bear  the  sentence,  whoever  he  may  be. 

11  But  I,  brethren,  if  I  yet  preach  circumcision, 
why  am  I  yet  persecuted  ?  Then  is  done  away 
the  scandal  of  the  cross.  ^^  I  would  they  would  even 
cut  themselves  off*  that  are  unsettling  you.  ^^  For  ye 
have  been  called  for  freedom,  brethren  :  only  [use]  not 
your  freedom  for  an  opportunity  to  the  flesh  ;  but  by 
iove  serve  one  another.  !•*  For  the  whole  law  is  ful- 
filled in  one  word,  in  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour 
as  thyself."  ^^  But  if  ye  bite  and  devour  one  another, 
see  that  ye  are  not  consumed  by  one  another. 

16  But  I  say,  walk  by  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  in  no 
wise  fulfil  flesh's  lust,  i'  For  the  flesh  lusteth  against 
the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh ;  and  these 
things  are  opposed  one  to  another,  that  ye  should  not 
do  those  things  which  ye  would  ;  i^  but  if  ye  are  led  by 
the  Spirit,  ye  are  under  no  law.  ^^  jN'ow  the  w'orks  of 
the  flesh  are  manifest,  which  are  fornication,  unclean- 
ness, licentiousness,  -'^idolatry,  sorcery, hatreds,  strifes, 
jealousies,  bursts  of  passion,  contentions,  divisions, 
parties,  '^lenvyings, murders, drunkennesses,  revels,  and 
things  like  these,  as  to  which  I  forewarn  you,  even  as 
also  I  forewarned,  that  they  who  do  such  tilings  shall 
not  inherit  God's  kingdom.  --But  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  longsuffering,  kindness, 
goodness,  faith,  meekness,  self-control :  -^  against  such 
things  there  is  no  law.  -•*  But  they  that  are  of  Christ 
have  crucified  the  flesh  with  its  passions  and  its  lusts. 
25  If  we  live  by  the  Spirit,  by  the  Spirit  let  us  also 
*  Or,  '  were  even  cut  off.' 


X  GALATIANS. 

walk.  26  jjQ^  us  not  become  vainglorious,  provoking 
one  another,  envying  one  another. 

YI.  Brethren,  if  a  man  be  even  taken  in  some 
offence,  do  ye,  the  spiritual  ones,  restore  such  an  one  in 
a  spirit  of  meekness,  looking  to  thyself  lest  thou  also 
be  tempted,  ^Bear  one  another's  burdens,  and  so 
completely  fidfil  the  law  of  Christ.  ^  Yor  if  any  one 
reputeth  himself  to  be  something  when  he  is  nothing, 
he  deceiveth  himself.  *But  let  each  prove  his  own  work, 
and  then  he  will  have  his  boast  as  to  himself  alone,  and 
not  as  to  the  other ;  ^for  each  shall  bear  his  own  load. 

6  But  let  him  that  is  taught  in  the  word  commu- 
nicate to  him  that  teacheth  in  all  good  things.  "  Be  not 
deceived  :  G-od  is  not  mocked  ;  for  whatsoever  a  man 
soweth,  this  also  shall  he  reap ;  ^for  he  that  soweth  unto 
his  own  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption ;  but  he 
that  soweth  unto  the  Spirit  shall  of  the  Spirit  reap  life 
eternal.  9  But  in  well-doing  let  us  not  be  faint- 
hearted, for  in  due  time  we  shall  reap,  if  we  do  not 
faint.  ^'^  So  then,  as  we  have  opportunity,  let  us  work 
that  which  is  good  toward  all,  and  especially  toward 
those  of  the  household  of  faith. 

^1  See  in  how  large  letters  I  have  written  to  you 
with  my  own  hand.  i2j\^s  ^jany  as  wish  to  have  a 
fair  appearance  in  the  flesh,  these  are  compelling  you 
to  be  circumcised,  only  that  they  may  not  be  perse- 
cuted through  the  cross  of  Christ.  ^^For  neither  do 
they  that  are  being  circumcised  themselves  keep  the 
law,  but  wish  you  to  be  circumcised  that  in  your  flesh 
they  may  boast.  ^^  But  be  it  not  for  me  to  boast, 
jsave  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom 
the  world  is  crucified  to  me  and  I  to  the  world. 
^^  For  in  Christ  Jesus  neither  is  circumcision  anything, 
nor  uncircumcision,  but  a  new  creation.  i^And  as 
many  as  walk  by  this  rule,  peace  [be]  upon  them  and 
mercy,  and  upon  the  Israel  of  Grod.  i"  For  the  rest 
let  no  one  give  me  trouble,  for  I  bear  the  marks  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  in  my  body.  ^^  The  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  be  with  your  spirit,  brethren.  Amen. 


NOTES 

ON  THE 

EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

I  TRUST  to  be  enabled  to  show,  in  looking  at  the  Epistle 
to  the  Galatians,  that  this  portion  of  the  word  of  God  is 
formed  with  the  same  skill  (as,  indeed,  a  revelation  of 
God  must  be)  which  we  have  found  occasion  to  remark 
in  other  books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments ;  that  it 
is  stamped  with  the  same  evidence  of  divine  design; 
and  that,  having  a  special  object,  the  Holy  Ghost  sub- 
ordinates all  the  details  to  the  great  thought  and  task 
that  He  has  in  hand. 

Now,  it  is  plain,  from  a  very  cursory  glance,  that  the 
object  of  the  epistle  was  not  so  much  the  assertion  of 
the  truth  of  justification  by  faith  in  contrast  with  works 
of  law,  as  the  vindicating  it  against  the  efforts  of  the 
enemy  who  would  merge  it  under  ordinances  and  human 
authority;  in  other  words,  it  is  the  antidote  to  the  / 
Judaizing  poison  of  many  who  professed  the  name  of  / 
the  Lord. 

In  Romans,  it  is  more  the  bringing  out  of  positive 
truth ;  in  Galatians,  the  recovery  of  the  truth  after  it  / 
had  been  taught  and  received,  the  enemy  seeking  to 


2  GALATIAXS. 

swamp  it  by  bringing  in  the  law  as  the  conjoint  means 
of  justification.  The  Holy  Ghost  sets  Himself,  by  the 
Apostle  Paul,  thoroughly  to  nullify  all  this  force  of 
Satan;  and  this  gives  a  peculiar  tone  to  the  epistle. 

As  usual,  the  first  few  verses  bear  the  stamp  of  the 
-whole,  and  show  what  the  Holy  Ghost  was  about  to 
bring  out  in  every  part.  We  have,  of  course,  the 
choicest  collection  of  words,  and  the  avoiding  of  irre- 
levant topics,  so  as  to  reveal  in  short  compass  the  mind 
of  God  as  to  the  state  of  things  among  the  churches  in 
Galatia.  This  accounts  for  the  comparative  coldness  of 
the  tone  of  the  epistle — the  reserve,  we  may  say,  with 
which  the  apostle  speaks  to  them.  I  think  it  is  unex- 
ampled in  any  other  part  of  the  New  Testament.  And  the 
reason  was  this :  the  bad  state  into  which  the  Galatians 
had  fallen  did  not  so  much  arise  from  ignorance,  as  it 
was  unfaithfulness.  And  there  is  a  great  difference. 
God  is  most  patient  towards  mere  want  of  light;  but 
He  is  intolerant  of  His  saints'  trifling  w^th  the  light 
He  has  given  them.  The  apostle  Avas  imbued  with 
the  mind  of  God,  and  has  given  it  to  us  in  a  written 
form  without  the  slightest  admixture  of  human  error. 
He  has  given  us,  not  only  the  mind,  but  the  feelings  of 
God.  Now  man  reserves  his  bitter  censure  for  that 
which  is  immoral — for  a  man  guilty  of  cheating  or 
intoxication,  or  any  other  grossness :  every  correct 
person  would  feel  these  things.  But  the  very  same 
persons  who  are  alive  to  the  moral  scandal  may  be  dead 
to  an  evil  that  is  a  thousand  times  ^vorse  in  the  sight 
of  God.  Most  people  are  sure  to  feel  immorality,  partly 
because  it  affects  themselves;  whereas  in  -what  touches 
the  Lord,  they  always  need  to  be  exhorted  strenuously 


CHArTER  I. 


and  to  have  the  light  of  God  brouglit  to  bear  strongly 
upon  it.  Satan  is  not  apt  to  serve  up  naked  and  bare 
error,  but  generally  garnishes  it  with  more  or  less 
of  truth,  attractive  to  the  mind.  Thus  he  entices  per- 
sons to  refuse  what  is  good,  and  choose  what  is  evil. 

We  learn  from  God  how  we  ought  to  feel  about  evil 
doctrine.  Take  the  epistle  to  the  Galatians,  as  com- 
pared with  the  Corinthians,  in  proof  of  what  I  am 
asserting.  There  you  w^ould  have  seen,  if  you  went 
into  a  meeting  at  Corinth,  a  number  of  people,  very 
proud  of  their  gifts.  They  were  fleshly,  making  a 
display  of  the  power  with  which  the  Spirit  of  God  had 
endorsed  them.  For  one  may  have  a  real  gift  of  God  used 
in  a  very  carnal  manner.  At  Corinth  there  was  also  a 
great  deal  that  was  openly  scandalous.  In  the  early 
christian  times  it  was  usual  to  have  what  is  called  a 
love-feast,  which  was  really  a  social  meal,  or  supper, 
when  men  had  done  their  work,  or  before  it,  and  they 
could  come  together.  At  Corinth,  if  not  elsewhere, 
they  united  this  meal  of  love  along  with  the  supper  of 
the  Lord.  And  one  can  understand  that  they  might 
easily  get  excited:  for  we  must  remember  that  these 
believers  had  only  just  emerged  from  the  depravities 
and  darkness  of  heathenism.  Drunkenness  was  most 
common  among  the  heathen:  they  even  made  it  a  point 
of  honour  to  get  intoxicated  in  honour  of  their  gods. 
These  Corinthian  saints  must  not  be  judged  of  by  the 
light  that  persons  afterwards  received;  and  indeed  it  is 
in  great  measure  through  the  slips  of  the  early  believers, 
that  we  have  learnt  what  christian  morality  is  or  ought 
to  be.  They  were  like  babes  coming  out  of  the  nursery, 
and  their  steps  were  feeble  and  faltering.     There  were, 


4  galatia:jts. 

too  often,  ebnllitloTis  of  nature  that  shewed  themselves 
among  them  like  the  heathen.  There  were,  besides, 
parties  among  the  saints.  Some  were  ranging  themselves 
nnder  one  banner,  and  some  under  another.  They  had 
their  different  favourites  that  they  followed.  Some  had 
even  fallen  into  most  flagrant  evil,  and  others  again 
were  standing  up  for  their  rights,  and  going  to  law  one 
with  another.  There  was  looseness  of  every  kind  in 
their  walk.  All  these  things  came  out  in  their  midst. 
There  was  a  low  moral  order  of  things.  Had  we  not 
the  writing  of  an  apostle  to  such  as  these,  we  might 
have  considered  that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  be 
Christians  at  all.  Whereas,  though  there  is  the  most 
holy  tone  and  condemnation  of  their  sin  throughout  the 
epistle,  yet  the  apostle  begins  in  a  manner  that  is  more 
and  more  striking,  the  more  you  think  of  it  and  bear  in 
mind  the  state  of  the  Corinthian  believers.  He  begins 
by  telling  them  that  they  were  sanctified  in  Christ 
Jesus,  and  called  as  saints.  He  speaks  to  them,  too, 
of  God's  faithfulness,  by  whom  they  were  "  called 
unto  the  fellowship  of  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord." 
What  a  contrast  with  the  natural  impulse  of  our  minds  ! 
We  might  have  been  disposed  to  doubt  that  any,  save 
a  very  few  of  them,  could  have  been  converted. 

Now,  why  is  it  that  to  the  disorderly  Corinthians  there 
were  such  strong  expressions  of  affection,  and  none  to 
the  Galatians?  Writing  to  the  former,  he, calls  them 
the  church  of  God.  "  Paul,  called  an  apostle  of  Jesus 
Christ  ....  unto  the  church  of  God  that  is  at  Corinth, 
to  them  that  are  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus,  called  saints 
....  I  thank  my  God  always  on  your  behalf,  for  the 
grace  of  God  that  is  given  you  by  Jesus  Christ;  that  in 


CHAPTER  I.  O 

everything  ye  are  enriched  by  him,  in  all  utterance,  and 
in  all  knowledge  ....  so  that  ye  come  behind  in  no 
gift:  waiting  for  the  coming  [revelation]  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,"  &c.  And  then  he  begins  to  touch  upon 
what  was  wrong,  and  continues  it  throughout.  Writ- 
ing to  the  Galatians,  on  the  contrary,  he  says,  "  Paul, 
an  apostle,  (not  of  men,  neither  by  man,  but  by  Jesfis 
Christ,  and  God  the  Father,  who  raised  him  from  the 
dead,)  and  all  the  brethren  which  are  with  me,  unto  the 
churches  of  Galatia:  Grace  be  to  you  and  peace  from 
God  the  Father,  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
Not  a  word  about  their  being  in  Christ  or  in  God  the 
Father  !  Not  a  word  about  their  being  saints  in  Christ 
Jesus  and  faithful  brethren.  He  just  simply  says  the 
very  least  that  it  is  possible  to  say  about  Christians 
collectively  here  below.  He  speaks  of  them  as  *'  the 
churches  of  Galatia:"  he  does  not  associate  them  with 
any  others,  but  they  are  put,  so  to  speak,  as  naughty  by 
themselves.  On  the  other  hand,  the  apostle  takes  care 
to  say,  **  All  the  brethren  that  are  with  me  unto  the 
churches  of  Galatia."  If  he  does  not  speak  of  the 
saints  in  general,  he  does  universally  of  the  brethren 
then  with  him,  his  companions  in  service,  whom  he 
joins  with  himself  in  writing  to  the  Galatians.  He  had 
a  reason  for  this.  He  was  not  alone  in  his  testimony, 
whatever  the  false  teachers  might  insinuate.  All  the 
brethren  that  were  with  him  identified  themselves,  as 
it  were,  with  his  present  communication. 

Looking  at  the  manner  in  which  he  speaks  of  himself, 
there  is  something  very  notable  in  it.  "  Paul,  an  apostle, 
not  of  men,  neither  by  man,  but  by  Jesus  Christ,  and 
God  the  Father,  who  raised  him  from  the  dead,"  &c. 


b  GALATIAXS. 

He  begins  controversy  at  once.  The  very  first  words 
are  a  blow  at  the  root  of  their  Jewish  notions.  They 
found  fault  with  the  apostle  because  he  was  not  with  the 
Lord  Jesns,  when  He  was  upon  earth.  What  does  Paul 
reply  ?  He  says,  I  accept  that  which  you  mean  as  a 
reproach;  I  am  not  an  apostle  of  men  nor  by  man. 
He  completely  excludes  all  human  appointment  or  recog- 
nition in  any  way.  His  apostleship  was  not  of  men  as 
its  source,  nor  by  man  as  a  medium  in  any  way.  No- 
thing could  have  been  more  easy  than  for  God  to  have 
converted  the  Apostle  Paul  in  Jerusalem :  it  was  there 
he  was  brought  up  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel ;  it  was  there 
that  his  first  violence  against  the  Christians  broke  out. 
But  when  God  met  him,  he  was  away  from  Jerusalem, 
carrying  on  his  hot  persecution  of  the  saints:  and  there, 
outside  Damascus,  in  broad  daylight,  the  Lord  from 
heaven,  unseen  by  others,  reveals  Himself  to  the  aston- 
ished Saul  of  Tarsus.  He  was  called  not  only  a  saint, 
but  an  apostle;  "  an  apostle  not  of  men,  neither  by  man, 
but  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  God  the  Father,  who  raised 
him  from  the  dead."  And  to  make  it  the  more  strik- 
ing, when  he  was  baptized,  whom  did  the  Lord  choose 
to  make  the  instrument  of  his  baptism?  A  disciple 
who  is  only  this  once  brought  before  us  as  a  godly  old 
man,  residing  at  Damascus.  God  took  special  care  to 
show  that  the  apostle,  appointed  to  a  signally  important 
place,  the  most  momentous  function  of  any  man  that 
ever  was  called  to  serve  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  the 
gospel  —  that  St.  Paul  was  thus  called  without  the 
intervention,  authorization,  or  recognition  of  man  in 
any  shape  or  form.  His  baptism  had  nothing  to  do 
with  his  being  an  apostle.     Every  one  is  baptized  as  a 


CHAPTER  I.  7 

Christian,  not  as  an  apostle.  He  immediately  goes 
into  Arabia,  he  preaches  the  gospel,  and  God  at  once 
owns  him  as  Christ's  minister  in  the  gospel,  without 
any  human  interference.  Such,  indeed,  is  the  true 
principle  of  ministry,  fully  illustrated  in  the  call  and 
work  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  henceforth  the  bondman  of 
Jesus. 

It  may  be  objected,  however,  by  some  that  w^e  do 
read  of  human  setting  apart  and  laying  on  of  hands  in 
the  New  Testament.     We  own  it  fully.     But  in  some 
cases,  it  is  a  person  who  has  already  shown  qualifica- 
tion for  the  work,  set  apart  in  a  formal  manner  by 
apostolic  authority  to  a  local  charge,  and  clothed  with 
a  certain  dignity  in  the  eyes  of  the   saints,  perhaps 
because  there  was  not  much  gift.    For  the  elder,  it  will 
be  observed,  is  not  said  to  be  "a  teacher,"  but  simply 
"  apt  to  teach."     External  office  is  not  so  needed  where 
there  is  power  in  a  high  degree.     Power  makes  itself  ' 
felt.     Saints  of  God  will  always,  in  the  long  run,  be 
obliged  to  own  it.     Hence,  when  a  man  has  received 
a  gift    from    the    Lord,   he   ought    to    be    the    least 
anxious  about  it  for  his  own  sake:  God  know^s  ho^v 
to  make  it  respected,  if  men  fail  to  see  or  hear.     But 
when  there  are  men  who  have  grave  and  godly  qualities 
without  power  evident  to  all,  they  need  to  be  invested 
with  authority,  if  they  are  to  have  weight  with  un- 
spiritual  people.     Therefore,  it  seems,  we  read  of  an 
apostle,  or    an   apostolic   delegate,   going   round   and 
taking  the  lead  in   governing,    appointing,    advising, 
where  there  was  anything  amiss  or  lacking  among  the 
saints. 

The  fact  is,  people  confound  eldership  with  ministry. 


8  GALATIAXS. 

Elders  were  appointed  hj  those  wlio  themselves  had  a 
higher  authority  direct  from  Christ;  but  there  never 
was  such  a  thing  as  ordaining  a  man  to  preach  the 
gospel.  In  Scripture,  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  only, 
calls  men  to  preach.  There  is  not,  in  the  entire  New 
Testament,  one  instance  to  the  contrary.  It  is  posi- 
tively disorderly,  and  contrary  to  the  word  of  God,  for 
a  man  to  seek  a  human  commission  in  order  to  preach 
the  gospel,  or  for  taking  the  place  of  a  teacher  in  rela- 
tion to  the  Christian  assemblies.  In  apostolic  days 
there  never  was  such  a  thing  as  a  person  appointed  a 
teacher  any  more  than  a  prophet.  But  among  the  elders 
there  might  be,  some  of  them,  evangelists,  teachers,  &c. 
Therefore,  it  is  said,  "  Let  the  elders  that  rule  well  be 
counted  worthy  of  double  honour,  especially  they  who 
labour  in  the  word  and  doctrine."  The  presbyters,  or 
elders,  whose  business  it  was  to  rule,  even  if  they  were 
not  teachers,  were  in  danger  of  being  despised.  But 
they  were  to  be  counted  worthy  of  double  honour,  if 
they  ruled  well.  They  were  to  be  honoured  as  a  class, 
and  specially  they  who  laboured  in  the  word  and 
doctrine.  Several  of  them,  besides  being  elders,  might  be 
also  teachers,  and  such  would  have  superadded  claims 
on  the  esteem  of  the  saints.  There  is  no  wish  to  set 
aside  the  fact,  that  there  were  persons  set  apart  by 
man ;  but  what  I  deny  is,  that  such  was  the  case  in. 
the  ordinary  classes  of  ministry  —  pastors,  teachers, 
&c.,  &c.  These  were  never  appointed  by  man  in  any 
shape  whatever.  The  whole  body  of  scriptural  min- 
isters is  entirely  independent  of  ordination.  The 
assembly's  choice  entered  in  the  case  of  deacons,  who 
looked  after  external  things :  they  were  appointed  by 


CHAPTER  I.  9 

apostolic  sanction — at  least,  sncli  was  the  practice  in 
setting  the  seven  men  over  the  business  of  the  tables  in 
Jerusalem.  So,  too,  the  stewards  of  the  boimty  of  the 
Gentile  assemblies,  spoken  of  in  2  Corinthians  viii.  19, 
23.  They  were  chosen  to  the  work  by  the  various 
churches  whose  contributions  were  entrusted  to  them. 
The  elders  were  called  rather  to  take  the  lead  and 
govern  locally,  though  it  is  nowhere  intimated  that 
they  were  elected  of  the  assembly.  Nevertheless,  they 
were  formally  chosen  by  apostles  or  apostolic  delegates ; 
and  the  weight  of  those  who  chose  them  was  no  doubt 
intended  to  give  them  a  just  importance  in  the  minds 
of  the  saints  generally. 

The  case  of  Timothy  is,  no  doubt,  peculiar.  He  was 
designated  by  prophecy  to  a  certain  very  peculiar  work 
— that  of  guarding  doctrine.  And  the  apostle  and  the 
presbyters  laid  their  hands  upon  him,  by  which  a 
spiritual  gift  was  communicated  to  him  which  he  did 
not  possess  before.  It  is  evident  that  there  is  no  man 
now  living  who  has  been  similarly  endowed  and  called 
to  such  a  work. 

It  may  be  said  that,  in  the  case  of  the  Apostle  Paul, 
there  was  the  putting  on  of  hands,  which  we  have 
in  Acts  xiii.  What  does  this  show?  Not,  certainly, 
that  he  was  an  apostle  chosen  by  man;  for  the  Holy 
Ghost  declares  here  that  he  was  "  an  apostle,  not  of 
men,  neither  by  man."  That  which  took  place  at 
Antioch  was  in  no  sense  ordaining  him  to  be  an  apostle. 
It  is  evident  from  many  scriptures  that,  for  several  years 
before  hands  were  laid  on  him,  he  had  been  preaching, 
and  was  one  of  the  recognized  prophets  and  teachers 
at  Antioch.  (Ver.  1.)     I  believe  that  the  point  then  was 


10  GALATIANS. 

the  setting  him  and  Barnabas  apart  for  the  special 
mission  on  which  they  were  just  about  to  go  out — to 
plant  the  gospel  in  new  countries.  Assuredly,  when 
the  Holy  Ghost  said,  "  Separate  me  Barnabas  and  Saul 
for  the  work  whereunto  I  have  called  them,"  it  does 
not  mean,  that  hitherto  either  one  or  the  other  had 
been  preaching  of  their  own  will,  without  the  Lord's 
authority,  and  still  less  that  the  great  apostle  of  the 
Gentiles  was  now  constituted  such  by  his  inferiors.  It 
was,  then,  purely  and  simply  a  recommendation  to  the 
grace  of  God,  for  the  new  work  on  which  they  were 
about  to  enter.  Some  such  thing  might  be  done  at  the 
present  day.  Supposing  a  man,  who  had  already  been 
preaching  the  gospel  in  England,  felt  it  much  laid  on 
his  heart  to  go  and  visit  the  United  States  of  America, 
and  his  brethren  felt  that  he  was  just  the  man  for  that 
work,  they  might,  in  order  to  show  their  concurrence 
and  sympathy,  meet  together,  w^ith  prayer  and  fasting, 
to  lay  their  hands  upon  the  brother  who  was  going 
thither.  This,  in  my  opinion,  would  be  quite  scriptural. 
It  is  what  has  been  done  in  such  cases.  But  it  is  not 
ordaining.  It  is  merely  the  recommendation  to  the 
grace  of  God  of  persons  already  gifted  for  the  work, 
who  have  some  new  path  marked  out  for  them. 

But  what  I  believe  to  be  unscriptural,  and  indeed 
positively  sinful,  is  the  insisting  on  a  certain  ceremony 
through  which  a  man  must  pass  before  he 'is  recognized 
as  properly  a  minister  of  Christ.  This,  general  as  it 
may  be,  is  traditional  imposture,  without  one  shred  of 
Scripture  to  cover  itself.  It  is  merely  something 
that  man  has  brought  in,  chiefly  founded  upon  the 
Jewish  priesthood.     If  one  belonged  to  the  priestly 


CHAPTER  I.  11 

family,  before  he  could  enter  upon  his  priestly  func- 
tions, he  had  to  go  through  a  number  of  ceremonies. 
These  the  Roman  Catholics,  above  all,  imitate  in  their 
measure.  But  the  astonishing  thing  is,  that  men,  who 
in  words  denounce  popery,  have  continued  to  imitate 
one  of  the  worst  parts  of  it;  for  it  is  in  this  very  thing 
that  I  believe  the  Holy  Ghost  is  most  grieved.  The 
effect  is  this,  that  it  accredits  a  number  of  men  who  are 
not  ministers  of  Christ,  and  discredits  a  number  of  men 
who  are  His  ministers,  because  they  do  not  go  through 
tliat  particular  innovation.  It  has  the  effect  of  doing 
all  the  mischief  and  hindering  all  the  good  that  is 
possible.  This  is  an  evil  which,  derived  from  the  core 
of  Judaism,  is  the  greatest  conceivable  check  to  the 
energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Church  at  the  present 
or  any  other  time.  Some  may  look  grave  at  this 
remark,  and  say  it  is  not  charitable  so  to  sjoeak;  but 
such  persons  do  not  know  what  charity  means.  They 
confound  it  with  indifference.  And  indifference  is  the 
death  of  charity.  If  you  saw  your  child  with  its  hands 
over  the  burning  coals,  you  would  not  be  hindered  from 
the  most  earnest  cry,  or  any  other  energetic  means  to 
rescue  it,  by  people  telling  you  that  a  loud  voice  or  a 
sharp  snatch  were  wrong  things  for  a  Christian.  So, 
as  to  this  very  subject,  there  is  that  which  is  bound  up 
with  the  blessing  of  the  Church  on  the  one  hand,  and 
the  curse  of  Christendom  on  the  other.  How  many 
horrors  come  out  of  it?  The  pope  himself  is  a  product 
of  it:  because  if  you  have  got  priests,  you  naturally 
want  a  high  priest ;  if  you  have  the  sons  of  Aaron,  you 
need  Aaron  also  represented.  The  pope  was  set  up  on 
this  very  ground,  and  the  whole  system  of  popery  de- 


12  GALATIAN&. 

pends  upon  it.   Alas !  it  is  a  demon  which  Protestantism 
has  failed  to  exorcise. 

"  Paul,  an  apostle,  not  of  men,  neither  by  men," 
entirely  excludes  man,  as  being  either  the  source  of  his 
ministry,  or  the  medium  in  any  way  connected  with  it. 
The  great  thing  that  we  have  to  remember  with  regard  to 
ministry  is,  that  its  spring  is  in  the  hands  of  Christ ;  as 
he  says  here,  "  by  Jesus  Christ."  He  does  not  say  oj 
Jesus  Christ.  I  regard  "  hy  Jesus  Christ,"  in  this 
particular  connexion,  as  much  stronger,  for  this  reason 
— that  the  Judaizing  teachers  would  have  said,  We 
fully  allow  it  to  be  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  it  must  be  ly 
those  who  were  chosen  and  appointed  by  the  Lord  Him- 
self when  He  was  upon  earth ;  the  apostles  must  be  the 
channel.  God  was  striking  a  death-blow  at  the  notion 
of  apostolic  succession.  He  was  most  graciously  shut- 
ting out,  for  every  spiritual  man,  any  pretence  of  this 
evil  thing.  The  Galatians  were  probably  troubled  and 
perplexed  that,  avowedly,  Paul  should  be  an  apostle 
entirely  apart  from  the  other  twelve.  Why  did  they 
not  all  cast  lots  about  Paul,  if  he  was  to  be  one  of  the 
apostles  in  the  highest  sense  ?  This  is  what  he  is  meet- 
ing here.  He  connects  his  apostleship  not  only  with 
God  and  our  Lord  as  its  source,  but  also  as  the  medium 
— "  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  God  the  Father  who  raised 
him  from  the  dead."  Here  there  is  another  blow  at  the 
successionists.  They  had  been  drawing  a  contrast 
between  Paul  and  the  other  twelve  apostles,  to  the  dis- 
advantage of  the  former.  But  the  apostle  shows  that 
if  there  was  any  difference  between  himself  and  them, 
it  was  that  he  was  an  apostle  by  Him  who  raised 
Christ  from  the  dead.     The  others  were  only  called 


CHAPTER  I.  ]3 

when  our  Lord  was  here  upon  earth,  taking  His  place 
as  a  man  here  below.  Paul  was  called  by  Jesus  Christ 
risen  from  the  dead.  There  was  greater  power,  greater 
glory,  greater  distinction,  as  far  as  any  existed,  in  the 
case  of  Paul's  calling  to  be  an  apostle,  than  in  that  of 
any  of  the  others.  The  apostle  puts  all  their  theories 
to  the  rout,  and  brings  in  his  own  special  place  with 
great  force.  Paul  is  the  pattern  of  ministers  to  this 
very  moment.  In  speaking  about  ministry,  he  loves  to 
put  it  upon  this  ground,  the  ground  upon  which  he 
was  called  himself.  When  it  is  a  question  of  his 
preaching,  he  says,  (2  Cor.  iv.)  "We  believe,  and 
therefore  speak."  He  takes  it  up  upon  the  simplest 
and  the  best  basis — if  a  man  knows  the  truth,  let 
him  speak  of  it.  There  was  no  need  of  waiting  for 
anything.  It  is  to  that  the  Lord  works  in  the  Church. 
Hence,  in  speaking  about  ministerial  gift  in  Ephesians, 
where  we  have  it  in  the  highest  possible  forms,  on  what 
does  he  found  it?  On  Christ  ascended  up  on  high,  and 
giving  gifts  unto  men:  *'  And  he  gave  some,  apostles; 
and  some,  prophets ;  and  some,  evangelists ;  and  some, 
pastors  and  teachers ;  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints, 
for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  edifying  of  the 
body  of  Christ:  till  we  all  come,  in  the  unity  of  the 
faith  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  imto  a 
perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the 
fulness  of  Christ."  The  whole  of  ministry,  from  its 
highest  functions  to  its  lowest,  is  put  upon  the  same 
principle.  If  it  be  urged,  It  is  all  well  what  you  have 
been  saying  about  Paul,  but  it  does  not  apply  to  ordi- 
nary ministers,  I  reply  that  it  does ;  because  the  Holy 
Ghost   teaches   us    through   the   x\postle    Paul,   that 


14  GALATIANS. 

when  you  come  down  from  apostles  and  prophets,  to 
pastors,  teachers,  or  evangelists,  they  are  all  set  upon 
the  very  same  basis ;  all  are  gifts  from  the  same  Lord, 
■without  the  intervention  of  man  in  any  shape  or  degree. 
But,  then,  it  will  be  said  by  some,  What  about 
elders  ?  There  you  are  wrong :  you  have  not  got 
them.  I  answer,  We  have  not  elders  formally,  because 
we  have  not,  and  are  not,  apostles.  It  is  plain  that  in 
this  we  are  not  worse  off,  to  say  the  least,  than  any  of 
the  so-called  churches  or  sects ;  because  I  am  not  aware 
that  any  have  apostles.  So  that  the  true  difference 
between  those  who  meet  round  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  others,  is,  that  we  do  not  pretend  to 
have  what  we  have  not  got,  whereas  they  do  who  pre- 
tend to  appoint.  You  cannot  have  appointed  elders 
without  apostles ;  yet  we  may  have  certain  persons 
that  possess  the  qualifications  of  elders,  and  such  ought 
to  be  owned ;  but  to  imitate  the  appointment  of  pres- 
byters, now  that  apostles  no  longer  exist,  is  sinful. 
This  may  suffice  for  the  subject  of  ministry. 

And  what  were  the  Galatians  about  now  ?  What 
were  they  bringing  the  law  on  Christians  for  ?  If  the 
Lord  had  already  given  Himself  for  our  sins,  and 
settled  that  question,  to  suppose  that  He  should  have 
given  Himself  for  our  sins,  and  yet  the  sins  not  be 
blotted  out,  is  to  deny  the  efficacy  of  His  w:ork,  if  not 
the  glory  of  His  person.  He  is  showing  them  the  very 
elementary  truth  of  the  gospel,  that  Christ  gave  Himself 
for  our  sins.  So  that  it  is  not  at  all  a  question  of  man 
seeking  to  acquire  a  certain  righteousness,  but  of  Christ 
who  gave  Himself  for  our  sins  when  we  had  nothing  but 


cnArxER  I.  15 

sins.  And  this  is  not  for  the  purpose  of  putting  people 
under  the  law  again,  and  making  that  to  be  their  proper 
standard  as  Christians,  but  He  "  gave  himself  for  our 
sins,  that  he  might  deliver  us  from  this  present  evil 
world."  What  is  the  effect  of  men  taking  up  the  law 
as  Christians?  It  makes  them  worldly.  There  is  no 
exception.  There  cannot  be  such  a  thing  as  a  man 
separate  from  the  world,  when  he  is  under  the  law. 
We  are  not  in  the  flesh,  but  in  spirit.  That  is  the 
standard  of  a  believer :  not  of  some  particular  believers, 
but  of  all.  We  are  "  not  in  the  flesh."  There  is  that 
which  is  of  the  flesh  in  us,  but  we  are  not  in  the  flesh. 
The  meaning  of  the  apostle  there  is,  that  we  are  no 
longer  looked  upon  nor  dealt  with  by  God  as  mere 
mortal  men  with  our  sins  upon  us ;  but  we  are  regarded 
by  God  according  to  Christ,  in  whom  there  is  no  sin  : 
and  if  we  look  at  our  standing  as  Christians,  there  is 
none  in  us ;  for  our  nature  has  been  already  condemned 
in  the  cross,  and  God  does  not  mean  to  pass  sentence 
upon  it  twice.  What  we  have  now  to  do  is  to  live  upon 
Christ,  to  enter  into  the  blessedness  of  that  truth — 
He  *'  gave  himself  for  our  sins,  that  he  might  deliver 
us  from  this  present  evil  -world."  The  law  spoke  to 
citizens  of  the  world.  Christ  gave  Himself  for  our  sins, 
that  He  might  redeem  us  or  take  us  out  of  the  world, 
even  while  we  are  in  it.  "They  are  not  of  the  world, 
even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world."  We  are  regarded 
as  separated  from  the  world  by  the  death  of  Christ, 
and  sent  into  it  by  His  resurrection  ;  but  sent  into 
it  as  not  of  it,  yea,  not  so  much  of  it  as  an  angel. 
The  death  of  Christ  puts  us  completely  outside  the 
world.     The  resurrection  of  Christ  sends  us  into  it 


16  GALATIAXS. 

again  as  new  creatures,  messengers  of  the  peace  He 
gives,  entirely  apart  from  what  is  going  on  in  the  world. 
Our  Lord  says,  "  Now  I  am  no  more  in  the  world,  but 

they  are  in  the  world they  are  not  of  the  world, 

even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world as  thou  hast  sent 

me  into  the  world,  even  so  have  I  also  sent  them  into 
the  world."  He  puts  the  same  measure  for  both ;  and 
therefore,  when  He  rose  from  the  dead.  He  says,  "  As 
my  Father  hath  sent  me,  even  so  send  I  you." 

The  apostle  puts  himself  with  them  before  Christ, 
*'  who  gave  himself  for  our  sins."  It  is  the  common 
blessing  of  all  believers,  "that  he  might  deliver  us 
from  this  present  evil  world,  according  to  the  will  of 
God  and  our  Father."  The  remarkable  thing  is,  that 
when  God  reveals  Himself  as  the  Giver  of  a  law — as 
Jehovah — He  does  not  undertake  to  separate  men  from 
the  world.  The  Jews  could  not  be  said  to  be  separate 
from  the  world.  They  were  separate  from  the  Gentiles, 
but  they  were  the  most  important  people  in  the  world ; 
and  they  were  made  so  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining 
the  rights  of  God  in  the  world.  They  were  not  called 
to  be  outside  the  world,  but  as  a  people  in  the  world. 
Therefore  the  Jews  had  to  fight  the  Canaanites;  and 
hence,  too,  they  had  a  grand  temple.  Because  they 
were  a  worldly  people,  they  had  a  worldly  sanctuary. 
But  this  is  altogether  wrong  for  Christians,  because 
Christ  "has  given  himself  for  our  sins,  that  he  might 
deliver  us  from  this  present  evil  world,  according  to 
the  will  of  God  and  our  Father."  When  God  brings 
out  His  will,  no  longer  merely  His  law,  but  revealing 
Himself  as  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  has  been  given  to  die  for  our  sins,  there 


CHAPTER  I.  17 

comes  out  a  totally  different  state  of  things.  "We  enter 
into"  the  relationship  of  conscious  children  with  God 
our  Father:  and  our  business  now  is  to  honour  Christ 
according  to  the  position  that  He  has  taken  at  the  right 
hand  of  God.  People  forget  that  Christ  gave  Himself 
for  our  sins  in  order  to  deliver  us  from  this  present  evil 
world.  They  sink  down  into  the  world,  out  of  which 
redemption  ought  to  have  delivered  them ;  and  this  is 
because  they  put  themselves  under  the  law.  If  I  have 
to  do  with  the  will  of  God  my  Father,  my  privilege  is 
to  suffer  as  Christ  suffered.  The  law  puts  a  sword  in 
man's  hands;  whereas  the  will  of  God  makes  a  saint  to 
be  willing  to  go  to  the  stake,  or  to  suffer  by  the  sword 
for  Christ's  sake:  as  it  is  said,  "  For  thy  sake  we  are 
killed  all  the  day  long;  we  are  accounted  as  sheep  for 
the  slaughter.  Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are  more 
than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  us :"  but  it  is 
by  suffering,  not  by  what  the  world  glories  in.  God  is 
glorifying  Christ  after  the  pattern  of  the  cross,  and 
this  is  our  pattern ;  not  Israel,  nor  the  law ;  but  the 
cross  of  Christ.  And  now  He  says,  as  it  were,  I  have 
got  Christ  in  heaven :  I  am  occupied  with  the  only  One 
who  has  ever  glorified  Me,  and  that  is  the  One  you  are 
to  be  occupied  with. 

Nothing  can  be  more  exact  and  full,  nor  more 
thoroughly  calculated  to  meet  those  dangers  of  the 
present  day,  which  take  the  form  of  reviving  succes- 
sion and  religious  ordinances  as  a  means  of  honouring 
God.  Scripture  meets  every  case;  and  a  remedy  is 
given  for  it  in  the  blessed  word  of  God.  Our  wisdom 
is  to  seek  to  use  it  all,  to  be  simple  concerning  evil,  and 
wise  unto  that  which  is  good. 


18  GALATIANS. 

There  is  a  remarkable  abruptness  in  the  way  the 
apostle  enters  at  once  into  his  subject.  He  had  just 
alluded  to  our  Lord's  giving  Himself  for  our  sins,  that 
He  might  deliver  us  from  this  present  evil  world ;  and 
this  had  drawn  out  a  brief  thanksgiving  unto  "  God,  to 
whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever,  Amen."  But  now  he 
turns  at  once  to  the  great  object  that  he  had  in  hand. 
His  heart  was  too  full  of  it,  so  to  speak,  to  spend  more 
words  than  need  required.  There  was  that  which  was 
so  fatal  even  to  the  foundations  on  which  the  Church, 
or  rather  individual  Christians,  must  stand  before 
God,  that  he  could  not  linger,  "  I  marvel  that  ye 
are  so  soon  removed  from  him  that  called  you  into 
the  grace  of  Christ,  xmto  another  gospel."  "  So  soon 
removed"  seems  to  me  to  be  a  somewhat  stronger  ex- 
pression than  what  the  Spirit  of  God  makes  use  of.  It 
means,  in  process  of  removing.  They  were  shifting 
and  being  changed  "  from  him  that  had  called  them 
into  the  grace  of  Christ."  The  evil  and  danger  were 
not  yet  so  settled  a  thing  but  that  he  could  still  look  up 
to  God  aboat  them.  "When  we  think  that  it  was  the 
Apostle  Paul  that  had  evangelized  these  souls,  and  that 
the  time  was  short  since  he  had  preached  to  them,  I  do 
not  know  a  more  melancholy  proof  of  the  ease  with 
which  Satan  contrives  to  lead  astray.  Take  children 
of  God  that  have  been  ever  so  well  instructed,  and  yet 
one  sees  the  symptoms,  which  hardly  ev^r  fail  to  show 
themselves,  of  inclination  to  that  which  is  weak  and 
wrong,  a  readiness  to  follow  human  feelings  in  the 
things  of  God,  diverted  from  the  truth  by  appearance, 
where  there  is  no  reality.  These  things  you  will  find, 
unless  there  be  extraordinary  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost 


CHAPTER  I.  19 

to  counteract  the  workings  of  Satan.  The  rubbish 
which  may  enter  with  the  foundation,  of  which  the 
apostle  speaks  in  1  Corinthians  iii. — the  "  wood,  hay, 
and  stubble" — all  this  shows  us  how  it  may  come  to 
pass  that  although  God  it  was  who  had  formed  the 
Church,  yet  there  is  another  side  of  the  Church  to  take 
into  account,  and  that  is  man.  St.  Paul  speaks  of 
himself  as  a  wise  master-builder.  In  one  point  of  view 
it  is  God  who  builds  the  Church ;  and  in  this  there  is 
no  failure.  What  the  Lord  has  taken  in  hand  imme- 
diately, He  maintains  infallibly  by  His  own  power. 
But  human  responsibility  enters  into  this  great  work, 
as  it  does  into  almost  everything,  save  creation  and 
redemption,  where  God  alone  can  be.  But  elsewhere, 
no  matter  how  blessed,  whether  the  calling  in  of  souls 
to  the  gospel,  or  the  leading  them  on  after  they  have 
known  the  Lord,  or  the  corporate  gathering  of  the 
children  of  God  into  one — the  Church,  man  has  his 
part  in  it;  and  he  too  surely  brings  in  the  weakness  of 
his  nature.  The  history  God  gives  us  in  the  Bible  is 
that,  whatever  He  has  entrusted  into  the  hands  of  man, 
there  iie  is  weak  and  fails.  "  I  marvel  that  ye  are  so 
soon  removed  from  him  that  called  you  into  the  grace 
of  Christ  unto  another  gospel."  Now  this  is,  after  all, 
but  the  history,  not  only  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  of 
the  various  ways  in  which  God  had  tried  man ;  but  even 
where  you  have  the  far  more  blessed  subject  of  the  New 
Testament,  (what  God  is  in  His  Son  and  in  His  ways 
with  men  by  His  Son,  since  the  Lord  went  up  to 
heaven  and  the  Holy  Ghost  was  sent  down,)  even  in 
respect  of  these  things,  we  have  man's  weakness  surely 
showing  itself.     And  it  is  not  merely  that  unbelieving 


20 


GALATIANS. 


men  have  managed  to  creep  into  the  Churcli ;  but  the 
children  of  God  have  got  flesh  in  them  too.  They  have 
their  human  feelings  and  infirmities,  and  that  which 
Satan  can  find  in  every  Christian  whereby  to  hinder  or 
obscure  the  power  of  God.  It  was  by  this  means  that 
the  Galatian  saints  were  led  astray,  and  that  all  are  in 
danger  of  it,  at  any  moment.  I  gather  two  important 
lessons  from  this.  The  first  is,  not  to  be  surprised  if 
there  be  departure  in  the  saints  of  God.  I  must  not 
allow  myself  for  a  moment  to  think  that  it  shows  the 
slightest  weakness  in  the  truth  itself  or  in  the  testimony 
committed  to  us,  or  that  it  puts  a  slur  upon  what  is  of 
God ;  for  God  may  be  suffering  what  is  contrary  to  His 
own  nature  and  permitting  for  a  time  that  man  should 
show  what  he  is.  But  as  surely  as  there  is  that  which 
is  according  to  God,  He  will  vindicate  Himself  in  it, 
and  allow  what  is  not  of  Him  to  prove  its  true  character. 
But  another  thing  we  learn  is  the  call  for  watchfulness 
and  self-judgment.  To  these  Galatians,  who  once  were 
so  earnest,  who  would  have  plucked  out  their  eyes  in 
their  love  for  Paul,  that  very  apostle  has  now  to  write, 
"  I  marvel  that  ye  are  so  soon  removed  from  him  that 
called  you  into  the  grace  of  Christ."  Observe  the 
choice  of  expression — "  the  grace  of  Christ."  Because 
what  Satan  was  using  was  the  mixture  of  the  law  with 
grace,  of  legalism  and  Christ.  The  characteristic  of 
their  call  had  been  simply  and  solely  "-  the  grace  of 
Christ." 

God  had  made  known  to  the  Galatians  that  they  were 
poor  sinners  of  the  Gentiles,  that  there  was  nothing 
for  them  but  mercy,  and  that  mercy  had  come  to  them 
in  the  person  of  Christ.     And  if  this  is  the  one  thing 


CHAPTER  I.  21 

that  He  invites  souls  to — to  receive  the  mercy  that 
He  is  giving  them  in  Christ,  it  supposes  that  they  feel 
their  need  of  mercy,  and  are  -willing  to  look  to  Christ 
and  none  other.  But  still  it  remains  true  that  it  was 
alone  the  grace  of  Christ  which  had  acted  upon  these 
Galatian  believers  ;  and  of  this  he  reminds  them. 
What  were  they  removing  to  now  ?  A  diflferent  gospel, 
which  is  not  another.  In  our  English  version  it  is  a 
sort  of  paradox — "another  gospel,  which  is  not  another." 
But  in  the  language  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  wrote, 
there  was  sufficient  copiousness  to  admit  of  another 
shade  of  language.  "  I  marvel  that  ye  are  so  soon  re- 
moved from  him  that  called  you  into  the  grace  of  Christ 
unto  a  different  gospel,  which  is  not  aiioiher."  So  that 
if  the  grace  of  Christ  was  the  spring  and  power  of  their 
calling,  the  gospel  was  the  means  of  it.  But  now  they 
had  left  this  for  something  different.  Observe,  it  does 
not  say,  contrary  to  it,  but  a  different  one :  and  for  that 
very  reason  he  says,  it  is  not  another.  It  is  unworthy 
to  be  called  another  gospel.  God  owns  but  one.  He 
permits  no  compromise  about  the  gospel ;  neither 
ought  we. 

It  may  appear  strange  and  perhaps  strong  to  some ; 
but  I  am  thoroughly  convinced  that  the  same  Galatian 
evil  that  was  active  then  is  at  work  now  univer- 
sally in  Christendom.  It  may  take  a  somewhat 
different  form  in  one -place  from  another;  but  wherever 
you  turn,  wherever  you  have  either  the  word  spoken 
on  or  the  profession  of  Christ  maintained  in  the  way 
of  Christian  institutions,  you  will  find  the  mingling 
of  the  law  in  one  form  or  another  along  with  the  grace 
of  Christ.     It  does  not  matter  what  people  are  called, 


22  GALATIANS. 

it  is  the  same  thing  in  all.  There  are  differences  of 
degree.  Some  are  more  open,  some  more  intelligent, 
some  more  systematic  about  it;  but  the  same  poison, 
here  diluted,  and  there  concentrated,  is  found  every- 
where; so  much  so  that  the  truth  on  this  subject  sounds 
strange  in  the  ears  of  men.  As  a  proof  of  this,  I  take 
one  simple  expression  that  will  come  before  us  in  the 
various  epistles  of  St.  Paul,  the  misapprehension  that 
prevails  as  to  *'  the  righteousness  of  God."  One  may 
rejoice  to  know  of  persons  preaching  Christ,  or  even  the 
law;  because  God  uses  the  i3reaching  of  the  law  to 
convince  many  a  sinner.  Yet  we  are  not  to  suppose, 
because  God  works  even  where  there  is  a  perverted 
gospel  preached,  that  the  children  of  God  ought  to 
make  light  of  error.  It  is  one  thing  to  acknowledge 
that  God  works  sovereignly,  but  it  is  another  when  the 
question  for  us  is  what  is  His  true  testimony.  There 
we  are  bound  in  conscience  never  to  allow  anything 
except  the  simple  and  full  truth  of  God  for  our  own 
souls.  One  ought  never  to  listen  to  anything  short  of 
that,  and  truth  can  avoid  hearing  error.  I  am  not 
speaking  now  of  mistakes  that  may  be  in  preaching. 
A  slip  or  ignorance  is  not  a  perversion  of  the  gospel. 
It  is  one  thing  to  listen  to  what  may  be  a  mere  mistake ; 
but  to  go  where  one  knows  beforehand  that  the  law  is 
mingled  with  Christ,  is  sin. 

People  may  say,  Tliis  is  unjustifiably-  strong  lan- 
guage. But  am  I  going  to  set  myself  up  to  judge 
the  Holy  Ghost  ?  For  we  must  remember  that  what 
the  apostle  wrote  was  not  as  a  private  man,  but  that 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  wrote  for  our  instruction.  And 
what  he  tells  us  is  this:  "  There  be  some  that  trouble 


CHAPTER  I.  23 

you  and  would  pervert  the  gospel  of  Christ :  but  though 
we  or  an  angel  from  heaven  preach  any  other  gospel 
unto  you  than  that  which  I  have  preached  unto  you, 
let  him  be  accursed."  Let  a  fair  person  weigh  such  a 
word  as  this,  and  then  judge  whether  any  language 
of  mine  can  too  strongly  insist  upon  the  duty  of  a 
christian  man  in  reference  to  a  perverted  testimony  of 
the  gospel.  For  this  is  what  was  coming  in  among 
the  Galatians. 

Perhaps  you  will  tell  me  that  it  was  more — that, 
there,  it  was  the  mingling  of  the  ceremonial  law  with 
grace,  whereas  now  the  moral  law  is  held  up.  I  can 
only  say  that  this  is  worse  still,  and  more  deadly,  be- 
cause the  ceremonial  law  may  be  represented  as  typical 
of  Christ;  but  the  moral  law  brings  in  one's  own  doing 
in  some  form  or  other;  whereas  the  only  meaning  of 
any  of  the  Jewish  forms  and  ceremonies  is  invariably 
as  connected  with  Christ.  If  I  look  at  the  christian 
institutions  now,  I  say  there  is  no  virtue  in  the  water 
of  baptism  or  in  the  bread  and  wine,  save  in  what  they 
represent.  The  foundation  is  gone  if  anything  is 
brought  in  to  justify  a  man  except  Christ,  who  ought 
to  be  dearer  to  me  than  all  other  things — dearer  even 
than  these  means.  To  care  for  Christ  is  the  very  best 
evidence  of  a  saved  soul.  But  I  do  not  admit  that 
there  is  a  lively  care  for  Christ,  where  a  soul  knows  His 
will  in  anything,  and  does  not  make  it  of  the  very  first 
importance.  When  saints  of  God  have  learnt  the  truth 
with  simplicity,  and  are  enabled  to  hold  it  firmly,  a 
time  of  trial  comes.  Perhaps  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
weakness  and  unfaithfulness  among  those  that  hold  the 
truth;  and  persons  say,  I  do  not  see  that  those  who 
c 


24  GALATIANS. 

hold  this  truth  are  so  much  better  than  their  neigh- 
bours ;  but  there  is  this  difference  between  the  weakness 
of  people's  conduct  who  hold  the  truth  and  those  who 
do  not — that  it  can  be  remedied,  w^hile  there  is  no 
turning  falsehood  into  truth.  All  the  power  on  earth 
could  not  root  out  legalism  from  the  state  of  things  in 
Christendom.  The  religious  systems  that  are  established 
must  cease  to  be  earthly  systems  if  they  give  up  the 
law.  You  cannot  reform  that  of  which  the  foundation 
is  totally  unsound.  The  superstructure  can  be  removed, 
but  if  the  foundation  is  worthless  and  false,  it  never 
can  be  remedied.  There  is  one  right  course,  and  that  is 
to  quit  it  altogether.  I  say  that  those  who  see  these 
things,  owe  it  to  our  Lord  and  Master — owe  it  to  the 
truth  and  to  the  saints  of  God — to  show  an  uncompro- 
mising separation  from  all  that  destroys  the  full  truth 
of  this  grace  of  Christ.  We  may  bear  with  individuals 
who  may  not  know  better. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  you  see  a  person  very  worldly 
in  a  religious  body,  I  think  it  is  an  unworthy  thing 
to  fasten  upon  individuals,  and  take  up  such  an 
abuse  as  a  hunting  or  an  intoning  priest.  We  have 
much  better  employment  than  making  remarks  upon 
dancing  clergymen.  Such  a  thing  may  be  worth  the 
worlds  notice.  But  it  is  very  different  where  falsehood 
is  preached.  There  we  ought  to  seek  to  deliver  every 
child  of  God  from  the  evil  influence.  Ho'w  painful  to 
think  some  are  bound  to  preach  the  law,  so  bound  that 
it  would  be  a  dishonest  thing  if  they  did  not!  God 
gives,  not  a  help  merely,  but  a  deliverance  from  this  state 
of  things.  If  we  believe  the  word  of  God,  if  we  be- 
lieve what  the  Holy  Ghost  says  about  it  in  the  most 


CHAPTER  I.  25 

solemn  manner,  we  ought  to  have  done  with  it  alto- 
gether. There  may  be  very  good  men  concerned  who 
are  fettered ;  but  we  speak  of  the  danger  of  mingling 
the  law  with  the  gospel,  and  that  is  the  Galatian  evil. 

Let  us  consider  what  is  the  warning  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  the  souls  that  were  being  ensnared  by  it.  People 
may  tell  you,  that  they  know  how  to  separate  the  good 
from  the  bad;  but  God  is  wiser  than  men,  and  a 
spiritual  man  would  discern  a  going  back  of  soul  where 
such  things  are  allowed.  This  accounts  for  the  extra- 
ordinary strength  of  the  apostle's  warning.  They  were 
his  own  children  in  the  faith ;  and  as  to  those  who  per- 
verted and  troubled  them,  he  stood  in  doubt  of  them^ 
AVhat  he  says  is — no  matter  who  it  may  be — "  If  he 
preach  any  other  gospel  unto  you  than  that  ye  have 
received,  let  him  be  accursed.  Yea,  if  we,  or  an  angel 
from  heaven,  preach  any  other  gospel  unto  you  than 
that  which  we  have  preached  unto  you,  let  him  be 
accursed."  They  might  have  taken  refuge  in  this :  no 
doubt  it  was  what  Paul  preached,  but  we  have  addi- 
tional truth,  beside  what  Paul  gives.  But  he  says, 
"  If  any  man  preach  any  other  gospel  unto  you  than 
that  ye  have  received^  let  him  be  accursed."  It  is  not 
only  what  I  preached,  but  what  you  received.  It  is 
not  only  that  there  should  be  no  mixture  with  what  he 
preached,  but  no  addition  to  what  they  had  received. 
We  have  what  the  Apostle  Paul  wrote  as  clearly  as  they 
had  what  he  preached.  There  is  no  difference,  except 
that  what  is  written  is  even  of  greater  authority,  instru- 
mentally,  than  what  was  spoken.  In  the  latter,  too, 
that  which  is  of  nature  might  come  in.  The  apostle 
had  to  confess  on  certain  occasions  that  he  had  spoken 


26  GALATIANS. 

hastily ;  never  that  he  had  so  written.  It  was  not  a 
question  of  taking  away  the  gospel,  but  of  adding  what 
was  of  the  law  to  the  gospel. 

"  For  do  I  now  persuade  men  or  God  ?"  That  is, 
was  he  wishing  to  gain  them  over  or  God  ?  "Or  do 
I  seek  to  please  men  ?  for  if  I  yet  please  men,  I  should 
not  be  the  servant  of  Christ."  He  was  perfectly  aware 
that  this  kind  of  uncompromising  testimony  rendered 
him  particularly  obnoxious  to  men,  and  even  produced 
illwill  among  real  saints  of  God.  So  now  the  same 
thing  would  be  called  want  of  charity.  In  fact,  it  is 
not  want  of  charity  to  speak  uncompromisingly ;  but  it 
is  to  judge  those  who  do.  He  says  it  is  the  way  not  to 
please  men  but  to  please  God.  It  was  in  that  very  way 
that  Christ  had  called  him  to  be  a  servant.  "  I  certify 
you,  brethren,  that  the  gospel  which  was  preached  of 
me  is  not  after  man.  For  I  neither  received  it  of  man, 
neither  was  I  taught  it  but  by  the  revelation  of  Jesus 
Christ."  There  was  something,  no  doubt,  extraordinary 
in  the  manner  in  which  the  Apostle  Paul  had  had  the 
gospel  made  known  to  him.  He  was  not  converted  by 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  as  most  are.  Peter's  case 
was  a  similar  one.  Flesh  and  blood  had  not  revealed 
it  to  him,  but  the  Father  which  was  in  heaven.  Peter 
was  the  first  person  who  was  taught  the  glory  of  the 
person  of  Christ — taught  that  glory,  not  as  connected 
merely  with  Jewish  prophecies,  but  the  deej)er  glory  of 
Christ,  as  Christians  ought  to  know  Him  now,  as  the 
Son  of  the  living  God ;  not  connected  with  earth  exclu- 
sively. Peter  was  the  fii'st  to  whom  the  Holy  Ghost 
revealed  the  grand  truth  that  Jesus  was  not  only  the 
Messiah,  but  the  Son  of  God  in  a  heavenly  and  divine 


CHAPTER  r.  27 

sense.  Peter,  therefore,  was  honoured  by  God,  and 
put  by  our  Lord  in  a  very  special  place.  He  was  the 
one  to  whom  our  Lord  first  named  His  Church.  In 
the  case  of  St.  Paul,  the  truth  went  farther.  For  if 
we  have  the  Father  revealing  the  Son  to  Peter,  Paul 
goes  yet  beyond,  and  says  that  God  revealed  His  Son 
in  him.  Peter  could  have  said.  It  pleased  the  Father  to 
have  revealed  the  Son  to  him ;  Paul  could  say,  in  him. 
St.  Paul  was  led  of  the  Holy  Ghost  into  a  gradually 
increasing  knowledge  of  the  grand  and  most  glorious 
truth  of  the  oneness  of  the  believer  with  Christ.  But 
this  is  not  brought  out  here.  Yet  the  expression, 
*' revealed  his  Son  in  me,"  is  one  that  could  hardly 
have  been  used  by  one  who  did  not  know  this  truth. 
As  in  Hebrews,  the  apostle  speaks  about  believers 
having  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood 
of  Jesus,  though  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  does  not 
reveal  that  we  are  members  of  Christ's  body ;  yet  we 
could  not  be  exhorted  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the 
blood  of  Jesus,  unless  we  were  members  of  His  body, 
of  His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones ;  so  only  Paul  could  have 
said,  "  It  pleased  God  to  reveal  his  Son  in  me."  It  is 
connected  with  the  truth  of  which  Paul  was  the  chosen 
witness — the  union  of  Christ  and  the  Church,  intimated 
at  his  very  conversion.  "  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest 
thou  me  ?"  He  was  persecuting  the  saints ;  and  the 
Lord  says.  To  persecute  them  is  to  persecute  Me. 
They  were  one.  The  Church  and  the  Lord  are  united. 
"VVe  are  not  members  of  Christ's  divinity,  but  of  His 
body.  It  is  only  as  man  that  He  has  a  body.  But 
while  He  was- a  man  upon  earth,  we  were  not  members. 
The  corn  of  wheat,  unless  it  died,  must  abide  alone; 


GALATIANS. 


*'  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  fortb  miicb  fruit:"  that  is,  it 
is  founded  upon  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ, 
that  He  is  able  to  associate  others  with  Himself  as  the 
members  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones. 
Christ  in  heaven  and  the  saints  on  earth  make  one 
body.  That  is  what  Paul  learnt  at  his  conversion. 
Having  the  substance  of  this  in  view,  the  apostle  says, 
*'  1  certify  you,  brethren,  that  the  gospel  which  was 
preached  of  me  is  not  after  man." 

And  just  allow  me  to  state  another  word  or  two  in 
connexion  with  the  gospel  of  St.  Paul.  He  is  the  only 
one  who  characterizes  his  gospel  as  the  glorious  gospel. 
And  one  may  be  interested  to  know  that  when  the 
apostle  uses  that  phrase,  he  does  not  say,  "glorious" 
merely  as  we  use  it;  be  means  the  gospel  of  the  glory. 
And  the  true  force  of  that  expression  is  this :  it  is  the 
gospel  of  Christ  glorified  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  It 
is  the  glad  tidings  that  we  have  a  Saviour  who  is  risen 
and  glorified.  We  are  called  to  all  the  effects  of  His 
glory  as  well  as  of  His  death  upon  the  cross.  Other 
apostles  never  wrote  of  the  subject  of  the  Church  being 
made  one  with  Christ;  Paul  alone  did.  Possibly,  then, 
Paul  was  the  only  one  that  was  in  a  position  to 
say,  "  If  one  add  anything  to  my  gospel,  let  sucb  an 
one  be  accursed."  Although  Paul  added  something  to 
their  gospel,  they  could  add  nothing  to  bis.  The 
apostles  announced  Christ  as  the  Messiah  and  made 
known  remission  of  sins  through  His  name ;  but  they 
did  not  bring  out  the  heavenly  glory  of  Christ  as  Paul 
did.  He  brought  out  all  these  truths,  and  more  which 
they  never  touched  on.  That  is  the  reason  why  he  so 
constantly  speaks  of  "  my  gospel."     Because  while,  of 


CHAPTER  I.  29 

course,  as  to  the  grand  truths  of  the  gospel  there  could 
be  no  difference  between  what  Paul  and  the  other 
apostles  preached,  there  was  a  great  advance  in  that 
which  Paul  preached  beyond  them.  There  was  nothing 
contradictory;  but  Paul  being  called  after  the  ascension 
of  our  Lord  to  heaven,  he  was  the  one  to  whom  it  was 
peculiarly  appropriate  to  make  any  addition.  Till  Paul 
was  called,  there  was  something  still  needed  to  make 
up  the  sum  of  revealed  truth.  In  Col.  i.  25,  he  says 
that  he  was  a  minister  of  Christ  to  complete  the  word 
of  God,  to  fill  up  a  certain  space  that  was  not  filled  up. 
Paul  was  the  person  employed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
do  this.  John  brought  out  prophetic  truth — prophecy 
entirely  outside  what  we  have  been  speaking  of,  for  it 
reveals  the  dealings  of  God  with  the  world,  and  not 
with  the  Church.  Therefore,  the  apostle  can  insist 
strongly  upon  the  danger  of  attempting  to  swerve  from 
what  he  had  brought  out,  or  of  adding  anything  to  it. 
This  is  very  important.  Others  might  not  preach  all 
the  truth,  but  that  is  not  what  he  so  str^gly  de- 
nounces. No  person  ought  to  be  condemned  because  he 
does  not  unfold  the  higher  truth  of  God.  What  we 
ought  to  set  our  faces  against  is  the  bringing  in  of 
something  contrary  to  the  gospel,  or  mingling  the  law 
with  the  grace  of  Christ — putting  new  wine  into  old 
bottles.  Some  may  refer  to  the  Epistle  of  James; 
but  James  never  presents  the  law  so  as  to  clash  with 
the  gospel,  although  what  he  says  may  put  a  guard 
upon  souls  making  an  improper  use  of  the  solemn 
warning  of  the  Holy  Ghost  against  mingling  the  law 
with  the  gospel  in  any  shape  or  form.  There  will  be 
many  occasions  for  showing  how  the  Apostle  Paul  refers 
to  it  in  this  epistle. 


so  GALATIANS. 

The  next  point  to  whicli  he  alludes  in  his  argument 
is  his  previous  conversation  and  life.  He  says,  speak- 
ing of  his  gospel,  that  he  neither  received  it  of  man, 
neither  was  he  taught  it,  hut  by  the  revelation  of  Jesus 
Christ.  They  might  have  raised  a  doubt  about  this ; 
hut  he  shows  that  all  his  previous  life  was  opposed  to 
the  gospel.  There  was  not  another  such  antagonist  of 
Christ  as  he  had  been.  "  Ye  have  heard  of  my  conver- 
sation in  time  past  in  the  Jews'  religion,  how  that 
beyond  measure  I  persecuted  the  Church  of  God  and 
wasted  it,"  (there  may  be  a  little  word  for  them,  be- 
cause they  were  beginning  to  persecute  all  who  opposed 
their  notions  about  the  law,  and  were  getting  into  a 
hitter  spirit,)  "  and  profited  in  the  Jews'  religion  above 
many  my  equals  in  mine  own  nation,  being  more  ex- 
ceedingly zealous  of  tlie  traditions  of  the  fathers." 
There  was  no  doubt,  therefore,  of  the  sincerity  of  the 
apostle's  use  of  the  law  in  his  unconverted  days.  "  But 
when  it  pleased  God,  who  separated  me  from  my 
mother' sVomb,  and  called  me  by  his  grace,  to  reveal  his 
Son  in  me,  that  I  might  preach  him  among  the  heathen, 
immediately  I  conferred  not  with  flesh  and  blood." 

There  he  at  once  brings  in  a  mass  of  truth,  which, 
if  they  had  only  understood  its  force,  as  no  doubt 
some  did,  ruined  their  whole  system  from  top  to 
bottom.  He  shows  that  it  was  God  who  had  called 
him  away  from  the  law :  when  he  was  in  the  very  midst 
of  what  they  were  beginning  to  take  up  afresh,  he  was 
an  enemy  of  Christ.  He  gives  full  allowance  to  his 
providential  history.  He  had  been  brought  up  at  the 
feet  of  Gamaliel,  and  had  profited  in  the  Jews'  religion 
above  his  equals.     But  though  it  pleased  God  to  sepa- 


CHAPTER  I.  31 

rate  "him  from  his  motlier's  womb,  yet  to  call  him,  he 
insists,  was  much  more;  this  call  was  of  grace.  "  Im- 
mediately I  conferred  not  with  flesh  and  blood."  There 
he  both  positively  and  negatively  overthrows  their 
legalism.  He  had  been  called  to  preach  among  the 
Gentiles,  where  there  was  no  law  known.  There  was 
no  word  of  God  at  all  as  to  their  going  np  to  Jerusa- 
lem. And  yet  this  was  the  sort  of  thing  to  which 
they  were  desiring  to  return.  So  it  is  at  the  present 
day.  The  smallest  sect  under  the  sun  has  got  a  kind 
of  Jerusalem,  a  centre  for  the  minister  to  be  sent  up  to, 
in  order  to  qualify  him  for  what  he  has  to  do.  But 
where  it  is  sought  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  out  the 
glory  of  Christ,  it  proves  but  death.  Many  a  person 
has  conferred  with  flesh  and  blood,  has  gone  up  to 
*'this  mountain"  or  that  city,  and  his  soul  has  got 
completely  lowered  and  taken  away  from  the  cross  of 
Ch;i'ist ;  and  he  becomes  now  exceedingly  zealous  of  this 
very  law  that  he  had  been  delivered  from;  but  the 
simple  walk  is  the  path  of  dependence  upon  the  living 
God.  So  that  however  valuable  these  training  schools 
may  be  for  the  world,  however  admirable  for  giving 
men  a  certain  place,  it  ends  merely  in  what  man  can 
teach,  and  not  what  God  gives. 

Moses  thought  that,  when  he  had  spent  forty  years  in 
Egypt,  he  was  fitted  to  deliver  the  people  of  God ;  but 
he  had  to  learn  that  not,  until  he  had  been  taught  of 
God  in  the  wilderness,  was  he  competent  to  lead  the 
people  out  of  Egypt.  God  has  generally  to  put  souls 
through  a  sieve,  and  break  them  down  in  their  own 
conceit,  if  He  is  going  to  use  them  in  a  really  honour- 
able way. 


32  GALATIANS. 

Here  you  have  God  Himself,  when  He  calls  a  re- 
markable man  to  a  very  special  work,  instead  of  sum- 
moning him  to  the  apostles  at  Jerusalem,  sending  him 
away  into  the  desert.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  not 
only  helping  the  saints,  but  those  that  preach  in  the 
truth ;  and  the  Apostle  Paul  presses  upon  Timothy  that 
the  things  he  received,  he  was  to  commit  to  faithful 
men  who  should  be  able  to  teach  others  also.  There  is 
human  instrumentality  in  helping  on  those  who  are 
younger  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  Thus  we  must  leave 
room  for  the  various  ways  of  God,  only  steering  clear 
of  human  innovation  and  presumption,  which  can  never 
edify  man  any  more  than  honour  God. 

"  Neither  went  I  up  to  Jerusalem  to  them  which  were 
apostles  before  me ;  but  I  went  into  Arabia,  and  returned 
again  into  Damascus.  Then  after  three  years  I  went 
up  to  Jerusalem  to  see  Peter,  and  abode  with  him  fifteen 
days."  He  mentions  the  number  of  days  for  the  purpose 
of  showing  that  it  was  not  a  course  of  instruction  that 
he  had  been  receiving.  "  Now  the  things  which  I  write 
unto  you,  behold  before  God  I  lie  not.  Afterwards,  I 
came  into  the  regions  of  Syria  and  Cilicia,  and  was  un- 
known by  face  unto  the  churches  of  Judea  which  were  in 
Christ;  but  they  had  heard  only  that  he  which  persecuted 
us  in  times  past  now  preacheth  the  faith  which  once  he 
destroyed.  And  they  glorified  God  in  me."  The  facts 
were  of  moment  for  the  purpose  of  evincing  how  little 
time  he  had  spent  in  Jerusalem ;  yea,  that  he  was  un- 
known to  the  churches  of  Judea  generally.  But  these 
churches,  instead  of  blaming  God,  (which  was  what  the 
Galatian  conduct  amounted  to,)  instead  of  finding  fault 
with  his  testimony,  had  glorified  God  in  Paul.     The 


CHAPTER  I.  33 

early  churches  of  Judea,  that  the  Galatians  were 
looking  so  wistfully  at,  were  glorifying  God  in  him; 
while  they  themselves  were  quarrelling  with  the  rich 
mercy  God  had  been  showing  the  Gentiles.  He  had 
preached  to  them  the  gospel  more  fully  than  the 
other  apostles  had  presented  it;  and  yet  they  were 
already  slipping  from  it  by  seeking  to  bring  in  the 
law.  Paul  felt  it  was  so  deadly  in  its  own  nature 
that,  although  the  souls  drawn  aside  by  it  might  not 
be  lost,  yet  was  there  deep  dishonour  against  God 
and  incalculable  mischief  to  His  saints.  No  doubt 
they  thought  theirs  a  much  safer  course ;  but  the 
apostle  affirms  that  he  had  brought  them  the  truth 
of  the  gospel,  and  that  to  mingle  the  law  therewith 
is  to  subvert  it  altogether. 

How  applicable  is  all  to  the  need  of  souls  in  this  day 
of  ours !  We  ought  not  to  fancy  that  there  was  a 
deeper  evil  in  Galatia  than  there  is  at  work  now.  On 
the  contrary,  those  were  but  the  germs  of  that  which 
has  developed  far  more  since  then.  The  Lord  give  us 
to  set  our  faces  as  a  flint  against  all  that  would  damage 
conscience,  and  keep  us  from  allowing  anything  that  we 
know  to  be  contrary  to  His  will  and  glory ! 


Ji^c 


CHAPTER  11. 

We  have  still  the  apostle  appealing  to  certain  facts 
in  his  own  life  and  history,  as  giving  conclusive  evi- 
dence upon  the  great  question  that  had  been  raised: 
whether  the  law,  in  any  form,  is  that  under  which  the 
Christian  lies  ?  He  takes  it  up  fully  as  to  justification, 
but  it  is  not  limited  to  that  question.  We  see  in  chap- 
ters i.  and  ii.  the_divine  call  to  minister,  so  strikingly 
exemplified  in  the  apostle  himself,  m  opposition  to  the 
successional  claim;  and  we  shall  find  towards  the  latter 
part  of  the  epistle,  that  he  applies  grace  in  all  its  breadth, 
proving  that  in  Christ  God  has  brought  in  another 
principle  altogether,  which  works  efficaciously,  whereas 
the  law  can  only  curse  the  guilty.  In  short,  God  has 
established  the  grand  basis  of  His  own  grace ;  and  while 
I  His  grace  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the  moral  govern- 
ment of  God,  it  utterly  sets  aside  the  law  as  powerless 
through  the  condition  of  man,  not  as  if  the  law  in 
itself  were  not  holy,  and  just,  and  good.  Bat  in  Christ, 
God  has  brought  in  such  energy  of  life  in  resurrection, 
and  a  new  justifying  righteousness  of  His  own,  that 
He  for  ever  sets  the  Christian  on  the  wholly  different 
ground  of  grace.  In  this  epistle,  the  apostle  enters 
into  it  with  so  much  the  greater  strength,  because  the 
devil  was  attempting  to  bring  in  a  particularly  evil 
misuse  of  the  law. 

This  is,  I  conceive,  the  key  to  the  difference  of  lan- 
guage in  Komaus  and  Galatians.     In  the  former,  there 


CHAPTER  II.  85 

is  a  certain  tenderness  in  dealing  with  such  of  the 
brethren  there  as  knew  the  law  before  they  knew 
Christ,  and  had  been  under  it  as  Jews.  Hence,  in 
speaking  of  their  days,  and  meats,  and  drinks,  the 
apostle  shows  that  the  Spirit  of  God  called  for  the 
utmost  forbearance.  "  He  that  regardeth  the  day, 
regardeth  it  unto  the  Lord ;  and  he  that  regardeth  not 
the  day,  to  the  Lord  he  regardeth  it  not.  He  that 
eateth,  eateth  to  the  Lord,  for  he  giveth  God  thanks." 
The  reason  was,  that  the  saints  at  Rome  consisted 
largely  of  those  who  had  been  Jews,  and,  of  course, 
also  of  many  who  had  been  Gentiles.  The  important 
point  therefore  was  to  exhort  to  mutual  respect  and  for- 
bearance one  with  another.  The  Gentile  brother,  that 
knew  his  liberty,  was  not  to  despise  his  Jewish  brother, 
because  he  was  still  giving  heed  to  certain  distinctions, 
keeping  days,  &c.  Nor  was  the  Jew  to  judge  his 
Gentile  brother,  because  he  did  not  abstain  from  meats 
and  observe  days.  Remember,  in  speaking  of  these 
days,  we  are  not  to  imagine  that  the  apostle  is  alluding 
to  the  Lord's  day,  for  it  is  an  entirely  new  thing,  hav- 
ing no  connexion  either  with  creation  or  the  law.  The 
Sabbath  was  the  rest  of  creation,  and  also  the  divinely- 
appointed  and  well-known  sign  between  Jehovah  and 
the  Jewish  people  for  ever,  given  them  as  a  perpetuaf 
covenant,  and  separating  them  from  all  other  nations. 
But  the  Lord's  day  has  an  entirely  new  character, 
spoken  of  in  Scripture  as  the  first  day  of  the  week. 
It  belongs  to  the  Christian  only :  Adam,  man,  the 
Jew,  had  nothing  to  do  with  it.  So  that  when  the 
apostle  says,  "  He  that  regardeth  not  the  day,  to  the 
Lord  he  regardeth  it  not,"  let  us  beware  of  allowing 


36 


GALATIANS. 


the  evil  tlionght  that  the  Lord's  day  is  included,  and 
the  keeping  of  it  an  open  question.  As  for  days  or 
meats,  Levitically  distinguished,  they  are  left  to  he 
regarded  or  not,  according  to  spiritual  intelligence. 
Not  so  the  Lord's  day ;  it  may  not  fall  under  the  form 
of  an  express  command,  but  it  is  none  the  less  obliga- 
tory, because  it  comes  to  us  stamped  with  the  Lord's 
will  and  recognition  in  various  solemn  and  touching 
forms.  It  is  the  day  on  which  He  rose  from  the  dead, 
the  day  on  which  He  sanctioned,  by  His  special  presence, 
the  coming  together  of  the  disciples,  as  the  Holy  Ghost- 
afterwards  led  them  thereon  regularly,  to  break  bread. 
So  that  there  should  be  no  question  that  the  Lord's 
day  is  of  the  gravest  importance,  the  understanding  of 
which  always  goes  with  right  thoughts  as  to  the  true 
grace  of  God  in  which  we  stand.  The  confusion  of  it 
with  the  Sabbath  may  have  been  adopted  to  strengthen 
its  institution  by  deducing  it  from  the  law;  but  this  is 
a  complete  fallacy,  lowers  and  weakens  its  character, 
and  is  the  fruit  and  the  evidence  of  ignorance  of  the 
ground  on  which  the  believer  now  stands  with  God. 
In  Galatians,  instead  of  the  exhortation  to  brotherly 
forbearance,  which  we  find  impressed  on  the  saints  at 
Eome,  there  is,  on  the  contrary,  amazing  strength  and 
vehemence,  as  is  plain  in  chapters  iii.,  iv.  But  of  this 
more  in  its  own  place. 

The  apostle  refers  to  his  going  up  to  Jerusalem. 
When  he  says,  (chap.  i.  18,)  "  After  three  years  I  went 
up  to  Jerusalem,"  it  refers,  I  suppose,  to  his  conversion 
as  a  starting  point;  and  the  "  fourteen  years  after,"  in 
this  chapter,  would  date  from  the  same  period.     The 


CHAPTER  II.  37 

important  thing  for  the  Spirit  of  God  was  to  dispose  of 
all  pretence  for  connecting  Paul's  mission  or  ministry 
with  Jerusalem.  The  principle  of  apostolic  succession  is 
thus  cut  off  by  implication.  The  years  which  elapsed 
before  these  visits,  and  yet  more  their  character  when  he 
did  visit  Jerusalem,  absolutely  exclude  all  idea  of  deriva- 
tion. "  Then,  fourteen  years  after,  I  went  up  again  to 
Jerusalem  with  Barnabas,  and  took  Titus  with  me. 
And  I  went  up  by  revelation."  This  last  circumstance 
is  not  mentioned  in  the  Acts.  It  is  the  same  occasion 
which  is  referred  to  there,  (Acts  xv.,)  though  in  a 
different  manner.  In  Acts  we  are  told,  "  certain  men, 
which  came  down  from  Judea,  taught  the  brethren  and 
said,-Exxrept— y:e._b_e.j?ircumcised  after  the  manner  of 
Moses,  ye  cannot  be  saved.  When,  therefore,  Paul  and 
Barnabas  had  no  small  dissension  and  disputation  with 
them,  they  determined  that  Paul  and  Barnabas,  and 
certain  other  of  them,  should  go  up  to  Jerusalem  unto 
the  apostles  and  elders  about  this  question."  But  when 
they  arrived  at  Jerusalem,  they  found  there  the  same 
party.  "  There  rose  up  certain  of  the  sect  of  the  Pha- 
risees which  believed,  saying,  that  it  was  needful  to 
circumcise  them,  and  to  conmiand  them  to  keep  the 
law  of  Moses,"  clearly  showing  that  it  was  within  the 
bosom  of  the  Church.  And  then  we  have  the  con- 
ference of  the  apostles  and  elders  in  presence  of  the 
whole  Church  about  this  matter.  In  Galatians  ii.  the 
Holy  Ghost  brings  out  the  fact,  not  distinctly  men- 
tioned in  the  Acts,  that  on  this  occasion  Paul  took 
with  him  Titus,  and  went  up  by  revelation:  he  had 
positive  communication  from  God  about  it.  In  Acts, 
we  have  the  christian  motives  that  were  brought  to  act 


38  GALATIANS. 

upon  him  by  others;  but  in  Galatians  he  lets  us  know 
something  deeper  still — that  he  went  up  by  revelation, 
beside  his  taking  Titus.  Whatever  may  have  been 
the  case  with  the  others,  this  was  also  a  fact  of  immense 
importance,  because  Titus  was  in  no  way  a  Jew.  He 
was  not  even  like  Timothy,  whose  mother  was  a  Jewess.  *^ 
Titus  was  a  Greek.  Timothy  was  something  between  I 
the  two ;  and  therefore  there  seems  to  have  been  wisdom  i 
and  grace  in  the  apostle's  very  different  line  with  regard 
to  Timothy.  He  certainly  stopped  the  mouths  of  those 
who  might  have  raised  questions  about  that  young  dis- 
ciple founded  on  the  law,  though  I  do  not  say  that, 
strictly  speaking,  Timothy  would  have  come  under  it. 
It  must  be  allowed,  that  it  was  not  according  to  the  law 
for  a  Jewess  to  be  married  to  a  Gentile.  Titus,  how- 
ever, was,  beyond  doubt,  a  Greek.  The  apostle,  in  face 
of  the  twelve  apostles,  and  of  every  one,  brings  up  to 
Jerusalem  with  him  this  Greek  who  had  never  been 
circumcised.  He  was  acting,  in  the  boldest  manner,  on 
the  liberty  that  he  knew  he  had  in  Christ.  And  he 
adds  further,  "  I  went  up  by  revelation,  and  communi- 
cated unto  them  that  gospel  which  I  preach  among  the 
Gentiles,  but  privately  to  them  which  are  of  reputation, 
lest  by  any  means  I  should  run,  or  had  run,  in  vain." 
And  then  he  merely  drops  by  the  way,  in  one  of  his 
pregnant  parentheses,  '*  But  neither  Titus  who  was  with 
me,  being  a  Greek,  was  compelled  to  be  cimjumcised." 

Let  us  pay  attention  to  the  manner  in  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  refers  to  Paul's  communicating  his  gospel 
to  those  in  Jerusalem ;  for  this  was  a  death-blow  to  the 
insinuation  that  Paul  had  received  it  after  an  irregular 
fashion.     He  adds  also,  "  lest  by  any  means  I  should 


CH AFTER  II,  39 

run,  or  had  run,  in  vain."  There  was  sufficient  advance 
in  truth  in  what  the  apostle  taught,  but  he  would  not  run 
the  risk  of  making  a  split  among  the  saints  in  Jeru- 
salem. Had  he  been  indifferent  to  the  state  of  the 
saints,  he  would  have  brought  out  all  the  heavenly 
truth  in  which  he  was  so  far  beyond  the  others.  Bat 
there  are  ivvo  things  tliat  have  to  be  taken  account  of 
in  communicating  truth.  Not  merely  should  there  be 
^^  certainty  that  it  is  ttutk  iroui  Qod,  but  it  must  also 
•|  be  suited  truth  to  those  whom  you  address.  They 
might  have  needed  it  all,  but  they  were  not  in  a  condi- 
tion to  receive  it;  and  the  more  precious  the  truth,  the 
greater  the  injury,  in  a  certain  sense,  if  it  is  presented 
to  those  who  are  not  in  a  state  to  profit  by  it.  Suppos- 
ing persons  who  are  under  the  law,  what  would  be  the 
good  of  bringing  out  to  such  the  hope  of  Christ's  com- 
ing, or  of  union  with  Christ  ?  There  would  be  no  room 
for  these  truths  in  such  a  spiritual  condition.  When 
persons  are  still  under  law,  not  knowing  their  death  to 
it  in  Christ's  death  and  resurrection,  they  require  to  be 
established  in  the  grace  of  God.  This  appears  to  be  one 
reason  why,  in  the  epistle  to  the  Galatians,  the  apostle 
never  touches  on  those  blessed  truths.  The  wisdom  of 
omitting  them  is  apparent.  Such  truths  would  be  un- 
intelligible, or  at  least  unsuitable,  to  souls  in  their  state. 
To  have  developed  them  could  have  done  them  no  good. 
There  requires  to  be  first  the  understanding  of  the  com- 
plete putting  aside  of  the  law,  and  of  our  introduction 
in  Christ  into  a  new  atmosphere  altogether.  The  Lord 
had  many  things  to  tell  the  disciples  when  He  was  with 
them,  but  they  were  not  able  to  bear  them  then.  So 
the  apostle  tells  the  Hebrews  that  they  had  need  of 


40  GALATIANS. 

milk  and  not  of  strong  meat :  "  for  every  one  that 
nseth  milk  is  unskilful  in  the  word  of  righteousness, 
for  he  is  a  babe;  but  strong  meat  belongeth  to  them 
that  are  of  full  age,  even  to  those  who  by  reason  of  use 
have  their  senses  exercised  to  discern  both  good  and 
evil."  But  they  needed  to  be  taught  the  first  elements 
over  again ;  yet  that  epistle  was  written  not  long  before 
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  Nothing  hinders  the 
progress  of  saints  so  much  as  legal  principles.  The 
Corinthians  had  not  been  long  converted,  so  that  their 
ignorance  was  not  surprising.  But  the  Hebrews  had 
been  many  years  converted,  and  yet  they  were  only 
occupied  with  the  alphabet  of  Christianity.  So  that  the 
real  reason  which  hindered  these  Hebrew  believers  was, 
that  they  did  not  enter  into  their  death  to  the  law,  and 
union  with  Christ  risen.  They  were  not  even  stedfast 
on  the  full  foundation  of  Christian  truth — the  complete, 
eternal  putting  away  of  sins  in  the  blood  of  Christ, 
They  were  not  above  the  condition  of  spiritual  babes. 

The  apostle,  then,  having  referred  to  these  facts,  (to 
his  having  communicated  his  gospel  to  them,  privately 
to  those  of  reputation,  and,  withal,  to  his  taking  Titus 
with  him,  who  was  known  to  be  a  Greek,  and  yet  not 
compelled  to  be  circumcised) — leaves  all  this  to  have  its 
weight  upon  the  mind  of  the  Galatians,  giving  also  the 
reason,  "  And  that  because  of  false  brethren,  unawares 
brought  in."  If  you  read  the  third  verse  parentheti- 
cally, it  adds  to  the  clearness  of  the  passage.  He  had 
gone  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  communicated  his  gospel 
in  this  manner  to  the  apostles,  because  of  these  false 
brethren  unawares  brought  in.  He  did  not  wish  to  go 
into  controversy  about  truth  which  they  were  not  able 


CHAPTER  II.  41 

to  bear,  and  yet  he  wished  not  to  keep  it  hack  from 
those  who  could  appreciate  it.  But  he  hints  plainly 
what  these  false  brethren  aimed  at,  "  Who  came  in 
privily  to  spy  out  our  liberty  which  we  have  in  Christ 
Jesus,  that  they  might  bring  us  into  bondage."  This 
clearly  shows  the  connexion  between  legalism  and  the 
imtruthfulness  of  such  as  come  in  privily  to  spy  out  the 
liberty  they  do  not  understand.  "  To  whom  we  gave 
place  by  subjection,  no,  not  for  an  hour,  that  the  truth 
of  the  gospel  might  continue  with  you." 

But  now  he  goes  farther,  and  refers,  not  to  false 
brethren  that  were  at  work  undermining  the  gospel  by 
the  law,  but  to  those  who  took  the  most  prominent 
place  at  Jerusalem.  "  But  of  those  who  seemed  to  be 
somewhat,  whatsoever  they  were,  it  maketh  no  matter 
tome;  God  accepteth  no  man's  person;  for  they  who 
seemed  to  be  somewhat  in  conference  added  nothing  to 
me;  but  contrariwise,  when  they  saw  that  the  gospel  of 
the  uncircumcision  was  committed  unto  me,  as  the  gos- 
pel of  the  circumcision  was  unto  Peter:  (for  he  that 
wrought  effectually  in  Peter  to  the  apostleship  of  the 
circumcision,  the  same  was  mighty  in  me  towards  the 
Gentiles:)  and  when  James,  Cephas,  and  John,  who 
seemed  to  be  pillars,  perceived  the  grace  that  was  given 
unto  me,  they  gave  to  me  and  Barnahas  the  right  hand 
of  fellowship,  that  we  should  go  unto  the  heathen,  and 
they  unto  the  circumcision."  All  the  insinuations  of 
these  Jewish  teachers,  that  there  w^as  not  a  substantial 
agreement  between  Paul  and  the  other  apostles,  Avere 
thus  disappointed.  It  turned  out  that  Paul  was  the 
communicator,  not  Peter;  and  that  the  three  chiefs 
there  had  given  the  right  hand  of  fellowship  to  Paul. 


w, 


42  GALATIANS. 

They  in  no  way  controlled  his  miftistry,  but  perceived 
the  grace  that  was  given  to  him.  They  felt,  in  fact, 
both  as  regards  God  and  His  power  that  wrought  in 
Paul,  that  he  and  Barnabas  were  the  most  fitting  per- 
sons to  deal  with  the  uncircumcision.  The  vast  sphere 
of  the  heathen  world  was  evidently  for  Paul  and  those 
with  him,  while  they  remained  confined  to  their  narrow 
circle.  Paul  is  here  destroying  the  effort  of  the  enemy 
to  put  the  Gentile  believer  under  the  law. 

Next  he  takes  yet  another  step.  For  while  he  shows 
the  respect  that  Peter  and  James  and  John  in  Jerusalem 
had  to  himself  and  to  his  work,  he  does  another  thing 
still  more  disastrous  to  those  who  would  impose  the 
K  law  on  Gentiles.  "  But  when  Peter  was  come  to  An- 
'""'^tioch,  I  withstobd  him  to  the  face,  because  he  was 
to  be  blamed."  So  far  was  Paul  from  being  withstood 
by  Peter  at  Jerusalem,  that  Peter  gave  him  the  right 
hand  of  fellowship.  But  when  Peter  was  come  to 
Antioch,  Paul  withstood  him  to  the  face.  And  this 
clearly  was  a  thing  well  known.  "  For  before  that 
certain  came  from  James,  he  did  eat  with  the  Gentiles," 
which  was  a  mark  of  communion  with  them,  even  now 
and  everywhere  the  well-known  sign  of  what  is  equiva- 
lent. 1  am  not  speaking  here  of  eating  the  Lord's 
Supper,  which  is  the  highest  symbol  of  communion; 
but,  in  ordinary  life,  to  take  a  common  meal  together 
is  the  token  of  friendly  feeling,  and  with  Christians  it 
ought  specially  to  be  so,  for  they  are  called  to  walk  in 
everything  with  godly  sincerity.  Hence  the  import- 
ance attached  to  the  act  with  people  among  Christians, 
and  more  especially  in  the  face  ot  Jewish  separation 
from  Gentiles,  which,  under  the  law,  was  God's  command. 


CHAPTER  II.  43 

Peter  had  been  in  the  habit  of  eating  with  the  Gentiles, 
a  thought  which  no  man,  acting  on  Jewish  princi- 
ples, could  have  entertained ;  but  when  certain  persons 
came  from  James,  "  he  withdrew  and  separated  himself, 
fearing  them  which  were  of  the  circumcision."  How 
marvellous  is  the  influence  of  prejudices,  of  legal  pre- 
judices especially !  Swayed  thereby,  Peter  gives  up 
his  liberty,  and  no  longer  eats  with  the  Gentiles:  and 
this  was  the  very  chief  of  the  apostles!  Trifling  as 
tLe  act  might  seem,  it  was  a  weighty  one  in  the  eyes 
of  God  and  of  His  servant.  Paul  was  given  to  seQ 
that  in  this  seemingly  little  thing  the  truth  of  the 
gospel  was  surrendered. 

Let  us  consider  how  solemn  and  how  practical  a 
thing  this  is.  In  some  simple  matter  of  every-day  life 
there  may  be  a  virtual  abandonment  of  Christ  and  the 
truth  of  the  gospel,  a  lie  against  His  grace.  It  is  well 
to  bear  in  mind  that,  in  a  commonplace  act,  in  a  thing 
that  might  seem  to  be  of  no  comparative  importance, 
God  would  have  us  to  look  at  things  in  their  sources,  as 
they  touch  the  truth  and  grace  of  God.  We  are  apt 
to  make  light  of  what  relates  to  God,  and  to  make 
what  affects  ourselves  of  great  account.  But  God  in 
His  goodness  would  have  us  feel  deeply  what  concerns 
Christ  and  the  gospel,  passing  by  what  affects  our- 
selves. Why  should  Paul  thus  rebuke  Peter  publicly  ? 
Was  there  not  a  cause  ?  Was  there  not  a  crisis  come 
in  the  history  ?  Where  Peter  was  acting  as  the  apostle 
of  the  circumcision,  there  Paul  speaks  privately.  But 
now,  when  the  foundation  of  grace  was  concerned,  the 
same  man  is  bold  as  a  lion,  and  withstands  Peter  to 
the  face  because  he  was  to  be  condemned.     There  was 


44  GALATIANS. 

no  compromise,  no  timidity,  no  mere  human  prudence 
about  the  matter,  no  consideration  of  his  own  character 
or  Peter's,  but  there  was  the  looking  at  Christ's  glory 
in  the  gospel.  It  was  in  the  very  field  where  Peter  was 
peculiarly  responsible  to  his  Master  to  maintain  the 
truth,  and  there  he  had  failed.  Therefore  the  Apostle 
Paul  stood  on  firm  ground  here,  and  acted  fearlessly. 
He  withstood  Peter  to  the  face,  who  did  not  show  him- 
self at  all  according  to  the  Lord's  new  name,  in  this 
business.  He  was  more  like  Simon- Barjonas  than  the 
rock-man,  which  he  should  have  been.  He  had  fallen 
back  into  his  own  natural  ways ;  for  ardour  of  nature 
is  constantly  given  to  reaction.  What  gave  such 
strength  to  the  apostle's  remonstrance,  was  that  this 
took  place  after  that  solemn  conference  at  Jerusalem, 
where  Peter  took  an  active  part  to  prove  the  liberty 
that  God  had  given  to  the  Gentiles ;  where  he  showed 
that  God  had  made  choice  among  them,  that  by  his 
mouth  the  Gentiles  should  hear  the  word  of  the  gospel 
and  believe  it;  where  he  had  wound  up  his  declaration 
by  the  remarkable  words  so  galling  to  Jewish  pride,  and 
strengthening  the  Gentiles  who  might  have  been  uneasy : 
"  We  believe  that  through  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  we  shall  be  saved  even  as  they."  He  had  taught, 
yea,  in  the  face  of  the  Jews,  not  that  the  Gentiles 
should  be  saved  even  as  they,  but  that  the  Jewish  be- 
lievers should  be  saved  even  as  the  Gentiles.  So  that 
nothing  could  be  stronger.  He  had  no  thought  of 
treating  the  Gentiles  as  if  they  were  only  now  blessed 
on  some  irregular  and  disputable  tenure  of  mercy ;  for 
in  truth,  God  was  bringing  out  salvation  to  the  Gentiles 
more  clearly,  if  there  was  any  difference.     "  We  be- 


CHAPTER  II.  45 

lleve,  that  through  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
we  shall  be  saved  even  as  they."  The  Gentile  salvation 
was  made  the  very  pattern  of  those  who  should  be 
saved  among  the  Jews.  And  what  a  sorrow  that  after 
all  this,  Peter  should,  even  on  this  head,  go  astray  ! 
And  Barnabas  himself,  not  the  companion  of  Peter, 
but  of  Paul — who  had  first  discerned  his  worth  and 
devotedness,  and  had  joined  him  in  so  many  labours 
among  the  Gentiles — who  had  been  specially  named  as 
one  of  those  who  should  go  up  to  Jerusalem  to  set  at 
rest  this  grave  question ;  he  was  drawn  away  by  the 
dissimulation  of  Peter  and  the  rest !  The  Apostle  Paul 
was  not  wanting  to  the  occasion,  and  soon  discerns  that 
they  walked  not  uprightly,  according  to  the  truth  of 
the  gospel.  But  wherein  had  they  shown  this  lack  of 
uprightness?  In  ceasing  to  eat  with  the  Gentiles. 
Thus,  on  a  dinner  depended  the  truth  of  the  gospel. 
The  simple  act  of  eating  or  not  eating  with  the  Gentiles 
betrays  one's  heart  as  to  the  question  of  deliverance 
from  the  law. 

So  fatal  a  point  was  this,  if  allowed,  that  Paul  says 
to  Peter  before  them  all,  "  If  thou,  being  a  Jew,  livest 
after  the  manner  of  Gentiles,  and  not  as  do  the  Jews, 
how  compellest  thou  the  Gentiles  to  live  as  do  the 
Jews  ?"  What  had  Peter  been  about  ?  He  had  not, 
in  any  wise,  maintained  the  law  as  a  rule  for  the 
Jewish  believers.  Why,  then,  did  he  yield  to  an  act 
which  implied  it  among  the  Gentiles  ?  If  it  was  not  so 
in  Jerusalem,  where  God  had  of  old  bound  it  upon  their 
conscience,  what  a  turning  away  from  the  truth,  that 
one  who  knew  his  deliverance  should  practically  insist 
upon  it  at  Antioch  !     This  was  the  serious  matter  for 


4Q  GALATIANS, 

which  Paul  rebuked  Peter.  And  now  he  reasons  upon 
it:  "  We  who  are  Jews  by  nature  and  not  sinners  of  the 
Gentiles,"  (the  force  of  "  we,"  as  compared  with  "you," 
is  necessary  to  be  remarked  in  this  epistle  and  elsewhere,) 
"  knowing  that  a  man  is  not  justified  by  the  works  of 
the  law,  but  by  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  even  we  have 
believed  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  we  might  be  justified  by 
the  faith  of  Christ,  and  not  by  the  works  of  the  law; 
for  by  the  works  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified." 
Bear  in  mind,  also,  that  when  the  Apostle  Paul  dwells 
upon  law,  he  does  not  confine  his  remarks  to  the  Jewish 
law,  but  reasons  abstractedly.  He  says  and  means  not 
merely,  that  you  cannot  be  justified  by  the  •wgx}mMUh&. 
law,  but  by  no  law  at  all.  If  there  was  a  law  that 
couldT^  justify,  it  must  be  the  law  of  God  divulged  by 
Moses.  But  Paul  goes  farther,  and  insists  that  "  bt/ 
works  of  law ^^  you  cannot  be  justified.  The  law-prin- 
ciple is  opposed  to  justification  instead  of  being  the 
means  of  it.  He  takes  up  the  fact,  that  by  these  works 
of  law  no  flesh  can  be  justified. 

But  he  proceeds  to  argue  the  point,  and  asks,  "  If 
while  we  seek  to  be  justified  by  Christ,  we  ourselves 
also  are  found  sinners,  is  therefore  Christ  the  minister 
of  sin  ?  God  forbid."  That  is,  if  professing  faith  ia 
the  Lord  Jesus,  you  go  back  to  the  law,  the  effect  is 
necessarily  to  bring  you  in  a  sinner.  You  have  in 
truth  sin  in  your  nature,  and  the  consequence  is,  that  if 
you  have  to  do  with  the  law  at  all,  this  is  the  very 
condition  in  which  you  are  left  as  a  sinner  after  all. 
The  law  never  gives  deliverance  from  sin:  as  the  apostle 
says  elsewhere,  "  The  strength  of  sin  is  the  law."  So 
that,  if  while  you  seek  to  be  justified  by  Christ,  you 


CHAPTER  11.  47 

are  found  a  sinner,  is  therefore  Christ  the  minister  of 
sin?  This  is  the  issue  to  which  the  law  necessarily 
leads.  It  lays  hold  of  sin.  And  therefore,  if  after  you 
have  got  Christ,  you  are  only  found  after  all  througli 
the  law  to  be  a  sinner,  you,  in  effect,  make  Christ  the 
minister  of  sin.  Such  is  the  necessary  consequence  of 
bringing  in  the  law  after  Christ.  The  soul  that  has  to 
do  with  the  law  never  realizes  its  deliverance  from  sin; 
on  the  contrary,  the  law,  merely  detecting  the  evil,  and 
not  raising  the  soul  above  it,  leaves  the  man  powerless 
and  miserable  and  condemned. 

Some  people  talk  of  "  a  believing  sinner,"  or  speak 
of  the  worship  offered  to  God  by  "poor  sinners." 
Many  hymns  indeed  never  bring  the  soul  beyond  this 
condition.  But  what  is  meant  by  "sinner"  in  the 
word  of  God  is  a  soul  altogether  without  peace,  a  soul 
which  may  perhaps  feel  its  want  of  Christ,  being 
quickened  by  the  Spirit,  but  without  the  knowledge  of 
redemption.  It  is  not  truthfulness  to  deny  what  saints 
are  in  the  sight  of  God.  If  I  have  failed  in  anything, 
will  taking  the  ground  of  a  poor  sinner  make  the  sin- 
to  be  less,  or  give  me  to  feel  it  more?  No  I  If  I  am 
a  saint,  blessed  with  God  in  His  beloved  Son,  made  one 
with  Christ,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  given  to  dwell  in  me, 
then  I  say,  What  a  shame,  if  I  have  failed,  and  broken 
down,  and  dishonoured  the  Lord,  and  been  indifferent 
to  His  glory !  But  if  I  feel  my  own  coldness  and  in- 
difference, it  is  to  be  treated  as  baseness,  and  to  be 
hated  as  sin.  Whereas,  to  take  the  ground  of  a  poor 
sinner,  is  really,  though  it  may  not  be  intended,  to  make 
excuses  for  evil.  Which  of  the  two  ways  would  act 
most  powerfully  upon  the  conscience?  which  humbles 


48  GALATIANS. 

man  and  exalts  God  most?  Clearly  the  more  that  you 
realize  what  God  has  given  you,  and  made  you  in 
Christ — if  you  are  walking  inconsistently  with  it — the 
more  you  feel  the  sin  and  dishonour  of  your  course. 
Whereas,  if  you  keep  speaking  about  yourself  merely 
as  a  sinner,  it  may  seem  lowly  to  the  superficial,  but 
it  only  becomes  a  kind  of  palliative  of  your  evil,  w^hich 
in  this  case  never  humbles  so  thoroughly  as  God  looks 
for  in  the  child  of  faith. 

Take  another  instance  from  forms  of  worship,  which 
are  constructed  on  that  principle.  The  first  thing 
is  that  they  quote  Scripture  about  a  wicked  man 
turning  away  from  his  wickedness.  But  if  you  can 
begin  again  every  Sunday  afresh  as  a  Christian,  and  yet 
needing  priestly  absolution,  it  leaves  room  for  the  heart 
to  act  treacherously  to  the  Lord  all  the  rest  of  the  week, 
beside  being  a  virtual  denial  of  the  efficacy  of  His 
work.  This  is  a  very  serious  matter.  The  week's  prepa- 
ration for  the  sacrament  is  the  same  kind  of  thing.  It  is 
the  wicked  man  turning  away  from  his  wickedness,  re- 
newing his  vows  and  endeavouring  to  amend.  Even  in 
the  third  and  fourth  century,  when  they  spoke  about 
the  Lord's  Supper,  they  called  it  a  *'  tremendous  sacri- 
fice," &c.  All  that  completely  ignores  the  very  basis  of 
Christianity,  which  is,  that  "  by  one  offering  He  hath 
perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified."  And  by 
*'  them  that  are  sanctified,"  I  maintain  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  speaking  of  all  Christians, — of  that  separation 
which  is  equally  true  of  all  believers,  whether  church- 
men or  dissenters,  or  of  those  who,  renouncing  sectional 
ground,  understand  better,  as  I  believe,  what  God  wills 
about  His  Church.     This  will  tend  to  show  how  very 


CHAPTER  II.  49 

serious  is  the  question  of  tbe  law.  There  is  no  de- 
liverance, where  and  while  it  is  maintained,  from  the 
condition  of  a  sinner.  Christian  worship  is  an  im- 
possibility under  such  circumstances.  If  this  be  the 
case,  Christ  becomes  the  minister  of  sin;  because  I  am 
supposed  to  be  left  by  Him  under  the  bondage  of  my 
sin,  instead  of  being  delivered  from  it:  "  for  if  I  build 
again  the  thinss  which  I  destroyed,  I  make  myself  a 
transgressor."  /  That  is,  in  going  to  Christ,  I  give  up 
the  law  virtuaNy ;  and  if  after  all  that,  I  go  back  to 
the  law,  then  I  make  myself  a  transgressor.  It  is  plain 
that  if  I  am  right  now,  I  w^as  entirely  wrong  before. 
Who  was  it  made  me  give  up  the  law  ?  It  was  Christ. 
So  that  if  I  go  back  to  the  law^  the  gospel  of  Christ  is 
the  means. of  making  people  transgressors,  and  not  of 
justifying  them.  The  Galatians  had  never  thought  of 
flns^""  But  the  Holy  Ghost  brings  the  light  of  His  own 
truth  to  bear  upon  them,  and  shows  what  they  were 
doing  involved.  Thjg^ffect  of  enforcing  the  law  was, 
virtually,  to  make  Christ  the  minister  of  sin,  instead 
of  the  deliverer  from  it  ! 

But  not  so.  *'  For  I  through  the  law  am  dead  to  the 
law,  that  I  might  live  unto  God."  There  he  shows 
how  it  is  that  he  was  dead  to  the  law.  It  was  through 
the  law.  It  was  not  merely  a  thing  done  outside  his 
own  soul.  He  had  gone  through  the  question  within 
most  thoroughly.  He  had  been  under  the  law :  and 
when  God  had  quickened  him,  and  conscience  awoke 
under  divine  light,  he  realized  what  he  had  never 
dreamt  before  —  his  own  utter  powerlessness.  "  I 
through  the  law  am  dead  to  the  law."  He  had  felt 
truly  his  position  as  a  sinner,  and  owns  the  killing,  not 


\i 


50  GAL  AT  IAN  S. 

quickening,  power  of  the  law.  Bnt  then,  tjnsjvag^of 
grace  now,  not  jad^naent  by  and  by.  Hence,  says  the 
'apostle,  if  I  am  dead  by  law,  t  am  dead  to  law,  and 
completely  outside  its  reach.  I  mw  jead,  and,  .need  die 
by  it  nom^acoi^I  am  dead  to  it  that  I  might  live  unto 
God'.  I  am  crucified  with  Christ;  nevertheless,  I  live, 
"  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  Thus,  in  the 
soul  of  the  apostle,  we  have  law  upheld  in  its  utmost 
strength,  and  yet  himself  set  free  in  Christ,  and  outside 
it  in  grace.  So  in  Christ  we  have  the  same  thing,  at 
the  end  of  Romans  iii.  "  Do  we,  then,  make  void  the 
law  through  faith?  God  forbid.  Yea,  we  establish 
the  law."  How  is  it  maintained ?  Clirisfs  death_^W2iS 
the  strongest  and  most  divine  sanctiau,  the  law  ^eyer 
had.  It  was  the  law  laying  hold  of  the  Surety,  and 
carried  out  to  the  full,  in  the  person  of  Christ ;  so  that 
its  authority,  as  faith  knows,  has  been  perfectly  made 
good  in  Him.  It  is  fully  carried  out,  and  far,  far  more, 
.too,  in  the  death  of  Christ.  But  if  you  apply  that 
Scripture  to  prove  that  the  law  is  to  be  established 
over  Christians  as  their  rule  of  life,  it  is  as  ignorant  as 
it  is  false.  The  law  is  the  rule  of  death,  not  of  life: 
and  that  is  what  Paul's  experience  proves.  "  I  through 
the  law  am  dead  to  the  law,  that  I  might  live  unto 
God."  How  did  he  live  unto  God?  Not  in  that  old 
life,  to  which  only  the  law  applies^  for  he  says  he  was 
crucified  with  Christ,  who  suffered  in  his-  stead.  But 
Christ  is  risen,  as  well  as  dead,  and  risen,  that  Paul, 
that  I,  might  live  to  God:  no  longer  I  indeed,  but 
Christ  lives  in  me  —  a  wholly  new  life.  The  law 
touches  the  old  life,  and  has  no  authority  beyrmd  jt. 
The  moment  that    I   believe,  I  live,  and  the  life  is 


CIT AFTER  II.  51 

Christ,  and  it  is  founded  upon  the  cross.  And  more- 
over, says  lie,  "  The  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh, 
I  live  by  the  ffi'ch  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me 
and  gave  himself  for  me."  I  have,  of  course,  my 
naturaLJife  here  below,  but  that  wherein  I  now  live  in 
the  flesh  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God.  The  be- 
liever docs  live  by  looking,  not  at  the  law,  but  at  Christ. 
Thus,  thire  cannot  be  a  more  definitive  setting  aside  of 
the  law  in  every  shape  and  form.  The  believer  is 
ushered  into  a  new  state  of  being  altogether — a  life 
nourished  by  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me,  and  gave 
Himself  for  me.  It  is  Christ,  not  only  characterizing 
the  new  creature,  but  as  a  living,  loving  person  before 
the  soul.  Therefore  he  can  say,  "  I  do  not  frustrate  the 
grace  of  God."  But  those  did,  who  maintained  the  law 
for  righteousness  in  any  shape.  "  If  righteousness  come 
by  the  law,  then  Christ  is  dead  in  vain."  The  effect  of 
the  law,  even  upon  the  believer,  is,  that  he  never  rises 
by  his  own  confession  above  the  feelings  and  experiences 
of  a  sinner.  He  is  always  in  that  condition — always 
crying,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  !  Who  shall  de- 
liver me  from  the  body  of  this  death?"  Whereas, 
when  he  enters  into  the  glorious  place  that  he  has  in 
Christ,  he  is  able  to  say,  "  The  law  of  the  spirit  of 
life  in  Christ  Jesus  haih  made  me  free  from  the  law  of 
sin  and  death."  He  ought  to  say,  0  happy  that  I  am  ! 
Christ  has  delivered  me  !  "  There  is  no  condemnation 
to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  Such  is  the  true  and 
sure  place  of  the  Christian.  Christ  has  indeed  not 
died  for  nothing  in  such  a  case. 


CHAPTER  III. 

The  first  section  of  the  chapter  is  devoted  to  the  con- 
trast of  the  principles  of  law  and  of  faith,  not  exactly  of 
promise,  but  of  faith.  The  part  which  follows  takes  up 
the  subject  of  promise,  and  shows  the  mutual  relations 
of  law  and  promise ;  but  the  early  verses  are  devoted 
to  a  wider  domain.  For  we  must  bear  in  mind  that 
faith  has  a  variety  of  sphere  and  operation,  beside  the 
promise  of  God.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  promises 
belong  to  faith  ;  but  then  it  may  embrace  and  profit  by 
much  more  than  what  was  (not  revealed,  but)  promised. 
For  when  we  talk  of  promises,  it  is  not  merely  the 
general  blessings  God  speaks  of,  such  as  His  grace  to 
guilty  sinners,  but  certain  definite  privileges  which 
were  assigned  beforehand  to  Abraham,  and  are  now  "  yea 
and  amen"  in  all  their  spiritual  power  in  Christ — 
promises  which  will,  in  a  future  day,  be  fulfilled  to  the 
letter  as  well  as  in  spirit,  when  it  pleases  God  to  convert 
His  ancient  people.  Then  there  will  be  the  wonderful 
display  of  all  blessing,  heavenly  twi^  earthly,  made 
good  through  the  same  glorious  person,  the  source  and 
centre  of  it  all,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  in  the  part 
of  the  chapter  before  us,  it  is  not  so  much  a  question  of 
promise,  but  rather  how  the  blessing  is  to  be  got  at  all. 

The  Galatians  had  been  brought,  not  long  since,  under 
the  immense  privilege  of  the  apostle's  preaching,  into 
the  enjoyment  of  the  power  and  blessing  of  Chris- 
tianity ;  and  now,  sad  to  say,  they  were  in  danger  of 


CHAPTER  III. 


53 


slipping  away,  and  they  had  lost  the  sense  of  grace  in 
their  souls.  By  what  means  had  they  originally  received 
blessing  from  God  ?  This  question  was  raised  by  the 
last  verse  of  the  chapter  before.  Because  the  apostle 
had  there  pressed  home  the  great  point  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  illustrating  in  this  epistle,  namely,  that  it  is  not  the 
law,  but  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ,  that  freely  gives 
all  the  blessing  the  Christian  enjoys.  He  had  brought 
us  up  to  this  already,  that  "  I  through  the  law  am  dead 
to  the  law^,  that  I  might  live  unto  God."  He  showed 
how  this  came  to  pass  in  his  own  case,  who  was  a  Jew, 
and  was  therefore  necessarily  under  the  law  of  God  in 
a  way  in  which  no  Gentile,  as  such,  could  be;  how  it 
was  that  he  had  been  delivered  from  it  and  could  now 
adopt  such  different  language.  He  says,  "  I  am  cruci- 
fied with  Christ:  nevertheless  I  live;  yet  not  I,  but 
Christ  liveth  in  me."  So  that,  in  one  point  of  view,  he 
speaks  of  himself  as  dead,  in  another  as  alive;  but  that 
life  in  which  he  lived  now,  was  Christ  in  him.  The 
old  "  I"  he  treats  as  a  dead  thing.  All  that  consti- 
tuted his  natural  character,  the  old  self  which  was 
amenable  to  the  law,  is  treated  as  crucified.  The  rea- 
son is  obvious.  Wliat  is  the  spring  of  a  man's  energy 
and  the  end  of  everything  in  this  world  ?  What  min- 
gles with  and  corrupts  all  thoughts  and  desires  ?  It  is 
self.  Whether  you  look  at  courage,  or  generosity,  or 
care  for  one's  family,  and  country,  and  religion — all 
these  things  had  been  found  in  Paul  before  conversion ; 
but  one  thing  lay  deeper  than  any  other,  and  that  was 
self.  Yet  was  it  all  slain  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  which 
judged  his  whole  moral  being  as  being  founded  upon 
that  which  was  corrupt — i.  e.,  himself.    Paul's  character 


54  GALATIAN8. 

was  dealt  with  from  its  inmost  depths.  Henceforward 
he  starts  from  the  principle  of  having  now  another  for 
his  life,  even  Christ;  and  while  he  was  found  entering 
into  His  love,  and  carrying  out  His  will,  it  was  Christ, 
an  ohject  before  him,  who  was  the  power  of  life, 
through  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  him. 

Nor  is  this  peculiar  to  some ;  on  the  contrary,  Christ 
is  the  life  of  every  Christian,  but  it  may  not  be  always 
manifested.  You  may  find  the  old  man  breaking  out 
in  pride,  vanity,  love  of  ease,  the  force  of  old  habits. 
AVhere  this  is  the  case,  it  is,  of  course,  the  old  nature 
allowed  to  show  itself  afresh  through  lack  of  occupa- 
tion with  Christ  and  the  exercise  of  self-judgment. 

There  can  be  no  such  thing  as  Christ  dead  in  us,  so  to 
speak ;  but  when,  practically,  we  are  not  living  on  Christ, 
this  soon  works  out,  and  betrays  itself  in  our  ways, 
which  brought  Christ  to  the  cross.  The  apostle  had 
come  to  this  point;  it  was  Christ  living  in  him,  not  the 
law.  "  I  through  the  law  am  dead  to  the  law,  that  I 
might  live  unto  God."  All  that  the  law  could  do  was 
to  bring  in  its  killing  power  upon  them  that  were  under 
it.  There  was  no  striving,  as  we  often  see  in  these  days, 
to  keep  the  law  in  a  spiritual  way  now  that  he  was  con- 
verted; but  "  I  through  the  law  am  dead  to  the  law, 
that  I  might  live  unto  God."  That  expression,  "  live 
nnto  God,"  is  very  serious  and  beautiful.  The  law 
never  produced  life  in  a  single  soul:  it  kills.  Whereas 
here  you  find  Paul  dead  to  the  law,  but  alive  unto  God 
on  a  totally  different  principle.  The  question  was.  How 
did  this  life  come  ?  If  all  that  the  law  did  was  to  bring 
conscious  death  upon  his  soul,  (which  refers  to  his 
going  through  the  sense  of  condemnation  before  God,) 


CHAPTER  III.  55 

■what  is  the  spring  of  the  new  life  ?  Not  the  law,  but 
Christ.  He  has  done  with  the  law,  in  Christ,  and  he 
is  left  free,  yea,  and  has  life  in  him  to  live  unto  God. 
Hence  he  says,  "  Not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  So 
that  this  shows  us  not  only  the  source  and  character  of 
the  new  life,  but  that  it  is  all  sustained  by  the  self-same 
thing  which  gave  it  existence.  As  it  was  the  faith  of 
Christ  that  produced  the  life,  so  it  is  the  faith  of  Christ 
that  is  its  power.  A  person  may  admire  what  is  good 
and  lovely,  but  this  is  another  thing  from  being  it. 
And  what  gives  power?  Looking  to  Christ;  the  soul 
feasting  itself  upon  Christ.  The  objective  means  is 
Christ.  "  The  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live 
by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me  and  gave 
Himself  for  me.  I  do  not  frustrate  the  grace  of  God" 
— they  did — "  for  if  righteousness  came  by  the  law, 
then  Christ  is  dead  in  vain."  It  was  their  principle 
that  righteousness  came  by  the  law,  and  not  alone  in 
Christ  dead  and  risen.  Then,  says  he,  if  it  be  so, 
"  Christ  is  dead  in  vain."  Were  it  merely  a  question 
of  the  law,  all  the  necessity  would  have  been  that 
Christ  should  live  and  strengthen  us  to  keep  the  law. 
But  He  is  dead.  Their  doctrine,  he  insists,  makes 
Christ  to  be  dead  gratuitously ;  whereas  it  is  in  truth 
the  essential  thing,  the  very  and  only  way  in  which 
the  grace  of  God  comes  to  the  soul. 

Having  touched  upon  this  great  truth,  he  cannot  re- 
frain from  an  abrupt  and  startling  rebuke,  as  he  feels, 
by  the  contrast,  how  grievous  the  loss  was.  "  O 
foolish  Galatians,  who  hath  bewitched  you  [that  ye 
should  not  obey  the  truth]?"  The  expression,  "  that 
ye  should  not  obey  the  truth,"  is  one  brought  in  from 


56  GALATIANS. 

chapter  v.  7.  **  Ye  did  run  well;  who  did  hinder  you 
that  ye  shonld  not  obey  the  truth?"  There  it  is  most 
undeniably  and  properly  inserted,  but  here  it  is  left 
out  in  the  best  copies  of  the  epistle.  I  am  not  found- 
ing anything  upon  it,  but  merely  state  the  fact  by 
the  way,  because  it  is  right  to  do  so  on  fitting  occa- 
sions. One  main  form  of  this  meddling  with  Scripture 
consisted  in  transplanting  a  text,  or  phrase,  that  is 
perfectly  true  in  its  right  place,  from  some  other  part 
of  Scripture.  "  0  foolish  Galatians,  who  hath  be- 
witched you,  before  whose  eyes  Jesus  Christ  hath  been 
evidently  set  forth,  crucified  among  you?"  It  is  plain 
that  he  draws  particular  attention  to  the  cross  of 
Christ — not  merely  to  His  blood,  or  His  death,  but  to 
His  cross.  And  you  will  observe,  if  you  examine  the 
word  of  God,  that  the  particular  form  in  which  Christ's 
death — is  set  forth  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  invariably  in 
connexion  with  the  use  which  has  to  be  made  of  it 
practically.  Throughout  the  Hebrews  the  point,  with 
a  little  but  weighty  exception,  is  not  the  cross,  but  the 
blood  of  Christ;  while  in  the  Romans  it  is  mainly  His 
death,  the  blood  often,  but  death  the  grand  staple  of 
the  argument.  Why  does  the  Holy  Ghost  here  say, 
not  merely  that  He  shed  His  blood,  (which  is  the  thing 
that  a  Christian,  happy  in  the  knowledge  of  forgiveness, 
would  dwell  upon,)  but  "  crucified  among  you?"  There 
is  nothing  in  vain  in  Scripture :  there  is  no  bringing  any- 
thing into  prominence  without  a  divine  reason  for  it. 
The  crucifixion  puts  shame  upon  man,  and  upon  the 
flesh  more  than  any  other  thing.  The  effect  of  Christ's 
death,  simply,  does  not  give  me  man  made  nothing  of, 
and  the  utter  worthlessness  of  human  nature  as  before 


CHAPTER  III.  57 

God.  "When  the  apostle  wants  to  show  the  absolute 
separation  of  the  Christian  from  the  world,  he  says, 
"God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  the  world  is  crucified 
nnto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world."  Now  it  is  plain  that 
this  is  a  much  graver  and  more  forcible  way  of  putting 
the  case.  There  is  nothing  the  world  counted  so  foolish 
as  the  cross.  Philosophers  scorned  the  notion  that  a 
divine  person  should  thus  die:  it  was  something  that 
seemed  so  weak  and  objectless.  They  had  no  just  sense 
of  the  horriblcness  of  sin,  of  man's  positive  enmity  to 
God,  and  of  His  solemn,  eternal  judgment.  The 
cross  is  the  means  of  bringing  all  out.  But  more  than 
that;  the  cross  not  merely  shows  what  the  flesh  is,  and 
the  world,  but  it  also  proves  the  hopelessness  of  looking 
to  the  law  to  bring  in  blessing,  save  in  a  negative  way. 
There  is  such  a  thing  as  the  power  of  the  law  to  kill, 
but  not  to  quicken ;  Christ  alone  does  this. 

The  apostle  puts  it  to  their  own  recollection  and  ex- 
perience, how  it  was  that  the  Spirit  had  been  received, 
and  miracles  wrought,  and  they  had  got  blessing.  Was 
it  by  the  law  ?  The  Galatians  were  heathens,  worship- 
ping stocks  and  stones,  and  it  was  out  of  this  state  that 
they  were  brought,  not  by  the  law,  but  by  the  know- 
ledge of  Christ.  This  puts  it  in  a  very  pungent,  as 
well  as  effective,  form.  Had  it  been  God's  way  to  have 
used  the  law  as  a  means,  would  He  not  have  employed 
the  Apostle  Paul  to  bind  it  upon  them  ?  But  nothing 
of  the  kind.  He  had  brought  forth  God  before  them 
in  His  holy,  saving  love.  In  the  sermon  to  the  Athe- 
nians, on  Mars'  hill,  he  had  demonstrated  the  folly  of 
their  idolatry ;  he  had  shown  that  it  was  contrary  even 


58  GALATIANS. 

to  their  own  boasted  reason  to  worship  what  they  had 
made.  There  was  that  above  them  and  around  them, 
every  day  and  everywhere,  which  indicated  the  finger 
of  One  who  had  created  them.  Even  one  of  their  own 
poets  had  said  that  they  were  His  offspring,  not  making 
God  our  offspring,  or,  yet  less,  the  work  of  men's 
hands,  which  is  just  what  idolatry  does.  The  apostle 
always  goes  to  the  conscience  of  men,  and  shows  the 
evident  way  in  which  the  devil  had  perplexed  their 
minds,  and  taken  them  away  from  the  patent  facts  out- 
side them,  which  ought  to  have  shown  a  God  above 
them,  and  to  have  furnished  proofs  of  His  beneficent 
goodness.  Then  he  brings  out  the  solemn  truth,  that 
God  is  calling  all  men  everywhere  to  repent;  to  bow 
to  Him  in  acknowledgment  of  their  sin,  (which  is  only 
another  way  of  expressing  repentance,)  on  the  ground 
that  He  had  "  appointed  a  day  in  the  which  He  will 
judge  the  world  in  righteousness,  (not  the  law,  but  all 
in  righteousness,)  by  that  man  whom  He  hath  ordained; 
whereof  He  hath  given  assurance  unto  all  men,  in  that 
He  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead."  It  is  Christ  that 
is  put  before  them,  and  not  the  law.  This  was  the 
truth  habitual  with  the  apostle.  So  in  the  case  of 
these  Galatians.  He  recalls  them  to  the  way  in  which 
they  had  received  blessing ;  "  This  only  would  I  learn 
of  you.  Received  ye  the  Spirit  by  the  works  of  the 
law  or  by  the  hearing  of  faith  ?"  It  is  an  important 
advance  upon  the  chapter  before,  which  only  speaks  of 
life;  but  chaptgr  iii.  introduces  the  Holy  Ghost.  Down 
to  the  end  of  verse  15,  you  will  find  that,  as  he  begins 
with  the  Spirit  as  the  proof  of  God's  blessing  men,  so 
he  ends  with  the  Spirit.   The  argument  is  to  prove  that 


CHAPTER  lit.  59 

tlie  connexion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  with  faith,  and  not 
"u-ith  law  which  has  only  a  curse  for  guilty  man.  Christ 
is  our  life,  and  He  gives  the  Spirit. 

It  is  important  to  distinguish  life  and  the  Spirit; 
because  when  a  soul  receives  the  gospel,  though  there 
be  ordinarily  the  reception  of  life  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  at  the  same  moment,  yet  we  must  bear  in  mind 
that  the  two  things  are  quite  distinct.  The  new  life 
which  the  Christian  receives  in  Christ  is  not  God,  though 
of  God;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  is  very  God.  The  be- 
liever's life  is  a  new  creature  or  creation,  while  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  the  Creator.  It  is  not  because  we  have 
a  new  life  that  our  bodies  are  made  the  temple  of  God, 
but  because  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  therein.  Hence, 
when  Christians  do  not  properly  distinguish  this,  it  is 
very  possible  to  use  that  life  as  a  thing  to  comfort 
oneself  with  and  set  us  at  ease,  leading  us  to  say,  I 
know  that  I  shall  be  saved ;  and  all  spiritual  exercises 
may  close  there.  How  often  souls  settle  down  to  rest  in 
the  satisfaction  that  they  have  got  life,  or  exercise  that 
life  only  in  the  desire  to  bring  souls  to  Christ !  But, 
blessed  as  this  zeal  is,  it  is  a  very  inferior  thing  to 
loving  Christ ;  as  love  to  Christ  is  an  inferior  thing  to 
the  enjoyment  of  His  love  to  us;  and  I  believe  this  to 
be  the  true  order,  in  the  souls  of  the  saints  of  God. 
The  great  thing  that  God  calls  upon  me  for,  is  to  ad- 
mire and  delight  in  and  learn  more  and  more  of  the 
love  of  Christ.  What  is  the  effect  ?  Love  to  Christ 
is  produced  in  the  very  same  ratio  that  I  know  His 
love  to  me.  What  is  it  that  judges  self  and  keeps  it 
down,  and  raises  a  person  above  all  grovelling  ways 
and  ends  ?     Entrance  into  the  blessedness  of  His  love. 


60  GALATIANS. 

Being  filled  with  tlie  sense  of  it,  we  love  souls  in  a 
different  way,  because  we  see  them  in  His  light,  and 
we  view  them  out  of  His  afifectious,  and  not  merely  as 
having  some  link  with  ourselves.  This  is  the  true 
secret  of  all  spiritual  power,  at  least,  in  its  highest 
forms. 

Take,  again,  any  little  suffering  we  undergo  for  Christ's 
sake,  any  work  undertaken  for  Him — whatever  God 
calls  us  to:  in  all  these  things  the  true  blessing  of  the 
Christian  is  not  to  abstract  them  from  Christ,  but  to 
have  Christ  Himself  as  the  spring  and  pattern  and 
measure  of  all  our  service,  so  that  all  our  service  should 
flow  from  our  enjoyment  of  Christ.  In  one  way,  wor- 
ship is  a  nearer  thing  to  God,  and  ought  to  be  a  dearer 
thing  to  the  child  of  God,  than  even  service;  whereas 
it  is  no  uncommon  thing  to  find  zealous  servants  who 
know  very  little  of  true  worship.  I  say  this,  not  that 
we  should  serve  Christ  less,  but  that  we  should  enjoy 
Him  more,  and  serve  Him  in  the  spirit  of  enjoying 
what  He  is,  apart  from  all  circumstances.  What  is 
the  basis  of  this  measure  of  enjoyment?  It  is  the  ab- 
solute peace  and  rest  of  our  heart  in  Him  and  His  work. 
We  see  how  completely  every  sin  is  met  and  every  need 
of  our  soul  supplied  in  Christ.  We  are  put  as  children 
in  the  presence  of  a  father ;  one  knows  that  his  father 
uses  all  his  resources  for  the  good  of  his  child.  In  the 
poor  sinner  there  is  the  sense  of  need,-  and  the  soul 
must  go  through  that  first.  In  the  experience  of  almost 
every  regenerate  soul  there  is  a  state  where  there  is 
life,  but  in  the  midst,  perhaps,  of  the  greatest  ignorance, 
yet  with  deep  feeling  of  sin.  This  is  not  properly  the 
Christian  state ;  which,  when  rightly  apprehended,  sup- 


CHAPTER  III.  61 

poses  rest  in  Christ,  with  the  consciousness  that  all  is 
given  me  of  God  in  Him.  I  have  received  the  Spirit  of 
adoption,  not  the  spirit  of  bondage.  It  is  not  merely 
that  my  soul  is  awakened  to  feel  sin,  but  the  Holy 
Ghost  dwells  in  me;  and  the  result  of  the  indwelling 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  that  I  know  I  have  received  this 
fall  blessing  from  God. 

In  chapter  ii.,  as  we  have  remarked,  life  is  in  ques- 
tion; but  now,  in  the  beginning  of  chapter  iii.,  he 
speaks  about  the  reception  of  the  Spirit.  This  was  not 
merely  a  matter  of  enjoyment,  but  also  accompanied  by 
miraculous  power.  When  at  that  time  the  Holy  Ghost 
was  given,  there  were  outward  external  ways  in  which 
He  showed  Himself,  which  were  not  continued  in  the 
Church.  He  puts  the  two  together  here.  "  Received 
ye  the  Spirit  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hearing 
of  faith  ?  Are  ye  so  foolish  ?  having  begun  in  the 
Spirit,  are  ye  now  made  perfect  by  the  flesh  ?"  or,  "  are 
ye  being  made  perfect  by  the  flesh  ?"  It  was  a  process 
that  they  were  hoping  to  be  perfected  by  ;  because  flesh 
can  easily  be  satisfied  with  itself.  "  Have  ye  suffered 
so  many  things  in  vain  ?  if  it  be  yet  in  vain."  He  will 
not  give  them  up ;  he  will  not  suppose  that  the  enemy 
is  gaining  such  a  victory  over  them  but  that  they  may 
be  recovered  from  this  state.  "  He  therefore  that  minis- 
tereth  to  you  the  Spirit,  and  worketh  miracles  among 
you,  doeth  he  it  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the 
hearing  of  faith  ?"  This  refers  to  Paul  himself.  It 
was  God  that  gave  the  Spirit,  but  He  worked  by  means: 
by  those  who  had  been  preaching  the  gospel  had  they 
received  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  the  hearing  of  faith 
that  is  followed  by  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  after  we  have 


62-  GALATIA^S. 

received  Christ;  but  there  is  always  a  distinction  be- 
tween the  two  things.  You  will  find  in  Scripture  that 
the  reception  of  the  Spirit  was,  at  least  sometimes,  after 
believing  in  Christ.  Take  the  instance  of  the  Samari- 
tans. Was  not  the  Spirit  communicated  to  them  some 
time  after  conversion  ?  And  so,  not  to  speak  of  Cor- 
nelius, was  it  with  the  Ephesian  disciples  in  Acts  xix. 

Thus  we  see  many  a  soul  that  hears  the  gospel  filled 
with  joy,  but  it  passes  away;  and  perhaps  they  will 
have  to  go  through  a  very  painful  process  afterwards, 
because  they  had  not  really  understood  the  application 
of  Christ's  work  to  their  souls.  They  have  simply 
embraced  the  reality  of  a  blessed  divine  person  who  is 
full  of  love,  even  the  Lord  Jesus;  but  then,  when  they 
have  received  that,  the  sense  of  failure  comes  tip,  and 
they  go  through  much  heart-breaking  and  ploughing 
up.  I  could  not  say  of  such  persons,  that  they  have 
received  the  Spirit  of  God  as  One  dwelling  in  them, 
the  seal  of  the  blessing  they  have  found  in  Christ.  But 
when  they  are  brought  to  rest  in  Him,  with  all  the 
sense  of  their  sin  and  of  what  they  are,  and  yet,  in  spite 
of  it  all,  to  rest  in  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ,  so 
that,  in  the  face  of  everything,  knowing  what  God  is, 
what  Satan  is,  what  they  themselves  are,  what  the  law 
of  God  is, — still,  being  justified  by  faith,  they  have 
peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;'  such 
persons  have  received  the  Holy  Ghost;  they  have  not 
only  life,  but  the  Spirit  of  God.  In  early  times  this 
distinction  was  brought  out  very  clearly ;  but  the  same 
principle  is,  of  course,  true  now.  There  are  no  souls 
that  have  looked  to  Christ  but  what  God  will  give  them 
the  Spirit  of  adoption,  and  they  will  thus  be  brought 


CHAPTER  III.  63 

into  full  blessing.  But  often  this  may  be  upon  a  death- 
bed, which  ought  not  to  be  the  case  with  a  Christian. 

There  is  such  a  scanty  measure  of  truth  preached 
even  among  real  Christians  in  the  present  day,  that 
souls  have  not  the  consciousness  of  their  relationship 
nor  of  the  completeness  of  redemption.  Hence  it  is 
that  they  may  be  kept  from  their  proper  comfort  and 
enjoyment  for  many  a  day.  It  was  not  so  with  these 
Galatians ;  and  the  apostle  refers  to  their  full  blessing. 
At  once  they  were  brought  into  the  possession  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  They  had  received  Him  by  the  hearing 
of  faith :  and  I  take  it,  that  this  means  His  reception 
in  every  way ;  not  only  with  a  view  to  miracles  and 
powers,  but  the  Holy  Ghost  yet  more  as  One  dwelling 
within  them.  Where  souls  were  not  born  of  God,  but  had 
merely  outwardly  professed  Christ,  they  might  receive 
the  Spirit  for  gifts  of  power,  but  not  in  the  way  of 
communion.  Thus  in  Hebrews  vi.  you  have  persons 
w^ho  were  once  enlightened,  and  had  tasted  of  the 
heavenly  gift,  and  been  made  partakers  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  had  tasted  the  good  word  of  God,  and  the 
powers  of  the  world  to  come,  and  who  yet  had  fallen 
away.  It  is  nowhere  said  that  they  were  quickened, 
or  that  they  had  life ;  but  they  were  enlightened  and  had 
tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift;  they  had  been  baptized  and 
had  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come:  all  these  things 
were  true  of  them,  yet  they  fell  away — they  deserted 
Christ;  they  went  back  from  Him  to  Judaism  in  order 
to  make  their  conscience  easy  with  God.  Where  this 
was  the  case,  the  apostle  says,  "  It  is  impossible  to  re- 
new them  again  unto  repentance."  They  are  apostates, 
and  that  is  the  point  of  the  question.     For  on  a  large 


64  GALATIANS. 

scale,  similar  will  be  the  means  of  bringing  in  the  worst 
doom,  which  must  inevitably  follow  the  denial  of 
Christianity.  And  necessarily  so,  for  God  has  nothing 
better  to  bring  in ;  nothing  wiiereby  He  can  act  upon 
man  when  He  rejects  christian  revelation  and  the  grace 
of  Christ.  These  Galatians  were  convicted  by  this  very 
thing.  They  knew  that  they  had  not  heard  about  the 
law,  and  yet  they  had  received  the  Spirit  personally. 
Let  them  think  what  the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
involves  —  that  it  is  not  only  the  manifestation  of 
power,  but  the  deeper  blessing  that  abides  now.  And 
how  good  of  God  that  it  should  be  so,  that  He  has  not 
taken  away  the  spring  of  enjoying  Christ.  We  might 
have  thought  that,  so  deep  has  been  the  failure,  if  any- 
thing had  been  likely  to  be  taken  away,  it  would  be 
that  enjoyment  of  Christ. 

At  Pentecost  the  saints  were  all,  or  most,  at  any 
rate,  babes.  It  is  a  moral  misunderstanding  of  that 
day,  as  well  as  of  the  previous  state  of  the  disciples,  to 
suppose  that  the  wonderful  display  of  power  there  was 
then,  showed  a  deeper  enjoyment  of  Christ  vouchsafed 
then  and  there,  than  elsewhere  afterwards.  And  so 
one  sees  now  that  there  is  a  danger  of  persons  fancy- 
ing that  the  richest  harvest-time  of  peace  and  joy  pos- 
sible is  at  the  hour  of  conversion ;  whereas,  at  best,  it  is 
the  enjoyment  of  a  babe.  There  is  a  mighty  sense  of 
deliverance;  but  sense  of  deliverance  is  not  necessarily 
Christ,  nor  the  sweetest  way  of  tasting  Him.  It  is 
connected  with  our  sense  of  the  love  of  Christ,  and  this 
we  assuredly  are  privileged  to  enjoy;  but  there  is  a 
knowledge  and  delight  in  Christ  Himself  which  is  a 
deeper  thing  still,  and  it  is  based  upon  a  gro\Ying  ac- 


CHAPTER  III.  65 

qiiaintance  with  His  personal  glory  and  love,  as  well  as 
His  work. 

These  Galatians  were  getting  under  the  law,  and  the 
apostle  brings  the  folly  of  it  all  before  them.  They 
were  seeking  to  be  made  perfect  by  the  flesh.  This  is 
mere  nature,  working  upon  what  has  to  do  with  self, 
and  not  with  the  unfolding  of  Christ.  There  were  cer- 
tain things  they  thought  which  were  quite  necessary 
for  them  to  do.  Well,  he  argues,  that  is  the  flesh. 
"  Have  ye  suffered  so  many  things  in  vain  ?"  Then 
he  shows  that  it  had  all  been  by  the  hearing  of  faith, 
and  he  goes  up  to  Abraham  himself.  "  Even  as  Abra- 
ham believed  God,  and  it  was  accounted  to  him  for 
righteousness."  There  is  great  force  in  his  reference 
to  Abraham;  for  every  Jew  would  appeal  to  him 
as  the  root  of  circumcision;  and  the  mode  in  which 
the  law  was  brought  in  among  the  Galatians  was  by 
attaching  great  importance  to  the  right  of  circumcision. 
It  would  appear  that  the  argument  of  these  Judaizing 
men  was  this  : — You  cannot  have  the  inner  blessing  of 
circumcision  without  going  through  the  outward  form 
of  it.  The  apostle  summons  Abraham  to  prove  the 
contrary.  In  his  case,  it  was  a  question  of  faith,  and 
not  of  law,  or  of  circumcision.  When  was  it  that 
Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was  accounted  to  him 
for  righteousness  ?  Before  circumcision  came  in ;  for  the 
rite,  as  is  evident  from  the  history,  was  enjoined,  we 
are  particularly  informed,  after  Abraham  had  believed 
God,  and  God  had  accounted  it  to  him  for  righteousness. 

''  Know  ye,  therefore,"  he  continues, "  that  they  which 
are  of  faith,  the  same  are  the  children  of  Abraham." 
This  is  the  deduction  he  draws  from  it.     If  Abraham 


66  GALATIANS. 

was  brouglit  into  this  place  of  blessing  by  faith,  all  his 
seed  are  blessed  similarly.  He  begins  with  the  natural 
seed,  the  Jew ;  but  he  brings  in  the  Gentiles  also.  "  And 
the  scriptures,  foreseeing  that  God  would  justify  the 
heathen  through  faith,  preached  before  the  gospel  unto 
Abraham,  saying,  In  thee  shall  all  nations  be  blessed. 
So  then  they  which  be  of  faith  are  blessed  with  faithful 
Abraham."  We  shall  find  afterwards  that  he  does  not 
argue  on  the  promise  to  Abraham  himself  only,  but  to 
his  seed ;  but  he  purposely  leaves  out  the  seed  here. 
He  refers  to  the  first  promise  to  Abraham,  because, 
when  that  was  made,  there  was  no  thought  of  circum- 
cision. He  says,  "  The  scripture,  foreseeing  that  God 
would  justify  the  heathen  through  faith,  preached  be- 
fore the  gospel  unto  Abraham,  saying.  In  thee  shalhall 
nations  be  blessed."  It  showed  that  they  woul|  be 
blessed  as  Gentiles — not  by  becoming  Jews  virtually ; 
for  the  blessing  would  flow  out  to  them  as  Gentiles. 
"  So  then  they  which  be  of  faith  are  blessed  with  faith- 
ful Abraham."  There  he  closes  that  part  of  the  subject, 
proving  that  the  blessing  depends  upon  faith,  and  not 
upon  the  works  of  the  law  or  circumcision.  Abraham 
was  blessed  by  faith,  and  God  had  promised  him,  "  In 
thee  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed" — not 
in  circumcision,  but  in  Abraham;  so  that  we  find  in 
Abraham's  case  the  principle  of  a  promise  comes  in. 
In  fact,  he  was  an  idolator  at  the  time,  when  God  re- 
vealed Himself  to  him,  as  we  learn  from  Joshua  xxiv. : 
and  true  blessing  is  always  the  effect  of  God's  revealing 
Himself  to  the  soul.  The  effect  of  this  revelation  to 
Abraham  is,  that  he  leaves  his  country  and  his  father's 
house,  and  goes  forth  at  the  word  of  God,  not  knowing 


CHAPTER  III.  67 

whither  he  went.  He  counted  upon  God's  goodness 
towards  his  soul.  He  receives  from  God  the  promise 
of  blessing,  and  of  blessing  for  others,  too ;  as  it  was 
said,  "  In  thee  shall  all  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed." 
And  here  is  the  manner  of  it:  "  So  then  they  which  be 
of  faith  are  blessed  with  faithful  Abraham."  As  bless- 
ing depended  upon  faith,  so,  he  argues,  does  yours. 

Then,  in  a  most  solemn  and  sweeping  sentence,  which 
bears  the  very  stamp  of  God  upon  it,  he  adds,  "  For  as 
many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the 
curse:  for  it  is  written,  Cursed  is  every  one  that  con- 
tinueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book 
of  the  law  to  do  them."  Would  that  those  who  desire 
to  be  teachers  of  the  law,  only  understood  such  a  word 
as  this  !  Not  as  many  as  have  broken  the  law,  but  as 
many  persons  as  take  their  stand  upon  legal  ground 
are  under  the  curse;  whoever  attempts  to  please  God  on 
this  principle  is  fallen  under  it.  And  why  ?  Because 
there  is  such  a  thing  as  sin.  And  if  man  with  sin  upon 
him,  or  in  him,  essays  to  make  good  his  cause  by  the 
law,  as  far  as  the  principle  goes,  he  is  under  the  law's 
curse.  We  need  not  await  the  proof  as  a  matter  of 
fact;  he  who  does  so  is  condemned.  If  God  were  to 
deal  with  men  as  they  deal  with  God,  they  must  be  ad- 
judged to  death;  and  there  could  be  no  help  or  deliver- 
ance for  them.  Eegeneration  does  not  deliver,  and 
cannot  be  urged  as  a  plea.  If  they  are  governed  by  the 
law  as  their  rule,  it  necessarily  condemns  those  who 
break  it.  Nothing  can  be  more  conclusive:  "  As  many 
as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse,"  &c. 
So  that,  if  I  stand  upon  this  ground,  there  is  not  the 
slightest  provision  made  for  failure,  unless  I  also  plead 


€8  GALATIANS. 

sacrifices  and  offerings  for  sin.  If  I  do  not  continue  in 
all  things  as  they  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law — 
if  I  do  not  succeed  in  observing  them  all  faultlessly,  I  am 
accursed.  Could  such  a  standing  ever  do  for  a  Chris- 
tian ?  Impossible ;  and  therefore  all  is  inconsistent  with 
those  who  so  speak ;  for  they  do  really  rest  after  all  on 
Christ.  But  what  says  St.  Paul  ?  "  That  no  man  is 
justified  by  the  law  in  the  sight  of  God  is  evident;" 
because,  as  another  scripture  announces,  "  The  just 
shall  live  by  faith."  It  is  a  total  mistake  to  suppose 
that  it  is  by  law,  as  its  source,  its  power,  or  its  mea- 
sure. "  And  the  law  is  not  of  faith:  but  the  man  that 
doeth  them  shall  live  in  them." 

In  verse  13  he  closes  this  part  of  the  subject,  and 
shows  that  our  position  as  Christians  is  entiroW  different. 
He  begins  with  the  Jew.  *'  Christ  has  r4(-leemed  us 
from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us: 
for  it  is  written.  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a 
tree."  It  is  exceedingly  blessed  to  find  that,  as  in 
2  Corinthians  v.,  it  is  said  that  Christ  was  made  sin,  so 
here  it  is  said  that  "  He  is  made  a  curse  for  us."  In 
Corinthians  Paul  is  merely  putting  himself  with  the  be- 
lievers— he  is  not  drawing  a  contrast  between  us  and 
the  Jew;  consequently  the  "we"  in  Corinthians  includes 
all.  But  here  the  **  us"  means  the  Jewish  part  of  the 
believers;  for  he  refers  particularly  and  distinctly  to  the 
Gentiles  afterwards — "  That  the  blessing  of  Abraham 
might  come  on  the  Gentiles  through  Jesus  Christ." 
And  then  he  puts  them  all  together — "  that  ive  might 
receive  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  through  faith." 
*'  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law, 
being  made  a  curse  for  us."     The  "us"  there  is  em- 


CHAPTER  III.  69 

pliatic;  whereas  in  verse  14  the  word  "we"  19  not  so  at 
all,  but  is  nsed  in  a  general  way  of  all  believers,  whether 
Jews  or  Gentiles.  So  that  the  point  is  very  plain.  First, 
if  Jews  were  concerned,  he  would  say,  We  equally  needed 
Christ;  because  we  had  not  continued  in  all  the  things 
that  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them ;  and 
Christ  came  and  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law, 
being  made  a  curse  for  us.  Then,  as  to  you  Gentiles — 
you  who  never  had  anything  to  do  with  the  law,  are  you 
seeking  to  be  blessed  on  the  very  ground  where  w^e  can 
only  expect  cursing  ?  The  apostle  quotes  from  Deut. 
xxvii.,  where  we  have  a  very  striking  disclosure, 
as  has  been  well  remarked  by  another.  Half  of  the 
tribes  w^ere  to  stand  upon  one  mountain  to  bless, 
and  the  other  half  upon  another  mountain  to  curse. 
But  when,  immediately  after,  the  provision  comes  out, 
only  the  curses  are  mentioned,  and  there  is  no  blessing 
at  all  I  Why  ?  "  ^5  mauT/  as  are  of  the  works  of  the 
laio  are  under  the  cursed  God  had  spoken  of  the  tribes 
being  divided  for  blessing  and  cursing;  but  when  you 
come  to  the  fact,  only  the  curses  follow,  and  not  the 
blessings.  What  a  very  solemn  confirmation  of  the 
truth  we  have  been  looking  at !  God  did  not  positively 
provide  for  any  thus  to  get  the  blessing.  As  sure  as 
they  took  legal  ground,  they  could  only  get  a  curse;  and 
accordingly  the  curses  alone  are  heard. 

The  apostle,  therefore,  triumphantly  closes  this  part 
of  the  subject.  After  coming  to  the  full  acknowledg- 
ment of  the  law's  curse  because  of  sin,  then  through  the 
grace  of  God  can  the  believer  say,  •'  Christ  hath  re- 
deemed us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a 
cnrse  for  us."     It  is  not  merely  that  He  has  been  made 


70  GALATIANS. 

accursed  for  us,  but  "  a  curse."  What  could  more 
forcibly  convey  bow  fully  He  identified  Himself  with 
that  condition  as  a  whole  ?  The  consequence  is,  that 
those  He  represented  in  grace  are  completely  delivered 
from  it ;  yea,  and  the  blessing,  once  flowing,  bursts  far 
beyond  the  old  channel.  So  he  says,  "  As  it  is  written, 
Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree:  that  the 
blessing  of  Abraham  might  come  on  the  Gentiles 
through  Jesus  Christ."  First  of  all,  God  must  remove 
the  curse  out  of  the  way;  and  when  that  was  holily 
done  for  these  believing  Jews,  the  same  cross  of  Christ 
overflows  with  mercy  to  the  Gentiles.  Christ  had 
accomplished  the  work  of  redemption :  and  though  its 
primary  application  was  to  the  JWw,  yet  surely  the 
efficacy  and  glory  of  it  could  not  be  hid.  The  blessing 
of  Abraham  comes  on  the  Gentiles  through  Jesus  Christ 
— "  that  we  might  receive  the  promise  of  the  Spirit 
through  faith." 

This  concludes  the  argument  based  on  the  promise  of 
the  Spirit;  and  the  points  decided  arc  these: — the  law 
never  brought  a  blessing  upon  those  who  were  under  it, 
even  though  they  were  Abraham's  seed,  and  this,  be- 
cause they  were  sinners;  nor  was  it  ever  the  means  of 
their  receiving  the  Holy  Ghost  as  the  power  of  enjoy- 
ing Christ.  On  the  other  hand,  the  hearing  of  faith, 
as  of  old  for  Abraham  himself,  is  the  one  simple  means 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  uses  for  all  real  peace  and  blessing; 
and  this  avails,  through  redemption,  not  only  for  the 
proud  but  accursed  Jew,  but  even  for  the  poor  Gentile, 
now  expressly  contemplated  in  the  blessing,  and  in  the 
richest  part  of  it,  the  promise  of  the  Spirit. 

In  the  former  part  of  the  chapter,  we  saw  the  con- 


CHAPTER  in.  71 

trast  between  the  portion  of  faith  and  that  of  law.  We 
found  that  the  law  necessarily  brings  in  a  curse;  not 
that  the  law  is  bad,  bnt  because  men — because  Israel 
— were  sinners.  The  law,  therefore,  just  because  it  is 
holy,  just,  and  good,  must  condemn  those  that  were  not 
good,  but  evil.  The  conclusion  of  the  law,  for  such, 
accordingly,  was  a  curse.  It  was  the  law  of  God ;  but 
all  that  His  law  could  or  ought  to  procure  for  sinners 
was  condemnation  and  a  curse.  On  the  other  hand, 
God  loves  to  bless.  How  can  these  things  be  ?  How 
was  it  possible  that  God  could  bring  in  a  blessing  for  poor 
lost  man  ?  The  answer  is,  that  "  they  which  be  of 
faith  are  blessed  with  faithful  Abraham."  Abraham 
got  not  a  curse  but  a  blessing,  and  this  because  of  faith 
and  not  law.  The  apostle  thence  proves  that  since  the 
law,  no  matter  how  good  in  itself,  can  only  bring  a 
curse  upon  every  soul  who  takes  this  ground  in  its 
dealings  with  God,  "  as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of 
the  law  are  under  the  curse."  Nothing  could  be  more 
imiversal  or  more  conclusive.  The  law  involves  nothing 
but  a  curse  upon  every  child  of  Adam  who  attempts  to 
take  his  stand  on  it  as  a  means  of  relationship  with 
God.  Am  I  seeking  and  vowing  to  obey  God  in  order 
to  gain  a  blessing  from  Him  ?  I  only  earn  a  curse.  I 
ought  to  obey ;  but,  I  being  a  sinner,  the  effect  of  the 
law  is  to  bring  out  my  sin  and  curse  me.  On  the  other 
hand,  faith  brings  me  into  a  blessing,  yea,  all  blessing 
through  God's  grace. 

Now  we  come  to  the  question  of  promise,  which  is  a 
very  different  thing.  Faith  involves,  at  any  rate,  the 
condition  of  soul  in  the  person  who  believes ;  the  pro- 
mise looks  at  the  dealings  of  God;  and  although  we 


72  GALATIANS. 

have  seen  that  those  who  have  faith  are  the  only  re- 
ceivers of  the  blessing,  and  not  those  essaying  to  do 
the  law,  now  we  have  to  consider  God  promising,  as 
well  as  law  given.'  "  Brethren,  1  speak  after  the  man- 
ner of  men ;  though  it  be  but  a  man's  covenant,  yet,  if 
it  be  confirmed,  no  man  disannulleth  or  addeth  thereto. 
Now  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  were  the  promises  made" 
— not  the  law  given.  Abraham  knew  nothing  about 
the  law,  neither  did  his  seed  or  son;  yet  they  could  not 
deny  that  Abraham  got  the  blessing.  So  that  here  he 
stands  on  a  new  ground.  It  is  not  only  that  souls 
which  have  faith  will  get  the  blessing,  but  why  not 
have  faith  in  the  law  too?  The  latter  part  of  the 
chapter  takes  up  this  question,  and  shows  that  God  has 
given  promises ;  and  the  question  is,  how  to  reconcile 
God's  law  with  His  promises.  What  did  He  give  these 
two  things  for  ?  Were  they  meant  to  produce  the  same 
end  ?  Were  they  on  the  same  principle  ?  The  Holy 
Ghost  settles  these  questions.  *'  Now  to  Abraham  and 
his  seed  were  the  promises  made.  He  saith  not,  and 
to  seeds,  as  of  many;  but  as  of  one,  And  to  thy  seed, 
which  is  Christ."  Here  it  is  plain,  that  the  allusion  is 
to  two  distinct  and  signal  occasions  in  Abraham's  his- 
tory. These  two  occasions  were  first  to  Abraham  alone ; 
(Gen.  xii.;)  and  secondly,  to  Isaac,  or  rather  in  Isaac 
alone.  (Gen.  xxii.)  In  the  last  chapter,  both  the 
numerous  seed  and  the  single  SQcd  are  referred  to. 
With  the  numerous  seed  God  connects  the  possessing  the 
gate  of  their  enemies — that  is,  Jewish  supremacy.  But 
this  is  not  what  one  acquires  as  a  Christian.  I  do  not 
want  my  enemies  to  be  overthrown,  but  rather  to  be 
brought  to  Christ.     But  the  Jews,  as  such,  will  have 


CUArTER  III.  /  O 

not  only  blessing  through  Christ  by-and-by,  but  their 
enemies  put  down.  Israel  will  be  exalted  in  the  earth, 
which  God  never  promised  to  the  Gentiles.  In  Genesis 
xxii.  the  two  things  are  quite  distinct.  Where  the  seed 
is  spoken  of  without  allusion  to  number,  the  blessing 
of  the  Gentiles  comes  in;  but  where  they  are  said  to 
be  multiplied  as  the  stars  and  the  sand,  then  the  cha- 
racter is  unequivocally  Jewish  precedence.  Such  is,  I 
believe,  the  argument  of  the  apostle.  Where  Christ, 
typified  by  Isaac,  is  meant,  it  is  "  thy  seed "  simply, 
without  a  word  of  seed  innumerable  as  the  stars  or  the 
sand.  "  Now  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  were  the  pro- 
mises made;"  namely,  of  the  blessing  of  the  Gentiles, 
and  not  merely  of  the  putting  down  of  the  Gentiles. 
The  promises  were  made  first  to  Abraham,  and  then 
were  confirmed  in  his  seed.  "  He  saith  not,  and  to 
seeds,  as  of  many;  but  as  of  one,  and  of  thy  seed, 
which  is  Christ."  He  takes  Christ  as  the  one  intended 
by  Isaac. 

Let  me  recal  the  circumstances  under  which  God 
made  the  promise  in  Isaac  as  a  type  of  Christ.  In 
Genesis  xxii.  Isaac  is  ready  to  be  offered  as  a  sacrifice, 
and  Abraham  did  not  know  till  the  last  moment  but 
that  his  son  was  to  die.  For  three  days  Isaac  was,  as 
it  were,  under  the  sentence  of  death.  Abraham  had 
confidence  in  God,  who  had  promised  that  in  Isaac  he 
should  possess  the  land ;  and  he  was,  therefore,  certain 
that  in  this  very  Isaac  the  promise  must  be  accomp- 
lished. It  was  not  a  question  of  Sarah  having  anotlier 
son,  but  of  this  son,  his  only  son.  He  was  perfectly 
assured,  therefore,  that  God  would  raise  him  up  and 
give  him  back  again,  to  be  the  head  of  the  Jewish 


74  GALATIANS. 

family.  A  beautiful  type  tliis,  of  God's  sparing  not 
His  own  Son.  Abraham  had  as  good  as  offered  up  his 
son,  and  God  not  only  gave  Isaac  back  again,  but  then 
and  there  gave  the  promise,  "  In  thy  seed  shall  all  the 
nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed."  Thus  it  is  in  Christ 
risen  from  the  dead  that  our  blessing  comes.  Christ 
dead  and  risen  again  is  perfectly  free  to  bless  the  Gen- 
tiles. As  long  as  He  was  merely  living  on  the  earth, 
He  said,  "  I  am  not  sent  save  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the 
house  of  Israel,"  but,  when  risen,  all  is  changed.  Ac- 
cordingly, He  commissions  His  disciples,  "  Go  ye  there- 
fore and  make  disciples  of  all  nations."  And  so  He 
predicted  the  gospel  must  be  published  among  all 
nations.  The  apostle  draws  attention  to  the  fact,  that 
this  early  oracle  does  not  connect  the  numerous  seed 
when  God  spoke  of  blessing  the  Gentiles,  but  the  one 
seed,  Isaac,  as  the  type  of  Christ,  and  of  Christ  after 
He  had  been  under  death  and  had  passed  into  resurrec- 
tion. The  importance  of  this  is  immense;  because, 
while  Christ  was  upon  the  earth.  He  was  under  law 
Himself.  Risen  from  the  dead,  what  had  He  to  do 
with  law  ?  The  law  does  not  touch  a  man  when  he  is 
dead.  The  apostle  argues  that  the  Christian  belongs 
to  Christ  in  resurrection.  When  any  one  is  baptized 
into  Christ,  this  is  what  He  confesses: — I  belong  to 
Christ  dead  and  risen,  taken  out  of  my  old  place  of  Jew 
or  Gentile.  The  Jews  had  to  do  with  3  Messiah  who 
was  to  reign  over  them  on  the  earth ;  the  Gentiles  in 
that  day  shall  be  the  tail  and  not  the  head,  and  kings 
shall  be  the  nursing  fathers  of  Zion,  and  queens  the 
nursing  mothers,  bowing  down  to  the  earth  and  licking 
up  the  dust  of  Israel's  feet ;  but  we,  Christians,  begin 


CnAPTER  lil.  75 

with  Christ's  death  and  resurrection.     All  our  blessing 
is  in  Christ  raised  from  the. dead. 

"  And  this  I  say,  that  the  covenant  that  was  con- 
firmed before  of  God  in  Christ,"  (or,  as  it  should  be 
rendered,  "  to  Christ,")  "  the  law,  which  was  four  hun- 
dred and  thirty  years  after,  cannot  disannul,  that  it 
should  make  the  promise  of  none  effect."  God  took 
care  that,  between  the  promise  given  to  Abraham  and 
Isaac  and  the  law,  there  should  elapse  a  period  of  more 
than  four  centuries.  Had  He  given  the  law  a  sLort 
time  after,  they  might  have  said  it  was  all  one  and  the 
same  thing.  But  how  could  this  be  thought,  seeing 
that  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  passed  between  ?  The 
promise  has  its  own  special  object,  and  the  law  its  design 
also ;  and  we  are  not  to  mingle  the  two  things  together. 
Not  that  we  are  to  set  aside  either.  On  the  contrary, 
I  maintain  that  no  man  has  a  right  value  for  the 
promises  of  God  who  could  despise  His  law.  I  own 
the  exceeding  value  of  the  law;  but  what  is  its  object? 
This  we  have  here,  and  are  not  left  to  our  own  conjec- 
tures. The  covenant  of  the  law,  that  came  in  four  hun- 
dred and  thirty  years  after  the  giving  of  the  promise  to 
Abraham,  cannot  disannul  what  God  had  said  before. 
If  a  man  in  holding  out  a  reward  annexes  a  condition, 
it  is  all  fair.  But  supposing  you  said  to  another,  I 
intend  to  leave  you  my  house  and  garden,  without 
adding  any  condition;  if,  after  a  year  or  two,  you  should 
say  to  the  man.  You  must  pay  me  a  thousand  pounds  for 
the  house  and  garden,  he  might  answer.  What  do  you 
mean?  Do  you  repent  of  your  promise?  You  gave 
the  property  to  me  unconditionally,  and  now  you  call 
upon  me  for  payment!      There   was    God's   absolute 


76  GALATIANS. 

promise  to  Abraham ;  this  must  ever  remain  untonched. 
But    four  hundred  and    thirty  years  after  conditions 

come  in.     "  If  ye  will  obey  my  voice  indeed, 

then  ye  shall  be,"  &c.  Then  it  was,  God  made  the 
blessing  to  depend  upon  obedience.  Is  it,  then,  that 
God  sets  one  principle  against  another?  In  no  wise. 
He  permitted  the  lapse  of  time,  among  other  things,  to 
show  that  the  two  things  are  perfectly  distinct,  as  their 
object  also.  Therefore,  as  the  apostle  reasons  here,  the 
principle  of  condition  that  came  in  with  the  law  cannot 
disannul  that  of  grace,  which  came  in  with  the  promise. 
When  God  said  to  Abraham,  "  I  will  give  unto  thee, 
and  to  thy  seed  after  thee,  all  the  land  of  Canaan  for 
an  everlasting  possession,"  He  did  not  add,  If  you  will 
do  so  and  so.  The  Lord  was  to  give  him  certain  bless- 
ings there,  which  depended  entirely  upon  the  goodness 
and  undeserved  favour  of  God.  This  was  the  way 
of  God  in  the  promises.  But  in  the  law  all  hinged  on 
its  observance  by  him  who  was  put  under  it.  The  voice 
of  the  law  is  for  the  righteous  a  blessing,  and  for  the 
guilty  a  curse.  "  The  man  that  doeth  these  things  shall 
live  in  them."  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth 
not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  law  to 
do  them." 

The  apostle  next  proves  that,  if  the  inheritance  ''  be 
of  the  law,  it  is  no  more  of  promise."  If  a  man  pos- 
sesses a  thing  through  something  he  has  given  or  done 
for  it,  it  is  no  more  of  promise,  but  what  he  deserves. 
It  is  like  a  person  doing  so  much  work  for  so  much 
wages.  Of  course,  if  a  master  makes  his  servant  a 
present,  the  man  is  thankful  for  it ;  but  where  it  is 
only  an  equivalent  for  positive  work  done,  it  is  clearly 


CHAPTER  III.  77 

a  matter  of  debt,  and  not  of  gift.  The  law  is  the  prin- 
ciple of  what  is  due,  if  there  could  be  such  a  thing 
found  araong  men;  but  all  that  was  deserved  was  a 
curse,  because  man  was  a  sinner.  "  But  God  gave  it  to 
Abraham  by  promise,"  not  by  the  law.  Then  comes  the 
question,  What  is  the  good  of  the  law  ?  W  God 
meant  to  give  the  inheritance  by  promise,  why  bring  in 
the  law?  As  this  is  a  most  important  question,  I 
would  call  attention  particularly  to  it.  If  you  examine 
the  dealings  of  God  with  His  people  in  early  days,  God 
promises  them  a  blessing,  and  they  take  it  from  God 
without  looking  at  themselves  to  see  whether  they  de- 
serve it  or  not.  This  unquestioning  confidence  is  all 
very  blessed;  but  it  is  not  for  a  man's  good  not  to 
know  what  he  is.  It  is  of  great  momient  that  I  should 
learn  what  my  state  really  is.  Now  the  object  of  the 
law  was  to  bring  out  the  sinner's  true  condition  of 
soul;  not  at  all  to  bring  him  into  blessing,  but  to 
brine:  out  the  fearful  ruin  into  which  man  had  fallen 
by  sin.  The  law  was  not  meant  to  be  the  rule  of 
life;  indeed,  it  is  rather  the  rule  of  death.  If  a  man 
had  no  such  thing  as  sin,  it  might  be  the  rule  of  life; 
but  he  being  a  sinner,  it  is  an  absurd  misnomer  to  call 
it  the  rule  of  life. 

"Wherefore  then  serveth  the  law?  It  was  added 
because  of  transgressions."  It  is  not  said.  Because  of 
sins.  God  never  would  do  anything  to  make  a  man  a 
sinner — but  "  it  was  added  because  of  transgressions." 
What  is  the  difference?  Sin  is  in  every  child  of  Adam; 
sin  was  in  man  before  the  law,  as  much  as  after.  When 
the  whole  world  was  corrupt — when  all  flesh  became  so 
violent — that  God  was  obliged  to  judge  it  by  the  flood, 


78  GALATIAXS. 

it  is  too  clear  that  they  were  all  sinners.  After  God 
gave  the  law  to  Israel,  they  were  no  longer  merely 
sinners,  but  became  transgressors.  Rebels  against 
God's  authority,  they  became  the  actual  violators  of 
His  law.  The  law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man, 
but  for  the  lawless  and  disobedient.  And  whoever 
was  made  righteous  by  the  law?  Is  he  an  honest  man 
who  merely  refrains  from  taking  your  watch  for  fear  of 
being  transported?  The  only  really  honest  person  is 
he  who  has  the  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes.  The  law 
has  the  effect  of  punishing  those  that  break  it;  but  it 
is  not  what  makes  a  man  honest,  even  in  a  human  sense, 
still  less  in  the  divine.  Through  the  faith  of  Christ 
one  becomes  a  new  man,  the  possessor  of  a  ncAv  nature 
which  is  dependent  and  obedient,  loving  to  do  the  will 
of  God,  because  He  wishes  it,  and  not  merely  through 
dread  of  going  to  hell.  It  is  quite  right  to  have  the 
consciousness  that  we  deserve  hell;  but  were  this  the 
source  of  the  motive  for  obeying,  is  such  an  one  really 
converted  ? 

Here,  then,  we  have  the  law's  object:  it  is  to  prove 
that  men  were  sinners  by  bringing  out  the  fact  that 
those  under  the  law  broke  it  and  earned  its  curse. 
"The  law  entered  that  the  offence  might  abound" — 
not  exactly  that  sin  might  abound.  God  could  never 
do  this ;  but  men  being  already  sinners,  the  law  by  its 
very  holiness  provoked  the  sin  so  as  to  make  it  manifest 
to  themselves  and  to  all.  The  children  of  Israel  were 
sinners  like  all  others ;  but  they  would  not  acknowledge 
their  sin,  and  therefore  God  brought  in  the  law  by 
Moses.  Before  the  ten  words,  they  might  have  said, 
We  do  not  see  the  evil  of  worshipping  images,  or  of 


CHAPTER  III.  79 

not  keeping  the  Sabbath  day.  The  law  was  enough  to 
leave  an  Israelite  without  excuse.  And  therefore,  as 
the  Apostle  insists,  "  It  was  not  made  for  a  righteous 
man,"  though  this  is  what  people  apply  it  to  in  our 
days;  that  is,  for  a  rule  of  life.  But  then,  besides 
justifying  the  believer,  Christ  is  the  means  of  making 
him  righteous  and  keeping  him  so,  or  restoring  the 
soul ;  there  is  no  other  efficacious  way.  Just  as  Christ 
is  the  life  and  the  truth,  so  is  He  the  way.  There  is 
no  path  nor  power  of  righteousness  and  holiness  but 
Christ  revealed  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  If  you  take  the 
law  as  well  as  Christ,  you  become  at  least  half  a  Jew. 
We  are  called  to  look  at  Christ,  and  Christ  only, 
(2  Cor.  iii.,)  as  the  one  who  creates,  and  fashions,  and 
constitutes  every  'particle  of  righteousness  that  the 
Christian  possesses.  So  the  apostle  prays  that  they 
might  be  more  and  more  "  filled  with  the  fruits  of 
righteousness,"  &c.  The  natural  man  would  allow  the 
need  of  the  works  of  righteousness  which  are  demanded 
by  the  law;  but  he  knows  nothing  of  those  "  fruits  of 
righteousness  which  are  hy  Jesus  Christ  unto  the  glory 
and  praise  of  God."  The  law  was  the  rule  of  death 
for  a  sinner ;  Christ  is  the  rule  of  life  for  a  saint. 
"  Wherefore  then  serveth  the  law?"  Everyone  ought 
to  admit  both  the  end  and  the  limits  here  set  forth. 
The  law  "  was  added  because  of  transgressions,  till  the 
seed  (i.e.,  Christ)  should  come  to  whom  the  promise 
was  made."  God  was  pleased  to  use  this  platform 
negatively,  at  any  rate  for  a  time ;  but  now  the  seed  is 
come,  and  the  platform  is  gone  for  the  Christian.  It 
is  all-important  for  convicting  the  sinner,  the  standard 
of  what  a  sinful  man  ought  to  do  for  God.     But  it  is 


80  GALATIANS. 

neither  the  reflection  of  God  nor  the  pattern  for  the 
saints:  Christ  is  both,  and  Christ  only. 

Besides,  "  it  was  ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of 
a  mediator."  This  is  to  show  the  contrast  with  the 
promise,  which  was  direct  and  immediate  between  God 
and  man,  without  the  intervention  of  angels  or  any 
mere  creature  daysman.  In  the  case  of  the  law,  creature 
mediation  is  prominent.  Hence  the  immense  superiority 
of  the  promises  as  compared  with  the  law.  All  showed 
distance  between  God  and  the  people.  But  in  the 
promises,  God  comes,  speaks,  works  personally  and  in 
love.  He  has  as  directly  to  do  with  every  converted 
soul  as  He  had  with  Abraham :  nay,  now  that  redemp- 
tion has  been  effected  and  Christ  is  risen,  we  have  to  do 
with  God  in  a  still  nearer  way. 

"  Now,"  he  adds,  "  a  mediator  is  not  a  mediator  of 
one ;  but  God  is  one."  Under  the  law  you  have  God 
and  man  as  the  two  contracting  parties,  and  you  have 
also  a  mediator  between  the  two.  Moses  stood  thus 
between  God  and  men,  and  what  is  the  result  ?  God's 
part  was  safe  and  sound,  but  man  broke  down.  And 
so  it  was,  is,  and  must  be;  and  this  not  from  any  fault 
in  the  law,  but  from  man's  guilt  and  evil.  The  law  is 
like  a  bridge  that  may  be  ever  so  strong,  but,  resting,  at 
one  end,  on  no  foundation.  There  can  be  but  one  issue. 
So  with  man's  trial  under  law.  The  law  does  not 
depend  upon  God  alone,  save  as  exacting;  but,  thanks 
be  to  God,  the  promise  does.  Under  law,  man  is,  in 
one  sense,  the  chief  actor.  He  is  rendering  to  God,  not 
God  to  him.  Whereas,  when  God  promised  the  land 
to  Abraham,  He  did  not  say.  It  must  depend  upon 
what  you  do.     It  was  His  own  free,  absolute  gift.     In 


CHAPTER  III.  81 

tlie  law  there  are  two  parties,  and  tlie  whole  thing 
comes  to  pieces,  because  man  is  the  one  on  whom  prac- 
tically all  turns ;  and  what  is  he  to  be  accounted  of  ? 
In  promise  there  is  but  one  party,  and  there  can  be  no 
break-down,  because  God  cannot  fail  or  lie:  His  promise 
must  be  accomplished.  This  then  is  the  apostle's  con- 
clusive reasoning,  "  a  mediator  is  not  a  mediator  of 
one;"  that  is,  where  legal  mediation  is  required,  there 
must  necessarily  be  two  concerned,  one  of  whom  is  the 
sinner,  and  so  all  is  lost.  *'  But  God  is  one."  Such 
is  the  character  and  the  strength  of  promise.  God 
stands  alone,  brings  about  all  He  says,  and  the  be- 
liever has  only  to  give  thanks,  enjoy  the  blessing,  and 
seek  to  walk  worthily  and  consistently  with  it. 

"  Is  the  law,  then,  against  the  promises  of  God  ? 
God  forbid ;  for  •  if  there  had  been  a  law  given  which 
could  have  given  life,  verily  righteousness  should  have 
been  by  the  law.  But  the  Scripture  hath  concluded  all 
under  sin."  There  the  children  of  Israel  were,  and  the 
law  had  locked  them  all  up  together  under  sin.  And 
this,  "  that  the  promise  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  might 
be  given  to  them  that  believe."  Not  to  the  Jews,  as 
such,  but  "  to  them  that  believe."  "  But  before  faith 
came,  w^e  were  kept  under  the  law,  shut  up  unto  the 
faith  which  should  afterwards  be  revealed.  Wherefore 
the  law  was  our  schoolmaster  unto  Christy  "  To  bring 
ws"  has  no  business  here.  The  meaning  is  that  the  law 
was  a  schoolmaster  dealing  with  these  Jews,  until 
Christ  came ;  as  it  was  said  before,  "  It  was  added  be- 
cause of  transgression  till  the  seed  should  come  to  whom 
the  promise  was  made."  It  is  not  a  question  of  bring- 
ing people  now  to  Christ:  the  effect  of  the  law  is  rather 


82  GALATIANS. 

to  minister  death  and  condemnation,  as  we  are  so  clearly 
told  elsewhere.  God  may  let  people  thus  come  under 
sentence  of  death,  and  afterwards  by  Christ  bring  them 
out  of  it;  but  no  man  can  say  that  a  killing  power  is  in 
itself  the  means  of  bringing  people  to  Christ.  "  The 
law  was  our  schoolmaster."  It  did  the  office  of  the 
slave  who  had  the  charge  of  children  under  age.  It 
dealt  severely  with  those  under  it  till  Christ  came. 
The  Galatians  were  Gentiles  who  had  never  been  under 
the  law,  to  whom  Paul  is  describing  the  manner  of 
God's  dealings  with  the  Jews  that  were.  Speaking  of  such 
he  says,  "  The  law  was  our  [not,  your]  schoolmaster  unto 
Christ."  When  Christ  came  there  was  a  new  object 
manifested,  and  the  negative  process  of  legal  discip" 
line  closed,  "  that  we  might  be  justified  by  faith.' 
The  law  made  souls  feel  their  state ;  but  God  opened 
their  eyes  when  in  that  state  to  see  that  the  only  hope 
of  righteousness  was  in  Christ.  "  But  after  that  faith 
is  come,  we  are  no  longer  under  a  schoolmaster."  Not 
even  Jews  who  believed  were  any  longer  under  the  law! 
The  moment  they  had  Christ  revealed,  they  passed  from 
the  dominion  of  the  law  and  owed  their  new  subjection 
to  Christ.  Christ  is  the  Master  and  Lord  of  the 
Christian.  The  Jew  had  had  the  law  for  his  tutor. 
When  he  received  Christ,  the  law's  office  terminated, 
and  he  entered  a  new  domain  altogether. 

Observe  the  remarkable  change  from  verse  26.  It  is 
no  longer  "  we,"  but  "  ye."  "  For  ye  are  all  the  chil- 
dren of  God,  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus."  Now  he  is 
addressing  the  Galatians,  who  had,  of  course,  been 
sinners  of  the  Gentiles,  and  yet  they  enjoyed  the  near- 
ness of  sons  of  God.     You,  he  implies,  are  brought  into 


CHAPTER  III.  83 

tills  high  relationship  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  without 
the  intervention  of  the  law,  which,  after  all,  deals  with 
bondmen,  or  at  least  treats  its  subjects  as  if  they  were 
slaves.  Paul  did  not  preach  the  law  first  and  Christ 
afterwards,  but  rather  "  Jesus  and  the  resurrection." 
This  was  the  sum  and  substance  of  his  preaching;  and 
these  Galatians  had  at  first  received  it  accordingly. 
They  were  all  sons  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus — 
Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews. 

"  For  as  many  of  you  as  have  been  baptized  into 
Christ  have  put  on  Christ."  The  great  point  of  the 
whole  argument  was,  that  the  seed  was  risen,  the  seed 
Isaac,  after  he  had  been  appointed  to  die,  and  actually 
under  the  knife,  but  now  risen  from  the  dead  in  figure, 
to  show  that  this  is  the  condition  into  which  we  Gen- 
tiles are  admitted  as  having  to  do  with  Christ.  Was 
Christ  under  the  law  when  He  rose  from  the  dead  ? 
Nothing  of  the  kind.  So,  says  the  apostle,  it  is  with 
us  Christians  now.  You  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 
Jewish  schoolmaster.  Faith  has  come  in  alike  for  us, 
and  for  you  Gentiles;  you  have  become  sons  of  God 
without  passing  under  the  law  at  all.  "  For  as  many 
of  you  as  have  been  baptized  into  Christ  have  put  on 
Christ."  Do  you  not  know  what  your  baptism  meant? 
What  does  a  man  confess  when  he  is  baptized  ?  That 
he  belongs  to  a  Saviour  who  died  and  rose  again.  "  So 
many  of  us  as  were  baptized  unto  Jesus  Christ  (says  our 
apostle  elsewhere)  were  baptized  ww^o  His  death.''''  And 
the  death  of  Christ  is  that  which  for  ever  dissolves  even 
a  Jew's  connexion  with  the  law.  Up  to  death,  the  law 
had  a  righteous  claim  upon  the  Jew,  but  the  moment 
he  confessed  Jesus  dead  and  risen,  even  he  at  once 


84:  GALATIANS. 

passed  out  of  it  into  a  wholly  new  condition.  With  a 
Saviour  who  is  risen  from  the  dead  as  his  life  and  Lord, 
his  business  is  to  walk  as  a  man  that  is  united  to  Him: 
the  connexion  is  broken  with  the  old  husband,  and  he 
belongs  to  another.  Were  he  to  attempt  to  have 
Christ  and  law  together  afterwards,  it  would  be  like  a 
woman  having  two  husbands ;  that  is,  spiritual  adultery. 
The  "effect  of  it,  too,  is  most  palpable.  Who  has  not 
seen  a  Christian  one  day  joyous,  the  next  day  very 
much  cast  down  in  spirit,  not  sure  whether  he  have 
etei'nal  life  or  not ;  trembling  at  the  thought  of  the 
Lord's  coming ;  and  yet  that  same  man  admiring, 
loving,  adoring  Christ  ?  How  comes  this  ?  He  knows 
not  death  to  the  law.  No  wonder,  then,  he  is  in  a 
miserable  plight.  The  law  presses  him  to  death,  and 
Christ  is  only  known  enough  to  keep  his  head  above 
water,  but  with  constant  tendency  to  fall  under  it. 
How  good  for  his  soul  to  learn  that  God  has  broken  all 
such  ties  by  the  death  of  Christ !  My  very  baptism  is 
the  confession  that,  even  had  I  been  a  Jew,  I  am  dead 
to  the  law — "  being  dead  to  that  wherein  we  were  held." 
*'  Wherefore  ye  are  become  dead  to  the  law  by  the  body 
of  Christ;  that  ye  should  be  married  to  another,  even 
to  him  who  is  raised  from  the  dead."  Of  course,  if 
dead  to  the  law,  it  would  be  a  most  unhappy  state  not 
to  be  married  to  another.  How  great  would  be  the 
danger  of  thinking  oneself  at  liberty  to  do  what  one 
liked  !  But  if  belonging  to  Christ,  then  come  the  new 
feelings  of  one  who  is  thus  near  to  Him.  Now,  I  be- 
long to  Him,  and  I  am  to  do  what  He  likes;  our 
husband  gives  us  liberty  to  do  His  will,  not  to  do  our 
own — "  to  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God."     This  is  what 


CHAPTER  III.  85 

baptism  sets  forth  in  a  Christian;  it  is  the  confession 
of  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ.  The  believer 
should  know,  tben,  that  he  has  done  with  the  law,  and 
is  called  to  live  unto  God.  "  As  many  of  you  as  have 
been  baptized  into  Christ  have  put  on  Christ" — not  the 
law,  but  Christ. 

The  object  of  the  whole  is  to  show  that,  important  as 
the  law  was  for  bringing  people's  transgressions  plainly 
before  them,  yet  now  that  a  Christian  has  Christ,  he 
has  already  confessed  his  sins,  and  has  to  do  with  ano- 
ther state  of  things  altogether.  There  is  neither  Jew 
nor  Greek,  there  is  neither  bond  nor  free,  there  is 
neither  male  nor  female.  He  takes  up  the  grand  dis- 
tinctions of  men  naturally,  and  shows  that  these  things 
did  not  characterise  them  as  Christians.  That  which 
alone  stamps  me  as  such,  is  that  I  have  Christ,  and  have 
put  on  Christ.  "  For  ye  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus. 
And  if  ye  be  Christ's,  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed, 
and  heirs  according  to  the  promise."  That  is  to  say, 
they  had  not  to  pass  under  circumcision,  or  any  other 
rite  of  the  law,  in  order  to  get  the  promises.  The  Holy 
Ghost  brings  into  these  promises  by  having  Christ. 
If  you  are  striving  to  gain  them  by  the  law,  you  lose 
them;  if  you  receive  Christ,  they  are  assuredly  yours. 
He  is  the  true  seed  of  Abraham,  and,  having  Christ,  I 
have  all  the  promises  of  God.  "  For  all  the  promises 
of  God  in  Him  are  yea,  and  in  Him  amen,  unto  the  glory 
of  God  by  us."  Thus,  you  see,  he  is  giving  the  final 
touch  to  the  great  argument  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
throughout  the  whole  passage:  that  the  Gentile  be- 
liever has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  law  as  a 
means  of  blessing  from  God ;  that  he  may  use  the  law 


86  GALATIAN8. 

as  a  weapon  against  the  ungodly,  but  that  in  Christ  he 
has  done  with  the  question  of  law — has  emerged  defi- 
nitely out  of  it  all,  and  now  he  is  in  Christ.  And  if  I 
am  there,  I  have  all  that  Christ  can  give.  The  point 
is,  to  give  all  the  glory  to  Christ.  The  force  of  the 
passage  must  strike  any  thoughtful  mind  in  looking 
round  upon  the  present  time.  The  evil  against  w^hich 
Paul  was  warning  them  has  now  become  overwhelming. 
In  one  shape  or  another  the  law  is  mingled  with  Christ; 
and  therein  you  have  poor  Christians  endeavouring  to 
keep  the  two  husbands  at  the  same  time.  It  is  not 
something  that  w^e  merely  describe  about  others,  but 
most  of  us  know  it  from  experience.  We  have  proved 
both  its  misery  and  the  blessing  of  deliverance  from  it. 
And  may  God  be  pleased  to  vouchsafe  the  same  deliver- 
ance to  every  child  of  His  who  has  tasted  as  yet  only 
the  misery  and  not  the  deliverance. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

We  have  already  reviewed  the  admirable  contrast  the 
Holy  Ghost  has  given,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  previous 
chapter,  between  the  promises  and  the  law,  showing 
their  entire  distinctness,  not  only  in  date  and  circum- 
stances, but  also  principle,  character,  and  purpose.  In 
this,  of  course,  they  agree,  that  both  came  from  God. 
But,  then,  the  object  for  which  God  gave  them  was  as 
dissimilar  as  possible.  His  promises  were  the  fruit  of 
His  own  love — His  purpose  to  bless,  His  joy  in  bless- 
ing, and  this  not  Jews  only,  but  Gentiles.  And  we 
have  seen  that  particular  stress  was  laid  upon  those 
promises  which  were  made  to  Abraham  first,  and  then 
to  Isaac,  in  which  the  Gentiles  were  expressly  to  be 
blest  of  God.  The  remarkable  fact  the  Holy  Ghost 
takes  up  is,  that  where  there  is  unqualified  promise  of 
blessing  to  the  Gentiles,  there  is  no  reference  to  the 
numerous  seed  of  Abraham,  so  frequently  mentioned  in 
Scripture ;  but  where  the  seed  as  numerous  as  the  stars 
or  the  sand,  is  spoken  of,  the  Jews  are  meant.  And  when 
we  examine  still  more  closely,  we  shall  find  that  the 
time  when  the  "  one  seed"  meets  us,  was  after  the  type 
of  death  and  resurrection  had  been  gone  through  in  the 
person  of  Isaac  (Gen.  xxii.) :  emblem  of  Christ  who, 
risen,  lets  in  the  Gentiles  to  the  full  blessing  of  God 
apart  from  the  law.  And  I  am  persuaded  that  this  is 
so  little  understood  that  it  will  not  be  in  vain  just  to 
give  this  slight  passing  notice  now,  in  addition  to  what 

G 


88  GALATIANS. 

has  already  come  before  us.  There  is  no  one  part  of 
foundation  truth  on  which  Christians  are  generally 
feebler  than  in  their  apprehension  of  the  place  into 
which  the  resurrection  of  Christ  brings  the  believer. 
It  is  the  death  of  Christ  that  terminates  all  our  ques- 
tions. If  it  were  our  own  death,  it  would,  as  judgment, 
be  ruinous;  but  the  death  of  Christ  has  precisely  as 
much,  yea,  infinitely  greater,  efficacy  in  the  way  of 
grace.  And  Christ  rising  into  a  new  condition,  where 
there  is  no  possible  condemnation,  the  believer  passes 
before  God  into  the  same  sphere.  The  power  of  God 
in  the  death  of  Christ  puts  away  evil;  the  power  of 
His  resurrection  brings  us  into  the  good  of  which  He 
is  the  centre  and  the  head.  In  this  fourth  chapter  the 
apostle  takes  up  another  subject.  If  the  law  and  pro- 
mises were  opposite  in  their  nature — not  contradictory, 
but  totally  different  in  scope  and  object — what  was  the 
state  of  the  believer  under  the  Old  Testament  ?  It  is 
answered  in  the  beginning  of  chapter  iv.,  and  this  par- 
ticularly with  a  view  to  the  condition  in  which  any  of 
the  Jewish  believers  had  been,  and  what  their  present 
relationship  to  God  is  in  virtue  of  redemption. 

"  Now,  I  say,  that  the  heir,  as  long  as  he  is  a  child, 
differeth  nothing  from  a  servant  though  he  be  lord  of 
all."  This  is  a  principle  true  of  believers  under  what 
wre  may  call  the  old  covenant.  They  were  heirs,  no 
doubt,  and  blessing  is  to  be  their  portion ;  but  the  heir 
is  no  more  than  the  bondman  or  slave,  as  long  as  he  is 
an  "  infant,"  which  is  the  force  of  the  word  "  child" — the 
word  that  was  used  among  the  ancients,  as  our  legal 
term  is  still,  for  a  person  who  is  under  a  legal  age,  and 
incapable  of  entering  into  contracts  and  engagements, 


CHAPTER  IV.  8^ 

or  of  acting  for  himself.  That  was  precisely  the  posi- 
tion of  an  elder  under  the  law.  He  was  not  arrived  at 
full  age;  he  was  really  an  heir,  destined  to  sit  down 
with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  There  was  no  differ- 
ence as  to  this.  Conversion  and  regeneration  are  the 
same  in  all  times  and  dispensations.  There  may  be 
greater  fulness,  simplicity,  and  joy  now;  but  as  to  the 
substance  of  the  thing,  even  from  the  fall,  before  the 
flood  and  after  it,  either  with  law  or  without  it,  the  heir 
was  in  truth  lord  of  all.  He  really  is  to  have  a  part  in 
the  kingdom  of  Christ,  to  reign  with  Christ;  but  if  we 
enquire  into  his  condition  while  he  is  in  this  world,  we 
have  it  here  described  as  servantship.  God's  purpose 
is,  that  when  glory  comes,  he  shall  have  a  bright, 
blessed  place;  but  while  in  this  world  he  was  an  infant,. 
"  under  tutors  and  governors,  until  the  time  appointed 
of  the  father:"  the  first  word,  I  suppose,  referring  to 
the  person,  the  other  to  his  possessions.  He  is  under 
these  till  the  time  appointed  of  the  Father.  "  Even  so 
we,  when  we  were  children," — he  applies  it  particularly 
to  what  they  had  been  as  Jewish  believers — "  were  in 
bondage  (servitude)  under  the  elements  of  the  world: 
but  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  God  sent 
forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law, 
to  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law,  that  we  might 
receive  the  adoption  of  sons." 

Nothing  can  be  clearer  than  this.  All  is  adjusted  with 
divine  perspicuity  and  force.  The  blessing  of  the  Old 
Testament  saint  is  in  view,  or  of  one  who  knew  Christ  in 
the  days  of  His  flesh,  because  there  was  no  substantial 
difference  between  them:  Peter,  James,  and  John,  all 
were  then  infants.     It  was  true,  Christ  was  present  iu 


90  GALATIANS. 

person,  and  there  was  an  immense  accession  of  blessing; 
their  eyes  saw,  their  ears  heard,  what  prophets  and 
kings  had  desired  to  see.  Nevertheless,  they  were  still 
infants;  they  were  not  delivered  from  the  law;  they 
were  as  yet  kept  bound  down  by  its  injunctions  and 
ordinances;  and  the  terror  arising  from  it  always  kept 
them  in  a  measure  of  uncertainty  and  darkness ;  and  it 
ought  to  have  been  so.  A  man  under  the  law  was  not 
entitled  to  be  thoroughly  happy.  If  I  have  to  do  with 
the  law  at  all,  I  ought  to  feel  the  law :  if  I  am  con- 
scious of  having  failed  under  it,  I  ought  to  have  the 
j)ressure  of  its  condemnation  on  my  spirit.  It  was  so 
with  the  saints  under  the  old  covenant.  They  were 
under  bondage,  because  they  were  under  tutors  and 
governors.  "  But  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was 
come,  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made 
under  the  law,  to  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law, 
that  we  might  receive  the  adoption  of  sons."  It  was 
quite  necessary  that  Christ  should  be  a  man  and  a  Jew. 
If  He  had  not  been  a  man,  there  could  have  been  no 
basis  for  meeting  any  child  of  Adam,  under  any  circum- 
stances ;  and  if  He  had  not  been  a  Jew,  where  had  been 
the  law  or  the  promises  either  ?  But  being  both,  now 
comes  in  an  infinitely  greater  thing — redemption.  He 
came  as  a  man  and  under  the  law,  but  the  object  was, 
that  He  might  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law.  God 
had  chosen  to  put  the  Jew  in  a  special  place  for  par- 
ticular purposes;  and  the  issue  of  that  experiment  was 
that  the  Jews  brought  greater  dishonour  on  the  name 
of  God  than  even  the  "  sinners  of  the  Gentiles."  We 
know  that,  if  ever  there  was  a  people  bent  on  destroy- 
ing themselves,  and  forsaking  their  own  mercies,  it  was 


CHAPTER  IV.  91 

Israel.  If  there  was  an  idol  among  the  Gentiles,  they 
took  the  pattern  of  it;  and  King  Ahaz  even  went  so 
far  as  to  command  that  all  the  offerings  were  to  be 
offered  upon  the  altar  that  he  had  devised  after  the  pat- 
tern of  the  heathen  one  that  he  had  seen  at  Damascus, 
thus  insulting  the  altar  of  God.  The  great  crime  for 
which  Israel  were  carried  away  at  the  last  was,  that 
they  set  up  the  golden  calves.  In  Jerusalem,  in  the 
temple,  the  Jews  re-enacted  the  old  sin,  for  which  God 
had  smitten  them  in  the  wilderness.  They  were  un- 
faithful to  God,  but  they  stuck  to  idolatry  as  a  heritage 
too  precious  to  give  up.  The  Jews,  who  had  been 
called  out  to  be  the  special  witness  of  God  against 
image-worship,  were  not  satisfied  with  following  idols 
of  their  own,  but  must  adopt  those  of  their  heathen 
neighbours  around  them — and  God  swept  them  away. 
Hence  it  is  that  we  read  in  Kings  and  Chronicles  of 
the  sin  of  Jeroboam,  wherewith  he  made  Israel  to  sin. 
That  was  the  one  thing  which  God  had  in  remembrance. 
All  sorts  of  new  dynasties  were  continually  arising  in 
Israel ;  but  no  matter  what,  if  it  was  only  a  man  reign- 
ing for  a  month,  it  was  always  the  same  uniform  sin, 
the  sin  of  Jeroboam,  that  God  bore  in  mind,  and  that 
most  insulting  of  all  idolatries,  the  golden  calf.  It 
was  deliberate  sin  before  His  face  :  "  These  be  thy 
gods,  0  Israel,  which  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land 
of  Egypt."  So  far  we  see  what  Israel  was ;  and  if  we 
look  at  the  prophecy  of  Jeremiah,  we  shall  find  God 
reproaching  Judah,  that  backsliding  Israel  had  jus- 
tified herself  in  the  presence  of  Judah,  because  Judah 
was  far  more  guilty. 

But  we  must  not  confine  this  tale  of  evil  to  Israel; 


92  GALATIANS. 

we  must  read  the  Bible  as  a  lesson  of  the  heart,  the 
lesson  of  what  man  is  to  God.  And  when  we  hear  of 
Israel  and  Judah,  let  us  apply  it  to  ourselves.  This  is 
what  God  shows  me  that  I  am ;  this  is  the  kind  of  stuff 
that  my  heart  is  composed  of;  this  is  w^hat  human 
nature  does  when  God  puts  it  to  the  proof.  Idolatry, 
then,  governed ;  and,  as  we  know,  calamity  after  calamity 
came  upon  His  people.  They  were  carried  away  captive 
into  Babylon,  and  the  remnant  were  afterwards  brought 
out  of  captivity  to  receive  the  Son  of  God.  When  He 
came  from  heaven,  it  was  in  the  fullest  grace.  Sin  had 
entered  in  by  the  woman,  and  here  we  have  the  Saviour. 
And  the  law  having  brought  in  what  was  crushing  to 
fjae  hopes  of  the  sinner,  Christ  comes,  made  of  a  woman, 
made  under  the  law;  but  it  was  to  redeem  them  that 
were  under  the  law.  The  mere  keeping  of  the  law  could 
not  have  redeemed  any  one:  it  was  essential  to  the 
vindication  of  God  that  the  Lord  should  show  He  was 
perfect  man  under  the  law,  perfect  Son  of  man,  perfect 
Israelite,  perfect  Son  of  God  above  law — in  all  things 
perfect.  Bat  whatever  might  be  His  glory,  and  what- 
ever He  might  come  down  into,  the  end  of  all  was  re- 
demption— by  Him  to  redeem  them  that  were  under  the 
law.  God  was  waiting  that  He  might  bring  them  into 
the  place  that  He  intended  His  people  to  have.  It  was 
no  pleasure  for  God  to  see  children  trembling.  He  was 
waiting  for  the  blessed  moment  when  Christ's  death 
would  give  the  righteous  title  to  deliver  His  people 
from  that  condition,  to  bring  them  into  a  new  state  of 
things,  when  the  bond  of  the  law  would  be  for  ever  broken 
by  the  death  of  Jesus  the  Son  of  God.  And  so  it  was. 
He  therefore  redeemed  them  that  were  under  the  law. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


93 


And  here  comes  out  another   thing.     No  negative 
deliverance  will  ever  satisfy  God.     It  was  "  to  redeem 
them  that  were  under  the  law,  that  we  might  receive 
the  adoption  of  sons."     But  even  that  does  not  satisfy 
Him;  for  there  might  still  have  been  the  thought  that 
the  adoption  of  sons  was  only  for  the  believers  in  Israel 
— that  this  was  what  they  were  brought  into  now. 
But  the  apostle  turns  round  to  the  Gentiles,  and  says, 
"  And  because  ye  are  sons,"  changing  the  person,  and 
addressing  the  Galatians  in  a   very  pointed  manner. 
*'  And   because  ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent  forth  the 
Spirit   of  his    Son   into   your   hearts,    ciying,    Abba, 
Father."     Here  we  learn  most  clearly  that  the  Jew  by 
the  law  only  got  into  a  position  of  bondage:  that  was 
all  the  law  could  do  for  him.     It  was  impossible  that 
it. could  be  otherwise.     Law  could  condemn  what  was 
wrong,  and  no  more.     But  now  Christ  came,  and  in 
Christ  there  is  power  to  deliver,  and  this  is  what  ruined 
man  wants.     There  is  delivering  power,  and  God  intro- 
duces it  in  Christ.     "  When  the  fulness  of  the  time  was 
come,  God  sent  forth  his   Son."     It  was  God  Himself 
introducing  this  blessed  work:  indeed  it  is  what  He  de- 
lights in.     When  the  law  was  introduced,  though  God 
gave   it,   yet   He   simply   says,  "  it  was  ordained  by 
angels."     He  merely  puts  servants  to  the  work,  com- 
paratively distant  servants,  who  never  had  the  link  of 
life  and  the  Spirit,  the  link  of  Christ  Himself,  which 
we  have.     Angels  may  be  holy,  but  an  angel  never 
rises  out  of  the  condition  of  servant;  they  are  even 
servants  of  the  saints,  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them 
who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation.     But  now,  when  we 
come  to  hear  of  redemption,  God  is  made  most  evi- 


94  GALATIANS. 

dently  and  thoroughly  the  source  of  it.  *'  God  sent 
forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law, 
to  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law,  that  we  might 
receive  the  adoption  of  sons.  And  because  ye  are  sons, 
(ye  Gentiles,)"  &c.  Of  course,  believing  Gentiles  alone 
are  meant,  but  without  any  question  of  our  being  put 
under  the  law,  without  the  least  thought  of  putting 
us  under  the  disciplinary  process  which  the  Jews  had 
known. 

The  Jewish  believer  had  been  in  the  condition  of  an 
infant,  a  bondman  under  the  law;  the  Gentile  never  was. 
It  is  true  he  was  a  bondman,  but  of  a  totally  different 
character.  His  bondage  was  to  idolatry  ;  the  Jew's 
bondage  was  to  the  law.  The  one,  therefore,  was  under 
that  which,  in  itself,  was  intrinsically  good,  but  destruc- 
tive to  him ;  the  other  was  under  bondage  to  that  which 
was  of  Satan,  and  had  nothing  which  linked  him  to 
God.  The  more  religious  the  Gentile  was,  the  more 
thoroughly  was  he  the  slave  of  Satan.  We  shall  find 
the  force  of  that  shortly.  In  the  case  of  the  Jews,  they 
had  been  under  this  system  of  guardians  and  stewards: 
they  had  known  what  it  was,  though  really  believers, 
to  be  only  at  a  distance,  far  from  God,  unable  to  draw 
near  to  God  and  pour  out  their  hearts  before  Him  as 
children.  They  were  able  to  cry  to  Him,  to  groan  to 
Him:  that  is  -what  you  have  in  the  Psalms,  which  are 
full  of  this  blessed  confidence  in  God ;  but  it  is  the  con- 
fidence of  servants  who  count  upon  God  to  interfere 
for  them,  who  hope  in  God,  but  who  are  not  able  to 
praise  Him  yet — they  are  not  brought  near  to  Him. 
Even  in  some  of  the  brightest  of  the  Psalms  they  pray 
that  God's  anger  may  not  burn  against  them  for  ever. 


CHAPTER  IV.  95 

They  do  not  know  that  it  is  entirely  pnt  away  for 
them.  On  the  other  hand,  they  enter  into  the  judicial 
feelings  of  God  against  His  enemies:  they  look  forward, 
as  if  it  were  a  privilege  to  put  down  the  enemies  of 
God,  and  ask  Him  to  make  them  as  stubble  before  the 
wind — to  use  them  and  their  dogs  that  they  might 
drink  the  blood  of  enemies — to  us  a  thought  full  of  the 
most  painful  associations  which  all  Christians  would 
turn  from.  Many  are  even  in  danger  of  condemning 
the  word  of  God  because  such  desires  are  in  it.  The 
language  is  exactly  suited  to  souls  under  the  law ;  but 
now  are  we  under  grace,  and  no  longer  under  law,  and 
we  pray  for  persons  that  despitefully  use  us  and  perse- 
cute us;  whereas  the  whole  tone  of  the  Psalms,  where 
they  speak  of  the  happiness  of  dashing  the  children  of 
Babylon  against  the  stone,  is  anything  but  returning 
good  for  evil:  it  is  evil  meeting  with  its  just  doom.  I 
maintain  that  every  word  in  the  Psalms  is  of  God — 
that  all  these  imprecations  are  divine.  Each  curse, 
threat,  and  warning,  all  this  sympathy  with  divine 
retribution,  is  as  much  from  God  as  the  Christian's  now 
interceding  for  his  enemies;  but  they  are  not  suited  to 
the  same  time  nor  the  same  persons,  nor  is  God  accom- 
plishing the  same  end.  As  long  as  God  carries  on  the 
day  of  grace,  all  these  things  are  entirely  inapplicable. 
They  are  not  what  God  is  bringing  out  now.  They  re- 
main true  for  ever,  each  always  in  itself  a  right  thing. 
But  the  fact  is,  that  God  has  now,  in  Christ,  brought  in 
full,  sovereign  grace ;  and  therefore  God  puts  those  who 
belong  to  Christ  in  a  position  to  show  forth,  not  earthly 
righteousness,  but  heavenly  grace.  Righteous  rule  is  in 
reserve,  and  yet  to  be  accomplished  to  the  letter;  and 


96  GALATIANS. 

God  will  use  His  people  Israel  to  be  the  special  instru- 
ments of  executing  these  divine  judgments. 

Let  us  look  at  the  Revelation.  Righteous  dealing 
appears  after  the  Church  is  taken  to  heaven — after  the 
twenty-four  elders  are  enthroned  and  crowned  before  the 
throne,  representing  the  heavenly  redeemed  that  God  is 
now  calling  out  of  Jews  and  Gentiles.  God  then  begins 
to  work  upon  His  ancient  people  Israel,  who  understand 
and  cry  to  God  and  ask  Him,  "  How  long,  0  Lord, 
holy  and  true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our 
blood  on  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  ?"  Is  not  this 
the  counterpart  to  the  tone  of  the  Psalms  ?  Yet  are 
they  saints  of  God.  But  mark  the  consequence  of  con- 
founding these  dispensations  now.  The  Bible  requires 
to  be  rightly  divided.  If  you  take  up  parts  of  Scrip- 
ture and  misapply  them,  one  way  or  the  other,  you  will 
be  a  workman  that  needs  to  be  ashamed.  Alas  !  how 
men  pervert  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  They  see  cer- 
tain words  laid  down  by  our  Lord  for  His  disciples; 
they  find  Him  insisting  that  they  were  not  to  resist 
evil,  not  to  return  a  blow  for  a  blow,  nor  to  use  any 
earthly  means  for  asserting  their  claims  or  vindicating 
them  against  personal  violence,  spoliation  of  their  pro- 
perty, &c.  ;  the  very  things  men  resent  as  an  infringe- 
ment of  their  right.  Were  a  Christian  to  make  out  of 
this  a  code  for  all  men  now,  what  could  be  more  con- 
trary to  the  mind  of  God  ?  It  would  be  to  attempt 
governing  the  world  on  principles  of  grace.  If  you  ex- 
perimented thus  on  men  as  they  are,  it  would  become  a 
far  more  dreadful  bear-garden  than  even  in  the  times 
of  the  great  Rebellion,  when  they  tried  to  act  out  the 
retribution  of  the  Psalmist.     There,   Christians  were 


CHAPTER  IV.  97 

put  under  the  spirit  and  principle  of  the  law ;  but  the 
attempt  to  put  the  world  under  that  which  was  intended 
for  the  guidance  of  God's  children  would  be  still  worse 
confusion.  The  knave  and  rogue  would  be  pardoned 
and  caressed,  the  thief  allowed  to  help  himself  to  as 
much  more  as  he  liked.  Evidently  such  principles 
never  would  do  for  the  world,  neither  were  they  in- 
tended for  it.  The  uninstructed  may  cry  out  that  this  is 
to  take  away  the  Bible,  or  much  of  it,  but  it  is  a  totally 
false  alarm.  It  is  only  an  effort  to  lead  them  to  under- 
stand the  Bible ;  to  teach  them  the  real  meaning  of  its 
various  parts. 

The  practical  point  is,  that  Gentiles,  such  as  our- 
selves, have  been  taken  clean  out  of  all  the  condition  of 
sin  in  which  we  were.  We  were  not  under  law,  but  we 
were  under  sin — in  total  insubjection  to  God — under 
every  kind  of  evil.  It  might  not  be  necessarily  open, 
moral  evil,  but  we  lived  to  self,  and  lived  without  God, 
and  that  is  a  very  gentle  way  of  describing  the  con- 
dition in  which  all  of  us  have  been.  These  Galatians 
were  under  the  grossest  forms  of  ignorance  and  idolatry; 
but  such  is  the  spirit  of  grace,  that  they  were  taken 
quite  out  of  it  all,  and,  by  faith  in  Christ,  made  sons  of 
God,  without  passing  through  any  intermediate  steps. 
They  repented,  they  received  the  Gospel,  they  became 
children  of  God.  "  And  because  ye  are  sons,  God  hath 
sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into  your  hearts,  crying, 
Abba,  Father:" — the  very  word  which  He,  the  blessed 
One,  in  full  communion  with  His  Father,  uttered. 
Think  into  what  a  place  we  are  brought !  That  he  who 
was  but  the  day  before  a  wretched,  defiled,  idolatrous 
Gentile,  is  empowered  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  utter  the 


98  GALATIANS. 

same  sweet  expression  of  relationship — Fatber  !  What 
a  place  has  God  given  His  children  now  !  And  it 
comes  out,  not  in  speaking  about  the  Jews,  who  were 
expressly  said  to  be  redeemed  from  under  the  law,  and 
brought  into  sonship;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  expands 
when  He  speaks  about  the  Gentiles.  There  might 
have  been  the  notion  that  the  Gentile,  as  he  had  known 
nothing  about  the  law,  could  not  be  brought  into  so 
blessed  a  place,  all  at  once,  as  the  believing  Jew.  But 
not  so :  the  Jew  had  to  be  brought  out,  not  merely  of 
sin,  but  from  the  law.  The  Gentile  had  nothing  but 
his  sin  to  be  brought  out  of;  and  therefore  in  him  the 
work  was  done,  if  I  may  so  say,  far  more  simply. 
The  Jew  had  to  unlearn,  the  Gentile  merely  to  learn. 
All  that  the  Gentile  had  was  mere  corrupt  nature,  till 
he  was  converted,  when  he  was  brought  at  once  under 
the  shining  of  God's  grace;  whereas  the  Jew  had  to  be 
brought  out  of  the  law,  and  was  hampered — perhaps 
fettered — by  what  still  clung  to  him  of  the  legal 
system. 

Remember,  that  he  who  understands  grace  never 
weakens  the  law,  which  is  a  very  great  sin.  The  doc- 
trine of  faith  establishes  the  law.  If  you  think  the 
Christian  is  under  the  law,  and  yet  can  be  saved  and 
happy,  you  really  destroy  the  authority  of  the  law. 
Jewish  believers  under  the  law  never  had  the  full  peace 
and  joy  which  the  gospel  now  brings ; ,  and  where  you 
have  souls  now  under  the  law  in  spirit,  they  may  be 
saved,  but  they  never  have  the  full  rest  to  which  the 
work  of  Christ  entitles  them.  The  reason  is  most 
simple.  Though  they  received  Christ,  they  do  not 
apply  His  work.     If  they  did,  they  would  see  that  one 


CHAPTER  IV.  99 

of  the  effects  of  redemption  is  to  deliver  a  person — not 
from  subjection  to  Christ,  but  to  make  him  more  than 
ever  subject  to  the  will  of  God,  and  yet  not  put  under 
law.  Therefore  the  apostle  shows  that  what  they  were 
brought  into  is  the  place  of  sons.  Now  the  position 
of  the  son  is  intelligent  subjection  to  his  Father:  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  Spirit  of  His  Son,  teaches  to  cry, 
"Abba,  Father;"  but  not  to  say  longer,  "  0  wretched 
man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of 
this  death  ?"  That  is  the  cry  forced  out  of  the  heart 
of  one  under  the  law,  crying  out  in  anguish  of  spirit, 
always  having  the  sense  that  there  is  something  to  be 
delivered  from;  comforted  a  little  sometimes,  and  then 
down  under  the  pressure  of  the  law.  Whereas,  where 
the  fulness  of  blessing  that  God  has  given  us  in 
Christ  is  known,  the  heart  is  prompted  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  cry,  Abba,  Father.  The  flesh  is  done  with  in 
the  sight  of  God,  and  we  are  entitled  to  say  that  we 
have  done  with  it  ourselves.  God  cannot  trust  me,  nor 
can  I  trust  myself;  but  I  know  that  I  can  trust  God  in 
His  beloved  Son,  who  has  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice 
of  Himself,  so  that  there  is  perfect  rest  for  the  heart. 
The  cry  of  the  Spirit  is  Abba,  Father;  thus  is  the  child 
of  God  led  out  into  the  proper  language  of  relationship 
with  God.  Other  people  may  admire  His  creation,  may 
dwell  upon  the  wonders  of  the  heavens  and  earth ;  but 
the  cry  of  the  Spirit  is  Abba,  Father;  and  you  can 
feel  it  far  more  than  you  can  express  it.  What  is  the 
gladness  of  dwelling  upon  the  attributes  of  God,  or 
the  outward  effects  of  His  power,  compared  with  the  joy 
of  the  heart  that  feels  divine  relationship  ?  Thus  we 
have  the  Galatian  saint  here  reminded  of  his  relation- 


100  GALATIANS. 

ship ;  it  was  the  cry  which  the  Holy  Ghost  produced, 
and  suited  to  the  relationship,  into  the  consciousness  of 
which  he  was  brought  out  of  his  idolatry.  For  all  de- 
pends upon  this — the  simplicity  with  which  my  soul 
receives  the  great  truth  that,  as  to  all  that  1  am,  it 
was  judged  on  the  cross;  and  now  there  is  a  new  njan 
before  God,  and  a  new  man  before  me — Christ  risen 
from  the  dead ;  and  I  am  entitled  to  say,  that  is  the 
One  in  whom  I  stand  before  God.  Can  we  cry  any- 
thing else  than  "  Abba,  Father?" 

But  then  there  is  a  warning  as  well  as  a  conclusion. 
Tlie  conclusion  is,  "  Wherefore  thou  art  no  more  a 
servant,  but  a  son  ;  and  if  a  son,  then  an  heir  of  God 
through  Christ."  Just  as  in  chapter  vi.,  where  he  says, 
"  Brethren,  if  a  man  be  overtaken  in  a  fault,  ye  which 
are  spiritual  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meek- 
ness." The  Holy  Ghost  then  puts  it  to  each  individual's 
soul — "considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted." 
So,  if  God  gives  a  warning  that  is  individual.  He  gives 
a  comfort,  and  this  before  it.  "  Wherefore,"  it  is  said,  as 
the  result  of  all  the  reasonings,  "  thou  art  no  more  a 
servant,  but  a  son ;  and  if  a  son,  then  an  heir  of  God 
through  Christ."  Observe,  it  is  not  what  they  shall  be; 
not  that  they  are  always  infants  in  this  world,  and  shall 
get  their  blessing  in  heaven,  but  "  thou  art  no  more  a 
servant  but  a  son."  If  you  were  a  Jew,  you  would  be 
the  servant  of  the  law.  But  now,  no  matter  what  you 
were,  if  you  had  been  an  idolater,  you  have  passed,  in 
receiving  Christ,  into  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  that  is 
due  from  God  to  His  beloved  Son .  God  has  no  blessing 
too  great  for  the  heart  that  bows  to  Him — "  if  a  son, 
then  an  heir  of  God  through  Christ."     He  enlarges  the 


CHAPTER  IV.  101 

spliere:  it  is  not  merely  heir  of  this  or  tliat,  but  heir  of 
God.  What  God  possesses,  what  God  will  have  in  the 
blessed  day  that  is  coming,  He  will  share  with  His 
children.  And  that  is  the  meaning  of  the  last  clause 
in  Ephesians  i.  18.  See  also  Romans  viii.  Such  and 
no  less,  is  the  place  for  which  God  destines  us;  He 
does  not  mean  to  keep  anything  back.  As  grace  has 
been,  so  the  glory  will  be,  God's  answer  to  the  devil's 
insinuation  in  Eden. 

Now  for  the  warning.  *'  Howbeit,  then,  when  ye 
knew  not  God,  ye  did  service  unto  them  which  by 
nature  are  no  gods  !  But  now,  after  that  ye  have 
known  God,  or  rather  are  known  of  God,"  &c.  It  is 
plain  he  means  the  Gentiles;  he  does  not  say,  when  we 
knew  not  God,  because  the  Jews  had  a  certain  know- 
ledge of  God  under  the  law;  but  "when  ye  knew  not 
God  "clearly  is  about  the  heathen.  "How  turn  ye 
again  to  the  weak  and  beggarly  elements,  whereunto  ye 
desire  again  to  be  in  bondage  ?"  Weigh  that  expres- 
sion well.  There  cannot  be  a  more  solemn  statement 
as  regards  the  present  state  of  Christendom.  What 
does  he  mean  by  saying  that  these  Galatian  saints  were 
returning  again  to  the  weak  and  beggarly  elements,  to 
which  they  desired  again  to  be  in  bondage?  They  must 
have  been  perfectly  shocked.  Turning  again  to  idola- 
try !  How  could  this  be?  They  might  say.  We  are 
only  taking  up  the  principle  of  the  law:  do  you  call 
this  the  weak  and  beggarly  elements?  Why,  says  the 
apostle,  when  you  were  unconverted,  you  worshipped 
false  gods — idols;  but  if  you.  Christians,  go  and  take 
up  Jewish  principles,  even  these  feast-days  or  other 
principles  of  the  law,  you  are  in  principle  idolaters, 


102  GALATIANS. 

turning  back  again  to  that  idolatry  out  of  whicli  God 
delivered  you.  How  is  this?  The  reason  is  plain.  It 
was  not  that  the  law  in  itself  could  be  idolatrous,  or  that 
God  did  not  forbear  toward  the  prejudice  of  those  that 
were  Jews.  But  here  were  the  Gentile  believers  resort- 
ing to  these  legal  elements.  Who  told  them  ?  These 
things  had  lost  all  their  meaning,  and  a  Gentile  had 
nothing  to  do  with  them ;  they  had  their  value  as  a 
shadow  of  Christ,  before  Christ  came  ;  but  to  turn 
back  from  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  to  these  mere 
shadows,  was  in  God's  sight  going  back  to  idolatry. 
Whenever  professing  Christendom  takes  up  the  law, 
with  its  external  ceremonials  and  shadows,  (quite  right 
as  all  this  was  under  the  law,)  and  adopts  them  as 
christian  worship,  it  has  unconsciously  but  really  fallen 
into  idolatry. 

Supposing  a  person  were  to  say,  I  find  myself  very 
cold  in  worshipping  God,  and  I  want  something  to 
arouse  my  soul;  what  more  proper  than  to  have  a 
picture  of  my  Saviour,  that  as  1  look  upon  Him  and  the 
crown  of  thorns,  I  may  feel  more  deeply  His  love,  and 
have  my  heart's  affections  more  drawn  out  to  Him?  That 
is  idolatry  now,  if  it  would  not  have  been  so  at  any  time. 
But  there  were  certain  of  these  things  allowed  under 
the  legal  system,  because  of  the  hardness  of  their  heart; 
they  had  sacrifices  of  beasts  and  an  earthly  priesthood ; 
but  for  a  Gentile  to  turn  to  these  things  is  going  back 
to  idolatry  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  Holy  Ghost 
presses  this  upon  these  Galatian  believers,  for  the  evil 
was  only  in  the  germ.  If  this  be  true,  what  a  sin  to 
take  part  in,  to  countenance  or  sanction,  in  any  way, 
that  which  is  idolatry  in  God's  judgment  I     The  evil 


CHAPTER  IV.  1  03 

is  increasing  most  rapidly.  It  is  not  confined  now  to 
popery;  but  the  stride  wliich  has  been  made  of  late  years 
towards  Catholic  principles  is  the  same  thing.  If  it  has 
any  religious  element  at  all,  it  is  an  idolatrous  one, 
making  use  of  certain  feelings  of  awe  in  our  fallen 
nature  to  make  people  feel  more  reverent  in  worship. 
That  is  precisely  the  thing  that  is  opposed  to  faith. 
The  essence  of  our  blessing  lies  in  the  soul's  enjoying 
Christ  by  the  word  of  God — the  Holy  Ghost  giving 
this  enjoyment  of  Christ  apart  from  everything  that 
acts  upon  the  natural  eye  or  mind.  For  it  is  precisely 
this  very  abuse  that  the  apostle  here  so  strongly  de- 
nounces, and  which  he  calls  the  weak  and  beggarly 
element.  What  God  prizes  in  worship  would  now  be 
generally  considered  meagre  and  poor;  for  it  supposes 
the  absence  of  outward  decoration  and  of  excitement, 
in  order  that  it  may  be  the  real  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  acting  among  the  saints. 

"  Ye  observe  days,  and  months,  and  times,  and  years." 
Not  to  do  this  now  is  the  wonder.  Alas  !  the  Galatian  evil 
is  thought  a  proof  of  religion.  He  marks  this  observ- 
ance, not  merely  as  an  error,  but  as  a  proof  of  idolatry. 
In  heathenism  these  festivals  were  of  great  account; 
and  God  permitted  them  in  Judaism  because  the  Jews 
had  a  means  of  religion  suited  to  their  state  and  the 
worldly  sanctuary.  But  now  all  is  completely  changed, 
and  the  observance  of  special  feasts  and  seasons  as  a  means 
of  pleasing  God  is  put  down  with  a  high  hand  by  the 
Holy  Spirit.  "  I  am  afraid  of  you,  lest  I  have  bestowed 
upon  you  labour  in  vain."  Is  it  not  most  solemn,  that, 
whatever  might  have  been  the  evil  of  the  Corinthians, 
he  never  says  of  them,  "  I  am  afraid  of  you  ?"     Had  we 

H 


104 


GALATIANS. 


known  an  assembly  with  so  much  flagrant  moral  evil  in 
its  midst — some,  too,  seeking  to  overthrow  the  resur- 
rection,— should  we  not  have  said,  there  never  was  so 
pitiable  a  thing  as  their  state  ?  But  the  apostle  writes 
to  them  in  confidence,  that  they  would  be  brought  out 
of  their  evil.  Not  but  that  he  deeply  felt  it,  and  puts 
before  them  their  critical  condition ;  but  he  writes  to 
them,  assured  that  God  would  touch  their  hearts. 
"  God  is  faithfal,  by  whom  ye  were  called  unto  the 
fellowship  of  his  Son."  And  then  he  begins  to  deal 
with  their  conduct  after  he  has  touched  that  great  chord 
in  their  hearts.  But  when  he  writes  to  the  Galatians, 
there  is  no  such  expression.  Afterwards  the  Holy 
Ghost  gives  him  comfort  about  them,  but  it  is  far  short 
of  what  he  feels  in  writing  to  the  Corinthians.  Legal- 
ism is  an  insidious  thing,  because  it  looks  fair.  When 
this  is  the  case,  men  fancy  that  they  become  practically 
more  holy  ;  but  the  contrary  is  the  fact.  What  pro- 
duces true  holiness  is,  that  it  is  not  merely  the  name  of 
a  day,  or  of  an  hour,  or  of  a  season,  or  place,  but  God 
working  in  the  soul,  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good 
pleasure;  and  this,  because  "sanctified  through  the 
offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ."  God  brings  the 
believer  into  His  own  presence,  and  puts  him  there  as 
a  child. 

Persons  may  be  really  breathing  the  very  life-breath 
of  popery  who  think  that  they  have  the  ,most  whole- 
some dread  of  it.  Let  us  search  and  see  for  our  own 
souls.  We  can  always  look  up  to  God  and  count  upon 
victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Let  Satan 
rage  as  he  will,  yet  God  will  always  be  God — will 
always  be  true  to  His  own  word  and  Spirit. 


CHAPTER  IV.  105 

The  apostle  now  turns  to  bis  own  relations  with  the 
Oalatian  saints;  and  the  very  reproach  which  the  legal 
teachers  had  been  inciting  them  to  against  himself,  he 
takes  as  an  additional  ground  for  the  truth.  They,  by 
their  representations,  had  stirred  up  the  Galatians  to 
feel  aggrieved  with  the  apostle,  because  he  had,  as  it 
were,  ceased  to  be  a  Jew,  avowing  that  he  had  com- 
pletely done  with  the  law.  This  is  now  met.  It  is  im- 
portant to  understand  how  the  law  is  thus  done  with. 
It  was  not  that  the  apostle  did  not  use  it;  but  then  the 
point  is,  as  he  tells  Timothy,  that  a  man  should  use  it 
lawfully,  for  dealing  with  the  ungodly,  the  unrighteous, 
&c.  But  they  found  fault  with  him,  because  he  did 
not  stand  up  for  his  Jewish  privileges.  He  could  and 
did  use  the  law  of  God  for  moral  principles  and  for 
dealing  with  men ;  but  neither  as  a  title  nor  a  rule  for 
himself.  It  would  have  been  lowering  his  ground  and 
character  of  blessing,  had  he  condescended  to  speak 
about  anything  that  belonged  to  him  after  the  flesh. 
Grace  had  brought  him  into  a  far  better  place.  In 
man  the  law  and  the  flesh  always  go  together.  The 
cross  of  Christ  was  the  end  of  both  in  the  sight  of  God. 
The  flesh  was  judged  and  condemned  there;  it  was 
treated  as  a  dead  thing  before  God — dead  and  buried : 
and  the  law  which  deals  with  the  flesh  we  are  dead  to. 
We  have  passed  out  of  both,  we  are  not  in  the  flesh,  and 
are  no  longer  under  law.  The  flesh  being  that  in  us 
with  which  the  law  grapples,  and  the  flesh  being  now 
by  faith  accounted  a  dead  thing,  there  is  no  more  for 
the  law  to  lay  hold  of.  We  pass  out  of  its  province 
into  another  country  and  atmosphere. 

The  apostle  accordingly  seizes  this  very  reproach  and 


lOG  GALATIANS. 

turns  it  into  an  tinexpected  argument  for  tlie  gospel. 
"  Brethren,  I  beseech  yon,  be  as  I  am:"  that  is,  be  free 
from  the  law,  as  being  dead  to  it  in  Christ ;  take  your 
place  boldly  and  with  firmness,  "with  the  certainty  that 
the  will  of  God  is  that  you  have  no  direct  relationship 
to  it.  "  Be  as  I  am."  I  am  free  from  its  tenure  and 
obligations.  They  say  that  I  do  not  assert  my  legal 
rights  as  a  Jew :  I  know  and  proclaim  it.  You  were 
Gentiles  after  the  flesh ;  you  were  never  in  a  Jewish 
position  at  all :  do  not  seek  it  now  that  you  have,  by 
and  in  grace,  a  better.  "  Be  as  I  am ;  for  I  am  as  ye 
are."  You  are  Gentiles,  and  have  never  been,  and  are 
Dot,  under  the  law  at  all,  and  "I  am  as  ye  are."  If 
you  only  understood  your  place  of  liberty  from  the  law, 
how  could  you  wish  to  pass  under  its  yoke?  This  is 
put  in  a  concise  and  highly  elliptical  form ;  but  I  be- 
lieve it  is  to  be  understood  by  taking  it  in  connexion 
with  what  goes  before  and  after.  "  Ye  have  not  in- 
jured me  at  all."  They  were  apparently  afraid  that  in 
letting  the  apostle  know  that  he  was  foregoing  his  own 
proper  place,  they  were  doing  something  to  pain  his 
feelings.  Not  at  all,  he  says:  "  Ye  have  not  injured  me 
at  all."  I  fully  acknowledge  that,  whatever  I  was  as 
a  man  in  the  flesh,  I  have  entirely  abandoned  that 
ground.  As  a  lineal  descendent  of  Abraham,  without 
a  single  evil  thing,  the  law  kept  perfectly,  I  should  not 
be  so  blessed  as  I  am  in  Christ.  Then,  remembering 
what  he  said  in  chapter  iii.  10,  ("  as  many  as  are  of  the 
works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse,")  we  see  that  all 
which  could  be  got  by  taking  legal  ground  is  a  curse. 
Well,  therefore,  could  the  apostle  triumphantly  urge, 
**  Brethren,  I  beseech  you,  be  as  I  am ;  for  I  am  as  ye 


CHAPTER  IV.  107 

are."  You  were  only  Gentiles  and  had  noticing  to  say- 
to  the  law ;  and  now  I  am  brought  outside  it  as  much 
as  you — not,  of  course,  by  becoming  a  Gentile,  but  by 
being  delivered  from  law  in  and  through  Christ.  There 
is  the  blessedness  of  the  christian  position.  It  is  not 
merely  absence  of  law,  but  the  being  brought  into 
union  with  Christ,  which  raises  us  above  the  law,  while 
it  secures  obedience  and  draws  out  love  to  God  and  man 
as  the  law  never  could.  Thus,  what  the  law  aimed 
at  is  accomplished,  (Rom.  viii.  3,  4,)  and  far  more  fully 
than  it  ever  could  otherwise  have  been,  through  the 
love  of  Christ  constraining  the  soul.  And  this  is  done, 
not  through  the  mere  negative  process  of  telling  a  man 
that  he  has  not  the  law  as  his  rule;  but  by  putting 
him  under  Christ;  (i.e.,  under  grace.)  This  is  what 
faith  does  for  the  soul. 

"  Ye  know  how  through  infirmity  of  the  flesh,  I 
preached  the  gospel  to  you  at  the  first:  and  my  temp- 
tation that  was  in  my  flesh  ye  despised  not,  nor  rejected ; 
but  received  me  as  an  angel  of  God,  even  as  Christ 
Jesus."  So  far  from  coming  in  anything  that  savoured 
of  fleshly  confidence  and  authority,  he  came  as  a  suffer- 
ing man.  This  is  just  alluded  to  here,  but  it  is  more 
particularly  brought  forward  in  2  Corinthians  xii.  And 
very  sweet  it  is  to  consider  how  it  was,  and  when  it  was, 
that  the  apostle  had  this  humiliating  mark  in  his  flesh. 
"We  are  not  told  what  it  was.  It  might  have  been  some 
peculiarity  in  his  speech,  look,  &c.  We  know  it  was 
something  connected  with  his  bodily  state:  it  was  "  in 
his  flesh."  But  it  is  quite  clear,  as  it  is  affecting,  to 
know,  that  the  more  the  apostle  was  led  on  of  God  and 
blessed,  only  the  deeper  marks  did  he  wear  of  suffering, 


108  GALATIAirS. 

weakness,  and  shame  in  his  person.  The  thorn  in  the 
flesh  followed  his  being  taken  np  into  the  third  heaven. 
This  messenger  of  Satan  buffetted  him,  and  God  turned 
it  to  excellent  account,  that  the  apostle  might  be  kept  low 
in  his  own  eyes,  and  even  in  those  of  others.  It  was 
thus  made  manifest,  that  what  wrought  such  wonders  in 
Paul  was  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  spite  of  the 
sentence  of  death  being  passed  upon  all  the  energy  of 
nature.  The  day  is  coming  when  God  will  restore  the 
Jews,  and  will  put  them  in  the  position  of  "  the  head," 
and  the  Gentiles  of  "  the  tail ;"  and  then  all  will  be 
established  in  due  order  according  to  the  mind  of  God. 
But  now,  he,  as  it  were,  says,  it  is  not  so  at  all.  Being 
a  Jew  is  nothing.  It  is  all  gone.  I  have  come  here  as 
one  suffering  and  despised,  and  in  nothing  asserting  what 
I  am  as  a  child  of  Abraham.  I  am  dead  to  it  all ;  and 
as  a  proof,  he  refers  to  the  well-known  circumstances  of 
his  first  preaching  to  them.  Did  they  not  remember 
that  when  he  came  to  them,  it  was  not  with  might  or 
show,  but  deeply  tried  ?  Instead  of  outv/ard  attrac- 
tion attached  to  his  person,  there  was  that  which  could 
not  but  be  grievous  trial  to  himself  and  to  them.  But 
what  did  they  think  of  it  then  ?  They  were  so  full  of  the 
gospel,  so  happy  in  finding  the  grace  and  the  blessedness 
of  the  truth  preached,  that  they  regarded  Paul  as  one 
would  an  angel.  "  Ye  despised  not,  but  received  me 
as  an  angel  of  God,  even  as  Christ  Jesus.", 

"Where  is  then  the  blessedness  ye  spake  of?  for  I 
bear  you  record  that,  if  it  had  been  possible,  ye  would 
have  plucked  out  your  own  eyes,  and  have  given  them 
to  me."  Their  affections  had  been  completely  alienated, 
which  is  always  the  effect  of  false  teachers  working  on 


CHAPTER  IV.  109 

the  mind.  The  enmity  grows,  and  every  circumstance 
tends  to  swell  it.  The  apostle  presses  this  home 
urgently  on  their  conscience.  "  Am  I,  therefore,  be- 
come your  enemy,  because  I  tell  you  the  truth  ?  They 
zealously  affect  you,  but  not  well.  Yea,  they  would 
exclude  you,"  or  us  ;  for  it  was  really  shutting  out  the 
apostle  from  the  saints — making  a  barrier  between  him 
and  them,  "  They  would  exclude  us,  that  ye  might 
affect  them:"  that  is,  that  it  might  all  be  a  matter  of 
flattering  one  another;  for  the  law  is  invariably  per- 
verted to  the  puffing  up  of  the  flesh,  when  it  is  not  used 
according  to  the  purpose  of  God.  *'  But  it  is  good  to 
be  zealously  affected  always  in  a  good  thing,  and  not 
only  when  I  am  present  with  you."  The  experience  of 
Paul  with  the  Galatians  was  the  exact  opposite  to  what 
was  found  at  Philippi.  You  may  remember  a  well- 
known  passage  in  Phil.  ii.  where  the  apostle  speaks  of 
them  as  having  always  ''  obeyed,  not  as  in  his  presence 
only,  but  much  more  in  his  absence."  They  were  re- 
markable for  their  obedient  spirit  when  he  was  present; 
and  it  is  always  the  spirit  of  grace  which  produces  this, 
as  the  law  begets  servility  and  fear.  When  we  are 
happy  in  God's  presence,  we  are  united  in  one  common 
object,  and  that  object  is  Christ.  There  is  thus  a 
motive  that  governs  every  affection  and  action;  and 
happiness,  peace,  and  submissiveness  are  the  proper  and 
natural  effects  of  grace  working  among  the  children  of 
God.  At  Philippi,  then,  they  had  always  obeyed,  not 
only  when  Paul  was  there,  but  much  more  in  his 
absence.  They  were  working  out  their  own  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling,  conscious  of  the  mighty  con- 
flict in  which  they  were  engaged.     They  did  not  allow 


110  GALATIANS. 

the  fond  dream  that,  because  they  were  Christians,  all 
the  difficnlty  was  over;  but,  on  the  contrary,  having 
been  brought  to  Christ,  they  nevertheless  found  them- 
selves in  the  presence  of  a  powerful  enemy,  and  hence 
they  were  thrown  upon  God.  The  apostle  was  gone, 
but  instead  of  being  cast  down  thereby,  it  made  them 
look  up  to  God  more  and  more;  not  in  any  pride  of 
heart,  but  in  the  felt  need  of  dependence  on  Him.  The 
same  feeling  of  owning  God  would  have  made  them  use 
and  value  the  apostle  when  he  was  there;  when  he  was 
not  there,  it  threw  them  directly  and  immediately  upon 
God.  Whereas  the  pride  of  heart  that  would  have 
despised  the  apostle,  exposes  one  to  self-idolatry,  to 
such  as  flatter  self,  and  so  to  every  cheat  of  Satan. 
The  great  point  for  the  Philippians  was,  that  God 
wrought  in  them.  Why  be  downcast,  as  if  they  had 
not  the  confidence  that  He  who  loved  them  best  was 
Avorking  in  them,  and  would  care  for  them  so  much  the 
more  because  they  were  engaged  in  such  deadly  strife  ? 

With  the  Galatians  it  was  not  so.  Taking  advantage 
of  the  apostle's  absence,  they  had  soon  fallen  into  a 
fleshly  use  of  the  law ;  and  with  teachers  who  humoured 
it,  they  were  fast  losing  all  real  affection  for  him,  and 
the  blessedness  they  had  once  enjoyed.  Although  it 
would  have  been  better  that  they  should  have  looked 
up  to  God,  and  found  strength  to  stand  for  Him  when 
left  alone,  yet,  considering  the  state  in  which  they  were, 
he  could  have  wished  to  have  been  with  them.  Their 
faith  had  been  shaken,  and  they  were  slipping  from 
Christ,  to  make  things  more  secure  by  ordinances ;  and 
as  the  apostle  had  gone  through  an  immense  deal  about 
them  in  their  first  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  Christ, — 


CHAPTER  IV.  Ill 

liad  known,  as  he  expresses  it  himself,  deep  painful 
throes  about  it,  so  he  went  through  all,  in  spirit, 
again  now.  "  My  little  children,  of  whom  I  travail  in 
birth  again  until  Christ  be  formed  in  you."  Legalism 
had  so  disfigured  the  truth  in  their  sonls,  that  they 
needed  to  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  first  elements 
of  grace  over  again.  They  had  lost  their  hold  of  the 
cross,  and  the  apostle  stood  in  doubt  of  them.  Out- 
wardly they  might  be  very  zealous;  but  as  far  as  testi- 
mony for  Christ,  and  their  souls'  enjoyment  of  Him, 
was  concerned,  all  was  gone.  The  apostle  desired  that 
the  work  should  be  renewed  from  the  very  beginning  in 
their  souls.  "  I  desire  to  be  present  with  you  and  to 
change  my  voice,  for  I  stand  in  doubt  of  you."  The 
meaning  is,  he  wished  to  deal  with  them  according  to 
what  he  found  their  condition  called  for.  There  might 
be  an  effect  produced,  and  he  would  speak  softly  to 
them;  or  they  might  be  light,  proud,  and  hard,  and 
then  he  must  deal  sternly :  he  would  change  his  voice, 
as  he  says  to  the  Corinthians:  "  What  will  ye?  shall 
I  come  to  you  with  a  rod,  or  in  love  and  the  spirit  of 
meekness?"  Here  the  apostle  was  perplexed  as  to 
them. 

*'  Tell  me,  ye  that  desire  to  be  under  the  law,  do  ye 
not  hear  the  law  ?"  He  uses  the  word  "  law"  in  two 
different  .senses  in  this  verse.  Ye  that  desire  to  be 
under  the  principle  of  law,  do  ye  not  hear  what  the 
books  of  the  law  say  ?  That  is,  the  early  writings  of 
the  Bible.  "  Law"  is  sometimes  said  about  the  word 
of  God  in  general  as  then  revealed,  as  in  Psalm  xix., 
"  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul." 
But  when  spoken  of  as  that  which  the  Christian  is  not 


112  GALATIANS. 

under,  it  is  the  principle  of  the  conscience  being  put 
under  certain  obligations,  in  order  to  acquire  a  standing 
"with  God.  This  is  the  fallacy  which  St.  Paul  is  laying 
bare.  Therefore,  says  he,  *'  Ye  that  desire  to  be  under 
law,  do  ye  not  hear  the  law  ?  For  it  is  written  that 
Abraham  had  two  sons,  the  one  by  a  bondmaid,  the 
other  by  a  free-woman.  But  he  who  was  of  the  bond- 
woman was  born  after  the  flesh;  but  he  of  the  free- 
woman  was  by  promise."  There  you  see  the  connexion 
between  flesh  and  law,  promise  and  grace.  The  Spirit 
has  to  do  with  the  promise,  the  law  with  the  flesh. 
This  he  illustrates  from  Genesis. 

The  Holy  Ghost  has  taken  particular  pains  to  lay 
hold  of  facts  in  the  Old  Testament  which  we  should 
never  have  thought  applicable,  in  order  to  bring  out 
blessed  truths  in  the  New  Testament.  Who  would 
have  discerned  the  difference  between  law  and  promise 
in  Hagar  and  Ishmael  striving  with  Sarah  and  Isaac? 
The  Spirit  of  God  not  only  saw  it,  but  intended  the 
record  of  the  circumstances  to  be  the  beautiful  foresha- 
dowing of  the  two  covenants ;  that  of  law,  which  has 
only  a  child  of  the  flesh:  and  that  of  promise,  which,  on 
the  contrary,  brings  forth  in  due  time  the  child  of  the 
Spirit.  The  apostle  does  not  leave  us  to  our  own  ima- 
ginations. He  shows  that  Hagar  answers  to  Jerusalem 
that  now  is — the  city  of  scribes  and  Pharisees,  poor, 
proud,  miserable  Jerusalem,  that  had  no  liberty  towards 
God,  groaning  under  the  Roman  bondage,  and  the  still 
more  bitter  slavery  of  sin.  The  apostle  applies  this  to 
what  was  then  going  on  among  the  Galatians.  Let 
them  beware  of  becoming  virtually  the  children  of 
Hagar.     Did  they  not  take  the  place  of  being  zealous 


CHAPTER  IV.  113 

for  the  law  ?  Yet  after  all  they  did  not  understand  its 
voice ;  "  desiring  to  be  teachers  of  the  law ;  understand- 
ing neither  what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they  affirm." 
The  law  was  thoroughly  against  them.  It  clearly 
showed  that  God  attached  the  promise  not  to  the  mere 
offspring  of  the  letter,  but  to  the  children  of  the  Spirit. 
Every  religious  system  which  takes  its  stand  upon  the 
law,  invariably  assumes  a  Jewish  character.  We  need 
not  look  round  far  to  understand  this,  nor  to  apply  it. 
Why  is  it  that  men  have  magnificent  buildings,  or  the 
splendour  of  ritual  in  the  service  of  Gud  ?  On  what 
model  is  it  founded  ?  Certainly  they  are  not  like  those 
who  gathered  together  of  old  in  the  upper-room.  The 
temple  is  clearly  the  type,  and  along  with  this  goes  the 
having  a  peculiar  sacred  class  of  persons,  the  principle 
of  the  clergy  being  founded  upon  the  notion  of  the 
Jewish  priesthood.  The  service,  where  that  is  the  case, 
must  depend  upon  what  would  attract  the  senses — show 
of  ornament,  music,  imposing  ceremonies,  everything 
that  would  strike  man's  mind,  or  that  would  draw  a 
multitude  together,  not  by  the  truth,  but  by  something 
to  be  seen  or  heard  that  pleases  nature.  It  is  the  order 
of  what  the  word  of  God  calls  the  "  worldly  sanctuary." 
Not  that  the  tabernacle  or  temple  had  not  a  very  im- 
portant meaning  before  Christ  came;  but  afterwards 
their  shadowy  character  became  apparent,  and  their 
temporary  value  was  at  an  end,  and  the  full  truth  and 
grace  of  God  were  manifested  in  the  person  of  Him 
who  came  from  heaven.  When  Christ  was  rejected 
from  the  earth  and  went  back  to  heaven,  all  was 
changed,  and  the  heart-allegiance  of  God's  children  is 
transferred  to  heaven.  The  true  sanctuary  for  us  is 
I 


114  GALATIAXS. 

the  name  of  Obrist.  What  the  Old  Testament  con- 
nected for  an  earthly  people  with  the  temple,  the  New 
Testament  does  with  Jesus.  "  Where  two  or  three 
are  gathered  together  in  my  name,  there  am  I  in  the 
midst  of  them."  If  there  were  ever  so  few  true  to 
that,  they  would  reap  the  blessing.  It  is  of  great 
importance  to  trace  things  to  their  principle.  When 
the  apostle  wrote  to  the  Galati-ans,  only  the  germs  were 
showing  themselv-es ;  they  had  not  got  to  the  length  of 
consecrated  buildings  and  castes  of  men,  with  all  the 
pomp  and  circumstance  of  religious  worship  suited  to 
the  world,  which  we "  see  around  us  now,  the  result  of 
the  gradual  inroads  of  error  upon  the  Christian  profess- 
ing body.  But  still  there  was  the  beginning  of  the 
mischief,  the  attempt  to  bring  in  the  principles  of  the 
law  upon  Christians.  And  what  is  the  effect  ?  You 
only  fall  into  the  position  of  Ishmael,  out  of  Isaac's. 
To  be  thus  identified  with  the  law  is  to  be  an  Ishmael, 
to  forfeit  the  promises  and  to  becom.e  a  mere  child  of  the 
bond-woman.  This  is  the  argument  that  the  apostle 
uses  to  deal  with  the  Galatians,  who  were  flattering 
themselves  that  they  had  made  immense  progress;  but 
it  was  really  a  slip  out  of  liberty  into  bondage. 

"  But  Jerusalem,  which  is  above,  is  free,  which  is  the 
mother  of  us  all."  The  word  "  all"  has  been  added  to 
this  verse.  The  true  text  ends  with  "  us,"  and  ob- 
viously the  sense  is  fuller  and  better  without  it.  "AH" 
was  added,  probably,  by  those  who  thought  to  strengthen 
the  connexion  of  all  the  children  of  God;  whereas  the 
inspired  writer  particularly  refers  to  those  that  had 
been  Jews.  He  says.  We  are  no  longer  children  of 
Jerusalem  which  is  below,  but  we  belong  to  Jerusalem 


CHAPTER  IV.  115 

'which  is  above.  As  to  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  we  owe 
her  no  allegiance  now ;  we  belong  to  Christ,  and  conse- 
quently to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  For  it  is  written 
— and  now  he  refers  to  a  passage  in  the  prophets — 
"  Rejoice,  thou  barren  that  bearest  not ;  break  forth 
and  cry,  thou  that  travailest  not;  for  the  desolate  hath 
many  more  children  than  she  which  hath  an  husband." 
The  meaning  may  be  a  little  obscure  at  first,  but  adds 
much,  when  understood,  to  the  force  of  what  the  apostle 
insists  on.  It  is  connected  not  so  much  with  Hagar 
and  Sarah,  as  with  the  reference  to  Jerusalem.  See 
Isaiah  liv.,  where  Jerusalem  in  a  future  day  is  looking 
back  upon  her  past  trials,  and  God  makes  a  remarkable 
reckoning  of  grace.  He  is  speaking  of  the  time  when 
she  was  long  desolate,  of  her  present  season  of  trial, 
when  she  is  reft  of  all  her  outward  privileges;  but  of 
that  very  time  it  says,  she  has  more  children  than  even 
when  the  Lord  was  her  husband.  In  Hosea  Israel  is 
spoken  of  as  one  most  guilty,  and  the  Lord  about  to 
put  her  away.  Then  she  is  the  desolate  one:  the  Lord 
has  forsaken  her  because  of  her  sin ;  but  in  due  time, 
before  there  is  any  outward  deliverance  from  under 
Gentile  captivity  or  oppression,  grace  begins  to  work, 
and  all  those  who  are  brought  in  under  Christ  now  are 
counted  in  a  certain  respect  her  children.  But  all  is 
connected  with  Jerusalem  that  is  to  be — Jerusalem  that 
will  have  ceased  to  be  Hagar  and  have  taken  the  ground 
of  grace.  So  that  when  she  looks  upon  the  Christians 
who  will  then  be  in  their  own  heavenly  place,  the  Lord 
will  count  them  as  children  of  the  desolate  wife.  He 
will  say, "  Rejoice,  thou  barren,  that  bearest  not;  break 
forth  and  cry,  thou  that  travailest  not;  for  the  desolate 


116  GALATIANS. 

Lath  many  more  children  than  she  which  hath  an  hus- 
band." It  is  a  comparison  of  hergelf  during  her  time  of 
desolation  with  herself  when  she  had  a  husband.  The 
latter  was  the  time  when  she  was  owned  in  her  earthly 
standing,  and  she  had  few  children  then ;  but  now,  in 
her  desolation,  there  is  a  mighty  outpouring  of  God's 
grace,  and  a  wide  ingathering  of  souls,  who  are  counted, 
by  grace,  as  her  children. 

The  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  never  takes  up  the 
standing  of  the  Church  properly,  not  going  beyond  tLe 
inheritance  of  promise.  There  are  certain  privileges 
that  we  share  in  common  with  every  saint.  Abraham 
believed  God,  and  it  was  counted  to  him  for  righteous- 
ness. We  too  believe  and  are  justified.  Substantially, 
faith  has  so  far  the  same  blessings  at  all  times.  We 
are  children  of  promise,  entering  into  the  portion  of 
faith  as  past  saints  have  done  before  us;  and  this  is 
what  we  find  in  Galatians,  though  with  a  certain  ad- 
vance of  blessing  for  us.  But  if  you  look  at  Ephe- 
sians,  the  great  point  there  is  that  God  is  bringing  out 
wholly  new  and  heavenly  privileges.  This  is  in  no  re- 
spect what  is  taken  up  in  Galatians.  There  we  are  on  the 
common  ground  of  promises.  "  If  ye  be  Christ's,  then 
are  ye  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  according  to  the 
promise."  But  in  Ephesians  there  are  certain  distinct 
and  superadded  privileges  that  Abraham  never  thought 
nor  heard  of:  I  mean  the  formation  of  the  Church  of 
God,  Christ's  body,  the  truth  that  Jews  and  Gentiles 
were  to  be  taken  out  of  earthly  places,  and  made  one 
with  Christ  in  heaven.  This  was  the  mystery  concerning 
Christ  and  the  Church,  hidden  from  ages  and  genera- 
tions, but  now  revealed  through  the  Holy  Ghost.     So 


CHAPTER  IV.  117 

that,  in  order  to  have  a  right  view  of  the  full  blessing 
of  the  Christian,  we  must  take  the  Ephesian  blessing 
along  with  the  Galatian.  The  special  time  is  while 
Christ  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  Even  as  to  the 
millennial  saints,  do  you  think  they  will  enjoy  all  that 
^ve  have  now?  Far  from  it.  They  will  possess  much 
that  we  do  not,  such  as  the  manifested  glory  of  Christ, 
exemption  from  sorrow  and  suffering,  &c.  But  our 
calling  is  totally  different  and  contrasted.  It  is  to  love 
Him  whom  we  have  not  seen;  to  rejoice  in  the  midst  of 
tribulation  and  shame.  If  a  man  were  to  form  his 
thoughts  of  Christianity  from  Galatians  only,  he  might 
confound  the  saints  now  with  those  of  the  Old  Testament, 
always  remembering  the  difference  that  we  find  here, 
that  the  heir  as  long  as  he  is  under  age  differs  nothing 
from  a  servant;  whereas  we  are  brought  into  the  full 
possession  of  our  privileges.  But  there  are  other  and 
higher  things  in  Ephesians,  called,  or  at  least  flowing 
from,  the  eternal  purpose  of  God.  So  that  it  is  well 
to  distinguish  this  double  truth — the  community  of 
blessing  through  all  dispensations,  and  the  speciality  of 
privilege  that  attaches  to  those  who  are  being  called 
now  by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven. 

"  Now  we,  brethren,  as  Isaac  was,  are  the  children  of 
promise.  But,  as  then,  he  that  was  born  after  the  flesh 
persecuted  him  that  was  born  after  the  Spirit,  even  so 
now."  There  he  shows  the  practical  fruit;  nevertheless, 
he  adds,  "  What  saith  the  scripture  ?  Cast  out  the  bond- 
woman and  her  son,  for  the  son  of  the  bond-woman  shall 
not  be  heir  with  the  son  of  the  free-woman."  What  a 
death-blow  to  all  who  maintain  that  the  child  of  God 
has  anything  to  do  with  the  law,  as  that  which  deter- 


]18  GALATIANS. 

mines  his  own  relationship  to  God  !  The  law  is  a 
powerful  weapon  for  probing  the  ungodly ;  but  in  our  own 
standing  we  have  done  with  it.  "  So  then,  brethren, 
we  are  not  children  of  the  bond-woman,  but  of  the 
free."  Such  is  the  conclusion  of  the  apostle's  argu- 
ment. And  what  could  be  more  conclusive  ?  Out  of 
the  law  itself  he  contradicts  all  they  were  using  the 
law  for;  and  before  the  law  was  given  at  Sinai,  we 
have,  set  forth  in  this  remarkable  type,  the  true  position 
of  the  Christian  in  contrast  with  the  legalist.  The 
Jew  answers  to  the  child  of  the  bond-woman,  and  was 
then  in  bondage  too.  The  apostle  shows  that  such  is 
the  inevitable  portion  of  the  Gentile  also  who  desires 
to  take  that  place,  and  who  must  suffer  even  more  the 
consequences  of  his  own  folly  in  it.  He  is  leaving 
freedom  in  order  to  be  a  slave.  "  But  w^hat  saith  the 
scripture  ?  Cast  out  the  bond-woman  and  her  son ;  for 
the  son  of  the  bondwoman  shall  not  be  heir  with  the 
son  of  the  free-woman."  So  that  we  have,  in  the 
clearest  manner  possible,  God  resisting  all  this  attempt 
to  foist  in  the  law  among  the  children  of  the  free- 
woman.  On  the  contrary,  to  the  child  of  the  free  the 
promises  are  firmly  bound  by  God  Himself  in  Christ 
risen. 

Thus,  then,  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  that  we 
should  seize  clearly  our  position,  and  understand  what 
it  is  that  God  has  given  us.  He  has  called  us,  even 
had  we  been  Jews,  into  another  condition  than  subjec- 
tion to  the  law.  He  has  made  us  to  be  children  of  the 
free- woman  and  brought  us  into  liberty. 


CHAPTER  V. 

It  is  well  to  remark  the  different  way  in  wliich  the 
Holy  Ghost  brings  ont  the  liberty  which  the  believer 
now  enjoys.  In  John  viii.  32 — 36,  it  is  attributed  to  the 
Son,  and  the  Son  of  God  acting  by  the  truth;  and  both 
points  of  view  in  contradistinction  to  the  law.  The 
whole  chapter,  indeed,  is  most  striking  in  this  respect. 
For  we  have  the  case  of  a  woman  taken  in  adultery,  in  the 
very  act;  and  man  scrupling  not  to  use  this  for  selfish 
purposes:  and,  observe,  religious  m^an  !  He  puts  him- 
self, as  he  might  suppose,  on  God's  side,  to  judge  the 
gravest,  plainest,  most  positive  guilt,  and  this  without 
mercy  and  without  self-judgment.  Nay,  further:  he 
would  turn  the  case  of  man's  sin  and  shame,  and  God's 
law,  not  only  to  exalt  himself  and  claim  a  righteousness 
which  he  has  not,  but  to  dishonour  God's  Son.  Now 
this  is  the  thesis  of  the  chapter,  and  it  has  brought  out 
triumphantly  the  glory  of  Christ.  For  He  never  came 
to  sully  the  law.  But  then  there  was  a  glory  that  sur- 
passed, and  it  was  come — a  glory  before  wdiich  the 
dignity  of  the  law  grew  pale;  and  Christ  showed  it 
most  clearly.  Not  that  He  uttered  one  word  to  lower 
the  law,  which  indeed  could  not  have  been  of  God. 
But,  nevertheless,  He  proved  the  utter  powerlessness  of 
the  law  to  meet  the  sinner's  case,  save  only  in  the  way 
of  a  destruction  which  goes  much  farther  than  those 
who  cite  it  expect.  Law  destroys  the  guilty  hand  that 
wields  it,  as  well  as  him  against  whom  it  is  aimed.  It 
I 


120  GALATIANS. 

is  two-edged  in  its  character  -wlaen  Christ  speaks ;  and 
those  were  forced  to  feel  its  keenness  most  who  appealed 
to  it  against  the  abashed  adulteress.  Not  she,  but  they, 
retired  in  utter  confusion  from  the  presence  of  Christ,-^ 
but  mark  this — of  Christ  using  the  law  !  nay,  not  this; 
but  Christ,  as  divine  light,  dealing  with  conscience. 
Nevertheless ,  He  did  most  completely  expose  the  folly 
and  sin  of  their  recourse  to  the  law.  He  showed  that 
one  without  sin  could  alone  righteously  throw  the  first 
stone.  The  law  never  had  raised  such  a  question.  But 
Christ  brings  in  a  power  and  comprehensiveness  and 
searching  character  which  never  had  shone  before ;  and 
which  can  be  seen  now  only  in  and  through  Him.  The 
law  simply  said,  Thou  shalt  not  do  this;  but  this  is  not, 
"  He  that  is  without  sin.^'  And  who  was  the  sinless? 
He  alone  who  had  not  come  to  condemn.  The  law  might 
denounce,  but  there  was  none  to  execute  it.  For  had 
its  sentence  been  carried  out,-  they  were  all  dead  men — 
all  left  equally  under  the  penalty,  though  from  different 
causes.  They  retire  in  hopeless  confusion;  and  the 
woman  was  left  in  the  presence  of  the  Son,  who  shines 
with  the  word  of  God  as  light  upon  the  soul. 

In  the  whole  chapter  they  who  stood  upon  the  law 
are  manifested  as  the  slaves  of  sin.  They  might  boast 
about  being  children  of  Abraham,  but  they  did  not 
his  works.  And  certainly  Abraham,  who  did  not 
even  know  that  law  of  which  they  boasted,  did  know 
Christ's  day.  He  had  seen  the  light  of  God,  and 
rejoiced  to  see  that  day.  So  here,  when  proud,  guilty 
man  is  banished  from  His  presence.  He  meets  one  who 
was  outwardly  more  guilty,  and  with  nothing  but 
mercy.     This  flows  from  His  divine  rights  as  Son  of 


CHAPTER  V.  121 

God,  using  the  word  of  God  and  not  the  law.  The  law, 
on  the  contrary,  always  condemns  and  kills,  and  can 
only  put  bondage  on  the  soul.  But  it  is  Christ's  pre- 
rogative, and  Christ's  only,  to  give  true  liberty.  It  is 
the  Son  who  makes  free.  The  liberty  we  get  flows  from 
His  word.  Hence  it  is  through  faith ;  because  "  faith 
Cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God." 
These  things  always  go  together— the  Son  of  God 
working  by  the  word,  and  that  received  by  faith  into 
the  soul. 

Bat  there  is  another  point  of  view,  which  it  is  espe- 
cially the  Apostle  Paul's  to  bring  out,  that  Christ  has 
wrought  a  work  by  virtue  of  which  even  those  who 
were  under  the  law  are  completely  brought  outside  its 
domain;  and  those  not  previously  under  it,  i.e.,  the 
Gentiles,  are  proved  to  sin  against  their  own  mercies,  if 
in  any  way  they  pass  under  its  yoke.  To  this  the 
Apostle  Paul  has  come  in  our  epistle:  •*  Stand  fast," 
he  says,  "  in  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath  made  us 
free,  and  be  not  entangled  again  with  the  yoke  of  bond- 
age." Bear  in  mind  this,  too,  that,  among  the  Galatians, 
the  character  of  the  bondage  was  not  so  much  what  is 
called  the  moral  law  as  the  ceremonial.  I  am  aware 
that  many  would  think  the  latter  much  more  serious 
than  the  former.  But,  on  the  contrary,  the  Christian's 
subjection  to  the  moral  law  argues  a  far  deeper  depar- 
ture from  the  truth  than  if  it  were  the  ceremonial ; 
because  the  ceremonial  law,  every  Christian  must  feel, 
derives  its  whole  meaning  and  value  from  being  a  type 
of  Christ.  Not  so  the  ten  words,  which  are  not  a  type 
of  Christ,  but  the  direct  demand  upon  the  strength  and 
righteousness  of  man,  if  he  have  any.     And,  therefore, 


122  GALATIANS. 

one  can  understand  a  Christian's  getting  entangled  with 
types  and  shadows.  A  reasoning  mind  might  say,  Is  it 
possible  to  believe  that  circumcision,  on  which  God 
insisted  so  much  with  Israel,  is  to  be  given  up  now  ? 
If  there  were  no  value  in  it  ever,  why  was  it  enjoined 
on  Abraham's  seed  ?  And  if  it  were  so  significant 
and  obligatory  then,  why  not  now  ?  Besides,  does  not 
Christ  teach  that  it  was  not  of  Moses,  but  of  the  fathers? 
All  this  might  furnish  a  plausible  platform  for  human 
feeling  and  argument;  but  the  apostle  was  led  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  to  deal  with  the  question  of  introducing 
the  thinnest  wedge  of  the  law.  Take  circumcision,  the 
type  of  having  our  nature  mortified:  every  believer  has 
this  verified  in  the  death  of  Christ.  But  believers 
might  have  said,  There  ought  to  be  the  outward 
acknowledgment  of  it  too  :  why  not  retain  the  rite 
which  connects  us  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  ? 
We  are  feeble  and  forgetful ;  why  should  we  not  keep 
up  that  which  "  the  elders"  prized  so  deeply,  while  we 
also  enjoy  the  blessing  that  is  new  ?  But  the  apostle 
deals  with  it  decisively  in  this  epistle.  Whatever  the  use 
to  which  God  applied  circumcision  before  Christ,  it 
vanishes  now.  "  Stand  fast,  therefore,  in  the  liberty 
wherewith  Christ  has  made  us  free,  and  be  not  en- 
tangled again  with  the  yoke  of  bondage.  Behold,  I 
Paul  say  unto  you,  that  if  ye  be  circumcised,  Christ 
shall  profit  you  nothing  " — that  is,  if  you  should  be 
circumcised  after  this :  it  was  not  a  question  of  those 
who  had  already  been.  But  if  they,  as  Christians, 
nought  it,  "  Christ  shall  profit  you  nothing."  He  does 
not  mean  that,  supposing  any  one  had  made  the  gross 
mistake  of  being  circumcised,  this  could  not  be  for- 


CHAPTER  V,  123 

given;  but  that,  if  tliey  now  passed  through  that 
ordinance  as  necessary  to  their  complete  justification, 
His  efficacy  was  for  them  made  Toid.  Thus,  not  only 
is  Christ  a  complete  Saviour,  but  He  is  an  exclusive 
one.  The  attempt  to  add  to  Christ  is  in  fact  to  destroy 
salvation  by  Christ. 

This  principle  is  very  important;  because  you  will 
find  it  is  constantly  the  resource  of  ignorance  to  say. 
Well,  we  all  hold  the  same  thing  to  a  certain  degree; 
the  only  difference  is,  that  I  believe  something  more 
than  you  do.  Yes,  but  that  "  something  more "  is 
to  extinguish  faith,  and  annul  the  worth  of  Christ. 
Bring  in  anything,  no  matter  what,  necessary  to  be 
done  by  you — necessary  as  a  means  of  "  being  justified 
in  the  sight  of  God,"  and  I  say  unto  you,  warns  the 
apostle,  "  Christ  shall  profit  you  nothing."  Nay,  look  at 
circumcision,  which  God  once  instituted  with  peculiar 
solemnity,  threatening  with  death  him  who  did  not 
submit  to  it;  and  now  see  how  that  same  God,  having 
given  Christ,  puts  a  stop  to  it  all.  It  had  done  its 
office ;  and  now  to  bring  it  in  again  would  be  to  obscure, 
dishonour,  and  even  destroy  the  work  of  Christ.  God 
had  shown  by  it,  in  a  figure,  that  the  old  man  was  to 
be  treated  as  a  vile  and  dead  thing.  But  Christ  is 
come ;  and  there  is  not  now  a  mere  disciplinary  process 
on  the  old  man,  but  a  "  new  creature;"  and  the  idea  of 
mixing  up  something  done  to  the  old,  along  with  the 
new,  as  a  means  of  justification,  is  most  offensive  to  the 
Spirit  of  God.  "  Behold,  I  Paul  say  unto  you,  that  if 
ye  be  circumcised,  Christ  shall  profit  you  nothing:  for 
I  testify  again  to  every  man  that  is  circumcised,  that 
he  is  a  debtor  to  do  the  whole  law."     You  may  dis- 


124  GALATIANS. 

tinguish  between  the  ceremonial  part,  that  had  such  a 
blessed  meaning,  and  the  moral  part,  by  which,  you 
allow,  man  cannot  be  justified;  but  you  know  not  what 
you  do.  You  cannot  separate  circumcision  from  the 
law.  God  has  embodied  that  rite  so  formally  in  the 
whole  structure  of  the  law,  that  though  it  had  existed 
before,  it  became  an  integral  part  since,  and  henceforth 
amalgamates  so  intimately  that  you  cannot  separate 
the  rite  from  the  entire  system.  If  you  acknowledge 
any  portion  of  the  ritual  as  that  under  which  you  are, 
you  are  responsible  for  the  universal  legal  system ;  you 
are  debtor  to  all  its  demands.  And  I  would  call  your 
attention  solemnly  to  this — "  a  debtor  to  do  the  whole 
law." 

Is  not  then  every  Christian  thus  a  debtor?  God 
forbid  !  It  is  false  doctrine.  If  he  were,  he  would  be  a 
lost  man.  I  am  aware  there  are  those  who  do  not 
understand  this ;  who  think  that  Christ,  besides  bring- 
ing pardon,  is  simply  a  means  to  strengthen  them  to 
keep  the  law.  But  this  is  sad  and  fundamental  ignor- 
ance of  Christianity.  Is  a  Christian  then  at  liberty  to 
break  the  law  ?  Still  more  loudly  do  I  cry,  God  forbid ! 
It  is  one  thing  to  be  a  debtor  to  do  the  whole  law,  and 
another  that  God  can  make  light  of  any  breach  of  the 
law.  Is  there  then  nothing  possible  between  these  two 
conditions — debt  to  the  law  and  freedom  to  break  it  ? 
Neither  consists  with  a  Christian.  He  ^yho  is  free  to 
do  his  own  will,  is  a  lawless,  wicked  man.  He  who  is 
under  the  law  to  do  it,  describes  the  proper  condition 
of  the  Jew  and  nobody  else.  The  Christian  stands  on 
an  entirely  different  ground.  He  is  saved  by  grace  and 
is  called  to  walk  in  grace ;  and  the  character  of  righte- 


CHAPTER  V.  125 

onsncss  that  God  looks  for  in  him  is  of  another  sort 
altogether;  as  it  is  said  to  the  Philippians,  "being 
filled  with  the  fruits  of  righteousness  which  are" — not 
by  the  law,  but — "  by  Jesus  Christ  unto  the  glory  and 
praise  of  God" — by  Christ  under  grace  and  not  under 
law.  And  this  is  not  a  question  solely  of  justification. 
I  am  speaking  now  about  the  walk,  about  the  respon- 
sibility of  the  Christian  to  do  the  will  of  God;  and  I 
say  that  Christ,  not  the  law,  is  the  measure  of  the 
Christian's  walk;  which  makes  all  the  difference  pos- 
sible. 

It  may  be  said,  Was  not  Christ  under  the  law  ?  Yes, 
assuredly,  but  He  was  above  it  too.  The  Christian, 
the  Gentile,  never  was  under  it;  and  being  set  in 
Christ,  now  that  he  believes,  he  stands  on  other  ground, 
to  which  the  law  does  not  apply.  For  this  reason,  every 
Christian  (no  matter  who  or  what)  is  regarded  by  God 
as  alive  from  the  dead,  to  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God. 
The  law  only  deals  with  a  man  as  long  as  he  lives; 
never  after  he  is  dead.  "  But  ye  are  dead,  and  your 
life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  And  that,  it  is  remark- 
able, is  not  at  all  what  is  said  of  us,  after  a  "  second 
blessing,"  extreme  unction,  or  any  other  step  of  ima- 
ginary perfection.  We  begin  with  it,  and  our  baptism 
declares  it.  What  this  sets  forth  is  Christ's  death  and 
resurrection.  And  if  it  has  any  meaning  for  me,  it 
says  that  I  am  identified  with  Christ  dead  and  risen. 
It  is  no  longer  the  law  dealing  with  me  to  try  if  it  can 
get  any  good  out  of  me.  I  have  relinquished  all  by 
receiving  Christ,  and  I  take  my  stand  upon  Christ 
dead  and  risen  again,  and  am  baptized  into  His  name, 
as  one  alive  from  the  dead,  to  yield  myself  to  God. 


126  GALATIAKS. 

Nor  is  this  some  abstruse  doctrine  that  ought  to  re- 
quire deep  acquaintance  with  the  word  of  God.  It  is  not 
hid  away  in  some  trope  or  figure  of  a  hard  book,  but 
plainly  set  forth  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  and  this 
is  the  invariable  doctrine.  So,  wherever  you  look,  this 
is  the  foundation-truth  of  Christianity,  that  God  has 
done  with  mere  dealing  with  the  flesh.  He  has  another 
man,  even  a  new  man,  Christ  risen  from  the  dead ;  and 
the  Christian  has  received  Him.  This  is  practically 
what  God  has  to  make  good  in  the  heart  of  the  Chris- 
tian. "  Walk  ye  in  him."  A  young  Christian  may 
be  cast  down  after  receiving  Christ,  through  the  sense 
of  evil  he  finds  in  himself.  He  wonders  how  this  can 
be.  He  knows  how  Christ  deserves  to  be  served,  and 
is  conscious  how  little  he  serves  Him  as  he  ought :  he 
is  filled  with  sorrow  about  himself,  and  perhaps  begins 
to  doubt  whether  he  be  a  Christian  at  all.  He  has  not 
yet  learnt  his  lesson.  He  has  not  mastered  even  what 
his  baptism  set  forth,  the  value  of  having  a  Saviour  who 
is  dead  and  risen.  He  is  occupied  still  with  something 
of  the  old  man;  he  looks  at  it  and  expects  to  get 
better,  hoping  that  his  heart  will  not  have  so  many 
bad  thoughts,  &c.,  as  he  used  to  have;  whereas  the 
only  strength  of  the  Christian  is  being  filled  with 
Christ,  with  all  that  is  lovely  in  Him  before  God.  The 
saint,  in  proportion  as  he  enjoys  Christ,  lives  above 
himself.  There  is  the  exercise  of  that  by  virtue  of 
which  the  Christian  is  said  to  be  dead  and  risen — the 
new  life  which  the  Holy  Ghost  communicates  to  all 
who  believe.  Only  the  believer  feels  what  is  unlike 
Christ;  but  he  rests  in  what  Christ  is  to  God,  and  this 
makes  him  happy.     When  he  becomes  engrossed  with 


CHAPTER  V.  127 

what  takes  place  -within  him,  he  is  cast  down.  It  is 
not  that  he  should  not  judge  himself  for  what  is  con- 
trary to  Christ,  hut  that  he  should  treat  it  as  vile  and 
bad,  as  that  which  flows  from  man  and  not  from  Christ ; 
and  then,  having  confessed  it  to  God,  he  should  turn 
away  resolutely  from  it  to  the  Saviour.  The  believer 
has  acquired  the  title  in  Christ  not  to  be  cast  down 
because  of  what  he  finds  within  him;  not  to  be  dis- 
heartened, because  there  dwells  no  good  thing  in  his 
flesh.  Is  not  this  what  the  revealed  word  of  God  tells  him 
so  constantly  ?  And  yet  how  many  go  on  months  and 
years,  expecting  some  good  thing  to  come  out !  I  do 
not,  of  course,  mean  that  they  are  not  born  of  God; 
but  they  are  so  under  the  efiect  of  old  thoughts  and 
notions,  acquired  by  catechisms,  books  of  divinity,  and 
sermons,  that  they  do  not  enter  into  the  full  liberty 
wherewith  Christ  makes  free. 

Nothing  can  be  plainer  than  the  Holy  Ghost's  deci- 
sion in  the  matter.  He  shows  that  the  very  smallest 
insisting  on  the  law,  in  any  shape,  brings  you  in  a 
debtor  to  do  the  whole  of  it;  and  if  so,  where  are  you 
before  God  ?  You  are  lost  and  hopeless,  if  you  have  a 
conscience.  The  question  of  the  law  generally  comes 
up  now  as  connected  with  sanctification.  In  the  case 
of  the  Galatians,  it  came  out  strongly  in  the  matter  of 
justification.  But  the  Christian  has  no  more  to  do  with  it 
in  one  form  than  another.  In  verses  1 — 4  it  is  connected 
with  justification.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  chapter  its 
link  is  with  sanctification,  which  is  the  connexion,  and 
the  only  connexion,  in  llomans  vi.,  where  justification  is 
not  touched  upon,  but  only  the  believer's  walk.  As  to 
this,  he  is  not  under  law,  but  under  grace.     What  a 


]  28  GALATIANS. 

blessed  thing  it  is  to  stand  in  this  tme  grace  of  God ! 
If  I  look  at  my  salvation,  it  is  all  His  grace;  and  if 
I  think  what  is  to  give  strength  to  my  walk  and  ser- 
vice, it  is  just  the  same.  Grace  is  the  spring  all 
through.  God  does  not  alter,  now  that  He  has  re- 
vealed, the  fulness  of  grace  in  Christ.  Launched  into 
that  ocean,  He  will  not  go  back  into  what  had  to  do 
with  exposing  and  scourging  the  old  man,  needful  as 
the  task  was.  Is  He  not  rejoiced  to  have  done  with 
that  which  never  wrought  anything  else,  as  far  as 
man  was  concerned,  but  the  mere  crushing  of  those 
that  had  a  conscience,  and  an  opportunity  to  make 
out  a  self-righteousness  for  those  that  had  none ;  those 
that  were  conscientious,  groaning  and  miserable;  and 
those  that  were  not,  full  of  themselves  and  of  their 
fancied  goodness?  How  sad,  then,  the  departure  warned 
of  here  !  "  Christ  is  become  of  no  effect  to  you,  who- 
soever of  you  are  justified  by  the  law;  ye  are  fallen 
from  grace."  By  these  last  words,  he  does  not  mean 
that  they  had  slipped  into  immorality,  or  were  openly 
gone  from  Christ.  But  they  had  joined  the  law  along 
with  Christ  as  a  means  of  justification;  and  the  moment 
you  have  done  this,  you  have  let  slip  the  only  principle 
on  which  God  can  possibly  count  you  righteous.  For 
God  justifies  sinners.  What  a  glory  of  God !  "  To 
him  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth  on  Him  that  justi- 
fieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted  to  him  for 
righteousness." 

How  is  it,  then,  one  may  ask,  that  any  ungodly  are 
not  justified?  Because  they  do  not  believe  that  God 
is  as  good  as  He  is ;  because  the  gift  of  Christ  is  too 
great  for  them ;  because  their  confidence  is  in  them- 


CHAPTER  V.  129 

selves,  or  at  the  least  they  have  no  confidence  in  God. 
And  the  reason  why  they  have  none  is,  from  not  be- 
lieving what  Christ  is  for  the  sinner.  When  I  know 
His  glory  and  His  cross — that  He  has  turned  it  all 
now  into  the  scale  of  the  poor  sonl  who  goes  to  Him 
because  of  his  sins,  then  I  see  that  it  is  impossible  that 
God  could  not  save  him  who  stands  in  the  same  scale 
with  Christ;  and  this  is  what  the  soul  does  that  be- 
lieves in  Christ.  He  may  be  as  light  as  a  feather,  but 
it  is  not  his  own  weight  that  he  depends  on,  but  on 
what  Christ  is  and  Christ  has  done.  God  has  confi- 
dence in  the  work  of  His  Son,  and  he  has;  that  is 
faith.  A  man  is  a  believer  who  no  longer  trusts  in  his 
own  works,  nor  in  his  own  feelings,  but  in  God's  esti- 
mate of  the  cross  of  His  Son,  God  being  not  only 
gracious  but  righteous  in  that  very  thing.  I  want  to 
know  that  I  have  got  through  Christ  that  whereby 
God  is  glorified  in  thus  blessing  me.  And  therefore 
He  is  wdiat  He  is — righteous  in  justifying  my  soul. 
If  I  have  Christ,  God  is  equally  righteous  in  justifying 
me,  as  He  would  be  in  condemning  me  if  I  had  Him 
not.  The  righteousness  of  God  that  would  condemn 
the  sinner  is  the  very  thing  that  in  Christ  justifies  the 
sinner,  but,  then,  it  also  secures  holiness.  It  is  not 
merely  a  robe  over  him,  but  there  is  a  new  life  as  well ; 
and  I  receive  that  new  life  in  receiving  Christ:  in  a 
word,  we  have  justification  of  life  in  Him.  And  of 
what  character  is  this  life?  Not  the  same  as  Adam's. 
That  would  not  do,  because  Adam  fell  after  he  had  life. 
But  Christ  laid  down  His  life,  that  He  might  take  it 
again  in  resurrection ;  and  hence  we  never  lose  the  life 
that  He  has  given  us — a  life  stamped  with  His  victory 


150  GALATIANS. 

over  the  grave :  in  fact,  our  life  is  Christ  risen  from  the 
dead.  No  wonder,  then,  that  it  is  everlasting,  and  that 
we  can  never  perish.  It  is  the  life  of  One  risen,  over 
whom  death  has  no  more  dominion.  And  such,  con- 
sequently, is  the  position  of  the  believer.  Of  course 
there  may  be  the  physical  act  of  passing  through  death ; 
but  we  are  speaking  about  life  before  God  communi- 
cated to  the  soul ;  and  that  life  is  the  everlasting  life  of 
Christ,  after  He  had  put  away  our  sins  on  the  cross. 

Accordingly,  the  apostle  concludes  the  whole  matter 
with,  "  We,  through  the  Spirit,  wait  for  the  hope  of 
righteousness  by  faith."  It  is  not  that  we,  through 
the  Spirit,  are  waiting  to  be  justified,  but  "  we,  through 
the  Spirit,  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by  faith." 
And  ^vhat  is  this  hope?  It  is  the  glory  of  Christ.  We 
have  the  righteousness,  but  not  yet  the  hope  of  it.  We 
have  Christ  Himself,  but  the  hope  of  righteousness  is 
the  hope  that  righteousness  in  Christ  entitles  me  to. 
We  have  become  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Christ. 
But  what  is  the  hope  of  righteousness?  It  is  the  hope 
of  the  glory  of  God:  as  it  is  said  in  Romans  v.,  "  Being 
justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God,  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  by  whom  also  we  have  access 
by  faith  into  this  grace  wherein  we  stand,  and  rejoice  in 
hope  of  the  glory  of  God."  In  the  first  verse  is  the 
righteousness,  in  the  end  of  the  second,  the  hope — "  the 
hope  of  righteousness."  And  what  is  that?  That  I  shall 
be  with  Christ  in  the  very  same  glory  that  He  has.  For 
this  the  believer  is  waiting.  And  meanwhile  he  has 
the  Spirit  of  God,  not  merely  to  work  in  his  soul,  but 
that  we  through  Him  should  wait  for  the  hope  of 
righteousness.     We  have  not  that  hope  seen  and  pos- 


CHAPTER  V.  131 

sessed  yet;  and  therefore  it  is  entirely  a  question  of 
faith.  But  the  Spirit  of  God  who  dwells  in  us  gives  us 
to  know  that,  possessing  the  righteousness,  being  al- 
ready justified,  we  shall  have  a  hope  suited  to  that 
righteousness.  As  we  have  the  righteousness  of  God, 
we  shall  have  the  glory  of  God.  So  that  nothing  can 
be  more  blessed  than  the  position  in  which  the  believer 
is  set  here  by  the  apostle.  The  Galatians  were  hoping 
to  be  justified;  but  he  says,  You  are  justified  already; 
and  if  you  think  to  make  things  more  sure  by  circum- 
cision, you  lose  everything,  and  become  debtors  to  do 
that  which  ensures  only  a  curse:  whereas  "  we,  through 
the  Spirit,  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by  faith." 
We  are  waiting  for  glory — the  hope  of  righteousness. 

"  For  in  Jesus  Christ  neither  circumcision  availeth 
anything  nor  uncircumcision,  but  faith  which  worketh 
by  love."  Now  he  shows,  just  passingly,  that  there  is  a 
very  great  reality  in  the  believer's  moral  condition.  It 
is  not  only  that  he  has  justification,  and  a  hope  in 
character  with  it  by  and  by;  but  the  selfsame  faith 
which  makes  him  know  that  he  is  justified,  and  gives 
him  also  to  be  looking  onward  to  the  glory  he  is 
destined  to,  meanwhile  works  by  love,  not  by  law.  To 
this  he  is  going  to  bring  us,  the  question  of  practical 
sanctification ;  and  he  shows  that  the  believer  has  no 
need  of  going  under  the  law;  because,  if  his  faith  works 
by  love,  it  accomplishes  that  which  the  law  sought,  but 
never  effected  or  received.  He  does  not  at  all  mean  to 
say  that,  though  the  believer  is  thus  justified  and  waiting 
for  glory,  there  is  nothing  meanwhile  operating  in  his 
soul.  It  is  a  mighty  and  influential  thing;  but,  then, 
it  works  by  love.     Its  origin  and  its  rest  are  in  God's 


132  GALATIANS. 

love ;  it  knows  salvation  springing  from  that  love.  Tlie 
love  of  God  shown  in  Christ  fills  the  believer's  heart. 
He  has  a  hope  that  makes  not  ashamed.  And  why 
not?  Because  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  his 
heart.  And  I  take  that  love  of  God  in  its  largest 
possible  meaning:  first  of  all,  as  God's  love  to  us;  and 
next,  as  ours  to  Him.  It  is  the  fulness  of  the  sense  of 
God's  love  in  us ;  and  the  effect  is,  that  it  enables  us  to 
love  God  and  every  one  else.  If  persons  are  thoroughly 
happy  themselves,  they  cannot  help  loving  others. 

This,  then,  is  the  principle  upon  which  the  believer 
stands — he  is  already  justified;  he  is  waiting  for  the 
glory;  and  meanwhile  there  is  faith  that  worketh  by 
love.  Therefore  it  is  no  question  of  circumcision.  We 
are  Christians;  and  the  whole  basis  of  the  law,  there^ 
fore,  and  of  these  questions,  is  gone.  How  comes 
this  to  pass  ?  For  a  very  blessed  reason.  "  For,"  says 
he,  "  in  Jesus  Christ  neither  circumcision  availeth  any- 
thing nor  uncircumcision,  but  faith  which  worketh  by 
love."  The  first  availed  a  good  deal  to  the  flesh,  and 
there  was  an  important  lesson  taught  by  it.  But  he 
speaks  of  what  is  "  in  Jesus  Christ."  That  is  the  position 
of  a  Christian.  He  is  not  in  the  flesh:  he  once  was. 
And  "  when  we  w^ere  in  the  flesh,  the  motions  of  sin, 
which  were  by  the  law,  did  work  in  our  members  to 
bring  forth  fruit  unto  death" — an  expression  that  shows 
as  strongly  as  possible  that  we  are  not  in  the  flesh  now. 
Do  you  not  understand  this?  If  you  tell  a  person  that 
you  were  in  the  country  once,  it  implies  that  you  are 
not  there  now.  So,  when  the  apostle  says,  "  when  ye 
were  in  the  flesh,"  he  means  that  he  was  in  the  flesh 
before  he  knew  Christ;  but  now  he  is  in  the  flesh  no 


CHAPTER  V. 


133 


more,  thongli  he  has  the  flesh  in  him.  God  views  us 
in  another  condition.  We  have  the  old  nature,  but  we 
have  got  another  nature,  by  virtue  of  which  God  says, 
"  Ye  are  not  in  the  flesh."  When  we  were  in  the  flesh, 
we  were  not  delivered:  we  had  not  laid  hold  of  Christ. 
But  now  that  we  are  His,  we  are  no  longer  in  the  flesh. 
We  ought  firmly  to  hold  fast  this  truth,  and  to  rejoice 
in  it.  If  a  person  fails,  that  is  the  more  reason  why 
he  should  not  yield  to  the  further  suggestions  of  the 
enemy.  We  ought  always  to  hold  fast  to  the  truth 
that  we  are  not  in  the  flesh ;  the  more  especially  as  it  is 
not  for  our  own  praise.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  very 
thing  that  aggravates  our  sin,  and  that  makes  us  the 
more  ashamed  of  ourselves.  If  you  are  in  the  flesh,  no 
wonder  that  you  act  after  the  flesh.  But  if  you  are  not  in 
the  flesh,  then  be  ashamed  when  you  act  as  if  you 
were.  God  presses  upon  us  this  blessedness,  for  the 
express  purpose  of  making  us  feel  more  deeply  our 
failure,  if  we  do  fail.  We  are  not  in  the  flesh,  and 
therefore  we  ought  never  to  give  way  to  the  flesh. 
But  when  we  do,  we  should  feel  it,  and  confess  it  with 
humiliation  before  God,  but  not  let  go  Christ  nor  His 
truth.  This  is  true  of  every  Christian ;  though  I  am 
aware  that  there  are  many  Christians  who  would  say 
that  they  could  not  receive  a  word  of  it — that  it  is  all 
mysticism,  &c. :  but  it  is  a  comfort  to  think  God  says 
every  word  of  it  about  them.  They  may  not  be  able  to 
take  the  comfort  of  it  for  themselves ;  but  what  a  blessed 
thing  it  is  that  Christians  have  to  do  with  God,  and 
not  with  themselves  1  This  is  the  reason  why  they  are 
not  consumed.  We  prove  ourselves  to  be  just  as  weak 
and  foolish  as  Jacob  was,  giving  way  to  the  flesh  so 


134  GALATIAXS. 

often,  and  allowing  our  own  spirit  to  work  too;  but  we 
are,  in  a  still  higher  sense,  Israel.  We  have  prevailed, 
because  of  Him  in  whom  we  are  before  God. 

"  Ye  did  run  well.  Who  did  hinder  you,  that  ye 
should  not  obey  the  truth  ?  This  persuasion  cometh 
not  of  him  that  calletli  you."  He  reproaches  them 
with  having  listened  to  these  false  teachers,  who  had 
pressed  circumcision.  "  A  little  leaven  leaveneth  the 
whole  lump."  Is  it  not  solemn  to  find  that  the  very 
word  "  leaven"  which  is  used  in  1  Corinthians  to  de- 
scribe frightful  moral  corruption,  in  Galatians  charac- 
terizes the  introduction  of  the  legal  system  among  the 
children  of  God?  God  treats  it  as  a  most  offensive 
thing.  Indeed,  the  tone  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  writing  to 
the  Galatians  is  even  more  severe  than  in  addressing  the 
Corinthians.  Because,  although  the  Corinthians  were 
guilty  of  what  was  far  more  blameable  in  the  sight  of 
men,  the  Galatians  had  fallen  into  an  error  that  struck 
more  deeply  at  the  foundations  of  God's  grace;  and  a 
spiritual  man  invariably  judges  sin,  not  by  that  which 
man  thinks  of  it,  but  by  what  it  is  in  the  sight  of  God. 
Having  brought  out  the  character  of  it,  he  says,  "  I  have 
confidence  in  you  through  the  Lord  that  ye  will  be  none 
otherwise  minded."  He  could  not  say  that  about  all 
of  them :  he  says  it  in  a  general  way ;  and  adds,  '•  But 
he  that  troubleth  you  shall  bear  his  judgment,  whoso- 
ever he  be."  He  wants  to  separate  them  and  give  a 
sense  of  horror  about  those  who  had  '  misled  them. 
"  Faith  which  worketh  by  love"  does  not  hesitate  to 
use  strong  language  about  the  corrupters  of  the  Church 
of  God — denounces  them  most  earnestly,  and  as  a  duty 
to  God  and  man.     "  I  would  they  were  even  cut  off 


CITAI'TER  V.  135 

■v^•llicll  trouble  you."  He  that  troubletli  you  sLall  bear 
Lis  judgment,  wJwsoever  he  ^e."  There  were  several 
engaged  in  tliat  bad  work.  "  And  I,  brethren,  if  I 
preach  circumcision,  why  do  I  yet  suffer  persecution  ?" 
They  had  made  the  Apostle  Paul  to  be  a  sort  of  evidence 
in  their  favour.  They  may  have  taken  advantage  of  his 
circumcising  Timothy,  in  order  to  make  a  show  of  in- 
consistency between  his  acts  and  his  preaching.  But 
St.  Paul  was  not  acting  contrary  to  these  principles 
when  he  circumcised  Timothy.  It  was  the  elasticity  of 
a  man  who  could  stop  the  mouths  of  objectors;  and 
Paul,  to  silence  Jewish  slander,  ended  that  question 
most  unjewishly  —  by  having  Timothy  circumcised. 
But  he  would  not  suffer  it  in  the  case  of  Titus,  (who 
was  a  Greek,)  whom  he  took  up  to  Jerusalem  with 
himself.  This  might  appear  capricious,  but  grace  knows 
the  time  to  be  firm  as  well  as  to  bend.  There  seems 
here  to  be  an  allusion  to  this,  in  his  argument  with  the 
defenders  of  the  law.  It  requires  the  wisdom  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  giving  one  to  know  where  one  may  use 
our  liberty,  or  where  it  is  a  duty  to  stand  as  firm  as  a 
rock;  and  Paul  did  both.  If  Timothy  had  been  circum- 
cised, it  was  grace  stopping  mere  fleshly  questions,  and 
not  law,  for  his  father  was  a  Greek.  But  as  to  preach- 
ing it,  such  a  thing  w^as  far  from  his  mind.  Had  he 
ever  pressed  circumcision,  he  would  have  had  their 
favour  and  countenance  in  every  place  that  he  visited. 
On  the  contrary,  he  was  persecuted  because  he  would 
not  allow  the  flesh  nor  the  title  of  circumcision. 

The  latter  portion  of  the  chapter  takes  up  the  other 
subject,  namely,  the  law  as  ruling  the  walk.  What  we 
Lave  had  already  is  the  denial  of  circumcision  and  of  law 


lo6  GALATIANS. 

in  every  shape  as  entering  into  justification.  Admit 
the  principle  of  it  in  a  single  particular,  and  you  are  a 
debtor  to  do  the  whole  law. 

At  this  natural  division  the  Spirit  of  God  recurs  to 
the  thought  of  liberty  with  which  He  had  opened  the 
chapter.  It  is  put  forward  in  a  twofold  point  of  view. 
Liberty  as  a  question  of  justification  we  had  in  the  early 
part ;  liberty  now  we  have  as  that  which  leads  into,  and 
ought  always  to  be  connected  with,  practical  holiness. 
For  we  must  remember  that  this  is  the  subject-matter 
of  the  remainder  of  the  chapter.  Now  there  are  many 
persons  who  more  or  less  understand  that  Christ  has 
brought  US  liberty  in  the  matter  of  righteousness,  or 
the  standing  of  justified  men  in  the  sight  of  God;  but 
they  do  not  know  liberty  in  the  daily  walk  with  God. 
And  when  I  say  *'  many,"  I  mean  many  Christians,  or 
real  saints.  Practical  holiness,  in  such  cases,  invariably 
suffers.  Where  there  is,  along  with  this,  much  con- 
science, it  necessarily  takes  the  legal  form  of  ordinances, 
restraints,  and  the  like.  Or  where  souls  have  not  the 
same  internal  exercises,  it  takes  the  shape  of  laxity  to 
a  greater  or  less  extent:  that  is,  they  see  that  they  are 
delivered  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  they  consider  them- 
selves free  to  use  the  world,  and  to  allow,  to  no  little  a 
degree,  the  inclinations  of  nature;  because,  as  they  say, 
there  is  evil  in  the  nature,  and,  as  they  suppose,  God, 
in  His  tender  mercy,  makes  allowance  for  it.  Now 
both  these  things  are  totally  wrong.  One  cause  of  all 
this  mistake  lies  in  the  misapprehension  of  a  very  im- 
portant truth — the  effect  of  the  presence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  sent  down  from  heaven.  Yet,  in  the  Acts  and 
Epistles,  all  the  exhortations,  the  walk  that  is  set  forth, 


CHAPTER  V.  137 

the  worship  that  the  New  Testament  inculcates,  the 
whole  experience — in  a  word,  of  Christians  that  is  there 
portrayed  and  insisted  upon — everything  is  built  upon 
the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Where  this  is  not 
entered  into,  the  consequence  is,  that  children  of  God 
must  either  suppose  that  there  is  a  certain  latitude 
allowed  them  by  God,  which  is  only  another  wurd  for 
indifference,  or  they  must  fall  back  upon  the  righteous 
curb  that  God  has  put  upon  our  nature,  and  that  is 
only  another  expression  for  the  law  of  God.  Now,  the 
gospel  supposes  that,  good  and  holy  and  perfect  as 
the  law  of  God  is,  it  is  entirely  powerless  either  to 
justify  or  to  sanctify.  It  cannot  in  any  way  make  the 
old  nature  better;  neither  is  it  the  rule  of  the  new 
nature.  The  old  man  is  not  subject  to  it,  and  the  new 
man  does  not  need  it.  The  new  creature  has  another 
object  before  it,  and  another  power  that  acts  upon  it, 
in  order  to  produce  what  is  lovely  and  acceptable  to 
God — Christ  the  object,  realized  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  And  although,  of  course,  the  Spirit  can 
use  every  bit  of  the  word,  (God  forbid  that  I  should 
say  that  God's  righteous  law  was  not  brought  within 
the  range  of  the  Spirit  to  turn  to  account !)  I  maintain 
that  the  law  does  not  give  the  form,  nor  the  measure, 
nor  the  character,  any  more  than  the  power,  of  christian 
holiness.  It  is  a  misunderstanding  of  God's  design  in 
giving  it,  and  of  its  right  present  uses,  to  suppose  that 
therein  is  the  mould  in  which  God  now  is  fashioning 
the  souls  of  the  saints. 

This  is  the  subject  that  the  apostle  takes  up  and 
handles  henceforward  in  our  epistle.  We  have  seen 
the    question  of  justification   entirely    settled ;   now 


138  GALATlAirS. 

we  have  the  walk  or  practical  holiness.  Again  he  in- 
sists upon  liberty.  We  might  suppose  that  he  had 
said  enough  about  it,  after  having  charged  them  to 
stand  fast  in  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  had  made 
them  free,  and  not  to  be  entangled  again  with  the  yoke 
of  bondage.  But  no.  In  the  domain  of  holiness  this 
liberty  is  needed,  just  as  much  as  for  justification;  and 
therefore  says  he,  "  Brethren,  ye  have  been  called  unto 
liberty."  That  is,  it  characterizes  our  calling.  Only, 
says  he,  it  is  not  liberty  for  an  occasion  to  the  flesh,  or 
you  are  not  to  use  license:  do  not  turn  this  liberty  for 
an  occasion  to  the  flesh,  but  by  love  serve  one  another. 
There  he  showed  that  there  is  a  faith  that  works  by 
love,  (as  said  a  few  verses  before;)  so  now  he  shows 
that  the  object  of  that  love  should  be  the  helping  one 
of  another.  It  is  not  for  the  purpose  of  putting  you 
under  the  law,  but  that  you  may  serve  one  anotfce.*; 
*'  for  all  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  one  word,  even  in  this: 
Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  Had  they 
not  been  trying  the  law  ?  And  what  had  been  the 
result  ?  He  says.  You  have  been  biting  and  devouring 
one  another:  that  is  not  fulfilling  law,  but  lusts.  When 
persons  talk  about  it,  or  desire  to  he  its  teachers,  do 
they  ever  fulfil  it?  It  begins  with  confident  words, 
and  ends  without  deed  or  truth.  Whereas,  on  the  con- 
trary, when  Christ  is  the  object  of  the  soul,  though  the 
law  does  not  occupy  the  mind,  yet  is  it  fulfilled.  Christ 
is  the  power  of  God ;  the  law  is  the  strength  of  sin. 
I  have  exactly  the  same  word  of  God  to  tell  me  of 
Christ  and  the  law ;  and  both  are  in  the  same  epistle, 
( 1  Cor.)  But  it  does  not  matter  where  the  subject  is 
entered  into ;  the  great  point  that  the  Holy  Ghost  ia- 


cnArxER  V.  139 

sists  on  is,  not  that  the  law  was  not  a  good  thing,  but 
that,  our  nature  being  horribly  bad,  there  never  can  be 
any  good  got  from  bringing  the  law  to  bear  on  our  evil 
nature,  save  condemning  it.  The  question  is,  What 
will  strengthen  my  soul  for  what  is  good  ?  The  answer 
is,  not  the  law,  but  Christ.  The  law,  I  admit,  is  ex- 
cellent. But  you  have  been  talking  about  the  law  as  a 
means  of  walking  well:  what  sort  of  holiness  have  you 
been  producing  ?  Kiting  and  devouring  one  another  ! 
This  is  not  love.  But  it  is  the  effect  of  your  use  of 
the  law  you  boast  of.  *'  But  if  you  bite  and  devour 
one  another,  take  heed  that  ye  be  not  consumed  one  of 
another."  Such  is  the  result.  The  law  is  a  killing, 
destroying  power;  not  because  of  its  being  bad,  but  be- 
cause our  nature  is.  And  remember  that  the  law  bears 
upon  our  nature.  The  law  was  given  not  to  the  new 
man,  but  to  the  old. 

There  was  the  wisdom  of  God.  Law  was  for  the 
purpose  of  provoking  the  latent  sin.  But  what  is  to 
give  the  new  life  strength,  and  draw  out  its  affections  ? 
What  is  to  nourish  the  new  creature,  and  call  it  into 
lively  exercise  ?  Not  the  law.  But  he  tells  us  more. 
He  had  shown  that  love  is  the  sum  and  substance  of 
the  law.  If,  then,  love  prevails,  the  law  is  fulfilled ; 
but  among  you,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  contention, 
strife,  and  every  evil  work.  What  a  blow  to  tlieir 
legally-engendered  self-conceit !  Now,  going  farther, 
he  gives  them  a  positive  word.  "  This  I  say  then, 
walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of 
the  flesh."  The  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  not 
merely  as  a  convincer  of  sin,  nor  as  the  energy  of 
regeneration ;  all  Christians  hold  this :  far  as  they  aro 


140  GALATIAN3. 

parted  on  other  topics,  they  cannot  hut  hold  the  same 
fundamental  truth,  that  all  the  power  of  having  this 
new  nature  communicated  to  us  is  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Some  may  hold  the  truth  more  intelligently  and  care- 
fully as  to  form ;  but  all  necessarily  own  the  Holy  Ghost 
as  that  which  convinces  them  of  their  evil  and  gives 
them  this  new  life,  which  is  of  God. 

But  this  is  not  the  question  discussed  here.  The 
Galatians  had  new  life,  but  what  was  to  be  the  power 
for  producing  Christian  holiness  ?  They  w^ere  bringing 
in  the  rule  of  the  law  as  a  means  of  holiness ;  and  the 
apostle  entirely  puts  this  aside.  *'  Walk,"  he  says,  "  in 
the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh." 
There  we  have  the  divine  guard;  nay,  more  than  that, 
it  is  not  merely  admonition  against  this  or  that  evil, 
but  what  will  give  us  power  for  what  is  good.  "  Walk 
in  the  Spirit."  The  Holy  Ghost  has  been  sent  down  to 
dwell  in  the  believer.  It  is  not  the  truth  of  our  being 
builded  together  for  an  habitation  of  God  through  the 
Spirit,  as  in  Ephesians,  where  we  have  also  the  body 
of  Christ  brought  out,  the  corporate  relations  of  the 
children  of  God.  The  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  never 
gives  us  what  is  corporate,  but  always  what  is  indi- 
vidual. And  the  walk  being  an  individual  thing,  or 
what  concerns  each  soul,  if  there  were  not  another  in 
the  world,  thia  is  what  you  want.  The  word  is,  "  Walk 
in  the  Spirit;"  he  does  not  say.  Walk  in -the  law.  On 
the  contrary,  he  had  dealt  sharply  w^ith  the  men  who  were 
so  zealous  for  that  rule.  "  Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye 
shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh."  You  want  power 
against  the  lusts  of  the  flesh :  the  Spirit  is  that  power, 
and  there  is  no  other.     "  For  the  flesh  lusteth  against 


CHAPTER  V.  141 

the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh;  and  tliese 
are  contrary  the  one  to  the  otlier,  in  order  that  ye  may 
not  do  the  things  tliat  ye  would."  This,  I  bvlieve,  is 
what  the  Holy  Ghost  wrote  and  meant.  What  we 
have  in  onr  version  is,  as  many  of  us  have  long  known, 
positively  wrong.  I  wish  not  to  pass  it  over,  nor  to 
bring  it  in  by  an  underhand  way :  but  wherever  there 
is  anything  plainly  mischievous  in  this  version,  which 
is  but  a  human  one,  it  is  a  christian  duty  to  call  atten- 
tion to  it;  and  the  more  so,  as  I  am  always  ready  to 
maintain  its  general  excellence  and  to  defend  the  common 
Bible  we  have  got  against  adversaries  who  would  do  it 
dishonour.  But  it  is  not  a  friend's  part  to  justify  a 
real  mistake  that  may  have  slipped  in  through  human 
infirmity,  or  worse. 

Here,  then,  is  one  of  the  most  serious  mistakes, 
practically.  When  I  insist  upon  this,  it  is  not  a  matter 
that  I  admit  to  be  open  to  a  question,  or  that  there 
should  be  any  doubt  about.  No  person  acquainted  at 
all  intimately  with  the  language  in  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  wrote,  could  hesitate,  save  through  the  effect  of 
strong  prejudice.  I  would  also  observe,  that  the  best 
men — the  ablest  scholars,  who  perhaps  differ  from  my 
own  views  as  to  much  I  deem  important — nay,  persons 
who  are  dignitaries  in  the  very  church  which  had  the 
principal  hand  in  the  production  of  this  version, — 
admit  candidly  and  with  one  consent,  that  the  version 
I  have  just  given  is  the  true  one.  There  is  no  doubt 
of  it  on  the  minds  of  persons  of  the  most  opposite  ways  of 
thinking  on  other  matters,  as  to  what  is  the  true  mean- 
ing of  this  verse.  The  Holy  Ghost,  then,  says,  "  In 
order  that  ye  may  not  do  the  things  that  ye  would." 


142  GALATIAXS. 

The  very  point  of  the  verse  is  this.  He  was  showing 
them  why  they  were  called  upon  to  walk  in  the  Spirit; 
and  what  was  the  true  preservative  against  the  lusts  of 
the  flesh.  For  the  two  are  totally  opposed :  they  are 
contrary  to  one  another  in  every  way.  It  is  not  said, 
You  have  got  the  law  that  you  may  not  fulfil  the  lusts 
of  the  flesh;  but,  having  a  nature  that  will  always  be 
prone  to  do  its  own  will,  you  have  not  merely  the  law 
to  restrain  it,  but  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given ;  not  like 
the  law,  a  thing  outside  one;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  is  an 
inward  power,  identifying  Himself  with  the  affections 
of  the  soul,  and  giving  strength  to  desires  after  what  is 
good,  and  against  natural  lusts,  or  any  way  in  which 
the  flesh  may  show  itself. 

He  quite  admits  that  there  was  the  flesh — pride, 
vanity,  everything  that  is  evil,  at  work.  But,  as  Chris- 
tians, you  have  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  walking  in  the 
Spirit,  "ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh." 
Though  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  are  there,  you  have  the 
Spirit,  too,  in  order  that  you  may  not  fulfil  those  lusts. 
If  what  we  have  in  our  version,  "  so  that  ye  cannot  do 
the  things  that  ye  would,"  were  correct,  it  would  be 
like  blowing  hot  in  the  one  verse  and  cold  in  the  other. 
He  would  be  telling  them  in  one  verse  that  they  must 
walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  in  the  next  that  they  cannot  do 
it  after  all.  Such  a  rendering  carries  its  own  refutation 
on  its  face.  I  press  this  the  more  strongly,  because  it 
is  a  practical  point  to  christian  people.  On  mere 
critical  questions,  I  should  never  think  of  disturbing 
people's  minds.  There  is  so  much  of  the  deepest  mo- 
ment for  our  souls  with  God  every  day,  that  the  less 
we  have  to  do  with  points  of  curious  learning  the  better. 


CHAPTER  V.  143 

But  when  it  comes  to  be  a  matter  of  correcting  what 
every  christian  scholar  knows  to  be  an  error,  it  is  evi- 
dent that  I  should  be  guilty  of  keeping  up  a  serious 
mistake  if  such  a  point  as  the  present  were  slurred  over. 
One  thing  that  has  led,  I  apprehend,  to  the  con- 
fusion on  the  subject,  is  that  many  have  assumed  the 
doctrine  to  be  the  same  as  in  Romans  vii.  But  in  that 
chapter,  after  the  first  six  verses,  the  Holy  Ghost 
gives  us  the  experience  of  a  person  troubled  under 
law.  Accordingly  we  have  not  there  the  Spirit  of  God 
introduced  at  all.  This  is  a  remarkable  fact,  which 
accounts  for  the  difference  between  that  scripture  and 
what  we  have  here.  There,  it  is  a  renewed  man — a 
soul  really  born  of  God,  but  one  who,  while  he  hates 
sin  as  no  unconverted  man  does,  loves  righteousness 
because  it  is  of  God,  has  a  horror  of  evil ;  yet,  spite  of 
all,  the  evil  that  he  would  not  he  does;  and  the  good 
he  desires  is  never  done.  He  has  learnt  the  evil  of  sin, 
and  sees  the  good  of  righteousness,  but  he  is  utterly 
powerless.  "What  is  the  cause?  The  Holy  Ghost 
shows  the  reason  to  be  this — he  has  only  the  law  before 
him.  It  is  a  man  converted,  but  struggling  under  law; 
and  the  effect  is  that  it  entirely  unnerves  the  man.  So 
far  from  giving  him  courage,  and  drawing  out  what  is 
in  Christ,  it  is  merely  detecting  him  here  and  there,  put- 
ting in  a  probe  in  one  part  and  stabbing  him  in  another; 
so  that  he  is  bewildered  to  find  in  himself  such  an 
amount  of  evil  as  he  never  thought  could  be  in  the 
heart  of  a  converted  person.  We  all  know  something 
of  this.  We  have  not  been  long  following  Christ  if  we 
have  not  known  some  bitter  struggles.  The  conse- 
quence is  that  all  the  poor  soul  is  able  to  say  is,  "  0 


144  GALATIANS. 

■wretched  man  that  I  am:  who  shall  deliver  me  from 
the  body  of  this  death?"  We  might  have  thought 
that  a  Christian  would  have  said,  I  have  been  delivered 
long  ago.  But  observe  this — he  is  not  resting  with  his 
eye  upon  the  Deliverer.  He  is  converted,  but  he  does  not 
know  liberty.  He  has  faith  in  the  Saviour,  but  he 
does  not  understand  the  application  of  His  death  and 
resurrection  to  his  condition.  He  does  not  know  that 
he  is  no  longer  viewed  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the  Spirit — 
that  he  is  entitled  to  have  done  with  his  old  nature 
altogether,  and  to  see  himself  in  Christ  before  God. 
The  moment  he  comes  to  this  discovery,  that  it  is  a 
mistake  to  apply  the  law  to  his  soul,  he  gives  thanks. 
Before  this,  he  cries  out  in  the  intensity  of  his  agony, 
"  0  wretched  man  that  I  am!"  And  yet,  just  then 
comes  this  new  thought  from  God,  "  Who  shall  deliver 
me?"  I  have  got  it  now;  I  see  that  it  is  not  my  own 
struggling  with  the  law  to  overcome  the  evil ;  I  see 
there  is  another,  a  Deliverer. — Therefore  he  can  turn 
with  thankfulness  to  God  the  very  next  moment,  and  say, 
"  I  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  After 
this  he  is  happy,  perfectly  happy,  spite  of  the  conscious- 
ness that  there  is  the  old  nature  still  within  him.  What 
makes  him  happy?  He  sees  that  there  are  two  distinct 
things — the  old  nature,  which,  if  it  is  allowed  to  work, 
always  serves  the  law  of  sin,  and  the  new  nature,  which 
always  seeks  the  will  of  God,  whatever  it  may  be. 
Now,  then,  he  is  enabled  to  enter  into  the  great  truths 
of  chapter  viii. :  "  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that 
are  in  Christ  Jesus ;"  and  intelligently,  too,  "  for  the 
law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  has  made  me 
free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death."    He  does  not  leave 


CHAPTER  V.  145 

it  in  the  vagne  way,  "  made  all  free,"  but  it  "  Lath  made 
me  free."  It  is  not  a  general  creed,  but  the  truth  is 
applied  in  the  most  positive  manner  to  the  personal 
need  of  the  once  struggling  soul.  There  is  no  longer 
any  bondage,  now  that  he  sees  Christ  is  risen.  What 
is  He  risen  for  ?  As  the  head  of  a  family,  risen  to  give 
me  a  new  name  and  standing  altogether.  He  has  gone 
down  under  the  sea  of  my  sins,  and  he  is  risen  above 
them.  AVhat  was  of  mine  led  Him  below ;  and  if  He 
is  risen  above,  it  is  to  raise  me  with  Him  too.  The 
resurrection  of  Christ  was  not  to  give  Him  a  standing, 
but  to  give  uSj  to  give  me,  a  standing.  The  death  of 
Christ  was  for  us,  to  put  away  our  sin;  the  resurrection 
of  Christ  was  to  bring  in  a  blessing  that  nothing  can 
touch.  The  effect  of  the  first  coming  of  Christ  is,  that 
our  souls  enter  into  this;  the  effect  of  His  second  com- 
ing will  be,  that  our  bodies,  free  from  every  trace  of  sin, 
will  enter  into  it  perfectly,  as  our  souls  should  now. 
If  we  rest  upon  Him,  we  ought  not  to  have  a  single 
doubt.  It  is  not  at  all  a  question  whether  I  find  any 
flesh  in  me ;  it  would  be  rather  a  proof  that  I  was  not 
a  Christian  if  I  did  not.  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no 
sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us." 
"  If  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned,  we  make  him  a 
liar,  and  his  word  is  not  in  us."  This  is  a  darker  case, 
because  there  is  a  plain,  positive  declaration  of  Scripture 
against  it. 

What  marks  a  Christian  is,  then,  not  that  he 
has  not  sin  within,  but  that  he  has  a  new  nature, 
which  none  has  except  he  that  believes  in  Jesus  by  the 
Holy  Ghost.  In  virtue  of  Christ,  God  regards  him  as 
one  who  has  entirely  done  with   sin  as  a  matter  of 


146  OALATIANS. 

divine  judgment  on  us.  God  has  quite  closed  with  ifc 
thus;  not  as  a  dealing  with  us  day  by  day.  There  is 
where  confession  of  failure  comes  in ;  and  thus,  it  is  a 
good  and  right  thing  for  a  Christian  to  judge  and  con- 
fess his  evil.  A  man's  being  entirely  forgiven  all 
trespasses  does  not  put  aside  the  need  and  duty  and 
privilege  of  confessing  the  truth  about  ourselves  to 
God,  day  by  day.  It  is  a  very  blessed  thing  that  we 
may  do  it  with  the  confidence  that  God  is  interested  in 
us — that  God  loves  we  should  go  to  Him  about  all. 
We  should  have  sufficient  reliance  on  His  own  love, 
to  bring  out  our  every  failure,  and  tell  it  out 
before  Him. 

The  law  said,  Stand  back.  If  even  a  poor  brute  touched 
the  mountain,  it  w^as  to  be  stoned  or  thrust  through 
with  a  dart.  What  the  law  said  to  one,  it  said  to  all. 
It  did  not  say,  Any  of  you  that  are  believers  can  come 
near.  The  law  does  not  draw  distinctions  between 
believers  and  unbelievers.  It  does  not  make  allowance 
for  human  infirmity.  Are  people  sinners  ?  If  so,  then 
they  are  cursed.  There  is  the  sentence  of  the  law.  It 
never  made  a  man  righteous,  any  more  than  a  human 
law  produces  honesty.  There  never  was  a  man  made 
honest  by  an  act  of  parliament  since  the  world  began. 
What  makes  people  obey  is  Christ  entirely  above 
the  law.  The  just  dread  of  wrath  may  awaken,  but  it 
gives  no  power.  So,  in  earthly  things,  there  must  be  a 
principle  above  the  fear  of  being  sent  to  the  house  of 
correction.  If  it  be  only  that  dread  which  keeps  a  man 
from  stealing,  he  is  a  rogue.  So  it  is  precisely  with  the 
believer.  What  makes  a  man  a  Christian,  keeps  him 
walking  as  a  Christian.     It  is  the  power  of  the  Spirit 


CHAPTER  V.  147 

of  God  revealing  Christ.  Are  you  going  back  to  the 
law  to  keep  your  soul  in  order? 

It  would  have  been  much  better  that  you  had  been 
filled  -with  Christ,  walking  in  the  Spirit.  For  what 
does  the  Spirit  do?  He  is  glorifying  Christ.  This 
is  always  the  true  test.  The  power  of  a  thing  is  not 
the  test  of  it.  If  a  man  talked  a  great  deal  about 
the  Spirit,  and  at  the  same  time  was  serving  sin,  and 
not  Christ,  who  could  have  confidence  in  the  case? 
He  might  be  self-deceived.  A  man  may  make  the 
most  exorbitant  pretensions  to  have  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  acting  in  him  or  the  body;  but  how  am  I  to 
know  that  the  claim  is  a  real  one?  Let  us  look  at  the 
Epistles  of  John,  who  tells  us  to  try  the  spirits.  The 
great  criterion  is  just  this — the  Holy  Ghost  invariably 
exalts  Christ.  The  object  is  not  to  aggrandise  the  Church 
or  a  minister.  All  these  things  flow  from  man's  misuse 
of  the  things  of  God.  I  am  not  denying  that  the 
Church  has  a  most  important  place;  but  it  is  as  being 
the  subject  vessel  of  the  Spirit  of  God — the  scene  where 
the  Holy  Ghost  sets  forth  Christ.  If  human  preten- 
sions are  allowed,  or  the  world  made  much  of,  it  is  not 
the  Church  of  God  led  of  the  Spirit.  It  may  be  man's 
church,  or  the  world-church,  but  it  is  not  the  Church 
of  God.  What  characterizes  the  Church  is  the  owned, 
recognized,  carried-out  truth  of  the  Spirit's  presence. 

There  may  be  failure,  as  there  is  in  an  individual 
Christian  man,  who  may  show  temper,  pride,  or  vanity; 
still  he  will  feel  it,  when  he  is  brought  to  his  senses, 
though  the  Lord  may  have  to  break  a  person's  bones 
sometimes,  like  Job,  to  make  him  know  what  he 
ie.      The  true  action  of  the   Holy  Ghost,  whether  ia 


148  GALATIANS. 

the  individual  or  in  the  body,  is  in  the  exaltation  of 
Christ.  And  if  you  have  the  individual  failing,  or  the 
Church,  it  will  come  to  the  same  thing.  God  will 
never  allow  an  assembly  that  He  owns  to  go  on  in 
evil.  He  knows  how  to  chastise  a  Christian  assembly 
as  well  as  a  Christian  man.  He  will  deal  with  them  if 
they  are  honest.  We  ought  to  be  careful  for  nothing, 
but  in  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  make  our 
requests  known  unto  God.  We  need  not  be  restless  and 
tried  about  this  or  that.  We  often  fail  in  thinking 
^vhat  tve  may  do  in  talking  to  people  ;  whereas  if  we 
spoke  a  good  deal  more  to  God,  and  less  to  man,  others 
would  not  be  losers,  and  we  should  be  gainers,  and  God 
would  be  far  more  glorified. 

However  that  may  be,  what  we  find  here  is  that 
the  Spirit  of  truth  is  the  power  of  holiness — that 
the  Spirit  of  God  it  is  which  enables  a  Christian 
man  to  walk  aright,  not  the  law.  That  is  the  point  he 
brings  them  to:  and  so  he  concludes  the  matter,  "If 
ye  be  led  by  the  Spirit,  ye  are  not  under  the  law." 
It  is  plain  that  if  to  be  under  the  law  were  the  means 
of  Christian  holiness,  it  would  have  been  said,  "  If  ye 
be  led  by  the  Spirit,  ye  are  under  the  law,"  rather  than, 
*'  ye  are  7iot  under  the  law." 

But  men  are  blinded.  Though  they  constantly  take 
up  the  commandments,  repeat  them  and  teach  them,  yet 
they  say  they  are  not  under  the  law !  How  could  persons 
be  more  under  the  law  than  when  they  adopt  the 
language  of  the  Ten  Commandments,  as  the  expression 
of  their  own  relationship  before  God?  It  is  done  as 
literally  and  definitely  by  Christian  people,  at  the  present 
day,  as  it  ever  was  even  by  the  children  of  Israel  them- 


CHAPTER  V.  149 

solves.  For  persons  to  say  that  wliile  acting  and 
speaking  thus  in  their  public  worship,  they  are  at  the 
same  time  not  under  the  law,  is  evidently  to  cheat  their 
souls  in  a  very  fearful  manner.  What  is  meant  by 
being  under  tbe  law  ?  That  I  acknowledge  myself  under 
that  rule  as  what  God  has  given  me,  the  rule  by  which 
1  have  to  live.  If  a  person  were  to  use  the  law  for 
the  purpose  of  convincing  a  poor,  ungodly  man  of  his 
sins,  that  is  not  to  be  under  the  law.  Bat  if  I  take  up 
the  ten  words,  and  ask  God  to  enable  me  to  keep  each, 
this  is  to  confess  myself  under  the  law. 

Then  may  I  break  the  law  ?  God  forbid.  Such  an 
alternative  could  only  emanate  from  one  who  understands 
little  indeed  of  the  grace  of  Christ.  All  admit  that  the 
law  is  good  and  righteous.  The  question  is,  whether  the 
God  that  gave  the  law  to  Israel  has  given  the  same  to 
Christians,  as  the  rule  by  which  they — we — are  to  live? 
I  deny  it.  He  gave  it  to  Israel.  What  He  has  given 
to  the  Church  is  Christ.  Christ  is  unfolded  in  the 
whole  word  of  God;  and  what  the  Christian  has  to 
walk  by,  is  the  entire  word  of  God ;  and  so  taught  as 
to  manifest  Christ.  If  it  is  taken  up  in  mere  letter, 
what  does  the  Scripture  say?  It  kills;  but  the  Spirit 
gives  life.  One  may  take  up  Exodus  xx.  and  draw  from 
part  of  that  chapter  a  statement  of  the  grace  of  God. 
When  God  gives  the  law.  He  tells  them  that  He  was 
the  God  that  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
and  out  of  the  house  of  bondage.  One  might  show  how 
we,  too,  are  delivered  out  of  our  bondage.  This  is  quite 
grace,  as  far  as  it  goes.  But  the  moment  you  put 
Christians  under  the  law  as  that  which  they  have  to 
walk  by,  like  an  Israelite  of  old,  you  are  doing  the  very 


150  GALATIANS. 

evil  that  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  was  intended  to 
correct,  and  what  the  Holy  Ghost  says  those  led  by 
the  Spirit  do  not.  "  If  ye  are  led  by  the  Spirit,  ye  are 
not  under  the  law."  So  men  are  doing  at  the  present 
time — taking  np  the  language  of  the  commandments 
that  were  intended  for  Israel,  and  this  not  merely  to 
convict  of  sin ;  but  they  undertake  them  as  the  direc- 
tory of  their  own  obedience  to  God  every  day.  Yet 
they  are  obliged  to  explain  avvay  a  great  deal  of  the 
law;  for  instance,  the  sabbath-day.  They  keep,  and 
very  properly,  the  Lord's-day ;  and  I  keep  it  too.  But 
I  deny  it  to  be  the  sabbath-day,  and  maintain  that  the 
first  day  and  the  seventh  day  are  not  the  same  thing. 
Scripture  always  contrasts  the  first  day  with  the  seventh. 
The  one  is  the  first,  the  other  is  the  last  day  of  the 
week.  The  first  day  is  a  new  thing,  altogether  apart 
from  the  law.  People  think  that  the  keeping  of  a 
seventh  day  is  the  important  thing.  But  this  is  not 
what  God  says,  but  the  seventh  day;  and  we  are  not  at 
liberty  to  alter  Scripture.  This  is  not  hearing  the  law, 
but  destroying  it.  Who  gave  any  man  liberty  to  change 
the  for  a  ?  specially  as  the  change  makes  an  all-im- 
portant difference.  Let  us  only  beware  of  tradition 
aad  seek  to  understand  the  word  of  God. 

The  denial  that  the  law  is  the  Christian's  rule  of 
walk  is  far  from  impairing  holiness.  The  Holy  Ghost 
brings  in  a  deeper  character  of  holiness  than  was  even 
asked  in  the  Ten  Commandments.  When  our  Lord 
said,  "  Except  your  righteousness  exceed  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,"  He  did  not  mean 
righteousness  imputed  to  us,  but  practically  true.  The 
Christian  has  a  righteousness  that  is  real.     It  is  true 


CHAPTER  V.  151 

that  we  become  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Christ,  but 
that  this  is  the  only  righteousness  of  the  believer,  I 
dispute.  The  Holy  Ghost  produces  a  real  work  in  his 
soul,  founded  upon  the  work  of  Christ — separation 
from  the  world,  devotedness  to  God,  obedience,  and 
love ;  and  all  these  things,  not  merely  according  to  the 
Ten  Commandments,  but  according  to  the  will  of  God 
as  it  was  fully  displayed  in  Christ.  If  any  man  hold 
that  because  the  Lord  kept  the  law.  He  did  nothing 
else,  one  pities  him.  The  keeping  of  the  law  was  a  small 
part  of  His  obedience;  and  we  are  called  to  be  like 
Christ  in  His  devotedness  to  God  at  all  cost.  A  first 
principle  of  practical  Christianity  runs  thus:  "  If  when 
ye  do  well,  and  suffer  for  it,  ye  take  it  patiently,  this 
is  acceptable  with  God."  This  is  a  thing  quite  un- 
known to  the  legal  system.  In  the  Ten  Command- 
ments we  find,  if  a  man  obeyed  his  parents,  he  should 
live  long  on  the  earth.  That  this  is  not  the  principle 
on  which  God  now  deals  is  most  evident;  for  we  have 
all  known  most  obedient  children  taken  away  in  early 
days.  Am  I  denying  that  there  is  an  important  spiritual 
truth  for  me  to  gather  from  that  very  word  ?  Quite  the 
contrary.  St.  Paul  himself  refers  to  this  promise,  not 
at  all,  as  it  seems  to  me,  as  a  motive  why  a  christian 
child  should  obey  its  parents,  but  as  the  general  indica- 
tion of  God's  mind.  It  was  the  first  commandment 
with  promise. 

The  spiritual  instincts  of  Christians,  let  me  add,  are 
beyond  their  system;  and  although  they  are  doctrinally 
under  the  law,  they  desire  to  walk  in  the  Spirit.  I 
have  not  a  single  unkind  feeling  against  those  who 
maintain  that  state  of  things.     But  the  Spirit  of  God 


152  GALATIANS. 

does  speak  of  it  as  a  very  great  error  and  peril.  What 
we  have  to  do,  then,  is  to  understand  the  mind  of  God, 
to  give  utterance  to  it  and  obey.  "  If  ye  be  led  by 
the  Spirit,  ye  are  not  under  the  law."  The  eTews  were. 
Whenever  we  see  the  people  of  God  in  Scripture  under 
the  law,  it  always  means  Israel.  If  a  man  now  puts 
himself  in  a  Jewish  position,  he  takes  upon  himself 
that  responsibility.  In  his  faith  he  may  be  a  Chris- 
tian ;  but  in  outward  forms  and  ordinances  he  is  at  least 
half  a  Jew.  We  ought  to  seek  that  they  may  be  Chris- 
tians, and  nothing  else — to  have  done  with  that  which 
covers  and  obscures  the  character  of  Christ,  and  for 
which  they  have  to  pay  the  sad  penalty  either  of  care- 
lessness of  life,  or  of  having  their  hearts  cast  down  and 
doubting,  instead  of  enjoying  the  liberty  with  which 
Christ  has  made  us  free. 

After  this  the  apostle  draws  out  the  contrast  of  the 
works  of  the  flesh  and  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit. 

"Now  the  works  of  the  flesb  are  manifest" — there 
was  no  difficulty  to  discern  them — "  adultery,  fornica- 
tion, uncleanness,  lasciviousness,  idolatry,  witchcraft, 
hatred,  variance,  emulations,  wrath,  strife,  seditions, 
heresies,  envyings,  murders,  drunkenness,  revellings, 
and  such  like,"  Thus  you  have  human  corruption  and 
human  violence.  You  have  idolatry  and  witchcraft 
brought  in,  and  on  the  other  hand,  seditions  and  here- 
sies, which  refer  to  the  party-spirit  that  miglit  be  at 
work  even  under  a  christian  profession.  A  child  of 
God  might  slip  into  any  of  these  evil  things  for  a  time ; 
but  there  is  a  solemn  sentence  pronounced  upon  them — 
"  Of  the  which  I  tell  you  before,  as  I  have  also  told 
you  in  times  past,  that  they  which  do  such  things  shall 


CHAPTER  V.  153 

not  inherit  tlie  kingdom  of  God."  lie  warns  tliem 
now,  as  he  had  while  he  was  with  them,  "  that  they 
W'hich  do  such  things  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
God."  Whatever  the  difficulty  may  be,  let  us  never 
doubt,  but  most  firmly  receive  it  as  from  God,  that 
Christ  is  the  power  of  God  to  every  one  that  believes. 
He  is  the  power  of  God  not  merely  to  justification,  but 
to  salvation;  and  salvation,  while  it  includes  justifica- 
tion, goes  far  beyond  it,  because  it  takes  in  all  the  course 
of  a  christian  man  till  he  is  actually  in  the  resurrection- 
state  along  with  Christ.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the 
verse,  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling" — ^^not  your  own  forgiveness,  but  your  own 
salvation.  It  is  said  to  those  who  were  already  for- 
given. Thus,  salvation,  in  the  sense  spoken  of  there, 
implies  the  whole  conflict  with  the  power  of  evil  we  are 
passing  through.  We  know  that  we  have  to  do  with 
the  common  enemy ;  but  God  is  at  work  in  us  both  to 
will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure.  We  know  the 
deep  concern  and  regard  which  God  feels  for  us,  as  com- 
mitted to  this  conflict.  We  are  fighting  under  His 
orders— doing  His  will  in  that  thing  as  well  as  in 
others.  So  far  is  God  from  leaving  us  in  any  way, 
that  He  assures  our  soul  He  is  pledged  to  see  us 
through  to  the  end;  but  He  will  have  a  solemn  sense 
of  the  war  with  Satan  in  which  we  are  engaged. 

Then  we  have,  on  the  other  side,  "  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  love."  He  begins  with  love — that  which  is 
of  God,  and  flows  directly  from  God,  and  which  is  the 
knowledge  of  God's  character  more  than  any  other 
thing.  "  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace^ 
long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faitL"     Such  axe 


154  GALATIANS. 

tlie  first  and  weightiest  effects  produced  by  God's  love. 
Then  he  gets  down  to  what  would  more  particularly 
deal  with  one  another:  "meekness,  temperance,"  be- 
cause these  suppose  the  bridle  put  upon  the  evil  nature 
— the  self-control  which  the  Holy  Ghost  works  in  the 
soul  for  the  Lord's  sake,  as  evidently  being  set  in  this 
world  to  be  an  epistle  of  Christ,  so  that  we  should  not 
give  a  false  character  to  Him  whose  name  we  bear. 
But  all  these  are  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit;  and  he  adds, 
"  against  such  there  is  no  law."  When  did  law  ever 
produce  these  ?  So  the  law  will  never  condemn  those 
who  walk  in  these  things ;  as  he  says  to  the  Roman 
saints,  chapter  xiii.,  speaking  of  governors  and  rulers, 
'■'  Do  that  which  is  good,  and  thou  shalt  have  praise  of 
the  same;  for  he  is  the  minister  of  God  to  thee  for 
good."  So  here,  "  against  such  there  is  no  law."  If 
you  are  producing  these  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  there  is  no 
condemnation  against  them. 

Is  the  old  nature  then  forgotten?  Or  is  the  law 
needed  for  disciplining  it?  The  belief  so  thinks; 
but  the  word  says,  on  the  contrary,  "  They  that  are 
Christ's  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  affections 
and  lusts."  He  shows  that  all  that  are  Christ's 
have  gone  through  the  great  question  of  what  was 
not  His:  they  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  affec- 
tions and  lusts.  They  have  submitted,  by  faith,  to  the 
sentence  of  death  on  all  their  nature — they  have  "cru- 
cified the  flesh."  We  know,  of  course,  that  it  is  only 
really  and  fully  done  in  Christ — that  it  is  in  the  cross  of 
Christ  that  the  crucifixion  of  the  flesh,  with  all  its  lusts, 
has  taken  place.  Hence,  too,  it  is  true  of  every  believer. 
The  flesh,  with  the  affections  and  lusts,  is  a  thing  already 


CHAPTER  V.  155 

done  with  in  God's  sight.  If  we  are  Christians  at  all, 
we  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts. 
If  it  were  only  a  person  just  born  of  God,  he  might 
say  he  has  "  crucified  the  flesh,  with  its  affections 
and  lusts." 

But  it  may  be  asked,  Have  not  I  the  flesh  to  crucify  ? 
I  ans\Yer,  it  is  done  already:  you  have  to  believe  it, 
and  to  walk  in  the  strength  that  faith  gives  you.  What 
a  comfort  to  know  that  the  flesh  is  a  judged  thing — 
that  sentence  of  death  has  been  executed  on  it !  What 
will  strengthen  more  than,  that  you  are  not  alive 
in  the  flesh  now,  but  living  in  the  Spirit?  And 
"  if  we  live  in  the  Spirit,  let  us  also  walk  in  the  Spirit." 
Let  this  be  the  standard  by  which  you  desire  to  be 
directed — that  you  have  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in 
you,  and  willing  to  strengthen  you  in  Christ.  Let 
your  aim  be  to  walk  in  that  line  of  things. 

The  Lord  grant  us  to  have  wisdom  from  above,  to 
know  what  we  are,  and  what  we  are  not:  that  we  may 
believe,  whatever  be  the  evil,  whatever  its  strength  or 
tendencies,  there  is  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
strengthen  us  against  and  above  every  evil  thing.  But 
the  Holy  Ghost  will  not  put  forth  His  power,  except  as 
Christ  is  before  us.  If  we  seek  to  please  self  in  any- 
thing, we  shall  only  find  that  God  will  turn  the  self- 
pleasing  we  choose  to  our  chastening.  And  therefore 
what  a  happy  privilege  that,  in  submission  to  God,  we 
may,  as  we  should,  give  ourselves  to  the  glory  of  Christ 
in  everything. 


CHAPTJiR  VI, 

The  close  of  the  last  chapter  had  shown  ns  the  works 
of  the  flesh  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit 
on  the  other,  with  the  very  solemn  injunction  to  the 
children  of  God  that  if  they  lived  in  the  Spirit,  (which 
they  necessarily  did,  if  they  were  children  of  God,)  they 
were  also  to  walk  in  the  Spirit.  It  was  in  vain  to 
speak  about  privilege,  if  there  was  indifference  to  prac- 
tical ways.  We  cannot  have  life  in  the  Holy  Ghost, 
without  also  being  bound  by  the  most  solemn  sanctions 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  should  also  be  the  grand  directing 
force  of  the  walk.  The  act  is  but  the  outward  ex- 
pression of  the  inner  principle.  The  life  can  only  be 
absolutely  known  to  God :  the  walk  is  that  which  is 
manifested  before  men.  But  now,  besides  exhorting 
them  to  beware  of  vain-glory,  whatever  form  it  might 
take,  whether  of  provoking,  or  of  envying  one  another, 
(chap.  V.  26),  we  have  fresh  ground  taken  at  the  begin- 
ning of  chapter  vi. 

"  Brethren,  if  a  man  be  overtaken  in  a  fault,  ye 
which  are  spiritual,  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit 
of  meekness,  considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be 
tempted."  Supposing  a  person  goes  altogether  wrong, 
and  is  positively  surprised  into  what  is  plainly  evil, 
what  then?  Still  the  Holy  Ghost  presses  that  the 
spiritual  should  "  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of 
meekness."  A  very  weighty  word  indeed.  For,  first, 
in  case  of  a  fall,  through  want  of  watchfulness  and  de- 


CHAPTER  VI.  157 

pendence  upon  God,  we  learn  wlio  are  most  adapted  to 
meet  the  need.  It  is  the  obligation  of  all  in  a  general 
way;  but  who  are  those  that  the  Holy  Ghost  urges  to 
deal  well  with  such  a  case?  "  Ye  which  are  spiritual." 
Now  it  does  not  follow  that  he  who  is  born  of  God  is 
spiritual.  To  "  live  in  the  Spirit"  is  a  very  dif- 
ferent thing  from  being  "  spiritual."  A  spiritual  person 
not  only  lives,  but  walks  in  the  Spirit.  Of  course,  he 
has  the  infirmities  of  other  men,  and  may  at  times  show 
nature  ;  but  in  an  obvious  way,  taken  as  a  whole, 
through  the  grace  of  God,  he  has  learnt  to  judge,  not  to 
spare  self,  to  detect,  especially  in  himself,  departure 
from  the  Lord,  and  to  own  it  frankly  and  humbly  be- 
fore God.  In  consequence  of  this  habitual  self-judgment, 
there  will  be  far  greater  tenderness  in  dealing  with  sin 
in  others.  They  may  have  a  keen  discernment;  but 
where  it  comes  to  that  which  is  real  and  most  serious — 
which  perhaps  many  would  give  up  as  making  the  case 
hopeless,  and  think  that  the  person  could  not  be  a 
Christian  at  all — they,  knowing  more  of  the  subtlety  of 
the  flesh  as  well  as  of  the  grace  of  God,  arc  able  to 
count  upon  His  goodness,  and  are  the  very  persons  to 
deal  with  the  evil  and  to  restore  that  soul.  So  that 
you  will  always  find  in  cases  that  call  for  gracious 
handling,  it  is  for  the  spiritual,  not  those  that  are  the 
most  used  themselves  to  trip,  not  those  that  are  apt  to 
indulge  the  flesh  and  depart  from  the  Lord.  These  men 
some  might  think  the  most  likely  to  deal  pitifully 
with  such  as  stumble;  but  on  the  contrary,  those  are 
called  for  who  walk  circumspectly  and  in  self-judgment, 
as  a  general  rule,  and  who  are  tlius  kept  from  slipping, 
through  habitual  leaning  on  a  faithful  Lord;  because 


158  GALATIANS. 

the  very  power  that  preserves  them  from  going  astray 
is  Avhat  gives  them  to  understand  the  grace  of  God  and 
to  use  that  grace  for  others.  Accordingly  these  are 
told  to  "  restore  snch  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness." 
He  adds  further,  "  Considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also 
be  tempted."  This  would  justly  be  before  the  mind's 
eye  of  a  spiritual  man.  He  has  the  deepest  sense  of 
his  own  weakness ;  and  hence  would  he  most  readily 
esteem  others  better  than  himself.  How  is  that?  Not 
of  course  that  he  who  has  made  progress  in  the  ways 
of  God  is  to  count  a  babe's  knowledge  greater  than  his 
own.  Not  that  there  are  not,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the 
Church,  those  who  are  least  esteemed,  and  on  the  other, 
men  of  tried  and  spiritual  judgment.  Not  that  we  are 
to  suppose  all  alike  wise,  strong,  and  honourable.  This 
would  be  not  faith,  but  fanaticism,  and  contrary  to 
every  right  thought.  In  what  sense  then  are  we  to 
esteem  "  others  better  than  ourselves?"  When  a  soul 
that  is  in  any  measure  spiritual,  thinks  of  himself,  what 
he  feels  is  his  immense  falling  short  of  Christ.  He  has 
habitually  before  him  how  greatly  he  fails,  even  of  that 
which  he  desires  in  his  ways  before  God.  But  when  he 
looks  at  his  brother-christian,  let  him  be  the  feeblest 
possible,  and  sees  him  as  a  beloved  one  of  Christ,  in  full 
acceptance  in,  and  the  object  of,  the  Father's  tender  affec- 
tions, this  draws  out  both  love  and  self-loathing  !  Thus, 
if  grace  be  at  work,  what  is  Christ-like  in  another  saint 
rises  at  once  before  the  heart,  and  w^hat  is  unlike  Christ 
in  himself.  So  that  it  is  not  a  question  of  striving  to 
cultivate  high  feelings  about  one's  neighbours,  and  to 
think  them  what  they  are  not,  but  really  believing 
what  is  true  about  them,  and   feeling  rightly  about 


CHAPTER  VI.  159 

ourselves  too.  If  one  thinks  of  what  a  saint  is  in  Christ 
and  to  Christ,  and  what  he  will  be  throngh  Christ, 
then  one's  heart  takes  in  the  wonder  of  His  love,  and 
how  much  the  Lord  makes  of  him :  but  when  the  eye  is 
turned  to  oneself,  all  the  unworthy  ways  and  feelings 
and  shortcomings  come  up  in  humiliating  remembrance. 
So,  in  considering  "  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted," 
with  this  difference,  that  it  is  not  so  much  looking  at 
what  we  have  been,  as  at  what  we  have  to  fear  and 
watch  against. 

But,  further,  in  the  next  verse  he  presses  upon  them 
the  bearino;  of  one  another's  burdens.  There  are  diffi- 
culties,  trials,  sorrows  ;  there  are  things  in  the  shape 
of  infirmity  ;  there  are  circumstances  of  the  most 
variedly  painful  nature  that  press  upon  the  children  of 
God.  Now,  if  we  wish  to  show  our  value  for  the  saints, 
opportunity  need  not  be  lacking.  '^  Bear  ye  one  another's 
burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ."  Stoop  down, 
and  take  up  that  which  your  brother  groans  under.  The 
Ten  Commandments  may  not  demand  it ;  but  so  you  will 
fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.  This  is  the  law  for  us  Chris- 
tians. It  is  not  a  question  of  the  law  of  Moses  ;  because 
althougli  that  was  the  law  of  God,  and  always  must  be 
the  measure  with  which  God  deals  with  the  natural 
man,  lie  is  dealing  here  with  those  who  were  living  in 
the  Spirit  ;  and  the  law  at  Sinai  was  never  given  to  the 
spiritual  man,  but  to  a  fleshly  people,  even  to  Israel. 
The  law  deals  with  the  natural  man,  and  therefore  with 
what  is  evil  in  him.  Who  can  tell  the  new  man,  "  Thou 
shalt  not  kill  ;"  "  thou  shalt  not  steal  ?"  Does  the 
new  man  ever  lust,  or  commit  adultery  ?  The  very , 
notion  carries  upon  its  face  the  evidence  that  the  whole 


1'60  GALATIANS. 

theory  is  false.  The  law  of  the  Ten  Commandments 
never  was  addressed  to  the  new  man  at  all.  The  new 
man  can  make  use  of  it  ;  but  this  is  a  very  different 
thing  from  taking  it  up  as  the  language  of  its  own 
responsibility  before  God.  If  we  are  saints,  we  are  not 
doing  to  live,  but  living  to  do  our  Lord's  will  without 
such  a  thought  as  death  or  the  curse. 

Yon  who  contend  for  a  legal  rule,  what,  I  ask,  is  this 
"law  of  Christ?"  Christ  was  always  occupied  about 
others.  He  never  did,  in  one  act  of  His  life,  His  own 
will.  This  is  precisely  to  be  holy  in  love,  which  Christ 
was:  obedient  and  truthful  in  love  was  v.'hat  charac- 
terized all  His  existence  here  below.  Supposing  we  were 
to  do  any  and  every  duty  merely  because  we  thought  it 
right,  it  would  be  always  wrong.  As  a  Christian,  I 
should  have  failed  in  what  is  nearest  to  God,  and  for 
this  simple  reason — that  merely  doing  duty  because  it 
is  duty,  does  not  put  the  soul  in  the  attitude  of  obedience, 
but  may  be  only  proud  self-pleasing,  and  homage  to  the 
innermost  idol  of  the  heart.  To  do  what  /judge  right 
may  therefore  be  no  better  than  a  subtle  rebellion  against 
God.  I  have  no  right  to  choose  my  own  path.  I  am 
under  obedience,  if  I  take  the  place  of  being  His  creature ; 
and  still  more,  if  I  am  and  own  myself  His  child.  The 
question,  then,  is.  What  is  my  Father's  will?  How 
beautifully  our  Lord  shewed  this,  even  before  He  entered 
upon  the  public  part  of  His  ministry  !  He  had  always, 
and  in  the  highest  sense,  the  consciousness  of  His  own 
relationship.  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  my 
Father's  business?"  And  so  it  was  in  every  case. 
Take  Him  afterwards  in  His  ministry.  Even  in  a  matter 
that  had  so  strong  an  appeal  to  His  affections  as  a  man^ 


CHAPTER  VI.  161 

when  Lazams  was  a-dying,  why  does  He  stay  in  that 
place  two  days  after  hearing  that  he  was  sick  ?  He  acts 
not  only  not  on  the  ground  of  mere  right,  but  not  on 
the  ground  of  mere  love  to  the  person  He  loved ;  He 
must  have  the  Father's  command  before  He  goes. 

This  is  what  we  need  to  bear  in  mind.  If  you  take 
the  law  given  at  Sinai,  you  have  God  requiring  that 
which  condemns  a  sinner.  God  was  not  manifesting 
Himself  there  as  Father.  Take,  again,  the  sovereign 
of  this  country :  she  sends  out  her  army  to  attack  some 
foreign  enemy,  or  a  word  of  authority  to  deal  with  some 
rebellious  province.  Who  would  argue  that  she  was 
acting  as  a  mother  in  these  cases?  Who  would  conclude 
that  thus  we  view  her  in  relation  to  her  children?  It 
is  as  a  sovereign,  and  with  rebellious  subjects,  that  she 
so  acts.  At  Sinai  there  was  a  nation,  God's  rebellious 
subjects  ;  and  He  was  laying  down  in  thunder  and 
lightning,  and  with  a  voice  more  terrible  than  either, 
what  He  could  not  but  require  from  guilty  Israel.  But 
when  God,  who  spoke  thus  terribly,  speaks  now,  how 
is  it?  By  His  Son.  It  is  the  same  God,  but  His 
voice  how  different !  God  always  maintains  His  right 
and  title,  not  only  to  make  good  that  which  He  uttered 
in  connexion  with  Israel  of  old,  but  to  bring  in  that 
which  is  new.  What  means  a  new  covenant,  if  it  does 
not  antiquate  that  which  went  before? 

So  here,  we  have  the  law  of  Christ,  in  pointed  con- 
trast with  the  law  of  Moses,  which  dealt  with  rebellious 
flesh.  The  law  of  Christ  directs  those  who  live  in  the 
Spirit,  and  ought  to  be  walking  in  the  Spirit,  but  who 
have  got,  nevertheless,  an  evil  nature  still.  And  how 
are  they  to  be  strengthened  in  the  new  nature,  and  to 


162  GALATIANS. 

overcome  the  old  ?  He  points  them  at  once  to  Christ, 
and  says,  "  Bear  ye,"  &c.  Such  is  the  loving,  unselfish 
way  to  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.  Interest  your  soul 
about  saints  in  need  and  distress;  and  even  if  there  is 
that  which  is  positively  evil,  it  will  cast  you  upon  God 
to  bring  out  something  from  Christ  suited  to  lift  up  the 
soul  that  has  slipped  into  the  mire.  He  first  introduces 
the  flagrant  case  of  a  person  falling  into  sin,  and  then 
he  enlarges  it.  If  you  want  to  know  what  is  the  path 
of  Christ  now,  and  the  will  of  God,  this  was  what 
Christ  was  doing.  He  came  into  a  world  full  of  evil 
and  opposition  to  God — full  of  pride  and  vanity,  and 
what  was  He  doing  ?  "  He  went  about  doing  good, 
healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  devil,"  &c. 
Though  we  may  not  be  able  to  work  miracles,  yet  in 
all  that  is  in  spirit  like  Christ,  the  moral  principle  of 
the  life  of  Christ  here  below  is  precisely  that  which 
every  believer  has.  If  you  have  Christ  at  all,  you  have 
Christ  not  only  for  atonement,  but  as  your  life.  He 
that  believeth  on  the  Son  has  everlasting  life ;  and  the 
everlasting  life  is  Christ,  just  as  truly  as  by  being  born 
into  the  world  from  Adam  I  have  got  an  old  natural 
life  that  loves  evil,  and  which,  as  it  grows  in  strength, 
grows  in  capacity  for  self-will.  Even  so,  if  I  believe  in 
Christ,  there  is  this  new  life  produced,  which  is  de- 
veloped in  proportion  as  Christ  is  fed  upon  and  looked 
to,  and  as  Christ's  words  and  ways  are  pondered  over  by 
the  soul. 

There  is  an  assimilating  power  communicated  thus 
to  the  believer  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  words  of 
our  Lord  are  spirit  and  life.  It  is  not  only  that  they 
produce  life  in  the  first  instance,  but  they, sustain  the 


CHAPTER  VI.  163 

life,  and  are  the  means  of  its  vigour.  And  tliis  is  what 
the  Apostle  Peter  shows  us.  (1  Peter  i.)  He  speaks 
of  the  incorruptible  seed,  the  word  of  God  which  liveth 
and  abideth  for  ever.  But  then  he  shows  that  the 
same  word  of  God  which  is  the  means  of  first  impart- 
ing the  life  through  the  revelation  of  Christ,  is  also  the 
provision  for  strengthening  and  refreshing  it.  There- 
fore he  exhorts  them  that,  as  new-born  babes,  they 
should  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word.  The  word 
of  God  which  is  first  used  to  introduce  the  life  into  the 
soul,  through  the  making  known  of  Christ,  is  that 
which  now  keeps  up  the  life,  draws  it  out,  brings  it  into 
healthful  exercise.  And  here  is  one  way — "  Bear  ye  one 
another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ." 
This  is  what  Christ  was  doing  when  He  was  here 
below.  He  did  not  please  Himself.  He  never  chose 
the  path  of  ease;  but,  on  the  contrary,  every  case  of 
wretchedness  and  sin  and  sorrow  was  what  occupied 
the  Lord  Jesus,  provided  it  were  the  will  of  God. 
When  He  took  His  place  as  man  on  earth,  there  was 
the  continual  exercise  of  communion  between  the  Lord 
Jesus  and  His  Father,  the  spirit  of  dependence  upon 
the  living  God  that  never  acted  without  His  Father's 
direction.  And  so  it  should  be  with  our  souls.  If  we 
are  thus  laying  ourselves  out  to  bear  one  another's  bur- 
dens, we  need  to  wait  upon  God  about  it  to  know  what 
the  will  of  the  Lord  is.  It  is  not  the  law.  nor  ordi- 
nances, but  "  bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so 
fulfil  the  law  of  Christ." 

"  For  if  a  man  think  himself  to  be  something,"  &c. 
This  is  the  invariable  effect  of  law  acting  upon  the 
spirit.     It  supposes  a  man  to  have  power — at  any  rate, 


JG4  GALATIAXS. 

to  be  still  alive  as  a  man  in  the  "svorld.  But  this  is  the 
very  thing  which,  even  in  our  baptism,  we  declare  is  no 
longer  our  confession.  For  what  does  the  baptism  of  a 
Christian  man  set  forth  ?  It  is  the  acknowledgment  of 
the  Christ  who  is  dead  and  risen,  and  that^  in  Christ's 
death,  I  am  dead  to  sin  and  the  world,  and  God's  judg- 
ment too.  1  have  passed  out  of  the  scene  of  living  men 
upon  the  earth,  and  am  introduced  into  a  new  condition 
before  God ;  I  have  entered  upon  a  new  life ;  I  am  dead 
to  what  I  formerly  lived  to,  and  alive  to  that  which  I 
was  formerly  dead  to.  Into  all  this  Christ  brings  him 
that  believes. 

Manifestly,  then,  "  If  a  man  think  himself  to  be 
something,  when  he  is  nothing,  he  deceiveth  himself." 
The  law  never  crushes  the  pride  of  man;  and  man  will 
bear  with  anything  that  supposes  he  can  do  something. 
The  law  works  upon  the  mere  nature  of  man,  and  puffs 
him  up,  unless  it  be  used  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  slay 
him  in  his  conscience.  Xature  perverts  it  to  the  notion 
that  it  can  do  something;  and  people  love  this,  and  are 
the  more  pleased  wath  themselves.  This  is  what  the 
gospel  destroys  by  the  very  roots.  And  hence  persons 
who  are  uncommonly  self-satisfied  when  put  upon  the 
ground  of  doing  great  things  for  God,  would  be  deeply 
mortified  and  offended  if  told  plainly  that  they  are  not 
capable  of  serving  Him.  How  few  would  bear  to  hear 
that  they  had  never  worshipped  God  all  their  life,  and 
cannot  till  bom  of  God  !  They  are  offended  at  such  a 
doctrine  as  this,  because  it  makes  self  nothing  and  God 
everything ;  it  brings  before  them  what  an  awful  peril 
they  are  exposed  to — lost  indeed.  If  they  believed  it, 
they  would  cry  out  to  God  about  it,  and  look  to  God 


CHAPTER  VI.  105 

to  give  them  new  life.  But  as  long  as  men  are  dealt 
with  on  legal  principles,  the  distinction  between  what 
is  of  the  first  man  and  the  Second  is,  more  or  less, 
merged.  Man  is  addressed  as  snch,  and  not  thorouglily 
as  a  sinner,  or  as  a  saint;  but  the  two  things  are  con- 
fused together:  so  that  souls  do  not  know  clearly 
whether  they  are  saved  or  lost,  whether  they  have 
passed  from  death  unto  life,  or  are  still  under  the  wrath  of 
God.  This  is  the  reason  why  we  find  so  many,  even  some 
who  are  true  believers,  frequently  suffering  from  clouds 
and  eclipses.  The  root  of  the  matter  is  the  abuse  of 
the  law.  It  was  what  worked  among  the  Galatians ; 
and  what  has  tied  and  bound  with  the  chain  of  their 
sins  so  many  thousands  of  God's  children  ever  since. ' 
Thus  it  was  acting  upon  their  flesh  and  it  made  them 
think  themselves  to  be  something,  when  in  truth  they 
were  nothing ;  and  if  a  man  docs,  evidently,  as  the 
apostle  adds,  "  he  deceiveth  himself."  Nothing  can  be 
more  cutting  than  the  words  here. 

But  if  they  bowed  to  the  word  and  were  willing 
to  be  nothing,  but  that  God  should  work,  he  adds, 
"  let  every  man  prove  his  own  work."  God  begins 
upon  the  ground  that  we  are  nothing;  that  the  wise 
man  must  become  a  fool,  in  order  that  he  may  learn 
to  be  wise.  Man  does  not  like  it,  and  kicks  against 
it ;  and  the  consequence  is,  that  he  always  remains 
in  his  own  imbecility.  Whereas  you  will  never  get 
a  man  in  the  truth  of  his  own  rnin  without  finding 
God  there  in  the  truth  of  His  love,  giving  him 
eternal  life  in  His  Son.  And  what  then?  Let 
him  "prove  his  own  work;  and  then  shall  he  have 
rejoicing    in    himself    alone,    and    not    in    another." 


166  GALATIANS. 

Supposing  one  really  to  examine  everything,  thus 
thoroughly  to  prove  his  work,  then  shall  he  have 
rejoicing  in  himself  alone,  and  not  in  another.  There 
the  apostle  is  giving  a  home-thrust:  let  him  put  it  to 
the  proof.  No  doubt  the  Lord  will  own  true  service; 
hut  wherever  a  man  honestly  examines  and  proves  his 
work,  it  is  never  a  subject  of  self-gratulation,  but  most 
humiliating  in  every  possible  way.  But,  at  least,  when 
the  true  time  comes,  there  will  be  the  reaping,  if  we 
faint  not. 

The  apostle  winds  up  this  part  of  his  subject  by 
another  word,  and  one  that  might  appear  to  be  para- 
doxical, if  compared  with  the  second  verse.  "  For 
every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden."  In  fact,  we  have 
here  the  two  great  practical  principles  of  Christianity : 
the  one  is  active  energetic  love,  which  bears  the  burdens 
of  others  ;  and  the  other  is  personal  responsibility. 
"  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden."  Observe,  this 
is  not  sf)eaking  about  salvation.  If  a  man  had  to  bear 
his  own  burden  in  the  matter  of  justification  before  God, 
it  would  be  to  destroy  every  hope.  "  Enter  not,"  says 
the  Psalmist,  "  into  judgment  with  thy  servant:  for  in 
thy  sight  shall  no  man  living  be  justified."  If  in  this 
question  God  enters  into  judgment  with  me,  I  am  lost. 
He  says,  "  Enter  not  into  judgment"  (not  with  a  sinful 
man,  but)  *' with  thy  servant."  It  is  a  converted  or 
regenerate  man.  Therefore  it  is  that  our  Lord  brings 
out,  in  the  question  whether  a  man  shall  not  be  left  to 
perish  in  his  own  death,  or  be  delivered  by  the  pov/er  of 
the  life  of  Christ,  a  totally  different  principle.  He  says, 
"  Verily  I  say  unto  you.  He  that  heareth  my  words, 
and  believeth  on  him  that  sent  me,  hath  everlasting 


CHAPTER  VI.  1C7 

life,  and  shall  not  come  into  judgment,  but  is  passed 
from  death  nnto  life."  You  will  observe  that  in  this 
passage  I  have  altered  the  word  "  condemnation"  to 
judgment;"  I  have  done  it  advisedly,  because  it  is  the 
only  true  meaning  of  the  word.  "  Condemnation"  is  a 
positive  mistake.  That  which  is  rightly  translated 
"  condemnation"  elsewhere,  is  totally  different  from  this. 
Thus,  "  there  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in 
Christ  Jesus,"  is  not  the  same  word  at  all.  But  some- 
times where  our  Lord  and  the  Holy  Spirit  say  "judg- 
ment," the  translators  have  ventured  to  depart  from 
the  word  of  God,  and  have  introduced  "  condemnation." 
Nor  is  this  confined  to  one  passage  only.  In  the 
remarkable  revelation  about  the  Lord's  Supper  in 
1  Corinthians  xi.,  a  very  similar  mistake  occurs.  The 
translators  have  introduced  a  word  and  idea  of  their 
own,  unequivocally  erroneous:  and  have  ventured  to 
say,  that  "  he  that  eateth  and  drinketh  unworthily, 
eateth  and  drinketh  damnation  to  himself."  It  is  not 
true.  God  says,  "  he  eateth  and  drinketh  judgment  to 
himself."  There  is  no  competent  judge,  no  christian 
man  acquainted  with  the  language  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
that  could  deny  it,  if  he  fairly  examined  the  evidence. 
Human  tradition  accounts  for  the  proneness  of  persons 
to  put  aside  plain  principles  of  the  truth.  For  it  is 
not  so  much  a  question  to  be  decided  on  critical 
grounds ;  but  such  an  alteration  contradicts  the  whole 
object  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  passage.  What  is  the 
apostle  telling  these  Corinthians?  You  have  been 
treating  the  supper  of  the  Lord  unworthily,  by  making 
it  a  common  thing.  Some  of  you  have  gone  so  far  as 
to  forget  yourselves  in  open,  gross  sin.     There  is  a 

M 


168  GALATIAXS. 

peculiar  solemnity  about  the  Lord's-supper  as  about  the 
Lord's-day.  He  who  pretends  that  the  Lord's-day  is 
the  Sabbath,  and  that  the  Lord's-supper  resembles  a 
Jewish  ordinance,  does  not  know  what  the  two  most 
characteristic  christian  institutions  mean.  The  Lord's- 
day  differs  from  every  other  day,  the  day  of  grace  and 
resurrection  (the  Sabbath  being  the  token  of  creation 
and  law  j.  So  with  the  Lord's-supper :  in  it  the  Lord  sets 
before  the  believer  his  perfect  deliverance,  the  blood  and 
the  broken  body  of  Christ,  and  gives  the  witness  to  his 
soul  that  he  is  free  from  all  condemnation.  Now,  says 
the  apostle,  you  who  have  eaten  and  drank  as  at  a 
common  meal,  you  have  been  participating  unworthily. 
For  a  converted  person  might  eat  and  drink  unwor- 
thily. These  Corinthian  saints  took  it  lightly,  and  the 
devil  got  advantage  over  them,  and  some  had  even 
become  drunken.  This,  says  the  apostle,  was  to  eat 
and  drink  judgment  to  themselves,  not  the  Lord's- 
supper.  The  consequence  was  that  some  of  them  were 
sick,  and  others  were  dying.  He  lets  them  know  that 
the  Lord  was  judging  them,  and  laying  His  hand  upon 
them.  But  this  most  unquestionably  was  judgment, 
not  "damnation."  And  what  was  the  end  of  the  Lord  in 
all  this  ?  "  That  we  should  not  be  condemned  with  the 
world."  "  If  we  would  judge  ourselves,  we  should  not  be 
judged;  but  when  we  are  judged,  we  are  chastened  of 
the  Lord,  that  we  should  not  be  condemned  with  the 
world."  It  is  that  we  should  not  have  damnation; 
whereas  the  common  version  makes  it  out  that  they 
were  exposed  to  this  very  doom.  Eead  the  word  as 
"judgment,"  and  you  will  find  that  an  entirely  new 
light  is  thrown  on  the  passage.     Introduce  the  wrong 


CHAPTER  VI.  IGO 

word,  and  you  disturb  the  balance,  beyond  all  recovery ; 
but  the  moment  you  return  to  the  true  sense,  suggested 
in  the  margin,  all  is  made  plain.  What  before  was 
dark,  and  troubled  your  soul,  now  you  see  to  be  simple, 
and  solemn,  holy,  and  withal  comforting.  If  you  have 
been  treating  the  memento  of  the  Lord's  sufferings 
lightly,  you  are  in  danger  of  thus  coming  under  His 
hand.  Some  had  even  been  taken  away  ;  but  it  is, 
"  that  we  should  not  be  condemned  with  the  world." 
The  intimation  is,  that  they  were  such  naughty  chil- 
dren that  they  could  not  be  left  in  this  world  any 
longer.  Therefore  He  put  sickness  upon  them,  and 
took  them  away  by  death. 

The  meaning  of  the  word  (Kpi/ua)  in  1  Corinthians 
xi.  is  closely  akin  to  that  in  John  v.  (/cptats).  What 
our  Lord  is  teaching  in  the  gospel  is  that  men  must 
have  one  or  the  other  thing  from  Christ — either  life 
or  judgment.  The  main  difference  is,  that  in  John 
V.  the  judgment  is  the  final  and  eternal  act  of  judging; 
"whereas  1  Corinthians  xi.  speaks  of  a  disciplinary  pro- 
cess in  this  world.  But  the  right  word  is  "  judgment," 
not  "  condemnation."  Our  Lord  shows  Himself  to  be 
the  giver  of  life  in  communion  with  the  Father,  and  the 
exclusive  executor  of  judgment.  He  is  giving  life  now: 
whoever  believes  in  Him,  has  life ;  whoever  refuses  Him 
must  come  into  judgment.  For  no  person  can  be  the 
object  of  both  life  and  judgment.  The  reason  why  people 
shall  come  into  judgment,  is  because  they  reject  the 
Son  of  God  and  eternal  lif«  in  Him.  "  He  that  hath 
the  Son  hath  life."  This  is  the  point  of  our  Lord's 
words.  They  might  ask.  How  is  this  life  everlasting 
to  be  had  ?     Is  it  by  obedience  ?  or  by  an  ordinance  f 


170  GALATIANS. 

Neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  "  Verily  I  say  tinto 
you,  He  that  heareth  my  word,  and  believeth  on  Him 
that  sent  me,  hath  everlasting  life."  He  that  so  hears 
and  believes,  knows  that  God  is  interested  about  souls 
— that  He  wishes  to  have  them  happy  and  without  sin 
through  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  further,  "  he  shall 
not  come  into  judgment,  but  is  passed  from  death  unto 
life."  It  is  the  very  same  thing  in  Heb.  ix.  27.  "  As 
it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die,  but  after  this  the 
judgment."  It  is  the  same  word.  This  is  man's  por- 
tion, from  which  he  cannot  escape.  Man  as  such  must 
die,  and  must  be  judged.  But  mark,  it  is  he  who  lives 
and  dies  as  a  mere  natural  man.  It  is  not  said  that  it 
is  so  appointed  for  the  Christian.  On  the  contrary, 
there  are  many  Christians  that  will  never  die ;  and  no 
saint  will  ever  be  judged  eternally. 

I  must  prove  what  I  am  saying  by  other  passages. 
"  The  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a 
shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the 
trump  of  God,  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first. 
Then  we  which  are  alive  and  remain  shall  be  caught  up 
together  with  them  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in 
the  air."  That  is,  the  living  saints  are  caught  up  with 
the  dead  that  are  risen  already.  But  take  another 
scripture.  "  We  shall  not  all  sleep."  Men  must  all 
die;  but  "  z^e  shall  not  all  sleep."  We  shall  not 
all  necessarily  die;  but  we  shall  all  be  changed. 
Whether  they  be  dead  Christians,  or  living  ones, 
all  must  be  changed,  conformed  to  the  image  of  the 
Firstborn,  glorified  in  their  bodies.  But  all  saints 
will  not  have  departed  this  life,  nor  need  resurrec- 
tion;  for   those  Christians   who   will  be  found  alive 


CHAPTER  YI.  171 

wTien  Christ  comes,  will  be  taken  up  to  be  Avith  Christ, 
and  changed  into  His  glorious  image,  without  passing 
through  death  at  all,  like  so  many  Enochs,  at  once 
transformed  into  the  likeness  of  Christ's  glory.  This  is 
what  all  of  us  as  Christians  ought  to  be  waiting  for, 
without  knowing  when  it  may  be.  Therefore  it  is  said, 
"  We  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be  changed." 

But  what  will  become  ofthose  who  have  refused  Christ? 
They  must  all  be  judged.  "  It  is  appointed  unto  men 
once  to  die;  but  after  this  the  judgment."  But  more 
than  this — "  as  it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die, 
but  after  this  the  judgment;  so  Christ  was  once  offered 
to  bear  the  sins  of  many ;  and  unto  them  that  look  for 
Him  shall  He  appear  the  second  time  without  sin  unto 
salvation."  There  you  have  the  two  portions: — man's, 
death  and  judgment;  the  Christian's,  Christ,  the  one 
offering  for  sins,  and  about  to  return  in  glory  for  their 
full  salvation,  not  judgment.  The  question  of  sin  bad 
been  so  completely  settled  at  the  first  coming  of  Christ, 
that  not  a  single  question  will  ever  be  raised  about  it. 
When  He  comes  again,  "  He  will  appear  the  second 
time  without  sin  [i.e.,  apart  from  sin,  having  nothing 
to  do  with  it]  unto  salvation."  He  had  suffered  for  sin 
Himself — put  it  away  Himself;  and  the  consequence 
is,  every  believer,  no  matter  where  he  is,  no  matter 
what  his  ignorance  may  be,  is  entitled  to  wait  for  the 
Lord,  who  will  come  for  him,  and  come  for  all  that  have 
slept  in  Christ  before  him;  he  is  entitled  to  know  that 
Christ  will  never  call  him  into  judgment,  because,  hav- 
ing been  judged  for  him,  and  having  for  ever  put  away 
gin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself,  He  shall  appear  to  such 
the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation.     But  those 


172  GALATIANS. 

v^'ho  refuse  Christ,  so  far  from  not  coming  into  judgment, 
will  be  raised  expressly  for  it  from  the  dead  afterwards. 
This  is  the  "resurrection  of  judgment."  Its  effect,  doubt- 
less, will  be  damnation,  but  its  scriptural  designation  is 
"judgment."  It  is  the  same  word  as  before.  The  object 
of  raising  the  evil  will  be  for  judgment.  And  what  is 
the  character  of  the  believer's  resurrection?  Life — that 
the  same  life  which  is  now  given  to  our  souls  should 
liave  its  full  course  and  display  over  our  bodies — that 
we  should  be  perfectly  filled  with  the  life  of  Christ, 
body  and  soul. 

Such  is  the  Christian's  expectation.  Hence,  in  this 
fifth  verse,  ("  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden,") 
it  is  not  the  least  a  question  of  bearing  each  our  bur- 
den in  judgment.  If  this  were  so,  not  a  soul  could  be 
— not  one  deserves  to  be — saved.  For  who  has  not 
been  guilty  of  sins,  dark  and  deadly  sins  ? — sins  that 
God  could  not  possibly  forgive,  unless  He  had  a  perfect 
way  of  His  own,  and  He  has.  But  that  way  cost  Him 
His  Son,  and  the  cross  of  His  Son;  and  the  cross  is 
the  triumph  of  God.  In  it  Christ  has  put  a^v ay  sin 
for  ever  for  every  soul  that  believes  in  Him.  There- 
fore when  He  says,  "  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own 
burden,"  it  is  simply  in  view  of  the  difficulties  and 
trials  in  practical  life.  Mind,  he  says,  that  you  bear  one 
another's  burdens ; — but,  after  all,  every  man  must  bear 
his  own  burden.  Every  one  of  us  must  have  to  do  with 
God  for  himself.  We  cannot  get  any  one  else  to 
answer  for  us.  Some  make  Hebrews  xiii.  17  ("  they 
watcli  for  your  souls  as  they  that  must  give  account") 
to  teach  that  ministers  answer  for  the  souls  of  others; 
but  this  is  nonsense,  or  worse.     The  principle  is  false. 


CHAPTER  VI.  173 

There  is  no  sucli  thing  as  a  person  giving  an  account 
of  another's  sonl.  Each  must  give  an  account  of  him- 
self to  God.  The  sinner  must  be  judged;  but  every 
saint,  as  well  as  sinner,  must  give  account  of  everything 
unto  God.  The  believer,  says  our  Lord,  shall  not  come 
into  judgment;  which  means  that  a  man  is  put  upon 
his  trial  to  see  whether  he  shall  be  saved  or  not.  This 
can  never  be  the  case  with  a  Christian  man.  Every- 
thing will  be  opened  out  before  the  Lord — not  only  the 
sins  we  may  have  done  since  we  were  believers,  but 
what  we  committed  when  we  were  unconverted.  We 
might  suppose  this  would  be  inexpressibly  terrible.  But 
let  us  remember  that  the  condition  in  which  the  be- 
liever will  give  account  of  himself  to  God,  is  when  he 
will  be  like  Christ — when  he  has  not  one  feeling  which 
is  not  of  Christ — no  desire  bat  what  will  be  for  the 
glory  of  Christ ;  all  sense  of  shame  will  be  gone,  and 
only  that  will  abide  which  is  according  to  Christ.  The 
thought  that  Christ  will  set  us  all  perfectly,  like  Him- 
self, in  glory,  is  at  once  an  answer  to  every  anxiety  of 
the  soul.  But  while  this  is  true,  it  is  important  to 
bear  in  mind  that  now  there  is  a  very  active  judgment 
going  on.  The  Father  is  watching  our  ways  and  deal- 
ing with  us;  and  we  ought  to  be  examining  our  ways 
day  by  day.  Every  one,  saint  or  sinner,  must  render 
to  God  an  account  of  himself:  His  power  will  accomp- 
lish it  in  both;  in  the  one,  to  his  utter  condemnation — 
in  the  other,  that  he  may  learn  how  absolutely  he  is 
indebted  to  the  grace  of  God.  But  this  is  a  dififerent 
thing  from  judgment.  We  cannot  too  strongly  press, 
that  to  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ  is 
not  necessarily  judgment.     No  word  of  Scripture  can 


174  GALATIANS. 

ever  set  aside  the  truth  that  "  he  that  believeth 

shall  720^  come  into  judgment."  God  never  contradicts 
Himself.  Every  man  bearing  his  own  burden  has  to  do 
■with  our  responsibility.  What  a  wonderful  thing  is 
this  ! — that  we  have  done  with  our  responsibility  as 
men ;  and  having  got  Christ,  a  new  responsibility  is 
begun  for  us.  We  have  now  to  behave  ourselves  as  those 
•who  have  eternal  life,  who  belong  not  to  ourselves,  but  to 
Him  who  died  for  us  and  rose  again.  Now  commences 
our  responsibility  to  live  to  Christ — to  devote  to  Him 
the  new  life  that  God  has  given  us,  conscious  that  along 
with  this  the  Lord  sifts  day  by  day  our  ways. 

Then  comes  another  thing,  and  it  would  appear  that 
these  saints  had  forgotten  it :  "  Let  him  that  is  taught 
in  the  word  communicate  unto  him  that  teacheth,  in  all 
good  things."  1  think  there  is  a  little  danger  of  our- 
selves forgetting  this  kind  of  relationship  to  all  those 
whom  the  Lord  has  raised  up  for  the  good  of  the  Church. 
There  are  certain  landmarks  never  to  be  obliterated. 
One  is  this  very  thing — the  privilege  and  obligation  of 
the  taught  to  remember  Christian  teachers  in  love.  It 
is  not  said,  To  him  that  teacheth  them;  but,  "  To  him 
that  teacheth."  What  blessed  largeness  of  feeling  this  ! 
Supposing  you  are  free  from  such  a  need  in  the  parti- 
cular place  where  you  live,  are  you  to  be  so  short- 
sighted as  to  overlook  the  claims  of  the  Lord  elsewhere  ? 
This  would  be  selfish  indeed.  Nothing  could  be  more 
degrading  for  Christians  than,  when  they  have  aban- 
doned evils  here  or  there,  and  do  no  longer  what  was 
almost  compulsory,  that  they  should  take  advantage  of 
the  name  of  the  Lord  to  have  what  one  might  call  a 
cheap    Church;    forgetting   that   they   belong   to   the 


CHAPTER  VI.  175 

Chnrch  of  God  as  a  whole.  "  Let  him  that  is  taught 
in  the  word  communicate  unto  him  that  teacheth  in  all 
good  things."  Let  none  suppose  that  this  was  given 
only  for  early  days ;  or  that  any  circumstances  can  alter 
the  responsibility  of  the  saints  in  this  respect.  It  is 
well  for  us  to  remind  one  another  of  it,  that  we  are 
members  of  the  body  of  Christ.  Take  the  case  of 
persons  labouring  abroad:  has  not  that  a  voice  for  us  ? 
What  a  claim  upon  our  love  and  sympathy  !  The  Lord 
looks  for  far  greater  self-denial  and  service  of  love  now 
than  when  it  was  a  question  of  law.  Let  us  not  con- 
tent ourselves  with  ceasing  to  do  evil ;  but  also  learn  to 
do  good. 

*' Be  not  deceived;  God  is  not  mocked;  for  whatso- 
ever a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap.  For  he 
that  soweth  to  his  flesh,  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  cor- 
ruption." Evidently  there  it  is  a  question  of  self- 
indulgence  in  one  way  or  another.  If  there  is  a  heart 
for  the  Lord,  a  way  will  soon  be  found  wherein  to  serve 
Him  fully ;  but  that  way  often  demands  much  self- 
denial.  No  circumstances  set  this  aside.  '•  God  is  not 
mocked:  for  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he 
also  reap ;  for  he  that  soweth  to  his  flesh  shall  of  the 
flesh  reap  corruption;  but  he  that  soweth  to  the  Spirit 
shall  of  the  Spirit  reap  life  everlasting."  This  is  very 
strong,  yet  most  true.  A  person  might  say  to  me,  I 
understood  you  to  teach,  that  those  that  believe  had 
life  everlasting  already;  but  here  it  is  said.  He  that 
soweth  to  the  Spirit  shall  of  the  Spirit  reap  life  ever- 
lasting. Both  statements  are  of  the  utmost  value;  but 
the  point  of  view  is  totally  different.  If  God  is  ex- 
horting His  people  to  a  holy  walk,  He  shows  that  life 


176  GALATIANS. 

everlasting  is  the  crown  of  that  walk,  and  the  end  of  it. 
Whatever  may  he  the  salvation  that  grace  brings  in,  it 
never  sets  aside  the  value  of  holy  devotedness  to  God. 
And,  therefore,  those  who  have  true  faith,  manifest  also 
real  holiness ;  and  only  those.  The  two  things  coalesce. 
The  believer  in  Christ  receives  everlasting  life.  What 
is  the  consequence?  He  sows  to  the  Spirit,  and  reaps 
life  everlasting.  The  life  everlasting  here  is  evidently 
what  we  are  to  have  in  glory.  The  everlasting  life  spoken 
of  by  John  is  what  the  saint  possesses  on  earth.  Both 
are  true.  In  glory  he  will  find  everlasting  life  with- 
out alloy.  I  receive  it  now  as  a  believer  from  Christ,  and 
I  find  it  in  heaven,  pursuing  the  path  of  the  holy  will  of 
God.  The  life-resurrection  of  believers  consists  of  those 
who  have  done  good  here  below.  "  Let  us  not  be  weary 
in  well-doing;  for  in  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint 
not."  There  is  often  a  great  danger  of  relaxing  in  the 
course.  A  man  starts  well  and  graciously ;  but  after 
awhile  he  finds  that  he  has  been  taken  advantage  of  by 
so  many  people,  that  he  becomes  reserved  and  suspicious. 
This  is  to  be  weary  in  well-doing,  or  its  effect.  He  is 
determined  to  be  duped  no  more.  The  truth  is,  there 
is  a  great  deal  of  flesh  in  that  kind  of  talk  and  feeling. 
Where  souls  are  occupied  with  the  grace  of  God,  they 
are  not  so  easily  worn  out.  Because  another  has  been 
selfish,  is  that  a  reason  why  a  saint  should  become  sel- 
fish too?  The  becoming  state  for  a  Christian  is  to  have 
an  open,  generous  heart,  and  to  be  active  in  looking  out 
for  suitable  ways  of  doing  good.  The  Lord  does  not 
say,  Give  wliat  they  ask ;  but  the  principle  remains 
true,  that  the  Christian  is  to  keep  the  blessed  vantage- 
ground  of  being  the  giver.     If  I  am  on  the  standing  of 


CHAPTER  VI.  177 

law,  I  shall  merely  be  a  bargainer;  but  if  on  tlie  ground 
of  grace  and  faitli  in  Christ,  I  shall  have  the  more 
blessed  place ;  and  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to 
receive.  This  reaping,  plainly,  is  in  glory.  We  are  not 
to  expect  it  here.  We  may  meet  with  that  which  is 
sweet  and  grateful,  but  we  are  not  to  be  surprised  if  we 
do  not,  and  if  there  is  much  from  men  that  is  painful. 
Let  us  remember,  it  is  to  the  Lord  we  are  lending.  Is 
there  anything  disappointing  there?  He  that  looks  to 
the  Lord  is  never  disappointed.  "  As  we  have  there- 
fore opportunity,  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men."  This 
is  the  business  of  the  Christian — doing  good,  and  "  es- 
pecially unto  them  wdio  are  of  the  household  of  faith." 
There  is  a  special  connexion  with  saints ;  but  we  are  not 
to  stop  there.  *'  As  we  have  therefore  opportunity,  let 
us  do  good  unto  all  men,  specially  unto  them  who  are 
of  the  household  of  faith." 

It  is  important  to  bear  in  mind,  in  reading  every  part 
of  the  word  of  God,  that  there  is  nothing  brought  in 
without  the  direct  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
There  is  one  particular  passage  in  1  Corinthians  vii., 
where  the  apostle  asserts  expressly,  that  it  was  not  the 
Lord,  but  himself,  who  gives  a  certain  judgment  about 
the  natural  relations  of  believers.  But  even  the  apostle 
did  not  write  thus  without  the  Holy  Ghost.  He 
was  inspired  to  say  it  was  not  the  Lord,  but  himself. 
Hence  there  is  not  the  slightest  contrariety,  even  in  so 
exceptional  a  manner  of  speaking.  Again,  take  the 
Book  of  Job,  where  you  have  Satan  speaking,  as  w^ell 
as  elsewhere.  But  then,  while  no  intelligent  person 
would  assert  that  what  Satan  said  was  inspired,  yet  the 
writer  of  the  book  was  inspired  to  give  it  to  us  per- 


178  GALATIAXS. 

fectly;  the  writer  was  thoroughly  led  of  God  to  present 
just  so  much  of  what  those  concerned  said,  good  or 
evil,  man,  Satan,  or  the  Lord  Himself,  as  would  accom- 
plish the  divine  object  in  that  writing.  Thus  there 
is  no  exception  whatever  in  the  Bible  to  the  grand 
truth  that  "  all  scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of 
God."  This  is  not  a  mere  deduction  of  man,  but  the 
positive  doctrine  of  God  Himself.  Everything  coming 
under  the  designation  of  "  Scripture"  (Traaa  ^(parpr'})  is 
inspired  of  God.  Such  is  the  express  statement  of  the 
Apostle  Paul  in  his  last  epistle,  (2  Tim.,)  not  limiting  it, 
I  apprehend,  to  what  was  already  extant,  but  leaving 
room  also  for  what  was  to  be  written,  such  as  the 
Apocalypse.  *'  All  scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of 
God,"  &c.  Whether  what  had  been  given,  or  the  little 
that  remained  in  order  to  close  the  canon  of  the  Bible, 
all  was  equally  from  God ;  not  all  is  equally  lofty  in  its 
character,  not  all  taking  the  form*of  doctrine,  not  even 
all  revelation — for  revelation  and  inspiration  are  two 
different  things.  In  giving  the  account  of  our  Lord's 
life,  the  writers  occasionally,  of  course,  reported  what 
they  themselves  saw  and  heard.  It  was  inspired,  but  a 
revelation  is  that  which  man  never  knew.  When  the 
Apostle  Paul  says,  It  is  by  the  word  of  the  Lord  I  de- 
clare unto  you,  that  the  Lord  shall  descend  from  heaven 
with  a  shout,  that  is  not  merely  an  inspired  portion,  but 
a  revelation.  So,  of  course,  all  prophecy  is  necessarily 
a  revelation ;  and  it  was  only  in  case  of  a  positive  reve- 
lation that  there  was  any  licence  to  hinder  a  person  who 
might  be  speaking;  no  matter  how  important  what  he 
was  communicating,  if  something  was  revealed  to  ano- 
ther who  was  sitting  by,  he  was  entitled  to  stop  the 


CHAPTER  VI.  179 

speaker.  This  is  necessarily,  it  seems  to  me,  at  an  end 
now.  Kevelation  being  complete,  any  attempt  to  act 
upon  it  would  be  not  only  irregular  and  indecent,  but  a 
virtual  pretension  to  a  new  revelation,  which  is  posi- 
tively false,  and  a  dishonour  to  the  old.  When  there 
was  still  a  part  of  the  mind  of  God  yet  to  be  imparted, 
God  maintained  the  sovereign  right  of  His  Spirit  to  in- 
troduce a  revelation.  But  when  all  the  mind  of  God 
was  thoroughly  revealed  in  His  word,  such  a  line  of 
conduct  would  naturally  terminate.  Accordingly, 
although  a  person  might  have  what  was  most  truly 
from  God,  it  would  be  hi&  duty  to  wait  till  the  due 
time  came;  flesh,  Satan,  might  hinder,  but  God  is 
above  all  difficulties,  I  make  these  general  remarks  in 
reference  to  the  verse  which  is  about  to  come  before  us. 
It  might  seem  somewhat  surprising  in  an  epistle  so 
full  of  statements  of  doctrine,  and  appeals  to  the  con- 
science and  heart.  In  the  midst  of  all  this,  the  apostle 
says,  "  Ye  see  ho\v  large  a  letter  I  have  written  to  you 
wath  my  own  hand.  Or  if  you  take  the  phrase,  as  it 
may  very  well  be  taken,"  Ye  see  with  what  large  letters," 
&c.,  it  is  still  more  striking.  Writing  was  somewhat 
unusual,  even  for  the  Apostle  Paul.  To  write  an  im- 
portant document  was  not  common,  save  through  a  sec- 
retary ;  it  was  a  trade  or  occupation  to  itself.  Therefore 
it  was  the  habit  of  those  occupied  actively  and  arduously 
otherwise,  to  employ  some  one  to  write  for  them.  In 
this  instance,  however,  the  apostle  wrote  himself, 
and,  from  not  being  used  to  writing,  he  drew  attention 
to  the  large  characters  in  the  epistle.  It  was  compara- 
tively a  short  letter,  but  it  was  all  written  by  him; 
and,  from  not  being  used  to  write  his  own  compositions, 


180  GALATIANS. 

the  letters  seem  to  have  been  in  this  large  handwriting, 
executed  probably  with  considerable  difficulty  to  him- 
self. For  we  must  remember  that  there  was  a  great 
difference  in  the  facility  afforded  for  writing  then,  and 
at  the  present  time.  But  there  was  something  con- 
nected with  the  manner  and  bearing  of  the  whole 
epistle  in  this  simple  fact.  It  is  not  a  mere  isolated 
circumstance,  but  the  apostle  lays  stress  on  it,  because 
of  the  state  and  dangers  of  the  Galatians  whom  he 
was  addressing.  The  Holy  Ghost  led  him  out  in  the 
strongest  and  most  ardent  desire  for  their  deliverance. 
He  therefore  put  aside  any  thought  of  employing  a 
medium  between  them  and  himself;  no  matter  what 
the  difficulty,  he  will  write  to  them  himself.  On  other 
occasions,  he  might  employ  Tertius;  but  the  case  in 
hand  was  so  urgent,  the  question  at  stake  so  all-en- 
grossing and  momentous,  that  every  other  task  must 
give  way.  It  was  an  hour  so  full  of  grave  peril,  that 
he  takes  no  account  of  time,  trouble,  or  anything  else. 
It  was  a  testimony  of  his  instense  interest  in  these 
Galatian  saints,  and  so  much  the  more  striking,  because 
of  the  marked  absence  of  his  customary  greetings  of 
personal,  brotherly  kindness.  There  we  have  a  beauti- 
ful confirmation  of  the  remarkable  way  in  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  mentions  facts  that  bear  the  impress  of 
God's  own  mind,  His  care  and  love  for  His  people.  His 
deep  concern  in  them.  The  apostle  himself  draws  at- 
tention to  the  circumstances  of  this  epistle.  He  had 
written  by  others,  and  to  others,  far  more  freely;  for,  as 
I  said  before,  there  is  not  a  single  salutation  in  the 
epistle.  Not  that  he  was  straitened  in  desire  before 
God;  but  he  could  not  let  out  his  Christian  affections 


CHAPTER  VI.  181 

toward  them.  There  was  that  in  their  conduct  which, 
though  it  might  be  mingled  with  good,  was  so  disas- 
trous and  contrary  to  Christ's  glory,  that  he  stood  in 
doubt  about  them;  he  hoped  about  them,  and  that  was 
all.  He  had  confidence  in  the  Lord  touching  them; 
but  if  he  looked  at  themselves — at  what  they  were 
doing  and  saying — he  could  have  none. 

The  two  facts,  then — the  absence  of  personal  salu- 
tation, and  his  writing  the  letter  himself — both  bear  a 
remarkable  testimony  to  the  manner  of  God's  love 
working  through  man's  heart.  All  the  mere  inter- 
change of  the  fraternal  amenities  is  at  an  end.  People 
would  have  said.  How  unkind  of  Paul !  But  brotherly 
kindness  is  not  love,  though  people  often  confound 
them.  Had  the  apostle,  as  things  were,  sent  friendly 
messages  to  one  or  another,  it  would  have  been  merely 
human,  and  not  of  God.  He  could  do  that  in  writing 
to  the  Romans,  and  even  to  the  Corinthians,  but  not  to 
the  Galatians.  What  an  idea  this  gives  of  their  state ! 
And  yet  there  were  to  be  greater  abominations  than 
these:  things  incomparably  worse  must  creep  in,  but 
these  were  reserved  for  John.  And  though  of  all 
others,  he  was  (may  I  say  it  ?)  the  conspicuous  cham- 
pion of  love,  yet  so  far  was  John  from  direct  personal 
references  in  his  first  epistle,  that  it  is  not  addressed  to 
an  assembly  at  all,  but  introduced  without  heading  in 
the  most  general  form ;  and  therefore  it  is  commonly 
called  a  catholic  or  general  epistle.  It  was  perhaps  so 
written  that  it  might  be  pre-eminently  a  sort  of  cir- 
cular letter  to  the  whole  Church.  I  gather  from  this, 
that  where  there  is  that  which  touches  the  work  of 
Christ,   as   in   Galatians,   or   the    person   of    Christ, 


382  GALATIAN3. 

as  in  St.  Jolin,  all  personal  considerations  must  give 
way.  As  the  Lord,  in  His  final  mission  to  Israel,  (the 
Seventy,  Luke  x.,)  forbad  the  disciples  to  salute  any 
man  by  the  way,  so  here  the  Spirit  carries  out  some- 
thing analogous,  because  Christ's  glory  was  at  stake, 
and  the  foundation  of  all  blessing  was  menaced. 
Another  thing  to  be  observed  is,  that  the  children  of 
God  generally  do  not  understand  how  the  mingling  of 
the  law  with  Christ  lies  at  the  root  of  a  thousand  diffi- 
culties. It  is  a  rare  thing  now  to  find  a  Christian  who 
is  not  in  principle  where  the  Galatians  were.  In  the 
present  state  of  Christendom,  we  have  been  all  trained 
to  it  from  our  childhood.  We  shall  not  see  it  only 
in  particular  spots,  here  and  there ;  but  in  one  form  or 
another  it  is  the  universally  prevalent,  the  settled,  chro- 
nic, fatal  complaint  in  Christendom,  insinuating  itself 
into  men's  thoughts  and  ways,  and  everything. 

Having  so  spoken,  with  that  remarkable  abruptness 
vrhich  marks  his  character — for  we  must  all  have 
noticed  the  exceeding  rapidity  of  transition  from  one 
subject  to  another  which  so  frequently  characterizes 
the  writings  of  the  apostle — he  turns  to  the  subject  that 
agitated  his  spirit,  and  sums  up  in  these  last  verses 
both  the  danger  and  the  blessing.  "  As  many  as  desire 
to  make  a  fair  show  in  the  flesh,  they  constrain  you  to 
be  circumcised ;  only  lest  they  should  suffer  persecution 
for  the  cross  of  Christ."  He  does  riot  mind  what 
people  may  say.  They  might  call  it  imputing  motives, 
but  no  matter.  It  is  in  vain  to  deny  that  legalism 
fraternizes  with  the  world,  and  loves  its  own  ease,  loves 
present  reward,  boast  as  it  may  of  piety ;  it  is,  after  all, 


CHAPTER  VI.  183 

only  a  desire  to  make  a  fair  show  in  t^ic  flesh.  Tliis 
is  very  important;  because,  I  ask,  What  is  it  now  that 
men  look  for,  and  that  men  would  be  gratified  with  ? 
If  you  had  all  the  world  attending  churches  and  chapels 
— persons  walking  soberly  and  in  a  decent,  orderly  way 
otherwise — what  universal  rejoicing  over  the  improved 
state  and  prospects  of  Christendom  !  And  what  would 
all  this  be  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  I  have  not  the  slight- 
est hesitation  in  saying,  that,  if  there  were  no  more,  it 
would  only  be  "  a  fair  show  in  the  flesh."  What  we, 
as  Christians,  are  entitled  to  look  for,  and  what  we 
ought  never  to  be  satisfied  without  is,  that  souls  pass 
from  death  unto  life — that  souls  should  be  delivered 
from  the  power  of  Satan  and  be  translated  into  the 
kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son.  Until  they  have  passed 
the  boundary,  from  the  regions  of  men  into  the  presence 
of  God,  what  has  been  done  that  could  be  a  positive 
ground  of  Christian  joy  and  thankfulness?  It  is  not 
a  question  now  merely  of  society  or  the  world.  We 
know  that  the  world  is  under  condemnation,  that  ever 
since  the  cross  of  Christ,  judgment  has  been  impending, 
as  decidedly  as  after  a  criminal  has  been  tried  and  found 
guilty ;  as  he  is  waiting  in  his  condemned  cell  for  the 
sentence  to  be  executed — such  is  man's  condition.  Do 
Christians  realize  it  ?  Most  imperfectly.  If  they  did, 
could  they  be  upon  common  ground  with  the  world  ? 
Could  a  person  go  into  the  convict's  cell  and  talk  to 
him  as  if  nothing  were  the  matter  ?  We  must  think 
such  a  speaker  destitute  of  all  right  feeling.  So  it  is 
in  a  far  more  awful  way  than  the  execution  of  a  single 
criminal.  We  know  well  that  in  the  day  which  is 
coming,  there  will  be  no  escape  then  nor  for  eternity. 

N 


TS4  GALATIAXS. 

"  As  it  was  in  tlie  days  of  Noe,  so  shall  it  he  also  in 
the  days  of  the  Son  of  man.  They  did  eat,  they  drank, 
they  marriel  wives,  they  were  given  in  marriage,  until 
the  day  that  Noe  entered  into  the  ark,  and  the  food 
came,  and  destroyed  them  all.  Likewise  also  as  it  was 
in  the  days  of  Lot:  they  did  eat,  they  drank,  they 
iDonght,  they  sold,  they  planted,  they  builded ;  but  the 
same  day  that  Lot  went  out  of  Sodom,  it  rained  fire 
and  brimstone  from  heaven,  and  destroyed  them  all. 
Even  thus  shall  it  be  in  the  day  when  the  Son  of  man 
is  revealed."  God  looks  that  all  His  children  should 
tear  their  testimony  in  the  world  that  they  know  from 
Himself  that  all  hangs  on  the  uncertainty  of  a  thread; 
that  judgment  is  suspended  over  it;  that  Christ  is 
ready  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.  He  awaits  the 
will  of  His  Father.  All  simply  turns  upon  that.  But 
we  are  told  and  know  that  He  is  coming,  and  coming 
shortly;  and  we  wait  for  this.  Yet  in  the  midst  of 
this  scene  of  a  condemned  world,  with  the  Lord  coming 
to  execute  judgment  upon  it,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a 
number  of  souls  who  have  passed  through  the  faith  of 
Christ  into  life  everlasting,  and  who  know  it — at  least 
who  ought  to  know  it.  They  belong  to  Him  who  is 
going  to  judge,  not  to  the  scene  that  is  going  to 
be  judged. 

What  is  the  effect  of  all  this  ?  They  have  in  spirit 
abandoned  the  circumstances  in  which  men  are  striving 
to  keep  up  a  vain  show;  they  have  repented  towards 
God ;  they  have  bowed  down  to  the  Saviour,  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  have  found  eternal  life  and  peace  in  Him. 
All  is  settled  between  their  souls  and  God.  With 
Christ  the  light,  the  truth,  the  life,  the  fair  show  has 


CHAPTER  VI.  185 

vanished.  And  while  this  great  tranp.aotion  is  going 
on,  a  large  part  of  the  world  seek  to  be  as  religious  as 
they  can;  i.e.,  to  reconcile  religion  with  the  world. 
And  as  the  effect  of  this  strategy  of  the  enemy,  and  of 
their  own  unwatchfalness,  very  many  of  God's  children 
descend  to  it,  because  great  names  are  there,  appear- 
ances are  there,  and  even  the  word  of  God  may  be 
quoted  to  show  that  it  is  right  to  walk  there.  This  is 
commonly  done  by  taking  what  God  says  to  Israel, 
who  were  God's  people  after  the  flesh,  governed  by  the 
law,  and  applying  it  to  those  who  are  God's  people 
now,  called  to  walk  under  grace  and  Christ  alone,  who 
have  the  Holy  Ghost  that  they  may  walk  in  the  Spirit, 
and  not  yield  to  anything  of  the  flesh.  The  mingling 
of  the  two  tilings  beguiles  Christians  into  what  is,  after 
all,  only  the  religion  of  the  flesh.  They  think  that  an 
earthly  system  of  religions  forms  must  be  right  now, 
because  it  had  His  sanction  in  the  Old  Testament. 
They  see  that  God  acknowledged  "  a  worldly  sanc- 
tuary'' once,  and  they  reason  thence  for  all  times  and 
places.  Thus  they  get  drawn  into  the  "  fair  show  in 
the  flesh ;"  the  more  easily,  as  it  habitually  entails  an 
absence  of  persecution,  nay,  credit  with  the  world. 
People  are  sensible  that  you  cannot  raise  the  world  to 
walk  with  you  above  its  own  level  of  sight  and  reason- 
But  the  moment  you  come  down  to  meet  the  world, 
you  are  off  Christian  ground.  A  new  nature  is  required. 
Faith  is  indispensable.  The  world  has  not  this.  You 
must  descend  to  the  world's  path,  if  yon  will  take  com- 
mon action  with  the  world.  It  is  not  that  the  world 
becomes  Christian  thereby,  but  that  Christians  thus 
become  worldly.     Such  is  the  only  issue  of  the  attempi 


186  GALATIAKS. 

to  join  Christians  with  those  that  are  not  Christians  in 
the  service  and  worship  of  God. 

Hear  the  solemn  sentence: — "  As  many  as  desire  to 
make  a  fair  show  in  the  flesh,  they  constrain  you  to  be 
circumcised,  only  lest  they  should  suffer  persecution  for 
the  cross  of  Christ."  They  want  you  to  submit  to  these 
religious  forms.  The  reason  is  that  they  dread  suffer- 
ing for  Christ.  The  cross  is  the  term  of  the  old  world, 
where  the  flesh  was  acknowledged;  and  the  introduction 
of  the  new  state  of  things  where  nothing  but  what  is  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  of  value  in  the  sight  of  God.  He 
shows  that  selfishness,  after  all,  is  at  the  bottom. 
When  persons  are  walking  with  the  world,  there  is 
never  an  easy  conscience.  .  Nothing  so  much  pleases 
the  world  as  to  get  real  Christians  to  walk  with  them. 
How  humbling  is  the  success  of  Satan  in  this.  What 
God  called  out  Christians  for  is  to  manifest  a  people 
happy  in  Christ,  and  yet  having  nothing  but  tribulation 
in  the  world.  I  am  not  speaking  now  of  our  common, 
every-day  trials.  If  saints  do  foolish  things  and  suffer 
from  them  like  others,  they  have  their  share  of  the 
results  of  their  own  folly.  But  there  are  the  trials  that 
come  upon  a  Christian  because  he  is  a  Christian — to  be 
despised  and  rejected,  evil  spoken  of  and  calumniated, 
because  he  walks  with  God  and  has  taken  the  side  of 
God  against  the  world ;  because  he  is  a  sharer  of  Christ's 
cross  and  waits  for  His  glory,  refusing  therefore  not 
only  the  world's  bad,  but  its  best  things.  This  it  is 
that  the  world  is  so  angry  at.  They  may  talk  about 
the  faults  of  Christians ;  but  were  the  same  faults  com- 
mitted by  the  world,  how  soon  and  easily  they  would 
be  got  over !     But  where  it  is  a  Christian,  there  is  that 


CHAPTER  VI.  187 

wliicTi  makes  them  feel  that,  though  the  person  may  be 
weak  and  foolish,  yet  there  is  something  above  the 
world ;  and  it  is  really  this  which  makes  them  uneasy. 

If  the  Christians  in  question  here  would  only  have 
submitted  to  be  circumcised !  But  any  one  could  be 
circumcised,  even  if  unconverted.  Only  take  a  pledge 
with  a  worldly  man,  and  he  will  be  pleased,  because 
you  come  down  to  a  level  that  he  can  occupy  with  you. 
I  am  not  meddling  with  the  world's  trying  to  reform 
the  world ;  but  I  have  much  to  say  about  the  sin  and 
the  shame  of  Christians  joining  with  the  world  in  their 
efforts  to  stay  the  plague  by  means  of  man's  promises 
and  vows.  It  is  altogether  false  ground  and  contrary 
to  the  gospel,  which  starts  upon  the  utter  badness  of 
man's  nature.  Whereas  the  moment  you  do  a  work  to 
improve  that  nature,  which  the  worldly  man  can  equally 
do,  (and  he  can  sign  the  pledge  as  well  as  you,)  it  is 
plain  that  you  have  reached  ground  where  the  Christian 
gives  up  Christ  as  his  one  divinely-tempered  weapon 
for  dealing  with  man  in  the  flesh,  and  is  gone  back  to 
the  bow  and  arrows,  if  I  may  so  say,  of  moral  restraint. 
Indeed,  I  cannot  but  view  it  as  a  lower  thing  even  than 
circumcision,  which  was  the  type  of  a  most  blessed 
truth — the  entire  putting  away  of  the  flesh.  But  when 
Christ  died,  all  that  had  been  merely  types,  and  had 
entirely  failed  as  adequate  remedies,  were  buried  in  His 
grave ;  and  now  He  is  risen  and  there  is  a  new  life  in 
resurrection,  which  has  nothing  to  say  to  the  old,  save 
to  mortify  it.  The  reality  of  life  has  come  out,  and 
this  is  what  the  Christian  has  to  do  with  now.  Christ 
has  become  his  life  and  his  object  too.  It  is  the  great 
aim  of  the  devil  to  get  Christians  to  write  some  other 


18S  GALATIANS. 

name  along  with  Christ  on  God's  children:  so  that  na 
matter  what  it  is,  whether  you  take  circumcision  as  a 
type  of  spiritual  blessing,  or  the  mere  natural  moral 
restraints  of  the  present  day,  it  is  altogether  a  mistake 
as  to  the  object  for  which  God  has  called  us  out  in  this 
world.  The  Christian  is  outside  that  sphere;  he  is 
called  into  the  place  of  grace.  Tlie  magistrate's  place 
is  not  one  of  grace,  but  of  government,  which,  of  course, 
calls  for  the  punishment  of  evil.  That  is  not  grace. 
Grace  is  not  law,  but  "  If  a  man  smite  thee  on  the  one 
cheek,  turn  to  him  the  other  also."  There  would  be  an 
end  of  all  justice  if  magistrates  were  to  attempt  to  act 
thus.  But  while  the  Christian  has  no  business  out  of 
the  place  of  grace,  he  is  bound  to  respect  the  govern- 
ment, and  never  to  speak  loweringly  of  dignities  in  the 
world.  The  better  he  knows  his  own  privileges,  the 
more  he  can  afford  to  maintain  the  honour  of  the 
magistrate.  He  owns  it  so  much  the  more,  because 
he  does  not  covet  it  himself.  He  has  a  much  better 
place  himself;  but  if  he  knows  the  secret  of  his  own  joy 
and  liberty  in  this  world,  let  him  at  the  same  time 
acknowledge  the  higher  powers  which  God  has  ordained 
in  earthly  rule.  When  persons  are  in  the  same  sphere, 
there  may  be  more  or  less  rivalry ;  for  men  prefer  to 
rule  others  rather  than  to  be  ruled  themselves.  But 
when  a  soul  is  entirely  delivered  from  the  world,  he  can 
the  more  heartily  own  what  is  of  God  here  below,  and 
see  the  wisdom  of  His  order  there.  It  is  on  this  ground 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  always  presses  the  Christian's  obe- 
dience of  the  law,  and  honour  to  the  king  or  other 
governor  he  may  be  under. 

But  to  return  to  our  subject.     The  apostle  further 


CHAPTER  VI.  189 

bIiows  tliat,  after  all,  these  zealots  for  circumcision  did 
not  keep  the  law.  They  only  observed  it  in  joart,  with 
no  little  inconsistency,  however  hot  their  feeling  against 
the  advocates  of  Christian  liberty.  This  is  always  the 
case.  Those  who  insist  on  the  perpetuity  of  the  sab- 
bath, how  do  they  keep  it  ?  It  is  not  only  that  they 
never  heed  the  true  day ;  but  supposing  the  Lord's-day 
were  really  the  same  as  the  sabbath,  do  they  observe  it 
according  to  the  law  ?  Not  at  all.  They  will  tell  you 
that  Christianity,  besides  changing  the  day,  has  modified 
the  mode  of  its  observance,  that  the  gospel  mitigates 
the  severity  of  God's  law,  &c.  If  this  be  not  to  make 
void  the  law  through  unbelief,  it  is  hard  to  say  what 
is.  I  deny  their  facts,  doctrines,  and  conclusions.  Chris- 
tianity, so  far  from  attenuating  the  law,  or  reducing 
its  sanctions,  is  that  which  alone  gives  the  law  its  full 
value — "By  faith  we  establish  the  law."  (Rom.  iii.  31.) 
The  doctrine  of  faith,  instead  of  weakening  the  law's 
obligation,  illustrates  and  maintains  it  to  the  utmost. 
But  the  establishment  of  the  law,  of  which  the  apostle 
speaks  in  Bomans  iii.,  has  no  reference  whatever  to  the 
question  of  a  rule  by  which  the  Christian  has  to  walk. 
The  chapter  treats  of  man's  ruin  and  God's  righteous- 
ness, not  of  practice,  and  shows  that  faith  upholds  the 
authority  of  the  law  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  which  owns 
men's  just  and  total  condemnation,  and  is  the  basis  of 
divine  justifying  righteousness,  which  is  revealed  to  and 
becomes  the  portion  of  the  believer.  The  law's  curse 
fell  upon  Christ,  which  has  thus  been  magnified  to  the 
uttermost,  its  full  sentence  having  been  exhausted  upon 
the  head  of  the  Son  of  God.  Hence,  whether  you  look 
at  God  or  man,  or  the  Saviour,  faith  establishes  the  law, 


150  GALATIANS. 

as  nothing  else  could.  But  as  to  the  Lord's-day,  far 
from  being  the  same  as  the  sabbath,  it  is  the  first  day 
of  the  week,  not  the  seventh,  and  rests  on  quite  dif- 
ferent foundations.  When  you  come  to  test  the  would- 
be  teachers  of  the  law,  their  zeal  is  soon  seen  to  break 
down  in  practice ;  and  they  are  easily  convicted  of  in- 
troducing changes  and  modifications  in  order  to  suit 
the  time,  country,  climate,  and  people,  i.e.,  to  suit 
themselves  in  the  things  of  God.  This  theory  of  miti- 
gation, and  of  a  flexible  law,  can  never  stand  a  fair 
scrutiny.  On  the  other  hand,  those  w^ho  hold  that  the 
Lord's-day  is  a  new  thing,  in  no  way  connected  either 
with  creation  or  with  the  law,  are  under  no  difficulty ; 
because  they  see  that  the  same  God  who  sanctified  the 
sabbath  originally,  and  gave  the  law  to  Israel,  was 
pleased  to  put  special  honour  on  the  first  day  of  the 
week,  in  commemoration  of  redemption  accomplished 
in  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ ;  but  they  see  it 
as  having  its  own  proper  character,  and  not  as  con- 
founded with  the  sabbath.  The  Lord's-day  calls  for  no 
mere  rest  which  you  may  share  with  your  ox  or  your 
ass ;  and  so  far  from  its  due  honour  consisting  chiefly  in 
bodily  quiet,  I  believe  that  if  a  Christian  were  on  that 
day  enabled  to  walk  twenty  sabbath-days'  journeys  on 
special  services  for  the  Lord,  he  would  not  only  be  at 
liberty  to  do  that  work,  but  that  it  would  be  most  ac- 
ceptable to  the  Lord.  Each  day  is  separated  from 
other  days  by  divine  authority ;  but  in  other  respects 
they  differ  as  decidedly  as  law  from  grace,  or  the  old 
creation  from  the  new. 

*'  For  neither  they  themselves  who  are  circumcised 
keep    the  law,    but  desire  to  have  you    circumcised, 


CHAPTER  VI.  191 

that  they  may  glory  in  your  flesh."  That  is  most 
true  in  the  present  time.  The  truth  is  not  the  test 
in  the  religious  world,  nor  Christ  Himself,  nor  His 
service.  Eefuse  their  party  or  their  idols,  and  be 
prepared  for  reproach,  calumny,  scorn,  and  hatred. 
Yield  to  tlieir  Judaizing,  and  you  may  hold  blas- 
phemous doctrine  with  impunity  as  far  as  they  are 
concerned.  Touch  their  abuse  of  the  law,  and  their  cry 
is,  "  They  have  taken  away  my  lord,  and  I  know  not 
■where  they  have  laid  him."  The  law  is  their  lord  yet 
more  than  Christ.  I  am  now  alluding  to  a  literal  fact 
in  the  most  popular  organ  of  the  so-called  Evangelical, 
but  in  truth  the  legal,  party  of  the  day. 

And  now  the  apostle,  having  spoken  of  the  evil, 
turns  to  the  blessed  side:  "  But  God  forbid  that  I 
should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
by  whom  the  world  is  crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto 
the  world."  They  were  glorifying  in  what  would  exalt 
human  nature ;  because  in  that  way  they  could  get  the 
world  and  its  multitudes  to  unite  with  them.  In  chap- 
ter iii.  the  cross  of  Christ  is  viewed  as  deliverance  from 
the  law,  because  Christ  was  thereon  made  a  curse  for 
us.  A  man  who  believed  in  Christ,  who  owns  Him  as 
the  Son  of  God — would  you  deny  that  he  had  everlast- 
ing life?  But  unless  such  an  one  receives  the  doctrine 
of  the  cross  intelligently,  and  applies  it  to  his  position, 
he  is  still  more  or  less  under  the  law,  and  does  not  un- 
derstand that  he  is  completely  brought  out  of  the  old 
condition  of  things  into  a  new  ground. 

In  chapter  v.  the  apostle  applies  the  doctrine  of  the 
cross  to  the  flesh,  and  shows  that  they  that  are  Christ's 
have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts. 


192  GALATIA>,'S. 

Here  I  find  tliat  my  flesh  is  a  thing  I  am  entitled 
to  regard  as  done  with  before  God,  no  less  than 
the  law. 

Now,  in  chapter  vi.,  comes  in  the  third  thing,  the 
w^orld.  You  have  a  regular  gradation — freed  from  the 
law  which  would  affect  the  conscience  of  a  godly  person. 
Then,  when  a  man  is  free  from  that  anxiety,  comes  in 
the  question  of  the  flesh,  with  its  affections  and  lusts. 
But  this,  he  is  told,  was  all  judged  in  the  cross  of 
Christ.  Therefore,  as  a  part  of  the  comfort  God  gives 
me,  I  am  entitled,  as  a  matter  of  faith  and  not  of  mere 
feeling,  to  know,  "  They  that  are  Christ's  have  crucified 
the  flesh,  wdth  its  affections  and  lusts."  It  does  not 
say,  "  They  are  crucifying  it,"  as  if  it  were  something 
going  on ;  but  it  is  done  in  receiving  a  crucified  Christ. 
In  God's  sight,  and  now  to  faith  also,  their  nature  was 
nailed  to  the  tree,  and  is  done  with  before  God ;  and 
now  they  have  got  a  new  nature:  as  St.  Paul  says, 
"  Not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  The  old  nature  that 
we  have  still  exists,  of  course;  but  to  faith  God  has 
already  done  with  it  in  the  cross  of  Christ ;  so  that  the 
business  of  the  christian  man  is  to  occupy  himself,  not 
with  mere  restraints,  but  with  Christ;  which  fills  the 
soul,  by  the  energy  of  the  Spirit,  with  all  that  is  good, 
draws  it  out  into  what  is  lovely,  and,  in  short,  is  the 
true  power  of  Christian  holiness.  If  a  man  is  occupied 
with  what  is  good,  he  will  hate  his  flesh ;  but  it  is  only 
occupation  with  Christ  that  gives  the  s6ul  power  thus 
to  put  the  sentence  of  God  upon  the  flesh.  Now  comes 
the  third  and  last  thing  in  Christian  experience ;  for  you 
wdll  find  men  who  know  somewhat  of  deadness  to  the 
law  and  to  the  flesh,  but  who  still  think  that  it  is  the 


ciiArxER  VI.  193 

duty  of  the  Christian  man  in  this  world  to  serve  God 
in  his  generation.  But  how  would  God  have  Himself 
to  be  served  now  ?  Never  by  anything  that  contradicts 
the  cross  of  Christ.  The  service  of  the  Christian  is  to 
be  founded  on  the  cross;  and  what  does  the  cross  de- 
clare about  the  world  ?  That  it  is  now  at  open  war 
with  God.  Ever  since  the  cross  of  Christ,  God  has  no 
alliance  with  the  world.  Before  that,  the  world  was 
allowed:  and  therefore  it  was  not  wrong  for  Joseph  to 
be  governor  in  Egypt,  nor  for  Daniel  to  sit  in  the  gate 
of  the  king  of  Babylon.  But  it  is  utterly  ignorant  to 
reason  from  what  was  tolerated  then  to  what  pleases 
God  now  that  the  cross  of  His  Son  is  a  fact. 

God  does  not  ignore  the  cross,  if  Christians  do.  The 
very  same  cross  of  Christ  that  is  my  salvation,  my  de- 
liverance from  the  law  and  the  flesh,  shows  me  that  I 
have  no  part  with  this  world,  save  as  a  blessed  stranger 
passing  through  it.  We  may  have  occupations  that  are 
all  quite  right ;  but  that  is  not  at  all  what  you  can  call 
a  thing  of  the  world.  The  Lord  lived  here,  died  here, 
rose  here,  eat  and  drank  in  this  world ;  but  He  never 
was  of  the  world :  and  so  it  is  and  should  be  vfiih  the 
Christian.  Our  Lord  did  not  form  such  a  part  and 
parcel  of  this  world  as  that  His  appearance  in  it  or  de- 
parture from  it  ruffled  the  stream  for  a  moment.  He 
would  not  have  been  missed  in  the  world;  and  the 
moment  that  a  Christian  becomes  an  integral  part  of 
the  motive  power  which  carries  on  the  wheels  of  the 
world,  all  is  out  of  course,  as  far  as  his  allegiance  to 
Christ  goes.  A  Christian  ought  to  be  the  means  of 
constant  blessing  in  this  world.  But  how,  and  of  what 
character  ?     Bearing  the  testimony  of   Christ,  of  his 


194  GALATIAITS. 

Saviour ;  but  as  He  never  sought  His  own  things — was 
always  doing  good,  yet  doing  it  as  the  will  of  His 
Father — always  acting  upon  motives  that  were  not  of 
the  world,  but  from  above — never  uniting  with  men's 
plans  for  the  purpose  of  bettering  man,  but  realizing 
that  the  world  was  God's  enemy,  and  yet  that  God's 
love  was  sending  Him  into  it  to  do  them  good :  such 
was  Christ,  and  so  should  it  be  with  the  Christian.  A 
Christian's  business  is  to  be  the  epistle  of  Christ.  So 
that  the  one  clue  and  test  for  what  comes  before  a  per- 
son, is  this :  will  my  doing  this  or  that  be  acting  as  an 
epistle  of  Christ  ?  But  in  order  to  know  what  is  con- 
sistent with  an  epistle  of  Christ,  I  must  search  His 
ways  in  the  words  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  There  is  always 
light  in  Scripture  to  show  what  is  His  mind  for  the 
present  moment,  and  what  it  is  that  has  passed  away 
with  the  olden  time,  which  belonged  to  the  law  and  the 
world  and  to  Israel,  who  were  God's  ancient  witness  in 
the  world.  Biit  the  Christian  is  the  present  witness  of 
Christ,  and  is  not  of  the  world,  although  in  it.  This  is 
the  great  means  of  trying  our  ways,  and  thus  finding 
out  how  far  we  glory  in  the  cross.  That  is,  you  have 
them  on  totally  opposite  principles.  The  cross  of  Christ 
is  that  which  first  of  all  crucifies  the  Christian  to  the 
world,  puts  him  entirely  outside  it  as  one  saved  out  of 
it;  but  also  the  world  is  crucified  to  hira.  There  you 
see  the  world  with  all  its  unremoved  guilt,  ignorant  of 
the  Father,  spite  of  the  coming  of  the  Son.  So  there 
cannot  be  the  least  common  ground  between  a  Christian 
and  the  world ;  any  more  than  there  could  be  for  this 
country  if  it  were  at  open  war  with  any  of  its  neigh- 
bours.    If  this  be  true,  does  it  not  show  how  little 


CHAPTER  VI.  li)5 

God's  children  realize  their  Christian  position,  as  thus 
defined  by  the  cross  of  Christ ! 

Peace  made  by  the  blood  of  the  cross  is  more  or  less 
preached;  but  as  to  the  moral  power  of  the  cross  and 
its  bearing  upon  the  law,  the  flesh,  or  the  world,  there 
is  hardly  an  atom  save  in  the  way  of  motive.  The 
consequence  is,  that  such  Christians  can,  with  a  good 
conscience,  talk  about  the  cross,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
still  maintain  what  God  has  already  judged  and  put 
away  for  ever.  Hence  the  importance  of  full  Christian 
deliverance  is  unknown — the  ground-truths  which  ought 
to  be  understood  by  the  babe.  For  the  Epistle  to  the 
Galatians  does  not  take  up  the  highest  branch  of  Chris- 
tian truth,  but  rather  the  indispensable  foundations  of 
Christianity. 

The  apostle  now  brings  in  another  point.  To  speak 
merely  of  being  crucified  to  the  world  would  not  have 
been  enough.  There  is  more  than  that  in  Christ.  "  For 
in  Christ  Jesus,  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything^ 
nor  uncircuracision,  but  a  new  creation."  People  may 
boast  about  their  forms  or  their  no-forms ;  but  whatever 
it  may  be,  it  is  all  wrong,  unless  you  have  got  positive, 
substantial  blessing  from  God;  unless  you  have  the 
cross  of  Christ  and  the  new  creation.  As  a  Christian, 
I  belong  to  a  system  already  set  up  in  Christ,  in  the 
presence  of  God.  I  know  what  my  new  nature  is  when 
I  think  of  Christ.  I  see  Him  risen  from  the  dead  and 
in  glory;  the  perfect  delight  of  God  and  of  all  who 
surround  God.  And  there  all  Christians  are  going  to 
be ;  and  this  in  substance  they  have  got  now,  the  Holy 
Ghost  Himself  being  the  earnest  of  glory.  For  it  is 
not  merely  what  they  are  going  to  shine  in,  but  they 


19  G  GALATIAX8, 

have  the  blessmg  before  the  blessing  is  manifested. 
The  Christian  possesses  the  new  creature  in  perfection 
in  Christ.  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."  It  is 
called  here  the  "  new  creation;"  because  it  is  not  merely 
looked  at  as  life  found,  but  contrasted  with  the  old, 
which  had  to  do  with  the  world.  This  implies  not  only 
the  person,  but  the  work  of  Christ.  The  grand  work 
of  redemption  is  accomplished ;  God's  law  had  its 
free  course,  and  righteousness  is  established;  the  voice  of 
condemnation  is  never  to  be  heard  again  by  virtue  of 
the  cross  of  the  Just  One,  who  suffered  for  our  sake. 
But  then  He  is  risen  from  the  dead,  and  has  entered 
upon  a  new  and  blessed  existence  as  a  risen  man  before 
God.  And  this  is  the  nature  which  He  communicates 
to  us.  "  Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground 
and  die,  it  abideth  alone ;  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth 
much  fruit."  The  consequence  is  that,  having  died  but 
being  risen,  He  communicates  that  very  life  which  was 
in  Him.  "  I  am  come  that  ye  might  have  life,  and  that 
ye  might  have  it  more  abundantly."  The  more  abun- 
dant life  is  this  "  new  creature,"  or  life  in  resurrection. 

"  And  as  many  as  walk  according  to  this  rule,  peace 
be  on  them  and  mercy,  and  upon  the  Israel  of  God." 
In  the  first  expression,  "  as  many  as  walk  according  to 
this  rule,"  he  specially  looks,  I  think,  at  the  Gentile 
believers,  such  as  the  Galatians  were.  "  This  rule"  is 
the  rule  of  the  new  creation — Christ  Himself.  He 
adds,  "peace  be  on  them  and  mercy,'  and  upon  the 
Israel  of  God."  The  only  part  of  Israel  acknowledged 
consists  of  the  real  believing  Jews.  "Israel  of  God" 
seems  to  be  used  here,  not  as  a  general  phrase  for  every 
saint,  but  for  the  believing  ones  in  Israel — those  Jews 


CHAPTER  VI.  197 

\vho  had  repudiated  tlieir  own  works  and  found  shelter 
only  in  Christ  Jesus.  Two  parties  are  spoken  of,  and  not 
one  only.  ''  As  many  as  walk  according  to  this  rule," 
are  rather  the  Gentile  believers;  and  the  "Israel  of 
God"  are  the  Jewish  saints,  not  the  mere  literal  Israel, 
but  "  the  Israel  of  God;'''  the  Israelites  indeed,  whom 
grace  made  willing  to  receive  the  Saviour, 

He  then  adds,  "  From  henceforth  let  no  man  trouble 
me;  for  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,"  Their  fleshly  wisdom  had  brought  in  confusion 
and  every  evil  work,  law  instead  of  love,  questions  about 
his  ministry,  &c.  "  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the 
Lord  Jesus."  He  had  been  scourged  and  put  in  prison. 
What  mark  of  indignity  had  not  been  put  upon  him? 
These,  and  not  circumcision,  are  "  the  marks  of  the  Lord 
Jesus."  Just  as  a  slave  in  olden  time  used  to  bear  the 
name  of  his  master  burnt  into  his  flesh,  so,  he  means, 
he  bore  in  his  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus, — Let 
others  bear  or  seek  what  they  may,  these  are  marks  that 
I  value. — They  were  the  sufferings  that  he  had  endured 
for  the  sake  of  Christ  and  the  gospel.  Nothing  more 
sweet  and  touching,  but,  at  the  same  time,  what  a  sweep- 
ing condemnation  of  those  self-exalting  men,  who  took 
their  ease,  in  the  presence  of  one  whose  life  was  suffering 
for  Christ ! 

"  Brethren,  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be 
with  your  spirit.  Amen."  It  is  indeed  most  gracious 
and  dignified.  He  asks  not  that  they  might  feel 
the  thunders  of  that  law  under  which  they  desired 
to  put  themselves;  but  that  "the  grace  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  should  be  with  their  spirit,"  showing  how 
thoroughly  he  felt  the  vantage-ground  which  grace  gave 


198  GALATIANS. 

him — how  he  could  meet  all  these  attacks  upon  him- 
self— how  he  could  point  to  the  scars  of  his  honourahle 
warfare,  if  they  talked  of  their  circumcision,  though  he 
would  boast  of  nothing  but  Christ's  cross.  Our  wisdom 
is  Christ,  as  our  folly  is  ourselves.  The  Lord  grant 
then  that  we  may  learn  better  to  know  our  true  wisdom 
and  to  walk  in  it;  and  while  holding  fast  the  truth, 
that  we  may  desire  earnestly  the  blessing  of  those  who 
oppose  it,  and  seek  the  deliverance  of  every  soul  around 
us.  The  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  is  the  death-blow  to 
the  religious  world,  root  and  branch,  as  it  is  to  the  re- 
vival or  continuance  of  the  same  system,  which  the 
Apostle  Paul  was  then  so  strongly  denouncing,  and 
which  he  shows  to  be  the  enemy,  not  of  the  saints  only 
but  of  the  cross  of  Christ. 


o)^c 


Q.  Moirish  Priutei   24,  Wai-wick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row,  E.G. 


DATE  DUE 

p»>«»» 

' 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  U.S.A. 

BS2685.8  .K29 

Lectures  on  the  Epistle  of  Paul,  the 

Princeton  Theological  Seminary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  00062  2508 


