1 gare yy tte = Rete Wo oh 
rt ey blepor dehete 
ee seat 


rr, any 


B ‘ ee he onir bn bees IARI OV 
Sods ences a aia Esrreccineaiirer stants 
pe sioes a t se ‘ ae 3 three 


- Sieeet 
pei = rahe 


pees 
ae 


Mietet = 1 7 hae 
roa meee 4 ; Sip vu ; ; a Bin 
dies : iN Nepean NEL : dinceues 


Pivtoreter tn 
bates 


Gites Les eesti els See Ss iu 


meme poact eer 


Hee 
ae 


hee eon teEA 
iTioeem oes pene PAT menrsnarnate 3 = EAS Hana Hees 


esr tenre rere ore arrlsavsaarayal 


rece 

racennes 
nareuncesncaan 
pobseyi sae uea 


ia 
~ 


ey . 
Se 
ome 
is 
a 


_ 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/lecturesonepistIO000hair_u7vO 


LECTURES 


on the 


EPISTLE to the ROMANS 


By H. A. Ironside 


Author of ‘‘Mysteries of God;” “Minor Prophets;” 
“Praying in the Holy Spirit;’’ ‘‘The Four Hundred Silent Years;” 
**Lectures on Daniel;"’ ‘“‘Lectures on the Revelation,” etc., etc. 


THE CINCINNATI BIBLE SEMINARY 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, Inc. 
Neptune, New Jersey 


FIRST EDITION, 1928 


Ku 0643 
PUBLISHED sy LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, Inc. 


A Nonprofit Organization, Devoted to the Lord’s Work 
and to the Spread of His Truth 


LP Aly | 
aay on | 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


FOREWORD 


The present volume consists of Notes of Lectures 
on the Roman Letter, substantially as given to the 
students of the Moody Bible Institute of Chicago, 
Ill., the Evangelical Theological College of Dallas, 
Tex., and at various Bible Conferences through 
the United States and Canada in recent years. 

They are sent forth in printed form in response 
to the earnest solicitation of many who heard 
them; and in the hope that they will be used of 
God to the blessing of numbers who cannot be 
reached by the spoken word. 

The author is indebted far more than he realizes 
to writers and speakers who have gone over the 
same ground before him. No claim is made for 
originality. It is God’s truth—not that of any 
teacher—and as such it is committed to His care 
for His glory. 

H. A. IRONSIDE. 


July 80th, 1927. 


if 


CLITA we = Fy" 


d 
== ; : oe 
a =| 

z Yo¥ ett 
. i ont aa 
’ ‘ ehh, 
0 , ; 
ae ia_s 
7 > wes 
: Ge 


Pest wl) at © 
7 ee 
_ Sythe ons 


= js eee BS 


CONTENTS 


Division I. DOCTRINAL, chaps. 1-8: 
The Righteousness of God Revealed in the Gospel 


LECTURE Page 
I—The Theme and Analysis .............000- {i 
Ii—Salutation and Introduction ............... 17 
11I—The Need of the Gospel ................... 28 
IV—The Gospel in Relation to our Sins ......... 47 


V—tThe Gospel in Relation to Indwelling Sin.... 67 
Vi-—The Triumphsor Graces. Fane ae. rs 94 


Division II. DISPENSATIONAL, chaps. 9-11: 


The Righteousness of God Harmonized with His 
Dispensational Ways 


VII—God’s Past Dealings with Israel in Electing 


GEBCO Mes Sree aa ong eS ene re ieee 109 
VITI—God’s Present Dealings with Israel in Gov- 
ernmental Discipline (i. sc... cose cress 126 
IX—God’s Future Dealings with Israel in Fulfil- 
ment of the Prophetic Scriptures ........ 136 


Division III. PRACTICAL, chaps, 12-16: 
Divine Righteousness Producing Practical Righteousness 


in the Believer 


X—The Walk of the Christian in Relation to his 
Fellow-Believers, and to Men of the World.145 


XI—The Will of God as to the Believer’s Relation 
to Government and to Society; and the 
Closing Sections «o .0 ctie ccs eesis'e s ordlasle's s 155 


q 
~ a 
* ‘ . i 
7 a oe) ee Ateys : 
LJP pe' ae — wee & 
vo FP. le 77 = 
pre Wor 2 “0 aaity wy } 
mi 7 Fee el aay ee sul -aeT : \ 
= : 
. : : ap) at here =f i 


we — ‘ven oh ancl vg qaukele jl <6 TV} 7 
4: Sarena) Genie dene Aer =e 


| és ee ke eee 
a ; 
oh? ai reel neve: ae? 08 ' 
ee »' f = 
i” o 
. ad eet af 7 kas 
m1 ey allan nal ae. 
ou 
Ts 
Bas?" aii ria eta bmg 
i 
Vice i Sy 
eat 
- | 
mM The 
. 
us a) 


LECTURES ON ROMANS 


Division I. DOCTRINAL. 
The Righteousness of God Revealed in the Gospel 
Chapters 1-8 


LECTURE I 
The Theme and Analysis 


The Epistle to the Romans is undoubtedly the 
most scientific statement of the divine plan for the 
redemption of mankind that God has been pleased 
to give us. Apart altogether from the question of 
inspiration we may think of it as a treatise of 
transcendant, intellectual power, putting to shame 
the most brilliant philosophies ever conceived by 
the minds of men. 

It is noteworthy that the Holy Spirit did not 
take up an unlettered fisherman or provincial 
Galilean to unfold His redemption plan in all its 
majesty and grandeur. He selected a man of in- 
ternational outlook: a Roman citizen, yet a He- 
brew of the Hebrews; a man whose education 
combined familiarity with Greek and Roman lore, 


8 Lectures on Romans 


including history, religion, philosophy, poetry, 
science and music, together with closest acquaint- 
ance with Judaism both as a divine revelation and 
as a body of rabbinical traditions and additions to 
the sacred deposit of the LAW, the PROPHETS, 
and the PSALMS. This man, born in the proud 
educational centre, Tarsus of Cilicia, and brought 
up at the feet of Gamaliel in Jerusalem, was the 
chosen vessel to make known to all nations for 
the obedience of faith, the gospel of the glory of 
the blessed God, as so marvelously set forth in 
this immortal letter. 

It was evidently written somewhere along the 
journey from Macedonia to Jerusalem, and very 
likely, as tradition asserts, at Corinth. 

About to leave Europe for Palestine to carry to 
the Jewish Christians, his brethren after the 
flesh and in the Lord, the bounty provided by the 
Gentile assemblies, his heart turns longingly to 
Rome, the “eternal city,” the mistress of the an- 
cient world, where already apart from direct 
apostolic ministry a Christian church had been 
formed. To a number of its members he was al- 
ready known, to others he was a stranger, but he 
yearned over them all as a true father in Christ, 
and earnestly desired to share with them the 
precious treasure committed to him. The Spirit 
had already indicated that a visit to Rome was in 
the will of God for him, but the time and circum- 
stances were hidden from him. So he wrote this 


The Theme and Analysis 9 


exposition of the divine plan, and sent it on by a 
godly woman, Phebe, a deaconess of the assem- 
bly at Cenchrea, who had been called to Rome on 
business. The letter served the double purpose of 
introducing her to the Christians there and min- 
istering to them the marvelous unfolding of the 
righteousness of God revealed in the gospel in ac- 
cordance with the testimony committed to Paul. 
Think of the grace that entrusted this matchless 
epistle to the feeble hand of a woman in times 
such as those! The whole Church of God through- 
out the centuries owes to Phebe a debt of grati- 
tude, and to the God who watched over her un- 
ending praise, for the preservation of the valuable 
manuscript which she delivered safely into the 
hands of the elders at Rome, and through them to 
us. 

The theme of the Epistle is the Righteousness 
of God. It forms one of an inspired trio of exposi- 
tions which together give us an amazingly rich 
exegesis of a very brief Old Testament text. The 
text is found in Habakkuk, chapter 2, verse 4: 
“The just shall live by his faith.” As quoted 
three times in the New Testament there are just 
six words, the pronoun “his” being omitted. The 
three letters referred to are Romans, Galatians, 
and Hebrews, each of which is based upon this 
text. 

Romans has to do particularly with the first 
two words. Its message is, “THE JUST shall live 


10 Lectures on Romans 


by faith,” answering the question that is raised 
in the book of Job, “How shall man be just with 
God?” 


Galatians expounds the two central words, “The 
just SHALL LIVE by faith.” The Galatian error 
was in supposing that while we begin in faith, 
we are perfected by works. But the apostle shows 
that we live by that same faith through which 
we were justified. “Having begun in the Spirit, 
are ye now made perfect by the flesh?” 


Hebrews takes up the last two words, “The just 
shall live BY FAITH.” It emphasizes the nature 
and power of faith itself, by which alone the 
justified believer walks. Incidentally, this is one 
reason why, after having carefully examined 
many arguments against the Pauline author- 
ship of Hebrews, I have not the slightest doubt 
that it is correctly attributed to the same one 
who wrote Romans and Galatians; and this is 
confirmed by the testimony of the apostle Peter, 
in his second epistle, chapter 3: 15, 16, for it 
was to converted Hebrews Peter was addressing 
himself and to them Paul had also written. 


The epistles to the Romans may be readily di- 
vided into three great divisions. Chaps. 1-8 are 
DOCTRINAL, and give us THE RIGHTEOUS- 
NESS of GOD REVEALED IN THE GOSPEL. 
Chaps. 9-11 are DISPENSATIONAL, and give us 
THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD HARMONIZED 


The Theme and Analysis 11 


WITH HIS DISPENSATIONAL WAYS. Chaps. 
12-16 are PRACTICAL, and set forth THE 
RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD PRODUCING 
PRACTICAL RIGHTEOUSNESS IN THE BE- 
LIEVER. Each of these divisions will be found 
to break naturally into smaller subdivisions, and 
these into sections and subsections. 


In submitting the following outline I do so only 
suggestively. The careful student may think of 
more apt designations for each particular part, 
and may possibly find it simpler to separate the 
different paragraphs according to some other ar- 
rangement, but I suggest the following analysis 
as one that seems to me to be simple and illumi- 
nating: 


DIVISION I. DOCTRINAL, chaps. 1-8: The Righteous- 
ness of God Revealed in the Gospel. 
SUBDIVISION I. Chaps. 1: 1—38: 20: The need of the 
Gospel. 
Section A. Chap.1: 1-7: Salutation. 
Section B. Chap.1: 8-17; Introduction. 
Subsection (a) vers. 8-15: The Apostle’s Steward- 
ship. 
Subsection (b) vers. 16,17: The Theme Stated. 
Section C. Chaps. 1: 18—3: 20: The Ungodliness and 
Unrighteousness of the entire Human Family De- 
monstrated, or, The Need of the Gospel. 
Subsection (a). Chap.1: 18-32: The State of the 
Degraded Heathen—the Barbarian World. 
Subsection (b). Chap.2:1-16: The State of the 
Cultured Gentiles, the Moralists. 


12 Lectures on Romans 


Subsection (c). Chap.2: 17-29: The State of the 
Religious Jews. 

Subsection (d). Chap. 3:1-20: The Complete In- 
dictment of the Entire World. 


SUBDIVISION II. Chaps. 3: 21—5:11: The Gospel in 

Relation to the Question of our SINS. 

Section A. Chap. 3: 21-31: Justification by Grace 
through Faith on the Ground of Accomplished Re- 
demption. 

Section B. Chap.4: The Witness of the Law and the 
Prophets. 

Subsection (a) vers.1-6: Abraham’s Justification. 

Subsection (b) vers. 7,8: David’s Testimony. 

Subsection (c) vers. 9-25: For all Mankind on the 
Same Principle. 

Section C. Chap.5:1-5: Peace with God: Its Basis 
and Results. 

Section D. Chap. 5: 6-11; The Summing Up. 

SUBDIVISION III. Chaps. 5: 12—8: 389: The Gospel in 

Relation to Indwelling SIN. 

Section A. Chap. 5: 12-21: The Two Races and Two 


Heads. | 
Section B. Chap.6: The Two Masters — Sin and 
Righteousness. 


Section C. Chap.7: The Two Husbands, Two Na- 
tures, and Two Laws. 
Section D. Chap.8: The Triumph of Grace. 
Subsection (a) vers.1-4: No Condemnation; In 
Christ. 
Subsection (b) vers. 5-27: The Spirit of Christ in 
the Believer. 
Subsection (c) vers. 28-34: God for us. 


Subsection (d) vers. 35-39: No Separation. 
DIVISION II. Dispensational. Chaps. 9-11: The Right- 


eousness of God Harmonized with His Dispensational 
Ways. 


The Theme and Analysis 13 


SUBDIVISION I. Chap.9: God’s Past Dealings with 
Israel in Electing Grace. 


SUBDIVISION II. Chap.10: God’s Present Dealings 
with Israel in Governmental Discipline. 


SUBDIVISION III. Chap.11: God’s Future Dealings 
with Israel in Fulfilment of the Prophetic Scriptures. 


DIVISION III. PRACTICAL. Chaps.12-16: Divine 
Righteousness Producing Practical Righteousness in 
the Believer. 


SUBDIVISION I. Chaps. 12: 1—15: 7: God’s Good, Ac- 
ceptable, and Perfect Will Revealed. 

Section A. Chap.12: The Walk of the Christian in 
Relation to his Fellow-believers, and to men of the 
world. 

Section B. Chap.138: The Christian’s Relation to 

Worldly Governments. 

Section C. Chap.14: Christian Liberty and Consi- 
deration for Others. 

Section D. Chap.15:1-7: Christ, the Believer’s Pat- 

tern. 
SUBDIVISION II. Chap. 15: 8-83: Conclusion. 


SUBDIVISION III. Chap.16: 1-24. Salutations. 


APPENDIX. Chap.16: 25-27: Epilogue: The Mystery 
Revealed. 


I would earnestly press upon the student the 
importance of committing to memory, if possible, 
this outline, or some similar analysis of the e- 
pistle, before attempting the study of the letter 
itself. Failure to get the great divisions and 
subdivisions firmly fixed in the mind leaves 
the door open for false interpretations and con- 
fused views later on. Many, for instance, through 


14 Lectures on Romans 


not observing that the question of justification is 
settled in Chapters 38-5, are greatly perplexed 
when they come to Chapter 7. But if the teach- 
ing of the first chapters referred to be clearly un- 
derstood, then it will be seen that the man in 
chapter 7 is not raising again the question of a 
sinner’s acceptance with God, but is concerned 
about a saint’s walk in holiness. Then again, 
how many a soul has become almost distracted by 
reading eternal issues into chapter 9, altogether 
beyond what the apostle intended, and endeavor- 
ing to bring heaven and hell into it as though 
these were here the chief questions at issue, 
whereas God is dealing with the great dispensa- 
tional question of His sovereign electing grace 
toward Israel, and His temporary repudiation of 
them nationally, while in a special way His grace 
goes out to the Gentiles. I only mention these 
instances at this time in order to impress upon 
each student the importance of having an “out- 
line of sound words” in studying this or any 
other book of the Bible. 

I add an additional suggestion or two. It is 
good to have “catch-words”’ sometimes to fix 
things in the mind. Someone has aptly designated 
Romans as “The Epistle of the Forum.” This, I 
think, is most helpful. In this letter the sinner is 
brought into the court room, the forum, the place 
of judgment, and shown to be utterly guilty and 
undone. But through the work of Christ a right- 


The Theme and Analysis 15 


eous basis has been laid, upon which he can be 
justified from every charge. Nor does God stop 
here, but He openly acknowledges the believing 
sinner as His own son, making him a citizen of a 
favored race, and owning him as His heir. Thus 
the challenge can be hurled at all objectors, “What 
shall we then say to these things? If God be for 
us, who can be against us?” Every voice is 
silenced, for “It is God that justifieth,” and this 
not at the expense of righteousness, but in full ac. 
cord therewith. This view readily accounts for 
the use of legal and judicial terms, so frequently 
found in the argument. 


A dying sinner was once asked if he would not 
like to be saved. “I certainly would,” he replied; 
“put,” he added earnestly, “I don’t want God to 
do anything wrong in saving me.” It was through 
the letter to the Romans he learned how “God 
can be just and the Justifier of him which be- 
lieveth in Jesus.”’ You will remember how Soc- 
rates expressed himself five hundred years be- 
fore Christ. “It may be,” he said, addressing 
himself to Plato, “that the Deity can forgive sins, 
but I do not see how.” It is this that the Holy 
Spirit takes up so fully in this Epistle. He shows 
us that God does not save sinners at the expense 
of His righteousness. In other words, if saved at 
all, it will not be because righteousness has been 
set aside in order that mercy might triumph; but 
mercy has found a way whereby divine righteous- 


16 ' Lectures on Romans 


ness can be fully satisfied and yet guilty sinners 
justified before the throne of high heaven. 

The apostle John suggests the same wondrous 
truth when in his first epistle, chapter 1, verse 9, 
he says, “If we confess our sins He is faithful and 
just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from 
all unrighteousness.” How much more natural 
the sense would seem to our poor minds before 
being divinely instructed, if it read, ‘“He is merci- 
ful and gracious to forgive.” Although the gospel 
is in the most marvelous way the unfolding of the 
mercy of God, and exalts His grace as nothing 
else can, yet it is because it rests on a firm foun- 
dation of righteousness that it gives such settled 
peace to the soul who believes it. Since Christ has 
died, God could not be faithful to Him nor just to 
the believing sinner if He still condemned the one 
who trusts in Him who bore our sins in His own 
body on the tree. 

It is, therefore, the righteousness of God that 
is magnified in this Epistle to the Romans, even 
as David of old cried, “Save (or deliver) me in 
Thy righteousness.” It was as Luther was medi- 
tating on this verse that light began to dawn upon 
his darkened soul. He could understand how God 
could damn him in His righteousness, but it was 
when he saw that God can save in righteousness 
that his soul entered into peace. And untold 
myriads have found the same deliverance from 
perplexity when through this glorious unfolding 


The Theme and Analysis 17 


of the righteousness of God as revealed in the 
gospel, they saw how “God can save, yet righteous 
be.” If we fail to see this as we study the 
epistle, we have missed the great purpose for 
which it was given of God. 

I would add one other thought, which I be- 
lieve is of moment, particularly for those who 
seek to present the gospel to others. It is this: 
In Romans, we have the gospel taught to saints, 
rather than the gospel preached to unsaved sin- 
ners. I believe it is very important to see this. 
In order to be saved it is only necessary to trust 
in Christ. But in order to understand our salva- 
tion, and thus to get out of it the joy and bless- 
ing God intends to be our portion, we need to 
have the work of Christ unfolded to us. This is 
what the Holy Spirit has done in this precious 
epistle. It is written to people who are already 
saved to show them the secure foundation upon 
which their salvation rests: namely, the right- 
eousness of God. When faith apprehends this, 
doubts and fears are gone and the soul enters in- 
to settled peace. 


LECTURE II 


Salutation and Introduction 
Chapter 1: 1-17. 


As we come to a verse-by-verse examination of 
this epistle, we may well remind ourselves once 
more of the precious truth that “All scripture is 
God-breathed and profitable.”* God has spoken 
through His Word, and this letter contains some 
of the most important messages He has ever giv- 
en to mankind. It will be well for us, therefore, 
to approach the study of it in a prayerful and self- 
judged spirit, putting all our own preconceived 
ideas to one side and letting God through the in- 
spired Word correct our thoughts, or, better still, 
supplant them with His own. 

The first seven verses, as we have already no- 
ticed, form the salutation, and demand a careful 
examination. Some most precious truths are here 
communicated in what might seem a most casual 
manner. The writer, Paul, designates himself a 
servant, literally, bondman, of Jesus Christ. He 
does not mean, however, that his was a service of 
bondage, but rather the whole-hearted obedience 
of one who realized that he had been “bought 
with a price,” even the precious blood of Christ. 


*Literal rendering of 2 Tim. 3:16. 


Salutation and Introduction 19 


There is a story told of an African slave whose 
master was about to slay him with a spear, when 
a chivalrous British traveler thrust out his arm 
to ward off the blow, and it was pierced by the 
cruel weapon. As the blood spurted out he de- 
manded the person of the slave, saying he had 
bought him by his suffering. To this the former 
master ruefully agreed. As the latter walked 
away, the slave threw himself at the feet of his 
deliverer, exclaiming, “The blood-bought is now 
the slave of the son of pity. He will serve him 
faithfully.” And he insisted on accompanying his 
generous deliverer, and took delight in waiting 
upon him in every possible way. 

Thus had Paul, thus has each redeemed one, be- 
come the bondman of Jesus Christ. We have 
been set free to serve, and may well exclaim with 
the Psalmist, “O Lord, truly I am Thy servant; I 
am Thy servant and the son of Thine handmaid: 
Thou hast loosed my bonds” (Ps. 116:16). 

Not only was Paul in the general sense a serv- 
ant, but he was a servant of peculiar and exalted 
character. He was a called apostle; not as in the 
Authorized Version, “called to be an apostle.” 
The words “to be” are in italics and are not re- 
quired to complete the sense. It may seem a small 
thing to which to call attention, but the same 
interpolation occurs in verse 7, where it is alto- 
gether misleading, as we shall see when we come 
to consider it. 


20 Lectures on Romans 


We need not think of Paul as one of the twelve. 
Some question the regularity of the appointment 
of Matthias, but it seems to me we may well con- 
sider his selection by casting lots as the last offi- 
cial act of the old economy. It was necessary that 
one who had kept company with the Lord and His 
disciples from the baptism of John should fill the 
place which Judas had forfeited. Thus the num- 
ber of the twelve apostles of the Lamb who are 
(in the glorious days of earth’s regeneration 
which we generally call the Millennium) to sit 
upon twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of 
Israel, would be completed. Paul’s ministry is of 
a different character. He was pre-eminently the 
apostle to the Gentiles, and to him was committed 
the special “dispensation of the mystery.” This 
puts his apostleship on an altogether different 
plane from that of the twelve. They knew Christ 
on earth, and their ministry in a very definite way 
was linked with the kingdom and the family of 
God. Paul knew him first as the glorified Lord 
Jesus, and his was distinctively the gospel of the 
glory. 

He was “separated unto the gospel of God.” 
We may rightfully think of this separation from 
several different viewpoints. He had been set 
apart for his special ministry before his birth. As 
in the instances of Moses, Jeremiah, and John the 
Baptist, he was separated from his mother’s womb 
(Gal. 1:15). But he must first learn the weakness 


Salutation 21 


and unprofitableness of the flesh. Then God had 
mercy on him, and he was separated from the 
Christless mass and called by divine grace. But 
there was more than this. He was in a peculiar 
sense delivered from both the people of Israel and 
the Gentile nations to be a minister and witness of 
the things he had seen and heard. And lastly, 
he was separated with Barnabas for the specific 
work of carrying the gospel to the Gentiles, when 
at Antioch in Pisidia, the brethren, in accordance 
with the divine command, laid their hands upon 
them and sent them away to carry the gospel to 
the regions beyond. This gospel is here called 
“the gospel of God.” In verse 9 it is called “the 
gospel of His Son,” and in verse 16, “the gospel of 
Christ,” although there is a possibility that the 
words “of Christ” should be dropped, as they do 
not appear in some of the best manuscripts. 

Verse 2 is parenthetical and identifies the gospel 
with the glad tidings promised in Old Testament 
times and predicted by the prophets in the Holy 
Scriptures. ‘To Him give all the prophets witness, 
that through His name whosoever believeth in 
Him shall receive remission of sins.” Timothy 
had been taught, from a child, the Holy Scriptures, 
and the apostle says that these ‘“‘are able to make 
thee wise unto salvation through faith which is 
in Christ Jesus.” 

This gospel is not a new law. It is not a code of 
morals or ethics. It is not a creed to be accepted. 


22 Lectures on Romans 


It is not a system of religion to be adhered to. 
It is not good advice to be followed. It is a divinely 
given message concerning a divine Person, the Son 
of God, Jesus Christ our Lord. This glorious Be- 
ing is true Man, yet very God. He is the Branch 
that grew out of the root of David, therefore true 
Man. But He is also the Son of God, the virgin- 
born, who had no human father, and this His 
works of power demonstrate. To this blessed fact 
the Spirit of Holiness bare witness when He raised 
dead persons to life. The expression, “By the re- 
surrection from the dead,” is literally, “By resur- 
rection of dead persons.” It includes His own 
resurrection, of course: but it also takes in the re- 
surrection of the daughter of Jairus, of the 
widow’s son, and of Lazarus. He who could thus 
rob death of its prey was God and man in one 
blessed, adorable Person, worthy of all worship 
and praise, now and for evermore. 

From Him, the risen One, Paul had received 
grace (not only unmerited favor, but favor 
against merit, for he had deserved the very op- 
posite) and apostleship by divine call, that he 
might make known the gospel unto all nations, to 
the obedience of faith for Christ’s name’s sake. 

His apostleship, therefore, extended to those 
who were in Rome. Hitherto he had not been able 
to visit them personally, but his heart went out 
to them as the called of Jesus Christ, and so he 
writes “to all that be in Rome, called saints.” 


Introduction 23 


Observe that they were saints in the same way 
that he was an apostle, namely, by divine call. 
We do not become saints by acting in a saintly 
way, but because we are constituted saints we 
should manifest saintliness. 

As is customary in his letters, he wishes them 
grace and peace from God our Father and the Lord 
Jesus Christ. Saved by grace in the first place, 
we need grace for seasonable help all along the 
way. Having peace with God through the blood 
of His cross, we need the peace of God to keep our 
hearts at rest as we journey on toward the eternal 
Sabbath-keeping that remains for the people of 
God. 

Verses 8-17 are the Introduction, which make 
clear his reasons for writing. 

It is evident that a work of God had begun in 
Rome a number of years before the writing of 
this letter, for already the faith of the Christian 
assembly there was spoken of throughout the 
whole world, that is, throughout the Roman Em- 
pire. There is no evidence whatever that this 
work was in any sense linked with apostolic min- 
istry. Both Scripture and history are silent as to 
who founded the church in Rome. Certainly Peter 
did not. There is not the remotest reason for con- 
necting his name with it. The boast of the Roman 
Catholic Church that it is founded on Peter as 
the rock, and that the Roman Bishop is the suc- 
cessor of St. Peter, is all the merest twaddle. We 


24 Lectures on Romans 


have no means of knowing whether any apostle 
visited Rome until Paul himself was taken there 
in chains. 

There seems to have been a providential reason 
why he was hindered from going there earlier. He 
calls God to witness (that God whom he served not 
merely outwardly but in his spirit, the inward 
man, in the gospel of His Son) that he had never 
ceased to pray for those Roman believers since he 
first heard of them; and coupled with his petitions 
for them was his earnest request that if it was the 
will of God he might have the opportunity to 
visit them, and a prosperous journey. How dif- 
ferently that prayer was answered from what he 
might have expected, we well know; and it gives 
us a little idea of the overruling wisdom of God 
in answering all our prayers. No man is compet- 
ent to say what is prosperous and what is not. 
God’s ways are not ours. 

Paul longed to see them, hoping that he might 
be used of God to impart unto them some spiritual 
gift which would be for their establishment in the 
truth. Nor did he think only of being a blessing 
to them, but he fully expected that they would be 
a blessing to him. Both would be comforted to- 
gether. 

Many times during the past years he had pre- 
pared to go to Rome, but his plans had miscar- 
ried. He longed to have some fruit there as in 
other Gentile cities, for he felt himself to be a 


Introduction 25 


debtor to all mankind. The treasure committed 
to him was not for his own enjoyment, but that 
he might make it known to others, whether Greeks 
or barbarians, cultured or ignorant. And realizing 
this he was ready to preach the gospel in Rome 
as elsewhere. 

When in verse 16 he says, “I am not ashamed 
of the gospel of Christ,” I understand that he 
means far more than people generally attach to 
these words. It was not merely that he did not 
blush to be called a Christian, or that he was al- 
ways ready boldly to declare his faith in Christ; 
but the gospel was to him a wonderful, because 
inspired, scheme for the redemption of mankind, 
a divinely revealed system of truth transcending 
all the philosophies of earth, which he was ready 
to defend on every occasion. It was not, as some 
might have supposed, that he had refrained from 
visiting Rome because he did not feel competent to 
present the claims of Christ in the metropolis of 
the world in such a manner that they could not 
be answered and logically repudiated by the cul- 
tured philosophers who thronged the great city. 
He had no fear that they would be able to over- 
throw by their subtle reasonings that which he 
knew to be the only authoritative plan of salvation. 
It is beyond human reason, but it is not illogical 
or unreasonable. It is perfect because of God. 


This gospel had been demonstratively proven to 
be the divine dynamic bringing deliverance to 


26 Lectures on Romans 


all who put faith in it, whether the religious Jew or 
the cultured Greek. It was the power of God and 
the wisdom of God unto salvation. It met every 
need of the mind, the conscience, and the heart of 
man, for in it the righteousness of God was re- 
vealed faith-wise. This I take to be the real mean- 
ing of the somewhat difficult expression translated 
“from faith to faith.” It is really “out of faith 
unto faith.” That is, on the principle of faith to 
those who have faith. In other words, it is not a 
doctrine of salvation by works, but a proclamation 
of salvation entirely on the faith principle. This 
had been declared to Habakkuk long centuries be- 
fore when God said to the troubled prophet, “The 
just shall live by faith.” 

This is the text of the entire epistle, as we have 
already seen, and of Galatians and Hebrews like- 
wise. 

It gives us the quintessence of the divine plan, 
It has been the rest of millions throughout the 
centuries. It was the foundation of what has been 
designated the Augustinian Theology. It was 
the key that opened the door of liberty 
to Martin Luther. It became the battle-cry 
of the Reformation. And it is the touchstone 
of every system since, that professes to be of God. 
If wrong here, they are bound to be wrong 
throughout. It is impossible to understand the 
gospel if the basic principle be misunderstood or 
denied. Justification ‘vy faith alone is the test 


Introduction Zt 


of orthodoxy. But no mind untaught by the Holy 
Spirit will ever receive it, for it sets the first man 
aside altogether as in the flesh and unprofitable, 
in order that the Second Man, the Man of God’s 
counsels, the Lord Jesus Christ, may alone be ex- 
alted. Faith gives all honor to Him as the One who 
has finished the work that saves and in whom 
alone God has been fully glorified, His holiness 
maintained, and His righteousness vindicated, and 
that not in the death of the sinner but in the sal- 
vation of all who believe. It is a gospel worthy of 
God, and it has demonstrated its power by what it 
has accomplished in those who have received it 
in faith. 


LECTURE III 


The Need of the Gospel 


Chapters 1: 18—3: 20. 


We have seen that the gospel reveals the right- 
eousness of God. The apostle now proceeds to 
show the need of such a revelation, and piles proof 
upon proof, evidence upon evidence, and scripture 
upon scripture to demonstrate the solemn fact 
that man has no righteousness of his own, but is 
both by nature and practice utterly unsuited to a 
God of infinite holiness whose throne is established 
on righteousness. This he does in the next section 
of the epistle, chap 1:18—3:20. In a masterly 
way he brings the whole world into court and 
shows that condemnation rests upon all because 
all have sinned. Man is guilty, hopelessly so, and 
can do nothing to retrieve his condition. If God 
has not a righteousness for him his case is ended. 

In verses 18 to 32 of the first chapter the case of 
the barbarian is considered. “The wrath of God 
is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness 
and unrighteousness of men who hold the truth in 
unrighteousness.” The first class is the pagan 
world. The second, those to whom a divine revela- 


The Need of the Gospel 29 


tion had come. The barbarians and heathen gen- 
erally are ungodly. They know not the true God 
and so are “without God in the world.” Therefore 
their behavior is described as ungodliness. 


On the other hand, to the Jew had been com- 
mitted the knowledge of God and a divine code of 
righteousness. He gloried in this while walking 
in unrighteousness. He held the truth (as some- 
thing on which he had a “corner’’) in unrighteous- 
ness. Against both classes the wrath of God is 
revealed. 

The heathen are without excuse. Paganism 
and idolatry are not steps in human evolution as 
man advances from slime to divinity. Heathenism 
is a declension, not an upward reach. The great 
pagan nations once knew more than they do now. 
The knowledge of God brought through the flood 
was disseminated throughout the ancient world. 
Back of all the great idolatrous systems is pure 
monotheism. But men could not stand this inti- 
mate knowledge of God for it made them un- 
comfortable in their sins; so a host of lesser dei- 
ties and divinities were invented as go-betweens, 
and eventually the knowledge of the true God was 
entirely lost. But even to-day creation is His con- 
stant witness: ‘That which may be known of 
God is manifest to them; for God hath showed it 
to them.”’ This orderly universe with its succes- 
sion of the seasons and the mathematical accuracy 
‘of the movements of the heavenly bodies bears 


30 Lectures on Romans 


testimony to the Divine Mind. The stars in their 
courses proclaim the great Creator’s power: 


“Forever singing as they shine, 
The Hand that made us is divine.” 


So, “the invisible things of Him from the creation 
of the world are clearly seen, being understood by 
the things that are made, even His eternal power 
and Godhead.” One word in the original is ren- 
dered by four words in English: ‘“Things-that- 
are-made” is Poima, and from this we get our 
word poem. Creation is God’s great epic poem, 
every part fitted together like the lines and verses 
of a majestic hymn. In Ephesians 2:10 we find 
the same word again. “We are His workmanship” 
—His poem—‘“created in Christ Jesus unto good 
works which God hath before ordained that we 
should walk in them.” This is God’s greatest 
poem: the epic of Redemption. 


““Twas great to call a world from naught; 
’Twas greater to redeem.” 


These two wondrous poems are celebrated in 
Revelation 4 and 5. In chapter 4 the enthroned 
and crowned saints worship Christ as Creator. 
In chapter 5 they adore Him as Redeemer. 

Pursuing Paul’s argument we note in vers. 21- 
23 that the barbarous nations are without excuse 
for their present ignorance and bestial condition, 
“Because that when they knew God they glorified 


The Need of the Gospel 31 


Him not as God, neither were thankful; but be- 
came vain in their imaginations, and their foolish 
heart was darkened. Professing themselves to be 
wise they became fools, and changed the glory of 
the incorruptible God into an image made like to 
corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed 
beasts and creeping things.” Observe the down- 
ward steps on the toboggan-slide of idolatry—God 
first thought of as an idealized man, then likened 
to the birds that soar into the heavens, next to 
the beasts that prowl over the earth, and finally 
to serpents and other detestable creeping things, 
whether reptilian or insectivorous. Even the 
Egyptian worshipped the serpent and the scara- 
beus, and yet back of all Egyptian mythology is 
hidden the origina! revelation of one true and liv- 
ing God! What degradation does this imply on 
the part of one of the most enlightened nations 
of antiquity! And others bear similar marks of 
declension and deterioration. 

Because men gave God up He gave them up. 
Twice in the verses that follow we read, ‘God 
gave them up,” first to uncleanness and then to 
vile affections. Once we are told, “God gave them 
over to a reprobate mind.” The vile immoralities 
depicted here are the natural result of turning 
from the Holy One. The picture of heathenism 
in its unspeakable obscenities is not over-drawn, 
as any one acquainted with the lives of idolatrous 
people will testify. The awful thing is that all this 


ae Lectures on Romans 


vileness and filthiness is being reproduced in mod- 
ern high society where men and women repudi- 
ate God. If people change the truth of God into 
a lie and worship and serve the creature rather 
than the Creator, the whole order of nature is 
violated; for apart from the fear of God there is 
no power known that will hold the evil desires of 
the natural heart in check. It is part of the very 
nature of things that flesh will be manifested in 
its worst aspects when God gives men up to follow 
the bent of their unholy lusts. 

What a picture of mankind away from Him do 
we get in the closing verses. Sin and corruption 
are everywhere triumphant. Righteousness is not 
to be found when the back is turned on God. Nor 
are men sensitive about their sins or ashamed of 
their evil ways, but “knowing the judgment of 
God, that they which commit such things are 
worthy of death, not only do the same, but have 
pleasure in them that do them.” 

That the apostle’s picture of heathenism is 
still true the following clipping bears witness: “A 
Chinese Teacher once told a missionary that the 
Bible could not be so ancient a book after all, be- 
cause the first chapter of Romans gave an account 
of Chinese conduct, such as the missionary could 
only have written after full acquaintance with 
the people. The mistake was not an unnatural 
one, but it is a heathen’s testimony to the truth 
of the Bible.” 


The Need of the Gospel 33 


In the first sixteen verses of the next chapter 
another class is brought into view: it is the world 
of culture and refinement. Surely among the edu- 
cated, the followers of the various philosophic sys- 
tems, will be found men who lead such righteous 
lives that they can come into the presence of God 
claiming His blessing on the ground of their own 
goodness! Certainly there were those who pro- 
fessed to look with disgust and abhorrence upon 
the vile lewdness of the ignorant rabble, but were 
their private lives any holier or any cleaner than 
those whom they so loudly condemned ? 

It is now their turn to be summoned into court, 
so to speak, where the apostle fearlessly arraigns 
them before the august tribunal of “the righteous 
Lord,who loveth righteousness.” ‘Therefore thou 
art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that 
judgest; for wherein thou judgest another thou 
condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest 
the same things.” Philosophy does not preserve 
its devotee from the indulgence of the flesh. A 
recognition of the evil is not necessarily power to 
overcome the evil. Culture does not cleanse the 
heart nor education alter the nature; and it is 
against the doer of evil that the judgment of God 
according to truth will be rendered. To praise 
virtue while practising vice may enable one to get 
by with his fellows, but it will not deceive Him 
who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity. 

Sternly he asks, “Thinkest thou this, O man, 


34 Lectures on Romans 


that judgest them which do such things and doest 
the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of 
God? Or despisest thou the riches of His gocd- 
ness and forbearance and long-suffering; not 
knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee 
to repentance?” Men are inclined to consider that 
God is condoning their ways, if “sentence against 
an evil work is not executed speedily,” whereas 
He waits in long-suffering mercy that men may 
have opportunity to face their sins and own their 
guilt, thus finding mercy. Instead of doing this, 
after the hardness and impenitence of their hearts, 
men, untouched by divine grace, “‘treasure up un- 
to themselves wrath against the day of wrath and 
revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who 
will render to every man according to his deeds.” 
What a solemn expression is this—“Treasur- 
ing up,” or storing up, “wrath against the day of 
wrath!” How apt was the answer of the poor old 
colored woman who when taunted with the folly 
of believing in a “lake of fire and brimstone” be- 
cause “no such an amount of brimstone could be 
found in one place,” exclaimed solemnly, “Ery- 
one takes his own brimstone wif’ him!” Ah, that 
is it! Each rebel against God, each sinner against 
light, each violator of his own conscience, carries 
his own brimstone with him! He is making his 
own destiny. 
/ Properly, I believe, we should consider verses 7 
to 15 as parenthetical, not merely 13 to 15, as indi+ 


The Need of the Gospel 35 


cated in the Authorized Version. In these verses 
great principles of judgment are laid down which 
should forever silence the caviler who would 
charge God with unrighteousness because some 
have light and privileges that others do not enjoy. 

Judgment will be “according to truth” and “ac- 
cording to deeds.” Men will be judged by the light 
they have had, not by the light they never knew. 
Kternal life is offered to all who “by patient con- 
tinuance in well-doing seek for glory, honor and 
incorruptibility.” (Observe it is not immortality, 
but incorruptibility. The distinction is of great 
importance, though the two terms are often con- 
founded in the Authorized Version.) If any were 
so characterized, it would prove that there was a 
divine work in the soul; but where is the natural 
man who so lives? Well then, “unto them that 
are contentious and do not obey the truth, but 
obey unrighteousness,” there can but be meted 
out in the day of judgment “indignation and 
wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul 
of man that doeth evil,’”’ whether privileged Jew 
or ignorant Gentile. 

It is not that God will deal in indiscriminate 
judgment with all men therefore; but light given 
will be the standard by which they are judged. 
None can complain, for if one but “follow the 
gleam” he will find light enough to guide his steps 
and ensure his salvation. If, by the light of na- 
ture, men realize their responsibility to their Cre- 


36 Lectures on Romans 


ator, He will make Himself responsible to give 
them further light unto the salvation of their 
souls. 

With Him there is no respect of persons. The 
greater the privileges, the greater the responsi- 
bility. But where privileges are comparatively 
few, He regards ignorant men with no less in- 
terest and tender compassion than He does those 
whose outward circumstances are seemingly 
better. 

“As many as have sinned without law shali al- 
so perish without law, and as many as have sinned 
in the law shall be judged by the law.” No prin- 
ciple could be sounder. Men are held responsible 
for what they know, or might know if they would. 
They are not condemned for ignorance unless that 
ignorance be the result of the wilful rejection of 
light. ‘Men love darkness rather than light be- 
cause their deeds are evil.” 


The parenthetical verses 13 to 15 emphasize the 
plain principle already laid down so forcibly. 
Judgment is according to deeds. To know the 
law and fail to obey it only increases the con- 
demnation. Doers of the law will be justified, if 
such there are. But elsewhere we learn that from 
this standpoint all would be lost, for “by the deeds 
of the law there shall no flesh be justified in His 
sight.” The Jew prided himself upon being in 
possession of the divine oracles and thought this 
made him superior to the Gentile nations round 


The Neew of the Gospet 3 f 


about. But God has not left Himself without wit- 
ness; to these nations He has given both the light 
of conscience and the light of nature. They shew 
“the work of the law written in their hearts.” 
Observe, it is not that the law is written in their 
hearts. That is new birth, and is the distinctive 
blessing of the New Covenant. If the law were 
written there they would fulfil its righteousness. 
But the work of the law is quite another thing. 
“The law worketh wrath.” It is a “ministry of 
condemnation.” And Gentile sinners who never 
heard of the Sinaitic code have a sense of con- 
demnation resting upon them when they live in 
violation of the dictates of their divinely-im- 
planted conscience which testifies either for or 
against them—“accusing or else excusing one an- 
other.” This is experimental proof that they are 
on the ground of responsibility and that God will 
be righteous in judging them in that solemn day 
when the Man Christ Jesus will sit upon the 
august tribunal of the ages and manifest the se- 
cret motives and springs of conduct. This, Paul 
says is “according to my gospel.” He declares 
that the Crucified will sit upon the throne at the 
last great assize. “God hath appointed a day in 
which He will judge the world in righteousness by 
that Man whom He hath ordained; whereof He 
hath given assurance unto all men in that He 
hath raised Him from the dead” (Acts 17:31). 
With all that the apostle had written concern- 


388 Lectures on Romans 


ing the sinfulness and degeneracy of the Gentiles, 
whether barbarian or highly civilized, the Jew 
would be in fullest agreement. They were “dogs,” 
outside of the Abrahamic covenant, “aliens to the 
commonwealth of Israel.” Their judgment was 
just, for they were the enemies of God and His 
chosen people. But it was otherwise with the 
Hebrews. They were the elect of Jehovah, the 
chosen race to whom God had given His holy law 
and favored with abundant tokens of His special 
regard. So they reasoned, forgetting that holding 
correct doctrine does not avail if practical right- 
eousness be overlooked or disregarded. 

The apostle suddenly summons the proud 
worldly Sadducee and the complacent Pharisee 
into court, and proceeds to arraign them along 
with the despised Gentiles. Verses 17 to 29 give 
us the examination of the chosen people. 

“Behold,” he exclaims, ‘“‘thou art called a Jew, 
and restest in the law, and makest thy boast of 
God, and knowest His will, and approvest the 
things that are more excellent (or, triest things 
that differ; see margin), being instructed out of 
the law; and art confident that thou thyself art a 
guide of the blind, a light of them which are in 
darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher 
of babes, which hast the form of knowledge and 
of the truth in the law” (vers. 17-20). In these 
masterly clauses he sums up all their pretensions. 
And when I say pretensions, I do not mean pre- 


The Need of the Gospel 39 


tences. These were the things in which they 
gloried and they were largely true. God had re- 
vealed Himself to this people as to no other, but 
they were wrong in supposing that this exempted 
them from judgment if they failed to keep His 
covenant. He had said long before, ‘“You only have 
I known of all the families of the earth; therefore 
will I punish you for all your iniquities” (Amos 
Site ys 

Privilege increases responsibility. It does not, as 
they seemed to think, set it aside. The knowledge 
of the divine oracles gave to the Jew a standard of 
judgment that no others had. Therefore, how 
much holier should be his life! Were the Israelites 
then a more righteous people than the nations 
about them? On the contrary, they failed more 
miserably than those of less light and fewer priv- 
ileges. 

Incisively the Spirit of God drives home the 
truth as to their actual state, in four questions 
calculated to expose the inmost secrets of their 
hearts and to lay bare the hidden sins of their 
lives. “Thou therefore which teachest another, 
teachest thou not thyself?” You are so confident 
that you are fitted to instruct the ignorant, have 
you heeded the instruction given in the law? No 
answer! 

“Thou that preachest a man should not steal, 
dost thou steal?” Throughout the ancient world 
the Jew was looked upon as the arch-thief, using 


40 Lectures on Romans 


every cunning device known to the money-lender 
and usurer to part his clients from their wealth. 
True, driven by desperation, the Gentile volun- 
tarily put himself into the hand of the Jewish 
pawnbroker, but he knew as he did so that he was 
dealing with one who had no niceties of pity or 
compassion for an indigent debtor when the deb- 
tor was a hated Gentile dog. The Jew is again 
speechless. 

“Thou that sayest a man should not commit 
adultery, dost thou commit adultery?” Lechery 
of the gravest kind was not an uncommon offence 
in Israel, as the divine records prove and as his- 
tory bears witness. The evil is in the very nature 
of man. Out of the heart proceed fornication, las- 
civiousness, and every unclean thing. In this 
respect the Jew is as guilty as his Gentile neigh- 
bor. He has no reply. 

Perhaps the keenest thrust is in the last ques- 
tion of all. “Thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou 
commit sacrilege?” The word translated “commit 
sacrilege” really means “to traffic in idols.” This 
was an offence of which the Jew was peculiarly 
guilty. Abhorring images, he nevertheless was 
often known to act as a go-between in disposing of 
idols stolen from the temples of a conquered peo- 
ple and those ready to purchase them in other 
districts. He was even charged with systematical- 
ly robbing temples and then selling the images. 
The town-clerk of Ephesus had this in mind when 


The Need of the Gospel 41 


he said, “Ye have brought hither these men, which 
are neither robbers of temples (not, churches), 
nor yet blasphemers of your goddess” (Acts 19: 
387). So this was indeed a home-thrust, exposing 
at once the hypocritical character of the man who 
professed detestation of idolatry and all its works, 
and yet was not above profiting financially at the 
expense of idolators in a manner so thoroughly 
dishonest. 

So the apostle drives home the tremendous in- 
dictment! “For the name of God is blasphemed 
among the Gentiles through you, as it is written” 
(ver. 24). This their own prophets had declared, 
and he but insists upon what Scripture and their 
consciences confirmed. 

To trust in circumcision, the sign of the Abra- 
hamic covenant, while walking in so carnal a man- 
ner, was but deceiving themselves. Ordinances do 
not profit if that of which the ordinance speaks is 
neglected. The uncircumcised Gentile, if he walk 
before God in righteousness, will be accounted as 
circumcised, whereas the covenant-mark on the 
flesh of a Jew will only add to his condemnation if 
he lives in opposition to the law. 

It is reality that counts with God. The true Jew 
(and “Jew” is a contraction of ‘Judah,’ meaning, 
“Praise’’) is not one who is such by natural birth 
alone, or by outward conformity to ritual, but one 
who is circumcised in heart, who has judged his 
sinfulness in the sight of the Lord, and who now 


42 Lectures on Romans 


seeks to walk in accordance with the revealed will 
of God. “Whose praise (note the play on the word 
Jew) is not of man but of God” (vers. 26-29). 

In chapter 3:1-20 we have the great indictment, 
the summing up of all that has gone before. 
There is no moral distinction between Jew and 
Gentile. All are bereft of righteousness. All are 
shut up to judgment, unless God has a righteous- 
ness of His own providing for them. 

That the Jew has certain advantages over the 
Gentile is acknowledged as self-evident, and of 
these the chief is the possession of the Holy 
Scriptures, the oracles of God. But these very 
Scriptures only made his guilt the more evident. 
Even if they did not really have faith in these 
sacred writings yet their unfaith cannot make 
void the faithfulness of God. He will fulfil His 
Word even if it be in the setting aside of the peo- 
ple He chose for Himself. He must be true though 
all others prove untrue. In judgment He will 
maintain His righteousness, as David confesses in 
Psalm 51 (vers. 1-4). 

Does man’s unrighteousness then but prepare 
the way for God to display His righteousness, and 
is it a necessity of the case? If so, sin is a part of 
the divine plan and man cannot be held accounta- 
ble. But this the apostle indignantly refutes. God 
is just. He will judge men for their sins in right- 
eousness. And this could not be if sin were fore- 
ordained and pre-determined. If the latter were 


The Need of the Gospel 43 


true man might have just cause to complain: “If 
the truth of God hath more abounded through my 
lie unto His glory, why yet am I also judged as a 
sinner?” And in that case what was being sland- 
erously reported by some as the teaching of Paul, 
“Let us do evil that good may come,” would be 
correct. But all who so plead show themselves 
deficient in moral principle. Their judgment is 
just. 


Then in verses 9-20 we have the divine verdict 
on the entire human race. The Jew is no better 
than the Gentile. All alike are under—that is, 
slaves to—sin. And this the Old Testament con- 
firms. Like a masterly lawyer he cites authority 
after authority to prove his case. The quotations 
are largely from the Psalms, and one from the 
prophet Isaiah. (See Ps. 14:1-3; 53:1-3; 5:9; 
140:3; 10:7; Isa. 59:7,8; Ps.36:1.) These are tes- 
timonies the Jew could not attempt to refute, 
coming as they do from his own acknowledged 
Scriptures. There are fourteen distinct counts in 
this indictment or summary of evidence. 


1—“‘There is none righteous, no, not one.” All 
have failed in something. 


2—“There is none that understandeth.” All 
have become wilfully ignorant. 


38—“There is none that seeketh after God.” All 
seek their own. 


44 Lectures on Romans 


4“They are all gone out of the way.” They 
have deliberately turned their backs on the 
truth. 
5—“They are together become unprofitable.” 
They have dishonored God instead of glorify- 
ing Him. 
6—“There is none that doeth good, no, not one.” 
Their practices are evil. They do not follow 
after that which is good. 
7—“Their throat is an open sepulchre,” because 
of the corruption within. 
8—“With their tongues they have used deceit.” 
Lying and deception are characteristic. 
9—“The poison of asps is under their lips.” It 
is the poison inserted into the very nature of 
man by “that old serpent the devil and Sa- 
tan” at the very beginning. 
10—‘“‘Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitter- 
ness” for “out of the abundance of the heart, 
the mouth speaketh.” 
11—“‘Their feet are swift to shed blood.” Hatred 
produces murder, and, alas, in how many 
ways it is manifested! 
12—“Destruction and misery are in their ways,” 
because they have forgotten God the source 
of life and blessing. 
18—“The way of peace have they not known,” 


for they have deliberately chosen the ways 
of death. 


The Need of the Gospel 45 


14—“There is no fear of God before their eyes.” 
Hence there is no wisdom in them. 


Can any plead “Not guilty” to all of these 
charges? If so, let him speak. But none can hon- 
estly do so. And so he concludes, “We know that 
what things soever the law saith, it saith to them 
who are under the law: that every mouth may be 
stopped and all the world become guilty before 
God. Therefore by the deeds of the law there 
shall no flesh be justified in His sight, for by the 
law is the knowledge of sin” (vers. 19-20). 

It is God saying again, as in the days of Noah, 
“The end of all flesh is come before Me!” “They 
that are in the flesh cannot please God.” ‘The 
flesh profiteth nothing.” How slow we are to 
learn this! How hard it is for the natural man to 
give up all pretension to righteousness and to fall 
down in the dust of self-judgment and repentance 
before God, only to find he is then in the very 
place where grace can meet him! 

The law was given to a special people as we 
have seen. They alone were “under the law.” That 
Gentiles were not, we have already been told in 
chapter 2:12-14. How, then, does the failure of 
those under the law bring in all the world as 
guilty before God? An illustration may help. A 
man has a desert ranch of large extent. He is told 
it is worthless as pasturage or farming land. He 
fences off twelve acres; breaks it, harrows it, fer- 


46 Lectures on Romans 


tilizes it, sows it, cultivates it, and reaps only sage- 
brush and cactus! It is no use trying out the rest, 
for all is of the same character. He says it is all 
good-for-nothing, so far as agriculture is concern- 
ed. Israel was God’s twelve acres. He gave them 
His law, instructed them, disciplined them, 
warned them, restrained them, protected them, 
and sent His Son to them; and Him they rejected 
and crucified. In this act the Gentiles joined. All 
are under judgment to God. There is no use of 
further test. There is nothing in the flesh for 
God. Man is hopelessly corrupt. He is not only 
guilty, but is utterly unable to retrieve his con- 
dition. The law but accentuates his guilt. It 
cannot justify. It can only condemn. 

How hopeless is the picture! But it is the dark 
background on which God will display the riches 
of His grace in Christ Jesus! 


LECTURE IV 


The Gospel in Relation to our Sins 


Chapters 3: 21—5: 11. 


It is with a sense of the greatest relief that we 
turn from the sad story of man’s sin and shame 
to contemplate the wondrous grace of God as told 
out in the gospel, the divine remedy for the ruin 
that came in by the fall. And this presentation of 
the good news is in two parts: it presents the 
gospel first as having to do with the question of 
our sins: and then when that is settled, as having 
to do with our sin; the sin-principle, sin in the 
flesh, the carnal mind which dominates the un- 
saved, unregenerated man. The first theme is 
fully taken up in chapters 3:21 to 5:11, and this 
we will now consider. 

“BUT NOW”’—exclaims the apostle. It marks 
a decided change of subject. Now that man has 
been fully shown up, God will be revealed. Now 
upon the proven unrighteousness of all mankind 
“the righteousness of God is manifested.” Of 
old He had declared, “I will bring near My right- 
eousness.” This is in no sense a wrought-out, 
legal righteousness, such as man was unable to 
produce for God. It is a righteousness “without 


48 Lectures on Romans 


the law,” that is, altogether apart from any prin- 
ciple of human obedience to a divinely-ordained 
code of morals. It is a righteousness of God for 
unrighteous men, and is in no wise dependent up- 
on human merit or attainment. 

' The Righteousness of God is a term of wide im- 
port. Here it means a righteousness of God’s pro- 
viding—a perfect standing for guilty men for 
which God makes Himself responsible. If men 
are saved at all it must be in righteousness. But 
of this, man is utterly bereft. Therefore God 
must find a way whereby every claim of His 
righteous throne shall be met, and yet guilty sin- 
ners be justified from all things. His very nature 
demands that this must not be at the expense of 
righteousness but in full accord with it. 

And this has been in His mind from the be- 
ginning. It is “witnessed,” or borne testimony to, 
“by the law and the prophets.” Moses depicts it 
in many types of remarkable beauty. The coats 
of skin wherein our first parents were clothed; 
the sacrificial victims accepted in behalf of the 
offerers; the wonderful symbolism of the Taber- 
nacle; all tell out the story of a righteousness pro- 
vided by God for the unrighteous sinner who 
turns to Him in faith. The prophets, too, take up 
the same story. They predict the coming of the 
Just One who was to die to bring unjust men nigh 
to God. “Deliver me in Thy righteousness,” cries 
David. “Purge me with hyssop and I shall be 


Justification by Grace through Faith 49 


clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow,” 
he prays. “He hath clothed us in the garments 
of salvation, in the robe of righteousness,” says 
Isaiah, for ‘“‘the chastisement of our peace was 
upon Him” who was “bruised for our iniquities.” 
“This is His name,” exclaims Jeremiah, “where. 
by He shall be called, the Lord our Rigt:teous« 
ness.” “I will save you from all your unclean. 
nesses,” is the promise through Ezekiel. To Danie! 
the angel Gabriel foretells the making of “recon- 
ciliation for iniquity” and the bringing in of 
“everlasting righteousness.” The so-called Minor 
Prophets take up the same strain, and all poin’ 
forward to the Coming One through whom salva- 
tion will be secured for all who repent; Jehovah’s 
Fellow, who will become the smitten Shepherd for 
man’s redemption. “To Him give all the prophets 
witness that through His name whosoever be- 
lieveth in Him shall receive remission of sins” 
(Acts 10:48). 

The righteousness of God is a “by faith” right- 
ecusness. It is not “by works.” Faith is taking 
God at His word. So He has sent a message to 
man to be believed. It is the offer of an unim- 
peachable righteousness to all, but is only upon 
all them who believe. There is a question as to the 
reading here. Some editors reject ‘‘and upon all.” 
But there can be no question of the underlying 
truth. God freely offers a righteousness to all. 
Jt is the covering of all those who believe, and 


50 Lectures on Romans 


of them only. All need it alike, for all have sinned. 
There is no difference as to this. No man has 
come up to the standard. All have come short of 
the glory of God. But He is not looking for merit 
in man. He offers His righteousness as a free gift. 
So we read, “Being justified freely by His grace 
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus” 
(ver. 24). 


To be justified is to be declared righteous. It 
is the sentence of the judge in favor of the prison- 
er. It.is not a state or condition of soul. We are 
not justified because we have become righteous in 
heart and life. God justifies first, then He enables 
the justified one to walk in practical righteous- 
ness. We are justified freely. The word means 
“without price!’ It is the same as in John 15:25, 
“They hated me without a cause.” There was 
nothing evil in the ways or life of Jesus, for which 
men should hate Him. They hated Him freely. 
So there is no good in man for which God should 
justify him. He is justified freely, without a 
cause, When he believes in Jesus. 


This is “by grace.” Grace is not only unmerited 
favor. Grace is favor against merit. It is the 
goodness of God, not alone to men who have done 
and can do nothing to deserve it, but it is favor 
shown to men who have deserved the very op- 
posite. “Where sin abounded, grace did much 
more abound.” 


Justification by Grace through Faith 51 


‘Sovereign grace, o’er sin abounding; 
Ransomed souls the tidings swell, 
*Tis a deep that knows no sounding; 
Who its length and breadth can tell? 
On its glories 
Let my soul forever dwell.” 


In order thus to show grace in righteousness te 
admittedly guilty sinners God must have a just 
and satisfactory basis. Sin cannot be overlooked. 
It must be atoned for. This has been effectuated 
“through the redemption that is in Christ. Jesus.” 
Redemption is a buying back. Man’s life is for- 
feited because of his iniquitous ways. He is sold 
under judgment. Christ the Holy One—God and 
Man in one glorious Person upon whom the vio- 
lated law had no claim—took the guilty rebel’s 
place, paid the utmost penalty, thus redeeming 
the believing sinner from the wrath and curse to 
which he had sold himself. 


“He bore on the tree, the sentence: for me, 
And now both the Surety and sinn2r are free.” 


And He who died lives again and is Himself the 
abiding propitiation—literally, the mercy-seat, 
the place where God can meet with man through 
Christ’s atoning blood—available to faith. The 
apostle clearly alludes to the blood-sprinkled 
mercy-seat on the ark of the covenant of old. 
Within the ark were the tables of the law. Above 


20645 
THE CINCINNATI BIBLE SEMINARY Oe ON, 
LIBRARY Tear 


52 Lectures on Romans 


were the cherubim, “justice and judgment” the 
habitation of God’s throne. They are ready, as it 
were, to leap from that throne to execute God’s 
righteous wrath against the violators of His law. 
But sprinkled upon the mercy-seat is the blood 
that typifies the sacrifice of the cross. Justice and 
judgment ask no more. “Mercy rejoiceth against 
judgment,” for God Himself has found a ransom. 

Till the Lord Jesus suffered for sins, the Just 
for the unjust, to bring us to God, the sin-ques- 
tion was not really settled. “It was not possible 
that the blood of bulls and goats should take 
away sins.”’ Old Testament saints therefore were 
all saved “‘on credit,” as we say. Now that Christ 
has died the account is closed, and God declares 
His righteousness in pretermitting sins down 
through the past ages when men turned to Him 
in faith. It is not our past sins He refers to in 
verse 25. It is the sins of believers in the ages 
before the cross. And now God declares at this 
time—since the work is done—His righteousness, 
for He has shown how He can be just and yet 
justify ungodly sinners who believe in Jesus. 
This leaves no room for boasting on man’s part, 
rather for shame and contrition in view of what 
our sins cost the Saviour, and of joyful praise as 
we contemplate the grace that wrought so won- 
drously on our behalf. Human merit is barred out 
in the very nature of the case. Salvation is 
through grace by faith. “Therefore we conclude 


Witness of Law and Prophets 53 


that a man is justified by faith apart from the 
deeds of the law.” This then embraces lawless 
Gentiles as well as law-breaking Jews. The same 
evangel is for all. He who is the Creator of all 
has passed none by. He will justify the circum- 
cised, not by ritual, but by faith, and the uncir- 
cumcised Gentile through faith likewise. 

Does this invalidate or ignore the law? Not at 
all. The law condemned the breaker of it and de- 
manded vengeance. This Christ has borne, so the 
majesty of the law is upheld, yet sinners are 
saved. 


“On Christ Almighty vengeance fell 
That would have sunk a world to hell; 
He bore it for a chosen race, 

And thus became a Hiding-place.” 


In chapter four the apostle proceeds to show, by 
means of Abraham and David, how all this is wit- 
nessed by the law and the prophets. Abraham is 
taken from the Pentateuch, the books of the law; 
David from the Psalms, which are linked with the 
Prophets. 

What then do we see in Abraham? Was he 
justified before God by his works? If so, he had 
this to boast in, that he had righteously deserved 
the divine approval. But what does the Scripture 
say? In Gen. 15:6 we are told that “Abraham 
believed God, and it was counted unto him for 


54 Lectures on Romans 


righteousness.” This is the very principle the 
apostle has been pressing and explaining so 
clearly. 

To earn salvation by works would be to put 
God in man’s debt. He would owe it to the suc- 
cessful worker to save him. This is the very op- 
posite of grace, which is mercy shown “to him 
that worketh not, but believeth on Him that justi- 
fieth the ungodly.” It is his faith that is counted 
for righteousness. To this then Abraham bears 
testimony. And David too is heard singing the 
blessedness of the man to whom God imputes 
righteousness without works, when he cries in 
Psalm 32: “Blessed are they whose iniquities are 
forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is 
the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.” 
In the psalm the Hebrew word for “covered” 
means “atoned for.” This is the gospel. Atone- 
ment has been made. Therefore God does not 
impute sin to the believer in His Son, but imputes 
righteousness instead. 

Luther called the 82nd Psalm “a Pauline 
Psalm.” It teaches in no uncertain way the same 
glorious doctrine of justification apart from hu- 
man merit. The non-imputation of sin is equiva- 
lent to the imputation of righteousness. Augus- 
tine of Hippo had these words painted on a pla- 
card, and placed at the foot of his bed where his 
dying eyes could rest upon them. To myriads 
more they have brought peace and gladness in the 


Witness of Low ond Propheta 55 


knowledge of transgression forgiven and sin 
atoned for, as the Hebrew word in the Old Testa- 
ment translated “covered” really means. 


This blessedness was not—is not—for 4 chosen 
few only, but is freely offered to all. Faith was 
reckoned to Abraham for righteousness when he 
was on Gentile ground before the covenant sign 
of circumcision was placed upon his flesh. It was 
really a seal of what was already true, as in the 
case of Christian baptism; because he was justi- 
fied he was commanded to be circumcised. In the 
centuries since the Jews had come to regard the 
sign as of more importance than the faith. Peo- 
ple ever exalt the visible at the expense of the 
invisible. 

Abraham is called “the father of circumcision,” 
for through him the ordinance began. But he is 
father not only to them who are of the circum- 
cision literally, but to all who have no confidence 
in the flesh, who have judged it as weak and un- 
profitable, and who, like him, trust in the living 
God. 


The promise that he should be heir of the world 
was not given to him “through the law,” that is, it 
was not a reward of merit, something he had 
earned by obedience. It was on the ground of sov- 
ereign grace. Hence his righteousness, like ours 
if we believe, was a “by-faith righteousness.” The 
heirs of the promise are those who accept it in the 


56 Lectures on Romans 


same faith, otherwise it would be utterly in- 
validated. It was an unconditional promise. 

The law promised blessing upon obedience and 
denounced judgment on disobedience. None have 
kept it. Therefore, “The law worketh wrath.” 
It cursed. It could not bless. It intensified sin by 
giving it the specific character of transgression, 
making it the wilful violation of known law. It 
could not be the means of earning what was free- 
ly given. 

The promise of blessing through the Seed— 
which is Christ—is of faith that it might be by 
grace. And so it is “sure” to all the seed, that is, 
to all who have faith. All such are “of the faith 
of Abraham.” He is thus the father of us all, who 
believe in Jesus. And so the word is fulfilled 
which said, “I have made thee a father of many 
nations.” This comes in parenthetically. The 
words, “Before Him whom he believed,” properly 
follow the words, ‘‘The father of us all.” That is 
to say, Abraham, though not literally our father 
by natural generation, is the father of all who 
believe, in the sight of God. The same faith char- 
acterizes them all. 

God is the God of resurrection. He works when 
nature is powerless. He so wrought in the case 
of Abraham and Sarah, both beyond the time 
when they could naturally be the parents of a 
child. He so wrought when He raised up Christ, 
the true Seed, first by bringing Him into the world 


Peace with God 57 


contrary to nature, of a virgin mother; and sec- 
ond by bringing Him up from the dead. Abyra- 
ham believed in the God of resurrection, and stag- 
gered not at the divine promise though fulfilment 
seemed impossible. God delights to do impossibili- 
ties! What He promises He performs. Fully per- 
suaded of this, Abraham believed God and it was 
imputed to him for righteousness. In the same 
way we are called upon to believe on Him who 
raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead—He who 
was, in infinite grace, delivered up to death to 
make atonement for our offences, and who, upon 
the completion of His work to God’s satisfaction, 
was raised again for our justification. His resur- 
rection is the proof that God is satisfied. The 
divine justice has been appeased. The holiness of 
God has been vindicated. The law has been estab- 
lished. And so the believing sinner is declared 
justified from all things. Such is the testimony 
of chapter 4. 

In the first eleven verses of chapter 5 we have 
a marvelous summing up, concluding this phase 
of the subject. “Therefore,” that is, in view of 
all that has been so clearly established, ‘being 
justified by faith we have peace with God through 
our Lord Jesus Christ.” Some would render it, 
“Let us have peace.” But this is to weaken the 
force of the entire argument. Peace, as used here, 
is not a state of mind or heart. It is a prevailing 
condition between two who were once alienated. 


58 Lectures on Romans 


Sin had disturbed the relations of Creator and 
creature. A breach had come in which man could 
not mend. But peace has been made by the blood 
of Christ’s cross. There is no longer a barrier. 
Peace with God is now the abiding state into 
which every believer enters. The sin-question is 
settled. If two nations be at war there is no peace. 
If peace is made there is no war. “There is no 
peace, saith my God, to the wicked.” “But Christ 
has made peace,” yea, “He is our peace.” We be- 
lieve it, and we have peace with God. 


We might say, “Let us enjoy peace with God.” 
But, “Let us have peace with God,” is absurd on 
the face of it. We have the peace. It is a settled 
thing. He made it, not we. 


“°Tis everlasting peace, 
Sure as Jehovah’s name; 

"Tis stable as His steadfast throne, 
Forevermore the same. 


“My love is ofttimes low, 
My joy still ebbs and flows, 

But peace with Him remains the same, 
No change Jehovah knows. 


“T change; He changes not, 
My Christ can never die; 

This blood-sealed friendship changes not, 
His truth, not mine, the tie.” 


Peace with Goa 59 


“The peace of God” is another thing, as in 
Phil. 4: 6,7. That is experimental. It is the abid- 
ing portion of all who learn to cast every care on 
Him who is the great Burden-bearer. 


To see this distinction and to really grasp it in 
faith is of prime importance. Until the soul re- 
alizes that the peace made by the blood of His 
cross is eternal and undisturbed, even though 
one’s experience may be very different owing to 
personal failure or lack of appropriating faith, 
there will be no certainty of one’s ultimate sal- 
vation. 

But knowing this peace to be based, not on my 
frames or feelings, but on accomplished redemp- 
tion, I have conscious access by faith into this 
grace wherein I stand. I stand in grace; not in my 
own merit. I was saved by grace. I go on in grace. 
I shall be glorified in grace. Salvation from first 
to last is altogether of God, and therefore alto- 
gether of grace. 


“Grace is the sweetest sound 
That ever reached our ears: 
When conscience charged and justice frowned, 
’Twas grace removed our fears. 


“Grace is a mine of wealth 
Laid open to the poor, 
Grace is the sov’reign spring of health, 
"Tis life for evermore. 


60 Lectures on Romans 


“Of grace then, let us sing, 
A joyful wondrous theme; 

Who grace has brought shall glory bring, 
And we shall reign with Him.” 


This is the golden sceptre held out by the King 
of Glory to all who venture to approach in faith. 

Note it is access and standing that are before 
us in this 2nd verse of the 5th chapter of our epis- 
tle. Access is based on standing, not on state. 
The terms are to be carefully distinguished. In 
Philippians we read much about “your state.” 
Paul was greatly concerned about that. He never 
had a fear about the standing of the children of 
God. That is eternally settled. 

Standing refers to the new place in which I am 
put by grace as justified before the throne of God 
and in Christ risen, forever beyond the reach of 
judgment. State is condition of soul. It is ex- 
perience. Standing never varies. State is fluctuat- 
ing, and depends on the measure in which I walk 
with God. My standing is always perfect be- 
cause it is measured by Christ’s acceptance. I am 
accepted in Him. “As He is, so are we in this 
world.” But my state will be good or bad as I 
walk in the Spirit or walk after the flesh. 

My standing gives me title to enter consciously 
as a purged worshiper into the Holiest and to 
boldly approach the throne of grace in prayer. 
Of old God sternly said, “Stand afar off and wor- 


Peace with God 61 


ship.” Access was not known under the legal 
covenant. God was hidden; the veil was not yet 
rent. Now all is different, and we are urged to 
“draw nigh with true hearts in full assurance of 
faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil 
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure 
water.” 


“And now we draw near to the throne of grace, 
For His blood and the Priest are there; 

And we joyfully seek God’s holy face 
With our censer of praise and prayer. 

The burning mount and the mystic veil 
With our terrors and guilt are gone; 

Cur conscience has peace that can never fail, 
’Tis the Lamb on high on the throne.” 


Thus we do indeed rejoice in the hope of the 
glory of God. It is hope—not as uncertainty—but 
hope that is sure and certain, because based on 
the finished work of the Christ of God and a seat- 
ed Priest on the right hand of the Majesty in the 
heavens. The glory is assured for all who are 
justified by faith, and so have peace with God. 


But ere we reach the glory we must tread the 
sands of the wilderness. This is the place of test- 
ing. Here we learn the infinite resources of our 
wonderful God. So we are enabled to glory in tri- 
bulations, contrary though these may be to all 
that the natural man rejoices in. Tribulation is 


62 Lectures on Romans 


the divinely appointed flail to separate the wheat 
from the chaff. In suffering and sorrow we learn 
our own nothingness and the greatness of the 
power that has undertaken to carry us through. 
These are lessons we could never learn in heaven. 


“The touch that heals the broken heart 
Is never felt above; 

His angels know His blessedness, 
His wayworn saints His love.” 


Thus “tribulation worketh patience” if we accept 
it as from our loving Lord Himself, knowing it is 
for our blessing. Out of patient endurance springs 
fragrant Christian experience, as the soul learns 
how wonderfully Christ can sustain in every cir- 
cumstance. And experience blossoms into hope, 
weaning the heart from the things of earth and 
occupying them with the heavenly scene to which 
we are hastening. 


Thus “hope maketh not ashamed, for the love 
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy 
Spirit which is given unto us.” This is the first 
mention of the Spirit’s work in the epistle. We 
read of the Spirit of Holiness in chapter one in 
connection with Christ’s work and resurrection, 
but not a syllable about the Spirit’s work in the 
believer till the soul enters into peace through 
the apprehension of the finished work of Christ. 
This is all-important. I am not saved by what 


The Summing Up 63 


goes on within myself. I am saved by what the 
Lord Jesus did for me. But the Spirit seals me 
when I believe the gospel, and by His indwelling 
the love of God is shed abroad within my heart. | 


“Soon as my all I ventured 
On the atoning blood, 

The Holy Spirit entered, 
For I was born of God.” 


It is a great mistake to rely upon my own re- 
cognition of the Spirit’s work within me as the 
ground of my assurance. Assurance is by the 
word of the truth of the gospel. But upon be- 
lieving, I receive the Spirit. Of this the 8th 
chapter largely treats. This gives corroborative 
evidence. “We know that we have passed from 
death unto life because we love the brethren.” 

Verses 6 to 11 constitute a separate section. 
In this portion we have the summing up of all 
that has gone before, ere the apostle goes on in 
the next division to take up the second phase of 
the gospel—in relation to our SIN. 

We were helpless, without strength, when God 
in grace gave His Son, who died for ungodly sin- 
ners in whom no merit could be found. 

This is not like man. Few indeed could be 
found who would voluntarily die for an upright 
man, a righteous man, known and acknowledged 
to be such—much less for a wicked man. Some 


64 Lectures on Romans 


indeed might be willing to die for a good man, a 
kindly, benevolent man who has won their hearts 
by his gracious demeanor. But God has “com- 
mended His own love [see Greek] toward us, in 
that while we were yet sinners [neither right- 
eous nor good], Christ died for us,” thus becom- 
ing the Substitute for guilty rebels. If love gave 
Him up to the death of the cross while we were 
so lost and vile, we may know beyond any doubt 
that since we have been justified by His blood He 
will never allow us to come into judgment: “We 
shall be saved from wrath through Him.” 


This has been called the chapter of “the five 
much mores,” and of these we have the first one 
in the 9th verse. ‘‘Much more then,” he exclaims, 
since now, cleared of every charge by the blood 
of the Son of God, we are forever beyond the 
reach of the divine vengeance against sin. 


The second use of this term is in the 10th 
verse: “For if when we were enemies, we were re- 
conciled to God by the death of His Son, much 
more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by His 
life.’ How blind are they who read into this 
a reference to the earthly life of our blessed 
Lord. That life—pure and holy as it was—could 
never have saved one poor sinner. It was by His 
death He made atonement for our sins. Even 
the love of God told out so fully in the ways of 
Jesus only drew out the envenomed hate of the 
human heart. It is His death that destroys the 


The Summing Up 695 


enmity—when I realize He died for me I am re- 
conciled to God. The hatred was all on my side— 
there was no need for God to be reconciled to 
me—but I needed reconciliation, and I have found 
it in His death. Now since it is already an ac- 
complished fact I may know for a certainty I 
“shall be saved by His life.” He says, “Because 
I live ye shall live also.” It is, of course, His re- 
surrection life that is in view. “Wherefore He 
is able to save evermore them that come unto 
God by Him, seeing He ever liveth to make in- 
tercession for them” (Heb. 7: 25, marginal read- 
ing). A living Christ at God’s right hand is my 
pledge of eternal redemption. He lives to plead 
our cause, to deliver through all the trials of the 
way, and to bring us safely home to the Father’s 
house at last. We are bound up in the same 
bundle of life as Himself, though this properly 
is the subject of the last part of the chapter and 
has to do with the second phase of salvation. 
Secure for time and eternity we “joy in God 
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have 
now received the reconciliation” (ver. 11, see mar- 
gin). It is not we who received the atone- 
ment, but God. We needed to make an atone- 
ment for our sins, but were unable to do so. 
Christ has made it for us by offering up Him- 
self without spot unto God. Thus it is God who 
has accepted the atonement, and we, who once 
were “enemies” and “alienated in our minds by 


66 Lectures on Romans 


wicked works,” have received the reconciliation. 
The enmity is gone. We are at peace with God, 
and we joy in Him who has become our ever- 
lasting portion. 

This is the glorious end—for the present—to 
which the Holy Spirit has been leading us. Our 
salvation is full and complete. Our sins are gone. 
We are justified freely by His grace. We have 
peace with God and we look forward with joyous 
certainty to an eternity of bliss with Him who 
has redeemed us. 

The other three “much mores” occur in the 
next section, where the question of the two Head- 
ships is thoroughly gone into. We shall notice 
them in order when we come to them. 


LECTURE V 


The Gospel in Relation to Indwelling Sin 


Part [I 


Chapters 5: 12—7: 25 


It will be necessary to take up this third part of 
the great doctrinal division in two lectures because 
of the wide scope of chapter 5: 12 to the end of 
chapter 8. We shall look first therefore at that 
portion which ends with chapter 7. In the last 
half of chapter 5 we have the two heads—Adam 
and Christ. In chapter 6 we have two masters, 
SIN personified and GOD as revealed in Jesus. In 
chapter 7 there are two Husbands to be con- 
sidered—the Law and Christ risen. 

The awakened sinner is concerned about one 
thing: how to be delivered from the judgment 
his sins have righteously deserved. This aspect 
of salvation has all been gone into and settled in 
the portion we have recently gone over. It is 
never raised again. As we go on into this next 
part of the epistle the question of guilt does not 
come up. The moment a sinner believes the gos- 
pel his responsibility as a child of Adam under the 
judgment of God is over for ever. But that very 
moment his responsibility as a child of God be- 


68 Lectures on Romans 


gins. He has a new nature that craves what is 
divine. But he soon discovers that his carnal 
nature has not been removed nor improved by 
his conversion to God, and from this fact arises 
many trying experiences. It often comes as a 
great shock, when he realizes that he has still 
a nature capable of every kind of vileness. He 
is rightly horrified, and may be tempted to ques- 
tion the reality of his regeneration and his jus- 
tification before God. How can a Holy God go 
on with one who has such a nature as this? If 
he tries to fight sin in the flesh he is probably 
defeated, and learns by bitter experience what 
Philip Melanchthon, Luther’s friend, put so terse- 
ly, “Old Adam is too strong for young Philip.” 
Happy is the young convert if at this crisis he 
comes under sound scriptural instruction instead 
of falling into the hands of spiritual charlatans 
who will set him to seeking the elimination of the 
fleshly nature and the death of the carnal mind. 
If he follows their advice he will be led into a 
quagmire of uncertainty and dazzled by the de- 
lusive will-o’-the-wisp of possible perfection in 
the flesh, will perhaps flounder for years in the 
bog of fanaticism and self-torture before reach- 
ing the rest that remains for the people of God. 
I have tried to tell of my own early experiences 
along this line in a little volume entitled, Holi- 
ness, the False and the True, which I am thank- 
ful to know has been blessed to the deliverance 


Two Races, Two Heads 69 


of many thousands of souls. It was the truth we 
are now to consider that saved me at last from 
the wretchedness and disappointments of those 
early years. 

In taking up these chapters I desire to anta- 
gonize no one but, simply, to constructively open 
up the line of truth here set forth for the soul’s 
blessing. 

And first we have to consider the two great fa- 
milies and the two federal heads of chapter 5: 
12-21. 

The moment a man is justified by faith he is 
also born of God. His justification is, as we have 
seen, his official clearance before the throne of 
God. His regeneration involves his introduction 
into a new family. He becomes a part of the 
New Creation of which the risen Christ is the 
Head. Adam the first was federal head of the 
old race. Christ Risen, the Second Man and the 
Last Adam, is Head of the new race. The old cre- 
ation fell in Adam, and all his descendants were 
involved in his ruin. The new creation stands 
eternally secure in Christ, and all who have re- 
ceived life from Him are sharers in the blessings 
procured by His cross and secured by His life at 
God’s right hand. 


“Joyful now the new creation 
Rests in undisturbed repose, 
Blest in Jesus’ full salvation, 
Sorrow now nor thraldom knows.” 


70 Lectures on Romans 


It is the apprehension of this that settles the 
question of the believer’s security and thus gives 
a scriptural basis for the doctrine of deliverance 
from the power of sin. 


It will be observed that the subject begun in 
verse 12 is concluded in verses 18-21. The inter- 
vening passage (verses 13-17) is parenthetical, 
or explanatory. It may be best therefore for 
us to examine the parenthesis first. Sin was in 
the world dominating man from Adam’s fall 
even before the law was given by Moses; but 
sin did not as yet have the distinct character of 
transgression till a legal code was given to man 
‘which he consciously violated. Therefore, apart 
from law, sin was not imputed. Nevertheless 
that it was there and to be reckoned with, is 
manifest, for “by sin came death” and death 
reigned as a despotic monarch over all men from 
Adam to Moses, save as God interfered in the 
case of Enoch, who was translated that he should 
not see death. Even where there was no wilful 
sin, as in the case of infants and irresponsible 
persons, death reigned, thus proving that they 
were part of a fallen race federally involved in 
Adam’s sin and actually possessing Adam’s fallen 
nature. He who was originally created in the 
image and likeness of God defaced that image by 
sin and lost the divine likeness, and we read that 
“Adam begat a son in his own likeness, after his 
image” (Gen. 5:8). This is characteristic of all 


Two Races, Two Heads 71 


the race of which he is the head. “tn Adam all 
die.” 

Theologians may wrangle about the exact 
meaning of all this and rationalists may utterly 
refuse to accept it, but the fact remains, “It is 
appointed unto men once to die,” and apart from 
divine interference each one may well say with 
the poet: 


“T have a rendezvous with death, 
I shall not fail my rendezvous.” 


You have doubtless heard of the epitaph, often 
mentioned in this connection, which is engraven 
on a tombstone marking the resting place of the 
‘bodies of four young children in St. Andrew’s 
churchyard in Scotland: 


“Bold infidelity, turn pale and die. 

Beneath this stone four sleeping infants lie: 

Say, are they lost or saved? 

If death’s by sin, they sinned, for they are 
here. 

If heaven’s by works, in heaven they can’t 
appear, 

Reason, ah, how depraved! 

Turn to the Bible’s sacred page, the knot’s 
untied: 

They died, for Adam sinned; they live, for 
Jesus died.” 


{Ge Lectures on Romans 


There is no other solution to the problem of 
childhood suffering than that of the fall of the 
race in Adam. 

But Adam was a figure, an antitype, of Him 
who was to come—yea, who has come and has 
Himself taken the responsibility of undoing the 
effects of the fall for all who, trusting in Him, 
become recipients of His resurrection life; and 
with this is linked a perfect righteousness which 
is eternal in duration and divine in origin. There 
is a difference as to the offence and the gift how- 
ever. Adam’s one offence involved his race in 
the consequences of his fall. Christ, having 
satisfied divine justice, offers the gift of life by 
grace to all who will believe and so it abounds 
unto many. Notice that here in verse 15 we 
have the third “much more.” 

Nor is it merely that as by one that sinned so 
is the gift—for the one sin brought universal 
condemnation, putting the whole race under 
judgment. But the reception of the gift of life 
and righteousness in faith places the recipient in 
the position of justification from all things irre- 
spective of the number of offences. Death reigned 
because of one offence. But we are told that 
“much more,” those who receive this abundance 
of grace and this free gift of righteousness now 
reign triumphant over death in life by Jesus 
Christ, the one who has overcome death and says, 
“Because I live ye shall live also.” 


Two Races, Two Heads 13 


This is the substance of the parenthesis. Now 
let us go back—with all this in mind—to verse 
12, and link it with verses 18-21. Sin entered 
into the world by one man and death by sin, 
so death passed upon all men for all have sinned, 
inasmuch as all were in the loins of Adam when 
he fell and all the race is involved in the defec- 
tion of its head. 


Now look at verse 18. “Therefore as by one 
offence” there came universal condemnation, 
even so by one accomplished act of righteous- 
ness on the cross there comes an offer to all—that 
of justification of life. In other words, a life is 
offered as a free gift to all who are involved in 
the consequences of Adam’s sin, which is the 
eternal life manifested in the Son of God who 
once lay low in death under the sentence of con- 
demnation, but arose in triumph having abo- 
lished death, and now as Head of a new race 
imparts His own resurrection life—a life with 
which no charge of sin can ever be linked—to 
all who believe in Him. They share henceforth 
in a life to which sin can never be in any sense 
attached. This is a new creation, of which Paul 
writes so fully in 2 Cor. 5 and in 1 Cor. 15: “If any 
man be in Christ it is new creation.” And it is 
in new creation that “all is of God”; “Old things 
have passed away and all things have become 
new.” So we get the full force of the word, “‘As 
in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive.” 


74 Lectures on Romans 


It is not universal salvation, nor is it merely 
that He will raise all the dead, but the two races, 
the two creations, the two Headships, are in con- 
trast. Christ is the beginning, the origin, the 
federal Head of the creation of God (Rev. 3:14). 
As the risen Man at God’s right hand, having 
passed through death He now is the fountain of 
life, pure, holy, unpolluted life, to all who believe. 
So we are now before God in justification of life. 


By one man’s disobedience the many were con- 
stituted sinners. “Much more,” by one glorious 
act of obedience unto death on the part of Him 
who is now our new Head, the many are con- 
stituted righteous. 


The coming in of the law added to the gravity 
of the offence. It gave sin the specific character 
of transgression. But where sin abounded (had 
reached its flood-tide, so to speak) grace did 
“much more abound,” that is, grace super- 
abounded, so that as sin reigned like a despotic 
monarch throughout the long centuries before 
the cross, unto the death of all his subjects, now 
grace is on the throne and reigns through accom- 
plished righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus 
Christ our Lord! 


What a gospel! What a plan! It is perfect; it 
is divine; like God Himself! How gloriously do 
these five “much mores” bring out the marvels 
of grace! 


Two Masters 75 


In the light of all this, is it any wonder that 
the apostle, recognizing the innate tendency of 
the human heart to turn the grace of God into 
lasciviousness, puts into the mouth of the reader 
the question, “Shall we continue in sin that grace 
may abound?” Chapter 6 answers this cavil (for 
it is really that) in a masterly way. 


“Far be the thought!” he exclaims indignant- 
ly. “How shall we who have died to sin live any 
longer therein?” In what sense did we die to 
sin? If actually dead to it we would not be con- 
cerned about either the question or its answer. 
That which perplexes us is the fact that while 
we hate sin we find within ourselves a tendency 
to yield to it. But we are said to have died to it. 
How and where? The next verses give the 
answer. 

The very fact that our link with Adam as fed- 
eral head was broken by our association with 
Christ in His death tells us that we have the 
right to consider ourselves as having died, in that 
death of His, to the authority of sin as a master. 
Israel were redeemed from judgment by the blood 
of the Lamb. This answers to the first aspect of 
salvation. By the passage through the Red Sea 
they died to Pharaoh and his taskmasters. This 
illustrates the aspect we are now considering. Sin 
is no longer to hold sway over us, we served it in 
the past. But death has changed all that. Our 
condition of servitude is over. We are now 


76 Lectures on Romans 


linked with Christ risen and thus have been 
brought to God. 

Of this the initiatory ordinance of Christianity 
speaks. “Know ye not that so many of us have 
been baptized into (or unto) Christ were bap- 
tized into (or unto) His death?” Israel were 
“baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the 
sea.” They passed through death in figure, and 
Moses was their new leader. Pharaoh’s domin- 
ion was ended so far as they were concerned (1 
Cor.10). So we who are saved are now baptized 
unto, or into, the death of Christ. We have 
accepted His death as ours, knowing that He 
died in our place. We are baptized unto Him as 
the new Leader. 

Is this the Spirit’s baptism? I think not. The 
Spirit does not baptize unto death, but into the 
one new Body. It is establishment into the 
mystical Christ. Our baptism with water is a 
baptism unto Christ’s death. 

The apostle goes further, “Therefore we are 
buried with Him by baptism unto death; that 
like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the 
glory of the Father, even so we also should walk 
in newness of life” (vs.4). In my baptism I con- 
fess that I have died to the old life as a man in 
Adam under the dominion of sin. I am through 
with all that. Now let me prove the reality of 
this by living the life of a resurrected man—a 
man linked up with Christ on the other side of 


Two Masters T7 


death—as I walk in newness of life. Thus all 
thought of living in sin is rejected, all antinomi- 
anism refuted. My new life is to answer to the 
confession made in my baptism. 

1 am to realize practically my identification 
with Christ. I have been planted together with 
Him in the similitude of His death—that is, in 
baptism—I shall be (one with Him) also in the 
similitude of His resurrection. I do not live 
under sin’s domination. I live unto God as He 
does who is my new Head. 

Logically he continues, “Knowing this that 
our old man is crucified with Him, that the body 
of sin might be destroyed (or, rendered power- 
less) that henceforth we should not serve sin, 
for he that is dead is freed (or, justified) from 
sin” (vers. 6,7). 

My old man is not merely my old nature. It 
is rather all that I was as a man in the flesh, the 
“man of old,” the unsaved man with all his habits 
and desires. That man was crucified with Christ. 
When Jesus died I (as a man after the flesh) 
died too. I was seen by God on that cross with 
His blessed Son. 

How many people were crucified on Calvary? 
There were the thieves, there was Christ Him- 
self—three! But are these all? Paul says in 
Gal.2:20, “I am crucified with Christ.” He was 
there too; so that makes four. And each believer 
can say, “Our old man is crucified with Him.” 


78 Lectures on Romans 


So untold millions were seen by God as hanging 
there upon that cross with Christ. And this was 
not merely that our sins were being dealt with, 
but that we ourselves as sinners, as children of 
Adam’s fallen race, might be removed from 
under the eye of God and our old standing come 
to an end forever. 


But we who were crucified with Him now live 
with Him. So the apostle continues in Gal.2:20: 
“Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth 
in me, and the life that I now live in the flesh 
(that is, in this body) I live by the faith of the 
Son of God who loved me and gave Himself for 
me.” And so here. The body of sin is thus 
annulled, as the body of Pharaoh, all the power 
of Egypt, was annulled so far as Israel was con- 
cerned. Sin is not my master now. In Christ 
I live unto God. I am no longer to be a slave 
unto sin. I am righteously free (justified) from 
sin’s authority. 

Now he shows the practical effect of all this 
precious truth. We have died with Christ. We 
have faith that we shall also live with Him. Then 
—in heaven—sin will have no authority over us. 
Nor should we own its authority here by yielding 
ourselves to it. We know that the risen Christ 
will never die again. Death’s authority (and sin 
bringeth forth death) is forever abolished. “In 
that He died He died unto sin once for all,” unto 
sin as our old master (not His—upon Him never 


Two Masters 79 


came the yoke, He was ever free from sin), and 
now in resurrection He lives only unto God. And 
we are one with Him, therefore we too are hence- 
forth to live unto God alone. This involves 
practical deliverance from the power or author- 
ity of sin. 

It certainly never was the mind of God that 
His blood-redeemed people should be left under 
the power of the carnal nature, unable to walk 
in the liberty of free men in Christ. But practi- 
cal deliverance is not found by fighting with the 
old master, SIN in the flesh, but by the daily rec- - 
ognition of the truth we have just been consider- 
ing. 

And so we are told to count as true what God 
considers to be true that we died with Christ to all 
the claims of Pharaoh-Sin, and we are now free to 
walk in newness of life as one with Christ risen. 
“Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead in- 
deed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus 
Christ our Lord” (vs.11). This word “Reckon”’ is 
one of the key-words of the chapter. It means, 
literally, “count as true.” God says I died with 
Christ. I am to count it true. God says I live unto 
Him I count it true. As faith reckons on all this I 
find the claims of sin are annulled. There is no 
other method of deliverance than that which 
begins with this reckoning. Reason may argue, 
“But you do not feel dead!” What have feelings 
to do with it? It is a judicial fact. Christ’s death 


60 Lectures on Romans 


is my death. Therefore I reckon myself to have 
died unto sin’s dominion. 


The next verse follows in logical sequence. 
“Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body 
that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof.” I 
feel an impulse rising within demanding that I 
yield to a certain sinful desire. But if on the 
alert I say at once, “No, I have died to that. It 
is no longer to dominate my will. I belong to 
Christ. I am to live unto Him.” As faith lays 
hold of this the power of lust is broken. 


It involves watchfulness and constant recogni- 
tion of my union with Christ. As in times past 
I was in the habit of yielding the physical mem- 
bers as instruments of unrighteousness, control- 
led by sin, now I am to definitely and unreserv- 
edly yield myself unto God as one alive from 
that death into which I went with Christ, and as 
a natural result all my physical members are His 
to be used as instruments to work out righteous- 
ness for the glory of God whose grace has saved 
me. The word translated “instruments” is really 
“weapons,” or “armor,” as in Chap.13:2; 2 Cor. 
6:7 and 10:4. My talents, my physical members, 
all my powers are now to be used in the conflict 
as weapons for God. I am His soldier to he 
unreservedly at His disposal. 


Because I am not saved by any legal principle 
but by free grace alone sin is no longer to hold 


Two Masters 81 


sway over my life. Christ risen is the Captain 
of my salvation whose behests are to control me 
in all things. 

Nature might reason in a contrary way and 
tell me that inasmuch as I am under grace not 
law it matters little how I behave, and I am 
therefore free to sin since my works have noth- 
ing to do with my salvation. But as a regenera- 
ted man I do not want liberty to sin. I want power 
for holiness. If I habitually yield myself unto sin 
to obey its behests voluntarily, I show that I am 
still sin’s servant, and the end of that service is 
death. But as a renewed man I desire to obey 
the One whose I now am and whom I serve. So 
he says, “God be thanked, that ye were the 
slaves of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart 
that form of doctrine which was delivered unto 
you. Being then made free from sin (that is, 
by God’s judicial act on the cross) ye became the 
servants of righteousness” (vers.17,18). 


He speaks in a figure, illustrating his theme by 
personifying SIN and RIGHTEOUSNESS that our 
weak human minds may understand, and he re- 
peats his exhortation, or rather what had been 
stated doctrinally he now repeats as a command: 
“For as ye have yielded your members slaves to 
uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity (in the 
old life before our identification with Christ) 
even so now yield your members servants (bond- 
men) to righteousness unto holiness” (vs.19). 


82 Lectures on Romans 


When slaves of sin, righteousness was not our 
recognized master, and we can only hang our 
heads in shame as we think of the fruit of that 
evil relationship, the end of which would have 
been death, both physical and eternal. 

Therefore now that we are judicially delivered 
from sin’s dominion and have become bondmen 
to God, our lives should be abounding in fruit 
unto holiness and the end everlasting life. We 
have everlasting life now as a present possession, 
but here it is the end that is in view when we are 
at home in that scene where Christ who is our 
life has gone. 

He concludes this section with the solemn yet 
precious statement: “For the wages of sin is 
death, but the gift of God is eternal life through 
Jesus Christ our Lord.” Sin is in one respect a 
faithful master. His pay day is sure. His wages 
are death. Note it is not divine judgment that is in 
view for the moment, but sin’s wages. Death is the 
wages of sin, but “after this the judgment.” 
Penalty has yet to be faced at the judgment-bar 
of God. Through error to see this many have 
taken up with the error that physical death in- 
volves cessation of being and is both wages and 
penalty. Scripture clearly tells of divine judg- 
ment after sin’s wages have been paid. 

On the other hand eternal life is a free gift, 
the gift of God. None can earn it. It is given 
to all who trust in Christ as the Saviour of sin- 


Two Husbands, Two Natures 83 


ners. It is ours now, who believe the gospel. We 
shall enjoy it in all its fulness at the “end.” 

The seventh chapter takes up another phase 
of things that would be particularly hard for the 
Jewish believer to comprehend. It raises and 
answers the question, “What is the rule of life 
for the yielded believer?” The Jew would natur- 
ally say, “The law given at Sinai.” The apostle’s 
answer is “Christ risen!’ Alas, how many Gentile 
believers have missed the point here as well as 
those who came out of Judaism. 

That it is his Jewish-Christian brethren who 
are primarily before him is clear from the open- 
ing verse. “Know ye not, brethren (for I speak to 
them that know the law), how that the law hath 
dominion over a man as long as he liveth.”’ Now 
it is unthinkable that he is using the term ‘“‘the 
law” here in any different sense to that which he 
has had in mind as he has used it over and over 
again in the former chapters. The law, here, 
means the law of Moses, and it means nothing 
else. It means that which was the heart of the 
law of Moses, the ten words given on Sinai. And 
his argument here is that the law has dominion 
over men until death ends its authority or ends 
their relationship to it. But he has just been 
showing us in the clearest possible way that we 
have died with Christ; therefore we died not 
only unto sin, but we have died to the law as a 
rule of life. Is this then to leave us lawless? Not 


84 Lectures on Romans 


at all: for we are now, as he shows elsewhere 
(1Cor.9:21), “under law to Christ’, or ‘“en- 
lawed’’, that is, “legitimately subject” to Christ 
our new Head. He is Husband as well as Head, 
even as Eph.5 so clearly shows. 

This truth is illustrated in a very convincing 
way in verses 2 and 8, and the application is 
made in verse 4. A woman married to a husband 
is legally bound to him in that relationship until 
death severs the tie. If she marries another 
while her husband is living she becomes an adult- 
eress. But when the first husband is dead she is 
free to marry another with no blame attaching 
to her for so doing. 

Even so, death has ended the relationship of 
the believer to the law, not the death of the law 
but our death with Christ, which has brought 
the old order to an end. We are now free to be 
married to another, even to the risen Christ in 
order that we might bring forth fruit unto God. 

The somewhat weird and amazing conception 
has been drawn from the apostle’s illustration 
that the first husband is not the law at all but 
“our old man.” This is utterly illogical and un- 
tenable, for, as we have seen, the old man is 
myself as a man in the flesh. I was not married 
to myself! Such a suggestion is the very height 
of absurdity. The Jewish believer was once 
linked with the legal covenant. It was proposed 
as a means of producing fruit for God. It only 


Two Laws 85 


stirred up all that was evil in the heart. Death 
has dissolved the former relationship, and the 
one who once looked to the law for fruit now 
looks to Christ risen and, as the heart is occupied 
with Him, that is produced in the life in which 
God can delight. 

He says, “When we were in the flesh (that is, 
in the natural state, as unsaved men) the motions 
of sins which were by the law, did work in our 
members to bring forth fruit unto death.” This 
clearly establishes the position taken above. The 
law was the husband, the active agent through 
whom we hoped to bring forth fruit unto God. But 
instead of that, we brought forth fruit unto 
death, all our travail and suffering in the hope 
of producing righteousness ended in disappoint- 
ment, the child was still-born. 

“But now we are delivered from the law, hav- 
ing died to that (relationship) wherein we were 
held (note the marginal reading) that we might 
serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness 
of the letter” (vs.6). In the illustration the first 
husband dies and the woman is free to be mar- 
ried to another. In the application he does not 
say the law has died, but the point he makes is 
that death (and for us it is Christ’s death) has 
ended the relationship in which we stood toward 
it. So there is after all no real disagreement; 
in either case the former condition is ended by 
death. The law, as we have seen, was addressed 


86 Lectures on Romans 


to man in the flesh, and this was our former 
state, but now all is changed. We are no longer 
in the flesh, but (as the next chapter will show 
us) in the Spirit, and so in a new state to which 
the law in no sense applies. Again the old ques- 
tion comes to the fore: If all this be true shall 
we sin then? Are we to be lawless because not 
under law? By no means. The law must simply 
be recognized as having a special ministry but 
not as the rule of the new life. It is a great 
detector of sin. Paul could say, “I had not 
known sin but by the law.” That is, he had not 
detected the evil nature within—so correct was 
his outward deportment—had not the law said, 
“Thou shalt not covet.” The sin-nature rebelled 
against this and wrought in him all manner of 
covetousness, or unsatisfied desire. Observe care- 
fully how conclusively this proves that it was 
the ten commandments he has had in view 
throughout. To say it is the ceremonial law 
alone to which we have died is absurd in view 
of this statement. Where is the word found that 
forbids covetousness? In the ten commandments. 
Therefore “the law” means the divine ordinances 
engraved on tables of stone. 

Apart from the law sin was dead, that is, inert 
and unrecognized. Sins there were even before 
the law was given, but sin—the nature—was not 
recognized till the law provoked it. 


He says, “I was alive once without the law; 


Two Laws 87 


but when the commandment came, which was 
ordained (or proposed) to life, I found it to be 
unto death. For sin, taking occasion by the com- 
mandment, deceived me and by it slew me” 
(vers. 9-11). In other words it is as though he 
said, “I was blissfully unconscious of my true 
moral condition before God as a sinner until the 
force of the commandment forbidding covetous- 
ness came home to me. I had not realized that 
evil desire was in itself sinful, providing the 
desire was not carried out. But the law made 
this manifest. I struggled to keep down all 
unlawful desire; but sin—an evil principle within 
—was too strong for repression. It circumven- 
ted me, deceived me, and so by violation of the 
commandment brought me consciously under 
sentence of death.” This is exactly what the law 
was intended to do, as he shows in the epistle to 
the Galatians as well as here. “The law was 
added because of (or, with a view to) transgres- 
sions.” That is, the law served to give to sin 
the specific character of transgression, thus deep- 
ening the sense of guilt and unworthiness. 

Therefore, he concludes, “the law is holy, and 
the commandment holy, and just, and good.” 
The fault is not in the law but in me. 

Well, then, he asks, was this holy law made 
death to me? Not at all, but it detected that in 
him which could only result in death—namely, 
sin, which in order that it might be made mani- 


88 Lectures on Romans 


fest in all its hideousness was brought fully to 
light by the law, thus “working death” in him 
by that which he owns to be in itself good. And 
so sin, by means of the legal enactment, is made 
exceeding sinful. 

Verses 14-25 have been taken by many as the 
legitimate experience of a Christian throughout 
all his life. Others have thought that it could not 
be the conflict of a real Christian at all, but that 
Paul was describing the conflict between the higher 
and lower desires of the natural man, particu- 
larly of an unconverted Jew under law. But both 
views are clearly contrary to the argument of 
this part of the epistle. 

As to the latter interpretation, it should be 
remembered that in this entire section of the 
epistle the question is the deliverance of a believ- 
er from the power of sin, and not of an unbe- 
liever from his sins. Moreover no unsaved man 
can honestly say, “I delight in the law of God 
after the inward man.” It is only those who 
possess the new nature who can so speak. And 
as to this being the normal experience of one 
already saved I shall attempt to show as we go 
on with the study of the 7th and 8th chapters 
that there is an orderly progression from the 
bewilderment of chapter 7 to the intelligence and 
walk in the Spirit of chapter 8. All Christians 
doubtless know something of the state depicted 
in verses 14-25 of this 7th chapter, but once out 


Two Laws 89 


of it no one need ever go through it again. It is 
not merely the conflict between the two natures. 
If it were, one might indeed be back in the same 
unhappy experience again and again. It gives 
us the exercises of a quickened soul under law 
who has not yet learned the way of deliverance. 
This once learned, one is free from the law for- 
ever. I have said earlier in the address that 
primarily here we have a believing Jew strug- 
gling to obtain holiness by using the law as a 
rule of life and resolutely attempting to compel 
his old nature to be subject to it. In Christendom 
now the average Gentile believer goes through 
the same experience; for legality is commonly 
taught almost everywhere. 

Therefore when one is converted it is but natu- 
ral to reason that now one has been born of God 
it is only a matter of determination and persist- 
ent endeavor to subject oneself to the law, and 
one will achieve a life of holiness. And God Him- 
self permits the test to be made in order that His 
people may learn experimentally that the flesh 
in the believer is no better than the flesh in an 
unbeliever. When he ceases from self-effort he 
finds deliverance through the Spirit by occupa- 
tion with the risen Christ. 

Paul writes in the first person singular, not 
necessarily as depicting a lengtny experience of 
his own (though he may have gone through it), 
but in order that each reader may enter into it 


50 Lectures on Romans 


sympathetically and understandingly for him- 
self. 

The law is spiritual, that is, it is of God, it is 
holy and supernatural. But I am carnal, even 
though a believer; I am more or less dominated 
by the flesh. In 1 Cor.2 and 8 we have distin- 
guished for us the natural man, that is, the 
unsaved man; the carnal man, who is a child of 
God undelivered; and the spiritual man, the 
Christian who lives and walks in the Spirit. 


Here the carnal man is sold under sin, that is 
he is subject to the power of the evil nature to 
which he has died in Christ, a blessed truth 
indeed, but one which has not yet been appre- 
hended in faith. Consequently he continually 
finds hiniself going contrary to the deepest de- 
sires of his divinely-implanted new nature. He 
practises things he does not want to do. He fails 
to carry out his determinations for good. The 
sins he commits he hates. The good he loves 
he has not the strength to perform. But this 
proves to him that there is a something within 
him which is to be distinguished from ‘his real 
self as a child of God. He has the fleshly nature 
still, though born of God. He knows the law 
is good. He wants to keep it, and slowly the 
consciousness dawns upon him that it is not 
really himself as united to Christ who fails. It 
is sin, dwelling in him, which is exercising con- 
trol (vers. 14-17)- 


Two Laws 91 


So he learns the weakness and unprofitableness 
of the flesh. “I know,” he says, “that in me 
(that is, in my flesh) dwelleth no good thing.’ 
He wants to do good but he lacks the power to 
perform aright. Still he gives up slowly the 
effort to force the flesh to behave itself and to 
be subject to the law. 


But the good he would do, he does not, and the 
evil he would not do, he does. This but estab: 
lishes him in the conclusion already come to, 
that, “IC'is no more I that do it, but’ sin that 
dwelleth in me.” A law, or principle of action, 
then, has been discovered. He goes with the 
good ahd does the evil. According to the inward 
man he delights in the law of God, but this does 
not produce the holiness he expected. He must 
learn to delight in Christ risen to reach the goal 
of his desires! This he reaches later, but mean- 
time he is occupied with the discovery of the 
two natures with their different desires and acti- 
vities. He detects “another law,” a principle, 
in his members (that is, the members of the 
body through which the carnal mind works) 
which wars against the law of his renewed mind 
taking him captive to the sin-principle which is 
inseparable from his physical members so long 
as he is in this life. This principle he calls “the 
law of sin and death.” Were it not for this prin- 
ciple or controlling power there would be no 
danger of perverting or misusing any human 


92 Lectures on Romans 


desire, or propensity. Almost convinced that the 
struggle must go on during the entire course of 
his earthly existence he cries in anguish, “Oh, 
wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver me 
from this body of death!” He is like a living 
man chained to a polluted, because corrupt, 
corpse, and unable to snap the chains. He can- 
not make the corpse clean and subject, no matter 
how he tries. It is the cry of hopelessness so 
far as self-effort is concerned. He is brought to 
the end of human resources. In a moment he 
gets a vision by faith of the risen Christ. He 
alone is the Deliverer from Sin’s power, as well 
as the Saviour from the penalty of guilt. “I thank 
God,” he cries, “through Jesus Christ our Lord!” 
He has found the way out. Not the law but 
Christ in glory is the rule of life for the Chris- 
tian. 

But the actual entering into this is reserved 
for the next section. Meantime he confesses 
“So then with the mind (that is, the renewed 
mind) I myself (the real man as God sees him) 
serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law 
of sin.” Such an experience cannot be the Chris- 
tian ideal. The next chapter which we take up 
separately shows the way out of this perplexing 
and unsatisfactory state. 


If Iam addressing any believer who is even now 
in the agonizing throes of this terrific struggle, 
endeavoring to subject the flesh to the holy law 


Two Laws 93 


of God, let me urge you to accept God’s own ver. 
dict on the flesh and acknowledge the impossi- 
bility of ever making it behave itself. Do not 
fight with it. It will overthrow you every time. 
Turn away from it; cease from it altogether; and 
look away from self and law to Christ risen. 
Israel of old wanted to find a short cut through 
Edom, type of the flesh, but the children of Esau 
came out armed to contest their way. The com- 
mand of God was to turn away and ‘‘compass the 
land of Edom.” And so with us; it is as we turn 
altogether from self-occupation we find deliver. 
ance and victory in Christ by the Holy Spirit. 


LECTURE VI 


The Triumph of Grace 
Part II 


Chapter 8 


It has always seemed to me a great pity that in 
editing our Bibles and dividing the text into 
chapters and verses the break was permitted to 
come where it does between chapters seven and 
eight. I am persuaded that many souls have 
failed to see the connection just because of this. 
We get in the habit of reading by chapters, in- 
stead of by subjects. Properly, the first four 
verses of chapter 8 should be joined right on to 
chapter 7, thus linking with the expression of 
hope, “I thank God through Jesus Christ our 
Lord.” 

These opening verses form a summing up of 
all the truth previously unfolded in this part of 
the epistle beginning with chap. 5:12. It is, of 
course, hardly necessary for me to point out and 
emphasize what is now familiar to every careful 
student of the original text: that the last part 
of verse one is an interpolation (which properly 
belongs to verse 4), obscuring the sense of the 


The Triumph of Grace 95 


great truth enunciated in the opening words: 
“There is therefore now no condemnation to those 
who are in Christ Jesus.” This magnificent state, 
ment requires no qualifying clause. It does not 
depend on our walk. It is true of all who are in 
Christ, and to be in Him means to be of the new 
creation. A glance at the R.V. or any critical 
translation will show that what I am pointing out 
is sustained by all the editors. It was man’s in- 
nate aversion to sovereign grace, I am certain, 
that brought these qualifying words into the text 
of the common version. It seemed too much to 
believe that freedom from condemnation de- 
pended on being in Christ Jesus and not upon 
our walking after the Spirit. So it was easy to 
lift the words from verse four into verse one. 
But in verse four they have their proper place 
for there the question of state is to the fore. In 
verse one it is the question of standing that is 
under consideration. 

What unspeakable relief it is to the bewildered, 
troubled soul, oppressed with a sense of his own 
unworthiness, and distressed because of frequent 
failures to live up to his own highest resolves, 
when he learns that God sees him in Christ Jesus, 
and as thus seen he is free from all condemnation. 
He may exclaim, “But I feel so condemned.” This 
however is not the question. It is not how I feel 
but it is what God says. He sees me in Christ 
risen, forever beyond the reach of condemnation. 


96 Lectures on Romans 


A prisoner before the bar, hard of hearing and 
dull of sight, might imagine his doom was being 
pronounced at the very moment that the judge 
was giving a verdict of full acquittal. Neither 
blindness nor deafness would alter this fact. And 
though we are often slow to hear, and our spiritual 
vision is most defective, the blessed fact remains 
that God has pronounced the believer free from 
condemnation whether he fully rises to the glori- 
ous fact or not. 


Oh, doubting one, look away then altogether 
from self and state, look away from frames and 
feelings to Christ risen, now forever beyond the 
cross where your sins once put Him, and see your- 
self in Him, exalted there at God’s right hand. 
He would not be there if the sin question was not 
settled to the divine satisfaction. The fact that 
He is there and that you are seen by God in Him 
is the fullest possible testimony to your freedom 
from all condemnation. 


“Oh, the peace forever flowing 

From God’s thoughts of His own Son, 
Oh, the peace of simply knowing 

On the cross that was all done. 


Peace with God is Christ in glory, 
God is light and God is love, 
Jesus died to tell the story, 
Foes to bring to God above.” 


The Triumph of Grace 97 


We are brought to God “in Christ Jesus,” and 
so all question of judgment is forever settled. It 
can never be raised again. 


This leaves the soul at liberty to be occupied 
with pleasing God, not as a means of escaping the 
divine displeasure, but out of love to Him who 
has brought us to Himself in peace. What the 
law, with all its stern and solemn warnings and 
threatenings could not accomplish (that is, pro- 
duce a life of holiness, because of the weakness 
and unreliability of the flesh), is now realized 
in the power of the new life by the Spirit. A 
clearer reading of verse two would probably be, 
“The Spirit’s law (which is life in Christ Jesus) 
hath delivered me from the law of sin and death.” 
That is, the Spirit’s law of life in Christ Jesus 
received at new birth is put in contrast to the Law 
of sin and death against which the believer 
struggles in vain, as long as he wrestles in his 
own strength. Victory comes through turning 
from self to Christ risen. The Spirit’s law brings 
blessing because it gives power to him who had 
it not before. It is an altogether new principle: life 
(not in or of ourselves, but) in Christ Jesus. This 
new life is imparted to the believer, and in the 
power of this new life he is called to walk. “It is 
God who worketh in us both the willing and the 
doing of His good pleasure.” The law demanded 
righteousness from a man whose nature was 
utterly corrupt and perverted, and which could 


98 Lectures on Romans 


only bring forth corrupt fruit. The Holy Spirit 
has produced a new nature in the man in Christ, 
and linked with this new life are new affections 
and desires so that he gladly responds to the will 
of the Lord as revealed in His Word. Thus the 
righteousness of the law, the good in practice that 
the law required, is actually produced in the man 
who walks not after the flesh, not as under the 
power of the old nature, but after the Spirit, or in 
subjection to the Spirit, who has come to take 
possession of us for Christ. 

In verses 5 to 27 he proceeds to unfold a wide 
and soul-uplifting range of truth in connection 
with the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, who is the 
only true Vicar of Christ on earth. And first 
we are reminded that there are two exactly 
opposite: principles to be considered, or two 
utterly- opposed standards of life. They who are 
after the flesh, that is, the unsaved, are dominated 
by the fleshly nature—they “mind the things of 
the flesh.” In these terse words the entire life 
of the natural man is summed up. In blessed con- 
trast to this they who are after the Spirit, that 
is those who are born of the Word and the Spirit 
ef God, saved men and women, characteristically 
mind the things of the Spirit. Parenthetically he 
explains “‘the minding of the flesh is death,” that 
is its only legitimate result; but “the minding of 
the Spirit is life and peace.” He who is thus 
Spirit-controlled is lifted onto a new plain where 
death has no place and conflict is not known. 


—_ 


The Triumph of Grace 99 


It is not that the flesh is, or ever will be, in 
any sense improved. The flesh in the oldest and 
godliest Christian is as incorrigibly evil as the 
fiesh in the vilest sinner. “The carnal mind (or, 
mind of the flesh) is enmity against God: for it 
is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed 
can be” (ver. 7). All efforts to reform or purify 
it are in vain. The law only demonstrates its in- 
curable wickedness. And this explains why the 
natural man is so utterly unprofitable. ‘They 
that are in the flesh cannot please God.” It is not 
of course, that man, as such, does not know right 
from wrong, or, knowing it, is powerless to de 
right. To say so would be to declare that man 
is not a responsible creature but is simply the 
victim of a hard cruel fatalism. But knowing the 
evil and approving the good the natural man in- 
clines toward the wrong and fails to do the right, 
because he is dominated by sin in the flesh, to 
which he yields his members as instruments of 
unrighteousness, as we have seen in chapter six, 
As he is powerless to change his nature he there- 
fore cannot really please God. 

But it is otherwise with the believer. He is 
no longer in the flesh since born of God. He is 
now in the Spirit, and the Spirit of God dwells 
in him. “If so be’ does not imply that there are 
Christians who are not indwelt by the Spirit, but 
has the force of “since,” i.e., Since the Spirit of 
God dwells in you, you are no longer in the flesh; 


of- God. 2 


laut Cane 
Ps s 


Chosh be 
fes4, 


La th e 


go 


100 rectures on Romans 


that is characteristically, as being of the family 
of the first man, and under the dominion of the 
old nature. If anyone whether professing to be a 
believer or not, is devoid of the Spirit of Christ, 
he is none of His, or “not of Him.” It is not 
merely the disposition of Christ that is in view 
but the Spirit of Christ is the Holy Spirit whom 
Christ has sent into the world and who indwells 
all His redeemed ones in this dispensation of 
grace. But this, of course, produces a Christ- 
like disposition in the one so indwelt. 

But if Christ (by the Spirit) be thus in us He 
alone is the source of our power for holiness. We 
shall get no help from the body. “The body is 
dead because of sin.” It is to be considered as 
though lifeless and inert so far as ability to pro- 
duce fruit for God is concerned. Ali must be of 
the Spirit. “The Spirit is life because of righteous- 
ness.” 

This is not to ignore or undervalue the body. 
It too has been purchased by the blood of Christ, 
and we have the promise that “if the Spirit of 
Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in 
you, He that raised up Christ from the dead shall 
also quicken your mortal bodies by His Spirit that 
dwelleth in you.” (ver. 11.) It is idle to say, as 
some have done, that this is a present quickening, 
when the previous verse has told us the very op- 
posite. “The body is dead because of sin’”—not act- 
ually, of course, but judicially. Therefore we sre 


The Triumph of Grace 101 


not to expect anything of it. A strong body does not 
necessarily mean a strong saint, nor a feeble body 
a feeble believer. Natural strength may even 
seem to be a hindrance to spiritual progress if 
the truth we have been considering be un- 
known, while feebleness of nature’s power may 
seem to make holiness easier in practice. So 
monks and ascetics of various kinds have sought 
to grow in grace by punishing and starving the 
body. But we are told in Col. 2 that all this is 
vain and futile so far as checking fleshly indulg- 
ence is concerned. 

But the body is for the Lord, and the same Holy 
Spirit who raised up Jesus from the dead will 
eventually raise us up, by giving resurrection life 
to these mortal bodies. He is speaking of the 
body of the living believer who has the new life 
now, in a body subject to death. It shall put on 
immortality at the Lord’s return. Since God has 
claimed us for this we owe nothing to the flesh. 
We are not its debtors to do its service. To do 
so would only mean to die (it is the great fact to 
which he calls attention that “sin when it is 
finished brings forth death”). But, if through 
the power of the indwelling Spirit we put to death 
the deeds of the body we shall truly live. The 
body is viewed as the vehicle through which the 
flesh acts. It incites the natural appetite to 
lawless indulgence. The Spirit-led man must be 
on his guard against this. He has to put to death 


102 Lectures on Romans 


these unlawful desires. In Col. 3:5 we read, 
“Mortify therefore your members which are upon 
the earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate af- 
fection, evil concupiscence, and coveteousness 
which is idolatry.” Having been crucified with 
Christ we are now in faith to mortify by self- 
judgment the deeds of the body. ‘We which live 
are alway delivered unto death for Jesus’ sake.” 

To walk in the flesh is to do contrary to the 
whole principle of Christianity, for “as many as 
are led (controlled) by the Spirit of God, they are 
the sons of God.” It is by this life in the Spirit’s 
power we mortify the deeds of the body and mani- 
fest our new life and relationship. This is not 
a Spirit of bondage, of legality, filling us with fear 
and dread, but the Spirit of adoption, of son-ac- 
knowledgment, whereby we instinctively lift our 
hearts to God in the ery of the conscious child, 
“Abba, Father.” Adoption is to be distinguished 
from new birth. We are children by birth but 
sons by adoption. In the full sense we have not 
yet received the adoption. It will all be consum- 
mated, as verse 23 shows, at the Lord’s return. 
When a Roman father publicly acknowledged his 
child as his son and heir, legally in the forum, 
this ceremony was called “the adoption!” All 
born in his family were children. Only those 
adopted were recognized as sons. So we have 
been born again by the word of God and thus 
are children, as were all believers from Abe) down. 


The Triumph of Grace 103 


But as indwelt by the Spirit we are adopted sons, 
and this will be fully manifested in the most public 
way when we are changed into our Saviour’s 
image at His coming again. 


The child-cry, “Abba, Father,” is most suggest- 
ive. The one term is Hebrew in the text, the other 
Greek. For those who are in Christ, the middle 
wall is broken down. All are one in Him. To- 
gether we cry, “Abba, Father.” Our Lord Him- 
self used the double term in Gethsemane (see 
Mark 14:36). Some one has aptly suggested that 
“Abba” is a word for baby lips, whereas the Greek 
pateer, or the English equivalent, Father, is a 
word for the more mature. But young and old 
join together in approaching the Father by the 
Spirit. 

He Himself bears testimony with our human 
spirit that we are God’s children. We received 
His Witness to us as given in His Word (Heb. 10: 
15); thus we have the Witness im us, the Word 
hidden in our hearts (1 Jno.5:10), and now the 
Spirit Himself takes up His abode within and 
leads us into the enjoyment of heavenly things. 
In the text it is “the Spirit itself.”” The Greek 
demands this because the word “Spirit” is a 
neuter noun. But according to English idiom it 
is correct to use the personal pronoun. He com- 
munes with our spirits; He illumines, instructs 
and guides through the Word. 


104 Lectures on Romans 


“Whoso hath felt the Spirit of the Highest, 
Cannot confound, nor doubt Him, nor deny; 
Nay, with one voice, O World, though thou 
deniest, 
Stand then on that side, for on this am I.” 


“The fellowship of the Spirit” is a wonderfully 
real thing, known and enjoyed by those who live 
and walk in Him. 


If children of God it naturally follows that we 
are his heirs, and thus we are joint-heirs with 
Christ. We share in all His acquired glories, and 
so we shall eventually be “glorified together.” 


In verses 18-27 the apostle contrasts our pre- 
sent state with the coming glory. Even though 
thus indwelt by the Spirit we are called to a path 
of suffering and sorrow as we follow the steps 
of Him who was, on earth, the Man of Sorrows. 
But all we can possibly suffer here is as nothing 
compared to the glory soon to be manifested. 


All creation is expectantly waiting for the full 
revelation of the true estate of the sons of God, 
when it too shall share in that glorious liberty. 
It was made subject to vanity, not of its own will 
but through the failure of its federal head, yet 
subjected not forever, but in hope of final restora- 
tion, and in that day it shall be delivered from 
the “bondage of corruption” and made to share 
in “the liberty of the glory of the sons of God.” 


The Triumph of Grace 105 


Creation does not share in the liberty of grace. 
It shall have its part in the liberty of glory, the 
kingdom age of millennial blessing. Till then the 
minor note is heard in all creation’s sounds; 
groaning and travailing in birth-pangs through all 
the present age, waiting for the regeneration; and 
we ourselves, though we have received the salva- 
tion of our souls and have the first-fruits of the 
Spirit (enjoying a foretaste now of what shall 
soon be ours in all its fulness), we groan in unison 
with the groaning creation as we wait expectantly 
for our acknowledged adoption when we shall re- 
ceive the redemption of our bodies and be fully 
like Himself. 

In this hope we have been saved and in its 
power we live. We walk by faith, not by sight. 
If already seen, hope would fade away, but in this 
hope we patiently wait for the Lord. 

Meantime, often tried to the utmost, we do not 
know even what we should pray for as we ought, 
but the indwelling Spirit, knowing the mind of 
God fully, makes intercession within us according 
to the will of God, though not in audible words, 
but with unutterable groanings. “Once we 
groaned in bondage, now we groan in grace,” as 
another has well said, and this very groaning is 
in itself a testimony to the changed conditions 
brought about by our union with Christ. The 
Spirit’s groanings are in harmony with our own 
sighs and tears, and the great Heart-Searcher 


106 Lectures on Romans 


hears and answers in wisdom infinite and love 
unchanging. 


And so we go on in peace amid tribulation, as- 
sured in our hearts that, “All things work together 
for good to them who love God, who are the called 
according to His purpose” (ver. 28). This intro- 
duces the closing part of the chapter, and of this 
great doctrinal division of our epistle, which is 
a summing up of all we have gone over, and a 
masterly conclusion to the opening up of ‘“‘the 
righteousness of God as revealed in the gospel’. 
It breaks into two sub-sections. 


In verses 28 to 34 we have “God for us.” In 
verses 35 to 39, “No separation.” 


We have a glorious chain of five links in verses 
29, 80 reaching from Eternity in the past to 
Eternity in the future—foreknown, predestinated, 
called, justified, glorified! Every link was forged 
in heaven, and not one can ever be broken. This 
blessed portion is not for theologians to wrangle 
over but for saints to rejoice in. Foreknown ere 
we ever trod this globe, we have been predestin- 
ated to become fully like our blessed Lord—‘“con- 
formed to the image of God’s Son,” that He, who 
was from all Eternity the “only Begotten,” might 
be “the Firstborn among many brethren.” So 
we have been called by grace divine, justified by 
faith on the basis of accomplished redemption, 


The Triumph of Grace 107 


and our glorification is as certain as the foreknow- 
ledge of God. 


What shall we say to all of this? If God is 
thus so manifestly for us—not against us as once 
our troubled hearts and guilty consciences made 
us believe—what power can be against us? Who 
can successfully combat the divine will? 


In giving Christ God showed us that (as a 
brother beloved has said), ‘“He loved us better 
than we loved our sins,” and if He did not spare 
“His Son but delivered Him up for us all, how 
shall He not with Him also freely give us all 
things ?” 

The next two verses should probably all be 
thrown into question-form, as in several critical 
translations: “Who shall lay anything to the 
charge of God’s elect? Shall God, who justifieth ? 
Who shall condemn? Shall Christ who died, yea, 
rather, who is risen again, who is even at the 


right hand of God, who also maketh intercession 
for us?” 


There is no answer possible. Every voice is 
silenced. Every accusation is hushed. Our stand- 
ing in Christ is complete and our justification un- 
changeable. 


And so in the closing verses, 85 to 39, the 
apostle triumphantly challenges any possible cir- 
cumstance, or personal being in this life or the 
next, to attempt to separate the believer from the 


108 Lectures on Romans 


love of God which is in Christ Jesus. No experi- 
ence however hard or difficult can do it. Even 
though exposed as sheep to the slaughter, yet 
death but ushers us into the presence of the Lord. 
In all circumstances we more than conquer, we 
triumph in Christ. 

And so, as he began with this portion with “‘no 
condemnation,” he ends with ‘‘no separation.” “TI 
am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor 
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things 
present, nor things to come (and what is there 
that is neither present nor to come?), nor height, 
nor depth, nor any other created thing, shall be 
able to separate us from the love of God which is 
in Christ Jesus our Lord!” 

Blessed, wondrous consummation of the most 
marvellous theme it was ever given to man to 
make known to his fellows! May our souls enter 
ever more deeply into it, and find increasing joy 
and spiritual strength as we contemplate it. 


“No condemnation; blessed is the word! 

No separation; forever with the Lord, 

By His blood He bought us, cleansed our every 
stain; 

With rapture now we’ll praise Him. 

The Lamb for sinners slain.” 


—J. DENHAM SMITH. 


LECTURES ON ROMANS 


Division II. DISPENSATIONAL. 
The Righteousness of God Harmonized with His 
Dispensational Ways 


Chapters 9-11 


LECTURE VII 


God’s Past Dealings with Israel in 
Electing Grace 
Chapter 9 


Having carried us all the way from the distance 
and bondage and condemnation of chapters 1, 2, 
and 8 to the glorious freedom and justification and 
eternal union with Christ of chapter 8, the apostle 
now turns to consider another phase of things 
altogether. He well knew that many of his 
readers would be pious, godly Jews who had ac- 
cepted Christ as their Messiah and their Saviour, 
but who were passing through a time of great 
perplexity and bewilderment as they saw their 
own nation apparently hardened into opposition 
against the gospel and sinners of the Gentiles 
turning to the Lord. They were aware that the 
prophets predicted a great work of God among 
the Gentiles, but they had always been ac- 


110 Lectures on Romans 


customed to think of this as following upon the 
full restoration and blessing of Israel, and, indeed, 
as flowing from it. Israel should blossom and bud 
and fill the face of the whole earth with fruit. 
The Gentiles should come to her light and find 
happiness in subjection to her. Now all the pro- 
phecies on which they had based their expecta- 
tions seemed to have failed of fulfilment. How 
could Paul reconcile his proclamation of free grace 
to the Gentiles everywhere, apart from their sub- 
mission to the rights connected with the old cov- 
enant? In the three chapters that are now to oc- 
cupy us, the apostle meets this question, and that 
in a masterly way, showing how the righteous- 
ness of God is harmonized with His dispensational 
ways. This part of the epistle may be separated 
into three sub-divisions. Chapter 9 gives us 
God’s past dealings with Israel in electing grace; 
chapter 10, God’s present dealings with Israel 
in governmental discipline; and chapter 11, God’s 
future dealings with Israel in fulfilment of pro- 
phecy. 

Opening our Bibles, then, to chapter 9, who can 
fail to be touched by his earnest words in regard 
to his brethren after the flesh? He insists that 
he loves them tenderly, that his heart is con- 
stantly burdened because of them. No one could 
possibly love them more than he did. They, per- 
haps, thought him estranged from them because 
of his commission to give the gospel to the nations, 


God’s Past Dealings with Israel be 


but it is very evident, both here and throughout 
the latter part of the book of Acts, that though 
he magnified his office as the apostle to the Gen- 
tiles, there was always a great tugging at his 
heart to get to his own people and bear testimony 
to them. His ministry was ever to the Jew first 
and then to the Greek. 


There is a difference of opinion among men of 
piety and scholarship as to the exact meaning of 
verse 3: Did it mean to say that there were times 
when he had actually wished, if it were possible, 
to save his brethren by being himself accursed 
from Christ; that he would have been willing to 
submit to this? Or is he simply saying that he 
understands thoroughly the feeling of the most 
earnest Jew, who in his mistaken zeal detests the 
Christ, because he himself had at one time 
actually desired to be accursed from Christ as 
standing with his brethren after the flesh? If 
we accept the latter view, we see in this verse 
simply an expression of the intensity of his feel- 
ings as an unconverted Jew. If, as the present 
lecturer is inclined to do, we accept the former 
explanation, then we put him on the same plat- 
form with Moses, who cried, “If it be possible, 
blot me out of Thy book, only let the people live.” 
But whichever view we finally accept, our sense of 
his deep interest in his people becomes intensi- 
fied as we read. 


itz Lectures on Romans 


He enumerates, in verses 4 and 5, the great 
blessings that belong to Israel. He says that to 
them pertain the adoption (literally, the son-plac- 
ing), and the glory, and the covenants, and the 
giving of the law, and the ritual service, and the 
promises. “Whose are the fathers, and of whom 
as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over 
all, God blessed forever. Amen.” 

Consider these blessings in their order: 

First: The son-placing. God had owned the 
nation of Israel as His son. It is not the New 
Testament truth of individual adoption as we have 
it in the epistle to the Ephesians and as we have 
already considered it in Romans 8; in fact, it is 
not individual here at all, but national. God could 
say of Israel, “Out of Egypt have I called My 
son;” and, again, “You only have I known of all 
nations that be upon the earth.” They were His, 
and He owned them as such. 


Secondly: The glory. Glory is manifested 
excellence. And through them God would mani- 
fest the excellence of His great name. They were 
His witnesses. 


Third: The covenants. Observe that all the 
covenants pertain to Israel; that is, the Abra- 
hamic covenant, the Mosaic covenant, the Davidic 
covenant, and the new covenant. All belonged to 
them. Believers from among the Gentiles come 
under the blessings of the new covenant, because 


God’s Past Dealings with Tsrael 113 


it is a covenant of pure grace. But God has Israel 

and Judah in view when He says, through the 
prophet, “I will make a new covenant with you.”, 
When our Lord instituted the memorial supper, 

He said, “This cup is the new covenant in My 
blood, which is shed for you for the remission of 
sins.” The blood of the covenant has already been . 
poured out, but the new covenant has not yet? Hes 
actually been made, though it shall be eventually 
with the earthly people. Meantime, redeemed 
Gentiles come under all the spiritual blessings of 
that covenant, and indeed all the others in a 
manner far beyond anything that Old Testament 
prophets ever could have anticipated. 


y 


Fourth: The giving of the law. We have already 
seen that the law was given to Israel. It ad- 
dressed itself to Israel. It was never given to 
Gentiles as such, though all men become respon- 
sible in regard to its provisions when it is made 
known to them. 


Fifth: The ritual service. God ordained a ritual 
service of marvelous meaning and wondrous 
beauty in connection with both the tabernacle and 
the temple of old, but there is no hint of ritual- 
istic practices of any kind for the Church of God 
as such. In fact we are warned against them in 
unmistakable terms in Col. 2. 


Sixth: The promises. The reference, of course, 


114 Lectures on Romans 


is to the many promises of temporal’ blessing 
under Messiah’s reign in the kingdom age. 


Seventh: The fathers, Ahraham, Isaac and 
Jacob, the patriarchs, these belonged to the 
earthly people. The heavenly people have no 
genealogical list to consult; they are cut off en- 
tirely from earthly lineage. The Church was 
chosen in Christ before the foundation of the 
world. But in Israel we see the descendants of 
the fathers, though, as the chapter goes on to the 
show, they are not all reckoned of Israel who are 
of Israel after the flesh. 


Of this people Christ came, born of a virgin— 
a real man in a true body of flesh and blood with 
a rational spirit and soul; nevertheless, as to the 
mystery of His person, God over all, blessed for- 
ever. 

To the faithful Jew who had banked upon the 
promises of God to Israel, it would appear that 
in large measure these promises had failed; other- 
wise, why would Israel nationally be set to one 
side and the Gentiles be in the place of blessing? 
But the apostle now proceeds to show that God 
has ever acted on the principle of sovereign 
grace. All the special privileges that Israel had 
enjoyed were to be attributed to this principle. 
God took them out from among the nations as an 
elect people, separating them to Himself. But He 
ever had in mind a regenerated people as the people 


God’s Past Dealings with israel 115 


of the promise. Not all who were born of Israel’s 
blood belonged to Israel, as recognized by God. 
Neither because of the natural seed of Abraham 
were they necessarily children of promise. In 
electing grace God had said to Abraham, “In 
Isaac shall thy seed be called.”’ He chose to pass 
over Ishmael, the man born after the flesh, and 
take up Isaac, whose birth was miraculous. In 
this He illustrates the principle that ‘‘they which 
are the children of the flesh, these are not the 
children of God. Children of promise are counted 
for the seed.”” What a staggering blow is this to 
the pretensions of those who boast so loudly in 
our day of what they call the universal fatherhood 
of God and brotherhood of man. The children of the 
flesh, we are distinctly told, are not the children 
of God. And in this statement we have, empha- 
sized, the same truth that our Lord declared to 
Nicodemus, “Except a man be born again, he can- 
not see the kingdom of God.” 


Isaac was the child of promise. God said, “At 
this time will I come, and Sarah shall have a 
son.” Naturally, it would have been impossible 
for the promise to be fulfilled, but God wrought 
in resurrection power, quickening the dead bodies 
of Isaac’s parents, and the word came true. 


Then again, in the case of the children of Isaac 
and Rebecca, we see the same principle of elect- 
ing grace illustrated. We are told that: 


116 Lectures on Romans 


“(For the children being not yet born, neither 
having done any good or evil, that the purpose 
of God according to election might stand, not 
of works, but of Him that calleth;) It was said 
unto her, The elder shall serve the younger. As 
it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have 

I hated” (vers. 11-13). 

What a tremendous amount of needless con- 
troversy has raged about these verses! Yet how 
plain and simple they are, viewed in the light 
of God’s dispensational dealings. There is no 
question here of predestination to heaven or re- 
probation to hell; in fact, eternal issues do not 
really come in throughout this chapter, although, 
of course, they naturally follow as the result of 
the use or abuse of God-given privileges. But we 
are not told here, nor anywhere else, that before 
children are born it is God’s purpose to send one to 
heaven and another to hell; to save one by grace, 
notwithstanding all his evil works, and to con- 
demn the other to perdition, notwithstanding all 
his yearnings for something higher and nobler 
than he has yet found The passage has to do en- 
tirely with privilege here on earth. It was the 
purpose of God that Jacob should be the father 
of the nation of Israel, and that through him the 
promised Seed, our Lord Jesus Christ, should 
come into the world. He had also pre-determined 
that Esau should be a man of the wilderness— 
the father of a nation of nomads, as the Edomites 


God’s Past Dealings with Israel 117 


have ever been. It is this that is involved in the 
pre-natal decree: “The elder shall serve the 
younger.” And be it observed that it was not 
before the children were born, neither had done 
any good or evil, that God said, “Jacob have I 
loved, but Esau have I hated.” These words are 
quoted from the very last book of the Old Testa- 
ment. We find them in Malachi 1: 2, 3. Let me 
read them: 


“T have loved you, saith the Lord, yet ye say, 
Wherein hast thou loved us? Was not Esau 
Jacob’s brother? saith the Lord: yet I loved 
Jacob, and I hated Esau, and laid his mountains 
and his heritage waste for the dragons of the 
wilderness.” 


Observe what is in question:—God is plead- 
ing with the sons of Jacob to serve and obey Him, 
on the ground that He is doubly entitled to their 
obedience, first, because He is their Creator, 
second, because of the privileges, the earthly 
blessings He has given them. Comparatively 
speaking, He has loved Jacob, and hated Esau. 
That is, He gave to Jacob a beautiful fatherland, 
well-watered, productive, delightful for situation; 
He gave them, too, a holy law, pastors, shepherd- 
kings to guide them, prophets to instruct them, 
a ritual system full and expressive to lead their 
hearts out in worship and praise. All these things 
were denied to Edom. They were the children 


118 Lectures on Romans 


of the desert. We do not read that a prophet 
was ever sent to them, though they were not left 
without some knowledge of God. Esau received 
instruction from the lips of his parents, but for 
a morsel of bread he sold his birthright. And 
his descendants have ever been characterized by 
the same independent lawless spirit. Dispensa- 
tionally, Jacob was loved, Esau hated. There is 
no reference to the individual as such. “God 
so loved the world,” and therefore every child 
of Jacob or of Esau may be saved who will. But 
no one can dispute the fact that Jacob and his 
descendants enjoyed earthly privileges, and spirit- 
ual, too, that Esau and his children had never 
known. Is God unrighteous in thus distinguish- 
ing between nations? Is He unrighteous, for in- 
stance, to-day in giving to the peoples of northern 
Europe and of America privileges that the inhabi- 
tants of central Africa and inland South America 
have never known? By no means. He is 
severeign. He distributes the nations of men 
upon the earth as seems good to Himself, and 
though He takes up one nation in special grace 
and passes by another, that does not in the 
slightest degree hinder any individual in any 
nation from turning to God in repentance, and if 
any men anywhere under the sun, in any circum- 
stances whatever, look up to God, no matter how 
deep their ignorance, confessing their sin and 
crying out for mercy, it is written, “Whosoever 


God’s Past Dealings with Israel 119 


shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be 
saved.” 

Paul quotes the word of God to Moses: “TI will 
have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I 
will have compassion on whom I will have compas- 
sion.” 

Observe, you do not get the negative. He does 
not say, “I will condemn whom I will condemn, 
or I will reprobate to eternal destruction whom I 
will reprobate.” There is no such thought in the 
mind of God, who “‘desireth not the death of the 
sinner, but that all should turn to Him and live.” 
When were these words spoken to Moses? Turn 
back to Exodus 33:19. Read the entire passage, 
and note the occasion on which God used them. 
Israel had forfeited all claim to blessing on the 
ground of law; they had made a calf of gold and 
bowed down before it, even while Moses was in the 
mount receiving the tables of the covenant. Thus 
they had violated the first two commandments 
before they were brought into the camp, after 
having declared but a few days before, ‘‘All that 
the Lord hath spoken will we do, and be obedient.” 
Because of this, God was about to blot them out 
from the face of the earth, but Moses, the medi- 
ator, pleaded their cause in His presence. He even 
offered, as we have seen, to die in their stead, 
if that might turn aside the fierce anger of the 
Lord. But now observe the wonders of sovereign 
grace: God took refuge in His own inherent right 


120 Lectures on Romans 


to suspend judgment, if it pleased Him. And so 
He exclaims, “I will be gracious to whom I will 
be gracious, and I will show mercy on whom I 
will show mercy.” He spared the people, thus 
making them a wondrous witness to His grace. 
Apart from this sovereign grace no one would 
ever be saved, because ali men have forfeited title 
to life through sin. Israel, nationally, owed all 
their blessing to God’s mercy and compassion, 
when in righteousness they would have been cut 
off from the land of the living. If it pleased God 
now to take up the Gentiles and show mercy to 
them, what ground had Israel to complain? 

So, then, exclaims the apostle, “It is not of him 
that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God 
that showeth mercy.” He is not setting aside the 
will of man; he is not declaring that no responsi- 
bility to run in the way of righteousness rests 
upon man; but he is declaring that, apart from 
the sovereign mercy of God, no man would ever 
will to be saved or run in the way of His com- 
mandments. 

He turns next to speak of Pharaoh, for it is 
evident that one cannot logically accept the truth 
already demonstrated without recognizing the 
fact that God does give some up to destruction and 
leave them to perish in their sins. Pharaoh was 
a Gentile, the oppressor of Israel. To him God 
sent His servants demanding submission. In his 
pride and haughtiness, in his brazenness and 


God’s Past Dealings with Israel 121 


wickedness, he exclaimed, “Who is the Lord, that 
I should obey Him?” MHe dares to challenge 
the Almighty, and God condescends to accept the 
challenge. He says: 


“Even for this same purpose have I raised thee 
up, that I might show My power in thee, and 
that My name might be deciared througnout 
all the earth.” 


He is not speaking here of a helpless babe. The 
words have no reference to the birth of Pharaoh; 
they have to do exclusively with the outstanding 
position that God gave him in order that he might 
be a lesson to all succeeding generations of the 
folly of fighting against God. The Greeks used 
to say, “Whom the gods would destroy, they first 
‘make mad.” It was a principle that even the 
heathen could plainly discern. We see the same 
principle still: an Alexander, a Caesar, a Napoleon, 
a Kaiser permitted to climb to the very summit, 
almost, of human ambition, only to be hurled 
ignominiously into the depths of execration at 
last. 


And so God demonstrates that He hath mercy 
on whom He will have mercy, and whom He will, 
He hardeneth. He is the moral governor of the 
universe and He worketh all things according to 
the counsel of His own will. ‘None can stay His 
hand, nor say unto God, What doest Thou?” If 
men dare to rush ruthlessly upon the thick basses 


1s Lectures on Romans 


of the Almighty they must experience His right- 
eous wrath. 

Beginning with verse 19, and going on to the 
end of the chapter, the apostle undertakes to 
meet the objection of the fatalist, the man who 
says, “Well, granting all you’ve been saying, then 
God’s decrees are irresistible and I myself am but 
an automaton, moved about at His will, absolutely 
without responsibility. Why does He find fault? 
What ground can there be for judgment of a 
creature who can never will nor run but as God 
Himself directs? To resist His will is impossible. 
Where, then, does moral responsibility come in?” 

Such objections to the doctrine of the Divine 
Sovereignty have been raised from the earliest 
days. But, inasmuch as we have already seen 
that the apostle simply has in view privilege here 
on earth, those objections fall to the ground. The 
privileged Jew may fail utterly to appreciate the 
blessings lavished upon him, and so come under 
divine condemnation; while the ignorant bar- 
barian, bereft of all the blessings of civilization 
and enlightenment, may, nevertheless, have an 
exercised conscience that will lead him into the 
presence of God. At any rate, it is the height 
of impiety for puny man to sit in judgment upon 
God. It is as though the vessel wrought upon the 
wheel should turn to the potter and ask, indig- 
nantly, “Why hast thou made me thus?” Clearly, 
he who has the intelligence to form vessels aut of 


God’s Past Dealings with Israel 123 


clay has the right to make them of such shape 
or size or for such use as he deems best. Of the 
very same lump of clay he may make one vessel 
unto honor, to be displayed upon the sideboard to 
admiring throngs, and another unto dishonor, 
for use in a scullery, and altogether without 
beauty or attractiveness. If God, the great 
Former of all, willing to manifest both His anger 
and His power, endures, with much long-suffer- 
ing, vessels that call down His indignation because 
having a will, which the work of the potter has 
not, they deliberately fit themselves for destruc- 
tion, shall anyone find fault if He manifests the 
riches of His glory in His dealings with other 
vessels of mercy which He has had in view for 
the glory of His Son from eternity? And such 
vessels of mercy are the called of God, whether 
Jews by birth or Gentiles also. Passage after pas- 
sage from the Old Testament is called into requi- 
sition to show that this is nothing new in God’s 
ways with men, and that the prophets have fore- 
seen just such a setting aside of Israel and taking 
up of the Gentiles as has already taken place. 
Hosea testified that God has said, “I will call them 
My people which were not My people, and her be- 
loved which was not beloved. And it shall come 
to pass that in the place where it was said 
unto them, ‘Ye are not My people’, they shall be 
called the children of the living God.” Israel 
forfeited all title to be called His people. During 


124 Lectures on Romans 


the present dispensation, when grace is going out 
to the Gentiles, they would be set to one side 
nationally, as by-and-by the same grace that is now 
being shown to the nations will be manifested 
again to them, and they shall once more be called 
the children of the living God. Isaiah prophesied 
that although the number of the children of Israel 
should be as the sands of the sea, yet of this vast 
throng only a remnant should be saved, and that 
in the day of the Lord’s indignation, when He 
would be executing His judgment. upon the earth. 
The same prophet saw the sin of the people as the 
sin of the cities of the plain, and exclaimed, 
“Except the Lord of hosts hath left us a seed, we 
should be as Sodom, and be made like unto Go- 
morrah.” 


What then, is the conclusion? Simply that the 
unrighteous Gentiles have, through grace, at- 
tained to a righteousness which is of faith. They 
followed not after righteousness, but God in right- 
eousness pursued after them and made known His 
gospel, that they might believe and be saved. 
Israel, on the other hand, to whom He had given 
a law of righteousness, were even more guilty 
than the Gentiles, for they refused to follow it 
and therefore they missed that righteousness 
which the law would have inculcated. 

Why did they miss it? Because they failed to 
realize that is it only to be obtained by faith, and 
that no man, by his own power, can ever keep that 


God’s Past Dealings with Israel 125 


holy and perfect law. When God sent His Son 
into the world, who is the embodiment of all per- 
Tection, in whom the law was fulfilled perfectly, 
they knew Him not, but stumbled over the stumb- 
ling stone of a lowly Christ when they were expect- 
ing a triumphant King. They realized not their 
need of one who could accomplish righteousness 
on their behalf, because they lacked faith. And 
so they fulfilled the Scripture in condemning Him. 
But, nevertheless, wherever He is individually re- 
ceived by faith, He saves the soul that trusts 
Him, though the nation has stumbled and fallen. 
According as it is written, “Behold, I lay in Zion a 
stumbling stone, and a rock of offence, and who- 
soever believeth on Him shall not be ashamed.” 
When He came in grace the first time, Israel re- 
fused Him. But ‘“‘the stone that the builders re- 
jected is made the Head of the corner.” When 
He comes again He will be as the stone, falling in 
judgment upon the Gentiles, whereas Israel then 
repentant and regenerated will see in Him the 
chief corner stone. 


LECTURE VIII 


God’s Present Dealings with Israel 
in Governmental Discipline 


Chapter 10 


Having, as we have seen, vindicated in a 
masterly way the righteousness of God in setting 
aside Israel nationally because of unbelief, and 
taking up the Gentiles during the present dispen- 
sation of grace, the apostle now goes on to show 
that this deflection of the nation as such does 
not in any wise involve the rejection of the indi. 
vidual Israelite. The nation as such is no longer 
looked upon as in covenant relationship with God, 
nor will it be until it comes under the new coven- 
ant at the beginning of the millennium; when 
“a nation shall be born in a day;” but the same 
promises apply to any individual member of the 
house of Israel as to any individual Gentile. 

In the first three verses the apostle expresses 
his yearning desire and prayer for his kinsmen. 
He longs and prays that they may be saved, for 
though Abraham’s seed after the flesh, they are 
“lost sheep,’ and need to be sought and found by 
the Good Shepherd just as truly as those “other 
sheep” of the Gentiles. But the pitiable thing 


God’s Present Dealings with Israel 127 


is that, although lost, they do not realize their true 
condition. Filled with a mistaken zeal for God, 
marked by an outward adherence to Judaism as 
a divinely-established system, they are earnestly 
trying to serve the God of their fathers, but not 
according to knowledge; that is, they have refused 
the fuller revelation He has given of Himself, 
His mind, and His will through Christ Jesus. 
“For they being ignorant of God’s righteousness 
and going about to establish their own righteous- 
ness, have not submitted themselves unto the 
righteousness of God.” 


The term “God’s righteousness” is used here 
somewhat differently to the general expression, 
the “‘righteousness of God.” We have seen here- 
tofore that the righteousness of God is used in 
two ways: It is God’s consistency with Himself, 
as one has expressed it, and thereby becomes the 
great sheet-anchor of the soul, because in the gos- 
pel God has revealed how He can be just and the 
Justifier of those who put faith in Christ; the 
sin question has been settled in a righteous way, 
as God’s nature demanded that it should be, ere 
He could deal in grace with guilty men. The 
second aspect is that of imputation. God imputes 
righteousness to all who believe. Therefore 
Christ, and Christ Himself, is the righteousness of 
the believer. We are thus made, or constituted, 
the righteousness of God in Him according as 
it is written in the book of the prophet Jeremiah: 


128 Lectures on Romans 


“This is His name whereby He shall be called, 
The Lord our Righteousness” (Jehovah Tsid- 
kenu). 

But in these three verses where the apostle 
says, “They being ignorant of God’s righteous- 
ness,” it seems plain that he simply means that 
they are ignorant of how righteous God really is; 
therefore they go about attempting to establish 
a righteousness of their own. No man would 
think of doing this, if he realized for a moment the 
transcendent character of the divine righteous- 
ness. The utter impossibility of producing a 
righteousness of works suitable for a God of such 
infinite righteousness would cause the soul to 
shrink back in acknowledgement of his own help- 
lessness. It is when men reach this place that 
they are ready to submit themselves unto that 
righteousness of God which has been revealed in 
the gospel. When I learn that I am absolutely 
without righteousness in myself; that is, without 
such a righteousness as is suited to a righteous 
God, then I am glad to avail myself of that right- 
eousness which He Himself proclaims in the gos- 
pel, and in which He clothes me when I trust in 
Christ. “For Christ is the end (i.e., the object for 
the consummation) of the law for righteousness to 
every one that believeth.” The law proposed a 
righteousness which I could not furnish. Christ 
has met every requirement of that holy law, He 
has died under its penalty; He has risen from the 


God’s Present Dealings with Israel 129 


dead; He is Himself the righteousness which all 
need. 

In the verses that follow, the apostle contrasts 
legal righteousness or a “by works righteousness” 
with this “in faith righteousness.” He cites from 
Moses, who describes legal righteousness in the 
solemn words, ‘“The man which doeth those things 
shall live by them” (See Lev. 18:5). This is law in 
its very essence, “Do and live.” But no man ever 
yet did that which entitled him to life, for “if a 
man should keep the whole law and yet offend in 
one point, he is guilty of all’’; that is, he is a law- 
breaker. He has not necessarily violated every 
commandment. But a thief is as truly a law- 
breaker as a murderer. And the law having been 
violated, even once, man’s title to life thereunder 
is forfeited. 


Now the righteousness which is of faith 
depends upon testimony that God has given. 
Again the apostle quotes from Moses, who, in 
Deuteronomy 30:12-14, presses upon the people 
the fact that God has given testimony which man 
is responsible to believe. The testimony there, 
of course, was the revelation from Sinai. But the 
apostle takes up Moses’ words, and in a wonder- 
ful way under the guidance of the Spirit, applies 
them to Christ. “Say not in thine heart, Who 
shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ 
down from above:) Or, Who shall descend into 
the deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again from 


130 Lectures on Romans 


the dead.)” Christ has already come down. He 
has died. God has raised Him from the dead. 
And upon this depends the entire gospel testi- 
mony. 


Therefore he goes on to say, “The word is nigh 
thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart: that 
is, the word of faith, which we preach.” The 
gospel has been proclaimed; they have heard it; 
they are familiar with its terms. The question 
is: Do they believe it and confess the Christ it 
proclaims as their Lord? For in verses 9 and 10 
he epitomises the whole matter in words that 
have been used of God through the centuries to 
bring assurance to thousands of precious souls, 
“That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the 
Lord Jesus” (or literally, Jesus as Lord), “and 
shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised 
Him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. For 
with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; 
and with the mouth confession is made unto sal- 
vation.” The heart is simply another term for 
the real man. The apostle is not trying to draw 
a fine distinction, as some preachers do, between 
believing with the head and believing with the 
heart. He does not occupy us with the nature of 
belief; he does occupy us with the object of faith. 
We believe the message that God has given con- 
cerning Christ. If we believe at all, we believe 
with the heart. Otherwise we do not really trust. 
“With the heart” man believeth. The confession 


God’s Present Dealings with Israel 181. 


here is not, of course, necessarily the same thing 
as where our Lord says, ‘‘Whosoever shall confess 
Me before men, him will I confess before My 
Father which is in heaven.” This is rather the 
soul’s confession to God Himself that he takes 
Jesus as Lord. 


He then cites another Old Testament scripture 
from the book of the prophet Isaiah (ch.28:16), 
which declares that “Whosoever believeth on Him 
shall not be ashamed.” In this way he proves 
that the universality of the present gospel faith 
is in no wise in conflict with the revealed word 
of God as given to the Jew of old. “Whosoever” 
includes the whole world. Already he has estab- 
lished the fact in Chapter 3 that there is no 
difference between Jew and Gentile, so far as sin 
is concerned. Now he gives the other side of the 
‘no difference” doctrine. “The same Lord over all is 
rich unto all that call upon Him, for whosoever 
shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be 
saved.” To call upon the name of the Lord is, of 
course, to invoke His name in faith. His name 
speaks of what He is. He who calls upon the name 
of the Lord puts his trust in Him, as it is written, 
“The name of the Lord is a strong tower, and the 
righteous runneth into it and is safe.” 

The Jew had been accustomed to think of him- 
self as the chosen of the Lord, and as the one to 
whom was committed the testimony of the one 
true and living God. Therefore the objector 


132 Lectures on Romans 


naturally asks, and Paul puts the very words in 
his mouth, “How then shall they call on Him in 
whom they have not believed?” And he follows 
this question with another: ‘And how shall they 
believe in Him of whom they have not heard?” 
And this again with a third question: “How shall 
they hear without a preacher?” Nor are the 
objections ended with this, for again he says: 
“‘And how shall they preach, except they be sent? 
As it is written, How beautiful are the feet of 
them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring 
glad tidings of good things!” The Jew believed 
in God; he had heard of Him; to him preachers 
had proclaimed the message, and these preachers 
had been sent of God. But who authorized any- 
one to overleap the Jewish bounds and go with 
the gospel of peace to the Gentiles? 


In reply to the objector, Paul reminds him that 
Israel who had all these privileges had not re- 
sponded as might have been expected; not all had 
obeyed the gospel. And this, too, was foreseen 
by the Old Testament prophets. Isaiah sadly 
asked, “Lord, who hath believed our report?” 
indicating that many who heard would refuse to 
accept this message. But then the objector 
answers, “You admit, Paul, that faith comes by 
hearing, and hearing by the Word, or the report 
of God.” “Yes,” he replies, “but have they not 
heard? Is there any people so utterly dark and 
ignorant that the word of God in some form has 


God’s Present Dealings with Israel 183 


not come to them, thus putting them into respon- 
sibility?” Psalm 19 testifies that the voice of 
God may be heard in His creation: the sun, the 
moon, the stars—all the marvels of this wonder- 
ful universe—testify to the reality of a personal 
Creator. And so the Psalmist says, “Their sound 
went unto all the earth, and their words unto the 
end of the world.” 


It is not a new thing, then, for God to speak to 
Gentiles. All that is new about it is that He is 
now speaking more fully, more clearly than He 
ever spoke before. He is now proclaiming in un- 
mistakable terms an offer of salvation to all who 
trust His word. And did not Israel know that God 
was going to take up the peoples of the nations? 
They should have known, for Moses himself said: 
“T will provoke you to jealousy by them that are 
no people, and by a foolish nation I will anger 
you.” And Isaiah, with uncompromising boldness, 
declares: “I was found of them that sought Me 

not; I was made manifest unto them that asked 
not after Me.” Surely words like these could 
only apply to the heathen of the Gentile world. 
And as for Israel, with all their privileges, con- 
cerning them God had said: “All day long I have 
stretched forth My hands unto a disobedient and 
gainsaying people.” The subject is continued in 
the opening verses of the next chapter, in which, 
as we shall see, the apostle shows how God is 
getting His election, even out of Israel, during 


134 Lectures on Romans 


the present dispensation. But we will consider 
the entire chapter in one address, and so I for- 
bear further comment now, save to insist that 
the gist of the present portion is evidently this: 
during the present dispensation, when grace is 
going out to the nations, beyond the bounds of 
the Jewish race, this does not involve the utter 
rejection of Israelites, but it does imply the end 
of special privilege. They may be saved if they 
will, but on exactly the same terms as the despised 
Gentile. The middle wall of partition is broken 
down, but grace is offered through Jesus Christ 
to all who own their guilt and confess His name. 


LECTURE Ix 


God’s Future Dealings with Israel 
in Fulfilment of the Prophetic Scriptures 


Chapter 11 


This eleventh chapter is most illuminating in 
regard to God’s dispensational plan. We have 
already seen how His past dealings with Israel 
proved His righteousness in acting toward the 
Gentiles as He now does, despite the covenant 
made with the earthly people. Then in chapter 10 
we have seen that although the nation as such 
is set to one side, this does not in any way hinder 
the individual Israelite from turning to God and 
finding that same salvation which He, in His 
sovereignty, is proclaiming through His servants 
to the Gentiles. In the first part of our present 
chapter, verses 1 to 6, the subject of chapter 10 
is continued and brought to a conclusion. The 
question is asked: “Hath God cast away His 
people?” By no means. Paul’s own experiences 
proved that this was not the case; for he was an 
Israelite, of the natural seed of Abraham, and 
of the tribe of Benjamin; yet he had been 
laid hold of by the Spirit of God and brought to 
a saving knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. And 


136 Lectures on Romans 


what was true of him might be true of any other. 
What had really happened was simply the ful- 
filment of the words of the prophet Elijah in 
a wider sense than when he spoke in Ahab’s day. 
The nation had rejected every testimony sent to it. 
As a people they had killed the prophets and de- 
filed Jehovah’s altar. But as in Elijah’s day, God 
had reserved seven thousand to Himself who had 
not bowed the knee to the image of Baal, so ‘‘at 
this present time also there is a remnant accord- 
ing to the election of grace.” God rejects the 
nation, but grace goes out to the individual. 


The great thing, however, for Israel to under- 
stand is that, if saved at all, they are saved 
exactly as Gentiles are saved, and that is by grace. 
Grace, as we have seen, is unmerited favor. Yea, 
we may put it even stronger: it is favor against 
merit. This precludes all thought of work. If 
merit of any sort is taken into consideration, then 
it is no more grace. On the other hand, if salva- 
tion be of works, this leaves no place whatever for 
grace, because it would take from work its merit- 
orious character. The two principles—salvation 
by grace and salvation by works—are diametri- 
cally opposed, one to the other. There can be no 
admixture of law and grace; they are mutually 
destructive principles. 


Beginning with verse 7, the apostle now under- 
takes to show God’s secret purpose in connection 


God’s Future Dealings with Israet 137 


with Israel in the coming day. What the nation 
sought it has failed to obtain; but the election 
(that is, those who are content to be saved by 
grace) do obtain it; and as to the rest, they are 
judicially blinded. Again he quotes from the Old 
Testament to show that this is in full accord with 
the prophetic Word. As Isaiah wrote, “God hath 
given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they 
should not see, and ears that they should not 
hear;” and He shows that this is true unto this 
day. David, too, had written: “Let their table be 
made a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling-block, 
and a recompense unto them: let their eyes be 
darkened, that they may not see, and bow down 
their back alway.” These terrible imprecations 
were fulfilled when the representatives of the 
nation deliberately rejected Christ and called 
down judgment upon the heads of their descend- 
ants when they cried in Pilate’s judgment hall, 
“His blood be upon us, and upon our children.” 
Rejecting Messiah, God rejected them. And many 
Christians have taken it for granted that He is 
through with them as a nation forever. This, 
the apostle now shows, is far from the truth. He 
asks, “Have they stumbled that they should 
fall?” ; that is, utterly fall, fall without any hope 
or possibility of recovering. The answer again 
is, “By no means.” God has overruled their pre- 
sent defection to make known His riches of grace 
toward the Gentiles, and this, in turn, will be used 


138 Lectures on Romans 


eventually to provoke Israel to jealousy and to turn 
them back to the God of their fathers and to the 
Christ whom they have rejected. This recovery 
will be a means of untold blessing to that part 
of the world which has not yet come to a saving 
knowledge of the gospel. With holy enthusiasm 
he exclaims: “Now if the defection of them be 
the riches of the world, and the diminishing of 
them the riches of the Gentiles; how much more 
their fulness?” It is well to note the use he 
makes of this word, “fulness,” as we shall come 
upon it lower down in the chapter. The fulness 
of Israel will be the conversion of Israel—the ful- 
filment of God’s purpose regarding them. 


Paul was the apostle to the Gentiles, and as 
such, he magnified his office; but he would not 
have the Gentiles for a moment think that he had 
lost his interest in Israel: rather he would see 
them stirred to emulation, that many might be 
saved from among them as they saw the grace of 
God going out to the Gentiles; on the other hand, 
he would not have the Gentile glory over the 
Jew because the latter was set aside and the 
former enjoyed the blessings that the Jew would 
have had, had he been ready to receive them. He 
continues his argument by introducing a parable, 
which brings out most vividly the divine plan. 
He says: ‘‘For if the casting away of them be the 
reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving 
of them be, but life from the dead?” That is, if, 


God’s Future Dealings with Israet 139 


as they wander among all the nations, a disap- 
pointed and weary people, under the ban of the 
God of their fathers, the message of grace is going 
out to the Gentiles, and an election from them are 
receiving the message, what will it mean to the 
world as a whole when Israel nationally will turn 
back to the Lord and become in very truth a holy 
people, His witnesses to all nations? 

“For if the firstfruit be holy, the lump is also 
holy: and if the root be holy, so are the branches.” 
If the regenerated remnant in Israel be indeed 
a people set apart to God, so eventually will the 
nation be to which they belong. And if the root 
of the covenant olive tree be holy (that is, Abra- 
ham, who believed God, and it was counted to 
him for righteousness), so are all those who are 
really linked with him by faith. They were 
natural branches in the olive tree—Israelites by 
birth but not by grace, who were broken 
off. And in order that the promises of God to 
Abraham should not fail, “In thy seed shall all the 
nations of the earth be blessed,” the branches of 
the wild olive tree—the Gentiles—were grafted 
in among the remnant of Israel, and thus Jew and 
Gentile believing together, partake of the root 
and fatness of the olive tree. But now the grave 
danger is lest the Gentile should rest on mere out- 
ward privileges, and while linked with the chil- 
dren of the promise, should fail to appreciate for 
themselves the gospel of God, and so prove un- 


140 Lectures on Romans 


real. In that case, God will have to deal with the 
Gentiles as He had dealt with the Jews. And so 
we get the solemn warning: “Boast not against 
the branches. But if thou boast, thou bearest 
not the root, but the root thee.” Some might say, 
“Well, but the natural branches were broken off, 
that I, a Gentile, might be grafted in.” The 
answer is clear and distinct: ‘They were broken 
off because of unbelief, and thou standest by 
faith.” Therefore the admonition, ‘Be not high- 
minded, but fear: for if God spared not the 
natural branches, take heed lest He also spare not 
thee.” 

Do we need to pause to ask whether the Gentiles 
have valued their privileges? Is it not patent to 
every observing spiritually-minded person that 
conditions in Christendom are as bad to-day as 
they ever were in Israel? Do we not see apostasy 
from the truth everywhere prevalent? Are not 
the characteristic features of the last days, as 
depicted in Znd Timothy 8, everywhere manifest? 
If so, may we not well be warned that the time 
is near when the unfruitful branches will be torn 
out of the olive tree and the natural branches, at 
last turning back to God, be grafted in again to 
their own olive tree? 


In these dispensational ways we see manifested 
that goodness and severity of God, which has 
already been so clearly brought out in the ninth 
chapter: on those who fell, who refused to believe 


God’s Future Deatings with Israel 141 


the testimony, severity; but toward ignorant and 
unworthy Gentiles, goodness, but this goodness 
only to be continued toward them if they continue 
to appreciate it, otherwise they, too, shall be cut 
off. Who can doubt that the day of the cutting 
off is near at hand, when the true Church having 
been caught up to be with the Lord, judgment will 
be meted out to unfaithful Christendom, and 
then God will turn back in grace to Israel, if they 
abide not still in unbelief, and they shall be re- 
grafted into their own olive tree, according to 
the power of the God of resurrection? 


I recall an article by a well-known “higher 
critic,” which I read some years ago, in which he 
was ridiculing the idea of the apostle Paul’s 
inspiration because of his apparent ignorance of 
one of the first principles of horticulture: “Paul,” 
said he, “was actually so ignorant of the art of 
grafting that he speaks of grafting wild branches 
into a good tree, evidently not aware of the fact 
that it is customary to graft good branches into 
a wild tree.” It is clear that the reverend critic 
had never carefully read the apostle’s own words, 
as given in the next verse, or he would not have 
been caught in such a trap. Paul clearly indicates 
that his illustration is one which he well knew to 
be opposed to that which was ordinarily done. 
He says: “For if thou wert cut out of the olive tree 
which is wild by nature, and wert graffed con- 
trary to nature into a good olive tree: how much 


142 Lecturzs on Romans 


more shall these, which be the natural branches, 
be graffed into their own olive tree?” 

No; Paul was not ignorant of horticulture, nor 
was the Holy Ghost ignorant, who was guiding 
him and inspiring him as he wrote. That which 
is not customary to man is often in full accord 
with the divine plan, as here. 

And so, in verses 25-32, we see just what must 
take place before this re-grafting, and what will 
follow afterwards. “I would not, brethren, that 
ye should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye 
should be wise in your own conceits; that blind- 
ness in part has happened to Israel, until the ful- 
ness of the Gentiles be come in. And so all Israel 
shall be saved.” 

This, then, is one of the secret things hidden 
in the mind of God until the due time for its 
revelation: Israel will be blinded in part, but, 
thank God, only in part, until the present work of 
God among the Gentiles be completed. Here we 
have the second use of this word “fulness.” ‘The 
fulness of the Gentiles” is the completion of the 
work among the nations which has been going on 
ever since Israel’s rejection. This “fulness,” as 
we know from other scriptures, will come in when 
our Lord calls His Church to be with Himself, in 
accordance with 1 Thessalonians 4, and 1 Corin- 
thians 15. It is then that “all Israel shall be 
saved.” We are not to understand by the term 
“all Israel” everyone of Israel’s blood, for we have 


God’s Future Dealings with Israel 143 


already learned that “they are not all Israel who 
are of Israel, but the children of the promise are 
counted for the seed.” So the remnant will be 
the true Israel in that glorious day when, “There 
shall come out of the Zion the Deliverer, and shall 
turn away ungodliness from Jacob,” for God has 
said: “This is My covenant unto them when I 
shall take away their sins.” 


So then, the apostle concludes, they are 
enemies of the gospel for the present time; but 
through their enmity grace goes out to the Gen- 
tiles. Nevertheless, according to the divine plan, 
they are still beloved for the fathers’ sakes, for 
God’s gifts and calling He never retracts; the 
promises made to the patriarchs and to David 
shall and must be fulfilled. Study carefully psalm 
89 in this connection. And just as the Gentiles, 
who in time past had not believed God but have 
now obtained mercy through the Jews’ unbelief, 
so, in like manner, when the Gentiles prove un- 
believing and are set to one side, Israel will obtain 
mercy when they turn back in faith to God. 


Whether Jew or Gentile, all alike are saved on 
the same principle, “For God hath concluded all 
in unbelief, that He might have mercy upon all.” 

The last four verses are in the nature of a Dox- 
ology. The apostle’s heart is filled with worship, 
and praise, and admiration as the full blaze of 
the divine plan fills the horizon of his soul. He ex- 


144 Lectures on Romans 


claims: “O the depths of the riches both of the 
wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearch- 
able are His judgments, and His ways past find- 
ing out!” 

Apart from revelation none could have known 
His mind, just as no created being could ever have 
been His counsellor. No one ever earned grace by 
first giving to Him, in order that blessing might 
be recompensed; but everything is of Him, and 
through Him, and unto Him, to whom be glory for- 
ever. Amen. 


LECTURES ON ROMANS 


Division III. PRACTICAL. 


Divine Righteousness Producing Practical Righteousness 
in the Believer 


Chapters 12-16 


LECTURE X 


The Walk of the Christian in Relation to his 
Fellow-Believers, and to Men of the World 


Chapter 12 


We come now to consider the practical bearing 
of all this precious truth, which the Spirit of 
God has been unfolding before our astonished 
eyes. In this last part of the epistle we learn 
what the effect should be upon the believer who 
has laid hold, by faith, of the truth of the gospel. 
We may divide this third part, roughly, as follows: 
Sub-division 1, Chapters 12:1—15:7, God’s good 
and acceptable and perfect will unfolded; Sub- 
division 2, Chapter 15:8-33, which divides into 
two parts the conclusion of the matter and his 
own service; Sub-division 8, Chapter 16:1-24, 
Salutations and Warning. Verses 25-27 form an 
appendix to the entire epistle. 


146 Lectures on Romans 


The first two verses of Chapter 12 are the intro- 
duction to this entire practical part of the letter, 
based upon the revelation given in Chapters 1-8, 
for we may very properly consider Chapters 9-11 
as a great parenthesis, occasioned because of the 
necessity of clearing the mind of the believing 
Jew in regard to the ways of God. 

The opening words necessarily link with the 
closing part of Chapter 8: “I beseech you, there- 
fore, brethren.” The “therefore” refers clearly 
to the magnificent summing up of Christian stand- 
ing and eternal blessing in the eighth chapter. 
Because you are in Christ free from all condem- 
nation; because you are indwelt by the Holy 
Spirit; because you are sons by adoption, because 
you are eternally linked up with Christ; because 
you are the elect of God,/predestined to be con- 
formed to the image of His Son; because you 
‘are beyond all possibility of condemnation, since 
Christ has died and been raised again and sits 
at God’s right hand; because no charge can ever 
be laid against the believer that God will hear; 
because there is no separation from the love of 
God for those who are in Christ Jesus—“I beseech 
you to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, 
acceptable unto God, which is your intelligent 
service!” Christ gave Himself for us—a sacrifice 
in death. Like the first-born in Egypt, redeemed 
by the blood of the lamb, you are now to be de- 
voted to Him. As the Levites were afterwards 


The Watk of the Christian 147 


presented to God to live sacrificial lives in place of 
the first-born, so each believer is called upon to 
recognize the Lord’s claims upon him, and to pre- 
sent, or yield, his body as a living sacrifice, set 
apart and acceptable unto God, because of the 
price that has been paid for his redemption. See 
Num. 8:11-21, and Daniel 3:28. How much do we 
really know of this experimentally? We who once 
yielded our members to the service of sin and 
Satan, are now called upon to yield ourselves 
wholly unto God as those who are alive from the 
dead. This will involve sacrifice all the way, the 
denial of self, and the constant recognition of the 
divine claims upon us. 

The second verse makes clearer the meaning 
involved: “Be not conformed to this world: but 
be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, 
that ye may prove what is that good, and accept- 
able, and perfect, will of God.” 

The cross of Christ has come in between the 
believer and the world. To conform himself to the 
ways of this present evil age is to be unfaithful 
to the One whom the world has rejected but whom 
we have owned as Lord and Saviour. “I would 
give the world to have your experience,” said a 
young woman on one occasion to a devoted Christ- 
ian lady. “My dear,” was the reply, “that’s 
exactly what it cost me. I gave the world for it.” 
The loyal heart exclaims with gladness, not grudg- 
ingly, 


148 Lectures on Romans 


“Take the world, but give me Jesus; 
All earth’s joys are but in name; 
But His love abideth ever, 
Through eternal years the same.” 


Moved by the “expulsive power of a new affec. 
tion,” it becomes easy for the soul to say with 
Paul: “God forbid that I should glory, save in the 
cross of the Lord Jesus Christ, by which the 
world is crucified unto me and I unto the world.” 

We are not to suppose that non-conformity to 
the world necessarily involves awkwardness of 
behavior, peculiarity of dress, or boorishness in 
manner. But the entire world system is summed 
up in three terms: the lust of the flesh, the 
lust of the eye and the pride of life, or the osten- 
tation of living. Therefore non-conformity to 
the world implies holding the body and its appe- 
tites in subjection to the Spirit of God, subject- 
ing the imagination to the mind of Christ, and 
walking in lowliness of spirit through a scene 
where self-confidence and boasting are the order 
of the day. ' 

In 2 Corinthians 3 we read that, “We all, be- 
holding as in a glass, the glory of the unveiled 
face of the Lord, are changed (or transformed) 
into the same image by the Spirit of the Lord” 
(literai rendering). 

And so here we are commanded to be trans- 
formed by the renewing of our minds; that is, 


The Walk of the Christian 149 


as the mind is occupied with Christ and the af- 
fections set on things above, we become like Him 
who has won our hearts for Himself; and walking 
in loving obedience, we prove the blessedness of 
the good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God. 
Through the rest of the chapter we have God’s 
good will in regard to our relations, particularly to 
fellow-believers; in chapter 13, the will of God 
for the believer in relation to human government 
and society in general; in chapter 14 and the 
first seven verses of chapter 15, the will of God 
in regard to the believer’s relation to those who 
are weak in the faith. 

We note, then, that the believer is here looked 
upon as a member of the Body of Christ, and this 
while speaking of wondrous privilege, neverthe- 
less involves grave responsibility. It might be 
well to point out here that the Body of Christ 
is looked at in two very distinct aspects in the 
episties. In Ephesians and Colossians we have 
the Body in its dispensational aspect, embracing 
all believers from Pentecost to the return of 
the Lord for His Church. Looked at in this way, 
Christ alone is the Head, and all are united to 
Him, whether as to their actual condition they be 
numbered among the living or the dead. But in 
1 Corinthians 12, and here in Romans 12, the Body 
is looked upon as something manifested on the 
earth, and therefore the apostle speaks of eyes, 
and ears, etc., as in the body here below. The 


150 Lectures on Romans 


absurd deduction has been drawn from this that 
the Church of the book of Acts and of the early 
epistles of Paul is not at all the same thing as the 
Church of the prison epistles. This view is pure 
assumption, based upon a far-fetched dispensa- 
tionalism that destroys a sense of Christian re- 
sponsibility to a very large degree wherever it is 
fully embraced. In Corinthians, and in Romans, 
too, the Body of Christ is viewed on earth; and 
inasmuch as there are those set in the Church who 
speak and act for the Head in heaven, it is quite 
in keeping to use the figures of the eyes, ears, and 
so on. “If one member suffer, all the members 
suffer with it,” could not be said of saints in 
heaven. Their sufferings are forever over; but as 
long as there is a suffering saint on earth, every 
other member of the Body of Christ shares with 
him in his affliction. 

I remember well, as a boy, gazing with rapt 
admiration upon a regiment of Highlanders as 
they marched through the streets of my native 
city, Toronto, Canada, and I was thrilled when I 
was told that that regiment had fought in the 
battle of Waterloo. It was quite a disappointment 
to me afterwards to learn that not one man of 
them all had been in that great battle. I was gaz- 
ing on the regiment as then constituted, and the 
battle of Waterloo had taken place many years be- 
fore; but it was the same regiment, new recruits 
taking the places constantly of those who passed 


The Walk of the Christian 152 


away. So it is with the Body of Christ on earth. 
Believers die and depart to be with Christ and 
join the choir invisible above; others take their 
places here below, and thus the Church continues 
from century to century. 

Now as a member of Christ’s Body I need to 
realize that I am not to act independently of other 
members; nor am I to think of myself as exalted 
above the rest, but to think soberly as one to 
whom God has dealt a measure of faith, as He 
also has to every other Christian. As there are 
many members in the human body, and no two 
members have the same office, so believers, though 
many, together constitute one Body in Christ, 
and are all members, one of another. But our 
gifts differ, and each one is to use whatever gifts 
may be given to him according to the grace that 
God supplies. If he have the gift of prophecy, 
he is to speak according to the proportion of faith; 
if his place be characteristically that of service, 
let him serve in subjection to the Lord; if he be a 
teacher, let him teach in lowly grace; if an ex- 
horter, let him seek to stir up his brethren, but 
in the love of Christ; if he be one to whom God 
has entrusted earthly treasure, that he may give 
generously to relieve the need of his brethren 
or to further the work of the gospel, let him dis- 
tribute with simplicity, not ostentatiously as 
drawing attention to himself, or his gifts; if 
he be fitted to rule in the assembly of God let 


152 Lectures on Fomans 


him be a diligent pastor, or shepherd of the flock; 
if it be given him to show mercy to the needy, 
or undeserving, let it be with cheerfulness. 

Above all things, let Jove be genuine, without 
pretence or hypocrisy, abhorring that which is 
evil but cleaving to that which is good. 

How much we need the simple exhortations of 
verse 10: “Be kindly affectioned one to another 
with brotherly love; in honor preferring one an- 
other.” 

Elsewhere he writes: “Be ye kind one to an- 
other.” How rare a virtue true kindness is! How 
often pretended zeal for truth, or for Church posi- 
tion, dries up the milk of human kindness! And 
yet this is one of the truest Christian virtues. 
Dr. Griffith Thomas used to tell of an old Scotch 
pastor who frequently said to his congregation: 
“Remember, if you are not very kind, you are not 
very spiritual.” And yet how often people 
imagine that there is something even incongruous 
between spirituality and kindness! How differ- 
ently would Christians speak of one another and 
act toward one another if these admonitions were 
but kept in view. 

The first part of the eleventh verse is better 
translated, “Not remiss in zeal.” It is not to be 
taken as a mere exhortation to careful business 
methods, but whatever one has to do should be 


done zealously, with spiritual fervor, as serving 
the Lord. 


The Walk of the Christian 153 


It is hardly necessary to take up each verse in 
detail. The exhortations are too plain to be mis- 
understood. In verse 16, however, it may be as 
well to point out that the apostle is not really 
inculecating condescension, as though of higher 
beings to those of less worth, but what he really 
saysis: “Mind not high things, but go along with 
the lowly.” The last five verses possibly have the 
world in view rather than fellow-Christians, and 
yet it is unhappily true that even in all dealings 
with fellow-believers the same admonitions are 
needed. It is not always possible to live peace- 
ably, even with fellow-saints, let alone with men 
of the world. Therefore the word, “Jf possible, as 
much lieth in you, live peaceably with all men.” 
‘Some have had difficulty over the meaning of 
the expression, “Give place unto wrath,” in verse 
19. What I understand the apostle to say is this: 
“Do not attempt to avenge yourselves, but leave 
room for the judgment of God. If wrath must 
be meted out, let Him do it, not yourself,” for it 
it written: “Vengeance is Mine: I will repay, 
saith the Lord.” 

Savonarola said, “A Christian’s life consists in 
doing good and suffering evil.” It is not for him 
to take matters into his own hands, but rather to 
act upon verses 20 and 21, in simple confidence 
that God will not suffer any trial to come upon 
him through others which will not eventually 
work out for good. 


154 Lectures on Romans 


This is not natural, but it is possible to the man 
who walks in the Spirit. A young nobleman com- 
plained to Francis of Assissi of a thief. “The 
rascal,” he cried, “has stolen my boots.” “Run 
after him quickly,” exclaimed Francis, “and give 
him your socks.” This was the spirit of the 
Lord Jesus “who when He was reviled, reviled not 
again,” and for hatred ever gave love. 

No one can fail to see how like are these exhor- 
tations to the teaching of our blessed Lord, 
in the so-called Sermon on the Mount. Yet the 
difference is immense. For there His words were 
the acid test of discipleship while waiting for 
the coming of the kingdom which is yet to be dis- 
played. But here we have exhortation to walk in 
accord with the new nature which we possess 
as children of God. It is not in order that we 
“may be the children of our Father in heaven.” 
It is the manifestation of the Spirit’s work in 
those who belong to the new creation. 


LECTURE XI 


The Will of God as to the Believer’s Relation 
to Government and to Society; 
and the Closing Sections 
Chapters 13-16. 


The position of the Christian in this world 
is necessarily, under the present order of things, 
a peculiarly difficult and almost anomalous one. 
He is a citizen of another world, passing as a 
stranger and a pilgrim through a strange land. 
Presumably loyal in heart to the rightful King, 
whom earth rejected and counted worthy only 
of a malefactor’s cross, he finds himself called 
upon to walk in a godly and circumspect way in a 
scene of which Satan, the usurper, is the prince! 
and god. Yet he is not to be an anarchist, nor is| 
he to flaunt the present order of things. His rule' 
ever should be: “We must obey God rather than 
man.” Nevertheless he is not to be found in op- 
position to human government, even though the 
administrators of that government may be men of 
the most unrighteous type. As we come to the 
study of this thirteenth chapter, it is well for 
us to remember that he who sat upon the throne 
of empire when Paul gave this instruction con- 
cerning obedience to the powers that be, was one 


~156 Lectures on Romans 


of the vilest beasts in human form whoever oc- 
cupied a throne—a sensuous, sensual brute, who 
ripped up the body of his own mother in order 
that he might see the womb that bore him—an 
evil, blatant egotist of most despicable character, 
whose cruelties and injustices beggar all descrip- 
tion. And yet God in His providence permitted 
this demon-controlled wretch to wear the diadem 
of the greatest empire the world had yet known. 
Paul himself designates him elsewhere as a savage 
beast, when he writes to the young preacher 
Timothy, “God delivered me out of the mouth 
of the lion.”” While the powers of the emperor 
were more or less circumscribed by the laws and 
the Senate, nevertheless his rule was one that 
could not but spell ruin and disaster for many of 
the early Christians. What faith was required on 
their part to obey the instruction given by the 
Spirit of God in the first seven verses of this chap- 
ter! And if under such government Christians 
were called upon to be obedient, surely there is no 
place for sedition, or rebellion, under any govern- 
ment. “The potsherds of the earth may strive 
with the potsherds of the earth,” and one govern- 
ment may be overthrown by another; but which- 
ever government is established in power at a given 
time, the Christian is to be subject to it. He has 
the resource of prayer if its edicts are tyrannous 
and unjust, but he is not to rise in rebellion against 
it. This is a hard saying for some of us, I know, 


The Christian’s Relation to Governments 157 


but if any be in doubt let him read carefully the 
verses now before us. “Let every soul be subject 
unto the higher powers. For there is no power but 
of God: the powers that be are ordained of God” 
(Ver.1). 

This is not to seek to establish the doctrine of 
the divine right of kings, but it simply means this: 
That God, who sets up one man and puts down an- 
other for His own infinitely wise purpose, ordains 
that certain forms of government or certain rulers 
shall be in the place of authority at a given time. 
As the book of Daniel tells us, He sets over the 
nations the basest of men at times as a punish- 
ment for their wickedness; but in any case, there 
could be no authority if not providentially permit- 
ted and therefore recognized by Himself. To re- 
sist this authority, the second verse shows us, is 
to resist a divine ordinance. But it would certain- 
ly be far-fetched to say that they that resist shall 
receive to themselves damnation, if by “damn- 
ation” we mean everlasting punishment. The 
word here, as in Corinthians 11, means judgment, 
but not in the sense of eternal judgment necess- 
arily. Rulers are not a terror to good works, but 
to the evil. Even a Nero respected such as walked 
in obedience to the law. The reason he persecuted 
the Christians was that they were reported to be 
opposed to existing institutions. He, then, who 
would not be afraid of those in authority is called 
‘upon to walk in obedience to the law— to do good, 


158 Lectures on Romans 


and thus his righteousness will be recognized; 
for, after all, the ruler is the minister of God to 
each one for good. But he who does evil, violating 
the institutions of the realm, may well fear, for 
into the magistrate’s hand has been committed by 
God Himself, the sword, which he does not bear 
in vain, and he is set by God to be His minister in 
the government of the world and to execute judg- 
ment upon those who act in a criminal way. So, 
then, the Christian is called upon to be subject to 
government, not only to avoid condemnation, but 
also that he may himself maintain a good con- 
science toward God. Let him pay tribute, even 
though at times the demands may seem to be un- 
righteous, rendering to all their dues, paying his 
taxes honorably, and thus showing that he desires 
in all things to be subject to the government. 

It will be observed that all the instruction we 
have here puts the Christian in the place of sub- 
jection, and not of authority; but, if in the pro- 
vidence of God, he be born to the purple, or put 
in the place of authority, he, too, is to be bound by 
the word of God as here set forth. 

The balance of the chapter has to do with the 
Christian’s relation to society in general, and that 
in view of the coming of the Lord and the soon- 
closing up of the present dispensation. He is to 
maintain the attitude not of a debtor but a giver; 
to owe no man anything, but rather to let love flow 
out freely to all. For every moral precept of the 


Christian Liberty & Consideration for Others 159 


second table of the law, which sets forth man’s 
duty to his neighbor, is summed up in the words: 
“Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.” He 
who thus loves could, by no possibility, ever be 
guilty of adultery, murder, theft, lying, or covet- 
ousness. It is impossible that love should be 
manifested in such ways as these. “Love work- 
eth no ill to his neighbor: therefore love is the 
fulfilling of the law.” It is in this way that the 
righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in us 
‘who walk, not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, 
/as we have already seen in looking at Chapter 
8:1-4. 

Every passing day brings the dispensation of 
grace nearer to its end and hastens the return of 
the Lord. It is not for the Christian, then, to be 
sleeping among the dead, but to be fully awake 
to his responsibilities and privileges, realizing 
that the salvation for which we wait—the redemp- 
tion of the body—is nearer now than when we 
believed. The night when Satan’s sway bears 
rule over the earth has nearly drawn to its close. 
Already the light of day begins to dawn. It is not, 
therefore, for those who have been saved by grace 
to have aught to do with works of darkness, but 
rather, as soldiers, to have on the armor of light, 
standing for that which is of God, living incor- 
ruptly as in the full light of day, not in debauch- 
ery or wantonness of any kind, neither in strife 
and envying; but having put on the Lord Jesus 


160 Lectures on Romans 


Christ, having confessed themselves as one with 
Him, to take the place of death with Him in a prac- 
tical sense, thus making no provision for the indul- 
gence of the lust of the flesh. It was these two 
closing verses of this thirteenth chapter that spoke 
so loudly to the heart of Augustine of Hippo when, 
after years of distress, he was fearful to confess 
Christ openly, even when intellectually convinced 
that he should be a Christian, lest he would find 
himself unable to hold his carnal nature in sub- 
jection, and so might bring grave discredit upon 
the cause with which he thought of identifying 
himself. But as he read the words: “Let us walk 
honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and drunken- 
ness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in 
strife and envying; but put ye on the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to 
fulfil the lusts thereof” the Spirit of God opened 
his eyes to see that the power for victory was not 
in himself, but in the fact that he was identified 
with a crucified and risen Saviour. 


As he gazed by faith upon His blessed 
face and the Holy Spirit showed him some- 
thing of the truth of union with Christ, he entered 
into the assurance of salvation and realized vic- 
tory over sin. When in an unexpected way he 
came face to face with one of the beautiful but 
wanton companions of his former days, he turned 
and ran. She followed, crying, “Austin, Austin, 
why do you run? Itis only I.” He replied as he 


Christian Liberty & Consideration for Others 161 


sped on his way, “I run, because it is not I!” Thus 
he made no provision for the flesh. 


In chapter 14 and the first seven verses of chap- 
ter 15 the Holy Spirit emphasizes the believer’s 
responsibilities toward his weaker brethren. He 
is to walk charitably toward those who have less 
light than himself. 


The weak in faith, that is, those whose unin- 
structed consciences cause them to be in trouble 
as to things indifferent, are to be received and 
owned as in this full Christian position and not to 
be judged for their questionings or doubtful 
thoughts. The principle is a most far-reaching 
one, and indicates the breadth of Christian charity 
that should prevail over the spirit of legality into 
which it is so easy to fall. Light is not the ground 
of reception to Christian privileges, but life. All 
those who are children of God are to be recognized 
as fellow-members of the Body, and unless living 
in evident wickedness, to be accorded their blood- 
bought place in the Christian company. Wicked- 
ness and weakness are not to be confounded. The 
wicked person is to be put away (see 1 Cor. 5), but 
the weak brother is to be received and protected. 


Of course it is not reception into fellowship that 
is here in view. The one who was weak in faith 
was already inside. He must not be looked upon 
coldly and judged for his doubtful thoughts (see 
margin), but received cordially, and his weak con- 


162 Lectures on Romans 


science carefully considered. It might be one who 
is still under law as to things clean and unclean 
or one who has difficulty regarding holy days. 
In the former case the brother who is strong in 
the liberty that is in Christ believes he may, as a 
Christian, eat all things, raising no questions as 
to their ceremonial cleanness. The weak brother 
is so afraid of defilement he subsists on a vegetable 
diet rather than possibly partake of what has 
been offered to idols or is not “Kosher’—that is, 
clean according to Levitical law. 

The one who is “strong’”’ must not look with con- 
tempt upon his over-scrupulous brother. On the 
other hand, the weak one is forbidden to accuse 
the stronger of insincerity or inconsistency. | 

Or if it be a question of days and one brother 
with a legal conscience possibly still holds to the 
sanctity of the Jewish Sabbath, while another sees 
all days as now alike and to be devoted to the glory 
of God, each must seek to act as before Him and 
be ‘fully persuaded in his own mind.” 

Who has given one servant to regulate another? 
Both are accountable to one Master, and He rec- 
ognizes integrity of heart, and will uphold His 
own. Where there is sincerity and it is the glory 
of the Lord that each has in view, both must en- 
deavor to act as in His presence. There can be no 
question but that the principle here enunciated if 
firmly held would make for fuller fellowship among 
saints and save from many heart-burnings. 


Christian Liberty & Consideration for Others 163 


We do not live for ourselves. Whether we will 
or no we are constantly affecting others for good 
or ill. Let us then recognize our individual re- 
sponsibility to the Lord, whose we are and whom 
we are to serve, whether in life or in death. “For 
to this end Christ both died and rose that He might 
be Lord both of the dead and living.” The words, 
“and revived,” are a needless interpolation omitted 
from ali critical versions. 

At the judgment-seat of God (according to the 
best reading), where Christ Himself is the Arbiter, 
all will come out, and He will show what was in 
accord with His mind. Till then we can afford to 
wait, realizing that we must all give account of 
ourselves to Him. In view of this, “Let us not 
judge one another any more,” but let there be in- 
dividual self-judgment, each one striving so to 
walk as not to put any occasion to fall in a weak 
brother’s way. 

Even where one is clear that his own behavior 
is consistent with Christian liberty, let him not 
flaunt that liberty before the weak lest he “destroy, 
one for whom Christ died.” See also 1 Cor. 8:11. 
It is of course the ruin of his testimony that is in 
view. Emboldened by the example of the strong 
one he may venture to go beyond the dictates of 
conscience and so bring himself under a sense of 
condemnation, or he may become discouraged, 
thinking others inconsistent, and so drift from the 
Christian company. 


164 Lectures on Romans 


After all, questions of meats and drinks are 
but of minor importance. “For the kingdom of 
God is not meat and drink”—i. e., has not to do 
with temporalities as have all merely human king- 
doms—but it is spiritual in character and has to do 
with “righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy 
Spirit.” Where one is exercised as to these things 
(even though mistaken as to others) he serves 
Christ, and is acceptable to God and approved of 
men. 

Every right-thinking person appreciates sin- 
cerity. “Let us therefore follow after the things 
that make for peace, and things wherewith one 
may edify another.” 

It is far better to abstain from ought that would 
trouble the conscience of a weak brother than to 
turn him aside by insisting on liberty, and so be 
responsible for his failure and the break-down of 
his discipleship. 

If one has faith that he can safely do what an- 
other condemns, let him have it to himself before 
God and not flaunt it flagrantly before the weak. 
But let him be sure he is not self-condemned while 
he professes to be clear; for he who persists in a 
certain course concerning which he is not really at 
ease before God does not truly act in faith, and so 
is condemned (not “damned” of course—for this 
word properly refers to eternal judgment), because 
“whatsoever is not of faith is sin.” That is to 
say, if I act contrary to what I believe to be right, 


Christ, the Beltever’s Pattern 165 


even though there be nothing morally wrong in 
my behavior, I am really sinning against consci- 
ence and thus against God. 

He sums it all up in the first seven verses of 
chapter 15. The strong should bear the burdens 
of the weak—as sympathetically entering into 
their difficulties—and not insist on liberty to please 
themselves. Rather let each one have his neigh- 
bor’s good in view, seeking his building up and not 
carelessly destroying his faith by ruthlessly in- 
sisting on his own personal liberty. True liberty 
will be manifested by refraining from what would 
stumble a weaker one. 

In this Christ is the great example. He who 
need never have yielded to any legal enactment, 
voluntarily submitted to every precept of the law, 
and even went far beyond it, pleasing not Himself 
(as when He paid the temple tax, giving as His 
reason, “Lest we should stumble them’’), thus 
taking upon Himself the reproaches of those who 
reproached God. His outward behavior was as 
blameless as His inward life, yet men reviled Him 
as they reviled God. 

Verse 4 stresses the importance of Old Testa- 
ment Scripture. ‘‘Whatsoever things were written 
aforetime were written for our learning, that we 
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures 
might have hope.” Link with this 1 Cor. 10:6, 11. 
“All Scripture is not about me, but all Scripture is 
for me.” is a quotation well worth remembering. 


166 Lectures on Romans 


He closes this section by praying that “the God 
of patience and consolation” may give the saints 
to be of one mind toward each other, with Christ 
whose blessed example he has cited, that all may 
unitedly glorify God, even the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Mind and mouth must be in agree- 
ment if this be so. And so he exhorts them to re- 
ceive one another as Christ also received us to the 
glory of God. If Christ could take us up in grace— 
whether weak or strong—and make us meet for 
the glory, surely we can be cordial and Christ-like 
in our fellowship one with another. Again, I re- 
peat, it is not the question of receiving into the 
Christian company that is in view here, but the 
recognition of those already inside. 


Properly speaking the epistle as such—the 
treatise on the righteousness of God—is brought 
to a conclusion in verses 8-13. All that comes af- 
terwards is more in the nature of postscript and 
appendix. 

What has really been demonstrated in this very 
full treatise? ‘‘Now I say that Jesus Christ was a 
minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, 
to confirm the promises made unto the fathers: 
and that the Gentiles might glorify God for His 
mercy.” That is, he has shown throughout that 
our Lord came in full accord with the Old Testa- 
ment promises. He entered into the sheepfold by 
the door (as John’s Gospel tells us in Chap. 10), 
and was the divinely appointed minister to the 


Conclusion 167 


Jews, come to confirm the covenanted promises. 
Though the nation rejected Him this does not in- 
validate His ministry but it opens the door of 
mercy to the Gentiles in a wider way than ever, 
though in full accord with the Jewish Scriptures. 
And so he cites passage after passage to clinch 
the truth already taught so clearly, that it was 
foreknown and predetermined that the Gentiles 
should hear the gospel and be given the same op- 
portunity to be saved that the Jew enjoyed. That 
this “mercy” actually transcends anything re- 
vealed in past ages we know since “the revelation 
of the mystery,” to which he alludes in the last 
verses of the next chapter. But his point here is 
that it is not contrary to the predictions of the 
prophets, but entirely consistent with what God 
had been pleased to make known beforehand. And 
so he brings this masterly unfolding of the gos- 
pel and its result to a close by saying, “Now the 
God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in be- 
lieving, that ye may abound in hope, through the 
power of the Holy Spirit” (vs. 13). In believing 
what? Why, simply in believing the great truths 
set forth in the epistle—the tremendous verities 
of our most holy faith—setting before us man’s 
ruin by sin and his redemption through Christ 
Jesus. When we believe this we are filled with 
joy and peace as we look on in hope to the con- 
summation of it all at our Lord’s return, mean- 
time walking before God in the power of the in- 


168 Lectures on Romans 


dwelling Spirit who alone makes these precious 
things real to us. 

The balance of the chapter takes on a distinctly 
personal character as the apostle takes the saints 
at Rome into his confidence and tells them of his 
exercises regarding them and his purpose to visit 
them. From the reports that had come to him he 
was persuaded that they were already in a very 
healthy spiritual state, “full of goodness, filled 
with all knowledge, and able also to admonish one 
another,” so he had no thought of going to them 
as a regulator but he felt that he had a ministry, 
committed to him by God which would be profita- 
ble for them; and, besides, Rome was part of that 
great Gentile world into which he had been sent 
and to which his ministry specially applied, “that 
the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, 
being sanctified by the Holy Spirit.” Israel was 
no longer the one separate nation but the gospel 
was for all alike. 


It was therefore to be expected that he should 
visit them whenever the way was opened, and as it 
seemed to him that his mission to those in Asia 
Minor and eastern Europe was now in large meas- 
ure fulfilled, he purposed shortly going westward 
as far as to Spain and hoped to visit them on the 
way. Meantime he was going up to Jerusalem to 
carry an offering from the saints of Macedonia 
and Achaia to the needy believers of Judea. As 
soon as this was accomplished he hoped to leave 


Salutations 169 


for Spain visiting them en route. What a mercy 
that the near future was sealed to him. How 
little he realized what he must soon be called upon 
to suffer for Christ’s name’s sake. ‘Man proposes, 
but God disposes.” And He had quite other plans 
for His devoted servant—though they included 
a visit to Rome, but in chains! 

Sure that in God’s due time he would get to 
them and “come in the fulness of the blessing of 
the gospel of Christ,’ he beseeches them to pray 
for the success of his mission to his own country- 
men and that he might be delivered from the un- 
believing Jews. The prayer was answered, but in 
how different a manner to what he anticipated! 

Chapter 16 consists largely of salutations to 
saints known to him, now dwelling in Rome, and 
from others who were in his company. The first 
two verses are in the nature of a letter of com- 
mendation for Phoebe a deaconess of the assem- 
bly in Cenchrea, a town just south of Corinth, in 
Achaia (see Acts 18:18). She would doubtless be 
well-known to Aquila and Priscilla (who are men- 
tioned by name—in inverse order—in the next 
verse) but he does not leave her to depend upon 
her friends’ recollections of the past, but by this 
letter assures the saints of her present standing in 
the Church. 

Priscilla and Aquila were to him as members of 
his own family—so intimate had been their asso- 
ciation; and he cannot forget how they had put 


170 Lectures on Romans 


themselves in jeopardy for his sake. It was in 
their house that one of the assemblies in Rome 
met. Another of the saints from Achaia was 
there also, Epaenetus, firstfruits of his mission to 
Corinth. 


As we go over the long list and note the delicate 
touches, the tender recollections, the slight dif- 
ferences in commendation, we feel we are drawn 
very close to these early believers, and we would 
like to know more of their history and experiences. 
We are interested in learning that there were rela- 
tives of his, Andronicus and Junia, who, he says, 
were “in Christ before me,’ and we wonder if 
their prayers for their brilliant young kinsman 
may not have had much to do with his remarka- 
ble conversion. 


Another kinsman is mentioned in verse 11, 
Herodion by name, but whether converted before 
or after him we are not told. 


There is a very human touch in the 18th verse. 
“Salute Rufus, chosen in the Lord, and his mother 
and mine.” Somewhere on his journeys this Chris- 
tian matron, though unnamed, had mothered the 
devoted and self-denying servant of Christ, and he 
remembered with a peculiar gratitude her care for 
him. 

All the names are of interest, and we shall be 
glad to meet them all “in that day,” and learn 
more of their devotion to the Lord and their suf- 


Salutations TTL 


ferings for His Name’s sake, though we cannot 
linger over the record here. 

Before sending messages from his associates he 
puts in a warning word against false teachers, in 
verses 17 and 18. “Now I beseech you, brethren, 
mark them which cause divisions and offences con- 
trary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and 
avoid them. For they that are such serve not our 
Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by 
good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts 
of the simple.” The evil-doers here referred to are 
not Christian teachers, even though in error. They 
are ungodly men who, as Jude tells us, have crept 
in from the outside. They are not servants of 
Christ but tools of the devil, brought in from the 
world to corrupt and divide the people of God. It 
is a fearfully wicked thing to apply such words to 
real Christians who, however mistaken they may 
be, love the Lord and yearn over His people, de- 
siring their blessing. In Phil. 3:18, 19 we learn 
more of those “who serve their own belly,” that 
is, who live only for self-gratification. “Many 
walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell 
you even weeping, that they are the enemies of 
the cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, 
whose God is their belly, and whose glory is 
in their shame, who mind earthly things.” 
These are identical with the wretched divi- 
sion-makers of our present chapter. Let us 
be exceedingly careful how we charge true servants 


172 Lectures on Romans 


of Christ with being of this unholy number, even 
though we may feel that truth compels us to take 
issue with them as to some things they do or teach. 


Though he warns the Roman saints of the dan- 
ger of listening to men of this type he lets them 
know that he has only heard good things of them, 
but he is jealous that they should maintain their 
excellent record. Alas, how soon did this very 
Church open its doors to just such false teachers 
as he warned them against, and so by the seventh 
century you have the Papacy itself enthroned in 
Rome! 


He would have us simple concerning evil and 
wise unto what is good, not occupied with error 
but with truth. That truth will triumph soon 
when the God of peace shall bruise Satan under 
the feet of the saints. 


The closing salutations from Paul and his com- 
panions are given in verses 21-24. Timothy and 
Luke were with him. We now learn for the first 
time that Jason was a near relative (see Acts 
17:5-9), which accounts in measure for his recep- 
tion of and devotion to Paul upon the visit to 
Thessalonica. Sosipater, also a kinsman, is linked 
with him. 


Tertius, the scribe who acted as Paul’s aman- 
uensis, adds his greeting. Apart from this we 
should never have known the name of the actual 
writer of the letter. 


Appendix 173 


Was the “Gaius mine host,” of verse 23, the 
same as the Gaius who received the travelling 
brethren and was commended by John for his 
Christian hospitality, in his 8rd epistle? We do 
not know, but he was at least a man of the same 
spirit. Of Erastus we have heard elsewhere (Acts 
19:22; 2 Tim. 4:20), but Quartus is not mentioned 
in any other passage. Both the names Tertius and 
Quartus would indicate that those who bore them 
were probably slaves at one time—their names. 
just meaning the third and the fourth respective- 
ly. Slaves were often named simply by number. 


The benediction of verse 24 concludes the 
epistle and marks it as genuinely Pauline. See 
2 Thess. 3:17,18. “Grace” was his secret mark, 
so to speak, that attested his authorship. Signi- 
ficantly enough it is found in Hebrews 13:25, and 
in no other epistles save in his. 


Verses 25 to 27 are an appendix, in which he 
links his precious unfolding of the gospel with 
that “mystery” which it was his special province 
to make known among the Gentiles, and which 
is unfolded so fully in Eph. 3 and several other 
scriptures. 


“Now to Him that is of power to establish you 
according to my gospel and the preaching of 
Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the 
mystery which was kept secret since the ages. 
began, but now is made manifest, and by pro- 


174 Lectures on Romans 


phetic writings, according to the commandment 
of the everlasting God, made known to all nations 
for the obedience of faith; to God only wise be 
glory through Jesus Christ forever. Amen.” 


To Paul was committed a two-fold ministry— 
that of the gospel (as linked with a glorified 
Christ) and that of the Church—the mystery hid 
in God from before the creation of the world but 
now revealed by the Spirit. See this double min- 
istry as set forth in Col 1:23-29 and Eph. 3:1-12. 

“The mystery” was not something of difficult, 
mysterious character, but a sacred secret never 
known to mankind until in due time opened up 
by the Holy Spirit through the apostle Paul, and 
by him communicated to all nations for the obedi- 
ence of faith. It was not hid in the Scriptures to 
be brought to light eventually; but we are dis- 
tinctly told it was hid in God until such time as 
He chose to manifest it. This was not until Israel 
had been given every opportunity to receive Christ 
both in incarnation and resurrection. When they 
definitely refused Him God made known what had 
been in His heart from eternity—that from all 
nations, Jews and Gentiles, He would redeem and 
take out an elect company who would, by the 
Spirit’s baptism, be formed into one Body to be 
associated with Christ, in the most intimate re- 
lationship (likened in Eph. 5 to that of husband 
and wife, or head and body), not only now but 
through all the ages to come. 


The Mystery Revealed 175 


This great mystery of Christ and the Church 
has now been manifested and made known by pro- 
phetic writings—not as translated here “by the 
Seriptures of the prophets’—but the meaning 
clearly is, made known by the writings of inspired 
men, New Testament prophets, in this day of 
gospel light and testimony. 

Nor is it just a beautiful and wonderful theory 
or system of doctrine to be held in the intellect. 
It involves present identification with Christ in 
His rejection, and hence is made known to all 
nations for the obedience of faith. It is not 
developed in the epistle to the Romans, for 
here the great theme, as we have seen, is 
the Righteousness of God as revealed in the 
Gospel. But it is touched on here in order to link 
the unfolding of the gospel in this letter with the 
revelation of the mystery, as given in the prison 
epistles particularly. This is not to say that we 
have new and higher truth in Ephesians and 
Colossians, for instance, than in Romans and 
earlier letters. All form part of one whole, and 
constitute that body of teaching everywhere pro- 
claimed by the apostle through his long years of 
ministry, but not all committed to writing at one 
time. The “mystery” of Romans 16:25 is the 
same as that of the later epistles, and ever formed 
an integral part of his messages. It would not be 
necessary to say this were there not some to-day 
who would divorce completely Paul’s ministry in 


“176 Lectures on Romans 


‘Acts from that which he embodied in the last of 
his letters written after the rejection of his mes- 
sage by the Jews in Rome as recorded in Acts 28. 
The appendix to the Roman letter is the complete 
denial of this. It is here added to manifest the 
unity of his ministry of the gospel and the Church, 
through two-fold in character. 

And with this we conclude our present some- 
what cursory study, trusting that our review of 
the epistle has not been in vain, but will be for in- 
creased profit and blessing as we wait for God’s 
Son from heaven. 

“To God only wise be glory through Jesus 
Christ for ever. Amen.” 


Q “i 7 
=o 
: - 2 ey) ae _ 
ih 
: a - 
; bho - 
| qx j ; 
J = i « 
\ 4) m £59 — i 
z : 7 — = sia. 
= Qu: = Se. as 
3 oe ee E 
— 
; 
Y - 


© pe ek 
ai 
i \ 
NY 
' 
) 


eo 


as fe may be kept 


GR DAYS 
A fine will be charged for each 
day the book is calli overtime. 


i er aes 
5 8) OY 7 Bt 


| 
AER ed OE 


#137 ae eo 
OG 24" fy 982 4 1999 
iE 10 oT 


Demco 290-F'5 


CINCIN 


T 


wi 


3 4320 


227,107 
ror 20643 
Ironside, Henry Allen 

- Lectures on the Epistle to 


main 
istle 


iii 


| 


the Romans ——— 
mats - ———— = =) a 


LHE CINCINNATI BIBLE 
SEMINARY LIBRARY 


0 wer a as ot Se ee ee rem 


reat 
noes ad 
serasntt 


vate 


