me: 
Mae Saas 
Cee Sn ae 


LECTURES 


on 


COLOSSIANS 


LECTURES 
on the EPISTLE to the 


COLOSSIANS 


by 


H. A. IRONSIDE 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, INC. 
Neptune, New Jersey 


Pirsr Enrriom, January 1929 


Priwt=p Im THe Usrrep States o- AMERICA 


EUTIACH FS BYLOK, 


PREFACE 


—EE 


Expositions of Colossians abound, many of 
them of great value, yet each generation seems 
to call for fresh and new applications of divine 
truth. Hence this volume. 

These lectures have been delivered at many 
Bible Conferences throughout the United States 
and Canada, and are issued in book form in re- 
sponse to the earnest requests of many who heard 
them. If read with the open Bible beside them, 
and thus used not as a substitute for, but as an 
aid to, the study of the Word itself, it is hoped 
they may prove helpful to a wider circle of stu- 
dents of the Book of books. 

The times are solemn. Old errors are being 
paraded in new terms, on all sides. Therefore 
the need of a new examination of this great epis- 
tle which so effectively meets the philosophical, 
mystical and legalistic speculations of carnal men. 
May God be pleased to bless these lectures to 


that end! 
—H. A. IRONSIDE. 


Oakland, Calif. 
Dec. 12, 1928. 


I 7S 64 


sok ta tind 


ce4-2 ) al See 
= al cal f= _ 
i ana ee ; 
: ¢ es ; 7 — , Z iw og 
SiS 91g storie B33 caine ae, Sail 
. Teh oe Ps 
ie or se ’ 
: nn eGo ek ee i of - 4 
+ iy 1 a. ores a 4 
=e ie ee oe ee 
oe - (isey 


. o a > 
> ; 7 
, -~ — &. 
’ = 2 
- ~p > a => 
SNe gee ogee a 
» tn, 
« ; 
la 
ne — 
~ a 
~* 


CONTENTS 


LECTURE page 
Part One: DOCTRINAL (Chaps. I: I—3: 4). 


I.—General Considerations and Analysis........ 7 


II.—The Salutation and Introduction ........... 17 
I1I.—Paul’s Prayer and Thanksgiving ........... 28 
IV.—Christ the Firstborn—Twofold Headship of 

Christ and Twofold Reconciliation ...... sci 4 

V.—Paul’s Twofold Ministry .................. 53 

ViI.—Christ the True Wisdom—the Revelation 
Of che Mysteryor ‘God "1c. vc,cc's<wicte stan c ves 62 
VII.—Christ the Antidote to Human Philosophy ... 71 
VIII.—Christ the Antidote to Jewish Legality ..... 82 


IX.—Christ the Antidote to Oriental Mysticism... 94 
X.—Christ the Antidote to Carnal Asceticism....106 
XI.—Christ the Believer’s Life and Object........ 118 


Part Two: PRACTICAL (Chaps. 3: 5—4: 18). 


XII.—Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ— 
Part I: In Relation to Ourselves ........... 130 


XIII.—Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ— 
Part II: In Relation to Others ............-. 142 


XIV.—The Earthly Relationships of the New Man..154 
XV.—Concluding Exhortations .....+.e.+-+see+ss: 165 


XVI.—Closing Salutations en eerie es eae kh 


. ae ot tek oars 
| nts eee 
ers oe mabe 


A ota 
ie aes 


a “oii 3 pont say ed 


— [2a nee * 
me a eeu La 


i 


VE 


io 
Pa 


LECTURES ON COLOSSIANS 
Part ONE: DOCTRINAL 


(Chaps. 1: 1—3: 4.) 


LECTURE I 


General Considerations and Analysis 


No one familiar with the Pauline Letters can | 
fail to see how intimately linked are those to the 
Ephesians and the Colossians. It is very likely 
that the letter from Laodicea, referred to in the 
last chapter of the epistle we are considering, 
is really our Epistle to the Ephesians, and 
therefore we can understand why the apostle 
was anxious that both should be read by the 
same people. My reasons for saying this will 
come out later. Some, in fact, who do not accept 
the inspiration of the New Testament have 
supposed that Colossians was a crude attempt 
to rewrite Ephesians from memory, but a careful 
examination of both letters shows that the one is 
the correlative of the other. Ephesians presents 


8 Lectures on Colossians 


the great truth revealed to Paul, and through him 
made known to all nations for the obedience of 
faith, and which he emphatically calls the mys- 
tery. It is the Church as the Body of Christ in 
its heavenly aspect, as 1 Corinthians reveals the 
Body in responsibility down here on the earth. 
Ephesians, of course, does not overlook the im- 
portance of our responsibility to walk according to 
the calling wherewith we are called, and to mani- 
fest the unity of the Spirit in our measure while 
still in this scene. Doctrinally, however, it is the 
Body as the aggregate of all believers from Pente- 
cost to the Rapture, united to a risen Christ by the 
indwelling Holy Spirit, that seems the theme of 
that Epistle. Colossians, on the other hand, has 
to do with Christ as the Head of the Body, and 
seeks to fix the hearts of the saints upon Him 
as risen and glorified, known no longer after 
the flesh but, in resurrection, the Head of a new 
order; and believers as responsible to manifest 
Him, to hold the Head, here in this world. So we 
might say the Headship of Christ is the theme of 
this Epistle. We need not therefore be surprised 
to find great similarity in Ephesians and Colos- 
sians, for so intimate is the link between Christ 
and the members of His Body that what is said 
of the one may often be said of the other, and it 
is given to the members of the Body to manifest 
the risen life of the Head. He it is with whom 
the Holy Spirit occupies us, in order that we may 


General Considerations and Analysis 9 


be separated practically from all that would dis- 
honor Him, and delivered from anything that 
would tend to keep Him at a distance. 

At the beginning there was very real need for 
such ministry. Christianity as a divine system 
seemed likely to be overwhelmed (only that the 
Lord Himself was watching over His own truth) 
in the first centuries by a strange mixture of 
Jewish legality, Grecian philosophy and Oriental 
mysticism, so interwoven as to form several al- 
together new systems with which the name of 
Christ was linked in a most cunning 'way. The 
result was the “mystery of iniquity” referred to 
in 2 Thessalonians 2. These various systems 
were known under the general name of “Gnosti- 
cism.” This, of course, in pretension, at least, 
was the very opposite to what Huxley, some years 
ago, designated “Agnosticism.” The latter term 
means “without knowledge.” The Agnostic says 
God is unknowable, the mystery of the universe 
is unsolvable. He says, There may or may not 
be a personal God back of this universe; matter 
may or may not be eternal; man may or may not 
survive death; I do not know; and he compla- 
cently takes it for granted that because he does 
not know, no one else does. He refuses the 
divine revelatlion given us in the Holy Scrip- 
tures and so is content to be an ignoramus 
(which is but the Latin equivalent for Agnostic), 
when he might have assured knowledge as one 


10 Lectures on Colossians 


taught of God. The Gnostic, on the other hand, 
says, I do know. Gnosis, from which the term 
is derived, simply means knowledge. Epignosis, 
used by the apostle for Christianity, is really 
super-knowledge. The Gnostic professed to have 
fuller knowledge of the mysteries of life and 
death and heavenly beings than the Bible itself 
reveals. He added to, or perverted the scrip- 
tural revelation, linking with it weird Persian 
dreams and human reasonings. He was neither 
a Jew, a Christian, a Philosopher, nor a Zoro- 
astrian. He considered himself superior to them 
all, very much as the Theosophists do to-day, hav- 
ing taken what he thought to be the best out of 
all these systems and made a new system there- 
with. This weird imitation of the divine mys- 
teries pretended to great depth of spirituality, to 
remarkable fulness of knowledge, to great pro- 
fundity of thought. It was therefore most at- 
tractive to the natural mind, ever delighting in 
speculation on sacred themes, but it was Satanic 
in origin, and deliberately planned by the enemy 
to hide the glory shining in the face of Christ 
Jesus, concerning whom the Gnostics indulged in 
the wildest speculations. I have neither time nor 
space here to go into the weird speculations of 
Gnosticism with its amazing conception of grades 
of spirit-beings mediating between the uncreated 
God and His creatures. Those who are interested 
can readily find access to full explanations con- 


General Considerations and Analysis 11 


cerning the Demiurge and the host of Kabbalistic 
Eons and inferior emanations supposedly coming 
in between the soul and God. The place that 
Christ Himself held in this system varied accord- 
ing to the vagaries of the respective teachers. 
Some thought that Jesus was but a man, and the 
Christ the divine Spirit which came to Him at 
His baptism and which left Him at the cross; so 
it could not be said Christ died, but simply Jesus 
died. You will recognize this as the root error 
of what is commonly called Christian Science and 
of most phases of the so-called “New Thought” 
of to-day. Others held that the body of Jesus 
was only spiritual, not material. They linked 
evil with matter and therefore refused to believe 
that “the Word became fiesh.” The first of 
these systems seems to be before the mind of 
the apostle Paul in the writing of Colossians. 
The second is met by the apostle John in his 
three Epistles. Both systems would rob the saints 
of the true Christ of God. They put Him afar off 
with many angels intervening who must first be 
invoked and placated before union with Christ can 
be known. Paul shows that we come to Him im- 
mediately, He being the one Mediator between 
God and men, the Man Christ Jesus. Again, 
these Gnostics placed varied ranks of principali- 
ties and powers, glorious spirit-beings, above and 
beyond Him, leading up to the invisible God, 
whereas the apostle Paul shows us that He is 


12 Lectures on Colossians 


the Creator of all principalities and powers, and 
that they must all be subject to Him who is Him- 
self the image of the invisible God. 

I would not think it necessary to occupy people 
with these old errors were it not that the danger 
of losing sight of the Head is as real to-day as 
it was then. Every modern erroneous cult is just 
some old Satanic heresy revived, and each is de- 
signed to misrepresent some aspect of revealed 
truth in regard to Christ and His redemptive 
work. The advocates of these systems may pro-| 
fess great humility and preach and practise great 
self-abnegation, even to the neglecting of the 
body and its physical needs, but they all put 
Christ Jesus—the true Christ of God—at a dis- 
tance, and an imaginary Christ, s Christ who is 
not an atoning Saviour, in His place. Some 
degree of familiarity with the ancient theories 
might save honest souls from being entangled in 
the meshes of these newer systems. Therefore 
the need, in every age, of reading this Colossian 
letter afresh in order that we ever may hold the 
Head. 

It has been observed by others, but will bear 
repeating, that so intent is the Spirit upon 
glorifying Christ in this wonderful epistle that 
He ever hides Himself. In Ephesians, where it is 
the truth of the one Body that is being unfolded, 
the Holy Spirit is mentioned many times, and 
we have clear teaching as to His personality and 


General Considerations and Analysis 18 


operations. In Colossians He is never mentioned 
doctrinally, and only once incidentally, if I may 
so say where I recognize divine design through- 
out, and that is in verse 8 of chapter 1, 
where the writer speaks of having heard through 
Epaphras of the Colossians’ “love in the Spirit.” 
This is surely most significant; even the Holy 
Spirit Himself, eternally co-equal with the Father 
and Son, who all together constitute one God, 
would nevertheless hide Himself if men belittle or 
lose sight of the Lord Jesus as Head of the new 
creation. The blessed Paraclete speaks not from 
or of Himself but He takes of the things of 
Christ and shows them unto us. He would not 
even risk (to speak after the manner of men) 
being put in as one coming between the believer 
and Christ. 

It may be well to point out that so far as we 
have any record Paul had never been to Colosse 
as a ministering servant, though Philemon, who 
was of that assembly, had been converted through 
him. But the saints in that city he had not seen 
in the flesh. Many individuals may have heard 
him during the time he was in Ephesus when 
“all in Asia” heard the Word, as related in 
Acts 19. By Asia here we are not to under- 
stand either the continent nor yet Asia Minor, 
but a much smaller district, ruled by a Roman 
proconsul, and therefore known as the “pro- 
consular province of Asia.” Thither Paul was at 


14 Lectures on Colossians 


one time forbidden to go. There he later labored 
with much blessing. There the seven Churches of 
the Apocalypse were afterwards located. Though 
Colosse was not one of these addressed by the 
Lord when He appeared to John in Patmos, yet 
it was situated very close te Laodicea, which 
with Colosse and Hierapolis formed a trio of 
cities in which were large Christian assemblies 
in early days. 

Epaphras was the chosen instrument for the 
evangelization of Colosse. He evidently remained 
among the saints and cared for them as a godly 
pastor afterwards. But he found himself hard 
beset by emissaries of Satan, who were bent 
upon misleading these young believers, for their 
own selfish advantage. He therefore sought the 
help of Paul, the apostle, who was at this time a 
prisoner in Rome. It was in response to his plea 
that the letter was penned by divine inspiration, 
which is now before us. 

Another subject which is full of interest is 
the fact that God in so many instances permitted 
error in doctrine or corruption in life, in the 
early churches, to be the means of adding to the 
volume of divine revelation and instruction. 

It is a signal mercy that in His wisdom God 
allowed every possible form of error to arise in 
the apostolic era of the Church’s history, in order 
that all might be exposed, and the truth declared 
through inspired men, that thus the faith in its 


General Considerations and Analysis 15 


simplicity might be preserved for the generations 
to come. As a result of this, Satan has nothing 
new to offer. Old heresies are re-dressed and 
brought forward as new conceptions of truth 
from age to age, but in this respect, “there is 
nothing new under the sun.” Therefore, all the 
Christian needs to protect him from modern sys- 
tems of an evil character is a better acquaintance 
with the Word of God, where the truth is taught 
in its purity and the lies of the adversary are 
brought out into the light and fully exposed. No 
one familiar with the teaching of Colossians, for 
instance, will ever be misled by the specious 
sophistries of the various occult systems now be- 
ing foisted on a credulous public, such as The- 
osophy or Spiritualism, nor will he be deluded by 
the revived Gnostic religions of Eddyism, Unity 
School of Christianity, or other branches of the 
misnamed New Thought. 

In studying any book of the Bible it is well 
to have its outline clearly in mind. I submit the 
following synoptic analysis as a suggestive out- 
line of the Epistle to the Colossians: 


PART ONE: DOCTRINAL, Chapters 1:1—3: 4. 


SALUTATION, Chapter 1:1, 2. 

INTRODUCTION, Chapter 1: 3-8. 

PauL’s PRAYER AND THANKSGIVING, Chapter 1: 9-14. 
TWOFOLD HEADSHIP OF CHRIST, Chapter 1:15-19. 
TWOFOLD RECONCILIATION, Chapter 1: 20-22. 


16 Lectures on Colossians 


TwoFroLD Ministry oF THE Presenr DisPanaemu, 
Chapter 1: 23-29. 

CHRIST THE TRUE WisnomM—Revelation of the myst=y 
of God, Chapter 2:1-7. 

CuRist THE ANTIDOTE FoR AcnNostic PoamssoP=yr, 
Chapter 2: 8-10. 

CHRIST THE ANTIDOTE FoR JEWISH Lecanrry, Chepter 
2:11-17. 

CHRIST THE ANTIDOTE FoR GNostic Mysmcorsm, Ciep- 
ter 2:18, 19. 

CHRIST THE ANTIDOTE FoR CakNaL Ascemosw, Chap- 
ter 2: 20-23. 

CHRIST THE BELizver’s Lire anp Osszct, Chester 3: 
1-4. 


PART TWO: PRACTICAL. Chapters $= 5—£-18. 
PractTicaL HoLiness By CoNForMiTy to Came, Ciep- 


ter 3: 5-17. 


NATURAL RELATIONSHIPS Sanctimimp, Chapters 3-18-4-1. 
CoNCLUDING ExHorTatTions, Chapter 4:2-4. 
SALUTATIONS, Chapter 4: 7-18. 


This is, of course, in no sense arbitrary. Many 
other outlines have been suggested, amd some of 
these may be much better than that which I have 
suggested. But it is along these limes that I 
purpose examining afresh this precious portion 
of the word of God, which, like Seripture, is 
written for our learning, and seems to have im- 
creasing value as new cults and false systems 
abound, all designed to make us lose sight of 
the Head and forget our union with Him im 
glory. 


17 


LECTURE II 


The Salutation and Introduction 
(Chap. 1:1-8.) 


“Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and 
Timotheus our brother, to the saints and faithful breth- 
ren in Christ which are at Colosse: Grace be unto you, 
and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus 
Christ”? (vers. I, 2). 

Thirteen epistles in the New Testament begin 
with the name Paul. A fourteenth letter, con- 
cerning the authorship of which there is consider- 
able dispute, is nevertheless generally accepted as 
from the same pen, namely, the epistle to the 
Hebrews. But the opening word of that epistle 
is God. The thirteen beginning with the word 
Paul, are addressed either to churches among the 
Gentiles, or to individual believers, who were on 
full Church ground. Paul was the apostle to the 
Gentiles and as such he magnified his office. He 
was not the apostle to the Hebrews. If, there- 
fore, he was the one chosen to write that wonder- 
ful opening up of the old and new covenants, as 
I firmly believe, it was quite in keeping with his 
Gentile apostleship that his name should be hid- 
den. Christ alone was the Apostle and Prophet 
of the new covenant, as Moses and Aaron had 
been of the old, and so the opening word of 
Hebrews is simply God, but God speaking in 


His Son. 


18 Lectures om Colosvianz 


In this Colossiam letter, 2s im the Philippian 
epistle, Paul assorizted Timothy with him im the 
salutation. The bond betweem these two men of 
God, so far apart im age though they were, was 
a very real one. Timothy wes converted during 
Paul's ministry at Lysiva, and om his next visit 
to the same region the bretirem took occasion 
heartily to commend this youmg man fo him, as 
one in whom marked spiritual graces were mani- 
fest, and who gave evidemce of comsiderable gift, 
and was therefore, in their judgment, suited to go 
out in the ministry of the Word. Acting on their 
advice, Paul took Timothy with him im the work 
etter: the, elder Pee econ ce et ee eee 
special service. ‘Ticamghint: the ‘gemce' tea Ge 
lowed, Timothy had proven himself in every re- 
spect reliable and devoted. His unselfish concern 
for the welfare of the people of God and his 
loyal attachment to his bomen leader endeared 
him very much to the wemerable apostle It 
would seem that Timothy hed evem accompanied 
Paul, or else followed him to Rome, and was 
either sharing his imprisonment, or within easy 
reach doing what he could to alleviate the suffer- 
ing of the apostle, 22 well 2s ministering among 
the Roman believers. So he here commects the 
young preacher with himself when he sends his 
greetings to the saints 2i Colosse 

Paul attributed his own 2postleship directly to 


The Salutation and Introduction 19 


the will of God. It was He who had revealed 
Christ both to and in him, and set him apart for 
service, commissioning him to proclaim the un- 
searchable riches of grace among the Gentiles. It 
would be preposterous to suppose that the laying 
on of hands of the Church at Antioch, as men- 
tioned in Acts 13, conferred any authority what- 
ever upon either Barnabas or Paul, inasmuch as 
they had been approved laborers in the gospel 
for some time. It simply expressed, as in Tim- 
othy’s case, the fellowship of the local assembly. 
It was the Holy Spirit who sent them forth and 
ordained them. Writing to the Galatians also, 
Paul uses similar expressions, and declares he is 
an apostle not of men nor by men. This is a 
principle of far-reaching importance in connec- 
tion with the work of the ministry. Whenever 
men presume to add anything to the divine call 
or to confer authority on a servant of Christ, 
they are usurping the place of the Holy Spirit. 
The most that any “laying on of hands” can do 
is to express fellowship in the work. 

In the second verse the Christians at Colosse 
are addressed as “the saints and faithful breth- 
ren.” The first expression suggests the divine 
call; the second, the human response. It is God 
who designates His redeemed ones as saints, 
yet Romanists and many Protestants are gen- 
erally astray as to the meaning of the term. 
With the first class, a saint is a particularly holy 


20 Lectures on Colossians 


person who displays great devotion or possesses 
miraculous powers, and is credited in the calendar 
of intermediaries with a superabundance of 
merit or goodness which may be appropriated 
by others. With many who profess greater en- 
lightenment, a saint is one who has become vic- 
torious in the struggle with sin, and has been 
received triumphantly into heaven. So they speak 
of the Christian dead as “‘sainted.” But the serip- 
tural conception is altogether different. The vilest 
sinner is constituted by God, a saint, the moment 
he puts his trust in the Lord Jesus Christ, “who 
was delivered for our offences and raised again 
for our justification.” Thus we are saints by call- 
ing and not primarily by practice. However, we 
should be careful not to divorce the practical side 
of things from the doctrinal. Being saints, we 
are now responsible to live in a saintly way. In 
other words, we are to live out practically what 
God has already declared to be true of us doc- 
trinally. We do not become saints by the display 
of saintly virtues; but because we are saints we 
are to cultivate saintly characters. This, of 
course, is done in communion with God, in obedi- 
ence to His Word, as we walk in the power of 
the Holy Spirit. 

The second expression, “faithful brethren,” 
does not, I take it, imply any advance upon the 
first one, nor do the two terms indicate two 
classes of believers. “Faithful brethren” are 


The Salutation and Introduction 21 


really brethren who believe; even as we read 
elsewhere, “They that be of faith are blessed 
with faithful Abraham.” It might be translated, 
either, “They that have faith are blessed with 
faithful Abraham,” or, “They that believe are 
blessed with believing Abraham.” There is an 
intentional connection between the two terms. All 
real Christians, therefore, are believing or faith- 
ful brethren. If any profess to be Christ’s who 
do not believe His Word, they but show them- 
selves to be unreal and false to their profession. 
For it is written, “He that cometh to God must 
believe that He is, and that He is the rewarder 
of them that diligently seek Him.” And again 
we are told, “If ye continue in My word, then are 
ye My disciples indeed.” 

The usual apostolic salutation follows. “Grace 
be unto you and peace, from God our Father and 
the Lord Jesus Christ.”” Grace is God’s free un- 
merited favor. It is even more than that. It is 
favor against merit. When we merit the very 
opposite God lavishes His loving-kindness upon 
us. That is grace; and what saint can but echo 
the words in the hymn, 


“Since our souls have known His love, 
What mercies has He made us prove?” 


He who sits upon a throne of grace bids us come 
boldly to obtain grace and mercy as daily needs 
arise. 


22 Lectures on Colossians 


Peace is here, of course, the peace of God gar- 
Tisoning His people’s hearts in the day of evil. It 
is peace amid the most disquieting circumstances, 
because assured that “all things work together 
for good to them who love God, who are the 
called according to His purpose” (Rom. 8: 28). 

We pass on, then, to the introduction: 


“We give thanks to God and the Father of our Lord 


to all the saints, for the hope which is laid up for you 
en, whereof ye heard before in the word of the 
of the gospel; which is come unto you, as it is in 
all the world; and bringeth forth fruit, as it doth also in 
you, since the day ye heard (of it), and knew the grace 
of God im truth: as ye also learned of Epaphras, our dear 
fellowservant, who is for you a faithful minister of Christ; 


We are reminded of the introduction to the 
epistle to the Ephesians as we read these words, 
which begin with an expression of thanksgiving 
to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
This presents God in a double character as 
Creator and as Saviour. It is through Jesus 
Christ that our salvation is mediated. Having 
heard of the conversion of the Colossians, the 
apostle’s heart was stirred to prayer on their be- 
half. He writes, “Praying always for you since 
we heard.” For him to learn of others coming 
to Christ invariably meant that his burden of 
prayer was increased. He felt, as few men 


The Salutation and Introduction 23 


ever have felt, the great need of intercession for 
the people of God, for he knew well the fearful 
opposition of Satan the prince and god of this 
world toward those who trust in the Lord Jesus 
Christ; and he realized the prevailing power of 
prayer to defeat the adversary. Therefore he 
bows in the presence of God in earnest suppli- 
cation on behalf of those whom grace has saved, 
and he tells us farther on what it was for which 
he prayed; so we do not now linger on that. 

It is interesting to notice how faith, love and 
hope are linked together here as in so many other 
places in Scripture. The order is different in 1 
Corinthians 13. There, where he is exalting love, 
he puts faith first, hope second and love last, as 
that which will abide when the other two have 
passed away. But here it is hope that closes that 
life which begins with faith, and the two are | 
linked together by love. Faith lays hold of the 
cross. Hope looks on to the glory. Love is the 
power that constrains the saint in view of both. 

It was a Divine Person to whom they had 
trusted their souls. People are troubled some- 
times for fear their faith should not be of 
the right quality, or might prove of insuffi- 
cient quantity to save them. But it is important 
to observe that it is not the character nor the 
amount of faith that saves. It is the Person in 
whom faith rests. The strongest faith in self- 
effort, or in the Church, or religious observances, 


24 Lectures on Colossians 


would leave the soul forever lost. But the feeblest 
faith in the Christ who died and rose again saves 
eternally. Some people try to make a Saviour of 
their faith, but Christ alone is the Saviour; and 
faith is but the hand that reaches out to Him. 

Then he speaks of the love which they had to 
all the saints. This is precious indeed, and is the 
evidence both of the divine nature imparted in 
new birth and of the indwelling of the Holy 
Spirit. It is the very nature of the new-born 
soul to love not only God, but those who are be- 
gotten of Him. This love knows no sectarian 
limitation, but embraces all the people of God. 

Hope looks on to the future; so he speaks of 
the hope which is laid up in heaven, and of this 
they had learned in the word of the truth of the 
gospel. No one fully appreciates the gospel who 
leaves out the blessed hope of the Lord’s return 
to receive His people to be with Himself in the 
Father’s house. This is the glad consummation 
of the believer’s life of faith and love and hope. 
Death is never set before the believer as his hope 
—but always it is the Lord’s return for which he 
is to wait. 

The gospel is God’s good news about His Son, 
and therefore, when fully preached, necessarily 
includes the proclamation of His true sinless hu- 
manity, His Deity, His virgin birth, His vicarious 
sacrifice, His glorious resurrection, His present 
session as Advocate and High Priest at God’s 


The Salutation and Introduction 25 


right hand in heaven, and His coming again to 
reign in power and righteousness when all His 
redeemed will be associated with Him. All these 
precious truths are included in the word of the 
truth of the gospel. 

In verse six we learn that this gospel, even in 
Paul’s day, had been carried to the very ends of 
the earth. The same message that had reached 
Colosse had been preached in all the world, as 
verse twenty-three also declares. And, wherever 
this great evangel of the cross had gone, it had 
produced fruit to the praise and glory of God in 
those who believed it. It is the height of folly 
to look for fruit before the soul has settled peace, 
or to expect evidence of salvation in the life be- 
fore the gospel has been believed. Salvation is 
altogether of grace. Human effort has no place 
in it at all. Neither are we saved by the work 
of the Spirit within us producing that ninefold 
fruit mentioned in Galatians 5. We are saved by 
the work of Christ for us, a work done altogether 
outside of ourselves, and in which we had no part 
excepting to commit the sins that put the Saviour 
on the cross. The old colored man expressed it 
correctly when he said, “I did my part and God 
did His—I did the sinning, and God did the sav- 
ing; I took to running away from Him as fast 
as my sins could carry me, and He took after me 
until He run me down!” Others might express 
it more elegantly, but no one could tell it more 


clearly. 


26 Lectures on Colossians 


The gospel is 2 message to be believed, not a 
collection of precepts or 2 code of laws to be 
obeyed. It is of faith that it might be by grace 
—“Not of works lest amy man should boast.” But 
the moment the message is believed it produces 
new life im the soul, and the Spirit seals the be- 
liever by coming to dwell within him. This in- 
variably resulis im precious fruit for God. And 
this the Colossiem believers had exemplified in 
their own experiences since they heard and knew 
the grace of God im truth. Observe that the 
italicized words, “of it,” are better omitted. 

Tt was not through the apostle Paul that the 
message had beem carried to Colosse, as we have 
already noticed. So far as we know he had never 
visited that city 2s 2 messenger of the cross. He 
speaks im this letter of those whose faces he had 
not seen im the fiesh It was another devoted 
man of God, Epaphras by name, who had pro- 
claimed the gospel to them. Paul speaks of him 
affectionately 2s “our dear fcllowservant,” and 


ered from chapter 4-12, was that of fervency in 
prayer. How blessed when faithful preaching 
and fervent prayer go together! Alas, that they 
are so often divorced! 

In verse 3, 2s we have seen, we get the only 
reference to the Holy Spirit that is found in this 
epistle. It has already been remarked that when 


The Salutation and Introduction pf § 


the truth as to Christ, the Head of the Church, 
is being called in question, or when Satan is 
seeking to interpose anything between the soul 
and Christ, God will not even occupy the saints 
with the person or work of the Spirit, lest by 
occupation with subjective truth they lose sight 
of the great objective verities. So here the ref- 
erence to the Spirit is only incidental. He 
simply mentions the fact that Epaphras had 
told them of their love in the Spirit. It was a 
precious testimony to the happy state of these 
dear young Christians, so recently brought out 
of Paganism with all its abominations. Now as 
a company set apart to the name of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, they were characterized by that love 
which the Spirit sheds abroad in the hearts of 
those who are born of God. This is all-impor- 
tant. To pretend to great zeal for the truth of 
the one Body, while failing to manifest the love 
of the Spirit, is to put the emphasis in the wrong 
place. Doctrinal correctness will never atone for 
lack of brotherly love. It is far more to God 
who is Himself love, in His very nature, that His 
people walk in love one toward another, than that 
they contend valiantly for set forms of truth, 
however scriptural. “Truthing in love” (which 
would correctly convey the thought of Eph. 4: 
15) is more than contending for formulas. It is 
the manifestation of the truth in a life of love 
to God and to those who are His, as well as for 
poor lost sinners for whom Christ died. 


28 


LECTURE III 


Paul’s Prayer and Thanksgiving 
(Chap. 1: 9-14.) 


“For this cause we also, since the day we heard it, do 
not cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be 
filled with the knowledge of His will in all wisdom and 
spiritual understanding; that ye might walk worthy of the 
Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, 
and increasing in the knowledge of God; strengthened with 
all might according to His glorious power, unto all pa- 
tience and longsuffering with joyfulness; giving thanks unto 
the Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers of 
the inheritance of the saints in light; who hath delivered 
us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into 
the kingdom of His dear Son: in whom we have redemp- 
tion through His blood, even the forgiveness of sins.”’ 


This section reminds us of the prayers of the 
apostle for the Ephesians, as recorded in chap- 
ters 1 and 3 of that epistle. There is something 
very precious and exceedingly instructive in be- 
ing thus permitted to share the thoughts of, and 
notice the petitions offered up by the apostle Paul 
. for the Lord’s people in various circumstances. 
His deep concern for their growth in grace, their 
enlightenment in divine things, their apprehen- 
sion of the purpose of God, and the manifesta- 
tion of spiritual power in the life—all these 
come out very strikingly as he bows his knees 
before the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. He was not content to know people were 
justified and hence safe for eternity. 


Paul’s Prayer and Thanksgiving 29 


He was controlled by the earnest desire that 
each one should understand the hope of his calling, 
in order that the life and walk might be in har- 
mony with it, and that they might remember they 
were here to represent Christ, their risen Head. 
These are what formed the burden of his pray- 
ers. It is questionable if any merely human 
writer has ever been able to give as helpful sug- 
gestions for our own prayer life as will come to 
us in our meditation upon these various petitions. 

In verses 9-11 we have set forth certain bless- 
ings for which he prays. In verses 12-14 there 
are others for which he gives thanks. It is very 
important to distinguish these things; that is, to 
have clearly in mind the privileges and blessings 
which are non-forfeitable, because confirmed to 
us by God in Christ from the moment we believe 
on Him who died to make them good to us; and 
the additional blessings for which we need to 
pray daily, and concerning which there should be 
constant soul-exercise lest we fail to enter into 
and enjoy them. Many believers fail in not 
distinguishing the two classes of blessings. In 
certain circles almost every public prayer will 
be concluded somewhat as follows: “We pray 
Thee, forgive us our sins, and wash us in the 
blood of Jesus; receive us into Thy kingdom, 
give us Thy Holy Spirit, and save us at last for 
Christ’s sake, Amen.” Yet every petition in this 
prayer has already been granted to the believer 


30 Lectures on Colossians 


in Christ! God has forgiven us all trespasses. 
We are cleansed by the blood of Jesus. He has 
already translated us out of the kingdom of dark- 
ness into that of the Son of His love. He has 
sealed us with His Holy Spirit, for “if any man 
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His.” 
And we are saved eternally from the moment we 
believe the gospel. Therefore we might far rather 
cry exultantly in faith: “We thank Thee that 
Thou hast forgiven all our sins, and washed us 
from every stain in the blood of the Lamb. Thou 
hast brought us into Thy kingdom, given us Thy 
Holy Spirit, and saved us for eternity.” Faith 
says “Amen” to what God has declared in His 
Word to be true. To go on praying for blessings 
that He tells us are already ours is the most subtle 
kind of unbelief, and robs us of the enjoyment 
that should be our portion if we but had faith to 
lay hold of the exceeding great and precious 
promises which are ours in Christ. 

Let us then follow carefully the apostle’s 
prayer, weighing every phrase and clause. He 
says, “I pray for you that you might be filled 
with the knowledge of His will.” Those who were 
troubling the Colossian saints boasted of their 
superior knowledge. They had evolved a complex 
system of mystical and wholly imaginative teach- 
ing in regard to the soul’s approach to God 
through an interminable number of intermedi- 
aries, coupled with ascetic regulations and legal 


Paul’s Prayer and Thanksgiving 31 


observances. In their eyes the gospel as preached 
by Paul was simplicity indeed; so much so that 
they looked upon it as a child’s conception of the 
philosophy of the universe, which was puerile for 
men of mature minds. But he who knew this 
gospel in all its grandeur, as few other men have 
ever known it, speaks here of being “filled with 
the knowledge of God’s will;” and he uses a 
superlative in the place of a word which the 
Gnostics were very fond of. They boasted of 
“Gnosis” — “knowledge.” He’ says, “Epignosis,” 
meaning, literally, “super-knowledge.” It is in 
the divine revelation alone that this is found. By 
this term, “the knowledge of His will,” I do not 
understand him to be referring merely to God’s 
will for the individual believer’s life from day to 
day (though, indeed, that would be involved in 
the fuller thought of the will of God, as the drop 
of water is included in the ocean), but by His 
will, I take it, he means the wondrous plan or 
programme of the Father known from eternity 
and now being carried out in time to have its 
consummation in the ages to come—“The eternal 
purpose of God.” Here is super-knowledge in- 
deed! Here is that which the cleverest human 
intellect could never fathom, apart from divine 
revelation. And this revelation we have in our 
Bibles. It runs throughout the Scriptures from 
Genesis to the Apocalypse; furnishing a theme 
for devout contemplation, and demanding enthu- 


32 Lectures on Colossians 


siastic study and careful examination by men of 
the most erudite minds and brilliant intellects, 
and the deepest investigation of the most spirit- 
ual believers: but in which also the unlearned 
and the ignorant Christians will find constant en- 
joyment if they but allow themselves to be 
guided by the Spirit in searching the Scriptures 
to see whether these things are so. 

So the words that follow stress the important 
fact that truth is not learned through the intel- 
lect alone. He prays that they may comprehend 
these things “in all wisdom and spiritual under- 
standing.” Wisdom is the ability to use knowl- 
edge aright, and is imparted by the Spirit, and 
He alone gives true understanding. Therefore, 
if we would learn the mind of God as revealed 
in His Word, there must be subjection of heart 
to the divine Teacher, and that self-judgment and 
self-distrust which leads one to walk softly be- 
fore God; not in self-will or egotism, but in 
humility and lowly dependence on the One who 
inspired the Holy Scriptures, which alone can 
make wise the simple. 

Then we learn in verse ten that if God opens 
up His truth to us it is not merely that we may 
delight in the wondrous things He has revealed, 
but it is His desire that we walk in the power 
of that which He makes known to us. So the 
prayer goes on, “That ye might walk worthy of 
the Lord unto all pleasing.” We can only walk 


Paul’s Prayer and Thanksgiving 33 


worthy of the Lord as we know His mind. The 
study of His Word and a godly walk should 
ever go together. 

It is noteworthy that in Ephesians 4:1 we are 
exhorted to “walk worthy of our vocation,” or 
calling, as members of the Body of Christ, while 
in Philippians 1: 27 we are told to “walk worthy 
of the gospel,” which we are left in the world 
to proclaim. Then in 1 Thessalonians 2:12 we 
are bidden to “walk worthy of God,’ Himself, 
who has called us to His kingdom and glory. Our 
walk is ever to be in accordance with the truth 
revealed to our souls. So here we are to walk 
worthy of the Lord, He who is the Head of the 
New Creation to which we now belong. 

Dr. Griffith Thomas points out that the word 
here rendered “pleasing” is not found in any 
other passage in the New Testament, but is used 
in Greek elsewhere to mean “a preference of the 
will of others before our own.” Bishop Handley 
Moule translated the phrase, “Unto every anti 
cipation of His will.” 

This is blessed indeed, when the will of God 
is sweeter far than our own will, and we delight 
in doing as He would have us, not in order to 
propitiate His favor, but to give joy to His 
heart. Yet most of us learn so slowly that the 
only true happiness in life is to be found in do- 
ing the will of God. In vain we seek for satis- 
faction by trying to have our own way, until at 


34 Lectures on Colossians 


last like a bird, wearied out with flying against 
the bars of its cage, we fall back upon the will 
of God and learn that in it the mind and heart 
find perfect rest. 
“Oh, the peace my Saviour gives; 
Peace I never knew before; 
And the way has brighter grown 
Since I’ve learned to trust Him more.” 

It is the subject believer who becomes fruitful, 
so he adds, “being fruitful in every good work.” 
Or it might be better rendered, “bearing fruit in 
every good work.” When we speak of every good 
work, we are not to think simply of preaching 
the gospel, teaching the Holy Scriptures, or en- 
gaging in what is sometimes called Christian 
activity or church work. We are very prone to 
do this and to distinguish between secular em- 
ployment and sacred. But we need to be remind- 
ed over and over again that everything im 2 be- 
liever’s life is sacred. The Church of Rome dis- 
tinguishes seven sacraments. But every act of a 
Christian should have a sacramental character, 
using the word as generally understood. What- 
ever is right and proper for me to do im any cir- 
cumstance, I should do with an eye single to the 
glory of God, and by so doing I shall be bearing 
fruit unto Him. The testimony of the little maid 
who said, “I know I am converted, and my mis- 
tress knows I am converted too, because I sweep 
under the mats now,” has gone around the world, 


Paul's Prayer and Thanksgiving 35 


and wherever this gospel is preached it is told 
for a memorial of her. She was right, for even 
in the most commonplace duties she was bearing 
fruit for God, and she sought to glorify Him by 
the faithful performance of her responsibilities, 
done not with eyeservice as a man-pleaser, but as 
pleasing “God which trieth the heart.” 

Then we have, “Increasing in the knowledge of 
God.” This is more than the knowledge of the 
Word of God, though undoubtedly the one leads 
to the other, for God has made Himself known 
through His Word. But we increase in the 
knowledge of God as we walk with Him from 
day to day, learning more of His love and grace, 
His tender compassion, His care for those who 
trust Him; and proving, too, how solemn a thing 
it is to deviate from the path of obedience and 
thus be exposed to the rod of correction. We 
know God as we walk with Him. We walk with 
Him as we obey His Word. 

“We know Him as we could not know 
Through heaven’s golden years; 


We there shall see His glorious face, 
On earth they saw His tears; 


The touch that heals the broken heart 
Is never felt above; 

His angels know His blessedness, 
His way-worn saints His love.” 


We shall thank Him for all eternity for every 
trial along our pilgrim path that gave Him a new 


36 Lectures on Colossians 


opportunity to display His grace and to manifest 
His heart to us, His needy people, so dependent 
upon His power and grace. 

As we thus go on with Him, we will be 
strengthened with all might according to His 
glorious power, and this “unto all patience and 
long-suffering with joyfulness.”’ How much have 
we here upon which our souls may well meditate? 
It is He who supplies strength, giving all needed 
power in order that we may overcome in every 
adverse circumstance, according to the might of 
His glory. What room is there for discourage- 
ment, as temptations and trials surround me and 
seem about to overwhelm me, if I realize that 
the very same spiritual dynamic, that wondrous 
energy which raised Christ from the dead, oper- 
ates in me by the Spirit, that I may be even more 
than victorious through Him who loves me! 

But we might have supposed that all this mani- 
festation of divine energy would result in pro- 
ducing some great outward display that would 
astonish and amaze an unbelieving world. But 
no, it is “unto all patience.” I need this dynamic 
force so to keep the flesh in subjection that I can 
patiently endure whatever God in His wisdom 
sees fit to let me go through while in this wilder- 
ness world. Neither will I simply endure with 
stoical resignation, such as even a pagan philos- 
opher might exhibit, but God would have me pa- 
tiently wait upon Him and rest in His love 


Paul’s Prayer and Thanksgiving 37 


even amid circumstances that press hard upon 
my soul, with long-suffering, that is uncomplain- 
ing endurance. But there is even more than 
this. In the hour of trial a song of gladness 
will well up in the heart where the will of 
God is supreme. And so he adds, “With joy- 
fulness.” Here is something that the natural 
man knows nothing of—joy in the time of trial; 
gladness in the time of hardship; songs in the 
night, though the darkness be overwhelming; 
praises to the God of my salvation when nature 
shrinks and trembles. It was thus the martyrs 
could rejoice in the arena when thrown to the 
lions; or exult in the Lord when the flames 
leaped up around them as they suffered at the 
stake. And myriads of sufferers all through the 
Christian era have been able to testify to the sus- 
taining grace of God, when the spirit seemed 
about to be overwhelmed. “The joy of the Lord 
is your strength.” 

The three verses that follow are in marked 
contrast to those we have just been considering. 
We have now thanksgiving instead of prayer. 
Here all is positive and eternally settled. The 
blessings enumerated are ours from the moment 
we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and are ab- 
solutely non-forfeitable. To pray for these is to 
dishonor God by casting doubt upon His Word. 
Notice the three “haths” and the one “have” of 
the Authorized Version; words that speak of 


38 Lectures on Colossians 


present possession. Faith lays hold of such testi- 
monies and rejoices in the assurance that these 
wondrous blessings are to be enjoyed even now. 

First we read, “Giving thanks unto the Father, 
which hath made us meet to be partakers of the 
inheritance of the saints in light.” This is true 
of every Christian, and there are no degrees in 
this divine fitness. We are made meet to be par- 
takers of our glorious inheritance the instant we 
are cleansed from our sins and receive the new 
nature, which is imparted by a divine operation 
when we are born of God. How different are the 
thoughts of even some of the best of men! How 
often we hear it said of some devoted and aged 
believer, “He is fit for heaven at last.” But he 
was just as truly fit for heaven the moment he 
received Christ as he is at the end of a long 
life of devoted service. Fitness does not depend 
upon experience. But in this connection it is 
well to remember that there is something more 
than the Father’s house, the inheritance of the 
saints in light, before us. It is important that 
we should also have in mind the coming glorious 
kingdom. In 2 Peter 1: 10, 11 we are told, 
“Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence 
to make your calling and election sure: for if ye 
do these things, ye shall never fall: for so an 
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly 
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ.” The expression, “these 


Paul’s Prayer and Thanksgiving 39 


things,” refers to the various Christian virtues 
enumerated in verses 5-7. It is through these 
things we are fitted for a place in the coming 
kingdom, but it is the justifying, regenerating 
grace of God that alone makes us meet for our 
heavenly inheritance. In other words, it is im- 
portant that we distinguish between salvation by 
grace and reward for service. 

We next read, “Who hath delivered us from 
the power (or, authority) of darkness, and hath 
translated us into the kingdom of the Son of His 
love.” This is a different kingdom to that of 
which we have been reading in 2 Peter. It is 
the present sphere where Christ’s authority is 
owned, the kingdom which we see and enter by 
new birth. This kingdom consists not of “meat 
and drink, but of righteousness, peace and joy in 
the Holy Ghost.” As born of God we have lost 
our old standing as sons of fallen Adam in the 
Satanic kingdom of darkness. We have been 
brought out of the darkness into the marvelous 
light of children of God, and it is here, of course, 
that responsibility comes in to walk as children 
of light. J. N. Darby was once asked, “But sup- 
pose a Christian turned his back on the light; 
what then?” He replied, “Then the light will 
shine upon his back!’ Most blessed it is to see 
this. We are in the light in all the value of the 
precious atoning blood of our Lord Jesus Christ 
sprinkled upon the mercy-seat, the very throne of 
God from which the light shines. 


40 Lectures on Colossmmzt 


Lastly we read, “In Him we have redemption 
through His blood, even the forgiveness of sins.” 
There is some question as to the MS. authority 
of the expression, “through His blood” The 
best editors generally omit it. It seems to have 
been inserted from Ephesians 1:7. But that does 
not for a moment touch the truth of which we 
have been speaking. It would only suggest the 
fuller character of redemption which is both by 
blood and by power. The blood having been shed, 
the omnipotent power of God makes redemption 
real to the believer, whose sins have all beem for- 
given and who has been lifted completely out of 
those circumstances in which he was omee ex- 
posed to the judgment of God As the soul 
meditates on the wonderful truths so succinctly 
presented in these three verses the heart will 
surely go out to God in worship and the life be 
yielded for devoted service! 

Let me recapitulate, as I close: 

He hath made us meet for the inheritance of 
the saints in light. 

He hath delivered us from the authority of 
darkness. 

He hath translated us into the kingdom of the 
Son of His love. 

We have redemption through His blood. 

Blessed certainties these that tell in ummistak- 
able terms of our eternal security if omce in 
Christ! 


41 


LECTURE IV 
Christ the Firstborn 


Twofold Headship of Christ and Twofold 
Reconciliation. 


(Chap. 1: 15-22.) 


“Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of 
every creature: for by Him were all things created, that 
are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, 
whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, 
or powers: all things were created by Him, and for Him: 
and He is the Head of the Body, the Church: who is the 
beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things 
He might have the preeminence. For it pleased the Father 
that in Him should all fulness dwell” (vers. 15-19). 


We have had our Lord Jesus before us as the 
Son of God’s love in whom we have redemption. 
Our attention is now directed to Him as the One 
who has made God known to us. Coming into 
the world as man He is the image of the in- 
visible God—that God who to the Gnostic could 
never be known or understood. We are told in 
John 1:18, “No man hath seen God at any time; 
the Only Begotten Son, which is in the bosom of 
the Father, He hath declared Him.” Five times 
in the New Testament He is called the Only Be- 
gotten, and this endearing term always refers to 
what He is from eternity, with no thought of 
generation connected with it. It implies unity in 


42 Lectures on Colossians ~ 


life and nature. Isaac is called, in Hebrews 11: 
17, Abraham’s only begotten son—yet Ishmael 
was also his son. But the link between Abra- 
ham and Isaac was of a unique character. And 
so, as the Only Begotten, our Lord is the unique 
Son, eternally that, for if He be not the Eternal 
Son then we lose the Eternal Father too. God 
existed from all eternity as three Persons, Father, 
Son and Holy Spirit, but never became visible 
to created eyes whether of angels or men until 
the Holy Babe was born in Bethlehem. The Son 
was as truly the invisible God as the Father or 
the Spirit until the incarnation. Then He was 
seen of angels, and later on by men. As thus 
begotten of God of a virgin mother without any 
human father, He is Son of God in a new sense. 
And it is as such He is owned of the Father as 
the firstborn of every creature, or perhaps the 
expression would be better rendered, the first- 
born of all creation. It is not that He is Him- 
self created, but He is the Head of all that has 
been created. 

It will be seen from what has been said above 
that the title “Firstborn” is not to be taken solely 
as a divine title, though He is divine who bears 
this name. But it is as Man He is owned of 
God the Father as the Firstborn. And how right 
it is that such a title should be conferred upon 
Him, for “by Him were all things created.” Com- 
ing into the world as Man, He takes that place 


Christ the Firstborn 43 


in virtue of the dignity of His person. His is 
the glory of the Firstborn because He is the 
Creator. The firstborn is the heir and pre- 
eminent one. It is important to remember that 
in Scripture the firstborn is not necessarily the 
one born first. Many instances might be cited 
where the one born first was set to one side and 
the right of the firstborn given to another. One 
only needs to mention the cases of Ishmael and 
Isaac, Esau and Jacob, Reuben and Joseph, 
Manasseh and Ephraim, to which many more 
might be added. The first man is set aside and 
the second man is acknowledged as the firstborn. 
And so Adam and all his race are set to one side 
as unfit to retain authority over the world in 
order that Christ, the Second Man, the Lord from 
heaven, may be acknowledged as the Firstborn. 
It will be seen how tremendously all this 
would weigh against the Gnostic conception of 
a created Jesus to whom the Christ, a divine 
emanation, came, upon His enlightenment follow- 
ing His baptism, and who left Him again at the 
cross. It was the Eternal Son who stooped in 
grace to become the Son of God as born of a 
virgin. It should never be lost sight of that His 
Sonship is spoken of in these two distinct ways 
in Scripture. As the Eternal Son, pre-incarnate, 
He is called “the Son,” “the Son of the Father,” 
and also the “Son of God,” but the latter term 
generally refers to what He became when He 


44 Lectures on Colossians 


took humanity into relation with deity and be- 
came God and Man in one Person with two na- 
tures, in accordance with the word of the angel, 
addressed to His virgin mother, “That Holy One, 
who shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son 
of God.” It is necessary to be very accurate in 
our thinking when considering this great mys- 
tery, and not to let our thoughts run beyond 
Holy Scripture. It was of the virgin-born Sa- 
viour that Micah prophesied, saying, “But thou, 
Bethlehem-Ephratah, though thou be little among 
the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall He 
come forth unto Me that is to be ruler in Israel; 
whose goings forth have been from of old, from 
everlasting,” or, as the margin puts it, “from 
the days of eternity” (Micah 5:2). 

The five passages in which He is called the 
Only Begotten, if carefully weighed, will make 
this clear. 


“The Word became flesh, and tabernacled among us, 
and we beheld His glory (the glory as of the only begot- 
ten of the Father), full of grace and truth” (Lit. Rend., 
John 1:14). 

“No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten 
Son, subsisting in the bosom of the Father, He hath told 
Him out” (Lit. Rend., John 1:18). 

“For God so loved the world, that He gave His only be- 
gotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life’ (John 3:15). 

“He that believeth on Him is not condemned: but he 
that believeth not is condemned already, because he hath 


not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God” 
(John 3:18). 


Christ the Firstborn 45 


“In this was manifested the love of God toward us, be- 
eause that God sent His only begotten Son into the world, 
that we might live through Him” (I John 4:9). 


The five other passages referred to in which 
He is called the Firstborn, or First Begotten, are 
as follows :— 

“Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of 
every creature” (or, of all creation) (Col. 1:15). 

“‘And he is the Head of the Body, the Church; who is 
the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all 
things He might have the preeminence” (Col. 1: 18). 

“For whom He did foreknow, He also did predestinate, 
to be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might 
be the firstborn among many brethren”? (Rom. 8:29). 

“Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first 
begotten of (or, from among) the dead, and the prince of 
the kings of the earth” (Rev. 1:5). 

“And when He bringeth the firstborn into the habitable 
earth, again He saith, And let all the angels of God wor- 
ship Him” (Lit. Rend., Heb. 1:6). 


It was He who brought all things into being. 
“Without Him was not anything made that was 
made.” All the inhabitants of heaven and of 
earth owe their life to Him. Beings visible or 
invisible are all the creatures of His hand. 
Angels, no matter how great their dignity, 
whether thrones, or dominions, or principalities, 
or powers, all were created by Him and for His 
glory. The Gnostics placed these varied ranks 
of exalted beings between Him and God; but 
He is shown to be superior to them all, for He 
brought them into being. He is Himself the 


46 Lectures on Colossians 


uncreated Son who became Man to accomplish 
the work of redemption. Higher than all angels, 
He was made a little lower than they for the 
suffering of death. 

In verse 17 His priority is insisted on in an- 
other way. “He is before all things.” By the 
term “all things’ we understand all that has 
been created, whether personal or impersonal. He 
Himself existed as the eternal Word before them 
all. “In the beginning was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God.” 
Full Deity is ascribed to Him, yet distinct per- 
sonality. Moreover, it is He who sustains the 
universe, for “by Him all things consist,” or, 
“hold together.” It is His hand that holds the 
stars in their courses, directs the planets in their 
orbits, and controls the laws of the universe. 
How great is His dignity, and yet how low did 
He stoop for our salvation! 

But He is firstborn in another sense in verse 
18. Man rejected Him saying, “This is the heir; 
come, let us kill Him that the inheritance may 
be ours.” So they slew Him, hanging Him on 
a tree. But it was then that God made His 
soul an offering for sin, and He accomplished the 
great work of redemption for which He came. 
“He died, the Just for the unjust, that He might 
bring us to God.” But having been delivered on 
account of our offences, He was raised again 
on account of our justification. As brought 


Christ the Firstborn 47 


again from the dead He became the Firstborn in 
a@ new sense, the Head of the new creation. As 
Man on earth in incarnation there was no union 
with Him. Union is in resurrection. He was 
alone as the Incarnate Son here in the world; as 
He Himself says: “Except a corn of wheat fall 
into the ground and die, it abideth alone; but if 
it die, it shall bring forth much fruit.” It is 
in resurrection that He is hailed as the Firstborn 
from among the dead. As such He becomes the 
Head of the Body, the Church; the Beginning of 
the creation of God; Firstborn among many 
brethren; the Resurrection King-Priest; the One 
who is yet to rule the world in manifested glory; 
the Melchizedek of the age to come, as Hebrews 
shows us. 

Verse 19 is admittedly difficult to translate 
euphoniously, and in our English version the 
words “the Father” have been supplied in order 
to complete what seems like an incomplete sen- 
tence. But it should be carefully noted that there 
is nothing in the original to answer to the term 
“the Father.” It is rather “the fulness” that was 
pleased to dwell in Jesus. And if this verse is 
connected with verse 9 of chapter 2 we shall 
understand at once what is in view. “In Him 
all the fulness (of the Godhead) was pleased to 
dwell.” Deity has been fully manifested in Jesus 
our adorable Lord. This is the mystery of godli- 
ness of 1 Timothy 3:16. The Gnostics used this 


48 Lectures on Colossians 


term, “the fulness,” or “pleroma,” for the divine 
essence, dwelling in unapproachable light; and 
in a lesser sense for the illumination that comes 
when one reaches the higher plane of knowledge. 
But all the divine pleroma dwelt in Jesus. All 
that God is, He is, so that we may now say, “We 
know God in knowing Him.” He has fully mani- 
fested Him. 

As we ponder the wondrous truths brought be- 
fore us in these verses the spiritual mind will 
feel more and more that we have here mysteries 
of a character beyond the ability of the human 
mind to grasp. Here is truth for pious medita- 
tion, to stir the soul to worship and thanksgiving; 
not at all for the exercise of the intellect in 
theological speculations. As we read we would 
bow our hearts in lowly adoration and thus gaze 
upon the face of Him who has come forth from 
the glory that He had with the Father in all the 
past eternity in order to bring us into the knowl- 
edge of God. 


In the next section we are told of a TWOFOLD 
RECONCILIATION. 


‘‘And having made peace through the blood of His cross, 
by Him to reconcile all things unto Himself; by Him, I 
say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven. 
And you, that were sometime alienated and enemies in 
your mind by wicked works, yet now hath He reconciled 
in the body of His flesh through death, to present you 
holy and unblameable and unreproveable in His sight’ 


(vers. 20-22). 


Christ the Firstborn 4y 


In the portion we have just considered Christ 
has been presented as the Firstborn in two dis- 
tinct ways. We have had His twofold Headship ; 
first over all creation and then as Head of the 
Body, the Church. In the verses now before us 
we have reconciliation presented in a double 
aspect. First, we have the future reconciliation 
of all things, and then present individual recon- 
ciliation. He in whom all the fulness dwells has 
made peace through the blood of His cross. Man 
is never called upon in Scripture to make his own 
peace with God. He is viewed as alienated and 
an enemy; manifestly so, through wicked works. 
Sin has come in between God and man, requir- 
ing expiation ere the guilty rebel could be re- 
ceived by God in peace. Not only on earth, but 
in heaven has sin lifted up its serpent-head. In 
fact it was in heaven that sin began, when 
Lucifer apostatized, leading with him a vast num- 
ber of the angelic hosts. Therefore the heavens 
themselves were unclean in the sight of God and 
had to be purified by a better sacrifice than those 
offered under the law. On the cross Christ tasted 
death, and so far-reaching are the results of His 
work that eventually all things in earth and in 
heaven will be reconciled to Ged upon the basis 
of what He there accomplished. Whether for the 
universe or for the individual sinner, He made 
peace through the blood of His cross. Yet rebels 
remain in spite of the fact that peace has been 


made. 


50 Lectures on Colossians 


We may understand it if we remember that 
two nations which have been at war with one 
another may through their plenipotentiaries have 
agreed on terms of peace, and yet guerilla bands 
may insist on fighting, ignoring the peace that 
has been made. So men and demons still persist 
in refusing to own the divine authority, notwith- 
standing the fact that, 


“Jesus’ blood, through earth and skies, 
Mercy, free boundless mercy, cries.” 


For angels the terms of peace offer no pardon, 
but to the sinful sons of Adam clemency is ex- 
tended, and he who will may trust in Christ and 
thus be reconciled to God. “Being justified by 
faith we have peace with God through our Lord 
Jesus Christ” (Rom. 5:1). 

The reconciliation of all things includes two 
spheres, and two only. The time will come when 
all in earth and all in heaven will be happily 
reconciled to God. When it is a question of sub- 
jugation, as in Phil. 2:10, there are three spheres. 
Heavenly, earthly, and infernal beings are at last 
to own the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
But there is no hope held out in Scripture that 
the sad inhabitants of the infernal regions will 
ever be reconciled to God. 

The reconciliation of verse 20 carries us on to 
the new heaven and the new earth where right- 
eousness will dwell, and the tabernacle of God 


Christ the Firstborn 51 


shall be with men, and all the redeemed with 
the elect angels abide with Him in holy har- 
mony. Sin has ruptured the state of peace 
and harmony that once existed between God and 
His creatures. Christ in death has wrought re- 
conciliation, and so made it possible for that lost 
concord to be re-established, but in new creation. 

This reconciliation is already accomplished for 
individual sinners who “were sometime alienated 
and enemies in their mind by wicked works,” but 
who through infinite grace have been reconciled 
to God by the death of His Son. It is the soul’s 
apprehension by faith of the infinite love of the 
offended Deity manifested in the death of the 
cross, that destroys the enmity and draws out the 
affections of the renewed man to God revealed in 
Christ. Well may the apostle exclaim elsewhere, 
“And all things are of God, who hath reconciled 
us to Himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given to 
us the ministry of reconciliation; to wit, that God 
was in Christ, reconciling the world unto Him- 
self, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and 
hath committed unto us the word of reconcilia- 
tion. Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, 
as though God did beseech you by us: we pray 
you in Christ’s stead, be ye reconciled to God” 
(2 Cor. 5: 18-20). 

It is not the holy, wondrous life of Christ that 
has thus reconciled us. It is His sacrificial death. 
And as a result of that death we shall eventually 


52 Lectures on Colossians 


be presented before God the Father unblameable 
in holiness and unreproveable in His sight. The 
sentence is not concluded in the 22nd verse, but 
the passage that follows introduces a new subject 
and therefore must be considered in a different 
connection. 

In leaving the verses which we have been con- 
sidering let us bear in mind the great outstand- 
ing truths that they would teach us. He who 
is the image of the invisible God has made peace 
for us by the blood of His cross. Now in resur- 
rection He is our exalted Head, and we are the 
members of His Body. As Head, He is con- 
cerned about every redeemed one here on earth, 
who has thus, through grace, been united to 
Him. To own Him as Head is our first respon- 
sibility. We are to let nothing put Him at a 
distance or hinder our loyal subjection to Him 
through whom we have been reconciled to God. 


LECTURE V 
Paul’s Twofold Ministry 


(Chap. 1: 23-29.) 


“If ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, and 
be not moved away from the hope of the gospel, which ye 
have heard, and which was preached to every creature 
which is under heaven; whereof I Paul am made a min- 
ister; who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill 
up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my 
flesh for His Body’s sake, which is the Church: whereof 
I am made a minister, according to the dispensation of 
God which is given to me for you, to fulfil the word of 
God” (vers. 23-25). 


The “if” with which the 23rd verse begins has 
been the occasion of much perplexity to timid 
souls who hardly dare to accept the truth of the 
believer’s eternal security, so conscious are they 
of their own weakness and insufficiency. But, 
rightly understood, there is nothing here to dis- 
turb any sincere believer in the Lord Jesus 
Christ. There are a number of similar “ifs” in 
the New Testament, and all with precisely the 
same object in view—the testing of profession. 
In 1 Cor. 15:1, 2 we read, “Moreover, brethren, 
I declare unto you the gospel which I preached 
unto you, which also ye have received, and where- 
in ye stand; by which also ye are saved, if ye 
keep in memory what I preached unto you, unless 


54 Lectures on Colossians 


ye have believed in vain.” Here the “if” is in-' 
serted in order to exercise the consciences of any 
who, having professed to believe the gospel, are 
in danger of forgetting the message, so proving 
that they have never really received the truth 
into their hearts. He would have them carefully 
examine their foundations. Many there are 
who readily profess to adopt Christianity and 
unite themselves outwardly with the people of 
God, who have never truly turned to the Lord 
in repentance and rested their souls upon His 
finished work. Such endure for a time, but soon 
forget the claims of the gospel when Satanic 
allurements would draw them away. 

In Hebrews 3:6 we have another such “if.” 
“But Christ as a Son over His own house; whose 
house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and 
the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end.”’ The 
meaning is plain. It is not enough to profess to 
have the Christian hope. Those who are real will 
hold fast unto the end, as we also read in chap- 
ter 10: 38, 39 of the same epistle. Endurance is 
the proof of reality. What God implants in the 
soul is lasting, and we may be assured that He 
who hath begun a good work in any one will per- 
form it until the day of Jesus Christ, the time 
when He shall come for His ransomed people, to 
complete in glory what His grace began on earth. 

Paul did not pretend to say who of the Colos- 
sians were really born of God. While he had 


Paul’s Twofold Ministry 55 


confidence that most of them were, he wrote 
in such a way as to stir up the consciences of 
any who were becoming slack. A readiness to 
adopt new and fanciful systems was a cause 
for grave concern. Those who are really chil- 
dren of God, grounded and strengthened in the 
truth, are not of the number who will be moved 
away from the hope of the gospel. They know 
too well what it has already done for them, to 
lightly turn away from it to some new and un- 
tried theory. 

This gospel they had heard, as in the provi- 
dence of God it had been preached in all the 
creation under heaven. This is probably a better 
translation than that of the Authorized Version. 
It is hardly thinkable that the apostle meant that 
every creature in the habitable earth had heard 
the gospel. But it is a wonderful testimony to 
the devotion of the early believers that even 
within one generation after our Lord’s ascension 
the evangel had been carried throughout the 
known world. Of this gospel Paul was made 
“minister.” The indefinite article does not really 
help; it only lends color to the idea which came 
in later, that the ministry is a special class to 
which all believers do not belong. The apostle 
is not claiming that he is a minister in the sense 
in which that term has been used in later years. 
He was one addicted to the work of the ministry. 
That is, the gospel had been committed to him 


56 Lectures on Colossians 


by God whom he served, as he says elsewhere, 
with his spirit in the gospel of His Son. This 
gospel ministry has been committed to all be- 
lievers, and Paul is a sharer with others in mak- 
ing the testimony known. But in a preeminent 
way it was given to him to reveal it. As preached 
py Paul it bears the distinctive character of “the 
gospel of the glory.” 

Another ministry had also been given to him, 
even that of the assembly, the Body of Christ. 
So he goes on to say that he rejoices in 
whatever he might be called upon to suffer on 
behalf of the people of God, as in doing this he 
was filling up what was lacking of the afflictions 
of Christ in his own flesh. That is true of every 
real servant of God. To such an one the people 
of the Lord will ever be precious. And he will 
realize that in serving them and enduring trial 
on their behalf he is ministering in place of his 
absent Lord. Christ suffered once for all on the 
cross to put away sin. His faithful servants 
suffer in fellowship with Him for the perfecting 
of the saints, “for His Body’s sake, which is the 
Church.” The more devoted one is to Christ’s in- 
terests down here, during His absence in heaven, 
the more one will enter into this phase of suffer- 
ing. It is godly shepherd-care that he has in 
mind; enduring affliction for the blessing of 
Christ’s beautiful flock. 

Of the Church Paul was made minister accord- 


Paul’s Twofold Ministry 57 


ing to the dispensation of God given to him on 
our behalf to complete the divine testimony, or 
to fill up the Word of God. The whole counsel 
of God was not made known until Paul received 
this revelation of the mystery. This dispensa- 
tion, or stewardship (for the two words are 
exactly the same in Greek), he unfolds more 
fully elsewhere; noticeably in the epistle to the 
Ephesians which, as previously intimated, is the 
correlative to that to the Colossians. It was a 
special revelation given not to the twelve, but to 
him as the apostle of the new dispensation. He 
goes on with this theme in the verses that follow. 


“Even the mystery which hath been hid from ages and 
generations, but now is made manifest to His saints: to 
whom God would make known what is the riches of the 
glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ 
in you, the hope of glory: whom we preach, warning every 
man, and teaching every man in all wisdom; that we may 
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus: whereunto I also 
labor, striving according to His working, which worketh in 
me mightily” (vers. 26-29). 


It is important to remember that the mysteries 
of the New Testament are not necessarily things 
mysterious or abtruse. They are rather sacred 
secrets made known to the initiated.* 


*For fuller discussion of this interesting subject the 
inquiring or studious reader is referred to the author’s 
handbook entitled, “The Mysteries of God,” which can be 
had from the publishers of this volume. 


58 Lectures on Colossians 


These divine secrets could never have been 
discovered by human reason, nor even by the 
child of God unless a special revelation had been 
given. The Gnostics made much of the mysteries 
of their systems. The Christian mysteries are 
in vivid contrast to these dreams of insubject 
men. 

The mystery of the Church as the Body of 
Christ was never made known in Old Testament 
times, nor yet in the days when our Lord was 
on the earth. We are told distinctly it had been 
“hid from ages and generations, but now is made 
manifest to the saints.” The divine method of 
making it known was by a special revelation to 
the apostle Paul, as he tells us in Ephesians 3. 
But this revelation was not for him only. It 
was a ministry committed to him to pass on to 
the saints, “To whom God did make known the 
wealth of the splendor of this sacred secret among 
the nations, which is Christ among the Gentiles, 
the hope of glory.” The Old Testament Scrip- 
tures clearly predicted the calling of the Gentiles, 
but always in subjection to Israel. During the 
present dispensation Israel, as we read in Romans 
11, is set aside because of unbelief, and Christ 
is working among the nations, attracting weary 
hearts to Himself altogether apart from any 
thought of Jewish priority. Believing Jews and 
Gentiles are united by the Holy Spirit’s baptism 
into the one Body, and thus all fleshly distine- 


Paul’s Twofold Ministry 59 


tions are done away. The middle wall of par- 
tition is broken down. This is the mystery. 

Christ Himself, the Head of this Body, is the 
apostle’s theme. Note his words, “whom we 
preach.” To substitute what for whom we preach 
is a serious mistake. Christianity ig centered in 
a Person, and no one preaches the gospel who 
does not preach Christ. When there is faith in 
Him the Spirit unites the believer to Him. 

How earnest was the apostle in seeking to lead 
Christians into the knowledge of this precious 
truth, “warning every man, and teaching every 
man in all wisdom.” His was the true pastor’s 
heart, and he combined in a marvelous way the 
teacher’s gift with this. The subject of his min- 
istry was the perfecting of the saints, as he says 
elsewhere. He would present every man complete 
or full grown in Christ Jesus. To this end he 
earnestly labored according to that divine energy 
which wrought so powerfully in him for the sal- 
vation of souls and the upbuilding of the people 
of God. 

False teachers would turn the eyes of the 
saints away from Christ, the glorified Head of 
the Body, in order that they might occupy them 
with specious systems of Satanic origin, and thus 
draw away disciples after themselves, as Paul 
had warned the Ephesian elders. But all true 
Spirit-given ministry is Christo-centric. Every 
faithful minister of the new dispensation would 


60 Lectures on Colossians 


lift up the Lord Jesus before the admiring gaze 
of His people so that, occupied with Him, they 
might be transfigured into His likemess. Like 
John the Baptist he will say, “He must increase, 
but I must decrease” 

No man really preaches the whole truth to-day 
who does not enter into the twofold ministry 
of this section of Colossiams—the gospel and 
the Church. The former is proclaimed to sin- 
ners and is the power of God unto salvation 
to every one who believes. The latter is taught 
to saints and builds them up im the faith as io 
sponsibilities. I am called upon, not only to win 
sinners to Christ that they may be saved from 
impending wrath, but I am to seck to make “good 
churchmen” out of those already saved. This 
is not to insist on what is called denominational 
loyalty, nor to endeavor to sectionalize the saints 
and bring them into bondage to legal principles 
and practices for which there is no biblical war- 
rant, but it is to show them their position as 
in the new creation, linked with their risen, glori- 
fied Head, and to lead them into the recognition 
of the unity of the Body, in which all believers 
have a part; that thus they may endeavor to keep 
the unity formed by the Holy Spirit, as they walk 
together in the uniting bond of peace. 

a means of dividing those of like precious faith, 


Paul’s Twofold Ministry 61 


when perverted by men of sectarian spirit and 
narrow cramped sympathies who are more con- 
cerned about building up local “causes” than 
edifying the Body of Christ! 

That saints are not to neglect local responsi- 
bilities, out of which grows the relationship of 
church to church, is perfectly true. But it is not 
a unity or confederacy of assemblies that is de- 
nominated “the unity of the Spirit.” It is rather 
that abiding unity which the Holy Ghost has 
formed by baptizing believers into one Body. If 
I set at nought any fellow-believer I am to that 
extent failing to keep this unity. As members 
one of another, having the same care one for the 
other, we show in a practical way the truth that 
we are one in Christ. 


62 


LECTURE VI 


Christ the True Wisdom. 
The Revelation of the Mystery of God 


(Chap. 2-1-7.) 


“For I would that ye knew what great conflict I have 
for you, amd for them at Laodicea, and for as many as 
have not seen my face in the flesh; that their hearts might 
be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all 
riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the 
acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the Father, 
and of Christ: in whom are hid all the treasures of wis- 
dom and knowledge. And this I say, lest any man should 
beguile you with enticing words. For though I be absent 
in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, joying and 
beholding your order, and the steadfastness of your faith 
in Christ. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the 
Lord, so walk ye in Him: rooted and built up in Him, and 
stablished in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding 
therein with thanksgiving.” 


Men who know little of the deep convictions 
that stirred the heart of the apostle Paul will 
have difficulty in realizing the intensity of 
his feelings when the truth of God was called in 
question, and the people of the Lord were in 
danger of being corrupted by false doctrine and 
turned aside from the simplicity that is in Christ. 
He says, “For I would have you know what in- 
tense agony I have for you.” He was not one 
who could play fast and loose with revealed truth, 


Christ the True Wisdom 63 


His very soul was tortured when Christ was dis- 
honored by those who professed His Name. He 
was not a self-complacent liberal in theology care- 
lessly tolerant of any teaching, no matter how 
pernicious, so long as outward unity is main- 
tained. To know that both at Colosse and Laodicea 
designing men were seeking to seduce the saints 
from their first love, who was Christ Himself, 
caused him intense concern. That the enemy was 
largely successful at Laodicea we know; for 
John, as the amanuensis of the glorified Son of 
Man, writing to them later from Patmos, charges 
them with being neither cold nor hot. Proud of 
their culture and wealth they were indifferent to 
Christ. It is from this Paul sought to save them, 
and it is to be hoped he succeeded at Colosse. 
The truth unites. Error divides. He desires 
“that their hearts might be comforted, being knit 
together in love, and unto all riches of the full 
assurance of understanding, to the acknowledg- 
ment of the mystery of God, even Christ” (ver. 
2). There is some MS. diversity in regard to 
the last part of this sentence. The Authorized 
Version reads, “The mystery of God, and of the 
Father, and of Christ,” which is admittedly 
peculiar. One could understand, “The mystery 
of God, even of the Father, and of Christ,” and 
it might be so translated; but the reading of 
some MSS., “The mystery of God, even Christ,” 
seems clearer, and is probably correct. It is the 


64 Lectures on Colossians 


great divine mystery of the new man, as we read 
in 1 Cor. 12:12, 13—“For as the body is one, and 
hath many members, and all the members of 
that one body, being many, are one body: so also 
is Christ. For by one Spirit are we all baptized 
into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, 
whether we be bond or free; and have been all 
made to drink into one Spirit.” The definite 
article before “Christ”? does not appear in the 
Authorized Version, but probably should be 
there. It is the mystical Christ that is in view, 
and I take it that we have a similar idea in 
Col. 2:2. The mystery of God is that which 
He has now revealed regarding Christ as Head 
of the Body, and consequently of the entire new 
creation. As believers enter into the truth of 
this they are delivered not only from vain spec- 
ulations but from fleshly strivings, for all per- 
fection is found in Christ. So the apostle would 
have them understand the wealth of this great 
mystery as they enjoy the full assurance of 
understanding in order to its acknowledgment. 
In Heb. 6:11 we read of the full assurance of 
hope, and in chap. 10: 22 of the same epistle we 
get the full assurance of faith. These together 
establish the soul and set it free from doubt 
and fear. 

In Christ, or if you prefer, in this mystery of 
God now revealed, are hid all the treasures of 
wisdom and knowledge. It is not necessary to 


Christ the True Wisdom 65 


go elsewhere, investigating human systems and 
philosophies, for an explanation of the mystery 
of the universe and the relations of the Creator 
to His creatures. All these are fully told out in 
Christ. As we learn to know Him better and 
apprehend the truth concerning Him, every ques- 
tion is answered, every perplexity made clear, 
and every doubt dissolved. Why turn aside to 
idle speculations, no matter how pretentious, 
when God has spoken in His Son and given 
His Holy Word to lead us by the Spirit into all 
truth? Paul says all this in order to protect the 
saints from being led astray by persuasive talk, 
or with enticing words. Advocates of error de- 
light to clothe their evil systems in most attrac- 
tive phraseology, to entrap the souls of the un- 
wary. Only the truth of God can preserve from 
such. It is important to remember that no 
amount of intellectual culture or human learning 
can take the place of divine revelation. If God 
has not spoken we may speculate and reason as 
we please. But if He has given the truth in His 
Word there is an end to all our theorizings. 

In this chapter he shows us how Christ is the 
antidote for human philosophy, Jewish legality, 
Oriental mysticism and carnal asceticism. These 
have no place in Christianity. Christ supersedes 
them all. And Paul knew through the testimony 
of Epaphras what Christ had meant to these 
Colossian saints from the time of their conver- 


66 Lectures on Colossians 


sion, and he was very jealous lest they should 
now be turned aside. Though not with them in 
the flesh, he was one with them in spirit, and 
rejoiced in all he had heard of their godly order 
and their steadfast confidence in Christ. This was 
how they began; moreover they had continued in 
the same paths and he would have them continue 
so. Having received Christ Jesus the Lord, that 
is, having trusted Him as Saviour and owned Him 
as Master, he would now have them walk in Him, 
not turning aside to any new system or per- 
version of the truth. He desired to see them 
rooted and built up in Him; rooted like a tree, 
sending its roots deep down into the soil; he 
would have all their hidden sources of supply 
so centered in Christ. Built up like a building 
founded on a rock and firmly established; he 
would so have them recognize Christ as their only 
foundation. He uses the same double figure in 
Eph. 3:7, “That Christ may dwell in your hearts 
by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in 
love.” God is love, and God has been revealed in 
Christ; so to be rooted and established in love 
is to be rooted in and founded upon God, and it 
is God revealed in Christ. Why then should any 
go after speculative theories that cannot give 
the soul peace and which make light of Christ the 
Head? As thus walking in Him the man would 
be established in the faith, in accordance with 
the instruction already received, “abounding 


Christ the True Wisdom 67 


therein with thanksgiving.” Nothing so causes 
the soul to overflow with worship and gratitude 
to God as a deep knowledge of Christ. It is 
noteworthy that true joy is only found in ac- 
quaintance with Him. 

It is hardly necessary to make the application 
to present-day systems. Each one who really 
knows Christ will readily do that for himself or 
herself. An illustration may help to make 
clear what I believe the apostle is here indicat- 
ing :—A follower of Mrs. Eddy, the now-deceased 
head of the so-called Christian Science Cult, la- 
bored long to unfold the professed benefits and 
beauties of that system to a simple Christian 
woman who, after listening for several hours, 
found herself utterly unable to follow the specious 
sophistries and vapid theorizings of her visitor. 
Finally she exclaimed, “I do not understand what 
you are getting at. Can you not put it all in 
simpler terms so that I may know what it is you 
want me to believe?” “Well,” replied the other, 
“in the first place you must get hold of this: God 
is principle not a person. You see, my dear, we 
worship a principle—” “Enough,” exclaimed the 
other with a relieved expression on her counte- 
nance; “that would never do for me! I worship 
a personal God revealed in Christ, my blessed, 
adorable Saviour.” And at once her soul was de- 
livered from the net spread before her by the soft- 
voiced emissary of Satan who had been endeavor- 


68 Lectures on Colossians 


ing to ensnare her. And this is ever the test. 
Every system that makes light of Christ or His 
atoning blood is from the pit, and to be shunned 
as a viper by all who know Him. 

John Newton has well written: 


“What think ye of Christ?” is the test, 
To try both your state and your scheme; 
You cannot be right in the rest, 
Unless you think rightly of Him: 
As Jesus appears in your view— 
As He is beloved or not, 
So God is disposed to you, 
And mercy or wrath is your lot. 


Some take Him a creature to be— 
A man, or an angel at most; 
But they have not feelings like me, 
Nor know themselves wretched and lost. 
So guilty, so helpless am I, 
I durst not confide in His blood, 
Nor on His protection rely, 
Unless I were sure He is God. 


Some call Him a Saviour, in word, 

But mix their own works with His plans 
And hope He His help will afford, 

When they have done all that they can: 
If doings prove rather too light 

(A little they own they may fail), 
They purpose to make up full weight, 

By casting His name in the scale. 


Some style Him “the Pearl of great price,” 
And say, He’s the fountain of joys; 

Yet feed upon folly and vice, 
And cleave to the world and its toys. 


Christ the True Wisdom 69 


Like Judas, the Saviour they kiss, 
And while they salute Him, betray: 

Oh! what will profession like this 
Avail in His terrible day? 


If asked what of Jesus J think, 

Though . still my best thoughts are but poor, 
I say, He’s my meat and my drink, 

My life, and my strength, and my store; 
My Shepherd, my trust, and my Friend, 

My Saviour from sin and from thrall; 
My Hope from beginning to end, 

My Portion, my Lord and my All.” 


The natural man cannot understand why Chris- 
tians should insist upon a clear-cut confession of 
the truth as to Christ. What matters it, he will 
ask, whether Jesus be a mere man, spiritual be- 
yond most, or be in very deed the Divine Eternal 
Son become flesh? If a man only, He is still 
the great Exemplar and the Master-Teacher. If 
more than man He is but the manifestation of 
the Father, and by His life of love and purity 
has shown us God’s attitude toward all mankind 
and so leads us into a better understanding of 
God and our relationship to Him. 

But this is not the truth of Holy Scripture con- 
cerning Him. His holy life—whether He be only 
human or divinely-human—can never put away 
our sins or fit us to stand uncondemned before 
the eternal throne. He had to be both God and 
Man in order that He might make atonement for 
sin, meeting as Man—yet Man in all perfection 


70 Lectures on Colossians 


—every claim that the throne of outraged Deity 
had against man. Touch the Person of Christ 
and you touch His work. If that work was not 
divinely perfect there remains no other sacrifice 
for sins and so we are left without a Saviour. 

But, blessed be God, He who came forth from 
the Father has glorified Him on the earth, and 
having finished the work given Him to do, has 
gone back to that glory that He had with the 
Father before the world was. There He sits, the 
exalted Man who made purification for sins, on 
the right hand of the Majesty in the heavens, 
ever living to make intercession for those His 
grace has saved. Happy in this knowledge we 
may well sing, with chastened joy, 


“Head of the Church! Thou sittest there, 
Thy members all the blessings share— 
Thy blessing, Lord, is ours: 
Our life Thou art—Thy grace sustains, 
Thy strength in us each vict’ry gains 
O’er sin and Satan’s pow’rs.” 


May we prove our loyalty to Him, not only by 
confessing a true Christ with our lips, but by 
giving Him the supreme place in our lives! 


71 


LECTURE VII 
Christ the Antidote to Human Philosophy 


(Chap. 2: 8-10.) 


“Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and 
vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments 
of the world, and not after Christ. For in Him dwelleth 
all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. And ye are com-< 
plete in Him, which is the Head of all principality and 
power.”’ 


Scripture nowhere condemns the acquisition of 
knowledge. It is the wisdom of this world, not 
its knowledge, that is foolishness with God. 
Philosophy is but worldly wisdom. It is the effort 
of the human mind to solve the mystery of the 
universe. It is not an exact science, for the phi- 
losophers have never been able to come to any 
satisfactory conclusion as to either the “why” or 
the “wherefore” of things. “The Greeks seek 
after wisdom,” we are told; and it was they who 
led the way for all future generations in phi- 
losophical theorizing. Before a divine revelation 
came it was quite natural and proper that man 
should seek by wisdom to solve the riddles that 
nature was constantly propounding, but now that 
God has spoken this is no longer necessary, and 
it may become grave infidelity. From Plato to 
Kant, and from Kant to the last of the moderns, 


“2, Lectures on Colossians 


one system has overturned another, so that the 
history of philosophy is a story of contradictory, 
discarded hypotheses. This is not to say that the 
philosophers were or are dishonest men, but it is 
to say that many of them have failed to avail 
themselves of that which would unravel every 
knot and solve every problem, namely, the revela- 
tion of God in Christ as given in the Holy Scrip- 
tures. 

Plato yearned for a divine Word—“logos’— 
which would come with authority and make 
everything plain. That Word is Christ of whom 
John writes, “In the beginning was the Word, 
and the Word was with God, and the Word was 
God.” And again, “The Word became flesh, and 
tabernacled among us, and we beheld His glory, 
the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, 
full of grace and truth.” The Word is no longer 
hidden. We do not need to search for it. “Theword 
is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart: 
that if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the 
Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that 
God hath raised Him-from the dead, thou shalt 
be saved.” . Socrates pondering the, to him, un- 
solvable problems relating to possible future re- 
wards and punishments, said, “It may be, Plato, 
that the Deity can forgive sins, but I do not see 
how.” No such perplexities need trouble any 
honest mind now, for what philosophy could not 
explain, the gospel has made clear, that gospel in 


Christ the Antidote to Human Philosophy 13 


which is revealed the righteousness of God for 
sinful men. Apart from this divine revelation 
the wisest philosopher of the 20th Century knows 
no more in regard to the origin and destiny of 
man than the Attic philosophers of so long ago. 
Two great systems were still contending for 
the mastery over the minds of men in the West- 
ern world when Paul wrote this letter to the 
Colossians—Stoicism and Epicureanism. The one 
said: Live nobly and death cannot matter. Hold 
appetite in check. Become indifferent to chang- 
ing conditions. Be not uplifted by good fortune 
nor cast down by adversity. The man is more 
than circumstances, the soul is greater than the 
universe. Epicureanism said: All is uncertain. 
We know not whence we came; we know not 
whither we gu; we only know that after a brief 
life we disappear from this scene, and it is vain 
to deny ourselves any present joy in view of 
possible future ill. “Let us eat and drink, for 
to-morrow we die.” To many of the former class 
the Christian message appealed, and one has only 
to read 1 Cor. 9: 24-29 or Phil. 4:11-13 to see 
how readily Paul’s message would lay hold of an 
honest Stoic. With Epicureanism Christianity 
had nothing in common. But while the Stoic 
might find in Christianity the fulfilment of his 
heart’s yearning, there was not in his philoso- 
phy anything the Christian needed, for every- 
thing that was best in that system he already 


74 Lectures on Colossians 


had in Christ. Besides these two great outstand- 
ing philosophical schools there were many lesser 
systems among both the Greeks and Romans, 
all of them seeking to draw away disciples to 
themselves. The Gnostics embodied parts of all 
the different schools of thought in their new sys- 
tem. From the weird guesses embodied in the 
Pythagorean fables down to the evolutionary 
theories of the present time the Church of God 
is still in conflict with these vagrant philosophies. 

Against all such the Christian is warned. 
“Beware lest any man spoil you” (that is, lest 
any make a prey of you) “through philosophy 
and vain deceit.” These may make a great show 
of learning and their adherents may look down 
with contempt from their heights of fancied 
superiority upon people simple enough to believe 
the gospel and to accept the Holy Scriptures as 
the inspired Word of the living God. But with 
all their pretentiousness they are simply the tra- 
ditions of man, the rudiments or elements of the 
world. The apostle thus expresses his contempt 
for mere reasoning in comparison with divine 
revelation. These systems that claim so much 
were after all but elementary; it was the ABC 
of the world offered to those who were in the 
school of Christ and had left the kindergarten 
of human tradition far behind. “Can a man by 
searching find out God?’ Impossible. But God 
is already known in His Son. 


Christ the Antidote to Human Philosophy 75 


It is most important that Christians should see 
this, particularly the young men who are called 
of God to be ministers of His Word. It is a sad 
commentary on conditions in Christendom that in 
the average theological seminary far more time 
is given to the study of philosophy than to 
searching the Scriptures. A minister of an ortho- 
dox church said recently, “I could have grad- 
uated with honors from my seminary without 
ever opening the English Bible.” Thank God, 
this is not true of all such training schools; but 
it is true of perhaps the majority; and the re- 
sult is we have to-day thousands of professed 
ministers of Christ, many of them unconverted, 
and others who, though children of God, have 
been so stunted and hindered by their philosoph- 
ical education that they are utterly unable to 
open up the Scriptures to others, for they are 
so ignorant of the Word themselves. Christianity 
owes no debt to Greek, Roman, Medieval, or 
Modern philosophy. It is like the Bible itself 
in this— 

“A glory gilds the sacred page; 
Majestic, like the sun, 


It sheds a light on every age, 
It gives, but borrows none.” 


A man can be a well furnished minister of 
Jesus Christ who has never heard the names 
of the great philosophers, whether pagan or 
Christian, and who is utterly ignorant of their 


76 Lectures on Colossians 


systems and hypotheses, providing he will “study 
to show himself approved unto God, a workman 
that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing 
the word of truth.” The truest culture, intel- 
lectual or spiritual, is that which is drawn from 
the constant study of the Bible. How often as 
one comes in contact with men of most gracious 
personality, gentlemanly appearance, high spirit- 
uality and well trained intellect he finds upon in- 
quiry that they are like John Wesley, “men of one 
book,” and in some instances, hardly conversant 
with the literature of earth. And in saying this 
I do not mean to put a premium on ignorance, 
for as mentioned in the beginning of this address, 
the knowledge of this world is not under the ban. 
The Christian may well avail himself of any legit- 
imate means of becoming better acquainted with 
the great facts of history, the findings of science, 
and the beauties of general literature; but let 
him never put human philosophy in the place of 
divine revelation. If he studies it at all, and 
there is no reason why he should not do so, let 
him begin with this—God has spoken in His Son 
and in the Holy Scriptures He has given us the 
last words upon every question that philosophy 
raises. Browning was right when he wrote: 


“I say, the acknowledgment of God in Christ, 
Accepted by the reason, solves for thee 
All questions in the earth and out of it, 
And has so far advanced thee to be wise.” 


Christ the Antidote to Human Philosophy 7 


When the Saviour revealed Himself to the 
Samaritan woman she found her every question 
answered as she gazed upon His face. 

“In Him dwelleth all the fulness of the God- 
head bodily.” We have already seen in a previous 
lecture that this word fulness, pleroma, was a 
favorite term of the Gnostics. It represented to 
them the sum of the qualities of Deity, and with 
them Christ was but one of many stepping-stones 
or intermediaries leading up to the pleroma, but 
here we learn that not only are all the attributes 
of God seen in Christ, as Arius afterwards 
thought, and as Theistic philosophers everywhere 
admit, but the very essence of the nature of God 
in all its entirety dwells in Him. 

All that God is, is fully told out in Christ. 
He could say, “He that hath seen Me hath seen 
the Father.” So that we may say without hesi- 
tation, if any ask as to the character of God, that 
God is exactly like Jesus. Jesus is the Christ, 
and in Christ all the fulness of Deity dwells in 
a body, so that when at last we come into the 
presence of the Father we shall find in Him one 
known and loved before, not a stranger still un- 
known and possibly unknowable. J. N. Darby 
was thinking of this when he wrote: 


“There no stranger-God shall meet thee! 
Stranger thou in courts above: 

He who to His rest shall greet thee, 
Greets thee with a well known love.” 


78 Lectures on Colossians 


“Confessedly great is the mystery of piety, He 
who hath been manifested in flesh, justified in the 
Spirit, seen of angels, proclaimed unto the Gen- 
tiles, believed on in the world, received up into 
glory” (1 Tim. 3:16). God is revealed, He is no 
longer hidden. All His glory shines in the face 
of Christ Jesus. This solves at once for me as 
a believer the mystery of the universe. 


“And that which seemed to me before 
One wild, confused Babel, 

Is now a fire-tongued Pentecost 
Proclaiming Christ is able; 

And all creation its evangel 
Utters forth abroad 

Into mine ears since once I know 
My Saviour Christ is God.” 


In the 10th verse we are told, “And ye are 
complete in Him which is the Head of all prin- 
cipality and power.” The word “complete” is 
literally “filled full.” In Christ dwells all the 
pleroma of Deity, and we have our pleroma in 
Him. We do not need to go elsewhere for illum- 
ination or information. “And of His fulness have 
all we received, and grace for grace. For the 
law was given by Moses, but grace and truth 
came by Jesus Christ. No man hath seen God 
at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in 
the bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him” 
(John 1:16-18). This revelation floods our be- 
ing with rapture, fills our cup of joy, and satis- 


Christ the Antidote to Human Philosophy 79 


fies every demand of the intellect. We are filled 
full in Him. I would suggest that it is not the 
believers’ standing exactly that is in view here. 
We have that in Eph. 1:6. There we are told 
we are “accepted in the Beloved.” In that sense 
we may be said, of course, to be complete in Him; 
but Col. 2:10 is rather our state; it is the state 
of those who have found every need met in Christ, 
who is the Head of all principality and power. 

It has already been pointed out that “princi- 
palities” and “powers” are terms relating to dif- 
ferent ranks of spiritual beings. In a pretended 
knowledge of the nature and office of these glori- 
ous intelligences, the Gnostics reveled, and placed 
them high above Christ Himself who was, ac- 
cording to them, but one who introduced the 
initiate into the fellowship of this great serried 
host leading on up to the invisible God. But the 
truth is the very opposite, for all the principali- 
ties and powers (and these may be good or evil, 
fallen or unfallen) were created by Him and for 
Him in whom all the fulness dwells, and He is 
the Head of all angelic companies as well as 
human beings. 


“No place too high for Him is found, 
No place too high in heaven.” 


God would have His people ever realize that He 
who stooped to the depths of shame and suffer- 
ing of the cross for their salvation is as to the 


80 Lectures on Colossians 


mystery of His wondrous Person, God over all, 
blessed for ever. 

It will be observed that the 10th verse does not 
complete the sentence, which is carried right on 
in verses 11 and 12, but as what follows is inti- 
mately linked with the next subject for our con- 
sideration, I leave them now to take them up in 
the next address, only observing that it is imme- 
diately after the declaration of Christ’s Headship 
over all angels that we are told of the depths of 
His humiliation; for God would never separate 
the Person and work of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
But He would have us remember that it was be- 
cause of His transcendent character and His true 
Deity that He could undertake the work of purg- 
ing our sins when He gave Himself a sacrifice on 
our behalf. He had to be who He was in order 
to do what He did. The settlement of the sin 
question could never be effected by a created 
being. The issues were too great. Of all men 
it is written, “None of them can by any means 
redeem his brother or give to God a ransom 
for him, for the redemption of the soul costs 
too much. Therefore, let it alone for ever.” This 
is a somewhat free translation, but authorized by 
the best Hebrew scholars. It emphasizes what 
is here brought before us. Low thoughts of 
Christ result from low thoughts of sin. When 
I realize the enormity of my iniquity I know that 
only the Daysman for whom Job yearned can 


Christ the Antidote to Human Philosophy 81 


save me from such a load of guilt. He, because 
He is God and Man, can “lay His hand upon us 
both,” and thus by making atonement for sin 
bring God and man together in holy, happy har- 
mony. 
-...-“Can a mere man do this? 
Yet Christ saith, this He lived and died to do. 
Call Christ, then, the illimitable God, 
Or lost!” —BROWNING. 


And so we may conclude with this tremendous 
truth: God has no other answer to all the ques- 
tionings of the mind of man as to spiritual 
verities than Christ; and no other is needed, for 
Christ is the answer to them all. He who re- 
fuses Christ refuses God’s last word to man- 
kind. He has said everything He has to say in 
sending Him into the world as the Giver of life 
and the propitiation for our sins. To turn from 
Him is to refuse the living incarnation of the 
Truth and to shut oneself up to error and de- 
lusion. 


82 


LECTURE VIII 


Christ the Antidote to Jewish Legality 
(Chap. 2:11-17.) 


“In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision 
made without hands, in putting off the body of [the sins 
of] the flesh by the circumcision of Christ: buried with 
Him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with Him 
through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised 
Him from the dead. And you, being dead in your sins and 
the uncircumcision of your flesh, hath He quickened to- 
gether with Him, having forgiven you all trespasses; blot- 
ting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, 
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, 
nailing it to His cross; and having spoiled principalities and 
powers, He made a show of them openly, triumphing over 
them in it. Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or 
in drink, or in respect of an holyday, or of the new moon, 
or of the sabbath days: which are a shadow of things to 
come; but the body is of Christ.” 


This somewhat lengthy section, beginning (as 
previously mentioned) in the middle of a sen- 
tence, might be more easily expounded if divided 
into two parts, but it is so intimately linked to- 
gether that I am taking it up as a whole. Philos- 
ophy, as we have observed, is the working of the 
human mind independently of divine revelation. 
Legality is the endeavor to use a divinely given 
code, to which may be added precepts of men, as 


Christ the Antidote to Jewish Legality 88 


a means either of salvation in the first instance 
or of growth in grace afterwards. Neither of 
these conceptions is in accordance with Scripture. 
“By the works of the law there shall no flesh be 
justified in His sight;” this forever bars out legal 
works as a procuring cause of salvation. “Ye are 
not under law but under grace;” this, as effec- 
tually, forbids the thought that holiness of life 
for the Christian is found in subjecting himself to 
legal principles. “The law is the strength of 
sin,” we are told in 1 Cor.15:56. It is not, as 
multitudes have supposed, the strength of holi- 
ness or the power for righteousness. It is the 
indwelling Holy Spirit, who occupies us with 
Christ crucified, raised and glorified, that is the 
dynamic of spirituality. 

Gnosticism was as much indebted to Judaism, 
which it perverted to its own ends, and to a 
weird Jewish Kabbalism, as it was to the vapid 
reasonings of Gentile philosophers and, as we 
shall see later, to Mithraic and Zoroastrian mys- 
ticism. Here the apostle specifically deals with 
Jewish legality, and shows how Christians have 
have been forever delivered from the law and the 
legal principle in its entirety, but are now linked 
with the risen Christ. For the believer to go 
back to the law for his perfecting in holiness is, 
as he shows in the epistle to the Galatians, to fall 
from grace. That is, it is the virtual setting aside 
vf the gospel of grace; forgetting that having be- 


84 Lectures on Colossians 


gun in the Spirit we are not to be made perfect 
by the flesh. There were those ever dogging the 
footsteps of the great apostle to the Gentiles who 
sought to pervert his converts by teaching them, 
“Except ye be circumcised and keep the law of 
Moses, ye cannot be saved.” While the council at 
Jerusalem gave forth no uncertain sound in oppo- 
sition to this it is evident that its decisions were 
by no means everywhere accepted. It was hard 
for converts from Judaism to realize their com- 
plete deliverance both from the law of Moses as 
a rule of life, and from the ceremonies and ritual 
of that law as a means of growth in grace. Here 
the question at issue is handled in a remarkable 
manner through the inspiration of the Holy 
Spirit. Having declared that we have our com- 
pleteness in Christ, our exalted Head, he con- 
tinues: “In whom also ye are circumcised with 
the circumcision made without hands, in putting 
off the body of the flesh by the circumcision of 
Christ.” I omit the words “of the sins” as being 
without sufficient MS. authority. It is not merely 
a question of sins here, but the flesh itself that 
is in view. Circumcision was the cutting off of 
the flesh physically, and it was given by God to 
picture the judgment of the carnal nature and its 
complete setting aside. This is what God has 
done in the cross of Christ. In His cutting off 
by death when He stood vicariously in our place, 
we see the end of the flesh as viewed from the 


Christ the Antidote to Jewish Legality 85 


divine standpoint. It is cut off, put to one side, 
as absolutely worthless. “The flesh,” we read, 
“profiteth nothing.” “It is not subject to the law 
of God, neither indeed can be.” Therefore God 
is making no attempt to improve it; consequent- 
ly, there is no place for merit so far as man is 
concerned. He has none, and, blessed be God, he 
needs none. All merit is in Another! 

The same truth is set forth in Christian bap- 
tism. Personally, I have no sympathy with those 
who in our day would seek to do away altogether 
with water baptism on the plea that there is now, 
since the full truth of the Church is revealed, only 
one baptism, and that the baptism of the Holy 
Spirit. Eph. 4: 4-6 was just as true from Pente- 
cost to Acts 28 as it has ever been since. Paul 
did not receive the revelation of the mystery after 
he went to prison. The rapture, which is part 
of that great mystery, is taught in his earliest 
epistle—1st Thessalonians. In his postscript te 
the Roman letter he tells how he has been mak. 
ing known the mystery throughout his ministry, 
“Made known to all nations for the obedience of 
faith.” To the Ephesian elders he said (as re- 
corded in Acts 20) that he had “not shunned to 
declare unto them the whole counsel of God.” 
That counsel in its entirety had already been 
made known to him and was proclaimed among 
the Gentiles. The baptism of the Holy Spirit 
wherebv believers were brought into the Body of 


86 Lectures on Colossians 


Christ took place on the day of Pentecost. It 
was thus that the Body, the Church, was formed. 
There is no hint of any such supernatural work 
'n a wide-spread manner after Paul’s imprison- 
ment. The Body had been formed for years, and 
each believer was added to it when he received 
the Spirit. The one baptism of Eph. 4:5, in my 
judgment, cannot refer to this event because this 
is already mentioned in the previous verse. In 
verse 4 we read, “There is one Body, and one 
Spirit, and one hope of your calling.” This is the 
full revelation of the mystery, the Body formed 
by the Spirit’s baptism, waiting for the coming 
of the Lord. In verse 5 we have “one Lord, one 
faith, one baptism.” This is responsibility here 
on earth—Christ owned as Lord, the Church 
called upon to contend for the faith once for all 
delivered to the saints, and water baptism in the 
name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit in rec- 
ognition of our subjection to the one Lord. It is 
not a question of form, formula, or subjects. It 
is simply the broad fact declared, that Christian- 
ity knows only one baptism, and that, of course, 
is baptism unto the death of Jesus Christ. To 
speak of the Holy Spirit’s baptism as a burial 
with Christ unto death is nonsense. It is after 
my identification by faith in death, burial and 
resurrection that the Holy Spirit baptizes me into 
the Body. 


Nor is this to say that persons who for various 


Christ the Antidote to Jewish Legality 87 


reasons, valid or otherwise, may not have been 
scripturally baptized are not in Christ. In draw- 
ing an illustration from what is scripturally cor- 
rect one does not unchristianize those who fall 
short either because of ignorance or wilfulness. 
The argument of verse 12, as I see it, is this: the 
Christian confesses his identification with a re- 
jected Christ in his baptism; he has owned that 
the man after the flesh deserved to die; he has 
died in Christ’s death. This therefore is the end 
of the responsible man before God. Necessarily 
then, it is the end of all self-effort, of every at- 
tempt to improve the flesh by subjecting it to 
ordinances, that is, regulations, whether divinely 
given as in the Old Testament, or humanly de- 
vised as in so many unscriptural systems. God 
is not attempting to improve the old man, He 
has judged him as too evil for any improvement 
and has therefore set him to one side in death. 
Baptism is the recognition of this. It is burial 
unto death. 

Some translators read, “Wherein also ye are 
risen with Him,” but the preponderance of evi- 
dence is, I believe, in favor of the reading, ‘In 
whom also ye are risen with Him through the 
faith of the operation of God who hath raised 
Him from the dead.” It is through faith in the 
risen Christ that we become the recipients of the 
new life, and are henceforth accounted by God 
as those who, having gone down into death 


88 Lectures on Colossians 


with Him, are now one with Him in resurrection. 
What place does legality have here? None what- 
ever. To put the new man, the man in Christ, 
under rules and regulations is contrary to the 
entire principle of new creation. 

This is further emphasized in verse 13. We 
who once were dead in our trespasses and as 
Gentiles in the uncircumcision of our flesh have 
now been made to live together with Him, God 
having forgiven us all trespasses. The word is 
the same in each case, and if translated “‘sins”’ in 
the first part of the verse should be “sins” in 
the last, otherwise “trespasses” in each instance. 
Moreover, the bond that was against us (“the 
handwriting,” a term which could only be prop- 
erly used of the Ten Commandments, which we 
are distinctly told were the handwriting of God, 
embraced in ten ordinances, or divinely-given 
rules) because of the sinfulness of our natures, 
making our disobedience to the law, when once 
it came to our knowledge, a foregone conclusion, 
and which therefore made it to us a ministration 
of death and condemnation, has now been taken 
out of the way and no longer hangs over us as 
an unfulfilled obligation. Christ nailed it to His 
cross. 

What are we to understand by this expression, 
“Nailing it to His cross?” It may help us if we 
remember that it was customary under Roman 
law, when criminals were executed by crucifixion, 


Christ the Antidote to Jewish Legality 89 


hanging, or impalement, to write out a copy of 
the law they had broken, or to indicate the nature 
of their offence on a placard, and nail it above the 
victim’s head, that all might know how Rome 
executed vengeance upon those who violated her 
criminal code. Pilate wrote out the inscription 
to be placed over the head of Christ Jesus, 
and that in three languages, Hebrew, Greek, and 
Latin, that all might know why the patient Suf- 
ferer from Galilee was being publicly executed. 
“This is Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews.” 
As the people read this they understood that he 
was being crucified because He made Himself a 
king and was thus disloyal to Caesar. But as 
God looked upon that cross His holy eye saw, 
as it were, another inscription altogether. Nailed 
upon the rood above the head of His blessed Son 
was the handwriting of ten ordinances given at 
Sinai. It was because this law had been broken 
in every point that Jesus poured out His blood, 
thus giving His life to redeem us from the curse 
of the law. And so all of our sins have been 
settled for. There the law, which we had so 
dishonored, has been magnified to the full in the 
satisfaction which He made to the divine justice. 
Thus Christ has become the end of the law to 
every one that believeth. It is of course the Jew- 
ish believers Paul has in mind when he says “us,” 
for Gentiles were not under the law. But it is 
true now in principle for us all, to whom the 


90 Lectures on Colossians 


knowledge of the law has come. Christ has, by 
His death, met every claim against us and can- 
celled the bond we could not pay. 

And now as a victorious leader He has come 
forth from the tomb, having made a prey of 
the evil principalities and powers who gloated 
over His apparent defeat when He was crucified 
through weakness, but who are now themselves 
defeated in His resurrection. He has ascended 
to heaven in a glorious triumph, having made a 
spectacle of them, openly triumphing over them 
in His cross. 


“His be the Victor’s name 
Who fought the fight alone, 
Triumphant saints no honor claim 
His conquest was their own. 


By weakness and defeat 
He won the meed and crown, 
Trod all our foes beneath His feet 
By being trodden down. 


Bless, bless the Conqueror slain, 
Slain in His victory; 

Who lived, who-died, who lives again, 
For thee, His Church, for thee.” 


He took our place upon the cross and now we 
share in all the results of that work. We are 
one with Him in the new creation. The law and 
all its ritual was given to man in the flesh. 
Christians are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, 


Christ the Antidote to Jewish Legality 91 


and the law, as such, has nothing to say to the 
man in this new sphere beyond the reach of 
death. And so he concludes this marvelous sec- 
tion with a solemn admonition not to permit our- 
selves to be disturbed by any who would put us 
back under the law in any shape or form. “Let 
no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink, 
or in respect of an holyday, or of the new moon, 
or of the sabbaths.” All these once had their 
place and he who would be an obedient child of 
the old covenant was called upon to observe 
the regulations regarding them scrupulously. All 
these, however, were but a shadow of things to 
come—things which have now come—“For the 
body is of Christ.” In the Old Testament dis- 
pensation the light of God was shining upon 
Christ, and all the forms and ceremonies, includ- 
ing even the weekly sabbaths, were but shadows 
cast by Him. Since He Himself has come and 
fulfilled all the redemptive types the believer has 
“Everything in Jesus, and Jesus everything.” The 
very fact that He links the sabbath with the 
other ceremonies shows clearly that the rule of 
life for the believer is not the ten words given 
at Sinai. While confessing this law to be holy, 
just and good, the new creation man is not un- 
der it. He is, as Paul expresses it elsewhere, 
“under law to Christ,” or more properly “en- 
lawed to Christ” (1 Cor. 9: 22). That is, his 
responsibility now is to walk in fellowship with 


92 Lectures on Colossians 


the risen Christ, the Head of the Body of which 
he is but a feeble member, in whom dwells the 
Holy Spirit to be the power of the new life— 
manifested in subjection to the exalted Lord. 
None need fear that this will make for a lower 
standard of piety than if one were under the 
law as a rule of life. It is a far higher stand- 
ard. He whose one thought and desire is to mani- 
fest the risen life of Christ in all his ways will 
lead a holier life than he who is seeking to sub- 
ject the flesh to rules and regulations, even 
though given from heaven in a dispensation now 
past. This comes out very strongly in the con- 
trast between the sabbath of the law and the 
Lord’s Day of the new creation. There is no 
commandment in the New Testament inculcating 
the sacredness of the first day of the week and 
demanding that Christians observe it scrupulous- 
ly for holy purposes, yet the consensus of judg- 
ment of spiritually minded believers all through 
the centuries has led to the honoring of this day 
as a time of worship, meditation and Christian 
testimony, which has given it a preeminence 
from a spiritual standpoint that the Jewish sab- 
bath never had. 

Nor are we called upon to substitute a Chris- 
tian ritual service for the Jewish ritual which 
we have discarded. We worship now by the 
Spirit of God whose delight it is to occupy the 
hearts of the redeemed with Him to whom they 


Christ the Antidote to Jewish Legality 98 


owe all their blessing. Thus all that is fleshly 
or carnal must give way, as but prefatory and 
evanescent, and that which is spiritual and abid- 
ing takes its place. 


94 


LECTURE In 


Christ the Antidote to Oriental Mysticism 
(Chap. 2:18, 19.) 


“Tet no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary 
humility and worshipping of angels, intruding into those 
things which he hath not seen, vainly puffed up by his 
fleshly mind, and not holding the Head, from which all the 
Body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, 
and knit together, increaseth with the increase of God.” 


The natural man is distinctly religious. He 
does not need to be regenerated in order to feel 
after God. While it is true of all the unsaved 
that “there is none that seeketh after God” in 
the sense of seeking Him for His own sake, yet 
it has been well said that man is incurably relig- 
ious; he must have something to worship. And 
so Satan has supplied him with cults of all de- 
scriptions to suit every type of mind. One of the 
oldest systems that has come down even to our 
own day is that of Parseeism, based upon the 
Zend Avesta, supposed to have originated with 
the Persian hero and prophet, Zoroaster, or 
Zarathustra, as he is called in the Persian scrip- 
tures. This system teaches a mystical dualism. 
Ahura Mazda, or Ormuzd, is the infinite God, 


Christ the Antidote to Oriental Mysticism 95 


the Eternal Light; a lesser deity, Ahriman, the 
Prince of Darkness, sometimes looked upon as the 
creator of matter, is in constant conflict with the 
supreme deity. For twelve thousand years he is 
destined to wage war against the light and then 
his kingdom of darkness will be destroyed. This 
system permeated various schools of thought, 
and in apostolic days had been widely accepted 
throughout the Greek and Roman world under 
the name Mithraism. Its votaries went every- 
where proclaiming it as the great unifying world 
religion. It was a vast secret society, its initiates 
going from one mystical degree to another until 
they became adepts. This Satanic system trem- 
bled before the advancing hosts of Christianity, 
and finally sought to combine certain of its views 
with a part of the Christian revelation; and, as 
we have already seen, by an eclectic combination 
of Judaism, Greek philosophy and oriental mysti- 
cism a new religion was formed, divided, how- 
ever, into many different sects all alike unsound 
as to Christ, and all rejecting the inspiration of 
the Holy Scriptures and substituting the vain 
speculations of the human mind. Yet imitations 
of almost every Christian doctrine were found 
in some one or other of these systems, but with 
certain accretions and contradictions which made 
them most dangerous. Justin Martyr wrote some 
years after the apostle John passed from this 
scene, “Many spirits are abroad in the world and 


96 Lectures on Colossians 


the credentials they display are splendid gifts of 
mind, eloquence and logic. Christian, look care- 
fully, and ask for the print of the nails.” All 
these systems denied the true Christ of God who 
gave Himself for our sins upon the cross of 
shame. Some, like the Docetists, taught that the 
humanity of Jesus was simply an appearance, un- 
real and immaterial. The first epistle of John 
meets this in a very wonderful way. Another 
sect, afterwards headed up in Cerinthus, the 
great arch-heretic of the second century, called 
by Polycarp, “the firstborn of Satan,” taught that 
Jesus was the natural son of Joseph and Mary, 
who died on the cross finally to separate him- 
self from his own sin, but to whom the Christ 
(identified with the eternal Spirit) came at his 
baptism and illumination, but left him at the 
cross. This system seems to be particularly be- 
fore the mind of the apostle Paul and he combats 
it in a masterly manner. In all of these systems 
knowledge was given the preeminence over faith. 
The latter, which is confidence in revealed testi- 
mony, was repudiated by these theorists who as- 
sumed acquaintance with divine mysteries far be- 
yond that of ordinary people and quite in advance 
of the Biblical revelation. In their pride and 
folly they put a great number of spirit-beings, 
known as eons, between the soul and the un- 
knowable God. These were all classified and 
named, as for instance, Reason, Wisdom, Power, 


Christ the Antidote to Oriental Mysticism 97: 


and similar divine attributes. All this appeals 
to the natural man. It sounds like humility to 
say, “In myself I am so utterly ignorant and un- 
worthy, it is not for me to go directly to God 
the Father or to Christ the Son. I will there- 
fore avail myself of mediating angels and spirits 
who can present my cause in a more suitable man- 
ner than I can myself.” But it is really pride 
of intellect, and is the grossest unbelief, when 
God has declared that “there is one Mediator 
between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, who 
gave Himself a ransom for all to be testified in 
due time.” The lowly man will receive what He 
has made known in His Word. 

Through the infinite mercy of God the early 
Church triumphed largely over these Satanic 
efforts to ally these dying cults and systems with 
Christianity. The Holy Ghost so clearly exposed 
that the Church repudiated in one council after 
another these vile theories which would have 
made man his own Saviour. But all down the 
centuries since there have been those who from 
time to time have taken up certain elements of 
these discarded schools of thought and sought to 
foist them upon Christians as though they were 
new and wonderful truths. Romanism, with its 
doctrine of justification by works, purgatorial 
purification after death, and mediating saints and 
angels, has simply adopted much that the apostles 
refused, and palms it off on its credulous dupes 


98 Lectures on Colossians 


as traditional Christianity. Imagine anyone pray- 

ing to saints and angels, or adoring their images, 
with the solemn words before him of this eight- 
eenth verse, “Let no man beguile you of your re- 
ward in a voluntary humility and worshipping of 
angels, intruding into those things which he hath 
not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind.” 
How striking the contrast between the expres- 
sions “voluntary humility” and “vainly puffed 
up.” I recall a friend of my youth, a very graci- 
ous and kindly man, who had been brought up 
from childhood in the Roman communion, with 
whom I often sought to reason out of the Scrip- 
tures, in order to show him the simplicity of the 
gospel of Christ. I remember, when I asked why 
he prayed to the blessed Virgin Mary instead of 
directly to our Lord Jesus, how with an air of 
the greatest humility he answered, “Oh, I am too 
sinful, too utterly unworthy, to go directly to our 
blessed Lord. He is infinitely above me, so pure 
and holy, His majesty is so great that I would 
not dare to prostrate myself before Him. But I 
know that no one has such influence with a son 
as his mother, and-I know, too, that a pure 
woman’s tender heart feels for sinners in their 
sorrows and failures, therefore I go to the blessed 
Virgin Mary and pour out my heart to her ag 
to my own mother, and I plead with her to speak 
for me to her holy, spotless Son, and I feel sure 
that she will influence Him as no other could.” 


Christ the Antidote to Oriental Mysticism 99 


This sounds like lowliness of mind and humility 
of spirit. It is really the most subtle kind of 
pride, for it involves proposing to be wiser than 
the revealed Word of God. There, as we have 
seen, we read of only the “one Mediator;” and 
we learn that “the Father sent the Son to be 
the Saviour of the world ;” that “He bore our sins 
in His own body on the tree,” that His tender 
heart was filled with compassion for sinners here 
on earth. None were too vile or degraded but 
that they were invited to come to Him. The 
worst His enemies could say of Him was, “This 
Man receiveth sinners and eateth with them.” 
And up there in yonder glory He is the same 
Jesus that He was when here on earth. We may 
rest assured that “we have not an High Priest 
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our 
infirmities, but One who was tempted in all points 
like as we are, apart from sin,” and who is “able 
- to succor those who are tempted.” In His name 
we are bidden to “come boldly to the throne of 
grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace 
for seasonable help.” Why turn aside to angels 
or saints, however devoted, or even to His blessed 
mother herself, when we can go directly to Him, 
assured of His deep interest in all that concerns 
us? He made intercession for transgressors on 
the cross; up there at God’s right hand He ever 
lives to make intercession for those who trust in 
Him. And so it is not an evidence of humility 


100 Lectures on Colossians 


to say, I am too unworthy to go to Christ; it is 
only unbelief that would lead one thus to speak. 
He stands with arms outstretched, pleading with 
all who are in trouble or distress, “Come unto Me 
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will 
give you rest.” What base ingratitude to turn 
from Him to any other! What amazing folly to 
think it necessary to have anyone speak for 
me to Him, when He stands there showing His 
wounded hands and saying, “Peace be unto you.” 
It is only pride and unbelief that would put Him 
off at a distance and bring angels in between. 
This voluntary humility and worshipping of 
angels is in itself a complete denial of the new 
creation. It fails to recognize the wondrous truth 
that all believers are one Body with their exalted 
Head. And so the apostle goes on to say, “And 
not holding the Head, from which all the Body 
by joints and bands having nourishment min- 
istered, and knit together, increaseth with the in- 
crease of God.” “Holding the Head” is recog- 
nizing our link with Him, both in life and by the 
Spirit. He, the exalted One at God’s right hand, 
is the source of blessing for all His people in this 
scene. As of old the holy oil poured upon Aaron’s 
head went down to the skirts of his garment 
(Ps. 183: 2), so now from the Head in heaven 
blessing in the Spirit’s power comes down to 
every member of His Body on the earth. It will 
be observed that the figure of a body is not mere- 


Mee ay 4 
Christ the Antidote to Oriental Mysticism 101 


ly that of a society or, as we would say, an or- 
ganization. It is far more wonderful than that. 
It is a divine organism. Just as truly as all the 
members of a human body form the complete 
man, so do all believers in Christ, through the 
Spirit’s baptism, form the one new man. See in 
this connection 1 Cor. 12:12,13 and Eph. 2:15. 
If out of touch with the Head through failure to 
apprehend the intimacy of our relation to Him 
we put anything or any creature between our- 
selves and Him, we are not holding the Head. 
Satan knows, as one has well put it, that if he 
could get but the thickness of a sheet of paper 
between the Head and the Body, all life would 
be destroyed. This, of course, can never be, but 
it is sadly possible so utterly to misunderstand 
our relation to the Head, and so fail to avail 
ourselves of the supplies of grace that might be 
ours did we but walk in fellowship with Him, 
that we would be out of communion with Him and 
therefore not consciously guided by Him. 

We are told that from the Head all the Body 
is nourished, and this through the ministry of 
joints and bands placed in the Body for this very 
purpose by the Holy Spirit, so that all being knit 
together grows, or increases, with the increase of 
God. This is most blessedly expanded and elab- 
orated in Ephesians 4:11-16. There we see how 
the risen Lord has given various gifts to His 
Church for the perfecting of the saints, with a 


Lincoln Christian Collen? 


102 Lectures on Colossians 


view to the work of the ministry for the 
edifying of the Body of Christ. Note specially 
verses 15 and 16, where we are told that He 
would have us “grow up into Him in all things, 
which is the Head, even Christ: from whom the 
whole Body fitly joined together and compacted 
by that which every joint supplieth, according to 
the effectual working in the measure of every 
part, maketh increase of the Body unto the edify- 
ing of itself in love.’ What a marvelous picture 
is this, and how strikingly does the one passage 
complement the other, and what responsibility 
does it put upon each one of us as members of 
Christ and members one of another! There are 
no useless members in this Body. Just as in the 
human body every joint, every ligament, every 
hidden part, has some service to perform for the 
good of the whole, even though as yet physicians 
and surgeons may not fully understand the need 
of every gland and organ, and may speak, as 
some do, of certain useless parts, or discarded 
vestiges of earlier forms, yet we may be very 
sure that God in His infinite wisdom has a use 
for every member of the body; so in the mys- 
tical Body of Christ let no believer think of him- 
self as useless, as without any special gift, and 
therefore as having no part in the building up 
of the whole. There is one term used in 1 Cor. 
12:28 that is most suggestive; it is the little 
word “helps.” Notice how it is sandwiched in 


Christ the Antidote to Oriental Mysticism 108 


between gifts of healings and governments. We 
may not all have spectacular gifts, but we can all 
be helps. The apostle writing to one Church says, 
“Ye all being helpers together by prayer.” Here 
is a service the feeblest saint may perform for 
the benefit of the whole Body. 

If in spiritual health each member will func- 
tion aright for the edification of all; but just 
as in the natural order diseased members be- 
come a menace to the entire body, so Christians 
out of fellowship with God, in a low or carnal 
state, are hindrances where they should be help- 
ers. May each one of us be concerned about our 
responsibility here. May we be so occupied with 
our blessed, glorified Head, so careful to see that 
there is nothing interfering with our communion 
with Him, that He may be able to use us as joints 
or bands to minister nourishment and blessing to 
His people that all may be the more knit to- 
gether because of our faithfulness in seeking to 
be helpers of one another’s faith, that thus the 
Body may indeed increase with the increase of 
God. 

And now in closing let me say a word to my 
younger brethren in Christ who seek to preach 
the gospel, or to minister for the edification of 
believers. Bear in mind that if you would be true 
ministers of Jesus Christ you are to preach the 
Word and seek to occupy your hearers with the 
truth of God. Do not, I beg of you, give way 


104 Lectures on Colossians 


to a very common vanity of preachers, speculation 
in regard to things not revealed. You are not sent 
forth to acquaint men with unsubstantiated theo- 
ries, nor to occupy their minds with speculative 
systems. God has entrusted you with His own 
holy Word, and He holds you responsible to give 
that out in all its clearness and simplicity. One 
“Thus saith the Lord” is worth a ton of human 
thoughts and ideas. Unreliable theological 
disquisitions and philosophical discussions never 
saved one poor sinner or comforted a discouraged 
saint. It is the truth of God, ministered in the 
power of the Holy Spirit, that alone can accom- 
plish this. All else is but wasting precious time, 
and is dishonoring to the Lord who sent you out to 
proclaim His truth. This divinely given message 
ministered in the power of the Holy Ghost sent 
down from heaven, will awaken the careless, 
quicken the dead in trespasses and sins, give 
peace to the anxious, comfort the distressed, and 
sanctify believers. To substitute the empty 
dreams of carnal, or unregenerate men for this, 
is the utmost folly. Of old, God said, through 
Jeremiah, “The prophet that hath a dream, let 
him tell a dream, and he that hath My Word, let 
him speak My Word faithfully. What is the chaff 
to the wheat? said the Lord” (Jer. 23: 28). 

To add to His Word is but to pervert it. 
Neither tradition, nor the voice of the Church, 
nor yet fancied superior intellectual illumination, 


Christ the Antidote to uriental Mysticism 105 


can complete that which is already perfect—the 
revelation of the mind of God in His holy Word. 
“The Bible and the Bible alone” is the founda- 
tion of our faith. 


106 


LECTURE X 


Christ the Antidote to Carnal Asceticism 
(Chap. 2: 20-23.) 


“Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudi- 
ments of the world, why, as though living in the world, 
are ye subject to ordinances (Touch not; taste not; handle 
not; which all are to perish with the using) after the com- 
mandments and doctrines of men? Which things have in- 
deed a show of wisdom in will worship, and humility, and 


neglecting of the body; not in any honor to the satisfying 
of the flesh.” 


It is a great mistake and a fatal blunder into 
which the best of people readily fall, to fail to 
distinguish the two very different senses in 
which the term “the flesh” is used in the Bible. 
Sometimes it refers solely to our bodies, “this 
mortal flesh,” but in the doctrinal parts of the 
New Testament it generally means the nature 
which fallen man has inherited from his first 
father. God created man, we are told, “in His 
own image, after His own likeness, male and 
female created He them, and called their name 
Adam in the day when they were created” (Gen. 
5:2). Physically perfect, they were morally 
innocent, and spiritually like unto God, who is 
a Spirit and the Father of spirits. But in the 


Christ the Antidote to Carnal Asceticism 107 


very next verse we read, “Adam begat a son in 
his own likeness after his image” (Gen. 5:3). 
This was after sin had defiled his nature and 
poisoned the springs of life; and all his chil- 
dren now bear this fallen image and likeness. 
Hence the need of regeneration, and so our Lord 
said to Nicodemus, “That which is born of the 
flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit 
is spirit.” He is not merely saying that that 
which is born of the physical body is a physical 
body, but that personality which comes into the 
world through natural generation and birth is 
one with the fallen nature which Adam acquired 
when he fell. This is called distinctively, ‘the 
flesh,” “the body of the flesh,” “sin in the flesh,” 
“sin that dwelleth in us,” “the carnal mind which 
is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed 
can be;” and is the nature of the old man—the 
unregenerate natural man. We are told that we 
all were by nature children of wrath, even as 
others. When converted, or regenerated, this 
carnal nature is not altered in the slightest de- 
gree; it is never improved nor sanctified, either 
in whole or in part. In the cross of Christ God 
has condemned it utterly as too vile for improve- 
ment. The believer has received a new nature 
which is spiritual, the nature of the new man; 
and he is now responsible to walk in obedience to 
the Word of God, which appeals only to this new 
nature. The old and the new natures are in the 


108 Lectures on. Colossians 


believer and will be until the redemption of the 
body. 

It is true that the flesh, or the old nature, acts 
through the members of the body, but the body 
itself is not evil. Every natural instinct or phy- 
sical appetite, no matter how perfectly right and 
proper it may be, and used as God intended, may 
be perverted to selfish and dishonorable purposes. 
But we are called upon to mortify, or put to 
death, the deeds of the body and no longer to 
yield our members as instruments of unright- 
eousness unto sin, but to present the body with 
all its ransomed powers unto God, to be used for 
His service under the controlling power of His 
Holy Spirit. Hence the Christian is called to a 
life of self-abnegation and so the apostle Paul 
could say, “I keep under my body and bring it 
into subjection.” But by that he does not mean 
that he visits needless punishment upon his phy- 
sical flesh in order to purify his spirit, but rather 
that he does not permit unlawful or inordinate 
physical appetites to dominate him, and so lead 
him into excesses which would bring dishonor 
upon the ministry committed to him and upon the 
name of the Lord whose servant he is. This sub- 
jection of the body will ever be necessary as long 
as we are in this scene of testing. So the apostle 
Peter tells us, “He that hath suffered in the flesh 
hath ceased from sin.” It is not that we ob- 
tain deliverance from the power of sin by ascetic 


Christ the Antidote to Carnal Asceticism 109 


practices such as flagellation, fasting, or ignor- 
ing physical comfort, but rather by refusing 
obedience to carnal impulses, the gratification of 
which may give physical pleasure while they 
war against the soul. 

And in this we may see the contrast between 
our Lord’s temptation and our own. Of Him we 
read that “He suffered being tempted.” Of us, 
that we cease from sin if we suffer in the flesh. 
In other words, to Him, the Holy One, tempta- 
tion caused the keenest suffering. His holy na- 
ture shrank from the slightest contact with evil 
even in Satanic suggestion. But with us, fallen 
as we are, the suggestion of evil may be seduc- 
tively pleasing, and we must resolutely refuse the 
thought of sensual pleasure in order that we may 
walk in purity before God. “He was tempted in 
all things like as we are, apart from sin.” That 
is, He was never tempted by inward desire for 
sin. He could say, “The prince of this world 
cometh and hath nothing in Me.” With us it is 
far otherwise; when temptation is presented 
from without we are sadly conscious of the fact 
that we have a traitor within who would open 
the door of the fortress to the enemy if he were 
not carefully watched. And right here is where 
purpose of heart is needed in order that we may 
cleave to the Lord and give no ground to the 
suggestions of the flesh or the promptings of the 


Adversary. 


110 Lectures on Colossians 


An Indian, in explaining the conflict of the 
two natures, said, “It seems to me as though two 
dogs are fighting within me: one is a black dog, 
and he is very savage and very bad; the other 
is a white dog, and he is very gentle and very 
good; but the black dog fights with him all the 
time.” “And which dog wins?” someone asked. 
Laconically the Indian replied, “Which ever one 
I say ‘sic him’ to.” And it was well put, ror if 
the will is on the side of the evil, the flesh will 
triumph; but if the will is subdued by grace 
and subject to the Holy Spirit the new nature 
will control. 

It is for lack of understanding this important 
truth that many have supposed they could per- 
fect themselves in holiness by imposing penances 
and suffering of various kinds upon the body. At 
a very early day such views came into the Church. 
The Jewish Essenes and the Stoic philosophers 
had accustomed both Jews and Gentiles to the 
thought that the body in itself is evil, and must 
be subdued if one would advance in holiness. 
These views were taken up by certain sects of 
Gnostics, while others went to the opposite ex- 
treme and taught that the spiritual alone was 
important, and that the body might be used in 
any way without polluting the soul. 

But in these last four verses of our pres- 
ent chapter the apostle warns against the folly 
of seeking holiness through asceticism. He de- 


Christ the Antidote to Carnal Asceticism 111 


scribes these practices as being part of that phil- 
osophy of which he has already spoken in verse 8, 
which he designated the rudiments, or elements of 
the world. Challenging the believer, as a new man 
in Christ, who died with Him to his old place and 
condition in the world, he asks: “Wherefore if 
ye died with Christ from the elements of the 
world, why, as though living in the world, are ye 
subject to ordinances after the commandments 
and doctrines of men?’ I have purposely left 
out certain parenthetical expressions which we 
will look at in a moment. The great thing 
now to see is that all these rules and regula- 
tions for the subduing of the body are accord- 
ing to the principles of the world. They all 
take for granted that God is still trying in some 
way to improve the flesh, and this we know is 
not His purpose.. Through John the Baptist He 
said, “The axe is laid to the root of the tree.” 
Not only in modern times, but in those early days 
of Christianity which we are considering, men 
have laid the axe, or the pruning-knife, if you 
will, to the fruit of the tree, as though the tree 
might be improved if the bad fruit were cut off. 
Get men to reform, to sign pledges, to put them- 
selves under rules and regulations, to starve the 
body, to inflict physical suffering upon it, and 
surely its vile propensities will be at least an- 
nulled if not eliminated, and little by little men 
will become spiritual and godlike. The formula 


112 Lectures on Colossians 


which thousands have taken up within the last 
few years: 


“Every day, in every way, 
I am getting better and better,” 


expresses the mind of many. But no amount 
of self-control, no physical suffering whatever 
can change the carnal mind, called emphatically, 
“the flesh.” 

Saint Jerome tells how, having lived a lecher- 
ous life in his youth, after he became a Chris- 
tian he fled from all contact with the gross and 
vulgar world in which he had once sought to 
gratify every fleshly desire. He left Rome and 
wandered to Palestine, and there lived in a cave 
near Bethlehem, where he sought to subdue his 
carnal nature by fasting almost to starvation. 
And then he tells us how disappointed he was 
when, exhausted and weary, he fell asleep and 
dreamed he was still rioting among the dissolute 
companions of his godless days. The flesh can- 
not be starved into subjection. It cannot be im- 
proved by subjecting it to ordinances whether 
human or divine. But as we walk in the Spirit, 
and are occupied thus with the risen Christ, we 
are delivered from the power of fieshly lusts 
which war against the soul. 

In the parenthetical portion of verses 21 and 
22 the apostle gives us a sample, if we may so 
say, of the carnal ordinances or doctrines of men 


Christ the Antidote to Carnal Asceticism 118 


to which he refers, “Touch not; taste not; handle 
not.” He is not saying, Do not touch, taste or 
handle these ascetic regulations—that would be 
nonsense—but these are the human rules, through 
obedience to which the ascetic hoped to attain 
to a higher degree of spirituality. How often we 
have heard this 21st verse quoted as though for 
the guidance of Christians to-day, exactly the 
opposite of that which the apostle intended. All 
such regulations are to perish with the using. 

These things have, indeed, an appearance of 
wisdom in will worship and humility and neg- 
lecting of the body, or punishing the body by 
making it suffer. It is natural to suppose that 
such things would have a tendency to free one 
from carnal desires, but untold thousands of 
monks, hermits and ascetics of all descriptions, 
have proved that they are useless against 
the indulgence of the flesh. One may shut him- 
self up in a monastery in order to escape the 
world, only to find he has taken the world in 
with him. One may dwell in a cave in the desert 
in order to subdue the flesh, only to find that the 
more the body is weakened and neglected, the 
more powerful the flesh becomes. 

Dr. A. T. Robertson translates the last part of 
verse 20: “Why, as though living in the world, 
do you dogmatize; such as, Touch not; taste 
not; handle not?” These rules may be elevated 
to the importance of dogmas but they will never 


114 Lectures on Colossians 


enable one to achieve the object he has in view. 
You have heard of the man who, anxious to fit 
himself for the presence of God, and awakened 
to a sense of the emptiness of a life of worldly 
pleasure, fled from the city to the desert and 
made his home in a cave in the rocks, there 
practising the greatest austerities, and hoping 
through prayer and penance to reach the place 
where he would be acceptable to God. Hearing 
of another hermit who was reputed to be a very 
holy and devout man, he made a long, wearisome 
journey across the desert, supported only by his 
staff, in order to interview him and learn from 
him how he might find peace with God. In an- 
swer to his agonized questions the aged anchorite 
said to him, “Take that staff, that dry rod which 
is in your hand, plant it in the desert soil, water 
it daily, offering fervent prayers as you do so, 
and when it bursts into leaf and bloom you may 
know that you have made your peace with God.” 
Rejoicing that at last he had what seemed like 
authoritative instruction in regard to this great- 
est of all ventures, he hastened back to his cell 
and planted his rod as he had been told to do. 
For long, weary days, weeks, and months, he 
faithfully watered the dry stick and prayed for 
the hour when the token of his acceptance would 
be manifest; until at last one day, in utter despair 
and brokenness of spirit, weakened by fasting 


Christ the Antidote to Carnal Asceticism 115 


and sick with longing for the apparently un- 
attainable, he exclaimed bitterly, “It is all no use; 
I am no better to-day than I was when I first 
came to the desert. The fact is, I am just like 
this dry stick myself. It needs life ere there can 
be leaves and fruit; and I need life, for I am 
dead in my sins and cannot produce fruit for 
God.” And then it seemed as though a voice 
within said, “At last you have learned the les- 
son that the old hermit meant to teach you. It is 
because you are dead and have no strength or 
power in yourself that you must turn to Christ 
alone and find life and peace in Him.” And leav- 
ing his desert cave he went back to the city to 
find the Word of God and in its sacred pages 
learn the way of peace. 

And let us remember it is as impossible to ob- 
tain holiness by ascetic practices as it is to buy 
salvation by physical suffering. We are saved in 
the first place, not through anything we undergo, 
but through that which our blessed Lord Jesus 
Christ underwent for us on Calvary’s cross, and, 
blessed be God, He who died for us upon that 
cross now lives for us at God’s right hand, and 
He is the power for holiness as well as for justifi- 
cation. By the Holy Spirit He dwells within us, 
and as we yield ourselves unto God as those who 
are alive from the dead, He is enabled to live 
out His wondrous life in us. Does your heart 
sometimes cry: 


116 Lectures on Colossians 


“Tell me what to do to be pure 
In the sight of all-seeing eyes; 
Tell me is there no thorough cure, 
No escape from the sins I despise? 
Will my Saviour only pass by, 
Only show how faulty I’ve been? 
Will He not attend to my cry? 
May I nct this moment be clean?” 


Oh, believe me, dear, anxious, seeking Chris- 
tian, you will find holiness in the same Christ in 
whom you found salvation. As you cease from 
self-occupation and look up in faith to Him you 
will be transformed into His own glorious image; 
you will become like Him as you gaze on His 
wonderful face. There is no other way by which 
the fiesh may be subdued and your life become 
one of triumph over the power of sin. Asceticism 
is but a vain will-o’-the-wisp which, while it 
promises you victory, will plunge you into the 
morass of disappointment and defeat. But occu- 
pation with Christ risen at God’s right hand is 
the sure way to overcome the lusts of the flesh 
and to become like Him who has said, “For their 
sakes I sanctify Myself, that they also may be 
sanctified through the truth.” 

Of Him they said He was a glutton and a 
wine-bibber, because He came, not as an ascetic 
but as a Man among men, entering with them 
into every sinless experience of human life. He 
has “left us an example that we should follow 


Christ the Antidote to Carnal Asceticism 117 


His steps.” He has come to sanctify every nat- 
tural relationship, not to do violence to those 
affections and feelings which He Himself im- 
planted in the hearts of mankind. 


LECTURE XI 
Christ the Believer’s Life and Object 
(Chap. 3-1-4) 


“If ye then be risen with Christ, seek these thimes which 
are above, where Christ sitteth on the right kend of Geek 
Set your affection on thimgs above, mot on times om the 
earth. For ye are dead, and your Efe is id with Christ 
in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then 
shall ye also appear with Him im glory.” 


After the somewhat lengthy digression of 
verses 13 to 23 in the previous chapter, the 
apostle comes back to apply the truth taught in 
verse 12. I think we shall get the commecition bei- 
ter if we read these two passages without any- 
thing intervening: “Buried with Him im bap- 
tism, wherein also ye are risen with Him through 
the faith of the operation of God, who hath 
raised Him from the dead. If ye then be risen 
with Christ, seek those things which are above, 
where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God.” 
All that has come in between these two verses 
was in the nature of warning against false sys- 
tems that would have robbed the believer of this 
great truth of unity with Christ in death and 


Christ the Believer’s Life and Object 119 


resurrection. It is of all importance that we 
realize that we do not stand before God on the 
ground of responsibility. The responsible man 
failed utterly to keep his obligations. There was 
nothing for him, therefore, but condemnation, but 
our Lord Jesus Christ has borne that condemna- 
tion; He voluntarily, in infinite grace, took the 
place of the sinner and bore his judgment upon 
the cross. Now in resurrection, as we have seen, 
all who believe are not only given a perfect rep- 
resentation by Him before the throne of God, but 
we are in Him in virtue of being partakers of 
His life. “In Adam” meant that we were born 
of his race; “in Christ,” in contrast clearly in- 
dicates that we have received a new life from 
Him and, therefore, we are not to think of our- 
selves as in any sense on probation. All that 
was ended on the cross of Christ. 


“Jesus died and we died with Him, 
Buried in His grave we lay, 

One in Him in resurrection, 
Soon with Him in heaven’s bright day. 


Death and judgment are behind us, 
Grace and glory are before; 

All the billows rolled o’er Jesus, 
There exhausted all their power.” 


It is when the soul enters into this experi- 
mentally, realizing that the death of Christ, in 
which faith has given him part, has severed the 


120 Lectures on Colossians 


link that bound him to the world and all its pur- 
poses and has freed him from all necessity to be 
subject to sin in the flesh, that he will be free to 
glorify God as he walks in newness of life. Most 
theological systems fail to apprehend this great 
truth of the new man in Christ, hence so few 
believers have settled peace and realize their 
union with Him who sits at God’s right hand, 
not only as the Head of the Church, but as the 
Head of every man who has found life through 
Him. 

Occupation, then, with Christ risen in the 
energy of the Holy Spirit, is the power for holi- 
ness. We are called upon to seek those things 
which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right 
hand of God. Our real life is there, our truest, 
best interests are all identified with Him. Heav- 
enly-mindedness is the natural, or I should say, 
spiritual outcome of this realization. As the 
heart is taken up with Him we will be concerned 
about representing Him aright in this world 
where He is still rejected and His claims re- 
fused. 

The marginal reading of verse 2 is better than 
the text of the Authorized Version—“Set your 
mind on things above, not on things on the 
earth.” That is, as a watch is set to the sun, in 
order to mark the time correctly, so let your mind 
be set to Christ risen, in order that His life may 
be seen in you. This is in contrast to the things 


Christ the Believer’s Life and Object 121 


spoken of in Phil. 3:19—“who mind earthly 
things.” The time for this is past for those who 
are now one with Christ risen. This will not 
make us impractical and visionary, but we shall 
live all the more consistently thus fulfilling 
our varied responsibilities in the home, in busi- 
ness, in the State and, of course, in the Church, 
as our minds are fixed on heavenly things. This 
is indeed the “ribbon of blue” to which refer- 
ence was made in an earlier address. We will 
manifest the heavenly character, just where we 
come closest into contact with the things of 
the earth. I think we may see in Christ 
during the forty days between resurrection and 
‘ascension something of what this involves. He 
was still here upon the earth but He was alto- 
gether heavenly. “Though we have known Christ 
after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him 
so no more,” and we are called into association 
with Him to manifest the heavenly character as 
we walk the desert sands. Men of the world will 
not understand this, and we need not expect them 
to; but nevertheless they can and will recognize 
and appreciate true piety and Christian character 
even though they hate those who possess it, as 
Cain hated Abel because his own works were evil 
and his brother’s righteous. But it should be true 
of us, as of our blessed Lord Himself, that this 
hatred is undeserved, according as it was writ 
ten of Him, “They hated Me without a cause.” 


iPr Lectures on Colossians 


The third verse epitomizes this in a very won- 
derful way, “For ye have died, and your life is 
hid with Christ in God.” We have died to all that 
we once were as children of Adam, and now we 
do not have independent life as Christians, but 
Christ Himself is our life and, while it is true 
we have this eternal life abiding in us, He who 
is the source and sustainer of it is hidden yonder 
in the heavens “in God,” and so our life is safe 
in His keeping. One can understand and appre- 
ciate the rather crude expression of the simple 
brother who, after his conversion, had been great- 
ly concerned lest by some sinful act or lack of 
faith he might in some way forfeit his salvation 
and lose the new life given in grace. But as he 
listened to an address upon these wonderful 
words of this third verse, his anxiety dis- 
appeared and he exclaimed with rapture, “Glory 
to God! Whoever heard of a man drowning with 
his head that high above water!” Admitting all 
their crudity, his words nevertheless expressed a 
great truth. Our Head is in heaven, our life is 
in Him, hidden in God, therefore we are eternally 
one with Him and nothing can ever separate the 
Christian from the risen Christ. 

Outwardly, believers in the Lord Jesus are like 
other men, they are still in dying bodies, and 
often distressed by the flesh within and in con- 
flict with Satan and the world without, yet each 
believer is to walk through this scene in the 


Christ the Believer’s Life and Object 128 


power of resurrection life, manifesting his union 
with his glorified Head. He is called to be a 
man of God, though in the humblest condition 
of life. 


“There is no glory halo 
Round his devoted head, 

No lustre marks the sacred path 
In which his footsteps tread. 


But holiness is graven 
Upon his thoughtful brow, 
And all his steps are ordered 
In the light of heaven e’en now. 


He often is peculiar, 
And oft misunderstood, 

And yet his power is felt by all,— 
The evil and the good. 


For he doth live in touch with heaven 
A life of faith and prayer; 

His hope, his- purpose and his all, 
His life is centered there.” 


This is indeed to be a consistent member of 
the Body of Christ, manifestly displaying the 
character of the new man whose Head is in 
heaven. And, though like his Lord despised and 
rejected of men, the Christian is called to run 
with patience the race set before him, knowing 
that the day of manifestation is nearing when he, 
too, according to his measure, shall see of the 
travail of his soul and be satisfied. Christ will 


124 Lectures on Colossians 


find His satisfaction in us, we will find ours in 
Him. 


“He and I in that bright glory 
One deep joy will share; 

Mine to be forever with Him, 
His that I am there.” 


And when the day of the Lord dawns after 
earth’s long, dark night—or, to put it in another 
way, after man’s garish day is ended—then those 
who are content to be strangers and pilgrims here 
during His rejection, shall shine forth with Him 
when He comes to reign as King of kings and 
Lord of lords. And so we read in verse four, 
“When Christ who is our life shall appear, then 
shall we also appear with Him in glory.” We 
might read, “be manifested,’ for “appear’—it 
would perhaps make the thought even clearer, 
When He with whom we have died and in whom 
we are risen shall return from heaven and be 
manifested before His earthly people who will be 
waiting for Him in that day, and before His foes 
as well, then we also shall be manifested with 
Him in glory. 

As we think of His coming we know it is pre- 
sented to us in two aspects in the New Testa- 
ment, and perhaps that which appeals most to 
every real lover of Christ is what we commonly 
call ‘‘the Rapture.” Our hearts long for the hour 
when “the Lord Himself shall descend from 


Christ the Believer’s Life and Object 125 


heaven with a shout, with the voice of the arch- 
angel, and with the trump of God: and the dead 
in Christ shall rise first, and we which are alive 
and remain shall be caught up together with 
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air.” 
We think of this as the end of the race, and as 
the time, too, when “He will change these bodies 
of our humiliation and make them like unto the 
body of His glory,” when “this mortal shall put 
on immortality and this corruptible shall put on 
incorruption,” and we shall be fully “conformed 
to the image of God’s Son.” This will be the ful- 
filment of our Lord’s promise given before He 
went away: “I go to*prepare a place for you, and 
if I go and prepare a place for you I will come 
again and receive you unto Myself, that where I 
am there ye may be also.” This will be the occa- 
sion of our reception into the Father’s house: but 
all of this, blessed as it is, and calculated to stir 
the souls of His waiting ones to their deepest 
depths, is but an introduction to the glories yet to 
be revealed in the everlasting kingdom of our 
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. He is coming back 
to the earth that rejected Him, and all His saints 
are coming with Him, not, of course, to take up 
human conditions here in the world again; but 
in resurrection bodies to appear with Him 
before the astonished eyes of those who still re- 
ject Him, and to the delight of those who will be 
waiting for Him as the delivering King in that 


126 Lectures on Colossians 


day when the word will be fulfilled, “Behold, He 
cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see Him, 
and they also which pierced Him, and all the 
tribes of the land shall wail because of Him.” That 
will be the time when we shall appear with Him 
in glory, and to this the apostle refers again in 
2 Thess. 1: 5-11, where he comforts the suffer- 
ing saints with the assurance that tribulation will 
be recompensed to those that trouble them, and 
rest will be the portion of the redeemed, “when 
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with 
His mighty angels, in flaming fire taking ven- 
geance on them that know not God, and that obey 
_not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who 
shall be punished with everlasting destruction 
from the presence of the Lord and from the 
glory of His power, when He shall come to be 
glorified in His saints and to be admired in all 
them that believe, in that day.” I have purposely 
omitted the parenthetical words, “because our 
testimony among you was believed.” They ex- 
plain why any from among earth’s inhabitants 
will be associated with Christ in the glory of 
that revelation. 


“Lamb of God, Thou soon in glory 
Wilt to this sad earth return; 

All Thy foes shall quake before Thee, 
All that now despise Thee, mourn. 


Then shall we, at Thine appearing, 
With Thee in Thy kingdom reign; 


Christ the Believer’s Life and Object 12% 


Thine the praise and Thine the glory, 
Lamb of God for sinners slain!” 


This is the consummation to which the Chris- 
tian dispensation is tending; when the kingdoms 
of this world shall become the kingdoms of our 
God and of His Christ, and His one-time pilgrim 
people shall reign with Him in righteousness 
throughout Messiah’s glorious years. 

And with this the apostle completes the doc- 
trinal teaching of the epistle to the Colossians. 
In these first two chapters with which the three 
opening verses of chapter three are linked, he 
has unfolded in a marvelous way the truth of the 
new creation and our link with the risen Man, 
God’s firstborn Son, the Heir of all things. We 
have seen that in Him we have deliverance from 
the power of darkness and we are even now trans- 
lated into His spiritual kingdom; in Him we have 
redemption, the forgiveness of sins, and have 
been made meet to be partakers of the inheritance 
of the saints in light. He has made peace by the 
blood of His cross, and we have been reconciled 
to God through His death. We are now members 
of His mystical Body and thus members one of 
another, called upon to hold the Head and in all 
things to be subject to Him as we pursue our 
way in faith through the wilderness of this 
world. Christ Himself is to be our heart’s blessed 
object. He is the Antidote for every form of 
error, for in Him all the fulness of the Godhead 


128 Lectures on Colossians 


dwells, and our fulness is found alone in Him. 
We have been identified with Him in His death, 
burial and resurrection. All that was against us 
He has taken out of the way, paying our bond 
and nailing it to His cross. He Himself is now 
to be the portion of our souls, and as we are 
occupied with Him, the risen One, with mind and 
heart set on heavenly things, we shall manifest 
His life here on earth while we wait for His 
return, when we shall be manifested with Him in 
glory. What a gospel! Surely it was never con- 
ceived in the mind of man. It could not be, for 
it makes nothing of man but everything of 
Christ. May our hearts enter into it more and 
more as the days grow darker and the end draws 
near, “While we look not at the things that 
are seen, but at the things which are not seen,” 
and live in daily expectation of His return to take 
us to be with Himself and make us fully like 
Himself forevermore. 


“For God has fixed the happy day, 
When the last tear shall dim our eyes, 
When He will wipe these tears away, 
And fill our hearts with glad surprise. 
To hear His voice, and see His face, 
And know the fulness of His grace.” 


This blessed consummation of all our hopes is 
set clearly before us in the Word of God as our 
goal—in order that, cheered by the glory shin- 
ing from the gates of the city, we may be heart- 


Christ the Believer’s Life and Object 129 


ened and lifted above discouragement, and the 
depressing power of present sorrows, whether in 
the world or the Church, so that we may run the 
race with patience, ever “looking unto Jesus.” 


130 


LECTURES ON COLOSSIANS 


Part Two: PRACTICAL 
(Chaps. 8: 5—4: 18.) 


LECTURE XII 


Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ 
Part I: IN RELATION TO OURSELVES. 
(Chap. 3: 5-11.) 


“Mortify therefore your members which are upon the 
earth; fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil 
concupiscence, and covetousness, which is idolatry: for 
which things’ sake the wrath of God cometh on the chile 
dren of disobedience: in the which ye also walked some 
time, when ye lived in them. But now ye also put off 
all these; anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy commue 
nication out of your mouth. Lie not one to another, see- 
ing that ye have put off the old man with his deeds; and 
have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge 
after the image of Him that created him: where there is 
neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, 
Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ is all, and 
in all.” 


We come now to the consideration of the prac- 
tical teaching of the epistle, where we have em- 
phasized for us the importance of walking in the 
power of the truth of the new man and our rela- 
tionship to Christ as Head. And in this section, 


Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ 131 


which includes verses 5 to 17 and is too lengthy 
to be taken up in one address, we have, first, that 
which relates to ourselves, our individual judg- 
ment of the old ways, in verses 5 to 11, which we 
will consider at this time. Then in verses 12 to 
17, we have rather our relationship to others, 
particularly our brethren in Christ; or, as we 
might put it, the claims of Christian fellowship. 
We must be right ourselves, in our own inner 
lives, if we would be right toward others. “Keep 
thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the 
issues of life.’ What I am when alone in the 
presence of God is what I really am. What I 
am before my fellows should be the outcome of 
this, otherwise my public life will be largely a 
sham. 

There is a very suggestive lesson along this line 
in connection with the fine linen in the taber- 
nacle. The tabernacle, as we know, was pri- 
marily a wonderful type of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. It was God’s dwelling place; and we 
read, “The Word became flesh and tabernacled 
among us, and we beheld His glory, the glory as 
of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace 
and truth.” Surrounding the court of the taber- 
nacle were curtains of fine twined linen suspend- 
ed from pillars. The fine linen, we learn from 
Rey. 19, is “the righteous acts of the saints” 
(literal rendering). Therefore the fine linen sur- 
rounding the court would speak of the perfect 


132 Lectures on Colossians 


ways of our Lord Jesus Christ as displayed be- 
fore men on earth. The hangings of the court 
were visible to all who drew near; but inside, 
covering the upright boards of the tabernacle, 
which were of acacia wood overlaid with gold, 
were ten curtains also of fine twined linen. These 
were not visible to men on the outside; they were 
seen by God Himself and, in measure, by His 
ministering priests. So if the fine linen outside 
speaks of Christ’s righteousness as Man on earth 
visible to the eyes of other men, which led them 
to exclaim, “He hath done all things well,” and 
which caused even Pilate to declare, “I find no 
fault in Him,” the ten curtains inside would 
speak of His perfect righteousness as seen by 
God the Father, that perfection which caused 
Him to open the heavens and proclaim, ‘This is 
My beloved Son in whom I have found all My 
delight.” 

Now how many cubits of fine twined linen were 
there forming the wall of the court? We learn 
that the court was 100 cubits long and 50 cubits 
wide. Subtracting 20 cubits for the varicolored 
gate of the tabernacle, we have 280 cubits, 100 
on each side, 50 in the rear, and 30 in front. In- 
side there were ten curtains joined together, and 
each one was 28 cubits long. Here then we have 
another 280 cubits. Note this well. There were 
280 cubits of fine twined linen surrounding the 
court where all could behold :t, and 280 cubits 


Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ 183 


of fine twined linen forming the tabernacle it- 
self, where only the eye of God saw it in its 
completeness! How suggestive is all this, and 
what a lesson for us. Our blessed Lord was just 
the same before God as before men. But the fact 
that the width of the curtains was different to 
that of the hangings is also suggestive. The cur- 
tains were four cubits wide, and four is the num- 
ber of weakness, and speaks of Christ’s perfect 
subjection to the will of the Father. The hang- 
ings were five cubits wide, and five, we know, is 
the number of responsibility, and suggests our 
Lord’s taking the place of responsibility here on 
earth, as meeting every claim of God which man 
had flouted. When His enemies came asking, 
“Who art Thou?’ He answered, “Altogether 
what I have said unto you.” With Him profes- 
sion and life were in perfect agreement, and this 
is the standard which God now puts before the 
believer. 

Recognizing, then, our union with Christ, we 
are called upon to manifest His life. There must 
be first of all the judgment of the old ways in 
their totality. In chapter 2 we have learned of 
our identification with Him in His death; in the 
cross we were circumcised with the circumcision 
of Christ, therefore we are to mortify, or put to 
death, our members which are upon the earth. 
The believer is never told to crucify himself; he 
is told to mortify the members of his body. We 


134 Lectures on Colossians 


have been crucified with Christ. Faith lays hold 
of this, and so it is written “They that are 
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with its affections 
and lusts.” All passed under judgment in the 
cross, but in order to make this practical the flesh 
must be kept, by faith, in the place of death and 
its evil promptings refused in self-judgment. 
The apostle insists first of all upon the impor- 
tance of dealing unsparingly with the sins that 
were so common in the heathen world out of 
which these Colossians had been saved. Sins, 
alas, almost as common in the world to-day, in 
spite of increased light and civilization. The be- 
liever, recognizing his link with Christ, is to 
abhor all uncleanness. He is to remember that 
the body is for the Lord, and the Lord for the 
body, consequently every tendency to the sins 
mentioned in verse 5—fornication, lasciviousness, 
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence (or, un- 
lawful lusts) and covetousness, which is idolatry 
(for in reality it is the worship of self)—all these 
are to be judged in the light of the cross of 
Christ at no matter what cost. No excuse must 
be offered for such sins nor any palliation of their 
wickedness attempted on the ground of the innate 
tendencies of human nature. These things are 
abhorrent to God and abhorrent to the new na- 
ture in every believer, and because of them the 
wrath of God is coming on the children of dis- 
obedience; as of old, when God destroyed the 


_ Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ 135 


antediluvian world because of corruption and 
violence, and rained fire from heaven upon the 
cities of the plain because of unbridled lusts and 
passions. 

In these sins, so characteristic of men away 
from God, the Colossians had once walked, liv- 
ing in them unblushingly; but that was before 
they knew Christ. Now, as risen with Him, these 
things, seen at last in their true light, must be 
refused as dishonoring to God and contrary to 
Christ. Other sins there are which in the eyes 
of many are far less vile and abominable than 
those mentioned above, but these, too, are to be 
put off. They were the habits of the old man, 
his old clothes, which are not fit to adorn the 
new man. And so we read, “But now ye also put 
off all these: anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, 
Althy communication out of your mouth. Lie not 
one to another, seeing that ye have put off the 
old man with his deeds.” The old man is more 
than the old nature. It is the man of old, the 
man you used to be before you knew Christ as 
Saviour and Lord. In other words, the old man 
is all that I once was as an unsaved person. I 
am through with that man; he has disappeared, 
for faith, in the cross of Christ. But if I make 
this profession, let me be sure that I do not 
manifest his ways. Sometimes those who make 
the loudest professions in regard to the truth of 
the new creation are the poorest performers of 


136 Lectures on Colossians 


the truth, and thus they give the lie to what they 
say by what they do. It was Emerson, I think, 
who said, “What you are speaks so loudly I can- 
not hear what you say.” It is to be feared that 
many a Christian has lost his testimony because 
of carelessness here. 

Anger, which, as we know from Eph. 4: 26, 
may be righteous, is generally but the raging of 
the flesh, and even where it is warranted (and 
we read of our blessed Lord looking round about 
upon His opponents with anger because of the 
hardness of their hearts), still this must not be 
nursed or it will degenerate into wrath, which is 
a settled condition of ill feeling toward an offend- 
er and generally has coupled with it a desire for 
revenge, and so malice springs from it. We have 
three generations of sin here: anger cherished 
begets wrath, and wrath if not judged begets 
malice. No matter how grievously I have been 
wronged I am not to give place to the devil and 
malign, or seek to harm, the one against whom 
I may have been righteously indignant in the be- 
ginning. “Let not the sun go down upon your 
wrath, neither give place to the devil.’ 

Blasphemy—This dreadful sin may be either 
Godward or manward. To impute evil to God 
or to seek to misrepresent Him, or to pervert the 
truth as to the Father, the Son, or the Spirit, 
these are various ways in which men blaspheme 
against God. But to speak injuriously of one 


Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ 137 


another, to circulate wicked and untruthful re- 
ports against one’s brethren, to revile rulers or 
governors, or to seek to harm, by evil report, 
servants of God, all these are included under the 
general term blasphemy, and here how often have 
sharp-tongued religious controversialists failed 
even at the very moment that they were en- 
deavoring to meet the blasphemy of their op- 
ponents in regard to divine things. When the 
hyper-Calvinist, the father of William Hone, the 
one-time infidel, described John Wesley as a child 
of the devil because of his Arminianism, he had 
himself fallen into the sin of blasphemy. No 
wonder his son turned from such Christianity in 
horror, and was for years in darkness, till reached 
by divine grace. Railing accusations ill become 
those who have been saved through mercy alone 
and have occasion daily to confess their own sins 
and sue for divine forgiveness. The wrath of man 
worketh not the righteousness of God, and He, 
the Holy One, is not served by our hard speeches 
against His saints, nor even against men of the 
world. 

Did we not know the corruption of our own 
hearts it might not seem necessary to warn re- 
deemed saints against the vice of using unclean 
language or relating salacious stories, but this is 
what is involved in the next expression, “filthy 
communication out of your mouth.” Question- 
able stories and the relating of things true or 


138 Lectures on Colossians 


false, the details of which only tend to feed a 
corrupt nature, these are to be shunned by a 
Christian. It was a wise answer and a deserved 
rebuke that a brother once gave to one in my 
own presence who began a story with the re- 
mark, “As there are no ladies here I want to 
tell you something I heard the other day.” 
But the other checked him by saying, “Brother, 
though there are no ladies present the Holy 
Ghost is here. Is your story fit for Him?’ The 
first blushed in confusion and accepted the re- 
buke. We did not hear the story. 

Were there any truth in the unscriptural the- 
ory held by some that the nature of the old man 
is eradicated in the case of a sanctified believer 
there would be no room whatever for the next 
injunction, “Lie not one to another, seeing that 
ye have put off the old man with his deeds.” 
Lying is one of the very first evidences of the 
carnal nature. Of the wicked we read, “They go 
astray as soon as they are born, speaking lies.” 
And untruthfulness is one of the hardest habits 
for anyone to overcome. It is so natural to these 
vain hearts of ours to try to make things appear 
better than they really are, to cover up our own 
failures and to accentuate the sins of others. Yet 
these are just different forms of lying, and we 
are called upon to judge all guile—untruthful- 
ness of every character—in the light of the cress 
af Christ. The old man was judged there in the 


Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ 189 


person of our Substitute, his deeds are to be re- 
fused, his habits put off as discarded garments 
which, as we have seen above, are in no sense 
fit for the new man. 

In the next two verses we are told that we 
“have put on the new man, which is renewed 
in knowledge after the image of Him that 
created him, where there is neither Greek nor 
Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, 
Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ is all, and 
in all.” The new man, then, is the man in 
Christ, even as the old man was the man in 
Adam. This new man has a new, divinely- 
imparted nature, and it is to this new nature 
God by the Spirit appeals. The new nature alone 
is capable of receiving divine instruction, and as 
the truth thus imparted controls the life, the be- 
liever manifests increasingly the image of Him 
who is the Head of the new creation. He Him- 
self, as we have seen, is the image of the in- 
visible God. Man was created in the image and 
likeness of God in the beginning, but that image 
became terribly marred through sin. In the new 
man this image again becomes manifest, and the 
very lineaments of Christ are seen in His peo- 
ple, and this is true, no matter who or what 
they were before receiving the new life, whether 
cultured Greek or religious Jew; whether with- 
in the circle of the Abrahamic covenant marked 
off from the rest of humanity by the ordinance 


140 Lectures on Colossians 


of circumcision, or whether in the world outside, 
strangers to the covenants of promise; whether 
barbarian or Scythian (that is, of the wild tribes 
outside the pale of civilization) ; whether slaves 
or free citizens; all alike were sinners; all alike 
are included in the term “the old man.” Now 
those who through grace have believed the gospel, 
from whichever of these classes they may have 
come, are members of the new creation and are 
seen by God as justified from all things and are 
possessors of a new and divine life. They be- 
long to that new company where Christ is every- 
thing and in everyone. This is not to deny racial 
or class distinctions in the world—these the 
Christian must still recognize, and he has his 
responsibilities as to these distinctions—but above 
and beyond all these responsibilities is his new 
place in Christ, linked up with the new Head. 
It is from this that his new responsibilities flow; 
because he is a new creation man, he is called 
upon to manifest new ways and to put on new 
habits, new clothes suited to his new relationship. 
These new clothes will come before us in our next 
study. 

In closing let me remark that new creation is 
not simply individual. It is not merely that I, 
as a believer, am a new creature in Christ Jesus. 
A better rendering of 2 Cor. 5:17 would be, 
“Therefore if any man be in Christ, it is new 
creation: old things are passed away; behold, 
all things are become new.” 


Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ 141 


“Joyful now the new creation 
Rests in undisturbed repose; 
Blest in Jesus’ full salvation 
Sorrow now nor thraldom knows.” 


Not yet do we see the manifestation of all this, 
but “we see Jesus crowned with glory and honor,” 
seated above all the changing scenes of time. 
Till He returns, it is as members of the new 
creation that we are called upon by our new ways 
to manifest the holiness, the grace, the right- 
eousness, the love and the compassion of Him who 
is “the beginning of the creation of God.” 

It is not that He is the first being created. 
This error was exposed in an earlier lecture. But 
He is the first, the Prince, the Head, the Origin 
of the New Creation where all things are of 
God. “For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision 
availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new 
creature (or a new creation), and aS many as 
walk according to this rule’—the rule; the con- 
trolling principle of this new creation—“peace 
be upon them and mercy, and upon the Israel of 
God” (Gal. 6:15,16). This is the very opposite 
of legality. It is the spontaneous expression of 
the life of the Head in the members here on 
earth! 


142 


LECTURE XIil 
Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ 


Part Il: IN RELATION TO OTHERS. 
(Chap. 3: 12-17.) 


“Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and be- 
loved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, 
meekness, longsuffering; forbearing one another, and for- 
giving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any: 
even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. And above all 
these things put on charity, which is the bond of perfect- 
ness. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the 
which also ye are called in one Body: and be ye thank- 
ful. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly im all wis- 
dom; teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and 
hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your 
hearts to the Lord. And whatsoever ye do in word or 
deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks 
to God and the Father by Him.” 


We now come to consider our new clothes, the 
garments of the new man—these things which 
we are to put on in place of the old habits which 
have been discarded. It is a striking thing that 
both in the Scriptures and in our ordinary Anglo- 
Saxon speech, we use at times the same words 
for clothing and behavior. We speak of a riding 
habit, a walking habit, habits of various descrip- 
tions, meaning of course, the clothing worn on 


Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ 143 


particular occasions, and we may speak of our 
behavior as our habit. When in the Old Testa- 
ment Solomon says, “Let thy garments be always 
white,” we understand him, of course, to mean, 
let your habits or behavior be pure and righteous. 
The wicked are depicted as clothed with filthy 
garments, and self-righteousness is described as 
but filthy rags. The characteristics of the new- 
born man are garments of glory and beauty. It 
is a common saying that you judge a man by his 
clothes. It is true that this is not always just. 
Many a princely character has, through poverty, 
been obliged to dress in worn and unbecoming 
garments, while rascals of the deepest dye have 
been arrayed like princes of the blood. But the 
same is true at times in regard to children of 
God and the unsaved. There are wolves who 
come in sheeps’ clothing, there are ministers of 
Satan who appear as ministers of righteousness, 
and, alas, there are real believers whose garments 
are often badly stained and rent by failure and 
sin. But in the ordinary course of things it is 
true that men are largely estimated according to 
their appearance, and Christians are expected to 
be adorned with good works and thus justify be- 
fore men the profession they make of justifica- 
tion before God by faith in Jesus Christ. These 
are the two sides of truth emphasized by the 
apostle Paul in Romans, and by James “the Lord’s 
brother” in his intensely practical letter. 


144 Lectures on Colossians 


Let us see just what kind of habits, or be- 
havior should characterize the man in Christ; 
with what beautiful garments he should be ar- 
rayed. First of all we read, “Put on therefore, 
as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of 
mercies.” The elect of God are those whom He 
has foreknown from all eternity and who are 
manifest in time as believers in His Son. “Holy 
and beloved” is what they are as before God. 
They have been set apart in Christ; sanctified by 
the blood of the everlasting covenant, they are 
dear to God because they are His own children, 
partakers of the divine nature. How unseemly 
if such are ever found stern and unfeeling to- 
ward others, recipients as they are of such 
grace themselves. The ancients used the term 
“bowels” very much as we do the word “heart,” 
to express the deepest feelings of humanity. We 
might read, “emotions of pity.” While this may 
not be exactly a translation, it at least expresses 
in English the thought of the original. We 
are called upon to have hearts readily stirred to 
compassion and, like God Himself, delighting in 
mercy. Where it is otherwise we may well ques- 
tion whether one has been born of God. Harsh- 
ness in dealing with failing brethren, on the basis 
of the necessity of maintaining righteousness, is 
anything but the spirit of Christ. Yearning 
love that would lead us to go to any possible 
length without contravening God’s righteous 


Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ 145 


claims, should ever characterize us in our deal- 
ings one with another. “Be pitiful,’ writes an- 
other apostle, and how much we need to take 
such an exhortation to heart. The cruelest things 
have been done in the name of Him who is the 
incarnation of infinite mercy. How He has been 
misrepresented in His attitude toward sin and 
sinners by many who profess to be His followers. 

The next word is in keeping with this: “kind- 
ness.” It is quite impossible to maintain fellow- 
ship with God and not show the kindness of God 
toward others. There may indeed be a rigid, 
legal type of piety which leads one to imagine 
that he has been appointed of God to demon- 
strate His justice, but this is far from the god- 
liness which is inculcated in the New Testament. 
Macaulay said of some of the sterner Puritans, 
““As one reads their writings he wonders if they 
had ever read a little volume called the New 
Testament.” The loving-kindness of the Lord 
will be manifest in our kindness one to another. 
These two garments, emotions of pity and kind- 
ness are, we might say, inner vestments. The 
next one is a cap for the head, “humbleness of 
mind.” Pride is of all things to God most hate- 
ful: “The proud He knoweth afar off.” “Pride 
goeth before destruction and a haughty spirit be- 
fore a fall.” The realization of one’s own weak- 
ness and natural tendency to err will lead to low 
thoughts of self, and will make it easy to don 


146 Lectures on Colossians 


the vesture of meekness. This is composed of 
rarer material than is often supposed. Our Lord 
was adorned with it; He could say, “I am meek 
and lowly in heart.” How beautiful He ap- 
peared as thus arrayed. And Moses had a gar- 
ment of this excellent texture, lawgiver though 
he was, for we read, “The man Moses was very 
meek above all the men that were upon the face 
of the earth.” But so rare is this grace that in 
the prophet Zephaniah, Chapter 2, verse 3, we 
are told to “seek meekness,” and this is after he 
has said, “Seek ye the Lord, ye meek of the 
earth, which have wrought His judgment.” So 
delicate is this fabric that it might readily wear 
away in the stress and strain of the trials of this 
life. One needs therefore to be constantly in the 
presence of God seeking for this grace, which can 
be found nowhere else than in communion with 
Him. “Take My yoke upon you and learn of 
Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart,” suggests 
the necessity of coming under His control if we 
would be adorned with meekness. The world will 
never understand the value of this lowly spirit. 
Our own lion-hearted Theodore Roosevelt said 
once, “I hate a meek man.” He probably did 
not realize that the boldest man, the most utter- 
ly unafraid man ever seen on earth, our Lord 
Jesus Christ, was in the fullest sense a meek 
man. Meekness is not inconsistent with bravery, 
and enables one to suffer and be strong when 


Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ 147 


the world would “turn aside the way of the meek” 
(Amos 2:7). 

Closely associated with meekness is the grace 
of “longsuffernig,” the readiness to endure grief 
suffering wrongfully. It is so natural for us 
when falsely accused to feel we must defend 
ourselves, or to resent such treatment; but of 
our blessed Lord we read that when false wit- 
nesses had risen up against Him He answered 
not a word, and when the adversary taunted 
King Hezekiah and his officers, charging them 
falsely and threatening severe treatment, the 
king’s command to his people was, “Answer him 
not a word.” God can be depended on to vindi- 
cate His own if they do not attempt to vindicate 
themselves, and so as they learn to commit their 
reputation, as well as all else that they once 
counted of value, to Christ Himself, they can pa- 
tiently endure without resentment, praying for 
those who despitefully use them and who perse- 
cute them. In this they become consistent follow- 
ers of the Man of Sorrows who could say, “They 
laid to my charge things I knew not.” 

We next read, “Forbearing one another, and 
forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel 
against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also 
do ye.” This is in exact accord with Eph. 4: 32; 
“And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, 
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ’s 
sake (or, in Christ) hath forgiven you.” 


148 Lectures on Colossians 


When teaching His disciples to pray our Lord 
told them to say, “Forgive us our trespasses as 
we forgive those who trespass against us,” and 
He added, ‘““When you stand praying, forgive: for 
if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither 
will your heavenly Father forgive you.” Some 
have thought the earlier passage is on lower 
ground than the later ones, but it does not seem 
necessary to put the one in any sense in opposi- 
tion to the others. The forgiveness of which our 
Lord was speaking to His disciples was not the 
forgiveness of a sinner, but the forgiveness of a 
failing saint, one who could address God as “‘our 
Father,” whereas the forgiveness spoken of here 
in Colossians and also in Ephesians is that of the 
sinner. Addressing His disciples our Lord says, 
as it were, “You are failing from day to day, you 
constantly need your Father’s restorative and 
governmental forgiveness, and yet you cherish 
feelings of malice and enmity and an unforgiving 
spirit toward your brethren who offend you. If 
you do not forgive them you cannot expect your 
Father’s forgiveness when you come to Him con- 
fessing your failures, and as long as this spirit 
of malice is cherished by you, you cannot really 
pray in faith.” Here Paul takes it up in another 
way. He says, as it were, “Think how freely you 
have been forgiven; think how much God has 
cast behind His back. In the light of this how 
can you hold hard feelings or maintain an un- 


Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ 149 


forgiving spirit toward those who have sinned 
against you? If God had dealt with you accord- 
ing to your offences, how fearful would your 
judgment be, yet He in Christ has graciously for- 
given all. He has put away every sin; thus mak- 
ing you fit for His holy presence. Your respon- 
sibility now is to forgive as you have been for- 
given.” 

Some of you will remember the striking inci- 
dent of the conversion of Macdonald Dubh, as 
narrated by Ralph Connor in “The Man from 
Glengarry.” I understand the incident is not 
merely fiction, but is founded upon actual fact. 
The black Macdonald, a powerful, burly High- 
lander, living in Glengarry county, Ontario, had 
suffered untold anguish for years because of an 
injury inflicted upon him by a French Canadian 
some years before. He had nursed the desire to 
take a fearful vengeance upon his foe until it be- 
came a perfect obsession with him. Neither God 
nor eternity had any place in his life. It was in 
vain that the minister’s wife tried to get him to 
forgive his enemy. She sought to have him re- 
peat the Lord’s Prayer, but he always balked at 
the words, “Forgive us our trespasses as we for- 
give those that trespass against us.” But God 
wrought in power in the Glengarry country, and 
there was a great revival, in which real 
Christians were aroused, and Christless men and 
women reached and saved. The black Macdonald 


150 Lectures on Colossians 


heard the story of the Cross told forth in living 
power in the Gaelic tongue, from the lips of the 
venerable Highland minister. It broke his heart 
and bowed him in penitence at the Saviour’s feet. 
When next the minister’s wife went to visit him 
and tried to stress the necessity of forgiveness, 
he sobbed out, as he joined with her in what is 
generally called the Lord’s Prayer, “Oh, it’s a 
little thing, it’s a little thing, for I have been for- 
given so much!” It is this that grips the heart 
and enables one to bear in patience the ill-doing 
and evil-speaking of others and preserves from 
bitterness of spirit or any desire for vengeance. 
How can one, forgiven so much, ever hold an un- 
forgiving spirit against any? 

And now turn to verse 14 where we have the 
girdle that holds all our new garments in place. 
It might be rendered, ‘‘And over all these things 
put on love, which is the girdle of perfection,” 
Just as the Oriental binds his flowing robes about 
him with a girdle, or sash, so the new man binds 
his new habits with the controlling power of love. 
Whatever is contrary to love is contrary to 
Christ. No amount of sophistical reasoning can 
make anything pleasing to God which is opposed 
to that divine love which He Himself sheds 
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit who is 
given unto us. 

It would be well for some of us who are pos- 
sessed with the idea that our great business on 


Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ 151 


earth is to carry out what has sometimes been 
called Pauline truth, to remember that Pauline 
truth does not center*in 1 Cor. 5, but rises to 
its highest, experimentally, in 1 Cor. 18. We are 
not to neglect the one in order to fulfil the other; 
both are right and proper in their own places. 
In the portion we have been looking at we have 
had what should express our attitude toward our 
brethren in Christ and toward men of the world. 
Now in verse 15 we get that which is distinctly 
personal: “Let the peace of God,” or, as some 
manuscripts read,‘‘the peace of Christ’’—the same 
peace that ever filled His breast when here on 
earth, the peace that is His on the throne of God 
in heaven, where He sits far above all the storms 
of this lower scene—let that peace bear rule, or 
umpire, in your hearts. It is to this you are 
called in one Body. We are to seek the things 
that make for peace as members of that Body, 
and things whereby we may edify one another. 
But what is distinctly emphasized here is daily 
abiding in the blessedness of communion with our 
risen Lord, so that our hearts, like His own, may 
be kept in peace despite all we may be called upon 
to pass through, and thus we can fulfil the brief 
injunction, “Be ye thankful.” Of the many sins 
of the unsaved not the least is unthankfulness. 
We are called upon to give thanks in every cir- 
cumstance, “Giving thanks always for all things,” 
knowing that nothing can ever enter into the life 
of the believer but what infinite love allows. 


152 Lectures on Colossians 


In the next two verses, which are very inti- 
mately linked with Eph. 5:18-20, we read, 


“Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly: in all wis- 
dom teaching and admonishing one another: in psalms and 
hymns and spiritual songs singing with grace in your hearts 
to the Lord. And whatever ye do in word or deed, do 
all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God 
and the Father by Him.” 


As punctuated in the Authorized Version the 
16th verse does not bring out the three admoni- 
tions clearly and distinctly, but as given above 
each one stands out separately and in its place. 
First we are told to let the word of Christ dwell 
in us richly. This is the only place in the New 
Testament where this particular expression, “the 
word of Christ,” is found. It is most suggestive. 
The actual teaching of Christ, whether personally 
here on earth or by the Spirit since He has 
ascended to heaven, is to dwell in full measure 
in each believer. Thus equipped and controlled 
by the truth we will be able to bless and help 
others—in all wisdom teaching and admonishing 
one another. What we have is not given for our- 
selves alone. We are to be ready to communicate. 
Then, in the third place, as thus controlled by 
the Word of God, our lives will be lyrical and our 
hearts filled with melody, in psalms and hymns 
and spiritual songs, singing with grace in our 
hearts to the Lord. We read in Nehemiah, “The 
joy of the Lord is your strength.” Holiness and 


Practical Holiness by Conformity to Christ 153 


happiness go together. Judah won a great vic- 
tory when Jehoshaphat put the singers in the 
forefront of the army. Depend upon it, some- 
thing is radically wrong with the Christian when 
he can no longer praise and rejoice. 

Then, lastly, the entire life of the believer is 
summed up as subjection to the Lord. Whatever 
he does, whether in act or speech, all is to be in 
the name of the Lord Jesus, through whom he 
gives thanks to God, even the Father. There is 
no room whatever for self-will, for self-assertive- 
ness here. As Christ in His humiliation could 
say, “I came not to do Mine own will but the 
will of Him that sent Me,” so the Christian, the 
new man, is left on earth to represent Christ, to 
do the will of the Lord and not to please himself. 

By comparing the Ephesian passage with this it 
will become evident that we have the same re- 
sults from being filled with the Spirit there, and 
filled with the Word here. A Word-filled Chris- 
tian is a Spirit-filled Christian; that is, a Chris- 
tian who is so controlled by the Word of God that 
it dominates his entire life, and manifests that 
he is filled with the Holy Spirit. A careful con- 
sideration of these two passages might save from 
a great deal of fanaticism and misunderstanding 
in regard to the fullness of blessing which every 
truly converted soul cannot but crave. 


154 


LECTURE XIV 
The Earthly Relationships of the New Man 


(Chap. 3:18—4:1.) 


“Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as 
it is fit in the Lord. 


“Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against 
them. 


“Children, obey your parents in all things: for this is 
well pleasing unto the Lord. 

“Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they 
be discouraged. 

“Servants, obey in all things your masters according to 
the flesh; mot with eye-service, as menpleasers; but in 
singleness of heart, fearing God; and whatsoever ye do, 
do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men; knowing 
that of the Lord ye shall receive the ‘reward of the inher- 
itance: for ye serve the Lord Christ. But he that doeth 
wrong shall receive for the wrong which he hath done; 
and there is no respect of persons. 

“Masters, give unto your servants that which is just and 
equal; knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven.” 


In these verses the Holy Spirit, who, as we 
have seen, is Himself not mentioned in this epis- 
tle, save incidentally in verse 8 of chapter 1, 
gives us instruction in regard to the sanctifica- 
tion of the natural, or earthly, relationships of 
the new man. It would be a great mistake to 
suppose, as some have done, that because we are 
members of the new creation we need no longer 


The Earthly Relationships of the New Man 155 


consider ordinary human ties or responsibilities. 
While it is quite true that in the new creation 
there is neither male nor female, bond or free, 
but all are one in Christ Jesus, it is important 
to remember that our bodies belong to the old 
creation still, and it will not be until the redemp- 
tion of the body at the coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ and our gathering together unto Him, that 
we shall be above the natural relationships in 
which we stand to one another as men and women 
here in the world. Even in the Church of God 
these human distinctions hold good, as we are 
reminded in the epistles to the Corinthians and 
to Timothy and Titus. To say as some do that 
because there is neither male nor female in the 
new creation, we are to pay no attention to the 
divinely-given order pertaining to the respective 
places of man and woman in the Church of God 
on earth is not only to go beyond Scripture, but 
is positive disobedience to the Word of God. As 
long as we are subject to human limitations so 
long must we recognize our human responsibili- 
ties, and seek to maintain these in a scriptural 
way in order that we may commend the gospel 
of Christ. There is no condition in which the 
new life is more blessedly manifested than in 
circumstances sometimes hard for flesh and blood 
to endure, but where grace enables, brings tri- 
umph. <A comparison of the instruction given 
in Colossians, in the verses quoted above, with 


156 Lectures on Colossians 


similar instruction in the epistle to the Ephe- 
sians, will show us that the apostle deals very 
briefly here with what he has taken up at much 
greater length there, and the one epistle should 
be compared with the other, and both with 
similar teaching given in 1 Peter, in order that 
we may get the mind of God as fully revealed 
in regard to the great and important principles 
which govern our behavior. 

It will be noticed that in each of the scriptures 
referred to the weaker is dealt with first, and 
then the stronger; or the one subject first, and 
then the one in authority: so here we have wives 
and husbands ; then children and fathers ; and 
lastly, servants and masters. Let us examine 
with some degree of care what the Holy Spirit 
says to each one. 

“Wives, submit yourselves unto your own hus- 
bands, as it is fit in the Lord.”’” Where husband 
and wife are both Christians seeking to do the 
will of God, in whose hearts there is real mutual 
affection and esteem there will be no difficulty 
whatever in regard to such an admonition as this; 
but it will require true grace to yield loving obe- 
dience when perhaps the husband is a carnal, 
worldly, and unreasonable man, and yet we need 
to remember the marriage relationship is divinely 
ordained and as the old wedding ceremony puts 
it, “not to be lightly entered into,” and accord- 
ing to the Word of God not easily to be termi- 


The Earthly Relationships of the New Man 157 


nated. “For better, for worse, until death do us 
part,” are words often flippantly uttered with no 
real conception of their seriousness. For the 
Christian woman this relationship once entered 
into there is no other position in conformity with 
the will of God than that of godly submission to 
the husband whom she herself has chosen. The 
present loose ideas in regard to easy divorce are 
bearing fearful fruit which will increase unto 
more ungodliness as the end draws near, until 
there will be duplicated in Christendom the cor- 
ruption and vileness of the days before the flood 
and the unspeakable immoralities of the cities of 
the plain. Of all this our blessed Lord has 
warned us most solemnly. For one to seek to 
dissolve the marriage relationship because of in- 
compatibility of temperament is to fly in the face 
of the Word of the living God. Death, or what 
is equivalent to it, the infidelity of husband or 
wife, is the only scriptural ground for termina- 
tion of the marriage contract, leaving the other 
party free to remarry. It is true that 1 Corinth- 
jans 7:11 would imply that there may be circum- 
stances in which no self-respecting woman could 
continue to live in this relationship, because of 
unspeakable cruelty, or abominable conditions 
which would be ruinous to soul and body alike, 
but if she departs she is to remain unmarried, 
and if conditions change she may be reconciled to 
her husband. But so long as she remains with 


158 Lectures on Colossians 


him she is responsible to recognize his headship 
as the one appointed by God to provide for the 
family, and even though conditions may some- 
times be very distressing she is to seek to win 
her wayward spouse by manifesting the grace of 
Christ. “As it is fit in the Lord,” suggests that 
gracious demeanor which ever characterized Him 
while He was in this scene, and also that her sub- 
mission and obedience will never be such as to 
injure conscience or dishonor the Lord. In 
this she must act as before God, for after all, 
hers is the submission of a wife and not of a 
slave. It is loyalty to him who is her head that 
is enjoined. 

In the 19th verse we read, “Husbands, love 
your wives, and be not bitter against them.” And, 
right here, how many husbands fail! Imperious- 
ly demanding submission from the wife, how 
little do they show the love of Christ in their 
dealings with those thus dependent upon them! 
The Christian husband is to accept his place of 
headship as a sacred responsibility put upon him 
by God Himself, and is to exercise his authority 
for the blessing of his home in the love of 
Christ. And just as some wives may be united 
to tyrannical and unreasonable men, so there are 
husbands who, after marriage, find that one 
who in days of courtship seemed so docile and 
affectionate is a veritable termagant, and as un- 
reasonable as it is possible to be. But still 


The Earthly Relationships of the N ew Man 159 


the husband is to love and care for her, show- 
ing all consideration, “giving honor unto the wife 
as unto the weaker vessel,” as Peter puts it, with- 
out indulging in wrath or anger. How much is 
involved in the exhortation, “Be not bitter against 
them.” God knew how petty and trying some 
women’s ways would be when He said to good 
men, “Be not bitter against them.” In the power 
of the new life one may manifest patience and 
grace under the most trying circumstances. 

Now we come to the injunction to children: 
“Children, obey your parents in all things, for 
this is well pleasing unto the Lord.” In childhood 
days parents stand in relation to their children 
as God Himself in relation to the parent. Chil- 
dren who do not obey their parents when young 
will not obey God when older. The natural heart 
is ever rebellious against authority, and perhaps 
never more strikingly has this been manifested 
than in these democratic days in which we live. 
But Christian children should be examples of 
godly submission to father and mother or who- 
ever may be in authority over them, and parents 
are responsible to instil into their hearts the 
divine requirement of obedience. For young peo- 
ple professing piety, to ignore this principle of 
obedience is to manifest utter insubjection to the 
One they own as Lord. 

But again we notice how carefully the Spirit 
of God guards all this when He says, “Fathers, 


160 Lectures on Colossians 


provoke not your children to anger, lest they 
be discouraged.” Parental rule may be of such 
a character as to fill the growing boy or girl with 
indignation and contempt instead of drawing out 
the young heart in love and obedience. How easy 
it is, when come to manhood, to forget the feelings 
of a child, and so to implant in the hearts of 
the little ones resentment instead of tender af- 
fection. Surely this is contrary to every instinct 
of the new man. The Christian father is to imi- 
tate Him who is our Father-God. 

It is when He addresses the servants that he 
goes into the greatest details. These, in the days 
when this epistle was written, were slaves and 
not free men who served for wages, but if such 
instruction as we have here was applicable to 
bondmen, how much more does it apply to those 
who have the privilege of selling their services 
and of terminating engagements at will. There 
is no excuse whatever for surly, dishonest service, 
because perhaps the master or mistress may be 
exasperating and unappreciative. Notice the ex- 
hortation, “Servants, obey in all things your 
masters according to the flesh ; not with eye- 
service, as men-pleasers; but in singleness of 
heart, fearing God.” How this glorifies the 
servant’s lowly path in whatever capacity he is 
called upon to labor for others. He is privileged 
to look at all his service as done unto the Lord 
Himself. Thus he labors faithfully, not only 


The Earthly Relationships of the New Man 161 


under the master’s eye, but when unseen by 
man; he carries on his appointed task conscien- 
tiously in singleness of heart, having the fear of 
God before his soul, according as it is written, 
“And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as unto the 
Lord and not unto men: knowing that of the Lord 
ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance, 
because ye serve the Lord Christ.” What a cheer 
was this to the Roman or Grecian slave, toiling 
on day after day with the most faithful ministra- 
tions taken perhaps but as a matter of course; yet 
if all were done as to the Lord one could be sure 
that in the coming day, the day of manifestation, 
He Himself would reward accordingly, accept- 
ing all the service as done unto Him. On the 
other hand, if treated cruelly, and perhaps over- 
reached and cheated out of the due reward of 
his labor, the Christian servant does well to re- 
member that God is taking note of all, and a 
day is coming when every wrong will be put right, 
and things that can never be settled here in 
righteousness will have a full settlement then, 
for, “He that doeth wrong shall receive for the 
wrong which he hath done: and there is no re- 
spect of persons.” Whether it be the servant who 
is unfaithful or the master who is unapprecia- 
tive, the Lord Himself will bring everything to 
light at His judgment-seat, or in the case of the 
unsaved, at the Great White Throne, when every 
man shall be judged according to his works. 


162 Lectures on Colossians 


It is unfortunate that the chapter break comes 
just where it does. It would seem far more suit- 
able to close chapter 3 with the next verse, and 
let chapter 4 begin with verse 2, for it is evi- 
dent that verse 1 concludes this particular section. 
It is a message to those in authority: “Masters, 
give unto your servants that which is just and 
equal; knowing that ye also have a Master in 
heaven.” In every instance it is to the new man 
He speaks. Ungodly masters could not be ex- 
pected to take heed to such an admonition as 
this, but it is addressed to one who, while master 
in his relationship to his servants, is himself but 
a servant to his own Master in heaven. He may 
well give heed to what is here so impressively 
urged upon him. He is to treat his servants as 
he would have the Lord treat him. He is to be 
characterized by fairness, giving to those beneath 
him that which is just and equal, knowing that 
all the time his heavenly Master is looking on, 
and that when he comes to give account of his 
service, his relations to those who on earth served 
under him will all be carefully gone into, when 
everything will be brought to light. 

What marvelous principles are these which 
we have seen so simply stated. Only one who 
knows something of the conditions prevailing in 
the Roman Empire at the time this letter was 
written can realize how revolutionary they were. 
in those days wives, children and slaves had prac- 


The Earthly Relationships of the New Man 163 


tically no standing before the law, except as 
husbands, fathers or masters might desire to re- 
cognize them, but this glorious truth of the new 
man, this blessed unfolding of the new creation, 
tinged with glory every earthly relationship in 
which the Christian was found. It is like the 
blue border upon the hem of the pious Israelite’s 
garment. Even on the lower edge where that 
long flowing robe came most nearly in contact 
with the earth, this ribbon of blue was seen; and 
blue, as we well know, is the heavenly color. The 
Israelite was to look upon it and remember that 
he had owned the Lord to be his God, He who 
had said, “Be ye holy, for I am holy.” As he 
looked upon the ribbon of blue he was to remem- 
ber his responsibility to honor and to glorify the 
God of heaven in his life on the earth, and we as 
Christians are to manifest the heavenly character 
in every lawful relationship which God has estab- 
lished during the present order of things for the 
blessing of mankind. 

There is a story told of one of the Dauphins of 
France who had an English tutor. This teacher 
found his princely pupil very difficult to handle. 
Proud and haughty, and impatient of restraint, 
the young man submitted unwillingly to school- 
room restrictions and his foreign instructor was 
often at his wits’ end how to deal with him. One 
morning as his pupil came to him, the tutor placed 
upon the lapel of his jacket a purple rosette, say- 


164 Lectures on Colossians 


ing to him, “This is the royal color, and as you 
wear it I want you to remember that you are the 
Crown Prince of France, and that it is incumbent 
upon you ever to behave in a princely way. If 
you are wilful or disobedient I shall, of course, 
not attempt to punish you, as that is not in my 
province, but I shall simply point to the purple, 
and you will understand what I mean, that I 
do not feel your behavior is worthy of a princely 
lad.” The appeal to the purple! How striking 
the suggestion, and may we not say that to us 
there is a similar appeal but, to use the Old Testa- 
ment picture, it is the appeal to the blue! Wives, 
husbands, children, fathers, masters and servants, 
are all alike called upon to manifest the holiness 
of heaven, to display the heavenly character, even 
in earthly relationships. 

It is in just such things as these that the power 
of the new life is wonderfully manifested. ‘Hold- 
ing the Head” is not merely maintaining eccles- 
iastical truth, but it is shown forth in a holy 
godly life—in subjection of heart and mind to 
Christ, and never more fully than in the way we 
live in the family, and in connection with busi- 
ness and social responsibilities. 


165 


LECTURE XV 


Concluding Exhortations 
(Chap. 4: 2-6.) 


“Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanks- 
giving; withal praying also for us, that God would open 
unto us a door of utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ, 
for which I am also in bonds: that I may make it manifest, 
as I ought to speak. Walk in wisdom toward them that 
are without, redeeming the time. Let your speech be al- 
way with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how 
‘ye ought to answer every man.” 


One of the most common sins among Christians 
to-day is that of prayerlessness. No doubt this 
has been true throughout the centuries. And yet 
Wwe are again and again not only exhorted, but 
distinctly commanded to pray. 


“Men ought always to pray and not to faint.” 

“Pray without ceasing.” 

“Praying always with all prayer and supplica- 
tion in the Spirit.” 

“Praying in the Holy Ghost.” 


To these might be added many similar expres- 
sions, reminding us that prayer is in very truth 
“the Christian’s vital breath.” It is the life of the 
new man. One can no more have a happy, tri- 


166 Lectures on Colossians 


umphant Christian experience who neglects this 
spiritual exercise than one can be well and strong 
physically who shuts himself up in a close room to 
which the sun never penetrates and where pure 
air is unknown. The soul flourishes in an at- 
mosphere of prayer. 

And yet the Christian has sometimes been 
asked, Why do we need to pray? If God is in- 
finitely wise and infinitely good, as the Holy Scrip- 
tures declare Him to be, why need any of His 
creatures petition Him regarding anything which 
they conceive to be either for their own good 
or for the blessing of others? Is it not a higher 
and purer faith that leads one to ignore these ex- 
ercises altogether and simply to trust Him to do 
what He sees to be best in every circumstance? 
Those who reason thus manifest but little ac- 
quaintance with the Word of God, and little real- 
ize the needs of the soul. 

Prayer, is first of all, communion with God. Our 
blessed Lord Himself, in the days of His flesh, 
is seen again and again leaving the company of 
His disciples and going out into some desert place 
on a mountain side, or into a garden, that His 
spirit might be refreshed as He bowed in prayer 
alone with the Father. From such reasons of fel- 
lowship He returned to do His mightiest works 
and to bear witness to the truth. And in this He 
is our great Exemplar. We need to pray as much 
as we need to breathe. Our souls will languish 
without it, and our testimony will be utterly fruit- 


Concluding Exhortattons 167 


less if we neglect it. We are told to continue in 
prayer. This does not mean that we are to be 
constantly teasing God in order that we may ob- 
tain what we might think would add most to our 
happiness or be best for us, but we are to abide 
in a sense of His presence and of our de- 
pendence upon His bounty. We are to learn to 
talk to Him and to quietly wait before Him, too, 
in order that we may hear His voice as He speaks 
tous. Weare bidden to bring everything to Him 
in prayer, assured that if we ask anything ac- 
cording to His will He heareth us. But because 
We are so ignorant and so shortsighted we need 
ever to remember that we are to leave the final 
disposal of things with Him who makes no mis- 
takes. Without anxiety as to anything, we may 
bring everything to Him in prayer and supplica- 
tion with thanksgiving, making known our re- 
quests in childlike simplicity; then, leaving all in 
His hands, we go forth in fullest confidence as our 
hearts say, “Thy will be done,” knowing that He 
will do for us exceeding abundantly above all that 
we ask or think. 

We need to be often reminded that we cannot 
pray as we should unless we are careful as to our 
walk before God, and so we are told not only to 
continue in prayer but to watch in the same, and 
that with thanksgiving. “Watch and pray.” Here 
are two things which must never be separated. 
It is so easy to slip into a careless condition of 


168 Lectures on Colossians 


soul, to become entangled amid worldly and 
unholy snares, so that we lose all spiritual dis- 
cernment and our prayers become selfish; and 
when this is the case it is vain to think that we 
shall obtain anything from the Lord. But where 
there is watchfulness and sobriety, with honest 
confession and self-judgment when we realize 
failure has come in, we can pray in fullest con- 
fidence, knowing that all hindrance is removed. 
Here, as in Philippians 4, we are reminded that 
thanksgiving for past mercies should accompany 
prayer for present and future blessing. To re- 
ceive God’s good gifts as a mere matter of course 
soon dries up spiritual affection, and we become 
self-centered instead of Christ-centered, and fool- 
ishly imagine that God is in some way bound to 
lavish His mercies upon us whether we are grate- 
ful or not. In our dealings with one another we 
feel it keenly if ingratitude is manifested and 
kindness goes unacknowledged. Even though 
we may give unselfishly we like appreciation, and 
a hearty “thank you” makes one all the more 
ready to minister again where there is need. And 
we may be assured that our God finds joy in His 
people’s praises. He loves to give, but He de- 
lights in our appreciation of His benefits. 

Paul, unquestionably the greatest preacher and 
teacher that the Christian dispensation has 
known, was not above requesting the prayers of 
the people of God. He felt his need of their 


Concluding Exhortations 169 


prayer-help, and so he says, “Withal praying also 
for us that God would open unto us a door of 
utterance to speak the mystery of Christ, for 
which I am also in bonds; that I may make it 
manifest as I ought to speak.’’ He did not feel 
that because he was in prison his work was 
over. Although unable to face the multitudes in 
public places as in past years, he was ever on the 
lookout for opportunities of service, and he would 
have the saints join with him in prayer that even 
in his prison cell a door of utterance might be 
open to him. How natural it would have been for 
him to give up in despair and settle down in ut- 
ter discouragement, or simply to endure passively 
the long, weary months of imprisonment, taking 
it for granted that nothing could really be accom- 
plished for God so far as gospel fruit was con- 
cerned until he should be free. But he was of 
another mind entirely. His circumstances did 
not indicate that God had forsaken him nor that 
He had set him to one side. He was eagerly look- 
ing for fresh opportunities to advance upon the 
enemy. 

We are told that just before the first battle 
of the Marne in the World War of 1914-18, Mar- 
shal Foch, the great French General, reported: 
“My centre is giving; my left wing is retreat- 
ing; the situation is excellent; I am attacking.” 
This was not mere military bombast, for the 
Marshal realized that apparent defeat could be 


170 Lectures on Colossians 


turned into victory by acting with resolution and 
alacrity at the very moment when the enemy 
seemed to be triumphant. Doubtless the devil 
thought he had gained a great advantage when 
he shut Paul up in prison, but from that prison cell 
came at least four of the great Church epistles, and 
some of the pastoral letters, which have been the 
means of untold blessing to millions throughout 
the centuries. And from that cell, too, the gospel 
went out; first to the prison-guards, and through 
them to many more in Cesar’s palace who might 
not otherwise have been reached. How import- 
ant it is not to give ground to Satan, but in 

prayer and faith to turn every defeat into a vic- 
tory by seizing the opportunity and advancing, 
against the foe, assured that our great Captain 
knows no retreat. Alas, we spend so much time 
halting between two opinions, debating what 
we should do, and doing nothing. We need the 
grace of decision that will enable us to seize the 
opportune moment and act upon it in the fear 
of God. And this is emphasized in the verse 
that follows: “Walk in wisdom toward them that 
are without, redeeming the time.” In our inter- 
course with men of the world how we need to re- 
member that opportunities, to warn of judgment 
to come and to point them to Christ, once given 
may never come again. Therefore the tremen- 
dous importance of buying up such privileges of 
service in the light of the judgment-seat of Christ. 


Concluding Exhortations 171 


The day of grace is fast passing away. We meet. 
men once, perhaps, never to see them again, and 
while it is perfectly true that we cannot be for- 
ever pestering people about what they would call 
our religious notions, yet it is the part of wis- 
dom to be on the lookout for every opening that 
will give us the privilege to minister Christ to 
their souls. 


“To each man’s life there comes a time supreme, 
One day, one night, one morning or one noon, 
One freighted hour, one moment opportune, 

One rift through which sublime fulfilments gleam, 

One space when faith goes tiding with the stream, 
One Once in balance ’twixt Too Late, Too Soon, 
And ready for the passing instant’s boon 

To tip in favor of uncertain beam 


‘Ah, happy he who, knowing how to wait, 
Knows, also how to watch, and work, and stand, 
On Life’s broad deck alert, and at the prow 
To seize the passing moment, big with fate, 
From Opportunity’s extended hand, 
When the great clock of Destiny strikes NOW!” 


But if we would witness to the Lord in such a 
way that our testimony will really count we must 
be careful that our walk agrees with our speech. 
Careless behaviour when in the company of 
worldlings will only make them feel that we do 
not ourselves believe the tremendous truths which 
we would press upon them. How careful preach- 
ers need to be in regard to this! The world is 
so quick to judge, and will only turn away with 


Viz Lectures on Colossians 


disgust from a man who is serious on the plat- 
form but frivolous among men. He who is solemn 
as he preaches of divine realities but is a giggling 
buffoon when out in company, need not think that 
he will make any permanent impression for good 
upon the hearts and consciences of those among 
whom he mingles. Many a servant of Christ in 
his anxiety to be accepted of men and to become 
what is called to-day “a good mixer,” sincerely 
hoping thereby to commend his message, has found 
to his sorrow that he has paid too high a price 
for his popularity; he has but cheapened himself 
and his ministry by coming down to the level of 
natural men who know not the power of the new 
life. I remember well a friend speaking once 
of two preachers. One was perhaps a bit unduly 
serious, not that anyone can be too sober as he 
faces the realities of eternity, but the man in 
question was perhaps a bit too stern to readily 
make friends among those whom he wished to 
help. The other was the very soul of cordiality. 
He would tell a good story, smoke a good cigar, 
and make himself hail-fellow-well-met with all 
and sundry with whom he came in contact. 
Speaking of him my friend said, “Dr. Blank is a 
fine fellow. I do enjoy an hour in his company; 
he makes me forget all my troubles, but,” he 
added thoughtfully, “if I were dying I’d rather 
have Mr. So-and-So come and pray with me.” Ah, 
my brethren, let us not forfeit our high and holy 


Concluding Exhortations 173 


ealling as Christ’s representatives in order that 
we may obtain popularity among men who have 
little relish for divine things. This does not mean 
that we are called upon to be disagreeable in our 
behavior or conversation, for we are told, “Let 
your speech be alway with grace, seasoned with 
salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer 
every man.” Gracious speech flows from a heart 
established in the grace of God. Of Jesus the 
psalmist wrote, “Grace is poured into Thy lips.” 
He could say, “Thy gentleness hath made me 
great.” But this did not make Him indifferent 
to evil, nor unfaithful in dealing with those who 
needed rebuke. “Seasoned with salt’ suggests the 
preservative power of faithfulness. There is 
always a danger that a gracious man will become 
a weak man, and will lack courage to speak out 
faithfully when occasion demands it. In the law 
it is written, “Thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy 
neighbor; thou shalt not suffer sin upon him.” 
We are all our brothers’ keepers to a certain ex- 
tent, and while nothing is more contrary to the 
spirit of Christ than an overweening, captious, 
fault-finding spirit, yet where Christ’s honor is 
at stake, or where we realize a brother is stand- 
ing in dangerous places, we need the salt of right- 
eousness to season gracious speech in order that 
we may know how to speak to every man. And 
if we would perfect ourselves in this grace we 
need to live more in company with the Lord Jesus 


174 Lectures on Colossians 


Christ Himself. Follow Him through the Gospels 
in His wondrous ministry of grace and truth here 
on earth. See how marvelously He met each in- 
dividual case. F. W. Grant has well said, “Our 
| Lord had no stereotyped method of dealing with 
souls.” He took up each case on its merits. He 
did not talk to the woman at the well in the same 
way as He addressed Nicodemus, the ruler of the 
Jews. He probed the depths of each heart and 
ministered according to the need. And His de- 
voted follower, the apostle Paul, the author 
of this divinely inspired letter to the Colos- 
sians, was ever exercised in regard to the same 
thing. He was made all things to all men if by 
any means he might save some. In the Jewish 
synagogue he reasoned out the Scriptures like the 
most able rabbi or doctor of the law. When he 
stood on Mars Hill among the Athenian philoso- 
phers he was a master of rhetoric and showed 
full acquaintance with Greek thought and liter- 
ature, but spake not as pleasing men, but God who 
trieth the hearts, until his great address was jn- 
terrupted by the excited throng about him, who 
spurned the idea of the resurrection of the body. 
Addressing the idolaters of Lycaonia he met them 
on their own ground, and appealed from nature 
to nature’s God, seeking to turn them from their 
vanities and draw their hearts to the Creator 
of all things. How different in all this was both 
the Master and the servant to many who to-day 


Concluding Exhortations 175 


seem to pride themselves on their outspokenness 
and indifference to the views and opinions of 
others. Is it any wonder that men turn from 
them in disgust and refuse to listen to what seems 
to them but the dogmatic utterances of self-cen- 
tred egotists. On the other hand, as intimated 
above, there are those who seek to be gracious but 
who utterly lack faithfulness, and who would 
gloss over any doctrine or evil in the lives of their 
hearers rather than run the risk of giving offence. 
How much divine wisdom is needed, and how 
close must the servant keep to the Master Him- 
self, in order that he may know how to answer 
every man. 


176 


LECTURE XVI 


Closing Salutations 
(Chap. 4: 7-18.) 


“All my state shall Tychicus declare unto you, who is 
a beloved brother, and a faithful minister and fellow- 
servant in the Lord: whom I have sent unto you for the 
same purpose, that he might know your estate, and com- 
fort your hearts; with Onesimus, a faithful and beloved 
brother, who is one of you. They shall make known 
unto you all things which are done here. Aristarchus my 
fellow-prisoner saluteth you, and Marcus, sister’s son to 
Barnabas (touching whom ye received commandments: if 
he come unto you, receive him); and Jesus, which is called 
Justus, who are of the circumcision. These only are my 
fellow-workers unto the kingdom of God which have been 
a comfort unto me. Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant 
of Christ, saluteth you, always laboring fervently for you in 
prayers, that ye may stand perfect and complete in all the 
will of God. For I bear him record, that he hath a great 
zeal for you, and them that are in Laodicea, and them in 
Hierapolis. Luke, the beloved physician, and Demas greet 
you. Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nym- 
phas, and the church which is in his house. And when 
this epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also 
in the church of the Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read 
the epistle from Laodicea. And say to Archippus, Take 
heed to the ministry which thou hast received in the Lord, 
that thou fulfil it. The salutation by the hand of me Paul. 
Remember my bonds. Grace be with you. Amen.’ 


This last section, though somewhat lengthy, 
does not require very much in the way of either 


Closing Salutations 177 


exposition or explanation. It is interesting, how- 
ever, to compare the references to the same per- 
son mentioned here with those in other epistles. 

We do not know much about Tychicus, men- 
tioned in verse 7, excepting that in Ephesians 6: 
21, 22, he is again spoken of in almost the same 
terms. It is evident that he was one in whom the 
apostle had implicit confidence. He speaks of 
him in each passage as a beloved brother and 
faithful minister, adding here a third expression 
—“fellow-servant in the Lord.” Beloved and yet 
faithful! What a rare but blessed combination 
is this! So often men who seek to be faithful 
become almost unconsciously stern and un- 
gracious, thereby forfeiting the tender affection 
of the people of God, even though they may be 
looked upon with respect as men of principle who 
can be depended upon to do and say the righteous 
thing at all cost to themselves or others ; and 
unhappily, in the last instance, they may mani- 
fest very little real concern for the peace of 
mind or comfort of heart of those who disagree 
with them. On the other hand, many a beloved 
brother purchases the affectionate regard of the 
saints at the cost of faithfulness to truth. It is 
far better to be true to Christ and His Word, and 
thus have His approval, than to be approved 
of men and loved because of weakness in enforc- 
ing what is according to truth. 


178 Lectures on Colossians 


Tychicus evidently went to neither extreme. 
He was undoubtedly a lovable man because of 
his gracious demeanor and his tender solici- 
tude for the welfare of the saints, but at the 
same time he was faithful in ministering the 
Word of God, rebuking iniquity and also comfort- 
ing the penitent. Such men are rarer than we 
realize. In them we see the delightful combina- 
tion of the shepherd’s heart and the prophet’s 
spirit. One cannot but think how alike in char- 
acter were Timothy and Tychicus. Both were 
loyal to the word of God, and both sought the 
comfort and blessing of the people of God. 

In verse 9 Onesimus is spoken of in similar 
terms. He is called a “faithful and beloved 
brother.” It is evident that he did not have the 
gift that marked Tychicus, but the two character- 
istics we have noticed were manifest in him. We 
know much more of his history than of several 
others mentioned in this chapter. The brief letter 
to Philemon tells us a great deal regarding him. 
He had been a dishonest runaway slave: he had 
robbed his master and apparently wasted his ill- 
gotten gains, ere he was brought to Christ 
through coming in contact with Paul in Rome. 
Philemon himself had been converted through the 
same devoted servant, so we may see, in mercy 
being extended to the thieving slave, a wondrous 
picture of sovereign grace. 


Closing Salutations © 179 


“Sov’reign grace o’er sin abounding; 
Ransomed souls the tidings swell! 
*Tis a deep that knows no sounding; 
Who its length and breadth can tell? 

On its glories 
Let my soul forever dwell.” 


After Onesimus was brought to Christ, Paul 
sent him back to his master, offering himself to 
become his surety in the tender words, “If thou 
count me therefore a partner, receive him as my- 
self. If he hath wronged thee or oweth thee 
aught, put that to my account; I, Paul, have writ- 
ten it with mine own hand. I will repay it.” 
What a gospel picture is this! It is Christ Him- 
self who has assumed the responsibilities of the 
penitent sinner. “We are all God’s Onesimuses” 
said Luther. Christ paid our debt that we might 
be accepted in Him before God. 


“He bore on the tree, the sentence for me, 
And now both the Surety and sinner are free.” 


And when thus redeemed, it is our happy 
privilege to serve Him in glorious liberty and 
say with the psalmist, “Truly I am Thy servant; 
Thou hast loosed my bonds.” 

Of Aristarchus, whom Paul here calls his fel- 
low-prisoner, we read in Acts 19 that he was a 
Macedonian travelling with Paul, and endangered 
his very life on behalf of the gospel at the time 
of the uproar in Ephesus. He is also mentioned 


180 Lectures on Colossians 


again in Philemon 24 as a fellow-laborer with 
the apostle. His name would imply that he was 
of the so-called upper classes, an aristocrat of 
Macedonia, who for the sake of the kingdom of 
God had renounced his place of prominence in 
the world to become a bondman of Jesus 
Christ. 

We are glad to see the affectionate way in 
which Paul here writes of Marcus, the nephew 
of Barnabas. Years before, this young man had 
been the cause of serious contention between 
these two devoted men of God. Paul had lost 
confidence in John Mark because of his leaving 
the work and returning to his mother in Jeru- 
salem, upon the completion of the evangelistic 
tour in Cyprus. Barnabas, kindly in spirit and 
evidently moved by natural affection, wanted to 
give the unfaithful helper a second chance, but 
Paul was obdurate. He felt he could not afford 
to jeopardize the success of their work by again 
taking with them one who had proved himself 
a weakling. Which one really had the mind of 
God, we are not told; but we are thankful indeed 
to find that Mark “made good” as we say, and 
became a trusted and honored-man of God; com- 
panion to Peter (see 1 Pet.5:18), and dear to 
Paul as well as to his uncle Barnabas. He is 
again mentioned in Philemon 24 as a fellow- 
laborer, and Paul requests Timothy to bring Mark 
with him, in 2 Timothy 4:11. The fact that he 


Closing Salutations 181 


needed the spiritual commendation of this 10th 
verse would seem to imply that at the time of 
writing there were some who still stood in doubt 
of him, but the apostle’s recommendation would 
remove all that. 

The next name, “Jesus, which is called Justus,” 
might well remind us of the humiliation to which 
our blessed Lord stooped in grace when He bhe- 
came a man in order to give His life for sinners. 
To us there is only one “Jesus.” That name is 
now above every name, and shines resplendent in 
highest glory; unique and precious; a name with 
which none other can ever be compared. But 
we need to be reminded that “Jesus” represents 
the Hebrew name “Joshua” and was in common 
use when our Lord was here on earth. And so 
we have here a brother otherwise unknown bear- 
ing the same name as his Saviour, and not only 
that but surnamed The Just. This latter title 
was given to men because of their recognized 
integrity as in the case of Joseph Barsabas of 
Acts 1: 23, and an otherwise unknown Justus in 
Acts 18: 7. 

There is something peculiarly suggestive in the 
way the apostle eulogizes these brethren whose 
salutations he thus conveys to the Colossians. 
“These only are my fellow-workers unto the king- 
dom of God which have been a comfort unto me.” 
It is evident that then, as now, gift and grace did 
not necessarily go together. There were others 


182 Lectures on Colossians 


who were perhaps energetic enough in service but 
who were anything but brotherly in their atti- 
tude toward Paul. 

Of Epaphras we have already had the apostle’s 
estimate in chapter 1:7. Here he draws special 
attention to this man’s fervency in prayer. It 
was he who had come from Colosse to visit Paul 
and to acquaint him with the conditions that 
called forth this letter. That he had some ability 
as a preacher and teacher we know, for it was 
through his ministry these Colossians had been 
won to Christ and the assembly formed there; 
but his greatest ministry was evidently one of 
prayer. In that he labored fervently, striving 
earnestly in supplication before God, so deeply 
concerned was he for the saints that they might 
enter into the truth in all its fulness and thus 
in practical experience stand as full-grown and 
filled full, or complete, in all the will of God. 
In this prayer Paul joined, as we have seen in 
chap. 1:9. This earnest apostle of prayer, 
Epaphras, had not confined his ministry or inter- 
est to Colosse, but he bore in his heart, in the 
same intense zeal, the neighboring assemblies of 
Laodicea and Hierapolis. 

It is most pathetic to compare verse 14 with 
2 Tim. 4: 10, 11. Here we read, “Luke, the be- 
loved physician, and Demas greet you.” But in 
writing to Timothy the apostle says, ““Demas hath 
forsaken me, having loved this present world, 


Closing Salutations 183 


and hath departed unto Thessalonica. .Only Luke 
is with me.” From the day he joined Paul’s com- 
pany (as intimated in Acts 16 where the change 
of the pronoun from “they” to “us” showed that 
Luke formed one of the party at Troas, Acts 16: 
8,9), “Luke, the beloved physician,’ was one of 
Paul’s most devoted helpers. He remained with 
him to the end, and possibly saw him martyred. 

Demas and Luke seem to have been inti- 
mately associated, for both here and in Philemon 
24 the two names are found together, but upon 
the occasion of Paul’s second imprisonment we 
learn that the love of the world had been too 
much for Demas. He found the itinerant preach- 
er’s lot too hard, and he left the apostle in his 
hour of need and went off to Thessalonica. There 
is no hint that he plunged into a life of sin. He 
may have gone into some respectable business; 
but the Holy Ghost relentlessly exposes the hid- 
den springs of his changed behavior. He loved 
this present world. No longer are he and Luke 
joined in devoted service. Demas had chosen an 
easier path. 

Salutations are sent to the Laodicean brethren; 
and Nymphas, who was evidently prominent 
among them and in whose house they met for 
worship, is especially mentioned. We may gather 
from verse 16 how the apostolic letters were 
early circulated among the churches. This Colos- 
sian epistle was not only to be read locally but 


184 Lectures on Colossians 


was to be read also in the assembly of the Lao- 
diceans. And a letter sent to the latter church 
was to be sent on to Colosse. This epistle from 
Laodicea (observe not to Laodicea) is probably 
our epistle to the Ephesians, and is generally 
regarded as a circular letter that went first to 
Ephesus and then to other churches in the Roman 
proconsular province of Asia, thus reaching 
Colosse from Laodicea. We have already seen 
how important it is to study the two together 
as they are divinely linked in such a wonderful 
way. 

In verse 17 Paul gives a special admonition 
to Archippus, also mentioned in the letter to 
Philemon, who was apparently a servant of Christ 
ministering the Word at Colosse, but had a ten- 
dency not uncommon in some young preachers to 
settle down comfortably and take things easily. 
To him the apostle sends the message, “Take heed 
to the ministry which thou hast received in the 
Lord that thou fulfil it.” Promptness and energy 
are as important in spiritual service as in any- 
thing else. There is an incident related in con- 
nection with two leading generals of the Southern 
Confederacy of America that might well speak 
to every servant of Christ. General Robt. E. Lee 
once sent word to General Stonewall Jackson that 
he would be glad to talk with him at his con- 
venience on some matter of no great urgency. 
General Jackson instantly rode to Headquarters, 


Closing Salutations 185 


through most inclement weather. When General 
Lee expressed surprise at seeing him, Jackson 
exclaimed, “General Lee’s slightest wish is a 
supreme command to me, and I always take plea- 
sure in prompt obedience.” It is to be hoped 
that this same spirit laid hold of Archippus, and 
that he profited by the prodding of the aged 
apostle. 

The epistle was signed in accordance with Paul’s 
usual custom with his own hand. According to 
the note at the end Tychicus and Onesimus acted 
as his amanuenses in producing this letter but 
he appended his signature. How much would one 
give to have an autographed copy of this or any 
other of his letters! He would have them remem. 
ber his bonds both as stirring them up to prayer 
and to remind them that the servant’s path is 
one of suffering and rejection. 

He closes with the customary benediction, 
“Grace be with you. Amen.” This is not so full 
as that in the last verse of 2 Thessalonians, which 
he tells us is the token of genuineness in every 
epistle of his, but as we go over all the thirteen 
letters that bear his name and the anonymous 
letter to the Hebrews we see that in every one 
there is some message about grace at the end. 
He was preeminently the apostle of grace, and 
it is no matter of surprise that this precious word 
should be his secret mark, as it were, thus 
authenticating every letter. May that grace 


186 Lectures on Colossians 


abound in us as it already has abounded toward 
us through the abundant mercy of our God. 


“Grace is the sweetest sound 
That ever reached our ears, 

When conscience charged and Justice frowned, 
*T was grace removed our fears!” 


We began with grace, we are kept by grace, 
and it is grace that will bring us home at last. 


A a fh 


FEB 49°95 
APR 28 ‘80 
PFC 10 “60 
SEP 22 ‘82 
APR 24 RR 
NOV oe ‘GP 
we 28 88 
ppr 29 *88 
aA 6 BS 


Demco 38-297 JNGON ce 


227.7 
Ir7 ~ 37896 


Ironside 


lectures on the Epistle to the 
Colossians. 


co 
a= 
° 
> 
= 
x 
f 
S 


WET AT 


