Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


f 
4 


LECTURES 


mTEODDCIOET  TO  THE   aHIBT 


THE    PENTATEUCH. 


WILLIAM    KELLY. 


LONDOH : 
W.  H.  BROOM,  28,  PATEKNOSTEB  BOW. 


/^/, 


/ 


3S>0 


PREFACE. 


The  Lectures  which  follow  were  delivered  in  London, 
during  the  month  of  May,  1870,  and  corrected  from 
notes  taken  in  shorthand,  with  additions.  It  may  be 
painful  to  some  that  so  much  notice  is  taken  of  scepti- 
cal  assaults  on  the  Pentateuch.  My  object,  however,  is 
not  only  to  promote  the  direct  edification  of  the  Chris- 
tians who  are  quite  unaffected  by  such  puny  efforts  of 
unbelief,  but  to  furnish  helpful  hints  to  those  who  feel 
either  need  of  a  candid  answer  to  captious  objections, 
or  a  wish  to  aid  the  feeble  entangled  by  such  snares  of 
the  enemy.  These  remarks,  chiefly  in  the  form  of  foot- 
notes, unless  I  err  greatly,  will  not  be  unwelcome  to 
many  souls;  for  to  my  mind  the  defence  made  by 
those  friendly  to  revelation  is  in  general  almost  as 
feeble,  and  in  many  cases  quite  as  painful,  as  the 
attacks  of  its  foes.  May  He  whose  grace  is  rich  to  all 
that  caU  upon  Him  bless  every  reader,  as  He  bears 
with  my  shortcomings,  though  earnestly  desiring  to 
magnify  Himself  and  His  word! 

Guernsey ,  December,  1870. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Modern  criticism  has  ventured  to  undermine  and  assail 
almost  all  the  books  of  holy  scripture,  but  none  with 
such  boldness  as  the  Pentateuch,  unless  it  be  the  pro- 
phecy of  DanieL  The  incredulity  of  not  a  few  theo- 
logians in  our  own  day,  abroad  and  at  home,  outstrips 
while  it  foUows  that  of  Celsus  and  Porphyry,  of  Spinosa 
and  Hobbes,  of  Bolingbroke  and  Hume.  The  remote 
antiquity  of  Moses  especially  seemed  to  invite  their 
unhappy  efforts  in  the  dark ;  for  as  the  prowling  birds 
of  night  shun  -the  day,  so  the  sceptics  of  all  ages  love 
darkness  rather  than  light  for  a  reason  which  is  plain 
to  every  eye  but  their  own — a  reason  on  which  the 
Judge  of  quick  and  dead  has  already  pronounced,  if 
not  on  themselves  because  of  it. 

We  need  not  cite  the  heathen  critics,  nor  the  famous 
Eabbis  outside  Christianity  who  rise  up  to  rebuke  such 
unconscionable  doubts.  We  would  not  summon  the 
whole  nation  of  Israel,  whose  testimony  is  in  this  all 
the  stronger,  because  from  a  date  far  earlier  than  the 
father  of  Grecian  history  it  is  given  with  double  force 
to  the  law  if  not  to  the  prophet.    We  would  not  gleaxi 


VIU  INTRODUCTION. 

from  the  widespread  field  of  tradition,  east,  west,  north, 
south,  nor  appeal  even  to  the  unwritten  but  emphatic 
records  of  Egypt  itself,  that  once  renowned  mistress,  but 
now  according  to  one  of  Jehovah's  prophets  the  basest 
of  kingdoms,  which  hides  no  doubt  the  shame  of  its 
rulers,  but  confirms  in  the  most  minute  way  the  nicest 
details  of  the  Mosaic  report  of  Israel's  hard  bondage 
before  their  triumph.  Let  us  take  our  stand  on  the 
fact,  broad,  deep,  and  conclusive,  that  the  authority  of 
Christ  has  decided  the  question  for  all  who  own  Him 
to  be  God  as  well  as  man.  It  is  well  that  we  should 
know  with  what  sort  of  men  we  have  to  deal ;  for  all 
have  not  faith.  He  who  spoke  of  charity,  and  lived  it  as 
perhaps  none  other  ever  did  since,  saw  no  inconsistency 
(even  if  for  a  moment  we  leave  his  inspiration  out  of 
sight)  in  binding  up  with  his  salutation  in  the  same 
epistle  the  solemn  warning — "  If  any  man  love  not  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  Anathema  Maran-atha." 

Our  Lord  then  has  spoken  with  particular  care  of 
Daniel  as  "the  prophet"  toward  the  close  of  the  Old 
Testament  canon,  but  of  Moses  at  the  beginning  as  the 
writer  of  the  law.  (Mark  x.  5,  xii.  26 ;  Luke  xxiv.  27, 
44;  John  v.  46,  47,  vii.  19,)  It  is  not  merely  that  He 
does  not  contest  the  position^of  the  Jews  as  to  Moses ; 
He  aJB&rms  it  and  insists  on  it  repeatedly  Himself  in 
the  plainest  terms.  Think  of  the  coolness  of  a  man, 
professedly  not  an  infidel  but  a  Christian  and  a  Christian 
minister,  who,  after  quoting  Christ's  words,  "Have  ye 
not  read  in  the  hook  of  Moses,  how  in  the  bush  God 
spake  unto  him,  saying,  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham," 


INTRODUCTION.  IX 

&c.  &c.,  can  say,  "  Here  the  allusion  is  to  Exodus  iii  6, 
which  was  not  written  by  Moses,  as  we  suppose"!* 

Fully  admitting  the  value  of  reasoning  to  convict 
gainsayers  and  expose  the  futility  of  their  captious 
arguments,  I  lay  it  down  as  an  axiom  that  in  revealed 
truth  it  is  and  must  be  simply  a  question  of  a  divine 
testimony,  which  is  given  to  be  believed,  and  which 
binds  the  conscience  even  of  him  who  rejects  it  through 
unbelief.  If  physics  require  patient  induction  and 
comprehensive  grouping  under  general  principles  or 
laws,  if  mathematics  demand  a  strict  and  necessary 
demonstration,  if  the  mixed  sciences  admit  of  both,  the 
written  word  of  God  claims  faith  in  His  testimony 
which  tests  the  moral  state  of  him  who  hears.  The 
faith  which  receives  it  traditionally  and  with  indiffer- 
ence is  of  no  value,  and  will  under  pressure  give  it 
up  with  the  same  otiose  facility  in  which  it  assented. 
Certainly  to  doubt  is  not  to  believe;  yet  one  could 
almost  allow  the  saying  to  pass,  that  there  is  more 
faith  in  some  doubts  than  in  such  traditional  faith  as 
characterises  Christendom,  save  those  in  it  who  are 
born  of  God.  For  the  soul  which  begins  to  be  really 
in  earnest  is  apt  to  hesitate  till  it  has  adequate  motive 
to  believe ;  while  the  flesh  which  so  promptly  offered 
to  obey  at  Sinai  is  just  as  ready  to  say  its  Amen  to  the 
Athanasian  creed. 


*  An  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament,  Critical,  Historical,  and 
Theological ;  containing  a  Discussion  of  the  most  imporiant  Questions 
belonging  to  the  several  Books.  By  Samuel  Davidson,  D.D.,  of  the 
university  of  Halle,  and  LL.D.,  vol.  i.  124. 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

Again,  God  does  give  suJB&cient  evidence  to  render 
the  unbeKef  of  the  objector  inexcusable ;  but  the  faith 
which  rests  on  such  human  motives  is  merely  of  nature, 
not  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  its  source.  One  may  be 
arrested  or  attracted  by  such  evidence;  but  God's 
testimony  must  be  received  because  and  as  He  gives  it, 
with  no  other  motive  whatever :  else  we  set  up  to  judge 
Him  and  His  word,  instead  of  submitting,  as  divinely 
formed  faith  always  does,  to  be  judged  by  Him.  If  the 
testimony  be  of  God,  it  is  the  truth ;  and  if  so,  he  who 
cavils  and  opposes  is  ipso  facto  proved  to  be  in  such  a 
state  morally  that  he  has  no  congeniality  with  the 
truth  of  God,  and  if  pressed  closely  his  indisposition 
to  receive  it  ripens  into  active  hatred  and  scoffing  un- 
belief. Whatever  be  the  circumstances,  he  has  so  yielded 
to  his  own  thoughts  or  those  of  other  men,  that  he 
overlooks  the  motives  adequate  to  win  his  confidence 
which  God  has  given,  and  becomes  at  length  settled 
down  in  such  hardness  of  heart  against  His  word,  that 
it  is  enough  to  resist  all  testimony,  and  he  can  only  be 
left  to  the  judgment  which  he  despises. 

From  this  it  will  be  plain  to  the  reflecting  mind  why 
in  the  things  of  God  it  is  a  question  of  believing  a  divine 
testimony,  while  in  pure  science  we  have  to  do  with 
necessary  inference  and  in  appUed  science  with  observed 
facts  also.  Hence  in  these  latter  it  is  a' question  of  course 
of  knowledge  or  ignorance ;  they  are  not  the  subject  of 
doubt  or  belief  as  is  testimony.  But  it  is  a  horrible  and 
fatal  error  thence  to  infer  that  any  conclusion  of  science 
23  more  certain  than  every  word  of  God  is  in  itself  and 


INTRODUCTION.  xi 

SO  to  the  believer.  There  are  measures  of  feith  as  of 
knowledge ;  but,  though  no  Pyrrhonist  in  the  domain 
either  of  the  senses  or  of  science,  or  even  of  honest  and 
competent  history,  I  maintain  that  (pure  science  apart 
where  the  premisses  necessitate  the  conclusion)  the 
word  of  God  alone  gives  absolute  certainty,  and  faith 
receives  accordingly.  Eevelation  is  the  word  of  a  God 
who  cannot  lie ;  and  if  man  can  with  comparative  ease 
convey  his  mind  correctly,  how  much  more  can  God 
His,  infinite  though  it  be  ?  The  human  element  is  fully 
admitted:  but  the  essence  of  inspiration  is  that  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  excludes  error  in  the  writer. 
It  is  too  much  forgotten  that  there  is  ignorance  in 
every  reader ;  and  that  this  ignorance  as  to  divine  truth 
is  really  and  always,  spite  of  appearances,  in  the  ratio 
of  our  self-sufficiency. 

Further,  that  there  are  difficulties,  not  only  great  but 
possibly  insoluble  by  you,  me,  or  any  other  man,  is  not 
only  allowed  but  affirmed.  It  may  well,  not  to  say  it 
must,  be  so  in  a  system  so  immense  as  that  of  which 
revelation  treats  from  the  creation  of  all,  and  before  it, 
till  the  new  heavens  and  earth  of  eternity.  But  he 
is  unwise  who  would  surrender  the  positive  proofs  of 
revelation,  or  of  the  truths  it  contains,  because  of  diffi- 
culties which  perplex  the  human  mind.  There  is  no 
divinely  formed  province  even  in  nature,  and  this  in 
its  lowest  or  least  forms,  where  there  are  not  enigmas 
beyond  the  wit  of  man ;  and  these  the  wisest  are  the 
most  ready  to  confess.  If  writings  which  professed  to 
be  a  revelation  had  no  depths  beyoud  man's  plummet^ 


XU  INTRODUCTION. 

it  would  be  a  juster  conclusion  to  infer  that  it  could 
scarcely  be  a  revelation  of  God. 

Scripture  clauns  to  be  the  communication  of  the 
mind  of  God  to  man,  not  setting  aside  the  character  or 
circumstances  of  the  writers,  but  giving  the  fuU  and 
absolute  truth  of  God  in  and  through  alL  Such  is  the 
doctrine  asserted  in  1  Cor.  ii.,  2  Tim.  iii.;  and  with  this 
agrees  the  uniform  use  of  the  passages  cited  for  special 
purposes  throughout  both  the  Old  and  the  New 
Testaments.  So  above  aU  said  He  who  spoke  as  never 
man  spoke;  and  no  wonder;  for  He  was  God  as  well 
as  man,  and  man  as  truly  as  Grod.  But  it  is  to  be 
feared  that  unbelief  as  to  the  written  word  bodes  ill  for 
the  faith  which  is  professed  in  the  Word,  the  personal 
Word  of  life.  In  both  cases  it  is  the  Infinite  brought 
into  the  finite  by  grace;  of  which  the  ruinous  specu- 
lations of  unbelief  would  deprive  us,  as  their  authors 
have  been  themselves  deprived  of  it  by  an  enemy 
subtler  than  they  are.  Thus,  if  incarnation  be  the  Word 
made  flesh  (a  divine  person  yet  a  real  man,  "  that  Holy 
Thing"  bom  of  His  mother,  and  this  by  the  power  of  the 
Spirit),  revelation  is  the  mind  of  God  in  the  language  of 
man,  but  perfectly  guided  and  guarded  by  the  Spirit. 
It  were  to  lose  the  truth  in  both  respects,  if  we 
accepted  the  foolish  cheat  of  Satan  that  the  finite  drags 
down  the  Infinite.  Not  so ;  both  were  given  in  God's 
love  to  meet  the  finite  in  its  actual  state  of  sin,  degra- 
dation, and  distance  firom  Grod ;  and  in  both  the  finite 
is  90  governed  by  the  Infinite,  which  has  joined  it  to 
itself  in  holy  and  perfect  union,  that  grace  and  truth 


INTEODUCnON.  XIU 

alone  exist  and  appear  without  the  smallest  admixture 
of  human  evil  or  error.* 

Take  the  following  decisive  utterance  of  the  Saviour : 
"How  can  ye  believe,  which  receive  honour  one  of 
another,  and  seek  not  the  honour  that  cometh  from 
God  only?  Do  not  think  that  I  will  accuse  you  to  the 
Father :  there  is  one  that  accuseth  you,  even  Moses,  in 
whom  ye  trust.  For  had  ye  believed  Moses,  ye  would 
have  believed  me:  for  he  wrote  of  me.  But  if  ye 
believe  not  his  writings,  how  shall  ye  believe  my 
words?"  (John  v.  44-47.)  The  Lord  had  been  declaring 
HimseK  the  object  of  faith,  who  as  Son  of  God  becomes 
the  source  of  life  to  him  that  believes,  but  is  the  judge 
of  him  that  believes  not  to  his  utter  destruction.  This 
leads  Him  to  open  out  the  various  testimonies  to  Him- 
self :  first,  John  the  Baptist ;  secondly,  the  works  which 
the  Father  gave  the  Son  to  do ;  thirdly,  the  Father's  own 
witness  to  the  Son;  and,  lastly,  the  scriptures.  Even  the 
Jews  owned  their  all-importance  for  their  souls;  yet 
did  they  testify  concerning  Christ.  Self  and  the  world 
were  and  are  the  true  hindrances  to  the  love  and  the 
glory  of  God,  and  hence  also  render  faith  impossible. 
Their  accuser  would  be  not  Jesus  [who  will  judge  all] 
but  the  very  Moses  in  whom  they  had  their  hope.  If 
they  had  believed  Moses,  they  would  have  believed 
Jesus ;  "  for  he  wrote  of  me.  For  if  ye  believe  not  his 
writings,  how  shall  ye  believe  my  words  ?"    Thus  the 

*  I  do  not  refer  to  questions  of  readings,  translations  or  expositions, 
which  are  quite  distinct  from  divine  revelation,  and  belong  solely  to 
man*8  responsible  use  of  revelation. 


XIV  INTRODUCTION. 

Lord  puts  the  highest  honour  conceivable  on  the  written 
word,  if  it  were  only  the  law,  and  not  the  latest  and 
fullest  communications  of  God.  For  scripture  as  a 
testimony  has  a  permanence  in  this  respect  which  can 
belong  to  no  spoken  words.  Christ  did  not  therefore 
expect  them  to  receive  His  own  words  if  they  did  not 
believe  the  writings  of  Moses. 

It  will  be  observed,  however,  how  many  modem 
questions  are  here  by  anticipation  answered.  The  scrip- 
tures as  a  whole  testify  about  Christ.  He  is  the  object 
continually  before  the  inspiring  Spirit,  directly  or  in- 
directly. Good  or  evil  is  noticed  relatively  to  Him,  the 
brighter  and  only  complete  exemplar  of  the  one,  the 
absolute  contradiction  and  finally  the  judge  of  the 
other.  The  Old  Testament  therefore  is  in  the  fullest 
sense  prophetic.  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law :  is  He 
not  of  the  Psalms  also,  as  well  as  of  the  Prophets  ?  So 
indeed  He  risen  from  the  dead  tells  His  disciples.  (Luke 
xxiv.  27,  and  44,  45.)  I  know  that  these  unhappy 
rationalists  dare  to  think  that  in  the  days  of  His  flesh 
He,  the  Lord  God,  was  not  above  the  prejudices  of  that 
time  and  place  from  which  they,  dupes  of  Satan,  flatter 
themselves  somewhat  freed.  Thus  they  conceive  either 
that  He  did  not  know  the  truth,  or  that,  knowing  it, 

He  deigned  to .    No;  I  refuse  to  stain  even  this 

paper  of  mine  with  their  infamy  of  the  Lord  of  alL 

Yet,  earnestly  desiring  not  their  destruction  but  their 
edification,  I  entreat  them  to  weigh  the  last  citation, 
and  the  fact,  to  them  surely  as  reasonable  men  most 
momentous,  that  Jesus  is  declared  so  to  speak  as  risen 


INTEODUCTION.  XV 

from  the  dead.  If  they  have  failed  so  lamentably  in 
faith  and  reverence  for  His  personal  glory  during  His 
earthly  service,  at  least  they  must  believe,  if  they 
believe  anything  divine,  that  no  human  prejudices 
survive  the  grave,  that  in  the  risen  state  even  we  shall 
know  as  we  are  known.  If  then  they  are  pleased  to 
accord  also  to  Jesus  risen  that  perfection,  which  it  is  to 
be  supposed  they  hope  for  themselves,  I  call  on  them 
with  me  to  denounce  the  shameful,  nay  shameless, 
notion  that  He  stooped  to  "a  wise  accommodation  to 
popular  views."^ 

Again,  no  one  alleges  that  "  Christ  and  His 
apostles  came  into  the  world  to  instruct  the  Jews  in 
criticism."  (Introduct.  0.  T.  i.  126,  127.)  But  does  not 
faith  in  Christ  bind  us  to  accept  His  authority  as 
superior  to  any  criticism?  He  declares  both  during 
His  ministry  and  in  the  risen  state  that  Moses  wrote  of 
Him,  that  the  books  commonly  called  the  law,  the  Pen- 
tateuch, are  Moses'  writings.  Was  He  in  this  fostering 
an  error  of  the  day,  and  supporting  it  by  His  authority  ? 
Certainly  it  was  no  part  of  Christ's  mission  to  prove 
that  the  Pentateuch  did  not  proceed  from  Moses !  But 
it  is  impossible  to  believe  Christ's  words  and  to  deny 
that  He  declares  those  books  to  be  written  by  Moses, 
which  the  rationalist  declares  are  not  and  distributes 
between  Moses,  if  not  earlier  hands,  the  primitive 
Elohist  after  the  expulsion  of  the  Canaanites,  the 
junior  Elfthist  in  the  the  days  of  Uzziah,  the  Jehovist 
in  the  reign  of  Uzziah,  the  still  later  redactor  who  was 
not  Ezra,  and  the  unfortimate  Deuteronomist  in  the 


XVI  INTRODUCTION. 

reign  of  Manasseh  who  employed  the  "innocent  fiction," 
"  which  an  uncritical  age  rendered  easy,"  of  attributing 
to  the  legislator  the  utterance  of  the  contents  of 
Deuteronomy  as  well  as  the  authorship  of  the  first 
four  books,  in  both  of  which  Dr.  Davidson  (i.  118) 
deliberately  imputes  to  him  what  is  a  fraud. 

I  trust  the  pious  reader  will  pardon  my  copying  such 
views,  which  I  may  fairly  call  the  Christian  or  un- 
christian mythology  of  the  nineteenth  century.  They 
have  found  entrance  and  even  taken  root  in  certain 
quarters  beyond  their  native  soil ;  and  I  am  sure  that 
they  will  w6rk  to  yet  greater  ungodliness,  and  con- 
tribute to  the  growing  denial  and  rejection  of  divine 
authority  in  the  world  as  well  as  in  holy  things,  the 
counterpart  of  the  haughty  and  effete  superstition 
which  has  just  pretended  to  claim  the  infallibility  of 
God,  which  no  apostle*  had  nor  all  together,  for  its 
chief  priest :  two  main  streams  of  evil  which  will  pour 
their  impure  waters  into  the  stagnant  pool  of  "the 
apostacy"  that  is  at  hand  for  ungrateful  and  self- 
vaimting  Christendom. 

But  the  Christian  will  turn  with  increasing  con- 
fidence and  singleness  of  purpose  to  the  living  oracles ; 
and  loving  Christ  he  will  keep  His  word,  even  as  he 
who  loves  Him  not  keeps  not  His  words,  little  thinking 
that  the  word  he  thus  despises  is  the  Father's  who  sent 
the  Son,  and  will  judge  him  at  the  last  day. 

•  Authority  in  rule  or  appointment,  and  inspiration  which  they 
might  share  with  the  prophets,  are  very  different  things,  neither  of 
which  is  denied.    None  but  Qod  however  is  infiJlible. 


INTKODUCTION.  XVll 

Even  the  Jews  who  to  their  ruin  refused  Christ, 
because  they  did  not  hear  Moses  and  the  prophets,  and 
who  resisting  them  were  not  persuaded  when  He  Him- 
self rose  from  the  dead — even  they  never  went  so  far 
in  presumptuous  yet  petty  criticism  as  to  shut  their  eyes 
to  the  most  abundant  evidence,  external  and  internal, 
to  the  writings  of  Moses,  never  dared  to  deny  (as 
rationalists  do)  the  only  light  we  have  for  more  than 
half  this  world's  obscure  history,  besides  its  highest 
function  of  bearing  witness  to  Christ.     Never  did  they 
presume  to  say  that  there  is  little  external  evidence  for 
the  Mosaic  authorship;  that  what  little  there  is  does 
not  stand  the  test  of  criticism ;  or  that  the  succeeding 
writers  of  the  Old  Testament  do  not  confirm  it ! — all 
this  in  the  face  of  such  evidence  as  neither  Greek  nor 
Latin  classics  possess ;  whose  authorship  none  would 
dispute  but  vain  or  crazy  dreamers.  Again,  no  intelligent 
man  questions  the  claims  of  Mahomet  to  writing  the 
Koran,  probably  not  alone  but  by  the  help  of  an  un- 
principled Jew.     The  reason  of  the  difference  is  plain  : 
not  that  there  is  nearly  such  an  amount  or  excellence 
of  proofs  for  the  authorship  of  the  Koran  as  for  Moses' 
writings,  but  that  these,  not  that,  appeal  so  loudly  to 
conscience.     The  Koran  flatters  human  nature,  bribing 
its  own  party  and  bullying  othei's ;  but  the  law  brings 
in  God,  the  true  God,  and  testifies  of  Christ,  which 
flesh  fears  and  dislikes  and  therefore  instinctively  seeks 
to  defame,  unconscious  too  often  of  its  sin  and  shame. 

But  if  it  is  monstrous  to  deny  the  inmiense  and  un- 
broken chain  of  external  evidence  to  the  Pentateuch, 

6^ 


XVIU  INTBODUCmON. 

were  it  only  in  the  fact  that  the  entire  political  and 
religions  life  of  the  Jewish  nation  turned  on  it  in 
prosperity  and  adversity,  captive  and  restored,  for  fifteen 
hundred  years  before  Christ,  not  to  speak,  of  what  goes 
on  before  our  eyes  till  this  day ;  if  it  is  equally  so  to 
deny  that  from  Joshua  through  the  Psalms  to  Malachi 
the  strongest  links  and  the  most  express  statements  are 
given  wherever  they  could  be  foimd  naturally,  what  can 
we  think  of  one  who  does  not  shrink  from  saying 
with  the  scripture  before  his  eyes  that  "  the  venerable 
authority"  of  Christ  has  no  proper  bearing  on  the 
question?  I  should  have  thought  that  the  effort  to 
represent  Moses  as  not  the  writer  of  the  law  as  a 
whole,  as  a  lawgiver,  not  a  historian,  was  manifestly  and 
hopelessly  at  variance  with  His  authority  who  con- 
demned the  unbelief  of  the  Jewfi  on  the  ground  that 
Moses  not  only  wrote  the  law,  but  wrote  it  concerning 
Himself.  If  there  are  various  irreconcilable  contradic- 
tions;* if  there  are  convincing  traces  of  a  later  date 
(beyond  such  as  an  inspired  editor  put  for  the  help  of 
the  reader  after  an  immense  change  in  the  condition 
of  the  people  as  all  admit,  Jews  and  Christians) ;  if 
the  narratives  are  partly  mythical  and  legendary  and 
only  usually  trustworthy ;  if  the  miracles  are  the  exag- 
gerations of  a  later  age ;  if  the  voice  of  God  cannot 
without  profanity  be  said  to  have  externally  uttered  all 
the  precepts  attributed  to  Him;  if  Moses'  hand  laid  the 
Toundation  but  he  was  not  even  the  first  of  those  who 
penned  parts,*  where  is  Christ's  authority  ?  Did  He  not 

•  Introd.  0.  T.  i.  131. 


INTRODUCTION.  XIX 

mean,  did  not  the  Jew  understand  Hiin  to  mean,  the 
five  books  of  the  law  by  the  .writings  of  Moses  ?  Was 
He  deceived?  Does  the  evangelist  John  deceive  us 
(unwittingly  it  could  not  be  if  the  Holy  Spirit  inspired 
him)  through  Christ's  words  ?  Certainly,  if  Dr.  D.  be  true, 
He  who  is  the  truth  is  not  true ;  and  the  Gospels  are  as 
untrustworthy  and  misleading  as  it  is  possible  to  be. 
To  state  the  blasphemy  is  to  refute  it ;  yet  such  is  the 
inevitable  issue  if  there  be  one  word  of  reality  in  what 
is  thus  alleged  against  the  Pentateuch. 

But  if  the  Lord  is  and  spoke  the  truth,  no  real  be- 
liever can  fail,  though  with  grief  and  amazement,  to 
see  that  the  rationalist  stands  in  the  most  deplorable 
and  fatal  hostility  to  Christ's  authority  and  to  God's 
word.  For  if  Moses  testified  the  truth  of  Christ  some 
fifteen  centuries  before  He  lived  and  died,  he  was  a 
prophet,  and  inspired  of  God  in  what  he  wrote ;  and  if 
God  gave  hiin,  according  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  prophesy 
truly  of  Him,  is  it  credible  that  he  has  written  falsely 
of  that  of  which  even  an  ordinary  man  might  have 
written  truly?  If  the  rationalist  speaks  aright,  the 
Pentateuch  is  not  Moses'  writing,  but  a  bundle  of 
tales  true  and  false,  and  in  not  one  word  written  really 
of  Christ :  else  it  would  be  bond  fde  prophetic,  which 
the  system  denies  in  principle ;  because  true  prophecy 
implies  God's  supernatural  communication,  and  this 
would  be  necessarily  a  deathblow  to  the  criticism  of 
the  rationalist. 

It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  objections  derived  from 
internal  structure  are  only  conclusive  proofs  of  the 

6  2 


XX  INTRODUCTION. 

rash  ignorance  of  those  who  make  them,  and  leads  us, 
when  cleared  away  by  the  light  of  Christ,  into  (not 
mere  evidence  of  the  Mosaic  authorship,  which  is  ruled 
definitively  to  all  who  respect  the  word  and  authority  of 
Christ,  but)  an  increasing  sense  and  enjoyment  of  the 
testimony  which  the  honoured  servant  bears  to  his 
Master,  the  Lord  of  all  descried  from  far  but  most  dis- 
tinctly by  the  power  of  the  inspiring  Spirit. 

If  scripture  itself  gave  the  slightest  intimation  to 
that  effect,  there  would  be  no  difficulty  in  supposing 
ever  so  many  writers  contributing  to  the  Pentateuch. 
The  Psalms  also  consist  of  five  books  for  an  incompar- 
ably better  reason  than,  as  the  Eabbis  say,  in  order  to 
correspond  with  the  five  books  of  the  law.  I  have  no 
doubt  that  their  order  is  as  divine  as  are  the  contents 
and  character  of  each  ;  and  that  they  can  be  shewn  to 
have  internal  grounds  for  it  of  very  great  interest, 
instead  of  being  a  mere  collocation  of  David's  first,  and  of 
others  afterwards,  which  in  no  way  accounts  for  some 
of  David's  in  the  last  book,  and  for  one  of  Moses  him- 
self the  introduction  of  the  fourth  book.  But  we  have 
the  sons  of  Korah,  Ethan,  Asaph,  perhaps  Solomon,  and 
others  unnamed  in  addition  to  the  writers  already 
named.  But  then  we  know  the  authors  as  far  as  they 
are  mentioned  from  the  inspired  account  in  each  case ; 
and  the  grouping  wUl  be  found  to  carry  along  with  it 
the  self-evidencing  light  of  God;  for  none  but  He, 
I  am  persuaded,  could  have  distributed  to  each  as  He 
has  done,  or  have  so  tempered  them  as  a  body  together, 
securing  a  moral  and  prophetic  progress  in  the  greater 


INTEODUCTION.  XXI 

divisions  as  well  as  in  the  unity  of  the  entire  collec- 
tion. 

No  believer  would  refuse  to  the  Pentateuch  what  he 
owns  unhesitatingly  in  the  Psalter,  if  there  were  similar 
grounds  of  faith.  But  the  declarations  of  God  are 
clearly  and  expressly  opposed  to  any  such  conclusion, 
and  the  internal  structure  of  the  law  too  has  nothing 
in  common  with  that  of  the  Psalms,  but  to  my  mind 
falls  in  so  simply  and  naturally  with  the  single  author- 
ship of  Moses,  that  the  real  difficulty  would  have  been 
to  have  supposed  more  than  one  if  the  question  other- 
wise had  been  absolutely  open.  If  the  Lord  and  the 
apostles  had  not  corroborated  irrefragably  the  Mosaic 
authorship,  both  the  style  and  the  line  of  inspired 
Jewish  witnesses,  not  to  speak  of  the  evident  claim  of 
Moses  to  all  implied  in  Deuteroijomy,  would  point  to 
this  conclusion. 

If  Moses  had  been  led  of  God  to  use  a  quantity  of 
earlier  documents  for  the  writing  of  Genesis,  of  con- 
temporary records  for  Exodus  or  Numbers,  I  do  not  see 
how  this  could  impair  the  inspiration  of  the  Pentateuch. 
For  we  know  little  of  the  mode  in  which  God  wrought 
inspiration,  though  we  are  authoritatively  taught  the 
result,  and  we  cannot  but  be  sensible  of  its  essential 
difference  from  all  other  writings  in  the  working  out 
of  the  divine  purpose,  and  in  the  exclusion  of  human 
imperfections  stamped  on  it.  But  even  the  more  sober, 
who  contend  for  the  tesselated  composition  of  the 
Pentateuch,  have  as  yet  presented  no  evidence  but 
what  can  be  better  accounted  for  otherwise :  especially 


XXll  INTRODUCTION. 

as  they  confess  "  a  unity  of  plan,  a  coherence  of  parts*, 
a  shapeliness,  and  an  order"  which  satisfy  them  that,  as 
e,g.  Genesis  stands,  it  is  the  creation  of  a  single  mind. 
Is  it  not  forgotten  that  the  opening  chapters  for  in- 
stance, largely  at  least,  could  not  have  been  narrated  by 
Adam  himself  any  more  than  by  Moses  from  personal 
knowledge  ?  God  necessarily  must  have  communicated 
the  account  of  creation,  as  also  of  the  flood,  two  of  the 
parts  most  attacked,  and  I  will  add  with  least  reason, 
by  infidel  temerity. 

On  the  peculiar  use  of  the  divine  names,  and  a 
certain  accompanying  diflFerence  oi  style,  we  need  not 
enter  much,  as  this  is  noticed  frequently  in  its  place.  I 
will  only  say  that  the  Jehovah-Elohim  section  (Gen.  ii. 
4 — iii.)  presupposes  the  so-called  Elohistic  one  that 
precedes,  as  both  are  assumed  in  what  follows;  and 
the  difference  of  motive  truly  and  fully  accoimts  for 
all ;  and  that  it  is  the  very  reverse  of  the  fact  that  the 
name  of  Elohim  ialmost  ceases  to  be  characteristic  of 
whole  sections  after  Ex.  vi.  2 ;  vii.  7.  On  the  contrary, 
it  holds  good  wherever  similarly  required  throughout 
not  the  Pentateuch  only  but  the  Psalms  (compare  books 
first  and  second)  and  the  Prophets  (see  Jonah  especially). 
It  is  impossible  to  account  for  all  the  facts  (not  to  say 
for  any  of  them)  by  the  documentary  or  fragmentary 
hypothesis. 

But  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  Lord  distinctly 
attributes  to  Moses  not  merely  the  substance  but  the 
writing  of  Deuteronomy.  (Mark  x.  5.)  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  Pharisees  refer  to  the  injunction  in 


INTKODUCTION.  XXUl 

Deuteronomy  xxiv;  on  which  the  Lord  declares  that 
not  "a  later  writer,"  but  Moses,  ''wrote  you  this  pre- 
cept." How  grievous  the  mibelief  then  which  does 
not  tremble  to  say  after  'such  an  utterance,  "it  is 
certain  that  Moses  himself  could  not  have  written  the 
book  of  Deuteronomy,  nor  made  such  changes  in  the 
old  legislation  as  are  contained  in  the  discourses  of  the 
book !"  To  say  that  the  work  was  impossible  to  one 
whose  eye  was  not  dimmed  nor  his  natural  force  fled 
till  he  died  is  unwise.  Besides,  had  it  been  otherwise, 
or  had  he  seen  fit  as  it  was,  an  amanuensis  (one  or 
more)  would  not  detract  any  more  from  Moses'  writing 
than  Tertius  did  from  Paul's. 

As  to1;he  fact  of  changes,  such  as  Numbers  xviiL  18 
compared  with  Deuteronomy  xii.  17, 18;  xv.  19,  20,  they 
are  due  to  the  difference  in  the  character  and  object  of 
the  bookis ;  the  one  having  the  wilderness  in  view,  the 
other  the  settlement  in  the  land,  where  we  see  not  only 
the  importance  given  to  the  central  place  of  worship 
which  Jehovah  their  God  would  choose,  but  also  the 
joining  of  all,  including  the  priests  the  Levites,  in. 
the  exulting  joy  of  blessings  already  possessed.  To 
infer,  from  the  circumstance  of  Moses  addressing  the 
people  in  thfe  affecting  form  of  a  homiletic  recapitula- 
tion, that  he  of  his  own  motion  rescinded  what  Jehovah 
had  ordained,  is  as  wanton  as  to  deny  Jehovah's  title 
to  modify  according  to  moral  design  in  a  changed  state 
of  things.  Yet  this  puerility  is  made  much  of  more 
than  once.* 

•  Introd.  O.  T.  i.  76,  7«;  356,  867;  364;  377,  378;  396,  396. 


XXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

It  may  be  also  observed  that  the  Lord  Jesus  (Matt. 
xix.  4,  5)  attributes  to  Grod  the  words  cited  from  Gen. 
ii.  24 :  "  He  which  made  them  .  .  .  said,  For  this  cause 
shall  a  man  leave  father,"  &c.  It  was  Moses  that 
wrote :  but  it  was  God  speaking  none  the  less,  na- 
tionalism denies  both  through  confiding  in  an  ignis 
fatuuB  of  criticism. 

But  the  inspired  apostles  also  are  explicit.  Thus 
Peter  (Acts  iii.  22,  23)  cites  the  famous  passage  as  to 
the  prophet  from  Deut.  xviii,  and  afi&rms  that  Moses  said 
so.  nationalism  shrinks  neither  from  refusing  the  book 
to  Moses  nor  from  declaring  that  the  correct  inter- 
pretation rejects  all  but  the  one  sense — the  succession 
of  prophets  or  prophetic  order  in  general,  while  it 
allows  the  adaptation  to  Jesus  to  be  reasonable,  or  an 
argumentum  ad  hominem !  It  adds  no  more  weight  to 
« minds  of  this  bias  that  Stephen  too  quotes  it  as  the 
language  of  Moses,  and  with  evident  reference  to  the 
Messiah.  (Acts  vii.  37.) 

Paul  again  cites  freely  from  the  law,  and  in  the  same 
chapter  of  Romans  (x.  5,  19)  cites  twice  from  portions 
in  a  sense  diametrically  opposed  to  neological  criticism: 
in  the  former.  Lev.  xviii.  5 ;  in  the  latter,  Deut.  xxxii. 
21,  which  it  relegates  to  two  different  and  much  later 
writers.  It  is  not  a  question  of  Paul  as  a  man,  but  of 
Paul  writing  in  the  Spirit  Did  not  He  know  the 
truth  ?  Has  He  told  it  ?  We  cannot  speak  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  thinking  this  or  that :  He  knew  aU.  To 
suppose  that  He  did  not  know  is  as  false  as  that  He 
kept  up  a  fiction  is  impious.     No,  it  is  only  man  who 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 

has  deceived  himself  again  through  tmstiug  his  own 
thoughts  against  the  plain  word  of  God. 

1  Cor.  X.  1-11  is  a  passage  of  much  moment  for  the 
consideration  and  correction  of  those  influenced  against 
the  theopneustic  or  inspired  character  of  the  history  of 
Exodus  and  Numbers.  The  passage  of  the  Red  Sea  is 
denied  to  be  literal  history.  The  cloud ;  the  manna ;  the 
water  from  the  smitten  rock ;  the  punishment  of  the 
murmurers,  &c.,  are  viewed  as  more  or  less  legendary. 
The  apostle  aflBrms  that  all  these  things  happened  to 
them  as  types,  and  that  they  are  written  for  our  admo- 
nition. Thus  he  attaches  a  divinely  prophetic  character 
to  the  accounts  which  rationalism  slights.  Ought  it 
to  be  a  question  whether  the  apostle  or  a  neologian  has 
the  mind  of  God  ? 

Heb.  XL  is  quite  as  weighty  a  test,  and  yet  more 
comprehensive  in  its  survey  of  the  Pentateuch  and  the 
historical  books  of  the  Old  Testament.  The  apostle 
(verse  3)  accepts  creation  as  a  literal  fact;  the  ra- 
tionalist endeavours  to  shew  "its  mythical  character." 
But  both  Prof.  Powell' and  Dr.  Davidson  misstate  the 
case  in  order  to  place  Gen.  i.  in  opposition  to  facts. 
It  is  not  correct  that  "  the  chapter  can  only  convey  the 
idea  of  one  grand  creative  act,  of  a  common  and  sirmd- 
taneous  origin  of  the  whole  material  world,  terrestrial 
and  celestial,  together  with  all  its  parts  and  appendages, 
as  it  now  stands,  accomplished  in  obedience  to  the 
divine  fiat,  in  a  certain  order  and  by  certain  stages,  in 
six  equal  successive  periods,"  &c.  So  the  late  Mr.  P., 
in  whose  wake  follows  Dr.  D.,  who  says  that  "  the  first 


XXVI  INTRODUCTION.' 

verse  of  Greiiesis  is  a  suminary  accoun^i  of  the  isix  days' 
work  which  follows  in  detfiiL  On  the  first  creative 
day  God  produced  the  matter  of  the  woifld,  and  caused 
light  to  arise  out  of  it.  Hence  it  is  implied  that  the 
world  was  created  only  about  six  thousand  years  ago. 
But  geology  teaches  most  incontrovertibly  that  the 
world  must  have  existed  during  a  long  period  prior  to 
the  races  of  organized  beings  now  occupying  its  surface. 
Thus  geology  and  scripture  come  into  collision  as  to 
the  age  of  the  earth."  (Introd.  O.  T.  i.  152.) 

I  affirm,  on  the  contrary,  that  Moses  was  inspired  so 
to  write  Gen.  i.  1-3  as  to  avoid  with  the  greatest  pre- 
cision and  certainty  the  very  error  which  these  writers 
attribute  to  him.  It  is  easy  to  see  their  desire  to  array 
geology  against  the  Bible.  But  the  incontrovertible 
fact  is,  that  the  us^vs  loqybcndi  proves  that  the  first 
verse  is  Tiot  a  summary  of  what  follows  in  the  six 
days'  work,  but  an  initiatory  act  sui  generis,  the  ground- 
work of  all  that  follows  no  doubt,  and  as  distinct  from 
verse  2  as  both  clearly  are  from  verse  3,  where  the 
first  day's  work  begins.  The  copulative  vau  connects 
each  verse,  but  of  itself  in  no  way  forbids  an  immense 
space,  which  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  case  where 
no  specification  of  time  enters.  In  the  first  two 
verses  there  is  no  limitation  whatever;  and  hence  in 
these  instances  all  is  open  indefinitely.  Had  the  con- 
junction (which  I  translate  "and"  in  all  these  cases, 
not  "  but")  been  wanting,  .the  idea  of  a  summary  head- 
ing would  have  naturally  followed  in  accordance  with 
the  phraseology  elsewhere,  as  at  the  beginning  of  chaps. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXVII 

v.;  vi.  9,  &c.;  x.  1,  &c.,  passim;  xi.  10,  &c.,  27,  &c.; 
XXV.  12-17, 19,  &c.;  XXXV.  22-26 ;  xxxvi.  1,  &c.,  passim; 
xlvi.  8,  &c.,  passim;  Exodus  i.,  vi.,  &c.  It  is  needless 
to  pursue  the  proof.  It  is  the  necessary  phraseology 
not  of  Hebrew  only  but  of  every  conceivable  language. 
In  no  tongue  could  one  rightly  prefix  such  a  clause  as 
Gen.  i.  1  as  "  a  summary  account  of  the  six  days'  work." 
The  truth  is  that  the  first  verse  of  the  chapter  states 
with  noble  simplicity  the  creation  of  the  universe — not 
of  matter  on  the  first  day,  but  of  the  heavens  and  the 
earth — without  the  smallest  note  of  days.  There  is 
another  and  wholly  different  notation  of  time,  "  in  the 
beginning,"  reaching  back  to  the  farthest  point  when 
Grod  caused  (not  crude  matter,  nor  chaos,  but)  the 
heavens  and  the  earth  to  be.  The  second  verse  coupled 
with  it  describes,  as  even  Dr.  D.  admits,  a  state  of 
chaos  or  destruction,  but  not  universal ;  for  the  earth 
only,  not  the  heavens,  was  the  scene  of  the  utter  con- 
fusion.. I  am  surprised  that  a  sensible  man  did  not 
see  the  incongruity  of  this  with  his  previous  position, 
and  still  more  with  the  admirably  perfect  statement  of 
verse  1.  Contrary  to  the  style  of  Moses,  and  to  the 
genius  of  Hebrew  and  indeed  of  universal  grammar, 
he  asserts  the  first  verse  to  be  a  summary  of  the  entire 
six  days'  work.  But  if  so,  such  a  summary  cannot  be  the 
bare  creation  of  matter.  For  matter  is  not  said  to  be 
produced  on  any  one  of  th^se  days,  but  contrariwise  its 
previous  existence  is  assumed  throughout  their  course 
from  first  to  last.  On  the  other  hand,  if  he  says  that 
verse  1  means  the  production  of  matter,  he  abandons  his 


XXVIU  qfTRODUCnON. 

own  thesis  that  it  is  a  synoptical  view  of  the  six  days' 
worL  Does  he  then  take  verse  2  as  God  producing 
the  matter  of  the  world  ?  How,  if  so,  can  it  also  mean 
universal  chaos  or  destruction  ?  Perhaps  he  thinks 
that  the  first  clause  of  verse  2  means  this,  and  that  the 
4ast  points  to  the  production  of  matter ;  but  here  again 
he  is  entangled  in  the  strange  conclusion  that  the 
universal  cliaos  or  destruction — de3truction  of  what  ? — 
precedes  the  production  of  matter.  If  he  concede,  as 
I  think  he  must  on  reconsideration,  that  God  producing 
the  matter  of  the  world  is  not  the  meaning  either  of 
the  first  or  of  the  last  clause  of  verse  2,  it  follows  that 
his  exposition  is  fundamentally  erroneous,  and  that 
matter  must  have  been  produced  before,  unless  he  fall 
back  on  the  Aristotelian  absurdity  of  eternal  matter, 
which  is  a  virtual  denial  of  creation  in  the  proper  sense, 
and  indeed  betrays  an  atheistic  root.  From  this  he 
saves  himself  by  the  statement  that  "on  the  first 
creative  day  God  produced  the  matter  of  the  world, 
and  caused  light  to  arise  out  of  it."  The  reader,  how- 
ever, has  only  to  read  the  record  in  order  to  see  that 
Dr.  D.  interpolates  here  the  production  of  matter 
without  the  least  warrant  from  the  inspired  account 
of  the  first  day,  and  contrary  to  the  clear  intimation 
of  the  verses  that  precede  it.  The  production  of  matter 
is  supposed  before  the  chaos  of  verse  2,  and  is  involved 
in  the  creation  of  verse  1. 

Thus  scripture  is  more  exact  than  the  natural  philo- 
sophy of  Mr.  Baden  Powell,  or  the  system  of  Aristotle, 
or  the  exegesis  of  Dr.  S.  Davidson.   It  asserts  the  grave 


INTRODUCTION.  XXIX 

truth  of  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  but 
expressly  not  "  as  it  now  stands,"  nor  with  the  "  parts 
and  appendages  "  which  were  formed  in  the  days  which 
preceded  Adam,  We  have  no  connection  of  day  or 
night  in  this  earliest  phase,  any  more  than  the  state 
of  disruption  and  ruin  that  is  described  so  graphically 
in  verse  2.  Vast  tracts  of  time  may  have  passed  ere 
verse  S^not  "innumerable  periods  of  past  duration  in 
one  unbroken  chain  of  regular  changes."*  But  Dr.  D.  is 

*  It  is  not  true  that  "  law,  order,  uniformity,  slowness,  partiality 
characterize  those  changes ;  not  suddenness  or  universality.  Uniyersal 
destruction  and  reconstruction — anarchy  foUowed  hy  order — are  things 
unknown  to  science,  and  opposed  to  aU  its  fundamental  conclusions." 
A  little  learning  is  a  dangerous  thing.  Had  it  been  said  that,  once 
established,  such  is  the  way  ol  the  Creator  as  long  as  a  given  state  of 
things  is  permitted  to  endure,  Dr.  D.  would  have  been  right ;  but  to 
put  matters  thus  absolutely  is  only  the  science  of  infidel  progressionists 
or  unwary  souls,  like  the  late  Hugh  MiUer,  beguiled  in  a  measure  by 
them.  Laws  of  phenomena  are  quite  distinct  from  causes ;  and  the 
reason  why  modems  merge  the  last  in  the  first  is  the  instinctive  desire 
to  escape  from  the  thought  of  creation,  and  hence  of  the  true  God. 
Positivism  is  the  lowest  form  of  all,  and  hence  is  essentially  atheistic. 

But  the  reader  who  desires  to  find  a  calm  and  full  and  exact  expo- 
sition of  the  facts  can  find  it  in  D'Orbigny^s  **  Cours  de  Paleontologie 
et  de  Geologie  Stratigraphiques,"  especially  chapter  ix.  vol.  ii.  pp. 
251-258.  There  is  hardly  a  finer  instance  of  patient  induction,  nor 
in  more  distinct  contradiction  of  the  alleged  law  of  continuity,  and 
this  without  an  allusion  to  Genesis  or  a  thought  beyond  the  largest 
coUection  of  the  facts  of  geological  science  known  to  me.  Even  the 
tertiary  period  alone  he  shews  must  be  divided  into  five  distinct  suc- 
cessions, and  in  them,  of  6042  species  91  only  common  to  two  or 
more,  but  aU  distinct  from  the  existing  species  of  the  Adamic  earth. 
"Une  premiere  creation  s'est  montr^e  avec  I'etage  silurien.  Apr^s 
I'aneantissement  de  ceUe-ci,  par  une  cause  geologique  quelconque,  apres 
un  laps  de  temps  considerable,  une  seconde  creation  a  eu  lieu  dans 
Tetage  devonien;  et  successivement  vingt-sept  fois  des  creations 
distinctes  sont  venues  repeuplw  toute  la  terre  de  ses  plantes  ct  de  ses 


XXX  INTRODUCTION. 

ill-informed  in  the  facts  wliich  geology  is  slowly  build- 
ing np  into  a  consistent  science,  if  he  ignores  the  proofe 
of  repeated  and  extraordinary  breaks  and  upheavals, 
when  anarchy  was  again  followed  by  fresh  creative 
energy,  and  then  by  order.  So  it  was,  if  M.  D'Orbigny 
and  other  men  of  the  highest  reputation  may  be  trusted, 
for  some  thirty  successive  and  stupendous  revolutions 
of  this  earth  before  the  week  when  man  stands  at 
the  head  of  a  suited  realm  subjected  to  him  by  the 
Creator. 

It  is  granted  that  the  Bible  does  not  reveal  these 
sequences  of  order  and  convulsion.  But  it  shews  us 
the  principle  of  both  in  verses  1  and  2  anterior  to  the 
Adamic  earth.  This  was  enough  for  us  to  know ;  and 
this  we  know  more  clearly  and  certainly  from  these  few 
words  of  scripture  than  science  ever  taught  till  very 
lately.  In  fact  some  geologists  seem  recently  in  danger 
of  overlooking  the  best  established  facts  of  their  own 
and  all  other  science,  and  of  drifting  into  that  strange 
delusion — the  Darwinian  form  of  Lamarkian  develop- 

animaux,  a  la  suite  de  chaque  perturbation  geologique  qui  avait  tout 
detruit  dans  la  nature  vivante.  Tel  est  le  fait  nous  bomons  a  constater, 
sans  chercher  k  percer  le  myst^re  surhumain  qui  1'  environne."  This 
witness  is  true ;  but  the  Bible  conducts  the  simplest  believer  with  sure 
foot  and  opened  eyes  where  the  mere  man  of  science  finds  himself 
arrested  by  an  impenetrable  veil.  Scripture  asserts  original  creation, 
and  then  destruction :  how  often  renewals  and  destructions  may  have 
followed  it  does  not  say;  but,  having  given  us  the  key  to  both  facts, 
it  does  tell  us,  what  it  most  concerned  us  morally  to  learn,  the  details 
of  the  construction  of  the  world  where  the  human  race  was  to  be  tried 
and  fall,  where  the  Creator  was  to  become  in  sovereign  grace  tfaA 
woman's  Seed,  and  by  His  suffering  and  death  win  more  than 
for  the  creature's  blessing  to  the  glory  of  God. 


INTEODUCTION.  XXXI 

ment  which    necessarily   destroys    faith    in    creation 
altogether. 

But  Grenesis  leaves  room  for  all  the  changes,  calm  or 
violent,  which  passed  over  this  earth  before  the  race. 
Creation,  and  creation  of  the  universe,  verse  1  does  state ; 
how  long  it  went  on,  and  with  what  changes,  till  the 
state  of  chaos  described  in  verse  2,  we  are  not  informed. 
Let  science  tell  if  she  can.  There  is  ample  space  here 
without  danger  of  collision  :  God  has  effectually  guarded 
against  the  mistakes  of  hasty  expositors,  friends  or 
enemies.  Verse  3  begins  the  account  of  the  days ;  and 
here,  after  a  chaos  (we  know  not  how  long  or  often),  we 
hear  of  light  caused  to  be  on  the  first  day.  The  state  of 
things  is  so  contrasted  in  each  of  the  verses  that  the 
conjunction  which  simply  introduces  each  new  state- 
ment can  produce  no  difficulty  whatever. 

Far  from  contradicting  the  large  bearing  of  verse  1, 
texts  such  as.Grei;ii  xiv.  19-22,  Exodus  xx.  11,  xxxi.  17, 
2  Peter  iii.  13,  can  in  no  way  be  restrained  to  "the 
earth  itself."    It  is  careless  to  confound  the  making  of 
heaven  and  earth  in  six  days  (which  I  grant  is  always 
for  Adam)  with  the  original  creation  of  verse  1.     Gen. 
ii.  4  speaks  of  both.     As  to  the  objection  founded  on 
animals  of  previous  states  seeing,  and  plants  too  re- 
quiring light,  before  the  work  of  the  first  day  or  of  the 
fourth,  it  suffices  to  say  that  not  a  word  implies  that 
light  was  created  or  the  heavenly  bodies  either  on  these 
days.     light  was  caused  to  act,  as  the  luminaries  later 
still.    But  of  the  geologic  periods,  after  creation  but 
aatecedent  to  the  earth  made  for  man  in  six  days,  v^e 


XXXU  INTRODUCTION. 

have  nothing  either  affirmed  or  denied,  though  in  my 
opinion  the  strikingly  guarded  language  leaves  room 
for  all.  The  statements  of  Dr.  D.  are  as  unfounded  in 
science  as  they  are  careless  in  taking  account  of  the 
exactitude  of  scripture. 

That  the  sense  just  given  to  the  inspired  account  of 
creation  is  unforced  and  exact  it  would  require  hardi- 
hood to  question ;  so  it  would  to  deny  the  looseness  of 
the  ^rationalistic  interpretation,  inconsistent  as  it  also 
is  with  itself  and  with  facts,  and  thus  exhibiting  the 
usual  faults  of  what  is  wholly  misunderstood.  I 
advocate  no  stooping  to  a  barely  admissible  meaning, 
nor  call  in  the  wisdom  of  the  world  to  ascertain  the 
force  of  scripture.  The  believer  need  neither  court  nor 
fear  human  science.  Nowhere  however  has  a  single 
fact  of  geology  been  proved  to  be  at  variance  with  the 
words  of  Moses :  those  who  affirm  it  have  only  exposed 
themselves,  whether  they  attack  or  apologise  for  Gen. 
i.  1-3. 

Further,  from  Gen.  ii.  4  we  have  the  necessary  com- 
plement of  chapter  i.  The  terms  of  the  fourth  verse, 
though  a  most  natural  commencement  of  another  as- 
pect which  follows  with  fresh  particulars  of  the  greatest 
moral  weight,  refer  unmistakably  to  what  had  been 
already  written.  It  is  certainly  not  a  summary  of  what 
is  to  come,  for  this  does  Twt  describe  the  production  of 
the  heavens  and  the  earth,  but  introduces  us  to  the 
transitional  state  of  things  before  rain  fell  or  man  was 
there  to  till  the  groimd;  it  tben  gives  us  the  specific 
difPerence  which  is  ^Higrillltof  hiiiTiinn  responsibility, 


INTEODUCnON.  XXXUl 

and  therefore  forthwith  describes  the  garden  of  Eden 
with  its  two  trees,  where  the  first  Adam  was  about  to 
be  trijsd.  It  is  plain  accordingly  that  Gen.  ii  4,  while 
it  gives  a  retrospective  glance  at  chapter  i.  with  its 
orderly  chart  of  the  creation,  leads  us  into  the  scene  of 
relationships.  Even  according  to  the  earlier  outline,  far 
from  being  lost  in  the  graduated  series  of  creative  acts, 
the  pre-eminent  place  of  man  in  the  scale  of  the 
creature  is  carefiilly  guarded  for  male  and  female — of 
man  made  in  the. image  of  Grod,*  after  His  likeness, 
with  dominion  over  the  fish  and  birds  and  cattle  and 
earth  and  reptiles,  not  worshipping  them  all  like  the 
sages  of  Egypt.  But  the  detailed  formation  of  man,  in 
his  body  from  the  dust  of  the  ground,  in  his  soul  from 
Jehovah-Elohim's  breathing  into  his  nostrils,  alone  of 
hving  creatures,  the  source  of  an  immortal  immaterial 
nature  proper  to  him,  is  found  in  the  later  account 
only.  Here  too  we  have  his  various  relations  not  only 
to  the  subordinate*  creatures  to  which  he  gave  names  as 
their  lord,  but  to  his  wife  (who  was  buQt  up  peculiarly 
out  of  Adam's  body  as  he  slept),  and  above  all  to 
Him  who  set  the  man  in  a  position  of  such  singular 
honoui^  though  necessarily  of  commensurate  respon- 
sibility. 

In  Gen.  iii.  accordingly  the  issue  of  the  trial  soon 
appears.  Abruptly  and  mysteriously  an  enemy  of  God 
and  man  enters,  and  by  his  subtle  insinuations  deceives 
the  woman,  who  in  turn  becomes  the  instrument  of  the 

*  It  is  the  grossest  ignorance  to  confound  the  knowledge  of  good 
and  evil  (».^.  conscience),  which  was  acquired  by  the  faU,  with  the 
image  and  likeness  of  God  in  which  Adam  was  made. 

C 


XXXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

man's  disobedience.  It  is  a  simple  but  profound,  and 
the  only  satisfactory,  solution  of  the  problem  on  which 
human  philosophy  and  religion  have  laboured  in  vain, 
on  which  all  have  made  shipwreck  who  have  not  sub- 
mitted to  the  word  of  Grod.  It  can  surprise  none  that 
it  is  the  same  serpent  playing  his  old  deceits  and 
destroying  souls  by  the  hope  of  knowing  good  and  evil 
as  God,  yea  better  if  they  refuse  His  accoimt  for  their 
own  thoughts,  even  though  they  yield  no  more  than  that 
coldest  and  most  irreverent  of  results,  negative  criti- 
cism. Satan,  availing  himself  of  "the  serpent,"  thus 
dragged  down  our  first  parents  into  sin  and  ruin  not  for 
themselves  only  but  for  the  lower  creation  dependent 
on  Adam's  maintenance  of  his  relation  to  God,  as  also 
for  the  race  yet  to  be  bom. 

Does  not  this  approve  itself  as  worthy  of  God?  Is  it 
not  in  harmony  not  only  with  all  the  Old  Testament, 
but  only  more  conspicuously  with  the  New  ?  The 
earliest  inspired  account  reveals  God  creating  and 
fashioning  the  universe  in  wisdom  and  goodness  no  less 
than  omnipotent  power,  the  earth  in  detail  as  .man's 
abode  to  whom  the  word  is  given.  But  man  is  tried 
and  fails  irretrievably  as  far  as  original  innocence  and 
Eden  are  concerned,  but  not  without  righteous  convic- 
tion, not  without  a  judgment  which  accounts  for  the 
great  present  facts  of  humanity  even  to  the  difference 
of  woman's  lot  from  man's,  yet  with  their  common  sen- 
tence of  death  and  the  sorrowful  change  which  has 
passed  over  the  creation  now  subjected  to  vanity  and 
groans;  but  not  without  the  gracious  revelation  of  a 


INTBODUCTION.  XXXV 

Deliverer,  who  should  be  in  some  special  sense  Seed  of 
the  woman,  yet  (after  suflfering)  conqueror  of  the  enemy 
the  serpent,  who  had  done  this  foul  and  otherwise  fatal 
dishonour  to  God  as  well  as  man. 

Without  this  key  what  have  the  greatest  wits  of  this 
world  made  of  it  all  ?  I  do  not  speak  only  of  mon- 
strous cosmogony,  or  the  (if  possible)  still  falser  and 
less  rational  assertion  of  the  world's  eternity.  But  take 
the  mental  workings  of  Socrates,  Plato,  Aristotle ;  nay 
take  the  latest  philosophic  enemies,  who  have  stolen 
all  their  best  from  the  Bible  but  who  have  not  learnt 
its  first  lesson,  without  which  all  is  vain — that  fear  of 
Jehovah  which  is  the  beginuing  of  wisdom.  But  what 
have  any  ancients  or  modems  said  up  to  this  day  to  be 
named  in  comparison  of  the  Mosaic  account,  which 
ungrateful  rationalism  would  fain  behead,  draw  and 
quarter  ?  Sin  and  ruin,  suffering  and  death,  are  facts 
in  God's  earth  as  it  is :  inspiration  did  not  make  them; 
rationalism  cannot  unmake  them.  To  suppose  that  a 
Being  of  infinite  power  and  goodness  made  the  race 
and  the  earth  as  they  are  is  to  imply  an  absurdity, 
which  philosophy  (where  it  admits  God  at  all)  accepts. 
But  scripture  is  in  no  way  responsible  for  a  conclusion 
which  is  opposed  not  only  to  His  word  but  to  all  right 
reason  and  sound  morality,  for  mind  and  conscience 
cannot  but  own  the  truth  when  revealed,  though  super- 
stition and  philosophy  essay  to  explain  it  away  again. 
Such  a  Demiurge  as  every  system  supposes  but  scrip- 
ture (or  what  follows  scripture)  would  be  a  malicious 
demon,  not  the  true  God. 

•     c  2 


XXXVl  INTRODUCTION. 

Bow  to  Gen.  i.-iii.  and  the  difficulty  is  explained,  yet 
even  then  just  as  it  ought  to  be,  in  the  measure  of  our 
faith.  "If  thine  eye  be  single,  thy  whole  body  is  full  of 
light :"  the  want  of  this  is  the  real  source  of  confusion, 
error,  contradiction  and  every  other  fault  which  ration- 
alism loves  to  heap  on  the  Bible.  They  exist  in  their 
own  minds  and  system,  not  in  God's  word.  Impos- 
sible to  understand  scripture  without  seeing  the  divine 
design  which  accounts  for  distinct  aspects,  repetitions, 
and  all  the  other  peculiarities  over  which  they  igno- 
rantly  stumble.  God,  being  love,  is  considerate  of  the 
poor,  the  lowly,  the  young,  the  old,  while  He  puts 
down  the  haughty  who  coimt  themselves  learned  and 
deep,  wise  and  prudent.  He  has  revealed  Himself  in 
writings  whose  unity  of  thought  and  moral  purpose  is 
only  and  infinitely  more  striking  because  they  consist 
of  books  in  more  than  one  language  and  spread  over 
the  greatest  variety  of  writers  through  fifteen  centuries. 
Hence,  whether  dealing  by  law  through  Moses,  or  by 
grace  in  His  Son,  one  half  in  both  Old  Testament 
and  New  consists  of  facts  profoundly  instructive  for 
the  most  reflective,  but  withal  coming  down  to  the 
level  of  a  child.  Only  God  could  have  done  or  thought 
of  this  beforehand  :  now  that  it  is  before  us  in  the 
Bible,  we  can  see  that  there  is  nothing  like  it  (save  in 
poor  measure  what  is  borrowed  from  it)  for  simplicity 
or  for  depth,  for  rising  up  to  God  or  for  coming  down 
to  the  secrets  of  man's  heart. 

What  reader  can  fail,  for  example,  to  see  that  God 
made  all  around  and  above  Adam  and  pronounced  it 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXvii 

all  very  good ;  that  man  the  chief  and  most  favoured 
of  all  in  a  paradise  (not  such  as  blind  Mahometanism 
holds  out  but  of  purity  and  innocence)  disobeyed  Him 
who  gave  him  all  and  tried  him  by  the  least  con- 
ceivable test,  and  thus  brought  in  the  vanity  and 
death  of  all  this  lower  creation  ?  Who  can  be  deaf  to 
the  solemn  voice  that  searches  out  the  truth  from  lips 
which,  spite  of  deceit  and  insolence,  cannot  but  con- 
demn themselves  ?  Who  can  forget  the  accents  of 
grace  implied  even  in  the  hopeless  condemnation  of 
the  arch-foe,  and  assuring  the  guilty  of  a  Saviour  who 
must  suffer  first  but  at  last  crush  the  serpent's  head  ? 
None  but  the  rationalist;  none  but  the  man  who  prefers 
his  own  reasonings  to  scripture, — himseH  the  first  man 
to  Christ  the  Second  and  last  Adam. 

The  unreasonableness  and  utter  poverty  of  the  sepa- 
rate document-hypothesis  is  also  plain  by  joining  ch.  v. 
to  the  end  of  ch.  ii.  3  What  can  be  more  meagre  ?  The 
entrance  of  death  is  unaccounted  for,  the  moral  trial 
in  Eden  is  lost,  sin  is  left  out,  and  God's  ways  as  to 
it :  the  prophetic  revelation  of  the  Saviour  and  of  the 
destruction  of  Satan's  power  is  gone;  the  solemn  history 
of  Cain  and  Abel  disappears ;  also  faith  in  a  sacrifice, 
and  this  the  index  and  accompaniment  of  righteousness, 
God  testifying  of  the  gifts :  the  suffering  of  the  godly ; 
the  worldliness  and  progress  in  material  things  of  those 
who  are  far  from  God.  And  Seth  is  introduced  in  a 
way  which  derives  an  immense  accession  of  weight 
from  the  intervening  chapters,  if  even  it  be  reaUy  in- 
telligible without  them. 


XXVm  INTRODUCTION. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  entire  narrative  be  taken 
as  a  whole,  consisting  of  distinct  parts,  each  having  its 
own  definite  character,  yet  only  seen  in  their  proper 
value  as  conspiring  from  different  points  to  the  one 
result,  how  immense  the  gain  in  beauty,  force,  and 
harmony !  Creation  properiy  falls  under  Elohim ;  the 
relationship  of  man  and  his  trial  and  fall,  as  well  as 
the  ruin  of  creation,  under  Jehovah-Elohim ;  the  dis- 
crimination of  the  just  from  the  unjust,  both  morally 
and  above  all  in  worship,  with  the  issues  here  below, 
under  Jehovah,  the  distinctive  name  of  God  in  the 
government  of  man  on  the  earth.  Chapter  v.  returns 
naturally  to  Elohim  since  the  perpetuation  of  the  line 
from  Adam  is  in  question,  but  with  Jehovah  in  verse 
29  where  we  see  special  relationship. 

Mr.  Perowne  (Smith's  Diet,  of  the  Bible,  iL  775) 
thinks  that  the  alleged  design  in  the  use  of  the  divine 
names  will  not  bear  a  close  examination.  Not  so ;  it 
only  seems  to  fail,  I  venture  to  say,  for  want  of  a 
searching  analysis.  He  allows  that  it  does  suit  the 
earlier  chapters,  but  not  Noah's  history,  on  comparing 
chapter  vl  7  with  8  :  why  should  it  be  said  that "  Noah 
found  grace  in  the  eyes  of  Jehovah,"  yet  that  he 
"walked  with  Elohim"?  Now  he  might  have  seen  in 
chapter  v.  23,  24,  that  the  expression  "walked  with 
God"  is  not  casual  but  designed.  Not  only  is  it  ap- 
propriate to  simple  historical  mention,  but  to  moral 
contrast  with  those  characterised  by  the  violence  and 
corruption  of  all  flesh  in  the  earth  (11,  12).  Jehovah  is 
required  where  not  nature  but  relative  feelings  and 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXvii 

all  very  good;  that  man  the  chief  and  most  favoured 
of  all  in  a  paradise  (not  such  as  blind  Mahometanism 
holds  out  but  of  purity  and  innocence)  disobeyed  Him 
who  gave  him  all  and  tried  him  by  the  least  con- 
ceivable test,  and  thus  brought  in  the  vanity  and 
death  of  all  this  lower  creation  ?  Who  can  be  deaf  to 
the  solemn  voice  that  searches  out  the  truth  from  lips 
which,  spite  of  deceit  and  insolence,  cannot  but  con- 
demn themselves  ?  Who  can  forget  the  accents  of 
grace  implied  even  in  the  hopeless  condemnation  of 
the  arch-foe,  and  assuring  the  guilty  of  a  Saviour  who 
must  suffer  first  but  at  last  crush  the  serpent's  head  ? 
None  but  the  rationalist;  none  but  the  man  who  prefers 
his  own  reasonings  to  scripture, — himseH  the  first  man 
to  Christ  the  Second  and  last  Adam. 

The  unreasonableness  and  utter  poverty  of  the  sepa- 
rate document-hypothesis  is  also  plain  by  joining  ch.  v. 
to  the  end  of  ch.  ii.  3  What  can  be  more  meagre  ?  The 
entrance  of  death  is  unaccounted  for,  the  moral  trial 
in  Eden  is  lost,  sin  is  left  out,  and  God's  ways  as  to 
it :  the  prophetic  revelation  of  the  Saviour  and  of  the 
destruction  of  Satan's  power  is  gone;  the  solemn  history 
of  Cain  and  Abel  disappears ;  also  faith  in  a  sacrifice, 
and  this  the  index  and  accompaniment  of  righteousness, 
God  testifying  of  the  gifts :  the  suffering  of  the  godly ; 
the  worldliness  and  progress  in  material  things  of  those 
who  are  far  from  God.  And  Seth  is  introduced  in  a 
way  which  derives  an  immense  accession  of  weight 
from  the  intervening  chapters,  if  even  it  be  reaUy  in- 
telligible without  them. 


xl  INTRODUCTION. 

and  necessary,  as  in  verse  6  also,  closing  the  directions 
which  provide  for  the  exigencies  of  sacrifice  in  the 
"  clean  "  beasts  and  birds  preserved  not  by  a  pair  but 
by  sevens.  The  existence  of  both  titles  in  the  same 
verse  is  most  unnatural  on  the  document-hypothesis, 
but  as  explicable  as  elsewhere  when  we  see  that  a 
divine  design  guides  from  internal  reasons  in  every 
case.* 

Such  then  is  the  true  explanation  of  the  duplicate 
accounts,  as  they  have  been  styled.  If  diflFerence  of 
authors  or  of  documents  had  any  real  evidence,  it  in  no 
way  covers  the  facts ;  it  really  introduces  mere  imagina- 
tion to  set  aside  the  positive  declarations  of  the  Lord 
and  the  apostles,  who  attribute  to  Moses  expressly  what 
a  groundless  fancy  distributes  among  2,  3,  5,  10  or  even 
more  imaginary  writers  of  the  disjecta  membra  of  the 
Pentateuch  severed  from  each  other  by  considerable 
intervals  of  time. 

It  would  not  be  edifying  to  discuss  too  minutely  the 
neology  of  Dr.  Davidson's  book,  chiefly  cuUed  from 
German  sources :  a  few  specimens  must  suffice.  To  him 

♦  Neither  the  name  of  El-EIion  (the  most  High  God)  nor  any  other 
trait  in  Gen.  xiv.  is  a  sufficient  reason  to  warrant  the  notion  that  it  is 
a  "  monogram  "  from  another  pen.  It  is  bound  up  in  the  closest  moral 
connexion  with  chapter  xiii.  Lot  chose  for  himself,  and,  soon  tasting  the 
sorrows  of  the  world,  is  only  delivered  through  the  prompt  love  of  him 
who  walked  in  faith  while  he  himself  had  yielded  to  covetousness.  Fur- 
ther I  cannot  doubt  that  Jehovah's  declaration  in  Gen.  xv.  1, "  I  am  thy 
shield,  thy  exceeding  great  reward,"  is  an  allusive  answer  on  His  part 
to  the  noble  and  generous  disinterestedness  of  Abram  recorded  at  the 
dose  of  Gen.  xiv.  Thus  the  account  appears  to  be  so  bound  up  with 
the  chapters  before  and  after  as  to  refute  the  idea  of  its  being  an 
ancient  monument  transferred  to  this  book  of  Moses. 


INTRODUCTION.  xli 

the  fall,  for  instance,  is  a  national  mythos.  The  apostle 
repeatedly  treats  it  as  a  fact  of  the  gravest  import, 
which  none  can  slight  with  impunity.  (2  Cor.  x.;  1  Tim. 
ii.)  But  what  of  that?  Paul  knew  nothing  of' the 
higher  criticism,  and  must  be  condoned  for  his  ignorance. 
The  nature  of  the  serpent,  the  manner  in  which  he  is 
said  to  have  proceeded,  the  dialogue  between  him  and 
Eve,  the  sentence  pronoimced,  militate  against  that 
mode,  the  apostolic  mode,  of  interpretation !  Thus, 
however  plain  the  scriptures,  these  men  are  not  ashamed 
to  count  it  a  vulgar  error  if  one  insist  on  their  authority 
and  sacredness.  It  has  nothing,  say  they,  to  do  with 
peraonal  reUgion;  it  conduces  in  their  judgment  to  a 
right  view  of  inspiration  if  one  accepts  their  word  that 
the  Bible  abounds  in  almost  every  sort  of  error  on  the 
one  hand,  and  on  the  other  that  all  religious  men  were 
counted  inspired.  Talk  no  more  of  Paul  in  the  first 
century:  did  not  "the  immortal  De  Wette"  come  to 
opposite  conclusions  so  long  ago  as  the  year  1805  ? 
Paul,  no  doubt,  treats  the  history  as  the  origin  of  man's 
universal  sinfulness  (Eom.  v.  12-21;  1  Cor.  xv.  21,  22); 
but  why  heed  so  antiquated  an  idea?  The  Anglo- 
German  scribe  had  not  yet  appeared  to  expound  aright 
the  philosophical  myth  in  which  a  reflecting  Israelite 
sets  forth  his  views  on  the  origin  of  evil !  Such,  my 
reader,  is  the  spirit  of  modem  rationalism. 

Of  course  the  apostle's  use  of  Genesis  iv.  in  Hebrews 
xL  4  is  of  no  account.  It  is  an  acconmiodation.  We 
are  told  by  our  new  oracle  that  "the  mythic  view  of 
the  first  three  chapters  is  corroborated  by  the  succeed- 


xlii  INTRODUCTION. 

ing  narrative."  Genesis  iv.  "presupposes  a  diflFerent 
theory  of  the  origination  of  mankind" — this  because 
of  verse  14,  and  the  supposed  inconsistency  of  verses 
2  and  20!  The  infatuation  of  this  pseudo- criticism 
culminates  in  the  judgment  that  the  Sethite  line  in 
Gen.  V.  and  the  Cainite  one  in  chapter  iv.  17,  18  "  are 
parallel  accoimts  resolvable  into  one  and  the  same 
genealogy!" 

The  solemn  account  of  antediluvian  apostacy  and 
corruption  in  G^n.  vi.  is  natura,Ily  treated  with  levity ; 
and  the  flood  (chaps,  vii  viii.)  aflFords  the  usual  material 
for  free  handling.  "  What  gave  rise  to  the  mythus  was 
the  yeariy  inundations  which  happen  in  most  countries. 
....  If  the  account  of  the  deluge  be  a  poetical  myth, 
it  is  of  no  importance  to  inquire  whether  the  catastrophe 

was  partial  or  universal Authentic  (!)  Egyptian 

history  [for  with  these  men  Egyptian  history  (?)  is 
authentic,  scripture  is  not]  ignores  the  existence  of  a 
general  flood,  to  which  there  is  no  allusion  in  the  annals 
.  from  the  epoch  of  Menes,  the  founder  of  the  kingdom 
of  Egypt,  B.C.  3463  (!),  till  its  conquest  under  Darius 
Ochus,  B.C.  340 ;  whereas  the  period  of  the  Noachian 
deluge  is  said  to  be  about  2348  b.c."  I  presume  that 
the  writer  is  not  much  acquainted  with  these  matters, 
and  that  he  means  Baron  Bunsen's  date  for  the  acces- 
sion of  Menes,  B.C.  3643.  But  the  reader  should  know 
that  in  the  same  work  the  world's  history  before  Christ 
is  set  down  at  twenty  thousand  years,  and  that  Egypt 
is  supposed  to  have  been  ruled  provincially  for  more 
than  hve  thousand  years  before  Menes.     On  such  a 


DTTBODUCTION.  xliii 

scale,  in  contempt  of  all  that  is  known  in  or  out  of  the 
Bible,  one  must  consider  that  it  is  a  moderate  flight  in 
this  imaginative  system  to  claim  for  Menes  no  more 
than  a  few  centuries  before  the  flood.  It  may  be  added 
that  the  basis  of  it  is  a  passage  of  Syncellus,  and  a 
manifest  error,  as  has  been  shewn  by  others.  But  there 
is  no  need  of  learning  or  logic  here;  for  the  divine 
testimony  of  Christ  has  sealed  the  truth  of  the  flood 
as  an  authentic  fact,  and  a  most  solemn  warning  to 
unbeUef.  (See  Matt.  xxiv.  37-39;  Luke  xviL  26,  27.) 
The  apostles  Paul  (Heb.  xi.  7)  and  Peter  (1  Ep.  iii  20 ; 
2  Ep.  ii  5)  have  confirmed  the  witness  to  it,  if  this  were 
wanted. 

The  freest  thinker  will  not  complain  that,  when  I 
cite  the  testimony  of  Baron  Bunsen,  he  is  likely  to  give 
an  opinion  imfairly  to  the  prejudice  of  Egyptian  records 
as  compared  with  the  Old  Testament.  "The  written 
character  is  prolix;  the  repetition  of  fixed  phrases 
makes  it  still  more  so.  Little  is  lost  by  occasional 
laaumce;  but  comparatively  little  advance  is  made  by 
what  is  preserved.  There  are  few  words  in  a  line,  and, 
what  is  still  worse,  little  is  said  in  a  great  many  lines. 
Inscriptions  on  public  buildings  were  not  intended  to 
convey  historical  information.  They  consist  of  pane- 
gyrics on  the  king  and  praises  of  the  gods,  to  each  of 
whom  all  imaginable  titles  of  honour  are  given.  His- 
torical facts  are  thrown  into  the  shade  as  something 
paltry,  casual,  incidental,  by  the  side  of  such  pompous 
phraseology  as  Lords  of  the  World,  Conquerors  of  the 
North,  Tamers  of  the  South,  Destroyers  of  all  the  Un- 


xliv  DPiEODrcTio^r. 

clean,  and  all  their  eneotieaL  The  case  of  the  papyri  is 
certainly  different.  Bat  written  iustorr,  such  as  the 
lustorical  books  of  the  Old  Testament^  so  fur  as  oor 
knowledge  of  their  writings  goes,  was  certainly  un- 
known to  the  old  Egyptians." 

Let  OS  briefly  review  a  quantity  of  smaller  points. 
The  unbelieving  criticism  on  the  earlier  chapters  of 
Genesis  has  been  noticed  the  more,  as  being  in  fact 
the  most  confidently  nrged,  and,  if  refdted,  involving 
the  rejection  of  much  the  greater  part  of  the  rest. 
Prophetic  insertions,  brief  and  rare  as  they  are,  are 
rather  a  confirmation  than  a  weakening  of  the  Mosaic 
authorship,  and  in  no  way  an  infringement  of  inspira- 
tion, which  is  a  flEU*  more  important  thing ;  for  all  were 
equally  inspired  of  Grod,  whether  Moses  or  Samuel, 
Ezra,  Jeremiah,  or  any  other  prophet  But  it  is  not 
certain  that  some  of  the  notices  supposed  to  be  of  this 
kind  were  not  original,  as,  for  instance.  Gen.  xiii.  18, 
&c.  One  can  easily  imderstand  the  original  name,  for 
a  time  overlaid  by  the  name  of  Arba,  finally  restored ; 
as  we  can  conceive  a  curious  coincidence  in  the  name 
of  Dan,  as  it  seems  to  have  been  an  element  in  Jor-dan 
and  Dan-jaan,  apart  firom  the  tribe. 

The  passage  in  Gren.  xxxvL  (verse  31)  on  which  most 
stress  has  been  laid  seems  to  be  undoubtedly  of  Moses. 
To  call  the  notice  of  kings  that  reigned  in  Edom  "  be- 
fore there  reigned  any  king  over  the  land  of  Israel"  a 
trifling  proposition*  is  not  only  irreverence,  but  evinces 
that  fatal  defect  of  all  rationalists — ^the  absence  of  moral 

♦  Introd.  O.  T.  i  3,  4. 


INTRODUCTION.  xlv 

perception.  Israel  had  the  promise  of  kings,  which 
Esau  had  not;  yet  Esau  had  many  successive  kings 
long  before  a  sign  of  royalty  was  seen  in  the  object  of 
that  promise.  Had  the  passage  been  written  after  Saul 
or  David's  line  began  to  reign,  the  phraseology  would 
have  been  different,  not  "any"  or  "a"  king,  but  "the 
king'*  or  "  the  kings." 

Again,  Exodua  xvi.  35,  36 ;  xxii.  29 ;  Lev.  xxvi.  34, 
35,  43;  Deut.  xix.  14,  are  only  difficult  to  one  who 
denies  the  essential  claim  of  scripture.  Lev.  xviii.  28 
is  cleared  in  its  true  sense  by  simply  reading  verses  24, 
25.  Num.  XV.  32  is  quite  plain  if  written,  as  it  pro- 
bably was,  in  the  plains  of  Moab.  Gen.  xl.  15  is  most 
natural  in  the  lips  of  Joseph  looking  back  on  the  land 
where  his  father  and  himseK  were  once  together,  and 
designating  it  by  "the  Hebrews" — a  name  familiar 
among  the  Gentiles. 

Nor  do  notices  of  ancient  inhabitants  or  actual  rulers 
and  their  history,  as  in  Deut.  ii.  iii.,  present  the  smallest 
difficulty.  They  are  of  the  highest  interest  in  them- 
selves, and  Moses  might  well  speak  and  write  of  them. 
Exodus  vi.  26  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  lapse  of  a 
considerable  time  after  Moses,  but  is  due  to  the  sense 
of  God's  condescension  in  using  such  men  by  the  writer 
who  was  one  of  the  two.  This  may  seem  triffing  to  a 
modem  critic :  what  does  the  pettifoggery  (and  as  far 
as  I  have  had  leisure  to  sift  very  incorrect  minims) 
seem  to  those  who  rejoice  in  the  divine  truth  of  God's 
dealings  with  man  for  this  world  and  for  eternity  ?  So, 
if  the  Bible  were  a  human  book,  such  texts  as  Exodus 


Xlvi  INTEODUCTION. 

XL  3,  Numbers  xii  7,  might  seem  strange.  Neverthe- 
less the  history  proves  their  strict  truth ;  and  the  lan- 
guage of  Paul  in  2  Cor.  xi  may  cause  one  to  hesitate 
in  counting  them  later  additions  by  Ezra  or  some  other 
authorised  hand,  as  no  one  doubts  of  the  formula  "unto 
this  day."  But  none  of  these  in  the  smallest  degree 
touches  the  claim  of  Moses  to  have  written  the  Penta- 
teuch by  inspiration. 

It  is  not  only  that  the  "higher  criticism"  fails  to 
explain  justly  the  divine  names,  and  does  not  pretend 
to  any  remark  on  their  employment  beyond  the 
superficial  and,  as  we  have  seen,  unfounded  notion  of 
different  dates,  but  another  notable  trait  is  its  extreme 
carelessness,  and,  I  must  say,  its  misstatements  as  to 
alleged  matter  of  fact  Thus  even  opponents  of  neology 
are  too  apt  to  repeat  the  assumption  that  the  supposed 
Elohist  always  says  HB  or  anj^  ^g,  not  C3?^rii  D^  like 
the  supposed  Jehovist.  Now  the  fact  is  that  Padan 
occurs  but  once  (Gren.  xlviii  7)  in  an  address  opened 
and  therefore  governed  by  the  name  El-Shaddai,  the 
distinctive  title  of  relationship  to  the  patriarchs.  Next 
the  very  first  occurrence  of  Padau-aram  is  in  Genesis 
XXV.  20,  where  it  is  severed  from  Elohim  by  seven 
verses  (12-18),  which  set  forth  the  generations  of 
Ishmael  and  his  sons,  and  where  it  has  in  its  own 
immediate  sequence  and  connexion  (ver.  21)  the  name 
of  Jehovah.  In  Genesis  xxviii.  2  it  is  followed  in  the 
next  verse,  not  by  Elohim  but  by  El-Shaddai,  though 
after  that  no  doubt  comes  Elohim.  But  Jehovah  appears 
repeatedly  in  the  middle  of  the  same  short  chapter,  as 


INTEODUCTION.  xlvii 

does  Elohim  at  the  close.    The  only  criticism  therefore 
to  which  the  new  school  can  resort  is  the  very  mechani- 
cal device  of  the  scissors,  by  which  they  divide  these 
few  verses,  though  boimd  up  intimately,  among  at  least 
three  dififerent  writers — verses  1-9,  the  Elohist  (which 
does  not  at  all  accoimt  for  the  quite  distinct  title  of 
M-Shaddai);  10-12,  17-22,  the  junior  Elohist  (which 
overiooks  the  most  emphatic  use  of  Jehovah  in  the 
chapter,  ver.  21);  and  13-16,  the  redactor.    Why  the 
Jehovist  should  be  discarded  and  the  compiler  or  editor 
substituted  where  the  Jehovah  title  is  so  prominent  is 
not  explained  or  apparent.     But  such  is  the  artificial 
hypothesis   which  Dr.  D.  borrows   from  his  German 
leaders.     Genesis  xxxi.  18  is  the  next  occurrence  of 
Fadan-aram,  which  here  follows  Jehovah's  word   to 
Jacob.    Jacob  calls   him   repeatedly  God;   but  it  is 
impossible  to  deny  that  the  passage  turns  on  what 
Jehovah  said  (ver.  3).    The  ground  taken  therefore  is 
wholly  false;  and  the  attempt  to  cut  out  verse  18  for 
the  Elohist,  and  to  assign  the  rest  of  the  chapter  to  the 
younger  Elohist,  the  Jehovist,  and  the  redactor,  as  Dr. 
D.  does  (Introd.  0.  T.  i.  58,  59),  only  proves  the  des- 
peration as  well  as  the  poverty  of  thought  to  which 
such  criticism  reduces  its  partisans.    In  Genesis  xxxiii 
18  Padan-aram  occurs  again,  but  the  title  with  which 
it  stands  most  nearly  connected  is  the  remarkable  com- 
pound El-elohe-Israel,  which  is  certainly  not  purely 
Elohistic  on  their  system.  But  singularly  enough  Dr.  D. 
seems  here  to  have  forgotten  his  lesson  himself  (i.  59), 
for  he  distributes  this  verse  18  between  the  Jehovist 


xlviii  INTRODUCTION. 

and  the  redactor,  giving  the  latter  the  clause  containing 
the  name,  which  in  p.  27  he  confines  to  the  Elohist. 
And  this  is  criticism !  Genesis  xxxv.  9,  26  Dr.  D.  has 
mangled  to  the  utmost  limits  of  the  hypothesis,  for  he 
cuts  it  up  among  all  the  four  imaginary  writers  of  this 
book.  It  is  impossible,  however,  to  deny  the  distinctive 
force  in  the  chapter  of  El  and  El-Shaddai,  which  are 
not  Elohistic :  so  exactly  of  Genesis  xlvi.  15,  the  last 
occurrence,  save  that  El-Shaddai  is  not  here. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  basis  for  pronouncing  Aram- 
naharaim  Jehovistic  is  of  the  weakest,  as  the  reader 
will  feel  when  assured  that  it  occurs  but  twice  in  all  the 
five  books  of  Moses,  Genesis  xxiv.  10,  Deut.  xxiii.  4. 
Even  in  this  word  the  same  fatality  of  error  haunts  the 
neologian ;  for  one  of  the  only  three  occuiTences  of  the 
word  outside  the  Pentateuch  is  in  the  title  to  Psalm  Ix., 
one  of  the  most  intensely  Elohistic  compositions  in  the 
Bible.  Besides,  it  is  not  at  all  proved  that  Padan-aram 
is  identical  with  Aram-naharaim.  The  high  land  of  the 
two  rivers  may  well  include  the  ploughed  high  land  or 
plateau  of  Syria,  though  both  might  with  suiB&cient 
accuracy  for  ordinary  use  be  translated  Mesopotamia. 
Aram,  simply,  is  the  most  comprehensive  term  of  all, 
and  occurs  but  once  in  the  Pentateuch  (Num.  xYhi,  7) 
distinctly  in  the  sense  of  a  coimtry,  and  this  in  Bcdaam's 
speech,  who  uses  Elohim,  Jehovah,  Elion,  and  Shaddai 
in  such  a  way  as  puts  to  the  rout  the  idea  of  a  Jehovistic 
document. 

I  grant  that,  in  general,  terms  expressive  of  natural 
species,  distinctions  of  sex,  generations  (save  in  an  ex- 


INTRODUCTION.  xlix 

ceptional  case  such  as  Gen.  ii.  4),  historic  specifications 
of  time,  &c.  occur  in  scriptures  where  Elohini  is  used 
rather  than  Jehovah.  But  this  flows  from  the  nature 
of  things,  and  must  therefore  be  on  the  supposition 
that  Moses  wrote  the  five  books.  It  is  a  question  of 
propriety  and  exactness  of  speech,  not  of  different 
documents.  For  in  describing  for  instance  production 
as  such,  or  the  perpetuation  of  the  creature,  or  facts  as 
such,  Elohim  is  required,  and  the  name  of  special 
relationship  would  be  out  of  place. 

Again,  we  are  told  that  nn?  D^pn  (or  jnj),  "  establish 
a  covenant,"  is  the  Elohistic  expression,  the  Jehovistic 
nn5  nn?,  "to  make  (literally  'cut')  a  covenant."  Now, 
not  to  say  more  of  Genesis  xvii.  7,  19,  the  strongest 
evidence  possible  against  the  exclusive  Elohism  of  the 
first  formula  is,  that  it  is  employed  in  immediate 
sequence  after  the  formal  revelation  of  the  name  of 
Jehovah.  (Exodus  vi.  2-4.)  I  am  aware  that  our  scissors- 
critics  never  fail  for  want  of  boldness,  and  that  Dr.  D. 
ventures  to  bracket  this  very  passage  to  the  redactor  in 
verse  1,  and  to  the  Elohist  in  verses  2-7,  leaving  verse  8 
to  the  Jehovist.  But  to  treat  scripture  thus,  to  represent 
the  passage  as  such  an  ill-assorted  farrago,  is  mere  wilful- 
ness, and  contrary  to  their  own  principle  which  professes 
to  draw  its  proofs  wholly  from  internal  evidence.  For, 
if  so,  nothing  can  be  more  certain  than  the  Jehovistic 
character  of  this  chapter,  though  care  is  taken,  as  we 
have  seexi  elsewhere,  to  shew  that  Elohim  is  Jehovah, 
as  well  as  El-Shaddai,  henceforward  to  be  looked  to 

nationally  according  to  all  that  the  name  of  Jehovah 

d 


1  INTHIODUCTION. 

implies  as  their  God.  Ezekiel  xvi  6,  62  cannot  be 
pretended  to  be  Elohistic.  So  as  to  the  alternative  form 
(nn|  \T))),  it  occurs  twice  only  in  the  Pentateuch,  Gren. 
ix.  12,  Num.  XXV.  12.  Of  this  last  chapter  I  am  aware 
that  Dr.  D.  calls  verses  1-5  Jehovistic,  6-18  Elohistic. 
The  best  answer  is  to  read  verses  10-12,  which  open 
thus:  "And  Jehovah  spake."  As  to  the  exdusively 
Jehovistic  phrase,  the  disproof  is  equally  sure.  (See 
Gen.  XXL  27,  32.)  Jimior  or  senior,  it  is  Elohistic, 
contrary  to  the  alleged  distinction.  It  occurs  again  in 
Genesis  xxxi.  44,  which  is  certainly  not  Jehovistic; 
though  I  am  not  able  to  make  out  how  Dr.  D.  (58,  59) 
tabulates  verses  43-47.  He  assigns  parts  of  41  and  48 
to  his  redactor.  At  any  rate  the  use  here  contradicts 
the  system.  So  the  connexion  is  Elohistic,  not  Jeho- 
vistic, in  Ezra  x.  3 ;  Psalm  Ixxxiii.  5.  In  short  the 
reader  has  only  to  sift  in  order  to  prove  how  un- 
founded is  the  hypothesis  in  its  conclusions. 

I  do  not  judge  it  to  be  called  for  just  now  to  ex- 
amine all  the  other  phrases  sup'posed  to  characterize 
the  Elohistic  or  the  Jehovistic  passages*  respectively. 
But  of  this  the  reader  may  be  assured,  that  it  is 
wise  in  no  case,  were  it  the  most  inmiaterial  state- 
ment, to  trust  the  assertions  of  rationalism.    Even 

*  The  supposed  confirmation  of  the  Elohistic  and  Jehovistic  hypo- 
thesis drawn  from  the  few  proper  names  compounded  with  Jehovah 
before  Samuel. and  David  (Introd.  O.  T.  L  19)  is  nuU.  It  was  natural 
they  should  use  the  name  more  when  revealed  to  them  in  national 
relationship,  though  it  did  not  become  gpeneral  till  Samuel  in  measure, 
and  David,  fedthful  and  obedient,  ftdly  set  up  what  Moses  had  enjoined, 
but  what  had  beenr  grossly  neglected  for  centuries  before. 


INTRODUCTION.  li 

where  there  may  be  a  true  element,  it  is  invariably 
misapplied  and  in  general  exaggerated  to  the  last  degree. 
Thus  much  is  made  of  nin.8  "possession;"  and  D>>iap  pjj, 
"land  of  sojoumings,"as  "peculmrly  Elohistic."  Unfortu- 
nately for  the  theory,  their  first  occurrence  in  the  same 
chapter  and  in  the  ^same  verse  (Gen.  xvii.  8)  disproves 
the  assertion,  unless  indeed  one  is  weak  enough  to  allow 
a  chapter  to  be  counted  Elohistic  which  begins  thus: 
"And  when  Abram  was  ninety  years  old  and  nine, 
Jehovah  appeared  to  Abram,  and  said  unto  him,  I  am 
El-Shaddai,"  &c.  How  can  this  be  Elohistic,  either 
elder  or  younger?  It  begins  with  Jehovah  revealing 
Himself  to  Abram  by  that  special  name  in  which  h^ 
and  the  other  fathers  had  to  walk,  and  then  shewed 
Himself  to  be  none  other  than  Elohim  (ver.  12,  15,  18, 
19),  which  was  of  the  utmost  importance.  I  could 
l^^^rdly  conceive  of  a  more  satisfactory  disproof  of  dis- 
tinct documents  as  well  as  of  confining  the  phrases  cited 
to  Elohistic  passages.  Any  good  Hebrew  concordance 
ynh  multiply  cases  of  it. 

Another  remark  may  be  here  made,  and  not  without 
cftuse.  The  imcertainty  of  the^e  speculations  is  such 
that  hardly  t^o  rationalists  agree  tolerably,  nay,  hardly 
one  agrees  with  himself  for  any  length  of  time  even  as 
to  broad  outlines  and  points  of  very  great  importance. 
Thus  Dr.  Davidson,  in  his  contribution  to  the  tenth 
edition  of  Home's  Introduction,  contended  for  two 
documents,  the  Elohistic  of  Joshua's  day,  and  the 
Jehovistip  during  the  Judges,  which  he  supposed  to 
have  been  combined  in  one  work  imder  Saul's  or  David's 

d  2 


lii  INTKODUCTION. 

reign.  What  is  of  still  greater  moment,  he  then  ascribed 
the  authorship  of  Deuteronomy  to  Moses.  Traditional 
orthodoxy  may  haye  yet  exercised  a  check  on  his  mind; 
for  one  can  hardly  speak  of  faith,  when  in  six  years  all 
was  changed  for  the  worse  in  his  own  Introduction  to 
which  reference  has  so  often  been  made.  I  am  far  from 
insinuating  that  the  author  did  not  believe  what  he 
wrote  in  his  second  volume  for  the  late  Mr.  Home's 
work.  But  one  can  only  save  his  honesty  by  blaming 
both  the  extreme  want  of  judgment  in  questions  of 
very  great  consequence  (for  the  denial  of  this,  i.  129, 
will  satisfy  none  but  the  light-minded),  and  the  insta- 
bility which  could  make  such  a  revolution  in  so  short  a 
space.  Were  it  a  stripling,  allowance  might  be  made 
for  inexperience  or  the  influence  of  stronger  minds : 
as  it  is,  even  a  heathen  could  say,  fadlis  descensus 
Avemi.  The  pretentiousness  which  accompanies  the 
worst  insinuations  against  God's  word,  when  these  rest 
on  the  flimsiest  of  reasons,  is  deeply  painful.  Every 
one  in  the  least  familiar  with  the  manner  in  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  has  deigned  to  instruct  us  in  scripture 
knows  that  it  is  frequently  by  taking  up  the  same 
subject  and  presenting  another  line  of  association,  so 
as  to  give  us  the  truth  fully  through  viewing  it  on  all 
sides.  Not  otherwise  do  the  wisest  men,  as  far  as  their 
small  measure  is  capable  of  a  method  so  exhaustive. 
Instances  of  this  we  may  see  frequently,  not  only  in 
the  five  books  of  Moses,  but  in  every  part  of  the  scrip- 
tures, and  nowhere  more  conspicuously  than  in  the 
inspired  accounts  of  our  Lord;  for  it  is  true  of  whole 


INTRODUCTION.  liii 

books,  as  well  as  of  retracings  of  particular  themes 
within  them.  One  can  easily  understand  the  lack  of 
spiritual  perception  which  overlooks  such  a  mode  of 
instruction.  But  what  can  one  think  of  those  who 
fear  not  to  sit  in  judgment  on  what,  just  because  it  is 
divine,  must  be  beyond  the  natural  mind ;  and,  instead 
of  looking  to  God  that  the  entrance  of  His  words 
might  give  the  needed  light,  venture  to  speak  of  an 
author,  in  such  a  case,  stultifying  himself  by  announc- 
ing an  important  distinction  which  he  had  uniformly 
observed  in  certain  sections,  and  as  uniformly  violated 
in  others  ? 

It  is  a  joy  on  the  other  hand  to  learn  on,  I  suppose, 
good  authority  that  De  Wette,  speculative  as  he  once 
was,  I  will  not  say  led  captive  every  thought  to  the 
obedience  of  Christ,  but  certainly  turned  to  Him  and 
His  blood,  with  much  simplicity  some  time  before  his 
decease ;  and  that  the  late  Baron  Bunsen,  after  a  career 
of  almost  wilder  theorisii^g  on  scripture  than  Origen's, 
found  rest  at  last  in  that  Saviour  who  alone  can  and 
does  give  it  to  the  weary  and  heavy-laden. 

On  the  whole,  then,  no  support  is  given  by  any  or 
all  such  passages  to  the  scheme  of  Astruc,  who  deserves 
no  credit  for  a  critical  eye,  but  rather  reprobation  for 
yielding  to  an  unbridled  imagination,  which  has  already 
wrought  no.  small  mischief  among  his  followers;  and 
so  much  the  more  because,  untaught  and  ill-established 
in  divine  truth,  they  sometimes  expend  great  industry 
and  ample  erudition  on  the  mere  surface  of  the  scrip- 
tures which  they  wrest  to  their  own  destruction. 


Kt  nmtODircrnox 

Another  oppofrtunity  may  offer  to  pfioTe  how  fifir  the 
minttte  phflole^  applied  to  Denteronomj  reaHj  weakens 
Moses'  title  to  haye  written  it.  I  am  satisfied  myself 
that  the  phenomena  supposed  to  be  adrerse  are  but  a 
corer  for  the  main  object  nndemeath  all  the  muster  of 
difficulties  and  objections — the  desire  to  get  rid  of 
divine  authoritative  truth,  which  probes  the  conscience 
as  nothing  else  can ;  and  the  more  so,  as  Jiot  the  pro- 
phets only  but  the  Lord  of  glory  also  have  afiBxed  a 
seal,  which  profanity  alone  would  think  of  breaking,  to 
the  Pentateuch  as  Grod's  word  written  by  Moses. 

We  have  seen  that  the  positive  objections,  when 
sifted,  either  fall  to  the  ground,  or  become  rather  wit- 
nesses in  favour  of  the  Mosaic  authorship  and  inspired 
character  of  the  first  five  books  of  the  Old  Testament 
The  alleged  omissions,  rightly  viewed,  bear  testimony 
to  the  same.  An  inspired  writer  can  and  does  habit- 
ually leave  such  blanks  as  we  find  in  the  history  of  the 
sojourn  in  the  wilderness,  the  journeys  and  stations, 
the  desired  particulars  of  Hur  and  Jethro,  &c.  This  is 
never  so,  save  by  defect  of  information,  in  human 
annals ;  but  it  flows  immediately  from  the  moral  design 
of  scripture.  Man  loves  to  stimulate  and  indulge 
curiosity;  God  inspires  for  the  commimication  of  His 
mind,  the  link  of  connection  being  in  the  divine  pur- 
pose and  objects,  not  in  the  facts  which  may  often  be 
partial  and  disjointed  as  a  history.  Let  me  cite  the 
competent  opinion  given  entirely  apart  from  controversy 
by  Mr.  H.  F.  Clinton,  which  may  serve  to  illustrate 
wore  than  one  point.     "  The  history  contained  in  the 


INTBODUCTIOir.  Iv 

Hebrew  scriptures  presents  a  remarkable  and  pleasing 
contrast  to  the  early  accounts  of  the  Greeks.  In  the 
latter  we  trace  with  difl&culty  a  few  obscure  facts  pre- 
served to  us  by  the  poets,  who  transmitted. with  all  the 
embellishments  of  poetry  and  fable  what  they  had 
received  from  oral  tradition.  In  the  annals  of  the 
Hebrew  nation  we  have  authentic  narratives  written 
by  contempoiraries,  and  these  writing  under  the  guid- 
ance of  inspiration.  What  they  have  delivered  to  us 
comes  accordingly  under  a  double  sanction.  They  were 
aided  by  divine  inspiration  in  recording  facts,  upon 
which,  as  mere  human  witnesses,*  their  evidence  would 
be  valid.  But  as  the  narrative  comes  with  an  authority 
which  no  other  writing  can  possess,  so  in  the  matters 
related  it  has  a  character  of  its  own.  The  histoiy  of 
the  Israelites  is  the  history  of  miraculous  interpositions. 
Their  passage  out  of  Egypt  was  miraculous.  Their 
entrance  into  the  promised  land  was  miraculous.  Their 
prosperous  and  their  adverse  fortunes  in  that  land,  their 
servitudes  and  their  deliverances,  their  conquests  and 
their  captivities,  were  aU  miraculous.  The  entire  his- 
tory, from  the  call  of  Abraham  to  the  building  of  the 
sacred  temple,  was  a  series  of  miracles.  It  is  so  much 
the  object  of  the  sacred  historians  to  describe  these 

*  '*  It  may  be  said  that  Moses  was  not  a  witness  of  the  facts  which  he 
relates  between  the  birth  or  the  caU  of  Abraham  (when  the  history  of 
the  Hebrews  may  be  properly  said  to  commence)  and  his  own  time. 
Bat  there  were  so  few  steps  between  Abraham  and  Moses  that,  though 
not  a  witness,  he  was  an  authentic  reporter  of  evidence.  In  the 
following  history,  from  the  exode  to  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple,  all 
the  writers  were,  strictly  speaking,  witnesses.*' 


Ivi  IHTEODUCnON. 

that  little  else  is  recorded.  The  ordinaiy  events  and 
transactions,  what  constitutes  the  civil  history  of  other 
states,  are  either  very  briefly  told,  or  omitted  alto- 
gether; the  incidental  mention  of  these  facts  heing 
always  subordinate  to  the  main  design  of  registering 
the  extraordinary  manifestations  of  divine  power.  For 
these  reasons  the  history  of  the  Hebrews  cannot  be 
treated  like  the  history  of  any  other  nation  [exactly 
■  what  rationalism  essays  to  do  to  the  dishonour  of 
scripture,  and  its  own  utter  and  ruinous  confusion] ;  and 
he  who  should  attempt  to  write  their  history,  divesting 
it  of  its  miraculous  character,  would  find  himself  without 
materials.  Conformably  with  this  spirit  there  are  no 
historians  in  the  sacred  volume  of  the  period  in  which 
miraculous  intervention  was  withdrawn.  After  the 
declaration  by  the  mouth  of  Malacki  *  that  a  messenger 
should  he  sent  to  prepare  the  way,  the  next  event  recorded 
by  any  inspired  writer  is  the  birth  of  that  mesaenger.t 
But  of  the  interval  of  400  years  between  the  promise 
and  the  completion  no  account  is  given.  And  this 
period  of  more  than  400  years  between  Malachi  and 
the  Baptist  la  properly  the  only  portion,  in  the  whole 
long  series  of  ages  from  the  birth  of  Abraham  to  the 
Christian  era,  which  is  capable  of  beii^  treated  like 
the  history  of  any  other  nation."! 

•  "Maleohi  iii.  1." 

t  "Or  at  least  the  ciroumBtanoeB  which  preceded  it ;  Luke  L  1-64.    ; 
AngustiQe  Civ.  Dei,  ivii.  24,  haj  remarked  this  cessation  at  p 


INTRODUCTION.  Ivii 

"  From  this  spirit  of  the  scripture  history,  the  writer 
not  designing  to  give  a  full  account  of  all  transactions, 
but  only  to  dweU  on  that  portion  in  which  the  divine 
character  was  marked,  many  things  which  we  might 
desire  to  know  are  omitted,  and  on  many  occasions  a 
mere  outline  of  the  history  is  preserved."  {Fasti  Hellen, 
I  pp.  283-285.) 

These  are  in  the  main,  without  vouching  for  every 
thought  or  expression,  words  of  truth  and  soberness. 
Not  only  were  God's  ways  with  Israel  above  mere 
nature,  but  His  word  as  to  the  patriarchs  and  them  has 
throughout  a  prophetic  character.  Even  so  ordinary  a 
transaction  as  the  domestic  trouble  of  Sarah  and  Hagar 
as  to  Isaac  and  Ishmael  we  know  on  inspired  authority 
to  be  an  allegory  of  the  two  covenants,  and  the  opposi- 


msy  remark  that  in  all  ages  of  their  history  divine  inspiration  was 
vouchsafed  in  exact  proportion  to  the  necessity  of  the  case.  Inspi- 
ration was  afforded  to  Noahy  to  Abraham,  to  Moaea  ;  and  from  Moses 
to  Malaehi  there  was  an  uninterrupted  communication  of  the  divine 
wiU  through  inspired  ministry  to  the  chosen  people.  By  this  chosen 
people  the  knowledge  of  the  Deity  was  preserved  through  so  many 
ages  in  the  midst  of  the  darkness  and  idolatry  and  polytheism  of  the 
other  nations  of  the  world.  And  the  measure  of  inspiration  was 
always  in  proportion  to  the  exigency.  The  greatest  prophets  arose 
in  the  most  difficult  times.  The  reign  of  Ahab  was  distinguished  hy 
Elijah  and  Elisha.  Isaiah  continued  to  prophesy  through  the  time  of 
Ahaz.  And  during  the  captivity  many  eminent  prophets  consoled 
and  instructed  the  Jews  in  their  calamity.  But  with  Malaehi  inspi- 
ration ceased,  and  the  Jews  were  left  to  the  exertions  of  their  own 
£Eumlties.  Inspiration  appears  to  have  heen  withdrawn  because  it  was 
no  longer  necessary  for  the  purposes  of  Providence. 

"  The  character  of  the  Jews  in  their  captivity  had  undergone  a  re- 
markablB  change.  During  the  period  of  their  judges  they  had  been 
easily  seduced  into  the  idolatries  of  their  neighbours ;  but,  after  their 


Iviii  INTRODITCtlON. 

tion  of  the  flesh  to  promise  and  the  Spirit.  So  we  are 
taught  that  Melchisedec  in  Gen.  xiv.  represents  a  higher 
priesthood  than  that  of  Aaron  verified  now  in  Christ> 
and  to  be  displayed  in  His  kingdom.  In  short,  every- 
where God  selected  by  the  inspired  writers  such  facts 
as  were  adequate  to  bring  Out  ftdly  what  man  is  a» 
morally  judged  of  Himself,  and  what  God  is  in  grace  or 
in  government,  of  which  Christ  is  the  only  complete 
expression.  All  scripture  is  the  expansion  of  this  as 
its  central  idea — ^not  that  the  several  writers  knew  the 
bearing  of  all  they  wrote,  especially  those  before  Christ, 
but  that  He  did  who  inspired  them  all  to  write. 

Hence  there  is  a  vast  system  of  which  the  several 
books  form  part,  and  fill  up  each  the  place  assigned  in 
the  purpose  of  God.  While  every  book  has  an  unity  of 

return  firom  Babylon,  they  exhibited  a  spirit  of  attachment  to  their 
law  and  to  their  sacred  books  which  they  maintained  under  aU  cat^ 
cumstances  wiih  incredible  firmness.  A  people  of  such  habits  as  they 
had  now  acquired  was  eminently  fitted  for  the  office  for  which  they 
were  designed,  of  guardians  of  the  oracles  of  GKid,  i7riart(t9tiaav  rd 
\6yia  Tov  Oeov.  (Kom.  iii.  2.)  Josephus  Apion,  i.  8,  remarks  of  his 
coimtrymen,  iratn  trvfit^rov  koriv  li/Siic  Ik  rfjc  Tpiarnc  ytvkfftufc 
*lovdaioi£  TO  vofiiZtiv  avrtk  Oeov  SSyfiaraj  ical  roitroic  ififikvstv,  xai 
vtrkp  aifT&v,  d  dkoi  OvriaKHv  ridktoc.  Miraculous  aid  was  now  there- 
fofe  no  longer  necessary  to  fit  them  for  tiieir  office,  and  was  accord- 
ingly withheld.  As  in  the  material  world  Proiddence  had  everjrwhere 
proportioned  tho  means  to  ihe  end,  the  forces  being  not  greater  than 
the  occasion  requires,  so  it  would  seem  that  in  his  spiritual  communi- 
cations extraordinary  aids  are  only  granted  when  ordinary  influence 
16  insufficient.  At  the  birth  of  the  Messiah  the  greatness  of  the 
occasion  demanded  that  divine  communication,  after  a  suspension  of 
foilr  centuries,  should  again  be  made ;  and  the  evangelists  and  apostles 
Wei'e  armed  with  supernatural  gifts  and  powers  adequate  to  the  duties 
trhich  they  were  to  perform." 


INTRODUCTION.  lix 

its  own,  and  certain  books  may  supplement  each  other 
in  ^  way  evidently  beyond  the  writers*  thought,  they  all 
compose  a  divine  l^hole. 

Thus  in  Genesis,  couched  under  the  simplest  forms 
of  word  or  deed,  hve  seen  the  great  principles  of  divine 
action  and  relationship  with  man  from  the  earliest  days, 
which  look  on  typically  to  the  last:  creation,  human 
responsibility,  sin,  revelation  of  a  Deliverer  in  grace, 
sacrifice  in  faith,  the  world  in  its  worship  and  in  its 
outward  progress,  translation  to  heaven,  corruption  and 
violence  on  earth,  providential  judgment  and  deliverance 
through  it,  covenant  with  the  earth,  human  government 
ordained  but  of  God,  combination  of  men  in  pride,  dis- 
persion into  natiotis,  tribes,  and  tongties  by  divine  judg- 
ment ;  calling  by  grace  as  a  sefparate  witness  for  the  God 
of  promise ;  the  risen  son  and  heir  with  the  calling  of  the 
bride ;  the  election  for  the  earth  cast  out  for  a  time,  but 
after  humbling  experiences  restored  and  blessed  and  a 
blessing;  and  this  in  connexioti  With  a  holy  suflFerer 
rejected  by  his  brethren,  sold  to  the  Gentiles,  but  by 
this  very  path  of  sorrow  exalted  over  the  world  while 
unknown  to  Israel,  and  receiving  a  Gentile  bride,  but 
finally  making  himself  known  to  his  brethren  preserved 
through  their  secret  trouble,  and  now  Owning  in  him 
the  grace  and  glory  they  had  so  long  despised  and 
hated. 

In  Exodus  we  see,  not  individu.als  or  a  family,  but 
a  people,  God's  people,  redeemed  ftom  the  house  of 
bondage  and  brought  to  God  from  the  Ttroiid  which 
falls  under  His  mighty  hand,  and  inflictions  In  an  ever- 


Ix  INTRODUCTION. 

rising  character  till  chastening  slighted  ends  in  exter- 
minating judgment ;  but  the  people  of  God  themselves 
failing  to  appreciate  His  grace  which  led  them  all  the 
instructive  way  from  Egypt  to  Sinai,  and  voluntarily 
accepting  conditions  of  obeying  the  law  as  the  means 
and  tenure  of  divine  privilege,  yet  even  in  the  shadows 
of  the  tabernacle,  &c.,  having  His  grace  in  Christ  typified 
with  striking  variety  and  fulness. 

Leviticus  next  presents  God  from  the  tabernacle 
laying  down  the  means  and  character  and  consequences 
of  access  to  Himself  by  sacrifice  and  priesthood  and 
ordinances  for  food,  birth,  disease,  infirmity,  &c.,  and 
feasts  for  the  people  in  the  midst  of  whom  He  dwells, 
with  the  prophecy  of  their  ruin  and  exile  for  rebellious 
and  idolatrous  unbelief,  but  of  their  restoration  when 
they  should  repent  by  His  grace,  and  so  enjoy  the  pro- 
mises made  to  their  fathers. 

The  book  of  Numbers  gives  us  the  sojourn  and 
march  of  the  people  through  the  desert,  with  the  pro- 
visions of  grace,  the  full  account  of  their  unbelief  as 
to  both  the  way  and  the  end,  the  judgment  of  pre- 
sumption and  rebellion,  and  the  effort  of  the  enemy  to 
hinder  turned  of  God  into  the  grandest  vindication  of 
His  people  and  assurance  of  future  glory  when  He 
judges  the  world,  with  facts  and  ordinances  which  look 
onward  to  their  possession  of  the  promised  land. 

Deuteronomy  is  not  only  a  farewell  moral  rehearsal 
of  the  law,  but  also  of  God's  ways  with  Israel,  enforcing 
obedience  as  the  way  of  blessing ;  as  the  last  words  of 
him  who  was  the  chief  type  of  Messiah  as  Prophet,  it 


INTRODUCTION  Ixi 

urges  on  the  people,  just  about  to  enter  the  land,  a 
more  direct  relationship  with  Jehovah  their  God,  and, 
while  predicting  their  ruin  through  disobedience,  points 
darkly  to  "secret  things,"  the  resources  of  divine  mercy 
in  which  He  will  more  than  retrieve  all  to  their  bless- 
edness and  His  own  glory  in  the  latter  day. 

There  is  thus  a  deep  inward  connexion  as  well  as 
progress  in  the  five  books  of  Moses,  and  the  reader  who 
looks  below  the  surface  will  find  proofs  of  this  multi- 
plying on  his  prayerful  study ;  but  the  same  principle 
is  true  of  the  entire  Bible  from  Genesis  to  the  Eeve- 
lation,  the  links  between  which  are  as  strong  as  they 
are  numerous,  and  those  comparatively  indirect  or 
latent  so  much  the  more  undeniable  a  testimony  to  the 
One  Divine  Author  of  them  alL 


CONTENTS. 


I. 

Gbnbsis  i.-ur.  Faot8 — a  characteristic  of  a  divine  r&velatioii,  1.  The 
simple  Btatemoit  of  &cts  is  that  which  is  worthy  of  God,  2.  In  the 
beginning  matter  did  not  coexist  with  God,  3.  The  first  verse  of 
Genesis  aanounceB  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth ;  the 
second  a  desolatiooi  that  iMsdEell,  not  the  heavens,  but  the  oarth,  4.  The 
-conjunction  "and"  connects  the  second  with  the  first  verse,  5,  but 
brings  out  a  ^resh  fact,not  an  ^dcucgement  of  the  former  one,  6.  Even-' 
ing  and  morning,  7.  The  word  "  day"  literal,  not  figurative,  8.  light 
apart  from  the  heavenly  orbs,  9.  Scripture  is  as  much  above  man's 
science  as  it  is  ftbove  his  ignorance,  10.  Vegetation,  animal  and  then 
.human  life,  11.  Gsoation  from  a  new  point  of  view  to  bring  in  Paradise 
and  i^elationabipy  12.  Jehovah-Elohim,  13.  The  distinctions  in  thb 
divine  names  in  the  first  and  second  chapters,  14.  The  difiference  i^ 
.the  titles  of  Gk)d  due  to  a  distinctness  of  object,  not  of  authorship,  l§. 
Where  men, see  defective  and  clashing  documents,  believers  can  only 
wonder  at  human  blindness  and  adore  divine  grace,  16.  Man  did  not 
become  a  living  soul  in  the  way  that  every  other  animal  did,  17.  It  is 
an  old  story  in  the  world,  though  a  new  thing  for  professing  members 
and  ministers  of  Christ,  to  take  pride  in  putting  scorn  on  divine 
revelation,  18.  The  essential  feature  of  the  trial  in  the  garden  of 
£(ien  is  simply  a  question  of  Gk>d*s  authority  iii  prohibition,  not  one 
of  moral  evil  per  ae,  19.  Man  invariably  judges  from  his  own  ex- 
perience, instead  of  submitting  to  God  and  His  word,  20.  A  b^ever 
may  not  be  able  perhaps  to  meet  objections  :  the  great  point  is  to 
hold  £urt;.the  tath,  21.  The  locality  of  the  garden  of  Eden,  22.  The 
two  less  notorious  rKirers  are  described  more  fiilly  than  the  rivers  which 
are  so  commonly  known,  2Z.  Why  there  is  no  mention  of  the  tree  of 
the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  in  chapter  ii.  24.  Creation  does  not 
in  the  first  instance  belong  to  the  church  at  all  whose  place  is  purely 


Ldv  G09TESTS. 

one  of  giaoe,  2$.  God  was  ]deued  to  fonn  womaii,  is  weD  is  to  rereal 
YusT  ffmaaJtum,  in  a  way  that  oa^tt  to  make  nJiainfd  Idm  wbo  reoog- 
nizes  her  aa  his  own  flesh  and  bone,  jet  wB^bAa  or  nusoaes  a  lebdion- 
ship  so  intimate,  26.  Chapter  iii.  shews  ns  tiie  result  of  the  test  laid 
down  by  Jehorah-Elohim  broo^t  to  an  issue,  27.  Why  tiie  serpent 
and  Ere  are  represented  as  ssjring  "Elohim"  in  the  temptation,  seeing 
that  everywhere  else  in  the  section  the  name  employed  is  "  Jdiovah- 
Elohim,"  28.  Man  ate  not  as  deoeiTed  bat  with  open  eyes,  and  tiiere- 
fore  is  so  mnch  the  more  goilty,  29.  Believers  have  called  the  word 
addressed  to  the  serpent  a  promise,  scripture  never  does,  30.  The 
serpent  is  confronted  not  with  man  who  always  fidls,  but  with  Chiist 
who  alwa3r8  conquers,  31.  Adam  calling  his  wife's  name  Eve  shews 
how  speedy  was  the  fiill  after  the  creation  of  man,  32.  Note  on  the 
knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  33.  Chapter  iv.  opens  a  new  scene,  with 
a  change  in  the  name  of  God,  34.  The  principles  of  God's  nature  are 
immutable :  Ckxl  holds  to  that  which  belongs  to  His  own  moral 
being,  35.  Evil  conduct  does  not  fiiil  to  make  manifast  an  evil  state, 
and  flows  from  it,  36.  There  is  no  real  courage  with  an  evil  con- 
science, and  g^uile  will  soon  be  apparent  where  GhxL  brings  His  own 
light  and  makes  guilt  manifest,  37.  Man  now  as  ever  is  in  the  image 
of  GK>d,  but  the  Ukeness  was  lost  through  sin,  38.  The  apostasy  of  the 
ancient  world.  The  sons  of  God  chose  the  daughters  of  men,  39.  Any 
one  acquainted  with  the  chief  writings  of  the  old  idolatrous  world  will 
see  what  Qod  has  veiled  in  this  brief  statement,  40.  The  ark  and  the 
preservation  of  the  creature  in  chapter  vL;  in  chapter  vii.  special 
relationships,  41.  As  Creator,  Qod  preserves  two  of  every  sort ;  in 
respect  to  His  own  moral  government,  seven,  42.  Elohim  commanded 
Noah,  but  Jehovah  shut  him  in,  43.  Noah  builded  his  altar  to 
Jehovah,  44.  There  is  nothing  of  greater  importance  than  the  con- 
fession of  the  truth,  both  that  Qod  created  and  that  His  creation  is  in 
ruins,  45.  It  is  a  mistake  to  include  the  world  before  the  flood  in  the 
time  of  dispensations,  46.  There  was  a  trial  of  man  in  Eden,  and  he 
fell  immediately:  after  that  there  was  none  whatever  in  the  ante- 
diluvian world,  47.  The  man  in  whom  the  principle  of  human  govern- 
ment was  set  up  cohld  not  govern  himself,  48.  Chapter  x.  regards 
the  providential  arrangement  of  tongues,  fEiniilies,  and  nations,  49. 
Chapter  xi.  union  in  sin,  which  led  to  the  division  described  in  the 
preceding  chapter,  50.  At  length  we  come  to  Abram,  in  whom  God 
brings  in  wholly  new  principles  in  His  own  grace  to  meet  a  new  and 
monstrous  evil — idolatry,  51. 


CONTENTS.  Ixv 

II. 

Genesis  xii.-xxv.  Man  treated  no  longer  as  merely  such,  but 
as  separated  of  God  to  Himself,  and  this  by  promise  given  to  one 
chosen  and  called,  52.  God  had  chosen  before,  but  now  it  was  a 
publicly  affirmed  principle,  53.  Terah  the  hindrance  to  the  called  out 
man,  54.  Abram  a  pilgrim  not  a  settler  in  the  land,  65.  His  worship 
in  connexion  with  his  pilgrim  character,  56.  Saints  outside  Abram' s 
call,  57.  The  promise  of  the  land  to  Abram,  58.  It  is  necessary  to 
be  manifestly  a  pilgrim  in  the  world  as  well  as  a  worshipper  of  Gk)d 
who  called  us  out  of  it,  59.  The  tent  and  the  altar  unsuitable  for  a 
millennial  scene,  60.  The  word  of  Jehovah  in  a  vision  marks  a  new 
phase,  61.  Note  on  Dr.  Davidson's  suggestion  of  an  inconsistency,  62. 
The  justification  of  Abram  is  dealt  with  apart  from  the  record  of  his 
call,  63.  Chapters  xv.  to  xxi.  describe  rather  God's  dealings  with 
Abram  in  a  private  way,  as  the  preceding  ones  mark  those  of  public 
walk,  64.  It  is  better  to  wait  on  the  Lord  than  to  run  before  Him,  65. 
The  meaning  of  the  vision,  66,  which  neither  looks  up  at  the  heights 
of  Grod's  glory  nor  down  into  the  depths  of  His  grace,  67.  God  talks 
with  Abram,  68.  The  promise,  69.  Circumcision  not  necessarily  con- 
nected with  law — here  it  is  with  grace,  70.  Abraham's  beautiful  pro- 
priety of  behaviour  in  presence  of  Jehovah,  71.  When  relationship 
is  established,  the  knowledge  of  the  future  deepens  communion,  72. 
G^  enlightens  not  a  doubting  heart  or  an  inquisitive  mind,  but  one 
who  bows  down  in  heartfelt  homage  confiding  in  Gk)d,  73.  Abraham  was 
now  in  a  condition  to  enjoy  confidence  without  sinking  into  earthly- 
mindedness,  74.  Without  anxiety  about  himself,  his  whole  heart  could 
therefore  go  out  not  only  towards  the  God  who  loved  him  and  whom 
he  loved,  but  also  for  his  nephew,  righteous  Lot,  75.  The  spirit  of 
intercession  for  others  is  the  result  of  listening  to  the  Lord,  76.  The 
Moabite  and  Ammonite,  77.  Abimelech — his  keenly-cutting  condeni- 
nation  of  Abraham,  78.  Hagar  and  Ishmael ;  Isaac  as  the  type  of 
the  Lamb  of  God,  80.  "  Seed,"  one  and  many,  the  application  to 
Jewish  or  Gentile  blessing,  81.  How  treated  in  the  epistle  to  the 
Gkilatians,  82.  Sarah's  death ;  its  antitype  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
83.  The  call  of  Rebecca  altogether  a  fresh  element  in  the  history,  84. 
Christ  has  no  associations  with  earth  while  the  church  is  being  called 
out,  85 ;  but  fellowship  with  His  mind  hallows  the  most  ordinary 
employment  here  below,  86.  Eliezer  the  type  of  the  Spirit  sent  from 
the  Father  on  an  errand  of  love  for  the  church,  87.  God  has  let  our 
hearts  into  His  own  secrets  in  what  He  is  doing  for  Christ,  88.  Value 
of  a  comprehensive  view  of  scripture,  80. 

e 


Ixvi  CONTENTS. 

in. 

Genesis  xxv.-l.  The  sovereignty  of  God  shewn  forth  in  the  hirths 
of  Ishmael  and  Isaac,  but  still  more  so  in  those  of  Jacob  and  Esau,  90. 
The  after  history  illustrates  the  two  men,  but  Grod  chose  before  their 
history  began,  91.  Gk>d  did  not  express  His  hatred  of  Esau  at  the 
same  time  as  He  expressed  His  choice,  92.  Isaac's  history  resumed, 
92,  but  specially  as  the  type  of  tiie  risen  Christ,  93.  Jacob  and  Re- 
becca represent  believers  in  whom  flesh  is  but  little  judged,  but  who 
hold  fast  to  the  word.  Isaac  drifts  through  yielding  to  nature,  94. 
Jacob  the  standing  type  of  the  people  of  Gk>d  not  walking  in  com- 
munion, 95.  There  is  always  alarm  when  a  person  is  under  the 
government  of  God  without  being "  founded  on  His  grace,  96.  Ex- 
periences admirable  in  their  place,  but  they  entirely  melt  away  in  the 
presence  of  Grod,  97.  They  may  be  needed  and  wholesome,  but  only 
as  a  part  of  the  road  while  on  our  way  to  Him,  98.  Jacob's  departure 
from  Laban  manifested  no  confidence  in  God,  nor  a  pure  conscience 
divested  of  fear,  99.  No  providential  intervention  can  ever  set  the 
heart  or  conscience  right  with  God,  100.  Gk)d  puts  down  His  servant's 
dependence  on  his  own  strength,  101.  He  was  the  recipient  of  mercy, 
but  it  was  mercy  in  the  dark,  where  there  could  be  no  communion,  102. 
There  cannot  be  the  full  spirit  of  worship  till  we  delight  in  Grod  for 
what  He  is  in  Himself,  103.  We  easily  forget  what  our  heart  does 
not  judge  before  God ;  and  thus  Jacob  could  have  strange  gods  in  his 
femily  without  being  seriously  impressed  by  it,  104.  When  Jacob  is 
alive  to  his  responsibilities  toward  God,  the  terror  of  God  is  upon  the 
cities  around,  105,  and  Grod  can  reveal  His  name,  once  shrouded  in 
secresy,  106,  and  moreover  talk  with  him,  107.  The  history  of  Joseph 
— a  sufferer  to  be  exalted  in  due  time,  108.  The  communication  of 
the  mind  of  God  to  his  brethren  only  brings  out  their  ill-will  and 
finally  their  hatred,  109.  An  interruption  in  the  history — its  object^ 
110.  With  Potiphar,  110.  In  prison,  before  Pharaoh,  111.  Set  over 
the  land  of  Egypt,  112.  Type  of  Christ  cast  out  by  Israel,  sold  by  the 
Gentiles,  and  exalted  in  a  new  place  and  glory,  113.  His  brethren 
known  secretly,  and  the  plan  for  their  restoration  unfolded,  114. 
Heart-searchings,  115.  Love-pleadings,  116.  Unveilings,  117.  Em- 
bracings,  US.  Note  on  genealogies,  119.  Jacob  in  Pharaoh's  pre- 
sence, 120.  His  death-bed,  120.  His  vision  at  that  moment  clearer 
than  Joseph's  clear  vision,  121.  The  prophetic  history  of  the  tribes, 
122.  Note  on  infidel  notions  of  prophecy,  123.  Prophetic  histoiy  of 
the  tribes  continued,  124,  125.  The  death  of  Joseph.  Conclusion,  126. 


CONTENTS.  Ixvii 

lY. 
ExoDUB  i.-xym.  The  grand  idea  that  pervades  Exodua  is  redemp- 
tion, 127.  Also  the  consequences  of  redemption,  but  further  the 
result  when  man,  insensible  to  the  grace  that  has  wrought  redemption, 
turns  back  on  himself  and  his  own  resources,  128.  Note  on  Israel's 
increase  of  population  in  Egypt,  128.  Sketch  of  the  people  in  Egypt. 
The  edict  for  their  destruction,  and  the  birth  of  their  deliverer,  129. 
Moses,  his  perception  of  Grod*s  design  by  fEiith,  though  not  exempt 
from  nature,  130.  It  is  necessary  in  reading  scripture  to  disting^uish 
between  the  stf^tement  of  a  fact  and  any  sanction  given  to  that  fact, 
131.  Gk>d  states  things  as  they  are,  and  does  not  necessarily  comment 
upon  them,  132.  The  burning  bush,  133.  God  reminds  us  of  the  past 
while  bringing  in  present  blessing,  but  we  must  seek  to  distinguish 
things  that  differ,  134.  God  presents  Himself  as  the  ivnchu:iging  One 
that  could  and  would  fulfil  His  word  according  to  the  relation  in  which 
He  and  His  people  stood,  135.  There  is  nothing  that  can  hinder  a 
soul  from  being  an  object  of  the  most  real  love  to  God  except  the 
persistent  rejection  of  Himself,  136.  I  am  that  I  am,  137.  '*  Jehovah 
the  Qod  of  your  fathers,''  138.  How  like  the  grace  of  Jesus,  who, 
though  He  was  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  yet  delights  to  call  Himself 
*'  Son  of  man,*'  139.  Beauteous  analogy  and  harmony  between  the 
Old  and  New  Testaments,  140.  Spoiling  the  Egyptians,  141.  Mira- 
culous signs,  142.  The  rod,  the  leprosy,  the  river,  143.  Scripture 
savours  of  Grod's  infinity,  144.  Moses*  objections,  145.  Household 
hindrances,  146.  Public  work  can  only  rightly  follow  when  all  is  well 
at  home,  147.  "My  name  Jehovah,'*  148.  The  word  known  pre- 
viously, V^t  not  as  a  name  of  relationship,  149.  Aaron  and  Moses, 
Moses  and  Aaron,  150.  Always  avoid  onesidedncss :  nothing  more 
dangerous  in  the  things  of  God,  151.  God  hardens  because  man  refuses 
His  word,  152.  The  ten  plagues,  153.  Blood,  frogs,  154,  flies,  lice,  cattle- 
pestilence,  boils,  hail  with  thunder  and  fire,  155.  Locusts,  darkness, 
death  of  the  first-bom,  156.  Otod  was  there  as  Judge  dealing  with 
man's  sin^  157.  Infidel  objections,  158.  The  passover  is  the  type  of 
Christ  sacrificed  for  us,  but  communion  scarce  known,  159.  It  was 
the  judgment  of  sin  before  Grod,  160,  and  was  in  connexion  with 
imleavened  bread — that  is,  unfeigned  purity  of  heart  by  faith,  161. 
Peace  is  impossible,  if  we  have  only  that  which  answers  to  the  pass- 
over,  162.  Salvation  always  means  a  great  deal  more  than  that  sins 
tie  blotted  out  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  163.  Salvation  as  a  present 
status  is  i>art  of  the  current  coin  of  Christianity,  164.  Salvation  is  the 
known  destruction  of  the  foe,  165.    Redemption  means  not  only  that 

e  2 


Ixviii  CONTENTS. 

a  price  has  been  paid  for  our  purchase,  but  that  Grod  has  broken  the 
power  of  the  adversary,  ransoming  and  freeing  us  through  Christ, 
166.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  universal  redemption,  but  we  must 
confess  the  truth  of  universal  purchase,  167.  Those  are  found  in  2  Peter 
ii.  who  deny  the  sovereign  Lord  that  bought  them,  168.  Holiness  not 
spoken  of  in  Genesis,  168.  It  comes  in  after  redemption;  and  not  till 
then  does  God  speak  of  a  habitation  prepared  for  Him,  169.  In 
Christianity  this  has  a  most  blessed  antitype,  170.  Lack  of  water,  171 . 
"We  have  to  make  death  and  resurrection  good  in  practice,  172.  The 
manna  and  the  sabbath  types  of  the  food  and  rest  of  God,  173.  Infidel 
objections,  173.  The  omer  of  manna  laid  up  before  Jehotah — Christ 
in  His  humiliation  never  to  be  forgotten  by  our  hearts,  174.  The 
smitten  rock,  176.  Infidel  objections,  175.  Amalek,  176.  Jethro 
eating  bread  with  the  elders  of  Israel,  a  type  of  the  Gentile  in  singular 
prominence,  177.  None  but  Grod  could  have  drawn  the  picture.  Con- 
clusion, 178. 

V. 
Exodus  xix.-xl.  Up  to  this  point  all  has  been  grace.  All  changes 
now,  179.  Man,  insensible  to  grace,  has  to  be  put  thoroughly  to  the 
test,  180.  He  loves  sin  so  well  that  God  has  to  interdict  it,  181.  The 
law  is  a  test  morally  and  individually,  182.  The  law  is  not  in  force 
for  a  righteous  man,  183.  The  type  of  the  servant,  184.  Christ  in 
His  love  has  become  a  servant  for  ever,  186.  The  general  institutions 
of  the  law,  186.  There  will  be  greater  distance  between  Christ  and 
His  earthly  people  in  the  millennium  than  now  exists  between  Him 
and  us,  187.   We  are  introduced  into  the  family  circle  of  the  heavens, 

188.  The  children  of  Israel  stood  on  the  ground  of  man  in  the  flesh, 

189.  Law  is  essentially  incapable  of  helping,  190.  Responsibility, 
what  it  is,  191.  The  responsibility  of  the  Christian  is  according  to 
the  place  in  which  grace  has  set  us,  192.  Sprinkling  of  blood — what 
it  means,  193.  Sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  194,  which  takes  place  at  the 
moment  of  conversion,  196,  but  before  justification,  196.  Justification 
always  sure,  not  immediate,  on  conversion,  196.  Go  in  peace,  197. 
The  figures  in  the  tabernacle — the  ark,  197.  These  shadows  may  be 
divided  into  two  classes,  198.  The  mercy- seat,  the  table,  199.  The 
candlestick,  the  tent  coverings,  200.  The  veil  and  screen,  the  brazen 
altar,  201.  Priesthood  and  its  objects,  202.  Why  the  consecration  of 
Aaron  and  his  sons  interrupts  the  description  of  the  sanctuary  and  its 
vessels,  203.  The  breastplate,  204.  The  bells,  and  golden  frontlet,  206. 
Aaron  and  his  sons  clothed  and  girded  for  priestly  work,  206.     The 

incense  altar  and  brazen  laver,  207.  The  holy  anointing  oil  and  sweet 


CONTENTS.  Ixix 

perfume,  208.  The  sabbath-day  and  its  intimate  connexion  with  the 
whole  of  the  divine  economy,  209.  The  golden  calf,  210.  How  divine 
love  acts  when  God's  honour  is  in  question,  21 1.  The  consequences  of 
pitching  the  tabernacle  without  the  camp — greater  nearness  between 
Jehovah  and  His  servant,  and  larger  blessing  to  the  people  than 
before,  212.  The  faultiness  of  the  people  urged  as  a  reason  why  Grod 
should  go  with  them,  213.  Its  application  to  the  church  now,  213. 
Moses  pleading  for  the  people  on  the  groimd  of  God's  favour  to  him- 
self, 214.  The  proclamation  of  God's  goodness  must  not  be  mistaken 
for  the  gospel,  216.  Christians  of  to-day  are  continually  mistaking 
it,  216.  What  made  Moses'  face  shine,  217.  Our  place  is  represented 
by  Moses  when  he  put  off  his  vail  and  stood  face  to  face  with  the  glory 
of  Gk)d  Himself,  218.  The  zeal  of  the  congregation  for  the  construc- 
tion and  service  of  the  sanctuary,  219.  God  calls  and  gives  requisite 
g^ifts  to  His  workmen,  220.  Silver — ^its  typical  meaning,  221.  The 
cloud,  the  token  of  Jehovah's  presence,  ever  before  the  eyes  of  all 
Israel,  222. 

VI. 

L.EVITICU8  i.-xv.  Leviticus  is  the  revelation  in  type  of  what  God 
sees  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  223.  The  opening  type  presents  a 
wonderful  analysis  of  His  work  and  sacrifice,  224.  The  burnt-offer- 
ing, 225.  Its  answer  in  John  x.,  226.  There  was  no  question  of 
compulsion  in  the  burnt-offering,  227.  Not  so  in  the  sin-offering ;  it 
must  be  brought,  and  was  clearly  defined,  228.  The  imposition  of  the 
hand  contrasted  in  the  burnt-  and  sin-offerings,  229.  The  meat-offer- 
ing, 230,  gives  the  idea,  not  of  death,  but  of  life  consecrated  to  God, 
231.  "We  are  entitled  to  delight  in  what  Jesus  was  here  below,  232. 
The  second  aspect  of  the  meat-offering,  233.  God  has  put  His  stamp 
of  "most  holy"  on  that  which  was  peculiarly  liable  to  suffer  in  the 
thoughts  of  men  about  Christ,  234.  Honey,  235.  First-fruits.  The 
peace-offering,  i236.  Its  real  idea  is  a  feast  or  commimion  sacrifice, 
237.  Why  such  prominence  is  given  to  the  offering  of  the  fat,  238. 
The  sin-  and  trespass-offerings,  239.  The  sin  of  the  congregation — 
the  ruler — the  private  person,  240.  The  gravity  of  sin  depends  upon 
the  position  of  him  who  sins,  241 ;  and  the  blood  was  put  upon  the 
brazen  or  the  golden  altar  according  to  the  position  of  the  offender, 
242.  Infidel  objections,  243,  244,  245.  The  handful  of  fine  flour,  246. 
The  laws  of  the  various  offerings,  247.  Why  the  law  of  the  thank-  or 
peace-offering  stands  last,  248.  Its  two  chief  forms,  249.  The  con- 
secration of  the  priests,  250.    Aaron  washed  could  be  but  a  feeble 


Ixx  CONTENTS. 

type  of  Jesus  in  His  own  essential  purity,  251.  In  the  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  as  here,  the  points  of  analogy,  however  strong,  always  fall 
short  of  the  true  glory  of  Christ,  262.  Christ  now  acts  simply  as 
priest,  253.  A  human  religion  instinctively  makes  excuses  for  its 
officials,  254.  God  instantly  and  with  solenm  severity  resents  any 
liberty  taken  with  His  order,  265.  Diflference  between  clean  and  un- 
clean, 256.  What  is  meant  therein,  257.  Every  child  of  Adam  un- 
clean by  nature,  268.  Leprosy,  259.  The  divine  diagnosis,  260. 
The  cleansing  of  the  leper,  261.  Leprosy  in  the  house,  262.  Mercy 
rejoices  against  judgment,  263. 

VII. 

Leviticus  xvi.-xxvii.  The  great  day  of  atonement,  264.  The 
forms  in  which  Grod  gave  the  intimations  of  the  atonement  have  the 
deepest  possible  interest  for  our  souls,  265.  The  mode  of  Aaron* s 
entrance  to  the  sanctuary,  266.  The  single  and  double  offering,  267. 
Why  we  all  more  or  less  tend  towards  Jewish  ideas,  268.  What  we 
are  to  God  contrasted  with  what  God  is  to  us,  269.  The  depth  and 
simplicity  of  what  God  represented  by  the  death  of  the  bullock  looked 
for  in  vain  in  the  more  complicated  type  of  the  two  goats,  270. 
When  we  come  to  the  reality  of  atonement  by  the  Lord  Jesus  aD.  was 
contained  in  His  one  and  only  sacrifice,  271.  W*  have  to  do  witii  the 
work  of  Christ  as  measured  by  God  Himself  in  the  sanctuary,  272. 
Our  portion  is  where  Christ  is.  It  is  there  that  we  must  in  spirit 
follow  Him,  273.  We  know  that  His  standing  in  the  presence  of 
God  is  the  best  of  all  evidence  to  prove  how  completely  our  sins  are 
^one,  274.  We  follow  the  Lord  into  the  antitypical  sanctuary ;  Israel 
wiU  learn  the  blessed  truth  to  which  they  are  now  so  blind  when  He 
comes  out,  275.  Whatever  the  blessedness  of  the  work  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  in  view  of  God  and  heaven,  we  deprive  ourselves  of  much  if  we 
separate  it  from  our  work-a-day  life  and  common-place  duties,  276. 
It  is  our  joy  and  privilege  to  share  all  with  Him,  277.  How  startling 
it  must  have  been  to  a  Jew  to  hear,  "Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  and 
drink  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  Man,  ye  have  no  life  in  you,"  278. 
God  does  not  absolve  from  that  which  offends  His  natural  order,  279. 
EighteousnesB  must  be  and  is  according  to  the  relationship  in  which 
one  stands,  280.  Things  lawful  in  an  ordinary  Israelite  excluded  firom 
a  priest,  281.  He  who  enjoys  nearness  to  God  must  have  his  conduct 
in  every  particular  affected  and  governed  by  that  master  privilege, 
282.  The  feasts  of  Jehovah,  283.  In  a  certain  sense  the  sabbath  is 
one  of  these  feasta,  but  in  another  it  may  be  viewed  apart,  284.   How 


CONTENTS.  Ixxi 

a  day  is  reckoned  according  to  Jewish  order — its  importance,  285. 
The  wave  sheaf,  286.  Pentecost,  287.  What  is  true  of  Christ  is  true 
of  those  that  are  Christ's :  only  in  the  latter  there  is  leaven,  288. 
Harvest-gleaning,  289.  The  feast  of  trumpets,  290.  The  sense  of 
grace  in  redemption  which  puts  away  our  sins  is  the  only  trustworthy 
means  of  making  our  sins  really  felt,  291.  The  soul  that  presumes  to 
rest  on  grace  without  self-condemnation  because  of  its  sins  before 
Ood  is  trifling  with  Him,  292.  Eesurrection  points  to  heaven,  and 
can  never  satisfy  itself  except  in  heavenly  places,  293.  The  feast  of 
tabernacles,  293.  Oil  for  the  light  and  the  bread  of  memorial,  294. 
The  name  blasphemed,  295.  The  sabbatical  year  and  jubilee,  296. 
Whatever  trials  might  alienate  the  land  from  His  tenants,  the  jubilee 
rectifies  all,  297.  To  the  Christian  everything  is  measured  by  the 
coming  of  the  Lord,  298.  We  shall  be  manifested  in  glory  along 
with  Him,  299.  The  compassion  of  God  for  all  possible  vicissitudes 
of  Israel  in  distress,  300.  "I  will,"  He  says,  "remember  the  land,'* 
301.    Moses  a  type  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  Messiah.    Conclusion,  301. 

VIII. 

NuMBBBs  i.-ix.  The  specific  object  of  Numbers  is  to  set  out  the 
journeying  of  Israel  through  the  wilderness,  and  this  typically  as 
usual  in  Scripture,  303.  The  census,  304.  The  exclusion  of  the 
tribe  of  Levi,  305.  The  object  was  to  stamp  on  service  an  unearthly 
character,  306.  The  arrangement  of  the  camp,  307.  The  Levite 
service,  308.  The  Christian,  who  in  one  point  of  view  is  of  Israel  and 
in  another  a  Levite,  is  no  less  a  priest,  309.  Gospel  service  not  con- 
templated, 310.  Ministry  deprived  of  its  relation  to  Christ  is  stripped 
of  its  proper  dignity  and  ceases  to  subserve  His  glory,  311.  The 
Levites  taken  instead  of  the  firstborn,  312.  Each  servant  should 
know  his  work  and  stick  to  it,  313.  Every  saint  has  a  work  en- 
trusted to  him  that  no  one  else  can  do  as  well,  314.  Nothing  is  so 
happy  as  tiie  simple  carrying  out  of  the  will  of  God,  315.  Gershon, 
Kohath,  Merari,  316.  The  setting  forth  of  Christ  Godward  and  man- 
ward,  317.  Ministry  in  prayer  and  watchful  love,  318.  When  those 
who  have  better  knowledge  trip,  they  are  apt  to  fall  lower  with  less 
shame  than  those  who  know  less  with  more  conscience,  319.  The 
sovereignty  of  God  in  service  must  be  felt,  learned,  applied,  and 
walked  in,  320.  It  is  not  the  service  that  makes  the  greatest  show 
among  men  that  has  the  most  honourable  function  in  the  sigh't  of  God, 
321.  The  coverings  of  the  ark,  322.  Their  character,  323f.  The 
coverings  of  the  candlestick  and  table,  324.    Their  character,  32£>. 


Ixxii  CONTENTS. 

The  coverings  of  the  golden  and  brazen  altars,  326.  Brass  and  gold, 
327.  Erroneous  ideas  respecting  the  holy  and  most  holy  places,  328. 
Defilement  or  suspected  defilement,  329.  Confession — the  waters  of 
jealousy,  330.  A  type  of  Israel  or  of  Christendom,  331.  How  to 
meet  suspicions,  332.  The  Nazarite,  333.  Christ's  separation  from 
nature  was  the  more  remarkable  as  His  appreciation  of  everything  in 
it  was  most  exquisite,  334.  Christ  abode  separate  unto  God  always, 
335.  Nazariteship  only  for  a  time,  336.  It  comes  in  by  the  way  on 
earth,  337.  G-ifts  of  love,  free-will,  and  hearty  devotedness,  338. 
The  least  of  the  Levites  had  the  most  oxen  and  most  chariots,  339. 
Provision  while  passing  through  the  wilderness  for  impurity  that 
might  hinder  the  passover,  340.  The  call  to  unlimited  dependence  on 
the  Lord's  guidance,  341.  The  two  trumpets  of  silver,  342.  Assem- 
blage, march,  and  alarm,  343. 

IX. 

Numbers  x.-xxi.  The  history  of  the  journey  through  the  wilder- 
ness, 344.  A  remarkable  fact  deserving  of  attention,  345.  How  God 
could  be  in  the  midst  of  and  yet  go  before  His  people,  346.  Turning 
back  in  heart  to  Egypt,  347.  The  seventy  elders  upon  whom  came 
the  Spirit,  348.  When  a  descent  or  fall  comes,  it  is  invariably  that 
which  is  most  carnal  that  carries  the  day,  349.  Miriam  and  Aaron 
speak  against  Moses,  350.  Their  punishments,  351.  The  spies,  352. 
The  children  of  Anak,  353.  The  evil  report,  354.  We  owe  it  to  our 
God  to  give  a  good  report  of  the  land  that  lies  before  us,  355.  How 
blessed  to  hear  a  man  feeling  for  Jehovah's  name  and  glory,  356. 
Jehovah  deals  in  mercy  but  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty,  357. 
Caleb  and  Joshua  the  two  men  who  vindicated  God  and  held  fast  to 
His  word,  358.  Unbelief  along  the  way  cannot  turn  aside  God*s 
love,  359.  But  God  in  no  way  binds  Himself  not  to  judge  whatever 
is  contrary  to  His  glory  by  the  way,  360.  The  riband  of  blue,  361. 
A  conspiracy,  362.  There  is  nothing  that  produces  such  dissatis^EU}- 
tion  as  the  heart's  not  estimating  aright  what  God  has  given  us,  363. 
There  never  was  a  time  when  the  pretensions  of  Korah  were  put 
forth  more  distinctly  than  at  the  present  moment,  364.  The  judg- 
ment of  the  adversaries,  365.  The  plague  upon  the  people  who 
sympathised  with  them,  366.  Aaron's  rod  which  budded,  367.  It  is 
of  the  utmost  importance  that  external  service  should  never  be 
severed  from  the  priesthood  that  enters  within,  368.  The  red  heifer, 
369.  A  partial  reception  of  truth  promotes  sectarianism,  370.  The  red 
heifer  was  the  provision  for  daily  defilement,  371 ;  for  restoring  com- 


CONTENTS.  Ixxiii 

munion  when  broken,  372.  Purification  on  the  third  day,  373,  to 
give  time  for  the  realization  of  the  offence,  374.  Gk)d  woiild  habitu- 
ate us  to  the  nicest  discernment  and  most  thorough  self -judgment, 
375.  No  water,  376.  Moses  brings  out  the  rod  according  to  Jehovah's 
word,  but  does  not  use  it  according  to  Him,  377.  It  became  a  sin 
unto  death,  378.  Israel  in  Edom,  379.  A  long  stay  of  thirty-seven  years 
that  the  old  generation  might  die  off,  380.  The  serpent  of  brass,  381. 
"Why  a  serpent,  382.  The  triumphant  progress  of  the  people,  383. 
Kecords  even  in  the  songs  of  their  adversaries,  384. 

X. 

Numbers  xxii.-xxxvi.  The  power  of  Satan,  385.  Would  GU)d 
maintain  a  people  guilty  of  the  infraction  of  His  own  law  ?  386. 
Neither  man  nor  devil  has  power  over  the  spirits  of  the  righteous  or 
the  unrighteous,  387.  Demons  constantly  personate  whom  they 
please,  388.  God  turns  the  very  effort  of  Satan  against  himself,  389. 
Balaam  left  to  his  own  devices,  390.  Rebuked  by  the  ass,  391.  Utters 
his  prophecy  from  Jehovah,  392.  Another  message,  393.  Distinct 
justification  set  forth,  394.  **  Jehovah  his  Elohim  is  with  him,"  396. 
A  further  word  from  Jehovah,  396.  A  vision  for  open  eyes,  397. 
Balaam  had  no  sympathy  with  the  blessing  he  pronounced,  but  was 
entirely  under  the  power  of  God,  398.  A  further  prophecy,  399. 
Thus  the  intended  curse  was  turned  into  the  most  magnificent  blessing, 
400.  If  Balaam  could  not  turn  God  from  Israel,  he  was  more  success- 
ful in  turning  Israel  from  God,  401.  The  children  of  Korah  died 
not,  402.  A  key  furnished  to  the  second  book  of  Psalms,  403.  The 
daughters  of  Zelophehad,  404.  Joshua  a  type  of  Christ  acting  in  the 
power  of  the  Spirit,  405.  The  daily  lambs,  406.  "  The  beginning  of 
your  months,"  407.  The  feasts  and  their  distinctive  character,  408- 
411.  Vows,  412,  413.  Israel  avenged  of  the  Midianites,  414,  by  a 
small  chosen  company,  415.  Choosing  the  wrong  side  of  Jordan,  416. 
Levitical  cities,  417.  An  important  type  of  the  Jews'  place  on  earth, 
418.  The  death  of  "the  high  priest  of  that  day"  tj-pifies  the  close 
of  that  character  of  priesthood  in  which  our  Lord  now  acts,  419. 
Numbers  abounds  from  first  to  last  with  the  reiterated,  continual,  and 
perfect  proof  of  God's  loving  care  for  His  people  on  the  earth,  420. 

XI. 

Dbutbkonomy  i.~xvi.  Exodus,  Leviticus,  and  Numbers  present  an 
abstract  typical  system,  421.  God  was  setting  forth  by  them  the 
shadows  of  good  things  to  come,  422.    Deuteronomy  an  eminently 


Ixxiv  CONTENTS. 

practical  book,  423.  It  supposes  too  the  failure  of  the  people,  424. 
The  Lord  in  quoting  Deuteronomy  gives  evidence  that  He  had  before 
His  eyes  the  condition  of  the  people  of  Gknl,  whatever  might  be  their 
insensibility,  426.  Israel  had  totally  failed,  426.  Deuteronomy  in 
general  has  been  but  little  understood  even  by  the  children  of  Gk>d, 
427.  The  inner  motives  for  the  sending  of  the  spies,  428.  We  are 
let  into  secret  springs — what  wrought  in  the  people  and  hindered  their 
blessing,  429.  "  Because  Jehovah  hated  us  He  hath  brought  us  forth 
out  of  Egypt,"  430  ;  such  was  the  result  of  sending  the  spies,  431. 
Obedience  the  only  possible  way  of  maintaining  relationship  with 
God,  432.  Obedience  is  the  real  spring  of  blessing,  as  disobedience 
is  the  sure  pathway  of  ruin,  433.  This  is  the  leading  feature  of 
Deuteronomy,  434.  There  is  hardly  anything  that  more  hardens  the 
heart  than  the  practice  of  confessing  sin  without  feeling  it,  436. 
Obedience  depends  on  doing  what  Gtod  commands  us  to  do  notp,  436. 
Every  step  in  really  obeying  God  puts  us  morally  to  the  test  and  is 
more  or  less  attended  with  suffering,  437.  Jehovah  did  not  give 
the  Israelites  license  to  do  as  they  liked,  438.  A  Christian  is  the  last 
person  who  ought  to  exercise  a  choice  in  self-will,  439.  The  first 
chapter  takes  cognizance  of  themselves ;  the  second  puts  them  to  the 
test  in  the  presence  of  other  people,  440.  They  are  tried  after  this 
by  another  case  of  forbearance,  441.  Then  they  are  called  to  action, 
442.  What  a  difference  between  God's  conduct  of  His  people  and 
man's  corruption  of  it !  443.  God  enforced  a  thorough  discipline  on 
His  people  in  all  their  ways,  but  no  compulsion  was  used  to  the  people 
outside,  444.  How  Israel  were  to  deal  with  Sihon  king  of  the 
Amorites,  446.  The  law  set  before  them  in  its  application  to  them- 
selves, 446.  Their  privilege  in  having  Jehovah  in  their  midst,  447. 
Guarded  against  the  misuse  of  outward  form,  448,  and  from  practical 
^iconsistency  with  their  relationship,  449.    The  law  of  the  sabbath, 

460.  The  sabbath  law  rests  entirely  on  the  word  of  God  Himself, 

461,  and  differs  essentially  from  a  moral  law,  462.  The  seventh  day, 
not  merely  a  seventh  day,  463.  Kedemption  even  in  type  is  a  stronger 
motive  to  obedience  than  creation  itself,  464.  Whatever  we  are 
called  out  for  is  that  which  Satan  attempts  to  destroy,  466.  The 
point  for  the  Jew  was  to  testify  of  the  one  true  GU>d,  466  ;  that  for 
the  Christian  is  the  Father  displayed  by  the  Son  and  made  known  by 
the  Spirit,  466.  But  people  retreat  from  practical  facts  into  some  dim 
religious  light  of  their  own,  467.  The  true  Israelite  does  not  require 
to  put  God  to  the  test,  468.  "  The  priests  the  Levites,"  469.  Man 
does  not  live  by  bread  only,  460.    The  provision  of  Jehovah's  good- 


CONTENTS.  IXXV 

ness,  461.  Why  events  long  severed  in  time  are  introduced  seem- 
ingly together,  462.  The  close  of  the  first  part  of  Deuteronomy,  463. 
The  will  of  man  must  not  interfere  with  what  GKxi  has  chosen,  464. 
The  greater  the  blessing  of  God,  the  more  does  He  insist  on  thorough 
obedience,  465.  Israel  must  not  slight  Gknl's  claim  even  in  common 
things,  466,  and  accustom  themselves  to  things  uncomely,  467.  The 
three  obligatory  feasts,  468.  The  first  feast  for  all  males  of  Israel, 
469.    The  second  feast,  470.    The  third  feast,  471.    Conclusion,  472. 

XII. 

Deuteronomy  xvi.-xxxiv.  A  new  division — judicial  matters,  473. 
The  interweaving  of  the  religious  element  with  it  not  an  objection  but 
the  contrary,  474.  Two  or  three  witnesses,  475.  Matters  too  hard, 
476,  to  whom  to  be  brought,  477,  and  why,  478.  The  inheritance  of 
the  priests  the  Levites,  479.  The  guard  against  prying  into  the  will 
of  Grod  that  was  not  revealed,  480.  Beware  of  giving  up  your  wiU  to 
any  other  than  the  Lord  Jesus,  481.  The  enemy  is  at  work  behind  what 
is  apparent  on  the  surface,  482.  The  true  prophet  Christ  Himself,  483. 
The  three  cities  of  refuge,  484.  The  false  witness,  485.  The  law  of 
batUes,  486.  Gbd's  way  of  making  war  is  by  first  proposing  terms  of 
peace,  487.  What  the  Canaanites  typify,  488.  A  slain  man  found  in 
a  field,  and  the  murderer  unknown — what  was  to  be  done  '^  489.  Its 
application  to  Christ,  490.  The  beloved  and  the  hated  wife,  491.  The 
stubborn  and  rebellious  son,  492.  The  man  hanged  upon  a  tree,  493. 
Differences  in  our  judgments  and  thoughts  of  others  can  exist  without 
partiality,  494.  The  church  of  God  must  not  be  looked  at  as  though 
it  were  the  church  of  saints  merely,  495.  Jehovah  does  not  forget  in 
government  what  He  does  forget  when  it  is  a  question  of  grace,  496. 
It  is  not  a  question  of  how  far  we  can  appreciate  the  wisdom  of  Gk)d : 
our  business  is  to  believe,  and  obey  Him,  497.  The  law  of  divorce,  498. 
A  standing  witness  against  the  folly  of  confoimding  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments  is  founded  on  the  fact  that  each  is  in  a  different  language, 
499.  Amalek,  500.  Beware  of  what  is  pleasant  and  kindly  in  itself, 
but  without  detestation  of  that  which  dishonours  God,  501.  Israel 
entering  their  land,  502.  The  offering  of  the  fruits  of  the  land,  503 
Tithes,  504.  Prayer  is  the  place  of  dependence,  50r5.  Particularly 
distinguish  chapter  xxvii.  from  xxviii.,  506.  Mount  Ebal  and  Mount 
Gerizim,  507.  Curses  are  pronounced,  and  not  a  word  about  blessings, 
508.  The  character  of  blessing  in  chapter  xxviii.  merely  national,  509. 
in  chapter  xxvii.  it  is  the  person  cursed,  but  there  are  no  corresponding 
blessings,  510.    The  covenant  in  Moab  contrasted  with  the  covenant 


Ixxvi  CONTENTS. 

in  Horeb,  511 .  What  the  secret  things  of  Gkxl  refer  to,  512.  Romans  x. 
513.  "the  close  of  Moses*  ministry,  514.  The  song,  515.  Election  for 
Israel  in  time.  Christian  election  eternal,  516.  '*  The  song"  with  notes 
517,  518, 519.  Analysis  of  "  the  blessing  "  of  Moses,  and  answers  to  in- 
fidel objections,  520,  521,  522.  Moses  on  Pisgah,  523,  though  chastened 
for  his  fault,  yet  looking  down  on  the  land  from  beside  Jehovah.  Faith 
has  always  the  best  portion.     Conclusion,  524. 


LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


I. 

GENESIS. 

Chaps.  L-ad. 

There  is  one  characteristic  of  divine  revelation  to 
which  attention  may  be  profitably  called  as  a  starting 
point.  We  have  to  do  with  facts.  The  Bible  alone  is 
a  revelation  of  facts,  and,  we  can  add  (not  from  the 
Old  Testament,  but  from  the  New),  of  a  person.  This 
is  of  immense  importance.  In  all  pretended  revelations 
it  is  not  so.  They  give  you  notions — ideas ;  they  can 
furnish  nothing  better,  and  very  often  nothing  worse. 
But  they  cannot  produce  facts,  for  they  have  none. 
They  may  indulge  in  speculations  of  the  mind,  or  visions 
of  the  imagination — a  substitute  for  what  is  real,  and 
a  cheat  of  the  enemy.  God,  and  God  alone,  can  com- 
municate the  truth.  Thus  it  is  that  whether  it  be  the 
Old  Testament  or  New,  one  half  (speaking  now  in  a 
general' way)  consists  of  history.  Undoubtedly  there 
is  teaching  of  the  Spirit  of  God  founded  on  the  facts 
of  revelation.  In  the  New  Testament  these  unfoldings 
have  the  profoundest  character,  but  everywhere  they 
are  divine ;  for  there  is  no  diiBFerence,  whether  it  be 

B 


2  LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

the  Old  or  the  New,  in  the  absolutely  divine  character 
of  the  written  word.  But  still  it  is  well  to  take  note 
that  we  have  thus  a  grand  basis  of  things  as  they 
really  are — a  divine  communication  to  us  of  facts  of 
the  utmost  moment,  and,  at  the  same  time,  of  the 
deepest  interest  to  the  children  of  God.  In  this  too 
God's  own  glory  is  brought  before  us,  and  so  much  the 
more  because  there  is  not  the  smallest  effort.  The 
simple  statement  of  the  facts  is  that  which  is  worthy 
of  God. 

Take,  for  instance,  the  way  in  which  the  book  of 
Genesis  opens.  If  man  had  been  writing  it,  if  he 
had  attempted  to  give  that  which  pretended  to  be  a 
revelation,  we  could  understand  a  flourish  of  trum- 
pets, pompous  prolegomena,  some  elaborate  means  or 
other  of  setting  forth  who  and  what  God  is, — an 
attempt  by  fancy  to  project  His  image  out  of  man's 
mind,  or  by  subtle  d  priori  reasoning  to  justify  all  that 
might  follow.  The  highest,  the  holiest^  the  only  suit- 
able way,  once  it  is  laid  before  us,  evidently  is  what 
God  Himself  has  employed  in  His  word: — "In  the 
beginning  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth.'* 
Not  only  is  the  method  the  most  worthy,  but  the  truth 
with  which  the  book  opens  is  one  that  nobody  ever  did 
really  discover  before  it  was  revealed.  You  cannot,  as 
a  rule,  anticipate  facts;  you  cannot  discern  the  truth 
beforehand.  You  may  form  opinions ;  but  for  the  truth, 
and  even  for  such  facts  as  the  world's  history  before 
man  had  an  existence  in  it — fa^ts  as  to  which  there  can 
be  no  testimony  from  the  creature  on  the  earth,  we 
find  the  need  of  His  word  who  knew  and  wrought  all 
from  the  beginning.    But  God  does  communicate  in 


GENESIS  I.- XL  8 

such  a  way  as  at  once  meets  the  heart,  and  mind,  and 
conscience.  Man  feels  that  this  is  exactly  what  is 
appropriate  to  God. 

So  here  God  states  the  great  truth  of  creation;  for 
what  is  more  important,  short  of  redemption,  always 
excepting  the  manifestation  of  the  person  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  ?  Creation  and  redemp- 
tion bear  witness  to  His  glory,  instead  of  communicating 
aught  of  His  own  dignity.  But  short  of  Christ's  person 
and  work,  there  is  nothing  more  characteristic  of  God 
than  creation.  And  in  the  manner  in  which  creation 
is  here  [presented  what  unspeakable  grandeur !  all  the 
more  because  of  the  chaste  simplicity  of  the  style  and 
words.  How  suited  to  the  true  God,  who  perfectly 
knew  the  truth  and  would  make  it  known  to  man  ! 

"  In  the  beginning  God  created."  In  the  beginning 
matter  did  not  co-exist  with  God.  I  warn  every  person 
solemnly  against  a  notion  found  in  both  ancient  and 
modem  times,  that  there  was  in  the  beginning  a  quan- 
tity of  what  may  be  called  crude  matter  for  God  to 
work  on.  Another  notion  still  more  general,  and  only 
less  gross,  though  certainly  not  so  serious  in  what  it 
involves,  is  that  (xod  created  matter  in  the  beginning, 
according  to  verse  2,  in  a  state  of  confusion  or  "  chaos," 
as  men  say.  But  this  is  not  the  meaning  of  verses  1 
and  2.  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  it  is 
a  mistaken  interpretation,  however  prevalent.  Nor 
indeed  is  such  dealing  according  to  the  revealed  nature 
of  God.  Where  is  anything  like  it  in  all  the  known 
ways  of  Grod?  That  either  matter  existed  crude  or 
God  created  it  in  disorder  has  not,  I  believe,  the 
smallest  foimdation  in  the  word  of  God.  What  scripture 

B  2 


4  LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

gives  here  or  elsewhere  seems  to  me  altogether  at  vari- 
ance with  such  a  thought.  The  introductory  declarations 
of  Genesis  are  altogether  in  unison  with  the  glory  of 
God  Himself,  and  with  His  character ;  more  than  that, 
they  are  in  perfect  harmony  with  itself.  There  is  no 
statement,  from  beginning  to  end  of  scripture,  as  far  as 

1  am  aware,  which  in  the  smallest  degree  modifies  or 
takes  away  from  the  force  of  the  words  with  which  the 
Bible  opens — "In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven 
and  the  earth." 

Some  have  found  a  difi&culty  (which  I  simply  touch 
on  in  passing)  from  the  conjunction  with  which  verse 

2  conmiences.  They  have  conceived  that,  coupling  the 
second  verse  with  the  first,  it  suggests  the  notion  that 
when  God  created  the  earth  it  was  in  the  state  described 
in  the  second  verse.  Now  not  only  is  it  not  too  strong 
to  deny  that  there  is  the  least  ground  for  such  an 
inference,  but  one  may  go  farther  and  aflftrm  that  the 
simplest  and  surest  means  of  guarding  against  it, 
according  to  the  style  of  the  writer,  and  indeed  pro- 
priety of  language,  was  afforded  by  here  inserting  the 
word  1  ''and!'  In  short,  if  the  word  had  not  been 
here,  it  might  have  been  supposed  that  the  writer  meant 
us  to  conclude  that  the  original  condition  of  the  earth 
was  the  shapeless  mass  of  confusion  which  verse  2  de- 
scribes with  such  terse  and  graphic  brevity.  But,  as  it 
is,  scripture  means  nothing  of  the  sort.  We  have  first 
the  great  announcement*  that  in  the  beginning  Grod 
created  the  heaven  and  the  earth.  There  is  next  the 
associated  fact  of  an  utter  desolation  which  befeU  not 
the  heavens,  but  the  earth.  The  insertion  of  the  sub- 
stantive verb,  as  has  been  remarked,  expresses  no  doubt 


GENESIS  L-XI.  5 

a  condition  past  as  compared  with  what  follows,  but 
pointedly  not  said  to  be  contemporaneous  with  what 
preceded,  as  would  have  been  implied  in  its  omission ; 
but  what  interval  lay  between,  or  why  such  a  desolation 
ensued,  is  not  stated.     For  God  passes  rapidly  over  the 
early  account  and  history  of  the  globe — I  might  almost 
say,  hastening  to  that  condition  of  the  earth  in  which 
it  was  to  be  made  the  habitation  of  mankind ;  whereon 
also  God  was  to  display  His  moral  dealings,  and  finally 
His  own  Son,  with  the  fruitful  consequences  of  that 
stupendous  event,  whether  in  rejection  or  in  redemption. 
Had  the  copulative  not  been  here,  the  first  verse 
might  have  been  regarded  as  a  kind  of  summary  of 
the  chapter.     Its  insertion  forbids  the  thought,  and, 
to  speak  plainly,  convicts  those  who  so  understand  it 
either  of  ignorance,  or  at  the  least  of  inattention.    Not 
only  the  Hebrew  idiom  forbids  it,  but  our  own,  and  no 
doubt  every  other  language.     The  first  verse  is  not  a 
sunmiary.    When  a  compendious  statement  of  what 
follows  is  intended,  the  1  "a/w?"  is  never  put.    This  you 
can,  if  you  will,  verify  in  various  occasions  where  scrip- 
ture furnishes  examples  of  the  summary;  as,  for  in- 
stance, in  the  beginning  of  G^n.  v.,  "  This  is  the  book 
of  the  generations  of  Adam."    There  it  is  plain  that 
the  writer  gives  a  summary.     But  there  is  no  word 
coupling  the  introductory  statement  of  verse  1  with 
what  follows.     "  This  is  the  book  of  the  generations  of 
Adam.     In  the  day  that  God  created  man."    It  is  not 
'*And  in  the  day."    The  copulative  would  render  it 
improper,  and  impossible  to  bear  the  character  of  a 
general  introduction.     For  a  summary  gives  in  a  few 
words  that  which  is  opened  out  afterwai-ds ;  whereas 


6         LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

the  conjunction  "  and"  introduced  in  the  second  verse 
excludes  necessarily  all  notion  of  a  summary  here.  It 
is  another  statement  added  to  what  had  just  preceded, 
and  by  the  Hebrew  idiom  not  connected  with  it  in 
time. 

First  of  all  there  was  the  creation  by  Grod — both 
of  the  heavens  and  of  the  earth.  Then  we  have  the 
further  fact  stated  of  the  state  into  which  the  earth 
was  plunged — ^to  which  it  was  reduced.  Why  this  was, 
how  it  was,  God  has  not  here  explained.  It  was  not 
necessary  nor  wise  to  reveal  it  by  Moses.  K  man  can 
discover  such  facts  by  other  means,  be  it  so.  They  have 
no  small  interest;  but  men  are  apt  to  be  hasty  and 
shortsighted.  I  advise  none  to  embark  too  confidently 
in  the  pursuit  of  such  studies.  Those  who  enter  on 
them  had  better  be  cautious,  and  well  weigh  alleged 
facts,  and  above  all  their  own  conclusions,  or  those  of 
other  men.  But  the  perfectness  of  scripture  is,  I  am 
bold  to  say,  unimpeachable.  The  truth  affirmed  by  Moses 
remains  in  all  its  majesty  and  simplicity  withal. 

In  the  beginning  God  created  everything — the 
heavens  and  the  earth.  Then  the  earth  is  described  as 
void  and  waste,  and  (not  as  succeeding,  but  accompany- 
ing it)  darkness  upon  the  face  of  the  deep,  contem- 
poraneously with  which  the  Spirit  of  God  broods 
upon  the  face  of  the  waters.  All  this  ia  an  added 
account.  The  real  and  only  force  of  the  )  "and**  is 
another  fact ;  not  at  all  as  if  it  implied  that  the  first 
and  second  verses  spoke  of  the  same  time,  any  more 
than  they  decide  the  question  of  the  length  of  the 
interval  The  phraseology  employed  perfectly  agrees 
with  and  confirms  the  analogy  of  revelation,  that  the 


GENESIS  L-XL  7 

first  veise  speaks  of  an  original  condition  which  God 
was  pleased  to  bring  into  being ;  the  second,  of  a  desola- 
tion afterwards  brought  in;  but  how  long  the  fiist  lasted^ 
what  changes  may  have  intervened,  when  or  by  what 
means  the  ruin  came  to  pass,  is  not  the  subject-matter 
of  the  inspired  record,  but  open  to  the  ways  and  means 
of  human  research,  if  indeed  man  has  sufficient  facts 
on  which  to  ground  a  sure  conclusion.  It  is  false  that 
scripture  does  not  leave  room  for  his  investigation. 

We  saw  at  the  close  of  verse  2  the  introduction  of  the 
Spirit  of  (Jod  on  the  scene.  "  The  Spirit  of  Grod  moved 
upon  the  face  of  the  waters."  He  appears  most  con- 
sistently and  in  season,  when  matCs  earth  is  about  to 
be  brought  before  us.  In  the  previous  description, 
which  had  not  to  do  with  man,  there  was  silence  about 
the  Spirit  of  Grod ;  but,  as  the  divine  wisdom  is  shown 
in  Proverbs  viiL  to  rejoice  in  the  habitable  parts  of  the 
earth,  so  the  Spirit  of  (Jod  is  always  brought  before  us 
as  the  immediate  agent  in  the  Deity  whenever  man  is 
to  be  introduced.  Hence,  therefore,  as  closing  all  the 
previous  state  of  things,  where  man  was  not  spoken 
o^  preparing  the  way  for  the  Adamic  earth,  the  Spirit 
of  Gk)d  is  seen  brooding  upon  the  face  of  the  waters. 

Now  comes  the  first  mention  of  evening  and  morning, 
and  of  days.  Let  me  particularly  ask  those  who  have 
not  duly  considered  the  matter  to  weigh  God's  word. 
The  first  and  second  verses  make  allusion  to  these 
well-known  measures  of  time.  They  leave  room  conse- 
quently for  a  state  or  states  of  the  earth  long  before 
either  man  or  time,  as  man  measures  it.  The  days  that 
follow  I  see  no  ground  for  interpreting  save  in  their 


8  LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

simple  and  natural  import  Undoubtedly  "  day"  may 
be  used,  as  it  often  is,  in  a  iigurative  sense.  No  solid 
reason  whatever  appears  why  it  should  be  so  used  here. 
There  is  not  the  slightest  necessity  for  it.  The  strict 
import  of  the  term  is  that  which  to  my  mind  is  most 
suitable  to  the  context ;  the  week  in  which  Grod  made 
the  heaven  and  earth  for  man  seems  alone  appropriate 
in  introducing  the  revelation  of  God.  I  can  imderstand, 
when  all  Is  clear,  a  word  used  figuratively ;  but  nothing 
would  be  so  likely  to  let  elements  of  difficulty  into  the 
subject,  as  at  once  giving  us  in  tropical  language  what 
elsewhere  is  put  in  the  simplest  possible  forms. 

Hence  we  may  see  how  fitting  it  is  that,  as  man  is 
about  to  be  introduced  on  the  earth  for  the  first  time,  as 
the  previous  state  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  his 
being  here  below,  and  indeed  was  altogether  unfit  for 
his  dwelling  on  it,  besides  the  fact  that  he  was  not 
yet  created,  days  should  appear  only  when  it  was  a 
question  of  making  the  heavens  and  the  earth  as  they 
are.  It  will  be  found,  if  scripture  be  searched,  that 
there  is  the  most  careful  guard  on  this  subject.  If  the 
Holy  Spirit,  as  in  Exod.  xx.  11,  refers  to  heaven  and 
earth  made  in  six  days,  it  always  avoids  the  expression 
"  creation."  God  made  heaven  and  earth  in  six  days : 
it  is  never  said  He  created  heaven  and  earth  in  six  days. 
When  it  is  no  question  of  these,  creating,  making, 
and  forming  may  be  freely  used,  as  in  Isa.  xlv.  18.  The 
reason  is  plain  when  we  look  at  Genesis  i  He  created 
the  heaven  and  earth  at  the  beginning.  Then  another 
state  of  things  is  mentioned  in  verse  2,  not  for  the 
heaven,  but  for  the  eartk  "The  earth  was  without 
form  and  void."    The  heavens  were  in  no  such  state  of 


GENESIS  L-XL  9 

ehaos :  tbe  earth  was.  As  to  how,  when,  and  why  it  was, 
there  is  silence.  Others  have  spoken — spoken  rashly  and 
wrongly.  The  wisdom  of  the  inspired  writer's  silence 
will  be  evident  to  a  spiritual  mind,  and  the  more,  the 
more  it  is  reflected  on.  On  the  six  days  which  follow 
I  shall  not  dwell :  the  subject  was  before  many  of  us 
not  long  ago. 

But  we  have  on  the  first  day  light,  and  a  most 
remarkable  fiujt  it  is  (I  may  in  passing  just  say)  that 
the  inspired  historian  should  have  named  it.  No  one 
would  have  done  so  naturally.  It  is  plain,  had  Moses 
merely  formed  a  probable  opinion  as  men  do,  that  no 
one  would  have  introduced  the  mention  of  light,  apart 
from,  and  before  all  distinct  notice  of,  the  heavenly  orbs. 
The  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  would  certainly  have  been 
first  introduced,  had  man  simply  pursued  the  workings 
of  his  own  mind,  or  those  of  observation  and  experience. 
The  Spirit  of  God  has  acted  quite  otherwise.  He, 
knowing  the  truth,  could  afford  to  state  the  truth  as  it 
is,  leaving  men  to  find  out  at  another  day  the  certainty 
of  all  He  has  said,  and  leaving  them,  alas !  to  their 
unbelief  .if  they  choose  to  despise  or  resist  the  word  of 
God  meanwhila  We  might  with  interest  pass  through 
the  account  of  the  various  days,  and  mark  the  wisdom  of 
(Jod  in  each ;  but  I  forbear  to  dwell  on  such  details  now, 
saying  a  word  here  and  there  on  the  goodness  of  God 
apparent  throughout 

First  of  all  (verse  3)  light  is  caused  to  be  or  act. 
Next  the  day  is  reckoned  from  "  the  evening  and  the 
morning*' — a  statement  of  great  importance  for  other 
parts  of  scripture,  never  forgotten  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 


10        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

but  almost  invariably  let  slip  by  modems ;  which  forget- 
folness  has  been  a  great  source  of  the  difficulties  that 
have  encumbered  harmonies  of  the  Gospels.  It  may  be 
well  to  glance  at  it  just  to  show  the  importance  of 
heeding  the  word  of  God,  and  all  His  word.  The  reason 
why  persons  have  found  such  perplexities,  for  instance^ 
in  relation  to  our  Lord's,  as  compared  with  the  Jews, 
taking  the  passover  and  with  the  crucifixion,  is  owing 
to  their  ^  forgetting  that  the  evening  and  the  morning 
were  the  first  day,  the  second  day,  or  any  other.  Even 
scholars  bring  in  their  western  notions  from  the  familiar 
habit  of  counting  the  day  fipom  the  morning  to  the 
evening.  It  is  the  same  thing  with  the  account  of  the 
resurrection.  The  difficulty  could  never  arise  had  they 
seen  and  remembered  what  is  stated  in  the  very  first 
chapter  of  Genesis,  and  the  indelible  habit  graven 
thereby  on  the  Jew. 

We  find  then  light  caused  to  be  —  a  remarkable 
expression,  and,  be  assured,  profoundly  true.  But  what 
man  would  have  thought  it,  or  said  it,  if  he  had  not 
been  inspired  ?  For  it  is  much  more  exactly  true  than 
any  expression  that  has  been  invented  by  the  most 
scientific  of  men ;  yet  there  is  no  science  in  it.  It  is 
the  beauty  and  the  blessedness  of  scripture  that  it  ifl 
as  much  above  man's  science  as  above  his  ignorance. 
It  is  the  truth,  and  in  such  a  form  and  depth  as  man 
himself  could  not  have  discerned.  Being  the  truth, 
whatever  man  discovers  that  is  true  wiU  never  dash 
with  it. 

On  the  first  day  light  is.  Next  a  firmament  is  sepa* 
rated  in  the  midst  of  the  waters  to  divide  the  waters 
from  the  waters.    Thirdly  the  dry  land  appears,  and  the 


GENESIS  I.~XL  11 

earth  bringing  forth  grass,  and  herb,  and  fruit-tree. 
There  is  the  provision  of  God,  not  merely  for  the  need 
of  man,  but  for  His  own  glory ;  and  this  in  the  smallest 
things  as  in  the  greatest.  On  the  fourth  day  we  hear 
of  lights  in  the  firmament.  The  utmost  possible  care 
appears  in  the  statement.  They  are  not  said  to  be 
created  then ;  but  God  made  two  great  lights  (it  is  no 
question  of  their  mass,  but  of  their  capacity  as  light 
bearers,)  for  the  Adamic  earth — ^the  stars  also.  Then 
we  find  the  waters  caused  to  bring  forth  abundantly 
"  the  moving  creature  that  hath  life."  Vegetable  life  was 
before,  animal  life  now — a  very  weighty  truth,  and  of 
the  greatest  moment  too.  Life  is  not  the  matter  out  of 
which  animals  were  formed ;  nor  is  it  true  that  matter 
produces  life.  God  produces  life,  whether  it  be  for  the 
fish  that  people  the  sea,  for  the  birds  of  the  air,  or  for 
the  beasts,  cattle,  or  reptUes,  on  the  dry  land.  It  is  God 
that  does  all,  whether  it  be  for  the  earth,  the  air,  or  the 
waters.  And  here  in  a  secondary  sense  of  the  word  is 
the  propriety  of  the  phrase  **  created  "  in  verse  21 ;  and 
we  shall  see  it  also  when  a  new  action  comes  before  us 
in  imparting  not  animal  life  but  a  rational  souL  (Verse 
27.)  For  as  we  have  on  the  sixth  day  the  lower  crea- 
tion for  the  earth,  so  finally  man  himself  the  crown 
ofalL 

Bat  here  comes  a  striking  difierence.  God  speaks 
with  the  pecuUar  appropriateness  which  suits  the  new 
occasion^  in  contradistinction  from  what  we  have  seen 
elsewhere.  ''Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our 
likeness/'  It  is  man  as  the  head  of  creation.  It  is  not 
man  placed  in  his  moral  relationships,  but  man  the 
head  of  this  kingdom  of  creation,  as  they  say ;  but  still 


12         LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

even  so  with  remarkable  dignity.  "  Let  ns  make  man 
in  our  image."  He  was  to  represent  (Jod  here  below ; 
besides  this  he  was  to  be  like  God.  There  was  to  be  a 
mind  in  him,  a  spirit  capable  of  the  knowledge  of  God^ 
with  the  absence  of  all  evil.  Such  was  the  condition  in 
which  man  was  formed.  "And  let  them  have  dominion 
over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air, 
over  the  cattle,  and  over  all  the  earth,  and  over  every 
creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon  earth."  God  created 
man  in  His  own  image :  in  the  image  of  God  created 
He  him.  In  conclusion,  the  Sabbath  day,  which  God* 
sanctified,  closes  the  great  week  of  God's  forming  the 
earth  for  man,  the  lord  of  it.  (Gen.  ii  1-3.) 

Then,  from  Genesis  iL  4,  we  have  the  subject  from 
another  point  of  view, — ^not  a  repetition  of  the  account 
of  creation,  but  what  was  even  more  necessary  to  be 
brought  here  before  us, — ^the  place  of  relationship  in 
which  God  set  the  creation  He  had  formed,  not  mutually 
alone,  but  above  all,  in  reference  to  Himself.  Hence 
it  is  here  that  Eden  is  first  spoken  of.  We  should  not 
have  known  anything  of  paradise  from  the  first  chapter. 
The  reason  is  evident  Eden  was  to  be  the  scene  of 
the  moral  trial  of  man. 

From  the  fourth  verse  of  chapter  ii.,  therefore,  we 
first  meet  with  a  new  title  of  God.  To  the  end  of  the 
third  verse  of  that  chapter  it  was  always  God  (Elohim) 

*  Jehovah  here,  rather  than  Elohim,  would  have  spoilt  the  beauty 
of  the  divine  account.  No  doubt  afterwards  Gk>d  did  as  the  Jehovah 
of  Israel  impose  the  remembrance  of  the  Sabbath  every  seventh  day 
of  the  week  on  His  people.  But  it  was  important  to  shew  its  ground 
in  the  facts  of  creation,  apart  from  special  relationship ;  and  that 
made  Elohim  alone  appropriate  in  this  place. 


GENESIS  I.- XI.  13 

as  such.  It  was  the  name  of  the  divme  nature,  as 
such,  in  contrast  with  man  or  the  creature;  not  the 
special  manner  in  which  God  may  reveal  Himself  at 
a  particular  time,  or  deal  in  exceptional  ways;  hut  the 
general  and  what  you  may  call  historical  name  of  God, 
— "  God  "  as  such 

-For  this,  as  for  other  reasons,  it  is  manifest  that 
chapter  iL  ought  to  begin  with  the  verse  which  stands 
fourth  in  the  common  English  Bible.  God  is  here 
styled  Jehovah-Elohim ;  and  so  uniformly  to  the  end 
of  the  chapter. 

I  must  be  permitted  here  to  say  a  word  on  a  subject 
which,  if  it  has  called  out  enormous  discussion,  betrays 
in  its  course,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  no  small  amount  of 
evident  infidelity.     It  has  been  gathered  from  the 
varying  names  of  God,  &c.,  by  speculative  minds  that 
there  must  have  been  different  documents  joined  to- 
gether in  this  book.    Now  there  is  not  really  the  very 
least  ground  for  such  an  assumption.     On  the  contrary, 
supposing  there  was  but  one  writer  of  the  book  of 
Grenesis,  as  I  am  persuaded  is  the  truth  of  the  case,  it 
would  not  have  borne  the  stamp  of  a  divine  communi- 
cation if  he  had  used  either  the  name  of  Jehovah-Elohim 
in  i-ii  3,  or  the  name  of  "Elohim"  only  in  ii.  4r-25. 
The  change  of  designation  springs  from  distinct  truths, 
not  from  different  fabulists  and  a  sorry  compiler  who 
could  not  even  assimilate  them.    Accepting  the  whole 
as  an  inspired  writing,  I  maintain  that  the  same  writer 
must  have  used  this  distinctive  way  of  speaking  of  God 
in  chapters  i.  and  ii.,  and  that  the  notion  of  there  being 
two  or  three  writers  is  merely  a  want  of  real  intelli- 
gence in  scripture.     If  it  were  the  same  writer,  and  he 


14        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

an  inspired  one^  it  was  proper  in  the  highest  d^ree  to 
use  the  simple  tenn  ''  Elohim''  in  chapters  i  ii  3,  then 
the  compound  '' Jehovah-Elohim*'  from  verse  4  and 
onward  through  chapter  ii  A  mere  historian,  like 
Josephus  of  old — ^a  mere  commentator,  like  Ewald  now 
— ^might  have  used  either  the  on^  or  the  other  without 
sensible  loss  to  his  readers  through  both  chapters.  An 
inspired  author  could  not  have  expressed  himseK  differ- 
ently from  Moses  without  impairing  the  perfect  beauty 
and  accuracy  of  the  truth.*  If  the  book  were  in  each 
of  these  different  subjects  written  according  to  that 
most  perfect  keeping  which  pervades  scripture,  and 
which  only  God  is  capable  of  producing  by  His  chosen 
instruments,  I  am  convinced  that,  as  Elohim  simply  in 
chapter  ii.,  so  "  Jehovah-Elohim"  in  chapter  i,- would 
have  been  wholly  out  of  place  with  their  respective 
positions  in  L  and  ii.  As  they  stand,  they  are  in  exact 
harmony.  The  first  chapter  does  not  speak  of  special 
relationships, — does  not  treat  of  any  peculiar  dealings 
of  God  with  the  creature.  It  is  the  Creator  originating 
what  is  around  us;  consequently  it  is  God,  Elohim, 
who  alone  could  be  spoken  of  as  such  in  ch.  ii  1-3, 
taking  the  Sabbath  as  the  necessary  complement  of  the 
week,  and  therefore  going  on  with  the  preceding  six 
days,  not  with  what  follows.  But  in  chapter  ii,  begin- 
ning with  verse  4  where  we  have  special  position  and 
moral  responsibility  coming  to  view  for  the  first  time;, 

*  We  may  judge  how  little  the  LXX.  can  claim  credit  for  aocnracy 
from  their  inattention  to  this  diflference  in  the  Greek  version.  Holmes 
and  Parsons  shew,  however,  the  omission  of  Kvpiog  supplied  in  not  a 
few  MSS.,  whether  hy  the  translators  or  hy  their  copyists  may  be  a 
Question. 


GENESIS  I.- XI.  15 

the  compoimd  term  which  expresses  the  Supreme  put- 
ting Himself  in  relation  with  man,  and  morally  dealing 
with  him  here  below,  is  first  used,  and  with  the  most 
strildng  appropriateness. 

So  far  is  the  book  of  Genesis,  therefore,  from  indi^ 
eating  a  mere  dumsy  compiler,  who  strung  together 
documents  which  had  neither  cohesion  nor  distinctive 
propriety,  instead  of  there  being  merely  two  or  three 
sets  of  traditions  edited  by  another  party,  there  is  really 
the  perfect  statement  of  the  truth  of  God,  the  expres- 
sion of  one  mind,  as  is  found  in  no  writings  outside 
the  Bible.  The  difference  in  the  divine  titles  is  due  to 
a  distinctness  of  object,  not  of  authorship;  and  it  runs 
through  the  Psalms  and  the  Prophets  as  well  as  the 
Law,  so  as  to  convict  of  ignorance  and  temerity  the 
learned  men  who  vaunt  so  loudly  of  the  document 
hypothesis  as  applied  to  the  Pentateuch. 

Here  accordingly  we  find  in  chapter  ii,  with  a 
fulness  and  precision  given  nowhere  else,  God's  enter- 
ing into  relationship  with  man,  and  man's  relation  to 
Eden,  to  the  animal  realm,  and  to  woman  specially. 
Hence,  when  notice  is  here  taken  of  man's  formation, 
it  is  described  (as  all  else  is)  in  a  manner  quite  distinct 
from  that  of  chapter  L ;  but  that  distinctiveness  self- 
evidently  is  because  of  the  moral  relationship  which 
the  Spirit  of  God  is  here  bringing  before  the  reader. 
Every  subject  that  comes  before  us  is  dealt  with  in  a 
new  point  of  view  suitably  to  the  new  name  given  to 
God — the  name  of  God  as  a  moral  governor,  no  longer 
simply  as  a  creator.  Could  any  person  have  conceived 
such  wisdom  beforehand  ?  On  the  contrary,  we  have 
all  read  these  chapters  in  the  Bible,  and  we  may  have 


16         LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

read  them  as  believers  too,  without  seeing  their  im- 
mense scope  and  profoimd  accuracy  all  at  once.  But 
when  God's  word  is  humbly  and  prayerfully  studied, 
the  evidence  will  not  be  long  withheld  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  that  there  is  a  divine  depth  in  that  word  which 
no  mere  man  put  into  it  Then  what  confirmation  of 
one's  faith !  What  joy  and  delight  in  the  Scriptures  I 
If  men,  and  men  too  of  ability  and  learning,  have 
tortured  the  signs  of  its  very  perfection  into  proofs  of 
defective  and  clashing  documents,  ridiculously  com- 
bined by  a  man  who  did  not  perceive  that  he  was 
editing  not  fables  only  but  inconsistent  fables,  what 
can  believers  do  but  wonder  at  human  blindness,  and 
adore  divine  grace!  For  themselves,  with  glowing 
gratitude  they  receive  it  as  the  precious  word  of  Go(^ 
where  His  love  and  goodness  and  truth  shine  in  a  way 
beyond  all  comparison,  and  yet  meeting  the  mind  and 
heart  in  the  least,  no  less  than  in  the  most  serious, 
wants  that  each  day  brings  here  below.  In  every  way 
it  proves  itself  the  word  not  of  men,  but  as  it  is  in  truth 
of  God,  which  effectually  works  in  them  that  believe. 

In  this  new  section  accordingly  it  is  written,  "  These 
are  the  generations  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  when 
they  were  created  [going  up  to  the  first],  in  the  day* 
[here  the  writer  comes  down]  that  Jehovah -Elohim 

*  Is  it  not  the  mere  captiousness  of  criticism  to  set  the  general 
phrase  ''the  day,"  &c.,  against  the  precision  of  the  six  days  in  the 
previous  section  ?  It  is  unfounded  to  say  that  in  the  second  narrative 
the  present  world  is  supposed  to  be  brought  forth  at  onee.  The  history 
is  in  Gen.  i.  ii.  3  :  from  verse  4  to  the  end  of  chap.ii.  is  not  so  much 
a  history  of  creation  as  a  statement  of  the  relations  of  creation,  and 
especially  of  man,  its  centre  and  head.  Chap.  ii.  assumes  chap,  i, 
but  adds  moral  elements  of  the  utmost  importance  and  iuterest. 


GENESIS  I.- XL  17 

made  the  earth  and  the  heavens."  It  is  not  in  this 
connexion  "created,"  it  will  be  observed,  but  "made" 
them.  The  language  is  invariably  used  in  the  most 
perfect  manner.  "  And  every  plant  of  the  field  before 
it  was  in  the  earth,  and  every  herb  of  the  field  before 
it  grew ;  for  Jehovah-Elohim  had  not  caused  it  to  rain 
upon  the  earth;  and  there  was  not  a  man  to  till  the 
ground.  But  there  went  up  a  mist  from  the  earth, 
and  watered  the  whole  face  of  the  ground.*  And  Jeho- 
vah-Elohim formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and 
breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life,  and  man 
became  a  living  soul." 

Here  we  learn  that  man  did  not  become  a  living 
soul  in  the  way  that  every  other  animal  did.  The  others 
were  caused  to  live  by  the  simple  fact  that  God  or- 
ganized them  according  to  His  own  will ;  but  in  man's 
case  there  was  this  essential  difference,  that  he  alone  be- 
came a  living  soul  by  the  inbreathing  of  Jehovah-Elohim. 
Man  alone  therefore  has  what  is  commonly  called  an 
immortal  soul.  His  body  only  is  ever  said  to  be  mortal. 
Man  alone,  as  deriving  that  which  gave  him  the  breath 
of  life  not  from  his  body  but  from  the  breath  of  Jeho- 
vah-Elohim, gives  an  account  to  Grod.  Man  will  rise 
and  live  again.  Not  merely  with  the  elements  of  his 
body  will  he  reappear,  which  is  quite  true,  but  besides 
he  will  reappear  bodily  in  conn^tion  with  a  soul  that 

*  It  seems  almost  too  trivial  to  notice  what  Dr.  Davidson  and 
Bishop  Colenso  (or  their  German  sources)  say  of  Gen.  ii.  6,  6,  as  if 
inconsistent  with  chap..i.  9,  10.  If  divine  power  separated  the  earth 
from  the  watets,  why  should  it  remain  saturated?  In  chap.  i.  it 
is  said  that  ''the  dry  land"  was  called  earth;  in  the  others,  that 
though  no  rain  yet  feU,  a  mist  went  up.  What  can  be  more  con- 
sistent? 

C 


18        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

never  died.  It  is  the  soul  which  gives  the  unity,  and 
which  accounts  for  the  personal  identity.  AU  other 
ways  of  explaining  it  are  feeble,  if  not  mere  trasL  But 
this  divine  statement,  in  connection  with  man's  moral 
relationship  with  God,  here  calmly  and  clearly  stated, 
is  the  true  key.  When  men  reason  instead  of  re- 
ceiving the  revealed  light  of  the  Bible,  I  care  not  who 
or  what  they  may  be,  they  only  mistake  God  and  even 
man.  They  speculate ;  they  give  you  ideas — and  very 
foolish  ideas  they  often  are.  The  word  of  God  pre- 
sents to  the  simplest  Christian  the  perfect  account  of 
the  matter. 

This  elementary  truth  is  of  immense  importance  at 
the  present  moment.  For  it  is  a  day  when  all  things 
are  in  question,  even  the  surest.  It  is  not  as  if  it  were 
a  new  thing  for  man  to  deny  the  immortality  of  his 
own  soul.  At  first  it  sounds  strange  that  a  day  of 
human  self-exaltation  should  be  equally  characterised 
by  as  strong  a  desire  to  deny  the  special  breath  of  God 
for  his  soul,  and  degrade  him  to  the  pedigree  of  an  ape! 
But  it  is  an  old  story  in  this  world,  though  a  new  thing 
for  professing  members  and  ministers  of  Christ,  to  take 
pride  in  putting  scorn  on  divine  revelation.  Infidelity 
takes  increasingly  an  apostate  form,  and  those  that  used 
to  revere  both  Old  Testament  and  New  are  abandoning 
the  truth  of  God  for  the  dreamy  but  mischievous 
romances  of  so-called  modem  science.  Never  was 
there  a  moment  when  man  was  verging  more  evidently 
towards  apostacy  from  the  truth,  and  that  not  merely 
as  to  redemption,  but  even  as  to  creation,  as  to  himself, 
and  above  all  as  to  his  relationship  with  God.  Give  up 
the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  you  deny  the  ground 


GENESIS  L-XL  19 

of  that  relationship,  man's  ispecial  moral  responsibility 
toGocL 

But  there  is  more  than  this,  though  this  be  of 
exceeding  interest;  because  we  see  with  equal  cer- 
tainty and  clearness  why  Jehovah-Elohim  is  introduced 
not  before  but  here,  and  why  man's  becoming  a  living 
soul  by  the  inbreathing  of  God  was  said  here  and  not 
in  the  first  chapter.  Neither  would  have  suited  the 
chapter;  both  are  perfectly  in  season  in  chapter  iL 
Further,  we  now  hear  of  the  garden  that  was  planted  by 
Jehovah-Elohim  eastward  in  Eden,  where  He  put  the 
man  whom  He  had  formed.  And  here  we  find  the  solemn 
truth,  that  not  only  did  Jehovah-Elohim  cause  to  grow 
every  tree  that  is  pleasant  and  good  for  food,  but  "  the 
tree  of  life  also  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  and  the 
tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil." 

I  call  your  attention  for  a  moment  to  this.     It  is 

often  a  difficulty  with  souls  that  God  should  have  made 

the  moral  history  of  the  world  to  turn  on  touching  that 

tree  or  eating  of  that  fruit.    The  mere  mind  of  man 

thinks  it  a  mighty  difficulty  that  what  appears  to  be  so 

small  a  matter  should  be  pregnant  with  such  awful 

results.    Do  you  not  understand  that  this  was  the  very 

essence  of  the  trial  ?    It  was  the  essential  feature  that 

the  trial  should  be  simply  a  question  of  God's  authority 

in  prohibition,  not  one  of  grave  moral  evil     There 

was  the  whole  matter.    When  God  made  man,  when 

Jehovah-Elohim  breathed  the  breath  of  life  into  his 

nostrils,  man  had  no  knowledge  of  things  as  right  or 

wrong  in  themselves.    This  was  acquired  (have  you 

never  known,  or  have  you  forgotten,  the  solemn  fact  ?) 

by  the  fall.    An  innocent  man  could  not  have  had  the 

o2 


20        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

knowledge  of  good  and  evil ;  it  pertains  necessarily  to  a 
fallen  one.  He  who  is  innocent — a  man  absolutely 
without  any  evil  either  in  himself  or  in  that  which  was 
around  him,  where  all  was  from  God — (and  this  is  the 
revealed  account  of  things),  how  could  he  have  a 
knowledge  of  evil  ?  How  possibly  have  Uiat  discrimi- 
nation which  decides  morally  between  what  is  good 
and  what  is  evil  ?  How  perfect  therefore  is  the  inti- 
mation of  scripture !  Yet  none  did  or  could  anticipate 
it 

The  condition  of  man  was  altogether  different  then 
from  what  it  became  immediately  after.  All  is  con- 
sistent in  revelation,  and  nowhere  else.  Men,  the 
wisest — those  of  whom  the  world  has  most  boasted, 
never  had  even  the  least  adequate  thought  of  such  a 
state  of  things ;  yet  enough  of  tradition  remained  even 
among  heathens  to  witness  to  the  truth.  Nay,  more, 
now  that  it  is  clearly  revealed,  they  have  no  compe- 
tency to  appreciate  it — ^never  take  in  its  force ;  and  for 
this  simple  reason,  that  man  invariably  judges  from 
himself  and  from  his  own  experience,  instead  of  sub- 
mitting to  God  and  His  word.  It  is  only  faith  that 
really  accepts  what  comes  from  Gk)d;  and  faith  alone 
gives  the  clue  to  what  is  around  us  now,  but  then 
it  guides  us  through  all  present  entanglements  by 
believing  God  whether  as  to  what  He  once  made  or  whji 
He  will  yet  do.  Philosophy  believes  neither,  in  a  vain 
effort  to  account  for  all  by  what  is,  or  rather  appears ;  for 
it  knows  nothing,  not  even  the  present,  as  it  ought  to 
know.  Consequently  the  attempt  of  man's  mind  by 
what  is  now  to  judge  of  what  was  then  always  ends 
in  the  merest  confusion  and  total  failure.     In  truth 


GENESIS  I.- XI.  21 

only  God  is  competent  to  pronounce ;  and  this  He  has 
done. 

Hence  the  believer  finds  not  the  slightest  difficulty. 
He  may  not  be  able  perhaps  to  meet  objections.  That 
is  another  matter,  and  by  no  means  of  such  conse- 
quence as  many  suppose.  The  great  point,  my  brethren, 
is  to  hold  fast  the  truth.  It  is  all  well,  and  a  desirable 
service  of  love,  if  a  Christian  can  happily  and  with 
God-given  wisdom  meet  the  difficulties  of  others ;  but 
hold  you  the  tnith  yourselves.  Such  is  the  power  and 
simplicity  of  faith.  Adversaries  may  no  doubt  try  to 
embarrass  you :  if  they  will,  let  them  do  so.  Do  not 
be  troubled  if  you  cannot  answer  their  questions  and 
dispose  of  their  cavils ;  you  may  regret  it  in  charity 
for  injured  or  misled  souls.  But,  after  all,  it  is  the 
positive  truth  of  God  which  it  is  the  all-important 
business  to  hold,  and  this  God  has  put  in  the  heart  of 
the  simplest  child  who  believes  in  Jesus. 

I  affirm  then  that,  when  God  thus  made  man,  when 
He  put  him  in  Eden,  the  actual  test  was  the  interdict 
not  of  a  thing  which  was  in  itself  evil,  but  simply  and 
prescriptively  wrong  for  man  because  God  had  forbidden 
it  Such  is  the  very  essence  of  a  test  for  an  innocent 
man.  In  fact  any  other  thought  (such  as  the  law)  is 
not  only  contrary  to  scripture,  but  -when  you  closely 
and  seriously  think  of  it  as  a  believer,  it  will  be  seen  to 
be  an  impossible  state  of  things  then.  Cousequently  a 
moral  test  such  as  the  wise  and  prudent  would  intro- 
duce here,  and  count  a  worthier  reason  why  there 
should  be  so  vast  a  ruin  for  the  world  ensuing,  is  out 
of  the  question.  No,  it  was  the  simple  question  whether 
(}od  was  really  Jehovah -Elohim,  whether  He  was  a 


22        LECTUBES  OK  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

moral  governor  or  not,  whether  man  was  to  be  inde- 
pendent of  God  or  not.  This  was  decided  not  by  some 
grave  and  mighty  matter,  of  which  man  conld  reason 
and  see  the  consequences,  but  simply  by  doing  or  not 
doing  the  will  of  God.  Thus  we  see  how  the  simple 
truth  is  after  all  the  deepest  wisdom. 

It  is  of  great  interest  and  importance  to  observe 
that  Gk)d  distinguished  from  the  first  between  respon- 
sibility on  the  one  hand,  and  life-giving  on  the  other^ 
in  the  two  trees  (verse  9).  Even  for  Adam,  innocent 
as  he  was,  life  did  not  depend  on  abstinence  from 
eating  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  eviL 
Death  followed  if  he  disobeyed  God  in  eating  of  this 
tree  (verse  17);  but,  walking  in  obedience,  he  was 
free  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  Ufa  He  fell  in  partaking  of 
the  forbidden  fruit ;  and  God  took  care  that  he  should 
not  eat  of  the  tree  of  life.  But  the  two  trees,  repre- 
senting the  two  principles,  which  man  is  ever  con- 
founding or  obliterating  one  for  the  other,  are  in  the 
scripture  as  in  truth  wholly  distinct. 

Observe  another  thing  too.  We  have  the  description 
of  the  garden  of  Eden.  I  do  not  consider  that  its  locality 
is  so  very  difficult  to  ascertain  in  a  general  way  as 
has  been  often  imagined.  Scripture  describes  it,  and 
mentions  two  rivers  which  unquestionably  exist  at  the 
present  day.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Euphrates 
and  the  Tigris  or  Hiddekel,  here  named,  are  the  same 
two  rivers  similarly  called  to  this  moment.  It  appears 
to  me  beyond  reasonable  doubt  that  the  other  two 
rivers  are  by  no  means  impossible  to  trace ;  and  it  is 
T^markable,  as  showing  that  the  Spirit  of  God  takes  an 


GENESIS  I.- XL  ^3 

interest,  and  furnishes  a  thread  to  help  us  in  the  fact, 
that  the  two  less  notorious  rivers  are  described  more 
fully  than  the  rivers  which  are  so  commonly  known.* 
We  are  therefore  warranted  in  supposing  that  they  are 
described  just  because  they  might  have  been  less  easily 
discerned.  It  is  said  that  the  name  of  the  first  river  is 
the  Pison,  and  of  the  other  the  Gihon.  Now  without 
wishing  to  press  my  individual  judgment  of  such  a 
matter,  I  may  state  the  conviction  that  the  Pison  and 
the  Gihon,  here  described,  are  two  rivers  on  the  north 
of  the  site  of  Eden,  one  running  into  the  Black  Sea, 
the  other  into  the  Caspian.  I  believe  that  they  are 
what  are  called,  or  used  to  be  called  in  ancient  times  at 
any  rate,  the  Phasis  and  the  Aras  or  Araxes. 

However  this  is  merely  by  the  way,  for  it  is  evidently 
a  matter  of  no  great  importance  in  itself,  save  that 
we  should  hold  the  entire  account  of  Paradise  to  be 
historical  in  the  strictest  and  fullest  sense.  And,  more 
than  that,  the  position  of  these  rivers  seems  to  me  to 
explain — what  has  often  been  a  difficulty  to  many — the 

*  This,  not  to  speak  of  other  reasons,  appears  conclusiye  against 
the  claim  of  the  Pison  to  be  the  Gunges !  set  up  by  Josephus  and  a 
crowd  of  Greek  and  Latin  fathers,  the  Nile  according  to  Jarchi  and 
other  Rabbis,  the  Indus  of  late  reasserted  by  Ewald,  more  than  one  of 
the  fathers  considering  it  to  be  the  Danube !  Gaesarius  and  Epipha- 
uius  held  it  to  be  the  Danube,  the  Ganges,  and  the  Indus,  and  that 
after  an  extraordinary  course  in  the  south  it  joined  the  ocean  near 
Cadiz!  Those  who  made  the  Pison  to  be  the  Ganges  regarded  the 
Gihon  as  the  Nile.  Those  who  embrace  the  theory  that  Eden  lay  on 
the  Shat'd'Arab  consider  the  Pison  and  the  Gihon  as  mere  branches 
of  the  stream  formed  by  the  blending  of  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris 
(or  Hiddekel).  But  this  seems  to  me  indefensible,  though  there  may 
be  difficulty  in  reconciluig  what  I  regard  as  the  truth  with  an  unusual 
force  of  one  or  two  words. 


24         LECTUKBS  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

account  that  is  given  us  here,  that  "  a  river  went  out  of 
Eden  to  water  the  garden,  and  from  thence  it  was 
parted  and  became  into  four  heads;"  because  if  the 
garden  of  Eden  lay  in  that  quarter  (that  is  to  say  in 
Armenia),  in  the  part  of  it  where  are  found  the  springs 
or  watershed  of  these  rivers,  they  would  be  all  within 
a  certain  circumscribed  quarter,  as  surrounding  this 
garden.  It  is  however  possible  that  God  may  have 
allowed  a  certain  change  as  to  the  distribution  of  these 
waters  around  the  garden.  I  do  not  venture  on  any 
opinion  as  to  this.  Scripture  does  not  say  more,  and 
we  must  hold  to  scripture.  But  these  remarks  are 
merely  thrown  out  to  show  that  there  seems  to  be  no 
insuperable  difficulty  in  the  way  of  aniving  at  a  satis- 
factory solution  of  this  vexed  question.  As  for  the 
transfer  of  the  site  of  the  garden  lower  down  in  the 
plain  of  Shinar,  it  appears  to  me  altogether  untenable. 
It  is  impossible  thus  to  connect  Eden  with  the  fountain- 
head  or  sources  of  these  rivers.  It  is  not  hard  to  con- 
ceive both  that  they  had  a  common  source  before  they 
parted,  and  that  the  garden  of  Eden  may  have  been  of 
considerable  extent.  Let  this  suffice :  I  do  not  wish  to 
speculate  about  the  matter. 

The  grand  question  to  be  tried  we  have  afterwards. 
"  Jehovah-Elohim  took  the  man,  and  put  him  into  the 
garden  of  Eden  to  dress  it  and  to  keep  it."  Not  a 
word  of  this  is  in  the  first  chapter.  "And  Jehovah- 
Elohim  commanded  the  man,  saying.  Of  every  tree  of 
the  garden  thou  mayest  freely  eat :  but  of  the  tree  of 
the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  thou  shalt  not  eat  of 
it;  for  in  the  day,"  &c.  Not  a  word  of  this  again 
occurs  in  the  previous  chapter.    Why  ?    Because  moral 


GENESIS  I.- XI.  25 

responsibility  in  relationship  to  Jehovah-Elohim  comes 
in  exactly  where  it  should.  Ha^  it  been  spoken  of  in 
the  first  chapter,  there  might  have  been  grave  excep- 
tion taken  whether  such  an  account  could  have  been 
inspired ;  but,  coming  in  as  it  does,  it  is  exactly  as  it 
ought  to  be. 

Then  the  various  species  of  land  animals  and  birds 
are  brought  forward  to  see  what  Adam  would  call  them; 
not  when  Eve  was  formed,  but  before.  The  beautiful 
type  of  creation  belonging  to  Christ  is  thus  admirably 
preserved.*  Creation  does  not  in  the  first  instance  be- 
long to  the  church  at  all,  whose  place  is  purely  one  of 
grace.  The  Heir  of  all  things  is  the  Second  man,  and 
not  the  bride.  If  she  possesses  all  along  with  Him,  it 
is  because  of  her  union  with  Him,  not  intrinsically. 
This,  it  is  observable,  is  kept  up  strikingly  here,  for 
Adam  has  these  creatures  brought  before  him  by  Jeho- 
vah-Eldhim,  and  gives  names  to  them  all,  shewing 
clearly  not  alone  his  title  as  lord,  but  the  power  of 
appropriate  language  imparted  by  God  from  the  first. 
The  notion  that  intelligible  speech  is  a  mere  growth 
from  the  gradual  putting  together  of  elements  is  a 
dream  of  ingenious  speculation,  which  may  exercise 
men's  wits,  but  has  no  foundation  whatever.     Adam 

♦  This  moral  and  typical  bearing  is  the  true  key  to  the  record  in 
€^n.  ii.  4-25,  and  truly  accounts  for  the  differences  from  i.-ii.  3, 
which  ignorance  an^  unbelief  pervert  into  the  discrepancies  of  two 
separate  and  inconsistent  writers.  It  is  not  the  fact  that  chap.  ii. 
7,  19,  represents  man  as  created  first  of  aU  living  creatures  before  the 
birds  and  beasts ;  any  more  than  that  man  created  in  God's  image 
{Qten,  i.  27)  contradicts  the  statement  of  chapter  ii.  7>  that  he  was 
formed  of  IJie  dust  of  the  ground.  It  is  not  said  in  chapter  i.  27  that 
man  and  woman  were  created  together ;  or  that  the  woman  was  created 
directly,  and  not  formed  out  of  one  of  the  man's  ribs. 


26        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH.  - 

on  the  very  first  day  of  his  life,  even  before  Eve  was 
formed,  gave  the  animals  their  names,  and  Grod  Himself 
sanctioned  what  their  head  uttered.  Such  was  his 
relation  to  the  creature;  he  was  put  in  that  place  by  GUkL 

But  this  made  the  want  so  much  the  more  evident,  of 
which  Jehovah-Elohim  takes  notice,  of  a  partner  for 
Adam's  affections  and  life,  one  that  might  be  before 
him,  as  it  is  said :  "  And  Jehovah-Elohim  caused  a  deep 
sleep  to  fall  upon  Adam."  The  creation  of  the  woman 
apart  from  the  man  (as  no  doubt  every  other  male  and 
female  were  made  separately)  would  have  been  a  sterile 
and  imimpressive  fact.  As  it  is,  Gk)d  reserves  the 
striking  detail  for  the  scene  of  moral  relationship. 
And  may  I  not  put  it  to  the  conscience  of  every  soul 
whether  such  an  event  is  not  exactly  where  it  should 
be,  according  to  the  internal  and  distinctive  features  of 
chapters  i  and  ii  ?  We  aU  know  how  apt  man  has  been 
to  forget  the  truth — ^how  often  might  takes  advantage 
of  right !  God  at  least  was  pleased  to  form  woman,  as 
well  as  to  reveal  her  formation  in  a  way  that  ought  to 
make  ashamed  him  who  recognises  her  as  his  own  flesh 
and  bone,  yet  slights  or  misuses  a  relationship  so  in- 
timate. "And  he  took  one  of  his  ribs,  and  closed  up 
the  flesh  instead  thereof;  and  the  rib  which  Jehovah- 
.  Elohim  had  taken  from  man  made  he  a  woman,  and 
brought  her  unto  the  man.  And  Adam  said.  This  is 
now  bone  of  my  bones,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh:  she 
shall  be  called  Woman,  because  she  was  taken  out  of 
man.  Therefore  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  his 
mother,  and  shall  cleave  unto  his  wife,  and  they  shall 
be  one  flesh." 

The  primitive  condition  is  described  too.    "They 


GENESIS  L-XI.  27 

were  both  naked — ^the  man  and  his  wife,  and  were  not 
ashamed."  It  was  a  state  altogether  different  &om  that 
of  man  fallen;  however  suitable  then,  it  was  such  as 
man  as  he  is  could  never  have  conceived  of  with  pro- 
priety. Yet  we  cannot  but  feel  how  suitable  it  was  for 
innocence,  in  which  condition  Gk)d  made  man  and 
woman.  Could  He  have  made  them  otherwise  con- 
sistently with  His  own  character?  Could  they  so 
made  have  carried  themselves  otherwise  than  is  here 
described  ?  Man's  present  experience  would  have  sug- 
gested neither;  yet  his  heart  and  conscience,  unless 
rebellious,  feel  how  right  and  becoming  aU  is  in  such 
a  state  of  things — none  other  so  good. 

The  next  chapter  (iii)  shews  us  the  result  of  the  test 
which  we  have  seen  laid  down  by  Jehovah-Elohim.  It 
was  soon  brought  to  issue.  And  here  is  another  fact 
that  I  desire  to  bring  before  you.  We  see  introduced, 
without  more  delay  upon  the  scene,  one  too  well  and 
yet  too  little  known,  the  active,  audacious,  most  subtle 
adversary  of  Grod  and  man,  the  serpent — ^&om  whom 
sin  and  misery  result,  as  the  Bible  witnesses  &om  the 
begiiming  to  the  end-who  is  here  first  brought  in  a 
few  quiet  words  before  us.  Who  would  have  done  this 
but  Grod  ?  In  any  other  book,  in  a  book  written  by 
mere  man,  (need  one  hesitate  to  say  ?)  we  should  have 
had  a  long  introduction,  and  a  full  history  of  his  origin 
and  his  designs  and  his  doings.  God  could  introduce 
him,  and  could  leave  the  heart  to  feel  the  rightness 
of  saying  no  more  about  him  than  was  necessary.  The 
&ct  declares  itself.  If  in  the  first  chapter  the  true 
Grod  shows  Himself  in  creative  power  and  glory,  and 


i 


28  LEcruvsa  03  ths  festatetch: 

in  the  peifect  beneficeoce  wfaiclt  morka  too  that  which 
He  had  made ;  if  in  the  second  special  lelationa  display 
yet  more  His  moral  way  and  will,  so  the  serpent  does 
not  fadL  to  manifest  his  actual  condition  and  aim — 
not  of  conise  the  condition  in  which  he  was  made^ 
but  that  to  which  sin  had  reduced  him.  "^  The  serpent 
was  more  subtle  than  any  beast  of  the  field  which 
Jehovah-EIohim  had  made." 

The  third  chapter  is  indeed  a  continuation  of  the 
second — properly  enou^  made  into  a  separate  chapter, 
but  still  iis  sequel  simply.  It  is  the  issue  of  that  pro- 
bationary=  trial  which  was  proposed  ther&  And  here 
the  effort  of  the  enemy  was  first  to  breathe  suspicion 
on  the  goodness  of  Grod  as  well  as  on  His  truth,  in 
short,  on  Grod  Himself,  Human  lusts  and  passions 
were  not  yet  in  question,  but  they  soon  followed — the 
desire  of  having  what  God  had  forbidden.  First,  how- 
ever, it  was  an  iosinuation  iofiised  and  allowed  against 
the  true  Grod.  All  evil  is  due  to  this  as  its  spring ;  it 
b^ins  with  Grod  as  the  object  attacked  or  undermined. 
^And  he  said  unto  the  woman.  Yea,  hath  Grod*  said, 
Te  shall  not  eat  of  erery  tree  of  the  garden  ?     And 

*  Some  lutTe  wondered  why  the  sezpent  and  Ere  should  he  repore- 
lented  m  taynig  Elohim  ("(^od")  in  the  temptatian,  seeing  that 
ererjwhere  else  in  the  aection  the  name  employed  is  Jdjomfch-Klohim, 
Now,  not  oolj  may  it  he  the  simple  &ct  that  Elohim  akne  was  naed, 
but,  farther,  on  account  of  it,  the  historian  would  not  introdnce  here 
the  name  of  special  relationsh^  which  the  enemy  was  abore  aU 
anxious  to  hare  if  possible  forgotten,  and  whkh  the  woman  in  ftct 
did  soon  forget  when  she  allowed  one  to  work  on  her  mind  whose  first 
aim  was  to  sow  distrust  of  Ood.  To  me  it  appears  that  aU  is  in 
perfect  keeping;  and  that  the  omission  of  JehoTah  here  is  equally 
natural  on  the  part  of  the  serpent  and  Ere,  as  it  is  appropriate  to  the 
iaipptred  history  of  the  transaction. 


GENESIS  L-XL  29 

the  woman  said  unto  the  serpent.  We  may  eat  of  the 
fruit  of  the  trees  of  the  garden :  but  of  the  fruit  of  the 
tree  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  God  hath 
said.  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  it,  neither  shall  ye  touch  it, 
lest  ye  die.  And  the  serpent  said  unto  the  woman, 
Ye  shall  not  surely  die:  for  God  doth  know  that  in 
the  day  ye  eat  thereof,  then  your  eyes  shall  be  opened, 
and  ye  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil"  So 
it  was  that  the  serpent  envenomed  morally  the  heart 
of  the  woman  first,  and  then  of  the  man.  I  need  not 
dwell  on  the  sad  history  which  we  all  know  more 
or  less.  She  listened,  she  looked,  she  took  of  the  fruit ; 
she  eat,  and  was  fallen.  And  man  eat  too,  not  deceived, 
but  with  open  eyes,  and  therefore  so  much  the  more 
guilty — swayed,  no  doubt,  by  his  affections;  bold, 
however,  in  yielding  to  them,  for  he  ought  rather  to 
have  been  her  guard  and  guide,  certainly  not  to 
have  followed  her,  even  if  he  had  failed  to  keep  her 
safely  in  the  path  of  good.  Alas !  he  followed  her,  as 
he  has  often  since,  into  the  broad  way  of  evil  Adam 
did  not  preserve  the  place  in  which  God  had  set  him. 
Both  fallen,  they  were  both  ashamed.  "  They  knew 
that  they  were  naked,  and  they  sewed  fig  leaves  to- 
gether, and  made  themselves  aprons."  And  they  heard 
the  voice  of  Jehovah-Elohim  walking  in  the  garden  in 
the  cool  of  the  day,  and  Adam  and  his  wife  hid  them- 
selves. The  victims  of  sin  knew  shame,  now  fear. 
Departed  from  God,  they  hid  themselves,  and  He  had 
but  to  utter  those  solemn  and  searching  words  to  Adam, 
"Where  art  thou  ?"  He  was  gone  from  God.  Forced  to 
discover  himself,  Adam  tells  the  humiliating  tale : — "  I 
heard  thy  voice  in  the  garden,  and  I  was  afraid,  because 


30  Lscnnas  os  tkk  pdtatiicch. 

I  wu  naked,  and  I  Iiid  sLTseH.'^  The  eril  is  tnced  home 
at  last  to  its  sooxee,  and  fee  «rpcnt  is  ttonght  faBy  oat. 
Each  tevenHj — the  man,  the  woman,  the  seipent — 
stand  evidently  convicted  by  the  presence  of  Jehovah- 
Klohim.  Yet,  inmderfnl  to  say,  in  the  very  announce- 
ment of  judgment  on  the  serpent,  Crod,  vrho  had  by  the 
light  of  His  presence  compdled  the  gnihy  pair  to  come 
forth  ont  of  the  darkness  in  vrhich  they  had  hid,  or 
rather  sought  to  hide — €rod  held  out  the  first  bright 
light  of  mercy,  but  mercy  in  the  judgment  of  him  who 
was  the  root  of  the  eviL  May  one  not  say  again  who 
beforehand  would  have  thought  of  ways  so  truly  and 
self-evidently  divine  ?  But  it  is  the  word  of  (Jod,  and 
nothing  can  be  more  suitable  to  Grod,  gracious  to  man, 
or  just  to  the  enemy. 

Believers  have  constantly  called  it  a  ''promise  ;**  but 
it  is  not  uninstructive  to  see  that  scripture  never  does. 
There  was  a  revelation  of  an  infinite  blessing  for  man 
unquestionably,  but  hardly  what  is  called  a  promise. 
It  was  addressed  to  the  serpent  If  a  promise  to  any, 
it  was  to  the  woman's  Seed,  the  last  Adam,  not  to  the 
first,  who  was  just  sentenced  with  Eve.  Abraham,  not 
Adam,  is  the  depositary  of  promise :  so  speaks  scripture, 
as  far  as  I  know,  invariably.  We  see  why  that  ought 
to  be.  Was  it  a  time  for  a  promise  ?  Was  it  a  state  for 
a  promise  ?  Was  it  a  person  for  a  promise  ? — one  that 
had  ruined  the  glory  of  God,  as  far  as  it  rested  upon 
him.  No,  but  in  judging  the  serpent  there  comes  out 
the  revealed  purpose  of  God,  not  a  promise  to  Adam  in 
sin,  but  the  revelation  of  One  who  would  crush  the 
serpent's  -  head  the  first  siniier  and  too  successful 
tempter  to  sin.     The  Second  man,  not  the  first,  is  the 


GENESIS  I.~XI.  31 

object  of  promise.    This  indeed  is  the  invariable  truth 
of  scripture,  and  runs  through  it  to  the  last. 

Observe,  in  the  beginning  of  the  word  of  God,  the 
sources  of  aU  things.  As  we  saw  God  Himself  the 
Creator  and  the  moral  Governor,  so  further  we  find  the 
enemy  of  God  and  of  man  in  exact  accordance  with  the 
latest  word  that  God  speaks.  Again,  let  ns  note  the 
confronting  of  the  serpent,  not  with  man,  who  always 
falls  under  Satan's  power,  but  with  Christ,  who  always 
conquers.  Such  is  the  way  in  which  God  puts  His 
truth,  and  this  in  the  earliest  part  of  His  word.  No 
later  revelation  in  the  smallest  degree  corrects  the  veiy 
first.  Scripture  is  divine  from  first  to  last.  But  along 
with  this  we  find  no  haste  to  reveal :  all  is  in  season. 
Not  a  word  is  heard  about  eternal  life  yet — that 
must  wait  for  His  appearing  who  was  such  with 
the  Father;  not  a  word  yet  about  the  exhaustless 
riches  of  grace  which  were  afterwards  to  abound. 
A  person  is  held  out  —  the  Seed  of  the  woman; 
for  the  manner  most  expressly  bespeaks  the  tender 
mercy  of  God.  If  the  woman  was  the  one  first  of  all  to 
yield,  she  is  the  destined  mother  of  Him  that  would 
defeat  the  devil  and  deliver  man.  But  what  came  in 
inmiediately,  and  what  is  traced  throughout  the  Bible, 
it  may  be  noted,  is  the  present  consequence  in  the 
government  of  God.*  Consequently  we  find  that  as 
man  had  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  the  siren,  and  had 

*  How  this  agrees  with  the  dispensational  dealings  of  God  with 
Israel  needs  no  argument.  They  were  chosen  to  be  the  public  vessel 
of  divine  government  on  the  eart^.  We  have  had  their  failure  under 
law ;  we  look  for  their  stability  under  Messiah  and  the  new  covenant. 
But  it  is  and  will  be  of  the  deepest  interest  to  trace  these  ways  of 
God  in  earthly  government  £rom  the  first. 


32        LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

eaten  of  the  tree  of  which  he  was  commanded  not  to 
eat,  the  ground  was  cursed  for  him.  It  is  the  present 
result.  So  again  the  woman  has  her  portion,  of 
which  we  need  not  say  more  than  to  point  out  what  a 
clue  it  is  to  her  lot  in  the  history  of  the  race.  Both 
unite  in  this,  that,  as  they  were  made  of  dust,  to  the 
dust  they  must  return. 

IN'otwithstanding  in  the  midst  of  the  scene  of  deso- 
lation we  hear  Adam  calling  his  wife's  name  "Eve" 
(ver.  20).  To  me  it- is  perfectly  clear  how  speedy  was 
the  fall  after  the  creation  of  man.  He  had  not  before 
given  his  wife  this  her  full  and  proper  name.  He  had 
described  whcU  she  was  rather  than  who  ;  it  was  only 
when  sin  had  come  in,  and  when  others,  had  there  been 
any,  would  have  called  her  naturally  the  parent  of 
death,  that  Adam  (by  what  seems  to  be  the  guidance  of 
God  in  faith)  calls  her  rather  the  mother  of  the  living. 
His  soul,  I  cannot  doubt,  laid  hold  of  the  word  that 
God  had  pronounced  in  judging  the  deviL  And  God 
here  too  beautifully  marks  His  feeling.  For  (ver.  21) 
we  are  told,  that  "to  Adam  also  and  to  his  wife  did 
Jehovah-Elohim  make  coats  of  skins  and  clothed  them." 
The  insujB&ciency  of  their  resources  had  been  proved. 
Now  comes  in  the  shadow  of  what  God  would  do  fully 
another  day. 

Nevertheless  present  consequences  take  their  course, 
and  in  a  certain  sense  mercy  too  is  mingled  with 
them,  as  is  the  case  habitually,  I  think,  in  the  govern- 
ment of  God;  for  man  as  he  is  is  just  so  much  the 
less  happy  as  he  knows  not  what  it  is  to  labour  in 
such  a  world  as  this.  It  is  not  only  what  he  is  doomed 
to,  but  the  wisely  ordered  place  for  fallen  man  here 


GENESIS  I.- XL  33 

below.  There  is  no  one  more  miserable  than  the 
man  who  has  no  object  before  him.  I  grant  that  in 
an  imfaUen  condition  there  was  another  state  of  things. 
Where  all  was  bright  and  good  around  man*in  innocency 
the  scope  for  labour  would  not  have  its  place.  I  only 
speak  of  what  is  good  for  man  out  of  Paradise,  and 
how  God  meets  with  and  ministers  to  his  state  in  His 
infinite  grace.  On  this  however  we  need  not  say  more 
than  that  He  "  drove  out  the  man,"  lest  he  should  per- 
petuate the  condition  of  ruin  into  which  he  hcwi  passed.* 

*  It  is  deplorable  but  wholesome  to  see  how  superstition  and 
Tationalism  agree  in  the  grossest  ignorance  of  man's  condition  before 
the  £Edl  and  through  it.  The  doctrine  in  systematic  theology  is  that 
God's  image  within  became  corrupted  and  defiled;  yet  that  even  then 
he  was  not  altogether  forsaken ;  and  that  the  course  of  his  history 
declares  by  what  means  it  has  pleased  GU>d  to  renew,  in  some  measure, 
His  lost  image,  &c.  Another  divine,  but  an  infidel,  regards  the  know- 
ledge of  good  and  evil  as  the  image  of  God  by  creation.  This  last  is 
often  misunderstood.  Scripture  is  plain  and  profoundly  true :  *'  And 
Jehovah -Elohim  said,  Behold,  the  man  is  become  as  one  of  us,  to 
know  good  and  evil :  and  now,  lest  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  take 
also  of  the  tree  of  life,  and  eat,  and  live  for  ever :  therefore  Jehovah- 
Elohim  sent  him  forth  from  the  garden  of  Eden  to  till  the  ground 
whence  he  was  taken.  80  he  drove  out  the  man ;  and  he  placed  at 
the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden  cherubims,  and  a  flaming  sword  which 
tamed  every  way,  to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life." 

In  his  original  estate  man  was  created  in  God's  image,  but  he  had 
not  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  This  he  acquired  by  the  fall. 
After  this  he  could  estimate  and  know  things  himself  as  good  or  evil ; 
whilst  innocent  this  could  not  be.  A  holy  being  might  and  does  so 
know,  ue.,  a  being  who,  while  knowing,  has  an  intrinsic  nature  that 
repels  the  evil  and  cleaves  to  the  good.  But  this  was  not  Adam's 
state,  but  simply  made  upright,  with  absence  and  ignorance  of  evil. 
When  fiedlen  he  acquired  the  internal  capacity  of  knowing  right  from 
wrong,  apart  from  a  law  to  inform  or  forbid ;  and  in  this  respect  be- 
came like  Qod  at  the  very  time  when  he  lost  Gt>d  and  intercourse  with 
Him  as  an  innocent  creature.    We  thus  learn  the  compatibility  of 

D 


34        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Then  (chap,  iv.)  we  have  a  new  scene,  which  opens 
with  a  change  in  the  name  of  God.  It  is  no  longer  the 
test  of  creation,  as  God  made  it,  and  this  accordingly  m 
marked  here.  He  is  called  "Jehovah;"  He  is  not  desig- 
nated by  the  former  mingled  or  compound  term  "  Je-. 
hovah-Elohim,"  but  by  "  Jehovah"  simply ;  and  this  k, 
found  afterwards,  either  "Elohim"  alone  or  "Jehovah 
in  the  other  names  of  special  character,  as  we  shall 
see,"  imtil  the  call  of  Israel,  when  we  have  an  appro-^ 
priate  modification  in  the  expression  of  His  name.  But 
Adam  now  becomes  a  father,  not  innocent,  but  fallen 
before  he  became  the  head  of  the  race.  Cain  was  bom^ 
and  the  fallen  mother  gave  the  name ;  but,  oh,  what  a 
mistake !  I  am  sure,  not  that  she  was  exactly  entitled 
to  give  the  name,  but  that  it  can  be  proved  that  she 
gave  a  singularly  inappropriate  one.  She  thought  her 
first-bom  a  great  gain,  for  such  is  the  meaning  of  the 
name  "  Cain."  Alas !  what  disappointment  and  griefy 
both  of  the  most  poignant  kind,  followed  ere  long.  For 
Abel  too  was  bom ;  and  in  process  of  time  it  came  to 
pass  that  they  brought  their  oflerings  unto  "Jehovah" — 
a  term,  I  may  observe,  that  is  here  in  admirable  keeping. 
It  was  not  barely  as  He  who  had  created  all,  but  the 
God  that  was  in  special  relationship  with  man — Jeho- 
vah. This  is  the  force  of  it.  Cain  looked  at  Hinn  in 
the  place  merely  of  a  Creator,  and  there  was  his  wrong. 
Sin  needed  more.     Cain  brought  what  might  have  suf- 

these  two  things,  which  in  fact  were  true  of  man— a  £eJl  firom  the 
relationship  of  innocence,  in  which  he  was  originaUy  set  with  Gk)d, 
and  a  rise  in  moral  capacity,  which,  without  feith,  entails  immense 
misery,  but  which  is  of  the  utmost  value  when  one  is  brought  to  Gk)d 
by  our  Lord  Jesus. 


GENESIS  I.- XI.  35 

ficed  in  an  iinfiEdlen  world — what  might  have  suited  an 
innocent  worshipper  of  One  who  was  simply  known  as 
Elohim.  It  was  impossible  that  such  a  ground  could  be 
rightly  taken  longer;  but  so  Cain  did  not  feel.  He 
makes  a  religion  from  his  own  mind,  and  brings  of  the 
firuit  of  the  ground  now  under  the  curse ;  whilst  Abel 
by  faith  offers  the  firstlings  of  the  flock,  and  of  the  fat 
thereof.  And  Jehovah  had  respect  unto  Abel,  and  to 
his  offering.  It  is  the  great  truth  of  sacrifice,  of  which 
Abel's  faith  laid  hold,  realising  and  confessing  in  his 
slain  lamb  that  there  was  no  other  way  in  a  ruined 
world  for  a  holy  relationship,  and  for  the  confession  of 
the  truth  too,  as  between  God  and  man.  He  offers  of 
the  firstlings  of  his  flock — that  which  passed  under 
death — to  Jehovah. 

"And  Cain  was  very  wroth,  and  his  countenance  fell." 
And  Jehovah  speaks  to  him  thus — "Why  art  thou 
wroth  ?  and  why  is  thy  countenance  faUen  ?  If  thou 
doest  well,  shalt  thou  not  be  accepted  ?"  The  prin- 
ciples of  God's  nature  are  immutable.  "Whether  people 
are  believers  or  not,  whether  they  receive  the  truth  or 
not,  God  holds  to  that  which  belongs  to  His  own  moral 
being.  That  any  one  is  capable  of  meeting  the  cha- 
racter of  God  in  an  imfallen  state  is  another  matter. 
It  is  the  same  principle  in  Genesis  iv.,  which  we  find 
more  explicitly  stated  in  Eomans  iL,  where  God  shews 
Hia  sure  judgment  of  evil  on  the  one  hand,  and  His 
approval  of  that  which  is  good,  holy,  and  true  on  the 
other.  So  with  Cain  here — "and  if  thou  doest  not  well;" 
and  such  was  the  fact.  His  condition  was  that  of  a 
sinner,  and  he  looked  not  out  of  himself  to  God.  But 
what  characterises  this  scene  is  not  the  state  in  which 

D  2 


36        LECTUBES  OK  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

man  as  such  was — this  we  had  in  chapter  iiL — but 
what  man  did  in  that  &llen  state,  and  more  especially 
what  he  did  in  presence  of  God  and  faith.  Certainly 
he  did  not  well.  "And  if  thou  doest  not  weU,"  it  is 
said,  "sin  lieth  at  the  door."  Evil  conduct  is  that 
which  makes  manifest  an  evil  state,  and  flows  from  it 

I  do  not  think  that  the  expression  means  a  sin-offering, 
as  is  sometimes  supposed ;  for  it  does  not  appear  that 
there  is  ground  for  inferring  that  the  truth  of  a  sin- 
offering  was  understood  in  the  slightest  d^ree  till  long 
afterwards.  "By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin;" 
and  until  the  law  was  brought  in  there  was,  as  Seir  as 
scripture  tells  us,  no  such  discrimination,  if  any,  be- 
tween the  offerings.  They  were  all  merged  in  one; 
and  hence  it  is  that  we  find  that  Job's  friends,  though 
guilty  in  the  Lord's  sight,  yet  alike  with  him  offer 
burnt-offerings.  When  Nosh  brings  his  sacrifice,  it  is 
evidently  of  that  nature  also.  Would  there  not  have 
been  a  sin-offering  on  these  occasions  had  the  law  been 
then  in  force?  Most  wisely  all  such  details  awaited 
the  imfolding  of  another  day.  I  merely  use  these 
scriptural  facts  to  shew  what  seems  to  me  the  truth 
that  "sin"  here  does  not  refer  to  the  specific  offering 
for  it,  but  rather  to  that  which  was  proved  by  evil 
conduct 

Notwithstanding  God  maintained  the  place  that  be- 
longed to  the  elder  brother.  But  nothing  softeiled  the 
roused  and  irritated  spirit  of  Cain.  There  is  nothing 
which  more  maddens  man  than  mortified  religious 
pride ;  and  so  it  is  here  proved,  for  he  rose  up  against 
his  brother  and  slew  him.  And  Jehovah  speaks  to 
him  once  more.    It  was  sin  not  as  such  against  Grod  in 


GENESIS  L-XI.  37 

leaving  Him,  like  Adam's,  but  against  man,  his  brother 
accepted  of  God.  "  Where  is  Abel  thy  brother  ?"  To 
Grod's  appeal  he  answers  with  no  less  hardness  and 
audacity  than  falsehood,  "I  know  not"  There  is  no 
real  courage  with  a  bad  conscience,  and  guile  will  soon 
be  apparent  where  God  brings  His  own  light  and  makes 
guilt  manifest.  Let  us  not  forget  the  deceitfulness 
of  sin.  "  What  hast  thou  done  ?"  said  Jehovah.  "  The 
voice  of  thy  brother's  blood  crieth  unto  me  from  the 
ground."  Justly,  now  we  have  him  self-cursed  from  the 
face  of  the  earth,  pronounced  a  fugitive  and  vagabond. 
But  the  will  of  man  pits  itself  invariably  against  the 
known  will  of  God,  and  the  very  man  who  was  doomed 
to  be  a  fugitive  sets  to  work  that  he  may  settle  himself 
here  below.  Cain,  as  it  is  said,  went  out  from  His  pre- 
sence, and  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Ifod ;  a  sou  is  born  in 
due  time  who  builds  a  city  called  after  his  name.  Such 
is  the  birth  of  civil  life  in  the  family  of  Cain,  where 
we  find  the  discovery  and  advance  of  the  delights  of 
man ;  but,  along  with  the  progress  of  art  and  science, 
the  introduction  of  polygamy.  The  rebellious  spirit 
of  the  forefather  shows  itself  in  the  descendant 
Lamech. 

But  the  chapter  does  not  close  until  we  find  Seth, 
whom  God*  substituted  (for  this  is  the  meaning  of  the 
name),  or  "  appointed,"  as  it  is  said,  "  instead  of  Abel, 
whom  Cain  slew."    And  so  Seth,  to  him  also  there  was 

*  As  Eve  at  the  birth  of  Cain  seems  to  have  been  unduly  excited, 
and  expecting  I  think  a  deliverer  in  the  child  whom  she  named  as 
gotten  from  Jehovah,  so  she  seems  to  me  to  express  a  sobered  if  not 
desponding  sentiment  in  saying  at  Seth's  birth,  **£lohim  hath  ap- 
pointed me  another  seed,"  &c.  In  the  latter  she  only  saw  a  child 
given  of  God  naturaUy.    Both  appear  to  me  natural  and  purposed. 


38        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

bom  a  son,  and  he  called  his  name  Enos.    Then  began 
men  to  call  npon  the  name  of  JehovaL 

In  chapter  v.  we  have  the  generations  of  Adam. 
Upon  this  I  would  not  now  dwell  farther  than  to 
draw  attention  to  the  commencing  words,  "  In  the  day 
that  God  created  man,  in  the  likeness  of  God  made  he 
him;  male  and  female  created  he  them;  and  blessed 
them,  and  called  their  name  Adam  in  the  day  when 
they  were  created."    But  "Adam,"  it  is  said,  "begat  a 
son  in  his  own  likeness,  after  his  imaga''    It  was  no 
longer  in  the  likeness  of  God,  but  in  the  image  of  Gk)d 
always.    For  man,  now  as  ever,  fallen  or  not,  is  in  the 
image  of  God;  but  the  likeness  of  God  was  lost  through 
sin.     Seth  therefore  was  begotten  in  Adam's  own  like^ 
ness,  not  in  God's.    He  was  like  Adam  fallen,  not  his 
representative  only.    And  this  is  what  is  referred  to  in 
James  iiL,  where  he  speaks  of  our  having  been  made  in 
the  likeness  of  God.    But  it  is  the  more  important  be- 
cause, when  it  is  a  question  of  the  guilt  of  taking  man's 
Ufe,  the  ground  is  that  he  was  made  in  God's  image. 
This,  it  is  plain,  was  never  lost;  it  abides,  whatever 
man's  state.     Had  the  crime  depended  on  man's  re- 
taining the  likeness  of  Grod,  murder  might  have  been 
denied  or  justified,  because  if  a  man  were  not  like  Grod 
the  imlikeness  might  be  urged  in  extenuation  of  killing 
him.    But  it  is  a  crime  against  man  made  in  the  image 
of  God,  and  as  this  abides,  whether  he  be  fallen  or  not^ 
the  guilt  of  murder  is  unimpeachable  and  evident. 
This  accordingly  is  the  ground  taken,  to  which  I  refer 
as  an  instance  of  the  perfectness  of  scripture,  but  at 
the  same  time  of  the  profound  and  practical  power  of 
the  truth  of  God 


GENESIS  L-XL  39 

In  the  remarkable  list,  which  is  pursued  down  to 
Noah,  we  have  another  great  truth  set  forth  in  the 
most  simple  and  beautiful  way — the  power  of  life  which 
exempts  fiom  the  reign  of  death;  and  not  only  that, 
but  the  witness  to  heaven  as  a  place  for  man.  Enoch 
brings  both  these  lessons  before  us.  I  have  no  doubt 
tiiat,  besides  this,  Enoch  is  the  type  of  the  portion  of 
those  who  look  to  be  with  the  Lord  above,  just  as  Noah 
shews  us  (as  is  too  well  known  to  call  for  a  delay  upon 
it)  those  who  pass  through  the  judicial  dealings  of  God, 
and  nevertheless  are  preserved.  In  short  Enoch  is  the 
witness  of  the  heavenly  family,  as  Noah  is  of  the  earthly 
people  of  God. 

But  in  chap,  vl  we  have  a  very  solemn  statement — 
the  apostacy  of  the  ancient  world.  The  sons  pf  God 
chose  the  daughters  of  men.  The  true  key  to  this 
account  is  supplied  in  the  Epistle  of  Jude.  It  is  hardly 
60  common-place  and  ordinary  a  matter  as  many  sup- 
pose. When  understood,  it  is  really  awful  in  itself  and 
its  results.  But  the  Holy  Spirit  has  veiled  such  a  fact 
in  the  only  manner  that  became  God  and  was  proper 
for  man.  Here  indeed  the  principle  of  reserve  does 
apply,  not  in  withholding  from  man's  soul  the  deepest 
blessing  of  grace  for  his  deepest  wants,  but  in  furnish- 
ing no  more  than  that  which  was  suitable  for  man  to 
learn  about  the  matter.  He  has  said  enough ;  but  any 
one  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  refer  to  Jude  in  con- 
nection with  this  chapter  will  gather  more  than  appears 
on  the  surfiBLce.  It  is  not  needful  to  say  more  now. 
God  Himself  has  touched  it  but  curtly.  This  only  may 
be  remarked  in  addition,  that ''  the  sons  of  God,"  in  my 
judgment,  mean  the  same  beings  in  Gonesis  as  they  do 


40         LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

in  Job.  This  point  will  suffice  to  indicate  their  chief 
guilt  in  thus  traversing  the  boundaries  which  God  had 
appointed  for  His  creatures.  No  wonder  that  total  ruin 
speedily  ensues.  It  is  reaUy  the  basis  of  fact  for  not 
a  few  tales  of  mythology  which  men  have  made  up. 
Any  one  who  is  acquainted  with  the  chief  writings  of 
the  old  idolatrous  world,  of  the  Greeks  and  Bomans 
especially,  will  see  that  what  God  has  veiled  in  this 
brief  statement,  which  passes  cabuly  over  that  of  which 
more  had  better  not  be  spoken,  is  what  they  have 
amplified  into  the  Titans  and  the  giants  and  their 
greater  deities.  I  do  not  of  course  enter  into  detarLs, 
but  here  is  the  inspired  account,  which  shines  in  the 
midst  of  the  horrors  of  that  dark  scene  which  fabulists 
pourtrayed.  But  there  is  enough  in  man's  amplification 
to  point  to  what  is  stated  here  in  a  few  simple  words 
of  truth. 

The  flood  ensues.  In  the  statement  given  by  Moses 
every  minute  point  beautifully  exemplifies  the  propriety 
of  the  word  of  Grod.  Men  have  fancied  contradictions ; 
they  have  fallen  back  on  the  old  resource  of  opposed 
documents  put  together.  There  ia  not  the  slightest 
reason  for  suspicion.  It  is  the  same  inspired  historian 
who  presents  the  subject  in  more  than  one  point  oi 
view,  but  always  consistently,  and  with  a  divine  pur- 
pose which  governs  alL  Every  great  writer,  as  far  as 
he  can  go,  illustrates  this  plan — indeed  eveiybody,  we 
may  say.  If  you  are  speaking  in  the  intimacies  of  the 
family,  you  do  not  adopt  the  same  language  towards 
your  parents,  wife,  child,  or  servant^  still  less  towards  a 
stranger  outside.  Is  there  then  any  contradiction  to 
be  surmised  ?    Both  may  be  perfectly  right,  and  both 


GENESIS  L-XI.  41 

absolutely  true;  but  there  is  a  diflference  of  manner 
and  phraseology,  because  of  a  difference  of  object  before 
you.  It  is  no  otherwise  with  God's  word,  save  that  all 
illustrations  fiedl  to  measure  the  depth  of  the  differences 
in  it 

Thus  in  chapter  vi.  it  is  said  that  "the  earth  was 
corrupt  before  God,  and  the  earth  was  filled  with 
violence."  It  is  not  "  Jehovah  "  now  but  "  God/'  "And 
God  looked  upon  the  earth,  and,  behold,  it  was  corrupt; 
for  all  flesh  had  corrupted  his  way  upon  the  earth." 
What  does  He  do  then?  He  directs  the  ark  to  be 
made.  For  what  end  ?  The  preservation  of  the  creatures 
which  required  the  ark.  Hence  He  orders  that  two  of 
every  kind  should  be  taken  into  the  ark.  We  can  easily 
see  the  propriety  of  this.  It  is  very  simply  a  measure 
for  perpetuating  the  creature  by  God  the  Creator,  in 
spite  of  imminent  judgment.  It  has  nothing  to  do  with 
moral  relationships.  God  the  Creator  would  preserve 
such  of  the  creatures  as  required  the  shelter  of  the  ark. 
Here  then  we  only  hear  of  pairs  which  enter. 

In  chapter  vii.  we  have  another  order  of  facts.  It 
opens  thus :  "And  Jehovah  said  unto  Noah,  Come  thou 
and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark."  Is  this  merely  the  con- 
serving of  the  creature  ?  Not  so.  It  is  the  language 
of  One  who  has  special  relationships  with  Noah  and 
with  his  family.  "  Come  thou  into  the  ark,"  says  He ; 
"for  thee  have  I  seen  righteous  before  me  in  this 
generation."  "  Righteous  " — ^is  this  a  question  of  creation 
as  such?  It  is  not,  but  rather  of  moral  relationship.  "For 
thee  have  I  seen  righteous  before  me  in  this  generation. 
Of  every  clean  beast  thou  shalt  take  to  thee  by  sevens. 


42        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

the  male  and  his  female :  and  of  beasts  that  are  not 
clean  by  two,  the  male  and  his  female.  Of  fowls  also 
of  the  air  by  sevens,  the  male  and  the  female ;  to  keep 
seed  aHve  upon  the  &ce  of  aU  the  earth."  Certainly 
this  is  not  mere  creation  in  view,  but  special  dealings  of 
a  moral  sort  Almost  every  word  gives  evidence  of  it. 
"Of  every  clean  beast  thou  shalt  take  to  thee  by  sevens 
....  and  of  beasts  that  are  not  clean  by  two."  It  is 
God  providing  not  for  the  perpetuation  of  the  creature 
merely,  but  with  marked  completeness  for  sacrifice. 
Consequently  we  have  this  perfect  care  over  the  mam- 
tenance  of  H!is  rights  and  place  as  One  that  governed 
morally.  "And  Noah  did  according  unto  all  that 
Jehovah  commanded." 

Thus  in  relation  to  His  place  as  creator  God  preserved 
two  of  every  sort ;  in  relation  to  His  own  moral 
government  He  would  have  seven  taken  into  the  ark — 
seven  animals  of  each  clean  sort ;  of  the  unclean  just 
enough  would  be  there  to  preserve  what  He  had  made. 
It  is  evident  therefore  that  in  the  one  case  we  have 
that  which  was  generally  nece^ary,  in  the  other  case 
that  which  was  special  and  due  to  the  relationship  in 
which  man  was  placed  with  Jehovah.  Thus  it  is  seen 
at  once  that,  instead  of  these  wonderful  communications 
being  merely  earlier  and  later  legends  put  together  by 
a  still  more  modem  editor,  who  tried  to  make  some- 
thing complete  by  stringing  together  what  did  not  aptly 
fit,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God  who  gives  us 
various  sides  of  the  truth,  each  falling  under  the  title 
and  style  suitable  to  God,  according  to  that  which  was 
in  hand.  Put  them  out  of  their  order,  and  all  becomes 
confused;  receive  them  as  God  has  written  them,  and 


GENESIS  L-XL  43 

there  is  perfection  in  the  measure  in  which  you  under- 
stand them. 

So  we  find  what  shews  the  folly  of  this  yet  more  in 
what  follows :  "  And  they  that  went  in  went  in  male 
and  female  of  all  flesh,  as  Gk)d  commanded  him;  and 
Jehovah  shut  him  in."  The  two  terms  occur  in  the 
very  same  verse ;  yet  is  there  not  an  evident  propriety 
in  each  case?  Unquestionably.  They  went  in  male 
and  f emcde.  What  is  the  idea  ?  Moral  relationship  ?  Not 
at  alL  "  Male  and  female"  has  to  do  in  itself  with  the 
constitution  of  the  creature,  nothing  whatever  neces- 
sarily with  moral  relationship.  In  male  and  female 
God  acts  according  to  His  rights  and  wisdom  in  creation ; 
and  consequently  there  it  is  said,  "as  Elohim  com- 
manded him."  But  when  all  this  is  done  with,  who 
was  it  that  shut  Noah  in  ?  "Jehovah."  There  we  have 
delight  in  the  man  who  had  found  grace  in  His 
eyes.  No  doubt  the  mere  act  could  have  been  effected 
in  other  ways.  Noah  might  have  been  enabled  to  shut 
MmseK  in;  but  how  much  mbre  blessed  that  Jehovah 
should  do  it !  There  was  no  fear  then.  Had  it  been 
merely  said  that  Elohim  shut  him  in,  it  would  have 
simply  suggested  the  Creator's  care  of  every  creature ; 
but  Jehovah's  shutting  him  in  points  to  special  relation- 
ship, and  the  interest  taken  in  that  righteous  man. 
What  can  be  more  beautiful  in  its  season  ? 

Thus  a  peculiarity  in  scripture,  when  understood, 
is  pregnant  with  truth,  having  its  source  in  God's 
wisdom,  not  in  human  infirmity.  If  we  did  not  see  it 
at  once,  this  was  merely  because  of  our  dulness.  When 
we  begin  to  enter  into  its  real  meaning,  and  hold  fast 
that  which  is  clearly  the  intended  truth,  the  theory  of 


44        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Elohistic  and  Jehovistic  annalists,  with  their  redaction, 
vanishes  into  its  own  nothingness.  I  confess  human — 
my  own — ignorance ;  but  not  that  there  is  a  single 
instance  where  God  has  not  employed  the  terms  in  all 
respects  the  best.  No  language  could  express  so  well 
the  truth  as  that  which  God  has  employed  as  a  matter 
of  fact. 

The  next  chapter  (viii.)  shews  God's  remembrance 
of  Noah  and  every  living  thing.  Here  it  would  not 
have  served  His  purpose  to  say,  "Jehovah  remem- 
bered every  living  thing,"  because  every  living  thing 
was  not  in  moral  relationship  with  God.  Noah  was 
imdoubtedly ;  but  it  is  not  always,  nor  here,  the  aim  to 
draw  attention  to  what  was  special. 

In  due  time  the  ark  rests  upon  Ararat,  and  then 
follows  the  strikingly  beautiful  incident  of  the  raven 
and  the  dove,  which  has  been  often  before  us,  and  &om 
which  therefore  we  may  pass  on.  Afterwards  God  tells 
Noah  to  come  forth — he  and  all  the  other  creatures. 

"And  Noah,"  it  is  written  in  verse  20,  "builded 
an  altar."  Unto  whom?  Unto  God?  Most  appro- 
priately it  is  to  Jehovah  now.  Without  loss,  these  two 
things  could  not  be  transposed.  He  took  then,  it  is 
said,  "of  every  clean  beast,  and  of  every  clean  fowl." 
Yes,  Jehovah  is  in  question.  It  is  the  relationship 
of  Noah  which  appears  here.  It  is  the  special  place 
in  which  he  stood  that  was  witnessed  by  the  sacrifice 
thereon  offered.  And  there  Jehovah,  accepting  the 
sweet  savour,  declares  that  He  "will  not  again  curse 
the  ground  any  more  for  man's  sake.  For  the  imagina- 
tion of  man's  heart  is  evil  from  his  youth." 

Here  again  how  observable  is  the  transparent  and 


GENESIS  I.- XL  45 

self-consistent  tnith  of  scripture.  The  statement  before 
US  may  look  at  first  unaccountable ;  but  when  care- 
fully weighed  and  reflected  on,  the  propriety  of  it 
becomes  manifest  That  man's  being  evil  was  a  groimd 
for  sending  the  flood  we  can  all  see ;  but  what  depth 
of  grace  in  the  declaration  that  God  knew  perfectly  the 
ruined  condition  of  man  at  the  very  time  when  He 
pledges  His  word  that  there  shall  come  no  more  flood 
on  the  earth !    This  is  brought  before  us  here. 

Here  then  we  enter  on  an  entirely  new  state  of 
things,  and  a  truth  of  capital  importance  for  every- 
body to  consider  who  has  not  already  made  it  his  own. 
What  was  the  groimd  of  God's  delays  in  the  previous 
time  ?  Absence  of  evil  in  earth ;  innocence  in  man ; 
it  was  a  sinless,  imfallen  world.  What  is  the  groimd 
of  God's  dealings  now  ?  Man  is  fallen,  and  the  creature 
made  subject  to  vanity.  All  the  delays  of  God  now 
proceed  on  the  fact  that  the  first  man  is  in  sin.  Leave 
out  the  fall ;  fail  to  keep  it  before  you  and  test  all  with 
that  in  mind,  and  you  will  be  wrong  about  every  result. 
Next  to  Christ  Himself,  and  what  we  have  by  and  in 
Him,  there  is  nothing  of  greater  importance  than  the 
confession  of  the  truth,  both  that  God  created,  and  that 
His  creation  is  in  ruins.  Yoiir  judgment  alike  of  God 
and  man  will  be  falsified;  your  estimate  of  the  past 
and  your  expectations  of  the  future  will  all  be  vain, 
unless  you  steadily  remember  that  God  now  in  all  His 
dealings  with  man  acts  on  the  solemn  fact  of  sin — 
original  and  universal  sin.  Will  it  be  so  always  ?  By  no 
means.  There  is  a  day  coming  when  the  ground  of  God's 
action  will  be  neither  innocence  nor  sin,  but  righteous- 
ness. But  for  that  day  we  must  wait,  the  day  of  eternity 


46  LECTtJRES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

— of  "  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth."  It  is  a  real 
joy  to  know  that  it  is  coming ;  but  until  that  day  God 
always  has  before  Him,  as  the  theatre  and  material 
where  He  acts,  a  world  ruined — ruined  by  sinful  man. 

Thanks  be  to  God,  One  has  come  who  is  before  Him  in 
unfaiUng  sweet  savour,  so  that  if  sin  be  in  the  back- 
groimd,  there  cannot  but  be  also  what  He  introduces 
of  His  own  free  grace.  If  His  servant  bids  others 
behold  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of 
the  world,  how  much  more  does  God  Himself  behold 
Christ  and  His  sacrifice !  Need  it  be  said  that  as  far  as 
its  efficacy  is  concerned,  and  God's  delight  in  it.  He 
does  not  wait  for  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth, 
either  to  enjoy  it  Himself  or  make  known  its  value  to 
us?  In  short,  Christ  has  intervened,  and  this  most 
weighty  consequence  is  connected  with  it — that,  although 
everything  manifests  evil  and  ruin  increasingly,  God  has 
triumphed  in  grace  and  in  faith  after  the  fall  and  before 
"  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth 
righteousness."  God,  having  introduced  His  own  Son, 
has  won  the  victory,  the  fruits  of  which  He  gives  to  us 
by  faith  before  our  possession  is  displayed  by-and-by. 

Let  it  suffice  to  refer  to  the  great  principle,  remember- 
ing that  the  theatre  of  the  ages  or  dispensations  of  Gt)d 
is  the  world  since  the  flood.  It  is  a  mistake  to  include 
the  world  before  that  event  in  the  time  of  dispensations. 
There  was  no  dispensation,  properly  so  called,  before  it. 
What  dispensation  could  there  be?  What  does  it  mean? 
When  man  in  Paradise  was  forbidden  to  eat  of  the  tree 
of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  he  broke  the  command 
immediately — as  far  as  appears,  the  first  day.  Not  that 
one  could  say  positively  that  so  it  was ;  but  certainly 


GENESIS  I.- XI.  .  47 

it  is  to  be  supposed  that  little  time  could  have  passed 
after  receiving  the  woman,  his  wife.  And  the  patent  fact 
lies  before  us,  that  to  join  his  wife  in  the  sad  sin  is  his  first 
recorded  act.  What  dispensation  or  age  was  there  here  ? 
And  what  followed  after  it  ?  There  was  no  longer  trial 
in  Paradise,  because  man  was  turned  out.  By  what 
formal  test  was  he  proved  outside  ?  By  none  whatever. 
Man,  the  race,  became  simply  outcasts  morally — nothing 
else — from  that  day  till  after  the  flood.  Not  but  that  God 
wrought  in  His  grace  with  individuals.  Abel,  Enoch, 
Noah,  we  have  already  seen.  There  was  also  a  wonder- 
ful type  of  deliverance  through  Christ  in  the  ark — 
happily  so  familiar  to  most.  But  it  is  evident  that  dis- 
pensation, in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  there  was 
none.  There  was  a  trial  of  man  in  Eden,  and  he  fell 
immediately :  after  that  there  was  none  whatever,  in 
the  antediluvian  world.  The  history  supposes  man 
thenceforward  allowed  to  act  without  external  law 
or  government  to  control,  though  God  did  not  fail  to 
work  in  His  merciful  goodness — in  His  own  sove- 
reignty. 

But  after  the  flood  we  find  a  covenant  is  made  with 
the  earth  (chap,  ix.) :  the  principle  of  government  is 
set  up.  Then  we  enter  on  the  theatre  and  times  of 
dispensations.  One  sees  the  reason  why  man  before 
this  had  not  been  punished  by  the  judge ;  whereas 
after  the  flood  there  was  government  and  judicial  pro- 
ceeding. In  the  post-diluvian  earth  God  establishes 
principles  which  hold  their  course  throughout  the  whole 
scene  tiU  Jesus  came,  or  rather  till  He  not  only  come 
and  afl&rm  by  His  own  power  and  personal  reign  all  the 
ways  in  which  God  has  been  testing  and  trying  man. 


48        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

but  deliver  up  the  kingdom  to  the  Father,  that  God 
may  be  all  in  all,  when  He  shall  have  put  down  all 
rule,  and  all  authority  and  power. 

This  then  may  suflRce.  As  a  notice  of  God's  cove- 
nant with  the  earth,  I  may  just  refer,  in  passing,  to 
the  establishment  of  the  bow  in  the  cloud  as  the  sign 
of  the  mercy  of  Elohim  (verses  12-17). 

The  end  of  this  chapter  shews  that  the  man  in  whose 
person  the  principle  of  human  government  was  set  up 
could  not  govern  himself.  It  is  the  old  familiar  story, 
— man  tried  and  foimd  wanting  as  always.  This  gives 
occasion  to  the  manifestation  of  a  great  difference 
among  Noah's  sons,  and  to  the  solemn  words  which  the 
father  uttered  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  "  Cursed  be 
Canaan"  was  of  deep  interest,  especially  to  an  Israelite, 
but  in  truth  to  anyone  who  values  the  revelation  of 
God.  We  can  see  afterwards  how  verified  the  curse 
was,  as  it  will  be  yet  more.  The  sin  began  with  utter 
disrespect  to  a  father.  Not  to  speak  of  the  destroyed 
cities  of  the  plain,  they  had  in  Joshua's  day  sunk  into 
the  most  shameless  of  sinners  that  ever  disgraced  God 
and  defiled  the  earth.  The  believer  can  readily  under- 
stand how  Noah  was  divinely  led  to  pronoimce  a  just 
malediction  on  Canaan.*  "Cursed  [be]  Canaan;  a 
servant  of  servants  shall  he  be."  So  always  it  is.  A 
man  who  despises  him  whom  he  is  bound  to  honour, 
not  to  speak  of  the  special  distinction  which  God  had 

*  If  Canaan  drew  his  father  into  the  shameful  exposure  of  Noah, 
aU  can  see  how  just  the  sentence  was.  In  any  case  it  was  mercy  to 
confine  the  curse  certainly  earned  hy  Ham  within  the  narrowest 
limits,  instead  of  extending  it  to  all  his  posterity.  In  judgment  as 
in  grace  God  is  always  wise. 


GENESIS  I.- XL  49 

shown  him,  must  come  to  shame  and  degradation,  must 
be  not  merely  a  servant  but  "a  servant  of  servants." 
The  most  vaulting  pride  always  has  the  deepest  fall. 
On  the  other  hand,  "  Blessed  be  Jehovah  the  God" — 
for  God  does  not  dwell  upon  the  curse,  but  soon  turns 
to  the  blessing — "  Blessed  be  Jehovah  the  God  of 
Shem ;  and  Canaan  shall  be  his  servant."  And  Elohim, 
it  is  said,  "shall  enlarge  Japhet,  and  he  shall  dwell  in  the 
tents  of  Shem."  How  remarkably  this  has  been  made 
good  in  the  providential  history  of  the  world  I  need  not 
stay  to  prove,--how  Jehovah  God  connected  His  name 
with  Shem,  to  the  humiliation  of  Canaan,  and  how 
Elohim  enlarged  Japhet,  who  would  spread  himself 
not  merely  in  his  own  destined  lot,  but  even  dwell  in 
the  tents  of  Shem,  and  Canaan  humbled  there  too. 
How  true  of  the  energetic  Japhetic  race  that  pushed 
westward,  and  not  content  with  the  east,  pushes  round 
again  to  the  west — anywhere  and  everywhere.  Thus 
God  declares  Himself  in  every  word  He  utters.  A  little 
key  to  the  world's  history  is  contained  in  those  few 
words  of  Noah. 

Then  we  find  the  generations  of  the  sons  of  Shem. 
Without  pretending  to  enter  into  particulars,  this  I 
may  remark — that  in  the  Bible  there  is  not  a  more 
important  chapter  than  Genesis  x.  as  regards  the  provi- 
dential arrangement  of  tongues,  families,  and  nations. 
Here  alone  is  given  the  rise  of  diiBferent  races,  with 
their  sources.  Who  else  could  have  told  us  how  and 
when  the  earth  was  thus  divided  ?  For  this  was  a  new 
state  of  things,  not  only  not  at  all  in  the  world  before 
the  flood,  but  not  for  some  considerable  time  after  it, 

E 


50         LBCTCBES  OX  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

and  their  distribution  in  their  land&  This  is  the  divine 
ethnology.  Here  man  is  at  sea;  but  where  he  does 
anive  at  conclusions,  this  at  least  is  the  common  con- 
sent, as  liBLr  as  I  know,  of  all  who  have  given  their 
minds  to  the  studj,  that  there  are  three,  and  only  three, 
divisions  into  which  nations  properly  diverge.  So  it  is 
here.  The  word  of  Grod  is  before  them.  More  than 
that :  it  is  the  conviction  of  all  men,  and  men  worthy 
lo  be  listened  to,  that  not  more  surely  are  they  divided 
into  three  grand  lines  than  that  these  three  lines  had  a 
common  origin.  That  there  was  only  one  such  root  is 
the  statement  of  the  scriptures.  The  word  of  God  is 
always  right  The  details  are  of  the  highest  interest, 
more  especially  when  compared  with  the  predicted 
results  in  the  latter  day,  where  we  see  the  same  coim- 
tries  and  nations  re-appear  for  judgment  in  the  day  of 
Jehovah.  But  into  the  proof  of  this  we  cannot  now 
pause  to  enter. 

Chapter  xL  opens  with  the  sin  of  man,  which  led  to 
the  division  described  in  the  preceding  chapter,  the 
moral  reason  of  that  fact,  new  then,  but  still  in  its 
substance  going  on,  whatever  the  superficial  changes 
among  men  in  their  lands,  and  tongues,  and  political 
distribution.  Hitherto  they  had  been  of  one  lip ;  but 
combining  to  make  a  name  to  themselves,  lest  they 
should  be  scattered,  not  to  exalt  God  nor  confide  in 
Him,  they  had  their  language  confounded,  and  them- 
selves dispersed.  "  So  Jehovah  scattered  them  abioad 
from  thence  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth :  and  thej 
left  off  to  buUd  the  city.  Therefore  is  the  name  €^^^|^^ 
called  Babel ;  because  Jehovah  did  there  confound  ^^^^ 
langus^  of  all  the  earth :  and  from  thence  did 


GENESIS  I.- XI.  51 

them  abroad  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth"  (verses 
8,9). 

The  genealogy  of  Shem,  with  gradually  decreasing 
age  among  his  seed,  follows  down  to  Abram,  the  re- 
mainder of  the  chapter  being  thus  the  link  of  transition 
from  the  history  of  the  world  as  it  then  was,  and  in  its 
principle  still  is.  We  come  at  length  to  him  in  whom 
God  brings  in  wholly  new  principles  in  His  own  grace 
to  meet  a  new  and  monstrous  evil — ^idolatry.  This 
daring  evil  against  God,  we  know  from  Joshua  xxiv., 
was  then  spread  far  and  wide,  even  among  the  Shemitic 
race,  although  never  heard  of  in  scripture,  whatever 
man's  lawlessness  in  other  ways,  before  the  deluge. 
But  here  I  stop  for  the  present. 

May  we  confide  not  only  in  scripture,  but  in  Him 
who  gave  it!  May  we  seek  to  be  taught  more  and 
more  His  truth,  leaning  on  His  grace !  He  will  with- 
hold no  good  from  those  who  walk  uprightly;  and 
there  is  no  other  way  than  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 


■  / 


a  2 


52  liECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


II. 


GENESIS. 

Chaps.  zii.-zx7. 

We  have  had  hitherto  God's  account  of  that  which 
He  had  made;  then  the  trial  and  utter  ruin  of  the 
creature,  with  the  revelation  of  divine  mercy  in  Christ 
the  Lord.  We  have  had  in  fine  the  judgment  of  the 
world  before  the  flood,  and  the  universal  history,  we 
may  say,  of  the  sources  of  nations,  compared  with 
which  there  is  nothing  safe  or  sure,  even  to  this  day, 
spite  of  all  pretensions  of  men.  Their  true  history, 
and,  scanty  though  it  seems,  the  fullest  and  most  com- 
prehensive, is  in  that  one  short  chapter — Genesis  x. — 
which  was  before  us  last  night;  the  following  chap- 
ter (xi.)  disclosing  the  moral  ground  of  that  dispersion 
which  was  merely  given  as  a  fact  before.  Then 
the  Spirit  of  God  takes  up  not  merely  the  source  of 
that  nation  that  He  was  about  to  form  for  His  own 
praise  and  glory  in  the  earth,  but  a  regular  line  suc- 
cessionally  given  of  the  chosen  family  from  Shem  till 
we  come  to  Abram. 

This  introduces  chapter  xii.  on  wholly  new  ground  It 
is  evident  that  here  we  are  entering  a  sensibly  different 
atmosphere.  It  is  no  longer  man  as  such,  but  a  man 
separated  of  God  to  Himself,  and  this  by  a  promise 


GENESIS   XIT.-XXT.  53 

given  to  one  chosen  and  called — a  new  root  and  stock. 
These  are  principles  which  God  never  has  abandoned 
since,  and  never  wilL  Let  me  repeat  that  it  is  no 
longer  mankind  as  hitherto,  nor  nations  only,  but  we 
have  the  call  of  God  to  Himself — the  only  saving 
means  where  ruin  has  entered  before  judgment  vindi- 
cates God's  nature  and  will  by  His  power.  For  we 
know  from  elsewhere  that  idolatry  was  now  prevalent 
among  men  even  among  the  descendants  of  Shem,  when 
a  man  was  called  out  by  and  to  the  true  God  on  a 
principle  which  did  not  change  nor  judge  (save  morally) 
the  newly-formed'  associations  of  the  world,  but  sepa- 
rated him  who  obeyed  to  divine  promises  with  better 
hopes.  Abram,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  was  the  object 
of  His  choice.  I  am  not  denying  that  God  had  chosen 
before;  but  now  it  became  a  publicly  afl&rmed  prin- 
ciple. It  was  not  only  a  call  known  secretly  to  him 
who  was  its  object,  but  there  was  one  separated  to 
God  by  His  calling  him  out  as  the  depositary  of  His 
promise,  the  witness  of  it  being  before  the  eyes  of  all, 
and  in  consequence  blessed,  and  a  channel  of  blessing. 
For  what  might  seem  to  man's  narrow  mind  an  austere 
severing  from  his  fellows  w^s  in  point  of  fact  for  the 
express  purpose  of  securing  divine  and  eternal  blessing, 
and  not  to  himself  and  his  seed  alone,  but  an  ever-flow- 
ing stream  of  blessing  which  would  not  fail  to  all  the 
families  of  the  earth.  God  will  yet  shew  this.  For  the 
present  it  has  come  to  nought,  as  everything  else  does 
in  the  hands  of  man ;  but  God  will  yet  prove  in  the 
face  of  this  world  how  truly  and  divinely,  and  in  the 
interests  of  man  himself,  as  well  as  of  His  own  glory. 
He  wrought  in  His  call  of  Abram. 


54  LDCTUSES  OX  THE  FESTATEITCH. 

Abiam  comes  foith  therefore  at  Crod's  bidding ; 
he  departs  from  his  comitnr ;  but  fiist  of  all  we  find 
a  measure  of  infirmity  which  hindered.  There  was 
one  who  hnng  upon  the  called  out  man,  whose  pre- 
sence was  ever  a  clog :  the  company  of  one  not  in  the 
calling  always  must  be  sa  Terah  was  not  the  object  of 
the  call ;  and  yet  it  was  difficult  to  refuse  his  company; 
but  the  effect  was  grave,  for  as  long  as  Terah  was  there, 
Abram,  in  point  of  fact,  did  not  reach  Canaan.  Terah 
dies  (for  the  Lord  graciously  controls  things  in  favour 
of  those  whose  hearts  are  simple,  even  in  the  midst  of 
weakness) ;  and  now  "  Abram  set  forth  to  go  into  the 
land  of  Canaan,  and  into  the  land  of  Canaan  he  came." 
The  Canaanite,  it  is  added,  was  then  in  the  land.*  ''And 
Jehovah  appeared  unto  Abram,  and  said,  IJnto  thy 
seed  will  I  give  tins  land:  and  there  builded  he  an 
altar  unto  Jehovah,  who  appeared  unto  him." 

Here  we  find  for  the  first  time  the  principle  so  dear  to 
our  hearts — the  worship  of  God  founded  on  a  distinct 
appearing  of  Himself  (it  always  must  be  so).     Man 

*  It  is  wholly  unfounded  to  infer  that  these  words,  or  Qen,  ziiL  7, 
implj  that,  when  the  writer  lived,  the  Canaanites  and  Perizzites  had 
been  expelled  from  the  land.  Thej  shew  that  the  first  if  not  the< 
second  were  in  the  land  when  Alftam  entered  it ;  and  that  both  were 
settled  there  when  he  returned  from  Egypt.  That  this  was  a  trial  to 
the  patriarch  we  can  readily  understand ;  bat  he  had  not  to  wait  till 
Moses'  time,  still  less  Joshua's,  to  know  that  they  and  all  the  other 
intruders  were  doomed.  See  Gren.  xy.  16,  18-21.  No  doubt  their 
expulsion  was  yet  future ;  but  the  writer  like  Abram  believed  in 
Jehovah,  who  knows  and  reveals  the  end  frx)m  the  beginning.  I  am 
aware  of  Aben  Ezra's  insinuation  that  the  clause  was  interpolated, 
and  of  Dean  Prideaux  yielding  to  it,  though  the  latter  saves  the  credit 
of  scripture  by  attributing  it  to  Ezra,  an  inspired  editor.  But  there 
is  no  need  of  such  a  supposition  here,  however  true  elsewhere  and  in 
itself  legitimate. 


GENESIS  XII.- XXV.  55 

cannot  reason  out  that  which  is  a  ground  of  worship. 
It  flows  from,  and  is  presented  to  us  as  flowing  from, 
the  appearing  of  Jehovah.  It  is  not  merely  the  call 
now,  but  Jehovah  "  appeared"  unto  him.  True  worship 
must  spring  from  the  Lord,  known  in  that  which  at  any 
rate  is  a  figure  of  personal  knowledge  of  Himself.  It 
is  not  only  thus  a  blessing  conferred,  but  in  Himself 
known.  Of  course  no  one  means  to  deny  the  fact 
that  until  He  was  known  in  the  revelation  of  His  own 
Son  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  there  could  not 
be  that  which  we  understand  now  as  "  worship  in  spirit 
and  in  truth ;"  but  at  least  this  sets  forth  the  principle. 

There  is  another  thing  also  to  be  observed  here :  it 
was  only  in  Canaan  that  this  was  or  could  be.  There 
was  no  worship  in  Mesopotamia;  no  altar,  which  was 
the  syiribol  of  it,  was  seen  there.  Neither  was  there  an 
altar  in  Haran.  It  is  in  Canaan  we  see  one  first. 
Canaan  is  the  clear  type  of  that  heavenly  ground  where 
we  know  Christ  now  is.  Thus  we  see  first  Jehovah 
personally  revealing  Himself;  and  this  next  in  con- 
nection with  the  type  of  the  heavenly  places.  These 
are  clearly  the  two  roots  of  worship,  as  brought  before 
us  in  this  instructive  passage. 

Further,  Abram  moves  about  in  the  land;  he  pitches 
his  tent  elsewhere.  This  was  of  great  importance.  He 
was  a  pilgrim,  not  a  settler  in  the  lancL  He  was  as 
much  a  pUgrim  in  the  land  as  before  he  came  there.  It 
was  evident  that  he  was  a  pilgrim^  when  he  left  all  dear 
to  him,  whether  country,  or  kindred,  or  father's  house ; 
but  when  in  the  land  he  did  not  settle  down.  He  still 
pitches  his  tent,  but  he  also  builds  his  altar.  Who 
could  hesitate  to  say  that  in  the  land  Abram  acquired 


56  LECrUBES  ON  THE  PEIJ^ATEUCH. 

a  more  truly  heavenly  intelligence  ?  The  promise  of 
the  land  from  God  brought  him  out  of  his  own  land — 
out  of  that  which  is  the  figure  of  the  earth ;  but  when 
in  Canaan  God  raised  his  eyes  to  heaven,  instead  of 
permitting  them  to  rest  on  the  world.  And  this  is 
precisely  what  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  shews  us, — 
not  alone  the  faith  which  brought  him  into  the  land, 
but  the  faith  which  kept  him  a  stranger  when  thera 
This  is  precious  indeed,  and  exactly  the  faith  of 
Abram. 

His  worship  then  we  have  in  connection  with  his 
sustained  pilgrim  character  in  the  land  of  promise. 

Then  we  have  another  thing, — ^n^  mere  infirmity 
but  alas !  failure — open  and  serious  failure.  He  who 
had  come  out  to  God's  call,  the  stranger  in  the  land 
that  was  given  him  of  God,  fearing  the  pressure  of 
circumstances,  goes  down  into  the  granary  of  the  earth, 
the  land  which  boasts  of  exhaustless  resources.  Abram 
went  there  of  his  own  motion,  without  Grod  or  His 
word.  Not  only  is  no  altar  there,  but  he  is  without 
the  guidance  and  guard  of  divine  power  morally. 
Abram  fails  miserably.  Say  not  that  this  is  to  dis- 
parage the  blessed  man  of  (rod ;  it  is  rather  to  feel  and 
to  confess  what  we  are,  which  is  as  much  a  part  (how- 
ever Jow)  of  our  Christian  duty  as  to  adore  what  Grod 
is  in  His  own  excellency  to  our  own  souls.  Flesh  is 
no  better  in  an  Abram  than  in  any  other.  It  is  the 
same  ruinous  quagmire  wherever  trusted,  in  every 
person  and  in  any  circumstancea  And  there  it  is  that 
Abram  (who  had  already  failed  in  the  imbelief  which 
induced  him  to  seek  Egypt,  away  from  the  land  into 
which  God  had  called  him)  denies  his  wife,  exposing 


GENESIS  xn.-xxv.  57 

her  to  the  most  imminent  danger  of  defilement,  and 
bringing  not  a  blessing  on  the  families  of  the  earth, 
but  a  plague  from  Jehovah  on  Pharaoh  and  his  house. 
Thus  Abram  proves  the  utter  hopelessness  either  of 
blessing  to  others  or  preservation  even  for  ourselves 
when  straying  from  the  place  into  which  God  calls  us. 
But  God  was  faithful,  and  in  chapter  xiii.  Abram  is 
seen  returning  to  the  place  where  his  tent  was  at  the 
beginning.  He  is  restored,  and  so  resumes  his  place  of 
pilgrim,  and  along  with  it  of  a  worshipper.  Such  is 
the  restoring  goodness  of  God.  But  here  we  find 
another  encumbrance  in  Lot,  if  we  may  so  say,  although 
personally  a  man  of  God.  The  Spirit  bears  witness 
that  he  was  righteous,  but  he  had  no  such  faith  as 
Abram,  nor  was  he  included  in  that  character  of  call 
which  we  must  carefully  discriminate  from  the  inward 
working  of  divine  grace.  Let  us  bear  in  mind  that 
Abram  had  the  public  line  of  testimony  for  God,  and 
the  place  of  special  promise.  It  is  mere  ignorance  to 
suppose  that  there  were  not  saints  of  God  outside  that 
call,  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  question  of 
being  saints,  for  Lot  clearly  was  one ;  and  we  shall  find 
from  the  very  next  chapter  that  he  is  not  the  only  one. 
But  Lot's  hanging  upon  Abram,  though  it  had  not  the 
same  neutralizing  effect  as  his  father  Terah,  never- 
theless did  bring  in  difficulties.  And  here  again 
Abram,  restored  in  his  soul,  shines  according  to  the 
simplicity  of  faith.  It  was  not  for  him  to  contend. 
Alas  !  Lot  was  not  ashamed  to  choose.  He  used  his 
eyes  for  himself.  Fully  owning  jiim  to  be  a  believer, 
it  is  plain  that  he  lacked  faith  for  his  present  walk. 
He  preferred  to  choose  for  himself  rather  than  ask 


66  1SCTUSE&  OS  THX  PIEKTiTEUCS. 

God  to  ffTt.  Abrom  leEt  all  calmlf  inth  God.  It  was 
"welL 

Afber  Lot  Lad  thus  taken  the  best  fisr  himfldf,  dis- 
graoefol  as  it  vils  that  the  n^iihew  RKnmM  have  Tentured 
BO  to  act  in  a  lazid  irhich  Grod  Lad  psxamised  to  Abiam 
onlr^  another  thereon  decides  the  Tnatter  "Jehovah 
said  unto  Abram,  a&er  that  Loit  ^was  separated  from 
Lira.'*  So  iLe  Spirit  notes  now  that  a&  vas  aoooidiiig 
to  the  simple  will  of  God,  wLo  was  no  heedlera  spec- 
lauir,  and  does  not  fail  to  dear  ofT  the  elempiitB  that 
Lindej.  Now  that  it  was  sou  JeSiofvaL  sud,  '  Hit  up 
tLine  ejes  and  look  from,  the  place  wbeie  thou  ait, 
nonLward  and  somhwaid  and  eastward  and  westward," 
— Htt  h?A  never  said  so  before — ^  for  afi  the  land  whidi 
tLoG  saesi,  Vj  thee  will  I  give  it.  and  id  thy  seed  for 
ever.  And  I  will  make  ihr  seed  as  the  dost  of  the 
eaitl:,  ic^  then  sha3  thj  seed  ako  be  niunbeied.  Anse, 
walk  :£m>;!gh  tbe  land,'' — ^Abism  was  to  take  possession 
by  ^::h — "■  in  the  length  or  it  and  in  the  bieadth  of  it, 
for  I  will  give  it  mito  thee.  Thai  Al^am  lemored  his 
tent,  and  came  and  dwelt  in  the  jdain  of  Mamie  which 
i>  in  Hebron,  and  built  there  an  ahar  nnto  Jehovah." 
Well  he  might !  Thus  we  leazn  that  there  is  a  fresh 
manifestation  of  worship,  and  mider  the  happiest  pos- 
sible circumstances  to  the  close  of  the  chapter. 

This  port  is  concluded  by  chapter  xiv.  For  all  these 
chapters  may  be  viewed  as  forming  one  main  section  of 
the  life  of  Abram.  It  is  more  particularly  what  pertains 
to  him  publii^ly ;  consequently  we  have  as  the  public  cha- 
racter of  Abram  the  separating  call,  the  promise  secured, 
himself  constituted  manifestly  a  pilgrim  as  well  as  a 
worshipper  in  the  land.     It  is  all  vain  to  talk  about 


GENESIS  xn.-xxv.  59 

being  a  pilgrim  in  heart.  God  looks  for  it  thoroughly ; 
but  He  does  not  constitute  us  necessarily  the  judges, 
though  no  doubt  those  who  are  most  simple  will  not 
mind  the  judgment  of  their  fellows.  At  the  same  time 
it  is  well  to  judge  in  grace  where  we  have  to  do  with 
others.  If  there  is  reality,  it  will  commend  itself  to 
the  conscience  of  others ;  but  I  do  say  that  to  be  mani- 
festly, indisputably  a  pilgrim  is  the  only  right  thing 
for  one  who  is  thus  called  out  of  God,  as  well  as  a 
worshipper,  no  less  truly  separate  from  the  world  than 
knowing  and  enjoying  the  God  who  called  him  out. 
Then  we  have  seen  the  fatal  absence  of  truth  when  the 
faithful  are  in  the  type  of  this  world,  Egypt ;  and  the 
sustaining  grace  which  restores  and  gives  back  the 
place  of  one  who  was  manifestly  a  worshipper  to  the 
last.  These  were  the  great  points  of  his  public  separated 
career. 

The  work  is  closed,  as  remarked,  by  chapter  xiv. 
where  we  see  a  raid  made  by  certain  more  distant 
kings  of  the  earth  against  those  who  ruled  in  the  valley 
of  the  Jordan  or  the  neighbourhood,  four  against  five. 
In  the  affray  between  them,  he  who  had  chosen  the 
world  suffers  from  the  world.  Lot  with  all  that  he  had 
was  swept  away  by  the  conquering  kings  who  came 
from  the  north-east,  and  thereon  Abram  (guided  of  God 
I  cannot  doubt)  with  his  armed  servants,  goes  forth  in 
the  manifest  power  of  God  ;  for  the  conquerors  as 
thoroughly  fall  before  Abram  as  the  others  had  been 
conquered  by  them.  Thereon  the  priest  of  the  Most 
High  God  comes  forth  (mysteriously,  no  doubt)  king  of 
Salem  as  well  as  in  his  own  name,  king  of  righteous- 
ness.    On  this  the  apostle  Paul  enlarges  in  the  epistle 


60  LEcrruBES  on  the  pentateuch. 

to  the  Hebrews,  where  he  shews  us  the  close  of  the 
public  career  of  pilgrimage  and  worship  for  the  man  of 
faith.  For  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself  is  the  anti-typical 
Melchisedec  who  will  bring  forth  refreshment  when 
the  last  victory  has  been  won  at  the  end  of  this  age. 
Then  the  assembled  kings  will  have  come  to  nought 
after  fearful  convulsions  among  the  other  potsherds 
of  the  earth;  and  the  Most  High  will  bring  in  that 
magnificent  scene  of  blessing  which  was  represented  by 
Melchisedec.  For  God  in  Christ  will  take  the  place  of 
the  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth,  delighting  in  the  joy 
of  man,  as  man  will  be  made  to  delight  in  the  blessing 
of  God;  when  it  will  not  be  as  now  simply  sacrifice  and 
intercession  grounded  upon  it,  but  when,  besides  this 
which  finds  its  place  elsewhere  and  which  is  now  the 
only  comfort  for  our  souls,  there  will  be  a  new  scene  and 
God  will  take  another  character,  the  Most  High  God,  and 
then  all  false  gods  shall  fall  before  Him.  It  is  clearly 
therefore  the  concluding  scene  of  this  series  and  the  type 
of  the  millennial  age.  The  Lord  Jesus  will  be  the  uniting 
bond,  so  to  speak,  between  heaven  and  earth,  when  He 
will  bless  God  in  the  name  of  Abram,  and  He  will 
bless  Abram  in  the  name  of  God.  This  then,  in  my 
judgment,  winds  up  the  series  which  began  with  chap- 
ter xii. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  on  this  occasion  that  Abram 
builds  no  altar  here.  And  as  there  was  no  altar, 
so  the  course  of  pilgrimage  is  run.  Separateness  from 
the  world  and  heavenly  worship  are  no  longer  found. 
A  tent  and  altar  would  be  as  unsuitable,  reared  by 
Abram  at  this  jimcture,  as  before  they  were  exactly 
to  the  purpose.     It  is  the  millennial  scene  when  God 


GENESIS  xn.-xxv.  61 

alone  is  exalted,  His  enemies  confounded,  His  people 
saved  and  blessed. 

Chapter  xv.  introduces  a  new  character  of  communi- 
cations from  God.  It  will  be  observed  therefore  that 
the  language  indicates  a  break  or  change.  The  phrase 
"after  these  things"  separates  what  is  to  follow  from 
what  had  gone  before,  which  had  come  to  its  natural 
conclusion.  I  think  I  may  appeal  to  the  Christian  as 
to  these  things,  without  in  the  least  pretending  to  do 
more  than  give  a  judgment  upon  it.  Nevertheless, 
when  you  find  a  number  of  scriptures  which  all  march 
on  simply  and  without  violence,  clothed  with  a  certain 
character,  and  all  in  the  same  direction,  we  may  fairly 
gather  that  as  we  know  it  was  not  mere  man  who  wrote, 
so  also  the  confidence  is  to  be  cherished  that  it  is  God 
who  deigns  to  give  us  the  meaning  of  His  own  word. 
I  grant  you  that  truth  must  carry  its  own  evidence 
along  with  it — the  stamp  and  consistency  of  that  which 
reveals  what  our  God  is  to  our  souls.  Undoubtedly  it 
becomes  us  to  be  humble,  distrusting  ourselves,  and 
ever  ready  to  accept  the  corrections  of  others.  I  believe, 
however,  that  so  far  as  we  have  spoken,  such  is  the 
general  meaning  of  these  three  chapters.  From  this 
point  you  will  observe  a  striking  change.  It  is  not 
only  said  "  After  these  things,"  as  marking  a  break,  but 
also  a  new  phrase  occurs.  "  The  word  of  Jehovah  came 
unto  Abram  in  a  vision."  We  had  nothing  at  all  like 
this  before.  "Jehovah  called,"  "Jehovah  appeared," 
"Jehovah  said,"  but  not  as  here  "  the  word  of  Jehovah." 

It  is  a  new  beginning.  And  that  this  is  the  case  may 
be  made  still  more  manifest  when  we  bear  in  mind  what 
the  character  of  this  re-commencement  is.     "  Fear  not, 


62         LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Abram:  I  am  thy  shield  and  thy  exceeding  great  reward. 
And  Abram  said,  Adonai-Jehovah,  what  wilt  thou  give 
me,  seeing  I  go  childless,  and  the  steward  of  my  house 
is  this  Eliezer  of  Damascus  ?  And  Abmm  said,  Behold 
to  me  thou  hast  given  no  seed,  and,  lo,  one  born  in  my 
house  is  mine  heir.  And  behold  the  word  of  Jehovah."* 

*  Dr.  Davidson  (Introd.  O.  T.  i.  pp.  21,  22)  construes  this  into  an 
inconsistency  with  Exod.  vi.  3.  "  In  Genesis  xv.  it  is  recorded  that 
GK)d  was  manifested  to  Abraham,  who  believed  in  Jehovah f  and  there- 
fore his  *  faith  was  counted  for  righteousness.'  There  the  Lord  promises 
him  a  heir ;  declares  to  him  that  his  seed  shall  be  numberless  as  the 
stars  of  heaven,  shall  be  afiUcted  in  a  strange  land  400  years,  but  come 
forth  from  it  with  great  substance.  Jehovah  too  made  a  covenant  with 
Abraham,  and  assured  him  that  he  had  given  the  land  of  Canaan 
from  the  river  of  Egypt  to  the  Euphrates  to  his  posterity.  Here  is 
Jehovah  the  Covenant-Gk)d  revealing  himself  to  Abraham  in  a  pecu- 
liar manner,  encouraging  him  b^  a  fulness  of  promise,  and  confirming 
his  word  by  a  sign,  entering  into  covenant  with  his  servant,  and 
condescending  to  inform  him  of  the  future  of  his  race.  That  Abra- 
hfiun  apprehended  aright  the  character  of  the  Being  who  thus  revealed 
himself  is  evident  from  the  words  of  the  sixth  verse,  as  well  as  from 
the  language  he  addresses  to  Him  in  the  eighth.  Lord  God.  Hence 
on  the  hypothesis  of  one  and  the  same  writer  of  the  Pentateuch,  and 
the  correctness  of  the  alleged  explanation,  we  argue  that  the  contrast 
between  the  acquaintance  of  Abraham  with  the  name  Jehovah,  and 
the  full  knowledge  of  that  name  first  made  known  to  Moses,  is 
groundless  ....  If  our  view  of  Exodus  vi.  3  be  correct,  it  is  aU  but 
cortiin  that  one  writer  could  not  have  composed  the  book  of  Genesis, 
clso  he  would  have  violated  a  principle  expressly  enunciated  by  him- 
»<^lf  in  th<»  mwwgt)*."  The  mistake  throughout  is  due  to  the  want  of 
«i(*o\ntf  thnt  Utnl  only  in  Moses'  day  gave  His  i)er8onal  name  Jehovah 
M  th^  ^Mmal  chamcteristic  ground  of  relationship  to  the  sons  of 
liRt^^l  f  Af^  w^ro  to  walk  before  Him  as  Jehovah,  as  the  fathers  had 
xrniwii  ^H^(^^^^  tUm  *8  Kl-Shaddai.  But  it  is  in  no  way  meant  that 
\\\<^  \f\'swU  Jjte^^  *"^^  El-Shaddai  were  only  used,  or  their  import 
oi\lv  Vi^^^BL'^  Ua9M  and  the  patriarchs  respectively.  The 
'x^>Nr«li]r^^k^'*'*  employed  freely  before;  but  as  God  never 

^^  ^HVi^  before  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob  to  walk 

^    ^  ^^~  ^^  Qls  Almighty  protection,  so  He  first  gave 


GENESIS  xn.-xxv.  63 

Observe  it  here  again.     Clearly  therefore  it  is  a  charac- 
teristic that  cannot  be  neglected  without-  loss.     "  The 
word  of  Jehovah  came  nnto  him,  saying,  This  shall  not  be 
thine  heir,  but  he  that  shall  come  forth  out  of  thine  own 
bowels  shall  be  thine  heir.    And  he  brought  him  forth 
abroad,  and  said.  Look  now  toward  heaven,  and  tell  the 
stars  if  thou  be  able  to  number  them :  and  he  said  unto 
him.  So  shall  thy  seed  be.  And  he  believed  in  Jehovah." 
Is  not  this  a  fresh  commencement  ?    Is  it  not  the  evi- 
dent and  known  scripture  which  the  New  Testament 
uses  to  great  effect,  and  refers  to  repeatedly  as  the  great 
note  and  standing  witness  of  the  justification  of  Abram? 
If  we  do  not  go  back  again  with  the  type,  but  take  it 
as  following  the  scene  of  his  worship  and  pilgrimage, 
and  indeed  the  millennial  shadow,  it  has  no  force,  or 
would  mislead.     What !  man  justified  after  being  not 
called  out  only,  but  a  worshipper  entering  into  such 
wonders  as  Abram   had  done !    Take  it  as  a  recom- 
mencement, and  all  is  plain.     Justification  is  certainly 
not  after  the  Lord  had  been  leading  on  the  soul  in  the 
profound  way  in  which  Abram  had  been  taught.     I 
grant  you  the  order  of  facts  is  as  we  read  ;  but  what  we 
are  concerned  with  now  is  not  the  bare  history,  but  the 
form  in  which  God  has  presented  His  mind  to  us  in 

Israel  nationaUy  the  title  of  His  eternal  imchangeableness  as  Jehovah, 
as  that  on  which  they  might  count.  The  use  of  each  mune  has 
nothing  to  do  with  different  authors  or  documents,  but  depends  on 
moral  motives.  It  is  a  question  neither  of  antiquity  nor  of  piety :  not 
of  antiquity,  for  from  the  beginning  Jehovah  was  freely  employed ; 
not  of  piety,  for  the  Psalms  {e.g.  xlii.  Ixiii.  &c.)  shew  that  there  may 
he  as  genuine  and  fervent  piety  in  exercise  where  Elohim  is  the 
staple  as  where  Jehovah  is.  The  absence  or  presence  of  the  display 
of  His  covenant  character  of  relationship,  especially  with  Israel,  is  the 
true  and  invariable  key. 


64  LficruBES  OS  the  pentateuch. 

His  word.  He  has  so  ordered  the  drcumstances  of 
Abiam's  histoiy,  and  presented  them  with  the  stamp 
of  eternal  truth  on  them,  not  only  as  an  acconnt  of 
Abram,  but  looking  on  to  the  times  of  redemption,  in 
order  to  form  oar  souls  according  to  His  own  mind. 

I  consider  therefore  that»  as  the  former  series  gave  us 
the  public  life  of  Abram,  so  this  is  rather  that  which 
belongs  to  him  individually  considered,  and  the  dealings 
of  Grod  with  him  in  what  may  be  called  a  private 
rather  than  a  public  way.  Hence  therefore  we  shall 
find  that  there  is  this  further  series,  which  going  on 
from  chapter  xv.  closes  with  chapter  xxi,  where  again 
it  is  observable  that  there  follows  a  similar  introduc- 
tion to  a  new  series  afker  that.  For  the  beginning  of 
chapter  xxiL  runs  thus :  "  And  after  these  things."  Is 
it  not  plain  then  that  the  clause,  "  After  these  things," 
introduces  us  to  a  new  place  ?  I  am  not  aware  that 
the  same  phrase  occurs  anywhere  between.  Conse- 
quently there  is  an  evident  design  of  God  regarding  it. 
"We  shall  now  look  at  the  current  of  this  new  section, 
and  see  what  is  brought  before  us  in  these  chapters. 

First  of  all  there  is  founded  on  the  wants  which 
Abra9i  expresses  to  Grod  the  desire  that  it  should  not 
be  merely  an  adopted  child,  but  one  really  of  his  own 
blood.  It  was  a  desire  to  which  God  hearkened,  but  as 
it  was  a  feeling  which  emanated  from  no  higher  source 
than  Abram,  so  it  had  a  contracted  character  stamped 
on  it.  It  is  always  better  to  be  dependent  on  the  Lord 
for  everything.  It  is  not  a  question  of  merely  avoiding 
the  painful  way  in  which  Lot  exercised  his  choice,  but 
Abram  himself  is  not  at  the  height  of  communion  in 
this  chapter  whatever  God*s  mercy  to  him.    It  is  better 


GENESIS  XIL-XXV.  65 

to  wait  on  the  Lord  than  run  before  Him ;  and  we  are 
never  the  worse  that  He  should  take  the  first  step. 
Our  happy  place  is  always  confidence  in  His  love. 
Had  the  Lord  pressed  it  upon  His  servant  to  speak  to 
HiTn  with  open  heart,  it  would  have  been  another 
matter.  Abram  however  presented  his  desire,  and  the 
Lord  meets  it  graciously.  It  is  very  evident  that  He 
binds  HimseK  also  remarkably.  There,  was  given  to 
Abram  a  kind  of  seal  and  formal  deed  that  He  would 
secure  the  hoped-for  heir  to  him.  Who  could  gather 
from  this  that  Abram  is  here  found  in  the  brightest 
mood  in  which  the  Spirit  of  God  ever  presents  him  ?  He 
is  asking,  and  Jehovah  answers,  no  doubt ;  he  wants 
a  sign  whereby  he  may  know  that  he  shall  inherit  thus: 
"Whereby  shall  I  know  that  I  shall  inherit  it  ?"  This 
does  not  seem  to  rise  to  that  admirable  trust  in 
Jehovah  which  characterized  him  at  other  times.  This  is 
not  presuming  to  find  fault  with  one  where  one  would 
gladly  learn  much  ;  it  is  ours  to  search,  as  far  as 
grace  enables  us,  into  that  which  God  has  written  for 
our  instruction. 

Jehovah  accordingly  directs  him  to  take  a  heifer  and 
a  she-goat  and  a  ram  of  three  years  old,  and  a  turtle 
dove,  and  a  young  pigeon ;  and  then  "  when  the  sun 
was  going  down,  a  deep  sleep  fell  upon  him,  and  lo  an 
horror  of  great  darkness  feU  upon  him."  It  appears  to 
me  most  evident  that  the  circumstances  here  detailed 
were  suitable  to  the  condition  of  Abram;  that  there 
were  questions,  and  it  may  be  doubts,  connected  with 
that  prospect  which  Jehovah  had  put  before  his  soul ; 
and  that  consequently  we  may  safely  discover,  if  it 
were  only  by  the  manner  in  which  the  communication 

F 


66         LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

was  made  to  him,  his  state  of  experience  then.  Hence 
too  the  nature  of  the  communication:  "Be  sure," 
said  he,  *'  that  thy  seed  shall  be  a  stranger  in  a  land 
that  is  not  theirs,  and  shall  serve  them,  and  they  shall 
afflict  them  four  hundred  years.  And  also  that  nation 
whom  they  shall  serve  will  I  judge,  and  afterwards 
shall  they  come  out  with  great  substance.  And  thou 
shalt  go  to  thy  fathers  in  peace :  thou  shalt  be  buried 
at  a  good  old  age.  But  in  the  fourth  generation  they 
shall  come  hither  again ;  for  the  iniquity  of  the  Amor- 
ites  is  not  yet  full." 

This  is  not  alL  "And  it  came  to  pass,  that,  when 
the  sun  went  down,  and  it  was  dark,  behold  a  smoking 
furnace  and  a  burning  lamp."  The  mingled  character 
of  all  is  plain.  There  is  a  smoking  furnace,  the  emblem 
of  the  trial  on  the  one  hand,  not  without  darkness; 
there  is  the  burning  lamp,  the  sure  promise  and  pledge 
on  God's  part,  the  prophetic  and  sure  intimation  there- 
fore of  God's  deliverance.  Nevertheless  it  is  not  a 
bright  vision,  it  is  a  horror  of  darkness  which  is  seen 
in  the  sleep  which  had  fallen  upon  him.  Sifting  and 
tribulation  must  come,  but  salvation  in  due  time.  But 
there  is  more  than  this.  The  very  limits  of  the  land 
are  given  and  the  races  with  which  Abram's  seed 
should  have  to  do. 

In  short  we  see  that  the  whole  scene,  clothed 
in  a  measure  with  a  Jewish  character,  has  naturally 
the  elements  of  sacrifice  which  in  various  forms  were 
put  forward  afterwards  in  the  Levitical  economy,  and 
that  it  is  also  stamped  with  prophecy  which  never 
brings  one  into  the  depths  of  God's  nature,  but  displays 
fully  His  judgment  of  man.     Prophecy,  admirable  as  it 


GENESIS   XII.- XXV.  67 

is,  is  always  short  of  the  fulness  of  grace  and  truth 
which  is  in  Christ.  Prophecy  has  to  do  with  the  earth, 
with  the  Jew  and  the  nations,  with  the  times  and  the 
seasons.  So  it  is  here :  we  have  dates  and  generations ; 
we  have  the  land  and  its  limits;  we  have  Egypt  and 
the  Canaanitish  races.  It  is  not  heaven,  nor  the  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  known  where  He  is — very  far 
from  it.  It  is  God  knowing  what  He  means  to  do  on 
earth  and  giving  a  doubting  friend  the  certainty  of  it, 
securing  and  binding  Himself  to  comfort  the  faith  that 
wanted  extraordinary  support, — nevertheless  not  with- 
out auction  for  his  seed,  not  without  their  serving  a 
strange  nation,  but  Jehovah  bringing  them  out  tri- 
umphantly in  the  end.  Admirable  as  the  vision  is,  it 
neither  looks  up  at  the  heights  of  God's  glory;  nor 
again  does  it  in  any  way  go  down  into  the  depths  of 
His  grace. 

It  is  no  small  confirmation  of  the  condition  of 
Abram  at  this  time,  if  we  read  aright  what  follows  in  the 
very  next  chapter,  (xvi.)  Undoubtedly  Sarah  was  more 
to  blame  than  Abram :  there  was  haste  through  mani- 
fest want  of  faith  in  short;  and  consequently  Hagar 
was  given  to  her  husband,  and  the  fruits  of  the 
connexion  soon  appeared.  As  always,  she  who  was 
most  to  blame  suffered  the  most.  It  was  not  so  much 
Abram  as  Sarah  who  smarted  through  her  folly  about 
her  maid.  But  we  have  again  in  this  chapter  the 
faithfulness  of  God  even  in  the  case  of  Hagar,  who  is 
told  to  return  to  her  mistress  and  humble  herself  before 
her.  Jehovah  here  still  carries  on  the  prophetic  testi- 
mony through  His  angel,  and  draws  out  the  remarkable 
prefiguration  of  the  Bedouins,  who  remain  to  this  day 

F  2 


68         LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

a  minor  witness,  bnt  none  the  less  a  true  one,  of  the 
truth  of  God*s  word. 

In  the  next  chapter  (xviL)  we  have  another  and 
higher  scene.  "  When  Abram  was  ninety  years  old  and 
nine,  Jehovah  appeared  to  Abram,  and  said  unto  him, 
I  am  the  Almighty  God :  walk  before  me,  and  be  thou 
perfect.  And  I  will  make  my  covenant  between  me 
and  thee,  and  wiU  multiply  thee  exceedingly."  Now 
here  it  is  no  longer  Hagar,  the  type,  as  we  know,  of 
the  Sinai  covenant;  it  is  not  a  prediction  that  man's 
way  only  brings  the  child  of  flesh  into  the  house,  a 
trouble  to  all  concerned.  But  here  Jehovah,  unasked 
and  of  His  own  grace,  appears  once  more  to  His  be- 
loved servant.  "I  am,"  says  he,  "El-Shaddai:  walk 
before  me,  and  be  thou  perfect :  and  I  will  make  my 
covenant  between  me  and  thee,  and  will  multiply  thee 
exceedingly."  God,  not  man,  takes  the  foremost  place 
now.  It  is  not  Abram  who  asks,  but  God  who  speaks. 
Abram  accordingly,  instead  of  bringing  forward  his 
desires  and  difficulties,  fell  on  his  face — ^the  right  place 
— "  and  God  talked  with  him."  There  was  greater  free- 
dom than  he  had  ever  enjoyed  before ;  but  it  in  no  way 
diminished  the  reverence  of  his  spirit.  Never  was  he 
more  prostrate  before  God  than  when  He  thus  opened 
His  heart  to  him  about  the  seed  of  promise,  and  was 
about  to  make  further  communications  even  as  to  the 
world. 

Elohim  then  "talked  with  him,  saying,  As  for  me,  be- 
hold my  covenant  is  with  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  a  father 
of  many  nations."  It  is  not  now  about  his  seed  a  stranger 
in  a  land  not  theirs.  Now  we  have  the  wide  extent  of 
the  earthly  purposes  of  God  beginning  to  unfold  before 


GENESIS  XIL-XXV.  69 

US,  even  as  far  as  the  whole  earth,  and  Abram  was  con- 
cerned in  alL  "Neither  shall  thy  name  any  more  be 
called  Abram,  but  thy  name  shall  be  Abraham ;  for  a 
father  of  many  nations  have  I  made  thee.  And  I  will 
make  thee  exceeding  fruitful,  and  I  will  make  nations 
of  thee,  and  kings  shall  come  out  of  thee."  Not  a 
word  of  this  had  been  breathed  before.  That  he  should 
have  a  line  to  succeed  him,  one  that  should  inherit  the 
land  and  have  it  for  ever :  such  was  the  utmost  already 
vouchsafed.  And  when  the  doubting  mind  sought  and 
would  have  security  from  God  Himself,  God  deigned  to 
enter  as  it  were  into  a  bond  with  him,  but  along  with 
it  gave  him  to  know  that  many  a  sorrow  and  affiction 
must  precede  the  hour  of  His  judgment  in  favour  of 
the  chosen  seed.  But  here  all  is  of  another  order  and 
measure — ^beneficence  according  to  the  grace  and  pur- 
poses of  God.  "  I  will  make  thee  exceeding  fruitful, 
and  I  will  make  nations  of  thee,  and  kings  shall  come 
out  of  thee.  And  I  will  establish  my  covenant  be- 
tween me  and  thee  and  thy  seed  after  thee  in  their 
generations,  for  an  everlasting  covenant,  to  be  a  God 
unto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee.  And  I  will  give 
unto  thee  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee  the  land  wherein 
thou  art  a  stranger — all  the  land  of  Canaan  for  an 
everlasting  possession ;  and  I  wUl  be  their  God.  And 
God  said  imto  Abraham,  Thou  shalt  keep  my  covenant 
therefore,  thou  and  thy  seed  after  thee  in  their  gene- 
rations. This  is  my  covenant,  which  ye  shall  keep, 
between  me  and  you  and  thy  seed  after  thee;  every 
man-child  among  you  shall  be  circumcised." 

Let  none  suppose  that  circumcision  is  necessarily  a 
legal  thing.     In  the  connection  in  which  it  is  put  here 


70         LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

it  is  the  concomitant  of  grace — the  sign  of  flesh's  mor- 
tification. Undoubtedly  it  was  incorporated  into  the 
law  when  that  system  was  afterwards  imposed ;  but  in 
itself,  as  our  Lord  Himself  shews,  it  was  not  of  Moses, 
but  of  the  fathers ;  and  as  being  of  the  fathers — of 
Abraham — it  was,  as  we  see  here,  an  emblem  significant 
of  the  putting  flesh  to  death.  God  would  have  it  dealt 
with  as  an  unclean  thing;  and  certainly  this  is  not 
law.  It  may  be  turned  to  legalism  as  anything  else ; 
but  in  this  case  it  is  rather  in  contrast  with  law.  It 
means  flesh  judged,  which  is  the  true  spiritual  meaning 
of  that  which  God  then  instituted. 

The  chapter  then  exhibits  grace  that  gives  according 
to  God's  own  bountifulness :  at  the  same  time  flesh  is 
judged  before  him.  Such  is  the  meaning  of  this  remark- 
able seal.  Accordingly  we  have  the  promise  brought 
out  when  Sarah's  name  was  changed  from  being  "  my 
princess"  (Sarai)  to  be  "princess"  (Sarah)  absolutely. 
So  she  was  to  be  called  thenceforth.  "As  for  Sarai 
thy  wife,  thou  shalt  not  call  her  name  Sarai ;  but  Sarah 
shall  her  name  be.  And  I  will  bless  her,  and  give  thee 
a  son  also  of  her ;  yea,  I  will  bless  her,  and  she  shall 
be  a  mother  of  nations :  kings  of  people  shall  be  of 
her."  Then  goes  out  the  heart  of  Abraham  even  for 
Ishmael,  with  the  historical  notice  that  circumcision 
was  instituted  from  that  day. 

The  next  chapter  (xviii.)  shews  us  that  grace  gives  not 
only  communion  with  Jehovah  in  what  concerns  our- 
selves, but  that  to  His  servant  is  granted  to  enjoy  the 
communications  of  His  mind  even  as  to  what  is  wholly 
outside.  God  had  begun  to  speak  with  an  intimacy 
such  as  Abraham  had  never  before  known :  He  would 


GENESIS  xn.-xxy.  71 

certainly  not  repent  of  His  love.  It  is  not  God  who 
recedes  from  us — we  from  Him  rather,  never  He  from 
us.  "  And  Jehovah  appeared  unto  him  in  the  plains  of 
Mamre,  and  he  sat  in  the  tent  door  in  the  heat  of  the 
day.  And  he  lift  up  his  eyes  and  looked,  and  lo  !  three 
men  stood  by  him.  And  when  he  saw  them,  he  ran  to 
meet  them  from  the  tent  door,  and  bowed  himself 
toward  the  ground."  See  the  character  of  Abraham  ; 
it  is  very  lovely — ^genuine  lowliness,  but  remarkable 
dignity.  He  "said,  My  Lord,  if  now  I  have  found 
favour  in  thy  sight,  pass  not  away,  I  pray  thee,  from 
thy  servant.  Let  a  little  water,  I  pray  you,  be  fetched, 
and  wash  your  feet,  and  rest  yourselves  under  the  tree; 
and  I  wiU  fetch  a  morsel  of  bread,  and  comfort  ye  your 
hearts.  After  that,  ye  shall  pass  on ;  for  therefore  are 
ye  come  to  your  servant.  And  they  said,  So  do  as  thou 
hast  said."  At  this  time  there  seems  no  reason  to 
'  suppose  that  Abraham  had  any  knowledge  or  suspicion 
even  who  it  was.  We  shall  find  how  soon  he  does 
infer  it,  and  has  the  consciousness  of  it.  But  he  be- 
haves with  perfect  propriety.  He  would  not  speak  out 
openly;  he  does  not  break  what  we  may  call  the 
incognito  that  Jehovah  was  pleased  to  assume.  He 
understood  it :  his  eye  was  single,  his  body  full  of  light. 
Outwardly  it  was  simple  patriarchal  preparation  for 
passing  strangers.  Some,  you  know,  not  forgetful  to 
entertain  strangers,  have  unawares  entertained  angels. 
It  was  Abraham's  honour  to  entertain  Jehovah.  lu 
due  time  he  hears  the  question  put  to  him,  which  I 
think  is  the  point  where  he  enters  into  the  spirit  of 
the  divine  action :  "  Where  is  Sarah  thy  wife  ?  And  he 
said,  I  wiU  certainly  return  unto  thee  according  to  the 


70  LECTURES   OX  THE   PENTATEnil. 

it  is  the  concomitant  of  ojrace — the  siun  «u 
tilication.     Undoubtedly  it  was  incorj •'».•• 
law  when  that  system  was  afterwards  i:.. 
itself,  as  our  Lord  Himself  shews,  it  ^^«:• 
Imt  of  the  fathers;  and  as  heini^   «■. 
Abraliam — it  was,  as  we  see  here,  an  •  • 
of  the  putting  flesh  to  death,    (lod  . 
with  as  an  unclean  thing;  and   . 
law.     It  may  he  turned  to  le'^al;-. 
hut  in  this  case  it  is  rather  in 
nuMins  flesh  judged,  which  is  t' 
of  that  whicli  (Jod  then  insli'i- 

The  chapter  then  exhibit  ••  . 
to  (Jod's  own  l)ountifulness  : 
judiired  before  him.  SueJi  i.-   ' 
able  seal.     Accordingly  v.-  • 
out  when  Sarah's  ntinn-  v 
princess"   (Sarai)  in  b«'  • 
So  vshe  was  to  be  cal!--' 
thv  wife,  thou  shall  iv>' 
shall  her  name  be.    A' 
a  son  also  of  her ;  \ :  ■■ 
be  a  mother  of  naJ 
her."    Then  goes  «'•:• 
Ishmael,  with  ll)- 
was  instituted  I'l « » :  . 

Thenextchajit' . 
only  communi(>t: 
but  thai. 
•jication< 

.  God  ;. 

Ahrdh-' 


73 

<:  ice;  when  it 
.  A  lnjii  it  is  not 
.  ..s.    Such  it  was 
i»«fcu  set  perfectly 
.  what  pertained  to 
...     His  heart  is  clear. 
.    his   largest  thought. 
[...-pects  before  Abraham 
^k  of  God;  for  He  speaks 
.is  own  counsels,  which  must 
\  e  the  largest  expectations  of 
..ic  the  unveiling  of  the  future, 
.'  down  to  the  earth,  on  the  con- 
:  alls  only  of  drawing  us  into  the 
.•I  with  longing  after  His  own  grace, 
with  Abraham.   All  depends  on  this, 
iiot  first  yield  to  the  bias  of  our  minds 
r  into  the  perfect  liberty  and  the  enjoy- 
'wn  proper  place  with  Jesus  Christ  in  the 
our  God.    After  that  we  can  listen,  and 
comes  profitable  and  blessed  to  us. 
s  tlie  case  with  Abraham  now.     It  is  Jehovah 
.  110  takes  the  first  step.    It  is  Jehovah  who  says, 
.  I  hide  from  Abraham  that  thing  which  I  do  V* 
■   a  diflference  for  the  man  who  wanted  to  know 
ilicr  he  should  for  certain  have  the  line  that  God 
-i  he  should  have!     Here  Jehovah  meets  hirn  and 
.  'diets  to  him  the  imminent  ruin  of  the  cities  of  th'j 
/lain.    Jehovah  gives  light  to  him  here,  and  ev<;rythirij5 
is  made  plain.    But  it  ia  not  a  doubting  hr^rt  r^r  nu 
inquisitive  mind;  it  is  one  who  bows  down  in  \i*'Mj1.U:\i 
homage,  withal  confiding  in  God,  who  wan  \fU'js%i*M  \/t 


74         LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

confide,  in  him.  In  truth  God  was  going  to  act  upon 
the  world ;  He  was  going  to  judge  this  guilty  scene ; 
He  was  going  to  blot  out  that  sink  of  iniquity — Sodom 
and  Gomorrah  and  the  other  cities  of  the  plain  that 
was  as  the  garden  of  Jehovah,  but  alas !  now  rose  up 
with  pestilential  breath  against  God  Himself,  so  that 
He  must  as  it  were  mow  down  this  iniquity,  or  else 
the  whole  world  would  be  polluted  by  it. 

So  it  is  then  that  God  speaks  to  His  servant.  He 
loved  to  make  known  His  ways.  Abraham  was  now  in 
a  condition  to  enjoy  without  in  any  way  sinking  into 
earthly-mindedness.  Abraham  could  hear  anything  that 
Jehovah  would  tell  him.  Then,  instead  of  in  any  way 
dragging  him  down,  Jehovah  was  rather  lifting  him  up 
into  an  enjoyment  of  the  secrets  of  Himself,  into  con- 
fidential intercourse  with  Him,  for  indeed  he  was  the 
friend  of  God.  Abraham  profits  by  all  here ;  and  we 
shall  see  the  moral  effect  on  his  spirit  soon.  "  Seeing 
that  Abraham  shall  surely  become  a  great  and  mighty 
nation,  and  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  be  blessed 
in  him.  For  I  know  him  " — Oh,  what  a  word  is  this ! — 
"I  know  him,  that  he  will  command  his  children 
and  his  household  after  him  " — what  confidence  in  him 
the  Lord  expresses !  "  I  know  him,  that  he  will 
command  his  children  and  his  household  after  him,  and 
they  shall  keep  the  way  of  Jehovah  to  do  justice  and 
judgment;  that  Jehovah  may  bring  upon  Abraham 
that  which  he  hath  spoken  of  him.  And  Jehovah  said. 
Because  the  cry  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  is  great,  and 
because  their  sin  is  very  grievous ;  I  will  go  down  now, 
and  see  whether  they  have  done  altogether  according  to 
the  cry  of  it,  which  is  come  unto  me;  and  if  not,  I 


GENESIS  XII.- XXV.  75 

will  know.  And  the  men  turned  their  faces  from 
thence,  and  went  toward  Sodom;  but  Abraham  stood 
yet  before  Jehovah.  And  Abraham  drew  near" — such 
was  the  effect — *'  Abraham  drew  near,  and  said,  Wilt 
thou  also  destroy  the  righteous  with  the  wicked  ? 
Peradventure  there  be  fifty  righteous  within  the  city." 

It  may  not  be  now  the  fitting  time  to  say  much  upon 
such  a  scene,  but  I  wUl  make  at  least  this  observation, 
that  there  is  no  anxiety  about  himself,  and  for  that 
very  reason  his  whole  heart  can  go  out,  not  only 
towards  the  God  who  loved  him,  and  whom  he  loved, 
but  also  for  his  nephew,  righteous  Lot,  who  had  played 
so  poor  a  part,  suffered  for  his  folly,  and  once  more  had 
profited  little  by  the  discipline,  and  was  about  to  be  hum- 
bled yet  more,  as  Abraham  could  not  have  anticipated. 
Not  merely  did  the  man  of  faith  go  forth  to  pursue  the 
victorious  kings  of  the  earth  for  the  rescue  of  Lot,  but 
he  now  dares  in  the  confidence  of  Jehovah's  goodness 
to  draw  near  and  plead  for  him  whose  righteous  soul 
was  vexed  in  Sodom,  and  loved  the  Lord  spite  of  his 
earthly-mindedness  and  his  evil  position.  And  was  it 
not  of  Jehovah  that  Abraham  interceded?  Did  He 
not  strengthen  His  servant's  heart  to  go  on,  until  he 
was  ashamed?  As  everywhere,  so  here,  it  was  man 
who  left  off  pleading  with  Jehovah,  not  Jehovah  who 
refused  to  encourage  and  hear  the  voice  of  further 
intercession. 

Here  was  the  effect  of  prophecy  taken  into  the  heart 
after  it  was  freed  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  rendered 
practically  heavenly.  Instead  of  exercising  a  damaging 
character  by  indulging  idle  curiosity  about  others,  or 
causing  mere  occupation  with  self — the   wanting  to 


76        LBCTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

know  what  the  Lord  will  give  me — ^we  see  the  believer's 
heart  going  out  after  another.  This  is  as  God  would 
have  it.  It  is  the  spirit  of  intercession  for  others  which 
we  find  to  be  the  result  of  listening  to  the  Lord,  and 
delighting  in  the  communications  of  what  was  still 
unfulfilled,  not  because  they  were  about  himself,  but 
because  they  were  the  Lord's  secrets  about  others  (even 
the  world  itself)  entrusted  to  him,  and  drawing  out  his 
affections  after  a  divine  sort.  Is  it  so  with  us  in  oar 
use  of  the  prophetic  word  ?  Ought  it  to  be  otherwise  ? 
May  we  gather  such  fruit  of  our  Old  Testament  study ! 

In  the  next  chapter  (xix.)  the  blow  of  judgment  is  seen 
to  fall  The  angels  arrive  at  Sodom,  and  Lot  shews  him- 
self a  scholar  in  the  same  school  of  courteous  grace 
as  Abraham ;  but  the  men  of  the  guilty  city  justify 
Jehovah  in  that  unexampled  dealing  when  the  sun  next 
went  forth  on  the  earth.  Lot  meanwhile  was  brought 
out,  and  his  daughters  without  their  unbelieving  hus- 
bands; but  his  wife  I  —  "Eemember  Lot's  wife" — his 
wife  remains  for  ever  the  most  solemn  instance  on 
record  of  one  who  was  personally  outside,  but  in  heart 
attached  to  the  scene  of  evil 

Yet  Lot  delivered  is  nevertheless  but  half  delivered ; 
and  here  again  we  learn  how  the  blessed  written  word 
sets  forth  in  great  facts  the  moral  judgment  of  God 
before  the  time  came  to  speak  with  unmistakeable  plain- 
ness. We  had  seen  sorrowful  enough  results  in  the 
case  of  Noah,  who,  drinking  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine  to 
the  dishonour  of  himself,  pronounced  a  curse  on  a 
branch  of  his  posterity,  though  not  without  a  bl 
on  the  rest.  It  was  a  curse  no|}  caaseless 
jievertheless  what  a  sorrowful  thing  to-A 


GENESIS  XII.- XXV.  77 

to  utter!  So  here  with  Lot,  delivered  of  angels  from 
the  worst  of  associations,  even  after  his  deliverance  by 
Abraham,  brought  out  again,  but  as  it  were  maimed  and 
wounded,  to  be  yet,  more  dishonoured.  It  would  be 
painful  if  it  were  needful  to  say  a  word  of  that  which 
follows.  Yet  was  it  not  without  moral  profit  for  Israel 
to  remember  the  source  of  a  perpetual  thorn  in  their 
side — the  shameful  origin  of  the  Moabite  and  the 
Ammonite,  two  nations,  neighbours  and  akin,  notorious 
for  continual  envy  and  enmity  against  the  people  of 
God.  The  only  God  marks  all  in  His  wisdom.  Sin 
then  as  now  produced  a  harvest,  large  and  long-con- 
tinued, if  sovereign  grace  in  some  cases  forbids  that  it 
should  be  a  perpetual  harvest  of  misery  to  those  who 
indulged  in  it.  "He  that  soweth  to  the  flesh,"  no  matter 
who  or  where  or  when,  "shall  of  the  flesh  reap  cor- 
ruption." 

Then  foUows  a  new  scene,  where  Abraham  alas  !  fails 
once  more.  (chap,  xx.)  There  is  no  power  in  forms  to 
sustain  the  rich  triumplis  of  faith.  As  on  the  one  hand 
after  failure  God  can  bring  into  depths  of  grace  which 
never  were  proved  before,  so  on  the  other  from  the 
most  real  blessing  there  is  no  means  of  strength  or 
continuance,  but  only  in  God  Himself.  No  matter 
what  the  joy  for  one's  own  soul,  or  the  blessing  to 
others,  power  in  every  sense  belongs  to  God,  and  is 
only  ours  in  dependence  upon  Him.  And  now  it  was 
even  more  painful  than  before,  because  Sarah  was  the 
known  appointed  mother  of  the  heir  that  was  coming. 
There  was  no  question  as  to  her  any  more  than  about 
Abraham.  He  had  been  long  the  designated  father,  as 
she  was  later  the  designated  mother.     In  spite  of  all 


78         LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Abraham,  for  reasons  of  his  own,  is  guilty  once  more 
of  denying  the  relationship.  What  is  man  ?  Beloved 
brethren,  we  know  One,  who  at  all  cost  formed  the 
nearest  relationship  with  us  that  deserved  nothing  less, 
and  who  will  never  deny  it.  May  He  have  our  un- 
swerving confidence ! 

But  Abimelech  was  evidently  conscientious,  and  God 
took  care  of  him,  although  the  seriousness  of  the 
case  was  not  weakened  to  his  mind.  God  made  known 
in  a  dream  how  matters  really  stood,  that  he  must  not 
touch  the  man's  wife.  "  He  is  a  prophet  and  he  shall 
pray  for  thee  " — a  most  instructive  instance  of  the  way 
in  which  God  holds  to  His  principles.  He  will  even 
honour  Abraham  before  Abimelech,  however  he  may  act 
in  discipline  with  Abraham.  Perhaps  Abimelech  would 
be  ready  to  say,  "  How  can  Abraham  be  a  prophet, — a 
man  that  tells  lies  in  denying  his  own  wife?"  Never- 
theless, said  God,  "he  is  a  prophet;"  but  we  may 
be  assured  of  this,  that  the  Lord  in  no  way  restrained 
the  mouth  of  Abimelech  from  a  severe  reproof,  when 
he  said  to  Sarah,  "  Behold  I  have  given  thy  brother  a 
thousand  pieces  of  silver  :  behold  he  is  to  thee  a 
covering  of  the  eyes,  unto  all  that  are  with  thee,  and 
with  all  other :  thus  she  was  reproved."*  What  a  veil 
Abraham  had  been  to  his  poor  wife !  He  had  better 
buy  a  veil  for  her  with  the  thousand  pieces  of  silver. 
It  was  a  keenly  cutting  condemnation — a  rebuke  no 
doubt  addressed  to  Sarah,  but  how  it  must  have  touched 

*  There  is  some  difficulty  here  as  evinced  by  the  differenoes  of 
translators.  Thus  Benisch  translates  the  last  clause,  *'and  thou 
mayest  face  every  one,"  i.e.  she  was  made  right  by  the  fine  as  an  eye- 
covering.  De  Sola,  Lindenthal  and  Raphall,  in  their  version,  go  even. 
further,  "  and  unto  aU  others  as  a  vindication." 


GENESIS  XII.- XXV.  79 

Abraham  to  the  quick !  The  Bible  has  recorded  the  sin 
of  the  father  of  the  faithful  for  the  good  of  all  the 
children.  Where  was  the  faithfulness  of  Abraham 
now?  Grod  first  took  care  that  his  faith  should  not 
fail  May  the  sin  be  a  warning  to  us,  and  the  grace 
strengthen  our  faith  too ! 

The  next  chapter  presents  the  closing  scene  in  this 
series.  The  child  and  heir  of  promise  is  given;  the 
child  of  flesh  is  dismissed.  All  now  is  settled  according 
to  God.  Whatever  inconsistent  with  His  grace  had 
been  allowed  before  must  disappear.  Hagar  the  slave 
must  depart,  and  the  child  that  was  not  of  promise 
must  be  gone.  Jehovah  can  no  longer  tolerate  that  the 
child  of  flesh  shall  be  with  Isaac  and  Sarah  in  the 
house  of  Abraham. 

Eemarkable  to  say,  while  the  goodness  of  God  fails 
not  to  care  for  Hagar,  Ishmael  too  in  His  providence 
is  seen  winding  up  the  whole  scene.  Abimelech  comes 
in,  seeking  a  covenant  with  the  very  man  whose  failure 
must  have  surprised  and  stumbled  him  not  so  long 
before.  Abimelech,  with  Phichol  the  chief  captain  of  his 
host,  owns  God  to  be  with  Abraham  in  all  that  he  did, 
adjures  him  to  shew  favour  to  his  race,  and  stands  now 
reproved  for  the  wrong  of  his  servants.  The  Gentile 
king  in  short  craves  the  countenance  and  protection  of 
Abraham,  "  who  planted  a  grove,"  as  we  are  told  here, 
"in  Beersheba,  and  called  there  on  the  name  of  Jehovah 
the  everlasting  God."  It  is  clear  therefore  that  here 
we  behold  the  heir  of  the  world  in  figure  brought  in. 
It  is  not  a  question  yet  of  introducing  deeper  re- 
lations; nevertheless  it  is  the  heir  not  merely  of  the 
land  of  Palestine  but  of  the  world  that  comes  before  us 


80         LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

here.  Consequently  Jehovah  is  presented  to  us  in  the 
character  not  before  named  of  the  everlasting  Grod 
(El-olam).  This  fitly  terminates  the  series,  and  brings 
us  down  to  another  type  of  the  millennial  day.  It  is 
then  that  the  Grentiles  seek  the  protection  of  the 
faithful ;  it  is  then  that  Jehovah  will  shew  Himself  the 
God  of  ages,  the  guardian  and  blesser  of  the  true  Heir; 
it  is  then  that  pretensions  of  flesh  and  law  will  be  for 
ever  put  aside,  and  the  promises  will  have  their  full 
course  to  His  glory  who  gave  them.  This  again  con- 
cludes, as  it  would  appear,  in  a  way  similar  to  the 
former  section.  We  are  carried  forward  to  the  millen- 
nial day. 

After  this  a  still  deeper  order  of  things  begins,  where 
the  distinct  light  of  God  is  seen  shining,  one  might 
almost  say,  on  every  step.  Here  we  survey  a  type 
before  which  almost  every  other  even  in  this  precious 
book  may  be  considered  comparatively  a  little  thing.  It 
shadows  such  love  as  God  Himself  can  find  nothing  to 
surpass,  if  even  to  compare  with  it.  It  is  the  chosen 
figure  of  His  own  love,  and  this  not  only  in  the  gift  but 
in  the  death  of  His  Son,  who  deigned  to  be  for  us  also  the 
Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world. 
A  scene  at  once  so  simple  yet  so  deep  demands  few  and 
will  not  indeed  bear  many  words  of  ours  on  what  is 
happUy  the  most  familiar  of  all  types  to  all  Christians, 
as,  morally  viewed,  it  is  an  imequalled  call  to  our 
hearts.  For  we  must  not  overlook  it  as  a  most  real 
trial  of  Abraham's  faith,  besides  being  such  a  precious 
manifestation  of  God's  own  love.  For  if  Isaac  was  spared 
the  blow  to  which  Abraham  fally  devoted  him  in  the 


GENESIS  xn.-xxv.  81 

confidence  of  Grod's  raising  him  again  to  make  good 
the  line  of  promise,  the  type  of  death  as  a  sacrifice 
was  fully  carried  out  by  the  substitution  of  the  ram 
caught  in  the  thicket  and  slain  by  the  father.     Then 
follows  the  oath  of  Jehovah  founded  on  it,  of  which 
the  apostle  Paul  makes  so  striking  a  use  in  the  Epistle 
to  the  Galatians,  where  he  draws  the  remarkable  con- 
trast between  the  one  seed  and  the  many.     With  the 
seed  being  Christ,  where  number  is  not  expressed,  we 
have  the  blessing  of  the  Gentiles ;  whereas,  when  we 
hear  of  the  seed  numerous  as  the  stars  and  the  sand, 
the  connexion  beyond  all  controversy  is  with  the  su- 
premacy of  the  Jews  over  their  enemies.    If  we  closely 
examine  the  passage,  it  may  be  readily  seen  in  all  its 
force.     "By  myself  have  I  sworn,  saith  Jehovah,  for 
because  thou  hast  done  this  thing,  and  hast  not  with- 
held thy  son,  thine  only  son ;  that  in  blessing  I  will 
bless  thee,  and  in  multiplying  I  will  multiply  thy  seed 
as  the  stars  of  the  heaven,  and  as  the  sand  which  is 
upon  the  sea  shore."   Here  it  is  expressly  the  numerous 
seed;   and  what  follows?     Is  there  any  promise  of 
blessing  to  the  Gentiles  here  ?     On  the  contrary  it  is  a 
properly  Jewish  hope — "Thy  seed  shall  possess  the 
gate  of  his  enemies."     Is  this  the  special  place  of 
Christ  ?    Is  it  His  relation  to  us  now  from  among  the 
Gentiles  ?    The  very  reverse.    It  remains  to  be  verified 
when  He  reigns  as  the  Head  of  Israel,  and  He  will  give 
them  power  and  rule  over  their  enemies.     In  its  day 
this  will  be  all  right 

But  what  is  it  that  the  apostle  quotes,  and  for  what 
purpose?  Not  this  but  the  next  verse,  which  is  of 
a  wholly  different  nature  : — "  And  in  thy  seed  shall 

G 


82        LECTURIS  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed."  The  force  of 
the  apostle's  aigament  is  that,  where  the  scripture 
referred  to  says  nothing  of  number,  only  naming  *'  thy 
seed*'  as  such,  there  the  blessing  of  the  Gentiles  is 
assured.  On  the  other  hand,  where  He  speaks  of  the 
seed  multiplied  according  to  the  most  striking  images 
of  countless  number,  Jehovah  pledges  here  the  earthly 
exaltation  and  the  power  of  the  Jew  over  their  enemies 
— a  blessing  in  contrast  with  that  of  the  gospel  and  the 
argument  in  Galatians.  It  is  this  distinction  which  the 
apostle  applies  to  the  subject  with  such  depth  of  in- 
sight The  inference  is  obvioua  The  Galatians  had  no 
need  to  become  Jews  to  get  blessing.  Why  then  should 
they  be  circumcised?  What  (Jod  gives  them  in  the 
gospel  and  what  they  have  received  by  faith  is  Christ, 
dead  and  risen,  as  was  Isaac  in  the  figure.  (Compare 
Heb.  xi.  17-19.)  Of  this  seed  He  speaks  not  as  of 
many  but  as  of  one :  this  seed  secures  the  blessing  of 
the  Gentiles  as  Gentiles.  Hence,  where  Grod  speaks  of 
Abraham's  seed  apart  from  numbers  (ver.  18),  there  is 
the  blessing  of  the  Gtentiles.  This  is  what  we  really  need; 
but  it  is  what  we  have  in  Christ.  By  .and  by  there  will 
be  the  numerous  seed  spoken  of  in  verse  17.  This  will 
be  the  Jew ;  and  then  the  chosen  nation  will  possess 
the  gate  of  their  enemies.  I  can  conceive  nothing  more 
admirable  in  itself,  or  more  complete  as  a  refutation  of 
the  Judaisers  who  would  fain  have  compromised  the 
gospel,  and  sunk  the  Galatians  into  mere  Gentiles 
looking  up  to  their  Jewish  superiors  by  seeking  circum- 
cision after  they  had  a  risen  Christ.  But  the  truth  is 
that  both  are  divine,  the  Old  Testament  fact,  and  the 
New  Testament  comment.     And  as  the  fact  itself  was 


GENESIS  xn.-xxv.  83 

most  striking,  so  the  application  by  the  apostle  is  no 
less  profound 

In  chapter  xxiiL  another  instructive  event  opens  on 
us.     It  is  not  the  death  of  Hagar,  who  sets  forth  the 
Sinaitic  or  legal  covenant :  we  might  have  expected  some 
such  typical  matter,  and  could  all  understand  that. 
But  the  marvel  is  that,  after  the  figure  of  the  son  led 
as  a  sacrifice  to  Mount  Moriah  but  raised  from  it  (the 
death  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  as  the  Apostle  Paul 
himself  explains  it  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews),  we 
have  the  death  of  Sarah,  of  her  who  represents  the  new 
covenant,  not  of  the  law  but-  of  grace.     And  what  is 
the  meaning  of  that  type,  and  where  does  it  find  its 
answer  in  die  dealings  of  God  when  we  think  of  the 
antitype?  It  is  certain  and  also  plain.  In  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  not  to  speak  of  any  other  scripture,  the  true 
key  is  placed  in  our  hands.     When  the  Apostle  Peter 
stood  before  the  men  of  Israel,  and  bore  witness  of  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  true  Isaac, 
what  did  he  tell  them  ?   This — ^that  if  they  were  willing 
by  grace  to  repent  and  be  converted,  God  would  as- 
suredly bring  in  those  times  of  refreshing  of  which  He 
had  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  His  holy  prophets  since 
the  world  began.    He  added  that  they  were  the  children 
not  only  of  the  prophets  but  of  the  covenant  which 
God  made  with  the  fathers,  saying  unto  Abraham,  And 
in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  kindreds  of  the  earth  be 
blessed. 

There  we  have  the  required  solution.  Por  Peter  pre- 
sented after  this  the  readiness  of  God  to  bring  in  the 
blessedness  of  the  new  covenant,  if  they  by  grace 
bowed  their  stifif  neck  to  the  Lord  Jesus.     But  they 

o  2 


84         LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

would  not  hearken:  they  rejected  the  testimony,  and 
finally  put  to  death  one  of  the  brightest  witnesses.  In 
point  of  fact,  the  unbelief  was  complete  to  the  testi- 
mony of  the  Holy  Ghost  founded  on  the  death  and 
resurrection  of  Christ;  and,  in  consequence,  that  pre- 
sentation of  the  covenant  to  Israel  completely  disap- 
pears. It  was  the  antitype  of  Sarah's  death — the 
passing  away  for  the  time  of  all  such  overtures  of 
the  covenant  to  Israel  Nowhere  do  we  hear  of  it  re- 
newed after  that.  No  doubt  Sarah  will  rise  again,  and 
so  the  new  covenant  will  appear  when  God.  works  in 
the  latter  day  in  the  Jewish  peopla  But  meanwhile 
the  presentation  of  the  covenant  to  Israel,  as  that 
which  God  was  willing  there  and  then  to  bring  in, 
which  was  the  offer  then  made  by  grace,  completely 
passes  from  view,  and  a  new  thing  takes  its  place. 

So  it  is  here.  Immediately  after  the  death  and  burial 
of  Sarah  a  new  person  comes  before  us — another  object 
distinct  from  what  we  have  seen ;  and  what  is  it  ?  The 
introduction  of  a  wholly  unheard  of  personage,  called  to 
be  the  bride  of  Isaac,  the  figuratively  dead  and  risen 
son  of  promise.  It  is  no  more  a  question  of  covenant 
dealings.  The  call  of  Sebecca  was  not  thought  of  before 
— altogether  a  fresh  element  in  the  history.  Then 
again  we  have  the  type,  so  familiar  to  us,  of  Eliezer, 
the  trusty  servant  of  all  that  the  father  had,  now  the 
executor  of  the  new  purposes  of  his  heart,  who  goes  to 
fetch  the  bride  home  from  Mesopotamia.  For  as  no  maid 
of  Canaan  could  be  wedded  to  Abraham's  son ;  so  he, 
Isaac,  was  not  to  quit  Canaan  for  Mesopotamia!  Eliezer 
was  to  bring  the  bride,  if  willing,  but  Isaac  must  not  go 
there.     Nothing  is  more  strongly  insisted  on  than  this, 


GENESIS  xn.-xxv.  85 

and  to  its  typical  meaning  I  must  call  your  attention. 
The  servant  proposes  a  difficulty:  Suppose  she  is  not 
¥rilling  to  come :  Is  Isaac  to  go  for  her  ?  "  And  Abra- 
ham said  unto  him,  Beware  that  thou  bring  not  my  son 
thither  again."  When  the  church  is  being  called  as  a  bride 
for  Christ,  He  remains  exclusively  in  heavenly  places. 
He  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  world  while  the  church 
is  in  process  of  being  gathered  from  among  Jews  and 
Gentiles.  He  leaves  not  heaven,  nor  comes  to  the  world 
to  have  associations  with  the  earth,  while  it  is  a  ques- 
tion of  forming  the  bride,  the  LamlJs  wife.  In  relation 
to  the  call  of  the  church,  Christ  is  exclusively  heavenly. 
It  is  the  very  same  Isaac  who  had  been  under  the 
sentence  of  death  sacrificially.  As  Isaac  is  raised  again 
in  figure  and  must  on  no  account  go  from  Canaan  to 
Mesopotamia  for  Eebecca,  so  Christ  is  to  have  only 
heavenly  associations,  and  none  with  the  world,  while 
the  church-calling  is  in  progress.  Ignorance  of  this, 
and,  yet  more,  indifference  to  it  where  it  seems  to  be 
known,  must  make  the  Christian  worldly,  as  communion 
with  Christ  where  He  is  makes  one  heavenly-minded. 
It  shews  how  irretrievably  false  any  position  is  which 
necessarily  connects  us  with  the  world.  The  only  sure 
way  for  the  Christian  to  decide  any  question  aright  is 
to  ascertain  from  God's  word  how  it  bears  upon  Christ 
and  His  glory.  When  Christ  has  His  associations  with 
the  world,  we  may  have  our  place  there  too ;  if  Christ 
is  entirely  outside  it,  as  He  is  manifestly  apart  from  it 
now  in  heaven,  so  should  we  be.  To  judge  and  walk 
according  to  Him  is  what  we  do  well  to  cultivate. 

Never  call  it  worldliness  to  discharge  aright  your  duty 
here  below.    It  is   worldly-mindedness  wherever  the 


86         LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

world  or  its  things  may  occupy  us  as  an  object,  instead 
of  pleasing  and  doing  the  will  of  the  Lord  here  below. 
It  is  not  what  you  are  doing  which  is  so  important  as 
fellowship  with  His  mind ;  it  may  be  in  appearance  the 
most  holy  work^  but  if  it  links  Christ  and  His  name 
with  the  world,  it  is  only  deceiving  ourselves  and  play- 
ing so  much  the  more  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 
But^  on  the  other  hand,  supposing  it  is  connected  with 
the  world,  there  may  be  the  most  ordinary  act,  yet  as 
far  as  possible  from  worldliness,  even  though  it  were 
only  blacking  a  shoe.  It  is  hardly  needful  to  say  that 
the  power  of  Christianity  may  be  enjoyed  in  the  heart 
and  ways  of  a  shoe-black  just  as  truly  as  anywhere 
else.  Anything  that  is  outside  Christ  will  not  preserve, 
and  must  have  the  stamp  of  the  world  on  it ;  whereas, 
on  the  other  hand,  so  great  is  the  eflScacy  of  Christ  that 
if  my  heart  is  set  upon  Him,  and  seeking  after  what 
is  suitable  to  Him  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  we  be- 
come truly  witnesses  of  Him;  and,  supposing  there 
is  real  occupation  with  Him  there,  this  will  assuredly 
give  to  what  we  do  a  heavenly  stamp,  and  impart  the 
truest  and  highest  dignity,  no  matter  what  we  may  be 
about. 

The  details  of  this  chapter  of  course  it  is  not  for  me 
to  enter  into  now.  I  have  said  enough  to  shew  the 
general  principle-7-first,  the  novelty  and  unprecedented- 
ness  of  what  concerns  Isaac  and  Eebecca.  It  was  not 
mere  continuance  of  what  had  been  known  already,  but 
a  new  thing  following  up  not  only  the  tjrpical  sacrifice 
on  Moriah,  but  the  death  of  Sarah.  It  is  happy  when 
the  truth  of  Christ  illuminates  consecutive  chapters  of 
the  Old  Testament.    We  know  alas  1  what  it  is  to  be 


GENESIS  XII.~XXV.  87 

uncertain  and  dissatisfied  in  presence  of  the  written 
word,  which  is  really  simple  to  the  simple.  Again, 
there  is  the  passing  away  of  all  covenant  dealings.  How 
long  we  have  known  confusion  ourselves  in  all  this ! 
Sarah  is  dead  and  gone  for  the  time.  Then  the  bride  is 
sought  and  called,  and  comes ;  for  it  is  a  question  of  a 
bride,  not  a  mother.  Again,  we  have  Eliezer,  the  type 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  marked  by  this — the  heart  going 
out  towards  the  Lord  both  in  entire  dependence  and 
in  simple-hearted  praise  as  he  receives  the  speedy  and 
unequivocal  answer  of  His  grace.  Eliezer  had  his 
mission  from  Abraham :  so  is  the  Spirit  sent  from  the 
Father  on  an  errand  of  love  in  the  church.  Prayer  and 
worship  accordingly  become  the  members  of  Christ's 
body,  and  should  go  forth  intelligently  with  the  pur- 
pose of  God,  just  as  Eliezer's  prayer  was  entirely  founded 
on  the  object  that  he  who  sent  him  had  in  view.  He 
asked  much  and  boldly  about  the  bride,  and  nothing 
else  swerved  him  from  this  as  nearest  to  his  heart. 

It  is  all  well  for  men  in  an  evil  world  to  be 
filled  with  enterprises  for  doing  good  ;  but  here  was 
one  who  with  the  utmost  simplicity  knew  he  was  doing 
the  best,  and  this  we  too  ought  to  be  doing.  The  best 
of  all  service,  serving  the  Father's  glory  in  the  Son 
who  is  to  have  the  church  as  His  bride — this  is  worth 
living  for  and  dying  too — ^if  it  be  the  will  of  God  that 
we  should  meanwhile  fall  asleep,  instead  of  waiting  for 
the  coming  of  the  Lord.  It  is  not  merely  seeking  the 
salvation  of  sinners,  but  doing  His  will  with  a  direct 
view  to  Christ  and  His  love,  and  accordingly  not  with 
prayer  only,  but  the  character  of  it  naturally  marking 
this.     There  is  more  about  prayer  in  this  chapter  than 


S8  UflCTTSB  OX  mK  ETWTATIlJiaL 

in  any  iTtiier  in.  (SeneaiB :  bat  bendes  Aem  is  moEft  ds^ 
dncdy  tIubl  eiaenriiefe-  tiifr  heazt  t-iitniiig  ta  Jobov^  n 
wozsfaip  <3f  Ttfm.  Theae-  two  y.liifi^  onajiit  In  dfloc- 
CGxxze  t±t&  ClmadnL  and  de^  fttmrrfa,  now  timb  Oiuife 
tiie  Soil  of  GiA  ia  dead  and  naen^  and  ^m  mqaf  Ae 
TTnTTiftTiaft  leauita  hy  £nth — prayer  and  wucdilp,  Int 
prayer  and  wuisiiiu  in  oniaosi  with.  ti»  purpoBE  of  God 
in  rlie  t^idTTTag  ,>f  t±E&  bride;,  tfaa  (dinndL;  mfe  mexe 
iaolaced  jcdofti,  aitfaon^  diat  msy  bsve  its  pbHS  and  be 
most  OTe  fijT  special  need.  3tiiltfaegiB«k(diHHCteHdc 
nmr  ihonid  be  dna — diat  Goi  baa  let  oiie  beatta  folio 
His  own  jBetet  in  wiiat  He  is  doing  finr  CTrrrafc  He 
has  given  us  go  kncnrwbae  Cbiiat  ia  and  wbat  He^ 
who  deagns  ::o  be  die  dxeeutiTe  hoe  below  ^t^  Spcm), 
ia  doing  tbr  Hig  name  in  diis  worid.  Conaeqoently  oar 
heaica  may  weil  izo  ^oidi  in  prayer  and  pxsuae  in  con- 
neflfti  nn  widi  it  axming  m  onr  God  and  Fadus  with 
die  sense  at  Hrs  ssoedneis  and  fiutiifalneaa  now  as 
dvermore.  The  Sew  TtsscEunent  siiewa  na  wbac  tbe 
cburcii  was  and  dbouLi  be:  and  dise  ia  not  a  chapter 
in  Genesis  which,  sees  diisn  Inzdi  aa  a  type  in  anything 
like  so  piominiaic  a  finsL  aa  dii&  la  it  casoal,  or  the 
tiigtiTii^  .^ngTgn  of  God  dtat  here  only  in  diese  inodents 
ahoold  be  die  pictore  of  bniM^  expeecuicT  and  con- 
fidffloce  in  die  lo^e  of  one  not  yet  sen,  and  of  going 
forth  Ia)  meet  die  brxdegraom  ? 

Finally  we  haire  chapter  xxr.  diosiig  Atsaham's 
biacory^  with  his  relasmn  as  finder  to  ciotain  tcibes  of 
Antba  who  aa  being  of  bcs  sfioet  oxingled  widi  the 
fefama^Ittflff.  These  sona^  grtTflb*  Isaac:  iccecred  presents, 
aad  were  »nt  away.  Isioc  miKt  be  kft  the  nndispated 
bexr  fA  aS,  and  abides  erer  aa  son  in  the  &lher  s  hoiiseL 


GENESIS  xn.-xxv,  89 

The  purposes  of  love  centre  in  him ;  as  the  inheritance 
was  his  in  its  widest  extent. 

But  no  more  to-night.  Though  perfectly  persuaded 
that  a  cursory  sketch  has  its  disadvantages,  I  am 
equally  assured  that  it  is  not  without  advantages  of  its 
own;  for  it  is  well  for  us  to  have  a  broad  and  com- 
prehensive view,  as  it  is  well  also,  when  we  possess  this, 
to  fill  up  the  details.  But  we  shall  never  approach  to  a 
clear  or  a  full  intelligence  of  Scripture  if  we  neglect 
the  one  or  do  not  seek  the  other.  Grace  only  by  the 
written  word  used  in  faith  can  give  and  keep  both  for 
our  hearts  to  the  praise  of  the  Lord's  name. 


90  LECTDBES  ON  THB  PKNTATKUCH. 


iH. 

GENESIS. 

Gen.  zxT.  19  to  end. 


Having  already  shown  the  position  of  Isaac,  I  resume 
briefly  with  the  remark  that  he  stands  before  us  clearly 
as  the  representative  of  the  Son,  and  this  too  as  dead, 
risen,  and  in  heaven.  All  will  understand  it  who  re- 
member that  we  have  had  His  death  and  resurrection 
parabolically  in  chapter  xxii. ;  and  then,  after  the  passing 
away  of  her  who  was  the  figure  of  the  new  covenant,  come 
the  entirely  novel  dealings  of  God  in  the  call  of  the  bride 
for  the  Son  here  carefully  and  exclusively  connected 
with  the  type  of  heaven.  The  bearing  of  this  on  the 
great  mystery  of  the  heavenly  Christ  and  the  church, 
His  body  and  bride,  does  not  need  to  be  further  in- 
sisted on  now. 

We  have  here,  before  pursuing  the  history  of  Isaac 
to  the  end,  an  episode  which  brings  before  us  the  birth 
of  the  two  sons  of  Isaac  and  Rebecca.  God  had  already 
affirmed  the  principle  of  His  choice  in  the  son  of  the 
free  woman  Sarah,  when  the  child  of  the  flesh  was  set 
aside.  But  there  was  this  difference.  It  only  in  a 
preparatory  way  set  out  the  great  principle  of  God's 
sovereignty.  There  was  a  difference  in  the  mother,  if 
not  in  the  father.    There  was  a  need,  in  the  wisdom  of 


GENESIS  XXV.  TO  END.  91 

God,  that  the  sovereignty  should  be  affirmed  still  more 
expressly.  And  so  it  was  now ;  for  Esau  was  the  son 
of  the  same  father  and  of  the  same  mother  as  Jacob, 
and  in  fact  they  were  twins.  It  was  therefore  impos- 
sible to  find  a  closer  parity  between  any  than  in  these 
two  sons  of  Isaac  and  Bebecca.  Nevertheless,  from 
the  first,  entirely  apart  from  any  grounds  such  as  to 
determine  a  preference,  God  shews  that  He  will  be 
sovereign.  He  can  shew  mercy  to  the  uttermost,  and 
He  does ;  but  He  is  God,  and  as  such  He  reserves  to 
Himself  His  right  of  choice.  Why  even  a  man  does 
so ;  and  God  would  be  inferior  to  man  if  He  did  not. 
But  He  claims  His  choice  and  makes  it,  setting  it  forth 
in  the  most  distinct  manner,  which  is  reasoned  on,  as 
we  know,  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Bomans,  and  alluded  to  elsewhere  in  the 
Bible.  I  only  refer  to  it  passingly  to  shew  how  clearly 
it  is  brought  out  in  the  circumstances. 

At  the  same  time  there  is  another  thing  to  be 
weighed.  The  after  history  illustrates  the  two  men 
and  their  posterity ;  for  whatever  may  be  said  of  the 
fEulure  of  Jacob,  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  not  Jacob 
but  Esau  was  profane,  despising  God  and  consequently 
his  birthright.  This  is  brought  out  in  the  same  chapter. 
But  the  choice  of  God  was  before  anything  of  the  sort, 
and  God  made  it  unambiguous.  I  would  only  add  one 
other  word,  that  although  scripture  is  abundantly  plain 
that  He  chose  him  apart  from  anything  to  fix  that 
choice,  it  is  never  said  nor  insinuated  in  any  part  of 
the  word  of  God,  that  the  prophet's  solemn  expression 
"Esau  have  I  hated*'  was  applicable  from  the  first. 
The  choice  was  true,  but  not  the  hatred.    In  fact,  so 


92         LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

far  is  it  from  the  truth  that  we  see  the  plainest  facts 
in  opposition  to  such  a  thought  In  the  first  book  of 
the  Bible  the  choice  of  Jacob,  and  not  Esau,  is  made 
plain ;  in  the  last  book  of  the  Bible,  the  prophecy  of 
Malachi,  the  hatred  of  Esau  is  for  the  first  time  clearly 
affirmed.  How  admirable  the  word  of  God  is  in  this ! 
Let  us  delight  first  thai  God  should  have  His  choice ; 
secondly,  that  God,  far  from  pronouncing  His  hatred 
then,  waited  till  there  was  that  which  manifestly  de- 
served it — waited,  as  we  see,  to  the  very  last.  To  con- 
found two  things  so  distinguished,  to  mix  up  the  choice 
at  the  beginning  with  the  hatred  at  the  end,  seems 
nothing  but  the  narrow  folly  of  man's  mind.  The  truth 
is  that  all  the  good  is  on  God's  part,  all  the  evil  on 
man's.  He  is  sovereign ;  but  every  condemned  soul 
will  himself  own  the  absolute  justice  of  it. 

In  chapter  xxvL,  which  follows,  Isaac's  history  is 
resumed.  Let  us  bear  in  mind  that  it  is  the  account  of 
the  risen  Son.  Hence  mark  the  difference  when  Jeho- 
vah appears  to  Isaaa  I  call  your  attention  to  it  as  an 
interesting  fact,  as  well  as  an  instance  of  the  profoundly 
typical  character  of  the  Scriptures.  He  appears  as 
Almighty  God  (El-Shaddai)  to  Abraham :  so  He  is  also 
revealed  as  the  Almighty  to  Jacob ;  but  I  am  not  aware 
that  He  is  ever  represented  as  formally  proclaiming 
Himself  in  this  way  to  Isaac.  The  reason  is  manifest. 
While  surely  included  in  fact  like  his  father  and  son  in 
such  a  revelation  of  El-Shaddai,  Isaac  has  an  altogether 
peculiar  place  in  the  record,  not  connected  in  the  same 
way  with  the  dispensations  of  God  as  either  Abnduuft. 
on  the  one  hand,  or  Jacob  on  the  other.   Hep^ 


GBKESIS  XXV.  TO  END.  93 

Ood  either  in  His  own  abstract  majesty  as  Elohim,  or 
in  special  relationship  as  Jehovah — the  two  forms  in 
which  God  is  spioken  of.  These  are  used,  but  not  "  the 
Almighty."  Isaac  indeed  speaks  of  Him  as  the  Al- 
mighty when  he  blesses  Jacob ;  but  when  God  appears, 
Scripture  describes  Him  simply  as  Elohim  or  as  Je- 
hovah. The  reason  is  clear :  we  are  upon  the  ground 
where  God  meant  us  to  appreciate  the  very  peculiar 
dealings  with  him  who  sets  forth  the  Bridegroom  of  the 
church.  Consequently  what  was  merely  of  an  earthly, 
passing,  or  dispensational  nature  is  not  brought  forward. 
Again,  when  God  does  appear  to  Isaac,  He  says,  "Go 
not  down  into  Egypt ;  dwell  in  the  land  which  I  shall 
tell  thee  of."  Isaac  is  always  a  dweller  in  the  heavenly 
land.  How  admirably  this  suits  the  position  of  Christ 
as  the  risen  Bridegroom  will  be  too  plain  to  call  for 
further  proof.  *' Sojourn  in  this  land,  and  I  will  be 
with  thee  and  will  bless  thee ;  for  unto  thee  and  unto 
thy  seed  I  will  give  all  these  countries,  and  I  will  per- 
form the  oath  which  I  sware  unto  Abraham  thy  father. 
And  I  will  make  thy  seed  to  multiply  as  the  stars  of 
heaven."  Not  a  word  about  the  sand  of  the  sea.  He 
is  as  ever  exclusively  connected  with  what  is  heavenly 
as  far  as  the  figure  goes.  In  the  case  of  Abraham 
appears  the  double  figure :  the  children  were  to  be  as 
the  stars  of  the  sky,  but  also  as  the  sands  of  the  sea. 
Isaac  has  the  peculiar  place.  Abraham  takes  in  both  ; 
as  we  know,  he  is  connected  with  that  which  is  hea- 
venly, but  also  with  what  is  earthly.  For  Isaac  we  find 
the  heavenly  places,  a  relationship  past  resurrection  as 
fer  as  this  could  be  set  forth  in  type.  But  it  was  only 
the  shadow,  not  the  very  image ;  and  so  alas !  we  find 


94         LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

that  he  who  was  but  the  type  denies  his  relationship, 
which  Christ  never  does.  Isaac  failed  like  Abraham 
before.     Unswerving  fidelity  is  true  of  One  only. 

At  the  same  time  we  have  the  never-failing  faithful- 
ness of  God.  Immediately  afterwards  he  is  blessed  and 
blessed  a  hundred-fold.  What  is  not  the  goodness  of 
God  ?  And  Abimelech  seeks  his  favour  too ;  but  Isaac 
remains  always  in  the  emblematic  heavenly  land,  the 
type  of  Christ's  present  position. 

The  next  chapter  (xxvii.)  lets  us  into  the  sight  of 
circumstances  which  searched  the  heart  of  all  concerned. 
We  see  the  nature  which  left  ix)om  for  the  mingled 
character  which  so  evidently  belonged  to  Jacob.  He 
was  a  believer ;  but  a  believer  in  whom  flesh  was  little 
judged,  and  not  in  him  only,  but  in  Rebecca  also. 
Between  them  there  is  much  to  pain;  and  although 
Isaac  might  not  be  without  feebleness  and  fault,  there 
was  deceit  in  both  the  mother  and  the  son.  As  to 
Esau,  there  was  nothing  of  God,  and  consequently  no 
ground  of  complaint  on  that  score.  At  the  same  time 
there  was  positive  unrighteousness,  of  which  God  never 
makes  light  in  any  souL  Hence  we  find  that  though 
the  blessing  was  wrested  firatudulently  from  Isaac,  he  is 
astonished  to  find  where  he  had  been  drifting  through 
yielding  to  nature ;  for  indeed  flesh  wrought  in  Isaac, 
but  for  the  time  it  ruled,  I  may  say,  in  Bebecca  and 
in  Jacob.  Shocked  at  himself,  but  restored  in  soul,  he 
finds  himself  through  his  affections  in  danger  of 
fighting  against  the  purpose  of  God.  Spite  of  all  the 
faults  of  Rebecca  and  of  Jacob,  they  at  least  did  hold 
fast  the  word  of  God.  On  the  whole  it  is  a  humiliating 
spectacle :  God  alone  shines  throughout  it  all  as  ever. 


GENESIS  XXV.  TO  END.  95 

Isaac  therefore,  awakened  to  feel  whence  he  was  fallen, 
afiftrms  the  certainty  of  the  purpose  of  God,  and  pro- 
nounces in  the  most  emphatic  terms  that,  spite  of  the 
manner  in  which  Jacob  had  possessed  himself  of  his 
blessing,  he  shall  be  blessed  of  God. 

In  chapter  xxviiL  we  have  Jacob  called  by  Isaac, 
and  sent  to  Padan-Aram  for  a  wife,  with  El-Shaddai's 
blessing  on  him.  Now  the  governmental  dealings  of 
God  begin  to  appear,  and  Jacob  is  the  standing  type  of 
the  people  of  God  not  walking  in  communion  with 
God  like  Abraham,  and  consequently  the  first  type  of 
a  pilgrim  and  of  a  worshipper  too;  not  as  the  son, 
risen  from  the  dead  and  in  the  heavenly  land,  but  an 
outcast;  forced  to  be,  if  a  pilgrim,  a  pilgrim  against  his 
will  in  the  government  of  God,  and  consequently  the 
most  apt  possible  type  of  Israel,  for  unfaithfulness 
expelled  from  their  own  land,  passing  under  corrective 
discipline,  but  blessed  at  last  with  rest  and  joy  here 
below.  This  is  what  Jacob  represents — none  more  suit- 
able to  be  such  a  type,  as  we  shall  find  by  the  very 
name  which  God  gives  him.  So  "  Isaac  called  Jacob, 
and  blessed  him,  and  charged  him,  and  said  unto  him. 
Thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  Canaan. 
Arise,  go  to  Padan-aram,  to  the  house  of  Bethuel  thy 
ihother's  father;  and  take  thee  a  wife  from  thence  of 
the  daughters  of  Laban,  thy  mother's  brother.  And 
God  Almighty  bless  thee,  and  make  thee  fruitful,  and 
multiply  thee." 

Jacob  accordingly  goes  out  on  his  lonely  way,  and 
went  to  Padan-aram,  and  there  it  is  that  he  dreams; 
and  he  beheld  standing  above  the  ladder  Jehovah, 
who  proclaims  Himself  to  Jacob  as  the  God  of  his 


96        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

fathers.  "I  am  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Abraham  thy 
father,  and  the  God  of  Isaac.  The  land  whereon  thou 
liest,  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed ;  and  thy 
seed  shall  be  as  the  dust  of  the  earth."  Mark  again 
the  consistency  of  the  word  of  God.  Not  a  word  here 
about  the  stars  of  the  sky.  Abraham  had  both ;  Isaac 
had  the  heavenly  part  alone,  and  Jacob  the  earthly 
alona  And  He  says,  "  Behold  I  am  with  thee,  I  will 
keep  thee  in  all  places  whither  thou  goest,  and  will 
bring  thee  again  into  this  land ;  for  I  will  not  leave 
thee  until  I  have  done  that  which  I  have  spoken  to 
thee  of."  Jacob  awakes;  but,  as  is  ^ways  the  case 
when  a  person  is  simply  under  the  government  of  Grod 
without  being  founded  in  His  grace,  there  is  alarm. 
The  presence  of  God  is  more  or  less  an  object  of  dread 
to  the  soul,  as  indeed  he  expressed  it.  "  He  was  afraid, 
and  said.  How  dreadful  is  this  place!  This  is  none 
other  but  the  house  of  God,  and  this  is  the  gate  of 
heaven."  Many  of  us  may  be  astonished  to  think  of 
such  a  conjunction,  that  the  house  of  God  should  be 
associated  with  terror.  But  so  it  must  always  be  where 
the  heart  is  not  established  in  grace ;  and  Jacob's  heart 
was  far  from  it.  He  was  the  object  of  grace,  but  in 
no  way  established  in  grace.  Nevertheless  there  is  no 
doubt  of  God  s  grace  towards  him,  little  as  he  might  as 
yet  appreciate  its  fulness.  Jacob  then  rises  up  early, 
and  takes  the  stone  that  he  had  put  for  his  pillow,  and 
sets  it  up,  calling  the  name  of  the  place  Bethel,  and 
vowiug  a  vow;  for  all  here  is  of  a  Jewish  savour : — " If 
God*  Avill  be  with  me,  and  will  keep  me  in  the  way  that 

*  There  is  no  real  difficulty  in  understanding  the  propriety  of  the 
yarious  divine  names  in  these  chapters  according  to  the  motive  which 


GENESIS  XXV.  TO  END.  97 

I  go,  and  will  give  me  bread  to  eat  and  raiment  to  put 
on  " — ^his  demands  were  by  no  means  large,  legalism  is 
of  necessity  contracted — *'  so  that  I  come  again  to  my 
£Ekther*s  house  in  peace,  then  shall  Jehovah  be  my  God; 
and  this  stone,  which  I  have  set  for  a  pillar,  shall  be 
(rod's  house ;  and  of  all  that  thou  shalt  give  me  I  will 
surely  give  the  tenth  unto  thee."  He  was  in  no  way  a 
man  delivered  from  self  or  from  the  earth.  It  is  as 
nearly  as  possible  the  picture  of  a  man  under  law. 
How  appropriate,  therefore,  for  the  type  of  the  Jew, 
driven  out  through  his  own  fault,  but  under  the  mighty 
hand  of  God  for  government,  but  for  good  in  His  mercy 
at  the  end !  This  is  precisely  what  Jacob  himself  has 
to  prove,  as  we  may  see. 

Thus  he  goes  on  his  journey;  and  among  the  children 
of  the  east  ensues  a  characteristic  scene,  which  need 
not  be  entered  into  in  a  detailed  manner — the  provi- 
dential introduction  to  his  experiences  with  Laban  and 
his  family.  (Chapter  xxix.) 

Now  experiences  are  admirable  in  their  own  way  as 
a  school  for  the  heart  in  the  soul's  finding  its  way  to 
Grod;  but  experiences  completely  melt  away  in  the 
presence  of  God.  This  and  the  grace  known  there  in 
Him  who  died  and  rose  again  alone  can  give  fully  either 
the  end  of  self  or  communion  with  God.    Experiences 

governs.  Thus  El-Shaddai  is  the  peculiar  patriarchal  name  of 
guaranteed  protector;  Jehovah  of  special  relationship  for  covenant 
blessings  of  Israel  according  to  promise ;  but  then  Jehovah  is  Elohim 
in  His  own  majesty,  or  He  would  be  a  merely  national  deity.  Com- 
pare GJen.  xvii.,  where  it  is  expressly  Jehovah  that  appears  and  calls 
TTimHplf  El-Shaddai,  yet  immediately  after  talks  as  Elohim  with 
Abram.  See  also  Gen.  xxii.  1,  8,  9,  12,  and  11,  14,  15,  16,  where  the 
various  document-system  is  manifestly  disproved.  Esau  in  Gten.  xxvii. 
has  neither  covenant  nor  divine  name  of  any  sort. 

H 


98         LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

may  be  needed  and  wholesome;  but  they  are  chiefly 
wholesome  as  a  part  of  the  road  while  on  our  way  to  Him. 
Before  what  God  is  to  us  in  Christ  they  disappear — I 
do  not  mean  the  results,  but  the  processes.  So  we  shall 
find  it  was  with  Jacob.  He  is  a  man  evidently  cared 
for  by  God.  He  shews  us  much  that  was  exceeding 
sweet  and  lovely.  No  doubt  he  had  often  to  suffer  from 
Laban's  deceit;  but  was  there  not  a  memorial  here  of 
the  deceit  in  which  he  had  acted  himself?  He  is 
deceived  about  his  wife,  deceived  about  his  wages, 
deceived  about  everjrthing ;  but  how  had  he  dealt  with 
his  father,  not  to  speak  of  his  brother  ?  Deceit  must 
meet  with  deceit  under  the  retributive  hands  of  God. 
Wonder  not  overmuch  at  the  tale  of  Jacob ;  but  bless 
with  all  your  heart  the  God  who  shews  Himself  caring 
for  His  servant,  and,  after  he  had  sufiPered  awhile,  giving 
him  although  slowly  yet  surely  to  prosper.  At  his 
setting  out  he  was  by  no  means  a  young  man,  being 
somewhere  about  eighty  years  of  age  when  he  reached 
Laban.  There  he  receives,  not  willingly,  two  wives 
instead  of  one.  Leah  he  did  not  want,  Bachel  he  did. 
But  in  his  chequered  course,  as  we  know,  their  maids 
were  given  as  concubines,  with  many  a  child  and  many 
a  sorrow.*  And  spite  of  Laban  abundance  was  his  in 
herds  and  flocks.  (Chap,  xxx.) 

*  Can  it  be  doubted  that  this  part  of  Genesis  is  typical  like  what 
goes  before  and  after  ?  Surely  Jacob's  love  for  Eachel  first,  for  whom 
nevertheless  he  must  wait  and  fulfil  the  week  afresh  after  Leah  had 
been  given  him,  is  not  without  evident  bearing  on  the  Lord's  relation 
to  Israel  first  loved,  for  whom  meanwhile  the  slighted  Gentile  has 
been  substituted  with  rich  results  in  His  grace.  Kachel  is  at  length 
remembered  by  God,  who  takes  away  her  reproach  by  adding  to  her  a 
son  (Joseph) — ^type  of  One  glorified  among  the  Gentiles  and  delivering 


GENESIS  XXV.  TO  END.  99 

At  length,  when  Laban's  sons  murmur  and  their 
£ither's  countenance  was  not  toward  Jacob  as  before, 
Jehovah  bids  him  return  to  the  land  of  his  fathers. 
(Genesis  zxxi.  3.)  His  mind  is  at  once  made  up.  He 
gives  a  touching  explanation  to  Bachel  and  Leah,  and 
sets  out  secretly;  for  there  was  no  such  confidence  in 
God  with  a  pure  conscience  as  divested  himself  of  fear. 

His  Jewish  brethren  after  suffering  among  both  Jews  and  Grentiles. 
So  her  history  closes  in  the  death  of  her  Benoni  and  Jacob's  Benjamin, 
son  of  the  mother's  sorrow  and  of  the  father's  right  hand,  as  the 
people  of  God  will  prove  in  the  end.  I  take  this  opportunity  of 
noticing  the  beauty  of  Scripture  in  the  use  of  the  divine  names  in 
these  chapters,  the  best  answer  to  the  superficial  folly  which  attri- 
butes them  to  diffiarent  writers  and  documents.  In  the  case  of  Leah 
(chap,  xxix.),  who  was  hated  compared  with  Eachel,  Jehovah  as  such 
interposed  with  His  special  regard  to  her  sorrow,  and  this  was  ex- 
pressed in  the  name  of  her  first-bom  son,  Beuben;  and  His  hearing  in 
her  second,  Simeon.  At  Levi's  birth  she  does  not  go  farther  than  the 
hope  of  her  husband's  being  joined  to  her ;  but  Jehovah  has  praise  when 
she  bore  Jndah.  In  Kachael's  case  (chap,  xxx.)  there  is  no  such  ex- 
pression at  first  of  confidence  in  Jehovah's  compassionate  interest;  but 
in  disappointment  of  heart  she  gives  Jacob  her  maid ;  and,  when  Dan 
was  bom,  she  accepts  it  as  the  judgment  of  Elohim,  and  at  Naphtali's 
birth  speaks  of  His  wrestHngs.  Leah,  following  her  example,  gains 
through  Zilpah  Gad  and  Asher,  but  makes  no  acknowledgment  of  the 
divine  name  in  either  form.  After  this  comes  the  incident  of  using 
mandrakes  for  hire,  when  Elohim  acts  for  Leah  in  sovereign  power, 
and  she  owns  Him  as  such  when  Issachar  was  bom,  and  in  Zebulun 
on  the  pledge  of  her  husband's  dwelling  with  her.  In  the  same  power 
did  Elohim  remember  Rachael,  who  not  only  confesses  that  the  God 
of  creation  had  taken  away  her  reproach,  but  calls  her  son  Joseph, 
saying,  Jehovah  shall  add  to  me  another  son.  This  is  the  more  strik- 
ing because  it  is  an  instance  of  the  combined  use  of  these  names, 
admirably  illustrating  both  sides  of  the  truth,  and  irreconcileable  with 
the  double-document  hypothesis.  Bachel  rose  from  the  thought  of 
His  power  to  the  recognition  of  His  ways  with  His  own.  And  even 
Laban  (verse  39)  is  obliged  to  confess  that  Jacob  enjoyed  the  blessing 
of  One  who  was  in  special  relationship  with  him — of  Jehovah. 

a  2 


100        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

• 

There  was  the  unseen  hand  of  God ;  but  the  power  and 
the  honour  of  God  could  not  be  righteously  found  in 
such  a  course.  Grace  would  give  these  another  day: 
they  could  not  rightly  be  as  yet.  He  steals  away 
therefore  timidly,  pursued  as  if  he  were  a  thief  by  his 
father-in-law,  whom  however  God  takes  gravely  in  hand, 
coming  to  him  in  a  dream  by  night.  The  Syrian  (Laban) 
is  warned  to  beware  what  he  says  or  does  to  Jacob,  and 
even  obliged  to  confess  it  himself  While  Jacob  lays  his 
remonstrance  before  him,  Laban  after  all  cannot  but 
seek  his  aid,  and  enters  into  a  special  covenant  with 
the  very  man  he  had  overtaken  in  his  flight. 

After  this  we  find  the  angels  of  God  meeting  Jacob. 
(Chapter  xxxii.)  "  And  when  Jacob  saw  them,  he  said, 
This  is  God's  host."  They  were  the  witnesses  of  the 
full  providential  care  of  God ;  but  no  such  intervention 
can  ever  set  the  heart  or  conscience  right  with  God. 
This  was  proved  immediately  afterwards.  The  mes- 
sengers whom  Jacob  sent  to  propitiate  Esau  returned, 
saying,  that  the  dreaded  chief  of  Seir  was  coming  to 
meet  him  with  four  hundred  men.  God's  host  then 
gave  no  comfort  to  Jacob  against  the  host  of  Esau. 
He  is  alarmed  more  than  ever.  He  sets  to  work  in  his 
own  way.  He  makes  his  plan  and  then  he  makes  his 
prayer;  but  after  all  he  is  not  at  ease.  He  devised 
with  considerable  skill ;  feeble  was  his  faith,  and  where 
even  generous  self-sacrificing  love  for  the  family  ?  All 
bears  the  stamp  of  anxiety  as  well  as  address,  if  not 
craft.  This  was  his  natural  character;  for  though 
eminently  a  man  of  God,  still  it  is  not  God  who  is 
prominent  to  his  eyes,  and  leant  on,  but  his  own 
human  resources.     Ill  at  ease,  he  sends  over — I  am 


GENESIS  XXV.   TO  END.  101 

sorry  to  say — himself  last  of  all!  That  which  he 
valued  most  came  latest.  Jacob  was  not  among  the  first ! 
His  flocks,  herds  and  camels  set  first,  wives  and  children 
next,  Jacob  last.  The  various  bands  in  order  were 
meant  to  serve  as  a  breakwater  between  the  offended 
brother  Esau  and  trembling  Jacob.  But  at  length, 
when  all  were  taken  or  sent  over  the  ford  Jabbok, 
comes  another  whom  Jacob  did  not  expect  when  left 
alone.  A  man  struggled  with  him  that  night  till  break 
of  day. 

But  it  is  well  to  remark,  though  it  has  been  often 
noticed,  that  it  is  not  set  forth  to  the  honour  of  Jacob 
that  he  wrestled  with  the  man,  for  it  was  rather  the 
man,  or  God  Himself,  who  wrestled  with  him.  There 
was  still  not  a  little  in  him  with  which  God  had  a 
controversy  for  Jacob's  good,  not  without  his  humilia- 
tion. In  short  God  was  dealing  with  and  putting 
down  His  servant's  dependence  on  his  own  strengtli, 
devices,  and  resources  in  any  and  every  way.  Hence, 
as  the  symbol  of  this,  what  was  touched  and  shrank 
was  the  known  sign  of  man's  strength.  The  sinew  of 
the  thigh  was  caused  to  wither  away.  But  the  very 
hand  which  touched  the  seat  of  natural  strength  im- 

o 

parted  a  strength  from  above  ;  and  Jacob  on  this 
occasion  has  a  new  name  given  to  him.  "  Thy  name 
shall  be  called  no  more  Jacob,  but  Israel :  for  as  a 
prince  hast  thou  power  with  God  and  with  men,  and 
hast  prevailed."  He  asked  the  name  of  God,  but  this 
could  not,  consistently  with  His  character,  be  revealed 
yet.  God  keeps  His  name  in  secret  now.  Jacob 
struggles  all  night  that  he  might  be  blessed.  It  was 
no  question  of  peaceful  fellowship,  still  less  of  earnest 


102        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

intercession  for  othens.  It  was  indeed  most  significant 
of  divine  mercy;  but  of  God's  mercy  in  the  dark, 
where  there  could  not  yet  be  communion.  Thus 
nothing  could  more  truly  answer  to  the  state  of  Jacob. 
He  was  no  doubt  strengthened  of  God,  but  it  was 
compassionate  mercy  strengthening  him  to  profit  by  a 
needful  and  permanent  putting  down  of  all  his  own 
strength — love  that  must  wither  it  up,  but  would 
nevertheless  sustain  himself 

In  the  next  chapter  (xxxiii.)  the  meeting  takes  place. 
Esau  receives  him  with  every  appearance  of  generous 
aflFection,  refusing  but  at  length  receiving  his  gifts.  At 
the  same  time  Jacob  proves  that  his  confidence  was  far 
from  being  restored.  He  is  uneasy  at  the  presence  of 
Esau :  his  conscience  was  not  good.  Esau  proflTers  his 
protection.  There  was  nothing  farther  from  the  desire 
of  Jacob.  Is  it  too  much  to  say  that  the  excuse  was 
not  thoroughly  truthful  ?  Can  one  believe  that  Jacob 
meant  to  visit  him  at  mount  Seir?  Certain  it  is  that, 
directly  Esau's  back  is  turned,  he  goes  another  way. 
"  He  journeyed  to  Succoth,  and  built  him  an  house,  and 
made  booths  for  his  cattle :  therefore  the  name  of  the 
place  is  called  Succoth.  And  Jacob  came  to  Shalem,* 
a  city  of  Shechem,  which  is  in  the  land  of  Canaan, 
when  he  came  from  Padan-aram ;  and  pitched  his  tent 
before  the  city.  And  he  bought  a  parcel  of  a  field, 
where  he  had  spread  his  tent.  .  .  .  And  he  erected  there 
an  altar,  and  called  it  El-elohe-Israel."  Thus,  it  seems 
to  me  evident,  that  although  there  was  unquestionably 
progress  in  Jacob's  soul,  he  was  far  from  being  brought 

*  Probably,  instead  of  ''to  Shalem,*'  &c.,  we  should  translate  it 
"in  peace  to,"  &c.    Compare  chap,  zxviii.  21,  xxxiv.  21. 


GENESIS  XXY.  TO  END.  103 

to  that  which  we  find  in  Abraham  from  the  very 
beginning.  He  is  still  wandering — still  under  corrective 
government.  All  that  which  hindered  the  enjoyment 
of  grace  was  not  yet  removed.  There  was  earthliness 
of  mind  enough  to  quit  the  pilgrim's  tent  and  build  a 
house,  as  well  as  to  buy  a  piece  of  ground.  What  did 
he  want  it  for  ?  He  erected  no  doubt  an  altar.  There 
is  progress  unquestionably ;  but  he  does  not  in  this  go 
beyond  the  thought  of  God  as  connected  with  himself. 
It  was  in  uo  way  the  homage  of  one  who  regarded  God 
according  to  His  own  being  and  majesty.  Now  there 
never  can  be  the  spirit  of  worship  till  we  delight  in 
God  for  what  He  is  Himself,  not  merely  for  what  He 
has  been  to  you  or  me.  I  grant  you  that  it  is  all  right 
to  feel  what  He  has  done  for  us ;  but  it  is  rather  the 
preparation  for  worship,  or  at  most  worship  in  its  most 
elementary  form.  It  is  more  thanksgiving  than  the 
proper  adoration  of  God,  and  in  fact  a  circumscribing  of 
God  to  our  own  circumstances.  I  admit  fully  that  the 
grace  of  God  does  minister  to  our  wants;  but  then  it  is 
to  raise  us  above  them  and  the  sense  of  them,  in  order 
that  we  may  freely  and  fully  enjoy  what  God  is,  and 
not  merely  feel  what  He  has  done  for  us.  Jacob  had 
not  reached  that  yet ;  for  him  God  the  God  of  Israel  is 
all  he  can  say.     Shechem  is  not  Bethel. 

This  conclusion,  as  to  the  then  state  of  Jacob,  seems 
to  be  confirmed  by  the  chapter  which  follows.  The 
settling  down  in  the  city  ere  long  became  a  sorrowful 
story  for  Jacob,  who  proved  it  in  one  that  was  near 
and  dear  to  him.  It  was  the  occasion  of  his  daughter 
Dinah's  shame,  as  well  as  of  her  brother's  cruel  and 
deceitful  vengeance,  that  brought  trouble  on  Jacob,  and 


104        LECTUEBS  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

caused  him  to  stink  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  land, 
as  Jacob  so  sorely  confessed.  (Chap,  xxxiv.) 

Once  more  God  said  to  Jacob,  Arise ;  but  now  it  is 
to  "  go  to  Bethel,  and  dwell  there ;  and  make  there  an 
altar  unto  God,  that  appeared  unto  thee  when  thou  fled- 
dest  from  the  face  of  Esau  thy  brother."  Here  he  is 
not  met  by  a  host  of  angels,  nor  does  the  mysterious 
stranger  wrestle  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,  crippling 
him  in  the  might  of  nature,  and  making  the  weak  to 
be  strong.     It  is  a  more  open  call  in  chapter  xxxv. 

Now  it  is  singular  to  hear,  that  Jacob  says  to  his 
household  and  all  that  are  with  him,  "  Put  away  the 
strange  gods  that  are  among  you,  and  be  clean,  and 
change  your  garments."  "  Strange  gods  "  ?  Yes,  there 
they  were,  and  he  knew  it  all  along,  but  he  never  before 
felt  the  seriousness  of  it  till  summoned  to  go  to  BetheL 
His  conscience  is  now  awake  to  what  previously  made 
no  impression  on  his  mind.  We  easily  forget  what  our 
heart  does  not  judge  as  it  is  before  God;  but  as  He 
knows  how  to  rouse  the  conscience  adequately,  so  it  is 
a  sorrowfulg/ihing  on  the  other  hand  when  a  saint  for- 
gets what  ought  to  be  the  permanent  object  of  his  soul, 
still  more  solemn  when  his  conscience  is  not  sensitive 
to  that  which  utterly  sullies  the  glory  of  God.  Mani- 
festly it  was  the  case  with  Jacob  ;  but  now  the  presence 
of  God,  not  providential  power,  not  disciplinary  dealings 
with  him,  but  the  call  to  Bethel,  brings  light  into  his 
soul,  and  the  false  gods  must  be  put  away.  Jacob  will 
have  the  household  in  unison  with  an  altar  at  BetheL 
"  Be  clean,  and  change  your  garments,  and  go  to  Bethel ; 
and  I  will  make  there  an  altar  unto  God,  who  answered 
me  in  the  day  of  my  distress,  and  was  with  me  in  the 


GENESIS  XXV.  TO  END.  105 

Way  which  I  went."  What  in  his  ways  can  be  con- 
ceived more  blessed  than  the  patient  faithfulness  of 
God  ?  Now  at  length  Jacob  is  alive  to  his  responsibility 
toward  God.  "And  they  gave  unto  Jacob  all  the  strange 
gods  which  were  in  their  hand,  and  all  their  earrings 
which  were  in  their  ears;  and  Jacob  hid  them  under 
the  oak  which  was  by  Shex^hem.  And  they  journeyed." 
But  was  it  a  flight  now?  "And  the  terror  of  God  was 
upon  the  cities  that  were  round  about  them,  and  they 
did  not  pursue  after  the  sons  of  Jacob."  All  was 
changed  from  this  point.  "So  Jacob  came  to  Luz 
which  is  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  that  is,  BetbeL  And 
he  built  there  an  altar,  and  called  the  place  El-beth-el 
(the  God  of  Bethel)."  There  Deborah,  Eebekah*s  nurse, 
died  and  was  buried.  There  God  appeared  again ;  and 
while  He  repeats  the  name  of  Israel  instead  of  Jacob, 
He  reveals  Himself  as  God  Almighty,  El-Shaddai. 
"And  God  said  unto  him,  Thy  name  is  Jacob:  thy 
name  shall  not  be  called  any  more  Jacob,  but  Israel 
shall  be  thy  name;  and  He  called  his  name  Israel,"* — 

*  Dr.  Davidson  (Introd.  0.  T.  pp.  65,  66),  in  his  arguments  against 
unity  of  authorship  on  the  score  of  diversities,  confusedness,  and 
contradictions,  alleges  this:  "In  like  manner  Jacob's  name  was 
changed  to  Israel,  when  he  wrestled  with  a  supernatural  being  in 
human  form  all  night  before  he  met  his  brother  Esau,  on  his  return 
from  Mesopotamia  (Gen.  xxxii.  28) ;  whereas  according  to  Gen. 
XXXV.  10  he  received  the  name  on  another  occasion  at  Bethel,  not 
Penuel,  as  the  first  passage  states.  It  is  a  mere  subterfuge  to  assert 
that,  because  no  reason  is  assigned  for  the  change  of  name  in  xxxv. 
10,  it  relates  no  more  than  a  solemn  confirmation  of  what  had  been 
done  already.  A  reason  for  the  change  does  not  necessarily  accom- 
pany its  record.  The  words  are  explicit:  'And  God  said  unto  him, 
Thy  name  is  Jacob ;  thy  name  shaU  not  be  caUed  any  more  Jacob, 
but  Israel  shall  be  thy  name.'  If  his  name  were  Israel  before,  the 
words  plainly  assert  the  contrary.    The  passages  are  junior  Elohistic, 


106        LEGTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

blotting  out  in  one  sense  all  the  history  from  the  day 
when  that  name  was  fiist  conferred  on  him.  It  is  a 
sorrowful  reflection  for  the  heart  when  time  past  is,  so 
to  speak,  time  lost  It  is  not  that  Gk)d  cannot  turn  it 
to  purpose  when  grace  is  at  work,  but  there  must  be 
merited  self-reproach  as  we  may  too  well  know. 

Not  only  then  does  Jacob  receive  afresh  his  new  name, 
but  Grod  shrouds  His  name  no  longer  in  secrecy.  Now  he 
has  not  to  ask,  "What  is  thy  name  ?"  any  more  than  He 
who  wrestled  once  had  to  ask  him  wherefore  he  asked  it 
He  was  not  then  in  the  condition  to  profit  by  that  name ; 
nor  was  it  consistent  with  Grod's  own  honour  that  He 
should  make  it  known.  Now  Gkxl  can  reveal  Himself  to 
His  servant,  saying,  "  I  am  God  Almighty.  Be  fruitful 
and  multiply.  A  nation  and  a  company  of  nations 
shall  be  of  thee,  and  kings  shall  come  out  of  thy  loins. 

and  Elohistic  respectively.  An  analogous  example  is  Bethel,  fonnerly 
Luz,  which  was  so  named  hj  Jacob  on  his  journey  to  Mesopotamia 
(x^T^iii.  19,  XXX.  13),  but  according  to  xxxt.  15,  on  his  return.  Iden- 
tical names  of  places  are  not  imposed  twice."  It  is  evident  that  the 
rationalist  approaches  Scripture,  not  as  a  believer  and  learner,  but  as 
a  judge,  and  that  his  criticism  is  captious,  to  say  nothing  of  irreve- 
rence. There  is  nothing  to  hinder  a  repetition  in  giving  names  either 
to  persons  or  places.  Let  those  who  are  affected  by  such  petty  cavils 
weigh  our  Lord's  giving  Simon  the  name  of  Peter  twice  (John  i.  42 ; 
Matt.  xvi.  18),  and  the  second  time  with  yet  more  emphasis  than  the 
first.  It  is  the  more  absurd  in  the  case  of  Jacob  changed  to  Israel 
and  then  confirmed,  because  the  usual  plea  of  Jehovah  and  Elohim 
does  not  apply  here.  In  both  cases  it  is  Elohim.  Hence  the  need  of 
inventing  a  junior  Elohist  in  order  to  maintain  their  illusion.  Again, 
the  first  verse  of  chap.  xxxv.  fiimiahes  the  most  direct  and  conclusive 
proof  that  identical  names  of  places  may  be  imposed  twice ;  for  GK)d 
is  represented  on  this  second  occasion  as  bidding  Jacob  g^  up  to 
Bethel  {not  Luz)  before  he  calls  the  place  for  the  second  time  BetheL 
What  is  the  value  of  Dr.  D.'s  denial  of  what  Scripture  positively 
sjflSrmsP 


GENESIS  XXV.  TO  END.  107 

And  the  land  which  I  gave  Abraham  and  Isaac,  to  thee 
I  will  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee  will  I  give  the 
land."  And  not  unlike  what  was  said  of  Abraham,  so 
on  an  occasion  of  singular  nearness  it  is  said  of  Jacob, 
— great  honour  for  one  after  such  an  experience, — that 
*'  God  went  up  from  him  in  the  place  where  he  talked 
with  him."  If  it  was  a  glorious  moment  in  Abraham's 
history,  it  was  especially  gracious  in  God's  ways  with 
Jacob.  "And  Jacob  set  up  a  pillar  in  the  place  where 
he  talked  with  him,  even  a  pillar  of  stone,  and  he 
poured  a  drink-offering  thereon,  and  he  poured  oil 
thereon,  and  called  the  name  of  the  place  where  God 
spake  with  him  Beth-el."  Afterwards  comes  the  passing 
away  of  Eachel  at  a  moment  of  deep  interest  already 
noticed, — the  birth  of  her  second  son,  and  her  burial 
near  Bethlehem.-  And  on  the  journey  there  the  aged 
father  has  a  fresh  sorrow  and  shame  in  the  foul  sin  of 
his  first-born. 

Then  follows  the  genealogy  of  Jacob's  sons ;  and  the 
long-delayed  last  sight  of  Isaac  at  Hebron,  where  he 
dies  at  the  age  of  180  years,  and  was  buried  by  his  sons 
Esau  and  Jacob. 

But  there  is  another  genealogy  (chap,  xxxvi.),  and 
strikingly  introduced  in  this  place.  The  Edomite  in- 
terrupts the  course  of  the  line  of  God's  dealings.  We 
discern  at  once  what  remarkable  maturity  there  was 
here.  It  is  always  so — first  that  which  is  natural, 
afterwards  that  which  is  spiritual  Even  then  we  find 
a  rapid  development  of  power  in  the  family  of  Esau. 
They  were  all  great  people,  to  be  sure — duke  this  and 
duke  that,  to  the  end  of  the  chapter — even  kings,  as  we 
are  told,  reigned  before  there  were  any  such  in  Israel.  I 


108        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

have  no  doubt  that  this  is  given  us  as  an  important 
element  to  mark  how  rapidly  what  is  not  of  God  shoots 
up.  Growth  according  to  God  is  slower,  but  then  it  is 
more  permanent. 

Chapter  xxxvii.  introduces  to  us  a  new  and  alto- 
gether different  range  of  events — the  very  attractive 
account  of  Joseph.  It  is  not  now  a  fugitive  from  the 
land  under  the  righteous  hand  of  God,  but  a  sufferer  who 
is  going  to  be  exalted  in  due  time.  These  are  the  two 
main  outlines  of  Joseph's  history — a  more  than  usually 
meet  type  of  Christ,  in  that  he  shone  above  all  his  fel- 
lows for  unsullied  integrity  of  heart  under  the  several 
trials.  There  is  no  patriarch  on  whom  the  Spirit  of 
God  dwells  with  greater  delight ;  and  among  those  who 
preceded  Christ  our  Lord  it  may  be  questioned  where 
one  can  find  such  a  sufferer.  And  his  suffering  too 
was  not  merely  outside:  he  suffered  quite  as  keenly 
from  his  brethren.  Wherever  he  lived,  in  Palestine  or 
in  Egypt,  he  was  a  sufferer,  and  this  in  astonishing 
grace,  never  higher  morally  than  when  lying  under  the 
basest  reproach.  He  was  one  who  had  true  under- 
standing; and  the  knowledge  of  the  holy  is  under- 
standing. Such  was  Joseph's  great  distinctive  trait 
Thus  we  find  it  brings  him,  first  of  all,  into  collision 
with  his  father's  house.  Jacob  indeed  felt  very  dif- 
ferently. It  was  impossible  for  one  that  valued  holiness 
to  bring  a  good  Report  of  his  brethren.  But  his  father 
loved  him,  and  when  his  brethren  saw  their  father's 
estimate  of  him,  they  could  so  much  the  less  endure 
Joseph.  "  They  hated  him,  and  could  not  speak  peace- 
ably unto  him."  The  wisdom  that  follows  fidelity — 
and  J'^^^kf  ^^  ^  always  so  as  a  rule — is  fui'nished  and 

/    m 


GENESIS  XXV.  TO  END.  109 

exercised  in  the  communications  of  God ;  for  if  He 
forms  a  heart  for  what  is  of  Himself,  He  gives  the 
supply  of  what  it  craves.  He  ministers  to  Joseph 
dreams  that  shew  the  gracious  purposes  that  were 
before  Himself.  For  first  the  sheaves  pay  obeisance, 
and  he  with  the  utmost  simplicity  of  heart  tells  all  to 
his  brethren;  for  he  never  thought  of  himself,  and 
therefore  could  speak  with  candour.  But  they  with 
instinctive  dislike  and  jealousy  of  what  gave  glory  to 
their  brother  did  not  fail  to  make  the  detested  appli- 
cation of  his  dreams.  Even  the  father  finds  it  trying, 
much  as  he  loved  him  ;  for  Joseph  has  another  dream, 
in  which  the  sun  and  moon,  as  well  as  eleven  stars, 
made  obeisance  to  him ;  and  Jacob  felt  but  observed 
the  saying. 

The  story  proceeds :  Joseph  is  sent  to  see  the  peace 

of  his  brethren,  follows  them  to  Dothan,  and  there  the 

last  errand  of  love  brings  out  their  deepest  hatred. 

They  determine  to  get  rid  of  him.     They  will  have 

this  dreamer  no  more.     Eeuben  sets  himself  against 

their  murderous  intention;  but  the  result  is  that  at 

Judah's  proposal  he  is  cast  into  the  pit,  given  up  for 

death,  yet  taken  out  of  it  and  sold  to  the  Midianites — 

a  wonderful  type  of  a  greater  than  Joseph.    It  was  bad 

to  sell  him  for  twenty  pieces  of  silver,  but  this  was  not 

the  full  extent  of  the  wrong ;  for  the  same  cruel  hearts 

which  thus  disposed  of  a  holy  and  loving  brother  did 

not  scruple  to  inflict  the  deadliest  wound  on  their  aged 

father.     Sin  against  the  brother,  and  sin  against  the 

father — such  is  the  sorrowful  conclusion  of  this  chapter 

of  Joseph's  story. 


110       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Here  again,  we  have  another  interruption ;  but  never 
allow  for  a  moment  that  anything  is  not  perfect  in  the 
word  of  God.  It  is  right  that  we  should  see  what  the 
leader  in  this  wickedness  was ;  it  is  well  that  we  should 
know  what  the  character  and  conduct  of  Judah  was, 
whom  we  afterwards  see  the  object  of  wondrous  counsels 
on  God's  part.  The  answer  lies  in  the  shameful  account 
of  Judah,  his  sons,  and  his  daughter-in-law,  and  him- 
self (Chap,  xxxviii.)  Yet  of  that  very  line  was  He 
born,  with  her  name  specified  too,  which  points  to  the 
most  painfully  humiliating  tale  that  we  find  perhaps 
anywhere  in  the  book  of  Genesis.  But  what  humiliation 
was  He  not  willing  to  undergo  who  had  love  as  well  as 
glory  incomparably  greater  than  Joseph's ! 

In  chapter  xxxix.  Joseph  is  seen  in  the  land  of 
Egypt,  for  there  the  Midianites  sold  him.  He  is  in 
slavery,  first  of  all  in  the  house  of  Potiphar,  captain  of 
the  guard;  but  "Jehovah  was  with  Joseph;  and  he 
was  a  prosperous  man;  and  he  was  in  the  house  of 
his  master  the  Egyptian."  Here  again  he  comes  into 
suflTering ;  here  again  most  unworthily  is  he  misrepre- 
sented and  maligned,  and  hastily  cast  into  the  dungeon. 
But  Jehovah  was  with  Joseph  in  the  prison,  just  as 
much  as  in  Potiphar's  house.  In  verse  2,  it  is  written. 
He  was  with  Joseph ;  in  verse  21,  He  was  with  Joseph, 
*'  and  shewed  him  mercy,  and  gave  him  favour  in  the 
sight  of  the  keeper  of  the  prison.  The  keeper  of  the 
prison  looked  not  to  anything  that  was  under  his 
hand."  It  mattered  little  where  he  was,  since  Jehovah 
was  with  him.  What  a  difiijrence  it  makes  when  God 
is  with  us — God  too  in  His  special  known  relationship. 


GENESIS  XXV.  TO  END.  Ill 

which  is  implied  in  the  use  of  "Jehovah"  here  as 
everywhere.  "He  looked  not  to  anything  that  was 
under  his  hand,  because  Jehovah  was  with  him;  and 
that  which  he  did  Jehovah  made  it  to  prosper." 

But  God  works  for  Joseph,  and  in  the  prison  puts  him 
in  contact  with  the  chief  butler  and  the  chief  baker  of 
the  king  of  Egypt.  (Chap,  xl.)  They  too  have  their 
dreams  to  telL  Joseph  willingly  listens,  and  interprets 
according  to  the  wisdom  of  God  that  was  given  him.  His 
interpretation  was  soon  verified.  With  the  remarkable 
prudence  which  marks  his  character,  he  had  begged  not 
to  be  forgotten.  But  "  his  soul  came  into  iron  "  a  little 
longer.  The  word  of  Jehovah  tried  him.  God  would 
work  in  His  own  way.  If  the  chief  butler  forgot  Joseph 
in  his  prosperity,  God  did  not. 

Pharaoh  now  had  a  dream;  but  there  was  none  to 
interpret.  (Chap,  xli.)  It  was  two  years  after — a  long 
while  to  wait,  especially  in  a  dungeon ;  but  the  chief 
butler,  remembering  his  faults,  and  confessing  them, 
tells  his  master  of  the  young  Hebrew  in  the  prison, 
servant  to  the  captain  of  the  guard,  who  had  interpreted 
80  truly. 

"Then  Pharaoh  sent  and  called  Joseph,  and  they 
brought  him  hastily  out  of  the  dungeon,"  and  presented 
him  duly  before  the  king.  His  interpretation  carried 
its  own  light  and  evidence  along  with  it ;  and  Pharaoh 
recognized  the  wisdom  of  God  not  only  in  this  but  also 
in  the  counsel  that  Joseph  gave.  And  what  wiser  man 
than  Joseph  could  take  in  hand  the  critical  case  of 
Egypt,  to  husband  its  resources  during  the  seven  years 
of  plenty,  and  to  administer  the  stores  during  the  seven 
years  of  famine  that  would  surely  follow  ?    So  the  king 


112       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

felt  at  once,  and  his  servants  too  in  spite  of  the  usual 
jealousy  of  a  court.  Joseph  was  the  man  to  carry  out 
what  he  had  seen  beforehand  from  God;  and  Joseph 
accordingly  becomes  ruler  next  to  Pharaoh  over  all  the 
land  of  Egypt. 

"And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Joseph,  See,  I  have  set 
thee  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt  And  Pharaoh  took 
off  his  ring  from  his  hand,  and  put  it  upon  Joseph's 
hand,  and  arrayed  him  in  vestures  of  fine  linen,  and 
put  a  gold  chain  about  his  neck ;  and  he  made  him  to 
ride  in  the  second  chariot  which  he  had;  and  they 
cried  before  him.  Bow  the  knee :  and  he  made  him  ruler 
over  all  the  land  of  Egypt.  And  Pharaoh  said  unto 
Joseph,  I  am  Pharaoh,  and  without  thee  shall  no  man 
lift  up  his  hand  or  foot  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt.  And 
Pharaoh  called  Joseph's  name  Zaphnath-paaneah ;  and 
he  gave  him  to  wife  Asenath  the  daughter  of  Poti-pherah 
priest  of  On.  And  Joseph  went  out  over  all  the  land  of 
Egypt.  And  Joseph  was  thirty  years  old  when  he  stood 
before  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt.  And  Joseph  went  out 
from  the  presence  of  Pharaoh,  and  went  throughout  all 
the  land  of  Egypt.  And  in  the  seven  plenteous  years 
the  earth  brought  forth  handfuls.  And  he  gathered  up 
all  the  food  of  the  seven  years,  which  were  in  the  land 
of  Egypt,  and  laid  up  the  food  in  the  cities :  the  food 
of  the  field,  which  was  round  about  every  city,  laid  he 
up  in  the  same.  And  Joseph  gathered  com  as  the  sand 
of  the  sea,  very  much,  until  he  left  numbering;  for  it 
was  without  number.  And  unto  Joseph  were  born  two 
sons  before  the  years  of  famine  came,  which  Asenath 
the  daughter  of  Poti-pherah  priest  of  On  bare  unto  him. 
And  Joseph  called  the  name  of  the  firstborn  Manasseh: 


GENESIS  XXV.  TO  END.  113 

For  God,  said  he,  hath  made  me  forget  all  my  toil,  and 
all  my  father's  house.  And  the  name  of  the  second 
called  he  Ephraim:  For  God  hath  caused  me  to  be 
fruitful  in  the  land  of  my  affliction.  And  the  seven 
years  of  plenteousness,  that  was  in  the  land  of  Egypt, 
were  ended.  And  the  seven  years  of  dearth  began  to 
come,  according  as  Joseph  had  said :  and  the  dearth 
was  in  all  lands ;  but  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt  there 
was  bread.  And  when  all  the  land  of  Egypt  was 
famished,  the  people  cried  to  Pharaoh  for  bread:  and 
Pharaoh  said  unto  all  the  Egyptians,  Go  unto  Joseph ; 
what  he  saith  to  you,  do.  And  the  famine  was  over  all 
the  face  of  the  earth :  And  Joseph  opened  all  the  store- 
houses, and  sold  unto  the  Egyptians;  and  the  famine 
waxed  sore  in  the  land  of  Egypt.  And  all  countries 
came  into  Egypt  to  Joseph  for  to  buy  corn;  because 
that  the  famine  was  so  sore  in  all  lands." 

Then  comes  another  wonderful  working  of  Grod.  The 
sheaves  had  not  yet  stood  and  bowed ;  the  sun,  moon, 
and  stars  had  not  paid  obeisance  yet;  but  all  was  to 
follow  not  long  after.  The  famine  pressed  upon  the  land 
where  Jacob  sojourned,  while  Joseph  was  in  Eg3rpt 
with  a  new  family,  children  of  the  bride  that  was  given 
him  by  the  king,  evidently  corresponding  with  the  place 

'  of  Christ  cast  out  by  Israel,  sold  by  the  Gentiles,  but 
exalted  in  a  new  place  and  glory  altogether,  where  He 
too  can  say  during  His  rejection  and  separation  from 
Israel,  "  Behold  I  and  the  children  whom  Jehovah  hath 
given  me."  Nothing  can  be  more  transparent  than  the 
application  of  the  type. 

But  there  is  more  in  the  type  than  that  we  have  just 
seen.     The  brethren  that  remained  with  Israel  have  yet 

I 


114        LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

to  be  accounted  for ;  and  the  pressure  of  the  famine  is 
upon  them.  It  is  so  with  Israel  now, — a  &mine  indeed, 
and  in  the  deepest  sense.  But  ten  of  the  brethren 
come  down  to  buy  com  in  Egypt ;  and  there  it  is  that 
God  works  marvellously  by  Joseph.  He  recognizes  his 
brethren.  EUs  heart  is  towards  them  when  they  are 
altogether  ignorant  who  he  was  that  enjoyed  the  glory 
of  Egypt.  The  result  is  that  Joseph  puts  in  execution 
a  most  solemn  searching  of  the  heart  and  conscience  of 
his  brethren.  It  is  exactly  what  the  Lord  from  a  better 
glor}'^  will  do  ere  long  with  BUs  Jewish  brethren.  He 
is  now  outside  in  a  new  position  quite  unlooked  for  by 
them :  they  know  Him  not.  But  He  too  will  cause  the 
pinch  of  famine  to  press  upon  them.  He  too  will  work 
in  their  hearts  in  consequence,  that  He  may  be  made 
righteously  known  to  them  in  due  time.  (Chap.  xliL) 

We  find,  accordingly,  that  first  of  all  one  of  the 
brethren  is  taken,  Simeon;  and  the  charge  is  given 
that,  above  all,  Benjamin  should  be  brought  down. 
There  can  be  no  restoration,  no  reconciliation,  relief  it 
is  true,  but  no  deliverance  for  Israel  till  Joseph  and 
Benjamin  are  united.  He  that  was  separated  from  his 
brethren,  but  now  in  glory,  must  have  the  son  of  his 
father's  right  hand.  It  is  Christ  rejected  but  exalted 
on  high,  and  taking  the  character  also  of  the  man  of 
power  for  dealing  with  the  earth.  Such  is  the  meaning 
of  the  combined  types  of  Jacob's  sons,  Joseph  and 
Benjamin.  Christ  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  latter 
yet;  He  admirably  answers  to  the  type  of  Joseph, 
but  not  yet  of  Benjamin.  As  long  as  He  is  simply 
filling  up  the  type  of  Joseph,  there  is  no  knowledge  of 
Himself  on  the  part  of  his  brethren.     Hence,  there- 


GENESIS  XXY.  TO  END.  115 

fore,  tliis  became  the  great  question  how  to  bring  down 
Benjamin — ^how  to  put  him  into  connection  with  Joseph. 
But  the  truth  is,  there  was  another  moral  necessity 
which  must  be  met — how  to  get  their  hearts  and  their 
consciences  set  right  all  round.  This  part  of  the  beau- 
tiful tale  is  typical  of  the  dealings  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
long  severed  and  exalted  in  another  sphere, — first  with 
the  remnant,  and  then  with  the  whole  house  of  IsraeL 
There  are  various  portions.  We  have  Eeuben  and  Simeon ; 
and  then  others  come  forward, — Judah  more  particularly 
at  the  close,  and  Benjamin. 

The  famine  still  pressing  (chapter  xliii),  Jacob  sorely 
against  his  will  is  obliged  to  part  with  Benjamin ;  and 
here  it  is  that  we  find  affections  altogether  unheard  of 
before  in  the  brethren  of  Joseph.  We  might  have 
thought  them  incapable  of  anything  that  was  good;  and 
it  is  very  evident  that  their  hearts  were  now  shewn  to 
be  under  a  most  mighty  power  which  forced  them 
anew,  as'  far  as,  of  course,  the  type  was  concerned. 
More  particularly  we  see  how  the  very  ones  who  had  so 
shamefully  failed  are  now  distinctly  brought  into  com- 
munion with  God's  mind  about  their  ways.  Eeuben  is 
quick  to  feel,  recalls  the  truth  as  far  as  he  knew  it 
about  Joseph,  and  shews  right  feelings  towards  his 
father.  Yet  we  know  what  he  had  been.  Judah  is 
even  more  prominent,  and  clearly  knew  yet  deeper 
searchings  of  the  heart,  and  particularly  too  in  the 
way  of  right  affections  about  both  their  father  and 
their  brother.  These,  as  is  plain,  were  just  the  points 
in  which  they  had  broken  down  before.  On  these  they 
must  be  divinely  corrected  now  ;  and  so  they  were. 

The  issue  of  all  is  this, — that  at  last  Judah  and  his 

I  2 


116        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

brethren  return  to  Joseph's  housa  (Chapter  xlivi) 
Judah  speaks.  Here  indeed  we  have  a  most  earnest 
pleading,  and  fidl  of  touching  affection.  '^  O  my  lord, 
let  thy  servant,  I  pray  thee,  speak  a  word  in  my  lord's 
ears,  and  let  not  thine  anger  bum  against  thy  servant : 
for  thou  art  even  as  Pharaoh.  My  lord  asked  his  ser- 
vants, saying.  Have  ye  a  father,  or  a  brother?"  There 
we  have  evidently  a  heart  that  has  been  brought  right, 
exactly  where  the  sin  lay.  "We  said  unto  my  lord, 
We  have  a  &ther,  an  old  man."  Ah,  there  was  no 
lacerating  of  his  heart  now !  "  And  a  child  of  his  old 
age,  a  little  ona"  How  little  they  thought  of  that 
once !  "  And  his  brother  is  dead,  and  he  alone  is  left  of 
his  mother,  and  his  feither  loveth  him."  Do  we  not 
feel  how  far  the  hearts  of  all  his  brethren  wer^  from 
hating  Joseph  now  because  of  Jacob's  love  to  him! 
"  And  thou  saidst  unto  thy  servants,  Bring  him  down 
unto  me,  that  I  may  set  mine  eyes  upon  him.  And  we 
said  unto  my  lord.  The  lad  cannot  leave  his  father :  for 
if  he  should  leave  his  father,  his  father  would  die.  And 
thou  saidst  unto  thy  servants.  Except  your  youngest 
brother  come  down  with  you,  ye  shall  see  my  face  no 
more.  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  we  came  up  unto 
thy  servant  my  father,  we  told  him  the  words  of  my 
lord.  And  our  father  said,  Go  again  and  buy  us  a  little 
food.  And  we  said,  We  cannot  go  down.  If  our  young- 
est brother  be  with  us,  then  will  we  go  down :  for  we 
may  not  see  the  man's  face,  except  our  youngest  brother 
be  with  us.  And  thy  servant  my  father  said  unto  us,  Ye 
know  that  my  wife  bare  me  two  sons,  and  the  one  went 
out  from  me,  and  I  said,  Surely  he  is  torn  in  pieces,  and 
I  saw  him  not  since ;  and  if  ye  take  this  also  from  me. 


GENESIS  XXV.   TO  END.  117 

and  mischief  befall  him,  ye  shall  bring  down  my  grey 
hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  grave.  Now  therefore  when  I 
come  to  thy  servant  my  father,  and  the  lad  be  not  with 
us,  seeing  that  his  life  is  bound  up  in  the  lad's  life,  it 
shall  come  to  pass,  when  he  seeth  that  the  lad  is  not 
with  us,  that  he  will  die ;  and  thy  servants  shall  bring 
down  the  grey  hairs  of  thy  servant  our  father  with 
sorrow  to  the  grave ;  for  thy  servant  became  surety  for 
the  lad  unto  my  father,  saying,  If  I  bring  him  not  unto 
thee,  then  I  shall  bear  the  blame  to  my  father  for  ever. 
Now,  therefore,  I  pray  thee,  let  thy  servant  abide  in- 
stead of  the  lad  a  bondman  to  my  lord ;  and  let  the  lad 
go  up  with  his  brethren.  For  how  shall  I  go  up  to  my 
father,  and  the  lad  be  not  with  me  ?  lest  peradventure 
I  see  the  evil  that  shall  come  on  my  father."  The 
moral  restoration  was  complete. 

In  the  following  chapter  follows  the  unveiling 
of  the  typical  stranger,  the  glorified  man,  to  his 
brethren,  who  up  to  this  were  wholly  ignorant  of  him. 
"Then  Joseph  could  not  refrain  himself  before  all 
them  that  stood  by  him;  and  he  cried,  Cause  every 
man  to  go  out  from  me ;  and  there  stood  no  man  with 
him  while  Joseph  made  himself  known  unto  his 
bi*ethren.  And  he  wept  aloud ;  and  the  Egyptians  and 
the  house  of  Pharaoh  heard ;  and  Joseph  said  unto  his 
brethren,  I  am  Joseph.  Doth  my  father  yet  live  ?  And 
his  brethren  could  not  answer  him,  for  they  were 
troubled  at  his  presence.  And  Joseph  said  unto  his 
brethren.  Come  near  to  me,  I  pray  you ;  and  they  came 
near.  And  he  said,  I  am  Joseph  your  brother,  whom 
ye  sold  into  Egypt.  Now  therefore  be  not  grieved,  nor 
angry  with  yourselves,  that  ye  sold  me  hither ;  for  God 


118        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

did  send  me  before  you  to  preserve  life.  For  these  two 
years  hath  the  famine  been  in  the  land :  and  yet  there 
are  five  years  in  the  which  there  shaU  be  neither  earing 
nor  harvest.  And  God  sent  me  before  you  to  preserve 
you  a  posterity  in  the  earth,  and  to  save  your  lives  by 
a  great  deliveranca  So  now  it  was  not  you  that  sent 
me  hither,  but  God :  and  he  hath  made  me  a  father  to 
Pharaoh,  and  lord  of  all  his  house,  and  a  ruler  through- 
out all  the  land  of  Egypt.  Haste  ye,  and  go  up  to  my 
father."  (Chap.  xlv.  1-9.)  And  so  they  do.  Benjamin 
then  is  embraced  by  Joseph ;  and  now  there  is  no  let 
to  the  accomplishment  of  the  purpose  of  God  for  the 
restoration  of  Israel — for  this  complete  blessing  where 
the  reality  comes  under  Christ  and  the  new  covenant. 

Jacob  comes  down  at  length,  and  on  his  way  God 
speaks  to  Israel  "in  the  visions  of  the  night;  and  said, 
Jacob,  Jacob;  and  he  said.  Here  am  I.  And  he  said, 
I  am  God,  the  God  of  thy  father :  fear  not  to  go  down 
into  Egypt;  for  I  will  there  make  of  thee  a  great  nation : 
I  will  go  down  with  thee  into  Egypt ;  and  I  will  also 
surely  bring  thee  up  again :  and  Joseph  shall  put  his 
hand  upon  thine  eyes."  (Chap.  xlvi.  2-4.) 

Then  after  the  genealogies  of  the  chapter,*  we  have 

*  It  may  be  worth  while  to  observe  in  this  and  other  genealogies 
not  often  the  object  of  infidel  attack,  that  the  differences  between 
Genesis,  Numbers,  and  Chronicles  in  their  form  are  due  to  the  motive 
for  their  introduction  in  each  particular  connexion ;  that  the  difficul- 
ties clearly  spring  from  the  design,  in  no  way  from  error  in  the 
writer,  but  in  fact  because  of  ignorance  in  such  readers  as  misapprehend 
them  ;  and  that  both  the  differences  and  the  difficulties  are  the 
strongest  evidence  of  their  truth  and  inspired  character,  for  nothing 
would  have  been  easier  than  to  have  assimilated  their  various  forms 
and  to  have  eliminated  that  which  sounds  strange  to  western  ears. 

This  table  enumerates  32  of  Leah,  16  of  Zilpah,  11  of  Eachel,  7  of 


GENESIS  XXV.   TO  END.  119 

the  meeting  between  Jacob  and  Joseph.  Not  this  only  ; 
for  some  of  Joseph's  brethren  are  presented  to  Pharaoh ; 
and  Joseph  brought  in  Jacob  his  father,  and  set  him 

Bilhah=66.  But  the  head  also  goes  with  his  house ;  and  so  with  the 
larger  list  of  Leah's  children  we  see  Jacob  counted  (verse  8),  which  is 
confirmed  by  the  fisu;t  of  33  attributed  to  Leah,  whereas  no  more  than 
32  literally  are  named,  reckoning  Dinah,  and  excluding  Er  and  Onan 
who  died  in  Canaan  as  we  are  expressly  told.  Objectors  have  failed 
to  take  into  account  the  peculiarity  in  the  mention  of  Hezron  and 
Hamul  in  verse  12.  It  is  merely  said  (and  said  only  in  their  case) 
that  the  sons  of  Pharez  "  were"  Hezron  and  Hamul,  not  that  they 
were  bom  in  Canaan,  where  those  had  died  for  whom  they  were 
substitutes ;  next,  that  the  Hebrew  of  verse  26  does  not  go  so  far  as  to 
say  with  the  Authorised  Version,  "came  with  Jacob  into  Egypt,"  but 
of,  t,e.  belonging  to,  Jacob.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  there  is 
no  reason,  but  rather  the  contrary  from  scriptural  usage  for  construing 
ti^t^^  nrS  **  at  that  time,"  of  an  isolated  point  of  time,  but  rather 
of  a  general  period,  consisting  as  here  of  a  number  of  events,  the  last 
and  not  the  first  of  which  might  synchronize  with  the  event  recorded 
just  before.  It  seems  clear  that  Stephen  (Acts  vii.  14)  cites  the  LXX. 
where  75  are  given,  as  the  Greek  version  (Gen.  xlvi.  20)  adds  five 
sons  and  grandsons  of  Manasseh  and  Ephraim.  Is  it  not  monstrous 
for  a  man  professing  Christianity  and  ostensibly  in  the  position  of 
bishop,  to  neglect  elements  so  necessary  to  a  judgment  of  the  question, 
and  to  pronounce  the  Biblical  account  "  certainly  incredible,"  mainly 
on  the  assumption  that  Pharez's  sons  were  bom  in  Canaan,  which  is 
nowhere  said,  but  rather  room  left  for  the  inference  that  it  was  not  so 
in  the  exceptional  form  of  Gen.  xlvi.  12  ?  Yet  after  citing  this  verse 
we  are  told,  "  It  appears  to  me  certain  (!)  that  the  writer  here  means 
to  say  that  Hezron  and  Hamul  were  born  in  th^  land  of  Canaan." 
Is  scepticism  only  certain  that  its  own  dreams  are  true,  and  that 
scripture  is  false?  There  was  a  natural  and  weighty  motive  for 
selecting  two  grandsons  of  Judah,  though  no  other  of  Jacob's  great- 
grandsons  are  mentioned  in  the  list.  For  they  only  were  substitu- 
tional, as  the  very  verse  in  which  they  occur  implies.  And  it  was  of 
the  deeper  interest  too,  as  one  of  them  (Hezron)  stands  in  the  direct 
line  of  the  Messiah,  which  was,  as  it  appears  to  me,  one  chief  reason 
for  introducing  the  details  of  Judah's  history  and  its  shame  in  Gen. 
xxxviii.  It  is  vain  to  quote.  Num.  iii.  17  to  set  aside  the  peculiar 
force  of  the  allusion  to  the  sons  of  Pharez  in  Gen.  xlvi.  12,  with 
which  there  is  no  real  analogy. 


120        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

before  Pharaoh ;  and  Jacob  blessed  Pharaoh.  (Chapter 
xlvii.)  It  was  a  fine  sight  spiritually  (the  moriB  so, 
because  unconsciously,  without  a  definite  thought,  I 
presume,  on  his  own  part)  that  "  the  less  is  blessed  of 
the  greater."  But  so  it  is.  A  poor  pilgrim  blesses  the 
monarch  of  the  mightiest  realm  of  that  day;  but  the 
greatest  of  earth  is  little  in  comparison  with  the  blessed 
of  God.  Jacob  now  is  not  merely  blessed,  but  a  blesser. 
He  knows  God  well  enough  to  be  assured  that  nothing 
Pharaoh  has  could  really  enrich  him,  and  that  there  is 
very  much  which  God  could  give,  on  which  Jacob  could 
count  from  God  even  for  Pharaoh. 

In  chapter  ylviii.  tidings  of  Jacob's  sickness  brings 
Joseph  and  his  two  sons  to  the  bed  of  the  patriarch. 
The  closing  scene  of  Jacob  approaches,  and  I  scarcely 
know  a  more  affecting  thing  in  the  Bible.  It  is  a 
thorough  moral  restoration.  Not  merely  is  there  that 
which  typifies  it  for  Israel  by  and  by,  but  Jacob's  own 
soul  is  as  it  never  was  before.  There  is  no  such  brisht 
moment  in  his  past  life  as  in  the  circumstances  of 
his  death-bed.  I  grant  that  so  it  ought  to  be  in  a 
believer ;  and  that  it  is  really  so  in  fact  where  the  soul 
rests  simply  on  the  Lord.  But  whatever  we  may  see  in 
some  instances  and  fear  in  others,  in  Jacob's  case  the 
light  of  God's  presence  was  evident.  It  is  striking  that 
here  was  the  only  occavsion  on  which  the  brightness  of 
Joseph's  vision  was  not  so  apparent.  All  flesh  is  grass. 
The  believer  is  exposed  to  any  evil  when  he  ceases  to 
be  dependent,  or  yields  to  his  own  thoughts  which  are 
not  of  faith.  Jesus  is  the  only  "Faithful  Witness.'* 
Failure  is  found  in  the  most  blessed  servant  of  God.  So 
fact,  so  scripture  teaches.     Joseph,  ignorant  of  the  pur- 


GENESIS  XXV.   TO  END.  121 

pose  of  God  about  his  sons,  allows  his  natural  desires 
to  govern  him,  and  arranges  the  elder  before  the  right 
hand  of  his  dying  father,  the  younger  before  his  left. 
So  Joseph  would  have  had  it ;  but  not  so  Jacob.  His 
eyes  were  dim  with  age,  but  he  was  in  this  clearer- 
sighted  than  Joseph  after  all.  There  never  was  a  man 
who  saw  more  brightly  than  Joseph  ;  but  Jacob,  dying, 
sees  the  future  with  steadier  and  fuller  gaze  than  the 
most  famous  interpreter  of  dreams  and  visions  since  the 
world  began. 

And  what  thoughts  and  feelings  must  have  rushed 
through  the  old  man's  heart  as  he  looked  back  on  his 
own  early  days !  Did  he  fail  to  discern  then  how  easily 
God  could  have  crossed  the  hands  of  his  father  Isaac 
against  his  own  will  ?  Certainly  God  would  have  in- 
fallibly maintained  His  own  truth;  and  as  He  had 
promised  the  better  blessing  to  Jacob,  not  to  Esau,  so, 
spite  of  Esau  and  the  fruits  of  his  success  in  hunting, 
he  would  have  proved  that  it  was  not  to  him  that  willed 
like  Isaac,  nor  to  him  that  ran  like  Esau.  All  turns  on 
God,  who  shews  mercy  and  keeps  His  word. 

On  this  occasion,  then,  Jacob  pronounces  the  bless- 
ing— the  superior  blessing — on  the  younger  of  the  two 
boys ;  and  this  too  in  terms  which  one  may  safely  say, 
were  equal  to  so  extraordinary  a  conjuncture, — ^in  terms 
which  none  but  the  Spirit  of  God  could  have  enabled 
any  mouth  to  utter. 

In  chapter  xlix.  we  find  the  general  prophetic  blessing 
of  Jacob's  sons.'  Here  one  may  convey  the  scope  with- 
out ceasing  to  be  brief  As  the  blessings  allude. to  the 
history  of  the  twelve  heads  of  the  nation,  so  naturally 
we  have  the  future  that  awaits  the  tribes  of  Israel. 


122        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

But  as  this  is  a  matter  of  tolerably  wide-spread  know- 
ledge amongst  Christians,  there  is  no  need  for  much  to 
be  said  about  it. 

Eeuben  is  the  starting-point,  and  alas !  it  is,  like  man 
always,  corraption.  It  was  the  first  mark  of  evil  in 
the  creature.  The  second  is  no  better, — rather  worse 
it  may  be  in  some  respects, — ^violence.  Simeon  and 
Levi  were  as  remarkable  for  the  latter,  as  Reuben  for 
the  former— a  sorrowful  vision  for  Jacob's  heart, — to 
feel  that  this  not  only  had  been  but  was  going  to  be ; 
for  undoubtedly  he  knew,  as  he  says,  that  what  he 
then  uttered  would  sweep  onward  and  befall  the  people 
"  in  the  last  days."  This  did  not  hinder  his  beginning 
with  the  history  of  Israel  from  his  own  days.  Corruption 
and  violence,  as  they  had  been  the  two  fatal  characteris- 
tics of  his  three  eldest  sons,  so  would  stamp  the  people 
in  their  early  history.  Israel  imder  law  broke  the  law, 
and  was  ever  leaving  Jehovah  for  Baalim;  yet  the  sons 
would  be  no  better,  rather  worse,  than  the  father; 
but  the  gi'ace  of  God  would  interfere  for  the  genera- 
tions to  come  as  it  had  for  their  father  Jacob,  and  the 
last  day  would  be  bright  for  them  as  in  truth  for  him. 

Then  Judah  comes  before  us.  It  might  be  thought, 
that  surely  there  will  be  full  blessing  now.  "  Judah  is 
a  lion's  whelp :  from  the  prey,  my  sou,  thou  art  gone 
up :  he  stooped  down,  he  couched  as  a  lion,  and  as  an 
old  lion ;  who  shall  rouse  him  up  ?  The  sceptre  shall 
not  depart  from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his 
feet,  until  Shiloh  come ;  and  unto  him  shall  the  gathering 
of  the  people  be.*   Binding  his  foal  unto  the  vine,  and  his 

*  The  real  difficulty  in  Gen.  xlix.  10  is  neither  so  much  the  unusual 
application  of  the  word  Shiloh,  nor  doctrinal  zeal,  as  the  desire  to  get 


GENESIS  XXV.  TO  END.  123 

ass's  colt  unto  the  choice  vine ;  he  washed  his  garments 
in  wine,  and  his  clothes  in  the  blood  of  grapes :  his  eyes 

rid  of  a  prophecy.  Unbelief  sets  out  with  the  foregone  condasion 
that  there  is  and  can  be  no  such  thing.  Hence  the  effort  to  destroy 
its  only  just  and  worthy  sense.  ''The  Deity  (says  Dr.  D.,  Introd. 
O.  T.  L  198)  did  not  see  fit,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  to  impart  to  any 
man  like  Jacob  the  foreknowledge  of  future  and  distant  events.  Had 
He  done  so.  He  would  not  have  left  him  in  darkness  respecting  the 
immortality  of  the  soul  (!)  and  a  future  state  of  rewards  and  punish- 
ments (!)  He  would  not  have  left  him  to  speak  on  his  deathbed,  like 
bn  Arab  chie^  of  no  higher  blessings  to  his  sons  than  rapine  and 
murder,  without  the  least  reference  to  another  and  better  state  of 
existence  on  which  he  believed  he  should  enter,  and  in  relation  to 
which  he  might  counsel  his  sons  to  act  continually.  The  true  way  of 
dealing  with  the  prophecy  is  simply  to  ascertain  by  internal  evidence 
the  time  in  which  it  was  written,  on  the  only  tenable  and  philosophical 
ground  of  its  having  been  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  dying  patriarch 
by  a  succeeding  writer.  It  has  the  form  of  a  prediction ;  but  it  is  a 
vatieinium  post  eventum We  believe  that  the  time  of  the  pro- 
phetic Ijrric  falls  under  the  kings.  The  tribes  are  referred  to  as  dwelling 
in  the  localities  which  they  obtained  in  Joshua's  time.  The  announce- 
ment respecting  Judah's  pre-eminence  brings  down  the  composition 
much  later  than  Joshua,  since  he  is  represented  as  taking  the  leader- 
ship of  ^e  tribes  in  subduing  the  neighbouring  nations.  We  explain 
the  tenth  verse  in  such  a  manner  as  to  imply  that  David  was  king 
over  the  tribes,  and  had  humbled  their  enemies."  The  proper  trans- 
lation according  to  this  sceptic  is : 

"  The  soeptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah, 
Nor  the  staff  of  power  from  between  his  feet. 
Until  he  oome  to  Shiloh, 
And  to  him  the  obedience  of  the  peoples  be." 

But,  first,  the  ruling  position  of  Judah  was  not  tiU  but  after  he  came 
to  Shiloh.  That  any  one,  therefore,  during  the  kings  would  falsify 
the  events  in  a  pretended  prophecy  put  into  dying  Jacob's  lips  is  too 
much  for  the  credulity  of  any  one  but  a  rationalist.  Secondly,  one 
who  speaks  of  others  so  scornfully  as  this  writer  ought  not  to  have 
exposed  himself  to  the  charge  of  such  ignorance  as  confounding  **  the 
peoples"  or  nations  with  the  x)eople  or  tribes  of  Israel.  I  believe, 
therefore,  with  the  amplest  authority  in  Hebrew,  that  as  the  language 
admits  of  our  taking  Shiloh  as  the  subject,  not  object,  so  the  sense  in 
the  context  demands  that  we  render  it  **  until  Shiloh  (i.e.  Peace,  or  the 
Man  of  Peace,  the  Messiah)  come." 


124        LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

shall  be  red  with  wine,  and  his  teeth  white  with  milk. 
Zebulun  shall  dwell  at  the  haven  of  the  sea;  and  he 
shall  be  for  an  haven  of  ships ;  and  his  border  shall  be 
unto  Zidon." 

Yes,  Jacob  speaks  of  Shiloh.  But  Shiloh  was  pre- 
sented to  the  responsibility  of  the  Jew  first ;  and  con- 
sequently all  seemed  to  break  down,  and  in  one  sense 
all  really  did.  "To  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the 
peoples  be;"  and  so  certainly  it  will  be,  but  not  yet 
Shiloh  came;  but  Israel  were  not  ready,  and  refused 
Him.  Consequently  the  gathering  (or  the  obedience)  of 
the  peoples,  however  sure,  is  yet  in  the  future.  The 
counsel  of  God  seemed  to  be  abortive,  but  was  really 
established  in  the  blood  of  the  cross,  which  unbelief 
deems  its  ruin.    It  is  postponed,  not  lost. 

Zebulun  gives  us  the  next  picture  of  the  history  of 
Israel.  Now  that  they  have  had  Shiloh  presented  but 
have  refused  Him,  the  Jews  find  their  comforts  in 
intercourse  with  the  Gentiles.  This  is  what  they  do 
now — seeking  to  make  themselves  happy,  when,  if  they 
weigh  their  own  prophets,  they  must  suspect  fatal  error 
somewhere  in  their  history.  They  have  lost  their  Mes- 
siah, and  they  court  the  world.  "  Zebulun  shall  dwell 
at  the  haven  of  the  sea ;  and  he  shall  be  for  a  haven  of 
ships,  and  his  border  shall  be  unto  Zidon." 

Tlie  consequence  is  that  the  Jews  sink  under  the 
burden,  falling  completely  under  the  influence  of  the 
nations.  This  is  shewn  by  Issachar — "a  strong  ass 
crouching  down  between  two  burdens." 

Then  we  come  to  the  crisis  of  sorrows  for  the  Jew. 
In  Dan  we  hear  of  that  which  is  far  more  dreadful  than 
burdens  inflicted  by  the  Gentiles,  and  their  own  sub- 


GENESIS  XXV.  TO  END.  125 

jection,  instead  of  cleaving  to  their  proper  and  distinc- 
tive hopes.  In  the  case  of  Dan  there  is  set  forth  the 
power  of  Satan  (ver.  17).  "Dan  shall  be  a  serpent  by 
the  way,  an  adder  in  the  path,  that  biteth  the  horse 
heels,  so  that  his  rider  shall  fall  backward."  We  see 
here  the  enemy  in  the  serpent  that  bites,  and  the  con- 
sequent disaster  to  the  horseman.  It  is  the  moment 
of  total  ruin  among  the  Jews,  but  exactly  the  point  of 
change  for  blessing.  It  is  then  accordingly  we  hear 
the  cry  coming  forth, — *'  I  have  waited  for  thy  salva- 
tion, O  Jehovah."  It  is  the  sudden  change  from  the 
energy  of  Satan  to  the  heart  looking  up  and  out  to 
Jehovah  Himself 

From  that  point  all  is  changed.  "  Gad,  a  troop  shall 
overcome  him ;  but  he  shall  overcome  at  the  last."  Now 
we  tave  victory  on  the  side  of  Israel. 

This  is  not  alL  There  is  abundance  too.  "  Out  of 
Asher  his  bread  shall  be  fat,  and  he  shall  yield  royal 
dainties." 

Again,  there  will  be  liberty  unknown  under  law, — 
impossible  when  merely  dealt  with  under  the  governing 
hand  of  God  because  of  their  faults.  "Naphtali  is  a 
hind  let  loose  :  he  giveth  goodly  words."  What  a 
diflference  from  him  who  was  bearing  like  an  ass  two 
burdens ! 

But,  more  than  that,  we  have  Joseph.  Now  we  have 
the  glory  in  connection  with  Israel ;  and  finally  power 
in  the  earth :  Joseph  and  Benjamin  are  now  as  it  were 
found  together.  What  was  realised  in  the  facts  of  the 
history  at  last  terminates  in  the  blessedness — ^the  pre- 
dicted blessedness — of  Israel 

The  last  chapter  gives  us  the  conclusion  of  the  book, 


126       LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

the  burial  of  Jacob,  the  reappearance  of  his  sons 
left  with  Joseph,  and  at  last  Joseph's  own  death,  as 
lovely  as  had  been  his  life.  He  who  stood  on  the 
highest  pinnacle  in  the  land  next  to  the  throne,  type 
of  Him  who  will  hold  the  kingdom  unto  the  glory  of 
God  the  Father, — that  single-eyed  saint  now  breathes 
forth  his  soul  to  God.  **  By  faith  Joseph  when  he  died 
made  mention  of  the  departing  of  the  children  of  Israel, 
and  gave  commandment  concerning  his  bones."  His 
heart  is  out  of  the  scene  where  it  enjoyed  but  a  tran- 
sient and  at  best  typical  glory.  In  hope  he  goes  onward 
to  that  which  would  be  lasting  and  true  unto  God's  glory, 
when  Israel  should  be  in  Emmanuel's  land,  and  he 
himself  be  in  a  yet  better  condition — even  resurrection. 
He  had  been  exalted  in  Egypt,  but  he  solemnly  took 
an  oath  of  the  sons  of  Israel,  that  when  God  visits 
them,  as  He  surely  will,  they  will  carry  up  his  bones 
hence.  He  had  served  God  in  Egypt,  but  to  him  it 
was  ever  the  strange  land.  Though  he  dwelt  there, 
ruled  there,  there  had  a  family,  and  there  died  fuller 
of  honours  than  of  years,  an  hundred  and  ten  years 
old,  he  feels  that  Egypt  is  not  the  land  of  God,  and 
knows  that  He  will  redeem  His  people  from  it,  and  bring 
them  into  Canaan.  It  was  beautiful  fruit  in  its  season : 
no  change  of  circumstances  interfered  with  the  pro- 
mises of  God  to  the  fathers.  Joseph  waited  as  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob.  Earthly  honours  did  not  settle  him 
down  in  Egypt. 

On  another  day  we  may  see  how  this  oath  was  kept 
when  God  brought  about  the  accomplishment  of  Israel's 
deliverance,  the  type  of  its  ultimate  fulfilment. 


EXODUS  L-XVUL  127 


iV. 


EXODUS. 

Chaps.  i.-xyiii. 

There  is  hardly  a  book  of  the  Old  Testament  that 
stands  out  in  more  decided  contrast  with  the  book  of 
Genesis  than  the  one  which  follows  it  most  closely. 
And  this  is  the  more  striking,  because  God  employed 
the  same  inspired  writer  to  give  us  both,  as  well  as 
others.  One  of  the  most  salient  features  of  the  book 
of  Genesis  is  the  variety  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  has 
set  forth  the  various  principles  on  which  God  deals,  the 
ways  in  which  He  manifests  Himself,  the  special  fore- 
shadowings  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  this  not  only  in  re- 
spect to  man  but  Israel  and  even  the  church  in  type. 
Consequently  for  this  various  development  of  the  truth 
there  is  no  book  in  scripture  so  remarkable  as  the  very 
first  of  the  Pentateuch.  In  fact,  in  a  general  way  we 
may  sjay  that  all  the  other  books  take  up  special  truths, 
which  are  at  any  rate  in  the  germ  presented  there.  As 
for  the  second  book.  Exodus,  there  is  one  grand  idea 
which  pervades  it — redemption.  The  consequences  of 
redemption,  as  well  as  the  circumstances  in  which  it 
was  accomplished,  are  brought  before  us  in  a  very  full 
and  complete  manner,  as  we  shall  see.  Further,  not 
only  the  consequences  of  redemption,  but  that  which  may 


128       LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

be  the  result  when  man,  insensible  to  the  grace  which 
has  wrought  redemption,  turns  back  on  himself,  and 
attempts  to  gain  a  footing  by  his  own  resources  and 
faithfulness  before  Gk)i  How  God  deals  with  him 
thereon  we  shall  also  see  before  we  have  done  with  the 
book  of  Exodus.  In  making  these  few  remarks,  I  be- 
lieve we  have  touched  on  the  principal  topics  which 
will  come  before  us,  and  nearly  in  the  order  in  which 
God  has  presented  them. 

First  of  all  then  we  have  a  sketch  of  the  chosen 
people  in  the  land  of  Egypt*    But  a  king  is  seen  who 

*  To  arg^e  against  the  increase  of  Israel  in  Egypt  firom  the  data  of 
the  Pentateuch  is  the  more  unreasonable  as  the  record  does  not  give 
it  as  an  ordinary  ratio,  but  from  ^e  direct  blessing  of  Gk>d  according 
to  His  appearance  to  the  fathers,  and  the  more  striking,  because  He 
kept  them  comparatively  few  tiU  the  descent  into  the  house  of  bond- 
age, and  there  multiplied  them  in  the  iajce  of  the  hottest  persecution 
long  before  they  were  led  out  in  triumph.  (Compare  Deut.  xxvi.  6.) 

Apart  firom  the  power  of  God  accomplishing  His  word,  the  objec- 
tors seem  to  be  ignorant  that  doubling  the  population  in  fifteen  years 
or  less  is  by  no  means  without  example.  Mr.  Malthus,  who  had  no 
bias  in  favour  of  ^e  Bible,  will  be  allowed  to  speak  on  this  subject. 
(Essay  on  the  Principle  of  Population,  ii.  p.  190,  6th  edition.  1817.) 
There  was  nothing  incredible  to  his  mind  in  the  rate  of  increase 
assigned  to  Israel  in  Goshen,  supporting  it  by  a  reference  to  Dr. 
Short's  New  Obserrations  on  Bills  of  Mortality,  p.  269,  8vo.  1760. 
Speaking  of  America,  he  remarks  {ib,  pp.  193-4),  **  In  the  back  settle- 
ments, where  the  inhabitants  applied  themselves  solely  to  agriculture, 
and  luxury  was  not  known,  they  were  supposed  to  double  their  num- 
ber in  fifteen  years.  Along  the  sea  coast,  which  would  naturally  be 
first  inhabited,  the  period  of  doubling  was  about  thirty-five  years, 
and  in  some  of  the  maritime  towns  the  population  was  absolutely  at 
a  stand.  From  the  late  census  made  in  America,  it  appears  that 
taking  all  the  states  together,  they  have  still  continued  to  double 
their  numbers  every  twenty-five  years ;  and  as  the  whole  population 
is  now  BO  great  as  not  to  be  materiaUy  affected  by  the  emigrations 
from  Europe,  and  as  it  is  known  that,  in  some  of  the  towns  and 


EXODUS   L-XVUI.  129 

knew  not  Joseph,  and  the  afflictions  which  the  Spirit 
of  God  had  predicted  long  before  to  Abraham  begin  to 
thicken  on  his  seed  there.  Nevertheless  God  is  faithful, 
and  the  very  efforts  to  destroy  are  met  by  His  good 
hand,  who  produces  faithfulness  even  in  those  that 
might  have  been  supposed  most  of  all  subservient  to 
the  cruel  designs  of  the  king.  This  occupies  the  first 
chapter. 

In  the  second,  growing  out  of  these  circumstances 
and  of  the  edict  which  doomed  to  death  every  man- 
child  of  Israel,  appears  the  deliverer, — the  type  of  an 
infinitely  greater  one.  It  is  Moses,  a  man  of  whom 
the  Spirit  of  God  has  made  the  largest  use  not  only  in 
the  Old  Testament  but  in  the  New,  as  in  so  many 

districts  near  the  sea  coast,  the  progress  of  population  has  been 
comparatively  slow,  it  is  evident  that  in  the  interior  of  the  country 
in  general  the  x>eriod  of  doubling  from  procreation  only  must  have 
been  considerably  less  than  twenty-five  years."  In  a  note  he  adds, 
"  Prom  a  return  to  Congress  in  1782,  the  population  appesured  to  be 
2,389,300,  and  in  the  census  of  1790,  4,000,000;  increase  in  nine 
years,  1,610,700;  from  which  deduct  ten  thousand  per  annum  for 
European  settlers,  6  per  cent,  for  4^  years,  which  will  be  20,250  ;  the 
remaining  increase  during  the  nine  years,  from  procreation  only, 
wiU  be  1,600,450,  which  is  nearly  7  per  cent. ;  and  consequently  the 
period  of  doubling  at  this  rate  would  be  less  than  sixteen  years.  If 
this  calculation  for  the  whole  population  of  the  States  be  in  any 
degree  near  the  truth,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  in  particular  districts 
the  period  of  doubling  from  procreation  only  has  often  been  less  than 
fifteen  years.  The  period  immediately  succeeding  war  was  likely  to 
be  a  period  of  very  rapid  increase."  Thus,  even  supposing  with  Ussher, 
Clinton,  and  others  that  the  430  years  date  from  the  call  of  Abram, 
and  that  just  half  this  period,  or  216  years,  can  strictly  apply  to  the 
stay  in  Egypt,  the  objection  is  utterly  irrational. 

Nothing  can  be  conceived  more  captious  than  to  take  Gen.  xv.  16 
as  limiting  the  Israelites  who  sojourned  in  Egypt  to  just  the  fourth 
succession  in  feimily  birth,  or  to  assume  that  they  had  no  children 
beyond  those  named  for  special  reasons. 


130        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

forms  shadowing  forth  the  Lord  Jesus.     His  parents^ 
faith  is  not  spoken  of  here,  it  is  true,  but,  as  we  know, 
in  the  New  Testament.     The  fact  is  here  named  that 
they  hid  him ;  and  when  they  could  no  longer  do  so,  or 
it  may  be,  when  they  had  no  longer  faith  to  proceed  as 
before,  they  committed  him  to  an  ark  of  bulrushes  in 
the  river,  when  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh  takes  up  the 
child  and  adopts  him  as  her  own.     Thus  Moses  was 
learned,  as  we  are  told,  in  all  the  learning  of  the  Egyp- 
tians.  In  such  a  position  he  had  the  finest  opportunities 
for  assuaging  the  hard  lot  of  the  Israelites,  and  it  might 
be  for  accomplishing  that  which  was  so  dear  to  his  heart, 
their  deliverance  from    thraldom.     This    he    entirely 
declines.     Undoubtedly  it  must  have  been  a  far  greater 
trial  to  his  spirit  than  the  relinquishment  of  any  per- 
sonal advantages.     It  exposed  him  necessarily  to  the 
reproach  of  folly  from  his  brethren.     For  no  race  ever 
was  more  apt  to  find  matter  for  blame  than  they,  none 
quicker  to  see  their  own  advantages  or  to  speak  out 
whatever  they  did  see.     But  God  was  working  not  only 
for  a  design  according  to  His  own  heart,  but  so  that  the 
manner  in  which  that  design  was  to  be  accomplished 
should    bring    Him    glory.     This  Moses  in   measure 
understood ;  for  faith  always  sees  it,  and  holds  to  it 
just  so  far  as  it  is  faith.     There  may  be,  I  grant  you, 
the  mingling  of  that  which  is  of  nature  along  with 
faith ;  and  from  this  it  appears  to  me  that  Moses  was 
far  from  being  exempt,  either  in  his  first  appearance  as 
one  engaged  for  God  with  His  people  here  below,  or 
afterwards  when  God  summoned  him  to  accomplish  the 
great  work  of  which  he  had  a  certain  anticipation,  no 
doubt  vague  and  dark,  in  his  soul. 


EXODUS   I.- XVIII.  131 

Oa  this  enterprise  then  we  behold  him  going  forth, 
when  he  was  come  to  years  of  discretion.  He  sees  an 
Egyptian  maltreating  an  Israelite.  This  kindles  all  his 
affections  on  behalf  of  his  brethren.  Undoubtedly  the 
aflFections  were  there;  but  this  calls  them  out,  and  he 
acts  accordingly,  looking,  it  is  said,  this  way  and  that 
way — by  no  means  an  evidence  of  singleness  of  eye. 
Yet  here  was  just  the  situation.  It  was  impossible  for 
the  Spirit,  on  the  one  hand,  to  blame  the  love  that 
prompted  the  hand  of  Moses;  it  was  impossible,  on 
the  other,  to  vindicate  the  act.  God  has  just  left 
it,  as  He  always  knows  how  to  do — left  what  was  of 
Himself  to  tell  its  own  tale,  whilst  that  which  was  not 
of  Himself  is  before  the  spiritual  judgment  of  those 
who  have  confidence  in  Him.  And  is  there  anything 
that  more  beautifully  shews  the  character  of  scripture 
than  this  ?  In  any  other  book  there  would  be  a  kind  of 
apology,  if  not  an  elaborate  argument,  a  discourse  on 
the  matter,  to  vindicate  God  from  all  participation  in 
what  was  far  from  being  according  to  His  own  holiness. 

Nothing  shews  the  difference  between  God's  word  and 
the  way  in  which  even  men  of  God  may  handle,  or 
feel  it  necessary  to  handle  it,  more  strikingly  than  this. 
God  is  content  to  speak  of  things  as  they  are  without 
a  word  on  His  side  to  explain  or  account  for  it,  or  in 
anywise  to  soften  matters  for  man.  "  God  is  light,  and 
in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all."  Accordingly  the  tale  is 
told  with  all  simplicity.  The  self-same  principle  ap- 
plies to  hundreds  of  passages  in  the  Scriptures ;  and 
therefore  it  seemed  well  to  make  a  few  remarks  in  a 
more  general  shape. .  We  must  distinguish  between  the 
statement  of  a  fact  in  the  Bible  and  any  sanction  given 

X  2 


132        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

to  it.  This  may  help  our  appreciation  of  the  word  of 
God  in  all  such  cases.  We  are  bound  ever  to  refuse 
the  thought  that  the  record  of  facts  in  scripture  implies 
that  they  are  according  to  the  full  mind  of  God.  The 
truth  is  that  He  speaks  of  good  men  and  bad  men; 
that  He  mentions  not  only  what  was  excellent  in  the 
good,  but  such  distressing  and  shameful  things  as  draw 
out  His  own  chastening  it  may  be  for  a  long  while  to 
come.  God,  in  short,  states  things  exactly  as  they  are. 
He  counts  on  faith  in  His  own  people ;  but  they  will 
always  reckon  that  whatever  there  may  be  of  good  is 
from  Him — whatever  may  be  wrong  is  surely  not  so. 
It  is  an  easily  settled  principle  after  all,  and  it  accounts 
for  much  on  which  men's  minds  otherwise  are  apt  to 
stumble. 

Moses  then  flees  from  Egypt,  but  not  so  much  in 
fear  of  Egjrptian  enmity  ;  against  this  he  might  have 
looked  to  God  to  sustain  him,  no  matter  what  might  be 
the  pressure  on  his  spirit.  It  was  the  unworthy  dealing 
of  his  brethren  which  broke  up  all  hope  for  the  present. 
The  man  who  was  in  the  wrong  too,  as  is  always  the 
case,  had  the  bitter  feeling  against  him  who  loved  both, 
and  would  willingly  have  set  them  at  one  with  each 
other;  it  was  he  who  taunted  Moses  with  the  words, 
**  Who  made  thee  a  ruler  and  a  judge  ?"  The  Israelite's 
own  proud  spirit  was  ready  to  insinuate  pride  in  others. 
Moses  then  bends  to  the  blast.  The  time  was  not  yet 
come  evidently  for  the  deliverance  of  such  a  people.  He 
retires  from  the  scene  to  the  land  of  Midian,  and  there  is 
put  through  the  necessary  discipline  for  the  mighty  work 
he  was  yet  to  accomplish.  Moses  had  certainly  been 
hasty;  and  the  Lord  judged  it.   But  he  was  right  in  the 


EXODUS   L-XYIIL  133 

main ;  and  the  Lord  accordingly  left  not  to  another  but 
to  him  the  due  accomplishment  of  Israel's  deliverance 
when  the  fulness  of  time  was  come. 

There,  in  his  retirement,  he  receives  from  Jethro  his 
daughter  a  stranger  given  him  to  wife,  who  bears  him 
a  son,  the  name  of  whom  tells  whither  his  heart  turns. 
"  I  have  been  a  stranger  in  a  strange  land,"  is  the  word 
of  comment  that  is  made  upon  him.  He  was  called 
Grershom,  which  means  this — "  a  stranger  here." 

In  due  time  the  unforgetting  heart  of  God  shews  His 
remembrance  of  Israel.  (Chap,  iii.)  Abroad  Moses  was 
discharging  his  duty  long  enough  for  such  thoughts  to 
have  passed  away  from  him,  as  we  might  have  supposed. 
But  not  so.  At  the  back  side  of  the  desert  in  Horeb,  the 
angel  of  Jehovah  appears  to  him  in  a  flame  of  fire  out  of 
the  midst  of  a  bush.  "  And  he  looked,  and  behold,  the 
bush  burned  with  fire,  and  the  bush  was  not  consumed." 
We  are  never  to  suppose  that  the  manner  of  the  reve- 
lation of  God  is  an  unimportant  consideration.  No 
doubt  He  is  sovereign ;  but  for  that  very  reason  He  is 
sovereignly  wise,  and  displays  Himself  invariably  in 
such  a  sort  as  is  most  appropriate  to  the  object  in  hand. 
Hence  it  was  in  no  casual  sort  or  merely  arresting 
attention  by  its  wonders  that  Jehovah  here  appears  in 
the  burning  bush.  It  was  meant  to  be  an  image  of 
that  which  was  then  presented  to  the  spirit  of  Moses — 
a  bush  in  a  desert  burning  but  unconsumed.  It  was  no 
doubt  thus  that  God  was  about  to  work  in  the  midst  of 
Israel  Moses  and  they  must  know  it.  They  too  would 
be  the  chosen  vessel  of  His  power  in  their  weakness, 
and  this  for  ever  in  His  mercy.  Their  God,  as  ours, 
would  prove  Himself  a  consuming  fire.     Solemn  but 


134        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

infinite  favour !  For,  on  one  hand,  as  surely  as  He  is  a 
consuming  fire,  so  on  the  other  the  bush,  weak  as  it  is, 
and  ready  to  vanish  away,  nevertheless  remains  to  prove 
that  whatever  may  be  the  sittings  and  judicial  dealing 
of  God,  whatever  the  trials  and  searchings  of  man,  yet 
where  He  reveals  Himself  in  pitifulness  as  well  as  in 
power  (and  such  it  certainly  was  here).  He  sustains  the 
object  and  uses  the  trial  for  nothing  but  good — no  doubt 
for  His  own  glory,  but  consequently  for  the  very  best 
interests  of  those  that  are  His. 

Hence,  when  He  calls  Moses  to  draw  near,  He  first 
of  all  proclaims  Himself  the  God  of  his  fathers,  the 
God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of 
Jacob.  This  was  the  first  announcement  that  was 
meant  to  act  on  the  soul  of  Moses,  and  of  course  in 
due  time  on  Israel.  The  time  was  coming  when  they 
should  no  longer  be  a  family  but  a  nation;  and  if  God 
was  about  to  reveal  HimseK  after  a  special  sort,  He  at 
the  same  time  particularly  brings  before  them  His  asso- 
ciation with  their  fathers.  We  must  never  forget  the 
ways  in  which  God  has  acted  before  if  we  are  to  appre- 
ciate what  He  is  doing  now;  and,  in  point  of  fact,  our 
value  for  and  intelligence  of  these  things  will  be  found 
to  go  together.  It  is  by  confounding  the  scriptures  that 
men  misunderstand  them:  if  we  would  indeed  enter 
into  the  real  force  of  God's  word,  it  must  always  be  by 
distinguishing  the  things  that  differ.  Hence  it  is  to  be 
observed  that  first  God  draws  particular  attention  to 
His  being  the  God  of  the  fathers.  This  of  necessity 
would  recall  to  Moses  the  special  manner  in  which  He 
made  Himself  known  to  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob 
as  the  Almighty  God.     We  shall  find  this  set  out  in 


EXODUS   I- XVIII.  135 

express  terms  in  a  later  chapter ;  but  the  substance  of 
it  seems  conveyed  on  this  first  occasion  when  He  directs 
attention  to  His  being  the  God  of  promise,  coupling  con- 
sequently the  names  of  the  fathers  with  Himself 

God  was  now  about  to  present  Himself  as  the  un- 
changing One  that  could  and  would  accomplish  His  word 
according  to  the  relation  in  which  He  and  His  people 
stood.  Was  it  to  be  in  view  of  His  grace  or  their  desert  ? 
Whether  all  were  to  be  fully  made  good  now,  or  whetjier 
only  to  a  partial  extent, — whether  even  the  partial 
accomplishment  was  to  be  opposed  and  weakened,  and 
useless  as  far  as  this  could  do  it  by  Israel's  own  folly 
and  sin,  all  this  would  afterwards  appear.  In  point  of 
fact,  as  we  know,  there  could  be  no  such  thing  as  a 
complete  fulfilment  apart  from  Christ.  The  Son  of 
God,  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  promised  Seed,  must  come,  if 
there  was  to  be  the  making  all  the  promises  of  God 
yea  and  amen  in  Him.  If  this  furnish  the  direct  reason 
why  there  could  be  no  such  fulfilment,  the  moral  hin- 
drances from  the  state  of  Israel — from  man  fallen — ^were 
quite  as  real,  though  necessarily  indirect.  Nevertheless 
God  would  give  at  least  a  partial  accomplishment  in 
him  that  was  the  type  of  Christ.  How  this  was  arrested 
is  a  most  instructive  lesson,  but  it  will  be  found  later 
on  in  this  book. 

However  Jehovah  does  declare  in  full  His  deep 
interest  in  the  people.  And  what  a  proof  is  this  of 
never-failing  goodness  in  God !  For  there  was  not  one 
quality  in  the  people  which  could  in  anywise  move 
the  heart  towards  them  except  their  misery — not  one 
worthy  moral  feeling,  not  one  generous  emotion,  not  the 
smallest  care  for  the  glory  of  God.    Nay,  they  were 


136        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

ever  ready  to  turn  aside  to  reproach  Himself,  to  slander 
His  servants,  and  to  abandon  His  will.  All  these 
things  we  learn  in  due  time  as  they  were  known  to 
Him  before  He  began.  Nevertheless  God  expresses  in 
the  most  afiFecting  manner  His  tender  interest  in  them 
even  as  they  were.  There  is  nothing  therefore  that  can 
hinder  a  soul  from  being  the  object  of  the  most  real 
love  to  God  except  the  persistent  rejection  of  Himself. 
There  is  nothincr  too  low  or  too  hard  in  man  to  hinder 
the  power  of  God's  grace  except  the  wilfulness  that  will 
not  have  Him  at  all. 

The  Lord  then  brings  before  Moses  His  care,  saying, 
"  I  have  surely  seen  the  afflictions  of  my  people  which 
are  in  Egypt,  and  have  heard  their  cry  by  reason  of  the 
taskmasters,  for  I  know  their  sorrow ;"  but  He  does  not 
add,  their  cry  to  Him.  We  may  say  then,  as  a  prophet 
did  later,  that  they  groaned;  but  they  did  not  groan  to 
God.  It  was  but  selfish  sense  of  suffering.  They 
groaned  only  because  of  their  wretchedness ;  but  there 
was  no  looking  out  to  God — no  counting  on  His  mercy. 
Nevertheless,  says  He,  "I  am  come  down  to  deliver 
them  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Egyptians,  and  to  bring 
them  up  out  of  that  land  unto  a  good  land  and  a  large, 
unto  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey;  unto  the 
place  of  the  Canaanites,  and  the  Hittites,  and  the 
Amorites,  and  the  Perizzites,  and  the  Hivites,  and  the 
Jebusites.  Now  therefore,  behold,  the  cry  of  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  is  come  unto  me ;  and  I  have  also  seen 
the  oppression  wherewith  the  Egyptians  oppress  them. 
Come  now  therefore,  and  I  will  send  thee  unto  Pharaoh, 
that  thou  mayest  bring  forth  my  people  the  children  of 
Israel  out  of  Egypt."     Moses  soon  brings  forward  his 


EXODUS  I.- XVIII.  137 

difiRculties  and  objections.  Jehovah  however  meets  all 
at  first  with  quietness,  and  at  the  same  time  breathes 
comfort  into  the  ear  of  His  anxious  and  hesitating 
servant. 

But  what  a  lesson  it  is!  Is  this  the  man  once 
so  ready  to  smite  Eahab  and  deliver  Israel?  The 
very  same.  Full  of  courage  when  God's  time  was  not 
come,  he  feels  the  obstacles  when  it  is.  It  is  often  so ! 
Moses  thus  replies,  "Behold,  when  I  come  unto  the 
children  of  Israel,  and  shall  say  unto  them.  The  God  of 
your  fathers  hath  sent  me  unto  you ;  and  they  shall  say 
to  me,  What  is  his  name  ?"  Is  it  not  humbling  ?  What 
a  state !  God*s  people  do  not  even  know  His  name ! 
"What  shall  I  say  unto  them?"  sp^ys  Moses.  "And 
God  said  unto  Moses,  I  AM  THAT  I  AM.  And  he 
said.  Thus  shalt  thou  say  unto  the  children  of  Israel, 
I  AM  hath  sent  me  unto  you."  There  is  great  force  in 
these  words.  It  was  not  merely  what  God  was  going  to 
perform.  Man  probably  would  have  preferred  "  I  shall 
do ;"  but  God  takes  His  stand  upon  these  weighty  words, 
"  I  AM  THAT  I  AM,"  the  self-subsisting,  ever-being 
One.  In  truth,  on  Him  hangs  everything.  All  others 
are  merely  beings  that  exist ;  God  is  the  only  one  who 
can  say  "I  AM."  What  exists  was  called  into  being,  and 
may  pass  out  of  it,  if  God  so  please.  I  say  not  that 
they  do,  but  that  they  may.  Surely  God  is  evermore 
and  evermore  God.  This  is  what  describes  Him  in  His 
being  at  least.  I  am  not  now  speaking  of  His  grace, 
but  of  His  own  essential  being — "  I  AM." 

Accordingly,  as  a  message  to  Israel,  surrounded  by 
the  vanities  of  the  heathen — those  imaginary  objects  of 
adoration  whose  r81e  really  was  that  of  demons  taking 


138        LECrUBES  05  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

advantage  of  man's  superstition  and  folly>  it  was  a  fine 
and  an  admirable  name  for  those  who  might  ask  it: 
"  I  AM  hath  sent  me" 

•  But  there  is  more  than  this ;  for  God  takes  care  to 
utter  another  word:  '"Thus  shalt  thou  say  unto  the 
children  of  Israel,  Jehovah  the  (Jod  of  your  fathers,  the 
God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac^  and  the  God  of 
Jacob,  hath  sent  me  unto  you."  He  is  still  more 
explicit.  "  Jehovah  the  God  of  your  fieithers  hath  sent 
me  unto  you.  This  is  my  name  for  ever,  and  this  is 
my  memorial  unto  all  generations."  How  infinitely 
gracious  of  God,  that  the  name  taken  for  ever  in  con- 
nexion with  Israel  is  not  that  which  relegates  every  other 
creature  into  its  own  nothingness,  which  makes  all  to  be 
merely  the  consequence  of  His  word  and  of  His  wiU ! 
He  loves  and  cherishes  the  name  in  which  He  has 
bound  up  the  objects  of  His  choice  with  Himself. 

It  reminds  one  of  that  which  the  Gospels  tell  us. 
When  here  below  Jesus  never  proclaimed  Himself  as  the 
Christ  on  the  one  hand,  or  as  the  Son  of  God  on  the 
other,  though  truly  both,  and  always  accepting  and  vin- 
dicating either  when  He  was  thus  confessed  by  others. 
For  we  know  that  Jesus  was  the  Head  of  the  kingdom, 
and  that  "  Christ "  is  the  title  in  which  He  takes  His 
rights  over  Israel  and  their  land,  which  will  be  in  force 
in  the  day  that  is  coming.  And,  what  is  more  striking 
still,  He  does  not  even  take  His  stand  upon  His  being 
the  Son  of  God,  though  this  was  His  eternal  name.  It 
may  be  said  that  it  belongs  to  Him  more  strictly  and 
personally  in  the  highest  sense  than  any  other ;  for  He 
became  the  Christ,  but  He  is  and  will  be  (as  He  always 
was)  the  Word,  the  Son,  the  only  begotten   Son   of 


EXODUS  i.-xvin.  139 

the  Father.  There  was  no  hecomi^ig  here.  This  is 
what  He  is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting.  But  for  all 
that  He  does  not  assert  it.  What  name  does  He  take 
then  ?  What  does  He  Himself  delight  in  ?  The  chosen 
name  that  Jesus  habitually  puts  forward  is  "Son  of 
man."  "  Whom  do  ye  think  that  I,  the  Son  of  man, 
am  ?"  Where  all  was  morally  glorious,  there  is  nothing 
finer  than  this.  For,  as  we  know,  "  the  Son  of  man  "* 
is  not  merely  the  title  in  which  He  linked  Himself 
with  man  here  below,  but  the  name  of  sorrow  and 
suffering,  of  shame  and  rejection — it  is  the  name  un- 
doubtedly of  glory,  and  this  of  a  richer  and  fuller  sort; 
according  to  the  counsels  of  God,  than  anything  con- 
nected with  His  place  as  the  Christ,  the  object  of 
Jewish  hope  and  promise ;  for  it  opens  the  door  into  His 
reign  for  ever  and  ever  over  all  peoples,  tribes  and  tongues 
under  the  whole  heaven,  nay,  as  is  known,  over  all  the 
universe  of  God  the  Creator.  Nevertheless  it  was  the 
name  of  sufifering  first,  if  of  such  high  and  widespread 
glory  afterwards. 

So  with  Moses,  Jehovah  seems  to  be  speaking 
according  to  the  grace,  as  far  as  this  could  be  un- 
folded then,  which  afterwards  shone  in  the  blessed 
Lord  here  below.  In  the  latter  case,  naturally,  it  was 
more  connected  with  His  own  person  as  known  in  the 
Grodhead.  For  we  must  ever  remember  that  He  who 
shewed  Himself  then  as  Jehovah  was,  no  doubt,  the 
One  whom  we  know  as  the  Son  of  God.  When  reveal- 
ing Himself  as  Jehovah  their  God  then.  He  delighted  to 
take  a  name  which  in  some  way  linked  Himself  with 
His  people.  This  was  the  more  touching,  because  He 
knew  right  well  how  these  very  men  were  about  to 


140        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

disgrace  Him.  He  knew  how  they  would  depart  from 
all  that  was  before  His  own  mind,  seeking  in  self-con- 
fidence that  which  would  give  an  apparent  momentary 
importance,  but  be  sure  to  bring  a  blot  for  ages  on  His 
character  as  well  as  ruin  to  themselves, — for  so  lies  the 
Jew  now.  The  actual  wreck  of  Israelitish  hopes  is  the 
result  both  of  their  assuming  legal  condition  in  the  first 
place,  and  next  of  their  rejection  of  the  grace  of  God 
that  came  in  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  and  was  pro- 
claimed by  the  Spirit  sent  down  from  heaven. 

There  is  another  important  point  to  note  in  the 
chapter.  Jehovah  shews  from  the  very  first  how  all 
the  consequences  of  His  raising  and  sending  Moses  to 
Pharaoh  were  before  His  own  mind.  He  was  surprised 
by  nothing.  It  is  of  course  as  simple  as  necessary  for 
those  who  know  God,  but  none  the  less  delightful  to 
find  it  stated  clearly.  The  same  thing  pervades  the 
New  Testament.  It  is  sweet  to  see  these  analogies; 
because  in  one  respect  there  can  scarcely  be  two 
volumes  more  difierent  than  the  Old  Testament  and 
the  New  Testament ;  but  just  as  clearly  there  is  every- 
where the  same  mind,  and  the  same  source — God  Him- 
self dealing  with  a  different  subject,  but  the  same  God 
no  matter  what  He  deals  with.  Just  so  is  it  in  the 
New  Testament.  The  gospel  of  John,  for  instance,  dis- 
closes the  end  from  the  beginning ;  but  that  is  because 
here  we  have  Jesus  known  as  the  One  who  is  before 
the  beginning.  He  is  the  sent  One,  but  a  consciously 
divine  person.  Consequently  in  perfect  harmony  with 
this  all  things  are  known  (and  no  testimony  needed  by 
Him),  what  God  is  no  less  than  man,  with  as  absolute  a 
comprehension  of  the  future  as  of  the  past  or  present. 


EXODUS   L- XVIII.  141 

Here  then  Jehovah  says,  "  I  am  sure  that  the  king  of 
Egypt  will  not  let  you  go,  no,  not  by  a  mighty  hand. 
And  I  will  stretch  out  my  hand,  and  smite  Egypt  with 
all  my  wonders  which  I  will  do  in  the  midst  thereof: 
and  after  that  he  will  let  you  go.  And  I  will  give  this 
people  favour  in  the  sight  of  the  Egyptians  :  and  it 
shall  come  to  pass,  that,  when  ye  go,  ye  shall  not  go 
empty."  In  truth  their  wages  were  of  long  date,  never 
having  been  paid.  It  is  mere  folly  to  suppose  there  was 
any,  the  smallest,  infringement  of  what  was  right  and 
becoming.*  It  is  a  matter,  perhaps,  too  well  known  to 
need  many  words,  that  every  woman  was  simply  to  ask 
of  her  neighbour,  &c.,  vessels  of  silver  and  of  gold, 
with  raiment,  which  were  to  be  put  on  Israel's  sons  and 
daughters.  It  was  to  spoil  their  oppressors  by  divine 
authority,  and  no  question  whatever  of  deceit  or  dis- 
honesty. The  impression  of  "  borrowing  "  given  in  the 
Authorized  Version  is  by  no  means  necessary,  nor  does 
the  connexion  justify  it.  There  is  no  such  thought  as 
that  they  had  no  right  involved  in  the  matter.  There 
was  nothing  the  people  and  even  at  last  the  king  of 
Egypt  were  not  disposed  to  concede :  later  on  in  spite 
of  all  their  own  interests  in  the  retention  of  the 
children  of  Israel,  they  were  willing  and  desirous  that 

♦  The  remarks  of  Dr.  D.  (Introd.  0.  T.  i.  pp.  236,  237)  seem  to  me 
the  wantonness  of  incredulity,  which,  irritated  by  the  divine  authority 
of  Scripture,  yields  to  the  merest  calumny.  **  If  the  words  in  Ex. 
iii.  20-22  be  taken  literally  or  historically^  they  represent  Jehovah  as 
commanding  an  immoral  thing.  Hence  this  method  of  interpretation 
must  be  abandoned.  The  writer,  giving  expression  to  his  own  moral 
consciousness,  represents  the  Deity  as  directly  enjoining  the  people  to 
do  a  thing  dishonest  in  itself.  This  shews  the  imperfect  development 
of  the  divine  to  which  the  author's  age  had  attained,"  &c.  The 
rationalist  never  suspects  himself. 


142        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

they  should  go,  and  that  they  should  not  go  away 
empty.  Their  proud  will  was  broken,  although  their 
hearts  were  by  no  means  with  God.  There  was  no 
kind  of  communion,  I  need  hardly  say:  nevertheless 
they  bowed  to  that  which  they  had  so  stubbornly 
opposed  before.  And  then  Moses  speaks,  and  says, 
"But,  behold,  they  will  not  believe  me,  nor  hearken 
unto  my  voice:  for  they  will  say,  Jehovah  hath  not 
appeared  unto  thee." 

Then  follow  signs  of  a  miraculous  kind  in  proof  of 
Jehovah's  mission  of  His  servant.  (Chap,  iv.)  The  atten- 
tion of  Moses  is  drawn  to  what  was  in  his  hand — a  rod 
which,  when  cast  on  the  ground,  became  a  serpent.  The 
word  is  somewhat  vague,  and  probably  has  a  wider 
n)eaning  and  not  so  definite  as  serpent.  It  is  the  same 
word  that  is  used  for  sea  monsters  generally.  It  is  com- 
monly known  that  what  is  translated  "whales"  in  Gen. 
i.  21  means  the  huge  creatures  of  the  deep  ;  so  that  it  is 
not  quite  correct  to  restrain  it  to  a  "serpent" here,  as  it 
is  certainly  erroneous  to  call  it  "whales"  there.  It  pro- 
perly expresses  a  monster  which  might  be,  I  presume, 
amphibious,  not  certainly  confined  like  a  fish,  still  less 
like  a  whale,  to  the  waters,  nor  confined  to  the  land  like 
a  serpent.  But,  however  this  may  be  judged  by  others, 
it  would  appear  that,  although  not  specifically  a  serpent, 
it  was  meant  here  to  embrace  a  creature  with  such 
qualities.  The  point  of  this  wonder  was  the  change  of 
power  (which  a  "  rod "  means  in  scripture)  into  some- 
thing Satanic.  The  rod  is  the  symbol  of  authority ;  it 
may  also  represent  chastening.  But  then  no  chasten- 
ing is  right  unless  it  flow  from  just  authority;  and 
hence  the  connection  between  the  two  ideas  in  this 


EXODUS  I.- XVIII.  143 

emblem.  The  rod  of  power  then  taking  Satanic  form 
seems  to  be  meant  by  the  sign  first  committed  to  Moses. 
Such  was  exactly  the  state  of  things  in  the  land  of 
Egypt. 

But  there  was  more ;  and  h^nce  a  far  more  personal 
test.  Moses  was  told  by  Jehovah  to  put  his  hand  in 
his  bosom.  Undoubtedly  the  place  was  significant,  as 
well  as  the  effect;  for  when  he  took  it  out  again,  his 
hand  was  leprous  as  snow — the  well-known  type  of  sin, 
at  least  in  its  defiling  character  if  not  in  the  powerless- 
ness  to  which  it  reduces  man.  Throughout  the  word 
of  God  there  are  two  standing  types  of  sin.  Both 
appear  to  be  used  in  the  New  Testament,  as  is  familiar 
to  us,  if  one  of  them  is  more  prominent  in  the  Old. 
Paralysis,  or  palsy  as  it  is  called  in  our  version,  is  the  type 
of  the  effects  of  sin  as  thoroughly  destructive  of  human 
strength — of  sin  in  its  plunging  the  guilty  into  a  state 
of  weakness — "without  strength,"  as  it  is  said  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Eomans.  Leprosy  is  the  type  of  it  in  its 
defilement.  These  are  the  two  forms  more  particularly 
in  which  it  is  presented. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  when  Moses  put  his  hand 
into  his  bosom  again  at  the  word  of  God,  it  became  as 
his  other  flesh. 

If  they  would  not  hearken  to  these  two  signs,  there 
was  a  third  which  would  affect  the  river.  We  all  know 
what  the  Egyptians  thought  of  the  Nile.  That  which 
ought  to  have  been  for  refreshment  as  well  as  for 
purifying  becomes  the  sign  of  death — life  no  longer  in 
the  body.  Such  is  the  known  significance  of  blood 
symbolically  in  scripture. 

All  this  evinces  the  absolute  command  of  all  circum- 


144        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

stances  by  God,  but  in  His  servant's  hands,  and  in 
favour  of  His  people.  Let  them  know  that  God  would 
work  according  to  what  belongs  exclusively  to  BUm. 
There  could  be  nothing  more  thorough.  Look  at  au- 
thority in  the  world,  or  stt  that  which  pertains  to  man, 
or  at  the  resources  of  nature:  a  man  brings  the  vouchers 
of  One  who  was  sovereign  over  every  domain.  This 
seems  to  be  conveyed  in  these  three  signs.  At  the 
same  time  remember  this  caution  here,  my  brethren ; 
and  it  seems  to  be  a  wholesome  thought  ever  to  bear  in 
mind.  We  must  not  assume  in  such  points  that  we 
have  ascertained  the  whole  of  the  truth,  even  though 
we  may  have  got  some  true  elements.  Confident  as  we 
may  be  that  we  are  taught  of  God,  it  does  not  neces- 
sarily follow  that  there  may  not  be  another  side  of 
truth  which  we  have  yet  to  learn  more  fully.  In  fact 
it  is  one  of  the  blessed  features  of  the  word  of  Grod 
that  we  can  never  assume  to  possess  an  exhaustive 
view  of  scripture.  For  scripture  savours  of  God's  own 
infinity,  however  He  may  come  down  to  us,  and  adopt  the 
language  of  men,  as  we  know  He  hsts  done.  It  is  owned 
that  of  course  human  language  is  the  finite;  but  then 
He  who  comes  down  into  the  finite  is  Himself  infinite, 
and  we  must  never  lose  sight  of  this,  although  put  now 
in  its  most  general  shape.  It  is  indeed  a  most  important 
truth  to  hold  fast,  and  no  less  full  of  consolation  and 
blessing  for  our  souls. 

Let  us  be  thankful  then  for  all  that  which  commends 
itself  to  us  as  true  and  of  God,  but  never  assume  that 
we  have  apprehended  the  whole  truth.  "Now  we 
know  in  part."  Let  us  depend  on  God  to  bring  out  the 
truth  for  our  intelligence  in  the  measure  which  fits  His 


EXODUS  i-xvin.  145 

glory,  and  as  He  pleases  to  accomplish  more  fully  the 
purpose  for  which  He  has  revealed  it. 

Then  Moses  finds  another  difficulty.  He  says,  "I 
am  not  eloquent" — one  wonders  that  he  took  so  long  to 
find  it  out.  "  I  am  not  eloquent,  neither  heretofore,  nor 
since  thou  hast  spoken  unto  thy  servant :  but  I  am 
slow  of  speech,  and  of  a  slow  tongue."  If  God  sent 
him,  what  had  that  to  do  with  the  matter?  The  real 
difficulty  is  always  this, — one  thinks  about  oneself, 
instead  of  the  Lord.  It  is  astonishini^  what  a  difference 
it  makes  when  one  can  affi)rd  and  has  made  up  one's 
mind  to  drop  self  It  is  clear  that  God  must  be  the 
best  judge.  If  He  chooses  a  man  that  is  slow  of  speech, 
who  can  say  Nay  ?  Nevertheless  let  none  suppose  that 
this  is  said  in  the  smallest  disrespect  of  Moses — not  so, 
but  for  our  own  profit  and  instruction,  and  to  guard  us 
lest  we  should  enact  the  same  part  with  even  less 
excuse ;  for  God  has  set  before  us  the  wavering  of  a 
servant  so  faithful  for  the  express  purpose  of  guarding 
ourselves  from  the  like  or  other  failures. 

The  upshot  is  that  at  last  the  Lord  is  reaUy  displeased 
with  His  servant's  facility  in  objecting.  "  The  anger  of 
Jehovah  was  kindled  against  Moses,  and  he  said,  Is  not 
Aaron  the  Levite  thy  brother?"  Great  humiliation! 
He  might  have  been  the  simple  and  happy  instrument 
of  God  in  the  mighty  work  ;  but  Aaron  is  brought 
forward  to  share  it.  "  I  know  that  he  can  speak  well. 
And  also,  behold,  he  cometh  forth  to  meet  thee  :  and 
when  he  seeth  thee,  he  will  be  glad  in  his  heart." 

Thus  we  find  the  junction  of  Aaron  with  Moses, 
which  has  many  important  consequences,  and  some  of 
them  of  a  serious  character,  as  this  book  records. 

L 


146        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Another  fact  is  mentioned  before  we  close  the  chap- 
ter, and  one  of  deep  and  grave  practical  instruction. 
God  was  going  to  put  honour  on  Moses,  but  there  was 
a  dishonour  to  Him  in  the  house  of  Moses  already. 
God  could  not  pass  over  that  How  came  it  that 
Moses'  sons  were  not  circumcised  ?  How  came  it  that 
there  lacked  that  which  typifies  the  mortifying  the  flesh 
in  those  who  were  nearest  to  Moses?  How  came  it 
that  God's  glory  was  forgotten  in  that  which  ought  to 
have  been  ever  prominent  to  a  father's  heart  ?  It  ap- 
pears that  the  wife  had  something  to  do  with  the 
matter.  Accordingly  mark  how  Jehovah  deals  in  His 
own  wisdom.  There  never  is  a  hindrance  but  through 
flesh  ;  there  is  no  difficulty  brought  in  to  distract  a 
faithful  man  of  God  from  obedience,  but  God  accom- 
plishes the  end,  only  in  a  far  more  painful  way,  and 
often  by  the  very  one  who  obstructed.  What  a  safe- 
guard then  to  be  childlike  and  subject  to  the  Lord ! 
How  many  sorrows  are  thus  escaped!  But  no  escape 
would  God  allow  from  that  which  was  so  repugnant  to 
the  feelings  of  Zipporah.  In  fact  she  at  last  was 
obliged  to  do  what  she  most  hated,  as  she  said  herself 
in  her  son's  case.  But  more  than  that,  it  endangered 
Moses;  for  God  had  the  controversy  with  him — not 
with  his  wife.  Moses  was  the  responsible  person ;  and 
God  held  to  His  order.  It  is  said  that  Jehovah  met 
and  sought  to  kill  him.  The  consequence  was  that  his 
wife  had  to  take  a  sharp  stone  and  execute  the  work 
herself  It  must  be  done,  and  with  incomparably 
greater  pain  and  shame  to  herself  than  if  done  in  God's 
time  and  way.     Let  us  remember  this. 

Xow  that  God  was  vindicated  in  the  household  of 


EXODUS  L-xvin.  147 

Moses,  his  mission  could  begin.  (Chap,  v.)  Public  work 
can  only  rightly  follow  when  all  is  well  at  home.  So 
Moses  and  Aaron  go  in  and  tell  Pharaoh  the  message  of 
Jehovah ;  and  Pharaoh,  with  the  insolence  natural  to 
him,  replies,  "  Who  is  Jehovah,  that  I  should  obey  his 
voice  to  let  Israel  go  ?  I  know  not  Jehovah,  neither 
will  I  let  Israel  go.  And  they  said.  The  God  of  the 
Hebrews  hath  met  with  us:  let  us  go,  we  pray  thee, 
three  days'  journey  into  the  desert,  and  sacrifice  unto 
Jehovah  our  God,  lest  he  fall  upon  us  with  pestilence, 
or  with  the  sword."  But  the  result  of  their  interference 
is  that  the  tasks  are  increased,  and  that  the  children 
of  Israel  groan  yet  more,  quick  enough  to  resent  it  too, 
as  if,  instead  of  being  deliverers,  Moses  and  Aaron  were 
themselves  the  more  immediate  causes  of  the  troubles 
which  thickened  on  the  people.  This  is  described  in 
the  rest  of  the  chapter. 

But  Jehovah,  in  the  beginning  of  chap,  vi.,  speaks  to 
Moses  once  more  when  he  returns,*  and  says,  "Now 

*  The  attempt  to  eke  out  proofs  of  diversity  of  authorship  from 
aUeged  contradictions  and  confusion  is  not  only  futile,  but  evidence 
of  incapcu2ity  to  discern  what  is  excellent  and  fuU  of  instruction. 
Dr.  D.  says  (Introd.  O.  T.  i.  66)  that  "  the  Israelites  did  not  listen  to 
Moses  at  first  for  anguirfi  of  spirit  and  cruel  bondage.  (Ex.  vi.  9,  12.) 
But  in  iv.  31  they  believed  and  rejoiced  when  he  announced  deliver- 
ance to  them.  It  may  be  said  that  the  elders  were  the  persons  spoken 
to  in  the  latter  case,  not  the  people ;  and  that  they  were  induced  to 
believe  in  him  by  the  signs  he  wrought.  But  if  the  heads  of  the 
people  were  convinced  of  his  divine  mission,  the  people  groaning 
under  their  burdens  would  be  ready  to  follow  them." 

"According  to  Ex.  vi.  2,  &c.,  Moses  received  his  divine  commission 
to  deliver  the  people  out  of  bondage  in  Egypt,  But  in  iii.  1,  &c.,  he 
received  it  in  Midian.  It  was  not  first  received  in  Midian  and  after- 
wards repeated  in  Egypt,  because  the  former  call  is  followed  by  Moses 
and  Aaron  going  in  to  Pharaoh  and  asking  him  to  let  the  Israelites 

L  2 


148        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH.  .. 

shalt  thou  see  what  I  will  do  to  Pharaoh :  for  with  a 
strong  hand  shall  he  let  them  go,  and  with  a  strong 
hand  shall  he  drive  them  out  of  his  land.  And  God 
spake  unto  Moses,  and  said  unto  him,  I  am  Jehovah : 
and  I  appeared  unto  Abraham,  unto  Isaac,  and  unto 
Jacob,  by  the  name  of  God  Almighty,  but  by  my  name 
JEHOVAH  was  I  not  known  to  them."  We  come  to 
greater  precision  here.  Carefully  remember  that  this 
does  not  imply  that  the  word  "  Jehovah"  was  not  known. 
We  have  no  real  reason  to  doubt  that  men  heard  it  f5pom 
the  beginning.  As  a  word  "Jehovah"  occurs  frequently 
in  the  book  of  Genesis,  in  a  way  which  shews  not  only 
that  the  writer  knew  the  term,  but  that  it  was  in  use 

go  for  the  purpose  of  holding  a  feast  in  the  wilderness.  Had  Moses 
not  visited  the  king  to  ask  for  the  thing  he  was  caUed  by  Gt)d  to 
effect,  we  might  suppose  that  the  caU  was  repeated ;  but  since  he  did 
so  a  second  call  was  unnecessary !  The  two  calls  are  in  reality  the 
narrations  of  different  writers,  giving  a  somewhat  different  version  of 
the  same  thing.  The  one  represents  Moses  as  asking  for  a  temporary 
release  of  the  people  (Ex.  v.  3,  &c.) ;  the  other  for  their  entire  de- 
liverance (vi.  11;  vii.  2;  ix.  36;  xi.  10).'* 

The  fact  is  that  all  is  clear  and  consistent  but  progressive ;  and  the 
petty  pretence  of  Elohistic  and  Jehovistic  documents  manifestly  feula; 
for  Exodus  iii.  is  characterised  by  the  use  of  Jehovah  in  a  way  exactly 
similar  to  chapter  vi.    Elohim  in  both  reveals  Himself  or  is  spoken  of 
as  Jehovah.    When  the  signs  were  wrought  at  first,  the  people  and 
Moses  asked  leave  of  absence  for  three  days  only.    When  the  king 
haughtily  refused,  and  increased  their  oppression,   God  gave  His 
servant  a  stiU  fuller  revelation  of  Himself  for  the  people,  now  utterly 
cast  down,  and  a  commission  in  Egypt  more  peremptory — armed  not 
with  signs  only  but  judgments  on  their  oppressors — and  the  demand 
now  was  for  an  absolute  departure  of  Israel.    If  the  prince  of  the 
world   made   their  burdens  heavier,  the  assurance  of  deliverance 
becomes  more  distinct,  and  the  temporary  release  vanishes.    The 
second  call  in  Egypt  is  therefore  not  only  a  fact  but  necessary  sa  bji 
introduction  to  new  dealings  after  Pharaoh  despised  Jehovah's  claim 
according  to  the  first  caU  in  Midian. 


EXODUS  i.-xvni.  149 

from  the  beginning.  What  then  is  the  true  meaning  ? 
That  God  now  takes  this  name  as  the  revealed  cha- 
racter according  to  which  He  was  going  publicly  to  act 
on  behalf  of  the  children  of  Israel  Observe,  as  illus- 
trating what  is  here  meant,  that  when  our  Lord  came, 
as  scripture  says,  He  declared  the  Father.  What  an 
absurd  inference  it  would  be  that  the  term  "Father"  had 
never  been  known  before?  This  clearly  is  not  con- 
veyed anywhere,  but  that  God  had  not  before  revealed 
Himself  in  that  relationship  as  He  did  then.  It  is  so 
precisely  with  the  term  "  Jehovah."  Thus,  in  Gen.  xxii., 
when  Isaac  was  taken  from  under  the  sentence  of  death, 
Abraham  calls  the  place  "  Jehovah- Jireh."  The  word 
therefore  must  have  been  well  enough  known :  only 
God  did  not  yet  take  it  as  the  form  and  ground  of  His 
dealings  with  any  people  on  the  earth;  now  He  does 
with  Israel  It  was  not  enough  to  be  the  almighty 
shield  of  the  children  as  of  the  fathers :  no  matter 
what  thefr  weakness  and  exposure  in  the  midst  of 
jealous  and  hostile  and  wicked  Canaanites,  He  had  been 
the  protector  of  the  wandering  patriarchs.  It  was  what 
was  involved  in  the  formula  of  His  revelation  to  Abra- 
ham, Isaac,  and  Jacob. 

But  now  He  goes  farther,  shewing  Himself  the  un- 
changeable and  eternal  God,  the  God  who  was  indeed 
as  a  governor  true  to  the  promise  He  had  made  of 
old.    Accordingly  this  is  prefeisely  what  is  involved  in 
the  name  of  Jehovah.     Here  He  was  ready  for  His  part 
to  accomplish.    There  might  be  unreadiness  on  their 
part,  but  He  at  any  rate  was  able  to  make  good  all  He 
had  promised.    And  thus  fittingly  He,  as  Jehovah  their 
^)  pledges  before  them  His  own  unchangeable  cha- 


150        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

racter  to  accomplish  His  promises.  Whether  it  woald 
come  to  a  result  or  not  depended  on  altogether  diflferent 
circumstances — not  on  any  failure  in  Him. 

This  then  is  brought  before  Moses  and  Aaron,  and 
soon  after  we  find  the  message  given,  "Go  in,  speak 
unto  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt,  that  he  let  the  children 
of  Israel  go  out  of  his  land."  They  were  not  to  be  in 
anywise  cast  down  by  the  first  replies.  They  must  not 
be  disheartened  even  by  the  growing  troubles  of  the 
children  of  Israel.  They  had  this  warrant  to  go  on  in 
the  name  of  Jehovah. 

Then  (vi.  14-27)  the  genealogy  is  given,  which  calls 
for  no  remark,  save  only  to  notice  how  grace  cannot  but 
assert  itsel£  For  Moses  was  not  the  elder  brother  but 
Aaron,  and  in  the  genealogy  the  order  of  nature  is 
maintained,  as,  for  instance,  in  verses  20,  26,  "  These 
are  that  Aaron  and  Moses,  to  whom  Jehovah  said.  Bring 
out  the  children  of  Israel."  But  the  moment  we  come 
to  spiritual  action,  it  is  always  "  Moses  and  Aaron  " — 
never  "  Aaron  and  Moses."  How  slow  we  are  to  learn 
the  perfectness  of  the  word  of  God !  Yet  nothing  is 
like  it  for  simplicity  and  accessibility.  Our  difficulty 
is  that  the  very  familiarity  of  men  with  it  hinders 
their  taking  notice  of  what  is  under  their  eyes.  There 
it  is :  when  our  eyes  are  opened,  we  see  how  unique 
its  character  is.  And  this  has  an  amazing  effect  upon 
the  spiritual  man,  who  nourishes  himself  on  the  sound 
words  of  God,  because  we  are  all  apt  otherwise  to  be 
careless  and  to  use  words  lightly.  If  it  is  a  great  thing 
to  enjoy  the  profit  of  good  company,  there  is  no  com- 
pany or  converse  like  that  of  God.  This  is  the  way  in 
which  the  Lord    ives  us  simplicity,  and  at  the  same 


EXODUS  i.-xvnL  ir>l 

time  a  depth  entirely  beyond  ourselves.  How  good  tlie 
Lord  that  speaks  to  us  about  the  things  not  of  grace 
only  but  of  nature !  Do  we  as  Christians  quarrel  with 
such  matters  ?  We  acknowledge  them,  owning  nature 
in  its  place;  and  quite  right.  It  is  all  a  vain  thing 
to  deny  that  which  is  right  according  to  the  order  of 
nature.  Always  avoid  onesidedness.  There  is  nothing 
more  dangerous  in  the  things  of  God.  Give  nature  its 
place,  and  what  belongs  to  it;  but  always  maintain  thti 
superiority  of  grace  in  order  to  do  so.  And  take  care 
that,  not  only  knowing  and  enjoying  it,  we  walk  suit- 
ably to  grace :  else  it  loses  its  character.  Grace  is  then 
no  more  grace,  but  only  a  vain  pretension — the  flippant 
use  of  words  without  power. 

In  chapter  viL  begins  the  great  struggle,  and  wondcu's 
upon  wonders  awfully  fall  on  the  devoted  land  of  Kgy  pt. 
Observe,  as  to  the  hardening  of  Pharaoh's  heart,  that 
this  was  in  no-wise  the  case  before  the  pronounced 
infidelity  of  Pharaoh.  God  never  compelled  a  man  to 
be  an  unbeliever.  In  short,  unbelief  in  the  first  instjuu-o 
is  never  the  consequence  of  judicial  hardness  on  GocTs 
part.  Is  there  no  such  thing  then  as  hardening? 
Does  not  scripture  mean  that  there  is?  Undoubtedly 
hardening  there  is.  It  is  an  equal  error  to  suppose  that 
Grod  hardens  a  person  when  He  first  sends  a  testimony 
as  to  deny  that  He  does  harden  after  His  testimony  has 
been  refused.  The  fact  is,  both  are  true,  and  this  is 
just  another  instance  of  the  importance  of  not  taking, 
up  particular  views  of  scripture,  but  of  being  guided 
and  formed  in  our  thoughts  by  all  scripture. 

God  then  sent  a  testimony  to  Pharaoh,  as  He  does 
to  everyone  in  some  form  or  another.    But  man  left  to 


152        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

himself  invariably  refuses  the  testimony  of  God.  He 
knows  it  is  God;  he  has  the  consciousness  that  he  is 
doing  wrong  in  refusing  it ;  yet  he  does  refuse  because 
he  does  not  like  and  dare  not  trust  God,  whose  word 
interferes  with  everything  that  he  likes.  Hence  man 
gives  himself  up  to  unbelief,  and  then  God  may  either 
at  that  or  a  later  time,  according  to  His  own  wisdom, 
seal  up  a  person  in  a  judicial  hardness  which  is  a  dis- 
tinct positive  act  on  God*s  part.  I  hold  therefore  most 
strongly  that  hardening  is  not  merely  on  man's  side, 
and  in  the  judicial  sense  not  on  man's  at  all,  though  no 
doubt  the  result  of  man's  sin.  God  hardens  because 
man  refuses  His  word.  Thus  the  hardening  is  a  judicial 
act  on  God's  part,  which  comes  in  after  man  has  proved 
himself  an  unbeliever,  and  has  persisted  in  it.  It  was 
so  with  Pharaoh,  and  his  is  a  typical  case,  the  perma- 
nent warning  in  the  New  Testament,  as  it  is  the  first 
specified  instance  in  the  Old.  It  is  the  one  which  the 
apostle  Paul  quotes  for  this  purpose.  Consequently  it 
is  the  standing  witness  of  this  solemn  truth.  And 
remember  that  this  is  not  a  mere  exceptional  fact.  It 
is  commoner  than  people  imagine.  It  will  be  on  a 
great  scale  in  Christendom  shortly  (2  Thess.  ii),  as  I 
have  little  doubt  that  it  may  be  in  many  individual 
cases  now,  and  has  always  been  so.  Thus  it  was  when 
our  Lord  Jesus  was  here,  and  the  presence  of  the  Spirit, 
instead  of  preventing,  confirmed  it  Hence,  whether 
on  a  great  scale  or  in  individual  dealings  of  God, 
nothing  can  be  more  certain  than  that  there  is  such  an 
action  on  His  part.  At  the  same  time  it  is  never 
God  who  makes  man  an  unbeliever.  Hardening  is  a 
judgment  which  comes  when  man  persists  in  unbelief 


EXODUS  I -XVIII.  153 

in  the  face  of  distinct  and  repeated  testimony  from 
God. 

The  ten  plagues  follow  (chap.  vii.-xi.),  on  which  one 
or  two  general  remarks  may  be  made.  They  were  parti- 
cularly suited  in  the  wisdom  of  God  to  humble  Egypt. 
It  was  not  only  an  infliction  on  the  land ;  it  was  not  only 
a  deep  pain  and  anguish  to  the  natives,  and  this  with  in- 
creasing intensity ;  but  it  was  a  solemn  contest  between 
Jehovah  and  the  gods  of  Egypt.  The  plagues  were  cal- 
culated to  smite  them  most  acutely  in  what  constituted 
their  religion.  For  instance,  take  the  Nile:  we  know  the 
boastfulness  of  Egypt  in  that  river  which  they  supposed 
to  be  the  great  earthly  emblem  of  God.  On  the  other 
hand  it  is  well  known  what  all  these  ancient  nations 
thought  of  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  how  preternatural 
darkness  (with  light  for  Israel  in  Goshen)  must  have 
struck  them.  Again,  bodily  cleanliness  was  no  small 
part  of  heathenism  which  could  do  nothing  for  the  soul : 
more  particularly  was  it  so  with  Egyptian  heathenism. 
It  is  plain  that  the  infliction  of  lice  or  gnats,  if  either 
be  the  meaning  of  the  term — at  any  rate  a  loathsome 
insect  which  made  life  almost  intolerable  to  man  and 
beast — was  particularly  humiliating  to  Egypt.  Thus  a 
few  of  those  points  are  merely  touched  without  enter- 
ing into  details;  for  it  is  evident  that  this  would 
keep  us  longer  than  is  suitable  in  what  I  propose  for 
the  present.  In  these  repeated  strokes  we  find  then 
God  dealing  with  the  gods  as  well  as  with  the  men  and 
habits  of  i^ypt.  The  controversy  was  with  their 
opposition  to  the  true  God,  as  well  as  with  their 
oppression  of  His  people. 

Even  rationalism  does  not  in  every  case  venture  to 


154       L£CTUB£S  ON  THE  PENTATEt'CH. 

deny  the  supematuial  character  of  the  phenomena 
related  in  chaps.  Yii-xiL  Some  of  the  most  sceptical 
are  compelled  to  admit  that  the  ten  plagues  were  all 
actual  and  historical  events  Their  effort  is  to  strip 
and  reduce  them  to  the  uttermost  by  exalting  circum- 
stances, which  bear  a  somewhat  similar  appearance 
either  ordinarily  or  occasionally,  to  a  measure  of 
correspondence.  Thus,  alongside  the  first  plague 
(chap.  viL  15-25),  they  put  the  feet  that  Ehrenberg 
in  1823  saw  the  inlet  of  the  Sed  Sea,  near  Sinai, 
stained  a  blood-red  colour  by  cryptogamic  plants.  Did 
this  kill  the  fish  in  the  sea  or  make  the  waters  to 
stink  ?  Did  it  affect  every  pond  and  stream,  nay  every 
vessel  of  wood  and  stone?  They  cannot  deny  that 
there  is  all  possible  difference  between  the  reddish  tint 
of  the  Nile  for  some  weeks  in  June,  without  one  of 
these  consequences  as  compared  with  so  severe  a  blow 
in  or  about  January  on  the  river  of  their  pride  and 
idolatry,  which  had  seen  the  cruel  death  of  Israel's 
male  children. 

Again,  after  that  plague  of  blood  had  run  its  course 
in  vain  for  seven  days,  that  of  frogs  rose  up  from  the 
streams,  rivers,  and  ponds,  and  the  land  was  covered 
with  these  actively  disgusting  objects,  as  the  waters 
had  shocked  and  sickened  them  before.  (Chap.  viii. 
1-15.)  How  humbling  this  second  judgment  must 
have  been  to  a  people  who  included  frogs  among  their 
sacred  animals — ^to  see  them,  an  object  of  detestation, 
crowd  their  houses,  and  beds,  and  ovens,  and  kneading- 
troughs !  Never  do  these  animals  annoy  the  Egyptians 
at  the  beginning  of  the  year ;  still  less  do  they  come 
and  go  at  the  command  of  a  man  like  Moses. 


EXODUS  i.-xvm.  155 

• 

The  third  and  fourth  plagues  (in  our  version,  lice 
and  swarms  of  flies,  chap.  viiL  16-32,)  may  be  open  to 
discussion  as  to  their  specific  character ;  but  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  they  dealt  with  man  and  beast  with 
increasing  intensity  and  the  more  distressingly  if  they 
interfered  with  personal  cleanliness,  and  made  the 
killing  of  what  they  venerated  needful  in  self-defence. 
The  rationalist  counts  at  least  the  first  of  these  "a 
natural  phenomenon  of  the  country,"  the  wonder  being 
its  origination  by  Aaron  and  the  exemption  of  the 
Israelites.  He  is  thus  more  incredulous  than  the 
magicians  who  said  to  Pharaoh,  **  This  is  the  finger  of 
God" — not  a  mere  combination  of  unusual  circum- 
stances with  a  natural  phenomenon. 

The  fifth  plague  (chap.  ix.  1-7,)  was  a  very  heavy 
pestilence  which  at  Moses'  word  fell  the  next  day  on 
the  cattle  of  Egypt,  not  on  those  of  Israel.  This  was 
the  sharper  a  blow  as  immediately  before  Pharaoh  went 
back  even  from  his  promise  of  three  days'  absence. 
Moses  had  pleaded  the  inexpediency  of  their  sacri- 
ficing the  abomination  of  the  Egyptians  before  their 
eyes.  How  many  victims  fell  now !  It  is  well  known 
what  the  ox  and  the  sheep  were  in  their  eyes. 

Then  came  the  sixth  judgment  (chap.  ix.  8-12),  a 
boil  breaking  forth  with  blains  on  man  and  beast  in  all 
Egypt,  and  notably  on  the  magicians  who  could  not 
stand  before  Moses.  Such  a  purulent  eruption  baffled 
their  scrupulous  avoidance  of  impurity.  The  vanity  of 
their  divinities  was  as  manifest  as  of  their  own  arts  of 
healing. 

Next,  the  seventh  plague  (chap.  ix.  13-35),  hail  with 
thunder  and  consuming  fire,  drew  from  Pharaoh  the 


15f)        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

confession  of  his  sin  and  a  promise  to  let  the  people 
go,  brokeQ  by  him  as  soon  as  Jehovah  heard  the  inter- 
cession of  Moses.  Perversity  alone  could  in  this  see 
phenomena  ordinary  in  Egypt,  let  the  time  or  other 
circumstances  be  what  they  might. 

The  threat  of  the  locusts  to  eat  what  remained  from 
the  hail  brought  Pharaoh's  servants  to  their  senses ;  but 
on  the  demand  of  Moses  that  all  should  go,  old  and 
young,  children  and  cattle,  to  keep  their  feast  to 
Jehovah  (not  a  word  of  three  days  now),  they  are 
driven  out  from  before  the  king,  and  the  eighth  blow 
falls  all  over  the  land.  The  powers  of  the  air  were  at 
the  command  of  Jehovah  and  against  Egypt.  (Chap.  x. 
1-20.) 

So  still  more  solemnly  in  the  preternatural  darkness 
of  the  ninth  plague.  (Chap.  x.  21-29.)  The  sovereign 
who  derived  his  name  from  the  sun  availed  nothing  for 
all  the  land  of  Egypt,  while  the  darkness  which  might 
be  felt  was  made  visible  in  its  source  by  the  light 
which  all  the  children  of  Israel  had  in  their  habita- 
tions. 

It  is  sad  to  hear  a  so-called  orthodox  antagonist  of 
rationalism  weaken  the  tenth  infliction  (ch.  xi.)  by  the 
remark  that  "  it  must  not  be  inferred  that  none  of  the 
first-born  remained  alive  in  the  land,  or  that  none 
besides  the  first-bom  died."  And  it  is  rank  infidelity 
to  say  that  '*  the  eternal  (?)  laws  of  nature  are  sufficient 
to  effect  whatever  he  intended  to  bring  about  in  the 
history  of  redemption."  It  is  to  deny  God's  word,  if 
not  God  Himself. 

At  last  in  chapter  xii.  comes  the  grand  decisive 
stroke^   where   there  was   no   appearance   of   second 


EXODUS  i.-xvm.  157 

causes,  and  the  hand  of  God  made  itself  felt  in  an 
unprecedented  way.  Murrain  and  even  hail  were  not 
such  uncommon  visitors  in  Egypt,  still  less  so  were 
other  plagues.  It  was  impossible  to  deny  the  peculiar- 
ity of  some  of  the  plagues.  At  the  same  time  all  were 
so  distinctly  according  to  His  word,  and  fell  one  after 
another  with  such  alarming  frequency  and  tremendous 
force  on  them,  that  they  confessed  the  hand  of  God. 
The  very  magicians  themselves  owned  themselves 
defeated ;  for  whatever  they  might  do  with  their  en- 
chantments at  first,  they  were  soon  silenced.  But  at 
length  comes  the  last  plague  inflicted,  the  slaying  of  the 
first-bom  in  the  land,  and  with  it  the  line  of  demar- 
cation still  more  evident  between  the  friends  and  foes 
of  Jehovah.  Even  in  the  third  and  fourth  plagues 
we  find  God  marking  off  His  people.  At  first  they 
may  have  been  involved  in  a  general  way,  but  gradually 
a  separation  is  made  more  and  more  plain.  Now  it  was 
undeniable.  Another  plague  might,  if  not  must,  be  the 
destruction  of  the  nation.  Israel  must  leave  now. 
Pharaoh  had  scorned  Jehovah's  call  for  the  homage  of 
His  first-bom  Israel ;  and  from  the  beginning  had  been 
warned  that  if  he  refused  to  let  him  go,  "  behold,  I  will 
slay  thy  son,  thy  first-bom."  (Chap.  iv.  22.)  Heads  of 
houses  did  fall  afterwards  at  the  Eed  Sea  with  Pharaoh's 
host;  but  the  ten  plagues  were  in  the  way  of  pre- 
paratory chastenings,  not  the  figure  of  so  wide  and 
indiscriminate  a  judgment. 

But  the  question  which  was  decided  that  paschal 
night  affected  the  Jew  not  less  than  the  Egyptian.  God 
was  there  as  a  Judge,  dealing  with  man's  sin.  How 
then  could  Israel  escape?    This  was  what  had  to  be  set 


158        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

forth :  a  slain  lamb  becomes  the  sole  means  of  security* 
— the  sprinkled  blood  of  the  lamb.  There  were  other 
requisitions  on  God's  part  which  shewed  that  this  had 
another  and  an  infinitely  more  solemn  character  than 
the  preceding  plagues.  Not  a  fact  only  but  a  type, 
still  it  was  a  type  not  of  an  earthly  woe  but  of  a  judg- 
ment before  the  eyes  of  God — judgment  of  sin.  Hence 
there  were  not  merely  insects,  or  the  elements  brought 
in,  but  God  employing  a  destroyer  for  the  first-bom  of 

♦  Bishop  Coleiiso  (part  i.  ch.  xi.)  has  heaped  together  ohjections  to 
the  account  of  the  Passover  as  weak  as  they  ^re  malicious.  His  main 
point  seems  to  he  that  "  in  one  single  day^  the  whole  immense  popula- 
tion of  Israel,  as  large  as  that  of  London,  was  instructed  to  keep  the 
Passover,  and  actually  did  keep  it.*'  For  this  the  text  not  only  gives 
no  ground  birt  furnishes  its  unequivocal  disproof.  On  the  face  of  it 
the  prescribed  mode  required  the  lamb  to  be  taken  on  the  tenth  day 
of  the  month  of  Abib  and  kept  till  the  fourteenth,  in  the  evening  of 
which  it  was  killed.  "  This  night "  and  "  that  night "  can  in  no  way 
invalidate  these  directions,  nor  is  their  own  meaning  doubtful.  Besides 
there  may  have  been  notice  given  long  before  the  tenth  of  Abib.  Every 
one  knows  the  habit  in  Hebrew,  and  indeed  other  languages,  for  the 
speaker  to  throw  himself  forward  into  the  chief  event  in  question, 
even  if  there  had  been  no  express  preliminaries  which  evince  the 
futility  of  the  statement.  All  the  other  elements  are  exaggerated  by 
the  objector,  the  number  of  the  lambs  requisite,  as  well  as  the  degree 
of  haste,  which  affected  scarce  anything  but  their  bread,  as  otherwise 
they  stood  ready  for  their  move^  which  they  were  fully  expecting. 

As  to  the  difficulties  raised  in  Bishop  Colenso's  chaps,  xx.  xxi.,  the 
small  number  of  priests  for  their  work,  they  are  imaginary  and  prove 
great  inattention  to  the  fcujts  in  Scripture.  Thus  Aaron  and  his  sons 
had  no  such  duty  in  the  Passover,  as  we  find  in  the  extraordinary 
temple  celebration  recorded  in  2  Chron.  xxx.  6.  In  Egypt  it  was 
essentially  a  family  feast,  and  so  probably  in  the  wilderness:  certainly 
not  one  word  then  ties  it  to  the  presence  or  action  of  the  priests.  Its 
family  character  appears  in  the  New  Testament  also.  The  Israelites 
who  were  not  circumcised  in  the  wilderness  could  not  have  found  work 
for  Aaron  and  his  sons ;  for  that  rite  was  the  basis  for  all  the  rest,  and 
yet  it  was  certainly  neglected  there  and  then. 


EXODUS  I.~  XVIII.  159 

man  and  beast.  Here  man  had  to  face  death,  and  that 
in  what  was  dearest  to  him — his  first-bom. 

Hence  the  Passover  is  brought  before  us  of  which 
the  New  Testament  makes  great  account — the  type  of 
Christ  the  Lamb  of  God  sacrificed  for  us,  with  the 
striking  accompaniment  of  leaven  absolutely  excluded. 
Leaven  represents  iniquity  in  its  tendency  to  extend' 
itself  by  assimilating  what  was  exposed  to  its  action. 
This  ordinance  then  means  the  disallowance  and  putting 
away  of  all  evil  that  belongs  to  man  in  his  fallen  state. 
The  flesh  of  the  lamb  was  to  be  eaten  not  raw  or 
sodden,  but  roast  with  fire,  the  strong  and  evident  sign 
of  fierce  unsparing  divine  judgment.  It  must  and 
ought  to  be  so ;  for  herein  Christ's  death  met  our  sins 
and  God's  judgment.  Thus  and  thus  only  was  the 
Israelite  to  eat  of  the  lamb,  sanctified  by  and  to  this 
holy  feast,  eating  of  its  roast  flesh  that  night  and 
leaving  none  tiU  the  morning,  or,  if  aught  remained, 
burning  it  with  fire.  It  was  a  matter  between  God 
and  the  soul,  outside  the  domain  of  sense  and  nature. 
It  was  apart  from  all  common  food.  All  the  congrega- 
tion of  Israel  might  and  must  eat  it,  but  no  stranger — 
unless  circumcised,  no  foreigner,  no  hired  servant,  but 
only  he  who  was  bought  and  circumcised ;  and  when 
eaten,  bitter  herbs  must  accompany  it — repentance  on 
our  part,  the  fruit  of  the  truth  applied  to  us  by  grace. 
"And  thus  then  shall  ye  eat;  with  your  loins  girded, 
your  shoes  on  your  feet,  and  your  staff  in  your  hand ; 
and  ye  shall  eat  it  in  haste :  it  is  Jehovah's  passover." 

On  the  other  hand  the  feast  of  the  Passover  did  not 
comprehend  in  its  type  the  full  result  of  Christ's  work 
in  comfort  and  blessing.  There  was  no  communion.  As 


160       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

it  is  said  of  this  feast  elsewhere,  "Every  one  went  to 
his  own  tent;"  so  although  it  was  here  the  house  of 
the  Israelite  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  still  communion  is 
not  seen.  In  a  certain  sense  what  was  set  forth  is  yet 
more  important,  as  it  lies  at  the  bottom  of  communion, 
without  which  there  could  be  none  according  to  God's 
holy  nature. 

In  short,  the  Passover  was  the  judgment  of  sin 
before  God.    As  He  never  loses  sight  of  its  need,  so  we 
never  can  make  light  of  it  without  loss  to  our  souls. 
Much  as  one  rejoices  through  the  mercy  of  God  in  that 
which  is  built  upon  it  and  is  its  complement,  sweet  and 
precious  as  it  is  to  follow  by  the  way  of  resurrection 
into  heavenly  glory  itself,  never  forget  for  a  moment 
that  what  stands  alone  in  depth  of  suffering  and  in 
efficacious  value  before  God  is  the  death  of  Christ 
This  then  is  brought  before  us  here  with  the  utmost 
possible  care ;  as  the  Spirit  of  God  gives  immense  scope 
to  the  allusions  elsewhere.     Indeed,  it  is  one  of  those 
feasts  that  are  never  to  cease  whUe  souls  are  to  be 
saved.     Peculiar  to  the  land  of  Egypt  as  the  only  feast 
that  could  be  celebrated  there,  it  was  laid  down  speci- 
fically for  the  wilderness  (Num.  ix.) ;  and  when  Israel 
shaU  enter  the  land  again,  even  when  the  time  of  glory 
arrives  for  the  world,  stiU  there  will  be  the  feast  of  the 
Passover.     So  will  it  be  for  earthly  people,  when  ga- 
thered back  to  God's  land  here  below.     Thus  the  Pass- 
over has,  above  all,  a  fundamental  and  a  permanent 
character  beyond  all  other  feasts.     Hence  therefore  the 
children  of  God  may  surely  gather  what  its  antitype 
must  be  to  God  Himself. 

But  the  subject  is  so  familiar  to  us  that  we  need  not 


EXODUS  L- XVIII.  161 

enlarge  npon  the  minutiaB  of  this  feast.  I  will  only  add, 
that  in  chapter  xiii.  we  find  another  thing — a  character 
stamped  on  the  firstborn  brought  into  connection  with 
the  Passover  *  They  belonged  to  God  henceforth  after 
a  special  sort  as  the  consequence  of  deliverance  from 
Egypt  But  besides  this  complete  devotedness  we  see 
also  the  ordinance  of  the  unleavened  bread  in  this 
connexion,  that  is,  unfeigned  purity  of  heart  by  faith.t 

*  It  is  a  fedr  question,  wliich  has  perplexed  translators  and  com- 
mentators in  ancient  as  well  as  modem  times,  what  is  meant  hy  the 
Hebrew  word  translated  "harnessed"  (with  the  marginal  alternative 
**five  in  a  rank")  in  verse  18.  Bishop  Colenso  (part  1,  chap,  ix.)  will 
have  it  to  mean  "armed,"  in  flagrant  inconsistency  with  the  context, 
because  it  is  so  taken  elsewhere ;  and  this  in  order  to  urge  the  im- 
possibility of  600,000  "  wtirriors."  But  even  Gesenius  and  Knobel 
take  the  word  otherwise,  and  so  do  Onkelos  and  Aben  Ezra,  as  Dr. 
Mc  Caul  has  shown.  It  is  unwarrantable,  therefore,  to  reason  on  what 
is  so  precarious.  The  men  might  be  "girt"  or  "in  regular  order" 
without  all  being  armedj  and  very  far  indeed  from  being  all  "warriors." 

t  It  is  alleged  by  Dr.  D.  (Introd.  O.  T.  i.  66,)  that  "  according  to 
Exodus  xii.  15,  &c.,  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  was  introduced 
before  the  exodus ;  but  from  xiii.  3,  &c.,  we  learn  that  it  was  insti- 
tuted after  that  event  at  Succoth."  The  latter  statement  is  perfectly 
fictitious.  Not  a  word  implies  that  the  feast  was  instituted  in  Succoth, 
the  mention  of  which  is  severed  by  three  important  verses  (17-19) 
from  the  close  of  all  that  refers  to  the  feast.  It  is  evident  that  there 
is  an  addition  of  consequence  in  chapter  xiii.  to  what  Jehovah  had 
prescribed  in  chapter  xii.  No  date  or  place  is  named.  It  may  have 
been,  and  probably  was,  after  the  sons  of  Israel  left  Egypt,  as  it 
throughout  supposes  the  feast  already  instituted.  Here  too  there 
is  no  excuse  for  a  different  author  or  document,  as  the  codicil  of 
chapter  xiii.  is  Jehovistic  equally  with  chapter  xii.,  and  adds  the 
&esh  thought  of  the  sanctification  to  Jehovah  of  all  the  first-born 
in  Israel,  whether  of  man  or  of  beast.  The  males  were  to  be  His,  and 
must  be  either  sacrificed  or  redeemed.  The  tenor  of  Dr.  D.'s  statement 
is  the  more  remarkable,  because  the  reference  to  Succoth  occurs  in  a 
distinct  clause  that  follows  where  is  only  Elohim,  after  which  we 
have  Jehovah  once  more  as  before. 

M 


162        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

The  two  things  are  here  put  together  as  flowing  from 
the  sense  of  a  divinely  wrought  deliverance.  This  is 
remarkably  evinced  in  the  character  now  given  them, 
as  well  as  their  preciousness  with  God.  He  who  de- 
livered them  claimed  them  as  His  own.  If  the  first- 
born of  an  animal  could  not  be  sacrificed,  it  must  like 
man's  firstborn  be  redeemed.  "Sanctify  unto  me  all 
the  firstborn."  This,  as  well  as  the  connected  eating  of 
unleavened  bread,  is  founded  on  the  Passover. 

But  chapter  xiv.  brings  before  us  another  order  of 
ideas.  Though  there  can  be  no  stable  foundation  without 
the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  in  itself  it  does  not  give,  but  only 
lays  the  basis  for,  the  full  blessing  of  grace  in  redemp- 
tion. Without  it  there  is  nothing  good,  righteous,  or 
holy,  as  far  as  we  are  concerned ;  without  it  there  is  no 
adequate  dealing  with  sin ;  without  it  there  is  no  vindi- 
cation of  the  majesty  of  God.  Nevertheless  peace  is 
impossible  if  we  have  only  that  which  answers  to  the 
Passover.  The  soul  must  enter  into  what  is  beyond,  if 
we  are  to  have  real  rest  and  enjoyment  and  communion. 
Hence  we  find  here  that  God  permits  the  full  power  of 
the  enemy  to  be  arrayed  against  Israel.  They  never 
were  in  greater  alarm  than  after  they  had  partaken  of 
the  paschal  feast;  but  that  alarm  was  used  of  God  to 
shew  the  total  inability  of  Israel  to  cope  with  the 
difficulty.  It  was  for  the  purpose  of  having  the  full 
power  of  Satan  brought  out  against  His  people  that  He 
might  demolish  it  for  ever.  And  s6  He  does.  Pharaoh, 
his  host  and  his  chariots, —  all  the  flower  of  Egypt  — 
were  there  drawn  up  and  ready  to  devour  the  poor 
children  of  Israel.  Destruction  in  one  way  or  another 
-seemed  to  be  inevitable.    The  sea  was  before  them; 


EXODUS  i.-xvm.  163 

they  were  hemmed  in  on  every  side,  with  Pharaoh  and 
his  host  behind  them:  how  was  it  possible  to  conceive 
a  door  of  deliverance  there  ?  God  there  and  then  was 
about  to  accomplish  a  deliverance  without  precedent, 
which  remains  the  bright  and  strong  ground  for  counting 
on  such  a  God.  Thus,  whatever  difficulties  might  rise 
before  Israel,  no  matter  what  their  source  or  character, 
the  day  of  the  Eed  Sea  is  always,  whether  in  the 
Psalms  or  the  prophets,  the  point  to  which  the  heart  of 
an  instructed  Israelite  turned.  It  was  there  that  God 
shewed,  not  merely  what  must  be  in  order  that  He 
should  be  able  righteously  to  abstain  from  judging 
(and  hence  destroying)  a  sinful  people,  but  what  He  is 
in  defence  of  His  people  against  all  their  foes,  were 
they  the  mightiest. 

Accordingly  then  this  is  the  great  truth  taught  in 
chap.  xiv. ;  and  it  is  here  that  God  takes  the  place  pro- 
perly of  Saviour-God.  Salvation  always  means  a  great 
deal  more  than  that  my  sins  are  judged  in  the  death  of 
Christ.  Salvation  means  that  I  am  brought  consciously 
to  know  God  in  the  triumph  of  redemption  by  Christ 
for  me.  Hence  it  will  be  found  that  in  the  doctrine  of 
the  New  Testament  there  is  never  the  allowance  of 
such  a  thought  as  that  salvation  is  only  the  beginning 
of  the  blessing.  People  not  imbued  with  scriptural 
truth  are  often  apt  to  talk  of  salvation  in  a  slighting 
or  at  least  superficial  way.  They  speak  of  a  person 
perhaps  as  "not  happy;  but  at  any  rate  he  is  saved." 
Never  do  we  meet  with  language  like  this  in  the  New 
Testament.  Salvation  means  known  conscious  deliver- 
ance. It  is  not  merely  a  good  hope  of  being  delivered, 
but  that  the  person  himself  by  grace  has  no  doubt 

M  2 


164        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

about  it.  Of  this  people  often  lose  the  true  force  by 
an  nnscriptural  phraseology.  Indeed  the  denial  of 
salvation  as  a  present  status  is  part  of  the  current  coin 
of  Christendom,  and  the  truth  is  opposed  in  one  way 
or  another  by  the  parties  who  otherwise  oppose  each 
other.  Arminianism  naturally  resists  it,  as  its  doctrine 
causes  salvation  to  turn  largely  on  man's  deserts;  while 
Calvinism  would  consent  to  salvation  in  "  the  purpose 
of  God  "  or  some  jargon  of  the  kind,  while  meanwhile 
the  object  of  it  may  have  no  comfort,  nor  solid  footing 
whatever  for  his  soul.  Far  removed  from  both  is  the 
truth  and  the  language  of  scripture ;  and  to  scripture  we 
must  hold. 

Thus  in  Eomans  v.  salvation  is  very  clearly  re- 
ferred to,  and  put  in  full  contradistinction  to  what 
God  has  wrought  for  us  by  the  blood  of  Christ  The 
apostle  says,  "  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in 
that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us: 
much  more  then,  being  now  justified  by  his  blood" 
(it  is  evidently  the  same  grand  truth  as  the  Passover), 
"we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath  through  him."  It  is 
clear-  that  salvation  here  is  not  simply  that  a  person 
is  purged  from  guilt,  but  the  real  application  of 
Christ's  work  in  all  its  fulness;  only  that  we  have  it 
not  yet  for  our  bodies.  "We  shall  be  saved  from 
wrath  through  him.  For  if  when  we  were  enemies 
we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son" 
(this  was  the  beginning),  "much  more  being  recon- 
ciled we  shall  be  saved  by  his  life."  It  is  plain 
therefore,  that  salvation  requires  and  involves  not  only 
the  death  but  the  life  of  Christ;  that  salvation  sup- 
poses  not  merely  guilt  removed  through  His  blood,  but 


EXODUS  I.- XVIII.  165 

ourselves  maintained,  and  to  be  brought  through  all 
difficulties,  past,  present,  and  future.  Thus  it  is  a  com- 
plete deliverance  from  all  that  can  be  brought  against 
us;  not  a  going  through  the  world  with  hope  of  pro- 
tective mercy,  which  is  the  notion  of  man,  but  a 
complete  victory  over  the  foe  present  and  future. 

The  type  or  principle  of  this  we  have  here  for  the 
first  time  when  Moses  says  "this  day"  and  speaks 
about  the  salvation  of  Jehovah ;  and  again,  later  on  in 
the  chapter,  "Jehovah  saved  Israel"  How  beautiful 
the  accuracy  of  scripture !  We  might  have  put  in  that 
Jehovah  saved  Israel  on  the  night  of  the  paschal  lamb ; 
but  nowhere  then  is  such  an  expression  heard.  No; 
they  were  sheltered,  but  in  the  true  sense  not  yet  "saved." 
Salvation  means  the  known  destruction  of  their  foes, 
God  having  risen  up  in  the  majesty  of  His  power,  and 
manifested  it  completely  in  their  favour.  Here  they 
were  clearly  on  the  simple  ground  of  grace ;  and  imme- 
diately afterwards  we  have  the  triumphant  song  of 
Moses  and  the  children  of  Israel: — "I  will  sing  imto 
Jehovah,  for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously:  the  horse 
and  his  rider  hath  he  thrown  into  the  sea.  Jah  is 
my  strength  and  song,  and  he  is  become  my  salva- 
tion." This  last  phrase  then  is  not  merely  a  casual 
expression;  it  is  the  purposed  and  suited  language  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  We  are  meant  to  take  notice  that  now 
we  can  speak  of  "salvation,"  not  before.  (Chap,  xv.) 

But  there  is  more  than  this.  There  are  some  weighty 
consequences  of  this  wonderful  work  of  God,  and  one 
of  them  is  this :  "He  is  my  God,  and  I  will  prepare  him 
an  habitation."  It  has  been  often  remarked,  and  very 
justly^  that  although  Genesis  is  so  prolific  of  the  various 


166        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

counsels  and  ways  of  God,  there  is  the  more  marked 
an  absence  of  the  special  truth  of  Exodus  in  it.  Thus^ 
although  we  have  sacrifice  as  such,  covenant  and  other 
kindred  dealings  of  Grod,  redemption  in  its  full  import 
at  least  is  never  brought  before  us  in  that  book.  I  am 
not  aware  of  anything  of  the  sort.  By  redemption  I 
mean  not  merely  a  price  paid  to  purchase  us  that  we 
may  belong  to  God  (this  indeed  is  not  the  proper 
import  of  the  word),  but  rather  in  its  precise  meaning 
this  too  that  God  has  broken  the  power  of  the  adversary, 
ransoming  and  freeing  us  for  Himself.  Such  is  redemp- 
tion.  I  grant  you  that  to  the  Christian  both  these 
truths  are  made  good.  He  is  bought  with  a  price,  as  we 
are  often  told  in  scripture,  and  we  know  it.  But  the 
effect  of  the  purchase  is  that  we  become  the  bondmen 
of  the  Lord ;  the  effect  of  redemption  is  that  we  become 
the  freemen  of  the  Lord.  As  ever,  man  is  quick  to  put 
the  two  things  in  opposition.,  He  cannot  understand 
how  a  person  can  be  both  a  freeman  and  a  bondman. 
But  the  truth  is  certain,  and  both  clearly  revealed.  The 
reason  why  a  man  finds  it  hard  to  put  the  two  truths 
together  is  that  he  trusts  himself  and  not  God,  and  this 
because  he  wants  to  be  free  from  the  restraints  of  His 
will  and  word.  It  wants  but  little  thought  and  reflec- 
tion for  a  person  to  understand  that  each  of  them  is 
not  only  quite  just,  but  that  they  are  both  thoroughly 
compatible  and  harmonious.  Can  we  not  comprehend, 
brethren,  that  we  were  under  the  power  of  an  enemy  of 
God  ?  In  the  face  of  this,  when  enslaved  to  him,  re- 
demption was  the  putting  forth  of  God's  own  power  in 
Christ  in  a  way  suitable  to  His  majesty  and  holiness, 
in  which  not  a  single  claim  was  left  unsettled,  not  a 


EXODUS  I.-XVIIL  167 

single  requisite  was  not  answered,  not  a  single  sin 
of  man  but  was  judged,  yet  all  and  every  quality 
in  God  was  honoured,  and  we  are  brought  out  tri- 
umphant and  free.  Thus  we  are  made  to  be  the 
Lord's  freemen;  and  what  should  do  it  if  Christ's 
redemption  could  not  ?  He  did  indeed  accomplish  it, 
but  at  all  cost  to  Himself. 

But  there  is  more  than  this  in  the  work  of  Christ 
which  broke  the  power  of  Satan,  "that  by  death  he 
might  destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  death."  He  has 
perfectly  annulled  his  power,  and  met  all  on  Gtod's  part 
needful  for  us  ;  but  there  is  another  thought.  It  is  of 
aU  consequence  that  we  should  feel  that  we  are  imme- 
diately responsible  to  God  according  to  the  new,  inti- 
mate, and  holy  relationship  which  is  ours  in  virtue  of 
redemption.  We  are  bought  with  a  price.  (And  what  a 
price !)  Thus  we  belong  to  Him — we  are  not  our  own, 
but  His.  These  two  truths  combine  in  the  Christian ; 
but  there  is  this  difference  between  them — that  the  world 
also  is  "bought,"  and  every  man  in  it;  whereas  it  would 
be  false  to  say  that  every  man  in  the  world  is  "redeemed." 
If  we  are  subject  to  scripture,  we  must  say  that  there  is 
no  such  thing  as  universal  redemption  ;  but  we  must 
confess  the  truth  of  universal  purchase.*  Christ's  blood 
has  purchased  the  whole  world  with  every  soul  and 
every  other  creature  in  it.  Therefore  in  2  Peter  ii.,  for 
instance,  we  hear  wicked  heretics  spoken  of  as  denying 

*  The  Authorised  Version  does  not  disting^sh  as  it  evidently  ought 
between  dyopdZfi*  or  i^ayopdZta  on  the  one  hand,  and  XvTpdcj  on  the 
other,  meaning  **I  buy,"  and  "I  redeem."  GK>d  makes  both  true  in 
Christ  of  the  believer ;  but  purchase  is  unlimited,  as  an  examination 
of  the  Greek  Testament  wiU  convince  any  soul  who  reads  the  word 
of  God  with  a  subject  spirit ;  while  redemption  has  its  defined  objects. 


168        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

the  Lord  {pifnrorrqv),  not  that  redeemed,  but  ''that  bought 
them."  The  Sovereign  Master  made  them  His  propisrty : 
they  are  a  part  of  that  which  He  purchased  to  Himself 
by  blood.  They  do  not  own  it  themselves ;  they  treat 
the  Master's  claims  and  rights  with  indifference  and  con- 
tempt, as  every  unbeliever  does.  The  believer  is  not 
only  bought  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  but  de- 
livered from  the  power  of  the  enemy,  just  as  Israel 
was  in  type  here.  The  two  things  are  therefore  as  clear 
as  they  are  also  harmonious.  The  effect  of  the  one  is 
that  the  enemy  has  no  longer  the  slightest  claim  to  us, 
or  power  over  us ;  the  effect  of  the  other  is  that  the 
Lord  has  a  perfect  right  to  us  in  every  particular.  Let 
us  own  the  grace  and  wisdom  of  our  God  in  both. 

What  Christ  has  done  is  the  right  thing  as  well  for 
us  as  for  the  glory  of  God ;  but  then  there  is  another 
result  which  should  be  noticed  as  the  consequence  of 
redemption,  and  so,  beginning  to  appear  in  this  chapter, 
it  is  brought  out  more  fully  elsewhere.  It  is  now,  after 
redemption,  that  God  reveals  Himself  as  "glorious  in 
holiness."  He  never  did  before.  No  one  could  be  ex- 
pected to  believe  this  (if  he  did  not  look  into  the  Bible  and 
bow  to  the  truth),  that  God  could  have  written  a  whole 
book  and  never  once  have  spoken  of  holiness  before  this. 
That  God  should  not  have  touched  on  the  matter  in  a 
book  so  fertile  of  truths  as  Genesis  would  hardly  be  credi- 
ble to  a  mere  theologian.  But  when  we  begin  to  be  sub- 
ject to  the  truth,  instead  of  getting  up  technical  theology, 
when  we  look  into  that  which  is  divine,  not  the  mere 
science  that  man  has  made  of  it  to  the  utter  havoc  of 
its  bloom  and  beauty, — when  we  search  into  the  word 
of  God,  we  then  see  and  enjoy  its  perfection.     Holiness 


EXODUS  L-xvin.  169 

in  Scripture  is  as  much  made  to  depend  on  redemption 
as  God's  being  able  righteously  to  come  and  dwell  in 
our  midst.  How  could  He  do  this  till  sin  was  gone? 
And  how  till  redemption  could  sin  be  gone  for  God 
to  have  a  holy  resting-place  in  the  midst  of  men  ? 

Here  then  having  the  typical  redemption  of  Israel 
from  Egypt — the  greatest  and  fullest  type  of  it  in  the  Old 
Testament,  immediately  after  (without  even  allowing  a 
single  chapter  to  intervene)  we  hear  of  God  glorious  in 
holiness,  as  weU  as  of  a  habitation  prepared  for  Him.  This 
again  is  not  an  immaterial  expression  by  the  way,  but 
bound  up  with  the  truth  now  first  brought  before  us : 
"Thou  shalt  bring  them  in,  and  plant  them  in  the 
mountain  of  thine  inheritance,  in  the  place,  0  Jehovah, 
which  thou  hast  made  for  thee  to  dwell  in,  in  the  sanc- 
tuary, 0  Jehovah,  which  thy  hands  have  established. 
Jehovah  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever."* 

Thus  the  dwelling  of  God  amongst  His  people  is 

•  The  unbeKef  expressed  in  Dr.  D.'s  Tntrod.  to  the  Old  Testament 
here  for  instance  is  astounding.  The  author  boldly  says,  "  The  Song 
of  Moses  in  the  fifteenth  chapter  was  not  written  by  Moses  himself. 
It  is  a  Palestinian  production.  If  any  part  of  it  was  sung  at  the 
time  the  Hebrews  passed  over,  it  was  probably  the  words  of  the  first 
verse  .  .  .  Allusions  are  made  in  it  to  a  time  considerably  after  the 
song  is  said  to  have  been  first  sung ;  for  example  in  the  seventeenth 
verse  .  .  .  Here  the  temple  on  mount  Zion  seems  to  be  meant.  If 
so,  the  poem  was  not  prior  to  Solomon's  time"  (i.  p.  226)!  Thus,  as 
it  is  an  axiom  with  these  men,  that  there  can  be  no  prediction  of  events 
which  God  alone  could  foresee,  and  as  this  song  clearly  anticipates 
what  was  not  realised  till  the  reign  of  David's  son,  it  must  be  as  late 
as  his  days  at  least;  and  chap.  xiv.  is  pronounced  to  be  later  still, 
because  the  hand  of  the  Jehovist  appears  in  it,  not  in  the  fifteenth ! 
Can  there  be  more  absurd  trifling  than  the  sentence  that  Exodus  xv. 
("  the  poem  as  we  now  have  it ")  is  Elohistic  as  contrasted  with  chap, 
xiv.? 


170        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

revealed  immediately  after  we  have  the  express  type  of 

redemption.  Now  in  Christianity  this  has  a  moat  blessed 

antitype.     Not  that  there  will  not  be  the  dwelling  of 

God  in  the  midst  of  His  people  by-and-by;  but  the 

peculiarity  of  our  calling  is,  that  we  wait  for  none  of 

our  characteristic  joys :  we  have  all  in  Christ  now  by 

the  power  of  the  Spirit  before  we  go  to  heaven.     We 

have  in   principle  everything  while  we  are   on  the 

earth.     We  have  what  belongs  to  heaven  while  we  are 

here.     We  wait  for  nothing  except  Christ  Himself  in 

actual  person  to  take  us  above.     Of  course  by  many 

this  will  scarce  be  understood.     Hope  undoubtedly  has 

its  full  place ;  for  we  suflfer  still,  and  Christ  Himself  is 

gone  to  prepare  a  place  for  us,  and  is  coming  again  to 

receive  us  to  Himself,  and  that  we  may  be  glorified 

together.     But  what  else  is  there  that  we  have  not? 

All  the  promises  in  Him  are  Yea,  and  in  Him  Amen, 

unto  the  glory  of  God  by  us.     I  grant  you  that  my 

body  is  not  yet  changed,  nor  yours ;  but  then  we  have 

got  infinitely  better  than  even  the  body  changed  for 

us  if  alone;  we  have  Christ  Himself,  and  this  risen 

and  in  God*s  presence  on  high.     Therefore  the  change 

in  the  body  is  the  mere  consequence  of  what  we  have 

already;  whereas  Christ  in  heavenly  glory  as  the  fruit 

of  redemption  and  of  God's  righteousness  is  the  hinge 

of  all  that  will  glorify  God  and  secure  the  blessing,  not 

of  the  Old  Testament  saints  and  the  church  only,  but 

of  Israel,  the  nations,  man,  the  earth,  heaven,  and  all 

things  for  ever,  around  the  mighty  centre  of  all.     In 

Him  is  concentrated  the  full  power  of  the  change  that 

will  follow  in  due  time,  as  He  is  the  firstfruits  of  that 

glorious  harvest. 


EXODUS  i.-xvm.  171 

So  it  is  with  all  other  truths;  and  amongst  the 
rest  with  this,  that  God,  instead  of  waiting  to  have 
us  in  heaven,  and  taking  up  His  abode  in  our  midst 
there,  makes  us  to  be  His  habitation  while  we  are 
here — a  proof  of  His  love  and  of  the  perfectness  of 
Christ's  redemption  incomparably  greater  than  waiting 
till  we  are  actually  changed  and  taken  to  heaven, 
because  here  He  deigns  to  dwell  with  us  spite  of  all  we 
are.  We  are  here  in  the  place  where  we  may,  alas ! 
think,  feel,  speak,  and  act  unworthily  of  such  a  habi- 
tation; and  yet  in  the  face  of  all  He  here  deigns  to 
dwell  in  us.  If  He  thus  dwells  in  us,  is  not  this  one 
of  the  capital  truths  which  we  are  called  to  make  good 
in  our  faith  and  practice  day  by  day  ?  When  we  come 
together  as  His  assembly,  should  we  not  remind  our- 
selves that  we  are  not  only  members  of  the  body  of 
Christ,  but  God's  habitation  through  the  Spirit  ?  When 
held  thus  in  faith  it  becomes  a  most  practical  test  for 
souls;  for  nothing  should  be  said  or  done  in  that 
assembly  but  what  is  suitable  to  God's  dwelling-place. 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  chapter  there  is  another 
topic.  After  the  triumph  the  children  of  Israel  are 
led  by  Moses  into  the  wilderness  where  there  was  no 
water.  A  most  astonishing  thing  it  might  seem  at 
first  sight,  that  after  having  been  thus  blessed,  the  first 
thing  the  people  find  is  a  wilderness  where  there  is 
no  water;  and  that,  when  they  do  come  to  water,  it  is 
so  bitter  that  they  cannot  drink  it.  "Therefore  the 
name  of  it  was  called  Marah.  And  the  people  mur- 
mured against  Moses,  saying.  What  shall  we  drink?" 
But  the  resource  was  at  hand.  "  He  cried  unto  Jehovah; 
and  Jehovah  shewed  him  a  tree  which  when  he  had 


172        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

cast  into  the  waters,  the  waters  were  made  sweet. 
There  he  made  for  them  a  statute  and  an  ordinance, 
and  there  he  proved  them."  God  was  shewing  that  the 
privileges  and  power  of  redemption  in  Christ  are  one 
thing,  and  the  necessary  practice  that  follows  from  re- 
demption another.  But  we  are  now  in  the  place  where 
all  this  is  put  in  fact  to  the  test ;  and  the  only  power 
to  sweeten  what  is  bitter  is  by  bringing  in  Christ.  Else 
we  find  either  no  water  whatever,  or  the  water  brackish 
and  undrinkable.  Thus  we  have  to  make  death  and 
resurrection  good  in  our  practice,  learning  the  reality 
of  the  wilderness  and  the  utter  want  of  all  power  of 
refreshment  in  the  place  and  circumstances  through 
which  we  are  passing.     We  owe  everything  to  Christ. 

After  this  is  proved,  abundant  refreshment  is  given. 
How  truly  of  the  Lord !  "  They  came  to  Elim,  where 
were  twelve  wells  of  water,  and  threescore  and  ten 
palm  trees :  and  they  encamped  there  by  the  waters." 

But  there  is  another  lesson  also.  Whatever  may  be 
the  refreshment  by  the  way,  the  Lord  sets  forth  in  a 
full  and  distinct  manner  the  need  of  absolute  depend- 
ance  on  Christ  in  another  form  for  support  all  the 
wilderness  through.  Here  comes  in  that  most  remark- 
able type  of  Christ  personally  given  as  the  bread  of 
life  for  the  people  of  God  to  feed  on.  This  is  in 
chapter  xvi.*     It  has  been  well  remarked  that  it  is  as 

*  It  is  aUeged  that  there  is  "  a  double  description  of  the  manna  in 
Exodus  xvi.  11,  &c.,  and  Numbers  xi.  7-9.  In  the  former  it  is  said 
that  it  feU  from  the  air,  was  white  like  coriander  seed,  and  melted  if 
the  sun  shone  upon  it ;  in  the  latter,  that  it  could  be  pound  (sie)  in 
mills,  or  beaten  in  mortars,  or  baken  in  pans,  and  prepared  in  cakes. 
Thus  two  (?)  writers  appear.  Had  one  and  the  same  author  described 
this  extraordinary  food  of  the  Israelites,  he  would  not  have  presented 


EXODUS  I.- XVIII.  173 

connected  with  this  we  have  the  Sabbath  introduced, 
type  of  the  rest  of  God.  This  is  alone  marked  out  and 
secured  for  us  by  Him  who  came  down  from  heaven. 

such  varyincg  acounts.  Kalisch  (Commentary  on  Exodus,  p.  213  et 
»eq.)  can  only  explain  the  fact  by  assuming  that  two  sorts  of  manna 
are  meant;  what  he  calls  air-manna  and  tree-manna.  He  omits  to 
notice  the  true  cause  of  diversity  in  the  description — difference  of 
authorship.  The  tamarix  manifera  or  tarafa  shrub  yields  the  substance 
in  question  by  the  puncture  of  an  insect,  the  coccus  maniparus.  Exodus 
xvi.  9-26  is  Elohistic ;  Numbers  xi.  is  Jehovistic." 

"There  is  also  a  double  account  of  the  miracle  of  the  quails  in 
Exodus  xvi.  and  Numbers  xi.  The  former  represents  them  as  a  boon 
given  by  God  to  satisfy  the  people's  hunger,  and  convince  them  of 
their  dependance  on  the  covenant  God.  (Verses  4,  12.)  The  gift  of 
manna  to  the  people  is  also  connected  with  that  of  the  quails.  Both 
were  granted  together  in  the  second  month  of  the  first  year  after  the 
exodus.  The  latter  account  is  very  different.  The  quails  are  brought 
by  a  wind  from  the  sea,  and  the  eating  of  them  produces  a  plague 
among  the  people..  Because  the  people  lusted,  this  food  was  sent  in 
anger  to  destroy  them.  The  book  of  Numbers  does  not  contain  the 
least  hint  that  quails  had  been  previously  sent  to  the  people ;  but  the 
narrative  leaves  the  impression  that  this  was  their  first  and  only 
bestowal,  a  year  after  the  time  specified  in  Exodus  xvi.  at  Kibroth- 
hattaavah,  after  the  people  had  become  tired  of  the  manna.  Is  it  not 
probable  then  that  the  writer  in  Exodus  puts  two  different  facts 
together  which  were  separate  in  time ;  viz.,  the  sending  of  quails  and 
manna?  It  is  no  explanation  to  assert  that  there  is  nothing  im- 
probable in  supposing  that  the  Israelites  twice  murmured  for  flesh, 
and  that  God  twice  sent  them  quails.  The  manna  of  Numbers  xi. 
renders  this  supposition  extremely  improbable.  Part  of  Exodus  xvi. 
is  Elohistic;  Numbers  xi.  is  Jehovistic." 

First  it  is  not  the  fact  on  the  ground  of  rationalistic  theory  that  one 
is  a  whit  more  Elohistic  than  the  other:  Jehovah  is  the  term  used  in 
Exodus  xvi.  as  certainly  and  exclusively  as  in  Numbers  xi.  Next  the 
difference  of  description  is  not  only  not  inconsistent,  but  most  natural 
in  the  circumstances  respectively.  When  first  given,  its  appearance 
to  the  eye,  and  its  novelty  suggesting  its  name,  are  dwelt  on ;  later 
not  only  is  it  more  minutely  compared,  but  tiie  methods  of  using  it 
are  given,  in  connexion  with  the  lusting  after  the  old  food  of  Egypt. 


174        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Christ  Himself  is  the  manna  of  the  people  of  GoA 
Elsewhere  we  see  Christ,  not  humbled,  but  heavenly 
and  in  heaven  the  food  for  the  people  viewed  as  in 
heavenly  places.  But  it  is  well  to  note  at  the  end  of  the 
chapter  the  omer  of  manna  laid  up  before  Jehovah  for 
the  generations  of  Israel,  which  Aaron  laid  up  before 
the  Testimony.  It  is  Christ  the  hidden  manna,  Christ 
in  His  humiliation  never  to  be  forgotten  by  our  hearts. 
The  force  of  this  is  made  still  more  manifest  by  what 
follows.     In  chapter  xvii  we  have  not  Christ  given 

But  both  accounts  concur  in  representing. it  as  "  air-manna,"  not  as 
the  exudation  from  a  tree,  which  is  medicine,  not  food. 

But  as  to  the  second  point,  it  is  plain  that  not  the  writer  bnt  the 
rationalist  is  eruilty  of  confusion,  and  loses  the  profit  of  the  two 
accounts,  which  are  alike  circumstantially  and  morally  distinct. 
Xot  only  are  they  represented  as  happening  more  than  twelve  months 
ax)art,  but  the  truth  conveyed  depends  on  the  deepest  possible  difier- 
ence.  In  Exodus  xvi.  the  people  murmured  before  the  law  was  given, 
and  Grod  gave  them  freely  quails  in  the  evening  as  well  as  manna  in 
the  morning.  Guilty  they  were,  but  He  acts  only  in  grace  till  Exodus 
xix.  XX.  Then,  when  the  'people  who  had  voluntarily  accepted  legal 
conditions  murmured  once  more  for  flesh,  tiring  of  the  manna,  they 
were  dealt  with  according  to  the  law  under  which  they  stood,  and 
judgment  fell  on  them  from  Crod,  instead  of  the  grace  they  had 
originally  known.  If  we  had  not  the  two  facts,  resembling  each  other 
on  the  surface  but  contrasted  in  principle,  neither  the  believer  could 
have  had  so  profound  a  lesson,  nor  the  rationalist  have  so  fully  dis- 
played to  his  shame  his  ignorance  of  Gk)d.  Psalms  cv.  40,  cvi  14,  15, 
might  be  profitably  compared  by  friends  or  enemies  of  the  Bible. 
The  one  will  find  the  amplest  confirmation  of  Exodus  xvi.  and 
Numbers  xi.  as  distinct  accounts  illustrating  sovereign  grace  and 
creature-responsibility;  the  ottter  can  hardly  avoid  seeing  a  further 
and  independent  proof  of  his  ruinous  unbelief.  The  psalmist  sets 
forth  at  fiiU  length  the  distinction  which  pseudo- criticism  would 
destroy;  and  this  too  in  such  a  way  as  to  prove  that  they  are  but 
cases  out  of  many  &ctB  which  fiedl  under  the  principles  already 
indicated. 


EXODUS  i-xvin.  175 

from  above,  the  bread  of  God  for  us  while  we  are  in 
the  world,  but  the  rock  smitten  with  Moses'  rod 
when  the  waters  flow  abundantly.  It  was  the  last  place 
where  man  would  have  looked  for  refreshing  streams. 
But  the  rod  of  God  smites  the  rock,  and  the  people 
drink  of  the  waters  it  gave  out  *  But  the  name  of  the 
place  was   called    Massah   and   Meribah,  because   of 

•  "Another  duplicate  account,"  says  Dr.  D.  (Introd.  0.  T.  i.  63), 
•*i8  in  Exodus  xvii.  and  Numbers  xx.  1-13  of  the  water  brought 
out  of  the  rock,  and  the  origin  of  the  name  Meribah.  As  the 
same  name  could  not  be  given  twice,  both  must  have  grown  out 
of  one.  It  has  been  ascertained  that  Exodus  xvii.  2-7  is  Jehovistic ; 
while  Numbers  xx.  1-13  contains  portions  of  different  documents." 
A  more  unintelligent  criticism  it  is  impossible  to  conceive.  The  point 
of  both  histories  is  absolutely  lost  for  those  who  fail  to  see  a  contrast 
in  them,  instead  of  both  having  grown  out  of  one.  We  have  apostolic 
authority  for  believing  that  the  rock  is  Christ.  In  Exodus  the  rock 
was  by  divine  direction  smitten — smitten  by  Moses'  rod  of  judgment. 
The  gift  of  the  Spirit  is  from  Christ  after  He  was  smitten,  and 
suffered  for  us.  In  Numbers,  on  the  contrary,  Moses  was  told  to  take 
the  rod  {i.e,  Aaron's  rod  of  priestly  grace  from  before  Jehovah),  and 
he  and  Aaron  to  apeak  to  the  rock  before  the  eyes  of  the  people,  when 
it  should  give  forth  water.  But  there  they  failed.  For  whilst  Moses 
took  the  rod,  Aaron's  rod  as  Jehovah  commanded  him,  he  emote  the 
rock  twice  with  his  rod.  Thus  they  failed  in  faith  to  sanctify  Jehovah 
before  Israel.  Smiting  was  as  wrong  now  as  it  was  right  before, 
and  so  consequently  was  the  application  of  Moses*  judicial  rod.  The 
repetition  of  the  work  of  humiliation  is  uncalled  for.  Had  Moses  only 
spoken  with  the  rod  of  the  priesthood  in  his  hand,  the  sign  of  grace 
which  brought  forth  fruit  out  of  death,  all  had  been  according  to 
God's  mind  and  the  provision  of  His  mercy  to  bring  a  weak  and 
faulty  people  through  the  wilderness.  It  is  not  true  that  there  are 
different  documents  in  Numbers  xx.  1-13  any  more  than  in  Exodus 
xvii.  2-7 :  "  Jehovah  "  characterises  both  as  any  one  can  ascertain. 

That  any  difl&culty  should  be  raised  about  the  name  "Meribah" 
being  used  twice  on  those  two  contrasted  occasions  where  man 
behaved  equally  ill,  God  equally  in  grace,  only  proves  the  disposition 
to  cavil,  especially  as  on  the  first  occasion  their  chiding  gained  them 
a  specific  name,  which  was  not  given  the  seeond  time. 


176        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Israel's  strife  and  tempting  of  Jehovah,   saying,    Is 
Jehovah  among  ns  or  not?    Immediately  after  they 
came  into  conflict  at  Eephidim  with  Amalek,  the  proud 
enemy  of  Israel.    Joshua  (who  always  represents  Christ 
acting  by  the  Spirit)  fought  and  won,  while  Aaron 
and  Hur  held  up  the  heavy  hands  of  Moses  on  the  top 
of  the  hill.     "And  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  Write 
this  for  a  memorial  in  a  book,  and  rehearse  it  in  the 
ears  of  Joshua ;  for  I  will  utteriy  put  out  the  remem- 
brance of  Amalek  from  under  heaven."     The  bearing 
of  this  on  the  Christian  is  most  evident.     The  free 
gift  of  the  Spirit  of  God  to  us  in  our  thirst  and  weari- 
ness depends  simply  on  Christ  suffering  for  us — Christ 
coming  under  judicial   dealing,   the    rod   of   God  as 
applied  to  that  rock.     As  then  the  living   streams 
flowed,  so  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  know,  was  not  given  till 
Christ  was  glorified  as  the  result  of  redemption.     But 
then  what  follows  this  is  not  the  Sabbath,  but  conflict 
with  the  enemy.    Amalek  has  to  be  fought.     And  here 
comes  in  another  principle  of  immense  importance.  For 
the  believer  it  is  not  prowess  or  wisdom  that  secures 
the  victory.     It  is  entirely  dependent  on  the  uplifted 
hands  of  the  Mediator  on  high.     Here  Moses  was  but 
the  type,  and  consequently  there  is  feebleness.     On 
either  side  Aaron  and  Hur  support  his  arms  when  heavy, 
and  thus  victory  is  secured  for  the  people  of  G^ 
Whatever  may  be  the  power,  there  is  no  taking  them 
out  of  the  place  of  dependence.     They  are  made  to  feel 
the  necessity  of  dependence  on  the  one  who  is  not  in 
the  fight,  but  outside  it,  and  above  it  all.     They  must 
fight;  but  victory  turns  on  the  one  who  is  pleading  for 
them  on  the  hilL  Need  I  add  that  we  have  a  better  than 


EXODUS  L-xvin.  177 

MoseSy  who  requires  neither  Aaron  nor  Hur  to  support 
His  arm  in  interceding  for  us  ?  Nevertheless  it  remains 
true,  that  although  the  victory  is  assured,  the  fight  must 
be  maintained  to  the  very  last.  "  And  Moses  built  an 
altar,  and  called  the  name  of  it  Jehovah-nissi :  For  he 
said.  Because  Jah  hath  sworn  that  Jehovah  will  have 
war  with  Amalek  from  generation  to  generation."*  This 
is  a  war  which  must  be  without  intermission  main- 
tained by  His  people ;  but  it  is  Jehovah's  war.  What 
shall  man  do  to  us  ? 

The  last  of  these  chapters  that  I  would  now  notice  is 
the  typical  picture  of  the  scene  of  glory ;  and  there  too 
is  seen  the  Gentile  in  singular  prominence — Jethro 
eating  bread  with  the  elders  of  IsraeL  Thus  there  are 
all  the  great  elements  of  the  future  kingdom.  We  have 
the  type  of  Christ ;  we  have  Israel  in  their  proper  place 
and  order;  we  have  the  Gentile  represented  there. 
This  will  be  found  in  the  reign  of  glory  that  is  coming. 
But  it  is  well  to  direct  our  attention  to  the  order  of  the 
millennial  day,  foreshown  in  the  regulations  made  by 
the  legislator  for  the  due  administration  of  justice 
among  the  people  called  to  be  the  display  of  Jehovah's 
will  in  earthly  righteousness.  The  Gentile  will  un- 
feignedly  rejoice  for  all  the  goodness  Jehovah  will  have 
done  to  Israel,  delivering  them  from  the  hand  of  all 
enemies  from  first  to  last.  The  inhabitants  of  the  world 
will  learn  righteojisness  when  His  judgments  are  in  the 
earth,  and  will-  then  know  with  Jethro  that  Jehovah  is 
greater  than  all  gods,  for  in  the  thing  wherein  they 

*  Is  not  this  literally,  Because  the  (or  a)  hand  (is)  on  the  throne  of 
Jah,  war  (is)  from  Jehovah  with  Amalek  from  generation  to  genera- 
tion P    The  Authorised  Version  gives  the  sense. 

N 


178        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

dealt  proudly  [judgment  came]  upon  them.  And  He 
shall  be  King  over  all  the  earth:  in  that  day  shall 
there  be  one  Jehovah,  and  His  name  one.  None  but 
God  could  have  drawn  the  picture.  It  is  only  to  be 
read  in  the  light  of  Christ  and  of  God's  revelations 
about  Him :  all  then  is  clear  and  plain.  And  there 
cannot  be  a  more  affecting  feature  than  that  the  very 
people  to  whom  these  living  oracles  were  committed 
are  those  who  see  least  in  them,  unless  it  be  those 
apostates  from  Christianity,  who  borrow  but  exceed  the 
unbelieving  thoughts  of  the  Jews,  and  then  vaunt  their 
destructive  system  as  critical  and  rational.  What 
beauty  can  they  trace  in  that  which  has  been  occupying 
us  ?  It  must  be  so  because  of  their  rejection  and  scorn 
of  Christ,  whereas  the  whole  secret  of  entering  into 
the  mind  of  God  is  that  we  know  and  have  believed 
His  Son — ^that  we  have  received  Him  as  indeed  the 
Saviour  of  the  world,  as  was  confessed  by  the  Samari- 
tans when  they  heard  Him  themselves.  The  Holy 
Ghost  can  then  lead  on  in  the  growing  discernment  of 
His  image  impressed  on  each  incident  which  is  made  to 
be  the  means  of  setting  forth  His  glory  in  the  written 
word.  How  far  does  Christendom,  more  than  the  Jews, 
own  either  salvation  by  grace,  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  or 
the  kingdom  when  Christ  appears  in  glory  ? 

May  the  Lord  then  grant  us  unfeigned  and  growing 
confidence  in  all  that  which  He  is ! 

In  the  next  part  of  the  book  of  Exodus  is  a  change 
of  the  greatest  magnitude ;  but  we  shall  find  also  that 
God  never  forgets  His  own  people.  Although  circum- 
stances may  alter,  He  abides  alone  wise  and  alone  good. 
May  we  delight  in  all  He  has  given  us ! 


EXODUS  XDC-XL.  179 


V, 


EXODUS. 

Chaps.  ziz.-xl. 

"  In  the  third  month,  when  the  children  of  Israel  were 
gone  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  the  same  day  came 
they  into  the  wilderness  of  Sinai."  Up  to  this  point  all 
the  dealings  of  God  have  been  the  simple  application 
and  outflow  of  His  own  grace.  This  is  all  the  more 
striking  too,  because  even  after  the  redemption  of  the 
people  from  Egypt  there  are  grievous  faults,  unbelief, 
complaints,  and  murmurs;  nevertheless,  not  a  blow,  not 
a  single  answer  on  God's  part  save  in  tender  mercy 
towards  a  poor  and  failing  people.    AU  changes  now. 

The  reason  is  manifest.  They  left  the  ground  of  the 
grace  of  God,  which  they  had  in  no  wise  appreciated. 
Their  conduct  proved  that  His  grace  had  not  at  all 
entered  into  their  hearts.  It  was  a  perfectly  righteous 
thing  therefore  that  God  should  propose  terms  of  law. 
Had  He  not  done  so,  we  should  not  have  had  duly 
raised  the  solemn  question  of  man's  competence  to 
take  the  ground  of  his  own  fidelity  before  God.  Not 
a  soul  that  has  been  since  brought  to  the  knowledge  of 
God  but  what  at  least  ought  to  have  profited — ^in  point 
of  fact,  must  have  profited  by  this  grave  lesson.  It  is  true 
that  God  had  taken  every  care  to  shew  His  own  mind 

H   2 


180        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

about  it.  From  the  time  that  man  fell,  He  presented 
grace  as  the  only  hope  for  a  sinner.  But  man  was 
insensible,  and  therefore,  inasmuch  as  his  heart  was 
continually  taking  the  place  of  self-righteousness,  God's 
law  put  him  thoroughly  to  the  test.  This  accordingly 
was  proposed.  Had  there  been  any  true  understanding 
of  their  own  state  in  the  sight  of  God  they  had  con- 
fessed that,  however  righteous  the  obligation  to  render 
obedience  to  the  law,  they  being  unrighteous  could  only 
be  proved  guilty  under  such  a  proof.  The  test  must 
have  brought  inevitable  ruin.  But  they  had  no  such 
thoughts  of  themselves,  more  than  real  knowledge  of 
God. 

Hence  therefore,  no  sooner  does  God  propose  to  them 
that  they  should  obey  His  law  as  the  condition  of 
their  blessing  at  His  hands,  than  they  at  once  accept 
the  terms :  "  Now  therefore,  if  ye  will  obey  my  voice 
indeed,  and  keep  my  covenant,  then  ye  shall  be  a 
peculiar  treasure  unto  me  above  all  people :  for  all 
the  earth  is  mine."  The  result  soon  appears  in  their 
ruin ;  but  Jehovah  shews  that  He  knew  from  the  first, 
before  any  result  appeared,  their  inability  to  stand 
before  Him :  "  Lo,"  says  He  to  Moses,  "  I  come  unto 
thee  in  a  thick  cloud,  that  the  people  may  hear  when 
I  speak  with  thee,  and  believe  thee  for  ever."  But 
in  this  chapter,  and  indeed  in  the  next  still  more,  the 
people  entreat  that  God's  voice  should  not  speak  to 
them  any  more. 

Then  (chapter  xx.)  are  uttered  those  wonderful  ten 
commandments  which  are  the  great  centre  of  divine 
communications  through  Moses — the  fundamental  ex- 
pression of  God's  law.     On  this,  being  so  thoroughly 


EXODUS   XIX.-XL.  181 

familiar  to  all,  I  of  course  do  not  enlarge.  We  know 
from  our  Lord  Jesus  its  moral  summary  and  essence — 
the  love  of  God,  and  the  love  of  man.  But  it  was 
presented  here  for  the  most  part  in  a  way  that  betrayed 
the  condition  of  man — not  in  positive  precepts  but  in 
negative  ones — a  most  humbling  proof  of  man's  estate. 
He  loved  sin  so  well  that  God  had  to  interdict  it.  In 
the  greater  part  of  the  ten  commandments,  in  short,  it 
was  not  " Thou  shalt^"  but  " Thou  shalt  not"  That  is, 
it  was  a  prohibition  of  man's  wilL  He  was  a  sinner, 
and  nothing  else. 

A  few  words  on  the  law  may  be  well  here.  It  may 
be  looked  at  in  its  general  and  historical  bearing,  more 
abstractly  as  a  moral  test. 

First,  God  was  dealing  with  Israel  in  their  respon- 
sibility as  witnesses  of  Jehovah,  the  one  true  self- 
existing  God,  the  almighty  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob.  His  relationship' was  with  them  as  they 
then  were,  redeemed  from  Egjrpt  by  His  power  and 
brought  to  Himself  indeed,  but  only  after  an  outward 
sort,  neither  bom  of  God,  nor  justified.  They  were  a 
people  in  the  flesh.  They  had  been  wholly  insensible 
to  His  ways  of  grace  in  leading  them  out  of  Egypt  to 
Sinai  They  lost  sight  of  His  promises  to  the  fathers. 
They  stood  in  their  own  strength  to  obey  the  law  of 
God,  as  ignorant  of  their  impotence  or  of  His  holy 
majesty.  Accordingly  we  may  regard  the  law  as  a 
whole,  consisting  not  only  of  moral  claims  but  of 
national  institutes,  ordinances,  statutes,  and  judgments 
under  which  Israel  were  put.  These  consequently  were 
to  form  and  regulate  them  as  a  people  under  His  special 
government,  God  suiting  them  to  their  condition  and  in 


182        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

no  way  revealing  His  own  nature  as  He  afterwards  did 
personally  in  the  Word  made  flesh  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment as  a  full  display  of  His  mind,  and  in  the  Christian 
individually  or  the  church  corporately  as  responsible 
to  represent  Christ,  like  Israel  in  relation  to  the  tables 
of  stone.  (2  Cor.  iii.)  Hence  we  can  understand  the 
earthly,  external,  and  temporal  character  of  the  legal 
economy.  There  were  believers  before  it  and  all 
through ;  but  this  of  course  wholly  distinct  fix)m 
Judaism.  It  was  now  a  question  of  a  nation,  and  not 
of  individuals  merely,  thus  governed — of  one  nation  in 
the  midst  of  many  which  were  to  behold  in  it  the 
consequences  of  fidelity  or  the  lack  of  it  toward  the 
law  of  Jehovah.  The  Old  Testament  proves,  and 
indeed  the  New  Testament  also,  how  utterly  Israel 
failed,  and  what  the  consequences  have  been  alike  in 
the  justice  and  in  the  grace  of  God. 

But,  secondly,  the  law  is  a  test  morally  and  indi- 
vidually. This  always  abides ;  for  the  law  is  lawful  if 
a  man  use  it  lawfully.  Christianity  teaches  its  value 
instead  of  neutralising  it.  It  is  false  that  the  law  is 
dead.  It  is  not  thus  that  the  believer,  even  if  a  Jew 
and  therefore  under  law,  was  withdrawn  from  its  con- 
demning power.  By  the  law  he  died  to  the  law  that 
he  might  live  to  God.  He  is  crucified  with  Christ  and 
nevertheless  he  lives,  yet  not  himself  but  Christ  in 
him.  He  underwent  death  to  the  law  by  the  body  of 
Christ  that  he  should  belong  to  another — Him  that  was 
raised  from  the  dead  in  order  that  we  should  bear  fruit 
to  God.  But  it  is  as  far  as  possible  from  the  truth  that 
"  the  discipline  of  the  law  comes  in  to  supply  the 
deficiencies  of  the  Spirit,  and  curb  the  still  remainiDg 


EXODUS   XIX.-XL.  183 

tendencies  to  sin."*  Such  was  no  doubt  the  doctrine 
of  those  whom  the  apostle  censures  as  wishing  to  be 
law-teachers,  understanding  neither  what  things  they 
say  nor  whereof  they  stoutly  afl&rni.  It  is  not  Chris- 
tianity to  talk  of  "  deficiencies  of  the  Spirit,"  any  more 
than  of  "still  remaining  tendencies  to  sin;"  still  less 
to  call  in  the  discipline  of  the  law  to  mend  matters. 
Is  it  not  known  that  for  a  righteous  man  (which 
assuredly  the  believer  is)  law  is  not  in  force,  but  for 
lawless  and  insubordinate,  the  ungodly  and  sinful.  They 
that  are  of  Christ  Jesus  crucified  the  flesh  with  its 
affections  and  lusts.  It  is  a  question  of  mortifying  our 
members  which  are  on  earth,  on  the  ground  of  our 
being  dead,  and  of  walking  by  the  Spirit,  even  as  we 
live  by  Him,  and  of  those  not  in  anywise  fulfilling 
flesh's  lust.  Thus,  if  the  law  be  the  power  of  sin, 
grace  is  of  holiness.  Thanks  be  to  God  who  gives  us 
the  victory  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

However,  we  find  that  God  was  pleased  to  give  sub- 
sequently and  separately,  but  yet  in  connexion  with  the 
ten  words,  certain  ordinances  which  concerned  Israel  in 
their  worship. 

All  the  people  then  saw  the  thunderings  and  the 
lightnings,  and  the  voice  of  the  trumpet,  and  the 
mountain  smoking,  and  stood  afar  off,  asking  that  not 
(Jod  but  Moses  should  speak  with  them.  He  accord- 
ingly drew  ne,ar  into  the  thick  darkness;  for  so  God 
dealt  with  Israel  as  a  people  in  the  flesh.  For  the 
Christian  it  is  not  so.  The  veil  is  rent ;  and  we  walk 
in  the  light  as  He  is  in  the  light.  Tet  even  then 
Jehovah,  while  warning  against  making  gods  of  silver 

•  Dr.  P.  Fairbaim's  Typology,  ii  p.  190. 


184        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

and  gold,  deigned  to  direct  them  to  make  to  Him  an 
altar  of  ground  for  burnt-offerings  and  peace-offerings : 
if  of  stone  two  prohibitions  instruct  His  peopla 
It  must  not  be  of  hewn  stone,  as  their  work  would 
profane  it;  neither  must  the  Israelite  go  up  by  steps, 
as  thereby  his  nakedness  would  be  manifested.  Grace 
covers  through  the  expiation  of  Christ,  as  it  flows  in 
virtue  of  God's  work  and  in  maintaining  God's  order. 

In  the  beginning  of  chap,  xxi  we  find  the  type  of  the 
servant.  There  cannot  be  a  more  striking  illustration 
of  the  truth  that  Christ  is  the  continual  object  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  than  that,  even  in  these  temporary  ordi- 
nances, God  cannot  refrain  from  looking  onward  to  His 
Son.  No  doubt  ft  was  connected  with  the  earth,  and 
what  was  in  itself  anything  but  a  condition  suitable  to 
the  mind  of  Grod.  It  is  the  condition  of  a  slave; 
nevertheless  even  there  God  has  Christ  before  Him. 
If  a  Hebrew  servant  were  bought,  he  was  to  serve  for 
six  years, — ^in  the  seventh  to  go  out  free  for  nothing. 
"  If  he  came  in  by  himself,  he  shall  go  out  by  himself: 
if  he  were  married,  then  his  wife  shall  go  out  with 
him.  If  his  master  have  given  him  a  wife,  and  she 
have  borne  him  sons  or  daughters ;  the  wife  and  her 
children  shall  be  her  master's,  and  he  shall  go  out  by 
himsel£  And  if  the  servant  shall  plainly  say,  I  love 
my  master,  my  wife,  and  my  children ;  I  will  not  go 
out  free :  then  his  master  shall  bring  him  unto  the 
judges ;  he  shall  also  bring  him  to  the  door,  or  unto  the 
door  post ;  and  his  master  shall  bore  his  ear  through 
with  an  awl;  and  he  shall  serve  him  for  ever." 

Such  was  the  choice  of  Jesus — not  to  be  merely  a 
servant  here  on  the  earth  for  a  time — He  has  chosen 


EXODUS  XIX.-XL.  185 

of  His  own  gracious  will  to  be  servant  for  ever.  No 
doubt  He  cannot  but  be  a  divine  peraon,  the  Son,  as 
He  is  also  the  exalted  Lord ;  but  He  is  nevertheless  by 
His  own  grace  the  servant  for  ever.  Even  in  glory  we 
shall  know  Him  thus.  What  is  He  doing  now  ?  He 
gave  a  sample  of  it  before  He  went  up  on  high.  When 
the  time  was  come,  He  took  a  basin  of  water  and  a 
towel,  and  washed  His  disciples'  feet.  What  they  knew 
not  then,  they  were  to  know  hereafter,  as  we  know  it 
now.  Intimacy  with  what  is  unseen  and  heavenly  is 
quite  as  much  the  portion  of  a  Christian  and  even 
more  characteristically  so  than  the  knowledge  of  what 
passes  aroimd  us  now.  We  ought  to  know  heaven 
better  than  the  earth.  We  may  know  and  ought  to 
judge  what  is  passing  in  the  world,  though  it  be 
through  an  imperfect  medium;  but  we  know  heaven 
and  heavenly  things  from  God.  It  is  not  merely  as 
having  the  word  that  reveals  heaven ;  but  we  know  it 
from  Him  who  comes  from  heaven  and  is  above  all, 
and  testifies  what  He  has  seen  and  heard ;  we  know  it 
through  the  Holy  Ghost  who  has  come  down  from  it, 
and  hence  should  know  it  better  than  the  earth,  and 
the  things  of  the  world  which  ensnare  the  flesh.  But 
looking  onward  to  the  day  of  glory  that  is  coming,  when 
the  Lord  will  be  publicly  manifested,  and  we  manifested 
with  Him,  changed  into  His  glorious  likeness,  it  might 
have  been  thought  that  surely  His  service  will  cease 
then.  But  not  so:  it  will  take  a  new  shape.  He  is 
the  servant  of  His  own  choice  for  ever.  As  He  will 
never  cease  to  be  God,  He  will  never  cease  to  be  man. 
In  His  love  He  is  become  a  servant  for  ever ;  and  He 
loves  to  be  so. 


186        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

After  this  follow  the  general  institutions  of  the  law, 
which  mainly  insist  on  retribution.  Advantage  must 
not  be  taken  of  the  weak  or  subject ;  violence  cannot 
go  unpunished,  any  more  than  dishonour  where  we  owe 
reverence;  responsibility  for  what  is  allowed,  were  it 
but  a  mischievous  brute ;  restitution  must  be  made,  and 
this  double,  fourfold,  or  even  fivefold,  according  to  the 
wrong;  neither  a  witch  nor  an  offender  unnaturally 
could  live;  neither  stranger  nor  widow  nor  orphan 
must  be  vexed  or  afflicted ;  neither  poor  must  be  bur- 
dened, nor  judges  reviled ;  but  God  is  to  be  honoured 
with  the  first  of  the  fruits,  and  of  the  sons,  as  well  as 
of  the  cattle.  Israel  are  to  approve  themselves  as  holy 
men  to  God.  False  report  and  testimony  are  forbidden, 
were  a  multitude  to  lead  the  way ;  as  on  the  other  hand 
there  must  be  no  partiality  to  the  poor  man's  cause,  nor 
a  refusal  to  help  an  enemy,  nor  falsehood,  nor,  bribery, 
nor  oppression.  The  seventh  year  was  to  be  enjoyed  as 
the  land's  Sabbath,  even  as  the  seventh  day  by  each 
Israelite,  who  must  avoid  naming  false  gods,  but  keep 
the  due  feasts  thrice  a  year  to  the  true  God,  not  offering 
blood  with  leavened  bread,  nor  letting  the  fat  remain 
till  the  morning.  A  prohibition  occurs  of  a  peculiar 
kind,  and  is  repeated  not  only  in  a  later  part  of  this 
book,  but  also  in  Deuteronomy :  "  Thou  shalt  not  seethe 
a  kid  in  its  mother's  milk."  Qod  would  gua^rd  His 
people  from  an  outrage  in  comeliness,  were  it  even 
about  a  dumb  or  dead  animal ;  as  Satan  triumphs  in 
aU  that  is  abnormal  and  unnatural  in  the  superstitions 
which  usurp  the  place  of  the  truth,  and  are  bound  up  with 
idolatry.  His  angel  is  promised,  not  only  to  keep  and 
lead  Israel,  but  to  bring  them  in,  spite  of  the  doomed 


EXODUS  XIX.- XL.  187 

Canaanites,  who  should  be  driven  out :  they  should  have 
no  covenant  with  them  or  their  gods.  (Chaps.  xxi.-xxiii.) 
These  points  do  not  call  for  particular  remarks. 

Along  with  them  there  is  the  greatest  possible  care 
for  the  maintenance  of  one  true  God — ^an  immense  prin- 
ciple. No  doubt  the  time  was  not  yet  come  for  God  to 
reveal  Himself  as  He  is.  Into  that  wondrous  know- 
ledge we  are  brought  by  the  Son  come  down  here 
below;  and  above  all  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  now  that 
Christ  is  gone  up  on  higL  For  in  point  of  fact,  when 
God  was  only  known  as  the  one  God,  however  true 
this  may  be,  He  could  not  really  be  known  as  He  is. 
Now  we  do  so  know  Him.  We  know  Him  better  than 
even  His  earthly  people  will  know  Him  by  and  by. 
The  knowledge  of  Israel  in  the  millennium  will  be 
genuine,  for  they  shall  be  all  taught  of  God.  But  there 
is  now  an  intimacy  of  acquaintance  with  the  God  and 
Father  of  the  Lord  Jesus  which  none  on  earth  can  ever 
know  as  a  Christian  ought  to  know  it.  The  reason  is 
manifest ;  for  the  proper  knowledge  of  the  Christian  is 
such  knowledge  as  the  Son,  speaking  according  to  His 
own  communion  with  His  Father,  communicates  to  us. 

Now  the  Lord  Jesus  will  not  be  dealing  then  as  Son, 
though  then  as  evermore  the  Son  of  God.  He  will  not 
undertake  to  unfold  His  Father's  words  !to  men  in  the 
millennium.  He  will  reign  as  the  great  King — King 
of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  but  still  as  King.  It  would 
not  be  suitable  to  such  a  position  that  there  should  be 
undue  familiarity.  The  very  notion  of  a  king  and  a 
kingdom  puts  the  subjects  at  a  greater  distance.  A 
certain  reserve  becomes  requisite  to  majesty ;  whereas 
such  considerations  disappear  in  the  nearness  of  rela- 


188        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

tionship  He  is  pleased  to  enter  into  with  us.  It  is  true 
He  was  born  King  of  the  Jews,  and  He  never  can  cease  to 
be  really  so ;  but  it  is  not  so  that  we  know  Hiio.  The 
Son  of  the  Father,  He  brings  us  into  the  knowledge  of 
the  true  God — as  the  Son  knew  Him  in  heaven,  as  the 
Son  still  of  course  knew  Him  on  earth.  And  the  Holy 
Ghost  completes  this  wonderful  circle  of  divine  inti- 
macy. If  I  may  venture  on  such  an  Expression  without 
irreverence,  it  is  the  introducing  us  into  the  family 
cirqle  of  the  heavens — the  Father  made  known  in  the 
Son  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  I  maintain  to  be  pecu- 
liar to  Christianity  in  all  its  fulness.  When  God  the 
Father  shall  have  accomplished  His  present  purpose 
here  below,  then  will  be  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord 
those  among  whom  the  Spirit  is  thus  making  known 
God ;  and  after  that  the  ordinary  dealings  of  God  will 
resume  their  course  through  this  world.  No  doubt  all 
was  advancing  as  regards  the  world;  but  that  which 
was  brought  to  us  now  was  before  the  world,  and  alto- 
gether above  the  world  in  its  own  nature.  How  greatly 
blessed  then  is  the  Christian,  and  what  the  manner  and 
measure  of  the  worship  and  the  walk  which  become 
those  to  whom  grace  has  given  such  a  knowledge  of 
God! 

At  the  end  of  these  communications  a  call  is  given 
Moses  to  come  up  to  Jehovah.  (Chap,  xxiv.)  "And  he 
said  unto  Moses,  Come  up  unto  Jehovah^  thou,  and 
Aaron,  Nadab,  and  Abihu,  and  seventy  of  the  elders  of 
Israel,  and  worship  ye  afar  off."  There  is  distance,  even 
though  they  are  called  to  this  place  of  distinction.  "And 
Moses  alone  shall  come  near  Jehovah,  but  they  shall 
not  come  nigh,  neither  shaU  the  people  go  up  with 


EXODUS  xrx-xL.  189 

him."  And  there  the  solemn  compact  into  which  Israel 
had  passed  is  renewed.  All  the  people  answer  when  the 
words  and  judgments  are  pronounced,  "All  the  words 
which  Jehovah  hath  said  will  we  do."  They  promise 
obedience,  but  it  is  obedience  of  the  law.  Now  we  must 
always  bear  in  mind  that,  though  in  the  Christian  walk- 
ing  aright  the  righteousness  of  the  law-  will  surely  be 
fulfilled,  never  has  Christianity  either  a  legal  principle 
or  a  legal  character :  not  a  legal  principle  because  it 
flows  from  the  known  grace  of  God  to  the  soul ;  not  a 
legal  character  because  it  is  consistency  with  Christ 
risen  from  the  dead,  not  merely  with  the  Ten  Command- 
ments. But  inasmuch  as  Christ  differed  from  Moses,  as 
grace  differs  from  law;  as  that  which  suits  God  the 
Father  known  in  heaven,  though  manifesting  Himself 
upon  earth,  differs  from  a  process  of  mere  dealing  with 
the  first  man  according  to  righteous  claim;  so  it  is  with 
the  Christian  man :  while  faithful  to  Christ,  as  he  knows 
Him,  he  will  never  do  anything  which  the  law  could 
possibly  condemn.  Against  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  there 
is  no  law,  as  the  apostle  so  emphatically  says  to  the 
Galatians.  But  then  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  can  never 
be  attained  by  the  law ;  nor  are  they  even  contemplated 
by  a  legal  measure. 

In  short  therefore  the  children  of  Israel  stood  on  the 
ground  of  man  in  the  flesh;  and  man  in  the  flesh,  as 
he  is  a  sinful  being,  can  neither  deny  nor  accomplish 
his  obligation  to  do  the  will  of  God.  As  surely  as  God 
is,  man's  conscience  bears  witness  to  Him.  If  the  true 
God  deigns  to  give  a  law  to  man,  it  must  be  an  unim- 
peachably  wise  and  worthy  law  adapted  to  the  condition 
of  man,  as  far  as  a  law  possibly  can  be ;  and  such  is 


190        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

God's  law — ^holy,  just,  and  good.  But  the  difficulty  is 
this,  that  man  being  a  sinner  is  as  far  as  possible  from 
ability  to  meet  God*s  law  ;  for  how  indeed  can  there  be 
any  real  stable  bond  between  a  bad  man  and  a  good 
law?  There  lay  the  insuperable  difficulty  once;  but 
now  grace  perfectly  meets  it,  and  meets  it  in  a  way 
which  evinces  alike  the  goodness  and  the  wisdom  of 
God. 

Law  is  essentially  incapable  of  helping,  because 
being  only  a  claim  on  God's  part,  and  a  definition  of 
His  demands,  it  can  only  condemn  him  whose  condition 
makes  due  obedience  impossible.  It  is  evident  that  law 
as  such,  first  of  all,  has  no  object  to  present  to  man.  It 
can  press  duty  to  God  and  man  on  pain  of  death,  but  it 
has  no  object  to  reveal.  Secondly,  it  cannot  give  life; 
and  this  is  another  necessity  of  man.  In  addition  to 
atonement,  these  are  the  two  urgent  wants  of  fallen 
humanity.  Without  life  it  is  impossible  for  one  to  pro- 
duce that  which  is  according  to  God;  and  without  a 
worthy  object,  nay  without  a  divine  object  presented, 
there  can  be  nothing  to  draw  out  divine  aflfections.  As 
divine  life  alone  can  have  aflfections  according  to  God, 
so  a  divine  object  alone  can  either  act  on  those  affections 
or  minister  to  them.  Now  this  is  exactly  what  grace 
does  in  Christ  He  who  has  wrought  expiation  for  onr 
sins  is  our  life,  and  at  the  same  time  He  is  the  object 
whom  God  has  revealed  to  our  faith.  This  shews  the 
essential  difference  between  law  and  grace,  which  last 
means  God  giving  in  Christ  all  that  man  really  needs 
for  His  own  glory. 

Undoubtedly  there  is  another  measure  of  respon- 
sibility.  A  few  words  on  this  subject  may  not  be  amiss 


EXODUS  XIX.-XL.  191 

for  any  souls  that  have  not  adequately  considered  the 
matter,  as  there  is  hardly  anything  on  which  men  are 
so  much  at  fault  as  this  question.  Some  seem  on  the 
very  verge  of  denjdng  it  altogether,  in  their  one-sided 
zeal  for  the  grace  of  God;  others  who  stand  stoutly 
and  so  far  well  for  the  responsibility  of  man  misuse 
this  truth  so  as  apparently  to  swamp  God's  grace.  Scrip- 
ture never  sacrifices  one  truth  to  another.  It  is  the 
peculiar  property  and  glory  of  the  word  of  God  that  it 
communicates  not  merely  a  truth  here  and  there,  but 
the  truth ;  and  this  in  the  person  of  Christ.  The  Holy 
Ghost  is  the  only  power  for  rightly  using,  and  appl}dng, 
and  enjoying  the  truth ;  and  therefore  He  is  called  "the 
truth  "  no  less  than  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  is  the  intrinsic 
power  by  which  the  truth  is  received  into  the  heart, 
but  Christ  is  the  object.  Where  Christ  is  thus  received 
in  the  Holy  Ghost,  a  new  kind  of  responsibility  is 
created.  The  measure  of  it  for  the  Christian  is  based 
on  the  fact  that  he  possesses  life,  and  that  he  has  Christ 
Himself,  the  object  which  shews  him  the  position 
in  which  he  stands,  and  consequently  the  character  of 
the  relationship  that  attaches  to  him.  His  relationship 
is  that  of  a  son,  not  merely  of  one  adopted  into  that 
place  with  no  more  reality  than  he  obtains  in  human 
things.  We  are  adopted  sons  ; .  but  then  we  are  more 
than  that.  We  are  children,  members  of  the  family  of 
God.  That  is,  we  are  children  as  having  God's  own 
nature.  We  are  lorn  of  God,  and  not  merely  adopted 
as  if  we  were  strangers  to  Him.  Every  Christian  has 
a  nature  that  is  intrinsically  divine,  as  we  are  told  in 
2  Peter  i. 
Thus,  it  is  plain,  nothing  can  be  more  complete. 


192        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

We  have  a  nature  which  answers  morally  to   God 
whom  we  imitate  as  well  as  obey  in  light  and  love, 
in  holy  and  righteous  ways,  in  mercy,  truthfulness, 
and  humility.     We  have  the  position  of  sons,  a  re- 
lationship which  the  Lord  Jesus  had  in  all  its  perfection, 
and  in  an  infinitely  higher  sense,  in  which  no  ci'eature 
can  share  it  along  with  Him.    Still  Christ  does  bring  us 
into  His  own  relationship  as  far  as  it  is  possible  for  the 
creature  to  possess  it    Hence,  as  duty  is  ever  measured 
by  responsibility,  that  of  the  Christian  is  according  to 
the  place  in  which  grace  has  put  him.     It  is  certain 
therefore  that  all  the  common-places  about  the  law  as 
the  rule  of  the  Christian's  life  are  practically  a  denial 
of  what  Christianity  is.    Those  who  reason  from  Israel 
to  us,  without  intending  it,  ignore  the  relationship  of 
the  Christian,  and  set  aside  the  bearing  of  redemption 
on  our  walk:  so  serious  is  that  error  which  to  many 
seems  a  pious  thought,  and  I  am  sure  taken  up  by 
them  with  the  desire  of  honouring  God  and  His  wilL 
But  sincerity  will  not  serve  in  lieu  of  His  word ;  and 
our  own  thoughts  and  desires  can  never  be  trusted  as  a 
standard  of  principle  or  of  practice.     God  has  revealed 
His  mind,  and  to  this,  if  wise,  we  must  needs  be  subject. 
In  divine  things  there  is  nothing  like  simplicity;  by 
it  we  enjoy  a  wisdom  far  higher  than  our  own  and  real 
power  to  strengtlien  and  guide  the  heart. 

In  Israel's  case  it  was  not  so.  First  of  all  they 
promised  obedience;  but  it  was  the  obedience  of  the 
law.  Secondly,  when  the  blood  of  the  victims  was 
shed,  it  was  sprinkled  on  the  book  as  well  as  on  the 
people  (verses  7,  8).  What  was  the  meaning  of  the 
blood?    Not  atonement  .  Xhe  prime. idea  in  blood 


EXODUS   XIX.-XL.  193 

seems  always  to  be  the  life  given  up,  i.e.,  death,  in  ac- 
knowledgment of  the  guilt  of  the  one  concerned.  This 
is  true,  no  doubt ;  but  unless  it  goes  farther  than  this, 
it  is  a  declarative  sanction  of  God's  punishing  in  case 
of  failure  to  meet  His  demands.  The  grace  of  God 
applies  the  blood  of  Christ  in  a  totally  different  way ; 
and  this  is  what  is  referred  to  in  1  Peter  i.  2.  He 
describes  the  Christian  in  terms  which  at  once  recall 
Exodus  xxiv.  He  says  that  we  are  elect  according  to 
the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father  through  sanctifi- 
cation  of  the  Spirit  unto  obedience  and  sprinkling  of 
the  blood  of  Jesus.  The  Israelites  were  elect  as  a 
nation  according  to  the  sovereign  call  of  Jehovah — the 
known  God  of  their  fathers.  Ignorant  of  God  as  well 
as  of  themselves,  they  dared  to  take  their  stand  on  His 
law.  Accordingly  they  were  severed  by  the  ordinance 
of  circumcision  and  other  rites.  They  were  sanctified 
from  the  nations  by  this  fleshly  separation  to  obey  the 
law  under  its  solemn  and  extreme  penalty.  The  blood 
threatened  death  on  every  one  who  transgressed.  The 
Christian  position  is  altogether  different :  we  are  elect 
as  children  "  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the 
Father  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,"  meaning 
by  this  the  separating  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from 
the  very  first  moment  of  our  conversion.  This  vital 
separation  to  God,  and  not  practical  holiness,  is  what  is 
here  called  sanctification  of  the  Spirit — the  most  funda- 
mental meaning  of  it  indeed  anywhere.  But  practical 
sanctification  there  is,  and  amply  insisted  on  elsewhere; 
but  it  is  not  the  point  here,  and  if  we  attempt  to  bring 
practical  sanctification  into  this  verse,  we  destroy  the 
gospel  of  grace.     Nobody  doubts  the  good  intentions  of 

0 


194        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

such  as  interpret  it  thus;  but  these  are  not  enough  with 
the  word  of  God. 

We  must  take  care  that  we  receive  the  sense  which 
God  intends,  otherwise  we  may  err  seriously,  to  His 
dishonour  and  to  our  own  hurt  and  that  of  others.  Let 
us  then  bow  to  God  instead  of  forcing  our  own  meaning 
on  scripture.  What  for  instance  would  be  the  meaning 
of  our  being  practically  sanctified  to  obedience  as  well 
as  to  have  the  blood  of  Jesus  sprinkled  upon  us  ?  It 
simply  proves  that  he  who  expounds  unwittingly  sets 
aside  the  gospel.  Practical  sanctification  for  obedience 
and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus !  What  do  people 
mean  by  restricting  themselves  to  a  sense  of  sancti- 
fication which  necessarily  involves  in  it  so  portentous  a 
conclusion?  Evidently  the  language  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  is  as  unambiguous,  and  the  construction  as  plain 
and  simple  as  possible. 

Take  a  case  in  illustration.  A  man  hitherto  has 
been  altogether  indifferent  to  the  word  of  God.  He 
hears  it  now;  he  receives  Jesus  as  the  gift  of  God's 
love  with  all  simplicity.  Perhaps  he  has  not  peace  at 
once,  but  at  any  rate  he  is  thoroughly  arrested ;  he 
desires  earnestly  to  know  the  gospel  from  the  very  first. 
If  the  Spirit  of  God  has  thus  wrought  in  him,  he  is 
separated  to  God  from  what  he  was.  This  is  here  called 
"sanctification  of  the  Spirit."  For,  as  we  said,  the 
sanctification  is  "to  obedience;'*  and  this  is  the  very 
first  desire  implanted  in  a  soul  from  the  moment  that 
there  is  a  real  divine  work  in  him.  Such  an  one  may 
be  very  ignorant,  no  doubt ;  but  at  any  rate  his  heart 
is  made  up  to  obey  the  Lord — his  desire  is  Godward. 
It  18  not  a  merely  legal  way  of  escaping  the  dreadful 


EXODUS   XIX.- XL.  195 

« 

doom  that  he  sees  is  the  just  portion  of  those  that 
despise  God.  The  truth  has  touched  his  conscience  by 
grace,  and  God's  mercy,  however  dimly  seen,  is  enough 
to  attract  his  heart  to  obey.  Thus  he  is  sanctified  by 
the  Spirit  unto  the  obedience  and  the  sprinkling  of  the 
blood  of  Jesus.  He  would  now  obey,  because  he  has  the 
new  nature  through  receiving  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  would  enter  into  the  grace  of  God  that 
sprinkles  the  guilty  with  the  blood  of  Jesus.  He  would 
obey  like  Jesus,  not  under  compulsion  like  a  Jew,  and 
is  sprinkled  with  His  blood  in  remission  for  his  sins, 
instead  of  having  the  blood  sprinkled  on  him  as  a 
menace  of  death  in  case  of  disobeying  the  law.  The 
Christian  loves  to  obey,  and  is  already  forgiven  through 
faith  of  Jesus  and  His  blood.  This  I  believe  to  be  the 
true  meaning  of  the  passage,  and  especially  of  the  term 
"sanctification  of  the  Spirit"  here;  though  it  is  frankly 
and  fully  allowed  that  this  is  not  the  only  meaning  of 
"  sanctification  "  in  scripture. 

The  sanctification  here  in  question  then  applies  from 
the  start  of  an  effectual  inward  work  even  before 
a  soul  knows  pardon  and  peace,  but  there  is  also 
room  for  the  practical  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
subsequent  work  in  heart  and  conscience  severing 
us  more  and  more  by  the  truth  to  the  Lord.  The 
latter  is  practical  sanctification,  admits  of  degrees, 
and  is  thus  relative.  But  in  every  soul  there  is  the 
absolute  separation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  from  con- 
version. Thus  there  are  plainly  two  distinct  senses 
of  sanctification :  one  absolute,  in  which  a  man  is 
severed  once  for  all  from  the  world  to  God ;  the  other 

relative,  as  being  practical  and  hence  differing  in  mea- 

o  2 


196        LECyURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

sure  in  the  after  career  of  each  Christian.     "  But  ye  are 
washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified,  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our 
God."    Here  it  seems  in  substance  the  same  thing  as  in 
1  Peter  i  2.  "  Sanctified  "  in  this  sense  is  clearly  before 
justification ;  and  so  the  apostle  puts  it.     It  is  of  no 
use  to  decry  the  plain  meaning  of  the  scripture  because 
the  Eomanist  theologian  perverts  the  fact  more  fatally 
than  the  Protestant.     If  the  Spirit  of  God  here  puts 
"sanctified"  before  "justified,"  our  plain  duty  is   to 
learn  what  is  meant,  not  to  wrest  His  word  because  of 
Popish  misuse  of  it — a  misuse  due  largely  to  the  com- 
mon ignorance  of  the  primary  force  of  sanctification. 
Why  should  souls  be  driven  from  the  truth  by  prejudice 
or  clamour  ?     It  is  not  to  be  allowed  that  God's  word 
makes  mistakes :  man  does,  but  is  it  with  the  Spirit  of 
God  ?    Does  not  He  mean  what  He  says  ?    When  He 
says  they  were  washed.  He  is  referring  to  the  water  of 
the  word  used  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  deal  with  man. 
This  looks  more  at  evil;  "sanctified"  to  the  good  which 
attracted  the  heart  now.     But  these  are  not  the  only 
things.     "Justified"  is  not  when  the  prodigal  son  re- 
turns to  his  father,  but  when  the  best  robe  is  put  upon 
him ;  then  he  is,  according  to  1  Cor.  vi.,  not  washed 
and  sanctified  alone  but  "justified."  It  is  the  application 
of  the  full  power  of  the  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus.     It  is 
not  always  immediate  on  conversion.     It  may  be,  and, 
if  you  please,  ought  to  be,  soon ;  but  still  it  is  far  from 
being  always  so;  and  in  fact  there  is  and  perhaps 
must  be  always  an  interval  more  or  less  before  comfort 
or  peace  is  enjoyed.     It  may  be  ever  so  minute,  but 
there  is  habitually  a  dealing  of  Christ  between  the 


EXODUS  XIX.-XL.  '  197 

touch  that  stays  the  issue  and  the  word  which  declares, 
with  no  less  authority  than  love,  "Daughter,  be  of 
good'comfort :  thy  faith  hath  saved  thee ;  go  in  peace." 
Very  often  it  is  not  so  little  a  while,  as  many  of  us 
know  to  our  cost.  But  it  remains  always  true  that 
there  is  this  difference.  And  it  seems  well  to  remark 
it,  because  it  is  of  considemble  practical  and  also 
doctrinal  importance,  contrasting  as  it  does  the  place 
of  the  Christian  with  that  of  the  Jew.  The  tendency 
of  some  to  insist  on  the  whole  in  an  instant  is  a  reac- 
tion from  the  popular  unbelief,  which,  if  it  allow  peace 
at  all,  allows  it  as  a  matter  of  slow,  laborious  and  un- 
certain attainment.  But  we  must  not  be  driven  into 
any  error,  even  the  least  to  avoid  the  greatest;  and  it 
is  cei*tainly  an  error  to  swamp  in  one  all  the  ways  of 
God  with  the  soul. 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  chapter  we  have  clearly  the 
legal  glory.  This  does  not  take  them  out  of  their  con- 
dition of  flesh  and  blood  and  all  that  pertains  to  it. 
It  is  in  no  way  the  glory  which  is  the  hope  of  the 
Christian. 

Chapter  xxv.  introduces  us  to  a  new  order  of  figures, 
not  only  earthly  ordinances,  but  that  which  appertains 
to  the  tabernacle.  Undoubtedly  in  itself  it  composed 
a  worldly  tabernacle ;  but  this  does  not  hinder  these 
figures  from  typifying  what  was  to  be  for  the  most  part 
of  a  heavenly  character. 

After  the  call  to  the  people  to  bring  their  offerings, 
we  find  the  use  to  which  they  were  to  be  applied. 
First  and  foremost  stands  the  centre  of  Levitical  wor- 
ship— the  ark.    We  must  remember  that  they  are  but 


198        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

shadows,  and  not  the  very  image  of  the  thing.  In  none 
of  these  types  can  one  find  the  full  truth  of  Christ  and 
of  His  work.  They  are  only  a  faint  and  partial  adum- 
bration of  the  infinite  reality,  and  could  not  possibly  be 
more.  Hence  they  have  the  imperfection  of  a  shadow. 
In  fact  we  could  not  have  the  full  image  till  Christ 
appeared  and  died  on  the  cross  and  went  to  heaven.  As 
Christ  is  the  true  and  perfect  image  of  God,  so  is  He 
the  expression  of  all  that  is  good  and  holy  in  man. 
Where  will  one  find  what  man  should  be  but  in  Christ  ? 
Where  the  faultless  picture  of  a  servant  but  in  Him? 
And  so  one  might  go  through  every  quality  and  every 
office,  and  find  them  only  in  perfection  in  our  Lord 
Jesus.  There  indeed  is  the  truth.  The  legal  ordi- 
nances and  institutes  were  but  shadows;  still  they 
were  types  distinctly  constituted ;  and  we  should  learn 
by  them  all. 

In  these  shadows*  we  may  see  two  very  dififerent 
characters  or  classes,  we  may  say,  into  which  they  are 
divisible.  The  first  and  foundation  of  all  the  rest  is 
this :  God  would  disclose  Himself  in  some  of  them  to 
man,  as  far  as  this  was  possible  then ;  secondly,  founded 
on  that  and  growing  out  of  it,  man  would  be  taught  to 
draw  near  to  God.  Impossible  for  such  access  to  exist 
and  be  enjoyed  till  God  had  drawn  near  to  man  and 
shown  us  what  He  is  to  man.  We  can  see  therefore 
the   moral   propriety  and  beauty  of  this   distinction, 

*  Dr.  Fairbaim*8  "Typology"  is  here,  as  in  general,  poverty 
itself.  He  considers  that  distinct  meanings  to  be  attached  to  the 
materials,  colours,  &c.,  can  have  no  solid  foundation,  and  are  "  her$ 
out  of  place"!  Even  the  force  of  the  silver  redemption-money  he 
thinks  disproved  by  the  fact  that  the  sockets  of  the  door  were  made 
of  brass.    This  is  the  way  to  lose  aU  but  a  miaimum  of  truth. 


EXODUS  XIX.-XL.  199 

which  at  once  separates  the  shadows  of  the  latter  part 
of  Exodus  into  two  main  sections.  The  ark,  the  golden 
table,  the  golden  candlestick,  the  tabernacle  with  its 
curtains,  the  vail,  the  brazen  altar,  and  the  court,  form 
the  first  division  of  the  types,  the  common  object  of 
them  8dl  being  the  display  of  God  in  Christ  to  man. 

Of  these  the  highest  is  the  ark.  It  was  the  seat  of 
Divine  Majesty  in  Israel ;  and  as  all  know  (and  most 
significant  it  is),  the  mercy-seat  was  pre-eminently  that 
throne  of  God — the  mercy-seat  which  afterwards  we  see 
with  blood  sprinkled  on  it  and  before  it — ^the  mercy- 
seat  which  concealed  the  law  destructive  to  the  pre- 
tensions of  man,  but  maintained  it  in  the  place  of 
highest  honour,  though  hidden  from  human  view.  Was 
this  nothing?  Was  there  not  comfort  for  any  heart 
which  confides  in  God,  that  He  should  take  such  a  seat 
as  this,  and  give  it  such  a  name,  in  relationship  with  a 
guilty  people  on  the  earth  ? 

Next  came  the  table,*  and  upon  it  a  defined  supply 
of  bread.  For  what  was  presented  there?  One  loaf? 
No  such  carnal  thought  entered  as  if  God  had  need  of 
bread  from  man.  The  bread  that  was  set  on  the  golden 
table  consisted  of  twelve  loaves — in  evident  correspond- 
ence with  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  but  this  assuredly 
in  connection  with  Christ,  for  He  is  ever  the  object  of 
God's  counsels.  It  is  God  displaying  Himself  in  Christ; 
but  those  who  had  this  connection  with  Christ  were 

Dr.  Fairbaim  views  Christ's  whole  undertaking  as  symbolized 
already  in  the  furniture  and  services  of  the  Most  Holy  Place,  and 
therefore  considers  the  things  belonging  to  the  Holy  Place  as  directly 
referring  only  to  the  works  and  services  of  His  people.  The  conse- 
quence of  such  a  division  is  indeed  lowering  in  the  extreme. 


200        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Israel.     Of  them  He  came,  and  He  deigned  to  have  the 
memorial  of  them  on  this  table  before  GUkL 

In  the  candlestick  another  truth  comes  before  us.  It 
is  not  God  who  thus  deals  with  humanity,  of  which 
Israel  was  the  chosen  specimen,  and  the  one  remem- 
bered before  Him;  but  in  the  seven  candlesticks,  or 
rather  the  candelabrum  with  its  seven  lights,  we  clearly 
see  the  type  of  Christ  as  the  power  and  giver  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  testimony  for  God.  This  is  in  connection  with 
God's  sanctuary  and  presence.  Now,  in  all  these  things 
it  is  the  display  of  what  God  is  to  man ;  God  HimseKin 
His  own  sole  majesty  in  the  ark, — God  Himself  asso- 
ciated with  man,  with  Israel,  in  the  shew-bread, — God 
Himself  with  this  light  of  the  sanctuary  or  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

All  this  was  plain,  but  in  the  tabernacle  we  have 
more  than  this.  (Chap,  xxvi.)  Christ  is  set  forth  in 
various  ways  by  the  curtains — Christ  in  His  human 
purity  and  righteousness — Christ  in  what  was  heavenly 
— Christ  in  His  glory  whether  Jewish  or  extending 
over  Gentiles  also,  with  His  judicial  title  asserted.  The 
goats'  hair  would  seem  to  speak  of  Christ  in  His  pro- 
phetic separateness ;  the  rams*  skins  dyed  red  point  to 
His  absolute  consecration  to  God ;  as  the  power  which 
kept  out  all  evil  would  appear  to  be  meant  by  the 
badgers'  or  tachach  skins,  which  covered  the  tent 
above.  The  reference  is  to  the  fine  linen  and  blue,  &c., 
with  the  various  coverings  of  goats'  hair  and  badger 
skins.  All  these,  I  have  no  doubt,  have  their  own 
proper  significance,  as  manifesting  the  character  of 
Christ  here  below. 

Next  (verses  15-30)  follows  the  account  of  the  acacia 


EXODUS   XIX.-XL.  201 

boards  with  their  tenons  and  bolts,  the  sockets  of  silver 
and  the  rings  of  gold. 

Then  we  have  the  vail  and  screen.  Now  we  know 
what  these  mean.  Scripture  is  positive  that  the  vail  is 
His  flesh,  but  then  it  is  as  manifesting  the  Lord  as  man 
here  below.  As  long  as  this  was  the  case  only,  man  could 
not  come  to  God.  When  the  vail  was  rent  (namely,  by 
Christ  dying  as  a  man),  man  could  go  into  the  pre- 
sence of  God, — at  least  the  believer.  I  do  not  mean  man 
as  man,  but  that  there  was  no  bar  to  man.  The  way 
was  now  open  into  the  presence  of  God. 

In  the  brazen  altar  it  is  the  same  side  of  truth ;  but 
there  is  this  characteristic  difference.  (Chap,  xxvii.)  Not 
less  than  the  ark,  the  golden  throne  of  God  in  the  most 
holy  place,  it  shews  us  God's  righteousness ;  but  with 
this  difference  between  them — that  gold  is  the  right- 
eousness of  God  for  drawing  near  where  God  is ;  brass 
is  the  righteousness  of  God  for  dealing  with  man's  evil 
where  man  is.  Such  is  the  line  which  divides  them. 
It  is  the  display  of  God  in  both  cases — the  one  in  the 
presence  of  God  where  He  manifests  Himself;  the  other 
in  dealing  with  man  and  his  wants  in  this  world. 
Hence  we  find,  for  instance,  the  righteousness  of  God 
in  Komans.  If  we  consider  with  any  care  Eomans  iii., 
it  is  the  righteousness  of  God  presented  to  man  as  a 
sinful  being  in  this  world.  But  if  I  look  at  the 
passage  where  it  is  said,  "  He  made  him  to  be  sin  for 
us,  who  knew  no  sin ;  that  we  might  be  made  the 
rigliteousness  of  God  in  him,"  it  is  evident  that  we  are 
brought  into  the  very  presence  of  God.  Thus  2  Cor. 
V.  corresponds  with  the  ark  rather  than  the  brazen 
altar.    Everything  has  its  beautiful  and  perfect  answer 


202        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

in  the  word  of  God ;  but  then  all  is  useless  to  the  soul, 
except  just  so  far  as  one  sees  and  receives  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ. 

Next,  from  the  latter  part  of  chapter  xxvii.  we  have 
a  change  evident,  and  of  more  weight. 

The  last  two  verses  are,  I  think,  transitional.  They 
prepare  the  way  for  types  which,  instead  of  displaying 
God  in  Christ  to  man,  set  forth  rather  man  drawing 
near  by  the  appointed  channel  to  God.  They  are  occu- 
pied with  the  provision  of  light  where  God  manifested 
Himself,  and  in  order  to  the  due  service  of  those  who 
entered  the  sanctuary.  "  And  thou  shalt  command  the 
children  of  Israel,  that  they  bring  thee  pure  oil  olive 
beaten  for  the  light,  to  cause  the  lamp  to  burn  always." 
It  may  be  added  here,  as  some  have  found  an  apparent 
inconsistency  in  comparing  the  passage  with  1  Sam.  iii. 
3,  that  the  Hebrew  means  not  "always"  in  the  absolute 
sense,  but  continually  or  constantly.  It  was  from 
evening  to  morning,  and  of  course  uninterruptedly  for 
that  time.  "In  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  with- 
out the  vail,  which  is  before  the  testimony,  Aaron  and 
his  sons  shall  order  it  from  evening  to  morning  before 
Jehovah."     This  is  greatly  confirmed  by  what  follows. 

In  chapters  xxviii.,  xxix.  is  given  the  prescribed 
ceremonial  in  consecrating  the  priesthood.  And  what 
was  the  object  of  the  priesthood?  Clearly  it  was  for 
drawing  near  to  God.  This  is  the  new  division  brought 
in  and  what  might  seem  at  first  sight  a  notable  irre- 
gularity, as  has  been  observed  before,  is  simply  an  effect 
of  the  perfect  arrangement  of  God's  mind.  Doubtless 
to  a  superficial  glance  it  appears  somewhat  unaccount- 
able, in  the  midst  of  describing  the  various  parts  of  the 


PXODUS  XIX.- XL.  203 

sanctuary,  to  interrupt  the  course  of  it  by  dragging  into 
the  very  midst  of  it  the  consecration  of  Aaron  and  his 
sons.  But  if  there  be  two  separate  objects  in  these 
types — first,  God  displaying  Himself  to  man  ;  and, 
secondly,  man  in  consequence  drawing  near  to  God — 
the  way  of  all  is  clear.  The  priesthood  undeniably 
consisted  of  that  class  of  persons  who  had  the  privilege 
and  duty  of  going  into  the  sanctuary  on  behalf  of  the 
people.  And  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary  described 
after  the  priesthood  are  those  which  preserve  the  same 
common  character  of  presenting  the  service  due  to  God 
approached  in  His  sanctuary.  Now,  let  me  ask,  what 
mind  of  man  could. ever  have  thought  of  a  decision  so 
excellent,  though  surely  far  below  the  surface  ?  As  the 
foolishness  of  God,  says  the  apostle,  is  wiser  than  man, 
so  (may  we  not  say?)  the  seeming  disorder  of  God  is 
incomparably  more  orderly  than  man's  best  order. 

Thus  it  will  always  be  found  in  the  long  run.  We 
may  have  absolute  confidence  in  the  word  of  God.  Our 
only  business  is  to  learn  what  He  is,  what  He  says,  and, 
more  than  that,  to  confide  in  Him;  and  when  we  do 
not  know  what  He  means,  always  to  take  the  ground  of 
faith  against  all  adversaries.  We  may  be  ignorant,  and 
unable  to  expose  them ;  but  we  may  rest  perfectly  sure 
that  God  is  never  wrong  and  man  ever  untrustworthy. 
The  habitual  means  whereby  God  gives  proof  that  He 
is  right,  graciously  enabling  us  to  understand  is  by 
His  word.  There  is  no  other  means  of  knowing  the 
mind  of  God ;  the  power  for  understanding  is  the  Spirit 
of  God ;  and  the  object  in  whose  light  alone  it  can  be 
understood  is  Christ.  But  the  written  word  of  God  is 
the  sole  instrumental  means  and  the  revelation  of  it  all. 


204        LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Then,  after  the  priesthood  has  been  fully  brought 
before  us,  we  have  the  various  portions  of  their  dress. 
A  few  words  will  suffice  here  before  passing  on.  A 
remarkable  provision  is  that  the  ephod  of  the  high 
priest,  which  was  the  most  important  part  of  his  cos- 
tume, had  the  names  of  the  children  of  Israel  twice 
over.  One  inscription  was  in  the  shoulder-pieces. 
There  were  the  names  in  a  general  way — six  on  one 
shoulder,  six  on  the  other.  Besides  this  their  names 
were  written  on  the  breastplate.  There  the  names  were 
all  found  together  on  his  heart  He  who  cannot  appre- 
ciate the  blessedness  of  such  a  place,  with  the  great  high 
priest  bearing  up  thus  the  names  of  God's  people  before 
God,  must  be  very  insensible  to  the  highest  favours. 
But  God,  who  shewed  how  He  would  continually  re- 
member those  He  loved,  and  who  could  not  have  a  high 
priest  without  having  their  names  in  honour  and  love 
before  Him — that  blessed  God  has  given  us  much  more. 
He  ordered  that  there  should  be  the  Urim  and  the 
Thummim  connected  with  the  high  priest's  breastplate; 
that  is  the  means  of  divine  guidance  for  the  people. 
The  Christian  has  it  also,  and  in  a  far  better  way.  The 
Jew  had  it  after  this  outward  sort,  all  being  compara- 
tively external  in  Israel  We  have  it  intrinsically  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  Himself  It  is  in  vain  for  any  person 
to  pretend  that  it  was  better  to  have  the  Urim  and  Thum- 
mim, for  which  one  had  to  seek  the  priest  from  time  to 
time  when  wanted,  than  to  be  indwelt  always  by  One 
who  knows  all  the  truth.  May  Christians  believe  and 
use  for  God  the  portion  each  has  in  Christ ! 

But  besides,  when  the  high  priest  went  into  Jeho- 
vah's presence,  there  was  the  sounding  of  the  bells 


EXODUS  XIX.- XL.  205 

between  the  pomegranates  of  blue,  and  purple,  and 
scarlet  on  the  skirts  of  his  garment.  Such  is  the  effect, 
it  is  to  be  observed,  "when  he  goeth  in"  and  "when 
he  cometh  out."  Under  this  falls  the  Christian  testi- 
mony now,  as  the  result  of  the  entrance  of  Christ  into 
heavenly  places ;  and  under  this  will  fall  the  future 
fruit-bearing  portion  and  testimony  of  Israel  in  the  day 
when  Christ  will  appear  in  glory  from  the  heavens. 
The  bells  give  their  sound  when  the  high  priest  goes  in 
and  when  he  comes  out.  When  Christ  went  into  the 
presence  of  God,  what  a  mighty  effect  did  not  the  Spirit 
produce !  The  church  comes  under  that  now.  When 
Christ  returns  the  Spirit  will  be  poured  out  once  more  on 
all  flesh,  and  Israejl  wUl  be  brought  into  the  blessed 
position  of  bearing  fruit  in  testimony  for  God.  But, 
again,  Aaron  with  the  golden  plate  (engraved  "  Holiness 
to  Jehovah")  always  on  his  forehead,  bears  the  iniquity 
of  Israel's  holy  things  that  they  may  be  accepted ;  an 
important  consideration,  especially  when  we  know  the 
seriousness  and  the  facility  of  iniquity  therein.  Is  it  not 
true  that  there  is  scarce  anything  in  which  we  feel  more 
the  need  of  gracious  care  than  in  the  holy  things  of  God? 
We  know  His  tender  mercy  in  the  smallest  matters ;  but 
in  that  which  so  nearly  concerns  His  honour,  it  is 
indeed  a  truly  merciful  provision  that  the  Great  High 
Priest  bears  the  iniquity  of  holy  things,  where  other- 
wise defilement  would  be  fetal.  The  coat  of  fine  linen 
embroidered  means  personal  righteousness  in  ways,  set 
off  with  every  beauty  of  grace.  Aaron's  sons  were  to 
have  coats,  priests'  girdles,  and  bonnets  for  glory  and  for 
beauty.  It  is  Christ  put  on  us.  Then  follows  the  ritual 
required  in  the  act  of  consecrating  Aaron  and  his  sons. 


206  LEC5TUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

In  the  hallowing  of  the  priestly  family  the  following 
points  are  observable.  First,  they  were  all  washed  in 
the  water,  Aaron  and  his  sons.  "He  who  sanctifieth 
and  they  who  are  sanctified  are  all  of  one."  Christ  is 
essentially  apart  from  sin  and  sinners;  we  by  grace 
are  set  apart.  Further,  our  Lord  says,  "  For  their  sakes 
I  sanctify  myself  {i,e.  on  high),  that  they  also  might  be 
sanctified  by  the  truth."  Then  Aaron  is  duly  clothed  ; 
as  in  the  priestly  character  Christ  appears  before  God 
for  us.  Then  the  high  priest  alone  was  anointed ;  as 
we  know  Christ  could  be  and  was  sealed  of  God  the 
Father  without  blood,  the  Spirit  thus  attesting  both  the 
absolute  purity  of  His  person  and  the  truth  of  His 
Sonship  as  man.  Aaron's  sons  were  then  clothed,  and 
girded  for  priestly  work.  The  blood  of  the  bullock  for 
a  sin-offering  was  put  on  the  horns  of  the  altar;  the 
blood  of  one  ram  for^a  bumt-ofifering  was  sprinkled 
round  about  upon  the  altar;  and  the  blood  of  the  other 
ram  for  consecration  was  put  on  Aaron's  right  ear,  and 
that  of  his  sons,  on  their  right  thumb  and  right  great 
toe.  It  was  necessarily  so  with  the  high  priest  taken 
from  among  men,  after  the  witness  already  given  to 
Christ's  exceptional  place.  So  Christ  entered  by  His 
own  blood — entered  in  once  for  all — ^into  the  holies, 
having  obtained  eternal  redemption  that  we  might  have 
a  common  place  with  Him  by  blood  and  in  the  Spirit's 
power.  Grace  binds  us  with  Christ  as  Aaron  with  his 
sons.  As  no  sacrifice  was  absent  here,  so  we  enjoy  all 
the  value  of  Christ  and  His  work. 

But  after  the  form  of  hallowing  the  priests,  the  Spirit 
prescribes  in  the  end  of  chapter  xxix.  (ver.  38-46)  the 
sacrifice  of  the  daily  lambs  which  presented  the  con- 


EXODUS  XIX.- XL.  207 

tinual  acceptance  of  the  people  of  God,  with  the  renewed 
and  most  express  assurance  of  His  dwelling  among 
them.  Chapter  xxx.  resumes  the  account,  for  a  reason 
already  explained,  of  the  various  vessels  of  the  sanc- 
tuary which  had  to  follow  the  priesthood,  and  pursue 
the  truth  meant  by  it,  namely,  the  means  of  access  to 
God. 

Among  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary  the  altar  of 
incense  stands  first  (verses  1-10).  Who  does  not  know 
that  this  was  to  secure  the  people  always  being  accept- 
able before  God?  It  is  the  type  of  Christ  interceding 
for  us,  and  along  with  this  the  high  priest's  work  that 
the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  be  not  hindered. 

In  verses  11-16  is  introduced  the  ransom  money  of  the 
people,  rich  and  poor  alike,  as  an  offering  to  Jehovah, 
their  atonement  money  for  the  service  of  the  sanctuary 
(for  this  is  the  great  point  here),  the  link  of  all  with 
the  priests  who  actually  entered  on  their  behalf. 

But  there  was  another  requisite  next  set  forth.  The 
brazen  laver  judged  sin  by  "the  word  of  God,  just  as 
the  brazen  altar  judged  it  sacrifically.  We  need  "the 
washing  of  regeneration  "  and  generally  the  washing  of 
.  water  by  the  word.  This  follows  here.  The  former 
in  its  scriptural  usage  is  not  merely,  I  apprehend,  that 
we  are  bom  of  God,  but  goes  beyond  new  birth.  It 
is  the  putting  the  believer  into  an  entirely  new  place 
before  God,  which  is  a  different  thought  from  his  receiv- 
ing a  new  nature.  As  being  a  position,  it  may  have  so 
far  a  more  external  sound,  but  it  is  a  real  deliverance, 
which  grace  now  confers  on  us  in  Christ  Jesus,  not 
merely  the  communication  of  a  life  which  hates  sin, 
but  the  putting  one  according  to  the  new  place  of 


208        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Christ  Himself  before  God.  With  this  goes  also  the 
action  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  dealing  with  us  day  by 
day  according  to  such  a  beginning.  This  we  need, — the 
application  of  the  word  of  God  by  the  Spirit  to  deal 
with  every  kind  of  impurity.  Just  as  in  the  type  the 
priests  had  not  only  to  be  washed  completely  in  the 
laver  in  order  to  be  consecrated;  but  whenever  they 
entered  into  the  presence  of  God,  they  washed  their 
hands  and  feet.  We  have  what  answers  to  it.  Let  us 
not  forget  it. 

Then  we  have  the  holy  anointing  oil,  which  also  had 
to  do  with  fitting  the  priests  for  drawing  near  to  God. 
It  was  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  It  was  not  merely  a 
new  nature  or  a  new  position,  but  it  was  a  correspond- 
ing power  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  For  the  bare  pos- 
session of  a  new  nature  or  place  would  not  enable  us 
to  do  the  will  of  God.  It  would  make  us  feel  what 
ought  to  be  done,  but  gives  not  of  itself  the  power  to 
do  it.  The  Spirit  given  to  the  Christian  is  of  power, 
love,  and  a  sound  mind.  A  new  nature  finds  its  great 
characteristic  in  dependence — in  weakness,  or  sense  of 
weakness  certainly ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  the  con- 
sciousness of  power,  though  no  doubt  exercised  in 
dependence.  The  new  nature  accordingly  has  right 
affections  and  gracious  desires;  but  there  is  power  in 
the  Spirit  through  Christ  Jesus.  God  "  hath  not  given 
us  the  spirit  of  fear,  but  of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of 
a  sound  mind." 

The  last  of  these  types  is  the  holy  perfume.  Here 
it  seems  to  be  not  so  much  what  we  have  by  Christ,  but 
that  fragrance  in  Christ  Himself  of  which  God  alone 
is  the  adequate  judge,  and  which  rises  up  before  Him 


EXODUS   XIX.-XL.  209 

in  all  its  perfection.    How  blessed  for  us  !    It  is  for  us, 
but  it  is  only  in  Him  before  God. 

In  chap.  xxxL  we  have  aU  this  closed  with  two  facts — 
the  Spirit  of  God  empowering  man  to  make  a  tabernacle 
according  to  the  pattern,  and  the  Sabbath-day  connected 
with  the  order  of  the  tabernacle.  It  has  been  re- 
marked by  another,  and  it  is  perfectly  true,  that  in  this 
book  when  we  meet  with  any  dealing  of  God,  of  what- 
ever kind  it  may  be,  the  Sabbath-day  is  always  intro- 
duced. For  instance,  in  the  earlier  half  of  Exodus, 
where  we  have  God's  dealings  in  grace,  the  Sabbath-day 
is  brought  in,  marked  out  by  the  bread  God  provided 
for  His  people,  the  manna — the  figure  of  Christ  come 
down  from  heaven  to  be  the  food  of  the  hungry  on 
earth  :  then  followed  the  Sabbath  at  once.  Next,  when 
the  law  was  given,  in  the  very  centre  of  its  require- 
ments stands  the  Sabbath-day.  Again,  in  these  various 
figures  or  institutions  of  good  things  to  come,  the 
Sabbath  re-appears.  Thus  it  is  evident  that,  no  matter 
what  the  subject  may  be,  the  Sabbath  has  always 
a  place  assigned  to  it.  God  therefore  makes  much 
of  the  sign.  The  reason  is  that  He  would  impress,  on 
His  people  that  all  His  dealings,  varied  as  they  may 
be,  are  intended  to  keep  before  their  minds  that  rest  to 
which  He  was  steadily  working,  and  into  which  He 
means  to  bring  His  own  in  due  time.  Therefore  what- 
ever the  work  introduced  meanwhile — whether  of  grace, 
as  the  effectual  working  of  God,  or  whether  of  law 
as.  proving  the  inefl&ciency  of  man — He  always  holds 
out  His  rest,  to  which  He  would  also  direct  the  eyes 
of  all  who  love  Him. 

Chapter  xxxii.  reveals  a  sad  interruption  after  the 

P 


210        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

wonderful  communications  of  God  to  His  servant 
Here  at  least  the  people  are  at  their  work — earnestly 
at  work  in  dishonouring  God — striking  at  the  very 
foundation  of  His  truth  and  honour  to  their  own 
shame  and  ruin.  Poor  people!  the  objects  of  such 
countless  favours,  and  of  such  signal  honour  on  God's 
part.  They,  with  Aaron  to  help  them,  aimed  a  blow 
at  the  throne  of  God  by  making  a  golden  cal£  It 
is  needless  to  linger  on  the  scene  of  the  rebellion. 
Jehovah  directs  the  attention  of  Moses  to  the  camp, 
saying,  "I  have  seen  this  people,  and,  behold,  it  is  a 
stiff-necked  people.  iN'ow  therefore  let  me  alone,  that 
my  wrath  may  wax  hot  against  them,  and  that  I  may 
consume  them ;  and  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation." 
He  wanted  to  prove  and  manifest  the  heart  of  His  ser- 
vant. He  loved  the  people  Himself,  and  delighted  in 
Moses'  love  for  them.  If  the  people  were  under  the 
test  of  law,  Moses  was  under  the  test  of  grace. 

"And  Moses  besought  Jehovah  his  God  and  said,  Jeho- 
vah, why  doth  thy  wrath  wax  hot  against  thy  people, 
which  thou  hast  brought  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
with  great  power,  and  with  a  mighty  hand  ?  Wherefore 
should  the  Egyptians  speak  and  say.  For  mischief  did 
he  bring  them  out,  to  slay  them  in  the  mountains,  and 
to  consume  them  from  the  face  of  the  earth?  Turn 
from  thy  fierce  wrath,  and  repent  of  this  evil  against 
thy  people.  Eemember  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  [not 
merely  Jacob,  but]  Israel,  thy  servants,  to  whom  thou 
swarest  by  thine  own  self,  and  saidst  unto  them,  I  will 
multiply  your  seed  as  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  all  this 
land  that  I  have  spoken  of  will  I  give  unto  your  seed, 
and  they  shall  inherit  it  for  ever." 


EXODUS   XIX.-XL.  211 

See  the  ground  Moses  took — the  unqualified  pro- 
mises of  God's  mercy,  the  grace  assured  to  the  fathers. 
Impossible  for  Jehovah  to  set  aside  such  a  plea.  Never- 
theless Moses  comes  down  with  the  two  tables  in  his 
hand,  the  work  of  God.  He  hears  the  noise,  which 
Joshua  could  not  so  well  understand,  but  which  his  own 
keener  and  more  practised  ear  fails  not  to  interpret 

« 

aright ;  and  as  soon  as  he  came  near,  and  saw  the  con- 
firmation of  his  fears — the  calf  and  the  dancing — his 
"anger  waxed  hot,  and  he  cast  the  tables  out  of  his 
hands,  and  brake  them  beneath  the  mount.  And  he 
took  the  calf  which  they  had  made,  and  burnt  it  in  the 
fire,  and  ground  it  to  powder,  and  strawed  it  upon  the 
water,  and  made  the  children  of  Israel  drink  of  it." 

At  once  we  find  him  reproaching  Aaron,  the  most 
responsible  man  there,  who  makes  a  sorry  excuse,  not 
without  sin.  But  Moses  took  his  stand  in  the  gate  and 
said,  "  Who  is  on  Jehovah's  side  ?  Let  him  come  unto 
me."  Thus  he  who  rejected  every  overture  for  his  own 
advancement  at  the  expense  of  the  people  now  arms 
the  Levites  against  their  brethren.  "And  the  children 
of  Levi  did  according  to  the  word  of  Moses ;  and  there 
fell  of  the  people  that  day  about  three  thousand  men." 
Tet  we  know  on  the  best  authority  that  Moses  loved 
the  people  as  not  another  soul  in  the  camp  did.  There  is 
hardly  a  subject  on  which  men  are  so  apt  to  make  mis- 
takes as  the  true  nature  and  application  of  love.  Moses 
loved  Israel  with  a  love  stronger  than  death ;  yet  he 
who  thus  loved  them  shewed  unsparingly  his  horror  of 
the  leprosy  that  had  broken  out  among  them.  He  felt 
that  such  evil  must  at  all  cost  be  rooted  out,  and 

banished  from  amongst  them.     But  the  same  Moses 

p  2 


212        LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

returns  to  Jehovali  with  the  confession — ''Oh,  this 
people  have  sinned  a  great  sin,  and  have  made  them 
gods  of  gold.  Yet  now,  if  thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin — ; 
and  if  not,  blot  me,  I  pray  thee,  out  of  thy  book  which 
thou  hast  written/' 

Jehovah  however  stands  to  His  own  ways,  and  says 
to  Moses,  "Whosoever  hath   sinned  against  me,  him 
will  I  blot  out  of  my  book.    Therefore  now  go,  lead  the 
people  unto  the  place  of  which  I  have  spoken  unto 
thee :  behold,  mine  angel  shall  go  before  thee :  never- 
theless in  the  day  when  I  visit  I  will  visit  their  sin 
upon  them.    And  Jehovah  plagued  the  people,  because 
they  made  the  calf,  which  Aaron  made."    Nevertheless 
Moses  persists  in  his  plea  with  Jehovah,  who  does  not 
fail  to  try  him  to  the  utmost  by  adopting  the  language 
of  the  people.     They  had  denied  God,  and  attributed 
their  deliverance  merely  to  Moses :  so  Jehovah  takes  up 
these  very  words,  and  says,  "  Depart  and  go  up  hence, 
thou  and  the  people  which  thou  hast  brought  up  out  of 
the  land  of  Egypt,  imto  the  land  which  I  sware  unto 
Abraham,  to  Isaac,  and  to  Jacob,  saying.  Unto  thy  seed 
will  I  give  it."     He  reproaches  them  once  more  with 
being  a  stiff-necked  people ;  He  will  not  go  up  in  the 
midst  of  them,  lest  He  should  consume  them  in  the  way. 
The  people  thereon  mourn ;  and  Moses  has  recourse  to 
a  remarkable  act.    He  takes  and  pitches  the  tabernacle, 
it  is  said,  "  without  the  camp,  afar  off  from  the  camp, 
and  called  it  the  Tabernacle  of  the  Congregation."  After 
this  follow  two  things  worthy  of  aU  heed, — a  nearness 
of  communication  between  Jehovah  and  His  servant 
never  enjoyed  before,  and  more  than  that, — a  blessing 
secured  to  the  people  never  vouchsafed  befora 


EXODUS   XIX.-XL.  213 

From  this  moment  a  new  plea  is  urged :  the  faultiness 
of  the  people  is  used  as  a  reason  why  God  should  go  up 
— ^the  very  reason  which  righteousness  made  a  ground 
for  refusing  to  go  with  them,  lest  His  anger  should  bum 
against  such  a  stiff-necked  people.  But,  argues  Moses, 
for  this  very  reason,  we  most  of  all  want  Jehovah's 
presence.  Astonishing  is  the  boldness  of  faith;  but  then 
its  pleading  is  grounded  on  the  known  grace  of  God 
Himself  Moses  was  near  enough  to  God  in  the  taber- 
nacle, outside  the  camp,  to  get  a  better  view  of  His 
grace  than  he  ever  enjoyed  before.  And  so  it  always  is. 
No  doubt  there  was  large  and  rich  blessing  and  of  the 
most  unexpected  kind  when  God  sent  down  the  Holy 
Spirit  here  below,  and  His  church  was  first  seen.  But  is 
it  a  fact  that  the  church  at  Jerusalem  had  the  deepest 
enjoyment  of  God  in  apostolic  times  ?  This,  one  may 
be  permitted  to  question.  I  grant  you  that,  looking  at 
the  Pentecostal  saints,  in  them  we  see  the  most  powerful 
united  testimony  that  ever  was  borne  in  this  world ; 
but  it  was  borne  in  what  was  comparatively  not  the 
severest  trial — in  earthly  things  chiefly, — the  superiority 
of  those  who  had  been  newly  created  in  Christ  to  the 
wretched  selfishness  of  human  nature.  But  is  that  the 
highest  form  of  blessedness  ?  Is  that  the  way  in  which 
Christ  was  most  glorified  ? 

When  the  earliest  phase  of  things  passed  away — 
when  not  merely  there  was  the  unbelief  of  the  Jewish 
people  but  the  unworthy  sights  and  sounds  which  Satan 
introduced  among  that  fair  company — God,  always 
equal  to  the  occasion,  acts  in  the  supremacy  of  His 
own  grace,  and  brings  out  a  deeper  understanding  of 
His  truth  more  difficult  to  appreciate ;  not  striking  the 


214        LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

people  of  the  world  perhaps  in  the  same  way,  but  that 
which  I  think  has  a  more  intimate  character  of  com- 
munion with  Christ  Himself  than  anything  that  was 
found  before.  It  will  scarcely  be  affirmed  that  what 
we  discern  in  the  church,  while  limited  to  the  circum- 
cision, had  the  same  depth  and  heavenly  character 
stamped  upon  it,  as  what  was  found  when  the  full  grace 
of  God  broke  all  barriers  and  flowed  freely  among  the 
Gentiles.  It  is  in  vain  to  argue  that  the  fruit  of  the 
teaching  of  Peter  or  of  James  had  the  same  power  with 
it  as  the  fruit  of  Paul  not  very  long  after,  or  of  John 
latest  of  aU.  I  grant  you  this — that,  looked  at  as  a 
whole,  distressing  failure  was  setting  in  just  as  it 
was  here;  yet  as  here  the  very  failure  isolated  the 
truehearted,  but  isolated  them  not  in  want  of  love 
but  in  the  strongest  possible  manifestation  of  divine 
charity  and  sense  of  God's  glory.  Assuredly  Moses 
in  the  tabernacle  outside  had  not  less  love  for  the 
people,  nor  more  loyalty  to  God,  than  within  the  borders 
of  Sinai  when  the  ten  commandments  were  uttered. 

In  the  scene  which  follows  we  have  the  magnificent 
pleading  of  Moses  stUl  more  touchingly,  and,  I  am  per- 
suaded, in  advance  on  what  went  before.  This  is  not 
the  time  to  enter  into  details ;  but  hear  what  Moses 
says  to  Jehovah  now:  "See,  thou  sayest  unto  me, 
Bring  up  this  people :  and  thou  hast  not  let  me  know 
whom  thou  wilt  send  with  me.  Yet  thou  hast  said,  I 
know  thee  by  name,  and  thou  hast  also  found  grace  in 
my  sight."  What  can  be  more  lovely,  more  according  to 
Christ,  than  this  ?  He  uses  all  the  personal  confidence 
that  God  had  in  him  on  behalf  of  the  people.  That  is 
the  bearing  of  it  alL     "Now  therefore,  I  pray  thee,  if 


EXODUS  XIX.-XL.  215 

I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  shew  me  now  thy  way, 
that  I  may  know  thee,  that  I  may  find  grace  in  thy 
sight :  and  consider  that  this  nation  is  thine."  He  will 
not  give  up  his  love  and  desire  for  Israel.  God  may 
treat  them  as  the  people  of  Moses,  and  say,  '*  They  are 
the  people  you  have  brought  up :  they  are  your  people." 
"  Oh  no,"  says  Moses,  "  they  are  Thine ;  and  Thou  art 
their  only  hope."  He  will  not  be  put  off.  Jehovah 
loves  to  surrender  to  Moses,  as  of  old  to  Jacob  with 
far  feebler  forces.  Faith,  hope,  and  charity  abounded 
in  the  mediator ;  and  if  the  people  were  to  be  blessed, 
from  God  he  drew  on  every  spring  of  the  blessing  for 
His  own  glory.  Mark  the  answer  of  Jehovah  :  '*And  he 
said.  My  presence  shall  go  with  thee,  and  I  will  give 
thee  rest.  And  he  said  unto  him.  If  thy  presence  go 
not  with  me,  carry  us  not  up  hence."  Moses  wanted 
nothing  apart  from  the  people ;  even  if  he  went  out  of 
the  camp,  it  was  to  gather  so  much  more  of  blessing 
for  the  people  that  he  had  left  behind.  "  And  Jehovah 
said  unto  Moses,  I  will  do  this  thing  also  that  thou 
has  spoken :  for  thou  hast  found  grace  in  my  sight,  and 
I  know  thee  by  thy  name."  He  asked  to  see  His  glory. 
This  was  impossible  yet.  It  awaited  the  coming  of  a 
greater  than  Moses.  But  at  any  rate  His  goodness  is 
caused  to  pass  before  him,  which  in  chapter  xxxiv.  he 
sees. 

But  here  we  must  take  care.  It  is  a  great  mistake  to 
suppose  that  the  proclamation  of  divine  goodness  in 
this  scene  is  the  gospel.  They  greatly  err  who  in  this 
sense  quote  "Keeping  mercy  for  thousands,  forgiving 
iniquity,  transgression,  and  sin,"  and  stop  there.  God 
does  not  stop  here.     He  immediately  adds,  **  and  by  no 


216        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

means  clearing  the  guilty,  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the 
fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fourth, 
generation."  There  is  no  doubt  that  it  is  the  goodness 
and  mercy  of  God ;  but  it  is  to  a  people  still  under  the 
government  of  the  law.  This  is  the  peculiarity.  What 
we  find  here  then  is  not  law  pure  and  simple,  but  law 
with  mercy  and  goodness  and  longsuffering  in  the 
government  of  God  —  His  condescending  love  and 
patience  mingled  along  with  law.  Hence  we  see  its 
character  and  the  reason  why  it  appears  here.  Without 
it  the  guilty  people  never  could  have  been  spared,  but 
must  have  perished  root  and  branch,  as  it  was  in  con- 
sequence of  this  change  that  a  new  generation  of  the 
people  of  Israel  entered  into  the  land  at  aU.  Had  He 
dealt  on  the  groimd  of  pure  law,  how  could  it  have 
been  ?  They  were  guilty,  and  must  have  been  cut  off. 
Now  this  mingling  of  grace  with  the  law  is  the  kind  of 
system  which  Christians  have  accepted  as  Christianity. 
No  real  believer  ever  takes  the  ground  of  pure  law. 
They  take  a  mingled  system;  they  mix  up  law  and 
grace  together.  This  is  what  is  going  on  every  day 
now  in  Christendom.  It  was  the  state  in  which  the 
children  of  Israel  were  put  here,  and  was  a  very  great 
mercy  for  them  in  a  certain  sense.  It  is  no  less  a  mis- 
fortune for  the  Christian,  because  what  those  in  Christ 
are  called  to  is  neither  law,  nor  the  mingled  system  of 
law  interspersed  with  the  gracious  care  of  those  imder 
it  (who  must  have  been  consumed  had  law  reigned 
alone),  but  pure  grace  in  Christ  without  the  law.  At 
the  same  time  the  righteousness  of  the  law  is  fulfilled 
so  much  the  more  in  those  that  "walk  not  after  the 
flesh  but  after  the  Spirit." 


EXODUS  XIX.-XL.  217 

In  answer  to  Moses  who  advances  in  his  demands, 
yet  withal  no  less  suiting  them  to  the  divine  glory  than 
to  the  people's  wants  according  to  the  light  then  vouch- 
safed, God  makes  a  covenant  different  from  what  went 
before.  (Chap,  xxxiv.  10.)  Moses  had  prayed  Him  as 
Adonai  to  "  go  among  us;  for  it  is  a  stiff-necked  people ; 
and  pardon  our  sin,  and  take  us  for  thine  inheritance." 
Thus  he  avails  himself  of  the  special  affection  God  had 
shown  him  to  put  himself  with  the  people,  and  to 
secure  God's  presence  going  with  the  people,  who  other- 
wise could  never  enter  the  land.  It  was  bold  faith, 
working  in  unfeigned  love  of  the  people,  and  with  a 
deep  sense  of  what  God  is  spite  of  all  demerits ;  yet 
its  highest  petition  is  based  on  revealed  grace,  and  is 
therefore  the  very  reverse  of  human  presumption. 

The  Lord  accordingly  hearkens  in  grace,  and  under- 
takes for  Israel  against  the  Canaanites,  warning  them 
against  a  covenant  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  land, 
and  insisting  on  His  own  sole  worship.  His  feasts,  His 
firstlings  and  firstfruits ;  on  His  sabbaths,  on  the  absence 
of  leaven  and  unseemly  ways,  the  fruit  of  Satan's  wiles 
among  the  heathen. 

This  is  pursued  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  and  in 
a  very  interesting  way.  We  have  a  figure  to  which  the 
apostle  refers  (2  Cor.  iii.),  confirming  what  has  just  now 
been  stated.  For  the  first  time  the  face  of  Moses  shines 
after  communications  with  God.  There  was  no  such 
effect  when  it  was  merely  the  ten  commandments  or 
the  ordinances  connected  with  the  people  and  the  land; 
but  after  the  communications  of  heavenly  shadows  and 
the  mercy  of  God  which  intermixed  itself  with  the 
law,  Moses'  face  shines,  and  the  people  of  Israel  could 


218        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

not  bear  it.  The  glory  of  God,  or  at  any  rate  the  effect 
of  seeing  His  goodness,  was  brought  too  near  to  them. 
He  had  to  put  a  vail  on  his  face.  The  apostle  uses  this 
to  shew  that,  as  the  vailed  Moses  speaking  to  the  people 
of  Israel  is  the  most  apt  possible  figure  of  the  actual 
state  in  which  they  were  placed  (that  is,  not  law 
simply,  but  with  gracious  care  for  the  people  mingled 
with  it),  so  the  condition  of  the  Christian  is  in  marked 
contrast.  For  our  position  the  true  image  is  Moses 
not  when  speaking  to  the  people,  but  when  he  goes  up 
into  the  presence  of  God.  In  him  unvailed  there  we 
have  our  figure,  not  in  Moses  vailed,  stiU  less  in  IsraeL 
The  Christian  in  his  fuU  place  is  nowhere  set  forth  by 
the  Jew.  Certain  things  which  happened  to  Israel  may 
be  types  for  the  Christian,  but  nothing  more.  As  far  as 
this  figure  is  concerned,  then,  our  place  is  represented 
by  Moses  when  he  takes  off  the  vail  and  is  face  to  face 
with  the  glory  of  God  Himself.  What  a  place  for  us, 
and  for  us  now !  Surely  this  is  a  wondrous  truth,  and 
of  the  greatest  possible  importance.  We  should  re- 
member that  we  are  heavenly  now  (1  Cor.  xv.)  as 
truly  as  we  ever  shall  be.  More  manifestly  we  shall 
be  heavenly  at  the  coming  of  Christ,  but  not  more 
really  than  at  present.  I  speak  of  our  relationship 
and  title.  "  As  is  the  heavenly,  such  are  they  also  that 
are  heavenly."  By  and  by  we  shall  bear  the  image  of 
the  heavenly.  This  is  another  thing,  and  only  a  conse- 
quence when  the  due  moment  arrives.  For  the  soul 
the  great  change  is  a  fact;  it  remains  for  the  body 
when  the  Lord  comes. 

The  rest  of  the  book  of  Exodus  consists  of  the 
response,  and  the  actual  accomplishment  of 


EXODUS  XIX.-XL.  219 

tions  that  were  given  in  chapters  xxv.-xxx.,  and  calls 
for  no  lengthened  remarks  in  such  a  sketch  as  this. 
But  we  may  refer  to  chapter  xxxv.  as  the  witness  to 
the  zeal  of  the  congregation  for  the  construction  and 
service  of  the  sanctuary,  opened  by  the  law  of  the 
sabbath  stated  here  for  the  last  tinfe  in  the  book. 
Whatever  be  the  work  of  God,  His  rest  remains  for 
His  people.  The  utmost  alacrity  in  answer  to  the  call 
for  material,  useful  and  ornamental,  common  or  costly, 
is  shown  by  all.  "And  they  came,  every  one  whose 
heart  stirred  him  up,  and  every  one  whom  his  spirit 
made  wiUing,  and  they  brought  Jehovah's  ofifering  to 
the  work  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  and  for 
all  his  service,  and  for  the  holy  garments.  And  they 
came,  both  men  and  women,  as  many  as  were  willing 
hearted,  and  brought  bracelets,  and  earrings,  and  rings, 
and  tablets,  all  jewels  of  gold :  and  every  man  that 
offered  offered  an  ofifering  of  gold  unto  Jehovah.  And 
every  man,  with  whom  was  found  blue,  and  purple,  and 
scarlet,  and  fine  linen,  and  goats'  hair,  and  red  skins  of 
rams,  and  badgers'  skins,  brought  them.  Every  one 
that  did  offer  an  offering  of  silver  and  brass  brought 
Jehovah's  offering:  and  every  man,  with  whom  was 
found  shittim  wood  for  any  work  of  the  service, 
brought  it.  And  all  the  women  that  were  wise  hearted 
did  spin  with  their  hands,  and  brought  that  which  they 
had  spun,  both  of  blue,  and  of  purple,  and  of  scarlet, 
and  of  fine  linen.  And  all  the  women  whose  heart 
stirred  them  up  in  wisdom  spun  goats'  hair.  And  the 
rulers  brought  onyx  stones,  and  stones  to  be  set,  for  the 
eplipd  aad  for  the  breastplate :  and  spice,  and  oil  for 

for  the  anointing  oil^  and  for  the  sweet 


jr\ 


220        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

incense.  The  children  of  Israel  brought  a  willing  ofifer- 
ing  unto  Jehovah,  every  man  and  woman,  whose  heart 
made  them  willing  to  bring  for  aU  manner  of  work, 
which  Jehovah  had  commanded  to  be  made  by  the 
hand  of  Moses  "  (verses  21-29). 

Nevertheless,  here  as  everywhere  God  maintains  His 
right  to  call,  and  gives  the  requisite  gifts.  "  And  Moses 
said  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  See,  the  Lord  hath 
called  by  name  Bezaleel  the  son  of  Uri,  the  son  of  Hur, 
of  the  tribe  of  Judah ;  and  he  hath  filled  him  with  the 
spirit  of  God,  in  wisdom,  in  understanding,  and  in 
knowledge,  and  in  all  manner  of  workmanship ;  and  to 
devise  curious  works,  to  work  in  gold,  and  in  silver, 
and  in  brass,  and  in  the  cutting  of  stones,  to  set  them, 
and  in  carving  of  wood,  to  make  any  manner  of  cunning 
work.  And  he  hath  put  in  his  heart  that  he  may  teach, 
both  he,  and  Aholiab,  the  son  of  Abisamach,  of  the 
tribe  of  Dan.  Them  hath  he  filled  with  wisdom  of 
heart,  to  work  all  manner  of  work,  of  the  engraver,  and 
of  the  cunning  workman,  and  of  the  embroiderer,  in 
blue,  and  in  purple,  in  scarlet,  and  in  fine  linen,  and  of 
the  weaver,  even  of  them  that  do  any  ^ork,  and  of 
those  that  devise  cunning  work"  (verses  30-35). 

Chapter  xxxvi.  shews  us  the  chosen  workmen  engaged 
in  their  allotted  tasks,  and  even  begging  Moses  to  check 
the  over-aboTmding  suppKes  of  Israel's  liberality.  The 
work  is  described  with  as  much  minuteness,  in  the 
execution  as  in  the  plan,  throughout  chapters  xxxvi- 
xxxix.,  till  Moses,  inspecting  all  and  seeing  that  they 
had  done  it  as  Jehovah  had  commanded,  blessed  them. 

It  is  of  great  interest  to  observe  that  the  silver  paid 
in  by  the  children  of  Israel,  a  bekah  or  half  shekel  each, 


EXODUS  XIX.- XL.  221 

was  applied  to  the  production  of  the  silver  sockets  of 
the  vail,  and  the  hooks  of  the  columns.  Now  if  gold 
represents  God's  righteousness  which  we  approach 
within ;  and  if  brass  or  rather  copper  means,  when  thus 
symbolically  viewed.  His  righteousness  as  applied  to 
man  outside  in  His  immutable  judgment,  what  is  the 
force  of  silver  in  this  connexion  ?  Is  it  not  His  grace 
shewn  in  man,  even  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus?  Thus 
the  redemption  price  was  the  basis ;  and  on  hooks  made 
of  the  silver  expiation  money  were  suspended  the  hang- 
ings of  the  court  which  separated  the  sanctuary  service 
of  Grod  from  the  world.  The  judgment  of  One  who 
could  not  bear  sin  was  represented  in  the  copper  sockets 
of  the  boards  which  gave  immutable  stability;  but  grace 
in  redemption  was  that  on  which  all  hung  and  shone 
in  the  chapiters  and  fillets  also,  the  ornament  of  the 
work.     Both  unite  in  Christ  and  His  atoning  death. 

The  last  chapter  records,  first,  Jehovah's  caU  to  Moses 
to  set  up  the  dwelling  of  the  appointed  tent  on  the  first 
day  of  the  first  month  (i.e.,  in  the  second  year,  ver.  17), 
with  all  its  parts  and  vessels  in  due  order;  secondly, 
the  obedience  of  Moses  according  to  all  that  Jehovah 
commanded  him.  It  is  remarkable  that  on  this  occasion 
the  tabernacle  and  all  within  it  were  anointed  with  oil. 
Thus,  whatever  sin  on  our  part  may  call  for,  we  have 
here  the  whole  scene  of  creation,  all  things  in  heaven 
and  all  things  on  earth,  claimed  in  the  power  of  the 
Spirit  in  virtue  of  Christ's  person  and  title,  just  as  He 
was  in  fact  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with 
power  apart  from  bloodshedding. 

Finally,  when  the  work  was  finished  and  all  duly  set 
up,  a  cloud  covered  the  appointed  tent,  and  the  glory  of 


222        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Jehovah  filled  the  dwelling.  And  Moses  was  not  able 
to  enter  because  the  cloud  dwelt  thereon,  and  the  glory 
filled  the  tabernacle.  Thus  solemnly  did  Jehovah  mark 
His  dwelling-place  in  the  midst  of  His  people  redeemed 
from  Egypt;  and  He  deigned  to  guide  their  journeys 
through  the  desert  also  by  the  same  sign ;  for  when  the 
cloud  was  taken  up,  they  journeyed;  and  if  not  taken 
up,  they  abode  till  it  was.  But  cloud  by  day  and  fire 
by  night,  the  token  of  is  presence  was  ever  before  all 
Israel  (verses  34-38). 


LEVITICUS  L-XV.  223 


LEVITICUS. 

Chaps.  i.-XT. 

The  book  of  Leviticus  has  its  own  character  quite  as 
manifestly  as  Genesis  or  Exodus.  Its  peculiar  feature 
is  that  from  its  very  starting-point  it  is  the  revelation 
of  what  God  saw  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  the  typical 
application  which  grace  made  of  Him  and  His  work  to 
souls,  to  a  people  and  their  land.  It  is  the  most 
complete  direction-book  of  the  priests,  setting  forth  in 
all  the  detail  of  the  Levitical  service  the  various  offices 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  For  this  reason  we  see  the  pro- 
priety of  the  ground  and  circumstances  with  which 
it  opens.  "  Jehovah  called  unto  Moses,  and  spake  unto 
him  out  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation.'*  There 
is  not  the  rich  variety  of  Genesis,  neither  is  there 
the  special  object  of  Exodus  as  imfolding  redemption 
or  the  legal  conditions  which  the  people  undertook 
through  ignorance  of  themselves  and  of  God.  Here 
we  have,  as  its  characteristic  feature,  access  to  God; 
not  God  acting  in  grace  toward  men  to  deliver,  but 
Christ  as  the  means  of  approach  to  God  for  a  people 
in  relationship  with  Him,  sustaining  them  there  or 
warning  of  the  ways  and  consequences  of  departure 
from  Him.     It  is  admirably  calculated  to  act  on  the  soul 


224       LEGTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

of  the  believer  and  acqoamt  him  better  with  God  as 
He  reveals  Himself  in  the  Lord  Jesus. 

Thus  the  Spirit  of  God  b^ins  not  with  the  sinner 
and  his  wants,  but  with  Christ,  and   gives  in  the 
opening  types  a  wonderful  analysis  of  His  work  and 
sacrifice.     This  is  a  familiar  remark,  but  it  is  well  to 
repeat  it.     And  as  He  b^ns  with  Christ,  so  in  the 
first  place  is  given  the  highest  thought  of  our  Lord's 
death  in  atonement — the  bumt-ofiering.    It  is  that 
aspect  of  His  sacrifice  which  goes  exclusively  God-ward 
— an  aspect  which  believers  are  apt  to  be  in  no  small 
danger  of   attenuating,  if   not  losing  sight   of  alto- 
gether.    There  is  no  child  of  Grod  that  does  not  see  the 
need  of  Christ  to  be  a  sin-ofiering  for  him,  but  far 
too  many  stop  there.    In  a  general  way  they  have  the 
sense  of  His  grace  undoubtedly ;   but  as  we  are  now 
occupied  with  the  ofiering  of  Christ  in  all  its  fulness,  it 
does  not  seem  too  much  if  one  deplores  the  habitual 
disposition,  in  looking  at  Christ's  sacrifice,  to  think  of 
nothing  but  His  adaptation  to  our  wants.     Indeed  this 
is  the  very  reason  why  many  souls  so  fail  to  appreciate 
the  boundless  grace  which  has  met  them  in  their  wants, 
but  which  would  raise  them  to  enjoy  that  which  is 
incomparably  above  themselves. 

Hence  we  here  commence  with  the  type  of  the 
bumt-ofFering,  the  sweet  savour  of  Christ  to  God  for 
us  indeed,  but  not  limited  by  the  circle  of  human 
thought, — not  His  bare  adaptation  to  our  need.  Freely 
I  must  grant  that  the  man  who  begins  with  Christ  apart 
from  his  own  necessities  and  guilt  is  but  a  theorist 
where  it  most  of  all  becomes  one  to  be  real  We  may 
well  distrust  the  fiedth  of  the  soul  which,  professing  to 


LEVITICUS   L-XV.  225 

be  awakened  from  the  sleep  of  death,  only  cares  to  hear 
of  the  profound  truth  of  the  burnt-offering  in  the  death 
of  Jesus.  Must  we  not  fear  that  such  an  one 
deceives  himself?  For,  when  dealing  with  the  sinner, 
God  begins  with  him  as  he  is.  And  sinners  we  are, 
verily  guilty.  Doubtless  God  meets  the  man  in  the 
,  mind  and  heart,  yet  never  truly  saves  but  through  the 
conscience;  and  if  there  be  an  unwillingness  in  any 
one  to  have  his  conscience  searched — in  other  words,  to 
begin  as  nothing  but  a  poor  sinner  in  the  sight  of  God, 
he  must  be  brought  back  to  it  some  time  or  other. 
Happy  he  who  is  willing  to  begin  where  God  begins. 
Happy  he  who  escapes  the  painful  sifting  and  humilia- 
tion too,  when,  for  the  time  he  ought  to  be  making 
advance  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  and  of  His  grace, 
he  has  to  turn  back  again  through  having  overlooked 
his.  real  state  in  the  sight  of  God ;  when  he  has  to  learn 
what  he  is  himself,  it  may  be  years  after  he  has  been 
bearing  the  excellent  name  of  the  Lord. 

In  Leviticus  then  the  Spirit  of  God  shews  us  the 
all-important  truth  that,  whatever  may  be  the  divine 
way  of  dealing  with  individuals,  God  has  Christ  before 
Himself  He  surely  thinks  of  His  people  as  a  whole, 
but,  above  all.  He  cannot  overlook  His  own  glory  as 
maintained  in  Christ. 

First  of  all  then  we  are  in  presence  of  the  holocaust 
or  burnt-offering.  (Chap,  i.)  We  have  to  learn  that 
special  aspect  of  the  Lord  in  which  He,  "by  the 
Eternal  Spirit,  offered  himself  up  without  spot  unto 
God."  This  is  the  burnt-offering.  There,  if  anywhere, 
it  could  be  said  that  God  was  glorified  in  Him.  Apart 
from  this.  Scripture  nowhere  says  that  God,  as  such, 

Q 


226        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

was  glorified  in  the  Son  of  Man  till  Christ  gave  Him- 
self up  to  death.  The  Father  had  been  glorified  in  Him 
in  every  step  of  His  life ;  but  our  Lord  Jesus  refrains 
from  saying  that  God  was  glorified  in  Him,  till  the 
fatal  night  when  Judas  goes  out  to  betray  Him  to  His 
murderers,  and  the  whole  scene  is  before  His  eyes. 
(John  xiii.)  He  "became  obedient  unto  death,  even 
the  death  of  the  cross." 

And  this  principle  we  find  in  a  very  lovely  way 
brought  before  us  in  John  x.  Undoubtedly  He  laid 
His  life  down  for  the  sheep  ;  but  the  believer  who  sees 
nothing  more  than  this  in  the  death  of  Christ  has  a 
great  deal  to  learn.  It  is  very  evident  he  does  not 
think  much  about  God  or  His  Anointed.  He  feels  for 
himself  *and  for  others  in  similar  wants.  It  is  well 
that  he  should  begin  there  unquestionably;  but  why 
should  he  stop  with  it  ?  Our  Lord  Jesus  Himself  gives 
us  the  full  truth  of  the  matter,  saying,  "  I  am  the  good 
Shepherd,  and  know  my  [sheep],  and  am  known  of  mine; 
even  as  the  Father  knoweth  me,  and  I  know  the  Father: 
and  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep.  And  other  sheep 
I  have,  which  are  not  of  this  fold :  them  also  I  must 
bring,  and  they  shall  hear  my  voice ;  and  there  shall 
be  one  flock,  one  shepherd."  After  these  words,  we 
come  to  what  gives  the  more  particular  import  of  the 
burnt-offering  in  the  total  and  willing  surrender  of 
Himself  in  death.  "  Therefore  doth  my  Father  love  me, 
because  I  lay  down  my  life,  that  I  might  take  it  again. 
No  man  taketh  it  from  me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  myself. 
I  have  authority  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have  authority 
to  take  it  again."  The  only  One  who,  as  a  man,  had  a 
right  to  life — ^to  all  blessedness  and  glory  as  a  living 


LEVITICUS  L-XV.  227 

man  on  the  earth — is  the  only  One  entitled  to  lay  down 
His  life  of  Himself.  And  this  He  did — not  merely  for 
the  sheep,  but  He  laid  it  down  of  Himself;  and  yet  He 
could  say,  "  This  commandment  have  I  received  of  my 
Father."  It  was  in  His  own  heart,  and  it  was  obedience 
too,  absolutely,  with  trust  in  God.  It  was  glorifying  God 
in  the  very  matter  of  death,  and,  as  we  know,  on  account 
of  sin — our  sin. 

Thus  Christ  glorified  His  God  and  Father  in  a  world 
where  His  enemy  reigned.  It  was  the  fullest  proof  of 
One  who  could  confide  for  eveiything  in  Him  who  sent 
Him;  and  this  He  did.  God  was  glorified  in  Him; 
and  if  the  Son  of  man  glorified  Him,  no  wonder  God 
glorified  Him  in  Himself,  and  also  that  He  straightway 
glorified  Him.  This  He  did  by  taking  Christ  up  and 
setting  Him  at  His  own  right  hand  in  heaven.  This  of 
course  is  not  the  burnt -offering,  but  its  consequence  to 
Him  who  was  so.  The  burnt -offering  exhibits  the 
absolute  devotedness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  atoningly  to 
death  for  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.  It  is  allowed 
fully  that  there  is  nothing  here  which  seems  to  make 
blessing  to  man  prominent.  Were  there  no  sin,  there 
could  be  no  burnt-ofifering,  nothing  to  represent  the 
complete  surrender  up  of  self  unto  God,  even  to  death. 
But  the  expression  of  sin  in  its  hatefulness  and  neces- 
sary banishment  from  God's  presence  was  reserved  for 
another  offering  and  even  a  contrasted  class  of  offerings. 

The  prime  thought  here  is,  that  aU  goes  up  as  a  savour 
of  rest  to  God,  who  is  therefore  glorified  in  it.  Hence  it 
is  that  in  the  burnt-offering  of  this  chapter,  in  what  is 
called  the  meat-offering,  and  in  the  peace-offering,  no 
question  of  compulsion  enters.  TheofiTeringwas  in  nowise 

Q  2 


228 


LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


wrung  out  from  Israel    So,  as  we  see,  in  the  w 
blessed  Lord,  no  one  took  His  life  from  Hin: 
down  of  Himself.    "  If  any  man  of  you  bri: 
unto  Jehovah,  ye  shall  bring  your  offering 
even  of  the  herd  and  of  the  flock.    If  li; 
burnt-sacrifice  of  the  herd,  he  shall  off- 
out  blemish;  he  shall  offer  it  for  lii 
the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  c«'! 
Jehovah;"  but  there  was  no  demand. 

This  is  so  much  the  more  poir 
chapter  iv.  we  find  wholly  different  '' 
on  another  character  of  offering  tlv 
for  a  moment.     "If  a  soul  shal' 
"against  any  of  the  commandnn 
let  him  bring  for  his  sin,"  so 
absolute  requirement    There  v 
the  Israelite.    It  was  not  an  o  _ 

it ;  and  accordingly  it  was  » ■ 
person  had  no  option  in  brii; 
were  a  ruler,  he  must  brinp 
if  he  were  one  of  the  co? 
was  prescribed.    There  w;. 
first  place,  and  next  the 
brought  to  God  in  case  o 

But  all  the  earlier  ofifc  -^ 

offering,  the  oblation,  n 
to  the  heart  of  the  offei 
fullest  consideration  C' 
no  burden  of  that  wl- 
heart  giving  to  Him 
but  what  expressed  : 
How  perfectly  JeBv 


^ 


231 

tuimal  life.    Clearly  there- 

(liB  meat-oEfering  stand  in 

the  bumt-offeTing 

luticly  to  God.  This  no  man 
■ipahle  of  doing;  but,  Jeaua 
viiliie  of  His  self-sacrificing 
the  meat-offering  the  Lord  is 
a  inan  living  on  the  earth. 
'■_'ht  of  death,  but  of  life  couse- 
eneral  truth  of  the  food  or  cake- 


*h,i^ 


r  will  offer  a  meat-offering  noto 
j^-^_^^^^*!g  sliall  be  of  fine  flour;  and  he 
—  ^^^*%i  it,  and  put  frankincense  thereon." 
^•antiful  emblem  of  Christ  as  man  in 
'  liuDianity  is  represented  by  the  fine 
r  of  the  Holy  Gtost.  (which  is  so  set 
'"¥  from  His  very  copception)  by  the  oil 
^lour.  The  frankincense  shadowed  His  ever 
ranue  which  went  up  to  God  continually. 
•brought  to  the  priests,  one  of  whom  took 
iful.  "And  he  shall  bring  it  to  Aaron's 
ists;  and  he  shall  take  thereout  his  handful 
|f;ihereof,  and  of  the  oil  thereof,  with  all  the 
i.  thereof ;  and  the  priest  shall  bum  the 
rfit  upon  the  altar,  to  be  an  offering  made  by 
reet  savour  unto  Jehovah.  And  the  remnant 
^meat-offering  shall  be  Aaron's  and  his  sons," 
B  another  marked  difference.  The  bumt- 
r  as  a  whole  went  up  to  God,  or  in  its  lowest 
a  part  might  be  thrown  away ;  but  all  that  was 
vaa  aoMy  for  God.    In  the  oblation-Qffering  it  was 


230        LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

only  is  there  a  tendency  to  confound  things  that  difiFer; 
and  to  make  Christ's  sacrifice  to  be  solely  one  for  our 
sin,  for  our  wants  before  Grod,  but  there  is  in  these 
various  forms  of  the  bumt-oflFering  a  little  intimation, 
it  seems  to  me,  of  that  very  tendency;  for  as  we 
gradually  go  down  it  will  be  noticed  that  the  oflfering 
approaches  in  some  slight  degree  that  which  might  be 
more  appropriate  for  a  sin-offering.  "And  if  the  burnt 
sacrifice  for  his  offering  to  Jehovah  be  of  fowls,  then 
he  shall  bring  his  offering  of  turtle-doves,  or  of  young 
pigeons.  And  the  priest  shall  bring  it  unto  the  altar, 
and  wring  off  his  head,  and  bum  it  on  the  altar ;  and 
the  blood  thereof  shall  be  wrung  out  at  the  side  of  the 
altar.  And  he  shall  pluck  away  his  crop  with  his 
feathers,  and  cast  it  beside  the  altar."  There  is  not 
the  whole  animal  going  up  to  God  in  the  same  marked 
way  as  in  the  first  case.  That  is,  the  lower  the  feith 
(which  I  suppose  is  what  is  meant  by  the  sinking  of 
the  value  of  the  offering)  the  more  the  offering  approaches 
to  the  notion  of  one  for  our  sins:  we  see  what  is  unworthy 
and  cast  away  as  well  as  what  goes  up  to  (Jod. 

In  the  meat-offering  is  quite  another  thought.  There 
is  no  thought  whatever  of  atonement  here.  It  was  really 
the  best  of  food  given  up  to  Jehovah,  com  and  oil, 
not  without  salt,  as  we  see  later  on.  But  it  was  only 
for  priestly  food,  besides  Jehovah's  memorial  and  all  the 
frankincense,  not  for  the  offerer  or  his  friends.  Here 
it  is  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  word  *  meat**  might 
convey  a  wrong  impression.  This  rendering  of  •'WP, 
possibly  obsolete  now,  seems  somewhat  faulty,  as  the 
idea  is  an  oflfering  of  what  was  bloodless,  emphatically 


LEVITICUS  I.- XV.  231 

that  which  never  possessed  animal  life.  Clearly  there- 
fore the  bumt-ofifering  and  the  meat-oflfering  stand  in 
distinct  contrast.  The  very  essence  of  the  bumt-oflfering 
is  the  surrender  of  life  absolutely  to  God.  This  no  man 
but  a  divine  person  was  capable  of  doing ;  but,  Jesus 
being  such,  infinite  is  the  value  of  His  self-sacrificing 
death  on  the  cross.  In  the  meat-oflfering  the  Lord  is 
pre-eminently  viewed  as  a  man  living  on  the  earth. 
Tliat  there  is  no  thought  of  death,  but  of  life  conse- 
crated to  God,  is  the  general  truth  of  the  food  or  cake- 
ofifering. 

Hence,  "when  any  will  offer  a  meat-oflfering  unto 
Jehovah,  his  oflfering  shall  be  of  fine  flour;  and  he 
shall  pour  oil  upon  it,  and  put  frankincense  thereon." 
It  is  simply  the  beautiful  emblem  of  Christ  as  man  in 
this  world.  His  humanity  is  represented  by  the  fine 
flour,  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  (which  is  so  set 
forth  in  scripture  from  His  very  conception)  by  the  oil 
poured  on  the  flour.  The  frankincense  shadowed  His  ever 
acceptable  fragrance  which  went  up  to  God  continually. 
All  this  was  brought  to  the  priests,  one  of  whom  took 
out  his  handful.  "And  he  shall  bring  it  to  Aaron's 
sons,  the  priests;  and  he  shall  take  thereout  his  handful 
of  the  flour  thereof,  and  of  the  oil  thereof,  with  all  the 
frankincense  thereof;  and  the  priest  shall  bum  the 
memorial  of  it  upon  the  altar,  to  be  an  offering  made  by 
fire,  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  Jehovah.  And  the  remnant 
of  the  meat-offering  shall  be  Aaron's  and  his  sons." 
Therein  we  see  another  marked  difference.  The  burnt- 
offering  as  a  whole  went  up  to  God,  or  in  its  lowest 
form  a  part  might  be  thrown  away ;  but  all  that  was 
used  was  solely  for  God.    In  the  oblation-offering  it  was 


232        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

not  80.    Part  of  it  went  to  the  priestly  body — ^to  Aaron 
and  his  sons. 

Thus  here  we  have  devotedness  not  in  death  so  much 
as  in  life — the  Holy  One  absolutely  consecrated  to 
God,  in  whom  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  moulded 
every  thought  and  feeling,  and  this  viewed  as  a  man 
here  below  in  all  His  ways  and  words.  Of  the  oblation- 
offering  not  merely  has  God  His  portion,  but  we  too  are 
entitled  to  feed  on  it.  Aaron  and  his  sons  represent  the 
Lord  Jesus  and  those  that  He  has  made  priests;  for 
He  "loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his 
own  blood,"  and  made  us  not  only  kings  but  '*  priests 
unto  God."  Clearly  then  in  Christ  and  Christians  we 
have  the  antitype  of  Aaron  and  his  sons.  Now  we  are 
entitled  to  delight  in  that  which  Jesus  was  here  below ; 
and  certainly  it  were  a  great  and  irreparable  loss  to  the 
soul  if  a  Christian  said  or  thought  that  he  had  nothing 
to  do  with  Christ  thus — that  he  had  the  death  of  the 
blessed  Lord,  but  no  special  portion  in  Him  as  He  lived 
for  God  here  below.  It  is  well  to  resent  those  who 
slight  or  ignore  the  value  of  Christ's  sufferings,  but  we 
must  beware  of  error  on  the  other  sida  Why  such 
scant  measure  ?  why  such  carelessness  ?  You  who  by 
grace  are  priests  to  Grod — ^you  at  least  should  value  that 
which  is  so  distinctly  marked  out  as  your  portion  and 
proper  food.  Is  it  not  the  miserable  working  of  un- 
belief, similar  in  principle  though  opposite  in  form,  to 
what  we  have  already  noticed — the  heart  rising  in 
fiednt  d^ree  above  the  sense  of  sins,  and  after  all  sins 
but  poorly  felt?  God  would  give  us  communion  with 
Himself  in  Christ — in  aU  that  He  is. 

The  first  presentation  is  simply  the  oblation  in  its 


LEVITICUS   I.- XV.  233 

constituents,  setting  forth  Christ  as  a  living  man,  His 
nature  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  with  every  grace 
offered  to  God  without  distraction  or  deflection  or 
drawback  (verse  1-3). 

The  second  part  (ver.  4-10)  distinguishes  between  the 
mingling  and  anointing  with  oil — holiness  in  nature 
and  power  for  service.  For  there  are  different  forms 
of  which  it  may  be  well  to  speak.  "  If  thou  bring  an 
offering  of  an  oblation  baken  in  the  oven;"  and,  again, 
"  an  oblation-offering  baken  in  a  pan."  In  the  latter  case 
the  oblation  was  parted  in  pieces,  when  oil  was  poured 
on  all,  as  before  sundering  it  had  been  mingled  with 
oil.  Thus,  besides  being  conceived  of  the  Spirit,  Jesus 
knew  this  trial  to  the  uttermost ;  and  His  suffering  in 
obedience  displayed  most  intimately  the  power  of  the 
Spirit  in  every  pang,  when  He  knew  as  none  ever  did 
rejection,  desertion,  denial,  treachery,  not  to  speak  of 
the  ignominy  of  the  cross.  The  break-up  of  every 
hope  and  prospect  which  befell  Him  at  the  close  only 
revealed  His  perfectness  of  spiritual  power  in  an  inward 
way  and  in  the  least  particular.  Surely  this  is  not 
a  mere  figure  without  meaning:  there  is  nothing  in 
vain  in  the  Bible.  It  is  not  for  us  to  presume  or 
to  exceed  our  measure,  but  we  may  search  with  at 
least  the  earnest  desire  to  understand  what  God  has 
written. 

I  take  it  then  that  in  the  first  part  we  have  the 
simple  typical  expression  of  the  nature  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  as  man ;  that  in  the  second,  the  oblation  baken 
in  the  oven,  the  pan,  and  the  frying-pan;  we  see  the 
Lord  as  man  exposed  to  various  phases  of  severe  trial 
The  oven  indicates  trial  applied  in  a  way  of  which  man 


234       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

may  not  particularly  be  the  witness.  The  oven  does  not 
so  much  represent  public  manifestation ;  the  pan  does.  If 
the  pan  means  that  which  was  exposed  to  others,  which  I 
suppose  to  be  its  force  here,  the  frying-pan*  is  only  an- 
other shape  of  the  same  principle,  the  shade  of  difference 
being  in  intensity.  Thus  we  have  secret  trial,  public 
trial,  and  this  to  the  utmost — ^in  different  forms  the  Lord 
Jesus  tried  in  every  possible  way.  Fir6  is  always  the 
emblem  of  that  which  searches  judicially;  and  the 
Lord  Jesus,  it  is  not  too  much  to  say,  in  every  way  was 
put  to  the  proof.  What  was  the  effect  ?  His  excellency 
shown  more  than  ever — the  manifestation  of  the  per- 
fection, and  of  nothing  but  perfection,  that  was  found 
in  Him. 

There  is  a  further  point  which  may  be  profitably 
noticed  here :  the  Spirit  of  God  particularly  mentions 
that  this  cake-oflfering  is  "a  thing  most-  holy  of  the 
offerings  of  Jehovah  made  by  fire."  There  is  another 
offering  which  is  said  to  be  mogt  holy.  This  remark- 
able phrase  the  Spirit  of  God  applies  in  two  cases  out 
of  the  four.  Xot  only  is  it  used  about  the  cake-offering 
which  represents  His  life  as  man  here  below,  the  very 
thing  in  which  man  has  dared  to  suspect  a  taiiit ;  but 
in  the  sin-offering  the  same  expression  again  occurs — 

*  I  know  not  whether  some  would  translate,  with  sufficient  reason, 
n&{^rnD  as  **  boiling  pot."    No  doubt  among  the  poor  one  utensil 

•    •     • 

was  made  to  serve  more  than  one  purpose.  Certainly  "l^D  would 
seem  to  express  a  large  pot  or  caldron.  If  boiling  be  meant  here,  we 
should  have  first  the  imcooked  elements  (verses  1-3),  which  typify 
Christ  viewed  in  His  nature  as  devoted  to  God,  and  tested  folly  by 
the  fire  of  trial ;  next  (verses  4-7),  the  three'cases  where  the  oblation 
was  cooked,  whether  baked,  Med,  or  boiled,  representing  the  blessed 
Lord  viewed  as  a  concrete  man  here  below,  and  tried  as  we  have  seen 
in  every  conceivable  way,  but  in  all  a  sweet  savour  to  GK)d. 


LEVITICUS   I.- XV.  235 

the  very  occasion  which  man  would  have  suspected,  if 
anywhere,  of  sullying  the  perfectness  of  His  glory. 
He  was  as  really  man  on  the  one  hand,  as  on  the  other 
our  sins  were  really  borne  by  Him.  Nothing  seems  to 
exceed  therefore  the  perfect  care  of  the  Holy  Ghost  for 
the  glory  of  Christ.  For  in  the  offering  for  sin,  where 
man  would  imagine  Him  in  some  way  lowered.  He 
takes  care  most  of  all  to  say  that  it  is  "  a  thing  most 
holy."  Or  again,  if  man  inferred  a  taint  in  His 
humanity,  the  word  of  the  Spirit,  ever  jealous  to 
glorify  Him,  is  "most  holy."  If  the  golden  plate  on  the 
high  priest's  forehead  displayed  hoUness  to  Jehovah, 
not  less  is  the  stamp  "most  holy"  placed  by  God  pre- 
cisely where  man  has  allowed  his  mind  to  speculate  to 
the  dishonour  of  Christ  as  man  and  as  a  sacrifice  for 
our  sins. 

Again,  in  the  meat-oflfering  observe  other  traits,  before 
we  pass  on  (ver.  11).  Leaven  was  absolutely  to  be  ex- 
cluded from  it,  the  familiar  figure  of  sin  as  in  us.  There 
was  none  in  Him :  He  "knew  no  sin."  Again,  there  was 
the  prohibition  of  "any  honey."  It  means  a  thing 
pleasant  and  not  wrong,  but  incapable  of  being  offered 
to  God.  There  cannot  be  a  finer  proof  of  the  absence 
in  Christ  of  a  sweetness  merely  natural  than  the  way 
He  acted  even  where  His  mother  was  concerned ;  for 
scripture  has  not  recorded  it  in  vain  that  she  did  ask 
our  Lord,  but  had  not  her  requests  granted.  He  came  to 
do  the  wiU  of  Him  that  sent  Him,  and  to  finish  His  work. 
As  a  child  He  lived  subject  to  Joseph  and  Mary ;  for 
Him  when  entered  on  the  service  of  Gtjd  it  would  have 
been  mingling  honey  with  the  cake-offering  if  He  had 
answered  her  petitions.     What  an  anticipation,  and 


236        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

indeed  rebuke,  for  the  vain  superstition  of  men  who 
would  make  Mary  the  chief  means  of  access  to  God  by 
influencing  His  Son !  He  was  perfect.  He  came  not  to 
gratify  even  the  amiable  side  of  human  nature.  He 
came  to  do  the  will  of  God.  This  He  did,  and  the 
oblation  or  cake-ofifering  shews  it.  There  was  the  unc- 
tion of  the  Spirit,  not  leaven,  and  the  salt  of  the  cove- 
nant (ver.  13),  not  honey.  This  did  not  exclude,  as  we 
are  told,  the  offering  as  first-fruits  honey  or  even  loaves 
baked  with  leaven  (though  in  this  case  with  an  accom- 
panying offering  for  sin.  Lev.  xxiiL);  but  they  could 
not  be  burnt,  as  not  being  in  themselves  a  sweet  savour 
(ver.  12). 

The  oblation  of  first-fruits,  typifying  Christ,  in  verses 
14-16,  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  that  which 
represents  the  Christian  assembly.  In  Lev.  xxiiL  we 
have  first  the  wave  sheaf  offered  on  the  morrow  of  the 
sabbath  after  the  Passover,  where  there  was  no  sin- 
offering,  but  a  burnt-sacrifice  and  meat  and  drink 
offerings;  and  then,  when  Pentecost  was  fully  come, 
the  new  oblation  of  two  wave-loaves  offered  but  not 
burnt,  with  a  kid  of  the  goats  for  sin,  but  with  all  the 
other  offerings  also.  For  what  could  be  wanting  now  ? 
In  Lev.  ii.  14-16  however,  as  distinguished  from  verse 
13,  only  Christ  appears  to  be  set  forth  in  the  tender 
stalks  of  corn  parched  by  the  fire — corn  mature  out  of 
full  ears  (or  fruitful  fields).  Oil  and  frankincense  were 
duly  added,  and  the  priest  causes  its  memorial  to  rise 
in  fumes,  a  fire-offering  to  Jehovah. 

The  "peace-offering"  (chap,  iii.)  might  be  somewhat 
mistaken.    The  phrase  used  in  the  authorised  version 


LEVITICUS   I -XV.  237 

does  not  fully  if  it  truly  convey  the  force,  as  it  appears 
to  me  at  least.  The  real  idea  of  it  is  a  feast,  or  com- 
munion sacrifice.  It  is  not  a  question  merely  of  the 
word,  but  of  the  truth  which  is  intended  by  it.  In  no 
way  does  it  indicate  the  means  of  making  peace  for  a 
sinner  with  God,  though  it  may,  as  in  the  plural,  imply 
things  relating  to  peace,  of  which  communion  and 
thanksgiving  are  chief.  The  ground  of  peace  for  us  laid 
in  the  blood  of  the  cross  so  naturally  suggested  by 
the  common  rendering,  is  what  one  would  guard  souls 
against :  it  could  only  mislead.  The  thought  seems  to 
be  a  feast-offering.  It  is  not  here  all  going  up  to  God 
(Christ  surrendering  Himself  to  God  up  to  His  death) ; 
nor  only  has  God  His  portion,  but  the  priestly  family 
have  theirs  (Christ  surrendering  Himself  in  His  life) ; 
but  Christ  is  alike  the  means  and  object  of  com- 
munion. It  rightly  therefore  follows  both  the  offerings 
of  a  sweet  savour, — the  holocaust  and  the  oblation ;  it 
approaches  the  former,  in  that  it  supposes  the  death  of 
Christ ;  it  resembles  but  it  surpasses  the  latter,  in  that 
if  part  is  for  God  there  is  part  for  man.  It  was  pre- 
eminently therefore  what  united  all  who  partook  of  it 
in  joy,  thanksgiving,  and  praise.  Hence  the  fellowship 
of  God,  the  priest,  the  offerer  and  his  family,  is  the 
impression  engraved  on  it.  We  need  not  anticipate  more 
of  the  details  now,  as  it  is  in  the  law  of  the  peace- 
offering  that  we  find  the  particulars  just  referred  to. 

A  few  words  will  sufl&ce  for  the  sacrifice  itself.  The 
victim  from  the  herd  or  flock  was  not  necessarily  a 
male.  This  more  perfect  image  of  Christ  was  not  here 
sought  as  in  the  burnt- offering.  The  feast -sacrifice 
descends  more  to  man  and  his  having  part  in  Christ. 


238        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Still  the  offering  must  be  unblemished;  and  here  as 
always  the  priests  alone  sprinkle  the  blood,  though 
anyone  might  slay.    We  find  here  much  stress  laid  on 
the  inwards  being  offered  up  to  God, — "the  fat  that 
covereth  the  inwards,  all  the  fat  that  is  upon  the  in- 
wards."   Some  expressions  bring  this  out  very  strongly, 
as  "It  is  the  food  of  the  offering  made  by  fire  unto 
JehovaL"    "And  the  priest  shall  bum  them  upon  the 
altar:  it  is  the  food  of  the  offering  made  by  fire  for 
a  sweet  savour:   all  the  fat  is  Jehovah's."    The  fat 
and  the  blood  were  claimed  exclusively  for  Him  in 
the  very  offering  which  apart  from  that  admits  and 
displays  the  communion  of  others  with  Him.     Now 
what  is  the  meaning  of  that?    And  why  such  promi- 
nence given  to  the  offering  of  the  fat?    For  of  the 
blood  I  need  say  no  more  here.    Where  anything  is 
diseased  or  poor,  the  fat  is  the  first  thing  to  betray  it. 
Where  some  state  wholly  wrong  exists,  energy  in  evil 
would  be  displayed  by  the  condition  of  the  fat.   Where 
all  was  good  and  sound,  the  fat  would  manifest  that  all 
was  perfectly  according  to  normal  condition.     On  the 
one  hand,  it  was  a  sign  of  flourishing  in  the  righteous ; 
on  the  other,  of  self-complacent  evil  in  the  wicked. 
Hence,  in  describing  Israel  as  a  proud  and  self-willed 
people,  we  well  know  how  Moses  used  this  very  figure 
as  the  index  of  their  energy  in  evil.     They  waxed  fat 
and  kicked.     It  was  evil  unchecked  in  will  and  its 
effects,  and  the  extreme  sentence  of  judgment  on  the 
people  of  Israel    In  our  blessed  Lord  it  was  the  energy 
that  went  forth  in  the  continual  business  of  obeying 
His  Father  with  joy  of  heart.    "  I  do  always  the  tldngs 
that  please  him." 


LEVITICUS  L-XV.  239 

It  is  here  then  that  we  find  our  fellowship  in 
Christ  Himself,  all  whose  strength  of  devotedness  and 
self-sacrifice  were  for  God;  and  here  is  the  basis  and 
substance  of  fellowship,  for  this  was  what  the  Father 
tasted  there,  and  delights  that  we  should  enjoy.  The 
fat  and  blood  are  His  "  bread,"  as  the  prophet  says, — 
the  blood  sprinkled  by  Aaron's  sons  round  about  on  the 
altar,  and  the  fat  and  inwards  burnt  carefully  there. 
"All  the  fat  is  Jehovah's.  It  shall  be  a  perpetual 
statute  for  your  generations  throughout  all  your  dwell- 
ings that  ye  eat  neither  fat  nor  blood."  But  save  His 
claim,  the  peace-offering  was  for  communion  in  joy,  not 
at  all  for  expiation.  It  was  eucharistic.  It  was  not  for 
Aaron  and  his  sons  like  the  mincha  or  oblation,  but  for 
the  united  joy  of  all  who  partook,  Jehovah,  the  priest, 
the  offerer  and  his  guests.  But  Jehovah's  portion  was 
to  be  burnt  on  the  burnt-offering;  the  link  was  thus 
manifest  on  an  occasion  of  joy  with  that  deepest  display 
of  Christ's  obedience  up  to  death. 

In  the  sin  and  trespass  offerings  which  follow  (chaps. 
iv.-vi.  7)  we  have  another  line  of  truth,  in  which  the 
person  ("  soul ")  as  well  as  the  nature  of  the  offence  are 
characteristically  prominent.  It  is  not  now  the  truth 
of  Christ's  dedication  of  Himself  in  death  as  well  as 
life  to  God;  neither  is  it  the  eucharistic  character  of 
the  thank  or  peace  offering  in  praise,  vow  or  free-will. 
We  have  here  vicarious  offerings  for  sin,  a  substitute 
for  the  sinner.    Different  measures  are  defined. 

In  the  case  of  the  priest  that  was  anointed  (verses 
3-12)  —  for  this  comes  first  —  a  bullock  was  to  be 
offered  "without  blemish  unto  Jehovah  for  a  sin-offering. 


240        LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

And  he  shall  bring  the  bullock  unto  the  door  of  the 
tabernacle  of  the  congregation  before  Jehovah;  and 
shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  bullock's  head,  and  kill  the 
bullock  before  Jehovah.  And  the  priest  that  is  anointed 
shall  take  of  the  bullock's  blood,  and  bring  it  to  the 
tabernacle  of  the  congregation.  And  the  priest  shall 
dip  his  finger  in  the  blood,  and  sprinkle  of  the  blood 
seven  times  before  Jehovah,  before  the  veil  of  the 
sanctuary."  He  had  to  put  some  of  the  blood  on  the 
horns  of  the  altar  of  sweet  incense.  It  is  of  deep  in- 
terest to  note  that  here  is  no  promise  of  expiation  for 
the  high  priest,  nor  consequently  of  forgiveness,  as  in 
all  the  other  cases.  Is  this  accident?  or  part  of  the 
profound  mind  of  God  in  scripture  ? 

It  is  the  same  thing  substantially  when  the  whole 
congregation  sinned  (verses  13-20).  In  this  case  also  a 
young  bullock  had  to  be  slain,  and  the  elders  must  do 
what  the  anointed  priest  did  in  the  former  case.  The 
blood  was  sprinkled  precisely  in  the  same  way,  and  put 
on  the  horns  of  the  same  altar,  and  the  rest  poured  out 
as  before.  So  too  the  fat  was  burnt  on  the  brazen  altar, 
and  the  rest  of  the  victim  burnt  outside  the  camp  as  in 
the  former  case. 

But  when  we  come  down  to  a  ruler,  there  is  another 
procedure.  The  word  in  this  case  is,  that  he  shall 
offer  "a  kid  of  the  goats,"  not  a  bullock;  and  the  priest 
was  to  put  of  the  blood  on  the  horns  of  the  altar 
of  burnt-offering — not  on  the  golden  altar. 

When  a  private  person  or  one  of  the  common  people 
sinned,  there  was  to  be  a  female  kid,  the  blood  of  which 
was  put  on  the  same  brazen  altar.  In  neither  case  of 
the  two  last  was  the  body  burnt  outside. 


LEVITICUS  I.- XV,  241 

It  is  evident  therefore,  we  find  a  graduated  scale  in 
these  different  instances.  Why  so?  Because  of  a  most 
solemn  principle.  The  gravity  of  sin  depends  on  the 
position  of  him  who  sins.  It  is  not  so  man  is  prone  to 
adjust  matters,  though  his  conscience  feels  its  rectitude. 
How  often  man  would  screen  the  offence  of  him  that  is 
great,  if  he  could!  The  same  might  be  hard  on  the 
poor,  friendless,  and  despised.  The  life  of  such  at  any 
rate  seems  of  no  great  account.  It  is  not  so  with  God, 
nor  ought  it  to  be  in  the  minds  and  estimate  of  His 
saints.  And  another  witness  of  this  in  the  last  instance 
is  not  without  interest  for  our  souls.  Only  to  one  of  the 
common  people  is  allowed  the  alternative  of  a  female 
lamb  instead  of  a  kid'  (verses  32-35),  the  offering  of 
which  for  his  sin  is  reiterated  with  the  same  minute 
care.* 

When  the  anointed  priest  sinned,  the  result  was  pre- 
cisely such  as  if  the  whole  congregation  sinned.  When 
a  prince  sinned,  it  was  a  different  matter,  though  a 
stronger  case  for  sacrifice  than  where  it  was  a  private 
man.  In  short,  therefore,  the  relationship  of  the  person 
that  was  guilty  determines  the  relative  extent  of  the 
sin,  though  none  was  obscure  enough  for  his  sin  to  be 
passed  by.  Our  blessed  Lord  on  the  other  hand  meets 
each  and  all.  Himself  the  true  anointed  priest,  the  only 
One  who  needs  no  offering — who  could  therefore  be  the 
offering  for  all,  for  any.  This  is  the  general  truth,  at 
least  on  the  surface  of  the  sin-offering.  The  offence  was 
brought  forward,  confessed,  and  judged.  The  Lord  Jesus 

*  Does  not  Hjn^  '^^tf:  bv  mean  "upon  the  fire-offerings  of  Jehovah," 
rather  than  "according  to"  them?  De  Wette  takes  it  as  "for  fire- 
offerings." 

R 


242        LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH.   ' 

becomes  the  substitute  in  this  case  for  him  that  was 
guilty;  and  the  blood  was  put  in  the  case  of  individuals 
on  the  brazen  altar,  as  it  only  needed  to  be  dealt  with 
in  the  place  of  sinful  man's  access  to  God.  But  where 
the  anointed  priest,  or  the  whole  congregation  sinned 
(either  interrupting  communion),  it  was  done  in  a  far 
more  solemn  manner.  Consequently  the  blood  must  be 
brought  into  the  sanctuary,  and  be  put  on  the  horns  of 
the  golden  altar. 

There  is  a  sensible  difference  in  the  offerings  which 
follow.  It  would  seem  that  the  sin-offering  is  more 
connected  with  nature,  although  it  might  be  proved  by 
a  particular  sin,  and  that  the  trespass-offering  is  more 
connected  with  that  which,  while  it  might  be  in  the 
holy  things  of  Jehovah,  or  at  least  against  Him,  in- 
volved the  offender  in  a  fault  or  wrong  towards  his 
neighbour,  and  needed  amends  as  well  as  a  confession 
of  guilt  in  the  offering.  On  this  however  there  is  no 
call  for  discussion  at  present.  There  might  be  a  kind 
of  mingling  of  the  two  things,  and  to  this  there  seems 
to  be  regard  in  the  beginning  of  chap.  v.  1-13.  There 
is  nothing  more  astonishing  than  the  accuracy  of  the 
word  of  God  when  we  submit  humbly  as  well  as 
honestly  search  into  it. 

Let  it  be  observed,  moreover,  that  in  all  the  proper 
sin-offerings,  the  priest  not  only  put  some  of  the  blood 
on  the  altar  (golden  or  brazen,  as  the  case  might  re- 
quire), but  poured  all  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of  the 
altar  of  burnt-offering.  It  was  a  substitute  for  the  life 
of  the  sinner,  and  was  thus  poured  out  where  God,  in 
righteousness  but  in  love  also,  met  him  in  virtue  of 
Christ,  who,  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  drew  thither  tp 


LEVITICU6  I.- XV.  243 

Himself.  There  accordingly,  precisely  as  in  the  direc- 
tions for  the  peace-ofiferings  (chap.  iii.  9,  10),  the  fat, 
especially  on  the  inwards,  kidneys,  and  caul  (or  lobe) 
above  the  liver,  were  taken  and  burnt  on  the  altar,  while 
the  bullock  as  a  whole,  skin,  flesh,  head,  legs,  inwards, 
and  dung,  had  to  be  taken*  without  the  camp  and  burnt 
in  a  clean  place  there,  in  testimony  to  God's  vengeance 
on  sin — at  least  wherever  the  blood  was  sprinkled  before 

*  It  may  not  be  amiss  to  give  a  sample  of  Bishop  Colenso's  critical 
candour  and  intelligence  in  his  remarks  on  Lev.  iv.  11,  12.  (Parti. 
ch.  vi.    I  quote  from  the  fourth  edition  revised,  1863.)  In  his  citation 
he  ventures  to  insert  (the  Priest)  after  "shaU  he"  and  before  " carry 
forth."  His  comment  is :  "  In  that  case,  the  ofTal  of  the  sacrifices  would 
have  had  to  be  carried  by  Aaron  himself,  or  one  of  his  sons,  a  distance 
of  six  miles  (!) ;  and  the  same  difficulty  would  have  attended  each  of  the 
other  transactions  above-mentioned.     In  fact,  we  have  to  imagine 
the  Priest  having  himself  to  convey, — we  may  suppose,  with  the  help 
of  others, — from  St.  Paul's  to  the  outskirts  of  the  Metropolis  the  'skin, 
and  ^esh,  and  head,  and  legs,  and  inwards,  and  dung,  even  the  whole 
IraUock;'  and  the  people  having  to  carry  out  their  rubbish  in  like 
manner  and  bring  in  their  daily  supplies  of  water  and  fuel,  after  first 
cutting  down  the  latter  where  they  could  find  it."    Now  even  in  our 
language  it  would  be  unwarrantable  for  a  man  professedly  honest  or 
trathfiil  to  fix  on  the  words  "  shall  carry  "  the  necessity  of  personally 
doing  this  work  in  order  to  cast  doubt  or  ridicule  on  the  record.  What 
ahaU  be  said  of  one  ostensibly  in  the  position  of  a  chief  servant  of 
Chiist  so  doing  by  holy  scripture  ?  But  this  is  far  short  of  the  gravity 
of  his  g^t.    For  a  tyro  in  Hebrew  knows  that  verbs  are  susceptible 
of  a  change  in  form  which  gives  a  causative  force.    Such  is  the  fact 
'here.     The  verb  orig^inally  means  to  "go  forth;"  in  the  Hiphil  it 
means  "to  cause  to  go  forth,"  leaving  entirely  open  the  agency  em- 
ployed.   If  it  be  sorrowful  to  make  blunders  in  scripture  exposition 
with  good  and  reverent  intentions,  what  can  account  for  such  excessive 
ignosance  as  is  displayed  in  this  instance  F    Were  it  a  heathen  enemy 
who  thus  reproached  Gtod  and  His  word,  one  could  understand  that 
the  haste  to  blame  what  is  above  man's  mind  often  exposes  itself 
thus ;  but  what  shaU  we  say  of  one  who  so  comes  to  us  in  the  cloth- 
ing not  of  a  sheep  merely  but  of  a  shepherd  ? 

B  2 


244       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Jehovah,  before  the  vail.  (Compare  chap.  iv.  7-12,  17- 
21.)  In  the  case  of  an  individual  Israelite,  whether 
a  prince  or  a  soul  of  the  people  of  the  land,  there  was 
neither  sprinkling  of  the  blood  before  the  vail  of  the 
sanctuary  nor  burning  of  the  body  without  the  camp, 
and  the  blood  was  put  by  the  priest  on  the  horns  of  the 
brazen  (not  the  golden)  altar. 

In  the  transition  cases  of  Lev.  v.  1-13,  the  oflFering 
seems  to  be  called  both  a  trespass*  and  a  sin-ofifering 
(compare  verses  6,  7,  and  9,  11,  12) ;  yet  only  a  con- 
necting particle  opens  the  section.    The  former  class 

*  I  am  aware  of  the  confident  statements  of  Drs.  Davidson  and 
Fairbaim  on  this  point.  The  question  is  whether  they  are  well 
founded.  The  former  (Introd.  0.  T.  i.  267)  says,  **  VSHbosoever  wishes 
to  ascertain  the  points  of  difference  between  these  two  classes  of 
offerings  must  carefully  read  Lev.  y.  14-26  and  vii.  1-10,  relating  to 
the  trespass-offering;  and  v.  1-13,  vi.  17-23,  which  refer  to  the  sin- 
offering.  He  should  particularly  guard  against  the  mistake  of  refer- 
ring v.  5,  6  to  the  trespass-offering,  since  it  relates  to  the  ain-offering 
alone.  The  passage  says,  that  if  one  be  guilty  in  any  of  the  things 
mentioned  in  v.  1-4,  he  shall  confess  that  he  has  sinned,  and  bring  his 
IDK^S  his  debt,  his  due  cofnpenaation,  or  simply  his  offering.  The  word 
has  the  same  sense  in  v.  15 ;  Num.  y.  7.  Nothing  can  be  more  incor- 
rect than  to  affirm  with  Kitto,  that  the  same  offerings  are  called 
interchangeably  sin-offerings  and  trespass-offerings  in  Ley.  v.  6-9. 
DK'^  has  three  meanings — viz.,  guilt,  as  in  Gen.  xxvi.;  debt,  or  what 
is  due  for  contracting  for  guilt ;  and  sacrifice  for  certain  sins,  i.e.,  sin" 
offering.  Thus  the  term  D(^^  is  not  appropriated  to  trespass-offerings 
wherever  it  occurs,  but  is  of  wider  significance.  The  occasions  on 
which  the  two  classes  of  offerings  were  made  cannot  with  truth  be 
pronounced  the  same ;  nor  were  the  ceremonies  alike,  though  these 
assertions  have  been  made." 

Dr.  F.  (Typ.  u.  348)  remarks  truly  that  the  section  to  the  end  of 
verse  13  was  added  to  the  end  of  chap.  v.  without  the  formula,  ''  Je- 
hovah spake  unto  Moses,  saying."  But  does  he  not  go  too  &r  in 
asserting  that  it  was  to  specify  certain  occasions  in  which  it  should  be 
presented,  and  to  make  provision  for  the  destitute  ?    Is  it  not  plain 


LEVITICUS  I.-3CV.  245 

regarded  sin  in  itself  where  the  conscience  was  bad 
from  the  first ;  the  transitional  class  that  follows  treats 
rather  of  sin  viewed  in  its  consequences,  and  admits  of 
consideration,  which  the  first  class  did  not  with  a  single 
and  slight  exception.  But  here  we  have  an  option  of 
unexampled  largeness,  and  the  more  to  be  noticed  be- 
cause sin  was  in  question.  When  the  sin  came  to  be 
known,  the  guilty  person  confessed  it,  bringing  a  female 
lamb  or  kid ;  if  his  hand  were  insufficient  for  this,  two 
turtle-doves  or  two  young  pigeons — one  for  a  sin- 
offering,  and  the  other  for  a  burnt-oflfering ;  and  if  his 
hand  reached  not  to  this,  the  tenth  of  an  ephah  of  flour 

that  chap.  iv.  is  the  faU  ordinary  case  of  sin  in  error,  but  against 
oommandments  of  Jehovah,  doing  what  ought  not  to  be  done  ?  and 
that  Y.  1-13  is  an  appendix  of  defilement  through  Jehovah's  ordi- 
nance, rather  than  a  violation  of  natural  conscience  ?  These  cases  of 
refusal  under  adjuration  (1),  ceremonial  uncleanness  (2,  3),  and  the 
breaking  of  rash  oaths  (4),  are  specified  in  a  way  which  is  not  seen 
in  the  more  solemn  sin-offering,  which  was  also  general.  Hence, 
being  peculiar,  we  have  a  variety  of  offerings  quite  as  distinct 
from  the  usual  sin-offering  as  from  the  formal  trespass-offering  where 
separation  was  made.  It  is  true  that  in  these  appended  cases  '*  sin- 
offering"  is  used  (v.  6-9,  11,  12) ;  but  I  do  not  think  it  correct  to  say 
that  a  **  trespass-offering"  in  verse  6  is  a  mere  mistranslation,  or  that 
the  expression  in  the  original  is  the  same  in  verse  7.  For  although 
OSfK  is  not  always  determinately  a  trespass-offering,  but  is  used 
more  generaUy,  sometimes  for  guilt  and  its  punishment,  yet  it  can 
hardly  be  assumed  without  good  reason  where  we  are  on  ground  so 
precise  as  the  distinct  offerings.  And  to  me  it  is  evident  that  the 
word  is  not  used  in  exactly  the  same  way  in  Lev.  v.  6,  7, "  for  his  sin" 
(inK^n  bv\  following  in  the  former  case,  not  in  the  latter,  which 
makes  all  the  difference,  and  justifies,  I  think,  the  Authorised  Version, 
the  Samaritan,  De  Wette,  Dr.  Benisch,  and  Mr.  Young.  The  Vulgate 
is  vagpieness  itself;  the  Ixx.  and  the  Targum  of  Onkelos  seem  to  favour 
Dr.  F.,  and  so  probably  Luther.  Thus  ancients  and  modems  differ, 
and  the  point  is  evidently  not  easy  to  decide.  The  word  may  be  used 
in  a  general  rather  than  its  specific  sense. 


246        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

was  brought  by  the  sinner,  but  no  oil  nor  frankincense, 
as  it  was  a  sin-oflfering.  The  priest  grasped  his  hand- 
ful, it^  memorial,  and  burnt  it  on  the  altar  in  expiation 
for  his  sin  which  should  be  forgiven,  retaining  the 
rest  as  an  oblation.  Here,  again,  what  compassion  for 
the  poor  in  divine  things !  Yet  there  is  tihe  nicest  care 
of  holiness,  not  only  where  conscience  at  once  told  the 
tale  of  sin,  but  where  it  may  not  have  been  bad  till  it 
knew  the  consequence  of  overlooking  some  ordinance 
of  government  or  legal  purity.  When  it  thus  became 
bad,  there  must  be  both  confession  and  sin-offering  in 
order  to  forgiveness.  On  the  other  hand,  God  would  not 
let  circumstances  hinder  the  poorest  from  the  comfort 
of  atonement  as  well  as  the  duty  of  confession.  The 
offering  of  fine  flour  for  sin  is  exactly  the  exception 
which  proves  the  rule,  as  it  was  manifestly  owing  to 
destitution  on  the  offerer's  part,  and  only  a  graciously- 
allowed  substitute  for  a  bloody  offering  otherwise  indis- 
pensable. A  soul  may  feel  its  need  of  atonement,  and 
look  to  Christ  as  a  sin-bearer  without  anything  like  a 
full  perception  of  His  blood  and  death:  will  the  grace 
of  God  shut  out  from  the  effects  of  His  work  because 
of  imtoward  circumstances  which  hindered  more  know- 
ledge ?    Assuredly  I  do  not  think  so. 

Chap.  V.  14  gives  a  new  word  of  Jehovah  to  Moses, 
as  we  see  in  the  beginning  of  chap.  vi.  also.  Both  sec- 
tions however  (chaps,  v.  14-19  and  vi.  1-7)  share  the 
common  principle  of  making  amends,  or  restitution,  and 
the  common  name  of  trespass  or  guilt-offering,  which 
was  necessarily  a  ram,  the  blood  of  which  (as  we  learn 
from  its  law,  chap,  vii.)  was  sprinkled  round  about 
upon  the  altar,  not  poured  out  or  shed  at  its  base  as 


LEVITICUS  I.- XV.  247 

with  the  sin-oflFering.  The  proper  oflferings  for  guilt  or 
trespass,  then,  consist  of  two  classes :  first,  wrongs  done 
in  the  holy  things  of  Jehovah  (probably  firstfruits, 
tithes,  &c.),  or  by  doing  something  against  Jehovah's 
commands,  afterwards  found  out;  secondly,  wrongs  which 
Jehovah  counts  done  against  Him,  though  not  sacri- 
legious or  transgressive  like  the  former,  but  acts  of 
fraud  and  violence  with  deceit  against  men.  In  all 
such  cases,  besides  an  unblemished  ram  for  the  trespass- 
offering,  with  the  payment  of  the  value  of  the  wrong 
that  was  done,  a  fifth  was  added  according  to  the  valua- 
tion of  Moses,  and  given  either  to  the  priest  in  the 
former  class,  or  to  the  party  wronged  in  the  second 
class. 

Then  follow  the  various  laws  of  the  offerings. 
(Chapters  vi  8,  vii.) 

As  before,  the  burnt-offering  stands  first.  Here  it 
is  an  interesting  fact  to  learn  that  the  fire  burning 
on  the  altar  was  never  to  go  out.  Nothing  can 
be  more  express  than  this  repeated  injunction.  All 
night  it  must  burn,  and  never  go  out.  It  is  night  as 
regards  the  world — not  for  those  that  are  children  of 
the  day — in  a  certain  moral  sense  at  any  rate.  But  the 
fire  never  goes  out,  and  when  God  wakes  up  His  people 
and  the  nations,  how  precious  to  find  that  the  offering 
has  been  once  offered  by  reason  of  which  those  who 
submit  to  His  righteousness  will  be  acceptable  to  God ! 
All  was  burnt  to  God,  nothing  eaten  by  man. 

Next  comes  the  liw  of  the  oblation  or  food-offering, 
in  which  we  find  particularly  specified  that  Aaron  and 
his  sons  are  to  eat  of  it    "With  unleavened  bread 


248        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

shall  it  be  eaten  in  the  holy  placa"  Those  that  par- 
take of  Christ  and  are  priests  to  God  enjoy  by  faith  His 
devoting  Himself  in  life  unto  God,  and  had  better  be- 
ware of  that  which  ill  assorts  with  it.  With  unleavened 
bread,  which  sets  forth  absolute  separation  from  the  evil 
of  nature,  it  was  to  be  eaten,  as  also  in  the  holy  place. 
Is  it  not  most  derogatory  to  the  grace  which  brings  us 
nigh  to  trifle  with  Christ  thus  known  ?  I  know  nothing 
more  hatefuUy  defiling  than  the  way  in  which  men  who 
have  no  faith  in  Christ,  nor  sense  of  their  sin  or  need, 
nor  care  for  the  glory  of  God,  affect  in  an  eulogistic 
way  to  take  up  the  life  of  Christ  and  pronounce  on  His 
excellency  here  or  there.  Is  not  this  to  eat  the  obla- 
tion in  the  world  and  with  leavened  bread  ? 

Besides  we  have  the  offering  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  on 
the  day  of  his  anointing — a  peculiar  case  of  the  obla- 
tion. 

At  the  end  of  chapter  vL  is  the  law  of  the  sin- 
offering;  and  in  the  beginning  of  chapter  vii  that  of 
the  trespass-offering.  Here,  as  in  the  oblation,  the 
priests  were  to  eat  in  the  holy  place :  in  the  former  it 
was  communion  with  His  grace  as  man,  in  the  latter 
communion  with  Him  on  behalf  of  the  sinner  through 
His  work. 

But,  remarkably  enough,  and  nicely  distinguished 
as  we  shall  see,  the  thank  or  peace-offering  only  appears 
after  these,  and  at  great  length.  Thus  it  stands  last  in  the 
list  of  the  laws,  whereas  it  preceded  the  sin  and  trespass- 
offerings  themselves.  Can  it  be  doubted  that  all  this  has 
designed  significance,  and  that  here  the  Spirit  of  God 
reserves  for  the  last  place  the  sacrifice  which  typifies 
Christ  for  communion,  when  it  is  a  question  of  the  law 


LEVITICUS  I.- XV.'  249 

of  its  use  ?  For  there  is  nothing  finer  among  the  offer- 
ings than  this  sacrifice  when  we  come  to  practice. 
Whatever  may  be  the  order  of  communication  on  God's 
part  as  we  look  at  Christ ;  whatever  the  application  to  the 
sinner  as  we  look  at  ourselves,  jbhe  peace-ofifering  is  the 
last  when  we  come  to  take  it  up  as  a  matter  representing 
practically  the  state  of  our  souls.  Communion  as  set 
forth  by  the  peace-ofifering  is  what  most  of  all  answers  to 
our  soul's  state,  in  order  that  we  be  able  to  turn  to  God 
in  praise  and  thanksgiving.  There  were  two  chief  forms. 
If  ofifered  as  a  thanksgiving,  it  was  to  be  offered  on  the 
same  day,  and  no  part  kept.  But  if  it  was  a  vow  or 
voluntary  offering,  on  the  morrow  the  remainder  might 
be  eaten.  We  constantly  find  the  same  thing  true  in 
our  souls  now.  There  are  two  different  measures  in 
worshipping  God ;  both  real,  but  by  no  means  possess- 
ing the  same  power.  We  see  souls  thoroughly  happy 
in  the  sense  of  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  them,  and 
they  break  forth  in  grateful  thanks.  Who  would  not 
join  them  in  it  ?  It  is  truly  delightful,  and  quite  right 
in  its  place.  It  may  be  elementary,  it  is  true,  but  real 
worship  of  God.  Yet  it  wants  the  power  that  sustains. 
In  the  vow  we  see  more,  where  it  is  not  simply  a 
question  of  what  has  been  done  for  us,  and  what  we 
have  ourselves  received,  but  the  heart  can  thoroughly 
delight  in  what  Christ  is  Himself  before  God.  This 
abides.     There  is  no  change  here. 

In  chapter  viii.  we  begin  the  history  of  the  consecra- 
tion of  the  priests ;  for  now  having  been  given  the  offer- 
ings, with  their  laws,  we  in  due  order  come  to  the 
persons  who  had,  if  not  to  offer  them,  certainly  to  act 


250        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

for  the  people  as  to  them  in  the  sanctuary.  That  which' 
had  been  .laid  down  as  a  requisition  in  Exodus  xxviii., 
xxix.  is  now  carried  out  practically  as  to  the  family  of 
Aaron.  *'  Take  Aaron  and  his  sons  with  him,  and  the 
garments,  and  the  anointing  oil,  and  a  bullock  for  the 
sin-oflfering,  and  two  rams,  and  a  basket  of  unleavened 
bread;  and  gather  thou  all  thB  congregation  together 
unto  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation. 
And  Moses  did  as  Jehovah  commanded  him."  And 
there  Moses  brings  forth  Aaron  and  his  sons,  and 
washes  them  with  water.  In  this  we  see  the  failure  of 
any  type  to  represent  Christ.  Aaron  of  course,  as  weU 
as  his  sons,  had  to  be  washed.  In  Christ  there  was  no 
need;  nay,  He  came  to  cleanse  others.  What  the 
washing  did  for  Aaron,  Jesus  was,  and  infinitely  more. 
The  absolute  purity  of  Christ  as  man  no  doubt  fitted 
Him  so  far  to  be  a  priest.  At  the  same  time,  we 'must 
carefully  remember  that  there  is  an  element  in  the 
priesthood  of  Christ  that  could  not  be  given  in  any 
type,  of  which  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  makes  much. 
The  personal  basis  of  the  priesthood  of  Christ  consisted 
in  this,  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God.  Others  were 
merely  sons  of  men;  and  so  in  this  case  a  priest  was 
one  taken  from  among  men.  This  was  not  the  ground 
of  Christ's  priesthood.  It  was  no  doubt  necessary  that 
He  should  be  a  man,  but  that  which  attested  His  dis- 
tinguishing character  as  Priest  was  that  He  was  the 
Son  of  God.  And  hence  the  title  applied  to  Him  in 
the  second  Psalm  the  Holy  Ghost  reasons .  on  in  the 
same  fifth  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  in 
contrasting  Him  with  Aaron  and  his  sons.  Accordingly 
thej^  as  knowing  what  man  was,  could  ^feel  for  poor 


LEVITICUS  I.- XV.  251 

man,  bec5ause  they  were  poor  men  themselves.  But  the 
Son  of  God  was  altogether  different.  Immeasurably 
above  man,  all  His  heart  could  go  out  for  man.  He 
was  absolutely  above  the  condition  in  which  man  was 
involved  by  the  fall,  not  merely  in  so  much  as  He  was 
a  holy  man,  but  as  the  Son  of  God.  For  this  very 
reason  there  was  perfect  liberty  of  heart  to  take  up  the 
need  of  others ;  and  so  He  did.  This  does  not  at  all 
clash  with  the  distinct  truth  of  His  suffering.  Much 
which  He  endured  was  just  because  He  was  the  Holy 
One.  ELis  sufferings  therefore  essentially  differed  frocfi 
that  kind  of  chastening  which  we,  alas !  know  when 
buffeted  for  our  faults.  There  never  was  in  Jesus  any- 
thing short  of  sufferings  for  grace  or  for  righteousness, 
except  when  we  come  to  the  cross,  when  there  was  suf- 
fering for  sin ;  but  it  was  ours  entirely — not  His. 

In  this  case  then  Aaron  washed  could  be  but  a  feeble 
type  of  Jesus  in  His  own  essential  purity.  Upon  him 
the  coat  and  the  girdle  and  the  robe  and  the  ephod 
were  put,  and  with  the  curious  girdle  bound  upon  him. 
"And  he  put  the  breastplate  upon  him:  also  he  put 
in  the  breastplate  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim.  And 
he  put  the  mitre  upon  his  head ;  also  upon  the  mitre, 
even  upon  his  forefront,  did  he  put  the  golden  plate, 
the  holy  crown ;  as  Jehovah  commanded  Moses.  And 
Moses  took  the  anointing  oil,  and  anointed  the  taber- 
nacle and  all  that  was  therein,  and  sanctified  them. 
And  he  sprinkled  thereof  upon  the  altar  seven  times, 
and  anointed  the  altar  and  all  his  vessels,  both  the 
laver  and  his  foot,  to  sanctify  them.  And  he  poured  of 
the  anointing  oil  upon  Aaron's  head."  Mark  that«it 
was  without  blood :  a  most  striking  fact.    Although  a 


252        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

sinful  man  like  the  priests,  his  sons,  still  (that  he  might 
not  stand  in  flagrant  contradiction  to  Him  of  whom  he 
was  a  type)  Aaron  was  anointed  with  the  oil  before  the 
blood  was  shed.  It  is  worthy  of  observation  that  the 
tabernacle  was  anointed  (verse  10)  and  all  therein,  the 
altar  and  all  its  vessels,  with  the  laver  and  its  base, 
before  the  sprinkling  with  blood.  The  force  of  this  is 
plain  and  momentous  as  applied  to  the  power  of  the 
Spirit  in  which  Christ  claims  the  heavenly  things  and 
indeed  the  universe;  especially  when  we  notice  that 
the  altar  is  purified  by  blood  but  no  anointing  follows. 
Afterwards  (verse  13)  we  find  Aaron's  sons  broi:^ht, 
and  they  are  clothed  too,  but  they  are  not  anointed. 
"And  he  brought  the  bullock  for  the  sin-offering: 
and  Aaron  and  his  sons  laid  their  hands  upon  the 
head  of  the  bullock  for  the  sin-ofifering."  Indeed, 
Aaron  was  a  sinful  man;  but  there  was  this  careful 
reserve — that  Aaron  received  the  anointing  oil  before 
the  sin-ofifering  was  killed,  and  before  the  blood  there- 
fore was  sprinkled  on  him.  Notwithstanding,  when 
the  sin-ofifering  was  slain,  Aaron  and  his  sons  alike  laid 
their  hands  on  its  head;  and  Moses  took  the  blood, 
and  put  it  on  the  horns  of  the  altar  to  purify  it,  and 
poured  the  rest  at  the  base.  Then,  after  burning  the 
sin-ofifering  without  the  camp,  we  are  told  of  one  ram 
for  the  bumt-ofifering,  and  another  for  consecration,  to 
set  forth  special  devotedness  to  God  as  priests.  There- 
on the  blood  is  put  on  Aaron's  right  ear  and  thumb  and 
foot,  as  well  as  on  his  sons.'  But  we  must  remember 
that  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  as  here,  the  points  of 
analogy,  however  strong,  always  fall  short  of  the  full 
glory  of  Christ.    They  were  the  shadows,  and  not  the 


:v.  255 

vs  wholesome  for  us 
holiness — ^to  sell  in- 
'icrion  under  the  sun 
is  revealed  of  God. 
revelation,  when  it 
st  man,  not  yet  of 
■  unsparingly:  how 
d  and  dealt  with 
v  the  power  of  the 
iiose  that  believe! 
severity  is  seen 
o  of  those  stand- 
lay  ; — so  much  so 
0  whole  building 
IS  were  complete. 
oet  the  occasion, 
for  holy  exhor- 
aron,    and    unto 
iicover  not  your 
ye  die,  and  lest 
Kit  your  brethren, 
^  burning -which 
c  did  not  become 
lemselves  up  to 
a  carnal  excite- 
liis  is  forbidden. 
:  li  are  prohibited 
]i  was  a  serious 
But  connected 
as  uncomely  on 
o  God.     "And 
not  drink  wine 


254       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

In  the  next  chapter  (x.)  we  have  a  humiliating  fact 
— ^the  total  feebleness  of  man  in  this  new  relationship 
of  blessing  to  which  he  was  called.  ''And  Nadab  and. 
Abihu,  the  sons  of  Aaron,  took  either  of  them  his  censer, 
and  put  fire  therein,  and  put  incense  thereon,  and  oflfered 
strange  fire  before  Jehovah,  which  he  commanded  them 
not.  And  there  went  out  fire  from  Jehovah  and 
devoured  them,  and  they  died  before  Jehovah."  The 
consecration  was  but  complete.  Scarce  did  they  actually 
stand  forth  as  priests  of  Jehovah,  when  two  of  them  had 
so  failed  that  the  fire  of  divine  judgment  devours  them, 
instead  of  signifying  in  peace  the  acceptance  of  the 
victims.  "  Then  Moses  said  unto  Aaron,  This  is  it  that 
Jehovah  spake,  saying,  I  will  be  sanctified  in  them 
that  come  nigh  me,  and  before  all  the  people  I  will  be 
glorified." 

You  will  find  this  alwuys  to  be  the  difference 
between  that  which  is  of  God  and  that  which  is  of 
man.  A  human  religion  instinctively  makes  excuses 
for  its  officials,  and  never  fails  to  allow  a  certain  lati- 
tude and  license  for  those  that  propagate  it.  Tlie  true 
God  nowhere  maintains  the  nice  exigencies  of  His  own 
character  so  much  as  in  those  who  are  nearest  to  Him 
and  most  favoured  by  Him.  There  is  not  a  heart  and 
conscience  renewed  of  God  but  must  feel  how  right  and 
becoming  it  is  that  so  it  should  be.  No  doubt  flesh 
shrinks  from  such  searching  work;  but  Christianity 
means  and  is  based  on  the  judgment,  not  the  sparing, 
of  the  flesh — the  gospel  of  Christ,  and  the  Christian 
boasts  in  it  with  the  apostle.  There  is  nothing  like  the 
cross  for  God  morally;  but  it  is  God  acting  in  our 
interest,  as  well  as  for  His  own  glory.    Nothing  more 


LEVITICUS  I- XV.  255 

dishonouring  to  Him,  nothing  less  wholesome  for  us 
than  to  give  a  dispensation  for  unholiness — ^to  sell  in- 
dulgences ;  yet  it  is  what  every  religion  under  the  sun 
has  done  in  efifect,  save  that  which  is  revealed  of  God. 
Even  in  tixe  lowest  form  of  God's  revelation,  when  it 
was  a  question  of  schooling  the  first  man,  not  yet  of 
the  Second,  we  see  man's  way  judged  unsparingly :  how 
much  more  where  all  sin  is  discerned  and  dealt  with 
fully,  whether  in  the  cross  itself  or  by  the  power  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  the  consciences  of  those  that  believe ! 
But  immediately  God  with  solemn  severity  is  seen 
gravely  resenting  the  liberty  which  two  of  those  stand- 
ing high  in  religious  rank  took  that  day ; — so  much  so 
that  men  might  taunt  and  say  that  the  whole  building 
had  broken,  down  before  the  very  walls  were  complete. 
But  the  mediator  was  enabled  to  meet  the  occasion, 
and  turns  the  chastening  into  matter  for  holy  exhor- 
tation. "And  Moses  said  unto  Aaron,  and  unto 
Eleazar,  and  unto  Ithamar,  his  sons.  Uncover  not  your 
heads,  neither  rend  your  clothes ;  lest  ye  die,  and  lest 
wrath  come  upon  all  the  people :  but  let  your  brethren, 
the  whole  house  of  Israel,  bewail  the  burning  ^which 
Jehovah  hath  kindled."  He  felt  that  it  did  not  become 
those  so  near  to  Jehovah  to  yield  themselves  up  to 
natural  grief,  any  more  than  to  allow  a  carnal  excite- 
ment in  His  worship.  Henceforward  this  is  forbidden. 
The  outward  signs  of  mourning  for  death  are  prohibited 
for  the  priests.  Certainly  the  occasion  was  a  serious 
one,  and  fully  tested  the  principle.  But  connected 
with  it  we  learn  that  excitement  is  just  as  uncomely  on 
their  part  who  enjoy  such  nearness  to  God.  "And 
Jehovah  spake  unto  Aaron,  saying.  Do  not  drink  wine 


256       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

nor  strong  drink,  thou,  nor  thy  sons  with  thee,  when  ye 
go  into  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  lest  ye  die :  it 
shall  be  a  statute  for  ever  throughout  your  generations." 
No  doubt  it  had  also  a  practical  bearing.  Drinking 
wine  or  the  like  might  unfit  one  for  putting  difference 
between  holy  and  unholy.  But  first  and  foremost,  and 
most  rightly,  it  did  not  suit  the  presence  of  God :  next, 
it  unfitted  for  the  safe  and  holy  help  of  man  sur- 
rounded by  evil  and  perplexity. 

Afterward  oversight  appears  even  in  the  rest  of 
Aaron's  sons,  inasmuch  as  they  burnt  the  goat  of  the 
sin-offering,  for  which  Moses  was  angry  with  Eleazar 
and  Ithamar.  The  failure  thus  was  complete.  Two  of 
them  paid  the  penalty  with  their  lives;  the  other  two 
were  only  spared  in  answer  to  the  intercession  of  Aaron. 

The  next  chapter  (xi.)  gives  in  detail  this  very  differ- 
ence of  clean  and  unclean,  but  here  the  multiplicity  of 
minute  points  admonishes  for  this  sketch  no  more  than 
a  passing  survey.  It  was  not  the  point  to  furnish  in- 
formation as  to  the  wholesome  or  unwholesome ;  but  a 
moral  end  is  everywhere  uppermost.  Jehovah  would 
have  Israel  confide  in  Him  and  His  choice  for  them  as 
a  peculiar  and  consecrated  people.  Doubtless  He  chose 
what  was  good,  nay,  the  best;  and  His  restrictions 
were  not  without  the  discerning  insight  of  One  who 
made  each  creature  and  had  called  out  His  people  to 
be  under  His  righteous  government,  and  looked  onward 
to  a  heavenly  family  who  would  gather  His  mind  by 
the  Spirit  couched  under  these  outward  shadows. 

It  may  suflBce  for  the  present  that  these  remarks  be 
made  as  to  it — that  the  essential  condition  in  the  land 


LEVITICUS  L-XV.  257 

animals  at  any  rate  allowed  for  food  consisted  in  this, 
that  there  should  be  a  clean  and  firm  walk,  and  along 
with  it  mature  digestion.  If  there  was  failure  in  either, 
it  was  not  fitting  food  for  an  Israelite  (verses  2,  3). 
Hence  the  camel,  the  coney  (or  daman),  the  hare,  and 
the  swine,  failing  in  one  or  other  of  these  conditions 
could  not  be  eaten  nor  their  carcases  touched  without 
defilement  (verses  4-8).  Thus,  if  we  apply  this  prac- 
tically enough  to  shew  its  bearing,  let  us  suppose  a 
person  ever  so  clear  in  apprehending  truth,  but  without 
conscience  as  to  his  ordinary  walk,  all  is  good  for 
nothing ;  or  again  let  us  take  a  person  ever  so  blame- 
less in  walk,  but  his  walk  in  no  way  flowing  from  the 
truth,  all  is  good  for  nothing.  For  what  can  be  right 
that  is  not  the  effect  of  revealed  truth  received  into  the 
heart,  and  becoming  a  part  of  one's  vital  system  by  the 
Spirit's  application  of  it  to  our  souls  ?  Only  then  surely 
will  the  walk  be  fltm,  conscientious,  free,  and  holy; 
such  as  suits  the  communications  of  God.  But  it  is 
plain  that  the  two  things,  not  merely  one  of  the  two, 
are  absolutely  necessary,  and  are  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit's 
dealing  savingly  with  the  conscience.  It  is  a  miserable 
thing  to  deceive  ourselves  on  one  side  or  the  other.  Let 
none  ever  content  himself  with  being  hoped  to  be  a 
Christian  in  what  people  caU  the  judgment  of  charity. 
Let  us  look  well  to  it  that  our  hearts  be  open  to  the 
searchings  of  the  word  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  let  us 
not  shrink  from  suffering  the  word  of  exhortation. 
Others  will  look  for  the  resulting  fruit  day  by  day  in 
our  ways  and  spirit.  But  it  is  only  where  both  these 
features  are  combined  that  there  can  be  communion 
according  to  God.    This  seems  to  be  the  lesson  for  us 

s 


258       LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

typically  couched  under  eating  of  that  which  was 
clean. 

The  Israelite  was  not  to  partake  of  each  animal  which 
he  might  meet  with.  What  was  monstrous  in  one  way 
or  another  was  forbidden ;  what  was  according  to  divine 
order  was  lawful  to  him.  Thus  animals  in  the  waters 
without  fins  and  scales ;  winged  insects  without  spring- 
ing hind  legs  distinct  from  their  four  legs ;  the  ravenous 
and  nocturnal  among  birds ;  the  carnivorous  among 
beasts  were  of  course  excluded ;  but  there  were  others 
also  in  divine  wisdom  and  with  a  typical  regard.  When 
dead  too,  their  touch  defiled,  even  to  a  vessel  or  raiment, 
&c.  (verses  9-35.)  Not  so  a  fountain  or  pit,  or  gather- 
ing of  water,  which  cleansed  instead  of  contracting 
uncleanness  (ver.  36) ;  not  so  sowing  seed  (ver.  37). 
The  power  and  life  of  the  Spirit  are  incontaminate. 
Eeptiles  which  did  not  fly  or  leap  were  all  unclean. 
Jehovah  laid  all  this  on  His  people,  who  were  to  be 
holy  because  He  was. 

In  chapter  xii.  comes  in  another  remarkable  type, 
namely,  the  condition  in  which  sin  has  plunged  men 
and  women.  Every  child  of  Adam  suffers  from  the  defile- 
ment of  an  evil  nature.  In  case  there  was  a  man- 
child,  as  we  are  told,  there  was  such  a  result,  and 
with  a  female  child  still  more  manifestly.  The  Lord 
never  forgets  how  sin  came  into  the  world.  His  right- 
eousness takes  account  of  the  first  temptation  to  the 
end.  So  it  is  remarkable  how  the  Apostle  Paul  turns 
this  fact  even  for  a  matter  of  practical  guidance  in 
the  question  whether  a  woman  ought  to  teach  in  the 
church.    Assuredly  our  thoughts  ought  to  be  formed  by 


LEVITICUS   I.- XV.  259 

the  word  of  God.     It  is  a  question  of  government  on 
earth,  not  of  heaven  nor  of  eternity  in  all  this. 

In  chapter  xiii.  leprosy  is  set  forth  with  much 
detail  as  a  general  defilement  of  the  person,  also 
in  the  head  or  beard;  and  in  divers  forms.  Here 
we  have  the  most  characteristic  type  of  sin  under 
the  sign  of  that  foul  and  hopeless  disease.  There 
might  be  other  maladies  wearing  its  evil  appearance, 
but  in  fact  only  suspicious  symptoms.  Hence  there 
was  this  important  provision : — a  man  is  not  made  the 
judge  of  his  own  sin.  It  was  laid  down  in  the  law 
that  the  Israelite  should  submit  his  condition  to  the 
inspection  of  another,  and  this  other  the  type  of  a 
spiritual  man,  for  a  priest  means  that.  It  is  really  one 
who  is  called  to  have  title  of  access  to  God,  and  who 
therefore  should  have  his  senses  exercised  to  discern  both 
good  and  evil  according  to  the  standard  of  the  sanctuary. 
As  such  he  is  bound  not  to  be  carried  away  by  con- 
ventional opinions,  or  traditional  thoughts,  or  what 
men  call  public  opinion — one  of  the  most  mischievous 
sources  of  depraving  the  holy  moral  judgment  in  the 
children  of  God. 

The  leper  then,  whether  so  in  reality  or  in  appear- 
ance, submits  to  the  priest,  whatever  might  be  the  fact. 
The  spot  looked  ill ;  it  might  be  only  a  rising  in  the 
flesh,  some  passing  eviL  On  the  other  hand  a  very 
trifling  symptom  in  appearance,  the  least  bright  spot, 
with  the  hab  turned  white  in  it,  and  the  plague  or 
sore  deeper  than  the  skin,  might  have  real  leprosy 
lurking  under  it.  The  priest  judges  seriously.  If  these 
active  and  deep  indications,  however  small,  are  there, 

8   2 


260        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

he  pronounces  the  man  unclean.  If  he  has  a  doubt, 
the  suspected  person  is  shut  up,  and  remains  to  be 
seen  again.  If  there  are  hopeful  symptoms,  they 
are  noted ;  if  there  be  no  raw  flesh,  no  fresh  effects  of 
active  disease,  but  on  the  contrary  the  return  of  vigour, 
they  are  cherished,  and  if  continued  and  increasing 
after  a  week's  remand,  the  priest  pronounces  the  man 
clean.  If  the  hair  turned  white,  if  the  evil  lay  deeper 
than  the  skin,  and  if  it  tended  to  spread,  uncleanness 
was  thera  A  boil  or  a  bum  might  issue  in  leprosy. 
Nothing  is  trifled  with,  nothing  passed  over,  nothing 
left  without  watch  to  work  its  own  unimpeded  way 
of  evil.  After  a  certain  definite  limit  the  priest  looks 
again.  He  still  perceives  evil  somewhat  deeper  than  the 
skin.  If  it  is  a  well-defined  case  of  leprosy,  he  pro- 
nounces at  once  on  it;  if  there  is  still  uncertainty, 
there  must  be  a  farther  term  of  waiting. 

A  plague  might  be  in  the  head  or  beard,  as  well  as  the 
body ;  then  if  deeper  than  the  skin  and  in  it  a  yellow 
thin  hair,  the  priest  must  pronounce  it  leprosy ;  if  not 
so  deep,  he  must  delay,  when  if  it  did  not  spread  nor 
deepen,  he  must  delay  again,  and  then  if  all  went  on 
thus  favourably,  he  might  pronounce  him  clean.  Other 
cases  are  gone  through  with  the  utmost  care,  and  I  have 
no  doubt  that  every  minute  difference  is  full  of  instruc- 
tion ;  but  the  proof  of  this  would  carry  us  away  from 
my  present  object. 

The  result  in  one  instance  (verses  12,  13)  is  indeed 
remarkable — the  whole  person  was  covered  with  the 
effects  of  leprosy.  To  the  inexperienced  eye  it  might 
look  the  worst  of  all ;  for  the  leprosy  was  all  out  and 
over  the  sufferer.  Yes,  and  just  because  it  was,  the  priest 


LEVITICUS  I.- XV.  261 

had  warrant  to  pronounce  him  clean!  Thus,  when  a 
sinner  has  got  to  his  worst  and  felt  it,  he  is  forgiven.  It 
was  evil  no  longer  at  work  but  manifest  and  confessed 
Instead  of  going  about  to  establish  his  own  righteous- 
ness, he  submits  to  the  righteousness  of  God  and  is 
justified  by  faith.  Jehovah  entitled  the  priest  to  pro- 
nounce clean  the  evidently  and  utterly  unclean.  Bold- 
ness of  faith  becomes  those  who  know  such  a  God. 
Confidence  in  Him  was  what  suited  so  desperate  a  case; 
it  was  only  the  occasion  for  God  to  assert  His  superiority. 
We  should  count  on  Him  that  it  must  be  always  thus. 
When  you  see  a  man  filled  with  a  thorough  sense  of 
sin  yet  bowing  to  God,  we  may  assure  ourselves  of  a 
blessing,  and  with  full  measure  too.  It  only  hinders  the 
perception  of  God's  grace,  and  keeps  up  uncertainty, 
when  a  man  endeavours  to  palliate,  cover,  and  correct 
himself,  instead  of  confessing  his  sins  in  all  their 
enormity.  Such  striving  merely  perpetuates  vain  hopes, 
denies  the  extent  of  man's  ruin,  and  shuts  out  the  full 
delivering  mercy  of  God.  He  at  least  who  alone  could 
cure  called  the  leper  to  omit  no  sign  of  misery  (verses 
45,  46). 

The  case  of  the  leprous  garment  does  not  call  for 
lengthened  remark.  It  refers  to  leprosy  not  so  much 
in  the  nature  as  in  the  circumstances — in  what  was 
displayed  (verses  47-59). 

Chapter  xiv.  is  occupied  with  the  wonderfully  in- 
structive statement  of  the  cleansing  of  the  leper. 
There  is  no  such  thing  as  the  cure  of  leprosy  named 
here.  This  belonged  to  God  alone.  No  ceremony, 
no  rite,  could  really  heal, — nothing  but  divine  power 
mediate  or  immediate.    Supposing  somehow  or  another 


262        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

the  leprosy  stayed,  the  man  must  be  cleansed  This  is 
the  ceremonial  laid  down  in  the  beginning  of  the  chapter. 
It  presents  an  obvious  and  striking  type  of  Christ  dead 
and  risen  in  the  two  birds.  When  the  blood  of  the  killed 
bird  was  mingled  with  running  water  (representing 
the  action  of  the  Holy  Spirit  dealing  with  man),  and 
seven  times  sprinkled  by  the  high  priest  on  him,  he  is 
pronounced  clean  forthwith.  The  living  bird  dipped  in 
the  blood  of  the  slain  one  is  let  loose  into  the  field 
(type  of  Christ's  resurrection) ;  and  he  that  is  to  be 
cleansed  begins  to  wash  his  clothes,  shave  and  other- 
wise cleanse  himself  for  seven  days  more ;  and  on  the 
seventh  day  "he  shall  be  clean."  Not  till  then  could  he 
be,  though  he  was  not  longer  outside  the  camp. 

But  on  the  eighth  day  we  have  the  types  of  Christ  in 
the  fulness  of  His  grace,  and  all  the  efficacy  of  His  work 
before  God  applied  to  the  man,  so  that  the  soul  might 
realize  the  place  of  blessing  into  which  it  is  brought 
There  is  often  a  danger  of  our  contenting  ourselves 
with  the  first  part  without  the  last.  Of  how  much  we 
rob  our  souls  by  this  poverty  in  the  presence  of  the 
riches  of  the  grace  of  God  !  The  chapter  closes  (verses 
33-53)  with  the  leprosy  of  the  house,  which  is  clearly 
corporate  evil,  and  with  a  reference  to  each  case  (verses 
54-57). 

In  chapter  xv.  we  have  cases  of  the  evil  of  nature  in 
the  aspect  of  man's  utter  weakness  as  he  now  is  through 
sin.  If  we  find  such  awful  but  true  characteristics  of 
man,  may  we  delight  ourselves  that  God  and  God  alone 
brings  together  in  the  same  book  the  contrast  as  the 
rich  and  full  presentation  of  Christ's  sacrifice  in  aU  its 


LEVITICUS   I.- XV.  263 

variety  and  perfection !  After  such  an  introduction  we 
may  well  bear  to  see  that  dismal  picture  of  man  in  all 
his  loathsomeness, — ^leprosy  in  his  person,  leprosy  in  his 
character,  leprosy  in  his  connection,  with  the  antecedent 
uncleanness  and  the  defilements  which  follow.  Yet 
*' Mercy  rejoiceth  against  judgment."  We  shall  find 
however  that  it  is  not  bare  mercy,  but  a  God  who  acts 
in  power,  and  wiU  have  us  in  communion  with  Himself, 
while  we  are  in  the  old  scene  of  folly  and  evil,  instead 
of  having  us  to  wait  till  we  get  to  heaven.  How  blessed 
thus  to  know  Him  here !  I  hope  to  dwell  a  little  on 
that  which  will  illustrate  this  side  of  His  grace,  when 
proceeding  with  the  portion  of  the  book  of  Leviticus 
which  follows. 


264       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


LEVITICUS. 

Chaps.  xvi.-xzTii. 

We  have  seen  the  various  forms  of  the  work  of  Christ, 
of  His  offering  of  Himself  to  God,  whether  in  all  the 
periectness  of  His  life,  or  in  His  death  as  the  means  of 
our  acceptance.  We  have  seen  further  the  consecration 
of  the  priests  naturally  following  the  offerings  and  their 
laws,  then  the  directions  whereby  the  priests  might  learn 
to  distinguish  between  clean  and  unclean,  with  the 
various  forms  in  which  the  total  defilement  of  the  people 
was  represented,  in  birth,  disease,  and  infirmity. 

K"ow  we  have  the  great  atonement- day.  Not  more 
truly  does  this  chapter  stand  out  singly,  and  in  a  literally 
central  position  of  the  book,  than  the  atonement  itself 
does  in  the  ways  of  God.  It  is  evident  that,  however 
all  may  have  prepared  us  for  it,  and  however  that  which 
follows  too  may  flow  from  it,  atonement  has  a  place  to 
itseK — a  place  to  which  there  is  nothing  similar  or 
second — a  place  that  lies  at  the  very  basis  of  all  Grod's 
ways — the  only  possible  means  for  the  blessing  of  a 
sinful  creature  before  Grod.  It  is  weU  that  we  should 
enjoy  all  the  privil^es  with  which  (Jod's  grace  may 
invest  us,  and  that  we  should  delight  in  that  which  He 
makes  known  to  us  as  the  revelation  of  His  own  nature 


LEVITICUS  XVI.-XXVIL  265 

as  well  as  of  His  counsels  and  ways;  for  He  would 
make  us  truly  happy;  and  there  is  no  happiness  except 
in  communion  with  Himself.  At  the  same  time  the 
atonement  has  incomparably  the  deepest  place  of  all 
truths  in  scripture,  save  only  Christ's  person,  in  whom 
all  the  fulness  dwelt  bodily.  God  revealed  Himself 
thus  with  a  view  to  the  atonement,  and  the  atonement 
itself,  besides  having  this  character  of  centre  and  founda- 
tion-stone, becomes  the  capital  means  of  bringing  the 
soul  out  of  all  its  wretched  and  sinful  selfishness  (which 
indeed  is  sin  and  misery)  into  the  knowledge  of  God, 
so  as  God  Himself  never  could  have  given,  had  there 
not  been  sin  to  draw  out  the  Son  of  God  to  die  in 
atonement.  In  short  the  very  evil  of  the  creature  has 
given  occasion  to  such  a  knowledge  of  God  as  never 
could  have  been  enjoyed  without  it — to  its  own  shame 
indeed,  but  to  God's  everlasting  glory. 

For  this  reason  then  the  forms  in  which  God  gave 
the  intimations  of  the  atonement  have  the  deepest  pos- 
sible interest  for  our  souls.  We  must  bear  in  mind 
however,  that  here  as  everywhere  we  have  only  the 
shadow,  and  in  no  instance  the  very  image  of  the  thing. 
We  shall  always  find  that  which  falls  short.  There 
could  be  but  one  Christ,  the  only  begotten  Son ;  and  so 
but  one  work  in  which  He  has  brought  out  not  merely 
God  but  God  glorified  as  to  our  sin — glorified  in  His 
own  moral  being  and  in  His  gracious  provision  that  we 
should  be  delivered  from  it. 

First  of  all  then  we  have  that  which  shews  us  the 
necessary  imperfection  of  all  the  provisional  dealings. 
"  The  law  made  nothing  perfect."  We  may  see  indeed 
how  true  is  this  very  feature  in  the  beginning  of  the 


266  LECTDKES  ON  THE  PEHTATEUCH. 

chapter;  for  "Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses  after  the  death 
of  the  two  sons  of  Aaron,  when  they  offered  before 
Jehovah,  and  died;  and  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses, 
Speak  nnto  Aaron  thy  brother,  that  he  come  not  at  all 
times  into  the  holy  place  within  the  vail  before  the 
mercy  seat,  which  is  upon  the  ark;  that  he  die  not." 
Now  it  is  evident,  that  to  have  the  glory  of  God  as  the 
element  of  our  joy — and  we  are  entitled  to  rejoice  in 
hope  of  it  even  as  we  are  to  joy  in  God  Himself — sap- 
poses  nearness  to  Himself.  To  keep  the  soul  ont  of  the 
presence  of  God  is  incompatible  with  real  enjoyment  of 
Him.  Nevertheless,  though  the  circumstance  of  failure 
oa  the  part  of  Nadab  and  Abihu  gave  occasion  to  re- 
quirii^  distance  on  man's  part,  there  could  have  been 
none  other  provision  under  the  law  or  till  the  cross. 

When  Aaron  henceforth  entered  the  sanctuary,  he  must 
come  after  the  following  fashion.  He  was  to  bring  a 
young  bnlloek  for  a  sin-offering,  and  a  ram  for  a  bumt^ 
offering.  But  as  for  his  garments  of  glory  and  beauty, 
he  could  not  bring  them  into  the  sanctuary.  And  this 
again  lets  us  know  how  totally  all  signs  fail  in  con- 
sequence of  man's  condition.  Indeed  what  they  shewed 
was  not  the  entrance  of  man  according  to  the  counsels 
of  God  into  TTist  own  presence,  but  that  the  first  man 
conld  not  so  enter ;  for  whatever  might  be  the  forms  (^ 
glory  and  beauty  represented  by  that  clothing  for  Ha 
high  priest,  in  point  of  fact  he  never  could  wear  it  in 
the  presence  of  God-  The  only  time  at  which  he  did 
enter  the  most  holy  place  was  when  be  wore  the  linen 
clothes  to  be  put  on  expressly  on  the  day  of  atonement. 
At  other  seasons  he  might  not  enter  there.  He  was  to 
put  on  these  Ainen  clothes  after  having  put  oflF  the 


J 


LEVITICUS  xvi.-xxvn.  267 

others.  He  was  to  wash  his  flesh  in  water,  and  so  put 
them  on,  in  aim  shadowing  the  purity  of  Christ,  but 
in  fiact  confessing  the  impurity  of  the  first  man.  In- 
trinsic purity  was  found  in  its  perfection  in  Christ. 
"And  he  shall  take  of  the  congregation  of  the  children 
of  Israel  two  kids  of  the  goats  for  a  sin-offering,  and 
one  ram  for  a  bumt-oflfering.  And  Aaron  shall  offer 
his  bullock  of  the  sin-offering,  which  is  for  himself" 

The  first  thing  here  to  which  I  would  draw  your 
attention  is  the  single  offering  where  Aaron  and  his 
house  were  concerned,  and  the  double  one  on  behalf  of 
the  people  of  Israel.  This  is  evident  on  the  face  of  the 
chapter.  When  we  come  to  the  facts  to  which  these 
types  looked  onward,  need  it  be  said  that  there  was 
but  one  sacrifice — but  one  comprehensive  sacrificial  act 
which  met  all  that  was  meant>  whether  in  the  bullock 
on  the  one  hand,  or  in  both  the  goats  on  the  other? 
But  still  no  serious  soul  can  question  for  a  moment  the 
importance  of  the  truth  intended  to  be  conveyed  by 
this  typical  difference.  For  in  the  case  of  the  priestly 
family,  with  Aaron  at  the  head  of  it,  there  was  but  a 
single  act.  The  bullock  was  slain,  and  the  sprinkling 
of  its  blood  alone  met  all  the  exigencies  of  God's  holi- 
ness and  nature  as  regarded  Aaron  and  his  house.  But 
in  the  case  of  the  children  of  Israel  we  have  a  far  more 
complicated  system.  There  was  a  marked  distinction 
drawn  between  the  two  goats,  one  of  which  was  slain. 
It  was  called  Jehovah's  lot ;  for  lots  were  cast  for  them 
as  to  which  was  to  be  slain,  and  which  sent  alive  into 
the  wilderness.  The  latter,  carefully  reserved  till  all 
was  over  with  the  bullock  and  the  other  goat,  was 
brought  forward  at  a  later  moment. 


268        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Now  what  is  the  prominent  trath  to  be  gathered  from 
this  marked  difference  ?  To  me  it  appears  to  be  of  no 
small  moment  for  our  souls.  We  all  more  or  less  tend 
toward  Jewish  ideas.  So  it  has  invariably  been,  and 
there  are  natural  reasons  why  it  should  be.  I  do  not 
mean  merely  the  power  of  Satan  in  always  seeking  to 
corrupt  God's  testimony,  whatever  it  may  be  at  any 
given  time.  But  there  is  this  essential  difference  be- 
tween the  ways  of  God  with  the  Jew  and  with  the 
Christian — that  those  with  Israel  are  more  adapted  to 
the  senses  and  the  reason,  as  well  as  the  working  of 
natural  conscience;  whereas  those  addressed  to  the 
Christian  flow  simply  and  solely  from  the  revelations 
of  God's  counsels  and  grace,  and  suppose  the  faith  that 
acquaints  itself  with  His  mind  and  love.  For  instance, 
take  the  law  itself  Every  upright  conscience  feels 
what  may  be  called  the  reasonableness  of  its  demands, 
and  the  justice  of  its  decisions.  Conscience  can  con- 
clude about  it,  and  feel  how  right  it  all  is.  Of  course, 
when  one  speaks  about  its  reasonableness,  it  is  not 
meant  in  a  mere  mental  way,  but  so  as  to  satisfy  what 
conscience  owns  to  be  due  to  God  and  man. 

But  the  Christian  has  an  altogether  higher  standard, 
where  all  depends  on  the  simplicity  of  receiving  what 
is  above  nature,  and  where,  if  nature  presumes  to  reason, 
it  invariably  draws  false  conclusions.  In  short  the 
Christian  never  can  form  a  right  conclusion,  except  in 
reasoning  from  what  God  is  as  He  has  revealed  Himself 
in  His  word,  and  never  from  the  feelings  of  conscience, 
or  that  which  would  seem  to  be  just.  Now  this  is 
invariably  true,  and  therefore  it  is  that,  when  persons 
are  simply  awakened,  they  are  apt  to  fall  into  a  l^al 


LEVITICUS  XVL-XXVIL  269 

state.  It  has  always  for  its  effect  the  conscience  set  in 
action  through  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  brings  in  the 
light  of  the  word,  and  deals  with  the  heart,  shewing  no 
doubt  mercy  behind  it  all,  but  nevertheless  discovering 
the  evil  that  is  within.  In  such  a  condition  there  is 
always  danger  of  reasoning  from  what  we  are  to  God ; 
and  we  all  know  what  immense  anguish  of  soul  this 
may  produce,  and  how  perfectly  the  gospel  meets  all  such 
anxieties ;  for  while  it  gives  conscience  the  fullest  place, 
nevertheless  it  brings  liberty  of  heart  by  the  full  reve- 
lation of  God's  grace  in  Christ.  The  consequence  is 
that  the  effect  wrought  by  the  truth  of  God  in  the  full 
light  of  grace  is  incomparably  simpler;  and  for  this 
reason — that  by  the  light  of  Christianity  all  that  is  in 
or  of  man  is  put  down  as  thoroughly  evil.  In  point  of 
fact  the  cross  entitles  us  to  pronounce  ourselves  dead 
before  God;  and  beyond  question  death  settles  all 
questions.  Now  I  do  not  believe  that  even  in  the 
dealings  of  God  with  Israel  by  and  by  there  will  be 
anything  like  such  depth  of  dealings ;  and  certainly  it 
was  not  so  in  the  past.  We  can  see  it  in  the  psalms, 
as  well  as  in  the  accounts  given  of  the  saints  of  God, 
making  due  allowances  where  there  is  a  type  of  greater 
things. 

In  this  respect  we  may  illustrate  it  by  the  difference 
of  two  well-known  characters  in  the  very  first  book  of 
the  Bible.  Take  Abraham's  faith  and  way,  as  compared 
with  Jacob.  Abraham  walks  in  communion  by  faith. 
Jacob  has  to  be  chastened ;  the  ground  of  his  heart 
must  be  constantly  ploughed  up,  that  he  may  learn 
what  Abraham  did  not  need  in  the  same  way,  being 
occupied  with  what  God  was  towards  him  and  with  His 


270  LECTUBES  OTS  Tfflt  PENTATEUCH. 

word,  inste&d  of  lequizing  the  painfal  and  humblmg, 
however  salutary,  lesson  of  what  he  had  £Edled  to  be  for 
Grod.  It  would  seem  thafc  the  difiTeience  is  somewhat  of 
this  kind  between  the  provision  for  the  Jewish  people 
in  the  two  goats,  as  compared  with  that  which  is  repre- 
sented bj  the  sin^e  bullock,  where  the  whole  mighty 
work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  applied  to  the 
Christian  and  to  the  church,  is  found.  Of  course  the 
word  ''church'*  is  employed  here  only  in  a  general 
sense;  for  it  is  granted  fully  that  all  types  fedl  to 
reveal  the  mystery  as  such.  Certain  figures  there  are 
connected  with  the  myst^y,  but  there  is  no  type  what- 
soever which  brings  out  the  mystery  in  its  fulness. 

In  the  case  of  the  bullock  there  is  no  distinction 
drawn  between  the  judgment  of  sin  in  the  vindication 
of  Crod's  own  nature,  and  the  dealing  with  the  sins 
of  the  priestly  house.  All  was  contained  in  the  one 
unbroken  work  that  was  here  represented.  The  bullock 
was  brought  out  and  ofTered  as  it  is  said  as  a  sin-offering 
for  Aaron  and  for  his  house.  Afterwards  the  two  goats 
are  taken  and  presented  before  Jehovah,  and  lots  are 
cast  upon  them ;  one  lot  for  Jehovah,  and  the  other  lot 
for  the  scape-goat  Aaron  then  brings  the  bullock  of 
the  sin-offering,  and  makes  an  atonement  for  himself 
and  his  house.  He  carries  incense  within  the  vail,  and 
there  sprinkles  of  the  blood  upon  the  mercy-seat  and 
before  it  seven  times.  In  this  manner  the  whole  work 
is  done  with  fextreme  simplicity.  But  for  this  very 
reason  there  is  a  depth  in  what  Grod  represented  by 
the  death  of  the  bullock  that  is  looked  for  in  vain  in 
tij^^tap  complicated  type  of  the  two  goats. 
y         ^lood  of  the  bullock  is  brought  into  the  holiest — 


LEVITICUS  XVL-XXVII.  271 

part  sprinkled  wpon  the  mercy-seat,  part  hefore  it ;  then 
the  tirst  goat  having  been  killed,  its  blood  also  is  bronght 
in  to  '*  make  an  atonement  for  the  holy  place,  because 
of  the  uncleanness  of  the  children  of  IsraeL"  In  point 
of  fact,  as  we  know,  when  we  come  to  the  reality  of 
atonement  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  all  was  contained  in  His 
one  and  only  sacrifice.  Particular  emphasis  is  laid  on 
the  fact  that  there  was  no  man  present ;  it  was  all  a 
question  between  God  and  the  high  priest  for  sin.  After 
this  it  is  said, ''  And  he  shall  go  out  unto  the  altar  that 
is  before  Jehovah,  and  make  an  atonement  for  it ;  and 
shall  take  of  the  blood  of  the  bullock,  and  of  the  blood 
of  the  goat,  and  put  it  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar 
round  about.  And  he  shall  sprinkle  of  the  blood  upon 
it  with  his  finger  seven  times,  and  cleanse  it,  and  haUow 
it  from  the  uncleanness  of  the  children  of  Israel.  And 
when  he  hath  made  an  end  of  reconciling  the  holy 
place,  and  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  and  the 
altar,  he  shall  bring  the  live  goat :  and  Aaron  shall  lay 
both  his  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  live  goat,  and 
confess  over  him  all  the  iniquities  of  the  children  of 
Israel,  and  all  their  transgressions  in  all  their  sins, 
putting  them  upon  the  head  of  the  goat,  and  shall  send 
him  away  by  the  hand  of  a  fit  man  into  the  wilderness : 
and  the  goat  shall  bear  upon  him  all  their  iniquities 
unto  a  land  not  inhabited :  and  he  shall  let  go  the  goat 
into  the  wilderness." 

There  was  nothing  at  all  analogous  to  this  in  the 
bullock  for  Aaron  and  his  house  where  we  found 
the  representation  of  Christ's  work  for  the  heavenly 
people.  Mark  the  difference.  In  their  case  all  was 
settled  in  the  presence  of  God.     There  was  nothing 


272       LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

more  needed.  The  blood  was  carried  straight  into  the 
sanctuary,  and  all  was  closed.  Undoubtedly  a  most 
important  inference  is  intended  by  the  coming  out  of 
the  high  priest,  when  there  ensues  the  dealing  with  the 
other  goat,  the  substantial  result  of  which  I  deny  not 
to  us,  viewed  as  individuals,  sinners,  in  this  world ;  but 
in  the  precision  of  the  type,  as  far  as  our  full  place 
is  concerned,  it  does  not  directly  set  forth  what  is  done 
for  the  priestly  family.  This  is  exceedingly  observabla 
We  have  to  do  with  the  work  of  Christ  as  measured  by 
God  Himself  in  the  sanctuary.  The  divine  estimate 
of  it  all  is  the  ground  of  our  perfect  peace  with  God; 
and  how  blessed  thus  to  rest  on  what  God  has  found 
in  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus ! — of  Jesus  going  straight- 
way, we  may  say,  after  having  oflfered  up  Himself  upon 
the  cross,  into  the  presence  of  God.  It  is  not  denied 
that  for  peculiar  and  important  purposes  there  was  a 
delay  of  forty  days,  in  which  He  shewed  Himself 
here  below.  This  was  necessary,  according  to  the 
wisdom  of  God,  for  reasons  of  great  moment.  But  on 
the  ground  of  His  work  He  goes  up  into  the  presence 
of  God  and  there  stands  or  rather  sits  down,  God  Him- 
self in  His  own  heavenly  light  and  glory  giving  m 
the  full  value  of  what  He  has  found  in  the  cross  of 
Jesus. 

There  is  a  marked  difference  when  we  come  to 
Israel.  There  it  is  not  put  in  the  same  way.  And 
why  ?  Because  of  the  prominence  given  to  their  trans- 
gressions. Having  been  put  under  law  in  a  sense 
which  was  never  true  of  the  Gentiles,  the  law  brought 
out  the  transgressions  of  those  that  were  under  it,  and 
there  the  mercy  of  God  provides  a  special  means  fin 


LEVITICUS  xvi.-xxvn.  273 

comforting  them  in  their  necessary  trouble  of  conscience. 
A  specific  assurance  was  given  in  His  pity  where  their 
transgressions  were  made  so  patent.  The  Christian 
leams  in  short  what  his  guilt  was,  and  the  inbred  evil  of 
his  nature,  by  the  infiniteness  of  Christ's  sacrifice,  the 
glory  of  His  person,  and  the  place  into  which  He  has  now 
entered  in  the  presence  of  God.  Of  the  perfectness  of  the 
work  for  us,  these  are  the  great  evidences ;  but  to  the 
Israelite  there  is  the  type  of  something  else.  The  high 
priest  goes  forth,  and  publicly  stands  with  a  living  goat 
before  him,  upon  the  head  of  which  he  confesses  de- 
finitely and  distinctly  the  sins  of  the  children  of  Israel. 
They  will  need  it.  The  special  position  of  Israel,  in 
particular  their  having  to  do  with  the  law  of  God, 
accounts  for  the  difference.  Our  place  is  most  evidently 
that  of  men  who  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight.  In 
Israel's  case  the  goat  which  had  the  sins  thus  articulately 
confessed  upon  it  goes  away,  and  bears  them  far  away 
from  the  people  into  a  land  not  inhabited.  I  do  not 
think  the  idea  here  has  any  link  with  the  resur- 
rection, any  more  than  with  heaven  which  is  far  from 
being  a  desert  which  none  inhabit.  It  is  merely  a 
connected  fact  which  refers  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
upon  the  cross :  only  that  on  one  side  of  it  He  suffers 
as  bearing  our  judgment  from  God,  and  on  the  other 
side  there  is  the  fuU  bearing  away  of  the  sins  of  man, 
of  course  more  particularly  of  IsraeL  For  the  Christian 
believer  all  is  summed  up  in  Christ  having  borne  our 
judgment,  then  going  in  before  Gt)d ;  as  here  the  high 
priest  carries  the  blood  into  the  holiest  of  all. 

Our  portion  is  where  Christ  is.    It  is  there  that  we 
must  in  spirit  follow  Him.    The  whole  of  Christianity 


274       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

is  bound  up  with  what  is  transacted  within  the  vaiL 
This  is  what  is  peculiar  to  us  as  Christians ;  so  that,  if 
we  find  our  true  place,  it  must  be  in  Him  who  goes  into 
the  presence  of  God.  It  is  not  so  with  the  people  of 
Israel  They  yet  anxiously  await  His  coming  out,  and 
when  He  does  appear,  they  will  have  the  comfort 
then,  and  not  before,  of  knowing  that  their  sins  are 
all  completely  borne  away;  whereas  we  need  wait  for 
nothing.  On  the  ground  of  His  sacrifice,  as  estimated 
of  God  and  made  known  by  His  Spirit  while  Christ  is 
within  the  vail,  we  draw  near  whei'e  He  is.  We  know 
that  His  standing  in  the  presence  of  God  is  the  best  of 
all  evidence  to  prove  how  perfectly  our  sins  are  gone. 
If  there  were  a  question  of  any  single  one  remaining, 
how  could  He  rest  in  the  presence  of  G^d?  There 
He  is,  the  man  that  bore  our  sins,  but  He  is  now 
seated  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  Consequently  the 
demonstration  to  us  that  our  sins  are  gone  is  not  some 
fresh  action.  There  is  for  us  no  distinctive  bearing  of 
our  iniquities  confessed  on  the  scape-goat.  Those  who 
believe  without  seeing  do  not — ought  not  to — require 
this,  whereas  to  the  children  of  Israel  it  is  expressly 
given.  They  will  need  all  possible  comfort.  Accord- 
ingly we  find  in  the  prophets  there  is  that  which 
answers  to  this  type,  when,  if  the  Lord's  appearing  in 
glory  will  set  all  their  sins,  as  it  were,  before  their  eyes, 
at  the  same  time  there  will  be  the  fullest  conviction 
wrought  in  their  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  the 
sins,  though  thus  brought  before  them,  are  borne  for 
ever  away.  This  may  serve  to  make  somewhat  plainer 
the  difierence  between  Israel's  destiny  and  what  con- 
cerns Aaron  and  his  house  in  the  one  bullock  that  was 


LEVITICUS  xvi.-xxvn.  275 

offered  for  them ;  as  it  seems  to  be  the  reason  why  in 
the  types  of  the  sacrifices  for  the  priests  and  the  people 
there  is  an  undeniable  distinction. 

Another  thing  may  be  observed.  There  is  care  taken 
to  shew  that  the  high  priest  made  an  atonement  for  the 
holy  place,  and  for  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation. 
For  this  we  are  not  left  to  our  own  thoughts.  The  word 
of  God  is  plain  that,  when  our  Lord  Jesus  effected 
reconciliation,  it  was  not  only  for  those  that  believed 
but  for  the  universe  of  God — for  all  things  in  heaven 
and  on  earth.    This  is  clearly  what  is  represented  by  it. 

Further,  observe  the  beauty  of  the  type  in  another 
respect.  Although  in  point  of  fact  what  was  set  forth 
by  the  two  goats  did  take  place  in  the  offering  of  Christ, 
nevertheless  the  bringing  forward  of  the  scape-goat,  after 
the  high  priest  leaves  the  sanctuary,  seems  not  ob- 
scurely to  indicate  that  the  application  would  be  after 
the  whole  business  of  what  was  represented  by  Aaron 
and  his  house  is  completely  over.  The  Christian  follows 
the  Lord  into  the  antitypical  sanctuary — into  heaven 
itself;  and  then,  when  He  comes  out,  Israel  will  learn 
the  blessed  truth  to  which  they  are  now  so  blind.  They 
wiU  know  that  on  His  cross  atonement  was  made  for 
their  sins,  completely  borne  away,  but  borne  away  by 
the  One  that  shed  His  blood  before  it  was  a  question  of 
Christianity  at  all  on  earth ;  for  I  speak  not  of  divine 
counsels. 

Consequently  this  chapter  has  an  immense  compre- 
hensiveness of  meaning ;  and  that  which  might  seem 
irregular  in  its  parts  is  most  explicable  when  we  come 
to  leave  room  for  the  various  dispensational  dealings  of 

T  2 


276        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

God.  It  involves  a  certain  difiSculty  at  first  sight,  which 
is  very  often  the  case.  The  most  obvious  meaning  is 
rarely  the  true  one ;  but  when  the  truth  is  once  seen,  it 
commends  itself  to  the  heart  and  conscience  by  its  self- 
evidencing  force,  simplicity,  and  harmony  with  othertruth. 

Afterwards  follow  certain  commxmications  in  the  rest 
of  the  book  grounded  on  the  atonement. 

Thus,  in  the  next  chapter  (xvii)  we  have  a  very 
serious  and  solemn  injunction,  spoken  to  Moses  in  the 
first  instance,  but  set  forth  in  a  very  comprehensive 
manner.  ''  Speak  unto  Aaron,  and  imto  his  sons,  and 
unto  all  the  children  of  Israel,  and  say  unto  them ;  This 
is  the  thing  which  Jehovah  hath  commanded."  A  most 
jealous  care  as  to  blood  was  insisted  on.  The  reason  of 
this  is  given :  "  The  life  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood ; 
and  I  have  given  it  to  you  upon  the  altar,  to  make  an 
atonement  for  your  soul;  for  it  is  the  blood  that  maketh 
an  atonement  for  the  souL"*  It  is  clear  that  this  is  the 
deep  truth  which  lay  under  all  the  ceremonies  of  the 
day  of  atonement.  It  was  an  ancient  requirement^ 
pressed  in  Noah's  day,  when  death  first  furnished  food 
for  man,  and  now  bound  up  with  man's  ordinary  life  of 
every  day.  Whatever  may  be  the  blessedness  of  the 
work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  God  and  heaven — 
whatever  our  own  satisfaction  and  rest  and  joy  in 
looking  through  it  to  eternal  hopes — ^we  deprive  our- 

*  In  verse  11  the  general  principle  is  stated.  The  literal  rendering 
seems  to  be  this :  *'  For  the  life  (soul)  is  in  the  blood ;  and  I  have 
giren  it  to  yon  upon  the  altar  to  atone  for  your  souls ;  for  the  blood 
with  (through)  the  life  (sonl)  atones."  The  blood  had  this  expiating 
value  in  the  type  as  the  expression  of  the  life  or  soul  given  up  to  Qod. 
for  the  offerer,  and  this  of  course  judicially,  not  in  a  simply  moral 
way,  which  &11b  rather  under  the  minchah  or  meat-offering. 


LEVITICUS  XVI.-XXVIL  277 

selves  of  much,  if  we  separate  it  from  our  work-a-day 
life  and  common-place  duties.  Undoubtedly  it  has  an 
efi&cacy  which  brings  us  into  the  presence  of  God. 
There  is  nothing  that  we  ever  can  have  by  and  by 
which,  in  a  certain  sense,  exceeds  in  moral  depth  what 
we  are  brought  into  now  by  faith ;  but  at  the  same  time 
we  have  to  bear  in  mind  this  other  aspect  of  it — that 
is,  namely,  the  way  in  which  it  mingles  itself,  and  is 
intended  to. mingle  itself,  with  everything  that  comes 
across  us  from  day  to  day.  It  ought  not  to  be  apart 
in  daily  scenes  and  among  men.  Take  for  instance 
the  commonest  matter  of  our  daily  food  and  raiment. 
Ought  we  to  exempt  from  Christ  any  one  matter  of  our 
personal  or  relative  life,  or  any  one  earthly  duty  ?  Be 
assured  it  is  our  joy  and  privilege  to  share  all  with 
Him.  I  am  sure  it  is  also  our  duty — that  whatever 
we  d<5  we  should  do  in  His  name.  Ifor  can  we  do 
aught  in  His  name  except  as  having  before  our  souls 
that  wonderful  work  which  accounts  for  every  blessing 
which  God  has  given  us  even  now. 

Hence  it  was  then  that  God  would  not  permit  the 
life  of  any  creature  that  was  needful  for  the  food  of 
His  people  to  be  taken,  unless  there  was  the  witness  of 
that  which  had  its  most  solemn  testimony  on  the  great 
day  of  atonement.  But  this  was  not  enough.  Every  day 
and  every  day's  wants  were  to  witness  the  same  truth 
of  God,  to  render  the  same  confession  of  man.  This  is 
the  reason,  it  appears  to  me,  why  we  have  the  ordinance 
of  the  blood  following  the  great  atonement -day;  and 
most  properly  after  it,  and  not  before  it.  That  is  to  say, 
we  have  the  truth  in  its  deepest  and  highest  reaches 
before  we  are  enabled  to  estimate  it  in  its  common  and 


278        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

ordinary  application.  The  blood  shed  is  the  witness' 
that  sin  is  in  the  world.  In  the  first  state  of  things  no 
such  thing  was  allowed.  Before  sin  came  into  the  world 
there  was  no  question  of  blood*  Directly  after  sin 
entered  among  men,  we  hear  of  life  offered,  of  sacrifices ; 
but  man  was  not  permitted  to  touch  the  blood,  even 
when  after  the  flood  he  might  eat  of  animals.  Blood 
was  then  as  always  sacred  to  God  and  forbidden  to 
man  on  every  groimd  of  nature  or  of  law. 

And  this  gives  amazing  force  to  the  wonderful  differ- 
ence in  which  redemption  places  the  believer;  for  now 
(and  how  startling  it  must  have  been  to  a  Jew  to  hear 
it!)  "except  ye  eat  the  flesh,  and  drink  the  blood 
of  the  Son  of  man,  ye  have  no  life  in  you."  No  doubt 
the  one  was  a  literal  injunction,  whilst  the  other  was  an 
immense  spiritual  truth.  At  the  same  time  the  Lord 
could  have  chosen  some  other  form  for  expressing  that 
truth,  unless  there  had  been  particular  emphasis  laid  on 
the  very  figure  of  what  was  most  repulsive  to  a  Jew's 
mind  according  to  the  law.  So  thorough  was  the  change 
that  now  He  enjoins  what  would  have  been  before  the 
greatest  sin.  Except  one  eats  the  flesh  and  drinks 
the  blood  of  the  Son  of  man,  there  is  no  life.  The  sign 
of  His  death  yields  life  to  us,  and  is  indispensably 
needful  To  have  life  one  must  drink  that  which  was 
due  peremptorily,  exclusively,  to  God  the  judge  of  sin. 
But  now  contrariwise  Christ  has  changed  all  for  us. 
The  very  blood  that  it  would  have  been  most  of  all 
criminal  before  to  touch  or  taste  must  now  emphatically 
be  dmnk  by  us.  Hence  the  standing  testimony  to  the 
work  of  Christ  the  Christian  beholds,  as  we  know,  in 
the  bread  and  wine  of  the  Lord's  Sapper.    IbeiQifti 


LEVITICUS  xvL-xxyn.  279 

very  same  image  is  ever  recurring.  We  eat  His  body 
and  drink  His  blood. 

In  chapter  xviii.  the  people  being  treated  now  as  a 
holy  people,  everything  that  was  contrary  to  the  order 
of  God  in  nature  is  here  strictly  and  solemnly  pro- 
hibited. It  is  important  to  hold  the  same  principle 
always.  God  does  not  absolve  from  that  which  offends 
His  natural  order.  Grace  may  bring  us  into  a  higher 
place,  where  we  do  not  use  our  liberty  as  to  nature; 
but  God  habitually  maintains  His  own  order  there; 
and  so  should  we.  Grace,  I  repeat,  may  withdraw  one 
from  the  operation  of  it  because  of  a  higher  call,  as 
for  instance  in  the  service  of  God.  We  see  this  in  the 
case  of  Paul  himself;  nevertheless  was  there  any  one 
who  more  firmly  and  distinctly  held  fast  the  wisdom, 
the  propriety,  the  holiness  of  God's  order  in  nature^ 
than  that  man  who  through  grace  had  been  lifted  above 
it?  Hence  we  have  simply  the  prohibition  of  what 
was  contrary  to  God's  will  here  below.  Neither  Egypt 
nor  Canaan  must  regulate  the  practice  of  Israel:  He 
who  spoke  to  them  was  Jehovah  their  God,  who,  as  He 
laid  down  the  broadest  principles,  knew  how  to  descend 
into  the  smallest  details  which  concerned  His  people. 

And  let  me  take  the  opportunity  of  remarking  another 
thing:  the  chief  means  by  which  the  devil  brings  in 
what  is  so  offensive  is  by  high  pretensions,  which  affect 
to  slight  the  order  of  God.  This  ordinarily  is  the  pre- 
cursor of  an  outrage  on  holiness,  as  a  little  experience 
will  prove. 

It  is  beautiful  to  trace  the  unbending  authority  of 
revelation.  Moses  was  inspired  to  interdict  such  a  mar- 
riage as  that  of  Abraham  and  Sarah,  to  speak  of  no 


280        LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

more.   There  is  no  apology'for  the  past,  though  of  course 
the  guilt  would  have  been  aggravated  for  the  future. 

In  ch.  xix.  we  have  again  the  same  principle,  though 
now  in  its  positive  form.  **  Ye  shall  be  holy,"  it  is  said ; 
and  this  is  founded  on  a  very  precious  reason:  "for 
I,  Jehovah  your  Elohim,  am  holy."  "Te  shall  fear 
every  man  his  mother  and  his  father," — beginning  with 
the  one  that  might  naturally  be  somewhat  less  held  in 
awe,  and  bringing  her  unexpectedly  for  this  very  reason 
into  special  prominence.  Not  the  smallest  change 
occurs  in  the  word  of  God,  whilst  having  some  ground 
of  divine  wisdom  and  beauty  as  its  purpose  and  its 
sanction.  The  precepts  here  given  do  not  call  for  any 
particular  delay.  Let  us  never  fail  to  bear  in  mind,  for 
the  principle  holds  good  everywhere,  that  holiness  is 
and  must  be  according  to  the  relationship  in  which  one 

stands.  Hence  the  character  of  holiness  varies  accord- 
ing to  pur  place.  Here  it  was  a  people  in  the  flesh, 
and  accordingly  the  various  requirements  of  God  were 
suitable  to  their  place.  Our  condition  is  altogether 
different.  We  "  are  not  in  the  flesh  but  in  the  Spirit, 
if  so  be  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  us."  Christ  has 
Himself  brought  us  into  a  heavenly  position.  This  is  the 
meaning  of  what  He  says  in  John  xvii :  "For  their  sakes 
I  sanctify  myself."  Not  as  if  there  ever  was  or  could 
be  the  smallest  thought  of  evil  in  Christ's  nature,  or  in 
any  of  His  ways,  I  need  nor  say ;  nor  as  if  He  were 
here  thinking  of  the  mighty  work  of  redemption  by  which 
He  has  set  us  apart  to  God.  This  is  not  its  meaning; 
but  the  place  that  He  has  taken  according  to  the 
dignity  of  His  person  and  the  results  of  His  work 
for  us — His  place  in  heaven^  that  He  might  be  there  as 


LEVITICUS  XVI.-XXVII.  281 

man  in  that  new  scene — ^not  only  lifted  up  from  the 
earth,  but  in  the  glory  of  God  above,  and  consequently 
stamping  a  heavenly  character  upon  us  who  know  Him 
there.  It  is  well  to  make  this  remark,  because  Christian 
holiness  is  bound  up  with  the  place  where  we  know 
Christ  now,  when  we  come  to  look  at  it  in  its  full 
character  according  to  God's  mind. 

In  chapter  xx.  we  have  the  same  thing  maintained, 
with  a  strong  caution  against  all  that  was  inconsistent 
with  God's  moral  ways,  and  this  in  every  kind  of 
natural  relationship,  or  indeed  what  might  be  unnatural. 
It  is  mainly  in  view  of  the  enormities  practised  by  the 
Canaanites. 

Chapter  xxi.  brings  in  something  more  special.  There 
the  word  concerns  the  priests,  the  sons  of  Aaron ;  and 
we  learn  the  important  principle  in  it,  that  what  might 
be  quite  lawful  in  an  Israelite  is  excluded  from  a  priest. 
The  reason  is  of  the  greatest  interest.  The  whole  book 
is  founded  on  access  to  God.  It  begins  with  this,  and 
goes  through  with  it.  Everything  is  measured  according 
to  the  tabernacle  of  witness  between  God  and  His  people. 
It  is  a  question  here  of  approaching  God  in  His  sanc- 
tuary, and  of  its  effects.  So  here  we  have  those  who 
enjoy  the  privilege  of  drawing  near  to  God  as  far  as  it 
was  permitted  under  law.  The  effect  of  this  is  not 
merely  that  they  were  not  allowed  the  excitements  which 
were  admissible  in  an  ordinary  Israelite,  as  we  learnt  in 
ch.  X. ;  but  they  may  not  know  the  indulgence  of  sorrow 
for  the  nearest  dead.  Thus  it  is  said :  "  There  shall  none 
be  defiled  for  the  dead  among  his  people;  but  for  his 
kin  that  is  near  unto  him,  that  is,  for  his  mother,  and 
for  his  father,  and  for  his  son,  and  for  his  daughter,  and 


282        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

for  his  brother,  and  for  his  sister  a  virgin,  that  is  nigh 
unto  him,  which  hath  had  no  husband ;  for  her  may  he 
be  defiled.  But  he  shall  not  defile  himself,  being  a  chief 
man  among  his  people,  to  profane  himseli" 

Thus  a  number  of  different  regulations  are  laid  down 
which  are  all  in  view  of  this — that  he  who  enjoys  near- 
ness to  God  must  have  his  conduct  in  every  particular 
affected  and  governed  by  that  master  privilege.  How 
sweet  and  cheering  for  those  who  stand  in  a  relationship 
of  grace,  not  law !  At  the  same  time,  let  us  not  forget 
its  extreme  seriousness ;  for  what  the  Jew  had  only  in 
show  we  have  in  divine  reality.  It  is  impossible  to  be 
a  Christian  without  having  a  nearness  to  Grod  that  is 
measured  by  Christ  Himself.  When  He  was  here,  He 
always  walked  in  this  conscious  intimacy  with  His  God 
and  Father.  He  had  it  no  doubt  in  absolute  perfection 
according  to  the  glory  of  His  person ;  so  that  of  Him 
alone  it  could  be  said,  "The  Son  of  man  who  is  in 
heaven."  But  it  was  morally  true  also  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  as  He  walked  here  below;  and  what  was  true  of 
Him  alone  personally — I  mean  true  as  a  matter  of 
fact  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  in  Him  morally  is  now 
our  very  place,  as  far  as  it  is  possible  to  be  given  to  a 
creature.  Eedemption  has  brought  us  to  it,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  seals  us  in  it.  We  are  brought  to  Grod ;  and  the 
consequence  of  this  is,  that  it  goes  far  beyond  the  setting 
aside  of  what  is  wrong  and  what  is  evil  now.  We  are 
never  right  unless  we  judge  things  around  us  that  might 
be  quite  lawful  and  legitimate  otherwise ;  the  one  ques- 
tion for  us  is,  how  do  they  suit  a  man  who  is  brought 
to  God  ?  Unless  we  bring  in  this,  we  shall  find  our- 
selves continually  entangled  in  the  conventionalities  of 


LEVmCtJS  XVI.-XXVIL  283 

men,  or  in  what  is  possibly  even  baser-the  mere 
traditions  of  a  corrupted  Christendom  on  the  eve  of  its 
judgment. 

In  chapter  xxii  we  have  this  continued,  not  so  much 
as  to  matters  of  conduct,  but  as  to  questions  of  a  blemish 
in  some  form  or  another.  Jehovah  was  more  than  ever 
jealous  of  the  personal  state  and  household  of  the 
priests. 

Chapter  xxiii  calls  for  a  fuller  notice.  Here  we  are 
on  the  instructive  theme  of  the  feasts  of  Jehovah — the 
displays  of  His  ways  from  first  to  last  with  His  people. 
First  and  foremost  the  Spirit  of  God  brings  in  here,  as 
at  the  beginning  of  the  Bible  after  His  work  was  done, 
the  rest  of  GU)d.  There  is  nothing  that  man  so  little 
understands.  It  will  be  strange  perhaps  to  many  here 
to  know  that  what  the  wisdom  of  this  world  counts 
happiness  is  the  unrest  of  change — the  miserable  proof 
that  man  is  fallen  and  far  from  God.  Tet  it  is  the 
fact  that  man  so  defines  his  own  pleasure — the  shifting 
to  which  a  burdened  conscience  has  recourse  in  order  to 
lose  the  sense  of  what  it  has  lost  through  sin.  For  God 
and  His  children  all  is  different.  The  very  first  word 
He  speaks  is  the  pledge  of  that  rest  which  He  Himself 
first  instituted  at  the  beginning,  and  into  which  He  will 
bring  His  people  at  the  end.  This  He  would  impress 
on  their  sofils,  and  give  them  ever  to  have  it  before 
them.  He  deigns  to  think  of  us,  and  to  give  us  to 
share  rest  with  Himself ;  but  that  rest  will  be  His  rest. 
He  will  have  wrought  for  it,  and  will  finally  bring  us 
into  it. 

This  then  was  what  was  represented  by  the  sabbath- 
day,  and  the  reason  why  it  was  put  in  the  first  instance. 


284       LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Indeed  there  is  no  truth,  one  may  say,  more  important, 
as  far  as  these  facts  are  concerned ;  and  no  doubt  the 
tendency  in  mjin  to  lose  sight  of  it  was  one  ground 
why  it  was  the  only  feast  that  was  always  recurring. 
The  sense  of  need  would  make  the  passover  felt ;  but 
the  busy  activities  of  the  world  demanded  special 
means  to  keep  before  the  people  the  rest  of  God. 
This  done,  God  gives  us  a  fresh  beginning — ^I  have  no 

doubt  with  divine  wisdom — after  the  sabbath-day  has 
been  mentioned :  "  These  are  the  feasts  of  Jehovah." 
In  a  certain  sense  the  Sabbath  is  one  of  these  feasts, 
but  in  another  it  may  be  viewed  apart.  We  have  looked 
at  the  first  of  them. 

Now  in  those  that  were  strict  feasts,  which  occurred 
once  in  the  year,  the  passover  necessarily  has  a  funda- 
mental place.  The  reason  is  manifest.  It  is  the  well 
known  sign  of  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  "  In  the 
fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month  at  even  is  Jehovah's 
passover."  Immediately  connected  with  it  is  the  feast 
of  unleavened  bread ;  that  is,  purity  according  to  Christ, 
where  the  leaven  of  man's  nature  cannot  be  allowed; 
and  this  too  through  the  whole  circle  of  man's  day  here 
below.  "  Seven  days,"  as  it  is  said,  "  Ye  must  eat 
unleavened  bread.  In  the  first  day  ye  shall  have  an 
holy  convocation  :  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work  therein. 
But  ye  shall  offer  an  offering  made  by  fire  unto  Je- 
hovah seven  days :  in  the  seventh  day  is  an  holy  con- 
vocation :  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work  therein."  Then 
comes  another  and  a  very  distinct  statement  of  the  Spirit 
of  God, — not  exactly  a  feast,  but  what  'vcas  essential 
to  the  next  feast.  "And  Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses, 
saying,  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and  say  unto 


LEVITICUS  xvi.-xxvn.  285 

tbem,  When  ye  be  come  into  the  land  which  I  give  unto 
you,  and  shall  reap  the  harvest  thereof,  then  ye  shall 
bring  a  sheaf  of  the  first-fruits  of  your  harvest  unto  the 
priest :  and  he  shall  wave  the  sheaf  before  Jehovah,  to 
be  accepted  for  you :  on  the  morrow  after  the  sabbath" — 
the  evident  type  of  our  Lord's  resurrection.  On  the 
very  day  that  our  Saviour  died  on  the  cross  the  Jews 
kept  the  passover.  There  are  none  who  have  made 
greater  difficulties  than  those  who  have  written  most  on 
the  subject;  but  the  reason  is  that  they  almost  in- 
variably bring  in  western  notions  of  time,  instead  of 
taking  their  stand  upon  time  as  God  speaks  of  it  to  His 
ancient  people.  In  short  they  count  days  from  sunrise  to 
sunset.  Such  is  not  the  scriptural  way.  On  the  one  hand 
our  Lord  did  Himself  eat  the  passover  on  the  regular 
day.  It  is  not  true  that  it  was  a  different  day.  He  eat 
the  passover  on  the  day  prescribed  by  the  law.  On  the 
other  hand  even  the  Jews  that  had  played  their  part 
in  seizing  the  Lord  with  a  view  to  His  crucifixion, 
according  to  Jewish  reckoning  eat  the  passover  on  the 
very  same  day.  Though  it  was  (/wr  next  morning,  it  was 
their  same  day.  Christ  died  before  that  day  was  over. 
If  we  hear  the  law,  all  these  three  facts  which  were 
severed  by  a  considerable  length  of  time  really  hap- 
pened on  one  and  the  same  day  according  to  God's 
method  of  counting  the  day. 

Similar  difficulties  have  been  made  about  the  re- 
surrection, it  may  just  be  observed  in  passing.  It  is 
only  noticed  in  order  to  help  the  Christian  in  reading 
God's  word.  The  truth  is  that  the  subject  has  been 
confused  by  the  very  men  who  ought  to  be  a  help. 
There  are  none  who  have  more  embroiled  the  subject 


286        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

than  the  commentators.  It  would  be  hard  to  name  a 
single  one  that  has  rightly  nsed  the  light  of  the  scrip- 
tures on  this  point.  To  me  this  seems  humiliating;  for 
the  true  solution  lies  on  the  surface  of  scripture  both  in 
the  Old  Testament  and  in  the  New  Testament  What 
we  need  is  more  thorough  confidence  in  the  unerring 
word  of  God,  all  of  which  if  read  in  simple  faith  will 
be  found  to  convey  nothing  but  light 

Our  Lord  then  died  on  the  due  day  according  to  the 
passover  regulations.  So  He  rose  on  the  first  day  after 
the  sabbath,  when  the  priest  waved  the  sheaf  of  com 
that  had  been  cast  into  the  ground  and  died  and  had 
sprung  up  again.  Christ  was  as  much  the  waved  sheaf 
as  the  paschal  lamb.  In  this  case  you  will  observe  that^ 
when  it  was  offered,  there  was  a  lamb  without  blemish 
for  a  bumt-oflfering,  and  a  meat-oflfering  of  two  tenth 
deals  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil,  an  offering  made 
by  fire  unto  Jehovah  for  a  sweet  savour,  with  its  ap- 
propriate drink-offering  but  nothing  more:  there  was 
no  sin-offering.  Whenever  Christ  appears  in  that  which 
is  brought  before  us,  there  is  none  required.  He  Him- 
self in  fact  being  the  true  sin-offering  for  others.  The 
sheaf  of  first-fruits  became  thus  a  type  of  Him  who 
knew  no  sin.  It  was  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  just 
as  the  passover  pointed  to  His  death.  "And  ye  shall 
eat  neither  bread,  nor  parched  com,  nor  green  ears,  until 
the  selfsame  day  that  ye  have  brought  an  offering  unto 
your  God :  it  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever  throughout 
your  generations  in  all  your  dwellings." 

This  day  becomes  the  point  of  departure  from  which 
to  reckon  the  morrow  after  the  sabbath ;  as  it  is  said, 
**Ye  shall  count  imto  you  from  the  morrow  after  the 


LEVmCTJS  XVI.-XXVIL  287 

sabbath,  from  the  day  that  ye  brought  the  sheaf  of  the 
wave-oflfering ;  seven  sabbaths  shall  be  complete :  even 
unto  the  morrow  after  the  seventh  sabbath  shall  ye 
number  fifty  days."  And  then  comes  another  type  of 
great  significance:  "And  ye  shall  offer  a  new  meat- 
offering unto  Jehovah."  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  ? 
Perhaps  there  is  scarce  one  here  present  who  does  not 
know,  by  the  clear  light  of  the  New  Testament,  that  it 
was  Pentecost.  The  new  meat-offering  on  that  day 
ought  to  call  for  few  words  of  explanation,  not  because 
it  lacks  interest,  but  because  we  at  least,  all  the  chil- 
dren of  God,  ought  to  know  its  bearing  well.  It  is  the 
beautiful  type,  not  of  Christ,  but  of  those  that  are 
Christ's, — of  those  called  according  to  that  name  which 
was  given  to  Himself,  the  true  sheaf  of  first-fruits  with 
its  bumt-offering  and  meat-offering  and  drink-offering. 
In  it  there  could  be  no  question  of  defilement;  but 
in  the  first-fruits  which  followed  fifty  days  after,  when 
the  new  meat-offering  was  offered,  another  provision 
tells  its  own  tale :  "  Ye  shall  bring  out  of  your  habita- 
tion two  wave-loaves."  "The  law  made  nothing  perfect." 
It  is  not  the  complete  figure  of  the  church,  nor  could 
be ;  nor  is  there  any  adequate  setting  forth  of  its  unity: 
still  there  is  a  sufGicient  testimony  to  those  that 
compose  the  church;  and  we  must  always  make  this 
distinction  in  looking  at  these  types.  The  two  wave- 
loaves  may  possibly  indeed  refer  to  the  two  houses 
of  Israel,  out  of  which  were  called  such  as  should  be 
saved,  and  in  an  ulterior  sense  perhaps  to  Jew  and 
Gentile.  At  any  rate  there  was  no  proper  sign  of  that 
which  is  so  characteristic  a  feature  of  the  church, 
namely,  the  one  body  of  an  exalted  and  heavenly  Head. 


288        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

This  could  not  yet  come  into  view.  But  the  two  wave- 
loaves  of  two  tenth  deals  were  to  be  brought  out  of 
their  habitation ;  they  were  to  be  of  fine  flour,  but 
expressly  baken  with  leaven — a  surprising  feature  when 
we  bear  in  mind  Leviticus  ii. ;  and  the  more  as  they 
are  said  also  to  be  the  first-fruits  unto  Jehovah. 

What  was  true  of  Christ  is  true  also  of  those  that  are 
Christ's.  They  were  first-fruits  to  Jehovah.  But  then 
there  was  this  difference,  that  as  they  were  baken  with 
leaven  to  shew  the  evil  still  existing  in  the  nature  of 
those  that  compose  the  Christian  body,  so  there  is  the 
need  of  a  sin-offering  to  put  away  that  evil,  and  confess 
withal  the  sense  and  the  judgment  of  it  before  God. 
"  Ye  shall  offer  with  the  bread  seven  lambs  without 
blemish  of  the  first  year,  and  one  young  bullock,  and 
two  rams :  they  shall  be  for  a  burnt -offering  unto  Je- 
hovah, with  their  meat-offering,  and  their  drink-offerings, 
even  an  offering  made  by  fire,  of  sweet  savour  unto 
Jehovah"  There  is  the  full  witness  of  acceptance;  but 
there  is  more  than  this.  "Then  ye  shall  sacrifice  one 
kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin-offering,  and  two  lambs  of  the 
first  year  for  a  sacrifice  of  peace-offerings."  There  is 
the  recognition  of  the  evil  that  needed  the  sacrifice  of 
Christ.  At  the  same  time  there  is  the  witness  of  the 
communion  into  which  we  are  brought,  founded  upon 
the  blessed  sacrifice  of  Christ.  This  was  not  the  case 
with  what  represented  Christ.  "And  the  priest  shall 
wave  them  with  the  bread  of  the  first-fruits  for  a  wave- 
offering  before  the  Lord,  with  the  two  lambs:  they  shall 
be  holy  to  Jehovah  for  the  priest.  And  ye  shall  pro- 
claim on  the  self-same  day,  that  it  may  be  an  holy  con- 
vocation unto  you:  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work  therein: 


LEVITICUS  xvi.-xxvn.  289 

it  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever  in  all  your  dwellings 
throughout  your  generations." 

It  is  much  to  be  noted  that  here  closes  all  reckoning 
of  time  from  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  and  that  new  meat- 
offering which  followed  it  on  the  day  of  Pentecost. 
There  is  a  break.  Undoubtedly  a  quite  new  set  of 
feasts  begins  afterwards,  and  a  marked  lapse  now  comes 
before  us* 

Thus  the  wisdom  of  God  provided  for  a. mighty  work 
to  be  founded  on  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ, 
setting  forth,  as  far  as  this  could  be  without  revealing 
the  mystery,  a  place  of  association  with  Christ  of  the 
nearest  kind,  though  there  is  the  most  careful  guard 
against  confounding  the  Christian  with  Christ.  What- 
ever may  be  his  union  with  Him,  stiU  there  is  care  to 
hold  up  the  unsullied  purity  of  Christ.  The  Christian 
has  Him  for  his  life,  as  we  know;  but  there  is  the 
most  distinct  confession  that  his  nature  needs  the 
sacrifice  for  sin  to  meet  it. 

Then  follows,  it  is  true,  a  little  glance  at  the  harvest 
before  the  new  course.  This  is  brought  forward  in  a 
remarkably  mysterious  way.  "And  when  ye  reap  the 
harvest  of  your  land,  thou  shalt  not  make  clean  rid- 
dance of  the  corners  of  thy  field  when  thou  reapest, 
neither  shalt  thou  gather  any  gleaning  of  thy  harvest : 
thou  shalt  leave  them  unto  the  poor  and  to  the  stranger : 
I  am  Jehovah  your  God."  All  this  is  left  with  com- 
parative, and  I  believe  with  purposed,  vagueness.  There 
will  be  a  peculiar  testimony  of  God  in  the  end  of  the  age. 
The  heavenly  people  will  be  taken  into  the  garner,  but 
there  will  be  a  remnant  in  the  field  left  who  will  be  really 
of  Himself    The  gleanings  are  left,  as  it  is  said  here,  for 

u 


290        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

the  poor  and  the  stranger.  The  Lord  will  maintaiii  His 
testimony  even  in  the  darkest  times,  and  in  the  most 
peculiar  way.  This  however  is  lightly  passed  over, 
because  it  does  not  belong  to  the  properly  economic 
dealings  of  God. 

The  recommencement  is  very  significantly  set  forth 
by  a  new  banning  in  verse  23 :  *'  And  Jehovah  spake 
unto  Moses,  saying,  In  the  seventh  month."  Here  we 
come  down  to  the  closing  scene,  as  far  as  the  feasts 
could  represent  it  "  In  the  seventh  month,  in  the  first 
day  of  the  month,  shall  ye  have  a  sabbath,  a  memorial 
of  blowing  of  trumpets,  a  holy  convocation.'*  Clearly 
it  is  a  jfresh  testimony,  and  a  loud  summons  goes  forth, 
sounds  unheard  before.  It  is  no  longer  a  sheaf  waved 
before  Jehovah,  but  the  attention  of  men  is  drawn  in  a 
most  striking  manner.  The  public  dealings  of  God  for 
the  earth  now  openly  begin.  Though  Jesus  was  pre- 
sented to  man's  responsibility,  God  knew  perfectly  that 
the  ofifer  of  the  kingdom  in  His  person  as  Messiah  would 
break  down  through  the  unbelief  of  man ;  and  nothing 
shews  more  clearly  than  these  types  how  well  it  was 
known  all  along.  Man  never  surprises  God;  nor  is 
there  any  after-thought  on  His  part.  All  was  known 
and  settled  beforehand,  while  man  thoroughly  mani- 
fests what  he  is.  How  the  light  will  burst  on  Israel 
when  their  eyes  are  opened  to  it  in  the  day  that  is 
coming !  How  they  will  beat  their  breasts  in  amaze- 
ment and  sorrow  for  their  blindness  of  imbelief !  Grod 
will  work  in  their  consciences,  and  they  will  bow  at 
length  to  the  grace  of  their  glorified  Lord.  They  will 
sorrow  indeed,  but  it  will  not  be  mere  unavailing  sorrow; 
it  will  be  holy  gracious  sorrow,  not  without  shame  as 


LKVincus  xvL-xxvn.  291 

for  as  they  are  concerned ;  but  none  the  less  will  there 
be  the  simple  enjoyment  of  the  mercy  of  God  toward 
their  souls.  In  the  seventh  month  then,  and  on  the  first 
day  of  it,  there  is  the  feast  of  trumpets.  No  servile 
work  again  is  to  be  done,  "  but  ye  shall  offer  an  offering 
made  by  fire  unto  Jehovah."  And  then  we  are  told — 
"  On  the  tenth  day  of  this  seventh  month  there  shall 
be  a  day  of  atonement" — that  very  day  which  was 
brought  before  us  already  in  all  its  solitary  excellence 
and  glory,  both  in  its  connection  with  us  and  also  with 
IsraeL  (Chap,  xvl)  But  here  we  have  it  in  sole  con- 
nection with  the  earthly  people.  For  the  time  is  now 
come  for  man,  the  Jew,  to  have  his  sins  covered  before 
Gk)d;  and  therefore,  as  we  are  told,  "there  shall  be  a 
day  of  atonement :  it  shall  be  an  holy  convocation  unto 
you ;  and  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls,  and  offer  an  offer- 
ing made  by  fire  unto  Jehovah.  For  whatsoever  soul  it 
be  that  shall  not  be  afflicted  in  that  same  day,"  &c. 

Thus  we  find  two  great  truths  to  which  prominence 
is  given.  It  is  a  day  when  God  will  bring  His  people 
into  a  real  divinely -taught  knowledge  of  the  work  of 
expiation  for  their  sins — the  death  of  Christ ;  but  for 
this  reason  two  things  are  coupled  with  it :  they  judge 
themselves,  taking  the  place  of  sinners  on  the  day 
which  is  the  witness  of  their  sins  for  ever  gone.  Sense 
of  grace  in  redemption,  which  puts  away  our  sins,  is 
the  best,  truest,  and  only  trustworthy  means  of  making 
our  sins  really  felt.  When  it  is  not  so,  it  is  an  abomin- 
able abuse  of  the  grace  of  our  God  and  of  the  work  of 
Christ  It  was  never  done  to  make  us  judge  sin  lightly, 
but  to  enable  us  to  look  at  sin,  and  hate  sin,  as  God 
does — ^not  meaning  of  course  according  to  His  depth 

V  2 


292        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

of  holiness,  but  in  our  measure  on  the  same  principle. 
And  we  can  afford  to  do  it,  inasmuch  as  Christ  has 
taken  all  its  consequences  upon  Himself,  and  has  borne 
it  away  from  us  as  a  matter  of  eternal  judgment. 

But  there  is  a  second  element,  besides  this  moral 
judgment  of  self,  which  is  the  necessary  working  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  every  one  to  whom  the  atonement  of 
Christ  is  truly  applied.  "And  whatsoever  soul  it  be 
that  doeth  any  work  in  that  same  day,  the  same  soul 
will  I  destroy  from  among  his  people."  There  was 
enough  and  to  spare  of  work  for  other  days ;  but  for 
this  day  there  must  be  none.  Man  has  absolutely  no 
part  in  the  task.  None  but  the  Saviour  can  work  for 
it,  and  He  in  sufifering  for  us.  "  Ye  shall  do  no  work 
in  that  same  day ;  for  it  is  a  day  of  atonement,  to  make 
an  atonement  for  you  before  Jehovah  your  God.  For 
whatsoever  soul  it  be  that  shall  not  be  aflBlicted  in  that 
same  day,  he  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his  people." 
The  soul  that  presumes  to  rest  on  grace  without  self- 
condemnation  because  of  its  sins  before  God  is  trifling 
with  Him,  and  has  not  yet  learnt  to  hate  its  unholiness 
as  at  thorough  issue  with  God's  own  character.  And 
again  the  soul  that  presumes  to  work  shews  its  pre- 
sumption in  putting  itself,  so  to  speak,  on  a  level  with 
Christ  and  God  Himself;  for  the  work  which  alone 
sufl&ces  as  a  basis  for  atonement  must  be  done  before 
God  by  One  who  is  God's  own  fellow. 

On  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  same  month  begins  the 
final  festival  of  the  Jewish  year — ^the  feast  of  taber- 
nacles. This  does  not  call  for  any  considerable  length 
of  remark.  It  was  the  shadow  of  coming  glory,  but 
pi-esented  in  a  singular  manner,  especially  in  Leviticus. 


LEVITICUS  XVI.-XXVIL  293 

"  The  fifteenth  day  of  this  seventh  month  shall  be  the 
feast  of  tabernacles  for  seven  days  unto  Jehovah.  On 
the  first  day  shall  be  an  holy  convocation.  Ye  shall  do 
no  servile  work  therein.  Seven  days  ye  shall  ofifer  an 
offering  made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord ;  on  the  eighth  day 
shall  be  an  holy  convocation  unto  you,  and  ye  shall 
offer  an  offering  made  by  fire  unto  Jehovah.  It  is  a 
solemn  assembly,  and  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work 
therein."  God  thus  shews  us  by  this  remarkable  intro- 
duction of  the  eighth  day  here  the  connection  of  the 
earthly  blessing  with  the  heavenly  glory  of  resurrection. 
Resurrection  points  to  heaven,  and  can  never  satisfy 
itself  except  in  heavenly  places ;  and  therefore  a  link 
is  here  intimated  with  glory  on  high,  whilst  there  is  the 
fullest  possible  recognition  of  a  day  of  rest  and  blessed- 
ness for  the  earth  and  the  Jewish  people.  As  we  are 
told  here  in  the  latter  part  of  it,  they  were  all  to  keep 
this  feast  with  gladness  and  joy.  "  Ye  shall  take  you 
on  the  first  day  the  boughs  of  goodly  trees,  branches  of 
palm  trees,  and  the  boughs  of  thick  trees  and  willows 
of  the  brook,  and  ye  shall  rejoice  before  Jehovah 
your  God  seven  days."  The  eighth  day  is  evidently 
brought  in  in  a  mysterious  way — not  now  pointing  to 
those  who  may  be  a  testimony  for  God  where  all 
seemed  to  be  removed  from  the  earth,  as  we  saw  in  the 
notice  of  the  harvest  at  the  end ;  but  now,  when  we 
have  the  fulness  of  the  witness  of  glory  here  below, 
this  finger,  so  to  speak,  points  upward,  shewing  that  in 
some  way  not  developed  in  this  chapter  there  will  be 
the  connection  of  the  resurrection  and  heavenly  glory 
with  the  day  of  Jehovah  for  the  earth.  We  under- 
stand it  now  from  the  New  Testament,  where  all  is 


294        LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

clearly  brought  out.  In  point  of  fact  the  testimony  of 
the  New  Testament  is  fullest  on  that  which  is  but  an 
added  circumstance  here.  In  short  our  proper  hope  is 
in  the  heavens;  and  accordingly  the  New  Testament 
makes  this  the  prominent  truth,  as  it  was  according  to 
the  wisdom  of  God  it  should  be.  But  for  the  earthly 
people  we  find  the  prominent  place  given  to  the  earthly 
part  of  it,  although  the  heavenly  part  is  not  forgotten. 
In  chapter  xxiv.  injunctions  and  circumstances  are 
introduced  in  a  very  peculiar  manner.  First  a  command 
is  given  to  the  children  of  Israel  to  give  "pure  oil- 
olive  beaten  for  the  light."  This  was  to  be  ordered  by 
the  high  priest,  so  that  there  should  always  be  a  candle- 
stick burning  before  Jehovah  continually.  Along  with 
this  there  was  to  be  the  keeping  up  of  the  witness  of 
Israel  after  the  flesh,  though  not  without  Christ  and  the 
fragrance  of  His  grace  before  God.  "And  thou  shalt 
set  them  in  two  rows,  six  on  a  row,  upon  the  pure  table 
before  Jehovah.  And  thou  shalt  put  pure  frankincense 
upon  each  row,  that  it  may  be  on  the  bread  for  a 
memorial,  even  an  offering  made  by  fire  unto  Jehovah. 
Every  sabbath  he '  shall  set  it  in  order  before  Jehovah 
continually,  being  taken  from  the  children  of  Israel  by 
an  everlasting  covenant."  This  was  to  be  Aaron's  food. 
Thus  we  have  provision  that  there  shall  be  always  a 
testimony,  although  there  may  be  an  interruption,  as 
we  know  alas  1  there  has  been  in  the  dispensations  of 
God.  Still  God  will  infallibly  maintain  what  is  suitable 
to  His  own  character ;  and,  as  we  know  too,  a  heavenly 
testimony  is  precisely  what  comes  in  when  the  course 
of  the  earthly  economy  has  been  broken.  Thus,  although 
this  might  seem  to  be  strangely  brought  in  here,  its 


LEVITICUS  XVI.- xxm  295 

wisdom,  I  think,  will  be  apparent  to  any  reflecting 
mind  The  great  High  Priest  keeps  up  the  light  during 
the  long  night  of  Israel's  history. 

At  the  same  time  we  have  a  contrasted  fact:  ''And 
the  son  of  an  Israelitish  woman,  whose  father  was  an 
I^ptian,  went  out  among  the  children  of  Israel:  and  this 
son  of  the  Israelitish  woman  and  a  man  of  Israel  strove 
together  in  the  camp ;"  and  in  the  strife  he  blasphemed 
the  name  [of  Jehovah].  This  fact^  I  am  persuaded,  is 
purposely  preserved  along  with  the  former.  Israel  them- 
selves as  a  whole  have  fallen  under  this  dreadful  curse. 
Therefore  what  might  seem  to  be  a  singular  connexion, 
more  particularly  after  the  feasts  of  Jehovah,  exactly 
suits  the  situation.  That  is,  we  have  the  solemn  fact 
that  the  people,  who  ought  to  have  been  the  means  of 
blessing  to  all  others,  have  themselves  passed  under  the 
curse,  and  been  guilty,  in  the  most  painful  form,  of 
blaspheming  "the  name."  We  know  how  this  has  been; 
we  know  how  they  treated  Him  who  is  the  Word  of 
God  and  declared  the  Father,  who  was  and  is  Jehovah 
Himself  We  know  well  how  Israel,  yielding  to  thoughts 
of  the  world  (as  it  is  said  here,  the  son  of  an  Israelitish 
woman  whose  father  was  an  Egyptian),  having  fallen 
thoroughly  a  prey  to  carnal  wisdom  as  to  the  Messiah, 
were  guilty  of  rejecting  God  in  the  person  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  and  of  blaspheming  the  name.  Accordingly 
they  have  fallen  under  the  curse,  which  would  be  final 
but  for  the  grace  of  God,  who  knows  how  to  meet  the 
most  desperate  case.  But  indeed,  as  far  as  regards  the 
mass  of  the  nation,  that  judgment  is  definitive.  It  is 
the  remnant  that  will  become  a  strong  nation  in  the  day 
that  is  at  hand.  On  the  apostates  wrath  will  come  to 
the  uttermost. 


296        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

The  judgment  of  this  evil  doer  brings  in  some 
necessary  distinctions,  and  the  solemn  truth  of  retribu- 
tion is  added  as  closing  the  rest  of  the  chapter.  Jew 
or  stranger,  the  guilty  in  their  midst  must  alike  suffer. 

In  chap.  XXV.  another  trait  is  laid  down  to  complete 
the  picture ;  that  is,  the  regulation  of  the  principle  of 
the  sabbath,  not  merely  for  the  people,  but  for  the  land; 
not  only  a  sabbatical  year,  but  the  full  jubilee — all 
on  the  same  present  principle  of  a  sabbath.*  Accord- 
ingly then  this  chapter  brings  in  a  most  blessed 
privilege  under  the  hand  of  the  God  of  goodness,  but  a 
miserable  thing  when  man  meddles.  The  neglect  of  the 
sabbath — not  only  in  its  weekly  form,  but  on  a  larger 
scale  for  the  land — was  indicated  of  God  as  a  matter 
of  fact  in  the  history  of  the  chosen  people. 

AVhat  is  the  result  in  God's  hand  ?  Supposing  by 
any  iniquity  the  land  passed  from  those  to  whom  God 
assigned  it,  the  jubilee  was  God's  principle  for  pre- 
serving His  own  rights  intact.  For  in  truth  Israel 
were  but  tenants ;  Jehovah  was  the  landlord.    Jehovah 

*  Even  Ewald  (spite  of  his  ingenious  foUy  of  the  Elohist,  junior 
Elohist,  Jehovist  and  redactor,  not  to  speak  of  the  Deuteronomist,)  is 
struck  with  the  constant  recurrence  of  the  septenary  numbers  in 
-various  forms,  days,  weeks,  months,  and  years,  throughout  the  law  as 
a  strong  indication  that  the  whole  system  of  its  times  and  seasons  was 
the  product  of  one  mind.  The  truth  is  that  it  pervades  the  Hebrew 
Scriptures  from  Q«nesis  to  Daniel,  in  whose  chapter  ix.  we  have  the 
same  principle  in  another  and  original  shape.  And  this  is  the  more 
striking,  because  there  was  so  thorough  a  change  from  the  pastoral 
.character  of  the  wandering  fathers  to  the  agricultural  connexion  of 
the  feasts  when  fully  celebrated  by  the  sons  of  Israel  in  Canaan,  after 
they  had  been  impressed  by  Qod  in  the  times  of  the  legislator  with  a 
profoundly  historical  stamp,  the  shadow  of  good  things  to  come.  That 
one  mind  could  be  none  less  than  divine.  May  we  be  willing  to  un- 
learn in  order  to  learn ! 


LEVITICUS  XVI.- XXVII.  297 

therefore  retains  the  earth  in  His  own  possession. 
"And  thou  shalt  number  seven  sabbaths  of  years  unto 
thee,  seven  times  seven  years;  and  the  space  of  the 
seven  sabbaths  of  years  shall  be  unto  thee  forty  and 
nine  years.  Then  shalt  thou  cause  the  trumpet  of  the 
jubilee  to  sound  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month; 
in  the  day  of  atonement  shall  ye  make  the  trumpet 
sound  throughout  all  your  land.  And  ye  shall  hallow 
the  fiftieth  year,  and  proclaim  liberty,  throughout  all 
the  land  unto  all  the  inhabitants  thereof:  it  shall  be  a 
jubilee  unto  you ;  and  ye  shall  return  every  man  unto 
his  possession,  and  ye  shall  return  every  man  unto  his 
family.  A  jubilee  shall  that  fiftieth  year  be  unto  you : 
ye  shall  not  sow,  neither  reap  that  which  groweth  of 
itself  in  it,  nor  gather  the  grapes  in  it  of  thy  vine  un- 
dressed. For  it  is  the  jubilee;  it  shall  be  holy  unto  you : 
ye  shall  eat  the  increase  thereof  out  of  the  field.  In  the 
year  of  this  jubilee  ye  shall  return  every  man  unto  his 
possession."  Whatever  troubles,  whatever  sorrows,  what- 
ever sins  might  alienate  the  land  from  those  that  were 
His  tenants  there,  the  jubilee  year  rectifies  all.  The  land 
must  revert  to  the  landlord.  He  was  perfectly  entitled 
to  it,  and  surely  would  maintain  His  own  right  for  the 
blessing  of  His  own  people.  Such  is  ever  the  way  of 
grace.  Thus  we  see  that  righteousness,  so  terrible  a 
word  to  guilty  man,  when  wielded  by  divine  grace 
becomes  the  only  hope  for  the  ruined.  "Grace,"  as 
everywhere,  "  reigns  through  righteousness  unto  eternal 
life  by  Jesus  Qhrist."  So  it  is  for  us  who  believe  in 
Jesus ;  but  for  them  it  will  be  found  in  the  vindication 
of  what  God  promised,  when  they  had  sinned  away 
the  promises  as  far  as  man  could.     God  will  maintain 


298       LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

them  in  His  mercy,  and  will  use  them  so  for  the  people 
in  the  future  day  of  glory. 

The  law  of  jubilee  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  the 
bearing  of  Jewish  ordinances  on  moral  conduct.  Thus 
a  Jew  might  take  advantage  of  it  to  exact  a  price  for 
his  land  out  of  proportion  to  its  value,  which  depended 
on  distance  from  the  fiftieth  year.  Hence  it  is  written, 
"  And  if  thou  sell  ought  unto  thy  neighbour,  or  buyest 
ought  of  thy  neighbour!s  hand,  ye  shall  not  oppress 
one  another :  according  to  the  number  of  years  after 
the  jubilee  thou  shalt  buy  of  thy  neighbour,  and  accord- 
ing unto  the  number  of  years  of  the  fruits  he  shall  seU 
unto  thee:  according  to  the  multitude  of  years  thou 
shalt  increase  the  price  thereof,  and  according  to  the 
fewness  of  years  thou  shalt  diminish  the  price  of  it : 
for  according  to  the  number  of  the  years  of  the  fruits 
doth  he  sell  unto  thee.  Ye  shall  not  therefore  oppress 
one  another;  but  thou  shalt  fear  thy  God:  for  I  am 
Jehovah  your  God."  Sale  or  purchase  they  were  bound 
to  regulate  by  this  principle. 

To  the  Christian  the  coming  of  the  Lord  is  always  at 
hand,  and  he,  if  faithful,  will  measure  all  according  to 
that  standard.  So  says  the  apostle, ''  the  time  is  short : 
it  remaineth,  that  both  they  that  have  wives  be  as 
though  they  had  none ;  and  they  that  weep,  as  though 
they  wept  not ;  and  they  that  rejoice,  as  though  they 
rejoiced  not ;  and  they  that  buy,  as  though  they  pos- 
sessed not ;  and  they  that  use  this  world,  as  not 
using  it  for  themselves  ;*  for  the  fashion  of  this  world 

*  Or  "not  using  it  in  full "  It  is  not  "abusing"  the  world — 
which  would  be  Trapaxptt^tayoif  whereas  here  it  is  Kdraxp^fievoif  usin^ 
it  for  oneself,  not  for  the  Lord. 


LEVITICUS  xvL-xxvn.  299 

pivsseth  away."  If  the  treasures  and  prizes  of  the 
earth  will  be  worthless  in  that  day,  the  hope  of  it 
burning  brightly  in  the  heart  gives  us  present  victory ; 
for  this  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even 
our  faith.  I  grant  that  there  is  a  still  deeper  and  more 
searching  power  in  keeping  Him  before  us  who  makes 
that  day  to  be  what  it  is ;  but  He  Himself  has  marked 
the  danger  of  saying  in  our  heart  "  The  Lord  delayeth 
his  coming/* 

We  cannot  then  but  love  the  appearing  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  when  He  will  bring  in  deliverance  to  man  and 
creation  from  their  long  and  groaning  slavery  under 
Satan's  power  and  the  blighting  effects  of  the  curse. 
For  the  creature,  itself  also  shall  be  delivered  from  the 
bondage  of  corruption  into  the  liberty  of  the  glory  of 
the  children  of  God.  We  shall  be  manifested  in  glory 
along  with  Him,  and  shall  enjoy  that  mighty  and 
blessed  change  over  the  face  of  the  universe  to  the 
praise  of  His  name  and  the  honour  of  the  God  who 
sent  Him,  the  Second  Man. 

Meanwhile  the  Jew  need  not  be  troubled,  any  more 
than  the  Christian  now,  like  Gentiles  who  know  not 
God.  "Wherefore  ye  shall  do  my  statutes,  and  keep 
my  judgments,  and  do  them  ;  and  ye  shall  dwell  in  the 
land  in  safety.  And  the  land  shall  yield  her  fruit,  and 
ye  shall  eat  your  fill,  and  dwell  therein  in  safety.  And 
if  ye  shall  say,  What  shall  we  eat  the  seventh  year? 
behold,  we  shall  not  sow,  nor  gather  in  our  increase : 
then  I  will  command  my  blessing  upon  you  in  the 
sixth  year,  and  it  shall  bring  forth  fruit  for  three 
years.  And  ye  shall  sow  the  eighth  year,  and  eat  yet 
of  old  fruit  imt^il  the  ninth  year;  until  her  fruits  come 


300        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

in  ye  shall  eat  of  the  old  store.  The  land  shall  not  be 
sold  for  ever  :  for  the  land  is  mine ;  for  ye  are  strangers 
and  sojourners  with  me.  And  in  all  the  land  of  your 
possession  ye  shall  grant  a  redemption  for  the  land." 
What  matters  the  difficulty  if  God  is  the  guarantee  ? 

It  is  of  the  deepest  interest  to  notice  how  compas- 
sionately God  in  the  rest  of  the  chapter  (verses  25-55) 
dwells  on  all  possible  vicissitudes  of  Israel  in  distress. 
There  is  first  the  brother  waxen  poor,  who  sold  away 
some  of  his  possession  (verse  25  et  seqq,) ;  next^  the 
brother  waxen  poor,  whose  hand  is  lowered  and  needed 
strengthening  or  relief  (verse  35  et  seqq,) ;  then  the 
poor  brother  who  sold  himself  either  to  a  Jew  (verse 
39  et  seqq.)  or  to  a  stranger  (verse  47  et  seqq,)  with 
his  claim  in  Jehovah's  name  on  his  brethren  in  each 
respective  case.  May  we  never  forget  the  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  who,  though  He  was  rich,  yet  for  our 
sakes  became  poor,  that  we  through  His  poverty  might 
be  made  rich!  Assuredly,  if  we  follow  thus  in  His 
steps,  not  only  shall  we  have  joy  and  refreshment  in 
the  Lord  now,  but  He  will  repay  in  that  day. 

Chapter  xxvi.  draws  out  in  a  solemn  manner,  not  in 
the  form  of  type  now,  but  of  direct  statement,  the  pro- 
phetic history  of  the  people,*  and  warns  of  the  direct 
effect  of  their  being  tried  on  the  ground  of  their  own 
responsibility,  which  is  the  principle  of  law.  What  a 
contrast,  save  in  the  close,  with  the  jubilee!   I  shall  not 

*  The  characteristic  infidelity  of  rationalism  betrays  itself  in  theur 
anxious  excision  of  every  element  manifestly  divine.  Thus,  as  it  is 
one  of  their  assumptions  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  prophecy^ 
they  must  lower  the  age  of  such  a  chapter  as  Lev.  xxvi.  to  a  date 
that  would  put  the  supposed  writer  (the  pseudo-Moses)  on  the  same 
level  historicaUy  with  the  events  he  professes  to  predict.    Such  • 


LEVITICUS  XVI.- XXVII.  301 

of  course  enter  on  its  details.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  God 
does  not  close  this  searching  word  of  His  without  the 
remembrance  of  His  covenant,  as  it  is  said,  with  Jacob, 
and  His  covenant  with  Isaac,  and  His  covenant  with 
Abraham.  He  speaks  here  in  this  unusually  emphatic 
way  of  His  covenant  with  every  one  of  them;  so 
that  even  from  His  mouth,  against  whom  they  had 
80  long  and  deeply  sinned,  there  should  be  a  three- 
fold witness  for  His  mercy  in  that  day.  "And  I  will," 
says  He,  "  remember  the  land/'  Thus  we  see  the  con- 
nection with  the  chapter  before,  and  how  perfectly 
therefore  a  divine  order  is  kept  up  even  where  our 
dulness  hinders  us  often  from  perceiving  it.  "The 
land  also  shall  be  left  of  them,  and  shall  enjoy  her 
sabbaths" — another  link  of  the  connection  with  what 
went  before — "  while  she  lieth  desolate  without  them  : 
and  they  shall  accept  of  the  punishment  of  their  ini- 
quity :  because,  even  because  they  despised  my  judg- 
ments, and  because  their  souls  abhorred  my  statutes. 
And  yet  for  all  that,  when  they  be  in  the  land  of  their 
enemies,  I  will  not  cast  them  away,  neither  will  I  abhor 
them,  to  destroy  them  utterly,  and  to  break  my  covenant 
with  them :  for  I  am  Jehovah  their  God.  But  I  will 
for  their  sakes  remember  the  covenant  of  their  ancestors, 
whom  I  brought  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  in  the 
sight  of  the  heathen,  that  I  might  be  their  God :  I  am 
Jehovah."  Thus  God  falls  back  on  what  He  is  Himself 
after  He  has  fully  detailed  the  sorrows  that  fell  on  the 

ready  imputation  of  imposture  to  the  sacred  writers  is  a  guage  of 
their  moral  condition.  People  are  apt  to  judge  of  others  by  them- 
selves. The  fact  is  that  the  close  of  the  chapter  is  prophecy  as  yet 
TmfolfiUed,  to  which  the  Lord  Jesus  (Matt,  xxiii.  39)  puts  His  seal, 
as  well  as  the  Holy  Spirit  by  the  apostle  Paul.  (Eom.  zi.  26-31.) 


300        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

in  ye  shall  eat  of  the  old  store.    The  land  shall  not  be 
sold  for  ever  :  for  the  land  is  mine ;  for  ye  are  strangers 
and  sojourners  with  me.    And  in  all  the  land  of  your  • 
possession  ye  shall  grant  a  redemption  for  the  land." 
What  matters  the  difficulty  if  God  is  the  guarantee  ? 

It  is  of  the  deepest  interest  to  notice  how  compas- 
sionately God  in  the  rest  of  the  chapter  (verses  25-55) 
dwells  on  all  possible  vicissitudes  of  Israel  in  distress. 
There  is  first  the  brother  waxen  poor,  who  sold  away 
some  of  his  possession  (verse  25  et  seqq.) ;  next,  the 
brother  waxen  poor,  whose  hand  is  lowered  and  needed 
strengthening  or  relief  (verse  35  et  seqq.);  then  the 
poor  brother  who  sold  himself  either  to  a  Jew  (verse 
39  et  seqq.)  or  to  a  stranger  (verse  47  et  seqq.)  with 
his  claim  in  Jehovah's  name  on  his  brethren  in  each 
respective  case.  May  we  never  forget  the  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  who,  though  He  was  rich,  yet  for  our 
sakes  became  poor,  that  we  through  His  poverty  might 
be  made  rich!  Assuredly,  if  we  follow  thus  in  His 
steps,  not  only  shall  we  have  joy  and  refreshment  in 
the  Lord  now,  but  He  will  repay  in  that  day. 

Chapter  xxvi.  draws  out  in  a  solemn  manner,  not  in 
the  form  of  type  now,  but  of  direct  statement,  the  pro- 
phetic history  of  the  people,*  and  warns  of  the  direct 
effect  of  their  being  tried  on  the  ground  of  their  own 
responsibility,  which  is  the  principle  of  law.  What  a 
contrast,  save  in  the  close,  with  the  jubilee !   I  shall  not 

*  The  characteristic  infidelity  of  rationalism  betrays  itself  in  their 
anxious  excision  of  every  element  manifestly  divine.  Thus,  as  it  is 
one  of  their  assumptions  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  prophecy, 
they  must  lower  the  age  of  such  a  chapter  as  Lev.  xxvi.  to  a  date 
that  would  put  the  supposed  writer  (the  pseudo-Moses)  on  the  same 
level  historically  with  the  events  he  professes  to  predict.    Such  a 


LEVITICUS  xvi.-xxvn.  301 

of  course  enter  on  its  details.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  God 
does  not  close  this  searching  word  of  His  without  the 
remembrance  of  His  covenant,  as  it  is  said,  with  Jacob, 
and  His  covenant  with  Isaac,  and  His  covenant  with 
Abraham.  He  speaks  here  in  this  unusually  emphatic 
way  of  His  covenant  with  every  one  of  them;  so 
that  even  from  His  mouth,  against  whom  they  had 
so  long  and  deeply  sinned,  there  should  be  a  three- 
fold witness  for  His  mercy  in  that  day.  "And  I  will," 
says  He,  "remember  the  land/'  Thus  we  see  the  con- 
nection with  the  chapter  before,  and  how  perfectly 
therefore  a  divine  order  is  kept  up  even  where  our 
dulness  hinders  us  often  from  perceiving  it.  "The 
land  also  shall  be  left  of  them,  and  shaU  enjoy  her 
sabbaths" — another  link  of  the  connection  with  what 
went  before — "  while  she  lieth  desolate  without  them  : 
and  they  shall  accept  of  the  punishment  of  their  ini- 
quity :  because,  even  because  they  despised  my  judg- 
ments, and  because  their  souls  abhorred  my  statutes. 
And  yet  for  all  that,  when  they  be  in  the  land  of  their 
enemies,  I  will  not  cast  them  away,  neither  will  I  abhor 
them,  to  destroy  them  utterly,  and  to  break  my  covenant 
with  them :  for  I  am  Jehovah  their  God.  But  I  will 
for  their  sakes  remember  the  covenant  of  their  ancestors, 
whom  I  brought  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  in  the 
sight  of  the  heathen,  that  I  might  be  their  God :  I  am 
Jehovah."  Thus  God  falls  back  on  what  He  is  Himself 
after  He  has  fully  detailed  the  sorrows  that  fell  on  the 

ready  imputation  of  imposture  to  the  sacred  writers  is  a  guage  of 
their  moral  condition.  People  are  apt  to  judge  of  others  by  them- 
selves. The  fact  is  that  the  close  of  the  chapter  is  prophecy  as  yet 
nnfolfilled,  to  which  the  Lord  Jesus  (Matt,  xxiii.  39)  puts  His  seal, 
as  weU  as  the  Holy  Spirit  by  the  apostle  Paul.  (Eom.  zi.  26-31.) 


304        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

desert  before  Him,  rather  than  the  sanctuary.  We 
shall  find  of  course  the  sanctuary,  but  the  questictfi 
here  is  not  one  of  drawing  near  to  God  as  far  as  this 
could  be  then,  but  of  the  walk  of  the  people  of  God  on 
the  earth.  I  say  the  earth,  because  it  does  not  always 
set  before  us  the  earth  as  it  now  is — a  wilderness,  but 
the  earth  even  as  it  shall  be  when  the  Lord  Jesus  takes 
the  kingdom.  We  shall  find  the  importance  of  this 
remark  before  we  have  done  with  the  book  of  Numbers. 
Still  it  is  everywhere  the  earth  as  the  scene  through 
which  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  are  passing. 

Hence  the  first  thing  brought  before  us  is  that  we 
are  now  to  look  on  and  learn  the  varied  trials  whereby 
Israel  were  about  to  be  proved,  where  occasional  foes 
met  them,  where  there  were  always  dangers  and  diffi- 
culties, where  the  people  might  and  as  we  know  did 
manifest  their  lack  of  dependence  on  God,  even  to  the 
point  of  rebellious  and  flagrant  and  fatal  sin  against 
Him. 

It  was  needful  in  God's  wisdom  that  the  census  of 
the  children  of  Israel  should  be  taken.  The  primary 
object  that  is  presented  to  us  in  the  early  chapters  is  a 
reckoning  of  the  males  that  were  fit  for  war ;  but  we 
shall  find  that  the  numbering  goes  beyond  this,  and 
that  there  are  other  considerations  and  objects  than 
for  war  and  warlike  purposes.  In  shoit,  whatever 
might  be  the  particular  aim  in  various  parts  of  the 
book,  God  impresses  upon  us  this — the  care  and  the 
interest  that  He  takes  in  everyone  that  belongs  to  Him. 
It  is  a  very  simple  truth,  but  certainly  full  of  comfort 
to  the  soul ;  and  this,  it  will  be  observed,  for  the  earth. 


fJtTVXSEBS  L-IX  305 

tfiiid  the  sweetness  of  being  numbered 

luJ  to  that  the  heart  of  most  people  geae- 

L'ui   even  those  who  have  the  greatest 

I.  i  iig  at  the  counsels  of  God  securing  them 

:i]it  to  Collet  the  present  interest  which 

ill  all  our  movements,  ways,  conflicts, 

lis  ia  the  first  thing  with  which  the  book 

this   numbering  of    the  people   attention   is 

the  exception  of  the  tribe  of  Levi     Thus  it 

Thou  ahalt  not  number  the  tribe  of  Le\'i, 

take  the  aiim  of  them  among  the  children  of 

but  thou  sbalt  appoint  the  Levitee  over  the 

.ftcle  of  testimony,  and  over  all  the  vessels  thereof, 

all  things  that  belong  to  it :  they  shall  bear 

tabernacle  and  all  the  vessels  thereof;  and  they 

ministei'  unto  it,  and  shall  encamp  round  about 

tabernacla"     Tlie  two  things  are  true  ;    and  the 

[ott  of  both  (which  at  first  sight  m^bt  seem  to  be 

as  to  be  incompatible  with  each  other)  the 

would  surely  give  us  to  taste.     In  the  one  case 

census  relates  to  those  whom  God  has  put  in  the 

of  trial  and  proYOcation  (not  yet,  no  doubt,  the 

lest  form  of  conilict,  which  is  reserved  for  the  book 

Joshua).     Nevertheless  conflicts  there  are,  with  trial 

patience  always,  in  the  wilderness  for  the  people  of 

led.     But  then  there  is  another  truth  which  we  need 

Igo  to  apprehend,  which  has  no  less  consolation  for 

souls ;  we  are  not  only  God's  own  people,  every  one 

IS  counted  up  by  Himself  as  those  ou  whom  He 

jckons,  whatever  may  be  the  march,  with  whomsoever 

may  have  to  fight  in  passing  through  the  wilderness; 


306        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

but  we  have  to  do  with  serving  Him,  and,  above  all, 
in  reference  to  the  sanctuary.  In  this  point  of  view 
numbering  as  of  a  host  would  be  out  of  season.  The 
object  is  to  stamp  on  service  an  unearthly  character;  yet 
undoubtedly  it  is  while  we  are  going  through  the  earth. 
At  the  same  time  the  exclusion  from  this  census  in  the 
case  of  Levi  was  just  as  important  as  His  interest  in 
reckoning  Israel  up  one  by  one  in  the  midst  of  trials. 
For  the  Levites  taken  quite  apart  are  thus  viewed  as 
out  of  all  this  reckoning  and  simply  exempted  for  the 
service  of  God,  without  need  of  any  such  method  of 
impressing  God's  care  on  them. 

Both  truths  were  intended  to  be  brought  before  us 
as  having  distinpt  and  combined  meaning  in  the  Chris- 
tian. Accordingly  the  very  same  persons  who  in  one 
aspect  are  typified  by  the  numbered  tribes  of  Israel 
in  another  are  Levites  not  numbered  as  yet  because 
they  belong  to  God  simply  and  exclusively.  This  then 
is  the  double  aspect  It  would  not  be  easy  to  adduce 
an  instance  which  shews  us  more  the  importance  of  a 
right  handling  of  the  types,  because  the  natural  mind 
would  be  continually  prone  to  set  the  two  things  in 
opposition,  and  to  conclude  that,  as  the  Levites  were 
contrasted  with  the  other  tribes  of  Israel,  so  what 
either  represents  must  occupy  each  a  wholly  different 
position  now.  As  this  does  not  follow  d  priori,  so  the 
reverse  is  true  in  fact ;  and  the  types  indicate  different 
relations  of  the  same  antitypical  persons.  The  truth 
is,  when  we  think  of  a  Christian,  we  have  to  remember 
the  words  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  New  Testament : 
*'  All  things  are  yours."  It  does  not  matter  whether  it 
be  the  numbering  of  Israel  or  the  absence  of  number- 


NUMBEES  I.- DC  307 

ing  of  the  Levites,  both  are  true  of  the  Christian — 
not,  of  course,  in  the  same  aspect,  but  in  distinct 
relationships  equally  true. 

In  the  second  chapter  is  laid  down  the  arrangement 
of  the  camp ;  and  here  we  have  another  important 
principle  brought  before  us.  The  tabernacle  has  a  cen- 
tral place :  the  tribes  are  all  ranged  in  reference  to  it, 
"  Every  man  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall  pitch  by  his 
own  standard,  with  the  ensign  of  their  father's  house.** 
And  then  we  find,  '*  On  the  east  side  toward  the  rising 
of  the  sun  shall  they  of  the  standard  of  the  camp 
of  Judah  pitch  their  armies :  and  Nahshon  the  son  of 
Aminadab  shall  be  captain  of  the  children  of  Judah." 
(rod  insists  always  on  His  own  order.  "  And  his  host, 
and  those  that  were  numbered  of  them,  were  threescore 
and  fourteen  thousand  and  six  hundred.  And  those 
that  do  pitch  next  unto  him  shall  be  the  tribe  of 
Issachar :  and  Nethaneel  the  son  of  Zuar  shall  be  cap- 
tain of  the  children  of  Issachar.  And  his  host,  and 
those  that  were  numbered  thereof,  were  fifty  and  four 
thousand  and  four  hundred.  Then  the  tribe  of  Zebulun : 
and  Eliab,  the  son  of  Elon  shall  be  captain  of  the 
children  of  Zebulun."  Again  we  find  that  Judah  comes 
before  us.  "  On  the  south  side  shall  be  the  standard  of 
the  camp  of  Eeuben,"  and  again  of  Simeon.  After  all  this 
we  are  told,  "  The  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  shall 
set  forward  with  the  camp  of  the  Levites  in  the  midst 
of  the  camp :  as  they  encamp,  so  shall  they  set  forward, 
every  man  in  his  place  by  their  standards"  (verse  17). 
Then  follow  on  the  west  Ephraim's  standard,  and  on  the 

north  Dan's. 

X  2 


308        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Thus  the  tabernacle  is  surrounded  by  the  Levites  for 
the  purpose  of  asserting  their  special  and  exdusive 
absorption  in  the  service  of  God,  instead  of  being  left 
for  purposes  of  war,  or  any  object  on  the  earth  other 
than  God's  own  sanctuary.  They  hold  the  central 
place,  with  six  on  one  side  and  six  on  the  other. 
Such  was  the  order  of  the  march.  Indeed  the  same 
arrangement  appears  when  they  encamp.  We  shall 
find  however  a  subsequent  modification  of  this;  but 
I  do  not  speak  more  of  it  until  it  comes  in  its  own 
place.  Then  we  are  told  as  a  summary  that  "These  are 
those  which  were  numbered  of  the  children  of  Israel 
by  the  house  of  their  fathers.  All  those  that  were 
numbered  of  the  camps  throughout  their  hosts  were  six 
hundred  thousand  and  three  thousand  and  five  hundred 
and  fiftv.  But  the  Levites  were  not  numbered  among 
the  children  of  Israel,  as  Jehovah  commanded  Moses. 
And  the  children  of  Israel  did  according  to  all  that 
Jehovah  commanded  Moses :  so  they  pitched  by  their 
standards,  and  so  they  set  forward  every  one  after  their 
families  according  to  the  house  of  their  fathers." 

In  the  third  chapter  we  come  to  more  particulars  of 
that  which  has  a  still  nearer  interest  to  us — not  now 
the  general  order  of  the  host  of  Israel,  but  more  espe- 
cially what  concerns  the  service  of  the  Levites.  This 
specially  connects  itself  with  our  walk  here  below. 
Priesthood  is  just  as  remarkable  in  the  book  of  Levi- 
ticus as  Levite  service  is  in  the  book  of  Numbers.  In 
that  respect  Leviticus  is  by  no  means  a  happy  name  for 
the  book.  The  truth  is  that  much  the  greater  part  of 
the  detail  as  to  the  Levites  is  found  in  Numbers,  and 
not  in  Leviticus.    We  must  remember  that  the  name 


NUMBBBS  L-IX.  309 

"Leviticus"  is  not  given  by  divine  inspiration:  it  is 
merely  a  name  taken  from  the  Greek  version ;  in  short 
it  is  a  human  name.  I  do  not  hesitate  therefore  to 
make  the  remark.  The  Hebrew  mode  of  reference  to 
these  books  was  the  mere  citation  of  the  first  word  in 
each  book.  In  the  book  of  Numbers  then,  where  we  have 
the  walk  on  earth  set  forth,  service  finds  its  capital  seat. 
In  the  book  which  develops  access  to  God  priesthood  is 
as  prominent  as  here  Leviteship.  A  remark  applies  as 
to  priesthood  exactly  similar  to  what  we  found  true 
of  Leviteship  ;  namely,  that  the  Christian,  who  in  one 
point  of  view  is  of  Israel  and  in  another  a  Levite, 
is  no  less  a  priest.  Only  priesthood  sets  forth  the 
drawing  near  to  God  Himself  in  the  heavenly  sanc- 
tuary— no  longer  the  figure,  but  the  true — the  antitype; 
whereas  Levitical  service  has  to  do  with  the  service  of 
the  sanctuary  whilst  the  people  of  God  are  passing 
through  the  earth.  •  It  is  clear  from  this  that  the 
priestly  functions  of  the  believer  have  a  very  much 
higher  character  than  his  Levitical  service,  if  we  would 
express  ourselves  in  the  language  of  types.  In  the  one 
case  we  have  to  do  with  God  Himself ;  we  draw  near 
in  the  sense  of  what  Christ  is  to  Him  as  well  as  to  us. 
In  the  other  we  have  that  which  is  a  holy  duty ;  never- 
theless it  is  a  duty  which  has  to  do  with  man  emd  the 
earth  in  our  passage  through  this  world.  It  is  of  this 
latter  that  we  are  about  to  hear  more  particulars. 

The  third  chapter  accordingly  brings  before  us  the 
names  of  the  sons  of  Aaron,  who  had  the  highest  place 
among  the  Levites — "  Nadab  the  first-bom,  and  Abihu, 
Eleazar,  and  Ithamar."  "  These  are  the  names  of  the 
sons  of  Aaron,  the  priests  which  were  anointed,  whom 


310        LECTURES   ON  THE  PSNTATEUCH. 

he  consecrated  to  minister  in  the  priest's  office."  Then 
the  death  of  the  two  former,  Nadab  and  Abihn,  is  men- 
tioned, Eleazar  and  Ithamar  remaining  to  minister  in 
the  sight  of  Aaron  their  father. 

Next  follows  the  object  for  which  this  is  introduced. 
"  Jehovah  spake  with  Moses,  saying,  Bring  the  tribe  of 
Levi  near^  and  present  them  before  Aaron  the  priest, 
that  they  may  minister  unto  him."  It  is  clear  that 
gospel  service  is  not  the  point ;  and  the  reason  is  mani- 
fest. Service  in  the  gospel  is  not  merely  in  but  to  the 
world.  Here  it  is  service  in  the  world,  but  by  no  means 
the  making  known  to  the  world  the  grace  of  God.  The 
time  was  not  come  for  this.  It  is  characteristic  of 
Christianity,  and  could  not  be  set  forth  fully  until  the 
great  work  of  redemption  was  done.  Hence  we  do  not 
find,  except  in  a  mere  vague  and  general  principle,  any- 
thing that  could  properly  set  forth  the  service  of  the 
gospel ;  but  there  is  a  vast  deal  of  other  service  which 
has  and  ought  to  be  rendered  while  we  are  passing 
through  the  earth.  This  is  represented  by  the  different 
families  of  the  tribe  of  Levi. 

But  the  first  and  chief  point  to  lay  hold  of  in  the 
type  is  the  connexion  of  the  service  with  the  High 
Priest — with  Christ  Himself  Separate  ministry  in  any 
form,  divorce  the  service  of  the  saints  from  Christ, 
Himself  in  the  presence  of  God,  and  it  is.  falsified  and 
degraded.  Even  were  this  not  complete,  the  precious 
spring  of  comfort  is  weakened.  Thus  the  all-important 
point  is  what  the  Spirit  of  God  first  of  all  brings  before 
us;  that,  although  priesthood  and  ministry  are  in  them- 
selves essentially  distinct,  we  must  always  bear  in  mind 
that  ministry  is  a  gift  of  God  in  the  closest  connexion 


NUMBERS  I.- DC  311 

with  Him  who  is  the  type  of  the  great  High  Priest.  It 
is  for  His  honour,  and  for  the  accompUshment  of  what 
is  connected  with  Him.  What  has  to  be  done  on  the 
earth  can  only  be  rightly  done  in  subjection  to  Him, 
and  depends  on  His  place  as  High  Priest  The  false 
principle  which  has  ruined  service  here  below  is  that 
men  have  naturally  connected  it  with  the  church,  instead 
of  with  Christ  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  this  is 
always  fatal,  though  not  in  the  sense  that  there  may 
not  be  good  done,  as  men  say,  by  those  that  minister. 
Neither  would  one  deny  refreshment  to  souls.  Also 
we  must  particularly  bear  in  mind  the  remark  already 
made,  that  proper  gospel  ministry  is  not  contemplated 
here. 

But  when  we  think  not  merely  of  man,  of  souls 
getting  help,  &c., — when  we  think  of  the  glory  of  God, 
the  severing  it  from  Christ,  the  One  to  whom  it  really 
belongs  and  to  whom  it  is  given  of  God,  and  the 
putting  it  in  subjection  to  the  church,  completely  ruin 
all  testimony  to  His  will  and  glory  here  below.  Conse- 
quently service  becomes  either  a  selfish  thing,  turned 
perhaps  into  a  mere  worldly  profession,  or  a  matter  of 
corporate  sectarian  vainglory.  It  allows  of  the  love 
of  a  great  following,  or  the  desire  after  power  and  influ- 
ence— all  of  them  abominable  forms  of  flesh  or  world 
to  which  it  has  been  perverted  by  the  wiles  of  the 
devU.  In  any  case,  to  say  the  least,  ministry  deprived 
of  its  relation  to  Christ  is  stripped  of  its  own  proper 
dignity,  as  it  ceases  to  subserve  His  glory. 

When  cut  off  from  Him  and  connected  with  an 
earthly  stock,  it  is  taken  out  of  that  which  alone  se- 
cures its  true^  holy  and  heavenly  character.    It  becomes 


312        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

more  or  less  dependent  on  the  world  by  ceasing  to  be 
immediately  linked  with  Christ  Himself,  the  One  to 
whom  God  has  given  it.  Even  if  it  be  placed  under 
the  church,  instead  of  kept  in  the  hands  of  Christ,  it 
invariably  opens  a  door  for  pleasing  self  or  pleasing 
others;  and  thus  for  worldly  motives  or  selfishness 
in  every  possible  form.  Hence  we  see  the  all-im- 
portance pf  the  truth  as  here  typified :  "And  thou  shalt 
give  the  Levites  unto  Aaron  and  to  his  sons:  they 
are  wholly  given  to  him  out  of  the  children  of  Israel. 
And  thou  shalt  appoint  Aaron  and  his  sons,  and  they 
shall  wait  on  their  priest's  office :  and  the  stranger  that 
cometh  nigh  shall  be  put  to  death.'* 

But  there  is  a  further  truth  from  the  12th  verse: 
"And  Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses,  saying.  And  I,  behold, 
I  have  taken  the  Levites  from  among  the  children  of 
Israel  instead  of  all  the  firstborn  that  openeth  the 
matrix  among  the  children  of  Israel:  therefore  the 
Levites  shall  be  mine;  because  all  the  firstborn  are 
mine ;  for  on  the  dav  that  I  smote  all  the  firstborn  in 
the  land  of  Egypt  I  hallowed  unto  me  all  the  firstborn 
in  Israel,  both  man  and  beast :  mine  shall  they  be :  I 
am  Jehovah."  That  is,  we  find  them  in  a  very  special 
manner  taken  by  Jehovah  as  the  formal  substitute  for 
the  firstborn  of  Israel  who  were  spared  when  Egypt  was 
visited  by  the  destroying  angel.  They  were  redeemed 
by  blood,  and  counted  emphatically  to  belong  to  Jehovah. 
In  lieu  of  Israel's  firstborn  He  accepted  the  Levites. 
"They  shall  be  mine."  They  are  thus  made  the  standing 
witness  of  the  firstborn  due  to  Jehovah  from  man  as 
well  as  beast.  The  grace  of  God  had  exempted  those 
to  whom  they  answered  in  the  time  of  judgment.  Con- 


NUMBERS   I -IX.  313 

sequently  the  Levites,  being  thus  identified  with  mercy 
— the  great  distinguishing  mercy  which  rescued  Israel 
from  the  doom  of  Egypt,  were  so  much  the  better  fitted 
to  do  the  service  of  the  sanctuary.  Who  can  presume 
to  undertake  the  service  of  God  without  knowing  that 
God  has  accepted  him  on  the  ground  of  redemption  ? 
Salvation  precedes  ministry,  if  we  listen  to  God  and 
dread  the  solemn  warning  of  the  Lord  and  His  apostle. 
(Matt.  viL  22 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  27.) 

But  there  is  something  far  more  precise  than  this. 
"  Number  the  children  of  Levi  after  the  house  of  their 
fathers,  by  their  families :  every  male  from  a  month 
old  and  upward  shalt  thou  number  them.  And  Moses 
numbered  them  according  to  the  word  of  Jehovah, 
as  he  was  commanded."  Now  we  have  their  special 
numbering  for  the  place  assigned  to  each  family.  Here 
they  are  numbered  (apart  from  Israel,  but  still  num- 
bered) from  infants  of  days,  designated  to  service  long 
before  it  could  begin.  (Compare  Gal.  L  15.)  Strength 
is  given  before  service  is  cledmed ;  but  from  their  earliest 
days  they  are  reckoned  apart  according  to  the  grace 
and  intentions  of  God.  There  were  three  principal 
houses  —  Gershon,  Kohath,  and  Merari.  They  with 
their  sons  have  each  a  line  of  service  given  into  their 
hands  in  chap,  iv.,  where  they  are  afresh  numbered 
from  thirty  years  old  and  upward.  This  also  is  of  great 
moment.  There  is  nothing  practically  more  important 
than  that  each  servant  of  God  should  know  the  work 
He  has  given  him  to  do;  and  that  when  known  he 
should  stick  to  it.  Be  assured  also  that  it  is  of  no  small 
importance  never  to  interfere  with  another's  service. 
The  Lord  is  sovereign  in  this.     He  divides  according  to 


314        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

His  own  will.  This  on  the  one  hand  we  are  bound  to 
respect;  while  on  the  other  there  is  nothing  more  lovely 
than  mutual  subjection  according  to  the  grace  and  in 
the  fear  of  God.  This  very  principle  ought  to  make  us 
jealous  of  trenching  on  that  which  we  ourselves  could 
not  properly  enter  into.  I  hold  it  to  be  a  certain  truth, 
that  every  saint  of  God  has  a  work  to  do  entrusted  by 
the  Lord,  which  nobody  else  can  do  so  well.  The  great 
business  is,  that  we  should  find  what  it  is,  and  that 
we  should  cherish  unqualified  confidence  in  God  in 
carrying  it  out  as  now  redeemed  to  Him.  After  all,  this 
must  be  a  secret  between  Him  and  ourselves,  however 
we  may  be  helped  perhaps  by  the  wisdom  of  others  to 
find  it  out ;  for  there  are  many  ways  in  which  we  arrive 
at  the  conviction  of  the  work  God  has  given  us  to  do. 

Eeal  Christian  service  cannot  be  settled  in  the. simple 
external  fashion  in  which  it  was  appointed  to  Israel 
like  all  else  in  Christianity,  it  depends  on  faith,  not  on 
family,  or  birth -connection,  as  was  true  of  Israel,  a 
people  after  the  flesh.  But  what  was  true  of  them  in  a 
fleshly  sort  is  no  less  true  of  us  in  a  spiritual  way.  Now 
we  have  to  bear  this  in  mind ;  and  I  believe  that  you 
will  find  the  great  value  therefore  first  of  all  of  settling 
between  your  souls  and  the  Lord  what  the  work  is  in 
which  you  prove  His  power  with  you,  emd  His  blessing 
on  you.  Surely  now  is  the  appointed  time,  the  time  of 
labour  and  of  service,  while  you  are  passing  through 
the  world.  Thanks  be  to  God,  we  have  a  still  better 
place,  even  the  sanctuary  where  all  is  founded  on  the 
mighty  work  of  redemption,  whereby  we  rest  in  peace 
with  God  and  in  the  communion  of  His  love,  as  we 
draw  near  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ    Iq 


NUMBERS  L-DC  315 

virtue  of  this  we  have  our  true  worship  while  here 
below;  but  with  this,  as  we  have  seen,  Leviticus  has 
more  to  do  than  Numbers. 

But  besides  the  privilege  of  worshippers,  we  have 
our  work,  and  it  is  of  the  utmost  possible  moment  for 
the  glory  of  God  that  we  should  be  found  simple-hearted, 
devoted,  respecting  each  other,  not  hindering  but  helping 
on  in  brotherly  love.  Grace  no  doubt  teaches  us  what 
is  due  one  to  another,  while  earnestly  and  sedulously 
seeking  that  we  should  each  discharge  that  in  which 
God  is  with  us.  This  seems  very  plain  in  the  expressed 
directions  which  the  Spirit  of  God  lays  down  as  to  the 
sons  of  Levi.  And  we  shall  see  how  careful  He  is  in 
His  own  sovereign  choice ;  for  man's  will  has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  matter.  It  was  no  question  at  aU  of 
picking  out  those  who  might  seem  best  for  carrying  the 
boards  and  the  curtains,  or  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary. 
God  arranged  it  all,  taking  it  completely  out  of  man's 
hands :  He  chose  suited  men  Himself  Where  is  any- 
thing happy  unless  in  the  simple  carrying  out  of  the 
will  of  God  ?  Nothing  else  is  so  sweet.  Our  Lord  Jesus 
has  shown  us  this.  It  was  His  meat  to  do  the  will  of 
His  Father,  and  it  should  be  ours. 

These  Levites  then  shew  us  the  special  service 
framed,  and  the  instruments  arranged,  by  the  will  of 
our  God:  we  find  also  certain  positive  directions  laid 
down  for  alL  "These  are  the  families  of  the  Levites 
according  to  the  house  of  their  fathers.  Of  Gershon 
was  the  family  of  the  Libnites,  and  the  family  of  the 
Shimites:  these  are  the  families  of  the  Gershonites. 
Those  that  were  numbered  of  them,  according  to  the 
number  of  all  the  males,  from  a  month  old  and  upward. 


316        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

even  those  that  were  numbered  of  them  were  seven 
thousand  and  five  hundred.  The  families  of  the  Gershon- 
ites  shall  pitch  behind  the  tabernacle  westward.  And 
the  chief  of  the  house  of  the  father  of  the  Gershonites 
shall  be  Eliasaph  the  son  of  LaeL  And  the  charge  of 
the  sons  of  Gershon  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congrega- 
tion shall  be  the  tabernacle  (the  outward  frame)  and 
the  tent,  the  covering  thereof,  and  the  hanging  for  the 
door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  and  the 
hangings  of  the  court,  and  the  curtain  for  the  door  of 
the  court,  which  is  by  the  tabernacle,  and  by  the  altar 
round  about,  and  the  cords  of  it  for  all  the  service 
thereof." 

Then  we  hear  of  Kohath.  "And  of  Kohath  was 
the  family  of  the  Amramites,  and  the  family  of  the 
Izeharites,  and  the  famUy  of  the  Hebronites,  and  the 
family  of  the  Uzzielites :  these  are  the  families  of  the 
Kohathites."  Their  number  is  given;  and  these  were  to 
be  on  the  side  of  the  tabernacle  southward.  All  was  laid 
down  with  the  greatest  possible  care.  God  would  avoid 
confusion  in  the  service  of  the  tabernacle,  and  also  room 
for  human  will.  He  would  make  it  to  be  the  humblest 
thing  on  earth — a  matter  of  simple  obedience.  Their 
charge  we  gather  was  to  be  a  most  honourable  service, 
even  "  the  ark,  and  the  table,  and  the  candlestick,  and 
the  altars,  and  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary  wherewith 
they  minister,  and  the  hanging,  and  all  the  service 
thereof.  And  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron  the  priest  shall 
be  chief  over  the  chief  of  the  Levites,  and  have  the  over- 
sight of  them  that  keep  the  charge  of  the  sanctuary.** 

Then  come  the  Merarites,  under  whose  guardianship 
were  to  be  the  boards  of  the  tabernacle  (ver.  36).   "And 


NUMBERS  I.- DC  317 

under  the  custody  and  charge  of  the  sons  of  Merari  shall 
be  the  boards  of  the  tabernacle,  and  the  bars  thereof,  and 
the  pillars  thereof,  and  the  sockets  thereof,  and  all  the 
Vessels  thereof,  and  all  that  serveth  thereto."  Thus  it  is 
plain  all  was  fairly  portioned  according  to  6od*s  mind. 

What  has  been  here  pointed  out  it  is  of  all  possible 
consequence  to  apply  practically.  You  will  find  that 
in  the  service  of  the  children  of  God — in  those,  for 
instance,  that  minister  in  the  word,  without  confining  it 
to  them — these  distinctions  turn  up  constantly.  There 
are  those  whose  blessed  place  it  is  to  dwell  on  Christ 
Himself,  who  delight  in  dwelling  on  His  grace,  who 
have  the  deepest  admiration  for  His  person.  His  divine 
glory.  His  perfect  devotedness  to  the  Father.  I  need  not 
say  there  is  no  ministry  possessed  of  a  higher  character 
than  this :  what  indeed  has  one  so  high  ?  On  the  other 
hand  there  are  those  who  are  more  particularly  occupied 
with  that  which  displays  the  Lord  to  men.  It  is  clear 
that  the  curtains,  the  tabernacle,  all  the  outward  part, 
do  not  so  much  set  forth  Christ  before  God  as  before 
man.  The  former  sort  of  ministry  contributes  largely 
to  a  spirit  of  worship.  The  latter  is  adapted  more  to  the 
wunts  of  man.  The  difierence  may  be  better  understood 
by  this,  that  in  the  former  it  is  a  question  more  of  the 
value  of  Christ,  in  the  latter  of  His  ways ;  in  the  one 
more  what  He  is  and  does  for  God  than  what  He  appears 
before  the  eyes  of  man  below,  the  means  of  a  meeting 
between  Grod  and  man,  and  consequently  of  a  gracious 
supply  for  man's  necessities. 

It  is  evident  that  those  who  drove  in  their  waggons 
the  tabernacle,  with  its  tent  and  coverings,  had  the 
Gershonite  service,  as  compared  with  those  who  carried 


318        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

the  precious  vessels  of  the  sanctuary.  And  again  there 
was  somewhat  between  the  two — namely,  what  main- 
tained the  curtain.  This  therefore  did  not  seem  to 
represent  so  external  a  work  as  the  Gershonite  service ; 
on  the  other  hand,  it  does  not  suppose  such  intimate 
communion  with  Christ  and  His  offices  as  belonged  to 
the  Kohathites.  All  this  may  serve  to  shew  that  what 
is  set  forth  in  the  service  of  these  different  families  of 
Levites  has  an  obvious  bearing  on  different  forms  and 
shades  and  characters  of  ministry  in  the  word  here 
below. 

But  the  same  thing  is  also  more  widely  true;  for 
we  must  not  limit  ministry  to  the  word,  although  this 
comparatively  has  the  highest  character.  But  there 
is  also  ministry  in  prayer,  in  watchful  love  and  care 
for  others,  in  lowly  interest  in  all  that  pertains  to  the 
Lord  and  those  that  are  His.  These  things  must  not 
be  forgotten.  There  is  many  a  soul  that  never  appears 
as  a  workman  in  man's  eye,  but  who,  I  am  persuaded, 
carries  on  a  most  important  function  for  the  good  of 
those  that  do  appear,  bearing  up  and  strengthening 
before  God  those  who  have  to  do  more  with  the  din  and 
brunt  and  fag  of  the  war  that  must  be  carried  on  as 
long  as  the  enemy  is  in  force  here  below. 

All  these  things  then  we  may  well  seek  to  under- 
stand. Above  all,  when  we  do  understand,  let  us  not 
content  ourselves  with  this ;  for  what  is  the  value  of 
truth,  if  we  are  not  walking  in  it  to  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  ?  Is  it  not  rather  for  such  the  deepest  condemna- 
tion? Therefore  there  are  none  for  whom  one  may 
justly  dread  so  much  as  for  ourselves — for  you  and  me, 
if  careless.    The  more  simply  God  has  led  us  outside 


NUMBERS  I.- DC  319 

the  mere  reign  of  dreary  tradition,  with  all  its  darken- 
ing and  blinding  eflFects,  the  more  He  has  brought  us 
in  presence  of  His  own  word,  and  given  us  to  bow  to 
the  free  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  we  may  enjoy 
the  grace  and  truth  of  Christ — the  greater  the  danger, 
shame,  and  pain,  when  we  either  act  unworthily  in  our 
own  persons,  or  take  lightly  in  others  that  which  dis- 
honours the  Lord  Jesus.  Such  indifference,  if  it  exist 
along  with  a  better  knowledge  of  the  word  of  God, 
makes  all  the  more  sad  the  contrast  with  that  precious 
expression  of  His  own  grace.  Nevertheless  be  sure  that 
there  is  not  only  the  same  danger  of  slipping  as  for 
others,  but  when  those  who  have  the  better  knowledge 
do  trip,  they  are  apt  to  fall  lower  with  less  shame  than 
such  as  know  less  with  more  conscience.  When  such 
imseemliness  appears,  many  not  understanding  this  are 
scandalised.  They  wonder  how  it  can  be  that  those 
possessed  of  better  knowledge  of  God's  word  can  so 
grievously  turn  aside.  The  truth  is  that  the  cause  is 
painfully  simple.  Not  a  few  go  on  decently  in  the 
religious  world  through  love  of  reputation,  and  a  desire 
to  stand  well  one  with  another.  With  little  power  of 
godliness,  they  have  the  highest  value  for  position  and 
their  interests.  Can  any  one  doubt  who  knows  the 
general  state  of  things  that  this  exercises  immense  power 
of  a  low  kind?  But  it  is  not  so  where  the  Lord  has  dis- 
tinctly led  them  out  into  a  platform  practically  Christian. 
There  nothing  is  allowed  of  God  to  pass  in  the  long  run 
but  the  power  of  the  Spirit;  and  the  danger  is  like  Peter's, 
when  he  was  no  longer  in  the  ship  (where  he  was  safe 
enough  comparatively),  but  went  out  to  Jesus  walking 
on  the  waters.    Then  it  is  Christ  who  sustains,  one 


320        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

way  or  another,  or  sinking  is  inevitable.  Undoubtedly 
it  was  the  place  of  trae  honour,  but  faith  alone  could 
avail  itself  of  the  divine  power;  for  that  reason  the 
lack  of  it  exposed  him  the  more  because  of  his  ardour, 
though  the  Saviour  was  immediately  in  sight  to  extri- 
cate from  peril  and  sorrow.  ISTothing  but  dependence  on 
Christ  can  rightly  keep  the  Christian — I  do  not  mean 
from  drowning  so  much  as  from  dishonouring  the  Lord. 

In  order  to  this  the  sovereignty  of  God  in  service 
must  be  felt,  learned,  applied,  and  walked  in.  And  the 
same  feeling  which  maintains  it  as  a  matter  of  faithfdl- 
ness  to  God  will  also  respect  it  in  others.  Be  assured  that 
these  things  always  go  together.  This  must  suffice  for 
the  distinctive  service  of  the  Levites  in  contrast^  so  to 
speak,  with  the  common  character  of  the  priest's  work 
and  position.  In  drawing  near  to  God  all  differences 
disappear.  Who  and  what  are  we  in  His  presence? 
The  one  person  that  fills  the  scene  is  the  Lord.  And 
this  is  more  manifestly  true  and  known  to  us  now, 
because  the  vail  is  rent.  Hence  therefore  the  imme- 
diateness  of  the  presence  of  God  is  incomparably  more 
felt  in  Christianity  than  even  the  types  of  Judaism 
could  possibly  express. 

The  chapter  closes  with  fresh  calls  from  Jehovah  to 
Moses:  first,  to  number  the  firstborn  males  of  Israel 
from  a  month  old  and  upward,  and  to  take  the  Levites 
for  them ;  secondly,  as  the  number  of  the  firstborn  ex- 
ceeded that  of  the  Levites  by  two  hundred  and  seventy- 
three,  to  take  redemption-money  for  this  residue  (five 
shekels  apiece)  to  be  given  to  Aaron  and  to  his  sons.* 

*  It  is  g^evous  to  think  how  the  ignorant  or  careless  statements  of 
good  men  furnish  weapons  to  the  ill-minded  against  the  word  of  God. 


NUMBEBS  L-DC  321 

In  chapter  iv.  we  come  to  another  important  point — 
the  carrying  of  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary  tlirough 
the  wilderness ;  for  now  what  the  Kohathites  had  to  do 
is  taken  up  particularly.  It  was  the  highest  form ; 
it  was  what  brought  the  service  closest  to  Christ. 
Outwardly  it  did  not  look  so  well,  as  we  shall  find 
afterwards.  It  does  not  at  all  follow  that  the  service 
which  makes  the  greatest  show  or  noise  among  men 
has  the  most  honourable  character  in  the  eyes  of  God. 
This  is  important.  We  often  mistake  as  to  what  really 
has  the  weightiest  place.  This  is  the  one  sure  test  of 
value ;  it  is  always  Christ.  Whatever  brings  one  nearest 

Bp.  Patrick,  if  I  mistake  not,  inferred  from  the  ratio  of  the  first-bom 
to  aU  the  males  that  each  Jewish  family  must  have  consisted  of  forty- 
two  boys  on  the  average,  though  he  afterwards  reduced  it  more  than 
half.  Such  a  mistake  has  been  greedily  ro-echoed  by  rationalists 
abroad  and  at  home,  especially  by  Bishop  Colenso  in  Pt.  i.  chap.  xiv. 
But  these  reckoners,  so  ready  to  impugn  Scripture,  have  overlooked 
several  elements  which  the  record  itself  furnishes,  so  as  to  reduce  the 
number  to  an  average  of  at  most  eight  children,  boys  and  girls,  in 
each  fetmily,  which  no  man  can  pretend  to  be  excessive.  For,  first, 
the  heads  of  fiunilies — first-bom  fathers,  grandfathers,  or  great  grand- 
fathers— are  clearly  not  included  here  any  more  than  in  the  death  of 
the  first-bom  throughout  Egypt,  but  only  those  who  were  unmarried 
members  of  the  house.  Secondly,  those  numbered  were  not  merely 
eldest  sons,  but  strictly  first-bom  males.  Supposing  the  daughter  to 
be  the  first-bom  in  equal  ratio,  this  would  reduce  the  number  one 
half,  as  the  former  would  to  one-third.  Next,  there  is  a  further  re- 
duction necessary  when  we  take  the  mean  number  of  chUdren  who 
survive  to  the  twentieth  year ;  for  ordinarily  not  a  few  of  the  firstborn 
die  before  then.  Lastly,  the  first-bom  under  a  month  must  be  ex- 
cluded. Hence,  instead  of  forty-two  sons,  the  first  reduces  (say  in 
round  numbers)  to  fourteen;  the  second  to  seven;  the  third  and 
fourth  to  less  than  four,  if  we  rate  the  first-bom  surviving  at  two- 
thirds  for  the  whole  period,  and  take  the  first-bom  under  a  month  into 
account.  The  reader  wiU  find  the  minute  proof  of  this  drawn  out 
in  "  The  Exodus  of  Israel,''  chap.  vi. 

Y 


322  LEcrrEES  os  the  PKnAXErcH. 

to  Christ,  and  brings  ont  Christ  most,  is  alwmjs  the 
best  Tins  seems  to  be  the  case  tyfiaHj  with  the  sons 
of  Kohath  ia  their  serrice  Bat  if  we  look  closer,  you 
wfll  find  specud  ways  in  which  their  serrice  is  bioij^it 
before  nsu 

Thns  they  were  told  first  of  all,  ^When  the  camp 
setteth  forward,  Aanm  shall  come,  and  his  sons,  and 
they  shall  take  down  the  ooTcrii^  yail,  and  coTer 
the  ark  of  testimony  with  it :  and  shall  pat  thereon 
the  covering  of  badgers'  skins,  and  shall  spread  over  it 
a  doth  wholly  of  bine,  and  shall  pat  in  the  staves 
thereof  This  was,  of  all  the  vessels  of  the  sanctoaiy, 
the  fullest  and  the  highest  representation  of  God  Him- 
self as  displayed  in  Christ  The  arir,  as  we  know,  was 
for  the  holiest  of  alL  It  was  that  which  set  forth 
Christ, — and  Christ  not  as  He  met  the  need  of  man  in 
the  world,  bat  as  He  is  seen  in  the  presence  of  Grod — 
Christ  in  the  highest  display  of  His  glory  and  of  divine 
righteousness  on  high.  In  this  case  the  vail  was  that 
which  covered  it  It  is  not  merely  therefore  the  type 
of  the  Son  of  God  as  sach,  but  as  having  taken  hnmanity 
into  union  with  His  own  person.  I  trust  that  my 
reader  believes  and  knows  that  the  Son  of  (3od  Vas 
from  all  eternity ;  but  what  the  ark  covered  with  the 
vail  represented  is  the  Son  after  He  took  manhood  into 
onion  with  Himself 

Besides  this,  there  is  the  covering  of  badgers'  (or 
tachash)*  skins — the  figure,  it  would  seem,  of  that 

*  It  matters  little  comparatively  for  the  tyjacal  tmth  oonTeyed 
whether  t^HPi  means  a  seal  or  a  badger.  It  was  certainly  an  external 
protective  skin,  sufficiently  strong  (as  in  Esek.  xyL  30}  for  women's 
shoes  to  be  made  of  it.    The  Septnagint  translate  it  by  hattivOway 


NUMBERS  I- IX.  323 

which  absolutely  shut  out  all  that  was  offensive.  Such 
repellent  power  could  only  be  reprcsented  thus,  not 
in  the  intrinsic  way  in  which  it  belongs  to  Christ. 
The  form  in  which  the  figure  expresses  this  power  of 
moral  guard  is  by  a  skin  capable  of  warding  off  what 
was  disagreeable.  Badger's  skin  therefore  was  fitly 
chosen  in  every  case  when  it  was  a  question  of  repre- 
senting power  that  sets  aside  evil  and  forbids  its  smallest 
contact  with  the  object  so  covered.  Then  over  this 
type  of  His  separation  from  sinners  was  a  cloth  wholly 
of  blue,  because,  whatever  might  have  been  in  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  just  said,  whatever  might  be  the 
power  that  rejected  evil,  there  was  another  aspect  of 
Him  pre-eminently  presented  to  the  believer :  He  was 
"the  heavenly"  One.  (1  Cor.  xv.)  And  it  is  remark- 
able, too,  that  several  expressions  which  are  used  in 
John  iii.  combine  these  very  thoughts.  "The  Son  of 
man,"  it  is  said  there  rather  than  the  Christ.  Thus  we 
find  Him  shown  fully  as  man — the  title  in  which  He 
speaks  of  Himself  here  and  habitually  ;  but  we  find 
also  that  He  is  "  the  Son  of  Man  which  is  in  heaven,** 
This  never  could  be  severed  from  Him  when  He  was 
here  below ;  it  seems  to  be  the  allusion  meant  by  the 
covering  of  blue.  Even  John  the  Baptist  was  earthly, 
and  spoke  of  the  earth,  as  did  all  others ;  Jesus  alone 
came  from  above,  and  was  above  all.  He  was  divine, 
the  Word  and  Son,  whatever  He  became,  and  coming 
from  heaven  He  was  above  all. 

Further,  the  table  of  shewbread  had  a  cloth  of  blue, 

as  Aquila  by  idvOiva,  and  understood  a  peculiar  colour  to  be  meant. 
But  Gesenius  rightly,  I  think,  decides  against  this,  as  do  most,  though 
it  be  not  clear  what  animal  is  meant. 

T  2 


324        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

and  all  the  various  appurtenances  weie  so  covered. 
Besides  this  it  is  said,  "And  they  shall  spread  upon 
them  a  cloth  of  scarlet^*  and  cover  the  same  with  a 
covering  of  badgers*  skins,  and  shall  put  in  the  staves 
thereof"  Whereas,  on  the  contrary,  with  the  candle- 
stick there  was  simply  a  cloth  of  blue  which  covered 
all,  and  then  the  covering  of  badgers'  skins,  but  no 
scarlet  cloth.  What  are  we  taught  by  this  ?  Wherein 
lies  the  difference  ?  Why  is  it  that  the  Spirit  of  God 
directed  that  in  the  case  of  the  table  of  shewbread  a 
covering  of  scarlet  should  be  between  the  blue  and 
the  badgers'  skins  ?  And  why  not  in  the  candlestick  ? 
The  reason,  I  conceive,  is  that  scarlet  is  the  well- 
known  sign  of  His  glory,  not  so  much  as  Son  of  Man, 
but  as  the  true  Messiah — as  the  one  who  takes  the 
kingdom  of  His  father  David  after  the  flesh.  I  con- 
ceive therefore  that  this  is  probably  corroborated  by 
the  fact  of  its  connexion  with  the  table  of  shewbread. 
At  that  table  were  the  loaves,  which  clearly  bring 
before  us  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  When  the  Lord 
Jesus  restores  the  kingdom  to  Israel,  it  is  not  the 
covering  even  of  purple — I  shall  shew  this  by  and  by, 
— but  rather  the  covering  of  scarlet  The  mistake  of  the 
Jews  when  our  Lord  came  here  below  was  that  they 
only  looked  for  His  glory  as  the  Christ.  Our  Lord  Jesus 
was  refused  as  such;  but  when  it  was  manifest  that 
unbelief  rejected  Him,  then,  as  we  all  know.  He  brings 
in  this  further  glory  as  the  result  of  suffering  unto 
death.  His  death  and  unbounded  glory  throughout  all 
the  creation  go  together.  (Comp.  Ps.  viiL  with  Ps.  ii) 

*  The  word  seems  properly  to  mean  crimson.  (Cf.  Matt,  xzyii.  28 ; 
John  zix.  5.) 


NUMBEBS  I.~IX.  325 

Hence  therefore  the  evidence  is  plain,  and  God  shewed 
all  along,  that  there  never  would  be  the  limitation  of 
His  glory  in  connexion  with  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel 
represented  by  these  twelve  loaves,  as  the  Son;  He  comes 
of  man  in  all  the  fulness  of  power  and  glory.  It  would 
not  be  merely  as  of  the  Son  of  David,  but  the  infinitely 
larger  glory  of  the  Son  of  man.  But  He  will  not 
therefore  lose  His  royal  rights  over  Israel  as  His  special 
people.  With  this,  it  appears  to  me,  the  scarlet  or 
crimson  covering  is  connected.  I  shall  shew  presently 
how  the  purple  comes  in;  but  for  this  we  must  wait 
till  it  occurs  in  its  place. 

In  the  case  of  the  candlestick  of  light  there  is  alto- 
gether a  different  thing.  Nothing  else  but  blue  appears. 
There  is  neither  scarlet  nor  purple;  nor  was  there, 
you  will  observe,  the  covering  vail.  Why  is  this? 
Because  here  we  have  brought  into  close  juxtaposition 
the  light  of  divine  testimony,  which  does  not  refer  to 
the  tribes  of  Israel,  but  is  specially  connected  with  the 
heavenly  calling.  Now  it  is  precisely  when  Israel  dis- 
appears that  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is  given, 
which  is  the  real  means  of  manifesting  this  heavenly 
light.  Consequently  all  reduces  itself  to  two  ideas :  one 
is  the  heavenly  link,  and  the  other  is  the  power  that 
rejects  all  impurity.  The  church  of  God,  as  we  know, 
or  Christian  body,  is  especially  connected  with  that 
testimony.  In  the  case  of  the  twelve  tribes  there  will 
be,  when  the  due  time  comes  for  them,  a  connection 
through  Christ  with  heaven,  the  power  of  holiness;  but 
their  hope  is  Christ  in  the  glory  of  the  kingdom,  which 
He  will  take  as  the  risen  Son  of  David.  This  we  have 
already  seen  in  the  foregoing  type. 


326        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Further,  it  is  directed  that  the  golden  altar  should  be 
covered  with  blue  and  badgers'  skins ;  that  is  to  say,  in 
near  connexion  with  the  light  comes  the  altar  of  inter- 
cession, the  altar  of  priestly  grace.  How  beautifully 
this  applies  to  a  time  when  not  only  there  is  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  giving  a  testimony  for  God — a 
heavenly  testimony  and  a  holy  one,  but  besides  also  the 
power  of  grace  that  goes  forth  in  Christ's  intercession ! 
We  know  how  both  ought  to  characterize  the  Christian. 
These  two  objects  are  similar  in  kind,  were  found  per- 
fectly in  Christ,  and  should  be  in  us.  Now  is  the  time 
to  shine  as  lights  in  the  world,  holding  forth  the  word 
of  life;  now  to  pray  always  with  prayer  and  suppli- 
cation in  the  Spirit,  and  watching  thereunto  with  all 
perseverance  and  supplication  for  all  saints.  Our  God 
would  give  us  fellowship  with  Christ  in  botL  As  is  the 
heavenly,  such  are  they  also  who  are  heavenly.  The 
earthly  people  will  have  light  arising  for  them  by  and 
by;  but  it  will  be  for  earthly  government,  and  the  nation 
and  people  that  will  not  serve  Zion  must  perish. 

But  when  we  come  down  to  the  brazen  altar  in  verse 
13,  which  is  the  next  instrument,  it  is  said,  "They  shall 
take  away  the  ashes  from  the  altar,  and  spread  a  purple 
cloth  thereon."  It  is  plain  that  the  purple  must  have  a 
close  afiftnity  for  the  crimson  or  scarlet:  nevertheless 
there  is  distinction  as  well  as  resemblance.  The  dis- 
tinction seems  this — that  while  both  colours  agree 
in  bringing  in  dignity,  what  seems  to  belong  to  the 
purple  is  glory  in  general ;  and  I  need  not  tell  you  that 
Christ's  royal  dignity  is  connected  not  so  much  with 
His  being  the  Son  of  man  as  with  the  lineage  of  David. 
I  take  it  therefore  that  here  we  find  what  belongs  to 


NUMBERS  L-IX.  327 

the  Lord  as  sufifering  on  the  eartL  Here  He  suffered, 
and  here  He  is  to  reign.  No  doubt  He  is  and  could 
not  be  other  than  the  means  of  meeting  man  where  he 
is,  in  all  his  wants,  and  weakness,  and  sin,  and  distance : 
the  blessed  Lord  never  can  abdicate  that.  This  is  glory- 
pertaining  to  Him  for  the  earth.  At  the  same  time  He 
is  and  could  not  be  other  than  the  Son  of  David  as 
viewed  here  below;  as  it  was  said,  He  was  "  born  King 
of  the  Jews."  Looking  at  Him  as  connected  with  the 
earth,  this  is  in  part  what  belonged  to  Him — to  reign 
where  He  suffered.  The  proper  colour  to  express  this 
dignity  is  the  covering  of  the  brazen  altar.  He  is  more 
than  king,  but  still  He  is  King,  and  thus  connected 
with  all  the  earth. 

The  difference  between  the  brass  and  the  gold  in 
various  vessels  seems  to  be  this,  that,  while  both  shew 
divine  righteousness,  the  one  rather  looks  at  man  re- 
sponsible on  the  earth,  the  other  at  God  in  all  His  grace 
who  is  approached  in  heaven.  Such  is  the  difference. 
They  are  both  true,  both  alone  found  in  Christ :  never- 
theless the  one  means  God's  righteousness  to  whom  we 
draw  near;  the  other  means  God's  righteousness  that 
displays  what  He  is  in  dealing  with  man  as  a  respon- 
sible creature  here  below.  God  can  afford  to  forgive 
him,  but  it  is  simply  forgiveness.  This  takes  account, 
we  see,  of  his  responsibility,  which  concludes  by  his 
failure,  though  divine  mercy  steps  in  with  plenary  pardon 
on  faith.  But  it  is  another  thing  to  draw  near  to  God  as 
He  is  revealed  by  Christ.  This  is  found  in  the  ark  or 
in  the  other  vessels  of  the  sanctuary,  if  we  did  not  even 
look  at  the  highest  form. 

This  was  then  what  the  Kohathites  had  to  cany. 


328        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Accordingly  we  find  the  completing  of  the  numbering 
of  the  Levites — not  merely  of  the  children  of  Israel. 
But  we  have  now  the  same  sons  of  Gershon  brought 
distinctly  before  us,  not  mixed  up  with  the  warlike 
houses  of  Israel ;  but  when  their  service  has  been  dis- 
tinctly defined,  they  too  are  connected  with  the  work, 
and  summed  up  together. 

It  will  be  observed  that  here  again  as  in  Exodus  I 
scout  the  notion  as  erroneous,  that  the  most  holy  place 
with  its  furniture  sets  forth  Christ  in  contra-distinction 
to  the  holy  place  as  directly  referring  only  to  the  works 
and  services  of  His  people, — the  things  to  be  believed 
concerning  God,  and  the  things  to  be  done  by  His 
believing  people, — which  leaves  the  court  as  a  place 
where  they  might  personally  appear  before  God,  and 
hold  communion  with  Him  as  locally  present  among 
them.  How  poor  this  is,  how  it  leaves  out  the  true 
antitypical  place  into  which  the  believer  is  now  brought 
through  the  rent  vail  to  hold  communion  with  Him  in 
the  holiest  (Heb.  x.),  does  not  call  for  more  words.  The 
Cocceian  school  was  wild  and  vague ;  but  their  prime 
idea  is  incomparably  better  than  this  exclusion  of 
Christ  from  His  rightful  pre-eminence  and  all-compre- 
hensive functions  in  the  mind  of  the  Spirit.  Besides,  it 
does  not  seem  consistent  to  admit,  as  these  same  typolo- 
gists  do,  that  the  tabernacle  as  a  whole  sets  forth  the 
manifestation  of  God  in  Him,  and  then  to  allot  it  in 
this  strange  way,  giving  the  innermost  shrine  no  doubt 
to  the  blessed  Lord,  then  the  middle  or  holy  place  to  His 
people,  and  lastly  the  outer  court  to  the  place  of  meeting 
or  fellowship  for  the  Lord  and  them.  Having  already 
however  explained,  in  speaking  of  Exodus^  what  I  believe 


m 


NUMBEES   I.- IX.  329 

to  be  the  true  bearing  of  the  sanctuary  vessels,  there  is 
no  need  of  repeating  it  here.  I  would  only  point  out  the 
different  ordet^  in  this  place,  as  well  as  the  omission  of 
some :  both  due  to  the  fact  that  we  are  here  in  presence 
of  God's  display  of  His  life  in  Christ  (and  consequently 
in  the  Christian)  on  the  earth,  whether  in  the  days  of 
His  flesh  or  as  anticipating  His  appearing  in  the  king- 
dom. The  golden  altar  follows  the  golden  table  and 
chandelier,  as  it  again  is  followed  by  the  altar  of  burnt- 
offering.  The  laver  is  not  mentioned  anywhere.  It  is 
the  difference  of  design  which  governs  and  accounts  for 
all — a  striking  testimony  to  inspiration. 

In  chapter  v.  we  enter  on  another  view,  on  which  I 
must  be  brief  Defilement,  or  suspected  defilement,  is 
here  dealt  with ;  but  the  principle  is  always  according 
to  the  character  of  the  book.  It  is  not  now  priests, 
but  the  camp  of  JehovaL  He  deigns  to  be  with  the 
people,  and  is  there  in  the  very  midst  of  their  encamp- 
ment. They  must  carefully  avoid  what  was  unsuitable 
for  the  presence  of  God.  He  was  dwelling  there:  it 
was  not  merely  man's  drawing  near  to  Him.  This,  no 
doubt,  did  concern  the  Israelites,  and  we  find  it  in  the 
preceding  book ;  but  He  was  dwelling  with  them,  and 
accordingly  this  becomes  the  standard  of  judgment.  So 
we  find  the  various  forms  of  uncleanness  which  would 
unfit  for  a  camp  where  God  dwells.  This  is  the  first 
thought. 

In  the  next  place,  supposing  persons  committed  any 
sin,  trespgissing  against  Jehovah,  and  were  guilty,  the 
great  point  insisted  on  is  confession  (but  more  than 
this,  reparation,  if  possible,  by  the  guilty  party) ;  in  every 
case,  however,  to  God  Himself.    Undoubtedly  Christi- 


330        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

anity  in  no  way  weakens  this,  but  rather  strengthens 
it.  The  grace  of  God,  which  has  brought  in  unlimited 
forgiveness,  would  be  rather  a  calamity  if  it  did  not 
enforce  confession.  Can  one  conceive  a  thing  more 
dreadful  morally,  than  a  real  weakening  of  the  sense  of 
sin  in  those  brought  nigh  to  God?  It  may  seem  so 
where  there  is  only  a  superficial  acquaintance  with  God. 
Where  the  truth  has  been  hastily  gathered  and  learned 
on  the  surface,  it  is  quite  possible  to  pervert  the  gospel 
to  an  enfeebling  of  the  immutable  principles  of  God, 
ignoring  His  detestation  of  sin,  and  our  own  necessary 
abhorrence  of  it  as  born  of  God.  Whatever  produces 
such  an  effect  is  the  deepest  wrong  to  Him,  and  the 
greatest  loss  to  us.    This  is  guarded  against  here. 

But  there  is  another  case  where  there  was  not  a 
trespass,  but  a  suspicion  of  evil,  and  this  too  in-  the 
nearest  relationship — ^the  husband  about  his  wife.  Now 
Jehovah  had  his  eye  on  this.  He  would  not  have  one 
hardened.  What  is  more  dreadful  than  to  be  carrying 
suspicions  ?  We  ought  to  watch  against  it.  Still  there 
may  be  circumstances  that  bring  a  sense  of  evil,  and 
yet  we  can  hardly  give  an  account  of  it.  We  may 
struggle,  fearing  that  we  are  wrong  as  to  the  person; 
still,  somehow  or  another,  there  is  the  sense  of  some- 
thing wrong  against  Jehovah.  What,  then,  is  to  be 
done  ?  In  this  we  see  Jehovah  making  a  special  pro- 
vision for  it.  He  ordered  that  there  should  be  the 
administration  of  what  is  called  here  "the  waters  of 
jealousy."  The  wife  was  to  be  brought  to  the  priest; 
everything  was  to  be  done  in  a  holy  way.  It  was  not 
human  feeling,  but  connection  with  God  Himself,  and 
a  judgment  of  that  which  was  unsuitable  for  His  pre- 


NUMBERS  I.- DC  331 

sence.  "Then  shall  the  man  bring  his  wife  unto  the 
priest,  and  he  shall  bring  her  oflfering  for  her,  the  tenth 
part  of  an  ephah  of  bariey  meal ;  he  shall  pour  no  oil 
upon  it,  nor  put  frankincense  thereon;  for  it  is  an 
offering  of  jealousy,  an  offering  of  memorial,  bringing 
iniquity  to  remembrance.  And  the  priest  shall  bring 
her  near,  and  set  her  before  Jehovah.  And  the  priest 
shall  take  holy  water  in  an  earthen  vessel ;  and  of  the 
dust  that  is  in  the  floor  of  the  tabernacle  the  priest 
shall  take,  and  put  it  into  the  water :  and  the  priest 
shall  set  the  woman  before  the  Lord,  and  uncover  the 
woman's  head,  and  put  the  offering  of  memorial  in  her 
hands,  which  is  the  jealousy  offering:  and  the  priest 
shall  have  in  his  hand  the  bitter  water  that  causeth  the 
curse."  Then  the  charge  is  given  to  the  woman,  after 
which  he  says,  "  Jehovah  make  thee  a  curse  and  an  oath 
among  thy  people,  when  Jehovah  doth  make  thy  thigh 
to  rot,"  and  so  on.  The  priest  was  to  write  the  curses 
in  a  book,  and  blot  them  out  with  the  bitter  water,  and 
cause  the  woman  to  drink  the  water.  The  efifect  of  this 
would  be  that,  supposing  the  woman  was  innocent,  all 
would  go  on  so  much  the  better  in  the  family.  She  would 
have  the  manifestation  of  God's  blessing  on  her. 

This  I  do  not  doubt  to  be  a  type,  whether  of  Israel 
or  of  Christendom;  but  for  moral  profit  individually 
it  is  all-important.  It  may  be  very  painful  for  us  to 
be  suspected,  but  when  we  are,  let  us  never  resent  it  in 
the  pride  of  our  hearts.  Alas !  evil  is  possible,  and  it 
is  a  good  thing  to  evince  by  the' very  patience  of  what- 
ever may  be  that  which  is  laid  to  our  charge  that  we 
are  above  it.  It  is  always  a  sign  of  weakness  at  the 
least,  very  often  of  guilt,  when  there  is  a  restless  desire 


332        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

to  extemiate  and  deny ;  and  the  fiercer  the  denial, 
the  more  certain  the  guilt  as  a  rule.  But  there  may 
be  weakness  which  sometimes  gives  an  appearance  of 
wrong  where  it  does  not  really  exist.  Where  flesh  is 
not  thoroughly  judged,  there  will  be  a  tendency  to  resent 
the  smallest  imputation.  Now  here  it  is  where  we 
have  this  bringing  in  of  the  water  of  death.  What  is 
there  which  so  admirably  meets  everything  as  the  taking 
the  place  of  death  to  all  that  is  here  below?  It  is  very 
evident  a  dead  man  does  not  resent  an  injury.  It  is 
the  bringing  in  the  practical  power  of  death  into  the 
soul  which  enables  one  then  to  bear  it.  Whatever  it 
may  be,  let  it  take  its  course — let  us  humble  ourselves 
to  have,  as  it  were,  bitter  water  administered  to  us ;  and 
most  assuredly  where  the  heart,  instead  of  refusing  or 
in  a  fleshly  way  merely  repelling  an  insinuation  out  of 
the  pride  of  our  nature,  is  willing  that  all  should  be 
thoroughly  tested  in  the  presence  of  God,  the  result  is 
that  the  Lord  espouses  the  cause  of  the  one  causelessly 
suspected,  and  makes  all  to  flourish  as  never  befora 
Whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  if  there  is  a  trifling  with 
God,  with  His  name,  with  His  nature,  then  indeed 
bitter  is  the  curse  which  falls  on  such  a  one.  Thus  we 
see  it  was  an  invaluable  thing,  and  it  is  as  true  now  in 
principle  as  ever  it  was  in  outward  type.  I  do  not 
hesitate  to  say  it  is  true  in  a  deeper  and  better  sense 
now  than  it  was  then;  only  it  needs  faith.  It  needs 
self-judgment  however ;  nothing  less  will  carry  us 
through.  For  although  there  may  be  the  most  genuine 
faith,  still  if  there  is  not  the  willingness  to  be  nothing 
the  willingness  to  take  the  bitter  draught,  the  waters 
of  separation  or  waters  of  jealousy,  it  is  because  there 


NUMBERS  L-IX.  333 

is  a  power  of  flesh  hindering  us — a  want  of  faith  to 
take  the  place  of  deatL  Where  we  are  upright,  yet 
submit  to  it,  who  can  measure  the  fruitful  blessing 
which  results  through  the  grace  of  God  ? 

In  the  next  chapter  comes  a  type  of  positive  blessing. 
It  is  not  defilement,  but  special  severance  to  the  Lord. 
This  is  what  Israel  ought  to  have  been,  but  alas !  was 
not ;  for  Israel  defiled,  themselves  for  the  dead ;  and 
this  is  precisely  the  place  which  the  godly  remnant  in 
Israel  was  willing  to  take,  as  we  find  in  Acts  ii.  They 
owned  themselves  defiled  to  death;  and  for  what  ?  As  it 
is  said  here,  "  When  either  a  man  or  woman  shall  sepa- 
rate themselves  to  vow  a  vow  of  a  Nazarite,  to  separate 
themselves  unto  Jehovah:  he  shall  separate  himself 
from  wine  and  strong  drink,  and  shall  drink  no  vinegar 
of  wine,  or  vinegar  of  strong  drink,  neither  shall  he 
drink  any  liquor  of  grapes,  nor  eat  moist  grapes,  or 
dried.  All  the  days  of  his  separation  shall  he  eat 
nothing  that  is  made  of  the  vine  tree,  from  the  kernels 
even  to  the  husks."  It  is  separation  not  only  from 
what  was  defiling,  but  from  what  was  the  best  in 
nature.  Not  that  nature  is  condemned ;  which  is 
never  right  in  a  Christian.  We  are  bound  to  maintain 
the  honour  of  God  in  the  creature  to  the  last.  It  is 
always  deplorable  where  man  weakens  what  is  due  to 
God  in  anything  that  He  has  made;  yet  there  is  no 
reason  why  we  should  deny  the  power  that  lifts  us 
above  it. 

But  this  last  is  what  the  STazarite  shadowed.  It 
is  not  an  assault  on  God,  or  anything  He  has  made. 
Creation  as  God  made  it  was  worthy  of  His  hand ;  and 


334  LECTURES  ON  THE  PEIH^ATEUCH. 

natural  affection  is  ever  sweet    The  Lord  looked  on  a 
man  that  enquired  of  Him,  though  without  an  atom  of 
faith  in  Himself;  but  his  character  was  lovely,  and  as 
such  the  Lord  loved  him.     This  is  all  right ;   and  we 
ought  to  do  the  same.     Depend  on  it  that  there  is  a 
wrong  measure  if  in  this  we  venture  to  differ  from 
Christ.     Just  so  the  Lord  took  a  child  in  His  arms,  put 
His  hands  on  it,  and  blessed  it     Do  you  think  He  had 
not  a  special  interest  in  a  little  child  ?     The  disciples 
were  far  from  His  thoughts  and  feelings.     Do  you  sup- 
pose He  did  not  look  at  what  God  made,  were  it  but 
the  lilies  of  the  field  ?    Never  did  the  Lord  give  the 
least  sanction  to  the  pseudo-spirituality  some  of  us  have 
talked  as  to  this.    No ;  from  His  lips  never  fell  a  word 
of  slighting  thought  and  feeling  for  a  single  creature. 
Who  admired  as  He  every  blade  of  grass  that  came 
from  His  Father's  hand  ?  Who  so  delighted  in  His  care 
of  a  sparrow  ?    Who  so  marked  and  told  out  to  others 
the  interest  that  tells  itself  out  in  numbering  the  hairs 
of  the  head  of  those  who  belong  to  Him  ?    Christ  never 
denies  the  claims  of  nature,  never  weakens  the  sense 
of  its  beauty,  fallen  as  man  may  be,  and  the  world 
ruined  by  him — ^yes,  ruined  not  by  God,  but  by  him 
who  yielded  to  Satan's  wiles. 

Yet  that  same  blessed  Saviour  in  gracious  separate- 
ness  foregoes  all  enjoyment  of  what  was  found  here 
below — severing  Himself  in  special  vindication  of  God 
from  it  alL  The  creature  was  good.  How  could  it  be 
otherwise,  coming  from  the  hands  of  such  a  God  ?  He 
knew  better  than  any  the  state  into  which  it  had  fallen, 
but  He  did  not  forget  whose  wisdom  and  goodness 
made  it  alL    At  the  same  time  He  is  separate  to  Jeho- 


NUMBERS  L-IX.  335 

vah;  He  preserved  His  Nazariteship.  Israel  under- 
stood not,  but  the  godly  remnant  followed  His  steps. 
By  the  grace  of  God  they  took  ,the  place  of  confessing 
the  defilement  for  the  dead.  This  seems  to  be  the 
very  thing  illustrated  at  Pentecost  Those  who  received 
the  word  took  the  place  of  repentance.  Christ  abode 
separate  to  God  always.  The  repentant  Jews  in  living 
faith  acknov^ledged  what  their  hands  had  done — wliat 
they  themselves  had  been — what  their  fathers  as  well 
as  themselves  and  their  children.  They  bowed  to  God, 
and  owned  the  ruin  and  death  that  had  come  into  the 
world  through  sin.  This  is  the  only  way  of  deliverance 
from  it.  They  were  set  on  a  new  ground  of  Nazarite- 
ship unto  God  from  that  very  moment.  They  had 
begun  as  the  outward  people  of  God,  separate  from 
the  nations,  but  their  standing  had  been  all  spoilt  and 
lost  by  defilement.  The  death  of  the  Messiah  brought 
out  their  defilement  to  the  uttermost;  but  that  very 
death  which  was  their  greatest  sin  became  in  grace  the 
sole  means  by  which  they  could  renew  their  Nazarite- 
ship on  a  ground  that  could  not  give  way.  And  there 
we  follow.  More  than  that,  the  door  is  left  open  for  the 
remnant  in  the  latter  day.  They  will  be  Nazarites  too. 
They  will  not  refuse  to  own  their  sinfulness,  and  look 
from  every  other  hope  to  the  dead  and  risen  Saviour ; 
and  they  will  close  their  proper  place  of  separation  to 
God  in  the  joy  and  liberty  of  the  millennial  kingdom, 
when  the  Nazarite  may  drink  wine. 

But  a  few  words  more  as  to  the  Nazarite  may  be 
acceptable  here.  It  was  not  merely  that  there  was  the 
refusal  of  the  best  of  what  God  gives  (for  natural  joy 
here  below  was  represented,  I  suppose,  by  the  wine) ; 


336        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

but  further,  "  all  the  days  of  the  vow  of  his  separation 
there  shall  no  razor  come  upon  his  head."  It  is  plain 
that  this  was  not  the  ordinary  condition  of  a  man. 
Long  hair  did  not  become  him,  though  it  is  in  character 
with  the  woman.  Long  hair  is  the  sign  of  subjec- 
tion to  another;  subjection  is  not  God's  order  for  the 
man,  who  is  meant  to  be  the  image  and  glory  of  God. 
But  in  the  Nazarite  the  rule  was  altogether  special 
There  was  a  giving  up  of  man's  natural  rights,  of 
the  place  of  dignity  which  God  gave  him  in  nature. 
Further,  there  was  the  refusal  to  make  himself  unclean 
for  his  father,  or  mother,  or  brother,  or  sister,  when  they 
died,  "because  the  consecration  of  his  God  was  upon 
his  head :"  nothing  was  more  imperative  than  to  beware 
of  defilement  by  death.  It  has  been  already  referred  to. 
This  is  only  found  in  the  new  creation,  we  having  been 
sinful  men,  who  turned  back  to  God  in  repentance  and 
faith ;  and  always  excepting  the  Lord  Jesus  who  stood, 
but  stood  alone,  in  His  own  intrinsic  purity. 

Nazariteship  is  only  for  a  time.  This  is  stamped 
upon  it.  "  All  the  days  of  his  separation,"  it  is  said,  "  he 
is  holy  unto  Jehovah."  And  then  we  find,  either,  if  the 
Nazarite  law  were  broken,  how  he  had  to  begin  afresh, 
or,  if  the  days  were  complete,  how  it  terminated.  For 
this  too  was  carefully  noted  in  offerings  of  joy,  and 
gladness,  and  communion.  This  is  what  is  found  here. 
"  And  he  shall  offer  his  offering  unto  Jehovah,  one  he- 
lamb  of  the  first  year  without  blemish  for  a  bumt- 
ofifering,  and  one  ewe  lamb  of  the  first  year  without 
blemish  for  a  sin-offering,  and  one  ram  without  blemish 
for  peace-offerings,  and  a  basket  of  unleavened  bread, 
cakes  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil,  and  wafers  of 


NUMBERS   I.-  IX.  337 

unleavened  bread  anointed  with  oil,  and  their  meat- 
offering, and  their  drink-ofiferings/'  All  these  were  to 
be  brought ;  "  and  the  Nazarite  shall  shave  the  head  of 
his  separation  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  con- 
gregation, and  shall  take  the  hair  of  the  head  of  his 
separation,  and  put  it  in  the  fire  which  is  under  the 
sacrifice  of  the  peace-offerings.  And  the  priest  shall  take 
the  sodden  shoulder  of  a  ram,  and  one  unleavened  cake 
out  of  the  basket,  and  one  unleavened  wafer,  and  shall 
put  them  upon  the  hands  of  the  Nazarite,  after  the  hair 
of  his  separation  is  shaven  ;  and  the  priest  shall  wave 
them  for  a  wave-offering  before  Jehovah ;"  and  so  on. 

Again,  Nazariteship  is  never  supposed  to  be  per- 
manent, but  an  institution  for  the  wilderness.  It  comes 
in  by  the  way  on  earth,  and  is  peculiar  to  Numbers. 

Thus  I  apprehend  that  whatever  might  be  the  special 
separateness  either  of  Israel  in  responsibility,  of  the 
church  now,  of  the  Christian  by  grace,  or  of  Christ 
Himself,  the  only  One  absolutely  and  perfectly  so, — 
whatever  might  be  even  these  various  applications,  they 
all  terminate  in  joy  and  glory.  To  watch  in  self-renun- 
ciation will  not  always  be  called  for.  There  is  a  day 
coming  when  the  Nazarite  drinks  wine — a  time  of 
gladness  and  ease ;  and  thanks  be  to  God  for  the  hope 
of  it !  Then  all  will  be  changed ;  no  longer  must  we 
go  forward  with  girt  loins  because  of  passing  through  a 
world  where  not  only  evil  is,  but  the  best  may  be  a 
defiling  snare.  The  day  comes  when  all  things  in  heaven 
and  earth  shall  be  only  for  God's  glory,  all  regulated 
and  used  according  to  the  mind  and  heart  of  Christ. 
In  that  day  Nazariteship  shall  be  no  more;  even  he 
drinks  wine  then.    We  shall  dwell  at  ease ;  we  shall 

z 


338        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

rest  from  sorrow  and  Satan ;  we  shall  all  be  glad  in  the 
joy  of  the  Lord.  Then  too  it  will  not  be  merely 
heavenly  worship  and  praise,  but  the  earthly  ones  shall 
rejoice  for  ever  and  ever. 

Am  I  wrong  in  taking  it  that  this  is  the  reason 
why  the  blessing  of  the  high  priest  is  brought  in 
immediately  after  ?  It  is  in  strict  connection  with  the 
conclusion  of  the  Nazarite's  vow.  "  Speak  unto  Aaron 
and  unto  his  sons,  saying,  On  this  wise  ye  shall  bless 
the  children  of  Israel,  saying  unto  them,  Jehovah  bless 
thee,  and  keep  thee:  Jehovah  make  his  face  shine  upon 
thee,  and  be  gracious  unto  thee:  Jehovah  lift  up  his 
coimtenance  upon  thee,  and  give  thee  peace.  And  they 
shall  put  my  name  upon  the  children  of  Israel ;  and  I 
will  bless  them."  Such  will  be  really  and  literally  the 
fact  when  the  Nazarite's  term  shall  have  come  in  every 
sense ;  and  it  will  end  in  the  joy  and  gladness  without 
bound  of  the  millennial  reign. 

On  chapter  vii.  a  very  few  words  will  suffice.  We 
have  here  the  gifts  of  love  and  free-will,  of  hearty 
devotedness,  which  the  chiefs  of  the  people  offer  for 
the  service  of  the  sanctuary.  The  one  point  to  which 
attention  need  now  be  drawn  is  an  offering,  particularly 
for  the  service  of  the  Levites ;  but  remarkably  enough 
these  offerings  did  not  affect  the  Kohathites.  The 
Kohathites,  whatever  others  might  receive,  carry  the 
vessels  entrusted  to  them  upon  their  own  shouldera 
The  sons  of  Merari  and  the  sons  of  Gershon  are  pre- 
sented with  oxen  and  chariots ;  the  Kohathites  receive 
nona  There  is  no  such  principle  as  that  of  Gk)d  balanc- 
ing matters,  and  keeping  men  in  good  temper  by  giving 


NUMBERS  L-IX.  339 

all  the  same  portion.  If  it  were,  there  would  be  an  end 
of  practical  graca  On  the  contrary,  what  puts  faith  and 
love  to  the  test  is,  that  God  arranges  every  one  of  us 
in  a  different  place  according  to  His  wise  and  sovereign 
will.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  two  alike.  The  conse- 
quence is  that  this,  which  becomes  an  awful  danger  for 
flesh,  is  the  sweetest  exercise  of  grace  where  we  are  look- 
ing to  the  Lord.  What  gracious  man  would  feel  sore  with 
another  because  he  was  unlike  himself?  On  the  con- 
trary, he  would  take  an  honest  and  hearty  joy  in  that 
which  he  saw  of  Christ  in  another,  which  he  did  not 
himself  possess.  JTow  this  is  what  seems  to  me  is  called 
into  exercise  by  the  provision  for  the  carrying  out  of  the 
service  of  the  Levites.  The  least  of  them  had  the  most 
oxen  and  the  most  chariots.  At  the  same  time,  those 
who  had  the  highest  and  the  most  precious  charge  of 
all  had  to  bear  the  vessels  on  their  shoulders.  They 
had  much  less  noise  and  appearance  among  men,  but 
the  best  place  giving  rise  to  the  highest  exercises  of 
faith.  The  Lord  make  us  rejoice,  not  only  in  what  He 
has  given  to  us,  but  in  what  He  has  withheld  from 
us  and  entrusted  to  others ! 

In  chapter  viii  (where  again  I  must  be  very  brief) 
we  have  some  final  words,  after  the  order  about  lights 
is  announced,  in  a  very  particular  way,  namely,  that  the 
priesthood  alone  keeps  up  the  lights.  It  is  not  Levite 
service,  but  the  link  with  Christ  in  the  sanctuary  in 
the  presence  of  God  on  which  they  depend.  This 
really,  though  in  secret,  keeps  up  the  true  light  of 
testimony. 

In  the  next  place  we  find  another  fact.  Although 
the  Levites  were  separate  to  the  priesthood,  and  were 

z  2 


340  LEcrrsES  os  the  fentateuch. 

particiilarly  excepted  from  the  nambering  of  the  people 
as  belonging  to  the  services  of  the  sanctuary,  none  the 
less  were  they  connected  in  the  most  interesting  way 
with  eveiy  Israelite.  In  short,  at  the  consecration  of 
the  Levites,  the  Israelites  laid  their  hands  on  the  heads 
of  the  Levites.  JehoTah  had  clearly  shown  before 
that  He  was  the  One  to  whom  the  Levites  belonged; 
but  it  would  have  been  a  sad  loss  indeed,  if  the  people 
had  not  felt  so  much  the  deeper  interest  because  they 
were  Jehovah's  servants.  Thus^  we  see,  Jehovah  main- 
tained His  own  place  and  appointment  and  sovereign 
disposal  of  the  Levites.  If  we  are  His  people,  let  ns 
not  forget  that  the  people  of  Israel  signified  their 
acquiescence  and  joy ;  took  their  part  in  it  too  by  thus 
identifying  themselves  with  the  Levites  that  were  then 
set  apart  for  Jehovah.  How  happy,  when  on  the  one 
hand  we  thoroughly  recognise  the  rights  of  the  Lord, 
and  on  the  other  find  our  own  portion  so  much  the 
better.  We  find  ourselves  not  impoverished  because 
it  is  the  Lord's,  but  so  much  the  richer,  because  His 
things  are  ours. 

Then  comes  in  chapter  ix.  a  special  provision  in  case 
of  any  impurity  by  passing  through  the  wilderness  which 
might  hinder  the  passover  to  be  taken  at  the  right  season. 
It  is  the  resource  of  grace,  and  is  only  found  here.  It 
might  be  acted  on,  as  in  fact  it  was  at  a  later  day. 
The  principle  of  it  may  be  seen  in  the  historical  books, 
but  it  was  a  province  growing  out  of  the  condition  by 
the  way.  We  see  Jehovah  would  not  lower  His  end 
or  His  ways.  On  the  one  hand  the  passover  must  be 
kept — the  remembrance  of  the  death  of  Christ  is  neces- 
sary everywhere.  There  is  no  pathway  out  of  the  world 


NUMBERS   L-DL  341 

without  the  death  of  Christ  which  was  kept  in  Egypt. 
Nor  could  they  have  left  Egypt  without  the  passover. 
They  could  not  have  been  delivered  across  the  Bed  Sea 
without  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  first.  The  death  of 
Christ  is  the  necessary  and  only  possible  foundation 
for  any  blessing  fix)m  God;  but  besides,  when  they 
are  in  the  wilderness,  the  death  of  Christ  is  just  as 
necessary.  Where  indeed  is  it  not  necessary  ?  When 
we  enter  Canaan,  there  we  find  the  petssover  meets  us 
in  the  foreground.  (Joshua  v.)  Everywhere  the  death 
of  Christ  is  essential — as  for  God*s  glory,  so  for  man's 
blessing.  On  the  other  hand,  supposing  they  were  not 
in  a  fit  condition  through  defilement,  Jehovah  here 
makes  a  special  provision  for  it.  He  would  not  lower 
the  passover  by  dispensing  with  its  absolute  obligation ; 
but  at  the  same  time  He  would  pitifully  consider  the 
circumstances  of  the  way  which  might  hinder  its  prac- 
ticability. 

The  end  of  the  chapter  brings  before  us  another 
provision  of  goodness — ^the  people's  call  to  unlimited 
dependence  on  the  Lord'-s  guidance.  This  was  repre- 
sented first  of  all  by  the  cloud,  their  guide  by  day,  as 
the  pillar  of  fire  was  by  night.  And  mark  this ;  no 
circumstances,  no  times,  no  difficulties,  lessen  the  neces- 
sity for  Jehovah's  guidance.  Supposing  night  comes 
with  its  darkness :  what  then  ?  The  guidance  of  God 
is  only  so  much  the  more  conspicuous.  Can  we  doubt 
that  the  light  was  rather  brighter  by  night  than  by  day? 
I  speak  not  of  it  intrinsically,  but  in  the  eyes  of  man. 
Whatever  may  be  the  trial,  the  Lord  will  be  with  us,  if 
we  really  look  to  Him;  and  the  greater  the  need,  so 
much  the  more  manifest  will  be  His  guidanca    All  we 


342        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

want  is  that  the  heart  be  really  simple  in  dependence* 
on  Him.  At  His  command  therefore  they  rest ;  at  His 
command  they  journey.  If  it  stopped  but  for  a  little 
while,  so  did  they ;  if  it  abode  longer,  so  they  rested ; 
but  they  were  ever  to  be  at  Jehovah's  commandment 
They  were  privileged  to  expect  His  bidding  continually. 
Blessed  dependence !     May  it  be  ours ! 

There  is  but  one  other  topic  we  may  fittingly  refer  to 
before  coming  to  a  proper  halt  in  this  book  of  journeys. 
Following  the  directing  cloud,  we  find  the  prescribed  use 
of  the  trumpets  (ch.  x.  1-10).  This  clearly  is  a  character 
of  testimony  of  rather  more  marked  features,  more  loudly 
dealing  with  the  people  than  the  simple  indication  of 
the  cloud  or  the  pillar  of  fire.  There  are  different  ways 
in  which  Jehovah  signified  His  will.  It  might  not  always 
be  with  the  same  emphasis  which  the  trumpets  naturally 
imply.  There  were  two  trumpets  of  silver,  and  they 
were  to  be  blown  by  the  priests,  as  we  are  told  here. 
The  sons  of  Aaron  had  this  as  their  task  according  to 
certain  distinct  principles  explained  to  us. 

In  the  first  case  of  direction  the  people  looked  to  the 
manifest  sign  of  God's  presence ;  in  the  latter,  as  just 
seen,  the  signal  was  given  by  those  who  had  intimacy 
of  communion  with  God,  for  this  is  clearly  what  was 
represented  by  the  priests.  Now  the  Lord  does  guide 
in  various  ways.  There  may  be  times,  and  there  are 
things,  in  which  we  have  no  means  which  suppose  such 
intimacy  as  could  be  represented  by  the  priestly  trum- 
pets of  silver.  But  Jehovah  is  always  adequate  to 
guide  His  people,  no  matter  what  the  means  or  the 
circumstances  may  be.  Even  were  one  alone,  Jehovah 
is  superior  to  all  difficulties.    On  the  other  hand,  surely 


NUMBERS   L-X.  343 

it  is  wise  and  well  to  avail  ourselves  of  what  spiritual 
help  we  can  procure,  of  available  testimony  where  the 
case  admits  of  it;  above  all,  of  God*s  own  word  to  deal 
with  ourselves  as  well  as  our  dilB&culties. 

So  accordingly  we  find  here  that  on  various  occasions 
the  trumpets  had  to  sound.  The  most  general  use  was 
to  assemble  Israel  together.  But  the  trumpet  was  not 
so  much  a  question  of  the  journey ;  this  had  to  do 
more  particularly  with  the  cloud.  But  the  blowing  of 
the  silver  trumpets  was  to  assemble  the  people  at  the 
door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation.  They  were 
called  thus  to  draw  near  to  the  presence  of  God.  Again, 
supposing  the  enemy  at  hand,  there  was  an  alarm 
blown.  "  When  ye  blow  an  alarm,  then  the  camps  that 
lie  on  the  east  parts  shall  go  forward.  When  ye  blow 
an  alarm  the  second  time,"  then  the  rest  were  to  move- 
All  is  carefully  ordered  of  God.  "  But  when  the  con- 
gregation is  to  be  gathered  together,  ye  shall  blow,  but 
ye  shall  not  sound  an  alarm."  Thus,  it  is  seen,  that 
there  were  in  particular  these  two  cases.  The  trumpets 
were  blown  for  gathering  to  the  joy  of  co^lmunion; 
and  there  was  also  the  alarm  trumpet  sounded  by  God's 
own  testimony  in  the  presence  of  the  enemy.  The 
effect  was  to  be  this :  the  people  would  be  comforted 
with  the  thought  that,  when  the  silver  trumpets  blew 
an  alarm,  it  was  God  after  all  that  dwelt  in  the  camp. 
He  who  directed  heard  the  sound.  Not  merely  were 
they  reminded  that  God  was  there,  but  that  He  would 
act  for  and  in  them  against  all  adversaries.  The  trum- 
pets of  the  sanctuary  blown  by  the  priest  called  them 
against  the  enemy.  Might  they  not  boldly  say.  The 
Lord  is  our  helper :  why  fear  ?  what  can  man  do  ? 


344  I.ECTUBSS  OS  THE  FENTATEUCH. 


NUMBEES. 

Chaps.  X.  11-xzL 

The  previons  portion  of  the  Book  of  Numbers,  viewed 
as  a  history,  has  evidently  a  prefatory  character,  how- 
ever important  aad  divinely  wise.  It  is  in  a  great 
measure  preparatory  for  that  which  we  have  now  to 
look  at, — the  proper  journeying  of  the  children  of  Israel 
and  the  instruction  which  Jehovah  gives  founded  on 
their  path  through  the  wildemess.  We  have  had  the 
numbering  of  the  people,  and  the  ordinances  in  view  of 
service,  special  defilement  and  special  devotedness,  and 
other  provisions  of  grace,  for  heart  and  conscience,  for 
eye  and  ear,  marked  for  the  journey  through  the  wilder- 
ness. 

From  verse  11  of  chapter  x.  the  history  of  the 
actual  journey  begins,  and  a  very  remarkable  fact  is 
at  once  brought  before  us,  and  one  that  must  strike 
every  rational  mind,  though  it  ought  not  so  much 
to  surprise  the  child  of  God.  It  may  seem  somewhat 
embarrassing  that,  after  having  laid  down  the  place  of 
the  ark  in  the  centre  of  the  house  of  Israel  (and  we 
can  all  imderstand  how  becoming  it  was  that  Jehovah 
should  thus  be  in  the  midst  of  His  people  whether  en- 
camped or  marching),  now  when  they  go  forth  there 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  345 

should  be  a  change.*  What  drew  out  the  difiference  was 
that  Moses  counted  on  the  kindly  help  of  his  father-in- 
law.  Man  fails  as  always :  God  is  invariably  true  to 
His  word.  Nevertheless  He  does  not  bind  Himself 
that  He  shall  not  go  beyond  His  stipulation.  To  my 
own  mind  this  is  admirably  according  to  the  perfection 
of  God ;  for  it  is  not  a  question  this  of  God  forgetting 
what  was  due  to  His  own  name.  The  ordinance  that 
He  had  laid  down  at  the  beginning  shews  the  afifection 
that  He  bore  to  His  people,  the  place  that  was  suitable 
to  His  majesty,  as  having  been  pleased  to  come  down 
and  be  in  their  midst ;  but  the  want  of  His  people,  the 
anxiety  of  His  servants,  the  failure  of  what  had  been 
reckoned  upon  to  meet  the  dilB&culties  of  the  way,  at 
once  drew  out  His  grace — I  will  not  say  with  the  cords 
of  a  man,  but  according  to  that  infinite  goodness  which 
bends  to  the  necessities  of  the  way,  and  which  feels 
for  every  perplexity,  great  or  small,  in  the  heaits  of  His 
servants. 

It  is  this  which  accounts  for  the  difference.    Jeho- 
vah felt  for  Moses  and  felt  for  the  people  too.    And  so 

*  Let  me  here  cite  one  of  those  coincidences  which  are  so  natural 
in  a  writer  who  was  himself  an  eye-witness,  but  wholly  improbable 
for  a  mere  compiler,  however  upright,  to  think  of  at  a  later  day ;  for 
the  more  minute,  the  less  is  the  likelihood  that  such  details  would  be 
noticed.  "  In  the  second  chapter  of  the  book  of  Numbers  the  writer 
describes  the  divisions  of  the  twelve  tribes  into  four  camps,  the  num- 
ber of  each  tribe,  and  the  total  number  in  each  camp.  He  fixes  the 
positions  each  was  to  take  round  the  tabernacle,  and  the  order  of  their 
march ;  and  he  directs  that  the  tabernacle,  with  the  camp  of  the 
Levites,  should  not  set  forward  between  the  second  and  third  camps. 
But  in  the  tenth  chapter  occurs  what  seems  at  first  a  direct  contra- 
diction to  this ;  for  it  is  said  that  after  the  first  camp  had  set  forward, 
then  the  tabernacle  was  taken  down ;  and  the  sons  of  Gtershon,  and 


346        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

the  ark,  which  according  to  the  strict  rule  was  entitled 
to  the  place  of  chiefest  honour  in  the  midst  of  the  host 
that  moves  forward,  now  deigns  to  do  the  work  of  a 
courier,  if  I  may  so  say,  for  the  people,  not  only  finding 
the  way  for  them,  but  acting  as  an  advanced  guard 
to  the  host.  How  characteristically  this  displays  the 
unchanging  goodness  of  God !  On  the  one  hand,  the 
ordinance  marked  what  was  due  to  God,  on  the  other 
was  seen  in  this  the  gracious  consideration  which  sur- 
rendered ritual  for  love.  What  real  consistency  Gk)d 
maintains  with  Himsel£  There  is  always  this  where 
grace  reigns.  The  word  of  (Jod  may  seem  to  be  wanting 
for  a  little,  but  Grod  never  departs  in  the  smallest  thing 
which  has  the  character  of  an  ordinance,  but  to  bring 
out  His  character  fiEir  more  perfectly  than  if  all  had 
been  rigidly  carried  out. 

The  unerring  woi'd  of  God  gives  us  both  facts,  by  the 
same  scribe  and  in  the  same  book.  There  was  no  foi^ 
getfulness  of  His  mind,  but  a  tender  solicitude  about 
His  people — a  fine  fruit  of  the  same  divine  grace  which 
all  our  hearts  can  well  appreciate.    Alas !  it  was  very 

the  sons  of  Merari,  set  forward,  bearing  the  tabernacle;  and  after- 
wards the  second  camp,  or  standard,  of  the  children  of  Reuben.  Bat 
this  apparent  contradiction  is  reconciled  a  few  verses  after,  when 
we  find  that  though  the  less  sacred  jxarts  of  the  tabernacle,  the  out- 
side tent  and  its  apparatus,  set  out  between  the  first  and  second  camp ; 
yet  the  sanctuary,  or  holy  of  holies,  with  its  furniture,  the  ark  and 
the  altar,  did  not  set  out  tiU  after  the  second  camp ;  as  the  direction 
required.  And  the  reason  of  the  separation  is  assigned,  that  those 
who  bore  the  outside  tabernacle  might  set  it  up,  and  thus  prepare  for 
the  reception  of  the  sanctuary  against  it  came.  Would' a  forger  or 
compiler  who  lived  when  these  marches  had  wholly  ceased,  and  the 
Israelites  had  fixed  in  the  land  of  their  inheritance,  have  thought  of 
each,  a  circumstance  as  this  P"    (Dean  Graves'  Works,  ii.  p.  49.) 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  347 

different  with  the  people.  If  the  need  of  the  people 
drew  out  greater  grace  on  God's  part,  the  people  are 
found  complaining  with  bitter  ingratitude  in  the  scene 
just  after.  Jehovah  heard  it :  His  fire  burned  amongst 
them,  and  consumed  them  that  were  in  the  uttermost 
parts  of  the  camp.  The  people  cried  out,  but  first  of 
all  to  Moses.  And  when  Moses  prayed  unto  Jehovah, 
a  further  scene  ensues ;  for  even  divine  wrath  failed  to 
act  permanently  on  their  souls.  But  here  we  find  the 
result  of  that  mixed  multitude  which  had  come  out  of 
Egypt  with  them.  Proof  was  soon  given  that  there  is 
no  departure  from  the  mind  of  God  which  does  not 
produce  a  sad  harvest  in  days  to  follow.  The  strangers 
who  were  mixed  up  with  them  fell  a-lusting ;  and  the 
children  of  Israel  also  wept  again,  and  said,  "Who  shall 
give  us  flesh  to  eat?"  This  was  worse  than  the  com- 
plaining just  before.  It  was  contempt  of  signal  grace. 
There  was  utter  blindness  to  the  goodness  of  God. 
"We  remember,"  said  they,  "the  fish,  which  we  did 
eat  in  Egypt  freely.  But  now  our  soul  is  dried  away : 
there  is  nothing  at  all,  beside  this  manna.  And  when 
*  Moses  heard  the  people  weep  throughout  their  families, 
every  man  in  the  door  of  his  tent,  the  anger  of  Jeho- 
vah was  kindled  greatly ;  Moses  also  was  displeased." 

This  is  followed  by  the  remarkable  passage  between 
Jehovah  and  His  servant.  Moses  himself  is  downcast 
through  sorrow  and  distress  of  circumstances,  and  con- 
fesses that  he  is  not  able  to  bear  with  His  people. 
Then  Jehovah  bids  him  gather  to  him  seventy  men  of 
the  elders  of  Israel.  Was  this  really  according  to  the  full 
mind  of  the  Lord  ?  or  did  the  Lord  not  take  Moses  at 
his  word,  and,  as  the  result,  share  his  singular  honour 


348        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

with  these  elders  ?  Jehovah  came  down,  it  is  said,  in 
a  cloud  and  spake  to  him,  and  took  of  the  Spirit  that 
was  upon  him  and  gave  it  unto  the  seventy  elders ;  and 
it  came  to  pass  that  when  the  Spirit  was  upon  them, 
they  prophesied,  and  did  not  cease.  And  this  gave 
occasion  also  to  the  haste  of  Joshua,  who  was  some- 
what indignant  for  his  master.  Neither  was  this  welL 
It  was  weakness  in  Moses  that  he  could  not  trust  Jeho- 
vah to  care  for  His  people;  but  it  was  yet  more  in 
Joshua  to  be  over  jealous  for  Moses'  sake.  The  singular 
distinction  with  which  God  had  honoured  Moses  ought 
to  have  raised  Joshua  above  such  feeling.  "Enviest 
thou  for  my  sake?"  said  Moses.  "Would  Grod  that  all 
Jehovah's  people  were  prophets,  and  that  Jehovah 
would  put  his  spirit  upon  them." 

Blessed  anticipation  of  that  which  Grod  was  going 
to  do  another  day  —  the  very  day  in  which  we  are 
now  brought  to  God,  and  in  which  He  has  gathered 
us  together  in  one  I  Do  we  understand  this  day  of 
ours?  Are  our  hearts  in  the  secret  of  it?  Are  we 
misled  by  Joshua's  feeling  ?  or  do  we  share  the  mind 
of  Moses?  Undoubtedly  it  is  an  hour  of  feebleness 
but  withal  of  blessedness,  of  infinite  peace  and  joy  in 
the  Lord.    But  we  find  even  more. 

Jehovah  then  listened  to  the  complaint  of  His  people 
in  despising  the  bread  that  came  down  from  heaven, 
and  gave  them  what  they  sought  after.  How  grave  a 
consideration  for  our  souls  1  Not  only  a  believing  prayer 
may  have  its  answer  from  God,  but  an  unbelieving  one; 
and  a  miserable  thing  where  the  heart  is  not  humble, 
and  does  not  betake  itself  at  once  to  God.  Happy 
would  it  have  been  for  Israel  had  they  checked  their 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  349 

murmuring,  and  rebuked  their  own  souls  before  God ! 
Surely,  if  the  answer  had  brought  them  on  their  knees, 
and  into  the  dust  before  God,  it  would  have  been  better 
with  Israel;  but  they  were  practically  far  from  God. 
They  chose  to  be  their  own  purveyors,  and  distrusted 
Him  who  loved  them.  We  shall  soon  find  that  this 
spread  still  farther. 

And  is  it  not  a  serious  thought,  my  brethren,  that 
we  are  reading  but  the  starting-point  of  the  journey, 
according  to  this  book,  the  very  object  of  which  is  to 
shew  the  joumeyings  of  the  people  of  God  ?  Yet,  on 
the  one  hand,  we  have  seen  the  incomparable  grace  of 
the  Lord  that  has  always  streamed  out  to  meet  the 
wants  of  His  people,  that  knows  how  to  exceed,  who 
never  gives  less,  and  never  will  bind  Himself  not  to 
give  more.  Such  is  God.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
people  were  only  constant  in  rebelliousness  of  heart.  It 
begins  too  with  those  who  ought  to  have  known  better, 
but  too  soon  fell  under  the  enticements  of  the  strangers 
who  could  not  appreciate  the  goodness  of  their  God. 
Thus,  when  a  descent  or  fall  comes,  it  is  invariably  that 
which  is  most  carnal  which  carries  the  day.  It  was  not 
that  the  mixed  multitude  slipped,  unperceived  into  the 
thoughts  of  Israel,  but  that  Israel  sank  down  to  their 
lowest  desires  and  contempt  of  what  came  from  Jehovah. 

Alas!  we  find  failure  everywhere — with  the  very 
lawgiver  himself.  But  the  fault  of  his  too  eager  servant 
recalled  him  to  the  grace  he  felt.  He  delighted  in 
the  goodness  of  God,  even  though  it  might  seem  to 
involve  somewhat  taken  away  from  himself;  but  he  did 
not  think  of  self  but  of  God.  It  was  right  assuredly, 
when  the  people  greedily  fell  under  the  d^rading  wishes 


350       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

of  the  mixed  multitude  of  Egypt,  that  Jehovah  should 
then  rise  up  in  His  displeasure  and  smite  them  at  the 
time  when  they  flattered  themselves  with  His  answer 
to  their  cry.  But  His  was  an  answer  of  grief;  it  was  an 
answer  that  brought  its  own  deep  penalty  along  with 
it — not  only  leanness  into  their  souls,  but  an  indignant 
rebuke  from  God  Himself.  And  it  is  said.  His  "  wrath 
was  kindled  against  them  ere  the  flesh  was  chewed,  and 
Jehovah  smote  the  people  with  a  very  great  plagua" 

But  we  have  not  yet  done  with  the  painful  phases 
of  unbelief.  It  must  be  proved  everywhere.  What  is 
man  ?  ''And  Miriam  and  Aaron  spake  against  Moses." 
And  for  what  ?  Avowedly  because  of  the  type  of  still 
richer  counsels  which  their  hearts  never  appreciated — 
"  Because  of  the  Ethiopian  woman  whom  he  had  mar- 
ried; for  he  had  married  an  Ethiopian  woman.  And 
they  said.  Hath  Jehovah  indeed  spoken  only  by  Moses  ? 
hath  he  not  spoken  also  by  us  ?  And  Jehovah  heard  it 
(Now  the  man  Moses  was  very  meek,  above  all  the  men 
which  were  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.)"  So  much  the 
worse  for  them.  Had  Moses  defended  his  own  cause,  I 
am  persuaded  God  had  not  so  dealt  with  Aaron  and 
Miriam.  Supposing  a  person  were  ever  so  much  in  the 
right,  still  the  want  of  faith  which  fights  for  self  always 
thwarts  the  activity  of  grace. 

Here  therefore  as  everywhere,  when  the  thing  is 
simply  committed  to  Him,  the  Lord  takes  it  up ;  and 
nothing  is  more  serious  for  the  adversary.  "Jehovah 
spake  suddenly  unto  Moses;"  for  now  it  was  an  in- 
comparably graver  thing  than  the  complaints  and 
murmurs  and  lustings  of  the  mixed  multitude,  or  even 
Israel.    In  proportion  to  the  blessings  that  grace  has 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  351 

given  is  the  grievousness  of  that  which  is  contrary  to 
God,  and  therefore  does  He  speak  suddenly  unto 
Moses  and  to  Aaron  and  to  Miriam,  "Come  out  ye 
three  unto  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation."  They 
do  His  bidding;  ''And  Jehovah  came  down  in  the  pillar 
of  the  cloud,  and  stood  in  the  door  of  the  tabernacle, 
and  called  Aaron  and  Miriam."  It  was  in  the  presence 
of  Moses ;  but  Jehovah  had  to  do  with  them.  It  is  a 
fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God. 

"And  he  said.  Hear  now  my  words :  If  there  be  a 
prophet  among  you,  I  Jehovah  will  make  myself  known 
unto  him  in  a  vision,  and  will  speak  unto  him  in  a 
dream.  My  servant  Moses  is  not  so,  who  is  faithful  in 
all  mine  house.  With  him  will  I  speak  mouth  to  mouth, 
even  apparently,  and  not  in  dark  speeches:  and  the 
similitude  of  the  Lord  shall  he  behold ;  wherefore  then 
were  ye  not  afraid  to  speak  against  my  servant  Moses  ? 
And  the  anger  of  Jehovah  was  kindled  against  them ; 
and  he  departed."  But  not  without  the  mark  of  His 
hand,  not  without  the  judgment  that  dealt  in  the  way 
most  painful  to  her  who  evidently  was  the  chief  in  this 
stroke  of  insubjection.  For,  "behold,  Miriam  became 
leprous,  white  as  snow:  and  Aaron  looked  upon  Miriam, 
and,  behold,  she  was  leprous.  And  Aaron  said  unto 
Moses,  Alas,  my  lord,  I  beseech  thee,  lay  not  the  sin 
upon  us,  wherein  we  have  done  foolishly,  and  wherein 
we  have  sinned.  Let  her  not  be  as  one  dead,  of  whom 
the  flesh  is  half  consumed  when  he  cometh  out  of  liis 
mother's  womb.  And  Moses  cried  unto  Jehovah" — 
how  blessed  the  place  of  intercession! — "Moses  cried 
unto  Jehovah,  saying.  Heal  her  now,  0  God,  I  beseech 
thee.    And  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  If  her  father  had 


352        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

but  spit  in  her  face,  should  she  not  be  ashamed  seven 
days  ?  let  her  be  shut  out  from  the  camp  seven  days, 
aud  after  that  let  her  be  received  in  again.  And  Miriam 
was  shut  out  from  the  camp  seven  days:  and  the  people 
journeyed  not  till  Miriam  was  brought  in  again.'* 

Then  comes  another  incident.  It  was  not  merely  the 
working  of  a  spirit  of  repining  and  distrust  of  Jehovah 
which  infected  the  whole  people  even  to  those  that 
were  nearest  to  Moses ;  but  we  have  grave  unbelief  as 
to  the  land  to  which  they  were  journeying.  Here  how- 
ever it  is  clear  that  Jehovah  allowed  the  wish  to  be 
carried  out :  "  Send  thou  men."  We  know  from  else- 
where how.  this  originated — ^that  it  was  not  in  fedth,  but 
unbelief.  Nevertheless  Jehovah,  as  we  have  seen,  lets 
them  prove  the  principle.  That  is,  not  only  does  He  lay 
down  what  is  according  to  His  own  mind,  not  only  may 
He  in  gracious  care  and  consideration  for  His  people 
go  beyond  it ;  but,  further,  He  may  allow  that  to  be 
carried  out  which  was  not  originally  of  Himself,  and 
yet  everywhere  secure  His  own  glory.  So  here  spies 
are  sanctioned;  and  we  shall  see  the  result  of  it 
"  Moses  sent  them  to  spy  out  the  land  of  Canaan,  and 
said  unto  them,  Get  you  up  this  way  southward."  And 
so  they  did,  and  came  back  with  one  cluster  of 
grapes  so  large  that  they  bore  the  branch  between  two 
on  a  staff  They  brought  also  pomegranates  and  figs. 
And  they  returned  from  searching  the  land  after  forty 
days.  And  this  was  the  report.  "  We  came  imto  the 
land  whither  thou  sentest  us,  and  surely  it  floweth  with 
milk  and  honey ;  and  this  is  the  fruit  of  it.  Neverthe- 
less the  people  be  strong  that  dwell  in  the  land,  and  the 
cities  are  walled,  and  very  great :  and  moreover  we  saw 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  353 

the  children  of  Anak  there.  The  Amalekites  dwell  in 
the  land  of  the  south  :  and  the  Hittites,  and  the  Jebu- 
sites,  and  the  Amoiites,  dwell  in  the  mountains :  and 
the  Canaanites  dwell  by  the  sea,  and  by  the  coast  of 
Jordan." 

Unbelief  itself  could  not  deny  the  goodness  of  the 
land,  nor  ignore  the  magnificent  specimen  they  carried 
between  them.  But  they  thought  of  the  men  that 
dwelt  there,  and  not  of  God.  And  what  had  God 
brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  for  ?  Had  He 
said  that  there  were  no  children  of  Anak  there  ?  Had 
He  represented  the  land  to  be  a  desert  region  where 
the  sons  of  men  did  not  dwell  ?  Never.  Jehovah  had 
fully  stated  who  were  to  be  there  hundreds  of  years 
before.  It  was  a  plain  forgetfulness  of  their  distinctive 
glory  and  blessedness.  Is  this  a  strange  thing?  Let 
us  remember  that  we  too  are  in  the  place  of  our  trial. 
Let  us  never  forget  that  we  have  a  better  salvation, 
founded  on  a  better  redemption,  and  with  better  hopes. 
Nor  have  we  a  less  dangerous  wilderness  than  Israel  had 
to  pass  through ;  but  for  us  it  is  not  external  power,  nor 
the  governmental  goodness  of  Jehovah,  but  our  God 
and  Father,  yea,  as  Jesus  knew  Him ;  not  only  in  aU  the 
love  that  rested  on  Him  when  here  below,  but  in  all  the 
faithfulness  to  which  He  binds  Himself  now  to  us  in 
virtue  of  redemption  itselt 

And  how  is  it  that  we  treat  Him — how  trust  Him  ? 
Let  us  read  the  book  at  any  rate  as  the  true  picture  of 
that  which  we  are  apt  to  be.  To  believe  that  we  are  in 
danger  is  the  very  way  to  be  preserved  from  it.  To 
believe  that  He  is  caring  for  us  in  love  is  the  surest  way 
to  enjoy  all  through  the  faithfulness  and  the  strength 

2  A 


354       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

of  His  love.  It  was  not  so  with  these  spies.  ITeveiv 
theless  there  is  always  a  witness  for  God ;  there  is  a 
remnant  even  among  the  spies.  ''  And  Caleb  stilled  the 
people  before  Moses,  and  said,  Let  us  go  up  at  once,  and 
possess  it ;  for  we  are  well  able  to  overcome  it.  But  the 
men  that  went  up  with  him  said.  We  be  not  able  to  go 
up  against  the  people ;  for  they  are  stronger  than  we." 
All  their  thoughts  were — "God  is  not."  That  which  is 
80  sadly  true  of  the  unbeliever  was  evidently  yielded  to 
by  His  own  people.  "They  are  stronger  than  we."  And 
where  then  was  God  ?  They  brought  up  an  evil  report 
of  the  land.  This  was  an  advance  in  evil;  and  the  allow- 
ance of  evil  always  brings  in  a  worse.  "  They  brought 
up  an  evil  report  of  the  land  which  they  had  searched 
unto  the  children  of  Israel,  saying,  The  land  through 
which  we  have  gone  to  search  it  is  a  land  that  eateth  up 
the  inhabitants  thereof,  and  all  the  people  that  we  saw 
in  it  are  men  of  a  great  stature.  And  there  we  saw  the 
giants,  the  sons  of  Anak,  which  come  of  the  giants,  and 
we  were  in  our  own  sight  as  grasshoppers,  and  so  we 
were  in  their  sight."  And  what  did  this  matter,  if  Grod 
was  for  them  ?  Alas !  "  the  congregation  lifted  up  their 
voice  again  and  cried,  and  the  people  wept  that  night" 
But  they  were  tears  of  unbelief,  not  of  sorrow.  "  And 
all  the  children  of  Israel  murmured  against  Moses,  and 
against  Aaron,  and  the  whole  congregation  said  unto 
them.  Would  Grod  that  we  had  died  in  the  land  of 
Egypt !  or  would  God  that  we  had  died  in  this  wilder- 
ness !"  They  were  just  as  unbelieving  about  the  glory 
that  was  before  them,  the  land  of  Canaan  as  the  type 
of  it,  as  they  were  about  Egypt  which  they  had  left,  and 
about  the  wilderness  through  which  they  were  passing. 


NUMBERS  X.-XX1.  355 

The  consequence  w£ls  judgment ;  and  no  wonder.  For 
they  say,  "  Let  us  maJke  a  captain,  and  let  us  return  unto 
Egypt."  This  is  the  sure  result.  The  heart  that  refuses 
to  go  on  with  God  goes  back  to  i^pt  in  its  desires, 
"  Then  Moses  and  Aaron  fell  on  their  faces  before  all 
the  assembly  of  the  congregation  of  the  children  of 
Israel.  And  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  and  Caleb,"  the  two 
who  had  brought  the  good  report,  "  rent  their  clothes ; 
and  they  spake  unto  all  the  company  of  the  children  of 
Israel,  saying.  The  land  which  we  passed  through  to 
search  it  is  an  exceeding  good  land.*'  Let  us  not  forget 
this.  We  owe  it  to  our  God  to  give  a  good  report  of  the 
land  which  lies  before  us.  "  If  Jehovah  delight  in  us, 
then  he  wiU  bring  us  into  this  land  and  give  it  us — a 
land,  which  floweth  with  milk  and  honey.  Only  rebel 
not  ye  against  Jehovah,  neither  fear  ye  the  people  of 
the  land ;  for  they  are  bread  for  us :  their  defence  is 
departed  from  them,  and  Jehovah  is  with  us.  Fear 
them  not.  But  all  the  congregation  bade  stone  them 
with  stones.  And  the  glory  of  Jehovah  appeared  in  the 
tabernacle  of  the  congregation  before  all  the  children  of 
Israel."  This  was  Israel — Israel  in  the  wilderness- 
Israel  in  presence  of  the  goodly  land  and  of  the  earnest 
which  had  been  set  before  their  eyes. 

The  glory  of  Jehovah  appears  accordingly,  and  then 
He  speaks  to  Moses.  "  How  long  will  this  people  pro- 
voke me  ?  and  how  long  will  it  be  ere  they  believe  me, 
for  all  the  signs  which  I  have  shewed  amongst  them  ? 
I  will  smite  them  with  the  pestilence,  and  disinherit 
them,  and  will  make  of  thee  a  greater  nation  and 
mightier  than  they."  What  is  the  effect  now?  How 
does  Moses  answer  this  offer  ?  God  was  willing  to  begin 

2  A  2 


356        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

again — ^to  make  a  fresh  start.  As  with  Abraham,  so 
He  would  take  Moses  as  a  fresh  stock  to  work  from. 
He  was  willing  to  make  him  such  a  name  as  Moses 
otherwise  could  not  hope  for.  The  heart  of  Moses 
answered  to  the  heart  of  God.  He  would  not  hear  of 
it.  The  offer  was  to  bring  out  the  love  that  held  to 
what  God  can  afford  to  be  to  His  people.  What  He 
might  do  for  Moses  he  would  not  now  think  of.  And 
Moses  said  unto  Jehovah,  "Then  the  Egyptians  shall 
hear  it."  How  blessed  to  hear  a  man  feeling  for 
Jehovah's  name  and  glory! — "Then  the  Egyptians  shall 
hear  it  (for  thou  broughtest  up  this  people  in  thy 
might  from  among  them) ;  and  they  will  tell  it  to  the 
inhabitants  of  this  land :  for  they  have  heard  that  thou, 
Jehovah,  art  among  this  people,  that  thou,  Jehovah,  art 
seen  face  to  face,  and  that  thy  cloud  standeth  over  them, 
and  that  thou  goest  before  them,  by  day  time  in  a  pillar 
of  cloud,  and  in  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night.  Now  if  thou 
shalt  kill  all  this  people  as  one  man,  then  the  nations 
which  have  heard  the  fame  of  thee  will  speak,  saying, 
Because  Jehovah  was  not  able  to  bring  this  people  into 
the  land  which  he  sware  unto  them,  therefore  he  hath 
slain  them  in  the  wilderness.  And  now,  I  beseech  thee, 
let  the  power  of  my  Lord  be  great,  according  as  thou 
hast  spoken"  (verses  13-17). 

Thus  Moses  could  not  bear  Jehovah's  character 
to  be  compromised,  and  so  he  holds  Him  tenaciously, 
as  it  were,  to  His  own  word,  saying,  "Jehovah  is  long- 
sufifering,  and  of  great  mercy,  forgiving  iniquity  and 
transgression,  and  by  no  means  clearing  the  guilty, 
visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  childreii 
unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation.  Pardon^  I  beseech 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  357 

thee,  the  iniquity  of  this  people,  according  unto  the 
greatness  of  thy  mercy,  and  as  thou  hast  forgiven  this 
people,  from  Egypt  even  until  now."  He  cleaves  to  the 
word  of  God  and  to  His  ways — to  the  love  that  He 
had  so  often  proved,  even  to  the  faithless  people  whom 
He  knew  so  well  from  the  first.  If  He  had  borne  with 
them  before,  surely  He  would  not  turn  from  them  now. 
"And  Jehovah  said,  I  have  pardoned  according  to  thy 
word :  but  as  truly  as  I  live,  all  the  earth  shall  be  filled 
with  the  glory  of  Jehovah"  (verses  20,  21). 

Observe  how  at  the  same  time  that  Jehovah  pro- 
nounces judgment,  He  acts  according  to  the  very 
word  to  which  Moses  had  tied  Him  in  his  faith.  If 
his  faith  did  not  rise  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob, 
and  their  absolute  and  unconditional  promises,  it  went 
back  to  the  governmental  pledge  of  Jehovah,  and  to 
this  Jehovah  adheres.  Consequently  that  generation 
was  dealt  with  and  purged  away,  according  to  the  terms 
of  His  own  proclamation.  He  would  surely  hold  fast 
His  mercy,  but  He  would  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty. 
Pardon  there  was,  otherwise  Israel  had  not  gone  into 
the  land,  but  He  would  "by  no  means  clear  the 
guilty;"  and  so  that  generation  fell  Thus  God  pre- 
served His  character  intact,  and  His  hand  made  good 
what  His  mouth  had  uttered.  Another  day  a  deeper 
evil  would  make  it  necessary  to  fall  back,  not  on  what 
God  had  said  in  the  wilderness,  but  what  He  had  pro- 
mised to  the  fathers.  In  the  prophets  we  constantly 
find  that  there  is  a  going  back  in  faith,  not  to  what  was 
brought  out  provisionally  during  the  wilderness,  but 
to  what  was  promised  at  the  beginning  {i.e.  to  the 
fathers).    Thus  the  end  will  be  the  accomplishment  of 


358        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

the  beginning.  The  law  comes  in  by  the  by ;  and  the 
governmental  dealings  that  accompanied  it,  instructive 
then  and  for  all  times  morally  and  typically,  share 
in  themselves  its  tentative  character. 

There  is  another  thing  to  remark  here.  In  this  evil 
state  of  things  Israel  had  taunted  their  children,  or 
rather  God  about  them,  as  if  they  were  exposed  to 
inevitable  death.  Unbelief  had  thus  fastened  on  the 
little  ones,  as  if  it  was  vain  to  expect  that  such  as  they 
could  pass  through  the  desert  safely,  and  enter  the  land 
in  face  of  the  enemy.  The  very  people  that  yielded  to 
such  unbelieving  doubt  of  Jehovah's  care  did  them- 
selves reap  the  consequences ;  while  the  children,  who, 
as  they  thought,  could  not  possibly  be  preserved  through 
the  horrors  of  the  wilderness,  were  the  only  ones  brought 
in  with  the  two  men  who  vindicated  God  and  held 
fast  to  His  word,  Caleb  and  Joshua.  Alas !  as  we  know, 
even  Moses  and  Aaron  passed  away.  There  arose  that 
which  needed  their  removal  as  the  discipline  of  Jehovah 
in  their  case.  Caleb  and  Joshua,  who  gave  God  credit 
for  a  good  land,  and  for  a  hand  mighty  enough  to  bring 
the  weakest  in,  entered  Canaan  in  due  time ;  and  so 
did  the  little  ones,  who,  if  their  fathers  were  to  be 
believed,  must  surely  fall  by  the  way.  But  God  alone 
is  worthy  of  trust ;  and  we  see  how  perfect  He  is  in 
His  ways,  and  how  sure  and  good  is  the  end.  But  we 
see  too  how  dangerous  it  is  to  allow  the  complaints  and 
murmurings  of  unbelief,  lest  the  Lord  hear  and  deal 
with  us  according  to  our  folly. 

If  the  latter  part  of  the  chapter  sets  before  us  a  burst 
of  courage,  it  was  merely  of  the  flesh,  and  received  a 
rebuke  from  Jehovah.  The  people,  heretofore  so  unwill- 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  359 

ing  to  go,  are  now  too  ready ;  but  they  went  without 
Jehovah,  and  the  Amalekites  and  Canaanites  turned 
round  on  them,  inflicting  a  severe  defeat.  They  were 
discomfited  even  unto  Hormah  (verses  40-45). 

A  chapter  (xv.)  follows  which  might  seem  extraordi- 
nary at  first  sight.  It  is  a  sample  of  that  apparent 
disorder  in  the  word  of  God  which  is  only  an  example 
of  a  higher  and  divine  order.  God  does  not  aiTange 
things  according  to  man.  If  we  have  only  patience 
and  faith  to  believe  that  He  never  sinks  below  His  own 
glory,  we  shall  prove  this,  and  know  Him  better  in  due 
time.  We  need  not  wait  for  it  till  we  get  to  heaven ;  we 
may  count  on  seeing  what  is  according  to  His  will  for  us 
here.  Impossible  that  the  heart  could  truly  desire  from 
God  what  He  would  keep  back  from  it.  So,  after  aU  this 
miserable  history,  universal  unbelief  working  among 
the  people  of  God,  and  in  presence  of  this  calamitous 
defeat,  to  the  shame  of  Israel,  before  their  foes  that 
hated  them,  Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses,  saying,  "  Speak 
unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and  say  unto  them.  When 
ye  be  come  into  the  land  of  your  habitations,  which  I 
give  unto  you,  and  will  make  an  ofiFering  by  fire  unto 
Jehovah,"  which  was  duly  prescribed — a  fresh  pledge 
of  bringing  them  into  Canaan.  And  this  is  exactly 
the  force  of  it.  So  again  it  is  repeated  in  the  middle 
of  the  chapter.  "Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses,  saying, 
Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and  say  unto  them. 
When  ye  come  into  the  land  whither  I  will  bring  you." 
This  was  His  answer  to  the  unbelief  which  thought 
that  all  must  perish — a  double  witness  that  God  would 
surely  bring  them  in.  Unbelief  along  the  way  did  not 
turn  aside  His  love,  nor  unbelief  about  the  end,  for 


360        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

they  despised  the  pleasant  land.  God  holds  calmly 
here  to  His  purpose,  though  only  He  knew  of  the 
rebellion  just  about  to  break  out  and  all  that  was  to 
follow.  He  speaks  of  their  future  offerings  of  sweet 
savour  with  the  drink-offerings  of  wine  in  the  land  of 
promise;  and  this  for  the  stranger  just  as  for  the 
Israelite.  For  here  the  grace  of  God  runs  over,  pre- 
sumptuous sin  alone  being  fatal,  as  we  shall  now  sea 

For  as  the  next  lesson  we  learn  that  God  in  no 
way  bound  Himself  not  to  judge  what  was  contrary  to 
His  glory  by  the  way.  "And  while  the  children  of 
Israel  were  in  the  wilderness,  they  found  a  man  that 
gathered  sticks  upon  the  seventh  day.  And  they  that 
found  him  gathering  sticks  brought  him  unto  Moses 
and  Aaron,  and  unto  all  the  congregation."  And  here 
comes  out  a  very  important  principle — what  is  to  be 
done  where  we  have  not  a  distinct  word  of  the  Lord  so 
far  as  we  know.  There  is  always  one  great  safeguard, 
namely,  to  wait.  Never  be  in  a  hurry  in  devising  a 
remedy,  or  in  exercising  a  discipline,  without  the  word 
of  the  Lord.  What  is  done  cannot  be  undona  It  is 
better  to  wait  and  take  the  place  of  ignorance,  but  at 
the  same  time  of  ignorance  that  is  confident  that  the 
Lord  hears  and  cares  for  us.  This  is  exactly  what  they 
did.  And  they  were  right.  "  And  Jehovah  said  unto 
Moses,  The  man  shall  be  surely  put  to  death.  All  the 
congregation  shall  stone  him  with  stones  without  the 
camp."  Thus,  whatever  might  be  the  solemnity  of  the 
sentence,  the  children  of  Israel  had  a  fresh  proof  that 
God  entered  into  their  difficulties  and  took  the  greatest 
interest  in  what  concerned  them.  Never  can  souls  wait 
upon  the  Lord  and  be  confounded. 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  361 

But  there  is  more  than  that.  Jehovah  speaks  again 
unto  Moses,  saying,  "  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel, 
and  bid  them  that  they  make  them  fringes  in  the  borders 
of  their  garments  throughout  their  generations,  and  that 
they  put  upon  the  fringe  of  the  borders  a  ribband  of 
blue :  and  it  shall  be  unto  you  for  a  fringe,  that  ye 
may  look  upon  it,  and  remember  all  the  commandments 
of  the  Lord,  and  do  them ;  and  that  ye  seek  not  after 
your  own  heart  and  your  own  eyes,  after  which  ye  use 
to  go  a  whoring :  that  ye  may  remember,  and  do  all 
my  commandments,  and  be  holy  unto  your  God." 

It  is  not  only  that  God  graciously  waits  on  the  people 
that  wait  upon  Him,  and  appears  for  them,  and  knows 
how  to  give  them  what  they  have  never  learnt  before;  but 
He  deigns  to  use  a  means,  and  a  very  weighty  means, 
of  reminding  them  of  His  word.  And  what  is  this? 
The  riband  of  blue  was  a  continual  means  of  remini- 
scence for  the  people  of  the  Lord.  And  have  we  nothing 
to  remind  us  ?  Indeed  we  have,  and  there  is  one  grand 
means,  I  am  persuaded,  whHe  we  are  in  the  wilderness, 
of  putting  us  in  mind  of  His  will  and  the  walk  proper 
to  us.  There  is  nothing  that  better  enables  us  to  walk 
on  earth  than  the  consciousness  that  we  are  of  heaven. 
Is  not  this  the  meaning  of  the  riband  of  blue  ? 

But  after  such  comforting  thoughts  as  these  there 
comes  out  something  Qtill  more  tremendous  than  ever 
in  chapter  xvi.  It  is  not  complaint  now,  nor  mur- 
muring ;  it  is  not  merely  unbelief  because  of  the  diffi- 
culties of  the  wilderness,  nor  is  it  the  casting  of  a  bad 
character  on  God's  gift  and  choice  in  the  land  which 
their  unbelief  was  reluctant  to  go  up  and  take  in  the 
name  of  Jehovah.    There  is  a  conspiracy  under  the 


362        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

fairest  pretensions  possible.  This  does  not  mend  mat- 
ters. The  basest  things  sometimes  put  on  the  most 
pious  guise.  No  man  should  be  deceived  by  sound. 
The  Christian  is  meant  to  judge  things  according  to 
God.  The  men  who  did  so  were  not  by  any  means  such 
as  we  should  have  thought  most  likely  to  have  joined 
themselves  rebelliously  against  Jehovah.  "  Now  Korah 
the  son  of  Izhar,  the  son  of  Kohath,  the  son  of  Levi" 
(the  most  honourable  portion  among  those  who  had 
the  direct  service  of  the  sanctuary),  "  and  Dathan  and 
Abiram  the  sons  of  Eliab,  and  On  the  son  of  Peleth, 
sons  of  Eeuben,  took  men.'*  That  is,  there  were  those 
who  belonged  to  the  ministering  class,  and  those  that 
were  chief  men  in  the  congregation,  generally  repre- 
sentatives of  what  people  would  call  in  modem  days 
leading  men  in  church  and  state.  "  And  they  rose  up 
before  Moses,  with  certain  of  the  children  of  Israel,  two 
hundred  and  fifty  princes  of  the  assembly,  famous  in 
the  congregation,  men  of  renown.  And  they  gathered 
themselves  together  against  Moses  and  against  Aaron, 
and  said  unto  them.  Ye  take  too  much  upon  you,  seeing 
all  the  congregation  are  holy,  every  one  of  them,  and 
Jehovah  is  among  them.  Wherefore  then  lift  ye  up 
yourselves  above  the  congregation  of  Jehovah?  And 
when  Moses  heard  it,  he  fell  upon  his  face." 

It  is  a  good  thing  when  the  haughtiness  that  Satan 
knows  so  well  how  to  excite  brings  out  nothing  but 
lowliness  and  humiliation  of  our  souls  before  God. 
Haughtiness  is  apt  to  provoke  haughtiness,  and  flesh  to 
irritate  flesh ;  but  it  was  not  so  with  Moses.  *'  And  he 
spake  unto  Korah  and  unto  all  his  company,  saying, 
Even  to-morrow  Jehovah  will  shew  who  are  his,  and 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  363 

who  is  holy;  and  will  cause  him  to  come  near  unto 
him :  even  him  whom  he  hath  chosen  will  he  cause 
to  come  near  unto  him.  This  do;  Take  you  censers, 
Korah,  and  all  his  company ;  and  put  fire  therein,  and 
put  incense  in  them  before  Jehovah  to-morrow :  and  it 
shall  be  that  the  man  whom  Jehovah  doth  choose,  he 
shall  be  holy :  ye  take  too  much  upon  you,  ye  sons  of 
Levi.  And  Moses  said  unto  Korah,  Hear,  I  pray  you, 
ye  sons  of  Levi :  Seemeth  it  but  a  small  thing  unto  you, 
that  the  God  of  Israel  hath  separated  you  from  the 
congregation  of  Israel,  to  bring  you  near  to  himself  to 
do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  of  Jehovah,  and  to 
stand  before  the  congregation  to  minister  unto  them  ?" 
Unbelief  shews  itself  constantly  in  this  very  form.  If 
God  puts  an  honour  on  a  man,  and  he  does  not  take  it 
from  Him,  it  is  only  a  stepping  stone  for  despising  the 
God  who  gave  it  to  him  while  grasping  after  that  which 
He  has  never  given.  There  is  nothing  that  produces 
such  dissatisfaction  as  the  heart's  not  estimating  aright 
what  God  has  allotted  to  us.  Whatever  is  His  will 
alone  secures  real  joy  and  strength,  and  happy  results 
to  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  Now  in  this  case  these  men 
were  not  satisfied  with  their  position  either  as  princes 
of  the  congregation  on  the  one  hand,  or  as  Levites  on  the 
other.     They  sought  to  be  as  Aaron  and  Moses. 

What  makes  this  so  solemn  a  chapter  is,  that  the  Spirit 
of  God  distinctly  applies  it  to  the  anticipated  course 
of  Christendom.  We  all  need  its  warning.  In  the  epistle 
of  Jude  the  beginning,  way,  and  end  are  perfectly 
brought  before  us.  "The  way  of  Cain"  is  the  great 
departure  at  the  beginning  of  this  world's  moral  history, 
where  brother  slew  brother,  jealous  of  his  acceptance 


364       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

with  God,  as  well  as  of  the  righteousness  which  rebuked 
his  own  want  of  it.  "The  error  of  Balaam"  is  the 
clerical  evil  of  turning  the  name  of  God  into  a  means 
of  earthly  honour  and  gain,  not  without  hypocrisy. 
The  last  we  have  now  before  us,  "the  gainsaying  of 
Core,"  and  here  those  that  depart  from  God  perish. 
For  this  is  not  merely  the  selfish  diversions  of  the 
truth  to  a  means  of  aggrandisement  according  to  the 
covetousness  of  the  heart,  bad  as  it  was,  but  open, 
deliberate  insurrection  against  the  rights  of  Christ  Him- 
self. Moses  was  the  apostle  of  the  Jewish  profession, 
as  Aaron  was  its  high  priest.  Christ  is  the  apostle  and 
the  high  priest  of  pur  profession;  and  the  assertion  and 
the  exercise  of  a  priesthood  now  for  man  is  a  direct 
invasion  of  that  which  can  only  be  carried  out  exclu- 
sively by  Jesus  Christ  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 

There  never  was  a  time  when  such  pretensions  were 
put  forth  more  distinctly  than  at  this  present  moment. 
Of  old  it  was  not  exactly  so.  In  earlier  days  the 
writings,  for  instance,  of  those  that  are  commonly 
called  "  the  fathers  "  shew  that  it  was  rather  an  insen- 
sible slide;  but  the  solemn  fact  confronts  us  now 
that  it  is  on  the  part  of  men  who  have  the  Bible,  and 
this  circulated,  read,  proclaimed  in  the  very  streets — an 
unexampled  propagation  of  the  word  of  God,  and  of 
that  which  is  drawn  from  the  word- of  God,  and  this  even 
in  what  are  called  "  Protestant  lands."  Consequently  it 
takes  the  shape  of  an  apostacy,  accompanied  by  hatred 
of  the  truth  of  God ;  and  so  much  the  more  because 
there  has  been  in  past  history  the  fatal  experience  of 
the  effects  that  follow  a  slip  into  a  human  priesthood. 
But  now  there  is  a  growing  rejection  of  the  truth  of 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  365 

God,  and  despite  done  to  the  Spirit  who  witnesses  the 
grace  of  Christ.  The  attemp<(*once  more  is  to  return  to 
naturalism  from  grace  and  truth,  after  both  have  been 
fairly  brought  before  the  minds  of  men.  No  wonder 
therefore  the  Spirit  of  God  says  that  they  shall  perish 
in  the  gainsaying  of  Korah. 

But  Jehovah  acts  in  His  most  solemn  vindication  of 
His  will  against  the  adversaries,  as  described  in  this 
chapter.  They  perish  too.  "And  the  earth  opened  her 
mouth,  and  swallowed  them  up,  and  their  houses,  and 
all  the  men  that  appertained  unto  Korah,  and  all  their 
goods.  They,  and  all  that  appertained  to  them,  went 
down  alive  into  the  pit,  and  the  earth  closed  upon  them: 
and  they  perished  from  among  the  congregation.  And 
all  Israel  that  were  round  about  them  fled  at  the  cry  of 
them :  for  they  said,  Lest  the  earth  swallow  us  up  also. 
And  there  came  out  a  fire  from  Jehovah,  and  consumed 
the  two  hundred  and  fifty  men  that  offered  incense." 

And  then  was  marked  the  choice  of  God  and  the  value 
of  the  high  priest  that  had  been  despised.  For  it  is 
said,  "  Speak  unto  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron  the  priest, 
that  he  take  up  the  censers  out  of  the  burning,  and 
scatter  thou  the  fire  yonder;  for  they  are  hallowed.  The 
censers  of  these  sinners  against  their  own  souls,  let 
them  make  them  broad  plates  for  a  covering  of  the 
altar:  for  they  offered  them  before  Jehovah,  therefore 
they  are  hallowed :  and  they  shall  be  a  sign  unto  the 
children  of  Israel.  And  Eleazar  the  priest  took  the 
brasen  censers,  wherewith  they  that  were  burnt  had 
offered;  and  they  were  made  broad  plates  for  a  covering 
of  the  altar:  to  be  a  memorial  unto  the  children  of 
Israel,  that  no  stranger,  which  is  not  of  the  seed  of 


366       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Aaron,  come  near  to  oflfer  incense  before  Jehovah;  that 
he  be  not  as  Korah,  and. as  his  company:  as  Jehovah 
said  to  him  by  the  hand  of  Moses.  But  on  the  morrow 
all  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  Israel  murmured 
against  Moses  and  against  Aaron,  saying,  Te  have  killed 
the  people  of  Jehovah.  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  the 
congregation  was  gathered  against  Moses  and  against 
Aaron,  that  they  looked  toward  the  tabernacle  of  the 
congregation :  and,  behold,  the  cloud  covered  it,  and  the 
glory  of  Jehovah  appeared.  And  Moses  and  Aaron  came 
before  the  tabernacle  of  the  congr^ation.  And  Jehovah 
spake  unto  Moses,  saying.  Get  you  up  from  among 
this  congregation,  that  I  may  consume  them  as  in  a 
moment.  And  they  fell  upon  their  faces.  And  Moses 
said  unto  Aaron,  Take  the  censer,  and  put  fire  therein 
from  off  the  altar,  and  put  on  incense,  and  go  quickly 
unto  the  congregation,  and  make  an  atonement  for 
them :  for  there  is  wrath  gone  out  from  Jehovah ;  the 
plague  is  begun.  And  Aaron  took  as  Moses  commanded, 
and  ran  into  the  midst  of  the  congregation;  and,  behold, 
the  plague  was  begun  among  the  people." 

Thus  God  was  not  content  with  an  immediate  and  final 
judgment  executed  on  the  leaders  of  the  rebellion,  but 
the  people  whose  hearts  went  with  it  were  judged  by 
the  plague.  We  find  here  Moses  and  Aaron  yet  more 
remarkable  for  their  earnestness  of  purpose  than  for  the 
activity  of  divine  aflfection  in  the  endeavour  that  the 
grace  of  the  Lord  should  appear  for  the  guilty  people. 
"  Moses  stood,"  it  is  said,  "  between  the  dead  and  the 
living,  and  the  plague  was  stayed."  Thus  was  proved 
doubly  what  God  thought  of  tJie  presumption  of  these 
Levites : — on  the  one  hand  the  judgment  of  the  pre- 


NUMBEES  X.-XXI.  367 

feumptuoTis  Levite  and  his  party,  with  the  after-clap  of 
the  plague  among  the  people;  on  the  other  hand  the 
efficacy  and  grace  of  the  priesthood  whom  pride  and 
unbelief  had  sought  to  supplant  under  pretence  opdue 
honour  to  all  the  people  of  Jehovah. 

But  there  is  more  than  this  in  chapter  xvii.  God 
would  turn  it  to  a  practical  and  a  permanent  account; 
and  this  in  a  gracious  way  now,  not  to  call  up  the 
remembrance  of  a  sorrowful  and  humbling  judgment. 
He  tells  them  to  speak  to  the  children  of  Israel  that 
each  of  them  should  take  a  rod  ''according  to  the  house 
of  their  fathers,  and  of  all  their  princes  according 
to  the  house  of  their  fathers,  twelve  rods :  write  thou 
every  man's  name  upon  his  rod.  And  thou  shalt  write 
Aaron's  name  upon  the  rod  of  Levi."  And  these  were 
put  in  the  tabernacle,  before  the  testimony,  where  Jehor 
vah  met  with  Moses  when  He  made  manifest  His  mind. 
The  answer  was  soon  given.  "And  it  came  to  pass 
that  on  the  morrow  Moses  went  into  the  tabernacle  of 
witness ;  and,  behold,  the  rod  of  Aaron  for  the  house  of 
Levi  was  budded,  and  brought  forth  buds,  and  bloomed 
blossoms,  and  yielded  almonds.  And  Moses  brought 
out  all  the  rods  from  before  Jehovah  unto  the  children 
of  Israel;  and  they  looked,  and  took  every  man  his 
rod."  It  was  not  only  an  indisputable  sign  of  choice 
of  the  person,  but  a  most  significant  token  of  the  true 
place  of  priesthood,  which  was  here  in  type  founded 
on  death  and  resurrection.  Plainly  there  is  no  bearing 
of  fruit  except  according  to  the  priesthood  which  Je- 
hovah chose  for  them.  It  was  not  merely  to  be  the 
means  of  staying  the  plague  in  the  presence  of  an  evi- 
dent divine  judgment,  but  the  habitual  witness  that 


368        LECrUKES  on  the  PENTATEUCH. 

real  {rait-beaiiiig  fit  for  the  sanctuary  of  Grod  springs 
only  from  the  priesthood  that  Jehovah  has  chosen. 
There  is  the  expression,  no  doubt,  of  authority;  but 
tha^authority  is  by  grace,  and  for  gracious  ends.  The 
rod  was  the  figure ;  at  first  the  dead  rod,  which  quickly 
proves  the  vigour  of  life  imparted  in  the  grace  of  God, 
and  brings  forth  finit  for  His  sanctuary.  Strange  to  say, 
the  children  of  Israel  are  more  alarmed,  if  possible,  at 
the  witness  of  the  gracious  power  of  God  than  at  the 
plague  which  had  devoured  them  just  before.  "We 
die,"  say  they ;  "we  perish;  we  all  perish."  There  is 
nothing  so  blind  as  unbelief.  Daring  in  the  presence 
of  a  pestilence,  which  in  itself  followed  an  unprece- 
dented judgment,  they  are  fearful  even  unto  death  in 
the  presence  of  the  sign  of  all-overcoming  grace  in  life 
and  fruit-bearing. 

In  chapter  xviii  we  have  the  connection  of  Aaron  with 
the  tribe  of  Levi,  which  will  not  demand  more  than  a  few 
passing  words.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  the 
external  service  should  never  be  severed  from  the  priest- 
hood which  enters  within.  This  is  exactly  what  seems 
set  forth  here  (verses  2,  4).  The  tendency  of  ministry, 
when  it  does  not  presumptuously  set  up  to  priestly 
honour,  is  always  to  content  itseKwith  a  place  without, 
and  thus  to  get  severed  from  Christ  on  high.  It  never 
can  be  so  without  the  deepest  loss.  Whenever  ministry 
becomes  a  mere  human  institution,  founded  on  educa- 
tion and  chosen  by  man,  instead  of  depending  on  the 
sovereign  call  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  uses  those  called 
for  His  own  glory,  how  deplorable  the  descent  to 
the  minister,  how  dishonouring  to  the  Lord,  and  how 
ruinous  the  result  to  all  concerned  I    The  dependence 


mjMBERS  X.-XXI.  369 

of  ministry  then  on  Christ  in  the  presence  of  God  is 
what  is  taught,  as  it  appears  to  me,  by  the  Levite,  the 
sign  of  him  that  is  engaged  in  the  service  being  given 
to  Aaron.  It  was  a  remarkable  arrangement,  the  force 
of  which  has  not  always  been  seen.  God  would  thus 
keep  up  the  connection  of  that  which  goes  without 
with  what  passed  within  the  vail. 

The  priests  had  all  the  offerings  and  sacrifices  of 
which  man  might  partake;  the  Levites  had  the  tithes 
from  all  Israel:  the  one  fed  from  within,  the  other  from 
without;  but  both  received  from  Jehovah,  for  He  was 
their  inheritance.  Otherwise  they  were  miserable :  what 
else  had  they  ? 

In  chapter  xix.,  which  follows,  we  have  another  most 
instructive  ordinance  of  God,  peculiar  to  the  book  of 
Numbers.  "This  is  the  ordinance  of  the  law  which 
Jehovah  hath  commanded,  saying,  Speak  unto  the 
children  of  Israel,  that  they  bring  thee  a  red  heifer 
without  spot,  wherein  is  no  blemish,  and  upon  which 
never  came  yoke."  What  the  great  atonement-day  is 
to  the  centre  of  the  book  of  Leviticus,  the  red  heifer 
is  to  the  book  of  Numbers.  Each  seems  characteristic 
of  the  book  wherein  they  are  given,  which  shews  how 
systematic  are  the  order  and  contents  of  Scripture. 

Thus  we  have  here  a  provision  distinctly  for  the  defile- 
ments which  are  met  with  as  we  journey  through  this 
world.  This  is  of  vital  moment  in  practice.  There  is 
many  a  soul  disposed  to  make  the  atonement  do,  as  it 
were,  all  the  work.  There  is  no  truth  more  blessed  than 
the  atonement,  unless  it  be  His  person  who  gives  that 
work  its  divine  value ;  but  we  must  leave  room  for  all 
that  our  God  has  given  us.    There  is  nothing  which 

2  B 


LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTAT! 


ro'tl  fr  lit-bearing  fit  for  the  sanctn 

only  f VI All  the  priesthood  that 

Jhf'Af:  is  the  expression,  no  dr 

tliat  authority  is  by  grace,  anr* 

ro«l  was  the  figure ;  at  first  f 

proves  the  vigour  of  life  i* 

and  brings  forth  fruit  fo' 

the  children  of  Israel 

tlie  witness  of  the  ' 

pla;(ue  which  ha^" 

die,"  say  they ; 

riotliing  80  bl' 

of  a  pestilei 

dented  jud 

the  pres' ' 

and  fn 

I]. 
thi- 

1' 


»    m  > 


»1  • 


•^      i-.iL    .w  know 
'•'•'*     ''-     .a  "iitirely 
'    •   •  'Iter-;.     ::,.:a  most 
•it-      '.  ::'»ie   rruth  ? 
..^•*  i:i!»r'.'    iancorous 
.  ".MI.      "ln_.v  are  as 
•   »■*'  •      u:    'he.- IT'  is 
•*'>«u«.i.  aiul  this 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  371 

I  openness  to  all  truth  is  precisely  what 

'^t  on.    Indeed  I  am  persuaded  that  this 

is  most  peculiar — to  avoid  peculi- 

'ccts,  welcoming  all  truth  by  the 

t  one  can  say  much  if  the  ques- 

^e  made  it  our  own  ?  but  it  is 

jH^sition  where  all  truth  is  open 

■  hi  which  does  not  exclude  a  single 

:  s  mind  and  will.   It  will  be  impossible, 

.'■d,  save  on  the  ground  of  the  assembly  of 

^  tind  a  place  which  will  not  shut  out  truth,  and 

tliaps   much  which  is  evidently  most  precious.     It 

is  well  to  guard  sedulously  another  thing — ^that  we  do 

not  simply  satisfy  ourselves  that  we  are  on  right,  ground 

according  to  God,  but  that  our  hearts  earnestly  desire 

to  turn  what  He  has  given  us  always  and  only  to  the 

account  of  His  glory. 

The  red  heifer  teaches  the  children  of  Israel  on  the 

surface  of  it  that  the  work  of  the  day  of  atonement  had 

not  so  completely  dealt  with  aU  sin  that  they  might 

treat  daily  defilements  as  immaterial.     It  is  impossible 

to  exaggerate  the  value  of  the  shedding  of  Christ's  blood 

for  our  sins.     It  does  give  no  more  conscience  of  sins. 

We  are  justified  by  His  blood ;  yea  more,  with  Christ 

we  have  died  to  sin;   and  we  are  alive  to  God  in 

Him.    But  though  this  is  all  quite  true  (and  was  then 

set  forth  imperfectly  as  far  as  figure  could,  when  we 

look  at  an  Israelite),  such  grace  is  the  strongest  motive 

why  we  cannot  tamper  with  what  is  defiled.    The  very 

fact  that  we  are  cleansed  perfectly  before  God  is  a  loud 

call  to  us  not  to  endure  a  blot  before  men.    It  was  to 

guard  His  people  from  soils  by  the  way  that  God  gave 

2  B  2 


372        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

here  a  provision  so  remarkable.  "  A  red  heifer"  was  to 
be  brought  "  without  spot,  wherein  is  no  blemish,  and 
upon  which  never  came  yoke,"  a  striking  picture  of 
Christ,  but  of  Christ  in  a  way  not  often  spoken  of 
in  scripture.  The  requirement  supposes  not  only  the 
absence  of  such  blemishes  as  was  indispensable  in  every 
sacrifice ;  but  here  expressly  also  it  must  have  never 
known  the  yoke,  that  is,  the  pressure  of  sin.  How  this 
speaks  of  the  antitype !  Christ  was  always  perfectly 
acceptable  unto  God.  "  And  ye  shall  give  her  to  Eleazar 
the  priest  that  he  may  bring  her  forth  without  the 
camp,  and  one  shall  slay  her  before  his  face.** 

The  blood  was  taken  and  put  seven  times  before 
the  tabernacle.  It  was  quite  right  that  the  connection 
should  be  kept  up  with  the  great  truth  of  the  blood 
that  makes  atonement,  and  that  vindicates  God  wher- 
ever the  thought  of  sin  occurs.  But  its  special  use 
points  to  another  feature.  The  sprinkling  of  the  blood 
is  the  continual  witness  of  the  truth  of  sacrifice ;  but 
the  characteristic  want  follows.  "And  one  shall  bum 
the  heifer  in  his  sight ;  her  skin,  and  her  flesh,  and  her 
blood,  with  her  dung,  shall  he  burn.  And  the  priest 
shall  take  cedar  wood,  and  hyssop,  and  scarlet,  and  cast 
it  into  the  midst  of  the  burning  of  the  heifer.'*  Then  we 
find  the  ashes  of  the  heifer  laid  up  in  a  clean  place. 
"And  a  man  that  is  clean  shall  gather  up  the  ashes 
of  the  heifer,  and  lay  them  up  without  the  camp  in 
a  clean  place,  and  it  shall  be  kept  for  the  congr^ation 
of  the  children  of  Israel  for  a  water  of  separation ;  it 
is  a  purification  for  sin.'*  In  what  sense  ?  Simply  and 
solely  with  a  view  to  communion,  i  e.  of  restoring  it 
when  broken.   It  is  not  at  all  a  question  of  establishing 


NUMBEBS  X.-XXL  373 

relationships  (that  was  abeady  done),  but  on  the  ground 
of  the  subsisting  relation  the  Israelite  must  allow  no- 
thing by  the  way  which  would  sully  the  holiness  that 
suits  the  sanctuary  of  Jehovah.     This  was  the  point. 

Such  is  the  true  standard  as  set  forth  in  this 
type.  It  is  not  merely  the  law  of  Jehovah  condemning 
this  or  that.  This  shadow  of  good  things  demanded 
separation  from  anything  inconsistent  with  the  sanc- 
tuary. The  form  which  this  ordinance  took  was  in 
respect  of  travelling  through  the  wilderness,  where  they 
were  exposed  constantly  to  the  contact  of  death.  It  is 
death  that  is  here  brought  in  as  defiling  in  various 
shapes  and  degrees.  Supposing  one  touched  the  dead 
body  of  a  man,  he  shaU  be  unclean  seven  days.  What 
was  to  be  done  ?  "  He  shall  purify  himself  with  it  on 
the  third  day,  and  on  the  seventh  day  he  shall  be  clean : 
but  if  he  purify  not  himself  the  third  day,  then  the 
seventh  day  he  shall  not  be  clean."  It  was  not  per- 
mitted to  purify  one's  self  on  the  first  day.  Am  I 
wrong  in  thinking  that  d  priori  we  might  have  thought 
this  haste  much  the  best  course?  Why  not  at  once? 
It  was  ordered  not  for  the  first  but  the  third  day. 
When  there  is  defilement  on  the  spirit,  when  anything 
succeeds  in  interrupting  communion  with  God,  it  is 
of  deep  moral  importance  that  we  should  thoroughly 
realize  our  ofifence. 

This  seems  the  meaning  of  its  being  done  on  the 
third  day.  It  was  to  be  no  mere  sudden  feeling  that  one 
had  sinned,  and  there  was  an  end  of  the  matter.  The 
Israelite  was  obliged  to  remain  tiU  the  third  day  under 
a  sense  of  his  sin.  This  was  a  painful  position.  He 
had  to  reckon  up  the  days,  and  remain  till  the  third. 


374       LECTURES  OK  THE  PESTATEUCIL 

when  he  has  the  water  of  separation  first  sprinkled  on 
hinL  "In  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses"  (the 
well-known  provision  in  every  ease)  "  every  word  shall 
be  establish^"  Thus  we  see  he  who  had  come  in  con- 
tact with  death  must  remain  an  adequate  time  to  shew 
the  deliberate  sense  of  it,  and  must  take  the  place  of 
one  that  was  defiled  before  God.  A  hasty  expression 
of  sorrow  does  not  prove  genuine  repentance  for  sin. 
We  see  something  like  this  with  children.  There  is 
many  a  one  who  has  a  child  ready  enough  to  ask  for  for- 
giveness, or  even  own  its  fault ;  but  the  child  that  feels 
it  most  is  not  always  quick.  A  child  who  is  far  slower 
to  own  it  may  have,  and  commonly  has,  a  deeper  sense 
of  what  confession  means.  However  I  am  not  now 
speaking  of  the  natural  character ;  but  I  say  that  it  is 
right  and  becoming  (and  this  I  believe  to  be  the  general 
meaning  of  the  Lord's  ordinance  here)  that  he  who  is 
defiled  (that  is,  has  his  communion  with  God  inter- 
rupted) should  take  that  place  seriously.  Of  course  in 
Christianity  it  is  not  a  question  of  days,  but  of  that 
which  corresponds  to  the  meaning;  which  is  that  there 
should  be  time  enough  to  prove  a  real  sense  of  the  evil 
of  one's  defilement  as  dishonouring  God  and  His  sanc- 
tuary, and  not  the  haste  which  really  evinces  an  absence 
of  right  feeling.  He  who  duly  purified  himself  on  the 
third  day  was  in  effect  purified  on  the  seventh  day. 

Thus  first  of  all  he  has  a  sense  of  his  sin  in  the  pre- 
sence of  this  grace  that  provides  against  it;  then  he  has 
at  last  the  precious  realization  of  grace  in  the  presence 
of  sin.  The  two  sprinklings  are  one  the  converse  of 
the  other.  They  set  forth  how  sin  had  brought  shame 
on  grace,  and  how  grace  had  triumphed  over  sin.    This 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  375 

seems  the  meaning,  and  more  particularly  for  the  fol- 
lowing reason.  The  ashes  of  the  heifer  express  the 
effect  of  the  consuming  judgment  of  God  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  because  of  sin.  It  is  not  simply  blood  shewing 
that  I  am  guilty,  and  that  God  gives  a  sacrifice  to  put 
it  away.  The  ashes  attest  the  judicial  dealing  of  God 
in  the  consumption,  as  it  were,  of  that  blessed  offering 
which  came  under  all  the  holy  sentence  of  God  through 
our  sins.  The  water  (or  Spirit  by  the  word)  gives  us 
to  realize  Christ's  having  suffered  for  that  which  we 
alas !  are  apt  to  feel  so  little  if  not  to  trifle  with  it. 

There  is  another  thing  to  notice  in  passing.  The 
water  of  purification  was  not  merely  wanted  when  one 
touched  a  dead  body,  but  in  different  modes  and  measures. 
That  might  be  called  a  great  case,  but  the  institution 
shews  that  God  takes  notice  of  the  least  thing.  So 
should  we — at  least  in  ourselves.  **This  is  the  law, 
when  a  man  dieth  in  a  tent :  all  that  come*  into  the 
tent,  and  all  that  is  in  the  tent,  shall  be  unclean  seven 
days.  And  every  open  vessel,  which  hath  no  covering 
bound  upon  it,  is  unclean.  And  whosoever  toucheth 
one  that  is  slain  with  a  sword  in  the  open  fields,  or  a 
dead  body,  or  a  bone  of  a  man,  or  a  grave,  shall  be 
unclean  seven  days."  "The  bone  of  a  man"  might  be 
a  much  lesser  object,  but  whatever  defiles  comes  into 
notice,  and  is  provided  for  in  Christ  our  Lord.  Thus 
God  would  habituate  us  to  the  nicest  discernment  and 
the  most  thorough  self-judgment.  It  is  not  only  grave 
matters  that  defile,  but  little  occasions,  as  men  would 
say,  which  come  between  us  and  communion  with  our 
God  and  Father.  At  the  same  time  He  provides  the 
unchanging  remedy  of  grace  for  every  defilement. 


376  LECTOtES  OS  TWK  FEmTirCB- 

In  chapter  ir.  connected  troth  «ppcazs  whea  they 
are  calling  out  for  water,  "There  was  i»  water  fer 
the  congregation :  and  thev  gathered  themsdTes  together 
againist  Moeea  and  against  Aaron."  It  wis  TetSbf,  as  we 
would  aav,  against  the  infinite  grace  of  ovr  Lord  Jesu 
This  is  what  answers  to  it  in  the  antitype:  This  in%fat 
seem  strong  to  say  of  Christians ;  but  wheneTer  we  are 
tried  and  occupied  with  circamstances»  are  we  not  domg 
so?  Do  von  think  the  Lord  does  not  know  what 
troubles  US  ?  Do  von  think  the  Lord  does  not  send  it 
for  our  good  ?  It  mar  be  bad  in  another;  bat  the  chief 
pf>int  we  have  to  look  at  is  to  see  the  good  hand  of  the 
Lord,  no  matter  what  it  is.  We  are  not  to  be  ^oTercome 
of  evil,"  but  to  "overcome  evil  with  good."  The  troe  way 
to  do  so  IS  to  count  on  the  Lord  Jesus  regolathig  every- 
thing, AH  power  is  given  to  Him  on  earth  and  heaven; 
and  why  should  we  not  be  happy  in  His  ways  with  ust 
He  it  is  who  deals  with  us,  whatever  may  be  the  in- 
strument and  whatever  the  circumstances. 

Here  the  people,  having  no  water,  began  to  chide 
with  Moses,  "  and  spake,  saying,  Would  €rod  that  we 
had  died  when  our  brethren  died  before  Jehovah!" 
There  is  nothing  too  base  for  one  even  belonging  to  God 
when  God  is  not  before  his  eyes.  "And  wherefore  have 
ye  made  us  to  come  up  out  of  Egypt,  to  bring  us  in  unto 
this  evil  place  ?  it  is  no  place  of  seed,  or  of  figs,  or  of 
vines,  or  of  pomegranates;  neither  is  there  any  water 
to  drink  And  Moses  and  Aaron  went  from  the  pre- 
sence of  the  assembly  unto  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 
of  the  congregation,  and  they  feU  upon  their  faces :  and 
the  glory  of  Jehovah  appeared  imto  them.  And  Jehovah 
spake  unto  Moses,  saying,  Take  the  rod,  and  gather  thou 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  377 

the  assembly  together,  thou,  and  Aaron  thy  brother,  and 
speak  ye  unto  the  rock  before  their  eyes ;  and  it  shall 
give  forth  his  water,  and  thou  shalt  bring  forth  to  them 
water  out  of  the  rock :  so  thou  shalt  give  the  congre- 
gation and  their  beasts  drink."  And  Moses  did  take  the 
rod  from  before  Jehovah  as  He  commanded  him ;  but 
when  he  with  Aaron  gathered  the  people,  he  said  to 
them, "  Hear  now,  ye  rebels ! "  Instead  of  speaking  to  the 
rock  he  speaks  to  them.    He  was  not  told  to  do  so. 

It  was  disobedience  if  Moses  had  done  no  more;  but 
he  goes  farther  than  this,  as  we  shall  see.  "Hear  now, 
ye  rebels ;  must  we  fetch  you  water  out  of  this  rock  ? 
And  Moses  lifted  up  his  hand,  and  with  his  rod."  Alas ! 
he  brought  another  rod,  his  own;  whereas  Jehovah  told 
him  to  bring  ''the  rod ;"  that  is,  the  rod  of  Aaron.  It 
was  the  rod  of  priestly  grace,  with  which  God  wished 
him  to  speak  to  the  rock ;  the  rod  that  told  how  God 
could  cause  life  to  work  where  there  had  been  death, 
and  could  produce  fruit  too  according  to  His  own  mar- 
vellous grace;  for  He  knows  how  to  quicken,  entirely 
beyond  the  thoughts  of  man  or  nature.  Although 
Moses  brings  out  "the  rod"  according  to  the  word  of 
Jehovah,  he  does  not  use  it  according  to  Him.  He 
strikes  with  his  own  rod.  What  was  its  distinctive 
character  ?  His  was  the  rod  of  authority,  and  of  judicial 
power.  Of  old  he  had  used  that  rod  aright  (Exodus 
xvii.):  it  was  a  question  of  judgment  falling  on  the 
rock — ^then  only.  Just  so  Christ  "once  suffered  for 
sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to 
God."    Now  He  ever  lives  to  make  intercession  for  us. 

But  here  Moses,  completely  losing  sight  of  the 
infinite  grace  of  God  in  this  woudrous  transaction  and 


378        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

provision  for  His  people,  and  falling  back  on  the  prin- 
ciple of  judgment,  misrepresented  the  God  that  he  had 
sought  to  magnify,  and  whose  grace  it  was  his  greatest 
joy  to  reflect.  It  was  not  so  now,  and  hence  a  grievous 
failure.  It  became  sin  unto  death  to  Moses,  for  God 
most  of  all  resents  a  grave  misrepresentation  of  Him- 
self on  the  part  of  one  who  ought  to  have  known  Him 
well.  It  was  precisely  because  Moses  and  Aaron  were 
so  near  to  God,  because  they  had  entered  (Moses  par- 
ticularly) into  the  grace  of  Jehovah,  that  now  under 
these  circumstances  total  failure  on  their  part  became 
the  occasion  for  setting  aside  Moses  as  a  vessel  that 
had  done  its  work.  He  was  not  fit  to  lead  them  into 
the  land — the  goodly  land.  It  was  a  sore  trial ;  it  was 
a  deep  pain,  you  may  be  sure,  to  Moses's  heart,  though 
he  never  distrusted  Jehovah  after  this,  I  am  persuaded, 
but  bowed  with  beautiful  grace  to  His  will,  as  we  shall 
see  in  the  history  that  follows.  At  the  same  time 
Moses  felt  and  was  meant  to  feel  it  all.  But  it  is  a 
sorrow  that  one  who  had  conducted  them  so  truly 
according  to  God,  and  who  had  stood  so  firm  in  cir- 
cumstances yet  more  trying,  should  have  failed,  as  it 
were,  when  close  to  the  very  brink  of  the  land — when 
drawing  near  to  the  point  from  which  they  were  to 
enter  on  the  Canaan  of  Jehovah's  choice.  But  so  it 
was.  Moses  failed,  departed  from  the  rich  grace  of 
God,  fell  back  on  judgment;  and  judgment  accord- 
ingly dealt  with  him.  Moses  did  not  act  according  to 
Jehovah.  He  lifted  up  his  hand,  and  with  his  rod  he 
smote  the  rock  twice.  Jehovah  did  not  withhold  the 
supply.  The  water  came  out  abundantly;  but  this  was 
to  God's  own  praise,  and  in  nowise  an  endorsement  of 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  379' 

Moses's  failure.  "  And  Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses,  and 
Aaron,  Because  ye  believed  me  not,  to  sanctify  me  in 
the  eyes  of  the  children  of  Israel,  therefore  ye  shall 
not  bring  this  congregation  into  the  land  which  I  have 
given  them." 

After  this  (verse  14)  we  find  Moses  sending  mes- 
sengers, that  they  might  pass  through  the  land  of  Edom. 
Edom  refuses ;  and  Jehovah  bids  Aaron  to  go  up.  The 
time  was  come  for  him  to  pass  away,  and  for  Eleazar 
his  son  to  take  his  place. 

The  endeavour  to  set  Deut.  ii.  29  in  opposition  to 
Num.  XX.  l-i-21  is  due  either  to  perverse  ill-will,  or  to 
mere  inattention  and  rashness.*  Edom  did  refuse  to 
let  Israel  pass  through,  yet  they  did  pass  through  at 
last.  The  two  occasions  were  quite  distinct.  The  re- 
fusal of  Edom  recorded  in  the  latter  scripture  occurred 
at  a  different  time  and  place  from  that  in  which  Israel 
effected  the  passage  through  their  territory.  The  mes- 
sengers were  sent  from  Kadesh,  not  the  district  in 
general  but  the  city,  in  their  uttermost  border,  it  would 
appear  on  the  north-west ;  and  this  before  the  death  of 
Aaron.  But  the  passage  was  actually  made  some  time 
after  his  death  by  the  south  of  Edom  by  the  way  of 
the  Eed  Sea,  as  indeed  we  may  learn  from  Num.  xxi. 
So  Num.  xxxiii.  36  et  seqq.  shews  Israel  leaving  Kadesh 
for  Mount  Hor,  and  Aaron  goes  up  into  the  mountain 
and  dies.  From  Hor  we  next  hear  of  their  encamping 
in  Zalmt)nah,  when  they  had  turned  the  southern  ex- 
tremity of  Edom,  and  were  advancing  northward  on 
the  east  of  the  mountainous  tract  before  reaching  the 

•  Dr.  Davidson's  Introd.  0.  f .  i.  70. 


380        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

border  of  Moab.  Thus,  if  we  compare  the  previous 
verses  (30-35),  we  see  that  the  children  of  Israel  first 
came  down  from  Moseroth  in  or  near  Mount  Hor  on 
the  west  of  Edom  to  Ezion-gaber  on  the  Red  Sea; 
thence  they  went  up  the  Arabah  again  to  Mount  Hor 
(verses  36,  37),  when  Aaron's  death  took  place;  and 
thence  they  came  down  by  the  same  western  side  of 
Edom  to  Ezion-gaber  on  the  Red  Sea  once  more,  thus 
compassing  Mount  Seir  many  days  before  they  turned 
northward.  No  less  than  thirty-seven  years  elapsed 
from  the  days  in  which  they  came  from  Kadesh-bamea 
till  they  crossed  the  brook  Zered.  (Deut.  il  14.)  The 
object  of  that  long  stay  there  was  in  order  that  the  old 
generation  might  gradually  die  oflf. 

It  may  be  added  that  Deut.  x.  6,  7  entirely  falls  in 
with  the  routes  akeady  indicated,  verse  6  shewing  us 
the  latter  part  of  their  upward  journey  from  Ezion-gaber 
to  Mosera  in  Mount  Hor,  where  Aaron  died,  as  verse  7 
traces  the  subsequent  journey  down  again  as  far  as 
Jotbath  or  Jotbatha.  Num.  xxxiii  furnishes  us  details 
of  this  journey  southward,  but  simply  the  broad  facts 
that  they  departed  from  Mount  Hor  and  encamped  in 
Zalmonah  on  their  final  northward  march  by  the  eastern 
side  of  Mount  Seir.  Derangement  in  the  order  of  the 
places  named  is  only  in  the  minds  of  hasty  readers,  not 
in  the  scriptures  when  patiently  considered. 

The  only  other  point  that  I  shall  notice,  as  closing 
this  part  of  my  subject,  is  given  in  chapter  xxi. ;  that 
is,  we  find  Israel  in  the  presence  of  the  Canaanite  king 
of  Arad,  who  at  first  takes  some  prisoners.  Israel  vows 
to  Jehovah  that  he  will  utterly  destroy  them,  if  He  will 
deliver  the  people  into  his  hand.    Jehovah  hearkens, 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  381 

and  such  destruction  ensues  that  the  place  is  thence 
called  Hormah. 

Soon  after  this,  however,  occurs  a  very  serious  scene 
of  warning  for  our  souls  (verse  4  et  seqq,).  It  is  no 
uncommon  case :  a  time  of  victory  has  to  be  watched, 
lest  it  be  a  precursor  of  danger.  A  time  of  defeat,  on 
the  other  hand,  constantly  prepares  one  for  a  fresh  and 
greater  blessing  from  God — so  rich  is  His  grace.  He 
knows  how  to  lift  up  the  fallen,  but  He  makes  those 
that  are  too  light  with  their  victory  to  feel  their  total 
weakness  and  the  constant  need  of  Himself.  So  it  was 
with  Israel.  They  became  much  discouraged  imme- 
diately after  their  great  victory,  and  they  speak  against 
God  and  against  Moses.  ''And  Jehovah  sent  fiery 
serpents  among  the  people,  and  they  bit  the  people; 
and  much  people  of  Israel  died."  They  at  once  fly  to 
Moses,  and  ask  him  to  pray  to  Jehovah  for  them ;  and 
Moses  is  directed  by  Jehovah  to  make  a  fiery  serpent. 
"Make  thee  a  fiery  serpent,  and  set  it  upon  a  pole: 
and  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  every  one  that  is  bitten, 
when  he  looketh  upon  it,  shall  live.  And  Moses  made 
a  serpent  of  brass,  and  pui  it  upon  a  pole,  and  it  came 
to  pass,  that  if  a  serpent  had  bitten  any  man,  when  he 
beheld  the  serpent  of  brass,  he  lived." 

It  is  important,  I  think,  for  our  souls  to  see  this — 
that,  as  connected  with  the  wilderness  and  with  the  flesh, 
there  is  no  life  for  man.  life  is  not  for  man  in  the 
flesL  Death  is  the  Lord's  way  of  dealing  with  fallen 
humanity.  How  then  is  man  to  live  1  "  I  if  I  be  lifted 
up  from  the  earth  will  draw  all  men  unto  me"  to  quote 
another  New  Testament  application  of  the  truth  now 
before  our  minds.  '*  I  if  I  be  lifkd  vp" — it  is  a  Saviour 


882        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

no  longer  on  the  earth,  but  lifted  up  fh)m  it:  I  do 
not  say  in  heaven,  but  a  Saviour  rejected  and  crucified. 
This  is  the  means  of  divine  attraction  when  sin  has 
been  thus  definitively  judged.  There  can  be  no  adequate 
blessing  without  the  cross  for  man  as  he  is ;  for  thus 
only  is  God  glorified  as  to  sin.  This  is  what  in  type 
comes  before  us  here. 

But  why,  it  may  be  asked,  the  serpent  of  brass? 
Why  after  that  figure?  For  another  most  solemn  reason. 
It  is  not  only  that  a  crucified  Saviour  is  the  means  of 
salvation  to  man;  but,  besides,  the  figure  intimates  One 
"made  sin,"  though  in  His  own  person  He  were  the 
only  One  who  "  knew  no  sin."  Had  He  known  sin.  He 
could  not  have  been  a  Saviour  according  to  divine 
holiness ;  had  He  not  been  made  sin,  we  had  never  been 
really  delivered  from  its  judgment.  He  is,  and  He  was 
made,  exactly  what  God  would  have  Him  to  be,  and 
what  we  most  needed  Him  to  be.  He  is  aU  this  for  us, 
and,  mark,  all  for  us  now.  We  shall  have  all  the  glorious 
consequences  in  due  time ;  but,  even  now,  having  Him- 
self on  the  completion  of  His  work,  we  have  to  faith 
all  things  in  Him.  So  here  Israel  had  all  things  by  the 
way;  they  had  life,  as  we  see — life  won  by  victory 
over  the  power  of  sin  and  death. 

Thus,  as  we  hear  just  after  this,  God  gives  them  joy 
by  the  way — springs  of  joy  and  gladness,  as  we  after- 
wards find — the  well  in  the  desert  which  the  princes 
digged.  After  all  not  much  digging  was  required :  with 
their  staves  was  quite  enough.  Such  is  the  goodness 
of  God  to  us  even  for  the  wilderness.  The  well  was  not 
made  by  dint  of  hard  work  on  the  part  of  those  used 
to  labour.    The  princes  ^put  to  their  hands  with  their 


NUMBERS  X.-XXI.  383 

ptaves ;  and  they  probably  did  not  know  much  about 
toil  But  it  was  enough.  Overabounding  grace  thjis 
gives  abundant  refreshment  for  the  people  as  following 
that  which  God  had  before  Him — the  beautiful  type 
which  Christ  Himself  applied  to  His  own  bearing  the 
judgment  of  sin  on  the  cross  :  once  sin  is  judged,  once 
life  is  given,  what  does  God  not  give  because  of  it 
and  in  unison  with  it  ?  "  He  that  spared  not  his  own 
Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not 
with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things." 

The  rest  of  the  chapter  shews  us  the  triumphant  pro- 
gress of  the  people,  with  their  victories  (often  alluded 
to  in  the  law  and  the  psalms)  over  Sihon  king  of  the 
Amorites,  and  Og  king  of  Bashan.  Two  references  are 
made  in  the  account  of  this — one  to  a  book  of  that 
day,  the  book  of  the  wars  of  Jehovah  (verse  14) ;  the 
other  to  certain  proverbial  sayings  or  legends  then  in 
vogue  (verses  27-30).  This  does  not,  as  the  rationalists 
pretend,  give  the  smallest  support  to  the  hypothesis 
that  Moses  composed  the  Pentateuch  from  a  mass  of 
previous  material  floating  among  the  Israelites  of  his 
age  and  their  Gentile  neighbours.  Written  and  oral, 
these  foreign  traditions  are  purposely  cited  with  the 
exceptional  end  in  view  of  proving  from  witnesses  un- 
impeachable in  the  eyes  of  their  most  zealous  adversaries 
that  the  land  in  debate,  when  Israel  took  it  by  con- 
quest, did  not  belong  to  Ammon  or  Moab,  but  to  the 
doomed  races  of  Canaan  and  its  vicinity.  To  the  country 
of  the  former  ^hey  had  no  just  claim;  that  of  the 
Amorite,  &c.,  was  given  them  up  by  God.  The  Amorite 
had  taken  it  from  Moab,  and  Israel  from  the  Amorite, 
subsequently  dwelling  in  all  their  cities,  from  Arnon  to 


384       LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Jabbok,  in  Heshbon  and  all  its  villages.  A  Jewish 
record  of  its  previous  possessors  and  of  their  own 
victories  might  be  disputed  as  interested  by  a  foe ;  but 
a  citation  from  their  own  current  proverbial  songs  was 
conclusive ;  and  the  Spirit  of  God  deigns  to  employ  an 
extract  to  this  end.  In  Judges  xL  we  see  precisely  this 
ground  of  recognised  fact  taken  by  Jephthah  in  refuting 
the  claims  of  the  then  king  of  Animon,  and  his  pre- 
tensions proved  baseless  by  the  incontrovertible  evidence 
that  the  Amorite  had  the  disputed  territory  when  Israel 
made  himself  master  of  it,  spite  of  Balak  king  of  Moab 
and  all  other  rivals.  On  a  somewhat  similar  principle 
the  apostle  does  not  hesitate  to  cite  heathen  testimonies 
in  the  New  Testament,  as  no  mean  confession  on  their 
part  for  the  matter  in  hand.  (Acts  xvii.  23,  28 ;  1  Cor. 
XV.  33 ;  Titus  i.  22.) 


NUMBEES  XXIL-  XXXYI.  385 


NUMBEES. 

Chaps,  zxii.-zzxvi. 

The  successes  given  to  the  children  of  Israel  alarmed 
some  of  their  neighbours,  more  particularly  Moab ;  and 
this  gives  occasion  for  a  striking  episode  in  the  history 
which  brought  to  issue  as  solemn  a  question  as  any 
raised  in  the  book  of  Numbers.  The  sending  for 
Balaam  on  the  part  of  Balak  was  an  altogether  new 
element.  We  have  had  the  grace  of  God  and  His 
provisions  for  the  people;  we  have  had  the  unbelief 
of  the  people,  with  chastenings  and  judgments,  not 
without  the  renewed  declarations  on  God  s  part  of  His 
surely  bringing  even  such  a  people  into  the  goodly 
land.     Grace  alone  could,  but  grace  would  do  it. 

But  there  was  an  enemy  not  yet  fairly  brought 
before  our  eyes — ^the  power  of  Satan.  It  did  not  appear 
at  first,  but  ere  long  it  plays  a  most  important  part  in 
the  great  transaction  which  now  begins  to  open  out  in 
this  chapter.  Satan  can  take  the  place  of  an  angel  of 
light  and  righteousness :  not  invariably  indeed,  for  he 
has  other  phases,  but  more  especially  with  the  people  of 
God.  On  the  other  hand  there  was  material  for  Satan 
to  use,  for  the  people  had  been  notoriously  fidthless — 

2  c 


386  LECTTSES  OX  THE  TESTATETCSL 

had  dishononred  God  often  and  groi'tfadr,  ISx  ques- 
tion then  was^  Wonld  God  mainTjizn  m  prc^lc  guilty  of 
the  infraction  of  His  own  hiw  ?  If  «&,  w^cnnM  ii  not  be 
a  dishonour  to  Himself?  What  o?dll  He  fBi-?  <ar  hov 
eonsistentlT  conid  He  meet  Safian?  Lsipssa^ile  tliat 
Satan  should  be  in  lealitT  more  czsefzl  ^  ssziscffmsneK 
than  God  Himself  Xererthfileas  ibssit  V3S  ms  small 
diffi.caItT  in  appearances^  azid  such  a  'iSr^Txihj  as  hnanaa 
wit  nerer  can  solre^  How  aocetr  in  mnsi  hmt  sssiessed 
one  who  ^nrei  the  people  I 

Bat  there  is  one  simple  ansl  ^nx  HHmtf  'if  duli'iiig 
ererr  difficaltT.  fVe  know  i&  ia  alL  ics  fiuxeas:  bvt  ewca 
be£:H!e  it  was  foil j  explazned^  knuwz.  ami  scrans^bn  oot^ 
the  principle  of  it  was  aiwajs  hefeE?  isoaL  While 
unbeBef  inTaziably  fcrgets  ami  ^^psl  AaJa-  aas  God, 
fiuth  izxTxriiibly  lirioiss  Hbn  in.;  ami  -vnons^nEr  naf 
be  the  dimcntrr  of  unbelief  it  is  ^Tbignc  ibac  is 
none  wba^e^er  to  God.  Thizs  tlien.  almiiicxn.  ^ne  heut 
mav  not  nnderstariii  how  G*ii  is  n.7  jqgcm?fTt^  Hss  <wni 
charairter  and  express  wnzd  ami  !m:sii  giiiamT  hn^isBeBt 
of  sin  with  the  brrngnig  of  saat  a  peaviie  inia  dEre  land 
of  promise,  where  His  eye  rests  ^rnxDzmany:  ic  saeRiId 
Ti<3C  warti  to  naiierstami  but  beSeve.  In.  ine  «aacn  il 
sorelr  will  tmderscanii :  onlv  ic  has  ihe  -^xnnmiffi  rf  tiie 
TUDierstiamiiiiir  benr^c  spinnnaL  !ict;  aororaL  ^zie  appre- 
hension. &}wins  from.  Grr^yii,  ami  ii«:ir  ::he  preoaiaioa  of 
TTXitn  t»  titink  mc  Goi,  ami  setde  oiiw  •^TTTtr^  ik  ts  be 
done  beforeimn*!  It  is  -nrrnrteLy  muis  *:]ie9wd  ts  be  as 
in  were  ben -mi  Him:  to  diDbw  in  H5s  woka :  iZ}  have 
ff^TTTaPif  sfaewinc  tis  everw  aoep  if  sie  wav:  sa  hare 
ffrm  iHowing  a  .iiiEcmtjr  za  came  tot  ji  iis  iCjfuglh, 
titixc  we  ma7  see  haw  liannusiT  He  setdtis  aiL 


NU^IBERS  xxn.-xxxvL  387 

This  is  precisely  what  came  out  in  the  new  trial 
which  is  to  be  brought  before  us.  Balak  sent  not 
merely  for  Midian's  help,  nor  was  it  a  question  of  the 
force  of  the  world.  He  himself  had  the  consciousness 
that  there  must  be  a  power  brought  in  superior  to 
man;  but  he  thought  only  of  what  he  knew — a  power 
that  for  an  adequate  consideration  would  gratify  man's 
lust,  and  allow  of  man's  will  However  the  true  God 
enters  on  the  ground  unexpectedly ;  for  we  must  care- 
fully remember  that  Balak  bad  no  real  knowledge 
of  God.  He  no  more  thought  of  Jehovah,  whatever 
use  he  might  make  of  the  name  of  God,  than  king 
Saul  honoured  Him  when  he  consulted  the  witch  of 
Endor.  Besides  the  witch  herself  had  no  thought  of 
the  real  spirit  of  Samuel;  for  I  need  not  tell  you, 
as  no  doubt  you  are  all  well  aware  that  neither  man 
nor  devil  has  the  smallest  power  over  the  spirits  of 
those  who  are  either  righteous  or  unrighteous.  As  for 
the  unrighteous,  they  are  kept  in  prison  till  the  day  of 
judgment ;  as  for  the  righteous,  it  need  not  be  said 
they  are  with  the  Lord.  I  say  then  that  neither  man 
nor  devil  has  power  to  produce  them.  But  then  we 
must  remember  there  is  a  world  of  spiritual  powers, 
and  man  is  apt  to  confound  with  God  beings  with 
powers  superior  to  his  own.  These  are  that  hidden 
energy  which  has  managed  to  usurp  the  place  of  God 
with  bad  consciences — so  much  the  more  polluting  above 
all  other  evils,  for  it  calls  itself  religion,  and  has  come 
between  the  true  God  and  the  soul.  Such  is  the  source 
and  character  of  all  idolatry.  This  is  its  real  nature  be- 
fore God.  The  outward  forms  are  but  the  blind.  The 
real  power  is  demoniacal;  it  deceives  and  destroys. 

2  6  2 


388        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Now  these  demons  constantly  personate  whom  they 
please.  They  may  pretend  to  be  the  spirit  of  this  per- 
son or  that,  but  they  are  nothing  of  the  sort ;  being  not 
more  than  demons  and  nothing  less.  They  deceive  men 
by  gratifying  their  distrust,  lusts,  and  passions,  and 
among  the  rest  their  fancy  about  friends  and  relatives, 
or  all  the  while,  it  may  be,  assuming  also  to  be  God, 
angels,  and  so  forth.  This  is  what  was  from  time  to 
time  going  on  then,  as  it  had  since  the  flood.  It  is  no  new 
thing,  though  becoming  more  familiar  no  doubt  to  men 
in  these  days  of  Christendom's  decrepitude — alas !  days 
that  are  preparing  the  w^ay  for  a  still  more  awful  power 
of  Satan  here  below  at  the  end  of  this  age. 

But  God  did  not  leave  it  to  be  a  question  of  demons 
and  deceits ;  for  when  Balak  presumed  to  bring  in  that 
power  above  man  to  blight  the  prospects  of  His  people, 
this  at  once  called  forth  the  true  God.  Balaam  in  his 
hypocritical  way  talks  about  consulting  Jehovah.  This 
too  has  always  been.  Those  who  have  least  to  do  with 
God  often  talk  most  flippantly  about  Him ;  and  so  it 
was  of  old  as  it  is  now.  "  God,"  it  is  written,  "  came 
unto  Balaam,  and  said.  What  men  are  these  with  thee  ?" 
He  was  not  alarmed,  being  accustomed  to  an  evil  sp^irii 
He  did  not  know  but  that  the  power  which  came  to 
him  was  the  old  familiar  spirit.  God  caught  the  crafty 
in  his  own  net.  This  is  just  where  the  mighty  power 
of  God  shews  what  He  is  in  the  face  of  every  adversary 
that  dared  to  oppose  His  people.  So  when  He  asked 
the  prophet  what  men  these  were,  Balaam  answers, 
"Balak  the  son  of  Zippor,  king  of  Moab,  hath  sent 
unto  me,  saying.  Behold,  there  is  a  people  come  out  of 
Egypt,  which  covereth  the  face  of  the  earth :  come  now. 


NUMBEKS  XXn.- XXXVI.  389 

curse  me  them ;  peradventure  I  shall  be  able  to  over- 
come them,  and  drive  them  out.  And  God  said  unto 
Balaam,  Thou  shalt  not  go  with  them ;  thou  shalt  not 
curse  the  people :  for  they  are  blessed." 

We  shall  see  in  the  sequel  how  wondrous  was 
the  way  of  God  to  turn  thus  the  very  effort  of  Satan 
against  himself,  and  to  make  this  most  wicked  wretch 
Balaam  to  be  unintentionally  opposed  to  all  his  interests, 
but  held  in  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  the  instrument 
for  sealing,  as  far  as  it  could  be  done  by  man,  the  bless- 
ing of  God  upon  His  people !  "And  Balaam  rose  up  in 
the  morning,  and  said  unto  the  princes  of  Balak,  Get 
you  into  your  land;  for  Jehovah  refuseth  to  give  me 
leave  to  go  with  you."  So  the  princes  returned,  and 
told  Balak  that  Balaam  refused  to  come.  Balak,  judging 
according  to  what  man  so  well  knows,  according  to  his 
own  heart  and  experience,  sends  princes  more  honour- 
able than  the  others  who  came  to  Balaam,  and  they 
said  to  him,  "  Thus  saith  Balak  the  son  of  Zippor,  Let 
nothing,  I  pray  thee,  hinder  thee  from  coming  unto  me; 
for  1  will  promote  thee  unto  very  great  honour,  and  I 
wiU  do  whatsoever  thou  sayest  unto  me :  come  therefore, 
I  pray  thee,  curse  me  this  people."  Balaam  then,  partly 
with  the  cunning  which  seeks  to  make  the  best  terms, 
partly  also  held  contrary  to  his  own  thoughts  by  God's 
hand,  says,  "  If  Balak  would  give  me  his  house  full  of 
silver  and  gold,  I  cannot  go  beyond  the  word  of  Je- 
hovah my  God,  to  do  less  or  more.  Now  therefore,  I  pray 
you,  tarry  ye  also  here  this  night,  that  I  may  know  what 
Jehovah  will  say  unto  me  more."  But  even  here  Balaam 
proves  that  all  his  talk  about  God  was  a  mere  pretence, 
and  that  there  could  be  no  reality  of  faith,  or  he  would 


-       "MPI    ■■■■LJ  -— <-  — ■    ■  _J       ^    ■«     rf    •■•1   '  


-1=  — 'i  n:i:     ^mM.-. 


^  -ziiia  "^Tz:  ".i^  JLc:  — ^~  :-:zisnis 


^r       riini-i    ...it    -    ...-ill    -   't       '..LJ."^   -US     .Tn     'linii 


-111  -  ■  ■*^-'  -Ti^r  ^r  T^-r?  .-::c5£rtrr  ^f  ^ruiionsiv 

"-5S  :-.-ii--. .^    — u    — s  ..'J  _:    _T*  -  .ce     :  ".lie  ^lorious 

:     -.-X  .-•  ji:-?  V'jiri.       ir  -.-.u     r*?a   _=%::r'.ti'^  "old  rhac 
-^  -T-T5  n. c  T."   .  -:r*5^  :^'r  .•^jKfL't.     iz  ~.   . -r*s>  T^em :  vet 

irse  T.i.Jse  A'ri'jtii   .-■-•*x   .iuc m   .-•rsfs!.      rh:*r?  was 

r»qir    -..li  row  ^-.vvs  ^iv^  ^m  :.- ^     ^^  .r -ij^r*     If  he 

v^mp*!,    --iiiz  *:zi=  li  :mi  :r^e  _:'.  nu .?  _:i:i^e  iizl-^c  viain; 

'!'''.-:c;h  ■V;r!  ..ail  -jiii  'ne  man  :a;i£  '^ita  ^^vr^iiL  :j  be 


NUMBERS  XXIL-XXXVL  391 

^aorant^  and  the  man  that  was  self-willed  to  go  and  do 
his  own  will,  there  was  an  expressed  and  solemn  warn- 
ing to  the  prophet  that  he  was  flying  in  the  fieice  of 
God.  (Compare  verses  12  and  22.) 

Then  follows  that  incident  of  which  the  New  Testa- 
ment takes  notice  in  2  Peter  ii.,  which  I  trust  no  one 
here  will  ever  allow  the  smallest  breath  of  suspicion  to 
sully.  In  truth  the  means  employed  were,  as  always, 
exactly  suited  in  divine  wisdom  to  the  casa  I  grant 
you  it  is  not.  a  usual  thing  for  God  to  make  a  dumb 
ass  speak ;  but  were  these  circumstances  usual  ?  Was 
there  not  something  awfully  humiliating  in  such  a  brute 
being  the  rebuker  of  the  guilty  prophet?  But  this 
very  fact  was  most  significant — ^that  it  was  an  ass  which 
rebuked  a  man  not  wanting  in  natural  intelligence,  and 
soon  the  vessel  of  the  most  beautiful  declarations  on 
God's  part,  but  not  before  the  brute  that  he  rode  warned 
him  of  his  ibUy  and  sin.     On  this  1  need  not  dilate. 

The  prophet  then  was  permitted  to  know  in  the  fullest 
possible  manner,  from  the  angel  of  Jehovah  himself, 
wherefore  it  was  that  ail  these  obstructions  were  put  in 
his  way.  How  gracious  of  God  thus  to  make  a  man 
-who  was  hurrying  on  to  destruction  pause  and  think, 
if  anything  could  rouse  him  I  But  no,  he  was  com- 
mitted to  wicked  ways.  Lawlessness  must  pursue  its 
miserable  course  to  an  end  no  less  miserable. 

However  he  goes  and  he  meets  with  Balak,  who 
takes  him  to  Kirjath-Huzoth.  "And  Balak  oflered 
oxen  and  sheep,  and  sent  to  Balaam,  and  to  the  princes 
that  were  with  him.  And  it  came  to  pass  on  the 
morrow,  that  Balak  took  Balaam,  and  brought  him  up 
into  the  high  places  of  Baal,  that  thence  he  might  see 


;^ft2  LBCTUBEa  osr  tedl  fcstateuch. 

fih^,  ntmrvit  part  of  the  people.*  (Chap,  xxii  40,  4L) 
''And  f^alaam  said  unto  Balak,  Build  me  heie  aerei 
^far^,  and  prepare  me  here  seven  oxen  and  seven  niniL 
A  Tif[  f^lak  did  2a  Balaam  had  spoken ;  and  Balak  ud 
tWih^rn  ottered  on  every  altar  a  bullock  and  a  nm. 
And  J>alaam  said  unto  Balak,  Stand  by  thy  bmni* 
fifffiririg,  afid  T  will  go:  peradventure  Jehovah  will  oome 
to  uimi  Trio :  and  whatsoever  He  sheweth  me  I  will  teU 
tlion.  And  he  went  to  an  high  place."  And  there  agih 
Fildliim*  iiR*ots  Balaam,  when  he  sajrs,  "Ihaveprqpmd 
BPVPti  altars,  and  I  have  offered  upon  eveiy  iltir  a 
httllook  and  a  ram.  And  Jehovah  put  a  word  ia 
UidantuV  month,  and  said.  Return  unto  Balik,  azid  dm 
thon  phalt  s|VAk/'  ^Chaiv  xxiii  1-5,) 

And  w-xMuiorful  is  the  word  that  w^as  ^Msken.  "  Came, 
onrs^i  nto  Ja^vK"     W*hon  he  takes  up  his  paz&hk  he 

lT,;i^  xi^^  tJvr*  w.vrd  .^:  B^&k  tc  iizc.  Hr  ^rabac.  'How 
^W ^  1  o«;r^  >«>svT^  vr,vi  >#j*ti  isoi  rsssed  •  cc  how daH 
;  .V->  ^Hv?^  ♦'^^V'^y  >Ari  :d.-c  oe&ed  Far  iran. mt 
^Y-  >■  -V  >v"^V:?  I  ^KHc  fcnt  «j£  frDiL  iht  nils  I  behoiA 
v.-w     v-v  rV  rvxv^V  s^-iC  ♦t^^'iCl  &lLiii&  ani.  sbaLnic  he 


NUMBERS  XXIL- XXXVI.  393 

end  be  like  his!"  That  is,  he  states  in  the  most 
explicit  manner  the  great  and  certainly  fundamental 
privil^e  of  Israel — that  they  were  a  nation  called  out 
to  be  alone  with  and  for  Jehovah.  This  is  the  basis  of 
all  their  blessing.  They  were  unlike  aU  the  rest  of  the 
world  in  this,  that  they  were  set  apart  to.  be  with  Jeho- 
vah, the  true  Elohim. 

Afterwards  comes  another  message ;  for  this  is  com- 
paratively abstract,  and  the  further  demand  of  Balak 
brings  out  successively  with  ever-increasing  clearness 
the  special  blessedness  of  the  people,  as  far  as  God  was 
pleased  to  make  it  known.*  He  does  not  say  whom 
he  is  to  meet ;  and  it  seems  to  me  that  the  true  force  of 
the  verse  is  best  reached  by  leaving  it  in  the  vague 
mystery  which  such  an  elliptical  phrase  conveys. 
Balaam  knew  weU  whom  he  was  used  to  meet.  At 
the  least  he  could  not  but  have  suspicions,  for  there 
never  is  a  person  who  honours  a  demon  as  the  true 
Grod  that  has  peaceful  confidence  of  heart.  Is  it  possible 
to  confide  in  a  demon  ?  There  may  be  perhaps  a  hazy 
dim  idea  which  people  do  not  like  thoroughly  to  grasp 
or  understand.  That  is  in  substance  what  natural 
religion  or  superstition  amounts  to.  They  leave  souls 
always  at  a  distance  from  God,  with  a  sort  of  striving 
and  searching  after  God,  but  in  fact  under  some  delusion 
of  the  adversary.  In  Balaam's  case  there  was  even 
more  than  this,  because  he  was  tampering  continually 
with  secret  power  in  order  to  gain  influence  over  others, 
but  as  deliberately  against  God's  people  as  for  himself, 

♦  "We  must  carefuUy  remember  that  the  word  "  Jehovah,"  printed 
in  italics,  has  no  right  to  a  place  in  verse  15.  **  And  he  said  unto 
Balak,  Stand  here  hj  thy  burnt-offering  whiU  I  meet  yonder" 


crrT-TTTT     r 


.jees  2.n;i;trn      -Icfinriraft  Toac  ^^rva  :3e  iimiiii  ^viur 

iir   -JKH.    ne   Tnraa   'Ta  TiPfiE." 


-earsc2.  .:zid  oft.  :3i2ii  i«3iL  r  Jliipor:  ^Itinnn  la  3Dr  a 
Tiaa.  'OJS  le-  ^fioiiiLi  licr:  iieEiier  "ae  -^el  •!  'imir  doff 
le-  -io:ii-l  r?*:-eEr :     ■^'^-    ^  -JUiL  .imi  ^hail  lie-  oot  Jo  x? 

Tie  .t2£ria-;T*  .5  :a  toj*  zucse  Tsrie  ••t  !:febrew^  Toverr. 

ir-w  -VR  _iT?^  'Hi*  "eeDLe-  c   r:ni  'SB  ooTeerot  izaonec 
cimiiiiEiLazi-as    r^iii    ^.nj^     I«  .3  luc  j-nir  "iat  diejr 

TCjLirL   Ij^t   jcs  Hi^^^stL  usair  .ronL  j1  jiinibr  Tannn^i 

ui  iiij'v  ;j:f  ^Dt^oAkA  :o  :zem»  j£e--;czixxxixzzi:j;aGE9k  3e  jptmff 

liis   -iina  .mi  .  ear:  "o  rniiaL:   anL  vcuc  la  X5  pnipuir ' 

Less  ■  -nd  je  .uicii  :ies5ed-.  imi  I  :amxi>r  rwn^ae  it 
Ztr  'zicri  Jiou  .efleiii  -Tir-riiiiy  n.  ^;icoa  TP*rtier  'lath  j» 
^eec  ■'ef'THrseEtees  _n:  I*i3fci  reiLOvad  Jia  Scthim  is 
TTiii  " —  -nd  -tie'  'Clth  >i  k  TTtt^  is-  wwuht  :heiL 
ZI:  11112.  JTroiTi^  "dtsi  'Hr  'f  Zz^mr.*  I^ '3uid  dsrncs 
'T.at  lie  ised  md  rhe  dlnsioicr  vre  lil  Ji  dm  xrnsesc 

*^:iranre'  ink.*e.  )iLr  usniiL*!  ;iiKnn!aiioii  §bc  3ira. 
Ir  Li  jju^  m  nitf  ^imd  11  :iie  inu»  Trhiuii  ^usimiis 

GrmI  :»iud  ^£kil  -n*>?n    lA^^.iTtiin^r  jj  -^ic  -vimilL  "rift 

dusiL  ^presL  3nw  viuEC:  Hk  "avaiud  onus  ^uisaL 


/^' 


NUMBERS  xxn.-xxxvL  395 

to  be  through  the  Saviour.  This  is  what  is  before  His 
mind  It  is  plain  that  justification  is  altogether  im- 
possible for  sinners,  unless  there  be  the  blotting  out  of 
what  they  are,  and  the  bringing  in  what  they  are  not. 
How  can  these  things  be  ?  It  is  through  another  alone 
that  there  can  be  justification.  Thus  only  God  "  hath 
not  beheld  iniquity  in  Jacob."  It  is  not  that  He  denies 
it;  nor  that  there  was  no  iniquity  on  their  part,  for 
indeed  there  was.  "Neither  hath  he  seen  perverseness  in 
Israel"  It  is  a  question  of  what  He  looks  at.  "Jehovah 
his  Elohim  is  with  him,  and  the  shout  of  a  King  is 
among  them." 

Of  course  the  time  was  not  yet  come  to  develope  how 
this  could  be.  Not  till  long  after  was  the  mighty  work 
done  by  which  alone  it  is  possible ;  but  we  have  the 
bold  announcement,  as  far  as  it  would  have  been  proper 
to  have  expressed  it  by  the  lips  of  one  that  was  an 
utter  stranger  to  all  in  race  as  in  heart ;  and  we  have 
it  so  much  the  more  gloriously  expressed,  because  it  is 
simply  given  in  its  great  principle  by  one  who  could  see 
the  ineflfable  blessedness  of  it  without  knowing  in  the 
least  the  experience  of  its  comfort  for  his  own  soul.  In 
God's  wisdom  he  was  just  the  man  to  declare  even  to 
the  enemy  that  it  is  entirely  a  question  of  what  He  has 
wrought,  not  in  any  way  of  Israel's  doings  or  deserts. 
"  Surely  there  is  no  enchantment  against  Jacob,  neither 
is  there  any  divination  against  Israel ;  according  to  this 
time  it  shall  be  said  of  Jacob  and  of  Israel,  What  hath 
God  wrought  I  Behold,  the  people  shall  rise  up  as  a 
great  lion,  and  lift  up  himself  as  a  yoimg  lion ;  he  shall 
not  lie  down  until  he  eat  of  ,the  prey,  and  drink  the 
blood  of  the  slain,"  (Compare  chap.  xxiv.  9.) 


396       LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Balak  was  incensed;  nevertheless  he  resolves  to  try 
another  time.  ''And  when  Balaam  saw  that  it  pleased 
Jehovah,"  we  are  told  in  the  beginning  of  chapter  xxiv., 
"  he  went  not,  as  at  other  times,  to  seek  for  enchant* 
ments/'  This  again  entirely  confirms  the  remark  that 
was  made  in  the  previous  chapter  as  to  what  he  went 
to  meet.  "  He  went  not,  as  at  other  times,  to  seek  for 
enchantments,  but  he  set  his  face  toward  the  wilder- 
ness. And  Balaam  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  he  saw  Israel 
abiding  in  his  tents  according  to  their  tribes ;  and  the 
spirit  of  God  came  upon  himu"  Thus  when  we  have 
any  object  completely  cleared  before  God  from  all 
question  of  sin,  it  is  not  His  way  to  rest  there.  As 
we  know,  for  the  Christian  there  follows  freedom, 
entirely  apart  from  what  he  was,  to  enter  into  positive 
enjoyment  both  of  the  place  of  blessing  in  which  he 
stands,  and  of  God  Himself  now  truly  known  in  Christ. 
Justification  is  always  a  taking  account  of  what  we 
were,  though  a  bringing  us  out  of  it ;  but  when  that  is 
seen  in  its  completeness,  then  we  can  go  out  into  all  the 
ways  of  God*s  grace.  And  so  it  is  here.  The  new  word 
of  Jehovah  has  another  character,  and  is  introduced 
therefore  in  a  manner  such  as  to  mark  its  entire  dis* 
tinctness  from  the  previous  words  given  to  the  prophet 

''And  he  took  up  his  parable,  and  said,  Balaam  the  son 
of  Beor  hath  said,  and  the  man  whose  eyes  are  opened 
hath  said :  he  hath  said,  which  heard  the  words  of  God, 
which  saw  the  vision  of  the  Almighty,  falling  into  a 
trance,  but  having  his  eyes  open :  How  goodly  are  thy 
tents,  0  Jacob,  and  thy  tabernacles,  0  Israel!"  It 
is  the  manifest  preciousness  of  the  place  of  Israel 
which  drew  out  from  his  mouth  at  any  rate  (I  do  not 


NUMBERS  XXII.- XXXVI.  397 

say  from  his  heart)  the  expression  of  the  beauteous 
and  goodly  estate  of  the  peopla  ''  As  the  valleys  are 
they  spread  forth,  as  gardens  by  the  river's  side,  as  the 
trees  of  lign-aloes  which  Jehovah  hath  planted,  and  as 
cedar  trees  beside  the  waters.  He  shall  pour  the  water 
out  of  his  buckets,  and  his  seed  shall  be  in  many  waters, 
and  his  king  shall  be  higher  than  Agag,  and  his  king- 
dom shall  be  exalted.  God  brought  him  forth  out  of 
Egypt."  In  both  cases,  you  will  observe,  whether  it  is 
the  comparatively  negative  side  of  justification,  or  the 
positive  side  of  rich  and  joyous  blessing  with  which 
the  people  are  endowed  of  Grod,  we  have  their  bringing 
out  of  Egypt. 

Another  thought  is  striking.  Balaam  does  not  refer 
to  what  they  were  to  be  made  in  Canaan,  but  what 
God  saw  them  to  be — nay,  what  he  himself  was  per- 
mitted to  see  them  to  be  while  they  were  in  the 
wilderness.  It  is  a  wonderfully  lovely  picture  there- 
fore of  what  grace  does  for  the  Cliristian  and  the 
church  now.  For  in  virtue  of  redemption  and  Christ's 
entrance  into  heavenly  glory,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
sent  down,  in  spite  of  aU  that  is  in  this  world,  in  spite 
of  what  has  been  justly  designated  the  ruined  state  of 
the  church  here  below,  we  are  entitled  always  to  take 
delight  in  the  real  beauty  of  God*s  children  and  assem- 
bly even  now.  No  doubt  it  is  a  vision  only  for  faith ; 
but  it  is  a  vision  not  for  eyes  shut,  but  for  eyes  open,  as 
it  is  said  here.  Certainly,  it  is  no  illusion,  no  heated 
human  imagination  of  what  they  are  going  to  be.  It 
is  what  God  sees,  and  delights  to  give  us  to  see  by 
faith,  in  His  people  here  below.  Of  course  it  was 
Israel,  but  the  same  principle  is  just  as  true,  I  need  not 


398       LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

say,  and  really  with  yet  greater  force,  in  the  case  of  the 
Christian. 

The  still  stronger  terms,  in  the  earlier  vision  of 
chapter  xxiv.,  which  Balaam  uses  in  speaking  of  the 
power  with  which  God  would  invest  them,  bring  Balak's 
anger  to  a  head ;  and  he  smites  his  hands  together,  and 
says,  "  I  called  thee  to  curse  mine  enemies,  and,  behold, 
thou  hast  altogether  blessed  them  these  three  times." 
We  must  remember  that  in  all  this  Balaam  was  no 
more  able  to  resist  the  power  of  God  which  wrought  on 
and  by  him  than  Balaam's  ass  could  hold  its  peace 
before.  We  must  not  suppose  that  there  was  the 
smallest  measure  of  real  sympathy  with  what  God  was 
doing.  The  whole  transaction  was  one  of  God's  power, 
in  spite  of  all  that  could  be  done  against  His  people, 
and  this  because  God  would  confound  the  enemy  which 
resorted  to  Satan's  power  in  order  to  bring  a  curse  on 
IsraeL  This  it  was  to  which  God  in  sovereign  grace  re- 
sponded in  so  grand  an  expression  of  their  blessedness, 
and  from  a  quarter  so  unlocked  for. 

But  one  supreme  effort  remains  as  far  as  cursing  is 
concerned.  Accordingly  Balak  tells  Balaam  now  to  be- 
gone, taunting  him  with  the  honour  and  wealth  he  had 
meant  to  give,  from  which  Jehovah,  he  adds,  had  kept  him 
back.  But  the  prophet  seems  neither  won  by  desire  for 
his  bribes,  nor  afraid  of  the  king's  power.  "  If  Balak," 
says  he,  "would  give  me  his  house  full  of  silver  and 
gold,  I  cannot  go  beyond  the  commandment  of  Jehovah, 
to  do  either  good  or  bad  of  mine  own  mind ;  but  what 
Jehovah  saith,  that  will  I  speak.  And  now,  behold,  I 
go  unto  my  people :  come  therefore,  and  I  will  advertise 
thee  what  this  people  shall  do  to  thy  people  in  the  latter 
days."    It  really  eHi\«»ii^i«a  >3DL<5i  ^ii^  ^1  thia  a^e. 


NUMBERS  xxn.-xxxvi.  399 

Thus  in  the  face  of  the  king's  threats,  of  what  might 
have  seemed  to  be  his  own  interests,  Balaam  after  all  was 
compelled  to  give  another  and  a  conclusive  word  from 
Jehovah,  and  this  without  going  to  meet  ...  or  Jeho- 
vah's meeting  him.  It  is  what  He  said  and  commanded. 
Here  there  is  not  only  the  tide  of  Shaddai  (Almighty), 
as  in  the  former  prophecy,  but  of  Elion  (the  Most  High), 
who  would  dispose  of  the  world  as  He  pleased  in  view 
of  His  purposed  judgment  of  the  earth  of  and  for  His 
people;  and  here  the  prophet  speaks  unasked  of  the 
king.  It  is  Jehovah  all  through,  though  care  is  taken 
to  shew  that  He  is  Elohim,  and  in  suited  connexion 
Shaddai  and  Elion.  **  And  he  took  up  his  parable,  and 
said,  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor  hath  said,  and  the  man 
whose  eyes  are  open  hath  said :  he  hath  said,  which 
heard  the  words  of  God,  and  knew  the  knowledge  of 
the  most  High,  which  saw  the  -vdsion  of  the  Almighty, 
falling  into  a  trance,  but  having  his  eyes  open :  I  shall 
see  him,  but  not  now:  I  shall  behold  him,  but  not 
nigh."  Solemn  words  these  which  pronounce  the  man's 
own  condemnation  of  his  own  souL  How  little  it  was  a 
question  of  will  or  heart  1  **  I  shall  see  him,  but  not 
now :  I  shall  behold  him,  but  not  nigh :  there  shall 
come  a  Star  out  of  Jacob,  and  a  Sceptre  shall  rise  out 
of  Israel,  and  shall  smite  the  comers  of  Moab,  and 
destroy  all  the  children  of  Sheth.  And  Edom  shall  be 
a  possession,  Seir  also  shall  be  a  possession  for  his 
enemies;  and  Israel  shall  do  valiantly.  Out  of  Jacob 
shall  come  he  that  shall  have  dominion,  and  shall 
destroy  him  that  remaineth  of  the  city." 

Even  when  he  looks  at  Amalek  too,  he  goes  farther 
and  pronounces  the  sure  doom  of  those  that  had  assailed 


400       LECTCBSS  OS   THE  FESTATEUCH. 

the  people  in  the  wildemesa.  **  Amalek  was  the  first 
of  the  nations,  bat  his  latter  end  shall  be  that  he 
perish  for  ever."  Then,  looking  on  the  Kenites;,  he  says, 
"Strong  is  thy  dwelling-plaoe,  and  thou  pattest  thy 
nest  in  a  rock.  Nevertheless  the  Kenite  shall  be 
wasted,  antil  Asshar  shall  carry  thee  away  captive." 
Bat  what  about  victorioas  Asshar?  ^ And  he  took  ap 
his  parable,  and  said,  Alas,  who  shall  live  when  Qod 
doeth  this !  And  ships  shall  come  from  the  coast  of 
Chittim,  and  shall  afflict  Asshar."  Thus  it  does  not 
matter  wheth^  it  be  western  powers  or  eastern,  whether 
the  adversaries  be  many  or  few,  with  what  resources  nor 
from  what  quarter.  Amalek  may  be  the  £rst  of  nations, 
and  Asshur  bid  fair  to  be  last ;  yet  affliction  comes  to 
Asshur  and  Eber ;  "  and  he  also  shall  perish  for  ever." 
It  is  the  day  of  Immanuel,  not  of  David  or  the  Mac- 
cabees.   Jehovah  alone  shall  be  exalted  in  that  day. 

Thus  the  intended  curse  of  Balaam  was  turned  into 
the  most  magnificent  utterance  of  blessing  ever  pro- 
nounced on  the  people  of  God,  stretching  down  to  the 
latter  days  when  Israel  shall  be  exalted  under  the  Most 
High  God,  the  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth. 

Who  would  not  trust  such  a  God,  and  such  revela- 
tions of  His  mind  and  will?  Who  would  not  have 
confidence  in  the  One  who  turns  the  bitterest  and  most 
subtle  of  enemies  only  the  more  powerfully  to  prove 
what  God's  people  are  to  Himself,  and  how  vain  the 
efibrts  of  their  worst  foes  ? 

In  chapter  xxv.  we  see  a  very  difiTerent  state  of  things 
among  men,  but  the  same  God  over  alL  Snares  are  set 
by  Moab  under  Balaam's  counsel,  yet  all  their  subtlety 


NUMBERS  XXn.-XXXVL  401 

could  not  turn  God  from  Israel.  Balaam  (as  we  know, 
although  it  be  not  explained  here  but  elsewhere)  gives 
the  enemy  his  cunning  advice^  and  all  at  first  goes  on 
successfully.  If  he  could  not  turn  God  from  Israel, 
could  he  not  turn  Israel  from  God  ?  Midianitish  women 
become  the  instrument  of  seduction.  This  sorrowful 
occasion  brings  out  now,  not  God  causing  an  enemy  to 
manifest  what  He  is  for  His  people,  but  Phinehas  the 
priest  roused  with  holy  indignation,  and  executing  judg- 
ment on  the  guilty  pair  in  the  face  of  a  plague  which 
fell  on  the  people  in  these  very  circumstances.  Phinehas 
accordingly  has  the  covenant  of  an  everlasting  priest- 
hood secured  to  him  and  to  his  seed  because  he  was 
zealous  for  his  God,  and  made  an  atonement  for  the 
children  of  Israel 

There  is  after  this  (chap,  xxvi.)  a  fresh  numbering  of 
the  men  of  Israel  in  view  of  going  to  war.  They  were 
now  on  the  borders  of  the  holy  land;  and  the  same 
grace  of  God  which  took  account  of  every  one  of  His 
people  when  they  entered  the  wilderness  gives  evidence 
that  His  love  was  imabated,  and  His  personal  interest 
the  same  to  the  end.  There  was  all  that  could  have 
turned  Him  aside,  had  it  been  possible.  Without  this 
there  would  have  been  merely  the  taking  in  the  people 
as  a  whole;  but  here  He  gives  this  witness  of  what  they 
were,  every  one  of  them,  to  Himself;  for  He  loves  to 
convince  His  people  of  His  unwavering  love,  spite  of 
failure  on  their  part. 

There  is  only  one  remark  that  I  need  make  now 
on  the  persons  that  are  enumerated  here,  but  it  is  one 
of  great  interest,  as  it  appears  to  me.  The  most  solemn 
judgment  recorded  in  the  book  of  Numbers  was  that  of 

2  D 


402        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Eorab  with  his  company  in  the  awful  scene  where 
Jehovah  created  a  new  thing,  and  the  earth  opened  her 
mouth  and  swallowed  them  up  aliva  The  children  of 
Dathan,  Abiram,  and  the  rest,  were  all  swaUowed  up ; 
but>  wonderful  to  say,  there  was  an  exemption.  Where 
was  it  ?  some  particularly  faithful  person,  who  had  the 
unhappiness  to  be  nearly  associated  with  them  ?  Not 
at  alL  The  exception  of  grace  was  in  the  household  of 
the  very  worst  of  them.  The  people  who  deserved  least 
of  all,  as  man  would  have  thought,  to  be  exempted 
from  destruction  were  precisely  those  for  whom  Grod 
did  reserve  this  special  grace — the  sons  of  Korah ! — of 
Korah  the  leader  and  organiser  of  the  apostasy,  from 
his  position  as  well  as  in  his  conduct,  above  all  others 
most  guilty !  The  sons  of  Korah  were  the  objects  of  a 
most  singular  deliverance.  Is  not  this  the  true  grace  of 
Godi  It  is  the  same  God  whom  we  now  know,  the 
same  God  from  first  to  last  Grace  is  no  new  thing 
with  Him ;  but  where  can  you  find  a  finer  sample  of  its 
power  and  superiority  to  all  circumstances  than  in  the 
distinguishing  grace  that  saved  from  destruction  the 
children  of  gainsaying  Korah,  the  most  infamous  of  those 
who  had  conspired  against  the  types  of  Christ's  royalty 
and  priesthood ;  namely,  Moses  and  Aaron  ?  Nothing 
can  be  more  explicit  than  the  information  here :  "  The 
earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  swallowed  them  up  together 
with  Korah,  when  that  company  died,  what  time  the 
fire  devoured  two  hundred  and  fifty  men:  and  they 
became  a  sign.  Notwithstanding  the  children  of  Korah 
died  not." 

Further,  this  is,  I  think,  an  important  key  to  the 
book  of  Psalms.     Every  attentive  reader  will  have 


NUMBEKS  XXII.- XXXVI.  403 

noticed  that  the  second  of  the  five  divisions  of  the 
Psalms  gives  us  at  its  beginning  psabns  entitled,  "  For 
the  sons  of  Korah."  (Pss.  xlii-xlix.) *  These  mean  the 
descendants  of  the  men  in  question.  And  who  were  so 
fit  to  have  such  psalms  and  songs  as  the  sons  of  Korah  ? 
What  state  does  the  second  book  of  Psalms  suppose  ? 
Assuredly  as  a  whole  days  of  future  apostasy  and  the 
sorest  trouble  that  the  Jews  will  ever  pass  through.  It 
is  the  last  and  greatest  tribulation.  It  is  the  time  when 
the  mass  of  the  nation  will  have  completely  cast  off  the 
true  God  and  rejected  His  grace — will  have  abandoned 
His  truth,  and  lost  themse^lves  in  losing  it.  To  this  fiery 
trial  it  is  that  these  psalms  apply.  And  no  doubt 
what  was  at  the  beginning  of  their  history  will  be 
re-enacted,  and  more,  at  the  end.  In  the  midst  of  a  con- 
dition guilty  indeed,  and  in  the  nearest  connection  with 
those  most  guilty,  God  will  reserve  a  remnant — not 
more  surely  the  children  of  Korah  in  the  wUdemess 
than  a  band  not  unworthy  of  the  name,  and  witnesses 
of  no  less  grace  from  God  in  the  last  crisis.  These 
psalms  will  be  suited  for  those  morally  in  similar  cir- 
cumstances, and  delivered  by  the  very  same  grace  of 
God.  Thus,  we  see,  whether  it  be  law  or  psalms  or 
prophets,  whether  it  be  the  gospel  or  the  kingdom  then, 
it  is  with  the  God  of  all  grace  that  we  have  to  do. 

To  the  end  of  this  chapter  the  account  is  given  of  the 
numbering.  « 

In  the  next  chapter  (xxvii.)  there  is  an  incident 
of  considerable  interest  which  illustrates  the  tender 
thoughtfulness  of  God.  "  Then  came  the  daughters  of 
Zelophehad,  the  son  of  Hepher,  the  son  of  Gilead,  the 

*  Some  few  foUow  in  book  iii.  (Pss.  IzzziT.-IsxxTiu.) 

2  D  2       . 


404       LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

son  of  Machir,  the  son  of  Manasseh,  of  the  families  of 
Manasseh  the  son  of  Joseph :  and  these  are  the  names  of 
his  daughters;  Mahlah,  Noah^  and  Hoglah^  and  Milcahi 
and  Tirzah.  And  they  stood  before  Moses^  and  before 
Eleazar  the  priest,  and  before  the  princes  and  all  the 
congregation,  by  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  con- 
gregation,  saying,  Our  father  died  in  the  wilderness,  and 
he  was  not  in  the  company  of  them  that  gathered  them' 
selves  together  against  Jehovah  in  the  company  of 
Korah;  but  died  in  his  own  sin,  and  had  no  sons.  Why 
should  the  name  of  our  father  be  done  away  from  among 
his  family,  because  he  hath  no  son  V*  There  was  no  son 
left.  This  was  a  case  which  had  not  yet  arisen ;  but  as 
we  see  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad  counted  on  God, 
and  not  in  vain.  It  is  impossible  for  God  to  be  like 
poor  man,  who  says,  "You  expect  more  good  than  I 
am  prepared  to  bestow."  God  could  not  make  such  an 
answer.  He  always  gives  more.  Whatever  may  be  the 
petition  of  faith,  the  answer  of  grace  never  fails  to  go 
beyond  it.  And  so  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad  have 
their  place  secured  to  them  in  the  goodness  of  God, 
though  outside  the  usual  routine  of  law. 

Further,  Jehovah  after  this  intimates  to  Moses  to 
ascend  Mount  Abarim  and  see  the  land,  and  he  is  to 
be  gathered  to  his  people.  This  leads  also  to  the  ap- 
pointment of  another.  There  is  this  to  be  noticed  in 
the  appointment  of  Joshua,  that  he  no  less  than  Moses 
is  a  type  of  Christ,  but  with  a  distinct  difference 
between  the  two.  Joshua  sets  forth  the  Captain  of 
Salvation,  and  this  answers  to  Christ;  but  it  is  no 
longer  Christ  after  the  flesh:  He  is  not  viewed  as  a 
Jewish  Messiah,  blessed  as  this  may  be.    For  Christ 


NUMBEES  XXIL-XXXVL  405 

is  a  great  deal  more  than  MessiaL  After  His  rejection 
on  the  earth,  when  it  was  no  longer  a  question  of  pre- 
sentation to  Israel  as  their  King,  Christ  then  acts  in 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  being  no  more  present  in 
a  bodily  manner.  Joshua  represents  this.  It  is  Christ, 
no  doubt,  but  Christ  acting  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit, 
not  Christ  in  flesh  connected  with  the  promises  and 
the  hopes  of  Israel  This  type  is  what  we  see  here ;  it 
is  developed  in  detail  elsewhere.  But  even  one  feature 
should  not  be  passed  by.  When  Moses  was  leading  the 
people,  he  acted  alone ;  but  when  Joshua  leads  them,  it 
is  said,  "  He  shall  stand  before  Eleazar  the  priest,  who 
shall  ask  counsel  for  him  after  the  judgment  of  Urim 
before  Jehovah."  How  does  this  apply  to  Christ  ?  It 
might  seem  a  difficulty,  but  in  reality  it  confirms  the 
application  which  has  just  been  made;  because  we  know 
that,  while  the  people  are  led  to  take  possession  of  the 
holy  land,  their  privilege  now  is  to  cross  the  Jordan, 
and  enter  into  those  blessings  with  which  they  are 
blessed  in  heavenly  places.  Observe  then  here  is  the 
connection  of  Christ  acting  thus  by  the  Spirit  with  His 
position  as  Priest.  At  the  very  same  time  that  we  are 
entering  into  our  heavenly  blessings  by  the  power  of 
the  Spirit,  we  also  have  Christ  as  Priest  in  the  presence 
of  God.  With  Moses  we  find  no  such  state  of  things. 
He  was  never  told  to  stand  before  the  priest.  Aaron 
might  speak  rather  than  Moses,  for  he  could  speak  welL 
Other  duties  he  discharged,  but  nothing  at  all  answer- 
ing to  this:  so  admirably  does  God  watch  over  and 
shape  and  fashion  all  these  types  to  impress  the  full 
truth  on  our  souls.  In  Christ's  case,  of  course  He  was 
Jlimself  head  of  the  church,  to  work  by  the  Spirit  of 


406        LEGTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

God  in  us;  but  besides  He  is  the  great  High  Priest. 
He  unites  the  two  functions.  They  must  necessarily 
be  two  different  individuals  in  the  type,  but  the  great 
Antitype  combines  them. 

In  chapters  xxviii  xxix.  we  have  a  somewhat  dif- 
ficult and  certainly  a  very  different  exposd  of  the  feasts 
and  sacrifices  from  that  which  we  found  elsewhera  But 
all  is  easy  to  those  who  bear  in  mind  the  distinctive 
theme  of  the  book  It  is  not  merely,  as  was  noticed, 
pilgrimage  through  the  wilderness.  This  it  is,  but  it 
comprises  the  earth  also.  In  short  the  earth  is  the 
scene ;  and  to  us  the  wilderness.  But  the  earth  will  not 
be  always  the  wilderness.  This  is  an  important  remark 
to  make  in  order  to  understand  Numbers.  For  there  is  a 
time  coming  when  that  which  is  now  a  wilderness  will 
no  doubt  still  be  the  earth  for  the  people  of  God  on  it, 
but  it  will  be  no  longer  the  chequered  place  of  trial  and 
sorrow  which  it  is  now.  If  we  hold  fast  this  fact>  the 
application  of  these  two  chapters  will  be  rendered  more 
easy. 

First  of  all  we  have  the  general  offering.  There  is 
the  sweet  savour  of  Christ  arising  continually,  in  which 
God  regards  his  people  on  the  earth.  It  is  the  Lamb 
of  God  who  invests  all  that  are  His  with  His  own 
acceptance  before  God.  This  is  what  was  meant  by 
the  daily  lambs,  but  there  is  much  more  than  this.  It 
is  said,  '^  And  on  the  sabbath-day  two  lambs  of  the  first 
year  without  spot,  and  two-tenth  deals  of  flour  for  a 
meat-offering."  This  clearly  goes  on  to  the  rest  of  (Jod, 
of  which  the  sabbath  is  always  the  well-knowii  figure. 
When  it  comes,  the  only  difference  will  be  that  the 
testimony  to  the  value  of  Christ  will  be  more  widely 


NUMBEES  xxn.-xxxvL  407 

spread  and  fuller.  God  will  never  fail  in  causing  the 
testimony  to  Christ's  sweet  savour  to  rise  before  Him. 
Christianity  has  brought  it  out  in  its  very  depths ;  but 
then  it  is  a  thing  only  known  to  the  believer  on  the 
one  hand,  and  to  God  on  the  other.  But  when  the  sab- 
bath dawns  on  the  earth,  the  true  sabbath  of  Jehovah 
in  all  its  meaning,  there  will  be  a  public  witness  of  it 
all  over  the  world  that  cannot  be  mistaken.  This  seems 
referred  to  in  the  doubling  of  the  lamb.  It  is  the  idea 
of  the  rest  of  God  contrasted  with  the  time  of  working 
which  precedes  the  rest  (as,  e,g.,  in  the  present  time). 
"  There  remaineth  therefore  a  rest  (or  a  sabbath-keep- 
ing) for  the  people  of  God."  The  time  of  the  true  rest 
is  not  yet  come.  Observe,  it  does  not  mean  the  i-est  we 
have  got  for  our  souls  by  faith.  We  must  always  guard 
against  that  common  misapprehension.  It  is  quite  true 
that  we  have  rest  now  in  Christ  for  the  conscience  and 
the  heart ;  but  this  is  not  the  meaning  of  Heb.  iv.  It  is 
rather  the  rest  of  glory  for  the  people  of  God  and  for 
the  world,  when  there  will  be  this  diffused  testimony. 

Then  comes  "  the  beginnings  of  your  months."  This 
is  peculiar  to  Numbers,  being  found  in  no  other  book  of 
the  Pentateuch.  The  reason  seems  to  be  that  it  is 
essentially  bound  up  with  the  wilderness  types  of 
Israel — their  experiences  and  changes  as  a  people  on 
earth.  ''  In  the  beginnings  of  your  months,"  that  is,  at 
the  new  moon,  when  there  was  the  shining  forth  again 
of  that  which  had  waned  away.  Such  a  type  in  no 
way  suits  the  church  which  is  called  during  Israel's 
darkness  after  the  light  waned  and  before  it  shines  again. 
"  And  in  the  beginnings  of  your  months  ye  shall  oflfer  a 
bumt-oflfering  unto  Jehovah ;  two  young  bullocks,  and 


408  LfiCTUBKS  OK  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

one  ram,  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year  without  spot," 
with  their  appropriate  meat-offerings  and  drink-offer- 
ings. There  is  represented  here  the  largest  form  of 
setting  forth  Christ  offered  to  Grod  in  the  bullock,  with 
the  idea  of  energy  of  devotedness  to  Grod,  and  this  too 
in  that  adequacy  of  testimony  which  ''two"  represents. 
The  sheep  or  the  lower  forms  indicate,  I  suppose, 
Christ  appreciated  after  a  less  measure.  The  bullock 
is  the  fullest  appreciation  of  Christ.  Those  that  had 
so  long  despised  Him  will  now  acknowledge  Him  with 
so  much  the  greater  fervour  because  of  their  former 
slight.  The  Lord  graciously  takes  notice  of  this.  The 
ram  is  a  type  of  Christ  as  an  offering  of  consecration 
to  Grod ;  here  it  is  but  a  feeble  testimony — "  one  ram." 
The  "  seven  lambs"  mean  the  completeness  of  Christ's 
sweet  savour  before  GkxL  There  is  also,  as  we  know, 
the  necessary  sm^ffeiing. 

But  now  we  come  to  the  feasts.  On  the  fourteenth 
day  of  the  first  month  the  passover  is  noticed,  where 
we  have,  as  it  is  said,  two  young  bullocks,  just  the  same 
provision  as  was  laid  down  for  the  b^inning  of  months, 
the  new  moons.  Further,  in  the  case  of  the  feast  of 
weeks,  *'  in  the  day  of  the  first-firuits,  when  ye  bring  a 
new  meat-offering  unto  Jehovah"  (the  Pentecostal  offer- 
ing), there  is  a  similar  type.  "After  your  weeks  be  out^ 
ye  shall  have  a  holy  convocation;  ye  shall  do  no  servile 
work :  but  ye  shall  offer  the  burnt -offering  for  a  sweet 
savour  xmto  Jehovah;  two  young  bullocks^  one  ram, 
and  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year." 

What  brings  out  the  truth  more  distinctly  is  the 
change  we  find  in  coming  down  to  the  seventh  month. 
This  is  the  acknowledged  type  of  what  distinctively 


NUMBERS  xxn.-xxxvi.  409 

concerns  Israel — Israel  summoned  and  brought  into 
the  blessing  of  God.  Here  we  see  the  difference  very 
marked ;  for  there  is  claimed  but  "  one  yoimg  bullock, 
one  ram,  and  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year  without 
blemisL"  It  lacks  the  fulness  of  testimony  to  grace 
which  went  out  to  the  Gentile  as  well  as  the  Jew.  It 
is  but  a  single  witness  to  the  grace  that  God  is  about  to 
display  to  His  people  Israel.  It  may  include  the  largest 
form  of  appreciation,  but  still  it  is  only  a  partial  witness 
of  grace.  There  is  but  one  young  bullock — not  the  two 
found  in  the  previous  case.  So  again  the  atonement- 
day  has  just  the  same  figure :  *'  Ye  shall  have  on  the 
tenth  day  of  this  seventh  month  an  holy  convocation; 
and  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls :  ye  shall  not  do  any 
work  therein :  but  ye  shall  ofier  a  burnt -offering  imto 
the  Lord  for  a  sweet  savour;  one  young  bollock,  one 
ram,  and  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year." 

But  after  a  few  days  there  is  a  very  different  type 
brought  before  us.  "On  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  seventh 
month  ye  shall  have  an  holy  convocation ;  ye  shall  do 
no  servile  work,  and  ye  shall  keep  a  feast  unto  the  Lord 
seven  days :  and  ye  shall  offer  a  burnt-offering,  a  sacrifice 
made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  Jehovah ;  thirteen 
young  bullocks."  Now  surely  this  is  very  noticeable. 
Why  such  a  change  ?  There  is  nothing  like  it  before. 
It  is  only  when  we  come  to  the  feast  of  tabernacles 
that  this  sudden  change  appears.  Before  this  we  hear 
in  certain  circumstances  of  two  bullocks  or  one  bullock: 
here  there  are  thirteen.  Why  thirteen  1  Was  this  not 
intended  to  exeroise  our  spiritual  thought  as  to  the 
truth  of  God  1  Are  we  not  to  infer  that  it  is  the  all  but 
fullest  expression  of  Christ  known  on  the  earth  ?    It  is 


410       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

no  longer  the  preparatory  dealings.  The  first  and  the 
tenth  days  of  the  month  mean  the  preparatory  ways  of 
(rod  to  bring  the  Jewish  people  back  to  their  position 
of  witnessing  to  the  glory  of  Christ  in  the  millennium. 
But  now  they  are  in  that  position — not  in  the  prelimi- 
nary processes,  so  to  speak,  with  Grod  gradually  leading 
them  on.  Hence  now  we  read,  "Ye  shall  offer  a  burnt- 
offering,  a  sacrifice  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet  savoar  unto 
Jehovah;  thirteen  young  bullocks,  two  rams,  and  four- 
teen lambs  of  the  first  year."  The  thirteen  seems  to 
signify  that  it  is  all  but  complete,  and  the  fullest  form 
of  expressing  this ;  for  clearly  two  sevens  would  be  the 
fullest  expression  of  it  Thirteen  is  only  short  of  this; 
the  figure  approaches  completeness  to  the  utmost  Such 
is  the  type  of  the  millennium  among  the  feasts.  The 
millennium  may  not  be  perfection,  but  it  will  be  in- 
definitely near  it 

This  feast  gives  us  a  true  notion  of  that  great  day. 
It  is  false  that  there  will  be  no  sin  in  the  coming  age. 
At  the  same  time  sin  will  be  quite  exceptional  There 
will  be  a  large  effect  produced  in  honour  of  the  work 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  reconciliation  of  all  things 
according  to  Christ  and  by  His  cross  will  be  displayed 
in  a  manner  only  not  complete.  This  is  what  is  repre- 
sented by  the  feast  here. 

But  in  the  details  of  this  feast  there  is  evidence  given 
of  another  striking  &ct  It  would  appear  that  there  is 
not  preserved  adequately  the  sense  of  the  Lord's  grace 
throughout  the  millenniunL  Alas !  that  age  will  exhibit 
symptoms  of  decline,  as  we  know  firom  elsewhere  that 
at  the  end  of  it  there  will  be  a  vast  outburst  of  rebellion 
when  Satan  is  let  loose  for  a  space.    There  has  been 


NUMBERS  XXn.-XXXVL  411 

but  one  faithful  witness.  Even  in  the  millennium,  when 
Satan  no  longer  tempts,  the  solemn  fact  will  be  found 
that  there  is  no  sustainment  of  the  power  of  testimony 
with  which  they  began.  Hence,  as  we  find,  this  feast 
represents  the  whole  scene  of  the  millennial  day.  It  is 
said  that  on  the  next  day,  the  second  day,  "Ye  shall 
offer  twelve  young  bullocks;"  and  again  on  the  third 
day  eleven  bullocks ;  and  again  on  the  fourth  day  ten 
bullocks ;  and  on  the  fifth  day  nine  bullocks,  and  so 
decreasing.  Surely  all  this  not  only  has  meaning,  but 
the  meaning  points  to  the  fact  that  there  will  not  be 
the  sustainment  of  the  same  devotedness  as  at  the  first. 
Nevertheless  the  purpose  of  God  never  fails.  Hence 
therefore  we  find  that  on  the  eighth  day  "  To  shall  offer 
a  burnt-offering,  a  sacrifice  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet 
savour  unto  Jehovah,  one  bullock,  one  ram,  and  seven 
lambs."  The  eighth  day  brings  us  here  no  more  than  a 
single  witness,  indicating  what  was  outside  the  earth. 
It  might  seem  extraordinary  at  first  sight  that  the 
eighth  day  should  be  less  than  the  seven  days.  During 
the  seven  days  the  number  never  came  down  so  low  as 
to  one  bullock.  But  the  reason  seems  to  be  this,  that  in 
Numbers  we  have  the  testimony  and  service  of  Christ 
on  earth,  and  consequently  no  more  than  a  witness  to 
what  is  outside  and  above  the  earth.  It  points  to 
another  and  heavenly  scene,  which  was  not  properly 
the  subject  of  the  book.  It  is  therefore  but  a  solitary 
witness  to  heavenly  things,  not  their  introduction  in 
power. 

In  chapter  xxx.  there  is  another  and  a  very  different 
exhibition  of  the  truth  of  God.  It  is  a  question  of 
divers  relationships.   Here  we  meet  with  a  very  blessed 


412       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

principle.  The  order  of  relationship  depends  on  the 
one  to  whom  we  are  related.  It  is  He  that  governs. 
It  is  not  God's  arrangement  in  these  matters  to  rest 
the  weight  on  the  weaker  one,  who  is  in  the  place  of 
responsibility,  but  on  the  higher,  who  is  expected  to 
have  strength  and  wisdom. 

The  first  case  of  which  we  read  in  the  chapter 
is,  "  If  a  man  vow  a  vow  unto  Jehovah,  or  swear  an 
oath  to  bind  his  soul  with  a  bond,  he  shall  not  break 
his  word,  he  shall  do  according  to  all  that  proceedeth 
out  of  his  mouth."  Do  we  not  know  who  this  is! 
We  know  the  One  who  never  needs  to  recall  a  word : 
indeed,  there  is  none  other.  His  word  stands ;  we  can 
trust  it  without  fear. 

But  it  is  not  so  with  the  woman,  the  weaker  vessel 
"  If  a  woman  also  vow  a  vow  unto  Jehovah,  and  bind 
herself  by  a  bond,  being  in  her  father's  house  in  her 
youth;  and  her  father  hear  her  vow,  and  her  bond 
wherewith  she  hath  bound  her  soul,  and  her  father 
shall  hold  his  peace  at  her:  then  all  her  vows  shall 
stand,  and  every  bond  wherewith  she  hath  bound  her 
soul  shall  stand."  This  is  our  position,  as  it  was  that 
of  Israel.  They  held  the  place  of  the  woman  according 
to  the  type  of  this  chapter,  as  the  man  was  Jehovah- 
Messiah,  no  doubt,  in  its  full  import.  But  it  was  Jeho- 
vah that  spoke,  and  His  words  stood ;  Jehovah-Messiah 
was  the  unfailing  One  of  Israel.  Many  a  rash  word 
they  said ;  many  a  foolish  vow  they  made.  How  did 
He  treat  all  ?  In  two  ways.  He  acted  in  the  power  of  His 
own  grace,  and  therefore  disallowed  what  was  wrong, 
not  binding  the  foolish  vow  on  her  who  spoke  so  un- 
advisedly with  her  11)^.    He  allowed  her  words  to  pass 


NUMBERS  xxn.-xxxvL  413 

away,  to  be  broken,  to  have  no  binding  efficacy.  How 
gracious  is  the  Lord !  On  the  other  hand,  dealing  in 
His  governmental  wisdom.  He  might  allow  the  foolish 
to  prove  her  own  folly ;  and  so  He  did.  This  too  has 
been  true  of  Israel  He  has  permitted  that  His  people 
should  feel  the  consequences  of  what  they  said  in  their 
pride.  But  assuredly  the  day  is  coming  when  He 
will  act  in  the  fulness  of  His  grace,  and  all  that  is 
foolish  will  be  as  unheard,  unregistered,  and  blotted 
out  for  ever. 

The  same  thing  is  true,  viewed  in  another  relation- 
ship. Supposing  it  was  not  a  father  with  a  child,  but 
a  husband  (verses  6-8):  in  this  case  all  depended  on 
the  husband.  How  perfectly  this  applies,  whether  you 
look  at  Israel  or  the  church,  need  not  be  enlarged  on. 
All  our  blessedness  depends  upon  Him  to  whom  we 
belqng.  At  the  same  time  in  His  government  He  may 
allow  us  to  feel  our  own  want  of  wisdom  and  of  waiting 
upon  Him. 

On  the  other  hand,  where  we  hear  of  a  widow  or 
one  divorced,  plainly  either  is  a  person  out  of  relation- 
ship, and  there  all  stands  (verse  9).  But  this  is  not  the 
relation  of  the  Christian  or  of  the  church,  if  we  believe 
the  scriptures.  Israel  may  be  a  widow,  and  may  be 
viewed  as  divorced  too,  but  never  the  church,  the  bride 
of  Christ.  For  us  we  know  the  marriage  is  yet  future ; 
and  such  is  the  way  in  which  scripture  views  it.  Thus 
you  see  the  power  of  full  grace  remains  in  the  hands  of 
our  Bridegroom.  We  have  the  position  of  children,  and 
our  Father  therefore  acts  in  the  fulness  of  His  loveT 
We  have  the  place  of  being  the  bride,  but  not  yet 
married.    It  rests  in  His  hands  to  use  in  perfect  grace. 


414       LECTUBE8  09  THK  FKNTATEUCH. 

It  is  not  80  with  IsraeL  Therefore,  we  find  another 
case  of  twofold  dealing  on  Jehovah's  part — a  seventy 
on  the  one  hand  which  does  not  foiget  their  folly*  bat 
judges  it ;  and  on  the  other  hand  fnll  mercy  in  remit- 
ting according  to  His  own  love.  Jehovah,  as  He  has 
executed  the  one,  will  assuredly  display  the  other. 

In  chapter  txxL,  on  which  I  may  say  but  very  few 

words,  we  have  a  blessed  principle  already  alluded  to 

briefly,  but  now  acted  on.    We  saw  that  Balaam  could 

not  separate  Grod  from  Israel    We  saw  that  he  did  in 

fact  separate  to  a  certain  extent  Israel  from  Grod.    Grod 

could  not  allow  His  servant  to  pass  away  before  he  saw 

this  disgrace  completely  blotted  out    How  was  this 

done  ?  "Avenge,"  says  Jehovah,  "  the  children  of  Israel 

of  the  Midianites,  afterward  shalt  thou  be  gathered 

unto  thy  people."    It  would  not  have  suited  the  grace 

of  God  towards  His  servant  to  leave  a  painful  thought 

on  his  heart  now  that  he  was  about  to  be  gathered  to 

his  fathers  or  fall  asleep.     ''  And  Moses  spake  imto  the 

people,  sajdng,  Arm  some  of  yourselves  unto  the  war, 

and  let  them  go  against  the  Midianites  and  avenge 

Jehovah  of  Midian."    Is  not  this  perfection?    When 

Jehovah  spoke,   He  told  His  servant  to  avenge  the 

children  of  Israel  of  the  Midianites;  but  when  Moses 

spoke,  he  told  them  to  avenge  Jehovah  of  the  Midianites. 

How  exactly  Jehovah  secures  His  own  glory,  and  in 

grace  to  His  people  1    Jehovah  thought  of  the  children 

of  Israel,  and  the  children  of  Israel  would  think  of 

Jehovah.     It  was  one  common  interest — Jehovah  and 

Israel  had  at  heart  one  and  the  same  thing.    This 

indeed  was  the  true  and  mighty  grace  of  God,  altogether 

reversing  what  the  sin  of  man  was  seen  to  have  accom- 


NUMBERS  XXn.- XXXVI.  415 

plished.  As  they  fell  under  the  power  of  the  snare,  it 
might  have  seemed  that  they  must  be  separated  from 
Jehovah.  But  no ;  the  link  must  be  riveted^  never  to 
be  broken. 

Accordingly  the  expedition  did  not  require  any  great 
force:  it  was  no  question  of  having  all  Israel  mar- 
shalled now.  A  small  body  would  suffice.  It  must  be  a 
select  company,  not  the  bravest  chosen  as  such,  but  some 
of  every  tribe  must  have  part  in  it.  It  is  a  question 
of  avenging  Jehovah  of  the  Midianites,  and  the  tribes 
would  share  it  between  them  equally.  Anything  that 
would  tend  to  bring  in  Israel  as  a  whole  would  defeat 
this  identification  with  His  name  by  giving  prominence 
to  them^  even  if  it  did  not  wear  the  look  of  national 
feeling  or  personal  vengeance.  Neither  must  be  now ; 
all  must  be  done  holily  in  His  name.  It  must  be 
Jehovah's  vengeance.  Accordingly  therefore  it  is  ordered 
after  a  sacred  fashion,  as  well  as  with  a  select  band 
from  each  tribe.  "  So  there  were  delivered  out  of  the 
thousands  of  Israel,  a  thousand  of  every  tribe,  twelve 
thousand  armed  for  war" — ^a  small  body  comparatively 
to  deal  with  a  formidable  people.  "And  Moses  sent 
them  to  the  war,  a  thousand  of  every  tribe,  them  and" 
— whom?  A  captain  ?  some  chosen  captain? — Joshua ? 
No;  "Phinehas  the  son  of  Eleazar  the  priest,  to  the 
war,  with  the  holy  instruments,  and  the  trumpets  to 
blow  in  his  hand."  The  leader  must  be  holy,  and  with 
no  lack  of  holy  instruments.  The  trumpets  must  be 
there  for  Jehovah's  ears  as  well  as  Israel's.  The  result 
could  not  be  doubted;  and  at  once  the  issue  of  the 
fight  is  brought  before  us. 

Further^  we  see   that  Jehovah  lays  down   most 


416       LECTUBES  OK  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

wholesome  principles  as  to  the  division  of  the  spoiL 
A  certain  reserve  is  mada  The  principle  is  this,  that 
nothing  could  be  used  by  Israel  which  did  not  go 
through  the  fire.  All  for  them  must  pass  through  the 
scrutinizing  judgment  of  God.  Besides,  the  people  who 
had  not  fought  were  to  have  their  share  as  well  as 
those  who  had.  It  was  reserved  for  David  to  decide 
that  they  must  all  share  alike.  This  ordinance  awaited 
another  day.  But  here  it  was  not  according  to  the  full 
grace  of  that  day.  It  was  a  season  of  goodness,  and 
nothing  mora 

From  the  next  chapter  (xxxii.)  it  would  seem  that 
this  very  victory  suggested  a  hasty  thought  to  the  heads 
of  some  tribes  of  Israel  They  liked  uncommonly  the 
land  that  was  conquered,  and  desired  to  remain  on  the 
wrong  side  of  the  Jordan.  Moses  was  grieved  at  this. 
Nevertheless,  after  consulting,  he  yields  to  them ;  only 
he  insists  that  they  must  help  their  brethren.  Mean- 
while whatever  may  be  the  allotment  that  they  had 
chosen  for  themselves  (and  certainly  they  must  prove 
how  unwise  it  is  to  choose  thus,  instead  of  accepting 
Jehovah's  choice),  they  must  none  the  less  share  the 
conflicts  of  the  people  in  Canaan. 

Chapter  xxxiiL  testifies  to  another  and  beautiful 
truth,  Jehovah's  remembrance  of  all  the  past,  of  all  our 
joumeyings,  of  all  the  scenes  of  difficulty  through  our 
weakness,  and  even  worse  occasionally  too,  of  solemn 
judgments.  And  here  we  have  it  rehearsed.  It  was  good 
to  think  of  His  ways  with  them, — good  for  those  who 
were  about  to  enter  on  a  new  scene  to  look  back  on 
every  step  of  the  journey.  It  is  thus  far  from  being  an 
unimportant  chapter,  or,  as  it  might  seem  to  the  super- 


NUMBERS  XXII.-XXXVL  417 

ficial,  a  mere  dry  list  of  names.  There  is  no  part  of 
scripture  which  has  not  a  divine  as  well  as  moral  pur- 
pose in  it. 

The  next  chapter  (xxxiv.)  presents  the  persons  that 
were  to  divide  the  inheritance.  This  introduces  in 
chapter  xxxv.  the  singular  institution  of  Levitical  cities* 
some  of  which  were  reserved  for  such  as  might  have 
been  guilty  of  shedding  blood.  If  done  with  malice 
prepmse,  there  could  be  no  shelter  for  the  perpetrator 
in  such  an  asylum.  They  could  serve  only  as  a  prison 
whence  he  must  be  taken  and  judged  in  due  time. 
But  there  were  many  cases  in  which  death  might  ensue 
where  there  was  no  malice.  On  the  one  hand  God 
would  not  make  light  of  the  bloodshed ;  on  the  other 
He  would  not  merge  the  guiltless  in  the  class  of 
murderers. 

The  chapter  then  sets  forth  in  a  vivid  manner  what 
was  ever  before  God*s  own  eyes — the  coming  act  of 
blood-guiltiness,  and  the  divine  dealings  with  Israel  in 
respect  of  it.  I  need  not  say  many  words  as  to  this. 
Israel  have  stained  themselves  with  blood,  and  stand 
charged  before  God  with  the  slaying  of  their  own 
Messiah.  The  grace  of  God  acts,  and  the  judgment  of 
God  also.  Both  are  true,  and  both  true  of  Israel.  As 
there  were  those  that  have  slain  Him  willingly,  so  they 
have  borne  their  judgment  and  will  yet  more.  But 
there  were  those  for  whom  grace  pleaded,  and  assuredly 
not  without  an  answer ;  for  the  very  One  whose  blood 
was  shed  cried  to  God  from  the  cross  in  intercession  for 
them :  *'  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not  what 
they  do."  How  mighty  and  how  wondrous  the  reckon- 
ing of  grace !    To  this  the  Spirit  of  God  answered  when 

2  E 


418       LECTDRES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

He  led  Peter  to  say,  ''I  know  that  through  ignorance 
ye  did  it,  as  did  aJso  your  rulers."  And  thus  there 
were  those  who  found  not  only  shelter,  hut  having 
found  it  are  there  kept  of  God.  Kay,  more:  in  a  certain 
providential  sense  it  applies  even  to  those  not  brought 
out  of  the  place  of  the  Jew  into  that  of  the  Christian, 
which  last  does  not  appear  here;  for  He  would  not  have 
the  membership  of  Christ's  body  thus  anticipated. 

But  we  have  an  important  type  of  the  Jew's  place  on 
earth.  The  man  who  was  sheltered  in  the  city  of  refuge, 
because  Of  the  stain  of  blood,  who  instead  of  being  put 
to  death  for  it  found  a  temporary  sojourn  there,  looked 
forward  to  the  time  when  he  might  return.  This  limi- 
tation to  his  stay  is  given  here.  It  only  occurs  in  the 
book  of  Numbers.  The  slayer  (it  is  said)  "  shall  abide, 
in  it  unto  the  death  of  the  high  priest,  which  was 
anointed  with  the  holy  oiL  But  if  the  slayer  shall  at 
any  time  come  without  the  border  of  the  city  of  his 
refuge,  whither  he  was  fled ;  and  the  revenger  of  blood 
find  him  without  the  borders  of  the  city  of  his  refuge, 
and  the  revenger  of  blood  kill  the  slayer;  he  shall  not 
be  guilty  of  blood :  because  he  should  have  remained 
in  the  city  of  his  refuge  until  the  death  of  the  high 
priest ;  but  after  the  death  of  the  high  priest  the  slayer 
shall  return  into  the  land  of  his  possession." 

This  remains  for  Israel.  That  people  is  the  slayer  of 
blood  now  in  the  city  of  refuga  As  long  as  Christ  is 
exercising  His  priesthood  according  to  the  type  here 
spoken  of,  as  long  as  He  is  the  anointed  Priest  who 
'*  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession"  in  the  presence  of 
God,  so  long  the  slayer  must  remain  out  of  the  land 
of  his  possession.    The  Jew  will  never  retain  as  ac- 


NUMBERS  XXn.- XXXVI.  419 

credited  of  God  while  Christ  carries  on  His  priesthood 
as  now  within  the  rent  vail  on  high.  But  we  know 
well  that  our  Lord  Jesus  is  coming  back  again.  We 
know  therefore  that  He  is  going  to  terminate  the 
form*  in  which  He  now  exercises  His  priesthood, 
which  is  typically  represented  by  the  death  of  the  high 
priest  that  was  anointed  with  oil.  The  death  of  the 
actual  high  priest  of  that  day  typifies  the  close  of  that 
character  of  priesthood  in  which  our  Lord  now  acts. 

Thus  it  is  that,  when  the  Lord  will  no  longer  be 
fulfilling  the  type  of  Aaron  within  the  vail,  when  He 
will  come  forth  as  the  great  Melchisedek,  there  will  be 
not  a  new  ground  but  a  new  form  and  character  of  His 
priesthood,  no  longer  as  now  intercession  founded  on 
•  blood  only,  but  what  corresponds  with  the  bringing 
forth  of  bread  and  wine,  as  the  priest  of  the  Most  High 
God,  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth  (the  millennial  name 
of  God).  When  that  day  comes,  the  slayer  wUl  then  no 
longer  require  to  be  protected  in  the  city  of  refuge,  but 
return  to  the  land  of  his  inheritance. 

In  chapter  xxxvi.  we  have  a  further  point  which 
winds  up  the  account  of  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad. 
As  the  former  notice  honoured  their  faith,  so  this  acts 
as  a  guard,  and  stamps  order  on  the  matter,  securing 
the  glory  of  God  but  avoiding  confusion  among  men ; 
for  the  tribes  of  Israel  must  be  duly  kept.     On  the  one 

*  Heb.  Tii.  24  might  seem  to  clash  with  this ;  but  it  is  not  so  really ; 
for  as  no  one  questions  that  Christ  continues  for  ever,  so  the  apostle 
asserts  that  His  priesthood  cannot  be  transferred,  like  the  Aaronical 
one,  from  father  to  son.  He  has  the  priesthood  intransmissible 
{atrapdPaTov),  It  is  a  denial  of  successional  transfer,  not  of  change 
of  form  according  to  His  grace  and  wisdom  in  the  age  to  come. 

2  B  2 


420        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

hand  it  was  according  to  God's  goodness  that  the  daugh- 
ters should  inherit  if  there  were  no  son ;  on  the  other 
hand  it  coidd  not  be  permitted  that  the  inheritance 
should  pass  out  of  the  tribe  of  their  fathers.  This  was 
provided  against  here  as  the  other  was  before.  Thus  the 
whole  book  abounds  from  first  to  last  with  the  reiterated, 
continual,  and  perfect  proof  of  God's  loving  care  for 
His  people  on  the  eartL 


DEUTEBONOMY  L-XVL  421 


DEUTERONOMY. 

Oliaps.  i.-xvL 

In  examining  Exodus,  Leviticus,  and  Numbers,  we  have 
found  what  may  be  called  an  abstract  typical  system. 
That  is,  we  see  in  them  a  number  of  institutions  laid 
down  by  Jehovah,  the  pattern  of  which  was  shown  in 
the  mount.  These  figures  Moses  was  inspired  to  give  as 
a  whole  to  the  people,  entirely  apart  from  the  question 
whether  they  were  or  could  be  carried  out  according  to 
the  letter  while  passing  through  the  wilderness.  I  have 
called  it  therefore  an  abstract  typical  system ;  for  the 
value  of  it  does  not  at  all  depend  on  the  fidelity  of  the 
people  to  it.  It  is  very  possible  that  not  a  single  insti- 
tution during  that  time  may  have  been  strictly  enforced 
or  obeyed  among  the  people. 

Thus  we  know  for  certain  that  the  most  funda- 
mental requirement  of  all,  the  Levitical  ritual,  was  not 
practised ;  and  if  they  did  not  prove  faithful  in  that 
which  was  most  urgent  as  weU  as  least  difficult  in  point 
of  means  for  executing  it,  we  can  hardly  suppose  that 
they  carried  out  their  obedience  in  what  was  surrounded 
with  immense  if  not  insuperable  obstacles.  Even  before 
the  law  from  Abraham's  days  there  certainly  was  no 


422       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

injunction  more  solemn  or  more  obUgatory  than  the 
circnmcision  of  every  male  child;  yet  we  are  assured 
that  no  male  was  circumcised  during  Israel's  wandering 
for  forty  years  through  the  wilderness.  This  fact  appears 
to  be  of  some  importance,  because  notoriously  difficulties 
have  been  raised,  on  the  score  of  practicability,  as  to 
the  various  ordinances  requiring  sacrifices  and  oflferings 
where  the  means  did  not  appear.  We  hear  of  sin  and 
trespass-offerings,  peace  and  bumt-ofiferings,  meat-oflfer- 
ings  and  drink-offerings,  not  to  speak  of  the  daily  lambs 
and  occasional  victims.  Men  have  reasoned  with  great 
detaU,  especiaUy  in  recent  years,  enquiring  how  aU  this 
could  be  done  in  the  desert  by  a  people  who  found  it 
hard  enough  to  pass  unscathed  themselves,  though  they 
had  Jehovah  their  God  with  them  to  feed  them  with 
angels'  bread,  and  water  if  need  were  from  the  rock.  But 
God,  in  fact,  is  always  left  out  of  the  calculations  of 
unbelief  For  although  there  were  flocks  and  herds  led 
into  the  wilderness  with  the  children  of  Israel  at  the 
command  of  Jehovah,  and  they  may  have  added  more 
from  enemies  they  conquered,  the  fact  just  now  referred 
to  meets  and  removes  a  host  of  objections  raised  about 
it,  and  proves  that  the  nature  of  these  ordinances  has 
not  been  understood. 

The  fact  is  that,  no  matter  what  might  be  the 
measure  of  carrying  them  out  in  the  wilderness,  God 
was  setting  forth  by  them  the  shadows  of  good  things 
to  come.  This  was  their  real  object.  It  is  not  therefore 
a  question  of  how  far  the  offerings,  &c.  were  then  offered, 
but  of  a  vast  body  of  systematically- ordered  teaching 
by  types.  What  God  was  displaying  by  them  has  now 
found  its  meaning,  since  Christ  was  revealed  and  the^ 


DEUTERONOMY  L-XVL  423 

mighty  work  of  redemption  effected.  It  is  a  different 
thing  however  with  the  book  of  Deuteronomy;  and  this 
was  my  reason  for  remarking  it  at  this  point. 

Deuteronomy  is  an  eminently  practical  book.  Types 
are  but  sparsely  presented  over  the  great  bulk  of  the 
instruction  which  crowds  its  pages.  We  are  far  from 
being  then  on  the  ground  of  a  mere  rehearsal  of  what 
has  been  shown  in  the  previous  books.  Deuteronomy, 
spite  of  its  Septuagintal  title,  is  no  such  repetition;  but 
the  Spirit  of  God  by  Moses  has  given  us,  along  with 
special  moral  exhortation,  such  types  as  bear  on  the 
position  of  the  people  on  the  very  edge  of  the  promised 
land.  They  had  marched  round  to  the  eastern  side  of 
the  Jordan ;  they  were  now  on  that  border  of  the  land, 
after  God's  long-continued  process  of  dealing  with  them 
in  the  wilderness  had  come  to  its  full  measure.  And 
this  book,  while  it  does  not  want  allusions  to  what  God 
had  said  in  all  the  other  books,  has,  no  less  than  the 
rest  of  them,  its  own  peculiar  character.  It  is  not  then 
a  grouping  of  types,  whatever  might  be  the  particular 
scope  and  aim  of  those  employed,  such  as  we  have  seen 
in  distinct  forms  throughout  the  books  of  Exodus, 
Leviticus,  or  Numbers ;  but  here  all  that  the  Spirit  is 
using,  whether  it  be  direct  moral  application  which 
forms  much  the  larger  part  of  the  book,  or  whether  it 
be  a  selection  of  such  shadows  as  fall  in  with  its  prac« 
tical  object,  seems  to  be  from  first  to  last  an  enforce- 
ment of  obedience,  grounded  on  the  relationship  between 
Jehovah  their  God  and  Israel,  whom  He  was  just  bring- 
ing as  His  people  into  His  land.  Accordingly  the  very 
large  introduction  is  an  address  to  the  people  for  the 
purpose  of  enforcing  these,  claims. 


424        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

There  is  another  peculiarity  in  the  book  of  Deuter- 
onomy which  it  is  well  to  present  briefly  before  we 
descend  to  particulars ;  it  supposes  the  failure  of  the 
people.  It  was  after  the  golden  calf,  nay  more  than 
this;  it  was  after  the  whole  disciplinary  dealings  of 
Jehovah  had  now  come  to  an  end.  They  had  had 
many  a  sight  of  their  own  hearts,  and  they  had  had 
ample  experience  of  God's  ways  in  patient  and  gracious 
government.  All  this  was  now  closed.  This  therefore 
gives  its  tone  to  the  book.  The  lawgiver,  about  to  be 
taken  from  them,  looks  back  on  all  the  past ;  but  he 
looks  forward  also  to  the  land  they  were  about  to  enter. 
Hence  there  is  a  tone  of  exceeding  seriousness,  as  well 
as  of  chastened  affection ;  there  is  a  solemnity  founded 
on  the  grand  dealings  of  a  God  whose  faithful  and  holy 
hand  was  now  ushering  them  into  His  land.  Above  all 
the  prime  object  is  to  press  obedience  on  the  people  of 
God,  but  the  obedience  of  a  people  who  had  already 
found  what  it  was  to  have  utterly  broken  down  on  their 
own  assumed  responsibility.  That  generation  had  passed 
away  no  doubt.  The  question  was,  did  the  present 
generation  about  to  be  brought  into  the  holy  land  profit 
by  the  past  ?  The  aged  lawgiver  in  these  last  words  was 
led  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  speak  home  to  their  souls. 

Tliis  too  explains  why  the  book  of  Deuteronomy  is 
made  use  of  in  the  New  Testament  in  so  very  striking 
a  manner,  and  in  circumstances  so  eminently  critical 
It  is  the  book  which  our  Lord  quotes  in  His  tempta- 
tions with  Satan.  He  cites  from  none  other.  In  all  the 
three  occasions  the  Lord  Jesus  draws  His  answers  from 
the  book  of  Deuteronomy.  Surely  this  is  highly  signi- 
ficant.   He  could  have  cited  from  any  other,  had  any 


DEUTERONOMY   I.- XVI.  425 

other  been  in  all  respects  so  suitable  to  the  occasion. 
It  was  not  necessarily,  I  conceive,  because  there  were 
no  words  elsewhere  admirably  adapted  to  meet  the  case. 
May  I  not  venture  to  think  that  other  considerations 
entered,  and  that  His  citation  of  Deuteronomy  only  is 
in  no  way  meant  to  disparage  fitting  words  found  else- 
where? It  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  the  words  cited 
fix)m  Deuteronomy  were  the  very  best — that  they  were 
chosen  according  to  divine  perfection.  But  also  it 
would  appear  that  the  deepest  wisdom  lay  in  citing 
from  that  book,  as  well  as  its  most  applicable  words. 
The  book  from  which  they  were  selected  had  itself  a 
special  appropriateness  to  the  occasion,  as  we  shall  see : 
can  it  be  doubted  that  the  blessed  Lord  knew  this  in- 
finitely well  when  He  was  pleased  to  use  it  ? 

Now  wherein  lay  this  fitness  not  only  in  the  words 
that  were  cited,  but  in  the  particular  book  from  which 
they  were  extracted?  Wherein  lay  the  superior  pro- 
priety of  Deuteronomy  to  furnish  answers  at  that  junc- 
ture for  Christ,  as  compared  with  any  other  book  of 
scripture?  I  have  no  hesitation  in  subscribing  the 
opinion  that  [our  Lord  Jesus  chose  them  not  only  be- 
cause they  were  in  themselves  exactly  such  as  met  and 
confronted  Satan's  temptations  perfectly,  but  because 
there  was  a  moral  suitability  in  the  fact  that  they 
were  the  words  addressed  to  the  people  when  ruin  had 
already  come  in — when  nothing  but  the  grace  of  God 
was  afresh  appealing  to  them  before  they  were  brought 
into  the  holy  land.  The  Lord,  by  the  simple  fact  that 
He  quotes  Deuteronomy,  gives  evidence  that  He  had 
before  His  eyes  the  condition  of  the  people  of  God, 
whatever  might  be  their  own  insensibility.    Not  only 


426        LECTUBBS  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

did  the  Lord  say  the  right  thing,  but  the  ground,  the 
line,  and  the  spirit  of  the  book  whence  He  chose  His 
answers  were  such  as  took  the  becoming  place  under 
such  circumstances  before  God.  The  less  that  Israel 
felt  they  had  failed,  the  more  Jesus  felt  it  for  them. 
If  they  betook  themselves  to  rites  and  ceremonies  as  a 
means  of  pleasing  God,  Jesus  gave  Himself  up  to  un- 
reserved obedience — was  Himself  the  constant  pattern 
of  One  who  never  sought  His  own  wiU.  Indeed  He 
found  His  moral  glpry  in  this  very  fact,  that  He  alone 
of  all  men  that  ever  lived  never  in  a  single  particular 
swerved  from  that  which  after  all  is  the  sweetest, 
loveliest,  highest  thing  in  man  here  below — absolute 
devotedness  to  another,  doing  the  will  of  His  God  and 
Father.     Such  was  the  uniform  walk  of  Jesus. 

Now  Israel  had  totally  failed  in  their  place.  The 
book  of  Deuteronomy  acknowledges  this  failure,  and 
takes  its  stand  not  only  on  the  fact  that  it  was  impos- 
sible to  deny,  it  but  on  the  duty  of  confessing  it.  At 
the  same  time  there  is  the  gracious  bringing  in  of  God, 
and  of  what  was  suited  to  the  people  of  God,  when 
ruin  was  there.  This  supposes  a  heart  that  knows  God ; 
and  certainly  so  it  is  with  Moses.  We  know  well  that, 
if  God  made  known  His  acts  unto  Israel,  He  made  His 
ways  known  unto  Moses.  But  Jesus  knew  God  Him- 
self as  Moses  never  did,  and  by  His  use  of  it  put  honour 
on  the  book  that  makes  plain  how  in  a  state  of  ruin 
the  one  saving  principle  is  obedience.  We  shall  find 
more  than  that  before  we  have  done  with  the  book  of 
Deuteronomy,  though  we  may  in  this  lecture  not  look 
fully  at  a  special  character  of  it  which  is  presented  in 
the  latter  part  of  the  book,  where  it  will  be  proved 


DEUTERONOMY   I- XVI.  427 

that  the  New  Testament  also  uses  it  in  a  very  striking 
manner.  But  inasmuch  as  the  Lord's  three  answers  are 
taken  from  the  early  portion  of  Deuteronomy,  which 
comes  before  us  on  this  occasion,  I  have  at  once  referred 
to  this  patent  fact  We  never  can  duly  understand  the 
Old  Testament  unless  in  the  light  of  the  New;  and  if 
there  is  anyone  who  is  personally  and  emphatically  "the 
light,"  need  it  be  said  that  it  is  Jesus  ?  This  men  forget. 
No  wonder  therefore  that  Deuteronomy  in  general  has 
been  but  little  understood,  even  by  the  children  of  God; 
that  the  thoughts  of  expositors  are  comparatively  vague 
in  explaining  it ;  and  that  men  are  apt  to  read  it  with 
so  little  insight  into  its  bearing  that  the  loss  might 
seem  comparatively  trifling  if  it  were  not  read  at  all* 
In  short  how  could  it  be  respected  as  it  deserves,  if 
regarded  as  an  almost  garrulous  repetition  of  the  law  ? 
Now,  apart  from  the  irreverence  of  so  treating  an  in- 
spired book,  such  an  impression  is  as  far  as  possible 
from  the  fact.  Deuteronomy  has  a  character  of  its 
own  totally  distinct  from  that  of  its  predecessors,  as 
has  been  already  pointed  out  and  will  appear  more 
fully. 

Let  us  now  look  at  the  details  as  far  as  it  can  be 
done  in  so  brief  a  glance  as  we  can  afford  to  give  it  at 
present. 

The  first  thing  introduced  here  is  the  fact  that 
Jehovah  had  spoken  to  them  in  Horeb,  saying,  "Ye 
have  dwelt  long  enough  in  this  mount.  Turn  you,  and 
take  your  journey,  and  go  to  the  mount  of  the  Amorites, 
and  unto  all  the  places  nigh  thereunto,  in  the  plain,  in 
the  hills,  and  in  the  vale,  and  in  the  south,  and  by  the 
sea  side,  to  the  land  of  the  Canaanites,  and  unto  Lebanon, 


428        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

unto  the  great  river,  the  river  Euphrates.  Behold,  I 
have  set  the  land  before  you:  go  in  and  possess  the 
land  which  Jehovah  sware  tmto  your  fathers,  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  to  give  unto  them  and  to  their  seed 
after  them.  And  I  spake  unto  you  at  that  time,  saying, 
I  am  not  able  to  bear  you  myself  alone :  Jehovah  your 
God  hath  multiplied  you,  and,  behold,  ye  are  this  day 
as  the  stars  of  heaven  for  multitude.''  Moses  reminds 
them  how  he  had  shared  the  burden  of  care  for  them 
with  others.  "  Take  you  wise  men,  and  understanding, 
and  known  among  your  tribes,  and  I  will  make  them 
rulers  over  you."  So  it  was  done ;  but  it  is  added  that, 
when  they  did  depart  from  Horeb  and  went  through 
the  wilderness,  "  which  ye  saw  by  the  way  of  the  moun- 
tain of  the  Amorites,  I  said  unto  you.  Ye  are  come  unto 
the  mountain  of  the  Amorites,  which  Jehovah  our  God 
doth  give  unto  us.  Behold,  Jehovah  thy  God  hath  set 
the  land  before  thee :  go  up  and  possess  it,  as  Jehovah 
God  of  thy  fathers  hath  said  unto  thee;  fear  not,  neither 
be  discouraged." 

Then  comes  (ver.  21  et  seqq,)  the  relaticwi  of  the  inner 
motives  for  the  sending  of  the  spies.*  This  it  is  well  to 

*  Dr.  Davidson  (Intxod.  O.  T.  i.  p.  235)  venturoB  to  Bet  poridons  of 
this  chapter  in  juxtaposition  with  two  from  elsewhere,  in  order  to 
shew  that  Gk>d's  speaking  to  the  inspired  writer  was  simply  his  own 
mind  and  conscience  enlightened  from  on  high.  He  and  other  sacred 
authors  are  to  be  regarded  as  nothing  more  than  representatives  of 
the  intelligence  of  their  age  in  relation  to  the  Deity.  "  The  Deuter- 
onomist,  writing  at  a  later  period  of  the  same  arrangement  [the 
mission  of  the  spies  in  Nuoibers],  represents  the  people-  proposing  the 
measure  to  Moses,  who  on  consideration  resolved  to  execute  it,  because 
it  approved  itself  to  his  heart  and  conscience:  ^Ye  came  near  unto 
me  every  one  of  you,  and  said,  We  will  send  men  before  us,  and  they 
shall  search  us  out  the  land ;  and  the  saying  pleased  me  well :  and  I 


DEUTERONOMY  I.- XVI.  429 

note,  as  we  should  not  have  discovered  it  from  the  Book 
of  Numbers.  What  we  have  here  is  not  a  repetition ; 
it  leads  us  into  things  secret — what  wrought  in  the 
people  and  hindered  their  blessing.  The  chief  point  to 
observe  is  that  there  was  not  a  spirit  of  obedience  in 
the  people,  and  this  they  lacked  because  there  was  no 
faith  in  God.  This  is  clearly  shewn.  Consequently  it 
is  not  an  isolated  fact  that  they  wished  spies,  or  that 
Jehovah  acceded  to  their  desire  to  have  them  (this  we 
have  already  seen),  but  here — "  Te  came  near  unto  me 
every  one  of  you,  and  said,  We  will  send  men  before 
us,  and  they  shall  search  us  out  the  land,  and  bring  us 
word  again  by  what  way  we  must  go  up,  and  into  what 
cities  we  shaU  come."  Moses  mentions  how  the  saying 
pleased  him:  here  things^  are  stated  exactly  as  they 
were.  He  may  not  at  aU  have  understood  at  the 
moment  what  was  working  in  the  people;  but  all  is 

took  twelve  men  of  you,  one  of  a  tribe.*  (Deut.  i.  22,  23.)  In  the 
same  manner  an  important  social  arrangement  is  declared  to  have 
been  made  by  Moses  at  the  suggestion  of  Jethro  his  father-in-law, 
who  says  in  prophesying,  *  If  thou  shalt  do  this  thing,  and  God  com" 
tnand  thee  ao,  then  thou  shalt  be  able,'  &c.  (Ex.  xviii.  23.)  But  in 
Deut.  i.  9,  &c.,  Moses  speaks  of  the  same  institution  as  his  own  with- 
out any  reference  to  Jethro,  or  the  divine  command  of  which  Jethro 
spoke."  Such  is  the  sceptic's  puny  e£fort  to  lower  the  character  and 
credit  of  scripture.  But  the  believer  sees  wisdom  and  grace  in  com- 
pcuring  the  first  historical  statement  with  the  solemn  use  the  legislator 
makes  to  the  generation  about  to  enter  the  land,  and  the  added  infor- 
mation is  of  grave  import. 

Numbers  ziii.  gives  the  fieuit  when  God  warranted  Moses  to  send 
the  spies ;  Deuteronomy  supplies  the  motives  which  wrought  in  the 
people  to  desire  them.  For  he  had  himself  told  them  to  go  up  into 
the  land ;  but  they  begged  spies  to  search  it  first.  The  wish  emanated 
neither  from  God  nor  His  servant  but  from  the  people,  though  Moses, 
at  God's  command,  did  send  them  to  the  ruin  of  that  generation,  as 


430  LECTURES  OK  THE  PENTAllSnCH. 

told  out  **The  saying  pleased  m^  well,  and  I  took 
twelve  men  of  you,  one  of  a  tribe :  and  they  turned 
and  went  up  into  the  mountain,  and  came  unto  the 
valley  of  Eschol,  and  searched  it  out  And  they  took 
of  the  fruit  of  the  land  in  their  hands,  and  brought  it 
down  unto  us,  and  brought  us  word  again,  and  said,  It 
is  a  good  land  which  Jehovah  our  God  doth  give  us. 
Notwithstanding  ye  would  not  go  up,  but  rebelled 
against  the  commandment  of  Jehovah  your  God  :  and 
ye  murmured  in  your  tents,  and  said.  Because  Jehovah 
hated  us."  Was  this  their  trust  ?  "  Because  Jehovah 
hated  us,  he  hath  brought  us  forth  out  of  Egypt"  Was 
it  not  the  pettishness  of  disobedient  children,  if  ever 
there  were  such  ?  "  Because  Jehovah  hated  us,  he  hath 
brought  us  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  to  deliver  us 
into  the  hand  of  the  Amorites,  to  destroy  us.    Whither 

it  turned  out.  And  it  has  been  weU  remarked  on  the  one  hand,  that 
he  graciously  omits  to  repeat  Gk)d*s  o£fer  to  make  himself  a  fresh  stock 
after  their  destruction  but  for  his  intercession ;  while  on  the  other  he 
confesses  how  he,  no  less  than  their  &thers,  had  grieved  Jehoyah,  so 
that  he  was  not  to  lead  them  into  the  land  any  more  than  they,  but 
to  give  that  place  of  honour  to  Joshua.  Conceive  the  state  of  mind 
which  could  say  that  '<in  Deuteronomy  Moses  repeatedly  lays  the 
blame  of  his  expulsion  on  the  people  (i.  37 ;  iiL  26 ;  iv.  21) ;  but  ac- 
cording to  Num.  zx.  12  God  punished  him  thus  for  not  believing 
Him ;  while  in  Num.  xxvii.  14  his  punishment  was  occasioned  by  the 
legislator's  own  disobedience"!  (Dr.  D.'s  Introd.  O.  T.  L  367.) 

Again,  what  can  be  more  simple  and  appropriate  than  that  Mosei 
at  the  close  should  omit  the  name  and  counsel  of  Jethro,  and  bring 
the  people  into  greater  prominence  than  himself  in  the  choice  of 
rulers?  This  he  had  fully  shewn  in  the  history.  Now  he  dwells 
chiefly  on  their  part  in  the  matter,  confessing  his  own  inability  to 
cope  with  their  great  increase,  which  he  touchingly  entreats  (>od  to 
swell  a  thousand  times,  but  withal  urges  on  the  rulers  to  judge  right- 
eously. 


DEUTERONOMY   I- XVI.  431 

shall  we  go  up?  our  brethren  have  discouraged  our  heart; 
saying,  The^  people  is  greater  and  taller  than  we.** 

Such  was  the  genuine  result  of  sending  the  spies. 
**  The  people  is  greater  and  taller  than  we;  the  cities  are 
great  and  walled  up  to  heaven ;  and  moreover  we  have 
seen  the  sons  of  the  Anakims  thera  Then  I  said  unto 
you,  Dread  not,  neither  be  afraid  of  them.  Jehovah 
your  God  which  goeth  before  you,  be  shall  fight  for 
you,  according  to  all  that  he  did  for  you  in  Egypt 
before  your  eyes ;  and  in  the  wilderness,  where  thou 
hast  seen  how  that  Jehovah  thy  God  bare  thee,  as  a 
man  doth  bear  his  son,  in  all  the  way  that  ye  went, 
until  ye  came  into  this  place.  Yet  in  this  thing  ye  did 
not  believe  Jehovah  your  God,  who  went  in  the  way 
before  you,  to  search  you  out  a  place  to  pitch  your 
tents  in,  in  fire  by  night,  to  shew  you  by  what  way  ye 
should  go,  and  in  a  cloud  by  day."  Then  the  bitter 
consequences  came.  *'  Jehovah  heard  the  voice  of  your 
words  and  was  wroth,  and  sware  saying,  Surely  there 
shall  not  one  of  these  men  of  this  evil  generation  see  that 
good  land  which  I  sware  to  give  unto  your  fathers." 

These  were  solemn  words  to  bring  before  the  minds 
of  Israel  just  about  to  enter  into  the  good  land.  We  may 
without  difficulty  see  the  admirable  appropriateness  of 
such  an  introduction.  They  were  about  to  enter  it  by 
special  grace;  for  it  is  of  importance  to  bear  in  mind 
that  it  was  not  by  the  covenant  which  was  made  at 
Horeb  that  the  children  of  Israel  entered  the  land  at 
all.  If  God  had  held  to  the  terms  of  that  covenant, 
never  could  the  people  have  found  their  way  into 
Canaan ;  but  God  was  pleased  to  bring  in  fresh  terms 
by  a  way  which  will  be  shewn  before  we  have  done 


% 


432        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

with  this  sketch  of  Deuteronomy ;  and  it  was  simply 
and  solely  because  of  those  fresh  terms  of  mercy  which 
God  Himself  brought  in  of  His  own  grace  that  Israel 
entered  there.  At  the  same  time  Moses,  though  well 
aware  of  this,  reminds  them  of  the  real  source  of  their 
misery,  and  of  the  judgment  that  had  fallen  on  them 
from  God. 

It  is  evident  therefore,  that  this  book  has  the  most 
sensible  difference  from  all  that  preceded  it  Its  moral 
turns  on  this — the  only  possible  way  of  maintaining 
relationship  with  God,  namely,  obedience;  what  the 
nature  of  that  obedience  is,  and  how  it  is  modified; 
how  God  graciously  takes  into  account  the  weakness  of 
those  brought  into  this  relationship,  and  how  He  pro- 
vides for  His  own  glory  in  it  At  all  events,  whatever 
may  be  His  grace,  whatever  His  ways  with  His  people, 
obedience  is  that  with  which  He  cannot  dispense.  Hence 
therefore  we  see  why  it  is  that  the  first  circumstance  in 
their  history  brought  before  them  was  that  God  told 
them  not  to  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Amorites ; 
but  they  would  go  up  in  self-will  and  self-confidence, 
and  utterly  failed  before  their  enemies.  The  land  was 
straight  before  them,  and  they  might,  as  far  as  that  was 
concerned,  have  gone  in  and  taken  possession  of  it  at 
once.  Why  did  they  not  ?  The  book  of  Deuteronomy 
discloses  it  Because  they  had  not  a  particle  of  con- 
fidence in  God.  Therefore  it  was  that,  when  God  told 
them  to  go  up,  they  refused  and  suffered  the  consequence 
of  their  disobedienca 

This  then  is  the  crucial  test,  so  to  speak,  which 
Moses  applies  throughout;  this  is  the  homily;  for  indeed 
Deuteronomy  we  may  call  a  book  of  divine  homilies  in 


DEUTERONOMY   I -XVI.  433 

this  respect.  It  consists  of  moral  addresses,  and  appeals 
in  a  tone  quite  unexampled  in  all  the  five  books  of 
Moses.  Need  one  point  out  how  suited  all  this  is  for 
the  last  words  of  one  who  was  just  about  to  depart? 
They  possess  that  inimitable  solemnity  which  cannot  be 
so  much  uttered  in  words  as  felt  in  the  general  bearing 
of  the  book.  Moses  himself  had  the  deepest  sense  of 
the  situation,  but  in  no  way  as  one  who  distrusted 
Jehovah,  for  he  had  well  learned  to  count  on  His  love. 
He  knew  fully  that  Jehovah  was  doing  nothing  but 
what  was  for  His  own  glory;  how  could  His  servant 
then  find  fault  ?  There  were  reasons  due  to  God's  cha- 
racter why  Moses  should  not  bring  the  people  into  the 
land.  He  had  compromised  Him  at  a  critical  occasion, 
and  could  not  but  feel  that  so  it  was.  Not  that  this 
made  the  smallest  cloud  between  Master  and  servant. 
As  God  loved  Moses,  so  Moses  confided  in  God.  Never- 
theless the  circumstance  that  he  too  had  failed  to  sanc- 
tify Jehovah  their  God  in  his  heart  as  he  ought — that 
even  he  had  misrepresented  Him  when  it  was  above 
all  due  to  God  that  His  grace  should  be  clearly  seen, 
all  this  added  gravity  to  the  appeals  and  style  of  the 
departing  man  of  God. 

Thus  then  the  circumstances  of  Moses,  as  weU  as  of 
the  people,  were  precisely  those  suited  to  impress  the 
lesson  of  obedience.  For  a  people  in  relationship  with 
God  such  is  the  only  possible  way,  either  of  pleasing 
Him,  or  of  tasting  that  joy  of  the  Lord  which  is  the 
strength  of  His  people. 

Obedience  is  the  real  spring  of  blessing,  as  dis- 
obedience is  the  sure  pathway  of  ruin.  Such  is  the 
fertile  topic  which  we  find  throughout  the  book. 

2  F 


434       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Hence  the  story  of  the  Amorites,  as  we  saw,  is 
given.  Hence,  while  he  fails  not  to  shew  that  Jehovah 
was  with  himself,  and  how  Joshua  was  to  displace  him, 
he  does  not  hesitate  to  set  before  aU  the  story  of  his 
own  shame,  so  to  speak.  What  love  there -was  in  this, 
if  by  any  means  he  might  impress  obedience  on  the 
people  that  were  just  going  into  the  land !  How  good 
are  the  ways  and  the  words  of  God !  So  it  is  that  the 
New  Testament  gives  us  the  failure  of  the  apostle  Peter, 
not  merely  at  the  beginning  but  in  the  very  midst  of 
his  career.  So  it  is  that  it  does  not  withhold  from  us 
the  over-heatedness  of  a  Paul,  as  well  as  the  weakness 
of  a  Barnabas ;  that  it  tells  out  the  stumbling  both  of 
Thomas  and  of  Mark :  all  is  openly  communicated  for 
our  instruction.  The  prime  duty  for  every  creature, 
whether  Jew  or  Christian,  is  obedience.  This  then  is 
the  leading  truth  of  Deuteronomy.  So,  after  it  has 
been  brought  before  us  from  the  first,  we  find  their 
failure  to  trust  Jehovah  leads  to  a  fresh  command. 
They  are  no  longer  to  go  up  and  take  possession  of  the 
land,  but  to  turn  back  and  take  their  journey  into  the 
wilderness.  With  this  they  did  not  at  all  like  to 
comply;  and  thus  the  same  spirit  which  declined  to 
go  up  in  obedience  to  Jehovah  refuses  to  go  back  in 
submission  to  Him. 

"Then  ye  answered  and  said  unto  me,  We  have 
sinned  " — "we  have  sinned  against  Jehovah:  we  will  go 
up  and  fight."  Ah!  it  is  an  easy  thing  to  say,  "We 
have  sinned;"  but  how  often  we  have  to  learn  that  it 
is  not  the  quick  abrupt  confession  of  sin  which  affords 
evidence  that  sin  is  felt  I  It  is  rather  a  proof  of  hard- 
ness of  heart.    The  conscience  feels  that  a  certain  act 


DEUTERONOMY  I.-XVL  435 

of  confessing  the  sin  is  necessary,  but  perhaps  there  iM 
hardly  anything  which  more  hardens  the  heart  than 
the  habit  of  confessing  sin  without  feeling  it.  This,  I 
believe,  is  one  of  the  great  snares  of  Christendom  from 
of  old  and  now — that  is,  the  stereotyped  acknowledg- 
ment of  sin,  the  mere  habit  of  hurrying  through  a 
formula  of  confession  to  God.  I  dare  say  we  have 
almost  all  done  so,  without  referring  to  any  particular 
mode;  for  alas!  there  is  formality  enough,  and  without 
having  written  forms,  the  heart  may  frame  forms  of  its 
own,  as  we  may  have  observed,  if  not  known  it  in  our 
own  experience,  without  finding  fault  with  other  people. 
For  notoriously,  in  a  legal  state  of  mind  people  are  apt 
to  get  through  the  acknowledgment  of  sin  in  what  they 
know  has  grieved  the  Lord ;  but  even  then  there  is  a 
want  of  bowing  to  His  will.  Here  then  we  have  all 
laid  bare.  The  Israelites  thought  to  settle  the  whole 
matter  with  God  by  saying,  "We  have  sinned;"  but 
then  they  proved  that  there  was  nothing  settled,  nothing 
right;  because  what  really  pleases  God  is  this — the 
acceptance  of  His  good  will,  whatever  it  be.  Faith 
leads  to  obedience:  first  of  all  the  acceptance  of 
His  word  brings  and  secures  blessing  by  faith  for 
our  souls ;  and  then>  having  received  it,  we  surrender 
ourselves  to  His  will  For  what  are  we  here  but  to 
please  God?  The  Israelites  realized  nothing  of  the 
kind.  The  spring  of  obedience  was  wanting.  This  is 
what  Moses  is  enforcing  by  every  possible  kind  of 
declaration  and  motive;  by  his  own  example  and  by 
theirs,  as  well  as  the  example  of  their  fathers.  All 
this  is  made  to  conveige  on  the  children.  He  wanted 
to  leave  them  his  blessing — nay,  he  wanted  them  to 

2  F  2 


436        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

have  the  best  blessing  that  God  could  give  them.  Next 
to  having  Christ  Himself  is  the  following  in  His  steps. 
What  better  blessing  after  all  can  be  on  earthy  except 
Christ  Himself,  if  indeed  it  be  not  a  part  of  Christ, 
than  that  life  of  Christ  which  walks  in  obedience? 

This  is  then  what  he  was  pressing.  But  their  fathers 
would  not  obey  at  that  time.  They  would  not  go  up 
when  Jehovah  bid  them,  and  when  He  commanded  them 
to  turn  back,  they  wished  to  go  forward.  They  said, 
*'  We  have  sinned  against  Jehovah :  we  will  go  up  and 
fight  according  to  all  that  Jehovah  our  God  commanded 
us. 

This  is  a  solemn  lesson — that  there  may  be  a  thorough 
spirit  of  disobedience  at  the  very  time  that  people  talk 
of  doing  whatever  God  is  pleased  to  command.  And 
it  is  obvious,  beloved  friends,  obedience  depends  on  this 
— that  we  really  do  what  God  commands  us  now — that 
we  are  doing  what  is  suitable  to  our  present  position 
and  state.  What  God  lays  on  one  He  does  not  neces- 
sarily enjoin  on  another.  For  instance,  it  is  not  every- 
body that  is  called  to  serve  God  in  a  public  way;  nor  is 
everyone  called  to  take  a  particular  step  or  course  which 
might  involve  him  in  trouble  and  persecution.  We 
have  to  consider  whether  we  are  undertaking  it  out  of 
some  human  desire  of  heroism.  How  many  one  has 
known  who  would  have  liked  much  to  be  martyrs !  I 
do  not  regard  this  as  evincing  the  spirit  of  obedience, 
but  rather  a  spice  of  self-confidence.  When  such  a 
death  is  really  before  one  in  service,  then  perhaps  the 
difficulties  would  be  incomparably  more  felt;  for  the 
Lord  does  not  call  to  such  a  course  or  end  to  gratify 
human  nature,  or  to  give  an  opportunity  for  glprifying 


DEUTERONOMY   I.-XVL  437 

man,  but  always  for  His  own  glory.  In  such  a  case 
there  is  no  room  for  will,  nor  sparing  of  the  heart. 
Every  step  in  really  obeying  God  puts  the  man  morally 
to  the  test,  and  is  more  or  less  attended  with  severe 
trial  Where  the  world  or  the  flesh  governs,  the  trial 
is  not  felt.  The  man  who  said,  "  Master,  I  wiU  follow 
thee  whithersoever  thou  goest,"  had  no  faith  at  all. 
The  other  whom  Jesus  called  thought  about  his  father 
and  mother;  he  would  like  to  see  them  first.  So  it 
habitually  is  where  the  faith  is  real;  but  nature  is 
not  yet  judged  root  and  branch.  The  heart  may  be 
made  up  to  follow  the  Lord,  but  the  difficulties  are 
still  felt  keenly;  whereas  the  man  who  only  theorises 
is  ready  in  his  own  conceit,  in  word  at  least,  to  do  any- 
thing ;  but  there  is  no  seriousness  of  spirit ;  he  does 
not  know  himself  yet.  No  matter  what  it  may  cost, 
he  assumes  that  he  wiU  at  once  go  through  with  the 
will  of  the  Lord.     It  is  exactly  so  here. 

Such  then  is  the  early  and  remarkably  striking  intro- 
duction to  the  book. 

Next  we  see  what  was  the  fact  when  they  did  go  up 
spite  of  the  warning  of  God  to  fight  the  Amorites. 
"Jehovah  said  unto  me.  Say  unto  them,  Go  not  up, 
neither  fight;  for  I  am  not  among  you;  lest  ye  be 
smitten  before  your  enemies.  So  I  spake  unto  you; 
and  ye  would  not  hear,  but  rebelled  against  the  com- 
mandment of  Jehovah,  and  went  presumptuously  up 
into  the  hilL  And  the  Amorites,  which  dwelt  in  that 
mountain,  came  out  against  you,  and  chased  you,  as 
bees  do," — there  was  a  most  ignominious  flight— "and 
destroyed  you  in  Seir,  even  unto  Hormah.  And  ye 
returned  and  wept  before  Jehovah ;  but  Jehovah  would 


k 


438       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

not  hearken  to  your  voice,  nor  give  ear  unto  you.  So  ye 
abode  in  Kadesh  many  days,  according  unto  the  days 
that  ye  abode  there."  I  am  afraid  there  was  not  much 
more  in  the  weeping  than  in  the  acknowledgment  of 
the  sin. 

Then  in  chapter  ii  the  law-giver  reminds  them  how 
they  took  their  weary  journey.  But  what  wonderful 
grace !  Jehovah  went  along  with  them ;  and  of  course 
the  faithful  turned  back  just  as  much  as  the  unfaithful 
How  good  is  the  Lord !  This  is  now  developed.  Moses 
says,  "We  turned,"  not  "Ye,"  merely.  "We  turned, 
and  took  our  journey  into  the  wilderness  by  the  way  of 
the  Bed  Sea,  as  Jehovah  spake  unto  me ;  and  we  com- 
passed Mount  Seir  many  days.  And  Jehovah  spake 
unto  me,  saying.  Ye  have  compassed  this  mountain  long 
enough:  turn  you  northward.  And  command  thou  the 
people,  saying.  Ye  are  to  pass  through  the  coast  of  your 
brethren  the  children  of  Esau,  which  dwell  in  Seir ; 
and  they  shall  be  afraid  of  you:  take  ye  good  heed 
unto  yourselves  therefore :  meddle  not  with  them ;  for 
I  will  not  give  you  of  their  land ;  no,  not  so  much  as  a 
foot  breadth;  because  I  have  given  Mount  Seir  unto 
Esau  for  a  possession."  Thus  Jehovah  from  the  very 
first  was  teaching  them  that  they  were  not  called  out  on 
an  errand  of  indiscriminate  conquest.  It  was  not  in 
His  mind  to  offer  men  His  law  or  the  sword.  They 
could  take  possession  of  no  lands  whatever  of  their 
own  wilL  Jehovah  gave  them  no  such  license  as  the 
right  to  slay,  bum,  or  plunder  others  as  they  liked.  It 
was  simply  a  question  of  subjection  to  God  and  obeying 
Him,  who  had  from  the  first  a  plan  for  the  nations 
round  Israel  as  their  centre.    "  When  the  Most  High 


DEUTEEONOMY  I.-XVL  439 

divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance,  when  he  sepa- 
rated the  sons  of  Adam,  he  set  the  bounds  of  the  people 
according  to  the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel" 

It  is  the  same  principle  here  again  as  elsewhere. 
Man  must  not  presume  to  choose.  Israel  was  called  in 
everything  to  confide  in  Jehovah  and  obey.  Is  there 
anything  so  wholesome?  I  am  persuaded  that  above 
all  the  Christian,  who  has  a  still  nearer  relationship 
with  God,  is  the  very  last  person  who  ought  to  exercise 
a  choice  in  self-will.  How  great  the  blessing  of  one 
who  walks,  as  Christ  walked,  in  dependence  on  God,  not 
consulting  Him  only  if  constrained,  but  of  a  ready  mind, 
and  assured  that  by  His  Spirit,  through  the  written 
word.  He  deigns  to  guide  every  step  of  your  way 
where  self  is  judged,  and  to  give  you  to  take  the  right 
path  with  a  simplicity  incomparably  better  than  all  the 
wisdom  the  world  could  muster,  if  one  sought  in  inde- 
pendence to  choose  for  oneself! 

This  seems  to  me  put  to  the  test  in  the  question  of 
the  land  of  Edom.  There  was  no  doubt  whatever  that 
Esau  had  behaved  so  ill  that  the  children  of  Israel  were 
not  likely  to  forget  it.  We  know  how  these  traditions 
linger  among  men,  particularly  in  the  East.  But  no, 
God  would  not  have  them  to  meddle.  "  I  will  not  give 
you  of  their  land."  Jehovah  was  most  careful  exactly 
where  He  had  least  sympathy.  The  fact  of  Esau's  pride 
and  contempt  of  Israel  gave  them  no  license  to  take 
their  land.  "  I  have  given  Mount  Seir  unto  Esau  for  a 
possession."  God  always  holds  to  His  own  principles, 
and  He  teaches  us  to  respect  them  in  others.  "Ye 
shall  buy  meat  of  them  for  money,  that  ye  may  eat ; 
and  ye  shall  also  buy  water  of  them  for  money,  that  ye 


440        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

may  drink.  For  Jehovah  thy  God  blessed  thee  in 
all  the  works  of  thy  hand :  he  knoweth  thy  walking 
through  this  great  wilderness:  these  forty  years  Jehovah 
thy  God  hati  been  with  thee;  thou  hast  lacked  no- 
thing." Why  should  they  covet  ?  They  must  learn  not 
to  seek  what  God  would  not  give  them.  That  is  the 
point — to  do  God*s  wilL  Jehovah  had  blessed  Israel, 
and  would  have  them  content  and  thankful  instead  of 
coveting  their  neighbour's  goods.  He  too  it  was  who 
had  given  the  Mount  to  Esau :  that  was  enough.  And 
Israel  bow  to  the  will  of  their  God.  "  And  when  we 
passed  by  from  our  brethren  the  children  of  Esau, 
which  dwelt  in  Seir,  through  the  way  of  the  plain  from 
Elath,  and  from  Ezion-gaber,  we  turned  and  passed  by 
the  way  of  the  wilderness  of  Moab." 

Then  comes  out  another  instance.  Were  they  to  lay 
hands  on  the  Moabites  who  were  not  so  near  of  kin  as 
the  Edomites  ?  Not  so.  **  Distress  not  the  Moabites, 
neither  contend  with  them  in  battle :  for  I  will  not  give 
thee  of  their  land  for  a  possession ;  because  I  have 
given  Ar  unto  the  children  of  Lot  for  a  possession." 
Thus,  we  see,  the  second  exhortation  contains  a  lesson 
about  other  people,  as  the  first  was  the  danger  of  dis- 
obedience on  their  own  part  What  we  find  here  is  a 
warning  not  to  yield  to  the  sight  of  their  eyes  or  the 
violence  of  their  hands,  guarding  against  a  covetous 
spirit  which  pays  slight  regard  to  that  which  God  had 
assigned  to  others.  It  is  ever  the  same  duty  of  sub- 
mission to  God's  will.  The  first  chapter  takes  cogni- 
zance of  themselves ;  the  second  chapter  puts  them  to 
the  test  in  the  presence  of  other  people.  It  did  not 
alter  their  duty,  if  the  antecedent  history  of  Moab  and 


DEUTERONOMY  I.- XVI.  441 

Ammon,  just  as  much  as  that  of  Esau,  was  far  from 
good  We  know  the  profanity  of  Esau  ;  we  know  the 
solemn  circumstances  of  Moab  and  Ammon  from  their 
very  origin ;  but  for  all  that  God  would  not  permit  His 
people  to  indulge  in  what  did  not  become  Himself  as 
represented  however  feebly  in  and  by  Israel  This  is 
the  plain  gist  of  the  book.  It  is  the  due  conduct  of  a 
people  in  relationship  with  Jehovah;  no  longer  the 
bringing  out  of  typical  institutions,  but  the  develop- 
ment of  the  moral  ways  which  become  the  people  with 
whom  Jehovah  had  a  present  connexion  and  intercourse 
on  earth.  The  grand  duty  and  safeguard  is  evermore 
to  heed  His  word,  and  the  consulting  Him  not  only  for 
their  own  path  but  in  respect  to  others.  The  same 
principle  is  steadily  pursued  on  all  sides. 

They  were  tried  after  this  by  another  case  of  for- 
bearance. "So  it  came  to  pass  when  all  the  men 
of  war  were  consumed  from  among  the  people,  that 
Jehovah  spake  unto  me,  saying.  Thou  art  to  pass  over 
through  Ar,  the  coast  of  Moab,  this  day :  and  when 
thou  comest  nigh  over  against  the  children  of  Ammon, 
distress  them  not,  nor  meddle  with  them."  But  the 
same  duty  abides  for  them.  We  see  from  this  that  it  is 
mere  ignorance  to  suppose  that  there  is  not  a  divine 
system  in  the  book ;  and  this  is  more  remarkable,  I  think, 
in  Deuteronomy,  if  possible,  than  in  the  preceding  books. 
We  can  all  understand  an  orderly  arrangement  where 
there  are  types  all  arranged  in  a  consecutive  manner ; 
but  here  in  these  moral  exhortations  it  is,  though  in 
another  way,  just  as  sensible.  In  this  case  too  we  have 
the  fact  that  there  had  been  a  great  deal  of  fighting  in 
previous  days.    The  children  of  Moab  had  had  their 


442  LECTTUBB  OS*  THE  PWiTATRTJCH. 

wars.  Wag  there  aay  leaaon  in  liiia  why  die  duMESi 
of  Isra^  should  have  wais  with  th^n.  now  ?  And  as  fiyr 
the  children  of  Amnum,  they  too  had  paased  thioi^ 
similar  experience,  Griants  had  dwdt  tiiexe  in  times 
past,  and  the  Ammonites  called  than  Zomzammima. 
They  were  ''a  people  great,  and  many,  and  tall»  as  the 
Anakims;  but  Jdiovah  destroyed  them  b^re  them; 
and  they  succeeded  them,  and  dwelt  in  their  stead.'' 
Bat  this  was  no  reason  why  they  were  to  expect 
Jehovah  to  destroy  the  Ammonites  now.  Both  wse 
powerful  motives  not  to  dread  the  Canaanite  races,  who 
were  destined  to  extirpation 

Thus  was  kept  up  a  thoroi:^  soise  of  discq>lin0  in 
the  people,  and  above  all  dependence  on  and  confidence 
in  Jehovah,  They  were  to  be  guided  simply  not  by 
what  Jehovah  had  done  in  providence  by  Ammon, 
Moab,  or  Esau,  but  by  His  will  as  to  themselves.  This 
was  a  lesson  for  Israel  of  prime  moment  May  we  not 
forget  it  ourselves !  Covenant  favour  would  surely  do 
as  much  for  Israel  as  providence  had  done  for  Moab 
and  Ammon  I 

All  this  then  precedes  another  lesson  It  is  well 
to  remark  here  that  verse  24  is  exactly  parallel  with 
verse  13 ;  that  it  is  not  Moses  in  verse  13,  but  Jehovah 
who  commands  to  "rise  up,"  &c.,  in  both;  and  that 
verses  10-12  are  a  parenthesis  of  instructive  past  his- 
tory for  moral  profit  like  verses  20-23.  "  Rise  ye  up, 
take  your  journey,  and  pass  over,  the  river  Amon."  Now 
comes  another  promise:  "Behold,"  says  He,  "I  have 
givon  into  thine  hand  Sihon  the  Amorite."  Here  then 
they  are  called  to  aiotion.  It  will  be  observed  that  first 
of  all  iu  this  chapter,  it  was  not  activity  but  sub- 


DEUTERONOMY  I- XVI.  443 

jection.  It  might  be,  and  no  doubt  was,  trjring  enough 
for  Israel  to  take  quietly  the  unfriendliness  of  the 
Edomites,  Ammonites,  and  Moabites ;  but  no  matter 
what  the  provocation  given,  no  matter  how  they  might 
be  insulted  by  them  (and  they  were),  a  hand  of  Israel 
must  not  be  lifted  up  against  their  brethren  ;  for 
Jehovah  reminds  them  of  the  connection,  and  gives 
those  races  the  closest  name  possible — their  brethren. 
Edomites  or  Moabites  or  Ammonites, — unfeeling  and 
disposed  to  injure  Israel,  still  God  would  educate  His 
people  in  remembering  whatever  bond  of  nature  there 
was :  if  blows  came,  God  would  not  forget  the  delin- 
quent. Meanwhile  they  were  not  to  meddle  with  their 
kindred,  even  though  jealous  and  imkind. 

But  Israel  is  called  to  action.  "  Eise  ye  up,  take  your 
journey,  and  pass  over  the  river  Arnon :  behold,  I  have 
given  into  thine  hand  Sihon  the  Amorite,  king  of 
Heshbon,  and  his  land:  begin  to  possess  it,  and  contend 
with  him  in  battle.  This  day  will  I  begin  to  put  the 
dread  of  thee  and  the  fear  of  thee  upon  the  nations 
that  are  under  the  whole  heaven,  who  shall  hear  report 
of  thee,  and  shall  tremble,  and  be  in  anguish  because 
of  thee.  And  I  sent  messengers  out  of  the  wilderness 
of  Kedemoth  unto  Sihon  king  of  Heshbon  with  words 
of  peace."  Is  not  this  very  notable  ?  What  a  difference 
between  God's  conduct  of  His  people,  and  man's  cor- 
ruption of  it!  When  we  compare,  for  instance,  the 
way  in  which  Moses,  under  the  direction  of  God,  was 
to  lead  on  the  Israelites,  and  the  way  in  which  Mahomet 
perverted  the  word  into  a  fable  for  ambitious  ends,  and 
allowance  of  human  lusts  and  passions,  who  cannot  see 
the  diflference  ?   In  the  one  case  there  was  the  thorough 


444        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

sifting  and  scrutiny  of  God — with  whom  most  ?  With 
the  enemies  ?  Not  at  all,  but  His  own  people.  In  His 
dealings  with  them  He  applied  a  higher  standard,  and 
far  more  severity.  There  was  incomparably  greater 
strictness  of  judgment  with  the  children  of  Israel 
than  with  all  their  enemies  put  together.  Mark  the 
very  fact  here  set  before  us :  not  a  single  man  of  the 
congregation  of  Jehovah  that  left  Egypt  passed  into 
the  holy  land  save  two  individuals,  who  identified  them- 
selves by  faith  from  the  very  first  with  the  glory  of 
Jehovah.  Where  else  can  be  found  such  jealous  care 
as  this  ?  It  is  granted  that  they  did  not  all  perish  in 
the  same  way,  but  they  all  fell  in  the  wilderness. 
Whatever  then  the  blows  which  fell  on  Sihon,  or  on 
Og,  or  on  any  of  the  others;  whatever  the  ways  of 
God  with  Moab  and  Ammon  afterwards,  or  even  with 
Egypt,  there  neVer  was  seen  such  unsparing  strictness 
as  with  Israel. 

When  man  builds  up  a  society,  when  he  founds  a 
religion  or  any  other  scheme,  how  wholly  different  his 
course !  What  gentle  censures,  if  any,  what  palpable 
favouritism  towards  his  own  party,  where  they  most 
deserve  reproof  and  rebuke  or  perhaps  still  more 
stringent  measures!  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no 
mercy  but  ruthless  severity  always  served  out  to  those 
who  refuse  to  fraternise,  not  to  speak  of  ceaseless 
enmity  to  those  who  condemn  and  oppose.  But  in 
Israel's  case  God  enforced  a  far  more  thorough  and 
searching  discipline  in  all  their  ways.  No  compulsion 
was  used  to  the  nations  outside.  In  special  instances 
judgment  to  the  full  took  its  course.  Was  anything 
like  this  the  rule  where  man  even  took  up  the  Bible 


DEUTERONOMY  I.-XVL  445 

for  his  own  ends?  It  was  otherwise  with  Mahomet. 
He  might  not  grant  such  a  liberal  concession  to  others 
as  he  left  to  himself.  I  do  not  dwell  on  this.  We  all 
know  that  it  is  natural  to  wretched,  wilful  man.  But 
there  never  was  a  system  that  more  thoroughly  pandered 
to  the  evil  heart  of  man,  and  gratified  it  in  its  violence 
against  others,  and  in  its  corrupt  lusts  for  itself,  than 
that  frightftd  imposture.  Whereas,  even  in  God's  deal- 
ings with  a  nation  after  the  flesh  (and  such  is  the  truth 
as  to  Israel  here),  there  was  an  admirable  check  on  man 
and  witness  of  divine  government,  though  the  law  made 
nothing  perfect.  It  was  not  yet  Christ*  manifested, 
but  man  under  trial  of  the  law  and  its  ordinances 
and  restraints,  dealt  with  as  living  in  the  world,  and 
instructed  in  view  of  this  present  life.  Yet  for  aU  that, 
even  though  it  was  but  the  governmental  display 
of  God  with  a  nation  (not  fully  as  with  Christ,  but 
provisionally  by  Moses),  there  is  not  a  fragment  of  it 
that  does  not,  when  candidly  examined,  prove  the  good- 
ness and  the  holiness  of  God,  as  much  as  it  illustrates 
also  on  the  pther  side  the  rebelliousness  of  man,  chosen 
man,  even  the  people  of  God. 

In  this  case  let  us  see  the  principles  of  Jehovah's 
discipline.  Did  He  warrant  Israel  to  coerce  Sihon  with 
threats  of  vengeance  or  win  by  cajolery  ?  Did  He  offer 
him  the  book  of  the  law  with  the  one  hand  or  the 
sword  with  the  other  ?  Nothing  of  the  sort.  Look  at 
the  way  in  which  Jehovah  treated  even  these  enemies 
of  Israel.  "  Let  me  pass  through  thy  land :  I  will  go 
along  by  the  highway,  I  will  neither  turn  unto  the  right 
hand  nor  to  the  left.  Thou  shalt  sell  me  meat  for 
money,  that  I  may  eat ;  and  give  me  water  for  money. 


446        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

that  I  may  drink:  only  I  will  pass  through  on  my 
feet"  "  But  Sihon,"  it  is  said,  "  king  of  Heshbon,  would 
not  let  us  pass  by  him :  for  Jehovah  thy  God  hard- 
ened his  spirit,  and  made  his  heart  obstinate,  that  he 
might  deliver  him  into  thy  hand,  as  appeareth  this 
day.  And  Jehovah  said  unto  me.  Behold,  I  have  begun 
to  give  Sihon  and  his  land  before  thee :  begin  to  possess 
that  thou  mayest  inherit  his  land.  Then  Sihon  came 
out  against  us,  he  and  all  his  people,  to  fight  at  Jahaz. 
And  Jehovah  our  God  delivered  him  before  us ;  and 
we  smote  him,  and  his  sons,  and  all  his  people."  Israel 
kept  the  path  of  right  and  courtesy.  Sihon  rushed  on 
them  to  his  own  ruin ;  and  only  so  did  Israel  smite  and 
dispossess  the  king  of  Heshbon. 

In  chapter  iii  it  is  substantially  similar  with  Bashan. 
Og  the  king  came  out,  and  as  with  Heshbon,  so  with 
Bashan.  "  Jehovah  said  unto  me,  Fear  not :  for  I  will 
deliver  him,  and  all  his  people,  and  his  land,  into  thy 
hand ;  and  thou  shalt  do  unto  him  as  thou  didst  unto 
Sihon  king  of  the  Amorites,  which  dwelt  at  Heshbon. 
So  Jehovah  our  God  delivered  into  our  hands  Og  abo, 
the  king  of  Bashan,  and  all  his  people."  All  this  is 
brought  out  to  Israel  as  the  fruit  of  obejring  Jehovah. 

Chapter  L  lets  us  see  the  end  of  disobedience ;  chap- 
ters ii  and  iiL  give  us  to  know  as  clearly  the  residt 
of  obedience.  Nothing  can  be  more  manifest  than  the 
moral  groundwork  which  Moses  is  preparing  for  all 
the  rest  of  the  book  that  follows. 

In  chapter  iv.  we  find  another  line  of  things.  The 
law-giver  sets  before  them  the  manner  in  which  the 
law  dealt  with  themselves,  in  one  feature  particularly, 
which  he  presses  on  them.  ''Now  therefore  hearken,  0 


DEUTERONOMY  L-XVL  447 

Israel."  It  appears  to  be  a  fresh  discourse  to  a  certain 
extent.  "Now  therefore  hearken,  0  Israel,  unto  the 
statutes  and  unto  the  judgments  which  I  te8U5h  you, 
for  to  do  them,  that  ye  may  live,  and  go  in  and  possess 
the  land  which  the  Jehovah  God  of  your  fathers  giveth 
you.  Ye  shall  not  add  unto  the  word  which  I  com- 
mand you,  neither  shall  ye  diminish  ought  from  it,  that 
ye  may  keep  the  commandments  of  Jehovah  your  God 
which  I  command  you."  Surely  this  again  makes  it 
too  plain  to  call  for  many  words  of  ours  to  demonstrate 
what  Moses,  or  rather  God  Himself,  has  in  view  in  all 
these  chapters.  It  is  obedience.  "Tour  eyes  have  seen 
what  Jehovah  did  because  of  Baal-peor :  for  all  the 
men  that  followed  Baal-peor,  Jehovah  thy  God  hath 
destroyed  them  from  among  you.  But  ye  that  did 
cleave  unto  Jehovah  your  God  are  alive  every  one  of 
you  this  day."  So  this  fact  also  is  used.  Jehovah  had 
cut  down  the  former  generation  for  their  disobedienca 
"Behold,  I  have  taught  you  statutes  and  judgments, 
even  as  Jehovah  my  God  commanded  me,  that  ye 
should  do  so  in  the  land  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it. 
Keep  therefore  and  do  them ;  for  this  is  your  wisdom 
and  your  imderstanding  in  the  sight  of  the  nations, 
which  shall  hear  all  these  statutes,  and  say,  Surely  this 
great  nation  is  a  wise  and  understanding  people." 

Next,  he  presses  their  singular  privilege  in  His 
presence  with  them.  What  nation  had  such  a  wonder 
as  God  Himself  in  their  midst — God  Himself  near  the 
least  of  them?  "For  what  nation  is  there  so  great, 
who  hath  God  so  nigh  unto  them,  as  Jehovah  our  God 
is  in  all  things  that  we  call  upon  him  for  ?  And  what 
nation  is  there  so  great,  that  hath  statutes  and  judg- 


448        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

ments  so  righteous  as  all  this  law,  which  I  set  before 
you  this  day."  It  was  not  merely  a  sight  of  God,  but 
One  who  deigned  to  take  the  liveliest  and  most  intimate 
interest  in  His  people  Israel.  "  Only  take  heed  to  thy- 
self, and  keep  thy  soul  diligently,  lest  thou  forget  the 
things  which  thine  eyes  have  seen,  and  lest  they  depart 
from  thy  heart  all  the  days  of  thy  life :  but  teach  them 
thy  sons,  and  thy  sons*  sons." 

The  point  urged  here  is,  that  wlien  they  came  and 
stood,  as  far  as  any  then  could  stand,  in  the  presence 
of  God,  they  had  seen  no  similitude  of  Jehovah.  What 
a  guard  this  was  against  the  misuse  of  outward  forms ! 
God  Himself  did  not  disclose  Himself  by  an  external 
creature-shape.  Jehovah  their  God  did  not  make  Himself 
visible  to  them  by  a  similituda    Consequently  there  is 
here  a  heavy  blow  struck  at  the  tendency  towards  idola- 
try. For  when  severed  from  Christ  then  those  ordinances 
only  became  a  snare  to  men.     Still  more  since  Christ : 
misused  ordinances  are  practically  the  same  thing  in 
principle,  as  Galatians  iv.  teaches.     This  was  guarded 
against  from  the  first  by  the  fact  that  no  similitude 
of  God  was  vouchsafed.     "Ye  came  near  and  stood 
under  the  mountain;  and  the  mountain  burned  with 
fire  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  with  darkness,  clouds,  and 
thick  darkness.     And  Jehovah  spake  unto  you  out  of 
the  midst  of  the  fire :  ye  heard  the  voice  of  the  words  " 
-7-because  they  were  called  to  obey — "but   saw  no 
similitude;  only  ye  heard  a  voice.    And  he  declared 
unto  you  his  covenant,  which  he  commanded  you  to 
perform,  even  ten  commandments ;  and  he  wrote  them 
upon  two  tables  of  stone."  And  then  comes  the  exhor- 
tation to  beware  of  corrupting  themselves  by  idolatries, 


DEUTERONOMY   I- XVI.  449 

by  the  likeness  of  any  creature.  This  is  pursued  to 
the  end  of  the  chapter,  with  the  institution  of  the  cities 
where  the  manslayer  might  find  refuge. 

In  chapter  v.  we  come  to  still  closer  quarters.  "  And 
Moses  called  all  Israel,  and  said  unto  them,  Hear,  0 
Israel,  the  statutes  and  judgments  which  I  speak  in 
your  ears  this  day,  that  ye  may  learn  them,  and  keep 
and  do  them."  Obedience  is  the  claim.  "Jehovah  our 
God  made  a  covenant  with  us  at  Horeb."  We  shall 
find  a  fresh  one  made  in  the  land  of  Moab,  but  first  of 
all  they  are  reminded  of  the  Sinaitic  covenant.  "Je- 
hovah made  not  this  covenant  with  our  fathers,  but 
with  us,  even  us,  who  are  all  of  us  here  alive  this  day. 
Jehovah  talked  with  you  face  to  face  in  the  Mount  out 
of  the  midst  of  the  fire.  (I  stood  between  Jehovah  and 
you  at  that  time,  to  shew  you  the  word  of  Jehovah : 
for  ye  were  afraid  by  reason  of  the  fire,  and  went  not 
up  into  the  Mount.)'*  Then  is  laid  down  the  memorial 
that' Jehovah,  who  gave  them  His  law,  was  the  same 
who  had  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  They 
were  a  people  brought  into  relationship  with  God,  and 
the  object  of  His  words  was  to  guard  them  from  prac- 
tical inconsistency  with  that  relationship. 

It  is  remarkable  that,  even  though  in  this  connexion 
Moses  gives  them  what  are  called  the  ten  command- 
ments, there  is  nevertheless  an  express  and  manifest 
difference  in  the  form  as  compared  with  Exodus; 
so  little  is  Deuteronomy  a  mere  rehearsal  of  the  earlier 
books.*  It  is  a  familiar  point  to  many,  but  may  claim  a 
brief  notice  here,  especially  as  all  do  not  see  its  bearing 

*  It  is  distresamg  that  any  man  bearing  the  Christian  name  should 
write  as  does  Dr.  Davidson.    (Introd.  O.  T.  i.  pp.  226-228.)    «*0n 

2   G 


450        LBCTCBES  ON  THE  FEHTATEUGH. 


in  b J  no  means  tiie  least  atriking  of  the  ten  words ;  I 
speak  of  the  law  of  the  sabbath.  Some  wonder  why  it 
should  be  joined  with  the  other  oommandments ;  but 
the  sabbath  is  so  much  the  more  important  here,  because 
it  is  not  strictly  a  moral  command.  This  makes  the  prin- 


oompanng  tibe  decaHogoe  as  reasded  in  Ex.  xx.  2-17  and  Dent  t. 
S-21,  H  win  be  observed — 

"1.  TbatitisBudof  foOy'God  JiMivantbesewoidB."  (Ex.  xz. 
1;  Dent.  T.  22.) 

**2.  Notwitfastanding  snA  exprem  dfirlanitimi,  jhe  fbPowing  divwr- 
silies  occur.  In  Dent.  t.  12  the  tenn  ie^  oonespondB  to  remember  in 
Ex.  XX.  8,  and  the  last  danse  of  tibe  foimer  Terae,  'as  the  Lord  tiiy 
God  hath  commanded,'  is  wanting  in  Exodns.  In  Dent.  t.  14  is  the 
addition,  'thine  ox  nor  thine  ass,'  as  well  as  the  danse,  'that  thj 
man-serrant  and  tliy  maid-servant  may  rest  as  wdl  as  thon.'  Again, 
in  Dent.  v.  16  two  new  cUnses  are  soppUed,  'and  that  it  may  go  well 
with  thee,'  and  '  as  the  Lord  tliy  God  hath  commanded  thee.'  The 
copolatiTe  conjnnction  is  prefixed  to  the  last  fonr  <v>fnTn«ji«lTnOTit0  in 
Deuteronomy.  In  the  ninth  and  tenth,  the  tenns  '£Edsehood'  and 
'  coTet*  are  not  the  same  as  in  Exodus.  The  tenth  has  also  the  fint 
two  cli^nafta  in  a  different  order  from  that  in  Exodusi,  and  adds  'his 
field.' 

"  3.  The  above  diyersHies  shew  that  the  ipeienma  verb*  spoken  by 
God  cannot  be  in  both,  because  both  do  not  exactly  agree. 

"  4.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  the  ipeueima  verba  may  be  in  one 
or  other.  Accordingly  the  majority  of  e^oettors  take  the  record  in 
Exodus  for  the  exact  one,  supposing  that,  as  Moses  was  speaking  to 
the  people  in  the  latter  case,  he  recited  finom  memory,  not  fiK>m  the 
tables  of  stone,  and  therefore  there  is  some  Tariation  of  terms.  A 
few,  however,  think  that  the  record  in  Deuteronomy  is  the  more 
exact,  because  when  Moses  recorded  the  words  in  Exodus  he  ^•^i 
heard  the  decalogue  pronounced;  whereas,  when  he  repeated  it  in 
Deuteronomy,  it  was  in  his  hands,  inscribed  in  permanent  lettecs. 

'*  5.  If  the  rigidly  literal  meaning  of  the  phrase  '  God  spake  these 
words*  is  not  adhered  to  in  the  case  of  the  one  record,  it  need  not 
in  the  case  of  the  other.  Or,  if  the  cognate  danse  used  in  both 
books, '  that  God  wrote  them  on  two  tables  of  stone^'  be  not  literally 
pressed  in  one  case,  there  is  no  necessity  for  doing  so  in  the  other. 


DEUTERONOMY  I.- XVI.  451 

ciple  at  stake  to  be  felt  the  more.  The  sabbath  law  rests 
entirely  on  the  word  of  God  Himself  It  was  a  question 
of  His  authority,  not  of  that  which  a  man  might  intrin- 
sically discern.  What  is  meant  by  a  moral  law  is  that 
which  one  can  pronounce  on  from  within  even  without 

It  seems  probable  to  us  that  the  record  in  Exodus  is  the  more  exact. 
That  in  Deuteronomy  has  an  amplification  corresponding  to  the  style 
of  the  book. 

**  6.  We  suppose  that  the  record  in  Exodus  is  the  older  one.  Yet 
it  would  be  hazardous  to  assert  that  it  is  the  exact  ariffinal.  It  is  very 
improbable  that  both  proceeded  from  one  and  the  same  writer,  because 
on  the  principle  of  strict  litercUity  of  langiMge  he  contradicts  himself. 
Both  are  substantially  the  decalogue ;  but  Moses  did  not  write  both. 
Indeed  he  could  not  have  written  either  in  its  present  form,  because 
that  in  Exodus  is  Jehovistic,  and  oldei;  than  the  record  in  Deuter- 
onomy.   If  we  have,"  &c. 

In  the  same  sceptical  spirit  follows  Dr.  Golenso.  (The  Pent.  pt.  ii., 
pp.  364-366.) 

Now  I  afiElrm  that  on  the  face  of  the  scriptures  no  candid  person 
can  deny  that  Exodus  is  professedly  given  as  the  history  of  the 
matter ;  Deuteronomy  as  a  subsequent  recital  to  the  people,  without 
the  least  aim  at  reiterating  the  words,  which  would  have  been  the 
easiest  thing  in  the  world;  for  even  these  free  thinkers  do  not  pretend 
that  the  Deuteronomist  did  not  possess  Exodus.  Hence,  if  darkness 
had  not  veiled  their  eyes,  they  would  have  seen  that  the  latter  clause 
of  Deut.  V.  12  cited  could  not  be  in  Exodus,  and  that  its  existence  in 
Deuteronomy  proves  that  we  have  here  a  grave  and  instructive  refer- 
ence to  the  commandments  formally  given  in  the  second  book  of 
Moses.  Such  moral  motives  as  are  added  are  therefore  as  appro- 
priate in  Deuteronomy  as  they  could  not,  ought  not  to,  be  in  Exodus. 
The  remembrance  of  tiieir  own  estate  as  slaves  in  Egypt  tiU  delivered 
by  Jehovah  is  most  suitable  in  verse  15 ;  but  it  is  certain  that  this  is 
an  appeal  to  their  hearts,  not  the  ground  stated  by  Gk)d  in  promulgating 
the  fourth  commandment.  All  is  perfect  in  its  own  place,  and  the 
imputation  of  self-contradiction  as  baseless  as  it  is  malicious  and 
irreverent.  But  one  must  only  expect  this  from  men  whose  aim  is  to 
reduce  the  inspired  writers  to  their  own  level,  and  who  think  that 
piety  can  co-exist  with  fraud,  yea,  with  fraudulent  fEJsehood  about 

God. 

2  o  2 


452        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

a  prescription  from  God.  For  instance^  a  man  knows 
perfectly  well  that  he  has  no  right  to  steaL  K  a  person 
takes  what  does  not  belong  to  him,  every  man,  even  a 
heathen,  can  judge  it  There  may  be  lands  where  every- 
thing morally  is  at  the  lowest  pointy  and  where  there- 
fore a  wrong  is  less  severely  estimated  than  elsewhera 
But  where  is  the  savage  even  who  does  not  know  the 
wrougness  of  stealing  ?  For  although  he  may  allow  him- 
self a  dispensation  to  take  from  others,  let  a  man  steal 
from  him»  and  it  will  soon  be  seen  whether  he  does  not 
condemn  the  wrong.  Plainly  then  the  savage  knows 
quite  well  that  it  is  unjustifiable  to  steal  But  nobody 
knows  about  the  sabbath-day  unless  Jehovah  command 
it  Yet  He  joins  its  observance  with  prohibitions  of 
evil  which  man  could  himself  jndgd.  It  is  therefore 
the  strongest  assertion  of  His  authority. 

This  is  constantiv  fon^rotten  when  men  talk  about  the 
moral  law.  One  of  the  most  weighty  duties  is  not 
properly  a  moral  question  at  alL  but  depends  simply  on 
the  cv>mmandment  of  God.  Xot  that  I  doubt  Urn 
s;ibbath-day  to  be  of  the  deepest  possible  moment,  and 
so  lasting  in  its  claicus  that^  when  the  TnfTTtfmnHnm  comes^ 
that  day  of  rest  will  be  in  ftiU  Ibcce  again.  It  is  not 
correct  theretbre  that  the  sabbath-day  b  dcnxe  with: 
uiAny  p^^ple  in  Chri:?tendoni  think  so ;  b«t  I  take  ti» 
liberty  of  having  a  stronger  view  aboot  the  ^^KHaA 
tburn  even  thoc^  who  think  themselTe^  stroi^est.  Mxar 
count  it  buried  in  Christ  s  grave,  but  it  k  no^.  Far 
fcom  being  done  with,  we  know  from  the  wucd  of  God 
thiis  He  will  niainsiui  the  sabbntkal  rest  sto:^.  sad 
en5:cce  rt  in  the  ifaiys  of  the  kmgiMn;  «j  ^r?r.^r  ff  ^ 
maa  ^S^f^  not  bow  to  He  aathority,  he  wxH  aaazzedfr 


DEUTERONOMY  L-XVL  453 

come  under  divine  judgment :  so  muoh  does  Jehovah 
make  of  it  in  itself,  and  so  much  will  He  make  of  it 
for  the  obedience  of  others  in  the  day  that  is  coming. 

We  however  are  not  under  law  but  grace.  The  law 
of  the  sabbath  is  not  given  to  Christians.  Grace  has 
brought  us  out  of  the  condition  of  a  nation  in  the  flesh 
or  of  men  in  the  earth.  The  Christian  is  not  a  mere 
man,  nor  is  he  a  Jew.  If  one  were  simply  a  man,  one 
must  have  to  do  with  the  place  and  state  of  Adam 
fallen.  For  a  Jew  no  doubt  there  is  the  law  of  Moses, 
But  for  the  Christian  a  very  essential  feature  of  his 
standing  is  that  he  is  delivered  from  the  status  of  man 
or  Israel,  and  called  to  Christ  and  heavenly  things. 
His  death  to  the  law  is  not  therefore  to  weaken  the 
authority  of  the  law,  but  because  of  the  principles  of 
divine  grace  which  are  now  brought  out  in  Christ 
risen  from  the  dead,  founded  pn  His  death,  manifested 
in  His  resurrection,  and  maintained  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
sent  down  from  heaven.  Such  is  the  reason  why  a 
Christian  even  now  on  earth  passes  into  a  new  state 
of  things  altogether.  Consequently,  when  Christianity 
began,  the  first  day  of  the  week  was  made  the  dis- 
tinguishing mark,  the  Lord's-day,  and  not  the  sabbath. 
For  we  must  remember  that  the  sabbath  does  not 
mean  a  seventh  day,  as  some  persons  (I  am  sorry  to 
say)  equivocate;  but  the  seventh  day  and  no  other. 
This  is  so  decided  that  in  the  millennial  age  there  will 
be  a  strict  maintenance  of  that  day  with  all  the  autho- 
rity of  God  Himself,  vested  in  and  exercised  by  the 
Messiah  governing  Israel  and  the  earth. 

Let  me  just  refer  to  this  for  a  moment  longer,  lest 
there  should  be  any  mistake  about  what  appears  to  me 


454        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

to  be  the  truth  about  it.  In  the  commandment  to  keep 
it  Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel  speaks  to  this  effect: 
"  Six  days  shalt  thou  labour,  and  do  all  thy  work ;  but 
the  seventh  day  is  the  sabbath  of  Jehovah  thy  God: 
in  it  thou  shalt  not  do  any  work."  But  the  motive 
here  is  not  because  God  rested  upon  that  day,  but 
because  they  were  to  remember  that  they  were  servants 
in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  that  Jehovah  had  brought 
them  out  through  a  mighty  hand,  and  by  a  stretched 
out  arm :  "  Therefore  Jehovah  thy  God  commanded 
thee  to  keep  the  sabbath-day."  Surely  this  is  very 
significant,  and  points  out  a  manifest  diiference  in  the 
character  and  scope  and  design  of  the  book  of  Deu- 
teronomy as  compared  with  Exodus.  In  the  one  case 
there  was  a  remembrance  of  creation;  in  this  case,  of 
symbolic  redemption,  the  bringing  out  of  Egypt.  The 
fact  is  that  redemption,  even  in  type,  is  a  stronger 
motive  to  obedience  than  creation  itself.  This  seems 
the  reason  why  it  is  brought  in  here,  as  the  time  was 
long  past;  whereas  all  was  fresh  in  Exodus,  which  is 
the  main  display  of  that  truth.  If  we  have  seen  the 
object  of  all  this  part  of  Deuteronomy  to  be  the 
enforcement  of  obedience,  there  is  nothing  which  main- 
tains obedience  so  much  as  redemption;  and  if  that 
were  the  case  when  it  was  only  an  outward  deliverance, 
how  much  more  when  it  is  eternal  ? 

It  is  freely  allowed  that  the  ten  words  have  a  specific 
character  of  the  deepest  moment  for  man  on  earth,  as 
distinguished  from  what  was  judicial  and  ceremoniaL 
Hence  Moses  says,  "  These  words  Jehovah  spake  unto 
all  your  assembly  in  the  mount  out  of  the  midst  of  the 
fire,  of  the  cloud,  and  of  the  thick  darkness,  with  a 


DEUTERONOMY  I.- XVI.  455 

great  voice:  and  he  added  no  more.  And  he  wrote 
them  in  two  tables  of  stone,  and  delivered  them  unto 
me. 

Next  follows  the  account  of  their  fear  before  God's 
solemn  words,  their  promise  to  obey,  and  the  media- 
torial place  which  the  people  desired  and  Grod  sanctioned 
for  Moses. 

In  chapter  vi.  we  find  the  first  of  those  texts  which 
our  Lord  quotes.  Hence,  I  need  not  say,  there  is  pecu- 
liar solemnity  in  its  character.  The  passage  insists  on 
the  unity  of  the  true  God.  This  was  a  truth  which 
Israel  was  most  prone  to  disregard.  The  very  point  of 
faith,  for  which  we  are  especially  responsible,  is  what 
we  are  in  most  danger  of  forgetting  under  pressure 
or  carelessness.  Whatever  we  are  called  out  for  is 
what  Satan  endeavours  to  destroy.  By  whom  ?  Oiu' 
adversaries  ?  No,  not  merely  so,  but  by  ourselves.  To 
apply  what  now  occupies  us  here,  give  me  the  chiief, 
fundamental,  and  most  salient  points  of  Christianity, 
and  I  wiU  shew  you  that  these  are  the  very  truths  that 
Christians  are  most  in  danger  of  forgetting.  What  is  it 
that  characterises  Christianity  ?  Eedemption  accom- 
plished ;  Christ  the  head  of  the  church  above ;  the 
Holy  Ghost  sent  down  here  below ;  and  all  this  borne 
witness  to  in  the  worship  and  in  the  ways  of  Christians 
and  the  church.  Is  this  what  you  feel  ?  Is  this  what 
you  read  ?  Is  this  what  you  hear  ?  Nothing  less.  The 
hardest  thing  to  find  now  in  a  Christian  is  real  intel- 
ligence about  Christianity.  Commonly  indeed  we  see 
that  Christians  understand  a  great  deal  better  what  the 
Jews  ought  to  have  done,  than  what  they  themselves 
ought  to  be  doing.  In  short,  whatever  it  be  to  which  God 


456        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

summons  us  is  precisely  what  the  devil  endeavours  to 
obscure,  and  so  to  hinder  our  testimony. 

The  point  then  for  the  Jew  was  the  one  true  God. 
"  Jehovah  Grod  that  hath  brought  thee  out  of  the  land 
of  Egypt " — He  was  the  only  God.  To  what  were  they 
always  inclined  ?  Setting  up  other  gods  in  the  wilder- 
ness. Accordingly  this  is  the  solemn  and  central  truth 
that  is  brought  in  here.  "  Hear,  0  Israel"  They  were 
about  to  go  into  the  land  to  enjoy  it ;  but  "  Hear,  0 
Israel :  Jehovah  our  God  is  one.  And  thou  shalt  love 
Jehovah  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart,  and  with  all 
thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  might.  And  these  words, 
which  I  command  thee  this  day,  shall  be  in  thine  heart. 
And  thou  shalt  teach  them  diligently  unto  thy  chil- 
dren ;"  and  they  were  to  bind  them  for  a  sign ;  they 
were  to  make  much  of  them  at  all  points— outside  the 
house  and  inside,  and  always.  And  this  is  enforced  in 
the  very  words  which  our  Saviour  employed.  "  Thou 
shalt  fear  Jehovah  thy  God,  and  serve  him,  and  shalt 
swear  by  his  name."  It  was  to  be  a  real  fealty :  it  was 
not  merely  a  dogma  pure  and  simple,  but  to  be  known 
as  a  fact.  It  was  revealed  as  the  gi^at  operative  truth, 
continually  impressed  on  Israel — ^their  one  true  God. 

It  seems  needless  to  say  that  this  is  altogether  short 
of  Christianity;  and  as  we  have  referred  to  the  difference 
of  a  Jew  and  a  Christian  as  to  the  sabbath -day  and 
the  first  day  of  the  week,  so  as  to  this.  The  essential 
revelation  of  God  to  us  is  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost — ^the  Father  displayed  by  the  Son,  and  made 
known  by  the  Spirit.  This  is  just  as  characteristic  a 
tmth  for  us  as  the  one  Jehovah  was  for  a  Jew.  Now 
notoriously  as  a  dogma  it  is  acknowledged  eveiywheie 


DEUTERONOMY   I.- XVI.  457 

in  Christendom  except  by  heretics ;  but  the  moment 
it  is  appropriated  as  a  practical  fact,  people  stand 
back  and  begin  to  qualify  and  mutilate.  *'  Is  He  then 
indeed  your  Father  ?"  "  Can  you  call  Him  Father  ?" 
"  Oh,  this  might  be  dangerous,  and  that  were  presump- 
tuous ;"  and  so  men  talk  on — ^that  is,  the  moment  it  be- 
comes a  real  living  truth,  and  not  words  on  paper.  The 
acknowledgment  in  a  creed  is  all  well;  but  when  it 
comes  to  be  the  truth  for  one's  own  soul,  stamping  its 
value  on  our  communion  and  also  on  our  ways,  men 
at  once  retreat  back  into  some  "dim  religious  light," 
where  it  is  all  forgotten  and  lost,  merely  owned  verb- 
ally, but  without  power  for  the  heart  and  life. 

Before  we  pass  to  the  hext  chapter,  it  would  be  well 
to  observe  for  a  moment  the  second  answer  of  our  Lord 
— "  Ye  shalt  not  tempt  Jehovah  your  God."  What  was 
meant  by  this  ?  Not  any  ordinary  fleshly  sin  on  our 
part,  as  many  suppose.  Tempting  God  was  to  doubt  Him, 
as  many,  all  of  us,  are  apt  to  do.  Satan  took  advan- 
tage of  the  scripture  that  said  that  He  should  not  dash 
His  foot  against  a  stone.  He  quotes  accordingly  Psalm 
xcL,  intimating  to  Jesus  that,  if  He  were  the  Son  of 
God,  all  He  had  to  do  was  to  throw  HimseK  from  the 
pinnacle  of  the  temple;  and  all  must  endorse  His  claims. 
Was  not  this  a  positive  promise  ?  God  would  "give  his 
angels  charge  concerning  him ; "  and  what  a  fine  proof 
it  would  be  that  He  was  the  true  Messiah,  if  He  threw 
Himself  down  from  such  a  height,  and  withal  the  angels 
preserved  Him !  But  Satan  as  usual  tampered  with  the 
plain  written  word,  alike  with  its  letter  and  its  spirit ; 
for  after  "  to  keep  thee  "  he  omitted  "  in  all  thy  ways." 
This  he  tried  to  conceal  from  One,  all  whose  ways  were 


458       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

odedience,  venturing  to  insinuate  what  a  noble  demon- 
stration of  His  Messiahship  it  would  be.  And  what  was 
the  Lord's  answer?  "  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  Jehovah  thy 
God."  The  true  Israelite  does  not  require  to  put  God 
to  the  test.  If  you  suspect  a  rogue  is  in  your  employ- 
ment, you  may  test  him  by  marking  a  piece  of  money 
to  see  whether  he  steals  or  not:  am  I  then  going  to 
mark  something  for  G<)d  to  see  whether  He  will  keep 
His  word  or  not?  I  know  God  will  do  it;  I  do  not 
require  to  put  Him  to  the  proof.  This  is  the  meaning 
of  it,  and  such  is  precisely  the  path  of  duty.  He  that 
believes  may  calmly  confide  in  Groi  under  all  circum- 
stances. His  Father  will  take  care  of  him.  Is  not  this 
in  wonderful  harmony  with  the  rest,  following  on  the 
confession  of  the  one  true  God  of  Israel  ? 

Chapter  vii  one  .may  sum  up  in  a  very  few  words. 
We  have  the  consecration  of  the  people  to  God.  This 
is  the  grand  pith  of  the  chapter  as  it  appears  to  me.  It 
is  the  people  repudiating  the  ways  of  the  heathen,  and 
consecrated  to  God.  And  this  characterizes  the  book  of 
Deuteronomy.  It  is  not  at  all  a  people  or  a  class  kept 
at  a  distance  by  intervening  priests.  Of  course  it  is  a 
fact  that  the  priests  are  there ;  but  one  of  the  peculiar 
features  of  this  book  is  that,  although  sacerdotalism 
existed,  the  priests  are  designedly  swamped  with  the 
Levites,  as  the  whole  of  the  people  are  gathered  round 
Jehovah.  Thus  it  is  not  a  book  which  defines  strict 
canonical  usage  in  these  matters.  The  object  is  quite 
different.  The  other  had  its  place  when  God  was  giv- 
ing the  book  of  Leviticus.  There  He  assigned  this  as 
the  portion  of  the  high  priest  and  his  sons,  that  of  the 
Levites^  this  again  of  the  people.   Biit  in  Deuteronomy 


DEUTERONOMY   I- XVI.  459 

the  point  is  to  centralize  them  all  around  Jehovah  Him- 
self. The  consequence  is  that,  though  all  have  their  place, 
these  distinctions  may  here  seem  small  indeed.  If  it 
is  a  question  of  access  to  God  in  His  sanctuary,  priests 
are  definitely  brought  out,  and  the  proper  book  for  this 
is  Leviticus ;  but  there  is  a  larger  truth  than  this — that 
God  has  a  people  whom  He  puts  in  a  place  of  consecra- 
tion to  Himself.  Such  is  the  point  here  in  the  seventh 
chapter.  We  shall  find  how  thoroughly  this  applies 
all  through  the  book  to  the  perplexity  of  poor  proud 
rationalism,  but  in  itself  a  simple  yet  very  important 
truth  indeed.*  So  difficult  is  it  to  unbelief  that  some 
take  the  ground  of  making  Deuteronomy  belong  to  an 
older  age  when  the  distinction  of  priests  from  Levites 
was  not  yet  brought  in.  Still  more  take  the  opposite 
hypothesis  and  contend  that  its  legislation  is  of  a  later 
character  than  that  of  the  preceding  book.  The  truth 
is  that  the  difference  is  due  to  moral  development  of 
Israel  according  to  Jehovah's  wisdom  on  the  eve  of  in- 
troducing His  people  into  the  land,  and  the  more 
settled  and  social  habits  He  would  have  them  cultivate 
there.  But  the  tone,  mind,  and  heart  of  Moses  are 
nowhere  more  characteristically  apparent  than  in  these 
his  last  words  to  the  people  of  Jehovah  whom  he  loved. 

*  Kothing  can  be  weaker  than  the  harping  on  the  phrase  ''the 
priests  the  Levites,"  as  in  the  writings  of  Davidson  and  Colenso 
(following  the  superficial  scepticism  of  foreign  authors,  who  them- 
selves followed  the  old  Deists  of  our  own  country).  The  broader 
character  of  the  book,  with  its  aim  of  bringing  forward  the  people,  and 
consequently  the  tribal  divisions,  rather  than  particular  families,  folly 
accounts  for  this.  Had  the  phrase  been  inverted  to  **  the  Levites  the 
priests"  (which  never  occurs),  there  would  have  been  some  force  in 
the  argument:  as  it  is,  there  is  none.  The  priests  were  Levites.  It  is 
the  design  of  the  book  which  governs  the  description  in  each  case. 


460        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH, 

In  chapter  viii  we  have  quite  a  diflferent  character. 
It  is  not  the  people's  consecration  to  God,  but  their 
discipline,  the  trial  of  heart,  and  exercise  by  the  way 
to  which  Jehovah  subjected  the  people;  and  a  most 
instructive  section  it  is  in  this  point  of  view. 

And  tWs  is  another  chapter  from  which  our  Lord 
quotes  when  tempted,  to  which  we  may  refer  in  passing. 
"And  thou  shalt  remember  all  the  way  which  Jehovah 
thy  God  led  thee  these  forty  years  in  the  wilderness, 
to  humble  thee,  and  to  prove  thee,  to  know  what  was 
in  thine  heart,  whether  thou  wouldest  keep  his  com- 
mandments, or  no."  We  see  that  what  has  been 
remarked  is  just  what  is  expressed  in  this  verse :  "And 
he  humbled  thee,  and  suffered  thee  to  hunger,  and  fed 
thee  with  manna,  which  thou  knewest  not,  neither  did 
thy  fathers  know ;  that  he  might  make  thee  know  that 
man  doth  not  live  by  bread  only,"  (what  exercise  of 
faith  was  there  in  that?)  "but  by  every  word  that 
proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  Jehovah  doth  man 
live."  This  is  precisely  what  does  put  man  to  the  proof 
morally.  The  word  of  God  tests  whether  he  submits 
to  it,  whether  he  lives  on  it,  whether  he  delights  in  it, 
whether  his  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  God  as  the  Lord 
Jesus  proved  His  meat  was. 

It  was  by  this  Scripture  that  the  Lord,  as  we  know, 
repelled  the  first  temptation  of  the  adversary.  None 
ever  honoured  God's  word  as  Christ  did. 

We  need  not  dilate  on  the  beautiful  detail  but  at 
the  same  time  simple  truth  of  this  chapter.  Clearly 
it  traces  the  discipline  of  Jehovah  by  the  way. 

In  chapter  ix.  another  topic  is  prominent.  It  is  not 
the  Jewish  people  in  the  school  of  Jehovah  to  manifest 


DEUTERONOMY   1^- XVI.  461 

what  was  in  their  heart,  and  what  He  was  towards 
them;  but  the  people  strengthened  by  Jehovah  in 
presence  of  a  power  mightier  than  thejr  own.  It  was 
because  of  this  very  truth:  Jehovah  was  with  them. 
What  did  it  matter  about  all  others  ?  They  might  be 
greater,  stronger,  wiser,  more  than  the  Israelites;  but 
what  of  Jehovah  ?  This  was  their  boast.  Could  they 
match  with  Him?  Certainly  they  could  not;  this 
Jehovah  spreads  in  the  most  forcible  manner  before 
His  people  for  their  cheer  and  stay. 

But  we  must  not  overlook  another  part  of  the  chapter 
— ^not  the  Lord  strengthening  the  people  against  the 
mightiest  of  adversaries,  but  Israel  reminded  of  their 
rebellious  heart  even  under  such  circumstances  against 
Jehovah. 

In  chapter  x.  we  find  the  provision  of  Jehovah's 
goodness  is  stated  in  a  very  striking  way.  Thus  when 
the  story  of  their  rebellion  is  mentioned,  it  leads  Moses 
to  go  back  and  to  trace  how  this  spirit  betrayed  itself 
even  so  early  as  at  Horeb;  for  when  it  is  a  question 
of  rebellion,  we  must  go  to  the  root  of  it.  We  are  also 
shewn  the  astonishing  patience  of  Jehovah,  and  with 
that  which  might  be  difficult  to  understand  if  we  did 
not  look  to  the  moral  scope  of  the  book — the  destruction 
of  the  first  tables,  the  writing  out  of  fresh  ones,  and  the 
place  in  which  they  were  to  be  kept.  At  the  same  time 
we  are  told  how  the  tribe  of  Levi  was  separated,  after 
having  brought  in  (in  an  episodical  way)  an  allusion  to 
Aaron's  death.  It  seems  just  a  parenthesis,  and  not  a 
question  of  chronology.* 

*  Dr.  D.  (Introd.  O.  T.  p.  65)  says :  **  From  Deut.  x.  8  it  is  plain 
that  the  Levites  were  not  appointed  at  Sinai  but  later ;  whereas  we 


462       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

A  fair  question  arises  for  those  who  honour  the 
divine  word,  why  events  so  long  severed  in  time  are 
thus  introduced  seemingly  together.  No  doubt  the 
malicious  mind  of  the  sceptic  takes  occasion  from  it  to 
turn  what  he  does  not  seek  to  imderstand  to  tRe  dis- 
paragement of  inspiration.  But  there  is  no  discrepancy 
whatever,  nor  confusion  of  Aaron's  death  in  the  last 
year  of  the  wilderness  sojourn  with  the  separation  of 
Levi  some  thirty-eight  years  before.  The  truth  is  that 
the  solemn  circumstances  appear  to  recall  to  the  mind 
of  Moses  the  awful  lapse  of  Isrisiel  when  "they  made 
the  calf  which  Aaron  made,"  and  licvi,  of  old  perfidious 
to  the  stranger  for  a  sister's  sake,  consecrated  them- 
selves to  Jehovah  in  the  blood  of  their  idolatrous 
brethren ;  and  Moses  hews  at  Jehovah's  command 
tables  of  stone  like  the  first,  and  put  them,  written  as 
before,  in  the  ai'k  which  he  had  made.  It  was  not  then 
and  there  that  Aaron  died,  as  he  alas !  deserved.  The 
intercession  of  Moses  prevailed  so  far  for  his  brother 
and  the  people,  that  the  one  lived  till  near  the  end  of 
the  wanderings  in  the  desert,  and  the  others,  instead  of 
perishing  as  a  whole  at  once,  lived  to  take  their  journey 
from  a  land  of  wells  (Beeroth)  to  Mosera  where  Aaron 
died  at  Mount  Hor,  and  thence  to  Gudgodah,  and  to 
Jotbath,  "a  land  of  rivers  of  waters:"  such  was  the 
patient  goodness  of  God  to  both,  as  the  long  interval 
made  the  more  marked.* 

learn  from  Num.  viii.  that  their  institution  took  place  at  Sinai."  A 
disgraceful  perversion ;  for  Deut.  z.  6,  7  is  manifestly  a  parenthesis. 
Bearing  this  in  mind,  any  reader  can  see  that  ''at  that  time"  in  verse 
8  really  coalesces  with  '*  at  that  time  "  in  verses  1-5,  and  therefoie  is 
in  perfect  accord  with  Num.  viii. ;  and  yet  is  it  repeated  in  p.  336. 
*  See  Dr.  Lightfoot's  Works,  ii.  p.  136  (Pitman's  Edition). 


DEUTERONOMY   I.- XVI.  463 

In  chapter  xi  is  given  the  summing  up  of  the  whole 
matter,  the  practical  conclusion  which  the  lawgiver 
keeps  before  their  eyes.  They  were  to  remember  what 
rebellion  must  end  in.  Hence  it  is  that  he  alludes  to 
the  fate  of  Dathan  and  Abiram  whom  the  earth 
swallowed  up  in  consequence  of  their  flagrant  apostasy 
and  fighting  against  God.  "Your  eyes  have  seen  all 
the  great  acts  of  Jehovah  which  he  did.  Therefore 
shall  ye  keep  all  the  commandments  which  I  command 
you  this  day,  that  ye  may  be  strong,  and  go  in  and 
possess  the  land  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it ;  and  that 
ye  may  prolong  your  days  in  the  land  which  Jehovah 
sware  unto  your  fathers  to  give  unto  them  and  to  their 
seed,  a  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey  "  (ver. 
7-9).  To  the  end  of  the  chapter  follow  the  most  earnest 
warnings,  as  well  as  bright  promises :  disobedience  or 
obedience  would  be  the  turning  point  in  the  land.  The 
mount  of  blessing  and  the  mount  of  curse  were  there 
on  the  other  side  Jordan. 

This  closes  the  first  part  of  Deuteronomy.  A  few  words 
on  the  next  few  chapters  will  suffice  for  the  present. 

In  chapter  xiL  we  have  statutes  and  judgments. 
Thus  we  come  to  what  might  be  called  the  direct 
charges,  having  done  with  aU  the  introductory  part. 
All  the  previous  part  prepares  the  way.  Now  we  find 
what  would  test  their  obedience.  "  These  are  the  statutes 
and  judgments,  which  ye  shall  observe  to  do  in  the  land, 
which  Jehovah  God  of  thy  fathers  giveth  thee  to 
possess  it,  all  the  days  that  ye  live  upon  the  earth." 
In  the  very  first  place  is  laid  down  utter  destruction  of 
the  high  places.    The  reason  is  obvious.    The  first  of 


464       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

all  rights,  and  the  highest  of  our  duties,  is  that  God 
should  have  His  rights.  With  this  then  most  fittingly 
He  begins.  It  is  no  use  talking  about  Israel :  the  first 
object  is  God.  If  therefore  God  was  dishonoured  by 
the  high  places,  they  must  all  come  down.  Besides,  if 
these  high  places  had  been  dedicated  to  heathen  gods, 
Israel  must  not  dare  to  consecrate  them  to  the  true 
God.  Such  conversion  does  not  suit  God,  who  must 
have  His  own. 

God  must  and  does  choose  for  Himself — a  simple  yet 
most  important  consideration  (ver.  5, 11, 14, 18,  21,  26). 
Will-worship  is  intolerable.  It  ought  most  of  all  to 
shock  the  Christian.  If  it  were  merely  a  question  of 
man,  nobody  would  think  of  choosing  for  another.  No- 
body likes  this.  If  people  like  to  choose  for  themselves, 
as  mere  men,  what  an  awful  delusion  it  is  to  be  choos- 
ing for  God — ^to  be  really  governed  by  your  own  will  in 
matters  of  religion!  We  can  all  see  how  very  bad  it  was 
in  Israel;  but  do  we  feel  that  it  is  still  worse  in  the 
Christian  ?  He  has  given  no  title  to  adopt  doctrines, 
practices,  ways,  government,  or  any  one  thing 'that  is 
not  His  expressed  will  for  His  children.  Some  there 
are,  no  doubt,  who  assume  that  God  has  not  in  these 
things  expressed  any  will  of  His  own.  I  do  not  envy 
them  the  thought  that  God  has  not  revealed  His  mind 
about  what  is  nearest  to  Himself,  and  what  most  of 
all  is  bound  up  with  His  glory!  It  is  making  Grod 
less  than  a  man;  for  if  he  could  not  be  content  with- 
out it,  how  much  less  the  living  God  ? 

Here  we  see  that  God  had  a  most  deliberate  choice 
in  the  smallest  matters  as  well  as  in  the  greatest; 
but  He  begins  with  what  most  nearly  touches  His  pre- 


DEUTERONOMY   I.- XVI.  465 

sence.  He  sets  Himself  against  the  high  places ;  He 
will  not  have  them.  He  chose  to  have  a  place  where 
He  would  put  His  name.  This  becomes  the  centre  for 
all ;  and  the  book  of  Deuteronomy  is  founded  on  that 
fact,  Israel  being  on  the  point  of  entering  into  the  land. 
Consequently  it  is  an  anticipation  of  what  was  before 
them.  It  is  not  a  book  for  the  wilderness,  except  for 
their  hearts  to  look  back  on  whilst  on  the  borders  before 
they  entered  the  land. 

And  the  grand  principle  too  we  may  just  notice  in 
passing:  Jehovah  reminds  them  by  Moses  that  He  had 
allowed  much  while  they  were  in  the  wilderness  which 
could  not  be  tolemted  now  (ver.  8).  If  they  were  going 
to  possess  the  land,  let  them  remember  it  was  God's 
land,  not  theirs.  He  might  and  would  give  it  to  them, 
but  still  He  always  kept  His  place.  It  was  "  the  land 
which  Jehovah  thy  God  giveth  thee."  In  fact  He  acted 
as  the  landlord.  They  were  only  tenants,  and  had  to 
pay  Him  rent.  This  was  the  substantial  meaning  of  the 
tithes  and  other  requisitions  (ver.  11).  They  were  the 
dues  He  demanded  in  virtue  of  His  position  as  landlord 
of  the  people  in  the  land.  Therefore  we  can  understand 
it  as  if  He  said,  When  you  were  in  the  strange  country, 
when  you  left  it  in  haste  to  wander  here  and  there 
in  the  wilderness,  there  were  great  difficulties  and 
many  irregularities  which  cannot  be  allowed  now.  The 
greater  the  blessing  of  God,  the  more  thoroughly  you 
are  put  on  the  ground  that  God  has  given  you,  the 
more  He  insists  on  thorough  and  constant  obedience. 
This  is  the  point  here,  and  thus  we  see  the  connection 
with  all  that  has  gone  before. 

Then  in  chapter  xiii.  there  is  a  similar  line,  aU  these 

2  H 


466        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

* 

early  injunctions  being  what  we  may  call  religious 
statutes.  We  shall  meet  with  others  ere  long,  we  shall 
come  to  civil  ones,  but  we  are  not  going  beyond  the 
religious  charges  at  present.  It  is  evident  that  they 
are  somehow  or  another  connected  with  God,  and  touch 
matters  of  religion,  as  men  would  say.  Israel  must  not 
slight  God's  claims  in  common  things.  For  instance, 
as  they  must  not  trifle  with  blood,  because  it  belonged 
to  God  (ch.  xii.  16-25),  the  dreamer  must  be  guarded 
against  a  dream  (ch.  xiii.  1-5).  It  might  belong  to  the 
true  God ;  but  "  Thou  shalt  not  hearken  "  if  there  was 
the  smallest  risk  of  going  after  other  gods.  Power 
supernatural  has  not  the  smallest  value,  nay,  is  to  be 
shunned  rigorously,  if  it  weakens  consciences  as  to  the 
true  God.  The  same  Spirit  which  has  the  power  of 
miracle  is  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  If 
truth  be  abandoned,  it  indicates  the  power  of  Satan  as 
the  source,  and  not  the  true  God.  Such  is  the  prin- 
ciple :  no  sparing  friends,  relatives,  "wife  of  thy  bosom," 
could  be  tolerated. 

There  is  then  (verses  12-18)  pointed  out  the  way 
to  deal  with  a  city  guilty  of  idolatry.  "Then  shalt 
thou  enquire,  and  make  search,  and  ask  diligently ; 
and,  behold,  if  it  be  truth,  and  the  thing  certain,  that 
such  abomination  is  wrought  among  you;  thou  shalt 
surely  smite  the  inhabitants  of  that  city  with  the  edge 
of  the  sword,  destroying  it  utterly,  and  all  that  is 
therein,  and  the  cattle  thereof,  with  the  edge  of  the 
sword,"  the  small  things  as  well  as  great.  To  have 
confidence  in  God  is  one  of  the  important  points  here, 
to  cherish  full  confidence  that  whatever  He  gives  us 
is  the  very  best  thing  for  us.     It  is  as  true  for  us  as  for 


DEUTERONOMY   L-XVL  467 

them,  though  not  shewn  in  the  same  legal  way  or  out- 
ward manner. 

Chapter  xiv.  insists  on  what  became  the  children  of 
Jehovah  their  God  in  abstaining  from  unseemly  mann- 
ings or  disfigurements  for  the  dead,  as  well  as  from  any 
food  which  He,  who  knew  better  than  they,  pronounced 
abominable.  They  are  then  shewn  what  may  or  may 
not  be  eaten,  whether  beasts,  fishes,  or  fowls.  A  people 
holy  to  Jehovah  must  not  eat  anything  that  dies  of 
itself,  nor  accustom  itself  to  an  uncomely  act,  were  it 
with  a  dumb  and  dead  kid  and  the  milk  of  its  dam. 

But  there  is  another  point  peculiar  to  this  book. 
Beside  the  tithe  of  their  increase  truly  rendered  from 
com,  wine,  oil,  with  the  firstlings,  which,  if  distant 
from  the  place  Jehovah  would  choose  for  His  centre  of 
worship,  might  be  turned  into  money,  and  there  spent 
before  Him  with  a  joyful  household  and  the  Levite  not 
forsaken,  there  was  to  be  a  tithe  at  the  end  of  three  years, 
mentioned  in  the  28th  and  29th  verses :  "At  the  end  of 
three  years  thou  shalt  bring  forth  all  the  tithe  of  thine 
increase  the  same  year,  and  shalt  lay  it  up  within  thy 
gates."  They  were  not  compelled  to  take  this  to  the 
one  place  that  God  had  consecrated.  It  had  more  of 
the  family  character;  but  a  beautiful  feature  is  con- 
nected with  it :  "And  the  Levite  (because  he  hath  no 
part  nor  inheritance  with  thee),  and  the  stranger,  and 
the  fatherless,  and  the  widow,  which  are  within  thy 
gates,  shall  come,  and  shall  eat  and  be  satisfied;  that 
Jehovah  thy  God  may  bless  thee  in  all  the  work  of 
thine  hand  which  thou  doest."  Even  in  the  very  witness 
of  domestic  blessing  there  must  be  the  largeness  of 
heart  that  goes  out  to  those  who  have  no  friends  to  care 

2  H  2 


«f  Hs  ^rb% !    W«;  kzcnr  ip^  iisiw  de  firndb-  is  i^  id 

jgadf  1^  <i&  Mfl>  Mjggr  cc  tecBia-  ttfaaa  m  icfeaed  arM^hnfawL 
It  k  ffi0t  fo  wfeR  G<id  ;^!^?f«9a.  llac»  even  li^ere  it 
de  imib' j^t&eid  in  sacbm  max  as  tiiiis  vidan  dieir 
gtts,tlK  LeTEt«udKr  sbb^b;  t&e  frthpriffgHs,  all  ]ia¥« 
dtfirpat.  WIkt  sifaiMifid  ttsM- Kt  f^oBtt  f  It^asGod 
wliCf  ndide  tlie  fionilT  if^oase,  and  dier  woe  to  go  out 
to  tiiii!j06  that  woe  soaiigeis  to  ilL  Is  it  nol  a  beamifiil 
iadiaakm  of  what  ibt  fme  God  is,  even  in  His  least 

In  dbapCcT  xr.  we  find  a  smikr  prindpie  as  to  the 
jear  of  lekaae^  On  this  we  need  not  panknlailT  dwdl, 
but  ther  aie  lendnded  of  thdr  owq  plaee^  Ther  had 
heen  bovidmea  themsidTes :  and  if  they  had  been  de- 
fireied  of  God,  ther  should  cultivate  the  same  spiiit  as 
He  bad  shewn.    This  was  their  point  of  iinitaiHng  God. 

In  chapter  ivi  1—17  (where  I  now  stc^)  we  have  the 
winding  iq>  of  all  this  pan — the  termination  of  the 
statutes  which  bad  to  do  with  lel^ion.  Let  me  ask, 
Why  were  there  these  three  feasts,  and  the%  three 
only?  For  a  reason  given  abeaihr.  These  feasts  made 
an  appeal  to  a  male  Israelite  which  none  besides  could 
make.  Others  might  be  optional,  bat  these  feasts  were 
obligatory.     It  is  a  call  to  obedience.     The  book  of 


•  The  eSait  of  rstkraafistB  to  shew  that  ''the  Dentoonoiiust" 
wrote  long  after  Icnel  were  in  the  land  of  Fdestine  is  mere  ill-will 
and  want  of  depth.  At  the  aame  time  it  is  in  no  way  opposed  to  tiie 
•tricteat  Tiews  of  inapintion  to  hold  that  the  law  was  tdiud  by  an  in- 
flpired  man,  whether  Ezra  (according  to  the  Jews,  as  Joaephns,  &c.), 
Jeremiah,  or  any  other  prophet.  The  inspired  editor  may  luiYe  giTen 
kter  namet,  and  aAdfld  **  la  it  is  in  this  day/' or  ezplanatoiy  zema^ 


DEUTERONOMY   I.-XVL  469 

Deuteronomy  throughout  pre-eminently  brings  in  the 
authority  of  God  over  a  people  in  relationship  with 
Himself,  displayed  and  proved  in  obedience.  What  did 
not  so  much  manifest  obedience  is  left  out,  though  it 
might  have  an  important  spiritual  meaning  in  its  place ; 
for  certainly  other  feasts  (as  the  feast  of  atonement,  for 
instance)  had.  But  it  was  not  a  question  here  of  truth 
or  its  forms,  but  of  obedience:  this  is  ever  in  view.  It 
is  not  the  tabernacle,  nor  the  priest,  not  the  wilderness, 
but  obeying  God  as  His  people  in  the  land. 

There  is  another  remark  to  be  made.  The  obedience 
spoken  of  in  this  chapter,  which  called  every  male  of 
Israel  up  to  remember  Jehovah  at  these  three  feasts, 
gathered  them  to  the  place  which  Jehovah  their  God 
would  choose.  Then  again  we  have  what  is  always 
brought  out  in  the  book  of  Deuteronomy.  It  is  Jehovah 
gathering  the  people  round  Himself.  In  the  delight  of 
His  people  He  delights.  He  would  have  them  happy  in 
Himself,  and  enjoying  all  He  had  given  them  to  enjoy. 
Consequently  we  have  these  three  feasts,  which  set 
forth  particularly  Jehovah  providing  to  fill  the  heart  of 
His  people  with  peace  and  joy  to  overflowing. 

Yet  at  the  first  of  these  feasts  Israel  were  not  told 
to  rejoice.  In  a  certain  sense  it  might  be  a  season  too 
good  and  deep  for  joy.  The  character  of  it  was  so 
solemn  as  scarce  to  admit  of  this.  It  represented  that 
death  which  befell  the  Lamb,  and  arrested  the  judgment 
of  God  which  had  gone  out  against  us  because  of  sin. 
We  may  rejoice  in  the  God  that  has  so  dealt  with  us, 
but  is  it  becoming  that  Christ's  death  should  be  a  call  to 
transports  ?  There  are  deeper  feelings  in  the  heart  than 
joy.    Times  we  know  when  the  sense  of  what  we  have 


470        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

been,  of  what  we  are,  and  of  God's  putting  all  our  evil 
away  for  ever  by  the  death  of  His  own  Son,  is  too  deep 
for  joy  if  not  for  tears.  I  do  not  mean  that  there  should 
not  be  the  profoundest  feeling  of  gratitude,  and  the 
fullest  expression  of  thanksgiving  to  God.  Still  it  is  too 
solemn  to  admit  of  what  is  so  buoyant,  which  has  its 
own  proper  exercise.  But  God  is  very  carefol,  in  the 
face  of  the  passover,  that  there  should  not  be  a  forget- 
folness  of  that  escape  which  brought  them  out  together 
then.  Hence,  in  the  first  feast,  we  find  they  were  to  eat 
unleavened  bread.  "  Thou  shal))  eat  no  leavened  bread 
with  it;  seven  days  shalt  thou  eat  xmleavened  bread 
therewith,  even  the  bread  of  affliction ;  for  thou  earnest 
forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  in  haste:  that  thou 
mayest  remember  the  day  when  thou  camest  forth  out 
of  the  land  of  Egypt  all  the  days  of  thy  life."  Then 
they  are  told  not  to  celebrate  the  feast  indiscriminately 
where  and  as  they  please.  "  Thou  mayest  not  sacrifice 
the  passover  in  any  of  thy  gates,  which  Jehovah  thy 
God  giveth  thee;  but  at  the  place  which  Jehovah  thy 
God  shall  choose  to  place  his  naone  in,  there  thou  shalt 
sacrifice  the  passover  at  even,  at  the  going  down  of  the 
sun,  at  the  season  that  thou  camest  forth  out  of  Egypt. 
And  thou  shalt  roast  and  eat  it  in  the  place  which 
Jehovah  thy  God  shall  choose ;  and  thou  shalt  turn  in 
the  morning,  and  go  unto  thy  tents." 

But  the  second  feast  brings  out  joy  in  a  very  dis- 
tinct and  delightful  manner.  "  Seven  weeks  shalt  thou 
number  unto  thee :  begin  to  number  the  seven  weeks 
from  such  time  as  thou  beginnest  to  put  the  sickle  to 
the  com.  And  thou  shalt  keep  the  feast  of  weeks  unto 
Jehovah  thy  God  with  a  tribute  of  a  freewill  offering 


DEUTEEONOMY   I.-XVL  471 

of  thine  hand,  which  thou  shalt  give  unto  Jehovah 
thy  God,  according  as  Jehovah  thy  God  hath  blessed 
thee :  and  thou  shalt  rejoice  before  Jehovah  thy  God, 
thou,  and  thy  son."  It  is  not  the  death  of  Christ  with 
all  its  solemn,  however  blessed,  issues.  It  is  founded 
on  the  life  of  Christ  in  resutrection,  when  the  Holy 
Ghost  brings  us  into  the  power  of  enjoyment.  It  is 
pentecost.  Consequently  it  is  that  great  feast  which 
finds  its  answer  in  Christianity  more  particularly  (the 
passover  being  of  course  the  foundation) ;  but  this  is 
pre-eminently  its  character  as  a  present  fact.  And 
mark  this;  that  it  is  not  only  joy  in  the  Lord,  but  calling 
others  to  joy  (ver.  11).  Besides,  "Thou  shalt  remember 
that  thou  wast  a  bondman  in  Egypt :  and  thou  shalt 
observe  and  do  these  statutes."  We  were  bondmen,  and 
are  not.  We  are  to  observe  the  statutes  and  to  do  them. 
Once  more  obedience  is  pre-eminently  the  matter,  and 
this  too  as  delivered  men — once  bondslaves,  but  now 
free  to  obey  (ver.  12). 

There  is  a  third  feast,  that  of  tabernacles.  It  is  not 
the  liberty  of  grace,  which  the  feast  of  pentecost  is, 
but  rather  the  epoch  in  type  wh^n  the  liberty  of 
gloiy  shaU  arrive.  Mark  how  very  strikingly  this  is 
shewn.  "Thou  shalt  observe  the  feast  of  tabernacles 
seven  days,  after  that  thou  hast  gathered  in  thy  corn 
and  thy  wine."  Undoubtedly  the  gatherings  in  of  the 
com  and  the  wine  (that  is,  the  harvest  and  the  vintage) 
are  the  well  known  types  of  God's  final  dealings :  the 
harvest  when  He  separates  the  wheat  from  the  chaff,  or 
at  any  rate  from  that  which  is  not  wheat;  and  the 
vintage  when  He  executes  unsparing  judgment  upon 
the  vine  of  the  earth — ^upon  all  religion  that  is  vain 


472        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

and  denies  heaven.  There  is  no  mercy  shewn  in  the 
vintage.  In  the  harvest  there  is  the  gathering  in  of 
the  good  and  the  extinction  of  the  evil ;  but  the 
vintage  knows  nothing  but  vengeance  from  God.  It  is 
after  this  will  come  the  full  time  of  joy  for  the  earth. 
Blessing  for  the  world  is  after  God  has  thus  cleared 
the  scoae :  in  the  prospect  of  this  the  Christian  is  caUed 
to  rejoice — to  have  the  joy  not  only  of  liberty  now  but 
of  the  glory  that  is  about  to  displace  the  oppression,  the 
sorrow,  the  wretchedness,  the  sin,  of  this  poor  long- 
groaning  earth,  when  aU  shall  be  put  imder  the  only 
One  who  is  competent  to  bear  the  burden  and  to  govern 
it  to  the  glory  of  God.  Hence  the  language  dififers 
most  sensibly  even  from  the  joyous  scene  of  blessing  of 
which  the  feast  of  weeks  was  so  redolent.  It  is  not 
merely  "  thou  shalt  keep  the  feast  of  weeks  unto  Jeho- 
vah thy  God  with  a  tribute  of  free-will  oflFering  of  thine 
hand,  which  thou  shalt  give,  according  as  Jehovah  thy 
God  hath  blessed  thee,"  but "  seven  days  shalt  thou  keep 
a  solemn  feast  unto  Jehovah  thy  God  in  the  place  which 
Jehovah  shall  choose :  because  Jehovah  thy  God  shall 
bless  thee  in  all  thine  increase,  and  in  all  the  increase 
of  thine  hands ;  therefore  thou  shalt  surely  rejoice." 

May  the  Lord  give  us  hearts  to  rejoice  in  all  His 
grace  and  truth  and  glory ! 


DEUTEEONOMY  XVI.- XXXIV.  473 


XM, 


DEUTERONOMY. 

Chaps,  xvi.  18-xzxiv. 

It  is  clear  that  a  new  division  of  the  statutes  and 
judgments  of  this  book  begins  with  the  later  verses 
just  read  from  chapter  xvi.  What  belonged  to  the 
religious  life  of  Israel  was  closed  with  the  three  feasts 
which  fill  the  previous  part  of  the  chapter. 

Now  we  touch  on  the  instruments  and  means  which 
Jehovah  established  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  the 
life  of  the  people  in  judicial  matters.  Judges  and 
ofl&cers  were  to  abound.  They  were  to  be  made  in  all 
their  gates,  and  with  watchful  care  there  is  a  guard 
against  respect  of  persons  and  anything  calculated  to 
turn  aside  the  sentence  of  righteousness.  The  land 
which  Jehovah  their  God  gave  must  have  justice ;  lov- 
ing-kindness, and  mercy  between  man  and  man,  and  all 
pleasant  aflFections  among  the  people  must  not  interfere 
in  such  questions.  Along  with  aU  this  we  suddenly  find 
what  the  spirit  of  man  cannot  understand — the  intro- 
duction of  a  fresh  allusion  to  religious  matters.  "  Then 
shalt  not  plant  a  grove  of  any  trees  near  unto  the  altar 
of  Jehovah  thy  God,  which  thou  shalt  make  thee. 
Neither  shalt  thou  set  thee  up  any  image ;  which  Jeho- 


4"2 


-£crv 


■jS  tsz  p^^jtatetch. 


:_•-•    i.-.-r  J»J »    ?. 


.•cIT^    LS    ..  .".'■^ 


i-i»r    _:r.»:    urn   ine 


.Mk...'.liNL«.',.  •.    .  k<^C 


•LL'T  f.:»=iie .  in  ^Aue  rri-spitor  of  iLio   .. 
:•■  r-r  Lice — -■»:  juve  zhe  fov  noi  «.  . 

'  Mm 

c  utr  zicrj  Tnaiu  L?  a'wut  to  JL  j.-.. 

jT'Jir.-^g  -iari.  when  all  -"I'v*- 
•I'Tie  Tiii:  is  icmpecent  to  1    . 
-I  ::   zh^  '^ly  of  Gel. 

zLiiiu  jffnirT/Iy  even  frnT^  ;'  

■^-iii'iii  lie  iast  of  Tf  "^ 

"5^  "-It  »>:*!  wirli  -3  *^^ 
'::ir'l  Triiiih  thou  «^*''** 

I  =*:l!fizji  "feast  r.  •  •  -•^^ 

■rfi-iTLi  siall  ."-^"" 
';[ei«s  iZiee  in 

:c  ~""^**  Sail  '^ 


« 


jl-i--*r 


JBOL 


—    -id 

.  ._    /ins- 

.  -iven. 
-nii*iii:  Lie 

. L.'-^rrap- 

-i  iiiaei, 

._r  _LLt  vviiac 

...u.  HI   iicir 
-?  -.liv^art:  ill 

.t.«.Lu.C2  111  iuxi 

•■•.»il 

.  .  ^    ;  iiW. 


..b«.>-    ^'' 


V^" 


•  Mil 


vsn.- XXXIV.  475 

■  pursued  to  shew 
;Lh  of  two  witnesses 
■  who  was  worthy  of 
gi-eat  value  in  practice, 
:i  the  New  Testament — a 
-.  ever  neglect  without  loss, 
•rin  singular  that  the  Spirit  of 
Luch  importance  to  the  require- 
witnesses;  but  let  us  remember 
.LiLiTiing  the  ways  of  God  actively 
pie  on  earth,  after  He  had  brought 
ouship  with  Himself.  Undoubtedly,  if 
active  concern  in  man  or  his  ways,  there 
:iiculties.  Israel  alone,  of  all  the  nations  on 
■X  the  earth,  stood  on  such  a  ground  as  this; 
Ilcui  God  laid  the  necessity  of  demanding  such 
.  uuny.  But  He  is  always  wise,  and  besides  He 
Id  teach  His  people  to  trust  that  He  wiU  always  give 
tever  is  necessary  according  to  His  own  order. 
0  the  New  Testament  uses  the  principle  with  us,  who 
3  to  do  with  Him  and  who  deals  with  us  in  a  far 
8  intimate  way  than  He  ever  did  with  Israel  We 
3  to  do  with  One  that  has  deigned  to  make  us  His 
Uing-place  by  the  Spirit.  Hence  where  He  has  laid 
n  His  word  with  clearness,  as  for  instance  in  such 
atter  as  this,  we  may  unqualifiedly  count  on  Him. 
pie  may  bring  all  kinds  of  objections,  and  say  that 
cannot  always  expect  such  an  amount  of  testimony 
Lis, — that  we  must  look  at  the  circumstances,  and,  if 
^  impossible  to  produce  evidence  sufficient,  we  must 
^xx  what  seems  most  probable.  But  this  is  neither 
^  nor  less  than  to  abandon  divine  ground  for  what 


•j_ 


I 


474       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

vah  thy  God  hateth.  Theu  shalt  not  sacrifice  unto 
Jehovah  thy  God  any  bullock,  or  sheep,  wherein  is 
blemish,  or  any  evil-favouredness :  for  that  is  an  abomi- 
nation unto  Jehovah  thy  God." 

With  this  beginning  of  chapter  xvii.  there  goes  a 
strong  warning  as  to  any  man  or  woman  that  had 
wrought  wickedness  in  the  sight  of  Jehovah  in  trans- 
gressing His  covenant,  going  and  serving  other  gods, 
more  particularly  worshipping  the  host  of  heaven. 
It  appears  to  me  that,  so  far  from  presenting  the 
smallest  real  difficulty,  so  far  from  being  an  interrup- 
tion of  the  great  subject  of  the  judicial  life  of  Israel, 
we  have  to  face  here  the  impoitant  truth  that  what 
touches  God,  what  falsifies  Him  as  such,  has  the  closest 
bearing  on  the  daily  life  of  His  people,  both  in  their 
households  and  also  in  matters  of  public  judgment.  If 
we  are  wrong  in  what  we  allow  as  to  God  Himself,  if 
there  is  a  tampering  with  that  which  sullies  His  glory, 
a  dishonour  allowed  (for  instance)  as  to  His  nature  in 
admitting  these  false  gods,  or  setting  up  creatures  in  the 
place  of  God  Himself,  all  the  lower  part  of  the  life  will 
feel  at  once  the  destructive  and  corrupting  consequences 
of  it. 

Hence  the  difficulty  which  divinea  have  found,  in 
what  they  supposed  the  going  back  to  matters  of  reli- 
gion, is  in  point  of  fact  a  mere  mistake  of  their  own 
from  divorcing  that  which  God  has  joined  together. 
We  have  had  fully  the  direct  instruction  as  to  what 
concerned  His  own  glory,  but  now  even  when  He  is 
touching  on  that  which  bears  on  man's  life,  He  inter- 
weaves religious  elements  not  at  all  as  a  repetition  of 
the  past,  but  as  connecting  it  with  the  present  subject. 


DEUTERONOMY  XVL- XXXIV.  475 

Further,  we  find  that  the  subject  is  pursued  to  shew 
the  place  of  testimony.  By  the  mouth  of  two  witnesses 
or  three  it  .was  ordained  that  he  who  was  worthy  of 
death  should  die.  This  was  of  great  value  in  practice, 
and  is  made  use  of  largely  in  the  New  Testament — a 
principle  which  no  man  can  ever  neglect  without  loss. 

At  first  sight  it  may  seem  singular  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  should  attach  so  much  importance  to  the  require- 
ment of  two  or  three  witnesses ;  but  let  us  remember 
that  we  are  here  learning  the  ways  of  God  actively 
dealing  with  a  people  on  earth,  after  He  had  brought 
them  into  relationship  with  Himself.  Undoubtedly,  if 
God  took  no  active  concern  in  man  or  his  ways,  there 
might  be  diflSculties.  Israel  alone,  of  all  the  nations  on 
the  face,  of  the  earth,  stood  on  such  a  ground  as  this ; 
and  on  them  God  laid  the  necessity  of  demanding  such 
testimony.  But  He  is  always  wise,  and  besides  He 
would  teach  His  people  to  trust  that  He  wiU  always  give 
whatever  is  necessary  according  to  His  own  order. 

So  the  New  Testament  uses  the  principle  with  us,  who 
have  to  do  with  Him  and  who  deals  with  us -in  a  far 
more  intimate  way  than  He  ever  did  with  Israel  We 
have  to  do  with  One  that  has  deigned  to  make  us  His 
dwelling-place  by  the  Spirit.  Hence  where  He  has  laid 
down  His  word  with  clearness,  as  for  instance  in  such 
a  matter  as  this,  we  may  unqualifiedly  count  on  Him. 
People  may  bring  all  kinds  of  objections,  and  say  that 
we  cannot  always  expect  such  an  amount  of  testimony 
as  this, — ^that  we  must  look  at  the  circumstances,  and,  if 
it  be  impossible  to  produce  evidence  sufficient,  we  must 
act  on  what  seems  most  probable.  But  this  is  neither 
more  nor  less  than  to  abandon  divine  ground  for  what 


476        LECTUBES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

is  hxuDan ;  and  I  am  persuaded  that  a  deeper  injury  by 
a  long  way  would  be  done  to  the  people  of  Grod  by  a 
single  departure  from  His  word  and  mind  and  way  in 
such  a  matter  as  this,  than  by  failure  to  convict  in 
ten  cases  where  there  might  be  evil  underneath.  Oar 
business  is  never  to  leave  the  plain  word  of  God,  but  to 
cleave  to  it,  and,  whatever  the  pressure  of  circumstances, 
to  wait  on  God.  He  is  able  to  produce  witnesses  when 
we  least  see  how  or  whence  they  come. 

•  Thus  we  are  kept  in  peace  while  trusting  in  His  word; 
and  what  is  the  spirit  of  him  who  in  such  matters  could 
bear  to  be  hasty,  or  wish  to  condemn  another  before  God 
has*  brought  out  the  evidence  ?  Thus  the  heart  abides 
confiding  and  calm,  knowing  that  He  who  beholds  and 
knows  all  is  able  to  bring  forward  whatever  is  neces- 
sary at  the  right  moment.  It  may  be  His  way  to  try 
the  faith  of  His  people  and  to  himible  by  keeping  them 
in  ignorance  for  a  tima  Where  there  existed  greater 
spiritual  power,  there  might  be  a  more  ready  use  of  the 
means  that  God  puts  at  our  disposal;  but  whatever 
His  ground  for  withholding  anything  they  needed,  our 
plain  call  is  to  cherish  perfect  confidence  that  He  cares 
for  us  not  only  in  what  He  gives,  but  in  what  He  with- 
holds. We  therefore  can  stand  to  His  word — "  In  the 
mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses  every  word  shall  be 
established ;"  and  where  this  is  not  vouchsafed,  where 
the  testimony  fails,  our  duty  is  to  wait  on  the  Lord. 

This  brings  us  to  another  point.  If  there  arose  mat- 
ters too  hard  for  them,  as  it  is  said,  they  were  to  get  up 
to  the  place  which  Jehovah  their  God  should  choose. 
"And  thou  shalt  come  imto  the  priests  the  Levites, 
and  imto  the  judge  that  shall  be  in  those  days,  and 


DEUTERONOMY  XVL- XXXIV.  477 

enquire ;  and  they  shall  shew  thee  the  sentence  of 
judgment:  and  thou  shalt  do  according  to  the  sen- 
tence, which  they  of  that  place  which  Jehovah  shall 
choose  shall  shew  thee ;  and  thou  shalt  observe  to  do 
according  to  all  that  they  inform  thee."  Here  again 
the  principle  is  good  and  valid  for  the  present  time ;  for 
we  must  remember  particularly  in  this  book  of  Deu- 
teronomy that  priests  are  used  in  a  sensibly  different 
way  from  what  is  found  elsewhere,  as  was  pointed 
out  in  the  last  lecture.  It  is  not  a  question  here  so 
much  of  their  service  in  standing  between  the  people 
and  God,  as  of  their  helping  the  people  in  what  they 
owed  to  Him.  In  Leviticus  it  is  the  former,  because 
there  it  is  a  question  of  drawing  near  to  God,  and 
the  people  could  not  go  into  the  sanctuary,  but  the 
priests  for  them.  In  Deuteronomy,  which  supposes  the 
people  about  to  enter  on  the  land,  we  have  more  the 
fanuly  order  of  the  nation,  with  Jehovah  their  God ; 
and  the  priests  the  Levites  help  this  on,  although  of 
course  in  the  sanctuary  the  priests  would  stiU  retain 
their  place.  The  two  books  are  in  no  way  inconsistent 
with  each  other.  There  is  a  difference  made,  which 
consists  in  this,  that  the  priests  are  regarded  more  as 
a  part  of  the  people,  not  so  much  as  an  intervening 
class  between  God  and  them. 

Accordingly  here  we  find  that  in  these  matters  of 
judgment  which  belong  to  the  practical  dificulties  of 
daily  life,  where  questions  were  too  hard  for  ordinary 
men,  appeal  must  be  made  to  them,  not  so  much 
in  their  sacrificial  capacity,  but  as  those  who  ought 
to  have  greater  practical  acquaintance  with  the  word 
of  God,  and  thereby  their  senses  more  exercised  to  dis- 


478        LECTUBES  ON  TUE  PENTATEUCH. 

cem  good  and  eviL  It  is  granted  at  once  that  nothing 
can  be  more  ruinous  in  Christendom  than  the  assertion 
of  an  earthly  priesthood,  based  on  the  notion  of  some 
having  an  access  to  Gk)d  more  than  others  in  point  of 
title ;  it  is  in  eflfect  to  deny  the  gospeL 

At  the  same  time  all  must  feel  the  value  of  a 
spiritual  man's  judgment  where  we  faiL  There  is  no 
one  perhaps,  unless  of  a  singularly  proud  and  inde- 
pendent spirit,  who  has  not  found  the  want  of  it ;  not 
a  few  have  practically  acted  upon  it,  and  proved  its 
value  when  enjoyed.  So  the  apostle  James  lets  us 
know  the  value  of  a  righteous  man's  prayers.  Surely 
this  does  not  mean  every  believer.  Although  every 
Christian  is  justified  by  faith,  and  may  be  expected  to 
display  a  just  and  good  man's  ways  practically ;  still  it 
cannot  be  denied  that  there  are  wide  diflerences  of 
measure  among  real  believers,  and  that  we  all  have  the 
consciousness  that  there  are  those  among  the  people  of 
God,  to  whom  we  could  not  happily  open  our  diffi- 
culties, and  some  to  whom  one  could  most  freely; 
some  who  have  such  a  spiritual  tone  and  ripe  acquaint- 
ance with  His  mind,  who  therefore  help  their  brethren, 
not  in  the  least  by  assuming  an  authority  over  the 
consciences  of  others,  not  by  claiming  dominion  over 
their  faith  (not  even  an  apostle  would  do  this),  but  who 
nevertheless  help  decidedly  by  spiritual  capacity  to  give 
a  judgment  formed  by  habitual  walking  in  fellowship 
with  Him,  so  as  to  meet  others  in  practical  difficulties 
and  trials  here  below.  This  seems  to  be  the  principle 
at  any  rate  of  what  we  have  here. 

But  this  leads  to  another  step.  Jehovah  would  raise 
up  judges  in  an  extraordinary  way  jfrom  time  to  time : 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.-XXXIV.  479 

a  fact  familiar  to  all  in  the  Old  Testament  history. 
Further,  there  is  the  supposition  even  of  a  king  being 
called  for  in  due  time.  But  in  a  most  striking  manner 
God  guards  against  the  very  snares  into  which  the 
king,  though  he  were  the  wise  son  of  David  himself, 
feU  away,  and  so  brought  shame  on  God  and  misery  on 
His  people.  Alas!  the  king  when  raised  up  among 
them,  though  ngt  a  stranger  but  their  brother  (as  it  is 
said)  did  multiply  wives  to  himself,  as  we  all  know, 
and  his  heart  was  turned  away.  Multiplying  to  himself 
silver  and  gold  beyond  all  measure,  the  law  of  Jehovah 
had  not  its  place  in  his  souL  The  consequence  was 
that  the  closing  days  even  of  that  wisest  and  richest 
King  of  Israel  notoriously  became  fruitful  in  sorrow 
and  vanity;  which  burst  out  publicly  as  soon  as  he  was 
taken  away. 

In  chap.  xviiL  we  have  the  priests  the  Levites  intro- 
duced in  another  way.  It  is  said  that  they  were  to 
have  no  part  nor  inheritance  with  Israel;  but  they 
were  to  "eat  the  offerings  of  Jehovah  made  by  fire 
and  his  inheritance.  Therefore  shall  they  have  no 
inheritance  among  their  brethren.  Jehovah  is  their 
inheritance,  as  he  hath  said  unto  them."  God  thus 
marks  afresh  their  special  place  of  having  Himself  for 
their  portion,  so  that  what  went  to  Him  feU  to  them. 
This  gave  a  deep  sense  of  identification  with  Jehovah ; 
as  also  it  will  be  found  that,  all  through  the  book  of 
Deuteronomy,  this  is  sustained  and  applied  beyond  all 
the  other  books  of  Moses.  We  may  see  before  we  have 
done  what  was  the  ground  of  it.  For  the  present  I 
only  call  witnesses  to  the  fact.  Hence  it  was  said, 
"  And  this  shall  be  the  priest's  due," — not  only  certain 


480       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

• 

parts  of  the  oflFerings,  but  also  "the  first-fruit  of  thy 
com,  of  thy  wine,  and  of  thine  oil,  and  the  first  of  the 
fleece  of  thy  sheep  shalt  thou  give  him.  For  Jehoyah 
thy  God  hath  chosen  him  out  of  all  thy  tribes  to  stand 
to  minister  in  the  name  of  Jehovah,  him  and  his  sons 
for  ever."  Then  comes  the  Levite,  his  service,  and  his 
portion.*  "And  if  a  Levite  come  from  any  of  thy  gates 
out  of  all  Israel,  where  he  sojourned,  and  come  with  all 
the  desire  of  his  mind  unto  the  place  which  Jehovah 
shall  choose;  then  he  shall  minister  in  the  name  of 
Jehovah  his  God,  as  all  his  brethren  the  Levites  do, 
which  stand  there  before  Jehovah.  They  shall  have 
like  portions  to  eat,  beside  that  which  cometh  of  the 
sale  of  his  patrimony." 

At  the  same  time  there  is  the  sternest  guard  against 
all  curious  prying  into  the  will  of  God  that  was  not 
revealed,  agaiost  tampering,  as  it  follows  here,  with  divi- 
nation or  observation  of  times,  against  enchantments  or 
charms,  against  consulting  familiar  spirits,  wizards,  or 
necromancers.  "For  all  that  do  these  things  are  an 
abomination  imto  Jehovah  :  and  because  of  these 
abominations  Jehovah  thy  God  doth  drive  them  out 
from,  before  thee.  Thou  shalt  be  perfect  with  Jehovah 
thy  God.  For  these  nations,  which  thou  shalt  possess, 
hearkened  unto  observers  of  times,  and  imto  diviners  : 
but  Jehovah  thy  God  hath  not  suffered  thee  so  to  do." 

Assuredly  this  principle  is  in  no  way  weakened  in 

*  Yerses  1  and  2  bring  forward  **  the  priests  the  Levites,  the  tribe 
of  Levi,"  giving  emphasis  to  the  priests,  but  joining  aU  the  tribe  to 
which  they  belonged  with  them.  Then  in  verses  3-5  the  priest  and 
his  sons  are  specified,  as  in  verses  6-8  the  Levite.  There  is  no  groand 
for  the  rationalist  dream  of  another  age  and  state  from  that  contem- 
plated in  Exodus,  Leviticus,  or  Numbers. 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.- XXXIV.  481 

the  present  day.  I  take  this  opportiinity  of  solemnly 
warning  every  soul — more  particularly  the  young — 
from  levity  in  hankering  after  that  which  they  do  not 
understand,  and  very  especially  in  the  way  of  giving 
up  their  will  to  any  one  but  the  Lord  Jesus.  This  is 
the  essential  point  of  danger.  I  do  not  raise  the 
smallest  doubt  that  there  are  powers  in  the  natural 
world  which  lie  quite  beyond  the  explanation  of  men. 
It  is  not  my  wish  therefore  to  excite  a  kind  of  hue 
and  cry  against  that  which  may  not  be  yet  explained. 
Let  us  avoid  the  presumption  of  supposing  that  we  can 
account  for  everything.  But  in  our  ignorance  (which 
the  wisest  most  feel  and  own)  this  wisdom  at  least 
ought  to  belong  to  the  least  of  God's  children,  that 
they  know  in  whom  they  believe,  that  they  have  His 
word  and  His  Spirit,  and  can  count  on  infinite  love 
and  power  as  well  as  wisdom  on  their  behalf.  They 
can  well  afford  therefore  to  leave  what  is  beyond  them- 
selves or  any  others  in  the  hands  of  God  their  Father. 
They  with  sorrow  see  others  rush  in  who  have  nothing 
higher,  who  have  no  God  to  count  on  or  look  to. 

But  above  all  beware.  Whenever  any  one  asks  you 
to  give  up  your  mind  or  will  to  another — were  it 
but  for  a  moment — there  is  the  evident  hand  of  the 
devil  in  it.  This  is  no  question  of  physical  powers,  or 
of  what  is  naturally  inexplicable.  What  is  behind 
giving  up  yourself,  your  will,  to  any  one  but  God,  is 
plain  enough  in  its  character  and  consequences;  it  is 
too  easy  to  understand  it.  The  divine  axiom  is  that  the 
Lord  and  He  alone  has  a  right  to  you.  Consequently 
such  a  demand  proves  that  Satan  is  taking  advantage, 
it  may  be  of  what  is  natural,  but  certainly  of  you. 

2  I 


482        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Hence  under  cover  of  occult  laws,  tliere  is  something 
deeper  than  what  is  natural  behind  the  calL  Do  not 
therefore  be  deceived  by  the  fact  that  there  may  be 
and  are  properties  beyond  our  ken  in  the  realm  of 
nature.  There  is  also  the  working  of  the  enemy,  which 
under  new  forms  reveals  the  same  principle  of  evil 
which  has  wrought  since  the'  flood.  It  has  changed  its 
name,  but  it  is  substantially  the  identical  evil  against 
which  Jehovah  was  here  warning  His  earthly  people. 
Now  we,  if  drawn  aside,  are  far  more  guilty  than  they, 
from  the  very  fact  that  God  has  spread  out  His  word 
with  incomparably  greater  fulness,  and  given  us  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  since  redemption  the  power  of  entering  into 
His  mind  and  will,  far  exceeding  anything  on  which 
even  a  high  priest  could  draw  in  times  of  old.  Here 
no  doubt  a  divine  oracle  was  looked  to,  and  an  answer 
received  in  peculiar  cases ;  but  there  is  no  possible  case 
of  difficulty,  there  is  no  point  whatever  that  concerns 
God  or  man,  for  which  there  is  not  an  answer  in  the 
written  word,  although  we  may  have  to  wait  on  Him 
for  profiting  by  it. 

In  due  order  then  we  find  not  merely  all  this 
curious  dabbling  with  evil  peremptorily  set  aside  and 
superseded,  not  only  now  the  introduction  of  priests, 
Levites,  and  judges,  ordinary  or  extraordinary,  but 
of  the  great  prophet — Christ  Himself.  It  is  one  of 
those  striking  sketches  which  the  Spirit  of  God  inter- 
sperses throughout  scripture.  Here  and  there  Christ 
more  than  usually  shines.  •  I  admit  that  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  (or  allusion  to  Him)  in  one  way  or  another 
is  found  everywhere;  but  here  it  is  most  manifest 
"  Jehovah  thy  God  will  raise  up  unto  thee  a  prophet 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.- XXXIV.  483 

from  the  midst  of  thee,  of  thy  brethren,  like  unto  me ; 
unto  him  ye  shall  hearken ;  according  to  all  that  thou 
desiredst  of  Jehovah  thy  God  in  Horeb  in  the  day  of 
the  assembly,  saying,  Let  me  not  hear  again  the  voice 
of  Jehovah  my  God,  neither  let  me  see  this  great  fire 
any  more,  that  I  die  not.  And  Jehovah  said  unto  me, 
They  have  well  spoken  that  which  they  have  spoken. 
I  will  raise  them  up  a  prophet  from  among  their 
brethren,  like  unto  thee,  and  will  put  my  words  in  his 
mouth ;  and  he  shall  speak  unto  them  all  that  I  shall 
command  him."  Undoubtedly  every  word  has  acquired 
a  force  far  beyond  what  could  be  looked  for  before 
this  revelation,  but  each  expression  now  is  bright  when 
we  see  its  verification  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  But  not  only 
is  their  fulness  of  truth  made  known  by  Jesus  alone, 
but  also  the  utmost  danger  of  slighting  Him,  and  thus 
losing  all  the  more.  "  It  shall  come  to  pass  that  whoso- 
ever will  not  hearken  unto  my  words  which  he  shall 
speak  in  my  name,  I  will  require  it  of  him.  But  the 
prophet,  which  shall  presume  to  speak  a  word  in  my 
name,  which  I  have  not  commanded  him  to  speak,  or 
that  shall  speak  in  the  name  of  other  gods,  even  that 
prophet  shall  die." 

Thus  plainly  we  have  the  true  prophet  put  forward, 
Christ  Himself.  For  its  application  to  Him,  in  the 
face  of  all  the  unbelief  of  men,  is  afi&rmed  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  over  and  over,  by  Peter  in  Acts  iii.,  and  by 
Stephen  in  Acts  vii. ;  and  in  point  of  fact  we  do  not 
even  need  these  citations  of  the  passage.  The  entire 
New  Testament  is  itself  the  irrefragable  demonstration 
that  Christ  is  the  prophet  here  referred  to,  and  of  the 
consequent  folly  and  sin  of  listening  to  another.    For 

2  I  2 


484        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

He  is  come :  and  God  made  this  fact  to  be  so  much 
the  more  manifest  in  a  more  glorious  way  still  for 
chosen  witnesses.  His  own  voice  set  aside  Moses  and 
Elias,  though  the  one  might  be  the  introducer  of  the 
law  and  the  other  its  great  restorer.  For  it  was  the 
Son  that  was  now  to  be  heard,  and  He  alone  is  left,  the 
others  disappearing.  Unquestionably  this  goes  beyond 
the  revelation  that  was  given  by  Moses  here,  while  it  is 
the  highest  possible  confirmation  of  it. 

In  chap.  xix.  we  have  the  order  in  detail  for  the  three 
cities  of  refuge,  and  then  for  three  more,  as  in  the  early 
part  of  the  book  we  saw  the  first  set  apart  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Jordan ;  for  God  on  the  one  hand  would  mark 
the  seriousness  of  blood -shedding;  on  the  other,  He 
would  not  confound  a  death  at  unawares  with  that  which 
was  deliberate  murder.    In  no  case  however  would  God 
have  His  people  to  forget  that  it  was  His  land,  and 
consequently  if  blood  were  shed  there,  that  it  was 
thereby  defiled.     It  called  for  serious  thought.     Man 
that  was  made  in  the  image  of  God  had  his  blood  shed 
there.     God  takes  notice  of  it,  but  that  which  had  a 
higher  and  a  deeper  reference  requires  not  to  be  proved 
now.     I  have  already  dwelt  upon  it.     Only  take  notice 
of  the  difference  between  the  allusion  here  and  in 
Numbers.     There  we  saw  it  was  applied  especially  to 
the  blood-guilty  while  out  of  the  land  of  their  pos- 
session.    Here  is  not  a  word  said  about  the  death  of 
the  priest  that  was  anointed  with  the  oil.     The  reason 
is  manifest.     The  book  of  Deuteronomy  applies  to  the 
people  when  they  are  just  on  the  point  of  entering 
the  land.    Thus  the  insertions  and  omissions  of  the 
Spirit  o£  Geod  ax^  ^  liotable  in  the  books  of  Moses  as 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.- XXXIV.  485 

in  the  Gospels  themselves.  We  may  be  more  familiar 
with  the  idea  and  effect  of  design  in  the  Gospels,  but 
it  is  just  as  true  here  and  everywhere  else. 

In  verses  12-13  the  greatest  care  is  enjoined  to 
hinder  all  abuse  through  the  cities  of  refuge.  No  facility 
must  be  given  thereby  for  a  murderer  to  find  permanent 
shelter  there.  If  blood  was  shed  intentionally  and  de- 
liberately, the  elders  of  his  city  were  bound  to  send  and 
fetch  him  thence,  delivering  him  over  to  the  avenger 
of  blood  that  he  might  die.* 

Then  we  find  further  care  taken  as  to  witnesses,  and 
this  afi&rmed  by  the  great  law  of  just  retribution ;  that 
is  to  say,  that  when  a  witness  testified  what  was  deli- 
berately false,  and  of  course  therefore  malicious,  the 
punishment  which  would  have  been  adjudged  in  case 
of  its  truth  was  ordered  to  fall  on  him  that  raised  the 
evil  report.  All  this  is  carefully  seen  to.  "  And  thine 
eye  shall  not  pity ;  but  life  shall  go  for  life,  eye  for  eye, 
tooth  for  tooth,  hand  for  hand,  foot  for  foot." 

Then  in  chapter  xx.  comes  in  the  law  of  battles. 
We  have  the  utmost  care  taken  that  they  should  be  in 

♦  People  must  be  hard  set  for  a  fault  who  can,  like  Dr.  Davidson 
(Introd.  O.  T.  i.  96),  array  this  chapter  against  Num.  xxxv.  14; 
because  the  latter,  written  before  the  former,  speaks  of  six  cities  of 
refuge,  three  on  either  side  of  the  Jordan,  whereas  the  latter  book 
speaks  only  of  three  at  first,  to  which  three  were  to  be  added  after 
Moses*  death.  It  is  a  ridiculous  inference  that  the  same  writer  did 
not  compose  both  books,  or  at  least  the  passage  respecting  these  cities. 
The  second  is  the  general  law  of  the  institutions,  the  second  gives  the 
more  minute  ordering  of  the  details.  And  this  is  confirmed,  not 
weakened,  by  Deut.  iv.  41-44  where  it  is  said  Moses  set  apart  three  on 
the  east  side,  just  as  Num.  xxxv.  enjoined ;  while  chap.  xix.  shews  us 
not  these  only  but  three  more,  if  Jehovah  enlarged  their  coast  as  He 
had  sworn  to  do.  Only  an  evil  eye  could  find  want  of  order  or  harmony 
here. 


486        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

no  way  conformed  to  the  Gentile  license.  The  governing 
principle  here,  as  elsewhere,  is  confidence  in  Jehovah, 
the  God  who  had  taken  His  people,  brought  them  out 
of  Egypt  into  relationship  with  Himself,  and  was  now 
placing  them  in  His  own  land.  It  would  be  beneath 
the  honour  of  God  that  any  should  be  forced  to  fight 
His  battles.  He  would  give  His  people  in  everything 
to  think  of  Himself.  It  was  not  a  question  of  soldiery 
or  strategy,  of  force  or  skill  or  fraud,,  but  of  Jehovah 
their  God.  It  is  evident  that  no  means  could  more 
thoroughly  purge  from  those  who  were  to  engage  in 
battle  what  was  unworthy  of  such  a  God  and  of  such 
a  people.  It  is  referred  to  now  as  being  not  the  least 
striking  of  the  peculiarities  of  Deuteronomy,  and  it  is 
obvious  how  it  suits  the  case  in  every  way.  The  hea- 
venly land  is  for  us  the  scene  of  contest  with  the 
enemy.  There  are  no  such  laws  of  war  in  the  other 
books  of  Moses;  they  are  here  only.  The  wilderness 
is  the  scene  of  temptation.  Canaan  is  the  place  where 
the  enemy  must  be  fought  and  beaten.  But  there  is 
no  power  by  which  he  can  be  overcome  but  that  of 
God.  Consequently  faintheartedness  would  be  intoler- 
able; for  it  could  only  arise  from  this — ^that  the  people 
were  thinking  not  of  Jehovah  their  God,  but  of  them- 
selves or  their  enemies.  Impossible  thus  to  win  the 
battles  of  Jehovah.  What  secures  victory  is  the  cer- 
tainty that  our  God  calls  to  the  fight,  that  it  is  His 
battle,  not  ours :  where  it  is  so,  we  are  as  sure  of  the 
end  as  of  the  beginning.  We  are  calmly  convinced 
that  as  He  does  not  send  us  at  our  own  charges,  so 
further  He  who  calls  to  fight  wiU  secure  that  the  enemy 
shall  be  vanquished. 


DEUTERONOMY  XVL- XXXIV.  487 

Hence  it  is  that  God  lays  down  in  the  most  minute 
manner  His  consideration  for  His  people.  In  the  case 
of  a  new  house,  or  of  one  who  had  planted  a  vineyard 
or  betrothed  a  wife,  all  is  cared  for :  where  fearfulness 
of  heart  prevailed,  such  are  made  to  feel  that  they  were 
unworthy  to  enter  on  the  battles  of  Jehovah.  Further, 
there  is  beautiful  consideration  on  His  part  for  the 
enemy;  for  when  they  came  nigh  the  threatened  city, 
they  were  first  called  to  proclaim  peace  to  it :  a  singular 
way  of  making  war,  but  worthy  of  God.  He  took  no 
pleasure  in  war,  and  would  accustom  His  people  to  go 
forth,  even  were  it  to  fight,  remembering  themselves 
"  shod  with  the  preparation  of  peace,"  if  I  may  so  say. 
"And  it  shaU  be,  if  it  [the  city]  make  thee  answer  of 
peace,  and  open  unto  thee,  then  it  shall  be,  that  all  the 
people  that  is  found  therein  shall  be  tributaries  unto 
thee,  and  they  shall  serve  thee.  And  if  it  will  make  no 
peace  with  thee,  but  will  miake  war  against  thee,  then 
thou  shalt  besiege  it :  and  when  Jehovah  thy  God  hath 
delivered  it  into  thine  hands,  thou  shalt  smite  every 
male  thereof  with  the  edge  of  the  sword."  There  is 
just  as  serious  a  dealing  with  them,  in  proportion  to  the 
reality  with  which  the  offer  of  peace  had  been  made 
before.     God's  ways  are  not  as  ours. 

Further,  "Thus  shalt  thou  do  unto  all  the  cities  which 
are  very  far  off  from  thee."  There  was  one  exception : 
there  must  be  no  peace  with  the  Canaanites;  not  because 
they  were  dreaded  as  rivals,  but  doomed  to  destruction 
because  of  their  abominations  and  seductions.  It  is 
well  known  that  some  find  a  difi&culty  in  this.  Possibly 
it  may  interest  others,  if  it  do  not  relieve  the  first  of 
their  difficulty,  to  know  that,  typically  considered,  the 


488        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Canaanites  represent  the  emissaries  of  Satan,  the  spiri- 
tual wickedness  in  heavenly  places, — those  rulers  of 
the  darkness  of  this  world  with  whom  we  are  called  to 
wrestle  now.  They  are  specifically  the  powers  of  evil 
which  continually  turn  every  link  of  religion  into  a 
means  of  deliberate  and  ruinous  dishonour  of  God. 
With  such  there  can  be,  there  ought  to  be,  no  terms,  no 
compromise,  no  cessation  of  the  fight  at  any  time  or 
under  any  possible  circumstances.  This  is  the  typical 
force  of  what  is  referred  to  here. 

I  may  just  add  the  further  remark,  that  of  all  the 
nations  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  there  was  no  such 
hotbed  for  every  kind  of  corruption  among  men,  and  for 
all  wickedness  and  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God,  as 
the  Canaanites  whom  God  devoted  to  destruction.  It 
was  therefore  perfectly  just,  as  far  as  righteousness  was 
concerned,  to  hold  up  these  Canaanites  for  a  solemn 
warning  to  all  the  world  and  to  all  times.  If  national 
righteousness  was  sought,  if  there  was  to  be  the  honour 
of  God  maintained  in  Israel,  they  must  be  extirpated ; 
and  there  were  the  wisest  reasons  for  doing  that  work 
by  the  sword  of  Israel.  In  the  last  lecture  we  saw  that, 
so  far  from  passing  over  His  own  people,  God  never 
dealt  with  any  nation  with  the  same  strictness  as  with 
Israel.  We  saw  that  every  soul  of  Israel  perished  in 
the  wilderness  except  the  two  spies  who  stood  for  God, 
even  against  their  fellows  as  weU  as  the  multitude; 
and  certainly,  if  God  caused  that  all  Israel  should  fall 
in  the  wUdemess  because  of  their  sins,  if  He  did  not 
even  spare  the  single  fault  of  Moses  which  he  himself 
records,  where  can  men  complain  justly  of  the  doom 
that  befell  such  corrupters  of  the  race,  sure  above  aU  to 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.- XXXIV.  489 

be  the  moral  destroyers  of  Israel  had  they  been  spared  ? 
In  fact  the  children  of  Israel  had  not  the  faith  to 
destroy  them  as  they  ought;  they  had  not  therefore  the 
fidelity  according  to  God's  word  to  exterminate  the 
Canaanites,  and  so  much  the  worse  for  themselves ;  for 
they  became  the  means  of  dragging  Israel  into  abomi- 
nations, and  thus  drew  judgments  down  on  them  after 
no  long  time. 

This  then  will  sufi&ce,  I  trust,  to  make  plain  the 
folly  of  distrusting  scripture,  and  the  wisdom  of  always 
setting  to  our  seal  that  God  is  true,  and  that  He  is 
righteous.  In  short  God  is  always  good,  true,  wise, 
and  right. 

Eemark  another  thing.  When  Israel  did  besiege  a 
city,  God  shewed  His  care,  even  if  it  were  only  for  a 
tree  good  for  human  food,  binding  it  with  His  own 
hand  on  His  people  in  the  midst  of  that  which  proved 
His  face  set  against  the  enemies  of  His  glory  in  the 
world.  Nevertheless  He  would  not  allow  them  even 
there  to  act  without  consideration  where  was  any  food 
fit  for  the  use  of  man.  "  The  trees  which  thou  knowest 
that  they  be  not  trees  for  meat,  thou  shalt  destroy  and 
cut  them  down;"  but  in  case  of  those  that  furnished 
food,  it  was  absolutely  forbidden.  Such  is  God,  acting 
in  time  as  He  counsels  from  eternity  to  eternity,  but 
condescending  to  speak  and  to  exercise  the  thoughts  of 
His  people  about  the  siaallest  matters  for  this  life. 

In  chapter  xxi.  we  have  some  particulars  of  a  re- 
markable nature,  and  peculiar  to  this  book,  on  which 
a  few  words  must  be  said.  "  If  one  be  found  slain 
in  the  land  which  Jehovah  thy  God  giveth  thee  to 
possess  it,  lying  in  the  field,  and  it  be  not  known  who 


490        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

hath  slain  him."     What  was  to  be  done  ?    "  Then  thy 
elders  and  thy  judges  shall  come  forth,  and  they  shall 
measure  unto  the  cities  which  are  round  about  him  that 
is  slain."    All  was  to  be  done  with  great  care.     "  And 
it  shall  be  that  the  city  which  is  next  to  the  slain 
man" — God  takes  care  even  of  that — "And  it  shall  be 
that  the  city  which  is  next  unto  the  slain  man,  even 
the  elders  of  that  city  shall  take  an  heifer,  which  hath 
not  been  wrought  with,  and  which  hath  not  drawn  in 
the  yoke.   And  the  elders  of  that  city  shall  bring  down 
the  heifer  unto  a  rough  valley,  which  is  neither  eared 
nor  sown"  (a  figure  of  this  world),  "  and  shall  strike  off 
the  heifer's  neck  there  in  the  valley:  and  the  priests 
the  sons  of  Levi  shall  come  near;  for  them  Jehovah 
thy  God  hath  chosen  to  minister  unto  him,  and  to  bless 
in  the  name  of  Jehovah ;  and  by  their  word  shall  every 
controversy  and  every  stroke  be  tried:   and  all  the 
elders  of  that  city,  that  are  next  unto  the  slain  man, 
shall  wash  their  hands  over  the  heifer  that  is  beheaded 
in  the  valley:  and  they  shall  answer  and  say.  Our 
hands  have  not  shed  this  blood,  neither  have  our  eyes 
seen  it.     Be  merciful,  Jehovah,  unto  thy  people  Israel, 
whom  thou  hast  redeemed,  and  lay  not  innocent  blood 
unto  thy  people  of  Israel's  charge.  And  the  blood  shall 
be  forgiven  them." 

It  is  just  so  that  Christ  has  been  found  slain  in  this 
world:  God  is  willing  to  regard  it  so.  He  is  found 
slain  among  them,  among  Israel  themselves.  This 
appears  to  be  a  gracious  provision  when  God  shall  have 
cleared  the  godly  remnant  in  the  days  that  are  coming, 
and  these  are  about  to  be  made  the  strong  nation,  and 
to  enter  on  the  land  of  their  inheritance  once  more  and 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.-XXXI7.  491 

for  ever.  It  is  the  means  by  which  God  will  wash  them 
from  the  taint  of  blood  in  the  land.  He  wiU  not  excuse 
them  because  their  hands  did  not  actually  do  the  deed. 
It  was  of  course  done  long  before;  stUl  it  was  done 
there.  Christ  was  found  in  the  vaUey  which  was  nearest 
to  them.  Hence,  for  Israel  of  that  day,  God  will  not 
pass  by  the  fact.  He  wiU  neither  take  excuses  for  it 
on  the  one  hand,  nor  on  the  other  will  He  judge  them 
as  irretrievably  guilty.  He  wiU  provide  for  them  when 
grace  has  turned  their  heart,  that  the  very  sacrifice  of 
Christ  may  serve  in  all  its  expiatory  power  to  clear 
them  of  the  guilt  of  shedding  His  precious  blood.  We 
must  remember  that  the  death  of  Christ  has  two  aspects 
if  closely  looked  at  whether  on  man's  part  or  on  God's 
side.  Humanly  it  was  the  worst  possible  guilt;  in 
God's  grace  it  is  what  alone  cleanses  from  guilt.  The 
man  who  cannot  discern  between  these  two  truths,  or 
who  sacrifices  one  or  other,  has  a  great  deal  to  learn  of 
scripture,  and  indeed  of  his  own  sin  and  God's  grace 
Here  we  have  the  type.  The  very  principle  disputed 
in  a  recent  and  painful  controversy  seems  to  me  un- 
answerably decided  by  the  Spirit  in  this  shadow  of 
good  things  to  come. 

Further :  supposing  there  was  the  case  of  a  wife,  or 
the  child  of  one  that  was  beloved.  "If  a  man  have 
two  wives,  one  beloved,  and  another  hated,  and  they 
have  borne  him  children,  both  the  beloved  and  the 
hated,  and  if  the  firstborn  son  be  hers  that  was  hated : 
then  it  shall  be,  when  he  maketh  his  sons  to  inherit 
that  which  he  hath,  that  he  may  not  make  the  son  of 
the  beloved  firstborn  before  the  son  of  the  hated,  which 
is  indeed  the  firstborn :  but  he  shall  acknowledge  the 


492        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

son  of  the  hated  for  the  firstborn,  by  giving  him  a 
double  portion  of  all  that  he  hath."  Here  too  we  have 
in  God's  ways  another  remarkable  type ;  for  having 
first  chosen  Israel,  He  afterwards  (as  we  know,  because 
of  their  sin)  was  pleased  to  take  the  Gentiles  to  Him- 
self. The  Jews  refused  the  testimony ;  and  as  for  the 
Gentiles,  it  is  said  that  they  will  hear.  Nevertheless 
here  He  gives  a  beautiful  provision  to  shew  that  He 
has  not  done  with  that  which  shall  come  forth  as  the 
firstborn  son  of  the  apparently  hated  one — of  her  he 
had  first.  On  the  contrary  this  is  the  very  one  for 
whom  the  rights  of  the  inheritance  wUl  be  preserved 
when  repentance  will  be  wrought  in  their  hearts.  Thus 
it  is  evident  that  the  godly  remnant  of  the  latter  day 
will  have  its  rights  reserved,  according  to  His  own 
precious  word  in  this  chapter. 

But  another  direction  follows.  There  is  the  case  of 
the  stubborn  and  rebellious  son.  To  whom  does  this 
apply?  To  the  people  of  Israel  in  their  obstinate 
selfwill  and  irreverence  toward  Jehovah  their  God.  In 
all  sorts  of  forms  God  sets  it  forth.  Alas !  when  blessing 
is  wrought,  when  the  contrite  heart  of  the  remnant 
desires  the  Messiah,  they  will  not  aU  turn  to  God. 
Contrariwise  the  great  mass  of  the  nation  will  be  more 
than  ever  rebellious  and  apostate.  The  end  of  this 
age  will  not  see  united  hearts  among  the  Jews,  but  a 
people  severed  and  broken — a  people  with  the  widest 
possible  breaches  among  them :  some  whose  hearts  are 
truly  touched  by  grace,  as  we  have  seen,  who  are 
destined  to  the  place  of  the  firstborn  on  the  earth; 
most,  on  the  other  hand,  who  will  fight  to  the  last 
against  God,  «ixyi  i^^-act  to  their  own  perdition  His 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.- XXXIV.  493 

testimony.  This  is  the  stubborn  son;  and  as  to  him 
it  is  said,  "  Then  shall  his  father  and  his  mother  lay 
hold  on  him,  and  bring  him  out  unto  the  elders  of  his 
city,  and  unto  the  gate  of  his  place :  and  they  shall 
say  unto  the  elders  of  his  city.  This  our  son  is  stubborn 
and  rebellious,  he  will  not  obey  our  voice;  he  is  a 
glutton,  and  a  drunkard."  And  such  has  Israel  been. 
"And  all  the  men  of  his  city  shall  stone  him  with 
stones,  that  he  die :  so  shalt  thou  put  evil  away  from 
among  you ;  and  all  Israel  shall  hear,  and  fear." 

But  the  chapter  does  not  even  close  with  this.  There 
is  another  scene,  and  a  deeper  one  than  all.  "  And  if  a 
man  have  committed  a  sin  worthy  of  death,  and  he  be 
to  be  put  to  death,  and  thou  hang  him  on  a  tree :  his 
body  shall  not  remain  all  night  upon  the  tree,  but  thou 
shalt  in  any  wise  bury  him  that  day ;  (for  he  that  is 
hanged  is  accursed  of  God ;)  that  thy  land  be  not 
defiled,  which  Jehovah  thy  God  giveth  thee  for  an  in- 
heritance." This  may  not  call  for  lengthened  remark, 
but  assuredly  for  solemn  reflection  and  profound  thank- 
fulness at  the  grace  in  which  God  turns  the  deepest 
shame  and  suffering  which  man  heaped  on  Jesus  to  the 
purposes  of  redeeming  love ;  for  who  knows  not  that 
Jesus  took  this  place  of  the  curse  on  the  cross,  to  bear 
our  judgment  in  the  sight  of  God  ?  He  too  knew  what 
it  was  to  be  hanged  on  a  tree — knew  what  it  was  to 
be  made  a  curse  for  us.  Our  souls  have  akeady  entered 
into  the  blessing.  But  aU  shews  how  thoroughly  Jesus 
is  the  object  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  a  chapter,  which 
looked  somewhat  obscure  at  first  sight,  is  rendered 
plain  and  luminous  and  full  of  instruction  the  moment 
we  bring  Jesus  in  and  see  Him  in  relationship  with 


494       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

His  ancient  people.  Its  substance  and  its  spirit  of 
course  are  equally  true  of  the  Christian,  and  in  a 
higher  way.  It  is  entirely  a  question  of  whether  we 
use  the  true  light,  or  overlay  the  word  of  God  with  our 
own  darkness.  Unbelief  not  merely  fails  to  see,  but 
excludes  and  denies  the  only  light  of  men. 

In  chapter  xxii.  we  have  a  group  of  diflferent  insti- 
tutions as  to  questions  of  righteousness,  care,  love, 
tenderness — the  smallest  matters  as  well  as  the  greatest 
— ^but  they  are  so  numerous,  in  themselves  purposely 
the  minutest  as  weU  as  the  most  momentous,  that  to 
dwell  on  them  one  by  one  would  occupy  much  too 
long  for  the  present  design.  All  can  understand  how- 
ever how  the  great  object  here  is  that  God  would  form 
the  heart  of  His  people  in  this  relationship  and  measure 
according  to  His  own  affections.  God  would  give  them 
not  bare,  righteous  but  holy  thoughts,  and  not  this 
only,  but  mingled  with  tenderness  when  called  for. 
This  will  be  found  true  if  the  contents  of  the  chapter 
be  duly  weighed. 

But  there  is  another  consideration.  In  chapter  xxiii. 
He  would  teach  us  differences  in  our  judgments  and 
thoughts  of  others,  and  consequently  in  our  conduct 
towards  them.  There  are  few  things  that  men  so  much 
dislike  in  general  as  to  be  taunted  with  partiality — 
specially  those  who  may  have  a  sense  of  righteousness 
according  to  God.  Yet  we  must  distinguish  (though 
without  partiality,  which  is  always  wrong) ;  but  if  we 
are  wise,  we  shall  not  be  driven  out  of  the  painstaking 
and  conscientious  appraisal  of  all  the  circumstances 
which  require  to  be  taken  into  account ;  and  we  shall 
weigh  also  what  God  may  give  us  to  judge  of  each 


DEUTERONOMY  XVL- XXXIV.  495 

particular  case  and  person, — for  He  makes  differences, 
though  no  respecter  of  persons.  Where  it  is  a  question 
of  His  grace,  difference  there  is  none,  but  a  dead  level. 
On  the  one  hand  sin  is  a  great  leveller  in  presence  of 
His  eternal  judgment ;  on  the  other  hand  grace  is  no 
less  so  in  an  opposite  way,  but  there  it  is  a  question  of 
the  value  of  Christ  and  His  work  for  bringing  souls 
into  His  presence  in  favour  and  in  peace.  Alike  lost  in 
sins,  we  are  alike  saved  from  them  by  the  faith  of 
Jesus.  But  then  in  saying  this  we  have  said  all  here, 
and  come  into  a  host  of  differences  on  either  side.  This 
seems  to  me  most  clearly  shewn  in  our  chapter. 

For  instance,  see  how  this  applies  to  those  forbidden 
to  enter  into  the  congregation  of  Jehovah.  And  here 
note  that  it  is  His  congregation;  for  this  is  the  great 
subject-matter  of  the  book :  all  finds  its  centre  and  its 
spring  in  Him.  It  is  not  merely  the  congregation  of 
Israel ;  and  this  is  an  important  thing  to  bear  in  mind 
as  a  matter  of  practical  dealing.  One  will  never  act 
right  in  the  church,  if  he  looks  at  it  merely  as  the 
church  of  saints,  though  in  itself  perfectly  true.  It  is 
the  church  of  God;  and  although  we  know  many 
shrink  from  this  as  high  ground,  it  is  just  so  much  the 
better.  If  it  be  the  truth,  can  it  be  too  high  ?  We 
want  all  that  can  lift  us  above  our  own  littleness  and 
our  own  lowness.  We  are  apt  to  get  low  enough  with- 
out abandoning  the  only  leverage  calculated  and 
adequate  to  give  us  the  elevation  we  need.  We  want 
and  have  God;  but  giving  up  the  place  and  relation- 
ship His  grace  has  conferred  on  us  through  redemption 
is  not  the  way  to  make  us  lowly.  On  the  contrary  the 
very  fact  that  we  bear  in  mind  that  it  is  God's  church 


496        LECTUEES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

is  the  best  and  divine  mode  of  making  us  most  sensible 
of  our  shortcomings.  If  we  regard  it  as  merely  an 
assembly  of  the  saints,  well  we  know  that  saints  are 
poor  creatures  for  the  matter  of  that ;  so  that  we  easily 
slip  from  poor  thoughts  into  an  excusing  of  sin ;  just 
as,  on  the  other  side,  the  flesh  professing  the  highest 
theory  will  the  sooner  make  itself  manifest.  If  it  be 
God's  church,  it  becomes  a  serious  matter  how  we  act 
and  how  we  speak. 

In  this  case  then  we  find  that  Jehovah  lays  down 
certain  things  as  irreconcileable  with  their  place  and 
relationship  to  Him.  They  must  carry  themselves  in  a 
way  suitable  to  His  congregation ;  and  amongst  the  rest 
"An  Ammonite  or  Moabite  shall  not  enter  into  the 
congregation  of  Jehovah ;  even  to  their  tenth  genera- 
tion shall  they  not  enter  into  the  congregation  of 
Jehovah  for  ever ;  because  they  met  you  not  with  bread 
and  with  water  in  the  way,  when  ye  came  forth  out  of 
Egypt."  Jehovah  does  not  forget  where  it  is  a  matter 
of  government.  He  does  forget  (and  it  is  precisely  what 
He  does)  when  it  is  a  question  of  grace.  Further  He 
says,  "  Thou  shalt  not  seek  their  peace,  nor  their  pros- 
perity all  thy  days  for  ever."  But  it  is  remarkable  too 
that  when  speaking  about  the  Edomite — and  I  am  not 
aware  that  it  is  ever  said  that  He  hated  either  of  them 
as  He  hated  Esau ;  but  when  speaking  of  the  Edomite 
— He  says,  "He  is  thy  brother."  So  with  those  that 
once  opposed  them,  "Thou  shalt  not  abhor  an  Egyptian, 
because  thou  wast  a  stranger  in  his  land."  Thus,  we 
see,  it  is  not  a  question  of  hatred  on  our  part,  but  of 
subjection  to  God,  of  taking  the  direction  of  our 
thoughts  iiom  Bia  ^cytd,  and  of  forming  our  judgments 


DEUTERONOMY  XVL- XXXIV.  497 

and  our  conduct  according  to  it.  I  have  no  doubt  at' 
all  that,  when  we  weigh  scripture,  we  shall  in  due  time 
see  the  wisdom  of  it  all.  But  it  is  not  a  question  of 
how  far  we  can  appreciate  the  wisdom  of  God.  Our 
business  is  to  believe  and  obey  Him ;  and  there  is  the 
way  in  which  He  cares  for  the  least  of  us.  The  simplest 
child  of  God  may  follow  and  be  subject  to  His  word. 

Very  probably  the  wisest  have  a  difficulty  in  entering 
into  all  His  wisdom — nay,  I  am  sure  that  they  have.  It 
is  only  a  matter  of  very  gradually  growing  up  into  His 
truth  and  infinite  mind ;  but  still  it  is  open  to  us  in  the 
written  word.  We  are  invited  to  read  and  understand ; 
for  He  has  revealed  what  was  wholly  beyond  man  to 
His  children  by  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  searches  all 
things,  yea  the  deep  things  of  God.  It  is  our  privilege 
to  say  "we  know:"  who  can  then  put  limits  to  the 
gracious  power  of  God  in  giving  us  really  to  understand 
His  ways  ?  But  understand  or  not,  the  word  of  God  is 
imperative  in  its  authority,  and  there  is  the  greatest 
comfort  too  when  we  have  done  a  thing  simply  because 
it  is  the  will  of  our  God.  Then  we  begin  to  learn  how 
blessed  it  is,  how  good  and  wise.  This  is  far  better  than 
slowly  coming  to  a  judgment  of  our  own  and  then 
acting.  If  we  gave  up  faith  for  such  guidance,  how 
deep  and  irreparable  the  loss  !  In  the  first  instance  if 
we  accept  His  word  with  simplicity,  the  wisdom  given 
is  a  fruit  of  His  grace  instead  of  being  ground  gained 
to  our  credit.  In  the  one  case  we  glorify  ourselves  be- 
cause we  count  it  wise  for  reasons  we  think  good ;  in 
the  other  case  we  are  subject  to  God  because  it  is  His 
own  will  in  His  word.  There  is  nothing  so  good  as  this, 
nothing  so  holy  and  humble  as  the  wisdom  of  faith. 

2  K 


498        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

In  the  chapter  before  us  various  regulations  of  this 
kind  are  laid  down.  There  is  also  the  prohibition  of 
anything  that  was  uncomely  and  unbefitting  for  the 
camp.  What  camp  ?  The  camp  of  Israel  ?  Of  course, 
but  much  more.  It  was  natural  that  there  should  be 
infirmity  in  the  camp  of  men.  This  is  not  the  question, 
but  whether  it  be  not  the  camp  of  Jehovah.  What- 
ever the  allowance  when  we  remember  that  we  are  men, 
God  would  have  His  people  trained  up  in  the  feeling 
that  they  have  Him  in  their. midst,  and  that  all  must 
be  decided  by  what  suits  His  presence. 

So  again  in  chapter  xxiv.  the  question  of  divorce  is 
treated,  where  we  must  say  that  a  certain  allowance 
was  made  them  for  the  wilfulness  of  man  in  this  respect. 
This  is  no  matter  of  opinion ;  for  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
has  ruled  in  this.  Nobody  can  understand  the  law 
aright,  or  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament  in  general, 
imless  he  bear  in  mind  that  in  it  God  is  dealing  with 
man  as  such.  Consequently,  though  there  is  wisdom  and 
goodness  and  righteousness,  it  is  man  in  the  flesh  under 
trial,  and  hence  it  is  not  yet  the  perfection  of  the  divine 
mind  displayed.  This  last  is  only  found  when  Christ 
comes.  The  first  Adam  is  not  the  Second ;  and  it  was 
with  the  first  man  that  Grod  was  then  at  work.  No  part 
of  the  law  lacks  the  wisdom  of  God ;  but,  Christ  not 
being  yet  revealed.  He  did  not  as  a  fact  go  beyond  man 
as  he  then  was.  To  have  brought  in  what  was  suitable 
for  the  Second  man  could  not  have  applied  to  Israel  in 
their  then  condition. 

And  God,  it  seems  to  me,  has  distinctly  marked  this 
in  Scripture  even  in  an  outward  fashion,  inasmuch  as 
He  has  not  been  pleased  to  give  us  His  word  even  in 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.— XXXIV.  499 

the  same  tongue.  The  standing  witness  against  the  folly 
of  confounding  the  two  Testaments  finds  its  rebuke  in 
the  patent  fact  that  the  Old  Testament  is  in  one  language, 
the  New  Testament  in  another.  So  plain  a  difference  on 
its  very  face  one  might  have  thought  it  impossible  to 
overlook;  but  even  believers  accept  shortsightedness 
in  divine  things,  and  just  so  far  as  tradition  influences 
them;  for  people  scarcely  think  about  Scripture,  and 
thus  they  do  not  know  how  to  apply  the  clearest  and 
surest  facts,  as  well  as  God's  words,  before  all  eyes. 

But  there  is  much  more  than  the  use  of  different 
languages — there  is  the  difference  between  the  first  man 
fallen  into  sin  and  the  Second  man  who  first  descended 
into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth,  and  then  ascended 
above  the  heavens  after  accomplishing  the  mighty  work 
of  redemption.  Assuredly  this  is  all  the  difference  pos- 
sible, and  it  is  just  what  reigns  between  the  Old  and 
the  New  Testament,  not  in  the  hearts  of  saints,  but 
as  a  state  of  things.  Consequently  the  relationship  is 
altogether  of  another  sort.  Hence  the  provisions  that 
were  suitable  and  appropriate,  when  God  had  as  an 
object  before  Him  the  first  man,  could  not  apply  to  the 
Second,  under  whose  revelation  and  redemption  we  find 
ourselves.  This  must  be  borne  in  mind  if  we  would 
judge  rightly  about  these  types,  or  the  law  in  general 
which  made  nothing  perfect. 

Again  we  find  in  the  rest  of  chapter  xxiv.  as  well  as 
in  chapter  xxv.  a  number  of  precepts  of  mercy  and  good- 
ness as  to  the  people  even  in  the  most  ordinary  matters 
of  household  life — not  the  wife  only  but  one's  fellows, 
servants  too,  strangers,  harvests  and  vineyards,  down  to 
the  care  of  the  cattle.    The  poor  man  who  was  in  fault 

2  K  2 


500        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

and  got  beaten  was  not  forgotten.  There  must  be  no 
over -passing  a  certain  measure,  nor  be  anything  that 
would  make  one's  brother  vile.  Stripes  may  be  due  and 
needful ;  but  there  must  be  nothing  to  destroy  respect. 
Jehovah  finds  His  own  interest  in  all  the  belongings  of 
His  people,  and  He  would  train  up  in  His  own  nurture 
and  admonition — an  important  point  for  us  to  consider 
betimes. 

Further,  we  find  that  anything  like  an  advantage 
taken  where  feelings  were  raised  against  another  is 
rebuked  in  the  sternest  manner.  A  righteous  and  equal 
measure  is  insisted  on.  But  Amalek  must  not  slip  out 
of  mind.  "  Eemember  what  Amalek  did  unto  thee  by 
the  way,  when  ye  were  come  forth  out  of  Egypt ;  how 
he  met  thee  by  the  way,  and  smote  the  hindmost  of 
thee,  even  all  that  were  feeble  behind  thee,  when  thou 
wast  faint  and  weary ;  and  he  feared  not  God.  There- 
fore it  shall  be,  when  Jehovah  thy  God  hath  given  thee 
rest  from  all  thine  enemies  round  about,  in  the  land 
which  Jehovah  thy  God  giveth  thee  for  an  inheritance 
to  possess  it,  that  thou  shalt  blot  out  the  remembrance 
of  Amalek  from  under  heaven;  thou  shalt  not  forget 
it."  Now,  who  will  dare  to  say  that  this  was  wrong  ? 
Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  and  say  what 
is  righteous  ? 

And  this  gives  me  occasion  to  press  a  few  words 
from  the  New  Testament,  often  forgotten  in  its  spirit 
when  its  words  may  be  remembered.  It  is  the  part 
of  a  Christian  to  abhor  evil  as  much  as  to  love  what 
is  good.  Beware  of  the  smallest  sympathy  with  him 
who  counts  it  good  to  be  indifferent,  lukewarm,  not 
zealous,   who  likes  no  doubt  what  is  pleasant  and 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.- XXXIV.  501 

kindly  in  itself,  but  without  detestation  of  that  which 
dishonours  Grod.  There  is  a  total  defect  in  the  Chris- 
tian character  which  (to  speak  tjrpically)  has  not  the 
badger's  skin  as  well  as  the  covering  of  blue.  Our  Lord 
Jesus  felt  strongly  against  eviL  He  alone  is  perfection, 
and  has  shewn  this  for  our  profit  and  example.  Here 
we  see  the  same  principle  inculcated  in  Amalek's 
case. 

The  truth  is  quite  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  age, 
entirely  different  from  what  people  call  a  sweet  tone, 
or  the  spirit  of  Christ.  They  know  little  of  Christ 
who  talk  thus.  The  fact  is  that  had  they  heard  Jesus 
denounce  religious  forms  and  men  who  walked  not  in 
faith,  had  they  or  their  friends  fallen  under  the  censure 
which  filled  His  soul — say  in  Matt,  xxiii. — it  is  to  be 
feared  that  a  similar  strain  of  thought  and  feeling 
would  have  condemned  the  Son  of  God.  This  is  of  the 
more  importance  for  those  who,  like  us  Christians,  ha^e 
to  walk  in  communion  with  Christ  and  His  cross  at  the 
same  time  that  the  power  of  evil  reigns  in  the  world. 
We  cannot  escape  trial  of  a  serious  kind,  and  to  take 
it  in  grace — such  exactly  is  Christianity  in  practice. 
The  millennium  will  be  the  overthrow  of  the  power  of 
evil,  and  consequently  righteousness  will  govern.  But 
what  brings  in  the  difficulty  now  is  the  perfection  of 
God's  ways  in  Christianity,  whilst  outwardly  evU  re- 
mains. God  permits,  but  lifts  the  Christian  above,  the 
very  worst  evil.  It  rose  up  against  the  Son  of  God 
Himself;  and  the  Christian  follows  Him  and  His  cross. 
Accordingly  this  is  precisely  where  and  how  he  has  to 
walk.  The  evU  God  permits  to  rage  to  the  uttermost,  but 
grace  and  truth  in  Christ  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  is 


502        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

brought  into  his  heart  and  governs  his  ways.  Hence 
he  is  called  to  abhor  evil  just  as  much  as  to  love  that 
which  is  good;  and  the  heart  which  does  not  shew 
divine  hatred  of  evil  has  really  but  scant  love  for 
what  is  good.  The  one  is  the  measure  of  the  other : 
they  are  inseparable  from  Christ,  and  should  be  from 
the  Christian. 

In  chapter  xxvL  we  arrive  at  a  brighter  scene :  we 
anticipate  Israel  entering  on  their  own  land.  Here 
we  find  a  relief  from  the  numerous  exhortations  which 
suppose  dangers  on  every  side.  On  the  contrary  blessing 
flows  richly  in  prospect ;  for  God  is  seen  accomplishing 
what  He  had  promised  His  people  of  old.  If  He  has 
brought  them  into  the  land,  they  come  in  grateful 
acknowledgment  of  His  grace.  "  And  it  shall  bq  when 
thou  art  come  in  unto  the  land  which  Jehovah  thy 
God  giveth  thee  for  an  inheritance,  and  possessest  it,  and 
dwellest  therein,  that  thou  shalt  take  of  the  first  of  all 
the  fruit  of  the  earth,  which  thou  shalt  bring  of  thy 
land  that  Jehovah  thy  God  giveth  thee,  and  shalt  put  it 
in  a  basket,  and  shalt  go  unto  the  place  which  Jehovah 
thy  God  shall  choose  to  place  his  name  there.  And 
thou  shalt  go  unto  the  priest  that  shall  be  in  those  days, 
and  say  unto  him,  I  profess  this  day  unto  Jehovah  thy 
God."  Here  then  is  the  full  confession  that  God's  hand 
had  accomplished  what  His  mouth  had  promised.  This 
in  a  higher  atmosphere  is  the  characteristic  of  the  Chris- 
tian. It  is  the  same  principle,  not  of  promises  only, 
but  these  made  good  in  Christ.  The  Christian  is  not 
merely  a  man  that  is  passing  through  the  wilderness,  but 
already  blessed  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly 
places  in  Clmal.  ^Q>\Ja.  «£fc  \x\aa«  If  we  have  our  march 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.- XXXIV.  503 

through  the  wilderness,  we  have  also  our  portion  in  the 
heavenly  land. 

Now  what  becomes  of  him  who  is  conscious  of  this 
place  ?  For  what  does  God  look  ?  Eemember,  it  is  the 
place  of  every  Christian,  and  a  part  of  the  ministry 
of  Christ  to  put  every  Christian  into  the  consciousness 
of  it.  He  cannot  worship  God  fully  unless  he  have  in 
his  soul  the  certainty  of  his  nearness  to  God  through 
Christ  and  His  work  as  the  ground  of  his  relationship. 
As  to  his  body,  he  is  no  doubt  in  the  earth,  still  sur- 
rounded with  what  is  far  from  God ;  but  when  he  looks 
up  into  the  presence  of  God,  he  knows  that  his  home 
is  there.  It  is  not  merely  that  he  will  find  his  home 
there,  but  that  his  life  and  righteousness  being  there, 
the  Holy  Ghost  has  come  down  to  give  him  a  present 
link  with  Christ  in  glory.  The  consequence  is  that 
there  is  that  in  him  which  corresponds  with  the  Is- 
raelite's here  bringing  of  the  fruits  of  the  land  before 
Jehovah.  His  praise  of  God  is  to  be  founded  on  the 
Spirit's  leading  him  to  worship  according  to  the  new 
place  of  blessing,  but  with  a  far  deeper  sense  than  ever 
of  his  unworthiness  in  the  Kght  of  such  grace  on  God's 
part. 

"  Thou  shalt  speak  and  say  before  Jehovah  thy  God, 
A  Syrian  ready  to  perish  was  my  father,  and  he  went 
down  into  Egypt,  and  sojourned  there  with  a  few,  and 
became  there  a  nation,  great,  mighty,  and  populous: 
and  the  Egyptians  evil  entreated  us,  and  afficted  us, 
and  laid  upon  us  hard  bondage:  and  when  we  cried 
unto  the  Jehovah  God  of  our  fathers,  Jehovah  heard 
our  voice,  and  looked  on  our  affliction,  and  our  labour, 
and  our  oppression :  and  Jehovah  brought  us  forth  out 


504        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

of  Egypt  with  a  mighty  hand,  and  with  an  outstretched 
arm,  and  with  great  terribleness,  and  with  signs,  and 
with  wonders :  and  he  hath  brought  us  into  this  place, 
and  hath  given  us  this  land,  even  a  land  that  floweth 
with  milk  and  honey.  And  now,  behold,  I  have  brought 
the  first-fruits  of  the  land."  He  had  been  brought  into 
Canaan,  as  it  is  said,  "which  thou,  0  Jehovah,  hast 
given  me."  "  And  thou  shalt  set  it  before  Jehovah  thy 
God."  In  whatever  form  the  most  important  exercise 
of  life  in  the  Christian  is  worship.  "And  thou  shalt 
rejoice  in  every  good  thing  which  Jehovah  thy  God 
hath  given  unto  thee,  and  imto  thine  house,  thou,  and 
the  Levite,  and  the  stranger  that  is  among  you."  This 
is  another  trait ;  that  is,  the  heart  going  forth  towards 
those  that  are  poor,  despised,  miserable  in  the  earth. 
This  is  supposed  to  follow  afterwards. 

Then,  further,  we  find  a  peculiar  direction  as  to  the 
giving  of  tithes.  "When  thou  hast  made  an  end  of 
tithing  all  the  tithes  of  thine  increase  the  third  year, 
which  is  the  year  of  tithing,  and  hast  given  it  unto 
the  Levite"  (it  was  a  special  tithe),  "then  thou  shalt 
say  before  Jehovah  thy  God,  I  have  brought  away  the 
hallowed  things  out  of  mine  house,  and  also  have  given 
them  unto  the  Levite."  It  is  not  only  that  the 
heart  considers  what  God  has  done  for  it,  but  it  is 
brought  also  to  regard  those  that  are  outwardly  friend- 
less in  the  world  as  the  special  object  of  our  care.  Are 
we  learning  such  a  duty  before  our  God,  and  caring  for 
them  according  to  that  which  H^  bounty  has  given 
us  ?  This  is  what  is  next  introduced.  Thus  the  Israelite 
was  called  not  only  to  an  expression  of  praise,  but  to 
the  confession,  in  an  exercised  conscience,  how  he  used 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.-XXXVL  505 

the  place  of  blessing  into  which  he  was  brought ;  how 
far  he  diffused  the  sense  of  the  blessing  around. 

Last  of  aU  is  a  prayer ;  for  no  matter  how  God  may 
bless  us,  to  whatever  extent  He  is  pleased  to  make  us  a 
means  of  blessing  to  others  (and  both  these  are  clearly 
the  points  we  have  had),  there  is  this  further  con- 
sideration— that  we  are  not  taken  out  of  the  place  of 
dependence.  Worship  does  not  weaken  prayer.  "  Look 
down  from  thy  holy  habitation,  from  heaven,  and  bless 
thy  people  Israel,  and  the  land  which  thou  hast  given 
us."  Now  we  desire  a  blessing  for  the  people  of  God, 
suitable  to  the  position  of  grace  in  which  we  stand. 
This  makes  us  feel  the  need  of  God  moment  by 
moment.  "  This  day  Jehovah  thy  God  hath  commanded 
thee  to  do  these  statutes  and  judgments."  Again, 
obedience,  instead  of  being  in  any  measure  enfeebled,  is 
strengthened  by  the  sense  of  the  nearness  to  God  into 
which  we  are  brought.  "Thou  has  avouched  Jehovah 
this  day  to  be  thy  God,  and  to  walk  in  his  ways,  and 
to  keep  his  statutes,  and  his  commandments,  and  his 
judgments,  and  to  hearken  unto  his  voice :  and  Jehovah 
hath  avouched  thee  this  day  to  be  his  peculiar  people, 
as  he  hath  promised  thee,  and  that  thou  shouldest 
keep  all  his  commandments;  and  to  make  thee  high 
above  all  nations  which  he  hath  made,  in  praise,  and 
in  name,  and  in  honour;  and  that  thou  mayest  be  an 
holy  people  unto  Jehovah  thy  God,  as  he  hath  spoken." 

Next  we  come  to  another  and  a  very  important  division 
of  this  book.  The  first  remark  I  would  make  is  that 
we  must  beware  of  confounding  chapter  xxviL  with 
chapter  xxviii    The  two  chapters  are  distinct  in  prin- 


506        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

ciple.  It  is  not  merely  a  question  of  form,  but  they 
are  altogether  distinct  in  character,  A  scripture  which 
will  help  much  to  put  this  in  a  clear  light  is  the  use 
that  the  apostle  Paul  makes  of  chapter  xxvii.  in  citing 
it  in  Gul.  iii  He  does  not  quote  from  chapter  xxviii 
One  may  boldly  say  that  it  would  have  been  incom- 
patible with  the  object  of  the  Spirit  of  Grod  to  have 
there  cited  anything  hence  but  from  chapter  xxvii 
Certainly  such  is  the  fact;  and  in  scripture,  if  not  in 
nature  fallen  as  it  is,  whatever  is  is  right. 

Now  this  calls  for  our  notice.  In  the  9th  and  10th 
verses  it  is  said,  "  So  then  they  which  be  of  faith  are 
blessed  with  faithful  Abraham.  For  as  many  as  are 
of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse :  for  it  is 
written,  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all 
things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do 
them."  This  is  a  quotation  from  the  last  verse  of 
chapter  xxvii  Of  what  is  the  apostle  treating  ?  Not 
merely  of  that  which  pertains  to  the  present  life.  He 
is  looking  at  law  as  that  which  brings  in  the  curse  for 
ever.  Using  this  light  then,  it  is  not  a  question  of 
present  things,  but  of  a  curse  in  the  sight  of  God.  This 
gives  the  true  key  to  the  passage  as  compared  with  the 
next  chapter.  We  shall  see  that  the  blessings  and  the 
curses  of  chapter  xxviii  are  strictly  those  that  pertain 
to  the  actual  curse  of  man  here  below. 

In  chapter  xxvii  we  read,  "And  Moses  with  the 
elders  of  Israel  commanded  the  people,  saying,  Keep 
all  the  commandments  which  I  command  you  this  day," 
and  he  directs  that  when  they  passed  over  Jordan  they 
were  to  set  up  great  stones.  "And  it  shall  be  on  the 
day  when  ye  shall  pass  over  Jordan  unto  the  land 


DEUTEKONOMY  XVI.- XXXIV.  507 

which  Jehovah  thy  God  giveth  thee,  that  thou  shalt  set 
thee  up  great  stones,  and  plaster  them  with  plaster : 
and  thou  shalt  write  upon  them  all  the  words  of  this 
law,  when  thou  art  passed  over,  that  thou  mayest  go  in 
unto  the  land  which  Jehovah  thy  God  giveth  thee,  a 
land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey ;  as  the  Jehovah 
God  of  thy  fathers  hath  promised  thee.  Therefore  it  shall 
be  when  ye  be  gone  over  Jordan,  that  ye  shaU  set  up 
these  stones,  which  I  command  you  this  day,  in  mount 
Ebal,  and  thou  shalt  plaster  them  with  plaster.  And 
there  shalt  thou  build  an  altar  unto  Jehovah  thy  God, 
an  altar  of  stones :  thou  shalt  not  lift  up  any  iron  tool 
upon  them.  Thou  shalt  build  the  altar  of  Jehovah  thy 
God  of  whole  stones :  and  thou  shalt  oflfer  bumt-oflfer- 
ings  thereon  unto  Jehovah  thy  God:  and  thou  shalt 
oflfer  peace-oflferings,  and  shalt  eat  there,  and  rejoice 
before  Jehovah  thy  God."  But  further  he  says  (verse 
12),  "These  shall  stand  upon  moimt  Gerizim  to  bless 
the  people,  when  ye  come  over  Jordan;  Simeon,  and 
Levi,  and  Judah,  and  Issachar,  and  Joseph,  and  Ben- 
jamin: and  these  shall  stand  upon  mount  Ebal  to 
curse;  Eeuben,  Gad,  and  Asher,  and  Zebulun,  Dan, 
and  Naphtali"  Thus  the  charge  is  given  that  half  the 
tribes  were  to  stand  on  one  mountain  to  bless,  the  other 
half  on  another  mountain  to  curse.  Here  we  find  how 
it  is  carried  out.  "And  the  Levites  shall  speak,  and  say 
unto  aU  the  men  of  Israel  with  a  loud  voice.  Cursed," 
and  so  it  was  through  every  verse  to  the  last. 

How  comes  this  ?  Where  are  the  blessings  ?  Nowhere. 
Nothing  remains  but  the  curses.  Is  not  this  solemn  ? 
The  point  is,  as  the  apostle  puts  it,  the  bearing  of  the 
law  on  souls  before  God.  By  Moses'  word  half  the  tribes 


508        LECTUKES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

are  directed  to  take  one  mountain  to  pronounce  the 
blessing,  the  other  half  to  pronounce  the  curse ;  but 
when  all  has  been  carried  out,  scripture  has  nothing  to 
record  but  the  curse,  without  a  word  of  the  blessing 
whatever.  It  is  impossible  for  man  to  find  blessing 
from  the  law  in  the  presence  of  God  when  we  come  to 
its  positive  application.  No  matter  what  may  be  the 
call,  when  we  stand  before  the  fact,  there  is  nothing 
but  a  curse  to  speak  of.  One  scarcely  knows  a  more 
solemn  scripture,  or  more  characteristic  of  this  book. 

It  is  not  that  there  is  the  least  im willingness  on  God's 
part  to  bless,  far  from  it ;  and  the  charge  was  given  to 
bless  as  much  as  to  curse.  But  alas !  the  creature,  the 
first  man,  was  under  probation  by  the  law  of  God ;  and 
the  result  is,  and  can  only  be,  that  if  it  depends  on 
man,  the  only  thing  he  gets  when  we  come  to  the  fact 
is  the  curse.  The  curses  were  pronoimced,  and  not  a 
word  about  blessings.  There  was  a  call  and  due  pre- 
paration to  bless ;  but  in  result  there  were  no  blessings 
to  pronounce,  nothing  but  the  curse.  And  what  an 
awful  thing  it  is  that  in  this  Christendom  of  ours,  after 
the  gospel  itseK  has  been  brought  in  at  the  cost  of  the 
death  of  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  this  is  what  is  thundered 
out  stiU — the  curse  and  not  the  blessing!  Is  it  a 
legitimate  excuse,  that  an  entire  want  of  spiritual 
understanding  prevails  ?  Why  should  it  exist  with 
Deuteronomy  commented  on  by  the  apostle  Paul  to  the 
Galatians?  There  is  no  want  of  divine  light  there. 
What  we  see  in  both  is  the  perfect  matchless  wisdom 
of  God.  In  the  one  Moses  speaks  of  the  awful  issue, 
himseK  full  of  love  to  the  people,  and  of  fervent  desires 
for  them ;  in  the  other,  the  light  which  the  gospel  gives 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.-XXXIV.  509 

by  Paul  confirms  it :  on  the  ground  of  law  there  remains 
nothing  for  man  but  the  curse.  Blessings  may  be  held 
out,  but  there  is  no  hand  that  can  take  up  the  blessing, 
any  more  than  a  mouth  here  to  pronounce  them :  there 
is  a  dead  and  ominous  silence  as  to  the  blessing.  The 
curses  sound  out  from  the  mountain  of  cursing,  and  are 
recorded  in  all  their  minute  sternness ;  but  there  is  no 
blessing  here  reported  from  the  mountain  of  blessing. 
Not  a  hint  of  these  is  given  in  chapter  xxvii.  In  order 
to  eke  out  an  appearance  of  blessing,  men  have  con- 
founded the  chapters  and  their  wholly  distinct  bearings. 
They  have  looked  for  the  blessing  in  the  next  chapter. 
They  are  quite  wrong.  There  is  not  the  slightest  ground 
for  such  a  connexion. 

Let  us  turn  to  chapter  xxviii.  and  the  distinction  wiU 
be  seen  with  singular  clearness.  "And  it  shall  come 
to  pass,  if  thou  shalt  hearken  diligently  unto  the  voice 
of  Jehovah  thy  God,  to  observe  and  to  do  all  his 
commandments  which  I  command  thee  this  day,  that 
Jehovah  thy  God  wiU  set  thee  on  high  above  all  nations 
of  the  earth."  It  is  merely  nationaL  It  has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  soul  in  the  sight  of  God.  "And  all 
these  blessings  shall  come  on  thee,  and  overtake  thee, 
if  thou  shalt  hearken  unto  the  voice  of  Jehovah  thy 
God.  Blessed  shalt  thou  be  in  the  city,  and  blessed 
shalt  thou  be  in  the  field."  This  is  not  what  a  poor  soul 
wants.  It  in  no  way  meets  a  sense  of  guilt  or  a 
dread  of  judgment.  The  sinner  needs  something  which 
will  stand  for  ever.  He  wants  what  will  be  in  heaven, 
and  not  merely  in  the  field  or  in  the  city.  He  wants 
acceptance  for  himseK  with  God,  not  merely  to  receive 
in  his  basket  and  in  his  store ;  there  is  nothing  of  that 


510       LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

sort  here.  Thus  the  distinction  is  radical  and  quit^ 
plain.  "What  shews  Ihat  these  are  not  the  blessings 
which  were  to  have  been  pronounced  on  the  mount  of 
blessing  is  that  we  find  at  the  end  of  the  blessings 
these  analogous  curses  follow  after  verse  15.  "  But  it 
shall  come  to  pass,  if  thou  wilt  not  hearken  unto  the 
voice  of  Jehovah  thy  God,  to  observe  to  do  all  his  com- 
mandments and  his  statutes  which  I  command  thee 
this  day;  that  all  these  curses  shall  come  upon  thee, 
and  overtake  thee:  cursed  shalt  thou  be  in  the  city, 
and  cursed  shalt  thou  be  in  the  field.*'  In  the  previous 
chapter  it  is  no  question  of  where  we  are  cursed,  but 
rather  of  the  person  cursed.  Here  it  is  a  particular 
curse  which  falls  on  a  particular  sphere. 

In  chapter  xxvii.  it  is  an  absolute  and  a  personal 
curse ;  it  is  not  in  mere  circumstances,  however  great 
the  change.  Such  is  the  difference.  In  short  then  in 
this  chapter  we  have  the  profound  intimation  of  what 
the  law  comes  to  in  man's — the  first  man's — hands. 
Whatever  may  be  the  goodness  of  God,  man  is  ruined. 
The  consequence  is,  there  is  only  a  curse  and  no 
blessing. 

In  chapter  xxviii.  we  have  law,  not  looked  at  in  its 
own  nature  as  a  question  between  God  and  man,  but 
regarded  as  the  rule  of  earthly  government,  as  having 
to  do  with  the  circumstances  of  man.  And  here  accord- 
ingly  we  have  the  blessing  on  the  one  hand  and  the 
curse  on  the  other.  Nothing  can  be  plainer  than  the 
teaching  conveyed  when  the  idea  is  once  seized. 

It  is  in  vain  to  say  that  we  receive  the  blessing 
which  belongs  to  chapter  xxvii.  We  do  not.  There 
we  get  the  cuise  and  no  blessing.    But  in  chapter 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.-XXXIV.  511 

xxviii.  we  get  certain  blessings  and  then  curses.  Thus 
as  a  part  of  this  chapter  we  have  the  state  in  which 
Israel  was  to  be  found  to  the  present  day.  "  Jehovah 
shall  cause  thee  to  be  smitten  before  thine  enemies. 
Jehovah  will  smite  thee  with  the  botch  of  Egypt,  and 
with  the  emerods,  and  with  the  scab,  and  with  the  itch, 
whereof  thou  canst  not  be  healed.  Jehovah  shall  smite 
thee  with  madness,  and  blindness,  and  astonishment 
of  heart,"  and  so  on.  This  is  detailed.  "And  thou 
shalt  become  an  astonishment,  a  proverb,  and  a  byword, 
among  all  nations  whither  Jehovah  shall  lead  thee." 
It  is  not  a  question  therefore  of  dealing  according  to 
God's  nature,  but  a  matter  of  His  dispensational  \^ays 
with  a  nation  in  this  world,  and  nothing  more. 

In  chapter  xxix.  another  important  point  comes  up — 
a  change  still  more  manifest.  We  have  the  fact  that 
"  These  are  the  words  of  the  covenant,  which  Jehovah 
commanded  Moses  to  make  with  the  children  of  Israel 
in  the  land  of  Moab,  beside  the  covenant  which  he 
made  with  them  in  Horeb."  Now  it  is  important  to 
bear  in  mind  that,  if  it  had  been  merely  the  covenant 
made  in  Horeb,  the  children  of  Israel  could  never  have 
entered  the  land  at  all.  It  was  necessary,  according 
to  the  far-counselling  wisdom  and  mercy  of  God,  that 
there  should  be  another  covenant.  I  say  not  the  new 
one,  but  that  God  should  bring  in  fresh  terms,  and  not 
merely  insist  on  the  strict  application  of  the  law  that 
was  pronounced  in  Horeb.  He  brings  in  governmental 
mercy.  Thus  God  now  as  it  were  says.  Here  you  are 
on  the  very  borders  of  the  land,  and  I  will  bring  you 
in.  You  must  take  care  how  you  behave  when  you  are 
there.    Hence  it  is  God  making  fresh  terms  for  the 


612        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

very  purpose  of  putting  His  people  in  the  land  without 
compromising  Himself,    This  is  here  shewn  with  care. 

The  end  of  the  chapter  gives  us  even  more.  When 
the  people  had  altogether  and  publicly  fiedled,  grace  can 
bring  out  from  God  Himself  the  only  suited  remedy. 
Now  Israel  take  their  place  before  God.  They  are 
called  to  keep  the  words  of  the  covenant;  the  very 
children  are  brought  in  and  put  before  Jehovah,  with 
solemn  warning  against  idolatry,  as  well  as  other  acts 
of  rebellion.  But  the  point  lies  here:  "The  secret 
things  belong  unto  Jehovah  our  God,  but  those  things 
which  are  revealed  belong  unto  us  and  to  our  children 
for  ever,  that  we  may  do  all  the  words  of  this  law." 
The  character  of  this  has  boen  often  noticed  before; 
but  it  cannot  be  too  much  insisted  on  always;  that 
grace,  though  in  a  distant  and  enigmatic  manner,  alludes 
to  an  unrevealed  secret,  whereby,  when  the  people  have 
utterly  failed,  as  we  have  seen,  on  the  ground  of  law, 
God  will  not  fail  to  find  ways  and  means  of  justifying 
them  by  faith.  It  is  not  merely  words  by  which  He 
can  bring  them  all  provisionally  into  the  land,  but 
means  as  yet  secret  by  which  He  can  justify  them  in 
the  face  of  aU  their  faults,  and  work  in  their  hearts 
according  to  what  is  in  His  heart — in  short,  His  secrets 
of  grace. 

Accordingly  all  is  strongly  confirmed  by  that  which 
chapter  xxx^  reveals.  Jehovah  takes  them  up  where 
they  are.  He  supposes  them  driven  out  of  every 
land  imder  heaven ;  yet  that  in  their  low  estate  their 
heart,  no  longer  haughty  but  circumcised,  turns  before 
Himself.  "Thou  shalt  return  and  obey  the  voice  of 
Jehovah,  and  do  all  His  commandments  which  I  com- 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI -XXXIV.  513 

mand  thee  this  day.  And  Jehovah  thy  God  will  make 
thee  plenteous  in  every  work  of  thine  hand,"  &c. ..."  if 
thou  shalt  hearken  unto  the  voice  of  Jehovah  thy  God 
to  keep  his  commandments  and  his  statutes  which  are 
written  in  this  book  of  the  law,  and  if  thou  turn  unto 
Jehovah  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart,  and  with  all  thy 
soul.  For  this  commandment  which  I  command  thee 
this  day,  it  is  not  hidden  from  thee,  neither  is  it  far  off. 
It  is  not  in  heaven,  that  thou  shouldest  say.  Who  shall 
go  up  for  us  to  heaven,  and  bring  it  unto  us,  that  we 
may  hear  it,  and  do  it." 

Now    these    words,    it    is    notorious,    are    applied 
by  the  apostle  Paul  in  Romans  x. ;  and  we  never  can 
overlook  the  applications  of  the  New  Testament  with- 
out losing  a  deeply  interesting  and  weighty  key  for 
understanding  the  Old.     For  what  does  the  apostle  use 
them  ?    For  the  very  purpose  which  has  been  already 
hinted  in  the  close  of  the  last  chapter.     The  children 
of  Israel  had  completely  ruined  themselves  under  the 
law.     They  had  failed  before  God.     The  righteousness 
which  the  law  claimed  had  only  proved  their,  actual 
unrighteousness.     What    was    to    become    of   them  ? 
Christ  is  brought  in — "  the  end  of  the  law  for  right- 
eousness to  every  one  that  believeth."    Hence  therefore 
the  apostle  by  the  Spirit  gives  the  passage  of  Deuter- 
onomy this  admirable  turn,  that  it  is  no  question  of 
going  up  to  heaven  to  find  the  Saviour,  nor  of  going 
down  into  the  bowels  of  the  earth  to  bring  Him  from 
the  dead — that  the  gospel  brings  the  word  of  salvation 
near  to  the  very  door,  "  in  thy  mouth  and  in  thy  heart." 
It  is  only  to  believe  and  confess  the  risen  Lord  Jesus, 
Therefore,  in  virtue  of  the  gospel  of  God,  let  them  take 

2  L 


514  LECTUKES  CfS  THE  PESTATETCH. 

the  fan  ererlaatii^  blesai^  of  His  grace,  cmce  wicked, 
defiled,  lost,  bat  wyw  ''washed,  sanctified,  justified,  in 
the  name  of  oar  Lord  Jesas,  and  hy  the  Spmt  of  oar 
Crod,"  if  I  may  qaote  another  scripture. 

On  this  principle  will  God  sorely  bless  His  ancient 
people  Israel,  scattered  and  broken  among  the  Grentiles, 
when  it  becomes  impossible  therefore,  as  £Eir  as  their 
state  is  concerned,  to  cany  on  their  Jewish  ritoaL 
What  will  become  of  them  ?  Their  heart  bows  to  the 
word  of  €rod ;  they  look  up  to  the  Messiah,  and  Grod 
will  work  in  grace.  Powerless^  sensible  of  past  wicked- 
ness, full  of  darkness  (for  I  haye  no  doubt  that  they  are 
those  described  in  the  end  of  Isaiah  L  as  the  seryants 
of  Jehoyah  who  walk  in  darkness^  and  see  no  light), 
neyertheless  their  heart  turns  to  Jehoyah,  and  they 
stay  on  their  God — a  condition  that  may  not  suit  the 
Christian  now,  but  which  grace  will  open  to  a  Jew 
then.  Such  is  precisely  the  happy  turn  furnished  by 
the  apostle  in  Bomans,  only  of  course  with  a  fuller 
application  to  the  Christian;  but  it  is  on  the  same 
principle  that  God  will  deal  with  the  remnant  of  the 
Jews  by  and  by. 

After  this,  in  chapter  xxxL,  we  find  Moses  about  to 
close  his  ministry.  He  had  given,  so  to  speak,  his  last 
discourse,  and  addresses  to  them  a  most  solemn  warning, 
telling  them  that  he  knew  the  rebellion  of  which  they 
would  be  guilty.  Joshua  is  charged,  and  the  Levites  also. 

But  Moses  does  not  end  without  a  song  (chap,  xxxii); 
and  this  song  is  grounded  on  the  secret  things  of  God's 
grace,  though  it  also  embrace  the  judgments  of  the 
latter  day.  Not  ignorant  of  the  eyil,  he  looks  onward 
to  the  bleaamg  thai  would  surely  come  to  them.     He 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.- XXXIV.  515 

deeply  feels  what  they  would  do  against  Jehovah  in 
their  stiff-necked  folly  and  ingratitude ;  but  he  beholds 
in  prophetic  vision  what  He  will  do  for  them. 

Accordingly  he  says,  "  Give  ear,  0  ye  heavens,  and  I 
will  speak;  and  hear,  0  earth,  the  words  of  my  mouth." 
Because  he  would  publish  the  name  of  Jehovah,  they 
were  to  ascribe  greatness  to  their  God.  He  is  the  rock, 
abiding  in  unshakeable  strength  for  His  people.  Not 
they  but  He  is  this  tower  of  strength.  "  His  doing  is 
perfect :  for  all  his  ways  are  judgment :  a  God  of  truth 
without  iniquity,  just  and  right  is  he."  As  for  the 
people,  it  was  manifest  what  they  were.  The  corrup- 
tion was  theirs,  not  His;  it  is  that  of  His  children, 
theirs  is  the  spot — a  perverse  and  crooked  generation. 
The  lawgiver  indignantly  reproves  their  ingratitude, 
and  clenches  it  the  more  by  reminding  them  that  it 
was  no  new  thought  on  G^d's  part.  Their  place  in  the 
world  to  His  glory  was  no  last  resource  that  would  be 
taken  up  in  the  last  days.  "When  the  Most  High 
(Elion)  divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance,  when 
he  separated  the  sons  of  Adam,  he  set  the  bounds  of 
the  people  according  to  the  number  of  the  children  of 
Israel." 

This,  it  is  true,  has  not  the  eternal  character  of  our 
election  as  Christians.  (Ephes.  i.)  The  diflPerence  is  just 
and  appropriate.  When  God  reveals  His  counsels  in 
Christ  touching  His  children,  His  choice  is  declared 
to  be  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  Not  so  with 
Israel.  It  is  always  said  to  be  in  time,  though  just  as 
sovereign  as  in  our  case.  Eternal  election  would  not 
suit  that  of  a  nation.  The  choice  of  Israel  is  strictly 
connected  with  the  eartL    The  speciality  in  His  choice 

2  L  2 


516        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

of  US  is  that  it  is  out-side  creation;  it  attaches  to  the  eter- 
nity of  God  Himself,  and  is  altogether  apart  from  the 
created  scene  that  was  about  to  be  ruined  by  man  and 
Satan.     God  would  have  saints  to  share  His  nature 
morally  and  to  enjoy  Himself,  no  less  than  angels  to  do 
His  pleasure  as  His  servants.    What  had  that  to  do 
with  creation  ?    It  is  a  question  of  God  forming  accord- 
ing to  His  own  wisdom  and  love  those  who  would  be 
able  to  share  His  mind  and  enjoy  His  love.     And  this 
is  done  by  Christ  His  Son,  and  made  known  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven.     It  is  altogether 
above  a  question  of  creature  condition.    Nobody  doubts 
that  those  who  were  to  be  so  blessed  did  in  fact  form 
part  of  the  creation,  yea,  in  its  deepest  ruin  and  guilt. 
We  had  our  part  in  that  world  which  rejected  and 
crucified  Jesus.     Then  comes  in  the  triumph  of  grace. 
It  was  necessary  that  there  should  be  not  merely 
eternal  life  given  us  in  Christ  but  redemption.     Life 
would  have  been  enough,  had  we  never  been  sinners. 
But  we  were  guilty  and  lost,  and  therefore   Christ 
comes  to  die  in  atonement.     He  took  our  judgment  on 
Himself  and  suffered  for  our  sins,  the  just  for  the 
unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God.  The  consequence  is  that  He 
in  His  death  on  the  cross  conciliated  what  was  other- 
wise irreconcileable,  and  made  it  righteous  for  God  to 
deliver  us,  as  well  as  free  to  bring  out  withal  those 
eternal  counsels  which  He  had  in  Christ  before  the 
world  was.    With  Israel  the  case  is  different.     There, 
as  we  have  said,  the  election  is  in  titne,  the  people 
separated   to  Jehovah  in  the   midst  of  the    bounds 
assigned  to  llcve  o\Jcvet  \va.\»\0Tis  among  the  sons  of  Adam ; 
for  it  is  no  CY\iesXK-OTv  \ist^  ^l  ^O^'i  ^^jc^^  ^^ai^ire,  but 


\ 

\ouT  xn.~xxxTr.  ... 

of  the  human  race.     "\  ^^^ 

according  to  the  number  of^J^^^®  bounds  of  the  people 
Jehovah's  portion  is  his  peop?  ^^^dren  of  Israel.  For 
inheritance."  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  his 

Then  Moses  sings  of  His  wonas 
ness  and  patience  to  that  people  arivlove  and  good- 
every  kind  of  iniquity,  sacrificing   dir  falling  into 
("he-goats"  they  are  contemptuously  calledo   demons 
but  "  to  gods  whom  they  knew  not,  to  neV  to  God 
came  newly  up,  whom  your  fathers  feared  not.    that 
Eock  that  begat  thee  thou  art  unmindful,  and  has^^ 
gotten  God  that  formed  thee."  Alas  !  Jehovah  then  l 
to  prepare  arrows  against  His  people,  has  to  pour  out 
His  vengeance  even  on  His  loved  Israel — ^more  guilty 
than  ally  other,  and  in  fact  to  leave  them  for  a  no-people 
(the  Gentiles),  by  whom  He  would  provoke  the  Jews  to 
jealousy.*     Then  the  heathen  take  advantage  of  God*s 

*  It  is  hard  to  imagine  a  greater  lack  of  spiritual  intelligence  than 
is  displayed  in  the  remarks  of  Dr.  Davidson  (Introduction  to  0.  T.  i. 
391-393)  and  the  German  authors  he  controverts.  The  choice  lies 
between  deeper  or  shallower  pits  of  error.  "  The  thirty-second  chapter, 
as  far  as  verse  43,  contains  Moses'  song  referred  to  in  xxxi.  19,  22,  30. 
It  is  pretty  clear  that  the  song  was  not  written  by  the  Deuteronomist 
himself,  who  never  appears  as  a  poet,  and  from  whose  style  it  strongly 
differs.  Neither  can  it  have  been  written  by  the  Jehovist ;  for  the 
difference  of  diction  and  manner  is  too  great.  It  proceeded  from  some 
unknown  poet,  whose  historical  allusions  and  linguistic  peculiarities 
shew  that  he  lived  after  Moses  (!)  and  even  after  Solomon  (! !).  Thus 
the  fifteenth  verse  presupposes  that  the  Israelites  had  passed  through 
highly  prosperous  and  peaceful  times;  and  in  the  twenty-first  the 
people  referred  to  are  the  Assyrians,  who  had  attained  to  the  height 
of  their  power,  and  are  described  in  the  thirty-third  chapter  of  Isaiah. 
AU  internal  evidence  tends  to  the  last  quarter  of  the  eighth  century 
as  the  period  when  the  song  was  written,  as  Ewald  has  proved  (!!!). 
The  Deuteronomist,  thinking  it  worthy  of  Moses,  though  it  was  not 


518  LECTURES   ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

indignation  against  His  people,  111  He  at  last  in  mei'cy 
to  Israel  will  rise  up  to  deal  f^ith  their  enemies.  "  For 
Jehovah  shall  judge  his  people,  and  repent  himself  for 
his  servants,  when  he  ifeeth  that  their  power  is  gone, 
and  there  is  none  s36t  up  or  left  And  he  shall  say, 
Where  are  their  gods,  their  rock  in  whom  they  trusted, 
which  did  eat  the  fat  of  their  sacrifices,  and  drank  the 
wine  of  their  drink-offerings  ?  let  them  rise  up  and  help 
you,  and  b^your  protection.  See  now  that  I,  even  I, 
am  hft  and  there  is  no  god  with  me :  I  kUl,  and  I  make 
alive;  I  wound,  and  I  heal:  neither  is  there  any  that 
can  deliver  out  of  my  hand.  For  I  lift  up  my  hand  to 
heaven,  and  say,  I  live  for  ever.  If  I  whet  my  glittering 
sword,  and  mine  hand  take  hold  on  judgment ;  I  will 
render  vengeance  to  mine  enemies,  and  will  reward 
them  that  hate  me.     I  will  make  mine  arrows  drunk 

written  for  the  purpose  of  passing  as  Mosaic,  adopted  and  put  it  into 
his  mouth.   We  cannot  agree  with  Ewald,"  &c.   "  These  observations 
shew  that  we  differ  from  Bjiobel,  who  assigns  the  song  to  the  Syrian 
period.    Instead  of  referring  verses  21,  30,  31,  35,  to  the  Assyrians, 
he  supposes  the  Syrians  to  be  meant,  chiefly  because  he  thinks  that 
the  former  would  have  been  spoken  of  in  stronger  language,  and  that 
the  captivity  would  have  been  announced.    But  Knobel  relies  much 
on  the  seventh  verse  [there  is  confusion  here :  it  must  be  of  chapter 
zxxiii.],  which  relates  to  Judah,  as  evidence  that  the  chapter  belongs 
to  a  much  earlier  time  than  is  commonly  (!)  assigned  to  it.     He  takes 
the  allusion  in  the  verse  to  be  to  David's  living  at  a  distance  from 
Saul  in  banishment;  while  the  twelfth  verse  he  applies  to  G-ibeon, 
whither  the  tabernacle  had  been  brought  after  Nob  had  been  destroyed 
by  Saul.    These  are  precarious  allusions  to  rely  upon.    We  do  not 
believe  with  Knobel  that  the  poem  belongs  to  the  time  of  Saul,  and 
are  surprised  to  find  the  critic  asserting  that  the  writers  of  Genesis 
xlix.  and  Deuteronomy  xxxiii.   were  independent  of  one  another 
without  perceptible  imitation  on  the  part  of  either. 

"  The  verses  immediately  succeeding  the  song,  viz.,  xxxii.  44-47, 
belong  to  the  Deuteronomist  himself,  as  the  allusion  in  verse  46  to  all 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.- XXXIV.  519 

with  blood,  and  my  sword  shall  devour  flesh ;  and  that 
with  the  blood  of  the  slain  and  of  the  captives,  from 
the  beginning  of  revenges  upon*  the  enemy.  Eejoice, 
0  ye  nations,  with  his  people :  for  he  will  avenge  the 
blood  of  his  servants,  and  will  render  vengeance  to  his 
adversaries,  and  will  be  merciful  unto  his  land,  and  to 
his  people."  Then  not  only  will  God  deliver  His  people 
Israel,  but  He  will  cause  the  very  nations  themselves 
to  rejoice  with  His  people  in  the  enlarging  circle  of  His 
grace ;  for  though  the  principle  apply  under  the  gospel, 
it  is  only  in  the  millennial  reign  that  the  full  import  of 
their  predicted  joy  together  will  be  realized. 

In  chapter  xxxiiL  we  have  a  blessing  pronounced  on 
the  various  tribes  of  IsraeL  This  may  be  entered  into 
rather  more  closely  just  now,  though  one  cannot  hope  to 
do  so  with  satisfaction  in  so  small  a  space.  Let  me  only 
just  say  that  it  is  altogether  in  reference  to  the  land 

the  words  of  Moses  plainly  shews.  The  remainder  of  the  chapter, 
viz.,  48-62,  is  Elohistic,  having  heen  taken  from  the  Elohim -writer 
and  put  here  by  the  Deuteronomist.  It  is  partly  a  repetition  of 
Numbers  xxvii.  12-23,  as  Bleek  has  pointed  out." 

I  have  given  this  long  extract  as  a  specimen  not  only  of  the  specu- 
lative mania  that  characterises  the  school,  but  also  of  their  readiness 
to  impute  the  basest  dishonesty  to  the  holy  men  of  God  who  spoke 
from  Him  as  they  were  borne  on  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  think 
little  of  imputing  to  their  imaginary  Deuteronomist  the  fraud  of  put- 
ting into  Moses'  mouth  what,  according  to  them,  Moses  never  uttered. 
Such  an  imposture  God's  word !  But  enough  of  this.  The  apostle  Paul 
refutes  them  aU  beforehand  in  a  few  words  which  carry  the  force  and 
light  of  truth,  as  theirs  do  of  clashing  inanities.  He  declares  that 
verse  21  is  the  language  of  Moses,  and  that  the  allusion  is  to  the 
Gentiles  caUed  while  God  counts  Israel  Lo-anmii.  (Bom.  x.  19.) 
Neither  Syrians  nor  Assyrians  are  in  view  then,  but,  during  the 
temporary  exclusion  of  the  ancient  people,  the  caU  of  those  not  a 
people  to  move  Israel  to  jealousy.    Compare  Romans  xi. 

♦  Literally,  "from  the  split  head  of  the  enemy." 


520        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

which  the  people  were  on  the  point  of  entering.  This  is 
perhaps  the  chief  difference  as  compared  with  Jacob's 
blessing.  In  the  latter  case  notice  was  taken  of  the 
tribes  from  the  beginning  of  their  history,  to  the  end, 
and  apart  from  their  possessing  the  land  or  not;  whereas 
the  blessing  that  Moses  pronounces  here  is  in  the 
strictest  subordination  to  the  great  object  of  Deuter- 
onomy. From  first  to  last  the  point  of  the  book  is 
God's  bringing  His  people  into  the  land,  and  putting 
them  into  a  relationship  as  immediate  with  Himself  as 
was  consistent  with  the  first  man.  This  we  have  sys- 
tematically and  always :  so  the  blessing  here  is  suitable 
to  it.  Moses  does  not  therefore  shew  us  historically 
the  course  of  things  as  when  Jacob  prophesied,  but  a 
more  specific  benediction  of  the  people  in  view  of  their 
place  in  relation  to  Jehovah  in  the  land. 

The  song  opens  with  the  vision  of  Jehovah  coming 
from  Sinai  and  shining  forth  from  Seir  as  well  as  Paran. 
It  is  His  judicial  manifestation  to  His  people,  His 
saints,  around  Him  in  the  wilderness:  from  His  right 
hand  [went]  a  fiery  law  for  them.  "  Yea,  He  loveth  the 
peoples:  all  his  saints  are  in  thy  hand;  and  they  sat 
down  at  thy  feet,  each  receive  thy  decisions.*'  The  special 
place  of  Moses  is  then  named  as  commanding  a  law, 
the  possession  of  the  congregation  of  Jacob ;  he  is  king 
in  Jeshurun  when  the  heads  of  the  people,  the  tribes  of 
Israel,  gathered  together. 

As  to  the  first-born,  the  word  is,  Let  Eeuben  live  and 
not  die,  and  his  men  be  few.* 

*  There  are  cases,  in  Hebrew  as  in  other  tongues,  where  the  negative 
particle  may  and  must  be  understood  from  the  context;  and  so  our 
translators  took  the  passage  before  us.  But  this  should  never  be, 
unless  it  be  implied  from  the  chief  clause,  which  is  not  the  &ct  here. 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.-XXXIV.  521 

The  next,  though  a  singular  choice  iji  appearance,  is 
ordered  in  divine  wisdom  so  as  to  bring  forward  that 
tribe  which  would  take  the  place  of  Eeuben,  politically 
soon,  but  eventually  according  to  the  counsels  of  God. 
For  of  Judah  Christ  was  to  be  bom  after  the  flesh. 
"And  this  is  for  Judah ;  and  he  said,  Hear,  0  Jehovah, 
the  voice  of  Judah,  and  bring  him  unto  his  people :  let 
his  hands  be  numerous  for  him,  and  be  thou  an  help 
from  his  adversaries."  We  know  that  the  Jews  have 
long  had  a  separate  place;  but  the  day  is  coming  when 
Judah  and  Israel  shall  be  joined  in  one  people  according 
to  the  expressive  symbol  of  Ezekiel,  which  may  illustrate 
the  language  of  Moses. 

His  own  tribe  has  then  his  blessing.  "And  of  Levi 
he  said,  Thy  Thummim  and  thy  Urim  are  for  thy  holy 
[i.e,  pious]  one,  whom  thou  didst  prove  at  Massah,  with 
whom  thou  didst  strive  at  the  waters  of  Meribah ;  who 
said  of  his  father  and  of  his  mother,  I  have  not  seen 
him ;  neither  did  he  acknowledge  his  brethren,  nor  know 
his  own  children ;  for  they  kept  thy  word,  and  guarded 
thy  covenant.  They  shall  teach  thy  judgments  to  Jacob, 
and  thy  law  to  Israel:  they  shall  put  incense  before 
thee,  and  whole  bumt-oflfering  upon  thine  altar.*   Bless, 

*  Thus,  if  Simeon  disappear,  Levi  gains  a  good  degree  by  fidelity  at 
the  severest  crisis  in  the  desert  history  of  Israel.  No  doubt  the  word 
in  Deuteronomy  xxxiii.  is  supposed  to  be  after  that  in  Genesis  xlix. ; 
but  there  is  not  the  smallest  ground  for  the  assumption  of  incredulity 
that  the  writer  of  the  one  lived  after  the  other.  As  the  representation 
of  Scripture  is  that  Moses  wrote  both,  so  the  differences  in  the  view 
taken  on  each  occasion  are  perfectly  compatible  and  indeed  remarkably 
verified.  Levi  is  involved  in  the  sentence  with  Simeon  according  to 
Genesis  xlix.  But  Deut.  xxxiii.,  though  it  omits  Simeon,  does  not 
reverse  the  scattering  predicted  of  Levi  by  Jacob;  but  it  turns  that 
very  circumstance  into  a  blessing  for  Israel  and  an  honour  to  the  tribe 


522        LECTURES  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH.  . 

Jehovah,  his  force,  and  accept  the  work  of  his  hands : 
strike  through  the  loins  of  those  that  rise  up  against 
him,  and  of  those  that  hate  him,  that  they  rise  not 
again." 

The  blessing  of  Benjamin*  alludes  to  Jehovah's  dwell- 
ing there;  for  Jerusalem  was  within  the  limits  of  that 
tribe  which  Judah  just,  skirted.  Joseph  has  his  full 
twofold  portion  in  the  land.     Zebulun's  blessing  t  is 

which  covered  over  their  old  fault  with  the  truest  zeal  for  Jehovah's 
honour  and  a  burning  love  for  the  people  at  all  cost  to  their  own  feel- 
ings and  appearances.  Ability  to  plead  for  man  is  in  proportion  to 
faithfulness  for  Gh>d.  The  priesthood  was  within  that  tribe,  and  the 
service  of  the  sanctuary,  and  the  teaching  of  the  people. 

♦  "  Of  Benjamin  he  said,  The  beloved  of  Jehovah  shall  dwell  in  safety 
by  him ;  he  shall  harbour  him  all  the  day,  and  he  shall  dwell  between 
his  shoulders."  The  prophet  alludes  to  Jerusalem  as  the  place  of  the 
sanctuary  and  throne,  the  city  of  the  great  King.  But  the  notion  that 
the  language  savours  of  the  reign  of  Josiah  or  near  Jeremiah's  day  is 
wholly  unfounded.  There  was  anything  but  safe  tabernacling  then 
for  Benjamin.    This  is  yet  more  evidently  refuted  in  what  follows. 

For  on  Joseph  the  inspiring  Spirit  dwells  largely.  ''Blessed  of 
Jehovah  be  his  land  for  the  precious  things  of  the  heavens,  for  the 
dew  and  for  the  deep  couching  beneath,  and  for  the  precious  things 
brought  forth  by  the  sun,  and  for  the  precious  things  driven  out  by 
the  moon,  and  for  the  chief  things  of  the  ancient  mountains,  and  for 
the  precious  things  of  the  lasting  hills,  and  the  good  pleasure  of  him 
that  dwelt  in  the  bush :  let  it  come  on  the  head  of  Joseph,  and  on  the 
top  of  the  head  of  him  that  was  separated  from  his  brethren.  The 
first-bom  of  his  herd  is  honour  to  him,  and  his  horns  the  horns  of  a 
bufialo  :  with  them  he  shall  push  peoples  together  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth;  and  they  are  the  myriads  of  Ephraim,  and  they  are  the  thou- 
sands of  Manasseh."  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  such  a  blessing  written, 
I  will  not  say  under  Josiah' s  reign,  but  even  in  the  earliest  days  of 
the  rent  kingdom  of  Israel. 

t  ''Andof  Zebulun  he  said,  Rejoice,  Zebulun,  in  thy  going  out;  and, 
Issachar,  in  thy  tents.  They  shall  call  the  peoples  to  the  mountain ; 
there  they  shall  sacrifice  sacrifices  of  righteousness ;  for  they  shall 
suck  the  abundance  of  the  seas,  even  treasures  hidden  in  the  sand. 


DEUTERONOMY  XVI.-XXXIV.  *  523 

9 

rather  without,  Issachar*8  within.  Gad*s  haste  to  get 
rich  appears,  though  he  shared  the  trials  of  the  people, 
Dan*s  warlike  impetuosity  is  noted;  and  Naphtali*s 
peaceful  satisfaction  with  his  portion ;  and  Asher's  ac- 
ceptance among  his  brethren,  and  abundant  resources 
and  vigour.  ^ 

Nothing  can  exceed  the  grandeur  of  the  closing  words 
of  Moses;  and  they  will  assuredly  be  fulfilled  in  the 
future  brightness  and  glory  of  restored  Israel.  He  has 
dealt  with  His  people  according  to  the  fiery  law  in  His 
right  hand ;  but  He  has  not  exhausted  the  resources  of 
His  tender  mercy;  nay,  the  best  wine  is  kept  to  the 
last,  to  be  brought  in  by  Him  whom  they  knew  not  in 
His  humiliation  but  will  own  to  theirs,  yet  in  the  end 
with  .exceeding  joy  when  He  returns  in  glory  to  change 
the  water  of  purifying  after  their  manner  into  that 
which  gladdens  the  heart  of  God  and  man.  "  There  is 
none  like  the  God  of  Jeshurun,  riding  the  heavens  for 
thy  help,  and  for  his  excellency  the  skies.    The  God  of 

And  of  Gad  he  said.  Blessed  be  he  that  enlargeth  Gad :  he  dwelleth 
as  a  lioness,  and  teareth  the  arm,  also  the  crown  of  the  head.  And  he 
provideth  the  first  part  for  himself,  for  there  is  the  portion  covered  for 
the  lawgiver;  and  he  came  with  the  heads  of  the  people;  he  did  the 
righteousness  of  Jehovah,  and  his  judgments  with  Israel.  And  of 
Dan  he  said,  Dan  is  a  lion's  whelp ;  he  shall  leap  from  Bashan.  And 
of  NaphtaH  he  said,  O  Naphtali,  satisfied  with  good  will,  and  fuU 
of  the  blessing  of  Jehovah,  possess  thou  the  west  and  the  south.  And 
of  Asher  he  said,  Asher,  blessed  among  sons,  let  him  be  acceptable  to 
his  brethren,  and  dip  his  foot  in  oil :  thy  shoes  iron  and  copper ;  and 
thy  strength  as  thy  days."  WiU  it  be  seriously  pretended  that  aU  this 
was  put  forth  as  a  prophecy  after  the  most  sweeping  storm  had  faUen 
on  all  these  tribes,  and  the  last  blows  were  about  to  fsill  on  Judah  and 
Benjamin?  The  credulity  of  infidels  is  proverbial,  and  can  alone 
account  for  such  senseless  theories,  even  if  one  lays  aside  for  a  moment 
their  one  point  in  common— opposition  to  the  revealed  truth  of  God. 


•^mmmm^tm  •  ■  I        ■  .M^ 


524  LECTURES   ON  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

ages  is  a  refuge,  and  underneath  the  everlasting  arms ; 
and  he  shall  drive  away  the  enemy  from  thy  presence, 
and  say,  Destroy.  Israel  dwelleth  in  safety,  the  fountain* 
of  Jacob  on  a  land  of  com  and  new  wine ;  his  heavens 
also  drop  down  dew.  Happy  thou,  0  Israel:  who  is 
like  thee,  0  people  saved  by  Jehovah,  the  shield  of  thy 
help,  and  who  is  the  sword  of  thy.  excellency !  And 
thy  enemies  shall  lie  to  thee ;  and  thou  shalt  tread  on 
their  high  places." 

Moses  (ch.  xxxiv.)  goes  up  to  the  top  of  Pisgah,  and 
there  Jehovah  points  out  to  him  the  land  in.  detail. 
It  was  impossible  that  the  fault  of  Moses  could  be 
slighted  without  weakening  the  authority  of  law.  There 
was  surely  righteousness  in  the  ways  of  God ;  but  this 
did  not  in  the  smallest  degree  hinder  the  perfectness  of 
His  love  to  Moses.  It  was  part  of  His  government  to 
chasten  his  fault :  His  grace  to  Moses  remained  entire. 
Had  it  been  possible,  consistently  with  the  ways  of 
God  (which  it  was  not),  that  Moses  should  have  entered 
the  land,  what  grief  to  Moses  to  have  beheld  the  un- 
faithfulness of  His  people,  their  slighting  of  His  law, 
their  imperfect  conquest  of  the  enemy,  their  readiness 
to  turn  back  to  iniquity  and  idolatry  even  in  that  land  ! 
Can  this  be  compared  with  the  blessedness  of  looking 
down  on  it  from  beside  Jehovah — not  seeing  it  in  the 
hands  of  man,  imperfectly  rescued  from  the  Canaanites, 
but  God  Himself  calling  it  already  the  land  of  this  tribe 
and  of  that,  and  thus  giving  His  servant's  heart  to  look 
to  the  time  when  no  Canaanite  should  be  in  the  land  ? 

Faith  has  always  the  best  portion. 

♦  literally  "  the  eye  "  of  Jacob. 


lioudou*.  "^  .Ti.'Bwwm.^^^^'S^Swctkai^Kt'^ssm, 


