v 



Boo.': 



'-n 



University of Chicago Library 

GIVEN BY 



\iV- 






Besides the main topic this book also treats of 
Subject No. On page Subject No. On page 



LECTURES 



ON 



THE EPISTLE OF PAUL, THE APOSTLE, 



TO 



THE EPHESIANS, 



WITH 



A NEW TRANSLATION. 



BY WILLIAM, KELLY. 



LONDON: 
G. MORRISH, 24, WARWICK LANE, 

PATERNOSTER ROW, E. C. 
GLASGOW: SCOTT & ALLAN, 164, SAUCHIEHALL STREET. 



THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 



I. PAUL, apostle of Christ Jesus by God's will, to the 
saints that are in Ephesus and faithful in Christ Jesus. 
2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and 
[the] Lord Jesus Christ. 3 Blessed [be] the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ that blessed us with 
every spiritual blessing in the heavenly [places] in Christ, 
4 even as he chose us in him before [the] world's 
foundation, that we should be holy and blameless be- 
fore him in love ; 5 having predestinated us for adoption 
through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the 
good pleasure of his will, 6 unto [the] praise of [the] 
glory of his grace, wherein he made us objects of grace 
in the beloved; 7 in whom we have redemption through 
his blood, the" forgiveness of offences, according to the 
riches of his grace, 8 which he caused to abound toward 
us in all wisdom and intelligence, 9 having made known 
to us the mystery of his will, according to his good 
pleasure which he purposed in himself 10 for [the] ad- 
ministration of the fulness of the times, to sum up all 
things in the Christ, the things in the heavens and the 
things on the earth, in him n in whom we have also ob- 
tained an inheritance, being predestinated according to 
[the] purpose of him that worketh all things according to 
the counsel of his will, 12 in order that we should be unto 
[the] praise of his glory, that have fore-trusted in the 
Christ ; 13 in whom ye also, having heard the word of 
truth, the gospel of your salvation, in whom having also 



IV EPHESIANS. 

believed, ye were sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, 
14 who is earnest of our inheritance, for [the] redemption 
of the purchased possession unto [the] praise of his glory. 
15 On this account I also, having heard of the faith 
that [is] among you in the Lord Jesus and the love 
that [ye have] toward all the saints, l6 do not cease 
giving thanks for you, making mention of you in my 
prayers, w that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Father of glory, would give you [the] spirit of wisdom 
and revelation in full knowledge of him, 18 having the 
eyes of your heart enlightened, that ye may know what 
is the hope of his calling ; and what the riches of the 
glory of his inheritance in the saints ; J 9 and what the 
surpassing greatness of his power toward us that believe, 
according to the working of the might of his strength, 
20 which he wrought in the Christ in having raised 
him out of the dead, and seated [him] at his right 
hand in the heavenly [places], 21 far above every prin- 
cipality and authority and power and lordship and 
every name named not only in this age but also in that 
to come ; zz and put all things under his feet, and gave 
him as head over all things to the assembly, 23 which* 
is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all. 
II. And you, being dead in your offences and your 
sins, 2 in which ye once walked according to the age of 
this world, according to the ruler of the authority of 
the air, the spirit that now worketh in the sons of dis- 
obedience ; 3 among whom we all also had our conver- 
sation once in the lusts of our flesh, doing the wishes of 
the flesh and of the thoughts, and were children, by 
nature, of wrath even as the rest ; * but God, being rich 

* Or, 'the which.' (though this is rather antiquated), 'inasmuch 
as it,' 7)1-4$, not i}, i.e., character, not fact, Comp. chap. iii. 13, 
vi. 19. and vL 2. 



CHAPTER It. V 

in mercy, on account of his great love wherewith he 
loved us, 5 even us being dead in our offences he 
quickened with the Christ (by grace are ye saved), 
6 and raised together and seated together in the 
heavenly [places] in Christ Jesus, 7 that he might shew 
forth in the coming ages the surpassing riches of his 
grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. 8 For by 
grace ye are saved through faith ; and this not of your- 
selves God's is the gift: 9 not of works, that no one 
might boast. 10 For his workmanship we are, created 
in Christ Jesus for good works which God before pre- 
pared that we should walk in them. 

11 Wherefore remember that once ye, the nations in 
[the] flesh, that are called uncircumcision by that 
called circumcision in [the] flesh made by hand, 12 that 
ye were at that time without Christ, aliens from the com- 
monwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants 
of promise, having no hope, and without God in the 
world : 13 but now in Christ Jesus ye that were once 
far off have become nigh by the blood of the Christ. 
14 For he is our peace that made both one, and broke 
down the middle wall of the fence, l5 having annulled 
the enmity in his flesh, the law of the commandments 
in ordinances, that he might create the two in himself 
into one new man, making peace, l6 and might reconcile 
both in one body to God through the cross, having slain 
the enmity in it. 17 And having come he preached peace 
to you that were afar off and peace to those that were 
nigh. 18 For through him we both have * access by 
one Spirit to the Father. J 9 So then ye are no .longer 

* I had hesitated whether I should not, -with several translators, 

say ' our' access (and so bis in iii. 12, and in iii. 17). But it appears 

to me that our possessive is too strong an expression of the Greek 

article here; and that the force, in one case at least, is rather technical. 

A2 



VI EPHESIANS. 

strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of 
the saints and of the household of God, 20 being built 
upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus 
Christ himself being chief corner-stone, a in whom all 
the building fitted together increaseth unto a holy 
temple in [the] Lord, 22 in whom ye also are builded 
together for an habitation of God in [the] Spirit. 

III. For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of the Christ 
Jesus for you nations, 2 if indeed ye heard of the ad- 
ministration of the grace of God that was given me 
toward you; 3 how that by revelation was made known 
to me the mystery, even as I have before written 
briefly, 4 in accordance with which ye can, in reading, 
perceive my understanding in the mystery of the Christ, 
* which in other generations was not made known to 
the sons of men, as it hath been now revealed to his 
holy apostles and prophets in [the] Spirit, 6 that the 
nations are fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and 
fellow-partakers of the promises in Christ Jesus by the 
gospel, 7 of which I was made minister according to the 
gift of the grace of God that was given me according 
to the working of his power. 8 To me who am less 
than the least of all saints was this grace given to 
preach to the nations the unsearchable riches of the 
Christ, 9 and to enlighten all as to what [is] the ad- 
ministration of the mystery which hath been hidden 
from the ages in God that created all things ; 10 in order 
that there might be known now to the principalities 
and the authorities in the heavenly [places] by the as- 
sembly the manifold wisdom of God, n according to 
[the] purpose of the ages which he made in Christ 
Jesus our Lord; 12 in whom we have* boldness and* 
access in confidence by the faith of him. 13 Where- 
* See note to chap. ii. 18. 



CHAPTER IV. Vll 

'fore I entreat [you] not to faint at my tribulations for you 
which is your glory. 14 For this cause I bow my knees 
to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 15 from whom 
every family in [the] heavens and on earth is named, 
16 that he would give you according to the riches of his 
glory to be strengthened with power by his Spirit into 
the inner man, J 7 that the Christ may dwell through 
*faith in your hearts, 18 being in love rooted and 
grounded that ye may be fully able to comprehend with 
all the saints what [is] the breadth and length and 
depth and height ; J 9 and to know the love of the 
Christ that surpasseth knowledge, that ye may be filled 
to all the fulness of God. 20 Now to him that is able 
to do above all things far exceedingly above what we 
ask or think, according to the power that worketh in 
us, 21 to him [be] glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus 
unto all the generations of the age of the ages. Amen. 

IV; I exhort you therefore, I the prisoner in [the] 
Lord, that ye walk worthily of the calling wherewith 
ye were called, 2 with all lowliness and meekness, with 
long-suffering, forbearing one another in love, 3 using 
diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of 
peace: 4 one body and one Spirit, even as ye were also 
called in one hope of your calling; 5 one Lord, one 
faith, one baptism; 6 one God and Father of all, that 
[is] over all, and through all, and in [us, or, you] all. 

7 But to each one of us was given grace according to 
the measure of the gift of the Christ. 8 Wherefore he 
saith, Having ascended on high, he led captivity captive 
and gave gifts to men. 9 Now that he ascended, what 
is it but that he also descended into the lower [parts] 
of the earth ? 10 He that descended, he it is also that 
ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill 
* See note to chap. ii. 18. 



Till EPHESIANS. 

all things. u And he gave some apostles, and some 
prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors and 
teachers, 12 for the perfecting of the saints, unto work of 
ministry, unto edifying of the body of the Christ, 
18 until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the 
full knowledge of the Son of God, at a fullgrown man, 
at [the] measure of [the] stature of the fulness of the 
Christ; "that we may no longer be babes, tossed and 
carried about by every wind of doctrine in the sleight 
of men, in craftiness for the scheming of error, 13 but, 
holding the truth in love, let us grow up unto him in 
all things, who is the head, Christ, 16 from whom all 
the body, being fitted together and compacted by every 
joint of supply, according to [the] working in [the] 
measure of each one part, worketh the increase of the 
body for edifying of itself in love. 

17 This then I say and testify in [the] Lord that ye 
should no longer walk even as also the rest of the 
nations walk in vanity of their mind, 18 being darkened 
in the understanding, estranged from the life of God 
on account of the ignorance that is in them, on account 
of the hardening of their heart, 19 who, as being past 
remorse, have given themselves up to lasciviousness 
unto [the] working of every uncleanness with greedi- 
ness. 20 But ye have not thus learnt the Christ, 21 if in- 
deed ye have heard him and been taught in him even as 
[the] truth is in Jesus,* 22 that ye should put off, ac- 
cording to your former conversation, the old man that 
is corrupt according to the lusts of deceit, 23 and be re- 
newed in the spirit of your mind, 24 and put on the new 
man, that according to God was created in righteous- 
ness and holiness of truth. 25 Wherefore having put 

* Or, ' in Jesus your having put off. and being renewed 

and having put on,' &c. 



CHAPTER V. IX 

off falsehood, speak truth each with his neighbour, for 
we are members one of another. 26 Be angry and sin 
not: let not the sun set upon your wrath, 27 nor yet give 
room for the devil. 2S Let him that stealeth steal no 
longer but rather labour, working what is good with his 
own hands, that he may have to distribute to him that 
hath need. 29 Let no corrupt word proceed out of 
your mouth, but if [there be] any one good for edification 
of the need, that it may give grace to those that hear. 
30 And grieve not the holy Spirit of God by whom ye 
were sealed for redemption-day. 31 Let all bitter- 
ness and passion and wrath and clamour and evil- 
speaking be removed from you with all malice ; 32 and 
be to one another kind, compassionate, forgiving each 
other, even as God also in Christ hath forgiven you. 

V. Be therefore imitators of God, as beloved child- 
ren, and walk in love, z even as the Christ also loved us 
and gave himself np for ns, an offering and sacrifice to 
God for an odour of sweet smell. 3 But ' fornication 
and all uncleanness or covetousness, let it not be even 
named among you, even as becometh saints; 4 and 
filthiness and foolish talking or jesting, which are not 
becoming, but rather thanksgiving. s For this ye are 
aware of, knowing that no fornicator nor unclean 
nor covetous [person], who is an idolater, hath 
inheritance in the kingdom of the Christ and God. 
6 Let no one deceive you by vain words ; for on account 
of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the sons 
of disobedience. ? Be not therefore fellow-partakers 
with them; 8 for ye were once darkness but now [are] 
light in the Lord : walk as children of light (9 for the 
fruit of the light [is] in all goodness and righteousness 
and truth), 10 proving what is agreeable to the Lord; 
11 and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of 



X EPHESIANS. 

darkness but rather also reprove; 12 for the things in 
secret done by them it is shameful even to speak of, 
13 but all of them,* when reproved by the light, are 
made manifest ; for everything that maketh manifest is 
light. 14 Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that sleepest, 
and arise ont of [the] dead, and the Christ shall shine 
upon thee. 15 See therefore how carefully ye walk, not 
as unwise but as wise, l6 buying up the time, because 
the days are evil, w On this account be not foolish, 
but understanding what the will of the Lord. [is]. 
18 And be not drunk with wine, in which is dissolute- 
ness, but be filled with [the] Spirit, 1 9 speaking to each 
other in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing 
and chanting in your heart to the Lord; 20 giving 
thanks always for all things in [the] name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ to him that is God and Father, 21 submit- 
ting yourselves one to another in fear of Christ. 

23 Wives, [submit yourselves] to your-j- own husbands 
as to the Lord ; 23 for a husband is head of the wife, as 
also the Christ [is] head of the assembly: he [is] the 
saviour of the body. ^ But as the assembly is subject 
to the Christ, so also the wives to their own husbands 
in everything. 25 Husbands, love your own wives, even 
as the Christ also loved the assembly and gave himself 
up for it, 2G that he might sanctify it, having cleansed 
[it] by the washing of water in [the] word, 27 that he 
might himself present to himself the assembly glorious, 
not having spot or wrinkle, or any of such things ; but 
that it should be holy and blameless. 28 Thus ought 

* Here the Auth. Version is doubly -wrong. To justify it, there 
should be no article with irdvTa, and there ought to be one with 
eXGyxfoeva.. I have done the best I could (though the result is 
poor) to represent the text. 

t Some excellent authorities read, " Let the wives be subject to 
their" &c. Others do not express the verb. 



CHAPTEB VI. XI 

husbands to love their own wives as their own bodies : he 
that loveth his own wife loveth himself, 29 for no one 
ever hated his own flesh but nourisheth and cherisheth 
it, even as the Christ also the assembly : 30 for we are 
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. 
31 Because of this shall a man leave father and mother 
and shall be closely joined to his wife, and they two 
shall be one flesh. 32 This mystery is great; but I 
speak as to Christ and as to the assembly. 33 Never- 
theless, ye also every one, let each so love his own wife 
as himself, and let the wife fear the husband. 

VI. Children, obey your parents in [the] Lord ; for 
this is just. 2 Honour thy father and thy mother, 
which is a commandment first in promise, 3 that it may 
be well for thee, and thou shalt be long-lived on the 
earth. 4 And, fathers, provoke not your children to 
wrath, but bring them up in [the] Lord's discipline 
and admonition. 

5 Bondmen, obey your masters according to flesh 
with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as 
to the Christ ; 6 not with eye-service as men-pleasers 
but as bondmen of Christ, doing the will of God from 
the soul, 7 with good-will doing service as to the Lord 
and not to men; 8 knowing that whatever good each 
shall do, this he shall receive of [the] Lord, whether 
bond or free. 9 And, masters, do the same things to- 
ward them, giving up threatening, knowing that the 
master both of them and of you is in [the] heavens ; and 
there is no respect of persons with him. 

10 For the rest, my brethren, be strengthened in [the] 
Lord and in the strength of his might. u Put on the 
panoply of God, that ye may be able to stand against 
the stratagems of the devil; 12 for our wrestling is 
not against blood and flesh, but against the principal!- 



Xll EPHESIANS. 

ties, against the authorities, against the world-rulers of 
this darkness, against the spiritual [hosts] of wicked- 
ness in the heavenly [places]. 13 On this account take 
up the panoply of God, that ye may be able to with- 
stand in the evil day, and, having fully done all, to 
stand. 

14 Stand therefore, having girt about your loins with 
truth, and having put on the breastplate of righteous- 
ness, 15 and having shod your feet with [the] prepara- 
tion of the gospel of peace ; 16 besides all, having taken 
up the shield of faith with which ye will be able to 
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked one ; 17 and 
receive the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the 
Spirit, which is God's word; ls with all prayer and 
supplication praying in every season in [the] Spirit, and 
thereunto watching with all perseverance and supplica- 
tion for all the saints, 19 and for me that utterance 
may be given me in [the] opening of my mouth with 
boldness to make known the mystery of the gospel, 
20 for which I am an ambassador in chain [s], that in it 
I may be bold as I ought to speak. 

21 But that ye also may know my affairs, what I do,* 
Tychicus shall make known all to you, the beloved 
brother and faithful servant in [the] Lord, 22 whom I 
sent to you for this very thing, that ye may know our 
matters, and [that] he may comfort your hearts. 

23 Peace to the brethren and love with faith from 
God [the] Father and [the] Lord Jesus Christ; 
24 grace with all that love our Lord Jesus Christ in 
incorruption. 

* Or, ' how I fare.' 



NOTES OF LECTURES 

ON THE 

EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 



CHAPTER I, 

IT must be manifest to the most casual reader of the 
epistle that we are upon very high and holy ground 
here. Let none suppose that this is to impeach other 
portions of the inspired scriptures. But who can deny 
that in revealiog His mind, God has been pleased to 
employ different instruments and with various measures? 
He could, if He pleased, have written all by one. He 
could have revealed Himself by all according to the full 
height of His own glory and nothing else. But we 
may be quite sure that the ways of God are as ad- 
mirable in the forms which His revelation takes, as in 
all other things which He has made for His praise. 
These diverse manners of developing His nature and 
character, His counsels and ways, display His glory in 
an infinitely more blessed light than if there had been 
one unvarying blaze of brightness. And the same 
wisdom which works best for His majesty and praise, 
is precisely that which is suited to the wants, and 
efficacious for the blessing of His children. Need I 
say, that a revelation, while it is from God is for His 
people? No doubt, it does glorify Him; but God, 
when He speaks, has an object in view, and provides 
graciously for those to whom He addresses Himself. 
B 



2 EPHESIANS. 

The revelations of God, therefore, while they flow 
from God, and are worthy of God, necessarily pre-sup- 
pose, and are adapted to, the condition of man. Now 
this, far from, in the smallest degree, lessening the 
divine glory which manifests itself in the successive 
parts of God's word, on the contrary, enhances it 
infinitely, and proves that it is His, by nothing more 
than its wonderful suitability to poor sinners, brought 
out of their low estate, in His rich mercy, and adopted 
into His family by faith in Christ Jesus. 

Now, of all the epistles of St. Paul, I am not aware 
of any one which rises so high as this to the Ephesians ; 
and one cannot doubt that there was a harmony be- 
tween the condition of these saints themselves, and the 
manner and measure of the Spirit's communications 
to them. We find it so elsewhere. In addressing the 
saints at Koine, they were not called a church; they 
were, indeed, in an infantine state. There were blessed 
saints of God there, but the assembly was not founded 
by an apostle. Years passed before ever an apostle 
went to Rome. God saw well that this very city of 
Rome would arrogate to itself enormous claims of a 
spiritual character. Therefore He took care that more 
inconsiderable places, such as Corinth, &c., should have 
an apostle to found churches and labour there for a con- 
siderable time; while the great centre of the world's 
glory was unvisited by an apostle till there were many 
assembled there, through persons going thither from one 
cause and another. When we consider the circumstances 
of the Roman saints, we can understand the propriety of 
addressing an epistle to them which strongly resembles 
a comprehensive scheme of Christian doctrine from the 
very alphabet of truth. And, hence, the very first thing 
that we have proved there, after the introduction, is the 
total ruin of man, and of man looked at in every point 
of view man examined, and weighed in the balances of 
God, from the flood downwards. After man had pos- 
sessed a knowledge of God of an outward sort, when" 



CHAPTER I. 3 

they knew God, tbey glorified Him not as God. In 
fact we have the origin of idolatry shown ; and also the 
time after the flood before idolatry came in. The verses 
I have referred to in .Romans i., bear upon the time when 
there was simply the race possessing the knowledge 
of God. But man departed from it, corrupting himself; 
and we have the awful picture of human depravity 
traced in the early chapters. Next, we have philosophic 
man ; and then man under the law man in every point 
of view "before the subject of redemption is treated of, 
or anything is said of the way to be justified. The 
reason is this: the apostle never having been there, the 
saints at Rome were comparatively ignorant, and 
required to be instructed in the nature and fatal issues 
of the fall. They needed to learn what the history 
of man is, as God looks at and thinks of it. There- 
fore, we have him seen as ruined in every way, and no 
help for him in the creature, the law, or anything else. 
Hence the result is, that all are gone out of the way ; 
u there is none righteous, no, not one." In a word, 
every mouth is stopped, and the whole world become 
guilty before God. Then, and not till then, we have 
the provision God has made in His righteous mercy for 
man, in chapters iii. and iv. ; and from chapter v., con- 
sequences shown and difficulties met, winding up with 
the triumphant conclusion of chapter viii. 

What a weighty summary of Christian doctrine, begin' 
ning with the actual condition of man, Jew or Gentile, 
and leading up to the firm footing God has given in 
Christ, dead and risen, to him that believes ! But in 
all this you have, most important as it is, only the 
individual. It may be man lost, or man saved ; but you 
have nothing about the Church. It is what pertains 
to those who are members of the Church, but no such 
thing appears as the assembly of God treated as such, 
Man's ruin and redemption is the theme, with the effects 
of redemption, and the order of the dispensations, and 
the practical duties flowing from all. But in 



4 EPHESIANS. 

sians how totally different ! Here, comparatively 
speaking, man disappears, and God is viewed as acting 
from Himself. 

Hence there is no preface nor proof of what man's 
state is. This was not necessary, nor is it the starting- 
point of the teaching there : in Eomans it is ; and 
nothing can be more simple. But in Ephesians, 
instead of our being raised up from the pit of corrup- 
tion, in which man lay buried, the very first thing the 
apostle does is to speak of God in heaven. It is God 
showering blessing upon man, and not man brought up 
to God. It is God shown in the ways of His grace 
and the thoughts of His heart, before even there was a 
world at all, entirely apart from all questions of Jews 
or Gentiles. It is God forming a scheme of glory and 
blessedness for His own praise ; God delighting in the 
display of His goodness, and this for the purpose of 
blessing, and the very highest, fullest character of 
blessing. Hence you will find that it is not simply 
God as God acting towards man, but He has Christ 
before Him, and hence there is no limit to the blessing. 

(He_would ha ve_j5ome_ channel of grace toward us to the 
full content of His~own"^artT^ l^ow therel^noToBfect 
wy-- '*'*- -"!'_ -^;. -- ^^.-m.mfr&^tHK.+.Jtx-'. -.--.-<'; ji'.m^r-rr.'J'-Uti.'JKr.*^ I/ 

that could draw out and sustain the delight of God, 
none that could be in itself an adequate object to look 
upon with complacency but one, even Christ. As for 
the angels, He charges them with folly, and yet were 
. they holy. If He scanned lower than the angels, what 
is there but a world lost in sin ? Thus there is but one 
capable of satisfying the heart and affections of God 
Christ Himself. 

Having therefore this great truth in hand God 
blessing, and Christ the object before God, through 
whom God is going to bless, according to all that 
is in His heart, we also find that He is named as a 
Blesser in a twofold manner. " Blessed be the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who hath blessed us 
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ." 



CHAPTER I. D 

These two titles are really the key to the epistle. 
And I must be permitted to press strongly the impor- 
tance of weighing words in Scripture. When we have 
to do with mankind, we must not make a person an 
offender for a word. But God needs no excuses for 
His word. Whatever allowance we might make for 
the slips of one another, with Scripture the occasion 
can never arise. When we draw near and listen to 
Him, the only proper attitude is to bow and worship. 
And, therefore, in this epistle, which is so full an ex- 
pression of His love, the apostle opens it thus, " Blessed 
be the God and Father," &c. He could not write to 
the Ephesians without breaking out into the praise and 
worship of God. Elsewhere you will find him blessing 
God, but where he does so, as in 2 Corinthians ii. 14, 
there were special circumstances that called it out. 
But not so here. At Corinth there was a blessed inter- 
vention of God's grace, breaking down the proud hearts 
of wayward disciples there, making them ashamed of 
themselves. But in Ephesians it was apart' from 
passing circumstances, save that he saw them in such 
a condition of soul that they were capable of going on 
with God, entering into His thoughts and counsels. 
" Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ" was not because of some peculiar mercy, or 
comfort ; but it flows from what He always is to us. 
For this very reason many saints may be unable to 
enter in. Some are apt to be particularly alive to, and 
touched by, sensible tokens, from day to day, and now 
and then extraordinary providential interventions of God. 
Perhaps they are in great trial, and God brings them a 
fresh blessing too out of it. But here the Ephesians 
were so simple and willing to go on with God that the 
apostle, instead of being detained by their state, could 
but speak in praise and thanksgiving. It is very 
blessed when there is such happy communion given in 
having to do with one another. 

It is true, again, that before he enters upon what I 



'6 EFHESIANS. 

shall endeavour to develope, lie introduces himself as 
an apostle. He does not say " servant" here; in writing 
to the Romans he does. " Paul, a servant of Jesus 
Christ." He was indeed Christ's bondman. Why 
should Paul be writing to them ? He was His servant. 
Did not they belong to Jesus? There was no such* 
thought as " independency" sanctioned in those days 
no such practice as little districts or assemblies belong- 
ing to this man or that ; but the Church everywhere the 
loved object of the Lord's servants. He is a true servant 
who is able to realize that he is the bondsman of Jesus 
Christ ; and he will serve souls best who most realizes 
what it is to serve the Lord. " Paul, a servant of 
Jesus Christ, called [to be] an apostle." He was an 
apostle by the calling of God. . At this time there was 
no such thing as a congregation giving a candidate " a 
call." Paul was an apostle called of God, and they 
were saints called of God, and they knew it. It was 
very sweet for them to think they had been thus called. 
They were in their measure treading the path of Christ, 
and the apostle was His servant and an apostle also. 
His object was to bring his apostleship into relief. But 
they at Corinth were in danger of beginning to stand 
in doubt of him and of thinking that to Jerusalem they 
ought to look. He thoroughly owns the common place of 
a brother; but if persons like the Corinthians were 
raising their heads too high, he says, " an apostle" 
simply, without adding " servant." If a dispute arose 
about the point, he proves the reality of his call. In 
addressing the Galatians I have shown elsewhere what 
peculiar force there is in his introduction of himself. 
" Paul, an apostle (not of men, neither by man)," &c. 
Here you have controversy at once, but of divine temper 
and strength. There were false principles in Galatia, 
and therefore he uses energetic, urgent language in 
writing to the saints. They were adopting Jewish 
notions about earthly succession. The apostle, there- 
fore, takes the very highest ground, and shows that 



CHAPTER I. 7 

9 

While he fully acknowledged the twelve in their place, 
he would not, in what touched the truth of the gospel, 
give place by subjection, no, not for an hour ; so that 
the whole epistle bears the stamp of the unqualified 
re-assertion of the call of grace and its heavenly charac- 
ter, founded upon the death and resurrection of Christ. 

In Ephesians he has no object of a controversial kind, 
nor of laying down the Christian foundations of truth, 
as in the case of the Eoraan saints. But he does put 
forward his apostolic function " Paul, an apostle of 
Jesus Christ." He shows fully out of what it sprang ; 
that same " will of God," out of which flowed their 
own blessing. He is about to trace,- first the individual 
blessing,. and then the corporate. It is quite a mistake 
to suppose that the former is a deeper thing than the 
latter. On the contrary, our highest blessings are 
connected with what we have as individuals. Fully 
acknowledging the blessedness of what is corporate, 
what we have individually is higher still; and it is the 
way of God's Spirit to begin with this before entering 
upon what is common. Hence I think he here ad- 
dresses " the saints which were at Ephesus, and the 
faithful in Christ Jesus," as such. They were the ' 
Church there, not only gathered formally, but intelli- 
gently so. They had had the Apostle Paul there, who 
had been God's instrument in that work. There were 
twelve men who believed before Paul went there ; but 
they never received the Holy Ghost after the Pentecost 
sort till Paul's visit. It is the personal presence of the 
Holy Ghost, founded upon our faith in Christ dead and 
risen, that brings us into this church character. But 
the Holy Ghost, besides making us members of Christ's 
body, the Church, also gives us the consciousness of our 
relationship as sons with His God and Father. He 
addresses "the Church of God at Corinth" as such, 
when he is speaking of points that concern order and 
discipline. Here he is going to look at the Church in 
a far higher point of view ; yet he begins with what is 



8 ' EPHESTANS. 

individual: " To the saints which are at Ephesus, and 
to the faithful in Christ Jesus. Grace be to you, and 
peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus 
Christ." Then he introduces the twofold title of God 
already referred to the same that our Lord announced 
when He rose from the dead, and sent the first message 
given to His disciples, by Mary Magdalene : " Go to 
my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my 
Father and your Father, and to my God and your 
God" not " to the Almighty God," or " to Jehovah." 

Our Lord stood in a twofold relation to God ; He was 
Son of God, not only as a divine person, but as man in 
the world (Luke i.) ; besides His highest personal glory 
which shines through John's Gospel, &c. " That holy 
thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the 
Son of God." This last title refers to Christ, viewed 
in humanity in this world; and it is therefore stated 
only in the Gospel of Luke, which is pre-eminently the 
human biography, if I may so speak, of Christ. But 
it might not have been known, unless God has told us, 
that He carried that same relationship as man into His 
resurrection. He teaches us that death and resurrec- 
tion gave Him title in God's righteousness to put us in 
His position. So that He could for the first time say, 
in the fulness of meaning which those words convey, 
" I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God 
and your God." He is now not merely " my Father" 
and " my God," but "your Father" and " your God/'' 

The death of Christ had completely obliterated all that 
was against the children of God: the resurrection of 
Christ, after redemption was effected, enabled Him to 
give them His place of resurrection and sonship be- 
fore God. And what a wonderful place is this! To 
think that now, even while we are in this world, our 
Lord would have us to know that we are sons, in and 
through Him, before our God, and that we are instinct 
with resurrection-life " alive unto God, through- Jesus 
Christ our Lord ;" that we stand before God without a. 



CHAPTER I. 9 

single charge or condemnation, and this, because He 
had taken by grace the " same condemnation" with the 
guilty on the cross. He was the "holy thing" we 
unholy, altogether undone. But on the cross He was 
made sin for us, and entered the same condemnation 
made it His own on the cross ; and now there is none for 
me. I am brought into the same place that He had as 
the risen one before God. Of course I am not speaking 
now of His divine glory. The notion of the creature, 
no matter how blest, being in any other position than 
that of looking up to God and worshipping Him, could 
not enter a renewed mind. The Lord Jesus was Son 
in His divine nature from all eternity; but as man, too, 
He was Son ; and also as risen from the dead. And by 
His death and resurrection, He brings us in before God 
and His Father, having the same position as Himself, 
so far as to be sons, absolutely without sin in our new 
nature, and freed from condemnation before God be- 
cause the old nature is already judged. The new 
nature requires none to die for it, but the old did ; and 
all is done. In Christ crucified, God condemned sin in 
the flesh, and to faith all the evil is gone: The blessed- 
ness of Christ is now made ours, and we can look UJD and 
say, " Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings 
in heavenly places in Christ." One great mischief that 
is done to the practical power of Christianity is the 
putting off the blessing, which the Holy Ghost attaches 
to us now, till we leave this world and get to heaven. 

Suppose you were to tell the great mass of God's 
children on the earth, You are " blessed with all 
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ," they 
would think it rank enthusiasm or mysticism. They are 
not prepared for such truth, and in general either do 
not enquire what the verse means, or attenuate it into 
some mere emotional sentiment. They have no notion 
that it is a present fact true of all Christians. Though we 
are not displayed in it yet, it is no question of feeling. 



1 EPHESIANS. 

May we "believe it ! Feelings may deceive ine, but faith 
never can. If I see a thing, it is merely my eye that 
sees. If I believe a truth on God's word, I am looking 
at it, in a measure, so to speak, with God's eyes. The 
world has a notion that faith only implies confidence as 
to a thing which is not sure. This is not the meaning 
of "I believe" in the things of God. My own vision 
is a poor range of sight ; but what of God's eye ? The 
believer stands upon the highest ground ; he rests upon 
the certainty of what God says. Happiness, too, is the 
result; for 'when you believe, you soon begin to feel. 
If you believe that God has blotted out your sins, you 
ere long, if not at once, begin to enjoy it. If I look at 
myself, I shall always see something wrong. How is 
this ? My sins all gone ; and yet, if looking within, I 
see so much that is painful, loathsome, humiliating. 
The putting away of sin is not a thing that goes on in 
my heart, but a mighty work that God wrought in the 
cross of His beloved Son, on which He calls me to rest, 
because on it He rests. Am I looking for a sign and 
token in myself? If so, I shall never have an assur- 
ance of it on the right ground. If I think that my 
sins Aust be forgiven because I am a changed character 
(as men speak) , can I ever have an hour's real peace ? 
The result must be, that the more one judges himself, 
the less happy he will be. What God puts before His 
children is this that they should be thoroughly happy 
in the certainty that their sins are gone, through the 
blood-shedding of Christ, and yet that they should 
spare nothing they find within them ; judging them- 
selves day by day, because Christ has been judged for 
them, and God has blotted out their sins, and they 
cannot endure trifling with that which cost the blood 
of His Son. 

Here, however, the first great thought is that " The 
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ has blessed 
us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in 
Christ." It is not redemption, though of course based 



CHAPTER I. 11 

upon it. I am here upon the earth, and yet I know that 
I am blest there where Christ is at the right hand of 
God. Not only have I blessings there, but I am blessed 
"with all spiritual blessings." The highest blessing 
God can confer is that which He gives every child of 
His in heavenly places in Christ. In these few words 
we gaze at the height of God's wonderful counsel 
about us and love for us. He has thus blessed us 
according to the fulness of His value for Christ. 

The expression " heavenly places" is in contrast with 
the portion of the Jews, who were blessed in earthly 
places. If we look at Bzekiel xxxvi., it may bring 
out more distinctly the character of our blessing in con- 
tradistinction to theirs. " Then will I sprinkle clean 

water upon you and ye shall be clean And ye 

shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers ; and 
ye shall be my people, and I will be your God." Thus, 
there are spiritual mercies mingled with their blessings ; 
but they will be in the land of their fathers, which God 
is to make good to the generation to come. It is chiefly 
learned but unspiritual men who make confusion about 
these matters. If readers were only simple about Scrip- 
ture, they would not fall into such mistakes. * The 
prophets says, " Ye shall dwell in the land that I gave 
to your fathers." Nothing can be plainer than this. He 
is to bless Israel on the earth in their soul too, no 
doubt: but the sphere of this blessing is the holy land. 
It is His earthly people, not the Church, as we shall 
see lower down. " I will multiply the fruit of the tree 
and the increase of the field, that ye shall receive no 
more reproach of famine among the heathen." Evi- 
dently the blessing is in earthly places. I should not 
find fault with good men trying to give this a spiritual 
turn and to preach the gospel from it, provided they did 
not blot out from it the hopes of Israel by and by. 
Primarily the people there are Israel, and they are to 
be blessed in this manner. We see the land of Pales- 
tine now desolate like a wilderness; but "the desert 



12 EPHESIANS. 

shall rejoice and blossom as the rose" in that day. 
There are certain blessings that apply to the believer 
now, it is true. To the " water" and " Spirit," in a 
wonderfully enlarged and deepened scope, our Lord 
alludes thus in John iii. But I object to the inference 
that God has abandoned His people, and that this pro- 
phecy about the earthly places should be confounded 
with our heavenly title. The earth and earthly bless- 
ings are here dwelt upon by the Spirit of God. Why 
should we be jealous about the Jews or the earth 
either ? God has shown us such overflowing and sur- 
passing favour that we may well delight and thank 
Him that the earth is reserved for His ancient nation. 

Now if we turn from this the predicted blessing of 
Israel upon the earth to our own proper blessing in 
Ephesians, how totally different it is ! " Blessed be the 
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath 
blessed us with spiritual blessings in heavenly places in 
Christ." It is God revealing Himself in the fullest 
manner conceivable. Who was it that knew God pre- 
eminently ? who was the object of God's love as none 
had ever been before? If ever there was one who 
fathomed the full meaning of the words, " My Father," 
it was the Lord Jesus. And who but He sounded the 
depths of " My God?" Yet now, that Blessed One, by 
redemption and the gift of the Spirit, has capacitated 
the believer in Him to enjoy the same privilege with 
Himself. Just in proportion as we receive it with 
simplicity and judge the old nature (which never enters 
into it, but only comes as a thick cloud over our bless- 
ing), shall we enter into the realization of our blessing. 

Israel's hope is not inward only but outward, in earthly 
places to be made the most exalted people here below. 
The scene of our blessing, on the contrary, is in heavenly 
places, and we are blessed there now in Christ. In a 
word, a Christian is as one who belongs to the family of 
the sovereign. There might be reasons of state to make 
it desirable for the Queen's heir to pass as a stranger 



CHAPTER I. 13 

through a foreign land, unknown and unregarded. So 
with the Christian. He is not of the world nor of the age. 
His body is of the earth, hut that which makes him to 
be what he is, as a son of God, has nothing to do with 
the present scene or circumstances. He belongs alto- 
gether to a glorified Christ. When God begins to deal 
with Israel, it will be another thing. The attention of 
the whole world will be directed towards them. There 
was a time when, even in the midst of all their sin, the 
people of Israel exercised an enormous influence in the* 
world, spite of their being a small nation and having 
only a narrow slip of land to dwell on. Their priests 
and kings gave up the true God, who thereon made 
them to be the sad evidence of His judgments. But the 
day is fast coming when they that smote will acknow- 
ledge their rejected Messiah, and then will shine the 
full splendour to which Israel is destined of God. He 
will crown them with blessing of every kind here below. 
All the nations of the earth will bow down to Israel ; 
kings and queens will be their nursing fathers and 
mothers. Christendom, despised as a proud and effete 
political engine, and more and more degenerating into 
apostacy, will be set aside like Yashti ; God will bless 
His people of Israel, the Esther of the great King, 
with all outward blessings in earthly places, not re- 
vealing Himself as the God and Father of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, but as the Lord God, Jehovah, Most High, 
identified at length with the lowly Jesus of Nazareth. 

Is this the way in which we are spoken of here? Not 
at all. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ 
has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly 
places in Christ. A Jew has nowhere in the Old Testa- 
ment the hope of being blessed in their Messiah. To be 
joint-heirs with Christ, not only blessed by Christ, but 
in Christ, is an idea that could not possibly enter the 
most intelligent Israelite's mind. In a word, their 
portion will always.be under their Messiah, to be ruled 
' by Him as an earthly people. But ours, who believe in. 



14 EPHESTANS. ' 

Christ now, will be to have the same blessing which. 
God the Father confers upon Christ risen from the 
dead. What has He done for Christ? He has raised 
Him up, and put all things -under His feet. This 
glory He will not take alone. He is waiting for His 
bride for those who are now being called out of Jews 
and Gentiles to the knowledge of His came. So that 
our Lord, while personally exalted, holds it in abeyance 
because He is waiting for His companions to share it 
with Him ; heirs by His grace, not merely of the fathers, 
but of God, and joint-heirs with Christ. 

Nothing can be larger or higher than the blessing 
spoken of here. Christ^ will have His heavenly ones 
above, and His earthly ones below; each fully blest 
though in different spheres. May I commend the truth 
brought out in Ephesians i. to the serious study of God's 
children? While it becomes us to hear the word of 
God, it claims from us earnestness of purpose and 
searching into it as for hidden treasure. We must not 
expect to be really and fully blessed through the word 
of God, unless there be diligence of soul. 

We have already seen the twofold title in which God 
blesses His saints now ; in both the form of the blessing 
being found only in Christ. Had God merely revealed 
Himself as the God of Abraham or Isaac for instance, 
He would not ensure a blessing beyond that promised . 
to the fathers. Now He does. Instead of having merely 
the Jewish blessing before Him, He has Christ in His 
eye, whom He raised from the dead and set at His own 
right hand, where He never put David nor any one else. 
It is a place that belongs to Him in virtue of His per- 
sonal glory and His suffering unto death. We may sit 
with Christ on His throne, but this is a very different 
thing from Christ's sitting at God's right hand. Now 
it is as the God of the Lord Jesus Christ that He 
blesses it is the full blessing that would be suitable 
to Christ Himself as the object of blessing. Grace 
puts us as common objects with Christ in order to 



CHAPTER I. 15 

be blessed by God who blesses after this manner and 
measure. Nor this only. He is the Father of the Lord 
Jesus, and as such also He blesses us. So that these 
two" characters, the very highest possible in which to 
look at God, are those according to which we are blessed. 
The characters of God, both as God and as Father, as they 
deal with Christ, issue in a blessing, a commensurate 
blessing, which He gives to us. Hence there is no limit. 
He has blessed us "with all spiritual blessings," and 
moreover too, as we saw, not on the earth, the com- 
paratively lower part of the universe, but in the highest 
scene of God's power, "in the heavenly places;" and in 
order to crown and complete all, it is "in Christ;", 
all is secured in His person. 

Yerse 4 particularly belongs to the first of these 
characters in which God has revealed Himself, as verse 
5 belongs rather to the second.- " According as he hath 
chosen us in him (that is, in Christ) before the founda- 
tion of the world, that we should be holy and without 
blame before him in love." Now it is as the God of 
Christ that He thus blesses us ; not as Father, but as 
God. In verse 5 it is as Father, because we there read, 
" Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children 
by Jesus Christ to himself." The style and character 
clearly answer to the character of the Father. Special 
relationship to Him is brought in. " Having predesti- 
nated us unto the adoption of children" not merely 
chosen, but " predestinated us unto the adoption of 
children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good 
pleasure of His will." Now that language was not used 
in verse 4. He does not say that He has predestinated us 
to be holy and without blame before Him in love. Nei- 
ther does He say that He has called us into this wond.er- 
ful place according to the good pleasure of His will. 
And the reason is most manifest. When we hear of the 
good pleasure of His will, we have language suitable to 
sovereign special love that which He displays in order 
to manifest His own favour. But when we hear of 



16 EPHESIAtfS. 

" holy and without blame," it is God who has chosen 
us for it: it could not "be otherwise. If God would 
have any brought near Him, and so near as to be 
in His presence in heaven, if chosen in Christ at all, 
somehow they must be holy and without blame be- 
fore Him in love. And all is really of His grace. 

The one blessing is from the necessary character of God 
as God ; the other flows from the special relationship 
into which He enters towards us through our Lord 
Jesus. Choosing us is a necessary part, because it is 
evident there was no one but God to choose. It was 
before the foundation of the world, when God alone 
was. Man had no voice nor choice in the matter. It 
was purely God acting from Himself. It was a matter 
of God's own choice, that He would have others to be 
in heaven besides Himself. But if they were to be near 
Him and before Him, how could they be so with sin upon 
them? Impossible. How could God sanction souls, even 
in the most distant part of His dominion, with sin upon 
them ? Still less could it be in heaven, the throne of 
His Majesty. The day is coming when all evil must be 
banished into the lake of fire. How then could He tole- 
rate sin in those who are to be brought into the nearest 
circle of His presence? It was the positive necessity 
of His character and nature, that if He chooses to have 
any with Himself in heaven, they must be there " holy 
and without blame before him." But that is far from 
being all : it must be " in love" because nothing could be 
more miserable than that they should not be able to 
enter into His own affections. Merely to be in the most 
blessed place of creatures without taint, without any- 
thing that could sully the presence of God, would not 
be enough. Man was made to have a heart, to have 
affections ; and there could not be happiness in creatures, 
who know what affection is, unless there were that on 
which affection could rest. If God had such beings 
brought into His presence, and necessarily without sin 
in any form, it must be in love also. He will give 



CHAPTER I. 17 

them a nature not only capable of being before Him 
without reproach and fear, but also answering to His 
own leve. " We love him because he first loved us." 
In Christ alone that love is known ; but St. John so 
speaks of God and Christ, that there is great difficulty 
in deciding which is meant. He uses " Him" thus, not 
indiscriminately, but sliding from one into the other. 
This flows from their oneness: " I and my Father are 
one," which is said by John only. 
. Here we have God's choice of us personally. For it 
is not merely to have a people, as if it were some vague 
thing, a certain number of niches in heaven to be filled 
up with so many souls. There is no such notion in the 
Bible. It is persons He chooses. There cannot be such 
love without a person distinctly before it. And if it is 
true even among men, that love is not an uncertain feel- 
ing which is rather a fancy, much more is it true with 
God. He loves us individually. Hence He has chosen 
us in Christ before the foundation of the world, to show 
how entirely it is a choice independent of our character 
and ways ; and if so, it must always flow back to God 
in a way according to Him. And so it does. If there 
is this choice of God in Christ before the foundation of 
the world, He will have saints before Him in such a way 
as God alone could. He will never have what is un- 
worthy of His love and presence. Hence then it is 
said, " that we should be holy and without blame before 
him in love." This is not merely holiness, or blame- 
lessness, or love any or all in part. Hence it does not 
refer to what we have been. If we examine any person 
we raay find grievous faults in him. Even as a Christian, 
he is very far indeed from being what is due to God. 
He is ashamed of himself, grieving over the little 
his heart responds to the favour God has shown 
him. And would this suit His presence? Will God 
be satisfied with that which even a Christian finds fault 
with ? Impossible. The verse looks not at the complex 
man here, but at what He makes us in Christ, His Son. 
c 



18 EPHESIANS. 

In the saint now there is that which is very unsaintly 
indeed, unlike God and His beloved Son: pride, vanity, 
foolishness, all kinds of evil ways and thoughts that 
never flow from Christ, and have no kind of resemblance 
to Him. But for all this, are they not saints ? God 
forbid they should not be. And yet this is the steady 
thought of God. He has chosen us in Christ that we 
should be holy and without blame before Him in love. 
How can that be ? The answer is, because God looks 
at us here according to that which He gives us in 
Christ, and nothing less. All is ignored in this verse, 
save that new nature which flows from His grace to the 
objects of His choice. He has chosen us to be so, and He 
will have us so perfectly, and nothing else, when the 
time comes for us to be in His presence. But even now 
it is true in the essence of the thing, inasmuch as we 
are in Christ and have His life in us. Can I find any 
fault in Christ? If Christ is without blame in love, 
in the very nature of God Himself, He is precisely the 
life of every Christian, let a man be called by what 
name he may among men. 

But even this is not all. Blessed as it is to answer 
to the holy character and nature of God and that is 
what every saint will do by and by in the glory, and 
what every saint really possesses as a new creature in 
Christ now yet this is not enough. We might be 
there holy and without blame before Him in love, yet 
simply as servants. Her Majesty the Queen may sur- 
round herself with servants to do her will ; she may bring 
one and another into her presence, and they ought to 
think themselves greatly honoured by being thus made 
the ministers of her pleasure, though no family rela- 
tionship, of course, exists between them. But nothing 
less than this will do in heavenly things. Such is the 
wonder of God's grace. In the very next verse we 
have the fact that God is not alone acting from Himself 
to call us into this wonderful place to be the reproduc- 
tion of His own moral nature and character. God is holy 



CHAPTER I. 19 

and without blame, and He is love in His own nature. 
This belongs to our life now, and will belong to us 
altogether when we are brought into heaven, by the 
power and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, shortly. 
Bat it is not as mere servants, but as sons, we shall be 
there consciously as sons; not even standing there, 
like angels, as ministers of His pleasure, but as those 
who take an interest in all that He is interested in. 
We shall feel not merely for Him, but with Him. We 
shall have a common interest with Him the same kind 
of feeling, if I may use the same illustration, that 
members of the royal family have with the crown. 

This is what the Holy Ghost brings before us in 
verse 5. The Christian is planted in Christ before God, 
and has a holy and a loving nature. But besides this, 
there is a positive relationship formed ; and that rela- 
tionship, in which we are brought to the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is nothing less than 
being sons according to the pattern of the risen Son of 
God. As the eternal Son cf the Father, none could 
have" such a place with Him. The very thought would 
be repulsive to a renewed mind. But Christ was 
pleased to call us His brethren when He rose from the 
dead, and not before. And it is on earth, the place of 
'our sins, where we have been servants of Satan it is 
here that, through the faith of Christ, we leave behind 
us all that we were, and enter into this blessed and 
glorious and most intimate relationship with God. 
" He hath predestinated us unto the adoption of 
children." The word predestinated is a more special 
one than " chosen," which signifies God electing us out 
of the world. None but an unbeliever could fancy that 
every one is to be in such a place as this, or that men 
who have lived in blasphemy against God all their 
days are to be holy and without blame when they die. 
God has a choice, and our business is to bless God for 
His great love not to judge or find fault with His 
ways. " Who art thou that repliest against God ?" 



20 EPHESIANS. 

That is the answer of God to all vain thoughts and 
reasonings. But then if He chooses according to His 
nature and holiness, He has predestinated us unto the 
adoption of children by Jesus Christ unto Himself. 
So that now we find the special privilege and glorious 
relationship of sons before God in His presence by 
Jesus Christ. He might not have done it, but it was 
" according to the good pleasure of his will." 

Not merely He would have, and therefore chose 
persons ; but here is a peculiar display of His pleasure, 
and therefore He puts them in this blessed place, " to 
the praise of the glory of his grace wherein he hath 
made us accepted in the Beloved." Verse 6 shows 
us that which answers to both the verses before it. The 
clause, " to the praise of the glory of his grace," &c., 
takes in both the choice of verse 4 and the predestina- 
tion of verse 5 the character of the choice of God, 
and the special favour of the predestination of the 
Father. " To the praise of the glory of his grace 
wherein he hath made us accepted in the Beloved." 
" Accepted " is rather a cold word to express what is 
meant here. It is not what persons doctrinally call 
acceptance, which is rather more of the nature of re- 
conciliation. But here it seems to me there is the 
fulness of divine favour, which goes far beyond bare 
acceptance. In short, God makes us objects of favour 
according to all that is in His heart, and, in order that 
this should be most fully brought out, He says " in the 
Beloved," not merely "in Christ." There was one 
object that satisfied God, that met every thought, every 
desire of His heart ; and this was Christ, the One beloved, 
of course, in a sense in which no creature could be so 
in itself. In order to bless us fully, God has made us 
the objects of His favour in this Beloved One, and all 
is "to the praise of the glory of his grace." This 
takes in all the heights and depths of His grace who is 
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, blessing 
us in Christ. In fact, He could not go farther. Could 



CHAPTER I. 21 

He show favour to any one so much as to Christ? 
Just so He loves and blesses us. He could not do 
more, and He will not do less. He has risen up to the 
fullest character of love and blessing in the grace 
wherewith He regards us in the Beloved. 

But, then, what was our previous state ? Verse 7 says, 
" In whom we have redemption through his blood, the 
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his 
grace." It is only alluded to passingly, but it sup- 
poses that we were wretched slaves of Satan. In the 
same person, in whom we become the objects of such 
favour, we have redemption. God does not in the 
least degree forget what our condition was when He 
thus blessed us. He is aware that we had to be 
brought out of all we were, for indeed we had nothing 
but sins. With only the previous verses, there might 
have been the idea that such blessedness and glory could 
not have been mixed with such as we were. But we 
have redemption, we are told, in Christ. Still, he never 
touches on redemption and forgiveness of sins till he 
has brought us into the height and depth of all privi- 
lege flowing from God Himself: so entirely is all ques- 
tion here of what man is out of sight, that we only, as 
it were, incidentally get hold of the sad truth of his 
condition. It might not have been known from the 
first few verses, that persons so blessed had ever been 
guilty of a single sin. But here we find that they 
needed to be redeemed, to have their sins forgiven ; and 
the same Christ, in and through whom we have all our 
other blessings, is He in whom also we have " redemp- 
tion through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, 
according to the riches of his grace." 

It may be noticed here, that there is a difference 
between " the glory" and " the riches" of His grace. 
" The glory of his grace" takes in all these privileges 
referred to before. The Holy Ghost has brought 
out in the seventh verse the riches of His grace 
the means and provisions for us as poor sinners. But 



22 EPHESIANS. 

this would not suffice for God, if He is acting so 
as to show, not merely His rich resources in dealing 
with the most wretched individuals, hut the glory of His 
grace. He would display His own character what He 
is, and not merely provide for what we were. The 
praise of the glory of His grace flows from what God 
feels, and in consequence will do, in order to manifest 
Himself for us. 

Observe, moreover, hefore we have done with this, 
that later on we have another redemption, that " of 
the purchased possession," and a very different thing. 
We have redemption as far as the forgiveness of sins 
is concerned : we are waiting for redemption as concerns 
the inheritance, which depends on the coming of Christ 
in order to take it actually under His government. 
The purchased possession has to do with the inheritance, 
not merely with what affects our souls. As for the 
soul, we have redemption now as completely as we ever 
can have it; which we do well to hear in mind. The 
believer cannot be more forgiven than now, nor could 
God do more to put away sin than He has done already. 
He has given His Son, and the blood of His Son is 
shed, and it is impossible that God Himself could do 
more to blot out sin from before His face. What a 
comfort for our souls ! If we think of our sins, we 
may also enter into the comfortable assurance that all 
our guilt is gone from before God. We may fall into 
sin, for it does exist ; but it remains a source of self- 
judgment, instead of a fearful looking for of judgment 
by and by. 

There is just the real difference. As a matter of 
divine judgment, sin is gone in Christ; as a matter of 
self-judgment, it is always to be confessed if we slip into 
it. Nor is self-judgment ever thorough until we know 
that God's judgment of sin is ended for us on the cross. 
Under the Old Testament there was no such self-judg- 
ment because of sin, as there ought to be under the New. 
We find, accordingly, that although God never did or 



CHAPTER I. 23 

could treat any sin with indifference, yet is it often 
left without a word of comment. But this is not light 
dealing : God lets the thing speak for itself. He 
exercises so much the more the hearts of His children. 
If they are in a wilful state, they may use the record of 
sin to make light of their own evil ways; otherwise 
conscience is brought into exercise. ... It is not until the 
full condition of man comes out in the cross of Christ, 
that we see what God's judgment of sin is. Since 
then we first hear of " the flesh" in the sense in which 
the New Testament speaks of it. You may find the 
expression in the Old Testament, but it never wears the 
same strong, determined, full character of wickedness 
as it does in the New. It had not yet proved itself, 
and God always waits till a person or thing proves its 
real character, before He pronounces judgment. And 
we ought to learn from'God as to this. The patience 
of God in judgment is one of the most marvellous of 
His ways ; and we ought to be as to this imitators of 
God. He awaited the cross of His Son before the 
true character of man's iniquity was fully brought out. 
Under the Old Testament we read of things borne with 
because of the hardness of men's hearts; but in the 
New Testament there is a different measure, and no 
evil tolerated for a moment. The mind of God is pro- 
nounced upon evil : the darkness is passing, the true light 
now shines. There is no hiding either of God or man. 
All is out. Man is lost. God is known not merely as a 
lawgiver, but as a Saviour-God; and if I do not know 
Him thus, I do not know Him at all. " This is life 
eternal: to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus 
Christ whom thou hast sent." 

From all this we learn that the final character of evil 
has only now come out. The Old Testament commanded 
that evil should not be done ; but, as we shall see in the 
next chapter, the full issue of the trial comes out here : 
and what is the verdict? That man is dead morally, 
spiritually dead in trespasses and sins. God perfectly 



24 EPHESIANS. 

understood the character of man before, but He wants 
us to understand it. We needed redemption, and we 
have it forgiveness, and we have it. But we are wait- 
ing to have the redemption of the purchased possession. 
This takes in the whole creation of God, including, 
perhaps, our bodies too, as a part of the creation of 
God. But the redemption of verse 7 is a closer thing, 
and we are put in a position now of thoroughly judging 
ourselves, because we know that we shall not be con- 
demned with the world. God puts us thus into a 
common interest with Himself; puts us on His own 
side, to take His part against ourselves. And this is 
what repentance means, and therefore it is called re- 
pentance towards God. 

But the next verse opens up another subject: 
" Wherein he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom 
and prudence." It is not said, " abounded toward us 
in forgiving us," because full forgiveness is a positive 
need. But when we hear of " wisdom and prudence," 
it is a question of God's counsels about His Son, over 
and independent of all thought of necessities. He 
says, as it were, You are able now to enter into My 
thoughts, and understand them when I speak. You 
are delivered from anxiety about your sins, and are free 
now to enter into My purpose. " Having made known 
unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good 
pleasure which he hath purposed in himself." And 
this secret of His will is, " That in the dispensation of 
the fulness of times he might gather together in one 
all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and 
which are on earth, even in him: in whom also we have 
obtained an inheritance." (Ver. 9 11.) We have clearly 
here, in these central verses, the fact that we are capa- 
citated (the question of sin being settled in our souls) to 
hear what God has to say to us about all other things. 
He has not now merely to tell us what He is going to 
do upon the earth, as He dealt with Abraham. The 



CHAPTER I. 25 

relationship is higher than that which was made known 
to the patriarchs. At the beginning, when the Lord 
God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of 
the air, He brought them to Adam, the lord of crea- 
tion, to see what he would call them ; and whatsoever 
he called each living creature, that became its name. 
" And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl 
of the air, and to every beast of the field." (Gen. ii. 
19, 20.) This was conferred wisdom in the domain of 
nature. - But now it is far more profound and compre- 
hensive ; for it is a question of the supremacy of the 
second Man and of the discernment which suffices for 
and suits its boundless heights and depths. Accord- 
ingly, God has made His grace to abound towards us 
in every sort of wisdom and intelligence. Whatever 
displays His character and Christ's glory, He makes 
known to us. He treats us, not as servants, but as 
friends. He has one thing nearer than aught else 
what He is going to do for His Son : and He imparts 
to us the secrets nearest to His own" heart. 

If any person say, I do not want to understand 
mysteries, I answer, You do not want to know what 
God wishes to teach you. Unbelief always shows it- 
self in some character of hostility to God. He, in His 
perfect goodness, gives the comfort of salvation, and then 
opens out these other truths. " Having made known 
unto us the mystery of his will." This does not mean 
something you cannot understand, but what you could 
not know before God told you. Do not turn away and 
say, All I want to know is to be saved. "We ought to 
desire to learn all God deigns to teach us. The 
word " mystery" means what God was pleased to keep 
secret something He had not before revealed, but 
quite intelligible when it js unfolded. " Mystery," in 
a popular sense, is totally different from its use in the 
word of God. There are many things very wonderful 
in the prophecies, but they are not called mysteries. 
Brought out now for the first time, it is the mystery 



26 EPHESIANS. 

of His will. There are many mysteries explained in 
the New Testament as those of the kingdom of heaven. 
Babylon, too, is called a mystery. The mystery here 
is, that God means to unite all things in heaven and in 
earth, under the headship of our Lord. He does not 
mean to have the heavens, as they are now, completely 
severed from the earth, but to have a united system of 
heavenly and earthly glory, all under Christ this is 
the mystery of His will. 

But there is more than this. He means that we 
should share the glory along with Christ. Thus there 
are two great parts in the mystery of His will. The 
first is Christ, and the second is the Church: and 
therefore it is said in this very Epistle, " This is a great 
mystery : but I speak concerning Christ and the Church." 
It is not " the Church," of course, that is the mystery, 
but "Christ and the Church." The Church, however 
blessed, is but a subordinate part of it. That she is 
so at all is solely because she belongs to Christ, the 
heavenly Head of all things. God's purpose is for 
" the dispensation of the fulness of times." Then the 
hours of shame and sorrow that are now running on 
will have exhausted their course the time of the 
creature's subjection to vanity, the time for Israel to be 
blinded judicially, the time for the Gentiles to rule as 
if God neither intervened nor noticed, the time when the 
Church of God lies in weakness and broken, the time 
of Satan's liberty to deceive and torment men. These 
things are now going on man, the chief, through sin, 
subject to sickness and death, and all creation groaning. 
But God Himself will put an end to everything of the 
sort. He means to bind Satan and deliver man from 
his seduction. He will have Israel blessed and united 
under their Messiah the Gentiles blessing God, who 
will be sanctified among them the earth itself no longer 
the poor, groaning, miserable scene that it is, but the 
curse removed, and the wilderness rejoicing and blossom- 
ing as the rose. All these things God will yet accom- 



CHAPTER I. 27 

plish; and when the suitable times according to God 
are complete (7r\r)p T. .),* He will change all, bringing 
forth Christ as the Head, centre, and means of every 
blessing. Christ is the stronger man that is to bind 
the strong, the bruiser of the serpent's head the Lord 
of heaven and earth the Messiah of Israel, and Son 
of man ruling supremely over all nations. All these 
things are to be accomplished most simply and effica- 
ciously, but not by the power of man not even by the 
spread of the gospel. Christ in person will administer 
and uphold the glory of God in the universe. 

If men had a just sense of the present state of the 
Church, they would put on sackcloth and ashes instead 
of blowing their trumpet. What we have to do is to 
humble ourselves before God, because of what we are 
and see around us, even in the best. It requires a great 
deal of patience not only to bear, and be borne with, but 
to go on in love. If we really have a heart for God 
and for His children, we shall feel these things deeply, 
and shall seek the blessing of those who are led away 
by it yea, thoroughly and heartily remembering that 
the blessed day is at hand when Christ will be exalted 
as the Head of all things, heavenly and earthly. While 

* As the verse contains several words and clauses which are not 
generally understood, it may be added in this note that the word 
" dispensation" (otKovojufa) has no reference to a particular period 
or age (which is in the New Testament expressed by al&v). It 
means " stewardship," or rather " administration," the particular 
form here meant being the summing, or heading (avaKeQuhaiuiris) 
up of all things, heavenly and earthly, under Christ. This will be 
in the age to come, when Christ shall be displayed as Head over all 
things, and the glorified saints shall reign with Him. It is neither 
this age, during which Satan is still permitted to reign as the god 
of this world, the prince of the power of the air; nor is it the 
eternal state, when all government is over, and Christ will have 
given up the kingdom, that God may be all in all. It is the in- 
tervening millennium. This will be the fulness of the times, previous 
periods having been the necessary preparation for it. Meanwhile, 
redemption through Christ's blood having been effected, the Holy 
Ghost seals the believer, and is the earnest of the inheritance. 



28 EPHESIANS. 

it becomes us to chasten ourselves, we need not be dis- 
heartened. We know that our hope is o,ne that maketh 
not ashamed. It is not founded upon what the Church 
or any society is going to do, for our hope is Christ. 
We know that God has made known unto us the secret 
of His will. Where there is not an exercised conscience, 
this truth may not be rejected : but it is not realized nor 
applied in such a state. God's blessed cure for the world's 
disorder is Christ brought out from His present hidden 
position ; and the moment that He is so, what a change ! 
All things in heaven and earth will be united in Christ; 
and when that day comes, we shall enter visibly on our 
inheritance. We have the title already, but are not in 
manifest possession. " In whom we have also obtained 
an inheritance, being predestinated according to the 
purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel 
of his own will ; that we should be to the praise of his 
glory who first trusted in Christ." 

We have, first of all, (verse 5) our predestination as 
children. "And if children then heirs" heirs of a 
glorious inheritance, Christ being made the head of the 
universe. (Ver. 10, 11.) The prevalent interpretation 
is to apply verse 10 to Christ's position now. They 
imagine that " the fulness of times" here means the 
same thing as in Galatians iv. But " the fulness of 
the times" differs widely from " the fulness of time," 
which last means the space which closed with the in- 
carnation of Christ, or was completed by it. Christ's 
birth is a very different thing from Christ's exaltation, 
as the head of all. Deadly error is at work when men 
put the Son's incarnation in the place of redemption. 
Our union with Christ is made to depend upon His 
bare incarnation, not upon His being risen from the 
dead and entering upon His headship thus. But if 
our union with Christ be confounded with His being 
a man, He unites Himself- with human nature, and 
there is no special union 'between the Christian and 



CHAPTER I. 29 

Christ, because humanity belongs to the whole race, 
i.e., to man in sin. This naturally leads to the further 
heresy of making Christ take up humanity in its fallen 
condition. 

It is said, again, " That we should be to the praise of 
his glory, we who first trusted in Christ." The allusion 
is, before the Jews (of whom it specially speaks) behold 
Christ in the appointed time and way. " They shall 
look upon me whom they have pierced." Now. he says, 
we are those who have fore-hoped in Christ. Our hope 
was founded upon Christ before He is seen and believed 
in by the rest of the nation. The " we" in ver&e 12 does 
not go beyond believing Jews. " In whom ye also" is 
in contradistinction. The " we" and the " ye" refer, the 
one to Paul and his fellow-believers out of Israel, the 
other to believing Gentiles, such as the Ephesians. If 
this be so, the meaning is " that we [Christian JewsJ 
should be to the praise of his glory who first trusted in 
Christ." The nation of Israel will not be fore-hopers " to 
the praise of His glory." They will be the subjects of 
His glory. " Arise, shine, for thy light is come and the 
glory of the Lord is risen upon thee." His glory will 
embrace their salvation ; but to " the praise of His 
glory" it will be that there are those out of that un- 
believing nation who received Christ before they saw 
Him, and who consequently will appear with Him in 
glory. Blessed are they who receive Christ when they 
behold Him ; but still more blessed those who, though 
they have not seen Him, yet have believed ! (John xx.) 

We have thus seen that the apostle, in verse 12, 
introduces the believing Jews as now brought into all 
the blessings spoken of in the previous portion. Then, 
addressing the Gentile saints at Ephesus, he says, " In 
whom ye also having heard the word of truth, the 
gospel of your salvation, in whom also having believed, 
ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise." 

It may be profitable, here, to enter into a further 
development of the Holy Ghost's presence and action. 



30 EPHESIANS. 

Men soon departed far from the truth of God. Before 
the three last centuries we know that a thick cloud of 
darkness hung over Christendom. But even since the 
light that shone at the Eeformation, Christians have 
been struggling to realize in their own souls that they 
were horn of God and justified in Christ. One fully 
admits the immense importance that a soul should be 
thoroughly established. But were regeneration and 
justification 'intended to be the sum and substance of 
the Christian's research, efforts, and desires ? On the 
contrary, are they more than the very threshold, or, at 
most, the foundation on which a Christian has to build ? 
Does not God look for it, that, being born again, in- 
stead of occupying ourselves with continual searching 
after signs and tokens that we are so, we should be 
making progress in Christ ? To be born again is the 
first essential work of the Spirit of God, without which 
there is no life towards God, no possibility of advance 
in the things of God. It is the universal want, the 
indispensable condition in order to any soul's having 
part in the blessing of God at any time and in all 
dispensations. 

Hence, when Mcodemus came to our Lord, wishing 
to be taught of Him, our Lord at once begins there. 
The Eabbi owned that Jesus was a teacher come from 
God, by whom he wanted to be taught. But our Lord 
stops him in a peculiarly solemn manner: " Except a 
man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." 
Nicodemus, astonished, asked how such a thing could 
be ? Our Lord, however, meets his unintelligent 
question with a re-assertion, only in still stronger 
terms : " Except a man be born of water and of the 
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." 
There we have clearly the explanation of what it is to 
be born again. It is to be born of water and of the 
Spirit. Nicodemus still expresses his amazement at 
this ; that a Jew, a moral, religious Jew, who was no 
heathen, who had the law, and seemed to have been pecu- 



CHAPTER I. .31 

liarly honoured of God, should need to he born afresh; 
that he himself, a master in Israel in a pre-eminent 
sense, should thus he met by what was really a rebuke 
to him, that pressed the necessity of a vital change 
which, so far from having realized, he did not even 
think to be necessary ! This was indeed a blow that 
arrested Nicodemus at the very start. Our Lord, how- 
ever, shows that he ought to have known these things 
(i.e., of course, from the prophets). Mark this, because 
it is a thoroughly satisfactory answer to those who wish 
to connect the being born of water with baptism. He 
who is acquainted with the views here taught, cannot 
fairly think that there is any depreciation of that insti- 
tution of Christ. For I hold, that nobody ought to 
be owned on Christian ground till he is baptized with 
water. I do not mean that he may not be a believer ; 
but if he have not submitted to baptism in the name 
of the Lord, he is not yet ostensibly off Jewish or 
Pagan ground. And oar Lord elsewhere insisted on 
the necessity of being baptized as well as believing. 
(Mark xvi.) 

But important as baptism may be as the appointed 
sign of death and resurrection in Christ, yet our Lord 
did not directly refer to the rite with Nicodemus. For 
He says not, Art thou a disciple of Christ, but 
" &rt thou a master of Israel and knowest not these 
things ?" That is, as a Jew he ought to have known 
this. How could he know Christian baptism as a 
Jew ? To such an one this was a novelty ; it did not 
even exist at the time. How could that be known 
which was not yet brought out ? He ought to have 
known what was meant by being born of water and of 
the Spirit, and to have felt the absolute necessity of it. 
"What then was meant ? This : that no matter where, 
when, or who, everyone who should see or enter the 
kingdom of God must be born of water and of the 
Spirit, must have the Holy, Ghost communicating a 
new life to him. And how is that life produced ? By 



32 EPHESIAUS. 

an ordinance? No. By Christian walk? No. By 
what means, then? By prayer? Nay; hut hy the 
reception of God's Word revealing Christ. Therefore 
it is written, that we are born again, " not of corruptible 
seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which 
liveth and ahideth for ever." With the testimony of 
Peter there is that of James also : " Of his own will 
begat he us with the word of truth, that we should he 
a kind of firstfruits of his creatures." The instrument 
employed for God's begetting us, is "the word of 
truth." So that water is clearly used in this passage 
in John iii. as figurative of the word of God applied 
"by the Spirit. The two are joined together that it 
should not be supposed it is merely an ordinance or thg 
word, hut the Spirit applying God's word with quick- 
ening power to the soul. Therefore, when speaking 
about believing, it is said, " How shall they believe in 
him of whom they have not heard ?" It is necessary 
the Word should be preached. " So then faith cometh 
"by hearing, and hearing by the word of God." Com- 
pare also 1 Cor. iv. 15. It is no matter what positive 
passage of Scripture you take up, all teach the same 
thing. Our Lord insists that every one who enters 
the kingdom must enter by that door. What, then, is 
to become of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacoh ? Some may 
say that circumcision is equivalent ; but do not believe 
the dream for a moment: if so, what would hecome of 
so many before or outside both circumcision and bap- 
tism ? All these explanations are mere clumsy guesses 
at Scripture. Even if there were no real difference 
between baptism and circumcision, when our Lord lays 
down the new birth He refers to neither. He does not 
insist on a rite with such large exceptions, but an 
absolute and universal spiritual necessity. He is not 
speaking of the comparatively modern rite of baptism 
of that which, as it came late into the world, will not 
always abide in it. For there is no ground, that I 
know, to suppose that during the millennium baptizing 



CHAPTER I. 33 

people with water will proceed. It is a rite peculiar to 
the time, at least, between the two advents baptism 
into Christ's death. 

But John iii. speaks of what every person must pass 
through without qualification or exception, if he is to 
see and enter the kingdom of God what was as true 
of the thief upon the cross as of Saul of Tarsus. All 
children of God, past, present, or future, are born again ; 
all have this new life given to them. There is the 
communication of divine life to them. But as far as 
regards those who hear the word, it is plainly through 
the Holy Ghost using the word as a means of life. It 
is emphatically the representation of Christ. In John 
iv. we enter on another operation of the Holy Ghost. 
" If thou knewest the free-giving of God, and who it is 
that saith to thee, Give nie to drink, thou woiildest 
have asked of him, and he would have given thee living 
water." The living water is plainly the Holy Ghost, 
whom Christ gives. Here it is not the quickening 
operation of the Spirit, indispensable for all times and 
under all circumstances, if any souls are to belong to 
God ; but it is a special privilege that Christ bestows 
personally. And you will find in the discourse of our 
Lord which follows, and is connected with what He 
had said to the woman of Samaria, that the Holy 
Ghost is given to believers now as the means of wor- 
shipping their God and Father in spirit and in truth. 
Thus we have in John iv. a totally different operation 
of the Spirit from what was urged in John iii. And 
to whom did our Lord disclose this? To a poor, 
wretched, abandoned woman ; not even a Jewess, but a 
Samaritan. Our Lord is there showing the grace that 
goes out to the very vilest. God was now no longer, 
as before, putting the law forward. He displays Him- 
self as a giver. Under the law God is rather a receiver; 
He asks, demands, insists that the creature render Him 
the honour due to His Majesty. In the gospel, God is 
the giver of His own Son. Instead of seeking some- 



34 EPHESIANS. 

thing from guilty, lost man, He confers His very best 
on one who did not at first ask Him. " If thou knewest 
the gift the free-giving of God, (what a new sound 
to the Samaritan!) thou wouldest have asked of him, 
and he would have given thee living water." This is 
what He does He is giving the Spirit, the power of 
eternal life. The consequence of this most precious open- 
ing out of the truth is, that we know the Holy Ghost 
to be in us as the spring of communion and power of 
worship. It is not so much as using the word of God 
to deal with us .in our natural uncleanness and to com- 
municate a new life which cleaves to God and hates 
sin, with new feelings, new desires, new wants, which 
are only answered in Christ, and which every regenerate 
soul must have, if it were a poor nun, or a superstitious 
priest going through the mass. Yet if one were born 
of God, he could not but have a yearning after what he 
had not, and find, in the long run, Christ the object 
that attracted his soul Christ the contrast of all that 
was found on earth or anywhere Christ the only One 
that suited him, and the One, too, whose glory it was so 
to bless him. Of what would this be the proof ? That 
he was born of God. For there is no proof but what 
may turn out a delusion save this that my wants turn 
me to Christ, and make me find in Him the only One 
that can satisfy the soul. 

But in John iv. it is not the case of a proud ruler of 
the Pharisees who is made to feel the need of regenera- 
tion, but a depraved woman, that had lost her character, 
to whom no one would care to speak, except wonderful 
to say the Son of God ! It is to her that the Lord 
brings out this great truth, the gift of the Spirit: no 
longer merely acting morally on the soul or quickening, 
but Himself dwelling in the heart, the Holy Ghost the 
power of divine fellowship and worship. What a joy ! 
the Holy Ghost dwelling in believers, the Father seek- 
ing such to worship Him. Do you know this ? Or 
are you still tramelled by what is now passed, what 



CHAPTER I. 35 

once existed and then had the sanction of God? "by 
the rule of a past dispensation for an earthly people ? 
by rites which no longer have the slightest value in His 
sight who reveals Himself as Father? The day of 
forms and ceremonies is entirely gone. How often 
people say, We do not attach importance to such things ! 
The truth is, that they are now a very bad thing, and 
contrary to God's actual order. It is not only that fine 
sights and sounds should not he an object in worship, 
hut it is a positive sin to seek or admit them. It is, in 
principle, a going back to idolatry and a condemned 
world. Therefore, in John iv., our Lord brings in, 
" The hour cometh and now is, when the true worship- 
pers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth." 
There is the truth enunciated about worship. At Jeru- 
salem the splendour of ceremonials had been at its 
height; but now all this is over, and any one fighting 
for it now unwittingly rebels against Christ. Our Lord 
shows that it is no longer in that mountain nor at 
Jerusalem that God should be worshipped. There was 
just about to dawn a new condition of things. And 
what does God value now ? The true worshippers 
adoring the Father in spirit and in truth. What are 
they ? His children. " The Father seeketh such to 
worship him." He is gathering children, forming them 
for His own praise, putting the Holy Ghost within 
them to give the consciousness of their relationship with 
Himself, and, having this, to draw near to Him as their 
God and Father. 

It is plain, then, that the notion now of having a 
mixed worship of people, some converted and some not, 
is a direct contradiction of Christianity. It could not 
be otherwise before the cross. There was then no such 
thing as God separating His children from those that 
were not thus related to Him. It would have been a 
sin for a believing Israelite to have said to an unbe- 
liever, I cannot worship with yon, because you are not 
born of God. But now the sin is to join in God's wor- 



36 EPHESLANS. 

ship with those who are not His children ; and for this 
simple reason, that the Father is seeking true worship- 
pers, and none but such, to worship Him. I do not 
mean that it is a sin for those not converted to he in 
the same place as spectators and hearers. But the 
attempt to join everybody in the worship of God is a 
fatal delusion, dishonouring to Himself and destructive 
to the souls of those that are not true worshippers. 
But people have not faith to stand separate from the 
world. They like to have the countenance of men; 
and, of course, it is trying to have to act decidedly. 
We are warned of God that, if we seek to please men, 
we should not be the servants of Christ. We must 
run the risk of paining them, but faithful are the 
wounds of a friend. Some confound hearing the gospel 
or other truth with worship. But they are totally dif- 
ferent. In worshipping God, Christians offer up to 
God services of praise and thanksgiving. Worship is 
what goes from the believer to God ; whereas, in the 
gospel or other ministry, it is a message coming down 
from God for the good of souls, for the instruction of 
believers, or for the conviction and salvation of unbe- 
lievers. But whether one or other be addressed, it is 
always that which comes from God to them, and not 
what goes from them to God ; so that the confounding 
of these two things is a serious evil. Among many 
the thing which makes them attached to the old walls 
and routine is not the prayers, but because they hope 
to hear something good in the sermon. They entirely 
thus pass out of the condition of worshippers. Wor- 
ship is the true expression of the heart's praise and 
thanks by the Holy Ghost, whether by an illiterate man 
or not. We know in the case of the apostles that they 
could not speak correctly (Acts iv.); but, for all that, 
they were the chosen vessels of such a power of God as 
never visited this earth before or since, in men of like 
passions with ourselves. And I believe it is so still 
and always will be so. God chooses the weak things 



CHAPTER I. 37 

of the world to confound the things which are mighty. 
Although there may be a Paul brought in occasionally, 
this is the exception, and God never intends that the 
exceptions should become the rule. 

Thus, beside regeneration, which is the first opera- 
tion of the Spirit of God, there is the further gift of 

the Holy Ghost. " In whom ye also after that 

ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salva- 
tion." They were born of water and of the Spirit. 
They heard the word of truth, which we find in this 
very epistle set forth under the figure of water " that 
he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of 
water by the word." (Chap. v. 26.) It is not only that 
the Church is washed by the word, but the poor sinner 
is born of the word when he believes the gospel born 
of water and of the Spirit. But was it merely that 
they were born of water and of the Spirit ? " In whom 
also, after that ye believed (or having believed), ye were 
sealed with that holy Spirit of promise." It is very 
startling to many to find that, after they have been 
born of the Spirit, there is such a thing as being sealed 
by the Spirit. Others, again, seeing both facts, invented 
confirmation. They felt from the Scripture that there 
is something over and above being born of water. 
Therefore a religion of forms first made baptism to 
regenerate every one, and then confirmation to crown it. 
But forms are no better than idolatry: it is putting 
something in the place of Christ. After the apostles 
left, this grew apace. Ceremonies, done by the hand of 
men, were substituted for the power of the Holy Ghost 
acting on the souls of men. Finding from the word of 
God that there were these two things, regeneration first 
and then the subsequent gift of the Holy Ghost, they 
adopted two different ceremonies in one sense very 
properly, if there must be a religion of forms at all. 
But it is a total mistake as to the very nature of 
Christianity. 

Yet the truth remains that there were two different 



38 EPHESIANS. 

operations of the Holy Ghost. The first is, when a 
man is brought to a sense of sin. What makes a man 
abhor himself? He is born of God. He has no hap- 
piness at all perhaps, but a real sense of ruin; yet 
his heart cleaves to God. That man is born of God 
truly converted : no comfort as yet perhaps in his soul, 
but his heart is open to listen further to the word of 
the truth, the gospel of salvation. He believes it. 
What then? He is sealed of the Holy Ghost, as a 
believer, not only in Christ, but in the gospel of our 
salvation the work that Christ has done. For I do not 
think that you can have a soul sealed with the Holy 
Ghost, unless he enters into the work as well as the 
person of Christ. This accounts for the fact that there 
were persons born of the Holy Ghost who never were 
sealed. For instance, the Old Testament saints were 
believers in Christ ; they all looked for Christ. All 
were born of God, but not one was sealed with the Holy 
Ghost. To be born of the Spirit and sealed with the 
Spirit are very different things, which may or may not 
be united in the same person. All must be born of the 
Spirit, but it is never said that all must be sealed with 
the Spirit in order to enter into the kingdom of God. 
Wherever the Holy Ghost speaks of the sealing of the 
Spirit, it proves the clean contrary. Who was the first 
person said to be sealed with the Spirit? Our blessed 
Lord Himself. He had it in a way peculiar to Himself. 
When was He sealed ? When redemption was accom- 
plished and He went up to heaven? No; but when 
He walked upon earth. " Him hath God the Father 
sealed." It was as Son of man He was sealed, and as 
Son of man on earth before redemption without blood- 
shedding, because He knew no sin, neither was guile 
found in His mouth. He was absolutely sinless: He 
could have the Holy Ghost abiding on Him entirely 
apart from blood, because He was the Holy One the 
Saviour. He needed no work no blood no redemp- 
tion; but yet He died, and there was blood shed and 



CH AFTER I. 39 

redemption effected. Why so? That we might be 
sealed that we, who had no natural title to he brought 
nigh, that we, in whom the Holy Ghost could never 
take up His abode, might have that same Holy Ghost 
who dwelt in Him abiding in us. 

This is what our Lord gradually brings out to view. 
" Thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have 
given thee living water." Therefore it was that the 
Lord taught the disciples to ask for the Holy Spirit ; 
and this, after they were already regenerate. Yet He 
tells them to ask the Father for the Holy Spirit. 
(Luke xi.) Is it the same thing now, seeing that He 
has given the Spirit? Am I to ask for the Holy 
Ghost when I have Him dwelling in me ? It would 
have been the most flagrant unbelief, after Christ was 
in the midst of the disciples, had they asked God to 
send Christ. And now, when the Holy Ghost is sent 
from heaven, and given to be in us a. well of water 
springing up into everlasting life, was it for such to en- 
treat the Holy Ghost to be given them ? for Christians 
to be praying for an outpouring of the Holy Spirit ? 
It is a practical denial that the Holy Ghost is sent 
clown from heaven, and is dwelling in us. It is quite 
right to pray that we may not grieve Him, and that 
we may not quench Him. To pray that we may be 
strengthened with all might according to His Spirit in 
the inner man, is according to the word of God; but 
we ought not to say one word that implies the Holy 
Ghost is not here when He is. A most grievous cloud 
of darkness rests on the minds of many children of 
God as to this subject. They do not believe their pri- 
vileges ; they do not know that the Holy Ghost dwells 
in them. Does not the Holy Ghost feel this ? If you 
had one caring for you day by day, and yoii were 
habitually to question your relationship to him, or 
doubt his care of you, it would show that you were 
morbid. There is a mist over your eyes, and you are 
asking for the very mercies that are already given. 



40 EPEESIANS. 

This is neither wisdom nor faith. It is quite true that 
we may ask God to bless the gospel to the unconverted 
and to regenerate them. But people pray for a pouring 
out of the Spirit a different thing from conversion, 
and only mentioned in connection with the Holy Ghost's 
being given, first to the Jews, next to the Samaritans, 
and, thirdly, to the Gentiles. From that day to this, 
there is not the smallest ground to ask God for an out- 
pouring of the Holy Spirit. It is an unintelligent 
prayer, founded on unbelief of the truth that the Holy 
Ghost is sent down. Even God Himself could not add 
to the blessedness of the gift He has already given. 
There was a great difference between a Jew, a Gentile, 
and a Samaritan ; and therefore it is mentioned expressly 
in relation to the three. The Holy Ghost never will 
be poured out again upon the Church. It is ignor- 
ance of the ways of God to look for it. He has been 
poured out for the Church as truly as it is possible 
for God to give. But when the heavenly saints have 
been taken to be with Christ at His coming, there will 
in due time follow an outpouring of His Spirit on a 
new people, when the Jews and Gentiles will be brought 
as such distinctly to the knowledge of Jesus. But as 
long as the Church is on the earth, there never will nor 
can be such a thing. Can it be repeated, any more 
than there can be another mission of the Lord Jesus 
to work again for us ? Nor is this a mere matter of 
speculation. It is connected in the deepest possible way 
with our worship and even our peace. 

You will find that faith in the presence of God's 
Spirit, or unbelief of it, is that which puts to the test 
saints in the present day. It behoves us to consider 
well whether we really do enter into the mind of God 
about it. Let us understand that what constitutes us 
Christians is not only that we believe in Christ, but 
that we are now sealed with the Holy Ghost. He re- 
generates an unbeliever by faith in Christ; He seals 
none but believers. This was the decisive proof of 



CHAPTER I. 41 

a man's being a Christian. Peter thus alleges the 
fact: " Can any man forbid water, that these should 
not be baptized which have received the Holy Ghost 
as well as we?" It was not merely that they had 
believed; but God had given them the Holy Ghost, 
and could they dare to refuse persons in whom that 
divine Person dwelt, on whom God had conferred such 
signal grace ? Such, too, is the ground of all Christian 
unity the presence of the Holy Ghost. The question 
is not merely, Is there life ? but, Have we believed 
that the Holy Ghost dwells in you? It was the 
possession of the Spirit, and not life merely, that was 
made the turning point. It was not until they had 
received' the Holy Ghost that the Gentiles were acknow- 
ledged as part and parcel of the Church of God. (Acts xi.) 
The Church is not only bound to look for life, and to 
believe that there is life in the soul, but is also autho- 
rized from the word of God to wait till there is such a 
manifestation of it, as to plainly manifest that the man 
has the Holy Ghost dwelling in him. There never 
was such a thing as owning as an assembly till there 
was a recognition of their being on common ground with 
the Church by the reception of the Holy Ghost. 

All this makes the true way of dealing with saints 
now very evident. The Church would be justified in 
expecting this manifestation of the power of the Spirit. 
It is not true charity which does not look for it. " In 
whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with 
that holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our 
inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased 
possession, unto the praise of His glory." Without 
dwelling on this last verse, I would make the remark 
again, that as the seal of the Spirit could not be till 
the work of Christ was done (the Son only being sealed 
upon earth who needed no redemption, but who came, 
on the contrary, to redeem us to God), as we now, on 
the footing of redemption, receive the Holy Ghost to 
dwell in us, so we receive the earnest of the inheritance. 



42 EPHESIAXS. 

This last, I believe, to be just as peculiar to the Church 
of God since Pentecost, as the sealing of the Spirit. 
As the disciples were not sealed with the Spirit, so 
neither had they the earnest of the inheritance till the 
Holy Ghost was sent down from heaven. This earnest 
is the power of the Holy Ghost giving a believer now 
present joy, present anticipation of the glory to which 
he is going. This may be hindered in many a believer's 
heart by a want of knowledge of the truth, or by the 
workings of the flesh, worldliness, &c. But still it 
remains true, that, now that the Holy Ghost is given, 
a believer ought to look up and pray to God if there be 
anything that hinders his entering into the joy of his 
blessed inheritance, that it may be detected and put 
away. I am quite sure that the caring only for being 
born of God has acted greatly to the injury of the 
children of God ; it has stopped them short, as if the 
only object were to learn that they were children and 
no more. But our business is, having believed, to go 
on and learn other truths, and above all, Christ Himself. 
So it is precisely that the Holy Ghost's regenerating a 
soul is not to arrest the soul with the fact that it is 
regenerate ; but being born of God, we have to go for- 
ward, to enter into the blessed truths of God, which 
cluster round both our redemption and our future glory, 
and find their centre in Christ's person and work. 

As the seal, the Holy Ghost is the witness of the 
perfectness of our being cleansed from our sins the 
effect of the work of Christ. That operation of the 
Spirit is meant which supposes the work done, and that 
we are set apart to God on the ground of redemption. 
We are sealed because redemption is finished. If I 
look at glory, it is not arrived. Therefore the figure is 
changed when he speaks of our inheritance. " Sealing" 
would not do in connection with that, because we have 
it not a,s a fact ; we wait to be put in possession of 
what we are to have along with Christ. Hence the 
Holy Ghost is spoken of as " the earnest of our inheri- 



CHAPTER I. 43 

tance." The same Spirit who seals us is the earnest of 
our bright future " till the redemption of the purchased 
possession." First of all, we have the privileges of 
divine grace that chose us in Christ ; predestined us to 
the place of sons ; took us into full favour, without a 
single question, " in the Beloved ;" gave us redemption 
already in Christ through His blood, even the for- 
giveness of sins. But no sooner has the Holy Ghost 
thus established us in the full knowledge of God's love 
to us, and the present effect of it in putting away our 
sins, than He brings before us the inheritance. Hence 
comes in the relation of the Holy Ghost to these two 
things. And as there are two great parts in God's 
choice of us personally, so the Holy Ghost takes a 
double relationship. He is the seal of the grace and 
blessing that we have in Christ, and He is the earnest 
of the glory we are going to have with Christ. These 
are the relations of the Holy Ghost to the individual 
believer. All the corporate dealings of the Spirit have 
a secondary place compared with His ways with the 
soul individually, which, though susceptible of a far 
fuller development, have received a measure of notice 
sufficient for my present purpose. 

We have now the Holy Ghost leading the apostle 
into a remarkable prayer flowing out of the subject 
(or, at least, a part of it) already brought before us. 
It will be found that all is in the most orderly connec- 
tion which it is possible to conceive, even when revealed 
to us; an order that we never could have conceived, 
unless God had made it known, but which, once com- 
municated, approves itself immediately to the spiritual 
judgment. For the blessing which the enraptured 
apostle had poured out in the earlier verses flows, we 
have seen, from a twofold title of God : " the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ." 

Accordingly in this epistle there are two prayers, 
answering to this double title. The first prayer is 
given in the portion now before us, and pertains to His 



44 EPHESIANS. 

title as the God of our Lord Jesus Christ; while in 
chapter iii. 14, we have a corresponding prayer, which 
answers to the second title, the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Both, clearly, have Christ as the foun- 
dation and centre; but, then, Christ regarded in a 
wholly different point of view. In the former of the 
two, Christ is viewed as man, and one who calls God 
His God; in the second of them, Christ is regarded in 
His still more intimate relationship as Son, who there- 
fore brings before us the Father. We, too, have com- 
munion with God in both respects ; we have to do with 
Him as God and as Father. It is said in John iv., 
" The hour is coming and now is, when the true wor- 
shippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in 
truth." But then our Lord adds, " God is a Spirit, and 
they that worship him must worship him in spirit and 
in truth." There is an immense difference between the 
two things. As the Father He is seeking worshippers, 
communicating the unspeakable favour of bringing them 
to the knowledge of His love. He forms their hearts 
after the display of Himself in Christ, causes them to 
overflow with thanksgiving and praise, and thus con- 
stitutes them worshippers in spirit and in truth. But 
then it is added, that God is a spirit, &c. Whatever 
the form in which He might have manifested Himself 
in Judaism, for special reasons whatever displays of 
His judicial majesty, in tangible ways, Himself pro- 
perly hidden, He is a spirit, and consequently He must 
have spiritual worship. Thus it is not merely the 
exceeding love that is seeking and making and gather- 
ing out worshippers, but it is the necessary character 
of the only worship that He admits now. From the 
moment that He reveals Himself fully, He can own 
nothing but real worship in the Spirit. The clay of 
forms, rites, and ceremonies is totally passed. Hence 
it is not only that He does not look for them, but He 
scorns them ; He treats them as a libel upon His nature, 
a slight on His Son, and Satan's substitute for the 



CHAPTER I. 45 

power of the Holy Ghost. They that worship Him 
must worship Him in spirit and in truth. I think it 
important to bring out the connections of the blessed 
word of God so as to show that the distinction pointed 
out is not imaginative. Alas ! that men should he he- 
guiled to invent, in presence of the untold treasures of 
the Bible. All we have to do is to how before what is 
given us there. We may have, no doubt, to learn; but 
where the truth is known, what a mercy to be entirely 
delivered from the vain desire or the need of any inven- 
tion ! It is natural to unsatisfied man to seek out 
exciting novelties. But God is infinitely above man, 
and His word rich beyond all thought; so that all we 
have to do is to submit our souls to Scripture, assured, 
too, that the revelation of God, old as it is, offers prac- 
tically that which is ever new to the heart. 

In our epistle, then, we have these two prayers ; the 
first of them introduced by the apostle, who says, " where- 
fore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, 
and love unto all the saints." Now inasmuch as our 
love would bring in the thought of something on man's 
part that would give importance to us, although he is 
about to speak of love to the saints, he introduces the 
matter by " faith," because this throws us not so much 
on our love to Him as His love to us. " Wherefore," 
he says, " I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord 
Jesus," and then gives the consequence of this, " and 
your love unto all the saints." This is a very important 
word in judging of our love. We are all apt to form 
a circle even among the saints of God to have those 
that we prefer, those that suit us best, whose thoughts, 
feelings, habits, are more or less the same as our own, 
or, at least, are no great trial to us. But, then, this . 
is not love to the saints. There is more love to ourselves 
in it than loving them. The flesh likes what is agreeable 
to us what does not cause us pain, what is, perhaps, a 
gratification to the amiabilities of nature. All that 
may be where there is really no exercise of the new 



46 EPHESIATvTS. 

nature, no mighty power of the Spirit of God working 
in our hearts. We have always to test our souls, and 
ask how we stand in this. Is the prominent motive 
and objects of our hearts the Lord Jesus? Is it with 
Him and for Him that we think of and feel towards all 
the saints? 

I fully admit that love towards the saints cannot, 
and ought not, to take the same shape towards all. It 
must be in the energy and intelligence of the Spirit, 
varied according to the call upon love. While one 
ought to love even a person who is under discipline, it 
would he a very great mistake to suppose that your love 
must he shown in the same way as if he were not. 
You do not cease to love him ; indeed you never are 
in a position and spirit to exercise discipline with the 
Lord where there is not love righteous hatred of the 
sin, indignation it may be, but real charity to the person. 
It would be better to wait upon God if it be not so in 
our hearts, till we can take it up in the spirit of divine 
grace. There must be, of course, a dealing in righte- 
ousness ; but even in dealing with one's child there 
ought not to be such a thing as chastening it in a 
passion. Anything that merely arises out of a sudden 
impulse, is not a feeling that glorifies God about evil. 
Therefore, in cases of discipline, there ought to be self- 
judgment, and great patience, too, unless it be some- 
thing so flagrant that to hesitate about it would be 
culpable weakness, or want of decision and jealousy for 
God ; for there are some sins so offensive to God and to 
man that they ought, if we are sensitive to His holi- 
ness and obedient, to be met with grave energy and as 
it were on the very spot. The arena of the sin God 
would have to be the scene of its judgment according 
to His will. 

Supposing something done in the public assembly, 
false doctrine in the midst of God's people, if there 
were the power of God, and a heart for His rights, it 
might be due to His majesty to deal with it without 



CHAPTER I. 47 

delay. This is sufficiently plain from the word of God, 
where in a case of direct hypocrisy and lying against 
God, we find the promptness of the Holy Ghost, through 
the apostle, in the very presence of the Church, which 
at once judged the fraud that was attempted to be 
practised upon Him who dwelt there. I deny there 
was want of love in this : rather was it the necessary 
accompaniment of divine love acting, through the Holy 
Ghost's might, in the assembly, or at least, by Peter, 
as the special instrument of His power therein. It was 
a stern judgment, doubtless; but it was the fruit of in- 
tense desire for the saints of God, and of horror that 
such a sin should get a footing and shelter among them, 
and the Holy Ghost should be thus foully dishonoured, 
and be grieved with the whole Church if it were con- 
nived at. But in ordinary cases the same love would 
wait, and let time be given for the fault to be owned 
and repented of. In nine cases out of ten mistakes 
arise from precipitancy, because we are apt to be. jealous 
for our own reputation. how little have we realized 
that we are crucified and dead with Christ ! We feel 
the scandal, or something that affects the public mind : 
this is not the power of the Holy Ghost, but the selfish 
egoism that is at work in our hearts. We do not like 
to lose our character, or to share the sorrow and shame 
of Christ in those who bear His name. Not of course, 
that one would make light of what is wrong : that 
never could be right about anything either great or 
small. We ought never to justify the least wrong, 
whether in ourselves or in others, but accustom our 
souls to the habitual clearing of the name of the Lord, 
even if it be about a hasty word. If we begin to be 
careless about little offences, there is nothing to pre- 
serve us from great sins but the mere mercy of God. 
If love unto all the saints were working in our hearts, 
there would be less haste. 

We sometimes misconstrue things, and endeavour to 
give, as we take, a very sombre impression, where evil 



48 EPHESIANS. 

was but in appearance. Let us beware of judging 
according to the first blush, where the reality may 
prove to be otherwise: it is not righteous judgment. 
"We should seek to judge things by a higher standard, 
and in the light of God. In these serious matters we 
are bound to be sure, and never to yield to suspicion. 
All judgment, if it be according to God, must proceed 
upon what is known and certain, not upon what is a 
surmise too often the effect of an unfounded preten- 
sion to superior spirituality. We find the importance 
of this constantly, and, were our souls more simple 
about it, fewer mistakes would be made. 

Christ has the first place where the heart is true; 
and next, " all the saints" become the object of our love. 
If there are two cases of persons in fault, and the one 
were a prime favourite, and the other but little liked, 
the latter is in imminent danger, I need hardly say, of 
going to the wall. My object of aversion would labour 
under a cloud which obscures the truth, no matter how 
evident it might be to the dispassionate; whereas, on 
the contrary, the favourite would derive that which 
outweighs the proofs of guilt from, the unwillingness 
on the part of his friends to pronounce anything wrong 
about him. Both these feelings are thoroughly at issue, 
in such circumstances, with the mind of God. Indeed, 
both favouritism and prejudices are plainly condemned 
by His blessed word. " The wisdom that is from above 
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be 
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without par- 
tiality, and without hypocrisy." (James iii. 17.) 

" Love unto all the saints" is enjoined because they 
are saints. To love them, because God has separated 
and brought them into an eternal relationship with 
Himself, is the only true and Christian love to such. 
Our great difficulty always is that our thoughts, feel- 
ings, actions, should flow from this ground. Do not 
mistake me. I do not mean that it is wrong to have 
friends. Our Lord had. He loved John as He did not 



CHAPTER I. 49 ' 

love the others, and there was a sense in which He 
loved them every one alike; as His saints, they were 
beyond comparison precious in His sight. He might 
prize the faithfulness of some of His servants; He 
might have to encourage, reprove, correct all round ; 
and we must leave room for all these things. There is 
the grand "basis of love to all the saints ; but it is clear 
we are not hound to open out matters of a personal 
nature to every one because he is a saint. For example, . 
saints are not always the wisest of men ; and while we 
are not to disown their saintship, we are not bound to 
lay bare our difficulties, or to seek counsel in what may 
require ripe spiritual judgment from those who could 
render no help whatever in the case. Love there must 
be always. This brings in the value of that divine 
principle, " esteeming others better than ourselves." 
This I hold to be true of all saints. It might be a 
man that had not two ideas and yet had Christ before 
his soul. He might be very ignorant and very foolish 
hasty perhaps in spirit, strong in prejudice, weak in 
sympathies, and worthless as a counsellor ; but if there 
is evidently a soul that cleaves to Christ and values 
Him above everything, can I not, should I not, esteem 
him better than myself? Do not I see there is that 
which admonishes my soul which refreshes and edifies 
me, much more than if he were merely the staunchest 
friend and the wisest adviser? In the least saint of 
God there is that which both cheers and humbles the 
heart. I am not to esteem a person for a quality which 
he may not possess : God does not, could not, put such 
a phantom before us. On the other hand, it is well to 
bethink ourselves of the preciousness of every saint as 
such. Show me the very weakest and most trying of 
them all; yet we may and ought to cultivate a real, 
genuine respect for them as God's children. There is 
not only God for them, but what is of Christ in them ; 
and this may commend them above all other consider- 

E 



50 EPHESIANS. 

ations to him who values communion with the Father 
and the Son. 

On the contrary, in thinking of ourselves, ought we 
not to feel how much there is that is unlike Christ? 
May we ever be specially alive to that in which we 
break down and grieve the Spirit of God ! This would 
have the effect of lowering and putting down our own 
self-esteem. Could we think so highly of ourselves, if 
we felt as we ought our exceeding and, alas ! frequent 
failure, in presence of the rich, perfect grace of God to 
our souls? Whereas, if we had before us in others, not 
their failure, but Christ's love to and His life in them, 
and the glory to which they belong, what would be the 
effect? " Love unto all the saints." It is Christ dis- 
cerned in the saints, which is the power of the love He 
would have going out towards them. Under certain 
circumstances, with a person whom you trusted God 
might bring out as a saint whom you have prayed 
for, and whose good you have sought in any way, yet 
at a given time it might be a sin to associate as a 
Christian. I am speaking of one who had by filthiness 
of flesh or spirit brought dishonour upon the name of 
the Lord. But though we may for the time abstain 
from all the expressions of loving intercourse, yet love 
always finds a place in which to show itself, though 
sometimes it may be only in the presence of God, and 
not manifestly to the human eye. So that, as to the 
manner of showing love, we must search the word of 
God. But the general principle cannot be doubted, 
that God would lay upon our hearts all the saints. He 
has them all upon His own heart, and He will have us 
to cultivate this largeness of family affection. 

Accordingly Paul, who entered into this in a measure 
which even the saints addressed perhaps knew little of 
practically, adds, " Wherefore I ...... cease not to 

give thanks for you, making mention of you in my 
prayers ; that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom 



CHAPTER I. 51 

and revelation in the knowledge of Him." There is the 
title so often referred to " the God of our Lord Jesus 
Christ." He is about to speak of the divine dealing 
with man and even with Christ as man ; for of course 
it is only in that sense that one could so speak. But 
if dealing with us accordingly, working mercies through 
the risen man and fresh blessings suited to this charac- 
ter, yet He is " the Father of glory" as being the great 
Head and Fountain of all heavenly blessedness, the 
One from whom it all came to His own name and 
praise. This at once lets us into the secret of the 
prayer. Glory is the main thought not the only, but 
the most prominent, feature of the prayer. Hence then 
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, 
purposes and works by Him to give certain blessings to 
us ; and it will be found that the basis of the bright 
pillar of blessing is Christ risen and glorified at the 
right hand of God. If you look at the prayer in chap- 
ter iii. there is not a word about His being there exalted 
" far above all principality, and power, and might;" for 
its subject is not glory at all, nor what God has done: 
it is not anything conferred upon Christ, but Himself 
and His love, the sum and substance of my blessing; 
as it is said there "that Christ may dwell in your 
hearts by faith." Here the prayer ' in chapter i. is the 
contrast in every way of that in chapter iii. In the 
latter, love is. the parent idea, and not glory. It is well 
to bear in mind always this wonderful connection of 
love and glory ; because the one would not do without 
the other. And although glory be its bright manifes- 
tation and effect, yet love is still deeper and is never 
fully known except in the immediate presence of our 
Father. The kingdoni is not the evidence in our case 
of the love of God ; the proof of it on our behalf is 
that we are to be with the Son in the Father's house, 
and that we shall appear with Christ in glory. Who 
brings us there? The world knows nothing about the 
Father's house. It is a scene outside the earth, that 



52 EPHESIANS. 

no eye of man here below can possibly enter into. But 
He will also display us to the world. 

Hence it is that, in John xvii. 22, you will find 
that the glory which the Father gives the Son and 
which the Son gives to us because of His all-perfect 
love this gift is in order that the world may know 
that the Father sent the "Son and loved us as He 
loved the Son. To prove the love, the glory there, 
as here, is set prominently forward. As we have the 
prayer of glory in Ephesians i. and the prayer of love 
in Ephesians iii., so the glory that is given in John xvii. 
is to prove what otherwise would not have been so 
clearly made known to the world. Men here below 
may see the glory, but they cannot enter into the 
love. The world will gather from our being in the 
glory with the Lord Jesus that we were loved with 
the same love wherewith the Lord Jesus was loved. 
Glory expresses itself outwardly, but love goes deeper 
still and brings one into the scene where the Father 
reveals Himself in His beloved Son. This is what I 
may call an intimate, family scene outside the world, 
the heavenly rest and home. It is not merely bright- 
ness, glory, majesty, or power. All these things will 
have their full display ; but there is something deeper 
than all and which lies at the root of all. It is the 
love, which, though it be the least entered into, yet 
at the same time was really before all, and that to 
which all will turn. It is the highest of all, and it is 
eternal. The kingdom may terminate the love never. 
The display before the world will have a beginning and 
an end. But as the love will never end, so it always 
was in the bosom of God the Father. 

Thus we have the prayer that " the God of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you 
the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full know- 
ledge of him." There might be a little difficulty if it 
were simply "the knowledge of him." The proper 
meaning of the word is "the full knowledge of him." 



CHAPTER I. 53 

They already knew Him, but Paul prayed that they 
might know Him more. He wanted them to he 
fathers in Christ, and what constitutes a father is a deep 
and growing knowledge of Christ Himself. The Spirit 
of God alone could give them this entrance into it ; hut 
it was in the full knowledge of Him. " The eyes of 
your understanding being enlightened, that ye may 
know what is the hope of his calling, and what the 
riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and 
what is the exceeding greatness of His power to us- 
ward who believe." We have three things here brought 
before us, which call for particular consideration. 

First, there is " the hope of his calling." Now I 
conceive that there he is referring in measure to what 
we have already found in the early part of the chapter. 
" Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings 
in heavenly places in Christ, according as he hath 
chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, 
that we should be holy and without blame before him 
in love." At any rate, I think verse 4 is before his 
mind's eye here. Verse 5 brings in His place as Father. 
" The hope of his calling" is founded on the full blessed- 
ness that pertains to us according to that purpose of 
God which is already ours in Christ already made 
known to us and received by our hearts the calling of 
God that we should be holy and without blame before 
Him in love. But then if this be the hope of His call- 
ing (for everything is made to flow from God Himself), 
he adds, " and what the riches of the glory of his inheri- 
tance in the saints." (Ver. 12.) There clearly he refers 
to what we found in the body of the chapter: the inheri- 
tance and not only the calling. The calling was the 
effectual work of God's grace, and the riches of the 
inheritance rather the glory suited to such a calling. 
But, besides this character of glory, there is, first, the 
hidden portion suitable to being chosen to be holy and 
without blame before Him in love called to be the 



54 EPHESIANS. 

reflection of His own holy, loving nature, which, of 
course, we have got in the life of Christ, and which we 
shall have perfectly developed when changed into His 
image, from glory to glory. For His calling has its own 
proper hope of what we shall enjoy in His presence. 

Thus there is, secondly, the inheritance. He wished 
them to know the riches of its glory, to know it better. 
But he uses a remarkable expression " the riches of 
the glory of His inheritance in the saints." You must 
carefully guard against a prevalent error on this subject, 
namely, that the saints mean the inheritance. This is 
not at all the force of the phrase : nay, I have no hesi- 
tation in saying that it would falsify the chief blessed- 
ness of the Church's calling. If we look at the Old 
Testament, we find that Israel were His inheritance 
and His people ; and that God, by virtue of Israel, took 
possession of the land. When the day comes for God 
to be king, and more than king, when He takes under 
His government the entire universe, how will this be 
done? Will it be by Israel? No; but by virtue of His 
heavenly saints the Church of God. The expression 
seems to be purposely large. Most decidedly it means 
the saints changed or risen, so as to be in the like- 
ness of Christ, in an entirely heavenly condition. Such 
is the mode in which God will challenge and assume 
the inheritance by and by into His own hand. When 
He took Canaan, He did not come down and possess it 
by heavenly power, but by means of His people. But 
when God expels the wicked spirits from any connection 
with the heavenly places, when He puts down all power 
upon the earth everything that contradicts Himself, 
and reduces the whole universe into subjection to the 
name of Christ, who are destined to take it in His name, 
as Israel entered on the land of Canaan ? The risen 
saints. Hence the meaning of the words, "the riches 
of the glory of his inheritance in the saints." The 
common notion that the saints constitute the inherit- 
ance is unscriptural. For most carefully throughout . 



CHAPTER I. 55 

the New Testament, the saints are always represented 
as (not the inheritance, but) the heirs, " heirs of God 
and joint-heirs with Christ." They are nowhere treated 
as the inheritance, but, on the contrary, what is re- 
vealed as the inheritance means the things in heaven and 
things on earth ; and the Church is ever and sedulously 
separated from them. This I consider to be a point 
which cannot be left as an open question ; the testimony 
of the word is too abundant and precise. We ought 
never to allow what is clearly revealed in Scripture to 
be debatable or uncertain, because doubt always has 
an injurious effect upon the spirit, no less than it insults 
God and grieves His Spirit. Another's certainty will 
not do for us ; but we need not hesitate to speak plainly 
where we have no doubt of God's mind upon a subject. 
And when looked at in this point of view, it quite 
falls in with the structure of the chapter. As we have 
found "the hope of his calling" in the first clause 
answering to what we had in the earlier verses, so the 
" glory of the inheritance" answers to .the middle verses 
of the chapter. God means to have the whole universe 
blest and happy under Christ; not merely glory given 
to Him in heaven, or a people subject to Him here 
below. We have here an incomparably larger view of 
what God intends. Christ is to have universal blessed- 
ness and glory, all things in heaven and earth being 
put under Him; and we have obtained in Him this 
inheritance. 

The remaining point is, " the exceeding greatness of 
his power to usward who believe, according to the 
working of his mighty power which he wrought in 
Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him 
at his own right hand in the heavenly places." (Ver. 20.) 
Why not draw attention to the power that was put forth 
when He made the world ? When Israel are addressed, 
He speaks of Himself as the Jehovah-God who clave 
the Red Sea, and brought His people out of Egypt 
with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. 



56 EPHESIANS. 

But what to us is the Bed Sea crossed ? The re- 
surrection of Christ; not the incarnation nor even the 
cross of Christ, though we could not do without either. 
The cross, though the most essential of all things for 
God's glory and our need, does not give us the power of 
God. s It shows us what God calls His weakness, and 
if I look at Christ there, He was " crucified through 
weakness." It was One who submitted to everything, 
who put Himself in the power of His creatures ; who 
went down under the judgment of God and sank even 
under the puny hand of man. But when we look at 
the resurrection, all trace of weakness is for ever past 
away and nothing is seen hut the most triumphant 
power of God ; a power far beyond anything connected 
with either the law or creation. It was a question of 
going down into the grave, not merely of a man, hut of 
that man who had borne in His person the sins of every 
soul that believes in Him. And so completely was 
God glorified about these sins that He takes up the 
despised, rejected, forsaken man from under the unheard- 
of burden, and puts Him at His own right hand in the 
heavenly places. We have there the astonishing con- 
trast between the grave in which Christ lay and the 
glory into which He is now exalted, still as man the 
glorified man far above all creatures, be they ever so 
high or blest : above creatures which were far above man 
in one sense and had never known taint or fall : above the 
principalities, authorities, dominions, powers on high, 
the heavenly orders, and every name that is named, not 
only in this age, but in that which is to come. (Ver. 21.) 
There will be the display of angelic hosts then, when the 
Son of man shall come in His glory and all the holy angels 
with Him. But He is raised above them all now. To 
be above them as God would he nothing new ; He is so 
always. But He has carried humanity above them; 
He is there exalted in our nature risen, of course, but 
still the nature of man. He has given us present as- 
sociation with the throne of God. For the application 



CHAPTER I. 57 

of all this is given to us here " the exceeding great- 
ness of his power to usward who believe, according to 
the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in 
Christ, when he raised him from the dead." It is not 
merely the exceeding greatness of His power towards 
Christ, but towards us in Christ. The power that 
wrought in our deliverance from Satan, that gave us our 
place as saints before God, is the self-same power that 
raised up Christ from the dead and put Him in the 
most glorious place in heaven. Is there anything 
difficult after this ? If we knew we had at command 
the power which called the world into being, should we 
not laugh at impossibilities ? 

But we have an energy greater than that which was 
put forth in creation no less than what raised up Christ 
from the dead. The word of God positively tells us so. 
Why then are we so weak? Because we so feebly 
believe it. The great mass of God's children never 
hear about it at all. But even they who, through the 
mercy of God, have heard, how little do they enter into 
it ! It is one thing not to deny it doctrinally, another 
to apply it and live in it, not only for great straits or 
heavy blows, but for the ordinary train of daily duty, 
of that which becomes us as saints, subjecting ourselves 
to the will of God. We forget, if we are in circum- 
stances of difficulty, if in the midst of foes, if we 
have to do with unseen enemies, what it is the apostle 
prays for us. That we may know the exceeding great- 
ness of His power towards us who believe, which He 
wrought in Christ when He raised Him from the dead. 
If the power of the Holy Ghost so wrought in Paul, it 
was but the answer of the servant to the Master's heart, 
who was so pleading above, that we might know the 
power that is above all obstacles. No saints could 
know this till after the resurrection was accomplished. 
It is to usward who believe strictly to the New-Tes- 
tament saints, called in after the Lord's death and 
resurrection. 



58 EPHESIANS. 

Alas ! how are the mighty fallen. How feebly they 
now realize their own privileges. Thus, supposing that 
a deliverer were expected for anything at all, it would 
be perfectly right to cry for that deliverer to feel that 
he was long in coming. But when he . came, do you 
think it would be proper or suitable to urge him to 
come ? It is the mistake people make now. They take 
up the language of the Psalms and apply it to Christian 
experience. But you could not have in the Psalms the 
revelation of that which we have here. God's mercy 
you surely have previous to the resurrection of Christ; 
but there was no such thing as that power at work 
which raised up Christ from the dead. The mistake is 
profound who pervert the Old Testament so as to make 
it the language of our experience. It would be sin if 
one did not use the Old Testament for our own profit 
and good; but that would be abusing, not using, it. 
It is unbelief to confound anything of old with the 
heavenly power of Christ's resurrection. 

This, then, is the measure of the power at work 
towards us the same power that wrought in Christ. 
How are any of these things to be known acco?'ding to 
God ? " In the full knowledge of him." You will 
never learn any truth aright excepting in the deep- 
ening knowledge of Christ. It is the lack of this 
which is the cause of weakness among us : bare doctrine 
is not connection with Christ. When the flower is 
separated from that which is its source, its sustenance 
and support, it is thenceforth doomed to decay and death. 
We have that which is lovely and full of blessing in 
Christ; but if we are to know it such, to prove its 
truth, to enjoy it always, it must be in taking these 
things as connected with Christ. Let me look at 
Christ, and I see there the very life that God has 
given me, and the hope of it too, even as to the in- 
heritance. Who would dare, to say, it is presumption 
for Christ to have it ? Nay, but it is what is due to 
Him. God loves and delights in Him as man so well, 



CHAPTER, I. 59 

that He could not keep back a single thing that He 
has made from Him. He is the heir of it all; and 
we, hidden in Christ, can enter into the fulness of His 
calling, and into the inheritance, because we merge into 
union with Christ. And as you can only know the 
calling and the inheritance in the full knowledge of 
Christ, so it is also with " the exceeding greatness of 
his power." 

The height of that power is what God put forth when 
He raised up Christ " from the dead, and set Him at 
His own right hand in the heavenly places," &c. He 
has given Him the supreme seat of glory. No matter 
what could be conceived of the highest angel or arch- 
angel, Christ has received a higher dignity, and this 
place. He holds in present association with us while 
we are here. It is One who not only owns us and is 
kind to us, and uses the greatness of His glory for our 
good, but far more. He who is at the head of a vast 
empire can turn the throne to the good of his subjects 
and the glory of those whom he desires to honour ; but 
there is no positive, immediate, personal association 
with him. This is what the Christian has with Christ. 
Nothing less than to be one with Christ is what we 
have here. 

Therefore it is added, that this blessed One, under 
whose feet God has put everything, has been also given 
to be head over all things to the Church. It is not said, 
" head over the church," but " head over all things to 
the church." ( Ver. 22.) The Church shares His place of 
headship over all ; but as His body, in inseparable union 
with Him. The glorified Man has universal exaltation 
over all the creatures of God ; and this He shares with 
us, and will soon manifest as our portion with Him. 
The Christian is now a member of Christ's body now, 
therefore, by the Holy Ghost, in the most intimate 
association with Christ, not only as having life in Him, 
but as enjoying oneness with Him who is the supreme 
exalted Head over all. He is a member of His body ; 



60 EPHESIANS. 

and although it was not to Eve directly that God gave 
the dominion, yet did she share it by His will. It was 
given to Adam, but by association Eve had it along 
with Adam. So the Church has it as the dependent 
and associated Eve of the heavenly Man, the last 
Adam. This gives us at once a bright view of what 
our calling is, and why God looks for complete separa- 
tion from the world. In the time of the Protector in 
this country, it would have been improper for any one 
that held to the royal family to seek or even accept a 
post of honour. So with the Christian now. We 
belong to One who is hidden away from the earth 
exalted now into this universal headship. The world 
that we see is not yet put under Christ practically, 
though to faith all things are ; but we know that He 
is exalted, " head over all things to the church." 

We belong to Him, and He would have our hearts 
lifted up above all the present scene. The Church is 
" His body, the fulness of Him that filleth all in all." 
(Ver. 23.) It is the complement, or that which fills 
up Christ, looked at as man risen from the dead. As 
Son of God He, of course, requires nothing to complete 
His glory ; but as man He does. He would no more 
be complete in His resurrection-glory without the 
Church, than Adam would have been without Eve. 
And God has, in the counsels of His glory, so ordered 
it. He meant, from all eternity, that when His Son 
became this blessed, glorified man, He should share for 
His own honour and praise all the glory He had as the 
risen man with those who were by nature poor, dead 
sinners, but now delivered from their sins, and made 
one with Christ on high. By the Spirit now given He 
communicates the knowledge of it to them while in the 
world, that they may be in spirit and ways entirely 
above the world. 



CHAPTER II. 

We now enter upon a new portion of our epistle ; if 
not so exalted in its tone as that which we have glanced 
over in chapter i., equally important in its place and of 
the utmost moment to us. But then we must carefully 
bear in mind that what is of interest to us is not an 
adequate measure in looking at either the word of God 
or His ways. God never acts for anything short of 
His own glory. So that although we find many parts 
of the word of God which in the very closest way 
touch our condition, wants, blessing and glory, we 
invariably fall short of the just scope and standard of 
the truth of God, if we limit our thoughts by its 
application to ourselves. Never do we reach the full 
extent of any truth in its bearing upon us, unless we 
also take into account its infinitely higher range as the 
revealed display of God's glory, character, and purposes. 
Hence it is, that although we find in the Scripture 
grace already shown to us, and glory that we are soon 
to participate in, yet how infinite the blessing when we 
no longer look at it as that which is directly toward 
creatures so limited and feeble as ourselves ! When we 
realize that it is the grace and the glory of God, how 
all is changed completely ! We then hear and find out 
this grand truth He does speak of us and feel for us 
in ways, forms, depths, and heights suited to Himself. 
He enters into all our little wants as well as all our 
greatest. But still, if it were the least thing He meets 
in us, the supply of that want flows from One who has 
no limits ; and if it be suited to our capacity for the 
present moment, it will not be always so. God will 
never rest in His love till He has not only given us 
by the Holy Ghost now to taste in measure the sweet- 
ness of the display of His own character, but made us 



62 EPHESIANS. 

in every way worthy of it. He has called us to he His 
children. The day is coming when not merely His 
love will not be ashamed so to call us, hut when there 
will he no reason why it should he : when, on the con- 
trary, everything that pertains to the family of God 
will savour just as much of what He is as, alas ! now 
our poor, pitiful, worldly ways often tell a painful tale 
of self and not God. 

In this chapter then it is, not the unfolding of God's 
counsels and magnificent purposes as they flow from 
His own mind consequently going back to the begin- 
ning of time, and before creation had a place at all as 
a matter of fact, when all was hut God Himself in the 
eternity of His own existence. Even then, as chapter i. 
told us, before His hand had been put forth in any- 
thing, there was this blessed thought in His heart : He 
meant to have a people, yea, sons, out of the scene that 
was yet to be created, gathered by His own sovereign 
grace out of sin, to be the partakers of His love and of 
His holiness, along with His beloved Son. This was 
His counsel. Chapter i. showed us this, not only what 
was in God's mind from eternity, but the answer to it 
in the day of glory that is coming. For two great 
thoughts were brought before us there: first, the calling 
of God; and next, the inheritance that is yet to be 
displayed in the bright display of glory when Christ 
shall take everything that God has made, and will be 
the acknowledged, glorified Head of -it (all things, 
whether in heaven or on earth, being put under Him) ; 
and when we who believed in Him shall be called to 
the place of sharing that inheritance along with Him, 
our Lord and Bridegroom. Thirdly, we saw an added 
and most weighty point that the same power of God 
which raised up Christ from the dead is at work toward 
believers now. This was only alluded to passingly in. 
the prayer of the apostle at the end of chapter i. What 
we have here is, to a certain point, a kind of develop- 
ment of it. Chapter ii. is mainly based on His resur^ 



CHAPTER II. 63 

rection-power; nay, not this only, but, if I may so say, 
ascension-power. The energy which raised up Christ 
and set Him at the right hand of God, is now put forth 
on behalf of and working in those that believe in Him. 
We shall see the consequences of this. But now let 
us weigh for a moment what the Holy Ghost here 
brings out. It is the application of the mighty power 
of God to the believer. It is not, therefore, simply the 
purpose of grace, nor the execution of that purpose in 
glory by and by, but it is the exercise of His power 
after the pattern of Christ risen and glorified, and the 
application of it to the believer even now. 

Hence we have necessarily first brought before us the 
condition of those in whom the power is put forth, 
what they were when it began to work in them. Ac- 
cordingly it is only in chapter ii. that we begin to have 
any development of the actual condition of those with 
whom God is so nearly linked. Chapter i. is mainly 
occupied with what God had in His rnind, and what He 
will yet accomplish. Now we have the question raised 
and answered, Who are these people, and what was 
their state when God could so deal with them ? And 
it is most marvellous, that, when we come to hear His 
word, there is in no other epistle any portion that gives 
us so deep, searching, humiliating a picture of the 
desperate, degraded state in which those were whom 
God destined to be joint-heirs with Christ. The laying 
bare moral corruptions we have in Romans, fully prov- 
ing what man is if he take the ground of anything 
within him. Whether the favoured Jew under the law, 
or the Gentile with his conscience, all is thoroughly 
discussed there, and every pretension of man is ground 
to powder. But in Ephesians the proof of guilt is need- 
less. Man is viewed as so completely dead, that it is but 
the removal of the cloth from off the corpse. Therefore 
the apostle says, " You hath he quickened who were dead 
in trespasses and sins." It is not simply, How is a sin- 
ner to be forgiven, justified? but " You hath he quickened 



64 EPHESIANS. 

who were dead in trespasses and sins." The words 
" hath he quickened " are inserted, it is true, in italics, 
but it is the evident and necessary sense; without it, 
to an English reader, the sentence would be embar- 
rassed. It is not till verses 4, 5 that we have the 
completion of the thought. It is plain that the quick- 
ening affects those that are called " you," as well as 
those designated " us." I shall hope to show the 
meaning of the distinction presently, but I only refer 
to it now in order to guard against the notion,- that 
there is no sufficient reason for inserting in English 
the expression, " You hath he quickened ;" whereas it 
is implied in the language that the Holy Ghost used, 
or at least in the sense. 

The grand fact remains. It is not merely a question 
of disease in the moral state of man ; but they are 
" dead." "What a blow to all the thoughts of man to 
the notion that he is in a state of probation that he is 
in a mere sickly state of soul ; and if you only soothe 
and comfort and educate him, after all he is not so bad. ! 
Some people think there is a difference between be- 
lievers and unbelievers in their unconverted state : this 
I deny. As to men being born, some of them more 
worthy of having mercy shown them than others, the 
idea is contrary to every word of God that treats of the 
subject. On the contrary, what the Holy Ghost insists 
upon is the real death and equal ruin of all. In Romans 
it is said that we were " without strength," but here we 
were " dead." The only way in which death is spoken 
of in Romans is as a privilege, the happy condition into 
which faith brought us when baptized unto the death of 
Christ. We are thus viewed as being dead to sin and 
alive to God. 

In Ephesians, on the contrary, death was our misery. 
It was the expression of God's mind about the extreme 
ruin in which we lay. We have both Jews and Gen- 
tiles (neither now first or last) man as such morally 
dead; so that it becomes a question of what God can 



CHAPTER Il 65 

do. God above, and man here below, are in the presence 
of each other; and if man is dead, thanks be to God! 
He raises the dead, and can and does quicken souls. The 
immortality of the soul is certain. However, what 
Scripture calls " life" is not bare existence, but a blessed 
spiritual nature given to a man who naturally was 
without it and merely felt or acted after a nature under 
sin. Such is the condition of every person until the 
Spirit of God has wrought this good work upon the 
soul. ' 

Our Lord reproaches Nicodemus for not understand- 
ing this. Even as a Jew he ought to have done so; 
but 'as a " master in Israel" was it not a shame that 
he should not know these things? When he heard 
of the necessity of being " born again," or on an alto- 
gether new principle, he imagined that the Saviour 
might speak of some repeated natural birth, which, if 
possible, would have been but the old thing over again. 
But the word "afresh" (aviadev) is exceedingly em- 
phatic; and so is the opening out of the truth. Hearken 
to this: "that which is bora of the flesh is flesh, and 
that which is born of the Spirit is spirit." Flesh never 
11 can become spirit. There is no such thing as spiritual- 
izing the old nature, and making it new and holy. What 
the unregenerate soul wants is a new nature, or, as the 
Lord explains it, to be "born of water and of the 
Spirit." It is the word of God, figuratively presented 
thus, and applied by the power of the Holy Ghost to 
the soul, which is the meaning of the passage. Baptism 
may set forth that which is conveyed by it, but it is a 
figure of a reality. Our Lord shows that there must be 
a new life imparted ; and, as we are told elsewhere, 
" Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth." 
A.nd this is brought out not only by James, but "by 
Peter also, where he declares that we are " born again, 
not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the 
word of God which liveth and,abideth for ever." We 
know positively from the Apostle Paul, that the wash- 

F 



66 EPHESIANS. 

ing of water by the word is God's own explanation of 
the figure. 

Again, what could Nicodemus have known ahout 
Christian baptism ? It was not then instituted ; and 
the disciples' baptism was only a sort of modification of 
St. John's rite, i.e., the confession of a living Messiah, 
coming or come on earth. But proper Christian baptism 
is founded upon the death and resurrection of our Lord. 
" Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized 
unto Jesus Christ, were baptized unto his death?" 
Christian baptism is the confession of the death and 
resurrection of Christ, and was instituted by our Lord 
when He rose from the dead. Then, and not before, 
He told them to go forth, baptizing all nations, or 
Gentiles, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost. He laid down the grand, full, 
Christian revelation of the Godhead, into the confession 
of which the believer is brought by his baptism. 

In the Scriptures just alluded to, we find clearly that, 
where unfigurative language is used, the means of giving 
the new life is said to be the word of God applied by 
the Holy Ghost; and that, when figures are used, water 
is what is chosen. But the sum and substance of the 
entire teaching is, that the testimony of God is the 
divine means of communicating life to the soul when 
applied by the Holy Ghost that is, by faith. And if 
we want still further to know what specially in the 
truth of God is used to quicken those who are dead in 
sins, it is always, more or less, the revelation of Christ. 
My believing that the creature was made by God will 
not quicken my soul. I might believe any facts in the 
Old Testament, and be assured of all the miracles, dis- 
courses, and ways of Jesus in the New, and yet my 
soul might still be unquickened. But believing in 
Christ Himself is a very different thing from not 
doubting things about Him. It supposes that I have, 
more or less, come to an end of myself; that I have 
bowed to the humiliating sentence of Scripture upon. 



CHAPTER II. 67 

my nature, and that I own myself to be only a poor, 
lost, dead creature in the sight of God. 

All this is beyond nature. Some men are proud 
of the affections we share with the brutes, and some 
still more deify themselves because of conscience ; but 
even conscience was acquired by sin. Adam, before 
the fall, could not have told what good and evil was. 
He did not avoid eating the forbidden fruit, because he 
knew it was in itself evil ; nor was there indeed any- 
thing morally wrong in its own nature in eating the 
fruit of that tree. But the command of God made it 
a test a moral test that Adam would have known 
nothing about unless God had told him, " Thou shalt 
not eat." Thus, for the purpose of exercising a child's 
obedience, it might be said, You are not to go out of 
this room: it might have been all right before. It was 
only after eating of the forbidden fruit that Adam ob- 
tained the distinctive and intuitive knowledge of good 
and evil. Thus he knew evil only by being under its 
power. Had it been said to Adam before the fall, 
" Thou shalt not lust or covet," he might have said, 
What does it mean? I do not understand. But the 
moment he listened to the devil, and took the fruit that 
God forbade, there was another element infused into 
Adam's nature that had not been there before. Un- 
fallen, he had body, soul, and spirit; after the fall, he 
acquired what Scripture calls " the flesh." This is not 
mere " flesh and blood :" our Lord had these, (else He 
could not have been truly a man,) but not " the flesh," 
which is the principle of self-will, or liking our own 
way, and not God's. This is sin, and what Scripture - 
means by sin that strong, restless craving to have 
what we wish, whether God wills it or not. Satan 
blinds the soul as to what is God's will, God's mind. 
The love of one's own will was not in the original 
nature of man. " The flesh" was gained through the 
fall, and shows itself in love of our own will and in- 
dependence of God. St. Paul constantly dwells upon it, 



68 EPHESIANS. 

as it is also what St. John ( 1 John iii. 4) really calls 
" lawlessness," rather than, as we have it, " transgression 
of the law." It is the wish for our way in despite of 
God's will and way, whether expressed or implied. It 
is the essence of sin, the sad inheritance of sinners, 
from which, thank God, the believer is delivered. So 
that, when a man receives Christ, he has still his old 
nature, not only body, soul, and spirit, but even " the 
flesh" for this, too, he has still, and it may be, alas ! 
the occasion of many a slip and sorrow, if he be un- 
watchful. Besides these, there is for the believer a new 
nature that he had not before. 

God has given us a new life, and this is just as dis- 
tinct in its workings as the old life is. But God has 
quickened us and given us a new life. Look at a man : 
what is there? Self-love; a little bit of pride here 
and of vanity there; love of one's own will everywhere 
the characteristic of the sinner under all circum- 
stances. Search and see, and you will not have to 
search long before you find that which betrays not 
Christ, but Adam. Look at the history of man, as 
given in Genesis, and there see what he is. He might 
be enticed by his affections. But why allow his affec- 
tions so to work as to carry him into disobedience 
against God ? Had God told him to listen to his wife ? 
He ought to have acted as the head, and have reminded 
her of what God told them. And God's order is never 
forgotten with impunity. So man, having allowed the 
wife to take the lead, soon reaped the bitter conse- 
quences. But in Christ I have the exact contrary. 
What more remarkable feature morally can be than 
this ? A person, who, while He was everything, was 
content to be nothing; who, while He was man here 
below, never acted upon His own independent title; 
who always, under every circumstance, great or small, 
sought and was 'subject to His Father's will. " Wist 
ye not that I must be about my Father's business ?" 
says He, in Luke ii., when only a child. It was not, 



CHAPTER II. 69 

only when He came publicly forward, but He tad the 
consciousness of it always. And if I want to know 
what our Lord was as He grew up to mature years, 
there, too, I find it. And wherever I look at Him, 
this crowning feature shows itself in all times and cir- 
cumstances One that never sought and never did His 
own will. 

There, do you not see, is another sort of man alto- 
gether ? No wonder the Holy Ghost says about Him, 
and Him only, " the Second man." All other men 
were only just so many reproductions of Adam, so 
many sons in his own likeness, after his own image. 
As far as they were men, viewed simply as such, they 
bore that one common character of Adam. But now 
comes forth another man ; and from and in this dead 
and risen stock we become new creatures, having His 
life communicated to us by faith in Him. As" by 
natural birth we have the life of Adam, so we have 
what would naturally flow from such a frightful begin- 
ning the same self-will, weakness, boastfulness, dread 
of God, dishonesty and insolence towards Him, &c. 
Such is man: such, too, is just what I find in my own 
self; and if I read the Bible aright, God will force me 
to own it. When quickening a soul, He always obliges 
it to take up the picture and say, That is myself, black 
as it is. Then, when a person is broken down under 
the awful discovery of sin within, and judges it accord- 
ing to God, this is what Scripture calls repentance. It 
is owning not only what we have done, but what we 
are also. How is it to be remedied ? " That which is 
born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the 
Spirit is spirit." The Spirit has given a new life, and 
in this world, through the knowledge of Christ. Hence 
it is by the word of God ("faith cometh by hearing," 
&c.), not by baptism, or any other institution of the 
Lord, blessed as they are. We must take care that we 
put things in their proper places. It is the word brought 
home by the Holy Ghost that produces faith, and this 



70 EPHESIANS. 

not by mending the first, but by revealing the last, 
Adam. God has come down from heaven to accomplish 
this great purpose to give me this new life to de- 
liver me from sin and self: and how is it done ? It .is 
the Holy Ghost who effects it by the word of Goci, 
which makes Christ known to the soul. 

But here the apostle does not enter into the detail of 
it; he is merely telling out the grand facts: " And you 
hath he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins 
(the worst of all deaths) ; wherein in time past ye walked 
according to the course of this world, according to the 
prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now 
worketh in the children of disobedience." Does it not 
show how active in evil was this kind of death ? ; These 
dead were at the same time walking according to the 
age of this world; which, indeed, was the proof of 
their moral death. They had no desire to shape their 
walk according to God's word. As Job says (chap, 
xxi. 14), " Therefore they say unto God, Depart from 
us ; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways." And 
was not this the condition of our own souls ? Can we 
not remember when it was a painful thing to have to 
meet God about our sins? I must have to do with 
God. And here is the solemnity of it. If I do not 
meet God now about the Saviour, I shall have to meet 
Him about my sins. [And if I despise meeting the 
Saviour about my sins, meet God I must in my sins 
to be lost for ever. You put a sort of honour upon an 
enemy by paying attention to him; but you cannot 
more deeply insult a friend than by paying no heed nor 
notice. So it is as to indifference about Christ. Per- 
haps we try to settle accounts with God once or twice 
a day what a wrong to God and a wrong to my soul ! 
If I have sins upon me and in that condition we all 
are and have been naturally what is to be done ? It 
is easy to say what we have been doing walking " ac- 
cording to the course of this world." This is not 
merely gross things. Supposing that people were all 



CHAPTER II. 71 

as courteous and kind as possible that there were no 
such things as jails and judges, nor convicts punished: 
supposing that men could be reasoned out of their 
wickedness, what would still be the condition of men ? 
" That which is born of the flesh is flesh." Man, as 
such, never can see the kingdom of God. The only 
way by which I can be brought into His kingdom is by 
being born anew, and having that new nature which is 
of Christ and not of Adam. Baptism is the sign of it. 
Paul had already believed on the Lord when Ananias 
said to him, " Arise, and be baptized, and wash away 
thy sins." There is the figure of washing; but the 
only effective means or instrument in the sight of God 
is the blood of Christ. " To him that loveth us and 
washed us from our sins in his own blood." 

The thought, then, of quickening leads the apostle to 
bring out the condition from which they were delivered. 
They were walking according to this world's age ; and 
not only so, but according to the arch-enemy. The 
title, " Prince of the power of the air," was to set forth 
Ms all-permeating "influence. As the air surrounds 
and penetrates everything, so does the devil the realm 
of nature " the spirit that now worketh in the children 
of disobedience." i This was the way they showed that 
they were under his power by their disobedience. 
" Among whom also we all had our conversation in 
times past." Why is it "we?" Why this change 
from " you" to we ? n When addressing the Ephesians, 
who had been Gentiles, he uses the word " ye;" but he 
includes now in this moral sentence, " dead in trespasses 
and sins," Jews as well as Gentiles. When God was 
measuring man by Christ, this was their state not a 
single being that was not dead. And there can be no 
degrees of death. If a man is dead, there is an end of 
him. So that, although, if you look at men morally, 
you may draw distinctions, and say, There is a man 
going farther and faster on the downward way than 
others, yet, if you look deeper still, these distinctions 



72 EPHESIANS. 

vanish, and they are all indiscriminately ruined, yea, 
dead, in the sight of God. So he says, as proving this, 
"Among whom also we all had our conversation in 
times past in the lusts of our flesh, doing the desires 
of the flesh and of the thoughts." No matter who we 
were, or what, he calls it ail " the lusts of our flesh." 
But some of them might have been philosophers, and 
some benevolent and moral, some gross people living in 
open and atrocious wickedness. But take the best of 
them, and judge them by this : was it their life-breath 
and governing motive to do the will of God ? Not at 
all. They might have been gratifying their own kindly 
nature ; but God was not in their thoughts ; or it was 
a kind of bribing God to let them off. For in heathen- 
ism there was a tradition that a sacrifice was necessary ; 
but it was corrupted, and degraded, and perverted in all 
sorts of ways. 

Here, then, we have the common condition in which 
all, Jews and Gentiles, were by nature. Yet he distin- 
guishes " the desires . (or wills) of the flesh and the 
thoughts," by which he means the grosser tendencies, 
and the more refined, intellectual workings. Suppos- 
ing a man devoting himself to science, and making 
it his object, is this to do the will of God? Nay, 
but rather the indulgence of the desires of the mind, 
and as thoroughly self as with- others who might 
be given up to the coarser appetites of nature. The 
grand thing is, that I have no right to myself I 
belong to another. Am I doing His will? Then, 
when we enter the relationships of faith, we are not 
merely the Lord's creatures, responsible to do His 
bidding as a natural duty, but bought with the blood 
of Christ, and alive in Him from the dead, that we 
should henceforth live, not to ourselves, but to Him 
who died for us and rose again. Let it be the choicest 
men that the world can boast of: this is their state 
" by nature the children of wrath even as others." 
What a word ! Even the Jews, who had the light of 



CHAPTER II. 73 

God as far as outward light was concerned, were "by 
nature" the children of wrath, as much as the degraded, 
idolatrous, stock-and-stone-worshipping Gentiles. So 
that there can be no more complete annihilation of all 
man's religious privilege as well as creature-standing, 
than what we have in this verse. It is not only that 
people have done wrong, but they were by nature the 
children of wrath. God did not make man so : it was 
man who chose the path of disobedience, who gave up 
God for the devil. He did not, of course, intend this; 
for Satan comes in as an angel of righteousness ; but 
however he may work, this is the one result to which 
all are reduced without exception " by nature children 
of wrath." And what does God? For there is the 
absolute necessity that God should act in order to bring 
in one ray of light into the midst of this hopeless wreck 
and ruin. But people will not believe that they are 
ruined ; they will think that it is a good world after all, 
and a state of things God has given man to cultivate, 
forgetting that God " drove out the man," and that all 
the inventions of man are only expedients to cover his 
nakedness, and to lead him to overlook that he is an 
exile from Paradise. Of course these inventions we 
can use, if we do not abuse them. But let us bear in 
mind that, as Christians, our life, our home, is not 
here; we belong to another scene, where Christ is. 
We are not of the world ; we are purchased to do God's 
will, sanctified to obedience, to the same kind of obe- ' 
dience as our Lord's. Do we weigh and apply this 
earnestly, assiduously, conscientiously, within the 
bosom of the family of God, or wherever we may be 
placed ? In our Lord was life, and He was ever happy 
in the consciousness of His Father's love. The be- 
liever, too, has life in Him, and is loved as He was 
loved. God may use the ten commandments to crush 
a man in the flesh ; but as a believer, he is called to 
obey as Christ obeyed, to walk as He walked; for He 
. left us an example that we should follow His steps. 



74 EPHESIANS. 

Here, then, we have this mighty intervention of 
God, who, " rich in mercy, because of his great love 
wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, 
hath quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye 
are saved) ; and hath raised us up together, and made 
us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; . 
that in the ages to come he might show the exceeding 
riches of his grace in kindness upon us through Christ 
Jesus." Not only are we quickened this would have 
been true, looking at any saint that ever lived on the 
face of the earth. But could you have said that all 
were raised up together with Christ? seated in hea- 
venly places in Christ Jesus ? Is it not a fuller state- 
ment of the blessing that belongs to us as Christians 
now, which could not be predicated of any till the 
resurrection and ascension of Christ were facts ? Our 
Lord says, " I am come that ye might have life, and 
that ye might have it more abundantly." Why does 
He draw the distinction between life, and life " more 
abundantly ?" 

On what principle, then, is it that Christ quickens 
at all? Because in Him, the Son, is life; and this 
life becomes the portion of the believer in Him. 
" For the hour is coming and now is, when the dead 
shall hear the voice of the Son of God and they that 
hear shall live." He was always the source of life 
to the soul, no matter when or where, though it was, 
of course, only in virtue of foreseen redemption that 
sinful men could receive it. Before His death and 
resurrection, however, it was simply life. But our 
Lord added, " and I will give it more abundantly." 
The disciples who then surrounded Him already had 
life because they believed in Him. But when our Lord 
rose from the dead, the first time He appeared among 
the disciples, He breathed upon them and said, " Re- 
ceive ye the Holy Ghost." What was this ? The - 
Spirit as the power of life more abundantly (not as 
gift yet). He gave them life while He was here, and 



CHAPTER II. 75 

when risen He imparted it more abundantly, life in 
resurrection. 

What is the difference, people may ask, to us? 
Immense. But the difference in the mind of God is 
the main thing and how it hears upon His glory. 
Therefore, whether understanding it or not, I desire to 
bow and bless God, perfectly sure that there is a wise 
and good reason for everything He does and says. "We 
are to be raised by and by from the dead : our bodies 
are still unchanged. The body of the believer decays, 
and crumbles like the unbeliever's, yet he has the resur- 
rection-life of Christ, this life " more abundantly." 
" As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you," was 
not a word merely for the twelve. No doubt they had 
a mission that none of us has. But while this is true, 
and .none now can be put on a level with them as 
aposwes, yet at the same time I maintain that they also 
had administrative functions, apart from their special 
apostolic character, and in those, not in this, they have 
successors. Our Lord met, on that day when He rose, 
" the disciples," which embraces a far wider thought. 
fit was the then Christian company, all that were there, 
whether men or women, if they were disciples. It was 
upon these He breathed. They were all to have His 
more abundant life. The effect is, that all are brought 
into liberty. (Comp. Eom. viii. 1, 2.) 

I do not enter farther into the very blessed accom- 
paniments of this new life, but only remark that, 'as to 
being raised and sitting together in heavenly places in 
Christ Jesus, all is spoken of as being now true of the 
believer. There is no such mystical notion meant by 
this as that we are not on earth or in our bodies here. 
Everything in Scripture is the very reverse of extrava- 
gance. Mysticism is the devil's imitation of God's 
mysteries, and the mere mist of men's fancies. " Mys- 
tery" in Scripture means nothing vague, but truth the 
human intellect would never discover, which, when pre- 
sented by the Holy Ghost to the new nature, is perfectly 



76 EPHESIANS. 

intelligible. Some things are of a profounder character 
than others, and there may be that which is beyond all 
knowledge, as, for instance, the nature of the Son of 
God. " No man knoweth the Son but the Father;" and 
it is not said of the Son, " he to whom the Father shall 
reveal Him." The Father maintains with holy jealousy 
the inscrutable glory of the person of His Son. But 
apart from this, the mysteries of Scripture are truths 
once locked up but now revealed and intended to be" 
known, and in fact the portion and joy of the believer. 

"We have already glanced at the strong contrast 
drawn between man's condition in the first three verses, 
and the mighty intervention of God's grace that fol- 
lows. We have seen the Gentile brought out in the 
dark portrait of abject moral corruption and senseless 
idolatry, the Holy Spirit laying everything bare in a 
few mighty touches. They were " dead in trespasses 
and sins," thoroughly subject to the prince of this 
world. They were merely pursuing the course of this 
age, children of disobedience, without reference to God 
in their ways. There is no thought of bringi-ng out in 
detail the frightful forms of human impiety, or the 
depravity and degradation into which man has fallen 
under Satan's instigation. Nevertheless we have a far 
deeper view of the hopelessly evil condition of man 
here, than even when all the details of impurity, super- 
stition, and rebellion are entered into at full length. 
In the word of God, how little the energy depends on 
seeming strength of language ! Still less is it what 
we find with men when they wish to put a thing 
forcibly. Of violent, exaggerated expression there is 
nothing in Scripture. 

We have simply (and what a fact it is!) God Himself 
sounding the condition of man, no longer looking at the 
heart as if it were a question of restraining its desires, 
which He did under the law. But now it is the utter 
death of nature in the presence of God the power of 



CHAPTER II. 77 

Batan substituted instead of God's government man 
himself evidently and hopelessly ruined. . But into this 
scene -of death God enters God who is rich in mercy. 
And the great love wherewith He loved us is just 
alluded to as the spring of all that He has done. " God, 
who is rich in mercy, because of his great love where- 
with he loved us, even, when we were dead in sins" 
" we, 1 " 1 whether Jews or Gentiles, but more particularly 
referring to the Jew here. At least he had contrasted 
the two in verses 2, 3. In verse 5 he may possibly 
be bringing them both in ; but if any be particularly 
alluded to, it is the Jew, for he is as dead as the Gen- 
tile there is no difference as to this. " Even when we 
were dead in sins, [God] hath quickened us together 
with Christ (by grace are ye saved), and hath raised us 
up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places 
in Christ Jesus." Having already entered into the 
general subject of regeneration, I would only just add, 
that although, now that Christianity is divulged, we 
have regeneration going on at least as much as ever, 
we have in fact the Holy Ghost stamping upon the 
regeneration of the present time a deeper character. 
For it is not only that there is life given, or souls 
born again, but they are quickened together with Christ. 
Language like this could not have been used before 
Christ's death and resurrection. There can be no hesi- 
tation, that all the life which any saint ever received 
from the beginning of the world, was of and through 
Christ. " In him was life." He is the eternal life 
that was with the Father, and other life there is none 
for a sinner. There was a tree of life before man fell ; 
not only a tree of the knowledge of good and evil, but a 
tree of life. . But this was only creature-life, that might 
have sustained an innocent creature to the end. But 
what, if the creature fell ? What, when Adam became 
a sinful man? Would the tree of life avail for him 
then ? Not for a moment. " So he drove out the man." 
God would not permit .that man should touch the mere 



78 EPHESIANS. 

natural tree of life. For supposing he had eaten of it 
after sin, what would have resulted ? Only a perpetu- 
ation of evil in a wretched, remediless condition of sin 
an eternal existence in a condition alienated from God, 
from which there was no escape. So that, although 
death came in as the sentence upon a guilty man, there 
is in a sense mercy in it, now that man is born into a 
sinful world, and is subject to every kind of misery, 
which an enemy has brought in, and which, if you look 
at death as a part of it, may be the just sentence of 
God upon man's iniquity. But all this is laid hold of 
by Satan, and turned to his purposes, miugled with a 
bad conscience, on which Satan works, so that a man is 
filled with dread and horror of God. From this God, 
by presenting Christ, delivers the soul. It is not only 
that the soul finds a life that is suited to its every need ; 
it is not at all a mere perpetuating one's existence in 
misery ; but life in Christ ensures deliverance out of evil 
and all its effects and curse, flowing from God in His 
grace, founded upon holiness ; and a holy blessedness in 
the presence of God is in that same Christ who brings 
in this life. There is also God recovered by the soul, as 
surely as He recovers it to Himself. It was not only 
that man by sin lost natural life, but he lost God ; and 
it is not only that Christ gives me now a new and 
better life than- the tree of life could give, but He gives 
me God ; He brings me to God and puts me in the pre- 
sence of God. He makes known God to my soul, and 
gives me to be sure of His love, of His interest in me, 
of His deep pity and even complacency ; for God cannot 
only love in a natural way, but with a love of compla- 
cency and special relationship. 

This, then, is what we find in Christ; and although 
life could be spoken of in connection with all the Old 
Testament saints ere Christ died and rose, still I doubt 
much that the Spirit of God could speak of the life 
which they received, as being life with Christ. Life 
by and in Christ it could not but be; but quickening 



CHAPTER II. 79 

with Christ goes' a great deal farther. And this is 
what we have now. For God points us to Christ under 
the hurden of our sins, under the whole consequences 
of that which my nature deserved because of its dis- 
tance and enmity to God its spirit of disobedience and 
self-will. All the evil was charged upon Him, and He 
was treated as if He were it all ; as if He, suffering 
for us on the cross, had the entire sum and substance 
of the evil of human nature in Hjs own person. Of 
course, had there been a single particle of it in Himself, 
He could not have atoned for others the judgment of 
God must have been upon it; but the total absence of 
it in His own person was what indicated His perfect 
fitness to be the victim. God was dealing with the 
whole height and length and depth and breadth of sin 
in the person of Christ upon the cross. But God raised 
up that same blessed One who went down under the wrath 
of God, and who, when He had tasted what it was to 
be forsaken and God's face hid from Him, did not and 
could not depart from this life without saying, " Father, 
into thy hands I commend my spirit," which showed 
the perfect confidence of His heart and delight in God. 
" Our fathers trusted in thee .... they cried unto thee 
and were delivered." But He could not be heard till 
the full trial was closed. He was only heard from the 
horns of the unicorn. He must go through it all - 
unutterable sorrow and anguish, intolerable to all but 
Him; and yet to Him, what was it not? all the wrath 
of God if the deliverance was to be complete and ac- 
cording to God. But He has done so ; and He lets us 
know, in -departing from the scene, that however He 
might suffer, yet His heart truly rested in God ; and 
He confessed unwaveringly, not only that God con- 
tinued holy; but that the Father was full of love. 
" Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit." 

But now we have another thing altogether God 
interposing to deliver to the uttermost. He would not 
say that He quickened Christ absolutely. It is always 



80 EPHESIANS. 

qualified somehow, "because Christ was life 
He was the eternal life with the Father, in due time 
manifested on the earth ; and how say anything that 
would imply that He owed His life to another ? He 
might say that, as man put to death in the flesh, He 
was quickened of the Spirit, but' His intrinsic personal 
glory abides, which indeed gave its value to the whole 
extent of His humiliation and suffering unto death. 
The Father, too, gave Him as a man to have life in 
Himself. This was the perfection of Christ here 
below : He would not take it as His own right ; He 
would not speak a word nor do a work that He had 
not heard from and in God. He was the perfectly 
dependent man. The same Gospel that dwells, as none 
other does, on His divine glory, shows us also His ab- 
solute dependence on God. On the other hand, how 
sweet to see in Scripture how God the Father watches 
over the glory of Christ ! He would not say one word 
that could in any way impair the dignity of His Son. 

Here, therefore, it is said, He hath " quickened us 
together with Christ !" It was we that needed the life. 
Christ might have gone down into death, hut He has 
quickened us together with Him. Christ had died in 
a more solemn manner than any mere man could die. 
He was emphatically the Holy One of God, the only 
holy man, and yet even so had He died. Of course, 
no unholy one could die as He died. He knew what 
it was to taste death in all its bitterness, God's judg- 
ment and wrath, as none other could; and yet He was 
one who felt it so much the more because He was essen- 
tially in the bosom of the Father. But this blessed 
One having gone down thoroughly under death as the 
judgment of God upon our nature and our sins, thereon 
ensues the mighty power of God, who has quickened us 
together with Christ. In a word, the life is in the most 
intimate association with Christ, and we are in union 
with Christ Himself, put to death in the flesh, but now 
quickened by the Spirit. As to the life that He had 



CHAPTER IT. 81 

here below, it was given up and gone ; and now He rises 
in a new condition of life, in resurrection. It is therefore 
immediately added that God not only quickened us to- 
gether with Christ, but raised us up together ; and 
more than this, He made us sit together in heavenly 
places in Christ Jesus. Thus the full value that belongs 
to life, as it is now in Christ, is also given to us ; so 
that we can be spoken of, even while we are in this 
world, according to the complete blessedness of life as it 
is now seen in Christ at the right hand of God. 

Let us consider what such a marvellous thought as 
this involves * what it brings us into association with. 
We know what our old nature loves, and does, and is ; 
we know too well what the life, or rather the death, of 
Adam, dragged us into. What have we derived from 
our first father what have we deserved and brought on 
ourselves, but sin, sorrow, suffering, sickness, death, a 
bad conscience, and a fearful looking for of judgment? 
All these things we have as the workings and effects of 
that existence which we have inherited, our sad heirloom 
from the first man. But now comes the new and 
supernatural source of life in the Second Man; and 
where shall we best know its character ? Let us look 
up at Christ. How does God the Father regard Him ? 
Is He delighted in Him? He was always so; and 
surely never more than when He traced Christ's steps 
as He walked a Man among men. But there was the 
terrible question of sin our sin. Is it an unsettled 
question now Ij Or has Christ in very deed answered it 
for ever in the cross ? Yes, it is the very thing that 
has given occasion for God to show His love as nothing 
else could. How should I have known how much God 
loves me if I had not had such depth of need as an 
enemy of God, fathomless save to His saving mercy in 
Christ? I do not say it to lighten the sin of my 
enmity to God, nor to allow the notion that there was 
or could be the smallest title to the favour of God. 
But my hopeless evil becomes a measure of the depth 



82 EPHESIANS. 

of His love; and this because it brings Christ into 
the scene, yea, Christ as a Eedeemer and Saviour on 
God's part Christ the infinite gift of God's grace 
Christ, who would be turned aside by nothing Christ, 
who endured everything from man, Satan, and God's 
righteous judgment, that we might be saved after a 
divine sort. And so in truth we are. And what do 
we not owe the Saviour .and the God who gave Him ? 
But what did not Christ bear ? Our frightful ruin and 
sin has just brought out what God is in His great love 
to us, and what Christ is in His value, and the mighty 
power of the life in which He is risen and gone up, 
seated, and ourselves in Him, in heavenly places. '' Do. 
you still ask what the character of the life is that the 
Christian possesses now ? Look at Christ, and see how 
precious He is to God how He cannot have the 
Blessed One, who is the full expression of that life, too 
near Himself. He has raised Him up and set Him at 
His own right hand in the heavenly places. In Ephe- 
sians ii. it is simply " made us sit together in heavenly 
places in Christ Jesus." It is not added here, as in 
Ephesians i., " at his own right hand." I am not 
aware that such words are ever said about the children 
of God, nor do I think they could be. Do they not 
rather seem to be the personal place of Christ? But it 
is said " in the heavenly places," because it is to them, 
and not to the earth, that we belong. Israel, as such, in 
their best days, belonged to the earth (as did we, far off, 
in our worst) ; but now it is not only that our names are 
written in heaven, though that very expression shows 
the wonderful love of God which destines and enrolls us 
to be above which connects us with heaven while we 
are upon the earth : all that is true ; but we have much 
more in Ephesians. There we find that, in virtue of 
our union with Christ, we are said to be not only raised 
with Him, but seated with Him in heavenly places. 
In a word, what is said of Christ Himself is true by 
grace of us, only excepting what may be personal in 



CHAPTER II. 83 

Him as God the Son, or used of the Lord in a neces- 
sarily pre-eminent degree. For after all there is a 
distinction between the Head and the body, even as 
such ; though, on the other hand the very difference 
shows the closest possible association: we are His fulness 
or complement. 

We learn, then, from this that we have Christ's own 
title while we are in this world nay, more than that, 
Christ's own life is ours, by virtue of which we are said 
to be quickened with Him, yea, raised and seated in 
Him in heavenly places. But let us carefully bear in 
mind that all this is never said of any in purpose or 
election, but only where faith exists. It is not appli- 
cable to us before we believe : it would not be true of 
any person before there is positive, living association 
with Christ. What is commonly called Calvinistic~ 
theology, much truth as it embodies, is totally false on 
this head. One of its main features is the endeavour 
to make out that, the love of God being from everlast- 
ing to everlasting, our relationship is always precisely 
the same; that because God has the purpose of making 
us His children, He always regards us as His children; 
that if a man be elect, supposing him still an infidel 
or a blasphemer, he is as much a son of God as when 
he is regenerate of the Holy Ghost and walking in the 
ways of God. It maintains that God loves him with 
exactly the same love (while he is, for example, a sot 
or a swearer) as afterwards. What among believers 
can be conceived more dishonouring to God and des- 
tructive to man than this doctrine ? Manifestly the 
apostle is speaking here, not of persons elect merely, 
though, of "course, they were elect, but quickened. That 
is, they had actually life. + Not only was there a pur- 
pose of God about them, but they were then living to 
God as those who had faith in Christ. ' You could not 
say that a man has life before he has faith. , It is the 
reception of Christ by the Holy Ghost which, on the 
one side, is called faith, and on the other, life. You 



84 EPHESIANS. 

could not rightly- put one before the other. If you 
could scarcely say that faith was before life, certainly 
life is not before faith. 'The first exercise of faith is 
the first also of life. It is the power of the Spirit of 
God presenting Christ to the soul. Hence it is said, 
" The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall 
hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear 
shall live." The living is there, if there be any differ- 
ence at all, the effect of hearing, rather than the hearing 
the effect of living. This is very important ; because 
none can affirm that persons are quickened with Christ 
until they are here to be called ; and it is impossible to 
say that they have life till they have heard the voice of 
the Son of God. The first proof that a man is a sheep 
is that he hears the good Shepherd's voice. He is not 
thrown on certain (or rather uncertain) indications, of _ 
life within himself, but on the grand, objective test 
and evidence which God demands not merely what I 
am doing, or not doing (the law asked this), but whether 
I receive and rest on the Son of God. Am I drawn 
away from all the sounds of the world ? and is His voice 
attracting my soul ? As sure as this is so, you 
have life. " He that believeth hath everlasting life." 
" He that hath the Son hath life." I prove that I 
have it by the very simple, sure, and blessed fact that 
I hear the voice of the Son of God. Thus only I have 
life then only am I assured of being quickened and 
raised with Christ. Mark, it is association with Christ 
after He had gone under death for our sins, which is 
the Christian character of quickening. We are also 
said to be seated in heavenly places, because we have the 
life of Christ who is there, and we are spoken of ac- 
cording to the place which He has entered who is our 
life. So that Scripture does not merely mean that we 
are so in God's decree or thought, when it says that He 
has raised us up and made us sit together in heavenly 
places. The reference is not to our future resurrection, 
but expressly to the present association of the believer 



CHAPTER II. 6*0 

by virtue of union with Christ, who is in the presence 
of God. And, in alluding to this first part of it, the 
apostle says, " By grace ye are saved." This is the 
source of all the blessing. Hence the expression is 
very strong. For what the form of the word implies 
is that the salvation was complete, and that they 
were now enjoying its present- result. Salvation* in 
Scripture is not always thus treated : there are whole 
Epistles where it is never so spoken of. Thus, parti- 
cularly in Philippians, salvation is regarded as a 
future thing as not complete till we see Christ in 
glory. Salvation,- there, is a solemn but not precarious 
process, which is now going on, because it is plain that 
we are not with Christ in glory, out in our natural bodies. 
And accordingly Christ is therein seen as a Saviour, 
not merely because He died and rose, but because He 
is coming back for my full deliverance and joy. This 
explains the meaning of the text which has perplexed 
some so much " work out your own. salvation with 
fear and trembling;" because, in the sense intended 
there, we shall only get salvation when we are glorified 
with Christ. Meanwhile, we are working it out with 
fear and trembling, remembering that Satan hates us 
because we are to be in glory with Christ. We are 
viewed as persons in this world, who know that there is 
not the slightest doubt that we are to have the prize, 
but we have to fight and. run for it, though we ought 
to hold fast the assurance that we shall have it when 
we see Christ coming for us from on high. 

But when we take up the language of the Ephesian 
Epistle, all is different. There salvation is regarded as 
an absolutely past thing : " By grace ye are saved" 
not merely that it is going on, and is to be completed 
by ,and by ; but we are saved and cannot in Christ be 
more so than we are. Whereas, according to Philip- 
pians, Paul himself had not his salvation yet: " not as 
though I had already attained, either were already 
perfect." The perfection there spoken of entirely and 



86 EFHESIANS. 

solely refers to the time when we shall be changed into 
the glorious likeness of Christ; then, not before, we 
shall be saved. If you apply the same sense of salvation 
to both Epistles, you make the doctrine contradictory. 
Take again the Epistle to the Hebrews. There, too,' 
salvation is always represented as a future thing. 
" Wherefore," it is said, " he is able to save them to 
the uttermost that come unto God by him." God's 
people are meant, not the unconverted, as coming unto 
God by Christ. For whom is He a priest ? For the 
believer only. Thus it is the saint that requires to be 
saved in the Epistle to the Hebrews ; because salvation 
there applies to all the difficulties of our wilderness- 
journey. The whole doctrine is founded on the type 
that we are now, like Israel of old, going through the 
desert, and have not yet entered into Canaan ; whereas, 
the characteristic teaching of the Ephesians is that 
Christ has gone into Canaan, and that we are in Him 
there. It is because we are occupied with a part of 
the word of God and not the whole, because we see 
one truth strongly and not the truth generally, that 
we get confused and faulty views which lead to wrong 
practice. 

The reason of these differences is most interesting. 
You have exactly in each epistle what is suited to its 
own character. In Ephesians the revelationjs not of 
Christ as one interceding for us before God: this we__ 
have in Hebrews. Why is He a priest ? That He may 
have compassion on the ignorant, and on them whic!T~~~ 
are out of the way. This is exactly, as we journey heriT^ 
below, our danger: we are ignorant, and always exposed 
to the temptation of slipping aside through an evil heart_ 
of unbelief. Therefore we need the Epistle to the He- 
brews. The doctrine of Ephesians would not of itself~ 
suffice to meet me in my weakness, difficulties, and sor- 
rows. . Supposing I had wandered, what is there to recall 
and comfort my soul in Ephesians ? There I read,. " that 
we should be holy and without blame before him -in 



CHAPTER II. 87 

love." Nay, but I have gone astray, and I cannot get 
any relief to my anguish thence. I may try to slay 
my heart on God's election and high counsels, but, if I 
have a tender conscience, these alone will make me 
more miserable. If God really loved me so much, how 
comes it (the heart will reason) that I should so dis- 
honour Him? In Hebrews I find nothing at all 
about my sitting in heavenly places, but Christ at the 
right hand of God, and pleading for me, after He had 
by Himself purged my sins. The very first chapter 
starts with the glorious truth that Christ took His 
seat on high only when He could go there on the 
ground that He had completely blotted out our sins, 
and this " by Himself," i. e., to the exclusion of all 
other help. It was His own task, and He has accom- 
plished it, and would not rest even in that, to Him, 
familiar glory, save on this ground. Therein we have 
a most sure foundation. But although we have the 
purging of sins through Christ, we < are in a place of 
temptation where, through ignorance, and weakness, 
and a thousand things that may arise, we are in con- 
stant peril of turning aside and slipping. What is to 
become of us then ? What is to sustain and carry us 
through ? God reveals the blessed Priest who cares 
for the soul One who has the full confidence of God 
the Father-^-who has given the most entire satisfaction 
to Him One who is seated at the right hand of God, 
and who there is unceasingly occupied with our need, on 
the ground that we belong to God and are already 
redeemed, and have no more conscience of sin. We 
can perhaps hardly make out how it is that persons who 
are so blessed of God should be so weak and wretched ; 
so little like Him who, at His own cost, has bought 
and secured us our blessing. But faith receives and 
asks of God what He intends to be our strength and 
comfort in the midst of our weakness and dangers. 
His answer is,^ that Christ is there to plead our cause, 
as surely as the Spirit is here to render us sensible of 



88 EPHESIANS: 

it. And it is through Christ's intercession at the right 
hand of God that we are brought to feel our need and 
failure. For we never judge it, without getting moral 
blessing through that judgment. All power of Christ 
resting on us is in proportion to the depth of the moral 
estimate produced in our souls by the Spirit of God in. 
answer to the intercession of Christ ; and it is part of 
Christ's intercession for us that we are made to feel, 
when we have in mind and fact gone astray. In 
Hebrews, salvation could not be spoken of as a past 
thing. We know that we shall be fully saved, and 
that Christ is coming for it. But although it is ap- 
pointed unto men to die, it is not necessarily so for the 
saint. We know that they may never fall asleep, as 
for certain they will never be judged, though all they 
have done will be surely manifested before the judg- 
ment-seat of Christ. But He has gone through death 
for them, and therefore there is no necessity that they 
should die; and He has endured judgment as none 
other could, and we have His own word for it that into 
judgment, at any rate, we shall never come. He that be- 
lieves on the Son of God " hath everlasting life, and shall 
not come into judgment." (John v.) The consequence 
is, that though we look for Him to come, we know that 
when He does appear the second time, it will be with- 
out sin unto salvation. He has so perfectly put away 
sin by the sacrifice of Himself, that when He is thus 
seen the second time by them that look for Him, it will 
be " without sin" (apart from all question of sin, as far 
as they are concerned), " unto salvation," and not unto 
judgment. Salvation and judgment are the two things 
above all others most in contrast. You cannot have 
judgment and salvation exercised upon the same indi- 
vidual. In Hebrews, then, you have salvation connected 
with our Lord's appearing the second time. 

In Ephesians, on the contrary, we are saved already, 
and there Christ's return to receive His people is not 
throughout referred to. In the Epistles where salvation 



CHAPTEE II. 89 

\ 

is said to be consummated by and by, there we have 
Christ coming to finish it. In Philippians he says, 
" Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we 
look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall 
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like 
unto his glorious body, according to the working 
whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto him- 
self." There we have our Lord changing this body of 
humiliation into the likeness of His glorious body, 
proving Himself to be the Saviour; because it is not a 
partial deliverance, bul a complete salvation for the 
whole man. But in Ephesians, where our Lord's com- 
ing is never introduced, this links itself with the fact 
that salvation is already supposed to be an accomplished 
fact, which we now enjoy. This is a way of looking at 
salvation rare in Scripture : it is generally looked at as 
something we have before us. People confound salva- 
tion with justification or reconciliation to God; but in 
Romans the evident distinction is drawn " If, when 
we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the 
death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall 
be saved by his life." Thus, we have the reconcilia- 
tion, but not the salvation, in the sense spoken of there. 
" We shall be saved." He is living for us, and, as a 
consequence, we are being saved. The salvation is 
going on ; and when Christ comes again in glory, then 
salvation will be complete. Hence, in Romans xiii. 
we have the doctrine applied again: " Now is our 
salvation nearer than when we believed," We have not 
got it yet; but it is nearer; and we shall have it all 
perfectly by and by. Before we believed, we were 
enemies and lost ; then, believing, we were reconciled to 
God by the death of His Son. Now He lives for us; 
and soon He will come again for us, and then all will 
be complete. 

Again, take Corinthians, and yon will find the same 
teaching there. v Salvation is not regarded there as com- 
plete. Hence the apostle says that he is keeping under 



90 EPHESIANS. 

his body and bringing it into subjection. He will not 
allow any evil lust to gain the mastery over him. He 
might preach to all the world; but if evil got the upper 
hand of him, how could he be saved himself? He puts 
it iu the strongest possible way of his own case ; and 
shows that preaching (of whichjsome apparently thought 
more than of Christ) has nothing to do with a man's 
being saved, but life in Christ; for the grace of Christ 
manifests itself in holy subjection to God and self- 
judgment of evil. These are the inseparable conse- 
quences of having the life of 'Christ by the power of 
- the Holy Ghost in the soul. " I keep under my body," 
says he, " lest that by any means, when I have preached 
to others, I myself should be a castaway." This last 
word I take in the strongest, and, indeed, the only 
scriptural, sense i.e., of reprobate. A castaway in 
the New Testament means not merely that a man was 
going to lose something, but to lose his own soul and 
lose Christ. There are no instances in the Epistles 
where the word is used in a modified sense: it inva- 
riably means lost for ever ; and it is neither faith nor 
intelligence to modify its force. It was not that Paul 
had any fear of being lost ; but he transfers the case to 
himself to make it more energetic, supposing that he 
were to renounce Christ and holiness. What is the 
consequence? > He might have been ever such a preacher, 
and yet be a castaway ; but no man that ever was regene- 
rate could be a castaway ; and so he does not say, Though 
I were born of God, I might be a castaway. Such a 
thing could not and ought not to be supposed. But he 
does illustrate most seriously what, alas! has been far 
too common, that a man might preach to others and be a 
reprobate. "We know that one of the apostles preached 
and wrought miracles; but the Lord never knew him. 

This will show the importance of leaving room for 
salvation in every way that Scripture looks at it. In 
the largest part of Scripture it is not regarded after 
the Ephesian manner, 'but in the way I have been de- 



CHAPTER II. 91 

scribing in Komans, &c. No question is fairly raised 
of falling away when the apostle speaks of salvation in 
this sense; but the fact is, that all the result of the 
blessing all the fulness of the deliverance, is not yet 
our portion. And who can say that it is ? Here we 
are suffering still : then we shall be out of the scene of 
temptation altogether. In Ephesians, when looking at 
the character of our life, he says, it is entirely outside 
all danger, all temptation, and everything of the sort. 
" By grace ye are saved." By this he means that we 
bave been and are saved ; that is, we have the present 
enjoyment of that which is already past and complete 
before God. It is a fact accomplished, because it is in 
Christ, and everything here is regarded as being in 
Christ, as, for instance, our peace. Hence He is called 
" our peace" further on. Hence, too, so truly is the 
salvation viewed as being in Christ, that, the Saviour 
being seated on high, we are said to be (not in process 
of salvation, but) completely saved, so as to need nothing 
more as far as this is concerned. In full accordance 
with this it was added, that God " hath raised us up 
together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in 
Christ Jesus ; that in the ages to come he might show 
the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward 
us through Christ Jesus." What plainer than the com- 
pleteness of the salvation ? How manifestly it has a 
character of association with Christ, that is entirely be-r 
yond all human conception ! It is easy to conceive that 
such a blessedness might be by and by ; but the won- 
derful thing is, that this could be predicated of poor, 
weak Christians in the world now. If we dwell much 
upon human things, they become cheap and common, 
and we cease to wonder ; but with this glorious work of 
God in His beloved Son, the more we think of it, the 
more we stand amazed before it. Observe, tooj it is for 
this very purpose : " that in the ages to come he might 
show the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness 
toward us through Christ Jesus." That is, it is not 



92 EPHESIANS. 

merely God looking at us, and giving us what we need, 
but God acting for the indulgence of His own affections 
through His Son. God says, as it were, I want to show 
what I arn, not merely to supply what you want. Thus 
it is God rising up to the height of His own>goodness. 
and acting from what He is, entirely irrespective of what 
we are, save that we become the occasion for God to show 
His matchless love ; and this, not merely now, but " in 
the ages to come," or, as I suppose, for unlimited time.- 
Nor is this all. There is a fresh guard against cer- 
tain misconceptions by taking up or repeating the 
expression, " For by grace are ye saved," with the addi- 
tion of " through faith," a strong confirmation of what 
has been already said. We are not saved by the electing 
purpose of God, true and blessed as it is, but through 
faith in our hearts, through that divine persuasion 
which the Holy Ghost works in the heart of a man once 
an unbeliever. " By grace are ye saved through faith." 
There is no such thing as God introducing one into the 
relationship of a child without the action of his heart and 
conscience. The Holy Ghost gives such a man to feel 
his own condition as seen of God and yet know what 
God is toward him in Christ. A cold parchment-deed, 
mechanical salvation there is not, any more than such a 
change of the old nature as could be a ground of hope 
toward God. But if human feeling cannot be trusted, 
neither can ever so orthodox a recognition of God's 
decrees. When God speaks in and of His Son, it is a 
real thing, and he who hears must more or less deeply 
Lave the consciousness of its solemnity. He is no longer 
unwilling and indifferent to Christ. He may feel sin 
and hate himself as he never did, just because he is under 
the hand of God and under the teaching of God. Thus 
the very thing that you bring to prove that you are 
not one of God's own, is rather a proof that you are. 
If you were dead to God, would you feel what grieves 
Him? It is when Christ has begun to dawn on the soul 
that you begin to realize that you have been lying in all 



CHAPTER II. 93 

that is dark! and loathsome, though a glimmer of hope may 
break through the clouds. You are seriously conscious 
of evil things to which you were insensible before. This 
is an effect of God's mighty and gracious operation ; 
but there is no such thing as life without faith or with 
unconsciousness. There will always be something that 
awakens new thoughts and feelings about God, a fear 
and a desire after God, a horror of sin, and a hatred of 
self. All these things and more will pass through the 
spirit of him that is born of God, and what produces 
all these feelings by the Spirit of God is Christ nothing 
else will. Otherwise a man in vain attends a church 
or chapel going to the best or the worst testimony; 
but he is there on this principle he thinks it is his 
duty to 1 attend perhaps every day it is the notion of 
a religious service which he thinks he ought to pay to 
God, and that, if he does it diligently, God will remem- 
ber him on his death-bed and in the day of judgment. 
Such is one part of the duty man pays in the hope of 
escaping hell. But all this goes on the ground of man's 
putting God under a kind of obligation to himself. Man 
is doing something because of which he thinks God 
ought to show him mercy. What can more flagrantly 
deny both sin and God's grace ? Now, it is " by grace 
ye are saved, through faith." And the meaning of 
being saved by grace is by what God is toward me in 
His Son, apart from a single thing deserving it in me. 
Are you willing to trust your salvation to God only, ia- 
His beloved Son ? This is faith. " By grace we are 
saved through faith. If I mingle a particle of my 
own, it is properly neither grace nor faith ; for faith re- 
nounces self for Christ, and grace is God's pure favour 
to me a sinner on the cross. When I listen to Christ, 
then the word of God begins to deal with everything 
in me that is selfish and contrary to God, and I must 
not attempt to modify or accommodate the word of God 
to my own thoughts, and thus to make provision for a 
little indulgence of the flesh. 



94 EPHESIANS. 

I maintain, therefore, that the salvation spoken of in 
Ephesians is already complete for him that believes ; so 
absolute indeed, that none can add anything to it, because 
it would be adding something to Christ, and to what 
Christ has done. And this may not be, cannot be, seeing 
that it is all the free, unmerited, unmingled mercy of 
God. And this is the great thing for the soul. Am I 
able, without question of what I am, or what I hope to 
be, or what I ought to do for God, to trust Him now ? 
Can I rest all that I have been and am upon Christ, 
without any promises or pledges of mine without any 
hope or thought of what I may do, because God might 
take me away in a moment ? Can I rest entirely and 
implicitly in Him ? Think of the case of the dying 
thief, which is a living and notable testimony of salva- 
tion by grace throughout all ages. Others may have a 
work to do afterwards ; but there we have one who was 
an object of grace in the last hours of his life. And there 
is no other way. Had he lived for a thousand years 
afterwards, he would not have been a whit more secure 
by grace than he was then. ! It is of great moment to 
bring our souls to v the touchstone from time to time 
whether we are resting solely upon the grace of God 
toward us, not upon what people call grace in us, i.e., 
our faithfulness toward Him. For this is a common 
notion of grace. They mean a great change that has 
taken place in the heart in respect of God. This, how- 
ever, is not what God calls grace, but what He has 
given gratuitously in the work that Christ has done for 
sin. " By grace are ye saved through faith." The 
Spirit shuts out all thought of man's contributing the 
faith or taking any credit because coming to Christ ; for 
He says immediately after, "And that not of yourselves ; 
it is the gift of God." This probably refers, not only 
to the salvation, but to the faith ; it was all the gift of 
God, and not man's production : " Not of works, lest 
any man should boast." On the contrary, instead of 
being a question of our works, we are God's handiwork, 



CHAPTER II. 95 

the new creation for His own praise. " For we are his 
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, 
which God hath before ordained that we should walk in 
them." There you have a most plain proof that there 
could he no carelessness as to the walk of the believer ; 
but the same verse cuts off all thought that man's 
doing can he the ground or means of salvation. 

Here, then, we have the believer the workmanship 
of God in Christ, and this " unto good works, which 
God hath before ordained that we should walk in them." 
This is a very remarkable expression, and one that we 
cannot too much weigh. It is not the good works of 
the law not those which might seem so in human 
judgment, but an offering of a new character, heavenly 
and of grace, which was in God's mind and all deter- 
mined about us before the scene existed into which we 
are now brought. The same God who had a purpose 
of saying us and blessing us with Christ before the 
world was made, had a certain line of walk, a special 
course of action, in which He expected the recipients of 
such favour to walk. It is -.not the thought of the good 
we ought to do as men, as a means of showing that we 
are willing to obey God under the law. It is not loving 
God, and one's neighbour as oneself simply, but another 
type and display of love altogether. It flows from our 
new relationships, and if it be exercised in loving God 
and loving those around us, it is according to the rich 
love which God Himself has shown us in Christ. It 
is not merely duty, let it be the very highest form of 
obligation. If a man were to walk merely in this, 
though ever so well, he would fall short of what a 
Christian ought to be, and they are not-the "good 
works which God has before ordained that w& -should 
walk in them." The law was brought in by Israel's 
presumption and self-conceit; .it was not something 
that God had before ordained for His people to walk in.. 
Therefore it is said in Komans, that law came in by the 
way (vapeiafaOev). It was a thing that entered inci- 



96 EPHESIANS. 

dentally, as a sort of parenthesis brought in for a special 
but very momentous purpose. And it has done its 
work, and the believer, even if he had been under it, 
is brought clear out of it and made alive to God. He 
has a new husband, and is dead to the old one. But here 
the truth is put in a very beautiful form, in harmony with 
the character of the whole epistle. As the calling and 
the purpose and all that God thought aboiit us were 
before the world was, so even the character of the be- 
liever's walk was ordained before ever we came into the 
world and is in its own nature entirely above it. It is 
a question of our manifesting God aright, as He is now 
displaying Himself. " Be ye followers of God as 
dear children." 

What a wonderful place is this that we are put into! 
We have been created in Christ Jesus for good works, 
which God before prepared that we should walk in 
them. We have a new character of life altogether 
that the law never contemplated, and we have a corres- 
pondingly new character of good works. 

- Here opens a very distinct section of the epistle. It 
is not God's thoughts of grace unfolded, reaching forth 
from before the world's foundation unto the inheritance 
of glory, when all things shall be subjected to Christ, 
the Church being one with Him in His supremacy over 
them all. Neither again is it the means whereby God 
takes up souls that were dead under the power of Satan 
and by nature children of wrath, one as much as another, 
quickening them with Christ, raising them up and 
making them sit together in Him in heavenly places. 
."We have had this in the earlier part of chapter ii. But 
now'we.have the present working of the plans of God 
j in the worlth- - .Chapter i. gave us the counsels of God 
i about them; chapter ii, 1 10, the way in which He 
wrought in them ; but now we have the manner of His 
plans upon the earth. Accordingly, this brings into 
very distinct relief the condition in which man had been, 



CHAPTER II. 97 

before. There had heen already dealings of God here 
below. After the flood, when the whole world had de- 
parted from God, and set up a new form of peculiarly 
malignant evil the worship of false gods, the true 
God called out one man into a place of separation from 
air others, and made him to he the depository of His 
promises and testimony upon the earth. This was 
Abraham, and Abraham's seed. Accordingly there it 
was that from the call of Abraham we find the scene 
of the workings of God's power, goodness, and govern- 
ment, though government was afterwards severed, be- 
cause of Israel's hopeless evil, and handed over to the 
Gentiles. But the cross of Christ terminated these trials. 
God might linger for many years after, as we know, in 
forbearance, but the fate of the Jewish nation was 
sealed in the cross of Christ; and from that very mo- 
ment God began to bring out these much deeper pur- 
poses of His love. For the Jewish people, at the very 
best even, had they been converted and received the 
Messiah, could never have been more here below than 
an earthly people. They might have been regenerate, 
but they must have been earthly. The promises that 
were so fully and richly accorded them in the Old Tes- 
tament had to do with the earth. I do not say that faith 
had nothing deeper, or that there was not in the hidden 
mind of God something outside this present scene. But, 
let me say again, they were an earthly people; they had 
the " earthly things" of the kingdom by the distinct 
gift of God ; and it is in reference to this very circum- 
stance, that God declares that His gifts and calling are 
without repentance. He had given earthly blessings to 
the Jews, and He had called them out for the purpose 
of enjoying the land. It will be in a condition of glory 
under their Messiah. He will never repent of His pur- 
pose, nor withdraw His gift. But meanwhile the whole 
history of Israel's rejection of God has come in ; their 
worshipping of idols, and finally the crucifixion of their 
own Messiah ; and for the time being they are dis- 
H 



98 EPHESIANS. 

possessed of their land, and scattered over the face of 
the earth. 

But during the time of the dispersion of Israel, and 
even before it began, from the moment that their 
guilt was consummated, this heavenly purpose of God 
was gradually manifested upon the earth. But we 
must remember that the Church, besides being the ob- 
ject of God's eternal counsels, and having a glorious 
portion in heaven along with Christ, for which we are 
waiting, has also an existence upon earth, and enters 
into the dealings of God here below. This is the point 
at which we are arrived in this epistle. We have had 
the deeper thoughts of God; but as the epistle does 
touch upon the ways of God on the earth, we should 
not have had a full view of the Church's place if it did 
not give us the dispensational succession here below. 
Accordingly we have the elements which compose the 
Church : " Wherefore remember that ye being in times 
past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called uncircumcision 
by that which is called the circumcision in the flesh 
made by hands." Here we are on totally different 
ground. It is no longer " children of wrath," persons 
that were by nature one as bad and dead as the other ; 
but here men are distinguished on earth the uncircum- 
cision on the one hand, and the circumcision on the 
other. So that you are on earthly ground, the ground 
of dispensational dealings, where you have God sepa- 
rating one part. of mankind from another by His own 
will ; not because the one was better than the other, but 
for the display of His own wisdom and purpose. The 
great mass of the Jews were just as evil in the sight of 
God as the Gentiles; and some of the Gentiles were 
converted, such as Job, while there were many of the 
Jews that perished in their sins. But for all that, God 
did put a difference between Jew and Gentile; and He 
says, " Eemember that ye being in time past Gentiles 
in the flesh." You were among the rest of mankind, 
left out of ^ call of God ; you were not brought into 



CHAPTER II. 99 

a place of separate witness for God as Abraham was ; 
you are called the uncircumcision by that which is 
called the circumcision. " At that time ye were with- 
out Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of 
Israel." They had no part in the polity of God set up 
in Israel; and they were " strangers from the covenants 
of promise." God gave glorious promises in the form 
of a covenant, and bound Himself to accompli sli 
them. The Gentiles had no part nor lot in them. 
There were promises about Gentiles, but none fo : t]j,em, 
Israel were the direct parties concerned in the promises 
they, and they only. And we must carefully re- 
member what these promises meant. They were not 
made to Abel or Enoch, much less to Adam and Eve, 
though it is common to speak of the promise made in 
the garden of Eden. But Scripture never talks of 
promise there. ^And if you examine Genesis iii., you 
will find the wisdom of God in this ; for it could 1)e in 
no sense a promise. To whom could it be a promise? 
To whom was it uttered? To that old serpent. No be- 
liever could imagine a promise to him. It was a threat 
of the extinction of his power. God was judging the 
sin which had just entered the world : is this the 
suited time when promises are made ? It is strictly a 
revelation of God, not in the form of a promise at all, 
but a declaration which comes out in denouncing judg- 
ment upon the serpent, and which showed that the Seed 
of the woman was to bruise his head. 

" The promises," then, do not go up higher than 
Abraham : they are connected with the dispensations of 
God. It may be asked, Have we not promises? .1 
answer, We have all the promises of God ; but how and 
where? They are yea and amen in Christ Jesus. If 
we have Christ, we are Abraham's seed, and inheritors 
of the promises, though in a way totally differing from 
that in which the Jews had them of old, or will have 
them by and by. We come in on the ground of pure 
mercy, and as altogether outside covenant. There is no 



100 EPHESIANS. 

such thing as a covenant with the Church, or with us 
Gentiles. I do not mean that we receive not the bless- 
ings that are in the new covenant: we have all that is 
blessed in it, and better too ; but not as Israel. They 
come under them as subjects of the promises of God; 
whereas we are sought, and reached, and blessed by 
sovereign grace having a title to nothing, and yet 
some better thing provided for us. We come in as 
filling up the gap between the rejection of the Messiah 
and His reception by Israel by and by ; and we form 
part of this parenthesis, rather than of the dealings of 
God here below, in a very interesting manner, as I hope 
to show. 

Here, then, the difference is first brought out. He 
wants us to know what was our condition. We have 
right to nothing ; we have not the smallest claim upon 
God; we had no such prescriptive place conferred upon 
us as Israel had through the promises. They had a 
place even as unconverted men in the world ; and the 
day is coming when, being converted, they will have a 
signally conspicuous position in the world, an earthly 
distinction and glory which never was and never will be 
our portion. Do not suppose that we shall not have far 
better, but we shall never have such a place on the earth. 
We shall have one with Christ over all things ; but it 
will not be while we have our natural life here below. 
It is in the resurrection-state that the Church's glory 
is destined to be brought out, in all its fulness, as far as 
manifested to the world. So that here the Ephesian 
saints are reminded of what their condition had been as 
Gentiles: " At that time ye were without Christ, being 
aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers 
from the covenants of promise, having no hope and 
without God in the world." They had no hope. 
They were not expecting any divine intervention to 
deliver them on the earth : they might dream of what 
people dream still a perfectibility of man upon the 
earth. They had no connection with God in the world; 



CHAPTER II. 101 

whereas the Jews had Him to direct all their movements 
how they were to live and how their inheritances 
were to be settled. God entered into all their domestic 
affairs as well as their worship : everything was entirely 
under the distinct ordinance of God. If they had God 
thus in the world, the Gentiles knew nothing of the 
sort. Out of this miserable condition, what are we 
brought into? Into the position that Israel had? That 
is treated of elsewhere. In Eomans xi. the great point 
is to show that the natural branches of the olive tree 
were broken off, that we who were wild branches might 
be graffed in. The subject there is not the Church, but 
merely the possession of promises, and the place of 
testimony to God here below. These are distinct things. 
Every baptized person that is, every one who out- 
wardly professes Christ belongs to the olive. All such 
have a special responsibility, as not being heathen (nor 
Jews either), but in possession of the oracles of God, and 
as bearing the name of Christ in an outward manner. 
But in Ephesians ii. there is a far deeper line: the 
apostle treats of the body of Christ and the assembly 
of God. And we must remember, that at the begin- 
ning of Christianity these two things closely approached 
each other : in other words, the assembly consisted of 
hardly any others than the members of Christ's body, 
true believers united to Christ by the Holy Ghost. But 
soon individuals crept in, not born of God, and of 
course not members of Christ, who nevertheless entered 
the assembly of God. Thus, by a Christian now is 
meant one who is not a Pagan nor a Jew. Hence, in 
Romans xi., you read of branches being cut off; hence 
the branches that are grafted in are said to stand in the 
goodness of God, and warned to continue in it, lest they 
also should be cut off. It is a question of profession, 
of its danger, and its sure doom if faithless. But in 
Ephesians there is no such thing as cutting off, because 
there the main subject is the membership of the body 
of Christ. Some now talk of not rending the body of 



102 EPHESIANS. 

Christ ; "but there is no such phrase or idea in Scripture. 
You will find passages that insist much upon the firm 
standing of true believers, and others which warn of pro- 
fessors coming to nothing of themselves or being judged 
of God. There is no such thought as cutting off a mem- 
ber of Christ's body. There are solemn warnings to 
Christians for preserving them from evil, but no such a 
thing as their insecurity. 

Proceeding with the chapter, the positive side of the 
question appears. The Gentiles did not possess the 
privileges of the Jews by nature. " But now in Christ 
Jesus ye who sometime were far off are made nigh by 
the blood of Christ. For he is our peace, who hath 
made both one" both Jew and. Gentile " and hath 
broken down the middle wall of partition between us." 
There we have it plainly set forth that the very insti- 
tutions God set up in His dealings with the Jews are 
now cast down. God Himself has destroyed the middle 
wall of partition. He alone is competent so to do. It 
would have been a sin for any one else to have attempted 
it. On the other hand, you will find persons who^ in 
their ignorance of Scripture, will argue that, because 
God had commanded these things once, He must sanction 
them always. Nothing can be more unfounded. It is 
entirely limiting God, and shutting their eyes to the 
plainest statements of His word. Throughout a large 
part of the New Testament God Himself sets aside the 
Jewish institution, in all its parts. Doubtless there 
are moral principles that were true before the law 
revealed ways of God from x the first, that always must 
regulate man's conduct with God ; but these have nothing 
necessarily to do with the law. Under the legal insti- 
tution they might be more or less embodied into the 
law and take the shape of commandments ; but their 
roots lie far deeper than the law ^given to Moses. It 
is founded upon this misconception, that when you speak 
of the Christian's deliverance from the law, some think 
you are going to destroy morality, and overthrow God's 



CHAPTER II. 103 

holy standard of good and evil. But it does not become 
us to judge what is most for the glory of God. Humility- 
is found in, and proved by, obedience ; and obedience 
depends on subjection to the word of God. The same 
act in different circumstances is a duty or a crime : the 
only unerring test for the believer is God's word. It 
was a sin in the Jews not to destroy all the Canaanites : 
God commanded them to do so the only One competent 
to judge, and entitled to command of His sovereign will. 
For a Christian now to do the same thing would be to 
mistake His mind. The world is bound to deal with 
murderers as stringently now as ever : God has not 
revoked in any wise the word He uttered as to the sanc- 
tity of human life. That is what God had set up long 
before the law of Moses,. or any distinction between Jews 
and Gentiles. It is annulled neither by the law given 
to Israel, nor by the gospel that now flows out in grace 
to the world. Government among men stands upon its 
own foundation and was involved in the commission 
given to Noah ; but the Christian is outside and above 
it all. He is called unto a new calling and this we have 
here. "Now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were 
far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ." Our 
task is not the preservation of the world's order or the 
punishment of its disorder ; but a new building grows 
up on the blessed, holy, divine ground of the blood of 
Christ, by which we are brought nigh to God. Nor is 
it only what we shall be by and by, but what we are 
now. We " are made nigh by the blood of Christ." 

Nothing can be more distinct, " For He is our peace ;" 
a most wonderful expression. Our peace is not merely 
a thing of enjoyment within us, but it is Christ outside 
us ; and if souls only rested upon this, would there be 
anxiety as to fulness of peace? It is my own fault 
entirely if I do not rest in and enjoy it. But even so; 
am I to doubt that Christ is my peace? I am dis- 
honouring Him if I do. If I had a surety whose 
riches could not fail, why should I doubt my standing 



104 EPHESIANS. 

or credit? It depends neither on my wealth, nor on my 
poverty : all turns on the resources of him who has 
become responsible for me. So it is with Christ. He 
is our peace, and there can be no possibility of failure 
in Him. Where the heart confides in this, what is the 
effect ? Then we can rest and enjoy. How can I enjoy 
a blessing before I believe it ? And I must begin with, 
believing before I enjoy. The Lord in His grace does 
give His people betimes transports of joy ; but joy may 
fluctuate. Peace is or should be a permanent thing: 
that the Christian is entitled to have always ; and this 
because Christ is our peace. He is not called our joy, 
nor God the God of joy, but of peace, because He 
Himself has done it : and it rests entirely upon Christ. 
" He is our peace who hath made both one, and hath 
broken down the middle wall of partition between us." 

There prevails a notion (unknown to the Bible) that 
Christ was making out our righteousness when He 
was here below. Now the life of Christ was, I do not 
question, necessary to vindicate God and His holy "law, 
as well as to manifest Himself and His love ; but the 
righteousness that we are made in Christ is another 
thought altogether not the law fulfilled by Him, but 
the justifying righteousness of God founded on Christ's 
death, displayed in His resurrection, and crowned by 
His glory in heaven. It is not Christ simply doing 
our duty Tor us, but God forgiving my trespasses, 
judging my sin, yea, finding such satisfaction in Christ's 
blood that now He cannot do too much for us ; it becomes^ 
if I may so say, a positive debt to Christ, because of 
what Christ has suffered. It is not seen that the law 
is the strength of sin, not of righteousness. Had 
Christ only kept the law, neither your soul nor mine 
could have been saved, much less blessed, as we are. 
Whoever kept the law, it would have been the righte- 
ousness of the law, and not God's righteousness which 
has not the smallest connection with obeying the law. 
It is never so treated in the word of God. Because 



CHAPTER"!!. 105 

Christ obeyed unto death, God has brought in a new 
kind- of righteousness not ours, but His own in our 
- favour. Christ has been made a curse upon the tree;, 
God has made Him sin for us, that we might be made 
the righteousness of God in Him. Were the common 
doctrine on this subject true, we might expect it 
to be said, He obeyed the law for us, that we might 
have legal righteousness imputed or transferred to us. 
Whereas the truth is in all points contrasted with such 
ideas. Surely Christ's obeying the law was not God's 
making Him sin. So, in the passage that is so often 
used, "by His obedience many are made righteous." 
How is His obedience here connected with the law ? 
The apostle does introduce the law in the next verse, 
as a new and additional thing, coming in by the way. 

Further, Adam wo aid" not have known the meaning 
of " the law," though undoubtedly he was .under a law 
.which he broke. What, x for instance, could Adam in 
his innocence have made of the word, " Thou shalt not 
lust," or covet ? No such feeling was within his ex- 
perience; Accordingly, as we see, it was only after 
man was fallen that the law in due time was given to 
condemn the outbreak of sin. But Christ has died for 
and under sin our sin. And what is the consequence ? 
All believers now, whether Jews or Gentiles, in Christ 
Jesus are brought into an entirely new place. The 
- Gentile is brought out of his distance from God; the 
Jew out of his disp'ensational nearness; both enjoy a 
common blessing in God's presence never possessed 
^before. The old separation dissolves and gives place 
by grace to oneness in Christ Jesus. When did this 
begin? An important question, for it is really the 
answer to the question : What, according to Scripture, 
is the Church ? Ask many of God's children. Would 
they not say, The aggregate of all believers ? But is 
this the body of Christ as shown us here? There 
were saints from the beginning, all who were born of 
God; but were they formed into an united assembly on 



106 EPHESIANS. 

the earth? Did anything under the Old Testament 
correspond to one body ? It never was heard of, ex- 
cepting as a thing promised, till the day of Pentecost. 
It awaited the cross of Christ. Therein God abolished 
the enmity. Before that God had commanded the Jew 
to be apart from the Gentile ; and our Lord maintained 
it most strenuously when He was upon earth. He 
forbade His disciples to go into any city of the Gen- 
tiles. He told the woman of Syrophenicia that He was 
not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. 
She had gone on the ground of promises, but He shows 
her that she had no part or lot in the promises. Had 
she addressed Him as Son of God, would our Lord 
have kept her waiting ? She appealed to Him as the 
Son of David ; and as such His connection was with 
Israel. She had to learn the mistake of going on the 
ground of promises that she had no title to. And this 
is often the reason why people do not enjoy peace. 
They plead God's promises ; but what if I cannot say 
that they are promises to me ? Need I wonder that 
the answer tarries? Hence, too, there is in general 
little solid peace. How well for the poor woman, how 
well for us to know and confess what we really are ! 
She owns that she was not a child nor a sheep at all. 
"Yet the dogs eat !" She sees why it was that she 
could not get what she wanted on the false ground of 
privileges she did not possess. She is brought to 
own herself as having no promises at all; and then 
there is no limit to the blessing in the grace of Christ. 
" woman, great is thy faith; be it unto thee even as 
thou wilt." 

The two instances in which the Lord admires the 
faith of those who came to Him were of Gentiles the 
centurion and the Syrophenician. .Our Lord cannot 
gainsay His love, and they knew it. They pressed 
their suit consequently. It was in the midst of dense 
ignorance ; but then the eye was single in the main, 
and the object on which it rested was a blesser beyond 



CHAPTER II. 107 

all thought. The blessing consequently could not be 
lost, and though it might be delayed, it was infinite. 

So in this epistle we have the Gentile in a most de- 
plorable condition of distance from God, and separation 
from all that God had chosen upon the earth. But the 
cross of Christ has annihilated all such distinctions. 
It has proved that the favoured Jew was, if possible, 
more iniquitous than the poor Gentile. They had re- 
jected and crucified their own Messiah; and if there 
were any among the Jews more urgent for His death 
than others, it was the priests; and so it always is. 
There is nothing so heartless as the religion of this 
world ; and if it was so then, still more now. What 
so bad under the sun as a spurious Christianity ? It 
may be fair-spoken, and have a good deal of truth 
mingled with it; but it is without a purged conscience 
and without divine affection ; and the more fearful will 
be its end. We need take care what we sanction at 
the present hour: the time is short. The Lord has 
brought out what His Church is. The will of man 
has raked up the law of commandments out of the 
grave of Christ, and enacts it over again. This is 
what is found throughout all Christendom. It is in- 
conceivable, except through realizing v the power of 
Satan, how Christians can take up the peculiar institu- 
tions of God to His people, curses and all, in the face 
of such a chapter as this, where we find that all this 
is gone, even for Jews who believe, by the authority of 
God. It is a practical denial of the blood and cross 
of Christ. What a solemn proof of the ruined state 
of the Church of God ! The truth is plain indeed: 
" Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the 
law of commandments contained in ordinances, for to 
make in himself of twain one new man, so making 
peace; and that he might reconcile both unto God in 
one^ body by the cross, having slain the enmity thereby." 
To this figure of one new man Christians answer. You 
will find that such a state of things never was known 



108 EPHESIANS. 

during the Old Testament times, nor even during our 
Lord's life on earth. It is only after the ascension that 
Jew and Gentile are united upon earth, and worship 
God on the same level. This is the Church. It is 
not merely that they are all helievers, but they are 
members of Christ and of one another on earth. Of 
course, when we get to heaven, it will still be the 
Church ; but it begins here, and that with Christ cru- 
cified and ascended to heaven. When He thus takes 
His place there, the work follows of forming the body 
in union with the Head. All distinction is gone, as 
far as its own sphere is concerned. The nature of the 
Church is most plain from this : " That he might re- 
concile both unto God in one body by the cross, having 
slain the enmity thereby" which enmity was in the 
commandments of the law, which straitly and wholly 
separated one from the other. 

But Christ " came and preached peace to you which 
were afar off, and to them which were nigh." All is 
attributed to Him, because founded on the cross ; and 
it is Christ-, by the Holy Ghost, who now proclaims 
this heavenly peace to the Gentiles once afar off, as 
well as to the hitherto favoured Israel. Where this 
truth is unknown, men may preach Christ more or 
less, may be descanting much in general on the pro- 
mises of God ; but a Jew would do that ; and to them 
especially it will be given by and by to sing the song 
that " the mercy of the Lord endureth for ever" the 
great burden of the millennial Psalms. The practically 
Jewish position taken by most Christians makes them 
turn the Psalms of David into the staple of Christian 
communion, and the expression of their own condition 
before God. All Scripture is, of course, given of God 
for the profit and blessing of the Christian. But am 
I to offer a bull and a goat, because of old it was com- 
manded? To imitate Leviticus is one thing; to un- 
derstand it is quite another. " By faith we establish, 
the law," but we are not under it. So, speaking about 



CHAPTER II. 109 

my walk as a Christian, St. Paul says that sin shall 
not have dominion over me, for I am not under law, 
but under grace. How sad to see that the Evangelicals 
as a body now diligently preach the contrary ! They 
may preach a measure of truth about other things, but 
they cannot preach the gospel, and they deny the 
Church of God. A Christian is under the law for 
nothing whatever, because he is under Christ dead and 
risen. Christ was under it once; but then I had 
nothing to say to Him. He passed out of it on the 
cross ; and my association with Christ begins thence- 
forward. I am united with Christ in heaven, not on 
the earth. What has Christ in heaven to do with the 
law ? Hence we are said to be under grace, not under 
law. Further, this doctrine is most practical. The 
walk is amazingly lowered where a mistake is made 
about it; and Satan tries to bring in the law after be- 
lieving, if he cannot pervert it to hinder believing. 

Here, then, it is peace that is preached " to you 
which were afar off, and to them that were nigh. For 
through him we both have access by one Spirit unto 
the Father." There, instead of the law, which drew a 
distinction between Jew and Gentile, the Holy Ghost 
unites them on a common ground, and puts them in a 
common relationship as sons, having to do with the 
Father. This is our position. When God was acting 
as a governor, He chose a nation; He had His own 
servants. But now, when He has a family, all that 
order of things vanishes. He has His children, and 
wants to have them near Him. The end of all the 
Jewish forms of holy places and days, of priesthood 
and of sacrifice, was the cross of Christ. God has 
fully tried and given up any working upon men by a 
religion that is visible, or by sight and sounds that act 
upon the senses. The Holy Ghost sent down from 
heaven leads the children of God to draw near to the 
Father. How can a Christian acknowledge that this is. 
what God has given to guide him, and yet be found 



110 EPHESIANS. 

taking part, were it only by his presence, in that which 
is positively Jewish ? What God has provided for the 
Jew, and what He enjoins upon the Christian, are very 
different things. We are not Jews but Christians. 
What He presses upon Christians is far more cutting 
to nature and more honouring to Christ than anything 
that He ever did . or will give to Israel. He has 
brought us as His family to Himself, and through 
Christ we have access by one Spirit unto the Father 
we both Jew and Gentile. How far are we carrying 
it, out? Are we to sanction the unbelief that turns 
back to the weak and beggarly elements of the world ? 
or are we cleaving only to Christ, worshipping God in 
the Spirit ? We may suffer, if faithful to grace and 
truth ; but happy are we, if it be so. 

He adds further, " Now, therefore, ye [Gentiles] are 
no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens 
with the saints, and of the household of God." They 
were brought out of all that condition of distance, and 
made part of His household, " and are built upon the 
foundation" not of the law but " of the apostles and 
prophets." What prophets ? Of the New Testament 
only. God was not taking up an old foundation, but 
laying down a new one ; and this new one He begins 
in Christ dead and risen. It is the foundation, not of 
the prophets and apostles, but " of the apostles and 
prophets." The phrase in Greek means that both 
classes, the apostles and prophets, were united in this 
joint work. They were together employed in laying this 
common basis. We read (chap. iii. 5) of the. mystery 
of Christ, " which in other ages was not made known 
unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his 
holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit." These 
words set aside all controversy ; for they prove that it 
is a question only of the present. So in chapter iv. 11, 
" He gave some apostles and some prophets." Some 
of the New-Testament writers were not apostles, and 
yet thev were just as much inspired. We are said, 



CHAPTER II. Ill 

then, to be built upon this " foundation of the apostles 
and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief 
corner-stone." It is not merely prophecy or promise, but 
" Jesus Christ Himself" His Person. It is what the 
Apostle Peter learned from the lips of our Lord : " Upon 
this rock I will build my Church;" that is, upon the 
confession of Christ as the Son of the living God. 
And so here you have Jesus Christ as the chief corner- 
stone. But it is not here, as in Matthew, Christ 
building ; but these apostles and prophets are used (of 
course subordinately) because they were the instruments 
of revealing the Church. Thus Scripture confines the 
Church to that which followed the death and resurrec- 
tion of Christ, and makes it depend on the Holy Ghost 
sent down to form them into one body upon earth. 
" In whom all the building, fitly framed together, 
groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord." It is not 
yet complete. " In whom ye also are builded together 
for an habitation of God through the Spirit." God had 
once a dwelling-place on earth the temple ; and there 
He dwelt, not by the Spirit, but in a visible manner. 
Now God dwells on earth in a more blessed way still, 
even through the Spirit. The Holy Ghost constitutes 
the saints the divine habitation and unites them as one 
body. He dwells in the Church, making it thus the 
temple of God. It is not His indwelling in the indi- 
vidual that we have here. This also is most true and 
important; but, besides, He dwells in the Church: He 
makes the Church to be God's dwelling-place. What 
a truth ! It is plain that God looks for it, that we 
should be walking faithfully in the truth, and according 
to Christ. 



CHAPTER III. 

We have here a remarkable instance of the paren- 
thetical style of the epistle ; for the whole chapter 
on which we are entering is an example of it. We 
shall find parenthesis within parenthesis, the want of 
seeing which increases the misunderstanding of the 
epistle ; but once observed, all is easy, and the moral 
fitness of such a form of describing what is in itself a 
sort of parenthesis in God's ways has been and should 
be noticed by the way. We can seek, by the grace of 
God, to learn and consider the reason for these digres- 
sions, which form an episode of unusual length. The 
whole of chapter iii. comes in between the doctrine 
of the close of chapter ii. and the exhortation at the 
beginning of chapter iv., which is founded upon that 
doctrine. What is the meaning of this turning aside ? 
The Holy Ghost stops short in the midst of the un- 
folding of the doctrine to lead us into what ? The 
answer, I think, is very plain. He has just alluded to 
that which must have seemed a great stumbling-block 
to a Jew ; namely, God's forming one body, where there 
is neither Jew nor Gentile. Among many Christians 
now, I am sorry to say, the difficulty is not even felt, 
still less is the truth understood. The reason is, be- 
cause they have so little hold of the faithfulness or the 
purposes of God. For it is a real trial of faith to 
a devout mind, when one part of the truth of God 
appears to clash with another. There cannot be any 
real discord; all must be in perfect keeping and har- 
mony. But we are not always able to understand how 
the different parts of truth hang together. While thus 
ignorant, we ought to wait in faith, neither doubting 
on the one hand nor indifferent on the other. 

Let us for a moment seek to put ourselves in the 
position of the Jewish believers } who inherited the 



,. CHAPTER III. 113 

thoughts and feelings and prejudices of the Old-Testa- 
ment saints. And let such an one have words of this 
kind clearly pressed upon him one body, neither Jew 
nor Gentile, the enmity slain, the middle wall of par- 
tition broken down. What a truth for a Jew ! How 
extraordinary that God should destroy that which He 
had been building up, and had so long sanctioned; that 
God who had formed and insisted on the distinctions 
between Jew and Gentile, onjperil even of death to those 
slighting them that He Himself should reduce them to 
nothing, and bring in what is totally different from and 
irreconcileable with the old order ! No wonder all this 
should be a difficulty, if put together as the mind 
of God for the same time. But there is a key to the 
whole enigma. They are not instituted of God con- 
temporaneously. Hence all the difficulty amounts to, 
is, that God, who at one time ordained the distinction 
between Israel and the Gentiles, is pleased now for a 
season to abolish it and to bring in an entirely new 
thing. Now the early part of chapter iii. is devoted to 
the explaining of this special part of the mystery of 
Christ, whereby the Gentiles are brought forward and 
put upon exactly the same level with the believing 
Jews who now received Christ, so that in this world 
they form one and the same body. But the more that 
a man adhered to the truth of the law and prophets, -the 
more insuperably hard this was, because the Old Testa- 
ment never speaks of such a state of things. In fact, 
for a person who only knew the ancient Hebrew revela- 
tions, it was a wrench without precedent, and that for 
which he must have been altogether unprepared. There 
was the difficulty of apparently going contrary to the 
plain word of God. This it is, accordingly, that the 
Holy Ghost here removes out of the way. And first 
of all, observe the wisdom of God in laying an admir- 
able foundation for the bringing in of the new doctrine. 
We have seen the counsels of God from all eternity 
centering in Christ, and embracing the glorious thought 



114 EPEESIANS. 

of souls gathered out from this world to be the sharers 
of the same love and glory in which Christ is now 
found in the presence of God. (Chap, i.) Next, we 
had the means employed to meet souls in their ruined 
state upon earth; this we had in chapter ii. And now 
in chapter iii. we have a digression for the purpose of 
explaining fully the nature of this part of the mystery 
in special relation to Gentiles. 

"We must, however, guard against the notion that " the 
mystery" or secret means the gospel. The gospel in 
itself does not and never can mean a mystery. It was 
that which in its foundations always was .before the 
mind of God's people in the form of promise, or of a 
revelation of grace not yet accomplished. But nowhere 
in Scripture is the gospel called a mystery. It may he 
connected with the mystery, but it is not itself a 
mystery. It was no mystery that a Saviour was to 
be given ; it was the very first revelation of grace after 
man became a sinner. The Seed of the woman was to 
bruise the serpent's head. A mystery is something 
that was not revealed of old, and which could not be 
known otherwise. Again, you have in the prophets a 
full declaration that the righteousness of God was near 
to come ; the plainest possible statement that God was 
going to show Himself a Saviour- God. So again you 
have His making an end of sins and bringing in re- 
conciliation and everlasting righteousness. All these 
things were in no sense the mystery. The mystery 
means that which was kept secret, not that which could 
not be understood, which is a human notion of mystery ; 
but an unrevealed secret, a secret not yet divulged in 
the Old Testament but brought out fully in the New. 
What, then, is this mystery ? It is, first, that Christ, 
instead of taking the kingdom, predicted by the 
prophets, should completely disappear from the scene of 
this world, and that God should set Him up in heaven 
at His own right hand as the Head of all glory, heavenly 
and earthly, and that He should give the whole universe 



CHAPTER III. 115 

into the hands of Christ to administer the kingdom and 
maintain the glory of God the Father in it. This 
is the first and most essential part of the mystery, 
the second, or Church's part, being hut the consequence 
of it. Christ's universal headship is not the theme 
spoken of in the Old Testament. You have Him as 
Son of David, Son of man, Son of God, the King ; but 
nowhere is the whole universe of God (but rather the 
kingdom under the whole heavens) -put under Him. 
In this headship over all things, Christ will share all 
with His bride. Christ will have His Church the part- 
ner of His own unlimited dominion, when that day of 
glory dawns upon the world. 

Hence, then, as we know, the mystery consists of 
two great parts, which we have summed up in Ephesians 
v. 32; "This is a great mystery; but I speak concern- 
ing Christ and the church." Thus the mystery means 
neither Christ nor the Church alone, but Christ and 
the Church united in heavenly blessedness and 
dominion over everything that God has made. Hence, 
as we saw from chapter i., when He was raised from 
the dead, God set Him at His own right hand in the 
heavenly places, far above all principality, and power, 
and might, " and put all things under Ks feet, and 
gave Him to be the head over all things to the church." 
It is not said, " over the church," which would over- 
throw, not teach, the mystery. He will be over Israel 
and over the Gentiles, but nowhere is He said to reign 
over the Church. The Church is His body. I admit 
it is a figure, but a figure that conveys an intense 
degree of intimacy, full of the richest comfort and the 
most exalted hope. The saints who are now being 
called are to share all things along with Christ in that 
day of glory. Hence it becomes of the greatest interest 
to know what the nature of the Church is. When 
did its calling begin, and what is the character of that 
calling, what the responsibilities that flow from it? 

The Epistle to the Ephesians is the capital seat of 



116 EPHESIANS. 

the doctrine of the Church; and if the Spirit of God 
here departs from the current of the doctrine, it is to 
give us a view of what was one of the chief difficulties 
connected with it ; viz., the Gentile believers "being 
"brought with believing Jews into the unity of Christ's 
body. A Jewish mind would not feel it so strange 
that God should bless a Gentile ; but he would suppose 
that the blessing must be inferior to that of a Jew 
that a higher place must be reserved for Israel and a 
lower one for the Gentile. The doctrine now brought 
out overturns all this. To a mind bred in Old 
Testament thought it was the apparent undermining of 
the plain word of God. How was so natural and strong 
an objection to be removed? It was a new thing for 
heaven, during Israel's rejection for the earth. Further, 
it is from not understanding " the mystery," and what 
the Church really is, that the Popish or antichurch sys- 
tem has sprung up. But not only so: Protestants too 
have departed from the word of God on this subject 
through unbelief of our heavenly relationship to Christ 
and through love of the world love of present honour 
and worldly greatness. They have not the faith and 
patience to wait for the day of Christ. A Christian is 
called upon to suffer now, to be cast out as evil, waiting 
to be glorified with Christ not merely l>y Christ, but 
with Christ, to be with Christ Himself where He is. 
This supposes our place "without the camp," i.e., every 
form of worldly religion. Does not the world now take 
the place of being the Church of God ? This is the 
part of Babylon ; and though the strongest expression, 
and the centre, if you will, of Babylon be found in 
Popery, that system of confusion is not confined to 
Home. We do well to come nearer home, to examine 
what we are about ourselves, to look whether we be not 
drawn away into a grave misunderstanding of what 
God has saved us for. Do Christians generally realize 
that they are saved at all ? Are they simply, 
thoroughly, abidingly happy in the consciousness of 



CHAPTER III. 117 

God's salvation ? Look at the hymns that are sung 
think of the prayers that are offered. They are the as- 
pirations of anxious, uneasy souls, who call themselves 
miserable sinners, because they have no conscious 
possession of the blessing, but only desires after it. Is 
it possible that it comes to this, that souls count it 
humility to doubt God? that it is a becoming and 
boasted part of the worship of God to express the 
misery and the bondage of redeemed souls on the day 
which proclaims that their sins are blotted out and their 
peace made ? Where, in all this, is the simple, hearty 
rest in the knowledge of redemption as a completed 
thing ? of sins being entirely done with for the 
Christian, as far as regards the judgment of God? 
Assuredly there remains always the need of our ac- 
knowledging our sins, and of judging ourselves; but 
this is quite another kind of judgment and of con- 
fession, the confession of souls which blame themselves 
so much the more because they have not a doubt that 
they are sons of God hearts which are perfectly at 
peace and which express their happiness in songs of 
praise and thanksgiving to the God who has for ever 
saved them. 

Upon the foundation of salvation as a cqmplete thing, 
the Holy Ghost leads on to the understanding of the 
Church. If you do not know and rest in Christ's re- 
demption as accomplished, yea, and accepted for us of 
God, you cannot have a single true idea of the Church. 
This shows the exceeding wisdom of the Spirit of God 
in bringing in the doctrine of the Church here, after all 
question of salvation has been fully met and settled. 
" For this cause I, Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ 
for you Gentiles." He was a sufferer even to bonds for 
the sake of the Gentiles. Wherever a person takes his 
place truly as a member of the body of Christ, how can 
he have honour, or escape reproach and trial in the 
world? The proper home of the Church is in heaven ; 
but on earth he who* brought out this blessed truth is 



118 EPHESIAN8. 

content to be a prisoner. " If ye have heard of the dis- 
pensation of the grace of God which is given me to you- 
ward." Dispensation here means " administration" or 
" stewardship" that for which he was held responsible 
to God. The Apostle Paul was the instrument chosen 
of God for bringing out the nature, calling, character, 
and hopes of the Church. Mark the ways of God. 
He would not develop it among the Jews, nor would 
He reveal it by Peter or James. It was revealed to 
them no doubt, but not ly them. The Apostle Paul 
was the only one of the inspired writers by whom God 
made it known. Hence if there were the smallest truth 
in apostolic succession, Paul ought to be the root or 
channel through whom the succession comes, and not 
Peter, who was expressly an apostle of the circumcision. 
Paul's apostleship was directly from the Lord and with 
the uncircumcision as its sphere. He was the grand 
witness that all true ministry must be direct from 
Christ. The Lord may work by means. He may call 
a person to preach, and there may be persons whose gift 
is developed by means of teaching. The same apostle 
who derived his gift from the Lord, and who insisted 
upon it so strongly, used to teach others. He com- 
municated the truth to Timothy, who again was 
enjoined to teach others that which he had himself 
received. The Lord works by those who understand 
the truth well, to communicate the truth to those who 
understand it less. But still the principle remains, that 
all gift is immediately from Christ, and not derivative 
from man. There were outward and local appointments, 
such as elders and deacons ; but that was another thing 
altogether. The elder might teach or not, and might 
do so formally and publicly, if he were a teacher ; but 
his eldership was purely a certain charge communicated 
by the authority of the apostles, distinct from the 
question of gift. I only refer to the underived charac- 
ter of gift properly so called, which the Spirit distributes 
in the Church. It comes immediately from Christ on 



CHAPTEE III. 119 

high (Epli. iv.), and not through a human channel, 
save in an exceptional and miraculous instance, as 
when the apostle laid hands on Timothy and imparted 
a -xapiafia to him according to prophecy. 

In this further statement the Apostle Paul says, 
" By revelation he made known unto me the mystery ; 
(as I wrote afore in a few words, whereby, when ye 
read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery 
of Christ.)" He had touched upon it in chapter ii., 
but now he is entering upon it more fully. " Which 
in other ages was not made known unto the sons of 
men." Here you have a positive statement that the 
secret was a something not revealed in other ages 
not that it was obscurely intimated or badly under- 
stood, but it was not revealed at all. It was a secret 
kept hid, as the apostle lets us know in Eomans xvi. 
" Now to him that is of power to stablish you ..... 
according to the revelation of the mystery, which was 
kept secret since the world began, but now is made 
manifest." It was only now divulged. It was not 
that the thing had been predicted by the prophets, and 
only now laid hold of by faith. In truth it was now 
made manifest, now published and taught; it never 
had been before. " But now is made manifest, and 

^ * 

by the scriptures of the prophets, according to the 
commandment of the everlasting God, made known to 
all nations for the obedience of faith." There is no 
doubt that the " scriptures of the prophets," alluded to 
here, are New Testament scriptures. It is, properly 
speaking, "by prophetic scriptures," not referring to 
Old Testament prophets at all ; and for this reason 
" Now is made manifest, and by prophetic scriptures 

made known to all nations." Had the meaning 

been Old Testament prophets, what could have been 
more extraordinary than such an expression? He 
might have said, It was revealed to the prophets, but 
now it is understood. But he says, It is now made 
manifest. " Which in other ages was not made known 



120 EPHESIANS. 

unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his 
holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit." There were 
inspired men, not apostles, who were prophets. To 
both of these it was now revealed; but we cannot say 
that " prophetic scriptures" in Romans xvi. extend 
beyond the writings of Paul, which develop this 
blessed secret of God. The unfolding of the Church 
ensued when the Holy Ghost was given after a new 
manner. " The Holy Ghost was not yet [given] 
because that Jesus was not yet glorified." The Holy 
Ghost had wrought before, but He was to be poured 
out personally ; and this is identified with the calling of 
the Church. At Pentecost, for the first time, we have 
an assembly that is called the Church of God. " The 
Lord added to the church daily such as should be 
saved." There we find what is called the Church, or 
the assembly: a body where God intended to have Jew 
and Gentile without distinction ; which state of things 
never existed before the day of Pentecost. And now 
we have Jews and Gentiles brought into this new order, 
new to both of them, to which the former revelations 
of God no longer applied as a direct description of 
their privileges. 

And here let me warn you to beware of so taking 
the Scriptures as if everything God says there is 
about you and me and the Church. The Church is, 
comparatively, a new thing in the earth; it is exclu- 
sively a New Testament subject. If I said that saints 
were thus new, it were false; but if you say that the 
Church embraces Old Testament saints, you neglect 
and oppose the word of God, which confines the 
Church of God to that which began with Christ set 
at the right feand of God, and the Holy Ghost sent 
down from ?>eaven to baptize all who now believe 
into this one body. What is meant by " the church ?" 
The assembly of souls gathered by the knowledge of 
Christ dead and risen, and by the Holy Ghost united 
to Christ, as the glorified man at God's right hand. 



CHAPTER III. 121 

Such a state of things did not exist before Pentecost. 
There was no redemption accomplished before the 
cross. Christ stands alone as Son of God from all 
eternity a divine person equal with the Father. But 
He became man in order to die for men upon the 
cross; and risen from the dead, He enters upon His 
new place of headship to the Church, His body ; the 
Bridegroom of the Bride. Atonement has been made 
and sin put away by the sacrifice of Himself; and 
there could be no such thing as becoming a member 
of the body of Christ till this was accomplished. The 
Church is founded upon the remission of sins by the 
blood of Christ already shed, and consists of those 
that are united with Christ to share all His glory, 
save that which is essentially and eternally His own as 
only-begotten Son of the Father. 

Then comes in this especial part of the mystery 
" That the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the 
same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by 
the gospel." The promises of God to Abraham, and 
this promise of God in Christ, are two things not only 
different but contrasted. For if I look at the promise 
to Abraham in Genesis xii., " I will make of thee 
a great nation," is this the Church's expectation? 
When Christians become great in the earth, it is when 
they have slipped out of their proper blessing in fellow- 
ship with Christ; but when Israel is made a great 
nation in the true sense of the word, they will be 
blessed and a blessing as they never were before. The 
promise was given to Abraham, and will be accom- 
plished in his seed on earth by and by. " I will make 

of thee a great nation and in thee shall all 

families of the earth be blessed." Here you have 
room left for the going out of blessing to the Gentiles ; 
but, mark, they are to be blessed in Abraham, and 
afterwards in his seed. In Genesis xxii., the promise 
is renewed to Isaac ; and this is what is referred to in 
Hebrews. " By myself I have sworn, saith the Lord. 



122 EPHESIANS. 

That in blessing I will bless thee, and in 

multiplying I will multiply tliy seed as the stars of the 
heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore ; 
and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies." 
Is this what we are looking for ? I trow not. We 
want to be in heaven with Christ, and we shall be 
there through His love and the fav.our of our God. 
But Israel is to possess the gate of his enemies, and 
to be exalted above all people of the earth. In the 
Psalms we have a sort of commentary upon these 
expectations of the godly in Israel. Thus in Psalm 
Ixvii. we have the prayer, "God be merciful unto us, 
and bless us; and cause His face to shine upon us 
(Selah); that thy way may be known upon earth, thy 
saving health among all nations." The preliminary of 
the blessing to other nations is the answer to Israel's 
cry, " God be merciful unto us and bless us." All 
hope for the world as such depends upon the blessing 
of the Jews. 

It is not so as to the Church, which God is 
now calling out. Its blessing does not hinge on the 
promises or the blessing of any people. Hence these 
Psalms do not apply ; yet persons persist in diverting 
them to present circumstances. No wonder that they 
are bewildered. The fault is in their perversion of the 
word of God. "Let the people praise thee, O God; 
yea, let all the people praise thee." Now it extends 
to others. " let the nations be glad and sing for 
joy; for thou shalt judge the people righteously and 
govern the nations upon earth." When that day 
dawns, instead of the groaning and travailing which as 
yet prevails, " Then shall the earth yield her increase; 
and God, even our own God, shall bless us." Any- 
thing like this is very far from being the case now. 
It is the millennial state that is expected here, when 
the power of God will be put forth triumphantly, and 
God will acknowledge His people Israel, and other 
nations will be blessed in them. Now the Gentiles 



CHAPTER III. 123 

are "fellow-heirs and of the same "body." Fellow- 
heirs with whom ? With Christ, and with all who 
are in Christ. Whether Jews or Gentiles, they are 
fellow-heirs. Grace has put them on common ground. 
It is not now the Jews set on the pinnacle of the 
earth's blessing. On the contrary, as a nation they 
are dispersed, and God is judging them, not showing 
mercy: there is a complete obliterating of the old 
landmarks. And for this reason: the Jewish people 
were the real leaders in the world's enmity against 
Christ, and in the crucifying of their own Messiah. 
The cross of Christ terminated the distinctions be- 
tween Jew and Gentile; and, founded upon that 
cross, God is building the Church. The vilest sinners 
upon the face of the earth, whether Jew or Gentile, 
God takes up; and, out of their condition of sin and 
distance from God, He puts them all upon one common 
heavenly level as members of the body of Christ. 
This is what God is doing now, and it is of immense 
importance to understand it, in order to enjoy fellow- 
ship with His ways. Besides, the whole Bible becomes 
practically a new and yet more precious book when 
this is understood. Truth cannot admit of com- 
promise, however rightly we .may seek to be patient; 
the revealed mind of God necessarily excludes the 
notion of people having their own private judgment. 
Neither you nor I have a right to an opinion on 
matters of faith. God is the only one entitled to 
speak on these things; and He has spoken so plainly 
that it is our sin if we do not hear Him. But you 
cannot sever truth from the spiritual affections. 
Hence, if people do not carry out the truth of the 
Church practically, they lose it, and become bitter 
against 'it. God's mind about the Church always 
brings him who knows it into the world's enmity, and 
the special enmity of Christians who do not under- 
stand it. It was so with St. Paul pre-eminently, and 
it has been the same tale ever since, as souls have laid 



124 EPHESIANS. 

hold of his testimony ; and so it must he. The 
doctrine that Paul held, if taught by the Spirit of 
God, never can admit of a party, hecause the very 
centre of it is Christ in heaven. 

The apostle goes on with his statement ; and this is 
the particular phase of the mystery that he brings out 
here "That the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and 
of the same body, and partakers of his promise in 
Christ by the gospel ; whereof I was made a minister, 
according to the gift of the grace of God given unto me 
by the effectual working of his power." What is the 
effect of this truth? The most humbling possible. 
" Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is 
this grace given, that I should preach among the 
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ." It brings 
out the value of Christ as nothing else does. He adds 
further, " And to make all men see what is the adminis- 
tration [not, fellowship] of the mystery." He shows 
thus, that besides the aspect of the mystery towards the 
saints, it has also its application to all men, without 
distinction to those outside the Church. Persons who 
preach the gospel necessarily preach Christ; but there 
are few who understand the character of the grace which 
unites the soul with Christ in the relationship of mem- 
bers of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones, This 
was a main part of Paul's work. Therefore he adds, 
administration of the mystery, " which from the 
beginning of the world hath been hid in God, wh*o 
created all things by Jesus Christ." Mark, it is not 
hid in the Scriptures, but " hid in God." " To the intent 
that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly 
places might be known by the church the manifold 
wisdom of God." 

Let us consider what a wonderful place this is 
that God is now making known a new kind of wisdom 
to the angels above by His dealings with us ; and, 
by us, I mean all the saints of God now on earth. 
For let them be called by whatsoever name, every saint 



CHAPTER III. 125 

of God is a member of the body of Christ. All belong 
truly and equally to the Church of God. One cannot 
but sorrow that so few understand or care what the 
Church of God is, and to act upon it. We ought to 
know what God intends, and how He intends His 
Church to walk. Christ is equally possessed by all ; 
but all do not equally understand what the will of God 
about His Church is ; how He would have us to wor- 
ship Him, and to act upon His word together ; how to 
help one another to carry out this glorious truth God 
is manifesting by the Church His varied wisdom. Are 
\ve walking so according to the will o God for His 
Church, that He can point to us as a lesson to the angels 
of God? Such, and no less than this, is God's inten- 
tion. You cannot, surely, get rid of the responsibility 
connected with it, by refusing to act according to it ! 
It is not by and by, when we reach heaven, that God 
will manifest by the Church His manifold wisdom to 
the heavenly hosts ; but now on earth while the mem- 
bers of the Church are being called. " That now unto 
the principalities and powers in heavenly places might 
be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God." 
Does not this bring in serious considerations ? It is 
not a question of what men think about us, and whether 
we are loved or disliked here below. Very sure I am, 
that if we are walking according to Christ, we never 
can be anything but hated by the world ; and it shows 
that we value the world if we wish otherwise. It is a 
most painful thing to feel that so it must be ; but if I 
believe Christ, I must believe this, and I ought to 
rejoice to be counted worthy to suffer in the least degree. 
But besides this, the Church is called to be the lesson- 
book for the angels of God. When we think that God 
is overlooking with the angels that surround Him ; 
that He is occupied with such objects as we are ; that 
He sees in them the dearest objects of His affections ; 
that He has given them Christ to be their life ; and 
Bent down the Holy Ghost, that blesed person of the 



126 EPHESIANS. 

Trinity, to take up His dwelling-place in them, and 
make them to be His temple, while they are in this 
world, what a calling it is ! If an angel wants to know 
where His great love is, he must look down into this 
world and see it thus. You cannot sever Christ from 
the Church. But the wonderful thing is, that, before 
the angels of God, the astonishing conflict is going on 
Satan and all his hosts endeavouring to mislead them 
by putting them on a false ground, preaching righte- 
ousness in a thousand forms, in order to lead them away 
from grace and from the cross of Christ. On the other 
hand, there you have God working by His word and 
Spirit to bring His people to a consciousness of their 
privileges. But whether the children of God are faith- 
ful or not, perfect love dwells upon them and acts toward 
them (it may be in discipline) ; God is occupied with 
them, caring for them, always keeping this before His 
mind, that He will have them perfectly like Christ. 
Nothing can cloud this. Weakness may for a time 
dishonour the Lord, and destroy our own comfort, and 
help on the delusion of the world. All that may be ; 
but the purpose of God, it shall stand ; what God has 
spoken must be accomplished. Our weakness may be 
manifested, but God in His mighty love will complete 
His purpose. And this is the way in which He is 
teaching the principalities and powers in heavenly 
places a new kind of wisdom, that never was seen, 
before in this world. They had seen God's ways in 
creation and at the deluge, and in Israel. But here 
was something that not even the Scriptures of God 
hinted, that was not promised to man a thing entirely 
kept secret between the Father and the Son. 

Now it is come out. The Holy Ghost is the One 
who develops and makes good this glorious truth of 
the Church of God. How far have our souls entered 
into it ? How far do we content ourselves with vague 
guesses at it, thinking that it is of no great import- 
ance ? Willing ignorance of this truth arises from a 



CHAPTER III. 127 

secret love of the world. There is the feeling in him 
who declines it, that you cannot take it up in heart 
and walk with the world. You must thoroughly 
break with everything that the flesh values under the 
sun. You have a place above the sun with Christ, and 
the consequence is that you are called on to submit to 
the sentence of death on everything here, to glorify 
the name of Christ and rejoice in Him, whatever may 
be the will of God about us. For no circumstances 
shut us out from the responsibility of being the 
witnesses of a glory that is above this world. The 
world ought to see in the Church the reflection of 
Christ. You may find a monk or a nun sweet morally, 
but all this may be mere nature and not Christ. I do 
not say that Christ may not be there too, in isolated 
cases, spite of an outrageously wicked system. To 
faith, however, it is a question of doing the will of 
God and of glorifying Christ in the place of earthly 
reproach. God looks for the confession of the name of 
His Son at cost of all dear to us. If the world heed it 
not, is it in vain for the principalities and powers in 
heavenly places ? 

On the closing verse or two of the portion just before 
us, I did not comment. A few words now. therefore, 
on verses 12, 13. The apostle having alluded to 
Christ as the One in whom, exalted on high, the 
eternal purpose of God has now been revealed by the 
Spirit, adds, that in that same person " we have bold- 
ness and access, with confidence by the faith of him. 
Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tribulations 
for you, which is your glory." Now it is very sweet 
to find how, even in so vast a subject as that which 
was occupying his heart and which he was desiring to 
press upon the saints, he can link on with the highest 
and deepest counsels of God the very simplest of the 
fundamental truths on which the believer rests. This 
is most instructive ; because while, on the one hand, 
we saw before now that it is quite in vain to enter into 



128 EPHESIANS. 

the nature of the Church without having a simple, 
clear, and full understanding of the peace which Christ 
has made and which He is for us in the presence of 
God; on the other hand, when we do seize in any 
measure the character of the Church, when we see the 
astonishing privileges which are ours as being made 
one with Christ, we regard with a more intense enjoy- 
ment the first elements, and we realize the amazing 
stability of the foundations on which our souls are 
privileged to stand. Thus one sees God would take 
care that peace of conscience, and of the heart too, 
should be kept up practically. There is nothing that 
is merely given for the wonder of onr minds. I do 
not say that there is not endless matter for admiration, 
or that there is not an infinity to learn; but every 
step, and indeed the highest attainment of the know- 
ledge of God's purposes in Christ, is intimately linked 
with the confidence of our souls in His love. So that 
while we cannot apprehend aright the nature of the 
Church until we have known simple peace with God, 
when we do enter into it, that peace is brightened in 
the heavenly light of the privileges into which the 
Holy Ghost has been leading our souls. We come 
back with renewed understanding and deeper enjoy- 
ment of the boundless grace which is ours in Christ. 
Hence it is that having ushered us into this wonderful 
expanse of God's love and purposes, he for a moment 
glances at certain practical consequences in us. " In 
whom," says he, " we have boldness and access with, 
confidence by the faith of him." It is not only peace, 
but " we have boldness," which refers more particu- 
larly to our speech in addressing God ; being able, as 
it were, to say anything to Him, because of our con- 
fidence in His love. And " access with confidence," 
which is not merely what we utter, but the drawing 
near to Him, even where there may be no positive 
going forth of heart in the way of formal prayer ; but 
there is the enjoyment of nearness, " access with con- 



CHAPTER III. 129 

fidence by the faith of him." " Wherefore I desire 
that ye faint not at my tribulations for you, which is 
your glory." Here is another practical fruit of this 
blessed truth. We saw before how he introduces the 
unfolding of the Church along with the fact that he 
was a prisoner of Jesus Christ. A.t the very moment 
when he was under the hand of the power of this 
world, and with the possibility of death before him, the 
Lord is pleased to bring out through the apostle the 
glorious calling of the Church. And he reminds them 
of this again. They might have been cast down at his 
sufferings. He says, on the contrary, you should not 
faint ; tribulation ought to be rather that which would 
exercise and strengthen your faith. In 2 Corinthians i. 
the apostle speaks of being pressed out of measure, 
above strength, so that he despaired even of life. But 
when the Corinthians needed comfort, he had it from 
God and was able to give it out to them. Now he was 
under the world's power and in prison, and there God 
unfolds the glory of the Church. They would, no 
doubt, be called to suffer too, and would have to know 
what tribulation was. So that the apostle, in the ful- 
ness of his own enjoyment of the truth which enabled 
him to rejoice even in his sufferings, calls upon them 
not to faint. So entirely has the Spirit df God- united 
together the saints, not only with Christ, but also with 
one another, that what Paul was suffering was their 
glory, not his only. They had a common interest in it 
as being members of the same body, 

" For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family in 
heaven and earth is named, that he would grant you, 
according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened 
with might by his Spirit in the inner man." (Ver. 
14 16.) Here we are on perceptibly different ground, 
and I may say, higher than that of chapter i. It is one 
of the two great relationships in which God stands to 
Christ, and, consequently, to us. For God now acts 

K 



130 EPHESIANS. 

toward Christ, in view not merely of His person, but 
of His work. The consequence is that the work effica- 
ciously puts us in the same place before God which 
belongs to Christ as man, yea, to Christ as man risen 
from the dead and in heaven. I carefully guard against 
saying all that Christ is, for this would not be true. 
"We never can share what pertains to Him as the Son 
of the Father, from all eternity. It were impossible : 
the very conception of it would be irreverent. No 
creature can overpass the bounds which separate him 
from God, neither would a renewed creature desire it. 
For in truth it is the joy of the most exalted creature 
to pay the lowliest homage to Him who is above him. 
Therefore I have little doubt that, in heaven among the 
angels of God, the highest is he who shows the deepest 
reverence. So, in earthly things, it is plainly the duty 
of every one to mark respect to the sovereign ; but the 
one who has the place next to the sovereign has the 
largest opportunities and the strongest obligation to 
prove what the sovereign is in his eyes. So with us 
now in things spiritual. 

In this portion, then, we have the second of the two 
great titles of God in relation to Christ and to us. It 
is not here, as in chapter i., the God, but the Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. The God of Christ brings out 
Christ more as the glorious man, which. He is the 
glorified man in God's presence, the centre of all -the 
counsels of God's power, who is even now exalted in 
the highest seat in heaven, and all things put under 
His feet. But it is plain that Christ has that which 
He values more than all that is set under His dominion 
the love and delight of His Father in Him. Even 
our hearts are capable of understanding and enjoying 
this in the Holy Spirit. Indeed the time comes in most 
men's history, even where the world has counted them 
greatest and happiest, when they find a void that nothing 
can satisfy. But in Christ's case glory will not be the 
withering plant that human handling makes it. We 



CHAPTER III* 131 

know that in His hands it will be equally "bright and 
holy, because God will be the object of it all ; and 
everything, consequently, will be turned to His praise ; 
as it is said, " Every knee shall bow and every tongue 
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God 
the Father." But then no possession of the universe, 
no expulsion of evil, no righteous judgment, no blessed 
control of every creature to the glory of God, could possibly 
satisfy the heart. There will be the salt of the ever- 
lasting covenant of God in it: the constant maintenance 
of God's will and glory will be felt. But there is some- 
thing sweeter than any power, let it be ever so glorious 
or howsoever administered ; and this we have here. It 
is the Father's love which is above all. The effect of 
the first prayer is, that you look down upon the immense 
scene that is put under Christ; and it is intended of 
God that you should. But the effect of the second is 
rather, you look up in the enjoyment of the love that 
is the secret of the glory, the glory being the effect and 
fruit of the love, and that which evidences what the 
love must have been, that has given such glory. But 
blessed as glory is, the love that gives the glory is still 
deeper and better. And hence when our Lord in John 
xvii. prays for the saints when He says, " The glory 
which thou gavest me, I have given them," what is it 
for? " That the world may know that thou hast sent me, 
and hast loved them as thou hast loved me." This is the 
object of it. All are made perfect in one in that glory; 
bat the end of this manifestation of glory is that the 
world may know how much the Father loved them. 
Thus, the glory that is seen, blessed as it must be, is 
not the end of everything. There was love before there 
was glory. And while I would not assert that there 
will be love after there is glory, still I do say that what 
produces, gives, and maintains the glory, is better than 
the glory itself. Ay, and there is nothing in all the 
thoughts of God more wondrous than that God can 
love such as we are with the same, love wherewith He 



132 EPHESIANS. 

loves His Son. And He does so love us ; I know it for 
myself, and dishonour His word if I do not know it. 
If He says it, is it not that I may believe it and take it 
home to my heart, and enjoy it now in this world? 
that I may use it as my constant buckler against every- 
thing that flesh, or world, or Satan can insinuate against 
me? He loves us as He loved Him. Do not say it is 
too high a thought. I know nothing so humiliating 
that so convicts us of being nothing as this that, so 
loved, we should so little feel it ; that, so loved, we 
should so feebly return it ; that, so loved, we should 
yield to the cares, the vanities, the thoughts, the pursuits, 
anything, in short, that is not according to such love. 
It is the delight and, if we may so say, the desire of 
God that those who are His should enter into the great- 
ness of His love. For no glory, nor sense of it, nor confi- 
dence in it, nor waiting for it, ought to be enough even 
for such hearts as ours. It is a wonderful thing to think 
that we are to share the glory of Christ : but more so that 
we have the same love. The same God who gives us 
the glory of Christ, will have our souls enter even now 
by the Holy Ghost into the community of the same 
love ; and such is the grand central thought of this 
prayer: " For this cause I bow my knees unto the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ." 

The Father of Christ is that relationship which 
brings out the love, just as the kingdom of Christ 
is connected with His conferred or human glory. In 
the one case it is what He is going to do for us. If 
we think what He did for Adam, what His purpose 
was about man, what will He not do for the last Adam, 
even Christ ? And all that He does for Him as this 
blessed, glorious man, He will share with us. But 
more than this. The love that the Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ bears to Him, He bears also to us. 
We know how He expressed it when His Son was 
here-^-at what striking moments He brought out His 
love how jealous He was lest man should suppose 



CHAPTER III. 133 

that He was indifferent to His beloved Son. Suffering 
allowed is no proof that He does not love ; yea, rather, 
the contrary it proves how much, not only He 
trusts our love, but how much also He would have us 
to trust His confiding in Him, that, spite of all 
appearances, He loves us as He loves His Son. 
We may be exposed to all that Satan can array against 
us ; but we are only in the same scene which the Son 
of His own love has trodden before us. But when men 
might have thought from this or that, that Jesus was 
no more than any other man, see how God vindicates 
Him. Thus, it was not only that John the Baptist 
tried to hinder the Lord Jesus from being baptized, as 
if He needed to confess anything for that baptism 
was a confession of sins ; and therefore did John show 
his astonishment that there should be even the appear- 
ance of confession on the part of such an one as Jesus. 
But God had deeper thoughts , and allows that there 
should be that which unbelief might torture into the 
insinuation of evil, but which faith lays hold of, and for 
which we . only adore Him and the Lamb yet more. 
So it was that the Father, when His beloved Son rose 
out of the Jordan, where all others were confessing 
unrighteousness where He was fulfilling all righte- 
ousness where He who had no unrighteousness to 
confess, still would not be severed from those who were 
doing that which became their unrighteousness, who 
were owning the God whose rights had been forgotten- 
when, in sympathy with the holy feeling that led them, 
there, He would be with them there : then it was that 
the Father declared, " This is my beloved Son, in whom 
I am well pleased." It was just at the right moment, 
and with the fullest wisdom; but with what love the 
Father uttered these words ! He that served Him as 
He never was served before He that glorified Him as 
God never had been glorified on this earth He that 
finished the work which God had given Him to do 
was God likely to betray the smallest turning aside of 



134 EPHESIANS. 

His heart from Him ? But yet we know that at the 
moment when He most of all needed it, when all else 
was against Him, then, crowning all, God forsook Him. . 
If sin was to be judged and put away for ever, it must 
be judged in all its reality. There must be no sparing, 
nor mitigating the wrath of God about sin. The whole 
judgment of God fell upon Him. The work was done: 
sin was put away by the sacrifice of Himself. 

And now all the love which the Father had towards 
this Blessed One can flow out to us on the ground of 
that work. It is there that the apostle puts us, brought 
into the place of sons with the Father ; and he bows 
his knee to the " Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of 
whom every family in heaven and earth is named." 
The expression " the whole family" is jumbled up with 
people's notions about the Church, as if part were supposed 
to be in heaven and part on earth. But the real force is 
" every family." There is no reference to the unity of 
the Church here. On the contrary, he means that 
when we look at the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
we rise sufficiently high to take in every class of crea- 
tures that God has made. Supposing you look at God 
as He made Himself known of old, it was as Jehovah 
to Israel. Does every family in heaven and earth 
come under this title ? Not a single family in heaven, 
and only one family on earth. Under the title of 
Jehovah there is a separate relationship in which God 
reveals Himself to the Jews. He was their God in a 
sense in which He was not the God of any other people. 
As Creator, He is the God of all ; and thus in some scrip- 
tures the term " God" is used, not Jehovah, because of 
a certain dealing with Gentiles. But where it concerns 
the ancient people of God, he uses the term Jehovah. 
Nay, in the second book of Psalms, when the Holy 
Ghost is contemplating the godly Jew cleaving to 
God far from His temple, we have not Jehovah pro- 
minent, but "God;" for they are not able to enjoy 
what is specially given to Israel. He never will cease 



CHAPTER III. 135 

to be God ; and they find their blessing in this come 
what may God cannot deny Himself. They are out- 
side the special place in which He had promised to 
bless them ; hut God was God everywhere. So that, if 
they were cast out of the Holy Land, and could not go 
up to the temple to worship according to the law, God 
could never cease to be God. It is the very same 
principle of grace that Christ was bringing down the 
poor Syrophenician woman to ; for we must always 
come to our true position ; and the same thing in sub- 
stance is verified in every real conversion. I must 
always be brought down to the truth of what I am, as 
well as receive the truth of what God is; and then 
there is no limit to the blessing. 

I have just referred to this, by the way, for the pur- 
pose of illustrating by contrast the phrase " every family 
in heaven and in earth." When God was revealing 
Himself in special relationship with Israel, it was as 
Jehovah. In Daniel we hear not of Jehovah, but the 
God of heaven, clearly in contradistinction to God re- 
vealing Himself on the earth to a certain people to which 
He gave a .peculiar land and privileges that no other 
nation shared along with them. They go after false 
gods : He takes His place in heaven, and falls back upon 
what never could be denied, and as " the God of heaven" 
He says, I will choose now whom I will; I will take 
the very worst people in the whole world, and will give 
them the empire of the earth. So He chose the enemy 
of the Jew the Babylonians. If God is acting thus 
sovereignly, as the God of heaven, the vilest may have 
the power here below. But "there is a God that 
judgeth the earth;" and when the day comes to verify 
this, it will be in the midst of His people as Jehovah. 
Looked at in this way, He has only one family that 
stands in covenant relationship to Himself: " You only 
have I known of all the families of the earth." But 
here we have the contrast. He is revealed not merely 
as Jehovah, having Israel, His people, upon earth, but 



136 EPHESIANS. 

as " the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ." The mo- 
ment He speaks in such a relationship as this, it is 
expressly in association with One who made everything, 
as was said before, " who created all things by Jesus 
Christ." All creatures therefore come into view, and 
find their due place -with Him as the Father, because 
the Lord Jesus is He who formed all, and for whose 
glory all was made. Hence all families in heaven and 
in earth, let them be principalities and powers, angels, 
Jews or Gentiles, as well as the Church of God all 
come under " the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ." 
The title of Jehovah is restricted to a particular race : 
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is unlimited in its 
range and brings in every class of beings that God 
has made. 

This puts the Church in a most remarkable 
position, taking us away from all that is local or tem- 
porary. We ourselves may have the most special place 
within this display of divine glory, but still we have to 
do with a God and Father who is the proclaimed and 
supreme source of everything else. We may be, we are, 
if we understand the calling of the Church, near to 
Him, in a place that none can share, a nearness that 
no angel enjoys. I mean by " we," all the members 
of the Church of God.' We have by grace a place of 
association with Christ before God, which none others 
enter. But as He is revealing Himself in connection 
with Christ as the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
so He brings in other classes of beings that He has 
made for the purpose of His giving blessing in their 
suited measure. He has brought out the heir and 
centre of all His purposes, and there is not a single 
class of beings that He has made for His praise, but 
what are put in their proper place before the Father of 
the Lord Jesus Christ. It is in contrast with the 
peculiarity of the Jew as being the sole possessor of 
the privileges God gave to them as Jehovah. The 
Father is Jehovah, and so is Jesus ; but it is not thus 



CHAPTER III. 137 

that we have to do with Him ; nor is this our intelligent 
character of address to Him. It is to the Father of 
the Lord Jesus Christ that the apostle is here bending 
his knees. And we ought to he conscious that we are 
drawing near to Him in the full nearness that such a 
title implies. He takes within His eye and heart all 
the creation as that which He means to hless with 
Christ. But there are those that have rejected Christ;, 
and, remember, God's very same love of Christ which 
means to bless the creation through Christ, will main- 
tain His glory against those who despise Him. This 
is a solemn truth. There is nothing more intolerant 
of evil than love, and the gospel of God has, as its 
background, the eternal condemnation of every soul 
that despises Jesus, the Son of God. It must be so. 
The same disciple that was the favoured one of God to 
bring out love as none other had done, is the one who 
brings out the eternal death of those who refuse His 
love. The revelation, therefore, of the endless ruin of 
those that despise Christ, is in the closest possible con- 
nection with the love that brings out the everlasting 
blessedness of those that cleave to Him. Thus we have 
this universality brought in, " Of whom the every 
family in heaven and earth is named." 

But there are, by grace, those who will have that 
which is most peculiar, which is nearest to His heart 
in the midst of this scene of love and glory. For these 
the prayer is, " That he would grant you, according to 
the riches of his glory, to .be strengthened with might 
by his Spirit in the inner man : that Christ may dwell 
in your hearts by faith ; being rooted and grounded in 
love, that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all 
saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and 
height." The prayer in chapter i. was for a deep and 
real apprehension of their standing before God; here it 
is rather for practical, inward power by the Holy Ghost. 
That was that they might know better their place in 
Christ, as to the call of grace and the inheritance of 



138 EPHESIANS. 

glory ; this is that Christ might have His place in their 
hearts by faith. In a word, it is here a question of 
actual state, of the affections having Christ within, of 
"being rooted and grounded in love, that they might be 
thoroughly able (for so it means) to apprehend that 
which is indeed measureless. The apostle does not say 
of what he leaves you there without any ending to the 
sentence. He brings you into infinity. I do not believe 
that it means the breadth, length, depth, and height of 
the love of Christ. The passage is often quoted so, and 
oftener so understood; but the "and" of the next verse 
indicates another sense distinctly: "And to know 
the love, of Christ which passeth knowledge." The 
love of Christ is evidently an additional thought. 
What then is the meaning ? If it were not too bold 
to fill up an outline which the apostle has left thus 
vaguely, I might venture to think that what he puts 
before us here, with such singular marks of undefined 
grandeur, is the mystery of which he had been speak- 
ing, and assuredly not Christ's love, which he immedi- 
ately adjoins. He had shown how every family in 
heaven and earth is ranged under Him who is the 
Father of the Lord Jesus. In connection with this he 
prays, that they might be able to apprehend with all 
saints " what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and 
height." It is in relation to the heavenly counsel of 
God the Father, once a secret, but now disclosed. All 
things were for the glory of His Son the whole 
creation, heavenly and earthly; and the saints are to 
have the very highest place with Him over it all. 

But there was something still deeper than this, and 
which needed to be known along with it. Therefore 
he adds, " And to know the love of Christ which 
surpasseth knowledge, that ye might be filled to all the 
fulness of God." Glorious as all these prospects are, 
what can compare with His love? The best wine is 
kept to the last. " To know the love of Christ which 
passeth knowledge." It may seem to be a paradox 



CHAPTER III. 139 

to say so, but a blessed one. He does not mean that 
we shall ever know it perfectly. But there may be the 
knowing more and more of that which surpasses know- 
ledge. He supposes us launched upon that sea where 
there is no shore: we can never reach the end of His 
love. Yet he speaks of knowing the knowledge- 
surpassing love of Christ;. " that ye might he filled to 
all the fulness of God." You could no more get to the 
end of the love, than you could get to the end of God 
Himself. Nothing can be more wonderful than such a 
desire for us, feeble creatures as we are, " that ye might 
be filled to all the fulness of God." And yet it is for 
the saints now that the apostle thus prayed; not that 
we might know ourselves to be Christ's body, the ful- 
ness of Him that fills all in all, but practically enlarged 
entrance by the power of the Spirit into God's fulness. 
It is the heart's condition, and real growth in com- 
munion with God that is before us here ; and this most 
appropriately after the -standing has been treated, and 
before the exhortations as to walk and conduct. 

Hence further, " Now unto him that is able to 
do exceedingly abundantly above all that we ask or 
think." He does not say, above all that we can ask 
or think. The Holy Ghost takes particular care not 
to say so. There is some difference to be remarked be- 
tween what we do and what we can ask and think. 
There is no limit to what we may ask, save that God 
is above anything that can be asked of Him ; yet He 
loves to hear us asking more and more. He would 
exercise us in asking more abundantly. 

Thus there is dependence on God, " according to the 
power that worketh in us." Whose power is this? It 
is God's, who Himself dwells in every Christian. It is 
God Himself whomakes every saint now, every Christian, 
to be His temple. Therefore, however poor and weak the 
believer may be, looked as he is, yet what cannot God 
make such an one to be ? He is the temple of God. 
God will always be above him, higher than any man's 



140 EPHESIANS. 

expectations of His love ; but it is taken into account 
that there is a power which now works in us, as well 
as a power which has wrought for us, to which we can 
set no limits. As to the power that wrought for us, 
we see it in chapter i. This was the power which raised 
up Christ from the dead. Yes, it is the same power 
that wrought to usward, that has raised us up from 
our death, and that raised up Christ from the dead. 
But now He goes farther, and points to the power 
that works in us to give us entrance into His love and 
God's fulness. Do we remember that this is precisely 
the thing in which we most fail ? For there is many a 
soul constantly proving how little it thinks of this power; 
how apt it is to be murmuring, and tried by the very 
things which, if it only had the sense of His love, it 
would bless Him for. " To him that is able to do ex- 
ceedingly abundantly above all that we ask or think, 
according to the power that worketh in us, unto him 
be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all 
agesj world without end. Amen." In what a special 
point of view the Church appears ! He intimates 
that there will never be a time when the Church 
will not have its own peculiar place. But it is not 
only true that the saints ought to have a wonderful 
introduction into the love of Christ and the fulness of 
God, by His power that works in us now ; but it would 
appear also that there never will be a time, in all the 
ages to come, when there will not be an unique and 
blessed character of relationship between the Church 
as such and God Himself the God and Father of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. And this is confirmed by the 
beautiful scene in Revelation xxi., where we have no 
longer nations and kings, but God with men. There 
it is not said simply, " Behold, God is come to dwell 
with men," but His tabernacle. It is not only that 
God then deigns to dwell with men, but "the taber- 
nacle of God is with men." It seems exactly the same 
thing that is here called the Church. God, dwelling 



CHAPTER IV. 

in the Church, will take tip His place with men ; so 
that the peculiar dwelling-place of God in the Church 
will continue^ even when the scene is an eternal one. 
Thus, when the heavens and earth have passed away, 
after the great white throne, and when all the saints 
will he in their resurrection bodies, then not only will 
God he in face of men, hut " the tabernacle of God" 
will come down to be with men God dwelling with 
them in His own tabernacle, which tabernacle can hardly 
but be that which is here called the Church. So that 
the Church, even in eternity, when all enemies and 
things shall be subdued, will enjoy the sweet and 
amazing privilege of being the home or dwelling-place 
of God. What manner of persons, then, ought we to 
be in holy conversation and godliness ! 

Thus there is dependence on God, but it is One who 
is able to bless us unlimitedly, " according to the power 
that worketh in us." 



CHAPTER IV. 

Before entering upon the subject of ministerial gifts, 
which is brought before us later on in the chapter, the 
Holy Ghost dwells npon the unity that belongs to the 
saints of God in Christ now. It was necessary that 
this should be laid down as a grand platform upon 
and in connection with which ministry takes its course. 
For ministry rather brings into prominence individual 
members of Christ and not so much the entire body. 
For although it is a common statement that the Church 
teaches, it is really and entirely unfounded. Indeed 
the notion leads to the pretence of infallibility ; and this 
finds its most open expression in Romanism. The 
truth is, the Church never teaches, but, on the contrary, 



142 EPHESIANS. 

is the body that is taught. There is no such thing as 
a body that teaches. The Church, no doubt, contains 
within itself the husbandmen that are employed of the 
Lord ; but itself is God's husbandry, or the scene on 
which God labours to produce fruit unto Himself. 
This is an important truth practically; because it 
destroys all pretension on the Church's part to create 
or even define doctrines. The Church is called to be 
the pillar and ground of the truth ; it is bound to take 
care by holy discipline that nothing contrary to the 
truth should be tolerated within it: God's assembly 
cannot relieve itself from this responsibility. But 
while this attaches to the entire Christian community, 
that it should be that body which on earth holds but 
the truth before men and within which we must come 
if the truth, having been believed, is to be acted on 
at all ; yet the way in which God has been pleased to 
work for the spread of His truth upon consciences is by 
individual members of His Church who are qualified 
for this particular purpose. Power to teach depends 
upon the gift conferred by sovereign grace. It is no 
question of an abstract right that any man can teach 
or preach if he likes. There is no such license in the 
Church of God. The Lord Jesus has a right to call 
and to communicate power in the Holy Ghost as He 
pleases. The Church is not a society of men who hold 
particular views on this or that: still less is it the 
gathering into one of the world. It is the assembly of 
God, of those He calls and wherein He dwells. And 
as this is true with regard to the whole that it all 
belongs to God that- it is God who forms, and guards 
itj and maintains His own holiness and glory in it, so 
is it in respect of ministry, which is one very im- 
portant function that is maintained in particular mem- 
bers of the Church. That is, there is the unity which 
the believers now have in Christ Jesus by virtue of 
which there is the assembly of God the common unity 
of blessing in which all believers now stand and which 



CHAPTER IV. 143 

is the groundwork, if I may so say, of everything. But 
in connection with it you have ministry at work, which 
pertains to particular members rather than to the 
whole Church. The gifts are in and of some for the 
good of all. 

This divides the earlier portion into two parts. In 
the opening verses, to the end of verse 6, we find 
rather the unity of the Spirit ; from verse 7 the diver- 
sity of the members of Christ. First of all, observe 
that the Holy Ghost has brought us now to the ground 
of exhortation. We have doctrine in the first three 
chapters ; now we come to practice. " I therefore, the 
prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy 
of the vocation wherewith ye are called." This voca- 
tion consists of two parts more particularly. First, 
the saints, all who know the Lord Jesus now, com- 
pose one body in Him ; secondly, they are the habita- 
tion of God through the Spirit. Thus, although the 
assembly of God is a body existing upon earth, yet it 
is founded upon heavenly privileges, the body of Christ 
showing us our corporate blessedness, the habitation of 
God through the Spirit rather bringing before us our 
responsibility as having God dwelling in the midst of 
us. It is too clear that these two things are very feebly 
entered into even by true children of God. When 
they hear of the body of Christ, the idea is scarcely 
more than that they are forgiven, are children of God, 
and are going to heaven. How very little all this 
is a measure of what is implied in the body of Christ ! 
Many true believers suppose it to mean the aggregate 
of those who are reconciled to God the objects of 
His favour who are not left to die in their sins. But 
one might have all these privileges without any of the 
characteristic features of Christ's body, or God's habi- 
tation through the Spirit. It would have been quite 
possible, if God had been so pleased to order it, that 
Christians should have been children of God, conscious 
of their redemption, knowing their sonship, fully ex- 



144 EPHESIANS. 

pecting to be glorified -with Christ in Leaven, and yet 
never have been joined together as one body in Christ, 
with God dwelling among them by a special presence 
of the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven. This was 
a superadded privilege over and above redemption 
through the blood of Christ. And this is so true, that 
if you search all the Old Testament through, you will 
find that never are the saints of God spoken of there 
as members of Christ's body, the habitation of God 
through the Spirit. 

But more than that. The prophets are full of a 
glorious scene yet to be enacted on this earth, when the 
Lord will put down Satan's power. There is a time 
coming when evil will no longer be permitted to go 
unpunished, nor good to suffer here below; and when 
that day comes, Scripture is plain that although God 
will have a people for Himself upon earth, they will 
not be joined together as one body, nor will they form 
His habitation through the Spirit. It is between the 
two advents of Christ, between the grace which has 
appeared, and the glory which is going to appear 
(Titus ii. 11 13,) that we hear of the special voca- 
tion wherewith we are called. For let us consider 
what the body of Christ is His body, of course, I 
mean, not as predicated of Himself personally, but as 
composed of and applied to those who believe in Christ 
now, that spiritual corporation to which belong all true 
saints of God now found upon the earth and ever 
since Pentecost. What are the blessings which con- 
stitute it ? What does the Holy Ghost mean by mem- 
bership of this body ? I answer, the cross, being the 
witness and expression of the guilt of the Jews more 
especially (the guilt, doubtless, of all men in general, 
but pre-eminently of the Jews), gave occasion for God 
to dissolve completely, for the time being, the peculiar 
place of favour which the Jewish people had previously 
possessed. God Himself blotted out the landmark 
which separated Israel from the Gentiles ; and instead 



CHAPTER IV. 145 

of making Israel to "be the one channel of His promise, 
on the contrary, the tide of blessing turns decidedly 
and conspicuously towards the Gentiles. He gathers 
out of Jews and Gentiles a people for His name, and 
joins together this election out of them both, who be- 
lieve in Christ, in order to the possession of new 
privileges that never had been tasted in like mode or 
measure before. 

One most remarkable feature of the blessing is, that 
the distinction between Jew and Gentile is gone. In the 
cross they united in wickedness before God. But what 
does God use it for ? He says, as it were, I will take 
that very cross which man has made the scene of his 
outrageous rebellion against Me which proved that 
My ancient people were grown violent in hostility 
against Me in the person of My Son ; and I will make 
the cross to be the pivot on which will turn fuller, 
richer blessing than had even been hoped for by be- 
lieving men in this world before. Thus, as the cross 
was the rallying point of Satan to gather men in an 
unholy union against God and His Son, so God makes 
it to be the precious centre where He forms the Jews 
and Gentiles that believe in His Son into a new body, 
where all such distinctions are blotted out for ever. 
And if God is pleased to call out a people for the 
purpose of giving a practical testimony to this new 
display of His love, who is to gainsay it ? The law is 
righteous; and it would be an outrage upon God to put 
the smallest stigma upon the ten words. But while 
the commandment is holy, just, and good, grace brings 
in what is higher and better still. It is right, of course, 
if I do well, that I should be rewarded for it ; but is it 
not more blessed, if I do well, suffer for it, and take it 
patiently? This is grace, acceptable with God, and the 
practical principle on which He is calling His children 
now to act. It was not the public rule of government 
in Old- Testament times, but the contrast of it. Does 
God, then, contradict Himself? Far from it. God 
L 



146 EPHESIANS. 

may have one way of dealing with the Jewish people ; 
and then He may lay down another mode of action 
with Christians. Indeed, who can deny that He has ? 
The Jew would have been guilty of a grievous sin if he 
had not been circumcised; and I believe that, as far as 
the earth is concerned," even in the bright day that is 
coming, the Jew will have his land, city, priest, and 
temple, &c. The will of God for the Jews will remain 
substantially unchanged. I find in the prophecies a 
state of things not yet accomplished, when all these 
outward ordinances of God will be fulfilled. Am I not 
to believe God till I see .the prophecies thus realized? 
It is not thus we treat the word of a good man. But 
if we receive the witness of men, the witness of God 
is greater. And for a man to receive Samuel and 
Kings, and not to believe Ezekiel or Hosea, is to treat 
God as you would not treat an ordinary man. But if I 
believe all that He has said, there are peculiar princi- 
ples of God for the Jews which are still to be carried 
out by the Messiah reigning in power when the devil 
is bound. God will accomplish all that He has spoken 
of in the prophets in the days of heaven upon the 
earth. But meanwhile the Messiah that was promised 
to bring in the glory came, and has been rejected. 
Instead of having a throne, He had the cross ; and far 
from taking the earth for His inheritance, He was cast 
out of it and went up to heaven. A new state of 
things consequently was opened; and for this order, 
altogether different from that contemplated generally 
in the prophecies, we have the New Testament revela- 
tion. Therein we find what meets little intimations 
here and there in the Old Testament, but at the same 
time introduces, as a whole, a scene without precedent 
or successor, where God unfolds privileges that were 
never tasted before, and looks for a walk that He did 
in no way demand even from saints of old. 

There are, of course, certain plain, fixed principles 
always obligatory. God never sanctioned a lie, or 



CHAPTER IV. 147 

covetousness, or malice: no dispensation can neutralize 
or weaken the grand moral distinctions between right 
and wrong. But the God who wrought in earthly 
power to protect His people, and would have protected 
them had they been faithful under the law, now, on the 
contrary, calls His people to suffer in grace. The same 
God who shielded them and brought them through the 
Red Sea, and who would not allow any power to gain 
universal supremacy in the earth till Israel had proved 
themselves unfaithful, then, when they did manifest 
themselves altogether unworthy, permitted Babylon, the 
very worst of the Gentile powers, to overthrow them ; 
and then one empire succeeded another, till finally, 
under the Romans, both Jews and Gentiles united in 
crucifying the Lord of glory. Then the world's doom 
was sealed; the knell of its judgment sounded from the 
cross of Jesus. You might have expected, had God 
been then acting upon principles of righteousness, that 
at once the universe of God would have been convulsed, 
at least Jerusalem and Rome destroyed in His fiery in- 
dignation. Far otherwise. Heaven opens, but it is to 
receive the crucified Jesus, not to judge His murderers: 
it is furthermore to send down the Holy Ghost on earth, 
to form by grace this new body the Church of God ; it 
is to bring those vile murderers of Jesus, if they only 
received Him, into a place of blessing, whose breadth, 
and length, and depth, and height never had been en- 
joyed or known before. And this is grace. " The law 
was given by Moses, grace and truth came by Jesus 
Christ." The gospel of God's grace goes out ; but it 
does not merely save souls it gathers them, unites 
them to Christ, makes them members of Him and one 
of another. The Old Jewish vantage-ground has dis- 
appeared ; the Levitical privileges are completely eclipsed 
as far as the Church is concerned. The Gentiles were 
sunk in idolatry, and the Jews self-complacent under 
God's law which they kept not ; but both are brought 
through the Spirit, by faith in Christ, into this one 



148 EPHESIANS. 

body, and worship God on the same common ground of 
grace. They are " builded together for an habitation 
of God through the Spirit." This is " the vocation 
"wherewith we are called." 

" I, therefore, the prisoner of the Lord," &c. He 
again points to that honourable scar from the world's 
enmity, because he is bringing out in a practical way 
what the consequence was in this world even to the 
greatest servant of God that ever lived (next to Christ). 
After all, he was the Lord's prisoner. What a won- 
derful honour? There were no fiery chariots to sur- 
round him, as with Elijah ; no power put forth to 
preserve him. He is suffering from the same empire 
that crucified the Lord of glory ; and out of his prison 
he is cheering the saints to walk worthy of that same 
calling ! Even now the world is overmatched : what 
will it be when Christ comes? 

Nevertheless, the word is, " With all lowliness 
and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one 
another in love." There was a danger of the contrary : 
spiritual privilege might be misused to puff up the 
saints. He therefore meets this, and shows them the 
only proper tone that becomes the Christian. " With 
all lowliness and meekness." It is a blessed thing to 
find zeal ; but what can redeem the walk of a Christian 
which fails in lowliness and meekness? There is a time 
to be firm and a time to be yielding, but neither gift 
nor position can justify those who seem -to think that 
in their case the exhortation to meekness and lowliness 
has no place. We must take care, on the other hand, 
that it is not meekness in manner or lowliness in word 
only, for God looks in us for what is real. Too often, 
such humility but covers the deepest pride, as love 
and the spirit of Christ are most talked of where they 
least exist. Let us beware of this vain show. 

But supposing there is that in others which you 
cannot overlook, as being contrary to the mind of God, 
how are we to act ? No doubt there should be the fitly- 



CHAPTEE IV. 149 

spoken word of reproof, if needful; but there is to be 
" long-suffering" also ; and if in any place long-suffer- 
ing be specially called for, it is where evil touches 
ourselves. We are not to tolerate evil against the 
Lord; but wherever it is that which injures us, long- 
suffering is the word, " forbearing one another in love, 
endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the 
bond of peace." Here it is not only the lowly grace 
and patience which the Christian has to cherish, but the 
spiritual diligence with which he is called to hold fast 
what is most precious and divine here below. 

" Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in 
the bond of peace." How perfect is Scripture! It 
does not say, " the unity of the body," although in- 
cluding it. But had it been said, " the unity of the 
body," people might have built up (as indeed they have) 
an outward institution and made it a point of life and 
death not to separate from that. But what the Holy 
Ghost lays upon those belonging to Christ is, " en- 
deavouring" showing all needed earnestness not to 
make, but " to keep the unity of the Spirit." It is 
something already made by the Spirit which we have 
to maintain or observe. It is not merely that we are 
to have feelings of love towards our fellow-christians. 
This might be in a thousand different bodies ; but if ever 
so well heeded, this would not be keeping " the unity 
of the Spirit." What is meant then ? The unity of 
the Holy Ghost, which is already formed, embraces all 
the members of Christ. And where are the members 
of Christ to be found? In one sense, thank God, 
everywhere : in another, alas ! anywhere. Wherever 
Christ is preached and souls have received Him, there 
are His members. And what have we to do ? Dili- 
gently to maintain the unity that embraces everyone 
belonging to Christ " in the bond of peace." Here 
we find peace spoken of, not so much for our own souls 
with God, but rather for enjoying and furthering prac- 
tically union among saints of God. The flesh is anxious 



150 EPHESIANS. 

and restless : a peaceful spirit is tlie fruit of the Holy 
Ghost, and mightily contributes to the hinding together 
of hearts in practice. God's Spirit is not occupied with 
merely giving right opinions ahout points : deeper pur- 
poses are His. He is howing souls to Christ, and 
exalting Him in their eyes. But to bring one soul out 
of darkness into light, or out of a little into deeper 
light, is surely precious ; and this is what God Him- 
self is now engaged with. We do well, while holding 
fast our liberty for Christ, not to allow the barriers 
that men have brought in, but to treat them as null 
and void. 

But, then, it will be, as is often, said that every man 
has a right of private judgment. I deny it totally. 
No man has a right to an opinion in divine things ; 
God only and absolutely is entitled to communicate His 
mind. What one has to do is to get out of the way, that 
God's light may shine into the hearts of His children. 
Men, in their self-importance, only cause their dark sha- 
dows to pass over themselves and each other: they thus 
hinder instead of helping the communication of divine 
truth. Whereas, when the desire of Christ's servant 
is, that God may lead on and strengthen His children, 
is it in vain? Never. The moment you begin to 
gather people round a particular person, view, or system, 
you are only forming a sect. For this is a party, though 
it may contain many members of Christ, which forms 
its hasis of union, not on Christ, hut on points of 
difference, which thus become a special badge and means 
of separating between the children of God. The apostolic 
Church never challenged a convert's faith as to an 
establishment or dissent never asked, Do you believe 
in episcopacy, voluntaryism, or even the Church of God? 
The true and God-glorifying enquiry ever was and is, 
Do you believe in the Christ of God ? It is true that in 
early days, if a man confessed Christ, he was cast off by 
Jews and Gentiles, and became an object of enmity to 
all the world ; and this was no slight a guard then against 



CHAPTER IV. 151 

people confessing Christ, unless they really believed in 
Him. But if a man had received the Holy Ghost, 
through the hearing of faith, he was at once a member 
of the one body, and acknowledged as such. 

Why should this not rule now ? Am I not content 
with the wisdom of God ? "Would I then supplement 
His word, or do without or against it ? It is no sect if 
you act upon the mind of God ; it is a sect if you depart 
from it. The question, therefore, is, what is God's in- 
tention about His Church ? How would He have us to 
meet ? Am I willing to receive all real Christians 
persons whom all believe to be converted ? Doubtless 
there is such a thing as putting them out if they prove 
not to be so ; for there is no possible case of evil but 
what the word of God applies to, so that there is not 
the smallest need for any rules or regulations of men. 
Unless men are spiritual, they will not keep the unity 
of the Spirit long ; they will soon find abundant ground 
for fault-finding. But those who hold fast and firm to 
Christ as the centre of the Spirit's unity, as they are 
no sect, so they never can become, one, whatever be the 
schisms, divisions, heresies, of their adversaries. It is 
very sorrowful that any souls should go away in self- 
condemnation, but it is the more blessed for those who, 
spite of all, have faith and patience and grace to stay. 
The apostle said, in writing to the Corinthians, " There 
must needs be heresies among you, that they which are 
approved may be made manifest." These were the men 
who in that day clave to the Lord with full purpose of 
heart. May the same thing be true of us now! I 
deny that the word of God is made of none effect, or 
that I am in any way bound to sin now more than then. 
The unity of the Spirit which the Ephesians had to 
keep, is the unity which God lays upon all His chil- 
dren. If the word has regenerated my soul through 
the Holy Ghost ; if through it I know my Saviour and 
my Father ; if to it I am indebted as the means God 
uses for cleansing my soul from day to day, am I to 



152 EPHESIANS. 

say that I need not follow His word as a member of 
Christ's body in the assembly of God, where He dwells 
in the Spirit? Surely, if my soul owns its divine 
authority, woe is me if I do not seek to follow it in all 
things. God calls on us to be diligent in 'maintaining 
" the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace." It is 
not the unity of our spirits, but the unity of the Spirit. 

When we reflect that it is the Holy Ghost who forms 
this unity, ,is it not a solemn thought ? Ought we not 
to guard against anything that would grieve Him? 
Our Lord attached special importance to what touched 
the Holy Ghost ; and so should we, if wise. If the 
Holy Ghost is here for this purpose on earth, He becomes 
a divine test for souls, whether they are prepared to 
honour Him or not. But people might say, if you 
receive all Christians without requiring them to give a 
pledge for the future, tacitly, if not expressly, you may 
accept a Socinian or an Arian. But I do not acknow- 
ledge such to be Christians at all : do you ? What is the 
Church founded on ? " Whom say ye that I am," says 
our Lord in the very chapter in which He first notices 
that He was going to build the Church. " Thou art 
the Christ," said a disciple, " the Son of the living 
God." And what does our Lord reply ? " Thou art 
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church." 
Hence there ought to be the strongest, strictest dealing 
with souls, whether in deed and in truth they believe 
and confess the divine glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
The smallest compromise as to this allowed would be a 
reason for standing in doubt of any soul. You have no 
ground to receive as a Christian him who tampers with 
the purity, glory, or integrity of the person of Christ. 
The Church is founded on Christ the Son of God : if 
this rock be shaken, all is gone. " If the foundations 
be destroyed, what shall the righteous do ?" To touch 
Christ is to touch the very basis on which the Church 
of God rests. 

But where a soul confesses Christ really and truly, 



CHAPTER IV. 153 

confesses Him in such a way that it commends itself to 
your conscience as divine, receive him ; for God has. 
He may be Baptist or Psedo-Baptist : never mind, re- 
ceive him. If he is living in sin, need I say that Christ 
and drunkenness, &c., cannot go together ? Faith in 
the Son of God is incompatible -with walking in dark- 
ness. No matter how a man may talk about Christ, 
if he joins with that confession a disregard for the 
moral glory of God, he proves by this fact that he is 
not born of God. Simon Magus thought that the gift 
of God could be purchased with money. It was a 
mistake that he made, some will say. Yes, but that 
mistake was vital, and proved that he could not have 
life from God ; and therefore, though baptized, he was 
not received as a member of the body of Christ. We 
have no reason to think that he broke bread at all. 
Baptism would be no reason, in the face of such circum- 
stances, why the assembly should receive him whom 
they do not believe to be a saint. 

This will show in some degree the character or limits 
of the unity of the Spirit. For the Holy Spirit, while 
He calls souls and empowers them to confess Christ, 
never leaves them to walk in the mire of their own 
wickedness. If a believer falls into sin of a certain 
character, he ought to be put away. What is merely 
personal should be dealt with in a private way; it 
would be monstrous to put all failures on the same 
ground. The first and deep feeling of the soul ought 
to be, in vindicating God, to get the person right. The 
Church is a witness of divine grace, and has to seek 
the blessing of the unconverted and the restoration of 
Christians who have gone astray. Are we endeavour- 
ing to keep the unity of the Spirit ? How is it that 
Christians are formed into different associations ? If 
the word of God be that which they at all cost seek to 
carry out, why do they require human rules and modern 
inventions ? If God gives a rule, I do not want another ; 
I do want to have His in all its strength, so as to bring 



154 EPHESIANS. 

forth the truth to a man's conscience, and say, That is 
God's will. Is it well or wise to yield this up ? God 
has written a word that bears upon everything moral, 
by which He intended His children to walk: are we 
doing so? Some may ask, Are you, then, perfect? I 
answer, We are endeavouring to hold fast and in peace 
the Spirit's unity, we are honestly seeking subjection 
to the will of God : are you doing the same ? This is 
the main question for every child of God Am I endea- 
vouring to keep the unity of the Spirit ? And am I 
doing it in God's way or out of my own head ? Have 
I surrendered myself to do His will ? Our business is 
to be dutiful to Him. We have our orders, and our 
responsibility is to carry them out, subject to Him whose 
we are, and whom we are bound to serve. 

But further, this unity is to be kept in the bond of 
peace. God is forming His Church of all those who 
belong to Himself. It is not Christian persons holding 
particular views of this or that; but the Spirit holding 
to His own unity, or to what Christ is to them, not 
to the points in which they differ one from another. 
If I want to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of 
peace, I must have my own soul settled upon this: the 
Holy Ghost is glorifying Christ alone. You cannot 
please the Father more than in exalting the Son ; and 
you cannot touch Him more nearly than by slighting 
His Son. All is secured in maintaining Christ. This 
brings it to the simplest possible "issue. What have we 
to do with forcing people to give up their views and 
adopt ours, let them be ever so correct? God's word 
furnishes a ground, in the name of Christ, on which 
you can embrace all saints, let them be ever so weak or 
prejudiced. Let us beware of being more careful of our 
own reputation or ease than of His will. Let us not be 
vain of our little knowledge, or of the point we have 
attained to in practice. Let us look up to the Lord for 
faith and patience to own every real member and servant 
of Christ, wherever found. Let us cleave to the unity 



OHAPTBK rv. 155 

of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and be diligent in 
maintaining it, whatever the difficulties may be, and 
surely they are great. Faith does not see many bodies 
and one Spirit it knows but one body. Bearing with 
others who in this see dimly or double, let us be rigid 
in holding fast the name of Christ, and for ourselves 
be careful to accredit nothing contrary to it. " There 
is one body and one Spirit, even as we are called in one 
hope of our calling." This is our most essential, vital 
blessing in Christ; "for we are members of his body, 
of his flesh, and of his bones." " One Spirit" is added 
immediately, because it is the Holy Ghost who makes 
it good ; and what we are now, by the power of the Holy 
Ghost, we hope to enjoy by and by with Christ. We 
shall have it fully and perfectly in the presence of God 
in heaven. This is the first unity. 

-There is a difference between this and the following 
verses. The fourth verse is one character of unity, the 
fifth another, and the sixth a third ; and these concen- 
tric unities enlarge respectively. " There is one body 
and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of 
your calling." Nobody enters into this who is not 
born and baptized of the Holy Ghost. This one body 
is on earth, no doubt ; but then it is a real thing and 
of God now, whatever may be the glory proper to it 
hereafter. But in verse 5 you have a more outside 
unity, an area of profession, larger than that of real 
spiritual power. Here " the Lord " is made prominent ; 
and there are many who will say in that day, " Lord, 
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name?" 

Hence we hear next of "one faith," by which is 
meant the Christian faith. If I talk about faith in the 
sense of its being the medium by which we lay hold of 
Christ, and are saved in the grace of God, it is never 
called one faith. By the phrase is meant the common 
faith that all Christians profess, in contradistinction to 
the religion or law of Jews and the idolatry of Gentiles. 
Accordingly, "one Lord, one faith," is followed by "one 



156 BPHESIANS. 

"baptism ;" because whoever professed to believe in Christ 
was baptized with water. Simon Magus received Christ 
nominally, and was baptized, though he soon proved to 
be no Christian. Thus, verse 5 gives us, not the unity 
which is real, and holy, and enduring, but that of the 
Christian profession. 

Last of all, we have " one God and Father of all, who 
is above all and through all and in you all." (Yer. 6.) 
Evidently in this we stand before a still vaster compass. 
There is an immense mass of mankind that does not pro- 
fess Christ at all. The bulk of men have gone on with 
their idols, spite of law and gospel. Are there no claims 
there ? We own " one God and Father of all, who is above 
all and through all and in you all." That is, it is a per- 
sonal God : not at all the idea that everything is God, 
which is infidelity in its worst shape, or Pantheism. 
We own " one God," not a number of divinities, like the 
Gentiles, but " one God and Father of all." The Jew 
did not believe that He was the Father of all, nor even 
properly Father for the chosen nation, but rather their 
Governor, even Jehovah. The Christian revelation 
brings out God in an infinitely larger, as well as for us 
more intimate, character ; but larger, too, as embracing 
all creaturehood " One God and Father of all, who is 
above all, and through all" (His supremacy and pro- 
vidence, but more than these), " and in you all." There 
is His near connection with some, and not with all. 
For it is not said, " in all," but " in you all." The Holy 
Ghost is speaking of the Father's peculiar relationship 
to the Christian. Thus nothing can be more full, and 
beautiful, and orderly than these unfoldings of unity in 
and around Christ our Lord. 

We have now closed the statement which the apostle 
has given us of the unity of the Spirit, the common 
place which pertains to all the children of God who are 
being called through His grace by the Holy Ghost sent 
down from heaven. We enter now the special ways in 



CHAPTER IV. 157 

which the Lord calls upon the various memhers of His 
body to serve Him not so much the common position 
which all must have who belong to Him, but the 
peculiar privileges and responsibilities of each individual 
member of Christ. And thus the seventh verse opens : 
" but unto every (or each) one of us is given grace ac- 
cording to the measure of the gift of Christ." This is 
the basis. Christ, according to His own good pleasure, 
as Head and Lord, is giving certain gifts. It is im- 
portant to observe that this is the point of view in 
which the Holy Ghost presents ministry in Ephesians. 
There is no one brought, I need hardly say, into such 
unequivocal prominence as Christ. In Corinthians, on 
the contrary, the Holy Ghost is more prominent than 
Christ. Both aspects are necessary to God's glory and 
equally perfect in their place ; but they are not the same 
thing. There is the wisdom of God in each epistle 
suited to the special object that God Himself aims at. 

It is impossible for any spiritual mind to look back 
upon the Epistle to the Ephesians without perceiving 
that the great truth of it is the fulness of blessing which 
belongs to the Church in virtue of its union with 
Christ. This, accordingly, brings Christ into relief. 
On the other hand, we cannot study the Epistle to the 
Corinthians, and particularly that part of it where the 
subject of spiritual manifestations is treated of, without 
seeing that it is not so much a question of Christ ex- 
alted at the right hand of God, as of the Holy Ghost 
sent down here below. The consequence is that in 
Corinthians we have rather the assembly upon earth and 
the divine person who is pleased to dwell and work in 
it. Thus the Holy Ghost is brought there into view ; 
whereas, in Ephesians, it is Christ as the Head of the 
Church, who is regarded still as the giver of these gifts. 
Indeed in no part of Scripture is the Holy Ghost repre- 
sented as properly the giver; and I doubt much, with 
another, that the expression " gifts of the Spirit" is an 
accurate phrase. You may find, in Hebrews ii. 4, a 



158 EPHESIANS. 

text which seems to imply as much; but it is the " dis- 
tributions of the Spirit." Wherever giving is simply 
and distinctly spoken of, it is Christ who is regarded as 
the giver. So our Lord Himself says of that which lies 
at the source of all, " the water that I shall give him 
shall be in him a well of water," &c. The water here 
represents the Holy Ghost. Hence, He is viewed in 
this place as the gift and Christ is the giver. And as 
this is true of that great foundation-truth, namely, the 
presence of the Holy Ghost Himself, so is it of all the 
details. Christ, the Head of the Church, is dealing in 
the individual members according to His own gracious 
affection ; for this is the blessed side of the truth which 
is held up here. " Unto each one of us is given grace 
according to the measure of the gift of Christ." He is 
speaking about ministerial gift; but it is called grace 
here because it is regarded not so much as a position of 
authority (though some of these gifts involve it) but of 
One who loves His Church and cares for each member 
of it ; and He cannot fail to supply whatever is suitable 
and worthy of Himself and His love. " Unto each one 
of us is given grace according to the measure of the 
gift of Christ." 

And this leads to another remark of a general kind. 
The Epistle to the Corinthians gave you an ampler field 
in which the Holy Ghost is presented as working ; you 
have miracles tongues healings the remarkable 
ways in which the Holy Ghost acts in outward power. 
All this is left out here. To what principle are we to 
attribute it? For God does nothing arbitrarily; but 
always with a love and wisdom worthy of Himself, and 
surely intended for our profit. What He has not 
revealed, it becomes us not to inquire ; but what He has 
made known in His word, we are clearly free, nay bound, 
to seek to learn simply and thankfully. Why then have 
we also the more eternal operations of the Spirit in 
Corinthians ? And why, in writing to the Ephesians, 
are the outward manifestations left out and only those 



CHAPTER IV. 159 

spoken of which pertain to the growth of the soul, the 
founding of the Church, and the carrying of it >on, 
the keeping up holy growth and fellowship and godly 
order among the children of God ? For to these alone 
the statements of this chapter apply. The key, I 
believe, is found in what we have already hinted. In 
Corinthians the prominent thought is the Holy Ghost 
present in the Church, and whatever He does comes 
before us. And as the Holy Ghost may work in an ex- 
traordinary manner and is the power of that which is 
sensibly supernatural as well as of that which meets the 
wants of the soul, hence all is brought before us there. 
But in Ephesians, where Christ is viewed in immediate 
relationship to His Church, and where it is His love 
and the care for the members of His body which flows 
out of that love, it is plain that whatever merely deals 
with the world and is a witness to unbelievers would be 
not needed but superfluous : only that which has to do 
with the members of Christ is in place and season. Oh 
that we only had more patience and confidence in God 
and His word ! We should find the answer to every 
difficulty in due time. God owns the heart's reliance 
upon Him. By examining a particular part in the light 
of the whole book where it occurs, how often we discern 
that which gives us the right clue to its meaning. 

But before looking at the gifts themselves, I would 
just draw attention to what is of still deeper interest 
and importance, the basis on which the giving of these 
gifts by Christ depends. For we have all suffered 
immensely from mere traditional views of ministry, 
regarding it as in general an honourable profession 
among men, or a certain position which has a status 
attached to it. These things entirely falsify the nature 
of ministry; and the consequence is that the full 
blessing and meaning of the word are so far lost for 
the soul. Do not mistake me. I deny not that God 
works where much is unscriptural. He is always right, 
and the failure of the Church, or of ourselves individ- 



160 EPHESIANS. 

ually, cannot toucli His sovereign goodness, who always 
watches over all and each member of Christ for blessing. 
But then He allows failure to show itself and permits 
that we should suffer the consequence of it to humble 
us and make us feel that all the good is from Him, 
that all the evil is on our part. Throughout the whole 
history of Christendom appear these two things : man 
corrupting his way upon the earth, and God showing 
Himself above the evil that His light judges. This is 
true of ministry as it is of all else. 

Hence if we turn to Scripture and see the ground on 
which ministry rests, we shall find that nothing can be 
more glorious; but, alas! nothing more contrary to 
that which ordinarily is its form among men. For its 
basis is not short of the redemption that Christ has 
accomplished by His blood, and of His ascension to 
heaven. Christian ministry flows from Christ at the 
right hand of God; it did not exist before. I do 
not deny that God had His ways of acting in Israel. 
But there His dealings partook more of the character 
of priesthood, from which ministry differs totally in 
character. Earthly priesthood is a caste of men who 
deal with God on behalf of those for whom they are 
priests : that is, they undertake the spiritual business 
of persons unable for one reason or another to transact 
it with God directly, and consequently dependent upon 
these mediators between God and them. The priest 
goes where the people cannot go, enters the holy place, 
presents the blood, burns the incense, deals with God 
in short for each spiritual want of those whom he 
represents. Ministry starts upon quite different ground, 
being an action, through man, from God toward men, 
and not from man toward God. The two are clean 
contrasts of each other. As to the servant of God, if 
truly one whom God raises up, who has a message from 
Him and a work to do for Him, that message or work 
is by God's authority for the blessing of men. Hence, 
if you take an evangelist, what is he ? One who, him- 



CHAPTER IV. 161 

self taught of God for his own soul's need, not only 
knows the way to be saved, but has a power, which he 
did not possess before, given him of Christ, to act upon 
the souls of others. Every Christian ought to be able 
to confess truth, to confess Christ ; yet this does not 
make one an evangelist, but so to state the gospel as to 
act powerfully on souls, specially of the unconverted, 
and thus awaken, clear, or establish in the grace of 
God. The spiritual action is by the Holy Ghost ; but 
it is from God and His beloved Son, Christ our Lord, 
toward man. Thus, the gift, under the Lord's hand, is 
exercised in love of souls to seek their good, and implies 
or is rather power from above to act upon them. 

Take again the gift of teaching. There you have 
another form of the power of God. Many understand 
the truth for their own souls' enjoyment, but they can- 
not help others: they are unable to put the truth so 
convincingly before believers, or so to deal with the 
affections, as to carry home the truth with energy to the 
soul. Where this is done, there is the gift of teaching. 
But I have only referred to it for the purpose of con- 
trasting the nature of priesthood with ministry, and of 
showing that the confusion of the two things is a lamen- 
table consequence of the state of the Church. If people 
go to hear a sermon, they say they go to worship. 
Men are so habituated to confound teaching with wor- 
ship that the two things are supposed each to involve 
the other. 

I admit there is such a thing as Christian priesthood : 
still ministry is wholly distinct. All Christians, with- 
out exception, men, women, and children, are priests; 
for the priest is one who has a divine call and qualifica- 
tion, which gives him access to the presence of God. 
Priesthood, in a word, gives the title of the soul to 
draw near to God. This is always its distinguishing 
character. On the other hand, ministry in the word is a 
varied service; but it is only by particular members 
of the body that Christ thus acts for the good of all. 

M 



] 62 EPHESIAKS. 

Hence while priesthood is universal, and no person can 
be a Christian without being a priest, it is only a few 
among the many who are what Scripture calls ministers 
of the word or public servants of Christ. I am not 
speaking of the vague sense in which all ought to be 
serving Christ every day of their lives ; but the ques- 
tion now is of proper ministry in the word ; and it is 
plain that all have not the power to preach the word of 
God profitably for the souls of others. The great mass 
of God's children require to have the path of God 
pointed out and difficulties removed, the right handling 
of which things depends upon, or constitutes, ministry 
in one form or another. 

Ministry, then, as said before, is from God to man ; 
priesthood is from man to God. When we meet to 
worship God, it is an exercise not of ministry, but of 
priesthood. Perhaps one or more of the persons who 
take part in it might be ministers ; but for the moment 
they are not ministering, but worshipping. Worship 
is the exercise of Christian priesthood, the offering up of 
praise and thanksgiving. This is from man towards 
God it is the direction of priesthood. Hence where 
there is an outflow of praise and thanksgiving, you have 
the highest character of priesthood. Intercession and 
prayer are a lower form, though intercession be blessed 
indeed, because it takes up the wants of others. But, 
strictly speaking, worship rather consists of praise and 
thanksgiving. Hence it is that the Lord's Supper, the 
Eucharist, forms so central a part of Christian worship. 
It is that which most powerfully, and in solemn joy, calls 
out our souls in the remembrance of Jesus and thanks- 
giving to God. And hence, though, of course, the 
taking the bread and wine cannot be regarded as in 
itself worship, yet it is that which acts upon the soul 
and draws out the heart, by the Holy Ghost, in the 
worship of God. Where the Lord's Supper is regarded 
as a means of grace, persons repair to it for comfort, or 
at least the hope of it. It is never so presented in the 



CHAPTER IV. 163 

word of God. On the contrary, if the communicants 
did not enter into the mind of God in the Supper (i. e., 
did not discern the Lord's body), it became a means of 
judgment to them. " He that eateth and drinketh 
unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to himself, 
not discerning the Lord's body." By this were meant 
not spurious Christians, but Christians ever so real, 
who were taking the Lord's Supper in a light spirit and 
without self-judgment. Where a soul, therefore, is 
walking in known sin, and comes to the table of the 
Lord, the effect is that the hand of the Lord is stretched 
out in one way or another, and it is impossible to escape 
when thus trifling with God. Again, if one put him- 
self outside to avoid this, he is proclaiming his own sin 
and practically excommunicating himself. Thus, there 
is nothing for a soul but to go straight forward and to 
look up to God for grace to watch against sin, yea, the 
least risings of it, and in self-judgment to lean on the 
Lord who alone can strengthen us to walk worthily of 
Him. To such an one the word is, " So let him eat;" 
it is not, Let him stay away ; but let him judge himself 
and come. 

These two things, then, worship and ministry, ought 
never to be jumbled together. There may be a word 
spoken at the table of the Lord, helping on communion ; 
but this can scarcely be called the ordinary exercise of 
ministry. A regular discourse there would be, I con- 
ceive, most irregular : it would distract from the prime 
object which the Lord intends. There may be the 
unfolding of the affections of Christ, or in particular 
circumstances there might be even more, such as one 
visiting for a limited time, as when Paul continued his 
discourse till midnight. But the Lord's Supper having 
no connection with ministry, but rather with the mem- 
bers of Christ remembering their Lord, and with their 
worship coming together to praise Him, it is plain that 
the formal exercise of ministry, properly speaking, finds 
its place elsewhere, not at the table of the Lord. A 



164 EPHESLMTS. 

brief word that would awaken the soul's affections and 
gather them up to Christ whom we are remembering, 
is most comely and seasonable, if the Lord so give ; but 
it is important to see the scriptural place, and order, 
and aim of the two things. In ministry you have the 
Lord providing for the spiritual supply of His people's 
wants. And on what is this founded ? Upon the fact 
that Christ has gone on high as Head, having first put 
away sin and glorified God on earth; and from His 
present seat of heavenly glory He is communicating 
the needed gifts. By what title has Christ taken His 
place ? Not as God, nor simply as man. Neither did 
Christ enter into the presence of God, because Satan 
had not been able to touch Him, when tempted in all 
points. There was a still more solemn scene the 
great hour for which He came the bearing of sin- 
the cross, where He made Himself chargeable with 
every failure, with my sins and with your sins. He has 
done so. Christ has only taken His place at the right 
hand of God on the ground of His having put away 
sin by the sacrifice of Himself. Upon this basis 
ministry is founded. God's righteous judgment has 
been borne and vindicated; sin and Satan are com- 
pletely vanquished for us by Christ. The testimony of 
divine grace, yea, the fulness of it, can be the portion 
of the believer now without hindrance. The victory for 
God in behalf of the most guilty sinners is won. And 
Christ has taken His place in the highest seat of 
heaven as the victorious man. As such He has carried 
humanity to the throne of God, and is there, as man, 
set down far above all angels, principalities, and powers. 
From thence it is that He gives these gifts. 

Christian ministry, therefore, owes its very origin to 
this the full remission of sins on God's part and the 
heavenly glorification of man in Christ's person. They 
are .fruits and witnesses of complete victory. Yet is it 
all and only made known to faith, save so far as 
miracles once were a sign to unbelievers. What is the 



CHAPTER IV. 165 

consequence ? Man goes on in sin. Satan still roams 
about as a roaring lion, seeking whom lie may devour. 
The judgment of God is hanging over the world. 
What then is the value of the death of Christ, and of 
His . victory ? Immense, but immense only for those 
who believe in Christ; and, therefore, in the midst of 
this ruined world, and while sin and Satan are there, 
the judgment of God impending, there is this wonderful 
link between Him who is at the right hand of God and 
those who were once poor, lost sinners in the sight of 
God. He sends down gifts ; He calls out this one and 
that one, and makes them to be the witnesses of His 
power, who has won all this and more ; who has, in 
short, left nothing undone that is needed for the glory 
of God and the blessing of man. The world hears the 
sound only to slight the good news, and even the child 
of God sees it dimly if he reasons about it ; but if I 
believe what God tells me His beloved Son has done, 
I ought to know that all these things are gone as be- 
tween my soul and God with as simple a certainty as if 
they had never existed at all. I ought to be as sure 
that sin is blotted out, as if I had been guilty of none 
that Satan is as thoroughly judged as if he were in the 
lake of fire that God's righteous judgment is com- 
pletely stayed, and that nothing but His grace remains 
for me. It is true of all His children. It is the only 
thing that becomes a Christian, because it is what God 
provides for him. God does not own Christian people 
in their trouble or hesitation whether all is finished for 
them. To doubt that all which Christ undertook is 
settled in their favour, is practically to deny redemp- 
tion ; and if all this is done and accepted, what more 
can I want ? Did not Christ know better than myself 
what was needed ? Did not God feel what was due to 
His holiness more than you or I ? And yet He who 
was and is God said, " It is finished." Who or what 
am I to doubt it ? To Christ, therefore, I owe it to 
bear this witness. 



166 EPHESIAXS. 

Ministry is founded upon Christ's work and exalta- 
tion. There were the twelve and the seventy sent out, 
no doubt, before Christ went up to the right hand of 
God, but their mission during the days of Christ's flesh, 
is excluded from Ephesians iv. Apostles are mentioned 
of course, but not in virtue of their call while He was 
the Messiah, on earth. On the contrary, " when he 
ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave 
gifts unto men." Not that those who had been ap- 
pointed apostles when Christ was here below, were not 
also brought into this new place, Judas excepted ; but 
that their being apostles of the Church is founded upon 
their having this gift of Christ after He had ascended 
on high. Therefore it is here said, " He gave some 
apostles." Why had there been twelve ? In relation 
to the twelve tribes of Israel ; and so, when our Lord 
sent them out, He forbade them to go into any city of 
the Gentiles. But the apostles of the Church, are they 
sent only to the Jews ? Every one knows that it is 
not so. After Christ was crucified, the links with 
Israel were broken. The rejected, suffering Son of 
man ascends to heaven, and from His heavenly glory 
He sends down the Holy Ghost, and calls out from the 
world in sovereign grace, constitutes members of His 
body, and endows with power to serve Him in what- 
ever way seems good to Himself. 

Hence what is called succession, is completely dis- 
posed of. In Jewish priesthood there was successional 
order, and all earthly ministry forms itself on this 
model. But Christian ministry is not of human ap- 
pointment, but divine in the fullest sense ; and therefore 
the whole source of man's thoughts on the subject is 
a manifest and total fallacy. Are we to abandon the 
clear word of God for the passing opinions of men ? 
If so, I shall never know any certainty at all. The 
Dissenter will say a church must call a man to be their 
minister. He may have and be a ministerial gift from 
Christ; but what makes a man to be their minister is 



CHAPTEH IV. 167 

fheir own call. Thus, it is founded on a particular 
church electing whom they please to.be their particular 
minister. He is their choice and therefore their minis- 
ter. But what if there be no such thing in Scripture ? 
What if such an idea be foreign to the word of God ? 
There is not even a hint of it to be found there. We 
have the appointment of men to take care of the funds 
and of the poor, and this with the concurrence of the 
assembly. No person ought to undertake such a work 
unless he have the just feeling of satisfaction in the 
whole Christian assembly. The Church gives what she 
can, and therefore is entitled by God to say who shall 
take care of their trust; that is, who shall transact the 
outward business of the Church. But in spiritual 
gifts, in teaching, preaching, exhorting, ruling, can the 
Church give ? Clearly not. The word of God con- 
tains nowhere such a notion as the Church choosing or 
appointing, except in such gifts as the Church can 
confer. The Church gives money, and can appoint 
persons to administer it. The Church does not give 
ministerial gifts, and has no title nor room to interfere. 
Who has ? It is Christ alone who gives, as we find 
here : " According to the measure of the gift of Christ." 
" When he ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto 
men: some apostles, some prophets." This excludes 
even the true Church of God from any claim of power 
to appoint ; and if it be examined, you will see how the 
scriptural history agrees with and confirms the prin- 
ciple. Who but the Lord chose Matthias? Who 
appointed Peter or the rest ? Who addressed the mul- 
titude on the day of Pentecost ? It could not be the 
Church, for the Church was only formed on that day. 
Peter preached, and by his preaching the Church was 
gathered. It was the Lord thus brought such as 
should be saved; so that ministry precedes the Church, 
as the atonement and ascension of Christ precede 
ministry. The Lord from on high calls the vessels of 
His grace, communicates power, leads forward by His 



168 EPHESIANS. 

Spirit's guidance, working by and controlling all cir- 
cumstances, so that His servants shall be more or less 
faithfully doing His work. The consequence is, souls 
are gathered and the Church is formed. Thus ministry 
in the word never flows from the Church, but from 
Christ, and the Church is the result. Ministry is 
therefore antecedent to the Church, instead of being 
founded on its authority. Hence it is that you have 
not only the dissenting principle of popular election 
entirely put aside, but every other human device. It 
was not the apostles, but Christ who gave gifts. And 
has He ceased to give them ? Is He at the right hand 
of God still ? Then, I ask, is He there as the Head 
of the Church ? Does He not remain now as perfectly 
and efficaciously the Head of the Church as before the 
day of Pentecost ? Then He was there, bringing the 
Church into being ; and now He is there, to perpetuate 
the Church and supply all its need. It is as impossible, 
therefore, for ministry to fail as for Christ to leave the 
right hand of God before the body is complete. But 
He is there as the giver of all needful gifts ; and the 
exercise of these gifts is what we call ministry. 

But if we look further, there is a most magnificent 
parenthesis of the apostle on this subject. " Therefore 
he saith, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity 
captive and gave gifts unto men." That is, He led 
those captive who had led the Church captive. We 
were led captive of the devil, and Christ going up on 
high passed triumphantly above the power of Satan. 
The fallen spirits were completely defeated and by 
Christ as man. Man has conquered Satan in the per- 
son of Christ, and we can look up as those that are one 
with Him who has defeated Satan. We ought never 
to treat with Satan as if he had power against us. We 
are entitled always to bid a detected Satan depart from 
us. We may and should always resist him : and we 
are told that, if so, he will depart from us ; not because 
\ve are strong, but because He to whom we belong has 



CHAPTER TV. 169 

gotten Him the victory by death and has given it to us. 
" Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also 
descended first into the lower parts of the earth." 
This supposes the glory of His person. He that is 
gone up is the One that first came down. 

It is indeed the constant principle of God; He is 
always the 'first to come down. We require to be lifted 
up and have nothing of our own to come down from. 
Christ, being God, was the only man who had glory 
proper to Himself and above all creaturehood. He de- 
scended first into the lower parts of the earth. His 
very humiliation is the proof of His own personal dig- 
nity. From His natural supremacy, so to speak, He 
descends first to do His work here below. " He that 
descended is the same also that ascended up far above 
all heavens, that he might fill all things." Thus we 
have here a most magnificent sight of our Saviour. 
The Holy Ghost gives us in two short verses the grand 
sweep of His glory and triumph, who condescended to 
be a man and a servant. He that is gone up now is 
the same that first came down, and who only would go 
up again into glory when He had completely put away 
all that must have for ever kept us from Him. But 
He came down to put it away and would not re- 
turn on high till it was done. He so loved us, with a 
love according to the glorious counsels of God, that our 
sins, gross and fatal as they were, only gave Him the 
opportunity to show what God is, and is to us, in His 
own person. And now it is a question of God's righte- 
ousness, not only to Him but to us, because of Him. 
What a difference ! He might come down in love, but 
that of itself would not give us a place in the presence 
of God ; but He is gone up in righteousness ; and this 
is the reason why our Lord says that, when the Spirit 
was come, He should convince the world of righteous- 
ness, " because. I go to the Father." You have the full 
display of righteousness now in Christ seated at the 
right hand of God. Righteousness toward Him in this 



170 EPHESIANS. 

world was nowhere found, but the foulest wrong and 
indignity. Where must I look for it ? At the right 
hand of God. I see One there to whom God, with 
reverence be it spoken, is indebted for the display and 
vindication of His moral glory, to whom He owes the 
only adequate exhibition of all that which manifested 
and maintained His character before men, even in the 
man Christ Jesus. God never had His character at all 
fully retrieved since sin came into the world till Christ 
died on the cross. When His blood was shed for the 
glory of God and the deliverance of man, God shone 
out in a new light before this world. God was no 
longer regarded as the hard master that Satan's lie mis- 
represented Him to be. The veil was rent ; the truth 
could no longer be hid that there was no proof of love 
the creature could have asked of God but what God 
had surpassed it in His Son, dead, risen, and glorified 
above. Up to the death of Christ God's righteousness 
must have destroyed every creature that had a sin upon 
it. Now, on the contrary, it is the righteousness of 
God to justify me, a believer, though I have been a 
vile sinner; and for this reason, that, although my sins 
in the one scale must have sunk myself alone down to 
hell, yet there was, in the other scale, Christ and His 
blood far outweighing all and raising me up to heaven. 
What is the consequence? My sins are clean vanished 
before that precious blood, and the scale of Christ 
proves itself to be the only one that keeps its weight 
before God. Upon this now hangs the very righteous- 
ness of God. It is no longer a question of legal 
righteousness ; but now He has Christ, and this is what 
God owes to Christ's obedience unto death, even the 
death of the cross ; by virtue of which God righteously 
clears the guilty, which, as dealing according to the 
law, He could by no means do. " By him all that be- 
lieve are justified from all things, from which they 
could not be justified by the law of Moses." What 
was known of God in creation contained no provision 



CHAPTER IV. 171 

for sin; what was known of Him under the law would 
have only blasted the smallest hope of the sinner. 
Whereas now, the more I see what God is in Christ's 
cross, the more confidence and peace I have. " This is 
life eternal, to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus 
Christ whom thou hast sent." 

We see, then, in these verses, the heavenly source of 
ministry. It is not a position which, according to God, 
gives importance in the world. The labourer, we all 
know, is worthy of his hire. But do you not see that 
the Apostle Paul would not use the title to support 
that the gospel gave him? He would not have what 
he calls his confident boasting made nothing of; for 
though he had power, he preferred to work with his 
own hands rather than be burdensome. And this is 
the wonderful liberty of grace: under it there is nothing 
we cannot do, except sin. But though all things are 
lawful, they are not all expedient ; and, no doubt, it 
was in the wisdom of God that the great apostle did 
what many servants of Christ would be ashamed to do. 
What a fearful declension there is from the whole 
spirit as well as letter of Christianity ! How complete 
the change from the character of the gospel, that men 
Protestants or Catholics, Churchmen or Dissenters, 
Presbyterians or Methodists should alike consider as 
a blot and matter of censure that which was the boast 
of the apostle ? There was a weighty principle involved 
in his conduct. He received a gift from the Philip- 
pians ; help was sent to him in prison as well as out. 
He desired fruit that might abound to the account of 
the saints. If the apostle had not occasionally received 
from them, it would have been loss to their souls. 
Christianity does not mean that saints should use for 
themselves what they owe to God, and what grace loves 
to do for all and any one. But the apostle never acted 
either so that it could be said that he served himself by 
the gospel, or that he was indifferent to the saints. 
God took care that it should be so in Paul's case. The 



1 72 EPHESIANS. 

smaller gifts there would have been the danger of de- 
spising. But the gracious effort of the apostle was to 
maintain the less ; the greater less needed his ample 
shield. But where any gave themselves up to gospel 
service, the apostle takes the utmost care to affirm their 
title to live of the gospel. Let those who so live take 
care that in this they serve the Lord Christ. 

" And he gave some, apostles ; and some, prophets." 
I apprehend that the apostles and prophets are clearly 
what might be called the foundation gifts, such as God 
used for the purpose of laying a broad and deep platform 
on which the Church was to he built. This was done 
by those whom God empowered in a special manner. 
The apostles and prophets were the two classes that 
first of all entered as instruments into the calling of 
the Church of God. Evangelists were at work from 
early days, also pastors soon after. But the first two, 
apostles and prophets, were peculiar in their full force 
to the original laying down of the Church of God. 
There is no ground to suppose that, in the strict sense, 
apostles and prophets were meant to continue, or do so 
in fact, though something analogous to an apostle may 
be raised up at fitting times. Take Luther, for in- 
stance. There was a partial recall of the saints of God 
generally to fundamental truth, which had been long 
lost sight of. This answers, in a little measure, to 
what an apostle did. A prophet, again, was one who 
not merely expounded the Scriptures, hut who so 
brought home the truth as immediately to connect the 
soul with God. 

At the very beginning, men of God appeared who 
were not apostles, nor necessarily inspired communica- 
tors of truth, such as Mark and Luke; but prophets, 
like Judas and Silas. (Acts xv. 32.) The Scriptures 
were not all written when the Church began, nor were 
the apostles everywhere. God, therefore, raised up 
prophets, who, in certain cases at least, were the means 
of revelation. And why is it that we have not such 



CHAPTER IV. 173 

channels now? Because revelation is complete: we 
have the word of God, and want no word more. To 
suppose another revelation now, would be to impair 
what we have; so that' the need for these prophets in 
the highest sense is closed with the canon of Scripture. 
In a subordinate sense, what would answer to the pro- 
phetic work in question is the revival of truth and power- 
ful action on saints at large by recalling what was once 
revealed, but completely evaporated. Take, for instance, 
the capital point of the coming of the Lord as the hope 
of the Church. This truth has suffered a long and 
almost total eclipse. Within our own day it has again 
shone out with a certain measure of power from God. 
In what writing, since the days of the apostles, do you 
find the nature and calling of the Church set forth ? 
where the unfolding of the Church's hope the Lord's 
coming to receive the Church and to give it a heavenly 
place? These truths had slipped away from the minds 
of men, until recovered within the last thirty or forty 
years. Justification by faith had been partially known 
by Augustine and Bernard. The Waldenses possessed 
great faithfulness but not clear doctrine. But the 
nature of the Church as the body of Christ, and the 
character of the Christian's hope, were most completely 
lost sight of, as far as I am aware. They had vanished 
from the Church. And it seems to me that the recovery 
of these truths resembles prophetic work in this particu- 
lar, though one might hesitate to call any used in the 
work either an apostle or a prophet. 

When we come to the next classes of gifts, namely, 
" evangelists, pastors, and teachers," it is plain that we 
have these still at work, more or less, in the present 
broken state ; and not confined to these believers or 
those, but distributed throughout, as the Lord pleases. 
Men confound ministry with local charges. It may be 
said, that I have slurred over a part of Scripture the 
apostles laying their hands on the elders, &c. With 
the most entire recollection of it, let me say that elders 



174 EPHESIANS. 

are not the same thing as ministers. Ministry is the 
exercise of a gift from Christ ; elders were appointed by 
men, but never except by apostles or apostolic delegates, 
such as Titus was. How do we stand with reference to 
that question now ? Where are the men who are duly 
authorized to appoint elders to-day? Do you know 
any better than I where they are to be found ? Some 
people, no doubt, pretend to the power of appointment, 
but the pretension does not make their appointing 
valid. In civil things, if one man were without full 
authority to appoint another to be a magistrate, he 
would run the risk of being punished severely. Is it 
possible that in the things of God interference with the 
authority of our Lord is of less moment ? It is not, 
that some sections have apostles and some have not, 
for no one has them more than another. I do not see 
that much is gained by assuming to do the work of an 
apostle, where it is only assumption. It is surely more 
humble not to pretend to apostolic work, if we are not 
apostles. We cannot legitimately ordain elders, because 
we want for it apostolic authority. Is it not most in 
accordance with the lowliness that becomes us, to abide 
within the limits of our powers ? I do not admit that 
any one living is entitled to choose elders, or anything 
else of the sort, because there is neither an apostle nor 
an apostolic man commissioned by the Lord for the 
purpose. If men assume to ordain, they should prove 
their title. 

But ministry and eldership are not the same thing ,- 
they are almost always confounded, but they differ 
totally. These two things are found in Scripture: 
local charges, duly ordained by apostles or their dele- 
gates ; and ministerial gifts, which never required 
human authentication. In Scripture, no person was 
ever chosen to be an apostle, nor called to be a prophet 
or an evangelist, except by Christ. It was precisely 
the same with pastors and teachers, as we see in our 
chapter; and why should it not be the same still? 



CHAPTER IV. 175 

Christ has not vacated His office ; and it is His office 
to call and give pastors, evangelists, teachers, &c. But 
there is another principle quite distinct from that in- 
volved in these gifts, namely, that Christ warranted the 
apostles to act in the way of authority. In virtue of 
this, they appointed persons to be elders or deacons, as 
the case might be. We cannot do what apostles did 
unless we are clothed with like authority ; but we have 
Christ ever abiding the immediate giver of ministerial 
gifts : this is always true. Ministry does not and never 
did depend upon apostles or the Church, but upon 
Christ ; and therefore it cannot lapse. But as the ap- 
pointment of elders, according to Scripture, hung upon 
the apostles, and as there are no apostles now, the 
rightful power to appoint elders is necessarily and evi- 
dently at an end. Scripture may intimate the continuance 
of gift, but not of authority to ordain. Elders, or rather 
officials, of the various religious bodies abound; but 
what is their appointment (I do not say their gifts) 
worth ? Let any one that knows the Bible, say whe- 
ther I am treating fairly this weighty matter according 
to the word of God. 

The question, then, for us now is. Are we carrying 
out the will of God ? Many have a notion that there 
is some special value in a human rite of ordination in 
making a man a minister. But in the days of the 
apostles themselves, no one ever thought of being ap- 
pointed to preach the gospel. If a person could preach, 
he was bound to do it; if he did not, he was like the 
slothful servant, hiding his talent. If a man took the 
ground of having a right to preach or to speak in the 
assembly, you may safely deny his right. None but 
God has a right to proclaim glad tidings to the world, 
or to speak to His assembly by whom He will. He, 
therefore, may call men and put them forward, one to 
do this work and another to do that work. And here 
comes in the searching question, Is the Lord to be ac- 
knowledged honestly and thoroughly as the Head over 



X; 



176 EPHESIANS. 

His own Church ? In ministry, properly so styled, it 
is not a question of men appointing men, but whether 
Christ is allowed to be the Head of His own Church. 
Do not, then, acknowledge that it is the Church's 
business to appoint ministers in the word. The Church 
is not my Lord, but Christ ; and we ought never to put 
the Church in the place of Christ. This has been one 
of the main and most mischievous sources of Popery. 

It follows that we ought to acknowledge all those the 
Lord appoints. If a man preaches the truth in this or 
that body, I am not to ignore, but own the servants of 
Christ everywhere. They may not thoroughly carry out 
the truth; but in all cases it is not the brethren, but 
Christ who gives gifts. But does it follow that I am 
to go to mass, even if a Romish priest preaches a 
measure of truth ? I must examine whether he who 
may be ever so real a servant of Christ, is doing the 
will of God in the matter. We are not called to 
follow this or that one, except so far as they follow 
Christ. "We are called on to do the will of God ; 
and " he that doeth the will of God abideth for 
ever." Nothing, therefore, can be more simple than 
the path of the Christian. Let him value the ser- 
vants of Christ in their place, but not necessarily 
all that they are doing, unless it be according to the 
will of God. But is it not said that we are to obey 
them who have the rule over us ? Yes, and it is as 
true now as ever it was. But supposing you are con- 
verted to God and there is a priest of Rome who says 
that you must obey those who have the rule over you, 
and that they have this rule, am I not to question what 
he means and what he is using the text for ? Is it to 
induce me to disobey God ? If so, am I not to say, I 
" must obey God rather than man ? " Thus a path 
always appears for the saint of God who desires to do 
His will, and that path is simply obedience. ' It may 
sometimes take the form of what mistaken or self- 
willed men might call disobedience; but certainly it 



CHAPTER IV. 177 

will be the obeying of God rather than man. Nothing 
can absolve us from the positive, invariable duty of 
obeying God. 

This will show that whatever may be the value of 
ministry, it was never -intended to bind down the chil- 
dren of God, and to make it a question of mere blind 
acquiescence. Ministry, where it is true, manifests 
what is the will of God wherever there is a simple mind. 
It puts the truth in so convincing a way as to bring 
the conscience into the light, making it feel its respon- 
sibility to follow that light. If you do a thing merely 
because a minister of God says it, influence is at work 
and not the power of the Spirit of God. Christian 
obedience is neither the blind leading the blind, nor the 
seeing leading the blind; but the seeing leading the 
seeing. Every believer has power in the Spirit to see 
the mind of God for himself; and he who is called of 
God to the place of guiding others will, as a general 
rule, be enabled to bring the mind of God so completely 
to bear upon the conscience that the simple-hearted 
cannot but see it. But let us remember that it is 
serious for any one to acknowledge the truth and not to 
follow it. " To him that knoweth to do good, and 
doeth it not, to him it is sin." 

I have already explained that the first two of these 
classes of gifts brought before us in verse 11, had for 
their aim the originating of a new work and testimony. 
They were destined for, and employed in,' laying a 
foundation for that previously unknown building, the 
assembly gathered in one* out of Jews and Gentiles in 
the confession of Jesus, the Son of God. The apostles 
were used not merely like the prophets as the inspired 
communicators of the mind of God which had not been 
before revealed, but also as invested with authority in 
the Lord's name. Hence there was a competent go- 
verning power, as well as a sure medium of communi- 
cation from God to man. The prophets as such had 
nothing to do with government, properly so called. 



178 EPHESIANS. 

They did not visit as authoritative agents (1 Cor. iv., 
xi. ; 2 Cor. xii., xiii.), nor did they lay down institutions 
here and there for regulating the Church as the apostles 
did. (See 1 Cor. vii. 17.) 

Nevertheless, the prophet was used in what was of 
the deepest importance, in bringing out directly and 
immediately from God truth that had never till then 
been known or even disclosed. They were, consequently, 
connected very specially with the revelation of truth, 
it might be by word of mouth or by writings ; and this 
is the meaning of Romans xvi. 26. Any one who is 
able to examine the language which the Holy Ghost 
employed, will see that the expression is not strictly 
" the writings of the prophets," but prophetic writings. 
These refer exclusively to the New Testament Scrip- 
tures, which were not all of them written by apostles. 
Two of the gospels were not apostolic, but they are 
just as much inspired as if they were. This is as true 
also of the oral instruction that was given in the apos- 
tolic days. For the Church began before any part of 
the New Testament was written. The misuse of this 
fact is a favourite argument of those who contend for 
a sort of inspiration in the Church. They insist that 
the Scriptures are not so essential as we allege. But I 
answer, that if the Church at first had the presence of 
inspired men, the Church afterwards had the holy 
deposit of the apostles and prophets committed to 
writing, under the perfect guard of the Spirit of God. 
Here, then, we have the only standard -of divine truth: 
the Old Testament being the original revelation of God 
as given to Israel the New Testament being that 
supplement of His truth which is necessary to the 
Church. But before the canon of Scripture was closed 
or even begun, it is evident there was needed a class of 
men who should bring out the mind o God in the 
rising difficulties of the Church. This was supplied 
in the apostles and prophets. It appears that, among 
the saints at Corinth, there were such persons as 
prophets. 



CHAPTER IV. 179' 

Hence we have a remarkable word in 1 Corinthians xiv.,. 
that I would advert to for a moment. The Spirit of God 
laid down there as a rule (ver. 29) that in case any one 
were speaking in an ordinary way in the assembly, if a 
revelation were given- to another, the latter was entitled 
to stop the former, and to bring in the revelation. 
Persons may reply, Supposing you had such a thing 
now, there would be confusion. But I answer, God is 
no longer now giving new revelations. While you. had 
the state of things in which the- full unfolding of the 
mind of God was not given, and while there were these 
inspired persons on the earth, God maintained His right,, 
even to interrupt a person by a communication of some 
fresh truth from Himself. But now, if any person were 
to plead a fresh revelation from God, he would only 
prove himself deluded if not an impostor. We have 
the full communication and standard of God's mind, 
now that these inspired persons have passed away. 
Thus the Church is cast, not upon apostles and pro- 
phets, but upon the written word of God as a criterion. 
Of course, there are the more ordinary means that the 
Spirit of God used then and still uses gifts just as 
really as apostles and prophets, but not of the same 
authoritative character in action as apostles, nor having 
the title to communicate new revelations like the pro- 
phets. Now everything is subordinate as compared 
with these. Whatever measure of authority there may 
be at present must prove itself to be from God in its 
character and end ; and it must not pretend to be some 
fresh revelation of the divine mind, but the right use or 
application of what has already been given. 

On the other hand, the gifts which the Holy Ghost 
still raises up for the good of the Church, are here 
called evangelists, and pastors, and teachers. These are 
not the only gifts that abide, for Scripture in no single 
passage gives, as men would like, a complete list of 
them. We must search all Scripture. And a whole- 
some, blessed thing it is for us, that we never can find 



180 EPHESIANS. 

anything complete from the word of God, by merely 
examining some particular part of it. God necessitates 
our searching His word through and through, in order to 
get at His mind with any measure of fulness. Were 
it not so, we should he disposed to make favourites of 
certain portions and to leave the rest alone. This is 
the reason why many Christians practically neglect a 
large part of the word of God, as if it no longer applied. 
On this very subject of ministry there is a great deal 
of ignorance and infidelity at the present moment. The 
idea is that you have merely sanctified intellect. Now, 
I admit, God gives and forms intellectual power. That 
is what is called in Scripture " the ability." But 
examine our Lord's parable where He alludes to this 
very thing, and you will find that He distinguishes 
between " the gift" and " the ability" " He gave to 
every man according to his several ability." God in 
calling men to serve Him, even before they are con- 
verted, fashions the vessel for His purposes. His pro- 
vidence singles out a person from his very birth, and 
He orders all the circumstances of his after life. 
Perhaps he is educated as a priest, or as a lawyer. 
Thus Paul so thoroughly knew all the resources of self- 
righteousness that he could fall back upon grace, and 
judge what it is that man's righteousness loves, lives 
in, and leads to. His own experience proved that 
even when cultivated to the highest degree, it issues in 
direct antagonism to the Lord of glory. Still you have 
in Paul a most remarkable natural character, as well as 
no ordinary training and acquirements. All this was 
providentially ordered in Saul of Tarsus ; but besides, 
when called by the grace of God, a gift was put into 
him, that he did not possess before, a capacity by the 
Holy Ghost of laying hold of the truth, and of enforc- 
ing it on people's souls. God wrought through his 
natural character, and his manner of utterance, and 
particular style of writing, but everything, though 
flowing through his natural ability, in this new power 



CHAPTER IV. 181 ' 

of the Holy Ghost communicated to his soul. Thus 
there are these two things, the ability which is the 
vessel of the gift, and the gift itself which is, under the 
Lord, the directing energy of the ahility. There is no 
such thing as gift apart from the vessel in which the 
gift acts. 

But now let me make another remark. In this 
epistle the gifts are not regarded -as merely spiritual 
powers. They are regarded as such in Eomans and 
Corinthians, but in Ephesians they are always persons. 
He gave apostles not merely the apostolic gifts. I 
find the gift of teaching in Romans and the gift of a 
teacher in Ephesians. The two truths are perfectly 
harmonious. There is a divine reason for the difference, 
which seems to he this. In Ephesians the love of 
Christ to the Church is the key-note to the whole 
epistle it is the fulness of blessing which Christ's 
body, the Church, has by virtue of union with the 
Head. What acts upon the affections of the Church 
is not a mere power. You can love, not a power, but 
a person ; and a person through whom the gift flows 
evidently acts upon the affections of those for whose 
good it is used. All through the epistle it is Christ, 
and not (save exceptionally) the Spirit. In Corinth- 
ians the Holy Spirit is made prominent. Here it is 
Christ; and in accordance with this, you have these 
persons who act from Christ for the good of His body. 
In this is a beautiful instance of the harmony of the 
truth of God. The active love of Christ is represented 
in this epistle as the spring of all the blessing of the 
Church ; and so with the personal gifts of Christ, whom 
He Himself loves, and uses to keep up His own love 
in others. 

The difference between the evangelists and the pastors 

and teachers is obvious. The evangelist is the ordinary 

means of gathering souls to Christ. It may be said 

as a gift to be wandering in its own nature ; not con- 

. fined to one spot, but called to be here and there 



182 EPHESIANS. 

wherever the Lord by the Spirit might lead him out 
for the need of souls. Timothy, who has heen by 
clerical sleight of hand metamorphosed into an arch- 
bishop, is called in 'Scripture an "evangelist." He 
was marked out by prophecy to a particular work, and 
a certain gift was communicated to him through the 
apostle, accompanied by presbyters. He goes at the 
apostle's command to a certain place, and there he takes 
a cognizance of things. But neither he nor Titus were 
stationary, like a modern diocesan. Still less was there 
a provision made for successors. . Timothy was to com- 
mit what he had heard from the apostle to faithful 
men who should be able to teach others also ; that is, 
the charge concerns the conveyance of truth, not of 
authority or holy orders, as men perversely say. 

The fact is, that a plurality of bishops were ap- 
pointed in every Church where there was a certain 
number of saints gathered together at least, after a 
certain time of testing and experience. They were 
chosen there by an apostle, or one commissioned by the 
apostles. As it is usurpation for gifted individuals to 
discharge the functions of the Church, so it is equally 
usurpation for the Church to assume the functions of 
the individual gifts. Of course, if there were anything 
immoral in the conduct of a servant of Christ, he is as 
much responsible as any other, and more so. The chil- 
dren of God and himself are bound to watch with holy 
jealousy, because his sin would bring a greater shame 
and scandal upon the name of Christ than a less con- 
spicuous member of the body. But, except in matters 
of a moral nature, in the exercise of his ministry, there 
ought not to be the slightest interference between him and 
the Master who has called him to serve Him. Herein 
dissent is thoroughly and radically unsound, because 
the Church is supposed to appoint a minister, and, of 
course, has the power to discharge him if they like. 
This makes the minister to be the minister of their 
church ; but Scripture never speaks,, as all '.do now, of 



CHAPTER IV. 183 

the minister of a particular church. There is no such 
thing as " our" and " your" minister. What Scripture 
shows us is, that all gifts are gifts in the unity of the 
body of Christ. If a man is a pastor or teacher at all, 
he is set as pastor or teacher in the whole Church. As 
far as this goes, it matters not where he may he ; wher- 
ever he goes, he has a call, if walking scripturally, not 
from a congregation but from Christ, to exercise his 
ministry fearlessly, of course humbly, and not pretend- 
ing to more than he has got. For a person setting up 
for more generally destroys credit even for what he 
possesses ; and, in general, the tendency of the children 
of God is not to discredit ministry, but to give an 
undue place to it. But Satan, who is always working 
to dislocate the means of helping the body on, stirs up 
the saints to give credit where they ought not, to be 
captious and to discredit where they ought to be thank- 
ful. All these things require to be regulated by the 
word. The thoughts of men in general are founded 
upon the Old Testament and not upon the New : hence 
the notion of ministry being a kind of honourable pro- 
fession, or something known as a title in the world. 
But if we examine such a portion as this, or all others 
in the epistles, it will soon appear that there never was 
such a thing recognized in the world as an apostle, &c. 
They were despised by the world. Peter was not more 
honoured in his day in the world after he became an 
apostle than he was before. The world might recognize 
that he wrought miracles, which is another thing alto- 
gether. Many fleshly men wrought great miracles. 
In Corinth they were mere babes in understanding, 
because they were so taken up with miracles and the 
display of external gifts. They liked, too, to hear 
themselves talk ; and the apostle shows that to bring 
out even a few words for the good of the Church, was 
far higher and better than any signs and wonders they 
performed. He could work more miracles than they 
all, yet he says he would rather speak five words with 



] 84 . EPHESIANS. 

his understanding " that by my voice I might teach 
others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown 
tongue." Thus, if the Church is shorn of the miracu- 
lous powers which strike the eye of the unbeliever, 
what is even more important abides, save the funda- 
mental gifts, which did not require to be continued. 

The foundation was so perfectly laid that apostles 
and prophets are not needed. This is intimated here. 
The Spirit of God does not prepare the saints for the 
long continuance of things in this world. Christ gave 
" some apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, some 
pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, 
for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the 
body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the 
faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a 
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the 
fulness of Christ." The believers in those days could 
not have known but that the whole work of the Church 
was to be completed in that very generation : there is no 
such idea as a succession taught here, though now we 
may see it is implied. Ministry is the exercise of a 
spiritual gift ; and these gifts depend upon Christ 
always abiding the Head of the Church, never termi- 
nating His office as a high priest might,' whose office 
would devolve upon some successor by reason of death. 
But Christ is in heaven after resurrection, and these 
apostles are what He gave when He ascended on high. 
We stand so far on the same ground now as they did 
upon the day of Pentecost. Christ had left the world 
then, and it was thence that He gave these gifts here 
described. The Holy Ghost abides in the Church, and 
by the Holy Ghost He empowers men on earth for 
whatever the Church may need. We have evangelists, 
the great agents the Lord uses for recruiting His 
spiritual army. Then we have pastors and teachers 
whom the Lord raises up and gives for the purpose of 
leading on and guiding and ruling those saints of God 
who are brought in, All these gifts abide as much as 



CHAPTER IV. 185 

ever. I am not speaking of measure of power, for 
things are weak indeed ; but inasmuch as they depend 
upon Christ above and the Holy Ghost below, and as 
Christ never can cease to be Head there and the Holy 
Ghost does not leave the Church here, these gifts neces- 
sarily abide also. So it is added, " Till we all come in 
the unity of the faith." There is no divine warrant for 
the continuance of miracles, but it is implied for the con- 
tinuance of these edification-gifts for the good of souls. 

Our Lord, then, gave these gifts " till we all come." 
It does not say He will give them, because the early 
Church was set in the posture of expecting the Lord 
Jesus Christ again. Paul and the other apostles 
directed the saints to be always looking out for Christ. 
There was no intimation that Christ must come, but 
they were to expect Him constantly. Hence, there is 
no such thing in connection with ministry as preparing 
for a long lapse of ages. But Christ is at the right 
hand of God, supplying what is necessary. " He gave 

some till we all come in the unity of the faith." 

If Christ had come in the apostolic generation, this 
would have been true. Christ has delayed ; but it 
abides true, " till we all come." So that, with the 
exceptions already stated, we are warranted to expect a 
perpetuation of ministry of the same character, and 
flowing from the same source, as the apostolic Church 
had. Whatever is necessary for the gathering in of 
souls, and caring for them when gathered, abides till 
Christ comes and completes all. 

What a blessed thing it is to know that we can 
accept from God that ministry, which in man's hand 
has been so proud or servile or both that we can look 
for it from Him and recognize it as a divine thing 
that we are not driven to the notion that we have only 
a human ministry now instead*of a divine, as of old, 
but that* we have the certainty that these gifts flow 
from Christ, who cannot fail in His word and work ! 
Bat how are we to know a minister, an evangelist, a 



3 86 EPHESIANS. 

pastor, a teacher ? I ask, How do you know a Chris- 
tian ? Every Christian, who is conversant with 
Christians, has a general idea. I do not say there is 
any infallible discernment of it. But although nobody 
can pronounce unfailingly, and we are necessarily de- 
pendent for our measure upon God's present help, still 
we know as a general rule there is that in a Christian 
which commends itself to his brethren in general. 
There is that in his confession of Christ which har- 
monizes with the word of God more or less. The 
spirit, the tone, the general life and ways, after they 
have been a little inured to the trials of the way, may 
either strengthen or weaken the conviction. It is just 
so as to judging of ministry. And we are bound to 
prove all things. A person is used of God to move 
souls powerfully and with blessing ; to gather them in 
and to bring them to Christ. There is an evangelist 
clearly. On the other hand, you may see one whose 
heart does not go out so much in putting the gospel 
before souls, but who enjoys and loves to make others 
enjoy the truth of God, and to develop the character of 
God. Is not he a teacher ? Others may know the 
truth of God as well, but they cannot bring it out so as 
to act thus upon others. But if a third person attempts 
to deal practically with souls and yet habitually makes 
grave mistakes, can I say, There is a pastor ? When 
there are difficulties, he is at his wits' end, knowing not 
what to do nor advise. He may be able to explain the 
Bible, but when it is a question of applying it to the 
practical life of Christians, there are endless blunders. 
Again, a pastor supposes not only knowledge of the 
truth, but the power to urge it day by day on indivi- 
duals : it involves a dealing with conscience and affec- 
tion in a way that a teacher does not necessarily imply. 
A man might be a teacher without being a pastor (and 
vice versa), or he might be both. An apostle might be 
a teacher, and an evangelist and pastor too. You will 
find a particular gift in one man and another of a totally 



CHAPTER IV. 187 

^different kind in another. Again, there may be a person 
who cannot bring out truth powerfully, but he can 
exhort; he can deal with the conscience. This is an 
invaluable gift not alluded to here; but in Romans xii. 
we find it. Here are the more prominent gifts for 
adjusting the saints in their proper order and functions. 
But while I believe the indwelling Spirit of God is the 
only power of discerning with the measure of certainty 
that God pleases, whether a person is a Christian or 
not, and whether he has a gift or not, of course the 
degree of discernment depends upon our hearts being 
above the flesh and its activity. It demands spirituality, 
and this supposes self-judgment. The whole Church is 
responsible to judge. An evangelist might make a 
mistake, thinking a person to be truly converted, and 
he might baptize him. But something comes out which 
leads the Church to refuse him. Supposing a person 
confessing the name of Christ and baptized seeks fel- 
lowship, the assembly of God in that place are bound 
to examine. No one has a right to come: who has 
rights now but God ? We are to be under obedience 
instead of talking about rights. The Church then ex- 
amines, and if there be a general fellowship or such a 
measure of satisfaction as would lead them to say, "We 
believe that this person has received Christ, we should 
not be justified in refusing his profession to be a mem- 
ber of Christ; the person is then received into the 
assembly, and then comes the trial dependence upon 
God after one is received. Christ is absolutely neces- 
sary for a right walk. Those even that are born of 
God will not be kept unless they walk in real lowliness 
and looking up to God. 

The Spirit of God works in the assembly. One man 
manifests ability to preach, another to teach ; some to 
serve the Lord in private, and others in public. What 
is the power for judging of these ? The same Spirit of 
God. And after all, it is a simpler question than many 
imagine. Just as a human being knows the food that 



188 EPHESIANS. 

is good for it, whether it be a "babe or a man ; so is it 
inseparable from the saints that they should know in 
the main what is for their spiritual blessing. If per- 
sons are low and fleshly they will be taken with showy 
trash ; but you will find in the main a right and sound 
judgment from the most matured spiritual judgment 
down to the mere babe. Although all are not able to 
point out the right thing, all who are guided of God in 
any measure are able to find out the value of what is 
ministered. And as to heresy. How can the assembly 
judge of false doctrine ? Christ is the standard. What- 
ever scripturally exalts Christ is true ; whatever lowers 
Christ is false, and of the devil. Christ is the power 
of God and the wisdom of God. But God works by 
means, and if there is a false teacher who brings in 
what is evil, there are true teachers who are able to 
discern it; and though he may try to wrap it up in 
pleasing forms, yet the Holy Spirit who dwells in the 
Church works against Satan, and by different members 
He unveils and brings out the true character of the evil 
thing before the assembly of God, and all are able, who 
are walking with God, to pronounce a divine judgment 
upon it when once it is exposed. If we had to make a 
railway we should not know how to begin the work; 
but when the railway is made, we can tell perfectly well 
the use and value of it, and can judge well enough for 
practice whether it is a good one or not. So with the 
Church of God. Though all may not equally discern 
and expose what is evil, God gives some who can, and 
afterwards all readily form a judgment upon it. These 
gifts are indispensable to the Church as a whole, though 
I do not say that wherever there is an assembly of God, 
it is absolutely necessary for their walking together that 
there should be such or such persons raised up in their 
midst. But we can bless God for this provision for the 
wants of His Church, as long as He has a Church here 
below. The existence of the Church and of ministry 
rests on the same ground ; they both flow from Christ's 



CHAPTER IV. 189 

love, and as long as we have the one we shall have the 
other ; it is the same love of Christ that sees His body 
and that supplies certain members with the requisite 
spiritual power for the well-being of that body. All 
men of God, no matter where they are, acknowledge 
that God must have to do with ministry, and therefore 
the Dissenter, when he puts his vote into the urn, does 
not deny that the Holy Ghost must capacitate a man 
to be a minister. If he was a minister before, he is, of 
course, a minister after; but they say we want to make 
him our minister. Would it not be better to drop this 
unscriptural form and own him as a minister of Christ 
always? You thus leave him on his own proper 
ground as one who is bound to serve God at all cost 
and in all ways. 

I admit that we find in the word of God bishops and 
deacons ; but they are not referred to here. It is not 
said that He gave some bishops and deacons. But I 
maintain from the Scripture that these bishops and 
deacons required an apostolic or quasi-apostolic ap- 
pointment. Is it not becoming for us now to say that, 
not being apostles, we do not pretend to exercise their 
functions in ordaining, though we do heartily recognize 
men possessed of the requisite qualifications for these 
local offices wherever we find them ? 

But the prevalent system not only assumes an au- 
thority which is not really possessed, but it introduces 
the utmost disorder and the most guilty confusion, if 
we judge it by Scripture, or even by its practical results ; 
and this too in every human association Episcopalian, 
Presbyterian, or Congregational. For what can be 
more fatal to blessing or the Lord's glory than to see 
an ardent evangelist tied down to a limited sphere and 
vainly essaying to meet the wants of a body of Chris- 
tians who need to be built up in Christ? or to know that 
a mature teacher, just adjoining, is compelled to abandon 
his proper gift, because his congregation consists almost 
exclusively of the unconverted ? What can be more 



190 EPBESIANS* 

painfully calculated to hinder the Spirit of God than- 
this network of canons, ecclesiastical etiquette, &c., 
which degrades ministry into the bondage of man and 
disposes of souls as if they were the serfs of the soil on 
which they live ? 

On the other hand, where Scripture ground is taken 
with conscience toward God, things may be weak, still 
there is room for the Holy Ghost to enter and work by 
whom He will. The enemy, no doubt, has his special 
wiles for distracting', and, if possible, perverting those 
who are there; nor do any need more watchfulness and 
prayer, not to say humiliation. But thank God it is 
the arena of faith ; it honours the word of God ; it gives 
the Spirit His proper place ; and it recognizes the Lord- 
ship of Christ, welcoming each member of the body 
where the Head has set it ; and because of this, if men 
plead that there must be order, I ask of what sort it is 
to be. Is it an order of our devising or God's that you 
really wish ? If we are subject to Scripture, we shall 
allow no claim, howsoever specious, to set aside the 
only order which God sanctions for His children now 
on earth, i.e., His assembly, guided by the Holy Ghost, 
present in their midst to maintain the glory of Christ 
and to work sovereignly by whom He will, though, of 
course, only for edification and with the comeliness that 
befits the presence of God. Disorders there may be 
through want of spirituality, and this on the part of 
gifted men as well as the ungifted. But, assuredly, 
Scripture is a safer and mightier rule to correct all dis- 
orders by, than the wisest regulations of men, though 
nothing will avail without present dependence on the 
Holy Ghost. 

The Apostle Paul, however, whilst meeting fleshly 
abuses, supposes the fullest opening for every gift of the 
Lord within the Christian assembly, subject only to His 
own express restrictions. (See 1 Cor. xiv.) If this was 
God's order then, when did it cease? or has the Church 
of God no longer divine landmarks for its public ser- 



CHAPTER IV. 191 

vices? I cannot envy those who, abandoning God's 
system for one of their adoption or invention, do not 
scruple nevertheless to cite scraps here and there, such 
as verse 33, 40, to support human arrangements directly 
opposed to both letter and spirit of the inspired word 
from which they are so abruptly taken. What God 
has laid down for the Church's worship and service, is 
and ought to be as obligatory on the conscience as that 
which He has written for our individual walk and con- 
versation. In a certain sense, indeed, it seems to me 
that public corporate disobedience is even more insulting 
to God than any individual's failure, grave as this may 
be. And what is the present state of Christendom ? 
God's people, with the world mixed up together, have 
departed from the word of God. I do not speak of 
them as men or of moral duties ; but the Spirit of God 
is not allowed His own proper place in the assembly, or 
even its members individually. His power is not owned 
as a divine person come down not merely to convert sin- 
ners, but to be the guide of the Christian assembly. How 
is it everywhere with the meetings of the Church (nay, 
does it meet at all as such ?) and with the exercise of 
the gifts of Christ in the assembly of God, separate from 
the world ?- When Christians ordinarily come together, 
is there not an unscriptural method set up, one thing 
here and another there, instead of leaving God's assem- 
bly in holy subjection to the Holy Ghost, and trusting 
Him to work freely, and fully, and mightily by the 
members as He will, for the good of the whole ? Is 
not the revealed word of God, as to His assembly, like 
all other truth, eternal for the Church's conduct here 
below ? I maintain that it is ; and believe those who 
dispute its constant authority and their own present 
responsibility, will have a serious question to answer 
before the judgment-seat of Christ; while such as stand 
by the will of God in His word, will surely have His 
blessing now and His approbation in that great day. 
But to come out from what is ostensibly evil is not 



192 EPHESIANS. 

all. Separation from our associations ought to be a 
pain to us, and should never be done except as believing 
it to be the clear will of God. And though one ought 
not to refuse the weakest Christians that come from 
elsewhere, yet I do not think that a person ought to be 
quick to receive what is new to them, unless they be- 
lieve that it is assuredly of God. If they only come 
because of some happy circumstances, it will not stand : 
if they say, " There is so much love, truth, union, sim- 
plicity, &c., among these Christians that we must go 
there," by and by some trial comes, and then they are 
ready to say, " There is no love at all among them how 
changed they all are ! " These spiritual effects may act 
upon the affections and win attention ; but they are not 
an adequate ground-work for the Christian in presence 
of the revealed will of God. Nay, supposing you could 
assemble a company of happy believers, all of the same 
mind as to the Spirit, and the Church, and the Lord's 
coming, beside fundamental truth, I would not belong 
to it, if adhesion to their mind were a condition. It 
wants and ignores the divine foundation. Be it mine 
to cleave only to the name of the Lord, Jesus, the sole 
and sufficient gathering-point for the entire Church of 
God; and this if those who gather to it are ever so 
few and feeble and whatever the cost. Perhaps my 
dearest friend may get astray or I may myself. Of 
course it is painful and humiliating for one to be judged 
by others, because of failing to judge self. But I dare 
not stay away because I know the will of God is 
against it. We are not free to make of the Church a 
religious club to suit ourselves. It is God's to choose 
and to call as it pleases Him for the glory of His Son ; 
it is ours to obey from our hearts. In the present 
broken state of Christianity we have learnt that God's 
principles always bind the conscience, and we have come 
together to be where His word is free to be carried 
out by the Holy Ghost. If some one amongst us falls 
into sin, our adversaries cry, See! they are no more 



V. '19'3 

' perfect' than their 1 neighbours. But'whd ever talked of 

5 personal superiority ? We arrogate -nothing to ourselves, 

1 only desiring to be led 'of God'to-'walk individually arid 

'collectively as He would have"us do. 

Are you 'willing 'to"bd like the! 'people who gathered 

r round David in the catfe of ^Adiillam'? Though they 

' were 'distressed 1 and nriserable' l when r they came, they did 
not continue so. He who attracted them to himself 

1 was the centre" of God's counsels; 'arid* God wrought in 
them and formed their 'hearts, arid put honour upon 

' th'ern, and the'day" : caine when those despised ones be- 
came the 'heroes and champions of the Lord's cause 
when every thing v was"br6ken in Israel. May it be our 
lot to ser^e Him faithfully ! I believe that we are 
ecclesiastically where' we' ought to be-^ where the Spirit 
is free to open' arid wield and apply that truth which is 
calculated to separate us in" heart and practice to God 
and His objects from the w'orld. It is now our own 
fault only -when we do not get on. If all that hindered 
us once (when bound up with the systematic dishonour 
of the Holy Ghost) is removed, may we feel deeply our 
personal failure I 'Our -principle is no longer a hum-an 
motive' 'but divine, because it is neither more :i nor less 
than carrying' 6ut the word of God as to His 'Church 
infaithyiind this'- as He vouchsafes light and' 1 power. 
If any "others could show us wherein we could 'do His 
will more perfectly, should we not greatly thank them, 
and bless 'God for the help? May we hold fast truth 
in subjection to His Spirit, desiring the -good of all 

' believers.'let them be where they may,' and'-not anxious 

"to bring them out or in one moment sootier than God 
'gives 'them to know His mind ! I ! do 1 riot acknowledge 

' that any human society, great ! br small, 'has the least 
right to a single 1 child of God. "It-is 1 only a questiorrof 

1 'His will. To obey His word,- td' urge it upon others, 
is neither presumptuous nor 'uncharitable, but faith; in 

' 'God. ''May we abound in 'it with thanksgiving ! 



o 



194 EPHESIANB. 

Although we have already dwelt upon the more 
remarkable forms in which the grace of Christ has 
displayed itself in the way of gift apostles, prophets, 
evangelists, pastors, and teachers, we have not yet 
touched upon the object that our Lord had in view, 
i. e., the general aim of ministry. This is said, in 
verse 12, to be " for the perfecting of the saints, for 
the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body 
of Christ." Now you will observe, in the very first 
expression of the Spirit of God, that which corrects 
one of the most prevalent fallacies of Christendom at 
this moment: and not merely of Christendom in its 
darker forms (for I am not speaking so much of Latins 
or Greeks), but where there is the orthodox light of 
Protestantism, and even strong evangelical sentiments. 
No one who is acquainted with the state of feeling that 
is now so general will doubt but that, even among 
Christians, the prominent notion of ministry is the bare 
calling in of souls to the knowledge of their own sal- 
vation in Christ. 

But this is not the Lord's ultimate design in ministry. 
The winning of sinners to the Saviour is a necessary 
part, but is only a part of the blessing. Evangelists, 
like the rest, are given " for the perfecting of the 
saints," which goes much farther. It is clear that they 
must first become saints; but that which the Holy 
Ghost makes to be the proper end in view is the form- 
ing the saints according to Christ; adjusting them 
according to the Lord's call and sovereign will touching 
them; the bringing them out adequately and rightly 
and freely, so as to find their proper action toward God 
and one another. This seems to be implied in "the 
perfecting of the saints." Then we have rather the 
mediate forms which this end assumes, " unto the 
work of the ministry, unto the edifying of the body 
of Christ." 

God always makes of prime moment His saints in- 
dividually considered their right condition before 



CHAPTER IV. 195 

Him, their being thoroughly fashioned according to 
His standard. Their heing gathered together and 
working as an assembly, important as it is, comes after. 
Thus, the subject of the body, the Church y does not 
appear till the close of chapter i. What is the early 
part of that chapter filled with? That which is ne- 
cessary for the perfecting of the saints. God Himself 
reveals His truth precisely in the same order, and to 
the same primary end. Here again the gifts of Christ 
are found to be just after the pattern of His own deal- 
ings. The perfecting of the saints is the nearest object 
to His heart; and then follows the means used to bring 
into the knowledge of common privileges, and the 
working of the Spirit in the assembly, which is bound 
up with His glory in the earth. Thus, whatever may 
be the condition of the Church, whatever the blessed 
ways of God in dealing with the Church, whatever the 
affections of Christ towards His body, after all God 
makes His saints of most immediate account, makes 
their perfecting to be the first and most prominent 
object. And this He always holds to. Whatever the 
fluctuations of the work, whatever the character of His 
testimony at any given moment upon the earth may be, 
the perfecting of the saints is the unceasing object 
before Him. 

There is something exceedingly sweet in this. Come 
what may, God will accomplish the perfecting of His 
saints, and turn even the things that are sorrowful and 
afflicting into a means of blessing for them, if not 
always to their credit. Where we need humbling, it is 
plain we are not humble ; where we are not low in our 
own eyes, God must Himself make us so. The process 
does not give room for our importance ; but God keeps 
His own blessed end in view, and never fails to accomp- 
lish it. So that we may always adore Him for His 
goodness ; though it may be in that which is distress- 
ing for the time, still God never fails ; He is bent upon 
the perfecting of the saints; He is faithful and will do 



196 EPHESIANS, 

5, * '' > ' ' "i> ' ' . : ,' -I 

f it. He puts this forward before .His , saints as the 
.practical object of Christ. There we have ministry 
,$aking these different forms according to fcs own sove- 
reign disposition. 

j But the Lord has to do with ministry, ( directly and 
immediately,, without the intervention of the assembly. 
JThere.is no such thing in Scripture as a ministry flow- 
ing ifrpn^the Church,.. though there is ministry directecl 
to t^e.Qhurch. ,.,St. ; Paul speaks of himself as a minis- 
ter of te Church : tljat is, not as derived from it, but 
serving 4jb,: for v the , Church v is formed by ministry, in- 
stead qf ministry flowing out of the Church. The gifts 
are for, tfye perfecting of ( th.e ,saints. The ministry may 
.fail, but. the Lorcl never fails in accomplishing His end. 
It may be in a slower w.ay, and there may be^that which 
.is utterly weak and even v afflicting; but He accomplishes 
His purposes. He give, 3 thesej gifts " for the' perfecting 
of the saints, unto the worl? of the ministry, unto tlie 
.edifying .of .^he body of Christ f " These two latter 
clauses come, in as subordinate to the first. It is most 
blessed to see the saints acting, together; but however 
the. work .of the ministry may fail or be impaired in 
man's hands, the great end. to which the Lord commits 
Himself, and for which He has given these .gifts, is 
.carried .through spite of all. And, more: this is true, 
"till we all arrive at the unity of the jfaith, ancj of the 
knowledge of, tjie, Son of God, at a perfept^man, at 
the measure ofj.the stature of the fulness of Christ." 
The " perfect man", here does not refer to resurrection, 
but to our being thoroughly grown up into the know- 
ledge of Christ. , ., u . i . . 

This .i observable in, St. .Paul. Although his great 
work was, unfolding the. redemption o| Christ and the 
counsels. of. God's glory founded on redemption, yet he 
cannot but; j^sist on this t full growth of the saints in 
connection with the deepening knowledge of the Son of 
,,.God. It is thej person of ( Christ that rises up before 
the soul ; and this is ve'ry much more a test of spiritu- 



CHAPTER IV. 197 

<." - T ? : 

ality than any acquaintance with His work. It is with 
Himself, as a' divine person, 'lhat we : become more and 1 
more intimate through "the 'truth that God ministers to' 
our souls. This "is 'what ''is 1 put before us " Till we' 
all arrive at the unity of the 'faith and of the know-" 
ledge of 'the Son of God. at a perfect mail." '' Know- 
ledge of 'the 'past ways of GpcTwbiuld riot dcVnow. Th'e 
Old Testament saints did look' to the ; Messiah v in the' 
way of hope; 'but the present f6rm i& which the 4 Spirit'' 
of God presents the bbj ect t ! 6 us* is the knowledge of 
His person, as ,th ; e : Son fully revealed for our" j'oy and' 
praise and^wbrsiiip* So that we have here 'the great 
Christian object arid form of knowledge !o that God has' 
in view with all His saints now. The comparison with"' 
verse 14 gives the force of the expression, '" a perfect' 
man;" it is in contrast with being children, " the mea- 
sure of the statu're' ; of the fuliiess'of Christ; that we 
henceforth be ho more babes, tosseci to arid fro, and" 
carried 'about' With every wind of &octrin'&." What' 
God designs 'for us is that we should be' full-grown, 1 
and this " unto 'the unity of the faith and of the know-- 
ledge 6'f the 1 Son' of God, 'unto a full-grown man, unto 
the measure of the stature of the fulne'ss !i of Christ." 1 
It is in contrast with this condition 'of weakness and 
exposure to all 'the craft of men, a'n'd ' their changing/ 
scheming tactics of error.' :> ' ' '" ' 
' Then we have the opposite practical way in which 
our growth is carried "on." "But speaking v the truth 8 
in love, may grow 'up unto him in 'all thing's, who is 
the head, even Christ." !| The expression' sedms deeper 
than what we have here. '' It is " being - truthful in 
love," hot merely " speaking the truth in love,'"' though,' 
of course, this is a very important part of being 1 truth-* 
ful, bu't it is not everything 1 ;' and we all know'" that it 
is ver'V possible not to' be truthful in thought and feel- 
ing, where the words are quite correct. " Being triithful 
in love" irhplies truth in the inward parts. 

We find here the two essential features of godliness 



198 EPHESIANS. 

which were found in Christ in infinite perfection. He 
was the light. Whatever He might say, He exactly 
reflected the full truth from God Himself; nay, He was 
it. We find a remarkahle expression when our Lord 
was dealing with the Jews and bringing Himself out 
as the light of the world, in John viii. They asked Him 
what He was, and He says (according to the English 
version), " Even the same that I said unto you from 
the beginning." But the true meaning is, " Abso- 
lutely what I speak unto you." There should be neither 
" at the beginning," but " absolutely ;" nor " what I 
said," but " what I am speaking." If these words are 
weighed, you will find the force of them. Our Lord is 
exactly and absolutely what He utters ; His words 
convey with infallible certainty what He is. He cer- 
tainly was truthful in love. Our Lord's words so com- 
pletely gave out the inner man, He was so perfectly 
transparent, that not one thing in Him deflected from 
the truth ; nothing seemed to be but exactly what He 
was. And this because there was no sin in Him, 
neither was guile found in His mouth. There was no 
object but God before His soul, as He says Himself : 
" I do always those things that please Him." And you 
may rely upon it, that it is having Christ before us as 
the object of our souls in everything practically, which 
alone gives us power of truth. The moment we have 
anything of our own as an object, so far we slip aside, 
and that comes out which is not the full truth, for Christ 
alone is the truth, and He alone gives us the truth in 
perfect love ; and it is only in proportion as we are filled 
with Him, and have Him to the exclusion of all our 
own evil, that we ourselves walk in the truth. Let us 
have our hearts fixed on any one thing or person save 
Christ, evil slips out, and it is good for us to know and 
own this. It was never so with our Lord. He could 
say, " I have set the Lord always before me." And 
He has given us Himself always to set before us. 
Our Lord's meat and His drink was to do the will of 



CHAPTER IV. 199 

His Father; still, of course, He had to meet God about 
our sins in a manner that none is called upon to do. 
We start upon a redemption accomplished by Christ, 
which has brought us into the presence of God, and 
which calls upon us to walk according to the grace 
which has brought us there and which keeps us there. 
We may not all realize it, but we have done with our- 
selves by virtue of the work of Christ ; we are brought 
near to God, brought to be at home with God, and 
from that place we are called upon to take up every- 
thing that becomes us here below ; and here we have to 
judge what is the will of God, for we are palpable 
weakness if we are not doing His will distinctly. It is 
not only that God will have us conformed to Christ by 
and by, but this is what He has in view now. And in 
spite of all, wherever the heart is true and Christ is 
before the soul, though there may be immense differ- 
ences, yet this is God's delight with His children. 
The child does not remain always a child, but becomes 
a man: and so should it be with the family of God. 
He would have us all to grow. 

This, then, is the object in the gifts of Christ. He 
is bent upon blessing souls even now in the world, and 
such is the object of all ministry. It is not something 
left for our thoughts and arrangements, but it is all in 
the hands of the Lord. It is He who loves His saints, 
who will bless them, and who makes His individual 
servants, that have to do with the saints, to be imme- 
diately connected with Himself, and to have His objects 
before their eyes in a duty which they have to discharge 
to Him and not to them. For directly the Church 
becomes the great object before the soul, the blessing is 
of a lower character altogether, inferior in all its spiri- 
tual lineaments. There may be right feelings toward 
one another, but there is that which is much higher 
than loving one's brethren, divine though it be ; and if 
you know nothing above brotherly love as the object, 
you will fail to walk in love. God is higher than love, 



2$0 ' EPHE6IANS.,. 

aad this* is precisely- the point, o i- difference., so, much, 
needed -. for the moment. One of.the main things that , 
w# have to. guard against is Satan's endeavouring to , 
p^rsuade people that, because God is love, therefore , 
love- -is- God. But it is.-not so,. If I say that God is . 
lo.vey.Il bring out what He is in the active energy of. 
HisJholy- nature. B,ut this- is not all that God is. He,. 
isJigbkas much as He is : . love; and I should, own His, 
love, without, the denial, of His light. What, prevails, 
among many, no,w is the deifying of love in. order to. . 
strip, God of His light. But where we have,, it clearly, 
before us, not that, love " is God," but that? " God is 
love," love will not be the less, but in factjmore true 
and pur& While it will be the active spring 4 o,f our own 
hearts* it- will, not be found at issue with His. character, 
but wills leave, -room for.-God to display Himself accord- 
ing to. .all that, He is. God is truthful in lo.v,e. Take 
it in.thevcase of His .dealings with my soul, for.instance, 
in conversion. Is faith, the only thing produced by 
the Holy Ghost ?. Wh.a.t,is the first effect,.Qi His break- 
ing in upon a sinner? Making nothing of him. Is 
nofethis love?- "Yjes.; but it is God's lave that deals 
with me in the truth of what He is, and of what the 
sinner's- awful condition, is. So the effect produced on 
the hearfe of him that is renewed is not merely faith in 
Christ^ but repentance toward God ; it is. the judgment 
of his- whole moral, condition in His sight. And as ypu, 
find bothi connected, in God's dealings with a soul from 
the first, and in, the moral answer produced in the SQul. 
of the saint, so.it is, true all through. Where, t^e 
action, of a saint is healthful in the presence of God, the. 
room will surely not.be less, open for diving love, yet there, 
will be the maintenance of, the holiness. and majesty of 
God. We should not wish, to be spared, pain for the. 
purpose of slipping through at God's e.xpense. There, 
never has been one trial of heart gone, through with, 
God, but we have been blessed by it. We might have,, 
thfi. blessing in, a. still, fuller, w.a^ w,\tjiout_ sc;, 



CHAPTER IV, . 2.01- 

failu-re~o;r letting oiit>o,f what we are. But supposing, 
we do not so lay holc^Qf Christ as to , be lifted above, 
ourselves, then,. we must learn painfully what we are. 
Yet God turn,!? it all for, blessing. This is the great 
thought o,f the chapter. He has brought us into a, 
blessed place. First of all, we are in Christ before 
God; ancl.next, God dwells in us: the one,'is v our great, 
privilege,, the other is also, : our solemn responsibility, 
which % ws. from. the fa.c,t t^at God has macteus His. 
dwelling-place.. 

At quce all, contracted ecclesiastical, nptiqns are .shut, 
o.ut by the truth of His dwelling-place. If w,e merely, 
meet as a church, such a connection with Qod disap- 
pears. But if it were only tw.p or. three, I, must meet 
qn the ground; qf the Church or, it ha.s no, truth in it 
before God; and tw,o or three Christians : thus gathered 
would do God's will and would have Him dwelling in 
them. There Christ is, and. there God dwells in a 
special: way. Qpd can "bless, vv.here. He does not sanc- 
tion; He can, bless even in Popery. His grace is so, 
rich and free, anc[ above all| the wicked ways of men, 
tjiat He can us the name of r Christ in the most untoy 
ward circumstances; but .tl}is is very different, from, 
God's putting His seal tp what we are about. In qrcler. 
that He may v Hipaself. be associated in it, we must be, 
in the truth of things, and. acting according to the. divine, 
mind. I believe .thajb only in our own.days, since the time, 
when the apos.tle.s, Paul especially, were raised up, has, 
this great tr,uth be,en brought out by tjie, IJoly Ghost so. 
as to bear upon, souls, according, to, God. I am not 
aware of any adequate testimony to i,t since the ruin of. 
Christendom. Ther.e w v ere in, abundance efforts of men 
to improve the present and imitate the past ; but either, 
is a very different thing frora, God's provision in the. 
word for saints in a fallen state. If you see a man who, 
is striving simply and ever so earnestly to get better, 
you say justly that he is under law and does not under- 5 
stand the. gospel. Just so, when a number of Chris- 

> < w x . i t . 1 1 . v '. i. ' * ' 



202 .EPHESIANS. 

tians are trying to ameliorate Christendom by new 
plans and efforts, I should say that, if they understood 
the nature of the Church of God, and the Holy Ghost's 
relation to it, they would feel that mere union is a poor 
substitute for unity ; they would humble themselves in 
the sight of God because of the state of the Church, 
and would fall back upon the word of God to see 
whether there is not a real and lowly but divine direc- 
tion for the actual state of things in Christendom. May 
God deliver His saints from the unholy as well as un- 
believing but very general notion, that we are obliged 
on account of present circumstances to go on in sin ! 
To men of spiritual discernment the thought is just 
making God such an one as ourselves. If I give up 
His holiness in one thing, how can I stand up for.it or 
trust Him in another ? Contrariwise, let us maintain 
that there is no emergency as to which God can lower 
His holiness, or sanction the lack of it in us; and if 
His will be perfect in other things, is it less in that 
which so deeply and nearly concerns the glory and 
name of Christ as the Church? People argue from 
the fact that things are not in order and beauty now ; 
they go so far as to deny the responsibility of saints, 
as if Christians were not in one way or another con- 
nected with these public departures from God. Will 
it be urged that they are to be adhered to because they 
themselves or their fathers have been brought up in 
them ? Surely the one question for us is this : Do we 
desire to learn and do the will of God ? Is this our 
governing object? Or is it merely, Where can I get 
enough comfort or blessing to keep my head above 
water ? Of this, too, I am fully assured, that if you 
are found doing the will of God, you will have the most 
and best blessing ; but it is not the true Christian motive, 
and it is an unsafe guide. We may go here and get a 
little blessing, and then go there hoping to get a little 
more. But, as it is said here, growth is, " that we 
henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro and 



CHAPTER IV. 203 

carried about with every wind of doctrine." He would 
guard us from all the cunning craftiness of men whereby 
they lie in wait to deceive. 

Is there, then, no means of having certainty in the 
midst of the confusion that reigns ? Assuredly there 
is ; and where the soul is sufficiently broken down to 
feel what is due to God, He will make all plain. We 
never ought to join in a single thing that we know to 
be wrong, whether privately or publicly. Of course, 
there may be everywhere things done or said that one 
may not be able to approve of, but this individual 
failure is different from joining in public acts of wor- 
ship, the order of which is known beforehand to be 
systematically unscriptural. There I am identified 
with the guilt of what is done contrary to the word 
of God and so fixed by human authority. But this 
shows us the importance of nothing being done in the 
assembly but what will carry the weight of the whole 
assembly along with it. Hence, too, the evident de- 
sirableness of keeping out of the assembly all debatable 
questions. We may speak of them to a servant of God, 
to a wise brother ; but even that which I may indivi- 
vidually enjoy is not a thing that I am entitled to 
occupy the assembly of God with, unless I believe God 
would have me say it, especially when there may be 
room for a just doubt on the mind of the simplest be- 
liever there. Minor matters of discipline never ought 
to be brought into the assembly. When anything 
appears of fundamental false doctrine or of a grossly 
immoral character, let it be what it may, there it is 
plain that all saints must be assumed to have the very 
same judgment. All would feel that they could have 
no fellowship with blasphemy or drunkenness, or any 
fatal manifestation of evil of one kind or another. 
Then we have cases which claim the united judgment 
of the whole assembly. Supposing a saint were what 
is called a Churchman, or a Dissenter, and little versed 
in scriptural thought or action ecclesiastically, still, if 



2.04. EPHESIANS. 

he were really biOrn of. God, there could.fye no material, 
difference of judgment about such matters. The power 
of the Spirit is mighty ; the Lord knows how to work : 
and, the common spiritual instincts of all the children of' 
God, guided by His word as to such matters, find their 
expression in the renouncing and judgment of all such 
evil. But public discipline in the Church' is so serious 
a. matter, that it ought never to be resorted to till the 
evil rises up to such a height that all unbiassed be- 
lievers w;puld be united about it. There is a 'tendency 
among righteous and active minds to make, out of every 
matter of difference, questions for the Church to decide 
on and deal with. This is a grave mistake, fraught 
with ill for all concerned, and' to be resisted with all 
possible earnestness. Even saints are' apt to be pre- 
judiced or prepossessed in what' concerns one another, 
especially in small things which can at all admit of 
party feeling. Besides, it would become an instrument 
o.f torture for many souls, if every private matter were 
liable to be brought into public. Thanks be to God, 
He has made His own landmarks for our guidance, and 
has shown us clearly that to bring anything into the 
open arena of Church discipline, ought never to be till 
every means has been taken to hinder it. The desire 
of our hearts ought to be the glory of the Lord in the 
blessing of one another's souls ; and we all know that 
needless publicity must add' largely to shame, pain, 
and difficulty. But when it is^ needful, let it be done',' 
so that it be to the Lord, with" tne utmost gravity and' 
real love. The Destroying the true notion of the Church,' 
and of its action, has tended to reduce it to the level of 
a mere club, sometimes lower than the world, though 
with the highest pretensions. : 

But when we lay hold of the truth that the Lord 
has that on earth with which He links His name, 
although only two or three souls may have gathered 
unto that name, renouncing their connection with whali 
is of the world and of man; when we have come to 

T ' : v .-,.,, ,,, ,, . ... , . . ..,..., _., 



' . /-" 

CHAPTER IV. 20a 

-..-.-;. ',-.. , ' ' i , . . < -1. ,. 

learn from God that He who saved our souls is the 
only One competent to form and keep and guide ' tfre 
'Church; when welmow that He Has made 'us members 
of His own Church, all we have to do is to act' upon the 
"ground^ of the Cn'urch that God has made. 'If we now 
.belong to God at all, we belong to His assembly, and 
we are called to follow it put practically. If I Know 
ever so few that act upon the 'word of God which 
applies to this,'! am free,' yea, bound in the liberty of 
Christ to meet'w'rfh them. Of course, it would tie 
matter of thankfulness, ' 'if there were hundreds of 
thqusands meeting' thus,' 'though ' this ' might in' other 
ways entail more sorrow and 'trial; but 'the trial will 
not be mere trouble of flesh; it will 'he, 'if 'we 'walk 
with (jfod,' ijhe exercise of. 'grace "arid 'patience; 'it will 
call out the real love to Christ' that seeks 'the good of 
others, and this is always drawn 6iit' into 'intercession 
by the pressure of evil on all sides. 

Supposing, then, two or three cdine ' 'to tlie f point 
.that \ they cannot acknowledge a human church, any 
more than a human salvation; are they to sit still, dis- 
honouring /God and ruining' their conscience by per- 
sisting in imown evil; or are' 'they" not in faith' '"to meet 
'in tne Lord's name? By' all means let 'them' come 
together, following the word and trusting 'the Spirit of 
God. They will find trial, but 'true liberty and tne 
'Holy Ghost working in their midst. ! He' is given to 
abide with them for ever ; let them believe it and' not 
, fail to count upon it. They inky be very weak, but tne 
JEEoly Ghost is not weak. On coming together j' perhaps 
the.re is no one to speak at' length,' with profit,'to them; 
but the assembly of 'God does not come' together for ser- 
mons. Much or little ''speaking, their object' is to do tne 
will of God, to remember Christ, to act scripturally on 
the faith of G.od's aim" and glory'iri His' Church. If 
there were twenty thousand Christians round! about, but 
meeting on hiVman principles, what believer can main- 
tain that these two or 'three would not enjoy the 'special 



206 EPHESIAT58. 

presence of God among them in a way the others could 
not ? The more we have the sense of the ruin of the 
Church, the fuller our confidence that God's principles 
always remain intact and as obligatory now as on the 
day of Pentecost; the more happy the soul in the Lord, 
the more it will be drawn out in love to all saints. 
May it be ours thus by grace to " grow up unto him 
in all things, who is the head, even Christ !" This 
does not depend on the number of communicants, 
nor on the forms and means of ministerial power, but 
far more on our own souls being with God, and doing 
His will, not only in individual service and life, but 
also as His assembly, which ought to come together 
.according to His word. 

There are, then, these three things: first and pro- 
minently, the perfecting of the saints individually ; 
subordinately, next, the work of the ministry, where 
other persons act upon me; and, lastly, the building 
up of the body of Christ. The full aim and desired 
result of it all is the growing up unto a ptrfect man, 
unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ; 
" that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and 
fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by 
the sleight of men and cunning craftiness, whereby 
they lie in wait to deceive ; but speaking the truth in 
love, may grow up unto him in all things, who is the 
head, even Christ." Allow me to point out a practical 
proof of it. You are aware that at an early date, false 
doctrines and heresies of all kinds came in. What was 
the resource of good men in those days ? They invented 
creeds and confessions by which they endeavoured to try 
suspected persons. But where was the authority for 
this course? Or was it found that these bulwarks 
kept the evil out ? In no wise, time, or place. There 
is only one power of maintaining truth and love even 
Christ; and where Christ is really held up and to, 
without the devices of men, there may be weakness and 
ignorance at first, but the result will be that Christ's 



CHAPTER IV. 207 

strength will be made perfect in their weakness. The 
power of Christ will rest upon those who, feeling 
their own weakness, cleave to Him alone. On the 
other hand, while you often stumble weak consciences 
in good men by imposing creeds, you can rarely, if ever, 
thereby shut out bad men; nor would spiritual men, 
alive to the honour of God's word, and aroused to see 
their unwarranted character if ever so correct, deem it 
right to own them. Thus you hamper the weak and 
you exclude the strong among the children of God; 
you have a crowd of thoughtless or bigoted subscribers ; 
and, as to dangerous men, what thief or robber cannot 
leap over a creed ? Human restraints may clog and dis- 
honour the work of God, but they avail not to hinder the 
evil of man or Satan. What you find in Scripture is 
the saints led on and the body knit together by the 
different joints and bands and thus having nourish- 
ment ministered. This is the exercise and fruit of 
ministry exercised in all its extent ; for there may 
be the Spirit of God giving a word by one who 
has not a permanent gift, though God ordinarily 
makes a man an evangelist or a teacher ; so that 
a stated ministry is a truth of God, while the truth 
goes much farther. 

But exclusive ministry, I am bold to say, is an inter- 
ference with the rights of Christ and with the action 
of the Holy Ghost. God has caused to be felt in 
these last days the ruin of the Church more than at 
any epoch known to me in its past history ; but He has 
also made souls learn and feel that no ruin of the 
Church destroys a divine principle. What was the truth 
for the Church is the truth for him who believes. The 
original principle of ministry ever abides the only prin- 
ciple which He sanctions or we ought to follow. If 
there was nothing like modern practice in apostolic 
times, it is a human thing (and why should a saint 
hold to or justify it?) in our days. It is absolutely 
due to the Lord, that the Church should not interfere 



20'S 'EP'HESIANS. 

-*' v * Y . * ) 

"with those who are" scripturally doing 'His Work;* arid 

'also, that all should 1 leave rdom for Him to raise up 

'others 'as He pleases. ' No 'workman, 1 " skilled or blessed 

'as he may be, had all gifts iri'his 1 pe'rstin. There might 

be" some me'mber'of Christ 'in the congregation qualified 

of God to' edify by a word 'of wisdom "occasionally, or 

'able to 1 'preach the gospel, to exhort, or to minister in 

some mo'de or 'measure, according to the' 'word of God. 

* "What "we find in' Scripture is the door kept open in 

principle and practice 'for 'all that God gives. Surely 

''this' is not to disparage 'ministry ; it is, 'on the contrary, 

"to assert it, and the rights of the Lord in' it. ' But the 

ground on' which' ministry 'is exercised at the present 

' time, is so wholly, 1 certainly, and transparently human, 

that the effect is inevitably to "accredit a' number of 

1 persons as ministers who are 1 not even Christians, and 

' to discredit' all real ministers, who, for the Lord's sake, 

' refuse uriscriptural forms', 'old' or new. This is an evil that 

no godly man) who' desired to be obedient, ought to tole- 

' rate, or" even make light 1 'of,' for an instant. It seems 

'to me 'a good re"asbn''why 'it 'is"wrong to become 'a 

minister of 'any ! denomination that follows (as all do) 

1 these baseless 'traditions. ' If you 'are a minister at all, 

you are a minister of Christ and of nobody else. This 

'the word "of God makes' as plain as light. The action 

'of the assembly, as such, is entirely distinct. While 

' the minister is, 'of course, a part or m'ember of the 

" assembly, yet must he a'ct, if he act rightly, from Christ, 

: " and from Christ alone.. ' He may 'strive to edify believers 

: by discourses, exhortations, &c.', ; 'addressed to them; he 

may seek earnestly the conversion ' of unbelievers ; but 

"ministry or no ministry (in which 'last case there would, 

... i . ,1.1. 

, * If honour to those that labour and help to maintain them or 

their families in case of need are supposed to involve a title to 
interfere, the worldly and evil source of such & thought becomes 
apparent. Would they purchase the gift of God with money, or 

, reduce a servant of Christ into the hireling of men ? On the other 
hand, let us beware of mere human independence, which:' is simply 

''pride, where it "is least becoming and 'most 'injurious. 



CHAPTER IV. 209 

of course, be loss), yet the assembly goes on, competent 
and bound to perform its own functions in subjection to 
the Lord. Again, not ministry but the presence and 
operation of the Spirit constitute the power of the 
assembly. This is as important for the assembly to 
bear in mind, as it is for the servants to remember that 
they have immediately to do with Christ as their Lord. 
Of course, abuse of ministry, like any other sin, neces- 
sarily brings him who is guilty under the judgment of 
the assembly. No man can ever be beyond the Church's 
judgment, where he gives occasion for it by the allow- 
ance of evil in his conduct. But the Church's interfer- 
ence never ought to appear, save in the case of known 
evil doctrine or practice. 

This may help to show the practical bearing of the 
passage. What God does and Christ gives, the mutual 
service of the various members of the body, joints and 
bands, all is that we should " grow up unto Christ in 
all things; from whom the whole body fitly joined to- 
gether, and compacted by that which every joint suppli- 
eth, according to the effectual working in the measure 
of every part, maketh increase of the body unto the 
edifying of itself in love." There we have the theory 
of the Church, because God, in laying down these blessed 
principles, does not bring in the mere accidents of evil. 
There is no such thought as a screw being loose here or 
something else being wrong there. All is supposed to 
be moving on harmoniously for the great end for which 
the Lord has established it. Disciplinary action, re- 
sources where evil reigns, must be looked for and are 
provided elsewhere. 

There is a difficulty that people often bring forward 
-that you cannot have a perfect church on earth. 
What do they mean ? If it be a condition where there 
will not be a soul ever doing or saying anything but 
what is quite according to God, they are asserting, 
doubtless, a simple truism, if it be not rather mere 
foolishness. Bub what is insinuated is, that you cannot 
p 



210 EPHESIANS. 

on earth get any association of saints according to the 
will of God. I deny this, believing that you may readily 
find the path of His will, and that every believer ought 
to find that path. You are responsible to learn the will 
of God about His Church, if you are a member of it, 
and to be doing nothing else. If I know two or three 
Christians in a place, seeking to walk according to the 
Scriptures, there should be my lot. One may be a for- 
ward .man naturally, another might have strange notions 
and ways. There might be something faulty in each of 
the individuals. All this is not to deter me for an in- 
stant, because my owning them as being that part of the 
Church which is acting where they are according to God 
does not depend upon an immaculate ideal in this .or that. 
The question is are they doing the will of God accor- 
ding to His word ? God's will at least is perfect, and 
he who does it abides for ever. Is not His will about 
His Church as absolute as about anything else ? If this 
be allowed, there, I say, is the ground of action. Must 
we not be about our Father's business as to this ? Hence 
the one question for all who desire to please God is, 
what is His will ? Not surely to meet as the flock 
of Mr. So-and-so, (for where do we read anything of 
the sort in Scripture) but to meet as Christians who 
are simply cleaving to Christ, and counting on the Holy 
Ghost to teach all the will of God ? Is not this, and 
this alone, the true basis on which Christians should 
corporately act ? Where, then, shall I find believers so 
meeting? Are there any who have had the faith to 
come out of that which is merely human, so as to stand 
on the ground laid down in God's word ? The same 
Scripture that tells me how I am to be saved tells me 
how to walk in His house, the Church of God. Neither 
the assembly nor ministry is left to human wit or caprice ; 
as to both, we must search, and be subject to, the word 
of God. God's system (for He has one, as revealed in 
Scripture) is what we have to learn and act upon; and 
though we may encounter great trial and difficulty, and 



CHAPTER IV. 211 

find ourselves in the same straits the early saints ex- 
perienced, yet, even this confirms the truth to us. Surely 
we shall have joy and strength if simply dependent on and 
obedient to the Lord. The very trials will become a 
means of fresh blessing ; and we shall prove how truly 
God can give us to use for His own glory much of His 
word which was once practically useless to us, and which 
we supposed merely referred to apostolic times. We 
thus begin to find a present application of the word of 
God in our corporate position, just as much as in meeting 
the wants of our souls day by day. If this be so, may 
we have the happiness, not only of knowing these things 
but of doing them steadfastly unto the end ! 

The reader now enters upon the general walk of 
Christian men, as suitable to, and connected with, the 
doctrine of our epistle. Indeed there was already an 
exhortation in the beginning of chapter iv., to walk 
worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called. Bat 
the apostle here descends to particulars. And, first of all, 
there is a solemn injunction to the saints, that they should 
not henceforth walk, as the other Gentiles walked, in 
the vanity of their mind. The Spirit of God guards 
us against what we perhaps might think needless the 
walk of those who surround us the walk that was 
our own before we were brought to Christ. And yet, 
the moment that we reflect, the wisdom of such an 
exhortation is apparent; for Christians are ordinarily 
liable to be much influenced by the tone of thought 
and feeling current in the world outside. The ruling 
passion that carries the world on for the time being is 
always apt to be a snare to those, at least, who shrink 
from the cross day by day, and so much the more be- 
cause they do not suspect themselves. Whatever be 
that which occupies its energies, especially if philan- 
thropy, moral progress, or religion be the form that it 
takes, there is always a liability to be thrown off our 
guard. Besides, and this is the immediate point here,, 



212 EPHESIANS. 

old habit is strong; so that the apostle does not hesi- 
tate to warn these saints who stood out, not only in 
the fresh joy of faith, but also in outward position, very 
separate from the world (and the lines were at that 
time strongly defined) ; and yet, in this opening word of 
exhortation, the Holy Ghost very solemnly guards the 
saints against being drawn into the ways and practices 
of the Gentiles. There is often a danger of this with 
Christians, because they do not like to be singular. 
There may be peculiar people among the children of 
God. Of course, the apostle does not speak of eccentric 
individuals, to whom it would be no difficulty but a 
pleasure to differ from everybody else men who affect 
originality in word and deed, and in their strain after it 
are only odd. But he is guarding against the common 
moral danger, when faith has lost somewhat of its 
simplicity and freshness. 

On the other hand, the apostle has shown elsewhere 
and we should always endeavour to remember it- 
that it is a wise and important thing to meet souls in 
grace as far as possible, not to impose upon others what 
they have not strength to bear. In writing to the 
Corinthians the apostle had insisted on this, as his min- 
istry exemplified it. He had become a Jew to the Jews, 
that he might gain the Jews. He was made all things 
to all men, that he might by all means save some. 
There was no kind of pressing points. There was the 
hearty desire for the good of souls ; for we may have 
this without the pressure of our own particular thoughts 
and feelings, however right they may be. It is the 
elasticity of the Christian if established in grace. We 
rarely can pull the cord too tightly in dealing with our 
own souls, or be too stringent in our vigilance and 
prayer against slipping here and there. But it is a 
totally different thing in having to do with others. 
We have to bear their infirmities, if, in truth, we are 
strong ; it is for their good that the Lord lays them, 
upon our hearts. We find that, even with His own 



CHAPTER IV. SIS' 

disciples, He went not beyond what they were able at 
that time to bear. But the very desire to meet souls, 
and not to raise questions that would gender strife, 
might expose a gracious Christian to be taking the 
colour of those outside himself, and giving up his own 
principles. On every side he has to watch. 

There is no doubt, then, of the forbearance in which 
we are called to walk with one another; nevertheless, 
we need to beware of turning grace- into levity or 
licentiousness. " This I say, therefore, and testify in the 
Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, 
in the vanity of their minds, having their understand- 
ing darkened, being alienated from the life of God through 
the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of 
their heart." (Ver. 17, 18.) Here he begins with the 
inner thing. You will find that our tendency is to 
occupy ourselves and others with something outward. 
But the apostle goes to the root of the evil walk of the 
Gentiles. Their minds were vain and empty, as all 
must be who have not God distinctly and positively 
and intelligently before them in any matter, whatever 
it may be. As to these Gentiles, in nothing had they 
God before them; they were "without God in the 
world." Consequently, there was nothing but the 
empty vapouring mind and mouth of man, imagining 
one thing and expressing another. "What was the 
effect ? - The understanding was darkened. " They 
were alienated from the life of God through the ignor- 
ance that was in them, because of the blindness of 
their heart." These are various descriptions, not of the 
outward walk, but of the root of all the evil fruit they 
bore. God was not in all their thoughts. They were 
" alienated from the life of God." How indeed could it 
be otherwise ? The life of God is only found in His 
Son; and Him, and, consequently, it they had not. 
Far from having relish, or a just sense of need, they 
were estranged from good ; and this on account of the 
blindness or hardness of their hearts. Thus far is the 



214 EPHESIANS. 

evident tracing of what the evil walk of these Gentiles 
sprang from ; the sum and substance is that it arose from 
their ignorance. And their ignorance was because their 
hearts were hard, not from mental dulness. What a 
solemn and practical truth for every soul of man, con- 
verted or not ! Our conduct flows from our judgment, 
and our judgment from our affections. Thus, the state 
of our heart becomes most important in practice. We 
find here that all the outward man finds its source in 
the inner man, and the inner man is formed by that 
which governs the heart. 

Hence the all-importance of having Christ for the 
heart's object yea, exclusive object. For nothing is 
more common than to have divided affections. Indeed, 
it is the great thing against which we all have to 
watch. Had we an eye more single, and a heart more 
thoroughly and self-judgingly devoted to Christ, what 
would be the consequence? The heart always gives 
direction, colour, and energy to the judgment. There 
never would be a waver individually, and there would 
be nothing but peaceful walking together in the light 
of God, without slip or stumble of any kind. And 
this is the theory of a Christian. (Compare Phil. i. and 
Col. i.) Practically there are difficulties. Who of us 
has not had to confess grievous failure and sin? Who 
has not had to say, I do not know what the mind 
of God is as to this or that ? In a word, the under- 
standing has been too often darkened, and the walk 
unlike His whose we are. Of course they differ from 
what we have described here. But is it not a solemn 
thing that the Christian has to watch against the very 
same evil which, in souls that know Him not, denies 
and outrages the character and will of God ? And yet 
this is what we all have to feel and confess as to our- 
selves. How often we have been without divine light ! 
This ought never to be in a saint. It never was so 
with Christ. He was the light ; so that it would 
utterly fall short of His glory to say that He was 



CHAPTER IV. 215 

always not only walking in the light, but according to 
the light. Consequently He never knew what it was 
to have a shade of doubt. If He waited, it was never 
doubt but simple dependence on His Father's will, as 
in John xi. It may be our path to wait; and it is well 
to do so, when we have HO such assurance. The de- 
velopment that follows is a description of the awful 
depravity of the Gentiles ; as he says in the next verse, 
" Who, being past feeling, have given themselves over 
unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with 
greediness." No doubt it is the lowest moral degra- 
dation of which the life of man is capable. But the 
wholesome thing for iis to see, and to apply for our own 
souls' help and guidance and guard too, is that all the 
excesses of this outward evil were the result of the 
heart being darkened, and this because it was without 
the life of God. There was nothing but what Satan 
drew from a man's own mind, and the consequence 
was the falsifying of his judgments and feelings. 
Hence men became a prey to every kind of evil. 
They had given themselves over to lasciviousness, to 
work all uncleanness with greediness. 

But now comes the Christian in contrast. He says 
(although we are in danger of all this, and the very 
sense of our danger is what God uses to keep us from 
falling into the danger), " Ye have not so learned Christ." 
As all the practical evil of the Gentiles arose from 
their ignorance of God, the heart, the mind, the walk, 
all wrong, and increasingly evil; so now God's deliver- 
ance from all evil, root, branch, and fruit, is Christ. 
And what a blessed, simple, holy, God-glorifying de- 
liverance it is ! It is not that He enters into anything 
of the various processes He may use in leading to this 
result. Besides, Christ is the way, as well as the truth. 
The one grand means that applies to every case, and 
that gives the surest deliverance, is Christ Himself. 
" Ye have not so learned Christ." He purposely makes 
Him to be the person who has to do directly with the 



216 EPHESIANS. 

soul. It is a remarkable way of connecting us with 
our Lord, though common in John, " My sheep hear 
my voice." But here, though the union of the members 
with the Head and not life only is the point insisted 
upon, we approach closely to the teaching of " the elder." 
It is as if we listened to Christ ourselves. " If so be 
that ye have heard him" not about Him ; they were 
taught in Him also, " as the truth is in Jesus." Is there 
not great emphasis in this expression ? It is not as 
the truth is in Christ. We all know that Jesus is 
Christ, and Christ is Jesus. But God never uses one 
word in vain. And I think that the difference is the 
greater because both are used. He first of all puts the 
word Christ " Ye have not so learned Christ ;" be- 
cause there he brings the whole mass of my privilege 
before the soul. Christ is the special name, when I 
look at Him as the risen, exalted man. In Him I have 
got my blessing. The word conveys to my mind the 
thought of One in whom all is concentrated as dead, cru- 
cified, but now in heaven. Jesus is the personal name 
that He bears on earth. The Spirit had been reveal- 
ing in previous chapters the great name brought before 
us in Christ. But when He is about to speak of the 
practical knowledge which would apply to the duties of 
their walk here below, He says, " If so be ye have 
heard him, and been taught in him, as the truth is in 
Jesus" There, I apprehend, He is more speaking of 
Him as that person who, in the eyes of men, as well as 
before God, was the blessed example of all light and 
purity in His ways here below. Thus, I conceive, any 
spiritual mind will at once appreciate what a blessed 
way it is of bringing this before our souls. He places 
before us the living presentation of all we have in 
Him ; but we see it in the ways of that blessed Man, 
Jesus, here below. By the " truth that is in Jesus," 
does He not mean the truth that we see and hear and 
know carried out in every word He said, in all His 
ways and obedience and service, in every kind of suffer- 



CHAPTER IV. 217 

ing that He passed through on the earth, in His pa- 
tience, in His earnestness, in His zeal for the glory of 
God, in His tender care for those that belonged to God, 
and in His compassion for perishing sinners? And 
yet, look where you will, behold His intolerance of that 
which is contrary to God. All these, and infinitely 
more, we find in Jesus, and no where else, in perfection. 
It is only in the person of Jesus that we have all 
truth fully out. I may learn truth through the Holy 
Ghost, and He is the only power of my knowing the 
truth, and is therefore, I suppose, called " truth " in 
1 John v. 6. Neither God, as such, nor the Father, is 
ever called the truth; nor could it be. When you 
speak of the truth, you do not mean merely either the 
divine nature in its perfectness, or His person " from 
whom cometh down every good gift." But why is it 
that Jesus should be emphatically the truth ? Jesus is 
the One who objectively has presented to me that 
which shows me the bearing and relationship of every- 
thing to God as well as to man. If I want to test 
any one thing, I never can arrive at its full character 
till I view it in connection with the person of Christ. 
The Holy Ghost is the truth subjectively, because no 
man can behold Jesus or find the truth in Jesus with- 
out Himself. The Holy Ghost is the revealer of Jesus ; 
our own mind cannot see Him. Even the new man 
cannot of itself understand Jesus, or enter into the 
things of God. And you will observe how strikingly 
this was shown when the disciples themselves, already 
born of God, had to wait till the Lord opened their 
understandings to understand the Scriptures, and after 
that for power to act on them. After they were con- 
verted, they needed the power of the Spirit to enable 
them to apprehend the Scriptures. Besides, again they 
must wait for power to testify the truth from the 
Scriptures to others. They required to have the power 
of the Spirit, distinct from the new nature, for the pur- 
pose of entering into the things of God. Mere human 



218 EPHESIANS. 

nature never understands the things of God, the new 
man does. But in order to do it, the Spirit's leading is 
requisite. The new man is characterized by dependence. 
The Holy Ghost acts in His own power. So that we 
do not merely need dependence upon God, but power 
from Him in order to enter into the truth. I am not 
now speaking of being converted merely, but of the 
practical entering into the mind of Christ, and the 
ways of God as brought out in the ways of Jesus. 

Let me illustrate the value of the truth as it is in 
Jesus. Take any truth you like, as, e.g., man. Where 
shall I learn the truth about man ? Shall I look for it 
in Adam a man that listened to his wife after she had 
listened to the devil a man who, when God came 
down, ran away from Him, and even dared to insult 
God by laying the blame upon Him ? Shall I look at 
his sons at Cain, his firstborn, or at Abel, whom Cain 
slew? The beautiful grace in Abel was what was 
of God, not what was of himself. If you pursue the 
history of man as such, you only find evil and pride 
and presumption increasing upon him, till you give up 
the whole tale in shame and disgust. And so it would 
all end, but for the Second Adam. I find here in every 
step that He took, in every word that He said, in every- 
thing that flowed from His heart and was reflected in 
His ways, One that never did His own will. Now I 
learn the beauty and the wonder of a man subject to 
God upon the earth the only One who ever walked in 
perfect, moral dignity, though He was despised of all, 
and most of all hated by the religious leaders of the 
world in that day. But how did not God delight in 
Him ? Here, then, the humbling truth is told. Man 
has shown himself thoroughly out: Jesus, the cross, 
tells the tale in full. 

But supposing another instance: if I look up and 
think of God, where shall I, of a surety, find Him ? 
In creation ? It is all ruined. Besides, to read Him 
only in the book of nature, is but to have glimpses of 



CHAPTER IV. 219 

power and beneficence. But in the midst of all these 
large and shining characters of divine majesty, and 
wisdom, and goodness, scattered up and down through 
everything that He has made upon the earth, I should 
also have to face other characteristics, as of weakness, de- 
cay, suffering, death, &c. The question arises, whence do 
these come ? They are as crooked as the others were 
straight; the latter as full of misery as the former wore 
the impress of wisdom and power. The result of all is, 
that, for the mere reasoner in the vanity of man's mind, 
the understanding gets darkened ; and all that can thus 
be learned, even from the consideration of that which 
comes from the hand of God, completely fails to give 
the knowledge of Himself. I see the effects of another 
hand there as well as His own the hand of a destroyer 
and liar; and instead of rising up from nature to nature's 
God, as poets vainly sing, you are apt to sink from 
nature to the devil who has ruined it all; you fall into 
the snares of the enemy by the effort to find out God 
in your own strength. I want some other way wherein 
to learn what God is. To gather an evidence of His 
being is one thing ; to know Him is another. I can 
delight in anything that He has made, but what are 
His thoughts, feelings, ways, especially to a sinner ? 
If you talk about providence, is there not an Abel suf- 
fering and a Cain prosperous ? Great deeds were done 
in the family of the proud murderer; while those who 
had whatever then shone of the light of God, were dis- 
liked and scorned by the world ; often weak in their own 
eyes too, but suffering and cast out wherever faith made 
them odious to those who had it not. This is an im- 
penetrable enigma to man. How can he, in the face of 
such facts, discern the superintending power of a God as 
conscience tells there is? Constant difficulties arise; 
and the reason is very plain; it is not in circumstances 
around, any more than in my own mind, that I can find 
the truth. Not that there are not traces and indications 
in providence as in creation ; but I want the truth and 
cannot find it in either. 



220 EPHESIANS. 

Then I may come down to the law. Does it give me 
the truth ? In no way. It is not that the law was 
not good and holy, but it is never called, nor in itself 
could it he, the truth. Its design was more for mating 
the discovery of man than of God. Its operation was 
that man might thereby learn what he is himself. It 
runs like a ploughshare, when directed by the Spirit, into 
the heart, and lays bare many furrows, and discovers 
what man never knew was there before. But none of 
these things shows what God is to man in grace. Not 
even the law can give the truth as to this. I cannot at 
all learn by it what a Saviour-God is, nor even fully 
what man is. At the best it declares what a man ought 
to be as well as do ; but this is not the truth. What 1 
ought to be is not God's truth but my duty. Law was 
the standard for man in the flesh; and hence it never 
was given till man was a sinful man. " The law was 
given by Moses," and not to or by Adam. The com- 
mandment laid upon Adam is never called the law, 
although it was, of course, a law. 

Further, you will never find truth, even in the Bible, 
if you sever it from Jesus. But the moment the same 
blessed One, who has shown me in His own life and 
death what man is, has also shown me in the very same 
what God is, then all the clouds break and the difficulties 
vanish. Now I know God, beholding Him in Jesus. 
New thoughts of God dawn on the soul, and submitting 
to Him, I am made perfectly happy ; perhaps not all at 
once, but as surely as my soul has received Jesus, and 
learnt what the true God is in Jesus, I have eternal 
life, and shall find unbroken peace; but in Him I re- 
ceive all that I want, all that God intends for my soul, 
because the truth is in Jesus. Thus, then, as a believer, 
I know God; I know that which the heathen never did 
nor could reach. Their understanding was darkened. 
Having no knowledge of Jesus, they had no full or 
saving means of knowing God. But this is precisely 
what the gospel brings close to every poor, needy soul 



CHAPTER IV. 221 

who hears it now. And what is it then that I learn of 
God, when I look at the truth as it is in Jesus ? I 
learn first this a God that comes down to me, a God 
that seeks my soul to do me good, a God that can fol- 
low me with love, selfish as I am, and pity my ignorance, 
and not this only, but One that can instruct me, and is 
willing to do it, spite of my wilfulness and stupidity ; 
in short, a most gracious and faithful God He makes 
Himself known in Jesus. I find One who, after using 
other means, spent Himself in love upon me, that I 
might know Him ; One who undertook to bear the 
judgment of my sins. For Jesus came and took all 
sins upon Himself for every soul that believes upon 
Him. I learn now that even the hateful self which has 
so refused and slighted Him for this He has suffered, 
and completely dealt with it. It has been judged in the 
cross of Christ; and if my soul believes that God is 
good enough to do all this for me, to suffer all this for 
me, to take and bear the whole consequence upon Him- 
self in the person of His beloved Son ; if I see this and 
bow to it, and receive it from God, what can shake or 
harass my soul more ? My sins ? Certainly if anything 
ought to trouble my soul, they most of all. But what 
is the cross for ? What has God done there ? What 
has He told me in the gospel ? If it was God revealing 
Himself in His beloved Son, if it was Jesus the Son of 
God that was made sin there, why should I have a 
single doubt or anxiety upon that score? All depends 
upon this : Have I bowed to what God has wrought 
and given me in the cross of Christ? If I am des- 
pairing about sin, it is in effect making the cross of 
Christ of none effect, and the work of Christ a vain 
thing. He has perfectly done His task, and I am en- 
titled so to rest upon it, as to know that my sins never 
can come up against me more. Ought I not to be a 
happy man, and to rest in the most perfect peace because 
of what Jesus had done and suffered ? Here faith can 
repose. Christ's death has such value in the mind of 



222 EPHESIANS. 

God, that He loves to give this peace in consequence. 
Such is the truth as it is in Jesus. What a wonderful 
depth and breadth of truth there is, if you look at it 
thus ! What a poor thing my own experience is, com- 
pared with the truth as it is in Jesus ! Spiritual power 
is much more proved hy discerning Jesus in others, 
than by measuring or comparing what people are in 
themselves, -which, indeed, is far from wise. But yet 
what a disappointing thing it is to see Him merely as 
He is reflected in others ! I must look at the truth as 
it is in Jesus : in what He was here below, as One who 
has shown me all through His life and up to His death 
what God is and man too, Himself the model-man. 

In the same person of Jesus I alone see the full 
truth about anything at all. And you will find the 
value of this not merely in the great lessons of what 
God or man is, but if you have to do with any par- 
ticular trial or difficulty, what is the one test of anything 
right or wrong ? The truth as it is in Jesus. It is 
the power of using Jesus to meet that difficulty, and 
of seeing how His name bears upon it. He has ex- 
pressed His will about it where I am to be quiet, 
where I am to act, how I am to walk, and how to bear. 
He has given me an example that I should follow in 
His steps. The secret of the power of being like Jesus 
depends upon the measure of spirituality we have in 
applying His name. I am still assuming that there 
is honesty of purpose, and that we are desiring to walk 
before one another as we are walking in truth before 
God ourselves. It is in proportion as we turn to Jesus 
and use Him, and view things in Him: this is the rule 
and spring of real spiritual power. It is this which 
constitutes strength and maturity in Christ. It was not 
the amount of zeal or of overcoming the world, or any 
great knowledge of this thing or that, but it is found in 
knowing Him. " I have written unto you, fathers, 
because you have known Him that is from the begin- 
ning." Who is this ? Jesus. The knowledge of Jesus, 



CHAPTER IV. 223 

then, is the practical power, growth, and wisdom of 
the Christian ; it is, as well as shows, advance in the 
things of God. This is in truth what all have to 
learn, more or less. But to know it deeply, and so as 
to apply it and bring it out, was what specially charac- 
terized the fathers. Everybody talks in his own tongue. 
The dullest soul can use intelligibly the words of his 
vernacular language. But there is an immense differ- 
ence between the capacity of different persons in wielding 
their own tongue. It is not every one who can speak 
according to what the subject calls for. A man who 
has a mastery of the language proves it by applying it 
appropriately to all variety of subjects. So all saints 
must have laid hold more or less of the truth in Jesus, 
but then the power to know it well, to use it rightly, to 
bring it out on fitting oocasions and turn it to profit for 
ourselves and others this is the true secret of our pro- 
gress in the things of God, and what tends to the 
blessing of souls and the helping on of the cause of 
God. The importance of such growth in grace and the 
knowledge of our Lord Jesus cannot be over estimated. 

Then we have stated to us the practical object of 
it all " Thatye put off according to the former conversa- 
tion the old man, which is corrupt according to the 
lusts of deceit." It is not a question of improvement. 
There is no bettering our old man. The heart may be 
purified by faith, but in itself it is " deceitful above all 
things, and desperately wicked." Faith may work the 
new life, and the Spirit; but the flesh never can be 
changed or renewed. And here we find what is to be 
done with our old nature : " That ye put off," &c.* The 
apostle is speaking to Christians. They have the old 
man, and need practically to put it off. We must beware, 

* Some suppose that the truth in Jesus is, "that ye have put 

off, as concerns your former conversation, the old man and 

have put on the new man," &c. (Ver 22 24). So Dr. Eadie 
and Mr. Peile, whose rendering seems to me quite consistent with 
the context, notwithstanding the depreciatory notice of Alford and 



224 EPHESIANS. 

remembering that we have still this incurably evil thing, 
accustomed to indulge its bad ways before conversion, and 
still tending to drag one, if unwatchful, into evil. 

But now begins the positive part. There was, first, 
the putting off the old man, the moral judgment of it, 
grounded on God's judgment in the cross of Christ, 
where it was definitively done with. Then comes the 
renewing of the spirit of the mind, which we cannot 
have unless there is the judgment of the old. The re- 
newal is intimated to be a present process going on 
gradually, as the spirit of the mind is imbued with 
Christ. The putting off and putting on are not viewed 
as present, but as the act in itself once for all. " And be 
renewed in the spirit of your mind ; that ye put on the 
new man which, according to God, has been created in 
righteousness and holiness of truth." They had the 
new man of course ; but it is the putting on the new 
man practically, the outward manifestation of the new 
man that was already within them. It is well to bear 
in mind that this is "righteousness and holiness of 
truth." It is the truth here again that produces it. 
Such is the full and real meaning of the expression. 

Eighteousness and holiness differ in this respect. 
Righteousness is the true perception and, of course, 
the walking in our relative duties as men of God; 
holiness is rather the rejection in heart and way, ac- 
cording to God's nature, of what is contrary to Him. 
Holiness, therefore, is a far more absolute thing than 
righteousness, which takes up what we owe relatively 
to God and man. It is in contrast with the first man. 
Adam was good as a creature, but he had no right appre- 
hension of God Himself, or of what evil was according to 
God. He did not then know sin; there was no evil to 

Ellicott. Mr. Darby takes the version and connection to be, that the 
truth in Jesus is not exactly " that ye should," nor " that ye have," 
but " your having put off," &c. I have not, however, altered the 
rendering and the comment, which remain here as before. The 
xeader can judge for himself. 



CHAPTER IV. 225 

know. If one had talked about lust to Adam in the 
garden of Eden, he must, I believe, have avowed his 
ignorance of what it meant. Therefore, if the law had 
been given to Adam, " Thou shalt not covet," he would 
not have comprehended its meaning, having no ex- 
perience of sin till afterwards. We have hearts which, 
crave what we have not got, but Adam had not. He 
was just the sample of creature-goodness in a man. It 
was not after God, created in the righteousness and 
holiness of the truth. God made man upright ; but 
uprightness is a different thing from being created in 
holiness. Upright he was created, and innocent ; but 
the new man is much more, knowing right well, through 
the Spirit's teaching, what evil is and what good is. 
Adam only learnt what good and evil are when he fell, 
never before; he then became conscious of a good 
that he lost and that he was not, and of an evil that he 
had fallen into, which God hated and must judge. So 
when a man is brought to the truth as it is in Jesus, 
he knew good and evil before with a bad conscience, 
but now he knows it with a purged and good con- 
science. There is nothing that could make a conscience 
so clean as the sacrifice of Jesus. Supposing that any 
of us were able to live without iniquity to the end of 
our days, would this make our conscience good ? Not 
in the least. There would always be a bad conscience, 
because of the consciousness of past, unremoved, unfor- 
given sin. No human process, nay, nor giving us a new 
nature, can get rid of the evil we have done. The sac- 
rifice of Christ has done it perfectly. My evil is there 
judged according to God. The evil of the old man is 
dealt with in His death before God. Christ rises from the 
dead and gives me His life, which is the new man. 
Christ in resurrection is the very source of the new man 
in my soul. If this be so, we must deal with the old man. 
It is to faith a thing done with. Jesus has shown me 
it as a judged thing in His cross, and I must judge it, 
and in no way allow my old pride and vanity and folly. 
Q 



226 EPHESIANS. 

I have all still within me, but I must treat it as dead: else 
I shall grieve the Lord, and bring myself under His hand. 
We have each of us to watch earnestly against the 
former conversation ; but then it easily happens that a 
person might be enticed by an evil never fallen into 
before, because he imagined it was impossible for him 
so to fall. There is nothing so exposes one to fall, 
as the notion one could not so turn aside. Self-confi- 
dence leads away from dependence on God, and has 
often been the ruin of a Christian man, as far as His 
glory is concerned. 

Thus, the new man is spoken of so as to bring out 
its contrast with what man was even in his best estate. 
Yea, Adam, when he came from the hand of God, 
could not be described in the terms of blessing which 
are true of every believer now. There is no such thing 
as restoring to an Adamic condition. A soul when 
converted now has the place of the second Man ; and as 
He, the Lord, cannot fall, so the Christian has a life 
that never can be touched. It is as impossible for a 
Christian to be lost, as for Christ to be removed from 
the right hand of God; because He is the life of the 
Christian. If you say that people can fall away from 
grace, nothing is more certain than that they may. 
But if you mean by this, that the life of the Christian 
can perish, you flatly contradict the word of God. It 
is a question, then, of understanding the Scriptures. 
Christ Himself is the life of the Christian: can He fall ? 
Thus it is a virtual denial of Christ Himself, that there 
should be a doubt allowed about it. All these exhorta- 
tions are based upon this; that they had learnt Christ, 
and knew the truth as it is in Jesus. They were 
already in living relation to Him, and upon this ground 
all Christian exhortations come. Is it even or ever a rea- 
sonable thing to talk about fruit till the plant has 
thoroughly taken root ? It would be no use to talk to 
a baby about the duties of a man. The man must be 
there, as such, before you can expect to see the dis- 



CHAPTER IV. 227 

charge of the duties of a man. And so with the Chris- 
tian, before you can rightly insist on the duties of a 
Christian. But now that the truth as it is in Jesus is 
known, you must not allow the old man. He is speak- 
ing of practical fruit and walk, because of already being 
in Christ, and knowing the truth in Him. This ought 
always to be a great encouragement to a soul. Even 
if God is exhorting me to self-judgment, it always 
supposes my previous blessing as a possessor of life 
everlasting. It is on this ground that God, as it were, 
thus addresses us. Is it possible that when I have 
done so much for you, you can be so careless of my 
will ? It is to touch the spring of grace in the 
soul, in order that we may go on with Him and do 
His will. 

Now some of the results are pressed upon them. 
" Wherefore, putting away lying, speak every man truth 
with his neighbour, for we are members one of another." 
(Ver. 25.) As they had learnt the truth in Jesus, the 
shame of falsehood was the more manifest. What is the 
ground that we have here ? We are too apt to take false- 
hood rather upon the human basis of honour. Many a 
man would not do it on moral grounds ; or he would be 
too proud to tell a lie ; and he that had a certain sense 
of the fear of God before his eyes, would not do it, be- 
cause it was a practical denial of God. It is as good as 
saying that God does not hear. So that whether you 
look at a mere man in his natural pride, or at a godly 
man, like a Jew, there you have the grounds on which 
many would act. But this is not enough for a Christian. 
It is of great importance for our souls, not only that we 
should walk well and righteously, but that the motive, 
character, and extent, should be according to God too. 
Not only is this exhortation necessary, but there is that 
coupled with it which we rarely think of in our inter- 
course one with another: we are here exhorted to speak 
truth every man with his neighbour, "for we are mem- 
bers one of another." It is looking at Christians only, 



228 EPHESIANS. 

None but such are members evidently. He wants to 
connect with Christ the most common duty, which we 
are in danger of putting upon a lower basis, and the 
ground he takes is this : that it is as preposterous and 
uncomely for a Christian not to tell the plain simple 
truth to a brother Christian, as for a man to deceive 
himself. They are part of ourselves. " We are mem- 
bers one of another." Do we realize this ? If we did, 
what would be the effects ? Assuredly, one would be 
perfect plainness in dealing with that which is wrong ; 
another would be a real, hearty desire to set right those 
who are wrong. It is evident that we could not wish 
to injure ourselves. And if I regard another as a part 
of myself, I ought to act towards them accordingly. In. 
the same way, also, we ought to feel what is contrary 
to God in another. And as one would greatly desire, 
if awakened to feel one's own sin, to go to God about it, 
and have our souls set right there, so it should be in 
having to do one with another. The deeper realizing 
of this truth would give a stronger desire for the well- 
being of our fellow-Christians. And yet if it is to be 
in accordance with God's glory, it is not merely that we 
should judge what is wrong, but that we should seek 
to get what is right and according to God. We are 
apt, where persons have been, for instance, put away 
from fellowship, to think only of getting rid of the evil ; 
but do ^we find this where the membership one of 
another is felt and owned in the presence of God ? 
Even where it comes to the extreme degree of so dealing 
with one whom we had believed to be a member of the 
body of Christ, the end of all discipline is to remove 
the evil, in order that that which is of Christ may 
shine forth. 

" Be ye angry and sin not ; let not the sun go down upon 
your wrath." (Ver. 26.) I take this to be a most impor- 
tant and holy intimation for our souls. There is a notion 
often that it is wrong for a Christian ever to feel dis- 
pleased or angry; this and other Scriptures shew it 



CHAPTER IV. 229 

may be right. But we must take care what the source, 
as well as the character, of the anger is. If it is merely 
about something that affects self, and it therefore takes 
the form of vindictiveness, this is of course beyond a 
doubt contrary to all that is of Christ. We find in 
Him (Mark iii.) that He looked round about upon cer- 
tain persons with anger, shewing clearly He had the 
strongest feeling about that which was contrary to God. 
It was not merely that He denounced the thing, but 
the people who were guilty of it. I find the same 
analogy in the epistles. We are told not only to cleave 
to that which is good, but to abhor that which is evil. 
Man's thought is that it is not for a Christian to judge 
and to be angry with what is wrong. The word of 
God tells us there are certain things we ought to judge 
and others we ought not. I am not to judge what is 
unseen; I am to judge positive, known evil. There we 
have plainly and clearly the line drawn by God. You. 
will find that men say, if you speak strongly about 
the wrong of this thing or that, you are uncharitable. 
But not so ; it is real charity to denounce it, not to let 
it pass. True love as to this consists in always having 
the feelings of God about what comes before us. That 
is the one qustion. What God has fellowship with, we 
can have fellowship with; and what God hates, we are 
not to love or allow. But we must take care that we 
are in the intelligence of God's mind. " Be ye angry 
and sin not." There is the greatest possible danger of 
sinning if you are angry, and therefore is this added. 
The simple emotion of anger toward one who has sinned 
may and ought to be a holy feeling ; it is provided it 
rests there. Thus it is felt in God's presence. But 
how am I to know that I am not sinning in my anger? 
" Let not the sun go down upon your wrath." If there 
is irritation kept up in the spirit, impatience, dislike, or 
scorn betrayed, who cannot see that it is not of God ? 
When the sun goes down, it is a time either for your 
peaceful communion with God, or your indulgence of re- 



230 EPHESIANS.' 

sentment away from Him. Therefore it is added, 
" Neither give place to the devil." (Ver. 27.) Where 
there is the nursing of wrath or the keepiDg up of griev- 
ances in the mind, Satan easily comes in and is not 
easily dislodged. 

In these exhortations, as in the doctrine of the epistle, 
there is no notion of bettering the nature of man. A 
new nature is shown to belong to the Christian : Christ 
is his life. The practical aim follows that this should 
be exercised and manifested. 

Nevertheless, there is a serious hindrance, for the 
old man remains, the flesh is still in the Christian ; and 
as the new creature is in no way the result of improv- 
ing the old, so the old nature is incapable of being 
absorbed or exalted into the new. They are irrecon- 
cileably opposed. " That which is born of the flesh is 
flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit." 
The only course and comfort and duty open to the 
faithful is to deny and mortify the flesh, so that the 
new man may be left free to do the will of God. 

On the last portion which occupied us, we saw the 
danger of yielding to anger; it easily degenerates into 
hatred, and this gives occasion for the devil to enter. 
We have now another exhortation, which to some 
might seem hardly called for among Christians. " Let 
him that stole steal no more." It is not exactly " him 
that stole," but " the stealer." " Thief" would be too 
strong; and " he that stole" is too weak. The apostle 
was led to choose a term so large as to take in every 
shade of such dishonesty. Do you think the caution 
needless? Beware lest your self-confidence, and the 
slight of any word that God has written, ensnare you. 
There can be no doubt that the Spirit, who inspired the 
epistle, judged the admonition necessary for all saints, 
as well as for the Ephesians ; yet nowhere do we find 
an assembly more happy, flourishing, and blessed of 
God, than the Church in Ephesus. Yet even for them, i( 
quickened and raised with Christ, and seated in Him. 



CHAPTER IV. 231 

in heavenly places, the Holy Ghost saw its suitability. 
God knows us better than we know ourselves ; and let 
saints be ever so instructed, devoted, or earnest, in none 
of these things, apart from the enjoyment of present 
communion, apart from actual dependence on God, is 
there any adequate safeguard. Besides, if a soul, 
through unwatchfulness, had slipped aside into that 
which is so degrading even in human eyes, we can 
readily conceive the force of such a word to the heart- 
broken and ashamed, in danger of being swallowed up 
with overmuch sorrow. How little the heart felt its 
perils, or knew either its own weakness or the power of 
Satan ! Now, restored to judge itself according to 
God, it owns the value of words like these, which it 
had once deemed well-nigh useless for the saint. Now, 
too, it feels how exceeding broad is the Spirit's appeal, 
comprehending every kind of worldly, professional, or 
trade custom (no matter how respectable) that is 
fraudulent, as well as the grosser forms of dishonesty. 
God is training the new man according to His own 
wisdom and grace. 

How strikingly also such a precept shews that the 
Christian is on larger, higher, firmer ground than that 
on which Israel after the flesh stood or rather fell. 
Never do you hear the law say " Let the stealer steal 
no more;" its voice must rather be, "Let him die." 
The law is good if a man use it lawfully; and its law- 
ful application is expressly not to form, guide, and 
govern the walk of the righteous, but to deal with the 
lawless and disobedient, ungodly and sinful, unholy and 
profane, and, in short, with whatever is contrary to 
sound doctrine. Sin, we are told in Romans vi., shall 
not have dominion over Christians, "for ye are not 
under the law, but under grace ;" and this in a chapter 
where the question is the holy walk of the saint, not 
his justification. Yet in the face of this, the clear and 
uniform teaching of the New Testament, the tendency 
of most in Christendom habitually is to go back to 



232 EPHESIANS. 

law, especially where there is feeble separation from the. 
world. But it is easily understood. For the world 
does not receive or understand the grace of God, 
whereas it can appreciate in the letter the righteous 
law of God. Hence, when the world and the saints 
are mixed together, the will of man soon takes the 
upper hand; and as the saint cannot elevate the world 
to his standing, he must sink to that which he holds in 
common with the world ; and thus both meet once more 
on Jewish ground, as if the cross of Christ had never 
been, and the Holy Ghost were not sent down from 
heaven to gather believers out of a mixed condition 
into the assembly of God apart from the world. Even 
for the individual Christian, as well as for the Church, 
and most of all for God's truth, grace, and glory, the 
loss has been incalculable. For the ordinary walk has 
been reduced to a string of negatives, save in public 
acts of philanthropy, religious activity, or ritual obser- 
vances, which the Christian shares with any and every- 
body that will join him. It is not occupation with 
good according to God's will ; still less is it suffering 
for the sake of Christ and of righteousness from a 
world which knows them not. This is not Christianity, 
though it is the state and the system of most Christians. 
Did Christ ever obey from the fear of judgment? Was 
not His life a surrender of Himself to the holy will and 
pleasure of His Father ? So our souls must be occu- 
pied with God's grace in Christ, if we are to find 
strength in pleasing Him. The mere avoidance of evil, 
the not doing this or that, is below our calling. Do 
we indeed desire to know and to do His will as His 
children ? Are we zealous in learning to do well, no 
less than careful to cease from each evil way ? If not, 
the day will come when we may begin to do evil again, 
and with a conscience the less sensitive, because we 
have learnt truth which we do not carry out. 

Very beautiful, therefore, is the apostolic exhortation 
on the positive side. " But rather let him labour [idle- 



CHAPTER IV. 233 

ness is neither right nor safe], working with his hands 
the thing which is good, that he may have to distribute 
to him that needeth." (Ver. 28.) Thus does the Spirit 
cheer and direct the man whose hands were once put forth 
in unworthy ways ; thus does He open a happy path 
where grace can vindicate its power, spite of a dishonest 
nature and habit ; and he who was the stealer before 
he knew the Saviour's name, may now have fellowship 
with the spirit and practice of the great apostle (Acts 
xx. 33 35), yea, and of the Master Himself, remem- 
bering His words, how He said, It is more blessed to 
give than to receive. To live is the worldly man's ob- 
ject in labour; to give is the Christian motive. It is 
not a mere question of chance surplusage, but an ex- 
press object, especially for him who has the conscious- 
ness of the mercy that delivered him from covetous sin 
and its shame and judgment. Only the toil must be 
about what is good and honest. In vain will you plead 
a benevolent or religious use of ill-gotten gain ! No 
employment that is contrary to God's will is good for 
the Christian, but should be given up at once. The 
covenant of Sinai never enunciated such a motive for 
toil as this. To talk about the ten commandments as 
the rule for the Christian's walk now, is to go back from 
the sun which rules the day to the moon which rules 
the night; it is to eclipse Christ by Moses under the 
delusive profession of doing God service. In general, 
what the law exacted from those under it on the prin- 
ciple of right, the Christian is responsible on the prin- 
ciple of grace to exceed in every possible way. The 
scope of obedience is immensely increased ; the inward 
motives are searched out and laid bare ; the very ten- 
dency to violence, corruption, and falsehood is judged 
in its roots, and suffering wrongfully and withal in love 
takes the place of earthly righteousness for the disciples. 
Such is the unquestionable teaching of our Lord and of 
His apostles ; it is darkened, undermined, and denied, 
by those who insist on judaisingthe Church by putting 



234 EPHESIANS. 

the Christian under the law as his rule of life. Truly, 
they " understand not what they say nor whereof they 
affirm." 

Next, it is not our deeds only that have to he con- 
sidered, hut our words. " Let no corrupt communication 
proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to 
the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the 
hearers." (Yer. 29.) Worthless language is to be 
eschewed as one rejects good-for-nothing fruit; if it 
were on the tongue, let the unprofitable word proceed 
no farther. Unclean allusion we shall find specified 
and forbidden in the chapter following. Here I con- 
ceive the circle is more comprehensive. Many who 
would neither utter nor hear impure conversation may 
often have to bemoan the utterance and the sanction of 
unsavoury discourse. Better to be silent if there be 
not (such is the force) something good for needful edi- 
fication. The need measures the service, and love 
builds up instead of puffing up as knowledge does. It is 
equally true that " in the multitude of words there 
wanteth not sin," and that " the lips of the righteous 
feed many;" they "know what is acceptable ;" and those 
who hear are refreshed and blessed. 

Hitherto we have had grounds of holy action, as well 
as guards against sin, found in the features of the new 
man. But this, we know, does not give us the full 
character and power of the Christian man. The holy 
Spirit of God dwells in him. This blessed but solemn 
trnth is now pressed in its practical bearing. We are 
said (chap. ii. 22) to be built together for an habitation 
of God in Spirit; and therefore do the apostles exhort 
us (chap, iv.) to walk worthy of the calling wherewith 
we have been called. Bnt there is an individual in- 
dwelling of the Holy Ghost, as well as His relation to 
the house of God. We have been sealed by the Spirit, 
appropriated thereby to God on the ground of accom- 
plished redemption. The precious blood of Christ has 
washed away our sins; in Him we have redemption 



CHAPTER IV. 235 

through His blood, the forgiveness of offences, according 
to the riches of God's grace. Thus, His sacrifice has 
effaced before God and to faith all our evil, and a new- 
nature is ours in Christ; so that the Holy Spirit can 
come and dwell in us, and seal us for the day of re- 
demption, when our body shall be transformed into the 
likeness of the glory of Christ, as surely as our souls 
are now quickened into His life. In presence of this 
infinite present privilege and pledge of glory for ever, 
the apostle adds, " And grieve not the Holy Spirit of 
God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption." 
He is the spring of energy to strengthen the saint unto 
all that is well-pleasing to God. But this supposes 
that there is self-judgment and dependence on God. 
Otherwise we grieve Him, and are made to feel, not 
His power, but our own wretched unfaithfulness. 

Again, it seems strange that any Christian should 
be so unintelligent as to confound the word here with 
" quench not the Spirit" in 1 Thessalonians v. 19. The 
context (ver. 20) there shows plainly that it is a warn- 
ing not to hinder the smallest real manifestation of the 
Holy Ghost in a saint, no matter how feeble he might 
be; and the history of Christendom to the present hour 
proves how much the precept was needed, and how little 
the apostolic injunction has been attended to. But the 
passage in Ephesians iv. is a personal concern for every 
saint and his own conversation every day. 

Another thing to be noted is the difference from the 
language of Psalm li. : " Take not thy Holy Spirit from 
me." But the apostle, even when he presses that we 
should not grieve the Holy Ghost, never hints at His 
being taken away. On the contrary, he in the same 
breath assures us that we were sealed by Him for the 
day of redemption. Where can there be a fuller way of 
intimating our personal security than such a sentence ? 
To what are we to attribute this difference? Not, I 
need hardly say, to a higher inspiration in Paul the 
apostle, than, in David the king; but to the necessary 



236 EPHESIAtfS. 

and revealed modification of the Spirit's relation to the 
saint, since Jesus died and rose and went to heaven. 
Till then there was no such thing as the Spirit given 
to ahide with the believer for ever. He blessed souls 
then, wrought in and by them, filled with joy and 
power betimes ; but indwelling, as the Christian has 
and knows it now, there was and could not be till the 
glorification of Jesus, because of sin put away by His 
blood. Hence we are told not to grieve the Spirit, but 
are never, since He was given, supposed to deprecate 
His departure. Unquestionably, this aggravates the 
sin of a Christian and imparts poignancy and bitter- 
ness to his self-reproach in that case; but even this is 
intended of God for the graver warning of His child. 
/The verse, therefore, clearly proves, on the one hand, 
I the danger of sinning and thus of grieving the Spirit; 
I and, on the other, the security of the saint even in and 
^ spite of such sorrowful circumstances. He is brought 
to God, reconciled, washed, sanctified, justified ; he has 
eternal life and shall never perish ; he is sealed of the 
Spirit, and that seal, who can break? If he fall into 
sin, assuredly God will see to it and chasten, yea, unto 
death ; for He will neither make light of his evil nor 
condemn himself with the world. So Peter exhorts 
the godly to walk in holy obedience, and while they 
called on Him as Father who, without respect of per- 
sons, judges according to each one's work, to pass their 
time of sojourn in fear; at the same time, far from 
weakening their confidence, he proceeds, " forasmuch as 
ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible 

things as silver and gold but with the precious 

blood of Christ." Thus, the truth of God has the effect 
of attracting and strengthening the affections, even when 
it sets us with our faces in the dust; while human 
error, as it weakens the full grace of God, so it fails 
thoroughly to humble the soul. But what a truth it is 
for the believer, that he has within the constant pre- 
sence of a divine person, the Holy Ghost, the witness 



CHAPTER IV. 237 

of all that passes there ! How careful should we be 
that we grieve Him not ! But it is not a truth for 
conscience only, but pregnant with consolation ; for He 
dwells in us evermore, not because we are worthy of 
such a heavenly denizen, but in virtue of the worth of 
Jesus and the perfectness with which His work has 
cleansed us in God's sight from our sins ; and He is in 
us for our joy, and strength, and blessing evermore, , 
through and in Christ the Lord. May we be enabled, 
always confident, always to pray, and not to faint ! 

The doctrine of the Holy Ghost's presence in the in- 
dividual believer, sealing him for redemption-day, has 
been already seen, and seems to be bound up in the 
closest way with practical holiness, as a motive and a 
guard, no less than as the power. For what more 
solemnly affecting than the remembrance of such an 
inhabitant ever dwelling in the believer's body? and 
what more certain than that He is the Spirit, not of 
fear, but of power, love, and a sound mind ? We may 
be utter weakness, and the natural heart deceitful and 
treacherous beyond human conception. But this is not 
the only truth. The Christian is characterized by the 
indwelling of the Holy Ghost. Is He weak ? Or if 
all might be His, is He in the believer the passive, inac- 
tive witness of every fault and infirmity? Is He not, 
on the contrary, within Him to associate his affections 
with Christ, to glorify Christ, taking of the things of 
Christ and showing them to him ? Doubtless, He may 
be and is grieved by allowed folly, and carelessness, and 
evil, and as to this we have just been seriously cautioned ; 
but it would be well for such as speak incessantly of 
the good-for-nothingness of the flesh (which is most 
clear and certain) to bear in mind that the believer, the 
Christian, is no longer in the flesh but in the Spirit, 
seeing that the Spirit of God dwells in him. Meet it 
is, therefore, that sin, all and every sin, should be con- 
fessed and judged; but it is neither genuine humility 
nor the faith of God's elect to ignore the blessed and 



238 EPHESIANS. 

encouraging as well as serious fact, that the Spirit of 
God is in us to give all strength in revealing Christ to 
our souls. It may be wholesome, unquestionably, to 
learn the painful lesson of Romans vii. 7, and seq. ; but 
to rest there is to prove that it has been ill learnt. For 
the proper place of the Christian is, as to this, the end 
of the chapter, ushering him into the still deeper 
exercises and the more unselfish sufferings of chapter 
viii., with the liberty, and power, and hope, and security 
which it so abundantly shews to be our portion through 
grace. The redemption of our body and of creation 
outside is not yet come ; but He who is its earnest is 
within us. 

This being so, " Let all bitterness, and wrath, and 
anger, and clamour, and evil-speaking be put away 
from you with all malice." (Ver. 31.) The very near- 
ness into which the family of God is brought may 
become a snare unless there be watchfulness and a 
simple looking to Christ. But the Holy Ghost gives 
quarter to no evil feeling whatever. These are the 
breaches of our nearness ; in the next chapter (yer. 3 
and seq.) we shall find the abuses of it. 

If we come to particulars, " all bitterness," I think, 
denotes every form of the sharp, unsparing mood which 
repels souls instead of winning them, and makes the most 
of the real or imagined faults of others. The " wrath 
and anger," next following, refer to the outburst of 
passion, and the more settled vindictive resentment, 
to which the indulgence of acrimony gives rise, as 
" clamour and evil speaking" are their respective 
counterparts in words: all flowing from the deep- 
seated fountain of " all malice," which is finally con- 
demned in our verse. Thus, as we were warned against 
dishonesty in word and deed, before the allusion to the. 
Holy Spirit's seal, so now, after it, hatred in its various 
parts and expressions is denounced. It is, alas, natural 
to the first man Adam the same corruption and vio- 
lence which brought the flood on the world of old, but, 



CHAPTER IV. 239 

spite of God's judgment, renewed itself, and will, till 
Christ deal with man and Satan in person. 

But, as was observed in the previous verses, bare 
abstinence from the mind and workings of the flesh 
suffices not. There is the activity of good in Christ, 
the second Man, and this the Spirit produces as well 
as demands in the Christian. Hence it is added, " Be 
ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving one 
another, even as God in Christ hath forgiven you." 
Clearly, therefore, it is a question of shewing grace; 
and the pattern of it all is God in Christ, not in the 
law, holy, just and good as the commandment is. But 
good as the law was and is, Christ is the best of all, the 
genuine and only full and perfect expression of what 
God is. And leaving the law to deal with the wicked 
(1 . Tim. i.), as the apostle expressly declares is its 
lawful use, we who are dead with Christ are not under 
law but grace, which, by the power of the Spirit, 
strengthens us according to its own character and gives 
communion with Him who is its source. 

The reader will notice that there is a departure from 
the Authorized Version of, verse 32. It is done advis- 
edly. Why king James' translators deserted the Greek, 
followed by Wycliffe, Coverdale, and even the Rhemish, 
it is hard to say, especially as Beza, who often influenced 
them, is here accurate. The erroneous rendering obscures 
the very grace of God which is set before us as our 
spring and pattern, and tends to countenance the error 
that Christ was the procuring cause of His love, instead 
of being the blessed and infinite channel of its communi- 
cation to us, the only possible means in which even His 
love could holily and justly avail for us. It is a part 
of the same error to think of God as " our reconciled 
Father," or to say that Christ " died to reconcile Him 
to us." Atonement was necessary beyond a doubt, the 
expiation of our sins by the blood of Christ. " He was 
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our 
iniquities." But God was in Christ reconciling; it is 



240 EPHESIANS. 

we (not He) " who Lave now received the reconcilia- 
tion." " And you that were sometimes alienated, and 
enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now hath he 
reconciled." Such is the uniform doctrine of Scripture. 
How blessedly all is put and kept in its place ! The 
atonement is that aspect of Christ's work, which is 
toward God, to put away sin by suffering the divine 
judgment of it in His own person; reconciliation, con- 
trariwise, is toward us, to bring us back in Christ unto 
God. Both are most true; to confound them is to 
lose much and weaken all ; and what is more serious, it 
is more or less to misrepresent the character of God, as 
if He were turned by Christ from an angry judge into 
a loving Father. God is love as truly as He is light. 
It is what He is, not what He is made. 



CHAPTER V. 

What a mighty principle opens here on the saints ! " Be 
ye therefore followers of God as dear children." (Yer. 1.) 
What limits can there be if we are exhorted to imitate 
.God Himself ! Nor is it in any way now an assertion 
of claim, as the law was, on man, standing on his own 
responsibility before God as a creature. God has re- 
vealed Himself in grace; still He is God and none 
other; and if He has communicated tp us His own 
nature, a lesser, lower standard there could not be. It 
would dishonour Himself and the very grace He has 
shown us, and nowhere more fully than in the earlier 
parts of this epistle. It would be, too, the most 
grievous loss to His children beloved, whom He would 
train and bless yet more and more even in this scene of 
evil and sorrow, turning the most adverse circumstances 



CHAPTER V. 241 

into an occasion of teaching us what He is in the depths 
of His grace and filling ourselves with the sense of it 
so as to form our hearts and fashion our ways, as we 
forget ourselves and live above our own habits and the 
conventionalities of men in the truth of Christ. 

Neither law nor even promise ever opened such a 
field as this. The very call so to imitate God sup- 
poses the perfect grace in which we stand: indeed it 
would be insupportable otherwise. No doubt, it is 
most humbling to reflect how little we have answered 
to His call; but even the sense of our previous short- 
comings where it is deep, if we do not lose sight of His 
grace, is turned to precious account, and we are grow- 
ing and going on with Him when we may little think 
it. The law demanded what man ought to render to 
God : to love Him and our neighbour is no more than 
our plain and bounden duty. The promise held out 
the hope of a Seed of blessing, not to Israel only, but 
to all families of the earth. But now, after promise 
was despised and law was broken, God has displayed 
Himself in Christ, and, while accomplishing all in 
Christ, has brought out higher counsels in infinite 
grace to us in such sort that His own character, thus 
displayed, becomes the only suitable pattern to which 
He would conform His children even here. "Be ye 
therefore imitators of God as beloved children ; and 
walk in love as Christ also loved us, and delivered 
himself up for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for 
a sweet-smelling savour." ( Ver. 1, 2.) 

To forgive one another, even as God in Christ for- 
gave, is blessed; but this, though after His own heart 
and ways, is not enough. It is surely divine in its 
source, and impossible in its full character and extent 
to flesh ; but it is in view of man and man's failure, and 
of the outbreaks of an evil nature. He would cherish 
this in us. It is the fruit of His grace, and most need- 
ful, in such a world as this; most wholesome for His 
saints in their intercourse and dealing with each other. 



242 EPHESIANS. 

But it is far from being the expression of all He is and 
would have us enjoy and reflect. There is the outgoing 
of good according to His heart, where there is no ques- 
tion of evil to be forgiven, which is in a certain sense 
only negative, however real and sweet it may be. Here 
all is positive, flowing fresh as it were and above 
human thought. Hence the word is, " Walk in love, 
as Christ also loved us and delivered himself up for us," 
&c. To be forgiven was our abject, urgent need, if we 
were indeed to have the smallest comfort from God or 
hope of deliverance from wrath and of blessedness here- 
after. It was grace, of course, the grace of God, but 
addressed to, if not bounded by, man's need. But now 
we stand on the new ground of the excellency of Christ 
and the exercise of that which is proper to God in the 
activity of His own nature. Hence it is not the sin- 
offering that is here alluded to, nor is it simply the 
blood or the sufferings of our blessed Lord, but His 
delivering Himself for us, in matchless love, " an offer- 
ing and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour." 

One would not be mistaken on such a theme, nor 
weaken for a moment the certainty that in the Lord's 
sufferings on the cross there are depths found there 
only; but these are not and could not be put before us 
as a pattern, seeing that they pertain exclusively to 
Him who bore our sins in His own body and was made 
sin for us, meeting that judgment of God, which no 
man, nor angel, nor creature, nor new creature could 
share with Him, however blessed through it, and filled 
with thankful, adoring delight in Him who was thus 
alone, not only for us, but for God's glory, the object of 
the wrath of God felt and must execute against sin. 
But here it is a question of that which sets forth the 
admirable love of Christ in all its positive fragrance 
and beauty ; and this in order to call out, in the energy of 
the Holy Ghost, the answering ways of the new nature in 
the saints ; for indeed Christ is our life, and what 
bounds are there to the power of the Spirit who dwells 



CHAPTER V. 243 

in us? Love leads to service in self-abnegation, 
whether in Him perfectly, or in us according to our 
measure ; but surely it gives and forms the spirit of 
service, as we see in our blessed Lord. (Phil, ii.) 

Nevertheless, the more sweet and blessed, the nearer 
it is to evil, unless it is maintained in divine power and 
self-judgment. It brings together; it awakens spiritual 
affections ; but what is begun in the Spirit may end in 
fleshly corruption, as we see at Corinth, no less than it 
may seek fleshly perfection of a religious form, as we see 
in Galatia. Accordingly the apostle proceeds to warn 
the Ephesian saints against the dangers to which free 
familiar converse might expose, unless sustained by the 
Holy Ghost. " But fornication and all uncleanness, 
or covetousness, let it not be even named among you, 
as becometh saints." (Yer. 3.) These lusts of the flesh 
were not only not to be allowed, but not even to be 
named. They were God's holy ones, saints; and the 
question now was of that which becomes (not mere 
men but) saints. 

Nor does he confine his warning to unbridled licen- 
tiousness or the covetous desire of that which might 
gratify man, but extends it to unholiness of language 
too, whether openly shameful or under the veil of re- 
finement " and [no] filthiness, and foolish talking, and 
jesting, which are not convenient, but rather giving of 
thanks." (Ver. 4.) Here again, not merely the absence 
of what is indecorous in the Christian, but the positive 
side is brought in and the heart's reference to God's good- 
ness, which breaks out in thanksgiving. " For this ye 
know, that no whoremonger, or unclean person, or 
covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance 
in the kingdom of Christ and God." (Ver. 5.) It is most 
important to remember, that let sovereign grace do 
what it will, let it go out to the vilest, let it cleanse the 
most defiled, the moral ways of God remain inflexible. 
His nature does not change. He hates and never can 
tolerate iniquity. His love may find and has found a 



244 EPHESIANS. 

glorious solution of the difficulty in the cross of Christ; 
but God and sin never can walk or dwell together. 

The children of God have opposite dangers to this, 
and need to watch against their feelings. They may be 
qiiick to exclaim in some flagrant case that there can 
be no life there ; they may be too precipitate in giving 
their confidence where there is a fair show in flesh. 
Some of the most solemn departures into the world 
have been where few, if any, doubted ; as on the other 
hand, who has not known the comfort of seeing the 
painful appearances which repelled one fade away so as 
to let the grace of Christ shine out more and more, or 
flesh was judged by the truth in the sight of God? Thus 
those, of whom most doubted because of untoward looks, 
at last won the confidence of all. Sometimes it may 
have needed a serious dealing of God: severe sickness, 
reverses of fortune, domestic sorrow, before the soul 
was set right ; still it was, though late in the day. Both 
these extremes teach us the need of waiting on God, 
instead of trusting our own impressions, that we may 
judge righteous judgment. The natural heart may 
take advantage of grace, but ere long will manifest its 
unremoved evil. Perverse men may rise up, wolves 
may enter, and sheep may for a while be deceived. 
But God abides, and the word of His grace: why 
should we be disquieted ? Let us have faith in God, 
imitate Him as children beloved, and walk in love, not 
only because, but as Christ loved us; and, whatever 
the result, we shall have the comfort of pleasing God, 
meanwhile kept from haste one way or another. Watch- 
ing for evil is very far from " giving of thanks," and 
indeed incompatible with it. But then let us never 
lower the standard of the ways which God looks for in 
His children. If no corrupt person have an inheritance 
in His kingdom, never treat such sin lightly now. 
" Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because 
of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the 
sons of disobedience Be not ye therefore partakers 



CHAPTER V. 245 

with them." (Ver. 6, 7.) To be partners with such in 
any way is grave for a saint. Let us take heed. 

The eighth verse of our chapter gives another ground 
of appeal. The exhortation to walk is neither in view 
of the calling wherewith we are called (chap. iv. 1), nor 
specially in contrast with other Gentiles, alienated from 
the life of God (chap. iv. 17, 18), nor yet in love only 
(chap. v. 27), hut " as children of light." " For ye 
were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the 
Lord." The change being thus complete, the word is 
"walk as children of light." Be consistent with what 
you are, not merely with what you ought to be. "We 
are light, yea, light in the Lord at once the ground, 
and character, and measure of that which becomes 
our ways as Christians : let us walk accordingly. 
How comforting is the call of grace to holy ways! 
The most solemn appeal reminds us of our blessing, 
and its security, even when urging us on with ever such 
closeness. How holy is our standing in Christ that 
God Himself should be able to say of us, " Ye are light 
in the Lord." If He does, should we not say it of 
ourselves, both in privilege and responsibility ? Let us 
look to Him that, thus set outside all taint (for there 
is nothing purer than light), we may go forward, shew- 
ing that light which we are now in the Lord. It is in 
the light we walk, and by it we should judge all, for 
light we are. God would repudiate a lower standard or 
an atmosphere less pure. He is light, and in Him is 
no darkness at all; if we are His children, we are cMi- 
dren of light. We are never said to be love (which is 
God's nature and prerogative), though surely called to 
love as born of Him and knowing Him in Christ. How 
completely law disappears as the motive or the mould 
of our walk. * 

" For the fruit of the light is in all goodness, and 
righteousness, and truth." No doubt these are the 
characteristics of the gracious operation of the Spirit; 
and this may have led to the substitution of "the 



246 EPHESIANS. 

Spirit" for light in the common text. But there can 
be no reasonable question that the true thought and 
word in verse 9 is " the light," which is not more borne 
out by external evidence than by the scope of the con- 
text. In Galatians v. it is the fruit, not of the light, 
but of the Spirit, because in contrast with the works of 
the flesh ways of uncleanness, violence against God 
and man, tampering with and subjection to the deceits of 
the enemy; whereas the Spirit's fruit is love, joy, peace, 
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, 
temperance, against which, as the apostle emphatically 
says to the law-affecters, there is no law. Here it is in 
contrast, not with legal proclivities and the workings of 
flesh, which the law alike provokes and condemns, but 
with the darkness which we once were when without 
the Lord. But now we are called to walk as children 
of light, which is our very nature in Him, and we are 
reminded that its fruit is in all goodness, and righteous- 
ness, and truth. God's exceeding riches and grace in 
no way weakens, but rather confirms, the display of His 
moral principles, and makes them good even in us His 
children, whatever we may have been and are naturally. 
The new life He has given us in Christ answers to His 
own goodness and righteousness and truth. It could 
not be it ought not to be otherwise ; nor would the 
renewed heart calmly bear that He should be dis- 
honoured or even misrepresented in the objects of His 
favour. He implants in us the desire of pleasing Him- 
self, and He watches over us that this desire should be 
neithej* vague nor uninfluential, but bear fruit the fruit 
of the light, " proving," as it is added, " what is ac- 
ceptable unto the Lord." (Ver. 10.) 

Again, it is not enough for our souls to refuse to be par- 
takers with the children of disobedience, as in verses 6, 7. 
We must have no fellowship with the unfruitful works 
of darkness, but rather even expose them. (Ver. 11.) 
It is all a part of our marvellous place and responsibi- 
lity as being children of light. It is not law, simply. 



CHAPTER V. 247 

condemning as by an applied outward standard, but an 
inward and most searching divine capacity, which, what- 
ever the love that is the source and end, spares evil 
even less, but brings in good by the Holy Ghost in 
Christ. " For it is a shame even to speak of those 
things which are done of them in secret [i.e., the doers 
of the fruitless works of darkness] ; but all things when 
reproved [or exposed] are made manifest by the light; 
for whatsoever doth make [or is made] manifest is 
light." (Ver. 12, 13.) It is the property of light to 
manifest itself and all things else; and this is quite 
as true spiritually as in nature. 

But there is more in the Lord's mind here concerning 
us. He would have us in the full enjoyment of the 
blessing, and not content to possess it only. There are 
dead things and persons around us, and their influence 
when allowed is most injurious. " Wherefore he saith, 
Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead and 
Christ shall enlighten thee." (Ver. 14.) It is not giving 
us life as if we were dead, nor even light as if we were 
not light already, but rather shining upon us who are 
light in Him, yet slumbering carelessly in the midst of 
that which is dead and deadening. How vigilant His 
love which thus thinks of us, that our cup of blessing 
may run over and our souls may be delivered from that 
which degrades Him and even us in Him, that we may 
be full of that which we are as His own ! How every 
word of His, how every circumstance of ours, calls us 
to see how carefully we walk (ver. 15), not as unwise but 
as wise, redeeming the fit opportunity because the days 
are evil ! We are furnished indeed ; but constant watch- 
ing and dependence are needed. The due season must be 
looked at and sought, let it be ever so costly, if, in these 
evil days, we would not be senseless, but understanding 
what the will of the Lord is. (Yer. 16, 17.) Worldly 
excitement must be avoided, and those incentives to 
nature which jaded man craves, wherein is excess. Yet 
we may and should be absorbed with a power above 



248 EPHESIANS. 

nature, which excludes not only what is evil, but the 
power of present things. " Be filled with the Spirit, 
speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiri- 
tual songs, singing and making melody in your heart 
to the Lord ; giving thanks always for all things to 
him who is God and Father in the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, submitting yourselves one to another in 
the fear of Christ." (Ver. 1821.) Speaking "to 
yourselves" means, I suppose, and might be translated, 
to one another, as in chapter iv. 32; speaking to one 
another in every form wherein the joy of the Church 
expressed itself. I understand them all to be the sacred 
metrical compositions of Christians, outpourings of wor- 
ship and praise, or of holy feeling, the word " spiritual" 
being added to the last or lowest class of them to mark 
even their consecration to the Lord. This is true and 
holy joy. May we cultivate it in simplicity. In truth, 
we have a goodly portion. What can we not thank Him 
for, who is our God and Father, in the name of our 
Lord Jesus? What else makes us so happily submit 
to one another in His fear ? 

We now enter upon the special earthly relations. 
The general exhortations we have had, which concern 
the saints of God as such children of God and mem- 
bers of Christ's body. But now the Holy Ghost shows 
that He is not indifferent to the relations which these 
saints may sustain, either towards one another, or 
towards others upon the earth. There might be, for 
instance, husbands and wives, both of them Christians ; 
or there might be only one in this relationship con- 
verted, the other being still a Jew or a heathen ; and so 
with the relation of fathers and children, masters and 
servants. For the present we have only to do with 
that which pertains to the nearest tie upon earth, that 
of husband and wife. And we shall find that the 
Holy Ghost most amply provides for the wants of the 
children of God bound thus together; so that what- 



CHAPTER V. 249 

ever may be their difficulties, they may find gracious 
instruction and grave exhortation, and not merely com- 
mands in reference to the circumstances in which they 
stand before God for this is not strictly the form in 
which Christian regulation comes before us. Of course, 
there may be and are, precepts and commandments 
throughout the New Testament. Indeed the one who 
most brings out love presses commandments most; for 
it is in the Gospel and Epistles of St. John, where the 
greatest stress is laid upon such injunctions; and yet we 
all know that there is no part of Scripture which 
brings out God's love to us more strikingly and con- 
stantly. It is, therefore, the greatest possible mistake 
to suppose that there is any inconsistency between God's 
love, and the strictest injunction that His authority 
lays upon His children. 

Still it is undeniable that as the general character of 
Christian instruction does not take the shape of com- 
mandments of a legal shape, so we are not set under 
the Mosaic commandments to form our present thoughts 
and feelings and course as Christians. Nay, we have got 
nothing analogous to the law, but a decided and complete 
contrast, according to Scripture, for " grace and truth 
came by Jesus Christ." Commandments we have ; but 
they suppose and regulate life, and are calculated to bring 
the obedience of Christ (1 Peter i.) into exercise ; and 
there is nothing more beautiful to the soul, nor more 
glorifying to God. Ordinarily the way in which in- 
struction comes in the New Testament is thus : there is a 
relationship formed, and according to its character, amply 
unfolded and enforced in the word, we have to glorify 
God. As this is true in natural things, so the Spirit 
of God uses an every-day relationship as the occasion of 
bringing out the spiritual one that answers to it. And 
our hearts being occupied with the exceeding grace that 
has formed the new and eternal tie, we may find not 
only a motive, but a pattern and power to glorify God 
in the natural as well as the spiritual one. There is on 



250 EPHESIANS. 

place -where this comes out more strikingly than in the 
first of these relationships on which the Holy Ghost 
here expands peculiarly. " Wives, submit yourselves 
unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord." The 
opening comparison which He uses, before entering into 
the spiritual relationship which is "brought before us 
after the figure of marriage, the very first thought is 
to present the headship of the man, as having special 
force in married life. We all know that, apart from 
marriage, the man is the head of the woman. That is, 
if there were no such thing as marriage, man has a 
place which woman has not- a place entirely indepen- 
dent of character. We may find a man imbecile, and 
a woman with firmness and wisdom; but nothing can 
alter God's order. We may find a child endowed with 
great prudence, and the parents unwise and weak. Still 
the relationship is altogether apart from the pecu- 
liar character, and state, and condition of those either 
in the superior place or in the subordinate. And it is 
of great importance that we should have the thing 
settled in our souls, that no circumstances whatever 
warrant a breach of God's arrangements. There are 
trying circumstances which make the difficulty immense 
in either relationship. But it is of deep consequence to 
remember that the rights of God's order always abide; 
that nothing ever justifies disobedience of His will. 
There may be cases where obedience of the natural 
order of God would be a sin: there are none where 
disobedience is a duty. You cannot be required to 
disobey under any circumstances. But there are crises 
where you must obey God rather than man. It is an 
exceeding mercy that the times are few indeed, where 
obeying God involves an apparent breach o* natural 
order and moral duty. But it may be so. You will 
find, for instance, in the beginning of the Acts, Peter 
and John charged, by the powers of that day which 
governed in Israel, not to teach in the name of Jesus 
What could they do but fall back upon the authority of 



CHAPTER V. 251 

God ? They could put it to those very rulers that their 
consciences were bound to God before men. Thus the 
first great principle remains and is plain, before we 
enter upon particulars, that obedience is always the part 
of the Christian. 

Hence, flowing out of the general call to submission 
in the fear of Christ (for Christ is the one brought 
before us with continual honour in this epistle), the 
Spirit takes up this first appropriate place for a Chris- 
tian woman, and lays down the word, " Wives, submit 
yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord." 
Although this may appear extraordinarily strong lan- 
guage, when we remember what husbands are or may 
be, still it is a great thing to be always certain that 
God is right. To human prudence it may seem little 
guarded. Perhaps you have even to do with an uncon- 
verted husband ! But only bring in the Lord, and at 
once you see the power that will make submission easy, 
and you learn the measure to "which submission is to 
be carried. But more than that, you have the guard 
against the abuse of the principle; " Submit yourselves 
unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord." The Lord 
is brought in, and this sets everything right. If it is 
a question of trial or suffering, still the word is the 
same. The Lord may put us through great difficulties 
and dangers. What is the proper place of the Christian 
under such circumstances ? Unqualified submission. 
Because I ought to be sure that, whatever may be the 
breaking up and down which these trials may occasion 
to one's spirit, yet whatever the Lord does is the best 
and happiest and most strengthening in the end to my 
soul, the Lord being incapable of any one thing for 
me that is not for enduring good to the praise of His 
own name. 

In this epistle it is not merely God's control that is 
brought out, but special relationship. Here it is the 
Lord loving His own, with a love that has sacrificed 
everything for their sake. How can I doubt the blessed- 



252 EPHESIANS. 

ness and value of submitting myself to the Lord? 
The Christian wife may have a husband ; and it may 
be very painful and hard to bear all. Perhaps he makes 
nothing of you, and asks often what is unreasonable. 
But what will make the burden light, though felt? 
" Submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto 
the Lord." I am to submit unto my husband as unto 
the Lord: let me only see the Lord in the matter, 
instead of his inconsiderateness and bad temper, and 
my path is plain. It is made a matter, not of mere 
duty, but of confidence in the Lord as above everything 
in His love, care, and government. This is what the 
Holy Ghost first starts with, and makes to be the basis 
of all the various instructions that He is about to 
bring forth. He begins with the grand truth, that the 
Christian woman is entitled to submit to her husband 
as unto the Lord. So that it is not made a question 
simply of affection, which would be human: this is 
a most necessary thing as a natural element, but it 
would be true if a person were not a Christian at all. 
Neither is it a question of that which the husband 
expects, or of what I might think to be right. All 
these things belong to the region of proper feeling and 
morality. But the important thing is that God cannot 
be with a Christian woman who walks in the habitual 
slighting of His ground for her in her relationship as 
a wife. He will not allow a Christian to walk merely 
on moral or conventional grounds. They may be right 
enough in their place, but, if I am a Christian, I have 
a higher calling ; and then, no matter what may be the 
difficulty even if the one to whom I owe my subjec- 
tion be not a Christian here comes in the blessed 
direction, " Submit yourselves unto your own husbands, 
as unto the Lord." He entitles me to see Himself behind 
the person of the husband ; and I have got to follow 
Him and to submit myself to Him. In this thought 
there would be great comfort for the Christian wife who 
is ever so tried. But then the limit of the trial comes 



CHAPTEE V. 253 

in for there is a limit in every path and it is 
this: that God never puts me in any circumstances 
where I am free to commit a sin. Therefore, suppos- 
ing a hushand were to command that which would 
be positively sinful, thence at once I learn that I 
am not bound, because I am told to submit to my 
husband, as unto the Lord. The Lord would never sanc- 
tion what is sinful. He may put me through the sieve, 
and I may not at first understand the goodness or the 
need of it; but faith constantly finds its strength and 
guidance in the Lord's wisdom in trusting Him, and 
not my wisdom in understanding Him. And you will 
find that we grow in wisdom by being content to take 
the place of having none. If my confidence is in His 
wisdom, I shall gather wisdom and grow in it. Our 
Lord was perfectly man; and although always perfect 
in every condition of life, yet the great mark of His 
perfectness lay in this He was ever the dependent One 
who looked up to God, and who could say, " Wist ye 
not that I must be about my Father's business ?" 
There was at once for man the lowest, but in truth, the 
highest place. He understood the secret of His own 
relationship to God the Father. And although this 
was true of Christ as of none others, yet it is surely 
true of every believer in measure. 

But we have most carefully to watch ourselves in 
this matter. Wherever there is the smallest tendency 
to slip out of the path of submission, we have to search 
and see, if we are wise according to God. Nature never 
likes to be subject. And wherever there is a danger of 
pleading the truth of God for any act that might seem 
to be a want of submission to the authority of another, 
I have need to watch myself with greater jealousy than 
in any other thing. When we are found in a path 
where submission is the word, let us leave room to 
bring in the Lord. In order to give power and faith 
to our obedience, and a holy character to it, I should 
see that it is the Lord I am obeying, even while there 



254 EPHESIANS. 

is an earthly authority to which I am subjected. The 
blessed truth that the Lord was about to introduce 
begins to open to us. " For a husband is head of 
the wife, even as Christ is head of the Church : he is 
Saviour of the body." (Ver. 23.) In this we have an 
allusion to the near relationship, which is intended to 
shew us how we ought to walk towards one another in 
this respect. Although He, and none but He, is the 
Saviour, there is no taking the Church or the saint out 
of the place of subjection, but expressly the reverse. 

" Therefore, as the church is subject unto Christ, so 
let the wives be to their husbands in everything." 
Such is the general principle. But then, you will ob- 
serve, there is always a measure and a guard in every 
such word of Scripture. It is not simply said, " There- 
fore, let the wives be subject in everything to their 
own husbands," but " Therefore, as the Church is sub- 
ject unto Christ, so let the wives be," &c. There I find 
that Christ's own blessed way of caring for the as- 
sembly and dealing with it in its due subjection to 
the Lord, is brought in as the pattern of wives towards 
their own husbands. But it is when we come to the 
higher of the two relationships, that we have the Holy 
Ghost bringing out its character more clearly. " Hus- 
bands, love your wives." Here we find what the snare 
of the husband might be. First, the wife is to look to 
her temper, that she discipline her spirit in thorough 
submission to her husband. It is not said to her, to 
love her husband, but to submit herself to him. But 
Satan might take advantage, and (they being in the 
relationship) the husband might be wanting in tender 
care and affection. There is the ruling and guiding 
the wife ; but what he is exhorted to here is that which 
his circumstances most need, and which would be most 
for his own soul's good and the comfort of his wife. 
So that the word is, " Husbands, love your wives, even 
as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for 
it." What a holy standard i What a most unselfish, 



CHAPTER V. 255 

considerate, pure, and heavenly Exemplar is brought 
before us, in order that the relationship, which might be 
easily degraded, should have and keep its due elevation; 
and that even the poorest saints on earth, so bound to- 
gether, might have the light and love of heaven shining 
upon them. 

" Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also 
loved the church and gave himself for it, that he 
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of 
water by the word, that he might present it to himself 
a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any 
such thing; but that it should be holy and without 
blemish." Thus we have the love of Christ to the 
church set forth as the model according to which the 
Christian husband is to seek that his own love to his 
wife should be conformed. Look at its source and 
character: " Christ also loved the assembly." All flows 
out of this. Need I, even as a man, say, that love, as 
it is what ought to precede a marriage, so is the only 
secret which, in nature, makes the marriage happy when 
it is formed ? The love of Christ that is shown us here 
is taken in from first to last, as one unbroken whole. 
It is well to remember it in married life : the love that 
was true before the tie was formed, is a love that abides 
when it is formed, and that should grow unto the end. 

Certainly it was so perfectly in our Lord. He loved 
the church. It is a question of a very special affection 
here on the part of Christ. It is not the general truth 
of God's love, who loved the world even ; but no rela- 
tionship was formed with the world. The important 
thing to look at here is that, although it is a love that 
exists before the relationship, it finds its proper exercise 
in it, and ever continues its real strength and joy. And 
if we turn aside from looking at the earthly thing to 
that which is set forth by it, how great the grace, and 
how rich the blessing ! Once it was a joy for our 
hearts to realize that God could love sinners, and so 
love as to spend His Son upon us, sinners as we were. 



256 EPHESIANS. 

But there is another kind of love that we know now. 
God has taken the relationship of a Father to us ; at 
any rate He has brought us into that of children by 
Jesus Christ to Himself. We are " children of God by 
faith in Christ Jesus." Accordingly the Father loves 
us with a father's heart ; it is not only that He loves 
the creature as God, but He loves us as a father 
yea, as the Father of our Lord Jesus loved Him, and not 
only in the measure in which a human parent regards 
his children. In such a circle there might be com- 
placency and delight ; and when we think what and who 
we are, to think that such an one as God the Father 
could delight in us now in this world, is most won- 
drous ! that He should infinitely more love us than an 
earthly father does the child that he loves best, and that 
this love should extend towards the weakest and 
most needy of His family ! There is also a conditional 
love towards those that are walking faithfully, and St. 
John brings this out in John xiv., xv. But now I am 
speaking of unfailing, personal love in the relationship 
in which God stands as Father to His children, as such; 
which does not only pity, but look with pleasure upon 
and take delight in them now, spite of everything that 
is calculated to turn aside or weaken His love. Ought 
I not, as in Christ, to be as sure of this, as I am of my 
own existence as a man ? yea, to have a better know- 
ledge and certainty of what His love is towards me, 
than of anything that affects me as one living on the 
earth ? I have that in me which is not proof against 
the deceptions of the world outside. But in the things 
of God, where faith lives, it is not so. There is, there 
ought to be, divine certainty. 

Where God clearly reveals Himself, the soul should 
receive it in humbleness of mind ; and the more humble, 
the more sure, because the ground of the assurance is 
that God has revealed it to us. It is a question of 
Himself and not of us at all. If this be so, what a 
wonderful place it is to be in Christ ! It is quite true 



CHAPTER T. 257 

that Christ loved me, but here it is the Church " the 
assembly;" and Christ has a special love for His as- 
sembly, which I am entitled to appropriate and count 
on. This makes the gathering together of the children of 
God as the assembly to be so precious, and shews the 
all-importance of not reducing it to a voluntary society, 
small or great. The moment you bring in the will of 
man, you virtually and at once destroy the divine 
ground which Scripture assumes. Whereas, if you see 
that God has formed a certain bond in the Holy Ghost 
for the glory of His Son among those who belong to 
Him on the earth now, and that Christ regards those 
who are within that bond with a perfect and most 
peculiar love ; then it is the greatest possible joy that 
our own souls should enter into His love, and next that 
we should seek to act by His word upon the other 
members of the body of Christ, that they may believe 
and enjoy it also. It is not a part only, but He " loved 
the assembly." The reason why I use the word " as- 
sembly" is that people often have a very vague notion 
about the Church. The word is usually and completely 
misapplied in the present day. It is said of a religious 
building, or of a particular party, in particular of what 
may be dominant anywhere. But bring in " the 
assembly," and understand by it the whole body of 
those that God calls out from this world by the Holy 
Ghost sent down from heaven ; and there you learn the 
special love that God has revealed in Christ, not 
merely to the soul, but to the assembly which is His 
body on earth. 

Of course, the death of Christ was essential, in order 
that the gospel should now be preached to the world. 
This, too, is the ground on which the heavens and earth 
will be cleared of all that now pollutes and defiles. 
Everythingfor the justification of Godinthe past, and for 
the outflow of the love of God in the future, is founded 
upon the death of Christ. Hence the momentous value 
of His redemption, fpr earth and heaven, for Jew, Gen- 
& 



258 EPHESIANS. 

tile, and Church of God, for time and eternity. But, 
besides, there is great force in the word, " He delivered 
himself up for it." There was nothing in Christ that 
He did not give. It is not what He did, nor only what 
He suffered, but He gave Himself. Of course, it implies 
all that was in Him and of Him, but it goes a great 
deal farther, because it is absolute self-renunciation in 
love for the sake of the object that He loved; the per- 
fect pattern of the very fulness of love, which it is 
quite beyond any human relationship to emulate. Justly 
does the Spirit, in addressing the Christian husband, 
shew us that Christ in all things has the pre-eminence ; 
" He delivered himself up for us." What is the conse- 
quence? The Church is without sin before God 
sins are blotted out for ever redemption is effected 
Satan is defeated divine wrath and judgment borne 
ordinances, which were against those that were under 
them, are nailed to the cross the enmity is gone the 
new man is formed; and all this, and much more than 
this, founded upon Christ's surrender of Himself. The 
effect for us is that here we have, in unclouded light, 
without doubt or question, Himself in love, as the 
object of our souls to delight in and submit to and 
serve and worship evermore. 

I have no more right to believe that Christ gave 
Himself for me, than I have to believe that my iniqui- 
ties are completely purged out by His precious blood. 
If I believe the one, I owe it to God to believe the 
other ; and the ground of my faith is God's testimony 
to the perfectness of what Christ has done according to 
the glory of His person. God sets such value upon 
His work of suffering on the cross, that He can per- 
fectly love me. We are free. We have redemption 
through His blood. But it is in Him, not only through 
His blood, but in Him; as it is said in chapter i., " In 
whom we have redemption through his blood, the for- 
giveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace." 
So that it is of great importance that, while we hold 



CHAPTER V. 259 

redemption, we should not hold it, if I may be allowed 
so to say, apart from but in Him. And what will 
enable me to estimate, and hold fast the preciousness of 
this work, is His person ; we must remember not only 
what was done, but who He was that did it. If you, 
in self-judgment, cleave to Him and to these two 
blessed truths in Him, there never can be a cloud upon 
your soul as to your own perfect deliverance from all 
charge before God. 

But now comes another thought. If Christ has com- 
pleted this, if it is a past thing, never requiring to be 
re-touched, we enter upon the second proof of His love, 
" that he might sanctify it, having cleansed [it] by the 
washing of water by the word." I take it that the 
sanctifying the Church spoken of here, though con- 
nected closely with its being cleansed through the 
word, is a distinct thing. These are two operations, 
and there is an important difference between sanctifying 
the Church and cleansing it. This sanctifying does not 
merely refer to our growth in grace, it is connected with 
Christ. It is not the Spirit of God merely working in 
the believer. Men talk as if it were the business of the 
Son to justify, and of the Spirit to sanctify. But we 
are washed, we are sanctified, we are justified in the 
name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our God, 
All that by virtue of which we are washed, and sanc- 
tified, and justified, is Christ; and it is by the Spirit of 
our God. The Spirit of God is the active agent in the 
justification, no less than in the sanctifying; but it is 
always by using Christ. Hence there is a great danger 
in disconnecting Christ from sanctification. Christ 
gave Himself for the Church, " that he might sanctify 
and cleanse it." His blood is involved in His giving 
Himself, though this is more than that. 

In fact, all that which flows into and from redemption, 
properly so called, is supposed in verse 25 :" He loved 
the church, and gave himself for it." This is a past 
thing, followed by that which is going on all the time of 



260 EPHE8IAN8. 

the Church's existence upon the earth. As the fruit of 
His love comes the death of Christ for us His giving 
Himself for the Church. And now you have, founded 
upon the cross, the sanctifying and cleansing that goes 
on continually. But how is it wrought? In both 
cases it is by the washing of water by the word. This 
shews us the immense importance of the word of God. 
Of what moment it is for every child of God to value 
that word and to seek to grow in acquaintance with 
God through it to increase in the knowledge of God ! 
So far from our belonging to the Church, or rather to 
Christ, being the sum and substance of all we have to 
learn, it is only the foundation ; and it is after we know 
this, that there follows all the sanctifying and cleans- 
ing by the washing of water by the word. So that it 
is clear we have got three fruits of the love of Christ 
that are very distinct indeed. The first is, that He 
gave Himself (that is, unto death) ; the second is, the 
present work of His life. Since the cross, He is occu- 
pying Himself in heaven about the Church; He is 
taking care of His members, working by the Holy 
Ghost, and applying the word of God. And all is con- 
nected with Himself, because the whole starting-point 
is Christ's love to the Church. He is sanctifying and 
cleansing now by the washing of water by the word ; 
but we know that our sins were put away by His blood. 
Before we turn to the third effect of His love, 
allow me to say here that a fresh application of the 
blood of Christ is unknown to Christianity. There are 
Christians, no doubt, who tell you that you must have 
fresh recourse to the blood; but they have no Scripture 
for their thought. On the contrary, it weakens the 
fundamental truth of the efficacy of Christ's own 
sacrifice, which it is intended, after a human fashion, 
to commend and exalt. Such is the effect of forming 
our own thoughts of the use that is to be made of any 
truth, instead of simply bowing to the word of God. 
The moment we take a truth out of His connection for 



CHAPTER V. 261 

us, it is like rooting up that which has its own due 
place in the garden of God, where it produces its 
proper, abundant, and precious fruit, but which becomes 
a withered thing when man takes it into his own hands. 
Repetition as to this would prove imperfectness. This 
foundation has been laid so completely in the Epistle 
to the Hebrews, that it never requires to be laid again. 
There is no more the possibility of a fresh sprinkling 
of Christ's blood, than there is room left for His dying 
once more to shed His blood. When a soul has found 
Him and been washed from sin in His blood, there it 
abides for ever. This is what makes the sin of a 
Christian to be so serious. If you could begin again, 
what is the effect ? Not very different from that which 
his confession before a priest has upon the Eomanist. 
People soon learn to trifle with sin, and to get hardened 
by its deceitfulness. Although it is a different thing 
where Christ is looked to, still the moral effect is much 
the same, as far as the making light of sin is con- 
cerned. If a person can again and again start afresh, 
as if a trifle had happened, and begin over and over 
again for every new downfall, sin is never felt nearly 
so deeply. For on one side we are bound to bring no 
stain upon that which is washed in the blood of Christ, 
yet, on the other, we are conscious of constant failure. 

Is there, then, no resource ? Is there no renewal of 
access to the cross ? It would be a tremendous thing 
if there were no provision against our failings and falls, 
no means of dealing with these departures : but there is a 
resource, and we have it here " That he might sanctify 
and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word." 
You have similar truth set forth in its individual ap- 
plication to John xiii. There it was on the ground that 
the disciples were His own ; that He loved them, and 
that whom He loved He loved unto the end: and then 
we find that, being exposed to defile themselves in the 
world, the Lord would guard them against two- things; 
first, the anxiety lest He should cease to love them be- 



262 EPHESIAUS. 

cause they were unfaithful; secondly, the danger of 
their using His faithfulness as a reason for trifling with 
sin. Christ will never cease to love, nor will He trifle 
with sin or allow us to trifle with it. He keeps us 
always resting on His blood. But, then, supposing 
one is guilty of sin after receiving remission of sins, what 
is to be done ? Let us go and spread it out before God. 
The veil is not set up again because you have acted 
foolishly outside it. You are entitled to draw near 
and spread out your failure before God to come to 
Him on the very ground that you are washed in the 
blood of Christ. What is the effect of this ? and what 
is this the effect of ? It is because Christ is sanctify- 
ing and cleansing, keeping up the washing of water by 
the word. There may be this corporate aspect of it, as 
well as the individual both are true. It is true for 
every soul and for the Church at large. Christ is 
always acting in the presence of God on behalf of the 
Church; and the consequence is the needed reproof and 
chastening. A man is brought to feel what he has done. 
Some word of God, either in his own meditation, or 
through others, flashes upon his soul. He is convinced 
of his folly; the will has ceased to act; the word of 
God is brought home with power by the Holy Ghost; 
the man bows under it to the Lord. 

This is the washing of water by the word. It is 
the effect of Christ's priesthood at the right hand of 
God. The application of the word of God to the soul 
is the effect of the intercession of Christ to put away 
failure wherever it has been. The work that He is 
doing at the right hand of God has an intercessional 
character. A great deal of that which goes on in the 
soul is not provision for failure, but to guard against 
failure. God does not count upon sin He does not 
look for failure in His child. On the contrary, there is 
a most solemn injunction against sin. " My little 
children, these things write I unto you that ye sin not." 
He had been telling them, that if any man say he haa 



CHAPTER V. 263 

no sin, lie deceives himself, and the truth is not in him. 
Then the effect of that on the corrupt heart of man 
would be, that some would infer sin to he not so much 
matter after all. " My little children," he says, " these 
things write I unto you that ye sin not." We are never 
free to sin. We are always inexcusable when we do sin. 
" But," it is added, " if any man sin, we have an ad- 
vocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous." 
There you have what answers to the Scripture before us. 
It is not that the position of Christ is the same, but 
the effect, as far as regards the soul, is similar. Christ 
is carrying on His blessed action of love, and the effect 
is that there is that in the word of God which applies 
itself, by the grace of God, to our fault; so that the 
sanctifying spoken of here is the practical setting us 
apart according to our proper calling as God's assembly 
the making it good in our souls by the word of God. 
This is done by the revelation of Christ, and of Christ 
as He now is in the presence of God. And this is 
what is referred to in 2 Corinthians iii., where it is said, 
" We all with open face, beholding as in a glass the 
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image 
from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord." 
We find that the Holy Ghost, revealing Christ as He 
is glorified now before God, separates us from the world 
which knows nothing of His glory, but is bent upon 
its own glory connected with present things. God re- 
veals to us Christ on high, and the effect is that we are 
weaned from the false glitter of this evil age. 

But this being the complete account of what Christ 
does, there is the cleansing, as well as the sanctifying, 
the Church. All defilement requires to be removed; 
and in both cases it is the washing of water by the 
word which God uses. But there is a third and future 
fruit of His love " that he might present it to him- 
self a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle or 
any such thing." There we have clearly the complete 
blessing of the Church, when there will be no question 



264 EPHESIANS. 

of cleansing it any more; when all the love of Christ 
will have its perfect effect, and when the Church will he 
glorious according to His own likeness, " That he might 
present the church to himself glorious, not having spot 
or wrinkle or any such thing; but that it should be 
holy and without blemish." Thus we have the full, 
divine account of the love of Christ. But mark, it is 
not introduced merely in a doctrinal form, bnt in a 
most practical way, for the purpose of illustrating the 
place of the Christian husband towards his wife. The 
husband can only act properly towards his wife when 
the relationship is regarded on higher ground than a 
natural one. A Christian must act upon heavenly prin- 
ciples, in order to act well in a natural relationship. 
You might have a husband attached to his wife, and a 
wife ever so much attached to him; but if this is their 
whole ground in married life, it will never have the 
power, blessing, and honour of God. Though it is all 
quite right, yet more than this is needed; and the 
something more that is needed is just the constant 
reminding of our souls how Christ feels and carries 
Himself toward the Church. There is always blessing 
and power in believing the word of God. If not using 
the word, we shall not have His strength in the natural 
relationship of this life ; yet we ought to have it. If we 
have it not thus, are we not so far doing without that 
which would give power, and which God would own 
and honour? 

The Spirit applies it, " So ought men to love their 
wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife 
loveth himself." He is now taking up the common 
instinct that men naturally avoid pain and take care of 
themselves. He is speaking only of the fact, and says, 
Look upon your wife as a part of yourself; and that 
anything that would wrong her is so much wrong done 
to your own body. It would teach you affectionate 
care, " for no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but 
nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the 



CHAPTER V. 265 

church :" a beautiful and sweet addition to the truth 
that was already brought out. All the rest had 
shown redemption, the present practical cleansing, the 
future glorification of the Church. But now he adds, 
that Christ " nourisheth and cherisheth it." There is 
the special entrance of His mind, His careful interest in 
those that belong to Him. It is a great comfort that 
we know this to he true in the present state of the 
Church, when we think of the ruin of all around. Does 
Christ ever cease to nourish that which belongs to Him? 
Impossible. Spite of all the ruin, He has the same care 
for His people. We never can pray too much for the 
Church ; but it is another thing to be troubling our 
minds as if the Lord forgot her, and were not taking 
adequate care of the saints in their need and sorrow. 
The Lord has never failed ; and what He here tells us 
to do in our earthly relationship is no more than what 
He perfectly does towards His Church. He loves 
the Church ; He nourishes and cherishes it, and He 
does this because " we are members of his body, of his 
flesh, and of his bones." Just as Eve was a part of 
Adam, so the Church is of Christ. The Lord took out 
of Adam's side that which He built into his wife. So 
we stand in this nearness of relationship to Christ. 

The verse is sometimes applied to Christ's becoming 
man ; but it is the converse of this. It does not mean 
Christ taking our flesh and bone, but our being made 
members of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones. 
It is our relationship to Christ risen from the dead, and 
not Christ's relationship to us as a man upon the earth. 
I only refer to it to guard souls. There is no allusion 
to our Lord's taking flesh and blood, which we know 
He did: this is taught in Hebrews, but not here. We 
are members of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones. 
We are really a part of Himself, united to Him as He 
now is in the presence of God. It is our union to 
Him, not His incarnation. 

The case of Adam is then quoted, and of Eve, in Ian- 



266 EPHESIAtfS. 

guage of allusion to Genesis ii. " For this cause shall a 
man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined 
unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This is 
a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the 
Church. Nevertheless, let every one of you in parti- 
cular so love his wife even as himself, and the wife see 
that she reverence her husband." Thus we have the 
subject summed up with this practical word. I need 
not say that everything contrary to the most entire 
confidence in such a relationship is excluded by this 
verse. The husband, if acting in the spirit of it, has 
no secret from the one that is part of himself: but as 
to the wife, let her see that she reverence or (literally) 
fear her husband. It would not be the mere familiarity 
of love, which is wrong in a heavenly point of view. 
Whatever the confidence of a wife in her husband, it is 
surely a becoming thing for a wife to fear him. Nor 
is this the least incompatible with love. We are told 
to hold fast grace ; and what is the effect ? That we 
may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear. 
There is an immense difference, of course, between God 
and man ; but it may serve to illustrate. Here it is 
the fear that dreads to offend, and seeks earnestly the 
husband's honour. This holds true in every case. 
Supposing you take the case of a stupid husband who 
has a clever wife ; if he shews what he is from day to 
day, so much the more has the wife to guard her own 
spirit, that she should use what she has for her 
husband without seeming to do so. And now comes 
in the very important thing, that in these circumstances 
she should honour God and her husband, instead of a 
word to himself or to others that would wound or shew 
a want of care. It is in such circumstances that the 
wisdom and spiritual feeling of a godly woman should 
shine, and shine by not shining : for the blessing of the 
married pair supposes that the man should appear and 
not the woman. Where the heart is simply looking to 
the Lord, there would be this result: and although it 



CHAPTER VI. 267 

might look unseemly that such should he linked to- 
gether, and it would make their path more difficult, 
still there is nothing impossible to God. And if the 
Christian woman sought the mind of God, honouring 
Him in the circumstances, God would use her in a very 
hlessed and happy way for the helping of her hushand, 
and for the covering of that which would he mortifying 
to him. But the principle always abides. As nothing 
justifies a hushand in not loving his wife, so nothing 
justifies a wife in not reverencing her husband. The 
Lord grant that we may hear in mind His holy and 
gracious admonition. 



CHAPTEE VI. 

Let us briefly look at the relations of children and 
fathers, as well as of servants and masters. Here, 
obedience is the grand point pressed on the inferior in 
each case. As all saints are called to submit themselves 
one to another in the fear of Christ, and wives espe- 
cially to their own husbands, subject to them in every 
thing, so children are to obey their parents in the Lord. 
(Ver. 1.) It is not that the Holy Ghost has not a 
suited and a serious word for their fathers; but, in 
general, how easy is the flow of a Christian household 
where the young obey above all, where they " obey in 
the Lord." Natural affection is sweet, and the lack of 
it is a sign of the perilous last days; but it is not 
enough; nor is conscience, all-important as it is in its 
place, an adequate guard, nor can it be a spring of 
power; but the Lord is. And how blessed, where duty 
is clothed with and absorbed in Him ! This, and nothing 
less than this, is pressed by the Holy Ghost. 



268 EPHESIANS. 

It was so with the Lord Himself when He was here, 
and knew what it was to be in the place of a child. 
" And the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, filled 
with wisdom ; and the grace of God was upon him." 
Nor are we left to a vagne, general statement; we are 
shown a living picture of His ways. " And when he 
was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after 
the custom of the feast. And when they had fulfilled 
the days, as they returned, the child Jesus tarried be- 
hind in Jerusalem ; and Joseph and his mother knew 
not of it. But they, supposing him to have been in 
the company, went a day's journey ; and they sought 
him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance. And 
when they found him not, they turned back again to 
Jerusalem, seeking him. And it came to pass, that 
after three days they found him in the temple, sitting 
in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them and 
asking them questions. And all that heard Mm were 
astonished at his understanding and answers. And 
when they saw him, they were amazed : and his mother 
said unto him, Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us ? 
behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing. 
And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me ? 
wist ye not that I must be about my Father's busi- 
ness ?" Thus, He, even as a child of twelve, had the 
consciousness of His own proper relationship. The 
humanity He had taken, as born of a woman, in no 
way weakened the sense He had of His Father's love 
and business, but rather gave a new occasion in which 
He had to make it good. At the same time, we see 
what is so beautiful how His eye, absolutely single, 
saw that which became Him on the earthly side, in 
striking contrast with Joseph and even His mother, 
who " understood not the saying which he spake unto 
them." Hence we read immediately after that, " He 
went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was 
subject to them." Such was Jesus, the Lord of all, 
during much the larger part of His earthly career. 



CHAPTER VI. 269 

The same principle is true of the Christian child; save 
that Christ's relationship to the Father was essential, 
ours to Him and to His Father is, of course, the pure 
gift of grace. But still we, too, are children, conferred 
on us as the title surely is in and through our Lord 
Jesus. " Behold what manner of love the Father hath 
hestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of 
God. ....... Beloved, now are we the sons of God." 

And this, by the working of the Holy Ghost, is the 
secret of happy obedience in the earthly relationship. 
Conscious of what we are to the Lord, we can obey in 
Him. " In the Lord" is both the encouragement, the 
safeguard, and the limit. The parents might be Jew 
or heathen, or they might bear unworthily the name 
of Christ; but Christian children (while thoroughly 
owning their relation to their parents, whatever they 
might be) have the sweet privilege of obeying " in the 
Lord." How it simplifies questions otherwise per- 
plexing ! How it determines also where and how far 
one ought to go ! For if they are to obey "in the Lord," 
such a call cannot rightly be made a reason or excuse 
for sin. 

In the Epistle to the Colossians, where the saints 
were in danger from a misuse of legal ordinances, the 
ground urged why children should obey their parents 
in all things, is " For this is well-pleasing unto the 
Lord." Here the faithful were free from that snare, 
and the Holy Ghost could freely use a principle em- 
bodied in the law, and hence adds " for this is right" or 
just. ' Nay, He can follow it up with a quotation, 
slightly changed from the decalogue, drawing attention 
parenthetically to its special place therein. " Honour 
thy father and mother, which is the first commandment 
with promise, that it may be well with thee, and thou 
mayest be long-lived on the earth." (Yer. 2, 3.) If 
such was God's estimate of filial piety under law, was 
it less now that the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ unfolds His nature and calls us to the relation- 



270 EPHESIANS. 

ship of sons unto Himself? If respect to that word of 
old found its approval and recompense in the righteous 
government of God, if He then watched over and pros- 
pered such as honoured their parents, did the revelation 
of Himself in grace relax the obligation for His child- 
ren, or make the love that prompts and sustains such 
honour less precious in His own eyes now ? No intelli- 
gent Christian would contend that it is other than a 
precept from the law, but so applied as to insinuate, if 
I mistake not, a kind of b, fortiori conclusion to the 
New-Testament believer. Certainly, to be well and 
live long on the earth is not the form in which the 
proper portion of a saint, since the cross of Christ, is 
usually set before him. 

To the fathers is the admonition (more needed by 
such than the mothers, perhaps, though in principle no 
doubt intended for both), " Provoke not your children 
to wrath; but bring them up in the nurture and admo- 
nition of the Lord." (Ver. 4.) What knowledge of 
the heart of both old and young ! What tender con- 
sideration, after the pressure of obedience, lest a too 
stringent and capricious use of the parental authority 
might exasperate ! The bringing them up, or nourish- 
ing, is, on the other hand, to be with the Lord's dis- 
cipline and admonition. As the Christian knows His 
ways, as they are in exercise toward himself and others, 
so is he to train up his children for Him an all-im- 
portant principle for the parent's own heart and con- 
science. Do we desire the Lord alone for them, or the 
world too ? 

Next (ver. 5 8), the Christian slaves are exhorted 
to obey their masters according tq the flesh (such they 
were, whether converted or not), to obey them with 
fear and trembling, in singleness of their heart, as to 
Christ; not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but as 
slaves of Christ, doing the will of God from the soul, 
with goodwill doing service as to the Lord and not to 
men, knowing that whatever good thing each doeth, 



CHAPTER VI. 271 

this lie shall receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or 
free. Is it not worthy of all note the extent and depth 
of the liberty that is in Christ? There is nothing 
violent or revolutionary ; and yet the change is com- 
plete, absolute, final in its principle and character, 
though one has to grow in the appreciation and mani- 
festation of it. And this growth is important morally, 
being part and parcel of Christianity practically viewed, 
where the very first blessing whih God's grace bestows 
upon us in Christ appears not save to faith, has to be 
realized all through in the power of the Spirit through 
self-judgment, and is only ours in actual possession 
and display when that which is perfect is come in 
resurrection-glory. Still, how blessed, that if in one 
sense we have nothing, in another and just as real a 
' sense we possess all things. On this truth faith has to 
lay hold and act ; and among the rest, what a boon to 
the Christian bondman ! What a mighty motive for 
him, who, already consciously free in Christ in a liberty 
entirely superior to circumstances, has for that very 
reason such a scope for triumphing over his fetters and 
serving Christ in obeying the worst of masters if it 
were the Lord's will so to try him ! Doubtless, the 
master too has his duties ; but if he fail, what then ? 
Is the slave absolved from his responsibility ? How 
can this ever be a difficulty, if he obeys in simplicity 
as unto Christ ? Does He fail ? What a deliverance 
from every shade of dishonesty ! " not with eye- 
service as men-pleasers, but as slaves of Christ [how 
honourable the title which one shares with an apostle !], 
doing the will of God from the soul ;" for such is the 
true word here. More than this : not only is there the 
call with goodwill to do service as to the Lord and not 
to men, but they are reminded that the day was coming 
when each, whether bond or free, should receive of the 
Lord for whatever good he might do. Ample wages 
then, be assured ; for He, at least, is not unrighteous. 
Then, in turn (ver. 9), the masters are called to im- 



272 EPHESIANS. 

partial equity, doing as they would be done by, and 
abstaining from the threats so natural toward a poor 
slave. They were to know that the Lord both of 
masters and slaves was in the heavens, and that no 
respect of persons is with Him : both of them weighty 
considerations for a master, and, with delicate propriety, 
laid before him rather than the slave. 

We now enter on the final exhortations of the epistle, 
no longer occupied with the several relationships of the 
saints in their earthly circumstances, and hence looking 
at distinct classes, but addressed to all. " Finally, my 
brethren, be strong in the Lord and in the power of his 
might." It is the opening of the solemn subject of 
proper Christian conflict, viewed, naturally in Ephesians, 
as carried on at the height of our heavenly privileges 
in Christ. In 1 Peter the scene lies, so to speak, in 
the wilderness, where, most appropriately, sobriety and 
vigilance are enjoined on the pilgrims and strangers 
who pass onward to the incorruptible inheritance ; be- 
cause their adversary, the devil, as a roaring lion, walks 
about, seeking whom he may devour. Here the enemy 
is regarded as on high, where the saints are blessed 
with every spiritual blessing, where their Head is 
exalted, where they are seated in Him, where the prin- 
cipalities and powers are learning by them the manifold 
wisdom of God ; there, too, is the real struggle with 
the prince of the power of the air and his hosts. 

But if, on the one hand, there is no keeping back 
from the believers the formidable conflict to which they 
are inevitably committed, there is, on the other hand, 
no weakening of their hands. On the contrary, the 
trumpet, which here summons to the battle, gives the 
most certain sounds of good courage, without presump- 
tion, in the saints, and of the amplest provision for 
their victory in the Lord, who has called them to war- 
fare at His charges. What was His name by faith in 
His name to him that was lame from his mother's 



CHAPTER VI. 273 

'womb, whom they laid for daily alms at the gate of 
the temple? Is it less for our need? Far be the 
thought. All that is needed is the faith which is by 
Him; and faith comes by a report and this by God's 
word; and what more inspiriting to us than such words 
as these, " Be strong in the Lord and in the power of 
his might?" 

Nevertheless, the mighty contest with the powers of 
darkness admits of no negligence on our part. We 
cannot afford to be unguarded anywhere. We have to 
stand, not so much against the strength of the devil 
(Christ did this) as against his wiles. In truth, he is 
to us a vanquished foe in the cross ; and we are entitled 
always to treat him as such. Therefore, says James, 
(chap. iv. 7), " Resist the devil and he will flee from 
you." It is his artifices that are chiefly and always to 
be dreaded ; and to resist these we need to put on the 
panoply of God, as it is added here: "Put on the 
whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand 
against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not 
against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against 
powers, against the world-rulers of this darkness, against 
spiritual wickedness in heavenly places." 

Well might we tremble if we stood in any resources 
of ours against such an array. But it is not so. The 
battle is the Lord's and our exposure but draws out 
His mighty hand and unfailing wisdom. Still we have 
to fight. It will not do to plead our weakness or His 
strength in order to shirk our responsibility. We must 
not merely look at, or point to, the panoply of God as 
our possession, so to speak, but must put it on at 
His bidding. 

Another thing must be borne in mind. It is no 
question here of our wants before God. For He has no 
conflict with us; but having delivered our souls, He 
calls us to wrestle for the mastery with the unseen 
-armies of. His enemy. As naked in our lost estate 
T 



274 EPHESIANS. 

once, we needed lo be clothed; and His grace did clothe 
us with the best robe, with Christ. This is our clothing 
as before God: nothing less, nothing else, would suit 
His presence as His guests. But here it is a question 
of fighting the enemy, after we are clad with Christ; 
and we needed armour of divine tempering to stand 
aright and securely. On the details of this armour -we 
shall enter by and by ; it is only on the general truth 
that I would insist now. 

How remarkably we are here reminded of Joshua in 
verse 10, and Israel's foes in verse 12 ! To Joshua 
the word was, " Arise, go over this Jordan, thou and 
all this people, unto the land which I do give to them, 
even to the children of Israel. Every place that the 
sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I given 
unto you, as I said unto Moses . . . . There shall not 
any man be able to stand before thee all the days of 
thy life: as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee: 
I will not fail thee nor forsake thee. Be strong and of 
a good courage : for unto this people shalt thou divide 
for an inheritance the land which I sware unto their 
fathers to give them. Only be thou strong and very 
courageous." (Joshua i. Compare also verses 9, 18.) 
Again, it is clear that if the Canaanites were but 
enemies of flesh and blood, they are types of the still 
deadlier foes we have to fight foes whose effort it is 
to hinder the Christian from taking possession, in pre- 
sent enjoyment, of his heavenly inheritance. 

It is not here, note it well, the Red Sea crossed, and 
then the desert, where we have to learn what God is 
and to be proved ourselves. The wilderness is the 
great scene of temptation ; though, no doubt, there are 
occasional battles, as with Amalefc and with Midian, 
still it is the place where we have to go or stay at 
God's bidding, in need of daily, heaven-sent supplies, 
where there is nothing else to sustain, ever marching 
onward with the heavenly land before us. But the 



CHAPTEE VI. 275 

wrestling here, as in the Book of Joshua, supposes the 
passage of the Jordan and entrance into Canaan, where 
the day of conflict begins, rather than that of tempta- 
tion in the wilderness. 

Is the evangelical school right in making Jordan to 
be the act of death at the end of our career when the 
saint departs to be with Christ? Clearly not; for in 
this case what would answer to the wars in Canaan? 
No ! excellent as Bunyan was, in this he was mistaken, 
following the mistakes of others before him and per- 
petuating them far and wide to this day. Indeed, this 
is one of the tests of where the soul is and how far it 
is emancipated from traditional theology, which limits 
its disciples to a minimum of truth. Elsewhere, as 
for instance in their use of the Passover and Red 
Sea, there is defectiveness ; here there is absolutely 
nothing, or error. And this I say, singling out the 
author of " Pilgrim's Progress" as a noble and most 
advanced specimen of popular views. The best of their 
day in the religious world are but his commentators 
some of them literally so. Can there be a better proof 
how completely the gist of this epistle is ignored? 
The truth is that in the Red Sea we have Christ dead 
and risen for us; in Jordan we have our death and 
resurrection with Him: the one ushering us into the 
world as the dreary waste of our pilgrimage, the other 
putting us in view of our heavenly blessing, which we 
have then to appropriate by victory over Satan. The 
distinction is as clear as it is important, though both 
are true of the Christian now. When the glorious day 
comes for the inheritance to be ours, not by the force 
of faith which thus in practice defeats the enemy and 
makes good the land God has given us, we shall not 
have to wrestle with these principalities and powers in 
heavenly places: the conflict will be closed for us and for 
ever. The expulsion of the dragon, " that old serpent," 
is not our work, but that of Michael and, his angels. 



276 EPHESIANS. 

With overcoming him we have to do, hut not with his 
forcible ejection from heaven. All the time the Church 
is here helow, our conflict goes on with these spiritual 
wickednesses in heavenly places ; when the actual cast- 
ing out hy God's providential power takes place, we 
shall not be here, but above. 

After the Passover and the Bed Sea there was no 
return of Israel to the slavery of Pharaoh ; their task- 
masters were overthrown and gone; " there remained 
not so much as one of them." " The Lord saved Israel 
that day out of the hand of the Egyptian, and Israel 
saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore." But 
circumcision did not characterize the redeemed in the 
wilderness. No sooner were the children on the 
Canaanitish side of Jordan than they rolled away the 
reproach of Egypt at Gilgal. The knife of circumcision 
was applied to deal with Israel hefore they draw the 
sword on the doomed inhabitants of Canaan. They 
were in Canaan and had nothing more to do to get 
there: their work was to make the land their own. 

Has this no instruction for us ? Have we consciously 
laid hold of our union with Christ on high ? Do we 
know our place is there in Him, and that we have there 
to stand ? Is nature, root and branch, a judged thing 
in us ? Do we render a heavenly testimony not only 
righteous and holy, but heavenly ? Are we then and 
thus advancing on the enemy and making good our 
title by present victory to enjoy the boundless blessings 
above which we have in Christ ? Or are we still, as 
far as realization goes, ransomed, but in the wilderness, 
with Jordan uncrossed and the old corn of the land for 
us untouched food ? Are we merely guarding against 
the flesh breaking out here or there, against worldly 
temptations overtaking us in this or that ? If so, need 
we wonder that verse 12 sounds mysterious, and that 
we question what is meant by the wrestling with the 
enemies in heavenly places ? It was probably the total 



CHAPTER VI. 277 

misapprehension, or non-apprehension, of the truth here 
revealed, which led our English translators into the 
unwarrantable change of heavenly into " high" places in 
this passage only. It behoves ourselves, however, to 
consider whether our own souls have proved and are 
proving the panoply of God in this conflict, where, 
ahove all, it is plain that " the flesh profiteth nothing." 

In these verses, after a prefatory resumption, we 
come to the particulars of the Christian's armour. 
" Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, 
that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, 
having done all, to stand. Stand, therefore, having 
your loins girt about with truth," &c. (Ver. 13 17.) 

The first thing to be noticed is that the Holy Spirit 
calls on us to take up the panoply of God. Neither 
strength nor wisdom of man avail in this conflict. As 
we have to do with the hosts of Satan on the one hand, 
we need on the other " the whole armour of God." 
Our natural character and habits may not signify, 
where the Spirit of God is at work to save our souls in 
His grace; but they are of vast moment in presence of 
a foe who knows how to take advantage of every un- 
guarded opening. Even to those at Corinth, carnal as 
they were, and only fit to bear the food of babes (not 
the solid meat which is set before the Ephesian saints), 
he had shown that, walking in flesh, we do not war 
according to flesh. For the weapons of our warfare are 
not carnal, but divinely mighty to the pulling down of 
strongholds, casting down reasonings and every high 
<thing that lifts itself up against the knowledge of God, 
and bringing, into captivity every thought to the obe- 
dience of Christ. Not flesh, but the Spirit of God has 
power against Satan. 

Here, too, the character of the time in which the 
conflict goes on is designated as "the evil-day." Evil 
indeed is the entire period since Christ was crucified 
T A 



278 EPHESIANS. 

and the enemy acquired the title of "the prince of this 
world." Hence, in chapter v., we are expected to walk 
with carefulness, not as fools but as wise, seizing every 
good and suited opportunity, because " the days are 
wil." But here we have something more precise, 
" that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day." 
For there are occasions when the power of evil is 
allowed to press more closely and the danger is great 
for the careless soul. It is emphatically then " the evil 
day ;" and it is well when the Christian has anticipated 
it ; for the point at such a time is not to take up the 
panoply, but, having already taken it, " to withstand." 
" The evil day" should find us already and fully armed, 
if we are to make effectual resistance. Nor is this 
enough. For how often the victory of faith is too 
great for the faith that won it, and a saint who has 
long and afresh vanquished the enemy, may tire of the 
struggle and turn aside into a seemingly easier path, 
to prove his own folly, and his exceeding danger, even 
if in the end delivered by the pure mercy of God ! To 
resist, then, does not suffice, but " having done all," 
having thoroughly accomplished all things requisite, 
u to stand." The fight the fights may have been 
keen, the victory complete through the Lord's goodness 
and might; but the war is not over. Our place is still 
to stand our ground. 

" Stand, therefore, having girt your loins about with 
truth, and put on the breastplate of righteousness, and 
shod your feet with the preparation of the gospel of 
peace." I have changed the English Yersion slightly, 
so as to adhere more closely to the true sense, which 
supposes not only a settled position, but the soul in 
activity according to the summons of the Holy Ghost. 
Much mischief has arisen from regarding this passage 
as if it treated of standing, whereas, in truth, it is 
essentially different. It is practical arming and con- 
flict, founded on the most blessed standing anywhere 



CHAPTER YI. 279 

revealed in the New Testament, and suitably closing 
the epistle which reveals it. 

To know the truth and be set free by the truth is 
one thing; to have girt about our loins with truth is 
another. It is the intimate dealing of truth with the 
soul, so that there is no laxity of heart or indulged 
will, but, on the contrary, the affections and judgment 
braced up to Christ and the things of Christ. Thus 
the saint cleaves to the Lord with full purpose of heart ; 
and, self being searched and judged by the truth, there 
is vigour imparted through the revelation of His mind 
and grace, which are now more than ever enjoyed. It 
is the power of truth in keeping the soul, delivered in 
God's rich mercy, and too thankful to be under an 
authority so comprehensive and penetrating and abso- 
lute, as to leave nothing, let it be ever so inward, out- 
side the range of God's will and the saint's obedience. 
To bear and delight in this, however, assumes that the 
heart is established in grace; it can then welcome the 
truth in all its energetic claim and control. 

Next follows " the breastplate of righteousness" put 
on. This is quite distinct from the righteousness of 
God, which we are made in Christ. The latter we 
need before God; the former we want for successful 
wrestling with our adversary the devil. As the Spirit, 
in the girding round our loins with truth, shews the 
first piece of armour to be the thorough application of 
the word to us in self-judgment, and, withal, in moral 
energy, so the next demanded is that we put on prac- 
tical righteousness as our breastplate. Nothing exposes 
a saint in conflict more readily than a bad conscience in 
his ways. I do not mean a conscience unpurged, but 
where evil, after the knowledge of redemption, has been, 
allowed and communion is broken. 

Connected with this is the having " the feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace." This, 
again, is evidently a matter of practical power and en- 



280 EPHESIANS. 

joyment, the effect of maintaining a good conscience, as 
the latter can only be where all is held and guarded by 
the truth. Then the soul goes on in peace. " The fruit 
of righteousness," as another apostle says, " is sown in 
peace of them that make peace." Where there is laxity, 
the conscience gets bad ; and the result is trouble, and 
making trouble ; where truth governs, the conscience is 
kept bright, and, happy ourselves, we shed happiness 
around us. 

Verse 16 introduces another and quite as necessary a 
part of the divine armour, but, doubtless, justly put 
subsequent to what we have seen. "Above [or, beside] 
all, having taken up the shield of faith with which ye 
shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked 
one." This means that confidence in God Himself 
which the soul is entitled and encouraged to cherish : 
I say, in Himself, because, though inseparable from the 
godly and righteous state the previous portions of the 
panoply intimate, it is a confidence springing only from 
what God is known to be in His own nature and 
character. All the envenomed efforts of the wicked 
one are futile where God is thus known in the power 
of the Holy Ghost ungrieved within us ; all his darts 
not only fail to produce despair and distrust, but they 
are extinguished by the shield of faith. 

But there is more (ver. 17): " and receive the helmet 
of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit which is the 
word of God." The shield of faith is more general 
confidence ; the helmet of salvation is rather the bold 
and joyful consciousness of the full deliverance God 
has wrought for us in Christ. This crowns the various 
parts of the armour already noticed, and is therefore 
followed, not by further means of defence (for it is com- 
plete), but by the instrument of offensive energy against 
the adversary, the sword of the Spirit, even God's word. 
How wisely it is thus placed in the last place of all, 
will be apparent to the instructed mind! Indeed, if 



CHAPTER VI. 281 

there be not this order known practically, the word is 
made a mere toy of, or perhaps a scourge for self, rather 
than to have the character of the sword of the Spirit; it 
is misused and powerless. Handled in the Spirit, what 
deliverance it works ! What disabling of adversaries 
and what a detecter of Satan ! It is for conflict. 

We have had the details of the panoply of God, active 
energy following that which pertains to the state, 
practical security and the confidence of the soul. 
But there is a hidden spring of power without which 
nothing avails the expression of weakness, strange to 
say, but of weakness in dependence on God. Hence 
the word is, " praying always with all prayer" pray- 
ing at every season. There is nothing the enemy more 
dreads, nothing that flesh more seeks to hinder, or to 
make amiss if there be the form. But so much the 
more need we to bear in mind the call to habitual and 
complete dependence. 

Besides, there is the exercise of spiritual desires, and 
not dependence only; as it is said by our Lord else- 
where, " Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will 
I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If 
ye shall ask anything in my name, I will do it." " If ye 
abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what 
ye will, and it shall be done unto you." (John xiv., xv.) 
In a word, there is encouragement and exhortation to 
every kind of prayer and at every opportunity, while 
there is also that character of petition which is sus- 
tained in the power of the Holy Ghost, " supplication 
in the Spirit," which all prayer of the saints is not. 

Another weighty word is the call to " watch unto 
this very thing ;" for this supposes the activity of love 
which is quick to discern in the fear of the Lord and 
in the bowels of Christ that which might tarnish His 
glory on the one hand, and on the other whatever would 
contribute to the exaltation of His name in His saints 
and testimony. What a deliverance this is, not only 



282 EPHESIANS. 

from self-will, but from anxiety and from self-importance! . 
And what a field for gracious affections to turn every- 
thing of good or ill into occasions of intercourse with 
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to turn 
all otherwise transient, or food for gossip into chan- 
nels of everlasting blessing! How wise and good is 
every word of our God ! May the thing itself, as well 
as His word about it, be precious in our eyes ! Where 
this is so, there will be watching in the habit of 
prayer, " with all perseverance and supplication for all 
saints." For where God's presence is thus realized, 
there is no straitness in the affections, but love goes 
out energetically to Him and in communion with Him 
concerning all the saints. It is the service of love 
before Him who is love. But as having at heart the 
interests of Christ, there is the special remembrance of 
such as gather with Christ. So here the apostle speaks 
of their supplication on behalf of himself; and, as it 
appears, with a link of greater energy than that which 
spread desires about the saints before the Lord " and 
for me" (not merely 7re/w, but virep e/toz), as indicating 
particularity among the general objects of the action), 
" that utterance may be given unto me that I may open 
my mouth boldly to make known the mystery of the 
gospel, on behalf of which I am ambassador in chains; 
that therein I may be bold as I ought to speak." 

It is blessed to find such a practical evidence of the 
apostle's own sense of the value of intercession, the in- 
tercession of saints, for his ministry. His consciousness 
of its dignity rather increased than diminished his wish 
to be thus remembered. 

But again, he reckoned on their love, not only in 
thus praying on his behalf, but also in their desiring to 
know matters concerning him, how he fared ; and, there- 
fore tells them that " Tychicus, the beloved brother, and 
faithful servant in the Lord, shall make known to you 
all things: whom I sent unto you for this very purpose, 



CHAPTER VI. 283 

that ye may know our affairs, and that he may comfort 
your hearts." What a contrast with the spirit of men 
is the mighty, gracious working of divine love in the 
heart, which counts on the tender concern of the saints 
in him who served and loved them in the Lord ! Man, 
as such, would either he indifferent and hard, or would 
fear the imputation of vanity, as if his matters could 
be objects of interest to others. But Christ changes 
all for the hearts of those that have received Him. 

" Peace to the brethren, and love with faith from God 
the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ : grace with all 
that love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption." 



G. Morrish. Printer, 24, Warwick Lane, Faternostft Row. . 



CATALOGUE. 



r As Post Office Orders for sums under 10s. can now be 
obtained for One Penny, purchasers are requested to 
send Post Office Orders (payable at the Chief -Office) 
for sums above 2s. Qd., and halfpenny stamps for 
smaller sums. Retail purchasers are requested to send 
remittances with all Orders. 



By C. H. M. 

Notes on the Book of Genesis, 2/6 ; gilt, 3/6 ; morocco, 6/6. 
Notes on the Book of Exodus, ditto ditto. 

Notes on the Book of Leviticus, ditto ditto. 

Notes on the Book of Numbers", ditto ditto. 

Reflections on the Life and Times of Elijah. Is. ; cloth, Is. 4d. 

The Life of Faith Exemplified ; being Thoughts on the Life 

and Times of David. ' Third Edition, Is. ; cloth, Is. 6d. 
Eegeneration : What is it ? 2d. 
Sanctification : What is it? 2d. 
Final Perseverance: What is it? 2d. 
Christian Perfection : What is it ? 2d. 
Forgiveness of Sins : What is it ? 2d. 
Unity: What is it? 2d. 
A Scriptural Inquiry into the True Nature of the Sabbath, 

Law, and Christian Ministry. 2d. 

" Thou and thy House ;" or, the Christian at Home. 6d. 

Reflections on the Life and Times of Hezekiah. 6d. 

The History of the Tribe of Levi. 6d. 

Discipleship in an Evil Day. 2d. 

Now and Then; or, Time and 'Eternity. - 3d. 

The Unequal Yoke. New Edition, Revised. 3d. 

Thoughts on the Confirmation Vows. l^d. 

Thoughts on the Lord's Supper : for the Help of Christians 

. in this day of difficulty. 4d. 

The Lord our Shepherd : a Lecture on Luke xv. 1-7. Id. 
Call of God ; or, Reflections on Abraham and Lot. 6d. 
Confidence ; or, The Peace- Giving Power of True Testimony. 

32mo. Id.; I2nio. d. 

The True Ground of Peace. 6d. per dozen. 

God in Everything. d. 

Communion with God. d. - 

Inside the Veil ; Outside the Camp. ^d. 

The Sunday School Teacher Encouraged, f d. 

Glad Tidings. 6d. The Three Appearings. 3d. 

The Law and the Gospel. Id. Naaman the Syrian. Id. 

Pharisee and Publican. Id. 

G. Morrish, 24, Warwick Lane, Paternoster Bow, London, E.C. 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post Free. 

ByC.H.M. 

Letters on Evangelization. 6d. 

Job and his Friends. 6d. . Once Purged, id. 

The Two Links. Id. Reconciled and Saved. Id. 

Pages for 1 the Anxious. 9d. Decision for Christ. 2d. 

Jehoshaphat: a Word on World-Bordering. 3d. 

Jesus Risen, a Remedy for all Evil. d. 

Corporal D. ; or, the Snares of a Young Convert; d. 

The Red Heifer. 4d. The Passover in Egypt. Id. 

Prayer in its Proper Place. |d. 

" God for us." 2d. 

A Risen Saviour's Challenge. Id. 

Eternal Punishment. |d. 

" The Man of God.'' 3d. 

The Christian Priesthood. Id. 

Gideon and his Companions. 6d. 

Papers on the Lord's Corning. Cloth, Is. 

Josiah and his Times. 

Edited by C. H. M. 

Things New and Old. Monthly. Id. Vols. 1 16. Is. 6d. 

each. 

PROPHECY. 

Seven Lectures on the Prophetical Addresses to the Seven 

Churches. Is. 6d. ; paper, Is. 
Eight Lectures on Prophecy. Is. 6d. 
Notes on the Apocalypse. J. N. D. 2s. 
Notes on the Book of Daniel. Is. 6d. 
Lectures on the Second Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. 4s. 
When and How ought I to expect my Lord? Id. , 
The Second Advent and Reign of the Lord Jesus Christ. Id. 
Rapture of the Saints. J. JST. D. 6d. ' 

What is the Difference between the Coming of Christ to 

receive His Saints and His appearing in Glory with them ? 3d. 

Coming Events, as revealed in Scripture, showing their 

Order and Connexion. 2d. 

The Kingdom of Heaven : What is it ? With Diagram. 3d. 

Seventy Weeks of Daniel, the Prophecy of, and its Fulfil- 
ment, with Diagram. 3d. [An important subject, as answering the 
question, "Where, in Prophecy, are we now?"j 

An Inquiry into the Doctrine of a General Judgment, and 

the Christian before the Judgment-seat of Christ. 3d. 
Brief Remarks in Reply to Rev. David Brown's work on 
Christ's Second Coming. By J. N. D. 6d. 

G-. Morrish, 24, Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row, London, E. C. 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post Free. 

PROPHECY. 

Lectures on the Second Coming. By J. N. D. Cloth, Is. 6d. 
No. 1, 1 Thess. i., 2d. ; No. 2, Eph. i,, 4d. ; No. 3, Eev. xiL, 

4d.; No. 4, Eom. xi., 2d.; No. 5, Matt, xiii., 4d.; No. 6, 7, Dan. ii., vii, 4d. 

Fifty Plain Proofs of Christ's Personal Appearing. Id. 

Sixty Solemn Proofs of Increasing Evil; &c. 2d. 

Scripture Proofs of the Lord's Second Coming. ls.6d.per 100. 

What Saints will be in the Tribulation. Id. 

Changed in a Moment. A Dialogue. 2d. 

He cometh with Clouds ; or, Every Eye shall see Him. 2d. 

The One who is Coming. -By G. V. W. Id. 

Coming of the Lord and order of events. 2d. 

Coming of Christ with His Saints. 4d. 

Elements of Prophecj r . Id. 

Papers on the Lord's Coming. Is. 

PLAIN PAPERS ON PROPHETIC SUBJECTS. 

/ 

New Edition, Revised, Cloth, 4s. 6d. 

No. 1. The Heavenly Hope. 2d. 

2. Approaching Judgments. 2d. 

3. The Coming Crisis and its Results. 2d. 

4. The Doom of Christendom. 2d. 

5. 6. Christ and the Church. 4d. 

7: Israel in the Past and Present. 2d. 
8. Israel's Future Restoration. 2d. 
' 9. Israel's Restoration Introductory to Millennial 

Blessedness. 2d. 

10, 11. The Great Prophetic Question. 4d. 

12. Waiting for Christ. 2d. 

13. Ecclesiastical Corruption and Apostasy. 2di 

14. The Last Days of Gentile Supremacy. 2d. 

15. Israel in the Approaching Crisis. 2d. 

16. The Spared Remnant. 2d. 

17. The.Martyred Remnant. 2d. 

18. Apocalyptic Interpretation. 2d. 
19, 20. The First Resurrection. 4d. 

21. . - The Millennium. 2d. 

22. Recapitulation : Outline of Prophetic Truth . 2d. 

23. 24. Objections Answered. 4d. 

THE HOPES OP THE CHURCH, in Connection with the 
Destiny of the Jews and the Nations, as Revealed in, 
Prophecy. Eleven Lectures. By J. N. D. Is. 6dr 
new edition, large type, 2s. - 

G. Morrish, 24, Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row, London, E.C 



sent Post Free. 



"C. S." TRACTS. 

Railway Tracts,-4 pages, 116. Is. per 100.' 

1 The Son of God 9 " An Interesting Question" 

2 The Handcuffs 10 "The Explosion" 
" Smashed to Pieces" 



3 

4 The J.ost Ticket 

5 "Just in Time" 

6 "Conversation" 

7 "What a Contrast" 

8 "Progress" t 

" Plain words," 4 pages, 1 16. 

1 The Little Garden 

2 Lesson from an Old School- 

master 

3 "Conversion" 

4 The Telescope 

5 Hedemption 

6 "Life" 

7 "TheJustifier" 

8 Worship 

" Bread Cast upon the Waters," 

1 " Your Dying Hour" 

2 " Be thou Clean" 

3 "Have I Repented Enough?" 

4 "Thy Sins be Forgiven thee" 

5 Two Things which God hath 

Joined together 

6 " Why are ye Troubled?" , 

7 How are you to be Saved? 

8 Who is to Blame? 



11 " I have my Ticket" 

12 "Over-Luggage" 

13 Howdoesamanbecomeasoldier? 

14 That Sad, Sad Face? 

15 " Must I not Strive" 

16 The Lunatic and his Keeper 

Is. per 100. 

9 The Burial of the Ethiopian 

10 " The Kisen Christ" ' 

11 ' ' The Live- Bird let loose" 

12 The Great Supper 

13 How did the Jew know his 

Sin was Forgiven 

14 Naaman, the Leper 

15 "As it was in the days of Noah" 

16 "As it was in the days of Lot" 

2 pages, 1 1G. Gd. per 100. 

10 " Repentance unto Life'' 

11 What is Good News to a maa 

who feels himself Lost? 

12 What is Grace? 

13 "Hath "and "Are" 

14 "The Righteousness of God" 

15 How can a Sinner be Justified? 
16. How does the Believer know 

that he is Justified? 



9 IfthouKnewesltheGiftofGod? 
Job's Conversion; or, God the Justifier. 2d., or 14s. per 100. 
Ruth; or Blessing and Rest. Id. each, or 7s. per 100. 
Mephibosheth : Lame on Both Eeet. Id. each, or 7s. per 100. 
Joseph: Type of the Risen Christ. Id. each, or 7s. per 100. 
"Awake, Awake! Behold the Bridegroom cometh!" Id. 
Victory, Id. The Two Husbands, 2d. 
Great Stones and Costly. Id. each, or 7s. per.100. 
What God hath said on the Second Coming of Christ and the 

End of the Present age. 2d. each, or 14s. per 100. 
Millennial Reign of Christ, 2d. Justification in the Risen Christ, Id. 
What was the Sabbath? and what is the first day of the week? 2d. 
Doors Shut and Lamps Put Out. 2d. 
Tracts for Young Christians: No. 1, .Full Redemption; No. 2 r 

Lessons of the Wilderness. Id. each. 
Mount Ararat; or, Noah raised up in the Ark. 2d. 
Coming of the Lord, &c. With Diagram. Jd. 
Ritualism : and what will he the end of it ! Id. 
The Oaks Explosion, Id. Jonathan ; or, One Thing Lacking, Id. 
Plain Dialogues on Solemn Subjects : No. 1, What is the Gospel? 

No. 2, Do you Believe God? Id. each. 

The Smaller Tracts in a vol. (*); the Larger Tracts in a vol. (**) Is. 6d. each- 
In quantities for distribution, half price, the purchaser paying carriage. 

G. Morrish, 24, Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row, London, E,C 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post Free. 

"C. S." TRACTS continued. 

Solompn's Temple. 2d. . 

The Revelation of Jesus Christ. 6d. 

Christ the Centre: or, Why do you meet in His name 

alone 1 ? 2d. 

The Railway Tracts in a volume. Is. 
Imputed Righteousness. ' 2d. 
How does a Man become a Soldier ? In German, 6d. per doz. 

CHARTS, by Sir E. Denny. 

The Coming of Christ with His Saints, with two Charts, 4d. 
The Great Epistle General of John and the Seven-sealed 

Book. In sheets, price Is. 

A Prophetical Stream of Time, with Companion, 1 2s. 6d. ; 

Companion- separate, 2s. 6d. 

The Seventy Weeks of Daniel, and the Cycle of Seventy 
"Weeks. Two Charts, with Companion. JB1. 

The Great Epistle General of John to the Seven Churches 

in Asia. A Chart, Ss. ; in cloth, mounted, with Companion, ISs. 6d. 
Companion, Sd. 

The Great Epistle General of John to the Seven Churches 

in Asia. 4to. 15s. . 

The Covenants and the Church of God, with Companion, 

price 7s. ; in cloth, mounted and folded, 14s. 6d. Companion, 6d. 

The Days and Hours named in Scripture, with Companion, 

price 4s. (3d. Companion, 4d. 

The Times of Methuselah and Noah. 4s. 

The Days and Hours and Times of Methuselah and Noah. 

In one case with Companion. 15s. 

The New Jerusalem. 3s. 6d.; or in cloth mounted and 

folded. 9s. Companion, 6d. 

The Five Prophetical Periods of Daniel, 3s. 6d. : Com- 
panion, 6d. In cloth, mounted and folded. 7s. (3d. 

The Elect Church, 5s. In cloth, mounted and folded. 9s. 

Companion, 4d. 

The River of God, with Companion, 5s. Companion, 4d. 

The Feasts of the Lord, 2s. ; Companion, 8d. Mounted 

and varnished, 10s. ; mounted and folded, 7s. 6d. 
Babylon the Great. In sheets, ; mounted and folded, 
; Companion, 

Hymns and Poems, by Sir E. Denny. 3s. 
Lady Powerscourt's Letters. 2s. 6d. ; gilt, 5s. 

Cr, Morrish, 24, Warwick lane, Paternoster Row, London, B.C. 



Now Publishing, 
In Parts Is., and in Volumes 7s. 6d. each, 

COLLECTED WHITINGS OF J. IT. DABBY* 

Uniform with "the Synopsis of the Books of the Bible" 

EACH VOLUME IS COMPLETE IN ITSELF.' 

VOL. I. Ecclesiastical- Vol. I. 

Containing twenty papers on Church principles. 
VOL. II. Prophetic-Vol. I. 

Notes on the Revelation ; The Hopes of the Clmrch, &.&. 
VOL. ill. Doctrinal Vol. I. 

Containing eleven papers on Doctrine. 
VOL. iv. Ecclesiastical- Vol. II. 

Containing eleven papers on Church principles. 
VOL. V. Prophetic Vol. II. 

Containing Notes on Apocalypse ; Studies on Daniel, &c. 
VOL. VI. Apologetic Vol. I. 

Containing The Irrationalism of Infidelity s &c. 
VOL. VII. Doctrinal Vol. II. 

The Sufferings of Christ, and eleven shorter pieces. 
VOL. VIII. Prophetic Vol. III. 

Examination of B. W. Newton's " Thoughts on the 

Apocalypse," &c. 
VOL. IX. Apologetic Vol. II. 

Containing Eeplies to the Essays and Eeviews. 
VOL. X. Doctrinal Vol. III. 

Containing twenty-four papers on Doctrine. 
VOL. XL Prophetic Vol. IV. 

Containing Six Lectures on the Second Coming, &c. 
VOL. XII. Evangelic-Vol. I. 

Containing Gospel Sermons and twenty -five other Pieces-. 
VOL. XIII. Critical Vol. I. 

Papers on the Greek Article, Particles, Prepositions, &c. 
VOL. XIV. Ecclesiastical- Vol. III. 

Claims of the Church of England considered, &c. 
VOL. XV. Doctrinal Vol. IV. , 

Tracts on the Doctrine of the Sufferings of our Lord, &cv 

G. Morrish, 24, "Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row, London, E.G. 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post Tree. 

By J. N. D. 

Synopsis of the Books of the Bible, in 5 vols., 7s. 6d. each. 

On the Greek Article ; Particles and Prepositions. 2s. 

Deliverance, not Pardon only. Id. 

Elements of Prophecy. Id. The Covenants, 2d. 

Rapture of the Saints, 6d. The Righteousness of God, 6d. 

Who is a Priest and what is a Priest ? |d. 

Thirteen Sermons, cloth, Is. 6d. Notes and Expositions, 2s. 

Sufferings of Christ, Is. How to get Peace, 2d. 

The Immortality of the Soul, -3d. The Morning Star, f d. 

Remarks on Light and Conscience. , 2d. 

Christian Position as to Life and the Spirit. Id. 

On Ministry, 6d. On Worship, 3d. 

Types of Leviticus, 3d. On Lay Preaching, 2d. 

Notes on the Offerings, 2d. Romans VII. and VIII., 2d. 

Evidence from Scripture of the passing away of the Present 

Dispensation. 3d. 

Grace the Power of Unity and of Gathering. 2d. 

What was the Church at the Beginning and what is its 

Present State? 2d. 
Brief Analysis of the Epistle to the Hebrews, in connection 

with the Priesthood of Christ. 6d. 

Irrationalism of Infidelity. Reduced to 6s. 
Operations of the Spirit, 2s. Presbyterianism, 3d. 
Brief Outline of the Books of v the Bible. lOd. 
What is the Church ? 3d. Divine Righteousness. Id. 
The Purpose of God, 2d. On Repentance. Id. 
What is the World, and What is its End? Id. 
Colenso and the Pentateuch. 6d. 
Brethren and their Reviewers. 6d. 
Eternal Punishment, Brief Scriptural Evidence on. Id. 
Is the Comforter Come? And is He Gone? 4d. 
Remarks on the Holy Ghost in the Christian. Id. 
Spirit of God in the Church. 3d. 
Books of the Bible Romans. 9d. 
Remarks on Christianity and Modern Progress. 2d. 
What the Christian has amid the Ruin of the Church. 4d. 
Inquiry as to the Antichrist of Prophecy. 2d. 
Non-atoning'Sufferings of Christ. |d. 
Letters on the Inspiration of the Scripture. 3d. 
Letter on Immortality and Everlasting Punishment. Id. 
Romanism. Is. The Christ of God. Is. 6d. per 100. 
On Binding and Loosing by the Assembly. 2d. 
Approach to, and delight in God. Id. 

G. Morrish, 24, Warwick lane, Paternoster Bow, London, E.G. 



Second Edition, Revised. 



A NEW TRANSLATION 



OF 



THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



s. d. 

Cloth.. 4 

French Morocco .... 5 6 

Morocco, gilt' edges... 6 6 

Morocco, limp, with lappets 8 



With Pearl NEW Testament, Authorized 

Version, references, Morocco 8 

With Pearl OLD Testament, Authorized 

Version, Morocco ... '... 9 

With Pearl OLD and NEW Testaments, 

Morocco 10 

Can be bound with Bagster's middle size Polyglot 
Bible or Testament to order. 

;y 

LONDON: 
G. MORRISH, 24, WARWICK LANE, 

PATEKNOSTER EOW. E.G. 



EBVELATION XIX, XX. 



8 And it was given to her that she 
should be clothed in fine linen, 
bright and pure ; for the fine linen 
is the righteousnesses k of the 

9 saints. And he says to me,- Write, 
Blessed [are] they who are called 
to the supper of the marriage of 
the Lamb. And he says to me, 
These are the true words of God. 

10 And I fell before his feet to do 
him homage. And he says to me, 
See [thou do it] not. I am thy 
fellow-bondsman, and [the fellow- 
bondsman] of thy brethren who 
have the testimony of Jesus. Do 
homage to God. For the spirit of 
prophecy is the testimony of Jesus. 

11 And I saw the heaven opened, 
and behold, a white horse, and one 
sitting on it, called 1 Faithful and 
True, and he judges and makes 

12 war in righteousness. And his eyes 
[were] m a flame of fire, and upon 
his head many diadems, having a 
name n written which no one knew 

13 but himself, and clothed with a 
garment dipped in blood; and his 
name is called The Word of God. 

14 And the armies which [are] in the 
heaven followed him upon white 
horses, clad in white, pure, fine 

M linen. And out of his mouth goes 
a sharp two-edged sword, that with 
it he might smite the nations; 
and he shall shepherd them, with 
an iron rod; and he treads the 
wine-prass of the fury of the 



* In Hebrew the plural of acts express- 
ing a quality is used for the abstract 
quality itself. This may be the case, by 
analogy, here. See Psalm xi. 7, where in 
Hebrew it is 'righteousnesses,' but it is 
actual, not imputed. 

i 'Called' is a doubtful reading, some 
omit it. 

m Some add ' as.' 

Somehave here 'having names written 



16 wrath of God the Almighty. And 
he has upon his garment, and. 
upon his thigh, the name written, 
King of kings, and Lord of lords. 

17 And I saw an angel standing in 
the sun ; and he cried with aloud 
voice, saying to all the birds that 
fly in mid-heaven, Come, gather 
yourselves to the great supper of 

18 God, that ye may eat flesh of 
kings, and flesh of chiliarchs, and 
flesh of strong [men], and flesh of 
horses and of those that sit upon 
them, and flesh of all, both free 
and bond, and both small and 
great. 

19 And I saw the beast and the 
kings of the earth and their ar- 
mies gathered together to make 
war against him that sat upon 
the horse, and against his army. 

20 And the beast was taken, and the 
false prophet that [was] with him, 
who wrought the signs before him 
by which he deceived them that 
received the mark of the beast, 
and those that worship P his image. 
Alive were both cast into the lake 
of fire which burns with brim- 

21 stone; and the rest were slain 
with the sword of him that sat 
upon the horse, which goes out of 
his mouth ; and all the birds were 
filled with their flesh. 

XX. And I saw an angel descend- 
ing from the heaven, having the 
key of the abyss, and a great 

and a name written which,' &c. K, which 
is very incorrect in the Apocalypse, and 
nowhere a very carefully written MS, is 
quite without sense here. It has merely 
' a name knew but himself.' . 

I do not say 'had received 'here, be- 
cause then the deceiving would come after 
the receiving, which is not the sense here. 

p Or 'do homage to.' 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post Free; 

By W. K. 

Notes on Daniel, Is. 6d. 

Notes on Romans, 2s. 6d. 

Lectures on Galatians, with a New Translation. Is. 6d.; 

extra cloth gilt, 2s. 

Lectures on Ephesians, with a New Translation. 2s. 6d. 
Lectures Introductory to the Gospels. 7s. 6d. 
Lectures Introductory to Paul's Epistles. 7s. 6d. 
Lectures Introductory to the Acts, the Catholic Epistles, 

and the Eevelation. 7s. 6d. 

Lectures on the Doctrine of the Holy Spirit. 5s. 
Lectures on the. Gospel of Matthew. 6s. 6d. ; gilt, 7s, 6d. 

Lectures on Philippians and Colossians. 2s, ; extra cloth, 

gilt, 2s. 6d. 

Six Lectures on the Fundamental Truth of the Church. 3s. 
Lectures on the Second Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. 4s. 
One Body and One Spirit. ld. 
The Free Service of Christians : A Letter to the Irish 

Evangelists. Id. 

Lectures on the Eevelation, cloth, 5s ; with New Tran- 
slation, 6s. 6d. 
Lectures on the Pentateuch. 7s. 6d. 
Lectures on Isaiah. 3s. 6d. 
Lectures on the Minor Prophets. 5s. 
Eleven Occasional Lectures. 5s. 
The Talmud, 3d. Second Coming of Christ, $d. 
Reply to the Christian Observer. 6d. 
God's Principles of Unity. 4d. 
The Powers that he, ^d. 
Three Lectures on Christian Worship. 4d. 
Christ Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 9d. 

BY A. M. 

Meditations on the Christian's Standing, State, Vocation, 

Warfare, and Hope. Is. 6d. _ 

Meditations on the 23rd and the 84th Psalms. Is. 6d, 
Meditations on the Song of Solomon. Cloth, Is. 6d. 
The Coming of the Lord and the Order of Events. 2d. 
The Christian's Conflict and God's Armour. 2d. ; cloth, 3d. 
Sympathy ; or, Comfort in Affliction. d. 
Man's Paradise Lost, God's Paradise Found. 32mo. Id. 
The Head and the Heart. 32mo. ^d. 
The Gospel and its Results. 2d. Philadelphia, l^d. 
Seven Plain Questions about Salvation. Is. 4d. per 100. 
Answers to Six Questions on Baptism. 2d. 

G. Morrish, 24, Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row, London E.G. 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post Free. 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

The Englishman's Greek Concordance. 2 2s. 
The Englishman's Hebrew Concordance. 2 vols., 3 13s. 6d. 
Justification and Acceptance with God. Is. 3d.; cloth, Is. 6d. 
The Skeleton : A Friendly Address to the Christians in 

England. 2d. 

Christian Baptism : What is it ? 3d. 
Christians Worshipping in the Last and Perilous Times. 2d. 
Sure Foundation of God in Times of Failure & Weakness. 2d. 
A Word of Exhortation to Christian Parents. 2d. 
Peace in Believing. 2d. ; cloth, 6d. 
Decline and its Symptoms. Id. 
Purged or Judged, Id. Love and Hatred, |d. 
Christian and Politics, Id. The Two Resurrections, 2d. 
Why, Sir, its Better and Better. Id. 
Jehovah Tsidkenu. (Music.) 6d. 
He Sitteth o'er the Water-floods (Music.) 6d. 
Pilgrim's Harp. (Music.) 1, 2, 3, 4. 2s. each. 
A Little While, & the Lord our Shepherd (Music). 6d.,each. 
" This do in remembrance of me." Id. 
The Uses of Affliction, d. Sympathy, f d. 
The Blood, the Death, and the Cross. By G. V. W. Is. 6d... 
Echoes of Grace and Truth. Is. 6d. 
Christian's Scrap Book. Is. 6d. .Precious Truth., Is. 6d. 
The Rule of Life: what is it? l^d. 
What the Scriptures teach on the Judgment to come. Id. 
The Heavenly Guest : the Holy Ghost. 6d. 
The Gospels: why are there four? why do they differ? 

and are they fully inspired? 6d. 

The Psalms. d. 

Effect of the Progress of Democratic Power, ^d. 

Plain Words on Eternal Punishment. Id. 

The Dates and Chronology of Scripture. Is. 6d. 

Four Horses, ^d. Hymns by H. B. 6d. 

Why do you meet separate from other Christians ? Id. 

A Man of Spirit and a Spiritual Man. 2d. 

The Streams (poetry). Limp, 8d. ; eloth boards, Is. 

The Atonement, its nature and extent. 4d. 

Grace or Judgment. Id. 

Cease to do evil, learn to do good. 3d. 

Letters on Subjects of Interest. By J. B. S. Is. 

Become a litte child (poetry). 6d. per doz. 

Life Everlasting : a Dialogue. 2d. 

The Three Gardens. Id. 

G. Morrish, 24, Warwick lane, Paternoster Eow, London, E.G. 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post Free. 

MISCELLANEOUS continued. 
Gleanings from the Teaching of G. V. W. Is. 
A short account of the Lord's dealings with the Convict, 

Daniel Mann. 2d. , 

Things New and Old Almanac for the current year. Id. ; 

Cloth, interleaved. Cd. 

What has God found in the Atoning 'Work and Death of 

His Son? Id. 

The Girdle of Truth, in 10 vols. complete, price 14s. 6d. 

Hebrew Proper Names, 4s. 

Discipline in the School of God. J. B. S. Is. 

Kemarks on " The Church and the World." Is. 

Toleration. Id. Confession, ^d. 

What do I learn from Scripture ? d. 

Are you brought to God ? 6d. per dozen. 

Pauvre Pecheur, viens ! 2s. per 100. 

Texts for Cottage Walls (12, sorted). 6d. 

PERIODICALS. 

The Present Testimony, occasionally. 6d. to 2s. Vols. 1 15. 

6s. each. New Series,. Vol. 1 and 2. 6s. 

The Bible Treasury, Monthly. 3d. Vols. 7, 8, 9, 7s. 6d. each. 
A Voice to the Faithful. Id. Vol. 17, Is. 6d. 
Things New and Old. Id. Vols. 116, Is. 6d. each. 
The Sunday School Worker. Id. Vol. 1, Is. 6d. 
Faithful Words for Old and Young, Id. (Illustrated,) 
Words of Truth. Id. 1 Vol. 18, Is. 6d. 
Evangelist, Id. Vol. 1 7, Is. 6d. 

Good News for the Little Ones. Id. Vols. 1 15, Is. 6d. each. 
Ambassador. Id. Vol. 1 5, Is. 6d. each : gilt, 2s. 
Sophy's Story. Vol. 14, Is. 6d. 

HYMN BOOKS. 
Little Flock, 8d., Is., Is. 6d., 2s., 2s. 6d. ; large type, Is. 6d., 

3s. 6d., 4s. 6d. r 6s. 6d. 

Music for Little Flock. 2s. 6d. 

Glad Tidings. 4d., 6d., Is. 

Sheet Hymns for the Gospel. Is. 6d. per 100. 

Hundred Select Hymns for Special Services. Id. ; cloth, 2d. 

144 Hymns for Schools and Families. Cloth, 6d. 

Select Hymns for Children. Id. 

Hymn Book for Youth. Id. ; cloth, 2d. 

Missionary and other Hymns and Verses for Children. Id. 

The Halfpenny Hymn Book for Children. 

G. Morrish, 24, Warwick Lane, Paternoster Bow. London, E.G. 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post 1 Free. 
IjAGSTER'S BIBLES. 



. Small. 
5| X 4 in. 
12s. 6d. 


Middle. 
6* X 44 in. 
"16s. 6d. 


Large. 
8Jx-5f in 
1 Is. Od. 


15 


20 


150 



Small, 


Middle. & 


5| X 4 in. 


6| X 4| in. 


3s. Od. 


4s. Od. 


5s. Od. 


6s. Od. 


6s. 6d. 


9s. Od. 



in a vol. 6d. 



Plain Morocco 
Limp, with flaps 

CHEAP BIBLES. 

GOOD READABLE TYPE. 

(With Maps, Is. extra.) 

Imitation Morocco 
Plain Morocco - 

Ditto limp, with flaps 

MINIATURE SERIES Tinted Paper. 

. 4d. per dozen, 2s. per 100. Sorted packet, 6d. 
A Religion of Four Letters. Place of Security. 
Is the Link on ? Time Enough. 

A Special Appeal. Appropriation. 

IPor Schools and Families. 
The Teacher's Class Book. 2d. 
First Reading Book. 2d. ; cloth, 4d. 
Pleasant Tales, in assorted packets. 6d. , 
Gospel Stories, 4d. 

Gospel Tickets, 4d. 

Opening Buds 6d. 

The Daisy packet. Is. 
Children's Illustrated Tracts. Is. per Packet. 
Scenes from. the ]ST. Testament, packets W, X, Y, Z, 6d. each. 

Books for Children. 
Child lost and found, f d. 

Jonas Eilers. 6d. Old James the Irish Pedlar. 6d. 
Letter to a Child about Jesus. Id. 
Above the bright blue sky. 6d. Child Geraldine. Is. 
The Bible in the Wall. Is. Story of Ada. 6d. 
Sophy's Story. Vol. 1 to 4. Is. 6d. each. 
Good News. Vol. 1 to 15, Is. 6d. each. 
What Little Hands can do. By the late Mrs. Owen. 2s. 6d. 
Six Days of Creation. 3s. 6d. Truths from Nature. 6d. 
What Aunty saw in Scotland. Is. 
Madagascar and its Martyrs. Is. The Daisy. 6d. 
The Voice of Flowers. Is. Opening Buds. 6d. 
Pleasant Tales. 6d. China and the Chinese. Is. 
999 Questions arid Answers. 9d. 

Cr. Morrish, 24, Warwick Lane, Paternoster Bow, London, E.G. 



Orders to the amount of One SMlling sent Post Free. 



By J. GK B. 

Short Meditations, 3s. 6d. The Son of God, 2s. 
Family Character and Family Religion. Id. 
Musings on the Hebrews, 6d. Woollen and Linen, 4d. 
Moral Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. Is. 6d. 
Showers on the Grass: Letters and Papers. Is. 6d. 
Belshazzah's Feast in its application to the Gt. Exhibition. 2d. 
Abraham, Ivfoah, Enoch, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph. 6d. each. 
" The Patriarchs," cloth, 5s. " The Evangelists," clothes. 
Matthew, 9d. ; Mark, 6d. ; Luke, 2s. ; John, 2s. 6d. . 
A Few Words on the Present Revival. 2d. 
Heaven and Earth, 6d. Confederacies of Men, 2d. 
Introduction to Job, 6d. ; to the Canticles, 6d. 
Meditations on Elisha, 9d. ; on the Psalms, 3s. 

CHEAP GOSPEL TRACTS, 

Direct from the Publisher, for Distribution, the purchaser 

paying carriage. 

10,000 Two-page Tracts, sorted, l. 
5,000 Four-page Tracts, sorted, 1. 
5,000 Two-page Tracts, 10s. 6d. 
2,500 Four-page Tracts, 10s. 6d. 

In less quantities. 

Two-page Tracts per 1000, 2s. 3d. By Post, 3s. 

Four-page Tracts per 1000, 4s. 6d. By Post, 6s. 

Small sorted Packets not sold at these prices. 

SORTED PACKETS. 

Railway Tracts, Is. In Small Books, 8d. 

" Plain Words," Is. In Small Books, 8d. 

" Bread Cast upon the Waters." 6d. 

Important Questions. 32mo 4d. 

The Miniature Series, of Gospel Books, tinted, 6d. 

London Series, Envelope Size, A. and B. 6d. each. 

Pleasant Tales for the Young, sorted, 6d. 

Seed Sown by the Way. 8d. 

Water from the Wellspring. 8d. 

Glad Tidings, four pages. 8d. 

Sounds of the Trumpet, four pages. Sd. 

Home Truths. 8d. 

Words of Eternal Life All Scripture. 8d. 

Arrows Shot at a Venture. 6d. 

G-. Mornsh, 24, Warwick Lane, Paternoster How, London, B.C. 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post Free. 

LARGE TYPE TRACTS. 

Poor Joseph. Four a penny, Is. 6d. per 100. 

I do depend upon the Blood. Four a penny, Is. 6d. per 100. 

Which is it, Self or Christ. - Four a penny, Is. 6d. per 100. 

SACRED GREETINGS. 

LEAFLETS FOR LETTERS.-On Tinted Paper. 

27 Communion 

28 "Weep not 

29 She is not dead but sleepeth 

30 Song in the day of the East 

Wind 

31 Pressing forward 

32 The Day of Trouble 

33 The word of God 

34 Thou God seest me 

35 Submission 

36 Christ is mine 

37 " Unto you which Believe," 

&c. 

38 Comfort in Affliction 

39 The Christian 

40 Proof of Sonship 

41 The Man of Pleasure 

42 " What time I am afraid I 

will trust in thee" 

43 My Ain Countree 

44 To-day or To-morrow 

45 Trust in the Lord Almighty 

46 " He restoreth my soul" 

47 The Heart's Desire 

48 Eest in the Rock of Ages 

49 All of Grace 

50 "What is that to thee?" 

Follow thou me 

51 Careful for nothing 

52 In the plains of Jordan 

53 If you love me lean hard 

54 Sunlight in the heart 



1 Last interview with a servant 

of Christ "My Beloved" 

2 The Invitation The Re- 

sponse 

3 Is this the way, my Father 

All, all is well- 

4 Christ has done it all - 

5 The Service of Love 

6 The Gospel Echo 

7 The Echo of Love 

8 In everything give thanks 

9 Whom have I in heaven? .. 

10 The Lord our Shepherd 

11 Eest of the saints above 

12 The Conqueror's Song 

13 The Ark 

14 Lord, save us, we perish 

15 This world is a wilderness 

16 Peace with God, &c. 

17 Morning Star come, Lord 

Jesus [saved 

Eest What must I do to be 
The water of Life 
I'm but a bruised reed-Lead 

Thou me on 

21 A little while 

22 The Christian's Prospect 

23 I'm going home 

24 Himself hath done it 

25 The name of Jesus 

26 Take no thought for 

morrow 



18 
19 
20 



the 



Sold separately, or in Sorted Packets, Id. & 8d. ' 

COLOURED HANDBILLS. 

IN PENNY AND SHILLING PACKETS. 



1. The Midnight Cry. ' 

2. The End is near. 

3. Union: a Word to. Christians. 

4. The Dav Labourer. 



5. The Enquiry. 

6. Pilgrim's Song. 

7. Song in the day 

Wind. 



of the East 



G. MorrisL, 24, Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row, London, B.C. 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post Free. 



totta Srifa. .'of 



"irwte 



ENVELOPE SIZE, SIXPENCE PER DOZEN, 



Boldness in the Day of Judgment. 

" And have I nothing to do ?" 

The Life Boat. 

" What wait I for ?" 

Christian Position : What is it ? 

Balm for a Troubled Soul. 

Perfect and Permanent. 

God's Word and Man's Evidences. 

God's Mercy is Man's Resource. 

The True Ground of Peace. 

A Heart for Christ. ' 

A Worshipper and a Workman. 

One of each of the ahove in an 

assorted Packet (A), price 6d. 

Also in a volume, cloth gilt, 9d. 



What think ye of Christ? 
The Great Salvation neglected. 
If Saved, why not Emancipated? 
The Soul saved & Satan silenced. 
" Just as I am." . 
Conscience and Revelation. 
A Word to a Troubled Conscience 
Grace Triumphant. - 
The Lowest Step in the Ladder. 
The Lamp and Ticket. 
The Power of Prayer. 
The Christian's Mission. 

One of each of the ahove in an 
assorted Packet (B), price 6d. 
-Also %n a volume, cloth gilt, 2d. 



SCBIPTUBE CALENDAB FOB 1874, price Is. 

"With a Text of Scripture for every day in the year. 



LEAFLETS FOB LETTEBS. 
12 Copies One Penny ; in assorted Packets, 2d. 



1. 



calls, 



Child, your Father 
come home. 

2. Cling to the Mighty One. 

3. They're clear to God. 

4. The Unchangeable. 

5. The Quiet Mind. 

6. Watching for the Morning. 



7. The Meeting Place. 

8. Re-union. 

9. The Refuge. 

10. That Happy Land. 

11. The Starless Crown. 

12. The Everlasting Kingdom. 

13. True Royalty. 






Serpent of Brass. Four a penny. 

Scarlet Line. Id. Bad Halfcrown. Id. 

A Just God and a Saviour, f d. The Last Ball. fd. 

FOB, BELIEVERS. 
The Morning Star. |d. 

Jesus and the Resurrection. |d. A Saint Now. Id. 
The Knowledge of God. - Id. 

Never Perish: a Dialogue for Believers who have not 
settled Peace. Id. 



Sayings of Jesus, Texts for a Month, on a Boiler, Is.; Second. 

Series, Is. 

G. Morrish, 24, Warwick Lane, Paternoster Bow, London, E.G.* 



UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 




